
THE EXPANSION OF THE EAST GERMANIC PEOPLES 
ILLUSTRATED BY MAPS (v. ? \, \ 


by 


ALEXANDER MALYCKY 














(2x UIBBIS 

mmbsiwis 

ansBMXisis 












UNIVEKSITY OF ALBDRTA 
LIBd iRY 


Regu 1 ations Ra g a Jia^ Tass cs a nc: _R is s -Stations 

Typescript copies of theses ana dissertations for Raster’s 
and Doctor ’s decrees deposited in the Univei sity of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the Faculty of Graduate Studies, 
may be consulted in the Reference Asa in; Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supervision the work was done. Some Departments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, Hire ough the inter library loan 
service of the University of alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the beparament must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 
Vllien permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub1ished work. 

This diesIs or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure die signature of each 
user. 


Please sign below* 


Date 


Signature 


Ins titution 









































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https ://arch i ve. org/detai Is/malycky 1952 


\ 


( 






UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 


FACULTY OP ARTS AND SCIENCE 


Department of Modern Languages 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read and 
recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for acceptance, 
a thesis entitled THE EXPANSION OP THE EAST GERMANIC PEOPLES, 
ILLUSTRATED BY MAPS submitted by Alexander Malycky B*A., in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts, 






















. 



' 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE EXPANSION OF THE EAST GERMANIC PEOPLES, ILLUSTRATED 

BY MAPS. 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE DEGREE 

OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF MODERN LANGUAGES 


BY 

ALEXANDER MALYCEY 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 


APRIL 1952 
















. 








. 

















































THE EXPANSION 


OP THE EAST GERMANIC PEOPLES, 


ILLUSTRATED BY MAPS 




TABLE OP CONTENTS 


Chapter 1. The Indo-European Problem in 

the Neolithic Period • . • ..1. 

Chapter 2. The Origin of the Germanic People • .8. 

Chapter 3. The Bronze Age.. . . • . 12. 

Chapter 4. The Iron Age .. 21. 

Chapter 5. The Bastarnae .28. 

Chapter 6. The Burgundians ..34. 

Chapter 7. The Gepidae . ..45. 

Chapter 8. The Goths.•.54. 

Chapter 9. The Heruli (Eastern Branch) ..... 61. 

Chapter 10. The Langobards. 68. 

Chapter 11. The Ostrogoths.76. 

Chapter 12. The Rugians .............80. 

Chapter 13. The Skirl ..85. 

Chapter 14. The Taifali .89. 

Chapter 15. The Torcllingi .92. 

Chapter 16. The Vandals. .93. 

Chapter 17. The Visigoths •••••• . 118. 

Chapter 18. The Warn! (Eastern Branch) . 123. 























































LIST OP MAPS 


1 . 

2e 

3 . 

4. 

5 . 

6 . 

7. 


Megalithic Expansion.. • • Map Nr* 1. 


Corded Ware People Expansion . . . . " 

Kersten - III Zones of the North-. * 
European Bronze Culture. . • ” 

Kersten - Bronze Age Period II ” 

Kersten - Bronze Age Period HI . . 11 

Kossinna - bronze Age Periods I, II n 

Kossinna - Bronze Age Periods III, 


2 . 

3. 

4. 



IV/ v. 




Y. 


8. 

Montelius - Bronze Age Period 

VI 

. . 

it tt 

8. 


9. 

The 

Indo-European peoples and 

the 






Corded Ware Culture.. 



tt tt 

9. 


10. 

The 

Bastarnae. ... . 


Maps 

Nr. Nr 

. 10 

- 16. 

11. 

The 

Burgundians. 


ii 

it 

17 

- 29. 

12. 

The 

Gepidae. 


It 

tt 

30 

- 39. 

13. 

The 

Goths • • . 


ft 

rt 

40 

- 45. 

14. 

The 

Heruli (Eastern Branch) 

• 

ft 

tt 

46 

- 53. 

15. 

The 

Langobards . . . 


t? 

tt 

54 

- 59. 

16. 

The 

Ostrogoths ... . 


It 

tt 

60 

- 71. 

17. 

The 

Hugians ......... 


(t 

tt 

72 

- 77. 

18. 

The 

Skiri .... . 


ft 

tt 

78 

- 81. 

19. 

The 

Taifali . 


ft 

tt 

82 

- 83. 

20. 

The 

Vandals .... . 



« 

84 

- 106 

21. 

The 

Visigoths . 


t! 

tt 

107 

- 116 

22. 

The 

Warnl (Eastern Branch) . . 

• 

ft 

tt 

117 

- 118 

23o 

Dr. 

Owen - The climatic Chart 

• # 

following 

Map Nr.8« 






























* . 

. 

, 

. 








. 

- 

• * 

. . . , 

...... 





- 1 - 

Chapter 1 

THE INDO-EUROPEAN PROBLEM IN THE NEOLITHIC PERIOD 

The problem of the origin and expansion of the Germanic 
people is an integral part of the problem of the Indo-Europeans 
of whom the Germanic people are but a branch. The original home 
of the Indo-Europeans and which of the Neolithic cultures is to 
be associated with them has been up to the present a matter 
of controversy. Many different solutions of this problem have 
been offered. The frame of this thesis does not include a 
discussion as to which of the solutions offered seems to be 
the right one. Therefore I shall only describe briefly the Mega- 
lithic and the Corded Ware cultures, indicate the area of their 
role in the formation of the Indo-European people, since both 
of these cultures are the main candidates for the title of Indo- 

European ^rvolk*. Finally I shall choose one of the theories-- 

in my opinion the most probable- as the working basis in order 

to arrive at the stage where it Is possible to speak about the 
Germanic people as an ethnic unity and about their homeland. 

In Europe, the third millenium B.C., was the scene of the 
appearance, the growth and the decline of a new culture, the 
Megalithic, named after the large stone graves which were erected 
as homes for the dead. The idea of building these huge stone 
graves and monuments seems to have cr iginated in the Eastern 
Mediterranean areas, to have spread westward and then, following 
the Atlantic litoral, to have finally reached Northern Europe. 

In Denmark, Southern Sweden and Northern Germany (between the 







' ' V ■ ■; 




•p/: o. ' r .*'- 


. ' 



) 




■ 


r, ' . jj -,i« 



■ 





i 

G -v- f ■' 

i >- 









' 

- - 0 : 5 r O'O 

r r- 



. 

















• 

• 


r- .. io 

: J : 'C 1 

Djt i 

•'I 















■ . y 

- ‘ •; i 

- 


* 







■ •; r 


' 







■ ■« 

», r 

' V 

■ 

$ 



r. 




J . . . 


•• • - .1. 


.■ i ' : 





• 















,.i i'., 

• 











Hi. 






. . . 


' 


■ t 















■ - > . f 

■ : r 






’ 




. : • 

, - 










... . j . ~ . ■ '• • ■' if, 


















. 

: ;uv.. 




- 2 - 

Elbe and the Oder) a special type of the Megalithic culture 

was developed - the Northern Megalithic culture. This 

burial practice, the erection of a home for the dead, appears 
to have been introduced into many areas along the Atlantic 
litoral and into Denmark by the tall Atlanto-Mediterranean 
type, apparently a mixed type, although basically Mediterr¬ 
anean.^ In this case the people introducing the new cultural 
idea presumably a seaborne movement, imposed their civilization 
on the native inhabitants. A gradual assimilation of the cul¬ 
tures and of the physical types took place. The resulting 
culture and the more or less unified physical type later ex¬ 
panded over vast areas to the south and east. 

Some students of this problem are of the opinion that no 
movement of new people Into Northern Europe took place at the 
time of the appearance of the cult of the dead, but that it 
was only the cult-idea which spread and was adopted by the 
native population, who, descendants of the Mesolithic people of 

Northern Europe, in turn developed a specific culture and 

2 ) 

carried this culture into many parts of Europe. 

It should also be noted that the people who, at the time 
of this expansion, (See Map 1) brought the Megalithic culture 
to the British Isles were not of the same physical type as the 
Northern Megalithic people. They were of the short Mediterra- 

1) Coon: Races of Europe p. 281 (Deniker^ classification). 

2) Schwantes: Geschichte Schleswig-Holsteins, I, 3, pp. 221-223. 















1* 











* 











. 






















' 

. 






, 













. 








3 


naan type, either entering the British Isles by sea, or over¬ 
land across Spain and France, and the movement was somewhat 
later than that of the Ncr them Megalithic Atlanto-Mediterranean 
type, since the earliest type of Megalithic graves, the dolmen 
grave, is very scarce in the British Isles.^ 

The Megalithic graves are community graves. They can be 
divided into three main stages of development; 1) dolmen graves, 

2) passage or corridor graves (called Long Barrows in the 
British Isles), and 3) stone cists (Steinkistengr'aber) . The 
pottery of the Megalithic culture differs materially from that 
of the latter stages of the Mesolithic culture and differs also 
from that of other European Neolithic cultures, such as the 
Painted Pottery, Banded Pottery, Swiss Lake Dwelling, Western 
European and Corded Ware cultures. For present purposes the 
differences between the Northern Megalithic culture and the 
Corded Ware culture are of special importance. Not only was 
there a significant difference In the pottery of the two cultures, 
but the type of battle-axes are also radically different. The 

people of the Northern Megalithic culture were predominantly 

2 ) 

agriculturists and in their expansion they overran first of all 
the loess areas, avoiding mountains and highlands. They thus 
overran the areas occupied by the peaceful agricultural pop¬ 
ulations of the Rhineland, Southern Germany, Czechoslovakia, 
Hungary, Poland and the Ukraine, areas occupied at that time 
by people of the Banded and Painted Pottery cultures. This means 

1) Coon: Races of Europe p. 281 (Deniker ! s classification). 

2) Schwantes; Deutschlands Urgeschichte, p. 110 and p. 112. 



' ' J ■' r. 




1 j Ts V y n t,,:; ..7 ■ .• : 


.1 iv- rJ a'i,: to }, fr 

?o<.r ^:i#* ■ * ; ■ 1 »! orfct 

■ ■ ' >‘ v ; 


i* r. • ■:: roo 1 J 










■ 






r 














1 i 




r’ ■)•>/> 






- 



4 


that In their expansion they occupied parts of the Rhine 
Valley, the valley of the Upper Danube, reached the foot¬ 
hills of the Alps, and expanded across the Central European 
Plain as far as the Dniepr river. Prom there they sent 
out colonies to the Kuban and even expanded to the head 
waters of the Volga river. (See Map 1) To the North they 
occupied Southern Sweden, East Prussia and the valley of 
the Bug river. 

But in the time span between 2,500 and 2,000 B.C. we 

witness the rise of another culture, that of the Corded 

Ware (or Single Grave or Battle Axe). Racially the people 

of this culture belonged to the Nordic type. 1 ^ Opinions 

are again divided as to their original home. Kossina re- 

2 ) 

gards Jutland and Schleswig-Holstein as their homeland; 

Schulz places the homeland in the highlands of Thuringia 
3 ) 

and Saxony; ' others prefer the Central Asiatic steppes, 
including the steppe area of the Ukraine. 4 ) In the first 
two cases the Corded Ware population would be pockets of 
the old Mesolithic inhabitants who had not been overrun 
at the time of the expansion of the Northern Megalithic 
people. The areas occupied by them are predominantly more 
suited for a pastoral or at least semi-pastoral life than 
for the growing of grain, and therefore we find the Corded 
Ware people favoring cattle-raising rather than grain- 

1) Schwantes: op. cit. p. 111. 

2) Kossinna: Ursprung und Verbreitung der Germanen, p. 160. 

3) Schulz: Germanen und Indogermanen, p. 32. 

4) Wahle: Deutsche Vorzeit; GUnther: Der Ursprung der 
Germanen; Childe: The Aryans. 
























- 

. 

. . 







growing, although the latter was of course not toy any means 
excluded.-*-) The semi-nomadic life could also toe responsible 
for their warlike nature which shows itself clearly in their 
elaborately shaped battle-axes. This combative nature may 
also explain why they were not conquered toy the waves of 
Northern Megalithic expansion. It was much easier to sub¬ 
ject the peaceful agricultural people of the Banded and 
Painted Pottery cultures in the rich loess areas than the 
warlike Corded W a re people. 

The graves of this second culture were single graves 
with no stone structures erected'above them; they were covered 
only with a shallow mound, a survival no doubt of the Meso¬ 
lithic burial practice of burial in a shallow shaft grave, 
except that the addition of a low mound may have been due 
to the influence of the Northern Megalithic culture. Their 
battle-axes had a characteristic canoe-like shape, distinguish¬ 
ing them sharply from the battle-axes of the Northern Megali¬ 
thic culture. Their pottery was ornamented by winding a cord 
around the wet clay before it was baked. 

During their period of expansion the people of the 
Corded Ware culture followed in general the invasion routes 
used by the people of the Northern Megalithic culture before 
them, but expanded over somewhat wider areas. To the west 
they occupied the Rhine valley and following the passes of 
the Jura mountains reached the Rhone. They occupied the 
Bohemian Plain. They moved down the Danube valley, penet¬ 
rated into Jugo-Slavia along the Morava river and through 


1) Schwantes: op. cit. p. 112 







. 

* 














- 

. 







. ' ■ ’ • * 
' 

. 








6 


the Maritza valley reached Aegean shores, spreading from there 
into-Greece and crossing to Asia Minor. Like the Northern 
Megalithic people befo^ them, they too reached the region 
of the Caucasus. In their northern expansion they occupied 
Southern Scandinavia and the eastern shores of the Baltic. 
Following continental routes, across the Northern European 
Plain, they spread as far eastward as the Middle Volga river. 
In many final stages these migration movements were not 
completed until the Bronze Age (See Map 2). 

Which of the two cultures represent the Indo-European 
people? Some think that the people of the Northern Megali¬ 
thic culture are the Indo-Europeans^ As Kossinna sees it, 
the expansion of the Northern Megalithic people was accom¬ 
plished by a series of migrations, as a result of which there 
emerged the different Indo-European peoples. The people of 
the Corded Ware culture are, in his opinion, the Proto- 
Finns, the native Mesolithic people of the North, who under 
the strong influence of the I n do-European Northern Megali¬ 
thic people, became a mixture which he calls Finno-Indo- 
European. These Finno-Indo-Europeans, according to Kossinna, 
later occupied Thuringia and Saxony and became the ancestors 
of the Celtic and Italic peoples. Kossinna believed that 
the Corded Ware people were native to Jutland, and merely 
formed a part of the Indo-European Northern Megalithic 
expansion movement. Schulz^) accepts the hypothesis that 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 153. 

2) Schulz: op. cit. 






* 0 

2 

- 

. 



























- 

. 








«* 


















~ 











. 





7 


both Northern Megalithic and Corded Ware people are two as¬ 
pects of the Indo-Europeans. Others regard the Corded Ware 

1 ) 2 ) 

people as the Indo-Europeans. Childe weighs the evidence 
for and against the various hypotheses, appears to be of the 
opinion that the Corded Ware people are the original Indo- 
Europeans, but is unable on the evidence to come to a definite 
conclusion as to whether the home of the Corded Ware culture 
is in Ukraine, in Thuringia or in Jutland. One thing is 
certain; after the expansion of the original Indo-Europeans 
a very extensive mixture must have taken place with the 
different conquered peoples, and out of the resulting phy¬ 
sical and cultural assimilation emerged the historic Indo- 
European peoples. 


1) cf. the works of Wahle, GUnthr, Childe. 

2 ) Childe: op. cit. p. 200. 





* 







* 

* 
























8 


Chapter 2 

THE ORIGIN OP THE GERMANIC PEOPLE 

In this thesis I am going to take as a working basis the 
hypothesis that the Corded W a re people are the original Indo- 
Europeans, that their homeland was In Thuringia and Saxony, 
the highland area which had not been overrun by the expanding 
Northern Megalithic people, and that they were the descend¬ 
ants of the native Mesolithic European population of that 
area. Prom there they expanded in all directions {See Map 2). 
One of these migration movements carried them down the Elbe 
river. Here they conquered first the people of the Northern 
Megalithic culture of N 0 rthwest Germany, Schleswig-Holstein 
and Southern Denmark. As a result of this conquest we do not 
find in these areas the third phase of the Northern Megalithic 

grave development - the stone cist. This event took place 

at the end of the Neolithic period. As a result there was a 
cultural uniformity in Zone 2 which is not found in Denmark 
proper. Zone 1*^ (See MaP 3). The Northern Megalithic people 
of Zone 1 also eventually lost the political supremacy to the 
Corded Ware conquerors. However, the cultural amalgamation 
in Zone 1 did not take place as rapidly as in Zone 2. The 
conquered people of the N 0 rthern Megalithic culture, concen¬ 
trated in Eastern Continental Denmark, the D g nish Islands and 
Southern Sweden, maintained their cultural traditions and it 
was In these areas Where the final stage of the Northern 
Megalithic culture, the stone cist grave, developed. 

1) Kersten: Zur alteren nordischen Bronzezeit, pp 99 and 106. 


















. 







. 



. 




* 













































. 












9 - 


The Corded W^re people settled mainly in the western and 
central parts of the Jutish Peninsula and in Northwestern 
Germany, presumably because, generally speaking, these areas 
were more suitable for pastoral!sm than for grain-growing on 
an intensive scale. Throughout the whole of Period I of the 
Bronze Age the two peoples, the Northern Megalithic and the 
Corded Ware, developed their own separate cultures.^ And 
even later in the Bronze Age and reaching into the early 
phases of the Iron Age in the North, long after thejethnic 
amalgamation must have been completed, at least in the more 
densely settled areas, the people of the areas in which the 
Northern Megalithic people had resisted Indo-Buropeanization 
the longest maintained their special cultural position. It 
is in these areas that the highest cultural attainments were 
reached in the Bronze Age. It is therefore possible to assume 
that the Northern Megalithic people contributed more to the 
artistic productiveness and the Corded Ware people more to 
the war-like nature of the Germanic people who developed out 
of the fusion of the two. 1 2 ^ 

It is obvious th if the Corded Ware people were the 
Indo-Europeans and if their original home was in Thuringia 
and Saxony, they must have been the people who introduced an 
Indo-European language into the Scandinavian North and into 
Northwest Germany. There must have followed the linguistic 
Indo-Europeanization of the people of the Northern Megalithic 
culture. There can be no doubt that a cultural amalgamation 
took place, also a physical, in so far as there existed any 

1) Kersten: op. cit. p. 106. 

2) Ibid. p. 107. 

















- 































* 

. 

. 

* - 

- 










. 






* 






* 

. 













Map 9 


1 - Germanic people, 2 - Celts, 7 > - Italic people, 
4 - Illyrians, 5 - Greeks, 6 - Thracians, 7 - Alba¬ 
nians, 8 - Slavs, 9 - Baltic people, 10 - Aryans. 
Shaded area - The Corded Ware Culture after Stamp- 
fuss. Indo-European tribes after Johansson. 































10 


radical difference in the dominant physical types of the two 
cultures. What would be the result of the linguistic Indo- 
Europeanization? The languages of the Germanic group differ 
materially from other language groups of the Indo-European 
stock. If the above explanation of the origin of the Germanic 
people is correct, it is clear that the Corded Ware people 
must have imposed their Indo-European language upon a non- 
Indo-European speaking people. If the sub-stratum hypothesis 
is accepted as a satisfactory explanation of certain signifi¬ 
cant phonetic differences between Germanic and other Indo- 
European languages, we can find fairly satisfactory condi¬ 
tions for the operation of such phonetic tendencies in the 
cultural and geographical conditions prevailing in the Bronze 
Age and the early part of the Iron Age in Northern Europe.^ 

It has been necessary to give this brief summary of the 
archaeological, cultural and linguistic background of the 
Indo-European problem and of the problem of the origin of 
the Germanic speaking peoples. My specific task, however, 
is not to discuss these problems, but to show by a series 
of maps and explanatory comments the expansion of the East 
Germanic peoples, not into their North European home, but out 
of it after the establishment of a linguistic and cultural 
unity in those areas from which the Germanic speaking peoples 
are known to have spread in the Bronze and Iron Ages. 

It was during the Bronze Age and especially during the 
Older Bronze Age that the process of cultural assimilation 

1) Kersten: op. cit. p. 106; Hirt: Etymologie, Konsonantismus - 
Indogermanische Grammatik, Vol. I; Braun F.; Die Urbevolke- 
rung Europas und die Herkunft der Germanen, passim; Prokosch: 
Germanic Review, Vol. I, Nr.l. 1926. 








- , 


. 


. 


























- 








• 



































. 






- 





il - 


must have begun. We may safely assume that a linguistic 
and cultural unity had been achieved before any major 
emigration took place, otherwise much greater differences 
would be evident in the different Germanic groups than is 
the case. 

It is then now necessary to examine the Bronze Age, to 
follow the process of cultural assimilation and to mark the 
successive stages of the overflow of the population out of 
the area of characterization of the Germanic people into 
adjacent areas and beyond. 






12 


Chapter 3 
THE BRONZE AGE 

The Bronze Age is usually divided into five periods hut 
Montelius adds a sixth transitional period. The two main 
schemes are those of Montelius and Kossinna.^ 


Montelius 

I 

-- 

1800 

- 

1500 

B.C. 


II 

— 

1500 

- 

1300 

B.C • 


III 

-- 

1300 

- 

1100 

B • C o 


IV 

-- 

1100 

- 

1000 

B.C. 


V 

-- 

1000 

- 

750 

B.C. 


VI 

-- 

750 

- 

600 

B.C. 

Kossinna 

I 

— 

2100 

- 

1750 

B.C. 


II 

-- 

1750 

- 

1400 

B.C. 


III 

-- 

1400 

- 

1200 

B.C© 


IV 

— 

1200 

- 

1000 

B.C. 


V 


1000 


750 

B.C. 


In Northern Europe the Bronze Age was preceded by a very 
short Copper Age* and since Kossinna includes the Copper Age 
in his first Period, it is necessary for him to date his 
Period I much earlier than Montelius does. In this Copper 
Age as well as in Period I of the Bronze Age the old Neolithic 
cultures continued to flourish side by side with the newer 
metal culture. It is, however, only in the second part of 
Period I of the Bronze Age that we can speak of locally man¬ 
ufactured tools, weapons and ornaments.^ These artifacts 
still bear the traces of the imported wares, but they have 
already ceased to be mere copies of them and far outnumber 

1) Nerman: Die Ilerkunft und die fruhesten Auswanderungen der 
Germanen, passim; Kossinna: Ursprung und Verbreitung der 

Germanen, passim 

2 ) Kersten: op. cit. p. 99. 











. 


















. 






















. 

. 




, 






















. 







15 


the Imported wares. 1 ) Nor can we speak yet of a specific 
Northern Bronze style in Period I. This specific style 
appears first in Period II* The Bronze culture of Northern 
Europe during Period I still belongs to the extensive Middle 
European Bronze culture, and is an integral part of it. 2 ^ 

As such it is characterized by the typical geometric ornamen¬ 
tation of the artifacts. 

Period I is also the time of the amalgamation of the two 

different peoples --- Corded Ware and Northern Megalithic-■ 

into one ethnic unity. And only in Period II did the now 
entirely victorious Bronze culture attain a uniformity and 
originality of style. 5 ) It is only in Period II of the Bronze 

Age that we can speak of the Germanic people as an ethnic 

4) 

unity. According to the chronological scheme of Montelius 

this would be about 1500 B.C. 

In discussing the Bronze Age of Northern Europe some 

authorities regard the areas affected as being one large 
a \ 

uniform entity^' Others, however, think that the areas affect- 

0) 

ed can be divided into three cultural zones. According to 
this division Zone 1 comprises the whole of Denmark, except 
the two southern districts of Kibe and Vejle, large parts of 
Southern Sweden, especially Scania, and during Periods II and 

1) Kersten: op. cit. p. 99. 

2 ) Ibid. 

3) Ibid. p. 100 

4) Ibid. p. 107 

5) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 5. 

6) Kersten: op. cit. p. 97. 








■ 









14 


III the three Northern Frisian islands Sylt, Amrum, and Fohre 
(See Map 3). This is the zone that plays a leading role in 
Period II in the cultural development of the Northern Bronze 
Age. In Zone I the Bronze Age can scarcely be said to have 
begun before Period II, the process of fusing the Neolithic 
cultures with the early Bronze culture being^here slower 
than in Schlewwig-Holstein. But once the fusion had taken 
place the Zone dominates all cultiiral achievements of 
Northern Europe, especially in the areas of the former 
Northern Megalithic people. All leading style-forms develop 
here first. 1 ) This area has therefore the greatest number 
of sub-divisions in the time scheme (See Map 3 and diagram 
on Page 14). 


III 

III 

III b - MUller VI 

III a - MUller V 

II 

I IB 

II c - Muller IV 

XIA 

II b - Muller III 

II a - MUller II 

I 

IB 

IB - MUller I 

IA 

IA - MUller I 


1) Kersten: op. cit. p. 97 

















15 


According to Kossinna the Germanic people spread in 
Period II mainly in a southerly direction. The area occupied 
is enclosed by a line that starts In the east at the mouth 
of the Peene river at Wogast, runs southward through 
Anklam, Friedland in Mecklenburg-Strelitz, Strassburg, Pren- 
zlau, Angermiinde, Eberswalde, Spandau to Potsdam. From 
here on It curves toward the Elbe which is reached at a point 
where the Saale joins the Elbe (near Kalbe a.S.). Then the 
line goes down the Saale to a point not far south of where 
the Bode flows into the Saale. Following the right bank 
of the Bode it reaches the Harz Mountains where it runs through 
Quedlingen and Blankenburg am Harz. It then follows the 
northern slopes of the Central German Mountain Range to the 
northwestern corner of the Teutoburge© Wald until it reaches 
the Ems river and from there on follows that river to the 
North Sea. (See Map 6). 

Kossinna’s Period III witnesses the retreat from the Ems 
to the areas situated on the left bank of the Weser river. 

(See Map 7). To the south they remain essentially on the 
northern slopes of the Central German Mountain Range, as 
during Period II, but occupy the area of the lower Lippe. 

There are no significant changes in their position in the 
area bdtween the Elbe and the Oder. But once the latter is 
reached the border line crosses this river and encloses a 
good portion of Hinterpommern. To indicate the areas 
occupied by the Germanic people during Period III in Scan¬ 
dinavia I refer to the information given by R. Stampfuss. 1 ^ 

1) Map by R. Stampfuss: Die Urgermanenzeit. 




I 







. 




. 










s 


















. 






■ 












- 

, 




' 




* 
















. 














16 


These areas were Southern and Central Sweden Including Dais- 
land, Nerike and Upland. Norway is not affected. The Is¬ 
lands of Gotland and Oland were included. (See Map 7). 

In the areas east of the Elbe the Germanic people came 
into touch with the Illyrian population. Already in Period I 
of the Bronze Age we find here the Illyrian Aunjetiz Gulture 
from which came the great part of the bronze artifacts that 
were Imported into the areas where latter in Period II the 
Northern Bronze Culture developed. (There were however 
some bronze imports from England). During the Middle Bronze 
Age we find here another Illyrian culture - the Lusatian 
Culture - which probably developed out of the Aunjetiz 
Culture. This culture was In many ways superior to that of 
the Germanic people after the latter had passed their cult¬ 
ural zenith during Period II of the Bronze Age. It is be¬ 
fore these people that the Germanic wave had to retreat 
temporarily during Periods IV and V of the Bronze Age. 

Period III, as conceived by Kersten, covers an area that is 
much smaller than that of Kossinna. During Period II the 
Germanic people spread into the province of Mecklenburg. 

On the other hand they retreated entirely from the district 
of Stade back to the right bank of the Elbe river. There is 
no significant change in Southern Scandinavia to be noted 
at this time. (See Map 5). 

Assuming that on the whole Kersten*s point of view is 
more correct than that of Kossinna, the move of the Germanic 
people during Period III into the province of Mecklenburg can 

be regarded as the first wave of Germanic expansion which took 
place. Up to this point we have witnessed the movement of 






. 

- 




, 






. 
























. 















. 
































. 





17 


the Corded Ware people into the North, their mixture with 
the conquered Northern legalithic population and the fusion 
of both peoples into an ethnic and cultural unity. Prom this 
point of view then the occupation of Mecklenburg is the first 
wave of expansion of the Germanic people. Prom a more con¬ 
servative point of view this occupation might be regarded 
as the last phase of the amalgamation process. 

Archaeologically Period III witnessed the decline of 
artistic achievements as compared with those of Period II. 

The artistic forms change greatly too. At the beginning of 
this Period we witness the disappearance of the practice of 
dividing the parts of the artifacts sharply from each other, 
which was characteristic of Period II. The various parts of 
the artifacts form now a harmonious whole, each part flowing 
smoothly into the next. A sharp adaptation of certain or¬ 
namentation to certain parts of artifacts, which toot place 
during Period II ceases to exist.^ In the latter part of 
the Period the forms become much larger and the ornamenta¬ 
tion that was very elegant and graceful in the first part dT 
the Period becomes much ruder.^ Parallel with these changes 
another very important cultural change took place. With this 
Period the practice of cremation, which up to now had only 
been sporadic, became the common burial practice as opposed 
to HUgelgraber and Eichenbaums&rge burials of Period II. 3 ^ 

Kersten f s work deals only with the Older Bronze Age. 
Consequently I am presenting Kossinna* s interpretation of 
the events of Periods IV and V. The two periods are discussed 

1) Kersten: op. cit. p. 103. 

2 ) ibid. p. 104. 

3) Hoops: Reallexikon der Germ. A1terturnskunde, V.II p. 566 
and V. I p. 183. 































1 










' 











- 

























■ 

. 












. 





- 







* 











































. 


. 







18 


together, because they were relatively of short duration and 
no significant changes took place during Period IV. In 
Period V the Ems river was crossed. The border line goes 
southwards until it reaches the lower part of the Lippe 
river where it probably touches the Rhine.^ It then runs 
to the headwaters of the L&ppe and, leaving the Teutoburger 
Wald and the Harz on its north side, passes along the valleys 
of the Gold, Aue and the Unstrut rivers until it reaches the 
Saale. It now follows the Saale, turns to the right before 
this river joins the Oder, crosses the Elbe, follows the 
right bank of it for a while and then, after making a bend, 
passes Berlin and reaches the Oder. (See Map 7). Between 
the Elbe and the Oder we witness now a slight retreat of the 
Germanic settlements as compared with Period III. This 
retreat is due to the eounter advance of the Illyrians which 
pushed back the advance-posts of the Germanic people for a 
short time. On the right bank of the Oder the line advances 
now to the area that lies on the right of the lower Warthe 
and the Netze until It reaches the Vistula and crosses this 
river north of the big bend. Then the line turns back to the 
left bank of this river, crosses it again and ends on the 
Baltic shore in Samiand. (See Map 7). 

In respect to the occupied territory east of the Oder 
L. Schmidt offers a somewhat more conservative view. His 
border line goes from Berlin through Bernau, Oderberg, crosses 

1) Prom this point the expansion that resulted in Caesar's 
German! cisrhenani must have started. See Kossinna: 
op. clt. p. 24. 

































i 









. . 


. 




■ 













o : 


' 




































' 







. • 
















. 

. 

















19 


the Oder and then to Gttstebiese, from there northwards to 
Soldin, follows the 52nd parallel to the Netze north of 
Czarnikau. Prom here the line goes to SchneidemUhl, along 
the Konigsberg railway as far a& Konitz, then to Prussian 
Stargard, Dirschau a. d. Weichsel and finally reaches Dan¬ 
zig. 1 ^ In Scandinavia the expansion as presented by R. 
Stampfuss for the time ca 800 B.C. would correspond to the 
end of Period V according to Kossinna and Montelius. In 
the east the border line starts at Hudiksvall, Sweden, not 
for south of the 62nd parallel. It then procedes westwards 
far into the valleys of all the large Scandinavian rivers. 

Only the main mountain massives remain unoccupied. The same 
is true for the coasts of Norway; the settlements here reach 
as far as Trondhjem. There are also a few colonies on the 
shores of Finland. (See Map 7). 

It is not until Period V that we meet the first indica¬ 
tion of the division of the Germanic people into East and 
West Germanic. The evidence of this division can be seen 
in Northern Germany east to the Oder in the development of 
a new type of burial, probably a local development, t&e 
result first of expansion from further west and then isolation. 
This new type of burial was urn burial in stone cists; in the 
urns were the incompletely burned bones of the deceased. 

These are community graves. The urns themselves show an 
attempt at modelling the human face; they are called f face 
urns* (Gesichtsurnen). This form of burial continues 
throughout a great part of the Pre-Roman Iron Age ( 750 - 
1) Schmidt: Geschichte der Germanischen FrUhzeit, p. 21. 












- 








. 

: 


- 










' 

. 

. 





































’ : ' 
















20 


0 B.C. Montelius scheme). In the northern part of the dis¬ 
tinctly Germanic area, however, it dies out about 500 B.C., 
in more southern areas about 500 B.C,, and is replaced by 
different burial customs. 1 2 ^ The problem of whose ancestors 
these people of the face-urn culture were will be discussed 
later in the chapter on the Iron Age, For the presnnt it is 
sufficient to note that almost all German archaeologists 
regard the face-urn people as Germanic, but of the East 
Germanic division, 

f i'he distinction between the East and West Germanic tribes 

is made on the basis of differences in burial customs, 

weapons, ornaments, pottery designs and ornamentation. There 

are also certain linguistic differences, although manuscript 

2 ) 

evidence dates from much later (Gothic) times. 


1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 29. 

2) Ibidem p. 28. 


X 












i * * 







. 

' 



























. 



21 


Chapter 4 
THE IRON AGE 

In the discussion of Germanic migrations during the 
Iron Age I am going to use the time-scheme as given by 
Montelius.*^ This time-shheme is as follows: 

750 B.C. — 600 B.C., Period VI of the Bronze Age, a period of 

600 B.C. -- 300 B.C. Period I of the Iron Age, transition. 

300 B.C. — 150 B.C. Period II of the Iron Age, 

150 B.C. — 0 B.C. Period III of the Iron Age. 

Iron replaces bronze mainly in the manufacture of wea¬ 
pons; bronze continues to be used in the making of many art¬ 
ifacts which were used for personal adornment. However, the 
old artistic skill of the Bronze Age is gone. In time iron 
rings and brooches gradually appear along with bronze 
articles, and, of course, iron artifacts increase in number 
as iron becomes more plentiful. 

With the coming of the Iron Age there Is a continuous 
emigration out of the Scandinavian home-land, as an enumer¬ 
ation of some of the more important of the tribes which left 
thosej^areas during a period of about 750 years will show; 
Vandals, Langobards, Burgundians, Rugians, Cimbrians, Teu¬ 
tons and Goths. As we shall see later this movement did 
not cease at the beginning of the present era; the North 
continued to pour out waves of emigrants. 

At the beginning of the Iron Age, that is, during Period 

VI of the Bronze Age according to Montelius, we witness a 

1) Berman: Die Herkunft und die frUhesten Auswanderungen 
der Germanen, passim. 



O 































22 


mass movement out of Scandinavia, especially from certain 
presumably over-populated areas. This does not mean that 
these areas were denuded of population, but it does mean 
that the density of the population was very greatly reduced, 
sufficiently reduced so that a very marked reduction can 
be noticed in the number of archaeological finds. Only the 
southwestern and southeastern parts of Norway, Jutland, the 
islands of Bornholm and Gotland continue to show the same 
density of artifacts, an indication that the emigration out 
of these districts was on a much smaller scale.^ And at 
the same time the artistic decline which began during 
Period III of the Bronze Age continues. 

Is it possible to assign any reason for this fairly 
general migration movement? An obvious reason, of course, 
is increase of population beyond the capacity of the none 
too fertile soil to supply with adequate food. In primit¬ 
ive, or unsophisticated societies a surplus of food usually 
results in an increase of population, and even in more 
advanced societies an increase in production, resulting in 
the ability to acquire a greater amount of food, will as 
a rule have the same effect, witness the rapid increase 
of population in England after the Industrial Revolution. 

It is, of course, also true that In a highly sophisticated 
society, a surplus of food, or comforts or leisure, may 
result in a marked, decrease in the birth rate. But we are 
not dealing with a highly sophisticated society in the 

1) Nerman: Die Herkunft und die fruhesten Auswanderungen 
der Germanen, pp. 13-18. 














. 


■ 






t 






























23 


Iron Age of the Germanic North, and from the beginning of 
the Neolithic Age on, that is, from the time of the first 
introduction of the food-producing economy, there is every 
indication of a constantly growing population, increasing 
to such an extent that the inevitable alternative was em¬ 
igration or starvation* We have seen this happen in the 
Neolithic Age with the outward movement of the people of 
the Northern Megalithic culfrure; we have noted the beginn¬ 
ings of another emigration movement during the latter part 
of the Bronze Age; the minor waves of the Bronze Age em¬ 
igration movement become a storm in the Iron Age, with wave 
after wave of hungry land-seekers seeking to move south and 
being forced in part, at least at first, to fan out in a 
westerly and easterly direction, until with the collapse of 
the power of the Illyrian and Celtic powers, the flood of 
migration surged towards the south, and was only restrained 
for several centuries by the military power of the Roman 
Empire which established a multitude of road-blocks along 
the Rhine and the Danube. 

Obviously this was one factor in the movement of expan¬ 
sion. But the sunny southern lands have always exerted a 
strange fascination on the northern peoples, the warm, sunny 
south where people are reported to live in luxury, where there 
is plunder for the taking by any war-like band, and where the 
strong can live on the forced exertions of the conquered 
natives. It has rarely turned out that way, but nevertheless 
the belief is a potent magnet. Undoubtedly this too was a 
factor in this Iron Age Volk er-wanderung . 





. 


. 






















' 





















, 

















J 

* 













0 

. 










24 - 


But there is reason to believe that there was another 
important factor, the factor of climatic deterioration. 

(See climatic chart following Map 8). The chart attempts 
to show the correlation between climatic conditions and 
the immigration into Northern Europe as well as the emig¬ 
ration out of it. It is quite clear that the peopling of 
Northern Europe could only begin with the retreat of the 
ice of the Fourth Glacial Period. And the settleae nts in 
the North increase as the climate moderates, 1 ^ until finally 
an optimum climate exists in the Neolithic Age and the 
upper part of the Bronze Age. Then the climate begins to 

deteriorate again, perhaps due in part to long term variations 

2 ) 

in the amount of solar radiation reaching the earth, or 

to isostatic and eustatic adjustments in the relative level 

of water and land after the melting of the glaciers and the 

return of the melt-water to the surrounding seas, or to 

another factor which has only recently been given prominence. 

This is the hypothesis of Petterson, as reported by 

3 ) 

H. L. Carlson. Petterson claims to have established a 
climatic cylle for the Scandinavian North of 1800 years. 

Every 1800 years there is a period of climatic deterioration, 
caused by what he calls f moon-waves f , the result of the 
sun and moon exercising a tidal attraction in approximately 
a straight line. This causes huge tides, which affect the 
ice-fields of the Arctic and very materially influence the 

1) Clark: The Mesolithic Settlement in Northern Europe, pas¬ 
sim. 

2) Graraow: Biography of the Earth, Chap. VIII. 

5) Carlson: The Sea around us, pp. 177 - 182. 







• 




, 






1 ’ ■ ; ‘ ■> 






j i :•• 











* 

















. 










. 









. 

. 

























. 

. 












*' 'e& 

- 


4 









25 


direction of the warm Atlantic current, the Gulf Stream, 
for instance, and as a result Northern Europe does not 
get the usual benefit of the warm currents for a period of 
several centuries before and after this low point of clim¬ 
atic deterioration. Now according to Petterson the last 
period of climatic deterioration in Northern Europe was 
during the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, 
and the preceding one would therefore be centred on 500 B.C. 
This agrees remarkably well with the archaeological evidence 
of emigration out of the Scandinavian North, just as the 
geological and botanical^ evidence of climatic amelioration 
after the retreat of the ice can be correlated with the 
immigration into Northern Europe. Just as in the thirteenth 
century there were floods, harvests failed, the Swedish 
fisheries went bankrupt, so in the fifth century B.C. plus 
or minus two or three hundred years, the climatic condit¬ 
ions were such that the food supply was affected, some of 
the Iww-lying lands were flooded, and we have here a very 
compelling factor in the urge to seek other lands further 
to the south. Some of the popular legends give floods and 
failure of harvests as a reason for a migration movement. 
This is particularly true in the case of the Cimbri and the 
Teutoni, and it is also given as one of the causes for 
the emigration of the Goths. 

Owing to the nature of the soil of Northern Scandinavia 
the emigration was forced to go in a southerly direction, 

1) Clark: op. cit. passim. 
















. 











■ 

; 

. 











. t 










. 




. • I ' 


" 




: 











, 












* 

■ 










' • .■.. •... 
• ’ . * t 














< 

• . . , : ro v- 1 - 














26 


and one could expect to be able to note the appearance of 

new settlements on the southern shores of the Baltic and 

North Sea. As we shall see, this is what happened. In 

the Iron Age there took place a very great expansion of the 

East Germanic Branch, characterized at first by the face-urns 

and stone-cist burials. According to Kossinna"^ Eastern 

Germanic tribes very early occupied Hinterpommern, Posen, 

parts of Silesia and crossed the Vistula into East Prussia. 

Further south they spread into Southern Poland and the 

Western Ukraine. (See Map 38 )• On the whole, however, 

information abouth this particular aspect of the expansion 

2 ) 3) 

process is not too plentiful. The map by Stampfuss 
gives the available data for 400 B.C., which may or may 
not adequately represent the situation at the earlier per¬ 
iod, the period of transition from the Bronze to the Iron 
Age, about 800 B.C. 

Opinions differ as to what tribes are represented by 

4) 

the people of the face-urn culture. Schmidt ' regards the 
people of the face-urn culture as ancestors of the 
Basternae and Skiri . Their expansion was caused by the 
pressure brought to bear on them by the advancing Vandals, 
who at the time of transition from the Bronze to the Iron 
Age emigrated from Upland in Sweden, overran the territory 
of the face-urn culture, undoubtedly mixing with those 
who remained in the area, and occupied the coasts of the 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. Abb. 25. 

2) Nerman: op. cit. p. 26. 

6 ) Stampfuss: Die alters Grossgermanenzeit. 

4) Schmidt: op. cit. pp. 29 and 35. 








* 






















. 

o 

* - 

. 










27 


Baltic between the Oder and the Vistula. They appear to have 
adopted the same burial customs as the people whom they in 
part displaced, and this adds to the difficulty of archaeol¬ 
ogical identification. 1 2 3 4 5 ^ In the region west of the lower 
Vistula the finds become so numerous that it is difficult 
to avoid the conclusion that a new settlement had been made 

there .^ At the end of the transitional period we also 

3 ) 

witness, according to Herman the movement of the Lango- 
bards from their original home in Scania (Schonen) into the 
provine of Mecklenburg where they remained until about 100 B.C. 
(See Map S'y). 

At about 600 B.C. Germanic tribes crossed the Rhine 
and the Maas and occupied the southern parts of Holland and 
the northeastern corner of Belgium. It is here that Caesar 
more than 500 years later found the German! cisrhenanl , 
who, although already celticized, still retained the memory 

4) 

of their Germanic origin. (See Map 8). 

In Thuringia, however, the Germanic population had to 
retreat before the advancing Celts who spread to the south¬ 
ern and eastern slopes of the Harz mountains, reaching the 
5 ) 

Bode river. (See Map 8). 


1) Nerman: op. cit. pp. 26. 

2) Ibid. p. 21 and Kossina: Das Weichselland, p. 19. 

3) Nerman: op. cit. p. 33. 

4) Kossinna: Ursprung und Verbreitung der Germanen, p. 24. 

5) Ibid. p. 38. 












. 


* * 

. 






28 


Chapter 5 

THE BASTERNAE 


The general opinion prevailing among scholars is that 

the Basternae are the descendants of the people of the Face 

Urn culture. (See Map 8 8 ). This culture died out in its 

southern areas according to L. Schmidt about 300 B.C. 1 2 3 4 5 ^ It 

is in these areas that we find shortly after this time the 

Basternae and the Skirl. According to Schmidt therefore 

the Basternae are the descendants of the Face Urn people who 

were forced out by the ancestors of the Vandals from their 

northern territories. Herman does not offer any definite 

opinion abox t their origin. In his early works Kossinna 

advocated the view that the Face Urn people are the ancestor 

of the Vandals.^ He thought that the Basternae were the 

result of the mixture of a part of the Vandals with the 

5 ) 

Sarmatae . Later he changed his mind, apparently under the 

influence of the works of K. Tackenberg, who was seconded by 

R. Much and E. Schwarz in his opinion that the mixture was 

4) 

caused by elements of the Lausitz culture. In his later 
works Kossinna regarded the Basternae as the result of a 

mixture of the early Eastern Germanic people with the con- 

. 

quered population of those areas now called Southern Poland, 

Eastern Galicia and Wolhynia, without mentioning the pre- 

5 ) 

viously suggested relationship with the Vandals. The 

1) Schmidt? op. cit. pp. 29 and 35. 

2) Kossinna: Die deutsche Vorgeschichte, p. 142. 

3) Kossinna: Zu meiner Ostgermanen-Karte. 

4) K. Tackenberg: Die Bastarnen. 

5) Kossinna: German. Kultur im I Jahrtausend nach Chr. p. 20 



















, 






. 








* 













' 

' 

* 

. 


- 29 


\ 

constitution of the new tribe of Basternae should have taken 

place in the third century B.C.^ K. Tackenberg was the 

first to prove that the Pace Urn people were the ancestors 
9) 

of the Basternae * B. v. Richthofen agrees also with this 

3) 

view. He also adds that the Skiri could have been the 

next most likely descendants of the Face Urn people. The 

German archaeologists reject the suggestion of the leading 

Polish archaeologist J. Kostrewski, who thinks that the 

Face Urn people were the ancestors of the Baltic people. ; 

For my work 1 am accepting the hypothesis that the Bastern ae 

were the descendants of the Face Urn people. Their first 

historical homeland was the northern and eastern slopes of 

5 ) 

the Carpathian mountains. They are first mentioned by 
Trogus Pompeius in 233 B.C. ' The Greeks regarded chem as 
f Keltoi ! . The area occupied by them stretched from the 
headwaters of the Vistula into Galicia and the neighboring 
part of Podolia. (See Map 10)o About 230 B.C. they moved 
eastwards into the area between the Dniestr and the Car¬ 
pathian Mountains, and reached the Black Sea. (See Map 11). 

The Basternae in the headwaters of the Vistula who did not 

7) 

participate in this migration were, according to Much 
absorbed by the Skiri, who after the siege of Olbia (probably 

s 

at the end of the third century B.C.) returned to thftir 

1) Ibid. 

2) K. Tackenberg: op. alt. pp. 232 - 244. 

3) v. Richthofen: Zur Vorgeschichte der Ostgermanen, p. 128. 

4) Ibid. p. 129. 

5) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme. Vol. I, p. 87. 

6) Ibid. 

7) Much: Deutsche Stammeskunde, p. 127. 






















■ 


































Map 10. 



Map 11. 


230 0 220 B.C. 



















50 - 


former homes east of the Upper Vistula* (See MaP7g ). 

Plinius (50 A«D.) does not mention the Basternae in these 
areas but Ptolomy does (170 A.D.). 

The Basternae were divided into several tribes. We 
know the names of three of them: the Peucini at the mouth 
of the Danube on G-eorge Island, the Sidones around the 
headwaters of the Vistula and the Waag, and the Atmonoi, 
whose headquarters are unknown. (See Map 10 and 12). 

The Basternae attacked the Dacians south of them and 
forced them oat of the area north of the Lower Danube. 

(See Map 12). Then in 220 B.C. they pushed the Sarmatae 
out of the area between the Dniestr and the Bug and endan¬ 
gered the Greek colony of Olbia at the mouth of the Bug. 

(See Map 15). This new power on the Lower Danube was drawn 
into the political struggles of these times and different 
parties tried to make full use of it. The Macedonian 
King, Philip V intended to use them as mercenary troops 
against the Romans. According to the treaty the Basternae 
were to conquer the Dardani (in modern Serbia) and later 
together with the Celtic Scordisci attack Upper Italy. 

In 179 B.C. the Basternae crossed the Danube and fought 
their way through Thracian territory into the land of the 
Dardani whom they conquered, with the consent of Philip’s 
successor Perseus, in 176 B.C. 1 ^ (See Map 15). A part of 
the expedition turned back after the heavy fighting with 
the Thracians and it was the remaining part of the Basternae 


1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 89 































4 


































■ 







. 

C : ' . : : - •>.. 













t 









Map 12 • 



179 - 174 B.C. 
176 - " ” 


Map 13. 


red 

blue 




















31 


who defeated the Dardani . Bat in the year 174 B.C. the 
Dardani rose against their conquerors, chased them oat 
and forced them to retreat beyond the Danube* Only a small 
remnant managed to escape; the majority of them perished 
when the ice on the river broke. 1 ^ In 168 B.G. the Basternae 
were again ready to ally themselves with Perseus in his 
quarrel with the Homans, but the king found the price they 

p) 

demanded too high and sent them home again. ' Until the 

end of the second century they held the Greek coast city of 

3) 

Istros under constant threat. In 88 B.C. they emerged 

again from temporary obscurity as the best mercenary troops 

of Mithradates, King of Pontus, in his conflict with the 

4) 

Romans. In 74 B.C. they distinguished themselves at the 

seige of the/city of Chalkeron in Bithynia (Asia Minor) by 

5 ) 

the troops of Mithridates. In 61 B.C. the Romans trium¬ 

phed over Mithridates but still in the same year by the city 

of Istros the Basternae destroyed a Roman army led by the 

6 ) 

proconsul C. Antonius. The rise of the power of the 

Dacians under their king Boirebistas meant, according to 
7 ) 

L. Schmidt ' for the Baaterna. the loss of their independ¬ 
ence. It is also knoxi'n that in 55 B.C. the city of Olbia 
was in the hands of the Dacians, which could only mean that 
the Basternae had been subdued by the Dacians.®^ But after 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 89. 

2) Ibid. p. 90. 

3) Ibid. 

4) Ibid. 

5) Ibid. p. 91. 

6) Ibid. 

7) Ibid. 

8) Ibid. 








. 

, 










































violet 45 B.C• - 29 B.C. 


Map 14 . 



Map 15. 


170 - 280 A.D. 





















32 


the death of the powerful Dacian king the Basternae regained 
their independence in 45 B.C. and conquered the lands of 
the Dentheletes , allied with the Romans, in the area south 
of modern Sofia.^ (See Map 14)o Thereupon Octavianus in 
29 B.C. sent an army under the proconsul M.L. Crassus, but the 
Basternae , avoiding battle, retreated behind the Balkan 
Mountains. The Roman army, however, caught up with the 
Basternae by the Cibrica river and almost completely annih¬ 
ilated them. (See Map 14). In 28 B.C. the Basternae re¬ 
appeared on the border of Macedonia, but they were again 
defeated by Crassus. These Roman victories kept the Basternae 
inactive for a long time; the Romans even took them under 
their protection and undertook a campaign against the 
Jazyges , a Sarmatian tribe, who in the middle of the first 
century A.D. had moved from the area north of the Black Sea 

westward and were pressing hard on the Basternae . This was 

2 ) 

between 63 and 66 A.D. 

About the beginning of the present era the Basternae 

appear to have expanded as far as the Dniepr (See Map 14), 

However, the evidence for this is based upon artifact® found 

in Sarubinets in the District of Kanew and in the district of 

Romny (See Map 14), and these Germanic wares might have 

3) 

reached those areas as the result of trade. In any case 
the eastern tribes of the Basternae were attacked by the 
newly-arriving Goths, the first detachments of whom appear 
in the steppes of the Ukraine in 170 A.D. 

1) Schmidt: op.c&t. p. 91. 

2) Ibid. p. 93. 

3) Ibid. p. 94. 















' 



„ 


- 




Map 16 • 












53 


The pressure of the newly arriving Gothic tribes also 
caused many other peoples to leave their original places 
of settlement. Thus the Kostoboks , neighbors of the 
Basteme, passed through Thracia and Macedonia into Greece 
The Basternae also at this time, that is, 170 A.D. appear 
in Asia Minor and that means they must have raided the 
territories of the Empire. 1 2 3 ^ But already by 174 A.D. the 
Romans had reduced the invaders to subjection and had pen¬ 
etrated as far as Zaleszczyki on the Dniestr. 

In the long run the Basternae were not able to with¬ 
stand the pressure of the Goths. In 280 A.D. they were per 
mitted by the Emperor Probus to settle in Thrace near 

modern Warna. (See Map 16)* They were still there in 391 
2 ) 

A.D. , when they were punished by Stilicho for the murder 

of the Roman General Promotus. They mast have survived in 

Thrace until the 6th century, for Justinian founded near 

3 ) 

Odess&s(Warna) a castle named Basternai. 


1) Schmidt: op. clt. p. 94 

2) Ibid. p. 95. 

3) Ibid. 





















. 










' 

. 




. . 




♦ 


„ 

. 

■ 











34 


Chapter 6 
THE BURGUNDIANS 

All authorities are agreed about the original home¬ 
land of the Burgundians* All agree that this people came 
into Northeastern Germany from the Island of Bornholm. The 
Burgundians are mentioned for the first time in history by 
Pliny*^ as being in Northeastern Germany. Ptolemy placed 

2 ) 

them between the Oder and the Vistula, south of the Baltic. 

To this new home the Burgundians brought their special 

r K\ 

burial custom - Brandgrubenbestattung . The migration took 

4) 

place about 100 B.C. But although a considerable number 
of Burgundians must have migrated, Bornholm was by no means 
completely evacuated. A considerable portion of the tribe 
remained on the island and only joined their relatives on 
the mainland about 300 A.D., while the latter were moving 
into the areas around the Upper and Middle Main. It is only 
from 300 A.D. on that Bornholm was for a time practically void 
of population.*"' 

After having landed at the mouth of the Oder these 
mainland Burgundians first conquered those sections of the 
West Germanic population who were east of the Lower Oder. 

Then spreading south and east they reached the juncture of 
the Warthe with the Oder and occupied that part of Branden- 
burg-Neumark which lies north of the Warthe. (See Map IS). 

1) Pliny: Hist. nat. IV, 28. 

2) Hoops: Reallexikon der German. Altertum. V. I, p. 357. 

3) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 129. 

4) Ibid. p. 83. 

5) Nerman: op. cit. p. 61. 





. 


. 


. 

. 









. 

* . 


' 





4 4 




■ 

, 4 









, 


' 






. 

• • • : 


. 









Map 17 


100 B.C. - 0 



Map 18 


blue 

orange 


300 A.D 
125 " 



















35 


Then turning east they moved up the Warthe into the area 
around the sources of the Netze, where they formed quite 
a dense settlement. (See Map 17). Crossing the Vistula 
between Gra&denz and Thorn they pushed as far east as 
Strasburg in East Prussia. To the north they extended 
as far as Flatow and Tuchel. In the south the border ran 
along the Lower Warthe to the district around Turek and 
along the Bzura until it turns east in its lower course. 
(See Map 17). The Burgundians occupied the districts of 
Gostynin, Kutno and even extended as far as Lowicz and 
Sochaczew on the Lower Bzura. From the juncture of the 
Bzura with the Vistula the line ran up the latter to the 
juncture of the Bzura and the Wkra (or Dzialdowka). The 
lower Wkra then constituted the border which followed 
fairly closely the right bank of the Vistula down to Thorn, 
from where it turned to the above-mentioned Strasburg^ 

(See Map 17). This eastward penetration of the Burgund¬ 
ians brought them into conflict with the Vandals, who were 
forced to give ground. The Burgundians wedge, penetrat¬ 
ing almost as far as Warsaw, cut the Vandal territory 
into two parts. Most of the Vandals retreated south ex¬ 
cept for a small pocket in West Masuria which remained in 
the north cut off from the main body. (See also under the 
Vandals). 

In these new areas the Burgundians remained undis¬ 
turbed until the beginning of the present era# The coming 
of the Goths, who landed at the mouth of the Vistula, 

1) Kossinna: German. Kultur im I.Jahrtausend nach Chr. pp. 

210, 211 and 202. 


1 ) 








- 






■ 





>" ■ 


■ 





' 

■ 

* 



















125 - 175 A.D. 


Map 19 



Map 20 


green 

red 













36 


affected the Burgundians also, although indirectly. The 
central section of the Rugians occupying the Baltic shore 
at the time of the arrival of the Goths had to give ground 
and move westward into the area west of the Persante, which 
forced the Burgundians to move to the east between the 
Warthe and the Netze. (See Map 18). Now a new assault 
came from the north, this time by that portion of the Goths 
later known as Gepidae , who at the beginning of the 2nd 
century were in possession of the area of the Middle 
Netze, that is, the districts of Bromberg, Scharnikau, 
Wirsitz and Kolmar.^ (See Map 19). (See also under the 
Goths). The Burgundians were forced to retreat to the 
west. This new migration began about the middle of the 

2 ) 

2nd century and continued until the end of the century. 

A small section of the Burgundians, who east of the big 
bend of the Lower Vistula, were not subjected to the 
Gothic attack, remained in this area until 250 A.D. At 
this time they were overrun by the Gepidae who in their 
migration southeast had to cross these Burgundian territ¬ 
ories. (See also under the Gepidae ). (See Map 20). 

The remainder of these Burgundians fled southeast and 

3 ) 

settled finally in the area around the mouth of the Don.' 

(See Map 22). In 290 A.D. they were attacked by the 

4 ) 

Ostrogoths and probably annihilated. 

In the meantime the main body of the Burgundians 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 238. 

2) Ibid. p. 222 and Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen 
Stamme. Vol I, p. 130. 

3) Schmidt: Ibid.* p. 210. 

4) Ibid. p. 131. 






















































37 


moved into Brandenburg. (See Map 20). They foreed the 

Vandals out of part of this area, Niederlausitz, Branden- 

burg-Neumark and Northern Silesia, the Vandals retreating 

eastward.^ Occupying these new areas the Burgundians 

exerted pressure on the Semn o nes who in turn crowded their 

western and southern neighbors, and the restlessness 

started by this movement resulted in the outbreak of the 

Marcomannic War. Opinion is divided as to how long the 

Burgundians remained in these new territories. According 

to Nerman^ they remained until 300 A.D., according to 

3 ) 

Kossinna they were still there in the 4th century, 

4) 

according to Schmidt throughout the first half of the 
3rd century only. The view of Nerman is here accepted. 

The next move of the Burgundians brought them to the 
Upper and Middle Main. (See Map 21). They were rein¬ 
forced by their relatives from Bornholm who joined them 
at this time, as mentioned above. (See Map 23). These 
lands had been occupied by the Alemanni up to 260 A.D. 

when they broke through the Limes into the agri decumates 

5 ) 

and settled there. A section of the Burgundians managed 
to penetrate behind the Limes and maintain a foothold there 
for a short time, but as the result of conflict with the 
Empire and the Alemanni they were eventually forced to 
retreat again, 0 From this time dates the animosity between 

1) Schmidt: op, cit. p. 130 and Kossinna: op. cit. pp. 188 
and 222. 

2) Nerman: op. cit. p. 61. 

3) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 222. 

4) Schmidt: on. cit. 130. 

5) Ibid. p. 131. 

6) Ibid. p. 132 and Kossinna: op. cit. p. 222. 








e< 









- 

- 





. 




a 


a 

‘ 

;• ;J V-' ; 4<>I| 

* 1 3 ’ .1 


; j ; 





















300 - 370 A.D. 



Map 22. 


250 - 290 A.D. 












38 


the Burgundians and the Alemanni , due perhaps to the fact 
that the Alemanni barred to the Burgundians the way into 
Gaul. In 370 a«D. the Burgundians must have been on the 
Kocher, a tributary of the Neckar, and it was probably the 
salt-springs at Schwab!sch Hall (See Map 24) for possession 
of which the Burgundians and Alemanni fought bitterly. 

In the north they had the Chattl as neighbors in the Rhon 
Mountains. In 400 A.D. the Burgundians forced the 

Alemanni to evacuate the lands between the Neckar and the 

2 ) 

Taunus Mountains, which enabled them to reach the Rhine. 
(See Map 24). They can be traced archaeologically at 
Frankfort on the Main, at Wiesbaden, Heidelberg and various 
other places. At this time they were converted to the 
Arian creed of Christianity. 2 3 ^ In 4o€ A.D., following the 
Vandals and the Alans, they, as well as the Alemanni , 
crossed, the Rhine, devastating and looting. All the im¬ 
portant Middle Rhine cities, such as, Mainz, Worms, Speyer, 
Strassburg were besieged and taken by the Invaders. 
Constantius III, a rival Emperor, defeated them once but 
was unable to drive them back beyond the Rhine or to destroy 
them. He did, however, succeed in concluding treaties 
with the Burgundians and the Alemanni , as a result of which 
the Alemanni retreated beyond the Rhine again and the 
Burgundians were settled in the Rhine cities on the left 
bank as garrisons to protect the frontier. in 411 A.D. 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 132. 

2) Ibid. p. 133 and Kossinna; op. cit. p. 222. 

3) Kossina; ibid. 












. 


. 









, r. 



















































39 


the Burgundians helped to proclaim Jovinus as emperor and 
obtained from him the land in the northern part of Germania 
I (or s uperior ). Later (in 413 A.D.) the Emperor Hon- 
orius confirmed the Burgundians in the possession of their 
lands.^ The Burgundian king at this time was Gundahar 
of Niebelungen memory. 

By crossing to the left bank of the Rhine, however, 
the Burgundians did not completely evacuate their former 
lands on the right bank of the river. In their newly,, 
acquired lands Worms and Speyer were the principal cities. 
Mainz still remained in the hands of the Romans. (See Map 25). 
In order to enlarge his territories Gundahar in 435 A.D. 
undertook a raid, into Belgica I , but was defeated by Aetius 
and forced to retreat. The next year, 436 A.D., Aetius 
sent some of his auxiliary Hunnish troops against the 
Burgundians. Then took place the great battle which later 
became the subject matter of the Niebelungen Saga. Gun¬ 
dahar with 20,000 of his men fell in the battle. The 
disaster, however, affected only that part of the tribe 
which was settled on the left bank of the Rhine. (See Map 26). 
In 443 A.D. Aetius settled the remainder of the Burgund¬ 
ians in Sapaudia (modern Savoie). But the Burgundians 

2 ) 

on the right bank remained and were still there in 524 A.D. 
(See Map 27). 

The Burgundians who had been transplanted by Aetius at 
first occupied the lands between the Lake of Geneva, the 
highest ridges of the Mont Blanc Massif, the Upper Isere 

1) Schmidt: Germanische Eruhzeit, p. 239. 

2) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme. Vol. I, p. 164 
(Godomar*s Law). 










413 - 436 A.D. 



red 436 - VI.cent, A.D. 

green " - 443 " 
























40 


and the Rhone from the Lake of Geneva to where it turns 
to the west. This was the northeastern part of the Roman 
province of Gallia riparensi s (or Vfeennensis ). The main 
cities were Geneva (the capital), Villeneuve and Grenoble. 
(See Map 27). In 451 A.D. these Burgundians rendered 
obedience to Rome as foederati by sending a considerable 
contingent of troops to the allied army which fought against 
Attila. In this battle the Burgundians suffered heavy 
losses* In 456 A.D. Burgundian troops accompanied the 
Roman and Visigothic armies in their campaign against the 
Swabians in Spain. In 457 A.D. the Burgundian king Gun- 
dowech annexed the adjacent parts of Lugunensis I and after 
a siege took the city of Lugdunum (modernLyons)• (See 
Map 27). Although the Emperor reconquered the city in the 
next year, the imperial garrison was confined within the 
walls. In 461 A.D. the city itself again fell to the 
Burgundians, this time permanently, the city becoming 
their capital. In 471 A.D. the Burgundians warded off 
the Visigoths who were attempting to settle on the left 
bank of the Rhone. After this success the Burgundians 
extended their possessions to the area north of the Durance. 
(See Map 27)• 

The Burgundian state achieved its greatest power under 
its next king Chilperich. In 470 A.D. the Burgundians 
were in possession of the whole of Lugdunensis I. (See 
Map 27). The city of Nevers was already at this time in 
their hands. In 480 A.D. the city of Langres lies within 
the Burgundian territory. (See Map 27). In the senond 
















. 




. 


















, 

. 





. . 

■ 

■ 

. 




















■ 


. « 








. 






■ 

- 




































Map 27 • 


Map 28. 


523 


530 A .1). 

















41 


half of the 5th century A.D. they a i go annexed a large 
part of Maxima Sequanorum , driving out their hereditary 
foes, the Alemanni . (See Map 27)* The frontier with the 
Alemanni ran along the Upper and Middle Aare to around 
Solothurn. North of this place Burgundian artifacts found 
in onsingen, Courfaivre, Bassecourt, Gourgenay, Delle, 
Herimoncourt, Allenloie, Bourogne show the approximate lines 
of the frontier.^ (See Map 27). 

During the reign of the next king, Gundobad, who be¬ 
fore becoming king had been a magister militurn in the 
West Roman army, the Burgundian power began to decline, 
although we still witness some new acquisition of territ¬ 
ory. In 500 A.D. a plot was made between Chlodewech, king 
of the Franks and Godisigel, brother of G-undobad, to place 
Godosigel on the throne in return for a portion of Bur¬ 
gundian territory. During a battle between the Burgund¬ 
ians and the Franks Godisigel carried out his treacherous 
plan by deserting to the enemy. Gundobad succeeded in 
escaping to Avignon. The Franks, regarding the war as 
already won, withdrew, leaving about 5,000 troops of those 
which were in Vienne with Godigisel. In the meantime 
Gundobad obtained help from the Visigoths, and with this 
assistance he was able to defeat Godisigel and his Franks. 

The Visigoths obtained for this help the City of Avignon 

2 ) 

from the Burgundians. (See Map 27). Instead of allying 
himself with the Goths, however, Gundobad came to an under- 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 146. 

2) Ibid. p. 152. 










- 



- 




















- 

. 

. 










* 



- 


. 


























« 



























. 























42 


standing with the Pranks, for the purpose of the annex¬ 
ation of the southern part of Provence. In 502 A.D. the 
Franks with Burgundian help attacked the Alemanni and 
only the intervention of Theodoric the Great, the Ostro- 
gothic king, who had taken part of the tribe inhabiting 
Raetia under his protection, checked the invasion. How¬ 
ever, the district of Windisch in modern Aargau between the 
Aare and the Reuss (See Map 27) came under Burgundian 
control, and the Pranks occupied the district of Basel. 

In 507 A.D. when war broke out between the Visigoths and 
the Pranks the Burgundians were quite openly on the side 
of the Pranks. They took an active part in the battle of 
Vougle; they besieged and stormed Narbonne. But in 508 
A.D. the Ostrogoths joined the Visigoths in a sudden raid 
over the pass of Mont Genevre deep into Burgundian territ¬ 
ory. The Burgundians, left in the lurch by the Pranks, 
were forced to retreat from their new acquisitions and 
hastily evacuated Southern Provence.^ The only gain 
they managed to retain was a part of the Viennensis 
territory on the right bank of the Rhone around the city 
of Viviers. (See Map 27). Before this enforced retreat 
the Burgundians had attained their greatest territorial 
expansion. This included the whole province of Gallia 
Lugdunensis I , a large part of Maxima Sequanor um, the 

whole northern part of Vienn e nsis , Alpes G raiae, Alpes 

2 ) 

Maritlmae and Narbonensis II north of the Durance. 

(See Map 27) 0 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 158. 

2) Ibid. p. 169. 




























, , 




- 

















* 

« 








' 




- 
















„ 

i 






° 







43 


Continuous quarrels, however, between the Orthodox 
Catholics and the heretical Arians were gradually weaken¬ 
ing the state. In 522 A.D. king Sigisraund contrived the 
murder of the son of his first wife, who was the daughter 
of Theodoric the Ostrogoth, As the Ostrogoths were pre¬ 
paring for war, the Frankish kings, Chlodomer, Childebert 
and Chlotachar fell upon the Burgundians in 523 A.D. The 
latter were defeated; Sigismund was taken prisoner, his 
brother Godomar escaping. As the Franks advanced from 
the North, along with the auxiliary troops from the 
Gepida e, the Ostrogoths moved in from the south, occupy¬ 
ing the land as far as the Isere river. (See Map 28). 

But as ©oon as the Frankish kings had left for home, the 
Burgundians under Godomar rallied again and in 524 A.D. 
drove out the Frankish occupational forces. Thereupon 
Chlodomer, after murdering Sigismund and his family, again 
attacked the Burgundians in alliance with Theuderich, 
another Frankish king. In the resulting battle , which took 
place In the area east of Vienne, Chodomer fell and the 
Franks, after having made a treaty, retreated. In 530 A.D. 
Godomar succeeded in arranging with the Ostrogoths for the 
return of the former Burgundian territories north of the 
Durance. (See Map 29). Hostilities, however, broke out 
again in 532 A.D. between the Burgundians and the Franks 
under Chlotachar and Childebert, and this time the Ostro¬ 
goths remained passive. In an attempt to come to the rescue 
of the besieged city of Autun Godomar was completely de- 
























. . 




» 


< 








i 
























- 

■ 














' 

. 










































44 


feated. The final division of the Burgundian lands 
among the Franks took place in 534 


< 



1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 165 






Chapter 7 

THE GEPIDAE 


It is only in the 3rd century that we can speak of 
the separate tribe called the Gepidae The migration 
of the Goths started about 150 A.D., but not as a single 
movement. It is only about 170 A«D« that the first Gothic 
migrants appeared In the Southern Ukraine. By the be- 
ginning of the 3rd century A.D. their consolidation there 
had been completed. The branch which later developed into 
the Gepidae extended further south at the expense of the 
Burgundians who were forced to retreat. During the re¬ 
maining part of the 2nd century these Goths occupied 
Burgundian territory as far south as the districts of 
BIrnbaum, Samter, Obornik and even as far as Wreschen in 
the southeast.(See Map 30). The bulk of the Burgund¬ 
ians gave way and retreated westwards at the end of the 
2nd century. Only a very small pocket of them remained 
in the area east of the bend of the Vistula. These 
Burgundians remained here until about 250 A.D. 

The furthest extension of the Gepidae in the south 
was as far as Neutomischl, Posen and Wreschen. (See Map 30) 
Their first migration took place about 250 A.D. At this 
time about one third of the tribe, probably the most 
northern, emigrated into Galicia, Bukowina and the most 
northern part of Siebenburgen. (See Map 31). It was 
about the same time that these areas had been evacuated 

1) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, V. I, p. 529. 

2) Kossinna: German. Kultur im I. Jahrtauzend n. Chr. p. 238 







. 


. 


. 














Map 30 • 



Map 31 • 


red and blue 250 - 325 A.D. 


















46 


by the Vandals. 1 ^ The Gepidae were led by their ambitious 
king Fastida. 2 ^ Right at the beginning the Gepidae had 
to deal with a pocket of Burgundians in the bend of the 
Vistula* The Burgundians, however, were almost annihilated, 
only a few of them managing to escape by migrating south¬ 
east where they joined the Goths in the Ukraine and settled 

3 ) 

down in the area around the mouth of the Don. 7 (See Map 22). 

The remaining Gepidae remained in Poland for several 

decades longer and only joined the Gepidae of Fastida at 

4) 

the beginning of the 4th century. But they were pre¬ 
vented from occupying the south of the Siebenburgen district 
by the Visigoths who in 260 A.D. had occupied this land. 

This cut the Gepidae off from Roman territory and also 
denied them the possibility of extending their territory. 

In 269 A.D. they participated in the big raid of Goths, 

Heruli and Basternae into Moesia which ended in defeat at 
theb attle of Naissus. In 290 A.D. they allied themselves 
with the Vandals in order to drive the Visigoths out of 
the southern Siebenburgen district. But the Visigoths, 

allied with the Taifali , repelled the attack and Fastida 1 3 

5) 

army and the Vandals had to retreat. 7 

We hear very kittle about the Gepidae during the 
4th century. After the Visigoths under Alavivus and 
Frithigern crossed the Danube in 376 A.D. and moved into 
imperial territories, the Gepidae probably spread into the 

1) Kossinnat op. cit. p. 238. 

2) Ibid. 

3) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 130. 

4) Nerman: Die Herkunft und die .fruhesten Auswanderungen 
der Germanen, p. 51. 

5) Kossinna: op. cit. 240. 
















Map 32. 



376 - 453 A.D. 

















47 


southern parts of the province of Dacia abandonned by the 

Goths.^ (See Map 33). At that time everyone was too 

much preoccupied with the movements of the Huns and the 

Goths to take much notice of the relatively unimportant 

Gepidae. In 406 A.D. a detachment of the Gepidae joined 

the Vandals in their raid on the West. After crossing 

the Rhine the Gepidae remained somewhere in Gaul (Map 34) as 

foederati of the Romans. It was they, who in 455 A.D. 

repelled an attack of the Burgundians.^ The GepidaB 

in Dacia did not come under the domination of the Huns 
3) 

until 418 A.D. At this time they were defeated by the 
Ostrogoths under Thorismund, acting as auxiliaries of the 
Huns. After their defeat they were forced to supply the 
Huron I sh army with auxiliary troops also, and as such they 
played a very important role; thus they fought together with 
the Huns against the Eastern Empire in 447 -H9 A.D., and 
again in 451 A. Do a large contingent of them accompanied 
Attila into France. But it was they who first revolted 
against the sons of Attila in 453 A.D. The revolt, started 
by Ardarich, king of the Gepidae, was soon joined by the 
Ostrogoths (?),the Heruli , Swebians, Rugians, Skiri, 
Sarmatae and Alans, and brought about the collapse of the 
Hunnish Empire. Because of their leading role in this 
insurrection the Gepidae occupied after the victory the 
best of the former Hunnish lands, the areas between the 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 240. 

2) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 531. 

3) Kossinna; op. cit. p. 240. 
















HiUJ. i 




. 






' 

. 

' 

- 




























Map 34. 


406 - 455 (?) A.D. 



green 473 - 

red 488 - 


Map 35. 


t» 

w 
















48 


Danube, the Theiss, the Alt and the Carpathian Mountains , 1j 
(See Map 35), that is: the province of Siebenburgen, Little 
Walachia, Banat, Crisana and Maramures. Shortly after 
this the Gepidae must have been converted to the Arian 
creed of Christianity. The Eastern Empire concluded a 
treaty with them and friendly relations existed until 
£36 A.B. 2) 

The hatred of the Gepidae , however, for the Ostro¬ 
goths, who after 453 A.D. settled in Pannonia, continued. 
Thus the Gepidae willingly participated in the coalition 
of 469 a.D. against the Ostrogoths,which however ended 
in a defeat for the allies. It is only in 471 A.D. that 
the Gepidae are freed from the constant threat of the 
Ostrogoths after the latter left Pannonia in that year 

3 ) 

to move into the Balkan Peninsula. According to Kossinna 

the Gepidae occupied the lands of the Sarmatae in 472 A.D., 

that is, the area between the Danube and the Theiss. 

4) 

Schmidt, however, disagrees with this statement. The 
opinion of Kossinna is here accepted. The colonization 
of this new area by the Gepidae themselves was, however, 

5) 

as Kossinna thinks not very extensive. In 473 A.D. 
the Gepidae occupied the major part of Pannonia lying 
between the Danube and the Sava, including the strategi¬ 
cally important fortified city of Sirmium (modern Mitrovice). 

1) Schmidt: op. dit. p. 532. 

2) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 841. 

3) Ibid. 

4) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 533, foot note 2. 

5) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 241. 
















. 









. 















49 


(See Map 35). When Theodoric the Great marched to Italy 
with his Ostrogoths in 488 A.D. he was bitterly opposed 
by the Gep idae who barred his passage on the Homan 
military road that passed through Sirmium. The Gepidae , 
however, had to give way, but they reoccupied Sirmium 
immediately after the Ostrogoths had passed on. Schmidt 

i 

thinks that at the same time the Gepidae also occupied the 
area around the city of Singidunum (modern Belgrade).^ 
(See Map 35). Other authorities do not mention this. 
Schmidt’s view is here accepted. The Gepidae remained 
in these territories until 504 A.D. At that time an 
Ostrogothic army sent out by Theodoric drove them behind 
the Danube, and this part of Pannonia was then occupied 
by the Ostrogoths until 536 A.D. (with the exception of 
a small beachhead around the city of Bassiana which was 
still under the control of the Eastern Emperor.) (See 
Map 36). The Gepidae who had been taken prisoners or who 
had remained in these territories occupied by the Ostro¬ 
goths were sent into southeastern Gaul in 536 A.D. where 
they were settled as frontier guards. (See Map 38). 

Here they remained faithful to the Ostrogoths to the very 

2 ) 

end and perished with the latter in 555 A.D. 

Meanwhile the Gepidae behind the Danube tried to 
penetrate ag&in into Pannonia in 530 A.D. but were again 
repelled by the Ostrogoths. However, In 536 A.D. during 
the war between the Ostrogoths and the Eastern Empire 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 533. 

2) Ibid. p. 534. 























t ' 

- 












; 




• 






0 















' 0 








. 

« 

' 

- ■ 

' 









Map 36. 


504 - 536 A.D. 



blue 

green 


536 - 567 A.D. 
539 - 552 M 














50 


the Gepidae succeeded in taking Pannonia II, also Sirm- 
ium, from which they expelled the Ostrogoths. (See Map 
37) • They were however, flroced to retreat from the area 
around Singidunum which was annexed to the Empire and 
where the Heruli were now transplanted. (See Map t>l ). 

In 539 A.I). the Gepida e defeated an imperial army in a 
raid into Dacia repensis (or Aurel iana), and thereupon 
occupied the greater part of this province, holding it 
until 552 A.D. 1 ^ (See Map 37). 

But now a new danger for the Gepidae emerged from 
the west. The Langobards, who in 505 A.D. destroyed the 
Herulian state and occupied their territories kept grow¬ 
ing steadily in power. The relationship between the 
Gepidae and the Langobards was at first quite friendly. 
The Pepidae , it is true, allowed the remnants of the 
Heruli to settle to the south of their territory, but 
treated them so badly that the latter preferred to pass 
under Roman protection or migrate back to the Scandin¬ 
avian homeland (as will be described under the neruli ). 

The Langobardian king married one of the princesses of 
2 ) 

the Gepidae . ' In 546 A.D. the Emperor granted the 
Langobards permission to occupy Pannonia I and Noricum 
(both of which were only nominally under his control). 
(See Map 58 ) . This was probably done in order to create 
antagonism between the Gepidae and the Langobards. The 
latter would now naturally try to get possession also of 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 536. 

2) Ibid. p. 535. 

















*' ■ 

. . 

, 

■ 

- 

, 

















51 


Pannonia II which was occupied by the Gepidae and who 
thus barred to the Langobards the road into Italy and the 
Balkan Peninsula. The scheme worked. The outbreak of 
war was hastened by the fact that the legitimate can¬ 
didate for the throne of the Langobards, Hildigis, had 
taken refuge among the Gepidae when Wach0 usurped the 
kingship.^ This was in 547 A.D. The Langobards allied 
themselves with the Emperor who sent a corps of 10,000 
cavalry and 1,500 auxiliary Herulian troops, who adhered 
to the orthodox creed. Before joining the Langobards 
these imperial troops staged an attack on S,000 Arian 
Heruli who were allied with the Gepida e. The next clash 
took place in 549 JUD., but neither side was able to win 
a decisive victory. Thereupon a two years truce was 
concluded. In 551 A.D. the struggle was renewed. This 
time the Langobards obtained but weak support from the 
Emperor. They still, however, managed to defeat the 

Gepidae . The decisive battle was fought either in the 

2 ) 

area between the Danube and the Theiss or in Pannonia 

3 ) 

II* The Emperor, however, in order to maintain the 
equilibrium intervened in the negotiations and as a re¬ 
sult no territorial changes took place, except that 
Dacia ripensis went back to the Empire. (See Map 37). 
This treaty between the Langobards, the Gepidae and the 
Emperor remained unbroken until 565 A.D. In this year 
the king of the Langobards, Alboin, abducted Rosimunda, 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 537. 

2) Ibid. p. 539 foot note 1 and Kossinna: op. dit p. 245. 

3) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 539. 

















. 





































•• 







. 






« - 





















. 




t ' 






. 




. 



















52 


the daughter of Kunimund, king of the Gepidae . 

After this event the war of course started up again. 

At first the nangobards were victorious but in 566 A.D. 

the G e pidae with the help of imperial troops defeated 

the juangobards. Alboin had to send Rosimunda back.^ 

In order to revenge himself Alboin now allied himself 

with the Avars, a Hunnish people, who since 538 A.D, 

had been settled to the east of the Gepidae . The call 

of the Gepidae to the Emperor remained unanswered, and 

the allies moved simultaneously into the lands of the 

Gepidae . Diculeecu and Kossinna think the Avars came 

2 ) 

from the east through the passes in the Carpathians; 
Schmidt on the other hand thinks they crossed the Danube 
in Scythia mino r(modern Dobrudza) and with the permiss¬ 
ion of the Emperor marched along the Roman military road 
that went immediately south of the Danube. 1 2 3 4 5 ^ Kunimund 
left some detachments of his army in the east and with 
the bulk of his army hurried to the west in order to 
meet the Langobards and defeat them before the Avars 
could join them. In the battle, however, which took 
place in the Banat the Langobards defeated the Gepidae . 
Kunimund fell and his daughter became a prisoner of 

Alboin.^ A Jermanic saga tells us that Alboin had a 

5 ) 

drinking cup made out of Kunimund f s skull. The few 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 540. 

2) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 247, and Schmidt: op. cit. 541. 

3) Schmidt: ibid. p. 541. 

4) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 247. 

5) Ibid. 

















t I 







■ 

















■ 



















, 

, 










■ ■ 





. 








' 








< 

• 


• 



























- 



. 

. 

. 















Map 38• 


504 - 536 - 555 A.D. 



Map 39. 


567 - IX.cent. A.D. 
















53 


Gepidian troops which had been left behind to protect 
the eastern frontier were easily brushed aside by the 
Avars, who had then no great difficulty in occupying the 
lands of the Gepidae * The remnants of the tribe still 
carried on a partisan warfare in the Carpathian Mount¬ 
ains for three years before they were completely annih¬ 
ilated. The Avars, and thMr auxiliaries, the Slavs, 
spread over the whole of the territory formerly occupied 
by the Gepidae . Some of the Gepidae remained for a while 
under the rule of the Avars, and supplied them with 
auxiliary troops. (See Map 39). In 670 A.D. they were 
assigned the task of driving the S2>avs out of Dacia. 

In the 9th century they must have come under the domin¬ 
ation of the Bulgarians who destroyed the empire of the 
Avars. From the 8th century on,however, they were 
gradually absorbed by the local population out of which 
the modern Romanians developed.^ 


1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 248, and Schmidt: op. cit. p. 543 




















. 








. 

' 



. 


















- 











■ 












54 


Chapter 8 
THE GOTHS 

Opinions are also divided in respect to the original 
homeland of the Goths* All agree that the Goths came 
from Scandinavia, and differences of opinion emerge 

06 Jo US&LM-' 

only^the original homeland is localized. Kossinna thought 

1 ) 

in his early works that the majority of the Goths came 

from the island of Gotland and only some insignificant 

elements from other Scandinavian districts* (See Map 40)* 

2 ) 

In this point of view he was seconded by Blume. In 

3) 

his later 'writings Kossinna changed his point of view, 

deriving the Goths chiefly from the Scandinavian mainland, 

specifically from Gdtaland. Only some of the inhabitants 

of Gotland joined them. (See Map 40). The Goths crossed 

the Baltic and landed at the mouth of the Vistula. Nor 

was Kossinna*s opinion stable in respect to the time of 

migration. At first he thought they arrived at the mouth 

of the Vistula about the beginning of the present era. 

Later he set the time of arrival a few decades earlier. 

Still later he suggests the middle of the 1st century B.C. 

4) 

Finally he returned to his original statement. ' Algren 
rejects Kossinna*s early view and Blume*s that the orig¬ 
inal homeland was on the island of Gotland. The great 
number of archaeological artifacts found on the island 
of Gotland during the first century A.D. forbids for him 

1) Herman: Die Herkunft und die frUhesten Auswanderungen 
der Germanen, p. 52. 

2) Ibid. 

5) Ibid. 

4) Ibid. pp. 49 - 50. 











■ 








. 











. 

■ 

.. 

. 


■ 


. 




. 




. 


































the assumption of a migration having taken place from 
that area. During this century also a burial custom dif¬ 
fering from that of the Vistula area and Scandinavia 
develops on the island of Gotland. A different burial 
custom is also found on the island of Oland. Thus de¬ 
rivation of the Goths from either of these two islands 
is out of the question. In Almgren f s opinion then the 
migration must have come from the Scandinavian mainland. 
After having examined the previous views, Herman himself 
decides in favor of Gdtaland as the original homeland, 
more exactly Oster- and Vastergotaland. (See Map 40). 

As for the time he agrees with the early and late view 

2 ) 

of Kossinna, that is, the beginning of the present era.~ 

The appearance of inhumation burials in Scandinavia and 

in the area around the mouth of the Vistula, as well as 

close resemblances in the burials of the two areas, proves 

for Herman a connection between them. The inhumation 

custom, Neman thinks, was probably' taken over from the 
3) 

Celts. This custom continues on the Scandinavian main¬ 
land and in the Vistula area, whereas on Gotland and 
Oland local varieties develop, excluding these areas as 
the original homeland. 

At the same time we witness a sudden and a consid¬ 
erable decrease in the number of artifacts found on the 

1) Nerman: op. cit. pp. 52 - 53. 

2) Ibid. p. 58. 

3) Ibid. p. 50. 


-c. , 

t 

■ 

■ 

: . • 

. 

n ' 

' 

' 

* • 


, 

a 

f ■ 

■ 

* 

■ 

. 







blue 0 - 150 A.D. 

green 100 - " " 

red 125 - 


Map 41. 


ft 















56 


Scandinavian mainland from this time. This would in¬ 
dicate migration. The Gothic saga, as told by Jordanes 
about 550 A.D."^ tells us about the arrival of the Goths 
from Scandinavia. According to this aaga the Goths mig¬ 
rated under thfrfer king Berich, and there is no evidence 
of a king ever reigning on the island of Gotland. 

Much contents himself with the statement that the 

Goths came from Scandinavia, without any more exact 

2 ) 

specification. Nor does he express any opinion about 

the time of the migration. Schmidt accepts Nerman f s 

view in respect to the place from which the migration 

started, but in respect to time he agrees with Kossinna f s 

view from his middle period, that is, about the middle 

3 ) 

of the first century B.C. 

In historical writings the Goths are mentioned for 

the first time by Plindus, who places them rather vaguely 

4) 

in Northeastern Germany. Plinius also refers to a 
statement by Phytheas of Massilia to the effect that on 
his journey on a coast rich in amber he came across a 

5) 

tribe named Gutoneg , Guiones ." There is, however, no 
archaeological evidence that the Goths inhabited the dis¬ 
trict of Samland in Eastern Prussia, where amber is found 
in large quantities, as early as 550 B.C. Pytheas must 
have become aqquainted with this tribe in the second 

1) Nerman: op. cit. pp. 45 and 46. 

2) Much: Reallexik. d. german. Altertumskunde, Vol. 2, p. 
507. 

3) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, Vol. I, 
pp. 83 and 196. 

4) Plinius: Hist. Nat. IV, 99. 

5) Ibid., 37 and 35. 










: 













. 


























57 - 


richest amber district in the north, the western coast 

of the Jutish Peninsula. Perhaps the name of the tribe 

1 ) 

was Teutones . Tacitus localizes the Goths in the rear 

2 ) 

of the Vandals. For present purposes the view of 

Nerman is accepted: that the Goths came from Cster and 

Vastergotland at the beginning of the present era, that 

they landed at the mouth of the Vistula, (See Map 40) 

and then subdued or expelled that part of the Rugians 

who had occupied that area before them. In the course 

of the 1st century A.D. they spread eastwards as far 

as the Passarge, occupying the districts of Marienburg, 

b) 

Stuhm, Elbing, Pr. Hollands, Mohrungen and Braunsberg, 
as well as the Island between the Vistula and the Nogat 
rivers. (See Map 41). In the first part of the 2nd 
century A.D. they must have exercised sovereignty over 
the Aestes who were in Samland and Natangen. 4 ^ (See Map 41). 

The branch of the Gothic tribe that later formed 
the tribe of the G e pidae expanded in the meantime at the 
beginning of the 2nd century over the district of Flatow 
and the Netze area in the districts of Bromberg, Scharn- 
ikau, Wirsitz and Kolmar. Thus they went around the 
Burgundians who remained east of the Vistula in the bend 

e ;) 

of this river. w ) (See Map 41). 

As long as the Goths remained In these areas they 

1) Schmidt: Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, p. 54. 

2) Tacitus: Germania 34. 

3) Kossinna: German. Kultur im I. Jhat. n. Chr., p. 237. 

4) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, Vol. I, 
p. 198. 

5) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 238. 



















' 




. 










. 

. . 











. 






. 




. , 


. 



































* 

. 

. 

• . . 












red 

200 - 

270 A.D. 

green 

238 - 

tt 

tt 

blue 

250 - 

f! 

tl 

orange 

257 - 

tl 

Tt 

violet 

260 - 

Tt 

tl 


Map 43* 












58 


still formed one civltas . The division into Ostrogoths 
and Visigoths took place only after their arrival in 
Southern Ukraine, T^e section of the common Gothic 
thibe that remained on the island between the Vistula 
and the Nogat after 150 A.D. received a new name — the 


The migration of that branch of the tribe which 
later constituted the Goths proper began about 150 iUD. 

On their way south they brushed aside a small pocket of 
Masurian Vandals. (See under the Vandals). Some Goths, 
however, remained in the area east of the Nogat, and these 
remained in Eastern Prussia even after the Gepidae in 
their turn migrated about the beginning of the 4th 
century.*^ Out of the mixture of these Goths and var¬ 
ious other tribes there developed a tribe called Vidu- 
2 ) 

varii . 

Prom this point on the further migrations of the 

part of the tribe that later came to be known as the 

3 ) 

Goths will be discussed. About the Gepidae see page 45. 


1) Herman: op. cit. pp. 59 - 60. 

2) Schmidt: op. cit. p, 530. 

3) Since the story of the Goths has been done by Mr. 
Oyler, who submitted a thesis on this subject, the 
following data have been taken from his work. This 
data concerns only the territorial expansion and 

is given here in order to complete the story of the 
East Germanic peoples and in explanation of the 
maps. The references are as given in Mr. Oyler f s 
thesis. 













. 

« 

. . 

1 





. 





















. 










59 - 


The route taken by the Goths in 150 A.D. was: The 
Bug, Pripet, the Dniepr into Southern Ukraine; or the 
Vistula, the San river across to the Dniestr and so 
into Southern Ukraine, (See Map 42). 

In 170 A.D. — First Gothic detachments in the 
Black Sea area* 

In 200 A*D* - 230 A.D. Arrival of the main body of 
the tribe, and formation of a new civitas in the land 
between the Don and the Dniestr. (See Map 43). 

In 248 A.D. -- Raid into Moesia inferior . Unsuccess 
ful siege of Marcianopolis. (See Map 44). 

In 250 A.D. — Raid into Moesia inferior . Unsuccess 
ful siege of Nicopolis, crossing into Thrace and the 
capture of Philippopolis• Second decisive battle by 
Abritta (or Forum Trebonii) near Silistria. A Roman 
army defeated and Illyria ravaged. (See Map 44). Tyra 
and Olbia captured. (See Map 43.). 

In 257 A.D. — The province of Dacia evacuated by the 
Romans and the Goths petfrin. Capture of Pithyus and Tre- 
bizond on the eastern shores of the Black Sea. (Map 44). 

In 258 A.D. -- Expansion from the mouth of the 
Dniestr along the western shores of the Black Sea. The 
crossing of the Bosphorus and the taking of such cities 
as: Chalcedon, Nicomedia, Nicaea, Apamea and Prus in 
Asia Minor. (See Map 44). 

In 260 A.D. — The Goths occupy Great Walachia, the 
southern part of SiebenbUrgen and Moldavia. (See Map 43) 













• 


- 

. 

. . 

— 


•• ') ... 


* 


. 


. 


- 


- 


• 





. . 





< 

i 











Map 44, 


1 - Marcianopolis 8 

2 - Nicopolis 9 

3 - Philippopolis 10 

4 - Durostorum 11 

5 - Thessalonice 12 

£> - Pithyus 13 

f - Trapesus free4 


Galchedon 

Nic©media 

Nleaea 

Cius 

Prusa 

Bysantium 

Illon 



orange 

green 

violet 

red 

black 

blue 



Map 45 


blue 

red 

orange 

violet 

green 

































- 

> 


































































60 


The Crimea was also occupied at this time . (See Map 43). 
At this time also took place the division into Visigoths 
and Ostrogoths. 

In 264 A.D. — A landing at Trebizont and a raid 
through Cappadocia, Galatia and Bithynia. With the 
Christian prisoners taken were the grandparents of ¥/ul- 
filas on the mother*s side, who were brought into Gothic 
territory. (See Map 45). 

In 265 A.D. - 269 A.D. Sea and land raids into 
Asia Minor, where Heraclea Fontica is captured, into 
Greece, where Athenae, Corinthus, Sparta and Argos are 
ravaged. Their fleet having been scattered by the Romans 
they return home by way of Boetia, Epirus and Macedonia, 
where they are severely defeated by the Emperor Gallienus 
at the Nestus river. Another combined land and sea raid, 
affecting Moesia , Thrace, Athos, Cassandrea, ThesSalon¬ 
ika, Crete, Rhodes, Cyprus, Greece and Asia Minor. The 
Goths suffered a decisive defeat at Naissus (Modern Nisch) 
by the Emperor Claudius. The land party moved with 
families and wagons and was consequently intended as a 
migration. (See Map 45.). 

The further story of the Goths will be discussed 
under the Visigoths and the Ostrogoths separately. 




































. . 






■ 

1 


■ 



- • 

. 












* ... ■ r 






. 






















. 




» 






























61 


Chapter 9 

THE HEHULI (EASTERN BRANCH) 

Opinions are divided as to the exact original home¬ 
land of the Heruli. Miillenhoff 1 ^ and Much 2 ^ think it has 
to be sought on the island of Seeland; (See Map 46) they 
think that the passage in Jordan!s, Get. 23: T, Dani ex 
ipsorum stirpe progress! Herulos propriis sedibus ex- 
pulerant”, refers to the end of the 5th centumy A.D., and 
that this expulsion took place on the island of Seeland, 

to which place the Danes came from Southern Sweden. 

3) 

L. Schmidt ' takes issue with this view. In his opinion 

the area at first occupied by the Herul i was in the 

Swedish districts of Halland, Smaland and. Blekinge. (See 

Map 47). The passage in Jordanis refers to these areas 

and should be dated about 250 A.D. The great difference 

in time between the two explanations can be explained by 

the fact that the first positively certain information 

which we have about the D P nes dates from the beginning of 

4) 

the 6th century A.D. Much does not consider it advisable 
to go back too far from this point of time, while the 
scarcity of information makes it possible for Schmidt 
to date the existence of the Danes as a separate thibe as 
early as the 3rd century A.D., even if we do not know 
anything about it. Th© raids of the Hamul i in the 3rd 

3) Much; Reallexik. d. German. Altertumskunde, Vol. II, o. 
518. 

2) Ibid. 

3) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, Vol. I, pp. 
548 - 549. 

4) Ibid. p. 549. 





























. 







. 








- 





' 






































Mach 250 A.D. 


Map 46. 



Map 47. 


Schmidt 


250 A.D. 










62 


century A.D. on the coastal areas of Gaul and on the coast 
of the Black Sea are regarded by Much as having been 
carried out by some offshoots from the main tribe, while 
the main body of the tribe remained in its original 
territories. Schmidt hinks that under pressure from the 
Danes the Herulian tribe had already emigrated at this 
time. - A part of the tribe went southwest, and another 
part, to be described below, went southeast and formed 
the eastern branch of the Heruli . Nerman^ advocates 
the view vHiich combines some features from both these 
points of view. In his opinion the Heruli were attacked 
in their territories in Southern Sweden by the Danes, who 
came from Svaeland. The jjeruli retreated into the West 
Danish Islands and from here parts of the tribe went 
southwest and southeast. This happened about 250 A*D. 

The remainder of the Heruli in Scandinavia was assimilated 
by the Danes. 

The explanation as given by L. Schmidt is accepted 

2 ) 

for present purposes. According to Schmidt the 
eastern Heruli landed at the mouth of the Vistula, and 
following the route already used by the Goths, arrived 
in Southern Ukraine, where they settled in the district 
called at that time Maeotis , now the area around the 
Sea of Azov. (See Map 48). The first positive information 
of their presence there dates from as early as 267 A.D. 3 ) 

1) Nerman: Die Herkunft und die frUhesten Auswanderungen 
der Germanen, p. 60. 

2) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 549<> 

3) Jordanes: De origine actibusque Getarum, 117. 
















Map 48. 



blue 

453 - 

505 A.D. 

red 

469 - 

tt 

tt 

green 

490 - 

tt 

ft 


Map 49. 













63 - 


It is, however, possible that they were responsible for 
the destruction of the Greek city of Tanais at zhe mouth 
of the Don river which took place in 255 A.D.~*^ With 
their western neighbors, the troths, they undertook a 
series of raiding expeditions into the territories of the 
Eastern Empire. These were usually raids by sea. Par¬ 
ticularly dangerous was the raid carried out mainly by 
the Heruli in 267 A.D. (See Map 45). It finally failed, 
but its boldness terrified the whole of the Balkan Pen¬ 
insula. They also participated in raids in 269 and 276 
A.D. (See Map 45). 

In 350 A.D. during the reign of Alarich the Her ¬ 
uli were subjugated by the Goths of Ermenrich and made 
a part of the great Gothic Empire. (See Map (?o ). In 
destroying this Empire in 375 A.D. the Huns also brought 
the Heruli under their rule. (See Map 48). As a 
consequence the Heruli were among the Germanic troops who 
accompanied Attila in 451 A.D. in hisjraid into Prance. 

The Heruli also participated in the great Germanic re¬ 
bellion which ended with the fall of the Hunnish Empire 
in 453 A.D. Following this they occupied the land be¬ 
tween the Morava and the Eipel. (See Map 49). They grew 
greatly in power in these new areas. They participated 
in the coalition against the Goths in Pannonia in 469 
A.D. After the destruction of the Skiri which took place 
in the same year they must have occupied the territories 
of the latter between the Little Carpathians and the 
1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 550. 








* 




. 






♦ 




* 




•' i’rr 




4 . 

















red 505 - 512 A.D. 

blue and green 512 - 


Map 50 



Map 51 


red 

blue 


512 - 536 A.D. 
536 - 545 " 














64 


1 ) 

Waag (See Map 49). Here they absorbed the remants of 
the s kiri . Prom 471 A. D. on they kept raiding Pannonia 
and Noricum, after the departure of the Goths from the former 
province. They also served very frequently as mercenary 
troops in the armies of the Western Empire. They composed 
the majority of the troops with which Odoacer overran 

o) 

Italy in 476 A.D. A number of tribes were tributary 
to them, for example, the Langobards, who shortly after 
488 A.D. occupied the territory of the Rugians after 

/ g) 

the destruction of the latter by Odoacer. (see Map 49) ; #*<£ 

fee Hasdingian Vandals in the region of the tipper Theiss, 

as well as remnants of the Quad! , the majority of whom 

had left their lands in 406 A.D., joining the Vandals. 

(See Map 49). The Herulians were now at the peak of their 

power. Around 500 A.D. Theodoric the Great made an 

alliance with them and named Rudolf, their king, as his 

■Waffensohn*• But about 498 A.D. the Langobards left former 

Rugian territory and settled in Central Hungary. Pinally, 

4) 

according to Schmidt probably in 505 A.D. there came 

a final clash between the Langobards and the Heruli . 

The Langobards won; Rodulf, the Herulian king, fell 

with the greater part of his men. The remnants of the 

tribe fled before the advancing Langobards into Rugiland but 

were unable to remain there for long, because the area 

had been completely devastated and they had been accustomed 

5 ) 

to living as overlords (See Map 50). Finally they 

1) Schmidt: op.cit. p. 551. 

2) Ibid. p. 550. 

3) Ibid. p. 551. 

4) Ibid. p. 552. 

5) Ibid. p. 553. 















65 


asked the Gepidae for protection, which was granted to 
them. They were allowed to settle in the region of the 
Lower Theiss. 1) (See Map 50 )• The 7 did not, however, 
stay there long; the Gepidae treated them so badly 
that the He mil preferred to move again. A part of 
the tribe sought entrance in 512 A*D. into Roman 
territory, and these people were permitted to settle in 
the province of Dacia ripensis . } (See Map 50)* Another, 
and smaller part, chose to journey back to the Scand¬ 
inavian homeland. These Herulians started the journey 
in 512 A.D., probably travelled down the Danube as far as the 
junction with the Prut, then followed the latter river 
to the upper course of the Vistula and then through 
Silesia, Brandenburg, Mecklenburg, to the Jutish Peninsula, 

on the eastern coast of which the Heruli embarked for 

3 ) 

Scandinavia. (See Map 50). The Heruli who had settled 
in Roman territory remained there until 535 A*D # , when 
with the consent of the Eastern Emperor, they moved in 
536 A.D* into the area around Singidunum(modern Belgrade) 
and those areas of the province of Pannonia II which 
were still tinder Roman control, that is, the area south 
of the Sava. (See Map 51). Their task was to protect 
the northern frontier ' • About this time they were 
converted to Christianity, some of them, among whom 
was the king, to the Catholic branch, but the majority 
of the tribe to the Arian confession. This was the 
cause of internal trouble. In 545 A.D. the Arian 
branch of the tribe joined the Gepidae across the 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 553 4) Ibid. p. 554. 

2) Ibid: p. 553 

3) Ibid: p. 553 

















t ' 

■ 




. 

- '* - 


- 






. 

< ■ 





* 


n • ■ 

- 

' 

.. 

















66 - 


Danube. (See Map 52). The Catholic Branch went in 547 A. 

D. as auxiliary troops of the Romans (who were now the 
allies of the Langobards against the Gepidae ). These Ro¬ 
man and Hern11an troops met on the Gepidian territory 
the Arian Herull and annihilated the latter almost com¬ 
pletely. Nothing more about them is known.^ 

The Pro-Roman Catholic part of the tribe was still 
living in the neighbourhood of Singidunum in 550 A.D. 

(See Map 52), but must have left this region shortly 
after this time and, except for a brief period in Italy, 
was not successful in finding a new and permanen^t home. 
There are notices of these Heruli from time to time as 
the best mercenary troops which the Germanic people fur¬ 
nished to the Roman armies: they fought in the first Per¬ 
sian war of Justinian, they were instrumental in suppre¬ 
ssing the Nikaa revolt in Constantinople, they fought in 
Armenia, Caucasus and Colchis under Belisarius against 
the Persians, contributed greatly to the destruction of 
the Vandal kingdom in Africa, fought in the Balkan Pen¬ 
insula, in Italy against the Ostrogoths, also against 
the Pranks and the Alemanni♦ In recognition of their 
exceptional services to the Empire they were settled in 
554 A.D. as frontier garrison troops in the Trient bounda¬ 
ry district (See Map 55) under Sinduals, who had been 

2 ) 

given the rank of magister militum . After a few years 
they revolted against the Emperor and Sinduals tried to 
follow the pattern set by Odoacer, but this insurrection 

1) Schmidt: op. Cit. p. 555. 

2) Ibid. p. 557. 







. 

, 

. 






. 


. 






' 

. 




m 


■ 




■ 

• *■ ,< '• : ' ■ v • • • • 






■ 

- 

. 

' i I 

t ■' - 1 : • • t 

*r ' ' 

. . 

. 




. . 











Map 52. 



red 545 - 555 (?) A.D. 

blue " - 547 " 



554 - 566/7 A.D. 














67 - 


was suppressed in 566 or 567 A.D. by Narsus.^ After 
this they disappear from history. 


1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 558 











68 - 


Chapter 10 
THE LANGOBARDS 

The original home of the Langobards was in Scan¬ 
dinavia; their own sagas and all other historical 
sources point to Scandinavia as their original homeland. 

i 

*> \ 

Friesen ' interprets the meaning of the word ’Scandi¬ 
navia* in the early sources to refer only to the 

southern part of the peninsula, the region which is to- 

2 ) 

day called Scania, and Herman ' agrees with this inter¬ 
pretation. Gradually the name of this part of the pen¬ 
insula was adopted for the whole country. This explana¬ 
tion confirms wife the archaeological evidence. Scania, 
which during the Bronze Age shows a great wealth of ar¬ 
tifacts, outnumbering the whole of the rest of the pen¬ 
insula, shows an almost complete lack of archaeological 

•z > 

material during the Pre-Roman Iron Age, and this 
appears to indicate a very extensive emigration movement, 
induced in part by climatic deterioration, a factor 
which has already been discussed. 

The Langobards are to be found in Germany at 
about 100 B.C. in the area west of the Lower Elbe (See 

4) 

Map 55), but schwantes claims that the prototypes of 
the Langobardian artifacts are to be found in the Pro¬ 
vince of Mecklenburg as far back as 600 B.C. Combining 

1) Nerman: Die Herkunft und die frUhesten Auswanderun- 
gen der Germanen, p. 31. 

2) Ibid. 

3) Ibid. pp. 17 and 33. 

4) Ibid. p. 33. 





. 





x 




■ 













. 


• 






. 

. • 

. 

4 

' 




. 

' 






• 











. 


- - 








. 

• . ' . 













blue Herman 600 B 0 C. 

green Schmidt 

orange Kossinna 350 ” 

red 600 - 100 B.C. 


Map 54* 



Map 55. 


100 B.C. - 300 A.D. 













69 - 


the evidence, Nerman concludes 1 ^ that the Langobards 
came to Germany, to Mecklenburg, from Scania at the time 
of the transition from the Bronze to the Iron Age. (See 
Map 54). There they remained until about 100 B.C., at 
which time they spread to the left bank of the Elbe.^ 
(See Map 55). Much is of the same opinion. Nerman 
explains the relationship that exists between the Law 
of the Langobards and that of the people of Gotland as 
being due either to the influence of the Gotlanders,who 
emigrated to Southern Denmark and Schleswig - Holstein 
at* about 300 B.C., on the neighboring Langobards, or 
on the other hand as due to the influence of the Lango¬ 
bards on the Gotlanders who in turn passed on this influ 
ence to their relatives remaining on the island of Got- 
land. L.Schmidt, however, regards the similarities of 

the two laws as proof that the Langobards came from the 
Island of Gotland about the middle of the La T£ne Period 
i.e. about 300 B.C.^(See Map 54). A decrease in the 
number of artifacts can also be noted for Gotland at 
about this time. According to Schmidt, then, the Lango¬ 
bards crossed the Baltic, and landed somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of Libau, Latvia, and after coming into 
violent contact with the Vandals, moved along the shores 
of the Baltic Into Mecklenburg. 6 ^ (See Map 54). Kossinna 

1) Nerman: op. cit. p. 33. 

2 ) Ibid. 

3) Hoops: Reallexik.d.German.Altertumskunde, Vol.III, 
p• 123. 

4) Nerman: op-, cib. p.37». 

5) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamm©, Vol.I, 
p. 567. 

6) Ibid. p. 569. 








- 70 


however thinks that the Langobards came from Scania 
between 300 B.C. and 400 B.C. to the mouth of the Vistu¬ 
la and from there moved westward into Mecklenburg.^ 

(See Map 54). 

In any case the Langobards appear to have occupied 
the area now called Mecklenburg and to have extended as 
far as the eastern part of Holstein. After the emigration 
of the Cimbri and the Teuton! about 120 B.C. they occu¬ 
pied the left bank of the Elbe also. They were separated 
from the North Sea by the Chauci and the Saxons; on the 
right bank of the Elbe, however, they touched the shores 
of the Baltic.^ (See Map 55). According to Kossinna 3 ^ 
their western border started at Kiel, ran from there to 
Eutin and then along the Treve to Segeberg, where it 
turns southwestward to Pinneberg, then turns to the left 
and reaches the Elbe at Hamburg. On the left bank of the 
Elbe they were mainly concentrated in the districts of 
Luneberg and Ulzen, i.e. in the area of the Ilmenau ri¬ 
ver. On the right bank of the Elbe they occupied the 
western part of Mecklenburg as far east as Wismar and 
Schwerin.(See Map 55). At the time of the expedition of 
Tiberius in the year 5 A.D. the Langobards evacuated 
their areas on the left bank of the Elbe but returned 
there again after the battle of the Teutoburger Forest 
(9 A.D.). In the year 167 A.D. a detachment of 6000 Lan- 
gobardian and Obian warriors following the route: Sile- 

1) Kossinna: German. Kultur im I.Jhdt n.Chr., p. 322. 

2) Ibid. p. 316 and Schmidt: op. cit. p. 570. 





- . ' , . ., 

- 

1 

■ a » ... •:... ' 

. 

■ 

* 







. 


























. 






. 

. 


. 








. 








orange Schmidt IV.cent.A.D. 
red Kossinna 11 Tl Tl 


Map 56• 



red 450 (?) - 488 A.D. 

green 488 - 498 " 
















71 - 


sia, the valley of the Morava, came to Upper Pannonia, 

where they were defeated by the Homans, after which they 

returned home.^ This raid was accompanied by no permanent 

settlement• From their settlements on the right and left 

banks of the Elbe (See Map 55) the Langobards emigrated 

probably at the end of the 3rd or beginning of the 4th 

century. After this the regions east of the Elbe with some 

minor exceptions remained unoccupied until the Slavs moved 

in. The next historically certain place of settlement by 

the Langobards was in Lower Austria and Southern Moravia, 

where they occupied the territory of the Rug Ians who had 

been defeated by Odoacer about 487 - 488$ A.D. ' From their 

North German areas they probably followed the route through 

Mark Brandenburg, Silesia, the Iron Gate into the valley 

3) 

of the Morava (according to Schmidt 1 s view)* 1 (See Map 56). 

4) 

Kossinna ’ thinks they moved first into Pomerania and then 
into the former territories of the Burgundians in Posen 
from where they reached bilesia and the Iron Gate. (See 
Map 56). 

The areas in Northern Germany were not completely 
abandoned. In the areas around Luneburg and in Eastern Hol¬ 
stein there remained parts of the tribe, later called *the 
Barden 1 . This name referred specially to the Langobards of 
Liineburg.^ They finally joined the Saxons.®^ 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 572. 

2) Ibid. p. 573. 

3) Ibid. p. 575. 

4) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 324. 

5) Schmidt: op. cit. p.573. 

6 ) Much: Deutsche Stammeskunde, p. 115. 


- 





* 














' 




: ' " 


















- 









- 

. ‘ 

. . . < 

. . 

- ' . .. 

- 





- 72 - 


Somewhere in the region close to the Northwestern Car¬ 
pathian Mountains the Langobards fought with the Huns, 
called Bulgarians in the Langobard saga. This happened at 
about the beginning of the 5th century. 1 ^ Shortly before 
the occupation of the land of the Rugians the Langobards 
mast have stayed for some time somewhere not very far from 
this area, perhaps in the valley of the Upper Morave and 
in adjoining valleys (see Map 57), that is between the 
Carpathian and Sudeten Mountains on the one side and the 

Moravian hills on the other. The Langobards remained for 

2 ) 

10 years in Lower Austria. ' (See Map 57). Here they were 
converted to the Arian form of Christianity, either by 
Rugian missionaries who had remained there or by Gothic 
missionaries. And here they were conquered by the neigh¬ 
boring Heruli , who, since the division of the Empire of 

the Huns, had been living in the area between the Morava 

3 ) 

and the Eipel. (see Map 49). The Langobards had to pay 
tribute to the Heruli. For this reason, according to Kos- 
sinna 1 they left Lower Austria and moved into the Hun¬ 
garian Rlains between the Upper Theiss and the Danube, 

5) 

in the area now called Alfold. (See Map 58). Here they 
grew in strength and finally, according to Schmidt 6 ^ in 
about 505 A.D., according to Kossinna*^ in 508 A.D. they 
met and destroyed the Heruli in a great battle. This 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 575. 

2 ) Ibid. p. 578. 

3) Ibid. p. 551. 

4) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 324. 

5) Ibid, and Schmidt; op. cit. p. 578. 

6) Schmidt: ibid. 

7) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 324. 














Map 58• 


red 498 - 568 A.D. 

green 505 - ff 

orange 535 - 11 

blue 546 - " ” 











started a period of great prosperity for the Langobards. 

They were courted now hy the Pranks, Thuringians, Gepidae , 
Ostrogoths and the Eastern Roman Empire. During the reign 
of Wacho the Langobards conquered the svebians in Northern 
Hungary, drove the rest of the Heruli out of Upper Austria, 
and occupied this territory, as well as Moravia and Bohe¬ 
mia. 1 ^ (See Map 58). All this took place between 510 and 
540 A.D. The occupation of Bohemia must have taken place 
after the year 531 A.D., since up to this time the country 
had been occupied by the Thuringians.^ (See Map 58). In 
546 A.D., according to Schmidt 3 ), 548 A.D. according to 
Kossinna 4 ^, the langobards made a treaty with the Emperor 
and obtained from him a grant of Pannonia I and the eastern 
part of Noricum (see Map 58), the areas from which the 
Goths had moved shortly before. Kossinna 3 ^ thinks that the 
acquisition of these new areas caused also the evacuation 
of Bohemia and Moravia. Schmidt 6 ^, hoY^ever, thinks that 
such an evacuation did not take place. The view of Schmidt 
is accepted here. In any case the Langobards appear to have 
occupied Pannonia I, the eastern part of Noricum mediterra- 
neum, the districts of Pettau and Cilli, Savia and these 
parts of Pannonia II which were not occupied by the Gepidae. 
(See Map 58). Thus the Emperor let the Langobards endanger 
the interests of the Pranks In Noricum and of the Gepidae 
in Sirmium. There were hostilities between the Langobards 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 578. 

2 ) Ibid. pp. 578 and 579. 

3) Ibid, p.580. 

4) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 325. 

5) Ibid. 

6) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 580. 

7) Ibid. 














' 

■ 4 

' 




. 




. 

* * 








■ 












- 








- 














. 




74 


and the Gepidae in the years 547 and 549 A.D 0 (see p. 51). 

In 551 A.D. the Langobards defeated the Gepidae but the 
Emperor intervened and in the treaty which was arranged 
no territorial changes took place.^(See page 51). Be¬ 
tween the Langobards and the Empire there now existed 
good relations; they furnished the Romans with some auxi¬ 
liary troops in 552 and 553 A.D. But after 553 A.D. they 
allied themselves with the Franks against the Emperor, 
with whom from now on the Gepidae made an allienee. In 
565 A.D. the Langobards again defeated the Gepidae , but 
were themselves defeated in 566 A.D. by the Byzantian for- 
ces. 1 Following these events the Langobards allied them¬ 
selves with the Avars and in the year 567 A.D. they com¬ 
pletely defeated and annihilated the Gepidian army. The 
territory of the Gepidae was now occupied by the Avars, 
who, however, had not arrived in time for the battle. 3 ^ 
Thereupon the Langobards, realizing the great danger from 
their new neighbour and ally, moved in 568 A.D., under 
their king Alboin, into Italy. They followed the Roman mi¬ 
litary road which went through the Julian Alps, the same 
road used already by the Ostrogoths. In a series of battles 
and sieges they occupied Italy except the costal area of 
Istria, Venetia, Aemilia (with the city of Ravenna), Pen- 
tapolis and Picenum, Rome and the surrounding coital terri¬ 
tory, Perugia with a series of castles (forming thus a sort 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 581. 

2) Ibid. p. 583. 

3) Ibid. 







• - 







. - 



' 




■ p 0 ' ( 





• 








. . 


. . 

. 


. . 

« . 

. 












. 

... . 








< 








' 

. 















Map 59. 


blue 

568 - 

774 A.D. 

orange 

57/80 - 

tt »t 

red 

640 - 

ft tt 

violet 

6 ? 0 - 

tt tt 

green 

727 - 

tt tt 

violet/red 

750 - 

tt tt 

























75 - 


of bridge between the imperial territories around Rome and 

* 

on the Adriatic shores), Naples with a small surrounding 
area, Maritima Italorum (with Genoa), southern parts of 
Appulia and Lucania as well as Calabria, Brutti and the is¬ 
land of Sicily.There followed a very long period of al¬ 
most continuous warfare between the Langobards and the im¬ 
perial troops stationed in the areas mentioned above. So- 
mejtime at the end of the 6th century A.D. the Langobards 
took Perugia making thus the land communication between the 
Mediterranean and Adriatic shores occupied by the imperial 
troops extremely difficult. In 640 A.D. the Langobards 
took Maritima Italorum; in 670 A.D. - the south of Appulia 
and Lucania as well as the northern part of Calabria; in 
727 A.D. - Pentapolis and Aemilia; in 750 A.D. - Ravenna 
with the surrounding area. In the meantime they were gra¬ 
dually converted to the Catholic creed of Christianity. 
Before the invasion of the Pranks they already mixed with 
the native Italian population and gave to the Northern Ita¬ 
ly Its modern name - Lombardy. In 774 A.D. the Pranks in¬ 
vaded Italy and annexed the greater part of it to their 
Eapire. (For all the territorial changes in Italy see Map 
59) . 


1) Poole: Historical Atlas of Modern Europe, Italy in the 
Lombard Period, A.D. 568 - 774. (All further information 
in this chapter is taken from the same source). 


' 

* 

‘ 

■ 

. 

* . 




. 










Chapter 11 
THE OSTROGOTHS 1 ) 


After the Visigoths expended over former Roman Dacia 
the Ostrogoths must have gradually spread westward, occu¬ 
pying the territories vacated by the Visigoths, in the 4th 
century A.D. the border between them would seem to have 
been the Dniestr. (See Map 60). In the 3rd quarter of this 
century Hermanarich organized a great empire, composed of 
the conquered Heruli , Slavs, Aistes , Finns, a part of the 
Alans on the right bank of the Don, and possibly some of 
the Visigoths. (See Map 60). However there is some uncer¬ 
tainty about the extent of this Ostrogothic Empire at this 
time. Its extent and power may have been the result of epic 
exaggeration in the Gothic Saga as narrated by Cassiodorus - 
- Jordanes, and many of the tribes may have been very loose¬ 
ly under Gothic control. 

In 375 A.D. the Huns detroyed the Empire of Hermanarich. 
The majority of the Ostrogoths remained under Hunnish domi¬ 
nation (see Map 61). Sections of them escaped under Ala- 
theus and Safrac and joined the Visigoths over the Danube. 
This detachment settled in 38o A.D. in Pannonia I. (See 
Map 61). Other detachment was settled by the Romans in 
Asia Minor. (See Map 61). In 399 A.D. these Ostrogoths 
organized an insurrection and devastated Phrygia, Pisidia 
and Pamphylia, crossed them into Europe and eventually 
disappeared. (See Map 62). 

In 406 A.D. the Ostrogoths furnished the majority of 
the troops with which Radagais invaded Italy, where they 

1) See the foot note 3) on page 58. 


















orange 270 - 375 A.D. 

green 300 (?)- " " 

blue 350 - " " 

violet 370 (?)- " " 


Map 60• 



red 375 - 4 55 A • D« 

green Alatheus & Safrac 376 - 380 A.D. 

violet Odotheus 386 ,T 

blue Radagais 405 

orange with the Huns to Prance 451 


Map 61• 


Tt 

II 




















Map 62 


red 386 - 399 A.D. 
green 399 - Tribiglld, 



Map 63 















77 - 


were defeated by Stilicho. (See Map 61). 

In 451 A.D. the Ostrogoths furnished large contingents 
to Atilla^ army when he invaded Prance. (See Map 61). 

In 453 A.D. there occurred the general insurrection 
of the Germanic tribes against the suzer4astty of the Huns; 
the Ostrogoths probably remained neutral. In 455 A.D. they 
were settled as foederati first of the Western and later 
of the Eastern Emperor in Pannonia I (or inferior ). (See 
Map 63). In 459 A.D. they raided Illyria and annexed Pan¬ 
nonia II (modern Slavonia) and probably Noricum ripense. 

(See Map 63). In 470 A.D. they annexed the area around Sin- 
gidunum. (See Map 63). In 471 A.D. the Ostrogoths changed 
their location; one part of the tribe under Widimer crossed 
Northern Italy and in 473 A.D. joined the Visigoths in 
Prance. (See Map 64); another part under Thiudemer and la¬ 
ter under his son Theodoric the Great penetrated into the 
valley of the Morava. Prom there they moved into Moesia 
inferior and settled around the city of Novae. (See Map 64). 
There followed a series of treaties between the Emperor 
either with Theodoric the Great or his opponent Theodoric 
Strabo, the leader of the Gothic mercenary troops of the 
Empire. 

In 479 A.D. Theodoric the Great moved with his Goths 
iiito Epirus and settled in the area around Dyrrachium (mo- 
dern Durazzo). (See Map 64). In 481 A.D. they moved again 
through Macedonia and Thessaly and after the siege of The- 


salonice settled in Macedonia in the area around Cyrrus, 












- - 

- 

- . 

. . - ! 

. . 

. . 

; 

■ 

• • 

- - , . ■- 

- 

- 

• ' ' 

. 

{ . . •• • ■ 

’ 

. 


* 

. 

• . 

r. 

. 













Map 64 


green 481 - 483 " 

blue Widimer to Italy and 

Gaul (arrived in 473). 



Map 65. 


483 - 488 A.D. 















Map 66• 



Map 67. 





.V- 




■ 


















' 







































78 


Pella, Europus, Methone, Pydna and Berea, (See Map 64). 

Prom this base Theodoric defeated Rekitach, son of Theodo- 
ric Strabo, and after this the remnants of the Goths of 
Rekitach joined Theodoric the Great. In 483 A.D. the Os¬ 
trogoths were given land in Dacia ripensis and Moesia in¬ 
ferior with headquarters at Novae. (See Map 65). 

In 488 - 489 A.D. the Ostrogoths were led by Theodo- 

> 

ric into Italy. The route which they followed was the Ro¬ 
man military road from Novae to Singidunum, Sirmium, Emona 
(modern Leibach) and Aquileja. (See Map 65). After a se¬ 
ries of battles with Odoacer the Ostrogoths became masters 
of Italy and Sicily in 493 A.D. (See Map 66). In 497 A.D. 
Theodoric was formally recognized by the Eastern Emperor. 

As the successor of the Emperor of the West his power ex¬ 
tended also over Istria, Dalmatia, Savia, Noricum mediter ¬ 
ranean, Rhaetia I and Rhaetia II with the exception of 
that part which was occupied by the Alemanni. (See Map 66). 
In 502 A.D. Theodoric took the Alemanni in the remaining 
part of Rhaetia II under his protection. (See Map 67). 
Pannonia Sirmensis (with thejexception of the area around 
Bassiana occupied by the troops of the Emperor) was taken 
from the Gepidae in 504 A.D. (See Map 67l In 508 A.D. the 
part of Provence between the Rhone and the Durance plus 
the area around the city of Avignon was annexed. (See Map 
67). In 523 A.D. the Ostrogoths took the land of the Bur¬ 
gundians south of the Isere and east of the Rhone. In 530 
A.D. they restored it back to the Burgundians. (See Maps 

















„ 


i ' 














, 


■ 

i ■ - 


•• 


■ 


•;*' • . ! 






* 

• 

. 

„ 










iff ■ 










|v 

' 


* 


. 

■ 




' 

* 


t . 








f *■ • 









. 















Map 68. 



Map 69. 


535/6 - 540 A.D. 

















540 - 541 A.D. 


Map 70 



Map 71 


541 - 552 A.D. 














79 - 


67 and 68). In 536 A.D. the Ostrogothic troops were evacu¬ 
ated from the possessions outside of Italy to fight against 
the armies of the Eastern Empire. The Goths suffered a se¬ 
ries of serious defeats and by 540 the remnants of them 
camped somwhere in Northern Italy. (See Map 70). But star¬ 
ting with 541 A.D., under their new king Totila they brought 
under their control almost^whole a Italy and even occupied 
Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica in 549 A.D. (See Map 71). The 
Emperor, however, was finally victorious. In 552 - 553 A.D. 
the Goths were decisively defeated. The survivors retreated 
to the north of Italy, where they sueceded in holding out 
until 555 A.D. After this the Ostrogoths disappear from 
history. 




« . 

. 







■ 

'.• - - • 

l • . 



• 

. 

- 

- 








. 

. , 









80 - 


Chapter 12 
THE RUGIANS 

The problem of the original home of the Rugians has 
not yet been satisfactorily solved. Schmidt 1 ^ thinks it 
is to be sought in Southwestern Norway, in Stavanger district. 
In later times people of this same name are found in this 

p \ 

region, as well as many related place - names. Herman ' 
points out that no archaeological proof for such an assump¬ 
tion has been found, but he regards this hypothesis as 
not improbable. Kossinna 3 ) also thinks that they came from 
Norway. Much^, however assumes that the appearenc© of the 
Rugians in Norway in later times is due to the migration 
of this tribe from Northeastern Germany, their original 
homeland into Norway• The name of the tribe is a cognate 
for the word rye f Roggen f , a knowledge of which the Rugi- 

i. 

ans acquired from the Lithuanians and brought with them 
to Norway* But Almgren 6 ) and with him Schmidt 6 ) thinks 
that the presence of the Rugians in Norway in later times 
is due to a re-immigration of a part of the tribe into the 
old territories, as was the case with the Herul i, too. 

For the purpose of this thesis I am accepting the Hypothe¬ 
sis of the homeland of the Rugians in Stavanger, Norway. 

1) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamine, Vol. I, p. 

117. 

2 ) Herman: Die Herkunft und die friihesten Auswanderungen 
der Germanen, p. 41. 

5) Kossinna: Die deutsche Vorgeschichte, p. 144. 

4 ) Hoops: Reallexik.d.German.Altertumskunde, Vol.IV, p. 4. 

5) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 117. 

6) Ibid. 






































■ 








. 

-■ 

■ 



. 


: 




. 








- 


















. . ; . •• . • 




. ■ 

. ■ t » f Pf!»*T ' 

. - 

... 




















Schmidt 150 B.C. 


Map 72. 



Map 73. 


150 B.C 


0 

















81 - 


Prom this area the Rugians emigrated in about 150 B. 
C. 1 *, landed at the mouth of the Oder and moved eastward 
into Hinterpommern and the area around the mouth of the 
Vistula. (See Map 72). The furthest eastern point occu¬ 
pied by them was Slbing. The eastern branch of the tribe 
occupied the districts of Karthaus, Danziger Hdhe, Dir- 
schau, Marienweder, Marienburg, Stuhm, Prussian Holland 
and Elbing. (See Map 73). The middle branch occupied the 
area of Putziger Wiek and the district of Lauenburg. 

(See Map 73). To the western branch belonged the dis¬ 
tricts of Stolp, schlawe, Kbsiin .and Belgard as well as 
Kolberg. vSee Map 73) The Vandals who held this land up 
to this time, were forced to retreat further south. At 
about the beginning of the present era the eastern group 
was overrun by the arriving Goths. (See Map 40). The Ru¬ 
gians were probably not exterminated but continued to 
live these as a subject class of the Goths, or were in 

part absorbed. They were called the Holmrugii by the Goths. 

2 ) 

According to Kossinna 1 the western branch of the Rugians 
continued to inhabit its territory. The middle group, how¬ 
ever, shifted slowly under pressure from the Goths, some¬ 
time after the beginning of the present era, moving west¬ 
wards and carrying probably with them some elements of 
the western branch. In this way they came to occupy the 
land between the Upper Persante and the Lower Oder as well 
as the island of Riigen which they took in about 200 a.D.^) 

1) Strasser: Die Nordgermanen, p. 13. 

2) Kossinna: German.Kultur im I.Jahrtausen^n.Ghr.,p. 228. 

3) Ibid. 





; 


♦ 

< 













- 








. 

- 

♦ 







. 


R '• 














. - 


* 




• 

, 








. 


, - i * , 






* 



»- 









■ 















- 









> 











■ 











. 

. ■ 




. 

, " . . , no ' 




. 




. . 






. • " . 








Map 75. 


400 - 453 A.D. 














82 


(See Map 74). The Burgundians who occupied these areas be¬ 
fore the Rugians, retreated to their major tribal areas 
between the Vistula and the Middle Warthe. (See Map 18). 

Prom these new areas the nugians began their movement south 
in about 350 A.D., according to Schmidt 1 ^, in about 300 A.B., 
or at the beginning of the 4th century, according to Ner- 
man. 2 ) Schmidt*s view is accepted here. They probably mo¬ 
ved up the Vistula, crossed the Carpathian Mountains, and 
settled down, apparently in the areas around the Upper 
iheiss. 3 4 5 6 ^ (See Map 75). This was the land which was left 
by the Vandals about 400 A.D. In these areas the Rugians 
were conquered by the Huns, but were allowed to have their 
own kings. Thus it happened that they accompanied, as 
auxiliary troops, the Huns in a raid into the Eastern Ro¬ 
man areas in the year 435 A.D., as well as participated 

4) 

in the raid of the Huns into Prance in 451 A.D. 

In 453 A.D. after the destruction of the Empire of 
the Huns to which they also contributed, the Rugians occu¬ 
pied the land north of the Middle Danube, opposite the 
Roman province Noricum ripense , the Lower Austria of to¬ 
day . ^ (See Map 76). Here they were converted, under the 

influence of the neighbouring Goths, to the Arian form of 
6 ) 

Christianity. / Another, considerably smaller part of the 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 119. 

2) Nerman: op. cit. p. 59. 

3) Schmidt: on. cit. p. 119. 

4) Ibid. 

5) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 232, and Schmidt: Ibid. 

6) Kossinna: Ibid. 







... 

•1V> 






















. 

' 

. , , 

, - ' 

. •; . , ^ • • 

r - ■ \ 1 r - •- • V * ' ! i v .(>, , 






' . f 




83 - 


tribe crossed after the destruction of the Hunnish Empire 
the Eastern Roman border and was allowed by the Homans to 
settle in Thrace, in the districts of Bizye and Arcadio- 
polis. 1 ) (See Map 75). The main part of the Rugians in 
Lower Austria participated in 469 A.D. in an alliance for¬ 
med by many Germanic and Non-Germanic tribes against the 
Ostrogoths in P a nnonia. The allies were defeated. It was 
not until 471 A.D. that the Rugians v/ere freed from the 

constant Gothic danger, the year in which the Goths left 
2 ) 

Pannonia. After 475 A.D. the Rugians occupied Noricum 

ripense as far west as the Emms and as far east as Klos- 

terneuburg at Vienna. (See Map 76). On the northern side 

of the Danube they extended as far east as Comagenis. In 

the west Emms was outside their aresL, but further north 

they extended probably further wfest that on the southern 

3) 

side of the river. (See Map 76). No settlement took 
place in the province of Noricum; only military strong¬ 
holds were occupied. 

In 487 A.D. the Rugian king Peletheus was about to 
invade Italy, but Odoacer marched into Rugian territory 
and defeated the Rugians completely. In 488 A.D*, as 
Friedrich, son of Feletheus, assumed leadership of the 
Rugians, Odoacer sent a new expedition and defeated them 
again. The remnants of the tribe fled to Novae and there 
came under the protection of Theodoric the Great. (See 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 119. 

2) Ibid., p. 120. 

3) Ibid. 





















- 






■ 


■ 




' 

. 


■ * : 





. 








red 475 - 


Map 76. 



Map 77. 


488 A.D. 










84 


Map 77). With the Ostrogoths these Rugians moved in 488 A. 
D. into Italy (see Map 77) and in 490 A.D. were responsible 
for the occupation of Pavia. They then turned against the 
Goths, allied themselves with Tufa, one of Odoacer f s ge¬ 
nerals, but soon a quarrel broke out and in a bloody battle 
Tufa was defeated by the Rugians. After this they returned 
to the alliance with Theodoric. In the distribution of 
land, made in Italy by Theodoric, the Rugians were treated 
as a separate unit. 1 ^ Later along with the Ostrogoths the 
Rugians were annihilated by the armies of the Eastern 
Roman Empire. 


1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 125 










- 85 - 


Chapter 13 
THE SKIRI 

There are two quite different views about the origi¬ 
nal homeland of the Skirl. Schmidt 1 ) thinks that their 
homeland is to be fought in the area east of the Upper 
Vistula where they are located by Pliny the Elder (about 
50 A.D • But we know from the psephisma that was erected 
in honor of protogenes who helped to rebuild the forti¬ 
fications of the city of Olbia, that the Skiri along with 
the Galatians in about 220 B.C. threatened but failed to 
take the city by assault.^ Much 5 ) suggests that by Gala¬ 
tians we might understand the Bastarnae or perhaps some 
Celtic tribe. Schmidt 4 ) thinks that these Skiri who attacked 
Olbia were only a part of the main tribe, and that after 
this raid they returned to the main body situated east 
of the Upper Vistula where they are mentioned as being 
by the Laterculus Veronensis , that is, at the beginning 
of the 4th century. (See Map 78). Mich 5 ) thinks that per¬ 
haps the Skiri and the Bastarnae are branches of the same 
tribe, the Bastarnae being a mixed branch of the tribe. 

He also holds that the Sldones , a tribe of the Bastarnae 
that remained at the headwaters of the Vistula, were pro¬ 
bably absorbed by the Skirl. 6 ) Arldt* 7 ) takes issue with 

1) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, Vol. I, p. 87. 

2) Ibid. p. 88 

3) Much: Deutsche Stammeskunde, p. 126 and p. 127. 

4) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 97. 

5) Much: op. cit. o. 127. 

6) Ibid. 

7) Arldt: Germanische Volkerwellen, p. 152. 


























. '' ! 1 1 

j. •* - ' .. ' i 

i '■>& V>'-: C • ■' ' V 1 

. 

. . 





. : 






. . 




. 


' 



: • t r < ; 


. 


' . ' ' 3 ‘ 




' 


• 


- 






- 

. 




, 



• , 




• 






• 







. < 



* 

i • • • 


■ 

« 


. ■ 

- 






Map 78. 



Arldt 


150 - 455 A.D. 


























86 - 


Schmidts statement about the original homeland of the 
Skirl . In his opinion their homeland was in Pomerania, 
in the area around the city of Thorn. Here they were 
neighbours of the Rugians and the Torcilingi . In company 
with the Goths they migrated to the areas north of the 
Black Sea about the middle of the 2nd century A.D., where 
they were later conquered by the Huns. (See Map 79)* 

Much-^ does not agree with this solution. Others who have 
studied the problem do not even mention this possibility. 

I am accepting the view that the Skiri are a tribe first 
encountered in the area east of the Upper Vistula; they 
existed as a separate tribe at about the same time as the 
Bastarnae emerged as such. Prom this area a part of the 
tribe in company with the Bastarnae made a raid against 
the Greek colony of Olbia, after which they returned home, 
the Bastarnae remaining in the steppes north and east <f 
the Black Sea. According to Schmidt2) the Skiri were 
still in the same areas at the time of the Hunnish con¬ 
quest. The Skiri accompanied the Huns as auxiliary troops 
in a winter raid into the territories of the Empire in 
380/81 or 381/82 A.D., crossing the frozen Lower Danube, 
but were defeated by the Imperial troops. 3 ) We hear about 
them again in 408 - 409 A.D. They now formed a conside¬ 
rable part of the troops led by the Hunnish chieftain 
Uldin who made a raid into the Roman provinces o|i Dacia 

1) Much: op. cit. p. 127. 

2 ) Schmidt: op. cit. o. 97. 

3) Ibid. 





























» - 1 ; • 

' 

. i.ri ■ • 























. 







: r: 











" ■ ' 

— 












• * 










ripensls and Thrace. The attack was beaten back by the 


Romans, the Skirl suffering considerable losses. 1 ) In 
451 A.D. the Skirian warriors accompanied Atilla into 
Prance. 2 ) They must have participated actively in 453 
A.D. in the struggle that ended with the distruction of 
the Hunnish Empire. After the victory a smaller part of 
the tribe sought entrance into Roman territories and 
was settled, together with the Sadagarians and the Alans, 
in the provinces of Scythia minor and Moesia inferior . 5 ) 
(See Map 80). The main part of the tribe migrated into 
the area north of the Middle Danube, between the Waag 
and the Little Carpathians. 4 ) (See Map 81). 

The Swebian king Hunimund incited them against the 
Ostrogoths in Pannonia, but they were beaten back. 5 ) 

To avenge their defeat the Skirl, under their duke Edica 
and his son Hunwulf, allied themselves with the Swebians 
of Hunimund, the Rugians, Gepidae , Heruli and Sarmatae , 
to which coalition the Roman Emperor also added a con¬ 
tingent. The armies of this coalition invaded Gothic 
territory again, bur were again defeated in a great battle 
on the Bolia river in Pannonia (the exact location of the 
river is not known) . 5 ) ^kis happened in 469 A.D. Edica 
seems to have fallen in the battle. His son Hunwulf went 
to Constantinople where he had a successful military ca¬ 
reer. Edica*s second son Odoacer entered the Imperial 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 97 

2) Ibid. p. 98. 

3) Hoops: Reallexik.d.German. Altertumskunde, Vol. IV, 
p. 191. 

4) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 98. 

5) Ibid. 










' ■ 

■ - " , : *:' • ' - - * : .. 

. . 

- 

, , 

• .. 

’ 

him i • '-‘L • . ... t 

• . ' ' ‘■9m ' ' 0[ v ' *:■,' 

<5 

- 

* 

, 






. 

> 









Map 80* 



Map 81. 


453 - 469 A.D. 















88 - 


bodyguard of the Eastern Emperor in which connection he 

appears to be mentioned for the first time in 472 A.D. 1 ) 

/ 

The scattered remnants of the Skiri were absorbed by the 
neighbouring tribes, their territory occupied probably 

Herulj ’ 

by the </ (see page 63) • Many of them took refuge among the 
Romans where they joined the army. Nothing is known about 
the fate of the Skiri who were settled south of the Lower 
Danube (see page 87). 


1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 99. 















89 


Chapter 14 

THE TAIFALI 

The Taifali were a small Germanic tribe whose his¬ 
tory was closely linked with that of the Visigoths. 

Schmidt^ thinks that we can assume their relationship 
with the Visigoths. In the historical records they are 
mentioned for the first time in 248 A.D., when they par¬ 
ticipated in a raid into Lower Moesia, undertaken by the 

2 ) 

Goths under their leaders Argaith and Guntherich. Some¬ 
time around 250 A.D. they occupied Little Wallachia and 
parts of Great Ifallachia situated in the neighbourhood 
of the Alt# ' (See Map 82). Because at about the same 
time there occurred a great depopulation in the land of 
the Vandals as a result of which Eastern Poland, Eastern 
Galicia and the eastern parts of Western Galicia were 
almost emptied of people, Kossinna^) suggests that these 
areas were evacuated by the Taifali , in his opinion a 
Vandal tribe of the Hasdingian branch. Schmidt 6 ) does not 
accept this view. Much 6 ) contents himself with a state¬ 
ment that they were a Germanic tribe without making any 
further classification, in about 290 A.D. the Taifali 
and the Visigoths had to withstand an attack of the Van¬ 
dals and the Gepidae , who were trying to extend their 

1) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, Vol. 1. p.546. 

2) Ibid. 

5) Ibid, and Kossinna: Germanische Kultur im I. Jahrtau- 
send, pp. 172 and 174. 

4) Kossinna: Ibid. 

5) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 546. 

6) Hoops: Reallexik.a.German. Altertumskunde, Vol.IV, p.305. 









Map 82• 



Map 83* 


376 - VI.cent. A.D. 















territories. The attack was beaten back. In 332 A.D 


the Taifali and the Visigoths again fought together 
against the Sarmatae and their Roman allies. The latter 
were finally victorious and in the treaty that followed 
the Taifali and the Visigoths were recognized in their 
territories as foederati . As such they fought in 358 A. 

D. with the Romans against the Sarmatae . In 369 A.D. 
in a new treaty they appear to have ceased to be foede ¬ 
rati , as did also the Goths.^) Attempting to escape sub¬ 
jugation by the Huns they retreated into SiebenbUrgen , 
but in 376 A.D. were forced out of that area by the Vi¬ 
sigoths under Athanarich, also trying to escape the Huns. 
Thereupon they joined the Visigoths of Parnobius and 
with the latter invaded Dacia ripense and Thrace. 2 ) (See 
Map 83). In 377 A.D. these invadors suffered a disastrous 
defeat by a Roman army under Frigeridus. What was left 
of the Taifali tribe was settled as prisoners of war in 
Italy in the areas around Mutina, Regium and Parma. 5 ) 

(See Map 83). They were still there at the time of the 
arrival of the Langobards. Some of them must have been 
transplanted shortly after their settlement in Italy to 
France, to the region of Poitiers, where they probably 
became tributary of the Visigoths, who had but newly 
arrived. 4 ) (See Map 83). After 507 A.D. they became sub- 
jects to the Franks. In 565 A.D. we hear of them rebelling 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 547. 

2) Ibid. 

3) Ibid. 

4) Ibid, and p. 548. 






































■ 






■ 


. . 

' 


. 






. , 

. 




. 













- 






. • 

. ■ 

- 













91 


against the Bishop of Chantoeeaux.-*-) They mast have been 
gradually absorbed by the native population. 


1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 548 






- 92 - 


Chapter 15 
THE TORCILINGI 

This tribe (?) is mentioned only among the auxili¬ 
ary troops of Attila and as being among the Germanic 
troops with whom Odoacer overthrew the Western Roman Em¬ 
pire in 476 A.D.l) Mttllenhof, Schmidt and Mach do not 
think that they formed a separate tribe, but were rather 
one of the noble families of the Skirl.. 1 2 3 ) Miillenhof and 
Zeuss think they were identical with Ptolemy*s Rutlkleioi 
whom the latter places on the Pommeranian shore, where 
the Rugians were.3) Schmidt and Much reject this explana¬ 
tion. 4 ) 

For present purpose I am accepting the view of 
Schmidt, MUllenhof and Much that they were probably only 
a noble family - Furstengeschlecht - of the Sklri and 
were not identical with the Rutikleioi of Ptolomy. 


1) Hoops: Reallexik.d.German. Altertumskunde, Vol. IV, 
p. 332. 

2) Ibid, and Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, 
Vol. I, p. 99. 

3) Hoops: op. cit. p. 333. 

4) Ibid, and Schmidt: op. cit. p. 99. 
















' 












' •) 


■ 

. • 

rre,\ 


' 








. 

• ~ ■ , ' “ f f ■ 

■ 



, 









- 93 - 


Chapter 16 
THE VANDALS 

In respect to the original homelend of the Vandals 
one encounters perhaps a greater variety of opinions than 
in the case of any other Eastern Germanic tribe. The va¬ 
rious points of view are: 

Nerman 1 ^ thinks that during the transition from the 
Bronze Age to the Iron Age, that is, from 750 till 600 B. 
C. a migration occurred which almost depopulated various 
regions of the Scandinavian Peninsula® The direction of 
the migration was towards Northeastern Germany. It is 
impossible to say whether at this early stage the Vandals 
participated in this migration movement or not, nor can 
it be determined from what part of Scandinavia such a 
group would have come. Nerman lists a number of places in 
Scandinavia where place names containing the root f Vendel* 
might give an indication, as for example, the name of a 
village in Uppland called Vendel. It is however possible 
that the name originated on German soil and has some¬ 
thing to do with a word for trade as in German Handel und 
Wandel . In this case the word Vandal would mean merchant, 
according to a suggestion of Kossinna. 2 ) One of the tribes 
with such a name could then in turn have given the name 
to the whole group of related tribes. (See Map 84) 

With more certainty, Nerman^) thinks, we can assume 

1) Nerman: Die Herkunft und die frtthesten Auswanderungen 
der Germanen, p. 26. 

2) Ibid. 

5) Ibid. 
















. 


• • 

: 























* 

■ 

I ■> 




t f: 1 •' 


- 









, I 

- i ■ 


’ * ' '/ f S ' C 








Herman 750/600 B.C. 


Map 84. 



Map 85. 


Schmidt 


750 B.C. 




















- 94 


that one group of these invaders bore the name Silingi 

and originated on the island of Seeland. In his opinion 
(jU\ 

from^archaeological point of view the migration of the 
Silingi , as well as that of the related Vandals, took 
place at approximately the same time, that is, as stated 
above, during the transition from the Bronze to the Iron 
A&e.l) As a result of this migration the number of arti¬ 
facts found on the island of Seeland during the whole of 
the Pre-Roman Iron Age is unusually small. The same is 
true for the Scandinavian peninsula. We witness here a 
vast depopulation which did not affect only the southwest 
regions of Norway, the Jutish Peninsula and the islands 
of Bornholm and Gotland. It is not until the 3rd period 
of the Iron Age (from 150 B.C. to 0) that there is evi¬ 
dence of an increase of population in Vaster-and Oster- 
gotland and on the islands of Oland and Funen. 2 ^ 

According to Nerman 3 ) it is not possible to trace 
the migration route of the Silingi in Germany. It is only 
quite later that they emerge in Silesia. 

In regard to the relationship of the Vandals to the 
Face Urn people Nerman 4 ) considers that the evidence at 
present available is insufficient to justify a conclusion. 

In one of his later works 3 ) Nerman mentions Northern 
Jutland as being partially the original homeland of the 
Vandals (besides Scandinavian peninsula). 

1) See climatic chart following Map 8. The deterioration 
of the climat during this transitional period was one 
of the main causes of the migration. 

2 ) Nerman: op. cit. p. 18. 

3) Ibid. p. 26. 

4) Ibid. 

5) Nerman: Vandalernas aldsta hem (in Fornvanner Vol. 1930, 
pp. 365 - 367. 









..u ' i ■ 







' / 

1 






• • • 









1 

- 


• - 




■ 




- 






■ 


... • ■ '» 








. • ■ • 1 • ; . ■ ■■ * •' 

. 

. 

- 

_ . 






- 95 - 


Schmidt*sl) opinion is very similar to that of Herman*s 
He derives the Vandals from the Scandinavian Peninsula, 
and rejects the hypothesis that the original home was in 
Northern Jutland, in the district now called Vendsyssel. 
(See Map 85). In favor of the Scandinavian homeland he 
mentions the relationship between the religious practices 
of the Lugians and those of Scandinavia. 2 ^ He also rejects 
the dating of the migration as late as the 2nd century B. 
C.3> If the migration had been as late as this, the Lango- 
bards would have had landed in Jutland where, according to 
the saga of the latter, they had a violent contact with 
the Vandals. But there is no evidence of the presence of 
the Langobards at this time in Jutish Peninsula. Schmidt 
therefore assumes that the Vandals began their migration 
as early as 750 B.C. and then landed in the mouth of the 
Vistula. Prom there they started their expansion into 
Northeastern Germany and Northwestern Poland, subjecting 
the Pace Urn people in the eastern part of Hinterpommern , 
West Prussia, the western part of East Prussia, the for¬ 
mer Prussian part of Poland and Middle Silesia.(See Map 
91). The mixture of the advancing tribes with the Pace 
Urn people resulted in a new tribal complex - the Vandals, 
who were the ancestors of the later religious confedera¬ 
tion of the Vandals - the Lugians. 

In respect to the Silingi Schmidt agrees with Jahn 

1) Schmidt: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, Vol. I, p. 83 

2 ) Ibid., foot note 1) 

3) Ibid. 

4) Ibid., p. 100. 





■ 











• 

. 



• 

, 








• 



• ' / • 

„ 

■ » . v\ • ‘ 

1 ■ . 

; > 

' . r ■ * - 

■ - 

• ': •« ■ . . . 

. ' ' i ■ hi\ : ' , i • • . V • •: ' r r ■: • . 


















. 









Mach II.cent. B.C. 


Map 86 



Map 87 


Kosslnna (late) II.cent.B.C. 




















96 - 


(see later) that they occupied Middle Silesia about the 
beginning of the present era. He also thinks that they 
came from Seeland.D (See Maps 85 and 91). 

Jahn^) takes issue with the opinion that the Vandals 
migrated so early. According to him the Silingi migrated 
from Seeland not earlier than the 2nd century B.C. He 
states that during the 2(2)*£period of the Iron Age the whole 
Province of Silesia does not show any archaeological evi¬ 
dence, and that consequently during this period - 300 to 
150 B.C. - the Pace Urn people who previously lived in 
this area, must have retreated to the main bod^i of the 
tribe in Posen and Prussia or migrated southwards. At the 
beginning of Period III of the Iron Age, that is, after 
150 B.C. archaeological evidence begins to appear again in 
Silesia, the artifacts, according to Jahn, belonging to 
the Pace Urn people who came from the north. But at the 
beginning of the present era there is again an interruption 
in the archaeological record and new artifacts appear in 
entirely new cemetries in Middle Silesia. For Jahn this 
indicates the arrival of the Silingi . (See Map 89). He 
thinks that they are identical with an older group which 
appeared at the beginning of Period III in the Silesian 
districts of Freystadt and in Niederlausitz and disappeared 
at the beginning of the present era. (See Map 89). He does 
however, according to Herman^), give reasons for this iden¬ 
tification of the Niederlausitz group with the ancestors 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 101. 

2) Jahn: Zur Herkunft der schlesischen Wandalen (quoted 
by Herman: op. cit. p. 23) 

3) Herman: op. cit. p. 25. 












. 

. 

* « 


■ r" • ■ ■, • \j 

. 


. 






■. I . , ' :: 

■ r • ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ 

. . 

• ' ’> •• " • O • 

' 

, ‘ ■ * ■ 







n 


- 


















• 


. 





1 n '■ ' ' 








. 

, 










Map 88. 


Kossinna (early) Pace Urn people 



Map 89. 


Jahn 


red 150 B.C 
violet 0 


0 










97 - 


of the Middle Silesian group. Jahn believes that the Si- 
ling 1 migrated into Niederlausitz about 150 B.C. after 
leaving Seeland shortly before this time. There they re¬ 
mained until the beginning of the present era at which 
time they moved into Middle Silesia. 

Much 1 ) does not express an opinion as to the time of 
migration, but he regards Vendsyssel in Northern Jutland 
as the possible homeland of the Vandals. He also regards 
it as probable that part of the tribe originated in South¬ 
ern Norway. (See Map 86). He does not consider, however, 
that the name of Silingi can be connected with Seeland. s ) 

He rejects Jahn*s view that the Silingi lived in Nieder¬ 
lausitz before moving into Middle Silesia. The fact that 
the Langobards had a violent contact with the Vandals 
proves to him only that that they must have lived in close 

proximity to each other. That would furnish, in his opi- 

c 

nion, proof of the ac^iracy of the Langobardic saga that 
there was conflict between the Langobards and the Vandals 
and would strengthen the hypothesis of Vendsyssel as their 
original home. 3 ) 

Kossinna 4 ) has an entirely different point of vie?/. 
First he thought that the Vandals were identical with the 
Face Urn people. It will be remembered in this connection 
that the Bastarnae were also supposed to be the descendants 
of the Face Urn people. Kossinna argues that many North 

1) Hoops: Reallexik.d.German.Altertimskunde, Vol.IV, p.479. 
B:*'v .Richthofen: Zur. VorgeschiChte der Ostgermanen, p.130, 
foot note 10. 

2) Hoops: op. cit. p. 479. 

3) Kossinna: Die deutsche Vorgeschichte, pp. 139 - 144. 










r ■ ■ ■ 

* 



. 


« ' 

• 


* 


















• ;v.>i 


’ : . 

■ 



. 


1 

. 


Jltfcl'Kt', , ■ r-'- 


. - » 

. * 






98 


Germanic tribes from Eastern and Southern Sweden, the is¬ 
lands of Bornholm and Gotland and the Jutish Peninsula 
would leave their homes and move by sea to the mouth of 
the Vistula.(See Map 88). Prom here they would start 
the conquest of the West Germanic population that had pe¬ 
netrated into Northeastern Germany and Northwestern Poland. 
Then pushing further south they would overrun various areas 
occypied by the Illyrians during Period V of the Bronze 
Age* Out of this mixture of conquerors and conquered a new 
Eastern Germanic tribe - the Vandili - emerged, who had 
the same burial e\istom as the Pace Urn people. At an earlly 
time, still during the 8th century B.G., they occupied 
West Prussia, Hinterpommern as far as Rega and south to 
Deutsch-Krone and Filehne on the Netze, Northern Posen to 
the Netze, southern West Prussia east of the Vistula and 
Western East Prussia as far as a line running through the 
districts of Neidenburg, Osterode, Allenstein, Rossel, 
Friedland, Prussian Eylau and to the mouth of the Pregel. 
(See Map 88). An offshoot from this main body occupied 
somewhat later the eastern part of Southern Posen and 
parts of Middle and Lower Silesia. The border on the west 
was from Filehne on the Netze through Birnbaum on the 
War the, Bentschen, Woll stein, Griinberg, Sprottau, Glogau, 
Steinau, Liegnitz, Breslau, Ohlau. The southern and eastern 
border went through Namslau to Kempen in Posen and from 
there northwards. (See Map 88). Still later the Face Urn 
people spread into Congress Poland to the Bug and from 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 142. 








. 




. 

■ 












4 * 


























, ' ' 


t ■ •• 








. 

, : 

. 







- 










t n f 

. 

' 


. 











Map 90. 


Kossinna (late) violet and red - Vandals 

green - Silingi 



Schmidt 


red 750 B.C 
gre en 0 


0 



















99 - 


the source of the Bug into East Galicia. (See Map 88). But 
in his later works^-) Kossinna changed his mind. He no longer 
regards the Face Urn people as the ancestors of the Vandals . 
He adopted the point of view of Jahn, Schulz and v.Richt¬ 
hofen and assumed with them that the Vandals emigrated from 
Northern Jutland during the 2nd century B.C. Sometime 
between 150 and 100 B.C. they can be traced with certainty 
in Southern Posen and Silesia, in Poland along the Upper 
and Middle Vistula and crossing the Lower Vistula in the 
western part of the Masuren area and the adjacent parts 
of Poland. (See Maps 87 and 90). Kossinna assumes therefore 
that the fighting with the Langobards took place as the 
Vandals moved out from Jutland and settled temporarily in 
the area between the Lower Elbe and the Lower Oder. (See 
Map 90). Then they moved up the Oder and occupied, as men¬ 
tioned above, Brandenburgian Neumark south of the Warthe, 
Niederlausitz , Posen, Lower Silesia, the southern part of 
West Prussia, the southwestern part of East Prussia, the 
adjacent area of West Masuren and the adjoining part of 
Congress Poland. (See Map 90). There was then, according 
to this interpretation, no violent contact with the Rugians. 
The Burgundians, who had also landed on German soil some¬ 
time between 150 and 100 B.C., forced the Vandals out of 
the region of the Upper Netze and the areas east of the 
Vistula close by Graudenz, Thorn and Strasburg (in East 
Prussia). (See Map 94). They also pushed forward along the 
middle course of the Vistula, especially on its southern 

1) Kossinna: German. Kultur im I. Jahrtausen n.Chr., p. 182. 



. ■ ‘ ■ ■ ' • ! ■ .•! ■ 'f ? 

« - 

, * 






4 • 




4 

. 


■ . 


. 

, 

* 4 , 

. 

4 


. 





100 - 


bank, almost to Warsaw. They thus divided the Vandals, cut¬ 
ting off an island in the West Masuren area. (See Map 94). 
Middle Silesia was occupied during the 1st century B.C., 
the tribe that was responsible for it coming from the is¬ 
land of Seeland, but the division into the Silingi and the 
(H)asdingi took place later (2nd century A.D.). (See Map 
94). From their new Middle Silesian home they even sent 
out some colonies into Middle Germany. 1 * * ^ Pushed out of 
their northern territories by the Burgundians the Vandals 
in 100 B.C• occupied the rest of Congress Poland, crossing 
the Bug and extending as far as Drohitschin and Sokal, 
from where they reached the Upper Dniestr.*^ (See Map 94). 
B.v.Richthofen also accepts the view that the Vandals 

'Z \ 

migrated during the 2nd century B.C. He also mentions 
the suggestion of W.Schulz that there might be a connection 
between the raid of the Cimbri and the Teutoni and that 
of the Vandals. 

W.Schulz 4 5 ^ is in favour of the 2nd century B.C. as the 
time of the migration of the Vandals. 

Much^ gives the view of Zeuss that the Sillngl came 
into Middle Silesia from Oberlausitz , an assumption men¬ 
tioned by none of the about mentioned authorities. 

Summing up all these views they fall into the follo¬ 
wing categories: Herman and Schmidt think that the Vandals 
came from the Scandinavian Peninsula during the 8th - 7th 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 188. 

2; Ibid. 

3J v.Richthofen: op. cit. p. 130 and Schmidt: op. cit. 
p. 83, foot note 1) 

4) v.Richthofen, op. cit. p. 131. 

5) Hoops: Realb xik.d.German. Alterturnskunde, Vol.IV, p.180. 










101 


century B.C. Jahn, Kossirma, v.Richthofen and Schulz think 
that they came during the 2nd century B.C* from Northern Jut¬ 
land. Much thinks that they came from Northern Jutland, too, 
hut expresses no opinion as to the date. As for the Silingi 
Nerman does not express an opinion about the date hut thinks 
that they might have come together with the other Vandals. 

He derives them from Seeland. Jahn, Schmidt and Kossirma de¬ 
rive them from Seeland, too, the former at about the begin¬ 
ning of the present era, the latter during the 1st century 
B.C. Much and Karsten^-' take issue with the view which deri¬ 
ves them from Seeland, but do not mention the time at which 
the migration took place. 

For present purposes the following interpretation is 
accepted: The Vandals came from the Scandinavian Peninsula 
some time after 750 B.C. (Nerman, Schmidt). The fight with 
the Langobards took place when the latter landed in Germa¬ 
ny around 600 B.C. The Vandals forced back the Face Urn 
people who are the ancestors of the Bastarnae (Schmidt) 
and occupied first the the eastern part of Hinterpommern , 

West Prussia, the western part of East Prussia (Schmidt), 
the West Masurian area, the adjacent part of Poland east 
of the Vistula, former Prussian Poland, Brandenburgian 
Neumark south of the Warthe, Niederlausitz and Lower Si¬ 
lesia (Kossinna). (See Map 92). About 150 B.C. they were 
driven out of the costal areas by the Rugians, the latter 
occupying the land from Kolberg to Elbing. The Vandals 
would now hold all the territory which they formely held 
minus the areas taken by the Rugians. (See Map 93). About 
100 B.C. new arrivals - the Burgundians - pushed the Van¬ 
dals out of the area north of the Warthe, the district of 
Turek and the area north of the Bzura. (See Map 94). On 
the right bank of the Vistula a Burgundian wedge cutj( off 


1) Karsten: Die Germanen, p. 149 












Map 92 • 



Map 95. 


150 - 100 B.C. 


















102 - 


a small West Masurian group in the districts of Neiden- 
burg, Ortelsburg, Allenstein and 0stepode from the main 
body of the tribe.1) (See Map 94) The main group attempted 
to enlarge its territories by spreading about 100 B.C. in¬ 
to the rest of Congress Poland, crossing the Bug and rea¬ 
ching Drohitschin and Sokal, as well as a small part of 
East Galicia as far as the Upper Dniestr. (See Map 94). 
About the beginning of the present era the Silingi occu¬ 
pied Middle Silesia (Jahn, Schmidt). (See Map 94). Parts 
c 

of the tribe raids into Middle Germany during the 1st 

century* B.C. and they can be traced archaeologically in 
the province of Saxony, Anhalt, Eastern Thuringia and even 
as far as Wetterau.^) With the landing of the Goths at the 
beginning of the present era at the mouth of the Vistula a 
new enemy appeared. But the conflict with them began only 
in 2nd century A.D. In the meantime the Vandals were in¬ 
volved in a struggle against the Swebians in Bohemia and 
Moravia.3) The Lugians, especially the Burl, participated 
in 50 A.D. in the expulsion of Vannius, the king of the 
Swebian state which had been created by the Romans in 19 A. 
D. in the area between the Waag and the Morava. While the 
Romans were fighting against the Dacians in 88 - 89 A.D., 
the Lugians struggled against the Marcoinanni and the Quadl . 
After this the Marcomanni allied themselves with the Romans 
and this alliance lasted till the Marcomannic wars in the 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 188. 

2 ) Ibid. 

3) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 102. 







* 


■ , 

" 
















. . 

. 




• ■ > 






• <■ *: 


. 


. 

D : 




* • • 



. - 150 A.D. 

tt t» 


red 

green 


100 B.C 
0 















103 


2nd century A.D. About 150 A.D. the Goths began their memo¬ 
rable migration in the southeasterly direction. This mig¬ 
ration affected also the Vandals. In 150 A.D. the small 
West Masurian pocket was overrun and conquered by the ad¬ 
vancing Goths. Then the pressure of the Gothg (who later 
became Gepldae ) caused the Burgundians to leave their 3and 
and move west. The Vandals thus were forced to abandon their 
territories in Brandenburg (Neumark), Niederlausitz and Up¬ 
per Silesia to the advancing Burgundians. (See Maps 20 and 
95)• The Vandals in turn in the course of the 2nd century 
occupied Eastern Galicia and Bukovina as far as Schipenitz. 1 ) 
(See Map 95. They also in the same century pushed the Celts 
out of Upper Silesia. (See Map 95). New opportunities 
opened with the outbreak of the Marcomannic wars, and the 
Vandals took advantage of the situation to penetrate into 
Roman Dacia behind the Carpathian Mountains. 

At this point a few remarks are necessary concerning 
the division and classification of the various Vandal, alias 
Lugian tribes. 

Under the mane of the Lugians a religious federation 
of the Vandal tribes was formed. The sacred grove of the fe¬ 
deration was on the territory of the Silingian Vandals in 
Silesia. Ptolomy enumerates 3 Lugian tribes: 1) the Omanoi , 

2) the ( Dl)dunol and 3) the Burol.2) Tacitus mentiones five 
main Lugian tribes: 1) the Harii , 2) the Helvecones , 3) the 
Maniml , 4) the Elisii and 5) the Nahar(na)vali . 5 ) The Silingi 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 188. 

2) Ptolomy: Geographia, II, 11, 18. 

3) Tacitus: Germania, 43. 

















104 


mentioned by Ptolomy but not as a Lugian tribe, are also to 
be counted as belonging to the Vandals. The name ( H)asdingi 
appears during the Marcomannic wars. We can assume that the 
Harii, the Hasdingi and Pliny*s Charini are all the same 
tribe. 1 ) The Silingi are identical with the Naharnavali . 2 ^ 

The Omgnol are probably the Manimi . Their territory and 
their fate is not known. 5 ) The Helvecones are probably iden¬ 
tical with the Naharnavali , and therefore also with the Si ¬ 
lingi and with the Ailuaiones , mentioned by Ptolomy, but 
not under the jjugians. 4 ) Much 5 ) identifies the Helvecones 
with the Elvejk)ones (?) of rtolomy, who, however, does not 
list them under the Lugians. The Didunoi are probably a 
wild invention of Ptolomy*s.^) The Buroi, although mentio¬ 
ned by Tacitus as belonging to the swebians are also a Lu¬ 
gian tribe. They can be traced during the Marcomannic wars 
in Northern Moravia. Their ultimate fate is not known?) Nor 
do we know anything about the 1 H)elisii .^) During the Mar¬ 
comannic wars 2 other tribes are mentioned which probably 
belonged to the Vandals: the Victovall (mentioned first by 
Capitolin) and the Lakringi (mentioned by Dio). Kossina, 
Mullenhof and Much regard the Victovali as identical with 
the Hasdingi . 9 t Schmidt 1 ^) does not agfcee with this identi- 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 102. 

2) Ibid, po 101. 

3) Ibid. 

4) Ibid. 

5) Hoops: Reallexik.d.German.altertumskunde, Vol.IV, p.480. 

6) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 101. 

7) Ibid. 

8) Hoops: op. cit. p. 480. 

9) Ibid. 

10 ) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 102. 































■ 










. 

■ 

. 




1 'l. : ' 


' 

• : • ■ ■' • • v, \ \ ± >vj 

. . 

* 

u 2 o 

1 

* 

- 

, 













red 

150 - 250 A.D. 

blue 

169 - " " 

green 

171 - " " 



Map 95• 


Map 96. 


250 - beginning of the IV.cent. A.D 

















105 - 


fication. According to him Capitolin mentions the date 169 
A.D. and not 170 A.D. as Much appears to think.D Schmidt 
does not know to what group they belong.^) as for hakringi 
Kossinna thinks that they are a part of the Hasdingi . 5 ) 
Schmidt regards them as Vandals, too, but does not indenti- 
fy them with the Hasdingi .4) Their fate after 26b A.D* is 
unknown. Much does not know where to place the Taif all 
Schmidt regards them as relatives tr^ the Visigoths. Much 
further thinks uhat Ptolomy f s Avarinol are identical with 
Pliny 1 s Uarinne , enumerated! by the latter as VandiljL?) Pto¬ 
lomy 1 s Ombrones (south of the Avarinoi ) and Frugindlones 
(north of the Avarinoi ) are in Much’s opinion Germanic 
tribes, but whether they are to be classified with the Van¬ 
dals or with the Bastarnae or Skiri cannot be determined. 7 ) 
The Ombrones may possibly have been Vandals, since one of 
the Vandal kings in the Langobardian saga called himself 
Ambri. 8 ) 

Juro 

Only p branches of the Vandals mad© the journey into 
Spain: the Hasdingi and the Silingi . 

The story of the Vandals will be now continued. The 
Hist.Aug.Vita Marci 14,1 mentions the Vandal tribes Vic - 
tovali and Lacringi for the first time. According to Kossi¬ 
nna 9 ) the Hasdingi whom he, MUllenhoff and Much regard as 

identical with the Victov ali, led by their kings Raos and 

1; Hoops: op. cit. p.Vol.IV, p 417. 

2) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 102. 

3) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 192. 

4) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 102. 

5 ) 

6) Hoops: op. cit. p. 480. 

7) Ibid. 

8) Ibid. 

9) Ibid. 


























. 



. . 

. 

' . 

- 





'■ ' t ; *’ r '• 



. 

■ 

■ 

' ' • «•/ 1 if • 

*' : *' r 

, 





' . ' 


i 









1 ’ ' . ; ' : ‘ •> ' ;",' 




J 




. ri.it 'tl$l 

■ 



. 



;.r 


' 


■ 1 l 

. ■ 



( . 

: 


' ' - 


< j ' ' '■ .... 

. . . . 

. . 

- . . . ; -: ‘i 

• • . ' 

. . 




- 106 


Raptos, break in 171 A.D. into Northern Hungary and Trans- 
carpathian Ukraine, They are accompanied by the Lacringi , 
one of the tribes of the Hasdingian group of the Vandals. 

The Hasdingi settled in the west and the Lacringi in the 
east. They occupy the districts of Zips, Saros, Zemplin, 

Bereg, Abauj, Hont, Szabolcz, Szatmar. 1 ) (See Map 96). The 
Theiss , the Maros, Siebenburgen and the Carpathian moun¬ 
tains formed the frontiers of these new Hasdingian terri¬ 
tories, Schmidt, however, accepting the Victoyall (although 
with hesitation) among the Lugians, is strongly opposed to 
identifying them with the Hasdingi , and interprets the events 
of these times differently. The Victovali , he thinks, inva¬ 
ded Dacia as early as 167 A.D. in company with other tribes. 2 ^ 
But the Romans managed to remain masters of the situation 
and settled the Victovali and the Lacringi in Northern Dacia , 
imposing upon them the duty of protecting the frontier. The 
Hasdingi , who also wanted to move into Dacia , were rejected 
by the Romans. They were told in 171 A.D. to occupy the land 
of the Kostroboci , on the eastern slopes of the Carpathian 
Mountains, who were at this time raiding the Eastern Empire. 
This the Hasdingi did, but because they still presented a 
menace to Roman Dacia , the Lacringi were incited or told 
by the Romans to attack the Hasdingi . The latter were defeated, 
after which they were allowed, still in the same 171 A.D., 
to settle in Dacia , in the area around the Upper Theiss.5) 

(See Map 95)• 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 192. 

2) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 103. 

3) Ibid. p. 104. 























107 


The controversy arises because Schmidt regards the Vic- 
rovali and the Hasdingi as $ different people, whereas MU1- 

lenhoff and his school think they are the same people under 

Cure 

$ different names. 

In 167 A.D. the Victovali are associated with the Lan- 
gobards in an attack on the Roman territory.!) They are also 
mentioned under the tribes which participated in the first 
phase of the Marcomannic war against the Romans. 2 ) They are 
mentioned by Capitolin (22, 2) as the first of the 2nd branch 
of these tribes. Schmidt thinks the Victovali must have been 
included among the 11 tribes with whom the Romans made 
treaties in 169 A.D., after having administred a defeat, 
as mentioned by Dio (71, 3, la). 3 ^ Schmidt assumes therefore 
that they must have been included in this treaty and given 
permission to settle in Northern Hungary, since they are 
mentioned as being there in 334 A.D. by Ammianus (17, 12, 19), 
and again in 358 A.D. by Eutropus as being in Banat (VIII 2). 4 ) 

According to Dio (71, 12) the Hasdingi are mentioned 
for the first time in connection with their raid into the 
land of the Kostroboci , as described above. Schmidt treats 
them (the Victovali and the Hasdingi ) separately but Millen- 
hoff. Much and Kosslnna think that they are the same tribe 
under % different names. They do not share Schmidt f s opinion 
that they are to be included among the S tribes who made 
peace with the Romans and then settled in Dacia . Their expla- 

1) Schmidt; op. cit. p. 103. 

2) Ibid. 

3) Ibid. 

4) Ibid. 


















- 

' 

* 











J 






. '• 

_ 

- • • 

■ 

' 

. i 

. 

Y • ’ ' 'V- ; 'I . 1 ' 






■ 




JJ 


. 

■ 










. 








red 310/20 - 335 A.D. 

« " - 400 " 

green " - 406 " 



red and green - 4ol - 4o6 A.D. 

















108 


nation is that the Hasdingi alias Victovali were in conflict 
with the Romans before 171 A.D. and that it was after this 
conflict that they broke into Dacia from the occupied terri¬ 
tory of the Kostrobocl , where they in turn were defeated by 
the Lacringi .-*•) 

Kossinna simplifies the story by having the Hasdingi 
alias Victovali and the Lacringi enter Northern Dacia to¬ 
gether and by omitting any mention of a conflict between 
them on Dacian soil. 2 ) 

Zw* 

For present purposes these % different views are combi¬ 
ned. It will be assumed that the Victovali and the Hasdingi 
are the same people, that they attacked the Romans in 167 
A.D. and later but did not settle down at this time in Dacia , 
nor did they make any treaty with the Romans. The Lacringi , 
however, a tribe of the Hasdingian branch of the Vandals, 
who were settled in 169 A.D. in the eastern part of Northern 
Dacia with the duty of protecting the border, come into con¬ 
flict with the Hasdingi when they reappear in 171 A.D., and 
after being refused land in Dacia by the Romans, are permit¬ 
ted to attack the Kostroboci , after which they invade Dacia 
and are defeated by the Lacringi , acting as allies of the 
Romans. (See Map 95). But now being far less dangerous they 
are permitted to settle in Northwestern Dacia , between the 
Lacringi and the Quadi. 3 ) (See Map 95). 

It remains to mention the Buri* They were situated In 

1) Hoops: op. cit. Vol. IV, p» 417 and Kossinna: op. cit. 
p. 192. 

2) Kossinna: ibid. 

3) Schmidt 1 s chronology is used. 
























J 





\ 








109 - 


Northern Moravia and Austrian Silesia, according to Tacitus 1 ^, 
or according to Ptolomy^) in Upper Silesia as far as the 
sources of the Vistula. (See Map 96). MUllenhoff thinks 
they occupied the territories in the area of the Upper Waag. 5 ^ 
During the Markomannic wars they are listed among the ene¬ 
mies of Roma.4) j n ]_78 a.D., however they were allies of 
the Romans against the Quadi.5) shortly after this they broke 
again their alliance with the Romans who sent a punitive 
expedition against them. They probably remained in their 
territories until the end of the 4th century A.D. at which 
time they emigrated, but the direction which they took and 
their fate is not known. 

The Vandal territories in Galicia extended as far as 
Welyka Tjernava.^) (See Map 95). But about 250 A.D. the Van¬ 
dals disappear from Eastern Galicia, Eastern Poland and the 
eastern part of Western Galicia.Kossinna thinks this mo¬ 
vement is connected with the sudden appearance of a tribe 
called the Taifali who also in 250 A.D. occupy parts of Wa- 
llachia. Thus Kossinna identifies the Taifali with the Van¬ 
dals. Schmidt disagrees. He thinks the Taifali are most 
probably related to the Visigoths and have nothing to do with 
the Vandals.Schmidt f s view is the one here accepted. (See 
also under Taifali - page 89). 

About 250 A.D. a considerable number of the Silingi 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. ppj 101 and 105, Hoops; op.cit.p.361,v.1 . 

2) Hoops: ibid. 

3) Ibid. ' 

4) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 104. 

5) Ibid. 

6) Ibid., p. 105. 

7) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 188. 

8) Ibid. p. 195. 

9) Ibid. 

10) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 546. 










I V •" ■ ■ 








. 

■ 

■ 








. . 






, 








- 
















•" ~'J'H i ■ 

, ’ ■ ' . ' \ . ■ ' r 

. 

• ■ I ■ ■ : 


IV, ■ !.;• 


u 






l ' 

■ 






















. 




110 


migrated westwards. 1 ) (See Map 96). Some of them settled in 
the region of the Middle Main. The majority of them were ex¬ 
terminated in the course of raids on Romans territories in 
276 - 282 A.D. Some of these Vandals who were taken priso¬ 
ners at that time were moved into Brittany as auxiliary troops 
of the Romans. 2 ) The majority of the Sllingi tribe, however, 
remained in Silesia until they joined the Hasdingi in their 
common migration into Spain. Even so, many of them must have 
remained behind, since the advancing Slavs took over the name 
of the tribe and gave it to the whole territory in the form 
of Slezi, Silesia.3) 

After 250 A.D. there is no mention of the Lacringi . Kos- 
sinna assumes that they must have migrated and that their 
territory was occupied by the newly arrived Gepidae under 
their king Fastida. Kossinna suggests 4 ) that the Lacringi 
joined the Taifali in Wallachia. This, however, is doubtful, 
since Kossinna regards the Taifali as the Vandals, too. Much 5 ) 
merely states that their fate is unknown. 

Kossinna states that the Gepidae in their expansion 
south (before their migration proper) reached the Vendalian 
territories. This took place during the 3rd century A.D. 6 ) 

The rest of the Hasdingian Vandals remained in their old 
territory even after the Gepidae had completely abandoned 
Poland by the beginning of the 4th century A.D. For ttow long 

djrd these Vandals remain''here is not certain. Schmidt assumes 

1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 195. 

2) Arldt: German!sche Volkerwellen, p. 155. 

3) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 190. 

4) Ibid. p. 195. 

5) Hoops: op. cit. Vol. Ill, p. 120. 

6 ) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 238. 













Ill 


that the royal graves In Sackrau near Breslau belong to the 
Hasdingi ; the graves belong to the beginning of the 4th cen¬ 
tury, and Schmidt therefore thinks that the Hasdingi lefit 
these areas at the beginning of the 4th century A.D., and 
as a guess, he suggests that they joined their relatives 
in Hungary.^) Kossinna, however, thinks the graves belong to 
the Silingi , although they look very much like Rugian graves. 
The Rugians must have passed through these regions very 
shortly afterwards. The Hasdingi would be by that time all 
in Hungary. 2 ) In his later works, however, Kossinna says 
that the graves are undoubtedly Vandalian, without specify¬ 
ing whether Silingian or Hasdingian. 5 ) Perhaps this indicates 
that he gave up his earlier view and now classifies the 
graves as Hasdingian who are sometimes referres to as the 
’genuine Vandals’ ( eigentliche Wandalen ). Schmidt’s version 
is here assumed to be correct. (See Map 96). 

Meanwhile the Hasdingi in Hungary tried to expand. In 
290 A.D. they allied themselves with the Gepidae and attacked 
the Visigoths in an attempt to drive the latter out of Sie- 
benburgen , but the attack failed. The Goths and their allies 
the Taifall were victorious. 4 ) About 355 A.D. the Vandals 
renewed their war against the Visigoths, this time in alli¬ 
ance with the Sarmatae , but this attempt also ended with a 
decided victory of the Goths. Wisumar, king of the Vandals, 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 107. 

2) Kossinna: Die deutsche Vorgeschichte, p. 166. 

3) Kossinna: German. Kultur im I.Jahrtausen n.Chr., p. 98. 

4) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 223. 
















” 










' . 

' 




















. 








Map 100• 


red and green - 411 - 418 A.D. 














112 


fell In the battle. 1 ) Kossinna thinks that after this 
battle the remainders of the tribe settled in Pannonia . 2 ) 

Not until 400 A.D. were they again strong enough to under¬ 
take to attack the Roman power. But in Schmidts opinion 
the shattered tribe of the Vandals remained after the de¬ 
feat of 335 A.D. in Dacia . Shortly before this time they 
had extended their authority as far as the Maros and the 
White, Black and Past Kdrds.3)(See Map 96). After the de¬ 
feat what remained of the Victovali (alias Hasdingi ) con¬ 
tinued to live in the same areas as before, and probably 
spread to the Banat, as Patsch thinks^), until about 400 A. 

D. their number increased to such an extend that they had 
to move because of lack of cultivable land. 5 ) Schmidt*s 
version Is accepted here. (See Map 97). 

A part of the tribe under their king Godigisel moved 
along the ^oman military road of xm or them Dacia through the 
territory of the Sarmatae and crossed the Danube at Aquin- 
cum. 5 ) (See Map 97). Here they were joined by the Alans, 
and moving along the right bank of the river through Brigetio, 
Garnuntum, Lauriacum they poured into Noricum and the adja¬ 
cent parts of Raetia . Here in 401 A.D. they were defeated 
by Stilicho, himself of Vandal origin, and were permitted 
to settle there as foederati .^) (See Map 98). But the Vandals 
and the Alans did not stay long in these new areas. In 406 A. 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 106. 

2 ) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 198. 

3) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 106. 

4) Ibid. p. 103. 

5) Ibid. p. 107. 

6 ) Ibid. p. 108. 

7) Ibid. 











- 






;'; }d . • 

> 

, 


>’ ■. 













■ 
















113 - 


D. they broke out again. Their aim was to cross the Khine and 
penetrate into Gaul. They took advantage of the opportunity 
created by the withdrawal of the Roman troops from the Rhine 
into Italy to meet an attack of Radagais there. The Vandals 
and the Alans were joined In this raid by the majority of 
the Quadi , the majority of the Sillngi and some detachments 
of the Gepidae . Some of the Vandals, as frequently happened, 
remained in Noricum. The raiders moved probably along the 
Roman military road which went through Noricum , Augsburg, 
Plochingen, Cannstadt and Heidelberg to Mainz. 1 ) (See Map 99). 
After a fieree battle with the Pranks, who as foederati of 
Rome had been left to protect the frontier, they forced the 
passage of the Rhine at the turn of the years 406 - 407 A.D. 
in the darkness of night. Their king Godigisel fell in this 
battle. For 3 year the invaders looted in Gaul and the Romans 
were unable to check them. 2 ^ Under Godigisel*s son GanderIch 
the Vandals and their allies crossed the Pyrenees and poured 
into Spain in the autumn of 409 A.D. For % year^ they looted 
and finally, endangered by the pestilence and famine which 
had broken out in Spain, they settled down: the Hasdingi and 
the Swebians ( Quadi ) in Gallaecia , the Sillngi in Baetica 
and the Alans in Lusitania and Carthaginiensis . 5 ) (See Map 
100). Their official status was that of foederati of Rome. 

In 416 A.D. the Visigoths under their king Wallia 
appeared in Spain to execute a commission of the Emperor, 
whose foederati they now were, to destroy the Vandals, the 


1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 109 

2) Ibid. 

3) Ibid. 






























' 








. 


- 














. 




’ 











419/21 - 429 A.D. 


Map 101 



429/36 - 442 A.D. 


Map 108 











114 


Alans and the Sweblans. The Goths defeated and almost anni¬ 
hilated the Silingi in a series of battles in 418 A.D. In 
the same year they also defeated and almost exterminated the 
Alans. Small remnants of this once very numerous tribe joi¬ 
ned the Hasdingi . The latter and the Swebians did not share 
the fate of their allies only because the Goths were called 
away from Spain at the end of 418 A.D. by the Emperor who 
feared that they might become too strong after these victo¬ 
ries.!) In 419 the Hasdingi attacked the Swebians, who were 
only saved from destruction by the intervention of a Roman 
army.2) (See Map 101). Thereupon the Vandals had to retreat 
into Beetlea . A second clash with the Romans in 421 or 422 
A.D. ended in a decisive victory of the Vandals, after which 
they spread into the whole of Southern Spain, including all 
the southern ports which were captured by a Vandal fleet, 
mentioned in this connection for the first time. 3 ) (See Map 
101). It might be mentioned now that the name of the modern 
Spanish province of Andalusia goes back to the original f Wan- 
dalusia 1 probably. 4 ) 

In 428 A.D., following Gunderich f s death, Gaiserich, 
besides Theodoric the Great, the mightiest figure of the mi¬ 
gration period, became king of the Vandals. In 429 A.D. he 
led his tribe across the Straits of Gibraltar into Northern 
Africa. At this time the tribe was about 80, 000 strong. 

They met their first resistance in 430 A.D. in the province 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. pp. 109 and 110. 

2) Ibid. p. 110. 

3) Ibid. 

4) Karsten: Die Germanen, p. 221. 










115 - 


of Numidia. This resistance was easily brushed aside, where- 
tipon the Vandals conquered the whole of Roman North Africa 
as far as Tripolis. (See Map 102). Only the fortified ports 
of Hippo Regius (modern Bone) and Carthage still remained 
in Roman hands. (See Map 102). In 455 A. D. they were reco¬ 
gnized by the helpless Emperor as foederati in the province 
of Numidia .^ (See Map 102). In 439 A.D. Gaiserich captured 

the city of Carthage by a stratagem.2) and used the arsenals 

\ 

and ships which he found there to strengthen his fleet. In 
order to cut off the grain supply from Italy Gaiserich occu¬ 
pied Sicily in 440 A.D., but evacuated the island shortly 
after this, after he had received news that a strong Byzan¬ 
tine fleet was approaching. This fleet landed In Sicily, but 
no actions against the Vandals followed, because the fleet 
was soon recalled (in 442 A.D.), when the Huns made an attack 
on the Eastern Empire. Thereupon the Western Empire made a 
treaty with the Vandals, giving them the provinces of Tingi - 
tana , Mauretania, Numidia , Zeugitana and Byzacena . 3 ) (See 
Map 103). The centre of the Vandal settlements was around 
Carthage; remaining lands were tributary. 

There followed a long period of friendly relations be¬ 
tween the Vandals and the Western Empire. Upon the death of 
the Emperor Valentian in 455 A.D. Gaiserich ceased to regard 
himself bound by the treaty with the Romans. It was In this 
year that the Vandals attacked the city of Rome itself, cap¬ 
tured It without any resistance and looted the city for a 

1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 111. 

2) Ibid. 

3) Ibid. p. 112. 












' 



.fir ; 




. . 



. 



■ 


• 








« 



* 

. 
















♦ 











• 








. 




. 









« 








< ' < 






. 

. 

) , . 

' 











Map 103. 


red 442 - 474 A.D. 

green 450 - n ” 



Map 104. 


474 - 476 A.D 













116 


period o(^ 2 weeks.1) The new Emperor Avitus was powerless to 
do anything. Gaiserich therefore occupied in the following 
years Tripolis. 2 ) (See Map 103). Majorianus, the succesor of 
Avitus, tindertook in 460 A.D. a campaign against the Vandals 
by sea and land, but Gaiserich destroyed his fleet and the 
imperial army sent to Spain to cross to Africa had therefore 
to retreat. After this the Vandals ravaged every year the coasts 
of Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, the Balearic and the Pi- 
tyus islands. Finally both Emperors, the Eastern and the West¬ 
ern, undertook in 467 A.D. a joint expedition against the Van¬ 
dals. The land force was to strike from Egypt and the fleet 
was to attack the Vandal ports. The Romans were at first vic¬ 
torious, but in 468 A.D. Gaiserich caught by Carthage the Ro¬ 
man fleet of about 1,000 ships by surprise and destroyed it. 

This caused the complete failure of the imperial campaign. 

The Vandals were now masters of the sea. In 472 A.D. Olybrius, 
Gaiserich 1 s candidate for Emperor, was proclaimed Emperor in 
Rome by Rikimer and for a time friendly relations were estab¬ 
lished. But In 474 A.D. the Vandals began hostilities against 
the Eastern Roman Empire. The Emperor Zeno was not in a posi¬ 
tion to offer effective resistance and in the same 474 A.D. 
he recognized the Vandals as sovereign possessors of Africa, 
Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, the Balearic and the Pityus is¬ 
lands.?) (See Map 104). In 476 A.D. Sicily was ceded to Odo- 
acer in return for an annual tribute. 4 ) (See Map 105). 

In 477 A.D., the year of the death of the great king, 

1) Schmidt: Germanische Fruhzeit, p. 211. 

2) Ibid. p. 212. 

3) Ibid. p. 213. 

4) Ibid. 





. . i 




■ 

. 

. 




• ) ( . r ■ r-- r v- ■ 




. , 




• 


) • - 


' 




. 




: ■ C • ■ .. . : 

. 

. 


> \ * !' ‘ <• 


„ 



. 

* • 


in O';:''.- 






, 

,j . . 

. 

. 

■ 

. ’ ■ '.;V < • ■ * - . V/ ' " 

■ ' . ' . . ■ ) i ■ . i - : ■ 

. 

... 

. ! , 

• ■' - ( ; 





Map 105• 



Map 106 


500 - 533 A.D. 















117 - 


the Vandals were at the peak of their power. The decline be¬ 
gan after Gaiserich*s death. The Mauritian tribes in Aurasius 
Mons (modern Great Atlas) revolted and could not be brought 
back to obedience. The Vandals abandoned also their territo¬ 
ries west of the Cheli^ river. The next king, Hunerich, in¬ 
stituted a disastrous policy of persecution of the Catholics. 
(It should be mentioned here that the Vandals were converted 
to the Arian branch of Christianity in the 1st half of the 
4th century A.D. in their North Hungarian territories.). 1 2 ) The 
next king. Gunthaims, modified this severity somewhat. His 
suecesor, Thrasarmnd, allied himself with the Ostrogoths in 
Italy and married in 500 A.D. Theodoric f s sister, Amalafrida, 
who brought him as dowry the western part of Sicily with the 
city of Lilybaeum.^) (See Map 106). Hilderich, the next king, 
made an alliance with the Eastern Empire, which caused a re¬ 
volt of a national party under Gelimer. Thereupon the Empe¬ 
ror Justinian took advantage of the opportunity and ordered 
his general Belisarius to attack the Vandals. The former Van¬ 
dal vigor had, however, deteriorated and they offered but a 
weak resistance. In the year 553 A.D. the Vandal state was 
destroyed. 3 ^ 


1) Kossinna: op. cit. p. 198. 

2) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 214. 

3) Ibid. p. 215. 




, 

I 

Ijj 

* 

' 

. • ■ „ . 

' , 

1 ■ ■ : ' ; ' ; 1 ■ : 1 : 

■ 

. ■ : ■ . ~ . 

„ . - 

> - 

. ’ • 

' 

. 


. 





118 - 


Chapter 17 
THE VISIGOTHS 1 * 

In 271 A.D. the Visigoths undertook another raid into 
Illyria and Thrace and then turned against their barbaric 
neighbours. In 280 A.D. they chased the Bastarnae with some 
other Non-Germanic tribes behind the Danube. (See Map 107). 

In 290 A.D. they repelled the attack of the Vandals and the 
Gepidae . Diocletian and Constantine the Great fortified the 
Danube frontier and thus made further raids veri^ difficult. 

As auxiliary troops of the Romans the Visigoths took part in 
many battles. They also attempted several raids, contrary to 
the treaty which they made, into imperial territories during 
the reign of Constantine. They were, however, in all cases 
turned back by the imperial armies. In 335 A.D. the Visigoths 
repelled the attack of the Vandals and the Sarmatae. 

In 348 A.D. part of the Christian Visigoths, persecuted 
by Athanaric , were granted permission to settle in the area 
around Nicopolis and Plevna in Moesla inferior . (See Map 107). 
This was the group with which Wulfilas was associated. 

In 376 A.D. the majority of the Visigoths under pressure 
from the Huns crossed the Danube and had to be settled in a 
part of Thrace. Athanaric with a small remnant, retreated 
into the highlands of Banat. (See Map 108), The Visigoths 
who had crossed the Danube, however, under Alavivus and Fri- 

thigern, soon became dissatisfied with their treatment at the 
hands of the Romans and war broke out between the "parties. 
The imperial army was defeated in 377 A.D. at Marcianopolis. 
(See Map 108). In 378 A.D. Frithigern made an Incursion into 

1) See foot note 3) on page 58. 










. * 

. . 
















■ 

, : b i - ■ l. , • 

, • • 


: i 




' 


• * . • ‘ w . f • 

- 

. 


- ‘ . - 4 * 

' ■ 

» ... 

. 

. 

V , * : ! ; 








. u i > 






Map 107 




Map 108. 


blue 377 A.D. green 380 A.D. Athanaric 

red 378 green/blue 382 A.D. 

red/green 380 ” Frithigern orange 391/2 M 

violet 382 - 395 A.D. 













119 - 


Thrace, and in a battle with the imperial army at Hadrianopo- 
lis the Goths won a great victory. The Emperor Valens fell 
in the battle. (See Map 108). However, the next year Theodo- 
sius cleared Thrace orctiof the Visigoths. In 380 A.D. the 
Visigoths of Prithigern raided Macedonia and Thesaly, whilst 
the Ostrogoths under Alatheus and Safrac turned west and fi¬ 
nally settled in Pannonia. (See Map 108). In the same year 
Athanaric made an alliance with the Romans and crossed 
Romans soil. tSee Map 108). In 381 A.D. after the death of 
Prithigern Athanaric became the sole leader of the Visigoths 
and was granted permission to settle with his people in Moe- 
sia inferior . (See Map 108). Then, however, the Visigoths 
under Alaric became restless again, and started their new 
migration in 395 A.D. After an ineffectual move against Con¬ 
stantinople they turned westward, crossed Thrace, Macedonia 
and Thessaly, entered Greece, captured Pireus, crossed to 
Peloponesus and captured here Corinth, Argos and Sparta. 

(See Map 109). But surrounded by the troops of Stilicho, who 
had arrived in 397, and hemmed them in the mountains around 
Elis, they sueceded in breaking through and reaching Epirus, 
where they remained for a few years. (See Map 109). 

In 401 A.D. Alaric made his first invasion into Italy. 

He crossed the Julian Alps, besieged unsuccessfully Aquileja, 
^retreated from Milan before Stilicho who had arrived on the 

scene with a big army, and after an indecisive battle near 
Pollentia returned to Istria or Dalmatia. (See Map 110). 

In 408 A.D. Alaric again invaded Italy. The route that he 














n 

■ 






# 

. 


















‘ 







' . * - 



, • ' ’ ' • •“> . ‘ ; •' 

■ . . 

. 

, 

* <: 

. . 



? 








Map 109 


395 - 397 A.D. 



red 401/2 A.D, 

green/viol./orange/blue 408/12 11 


Map 110, 





















120 - 


followed this time was Padua, Cremona, Piacenza, Modena, 
Rimini, Rome. (See Map 110). Rome was besieged and after 
the payment of a ransom the Visigoths discontinued the siege 
and moved into Tuscany. (See Map 110). After unsuccessful 
negotiations with the Emperor Alaric besieged Rome again, 
forced the senaU to elect an anti-emperor Attains and there¬ 
upon besieged the Emperor in Ravenna. (See Map 110). In 
410 A.D., after unsuccessful negotiation with the Emperor 
he marched on Rome again, stormed the city and the Visigoths 
looted in the capital for 3 days. (See Map 110). Prom Rome 
the Visigoths moved south through Campania and Lucania to 
Reggio with the intention of crossing through Sicily to Af¬ 
rica. But Alaric*s fleet was destroyed by a storm and he 
again marched to the north, but died on the way. (See Map 

no). 

Alaric*s successor, Atawulf, took the Visigoths in 
412 A.D. into Ggul. tpee Map 110). By 413 A.D. the Visigoths 
had occupied Southern Gaul with the cities of Valence, Tou¬ 
louse, Bordeaux and Narborme in their possession. (See Map 
111). The Romans, however, blocked the ports of Gaul and 
the shortage of food forced the Visigoths, who were also 
threatened by a big Roman army, to cross to Spain, xvhere they 
occupied in 415 A.D. a part of the province of Tarraconensis 
with Barcelona as capital. Under their king Wallia they 
severCLy defeated the Silingian Vandals and the Alans in 
416 - 418 A.D. But after this, being now foederati of Rome, 
the Visigoths were called off from Spain and given land in 
Aquitania II, that is, the land between the Loire and the 





\ r n 















' 

'■ *' ■' 






. 






■ 


* 



; ■ 








Map 111. 



orange -462 - 
green 468/9 - 


red/blue 477 - 
red after 484 - 


tt 


tt 


it 
























121 - 


Garonne, with the cities of Bordeaux, Agen, Angouleine, 
Poitiers, and the northwestern part of Narbonensis I with 
the city of Toulouse. (See Map 112). 

In 451 A.D. the Visigoths participated as allies of the 
Romans in the defeat of Attila at Troyes. In 456 A.D. with 
their Burgundian allies they were again in Spain and began 
a long campaign against the Swebians. In 462 A.D. the Visi¬ 
goths annexed Narbonne with the southwestern part of G&ul. 

(See Map 112). They probably started to penetrate at this 
time into Novempopulana ♦ In 464 A.D. the Gothic troops, with 
the exception of some garrisons, were evacuated from Spain* 

In 468 A.D. the Goths again penetrated into Spain and were 
finally successful in establishing themselves in Lusitania 
and Asturia. (See Map 112). In 469 A.D. they annexed Aquitania 
I with the city of Bourges and penetrated into the valley of 
the Lower Rhone. (See Map 112). In 471 A.D., after having 
beaten the Romans,they penetrated on the right bank of the 
Rhone and held these areas for a short time under their con¬ 
trol, but were unable to hold these territories because of 
the Burgundian pressure. In 475 A.D. a treaty with the Ro¬ 
mans recognized VIsigothic possession of Aquitania I and II , 
Novempopulana , Narbonensis I and part of Lugdunensis III with 
the city of Tours. (See Map 112). They also took at this time 
the city of Clermont. (See Map 112). In 477 A.D. the# annexed 
Provence east of the Rhone and south of the Durance, and 
about this time they also completed the conquest of Tarraco- 


nensis in Spain. (See Map 112). Under Alaric II, that is 











. 

' S r : I. . 

1 • ! . » . 

* 

* 

. . 



' v v 1 ■' ■ > : • :si‘ 

*■ . 




. , 









. 

• 


4 . 







f ■ ,. / 





- 






. f I ' 

- . 

- 










Map 113. 


507 - 531 A.D. 



Map 114. 


531 - ca 550 A.D. 















Map 115 


gr© en 
orange 


RQA 

620/30 



Map 116. 


711 - 














122 - 


after 484 A.D. they occupied Baetlca in Spain. (See Map 112). 
In 490 A.D. the Visigoths helped Theodoric the Great in 
Italy. In 501 A.D. they helped the Burgundians against the 
Franks and obtained the city of Avignon for this. (See Map 
112)• But in 507 A.D. the Franks defeated the Visigoths 
and occupied a good portion of the Visigothic land in France. 
In France:the.Visigoths retained only the southern part of 
the country. (See Map 115). In 531 A.D. the Franks annexed 
another part of the French territories of the Visigoths - 
the area east of Toulouse. (See Map 114). The Visigoths held 
now in France only the province of Narbonensis . Before 554 
A.D. the Byzantinian troops occupied the south of Spain with 
the cities of Corduba, Assidona, Segontia, Malaca, Basti, 
Carthago Spartaria and Hispalis. (See Map 115). In 572 A.D. 
the Visigoths took Corduba, Basti and Hispalis back. (See 
Map 115). In 584 A.D. the Visigoths annexed to their state 
the territories of the Swebians in Gallaecla. (See Map 115). 
In 620 - 630 A.D. they took all the Byzantine possessions in 
Southern Spain. In 711 A.D. the Moorish invasion of Spain 
put an end to the Visigothic power In Western Europe. The 
Visigoths, after a weak resistance retreated In the mountains 
of Asturia in Northwestern Spain. For a short time there also 
existed a semi-independent Visigothic area around the city 
of Murcia. (See Map 116). 



■ . 

« > 

A 



' 



* , 

' ' 

- 

„ ' 

' 



125 - 


Chapter 18 

THE WARNI (EASTERN BRANCH) 

The original homeland of the Warni was probably in Nor¬ 
way, where there is a place called Varnes. 1 ) Later at an 
indefinite time a large part of the tribe migrated into the 
Jutish Peninsula, where they are later found between the 
Anglii and the Teuton ! .%) (g ee Map 117 ). Another and smaller 
part of the tribe migrated into Northeastern Germany. (See 
Map 117 ) • Pliny mentions them as Varirme, but considers them 
to be Vandals. 5 ) Ptolemy* s U irunon are situated east of the 
Oder, south of the Rugikleioi, north of the Burgundians. 4 ) 
This would .indicate a region in Central Pommerania. (See Map 
118). Ptolomy*s Avarinoi , whom he places east of the sources 
of the Vistula, are in Schmidt *s opinion 5 ) an error of Pto- 
lomy, to be compared with his Ombrones , placed by him imme¬ 
diately south of the Avarinoi, and whom Schmidt regards as 
the Ambrones of the ‘Jutish Peninsula. Schmidt therefore 
thinks that Ptolomy erroneously put the Jutish Ambrones and 
the Warni in the areas east of the sources of the Vistula. 5 ) 
Much, however, is inclined to accept the evidence of Ptolomy 
as proof that the Vistula Warni were a Vandal tribe.^) 

Schmidt further suggests that these northern Warni moved 
south attel settled in Upper Silesia, possibly as the result 

1) Schmidt: Geschichte deft deutschen Stamme, Vol. I, p. 127. 

2) Ibid. 

5) IV, 99 (in Schmidt: ibid.) 

4) III, 5, 8 (in Schmidt: ibid.) 

5) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 127. 

6 ) Ibid. 

7) Hoops: Reallexik.d.German.Altertumskunde, Vol. IV, p. 484. 





















- 


. 


' 

c 







, 


. 

, 

« 


' 




. 

' 



, “ r '! • . ' 


. 




- 




. 

, - 

* ■ 

. 

» . 1 ' 1 ’■ ■> ■' : 

* 

- 

. 






Schmidt. 


Map 117 



Map 118 


XV *» V. cent. A.I). 




















- 124 


of pressure of the Rugians. 1 ) Together with Schwarz 2 ) he 
thinks that they might be camouflaged under the designation 
Transiugitani of Ammianus, or perhaps a part of this tribe 
* or group of tribes. 3 > Some of these Warn! must have joined 
the Quad! and the Vandals in their westward migration in 
406 A.D. Theodoric II, the king of the Visigoths, appointed 
a Wsrnlan Agiwulf as governor over the conquered Swebians. 
Risiulf 4 5 ) in flight from the Langobardian king Wacho in 
510 A.D. sought refuge among the Silesian Warni . The Lango- 
bards must at this time have occupied adjacent territories. 

The ultimate fate of this small Germanic tribe is not known.5) 


1) Schmidt: op. cit. p. 127. 

2 ) Ibid. 

3) 17, 12 (in Schmidt: ibid.) 

4) Ibid. 

5) Ibid. 



















.*• ■ ' : /. -jV / 




■ 


• c< 

• 

- - 



• , r r > :'1>] 


t 1 ' . : . ' ’ ! ' 





• 


• 

* 



. , 


) 






; ; • ; ■ 


, 

. 







bibliography 


Arcldt,Th.: Gerraanische Vblkerwellen und ihre Bedeutung in 
der Bevolkerungsgeschichte von Europe, Leipzig, 
1917. 

Braun, Friedrich: Die Urbevolkerung Europas und die Her- 

kunft der Germanen, Berlin/Stuttgart/ 
Leipzig, 1922. 

Carlson, R.L.: The Sea around us, Oxford Press, 1951. 

Childe, V.G.: The Aryans, London, 1926. 

Clark, J.D.: The Mesolithic settlement in Northern Europe, 
Cambridge University Press, 1936. 

Coon, C.S.: The Races of Europe, New York, 1939. 

Gamow, George: Biography of the Earth, Pelican Mentor Book, 
1948. 

Gunther, H.: Der Ursprung der Germanen, Heidelberg, 1934. 

Hoops: Eohannes: Reallexikon der Germanischen Altertums- 
kunde, Vol. I - IV, Strassburg, 1911-13. 

r 

Hirt, Hermann: Etymologie, lions on ant i smu s (Indo gerraanische 
Grammatik), Heidelberg, 1927. 

Jahn, M.: Zur Herkunft der schlesischen Wandalen, Mannus- 
bibliothek Nr.22. 

Jordanes: De Origins actibusque Getarum. 

Karsten, T.E.: Die Germanen, Berlind und Leipzig, 1928. 

Kersten, Karl: Zur alteren nordischen Bronzezeit, Neu- 
munster, 1935 (?) 

Kossinna, Gustaf: Die deutsche Vorgeschichte, Mannus Bib- 

liothek Nr.9., Leipzig, 1925. 

: Ursprung und Verbreitung der Germanen in 
vor-und fruhgeschichtlicher Zeit, Mannus- 
bibliothek Nr.6., Leipzig, 1928. 

: Germanised© Kultur im 1.Jahrtausend nach 
Christus, Vol.l., Mannus Bibliothek Nr.50, 
Leipzig, 1932. 

; Zu meiner Ostgermanenkarte, Mannus Bibli¬ 
othek 16, Leipzig, 1924. 

Much, Rudolf: Deutsche Stammeskunde, Sammlung Goschen, Ber¬ 
lin & Leipzig, 1920. 




• - 

* 

. 


, : • . » , 

. * * , • 

: - - 
-r 

. » 

■ i ■ ; < r. 

. 

, ■ .. ' ' ■ • : 

r • • . . t 

■ 

. 

< 

■ 

. 

. . * 

. 






Much, Rudolf: in Hoops: Reallexikon. 

Nerman, Birger: Die Herkunft und die frtihesten Auswande- 
rungen der Germanen, Stockholm, 1924. 

: Vandalernas aldata hem (in Fornvanner Vol 
1930). 

Oyler, J.E.: A Survey of Gothic History, Edmonton, 1950. 
Plinius Maior: Naturalis historia. 

Poole, Reginald Lane: Historical Atlas of Modern Europe 

from the Decline of the Roman Em¬ 
pire, Oxford, 1902. 

Prokosch: in Germanic Review, Vol. I., Nr.1.,1926. 
Ptolomy: Geography. 

Schmidt, Ludwig: Geschichte der deutschen Stamme, Vol. I. 
Mlinchen,- 1934. 

: Geschichte der germanischen Fruhzeit, 
Koln, 1934. 

Schulz,Walther: Indogermanen und Germanen, Leipzig & Ber¬ 
lin, 1936. 

Schwantes, Gustav: Deutschlands Urgeschichte, Leipzig. 

: Geschichte Schleswig-Holsteins, Neu- 
mlinster. 

Strasser, Karl Theodor: Die Nordgermanen, Hamburg, 1933. 
Tacitus: Germania. 

Tackenberg: Die Bastarnen, Volk und Rasse, 1929. 

Wahle; E.: Deutsche Vorzeit, Leipzig, 1932. 



























