



























UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


(THEOLOGY) 


We, the undersigned, hereby certify that we have 
read the within thesis entitled 

"THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE IDEA OF SACRIFICE” 
submitted by Rev, Thomas Bruce McDormand, B.A., in^ful¬ 
filment of the requirements for the degree of Bachelor 
of Divinity, and we hereby recommend its acceptance. 


) 


Edmonton, ) 
Alberta, ) 



) 


April IS, ) 
1935 , ) 


) 



Professo€ 







THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE IDEA OF SACRIFICE 


A THESIS 

Submitted to the B.D. Committee 
in candidacy for the degree of 
BACHELOR OF DIVINITY 


by 


THOMS BRUCE MCDORMAND 


April, 1955 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/mcdormand1935 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


BADE, W.F, : The Old Testament in the Light of Today 

CAIRD, EDWARD : The Evolution of Religion 

COOLEY, W.F. : The Aim of Jesus Christ 

Encyclopaedia Britannica, Eleventh Edition 

GARVIE, A.E. : Studies in the Inner Life of Jesus 

GRAY, BUCHANAN : Sacrifice in the Old Testament 

HASTINGS’ Dictionary of the Bible 

HASTINGS’ Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics 

International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia 

KNUDSON, A.C. ; Religious Teaching of the Old Testament 

MATTHEWS, SHAILER : The Faith of Modernism 

MAURICE, F.D. : The Doctrine of Sacrifice 

MeFADYEN, J.E* : The Message of Israel 

OESTERLEY, W.O.E. and T.H. ROBINSON : Hebrew Religion 

PEaKE, A.S. Commentary on the Bible 

SMITH, J.M.P. : The Moral Life of the Prophets 

SMITH, W. ROBERTSON : The Religion of the Semites 

STEVENS, G.B, % The Doctrine of Salvation 

WALKER, THOMAS: Jesus 'and Jewish Teaching 

WEBB, T.M. : Influence of the Mystery Religions Upon 
Early Christianity 

WRIGHT, WILLIAM KELLEY : A Student’s Philosophy of Religion 








TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter $age 

I. The Earlier Origins of Sacrifice ...... 4 

II. Some of the Original Ideas Behind 

Sacrifice ........a.................... 15 


III. A Rapid Survey of the Types and 

Development of Sacrifice Among the 
Hebrev/ People ......................... £6 


IV. Atonement , Propitiation, Expiation .... 41 


V. The Sacrificial Death of Jesus Christ . 59 





INTRODUCTION 


The subject of this paper is one that carries us back into the 

earliest beginnings of recorded history and beyond. Prehistoric 

data has, in recent years, been brought to light by anthropologists 

and archaeologists to throw further light than written historical 

records could do. Our theme carries us back into the very heart of 

the beginnings of religion. The word ’sacrifice' is derived from 

the Latin, sacrificium, which in turn is a compound of sacer, 

meaning holy, and facere, to make. Hence, Hubert and Mauss were 

probably quite accurate when they described sacrifice as religious 

act, which, by the cansecration of a victim, modifies the moral state 

of the sacrificer or of certain material objects which he had in 
1 

view.” Sacrifice in all its range of forms from the most primitive 
to the most complex is always an expression of man’s eternal quest 
ior God, of his desire to enjoy tie fellowship, forgiveness, ana 
guidance of theEterna.l Spirit, J.J.Reeve expresses tnis thought in 
a sentence when he says, ’’The notion of sacrifice' arose out of the 
religious instincts of the human heart." 

However crude or materialistic sacrifice at certain stages in 
its development may appear it always bears evidence of the inexplic¬ 
able fact that man is a creature of two worlds and that he is not at 


1 Encyclopaedia Britannica, Article on ’’Sacrifice” 

2 International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia P. 2659 













- 2 - 

home on the earth until he is at home with God while on the earth. 

Through sacrifice men have sought to assure themselves of the presence 

of God in their midst. Through sacrifice they have sought to assure 

their particular deity or deities of their aspirations, gratitude, 

trust, penitence, loyalty, and sense of dependence on Him. (This 

note of caution should be struck, however, that we must be careful 

not to find theistic references in all ancient sacrifices, for 

sometimes they consisted largely of purely magical rites) 

The sacrificial rites of primitive people represented their 

way of establishing between themselves and the unseen world of 

spirits some commerce and communion. 

As we follow the subject of sacrifice down the long evolutionary 

road it has travelled we should ever keep in mind the fact that we 

are observing the unfolding of a splendid reality which, beginning 

in elemental germinal form, developed by slow degrees through great 

diversities of form and motive into institutions from which men have 

derived inspiration for the highest degree of ethical life, and 

through which they have enjoyed the most intimate and meaningful 

communion with God. In following the development of sacrifice we 

follow the pathway of mankind as it moves from "dust to destiny." 

William Herbert Carruth wrote: 

A fire mist and a planet, 

Acrystal and a cell, 

A jellyfish and a saurian, 

And caves where the cavemen dwell; 

Then a sense of law and beauty, 

And a face turned from the clod- 
Some call it Evolution, 

And others call it God. 








- 


... 


. 

««$'•'< : ... , 0 J. - .. . ; . 

' 

. 

- 

' 










- 5 - 


And in this progressive process which has carried men so far on the 
road to larger life the institution of sacrifice deserves a conspic 
uous and honored place. 










- 4 - 

CHAPTER I 

THE EARXIER ORIGINS OF SACRIFICE. 

Our knowledge of primitive forms of sacrifice is, from a 
research standpoint, saanty. The remotest origins are veiled in 
prehistoric obscurity. And yet we have sufficient data to trace 
the basic motives which lay behind the more elementary forms of 
sacrificial rites. And as we stpdy in this chapter the record of 
earlier sacrificial practices we shall be impressed by the fact 
that there are constant suggestions of the concepts around which 
the higher sacrificial customs of centuries later revolved. 

We shall first point out several forms of worship as found 
among primitive peoples y and shall then examine certain theories 
of' the origin of sacrifice which have been propounded in compar.i- 
tively recent years. 

totemism/ 

Totemism has prevailed among barbarian peoples in many and 
widely scattered portions of the globe. It has been a prominent 
feature in the life of the Arunta tribes of Central Australia, 
the hed Indians of North America, the Eskimo, the Polynesians, 
and the non-Aryan peoples of India. Traces of it are found in 
Central and South America, and among the Bantu tribes of Africa. 
It would thus appear than Totemism was a very general institution 
among primitive peoples. 


1 Our scources of information on Totemism are the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica ,and Hastings' Encyclopaedia of Religion ^ Ethics. 
















- 5 - 

Totems were essentially species of plants or animals . 
Occasionally inanimate natural objects (rain, cloud, star, sun,&c.) 
served as totems. The totem is always attached to a social group or 
a clan, and the relation between the totem ana group is one of 
friendship and alliance. Fundamentally the origin of Totemism rep¬ 
resents an expression of early man’s sense of kinship with the 

natural world. "Totemism has its various sides-religious, social, 

1 

magical. These were in origin undistinguished from one another." 

"The relation of the clan to its totem assumes a mystical aspect 
ana generates an intense feeling of kinship The Totem 

was regarded with reverence and looked to for help." Members of 
the totemic clan called themselves by the name of their totem, and 
in many cases possessed badges, emblems, or crests, which represented 
the totem or some part of it. These insignia were drawn or tattooed 
on the body or carved on weapons, canoes, houses, &c. Such practices 
indicate a clansman’s desire to identify himself with his totem. In 
Australia and the Malay Peninsula the members of totemic clans 
believe themselves to have actually descended from a mythical half- 
human*- half-animal ancestor alike of the totem and themselves. Such 
a belief constitutes a real social bond since the. clansmen regard 
one another as kinsmen. 

The treatment of touems varies widely. The respect of some 


1 Hastings, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, p.406 

2 Ibid, p.406 




















....... 


■ 
















































. 













clansmen for their totem prevents them from killing ana eating it. 

In other cases a clansman is forbidden to touch the totem or even 
to look at it except on rare occasions when the head of the tribe 
sacrificially slays and eats the totem. In the totemism of the 
Arunta(, Central Australia) the natives eat their totems in order to 
gain magical powers to increase the stock of the totem animal. 

The totemism which we have discussed thus far represents a 
very primitive form. Among more civilized peoples totemism incor¬ 
porated some comparitively advanced practices. And what is of part¬ 
icular interest to us is the fact that sacrifice appears. A striking 
instance of this very primitive sacrifice among totemic tribes is 

seen in W. Robertson Smith’s description of the hilus rite among 

1 

the Arabs. The principle feature of this rite was the sacrifice of 
the sacred camel. The camel chosen was bound, still living, upon a 
rude altar of stones. After the leader of the band has led the wor¬ 
shipers aroun^.the altar three times he inflicts the first wound 

2 

and drinks in all haste of the gushing blood. Immediately the vdiole 

company fall on the victim with their swords, hacking off pieces of 

the quivering flesh and eating them raw in such haste that, in the 

short period between the rise of the day star and the rising of the 

sun, the entire camel, body and bones, skin, blood and entrails, is 
3 

wholly devoured. 


1 The Religion of the Semites, p. 358. 

2 Oehler in "Old Testament Theology" states that the "bursting of 
the blood " is the essential thing, 

’5 Note how primitive are the times to which such New Testament 

words as these Hark back, "Except ye eat the flesh and drink the 
blood of the Son of Man ye have no life in you." (John 6:53) 












- 7 - 


By eating the “living flesh" the wprshipers felt that they 

had absorbed the victim's life into themselves. Smith says,"One 

sees how much more forcibly than any ordinary meal such a rite 

expresses the establishment or confirmation of a bond of common 

life between the worshipers, and also, since the blood is shed 

1 

upon the altar itself, between the worshipers and their god." 

In this ceremony we have striking evidence of these similarities 
between certain Hebrew sacrifices and those of more primitive 
peoples. 

We pass on to consider certain early Australian rites which 
bear a close resemblance to sacrifice. Just as the German reaper 
left the last ears of corn to ‘Woden, so the Australian blacks 
offer a portion of their fine, of wild honey. In New South Wales 
speers and pebbles are offered, and in Queensland painful wounds 
are made upon the body by the removal of strips of skin. Such 
customs suggest the early existence of the concept of gift sacrifices 
to the spirits. 

An early suggestion of blood sacrifice is found among the 
Arunta tribes in their intichiuma ceremony where blood from the 
veins of selected young men is allowed to run over the two sacred 

"kangaroo rocks" (one representing the male kangaroo and one the 

2 

female, the kangaroo being the totemic animal of these tribes.) 


1 W.R.Smith, "The Religion of the Semites”, p. 538. 

' 2 Encyclopaedia Briticannica, Article on Totemism, Ax possible 
reflection of this very primitive form of sacrifice is seen in the 
custom among the early Hebrews of pouring blood upon an upright 
stone (mass ebhad). Genesis 28:18 refers to tnis custom. 















- 


- 







.... 

• ■ ..... 







- 






























' 


. 





















- 8 - 

1 

Spencer ana Gillan affirm in a paper to the Journal of the 

Anthropological Institute that the one eesential feature of these 

ceremonies is the necessity of A identifying himself closely with the 

totem. The affect of this sacramental union is the neutralization 

or ex ulsion of the evil in man by contact with his supernatural 
2 

ally. In this intichiuma ceremony we have evidence to substantiate 
3 

the claim of Jevans that "the core of worship is communion- that, 
at least,is the fundamental concept underlying the most rudimentary 
forms of sacrifice.” 

CELTIC SACRIFICE . 

Caesar in his "Gallic Wars" speaks of the religion of the Celts. 
In times of illness men would sacrifice or promise to sacrifice 
human victims in the belief that a life would be spared for a life 
given. Evil doers were sacrificed by impairment every five years. 
Plutarch and Tacitus speak of the Gauls offering the blood of captives 

The blood of the first prisoner of war was especially prized for 

4 

sacrifice. Celtic sacrifice was largely piacular (expiatory)- 
regarding human sacrifice as especially pleasing to God. The origin 
of this idea, as abundant evidence shows, goes back to a deeper 
stratum of human history than the development of anthropomorphical 
deities. 


1 Encyclopaedia Britannica, Article on Sacrifice. 

2 A distinction between Australian forms of sacrifice and more 
advanced forms lies in the fact that the animal is regarded, as 
naturally saerea, whereas in later forms of sacrifice it acquires 

this character ritualistically. 

3 Introduction to the history of Religion, p. 225. 

4 Hastings, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. 









- 9 - 

1 

HINDU SACRIFICES . 

The Hindu sacrificial system is very elaborate, making 
detailed provisions concerning the place, the victim, the officiant, 
and the objects of the sacrifice. It is interesting to note a 
reflection of the more advanced prophetic Hebrew views of sacrifice 
in the attitude of Buddhism toward externalism in sacrificial ritual. 

1. It judged such ritual to be the futile expression of raisdire- 
ected effort. 

2. It regarded some forms of sacrifice as cruel. 

3. It regarded the benefits as not sufficiently spiritual. 

These lines translated from the Samyutta are enlightening: 

"The sacrifices called the Horse, the Man, 

* The Peg-Thrown Site, the Drink of Victory, 

The Bolts withdrawn, and all the mighty fuss- 
These are not rites that bring a rich result.” 

Thus among the Hindus many centuries before Christ we observe 
the spiritualizing of sacrifice going on. 


GREEK SACRIFICES . 


All sacrifices of the Hellenic period were denoted by the word 
indicating a direct reference to deity. 

Bloodless offerings were common. Cereals, vegetables, fruits, 
as necessary elements of human nourishment, were natural oblations 
to the gods of vegetative growth and fertility- such as Demeter 
(the earth-mother), Dionysus, Poseidon, Heracles. Usually such 
oblations were pure gifts offered partly for thanksgiving and partly 
to secure continued blessings in the year to ©§me. 


1 See C.A.F.Hhys Davids in Hastings, Encyclopaedia of Religion and 
Ethics, Article on Sacrifice^ ©7. //, pp.y-r. 










- 10 - 


Sacrificial rites were also held to remove tabus from new fields 
in order to make them fit for the use of man. In the Greek blood 
offerings there are evidences of a belief in the establiehment of a 
mystic connection between the victim and the divine power to whom it 
is consecrated on the altar.The sacrificial animal thus mediates 
divine power. 

Oath sacrifices were common in Greece. Such a sacrifice bound 
the parties to an oath to itsLobservsnce^the penalty of its violation 
being some drastic punishment by the deity to whom the sacrifice is 

offered. There is in this a suggestion at least of ethical demands 

| 

upon man by the deity. 

In general^the current view of Greek sacrifice was that it 

represented a gift to the gods. M higher view than this emerges in 

Greek literature and philosophy. Even the Delphic oracle was supposed 

to encourage the idea that the simplest offering of the poor was 

as acceptable as the lavish sacrifice by the rich of a hundred beasts 

apon a hundred altars, 

: PERSIAN SACRIFICES . 

In Persian sacrifices offerings were frequently brought into 
relation with sin. In fact the Pahlavi literature speaks of the 
vicarious or atoning nature of sacrifice. In the later developments 
of Persian sacrifice it was felt that the gods needed only the soul 
of an animal,not its flesh and blood. 

SACRIFICE IN EGYPT . 

In all probability sacrifices and sacrificial systems existed in 













. 

. 









. 











































. .. 






' 















- 11 - 


Egypt from the beginning of the fourth millenmium B.C. As to the 
nature of Egyptian sacrificial practices our most important 
evidence is in the record of pictures. At Dei-el-Bahri there are 
pictures of animals having their throats cut in Mohammedan fashion. 
Burnt, grain, and peace offerings predominated. Oxen, wild goats, 
igs, geese were the chief animals offered. There were no human 
sacrifices. An important feature of the Egyptian sacrificial system 
is found in the central shrines to which people came from many miles 
around to offer their sacrifices. We note the influence of the 
Egyptians upon the Hebrews as we think of the place of Jerusalem 

as the central snrine of worship for the Israelites. 

1 

BABYLONIAN SACRIFICE . 

As early as 5000B.C. there were many centres of worship in 
Babylonia such as Ur, Nisin, Agade, &c. Elaborate systems of sacrif¬ 
ices rjrevailed. Over one hundred temples are mentioned on inscript¬ 
ions and several hundreds in the literature of the times. Animal 
and vegetable sacrifices were constantly offered. The sacrifices 
provided an income for the priests, as did the Mosaic at a later 
time. In: some of' the larger centres animals were offered twice a 
day, morning and evening, j^t these sacrifices certain portions were 
burned on the altay, the rest belonging to the priests. We cannot 
doubt that Moses made use of many elements found in the Egyptian 
and Babylonian systems, adding to or subtracting ftom them as cir¬ 
cumstances requirea, 

h Hastings® Dictionary of the Bible, Vol. 5, p. 580, 

International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia, Vol. , p. xtv/ 











. 


- 








- 12 - 

Before leaving our consideration of early sacrifice among 
non-Hebrew people we should give some attention to the matter of 
human sacrifices, for these represented man’s most extravagant 
gifts to the gods, and prevailed among tribes and nations widely 
scattered in respect of both time and place. 

(a) In Greece and Rome outcasts were held to be sacrificed in 
times of national calamity. Two were chosen, one for the men and 
one for the women, and were stonea to death as a means of expelling 
evil. 

(b) In India many human sacrifices were offered. Of these the 
most important was the suttee- the burning of a widow upon the 
funeral pyre of her husband. This was usually voluntary and was 
regarded as a mark of ideal wifely devotion. This practice prevailed 
until 1829 when it was banned by the British Government, The khond 
sacrifice was also common in cases of illness. The human victim 

. was either the son of the djfrilicted individual or a person purchased 
for the occasion. 

(c) Human sacrifice was particularly prominent among certain 

African tribes and remains so to this day. In the! Dahomey area of 
West Africa human sacrificial practices are of great interest to us 
because of the nature of the three forms they took. They were as 
follows: (1) The scapegoat,(2) The messenger, (3) The expiation. 

Often the people transferred their sins by laying hands on the 
victim as it was lead in procession. To-day the blood of victims 

is sometimes smeared on the sacrificer, or on the door-posts of the 
homes. The striking similarity of such a ritual to the Hebrew 











- 14 - 


least tne significant place sacrifice has played in the social and 
religious life of many primitive and many more civilized peoples. 

We also feel that the content of foregoing pages is sufficient to 
reveal that from time immemorial there has been a gradual development 
of those insights, ideas, and ideals which in course of time event¬ 
uated in those highly organized and socially important religions 
whose influence upon the life of mankind persists to this day. 

In fact a number of reputable scholars in our day, such as 
Dr. Rudolph Bultmann of the University of Marburg, and Professor 
F.C.Grant of Chicago, have given much thought to the elaboration 
of the ’’Form History Criticism" theory. In kernal this theory affirms 
that the fundamental elements of man’s religious experience have 
cropped out in earliest religions, and that there is a tendancy for 
tnese elements tc maintain fairly conventional forms at all times. 
This theory, which certainly holds within reasonable limits, wrarrants 
us in expecting tc find among primitive sacrifices the same general 
forms that have survived in the practices of contemporary religions. 
We feel that our all too hasty survey of sacrifice among various 

peoples through the ages has served to draw attention to the fact 

in 

that the views of sacrifice whicn A so exalted a form in the religion 
of the Hebrews, ana of Christianity itself, were struggling for 
expression among those who offered sacrifices to the spirits, or tc 
the gods of their faith, as gifts, as means of communion, as tokens 
of gratitude, and even as propitiation for sin. These major motives 
for sacrifice, which we shall study in more detail in the next chap¬ 
ter, appear in the earliest sacrifices of which we have any record. 




- 15 - 


CHaPTER 2 

Original Ideas Behind Sacrifice 
At chis juncture it will be ©f value to indicate very briefly 
some of the outstanding theories as to the original ideas behind 
sacrifice. 

Some hold that the custom of sacrifice had its origin in a 

divine revelation, that it was initiated by God himself at the 

beginnings of human history. Fairbairn, lor example, in his 

"Typology" holus that the skins which Adam and Eve where clothed 

1 

with where from animals which had been slain in sacrifices. For 

this view we can establish no tenable basis, out it at least sugg ests 

the belief of reputable scholars in the extreme antiquity of animal 

sacriiices . Kpdson makes a whrthv/hile comment in these words, 

"Its universal prevalence suggests that it must in some way have 

2 

been a natural expression of man*s sense of relation to God.” 

Out of the considerable discussion that has revolved about 


the question of the original ideas behind the practice of sacrifi ce 
four theories deserve the leading place. 

1. The gift theory. 

2. The homage theory. 

3. The communion theory, 

4. The propitiatory, substitutionary, or 
piacular theory. 

We shall outline the principal features in these four theories. 
It will be well xor us to keeppthese constantly in mind as we pursue 

out later study of Hebrew sacrfice. _____ 

1 Quoted in International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia, p. 2639 

2 "The Religious Teaching of the Old Testament > p, 306, 









- 16 - 

1. 'i’H GIF T THEORY . Leading exponents of this theory are, 

H. Spenser, E. B. Tylor, H. H. Schultz, and G. F. Moore. This 

would seem to represent the earliest type of sacrifice. In the 

the words of Prof. Albert C. Knudson, ’’The gift theory regarded 

sacrifice as originally the gift offered to supernatural beings 

for the purpose of winning their favour and overcoming their 
1 

hostility.” The offeren?of a gif t sacrifice took it for 

granted that their gifts would be received by the deity or spirit 

with pleasure ana even gratification. Gooa relations were regarded 

as being re-established by such gift offerings. In fact the heathen 

people among whom we find the first evidences of gift sacrifices 

apparently believed that their gifts placed the god under obligation 

to favour them. It was as though he had accepted a bribe and was 

thereforeobligated to fulifil the conditions which prompted its 

2 

offering. William Kelly Wright avers that by tae gift sacrifice 
tne pagan offerer sought to conorol the god-to force him to act 
at the worshipers behest . Magical means where sometimes used 
to compel the god to meet the worshiped demands. For example, 
in ancient Egypt the magicians claimed the power of compelling 
even the highest gods to do their bidding, threatening to destroy 
them in case of disobedience. Similarly in India today the great 
Hindu trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva is thought to be subject 


1 Religious Teaching of the Old Testament, p. 306 

2 A Student’s Philosophy of Religion, pp. 62-65 

3 Ibid. 63. 












. 










r 











■ 














L 










- 17 - 


to so#rcery. In mediaeval times French pedants used to believe 

1 

that their priests by a special ’’Mass of the Holy Ghost” could 
compel God to grant whatever was asked him. Socrates pointed out 
that the Greek sacrifices were largely a pure business transaction. 
In all gift sacrifices there was the idea held that if a man did 


2 


his part in the transaction the god^s would do theirs. This weird 
confusion of religion and magic represents an elementary stage in 
the evolution of the idea of sacrifice. 

Behind the gift sacrifice there was also the belief that the 
god, the fetish, the ancestral ghost, or the nature-spirit, as 

I f/. A 5 

the case might be, needed the sacrifice. A Wright suggests th«t 

the gift sacrifice often sought to strengthen the god so as to 

enable him to continue his beneficent 'work. In India sacrifices 

are still offered to the- sun to strengthen it so that it will be 

4 

able to rise again the following morning. 

This whole bargaining attitude behind the gift sacrifice 

as 

represented a very low concept of the deity, and A there arose from 
time to time more enlightened men they condemned the lower motives, 
which had prompted gift sacrifices, We shall note this conspicuously 
in our reference later in this thesis to the writings of t.ieHebre -w 



Cicero, speaking in condemnation of certain types of 


us. 


Greek sacrifice, said, ’’Let not the impious dare to appease the 
gods with gifts. Let them harken to Plato, who warns them that 


1 


Encyclopaedia Britannica , Vol, 25, p. 982 
2 Hastings’, Dictionary of the Bible , Vol. 4, p. 351 
5 A Student’s Philosophy of Religion, p. 64 
4 Hastings’ Dictionary oi the Bible, Vol. 4, p. 351 






' 
















• : 





- 






- : : 



jj 

. 





















■ 










- 18 — 


there can be no doubt what the gods’ disposition to them will be, 

since even a good man will refuse to accept presents from the 

1 

wicked. ” 

In concluding for the present our reference to the gift 

sacrifice we should observe that though it represents very 

primitive ioeas and accounts for many heathen systems of sacrifice, 

it cannot be taken to help a great deal in our understanding of 

2 

biblical sacrifice. And yet Buchanan Gray , very thorough student 

of Old Testament sacrifice is at great pains to show the extent 

to which the idea of gift was consciously associated with sacrifice 

among the Hebrews. Of this we shall hear more later. 

! THE HOMABE T HEORY This theory holds that sacrifices were 

originally acts of worship-”the embodied prayers of men who thought 
5 

like children.” They expressed the various feelings of dependence, 

reverence, thanksgiving, penitence, trust, with which men instinct- 
: ~ 4 ' 

ively approach the higher powers. Many scholars are eloquent in 

5 

their advocacy of this theory. To F. D. Maurice man, even in 

primitive times, felt naturally impelled to seek closer communion 

with God,-not so much from any sense of guilt as from a sense of 

dependence and a desire to show obeoience. To show this primitive 

man had recourse to acts rather than words. He thought in pictures, 

ip terms of concrete things. Sacrifice was an active prayer-an 

6 

expression of his longing, hir reverence, and his submission. 

1 Hastings’ Dictionary of the Bible, Vol. 4, p. 552 

2 Sacrifice in the Old Testament. 

3 Kudson, "Religious Teaching of she Old Testament, p. 291 

4 ’’The eucnaristic conception of sacrifice, that is, as free from 
the desire to secure material benefits in the future, is seldom 

found in really primitive cults-Hastings’, Encyclopaedia of 
Religion and Ethics. v*1-//. ^ HC 

5 The Doctrine of Sacrifice. 6 International Bible Encyclopaedia,jp .a 









■ 



































- 19 - 


Obviously the homage theory represents, in instances whore 
it is an «ddequ«xc interpretation of sacrifices practiced, a much 
higher concept of God and of man's proper approach to him. 

THE COMMUNION THEORY This designation is suggested by man's 
attempt to effect some sort of intercourse between himself and God 
so that man may be strengthened by the divine. This form of 
sacrifice probably had its first faint beginnings in totemism where 
there was a sort of identity between man and his totem gat needed 

strengthening. Ancestral worship also had a part in promoting the 

of 

idea with communion with the gods, the spirit-world, for a child 

felt strengthened by the feeling that a beloved ancestor was 

1 

supporting him in his earthly efforts . 

The brilliant exponent of the communion theory is W» Robertson 

Z 

Smith, with Wellhausen as an able contemporary. They propound 

their theory upon the basis of a study of totemism. In totemism 

the object of sharing the meal with the god (totem) was to renew 

the blood-bond. The victim was, in the beginning, the animal of 

3 

a hostile totem-kin or. tjtheanthropic animal"» The god was 

originally a stranger taken into the kin by a rite of blood brother- 
4 

hood. 

Smith interpreted ancient sacrifice, Greek as well as Semitic, 

I 

as a communion feast with the deity in which the god and his people 

became one flesh by parts.King of the same food, or the flesh of a 

lWSight, "A Studentfe Philosophy of Religion.” (Quoted in. International 
Standard Bible Encyclopaedia, p. £641 
£ L. R. Farrell, article in Hastings * Encyclopaedia of Religion and 
Ethics. (Article on "Sacrifice") 

3 Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol, £3, p. 98£ 

4 Ibid, p, 982 







- 20 - 


common victim, the animal being regarded as in a degree divine (at 
least as sharing with man the divine life.) Smith md others drew 
the corollary that wpre the view of sacrifice as a gift or bribe 
to the god prevailed it was a later degeneracy of religion, possible 
only when the sense of communion had faded from the ceremony. 

At this communion feast, according to its practice among 
savage nations, they literally "ate the god" and thus incorporated . 
into themselves the physical, intellectual, and moral qualities 
which the animal was su_cosed to have (in as much as the divine 
life was thought to dwell in the sacred animal). Sometimes the 

worshipers drank the blood and thus imbibed the divine life. Among 

1 

the Arabs of ancient times the sacred camel was eaten by the 

worshipers who devoured the still quivering flesh before the 

animal was really dead, and the entire carcass had to be eaten 
2 

before morning. This common meal was regarded by the Arabians as 
binding the people together. The outjpoured blood of the 
sacrificial meal cemented the union between the deity and his 
people. It was a renewal of the blood-bond with the deity. In 
this we find a foreshadowing of the social function of religion. 

Although this theory doubtless represents an important aspect 
of sacrifice in the course of this development, it is probably not 
an explanation of tne origin of sacrifice. Many scholars, led in 
the main by L. Marillier, have criticized W, R, Smith’s position 
on these grounds. Ana yet there seem excellent grounds for the 

1, Supfea n, 6 

h ti n 







- 21 - 


belief that the idea of communion prevailed from comparitively 
early times, and represented the finest of the motives and 
instincts out of which the practice of sacrifice grew. 

THE PROPITIATORY. PIACULAR . OR SUBSTITUTIONARY THEORY 

Still another theory respecting the original meaning of 
sacrifice is the piabular, This type of sacrifice arose out of 
the need of atoning for bloodshed within the kinship group, 
properly speaking the culprit should suffer, but should he be 
unkywn or beyond reach of vengeance a substitute had to be found. 

This was naturally found in the non-human member of the totem-ki^, 

1 

the totem-animal in a sense. Thus "the god died for his people”. 

The penalty cue the sinner was inflicted on the sacrificial animal. 
The object of the piaculum was the re-establishment of a broken 
alliance. (In this fact we detect a marked similarity in motive 
to that of the communion sacrifice.) 

This theory of the origin of sacrifice is ^ specially interest¬ 
ing and has wide support. Hubert and Mauss admit that in all 

sacrifices there are suggestions of purchase and substitution. 

3 t 

Westermarck makes the original idea in sacrifice a substitute for 

the offerer (that is, a piaculum). This wcula find little support 
4 

today, W, K. Wright affirms that the piacular significance of 
sacrifice appears upon a very early savage level where there is the 
tribal feeling that the god is angry and demands blood. This 
often involved magical rites. The sins ana curses that have afflicted 

1 Encyclopaedia Britannica Vol. 23, p, 983. 

2 Jkrom J. J. Reeve in International Bible Encyclopaedia. 

5 n u n « z!& u 

4 A Student’s Philosophy of Religion 









the group may be magically transferred to the sacrificial victims 
and consumed with them in the fire, or loaded upon a scapegoat 
and driven into the wilderness. 

Reference should be made in passing to A.B. Davidson*s 

objection to the claim that propitiatory sacrifice represents too 

advance*a stage of ethical thought for primitive man. Most 

authorities dispute Dr. Davidson*s findings, declaring upon the 

contrary that the thought of propitiation represents a very 

simple and primitive stage. The sense of sin and its penalty 

is an instinct as old as trie race. Viewrs regarding what constitutes 

sin have gone through many modifications, but the sense of sin 

1 

is never absent from people of greatest antiquity. Prof. Davidson* 
objection is that primitive sacrifices were preponderantly joyous 
in character and could not theref gib represent an expiation. But 
this objection is met by the fact that in most cases joyous feasts 
followed the killing of the animal by which the expiation was 
accomplished. The feast was joyous because atonement had been 
made. 

On the -whole we may conclude that the idea of propitiation 

is present, in germ at least, in many of the sacrifices of 

primitive man. In its higher forms, of course, it belongs to our 

own age, but these forms represent the culmination of ideas which 

go back in essence to very early beginning. 

1 Wk K. Wright, ’’The Origin of Moral Ideas.” 

£ Hastings* Dictionary of the Bible, Vol. 4, p. 351 


















' 

. 

, ' , L • 




;: HflL ; cJ’jji ■. lb l/K 




, 


. 




: . 

: 


. 


. 

. 


n K-.J- 






" i -trl : y rr> 














- 25 - 


As a concluding word in this section we can do no better than 

quote a paragraph from Prof. A. C. Knudson : ’’These different 

theories may at first seem quite distinct from each other, .uid 

it may seem necessary to make a choice of some one to the exclusion 

of the others. But it is not improbable that there is truth in 

more than one of them, and that each represents a factor or motive 

which at an early date was associated with the custom of sacrifice. 

1 

To pass from one of these motives to another was not difficult.” 
fhis view is in harmony with the philosophical position Laid down 
by Edward Caird, that there is in the human mind, in germ, a faint 
glimpse of all that emerges in the later speculations of philosophy 
and practices of religion. 

It might be of value to quote further G. B. Stevens’lucid 
extension of Knudson*s statement. Steven says,"Let us assume the 
correctness of the simplest theory of sacrifice, the gift theory. 
But the idea of a present to the deity is itself an act. of homage 
or worship. The gift of what has value for the giver is made in 
recognition of the superior ri^s or claims of the divinity. And 
this idea of homage, in tfifrn, would naturally deepen into the 
feeling of fellowship or communion. If the offered gift is 
regarded as sacred; if, for example, the idea obtains that there 
is some mysterious connection between the life of the divinity 
and the life or blood of the animal, then the conviction will 

1 Religious Teaching of the Old Testament, j>. 

2 The Development of Religion. 





naturally arise that in offering the animal in sacrifice the 
worshiper enters into communion with the Power whom he would 
honor. Then, again, when the sense of sin is deepened in men; 
when the conception of the divine holiness arises and man 
appreciates the moral separation between himself and the deity, 
it will then be natural that sacrifice should assume a more 
distinct reference to sin. It will become the means whereby sin 
is confessed and reconciliation with the offenced deity sought. 

Thus it would naturally happen that gifts, which in a more naive 
r e ligious condition were merely presents, should come to be 
regarded as the means of a mystic communion or even as a cover 

or protection from the displeasure felt by the deity toward the 

l" 

sins of its worshipers." 

We now pass on to consider the sacrificial system of the 

Hebrews as indicated in the writings of the Old Testament^period. 
The subject matter 01 the foregoing pages has been selected for 

the purpose of providing a historical background for a more 
intelligent study of Hebrew sacrifice. Hence we may expect to 
encounter ideas which we have already considered in their general 
reference, but our concern with such ideas wilj. be in respect to 
their specific significance in the sacrificial system of Judaism 
through the century£S 

We need scareely be reminded of the influence of environment 
upon the development of the Hebrew institutions of religion. 
Before the great trek to Canaan Egyptian influence would be 


1 The Christian Doctrine of Salvation, pp. 6-7 








- 25 - 


inevitable. During their nomadic lire in the desert they doubtless 
came in contact with, and to some degree adopted, nomadic ways of 
living and of worshiping. In the land of Canaan they were profoundly 
effected by adjacent Canaanite and Babylonian civilizations with 
which they came in constant contact in the formative period of 
their national life. Later on Persian and Greek influences made 
themselves felt. These patent facts prepare us for the recurrence 
in Jewish life of sacrificial customs markedly suggestive of 
sacrificial customs which we have already referred to. By way of 

illustration we might cite the Hebrew adoptipn during a certain 

1 

period of the Canaanite infant sacrifice; and the Moabite ban of 

destruction which involved the complete destruction after victory 

in battle of all of the enemy., men,women,, and children, together 

2 

with their flocks and herds. The Phoenician sacrifice of baked 

1 

cakes was also employed. 


1 Micah 6 j 7 

2 Deuteronomy 6; 19, 7 s16 
3 Numbers 15:20 














. 















CHAPTER 5 


4 RAPID SURVEY OF THE TYPES AND DEVELOPMENT 
OF SACRIFICE AMONG THE HEBREW PEOPL E_ 

It might be of value that the outset to set down certain 
terms which occur with frequency in the Old Testament records.(The 
first word in each case is a transliteration of the original Hebrew 
term.) Zebhah, n sacrifice n ; 'olah,#bumt offering"; h&ta’ah,"sin off¬ 
ering"; 'asham, "guilt" or "trespass offering"; minhah, "offering 
present"; zebhah sh e lamim, "sacrifice of peace offerings"; zebhah 
ha-todhah , "thankofferings"; zebhah n e dhabhah, "free-will offerings" 
zebhah nedher, "votive offerings"; korban, "oblationy "gift"; kalel, 
"whole burnt offering"; ’ishsheh, "fire offering"; k e toreth, "odor", 
"incense". The very extent of this list points quite clearly to the 
fact that we cannot, in the compas of this paper, deal in any exhaus¬ 
tive way with the sacrificial customs and laws of the Hebrews, We 

shall only attempt to touch upon the more salient features of them. 

1 

Buchanan Gray reminds us that these Hebrew terms were very specific 

in their use and that our English versions usually give them a much 

freer rendering than their strict etymology would warrant. Dr. Gray 

says, "In any discussion of Hebrew sacrifice the cpiestion of the 

range of a term always arises. Should a term, for example, include 

all gifts at the altar, or only animal victims; and again should it 

include certain ceremonial slayings of animals which had not been 

2 

presented on the altar? 

Furthermore, in considering the bearing of terms on current 


1 Sacrifice in the Old Testament, p. 19 

2 Ibid, p.19 

































... . 

. 

. 






■ 


■ 








. 






















. 










- 27 - 


ideas, the actual usage ol any given period is or far more importance 
than etymology. Etymology cannot be given to much weight as against 
usage. In illustrating this principle Buchanan Gray cites the words, 
minhah, and korban. In earlier literature minhah is the term used 

for sacred gifts and sacrifices, in l^rer literature korban is used 

1 

almost exclusively. In summarizing a lengthy passage dealing with 

the usages and etymology of the leading Hebrew sacrificial tqrms. 

Dr. Gray concludes with these words, n The specific Hebrew terms are 

largely represented in the English versions by some compound expression 

containing the word offering, such as ’’burnt offering". But the 

idea of offering is not directly conveyed by any of the special 

terms, largely because the Hebrew language does not create compound 

words. The special terms for sacrifice have for the most part 

referred to the treatment of the object, whether simply slain, or 

also burnt; to the occasion on which it was offered; or to a state, 

such as that of guilt, in reference to which the sacrifice was 
2 

offered. w 

Having suggested some of the more common sacrificial terms 
found in the Old Testament, and having set forth the point of view 
from thich the Old Testament sacrificial terms in general must be 
regarded, it now becomes our task to speak of the nature of sacred 
gifts and sacrifices offered at various periods in Hebrew history. 

In dealing with this theme we shall have frequent recourse to 
Buchanan Gray as our chief source of authority, in^as^much as he has 
done widely recognized research work in this particular field. 

1 Sacrifice in the Old Testament, p, 17 

2 Ibid. p. 9 














- 28 - 


•Sacred gifts consisted chiefly of foods- animals, and 
vegetables (especially cereals). These were given by man and 
received by Yahweh (In Numbers 28:2 Yahweh is. reported as saying, 
n my food'’). 

The idea of food offerings goes back to crude anthropomorphic 

views of God where he was actually thought to eat food. The 

Babylonian Bels were also thought by their worshipers to eat mea^ , 

meal, and wine placed nightly uponihtb" table. In J, the earliest 

Penteteuchal document, it is recorded that "Yahweh smelt the 

1 

soothing savour Noah’s burnt offering," David though Yahweh 
2 

smelt sacred gifts, and Jotham believed that Yahweh, like# men, 

3 

was made happy by wine. But later the sacred gifts were treated 

4 

differently. They were still "given by man and received by God" , 

but not for his own use, rather as intended for human representatives 

or proxies - the priests, the poor, and to some extent the worshipers 

themselves. In practice, thereforf certain parts of the gift 
5 " 

offerings were used by special classes of men, and those parts of 

the gifts which were subject to ritual were actually destroyed 

(burnt) and used by ft o owe In all of our discussion we must bear in 

mind that in the case of an animal sacrifice the blood and fat were 

thought of as belonging ^ exclusively n God regardless of what use 

was made of the rest. The blood was poured out at the base of the 

altar, after certain ritual use had been made of it (such as smearing 

it upon the horns of the altar), and the fat was burned upon the altsr. 

1 Genesis 8:21; 2 1 Samuel 26:19; 3 Judges 9:13 

4 Supra p. 28 

5 Minhah, 'olah, zebhah n e dhabhah. 

• f 








— 29 — 


The fat or the entrails was regarded as especially acceptable to the 
1 

god , and among early Australian and African tribes (as well as among 
people of higher civilizations) the kidney fat was treated with 
particular care, for this was regarded by the Semites as the seat 
of the emotions. The Hebrew law prhibited the eating of the fat of 
entrails and directed that t&'be burnt ceremonially upon the altar. 

It is interesting to note how this law harks back to primitive 
customs. 

A detailed list of the articles to be offered to Yah eh for all 

purposes is found In Leviticus 1-7. and in Numbers 18; 8-22 is 

found a list of sacred gifts in particular. Part or all of these 

2 

might be presented in various forms of burnt offerings , peace 
3 4 

offerings , and guilt offerings , Cereal food must be unleavened 
* 5 

if burnt, but might under certain circumstances: be leavened , 

8 

or cereals could be merely parched grain. 

Conspicuous among sacred gifts were first-fruits, and the first¬ 
born ; (not only of kine, sheep and goats, but also of man). The 
presentation of the first bora could be by computation or by 
redemption. What was actually given to Yahweh was affixed sum of 
money per head. The ass was regarded as unclean, etxd could not be 
offered directly or burned, so two alternatives were open; 

(a) It could be redeemed by the offering of a young sheep or 
goat. 

(b) Its neck could be broken so as to make it of no use to man, 
even though not offered to God, 

1 Cf, W, R. Smith, Religion of the Semites, p.280-285. 

2 Lev, 1:3; 3 Lev. 3:1,6; 4 Numbers 18:9; 5 Lev. 2:12, 23;17 

6 Lev, 2:14-16 












- 50 - 


A distinct sanctity attached to the first-bom. "The first- 

1 

born shalt thou give unto me,” ’’All that openeth the womb is 
2 

mine.” The first-born fell into three classes; 

1. The first-born of clean animals. 

2. The first-born of unclean animals. 

3. The first-born of men. 

In the earliest law the first-born of clean animals were 

sacrificed to Yahweh upon the eighth day after birth. The Deuteron- 

omic law is not so clear, however, On the one hand the first-born 

is not killed on the eighth day but is subject to certain restrictions,! 

as potentionaly given to Yahweh* such as not bemg allowed to be 

worked; or, in the case of sheep, the wool should not be shorn and 

used. On the other hand when, at the end of the year, the gift was 

completed by slaughter the carcass was not wholly burned at the altar 

but was eaten as a sacred meal before Yahweh by the owner. Later 

3 

the unburned portions went to the priests. So v.e note that 

animals subjected to sacrificial rites were not always an^wholly 

4 

gifts to God. We have already referred to the case of the first— 

5 

born of unclean animals. They.were either redeemed by a clean 

animal, or withdrawn from man3 use. After it was redeemed its tabu 

was removed. Thus the idea of inherent sanctity is breaking down. 

In a later stage, represented by the writings of P, redemption by 

6 

a clean animal is replaced by the payment of a money tax. In the 
case of the first-born of man the earliest laws provided for redemption 

A classic example of this is in the case of the redemption of Isaac 

7 

by the ram caught in the thicket. Later laws made it clear- the 


1 Exod. 22:28f; 2 Exod, 54:19; 3 Num. 18;15-17f; 4 Supra p. 29 

5 Above, this page; 6 Exod, 13:13, 34:20. 7 Gen. 22:13 



















- 51 - 


first-born of man were redeemed by five shekels (twelve shillings) 

1 

ahead, and this went to the priest . 

In earlier times by a vow other persons could be given to 

£ 

Yehweh. The sacrifice of Jephthah’s daughter is a case in point , 

Later>vowed persons could be redeemed or commuted by money as 

follows: Males 20 - 60 years, fifty shekels (£. 6 ) 

Males 5 - £0 years, twenty shekels. 

Females one-half the ’’rate” for males. 

In this w r e observe further evidence of the trend away from inherent 

sanctity to a tax calculation, A striking reference to this fact 

is seen in the decree of the oral law that the minimum value of 

all guilt offerings (except that of the Nazarite or Leper) must be 
5 

two shekels. 

Offerings of first fruits other than animal did not merely 

apply to vegetables and cereals but to a much larger list including 

4 

such things as honey, figs, grapes, pomegranates, and so on. 

Where tithes and sacred dues w^ere levied the smallest produce items 

were included, A striking suggestion of this is Jesus’reference 

5 

to the "tithing of mint, anice, and cummin”. 

Similarly le*ven was forbidden in what was t© be burned on 

the altar, but definitely included in certain other things where 

6 

a part is nob t© be burned on the altar , while the remainder, 

according to the Mishnah, was to be eaten by the offerer. 

At this point we should consider th. question, ’’What is the 

differentia between a sacrifice and a sacred gift?” The answer 

is that "the least differentia would consist in the fact that a 

7 

sacrifice is a gift presented with some ritual.” 

1 Numbers 8:165 2 Judges 11:39 \ 5 Z e bahim 10:5; 4 See foot-note 
5 Matthew 23:2b, 6 Lev. 7:Ilf; 7 Buchanan Gray, "Sacrifice in p. 

the Old Testament” ,28 


*_J 








. 











- 

. • 





. 

. 

. 






. 








- 32 - 


We may well, therefore, briefly classify Hebrew gifts accord¬ 
ing t > the altar-ritual that accompanied their presentation to 
Yahweh. 

ib 

(1) There were certain gifts ithout ritual, such as money, 
and contributions in Kind made direct to the priests. The Mishnah 
goes into great detail in defining such gifts. 


It is not difficult to note the antinuaticn of the de—ritual— 


2 

izing process,evidences of which we have referred to b^r before. 

For example, in Numbers 18 certain gifts are given directly to 

5 


the priests, whereas che first-fruits are brought to Hahweh; 

that is, they were presented with ritual before going to the priests. 

4 

A difference between gifts given and brought is creeping in. 

In the passage of Nehemiah 10; 34-58 the first-fruits In one case 

are ”brought to the house of Yahw r eh," and certain other offerings, 

such as dough, wine, and oil, were "brought to the chambers of our 

God". That is, one type of offering was taken to the temple for 

ritualistic presentation, and others were taken direct to the 

quarters of the priest. We begin to understand the origins of 

the vested interests of the later priesthood. The practice of 

commutation further accelerated this trend. Sacrifices could be 

commuted into money gifts, especially in the case of sacrifices 

that could only be made at the central shrine in Jerusalem. 

Pilgrims coming from awkward distances, especially the Jews of 
5 

the Drspora , found it difficult to bring sacrificial gifts, so 

1 Some affirm that Hebrew law forbade the offering of honey, but 
actually the la?/ forbade it being offered in certain forms (Lev.2:11) 
lb Such as the temple tax of 7^r shekels. ^ Supra-p. 30 3 Num.l8;13 

4 This is definitely indicated in Neh, 10:34-38, 5 Dispersion -the 
Jews ’who lived outside of Palestine. 











. 










- 33 - 


they paid the priests money in lieu of them. Thus there grew up the 

pernicious tendency to evaluate a sacrifice by its money value. 

We have a reflection of this in Jesus’ high appraisal of the widows 

1 

mite in contrast to the opulent gifts of the Pharisees. 

(2) The second glass of offerings or gifts were those presented 
at the altar, and thereafter not burnt on the altar but given to 

the priests and becoming their property. The ritual for the present¬ 
ation of this class of gifts is described in great detail in the 
Mishnah Tract Bikkurim. 

(3) The third class of offerings were animals slain at the 
sactuary and in part burnt on the altar, the remainder being con¬ 
sumed by the offerer and the priests. This was the classical form 

2 

of "peace-offering 1 !. 

(4) The fourth class, differentiated at a comparitively late 
period, consisted of gifts whife 'were in part burnt on the alter 
and for the rest consumed by the priest. This included most of the 
sin-offerings and guilt-offerings. 

(5) The fifth class consisted of gifts which were wholly burnt 
on the altar after, in the case of animal gifts, the withdrawal of 
the blood, which was thrown against the altar. This class consisted 
primarily of burnt-offerings. 

These five classes could all be included in a simple three-fold 
classification based upon the extent to which txie altar received 
and. retained the gifts offered. 

(a) Gifts of which the altar retains nothing. These would 
Include che first two classes above. 


1 Mark 12:42; 


2 Sh®lamim. 








- 34 - 


(b) Those gifts of which the altar retains some part but not 
the whole. These would include classes (5) and (4) above. 

(c) Those gifts of which the.; altar retains all - identical 

1 

with cl“33 five above.' 

Nearly all gifts were subject to fire-ritual, and this ritual 
was probably organically connected with the conception of a gift 
to God; the fire sublimated the food presented into a form suit¬ 
able to the deity- at least so it was thought. Those parts eaten 
by the priests were regarded as gif ts to the deity past^onfco him 
by his proxies,the priests. 

All sacrifices were not offered upon or at the altar. For 

examole, a young calf -was slain by running water vke r e the body of 

.2 

a murdered man had been found. Similarly the red cow, whose 

ashes were used as an ingredient in "cleansing liquid”, was 

3 

slain outside the camp and was not presented at the altar. 

True, this was not regarded as a sacrifice, because not offered 
at the altar, yet it was subject to a blood-ritual and a fire- 
ritual. 

We cite these two cases to demonstrate thefact that ritual¬ 
istic observances were common in reference to objects that were 
not strictly sacrifices. Here we discern a trend toward that 
ritualistic complexity wnich characterized the priestly document 
(P) of the fifth century, B. C,, and also the shackling legalism 
which aur Lord combated during his ministry. This tendency points 
to the waning of the idea of communion and the strengthening of 

the idea of gift. ___ 

1 This classification is taken from Buchanan Gray, "Sacrifice in the 
Old Testament, Chapter 2. 2 Deut,21:l-8. o Deut. 21: 1-S. 
























' 














.. t • ik\ .. - i 

■ 

■ 

- ' . . ; . . ; 

■ 




- 35 - 


In this chapter we have indicated something of the complexity 
and arbitrariness of thesacrificial system in the earlier days of 
the period covered by the Old Testament recoro. We have noted 
the tendency of sacrificial gifts to pass out of the hands of t he 
'indiviuual offerer into the hands of the priesthood, and the 
accompanying, and inevitable, development of a priestly class 
with vested interests in the priestly regulations attaching to 
the sacrificial system. We have further observed the trend away 
from the inherent sanctity of certain sacrificial objects, and 
the accompanying development of the system of redemption or 
commutation in money form. 

From these considerations we can see the trend toward rigid 
legalism of worship, and the tendency to regard sacrifice as a 
means of purchasing favour with God; and, as a natural corollary, 
the tendency to assume that the payment of mony gifts according 
to priestly prescription placed God under the obligation to favour 
those who made their sacrifices with »eticulous regard for legal 

specifications. This trend manifestly led in the direction of 

♦ 

a blind unconcern for the ethical demands of Yahweh, and a general 
disregard of the relationship Betwee n religion as an institution 
and life in its moral and ethical aspects. 

It remained for the promts, acting as spokemen for God, to 
denounce a religion which was divorced from life, and hich utt erly 
lost sight of, ox* failed to comprehend, the fundamental character 
of God and his requirements of those who would acceptably worship 


him. 






























. 
























it • • ' .i .. £ . ’«• 


. i •; . - ' . * 







• 














- 36 - 


It would be well, at this point, for us to consiaer the 

atiituae oi the prophets toward the sacrificial system which had 

1 2 

evolved to the state mentioned above. 

The chief prophetic passages indicting legalistic sacrifices 

i 

are well known - Hosea 6:4-6; Amos 4:4,5:21-25; Isaiah 1:10-17; 

3 

JVIicah 6:6-8; Jeremiah 7:21ff. One criticsm is common to all, 

namely, that sacrifices are largely a means of gratifying those 

|who offer them rather than Yahweh. They may be agreeable to the 

givers, but they are certainly not so to 'the divine recipient. 

This implication is explained quite clearly by the fact that 

sacrifices were in the main sacrificial feasts whicn in too many 
i 

cases were orgies of gluttony and intemperance. The most summary 

expression of the prophetic attitude is that of Hosea, "I will 

4 

have mercy and not sacrifice .” 

The passages in Isaiah and Micah point clearly to the fact 
that the people mere placing their trust in a system, a system 
which largely involved the attempt to purchase God f s favour by 
gifts, rather than by the nobler attempt to establish communion, 
fellowship, and acceptance with God, upon h&. spiritual and moral 
plane. Some writers maintain that the; p&rophets do not condemn, 
nor command the abolition of, the sacrificial system as such; that 
they seem even ready to tolerate it, or even to make use of it 

themselves, so long as the peo p le will n ot abuse the system nor 

1 Supra p.55. 

2 In this Chapter thus far we have secured our data largely from 
"Sacrifice in the Old Testament" by Buchanan Gray, an outstanding 
authority in this field. Our references shall cover a wider field 
from this point on. 

3 To these should be added, "To obey is better than sacrifice*" 

I Sam. 15:22. Also, "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit..." 
Psctlm 51:17. 4-Hosea 6:6. 






















• 

Y ■ 

- 'v . ' 


































- 57 - 


continue to hold inadequate or distorted coneeptions of its place 

1 

in their religious life . Prof. J. M. P. Smith in his book, 

"The Moral Life of the Prophets", says, "It will hardly do to make 

Amos ^ wholly discard ritual and put ethics in its place......he 

was not consistently hostile to ritual. It is safer to assume that ,ij 

he is protesting not against ritual, per se, but against making 

Z 

ritual do service for character and right conduct." 


In similar vein Prof. T. H. Robinson, while admitting that 

Hosea and Jeremiah had little use for sacrifice, says, "Pre-exilic 

prophets would not have swept it away altogether: their concern 

was to see that men realized that religion was a moral and spiritual 

3 

thing, and not merely a ritual one. " 

The book of Oeuteronomy does not prohibit sacrifice, it 
regulates it. It did its best to emphasize to Israel that as they 
w r ent to their festivals and sacrifices they should go not with 
the thought that they were to give something to Yahweh, still less 

by so doing they could constrain his acceptance of them and extort 

. 

his favour, but with thoughts of his goodness to them in delivering 
them from their bondage in Egypt, and in making their fields and 
flocks fertile from year to year. The eucharistic emphasis is 
constantly given. 

We should realize in doing justice to the presentation of 

sacrifices to Yahweh, that a gift did represent a sacrifice on 

the part of the offerer. It involved the parting with something 

of value. The devotion of man to God expressed by his readiness 

to part with what he valued at God f s command is trie ob vio us mora l 
1 J, M. P, Smith, "The Moral Life of the Prophets",p.gjjf. j 

1 J, E. McFadyen, "The Message of Israel"p.64fsee foot-note l«p.58.f cf 5* 

























- 58 - 


lb 

of the story of Abraham's readiness to sacrifice Isaac. 

This cost oi sacrifice in terms of what the offerer loses 
leads naturally to the idea of self-sacrifice as the greatest of 
al± gifts. So it was that even inadequate sacrifices served as 
forerunners of adequate one^; and thus the Jewish sacriiicial 
system with all the crudities and shallowness which marked it at 
times has been shown, in the light of history, to be responsible 
for man's eventual arrival at a truely spiritual and worthy under¬ 
standing of God's requirements of his people. 

As a general conclusion, reached by the best of modern scholar 
ship, it may be said that the prophets, were indifferent to 
sacrificial rites. To them God desires not sacrifice, but the 
knowledge of Himself; not sacrifice, but justice and mercy: not 
sacrifice but the dedications of the whole of lifeto His obedience. 
God's favour is found by men becoming like Himself, just and 
merciful. 

Many recent authorities go even further than to assert the 
indifference of tne rophets to the sacrificial system by declaring 
that they positively denounced it and pressed for its repudiation, 
I quote from a widely acclaimed recent book, "All the pre-exilic 
prophets are agreed that Yahweh.., will have no respect to the 
offerings that people make (cf, Amos 5:21-£o),..,their object' was 

1 (Footnote continued from p, 57) "Prophecy and the Prophets in 
Ancient Israelp. 190. 

2 Psalm 40 and 5i. 
lb Genesis 22:1-14 







- 59 - 


that it served as a moral opiate, and dulled the consciences of 

men to the reality of true spiritual values.To the ordinary 

Israelite sin was a neglect of ritual regulations; to the prophets 

it was a violation of the moral law, ...It followed that no 

ritual within the area of' sacrifice could possibly atone for sins 

committed in the region of morality... the atonement must be 

t 

moral, and even the earliest of sacrifices were uterly futile 

1 

in the effort to recover the favour of Yahweh,” Dr. W. F. Bade' 

is even more positive. His own words conve^y this impression best, 

n In Ezekiel, Leviticus, and kindred Priestly literature God’s 

favour is dependent upon a strict performance of die ritual. The 

prophets from Amos to Jeremiah denounce and repudiate this view r ..,. 

2 

■they deny any intrinsic value in ritual purity.” Prof. G, B. Gray 

puts it as strongly as possible in these words, ”It is not the 

institution, but the repudiation, of sacrifice, that distinguishes 

*5 

the religion of Israel.” To these authoritative voices we should 

add a word from Buchanan Gray, ”The prophets repudiate the gift- 

4 

theory of sacrifice. ” 

The observation of J, J. Reeve concerning the whole sacrificial 
system of the Hebrews is most intriguing, ”We prefer to regard 
the Hebrew sacrificial system as a great religious educational 

system, adapted to the capacity of the people of that age, intended 

■ 

to develop right conception of sin, proper appreciation of the 

holiness of God, correct ideas of ho. to appr oach G od, and a 

1 W. D.” E. Oesterley,. T. H. Robinson, ’’Hebrew religion 15 , pp.^Ol-^. 

'2’’The Old Testament in the Light of To-day”, Chap.10. 

.3 Ibid, p* 281, 

4 ”Sacrifice ‘in the Old Testament, p.45. 











- 40 - 


familiarity with the idea of sacrifice as the fundamental thing 

1 

in redemption, life, and service to God and man. n 

The Hebrew sacrificial system ended in 70 A.D. with the 
destruction of Jerusalem and of the temple by the Romans. And 
as Buchanan Gray suggests, its end may have been an advantage, 
inasmuch as it gave freer play to the higher functions of religion. 


1 International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia, Vol. 4, p.£651 







- 41 - 


CHAPT5R 4. 

ATONEMENT. PROPITIATION, EXPIA TION. 

There is no doubt that the Hebrews believed in the eificaey 
of sacrifice. And it is equally clear that no one theory can 
account for their zeal in sacrificing to Yahweh. Doubtless the 

1 

idea of gift, communion, homage, and propitiation ar all present. 
Doubtless also different groups of these motives dominated certain 
periods, and others were in the ascendancy at other times. The 
emotions of fear, respect, penitence, reverence, gratitude, and 
desire all played their respective parts. We have already considered 
the prophetic denunciation of the lower motives which lay behind 
many of the sacrifices and their insistence upon the inwardness 
of true religion. 

It now becomes our purpose to examine Hebrew sacrifice with 

a view to discovering the part which the idea of atonement, 

and ^ 

propiatiation, expiation played in it; for this, be it recalled, 

was one of the earliest elements to be detected in sacrifice, 

ana also the one having the highest possibilities of development 

into an adequate relationship with the divine . Furthermore, it 

is this element in Old Testament sacrifice which leads us most 

directly to the sacrificial death of Jesus Christ which is to 

be our final consideration in this paper. 

1 Ibia. p. 26, from, "Christian Doctrine of Salvation", by 
G.B.Knudson. 

£ Supra . 56. 

5 Supra p. 23. 
















-4fc2~ 

Two Hebrew sacrificial terms are of particular interest to 

us because of their suggestion of the fact that the Hebrew people 

offeree sacrifices with a view to removing conditions in man, 

whether physical or ethical, that aroused divine displeasure,and 

thus of arresting or preventing the punishment which Yahweh would 

1 

decree. These terms are hataah (or hattath), "sin-offering”, and 

*2 

^asham, "guilt" or n trespass-offering". These terms in their derived 
sense indicate that sin-offerings and guilt-offerings would be 
payments for sin. For example, guilt-offerings (asham), special 
offerings in cases where wrong had been done to God, could be ass¬ 
essed in money, such as tithes and dues. And if an animal were 
sacrificed it must be of a certain value. 

There was an important distinction between the sin-offering 
3 

and the guilt-offering. The sin-offering was meant specifically 

to atone for unwitting sins, sins of error (sh c ghaghah), mistakes 

or rash acts. There were gradations of them for different classes 
4 

of offenders: the anointed priest, the whole congregation, a 

ruler, one of the common people. 

The first mention of the sin-offering is at the consecration 

5 

of Aaron and his sons to the priesthood. At this ceremony a bull¬ 
ock was killed before the altar, some of its blood was put upon 
the horns of the altar by Moses, the rest was poured out at the 

base. The fat of the inwards was burned upon the altar, the flesh 

6 

and skin were burned outside the camp. Every day during the con- 

1 & 2 Many examples of the rules laid down for these offerings 
axe found Lev. 4-7, 11-15. 

3 International Bible Encyclopaedia, Vol. 4, p. 2644. 

4 Lev, 4:1-35; 5 Esod. 29:10ff.; 6 Supra p. 28. 








-45- 

secration this was done. 

The sin-oifering did not apply to conscious and wilful viol¬ 
ation of the law. This was the sin unto death. No atonement for it 
was possible. There were, however,acertain few exceptions. These 
were covered by the guilt-offering. It def'initly expressed expia¬ 
tion and restitution, the latter being suggested by the line 
which always accompanied the guilt-offering. In general "the pre¬ 
vailing view in the priestly writings was that only sins or inad- 

1 

vertence may be forgiven," 

The use of the term hataah in the ritual of the red cow in¬ 
dicates the real value of the term when used for what was burnt 
at the altar as an offering to Yahweh (that is, when used as a 
sin-offering.) It then did not so much refer to the fact that they 
were offerings to Yahv/eh as that they were victims by means of 
which the sins of men who offered them were removed; whether in 
virtue of the gift of the animal to God, or of some ritual treat¬ 
ment of it. 

True, these terms were largely employed in the post-exilic 
period, yet Ezekiel refers to them as though their use was cust¬ 
omary and familiar. Doubtless they were familiar, even though sub¬ 
ordinate in the pre-exilic period. In Ezekiel they stand beside 

5 

burnt offerings and peace offerings as things equally familiar. 

I quote now from Dr. Buchanan Gray, "But apart from the 
names there are of course other means of determining -whether other, 

and what other, sacrifices besides the sin-offerings and one gui .lt- 

1 A*C,Knudson, "Religious Teaching of the Old Testament, p.oll. 

£ Num. 19:9; 5 Knudson (Ibid.) suggests that prior to Ezekiel’s 

day any sacrifice might serve the purpose of atonement. 






-44- 

offerings were offered with a propitiatory or expiatory purpose, 
and the most important is the attachment to a law or description of 
sacrifice that it was "to make atonement " OgpJj). The root of 
this designation is kipper HDD), which, regardless of all the dis¬ 
cussions which have gathered about its meaning, undoubtedly meant 
to cover, to cover over, When the object of the verb is a person 
the Hebrew idiom would mean "to cover the face" of the angry person, 

that is, to get him to overlook the wrong committed so as to look 

1 

again with favor upon the person who had committed the wrong. 

When, on the other hand, the object is a sin or an offence, the 

usage indicates that the sin or offence is covered so as to make it 

henceforth of no affect on either the wronged person or the one who 
2 

had done the wrong." 

Arabic and Babylonian terms indicate that the idea of propit¬ 
iation and expiation vrere current, and the Hebrew 7 usage was prob¬ 
ably much the same. The term "kuppuru M used in the Babylonian rit- 

5 

ual of atonement is certainly identical with the Hebrew 7 kipper, 

the technical designation for "atonement" in the language of P. 

On the question of the original meaning of the Semitic root which 

gave kuppuru in Babylonian, and kipper in Hebrew, Dr. Langdon 
4 ^ 

writes, "In the ordinary ritual of atonement water, bread, grains, 
plants, and animal sacrifices are introduced ...••••the priest seeks 
to drive the demons into the water, the bread, the grain, or what¬ 
ever element is used. When he utters the curse the evil passes into 

1 Genesis 5:20-21, 2 Gray, “Sacrifice in the Ola Testamenty p.67. 

o The noun form of kipper is k“the price of a life”, 

4 Hastings 1 Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, Article on Saerific 
















- 45 - 


into the element, which is then taken away. The bread, water, plant, 

etc., into which the curse had driven the powers of evil are called 

"takpirtu". It refore a logical development for kuppuru to 

attach to itself the sense of purge, purify, wipe away, atone. 

This use ox the Babylonian term, kuppuru, gives us our clue 

for determining the Semitic conception of atonement. That is to 

say, it involved the idea of sin being covered, removed, wiped 

away, turned aside (referring to the penalty of sin). Hence the 

idea of the propagation of God and the expiation of sin are both 
‘l . 

inferred. Oehler explains that in sacrifice man places tne life 

of a pure, innocent, sacrificial animal between himself and God, 

because he is unable to approach God on account of his sinfulness 

Z 

and impurity. Thus the sacrifice becomes a "fcopher” for him- it 

covers his sin. The law does not lay the emphasis upon the slaughter, 
| 5 

but upon the shedding of the blood. The ’’bursting of the blood" 

was the essential thing. The altar is not regarded as a place of 

execution but as the place where the sins of the covenant people 

were covered- hence the security afforded the sinner who clung to 

the blood-stained horns of the altar. 

In the Mithraic cult, which grew up in Persia in the first 

century B.G., one of the leading ceremonies was the "taurobolium" 

In which a candidate seeking purification stood, under a latticed 

4 

platform and was drenched by the blood of a bullock slain above. 

1 "Old Testament Theology"- Oehler. 

Z See footnote 5, p. 44 above. 

5 Supra.p.6, footnote Z . 

4 Cited in thesis on ’’The Mystery Religions." by Rev. T.M.Webb. 















. 

















. 

' 
















. 


. 





















- 46 - 


The Cybelene Cult used the same ceremony. The sins of the worshipper 

1 

were "covered by the blood M . 

The fundamental idea of bloody sacrifices in early Semitism 

Was that the victim took the place of tne man and redeemed him or 

2 

atoned for him as a substitute. Dr. Owen C. Whitehouse says,"In 

the days of the Exile and after sacrifice became to an increasing- 

degree propitiatory, although undoubtedly from very early times 

sacrifice expressed the idea of propiatiation as well as communion." 

All propitiatory sacrifices'were blood offerings- "without the 

shedding of blood there is no remission ofk sin." The life of the 

flesh is in the blood; and I have given it to you upon the altar to 

make atonement for your souls: for it is the blood that maketh 

5 

atonement by reason of the life." A.C., Knuds on in commenting on 

this passage says, "This is the nearest approach to a 'rationale’ 

4 

of atonement in the Old Testament." 

A most striking illustration of the propitiatory virtue of 
early sacrifice is seen in the story of Saul's pursuit of David. 
David, though unconscious of any definite sin, feels that Saul's 
pursuit of him is an evidence of Yahweh's anger, and therefore the 
only thing for him to do is to bring a sacrificial offering and to 
burn it on the altar in order that the fumes may please and placate 
Yahweh. It is significant to note that since David was conscious of 
no particular sin, his offering was purely propitiatory with no 
element of expiation, "If it be Yahweh that hath incited thee against 


1 Cf. footnote 4, , 45 above. 

S In A.S.Peake's Commentary on the Bible, p.99. 

5 Lev. 17:11; 4 Sacrifice in tne Ola Testament, p.515. 

5. I Sam. 26:19. 













-47- 

1 

me, let him smell an offering." A further classic example is Noah’s 


sacrifice after the flood. We read these words,"And the Lord smelled 

eet savour; and the Lora said in his'heart, I will not again 

2 

curse the ground any more for man’s sake,” 


We turn now to 2 Samuel 24, a chapter which has been described 

as "the charter for the sacrificial service which was rendered to 

5 4 


Yahweh on Mount Zion,” The story culminates, as Gray points out, 

in the first sacrifice on Mount Zion, and in the building of the altar 

which is to become the central and ultimately the ownly place were 

Israel might sacrifice to Yahweh, The story opens with the record 

5 

of Yahwehs anger against Israel, because of David’s offense in 

numbering the people. Then the altar was built and sacrifices are 

offered, and "Yahweh suffered himself to be entreated for the land 

6 

and the plague was stayed in Israel," 

In other passages, such as I Samuel 3:If, the expiatory purpose 
is predominant. 


A striking instance of human sacrifice being offered as prc f&tion : 
is in the record of 2 Kings 3:27, True, the sacrifice here is a 
Moabite &ne, but its interpretation is a Hebrew one. Che osh, the 
god of Moab, was angry with his people, As a result he has allowed 
Israel to drive them into a corner. At this point the king of Moab 
offered his eldest son in sacrifice to Chemosh. As a result the anger -j 

of Chemosh is deflected from Moab and poured out upon Israel who retreat] 

- 

in all haste to escape the wrath of Chemosh. 

The principle records of propitiatory human sacrifice in Israel 

1 Gen. 8:2Q; 2 Gen. 8:21; 5 Gray, Sacrifice in the Old Testame rr^p.€4 

4 Sacrifice in Old Testament, p.84, 5 Cf.I Sam.26;19, 6 2Sam.24:25. 






















































. 










. 
























- 48 - 


are in the writings of the seventh century. It was then a common 

thing for children to be offered as burnt offerings in the Valley of 

Gehinnom. "They have built thehigh places of Tophet, which is in the 

Valley of the Son of Hinnom , to burn their sons and daughters in the 
1 

fire." A distinct suggestion of the expiatory and propitiatory merit 


of human sacrifice is found in the word of Micah, "Shall I giv'-^-my 

f irst-bom for my transgression, the fruit of my womb for the sin of 
2 

my soul?" 

3 

0f course, as re have already observed, the tendency of the pec le 

to give ever greater pominence to expiatory and propitiatory sacrifice 

was accompanied by a prophetic tendency to substitute the sacrifices 

of right conduct before Yahweh. What was past was past and man could 

not undo it by sacrifice, but God’s anger could be changed to favour 

by their return in humility to well-doing, "Hate the evil, and love 

4 

the good, it may be that Yah eh ..'.will be gracious 


Enough has been said above to indicate quite definitely the place : 
4 eh the idea of propitiation and expiation had in Hebrew sacrifices- ] 
increasingly so after the Exile, but in a measure so from earliest 


times, 


In concluding our treatment of this section we now turn our 


attention to the Day of Atonement and the Passover, the two great 
Hebrew institutions which bear eloquent witness to the influencial 
place of propitiation, atonement, and expiation in the sacrificial 
system. 


THE DAY OF ATONEMENT. 


T he most important of all Hebrew wholly days, 'one Day of 

1 Jeremiah 32:35, 2 Chron, 30:6: 2 Micah 6:7 

3 Supra 36ff; 4 Amos 5:15. 


oneraent/ 















- 49 - 


fell on the tenth day of the seventh month, Tishri. It shared with 

the Passover the first place in the reverent attention of the Jews. ■ 

" 

Its importance developed comparitively late- probably after the Exile, 

1 Z 

and certainly not before the fifth century B.C. 

The unique feature of theday lay not in the quantity or type of 

Z 

sacrifices, but in the fact that the whole d.-.y from evening to 

evening was. spent in fasting- a token of genuine repentence and sorrow 

for sin. To break one's fast was a mortal sin, and the fast included 

abstention from all work. All other days on the festival calendars 

of the Pentateuch were days of joy. Furthermore, the Day of Atonement j 

did not in any sense, like most of the feasts, commemorate a historical 

4 

event in the life of Israel, "The day occupied a striking place in 
the calendar; coming between the New Year’s Day on which, as early as 
the Mishnah at least, it as believed that men were judged and their 
destinies fixed by God for the year, and the greet feast of the 
Ingathered Harvest with its joy and cheerful rites which began a 
fortnight later. The yearly expiation was thus able to add during 
the days of the festival to the joy of harvest the joy of recently 
forgiven sin. In the leber Midrash it was the one day in the 365 of 


1 In "Jev/ish Religion", by Friedlander, we are told that the Day of 
Atonement has been the most important Hebrew Holy Day for at least the 
last 1700 years, 

Z Lev, 16 and Numbers are the most important Old Testament sources of 
our knowledge regarding it. The Mishnah tract Toma ir- also Important, 

3 It was but a single day in the year, whereas the other major festal 
days, required by the Law, numbered ZQ; yet this one day played a 
larger part In the religious life of the aeorews tuau all me otners,- 
Internutlonal standard nibie Encyclopaedia, voi. 1, p. '6z'f, 

4 me autnor or Jttoilees maxes a determined attempt cc avos.cn it too 
tne mourning ox jacoo alter tne supposed slaying of Joseph by his 
brethren, 











. 


1 

. 










- 50 - 


1 1 

when Satan 1'or three hours ceased from accusing Israel.” 

This quotation bears witness to the genuine sense of atonement 

which the day produced. A further indication of the d ys 

is seen in the fact that on that day the high priest did certain 

services which on other days could be done by any priest; and also by 

the fact that on that day certain things were done which only the high 

priest could perform. Then again, on this day alone was the method of 
2 

the scape-goat adopted in the interests of the whole community. All 
people shared in it because the Sabbath rest fell also on that day 
and all must keep it. 

Two of tne most prominent rites of the day demand our attention: >|j 

(1) The Blood Ritual, (2) The Scape-Goat, 

THE BLOOD RITUAL. In the blood ritual che high priest, beginning 
5 

with Aaron, must take a bullock for himself and his house, and kill 

it before the altar. Sweet incense was burned within the rail and 

blood was sprinkled on the mercy seat and before it seven times. By 

this ritual was the priesthood rendered worthy to secure from Yahweh 

rich blessings for his people. Of striking interest and significance 

was the SCAPE-GOAT RITUAL. On the ..Day of Atonement the high priest must 

take two he-goats for the people, present the goats at the sanctuary, 

cast lots, one for Yahweh as a sin-offering, the other for Azaze'l, to 

be sent into the wilderness. The goat selected by lot as a sin-offeringj 

/?as killed before the altar, as was the bullock of the priest and his 

louse, its blood sprinkled upon trie mercy-seat and before it, and its 

carcass burned, with the carcass of the sacrificed bullock, •.-utsiue 

the camp. ______________ 

L Buchanan Gray,“Sacrifice in the Old Testament", p.319. 

2 Lev, 16:5-8; 5 Lev, 16:1-28. 





































* 




















































. 

. ' 















- 51 - 

The other goat, that is, the scape-goat, was also presented 
1 

before the altar, the hands of the people were laid upon it, the 

sins of all were confessed over it by the high priest and transferred 

2 3 

to the goat, and it was sent into the wilderness. Sir J. E. Frazer 
declares "that the general principle of transferring sins physically 
to some animal or other medium , and, by then dismissing the medium, 
getting rid for good of the sins, is now recognized as a wide spread 
practice associated with the stage of belief far nearer the primitive 
than the religion either of Ezra or of Moses." 

4 

«n important fact to bear in mind is, that though Azazel receives 

the sins, he is not responsible for ridding Israel of them. The 

removal of sin is entirely due to the power of Yahweh. The goat can 

be loaded with Israel 1 s sin and as Azazel must receive them because 

Yahweh; wills that "Expiation shall be made for the Israelites from 

5 

all their sins once a year." 

6 

The idea of a ’transfer of guilt’ is the striking feature of 
the scape-goat ritual. It should be observed that the ritual does not 


in any wpy suggest Vicarious death. The element ox atonement derives 

7 

from the sprinkling of the blood of the slain goat upon the mercy seat. 
1 Lev. 16;5-8, 2 Lev. 16:10-22. 

3 In "The golden Bough", quoted in Gray,"Sacrifice in the Old Testament^ 
p. 315. 

4 As to the identity of Azazel much doubt prevails. Probably it is 

a : , comparitively late literary addition, because it does not belong to 
the essence of the rite of the scape-goate For the goat to go into the 
solitary wilderness would be enough,. T. K. Cheyne says that Azazel is 
a fallen angel substituted by the author of the ritual for the eerth 
demons of popular thought. Oesterley and Robinson in "Hebrew Religion" 
tell us that Azazel in Hebrew means "complete removal". So the use of 
the term Azazel is the ritual signifies the idea of sin removed. 

5i Lev, 16:34; 6 Note Lev, 16:26,28; 

7 A certain mystical sanctity was in ancient times attributed to the 
blood because it was regarded as the seat of life, and this made it 

(Continued as .footnote 1. r. 52) 






















"For it is the blood that m&keth' atonement by 


2 

reason of the life." 


And, yet the ritual of the scape-goat with its conception of the 
transfer of guilt played a leading part in Jewish thought, and 


represents a mode of thinking which has dominated the Christian 
doctrine of atonement at various times. 

With this thought of the transfer of guilt in mind e might do 
well to turn to the place in the Old Testament of the idea of the 
substitution of one victim for another’s sin. There is no doubt that 
it played a .art in Hebrew thinking, although chere is no warrant 
for reading it into the scape-goat ritual, as Christian theologians 
have been wont to do in their effort to make Christ the scape-goat 
for man’s sin. 

3 

The grandsons of Saul were required to pay with their lives 

' - 

the penalty which Saul’s sin deserved. The idea of substitution seems 

| 

to be suggested in this. Then again, Isaac was saved from being 

offered up as a burnt offering by Abraham by the substitution of the 

4 

ram caught in the thicket. The first-born in early Israel were 

5 

redeemed by gifts or offerings. In later times the Levites were 

6 

regarded as an offering to Yahweh for the first-born of Israel. 

In these instances there is, however, no idea of penal substitution. 

There is no doubt whatever chat the Priestly writer made provision 

7 

for substitutionary sacrifices and offerings. 


1 a fitting symbol of the sinner’s sorrow for sin and desire for 
pardon."- A. C. Knudson, "Religious Teaching of Old Testament, .314 

2 Lev. 17:11; 3 2 Sam. 21:1-11; 4 Gen. 22:1-14 (E); 5 Exod.34:20 (J); 

6 Exod, 13:2, Numbers 3:12f,etc. (all in P). 

7 Cf. Lev. 4:15—21(P). 



















- 55 - 


We turn now to a consideration of the sacrifice of the Passover, 
regarded as another great Hebrew institution embodying the concepts 
of propitiation and expiation. 

The word ’passover’ is from the Hebrew pasah, from pasah, "to 

. 

pass", "spring over", "to spare". It is also reliably related to 
the Assyrian’pasahu’, meaning "to placate". The annual Passover 

i m 

Festival was held on the evening of the 14th. day of Nisan or Abhhteh 
and represented really the opening of the seven-day feast of unleavened 
bread. The children of Israel began thekeeping of the Passover in 

5 

the wilderness of Sinai after their departure from the Land of Goshen. 

In the very beginning of their national life in Palestine we find them < 
* 4 

celebrating the Passover under 'the leadership of Joshua, in the plains 1 

of Jericho. By the days of Hezekiah it had fallen into such a state 

of neglect that neither the priest nor people were prepared ior the 

king f s urgent appeal to observe it. In the reign oi Josiah the 

festival was revived and its continuance up to the Exile is attested 

5 

by Ezekiel’s interest in it. In post-exilic days it was kept more 
6 

strictly than ever. And by the beginning of the Christian era it 

7 

was the most devoutly kept of all the Je'wish festivals. The Reman 

soldiers in Jesus’ day released Jewish prisoners in recognition of 

■ 

the great celebration. The festival is mentioned no fewer than 51 
times in the Hew Testament. The Christian eucharist is based upon 
the feast ? .--md until the Council of Nicaea in 5^5 A.D. the Christian 
church observed Easter on the date of the Passover. After the des- 


1 The Passovef could only be eaten during the night (Exod.l2:l-s3) 

Z Corresponding to our month of March-April. 5 Num.9:5 

4 Joshua 5:10; 5 Ezek. 45:18; 6 Ezra. 6:19ff.; 

7 Nathan Isaacs in International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia, p.2k58, 
says, (Quotation given as footnote 1, p. 54) 






























































. 
















































- 54 - 

truction of the Temple in 70 A.D. the Passover became of necessity 

largely a home service and the blood ritual of the Paschal Lamb were 

omitted. So much for the historical survey of the institution. 

Z 

According to Buchanan Gray two facts serve to indicate that 

the Passover, in common with other Hebrew sacrifices, was not merely 

a gift. These facts are: (1) The Sacrificial Meal. 

(2) The Blood Ritual. 

The Passover Meal is one of the earliest parts of the Priestly 

ritual. There are two accounts of the first Passover: the record of 

J in Exodus 12:21-28, which says nothing of the Paschal Meal; and 

the record of P in Exodus 12:1-13, which describes the meal with 

great care. The law of Deuteronomy.. 16:1-8 commands the eating of 

the meal and implies that it is a very ancient rite. The primitive 

character of ohe meal is clearly suggested by the fact that in P 

participants in the meal are forbidden to eat the flesh of the victim 

3 

raw or to break any of its bones. The inference is that there was 

4 

a time when the victim was eaten raw and that the bones, having been 


1 "After the destruction of the temple the Passover became a home 
service ana has remained so to this day. The paschal lamb is no longer 
included. Only the Samaritans have continued this rite up to the 
present. In the Jewish home a roasted bone is placed upon the table 

in memory of the rite, and other articles symbolic of the Passover are 
placed beside it: sucn as a roasted egg, symbolic of the free-will 
offering; a sauce called haroseth, said to resemble the mortar used in 
Egypt; salt water for the symbolic dipping (of. Matthew 26:25); the 
bitter herb and the maccoth,” 

2 Sacrifice in the Old Testament, p. 369 

3 Exod. 12:46. 

4 Supra p. 6 








' 





- 








- 55 - 


broken and powdered, were eaten as well. This suggestion of the 

1 ; 

ancient nilus ceremony oi tne Arabs indicates the antiquity oi 

certain features of the paschal meal. 

The Paschal meal was originally eaten to "secure the clansmen 

^ j 

the protection of their god by uniting tnem closely with him." 

In the body of the victim is hidden the very life of the goo-the 

3 

elixir of life. Quoting from Gray , "On this theory of the paschal 

meal the double Paschal ritual of sprinkling the blood anti eating 
. 

the victim secured its main end, the security of the household, by 

a double method: the blood sprinkled without kept the evil powers 

at bay, and the meal eaten within renewed the divine life of the 

inhabitants." As time went on the external application of the blood 

became secondary in importance to the:meal itself. After 70 A..D, 

the sacrificial element in the meal was completely subordinated to 

the eating of the sacred meal. In pre-exilic days,however a vital 

factor in the feast was the sacrificial victim, slain within the 

Temple precincts, its fat offered on the altar, its blood poured away 

4 

at the base of the altar. It is striking to note that in the days 

\ 

of Philo the Paschal victim was not slain by the sacred class of 

Levites, as had become the custom for all other sacrifices, but by 

the wwners of the Pascal victims; and by this act the. layman became 

for the time being a priest, "On this day," says Philo, "the whole 

5 

nation sacrifices without waiting for their priest." 

1 Supra p, 6, 2 Beer, P sachim, p. 15 

3 Sacrifice in the Opd Testament, p, 369-370. 

4 In the Old Testament there is a two-fold prohibition against eating 

"any manner of blood"; first, because the life of the flesh is in the 
blood (Lev,14:11,14); secondly, because for this reason God has chosen 
the blood to be the symbol of the life substituted for the life of the 
guilty in atoning sacrifice.(Lev,14:11) 5 De Decal p.30 (Gray p,376) 



















- 56 - 


ffhe Paschal meal was primarily commemorative of past redemption, 

of the intervention of God in the days of the natiorfs infancy. n If 

we knew no more than this," says Buchanan Gray, "it would be scareely j 

possibly to overlook or overestimate the probability that this 

commemoration of the past fixed the minds of the participants with 

hope for the future: for a new interposition of Providence which 

i 

should set them free from present servitude . r 

We shall have further occasion to refer to the Passover as we 

' 

point out how its essential meaning was fulfilled for Christian 

believers in the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, "the lamb slain from the 

2 

foundation of the world," 

We pass on to speak of the blood ritual of the Passover, This 

ritual was one of the earliest features of the Passover, and at times 

the most essential. The blood ritual described in scripture was 

actually only carried out on one single occasion, namely, on the night 
5 

of the exodus, although "this thing" is to be observed as "an 
4 

ordinance forever," But there was much later a blood ritual re¬ 
introduced into the Passover (probably about 300 B.C.). "The 
sprinkling oi the blood on the door posts in Egypt mafeks the great 
difference between the Passover oi Egypt and the Passover as a 

permanent institution. The Passover in Egypt is of interest chiefly 

' F> 

because of its witness to a ritual of undetermined antiquity , u 

The victims supplying the blood for the ritual were small cattle. 


1 Sacrifice in one Old Testament, p, 379, 

2 Revelation 13:8 

3 Exodus 12:24 (J)~ also described by P in Exodus 12:7,13. 

4 Exodus 12:14. 

5 Buchanan Gray, Sacrifice in the Old Testament, t>. 356, 









- . . : 

- . . . - : ' J • ' 


. 




. . . - v. - •• • .'• 

. 










. 


























sheep or goats, and were chosen ith great care ("without spot or 
1 

blemish"). A victim, usually a lamb, was taken from each home on 

the 10th» Nisan and was slain at or before sunset on the 14th. Nisan . 

2 

Special care was taken that no bones should be broken, and that it 

should not be sodden with water. Then on Passover night the blood 

was applied to the doorposts of every Hebrew house. Then the victims 

3 

themselves, were eaten within the homes. As to the purpose of the 

bp.ood it was not expiatory originally, but later became definitely 

so. In the beginning it was. rather apotropaie, that is, aimed at 

keeping some power at a distance- probably by the act of entering- 

in to communion with another and greater power such as Yahweh. The 

Hebrew no doubt applied the blood to keep something outside his house 

on Passover night, "The blood ritual of the'early Passover is thus 

4 

an instance of what we may term the "reinforced closed door," Later, 

I 

of course, it became a memorial of the way in which something had 
been kept out on a certain occasion. At all events the blood ritual 
represented an earnest effort to keep the Israelite^ home free from 
the blight of evil spirits, and later was regarded as a means of 

i 

satisfying an offended deity by the sight of blood representing his f 
people’s recognition of their sin and their effort to atone for it. 

This completes our study of sacrifice among the Hebrews of the 
Old Testament.period. We have observed some of the most conspicuous 


1 Exodus 12:5 

2 The penalty for creaking a bone was forty stripes save one- A.6. 
Peake’s Gommentary on the Bible, p. 105, 

3 Striking parallels In this rite are found today among the Syrians 

. and the Arabians (Cf. Gray, "Sacrifice in the Old Testament, p.360) 

4 Buchanan Gray, Sacrifice in the Old Testament p. 36 







. 


' 












, 










- 58 - 


forms of sacrifice, and some of the most elaborately developed 
rituals; ana have, at tiie same time, noted some of the leading 
motives, often intermingled, .vhich prompted them. Feelings of fear, 
dependence, kinship, penitence, and obligation, all played their 
respective parts in defining the significance of various sacrifices. 

We noted how there gradually emerged, due largely to the leadership 
of the 8th. century prophets, a moral and ethical content in the 
sacrificial system. And again we saw how, with the development of 
the sense of sin growing out of the (developing realization of God’s j 
moral demands upon his people, sacrifice became increasingly pro- 

I 

pitiatory, expiatory, and to some extent substitutionary. This more i 

' I 

profound aspect of sacrifice reached its most notable expression in 


the rites of the Day of Atonement and of the Passover. 


It now becomes our purpose to conclude this paper by A consider¬ 
ation of the sacrificial death of Jesus Christ as representing the 


very highest interpretation of the significance of sacrifice as a 
means of establishing paooer relations between man and God. We are 
not concerned here with Jesus’ own attitude toward sacrifice, nor 
are we interested in the problem of the sources or authorship of the 
passages we shall refer to. Our sole interest in this closing chapter 
will be to discover by reference to the gospels and epistles as they 
stand, just how the death of Jesus Christ was conceived by the New 
Testament writers as being the fulfilment of the sacrificial system 
whose development had been so vitally related to the history of 
Jesus’ generic ancestors. 












. 












. 






- 59 - 


CHAPTER 5 

THE SACRIFICIAL DEATH OP JESUS CHRIST 

Our study thus far of the development of the idea of sacrifice 

has revealed the fact that running through all the varied ^ ch; nging 

forms of sacrifice have been a comuaritively few basic beliefs and 

motives. It is thereforequite reasonable for us to examine the 

sacrificial death of Jesus Christ with the expectation of discovering 

in the New Testament records concerning it definite reflections of 

the views attaching to the sacrificial systems of the Old Testament 

period, and even of periods still more remotely past. And we quickly 

discover that our expectations are well founded. In all of the major 

writings of the New Testament we find that the death of Jesus is 

represented in terms 'that distinctly echo the Old Testament concepts 

of sacrifice in this relations to man*s desire for the favour, 

forgiveness, and acceptance of Goa. 

The synoptic gospels all report the last supper which Jesus 

and his disciples had together before cheMaster's arrest in the 

Garden of Gethsemane. Whetner the Last Supper synchronized with 

the Passover does not have any bearing upon our purpose here. We 

know that very early in the history of the Christian church the 

Eucharist or Sacrament became modelled after the Jewish Passover. 

The language used by tne gospel writers in reporting the events 

■ 

connected with the Last Supper indicates in a striking way ho?/ the 
aeath of Jesus was interpreted in the light of the current ideas 
relating to tne Passover ritual. "And as they were eating, Jesus 




























- 60 - 


took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the 

disciples, and said, "take, eat; this is my body.” And he took 

the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, "Drink ye 

all of it; ior this is my blood of the new testament, which is 

1 

shed for many, for the remission of sins." These words nark back 

to trie Jewish Passover where, in the post-exilic days in particular, 

the blood was regarded as propitiatory in character, and the broken 

body of the Paschal lamb was eaten as a token of communion with 
2 

Yahweh. This parallelism is heightened by such words as these, 

"Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except 

ye eat the flesh of thee Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have 
3 

no life in you."; "For if the blood of bulls and of goats, ....how 

much more shall the blood of Christ, ....purge your conscience ...for 

4 

without shedding of blood is no remission;" "Behold the Iamb of God, 

5 

which taketh away the sin of the world." 

In these references, and in others too numerous to mention, we 
observe how the death of Jesus in relation to human sin and the 
general spiritual well-being of mankind was regarded by first century 
writers in the general terms of the Hebrew Passover feast- especially 
in terms of the propitiatory and expiatory significance attached to 
the Passover in the post-exilic period. Throughout the passages 
quoted we note the prevalence of the idea of .’blood’ as vitally 
bearing upon the remission of sin. We recall that the shedding of 
blood played a consistently important p«ort in thG Old Testament 


1 Matthew 26:26-28; 2 Supra 53xf.; 3 John 6:53 

4 Hebrews 9:13-14,22; (Cf. also IPeter 1:19, ICor. 5:7). 

5 John 1:29, 











- 61 - 


in all sacrifices that had as their primary object the removal of 
the carrier of sin between disobedient men and a just and righteous 
God. 

In the Epistle to the Hebrews we find a vivid carry-over of the 

spirit of the Day of Atonement in the fact that the writer of the 

epistle represents Jesus as the great high priest- "Called of God 

1 

an high priest after the order of Melchisedec," "But this man, 

because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood.... to 

Z 

make intercession for them." It will be recalled from our previous 

3 

consideration of the Day of Atonement rites that the high priest 

played a conspicuous part. Certain of the more fundamental services 

of the day could be done only by the high priest. So the high 

priestly office became an indispensable factor in the securing of 

the atonement for sin that was so earnestly sought. Similarly, 

the writer of Hebrews represents Jesus Christ, the "high priest 

4 

after the order of Melchisedec’,’ as man’s one and only intercessor 
with God; and as the One who has made once and for all that sacrifice 
for human sin which is acceptable before God- even the sacrifice 
of His own most precious life, "He needeth not daily ...to offer 

5 

up sacrifice ...for this he did once, when he offered up himself.” 

There is no more impressive parallel between the more exalted 
ideas of sacrifice in the Old Testament and the suffering and death 
of Christ than in the representation of Christ, by several of the 
New Testament writers in terms of the "Suffering Servant" depicted in 


1 Hebrews 7:17; 
4 Hebrews 7:17; 


2 Hebrews 7:24; 
5 Hebrews 7: z7 ; 


5 Supra p. 57 











“ f - ; 




■ 

5 








- 62 - 


1 

Isaiah 55. We cite a few typical passages: "Who bore our sins in 

2 

his own body on one tree ....by whose stripes we are healed "; 

"He was lead as a sheep to the slaughter ...so opened he not his 
5 4 

mouth"; "He was in all points tempted like as we are "So 

5 

Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many." 

In Deutero-Isaiah’s exalted concept of the Suffering Servant, 

Israel by her bondage and suffering would win first the sympathy, 

then the respect and honor of the pagan nations surrounding her. 

Gradually these nations woula turn to Israel f s God and by devotion 

to him would escape the suffering and punishment which disregard of 

6 

Him, the one true God, must always involve. As Israel thus vicar- 

* 

iously bore the sins of the nations so Jesus was regarded by many 
of the New Testament v/riters as bearing the sins of the whole world. 


By His suffering men would be brought to see the heinousness of sin, 

the suffering and death which are its inevitable wages, and the divine 

love that made such a uremejdous and costly effort to save mankind 

from its destruction. This realization would lead men to repentenee 

and to the adoption for their lives of th purposes of Him who 
7 

"died for them". This conception forms the heart of the Moral 

Influence and Substitutionary theories of the atonement. 

To Paul the Apostle the suffering' and death of Christ "for 

the sins of the world" satisfied the demands of a right .cud God 

by paying in full, in 'Germs of his own suffering d.nJ death, the 
8 

1 price’ of man’s redemption, the penalty which man’s sin rightly 

deserved. As a consequence m an, by acce ting the free salvation 

1 In the A.V. this ch- ter is headed, "Christ’s Free Redemption." 

2 IPeter 2:24 (cf. Is.55:5); 3 Acts 8:32 (cf.Is.55:7); 

4 Heb,4:15 (cf.Is, 53:3); 5 Heb. 9:28 (cf. Is. 53:4); 

6: (See footnote 1, p.65;) 7 2 Cor, 5:15; 8 ^ Cor. 6:20, 











- 63 - 


ofi'ered through Christ need not bear the penalty of his own sin, 
inasmuch as it has been bonf already, and God is morally bound to 
recognize the sufficiency of Christ*s redemptive work for all who 
seek reconciliation in His name. 

A few representative passages from Paul's writings will illustrate 
the clear-cut way in which this "Satisfaction" or "Ransom Theory" of 
the atonement appears in his theology. "But Go# commendeth his love 

it 

....justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him." 

"In whom we have redemption through his blood...." "That he might 

reconcile both unto God in one bogy by the cross, having slain the 
3 

enmity thereby." "Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that 
I ’ 4 

was against us, .. and took it out of the ’way, nailing it to nis cross'.' 

Centuries after Paul's letters were written his view of the 

relation of the death of Christ to human sin became the authoritative 

doctrine of the Roman Catholic Chtmch, largely through the work of 

Anselm,Hruly great church scholar of the 11th.Century, in his great 

book, "Cur Deus Home." Out of the feudal v/orld in which Anselm lived 

he developed a theology based upon the sovereignty of God. His theory 

of the atonement proceeds along the lines of faultless logic. Man 

has sinned; by his sin he. has not only offended the justice of God, 

but has also violated his sovereign dignity: as a consequence God is 

angry with the sinner and must be satisfied and compensated; such 

laSome would consider the suffering in Babylon as not being the 
consequences of sin, and hence would consider the idea of vicarious 
suffering attached to Isaiah 53 as a later interpretation. Common 
usage, however would seem to warrant the use of the passage which we 
have made. 

lb Romans 5:8-10; 2 Ephesians 1:7; 3 Ephesians 2:16 

4 Colossians 2:13-14 











satisfaction can only be made by one who will make full payment for 
tjhe sin, and at the same time, by the ’•merit" of his person, satisfy 
the offended dignity oi God. The only one fitted to do all this was 
Christ, the divine and sinless Son of God. By his death he satisfied 
the claims of justice for sin, and by the quality of his person he 
satisfied the offended dignity of God. Only he could atone adequate! 
for human sin, and only by an acceptance of his ’finished work’ 
could sinful^ men be restored to the favour of God. 

In the Protestant Church Luther and Calvin wrought geolously 
to make the "Satisfaction Theory" of Anselm the official tfiew of 
Protestantism. The measure of their success is seen in the fact 
that their position is still influential in many ultra-conservative 
circles. 

It should be said thau there is a measure of aruth in the 
Ransom or Satisfaction Theory- truth far more profound and far more 
worthy of the character of the god revealed by Jesus Christ than 
that represented by the thorough-going theology of Anselm. There is 
something in .the nature of God himself which must be satisfied before 
rfe and one who has wilfully sinned against him can approach a 
relations hip of harmony and accord. A clue to this truth is seen 
in-the fact that even an earthly father cannot have the same feeling 
toward a wilful/ and rebellious child as he has toward one w r ho is 
devoted and obedient; neither can he share hislife and his ideals 
so fully with the one as with 'the other. A change must take place 
in the attitude of the self-estranged child before the true father- 
son relationship can oe restored. This change is effected by 
repentence and surrender. These new attitudes elicit the Father’s 










. 














- 65 - 


forgiveness, and reconciliation is made possible, yes, inevitable. 

Ano this reconciliation is accomplished without any compromise of 

the Father f s moral rectitude, and without the son being deprived 

of that transformation of mind and heart which he so vitally needed 

in order b realize life in its highest terms. The sacrificial death 

of Jesus Christ plays a vital part in this more adequate view of 

the process by which God and. sinners are reconciled. Christ f s death 

reveals to men the fact that though they may be sinners, and in that 

sense under the wrath of God, that still God’s heart of love goes out 

for them even unto death. This evidence of the divine love, and of 

the Father’s suffering for the sin of his children, r tends to break 

( 

down any opposition to One whose desire for the recovery of his 

estranged ehildren is so poignantly obvious. Christ, therefor^, 

performed the mission which made an adequate salvation possible 

"without God on his part surrendering his adherence to the principle 

of moral rectitude, his loyalty to holiness, his hatred of sin. God 

1 

was revealed in Christ as just and justifies at the' same time.” 

We have endeavoured in this chapter thus far to show ho\ the 
suffering and death of Jesus Christ was regarded by the New Testament 
writers, and by generations of their interpreters, in terms of the 
Old Testament concepts of sacrifice. In the light of this fact 
the death of Christ becomes the culmination of the development of 
the idea of sacrifice insofar as the scriptural records go. 

We snail, at this point, outline our own view of the present-day 
significance of the death of Jesus Christ in relation to the moral 
and spiritual needs of mankind. 

1 Dr. AsS. Tuttle, notes on Christian Theology, 




































■ 










■ 





- 66 - 


The historic views of the relation of the death of Christ to the 
life of men seem at their face value inadequate. They are too art¬ 
ificial and arbitrary. There is too much of the ancient bargaining 
spirit surviving in them. There is too much that resembles the pro¬ 
pitiatory motives of primitive sacrifice when men undertook, by the 
fulfilment of certain stipulated conditions, to compel the deity to 
assume an attitude of favor toward: them. Many of the traditional views 
of the Atonement tend to make moral and ethical living a secondary 
concern in the matter of man’s relation to God, inasmuch as ’salvation' 
is thought to rest upon the acceptance of a cut-and-dried formula, 
the resigned acceptance (in blind faith, if necessary) of a certain 
set of conditions, rather than upon the progressive attainment of a 
quality of life built around the high ideals, attitudes, and principles 
of conduct for which Christ died, and which His life so splendidly in¬ 
carnated, These criticisms of the traditional views of the atoning 
work of Christ must, however, be made only while keeping in mind the 

elemental truths which the various theories of the atonement sought to 

1 

incorporate and perpetuate. Our observations above as to the spirit¬ 
ual truth underlying the Satisfaction Theory of Anselm is but typical 
of the more adequate conceptions which are at least suggested in most 
of the time-honored views of the Atonement. 

To my thought one is impelled to see in the death of Jesus God’s 
hatred of sin. His yearning for the sinner's emancipation from all 

that constricts and befouls life, and His suffering with® the sinner 

2 

by "sympathetic identification". It reveals the cosmic fact that 

the effect of an individual’s sin is not confined to himself, but falls 
with crushing weight u.jcn the heart of the Father, By his _ 

1 Supra 64 ~ 65. k A phrase coined by Dr, Marcus Dods, 












- 67 - 


love and sympathy for his children God'V sorrows for their sin and 

1 

shares the punishment which it involves. Thus in very truth Christ 

2 

did "bear in his own body our sins upon the tree." It was wounded 

love that suffered on Calvary^ not a sacrificial lamb whose blond 

a-ppeased divine wrath and atoned for the sins which had angered God. 

"God is the great sin-bearer. He bears sin as a hater of sin and a 
5 

lover of men." 

The attituae of the Father heart towards sin (not vindictively 

toward the sinner) thus tends to turn men against sin and to awaken 

within them a desire for reconciliation. This attitude is clearly 

described in the parable of the Prodigal Son, "And when he came to 

himself ....he said, "I nil arise and go to my father, and will say 

unto him. Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, 

and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy. 

4 

hired servants." The penitent son was joyfully reinstated by the 
father whose happiness knew no bounds as he observed the evidence 
of the complete change of heart which had taken place in his son. 


The father f s first desire was not for restitution to himself for an 

5 

injury suffered, but xor the recovery of the son that was lost. 

6 

Belief in Christ as the "author and finisher of our faith" 
does not mean to me that we are to regard Him as prisoners whose 
only hope of release lies in His ability to-furnish the necessary 


ransom price. Ratner such belief implies an acceptance of His w«.y 
of life as our way of life; the making of His will supremely ours; 


1 For us, without the need of any discussion here, Christ is synonomouj 

2 IPeper 2:24; 3 Dr. A. S. Tut ole, notes on Christian Theology. 

4 Luke 15S17-19 6 , H eb. 18:2 . , su ,, „ ;ts the ioy 

5 The joyous feast neid for 'Ghe returning prodigal sug 0 e..is one juy 

which Marked many primitive sacrificial feasts - joy occasioned by 

the feeling that the sacrifice had restored them to the rocs * * 4 5 * 7 xc.vor, ^ 






















, 




; @f - li lx %*& 


■ 








- 68 - 


the compl ;te surrender in consecration of life to His lofty purposes. 
A; ' saving belief in Christ 4, means for me an acknowledgement of the 
nobility of Jesus' character, .the authority of his words, the beauty 
of his spirit, the reality ox' his love, and',,following such an 
acknowledgement, the complete abandonment of life to the enterprise 
of realizing these things in one's own life. Salvation, so conceived., 1 
is not a completed prize placed in our hands by a bargaining or an 
indulgent God, it is rather a progressively attained quality and 
measure of life - the very life of Jesus• which we achieve as He 
ahMeved it by service, sacrifice, courage, unselfishness, and 
implicit obedience to the will of the Father. 

I repeat that the dynamic motives which send the more thoughtful 

! 

of men upon the quest of 'salvation' are to be found in the matchless , 
personality of Christ which men may approximate with the aid of the 
divine Spirit; and in the suffering, yearing love of the Father God 
revealed in the Cross of Calvary, And so the sacrifice of the ■ 

"lamb of God", the "first-born of many brethren," has indeed served 
through nineteen centuries of time to mediate the blessings of God 
to man, to open for mankind the way of richest communion and fellow¬ 
ship with the Father. But the means by which this gracious mission 
has been accomplished is not to be explained in terms of the crudely 
materialistic legalism and commercialism which played so large a part 
in the sacrificial system of the Hebrew people during pre-Christian 
centuries and in the theology of one Christian Church through a large 
part of the past nineteen centuries. It must rather be explained in 

terms of that more adequate view of the character of God and of the 


























- 






















































- 69 - 


nature of the incarnation and death of Jesus Christ which the best 

of scientific and philosophical thought demands and can provide. 

In conclusion we should observe that not only do the ancient 

ideas of propitiation and expiation as motives for sacrifice find 

a ricn fulfilment in the sacrificial death of Jesus Christ for human 

sin, but likewise do the time-honored motives of 'gift* and ’commun- 

1 

ion l Christ was God’s supreme gift to men, and n turn the human 
Jesus, as the representative man, was humanitjt&JS surpassing gift 
to God. Hunan salvation, furthermore, requires the unreserved gift 
of the individual^ life in consecration and service to God. The 

apostle Paul speaks of this human contribution to the process of 

. 

salvation in well-known words, "I beseech you therefore, brethren, 

by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice 

2 

holy, acceptable unto God, : hich is your reasonable service," 

Then again, the idea of communion, which lay behind the ancient 

sacrificial meals, reaches its splendid spiritual climax in the 

* 5 

Christian ordinance of Communion. In this sacrament of thanksgiving 

and commemoration the believer partakes not of the literal flesh and 

4 

blood of Christ, "the lamb slain from the foundation of the world" , 

but by meditation and communion of spirit he comes into a mystical 

union with Him whereby the divine life in very truth becomes his 

life so that with the apostle he can say, "I no longer live, but 

5 

Christ liveth in me." In this sacrament of the Lord’s Supper there 
is established not only fellowship and communion between God and man, 


1 Cf‘. John 3:16; 2 Romans 12:1; 3 Also known as Lord’s Supper. 

4 Rev. 5:12; 5 Galatians 2:20. 


















- 70 - 


but a richer fellowship is made possible among the human pariaQip&dts 
in the common meal. Thus the social and religious values of the 
earlier communion meal are not only conserved but immeasureably 
heightened in the Christian Communion. 

The process of development in conceptions of moral and spiritual 
truth is al ays from the natural to the spiritual. Ideas vaguely' 
forshaaowed in .the practices of early times appear in clear-cut 
relief in the fuller light of later revelation. We have observed 
the working of this process very clearly, if very sketchily, in 
this paper. We marvel at the way mankind has moved from 'precedent 
to precedent', ever drawing nearer to che heart of truth. We stand 
in awe and reverence before a God who works through the unending 
processes of time toward the perfect truth wnife has eternity in its 
heart. 

• We cannot help but feel that the divine processes of revelation 
and evolution have not run their full course but will continue their 
ministry of enlarging and enriching the life of mankind through all 
time to come. 


















ft 









