#3 



0 1620 3448182 8 



&Z97V?- 







































HOLL1NGER 
pH 8.5 

MILL RUN F3-1543 









McGookin, J.Y. 


The children 1 s story. 1924 








UNIVERSITY OE AIBERTA 


Session 1923-24. 


THE CHIIDREU T S STORY , 

A Study of Story Preferences With a View to 

4 

Better UnderstandingsThe Mental 
life Of Children. 


Thesis Submitted in part for the Degree of Bachelor of Education. 


J.Y. HcQoohin 













"TV\ev£ 

n 


BIB BIOGRAPHY 


Uhl: 
Miller: 
Barry: 
Jones: 

Norsworthy 
Parkhurst: 

Rasmussen: 

Brill: 


Elementary School Course in Reading. 

The New Psychology and the Teacher. 

/ 

1 Century of Childrens Boohs. 

Some Problems of Adolescence, - / 

British Journal of Psychology. ^ 

and Uhitley:Psychology of Childhood. 

The Evolution of Mastery - The International 
Journal of Ethics, July 1920. 

Child Psychology. 

Psychanalysis: Its Theory and Application 
(Chapter on Eairy Tales.) 


I 




: 


■ 







Preface 


Or. Stanley Hall has said: "let me tell the stories 
and I care not who writes the text hooks". The eminent psychologist, 
however, continued writing text hooks and like most psychological 
writers largely ignored the value which might accrue to psychology, 
and especially to educational psychology, from a study of the story 
preferences of the child. Prom the psychological point of view 
little has been written on the story. Story tellers have, for 
the most part, been left to their own resources. largely by a 
process of trial and error they have discovered that certain 
stories are adapted for relating to the young while others are not. 
The credit due to them is not small. But scarcely any effort has 
been made to get, through a study of the child f s story preferences, 
an insight into his mental life. It is true that Madame Montessori 
has devoted some space to a discussion of the story, and her 
criticism of certain types of stories has been very destructive. 

She strongly denounces the principle of telling to children stories 
which do not have what she considers a foundation in reality. Ho 
fault can be found with this provided the conclusions reached can 
be justified on psychological grounds. But whether Montessori’s 
discussion of the story is in any way thorough from a psychological 
point of view is open to serious question. Representatives of 
the Freudian school have suggested an approach to the problem and 
"Wish Fulfilment and Symbolism in Fairy Tales" by Ricklin represents 
an attempt to apply to the fairy story certain concepts of the 
Freudian psychology. But the peculiar significance which the 
Freudians attribute to sex detracts from the value of their contri- 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/mcgookin1924 


(2) 


buttons from the point of view of students, who, while recognizing 
the importance of sex as a dynamic factor, refuse to accept an 
hypothesis which makes sex impulse the controlling force in mental 
life. The survey which in 1915-1919 was made by the University of 
Wisconsin with a view to obtaining data regarding the school 
reading course, the results of which are published under the title 
"Scientific Determination of the Content of the Elementary School 
Course in Reading", is referred to at considerable length in this 
discussion. It represents the best, in fact the only, attempt 
yet made to determine scientifically the reading material most 
suitable for children in the different grades. The object was, of 
course, purely to .collect data. No effort was made to enunciate, 
from the facts obtained, any psychological principles. Therefore, 
while many writers are, like G. Stanley Hall, cognisant of the 
importance of the subject and while some psychological literature 
can be found which bears indirectly on the problem of the story, 
scarcely any attempts have been made to show what the story 
preferences of the child actually tell us about his mental life. 

Partly on account of this scantiness of material 
considerable difficulty has been experienced in treating the 
subject. In the following pages a number of questions have been 
raised. To some of these answers have been attempted. In these 
answers the writer has been desirous of avoiding dogmatism. The 
whole question is too disputable to warrant us clinging tenaciously 
to any particular theory. 

If the discussion seems very inadequate it should be 
remembered that the story preferences of the child may be compared 
to Tennyson’s "Flower in the Crannied Wall". If we thoroughly 








( 3 ) 


understood them we would possess the key which opens at least 
one gate leading to a very important field of knowledge. It is 
true we would not know "what God and man is". We might not 
know all about even the mental life of the child, hut we would 
hold the clue to a very interesting phase of it. 








( 4 ) 


Throughout this discussion it should be borne in mind 
that our interest in the question is primarily psychological. 

This may be disappointing from the standpoint of those who are 
repeatedly asking for the "practical’ 1 and the "applied". Dr. 

Ernest Jones in an address to the British Psychological Society 
recently said: "the special danger besetting all forms of applied 
science is tnat too much emphasis is apt to be placed on the 
"applied" and too little on the "science"....."The impulse to do 
makes us impatient of the desire to know". Words such as "practical" 
and "applied" are frequently used in quarters where little thought 
is given as to what is to be practised or applied. In even a 
"practical" age like this it is advisable to recognise that for any 
study a proper basis is essential. At the same time, while 
primarily our interest is psychological, ultimately it is educational. 
But the value of psychology for education is becoming more and 
more apparent. If education has floundered, as it often has 
done in the past, one reason has been lack of a proper scientific 
basis. Education is an art. But if it is to adequately function 
as such it must be based on some science. Modern education 
recognises the necessity of finding for itself a scientific basis 
in psychology. 

The statement that our aim is psychological also implies 
that it is psychological rather than ethical. As psychology is 
concerned with how people do_ think and act and not with how they 
ought to think and act so we are ooncerned with the stories which 
children do_ prefer, not with those we would like them to prefer. It 
is disconcerting if children repeatedly ask to have retold stories 


that "have no moral" 














: ' 


. ■ 
























































( 5 ) 


and impiously reject those on which the adult places a high value. 

But the concern of the psychologist is with the stories which 

actually do appeal to the child mind. As a psychologist he has 

no alternative hut to faithfully keep to the task of discovering 
though 

what is even/when it is discovered, it proves to he the antithesis 
of what he and his fellows wished to he . 

It is hardly necessary to point out the distinction 
between the aim Just stated and that of the average hook on the 
story. Books with titles such as "Stories and Story Telling"; 

"How to Tell Stories to Children", etc. usually aim to give 
"practical suggestions”. It is obvious, however, that if suggestions 
are to he of value they must he based on facts and that such facts 
must he scientifically collected, correlated and interpreted. 

Also, in most discussions on the story th© writer has "an axe to 
grind". He aims to assist the child to acquire certain moral 
and religious concepts. That the aim is a laudable on© cannot he 
denied. But any structure of moral training is a house built on 
sand unless it rests on a solid psychological foundation, in other 
words, unless it is based on the nature of th© child. 

Aim and Method . 

Our approach to the problem then should he scientific. 

This means that to a certain extent the inductive method must 
he used. But to he more specific regarding method we may say that 
it should he determined by our aim. Our aim is to find out what 
can he learned from the story preferences of the child as to the 
nature of the child's mental life. It is therefore necessary 
to ascertain in so far as is practicable from the data available 
what types of story children actually do prefer. The next step 







( 6 ) 


must be to examine some of these stories with a view to discovering 
what elements in them account for their being preferred. But 
before we do this it is advisable to have some concept as to 
the nature of the child. As has been seen, our discussion 
must deal with two things, viz. the child and the story. It 
is true that our plan is to go to the story to find out what 
light it can throw on the child*s mental life. At the same 
time, especially as our interest in the problem is psychological, 
it will facilitate our study if we note certain facts,which modern 
psychology accepts as basic, and their bearing on the problem of 
the child. Therefore, we shall first attempt to find a back- 
grbund for our study in accepted psychological premises and shall 
note certain things which may be inferred from these premises 
concerning the child and some questions which arise therefrom. 
Having done this we must next turn to the story to find out 
if there is anything in it which might help to answer some of 
these questions. In discussing it we shall ask in the first 
place what are the story preferences of children and in the second 
place what are the reasons for these preferences. 

Our discussion will, therefore, take the following form: 

I. Psychological premises and their bearings on the problem of 
the mental life of children. 

II. Determination of the story preferences of children with 
a view to discovering what insight they give into the child’s 
mental life. 

III. Determining factors or the elements in particular stories 
which may account for their being favoured and, therefore, what 

the child’s preferences for certain stories may indicate regarding 
his intellectual development. 




Psychological Premises 


limitations of Psychology. 

While recognising, as we have done, that in a discussion 
of this nature the psychological interest must be the primary one 
we must also recognise that psychology has at present certain very 
marked limitations. In fact these limitations are in part the 
justification for such a discussion as this. In the first place 
psychology as a science is comparatively new. It has not yet 
arrived at the stage where it can accept without farther examination 
its own fundamental categories. The contrast with the other 
sciences is obvious. Physics, chemistry, etc. no longer find it 
necessary to examine the validity of their own hypotheses. This 
does not mean that their hypotheses are universally accepted. 

It does mean however that they are accepted as a working basis 
by those sciences themselves. But even psychologists are at 
present subjecting to rigorous criticism things which may be 
regarded, or which formerly were regarded, as fundamental to 
their own science. Any current psychological journal provides 
ample evidence of this. The theory of instinct, for example, on 
which so much psychology has been based, has of late been ruthlessly 
attacked. 

In the second place psychology even as it has become a 
science has experienced difficulty in shaking itself free from 
a tendency to indulge in metaphysical speculations. To a certain 
extent metaphysics has been an "old man of the sea" clinging to 
psychology. 

In the last place, the subject matter of psychology has 
been elusive and complex. The subject matter of psychology is 
said to be mental processes. The very name suggests something 










( 8 ) 


more intangible than the subject matter of the other sciences. 

The physiologist and the anatomist have as their subject matter 
the body. But the subject matter of the psychologist is not 
something which lends itself to being put on the dissecting table 
in any such literal way. Also, the mental processes which the 
psychologist aims to study are those of the human organism. That 
organism he encounters usually in our developed civilisation. 
Psychology therefore finds that its subject matter is exceedingly 
intricate and complex. 

Modem Psychology Objective and Genetic. 

These and other limitations are forcing psychology to 
go "down to bed rock”. If some of its hypotheses are challenged 
it must build on those which are accepted at least within the 
ranks of its own workers. If its subject matter has been expressed 
in terms which seem too subjective, vague, and abstract it must 
seek to express it more objectively, definitely, and concretely. 

If the complexity of the developed human organism renders 

difficult a study of that organism it must go back to more simple 
organisms. 

Regarding psychology then we may say: (1) It seeks to 
be an objective science by studying mental processes as they are 
manifested in the objective facts of behaviour. (2) It approaches 
its problems genetically and in order to understand the behaviour-^^*- 
of A the behaviour of all organisms down to even the simplest. 

Therefore, in the behaviour of organisms, i.e. in their reactions 
to their environment psychology finds a shfe foundation on which 
to build. 







' ■ ■ : ■ ■ ■ 

‘ 

. . . ■ 

' 



(9) 


The Organism and its Behaviour. 

With regard to the relations Between the organism and 
its environment we are not making any dangerous assumptions if 
we suggest that the following facts are accepted by modern 
psychologists: 

(1) In its reactions to its environment the organism gives 
evidence of certain needs. In the lower forms of life those needs 
are very simple. In the higher animals, not including man, 
hunger, thirst and sex are perhaps the sol® needs. But man’s 
needs are much more varied and compled. Even among what are 
regarded as the lower types of civilisation w@ find needs which 
are bewildering in their variety and complexity. The needs of 
"civilised man" seem to have "neither length, breadth, depth, nor 
height." Besides sharing with the other animals the baser needs 
of hunger, thirst, and sex modern civilised man in his needs 
includes philosophy, science, literature, art, and religion. To 
the physical needs of the human organism there is added, therefor®, 
a multitude of needs which may be called aesthetic. The highest 
ends which the human organism desires may be expressed in the 
words of St. Paul: "whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are 
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report." 

(2) The organism is dependent on the environment for the 
supply of its needs. Hunger and thirst can be gratified only 
when the physical world yields food and water. The gratification 
of sex is conditioned by the presence of an individual of the same 
species but of a different sex. Even the human organism in 
seeding the gratification of those higher needs which have just 
































































































. 




( 10 ) 


been mentioned cannot be indifferent to its environment. It suits 
our purpose to note that frequently the environment seems out of 
sympathy with the organism and disregards some of its needs. In 
countless numbers the more helpless organisms are ruthlessly 
crushed. One animal lives by preying on the other, nature is 
"red in tooth and claw", Man, the highest of the organisms often 
finds himself in sin alien world", The causal order, the world of 
nature # not infrequently seems to disregard his needs. Even the 
social order, the world of human beings, the individual organism 
often feels is out of sympathy with him. 

(3) In view of the existence of these needs and in view 
of its dependence on the environment for their satisfaction the 
organism is called upon to put forth some measure of activity. 

Dr. Wm. McDougall says that a characteristic of all organisms is 
a persistent striving toward some end. It must be understood 
that among the lowest forms of life the striving is almost 
imperceptible. In its earlier stages the organism seems, for 
the most part, to be passive. Doubtless there was a time when 
life existed without possessing even a sense of touch. But from 
what a writer in the International Journal of Ethics has termed 
"the first stirrings of vitalised matter in the welter of 
primeval slime" \mtil the conquest by modern man of sea and air 
activity in some form is exhibited, 

(4) In reacting to its environment the organism displays 
vaiiotns degrees /’plasticity". This means that it is amenable to 
the effects of its experience. Among the simpler organisms the 
degree of plasticity is small, i.e. these organisms possess to 
only a limited extent power of variation of behaviour. This power 




( 11 ) 


of variation ranges in its expression from what are called tropisms, 
or turnings, on the part of the lowest forms of life to the highly 
modifiable behaviour of well developed adult organisms of the human 
species. The form of plasticity which r esults by experience is called 
intelligence. Such is the form of plasticity which is found in the 
developed human organism. 

Regarding intelligence there is much that is in dispute. 

But there is fairly general agreement that the levels of intelligence 
are:- (1) The perceptual level. (2) The representative level. (3) 

, 1 rj , x / 

The conceptual level. The first mentioned is the lowest of the three. 

It consists in the perceiving of objects through the sense organs - 
the organs of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and touching. The 
second is represented by memory and imagination. It functions by 
means of past experiences instead of present stimulations as does 
perception. Dr. Galkins illustrates this type of intelligence as 
follows: "as a merely perceiving self I am bound to this desk..., 
but as a remembering self I live through once more the exhilarating 
adventures of my past experience, and as a creatively imagining self 
I am hampered neither by "now" nor by "then”. Conceptual intelligence 
includes as Kirkpatrick says what psychology usually terms the "thinking 
processes” such as abstraction, generalisation, conception, judgment, 
and reasoning. Therefore, the plasticity of organisms includes every 
method of reacting from the tropism of e.g. the plant which turns 
toward the sun to the abstract thinking of a cultured human being. 

Between the tropism and intelligence are certain degrees 
of plasticity as the reflex, which is supposed to admit of a little 
men e consciousness than the tropism,and the instinct, which has been 

defined by McDougall as "an inherited or innate psycho-physical 
disposition which determines its possessor to perceive, and to pay 






( 12 ) 

attention to, objects bf a certain class, to experience an 
emotional excitement of a particular quality upon perceiving such 
an object, and to act in regard to it in a particular manner, or, 
at least, to experience an impulse to such action". But the 
chaotic state in which the whole instinct psychology finds itself 
at present renders it difficult, if not impossible, to make positive 
statements regarding instincts or even reflexes. The higher th© 
degree of plasticity which the organism possesses the greater is 
its adaptability, i.e. its power to react to the environment in 
such a way as will tend toward its preservation and development, 
in other words will obtain the satisfaction of its needs. 

Wn&t means the organism uses then in its attempts to 
meet its needs is a measure of the degree of plasticity which it 
possesses, or, if the reactions have reached a conscious and 
deliberate level, is a measure of its intelligence. Different 
organisms having the same needs in order to get those needs 
supplied may react in various ways. Such reactions must afford 
some clue to the relative plasticity or intelligence of the 
organisms in question. The following illustrations may serve to 
make this clearer:- (h)The ostrich which buries its head in the 
sand in an effort to conceal itself from its enemy and the trained 
soldier who in war knows how to take cover to the best advantage 
are both seeking the same end, viz. safety from danger, (b) The 
ants who in a mechanical way make their hills and the modern man 
who in the most scientific manner builds his dwellings are both 
attempting to react to environment so as to satisfy some need. 

(c) Primitive man goes through weird incantations, lacerates his 
body, sacrifices his children in an attempt to gratify a certain 
need while the modern man may seek to obtain the same end by 
















( 13 ) 


appealing to the highest that modern art, literature and religion 
can provide. The possible modes of reacting then are many and from 
them some concept can be formed as to the degree of plasticity of 
the organism. 

However, such are the needs of the organism and such is 
the nature of the environment that the behaviour of the organism, 
however plastic it may be, in fact however intelligent it may be, 
must be along one or more of three lines:- (1) It may seek to 
adjust itself to its environment - to get into harmony with it, 
e.g. it may be passive and depend largely on the environment for 
the supply of its needs or it may actively cooperate with its 
environment and in this connection attempt to better understand 
it in certain aspects. (2) It may struggle against certain 
features in its environment with a view to overcoming them. The 
history of the race is largely a story of the organism struggling 
against certain environmental factors which seemed to be standing 
in the way of its attaining certain ends. (3) It may endeavour 
to escape from its environment or certain things in it. The snail 
which when touched draws in its horns, the hermit who lives in a 
cave, and the person who allows imagination to "carry him away" are 
all endeavouring to escape from something in their environment which 
is disagreeable to them. 

The Child as an Organism. 

Our direct concern is with the human organism and with the 
young of that organism - the child. What can we infer from the 
foregoing as to the nature of the child? What pertains to organisms 
in general naturally pertains to the child; i.e. (1) He has needs 
for the supply of which he must depend on his environment - on either 












( 14 ) 


the physical world or on the social milieu or on both. (2) In 
seeking to obtain satisfaction for those needs he must react to his 
environment by attempting to either adjust himself to it, struggle 
against it, or withdraw from it. (3) The manner in which he reacts 
to the environment with a view to the satisfying of need is an 
indication of the degree of plasticity which he possesses - whether 
that plasticity is sufficiently modifiable to justify us in consider- 
ingit intelligent and,if so,to what level of intelligence it belongs. 

The problem which arises may, therefore, be expressed in 
the following questions(1) Prom the child S s behaviour, or reactions 
to environment, what do we know about his needs? (2) If the child 
must react to his environment in some of three ways what can we 
say about his manner of reacting? What means does he use to (a) 

(Jet into harmony with his environment, (b) Gain the mastery over it, 
(c) Withdraw from it? (3) Of what degree of plasticity in the 
child do his reactions give evidence? Gan we know when as a human 
organism his reactions may be deemed deserving of being called 
intelligent? If certain reactions do indicate intelligence is the 
level perceptual, representative, or conceptual? 

II Determination of Story Preferences . 

It is/questions such as the above that we look for a study 
of the story preferences of the child to help us to answer. To 
state our questions in such a way as will apply more specifically to 
the problem of the story we may ask: (1) What may be learned from 
the story preferences of the child regarding his needs and his manner 
of reacting with a view to meeting those needs? (2) If the story 
preferences of the child indicate that he reacts in a certain way 
in order to gratify certain needs what do these reactions tell us 




about the child’s plasticity of behaviour or intelligence. 

With a view to answering these questions we must first 
attempt to find out what are the stories or types of stories which 
children prefer. It is popularly recognised that certain stories 
do appeal to children. The average parent or teacher will 
unhesitatingly say that the juvenile mind is fascinated by such 
stories as Goldilocks and the Three Bears, little Red Riding Hood, 
Jack the Giant Killer, The Ugly Buckling, the Three little Pigs, 
Knights of the Round Table, Robinson Crusoe, Bavid and Goliath, 
etc. The number of books issued containing these stories and 
others of their type testify to their popularity. The fact that 
library story tellers make such free use of certain stories in 
,T The Childrens 1 Hour 11 indicates that these particular stories are 
found to meet a need on the part of the children. These judgments 
are by no means to be despised as they are often the result of 
many years experience. Yet their basis is largely, if not wholly 
impressionistic. For this reason they do not possess the relia¬ 
bility of data which,hsve been scientifically collected. Is it 
possible to state on a basis other than the impressionistic one 
what are the story preferences of the child? 

Wisconsin Survey . Attention may be drawn to an investigation 
recently carried out by the University of Wisconsin sra& which is 

described by Professor Uhl in Elementary School Course in 

j/ 

Reading. This investigation was undertaken with a view to 
discovering the most suitable reading matter for use in schools. 
Part of the enquiry and some of the results obtained do not concern 
us. But certain things in the method, the questions asked, and 
the results we should note. Our interest is in the method taken 






( 16 ) 


to secure suitable reading selections and the results. 

Method: The first questionnaire was sent out in September, 1915. 

It contained such queries as "Name two selections which pupils 
ash to re-read most". "Name two selections which the pupils discuss 
enthusiastically". Replies were received from 2,253 teachers 
from 80 cities located in 25 States and the District of Columbia. 

In February 1917, a second questionnaire was sent out. In this 
titles of selections were arranged in lists of about fifty for 
each of the Aight grades. A descriptive list of desirable and 
undesirable terms used in the responses to questionnaire I was 
included. The second questionnaire contained queries such as "Ranh 
by numbering from one to fifteen in the order of merit selections 
which you regard as being the best ones for use in your grades". 

It was in 1918 and 1919 that the third effort to secure 
data was made by presenting selections directly to pupils. 
Questionnaires were sent to four different schools each of which 
was attended bgr pupils of different social status. School A was 
attended by pupils of the middle class; School B by pupils haring 
access to home libraries and whose parents had ample financial 
means; School C by pupils of the poorer classes with a per centage 
of foreigners and negroes; School D was the University of Chicago 
Elementary School. These facts are mentioned to show that the 
selections were presented to a fdirly varied assortment of pupils. 
They were presented to 529 pupils in grades 3 to 8 inclusive. 

The pupils were told to state on paper, after reading the selections 
whether they liked them. 

Results: 


As to the results obtained, under the heading: "Superior 






t 














Selections for all Grades” Professor Uhl gives a list of selections 
judged as superior by teachers, or pupils, or both. The standard 
set up admitted only selections favoured by 90 per cent or more 
of the teachers and favoured or comprehended by 80 per cent or 
more of the pupils. The number of selections judged superior 
was about 250. These are distributed among the eight grades 
as follows:- Grade 1. 41; Grade II, 37; Grade III, 29; Grade IV, 

29; Grade V, 21; Grade YI, 18; Grade YII, 26; Grade YIII, 35. 

These figures will suggest that there is considerable 
overlapping, i.e. that certain selections are judged superior 
for more than one grade. The "common” selections, or selections 
favoured by two or more grades are numerically as follows:- 


9 

selections 

are 

c ommon 

to 

Grades 

I and 

II. 

1 

ti 

is 

IT 

If 

ii 

I ” 


III. 

2 

rt 

are 

If 

II 

ii 

II " 


III. 

5 

If 

ti 

II 

II 

IT 

III” 

IY. 

3 

it 

it 

II 

II 

IT 

III 

ii 

Y. 

3 

if 

ii 

II 

II 

II 

IY 

if 

Y. 

5 

selection 

is 

II 

II 

II 

IY 

IT 

YI. 

6 

selections 

are 

II 

II 

IT 

Y 

If 

YI. 

1 

selection 

is 

II 

If 

If 

Y 

It 

VII. 

4 

selections 

are 

II 

If 

If 

YI 

If 

YII. 

2 

selections 

are 

II 

If 

IT 

VI 

If 

YIII 

15 

n 

IT 

II 

n 

If 

YII 

If 

YIII 


It is significant that -five selections are common to more than 
two grades. One stoiry is a favourite in all the Grades from III 
to YII inclusive * while three are deemed satisfactory in Grades 
YI to YIII inclusive. Another selection is common to grades III 
to Y inclusive. 

The selections which have the distinction of being 
judged superior for more than one grade are as follows: 

Grades I and II, The Three Bears, The Three little Pigs, The 
little Hed Hen, Cinderella, Henny Penny, The Crow and the Pitcher, 

The Hare and the Tortoise, The Bremen Band, 


The Swing 





( 18 ) 


Grades I and III: The Elves and the Shoemaker. 

Grades II and III: The Golden Touch, The Sleeping Beauty. 

Grades III and IV: Dick Whittington and His Oat, Knights of the 
Silver Shield, Knights of the Silver Arrows, Black Beauty. 

Grades III and V: Aladdin and the Wonderful lamp. How Cedric 
became a Knight, Robinson Crusoe* 

Grades IV and V. How Cedric Became a Knight, William Tell, 

Aladdin and his Wonderful lamp. 

Grades IV And VI: William Tell, 

" V and VI: Robin Hood, The King of the Golden River, 
Hiawatha, William Tell, The Simple Old Man, Gulliver*s Travels. 
Grades VI and VII: Birds of Killingworth, The Sandpiper, William 
Tell, The Pied Piper, Horatius at the Bridge. 

Grades VI~ and VIII: The Sandpiper, Christmas at the Cratchits. 
Grades VII and VIII: Rip Van Winkle, The Courtship of Miles 
Standish, Evangeline, Snowbound, The Man without a Country, The 
Barefoot Boy, Paul Revere's Ride, Christmas at the Cratchits, 

The Sandpiper, Birds of Killings or th. Paper Money, Money in the 
Home and the Community, The Mint of Coins, Before Coins were 
made. Mansion and Douglas, Mr. Pickwick f s Slide. 

The following selections are considered superior for 
more than two grades: William Tell - common to Grades III to VII 
inclusive.. Birds of Killingworth, Christmas at the Cratchits, 
and The Sandpiper - common to Grades VI - VIII inclusive. Aladdin 
and the Wonderful lamp - common to Grades III - V inclusive. It 
may be noted that The Elves and the Shoemaker is a favourite in 
Grades I and III, but is not reported as favoured in Grade II. 
Robinson Crusoe is not reported as superior for Grade IV while 
it is ranked among the superior selections for grades III and V. 


■1 






I 


1 


I 









The following is the number of selections judged 
superior for one grade alone: Grade £ 31; Grade li, 26; Grade III 
23; Grade IV, 23; Grade V, 12; Grade VI, 8; Grade VII, 9; Grade 
VIII, 20. 

To give the titles of all the stories which are favoured 
in only one grade would take too long, hut the following is 
given as a random sampling (one out of every three):- Grade I, 

The Gingerbread Boy; The lion and the Mouse, How Patty Gave 
Thanks, The little Steam Engine, The Old Woman and her Pig, The 
Clouds, My Shadow, The Star, Playing in the Snow, Santa Claus, 

The Caterpillar. 

Grade II. Three Billy Goats Gruff, lambikin. Jackal and 

Alligator, Hans in luck, Columbus, Who Became King, Our Flag. 

Grade III. The Tar Baby; The Wishing Gate; David, the Slinger; 

St. George and the Dragon, Hans who made the Princess laugh. 

The Brownies. 

Grade IV. Robert of Lincoln, Boland the Noble Knight, The 
Magic Prison, Inchcap© Bock. * 

Grade V. The Nurhberg Stove, The Village Blacksmith, Tom the 
Chimney SweeJ), Cosette. 

Grade VI. Sir Kenneth and the Flag, Midget the Beturn Horse, 
Grade VII. King Robert of Sicily, King Arthur Stories, How They 
Brought the Good News from Gent to Aix. 

Grade VIII. The legend of Sleepy Hollow, The One-hoss Shay, 

The Heritage, How I Killed a Bear, The Prairie Eire, Julius Caesar, 
The Skeleton in Armour. 

Some of the other selections favoured will be referred to 
later in the discussion. The methods and results of the investi- 















( 20 ) 


gat ion have been presented in sufficient detail to suit the 
purpose of this discussion. We now proceed to comment on them 
briefly. 

Criticisms . Any criticism presented here regarding this survey 
is made with only one thought in mind, viz. the value of the 
investigation for our purposes, i.e. in how far it assists in 
determining the actual story preferences of children. Judged by 
this criterion the investigation has some weaknesses, e.g. (1) 

The number of replies received was comparatively small. Only 
slightly over two thousand teachers and about five hundred 
children were heard from. Until the preferences of a large number 
of children can be obtained either directly or through their 
teachers it is inadvisable to dogmatise. (2) The investigation 
was concerned with only stories appearing in the school readers. 
Important stories not found in the readers for this reason were 
not considered. (5) lo attempt was made to find out what stories 
are suitable to children under school age. At the same time the 
survey is of no small value for our purpose because: —(1) On the 
basis of the opinion of both teachers and pupils it decides that 
certain reading selections are desirable while others are not. 

(2) The large majority of the selections dealt with are stories 
and are therefore of vital interest to us. (3) It gives the 
grades in which the different selections mentioned were favoured. 
This helps us to decide the type of story which is likeUy to appeal 
to a child of a certain chronological age, as pedagogical and 
chronological ages may be assumed to have as a rule a fairly close 
relation. (4) The number of stories dealt with was sufficiently 
large and varied to justify us in considering the list fairly 






• ;-r 



































' 


' 


















■ 





( 21 ) 


representative. Tfie number judged as superior selections is about 
250. 

The investigation carried out by the University of 
Wisconsin provides, therefore, the best experimental evidence 
within our reach on the subject of superior stories for children. 
As has been suggested, the term "superior” is used by Prof. Uhl 
to designate stories which are favoured by both teachers and 
pupils. It is significant that in a great many instances the 
results obtained by this enquiry corroborate the opinions of the 
more or less professional story teller. We mentioned a number 
of stories as being generally considered as favourites. All of 
them are judged superior in the Wisconsin Studies. Many other 
stories favoured in a large per centage of the replies received 
figure very prominently in popular discussions on the story. If 
some stories usually deemed to be popular with children are not 
mentioned by Prof. Uhl the reason may be not that the popular 
impression is wrong but that they do not appear in the American 
School readers. At the same time the value to be attached to 
the results of systematic investigation such as has been described 
is immensely greater than that which can be attached to judgments 
which rest on a more impressionistic basis. 

III. Determining factors or why these stories are preferred® 

Having satisfied ourselves in so far as we are able 
from the data now available, What are the stories or some of the 
stories which are most favoured by children, our next step is 
to ask "Why”? Why is it that the stories judged as superior by 
the Wisconsin Survey and others of their type appeal to the minds 
of the young? In an attempt to answer this an examination must 












' 


















' 











(zz) 


be made of at least a few stories. In making such an examination 
we must keep in view the psychological premises which have been 
accepted,remembering that the child, like other organisms, is 
impelled by certain needs and that his ability to so react as to 
gain satisfaction for those needs depends on his plasticity, also 
that his reactions must be along one or more of three lines, viz. 
adjustment, struggle, retirement. 

(1) Form - The "Three R’s" in the Story. 

In a discussion of the story, as of any other literature, 
it is necessary to take into consideration both form and content. 

We, therefore, ask first if the form of the favoured story in 
any way accounts for its popularity. The usual popular dissertation 
on the story invariably Emphasises the importance of what may be 
called the "Three R*s", viz. rhyme, rhythm, and repetition. Whether 
or not the authors of these popular treatises exaggerate the 
importance of the above mentioned elements these elements are 
assuredly of sufficient significance to warrant discussion. That 
all three are in the same class is obvious. In fact rhyme and 
rhythm are a form of repetition if the latter term is used in a 
broad sense. In rhyme the same sound is repeated while rhythm 
depends on periodic recurrences. But the term repetition in 
literature can be used in a narrower sense as referring to the 
repetition of words, phrases, ideas, etc. But in endeavouring 
to trace the presence of these elements in the story we shall 
deal first with rhyme and rhythm and then with repetition using 
the latter term in the narrower sense. Then when we come to 
ask what light these elements in as far as they are present in 
the story throw on the child’s mental life we shall discuss the 
three together. 








- ' ' 




. 

• : • • ; ■" ■ r ' '■ od j 

: • a • ' 




, : 








, 





- - - ' > 

, i i 







; 



* 

■ 




“ 


. 




t , ' 




. 












1 










( 23 ) 


Rhyme and rhythm . 

Nursery Rhymes: To what extent do rhyme and rhythm account for 

the popularity of some stories? In endeavouring to answer this we 
may find a point of departure by recalling the inadequacy for our 
purpose of the Wisconsin investigation in that it tells us nothing 
regarding the preferences of children under school age. In view of 
the lack of experimental data it is unwise to dogmatise, but we seem 
on safe ground if we say that the first type of literature to appeal 
to children is the nursery rhyme or something else which contains 
strong rhythmic elements. The demand for books of rhymes of the 
Mother Goose type is an argument in favour of this assertion. Is 
it form alone that accounts for the popularity of these rhymes 
with very young children? 

It is very questionable if the child is concerned with 

content when listening to such a rhyme as:- 

"There was a young lady from Niger, 

She smiled on the back of a tiger, 

They came home from their ride 
With the lady inside, 

And the smile on the face of the tiger." 

or 

"little Bo Peep lost her sheep. 

And didn’t know where to find them, 
leave them alone and they’ll come home. 

Wagging their tails behind them." 

On the other hand when a parent dangles his offspring on 

his knee and repeats: 

"Ride a horse to Banbury Cross, 

To see a fine lady on a white horse. 

Bells on her fingers and bells on her toes. 

She shall have music wherever she goes." 

it is very probable, as a writer has suggested that the child in his 

imagination becomes a horseman; rides to Banbury Cross; sees the 

fine lady and listens to the music of the bells. In 


other words 

































( 24 ) 


does not the content as well as the rhythm appeal to something in 
the nature of the child? 

If we could know the type of nursery rhyme preferred by 
children under school age with the same degree of certainty that 
we can know the type of story preferred by older children we could 
afford to be somewhat more dogmatic in our eonclasbns* All we can 
say at present is that whether or not rhyme and rhythm alone account 
for the popularity of these nursery tales they are in practically 
all of them indispensable elements. If a child in the nursery were 
told in prose language a story about a cow jumping over the moon, 
a dog laughing, etc. it would be very unexciting in comparison with 
that classic nursery rhyme: "Hey diddle diddle". The content of 
many of the nursery rhymes is of such a nature that the child could 
not possibly grasp it, and it is doubtful if a child of the pre¬ 
school age would be more excited by hearing of a cow jumping over 
a moon than by hearing of one jumping over a fence. Whether the 
nursery rhymes whose content the child does not grasp have as 
strong an appeal as those which he in some measure may grasp would 
be the best answer to the question as to whether rhyme and rhythm 
alone account for the popularity of these stories. But this is a 
question which only further investigation can decide. 

How soon does the child seem to prefer a type of story 
different from the nursery rhyme? Kindergarten teachers frequently 
use stories such as The Three Bears, The Three little Pigs, Bed 
Riding Hood, The Ugly Buckling, etc. This is fairly good evidence 
that before he reaches Grade I, perhaps soon after his third year 
the child is attracted by this type of story. Evidently then the 
nursery rhyme does not for a long period reign alone in the 





( 25 ) 


affections of the child. 

Rhyme and rhythm in the early grades. 

In treating of the preferences of school children 

commencing with the first grade we are on more solid ground. As 

has "been seen the Wisconsin investigation has furnished us with 41 

selections which are favoured by pupils and teachers in Grade I, 

Also, it is easier for teachers, librarians and others to find out 

what are the preferences at this age. What we are interested in at 

present is whether rhyme and rhythm still play a considerable part 

in determining the preferences of children aged from six and over. 

An analysis of some of these stories with a view to determining the 

presence or absence of rhythmic elements would seem to indicate:- 

(1) That in the earlier school grades some nursery rhymes continue to 

rank as favourites. The Wisconsin investigation mentions only two, 

viz, Tom, Tom, the Piper*s Son, and The Swing, as favoured in 

Grade I, and one of them. The Swing, as favoured also in Grade II, 

It is probable that a few other rhymes are popular with Grade I 

children. (2) Many stories which as a whole bear no resemblance to 

the nursery rhymes contain considerable rhyme and rhythm* As an 

example we may cite the oft recurring rhyme in the "Three little 

Pigs": "little pig, little pig, let me in 

Ho, no by the hair of my chiney, chin, chin. 

Then 1*11 huff and I*11 puff 
And I’ll blow your house in.” 

A similar rhyme only poorer keeps recurring in the Ginger Bread Man. 
The hero of this story frequently repeats: 

"I am the Gingerbread Man, 

I ran away from a little old woman 
A little old man 

And I can run away from you, I can.” 

(3) But in a great many of the Grade I favourites there is neither 






( 26 ) 


rhyme nor rhythm. While in others there is no rhyme hut what may 
he considered a kind of rhythm. If Cinderella, The Elves and the 
Shoemaker, The Hare and the Tortoise, The lion and the Mouse, The 
little Red Hen, etc. are favourites at this stage it is not because 
they contain either rhyme or rhythm. Some stories from which 
rhyme is wholly lacking are characterised hy unvarying repetition 
which in a carefully told story may have a rhythmic effect. Of this 
The Three Bears is a good illustration. The well known words 
which are so constantly reiterated, viz. "The great hig hear, the 
middle sized hear, and the little wee bear" can easily he given a 
rhythmic swing as can also the words:"She tasted the hig hearts soup 
and it was too hot, she tasted the middle sized bear's soup and it 
was too cold, then she tasted the little wee bear's soup and it was 
just right". 

In grade I then, some nursery rhymes continue to he 
favoured. But the preference is largely for the longer story. In 
the stories most preferred in this grade rhythmic elements may he 
conspicious as has been illustrated from The Three little Pigs, and 
the Gingerbread Man. Or these elements may he wholly lacking as 
they are from stories like Cinderella, The Elves and the Shoemaker, 
and the Lion and the Mouse. Or the stories while void of rhyme 
and not conspicious for rhythm may lend themselves to a "rhythmic 
telling" as in the case of The Three Bears. 

All through the grades certain stories containing rhythmic 
elements are favoured. We have noted that one nursery rhyme. The 
Swing, is favoured in Grade II. The Three little Pigs which we 
noted contains strong rhythmic elements also ranks high in Grade II. 
In the four schools where investigation was made the majority of 



( 27 ) 


pupils reported that they did not like poetry. Yet in almost all 
the middle and senior Grades some poems are among the stated 
preferences, e,g, Hiawatha is favoured in Grades V and VI, The 
Village Blacksmith in Grade V, The Pied Piper in Grades VI and VII 
and the Courtship of Miles Standish and Evangeline in Grades VII 
and VIII. 

The part played hy rhyme and rhythm in determining the 
story preferences of children may, therefore, he summed up as follows 

(1) If any selection is to appeal to very young children rhyme and 
rhythm are indispensable factors, 

( 2 ) But while the child is still in the kindergarten content as 
well as rhythm becomes a reason for preferences, and when he reaches 
school age rhyme and rhythm, while still appearing in many stories, 
are no longer the chief factors in determining preference* 

(3) As the child grows older is gradually weaned 

away from dependence on crude rhythm. He may like selections on 
account of their rhythmic values, but the rhythm which attracts the 
child when he is ten or over is different from that which attracted 
him when he was in the kindergarten. The difference is vast between 
the rhythm of "Twinkle, twinkle little star", and that of Evangeline 
or Hiawatha, 

Repetition , 

We would remind ourselves that at present we are using 
the term repetition as applying to the reiteration of words, phrases, 
etc. The most noticeable thing in this connection is the contrast 
between the stories favoured in the earlier grades and (l)the early 
nursery rhymes and (2) the stories preferred by children in the 
more advanced grades. To illustrate this contrast we shall note 



" ' l ■- • 

* * 


i 

■ ■ ■ . 


- 

■ • . 

■ 


■ 

. 

. 


' ' 




* 


■ • 


■->- ■ ‘ ' 

{ ; 


. 


. .. > , • • 

; roof;;-: 

•: r 2 2 ■ . OKy r x .c S • ' ?■ r ivf. .£■ - to 

’ 

• 


. 




, ■ ■■ : 




. 


. . ' : V ' - i ■■: 




( 28 ) 


the place of repetition in each of these three types of stories. 

(1) The nursery rhymes are remarkably free from repetition. They 
are usually short and straight forward. Most of these pieces 
consist of a short story which is told in crude rhyme, scarcely 
any unnecessary words being used. Nothing could be more simple or 
more economical of words than the story of Jack and Jill* 

(2) But in the stories favoured in the earlier school grades there 
is a vast amount of what seems to the adult useless repetition. 

We may note as illustrationshe rhyme "little pig, little pig 
let me in" is repeated over and over again in The Three little Pigs. 
In The Three Bears we are often told about the "great big bear" etc. 
In fact there is a vast amount of repetition in this favourite* In 
The Three Billy Goats Gruff every time a goat crosses the bridge 
the child is caused to hear its "trip, trap, trip, trap." The 
enemy of the goats asks each of them the same question and gets a 
similar reply. In the Old Woman and Her Pig the pig refuses to go 
over the stile. The dog is asked to bite it and refuses. The stick 
is asked to strike the dog and refuses, etc. Then there follows a 
wearisome round of repetition as "cow won’t drink water, water won’t 
quench fire, fire w on ’t bum stick, stick won’t beat dog, dog won’t 
bite pig, pig won’t go over the stile and I won’t get home till 
morning". The contrast between these and the nursery rhyme with 
its shortness and directness is obvious. 

(3) There is a similar contrast between these stories favoured in 
the earlier grades and those favoured by older children. It is 
true that certain poems in which there is considerable repetition 
are favoured in Grades IV to VIII* But as a anile in the stories 
preferred in these grades there is the minimum of repetition. A 
few fairly well known tales may be mentioned as illustrations: 


:o 

.. 

; ' ... .■ * ■ ' . .■ • : ' 

' - to £ ' • 






. . . ' i -;.' , 

. 

..ail .' ‘ 

t ' X ' 

. .. ■.! i . • . ■ ' . : ' ‘ . / ■ - v o 

# 

, ■ n ■ : ■ ■ : : J 1 : ; =.,■ ..... ■ : 1. , ’ '■ 0 .V :. i‘ O ’ J: £ i'' .. i>Vi' 

, • .' T . : 1 . 

. . a : - • ? • ’vo ' g..;: 

. 

* i 

. . . : :■? ' ' J : :: i " . J. i .. 0 :■ I .... , . u 0 ... 

- 

. • 






' ' ; 






( 29 ) 


Robinson Crusoe, which is favoured in Grades III and Y; Aladdin 
and the Wonderful lamp, which is favoured in Grades III, IV and V; 
Robin Hood, which is favoured in Grade VI; Christmas at the 
Cratchits, which is favoured in Grades VII and VIII. 

Our next step is to ascertain what the presence in 
preferred stories of the elements under discussion tells us 
regarding the child’s mental life - his needs and his manner of 
reacting with a view to satisfying those needs. Can the facts 
which have been stated regarding the preference of children of 
different ages for stories of a certain form be made a basis for 
any theory? 

In an attempt to answer this the following may be 
suggested: The young^experiences difficulty in assimilating very 
much content. He is unable to partake of very strong intellectual 
food. Figuratively speaking, when he is given strong food he 
requires something to "wash it down". To slightly change the figure 
we may say that he needs preserves v/ith his bread. The Three Rfs 
in the story are like preserves on the bread of, what may be to the 
child, hard, dry intellectual content. The nursery rhymes, or many 
of them, are evidently all preserves and no bread. They are short, 
and rich rhythmically. There is no need for repetition of words, 
etc. But the child of from four to seven wants something containing 
more content than the nursery rhyme. At the same time his powers 
of concentration are not equal to the task of following through 
some of these narratives which sometimes are comparatively intricate. 
In the frequent recurrence of a rhyme as in The Three little Pigs 
or in the repetition of words as in The Three Bears the child gets 
a mental rest, and also a pleasurable sensation, and is therefore 
encouraged to maintain his interest. Children of seven or eight or 


. 

. 

. 

i : 

. 



; : ' y i , ;-v; 



, 

Klf, 

' 











* 

■ 


' 




* • ;: •: • ‘ 





. 

r 






, • . • J : : a 







. 

- 


(30) 


over are often able to maintain their interest in much longer 
stories without the necessity of being soothed or stimulated by 
repetition. 

The Three R's and The Child’s Heeds . 

But why should these elements in the story be so pleasing 
to the child? Why should a rhyme or the repetition of certain 
words have a pleasing effect? What is there in the nature of the 
child that accounts for it? Perhaps the best approach to this 
question can be found through the adult 1 s attitude to rhythmic 
values. That rhyme, rhythm, and repetition play an important part 
in adult life cannot be denied. Poetry, music and dancing are 
pleasing. A wrong note in music and a faulty line in poetry "jarr". 
The adult, as also the child, therefore, finds rhythm pleasing. 
People frequently try to explain this by saying that rhythm is 
fundamental in human life. But this can scarcely be considered an 
explanation. As an attempt to face the problem the following may 
be suggested:- 

In nature there is harmony in the form of rhythmic 
repetition. The sun rises and sets without displaying any vagaries. 
The seasons succeed one another with unbroken regularity. To this 
regularity in nature it is probable that most, if not all, organisms 
must conform or else suffer the consequences. The mating time of 
the birds and the spawning time of the fish is determined by the 
season. As to the human organisms it is certain that they must 
conform to the rhythmic in nature. There are only certain seasons 
in which primitive man can hunt and fish and pick fruit. If man 
is sufficiently developed to till the soil he must sow in one season 
and reap in another. Man, therefore, has to adjust himself to 









"■'JVvrf r- 













0 >. .M. , 






. 














lull 




■ 

X 












v). :" 


- 

* 


■ 





: ; . 

. 





f ' 


, . 










: 

;,0 : . 



' 

' 


a.nu 0; 

- • .v. 



■. ' . , ' ‘ . K 







. - : . c ■ . 0 



• 


■ 


' " : ;; 




: ' . 


. 




■ 




i - ... .. . .. u : ... i 


'■U, 


1 . ■ , . 


' Q ' y ... , 




■s::iiky-v/oZ> v2 dal: odd do yddr %:i ,1 smgf ©■.. ©4^ cb'tld 0 . 


' • - . ' 0 






. 




' 




* 





nature. He has to "keep step" with it if his needs are to he 
supplied. Also, man has to adjust himself to the social milieu. 

Even among primitive races a countless number of adjustments have 
to be made. Man, therefore, feels a need of getting into harmony 
with his environment both physical and social. Rhythm, we suggest 
therefore, was at first pleasing to man because through getting into 
harmony with something he gained certain ends. But frequently 
something which is at first pleasing because it is a means of 
gratifying some end becomes intrinsically pleasing. 

Our contentions then are 

1. That the satisfaction which the young child gets from rhyme, 
rhythm and repetition in certain stories renders more agreeable 
the content of those stories. 

2. That the tendency to find satisfaction in the rhythmic is a 
characteristic of the human organism whether inherited from 
animal ancestors or acquired in the history of the race. 

The "Three R^" and the Child*s Intelligence . 

Does the extent to which the child depends on the "Three 

R*s" throw any light on his plasticity? We have been careful not 

because 

to make assumptions regarding the child f s intelligence, as-, when 
the behaviour of the infant may be said to be on an intelligence 
plane is a disputable point. But the term plasticity can be applied 
to all the reactions of the organism whatever may be their degree 
of modifiability. We have seen that rhyme, rhythm and repetition 
in the story provide the child with rest and pleasure rather than 
with intellectual effort. But if the child f s mental life were on 
a higher plane would it make any difference to the degree of 
satisfaction which he would find in the unmixed rhythm and the 











- 




O';;, O'-. 0 ; O.oi; us*. 




■ : • , 

■. cCrix 



, 


■ 

" 

: i : /o'o ;. 00 .f oo 



; o . . o' 



i 

- 






• 

■ 


.. 1 t ■ 



o 

• . jf ' 




tii l : 'O' rx. 1 h . 0 




c 



* 

I 




• 

■ 


' 3 

.. 







« 

3 



. 

; : j ;.o; J': :o 



I . f .,'o ' - 1 o 



. 


r 




f 


■ 

. 


i .0 C.i’0 S . - J j vOO.- 

- ' 










■ 1 ; ' ■ . 

- 




. - ... 







■ ■ : . . •> . 

. r , . .. o ; ■. £ f :i t A . 1 

o ■ ■ 

) ' o -/■ v. o i: c?#i 










(32) 


unvarying repetition which characterise some of the favourite 
stories of his earlier years? The answer is fairly obvious. The 
rhythm of the nursery rhyme is crude. The repetition in the stories 
favoured by children in the earlier grades is, from an adult point 
of view monotonous. Some illustrations may be taken from adult 
life. Jazz music is largely made up of unbroken rhythm. The same 
applies to many of the hymns sung at certain types of religious 
gatherings. In the art of the savage the chief characteristic is 
unbroken rhythm. His ritual is filled with wearisome repetitions. 
But the mentality of the individual who finds satisfaction in these 
crude rhythmic elements is not considered to b© on a very high 
plane. The degree of consciousness required to follow rhythm which 
has no breaks and repetition which is without variation is little 
above the reflex level. If the individual with a fairly high 
degree of intelligence does find satisfaction in crude rhythm it 
is not in his most intellectual moments. The University man who 
takes delight in uttering a college yell becomes a savage for the 
time being. When rhythm is unbroken it tends to drop as Ur. 
Parkhurst says in her article on The Evolution of Mastery to the 
level of the unconscious. It is automatic. In the poems favoured 
by older children as in the music and poetry of the civilised adult 
rhythmic and arhythmic elements are combined. This is evidence of 
an intelligence of^plasticity which is on a higher plane than the 
automatic reflex. 

It is questionable then if in the nursery rhyme the child 
often exhibits a degree of plasticity higher than the reflex level. 
The stories favoured by children about six or seven or earlier give 


I 


J . > 


l 





L J O’ 


r> 


a 





■3 







1 


evidence that at these ages the child’s degree of plasticity is 


'v higher than the reflex• But the stories would seem to suggest that 
he cannot remain on this higher level for a great length of time. 
Consequently in the rhyme, rhythm and repetition abundant in many 
v- the stories preferred at this age he frequently descends to a 
I x lower level where a lesser degree of plasticity is required. The 

d 


. % 

K 


stories favoured by older children indicate that as the child grows 
older this need for descending to the lower and easier becomes less 
and less. 

Rhythm and the Child’s Sex life . 

As Sigmund Freud and his followers say that the child 
under six has a rich sex life and as rhythmic elements play a large 
part in determining the story preferences of the child of six and 
under it is legitimate to ash if child preferences for stories 
containing rhythm throw any light on the Freudian position. It is 
difficult to treat of such a subject in small space, particularly 
as the Freudians do not seem to be consistent in their use of the 
term sex. They profess to use the term as referring to the whole 
libido or desire of the child, yet most of their illustrations are 
from what we understand as the sex life. If sex means what we 
are accustomed to mean by it it is very questionable if the rhythmic 
elements in the story could be shown to have any connection with 
the sex life of the child* But if it is to be used in the wider sense 
in which the Freudians profess to use it our answer would b© that 
anything which has a soothing or pleasing effect satisfies the 
child’s libido. But this is not going beyond the thesis which has 
already been stated, viz. that the child favours rhythm, etc. because 
it has a satisfying effect. 



7 




o t ft: f; r 7B ' 


T 


• ; : 




' 

' 

7 ■ i7 $ ' " : co 

y ' 1 






. 




.. g - 0 j ;■ [ ' I I ■: v £ i J l %B tSXB'. 

’ 

.■ «fix 


i • 




o::' o. 


, 

■ 

. 

■ 








Content 


( 34 ) 


In the foregoing discussion on the form of the story it 
was decided that very early in the child 1 s life content in addition 
to form plays a considerable part in determining his story preferences 
What then is the nature of this content? 

I. The characters in the story. The content of the story may 
be discussed under the headings of:- 

1. The characters. 

2. How the characters react or are reacted upon. 

As a rule the story selects its characters from (1) The Animal- 
world. (2) The world of imaginary beings. (3) The world of human 
beings - children or adults. 

(1) Animal Characters . 

The child of six or seven or younger exhibits a strong 
tendency to make animals his favourite characters. In about 16 of 
the 41 stories which Professor Uhl reports as being favoured in 
Grade I animals are either the only characters or are very prominent. 
It is doubtful if this number conveys a proper idea as to the 
strength of the preference of the child of six for animal characters. 
Those which are apparently most favoured among the favoured at this 
period are animal stories. Stories such as The Three Bears, The 
Three little Pigs, Three Billy Goats Gruff, The Boy and the Goat, 

The little Red Hen, The Old Woman and Her Pig, and The Squirrels 
are popularly recognised as favourites. All these are mentioned 
as favoured in Grade I. In Grade II animal characters are prominent # 
Among the Grade III favourites animals are the leading characters 
in only about four. Pew of the stories favoured w^.the later grades 
are animal stories in the same sense. Children of all ages like 
stories in which animals figure. But the above favourites in Grade 

I differ vastly from e.g. How I Hilled a Bear, which is favoured in 






j r::oo o:\ 


8x r X9.0 ti 9 


,9 0 'SC.?,': 1 ',. ©' 




V'i",:., 0... J 9 

. : 1)1.1 it 


1QV 


9;.V:,£T;0",:- 70 






0 9 (90. 


torov 


■ . . ■ .. .. • • •- • - . - - • 

11.1 ” , 9 ''9 : • :.i; i i 07 ■:• I'X : ; o;"0 1;0 {/. 9;' . f f90. 1"9 
9990 "T;-X 9 S 797999 7,9 9‘X,9 |90 i9'';9 9 99,99) 

. i 9 • '• ' , ' . 9 . ‘ : 9 '■ . ' 




t 


' 


C 9 




'9'(9: O' 


: . ■ o o o o 99 ''9. . ' o ' c ’ , • 

. ';; ' <: 

* 

« 


. . . 






















( 35 ) 


Grade VIII. 

II. Imaginary Beings as Characters . 

The preference for the story in which the characters, or 
some of them are imaginary beings is popularly supposed to start 
about the seventh year. The Wisconsin results, however, would 
seem to make it a little later. Few stories in which fairy 
characters predominate are reported as favoured earlier than 
Grade III. To this there are some exceptions. Cinderella is 
classified as a superior selection for Grade I and the Elves 
and the Shoemaker for Grade II. It is noticeable that the 
number of stories the characters in which are fairies reported 
as favoured, even in Grades III-V where we would expect to find 
them, is small. The tales of the Grimm Brothers and Anderste 
do not seem to be favoured as we would expect them to be. 

However, as they are not among the selections Judged unfavourably 
we must conclude that they did not figure in the reading matter 
submitted. The Water Babies was among the selections mentioned 
in some replies as suitable for Grade IV but the per centage of 
favourable responses was only 22. Stories such as The Wishing 
Gate, Aladdin and the Wonderful lamp. The Elves and the Shoemaker, 
The Brownies, Brownies and the Cook, Arabian lights (selections) 
Gulliver’s Travels, are reported as favoured In Grades III-Y. 

III. Human Characters . 

Commencing with Grade IV there is a strong tendency to 
prefer stories the actors in which are human beings. This does 
not mean that human characters do not appear in the preferences 
of children of earlier years. In many of the "animal stories" 
human characters figure. In some they play a very minor part. 







( 36 ) 


as, the men from whom the three little pigs begged materials with 
which to build their houses. In others they play a leading role 
as Goldilocks in the story of The Three Bears and the lady in the 
story of The Old VToman and her Pig. In some of the "fairy storied 1 
human characters are very prominent, e.g. Cinderella. In some 
of the middle grades there is exhibited a preference for stories 
in which most of the actors are human, but in which some 
characters from fairy land appear. The King of the Golden Hiver 
reported as favoured in Grades V and YI is a good illustration. 

The "King" is a mysterious personage who appears to the younger 
of three brothers. But in the stories favoured by the older 
grades it is real men and women who are dealt with. They may 
act mysteriously or have mysterious experiences, but they are 
easily recognised as beings of flesh and blood, numerous examples 
might be cited. We may mention King Robert of Sicily, The Man 
Without a Country, Rip Yan Winkle and The Courtship of Miles 
Standish. 

Among the human characters in the story we naturally 
expect to find a considerable number of boys and girls. It is 
questionable, however, if the results of the Wisconsin investi¬ 
gation show as many child characters in the story as might be 
looked for. Yet there are a number particularly in the earlier 
grades. A little girl is the central figure in Cinderella, 
little Red Riding Hood, and The Three Bears. In The Hare and 
the Tortoise two boys figure prominently. A boy is a hero in 
How Cedric Became a Kni^it, David the Slinger, The Humberg Stove, 
and The King of the Golden River. All of the above mentioned 
stories are favoured in one or more of the grades from I to VI. 




* 

. 

I 

* * 

. nr; • ! 

- . ixvi 

* 

::t\- 7; 7,/y7 yy.7 II 7 joy y n.t 1.7 ' yyy 7 < 7> '7 ; ’ •' y . *' > a „• n, *,-} 

■ . ■' rj o ■. & 1 7 ’ ■ 

’ "' ' ' '■ ■' . . ' n .. ' ‘ v ~ ■ 

7 < ■ ' 7 t ■ ' r'r : . : y . C& yy ; 7 ' :.,. I): 

. . . \ ■ . ‘ . .. 

. . ■ . . . 

... « , . 

7 7 7 f i';sy ; y • ;:>a . 7: ■ 1 , 7 t y, -:. 0 .7, ... 7 yy7i:f 

* 

7 77- ';.7 j s : :U -nl 7 r .yy y .7o H.yyyy' c * . yyyyiy 

. 7 7 ; . . y : ;; '.. •.! 7 ' y. ■ 7 / . o.; .-> 

• ‘ ' ‘ r y ; .' y / ■ y f . ; , y 7y y:; 

7 y 

7 7. 7 . y. ... y y : -7 ' 7:7,' . 7 oC 

T 7C ' ' ' ' ■ * . 

IT 

* 

y • ' y : • : ’ ■ O' ' 

■ 

1 ■ ■. • . ■ ■ . y 





( 37 ) 


In these Grades though there are also many adult characters 9 
Robinson Crusoe is favoured as early as Grade III. The shoemaker 
of the Elves and the Shoemaker is an old man. Robin Hood is 
favoured in Grade V. It is in Grades VII and VIII, however, that 
adult human characters predominate. 

(2) How the characters react and how they are reacted on . 

The characters figuring in the stories we have seen to 
be either animals, imaginary beings, or human beings. How do these 
characters act? In what manner are they reacted on? An answer 
to these questions is rendered difficult in that when dealing 
with some of the characters we do not know what to look for. Of 
the world of imaginary beings we can obtain no information 
through any channels of knowledge to which the human intellect 
has access. In the first part of this discussion we went back to 
two elementary facts, viz. the organism and its environment. 

The organism in which we are most interested is the human. We 
are interested in it in its reactions to both its physical and 
social environment. We may here briefly recapitulate what has 
been said regarding the human organism and its environment, viz. 

(1) Like other organisms it has needs for the supply of which 
it depends on its physical environment and as a human organism 

it has needs which are on a higher plane other than the physical. 

(2) Often the environment, which includes both the physical world 
and the social milieu, is apparently unsympathetic with the human 
organism in its efforts to satisfy its needs. (3) Its reactions to 
environment take the form of adjustment, struggle or retirement. 

It should be recognised, however, that frequently these three 
modes of reacting cannot be separated. Some of the reactions of 


















. 







. 








' 


. 










. 




. 










. 

















( 38 ) 


human beings may partake of the nature of the whole three. (4) 

Like other organiaus in its reactions it exhibits various degrees 
of plasticity, and as a human organism begins at some time to 
develop intelligence which may be on a perceptual, representative 
or conceptual level. 

Such then is the continuity of behaviour that man is 
still striving as h© was when much lower in the scale of organic 
being. But as has been seen he strives not only for physical 
ends but also for many ends which may be described as ethical. He 
is no longer an animal driven on by only the urge of hunger, thirst 
and sex. But whatever be his needs it is on his environment that 
he must depend for their supply. In this Interaction between 
the individual human organism tod its environment, we have what 
may be called "the drama of life". In this "Drama of life” 
appear those reactions which so frequently are portrayed on 
the stage. In many ways man seeks to "keep step" with his 
surroundings, to get into harmony with them. In countless 
ways man adjusts himself to the physical world as in sowing and 
reaping at the proper season, etc. In his various interpre¬ 
tations of nature’s forces man has sought to understand his 
physical environment with a view to better adjustment to It. 

The individual man adjusts himself to the social milieu by 
conforming to the laws of society. But man Is also a straggler. 

He may struggle against certain conditions in his physical or 
his social environment in order to alter them. The adventure, 
heroism and tragedy of life represent the struggle of the 
individual human being with certain elements in his environment. 




















* 















































( 39 ) 


On the other hand there are times when the individual feels he 
cannot adjust himself and is unahle to struggle. Under those 
circumstances he seeks some means of escape from hostile 
surroundings. 

In attempting, therefore, to "bring the reactions of the 
story characters under certain concepts we shall keep "before us 
two questions, viz. (1) How do the activities and experiences of 
those characters conform to the reality of the physical world. 

(2) How do they resemble or how are they related to the reactions 
of the human organism in real life. Begarding these problems we 
may note: 

(1) The reactions of the imaginary beings are characterised 
by (a ) Disregard of time and space. In Aladdin and the Wonderful 
lamp the genie can appear at bidding. When the ill treated sister 
needs her Cinderella's fairy godmother is able to appear in a 
magical way. In the Water Babies the hero who has become a 
character in the imaginary world is swept on the wings of magic 
to an unknown land. (b) Disregard of matter. In the King of the 
Uolden Biver a mysterious and powerful character makes his 
appearance out of a small mass of molten metal. In Beauty and 
the Beast some imaginary being has power to create a castle with 
treasures, to provide horses, etc. when required. The word of 
the fairy godmother gives Cinderella a dress, carriage, horses, 
coachman and footmen. (c) Use of materials in the physical world. 
These mysterious beings apparently possessing all power do not 
scorn to make use of properties of the physical world. We wonder 
why the fairy does not make a carriage for Cinderella without 
using a pumpkin, horses without using mice, coachmen and footmen 


D.> ■ v 

1 ./" ‘' '■ ~ - i C>i; >. :0 :! ■ DD : : : j ' :, r; n :j ? : X ;,/?.!: 

| o -hi 

'§§3 - XO l ''SO i i%0%S- DD r ' 3D ii X 

' . • 

* 

; 

. 

- • : ‘ ; 

1 

• I . * 

; 

. 

:>r e;{t 

, • ■> ■ • 0 ; *j.;... d :: .; 

. • / . J o .is: ;: •'; oo 

' ■" .. i o o. . o . 

' 


( 40 ) 


without using rats. (d) Use of the other characters. The other 
characters in the story are frequently made the objects of this 
apparent omnipotence, omniscience and caprice of the fairy 
characters. To an extent this applies to even the animal characters. 
In Cinderella rats and mice are turned into men and horses and then 
bach again into rats and mice. In Beauty and the Beast a beast 
suddenly is created out of a prince but as suddenly disappears 
when the magic spell is broken. But it is the human characters 
especially who are affected by the activities of these beings 
from the other world. Aladdin 1 s genie makes a poor boy rich; gives 
him a beautiful palace to live in and a princess for a wife. This 
means that a great many people are seriously upset. For example 
other suitors for the hand of the princess are put in the shade 
when Aladdin appears on the scene with this all powerful being 
from fairy land placing his arts at his disposal. As the fairies 
in the Midsummer Night's Bream were the means of getting a number 
of people into hopeless entanglements so part of the work of the 
imaginary characters in the stories is that of turning topsy turvy 
human affairs. 

(2) As regards the human and animal characters we shall treat 
of their activities and experiences as they appear, - (1) in the 
stories favoured by pupils in the earlier grades and (2) in those 
favoured by pupils in the more advanced grades. We have seen that 
many of the characters in the early stories are animals but that 
from the stories favoured by older pupils the animals largely 
disappear. 

In the reactions of the characters of the earlier grades 
there is found (a) Anthropomorphism on the part of the animals, 


■ 

. . . 

. 

■ 

* 

. 

* 




. 

• : ■ J ' • : ‘ 

* ' T ~ ■ I -.-v. \"j . I 

* 










■ 

• ; . ^ 

. } 












( 41 ) 


i.e. the animals often perform some of the activities and undergo 
some of the experiences which in real life pertain to human beings. 
Pigs talk, build houses, climb apple trees, etc. The story of The 
Three Bears shows the bears as beings who live in houses, talk, 
eat soup, sit on chairs, sleep on beds. In Red Riding Hood the 
wolf dons the attire of an old lady and carries on a conversation 
with the heroine. Alice in Wonderland is not, strange to say, 
mentioned in the Wisconsin investigation. But of its popularity 
there can be no doubt. It relates some of the most anthropo¬ 
morphic doings on the part of animals that are to be found any¬ 
where in children’s literature. This anthropomorphic conduct on 
the part of the animal characters is a strong factor in determining 
the conduct as also the experiences of the human characters. The 
story of Goldilocks would have been different had the bears she 
visited not been anthropomorphised. Red Riding Hood was entrapped 
because the wolf was able to wmwmv&mWmMiif masquerade as her 
grandmother. 

This anthropomorphism of the early stories leads us to 
mention two elements which are often considered to be lacking from 
these stories, viz. heroism or adventure, and in connection with 
this, tragedy. Where adult human characters are the actors we 
look for these elements because they are so conspicuous in the 
struggles of the human organism. Are they found in these favourites 
in early childhood in which the characters frequently are animals? 
We may note: (a) That adventure and heroism are quite prominent in 
Grade I and Grade II stories. Goldilocks has an exciting 
adventure, nothing could be more thrilling than the rescue of 
Red Riding Hood from the jaws of the wolf. The cleverest pig in 


. 

- • . $ . ! ... 

■ t • - 

r ' ’ «• ■ 

. 

* 

. 

* ? 

' 

3 

• .. ' vo r: . . ’ 

* 

" 

do l t: i , ‘ . 

r 

..t 











• 










- 



* 











■ 

' 





( 42 ) 


The Three little Pigs has adventures which thrill the children who 
listen to the story* Therefore, when we ask if stories favoured 
hy young children contain heroic elements we must remember the 
part played in these stories by both the human and the animal 
characters. In some of these favourites heroes and villains 
abound. Frequently the villain is a fox or a wolf and the hero 
is a child, a lamb or a pig. (b) That these stories contain also 
tragic elements. But as a rule animals are the victims. Animals 
are ruthlessly slaughtered in the stories favoured in the earlier 
grades. In The Three little Pigs two of the pigs are eaten by 
the wolf. Then the wolf gets his desserts by being cooked and 
eaten by the third pig. In the Wolf and the Iamb, a well known 
short story not mentioned in the Wisconsin investigation the lamb 
is killed and eaten by the wolf. But it is significant that in 
few of the early favourites are human characters, particularly 
children, made the victims of tragedy. It is true that in one 
version of Bed Biding Hood the heroine is devoured, but in the 
modern versions a wood chopper is introduced as the deus ex machina 
who saves her. A logical happening would have been Goldilocks 
death in the home of the bears. But in order to save her, a rather 
illogical and uneventful ending is given to the story. kipling f s 
story Bikki Tikki Tavi is judged by local story tellers as an 
exceptional favourite. Evidently it did not come under the notice 
of those in charge of the Wisconsin survey. It is an excellent 
illustration of the point we are making. In this story birds and 
other animals are killed by snakes. Children are often on the 
point of being killed. But the little animal named Bikki Tikki Tavi 
appears just as the serpent is about to strike and saves the child. 



( 45 ) 


In commencing our discussion on the reactions of the 
characters figuring in the stories favoured by older children we 
may note that the anthropomorphic conduct of the animals in the 
earlier stories is also exhibited in the conduct of the imaginary 
characters. The fairies, although pov/erful beings, often appear 
in the form of human characters, either children or adults. But 
from the stories favoured in the later grades these anthropomorphic 
elements have largely disappeared. We say largely because anthro¬ 
pomorphism in some form may be found in some of the stories favoured 
at any age. In the Pied Piper of Hamelin, which is a favourite in 
Grades VI and VII, the rats are anthropomorphised to a certain 
extent. It is probable, however, that this fact in no way accounts 
for the story being preferred in these grades. The disappearance of 
this element does not mean, however, that all imaginary elements 
have disappeared. The imaginary world plays a large part in the 
stories favoured about the twelfth and thirteenth years. Rip Van 
Winkle, king Robert of Sicily, the king Arthur stories, and The 
Pied Piper of Hamelin are reported as favoured in Grade VII and some 
of them in Grade VIII. In these the world of imagination is as 
prominent as it was in the fairy stories proper. But the forces 
at work are no longer the fairies or some such beings who can control 
the laws of nature and yet masquerade as human beings. In the Pied 
Piper of Hamelin consternation is brought upon a city not by a 
being from fairy land but by the marvellous power of music. In 
king Robert of Sicily it is a Power vastly different from the 
fairies who ,T hath brought down the mighty frcm their seats and hath 
exalted them of low degree". Yet even the Deity has an angel who 
in the form of a man occupies the arrogant king’s throne until the 
monarch repents. In the "stories for older grades” then the 






























•i I 














. 

. 













( 44 ) 


imaginary world is by no means dispensed with, although the forces 
controlling it have undergone a transformation• 

But side by side, in the preferences of older children, 
with these stories which contain such strong imaginative elements 
are found others which are strongly realistic. Victor Hugo’s story 
"Cosette” may be mentioned as an illustration from the Grade V 
preferences. It is the story of a little girl who is badly treated 
by her foster mother and her family. At Christmas her heart is 
breaking because she cannot get a beautiful doll which she sees in 
a shop window. Eventually a benevolent gentleman comes along 
who not only procures for her the doll but takes her to his own 
home. It is obvious that this story has much in common with 
Cinderella, Aladdin, and Zing Robert of Sicily. But the fairies, 
the genie and the angel are dispensed with and the laws of the 
universe are not set aside. One of the earliest of the realistic 
stories to be found is the story of Dick Whittington and His Cat 
which is reported as favoured in Grade IV. But this story contains 
an element which distinguishes it from some of the realistic stories 
favoured at a later age. Whittington’s circumstances are suddenly 
altered. But this is not brought about as in the fairy story by 
beings from another world but simply by his obtaining a fabulous 
price for his cat. Therefore, no principle of reality is violated. 
Such a story seems a kind of via media between the earlier 
stories in which imaginary beings "turn the tables" and a biography 
such as that of Lincoln or Garfield where there is no sudden inter- 
ference with the natural order of things. As instances of stories 
that "might have happened", stories in which the characters conform 
to reality we may cite "The Nurnberg Stove" and "How Cedric Became 















* 


. 




. 








- 

■■ , 








( 45 ) 


a Knight" which are favoured in Grade V., The Man Without a Country 
and Christmas at the Cratchits" which are favoured in Grades VII 
and VIII; and The Great Stone Pace which is favoured in Grade VIII. 
Most of these are so familiar that they require little comment. 

We may however draw attention to the first mentioned. The Wurnberg 
Stove is a story of a hoy who was very much attached to an old stove. 
To the hoy’s horror his needy father was forced to sell the stove. 

The hoy determined to go with his beloved stove and creeping inside 
it remained there for days, as the stove travelled to the office 
of the dealers and finally to the king who had bought it. The King 
learning of the lad’s devotiln gave him an education. In such a 
story the characters "cut loose" from the world of imaginary beings 
and however strange may h© the happenings they do not transcend 
the limitations imposed by reality. 

It is generally understood that in the older stories the 
heroic element proper makes its appearance. We have noted the 
existence of these elements in some form in some of the favourites 
in the earlier grades, but the contrast with the hero of the story 
ifavoured by more mature children is obvious. The departure from 
the story whose characters are largely beings from th© world of 
animals or the world of spirits and the centering of the story 
around human characters naturally results in the production of 
characters who perform heroic feats. Heroism and adventure as they 
are usually understood are very prominent in the stories favoured in 
Grade IV and the later grades. In fact a few stories of this type 
are reported as favourites in Grade III. But it is questionable 
if, as a rule, such stories play a prominent part much earlier than 
the ages of nine or ten. 





( 46 ) 


Any division of these tales in which the reactions of 
the characters are marked by adventure and heroism may seem 
arbitrary, yet, while there is no clear out division, the stories 
do appear to belong to two different types. In one type the doings 
of the hero or heroes are related without comment. In the other 
type there takes place, regarding the hero, a certain amount of 
philosophising. In other words in one type we get action and in 
the other type contemplation. Of the first How Cedric Became a 
Knight is a fairly good illustration. It is a story about a boy 
who longed to be a knight. Some knights who were impressed by his 
boyish chivalry had him taken to the castle where he started 
training for knightffiood to which he attained after undergoing many 
trials. Such a story simply relates what the hero did and his 
experiences without stopping to contemplate him or philosophise 
regarding him. The Great Stone Face which is reported as a Grade 
VIII preference illustrates the other type. "The Great Stone Face" 
is a large rock with a face-like appearance. In the face strength, 
benevolence, etc. are represented. A superstition believed in 
by the local peasantry says that one day a man will appear in 
that valley possessing those characteristics which the face-lik© 
rock suggests. The story makes a great impression on the boy hero, 
who spends much time contemplating the "Great Stone Face" and waits 
anxiously for the man described. Three men came into the 
valley, each of whom the simple inhabitants hope may possess 
the qualities locked for; one is a rich man, another a 
soldier, another a politician. But in each case the 
hopes of the people are disappointed. Meanwhile the boy is growing 
up thoughtful, true, and kind, and eventually it is recognised that 






















, 


. 

, ■ 

; 








- • ; - • \ ~ 




■ 

zdu ' ■- ' ■. « ■■ 




. 










. 








he possesses the qualities and appearance so long looked for# The 
contrast between the stories does seem to suggest that they belong 
to two different types. In the latter story the hero does little 
acting but the story is largely a philosophy about him and about 
the ideals which he represents. 

Where we find the heroic we usually expect the tragic. 

Is there tragedy in the experiences of the characters who figure 
in the stories preferred by senior children? In these stories 
the animals are not available to be made victims of as they are in 
the earlier tales. If tragedy appears in the stories preferred in 
the senior grades it is necessary that human characters be the 
victims. It is noticeable that few of the great tragedies of 
literature are reported as preferences in even the last grades. 
Julius Caesar, which is favoured in Grade VIII, is however an 
exception. However, the tragic side of life is depicted in stories 
like Hiawatha, which is favoured in Grades V and VI, Svangeline, 
which is a Grade VII and VIII favourite. The loss of the children 
in the Pied Piper is a striking contrast to the usual ending of 
the Grade I story. In these more mature stories there is little 
or no indication of that ingenious protecting of human characters, 
especially child characters, which is so conspicuous in Grade I. 

At the same time unwillingness to sacrifice the hero is still 
apparent. Of course human characters must die in the villain who 
is now no longer a fox or a wolf. But there is still a tendency 
to have the hero and his friends "live happy ever afterwards". 
Robinson Grusoe safely ends his long captivity. In The Hurnberg 
Stove the "troubles of the boy hero are ended with his adoption 
by the king. 

Why Stories with the content described appeal to 




d 



' ‘ . 








o:J 


* j 


7 







( 48 ) 


children. 

The foregoing analysis should be kept before us as 
we attempt to answer the question which we set out to answer, 
viz. why certain stories are preferred. Why does a child of 
a certain age prefer stories containing certain elements? 

The Story Content and the Child*s Heeds . 

What light then does preference for a certain content 
in the story throw on the child 7 s needs and his manner of reacting 
in order to find satisfaction? From our analysis of the content 
of a number of stories we may note certain elements in those 
stories which are of interest to us at present, viz. (1) Anthro¬ 
pomorphic conduct on the part of the characters belonging to the 
animal world and also on the part of those belonging to the 
imaginary world. (2) Tendency to save human characters from very 
unpleasant experiences partly by the substitution of animal 
characters. (5) Tendency to resort to an imaginary world as a 
means of dealing with the problems of reality. 

To relate these to the child 1 s needs is our next task® 

Anthropomorphism or Familiarity - Mystery. 

Rasmussen in fl Ghild Psychology” says that anthropomorphism is 
the simplest and therefore the most primitive means of explaining 
nature. To think of things in the organic or inorganic world in 
terms of themselves is very natural for human beings. This is 
the method of explaining nature to which the savage resorts. He 
thinks of trees, stones, animals, as possrssing a soul like 
himself. In this we get the beginning of animism. 

If his story preferences give us any clue to the 
child 1 s mental life it would appear that the anthropomorphic 
explanation appeals ^ iie child as it does to the savage. 





































. 









( 49 ) 


animals whether those seen in picture hooks or his domestic 
pets. In his very elementary way the child seeks to understand 
this little world of his. The simplest interpretation is that 
it is like himself. 

The anthropomorphic conduct on the part of the other 
world characters in the story resembles the primitive tendency 
to conceive of gods and spirits in human form. To primitive man 
the elements of nature as day and night, thunder, lightning, the 
seasons, etc. constituted a problem. How were these elements 
controlled? Surely they were controlled by beings like himself. 
Similarly the child sees many circumstances which he cannot 
explain. He knows that he himself manipulates his toys, pets, 
etc. Consequently it is very easy for him to conceive of the 
existence of beings, in some way resembling himself, who manipulate# 
boys and girls and even men and women. 

But this raises the question why the primitive mind 
whether that of a child or a savage should trouble about under¬ 
standing things. Why are explanations sought for? This tendency 
to enquire is generally attributed to the "instinct of curiosity". 
But the precarious condition of the instinct psychology renders 
it inadvisable to stop with such an explanation. We must push 
the problem farther back and ask how we explain curiosity in a 
specific case like that before us. It would seem that the child 
and the savage want to understand because they want to adjust 
themselves. On the world around him the savage depends for the 
supply of his needs. The better he can understand it the more 
satisfying reactions he comes to feel he can make. In the case 
of the child this seems fairly evident. It is doubtful if he 

enquires how babies come until after experiencing a desire to 




















' 






- - 

. 

■ 

- i a 

: ..v, r 

* 
















- 














( 50 ) 


have a baby brother or sister as some other hoy has. The 
practical problem of how to meet needs would seem then to be the 
source of certain speculative questions as to the meaning of 
things. 

This anthropomorphism may be associated with wh&t may 
be called the Familiarity - mystery principle. It is an attempt 
to connect the known and the unknown. The story may depict 

'Un¬ 
known animals per forming^: ami liar actions. Or it may depict 

unknown beings like the fairies making use of elements in the 

known world in the performance of actions which are partly 

familiar and partly mysterious. In thus connecting the known 

and the unknown there is a satisfaction. The totally unfamiliar 

has no appeal. It seems to leave a sense of failure to make an 

adjiaBtment. But when familiar elements are found in conjunction 

with unfamiliar ones there is a feeling that an adjustment has 

been made in the acquiring of new knowledge through knowledge 

already possessed. 

Substitution or Concession to Beality. 

This anthropomorphic conduct on the part of animals 
connects itself in a very interesting way with the child’s attitude 
to the heroic and tragic in life. The question of the adult’s 
liking for tragedj 7 in art and literature is, from the point of 
view of psychology, a disputed one. In the tragedies depicted on 
the stage some combination of circumstances, usually called a 
plot, results in the death of human beings. In the children’s 
stories there is found a plot. But as we have seen the killing 
of human beings particularly children, is a rare occurrence, while 
the killing of animald is quite frequent. This striking contrast 



. 

, 

' * ■ 

* : 

. 

. 






■ 

; • • • . ...... • • «' t ,i - • 

: ....,• , ■ ■ 

. ■ ' 




( 51 ) 


"between child and adult literature should be emphasized. On the 
child’s stage little blood»shed takes place if by the term ,f blood TT 
we mean human blood. 

We noted that this reluctance to sacrifice human 
characters persists throughout all the grades. The tendency to 
introduce a Deus ex Machina is very noticeable in the earlier 
grades. For example, the woodchopper is the Deus ex Machina of 
the Red Riding Hood story. In the later grades this desire to 
have things end well is gratified without such an outrage on 
reality. This "all’s well that ends well" attitude is character¬ 
istic of the primitive viewpoint. A Deus ex machina saves Isaac 
from his father’s knife. The attitude persists in the "live 
happy ever afterwards" ending of many modern novels. The story 
then frequently brings its human heroes through many hardships 
and often to the point of apparent death, and then either by 
having a miracle worked or in some natural way sees that everything 
ends satisfactorily. 

But as has also been seen the story is not so considerate 
of the animal characters. The child appears to shed no tears 
over the ruthless carnage of animals in his stories. It is true 
he rejoices when the little pig outwits the wolf. But this 
merely represents Joy at the victory of the hero# Ho particular 
horror seems to be expressed at the death of the other two pigs. 

Gan this tendency be accounted for? Again we can trace a similar 
tendency in primitive races. The primitive sacrificed animals 
to his gods. It is true he also sacrificed human bdings and some¬ 
times his own children. But the tendency to make the animal take 
the place of the child appears very strongly in the literature 
and practices of primitive peoples. The Hebrew story of Abraham 
and Isaac which has already been mentioned is a well known 


- 

« 













. 




- 































( 52 ) 


illustration. The ram is made to take the place of Isaac. 

Where sacrifice seems necessary, therefore, the primitive mind 
whether that of the savage or of the child evidently finds in the 
animal a convenient substitute for something which it is more 
reluctant to sacrifice. 

One frequent occurrence in the story then is the human 
characters undergoing many trials but eventually coming through 
them all safely while another frequent occurrence is the death of 
animal characters. From these facts two questions arise, viz. 

(1) Why should the child in his stories bring his human characters 
through trials. (2) Why should he consent to putting to death 
his animal characters. As an attempt to answer these questions 
it may be suggested that there seems to be in the mind of the 
child, as in that of the savage, a dim consciousness of struggle 
With certain elements in environment. It is possible that 
the fact of hostility and cruelty comes to be known to even the 
child mind. The child soon learns that bears, wolves, etc. are 
sometimes fierce. Naturally this is reflected in the literature 
preferred by the child as the adult’s consciousness of struggle, 
victory, defeat, tragedy, etc. is reflected in his literature. At 
the same time the child mind revolts from the thought of other 
children being put to death. It may be suggested then that the 
trials of some of the human characters in the story, and the 
death of some of the animal characters are concessions which the 
child in his literature makes to reality. In the adventure, 
heroism and struggle of all forms in the story, there is reflected 
the child’s own determination to struggle against Miat he regards 
as hostile. Yet he apparently feels that he cannot get 

everything as he would like it b’&t that at times compromises must 



T 






( 53 ) 


be made* The child at the age in which animal characters play a 
part in his story can conveniently use these characters as victims. 
The older child whose stories deal, for the most part, with human 
characters while not able to make victims of the animals is still 
reluctant to sacrifice human beings. He makes his concession to 
reality by causing his characters to ’’endure hardness” and 
satisfies his own desires by bringing them safely through. 

It may be asked, however, why the child should show 
partiality to human rather than animal characters. Hr. Ernest 
Jones says that the child’s attitude toward the heroic is ego¬ 
centric, i.e. he identifies himself with his heroes. Hr. Jones 
was evidently thinking of only human and not of animal heroes. 

In spite of the fact that the animals are frequently anthropo- 
morphised it is doubtful if there Is much identification between 
the child and the animal hero. If then it is only the human hero 
in whom the child sees himself it would be reasonable to conclude 
that his disinclination to sacrifice any character is in direct 
proportion to his identification with that character. The savage 
has no scruples about killing enemies or captives. But his 
identification with the members of his own tribe or clan may be 
such that their sufferings become his sufferings. Th© child is 
likely to identify himself to a much greater extent with other 
children than with adults. Consequently he is not in th© habit 
of introducing a Heus ex Machina to save the adult. In th© 

Red Riding Hood story no such pains are taken to rescue the 
grandmother as to rescue the heroine herself. 

Resort to Imaginary World, or Pleasure-Pain Principle versus 

Reality Principle. 

Prom what has been said regarding the child’s concession 
to reality it should not be inferred that the child always treats 







. 















v> 


































' 



f 54) 


the real world by making concessions to it. In our analysis we 
saw how a multitude of stories illustrate the well known fact that 
the child in his literature has a world of imaginary characters 
who often play a large part in his own life. Professor Kirkpatrick 
says that the child is both a realist and an idealist - at one time 
he seems conscious of the hard stern facts of reality while at 
another time he is living in fairy land. Our contention is that 
it is because of this consciousness of reality in its more 
disagreeable aspects and because of a desire to escape from it 
that he sometimes makes excursions to the fairy world. The story 
often affords a means of withdrawal from an environment which the 
child does not feel is sympathetic. 

A glance at how the adult sometimes seeks to escape from 
an environment which has become disagreeable may serve to illustrate 
this. We have suggested that the adult may by means of his art 
and of his religion seek to escape from the hard reality of the 
world which he knows. The human mind in endeavouring to escape 
from the real world repeatedly creates some utopia or other "land 
flowing with milk and honey". When in reality the sky is clouded 
and the fountains are almost dried man frequently allows his art 
or his religion to carry him away from reality and says: 

"I am living on the mountain 
Underneath a cloudless sky, 

I am feasting at the fountain 
That never shall go dry." 

The fairy world elements in the story, therefore, seem 
to be to the child what art and religion are to the adult, viz. 
means of withdrawing from certain disagreeable features in the 
world of reality. 3n these stories the reality principle is 
subordinated to the pleasure principle. 






< - 


. . , 














i : i ' 




. 


■: o. ' i:\ : • lino 


‘to : 

- 

• . . 

: ' tot • , . 



, - . .. . : . 







0 0:1 








* 






01 m 


( 55 ) 


Reality is subordinated to phantasy. H. Griohton Miller has 
an interesting chapter in The New Psychology And The Teacher on 
TT reality and phantasy TT . In this chapter three kinds of phantasies 
are mentioned, viz. (1) the "compensatory phantasy, (2) the 
"curiosity phantasy", and (3) the "creative phantasy". We have 
already seen how the story illustrates a "curiosity phantasy\n 
that the anthropomorphic conduct of the animals represents an 
attempt on the child’s part to satisfy curiosity. Poes the story 
illustrate also a phantasy similar to these other two types? 

By the compensatory phantasy is meant the tendency on 
the part of an individual to seek in an imaginary world some Q 
compensation for certain wrongs and injustices which t-hre— ±ndivi - du al 
believes exist# in the real world. On the part of adults this 
tendency has been strong. In reality Pives may receive his "good 

things and likewise lazarus evil things" but in a world created by 

. ' , >). . 

religious imagination lazarus is comforted while Pives is 

>/ 

tormented. The presence of a phantasy of this type in many 
stories seems to be evident. One type of the story which portrays 
inter relations between the imaginary and real worlds has for its 
hero or heroine a boy or a girl who is being badly treated by 
those whose position gives them authority over him or her. The 
other characters by their haughtiness make life miserable for 
the hero or heroine. But the time comes when the tables turn. 

A fairy or some other-world character reverses the situation. A 
"cinder wench" becomes the envy of her step sisters. The sisters 
of Beauty who had previously despised her came to honour her as 
the bride of the prince. 

Our theory then is that in this type of story the child 
is appealing to the imaginary world for compensation for wrongs 



I 




\ 


3 G 



j...'. • . : ■■■: 'io 


<; l't rf 






( 56 ) 


felt in the real world. The human characters the child knows in 
the world of reality are his parents, brothers, sisters, and play 
mates. Sometimes they seem to him arbitrary and tyrannical. 
Brothers, sisters, or play mates have things which he thinks he 
should have. Probably a play mate lives in a fine house, has fine 
clothes, plenty of toys, etc. Possibly such a play mate treats 
him in a cavalier manner. The child knows no power in the real 
world which can get him what he considers his rights. But the 
imaginary world provides him with a means of obtaining the 
compensation for which he longs. 

But in addition to being conscious of injustice done 
by others the child is apparently sometimes conscious of his own 
limitations. In this sense of limitation we get the "creative 
phantasy". It may be understood to refer to a tendency on the 
part of the individual to believe that powers outside reality 
enable him to do things which, owing to the limitations imposed 
on him by the real world, he is unable to do. In a vague way 
the child seems to know something of human achievement. He 
wishes he could accomplish some feat. But he is often told that 
he is "good for nothing". He knows that he cannot even 
his broken toy. But in the imaginary world he finds compensation 
for his limitations in the real world. That this "creative 
phantasy" is illustrated in the story seems a safe assertion. 

In the story of Aladdin and the Wonderful lamp, for example, 
Aladdin is a careless, useless boy and therefore in reality good 
for nothing. But by the aid of his lamp and ring, both procured 
from the imaginary world, he is able to construct a castle and 
do other wonderful things. 








* 





( 57 ) 


It may be argued, however, that it is to only pupils 
in the middle grades that the fairy story appeals and, therefore, 
the question may he asked v/hether children in the earlier and later 
grades can find any such magical means of escape from the real 
world. It is significant that it is in the earlier and later 
stories - the animal and hero stories - that the child seems to 
have such a recognition of the fact of reality that he feels 
compelled to make to it certain concessions. At the same time 
the child helow the "fairy story age" finds certain ways of 
escaping in his imagination from the unpleasant in his environment. 
Frequently he finds escape hy changing his environment. If in 

4jU -\stsQ 

the real world hears are fierce, hears made to order who are "good 

A 

hears - a little rough as the manner of hears is hut for all that 
very good natured and hospitable". Als6, as we saw, although the 
fairy disappears from the stories favoured in the older grades the 
imaginary world does not disappear. There is at work a "compen¬ 
satory phantasy" which resorts to some power who can pluck from 
his throne the haughty king. Even where the laws of the universe 
are not tampered with some means is found of exalting "them of 
low degree". After Dick Whittington receives his marvellous 
fortune he is no longer the hutt of the jests of the insolent 
cook. With still older children the story of a rail splitter 
becoming president is popular. The story of the poor hoy or girl 
meeting with good fortune persists, through all childrens 
literature. At the "fairy story age" it is the fairies who are 
responsible for the altered circumstances. At a later age the 
new situation may he created hy the Deity, or by an angel; hy a 
sudden stroke of good luck or hy the worth of the hero himself. 




3 it 


DO 0 





( 58 ) 


Relation to the Chiles Intelligence , 

As has already been illustrated the reactions which 
any organism carries out in its strivings toward satisfaction 
indicate the degree of plasticity possessed by that organism. 

If then the child*s preference for a certain type of story is 
a reaction which is prompted by a consciousness of need the 
question arises as to what is the degree of intelligence or 
plasticity possessed by the child which leads him to react in 
this way. 

We saw that adult human intelligence may be on a 
perceptual, representative or conceptual level, The fact that 
the content of stories we have discussed is satisfying to the 
child for the reasons we have given undoubtedly indicates that 
his intelligence is on a level which enables him to have 
memories of the past and dreams of the future. In other words, 
he possesses memory and imagination both of which are character¬ 
istic manifestations of representative intelligence. Professor 
E.A. Kirkpatrick says that "representative intelligence......•. 

serves as a means of satisfying psychical needs". Perhaps the 
word "aesthetic" or "ethical" would be better than psychical?. 

In so far as we know the animals do not experience to any extent 
these "psychical needs". Evidently they live, for the most part, 
in the present. The pleasures of reminiscence and of antici¬ 
pation seem to be denied them. The reason for this is that 
either they do not possess representative intelligence or else 
it is not developed to any appreciable extent. 

Granted then that the story preferences of the child 
indicate that his intelligence is as high as the representative 




7 


' 













: o - msm - & ns 


- 










( 59 ) 


level do they indicate how that intelligence is functioning? 

What we are most concerned with in the story is a certain 
attitude on the part of the child toward reality - toward time 
and space, and matter. What does this attitude indicate 
regarding the child T s representative functions? It must he 
recognised that the representative centers cannot function 
independent of the individuals perceptual experiences. Proper 
functioning of the intellect on the representative level, there¬ 
fore, partly depends on: (1) The richness and clarity of the 
individuals perceptual experiences. (2) The extent to which 
these experiences have become integrated* 

(1) Poverty of Child's Perceptual Experience. 

With regard to the first, the child's perceptual 
experiences are obviously limited and indistinct. This being so 
he may not know that his stories contradict reality for the 
reason that he does not know reality. The adult would deny that 
events are controlled by fairies or spirits because such a concept 
is contrary to science. But to the child and the primitive this 
may be science. It is well known that what one age consider^ as 
mythology a previous age considered as science. Mythology 
disappears as people come to understand the universe. Eor example, 
very primitive races have had a tendency to believe that the home 
of departed spirits was in some valley convenient to their own 
neighbourhood. Why did they believe this? Because that valley 
was unknown to them. They had no perceptual awareness of it. 

But when this valley had been explored the abode of the dead was 
conceived as farther away. Then, at a later date, when the 
science of geography, assisted by exploration, caused the world 
to be known the home of the departed came to be located still 


J 


. 




c 


- 


a:-. 


: 

.. . : ' 

%4 he 

: 

* 


' 

- 



. 



a* ' ’a a-'.aria a a a 

Ted 1 ZvBBZ 

n: v S 


i; 





L 


rf v;& $ j I'i 


JOB 






» 

. 

. 







( 60 ) 


farther away - in the howels of the earth and above the sky. 

But as men have come to understand the earth through geology 
and the heavens through astronomy this belief also has been 
abandoned. Hone of these phases of belief contradicted reality 
as those holding them understood reality. The position of the 
child is, in this respect, analagous to that of primitive man. 

To the young child there may be nothing more remarkable about a 
carriage being made from a pumpkin than about its being made 
from wood. In either case he. cannot do it and cannot understand 
how it is done. In other words it is beyond the child T s perceptual 
experience. Eggleston in The Use of the Story in Religious 
Education says that to the child the feeding of the five thousand 
with five loaves and two fishes ie no more miraculous than the 
baker bringing his family their bread. Therefore, when we speak 
about the child subordinating reality to phantasy we should 
remember that his experience of reality must come through percepts 
and that these percepts are often few in number and are, also 
vague and indistinct. 

A question that is often raised is to what extent the 
child knows or feels that his stories are fancies. This question 
the foregbing discussion should A in some measure^to answer. 

Often the child says "this did not really happen, we are only 
pretending". The child seems to be conscious that he is "pretending" 
when he tells a story the content of which contradicts some clear 
and definite perceptual experience which he has had. The same 
of course applies to the games which children play. For example, 
when the child makes mud pies he probably would say he is "pretending’; 
He does not eat the pies. His perceptual experiences of both pies 
and mud have been fairly distinct. But it is very doubtful if the 








■ . . ■ . ■ , 


' 


I p 1 






. 




ifu 




c ■' 


■ 


. 


• J •, 





( 61 ) 


same child knows he is "pretending” when he tells about rich 
presents being brought to children by the fairies or Santa Claus 
or some other imaginary characters* 

(2) Experiences not integrated* 

Dr. Ernest Jones in discussing the difference between 
children and adults says that one difference is the higher degree 
of integration in the adult* It is probable that the percepts of 
young children are what Horsworthy and Whitley in "Psychology of 

Childhood" calls an "undifferentiated mass of mental stuff", or 

1/ 

what James calls a great blooming, buzzing confusion. Power of 
representation depends on the wealth of the associative processes 
and this in part depends on the integration with one another of 
the various perceptual experiences. Some of the stories of 
anthropomorphised animals illustrate this. The child has had 
perceptual experiences of both human and animal characters. Bf 
these percepts he has memories. But the mass of "mental stuff" 
thus acquired has not become sufficiently well organised to enable 
him to say that certain reactions can be performed by only human 
beings. For example, a story like The Three Bears indicates a 
confusion of the memories of certain perceptual experiences. The 
child has had some percepts, however vague, of bears* Of a girl, 
chairs, tables, beds, soup, spoons, etc., he has had percepts 
still more numerous and more distinct. But these experiences 
have not become so well integrated that the child is certain that 
one group of reactions characterises bears while another group 
characterises human beings. We saw how in a fairy story like 
Cinderella elements from the real world are freely used by the 

imaginary characters. As we saw, the child begins with experiences 
which are only partially clarified. The process of integrating these 






' 













( 62 ) 


experiences is slow. Whatever memories children may have of 
pumpkins, carriages, horses,rats and mice it is necessary that a 
considerable amount of integration take place before they clearly 
understand that carriages are not made of pumpkins, that mice do 
not become horses, or rats become coachmen. 

To what extent then reality can become subordinate 
to phantasy depends not only on the strength of the phantasy^ or the 
yearning for the satisfaction of some need,- It depends also on 
how clear have been the experiences of reality and to what extent 
these experiences have become integrated. The child of ten may 
wish for a fortune, fine clothes, etc. as strongly as his brother 
of seven. But his experiences of time, space, and matter in the 
real world have become so well clarified and coordinated that he 
ceases to find satisfaction in contemplating the gratification of 
those wishes without any regard for natural law. His growing 
experiences of reality and the coordination of those experiences 
have forced the subjection of the pleasure - pain principle to 
the reality principle. But even among children in the middle 
grades the reality principle has not become sufficiently dominant 
to prevent them getting satisfaction by imagining themselves a 
Dick Whittington getting a fortune for a cat. But gradually 
shades of the prison house of reality are closing on the child 
so that when he reaches high school age it is probable that he 
has largely brought his phantasies into subjection to a reality 
which is in many respects similar to that of the adult. 

Therefore, as the developing child comes to better 
understand reality, i.e. as his experiences become clarified and 
organised his imaginary world recedes. His fairy land like the 
spirit world of primitive man goes farther and farther back. That 


. 

u' ' ? ■ 


. 

* 








( 63 ) 


there is "no Santa Clans" may he just as clear to the child of 
twelve as it is clear to the child of five that he cannot eat his 
mud pies. By the gradual clarifying and integrating of experiences 
the imaginary world is conquered. Tet the experience of reality fcf 
the child in the senior grades and even of the average adult is 
very limited. The modern man f s science may tell him what is "in 
the heavens above and in the earth beneath" so that he can no 
longer, consistently with his experiences, believe that these 
regions are reserved for the ghosts of the dead. Yet he has no 
experience of reality which contradicts his religious imagination 
when it tells him that perhaps there is an ideal sphere where a 
Dives is punished and a lazarus is rewarded. To the child in the 
senior grades, as to the adult there may be a Power in the universe 
who brings "down the mighty from their seats" and exalts "them of 
low degree". Also, as the child grows to adulthood he frequently 
can at will transport himself to the imaginary world. The child 
in Grade VIII may enjoy The Pied Piper, but he knows he is 
"pretending". In stories of chivalry and romance the adolescent 
may experience pleasure similar to that experienced by the child 
of four as he plays with his mud pies. The adult may revel in 
Alice in Wonderland, Peter Pan or The Water Babies, but we cannot 
suggest that he is subjecting reality to phantasy. The individual 
then, whether child or adult, has a capacity for play, for make 
believe from which much of the aesthetic enjoyment of life is 
obtained. If as normal human adults we sometimes have sight of: 

"That immortal sea 
Which brought us hither 
Gan in a moment travel thither 
And see the children sport upon the shore 
And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore, 

it is because of this capacity for play and not because reality is 
subordinated to phantasy. 


■ 


: y r ; .Y Y.a??: 

* 1 ■ ■. /. ■ ■ i, ' /*’*( f . Y 




r • 


' 





t 

■ I il£ft,r '3b-V- I.Cu, : 

I 



'. ixt 

: ); 

:o l ri;', vyy ; It ? ul 


- . ■■ . J . . „■ l ... 


' 



: ■. 

' . ■ I :. 31 ; .j rri-.; a I o t yb?? 



> 

" 

. 




%:Y*YY : 1 

* 








