















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/mcleod1935 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 
(DIVINITY) 

We, the undersigned, hereby certify that we have 
read the within thesis entitled n WORDS WORTH f S 
CONCEPTION OF THE RELATIONSHIP OF COD TO THE WORLD" 
submitted by Rev. Norman D. McLeod, B.A., in part'll 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity and we hereby recommend its 
acceptance# 


Edmoiton 

Alberta 



Professor 


April 

1935 


_ 


Professor 











, 

* 

. . « . . 

. 










"WORDSWORTH 1 S CONCEPTION OF THE RELATIONSHIP OF 
GOD TO THE WORLD" 


A Dissertation 

Submitted to the B.D. Committee of the 
Senate of the University of Alberta 
In candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity 

by 

Rev* Norman D* McLeod, B*A*, 


University of Alberta 
April 13, 1935* 










T 






. . 
























- ' 







BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Batho, E.C., 

n The Early Life of Wordsworth 11 • 

Brooke, Stopford, 

"Theology in the English Poets.” 

Brown, W. A. 

"Christian theology in Outline”. 

Clarke, W. H. 

"Outline of Christian Theology”. 

DeSelincourt, E. 

"Wordsworth 1 s Prelude”. 

Fairbairn, A. 

"Philosophy of the Christian 

Religion”. 

Knight, W. 

"Poems of Wordsworth." 

Lecky, W. E. H., 

"History of England in the Eight¬ 
eenth Century". Yol. III. 

Legouis, Emil 

"The Early Life of Wordsworth". 

Long, W. J., 

"English Literature". 

Morgan, W. 

"The Hature and Right of Religion." 

Myers, F. W. H. 

"Life of Wordsworth”. 

Rogers, A. K., 

"Students History of Philosophy". 

Wells, H. G. 

"Outline of History". 

















































t • 









• 4 • 










CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 
SECTION ONE 

VARIOUS WAYS OF CONCEIVING THE RELATIONSHIP 
OF GOD TO THE WORLD 

Deism Pantheism Theism 

SECTION TWO 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTRUY 


I 

Scientific 

II 

Philosophical 

III 

Theological 

* IV 

' Religious 

V 

Literary 

SECTION THREE 

INFLUENCES WHICH PLAYED A PART IN MOULDING 
WORDSWORTH* S THEOLOGICAL IDEAS 

I 

Parents, School, Nature 

II 

Cambridge 

III 

French Revolution 

IV 

Friendship of Coleridge 


SECTION FOUR 

WORDSWORTH 1 S CONCEPTION OF GOD 
I Pantheism 

II Modification 


III 


Theism 



























































INTRODUCTION 


In leading up to the subject, with which 
this paper is concerned, a brief consideration of the 
conceptions represented by the terms Deism, Pantheism 
and Theism will be undertaken. It will also be 
necessary to note the general character of the century, 
of which Wordsworth was the product* Ihe influences 
which had most effect upon him, in the development of 
his thought will also be considered. 

From Wordsworth’s poetry, especially his 
autobiographical poem, !l The ^relude”, a study of his 
theological conceptions will be made, with special 
reference to his understanding of the relationship of 
God to the World. ‘*^he thesis to be attempted is, that 
this conception of the relationship of the Supreme 
Being to his creation, is best described by the doctrine 
of Theism in which His Immanence finds complete 
expression* 










- 2 - 

SECTION A 

VARIOUS WAYS OF CONCEIVING THE RELATIONSHIP OF GOD TO 

THE WORLD 

There are three main ways in which man has 
conceived the relationship of the supreme being to the 
world, ^hese may be represented by the terms, Pantheism, 
Deism and Theism. The ascendency of the conception, 
represented by any one of these terms, has been largely 
due, to the scientific, or philisophical outlook which 
has held the field, at that particular period of time. 
Each view has had its day of popularity, and then was 
replaced by another, or has been modified in the direct- 

i 

ion of some other. 

Deism emphasizes the transendence of the supreme 
being as above, and apart, from the world; as man under¬ 
stands it. It represents God as the creator of the 
world, but not active within it. Pantheism is the 
opposite view to Deism, and presents the idea, of God as 
active in the universe, its life, and its processes, and 
completely limited by it. Theism seeks to preserve 
the essential truth contained in each of the opposing 
views maintaining, the independent existance of God, 
Transendent, and apart, from the world, yet at the 
same time active within it, in its life and processes. 

Historically, the transendent conception of 
the supernatural comes first. It is the general view of 












- 


* 

t 

* 

. 

• . 













- 3 - 


God which dominated the religious beliefs of the Old 
Testament, though there were occassional glimpses of 
the dawn of a more intimate way of conceiving his 
relationship to man, and the world* By the time the 
New Testament was written, the idea of transendence had 
become more pronounced through the influence of Hell¬ 
enistic thought. In Hellenism, God and the world, are 
separated by a wide, and forbidding gulf, and the dualism 
of this way of conceiving the universe, sets mind against 
matter, the natural against the supernatural, the finite 
against the infinte* ^he only way in vrtiieh God has 
any contact with the world, or makes himself mainfest 

within it, is through the medium of miracle. For the 

. 

Christian community, Christ was a connecting link 
between God, and the world. His miracles were 
manifestations of his divine nature, and his advent 

was understood in the light of the miracleous; and 

I 

the complete transendense of the character of God was 
maintained. Union of the believer with God was 
possible through belief, with the consequent 
deification of our human, and corruptible nature. 

n The fourth evangelist thinks of the divin¬ 
izing uni&n as established through knowledge. But in 
the subsequent development thisjdfca is overshadowed 























. . ' 














• < 




' 

• . 





















- 4 - 


by the idea of a union of substances# Perhaps the 
most outstanding contribution of the Greek Fathers 
-we do not here assess its permenant value- was its 
conception of the Divine as a transendent, supernatural 
substance# As opposed to creaturely substance, which 
is derivative, mutable, and corruptable# Divine 
substance has the attributes of uncreatedness, immut¬ 
ability, and incorruptability# The relation between 
the two is thus one of complet disparity.” (1) 

Thus the complete ascendence of the idea of 
transendence in the early Christian theology is evid¬ 
enced even in relation to the coming, and the mission, 
of ^hrist. It was maintained throughout early and 
medieval Christianity# 

The way was opened up for a modification of the 
extreme transendent view in the teaching of Luther, 
(1483-1546) who emphesized the importance of faith in 
! Christ alone 1 . The life of God comes into the life 
of the believer through his faith in Christ, who is 
the manifestation of God’s grace# Thus the Hellenistic 
conception gave way for the moment, before a more 
ethical vie?/ of the relation of God to the world and 
He v/as brought a little closer to the world# 

(1) "The Hature and Right of Religion” Prof. W. Morgan 

p 144. 





. 


- 

. 

• • . 

. 

. 

. 

. a . 

. 

. 

. 






- 5 - 


But the reformation did not do away with transendent 
theology, for the bible which came in for a new 
importance, through the revolt, was itself a super¬ 
natural gift of a transendent Bod. IStiracle continued 
to be the important way in which God manifested his 
presence and gave assurance of his reality. As long 
as miracles were accepted without question this view 
of transendence was maintained. If anything happens, 
to throw discredit on the miracle then this avenue 
through which God invades the world is blocked and 
contact with him becomes impossible unless the tran¬ 
sendent conception gives way to some other view. 

With the coming of the scientific view of the 
universe, miracles came to be thought of in a new way, 
in fact, they were confronted with a challenge as to 
the truth of their reality at all. "And finally, there 

came forward, to realize the new possibilities in the 

I 

way of knowledge, a brilliant group of scientists of 
the first magnitude - Tycho Brahe, Copernicus, Galilio, 
Kepler, and others - whose investigations gave a firm 
foundation to those scientific methods and conceptions 
which v/ere destined to enter so vitally into all future 

thought. God couJd no longer be conceived 

as having his local habitation in the heavens; the 
whole geography of the spiritual world was thrown into 









, 















* 








- 










- 6 - 


confusion, and the way opened for a deeper conception 
of God's relation to the universe." (1) 

This new way of conceiving the relation of God 
to the world was not popular in ecclesiastical circles, 
and because he sponsored these views, Bruno was burned 
at the stake in Rome in the year 1600. But the scient¬ 
ific view of the world, was not to be turned aside, by 
the displeasure of the church, and it gained ground 
steadily, until, by the eighteenth century it was 
generally accepted. With the establishing of the con¬ 
ception of the reign of law throughout the universe, a 
severe blow was dealt to belief in miracles. If the 
transendent view of the supreme being was to remain, 
and the only avenue through which he is manifest in 
the world is closed, his connection with the world must 
be severed altogether. Ihis was done in the develop¬ 
ment of Deism, according to which, God was thought of 
merely as the power which had created the world and 
had no further connection with it. This scientific 
view with its consequent rationalism which brought 
about such a remote view of God, landed man in a con¬ 
dition which was spiritually unsatisfying. Religion 
could scarcely be expected to thrive on such a view. 

(1) "Students History of Philosophy" Rogers, p 226. 







T 

. 

. 

, 

* 

• ; * 


- 7 - 


Without contact with the divine it would soon perish. 

The church persisted in ignoring the new findings and 
clung to belief in the miracleous as long as it could, 
but could not hope to do so indefinitely. A number 
of movements throughout the church protested with a 
measure of success, and the transendent view of God 
in his relation to the world has never altogether 
faded from the mind of man. While Deism was on the 
throne of human intellect, in the eighteenth century, 
the Wesleyan Revival, the Catholic Revival, the 
evangelical movement in Scotland, the evangelical and 
neo-Catholic movements in the church of England were 
dominated by a transendent theology which frowned 
upon the findings of science. 

However, another view was developed by those who 
accepted the scientific outlook of the universe, but 
revolted against the unsatisfying theology of Deism. 

Its vagueness and consequent unreality drove them to 
the opposite view, namely, Pantheism. Some went as far 
as Pantheism, others who did not go quite so far, found 
satisfaction in the view of Immanence. A very important 
tendency towards the view of Immanence, is found in 
the philosophy of Spinoza (1632-1677$. He received 
two titles as a result of his views, ! athiest T from 
one side, from the other f God-intoxicated*. 















. . 








- 


* 









- 8 - 


ft The central idea of Spinoza, and that which gave 
him his deep influence somewhat later on, when the 
period of the Enlightenment was drawing to a close, 
was his recognition of the unity of things; and not 
only as an intellectual necessity, hut as a require¬ 
ment of feeling, a religious requirement as well. 
Descartes had split the world up into two substances 
distinct from each other, and God separate from them 
both, '^he Rationalism which took its rise from him, 
tended still further to remove God from the world, 
until he became a mere far-away observer, with scarcely 
any relation to his work. Such a separation was fatal 
in two ways, ^t emptied the idea of God, on the one 
hand of all content, and so made him superfluous; and 
it rendered it impossible to give any ultimate and 
unitary explanation of the world of things• In 
opposition to this, it ?/as Spinoza's task to insist 
upon the connection of God with the world, and to find 
in him the ultimate reality, alongside which the 
independent reality of other so-called substances 
fades into nothingness. n (1) While to many, the 
Pantheism of Spinoza is as spiritually unsatisfying as 
the doctrines of Deism, he opened up the way for a 
most fruitful view of the universe, in the doctrine of 
(1) "Students History of Philosophy" Rogers p 280. 






. : . 

. 

' 

. 

. 



- 9 - 


Divine Immanence, ^hose who came after him were 
influenced by him to a view of God present in the 
universe, in its processes, in nature and in man; 
yet not limited by it or completely confined to it. 

"The earliest exponents of the immanence idea were 
the Romantic poets and the writers who stood under 
their influence- Rousseau, Goethe, Wordsworth, Shelley, 

Carlyle, Emerson.What the poets possessed 

as an intuition, the philosophers - Fichte, Schelling, 
Hegel - established on a reasoned basis - not everywhere 
secure - and worked out into a system. By Schleierm- 
aeher, and later on by Schweitzer, the new idea was 
carried into theology." (1) 

The doctrine of Immanence is so close to that of 
Pantheism that it is difficult to keep them apart at 
all times. When we think of &od in the life we see 
around us in nature, and in man it is quite easy, 
almost natural, to fall into a pantheistic view, and 
allow the thought of his transendence to slip out of our 
thinking. "An unguarded pantheism may not be 
religiously offensive, at least not obviously so, so 
long as religious feeling is of the aesthetic kind to 
which the poets have usually limited themselves. 

(1) "nature and Right of Religion" Prof. Morgan p 158 








. 

* 

- 

. 

■ 

. 

. 

. 



- 10 - 


But it is otherwise when we have to do with ethical 
piety. With that anything like thoroughgoing pan¬ 
theism is absolutely irreconcilable.” (1) 

From this consideration of these various ways 
in which man has thought of God’s relationship to the 
world, it is evident that in each conception some basic 
truth was struggling for expression. Deism with its 
tendency to emphasise the transendent phase, contained 
the truth that God, while he is the creator of the 
universe, is not to be completely confined within it,. 
He is greater than his creation and not to be bound or 
limited by it. Pantheism contains the truth - as 
important as the transendent truth - that &od having 
created the universe could not stand aside from it, 
but, to some degree must be sought, and can be found 
active in those resident forces at work throughout 
that universe. The extreme fallacy to which Deism 
went dismissed God from his creation and set up a 
dualism which is mentally and spiritually unsatisfying. 
The fallacy to which Pantheism sometimes reached, was 
that it destroyed the freedom and the personality of 
God. Theism with its basis in the idea of Immanence, 
retained the idea of transendence preserving both 
truths in a new synthesis. 

(1) Nature and Right of Religion” Prof. Morgan p 161 






. 

. 

- 

- 

' 

■ 


- 11 - 


"The presence of God rules Deism out, and the freedom 
of God rules Pantheism out. That T all is God 1 is not 
true, that f God is all* is not true. 1 he truth is 
that f from him and through him and in him are all 
things*, God is source of all, and Lord of all.** 


"Outline of Christian Theology" Prof. W. IT. Clark 

p. 130. 











a 



a 





- 12 - 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 
The eighteenth century, though not marked by 
outstanding greatness, is a very interesting one and 
not without a measure of importance in the story of 
England, and Anglo-Saxon people generally. *t was a 
time of mixed movements, a time when powerful forces 
were working beneath the surface of the ordinary 
affairs of life. The Revolution of 1688 which had 
banished the last of the Stewart kings, and called 
William of Orange to the throne, marks the end of the 
long struggle for political freedom in England, ^here¬ 
after Englishmen spent the tremendous energy, which their 
forefathers had spent largely in fighting for freedom, 
in endless political discussion, and in efforts to 
improve governments. In the sphere of government, the 
attention of the leaders was focused upon the various 
ways and means of educating the masses to certain 
political ideas. This period saw the beginning of the 
newspaper. The daily Curant was first published in 
London in the year 1702. A no ther development, though of 
minor importance in itself, was suggestive of the new 
turn in the social life of the country; it was the growth 
of a large number of coffee-houses, two thousand of 
which were opened in London alone, these were centers 

i 

of sociability and provided places for the discussion 














- 13 - 


of every conceivable topic, political, economic or 
religions# Ihe growth of social life, and intercourse, 
naturally tended to minimize some of the strong 
antagonisms which had so imbittered men in previous times# 

In the eighteenth century along with the general 
diffusion of knowledge, there was a widespread interest 
in natural science# This knowledge was spread by 
public lectures, through libraries, and by a new agent, 
the encyclopaedia# 

In this period ethics were placed largely on the 
basis of reasonableness, and tended towards formality. 
Morals generally were at a low ebb, while in the upper 
classes a shallow formality predominated, with the mass 
of the people license prevailed. n It is inconceivable 
that the world of the eighteenth century could have 
| produced a Jesus of Hazareth, a Gautama, a Francis of 
Assisi, an Ignatius of Lyola. ^f one may imagine an 
eighteenth century John Huss, it is impossible to 
imagine anyone with sufficient passion to burn him." (1) 
Yet forces were at work beneath the surface of life in 
England which were to issue in matters of great importance. 

Because of their bearing on the general theme of 
this paper, the outstanding features of the scientific, 
philosophical, theological, and literary trends of the 
century will be noted briefly# 

(1) "Outline of History” H. G. Wells P. 812# 







. 

. 

. 

. 




- 14 - 


I SCIENTIFIC 

Reference has already "been made, to the fact that 
the scientific view of the world had come to be generally 
accepted* Except for those who protested in the name 
of orthodox religion, the world had graduated from the 
conceptions of the middle ages* No greater revolution 
could be thought of than, that, which would naturally 
follow the work of such men as Copernicus, G-alileo, or 
Kepler* ^heir findings had undermined the view of 
Scolasticism, and had laid the foundation for an entir¬ 
ely new conception of the universe, ^he universe became 
more interesting because it was capable of being under¬ 
stood, and was subject to definite laws* 

A very important instrument for the promotion of 
science was supplied by Francis Bacon (1561-1626) when 
he replaced the ’a priori’ syllogistic reasoning of the 
Scholastics with the inductive method. Bacon thought 
"theories and opinions and common notions so far as can 
be obtained from the stiffness, and firmness of the mind, 
should be entirely done away with, and that the under¬ 
standing should begin anew plainly ahd fairly with part¬ 
iculars, since there is no other entrance open to the 
kingdom of nature than to the kingdom of heaven, into 
which no one may enter except In the form of a little chili.’ 

"Novum Opganum" quoted from Roger’s "Student Hist of 

Philosophy" page 238. 

















. 

, I 

. 






■ . 

. 

. 








































- 15 - 


While the inductive method was important and 
served to do away with a false method of reasoning, 
it neglected the importance of 'scientific imagination 1 , 
and scientific hypothesis. Hohhes (1588-1679) supple¬ 
mented the achievement of ^acon hy stressing the import¬ 
ance of deduction in arriving at scientific truth. 
Descartes (1596-1650), further assured the future of 
the scientific method hy laying great stress on the 
validity of thought itself, ^e went so far as to make 
thought the basis of being in his famous phrase 'cogito 

ergo sum*• 

i 

Spinoza (1632-1677) carried the tendency which was 
to enhance the scientific view, a step farther, in 
stressing the importance of unity in thought. f ^he 

philosophical speculations of Leibnitz, Locke and 

. 

s erke]$r all tended to strengthen this new way of thinking 
which was to bring into its completeness the modern view 
of life, and the universe. 

^hus by the eighteenth century, the general scient¬ 
ific view is rooted, and while the century is not marked 
by any great scientific discovery comparable to that of 
Darwin (1809-1882), in the nineteenth eentury, it was 
a time when the whole trend of things provided favour¬ 
able preparation for such a discovery, ^he pioneer 
scientists had been assisted by a new and revolutionary 





- - 






- 

. 

- 

. 


. 1 

- 

. 


. 







- 16 - 


way of thinking* The seed had been sown, and the soil 
had been prepared, the scientific harvest was 
inevitable• 

II PHILOSOPHICAL 

The philosophical tendencies of the eighteenth 
century may be said to center around the names of 
Berkeley (1685-1753), Hume (1711-1776), Rousseau 
(1712-1778), Voltaire (1694-1778). 

The philosophy of the seventeenth century might be 
described by the term Rationalism, that of the eight¬ 
eenth century was slightly different and is character¬ 
ized by the term Empiricism. England Locke, 

Berkeley, and Hume were grouped under this heading* 
Empirical philosophy is highly introspective. *^he 
confidence which had been placed in reason, and the 
validity of thought in general, gave way to a sort of 
: csiticism of them* ^he question was faced, where do 
ideas or thoughts come from? Locke showed that we have 
no innate ideas, but that the mind is like a blank 
sheet of paper, upon which experience through the 
senses writes the ideas, ^his type of philosophy could 
not escape the charge of materialism. Bishop Berkeley 
swung away from this materialistic view, and showed 
that the mind could not perceive matter, but ideas only, 

which are derived from sensations. According to 







. 

\ 

. 




- 

- 

. 

- 

. 




. 




- 17 - 


Berkeley the only reality that we know is mind, and 
matter is simply a condition of mind. This was a 
refutation of the materialism of Locke, while the 
general view of knowledge was the same, namely, the 
experience of the senses. David Hume went farther 
than Berkeley. Vi/ hile Berkeley destroyed matter, &ume 
seemed to destroy mind, In his absolute scepticism 
man and science came under a cloud of undependibility 
thus empiricism had led man into a blind alley. 

While the empiricism of these philosophers ended 
thus in a thin scepticism, another movement of a more 
practical nature was taking shape in both France and 
England. This movement represented a spirit of liberty 
guided by reason and contained little reveranee for 
traditional institutions. It resented established 
authority in a church or a form of society. It was 
highly critical of entheusiam and emotionalism. It 
was a movement of emancipation and its instrument was 
the critical intellect. It was marked by two main 
features, the deistic movement and the development of 
ethical theory. "Deism was an attempt to get rid of the 
supposed irrational elements of Christianity. It began 
with a desire to explain away the mysteries of church 
dogma, and to show that between reason and revelation 
there is no contradiction." (1) 

(1) Roger 1 s "Student History of Philosophy’ 1 P 387 








> . V 


























r- • • -> 












. 






. 


. 






J 






. 



















- 18 - 


How ever the exaltation of r eason soon tended to do 
away with the necessity for revelation, consequently 
there was a rise of so-called 1 natural religion 1 . As 
already noted the main feature of Deism is, that it 
removes the deity from any connection with the world 
except, as its creator. This idea of course brought 
down the condemnation of the authorities in the church, 
though it continued to be a common way cbf thinking about 
God, and his relation to the world, in the eighteenth 
eentuiy • 

The second characteristic of the enlightenment was 
the development of ethical theory. i he natural effect 

if 

of Deism was to reduce religion to a life of moral 
J conduct. In this development of ethical theory a 
number of motives were to be found. Sometimes the 
i motive of pure self-interest dominated, while at other 
times this is replaced by a desire for true harmony. 

We have the expression of Paley f s definition of virture, 
tT the happiness of mankind is obedience to the will of 
God, and for the sake of everlasting happiness”. How¬ 
ever there was some development in the direction of 
utilitarianism, and the motive of self seeking was not 
wholly acceptable. 

^n France, the spirit of the enlightenment was 
introduced by Voltaire (1694-1778$, who had been 
touched, while in England, by the teachings of Locke. 











- - 






. 1 


. 







. 


- 


' 







. 



- 19 - 


His influence was reflected in the work of an out¬ 
standing group of men who were called Encyclopaedist. 

In France as in England the movement was marked by the 
genius of Deism, though in France much more antagonism 
was aroused as it conflicted with the authority of both 
church and state. 

While Empiricism in England had ended in the 
scepticism of Hume, in France it took the form of the 
spirit of deism, but it ended in practical atheism, 
and for God it substituted Nature. "Nature says to 
man ’thou art free 1 and no power on earth can lawfully 
strip thee of thy rights. Religion cries to him that 
f he is a slave condemned to groan under the rod of 
God’s representatives." (1) This was a fairly 
accurate representation of the attitude of the French 
enlightenment toward religion. 

About this time there came into prominence a man 
who was to be the forerunner of a most important 
movement diametrically opposed to the whole rationalistic 
outlook, his name was Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778). 
While he possessed so$e of the concepts produced in the 
Enlightenment, he swung away from its materialism and 
atheism, fife cried out for the absolute freedom of man 
from all bonds of tradition in any form. His thought 
(1) Rogers "Students History of Philosophy" p 398. 















































» » 
















. 




■ 























- 20 * 


was dominated by the idea T back to nature back to the 
natural man r • Reason must give way to that supreme 
human faculty Feeling. In the sphere of theology he 
maintained that reason always leads to scepticism, but 
feeling to belief in God, and Immortality. 

The extreme ideas of Rousseau were incorporated 
in the doctrines of the French Revolution, but they 
fou#d a better soil and produced a r icher harvest in 
Germany, where in the person of Lessing they emerged in 
a new and fruitful vie?; of life, of the world, and of 
the divine. According to his view, God was no longer 
conceived in the cold methods of rationalism, as a 
deity far removed from the world, but is seen as "act¬ 
ually present and energizing, in nature, in the course 
of human events, and in the heart of the spiritual 
experience, while all have their reality and unity in 
Him ." (1) Towards the end of the eighteenth century, 

Goethe (1749-1832) expresses a similar idea in his 
works• 

(1) "Students History of Philosophy" Rogers p 410 









1 












. 


. 

. 

. 

. 

. 











- 21 - 


III THEOLOGICAL 

The theological characteristics of the eighteenth 
century are closely interwoven with the philosophical. 

The outstanding theological idea in liberal circles was 
the doctrine of Deism, with its extreme transendent 
conception of God. ^ver against this view there was 
that of the orthodox theologian, who while his conception 
of God was also one of transendenee, held to the reality 
of God's relation to the world through the avenue of the 
miracleous. ‘ x ‘he influence of Spinoza and his followers 
was still felt and threatened to break out with new 
vitality towards the end of the century. 

17 RELIGIOUS - 

' 

The religious life of the century follows naturally 
from the theological, and philosophical ideas which held 
the field. °n one hand, the distinctive thing about the 
religion of the time was its cold formalism and emphesis 
on ethical culture, which was in bondage to human reason. 
11 The sermons of the time were almost always written, and 
the prevailing taste was cold, polished and fastidious.” 
"As is always the case, the habits prevailing in other 
spheres at once acted on, and were influenced by 
religion. x he selfishness, the corruption, the worship 
of expediency, the scepticism as to all higher motives 




- - 







' 

. 

. ■ 



- 

■ 




- 22 - 

that characterized the politicians of the school of 
Walpole; the heartless cynicism reigning in fashionable 
life,,which is so clearly reflected in the letters of 
Horace Walpole and Chesterfield; the spirit of a 
brilliant and varied contemporary literature, eminently 

distinguished for its sobriety of judgment and for its 
fastidious purity and elegance of expression, but for 
most part deficient in depth, in passion, and in 
imagination, may all be traced to popular theology. 
Sobriety and good sense were the qualities most 
| valued in the pulpit, and entheusiasm and extravagance 
were those which were most dreaded.” (1) 

As a counteraction to this cold formalism in 
! religion, the century developed a most important influ¬ 
ence in the Methodist Revival, one of the outstanding 
I events in the religious history of England, the Revival 
coming at a time when economic conditions tended to 

l 

divide the rich and the poor by an ever widening gulf, 
brought the common man into a place of prominence in 
human interest. The Revival had no part in the Deism of 
the time, but restored to all rich and poor alike a 
sense of the reality, and nearness of God, and united all 
to Him in the relationship of a new and intimate exper¬ 
ience. While the movement was oceassionally marked by 

(1) Hist of Eng. in Ei^iteenth Century” Lecky V III 

J2 S1 











. 

- 

■ 










. 




- 23 - 


excesses, and while its theological background was some¬ 
what primative, it restored warmth and life to religion 
in England. Thus with two extreme types of religious 
life, one cold and formal with a very remote conception 
of God, the other marked by extreme entheusiasm and 
miracleous conception of the divine, there were many 
people who found little satisfaction in either point 
of view. 

Y LITERARY - 

In considering the literature of eighteenth 
century England, two words stand out as representing 
the character of its expression, Classicism and Roman¬ 
ticism. ^he term Classicism or Augustan denotes, that 
type of literature of the century as expressed in the 
I writings of such men as 2?ope, Addison, Swift, Johnson, 
Burk. It represented the type of writing in which great 
stress is placed on the form of expression. ”The general 
tendency of literature was to look at life critically, 
to emphasize intellect rather than imagination, the 
form rather than the content of the sentence. Writers 
strove to repress all emotion and entheusiasm and to use 
only precise and elegant methods of expression”. (1) 

This type of literature was to fall short of true great¬ 
ness, which cannot be confined to strict rules and forms, 
to the impoverishment of content, but rather breaks 
(1) "English Literature” Wm. J. Long PhD. p 263. 













- 24 - 


through them by the power ofnits immagination and. 
inspiration* 

The other important tern to be reckoned, with in 
eithteenth century literature is Romanticism. This 
term denotes the ppirit in which the cold, forms of 
Classicism were broken. The roots of the movement, 
which was to mature in the nineteenth century, are 
found, mingled, with the classic tendencies of the period 
preceding it. The Romantic movement Ytras revived during 
the eighteenth century in the works of James Tornson 
(1700-1748) Thomas Gray tl716-1771) William Cowper 
(1731-1800) Robert Burns (1759-1796). 

Because of the important relationship of Romanticism 
i to this thesis, its main features are noted here. 

Victor Hugo defined Romanticism as "liberalism in 
literature" The movement can be characterized broadly 
by the word freedom. The early Romantic poets - 
mentioned above reflect in their work the struggle 
between the Romantic and the Classic spirits. The 
new wine was bursting the old wineskins. 

Dr. Wm. Long in his book, "English Literature" 
gives six main characteristics of the Romantic phase 
of literature. 

First - It is always marked by a strong protest 
against the bondage of rule and custom which tend 








- 25 - 


gene rally to T fetter the free human spirits 

Second - In the movement there is a return to 
nature and to humanity for its material. n The 
seasons” by Tomson shows this characteristic very 
plainly especially the tendency to a new interest 
in nature. 

Third - It brought to life again the dreamer of 
a golden age, in which the ideals of youth take 
precedence over the sterner realities of life. 

Fourth - The movement is marked by a new tender¬ 
ness and human sympathy, it exalts the sympathetic 
heart above the reason and intellect. Ihere is a cry 
against human oppression, especially in the writings 
of Burns. 

Fifth - There is a strong tendency by reason of 
the freedom of the movement to develop greater individ¬ 
uality. 

Sixth - ‘^here is in this movement - while it is 
liberal in spirit and tends to break away from rule - a 
profound reverence for the past, and the old masters, it 
draws much of its inspiration from Spencer, Shakespere, 
and Milton. 

The presentation of the general character of 
Romantic poetry serves as an introduction to the poet 
whose thought is to be studied here, for in his work 
the expression of Romanticism reached its height. 









- 26 - 


SECTION THREE 

THE INFLUENCES WHICH PLAYED A PART IN MOULDING 
WORDSWORTH'S THEOLOGICAL IDEAS 
In this section consideration will be given to 
the development of Wordsworth's mind, with special 
reference to those influences which had a marked effect 
upon him and his thinking. The main source of this 
information is his work fT The Prelude”, which presents 
his own account of the development of his thought. 

I PARENTS, SCHOOL, NATURE 
In evaluing the influences which go to make or 
marr a man, it is natural to begin with a consideration 
of his home and parents. In the case of Wordsworth, 
there is not a great deal to note in this connection. 
His mother died when he was eight years of age, and 
his father when he was fourteen. °f his father he 
has told us nothing in his poems. However he devotes 
some lines to his mother, and from these^is clear 
she exerted a happy influence upon him in those tender 
impressionable years. 

She, not falsely taught, 

Fetching her goodness rather from times past, 

Than shaping novelties for times to come, 

Had no presumption, no such jealousy, 

Nor did by habit of her thought mistrust 
Our nature, but had virtual faith that He 
Who fills the mother's breast with innocent milk, 
Doth also for our nobler part provide, 

Under His great correction and control, 

As innocent instincts, and as innocent food; 







- 27 - 


Such was she - not from faculties more strong 
Than others have, but from the times, perhaps, 

And spot in which she lived, and through a grace 
Of modest meekness, simple-mindedness, 

A heart that found benignity and hope, 

Being itself benign. (1) 

The influence of this gracious lady of simple 
faith, was an important factor in the childhood of the 
poet, it could not be otherwise. 

Wordsworth as a child was particularily sensitive 
to Nature, and while he never graduated from this 
sensitiveness, in those early years there is little 
doubt that nature had more influence over him than 
any other phase of his experience. The Prelude opens 
with these lines. 

0 there is blessing in this gentle breeze, 

A visitant that while it fans my cheek 
Both seem half conscious of the joy it brings 
Prom the green fie Us and from the azure sky. 

What e’er its mission, the soft breeze can come 
To none more grateful than to me. (2) 

None could be more grateful than he in all the 

moods of Nature which he so well understood. They were 

for his a source of joy, which at times knew no bounds 

and seemed to defy expression. 

Was it for this 

^hat one, the fairest of all rivers, loved 
To blend his murmurs with my nurse’s song, 


(1) Prelude Bk V L 267-277, 288-293 

(2) " Bk I L 1-6 













- 28 - 


And, from his alder shades and r ocky falls, 

And from his fords and shallows, sent a voice 
That flowed along my dreams? For this, didst thou, 

0 DerwentI winding among grassy holms 
Where I was looking on, a babe in arms, 

Make ceaseless music that composed my thought 

To more than infant softness, giving me 

Amid the fretful dwellings of mankind 

A foretaste, a dim earnest, of the calm 

That Nature breathes amonge the hills and groves,(1) 

Though a soft west wind 
Ruffled the waters to the anglers wish 
For a whole day together, have I lain 
Down by thy side 0 derwentl murmuring stream, 

On the hot stones, and in the glaring sun, 

And there have read, devouring as I read, 

Defrauding the day*s glory, desperate I 
Till with a sudden bound of smart reproach. 

Such as an idler deals with in his shame. 

I to the sport betook myself again. (2) 

While, as a boy he was fond of reading, the first 

place in his affections was held by Nature. 

In these early days of childhood he possessed a 

sense of liberty. a e lived so much in the open with 

the spaciousness of Nature, that all the Romantic 

tendencies found in nature, played upon him. ^e says 

Dear Libertyl Yet what would it avail 
But for a gift that consecrates the joy? 

Tor I methought, while the sweet breath of heaven 
Was blowing on my body, felt within 
A correspondent breeze, that gently moved 
With quickening virture, but is now become 
A tempest, a redundant energy, 

Vexing its own creation. (3) 

(1) Prelude Bk I L 269-281 

(2) " Bk V 480-490 

(3) " Bk V 538-545 












- 29 - 


I at this time, 

Saw blessings spread around me like a sea. 

Thus while the days flew by, and years passed on 
From Nature and her overflowing soul, 

I had received so much, that all my thoughts 
Were steeped in feeling; I was only then 
Contented, when with bliss ineffable 
I felt the sentiment of Being spread 
0®er all that moves and all that seemeth still; 
O f er all that, lost beyond the reach of thought 
And human knowledge, to the human eye 
Invisible, yet liveth to the heart; (1) 

: In the light of these passages, it is certain that in 

Nature, Wordsworth in these early years had come in 

close touch with one of the greatest influences of 

his whole experience. The impressions made upon him 

could never die, but would become a part of his 

philosophy of life, or colour it completely. 

The freedom of the grammar school at Hawkshead, 

which he attended from 1778-1787, was a factor in 

allowing Nature to have full play upon his young life 

"Wordsworth described the time spent at Hawkshead as 

the happiest most fruitful period of his life." (2) 

A reference to one of his teachers shows the happy 

influence this school period had been. 

This faithful guide, speaking from his deathbed, 
Added no farewell to his parting counsel, 

But said to me, *My head will soon lie low;® 

And when I s«w the turf that covered him 
After the lapse of full eight years, those words 
With sound of voice and countenance of the Man 
Came back upon me, so that some few tears 
Fell from me in my own despite...... 

(1) Prelude II L 394-405 

(2) "Early Life of Wordsworth" E.Legois p 29 







I 



- 30 - 


He loved the poets, and, if now alive, 

Would have loved me, as one not destitute 
Of promise, not belying the kind hope 
That he had formed, when I, at his command, 

Began to spin, with toil, my earliest songs. (1) 

A reference to the lady at whose cottage he boarded 

in his school days shows another influence which went to 

make his school days happy, and free, and rich. 

Glad welcome had I with some tears perhaps, 

From my old dame, so kind and motherly, 

While she perused me with a parents pride. 

The thoughts of gratitude shall fall like dew 
Upon thy grave, good creature. (2) 

The influence of Nature, the freedom and the 

pleasure of his school life enriched by the kindly 

maternal care of Anne Tyson, made of this period a time 

of spiritual growth unhampered by repressions and strict 

orthodox teaching. About this time Rousseau had exerted 

considerable influence in England, and his conception of 

the importance of the natural man free from conventions 

and restraining influences, ware finding expression in 

a life which was particularily adapted to it, that life 

was Wordsworth’s. 

Our childhood sits, 

Our simple childhood, sits upon a throne 

That hath more power than all the elements. (3) 


(1) Prelude Bk X L 536-551 

(2) 11 Bk 17 L 27-31 

(3) " Bk 7 L 507-610 














( I 


. 

* 
















. 


















- 










-Si¬ 


ll CAMBRIDGE 

The sojurn of Wordsworth at Cambridge (1787-1791), 
beginning as it did when he was seventeen, was important, 
almost as much because of the way in which it did not 
affect him, as it was for the actual influence it 
exerted on his mind* He was not gripped by anything 
the university had to present, and in this period as 
before, Nature continued to be his most trusted teacher, 
though the social life, and activity had some influence 
| towards his development* 

IT The young student entered Cambridge during one of 
| the least brilliant epochs in the history of the old 

I T 

University* x t was then in the veiy last stage of 
intellectual langour* During the years immediately 
preceding the violent excitement of the French Revolution 
its atmosphere was heavy and drowsy, as if at the 

approach of a tempest.. To tell the truth 

learning was not in high repute at Cambridge, which was 
more especially the stronghold of Anglicanism and the 
nursery of the clergy." (1) 

The orthodox teachings of the church at this time 
were devoid of inspiration, for one who had known the 
freedom and grandure of Nature, and under the free and 
happy influences at Hawkshead had found it the best 
teacher of divinity. The cold, formal, deistic 
(1) "Early Life of Wordsworth" E. Legois p 71-2 

















, 

. 
















.... 



- 22 - 


influences of the university had little effect on the 
poets mind so that he still sat at the feet of his 


old teacher. 


Unknown, unthought of yet I was most rich- 
I had a world about me - 1 2 twas my own; 

I made it, for it only lived to me, 

And to the G-od who sees into the heart. (1) 

The impressions of the value which the poet found 

in the period spent at Cambridge are well expressed in 

the following lines. 


Could I behold 


With undelighted heart. 
So many happy youths, so wide and fair 
A congregation in its budding time 
Of health, and hope, and beauty, all at once 
So many divers samples from the growth 
Of life f s sweet season-could have seen unmoved 
That miscellaneous garland of wild flowers 
Decking the matron temples of a place 
So famous through the world? 


if a throng was near 

That way I leaned by nature; for my heart 
Was social, and loved idleness and joy. (2) 


The period had a value in that he developed under 


the social life of the place a larger place in his life 


for human fellowship. But the futility and the hollow¬ 
ness of ceremony, the disregard for new and vital truth 
aroused the soul of the poet and is expressed here. 


Youth should be awed, religiously, possessed 
With a conviction of the power that waits 
On knowledge, when sincerely sought and prized 
For its own sake.. 


(1) Prelude Bk III L 143-146 

(2) » Bk III L 216-235 















- 33 - 


A healthy sound simplicity should reign, 

A seemly plainess, name it what you will, 
Republican or pious. 

If these thoughts 
Are a gratuitous emblazonry 
That modes the recreant age we live in, then 
Be Folly and False-seeming ffcee to effect 
Whatever formal gait of discipline 
Shall raise them highest in their own esteem- 
Let them parade among the schooles at will, 
But spare the house of God. 


Be wise, 

Ye Presidents and deans, and till the spirit 
Of ancient times rivive, and youth be trained 
At home in pious service, to your bells 
Give reasonable rest, for T tis a sound 
Hollow as ever vexed the tranquil air; 

And your officious doings bring disgrace 

On the plain steeples of our English Church. (1) 

This passage sheds a light on Wordsworth 1 s love of 

reality, and reverence for true piety; it also shows 

how he resented the attempts at compulsory religious 

practices in which little reality existed; consequently 

it shows how impossible it was for him to find any 

great stimulus in the life of Cambridge, as far as his 

theology and his religious convictions were concerned. 

He is still thrown back on his true teacher Nature. 

Ill FRENCH RE70HJTION 

Further influences in the life of the poet which 
could hardly be over estimated were the French, and the 
French Revolution. It could scarcely have heen other¬ 
wise with anyone living in his day and with his sensitive¬ 
ness of soul. H e went to France in 1791 at the age of 
(1) Prelude Bk III L 390-419 













- 34 - 


twenty-one, and became entheused over the Revolution. 

Meantime, day by day, the roads 
Were crowded with the bravest youth of France, 

And all the promptness of her spirits, linked 
In gallant soldiership... 

Even by these passing spectacles my heart 
Was oftentimes uplifted, and they seemed 
Arguments sent from Heaven to prove the cause 
Good, pure, which no one could stand up against, 
Who was not lost, abandoned, selfish, proud, 

^an miserable, wilfully depraved, 

Hater perverse of equity and truth. (1) 

In his boyhood Wordsworth had been absorbed 

with nature now in his young manhood he was absorbed 

in his thoughts of Man. He became acquainted with a 

young army officer by the name of Beaupuy, who exerted 

a great influence over him. 

By birth he ranked 

With the most noble, but unto the poor 
Among mankind he was in service bound, 

As by some tie invisible, oaths professed 
To a religious order. Man he loved 
As man; and, to the mean and the obscure, 

And all the homely in their homely works, 
Transferred a courtesy which had no air 
Of condescension. (2) 

Beaupuy who was considerably older than Wordsworth, 

was at this time his teacher, as well as his hero. He 

was on fire with the religion of Humanity, which had 

been inspired by Rousseau*s doctrines. 

(1) Prelude Bk IX L 262-287 

(2) « Bk IX L 303-311 













- 25 - 


Something of the idealism shared by the soldier- 

philosopher, and the poet, is seen in the lines, 

To aspirations then of our own minds 
Did we appeal; and, finally, beheld 
A living confirmation of the whole 
Before us, in a people from the deepth 
Of shameful imbecility uprisen, 

Fresh as the morning star. Elate we looked 
Upon their virtues:; saw, in rudest men. 
Self-sacrifice the firmest; generous love, 

And continence of mind, and sense of right, 
Uppermost in the midst of strife. (&) 

Then doubt it not, and truth is more than truth,- 

A hope it is, and a desire; a creed 

Of zeal, by an authority Divine 

Sanction of danger, difficulty, or death. (2) 

In this frame of mind, 

Dragged by a chain of harsh necessity, 

So seemed it,-now I thankfully acknowledge, 

Forced by the gracious Providence of Heaven- 
To England I returned. (3) 

He returned to his native land with these revol¬ 
utionary ideals, filling his mind and soul, to take a 
keen interest in the political affairs of his country 
and to give his allegience to the Republican party. 
During the war between England and France his feelings 
find expression in the lines. 

It was a grief- 

Grief call it not, y twas anything but that- 
A conflict of sensations without name, 

(1) Prelude Bk IX L 381-390 

(2) " Bk IX L 404-407 
(3$ " Bk X L 221-225 




























































- 36 - 


Of which only, who may love the sight 
Of a village steeple, as I do, can judge, 

When in the congregation bending all 

To their great Father, prayers were offered up, 

Or praises for our countries victories; 

And r mid the simple worshipers, perchance 

I only, like an uninvited guest 

Whom no one owned, sate silent, shall I add, 

Fed on the day of vengeance yet to come. (1) 

When the glorious hopes and high expectations of 

the Revolution had been replaced by the reign of Terror, 

Wordsworth sank into a mood of utter despair. 

Then suddenly the scene 
Changed, and the unbroken dream entangled me 
In long orations, which I strove to plead 
Before unjust tribunals, - with a voice 
Labouring, a brain confounded, and a sense, 
Death-like, of treacherous desertion, felt 
In the last place of refuge - my own soul. (2) 

In this hour of despondency, the poet went to 

nature for comfort, but Nature had become a term with 

deeper meaning and larger content. Nature now to a 

dggree unrealized by him before included, Man. 

And as the desert hath green spots, the sea, 

Small islands scattered amid stormy waves. 

So that disasterous period did not want 
Bright sprinklings of all human excellence, 

To which the silver wands of saints in heaven 
May point with rapturous joy. (3) 


(1) Prelude 2 L 288-299 

(2) " " " 409-415 

(3) " " " 480-485 









- 37 - 


About the time Wordsworth had experienced the 
disillusionment of the Revolution he came under the 
influence of William G-oodwin, a pupil of Rousseau, 
hut one who had gone to extremes. G-oodwin rejected 
the Deism of Roussean and was practically an atheist* 

His extreme ideas of personal liberty amounted to 
moral anarchy. He made reason the final authority in 
his philosophy. His influence on Wordsworth is seen 
in this passage. 

But speaking more in charity the dream 
Flattered the young, pleased with extremes, nor 

least 

With that which makes our Reason 1 s naked self 
The object of its fervor. What delight i 
Hoy/ gloriousl in self-knowledge and self-rule, 

To look through all the frailties of the world, 

And, with a resolute mastery shaking off 
Infirmities of nature, time, and place, 

Build social upon personal liberty, 

Which to the blind restraints of general laws 
Superior, magisterially adopts 
One guide, the light of circumstance, flashed 
Upon the independent intellect. (1) 

Wordsworth does not surrender to the pessimism in 

which he found himself at the time of his disappointment. 

Depressed, bewildered thus, I did not walk 
With scoffers, seeking light and gay revenge 
From indiscriminate laughter, nor sate down 
In reconcilement with an utter waste 
Of intellect; such sloth I could not brook, 

(To well I loved, in that my spring of life, 

Pains-taking thoughts, and truth, their dear 

reward). 


(1) Prelude XI L 232-244 







- 38 - 


But turned to abstract science, and there sought 
Work for the reasoiling faculty enthroned. (1) 

IV FRIENDSHIP OF COLERIDGE 
A consideration of the various influences which 
played upon the life of Wordsworth could not overlook 
his long, and deep, friendship with Coleridge (1772-1834) 
The friendship of these two great figures of 
Romantic poetry began in the year 1795, when they met 
for the first time. That friendship was based on Mutual 
understanding, and mutual admiration, though there was 
a marked difference between them in the matter of temper- 
ment. Wordsworth was slow, methodical and not easily 
turned from his views. Coleridge was quick, impulsive 
and impressionable. Coleridge had been affected by the 
Revolution in much the same way as Wordsworth, and he 
had also come under the spell of Godwin for a time. 
Coleridge gave much more formal allegiance to orthodox 
religion than ?/ordsworth, whom he referred to at one 
time as a T semi-atheist T . Goleridge had been greatly 
influenced by the doctrines of Spinoza whose views he 
discussed with Wordsv/orth from time to time. Coleridge 
had received much from the Neo-Jilatonists of the Alex¬ 
andrian school, and possessed a vivid faith in the power 
of intuition, ecstasy, and divine love. At the time of 


(1) Prelude XI L 321-329 











- 39 - 


their meeting it was a most fortunate experience for 
Wordsworth, who needed the stimulus of the encourage¬ 
ment which Coleridge lavished upon him. While 
Wordsworth did not accept Coleridge*s views readily, he 

! 

was very considerably Influenced in the matter of his 
theology and religion. On their first meeting Wordsworth 
read "The Ruined Cottage", Coleridge his "Religious 
Musings". We noted that Wordsworth, following Godwin, 
had been inclined to place Reason on the throne, 

Coleridge tald dethrone reason in favour of Love, through 
which alone we preceive God. The orthodox nature of 
Coleridge f s faith is seen in the passage, 

Believe thou, 0 my soul, 

Life is a vision shadowy of truth, 

And vice and anguish, and the wormy grave, 

Shapes of a dream! The veiling clouds retire, 

And lol the throne of the redeeming God 
Forth flashing unimaginable day 

Wraps in one blaze earth, heaven, and the deepest 

hell. (1) 

While Coleridge influenced Wordsworth to some 
extent towards a more orthodox religious faith, Words¬ 
worth influenced Coleridge toward a greater appreciation 
of nature. 

Of rivers, fields, 

And groves I speak to thee, my Friend! to thee, 

Who, yet a liveried achoolboy, in the depths 
Of the huge city, on the leaded roof 
Of that wide edifice, thy school and home, 

Wert used to lie and gaze upon the clouds 
Moving in heaven, or, of that pleasure tired, 


(1) Coleridge "Religious Musings" L 422-428 






. 

. - , . 

. 

4 

, 

, 

I 

' l 

' 

. 




















- 40 - 


To shut thine eyes, and hy internal light 
See trees, and meadows, and thy native stream 
Far distant, thus beheld from year to year 
Of a long exile. (1) 

Thus while the friendship enriched the lives of 
both poets, the influence of Coleridge upon Wordsworth 
in restoring him to something of the joy and wonder in 
life, which was his portion in childhood, but lost to 
some degree in his experience of the revolution, was a 
great service to mankind, for it gave to the poet’s 
thought a new and deeper theological quality. 

In summarizing the influences which were out 

I 

standing in the life of Wordsx^orth, especially those 
which would have a bearing upon his idea of Gk>d and 
His relation to the world, the first and possibly the 
most important was that of Nature, in his childhood. 

His younger days were free and unhampered by any strict 
school, rather was Hawkshead a place conducive to the 
development of his sensativeness to Nature. His 
experience at Cambridge did not leave any theological 
impression with him and only discouraged him from the 
orthodox views of the times. £‘he Revolution enlarged 
his view of Mature to include Man, though the disappoint¬ 
ments of the results of this social upheaval unsettled 
him greatly. His friendship with Coleridge restored 
his spirit and gave him a more orthodox view of theology, 








' 

. 


. 










* 


. 

. 

. 











-Al¬ 


though it did not weaken the independence of his 
thinking. 










- 42 - 


WORDSWORTH 1 S CONCEPTION OF OOI) 

In approaching the subject of Wordsworth’s con¬ 
ception of God, it is to be noted, that he did not 

make formal declarations of his creed. He was a poet, 

■ 

not a theologian, possibly not even interested in 
theology, as such* &e was merely describing his impressions 
of Nature and experience, as they had registered upon 
his mind, though the medium of poetry* That his 
experiences brought to him a consciousness of God, 
there can be no doubt* used the word ^od freely 
throughout his works, as well as various other terms 
which have a similar significance* It has been noted 
that the tendency of the century previous to the time 
in which he wrote the most of his important poems, was 
toward a conception of God as working in and consequently 
to be found, in the universe, in nature and her laws. 

I The romantic movement had intensified this tendency 
because of its preoccupation with the beauty of nature 
and the dignity of man. The tendency would be that, if 

ij 

Wordsworth was to find God, he would find him in the 
universe, as he understood it and found himself in 
relation to it. (the Deism of the orthodox theologians 

4 - 

coulld have little influence on a Romantic poet. The 
extreme transendence of the whole orthodox section of 
the church had little or no place in the thought of 
Wordsworth. 

















- 43 - 


The natural consequence of Wordsworth’s lack of 
interest in the Deism of his day w)uld he, that he 
would tend to find a satisfying conception in the 
direction of Pantheism. A further probability would be 
that even though he did not go to the extreme limits of 
the pantheistic view of God, he would go far enough in 
that direction to arouse the criticism of those who 
were interested in orthodox Christianity. It is quite 
conceivable that even though his conception of God was 
that of Immanence, rather than Pantheism, he might have 
received the same criticism. x he criticism might have 
been based on misunderstanding rather than on actual 
Pantheism, ^‘his idea is hinted at in Professor De 
Selincourt’s introduction to !f Wordsworth’s Prelude 1 ’. 
’’Moreover, he felt a deep sense of responsibility as a 
teacher, and he had good reason to know that he was 

misunderstood. Both Lines composed.above Tintern 

Abbey and the Ode; ’Intimations of Immortality’, had 
proved a stumblingblock to many. He was accused, even 
by the readers of ”The Excursion”, of not distinguishing 
’Nature as the work of God and God himself’.” (1) 

A further caution in our approach to a true under¬ 
standing of Wordsworth’s conception of God would be 
related to the point of his emphesis. Naturally by 
"Wordsworth’s Prelude” E. De Selincourt P LIX 














I 




' :' i . ■. . > 

■ * r. 1 v.' . .I 


• r V •. i 












, . d . . :: .. . » - 



- 44 - 


virtue of his romantic spirit, and his consequent 
interest in nature and in man, as the field in which 
he sought and discovered the reality of God, his 
emphesis would tend to he on the idea of Immanence, 

I 

and the transendent phase of his theology would not he 
so liable to find expression* It might rather he 
taken for granted than expressed in actual words or 
phrases. 

To those who would charge Wordsworth with Pan¬ 
theism, it could he pointed out, that due to the fine 
i distinction between the idea of Pantheism and that of 
Immanence, the further vagueness of poetic expression 
and his natural point of emphesis as a Romantic poet, 
the possibility of misunderstanding his theological 
viev^s is quite strong* 

To support the charge of Pantheism it would he 
I necessary to show that in the view of Wordsworth 
expressed in his poems there was no place for belief 
in the reality of God, apart from the universe as he 
saw it in Nature, and in Man. 

To refute the charge of Pantheism it would he 
necessary to show from his works, that he did have a 
conception of God in which there was an element of 
transendence. That God was not limited to these worldly 
spheres hut existed to some degree above and apart 
from them* 





■ 

. 

- 




- 45 - 


II HIS PANTHEISM 

Those who charge Wordsworth with Pantheism acknow¬ 
ledge that it is more marked in his earlier writings, 
and becomes less apparent in his later work. It has 
been pointed out that in his earlier life he was more 
under the sway of nature. Nature was his first teacher 
and the entheusiasm in which his first lessons were 
learned, even though they were expressed in poems, some¬ 
what later would tend to place the emphesis on the 
pantheisistic side. 

That which we see of forms and images 
Which float along our minds, and what we feel 
Of active or recognizable thought, 

Prospectiveness, or intellect, or will, 

Not only is not worthy to be deemed 
Our being, to be prized as what we are 
But is the very littleness of life. 

Such consciousness I deem but accidents, 

Relapses from the one interior life 
That lives in all things, sacred from the touch 
Of that false secondary power by which 
In weakness we create distinctions, then 
Believe that all our puny boundaries are things 
Which we perceive and not which we have made; 

In which all beings live with God, themselves 
Are God, existing in the mighty whole, 

As indistinguishable as the cloudless East 
At noon is from the cloudless west when all 
The hemisphere is one cerulean blue. (1) 

Here Wordsworth is drawing a contrast between the 
power of reason or intellect, and a state of passive¬ 
ness in which %ture through our senses imparts to us 
a consciousness of God* This sensationalism is similar 

(1) Fragment referred to by Prof. Be Selincourt. 

"Prelude n page 512 









- 46 - 


to that developed by Locke, Berkeley and Hume* 

In which all ebings live with God, themselves 

Are God, . 

indistinguishable etc* 

Here we have what is perhaps the most outstanding 

statement of Wordsworth, which provided a basis for 

charging him with pantheistic doctrine* It would seem 

that in this passage he has come very near saying ’all 

is God®. It seems more proper to think of this section 

of the passage as an overwhelming mystical experience 

induced by Nature, and expressed rather extravagantly. 

’Themselves are God 1 , could be said to be a poetic way 

of enhancing the phrase ’In which all beings live with 

God’. %e phrase,’line nine’, of the passage quoted 

would almost save it from sheer pantheism, ’the one 

interior life that lives in all things’, Reference is 

made here to something which transends at least the 

processes of thought and reason. While it may not be 

a real expression of a transendent idea, the door is 

not completely closed to the idea of transendence* 

Another passage which was used to substantiate 

the charge of Pantheism is quoted here* 

My mind hath look’d 

Upon the speaking face of earth and heaven 
As her prime Teacher, intercourse witji man 
Establish’d by the sovereign Intellect t 
Who through that bodily immage hath diffus s 
A soul divine which we participate, * 

A deathless spirit. (1) 

(1) Prelude Book V L 11-17 1805-6 Edition 











t 






















I 


' 






* 




• 




1 




• ' 





■ 
















' -• « 

» 7 

7 . V 

. . 












. 



















- 47 - 


The above passage, quoted here as it was first 
written, was one of the passages which Wordsworth con¬ 
sidered it necessary to change because of its pan¬ 
theistic flavour* 11 he passage might be described as 
one which tends toward the conception of Immanence. 

’The speaking face of earth and heaven 1 , is referred to 

as the Teacher. This would seem to imply that Nature 

was an instrument through which something which trans- 

ended it was mediated to the soul of the poet. Further 

’sovereign Intellect’ diffusing a soul divine through 

bodily immage, etc. at least does not deny the reality 

of a transendent element in the supreme reality, in 

fact it almost implies such an element. 

Add unto this subservience from the first 
To God and Nature T s single sovereignty, 

Familiar presences of awful power 

And fellowship with venerable books 

To sanction the proud workings of the soul, 

And mountain liberty. (1) 

This is another of the passages Wordsworth felt, 
aught to be changed toward a more orthodox view. f To 
God and Nature’s single sovereignty 1 , does not rule 
out the idea of transendence. Tt could almost be read 
as a blending of Immanence and transendence in a single 
sovereignty. The idea of subservience to this supreme 
sovereignty does not imply pantheism. 

(1) Prelude Bk IX L 233-238 (1805-6) Edition. 






















. 














r 

















♦ 

1 1 


































- 48 - 


A poem into which might he read considerable of 
pantheistic tendency is pointed out by Professor De 
Selincourt as the embodiment of Wordsworth*s religious 
creed, and is one of his best know works, "Lines com- 

' 

posed a few miles above Tintern Abbey". To quote from 


an introductory note to the poem written by Wordsworth 


himself "no poem of mine was composed under circumstances 
more pleasant for me to remember than this". As he 
revisits an old haunt he recounts how the images id his 
mind of this view has affected him, as a source of 
strength, of pleasure, and of understanding of the 


universe. 

Nor less, I trust, 

To them I may have owed another gift, 

Of aspect more sublime; that blessed mood, 

In which the burden of the mystery, 

In which the heavy and the weary weight 
Of this unintelligible world, 

Is lightened:- that serenee and blessed mood, 

In which the affections gently lead us on, 

Until, the breath of this corporeal frame 
And even the motion of our human blood 
Almost suspended, we are laid asleep 
In body, and become a living soul: 

While with an eye made quiet by the power 
Of harmony, and the deep power of joy 
We see into the life of things. (1) 

To fathom the depths of such expression must ever 

be an unfinished task for the ordinary person. It is 


impossible to escape the feeling that here is the 


expression of a deeply religious spirit whose experience 
of the Supreme Reality is first hand. Through Nature 
1)"Lines Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey" 



















































- 49 - 


the poet, fully conscious of the intellectual problems 
life presents has a spiritual experience which assures 
him of a harmony in things strong enough to bring him 
Joy* In this part of the poem the spiritual takes 
precedence over the physical. It hardly suggests 
pantheism* The affections gently lead us on. Love 
plays a part in our approach to understanding the 
Supreme Reality. The word ecstasy might describe the 
experience, but it is the ecstasy of spiritual discovery• 
The poet continues to recount the pleasures of the 
prospect before him and the change which has taken 
place within himself since his boyhood when, 

like a roe 

I bounded o T er the mountains, by the sides 
Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams, 

Where ever nature led: More like a man 
Flying from something that he dreads, than one 
Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then 
(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days, 

And their glad animal movements all gone by) 

To me was all in all. 

H ere Wordsworth notes a change in himself a widening 
of his horizon, from the sphere fl>f his first lessons 
at the feet of his beloved teacher Mature, to one 
which includes man, with his evil and his sadness. 

For I have learned 

To look on Mature, not as in the hour 
Of thoughtless youth; but hearing of tentimes 
The still, sad music of humanity, 

Hot harsh nor grating, though of ample power 
To chasten and subdue. And I have felt 
A presence that disturbs me with the Joy 











- 50 - 


Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime 
Of something far more deeply interfused 
Whose dwelling is the light of settling suns 
And the round ocean, and the living air, 

And the blue sky, and in the mind of man: 

A motion and a spirit, that impels 

All thinking things, all objects of all thought, 

And rolls through all things, therefore am I still 
A lover pf the meadows and the woods, 

And mountains; and of all that we behold 
FQr this green earth; of all the mighty world 
Of eye, and ear, -both what they half create, 

And what pereeive; well pleased to recognize 
In nature and the language of the sense, 

The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse, 
f «^he guide, the guardian of my heart and soul 
Of all my moral being. 

To read this passage as the utterance of a pantheist 
would not be altogether unreasonable. From the line 
beginning, 'Whose dwelling is the light of setting sons 1 , 
to 'rolls through all things 1 , would suggest such 
interpretation. Yet it does not seem possible to cover 
the full meaning of this whole section quoted above, 
by the term pantheism. 

And I have felt 

A presence that disturbs me with a joy 


something far more deeply interfused. 

The term, ’a presence 1 , would seem to indicate an 
element of transendence. ^he presence is an intrusion, 
it disturbs with a joy of elevated thoughts. It is 
like inspiration breaking in from a spiritual world. 
Moreover it creates in the mind of the poet a 'sense 
sublime of something far more deeply interfused'. 












-Sl¬ 


it suggests the expression contained in the passage 
referred to above, f in one interior life*. It seems 
that the poet is seeking to express a reality which 
transends his power to perceive. 

’Well pleased to recognize in Nature the language 
of the sense*, Wordsworth places great emphesis on this 
sensationalism, yet it is but an instrument In bringing 
to his soul something which lies beyond the senses. 

Nature is an ’anchor*, ’the nurse’, ’the guide’, ’the 
guardian*, all these terms represent functions minister¬ 
ing to his soul, to his moral being. 

it is true that he speaks of himself as a worshiper 

A 

of nature. Later in Tintern Abbey he says 

’’and that I, so long 
A worshipper of Nature, hither came 
Unwearied in that service.** 

While Wordsworth in his earlier life was a worshipper 

| 

I of N a ture, it was a worship wn which nature reflected 
some reality beyond itself. It induced in the soul of 
the poet, stren^Bh and pleasure, and understanding of the 
universe, it inspired him with the consciousness of a 
’presence*, it was an inspiration to him, because it 
was alive with manifestations of God. fhere is some 
ground for calling him a pantheist, yet there seems to 
h@ an element, even in his poems, which gave rise to 









- 52 - 


this description of him, which transend the strict 
limits of pantheism. 

II MODIFICATIONS 

The Prelude or ’Growth of a Poet f s mind 1 has 
special significance for anyone seeking to understand 
the theology of Wordsworth. It is the introduction to 
a larger work he had planned to call the "Recluse”, of 
which the "Excursion”, was the first instalment. The 
Prelude deals with the development of the poet’s thought, 
and was published after his death, though it was 
written by 1805-6, and revised by himself considerably 
throughout his life, ^he process of revision is noted 
by considering a number of Manuscripts of the work which 
are in existence some quite complete and in good cond¬ 
ition, though others are fragmentary and mutilated. 

In Professor De Selincourt T s edition of the Prelude, 
he gives two readings of the poem; on one side of the 
page the poem as it was at the time it was completed in 
1805-6, on the other page, the edition which was 
published after Wordsworth*s death in 1850. Many 
changes are noted dealing with various phases of the 
poets work. In one section of the Introduction, Prof¬ 
essor De Selincourt notes the changes between the 1805-6 
edition and the 1850 edition which have a bearing on 
Wordsworth’s religious views, ^hese will be noted here 










- 53 - 


as they are related to the matter of the poets tendency 
towards pantheism. 

(1) In Prelude Bk 1 line 341 1805-6 edition, Wordsworth 
writes 

The mind of man is framed even like the breath 
And harmony of music: 

In the parallel passage of the 1850 edition this 
is changed to. 

Dust as we are, the immortal spirit grows 
Like harmony in music; 

This passage indicates that Wordsworth was anxious 
to remove any marks of unorthodox teaching from his 
work, and in this case he does erase a hint at pan¬ 
theism, by contrasting f dust as we are f with the 
r immortal spirit 1 . 

(2) In Bk 5 line 15,16 1805-6 

Who through that bodily image hath difussed 
A soul divine which we participate, 

A deathless ppnrit. 

becomes in 1850 

V/ho through the bodily image hath diffused 
As might appear to eye of fleeting time, 

A deathless spirit. 

(3) In Bk 9 line 237 

To God and nature’s single sovereignty 
becomes in 1850 

Presences of God f s mysterious power 
Made manifest in natures sovereignty. 

(4) In Bk 2 line 429-30 

For in all things now 
I saw one life, and felt that it was joy 








- 54 - 


beeomes in 1850 

Communing in this sort through earth and heaven 
With every form of creature, as it looked 
Towards the Uncreated, with a countenance 
Of adoration, with an eye of love. 

(5) Book 11 line 234-8 1805-6 

I worshipped then among the depths of things 

As my soul hade me-. 

I felt and nothing else 

becomes in 1850 

Worshipping then among the depths of things 

As piety ordained. 

I felt, observed, and pondered. 

(6) Book 13 line 183-4 

i 

The feeling of life endless, the great thought 
By which we live, Infinity and G-od 

becomes in 1850 

Faith in life endless, the sustaining thought 
Of human Being, Eternity and Uod. 

In the above passages only 1,2,3,4, are of much 

importance in relation to Wordsworth*s pantheism. The 

I other passages show a general tendency with the passing 

of time towards a definite desire to adhere to orthodox 

Christianity. While this dulls the vigor and the realism 

of the poets earlier work, it does not follow that he 

was not being true to his convictions. In the passages 

quoted, no surrender has been made of anything which 

was fundamental in his mind before. It was merely 

overlaid with a touch of orthodoxy which seems out of 










_ 






. 








* 


l 













I 




0 









' ’ ■■■ 









t 

« 


I .... 








. 





















- 55 - 


place. Professor De Selincourt deplores fohe changes 
which Wordsworth affected in such lines as have been 
quoted but goes on to say* "The revised Prelude 
represents another, less independent creed. Ihe 
position into which he had now withdrawn was not for 
him a false position. He was sincere, now as ever. 

But if he was conscious of a change, as it is abundantly 
clear that he was, he would surely have done better to 
leave as it stood what he had first written for Coleridge, 
and, instead of disguising his former faith, to have 
expounded in a book of the Recluse, or elsewhere the 
reasons that led him to move from it, and the manner 
in which it could be reconciled with the tenets of an 
historic church* TT (1) 

Ihe changes which Wordsworth made in the various 
revisions of the Prelude show that he was not a 
thorough-going panteist. The passages which deal with 
this phase of this thought show quite clearly that there 
was a place in his view for an element of transendence 
in the supreme being. 

So far, from the consideration of those poems 
which were marked by the expression of a fresh invigor¬ 
ating experience of the Divine even with the flavour of 
pantheism it is seen that the pantheistic element was 
not completely demonstrable. How in the light of 
$1) "Wordsworth 1 s Prelude" E. De Selincourt page L XII 











- 56 - 


1 revisions 1 it is much less tenable. 11 he establishing 
of Wordsworth’s Theism would depend now on finding 
throughout his works a sufficient number of statements 
in which there was clearly an element of the idea of 
transedence in his conception of G-od. As has been 
noted clear-cut statements from a poets mind are not 
common, however throughout his poems, and especially 
in the Prelude a considerable number seem to indicate 
this transendent element in his theology. 

Ill HIS THEISM 

As the ’Prelude* is the account by Wordsworth 
himself of the development of his thought, it supplies 
important evidence of his conception of G-od. The 
| passages which have a direct bearing on this subject 
will be noted, and the element of transendence indic¬ 
ated. Quotations will be taken from the 1850 edition 
of the Prelude as given in Professor he Selineourt’s 
’’WordsY/orth’s Prelude”. The poem covers the story of 
the poets life from his childhood at Cockermouth and 
Hawkshead, through his Cambridge experience and 
residence in London, his sojura in France and his 
experience of the Revolution out of which there arises 
a crisis in his experience. This is followed by a 
period of restoration under the influence of his 
friends, and his sister at Alfoxden. The events of 














- 57 - 


these years register in his thought and. there is a cont¬ 
inuous development in his philosophy and theology through¬ 
out ♦ 


Book I hears the title Childhood and School-Time 1 , 
when-as he indicates in Tintem Ahbey- "nature then.... 

.to me was all in all." 

Book I L 544-558. 

Nor, sedulous as I have been to trace 
How Nature by extrinsic passion first 
Peopled the mind with form sublime or fair, 

And made me love them, may I here omit 
How other pleasures have been mine, and joys 
Of Subtler origin; How I have felt, 

Not seldom even in that tempestuous time, 

Those hallowed and pure motions of the senwe 
Which seem in their simplicity, to own 
An intellectual charm; that calm delight 
Which, if I err not, surely must belong 
To those first-born affinities that fit 
Our new existence to existing things, 

And, in our dawn of being, constitute 
^he bond of union bet ween life and joy. 

^he point in this passage would seem to be that 

there was some power of more subtle origin than Mature 

with which the child had contact which made for joy. 

The passage suggests something of the idea Wordsworth 

expresses in "Ode to Immortality" 

Not in entire forgefulness 
And not in utter nakedness 
But trailing clouds of glory do we come 
From God who is our home. (1) 


(1) "Ode to Immortality" Stanza Y 










- 58 - 


This raises the question of Wordsworth 1 s idea of 
pre-existence, in which there seems to he an element of 
transendence. Certainly God exists in a sense apart 
from the world as we know it in our complete sophist¬ 
ication here. 

Book I L 340-344 

Bust as we are, the immortal spirit grows 
Like harmony in music; there is a dark 
Inscrutable workmanship that reconciles 
Discordant elements, makes them cling together 
In one society. 

This passage has already been quoted and shows 
clearly the distinction between, ’dust as we are’, 
and (the immortal spirit 1 . In the f inscrutable 
workmanship 1 , that reconciles discordant elements 
there is a suggestion of transendence. 

Book I L 401-414 

Wisdom and Spirit of the universe1 

Thou soul that art the eternity of thought, 

That givest to forms and images a breath 
An everlasting motion, not in vain 
By day or star-light thus from my first dawn 
Of childhood didst thou intertwine for me 
'^he passions that build up our human soul: 

Not with the mean and vulgar works of man, 

But with high objects, with enduring things- 
With life and nature, purifying thus 
The elements of feeling and of thought, 

And sanctifying, by such discipline, 

Both pain and fear, until we recognize 
A grandure in the beatings of the heart. 

In this passage the opening words f Wisdom and 

Spirit 1 suggest a transendent idea of ultimate reality. 














- 59 - 


It is this Spirit or soul working through images, 
childhood, high objects feeling, and thought, which 
induce in the soul a sense of its grandure. The 
implication is that This Reality transends these 
experiences which provide a medium through which It 
moves us. 

Book II School-time (continued) L 215 
No officious slave 

Art thou of that false secondary power 
By which we multiply distinctions, then 
Deem that our puny boundaries are things 
That we pereeive, and not that we have made. 

With the false secondary power (science) the poet 

contrasts the understanding possessed by the babe. 

L 235 


blest the Babe, 

Nursed in his Mother 1 s arms, who sinks to sleep 
Rocked on his Mother^ breast; who with his soul 
Brinks in the feelings of his Mother 1 s eye 
For him in one dear Presence, there exists 
A virtue which irradiates and exalts 
Objects through widest intercourse of sense. 

Thus feeling plays such an important part in our 

understanding of the Universe. Feeling is "like an 

agent of the one G-reat Mind, Great creator and 

receiver both", L 257-8. "The one great ^ind" and agent 

of which 1 Seeling, shows an element of transendense. 















V • 



. 



























- 60 - 


Book II L 395-409 

I at this time (age 17) 

Saw blessings spread round me like a sea* 

Thus while the days flew by, and years passed on, 
From Nature and her overflowing soul, 

I had received so much, that all my thoughts 
Were steeped in feeling; I was only then 
Contented, when with bliss ineffable 
I felt the sentiment of Being spread 
O’er all that moves and all that seemeth still; 

O’er all that, lost beyond the reach of thought 
And human knowledge, to the human eye 
Invisible, yet liveth to the heart; 

0 T er all that leaps and runs, and shouts and sings, 
Beneath the wave, yea in the wave itself, 

And mighty depth of waters• 

It would seem that this passage does contain a 
; flavour of pantheistic teaching, iet when this 

’sentiment of s eing’ is beyond the reach of thought and 
knowledge and is discoverable only in feeling or more 
! particularly in feeling, the mysticism which is thus 
assumed, denotes, a transendent conception of that Being. 
Book II L 427-32 

If in my youth I have been pure in heart, 

If, mingling with the world, I am content 
With my own modest pleasures, and have lived 
With God and nature communing, removed 
From little enmities and low desires, 

The gift is yours (nature) 

There seems to be in ithis passage a certain 
asceticism suggested. The poet has withdrawn from life’s 
littleness by his communion with God and Mature. ’God 
and nature’, incline to a transendent view. 











- 61 - 


Book III Residence at Cambridge 
Wordsworth was not inspired by the type of 
experience he had at Cambridge and still finds Nature 
his school, and source of strenght. 

Book III L 143-147 

Unknow, unthought of, yet I was most rich- 
I had a /world about me- 1 twas my own; 

I made it, for it only lived to me, 

And to the God who sees into the heart. 

The last line of this passage implies belief in 

a ^od whose being frransends the world and who from 

without looks into the heart of men. 

Book III L 170-191 

And here 0 Friend! have I retraced my life 
Up to an eminence, and told a tale 
Of matters which not falsly may be called 
the glory of my youth, ^f genius, power, 
Creation and divinity itself. 

I have been speaking, for my theme has been 
What passed within me. Not of outward things 
Bone visibly for other minds, words, signs, 
Symbols or actions, but of my own heart 
Have I been speaking, and my youthful mind. 

0 heavens! how awful is the might of souls, 

And what they do within themselves while yet 
■‘‘he yoke of earth is new to them, the world 
Nothing but a wild fie.ld where they were sown. 
This is in truth herioc argument, 

This genuine prowess, which T wished to touch 
With hand however weak, but in the main 
It lies far hidden from the reach of words. 

Points have we all of us within our souls 
Where all stand singly; this I feel, and make 
Breathings for incommunicable powers; 

But is not each a memory to himself 

And, therefore now that we must quit this theme, 

I am not heartless, for there f s not a man 
That lives who hath not known his god-like hours, 
And feels not what an empire we inherit 
As natural beings in the strength of Nature. 













- 62 - 


In the above passage The divine is set over against 
the world in the words ! the yoke of earth*, and in 
1 the world nothing but a wild field in which they were 
sown 1 . x he prowess which the poet sought to touch T with 
hand however weak 1 , seems to be somewhat transendent. 

! The same idea is contained in * breathings for incommun¬ 
icable powers 1 . 

Book 17 Summer Vacation 
L 150 

Gently did my soul 

Put off her veil, and, self-transmuted, stood 
Baked, as in the presence of her God. 

In an hour of solitude Wordsworth seeks the presence of 

God, and in this instance the experience which is the 

result of his quest is not prudHced by Hature. 

L 153 

While on 1 walked, a comfort seemed to touch 
A heart that had not been disconsolate: 

Strenght came where weakness was not known to be, 

At least not felt; and restoration came 
Like an intruder knocking at the door 
Of unacknowledged weariness. I took 
The balance, and with firm hand weighed myself. 

Of that external scene which round me lay£ 

Little, in this abstraction, did I see; 

Remembered less; but I had inward hopes 
And swellings of the spirit, was rapt and soothed, 
Conversed with promises, had glimmering views- 
How life pervades the undecaying mind 
How the immortal soul with God-like power 
Informs creates, and thaws the deepest sleep 
That time can lay upon her; 1km on earth, 

Man, if he do but live within the light 
Of high endeavours, daily spreads abroad 
His being armed with strength that cannot fell. 











- 63 - 


In this experience in which there is a very real 
Mysticism the idea of ^od conveyed by the passage 
certainly contains an element of transendence# 

Book IV L 333 

In the following passage, the poet has been for 

a walk, in which he is struck by the beauty of his 

surroundings, and experiences a consecration# 

All I need I say, dear Friend! that to the brim 
My heart was full; I made no vows, but voy/s 
Were then made for me; bond unknown to me 
Was given, that I should be , else sinning greatljzr, 
A dedicated Spirit# On I walked 
In thankful blessedness, which yet survives. 

In this experience of dedication Wordsworth in 

using the words T I made no vows, but vows were made for 

me 1 , and T bond unknown to me was given 1 , shows that the 

experience of dedication had to do with some power 

beyond the reach of his mind or heart. 

Book IV L 348 

When folly from the frown of fleeting Time 
Shrunk, and the mind experienced in herself 
Conformity as just as that of old 
To the end and written spirit of G-od T s works, 
Whether held forth in Mature or in Man 
through pregnant vision, separate or conjoined# 

The phrasing in the above passage r G-od ! s works..# 

....in Nature or in Man T , is not the phraseology of 

pantheism, but a suggestion of a somewhat transendent 

Being, finding expression in the sphere of the world. 


































■ 


I 

■ 




.. jlli . 



































- 64 - 


Book V (BOOKS) 


L 359 

Wordsworth is pouring scorn on the presumption of 

the too confident knowledge of the world, with its 

various prophesies* 

When will their presumption learn 
f ^hat in the unreasoning progress of the world 
A wiser spirit is at work for us, 

A better eye than theirs, most prodigal 
Of blessings, and most studious of our good, 

Even in what seem our most fruitful hours? 

It would be difficult to find a passage in poetry 

which would express more clearly, the idea of a trans- 

endent God, presiding over the affairs of men. 

Book 71 CAMBRIDGE AID THE ALPS 

L 129-141 

Wordsworth has been commenting on the science of 

Geometry to which he is attracted for a time. 

More frequently from the same source I drew 
A pleasure quiet and profound, a sense 
Of permanent and iniversal sway, 

^nd paramount belief; there, recognized 
A type, for finite natures, of the one 
Supreme Existence, the surpassing life 
Which -to the boundaries of space and time, 

Of melancholy space and doleful time, 

^uperior, and incapable of change, 

Hor touched by welterings of passion^ is, 

And hath the name of, God. Transendent peace 
And silence did await upon these thoughts 
That were a frequent comfort to my youth. 

The distinction between ’finite natures 1 and the 

one ’Supreme Existence’, ’superior’ to ’boundaries of 

;space and time’, is more than a suggestion of the idea 






















7 'I : 1 o< . ■' . 

















- 65 - 


of the transendent nature of the Supreme ^eing* 

Book VI L 682-687 

Wordsworth has been discribing Lake Locarno and 
the surroundings. 


sweet as lcbve, 

Or the remembrance of a generous deed, 

Or mildest visitations of pure thought, 

When God, the giver of all joy, is thanked 
Religiously, in silent blessedness; 

Sweet as this last herself, for such it is. 

f When ^'od, the giver of all <joy T is the language 

of transendence rather than pantheism. 

Book VIII RETROSPECT 

L 259 

!! genius, under Nature, under God presiding”, 

This phrase has a transendent meaning. 

Book VIII L 476-494 

Enough of humble arguments; recall, 

My Song! those high emotions which thy voice 
Has heretofore made known; that bursting forth 
Of sympathy, inspiring and inspired, 

When everywhere a vital pulse was felt, 

And all the several frames of things, like stars. 
Through every magnitude distinguishable, 

Shone mutually indebted, or half lost 
Each in the others blaze, a galaxy 
Of life and glory. In the midst stood Man, 
Outwardly, inwardly contemplated, 

As of all visible natures, crown, though born 
Of dust, and kindred to the worm; a Being 
Both in perception and discernment, first 
In every capability of rapture, 

Through the divine effect of power and love; 

As, more than anything we know, instinct 
With godhead, and, by reason and by will, 
Acknowledging dependency sublime. 

This passage has a special importance in that it 








- 66 - 


marks that enlargment of Wordsworth*s views, from a 
point at which he had hitherto found Nature his great 
object of affection, to one in which Man became the 
center and the crown of Nature, ^t also shows clearly 
the transendent element in the poets theology, fen 
though born of dust and kindred to the worm; through 
the ’divine effect of power and love’ is above all 
other creatures * instinct with godhead’ but acknowledges 
’dependency sublime’. 

Book IX RESIDENCE IN FRANCE 
L 233-236 

Add unto this, subservience from the first 
To p res enc e s of G-od 1 s mys teri ous powe r 
^ade manifest in Mature f s sovereignty, 

And fellowship with venerable books, 

To sanction the proud workings of the soul, 

And mountain liberty. 

Upon this basis Wordsworth builds his justif¬ 
ication of the French Revolution, the transendent 
side of the passage is worthy of note. ’Nature*s 
sovereignty 1 is but a manifestation of ’G-od's 

O 

mysterious power*. 

Book IX L 354-363 

We added dearest themes- 

Man and his noble nature, as it is 

The gift which God has placed within his power, 

His blind desires and steady faculties 
Capable of clear truth, the one to break 
bondage, the other to build liberty 
On firm foundations,making social life 
Through knowledge spreading and imperishable, 

As just in regulation, and as pure 
As individual in the wise and good. 













- 67 - 


^ere again the poet is setting forth the spiritual 
basis of the revolution as it is rooted in 'The gift 
which &od has placed within his (man's) power*. An 
idea containing the transendent view of G-od. 

Book X RESIDENCE IN FRANCE (continued) 

L 420 

But, 0 Power Supreme! 

Without Whose call the v/orld would cease to breathe, 
Who from the fountain of Thy grace dost fill 
The veins that branch through every frame of life 
Making man what he is creature divine. 

In this passage the idea of transendence and 

Immanence blend in a natural Theism. 

Book XI FRANCE (concluded) 

L 290-300 

These lines show a stage of perplexity and dis¬ 
illusionment over the French Revolution. 

Out of a heart that had been turned aside 
From Nature's way by outward accidents, 

And which was thus confounded more and more 
Misguided, and misguiding. s o I fared 
Dragging all precepts, judgments, maxims, creeds, 
Like culprits to the bar; calling the mind, 
Suspiciously, to establish in plain day 
Mer titles and her honours; now believing, 

Now desbelieving; endlessly perplexed 
With impulse motive, right and wrong, 

The ground of obligation, what the rule and whence 
The sanction 


306-213 

This was the crisis of that strong disease, 
This the souls last and lowest ebb; I dropped, 
Deeming our blessed reason of least use 
Where wanted most: The lordly attributes 
Of will and choice, I bitterly exclaimed, 

'What are they but a mockery of a Being 
Who hath in no concerns of his a test 
Of good and evil; 1 

















- 68 - 


^his passage represents a low ebb in the spiritual 

discernment of Wordsworth. For a time he has turned 

aside from Nature, in fhvour of Reason and was absorbed 

in tfche sphere of Man, and his social betterment, but 

he found that sphere a morass of disappointment and 

dispair. ’Will and choice’, which have appeared to 

have a divine significence, are now a mockery of a 

’Being’ who seems to have given man no ultimate tests 

to guide him. it almost reflects the idea that God has 

become for him as remote as the Deistic view wouldtteach. 

however, Wordsworth does not yield long to the spirit of 

pessemism. 11 he re is strength in the passage, Line 391-95- 

But indignation works where hope is not, 

And thou 0 Friendl wilt be refreshed, ^here is 
One great society alone on earth: 

The noble Living and the noble Dead. 

Here from the idea, of u od finding his greatest 

and most complete expression in Nature or in man as 

a reasoning progressing spirit, we find a somewhat new 

emphasis on the ethical \noble living’ and the ’noble 

dead’• 

Book XII 

IMAGINATION AND TASTE HOW IMPAIRED AND RESTORED 
L 40-44 

through these distracted times; in Mature still 
Glorying, I found a counterpoise in her, 

Which when the spirit of evil reached its height 
Maintained for me a secret happiness. 










' fa ■ ■ 

* • 

j « . 

' 

/ I T 






















• ' 


. * 





























- 69 - 


Nature acts as a restorative influence in bringing 
back poise to the poet’s soul. 

L 96-102 

What then remained in such eclipse? what light 
To guide or cheer? ^'he laws of things which lie 
beyond the reach of human will or power: 

The life of nature by the God of love 
Inspired, celestial presence ever pure; 

^hese left, the soul of youth must needs be rich, 
Whatever else be lost. 

It would appear from this passage that the trying 
experiences through which the poet has been passing, 
have left him on a higher level of spiritual conscious¬ 
ness. x he lines quoted show that God transends by his 
love, and that the possession of the consciousness of 
this fact is of greater value than aU that may have 
been lost or eclipsed. 

Book XII L 171 

The poet having discribed a maid of singular charm 
and grace adds this. 

God delights, 

In such a being; for her common thoughts 
Are piety, her life is gratitude. 

T God delights 1 is only possible when considered 

to some degree at least transendent. The quality of 

gratitude also denotes a relationship which belongs 

to a theistic conception of the diety. 

Book XII L 311-316 

And when I called to mind 
That day so lately past, when from the crag 




















. 


























■ 




































- 70 - 


I looked, in such anxiety of hope; 

With trite reflections of morality, 

Yet in the deepest passion, I bowed low 
To God, who thus corrected my desires. 

The reference is to an experience of grief over 

the death of Wordsworth s brother. The language in 

i~\ 

which expression is given to the poets surrender to 
the higher will is not capable of interpretation except 
in the light of God s transendence. 

r» 

Book XIII 

IMAGINATION AND TASTE HOW IMPAIRED AND RESTORED 
(continued) 

L 20-28 

I had been tought to reverence a Power 
That is the visable quality and shape 
And image of right reason: that matures 
Her processes by steadfast lawa; gives birth 
To no impatient or fallacious hopes, 

No heat of passion or excessive zeal, 

No vain conceits provokes to no quick turns 
Of self-applauding intellect; but trains 
To meekness, and exalts by humble faith; 


(continuation) L 39-47 

above all 

Were re-established now those watchful thoughts 
Which, seeing little worthy or sublime 
In what the Historian 1 s pen so much delights 
To blazon—power and energy detached 
FRom moral purpose—early tutored me 
To look with feelings of fraternal love 
Upon the unassuming t hings that hold 
A silent station in this beauteous world. 

In this passage Wordsworth shows his reverence 

for a Power which works through-out the universe 

according to steadfast and unchanging laws. This was 
the result of his early training under his beloved 


























































* 










- 71 - 


teacher ^ature. He resents however the idea of these 
lav/s operating in power and energy without reference 
to moral purpose. When we think of moral purpose the 
pantheistic view is not adequate to contain the con¬ 
ception, and we are on the threshold of Theism which 
contains the necessary element of transendence. '^he 
idea of Immanence is unmistakably contained in the 
conception of a Power which works through laws. 

Book XIII L 275 

In the context of this passage Wordsworth is 
praising humble men, of high ideals of service, though 
not prominent in the eyes of the world. 

^his I speak 

In gratitude to G-od, Who feeds our hearts 
For His own service; knoweth, loveth us, 

When we are unregarded by the world. 

In these lines the poet pays tribute to the service 

which is inspired by &od. ^here is a distinction here 

between ^od on the one hand who loves us, and the world 

by which we are unregarded, ^he implication is that 

God is above the earthly sphere. 

Book XIII L 366-375 

Moreover, each man f s Mind is to herself 
Witness and judge; and I remember well 
That in life f s every-day appearances 
I seemed about this time to gain clear sight 
Of a new world—a world, too, that was fit 
To be transmitted, and to other eyes 
Made visible; as ruled by those fixed laws 
Whence spiritual dignity originates, 

Which do both give it being and maintain 






- • V . C . i . 


















• .. 
































- 72 - 


A balance, an ennobling interchange 
Of action from without and from within; 

It would seem impossible to intepret this passage 

as pantheistic. It would appear more like well 

balanced theism. 

Book XIV CONCLUSION 

L 112 

Such minds are truly from the Deity 

For they are powers; and hence the highest bliss 

That flesh can know is theirs—the ©onsciousness 

Of whom they are habitually infused 

through every image and through every thought, 

And all affections by communion raised 
From earth to heaven, from human to (divine; 

Hence endless occupation of the Soul. 


L 124-129 

Hence amid ills that vex and wrongs that onrush 
Our hearts—if here the words of Holy Writ 
May with fit reverence be applied--that peace 
Which passeth understanding, that repose 
In moral judgments which from this pure source 
Must come, or will by man be sought in vain. 

The reference to T such minds T is to three chance 

wanderers in calm thought L 65, who seem to possess 

special powers of spiritual insight. The communion or 

mystic experience they enjoy is centered in an trans- 

endent Uod, they are raised from T earth to heaven, from 

human to divine 1 . From this pure source peace must 

come to man or T will by man be sought in vain 1 . 

Book XIV L 181- 

Wordsworth has been discussing love in its various 
forms when he makes this statement raising love to a 








• . . ) . ■ *8 














































- 73 - 


high level. 

Unless this love by a still higher love, 

Be hallowed, love that breathes not without awe; 

Love that adores, but on the knee of prayer, 

By heaven inspired; that frees from chains the soul, 
Lifted, in union with the purest, best. 

Of earth-born passions, on the wings of praise 
Bearing a tribute to the Almighty*s throne. 

That love which is one of the heights of human 

experience, should require to be sanctioned by the God 

of Heaven shows a strong trend in the direction of 

transendence. 


L 188-205 

This spiritual Love acts not nor can exist 
Without Imagination, which, in truth, 

Is but another name for absolute power 
And clearest insight, amplitude of mind, 

And Reason in her most exalted mood. 

This faculty hath been the feeding source 
From the blind cavern whence is faintly heard 
Its natal murmur; followed it to light 
An open day; accompanied its course 
Among the ways of Mature, for a time 
Lost sight of it bewildered and engulfed; 

^hen given it greeting as it rose once more 
In strength, reflecting' from its placid breast 
'£he works of man and face of human life; 

^nd lastly, from its progress have we drawn 
Faith in life endless, the sustaining thought 
Of human Being, Eternity, and God. 

This passage is an admirable summary of the 

development of Wordsworth*s view of ultimate reality. 

^here is a large place given to Imagination which is 

*reason in her most exalted mood*. Reference is made 

to the place nature filled in developing his thought. 

























» 







































. 








I 




u > 

. 








































- 74 - 


The eclipse occassioned by the Revolution and its 
disappointments are indicated, then a fresh faith in 
Human life, finally faith in life endless, Eternity 
and God. ^t would be difficult to call this creed by 
any name more fitting than Theism. 

While any conclusion with reference to the theolog¬ 
ical conceptions of Wordsworth, which might be reached 
in an examination of the ’Prelude*, would not be 
reversed by consideration of other poems, a few passages 
which strengthen the implications resulting from quot¬ 
ations already made may be added from some of the more 
important ones. The Excursion, written 1795-1814, 
while it was used as an evidence of Wordsworth’s pan¬ 
theistic views, contains passages in which there is a 
denial of this viewpoint. 

In sue© access of mind in such high hour 
Of visitation from the living God, 

Thought was not; in enjoyment it expired. 

Ho thanks he breathed, he proffered no request; 

Rapt into still communion that transends 
The imperfect offices of prayer and praise, 

His mind was a thanksgiving to the power 

That made him; it was blessedness and love. (1) 

The idea of the transendent nature of G-od is very 

clearly expressed in this passage. 

One adequate support 
For the calamities of mortal life 
Exists -one only; an assured belief 
That the procession of our fate, how e’er 
Sad or disturbed, is ordered by a -^eing 

(1) Excursion Sk I page 420 (Everyman’s Edition) 



















. 

. 

t * ■ 1 

» 










' 










* 

















- 75 - 


Of infinite benevolence and power; 

Whose everlasting purposes embrace 
All accidents, converting them to good. 


by faith. 

Faith absolute in God, including hope 
and the defence that lies in boundless love 
Of his perfections: with habitual dread 
Of aught unworthily conceived, endured 
Impatiently, ill-done or left undone, 

To the dishonour of his holy name. (1) 

Single and one the omnipresent God 
By vocal utterance, or blaze of ligjit, 

Or cloud of darkness, localized in heaven; (2) 

I have seen 

A curious child, who dwelt upon a tract 
Of inland ground, applying to his ear 
'•t'he convolutions of a smoothe-lipped shell; 

To which, in silence hushed, his very soul 
Listened intensely; and his countenance soon 
Brightened with joy; for from within were heard 
Murmurings whereby the monitor expressed 
Mysterious union v/ith his native sea. 

Even such a shell the universe itself 

Is to the ear of Faith; and there are times, 

I doubt not, when to you it doth impart 
Authentic tidings of invisible things; 

Of ebb and flow, and ever-during power; 

2nd central peace, subsisting at the heart 
®f endless agitation. Here you stand, 

Adore and worship, when you know it not; 

Bious beyond the intention of your thought; 

Devout above the meaning of your will. 

-Yes you have felt, and may not cease to feel. 

II he estate of man would be indeed forlorn 
If false conclusions of the reasoning power 
Made the eye blind, and closed the passages 
Through which the ear converses with the heart.(3) 


( 1 ) 

( 2 ) 

(3) 


Excursion Bk 
TT Bk 

TT Bk 


IV page 


IV 

IV 


ti 


482-3 (Everyman*s Edition) 

497 " it 

509 


TT 


TT 


TT 














- 76 - 


Here the poet through the universe sees, feels and 

hears Cod yet has a sense that He is beyond all his 

senses and intuitions. 

While from the grassy mountain 1 s open side 
We gazed in saLence hushed, with eyes intent 
On the refulgent spectacle, difussed 
Through earth, sky, water, and all visable space, 

The priest in holy transport thus exclaimed: 

"Eternal Spirit! Universal G-od!" 

Power inaccessahle to human thought, 

Save by degrees and steps which thou hast deigned 
To furnish; for this effluence of thyself, 

To the infirmity of mortal sense 
Vouchsafed; (1) 

■ 

’Power inaccessable to human thought 1 stresses the 
transehdent character of ^od. 

A group of Wordsworth’s poems which aught not to 
be passed over without notice in considering his theo¬ 
logy, is the "Ecclesiastical Sonnets". While critics 
of Wordsworth do not give these a high place in his 
work, many of them are interesting as well as beautiful. 
As to their bearing on his theological views, they show 
that in his later years the poet gave himself quite 
whole-heartedly to orthodox views of the Christian faith. 
Few of these sonnets express clearly his theological 
views, they deal -with subjects relating to the church and 
its functions and activities and the theology which has 
been noted in ’the Prelude 1 is implied in them, ^hese 
poems have less passion than is contained in the story 

(1) "The Excursion" Bk VII page 617 (Everyman 1 s Edition) 

















* . . 




















1 


























































- 














- 77 - 


of his own mental and spiritual struggles. In the 
Prelude his faith was the result of a persistant attack 
on his own doubts and misgivings until conviction came 
to him. In the "Ecclesiastical Sonnets", either he has 
come to a more peaceful orthodox view, or hi is accept¬ 
ing the theological frame work of the Church of England 
with which he had always been more or less connected, 

A few passages will reveal his theological temper in 
this period, (1821-2) 

Ihe Point At Issue 

For what contend the wise? —for nothing less 
Than that the soul, freed from the bonds of Sense, 
And to her ^od restored by evidence 
Of things not seen, drawn forth from their recess, 
Eoot there, and not in forms, her holiness; 

For Faith which to the Patriarchs did dispense 
Sure guidance, ere a ceremonial fence 
Was needful round men thirsting to transgress;— 
For Faith, more perfect still, with which the Lord 
Of all, himself a Spirit, in the youth 
Of Christian aspiriation, deigned to fill 
ij, he temples of their hearts who, with his word 
Informed, were resolute to do his will, 

And worship him in spirit and in truth. 

There is in this passage a new emphasis on faith 

and freedom from the senses. This had already appeared 

in the later chapters of the Prelude, ^ere also we 

have more of the language of orthodox, and more of the 

ecclesiast. ^he theology implied is one in which trans- 

endence is rather the point of emphasis. 


"Poems of William Wordsworth" W. Knight Vol. VII p. 58 














( 

I • 

* 
























. 








- 78 - 


CONJECTURES 

If there be prophets on whose spirits rest 
Past things revealed like future, they can tell 
What Powers, presiding o*er the sacred well 
Of Christian Faith, this savage Island blessed 
With its fair bounty. Wandering through the west, 
Did holy Paul a while in Britain dwell, 

^nd call the fountain forth by miracle, 

^nd with dread signs the nascent stream invest? 

Or He, whose bonds dropped off, whose prison doors 
Flew open, by an Angel*s voice u&barred? 

Or some of humbler name, to these wild shores 
Storm-driven; who, having seen the cup of woe 
Pass from their Master, sojourned here to guard 
The precious Current they had tought to flow. (1) 

In the years in which these sonnets v/ere written, 
Wordsworth had a greater interest in organized Christian¬ 
ity. In previous times religion was something fed by 
his own inner life as it reacted to experience. By the 
time of the writing of the sonnets, he seems to rely 
somewhat on an external authority for his views. 

ENGLISH REFORMERS IN EXILE 

Scattering, like birds escaped the folwer s net, 
s ome seek with timely flight a foreign strand; 

Most happy, re-assembled in the land 
By dauntless Luther freed, could they forget 
Their Country*s woes. But scarcely have they met, 
Partners in faith, and brothers in distress, 

Free to pour forth their common thankfulness, 

Ere hope declines:- their union is beset 
With speculative notions rashly sown, 

Whence thickly-sprouting growth of poisonous weeds, 
^heir forms are broken staves; their passions seeds, 
That master them. How enviable blest 
^s he who can, by help of grace, enthrone 
The peace of God within his single breast. (2) 

The poet displays a knowledge of the problems which 

(1) "Poems of William ^ordwworth" W. Knight Vol.VII p 5 

(2) " " " " 11 " VII p 64 










- 79 - 


acompany spiritual independence. He had learned of 
them in the school of his own experience and struggle. 

"How enviable.is he who....by help of grace... 

can enthrone the peace of God within his own 
experience? TT It would seem that he could refer to 
himself in this way. 

CLERICAL INTEGRITY 

Nor shall the eternal roll of praise reject 
Those Unconforming; whom one rigourous day 
Prives from their Curses a voluntary prey 
To poverty and grief, and disrespect, 

And some to want—as if by tempests wrecked 
On a wild coast; how destitute!- did they 
Feel not that Conscience never can betray. 

That peace of mind is Virtue*s sure effect. 

Their alters they forego, their homes they quit 
Fields which they love, and paths they daily trod, 
And cast the future upon Providence; 

As men the dictate of whose inward sense 
Outweighs the world; whom self-deceiving wit 
Lures not from what they deem the cause of God. (1) 

Wordsworth has a wholesome respect for man*s 

inner convictions even though they cause suffering 

and deprivation. 


SACRAMENT 

By chain yet stronger must the soul be tied: 
One duty more, last stage of this ascent, 
Brings to thy food, mysterious Sacrament! 

‘i'he Offspring, haply at the parent*s side; 

But not till they, with all that do abide 
In Heaven, have lifted up their hearts to laud 
And magnify the glorious name of God, 

Fountain of Grace, whose Son for sinners died 
Ye, who have duly weighed the summons, pause 


)1) "Poems of William Wordsworth’* W. Knight p 78 

































- 80 - 


No longer; ye, whom to the saving rite 
^he alter calls; come early under laws 
That can secure for you a path of light 
Through gloomiest shade; put on (nor dread the 

weight) 

Armour divine, and conquer in your cause. (1) 
Wordsworth seems to have found a place of 
importance in his thought for the ceremonial side of 
religious observance, and sees in the sacrament a 
valid source of * light 1 , as well as a strength through 
which one may be victorious in a cause. 

FORMS OF PRAYER AT SEA 

To kneeling worshippers no earthly floor 
Gives holier invitation than the deck 
Of a storm-shattered vessel saved from wreck 
(When all that Man could do avail 1 d no more) 

By him who raised the tempest and restrains: 

Happy the crew who this have felt, and pour 
Forth for his mercy, as the Church ordains, 

Solemn thanksgiving. Nor will theyimplore 
In vain who, for a rightful cause, give breath 
To words the church prescribes aiding the lip 
For the hearts sake, ere ship with hostile ship 
Encounters, armed for work of pain and death. 
Suppliants! the God to whom your cause ye trust 
Will listen, and ye know that He is just. (2) 

It would seem that in this sonnet Wordsworth goes 

farther in the direction of orthodox, ecclesiastical 

faith than is becoming to him. He goes beyond mere 

assent to a creed and exalts the institution to a place 


(1) ,! Poems of William Wordsworth 11 W. Knight p 93 


( 2 ) 


TT 


ir 


T! 


Tt 


P 94 







, * . 

* 

- 

4 


i 

. 

> 








- 81 - 


of important authority. His own soul is overshadowed 
by the importance of an external order. 

In presenting the evidence in favour of the tend¬ 
ency of Wordsworth toward Iheism rather than Pantheism 
some statement, of his own, hearing on the subject 
should be of value. Wehave noted that he was charged 
with Pantheistic doctrine and made certain changes in 
the Prelude in order that he might not be misunderstood. 
E. C. Batho presents a statement by Wordsworth himself 
which is a reply to a friend, Mrs. Giarkson, who has 
accused him of Spinozism. 

,! She talks of my being a worshipper of Mature. A 
passionate expression, uttered incautiously in the poem 
upon the Wye, has lead her to this mistake; she, reading 
in cold-heartedness, and substituting the letter for 
the spirit. Unless I am greatly mistaken, there is 

i 

nothing of this kind in the Excursion. 2?here is indeed 
a passage towards the end of the fourth book, where the 
Wanderer introduces the simile of a Boy and the Shell 
that has something ordinarily (but absurdly) called 
Spinozistie. But the intelligent reader will easily see 
the dramatic propriety of the passage....She condemns me 
for not distinguishing between, ^ature as the work of 
God, and God himself. But where does she find this 
doctrine inculcated? Whence does she gather that the 
author of the Excursion looks upon Jfaute and God as 












. 

. 

r ■ o. • v 





. 

























- 82 - 


the same? He does not indeed consider the Supreme 
Being as bearing the same relation to the Universe as a 
watchmaker bears to a watch. In fact there is nothing 
in the course of the religious education adopted in 
this country, and in the use made by us of the Holy 
Scriptures, that appears to me so injurious as perpet¬ 
ually talking about T making by God’.” (1) 

CONCLUSION 

The assumption with which this paper began was, 
that Wordsworth’s idea of God could best be described 
by the term Immanence. Immanence was the essential 
element in the position of theism and while like pan¬ 
theism, it held to the reality of God working and 
present in the world, it made room for an element of 
transendence in our view of Him, which was denied by 
Pantheism. 

Wordsworth was so conscious of the reality of &od 
in Mature and in Man, and he expressed it in such 
passionate terms that he was accused of Pantheism. It 
was necessary to point out that in his works he showed 
that the idea of transendence was present in his view 
of God. 

It was pointed out that in those poems which came 
nearest to pantheism and were the occasion for misunder¬ 
standing him, there was not a completely closed door to 
(1) Edith C. Batho "The Later Wordsworth” page 247 

















. 








. » 


■ 

. 

’ • . . .. • •• 








. 

V. 

. 






- 83 - 


the possibility of an element of transendence. 

Note was made of various changes made in 
revisions of the Prelude, by Wordsworth himself to¬ 
ward a more definite orthodox view point without sacri¬ 
ficing his doctrine of Immanence. 

numerous passages especially from the Prelude 
afford evidence that the transendent vie?/ was not 
lacking in his theology. Moreover a development in 
his thought was noted always tov/ard a greater hospital¬ 
ity to the idea of God as to some extent above and 
apart from Mature and the world. The point is reached 
in the Prelude and other poems in which the relation¬ 
ship between God and Man is one of Love, r Ihe freedom 
of God's personality which can make Love possible in 
his relation to creation and man could not find room 
in a pantheistic theology. Love is the highest 
conception reached by Theism, and God ! s love for man 
is the deepest element in the idea of Immanence, 
lastly a statement by Wordsworth himself stated his 
position clearly, and it is the position assumed at the 


beginning of this thesis 











. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 




















I 


/ 




















B29743 





