



Sx 11BB1* 

awwnwis 

aamaiMis 



University of Alberta 
Printing Department 




















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/meaninglearningOOmunr 



D. 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


MEANING AND LEARNING 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE 
STUDIES IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE 
RBQUIRMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF 
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 

by 


BARRY CARTWRIGHT MUNRO 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


1959 



















ABSTRACT 


The principal purpose of this investigation was to determine the 
learning outcomes resulting from the use of three methods of study 
arranged in ascending order of meaningfulness. To achieve this purpose 
an experiment was conducted in twelve selected grade seven classrooms of 
the junior high schools of the Edmonton Public and Separate School 
systems* 

In the investigation, the differential effects of three in¬ 
structional procedures upon learning in three subject-matter areas were 
studied. The three methods involved the study of material for facts, the 
study of material to determine the significant relationships that ex¬ 
isted within it, and the study of material to determine the major gener¬ 
alizations that might arise from it. The effects of the varied methods 
were ascertained by measuring the amount of material learned, the 
amount retained after an interval of twenty-one days, and the degree to 
which the effects of training in a particular method were transferred to 
other situations. The three subject-matter areas considered in this 
experiment were mathematics, science and social studies. 

The twelve classrooms taking part in the experiment were divided 
into three subject-matter groups, each composed of three experimental 
classes and one control. Each experimental class was randomly assigned 
a particular method of study to be followed throughout the investigation 
and received four thirty-five minute instructional periods in each of 
two subject-matter fields. 


iii 









- 




























. 






- 





: 





, 









' 

- 




. 




' 


- 

. 












Selected bodies of subject matter, suitable to the level of 
experience of the students involved and related to the grade seven 
course of studies in mathematics, science and social studies, served 
as learning materials for the testing program. Three multiple-choice 
tests, similar in structure and equated in degree of difficulty were 
designed to accompany the learning materials and serve as pre-tests, 
post-tests and transfer tests. In addition to these, the Otis Quick- 
Scoring Test of Mental Abilities, Beta Test, was given to each of the 
classes. Retention after a three-week interval was measured by a 
second administration of the post-test in each group. 

Since it was not possible to match the groups prior to the 
beginning of the experiment, they were equated statistically during 
the analysis of the results, on the basis of mental ability and 
experience in the methods of study employed in the experiment. To do 
this, analysis of covariance was used with mental age and pre-test 
scores held constant. "Where equating was not necessary, analysis of 
variance was employed to investigate mean differences. 

The analysis of the data obtained from the twelve grade seven 
classes revealed the following; 

1. In the majority of cases, the three methods of study employed 
in this experiment were equally effective in producing gains 
in learning as measured by the difference between scores on 
the pre-test and the post-test. "Where differences in gains 
occurred, however, the more meaningful methods of study were 
favored over the less meaningful methods. 


iv 








- 

, 


, 

- 

- ' 

- 

■ 

* 

* 

„ 






























r 


’ 



2 . Within the same subject-matter area, the effects of training in 
the more meaningful methods of study, those of generalization 
and relationship, appeared to be transferred to a greater 
extent than did the effects of training in a less meaningful 
method, that of facts. 

3. There was no indication that training in one method of study 
produced greater retention of material after an interval of 
twenty-one days than did training in any other method of study 
employed in this investigation. 

On the whole, where significant differences were obtained, 
results generally favored the more meaningful approach to learning. 

For the most part the Generalization group was found to have made 
significantly higher scores than the Fact group. There were, however, 
a number of instances in which the Generalization group was superior 
to the Relationship group, and also a number in which the Relationship 
group made higher scores than the Fact group. The total picture 
suggested by these results is a gradient of meaningfulness of methods 
of study beginning with the lowest level, the study of facts, and 
extending through the study of relationships to the highest level, the 
study of generalizations. 

Although there were indications that learning with meaning has 
been incorporated into the modem classroom, the failure of the 
Control group to achieve as well as the Generalization group would 
suggest that learning with meaning has not reached its maximum in 
current educational practice. Possibly greater emphasis should be 


v 






. • r 




' • , ' ■ ■ - 


. 









- , . 




■ 


' 

. 

* ' • 




' 






- 






■ 

. 

* 











, 




- ' 











given to the development of the ability to read for generalizations 
than is presently the case. Since habits associated with methods of 
study seemed to be resistant to change by the grade seven level, it 
would likely be best to initiate this attention to the development 
of the ability to read for generalizations early in the school 
program. If, however, changes in methods of study must be made in 
the later grades, it appears that considerably more extensive 
training would be required than was employed in the present 
inve s tigation. 


vi 


: ; \ ■ : ■ j 




. 


* 




ACKNOWLEDQffiNTS 


The writer wishes to express his appreciation to the members 
of his committee for their helpful criticisms and encouragement 
during the preparation of this dissertation. To Dr. G.M. Dunlop, 
Chairman of the Division of Educational Psychology, special 
indebtedness is gratefully acknowledged. 

In addition, the writer wishes to express his thanks to the 
Edmonton Separate School Board and the Edmonton Public School Board 
for providing the classrooms required for this investigation. The 
cooperation of the students taking part in the experiment and the 
consideration of their teachers are also gratefully acknowledged. 














' 


? ■ • - . 




, . 


* 


, 


- 

. . - . > ' ‘ t 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


LIST OF TABLES . xv 

Chapter 

I. MEANING AND LEARNING. 1 

II. THE PROPOSED STUDY . 7 

General Statement . 7 

Importance of the Study. 7 

The Scope of the Study. 9 

Population to be Used . 9 

Delimitation of the Areas of Investigation .... 9 

Methods . 9 

Subject Matter. 10 

Classes... 11 

Time . 11 

Selection of Classes . 12 

Definition of Terms . 12 

Summary. 13 

Basic Assumptions . 13 

Subdivisions of the Main Problem. 14 

III. RELATED STUDIES . l6 

Learning . 1 6 

Transfer of Training . 17 

Retention. 23 

Summary. 31 


viii 





























- 






















Chapter Page 

IV. THE PILOT STUDY. 32 

Introduction . 32 

Procedure. 32 

Analysis of the Results . 3^ 

Pre-test . 34 

Post-test . 35 

Retention Test .. 36 

Item Analysis . 38 

Summary of Findings . 38 

Insights for Further Studies . 40 

V. DESIGN OF THE EXPERIMENT . 42 

Subjects ...... 42 

Tests and Materials ... 43 

Intelligence Test.... 43 

Pre-Tests, Post-Tests and Transfer Tests. 44 

Materials for Training Periods . 49 

Procedure ..... 52 

Statistical Analysis .... 57 

Summary... 62 

VI. ANALYSIS OF MENTAL AGE AND PRE-TEST RESULTS IN 
MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL STUDIES, 

STAGE ONE. 64 

Mental Age . 64 

Pre-Tests in Mathematics, Science and 

Social Studies . 68 


Mathematics 


68 














































Chapter page 

Science . 76 

Social Studies . 81 

Summary ... 86 

VII. ANALYSIS OF GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL STUDIES, 

STAGE ONE. 88 

Mathematics ... 88 

Science . 92 

Social Studies... 

Summary... 101 

VIII. TRANSFER IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL 

STUDIES, STAGE ONE. 103 

Mathematics .... 103 

Science . 110 

Social Studies .... 121 

Summary. 126 

IX. RETENTION IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL 

STUDIES, STAGE ONE. 130 

Mathematics ....... 130 

Science .. 133 

Social Studies... 136 

Summary. 139 

X. A SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS OF STAGE ONE IN 

LEARNING, TRANSFER AND RETENTION . l40 

Gains from pre-test to post-test . 140 

Mathematics ... 140 


x 


























































Chapter Page 

X. Continued 

Science . l4l 

Social Studies .. # 141 

Summary. 142 

Transfer. 142 

Mathematics... 142 

Science ... 143 

Social Studies ..... 144 

Summary. 144 

Retention . 145 

Mathematics..... 145 

Science . 145 

Social Studies . 145 

Summary. 146 

Tentative Conclusions . 146 

XI. ANALYSIS OF MENTAL AGE AND PRE-TEST RESULTS IN 

MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL STUDIES, 

STAGE TWO... 148 

Mental Age . 149 

Pre-Test Results, Stage Two.. 151 

Mathematics ... 152 

Science .. 156 

Social Studies . l6l 

Summary.... 163 

XII. ANALYSIS OF GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST IN 
MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL STUDIES, 

STAGE TWO. 166 

xi 






























. 




* I i * , 

































Chapter Page 

XU. Continued 

Mathematics . 166 

Science . 170 

Social Studies . 172 

Summary... 173 

XIII. TRANSFER IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL 

STUDIES, STAGE TWO . 175 

Mathematics . 175 

Science. 184 

Social Studies . 191 

Summary... 197 

XIV. RETENTION IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL 

STUDIES, STAGE TWO .. 199 

Mathematics . 199 

Science. 201 

Social Studies .. 202 

Summary. 203 

XV. A SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS OF STAGE TWO IN 

LEARNING, TRANSFER AND RETENTION. 204 

Gains from Pre-Test to Post-Test .. 204 

Mathematics ... 204 

Science . 205 

Social Studies . 205 

Summary. 205 

Transfer Within the Same Subject Matter Area .... 206 

xii 
























































Chapter page 

XV. Continued 

Mathematics . 206 

Science . 207 

Social Studies . 207 

Summary. 208 

Transfer From One Subject Matter Area to Another 208 

Mathematics. 208 

Science . 209 

Social Studies . 209 

Summary. 210 

Retention . 210 

Mathematics . 210 

Science . 211 

Social Studies . 211 

Summary. 211 

Tentative Conclusions . 211 

XVI. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOE FURTHER STUD! .... 214 

Conclusions . 2l4 

Discussion of the Results .. 2l6 

Implications for Further Study. 219 

BIBLIOGRAPHY - . 222 

APPENDIX. 229 

A. Example Reading Selection and Tests for 

Social Studies . 229 


xiii 













































Page 

B. Example of Reading Selection and Tests 

Used in the Training Periods in Arithmetic ... 240 

C. Example of Lesson Flans Used in the Training 

Periods in Science. 2^9 


xiv 















. .. . 














LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Pilot Study Pre-Test Results...34 

II. Pilot Study Post-Test Results . 36 

III. Pilot Study Retention Test Results . 37 

IV. Distribution of Subjects by Method and Material 

to be Studied .. 43 

V. Mean Difficulty Indices for Subsections and Total Tests . 4? 

VI. Test Reliabilities and Standard Errors of Measurement . . 48 

VII. The Testing and Training Program for One Subject 

Matter Group . ................ 56 

VIII. Standard Deviations and Mean Mental Ages in Months for 

Experimental and Control Classes, Stage One . 65 

IX. Analysis of Variance of the Mental Ages 

of All Classes, Stage One. 66 

X. Analysis of Variance of the Mental Ages of the Social 

Studies-Mathematics Group, Stage One.. . 66 

XI. Analysis of Variance of the Mental Ages of the 

Mathematics-Science Group, Stage One .......... 6? 

HI. Analysis of Variance of the Mental Ages of the 

Science-Social Studies Group, Stage One . 67 

XIII. Means and Standard Deviations for the Pre-Test 

in Mathematics, Stage One ............... 68 

XIV. Analysis of Variance of the Total Scores on the 

Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One 69 

XV. Mean Difference Tests for the Total Scores of the General¬ 
ization Group on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One 70 


xv 
















- 

< 












TABLE 


PAGE 


XVI. Analysis of Covariance of the Fact Group subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One ...... 71 

XVII. Mean Difference Tests for the Fact Subscores of the 

Fact Group on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One 71 
XVIII. Analysis of Covariance of the Relationship Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One ...... 72 

XTX. Analysis of Variance of the Generalization Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One.. 72 

XX. Mean Difference Tests for the Generalization Subscores 
of the Generalization Group on the Pre-Test 
in Mathematics, Stage One • 73 

XXI. Mean Difference Tests for the Control Group Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One. 73 

XXII. Analysis of Variance of the Fact Group Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One. 7^ 

XXIII. Mean Difference Tests for the Relationship Group Sub¬ 
scores on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One . . 75 

XXIV. Analysis of Variance of the Generalization Group Sub¬ 
scores on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage One . . 75 

XXV. Means and Standard Deviations for the Pre-Test in 

Science, Stage One ... . .......... 76 

XXVI. Analysis of Variance of the Total Scores on the 

Pre-Test in Science, Stage One...77 

XXVII. Mean Difference Tests for the Total Scores of the General¬ 
ization Group on the Pre-Test in Science, Stage One . 

,cvi 


77 
















' 








........ • ;i 










TABLE 


PAGE 


XXVIII. Analysis of Variance of the Fact Subscores on 

the Pre-Test in Science, Stage One.. • . . 77 

XXIX. Analysis of Covariance of the Relationship Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Science, Stage One ....... 78 

XXX. Analysis of Covariance of the Generalization Sub¬ 
scores on the Pre-Test in Science, Stage One . , , , 78 

XXXI. Analysis of Variance of the Fact Group Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Science, Stage One ....... 79 

XXXII. Analysis of Variance of the Relationship Group Sub- 

scores on the Pre-Test in Science, Stage One . * « . 80 

XXXIII. Analysis of Variance of the Generalization Group 

Subscores on the Pre-Test in Science, Stage One . . 80 

XXXIV. Analysis of Variance of the Control Group Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Science, Stage One 81 

XXXV. Means and Standard Deviations for the Pre-Test in 

Social Studies, Stage One • 81 

XXXVI. Analysis of Variance of the Total Scores on the 

Pre-Test in Social Studies, Stage One.. , 82 

XXXVII. Analysis of Variance of the Fact Subscores on the 

Pre-Test in Social Studies, Stage One .«•••••• 82 

XXXVIII. Analysis of Variance of the Relationship Subscores on 

the Pre-Test in Social Studies, Stage One 83 

XX XI X. Analysis of Variance of the Generalization Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Social Studies, Stage One . • • « 83 

XL. Analysis of Variance of the Fact Group Subscores on 


xvii 














■ 























TABLE 


PAGE 


the Pre-Test in Social Studies, Stage One . 84 

XLI. Analysis of Variance of the Relationship Group Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Social Studies, Stage One . . • . • 84 

XLII. Analysis of Variance of the Generalization Group Sub¬ 
scores on the Pre-Test in Social Studies, Stage One . , 85 

XLIII. Analysis of Variance of the Control Group Subscores on 

the Pre-Test in Social Studies, Stage One . 86 

XLIV. Means and Standard Deviations for the Distribution of 
Gains from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Mathematics, 

Stage One . . .. ......... 88 

XLV, F-Ratios Derived from the Analysis of Gains from Pre- 

Test to Post-Test in Mathematics, Stage One ...... 91 

XLVI. Means and Standard Deviations for the Distribution of 

Gains from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Science, Stage One 92 
XL VII. F-Ratio Derived from the Analysis of Gains from Pre- 

Test to Post-Test in Science, Stage One ........ 94 

XLVIII. Means and Standard Deviations for the Distribution of 
Gains from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Social Studies, 

Stage One , . ... . .. 94 

XLIX. Analysis of Covariance of the Gains in Total Score 
from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Social Studies, 

Stage One „ . . .... 95 

L. Mean Difference Tests for Gains in Total Score from 
Pre-Test to Post-Test in Social Studies, Stage One 
LI. Analysis of Variance of the Gains in Fact Subscores 


96 














, 



















TABLE 


PAGE 


from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Social Studies, 

Stage One ..♦.. 96 

LII. Mean Difference Tests for Gains in Fact Subscores 
from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Social Studies, 

Stage One . 97 

LIII. Analysis of Variance of the Gains in Relationship 
Subscores from the Pre-Test to the Post-Test in 

Social Studies, Stage One.. . .. 98 

LIV. Mean Difference Tests for Gains in Relationship Sub¬ 
scores from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Social Studies, 

Stage One .. ........... 98 

LV. Analysis of Covariance of the Gains in Control Group 
Subscores from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Social 

Studies, Stage One ........... . 99 

LVI. F-Ratios Derived from the Analysis of Gains from Pre- 

Test to Post-Test in Social Studies, Stage One * * * * 100 

LVII. Means and Standard Deviations for the Transfer Test in 

Mathematics, Stage One 103 

LVIII. Analysis of Covariance of the Total Scores on the 

Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage One ....... 104 

LIZ. Mean Difference Tests for the Total Scores on the 

Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage One ....... 105 

LX. Analysis of Covariance of the Fact Subscores on the 
Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage One ...... 

LXI. Analysis of Covariance of the Generalization Subscores 


106 















■: iv 






TABLE PAGE 

on the Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage One . . 107 

LXII. Mean Difference Tests for the Generalization Sub- 
scores on the Transfer Test in Mathematics, 

Stage One ..108 

LXIII. Analysis of Variance of the Fact Group Subscores on 

the Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage One .... 109 

LXIV. Analysis of Variance of the Control Group Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage One . . HO 
LXV. Means and Standard Deviations for the Transfer Test 

in Science, Stage One ............... Ill 

LXVI. Analysis of Covariance of the Total Scores on the 

Transfer Test in Science, Stage One. 112 

LXVII. Mean Difference Tests for the Total Scores on the 

Transfer Test in Science, Stage One ........ 112 

LXVIII. Analysis of Variance of the Fact Subscores on the 

Transfer Test in Science, Stage One ........ 113 

LXIX. Mean Difference Tests for the Fact Subscores on the 

Transfer Test in Science, Stage One . ..114 

LXX. Analysis of Covariance of the Relationship Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Science, Stage One .... 115 
LXX1. Mean Difference Tests for the Relationship Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Science, Stage One .... 115 
LXXII. Analysis of Covariance of the Generalization Sub¬ 
scores on the Transfer Test in Science, Stage One . 116 
LXXIII. Mean Difference Tests for the Generalization Sub- 


xx 


























TABLE 

LXXIV. 

LXXV. 

LXXVI. 

Lxxvn. 

LXXVTII. 

LXXIX. 

LXXX. 

LXXXI. 

lxxxh. 

LXXXIII. 

LXXXIV. 


PAGE 

scores on the Transfer Test in Science, Stage One . *117 
Mean Difference Tests for the Generalization Group 
Subscores on the Transfer Test in Science, 

Stage One.*.. 118 

Mean Difference Tests for the Relationship Group 


Subscores on the Transfer Test in Science, 

Stage One «*..****..••***••.»♦• 118 

Mean Difference Tests for Gains Made by the 
Relationship Group from the Pre-Test to the 
Transfer Test in Science, Stage One 119 

Means and Standard Deviations for the Transfer 

Test in Social Studies, Stage One .**..•*.* 121 


Analysis of Covariance of the Total Scores on the 

Transfer Test in Social Studies, Stage One . * * * 122 

Mean Difference Tests for the Total Scores on the 

Transfer Test in Social Studies, Stage One * * • « 123 

Analysis of Variance of the Fact Subscores on the 

Transfer Test in Social Studies, Stage One . * . . 123 

Mean Difference Tests for the Fact Subscores on the 

Transfer Test in Social Studies, Stage One . , . . 124 

Analysis of Variance of the Relationship Subscores on 
the Transfer Test in Social Studies, Stage One . * 125 
Mean Difference Tests for the Relationship Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Social Studies, Stage One * 126 
Means and Standard Deviations for Retention Scores i& 


xxi 














■ . , 


























TABLE 


PAGE 


Mathematics, Stage One . . . ♦.. 131 

LXXXV. Mean Difference Tests for the Fact Subscores in 

Retention in Mathematics, Stage One ... 131 

LXXXVI. Mean Difference Tests for the Relationship Group Sub¬ 
scores in Retention in Mathematics, Stage One » . . 132 
LXXXVTI. Means and Standard Deviations for Retention Scores in 

Science, Stage One . . .. • * . • 133 

LXXXVIII. Mean Difference Tests for the Fact Group Subscores in 

Retention in Science, Stage One * ..13^ 

LXXXIX* Mean Difference Tests for the Control Group Subscores 

in Retention in Science, Stage One . * . . e ® ® 135 

XC. Means and Standard Deviations for Retention Scores in 

Social Studies, Stage One 13& 

XCI. Mean Difference Tests for the Fact Group Subscores in 

Retention in Social Studies, Stage One . 137 

XCII. Mean Difference Tests for the Generalization Group 

Subscores in Retention in Social Studies, Stage One 138 
XCIII. Standard Deviations and Mean Mental Ages in Months 

for Ehq^erimental and Control Classes, Stage Two ♦ . 1^9 

XCIV. Analysis of Variance of the Mental Ages for the 

Social Studies-Mathematics Group, Stage Two . • . « 150 

XCV. Analysis of Variance of the Mental Ages for the 

Mathematics-Science Group, Stage Two . .••*.•♦150 
XCVE. Analysis of Variance of the Mental Ages for the 

Science-Social Studies Group, Stage Two •••••• 151 























TABLE 


PAGE 


XCVII. Means and Standard Deviations for the Pre-Test in 

Mathematics, Stage Two . ..... 152 

XCVIII. Analysis of Covariance of the Total Scores on the 

Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage Two ... 152 

XCIX. Mean Difference Tests for Total Scores on the Pre- 

Test in Mathematics, Stage Two.153 

C. Mean Difference Tests for the Fact Subscores on the 

Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage Two ......... 15^ 

Cl. Mean Difference Tests for the Relationship Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage Two ..... 155 

CII. Mean Difference Tests for the Generalization Sub¬ 
scores on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage Two . . 156 
CHI. Mean Difference Tests for the Fact Group Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, Stage Two ...... 156 

CIV. Mean Difference Tests for the Relationship Group 
Subscores on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, 

Stage Two ................ . 157 

CV. Mean Difference Tests for the Generalization Group 
Subscores on the Pre-Test in Mathematics, 

Stage Two.... 157 

CVI. Means and Standard Deviations for the Pre-Test 

in Science, Stage Two ............... 159 

CVH. Mean Difference Tests for the Relationship Subscores 

on the Pre-Test in Science, Stage Two ....... 160 

CVIII. Means and Standard Deviations for the Pre-Test in 















. 


i 


. 




3 . - - 















TABLE PAGE 

Social Studies, Stage Two . . . . . . 

CIX. Mean Difference Tests for the Generalization Group 
Subscores on the Pre-Test in Social Studies, 

Stage Two... 162 

CX. Means and Standard Deviations for the Distribution of 
Gains from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Mathematics, 

Stage Two . . . .. ........ 166 

CXI. Mean Difference Tests for Gains in Total Score from 

Pre-Test to Post-Test in Mathematics, Stage Two . • 167 

CXII. Mean Difference Tests for Gains in Relationship 
Group Subscores from Pre-Test to Post-Test in 

Mathematics, Stage Two. «.,,**.** . 169 

CXIII. Mean Difference Tests for Gains in Control Group 
Subscores from Pre-Test to Post-Test in 
Mathematics, Stage Two ............ ...170 

CXIV. Means and Standard Deviations for the Distribution 
of Gains from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Science, 

Stage Two ..171 

CXV. Mean Difference Tests for Gains in Relationship Sub¬ 
scores from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Science, 

Stage Two 172 

CXVI. Means and Standard Deviations for the Distribution 
of Gains from Pre-Test to Post-Test in Social 

Studies, Stage Two ...... . ... 173 

CXVII. Means and Standard Deviations for the Transfer Test 


xxiv 




















TABLE 


PAGE 


In Mathematics, Stage Two. 176 

CXVIII. Mean Difference Tests for Total Scores on the 

Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage Two ••••«• 176 

CXIX. Mean Difference Tests for Fact Subscores on the 

Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage Two. 178 

CXX. Mean Difference Tests for Relationship Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage Two * , 178 

CXXI. Mean Difference Tests for Control Group Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage Two . • 179 

CXXII. Mean Difference Tests for Differences in the Scores 
of the Fact Group on the Pre-Test and the Transfer 
Test in Mathematics, Stage Two ••••••••«•• 181 

CXXIII. Mean Difference Tests for Differences in Scores of 

the Generalization Group on the Pre-Test and the 
Transfer Test in Mathematics, Stage Two 182 

CXXIV. Means and Standard Deviations for the Transfer Test 

in Science, Stage Two 184 

CXXV, Mean Difference Tests for Total Scores on the 

Transfer Test in Science, Stage Two 185 

GX3CVI. Mean Difference Tests for Fact Subscores on the 

Transfer Test in Science, Stage Two . , , , * . » . 186 

CXXVII. Mean Difference Tests for Generalization Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Science, Stage Two . * 9 • 1^7 

CXXVIII. Mean Difference Tests for Fact Group Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Science, Stage Two • . • • 


xxv 






























: ' I ■'. 










TABLE 


PAGE 


CXXIX. Mean Difference Test for Relationship Group Sub¬ 
scores on the Transfer Test in Science, Stage Two . 189 

CXXX. Mean Difference Tests for Generalization Group 
Subscores on the Transfer Test in Science, 

Stage Two. 190 

CXXXI. Means and Standard Deviations for the Transfer Test 

in Social Studies, Stage Two.. ♦ . . 192 

CXXXII. Mean Difference Tests for Fact Subscores on the 

Transfer Test in Social Studies, Stage Two * • » . 193 

CXXXIII, Mean Difference Tests for Relationship Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Social Studies, Stage Two . 194 

CXXXIV. Mean Difference Tests for Control Group Scores on 

the Generalization Subsection of the Transfer Test in 
Social Studies, Stage Two 195 

CXXXV. Mean Difference Tests for Control Group Subscores 

on the Transfer Test in Social Studies, Stage Two . 196 

CXXXVI. Means and Standard Deviations for Retention Scores 

in Mathematics, Stage Two ••••••••••••• 199 

CXXXvTI. Mean Difference Tests for the Control Group Subscores 

in Retention in Mathematics, Stage Two 200 

CXXXflll. Means and Standard Deviations for Retention Scores in 

Science, Stage Two ....... . 201 

CXXXIX. Means and Standard Deviations for Retention Scores in 

Social Studies, Stage Two ............. 202 

CXL. Mean Difference Tests for the Fact Group Subscores in 

Retention in Social Studies, Stage Two . 203 


xxvi 















■ 




, , . , 

.. 









CHAPTER I 


MEANING AND LEARNING 

Recently, in education, considerable attention has been focused on 
the value of meaning in learning. In increasing numbers, teachers have 
come to realize that if desirable outcomes of learning in terms of 
retention and transfer are to be achieved, the experiences encountered 
in the classroom must have meaning for the pupil. 

With reference to the nature of meaning, Babcock states that it 
”... denotes psychological insight, the spontaneous perception of 
essential relationships in social and environmental contexts by a 
complex ... process called thinking” (19^+8» p.393). The raw material 
from which complete meanings are constructed is sense perception. The 
primary stage in this development consists of identifying objects, 
naming them and acquiring definite modes of adjustment to them. A 
secondary phase of the development of meaning arises when one object or 
event points to or signifies more than is perceived immediately 
(Griffith, 1939). The second stage is most important according to 
Cohen, who observes that ”... anything acquires meaning if it is 
connected with, or indicates, or refers to something beyond itself, 
so that its full nature points to and is revealed in that connection” 
( 1944 , p. 47 ). This is essentially Brownell’s point of view (19^5) when 
he suggests that meaning is related to the structure and organization 
of the subject itself. 

Many psychologists, on the other hand, do not consider the material- 
to be the only factor influencing the development of meaning. They are 


















< ] 


c 








. 


























. 






■ 


, 
























2 


inclined to agree with Bernard (195*0 who maintains that meaning 
always has reference to the individual. Things acquire meaning when 
they are "... related to the individual’s interests, when they are 
involved in his living and when they not only contribute to his purpose 
at the time, but enable him to make more intelligent adjustments in 
the future ..." (Gates, Jersild, McConnell, and Challman, 1949). 

In a discussion of ideational learning, Brownell and Hendrickson 
(1950) postulate a continuum of meaningfulness for facts and concepts 
ranging from the level of unrelated facts or arbitrary associations to 
the level of the development of explanatory principles and generali¬ 
zations. They note, in addition, that a given fact cannot be assigned 
an absolute position on the continuum, but that its meaning depends 
upon the individual who is involved in the learning task. 

Cronbach (1954) suggests that a concept has meaning for an 
individual when it is consistently applied to some situationsand not 
to others. This idea implies agreement with Spitzer who stated that 
"meaning is the seeing of reasons for, the import of, or the sense of, 
a process" (1948, p,l4). A further test of meaning is given by Davis 
(1948); namely, the ease with which the learner makes progress in the 
learning situation and the extent to which he can understand new facts. 

There are factors within the individual, of course, which limit 
the number of understandings he may acquire and the degree to which 
they may be mastered. Within the capacity of the individual learner, 
however, the nature of the learning situation determines to a large 
extent the amount of meaning he associates with his experience. 

Brownell and Sims (1946) state that the development of meaning 




t 



, 

t • . t 


* . 



• 








- 


■ 


. 



. 

' * ■ U ' ' - A 

■ 




; 

s 



« ■ : v...‘ / . ' : " '•> 





. 





; , : ■ ■ r 






3 


is facilitated if the individual is motivated initially by a 
recognized need. Also, the learner must possess a background of 
experiences relevant to a new situation. Understanding increases, 
they maintain further, when a pupil formulates the results of his 
learnings in his own words and in a variety of ways. In developing 
meanings, then, from their point of view, the learning situation must 
be characterized by activity on the part of the student, not by the 
passive acceptance of the teacher’s word. 

According to Davis (1948) facts known in isolation cannot yield 
full meaning until their roles as parts in a total picture are made 
clear. He believes that the establishment of meaningful learning 
situations requires the development of a plan of learning, stress upon 
meaning for the learner and effective relating of wholes and parts. 

In discussing meaningful learning situations, Theile (1951) 
emphasizes the role played by the student. He feels that each student 
should make a contribution to the learning process. Teachers in such 
a situation can no longer rely on prescribing material, identifying 
adequate responses and striving for mastery by repetition, but must 
concern themselves with broader patterns of behavior. They must seek 
active pupil participation in learning, and they must endeavour to 
make thinking a dominant part of the learning period. 

Both Theile (1951) and Horn (1951) point out that students may 
be stimulated and guided in the construction of meanings, but that 
they cannot be given them. Teachers may create situations or bring 


:• . ■ 

» ' 

, 

' f 

t ' 





! 




■ 



■ 


K • v; ■ v 





i 









. . 

. 






( • V ' 

• i . 1 

. 


■ ;v i\ ■ 

: 



'4 




' i 


' ri a 





* 


l . 




' 




















c 



' 



* 







. 

. 

i 




4 ; 


- 

:i ■ • 

i. 




- 


4 


about conditions that help children gain meaning, but in the last 
analysis, meanings must be discovered by the children themselves. 

Horn mentions further that the effectiveness of the development of 
meaning in the learning situation depends upon the student's experi¬ 
ence, interest, intelligence, command of the language skill and the 
efficiency of his work habits. 

Hopkins (1955) observes that many meanings developed by children 
are from second-hand experiences and as a result are cloudy meanings. 
He feels, then, that children need assistance in clarifying their 
meanings and that to build better meanings they must be free to 
express, without fear of oppression, those concepts which they accept. 
A feeling of security in the process of building better meanings is 
vital as it leads to open mindedness, tolerance and intelligent change. 
Many teachers, in his opinion, lose the opportunity to better the 
meanings of their pupils through a failure to develop feelings of 
security within the class. 

In considering the value of learning with meaning, Douglas and 
Spitzer (1946) state that understanding influences both the range and 
quality of the adjustments of the individual. Without meaning, they 
note, a pupil may react only to familiar situations and in a routine 
manner. In commenting on the same point, Fransden (1957) observes 
that emphasizing meaning in learning has two main advantages: it 
utilizes the concepts and principles achieved through the individual's 
past experience, and it consolidates numerous separate learnings into 
a smaller number of unifying principles. 

Advantages of learning with meaning have been experimentally 








- 





! 


■ 




< 

■ 



. ' ; ■: ■ ■ - 













t *<-’ ■ 



■ ; s 





■ 






i 




' 

, ’ 




. 


..... 

« 

■ 

- 





5 

determined on many occasions. In the discussion of his experiments 
on memorizing and forgetting, Ebbinghaus (1913) stated that meaningful 
material is more easily fixated, and better retained than nonsense 
material. More recent writers (Deese,1948; Miller and Selfridge,1950) 
agree with this finding and suggest that the reason for this is that 
meaningful materials contain a number of short phrases that go together 
and that these short range associations are familiar to the learners. 

Hildreth (1942) studied problem solving with children in grades 
two, three and four and found that solutions were obtained faster 
and more easily when a meaningful approach was used than when the 
problems were attempted in a blind mechanical fashion. McGeogh and 
Irwin (1952) concur in this finding and state further that the greater 
effectiveness of the meaningful over the rote method suggests that 
learning requires an active, analytical mode of response on the part 
of the pupil. 

Brownell and Moser (1949) reported that teaching subtraction 
by a meaningful decomposition method produced greater transfer and 
retention than either decomposition taught mechanically or the equal 
addition method taught mechanically or in a meaningful manner. They 
felt that the meaningful decomposition method was successful because 
it was understood by the pupils involved in the experiment, while the 
other methods were not. 

A general conclusion offered by Swenson (1949) was that a 
significant advantage in learning appeared to be associated with 
a method of study that stressed the organization of number facts 
about pupil-discovered generalizations. This method, it may be 
noted, was the most meaningful of those used in the study. 


- 

. 

« r ' 


' c ■ 

■ 
















' 













































































, 






6 


Another finding that confirms the idea that there is an 
advantage in learning through the meaningful approach is reported by- 
Stacey who noted that "the learner obtains as many or more facts and 
discovers more correct reasons for them, by a process of self-discovery 
than by a process of authoritative identification" (1949, p.101). 

Brownell (1928) found that childrens success in learning the 
simple addition combinations was closely related to the completeness 
of their concepts of numbers, that is, to the meaning that numbers 
had for them. 

The value of a meaningful approach to learning is well summarized 
by Reid (1938). In discussing the results of his investigation he 
noted: 

...the advantage of the perception of meaning is that it 
contains the secret of economical learning. This means that 
in order to learn easily, retain well and transfer skill 
effectively, we should emphasize the importance of the perception 
of meanings, relationships, and principles (1938, p.422). 

While many opinions have been expressed favoring a meaningful 
approach to learning, and a considerable body of research lends support 
to these opinions, the method has not, as yet, been adopted universally. 
Perhaps generalizations have been made from experiments involving 
nonsense materials that have not been borne o\it in meaningful situations. 
It may be that the results of experimentation are relevant only when 
restricted to the grades and subjects involved in a particular study, 
and cannot be applied to learning situations generally. Regardless 
of the cause of the lack of acceptance, however, it appears that 
further information must be obtained on the relationship between 
meaning and learning if one is to expect a change in existing practices 


in education 











* 














- 


. 









( 
























. "> ' V ■ 






- 








< 






















CHAPTER II 


THE PROPOSED STUDY 

General Statement 

The principal purpose of this investigation was to determine the 
learning outcomes resulting from the study of classroom material using 
methods arranged in an ascending order of meaningfulness. To achieve 
this purpose, an experiment was conducted in selected grade seven 
classrooms of the junior high schools of the Edmonton Separate School 
system and the Edmonton Public School system. 

In the investigation, the differential effects of three instructional 
procedures upon learning in three subject matter areas were studied. The 
three methods involve the study of material for facts, the study of 
material to determine the important relationships that exist within it, 
and the study of material to determine the major generalizations that 
may be made from it. The effects of the varied methods were determined 
by measuring the amount of material learned, the amount retained after 
a three-week interval, and the degree to which the effects of a particular 
method were transferred to other situations. The three subject-matter 
areas considered in this experiment were mathematics, science, and 
social studies. 

Importance of the Study 

In our society educators are faced with the increased pressures of 
greater numbers of students in the schools, coupled with demands for 
better and more extensive training. Much of this pressure is due to 


li Hsii'i. 


YGJJT8 ■ dSSvHCbH SHT 

$rs.sm$$a$.3 Xb«js«©0 

■ " . n o ns ■ , at ' ■ ■ ■ ■■ '' 

; . ’ . ■ ■ eg • £ Ss ’1 . ; 

. ■ - - ; f . • .tn '. ■ o . £ y< a ' i be ' t 

1 ; ■ . eh - ■ a • 

. , ■ : .■ . ■ »j o do ■ d ■ ri • i ■ 2 ■■■"', g « 5 Ll i 

*i oiJ If ■ 

lo , pi ; 

. . 19 ■ ; ' ' Iff >x : ■ ' 

’h;, 'ioX ‘• O v:.. ;;j'. X w.rcw.-.;; cj.oodjovrr aside! - 

, 1 ■ ' ' - . ' ' •. i ■ • ■ r 

' ■ C . L 

■ ■■ * ■■ 

, 

- • ’ . . ' H ■ ■ . 

t ©orisio hi i 

. 88i'.bifis Isiooe 

. .. 

vbn.to o 

• • ' rfi as ( i g i R *i 

t . . : i< iiedn 

*1 ♦ •£ 








8 


our rapidly increasing technological development with its demand for 
more highly trained personnel. Some, also, stems from unfavorable 
comparisons of the products of our educational system with those of 
other nations. Regardless of the source, however, it is the efficiency 
of our educational system that is being questioned. 

It seems appropriate, then, that where possible, investigations 
should be carried forward that may lead to further understanding of the 
learning process, enabling modifications to be made where necessary to 
meet present demands on education. Investigations of this nature, 
aiming at practical findings, would seem to be best conducted within 
the present system, and, as nearly as possible, tinder ordinary classroom 
conditions. The results of such research should prove to be more readily 
translated into classroom practice than results achieved from smaller 
laboratory projects, valuable though these may be. 

Many experiments have been undertaken to compare the relative 
efficiency of learning by various methods and to determine the amount of 
retention and degree of transfer associated with these methods. Few of 
the existing studies, however, endeavor to examine all these factors 
within the same experimental framework, nor do they attempt comparisons 
between various subject-matter areas. In addition, many experimenters 
have generalized findings from research involving nonsense materials 
and arbitrary relationships, quite unlike the material of the average 
classroom. 

The decision to include in this experiment actual classroom 
material in three subject matter areas as well as to investigate the 
influence of three methods of study on learning, transfer and retention 






' ■■ « , •• • • •. 


t * • I •; 1 ' 

- 



, 




. • ■ -■ . 




« 


■ . 












■ - • < • ■vqfyt-ii r ' 

« 

■ 




, . 




. 








* 









9 


should prove of value in several ways. It will, first, allow an 
examination of existing points of view in a new situation. Secondly, 
generalizations on learning may be broadened in their scope and made 
more widely applicable. Third, the results should be in a form that 
is meaningful to the teacher, and hence be more readily applied in 
the classroom. 


The Scope of the Study 


Population to be Used 

To make the results of this investigation as valuable as possible 
for the practicing teacher it was decided that the unit for study should 
be the actual classroom* While any grades of the school system may serve 
as an adequate site for an investigation of this kind, it was decided to 
concentrate at a point where the students would have sufficient experi¬ 
ence to be able to make effective generalizations and at the same time 
not have reached the period of specialization in study that is found in 
the high school. 

The pupils of the seventh grade were thought to meet these criteria 
sufficiently to serve as the experimental group. In addition, this 
group met another practical requirement in that grade seven students 
are not required to write departmental examinations at the end of the 
term, a fact which would have seriously affected the attitude of the 
teaching staff toward the experiment had it been conducted at the 
grade nine or grade twelve levels. 

Delimitation of the Area of Investigation 


Methods . It is possible to envision a continuum of meaningfulness 









I » Ir'v 1 


. 








: . : ..v o 





, 

, 













■ 


' 




. 

- 















. 


10 

of material to be studied in a classroom extending from the level of 
unrelated facts, or arbitrary associations, to the level of the develop¬ 
ment of explanatory principles and generalizations (Brownell and 
Hendrickson, 1950 )- At the same time there are a number of methods of 
studying material which differ in meaningfulness for the learner. These 
range from drill, in which meaning may be at a minimum, through various 
stages of guided learning to the most meaningful method of study, that 
of pupil-discovery and verification. The combinations of methods and 
materials of varying degrees of meaning become so numerous that their 
investigation in a single experiment would not be possible. 

In an effort to ascertain some of the relationships between meaning 
and learning it was decided to limit to three the methods of study to 
be used in this investigation. The three methods of study, capable of 
separation by careful definition, were : first, the study of a body of 
subject matter to determine the significant facts in it, second, the 
study of a body of subject matter to determine the important relation¬ 
ships that exist within it, and third, the study of a body of subject 
matter to determine the major generalizations that might be made from 
it. 

Subject Matter. If one can make generalizations concerning the 
processes of learning, retention and transfer, it would seem that any 
material suited to the level of experience of the learners would serve 
adequately as material in an investigation such as this. Again, 
however, with the aim in mind on making the results more directly 
applicable to the classroom itself, it was decided to use materials 
that form part of the content of courses actually being taught in the 



i '71 v. f ’■ ' ■ '(fJ : r 

■’ \ • ; \ ‘v :■ :M&u 


. 





, 



t , 









. 



- 

" . ■■ * ■: - . :i o. f. 

■ 

' 

■ 

d • •’ '• '' • - 









, . 




' 

* 


■ 




e 


■ 










schools 


11 


Because a comparison of the effects of the different methods of 
study in various subject matter areas was desired, the decision was 
reached to include material from mathematics, science and social 
studies. The only restriction placed on the material to be studied 
was that it had not been discussed in class before the time of the 
investigation. 

Classes . Because of the need for extensive classroom time for an 
investigation of this kind, an attempt was made to operate with the 
minimum number of classes that would permit the fulfillment of the 
purposes of the study. To make the experiment administratively 
simpler and to allow the experimenter to conduct all training periods 
orally, a particular method of study was assigned to a complete class¬ 
room. The investigation of one subject-matter area would, then, 
require three classrooms • one for each of the three methods of study. 

In order to compare the effectiveness of the methods of study in 
different subject-matter areas and at the same time not deprive a class 
of too much of its regular instruction, it was decided to limit each 
class to a study of two kinds of subject-matter. This resulted in the 
experiment requiring a total of nine experimental classes. An 
additional three classes were added to serve as control groups. 

Time . It would seem likely that, regardless of the method of study 
employed, the greater the time spent in training the students, the 
greater the chance of the application of the method in later situations, 
A pilot study conducted by the experimenter in June, 1957 * suggested 

















. 


* 




- 










. 




■ 


- 






, 

c 


' ' 




« 










. 









« 





12 


that intensive study of material by the methods proposed for this 
investigation might be effectively carried out for four or five thirty- 
five minute periods over four or five days. Beyond that time it 
seemed that there was a loss in motivation, particularly in the group 
restricted to the study of the facts in a selection. With this in mind, 
and also to complete the training periods before the Christmas vacation, 
a four-period training plan was accepted. 

Selection of Classes 

Since a total of twelve classrooms was to be involved in this 
study, both the Edmonton Public School Board and the Edmonton Separate 
School Board were approached to secure their co-operation in the project. 
The principals and staffs of five schools in the Edmonton Separate School 
system, interested in the study, provided six of the required classrooms. 
The six additional classes were made available to the experimenter in 
one large junior high school in the Edmonton Public School system. 
Altogether there were 386 students involved in the experiment. 

Definition of Terms 

For the purposes of this study, the term '‘fact” will be taken to 
mean anything that is known to exist or is accepted as being true without 
consideration of supporting evidence. 

•’Relationships” will emphasize the connection, correspondence or 
contrast that exists between persons or things® More specifically, the 
term will be restricted to cause and effect, temporal or spatial 
relationships, and similarities and differences. 

The term ’’generalization” will refer to general inferences that 






i ■ ‘ : - i ' 

, 

, 

. 

. 

* 

■ r 

* 

*' - ' ! V V V: « , • . J Vo :• . V .. ; :.v 

• • T • 

t 

•- • - 1 i t. J- ■ , t '.. ’ ■ I: ;■ £.&$ 














v- 


■ 



13 


may be made from the subject matter studied in the experiment. It 
will include the derivation or induction of general principles or 
general conceptions. These generalizations would have application in 
the area of the material read, although they may be applied more 
broadly. 

Summary 

Three kinds of learning activity were employed in this study. 

These were: the study of material for facts, for relationships, and for 
generalizations. 

Because there might be differences in the ease with which learning 
outcomes are achieved in the various subject matter areas, three sets of 
material were assembled, covering the fields of mathematics, science and 
social studies. Each class was given two sets of materials, thus allow¬ 
ing comparisons to be made between the kinds of material studied and the 
various learning outcomes. As well, comparisons could be made between 
the kinds of learning activity and their results. 

Twelve classrooms were used in the investigation, nine serving as 
experimental groups and three as controls. 

Basic Assumptions 

Before undertaking an investigation of this kind, certain basic 
assumptions had to be made. First, it was necessary to accept the 
assumption that there is a relationship between the meaning that the 
material or method of study has for the individual and the amount of 
learning, the extent of retention and the degree of transfer. 

A second assumption was that the methods of study employed in the 





* 














- 








e 








, • .'.t - jot ' ' ' V ' ■ , ■ i , ' ■ : ' • ' 008 


« , ' 






. 




- 

‘ 









14 

experiment were sufficiently distinct to produce measurable differences 
in the outcomes of the learning situation. 

It was also necessary to assume that the tests employed in determin¬ 
ing the effects of the different methods of study were sufficiently well 
constructed to measure these effects adequately. 

A fourth assumption was that there were available techniques of 
analysis that would allow the assessment of the extent and direction of 
differences in performance that appear from the testing program. In 
this instance, the techniques of analysis of variance and covariance 
were selected as being most appropriate. 

Subdivisions of the Main Problem 

In order to fulfill the purpose of the experiment, it was necessary 
to subdivide the main problem for the analysis of the data. The follow¬ 
ing questions represent the major areas of investigation: 

1. Does training through any one of the methods employed in this 
investigation, namely, the study of material for facts, for 
relationships, and for generalizations, tend to produce greater 
gains in learning than result through training in ary of the 
other methods? 

2. Does training through one particular method of study produce 
comparable gains in other learning outcomes? For example does 
practice in the development of generalizations based on a body of 
subject matter produce improvement in the learning of facts and 
the developing of relationships? 

Does training through one particular method of study yield 


3* 


' 

. i' ' ’ ' A : ' " 

i j-: r ; ; f •' ; t : ! •••'.' 

.. ' . 

* ..■» 1 . ■: . : : v.,. • ' 

. 

■ • 

’ • 

* 

' 

t * 













15 

greater evidence of transfer to new material within the same 
subject matter area than does training through another method? 

4. Within the given subject matter field, is the amount of transfer 
associated with a particular method comparable for the areas 

of fact, relationship and generalization? 

5. Do the effects of training through one particular method of study 
appear to be transferred from one subject matter area to another 
to a greater extent than the effects of training through another 
method? 

6. Is the amount of transfer associated with a particular method of 
study comparable in the areas of fact, relationship, and 
generalization? 

?. Does training through one particular method of study produce 

greater retention than through either of the two other methods? 

8. Does training through one particular method of study produce 

comparable retention of facts, relationships and generalizations? 
For example, does training in the method of studying material 
for generalizations result merely in the retention of general¬ 
izations, or are other learning outcomes retained as well? 

These questions were translated into hypotheses to be tested. 

The experimental and statistical design used in their testing is 
discussed in detail in Chapter Five, 









CL J -'-.i.-'i J 10 ^ v '■: ' 


o i . .. a li-.- .. . -J V4 .- 

'• ' r... - J ■■ id’ v.i, •. . :?• *i 

. 

;‘ 'X 


1 • - c 










































. 




, 

: 








' . . 











CHAPTER III 


RELATED STUDIES 

An attempt will be made in this chapter to present certain theoreti¬ 
cal points of view related to this study and to summarize existing 
research supporting these views. As much as possible, the discussion 
will center about theory and research that has been most closely 
related to classroom practice. It is felt that a review of this nature 
will prove of value in the interpretation of the results of the present 
experiment. 


Learning 


While recognizing that it is extremely difficult to formulate an 
acceptable definition of learning, Hilgard suggests the following: 

Learning is the process by which an activity originates or is 
changed through reacting to an encountered situation, provided that 
the characteristics of the change in activity cannot be explained on 
the basis of native response, tendencies, maturation, or temporary 
states of the organism (e„g. fatigue, drugs, etc.) (1950,p.3)• 

Attempts to explain the nature of learning, he continues, fall 
into two broad categories, stimulus-response theories on the one hand, 
and cognitive theories on the other. The lines of separation between 
theories, however? are not always sharp. There may be areas of agree¬ 
ment between members of opposing groups as well as areas of difference 
between those of the same general category. 

Some basic differences between theorists in these two groups may 
be seen through a consideration of three main points: (a) the stimulus- 
response theorist prefers to find peripheral machanisms to integrate 






« ' * ■ ■' ■ v 7- ■ ' 7y 







■' V ; , J ' . '.'T; Hi/; 

. - 

' 








' 

. « ■ '■ .• ' 7 

« 

* ' • • • . . 

« 

■« 

7 . .. ; 


• • <• . - t . 7. cnt 

* 




■ 


. 




17 

sequences of behavior, that is, he is interested in movement and what 
the individual does, while the cognitive theorist utilizes central or 
ideational intermediaries, using such things as memories and expec¬ 
tations as integrators of goal-seeking behavior, (b) the stimulus- 
response theorist maintains that what is learned is habit or response; 
the field theorist believes that it is a cognitive structure that is 
learned, (c) trial and error is the characteristic form of learning 
for the stimulus-response theorist, while the cognitive theorist feels 
that insight, that is, the understanding of the relationships involved 
in a situation, plays an important part in learning. 

Each of the systematic approaches to the understanding of learning 
has contributed to existing knowledge concerning the problem. But, 
Hilgard cautions: 

At the same time, no one has succeeded in providing a system 
invulnerable to criticism. The construction of a fully 
satisfactory theory of learning is likely to remain for a 
long time an unaccomplished task (I956,p.l4). 

Transfer of Training 

Transfer of training, broadly speaking, refers to instances 
where learning in one situation affects, in some way, the individual’s 
performance in another, somewhat different situation. 

An early point of view which offered an explanation of transfer 
was known as the theory of formal discipline. This idea was based on 
the principles of faculty psychology in which the mind was considered 
to have a number of faculties such as memory, reason, the will, 
attention, and the like. Each faculty was thought to operate 








, ' 




t 

« 

: c ' ' 


























* : 



■ 


, 

• . 










. 



. 



• 






■ . 













t u , 

■.■ t : ■ ' . 




. * • 




- 


C . ’!." " r . 

























18 

independently and each could be improved with practice. Transfer, from 
this point of view, came about automatically. Drill in geometry, for 
example, was believed to improve the reasoning ability of the individual 
in all areas. 

Many psychologists were not satisfied with this explanation, and 
attempted to clarify the situation by experimentation. One of the 
earliest studies was that undertaken by Thorndike in 1924, in which he 
studied the influence of training in particular subject areas in the 
high school on performance on a series of reasoning tests. About 
13,500 high school students were involved in the investigation. He 
concluded that: 

By any reasonable interpretation of the results, the intellectual 
values of studies should be determined largely by the special information, 
habits, interests, attitudes and ideals which they demonstrably produce. 
The expectation of any large differences in general improvement of the 
mind from one study rather than another seems doomed to disappointment... 
After positive correlation of gain with initial ability is allowed for, 
the balance in favor of any study is certainly not large (1924,p.98). 

As experimental evidence opposing formal discipline accumulated, 
it became evident that practice did not bring about automatic improve¬ 
ment in all aspects of a mental operation. A question then arose con¬ 
cerning the degree to which training in one area was effective in 
improving or aiding operations in a second area. 

According to Thorndike, this phenomenon could be explained by 
determining the number of common elements in the two situations. He 
expressed this point of view, known as the theory of identical elements, 
as follows: 

The answer which I shall try to defend is that a change in one 
function alters any other only in so far as the two functions have, 
as factors, identical elements. The change in the second function 
is in amount that due to the change in the elements common to it 






t ,, 



. •• " t ■ 


. 


, 

-si - , ' ’ ' 1 ■ * ' '■ ' . , 

t . 

. - 

« , 

f , 

. 

1 

- 

■ • ■ • • .• • • 





19 


and the first. The change is simply the necessary result upon the 
second function of the alteration of those of its factors which were 
elements of the first function, and so were altered by its training 
(1913,p.358). 

Because the term "element" became generally taken to mean something 
indivisible or atomistic, Wood worth (1938) suggested that the term 
"component" be substituted. This broadened the scope of the theory so 
that a fact, procedure or attitude, learned in one situation, could be 
made to operate in another similar situation. 

Another, and somewhat different idea of transfer was expressed by 
Charles Judd (1939). As a result of experimentation, he concluded that 
the essence of transfer is found in generalization - the ability to 
apply broad principles and meanings to specific situations. According 
to this theory, understanding of experience, its organization into 
patterns and its relations to other situations should be stressed in 
learning, if transfer is to take place. 

Although transfer of training is not discussed by gestalt 
psychologists, their concept of transposition, according to Hilgard 
(1956), is similar to transfer. This is essentially the application 
of perceived relationships to other suitable situations. Hilgard notes: 
"there is something in common between the earlier learning and the 
situation in which transfer is found, but what exists in common is not 
identical, perceived elements, but common patterns, configuration or 
relationships." (1956,p.252). This idea is not unlike that expressed 
by Judd, but Katona (19^0) states that generalization in itself is not 
sufficient for transfer. The effect is produced only by structurally 
adequate generalizations which bring adequate, meaningful organization 


to the situation. 




' 


■ 

. 

t ' 

, 

4 

- 

■ 

- 




■ ■ 




: ' 










■ 




- 












- 

' 











20 

Referring to the mechanisms b 7 which transfer takes place, 
Stephens observes: 

A large part of the controversy has been between the proponents of the 
identical elements theory of Thorndike and the generalizations theory 
of Judd. This argument is rapidly coming to have merely historical 
importance, since it becomes more and more evident that the contrast 
between the two theories is not very clearly drawn (1951 ,p.^6?). 

A consideration of research findings, rather than the theoretical 
points of view may be of greater value in understanding the phenomenon 
of transfer. 

The influence of method of study on transfer has received 
attention from psychologists for some time. Woodrow (192?) investi¬ 
gated the relationships between transfer and method of learning to 
memorize. One experimental group merely practised memorizing passages; 
a second experimental group received specific training in how to 
memorize; a third group served as a control. It was found that with 
undirected drill, indications of transfer were generally small, 
either positive or negative, but that the group receiving some train¬ 
ing in method of study exhibited considerable positive transfer. 

In another early experiment. Overman (1930) attempted to measure 
the transfer effects of instruction given in three methods of teaching 
addition. He had a Generalizations group, which formulated general 
methods or procedures, a Rationalization group, in which reasons and 
principles were discussed, and a third group for which these two 
approaches were combined. Working with grade two pupils, it was found 
that the Generalization group was superior in transfer tests, followed 
by the Gombined group and then the Rationalization group. 

A more recent study by Swenson (19^9) tends to substantiate these 






; 


. i i M ; '■ . V . " . • 


- 

’ 

- 

, „ 

. 


. 

' 

. 

: 

. 

■ 

' 

. f - ' 

. . ' ‘j ■ 

' - 


» 

' 

' 




21 


findings. Working with three groups of grade two pupils, and using 
one hundred addition facts as material, she found that the group taught 
to organize addition facts around number generalizations was superior 
to a drill-plus-verification group and a drill group. 

Essentially the same results had been reported by McConnell (l94l). 
He gave four transfer tests to two groups of second grade pupils. One 
group had been taught by methods that were confined to specific drill 
on the basic addition and subtraction facts, and the other had been given 
instruction that emphasized the meaning and interrelationships of the 
combinations. The latter group was superior to the drill group on all 
four tests. 

Theile's experiment (1939) also indicated that a more meaningful 
method of study, that of discovery and verification, produced superior 
transfer when compared with a method that emphasized drill without 
iinders handing. 

In 1941» Hendrickson and Schroeder repeated Judd's classic experi¬ 
ment involving the submerged target, with an air gun in place of the 
darts originally used. They found that knowledge of theory facilitated 
transfer, confirming the findings of the earlier experiment. They found, 
in addition, that theoretical information was an aid in making the 
original adjustment to the first situation, a finding in contrast to 
that of Judd and Scholckow. 

Katona (1940) , in his study of retention and transfer, noted that, 
contrary to the views of the proponents of the theory of identical 
elements, transfer would take place when learning was accompanied by 
understanding whether the elements of the new situation were more or 












- 

- 








' 

- 

■ 

» • , 












■ 










- 

* 












1 ■I , . 



















22 

less similar to the old situation* 

In stressing the significance of learning with understanding he 
stated further: 

With meaningful learning ... we find that there is a plasticity or 
flexibility of learning which permits reasonable applications in a 
wide scale. These applications are due, not to the transfer of 
specific data from an A to a B, but to the fact that meaningful 
learning results from the acquisition of integrated knowledge, which 
is usable under different circumstances (1940»p.136). 

An extension of the experimentation of Katona by Hilgard and his 
associates (1953) verifies the earlier findings. In this experiment, 
learning with understanding produced transfer, both in simple and 
complex situations, in greater amounts than did learning by memori¬ 
zation. 

That attitudes of the learner are significant in transfer is noted 
by Dorsey and Hopkins (1930). By building up in their experimental 
groups a "readiness to act", they found superiority in this group over 
a control group in transfer of method of a study, transfer of skills 
and transfer of knowledge. Because the groups were equated in intelli¬ 
gence and both received the same preliminary instructions, the experi¬ 
menters felt that the difference in performance was due to something 
other than these and suggested the attitude of readiness as the cause. 

The kind of instruction given pupils also appears to influence 
the amount of transfer obtained. Salisbury (193*0 observed that train¬ 
ing in the conscious use of outlining, which stressed organization and 
hence understanding of material, tended to improve the masteiy of 
content subjects. Gatchel (1931) concluded from his research that it 
was possible to train pupils in methods of study and that such training 
carried over into a variety of subjects. 




- 




- 


« 

- . ■ - * '■■■'■ 1 1 • ' " ■■ ' r : tt . 






■ 










- 








, 






• * 


■ 

- 

' c 

















- 
































23 

It was noted by Barlow that "where training was devoted to instructions 
in abstracting, analyzing and generalizing, a relatively large amount 
of transfer resulted" (l937tP*127) • Somewhat similar results are 
reported by Anderson (19^9) who found that in mathematics, procedures 
emphasizing relational learning, discovery and generalization were more 
productive in both learning and transfer* 

A recent investigation was reported by Kitell (19^7) in which each 
of three groups of sixth-grade pupils was supplied with a different 
amount of direction during discovery of principles determining the 
solution of multiple-choice verbal items. He concluded that furnishing 
learners with information in the form of underlying principles promotes 
transfer and retention. 

In summarizing the research reported, it appears that the most 
common conclusion concerning transfer of training is that transfer is 
facilitated by emphasis on understanding in the learning process. Methods 
of study stressing the importance of generalization, and specific 
techniques that require analysis and organization of the material seem 
to bring about the highest degree of transfer. In other words, the more 
meaningful the situation is for the learner the greater will be the 
amount transferred to new situations. 

Retention 

An early point of view concerning forgetting was found in Thorndike’s 
Law of Exercise. This states that connections are strengthened when 
practised and tend to weaken when practice is stopped. Thus it appears 
that the passage of time is the major factor in forgetting. Although 






* 

- 

. 

- , 


. 

• 

' 



■ ■ 



• 

* 



- 



* 



A \ 

'■ • ■- . ..H ■ '■ - •; 


< 




- 

■ n::, orris 

' 

. 


■ 


. 


- 


. , . • . •, - . • 

. 






24 


Thorndike later withdrew emphasis from this statement as a law of 
learning, its influence has not altogether disappeared from people*s 
thinking. 

The concept of memory trace was advanced by Koffka in an attempt 
to explain the influence of the past by the condition of the present. 

He states: 

In this explanation of memory events, an event in time influences 
another event, which succeeds it after a finite interval, not directly, 
but only through some effect which it has left behind and which for 
brevity’s sake we shall call a trace ... (1935»p.429). 

Hilgard (1956) notes that in addition to the trace, something 
that goes on because of a present stimulating situation called a 
present process, must a].so be postulated. This present process can 
select, reactivate or in some way communicate with the trace, resulting 
in recognition or recall. The process and the trace are distinguishable 
in that they are localized in different parts of the brain. The entire 
trace system is considered to be organized according to the same 
gestalt laws as are applied in other fields. 

Of a3.1 the changes in the trace system, forgetting has received 
the greatest attention. Inability to remember, according to trace 
theory, means that the present problems cannot come into communication 
with an older trace or trace system. This may be due to three causes. 
First, the trace may have disappeared. Such an occurrence may be due 
to a lapse of time, through lack of cohesion in the parts of the 
structure, or through interaction with other traces or new processes. 
Second, the trace may not be able to exert an influence on the present 
occasion, that is, it may be unavailable. Third, there are instances 






' : v.:.■_ . J„ .- 

■ 

. J .f ' • . i . ' ; 

i t; ’ J ; . ' ' . :f ' : I *■■ ■ 



f 














3 


i 


1 5 '■ : 




: 






* 


' 

.. ) 

, 
















c : o ' ■ >: 


f 






' • •' ' •* . -i-ri m 













'' ■ • c 




25 


in which the present condition cannot communicate with the trace. 

These three causes are not to be considered mutually exclusive, but in 
each case of forgetting, all may play some part. 

Bartlett, as reported by Cronbach (195^) * extended this view of 
forgetting and retention. He suggested that memory cannot be explained 
solely through the effects of a passage of time upon learning. It is 
a reconstruction process operating in such a way that when an individual 
encounters a situation, he attempts to make it as sensible as possible. 

On the recurrence of the situation it is thought that, rather than 
filling in the gap left through the passage of time, the individual 
makes a new organized interpretation of the whole thing. This new 
interpretation is as regular and consistent as it can be made. To 
eliminate errors in recall, then, the structure and significance of a 
situation must be stressed during the original learning. 

A different view of retention and forgetting is held by some 
psychologists, who have come to regard an active process of inter¬ 
ference between the old and the new learnings as the main cause of 
for getting. This process or interaction is called retroactive 
inhibition. In retroactive inhibition some other learning occurs 
between the learning and recall of the original material and 
interferes with its retention. Another similar situation, called 
proactive inhibition, occurs when the interfering material was learned 
prior to the learning and recall of something else. 

Melton and Irwin (19^0) distinguished between two kinds of proactive 
inhibition. One case involves the retardation of learning an activity 
because of prior experience, a phenomenon sometimes referred to as 




: 

' • 5 

■ 5 . 

. • . 3 t y 

■ ■ 


t i 

. 

■■v ( :: •. ■■ • ■> j , =■. 


■ 

C 

• - ■ • ■ . - . 


■ 

- 






■ - l, 'l ■ ’ ■ V.;,! , f 


. ■ • > * t , . ... 

. 

. ‘ • ■ . | | • , . .. 

- 

’ ' ' ' 1 " ' ' -■ • Ui-.‘ . ■ • . i ' •; 




















3 - ■ ' .. . . . , , ' .. ±>-\ 
'■< ■ . . . . 


26 


negative transfer. The second case occurs when the retention of an 
activity is impaired by the influence of earlier activities. 

It is also possible that repression plays a part in forgetting. 

In this process, unacceptable ideas pass from the conscious to the 
unconscious and are no longer recalled. While this may explain some 
forgetting, it is not generally felt to hold for all kinds. 

An examination of research conducted in the area of retention may 
provide a meaningful elaboration of some of the above points of view. 

In reviewing the literature on retroactive inhibition, Britt 
reported that it is well known that the degree of revival of a 

previously acquired activity depends on the kind and amount of activity 
which intervenes between the original learning of the activity and its 
reinstatement” (1935»p.38l). 

Two major influences on the amount of interference noted in his 
report were the similarity of the original and interpolated material 
and the degree of learning of the original material. It was found that 
as the degree of similarity increased, the degree of retroactive 
inhibition also increased to a maximum, then as the materials approached 
identity, the amount of retroactive inhibition decreased to zero with 
simple repetition. It was also noted that the greater the degree of 
learning of the original material, the less susceptible it was to 
retroactive inhibition. 

Britt 1 s first conclusion received subsequent verification in 
experiments by Johnson (1933) and Melton and von Lackum (19^1). In 
these experiments, serial lists of nonsense syllables were used as 
subject matter. 




. . 

, : • I ‘ ‘ • 

,cj. ", ' .t • 1 *•'' . - 

« 

■ .... 

I ' .i:; - Ti 1 V ii ; . ' . .. - i 1 ■ 

■ ■ J" • -• v V .' s..' 

. , 

' 

. 

• i'l'j . ■ ' ••, 

. 

i v - . . •, « ■%/ ‘. j 

i , ' , ■ ' 

nil ■ « 




27 


On the other hand, Hall (1955)» using meaningful material (the 
characteristics and customs of a hypothetical primitive tribe of people), 
found no relationship between the amount recalled and the degree of 
similarity between the interpolated and original material. 

Again using meaningful school materials, Ausubel and his 
associates (1957) found that (a) proactive rather than retroactive 
inhibition was the determining cause of forgetting; (b) interpolated 
material, substantially similar to the original material, but not 
identical with it, does not result in retroactive inhibition, but is 
sometimes as valuable as repetition of the original material in 
improving recall. They feel that the extrapolation of the findings 
of experiments based on meaningless material to the classroom situation 
is a questionable procedure. 

Using a variety of methods of learning addition facts with grade 
two pupils, Swenson (1949) was led to conclude that retroactive 
inhibition appeared more frequently and in greater amounts when a drill 
method was used than when the children were taught to organize the 
facts around generalizations. 

The effect of a passage of time on the recall of learned material 
has received considerable attention in experiments. In an early study 
Bruene (1928) reported that over the summer vacation the greatest loss 
occurred in arithmetic computation, with losses also found in spelling, 
language usage, history and literature. There was little or no loss in 
arithmetic reasoning while reading, nature study and science showed 
increases. In reading, more of the bright children gained or remained 
the same over the summer vacation. In arithmetic, more of the average 





< . . 


. 1 3 ; i ■; 



. 


• 



; 


. 


i , . 


< 







* ; , j j • ; 

: 





' 


S 



■ 


. 


- 

• 




i 

1 • . 




- 


‘ 








. 

. ... ; i ■( 


i 








. 








. 

: ' 





* 



. ai , 





■ ; 



. 


' 


. 



> I 

: . ' : ' l' ■ V- 

; 3 i 


. 


“ 









’ / J 'it 




4 

• , 







• • • < . • . •; i 







children fell into this class 


28 


Kolberg (193*0 found that over the summer vacation there was an 
improvement in knowledge of subject matter, rather than a loss, if the 
material was easy. Contrary to Bruene's study, it was found that when 
the entire range of intelligence was considered, there was no relation¬ 
ship between retention and intelligence quotient. This is in keeping 
with the findings of Bassett (1929) who reported low positive corre¬ 
lations between retention and mental age. 

In a study of junior high school pupils, Schrepel and Laslett (1936) 
confirmed the findings of Bruene, as far as reading and computation in 
arithmetic were concerned. In other areas no serious losses in subject 
matter were noted. They also found that the pupils of greater mental 
age, as a group, lost less or gained more knowledge over the summer 
vacation than did pupils of lesser mental age. 

In considering further the relationship between intelligence and 
retention, Sister M. La hey (19**1) reported positive, but low corre¬ 
lations between intelligence test scores and fundamental operations 
in first year algebra. Correlations between intelligence and the 
retention of the ability to solve verbal problems were higher. 

Grant (1932) found positive correlations between intelligence 
and retention, the coefficients being the highest for the most 
meaningful material. 

In investigating the retention of course outcomes in educational 
psychology. McDougall (1958) found that the abilities to interpret 
and extrapolate material were retained to a significantly higher 
degree than the ability to recall knowledge or translate this 














' 


' 

' t . 


t 


, 


. 

. 


: 







, ' : J ' . ; i ■ 

I . V; • & . . \ . • 

. 

* ■ : ’■ • -• i ■ r ' Lr 

. 


29 

knowledge from one form to the other. One might observe that the 
difference appears to favor the more meaningful outcomes 

Tyler (1930) attempted to determine whether information that is 
seldom used would be more quickly forgotten than explanations that can 
be commonly applied to everyday life and methods of thinking that can 
be employed in practical situations. He gave three tests in science, 
one an information test, another an explanation test, and a third, a 
generalizations test. These were repeated after an eight-month 
interval. There was a distinct loss in the factual information test, 
but only slight differences in the other two, suggesting advantages in 
retention for more meaningful material. 

Freud and Cheronis (19^0) reported similar findings. The subject 
matter best retained in a physical science course appeared to be 
principles and theories, their applications and related facts. Material 
showing the poorest retention was memorized without the use of reason. 

Johannsen and associates (1932) and Dietze and Jones (1931) 
suggest that scores on a memory test seem to be a function of the kind 
of material learned, the more familiar being retained best. The latter 
study also indicated that factual material (in this case, three stories) 
was forgotten less rapidly than either nonsense syllables or meaningful 
materials learned by rote. 

An attempt was made by Craig (1956) to determine the effects 
of directing learners’ discovery of established relationships upon 
retention and the ability to discover new relationships. He reported 
that the groups receiving the greater amount of direction learned 
more relationships, and in a delayed retention test after thirty-one 










« '-W W w Ju : , . 














■ 

■ 


- 








- 































' 

































30 

days, had retained more than the independent discovery groups. This 
would suggest that supplying information to the student to make the 
problem more meaningful resulted in improved learning and retention. 

In investigating the learning and retention of concepts, Reed 
(1946) noted that a set to learn meanings as well as names yielded a 
higher degree of retention than a set to learn names only. Logically 
formed concepts were found to be better remembered than those illogically 
formed. 

In his experiments on learning involving a memorizing group and 
an understanding group, Katona (1940) reported that the memorizing 
group tended to follow the main features of the Ebbinhaus curve. 

Learning by understanding, however, brought about different effects, 
the average performance several weeks after training being as good as 
performance immediately following training. 

Katona suggests that "during the interval between testing, 
additional practice of a different kind may strengthen an integrated 
knowledge by enriching and widening its scope" (1940,p.l63). An 
alternative explanation for the apparent absence of forgetting when 
material is learned by understanding is found, according to Katona, 
in the belief that recall in the form of reconstruction does not 
produce the Ebbinhaus type curve as frequently as does recall in the 
form of reproduction. 

In summarizing the material presented on retention and forgetting, 
one may note that the exact nature of the processes involved are not 
definitely known. The effect of the similarity of original and 
interpolated learning materials has not been firmly established, nor 





- 





















- 




' • : 

■J 





- , 









. 

















. 







31 

has the relationship between intelligence and retention. In general. 


support has been found for the contention that more meaningful 
materials, such as principles and applications, are better retained, 
and that methods of study that help to develop meanings for children 
also promote retention. 


Summary 

In this brief review of the theory and research in the areas of 
learning, transfer and retention, it is possible to observe the 
divergent views held by psychologists. One may note, too, that 
experiments and research in these fields do not always yield 
similar results. Throughout this pattern of disagreement, however, 
there runs a thread of agreement concerning the importance of meaning 
or understanding in learning. It has generally been found that the 
more meaningful the method of teaching and learning employed, and 
the more meaningful the material involved in learning, the greater 
the amount learned and retained, and the greater the degree of 
transfer of learning. 


r 




' • 


-U ..hi :.. - - - - ll • 




' • , 




: , : . 


V t •:. : -r-. ' : [ r*' 

. 







: . 

:n ' t . ' i 


v 

t . 1 .' 






CHAPTER 17 


THE PILOT STUDY 

Introduction 

In June, 1958* a preliminary investigation was carried out to 
test the hypothesis that there is a relationship between the cognitive 
activity of the learner and the amount learned and retained. As well 
as giving an indication of the nature of these relationships# the 
pilot study permitted an evaluation, in a practical setting, of the 
method of study proposed for the major experiment. 

Three grade seven classrooms in two junior high schools of the 
Edmonton Separate School system were made available for this investi¬ 
gation. A total of eighty-six pupils took part in the training and 
testing program. 

Procedure 

In the pilot study three types of learning activity were used. 
These were: the study of material for facts; the study of material to 
determine the significant relationships within it; the study of 
material to determine the major generalizations that could be made 
from it. Each class was randomly assigned a type of learning activity 
to be followed throughout the study. 

On the first day of the investigation a pre-test was administered 
to all classes. This consisted of a reading selection in science 
entitled ’'Winds", and a twenty-eight item multiple-choice test. The 









, 



e ■ J / u j 























' 





















' 

. 











- 




33 


test, contained ten factual questions, ten questions involving 
relationships and eight questions involving generalizations. The 
students were allowed ten minutes to read the selection and fifteen 
minutes to complete the test. 

The following four daily periods were used for training the 
classes in their particular method of study. A different body of 
subject matter was used each day, although on a given day the material 
was common to all classes. Each class read the assigned selection 
quickly, then studied it in detail and marked the important items. 

The activities of the pupils were controlled during this period by the 
suggestions and questions of the experimenter. Time was allowed the 
students to re-read the selection before they attempted a ten-item 
multiple-choice test designed to measure the outcomes appropriate to 
each group. The test for the Fact group, for example, contained only 
questions of fact. 

On the sixth day of the study, the groups were given the post¬ 
test. This was comparable in structure to the pre-test, though not 
equated with it. The reading selection was again from science, this 
time entitled "Radiation”. The multiple-choice test consisted of 
twenty-eight items with the same distribution of questions as before. 
Time limits were again ten minutes for reading and fifteen minutes for 
testing. 

A second test was also administered in this period. This was a 
twenty-four item multiple-choice test containing eight items measuring 
each of the three learning outcomes, fact, relationship and generali¬ 
zation. The questions were based on subject matter studied by all 

























. 


















. 


- 






. 






















. 











classes during the second training period and were used as a measure 
of retention. The students were allowed fifteen minutes to complete 
the test. 


Analysis of the Results 

Analysis of the data was carried out using analysis of variance 
and covariance techniques. In all instances of significantly different 
means, homogeneity of variance was verified with Bartlett’s test. In 
cases where the variance was found to be heterogeneous, the data were 
re-analysed using the Cochran and Cox test if the groups were of 
different sizes and simple t-tests if the groups were the same size 
or if the means were correlated. In all instances significance was 
claimed if F or t reached the 5$ level. 

Pre-test 

The results of the pre-test administered to all students on the 
first day of study are summarized in Table I. 


TABLE I 

PILOT STUDY 
PRE-TEST RESULTS 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 




Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D, 

M 

S.D. 

M 

.S.D. 

M 

S.D... 

Fact 

29 

17.93 

5*88 

5*83 

1.91 

6.97 

2.58 

5.10 

1.89 

Relation¬ 

ship 

31 

20.06 

4.60 

7*10 

1.84 

7.48 

2,69 

5.48 

1,82 

General¬ 

ization 

26 

20.42 

4.70 

7*15 

1.58 

7.73 

1.99 

5.54 

1.82 







































_ ' 


^.vC I;... ' *'-• 




. ' i ' ' ' 








! ' - < 
' . r : \ ■ ; ' , - 







35 

Seven analyses of the data of Table I were carried out with analysis 
of variance techniques used in each instance. The following means were 
tested for significant differences: 

1. Total scores in the three groups. 

2. Fact subscores in the three groups. 

3. Relationship subscores in the three groups. 

4. Generalization subscores in the three groups. 

5. Three subscores for the Fact group. 

6. Three subscores for the Relationship group. 

7. Three subscores for the Generalizations group. 

The analysis of the pre-test scores revealed that there were no 
significant differences in the total test performance , nor in the sub¬ 
test results within each of the three groups. In addition, there were 
no significant differences noted when the three groups were compared 
on the relationships and generalizations subsections of the test. Both 
the Relationship group and the Generalization group, however, were 
superior to the Fact group on the factual section of the pre-test. As 
a result of this difference, initial performance on the fact subsection 
was controlled through analysis of covariance in subsequent treatment 
of results. 

Post-test 


Post-test results are presented in Table II. 



. 

. 


. 


. 

, 

ivrv^rff \d 

- 

« 

« •• 1 : 

* 


■ 





■ 


' 


TABLE II 


36 


PILOT STUDY 
POST-TEST RESULTS 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 




Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D 

• 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

29 

12.72 

4.85 

4.97 

1.89 

4.17 

1*75 

3.59 

1.42 

Relation¬ 

ship 

31 

14.26 

4.21 

5.03 

1-95 

4.97 

1.94 

4.26 

1.45 

General¬ 

ization 

26 

16.69 

4.96 

6.23 

1.79 

5.96 

2.28 

4.50 

1.71 


The analysis of the post-test results followed the same pattern 
used with the pre-test. It was found that the Generalization group 
was superior to both the Fact and Relationship groups when mean total 
scores were compared. The same result was obtained when the mean scores 
on both the fact subsection and the relationship subsection were tested 
for significant differences. No method of study appeared to produce 
differences in performance on the generalization section of the test. 
When the subscores of each method group were analysed no significant 
differences were found. Training did not produce variation in results 
in the different learning outcomes, within any group. 

Retention Test 

Keans and standard deviations for the three groups on the 
retention test are presented in Table III. 














































































' 














. ' • I . 






































TABLE III 


37 


PILOT STUDY 
RETENTION TEST RESULTS 


Group 

N 

Total 

— -- ——m as: ±i*u., ■ i 

Subscores 




Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

30 

18.20 

4.29 

6.93 

1.36 

5.90 

1.85 

5.37 

1.75 

Relation¬ 

ship 

29 

19.76 

3.67 

6.90 

1.22 

7.03 

1.42 

5.83 

1.63 

General¬ 

ization 

2 ? 

18.00 

5.08 

6.48 

1.90 

5.96 

2.26 

5.56 

1.48 


On the retention test no significant differences were found when 
mean total scores were compared, nor when mean scores on the fact and 
generalization subsections were tested. Because the variance was 
heterogeneous, the Cochran and Cox technique was used to test mean 
differences on the relationship section of the retention test. This 
revealed that the Relationship group was superior in retention to both 
the Fact group and the Generalization group. 

Bartlett 1 s test revealed that the variance of the Fact group 
subscores was heterogeneous and since each subsection had the same N, 
an ordinary t-test was used to test the difference between means. It 
was found that scores on the factual section were significantly superior 
to those made on the relationship and generalization sections. The 
Fact group also retained significantly more relationships than gener¬ 
alizations. Analysis of variance showed that the Relationship group 
made superior scores on both the fact and the relationship sections 






























■ 




- 




- 




t 

' 

' 


• 



. . • ■■ ■ : ; : ' U . 

. 






■ 





. , 

- 

■ 


. 





V 







■ • A ; 






38 


than it did on generalizations. The difference between means on the 
fact and relationship sections, however, was not significant. The mean 
fact subscore was found to be significantly greater than the mean 
generalization subscore in the Generalization group. The difference 
between the fact and the relationship score almost reached the .05 level 
of significance in this group. The generalization and relationship 
scores, however, were not found to differ significantly. The more 
meaningful methods of study appear to effect retention more uniformly 
than does the less meaningful method. 

Item Analysis 

Item analysis of the pre-test and the post-test was undertaken, 
following the experiment, to determine the mean difficulty indices for 
the tests and the subsections of each test. The method outlined by 
Davis (19^9) was employed in this investigation. The mean index of 
difficulty for the pre-test was found to be 54.98, while that of the 
post-test was 42.10. The difference between these means was tested 
for significance and the resulting value of t was 3*34 which is highly 
significant. The post-test, then, was more difficult than the pre-test, 
a factor to be considered when interpreting the results of the earlier 
analysis. Within the subsections of the test, only in the area of 
relationships was there a significant difference between the pre- and 
post-test, and this again showed the post-test to be more difficult. 

Summary of Findings 

1. One of the major findings of the pilot study was that three 









' 


- 















- . 






. 


















. 




< • 



















- 

■ 

. 























. 














39 

groups who began the period of investigation showing equal proficiency 
in learning important facts, relationships and generalizations, could 
be ranked in order of achievement after four days of instruction. The 
Generalization group was superior in performance to the Fact group and 
the Relationship group. Although there was a difference between the 
Fact and Relationship groups favoring the latter, this difference was 
not significant. 

2. On factual questions there were significant differences on 
the pre-test favoring both the Relationship and Generalization groups 
over the Fact group. On the post-test the Generalization group was 
superior to both the Fact and the Relationship groups, while the latter 
pair on this occasion did not differ significantly. 

3. In the area of relationships there were no significant 
differences on the pre-test, but on the post-test the Generalization 
group performed better than both the Relationship and the Fact groups. 

4. There were no significant differences on either the pre-test 
or the post-test mean scores on the generalization sections. 

5. From the above results it appears that the method of teaching 
for generalizations at the grade level and under the conditions 
described, leads to superior results in the learning of new material. 

6 . While differences between Fact and Relationship group scores 
did not reach significance, they consistently favored the relationship 
group. 

?. Item analysis revealed that the post-test was significantly 
more difficult than the pre-test. This made comparisons of pre-test 
and post-test results of doubtful value. It is worthy of note, however. 


' • 




- 


- 

‘ <’ ■ . ' 

- 

.-.-.i is. ' ' • ■: i ' i- ■' >■ . 


- 

' 

. - ; ' 

: 

. 

■ v ~ vi.-r - 

. 

' 










■ . 









40 

that the Generalization group made a significantly higher score on the 
post-test, in spite of its greater difficulty. 

8 . In investigating retention it was found that there were no 
significant differences in total scores on a test of material learned 
one week earlier. In the subsections there were no differences in the 
areas of fact and generalization, but the Relationship group retained 
significantly more relationships than did the other two groups. 

9. Within the subscores of each method group, significant 
differences in performance on the retention test were found. For the 
Fact group the order of degree of retention appeared to be facts 
greater than relationships greater than generalizations. The order for 
the Relationship group was: fact and relationships greater than 
generalizations. The Generalization group was found to recall factual 
material better than generalizations, and possibly better than relation¬ 
ships. The order for this group was: facts greater than relationships 
and generalizations. 


Insights for Further Studies 

1. A major difficulty encountered in the, pilot study was the 
lack of equivalence of the pre- and post-tests. This seriously 
restricted the analysis of the data, since comparisons between pre¬ 
test and post-test could not be made. The investigator realized that 
before initiating a larger investigation, tests to be used should be 
equated in some manner. 

2. The tests administered daily could be made a more integral 


part of the training period by having them corrected in class. At the 






. 

. 






- 


- 












* ! > r:oi : r • : ' [ 

- 


. 

■ 

■ 













- 

■ 




. 

' 















41 

same time the experimenter could point out their appropriateness in 
terms of the desired learning outcomes and through this further 
emphasize the method to be employed by the group in study. 

3. The retention test should be one that all groups have 
attempted on a previous occasion and should be comparable to the pre¬ 
test in difficulty and structure* This would allow pre-test performance 
to be controlled in the analysis of the retention test scores. The best 
method for securing this would seem to be to administer the post-test 

at appropriate intervals after the training period. 

4. A control group should be included if the experiment is to 
extend over a long period of time. The control group would take the 
major tests, but would not have the training periods. In this way, 
allowance may be made in the analysis of the results for improvement 
brought about by experiences outside the experimental program. 

5. Time limits imposed in the testing and training periods 
seemed, adequate. It was found, however, that motivation, particularly 
in the case of the Fact group, appeared to diminish by the fourth 
training period. This, however, might be attributed to the time of the 
year in which the pilot study was undertaken and not be related to the 


experiment. 














* ■ e 








- 




■ 






















- 

. 





r 

= / ' , ■ ' ■ ; ■ , 












CHAPTER V 


DESIGN OF THE EXPERIMENT 

In this chapter the methods and materials employed in the 
experiment and the statistical procedures followed in the analysis of 
the data will be presented. The topics will be discussed in the 
following order: the subjects for the experiment, the tests and 
materials used, the procedure followed in the collection of the data, 
and the statistical methods used in the treatment of the results. 

Subjects 

The subjects for this experiment were the students in twelve 
grade seven classrooms in the city of Edmonton. Six classes were 
from five junior high schools in the Separate School system and six 
were from one large junior high school in the Public School system. 

Before the experiment began, the twelve available classrooms 
were divided into four groups, three experimental and one control. 
Three of the public school classes were designated as the control 
group, and the remaining three functioned as one experimental 
group. The six separate school classes were divided randomly into 
two experimental groups. 

The classes within each of the experimental groups were then 
randomly assigned the method of study they would employ during the 
experiment. These methods included the study of material for facts, 
the study of material for relationships and the study of material 
for generalizations. 












3 






. 

, 






• - 







i • - * 


C 

S 






• : ■ 








The experimental groups and each class in the control group 
were to study material from two of the three subject matter areas, 
mathematics, science and social studies. The subject matter areas 
were assigned by chance, with the qualification that no class would 
study the same material during both stages of the investigation. 

As a result of this division, there were three large groups 
formed on the basis of subject matter to be studied. These groups 
each contained three experimental classes and one control class. 

The division is summarized in Table IV, together with the number 
of pupils in each class. 


TABLE IV 

DISTRIBUTION OF SUBJECTS 
BY METHOD AND MATERIAL TO BE STUDIED 



Social Studies 
and Mathematics 

Science and" 
Social Studies 

Mathematics 
and Science 

Fact Class 

36 

36 

29 

Relation Class 

38 

38 

29 

Generalization 

Class 

26 

39 

34 

Control Class 

22 

22 

_29 


A total of three hundred and eighty-six students took part in the 
testing and training periods involved in the investigation. 

Tests and Materials 

Intelligence Test 

The intelligence test selected for use in this investigation 
was the Otis Quick Scoring Mental Abilities Tests, Beta Test, Form Cm. 
This test was chosen because the Otis tests were not part of the 



















. , . : . _ - -' - 


. 

c 












. 
































. 













L 































regular testing program for grade seven in any of the schools involved 
in the study. The test manual (Otis,195^) reports the average relia¬ 
bility coefficient for Form Cm of the Beta tests to be 0,86. This was 
found by determining the correlation between odd and even items on the 
test and correcting the result with the Spearman-Brown formula. Validity 
for the test is claimed by virtue of the fact that the items were 
selected from the Otis Higher Examination, an instrument previously 
found to have accepted validity. 

Pre-Tests, Post-Tests, and Transfer Tests 

The first problem faced by the experimenter involved the selection 
of adequate bodies of subject matter in mathematics, science and social 
studies, upon which the tests could be based. The basic criteria used 
to determine the suitability of the material were, first, it was to be 
at the level of understanding of the subjects, and second, it was to 
be related to some section of the grade seven course of studies that 
would not have been studied by the time of the experiment. Publishers' 
catalogues and book lists provided by the Department of Education 
provided a number of references meeting the first criterion. Consul¬ 
tation with superintendents and teachers provided guidance in meeting 
the second. 

The subject matter used in constructing the first test in science 
consisted of a five page selection entitled "How Plants Live" (Limpus, 
Reid and Shore, 1951). This dealt mainly with the processes of 
respiration, photosynthesis and growth in plants. The second science 
test was based on a six page passage entitled "The Heat of the Body" 
(Meister, Keirsted and Shoemaker, 19^8) * in which warm and cold 







. 


' 




. 




i; ! ■ ■; • 












. 

< 1 <\* ■ 












'hi 




. 




. 








- 










. 








• , ■ c-' 


■ 









45 

blooded animals, natural protection against adverse climatic conditions, 
and familiar materials used in clothing were described. "What is Work" 
(Smith and Trafton, 1951)* a four page discussion of the physical 
principles of work, provided material for the third test in science. 

In social studies, the first body of subject matter to be used was 
a five page passage entitled "Democracy and Freedom" (Brown,1951)• In 
this, democracies and dictatorships were compared and the means for 
preserving democratic forms of government were stressed. The second 
selection was "Local Government" (Goldring, 1948), a discussion of the 
development of local government in Canada and a description of the 
procedures followed in the election of a city council. The third 
social studies test was based on a six page passage entitled "The First 
People" (Dickie, 1950)* This selection described the life of the early 
Indian in Canada emphasizing particularly his dependence upon his 
environment for food, clothing and shelter. 

In developing three reading selections in mathematics reference 
was made to Henderson and Pringy (195&)» Ruch, Knight and Studebaker 
(1942), Stein, Gilles, Hodgson and Deverell (1952), and Clark and 
Smith (1952). The first material dealt with varieties of angles and 
triangles, and presented a method for determining the area of a 
triangle. The second passage was entitled "Circles." In this, the 
parts of a circle were described, and methods outlined for calculating 
its circumference and area. The final reading selection in mathematics 
was on the topic of "The Formula." The development of formulae for 
the perimeter and area of squares and rectangles was presented and 
the advantages of the use of the formulae in mathematics was stressed. 






J. . .L. \ .... : . - ' .. ' • t .... 

: 




... 

c; 

. 

- 

• r ' 


- 

















• t 








< ■ 




. 

. 

■ 


■ 


















, 

■ 



46 


Three preliminary tests in each of the subject matter areas, 
mathematics, science and social studies, were constructed. Each test 
consisted of thirty-six or more multiple-choice items, divided approxi¬ 
mately equally between questions of facts, relationships and generali¬ 
zation. 

All the preliminary tests were administered to 135 pupils in four 
grade seven rooms in the Edmonton Separate School system. The results 
of this testing program were subjected to item-analysis following the 
technique of Davis (1949). Using the upper and lower twenty-seven 
percent of the cases, difficulty indices were determined for each of 
the items on the tests. 

From these data, items were selected for inclusion in the final 
tests on the basis of the following criteria: first, all tests within 
a subject matter area should have the same mean difficulty index; 
second, the subsections within a particular test should have the same 
mean difficulty index; third, within a subject matter area, the mean 
index of difficulty for a particular subsection should be the same on 
each of the three tests. 

After items had been tentatively selected for the final test, 
analysis of variance technique was used to determine how well the above 
criteria had been met. Revisions were undertaken until analysis 
revealed no significant differences in mean difficulty indices. Mean 
difficulty indices for the tests are presented in Table V. 








, '• • ■ ■ ■ *-■ 

' ' 


< 



s 




■ 









)' ; v . V > AVC' ’’ ■ • * ' 

. 

. ; .;.v ' : ^ 




. 












! V 


L 










TABLE V 


4 ? 


MEAN DIFFICULTY INDICES 
FOR SUBSECTIONS AND TOTAL TESTS 



Mathematics 

Science 

Social Studies 


I 

II 

III 

I 

II 

III 

I 

II 

III 

Fact 

38.22 

38.62 

39.78 

46.94 

47.31 

47.25 

38.30 

43.25 

37.90 

Relation¬ 

ship 

29.25 

38.38 

37.97 

44.97 

45.19 

35.78 

35.34 

42.28 

40.31 

General¬ 

ization 

29.93 

29.61 

36.82 

50.44 

44.81 

49.88 

43.38 

43.47 

44.31 

Total 

1 22JS8 

35,71 

.38.25 

. 47.45 


44.30 

L^Ol 

43.00 

40.85 


In order that all types of questions on the final tests should 
receive a fair amount of the students’ time during the examination 
period, it was decided that the questions should be arranged in a 
definite order. A fact question was first on all tests» followed 
by a relationship question, followed in turn by a generalization 
question. This pattern was repeated throughout each test. Within 
this framework, the questions selected on the basis of their difficulty 
indices were randomly assigned a position on the final test. The 
questions were numbered consecutively, with no indication that they 
were testing different learning outcomes. 

Reliability coefficients for the final tests were calculated 
by the method of rational equivalence. A modification of the 
standard Kuder-Richardson formula provided by Walker and Lev 
(1953*p. 311) was used. The method of rational equivalence 
stresses the intercorrelation of the items within the test as 
a whole. It is a measure of the internal consistency of the 
test and as such "... yields a type of reliability estimate 





























































. 




, 


. 







- 

* 

; 





\ . 




‘ 




• 



* ' 




















. 

, 


. 




. 








, 


. 

■ 




„ 



. 

















■ 

. 




. 






- * 









, - ~ 



• 






48 

analagous to those obtained by subdividing a test" (Thorndike,R.E., 
1951). According to Walker and Lev (1953), the formula provides 
a kind of average of the various reliability coefficients which could 
be obtained from all the possible ways the test items could be sub¬ 
divided for use with the split-halves method for calculating relia¬ 
bility. Table VI provides a summary of the reliability coefficients 
and the standard errors of measurement for the nine major tests used 
in the investigation. 


TABLE VI 

TEST RELIABILITY AND 
STANDARD ERROR OF MEASUREMENT 



Mathematics 

Science 

Social Studies 


I 

II 

III 

I 

II 

III 

I 

II 

III 

r 

.69 

.74 

.65 

.51 

•70 

.76 

.79 

.51 

.74 

S.E. 
meas. 

2.16 

2.14 

2.15 

2.26 

2.20 

2.14 

2-19 

2.26 

2.18 


The low reliability coefficients indicate that there would 
likely be a substantial variation in the scores of individuals 
taking the tests. However, since the results were to be used for 
the evaluation of group, rather than individual performance, the 
effects of unreliability should be less pronounced. 

As has been noted, the items for the tests used in this experi¬ 
ment were based on short bodies of subject matter presented to the 
testee for study during each testing period. These items were 
designed to measure the facts, relationships, and generalizations 
found in the reading selection, outcomes that were differentiated 
through careful definition. In addition, subject matter experts 






















. - 

c 

i 






l 



















, 


- . j 


























* 

! 







< " ' : , . r , 




) f 



. 





- 






- 


49 

were consulted during the construction of the tests. Since these 
procedures follow the suggested outline for securing content validity 
(American Psychological Association, 1954) it was felt that the tests 
had adequately met this requirement. 

Samples of the reading materials and the tests are included in 
Appendix A. 

Materials for the Training Periods 

In each of the three subject matter areas, materials and tests 
were required for four training periods. The same criteria were 
applied as were used in the selection of the subject matter for the 
major tests, namely, first, the material should be at the level of 
understanding of the subjects, and second, it should be related to 
some part of the course of studies in mathematics, science and social 
studies that had not been covered at the time of the experiment. In 
the training periods the lengths of the reading selections were from 
one and one-half to two typewritten pages. 

The topics covered in the instructional periods in science were 
"The Balance in Nature", in which natural plant-animal communities 
and factors that disrupt these relationships were discussed: "Wind", 
in which the cause of wind is presented as well as an account of the 
difference between local and prevailing winds; "The Effects of Heat", 
including an explanation of expansion and changes of state in terms 
of the molecular structure of matter; "Radiation" presents the 
properties of radiant heat, and practical applications in the form of 
the thermos bottle and the selection of appropriate clothing. 











' 
































- 

. 




: 


. 3 


' . - £ . Si . ■ ■■ i; • ad • -i '■ S 

5 • /• " ' i. 0 /' •• • 1 


■ - ■ - 




‘ > ' ■ 













50 

In social studies the material for the first training period 
was entitled "The Law that Made a Nation". This was a discussion of 
the British North America Act and the division of power between the 
federal and provincial governments. The second training period used 
a passage entitled "Canada Comes of Age", which described Canada*s 
development as an independent nation in the Commonwealth. "Canada 
in the United Nations" was the topic for the third practice period. 

In this selection Canada*s role as a middle power and her position as 
leader of the smaller nations was discussed. The final topic used in 
training in social studies was entitled "The Bush Pilots. ** Present- 
day bush fliers are compared with those of earlier periods in the 
history of Canadian aviation. The hardships of bush flying and its 
value to Canadian development were also stressed. 

The first selection to be used in the mathematics classes was 
entitled "Decimals." In this the meaning of the decimal fraction was 
discussed and examples of addition, subtraction and multiplication of 
decimals presented. "Percentages" was the topic of the second practice 
period. In this the relationships between decimals, vulgar fractions 
and percentages were explained and examples given of the use of 
percentage in practical situations. In the third period "Arithmetic 
in Business" was the name given to the reading selection. Ideas of 
mark-up, reduction, net cost, profit and loss were presented with 
computational illustrations of the arithmetic processes involved in 
each of these. The topic for the final training period in mathematics 
was "Interest." Here the problems of borrowing money were discussed 
and the formula for simple interest developed and applied. 








* 






■ • 










- 




- 

, 


v - t , 

: 

' 








‘ 




\ r 




. 




. 








4 


- 


* 


. 


' 

. 


t ' : • , . r 

;>■< -r.i o 




. 













51 

To accompany each of the topics in the three subject matter areas, 
short multiple-choice tests were constructed to be used as part of the 
training period. For each topic three tests of ten items were designed, 
one based on the facts of the selection, one on the relationships and 
one on the generalizations. Samples of these tests are included in 
Appendix (B). 

Since each body of subject matter was to be employed in two 
different groups of classes, lesson plans were designed to establish 
some degree of uniformity in the presentation of the materials during 
the training periods. For each lesson three plans were required, one 
for the group studying the material for facts, one for the relationship 
group and one for the generalization group. As the method to be employed 
in the training period was to be the question and answer technique, the 
lesson plans consisted of a series of questions appropriate to each 
method group. For example t fact questions were of the variety: 

(a) What is the name given to an animal that lives on another 
but does not eat it outright? 

(b) When did the British North America Act become law? 

Relationship questions included: 

(a) In what way are the members of the House of Commons and 
the Senate different? 

(b) What is the effect of radiant heat upon the empty spaces 
through which it travels on its way from the sun to the earth? 

Questions based on generalizations included: 

(a) Why have scientists come to expect breezes to blow from a 
lake to the land on a hot summer day? 


f 

. 

■ . ' 1 ; •' 


■ 

. 

■ 

. 

' 

t 


■ 


• 5 . 




* ' 














‘ 

• ' r ; < . :•? 




■ 


(b) Why is the House of Commons considered to be the most 


52 


important part of the machinery of the government? 

Samples of lesson plans used in the experiment are included in 
Appendix C. 

Procedure 

Since each class was to study material from two subject matter 
fields, the experiment was divided into two stages, one for each 
subject involved. The procedures followed in each stage of the 
investigation were identical. Daily class periods of thirty-five 
minutes each were made available to the experimenter and these were 
found to be adequate for all but the delayed tests, where an additional 
fifteen minutes were required. 

The first period of the investigation was devoted to the 
administration of the Otis Quick-Scoring Mental Abilities Test, 

In the second period a preliminary test was administered. All 
classes in a subject matter group, that is, one control and three 
experimental classes, took the same test. Mimeographed copies of 
the reading selection were distributed to the class and the pupils 
were allowed twelve minutes to read the material. Those who finished 
early were encouraged to continue studying until the time had expired. 
Following this period, the pupils were given a multiple-choice 
examination based on the reading selection. Fifteen minutes were 
allowed for the completion of the test. 

The items in the test measured the three learning outcomes: 
knowledge of facts, knowledge of relationships and knowledge of 


I ■ j 

- 

; . : >. ■ '• a -r ■ f. ax ■ - - 

^ , • i . • * li 1 . . ■’ i - :i • ? •• 

- 

: - » 

, 


. 

. 

. 

. - s . t 

i 

i i. ' • ... , . ' ' • 4 ' . ■ l , .. < .* oe.j. li (1 ' : . ' ;' *tO i 

■ 

, ? J t • ■ 

. : ■ 

. ‘ ■ t 

.* S 












53 

generalizations. The results of this test were taken to indicate 
the group's ability to obtain the desired outcomes without training, 
a factor to be controlled in subsequent analysis. 

The following four daily periods were utilized as training periods 
for the experimental classes. At the beginning of each period, a 
mimeographed selection, approximately one and one-half pages in length, 
was distributed to the class. The pupils were allowed three minutes 
to become familiar with the day's topic. The following fifteen minutes 
were devoted to a careful study of the material. The activities of 
the class during this time were determined by the outcomes to be sought, 
one class studying the facts in the selection, another the relationships 
and the third, the generalizations. The suggestions and questions of 
the experimenter directed the pupils’ activity during this period and 
they were encouraged to mark important facts, relationships or generali¬ 
zations as they were developed during the study period. In the study 
of facts, for example, the pupils concentrated on identifying and 
marking the significant facts in the selection. No consideration was 
given to the relationships that existed between these facts, nor to 
generalizations that could be made from them. 

The same material was used by each class in a particular subject 
matter field and the same time limits and general procedures were 
followed. 

At the end of the fifteen minute period the pupils were allowed, 
three minutes to re-read the selection to note the important items 
marked earlier. 

After re-reading the material, a ten-item multiple-choice test 


, —- 

. l i F . J1 • . .3 .. . • ' 1 • ; . ■ ■" 

i: ' . ' )<•• ■ ' ■ 

, fc'C-.r-}.- - • -■ '••■■■ -h : i < ■ t ■ • * ... 

* 

- 

*• 





54 

was administered to each class, eight minutes being allowed for its 
completion. Each test was designed to cover the outcomes appropriate 
to a particular class. For example, the test for the fact class dealt 
only with the facts studied, no mention being made of relationships or 
generalizations. Similar restrictions were imposed upon the items of 
the tests for the relationship and generalization classes. 

The tests were corrected by the students with answers provided by 
the experimenter. As this was done, stress was placed on the relation¬ 
ship between the acceptable answers and the outcomes sought. For 
example, in the relationship class, the kind of relationship involved 
in the answer was mentioned. Through this procedure it was felt that 
the testing period would emphasize further the particular activity of 
the class. The final five minutes of the training period were spent 
in this manner. 

During the sixth period, a post-test was administered. This was 
similar in structure to the pre-test and equated with it in degree of 
difficulty. The pupils again were allowed twelve minutes to read the 
material and fifteen minutes to complete the test. In this test, also, 
all learning outcomes, facts» relationships, and generalizations were 
examined. All classes, including the control class, in a particular 
subject matter field were given the same test. 

Three weeks after the administration of the post-test, a third 
test, similar in design and equated with the pre-tests and post-tests 
in degree of difficulty, was administered. The same time limits were 
in force as in previous testing situations. The purpose of this test 
was to determine the degree to which the effects of training in a 








;1 Lit. u 1 a~ .—- C i4- a ~.. 






I " ■ 




" •': '■'. ■ ..:.> r- r. ' . >• ‘ !' \ • ; -f * fr* rtv ; r ■ • ■: ; .7 ; 1 * ' ;v ;/• : 


3 

. • • , t . ' ’.7 . ' ' : ' " • ' ' 


■ ' 


"' , 1 ■. . ■; : ' /' 

■ ' ' • 1 -. J - . - • « .■ 

■ - " '■ r •!'■,: r ' ■ I ' •;> ' ; ■- ; . ; rj r, - , :■ 

. 

• • • 5 , 

' 

l ■ 

■ 

> : • - 

• t • ro^t t 

5 - , • : ' " ' r i ■ j, 

■ 

■ 

■ .. ■ - VI- i- 

. 







55 

particular method would be transferred to a new situation after an 
interval in which there was no training in that subject. During the 
same period the post-test was repeated in all classes, as a delayed 
retention test. On this occasion, the reading selection was not 
included in the test. The pupils were again allowed fifteen minutes 
to attempt the items. 

The eight periods described, namely, the administration of the 
intelligence test, the pre-test, the four training periods, the post- 
test, the transfer and retention tests, constitute one stage of the 
experiment. These periods are summarized for one subject matter group 
in Table VII. 

In the interval between the first post-test and the first transfer 
test, the second stage of the study was undertaken. This involved a 
change in subject matter for each class and a repetition of the 
procedures outlined above, except that the intelligence test was not 
administered a second' time. Each class continued to use the method 
of study assigned to it at the beginning of the experiment. In 
addition, the order of materials used for pre-tests and post-tests was 
reversed in the second stage of the experiment. 

For the experimental classes the complete investigation required 
a total of thirteen class periods of thirty-five minutes and two 
periods of forty-five minutes, the latter for the administration of 
the transfer and retention tests. The control groups did not take 
part in the training periods and consequently were involved in five 
thirty-five minute and two forty-five minute periods. 











- 


-1 


: > 






- 

. 

- 














l i 




■ 










‘ 

. 


o .. 

i 

■ 






o 






c. 





TABLE VII 

TESTING AND TRAINING PROGRAM FOR ONE SUBJECT MATTER GROUP 


56 


1 




£ 



£ 



£ 



£ 








O -P 



O 



O P 



O 


P 


M 




•H -P cd ^ 



•rl P P ' ' 



•H P 0 r-N 



•H P 

0 

/^N 





-P 0 © CM 



P 0 0 CM 



P 0 0 CM 



P 

0 

0 

CM 

I 




£ 0 P, 1 



£ 0 0 1 



£ 0 P, 1 



£ 

© 

Ph 1 

9 f-> 




0 Eh 0 Eh 



0 Eh PhEh 



0 Eh 0 Eh 



© 

Eh 

0 

EH 

9 0 




P PS 



p 0 



P PS 



P 


PS 


9 +> 

H 



0 w 



0 PS 



0 w 



© 





H 



PS 



PS ^ 



PS 



PS 




I ^ 

K 














H w 

















1 PS 

>> 
















9 © 

0 
















B © 

P 


£ 

£ 


£ 

£ 


£ 

£ 

bo 

£ 



£ 


U 'SJ 

n 


bO 

o 

© 

bo 

£ 

O 

© 

bD 

o 

0 

o 



© 




c 

•H 

«h -P ro 

•H 

*H P 

a 


H P 

£ 

•H 




P 

0 0 


•H 

P 

O 0 0 1 

•rH 

P 

O W 0(0 

P 

(0 W CO 

•H 

p 



W 

0 

jj 0 


*d 

O 

PS £ 0 E-1 

*0 

O PS £ 0 8 

d 

O O £01 

d 

o o 


£ 

0 1 

fl fi 


cd 

0 

0 Eh 

0 

© 

0 EH Eh 

0 

© PS 0 Eh Eh 

0 

0 PS 


0 

Eh Eh 

u ^ 


0 

i—1 

£ 

0 

rH 

£ 

0 

rH 

£ 

0 

rH 



£ 


1 H 


PS 

0 

Eh 

PS 

© 

EH 

PS 

CD 

Eh 

PS 

0 



Eh 





CO 


CO 



CO 



CO 






H 


£ 



£ 



£ 


bO 

£ 






£ 

bo 

o 


bO 

O 


bO 

D 


o 






5 

•rl 

P 

PO 1 

a 

•H 

-P 

m p +> 

a 

•H 

P 

CQ p P 

S » » CM 

•S 

•H 

P 



1 

P 

4^ 


l>a 

od 

O 

PS -P P 

•d 

O 

PS 0 0 CM 

d 

O 

d 

O 

pq 


0 

0 CM 


0 

cd 

0 

0 CO CM 

0 

0 

O 0 1 

0 

0 

O 0 8 

0 

0 

PS 


O 

0 1 


P 

0 

H 

O © 1 

0 

H 

Ph Eh Eh 

0 

H 

Ph Eh Eh 

© 

H 



Ph 

Eh Eh 



ft! 

0 

Ph EH Eh 

PS 

© 


PS 

0 


PS 

0 








co 

CO 


CO 



CO 





m 

















!>i 

















0 

















p 

H 

£ 

1 

£ 



£ 

0 

a, 

g * 

£ 

0 

g 

g 5 -d 







O 

H 

o 


W> H 

£ 0 cd 

O 

•H 

O 

•H 

•rl 0 g 







o 

H 




PS 

•H 0 g 


P 

£ d £ 0 







PS 

H 

0 

0 

•H "d £ 0 

0 

0 

5 *8 O 0 

© 

0 

•H O O P 







o 


O 

+5 

£ o £ P 

o 

Pi 

o 


0 «H 0 







CO 

0 

•H 

o 

•H *H O 0 

•rl 

o 

0 *rl P 

•H 

•H 

£ £ £ 0 







0 

b> 

P 

cd 

0 £ 0 

P 

•H 

£ £ £ 0 

P 

H 

Eh 0 H Eh 







0 

o {X, 

£ 0 £ Eh 

O 

P 

Eh 0 H © 

O 

0 

Ph 







> 

p 

cd 


EH Ph H 

0 

0 

Ph Eh 

0 

£ 

-S’ 







•H 


£ 



£ i—1 

-3- -3" 

£ 

© 








P 


Ph 


-3* -3- 

Ph 

© 

Ph 

£ 








O 






PS 











0 
















0 

















£ 

















o 

















o 



£ 



fi 



£ 



£ 





£ 

H 

bO 

O 


bO 

o 


bD 

£ 



bO 

o 





0 

H 

£ 

•H 

1 

£ 

•H 

8 P 

•H 

1 P 

£ 

•H 



1 

P 

> 


•rl 

-P 

0 -P H 

•H 

P 

<S 0 0 H 

•rJ 

P 

<S 0 CO H 

•H 

P 



© 

0 H 

0 

b 

TD 

O 

< £ 0 | 

d 

O 

PS £ 0 1 

d 

O 

PS £ _© I 

d 

O 

<S 


£ 

0 8 

00 

cd 

cd 

© 

PS PL, © Eh 

0 

0 

Ph Eh Eh 

0 

0 

Ph Eh Eh 

0 

0 

PS 


Ph 

Eh Eh 


Q 

0 

rH 

EH 

© 

i—1 


0 

i—| 


0 

H 







PS 

© 


PS 

© 


PS 

© 


PS 

0 








CO 



CO 


co 



CO 






H 



0 p 



0 P 



0 P 




0 


P 


}>> 



•H Q* 0 



•HO?© 



•H O’ 0 




•H 

O? 

0 


cd 



•PH© 



P H 0 



P H 0 




P 

H 

0 


P 



O Eh 



O Eh 



O Eh 




O 


Eh 








Ph 



£ 




0 







0 



•H 



o 




0 







0 



r£ 



•H 




0 







0 

3 



0 

£ 0 

O 0 



0 0 
« 0 




d 










•H 0 



•H 0 




H 







-P 

O 



3d 



rH rH 

0 O 




O 

£ 







0 



H 



£ 




P 










© 



0 




£ 










PS 



£ 
















5 




o 















































Statistical Analysis 


57 


The major techniques utilized in the treatment of the results of 
this experiment were the analysis of variance and covariance. 

Since it was not possible to match the groups involved in the 
investigation prior to the beginning of the experiment, it was decided 
to equate the groups statistically on certain variables. Mental age 
was one factor considered to be worth controlling as it would, in 
effect, equate the pupils in their level of ability. In addition, 
since the classes used in the experiment were from different schools, 
pupils would likely have somewhat different backgrounds of experience 
in the methods of study employed in this investigation. By making 
allowance for this through the control of pre-test scores by the 
covariance technique, it was felt that a truer picture of change 
brought about by training would be achieved. 

The effective use of analysis of variance and covariance require 
that a number of basic assumptions be met. McNemar (1955) gives two 
assumptions for the analysis of variance, first, that the cases consti¬ 
tuting each group have been drawn from a normally distributed population 
of scores for the trait, and second, that the groups have the same 
variance. Lindquist (1953) adds to this list the assumption that all 
treatment groups were originally drawn at random from the same parent 
population. Siegel (1956) suggests, too, that the variables must have 
been measured in at least an interval scale. Johnson (19^9) agrees 
with McNemar and Lindquist, but indicates that the assumption of the 
normal distribution of the population is not particularly important. 
There is doubt expressed in some areas, too, concerning the degree to 


t 




. \ 

. 



■ : 



, 




o 

O ' 


$ 




* 

- 



c 






. 



- 










- 




' 

- ' -f p : ■ j " « ■ ' 

C jV ' 

< t' • : * 



7 

c 

'>*' ; .x.;. x;.: ■■ ■'■ ih Xwrmt$ 

t ■ ' t'. ...... .. ..i..,.. vj i,>ji-i..J OX ? J 3H 1 


58 

which other assumptions must be met in the use of analysis of variance. 
Maxwell, for example, states: 

In practice we seldom, if ever, know the exact extent to which 
these assumptions are justified by our data. But, fortunately, the 
t-test, and the F-ratio test for comparing a number of means, are, 
what recently have been christened, ’robust’ tests — they are 

(i) remarkably insensitive to non-normality in the parent populations, 
and 

(ii) in the commonly occurring case where the samples are of equal 
size the tests are not sensitive to inequalities of variance among 
the populations sampled (1958,p.36). 

Wert, Neidt and Ahman note that ”it is becoming more apparent 

that the analysis of variance technique is sufficiently satisfactory 

even when there is considerable departure from the strict fulfillment 

of the assumptions” (1954,p.184). Lindquist elaborates this somewhat 

by observing that "unless the heterogeneity of either form or variance 

is so extreme as to be readily apparent upon inspection of the data., 

the effect upon the F-distribution will probably be negligible” (1953♦ 

p.86), 


Concerning the effects of non-normality of data, Cochran reports? 

.. .no serious error is introduced by non-normality in the significance 
levels of the F-test or of the two-tailed t-test. While it is difficult 
to generalize about the range of populations that were investigated, 
this appears to cover most cases encountered in practice. If a guess 
may be made about the limits of error, the true probability corresponding 
to the tabular 5 percent significance level may be between 4 and ? 
percent. For the 1 percent level, the limits might be taken as j percent 
and 2 percent. As a rule, the tabular probability is an underestimate: 
that is, by using the ordinary F and t tables we tend to err in the 
direction of announcing too many significant results (194?,p.24). 

Although it appears that rigorous testing of the assumptions 
underlying analysis of variance is not mandatory, they were validated 
statistically in this investigation when this was possible. 

Meeting the assumption of random sampling was a source of 
difficulty in this study. Certain factors prevented the experimenter 


t 

t ; ' : ' ' 

. 


•• £: ‘ 1 ■ 

- 


6 

I- 









. c 



• 

■ 








* - 



' 



’ ' i . • ; i • . 


< 




• 

• 


* 

* .. -. ■ •• : , - 

: . r 

• r. . 

. 

. 

‘ 

' ■ r, ;o f -i : ' r 

* 

c ' 

•• - wij.,. f. . . w.'-.M-ro of-rs-f 


59 


from selecting schools strictly at random from the population. Size 
of classes, accessibility, and lack of interest on the part of the 
teachers were factors that required consideration and eliminated some 
schools from the study. In addition, certain other schools, through 
internal difficulties, were not available for experimentation. As a 
result of this, the means obtained for any given treatment must be 
regarded as biased estimates of the corresponding means for the real 
population. 

Considering the problem of the assumption of random sampling and 

its effect on the results of educational experiments, Lindquist states: 

Fortunately, however, in most experiments we are not so much interested 
in estimating the population means for a given treatment, as in 
estimating the rank order of the treatments on the basis of their 
effectiveness for the whole (real population). For this purpose, it 
does not matter if all obtained treatment means are biased, so long 
as all are equally biased in the same direction. ...All the treatments 
may do better with the accessible schools than they would with the 
non-accessible schools, but there may be no reason to suppose that 
any one treatment will do relatively better than any other for 
either group of schools (Lindquist, 1953» p* 180). 

Inasmuch as there did not appear to be any differences between 
selected and unselected schools that would affect responses to one 
treatment more than others, it was felt that the failure to meet the 
assumption of random sampling would not seriously affect the results 
of the experiment. 

The assumption of normality could not be tested statistically 
because of the small number of pupils in each class. In discussing 
the use of chi-square in testing the goodness of fit of a normal 
curve to an actual distribution, Garrett (1953) suggests that there 
should be no experimental frequencies less than five. Since the 
largest treatment group contained only twenty-nine cases, this 




,rxo±: - ■ ' 

' . isq ■ - £ ' BOOB * 

O b©d Jfii : it h a oo ben ■ to '• s 5 i • si< 

f ■ *ss « Lti 

* ■ t £ ,sei , 

.- i n t± : o . • r 

■ - ■ e io' • ‘ >i woo 3 ‘8 & b©s&i 

>06 . ■ ' .. . I ob CS*S V . ' :: £ ’ 2 t Xl 

■ 

OJ do S ; H Kp£© . ; • 

' 

\ • . . © i • : *t. wc . t n 3 

o r ? ‘ 

io! < * . six e . j .. . r: : . i 

1 £.•••• . eaixf 

. . !.. bi ut ■ ' do ■ . Xdr ooj add ddj - Jd©d o 

« . 

• ....... . ' 

. ' « i 

' $ . . ; ■ i ■ Dv ■ ' ■ ■ . SBfll 

S91 - 

r £l ' ' : , •„ £ O " D t 

• ' . - . don 'bjjjo^ arXqMBB iioXd< 

.i • •: ix:o ... o ?./ " o 

soi l ■ £ d / . d i . 3 s ' : i;j • t on 1c toi X pn sbb ■ ■ 

■ Lfde , • 

,nc hjd.rid« i : ' o 

■ .©Vi ' . ' ■ : til 

8Xff t ■ o ' ..... '. i oo . •. .. • 


60 

criterion could not be met. As an approximate test of normality, the 
cumulative percentage distribution of the most markedly skewed samples 
were plotted against obtained scores using normal probability paper. 
When the cumulative percentages thus plotted fall on a straight line 
the distribution is considered normal (inwards ,195°)• 

Homogeneity of variance was tested using the method developed by 
Hartley (1950) in which the ratio between the largest and smallest 
variance is computed. Tables are available (Walker and Lev,1953) for 
determining the upper five percent and one percent points for this 
ratio, called F max by Hartley, in a set of k mean squares all based on 
n degrees of freedom. As this method is a simplified test for homoge¬ 
neity of variance, doubtful cases were subjected to Bartlett's test as 
outlined in Edwards (1950)* 

The assumptions underlying the analysis of covariance are 
essentially those for analysis of variance, to which Lindquist (1953) 
adds (a) the criterion measures are unaffected by the treatments, 

(b) the regression of the criterion variable on the variable on which 
comparisons are to be made is the same for all treatment populations 

(c) this regression is linear. 

The first of the assumptions was readily met, since both measures 
serving as criterion scores, namely the intelligence test and the pre¬ 
test, were administered before treatments began. Walker and Lev (1953) 
provided a test for homogeneity of regression in which the sum of 
squares for differences among group regression lines and the sum of 
squares of deviations of individual scores from the separate regression 
estimates are obtained, having k-X and N-2k degrees of freedom, where 



- .. . . a q Vi . 










f 


' i 














j 




. 










■ ' • r. « ) 


. 






j 






' 








' ■ 

{ • 

• , " 




. 


















6l 


N equals the number of cases and k equals the number of treatments. 

The ratio of the two mean squares is distributed as F and this was used 
to test the hypothesis that there was no difference among group 
regressions. 

Maxwell (1958) provided a test of the significance of linear 
regression based on analysis of variance that was used to validate the 
third assumption for covariance. 

Wherever basic assumptions could be met, analysis of variance and 
covariance was utilized to determine the significance of mean differences 
found in the testing program. From each test administered, there were 
four scores available for each classs a fact subscore; a relationship 
subscore; a generalization subscore and a total score. Each test was 
taken by the four classes in one subject matter group, three experimental 
classes and one control. From these results, the following means were 
tested for significant differences. 

1. Total scores in the four classes. 

2. Fact subscores in the four classes. 

3. Relationship subscores in the four classes. 

4. Generalization subscores in the four classes. 

5. Three subscores of the Fact class. 

6. Three subscores of the Relationship class. 

7. Three subscores of the Generalization class. 

8. Three subscores of the Control class. 

In instances where the variance proved to be heterogeneous, and the 
number of cases differed in the groups in question, the method of testing 
mean differences outlined by Cochran and Cox (1957) was employed. When 




13 






j ' = 

* 


' 




{ 


J. '• 




c 










. 




I 



■ 














. 


J • ' 

. .. .... . 


- M 











62 


the number of cases in each group was equal, ordinary t-tests were 
employed. 

In cases where assumptions concerning the use of analysis of 
covariance could not be met, means were tested through the application 
of analysis of variance. 


Summary 

The twelve classrooms taking part in the experiment were divided 
into three subject matter groups, each composed of three experimental 
classes and one control. Each experimental class was assigned a 
particular method of study to be followed throughout the investigation. 
The methods included the study of material for facts, the study of 
material for relationships, and the study of material for generali¬ 
zations. Four thirty-five minute periods of training were given to 
each experimental class in two of the three subject matter areas: 
mathematics, science, and social studies. 

Selected bodies of subject matter, suitable to the level of the 
pupils involved and related to the grade seven course of studies, 
served as learning materials for the testing program. Three multiple- 
choice tests, similar in structure and equated in degree of difficulty, 
were designed to accompany the learning materials and serve as pre-tests, 
post-tests and transfer tests. In addition, the Otis Quick-Scoring Test 
of Mental Abilities, Beta Test was given to each of the classes. 

Retention after a three-week interval was measured by a second adminis¬ 
tration of the post-test in each group. 

Since it was not possible to match the groups prior to the 












. 






1 






!; I J. 








. 

















' 

: 

_ 

V'. 












ur . . ' :• - '' .'i 



beginning of the experiment, they were equated statistically on the 
basis of mental ability and experience with the methods of study 
employed in the investigation. To do this, analysis of covariance 
was used with mental age and pre-test scores held constant. Where 
equating was not necessary, analysis of variance was employed. In 
all cases, the assumptions underlying the use of these techniques 
were first tested. In instances where these assumptions could not 
be met, recourse was made to simpler devices for the evaluation of 


mean differences. 



















CHAPTER VI 


ANALYSIS OF MENTAL AGE AND PRE-TEST RESULTS 
IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 

In this chapter two major analyses will be presented. First, 
mental ages will be examined to determine the existence of significant 
differences in class means. Second, mean total scores and subscores 
in the pre-tests of the three subject matter areas, mathematics, 
science and social studies, will be compared to test the hypothesis 
that the classes within a subject matter group do not differ in 
performance on the pre-test. 

The purpose in investigating these mean differences is that 
mental age and pre-test scores will serve as criteria or predictor 
variables in subsequent analyses. Where differences exist, these 
variables will be controlled by the use of analysis of covariance. 

This procedure, in effect, will equate the classes within a subject 
matter group in mental ability and in the ability to determine the 
important facts, relationships and generalizations in a reading 
selection, prior to training. 

Mental Age 

A summary of mean mental ages for the classes, together with 
the corresponding standard deviations is presented in Table VIII. 


* ■ ••:) . . ( .. 5 : l • ' . r >r H ' ; , 

; ' x. ~ , > ' : ' • ' , . x - v ■ ' : 

: ' ' ■ 

















• 
















< 

, 

- 



- 

• ■ ■ 






. ■ 1 

■4 


- 

















, 




? 

- ' .. X; 

■ 

i j • ' i \t i 







TABLE VIII 


65 


STANDARD DEVIATIONS AND MEAN MENTAL AGES IN MONTHS 


FOR EXPERIMENTAL 

AND 

CONTROL CLASSES, 

STAGE ONE 


n 

Mean 

Standard 

Deviation 

Social Studies - 




Mathematics Group: 

Fact Class 

29 

157.66 

21.99 

Relationship Class 

22 

168.55 

21.42 

Generalization Class 

19 

169.7^ 

19.82 

Control Class 

2? 

161.26 

23.23 

Science - Social 




Studies Group: 

Fact Class 

26 

156.00 

17.78 

Relationship Class 

24 

154.54 

16.78 

Generalization Class 

28 

166.57 

14.79 

Control Class 

16 

154.13 

12.42 


Mathematics - 
Science Group: 


Fact Class 

22 

163.00 

13.85 


Relationship Class 

23 

152.74 

16.39 


Generalization Class 

2? 

167.56 

17.07 


Control Class 

23 

158.87 

18.01 



Homogeneity of variance of the entire group of classes was 
tested by the Hartley method and found to be satisfactory. Mean 
mental ages were then compared using analysis of variance. The 
results of this investigation are summarized in Table IX. 















. 










' !l l 

. i .6 


: • • 


- 








. 






i 

< 

- 


- - . \ — • A _ . W K) ... O : ..V ; :.i <r ■ ■ ■ ■ ‘ i • : . ; . 













TABLE IX 


66 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE MENTAL AGES 
FOR ALL CLASSES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate F 

Between Groups 

11 

6 , 000.51 

546.14 

Within Groups 

270 

80,390.49 

297.74 1.83* 

Total 

281 

86 ,398.00 



* significant at ,05 level 

The F-ratio obtained in this analjrsis reached the .05 level 
of significance, indicating that the classes differed in mean mental 
age. To determine the extent to which this difference would have to 
be controlled, the classes were divided into the three subject matter 
groups and the mental ages of the four classes in each group were 
analyzed. Table X contains the results for the Social Studies - 
Mathematics group. 

TABLE X 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE MENTAL AGES 
OF THE SOCIAL STUDIES-MATHEMATICS GROUP, 

STAGE ONE 


Source of Variance 

Variation df Sum of Squares Estimate F 


Between Groups 3 2,404.35 801.45 

Within Groups 89 42,126.12 473*33 1.693 


92 44,530.47 


Total 









































' 






.w;.■ ' - ‘ . . 




. 












. 

. 





i: 







































■ 
































67 


The F-ratio in this instance did not reach the .05 level of 
significance. These classes did not differ in mean mental age and 
consequently it was not necessary to control this factor in succeed¬ 
ing treatments of the data obtained from the Social Studies - 
Mathematics group. 

The results of the analysis of variance for the Mathematics - 
Science group are given in Table XI. In this case differences were 

TABLE XI 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE MENTAL AGES 
OF THE MATHEMATICS-SCIENCE GROUP, 

STAGE ONE 


Source of Variance 

Variation df Sum of Squares Estimate F 

Between Groups 3 2,918.79 972.93 

Within Groups 91 24,655.80 270.94 3.59* 

Total 94 27,574.59 

* significant at .05 level 

found to be significant beyond the .05 level. The same result was 
obtained from the analysis of the mean mental ages for the Science - 
Social Studies group which is summarized in Table XII. The classes 

TABLE XII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE MENTAL AGES 
OF THE SCIENCE-SOCIAL STUDIES GROUP, 

STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

2 , 668.76 

889.59 


Within Groups 

90 

22,608.57 

251.21 

3 . 54 * 

Total 


Z5,m+22—l. 




* significant at .05 level 


























. 




.. . .. _ . * ■ .. ' .. ' . - ' - 

■ 

: ' • J ■ .■ : i 

‘ 

: 

' 

■ ‘ 

'' “ •"•••• *:•// ■• ■ r ■ ; • • . »' ; 

: i9'S $ , . OJ ■' ' C . > '■ 

• • 

. - - < . ' 

- 

' 

- 






* 

: 


: >'V/ -i..' •' 



- * 

- 

? 


' 






. . 










68 


in each of these groups do not have the same mean mental age, 
indicating that analysis of covariance should be used to control the 
effects of these differences in subsequent investigations. 

Pre-Tests in Mathematics, Science and Social Studies 

In this investigation each subject matter group was composed of 
four classes, three experimental and one control. The pre-test 
administered to each class yielded a score for three learning outcomes, 
facts, relationships and generalizations, and a total score. The 
analysis of the pre-test consisted in comparing the mean scores made 
by the four classes in one subject matter group, plus an examination 
of the subscores within each class. The results of the analysis of 
pre-test performance for the subject matter groups will be presented 
in the order: mathematics, science, social studies. 

Mathematics 

Means and standard deviations for the four classes taking the 
pre-test in mathematics are presented in Table XIII. 


TABLE XIII 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE 
PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGS ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 




Fact 

Relation | Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

Relation¬ 

22 

10.59 

2.9? 

4.00 

0.976 

4.26 

1.35 

2.32 

1.04 

ship 

General¬ 

23 

9.96 

3.17 

3.70 

1.66 

3.74 

1.63 

2.52 

0.85 

ization 

27 

13.63 

4.99 

5.00 

1.80 

5.04 

1.76 

3.59 

1.82 

Control 

23 

11.09 

3.69 

JLSk. 

1.68 

3.91 

2.02 

3.26 

1*25 






















e ?■ ■ . O-'u , ..1 

■ 

- .' V ' ... . :■ • , .1 : \ ■ ! . ■ ■ ' . ) 

* 1 ;■ •: ’>' ~ : ’ : - ■■ *•> ;•■■■■. ' t .1 ' - •, • 


- 

: ' ” 




; , .... ... • 




. 




■ ; ■ 

^ y-,. j..i *.i .• • !i"i •/ Kj -/o' ‘"■i) 

'■ 1 l ' v.v ■ . ... ; .1 . ■ 


' 

j 




















- 




* 




- 


K 


. 

•■/i J' 








69 


The application of Hartley's test to the total scores revealed that 
the variance was heterogeneous, indicating that analysis of variance 
could not be undertaken with the complete group. After omitting the 
Generalization group from consideration, the variance of the remaining 
groups was found to be homogeneous. In addition, when the Generalization 
group was not considered, the remaining classes did not differ in mental 
age, consequently mean total scores were compared using simple analysis 
of variance. The results are summarized in Table XIV. In this instance 


TABLE XIV 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE TOTAL SCORES 
ON THE PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate F 

Between Groups 

2 

14.76 

7.38 

Within Groups 

65 

706.11 

10.86 0.680 

Total 

6? 

720 . 8 ? 



Generalizations group not included. 

the F-ratio is not significant, which indicates that the three 
classes, Fact, Relationship and Control, performed equally well on the 
pre-test in mathematics, as far as could be determined from the total 
scores. 

The Cochran and Cox technique was employed in comparing the mean 
total score of the Generalization group with that of the other classes 
taking the Mathematics test. The results of this analysis are 
presented in Table XV. 










J'•.: . — ‘ - j . .. J ,;U_J. .1 - ji’j. 

: , rv ; } 

J '.;u V : lf •• ■ ■ ' . T •. . : 1 

' .< ' j •• ’• n ■ < .'/V.. \j. •. 

r 


J 
















V 




A 






, ■ 

. 1 

' 








TABLE XV 


70 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE TOTAL SCORES OF THE 
GENERALIZATION GROUP ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 



t’05 

t’oi 

t 

Generalization and Fact 

2.064 

2.795 

2.578 

Generalization and 

Relationship 

2.062 

2.792 

3.084 

Generalization and 

Control 

2,063 

2,795 

2.022 


The generalization group was superior in pre-test performance to both 
the Fact and the Relationship groups. Because of these differences, 
it was decided that pre-test total scores should be controlled in the 
later analyses of the performance of this subject matter group. 

When the distribution of scores made by the classes on the fact 
subsection of the test was examined, it was found that the variance 
was heterogeneous. On this occasion the elimination of the Fact group 
from consideration produced homogeneity of variance among the remaining 
classes. The classes still differed in mean mental ages and consequently t 
after verifying that regression was linear and coefficients were homo¬ 
geneous , pre-test scores were compared using analysis of covariance. 

The results of this analysis are given in Table XVI. The resulting 
F-ratio was not significant at the ,05 level. The Relationship, 
Generalization and Control groups did not differ in performance on 




















I ... 






f 














TABLE XVI 


71 


ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE FACT 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE a 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

2 

6.70 

3.35 


Within Groups 

69 

166.80 

2.42 

1.39 

Total 

71 

173.50 



a Fact group not included. 




the fact section 

of the pre-test. 



The Cochran 

and Cox technique was employed to test mean differences 

between the Fact 

group and the other classes taking the Mathematics 

test. Table XVII 

summarizes the results of this 

test. 




TABLE XVII 



MEAN 

DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE FACT SUBSCORES 



OF THE FACT GROUP ON THE PRE-TEST 



IN MATHEMATICS # STAGE ONE 





t! 05 t ’oi 

t* 


Fact and Relationship 

2.076 2.818 

0.738 


Fact and Generalization 

2.065 2.793 

2.423 


Fact and Control 


2.075 2.821 

0.216 



The Generalization group was superior to the Fact group in the fact 
section of this test. This difference necessitates the control of the 
pre-test scores in this area in subsequent analyses. 

Homogeneity of variance and regression coefficients and linearity 
of regression were confirmed for the distribution of scores in the 






















.) .. ..... ./ 

: 


. 





. 

. .. . ... i . -. 

. 


. 









■ 



. 



i 









. 

. : 










72 


relationship subsection of the test. Analysis of covariance was then 
undertaken, controlling mental age. The classes did not differ beyond 
the bounds of chance in their performance on this part of the pre-test, 
making it unnecessary to consider pre-test results in succeeding 
investigations. A summary of this analysis is presented in Table XVTII. 

TABLE XVIII 

MALY SIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of Adjusted Variance 

Variation df Sum of Squares Estimate F 


Between Groups 3 4.83 1.6l 

Within Groups 90 192.36 2.14 0.?5 


Total 93 187.19 

To achieve homogeneity of variance in the generalization scores, 
the Generalization group was not included in the analysis. The 
remaining classes did not differ in mental age and as a result, simple 
analysis of variance was employed to investigate mean differences. In 
this instance, as summarized in Table XIX, the F-ratio was significant 
beyond the .01 level. The Control group was superior to both the Fact 

TABLE XIX 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE GENERALIZATION 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

2 

11.22 

5.61 


Within Groups 

6JL„ 

62.90 

0.97 

5.80* 

Total 

67 

74.12 



^Generalization group not 

included. 



Significant beyond the .01 level. 
























. 

« 

■1 " 

. 

' ■ ' :■ : . .3 : :< : "■! 


, 

f 

. 

, 




. 

. 

f ■ ■ 


. 

i 


1'- r j 

. 


' 




, 

. 


















. * , ' ;, . r • ■, ...l: \ ' 

. 

- ' 











73 


group and the Relationship group in this section of the test. The 
resirlts of the application of the Cochran and Cox technique to mean 
differences involving the Generalizations group are presented in 
Table XX. The Generalizations group made significantly higher scores 

TABLE XX 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE GENERALIZATION 
SUBSCORES OF THE GENERALIZATION GROUP ON 
THE PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS» STAGE ONE 





t+ 

O 

Ui 

t'oi 

t« 

Generalization 

and 

Fact 

2.061 

2.794 

2.995 

Generalization 

Relationship 

and 


2.056 

2.788 

2.550 

Generalization 

and 

Control 

2.061 

2.793 

0.780 


than the Facts and Relationships groups on the generalization section 
of the pre-test. Because of these differences, the analysis of this 
section of subsequent tests requires the control of the pre-test 
results. 

The subscores made by the Control group showed heterogeneity of 
variance when tested by the Hartley method. Because these means were 
correlated, differences were examined by the ordinary t-test for 

TABLE XXI 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE CONTROL 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGS ONE 



Mean 

Difference 

Standard 

Error 

t 

Fact and Relationship 

0 

- 

- 

Fact and Generalization 

0.65 

0.40 

1.62 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

0.65 

0.45 

1,44 
















74 

non-independent means. The Control group, as indicated in Table XXI, 
did equally well on the three subsections of the pre-test. 

The variances of the distributions of scores made by the Fact 
group on the three subsections of the test were homogeneous, and as a 
result, analysis of variance was employed to test for significant mean 
differences. The members of the Fact group performed better on the 
fact and relationship sections than they did on the generalization 
sections. These differences indicate that pre-test results must be 
considered in later analysis of sub-test performance in the Fact group. 
The analysis is summarized in Table XXII. 

TABLE XXII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE FACT 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

49.30 

24.65 


Subjects 

21 

61.77 

2.94 


Remainder 

42 

19.37 

0.46 

53.59 

Total 

65 

130.44 




Heterogeneity of variance necessitated the use of the t-test 
for non-independent means in the analysis of sub-test performance In 
the Relationship group. The results are presented in Table XXIII. 
Both the fact and relationship score were significantly higher than 
the generalization scores in this class a 


















'■'0 . .. • fe ' .)■' : 


’-, ;• -L : 




■noor'. . ; t 




'i ■r 


■ 

, 






. 

























- 










I 































TABLE XXIII 


75 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE RELATIONSHIP 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Difference 

Standard 

Error 

t 

Fact and Relationship 

,o4 

-3* 

00 

<r\ 

• 

.104 

Fact and Generalization 

1.175 

.330 

3.561* 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

_ 1.215 

•32’_ 

3.716* 


Significant beyond the ,01 level. 

Later analyses of the Relationship group subscores will require 
covariance with the pre-test results controlled. 


Analysis of variance was used to compare mean scores on the sub¬ 
sections of the pre-test for the Generalization group after homogeneity 
of variance had been confirmed. Table XXIV provides a summary of this 
analysis. 


TABLE XXIV 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE GENERALIZATION 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

36.43 

18.22 


Subjects 

26 

216.10 

8.31 


Remainder 


35.57 

0.68 

26.78 


Total 80 288,10 


The F-ratio was significant beyond the ,01 level, scores on the 
fact and relationship sections again being higher than the generalization 
























76 


score. As in previous instances, these differences indicate that 
pre-test scores must be controlled in subsequent analyses of subscores 
with the Generalization class in this group. 


Science 


Science pre-test means and standard deviations are included in 
Table XXV. 


TABLE XXV 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE 
PRE-TEST IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 



Subscores 







Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

Relation¬ 

26 

11.30 

2.77 

3.46 

1.42 

3.73 

1.66 

4,12 

1.26 

ship 

General¬ 

24 

12.93 

2.12 

3.85 

1.40 

3.83 

1,20 

5.92 

1.12 

ization 

28 

13.46 

3.51 

3.78 

1.62 

4.39 

1.51 

5.28 

1.56 

Control 

16 

13.61 

3.18 

4.12 


4.82 

1.52 

4.68 

1.54 


To secure homogeneity of variance, the Generalization group was 
not considered in the first analysis. Elimination of this group also 
produced homogeneity of mental ages among the remaining classes and as 
a result simple analysis of variance was used to compare mean total 
scores. Table XXVI contains a summary of this investigation. 

TABLE XXVI 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE TOTAL SCOPES 
ON THE PRE-TEST IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONET 


Source of 

Variation 

d T~ 

Sum of Squares 

" VsrasneB’” 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

2 

61.97 

30.99 


Within Groups 

63 

446.4? 

7.09 

4.372* 

'T’otal 

.6j 

508.44 




^Generalization group not included. 
Significant at .05 level. 





























J.- 








' 










Y 


....... 

- . 

, _ • . ■ ' ; . ■ ■ .. 

: ; : > x ■ , . ... ■ 

' • 

. 





77 

Both the Control and the Relationship groups were superior to the Fact 
group in total test performance. The use of the Cochran and Cox 
technique showed that this difference was maintained in the case of the 
Generalization group. The comparisons made with the latter group are 
presented in Table XXVII. These differences necessitate the control of 

TABLE XXVII 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE TOTAL SCORES OF 
THE GENERALIZATION GROUP ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 



t 'o5 

t ’ox 

t 

Generalization and Fact 

2.0 55 

2.777 

2.476 

Generalization and 

Relationship 

2.057 

2.78x 

.636 

Generalization and Control 

2.099 

2.875 

,136 


total scores in subsequent analysis involving these classes. 

Since regression was found to be non-linear, recourse was made to 
analysis of variance to determine mean differences in fact subscores 
in the science pre-test. As is indicated in Table XXVIII, the four 
classes did not differ in mean scores In this area of the test. Fact 

TABLE XXVIII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE FACT 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

4.59 

1.53 


Within Groups 

90 

204.26 

2.27 

.674 

Total 

93 

208.85 



























= ' 'X_.i 1.. ...... .( «. 


■ 

. 

' 


















78 

subscores, therefore, will not have to be controlled in later 
investigations. 

Analysis of covariance was used in the investigation of mean 
differences in performance on the relationship section of the pre-test, 
linearity of regression and homogeneity of variance and regression 
coefficients being confirmed beforehand. There were no differences in 
performance on this test, indicating that controls of these scores 
would not be necessary in subsequent analysis. Summary of the analysis 
of relationship subscores is given in Table XXIX. 

TABLE XXIX 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
SCIENCE, STAGS ONE 


Source of 

Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

14.44 

4.81 


Within Groups 

89 

170.60 

1.92 

2.51 

Total 

92 

185.04 




A similar analysis was carried out with the generalization 
subscores, after confirming the necessary assumptions for covariance. 
The results are presented in Table XXX. The F-ratio in this instance 

TABLE XXX 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE GENERALIZATION 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 


Between Groups 

3 

20,60 

6.87 



Within Groups 

89 

.153.47 

1.72 

❖ 

3.98 


Total 

,22 

174,04 





Significant at the .05 level. 


























































I l I 












. 




























' 




. 


■ 

■ * J 


- ' 

- 









. 























* 

. - 

. 












. .. 












79 

was significant at the *05 level. Both the Relationship and Generali¬ 
zation groups obtained higher scores than the Fact group on this section 
of the test. These differences indicate that the pre-test generalization 
scores must be controlled in later analyses of performance. 

After confirming homogeneity of variance, two-way analysis of 
variance revealed no differences in performance in subsections of the 
test by students in the Fact group. The analysis is shown in Table 
XXXI. No consideration need be given to pre-test performance in 

TABLE XXXI 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE FACT GROUP 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

5.62 

2.81 


Subjects 

25 

63.85 

2.55 


Remainder 

50 

95.38 

1.91 

1.4? 

Total 

77 

164.85 



subsequent analyses of Fact 

group sub-test scores 




The same analysis conducted with the subscores of the Relationship 
group indicated that pre-test results would have to be controlled in 
later investigations. As may be observed in Table XXXII, the F-ratio 
was significant beyond the .01 level. In this instance, the generali¬ 
zation score was superior to the fact and. relationship scores. 



















TABLE XXXII 


80 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE RELATIONSHIP 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

34.03 

17.02 


Subjects 

23 

35.71 

1.55 


Remainder 

46 

71.91 

1.56 

10,90 


Total 71 141,65 


A similar result was found on the analysis of the subscores of the 
Generalization group. Differences in pre-test scores must be controlled 
in further analyses of this kind. Table XXXIII contains a summary of 

TABLE XXXIII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE GENERALIZATION 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGS ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

31.88 

15.94 


Subjects 

27 

102.32 

4.12 


Remainder 

54 

86.79 

1.61 

9.90 ... 

Total 

83 

220.99 




these results. As in the previous class, generalization scores were 
superior to both the fact and relationship scores. 

Analysis of variance revealed no differences in performance 
within the pre-test by members of the Control group. The results 



































. 


. 














- . 


















: 

















81 

are summarized in Table XXXIV. It will not be necessary to consider 

TABLE XXXIV 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE CONTROL 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

4.30 

2.15 


Subjects 

15 

50.60 

3.38 


Remainder 

30 

56.90 

1.90 

1.13 

Total 

47 

111.80 




pre-test results in later investigations of the performance of the 
Control group on the subsections of the test. 

Social Studies 

The results of the administration of the pre-test in Social Studies 
are presented in Table XXXV. Homogeneity of variance was confirmed for 

TABLE XXXV 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR 
THE PRE-TEST IN SOCIAL STUDIES, 
STAGS ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 


Subscores 






Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M. 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

Relation¬ 

29 

10.08 

3.79 

3.31 

1.71 

3.76 

1.97 

3.76 

1.80 

ship 

General¬ 

22 

12.33 

4.73 

4.00 

1.69 

3.64 

1.96 

4.68 

2.10 

ization 

19 

10.90 

4.27 

3.79 

1.51 

3.21 

2.25 

3.89 

1.59 

Control 

23 


5-04 

4.47 

1.62 

4.68 

2.07 

J5.30 















































82 


all distributions in this test and, as the classes did not differ in 
mental age, analysis of variance was used throughout the investigation 
to determine significant mean differences. 

The results of the analysis of the total scores are presented in 
Table XXXVI. The F-ratio in this case was significant at the .01 level. 

TABLE XXXVI 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE TOTAL SCORES 
ON THE PRE-TEST IN SOCIAL STUDIES, 

STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

283.63 

94.54 


Within Groups 

89 

1724.07 

. 19.37 

4 . 88 * 

Total 

92 

2007.70 




^significant at the .01 level. 

The Control group was superior to the Fact and the Generalization group 
on this pre-test. These differences necessitate the control of pre-test 
total scores in subsequent analyses in this study. 

Differences in performance on the fact subsection of the test were 
found to be within the bounds of chance. The F-ratio, as noted in 
Table XXXVII, was not significant. No consideration need be given 

TABLE XXXVII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE FACT 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGS ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

18.07 

6.02 


Within Groups 

89 

241.11 

2,71 

2.22 

Total 

22 

239.18 

















- 

. 

. 

' 




■ 

ut i ' ' ' 

■ •; V J :>: ' " •. s £ „• - 

i v lo ■; .bf;l K||§ iiX> ] /'f vd f4%iK>2 

. 

v ■; .:;j O j : 






■ 









these results in later treatment of the data. 


There appeared to be differences , however, in performance on the 
relationship subsection of this test. The summary of the analysis is 
given in Table XXXVIII. The F-ratio is barely significant at the .05 
level. Subsequent t-tests revealed no pairs of means that differed 

TABLE XXXVIII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCORES IN THE PRE-TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

34.33 

11.44 


Within Groups 

89 

374.99 

4.21 

2.72 

Total 

92 

409•32 




significantly and as a result, control of pre-test scores will not be 
necessary in later analyses. 


There were differences in performance on the generalization 
section of the test that were confirmed by the t-test. The F-ratio 
reported in Table XXXIX is significant beyond the .01 level. The 

TABLE XXXIX 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE GENERALIZATION 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sm of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

54.02 

18.01 


Within Groups 

89 

296.26 

3.33 

5.41 

Total 

22 

250.28 




Control group obtained better scores than the Fact and the Generalization 



















' ' ■ J • : ' ■: ' 

■ ' 

. ' 

■■ 1 


. 




. 


>. . 













; 


, 

v - 

. » 


' : 








* 






r.- .5-:. j, : X' 












84 

groups, and the Relationship group was also superior to the Fact group 
in performance. Pre-test scores* therefore, must be controlled, in 
analyses of the generalization sub-sections of later tests. 

The analysis summarized in Table XL shows that the Fact group did 
not differ in its performance on the three learning outcomes measured 

TABLE XL 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE FACT GROUP 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

.09 

.046 


Subjects 

28 

8.34 

.298 


Remainder 

56 

273.52 

4,884 

.009 

Total 

86 

281.95 



in the pre-test 

. These scores, then, need not 

be controlled when 

later tests are 

analyzed. 




The Relationship group showed variation in sub-test performance 

as revealed by the analysis presented in Table 

XLI. The class made a 



TABLE XLI 



ANALYSIS OF 

VARIANCE OF THE RELATIONSHIP 



GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 



SOCIAL STUDIES* STAGE ONE 


Source of 



Variance 


Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

12.39 

6.2.0 


Subjects 

21 

156.26 

7.44 


Remainder 

42 

77.61 

1.85 

3.35 . 

Total 

65 

242.26 





































p!& 












. 






. 






















.. ; 

>- ’■ r . .1 " ' : - | • < . . . 1 - 

, ' ; ■ ' ■<■> 








85 

significantly higher score in the generalization section of the test 
than on the relationship section. The effects of these differences will 
therefore be controlled by analyses of covariance during the treatment 
of later test results. 

The Generalization group followed the pattern of the Fact group in 
that no differences in performance were noted. As in the earlier case, 
control of pre-test scores will not be necessary. The analysis is 
summarized in Table XLII. 

TABLE XLII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE GENERALIZATION 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

5.16 

2.58 


Subjects 

18 

109.26 

6.0? 


Remainder 

36 

68.84 

1.91 

1.35 

Total 

56 

183.26 




On the pre-test, members of the Control group did significantly 
better on generalization than on either the fact or relationship 
sections. These differences, then, must be considered in later 
analyses involving comparisons of the performance of the Control 
group on the subsections of the tests. The analysis is summarized 


in Table XLIII. 



















- 

. 

■ 

■ 

. . 




















4 












. 




, 


, 




















TABLE XLIII 


86 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE CONTROL GROUP 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

8.03 

4.02 


Subjects 

22 

185.88 

8.45 


Remainder 

44 

32.64 

.74 

5.41 

Total 

68 

226.55 




Summary 

The analyses presented in this chapter revealed differences between 
classes in mental age and in familiarity with the methods employed in 
this investigation. Consideration must be given these differences, 
through the analysis of covariance, if subsequent test results are 
to be interpreted adequately. 

Mental ages for both the Mathematics-Science group and the Science- 
Social Studies group were found to differ significantly and must be 
controlled. 

Sections of each subject matter area to be held constant by 
analysis of covariance are as follows; 

Mathematics; total scores, fact subscores, generalization 
subscores, Fact group subscores, Relationship group subscores, and 
Generalization group subscores. 

Science; total scores, generalization subscores, Relationship 
group subscores, and Generalization group subscores. 












- 




' 




J > < 




























. 


. 








.1- -i : 








t 




. 















Social Studies: total scores, generalization subscores. 


Relationship group subscores, and Control group subscores. 





CHAPTER VII 


ANALYSIS OF GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, 
SCIENCE AND SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 

After the experimental classes had completed training periods in 
one of the three methods of study, a post-test was administered to all 
classes. Pre-test scores were subtracted from post-test scores to 
obtain a distribution of gains made during the period of training. 
Analysis of these distributions was undertaken to determine the 
differential effects of training on the learning of facts, relation¬ 
ships and generalizations. Results will be presented for each subject 
matter group in the order? mathematics, science and social studies. 

Mathematics 

The means and standard deviations for the distribution of gains in 
mathematics are presented in Table XLIV. A negative mean indicates that 

TABLE XLIV 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE 
DISTRIBUTION OF GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO 
POST-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 


Subscores 






Fact 

Relation 1 Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

22 

-0.91 

3.53 

0.18 

1.94 

-1.32 

2.06 

0.23 

1.41 

Relation¬ 

ship 

23 

-0.26 

4.55 

0.78 

1.83 

-1.04 

2.64 

0.00 

1.45 

General¬ 

ization 

27 

-1.96 

4.47 

0.26 

1.53 

-1.41 

1.95 

-0.82 

2.49 

Control 

-23 

-1.74 

3.24 

-0.09 

1.65 

-1.13 

2.12 

-0.52 

.1.61— 


the group, as a whole, made lower scores on the post-test than on the 
























89 

pre-test. 

The assumptions concerning linearity of regression, homogeneity 
of regression coefficients and homogeneity of variance were confirmed 
for the total gain scores. Mean differences between the classes were 
then compared by analysis of covariance, with mental age and pre-test 
scores controlled. No significant differences were found between mean 
total gains for the four classes. Four training periods in a par¬ 
ticular method of study did not produce an improvement in the 
performance of any of the classes, as measured by total gains from 
the pre-test to the post-test. 

In the analysis of the fact subscores, it was found that 
covariance could not be used since the regression of mental age on 
gain was not linear, and the regression coefficients of the pre-test 
and gains distributions were not homogeneous. Since homogeneity of 
variance was confirmed for the fact subscores themselves, analysis of 
variance was used to compare means. As with the total gain distri¬ 
bution, no significant differences were found.^ The training periods 
failed to produce differential performance on the post-test in 
mathematics. 

Since differences in pre-test performance on the relationship 
section of the mathematics test were due to differences in mental age, 
pre-test scores were not controlled in the analysis of gains. The mean 


Analysis of covariance was undertaken, holding mental age constant, 
in spite of the failure to meet the assumptions. It was felt that this 
procedure would reveal, at least in part, the influence of mental age 
on gain. As in analysis of variance, there were no significant 
differences. 



. 


. 




. 

' 












. u ' . i* - ■ 












' 


- 

















. 







- 

- 

- 






90 


gains in this section of the test were compared by analysis of 
covariance, with mental age held constant* There were no significant 
differences between the classes in the learning of relationships in 
mathematics. 

To secure homogeneity of variance in the generalization section 
of the distribution the Generalization group was omitted. This also 
produced homogeneity of mental age and as a result, analysis of 
covariance with only pre-test performance constant was used to compare 
the means of the remaining three classes. As before, no significant 
differences were noted. The use of Cochran and Cox technique to compare 
means involving the Generalization group revealed the same pattern of 
non-significance. As in the other parts of the distribution, the 
training periods did not produce any differences in post-test 
performance. 

Homogeneity of variance was confirmed in the subsections of the 
distributions for both the Control group and the Fact group. Two-way 
analysis of variance was used to compare mean differences in gains in 
each of these groups. No significant differences were obtained in the 
case of the Control group. The experiences of the Control group in the 
interval between tests did not produce any apparent effect on their 
ability to determine the facts, relationships and generalizations in a 
reading selection in mathematics. In the Fact group, however, gains 
in the fact and generalization sections were found to be superior to that 
made in the relationship section. Their higher performance on generali¬ 
zations may be due in part to previous classroom practice in the appli¬ 
cation of mathematics to problem areas. The higher gain in the area of 


, 

. 

* 

, 

- 

t r < - . « 

, 


■ ' ' 

■. t 


' 

. 

- 

• .... «• ■ t . . - 




' 


-.i t- 




•. ■ ", i: > . - ■ . 

. 










91 

facts could be explained on the basis of the training received in 
the experiment. 

Since the variance was heterogeneous in the subscores of both the 
Relationship and Generalization groups, t-tests were used to investigate 
mean differences in these instances. The pattern of non-significant 
differences was maintained in this analysis as far as the Relationship 
group was concerned, training apparently producing no effect on post¬ 
test performance. In the Generalization group, fact scores were 
significantly higher than either relationships or generalizations. It 
seems that training in generalizations does not cause the student to 
ignore the facts in a selection, but quite to the contrary, produces 
an aw a reness of important facts. 

Table XLV contains a summary of the F-ratios obtained from the 
analysis of gains from pre-test to post-test in mathematics. Since 
no significant differences were found between groups, it appears 
that the training periods were not capable of influencing the 
performance of pupils in this area. 

TABLE XLV 

F-RATIOS DERIVED FROM THE ANALYSIS OF 
GAIKS FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN MATHMATICS, STAGS ONE 



F 05 

F 01 

F 

Interpretation 

Total 

2.71 

4.00 

0.46 

not significant 

Fact scores 

2.71 

4.00 

1.01 

not s-r gnificant 

Relationship scores 

2.71 

4.00 

0.01 

not significant 

Generalization scores 3 

q.i 4 

4.Q5 

0.26 

not signi ficant 

Fact group scores 

1.22 

5.15 

5.83 

p less than .01 

Relationship group scores 13 





Generalization group scores* 5 





Control group scores 

3.21 

5.12 

2.03 

not significant 


Generalization group not included. 
^Variance heterogeneous, t-test employed. 


























, 




. 

* 






' 




. 


■ 




■ 












. 


j ■■■■ ■■ ■ ■ . - ■ ■ C ■■ " ■ ' »- ■ 






■ . > 




• ■ 












: . .. Ww .. 






o • 


. . 

. 

* 

. 

. * 


r 




' 








i,. , ' j':- 







Science 


92 


The means and standard deviations for gains in science are 
summarized in Table XL VT. 

TABLE XLVI 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE 
DISTRIBUTION OF GAINS FROM PRE-TEST 
TO POST-TEST IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 




Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

26 

0.69 

3.6l 

0.35 

1.83 

0.39 

1.84 

-0.04 

1.51 

Relation¬ 

ship 

24 

1.58 

3.8? 

1.25 

2.11 

0.46 

1.87 

-0.13 

2.23 

General¬ 

ization 

28 

2.21 

4.10 

1.04 

2.32 

1.07 

1.78 

0.11 

1.75 

Control 

16 

-6.06 

2.91 

0.06 


-0.06 

1.44 

-o.o6 

-1*2L 


To compare mean and total gains in science, analysis of 
covariance was used with mental age and pre-test scores constant. No 
significant results were obtained from this analysis. It is interesting 
to note, however, that the trend of mean total gains runs from Control 
to Fact, to Relationship to Generalization in order of increasing values. 
This is also in the order of increasing amount of meaning associated 
with a method of study and may indicate that the training periods did 
have some effect on post-test performance. 

The gains made by the four classes on the fact subsection of the 
distribution were investigated by analysis of covariance with mental 
age held constant. Again, no significant differences were obtained, 
nor was the trend in mean scores as clearly noticeable. The groups 
using the more meaningful methods, Relationship and Generalization, 
























. 


. 


■ • : j . 

I . 

./ • -J J . ■ • b . ; • • r:.. i ; > . 

. 


' 



• 








■ 

■ 



« 

. 



- 




. ■ 




93 

again appeared to have higher mean scores, though, as noted differences 
were not significant. 

In the relationship section, analysis of covariance with mental 
age controlled, revealed no significant differences in mean gain. The 
rank order of mean gains was the same as that observed with total scores, 
the groups being arranged in order of increasing meaningfulness of 
method. 

Analysis of covariance with pre-test results held constant was 
used to compare means on the generalization section of the gains 
distribution. No significant differences were obtained from this 
investigation. The generalization section of the post-test appeared 
to be more difficult than the pre-test for the students, since lower 
scores were made by all classes except the Generalization class, who 
had received training in this area. 

The analysis of the subscores within each group failed to reveal 
any significant differences. The training periods did not produce 
any marked effects on the performance of the students on the different 
subsections of the test. 

The results of the analysis of the distribution of gains in 
science from the pre-test to the post-test were negative. No 
significant differences were found. The F-ratios obtained in the 
various investigations of mean differences are summarized in 


Table XLVII. 










- 

■ • 

' 

' 








■ 






* 




. o 

. 


,■ i*o£ j:ss: ? r • . 1 fc £J.iS I«*W_ 3S*XO0« 

. 

. 





■ 



. 

. 




* 

. 

■ 



. - 





TABLE XLVII 


94 


F-RATIOS DERIVED FROM THE ANALYSIS OF 
GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 



F 05 

F 01 

F 

Interpretation 

Total 

2.71 

4.00 

1.502 

not significant 

Fact subscores 

2.71 

4.00 

i.4n 

not significant 

Relationship subscores 

2.71 

4.00 

0.498 

not significant 

Generalization subscores 

2.71 

4.00 

1.258 

not significant 

Fact group subscores 

3.18 

5.06 

0.612 

not significant 

Relationship group subscores 

3.20 

5.10 

2.894 

not significant 

Generalization group subscores 

3,17 

2.01 

1.730 

not significant 

Control group subscores 

3.32 


0.059 

not significant 


UriLike the results of the mathematics analysis, inspection of the 
distribution of gains in science showed a trend that appeared to favor 
the more meaningful methods of study. It would seem that the training 
periods influenced performance to a greater extent in science than in 
mathematics, although this could not be rigorously confirmed. 


Social Studies 


The means and standard deviations for the gains made by the 
classes in social studies are presented in Table XLVIII. In the 

TABLE XLVIII 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE 
DISTRIBUTION OF GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO 
POST-TEST IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 


Subscores 







Fact 


Relation 1 Generalization 



M 

SLD. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

Relation¬ 

29 

2.59 

3.96 

0.97 

1.94 

0.59 

2.40 

1.03 

2.24 

ship 

General¬ 

22 

2.68 

4.18 

0.73 

1.84 

1.55 

1.65 

0.41 

1.94 

ization 

19 

5.05 

3.24 

1.21 

1.65 

2.42 

2.75 

1.42 

1.39 

Control 

JL 

-=P-J2.. 

3-19 

-0.70 

1.72 

0.02 

-JU9JL 

0.01 

1.65 

















































■ 

; 

. 

- 

* . 










■ : 

. 

. 


* 


- 






' 
















, 




- * 






* 






. 


. 











* 

. 

■ 

- 



n.' 



- 
















95 


analysis of these results, mental ages were not considered since 
preliminary investigation revealed no significant differences between 
the classes in this group. 

Mean total gains were examined using analysis of covariance, with 
pre-test scores in social studies held constant. The results of this 
analysis are summarized in Table XLIX. The F-ratio obtained in this 

TABLE XLIX 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE GAINS IN 
TOTAL SCORE FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

150.61 

50.20 


Within Groups 

88 

753.86 

8.57 

5.86* 

Total 

ST' ^ .... ^t~:—'—T 

91 

904.4? 




instance was significant beyond the .01 level. A comparison of 
adjusted means was made and revealed that the Generalization group made 
significantly greater gains than both the Control group and the Fact 
group. The difference between the Generalization group and the Relation¬ 
ship group favored the former but did not reach the .05 level. The 
Relationship group gain was significantly greater than the Control 
group and in addition, the Relationship group was superior to the 
Fact group although the difference did not reach the .05 level of 
significance. The difference between the Fact group and the Control 
group was not significant, although the gain made by the former was 
greater. The mean difference tests are summarized in Table L. 











■ t 

■ .', ", '■■■V 

* • ■ J ■ ■ J 

. 

1 • 

. ■ ■ - 


. 












. 




* 


- 

♦ 

' 

■ 

■; 










- 






f 

. 

1 4 ■■ / vit, * ' . 

■ 

, 








- 


. 




. 























TABLE L 


96 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR GAINS IN TOTAL 
SCORE FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalization and Fact a 

2.89 

3.34 

p < .01 

Generalization and Relationship 

1.63 

1.77 

.05 < p <r .10 

Generalization and Control 

3.34 

3.75 

p < .01 

Relationship and Fact 

1.263 

1.51 

.1 < p < .2 

Relationship and Control 

1.91 

2.16 

.01< p < .05 

Fact and Control 

cT-r.._1. _ j. _ _ ... 

0.65 

0.69 

.4 < p < .5 


It would appear that in the field of social studies, the training 
periods experienced by the experimental groups influenced their post¬ 
test performance. The results of this analysis substantiate the 


hypothesis that the more meaningful methods of study produce greater 


gains in learning, since the gains may be ranked in increasing 
magnitude as follows: Control, Fact, Relationship, Generalization. 


Analysis of variance of the gains made by the four classes on the 
fact section of the distribution is shown in Table LI. 


TABLE LI 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE GAINS IN FACT 
SUBSCORES FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

49.67 

16.557 


Within Groups 

89 

285.36 

3.206 

5.164* 

Total 

92 

335-03 




* significant at .01 level. 




























97 

The F-ratio is significant at the *01 level, indicating that there are 
significant differences in gains in this area. 

Mean difference tests are summarized in Table LII. 

TABLE LII 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR GAINS IN FACT 
SUBSCORES FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Differences t 

Significance 

Generalization and Fact a 

0.245. .... 

0.456 

none 

Generalization and Relationship 

0.483 

0.870 

none 

Generalization and Control 

1.906 

3.434 

p < .01 

Fact and Relationship 

0.238 

0.475 

none 

Fact and Control 

1.66l 

3.315 

p < .01 

Relationship and Control 

1.423 

2.650 

p < .01 


difference favors class named first. 

In all instances the experimental groups were superior to the 
Control group in the fact subsection. The training of the Generali¬ 
zation and Relationship groups, while not stressing the learning of 
facts, produced as much gain in this area as direct practice itself. 

No differentiation in performance could be made between the classes of 
the experimental group. 

The analysis of the relationship section of the distribution of 
gains revealed a pattern similar to that for total scores. The F-ratio, 
as indicated in Table LIII, is significant at the .01 level. In this 
area the Generalization group showed the greatest gain, being 
significantly superior in performance to both the Control and the Fact 















. 


























. 













, 






- 

. 










- 




. 





' 


















. 

, 

■ 






. 











TABLE LIU 


$8 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE GAINS IN RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCORES FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

63.10 

21.03 


Within Groups 

89 

439.03 

4.933 

4.26* 

Total 

92 

502.13 




* Significant at the *01 level. 


groups. The Relationship gain was greater than both the Fact and the 
Control groups, although the difference t*as significant only in the 
latter case. The Fact group was not significantly better than the 
Control group in the learning of the relationships. The results of 
the mean difference tests are presented in Table LIV. In general, 

TABLE LIV 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR GAITS IN RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCORES FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Differences 

t 

Significance 


Generalization and Fact 

1.835 

2.755 

p < .01 


Generalization and Relationship 

0.846 

1.230 

.2 < p < .3 


Generalization and Control 

2.399 

3.487 

o 

A 

b 


Relationship and Fact 

0.959 

1.544 

.1 < p < .2 


Relationship and Control 

1*523 

2.287 

• 01< p < .05 


Fact and Control 

0.564 

0.908 

.3 < p < .4 . 



these results favor the view that there is an advantage to be gained by 
learning with meaning. The more meaningful the method of study the 




















99 


greater the amount learned. It is worth observing that the Generali¬ 
zation group, which received no training in relationships as defined 
in this study, made gains comparable to the group receiving specific 
instruction in this area. 

Analysis of covariance with pre-test scores controlled revealed 
no significant differences in gain in the generalization section of 
the distribution. The training periods apparently failed to bring 
about differential performance in the learning of generalizations. 

In passing it might be noted that the greatest gain appeared to be 
made by the Generalization group. 

Analysis of the subscores made by each of the experimental groups 
revealed no significant differences in performance. Evidently training 
in one method of study did not produce differential test performance. 

The gains of the Control group in the subsections of the 
distribution were subjected to the analysis of covariance, with 
pre-test scores held constant. The results of the analysis are 
summarized in Table LV. 

TABLE LV 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE GAINS IN 
CONTROL GROUP SUBSCORES FROM PRE-TEST TO 



POST-TEST 

IN SOCIAL STUDIES, 

STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 
Remainder 

45 

83.06 



Remainder 

43 

47.09 

1.095 


Between Groups 

2 

36.51 

18.255 

16 . 67 * 


*significant at .01 level. 









. 

I . 

- 

' 


■... ,r ; 

. 














- 


< 
















































■ 



, . 






. 









100 


In this case the relationship and generalization gains were 
superior to those made in the facts. Inasmuch as the Control group 
received no special training, these differences cannot be attributed 
to more than chance experiences on the part of the members of this 
class that enabled them to perform better on some sections of the test 
than on others. 

In Table LVI, the F-ratios resulting from the analysis of the gains 
in social studies are presented. 

TABLE LVI 

F-RATIOS DERIVED FROM THE ANALYSIS OF 
GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 



f 05 

F 01 

F 

Interpretation 

Total 

2-71 

4. GO 

5 -fi 6 

P < . 01 

Fact subscores 

2.71 

4.00 

5.16 

P < .01 

Relationship subscores 

2.71 

4.00 

4.26 

P < .01 

Generalization subscores 

2.71 

4.00 

0.45 

not significant 

Fact group subscores 

2.17 

5.01 

.36 

not significant 

Relationship group subscores 

3.22 

5.11 

2.976 

not significant 

Generalization group subscores a 





Control group subscores 

2,2 1 

5.12 

16.67 

E SL *°1 


a t-tests used, mean differences not significant. 


This analysis generally supported the view that the greater the 
meaningfulness of a method of study, the greater the amount learned. 
The Generalization group tended to show superior performance, followed 
in turn by the Relationship and Fact groups. 



















. 

■ 

' v|§! 


■V 





. 




















. . . 














. 








- '. -. 

. 




- 

- 












« 








































Summary 


101 


The analyses of the gains made from the pre-test to post-test 
in three subject matter areas revealed certain differential effects 
of the four training periods. In mathematics, the results were 
negative. Training in a particular method of study did not produce 
significant differences in later performance nor any distribution of 
gains that could be interpreted as a trend. In science a similar 
pattern of non-significant results was obtained, although on this 
occasion the distribution of gains appeared to favor the more 
meaningful methods, that is, the study of material for relationships 
and generalizations, over the study of material for facts alone. The 
analysis of the social studies gains showed significant differences 
in performance on the part of the Generalization group and, to a 
lesser extent, the Relationship group, the two most meaningful methods 
employed in the study. 

The differential effect of training in the three subject-matter 
areas may reflect the type of instruction generally associated with 
these subjects in the classroom. In mathematics, and to a lesser 
extent in science, much class time is devoted to solving problems, 
and the application of methods to practical situations. Against this 
background of experience, it may have been difficult for the Fact and 
Relationship groups to ignore applications presented in the reading 
selection and to concentrate on their particular experimental method. 
This interference from their past experience could have contributed 
to the negative results in the first two areas investigated. 










■ 

, 


. 
















r/\ ■ ‘ ;■ j ■. ■' ■ -» ' 

. 

, . v'i ' '■■■ 

< 




, 

■ 

- . ' . 

fit ■ *• 





t . 











. 












. ' !: c» 

» 









■ : ,hu 







. 







102 

In the study of social studies, on the other hand, more time is 
usually devoted to the presentation of facts and less to application 
of these to meaningful situations* Because of this, the classes would 
likely be less familiar with the methods used in this investigation, 
permitting a differentiation in performance to result from the training 
periods. 

From the results of the analysis of gains in social studies it 
appears that the method of studying material to determine the significant 
generalizations within it, tends to produce the greatest gains in learn¬ 
ing. The case for the generalization method is strengthened when con¬ 
sideration is given to the fact that this group did equally well on 
the fact section of the test when compared with the group receiving 
specific training in the learning of facts. In addition, the generali¬ 
zation group showed a greater gain in learning of relationships than 
did the Relationship group, which had practised on these learning 
outcomes. 

On the whole, results from the analysis of the gains in the three 
subject matter areas are not well-defined. Conclusions based on these 
must be considered tentative until confirmation is obtained from the 
second stage of the experiment. 



CHAPTER VIII 


TRANSFER IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE 
AND SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 

Three weeks after the administration of the post-test each group 
was given another test in its particular subject-matter area. The 
purpose of this test was to determine the extent to which the effects 
of training in a particular method of study would be applied to a new 
situation after an interval of time. Analysis was carried out on the 
raw scores, with mental age and pre-test scores controlled where nec¬ 
essary. The results are presented separately for each subject-matter 
field in the order: mathematics, science and social studies* 

Mathematics 

The means and standard deviations for the distribution of scores 
on the transfer test are presented in Table LVII. 

TABLE LVII 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS, 

FOR THE TRANSFER TEST IN 
MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 





Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M - 

S.D. 

M 

S.D* 

Fact 

22 

11.U6 

2.56 

3.23 

1.U8 

it.23 

1#23 

lt.OO 

0.98 

Relation¬ 

ship 

23 

11.30 

3.0U 

3*65 

1.11 

k.n 

1.6U 

3.U8 

lj-tl 

General¬ 

ization 

27 

15.67 

3.19 

5*56 

1.26 

5.33 

1*66 

lt.78 

1.26 

Control 

23 

10.96 

3.22 

3.17 

1.62 

U .65 

1*37 

3.13 

1.18 





















■ . ' j 5 


• - ' 1 ■ >ac > 



TOO 0 




r; 


;> 



























104 

One may observe that generally the training periods seem to have pro¬ 
duced some effects on performance since in most instances the means of 
the experimental group exceed those of the control group* It may be 
noted also that the Generalisation group appears to be superior to the 
other groups on all areas of the test* 

After the necessary assumptions had been confirmed, that is, 
homogeneity of variance and regression coefficients and linearity of 
regression, analysis of covariance, with mental age and pre-test 
results held constant, was used to investigate mean differences* 

TABLE LVIII 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE TOTAL 
SCORES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

217.08 

72.36 


Within Groups 

8? 

720.06 

8.09 

8.9k* 

Total 

92 

937.1U 




---Significant at the *01 level 

As may be noted from Table LVIII, the F-ratio is significant at the *01 
level* After adjustment for the effects of differences in mental age 
and previous experience, the means for the groups were as follows? Fact, 
11.61$ Relationship, 12.10$ Generalization, 14*70$ Control, 11*15® 
Pairs of adjusted means were then compared by ordinary t-tests to deter¬ 
mine areas of difference. The mean score of the Generalization group 













105 

was significantly higher than that of any other group. The Relation¬ 
ship group made greater scores than both the Control and the Fact 
groups, and the Fact group obtained a slightly higher score than the 
Control group, but none of these differences reached the .05 level of 
significance. The results of the t-tests are summarized in Table LIX. 

TABLE LH 


MEM DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE TOTAL 
SCORES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact a 

3.09 

3.62 


P < .01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

2.60 

2.91 


p < .01 

Generalization 
and Control 

3.55 

U.21 


P < .01 

Relationship 
and Fact 

0.h9 

0.56 

.3 

< P < .6 

Relationship 
and Control 

0.95 

1.13 

.2 

<■ p < .3 

Fact and Control 

0.U6 

o.5k 

.5 

< p^: , 6 


difference favors group named first* 


The analysis indicates that the effects of the more meaningful 
method of study are transferred to the greatest extent. 

Fact subscores were investigated following the same form of 
analysis as was used with the total scores, the results being summarized 
in Table LX. The obtained F-ratio was significant beyond the .01 level. 















" .5 













" 






■ . 




J ! 


:>' 




0 










TABLE LX 


106 


ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE FACT 
SUBSCQRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

66.25 

22.08 


Within Groups 

89 

155.23 

1.7U 

12 . 66 * 

Total 

92 

221 .U 8 




'^Significant at the .01 level 

Adjusted means for each class were as follows: Fact, 3*25; Relationship, 
3*93; Generalization, 3>*19j Control, 3*30. Mien these adjusted means were 
compared by the t-test it was found that again, the only significant diff¬ 
erences were between the Generalisation group and each of the remaining 
groups, the former being superior in each instance* These present further 
evidence of the superiority of the more meaningful method of study. 

The relationship subscores were subjected to analysis of covariance, 
with mental age controlled. The analysis revealed no significant diff¬ 
erences in mean scores on this section of the transfer test. Apparent 
differences, noticeable in Table LVTII, must be attributed to differences 
in mental age. The method of study stressing the relationships that are 
found in a reading selection has not been proven to be capable of produc¬ 
ing differential performance in mathematics. It should be noted that 
training with the generalization method also failed to improve the 
students* ability in this area. 










,v, ; o : •: 










107 


With mental age held constant, analysis of covariance revealed 
significant differences in performance on the generalization subsection 
of the transfer test. The F-ratio obtained from this treatment of the 
data was found to be significant beyond the .01 level. The results of 
this analysis are given in Table LH. When the means were adjusted for 
differences in mental age, the following values were obtained: Fact, 
U.OI 5 Relationship, 3#U9; Generalization, U.77 5 Control, 3.12. 

TABLE LXI 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE GENERALIZATION 
SUBSCGRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

25.61* 

8.55 


Within Groups 

90 

123.90 

1.38 

6.21* 

Total 

93 

11*9.5It 




^Significant beyond the .01 level 


Mean difference tests, summarized in Table LXII, revealed that the 
Generalization group was superior to all others, as has been noticed in 
earlier analyses* In addition, on this occasion the Fact group made a 
significantly higher score than the Control group. While the difference 
between the Fact and Relationship groups favored the former, this diff¬ 
erence was not significant at the .05 level. The advantage of the 
Relationship group over the Control group also failed to reach the ,QS> 
level of significance. 











TABLE LXII 


108 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FCR THE GENERALIZATION 
SUBSCORES ON THE TRANSFEE TEST 



IN MATHEMATICS, 

STAGE ONE 




Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalisation 
and Relationship a 

1.28 

3.68 

pc 

*01 

Generalisation 
and Fact 

0.76 

2.12 

.01 < p 

c .05 

Generalisation 
and Control 

1.65 

4.93 

P ^ 

.01 

Fact and 
Relationship 

0.52 

1.49 

•1 < p 

< .2 

Fact and 

Control 

0.8? 

2.48 

.01 < p 

.o5 

Relationship 
and Control 

0.37 

i.o5 

.2 < p 

c .3 


difference favors group named first* 


Although members of the Fact group varied in their performance on 

the three sections of the pre-test, differences could not be controlled 

since regression was found to be non-linear* Analysis of variance in- 

2 

dicated differences in performance on the transfer test as well. The 
analysis is summarized in Table LXII1. Mean difference tests revealed 
that both the generalisation and relationship scores were superior to 
the fact score* It seems that, when presented with the reading selection 
for the test, the students in this group were not able to concentrate 
merely on the facts of the selection, but that prior experience in 
mathematics caused them to consider the relationships and generalisations 
as well. It is hardly conceivable that the study of facts alone could 
produce these results* 

^Analysis of covariance revealed the same pattern of results. 























o ".U'Ia 


- 


3- ' 


j;' \okb 






■ 




: : 


t 




J [ 1 ' 
















TABLE LXIII 


109 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE FACT GROUP 
SUBSCORES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

12.09 

6.05 


Subjects 

21 

45.82 



Remainder 

42 

51.91 

1.24 

4.89 

Total 

65 

109.82 




Analysis of the subscores of both the Relationship group and the 
Generalization group revealed no significant differences. The same 
result was obtained on the analysis of the gains scores in the previous 
chapter. After a three-week interval there is no tendency toward 
differential performance in either of these groups. 

The subscores made by the Control group were found to be signifi¬ 
cantly different when investigated with analysis of variance. The 
relationship score was superior to both the fact and the generalization 
score. Since this group received no training in the course of the 
experiment, these results are likely due to some experiences within the 
group that made them more favorably disposed toward the learning of 
relationships than toward the other learning outcomes on this test. 

The results of the analysis are summarized in Table 1X07. 







i;OXI oJEA* 


Teal; , ■' c;c otfXOOfcTTJS 



, 

MI 


■ - ■ ■ ~ 

. ■ •• 



3:) £ 'f!fe*«£ 



To etruxoS 

sc.'. • X.'.'- cl;:. 

T.fo 

aoid'L..rs-L\ ; 


~—.—..——---- 

---- 

—• * -•—^***"*“" " rt "" "" "***■ 

■to..:, 

SO .SI 


efoodXeH 


SB. 6* 

IS 

oXoet.duS 


is.JRL 


xel . ' 1 © 


a: . X 


IbXoT 


- . I SOi - ' ' • ' 

. ■ ■ ■'■ r 1 
axwJtwx-v ,.fi <* sqiooc safe *> «.fc«l£»n» »ii ^ t*ni**> **« *Xmn 

. , , c si *» - n : n - - tftt * i 

0 • 3 5S ' '. ••'• " ' "' ' 

... " ' ■■.• >niro' s w ‘i 

s ■ . BOi > ■■•, it i n >i 1 y ; - ■ i' s ' 

noiiBsxlBT^^ exii ins mS Tied oi mt^qx/c s,-w 

f j '. .xroo i ■ ri& ■ ; ; 

/' i - ^ xs . ‘ ; ■' ' : i • . . ■ 

. .: n x i JS< . ; • 1 ■ ■'•■ ■ - ' ' '' 
















TABLE LXIV 


110 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE CONTROL GROUP 
SUBSCGRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Methods 

2 

3U.32 

17.26 


Subjects 

22 

76.32 



Remainder 

Ill* 

32.81 

1.20 

Ht.39 

Total 

68 

163.63 




The analysis of transfer test results in mathematics generally in¬ 
dicated the superiority of the group using the more meaningful method 
of study* The Generalisation group made higher scores in all areas ex¬ 
amined except relationships, where no significant differences were found* 
A partial explanation for this change in mathematics results from the 
non-significance noted in the previous chapter to the present clearly 
significant results, may be found in the activities of the groups during 
the interval between post and transfer .tests* In this period each group 
received further instruction in its particular method of study, but in a 
different subject-matter area, namely, science. It is possible that these 
additional training periods were in part responsible for the differences 
in performance on the transfer test. 

Science 

The means and standard deviations for the distribution of scores in 
science are given in Table LXV* Again it is possible to observe the 










) 


■ 


’ 1 


' ') 




>J • > ' 







Ill 

general superiority of the generalization group as far as the rank 
order of raw scores is concerned* 


TABLE LXV 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE 
TRANSFER TEST IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 


Subscores 








Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D, 

M 

S,D, 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

26 

9.85 

3,27 

3.35 

1.13 

3.0U 

1,80 

3.U6 

1.30 

Relation 

ship 

•21* 

12.38 

It.50 

lu63 

1.31 

3.17 

2.33 

It.58 

1.69 

General¬ 

ization 

28 

i5.oo 

3.87 

lt.82 

1.25 


2,10 

5.61+ 

1.31 

Control 

16 

1U.12 

3.35 

5.13 

1.15 

14.38 

1*75 

lt.63 

1.75 


Mean total scores for the four groups were compared using analysis 
of covariance with mental age and pre-test results held constant* As 
may be observed in Table LJCVI, the F-ratio on this occasion was signi¬ 
ficant beyond the *01 level, Mien the means were adjusted for differ¬ 
ences in mental age and pre-test performance, the following were 
obtained: Fact, 10,50; Relationship, 12,63; Generalization, lii,lU; 
Control, 111.21, Mean difference tests for pairs of adjusted means were 
undertaken and it was found that the Generalization, Relationship and 
Control groups means were all significantly superior to that of the 
Fact group. Other differences failed to reach the .05 level of signi¬ 
ficance, Within the experimental groups the results again suggest an 






















1 








advantage in favor of the more meaningful methods of study, 


112 


TABLE LXVI 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE TOTAL 
SCCRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 




IN SCIENCE, STAGE 

ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 
Sim of Squares 


Variance 

Estimate F 

Between Groups 

3 

2 li 5 .L 2 


81.81 

Within Groups 

88 

1121. 2 k 


12.7k 6.k2* 

Total 

91 

1366.66 



^‘Significant at the , 

,01 level 



A summary of 

mean difference tests 

is given in Table LXVII 



TABLE LXVII 



MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FCR THE TOTAL 

SCCRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 

IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 



Adjusted Mean 
Difference 

t 

Significance 

Generalisation 
and Fact 


3.6U 

3.60 

p < *01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 


1.51 

1.53 

.1 < P < .2 

Control and 
Generalization 


0*07 

0.06 

- 

Control and 
Relationship 


1.58 

1.36 

,1< p < .2 

Control and 

Fact 


3.71 

3.1k 

p <. .01 

Relationship 
and Fact 


2.13 

2.09 

.oi< p ,o5 


difference favors group named first* 

















", > 




) 























113 

Because regression coefficients were not homogeneous, mean sub¬ 
scores in the fact section of the test were examined using simple 

3 

analysis of variance. The F-ratio obtained with this method was 
significant beyond the *01 level as is indicated in Table LX.VIII. 

TABLE LXVIII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE FACT 
SUBSCORES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

43.46 

14.49 


Within Groups 

90 

133.36 

1.48 

9.78* 

Total 

93 

176.82 




^Significant at the ,01 level. 

When these means were compared by the use of t-tests, it was again found 
that the Generalization, Relationship and Control groups were superior 
in performance to the Fact group* Within the experimental groups the 
results again may be interpreted as showing an advantage in learning in 
favor of a meaningful method of study. The results of the mean 
difference tests are summarized in Table LXIX. 

^Analysis of covariance however, revealed the same pattern of 
results. 








ui 


H iiVBXZ ' 


tz . £a ' ii ^ t ■ * ' ' ; ^ : ^ 

bofi : ■ . ' d > . . ' : ol - ■ "•© « fr o si *%X* • 


# 




'i\; ;:'TPj louLPlA 

T'. *1V ; - ■ ■ '■ 1 V> -KX^Uo 


rrr. £■ :;i‘ : 


-- t..,“ ■" x-.~z.~z.r- 


■r. 

. *5 . 6 v : B:,±v)''i-;.'- ee'iBiJpu lo !UJJC, 




. 

■ x* 


. 


-vr :: .~r. r—, r. c\. -* 

' : o go'iroB 
X X X X 


3 rpicncte e■ vieP 
aqu^rrO ncd^iW 


3.3 > 3: 


. - ■ ' 

t 

. U X ■ i Olti,3’1 . I ‘ '' ' 

;• i ■ ■ i 

. g 1 : . ' . ■' ' ' 

, : ,,,J 3 f ,, 3 i .y-ys.in . ' ■■■■ ■ ■ X '• X’ - 


■ 

‘ t ' 

■ . aili/soi 


J 












TABLE LXIX 


114 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE FACT 
SUBSCCRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Difference 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact a 

1 .U 8 


p < .01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

0.20 

0.57 

•5^ p < .6 

Control and 
Generalization 

0.30 

0.80 

.4-=^ p< *5 

Control and 
Relationship 

0.50 

1*27 

.2 < .3 

Control and Fact 

1.78 

H.5 9 

p-c *01 

Relationship 
and Fact 

1.28 

3.7U 

p<. .01 


differences favor group named first 


The scores on the relationship subsection of the transfer test were 
subjected to analysis of covariance, with mental age held constant* The 
resulting F-ratio of 2*68 was almost at the .05 level of significance* 

Since ordinary analysis of variance had revealed differences in perform¬ 
ance, it was decided to proceed with mean difference tests with adjustments 
made for differences in mental age. The results of the covariance analysis 
are presented in Table LXX* The adjusted relationship means for the four 
groups were as followss Fact, 3*15 ; Relationship, 3*34$ Generalization, 
4 .I 85 and Control, 4*57* 



















TABLE LXX 


115 


ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCCRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

29.62 

9.87 


Within Groups 

89 

327.59 

3.68 

2.68* 

Total 

92 

357.21 



"^Significant at 

almost 

.05 level 




The Generalization group and the Control group were found to have 
significantly higher scores than the Fact group. In addition, the 


Control group showed performance significantly superior to that of the 
Relationship group. Among the experimental groups, the superiority of 
the generalization method of study has been maintained in this section 
of the test* The t-test results are summarized in Table LIU. 

TABLE LXXI 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCCRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 



Adjusted Mean 
Difference 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact 

1*03 

1.99 

,oi< p ^ *o5 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

0.81i 

1.59 

.1 p <. *2 

Control and 
Generalization 

0*39 

0.65 

.5 ^ p .6 

Control and 
Relationship 

1.23 

1.99 

.01 <p4 .05 

Control and Fact 

1.U2 

2.33 

.oi p < .05 

Relationship and 
Fact 

0.19 

0.35 

*7 < p ^ .8 


difference favors group named first 











































n6 


Analysis of covariance was used to investigate mean difference 
in generalization subscores. Mental age was the only variable held 
constant since the regression of transfer on pre-test was non-linear. 

Table LXXII contains the results of this analysis. Since significant 
differences were evident, individual means were adjusted for differences 
in mental age and t-tests employed to determine exact areas of difference. 

TABLE LXXII 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE GENERALIZATION 
SUBSCORES QM THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

1*8.70 

16.23 


Within Groups 

89 

188.37 

2.12 

7 . 67 * 

Total 

92 

237*07 



'“'Significant at 

the .01 

level 




The adjusted means for the generalization section of the test were: Fact, 
3.52 5 Relationship, I 4.67 * 3 Generalization, 5.U5; and Control, U.73. On 
examining pairs of means it was found that the Generalization group had 
obtained significantly higher scores than the Fact and Relationship 
groups. In addition, both the Relationship and the Control groups were 
superior to the Fact group. These results suggest that the learning of 
generalizations in science is facilitated by a meaningful method of 
study* The results of the t-tests are given in Table LXXIII. 













* 





' 8 




) 









J.L 


) 








TABLE LXXIII 


117 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR. THE GENERALIZATION 
SUBSCQRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 

cl 

and Fact 

1*93 

It. 90 

p*c .01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

0.78 

1.9? 

*01<^p *05 

Generalization 
and Control 

0.72 

1.58 

.1-^ p .2 

Relationship 
and Fact 

1.15 

2.81 

p .01 

Control and 
Relationship 

0.06 

0*13 

P < .9 

Control and Fact 

1.21 

2.62 

*01^p -c. *o£ 


difference favors group named first 


Analysis of variance revealed no significant differences in perf¬ 
ormance on the subsections of the test within either the Fact or the 
Control group* Since variance was heterogeneous, t-tests were used to 
investigate subsection scores within the Generalization and Relationship 
groups* Significant differences were found in both instances* The re¬ 
sults of the analysis of the Generalization group are summarized in 
Table LXXIV* 

The scores of the generalization section were higher than those of 
fact and relationship. This same relative position was noted on the pre¬ 
test, and on testing, the differences between the gains of the groups 
from pre-test to transfer test were found to be non-significant. This 
would appear to indicate that the effects of training had been transferred 















) ; ) 



•= v-:. 





: ' -V : 






: )C 


























118 

in a uniform manner and that training had not produced differential 
performance on the transfer test. 


TABLE LXXIV 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE GENERALIZATION 
GROUP SUBSCCRES CN THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

1.107 

3.1*38 

p .01 

Generalization 
and Fact 

0.822 

3.571* 

p < .01 

Fact and 
Relationship 

0.285 

0.792 

•h<v .5 

difference favors 

section named first 



The results of the examination of the scores 

made by the Relation- 

ships group are contained in Table LXXF. 




TABLE LXXV 



MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE RELATIONSHIP 

GROUP SUBSCCRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 

IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Fact and a Relat- 
ionships 

1.1*58 

3.880 

p < .01 

Fact and 
Generalization 

0.01*2 

0.131 

.8 ^ p < .9 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

1.1*16 

3.320 

p*c .01 


difference favors section named first 













t ■ ■ ' ■ " 

-■ 




•• - •■■•V 





? - . ' '.V > 


. > 



>0 














119 


This group obtained significantly higher scores in both a fact and 
generalizations than in relationships, while the difference between 
the fact and generalization score was not significant* On the pre¬ 
test, the generalization score was higher than both fact and relation¬ 
ship, and no significant difference had been found between fact and 
relationship scores* Analyses of gains from pre-test to transfer test 
were undertaken to investigate the extent to which training had pro¬ 
duced a change in performance on the transfer test* These results in¬ 
dicated that significant gains had been made in facts, producing the 
differences noted in Table LXXV* The training periods in this group, 
although emphasizing relationships, had not caused the group to over¬ 
look the facts in the selection, but, indeed, had evidently produced 
an increase in performance in this area of the test* Results of this 
analysis are summarized in Table LXXVI* 

TABLE LXXV I 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR GAINS FADE BY TEE 
RELATIONSHIP GROUP FROM THE PRE-TEST TO THE 
TRANSFER TEST IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Differences 

t 

Significance 

Fact and 
Relationship 3, 

1.U6 

2.875 

p < *01 

Fact and 
Generalization 

1.50 

3.020 

p < *01 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

o.o5 

0.088 

P > .90 


difference favors section named first 









120 

In general, the findings of the analysis of the transfer test in 
science tend to substantiate those of mathematics. The effects of 
more meaningful methods of study appear to be transferred to new sit¬ 
uations to a greater extent than the less meaningful, resulting in 
higher scores on the transfer test for the groups using these methods. 

Inasmuch as no significant differences were found in science with 
the analysis of gains, it appears that subsequent training periods 
have had some influence on the performance of this group. In the in¬ 
terval between the post-test and the transfer test this group received 
training in the same method of study, but in social studies rather than 
science. 

On the basis of transfer test results, the Control class in this 
group appears to be an exceptional case. Unlike the results found in 
other analyses. Control group scores in this instance were consistently 
higher than all except the Generalization group. Since the Control 
group received no special training in methods of study, these high 
scores could possibly be the outcome of previous experience with the 
test material during regular classroom instruction. An alternate and 
possibly more valid reason for the superior performance of the Control 
group lies in the fact that throughout the experiment they received 
normal classroom instruction. This experience would certainly be 
broader than that of the other classes and likely contained elements of 
the training received by the three experimental classes. In addition 
they were not under pressure to use a particular method during the test. 
These factors could combine to produce higher test results. 

If only the experimental groups are considered, the transfer test 




' : 


i 


f ' "'W 


i •. •, ) 




it 


( 


' 0 3 







121 


in science indicates that the methods of study may be ranked in the 
order in which the effects of training are transferred* The general¬ 
ization method appeared consistently superior, followed by the study 
of relationships, followed in turn by the study of facts. 

Social Studies 

Means and standard deviations for the distributions of scores made 
on the transfer test in social studies are presented in Table LXXVII. 
Observation of the scores would again lead one to suspect the superior¬ 
ity of the Control group. 


TABLE LXXVII 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR 
THE TRANSFER TEST IN SOCIAL 
STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 





Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

29 

10.66 

3.30 

3.1*5 

1.61* 

3.62 

1.1*0 

3.59 

1.71* 

Relation¬ 

ship 

22 

12.50 

U.75 

U.18 

1.76 

U.09 

1.95 

U.23 

2.02 

General¬ 

ization 

19 

D*.58 

3.29 

1*.8U 

1.30 

5.10 

1.33 

U.63 

1.67 

Control 

23 

I2w78 

3.79 

5.21 

1.35 

U.52 

1.85 

5.ol* 

1.1*3 


Mean total scores on the test were investigated by analysis of 









































122 

covariance, with pre-test scores constant* The F-ratio obtained in 
this way was significant at the *01 level, indicating differences in 
performance beyond the bounds of chance* The summary of the analysis 
appears in Table LXXVIII. On making adjustments for initial diff¬ 
erences in performance, the following means were obtained: Fact, 
11*66; Relationship, 12*25; Generalization, 15*12; and Control, 13.28* 

TABLE LXXVIII 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF TEE TOTAL 
SCORES CM THE TRANSFER TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Adjusted 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

1U9.83 

h9.9h 


Within Groups 

88 

777.29 

8.83 

5* 65* 

Total 

91 

927.12 




^Significant at the *01 level 

Mean difference tests reported in Table LXXIX revealed that the General¬ 
ization group surpassed both the Fact and the Relationship groups in 
total test performance* The difference favoring the Generalization group 
over the Control group almost reached the *05 level of significance* 

These results are in keeping with those of the transfer tests reported 
earlier, in which the superiority of the Generalization group was noted. 















- ,i : . ;: . 














TABLE LXXIX 


123 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE TOTAL 
SCORES ON THE TRANSFER TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 



Adjusted Mean 
Difference 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact a 

3.U6 

3.95 

p < .01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

2,87 

3.07 

p < *01 

Generalization 
and Control 

1 . 8 U 

1.92 

*o5< p ^ .1 

Control and 
Relationship 

1*03 

1.15 

.2 p< .3 

Control and Fact 

1.62 

1.83 

.05 < p < .1 

Relationship 
and Fact 

0.59 

0.69 

.h ^ p < .5 


^Differences favor group named first 


Since pre-test scores and mental ages did not differ, simple 
analysis of variance was employed to examine scores on the fact section 
of the test* An F-ratio significant beyond the .01 level indicated 
differential performance in this area* The results of the analysis are 
contained in Table LXXX. 

TABLE LXXX 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE FACT 
SUBSCQRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGS 01® 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

46.11 

15.37 


Within Groups 

89 

210.88 

2.37 

6 . 49 * 

Total 

92 

256.99 




“''Significant at the *01 level 























© f 


i - 


3 ■) 


: x 


y 


d ..•••• . 























124 

Using the t-test to compare pairs of means, it was found that the 
Generalization group made a significantly higher score than the Fact 
group and that the Control group was significantly better than both the 
Relationship and Fact groups on this section of the test* The t-tests 
are summarized in Table LXXXI. Again it may be noted that the group 
trained to studying material to determine the important generalizations 
within it showed greater evidence of transfer to new situations than did 
groups following less meaningful methods* The advantage in social 
studies was less clear-cut than it was in mathematics or science, however. 


TABLE Iffll 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE FACT 
SUBSCCRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact 

1*39 

3.02 

p < .01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

0*66 

1.38 

*1 < p < .2 

Control and Fact 

1.77 

lull 

p < .01 

Control and 
Relationship 

l.olt 

2.2li 

.01 p <c .0? 

Control and 
Generalization 

0.38 

0*79 

*4 < P < .6 

Relationship 
and Fact 

0.73 

1.71 

*o 5-£ p^ .1 


difference favors group named first 


Performance on the relationship section of the transfer test was 
investigated by means of analysis of variance. The F-ratio, significant 



















125 


at the .05 level, revealed that the groups differed significantly. 
Table LXXXII contains the results of this analysis. When pairs of 
means were compared, the Generalization group once more was found to 
be significantly higher than the Fact group. No other differences 
reached the .05 level, although the superiority of the Generalization 
group over the Relationship group and the Control group over the Fact 
group was very nearly significant as may be noted in Table LXXXIII. 

TABLE LXXXII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCCBES ON THE TRANSFER TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

27.63 

9.21 


Within Groups 

89 

2lt2.l8 

2.72 

3.38* 

Total 

92 

269.81 




"^Significant at the .05 level 


This analysis gives further confirmation to the view that a more 
meaningful method of study results in a higher degree of transfer than 
a method that is less meaningful. 

Analysis of covariance, controlling pre-test scores, failed to 
reveal significant differences in generalization subscores. The effects 
of training in a particular method of study did not transfer to the 
generalization section of this test. This finding is in contrast to 
that of both the Mathematics and Science transfer tests, where the more 



















:? • < 








r; b 




•/■V >0 

■ r , :> ) ’ 


' 


ir j. 


r.r )7. 




/ 3 





meaningful methods evidenced greater transfer, 


126 


TABLE mXIII 


KEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCGRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES* STAGE 01© 



Mean 

Difference 

t 

sr-i-T , ivssa 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact a 

1.1*8 

2.99 

P < .01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

1.01 

1*97 

.o5<^ p < .1 

Control and 
Generalization 

0,58 

1*13 

*2 <. p <. *3 

Control and 
Relationship 

0.1*3 

0.87 

*3 < p< 

Control and Fact 

0.90 

1.95 

.o5< p < .1 

Relationship 
and Fact 

0.1*7 

1.02 

*3 < p < *k 


difference favors group named first 


Investigation of the subtest performance of the members of each of 
the groups by means of analysis of variance or analysis of covariance 
did not disclose any significant differences* These results are com¬ 
parable to those found in the science transfer test* and in the 
Relationship and Generalization groups in mathematics. 


Summary 

This chapter has presented the analysis of the performance of the 
three subject-matter groups on transfer tests similar in structure to 
the pre-test and post-test given to each group and equated with the 
subject-matter tests in degree of difficulty* The transfer test was 


















127 

administered twenty-one days after the post-test, during which time no 
training was received in the original subject-matter. In the interval 
between the post-test and the transfer test, each class was tested and 
received instruction from the experimenter in its original method of 
study, but in a different subject-matter area. Performance on the 
present transfer tests, without doubt, reflect this additional training. 

In the science and social studies tests the Control group may have 
been more familiar with the materials on which the tests were based than 
were the experimental groups. Their consistently high scores on all 
sections of the test more likely were the results of their regular class¬ 
room instruction which would likely include practice in the study of 
material for facts, relationships and generalizations. These experiences 
would tend to produce higher test performance than the emphasis on a re¬ 
stricted method of study that was used with the experimental group. 

The analysis of the total scores on the three transfer tests re¬ 
vealed that the Generalization group made significantly higher scores 
than the other experimental groups in mathematics, science and social 
studies. In both mathematics and science the Relationship group was 
superior to the Fact group. 

On the fact section of the test, the Generalization group was 
superior to the Fact group in the three subject-matter areas. In 
mathematics, the Generalization group also surpassed the Relationship 
group. In addition, in one instance, science, the Relationship group 
was superior to the Fact group. 

Analysis of the relationship section of the test disclosed that 
the Generalization group again surpassed the Fact group in science and 


1 ' . >• 




128 

social studies. In mathematics no differences were found in this area 
of the test. 

The Generalization and the Relationship groups made significantly 
higher scores than the Fact group in the generalization section of the 
science transfer test. On this test also, the Generalization group was 
superior to the Relationship group. In both mathematics and social 
studies no differences were noted in this area. 

Differential subtest performance within a particular class was 
found in mathematics and science. In mathematics, the Control group 
made higher scores in relationships than in facts or generalizations. 

On this test also the Fact group made higher scores in relationships 
and generalizations than in the fact section* 

In the Relationship group, in science, superior performance 
appeared in the fact section over the generalization and relationship 
sections. While the Generalization group made higher scores in 
generalizations than in facts or relationships, it seemed that this 
difference could be attributed to pre-test performance which was not 
controlled in the analysis. 

On the whole, there does not appear to be a trend in the within- 
group performance on the transfer tests. 

From the results of the analysis described in this chapter it 
appears that training in a method of study involving the reading of a 
selection to determine the important generalizations within it leads 
to greater transfer than does the study of material for facts or 
relationships. Evidence seems to indicate that this conclusion may 
be generalized to cover the three subject-matter areas investigated. 







In other words, it appears that for the students taking part in this 
experiment the effects of training are transferred to a higher degree 
if the method of study employed emphasizes meaning in learning* 








CHAPTER IX 


RETENTION IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE 
AND SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 

To determine the effects of a passage of time on the retention of 
materials learned after training in one of the experimental methods of 
this investigation, the multiple-choice test, given as part of the 
post-test in each subject matter area, was administered again after a 
twenty-one-day interval. Scores made on the retention test were sub¬ 
tracted from post-test scores to obtain a distribution of losses. It 
should be noted that in this distribution, low scores indicate superior 
retention. 

Analyses of variance and covariance were used throughout the 
examination of the retention scores. Underlying assumptions were tested 
in each instance, before using either technique. As in other chapters, 
results are again presented separately for each subject matter group and 
in the order: mathematics, science and social studies. 

Mathematics 

Means and standard deviations for the retention scores are 


presented in Table LXXXIV. 








TABLE LXXXIV 


131 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR 
RETENTION SCORES IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 



Subscores 







Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M. 

S.D. 

M. 

S.D. 

| M. 

S.D. 

M. 

S.D. 

Fact 

22 

0.73 

2.93 

0.50 

1.62 

0.05 

2.08 

0.18 

1*35 

Relation¬ 

ship 

23 

1.26 

3.05 

1.48 

1.08 

-0.13 

1.66 

0.09 

1.28 

General¬ 

ization 

27 

0.59 

3.55 

0.37 

1.27 

0.26 

1.93 

-0.04 

1.93 

Control 

23 

0.52 

2.79 

-0.22 

1.98 

j 0.09 

1.65 

0.65 

1.64 


Analysis of variance of the total scores revealed no significant 
differences. It would appear that, in mathematics, the training periods 
were insufficient to produce variations in retention. 

The variance of the distribution of fact scores was found to be 
heterogeneous; consequently mean differences were examined using the 
Cochran and Cox technique. The results of this analysis are presented 
in Table LXXXV. 


TABLE LXXXV 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE FACT SUBSCORES 
IN RETENTION IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 



t f 05 

t ‘01 

t 

Relationship 
and Fact a 

2.078 

2.827 

2.312 

Fact and 
Generalization 

2.810 

2.065 

0.302 

Fact and Control 

2.076 

2.826 

1.300 

Relationship 
and Generalization 

2.069 

2.793 

3.259 

Relationship 
and Control 

2.074 

2.818 

3.530 

Generalization 
and Control 

2.809 

2.071 

1.198 

difference favors 

group named 

first. 




































On this section of the test the Generalization, Fact and Control 
groups showed superior retention when compared with the Relationship 
group. No other significant differences were found. In mathematics, 
a method of study emphasizing relationships and excluding a direct 
consideration of facts appears to adversely influence the recall of 
facts at a later date. 

Analysis of the relationship and generalization subscores did not 
disclose any significant mean differences. In addition, subjective 
examination of the distribution of means failed to reveal a trend in 
either area. Four periods of training in mathematics did not bring 
about differential performance on the retention test. 

On the examination of sub-test performance within each subject 
matter group, significant differences were found only in the case of 
the Relationship group. The comparison of mean scores, summarized in 
Table LXXXVI, revealed that the members of this group remembered sig- 


TABLE Um 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE RELATIONSHIP GROUP 
SUBSCORES IN RETENTION IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Difference 

D05 3, 

B01 

Fact and ^ 

Relationship 

1.61 

0.669 

0.893 

Fact and 
Generalization 

1.39 

0.669 

0.893 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

0.22 

0.669 

0.893 


^Difference must exceed Table Value to be significant at the .05 level. 
^Difference favors section named first. 

nifieantly fewer facts than they did relationships and generalizations. 
In mathematics, on the basis of these results, studying material to 














" <yr *+7.:: •? rtf rdf > i 

■ 

„ .- • •. ' • • ' • ■ - 5 •' ■ 

. .c ■ v- ./ ; - - • , - ■ . 5 

' ■ o 










- 

; 


* 

■ ■ 






















, 

■ : . . 












. 


. 




. 


■ 


v . •. 

. v •; - V.? ■>: $.:■&'* . v->’ ; 

. •: Or-v: • - ’ V ".'n. v-f orit 'to : ^ 








133 


determine the important relationships apparently does not produce 
improvement in the less meaningful outcomes, namely, the retention of 
facts. 

In viewing the analysis of the retention test as a whole, it 
appears that the training periods produced little effect on the 
retention of facts, relationships and generalizations. Apart from 
the single instance of poorer recall of facts by the Relationship 
group, no significant differences were found. 

Science 


Means and standard deviations for retention scores in science are 
summarized in Table LXXXVII. 

TABLE LffiVII 

MEAL'S AMD STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR 
RETENTION SCORES IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 



Subscores 







Fact 

Relation Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M. 

S.D. 

M. 

S.D. 

Fact 

26 

2.39 

3.88 

1.12 

1.86 

1.92 

1.77 

0.08 

1.76 

Relation¬ 

ship 

24 

1.67 

2.66 

0.54 

1.69 

0.5^ 

1.38 

0.58 

1.44 

General¬ 

ization 

28 

1.36 

3.13 

0.6l 

1.50 

0.86 

1.80 

-0.11 

1.71 

Control 

16 

2.06 

3.73 

-0.2 5 

2.08 

1.50 

1.97 

0.81 

1.68 


Since regression was found to be non-linear, mean total scores 
were analyzed using simple analysis of variance. As in the case of 
mathematics, no significant differences were found. Training for four 
periods in different methods of study did not produce differential 
retention in science as measured by total scores. 
































. •:[ : ; 









;* 9 ■it') 











i 








• - 








134 

The examination of the means of the four classes in each of the 
subsections of the test, fact, relationship and generalization, also 
failed to disclose instances of significant differences. No method of 
study employed in the experiment produced an advantage in retention in 
any of the learning outcomes tested. 

Analysis of variance of Fact group scores on the three sections of 
the distribution resulted in a significant F-ratio. On the examination 
of the pairs of means, it was found that the members of this class re¬ 
tained significantly more generalizations than they did facts and re¬ 
lationships. Mean difference test results are summarized in Table 
LXXXVIII. 


TABLE LXXXVIII 

MEM DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE FACT GROUP 
SUBSCORES IN RETENTION IN SCIENCE, STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

%L 

Fact and 
Relationship 

0.770 

0.860 

1.1^7 

Fact and 
Generalization 

1.038 

0.860 

1.14? 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

1.115 

0.860 

1.14? 


difference must exceed Table Value to be significant at 
the .05 level. 

difference favors section named first. 


Since this group received training in a method stressing the facts 
in a selection and not considering either relationships or generalizations, 
it would seem that the successful recall of the latter was due to ex¬ 
perience outside the experimental situation. 

The Control group also showed evidence of variable performance on 












the retention test. The F-ratio obtained through analysis of variance 
was significant beyond the .05 level. Mean difference tests, summarized 
in Table LXXXIX, revealed that the Control group retained significantly 


TABLE LXXXIX 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE CONTROL GROUP 
SUBSCORES IN RETENTION IN SCIENCE,STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

E 01 

Relationship and 
Generalization* 3 

0.687 

1.29? 

1.746 

Relationship 
and Fact 

1.750 

1.297 

1.746 

Generalization 
and Fact 

1.063 

1.297 

1.746 


difference must exceed Table Value to be significant at the 


favor section named first, 
more facts than it did relationships. No other differences were signifi¬ 
cant. As this group received no special training, the differences in 
performance may be attributed to experiences in learning in the regular 
classroom. 

Analysis of the subsection scores of the Relationship and the 
Generalization group did not disclose any significant difference in 
performance. Training in reading material for generalizations or re¬ 
lationships did not produce variation in retention of the learning out¬ 
comes examined in this experiment. 

On the whole the results of the analysis of retention scores in 
science are similar to those in mathematics. Except for within group 
variation on the part of the Control and Fact groups, the training ex¬ 
perienced by the classes in three different methods of study failed to 
produce differences in retention over a twenty-one day interval. 


,.05 level, 
differences 














" - ■ ' ‘ 

. 








* 














■ 








. 





. 



. . c- 









* 
















, 




* 


- 










Social Studies 


136 


Means and standard deviations for the distribution of retention 
scores in social studies are presented in Table XC. 

TABLE XC 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR RETENTION 
SCORES IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE ONE 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 





Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

29 

1.79 

2.78 

1.24 

1.97 

0.07 

1.65 

0.48 

1.50 

Relation¬ 

ship 

22 

0.73 

2.91 

0.91 

1.38 

- 0.23 

1.80 

0.05 

1.73 

General¬ 

ization 

19 

1.95 

3.41 

0.84 

1.42 

0.00 

1.20 

1.11 

1.45 

Control 

23 

0.6l 

3.36 

0.13 

2.01 

0.35 

1*77 

0.13 

1.46 


In examining the total scores of the distribution, regression was 
found to be non-linear, necessitating the use of simple analysis of 
variance. The F-ratio did not reach the .05 level of significance, in¬ 
dicating that there were no significant differences in mean total scores 
on this test. In social studies, as in mathematics and science, the 
training periods in methods of study failed to produce variation in per¬ 
formance on the retention tests, as far as could be determined from the 
total scores. 

Analysis of the fact, relationship and generalization subsections of 
the distribution did not reveal any significant differences between 
means. After four training periods, the methods of study employed in 
this investigation did not result in superior retention on the part of 


any of the groups 























• .. 



(- 

: , - . 


• 













- 

■ i 

i 




* 

' 



■ y-' h 


T 

: :o 

■ _■ i • •. 



■ . ■* . 

' 



* ■ • 


■ ■ : ■ f 


- ' 

■ 

• 




IJ 












No significant differences were found between mean scores on the 


137 


subsections of the distribution for either the Control group or the 
Relationship group. The training received by the Relationship group 
evidently was not sufficient to produce differential performance on the 
retention test. The homogeneity of mean scores within the Control group 
suggests that the pupils did not have ary experiences in the course of 
their regular classroom activities that would promote retention of 
social studies in one of the areas, fact, relationship or generalization, 
rather than another. 

When the retention scores of the Fact group were subjected to 
analysis of variance, a significant F-ratio was obtained. Mean differ¬ 
ence tests, summarized in Table XCI, disclosed that the members of this 


TABLE XCI 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE FACT GROUP 
SUBSCORES IN RETENTION IN SOCIAL STUDIES,STAGE ONE 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

D 01 

Fact and 
Relationship b 

1.171 

0.922 

1.230 

Fact and 
Generalization 

0.757 

0.922 

1.230 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

0.414 

0.922 

1.230 


difference must exceed Table Value for significance at the 


.05 level. 

differences favor section named first. 


group retained significantly more relationships than facts. As the 
training for this group stressed the identification of important facts 
in a selection, and no consideration was given to either generalizations 
or relationships, it seems unlikely that the differences in results can 






















■ 












■ 














. 

. 






• • *.-.3 ‘ ' • 






' 




. 


, 


, 






. 


. 


. 

' 














be attributed to the training periods. It may be, however, that even 
with training, the facts of a selection, learned without consideration 
for their meaning are not well retained. 

Analysis of the scores made by the Generalization group on the 
subsections of the test revealed significant differences in performance. 
Table XCII contains the results of the mean difference tests, 

TABLE XCII 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FCR THE GENERALIZATION GROUP 
SUBSCORES IN RETENTION IN SOCIAL STUDIES, ST AGE ONE 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

D 01 

Fact and 
Relationship 

0.842 

0.812 

1.008 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

1.105 

0.812 

1.008 

Generalization 
and Fact 

0.263 

0.812 

1.008 


difference must exceed Table Value to be significant at the 
*05 level. 

difference favors section named first. 

The members of the Generalization group displayed significantly 
greater retention of relationships than they did of generalizations and 
facts. The four practice periods apparently were insufficient to produce 
uniform retention of the material in the reading selection in social 
studies. 

On the whole, the analysis of the distribution of retention scores 
in social studies reflected the pattern observed in mathematics and 
science. With the exception of the variation in the subsections of the 
Fact and Generalization groups, no significant differences were found. 

The training periods in social studies failed to produce superiority in 











:>i' ' 


v 



_ 

; .. • f. . : •. ■ • : J,'-. < : M 

, 

'• , :■ L. '■> . ) } *■ * , : ■ 

... 

■ : 3 ' 


« 






■ 







• 

t 






• 





* 

• 



. 








* 

'.o; 


e 









retention on the part of any of the methods of study employed in the 
experiment. 


139 


Summary 

Analysis of the total retention scores for the three subject matter 
groups did not reveal any significant differences among the groups 
trained in different methods of study. ¥ith one exception, the same re¬ 
sults were found when the three subsections of the distributions, fact, 
relationship and generalization, were examined. The exception occurred 
in the fact section of the mathematics test where the Fact, Generalization 
and Control groups showed significantly greater retention than did the 
Relationship group. 

There was some variation of performance within certain classes in 
all subject matter groups. In mathematics, the Relationship group re¬ 
membered fewer facts than it did relationships and generalizations. The 
Fact group, in science, retained more generalizations than relationships 
and facts. In addition, in science, the Control group recalled signifi¬ 
cantly more facts than it did relationships. The Fact and Generalization 
groups in social studies exhibited differential retention, the former 
being better in relationships than facts, and the latter, better in re¬ 
lationships than in both facts and generalizations. 

Generally, the results of the analysis of retention scores were 
negative. No method of study employed in the four training periods 
appeared to favor the retention of material more than another. 


■; ' 




jV 


. 




-r % 


5 







j. 5 /: 










CHAPTER X 


A SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS OF STAGE ONE 
IN LEARNING, TRANSFER AND RETENTION 

Stage one of the experiment included the test and training periods 
involving the first subject matter area assigned to each class. A pre¬ 
test was first administered to all classes to determine their famili¬ 
arity with the methods employed in the study. This was followed by 
four thirty-five minute periods in which the three experimental classes 
in each subject matter group received training in the study of material 
for facts, relationships and generalizations. A post-test was then 
administered to find the extent to which performance had been influ¬ 
enced by the training periods. Twenty-one days later, the post-test 
was re-administered as a delayed retention test. In this period also, 
the transfer test was given to measure the degree to which the effects 
of training were applied to a new situation after the lapse of a period 
of time. 

In the course of the treatment of the data from stage one, analyses 
were made of the distribution of gains from pre-test to post-test, the 
performance on the transfer test, and the distribution of losses from 
post-test to retention test. The results of these analyses are pre¬ 
sented, in summary form, in this chapter. 

Gains From Pre-test to Post-test 


Mathematics 


Analysis of the distribution of gains from pre-test to post-test 







141 


revealed no significant differences among the groups. Within the Fact 
group, gains made in the fact and generalization sections were signifi¬ 
cantly greater than those made in relationships. In the Generalization 
group, gains in fact were greater than gains in relationships and 
generalizations. 

Science 

In science, the analyses also disclosed non-significant differences 
in mean gains among the groups. In addition, the investigation of the 
performance within each of the groups failed to reveal significant 
differences. Inspection of the distribution of gains, however, showed 
a trend that appeared to favor the more meaningful methods of study. 
Social Studies 

The Generalization group ma.de significantly greater gains in mean 
total score in social studies than did the Fact or Control groups. The 
Relationship group also showed significantly greater gains than the 
Control group. The superiority of the Generalization group over the 
Relationship group, and the Relationship over the Fact group approached, 
but did not reach the .05 level of significance. 

On the fact section of the distribution, all experimental, groups 
were superior to the Control group beyond the .01 level of significance. 
The analysis of gains in relationship revealed significantly better 
performance on the part of the Generalization group over the Control and 
Fact groups. The Relationship group was also significantly higher than 
the Control group. No significant differences were found on the 
analysis of the generalization section of the distribution. 




■ . • ' 

■ 

. 

' 

- 



< 


* 


■ 






< 

' *' :• - - : 

* 

' ■■ ■ ; S.l 

..; . : 



T 


: ' . -■ 


■ • . i ■ . :• 

■ - 

, 

• ■ 

. 

.T’' ; 


. 




. ■ 




■ 







* 










142 

The only variation noted within any of the groups occurred with 
the Control group where gains in relationships and generalizations 
exceeded those made in facts. 

Summary 

In the area of social, studies, the results of the analyses of 
gains indicate that training in a more meaningful method, that of 
generalizations, produces greater gains than does training in the less 
meaningful method, the study of facts. This tentative conclusion cannot 
be generalized since results from the other two subject matter areas 
were negative. The pattern of non-significance resulting from the 
analysis of performance within each group in the three subject matter 
areas, suggests that gains were made uniformly in fact, relationship 
and generalization. 


Transfer 


Mathematics 

On total test performance in mathematics, the Generalization group 
was found to be significantly higher than the other three groups. The 
same result was obtained from the analyses of the fact and the generali¬ 
zation subsections of the transfer test. In addition, in the latter 
instance, the Fact group made a significantly higher score than the 
Control group. No significant differences were found in the analysis 
of the relationship subsection of the test. 

Within the Fact group, significantly higher scores were made in 
the area of generalizations and relationships than in facts. Superior 
performance on the part of the members of the Control group was noted 






r% s\ ' O; f* r ?'**Sp ; 


o f' ‘ ro ^jr^T “ 1 


r> y-s_ 


■ .. 




















i€ / 


‘i 







: i 




* 

« 

■ C ;: • . '. C|< ■« ...; ‘ 'iv Xlt^Out 







Jx> ; 






:T * 


■UK‘ :!■ 


. K 


> , .. 1 - 


j ' £ 




■ T '.}*/ 




< * jT0Q 







143 


in the area of relationships as compared x-rith both facts and generali¬ 
zations. No differences were found within the Relationship and 
Generalization groups. 

Science 

The Generalization, Relationship and Control groups obtained 
significantly higher total scores than the Fact group in science. The 
same results were obtained on the analysis of the fact section of the 
transfer test. In the area of relationships, the Generalization and 
Control groups showed performance significantly superior to that of the 
Fact group. The Control group in this case was also significantly 
higher than the Relationship group. A significantly greater score was 
made by the Generalization group than either the Fact or Relationship 
group on the generalization section of the transfer test. In addition, 
in this area, both the Relationship and Control groups were superior to 
the Fact group. 

Within the Relationship group, it was found that the effects of 
training had been most marked in the fact section of the test. Analyses 
of variance revealed that the members of the Generalization group had 
made higher scores in the area of generalizations than in relationships 
and facts. Since it was not possible to control pre-test scores in this 
area, gains from the pre-test to the transfer test were examined. These 
differences were found to be non-significant, indicating that the 
training periods had not produced differential performance on the 
transfer test. There were no significant differences within the 
Control group or the Fact group. 



.^4. - r 


r . •' ' ' r '*T? 






' • 








• !• 




■ 

' 

• >• ■ 






4 

' 

■ 

. 

'' '■ ' ’^1 

f ■ '■ 

' 












Social Studies 


144 


The Generalization group achieved a significantly higher mean 
total score in social studies than both the Fact and the Relationship 
groups. On the fact section of the test, the Generalization and the 
Control groups made significantly higher scores than the Fact group. 

The Control group, in this instance, also was superior to the Relation¬ 
ship group beyond the .05 level of significance. The difference 
between the Generalization group and the Fact group, favoring the 
former, was significant beyond the .01 level on the relationship 
section of the test. Wo significant differences were noted on the 
analysis of the generalization section of the test. 

The analysis of the performance on the subsections of the test by 
members within each group revealed no significant differences. 

Summary 

The results of the analyses of the scores made on the transfer 
tests seem to indicate that the study of materials for generalizations 
led to greater transfer than did the study of material for relation¬ 
ships and facts. Under the conditions of the present experiment, then, 
it appears that the effects of training in the more meaningful method 
of study are transferred to a greater extent than those of less 
meaningful methods. 

The analysis of the performance of each group on the subsections 
of the test revealed few significant differences. This indicates a 
uniformity in the transfer of the effects of training in a particular 
method to the areas of fact, relationship and generalization. 





*r» -■ • >- -- -*" •• - ' 

. 

, - 

1 , 

* 

' 

■ 

- 

. 

. 






Retention 


145 


Mathematics 

The analyses of mean total scores in mathematics revealed no sig¬ 
nificant differences. On the fact section of the test, the Generali¬ 
zation, Fact and Control groups were found to be significantly superior 
to the Relationship group. The examination of the relationship and 
generalization sections of the distribution failed to produce signifi¬ 
cant differences. The only group showing variation in performance on 
the subsections of the test was the Relationship group. The members of 
this group retained significantly more generalizations and relation¬ 
ships than they did facts. 

Science 

Analyses of total scores as well as those obtained on the fact, 
relationship and generalization subsections of the test failed to reveal 
significant differences in retention. Within the Fact group, signifi¬ 
cantly greater retention was noted for generalizations and relationships 
than for facts. The Control group, on the other hand, showed superior 
retention of facts when compared with relationships. Differences within 
the Relationship and Generalization groups did not reach the .05 level 
of significance. 

Social Studies 

In social studies, as in science, analyses of total scores and 
scores of the fact, relationship and generalization sections of the test 
revealed no significant differences in performance. Within the Fact 
group, significantly more relationships than facts were retained. The 





































■ 
















' . v' 


* 


. 

■ 



■ 







r; t ■ . ' . :J, r?ir, ' " £ t:;j..ce 


’ 




146 


members of the Generalization group showed greater retention of 
relationships than either generalizations or facts. No significant 
differences were obtained when the subscores of the Relationship group 
and Control group were examined. 

Summary 

In general, analyses of the distributions of retention scores 
failed to establish the superiority of any of the methods of study in¬ 
volved in this experiment. 

Although there was some variation within the classes, no pattern 
was found that would permit the evaluation of the effects of training 
on the retention of facts, relationships and generalizations by the 
members of a class. 

Tentative Conclusions 

On the basis of the analyses of the results of stage one, certain 
conclusions are presented, tentative in nature, pending the results of 
stage two of the experiment. 

1. In the area of social studies, training in the more meaningful method 
of generalizations, tended to produce greater gains in learning than did 
the less meaningful methods of relationships and facts. Results from 
the analysis of mathematics and science were inconclusive. 

2. Within each of the classes involved in this experiment, gains appeared 
to be made uniformly in the areas of facts, relationships and generali¬ 
zations, since in only two instances were significant differences 
obtained. 

3. The analysis of the transfer test revealed that, in general, the 





t .. ■ 


. ' • ■ • 


■ • ■ • . : V'* r - 

. 


. 

* 

■ 

* 


' 




. 

- 















■ u j •. • 

- ; .. 

i ■ \ 


r 


■ 


- 




147 


effects of training in the more meaningful method of study, that is, 
the study of material for generalizations, appeared to be transferred 
to a greater extent than did the effects of training in less meaning¬ 
ful methods, those of facts and relationships. 

4. The effects of training appeared to be transferred uniformly in 
the areas of fact, relationship and generalization within each of the 
classes. In all but three instances no significant differences were 
found. 

5* Investigation of retention failed to reveal the superiority of any 
of the methods of study employed in this investigation, 

6. The results of the analyses of the performance of members within 
each of the classes were inconclusive. The effects of training upon 
retention, therefore, could not be determined in stage one of the 
experiment. 







CHAPTER XI 


ANALYSIS OF MENTAL AGE AND PRE-TEST RESULTS IN 
MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 

During the period following the post-test in the first subject 
matter area, the second stage of the experiment was started. Each 
class repeated the procedures used in the first part of the experiment, 
receiving training in the same method of study, but working in a 
different subject matter field. 

Because training received in the first stage of the experiment 
would influence performance on the tests in the second, only those stud¬ 
ents who had completed all training periods and tests were included as 
subjects for the final analyses. This restriction, although necessary, 
greatly reduced the number of cases in a class in some instances. As a 
result of this, a re-examination of the distributions of mental age was 
undertaken to determine the extent to which this variable would have to 
be controlled in subsequent statistical analyses. This investigation of 
mental ages constitutes the first section of the present chapter. 

The results of a pre-test administered in the second subject matter 
area were also examined. The analysis in this case served two purposes: 
first, the extent to which performance on this pre-test should be con¬ 
trolled in later investigations of learning, transfer and retention was 
determined; second, holding initial pre-test constant, the degree to 
which the effects of training in a particular method of study were 
transferred to a different subject matter area was found. This analysis 
constitutes the second section of the chapter. 














. 


. 






■ 

* 

. 

. 

. 




. 




. 

■ 

. 

■ 

-■ ■ ■ 

' 

. . 

- 











Mental Age 


149 


A summary of mean mental ages for the classes of each subject 
matter group is presented in Table XCIII. 

TABLE XCIII 

STANDARD DEVIATIONS AND MEAN MENTAL AGES IN MONTHS 
FOR EXPERIMENTAL AND CONTROL CLASSES, STAGE TWO 



n 

Mean 

Standard 

Deviation 


Social Studies - 
Mathematics Group: 





Fact Class 

21 

159-57 

22.46 


Relationship Class 

18 

171.44 

22.43 


Generalization Class 

12 

171.67 

13.67 


Control Class 

21 

160.43 

22.97 


Science - 

Social Studies Group: 





Fact Class 

21 

155.52 

18.26 


Relationship Class 

19 

156.58 

18.15 


Generalization Class 

19 

169.47 

13.98 


Control Class 

15 

153.20 

12.28 


Mathematics - 
Science Group: 





Fact Class 

20 

161.40 

13.50 


Relationship Class 

14 

160.64 

14.01 


Generalization Class 

21 

170.00 

17.10 


Control Class 

19 

157.05 

18.41 







































■ . c 










' 





• 

'.or 


- 

i ' 

■ 


















150 

The application of Hartley's test revealed that the variances of the 
distribution of mental ages were homogeneous. Analysis of variance in¬ 
dicated that there were differences in mental ages among the twelve 
classes. To determine the extent to which mental age would need to be 
controlled during the second stage of the study, the distributions for 
each subject matter group were treated separately, using analysis of 
variance in each instance. The results for the Social Studies - Mathe¬ 
matics group are presented in Table XCIV. 

TABLE XCIV 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE MENTAL AGES FOR THE 
SOCIAL STTJmES-MATHMATICS GROUP IN STAGE TWO 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

2,335.89 

778.63 


Within Groups 

68 

31,245.39 

459.49 

1.70 

Total 

71 

33,581.28 




The F-ratio failed to reach the .05 level of significance, con¬ 
sequently mental ages need not be controlled in later statistical treat¬ 
ments of the data for this group. 

The same conclusion was drawn from the analysis of mental ages for 
the Mathematics - Science group, summarized in Table XCV. 


TABLE XCV 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE MENIAL AGES FOR 
THE MATHEMATICS-SCIENCE GROUP IN STAGE TWO 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

1 , 817.05 

605.68 


Within Groups 

70 

17 , 962.96 

256.61 

2.36 


Total 


73 


19,780.01 
















><; 




















- 

■' 

- ■ ■ ' - 7 ' ' 




. 








■ 




- 




. 






- 

. 
















151 

The treatment of the data for the Science - Social Studies group, 
on the other hand, produced an F-ratio significant at the .05 level. 

This analysis is reported in Table XCVI, The classes in this group 


TABLE XCVI 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE OF THE MENTAL AGES FOR THE 
SCIENCE-SOCIAL STUDIES GROUP IN STAGE TWO 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Variance 

Estimate F 


Between Groups 

3 

2,953.33 

984.44 


Within Groups 

70 

18,235.01 

260.50 3.78* 


Total 

73 

21,188.34 




^Significant at the .05 level. 

differed in mental age and as a result, this variable must be held 
constant in later treatments of the data. Although mean differences 
were not tested, it would appear from Table XCIII that the Generaliz¬ 
ation class was significantly higher in mental age than the other 
classes. 

The examination of mental age distributions for the three subject 
matter groups indicated that this variable should be controlled in sub¬ 
sequent analyses of the Science - Social Studies group. No differences 
were found in either the Social Studies - Mathematics group or the 
Mathematics - Science group. 

Pre-Test Results, Stage Two 

The analysis of pre-test scores follows the same pattern as in 
previous chapters. Each subject matter group is considered separately 
and is reported in the order: mathematics, science and social studies. 

























• ]> T. . 

.. [f Vi 






■ 

* ■ 

. 




f ■ » ■ ■ 














... ‘ 

*■ 

. . , 





Mathematics 


152 


The means and standard deviations for the four classes of the 
Social Studies - Mathematics group in the mathematics pre-test are 
summarized in Table XCVII. 


TABLE XCVH 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE 
PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 





Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

21 

8.95 

3.34 

4.05 

1.39 

2.29 

1.31 

2.62 

1.66 

Relation¬ 

ship 

18 

9.17 

3.69 

4.50 

1.66 

2.83 

1.34 

1.83 

1.58 

General¬ 

ization 

12 

13.00 

4,00 

6,08 

1.38 

4.16 

2.29 

2.75 

1.60 

Control 

21 

10,90 

2.57 

4.48 

1.57 

3.52 

1.48 

2.90 

1.36 


Analysis of covariance of the total scores, with initial pre-test 
results held constant, revealed that there were differences among the 
classes in performance on the second pre-test. The results of this 
analysis are contained in Table XCVIII. 

TABLE XCVIII 

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF THE TOTAL SCORES 
ON THE PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 


Source of 
Variation 

df 

Sum of Squares 

Estimate of 
Variance 

F 

Between Groups 

3 

161.83 

53.94 


Within Groups 

67 

641.29 

9.57 

5.64* 

Total 

70 

803.12 




♦Significant beyond the ,01 level. 










































153 

After adjusting for differences in initial ability in the methods 
employed in this study, the means for the classes were as follows: 

Fact, 9.59; Relationship, 8.94; Generalization, 13.46; and Control, 
10.20. Mean differences were investigated by means of t-tests, the 
results of which are found in Table XCIX. The Generalization group was 


TABLE XCIX 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR TOTAL.. SCORES ON 
THE PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGS TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

t 

Significance 

Generalization and Fact a 

3.87 

3.46 

p < .01 

Generalization and Relationship 

4.52 

3.86 

p < .01 

Generalization and Control 

3.26 

2.80 

P < .01 

Control and Fact 

0.6l 

0.59 

.5 < p < .6 

Control and Relationship 

1.26 

1.25 

.2 <; p < .3 

Fact and Relationship 

0.6 5 

0.63 

• 5< p < .6 


difference favors group named first. 


found to have a total score significantly higher than that of the other 
three groups. These differences were the only significant mean differ¬ 
ences discovered. 

The results of the analysis indicate that pre-test results should 
be controlled in analysis of the later performance of this group. In 
addition, the superiority of the Generalization group suggests that the 
effects of the more meaningful method of study are transferred from one 
subject matter area to another to a greater extent than are those of less 


meaningful methods. 






. 









. 

















' ' 

. 

. 















' i . . ' • <<-li 

- 





154 


Analysis of variance of the fact subscores for the mathematics 
test produced a significant F-ratio, indicating differences in perform¬ 
ance in this section of the test. Pairs of means were then examined 
with the t-test to determine specific differences. The results, shown 
in Table C, again disclosed that the Generalization group had obtained a 

TABLE C 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE FACT SUBSCORES 
ON THE PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

t 

Significance 

Generalization and Fact 3, 

2.03 

3.73 

p < .01 

Generalization and Relationship 

1.58 

2.82 

p < .01 

Generalization and Control 

1.6o 

2.94 

P< .01 

Relationship and Fact 

0.45 

0.92 

.3 < p < *4 

Relationship and Control 

0.02 

0.04 

.9 < p 

Control and Fact 

0.43 

0.92 

.3 < p < .4 


difference favors the group named first. 


significantly higher score than any other group. As in the previous 
analysis, there were no other significant differences. Because of these 
differences, the scores on the fact section of the pre-test must be held 
constant in later analyses. Again, the effects of training in the gener¬ 
alization method appear to be transferred to a higher degree than the 
effects of training in the fact or relationship method. 

The examination of relationship subscores indicated differential 
performance on the part of the classes in this group. These scores, too, 
must be held constant during subsequent treatment of results in mathe¬ 
matics. Mean difference tests, summarized in Table Cl showed that the 
Generalization group obtained significantly higher scores than either the 













TABLE Cl 


155 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE RELATIONSHIP SUBSCORES 
ON THE PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TOO 



Mean 

Difference 

t 

Significance 

Generalization and Fact 3 - 

1.87 

3.37 

P 

I\ 

• 

H 

Generalization and Relationship 

1.33 

2.33 

.01 < 

P < .05 

Generalization and Control 

0.64 

1.15 

.2 < 

P < .3 

Control and Fact 

1.23 

2.57 

.01 < 

P < .05 

Control and Relationship 

0.69 

1.40 

.1 < 

P < .2 

Relationship and Fact 

0.54 

1.10 

.2 <. 

P < .3 


difference favors group named first. 


fact or the Relationship group. The difference between the Generalization 
and Control groups favored the former but did not reach significance. In 
this instance, also,the Control group was significantly better in perform¬ 
ance than the Fact group. On the whole, the results of the analysis 
tend to substantiate the findings of the previous sections, namely, the 
more meaningful the method of study, the greater the degree of transfer. 

Generalization subscores revealed no significant differences on 
analysis of variance, making it unnecessary to control these scores in 
later analyses. 

With pre-test scores from stage one held constant, analysis of co- 
variance yielded a significant F-ratio. After adjustment for difference 
in initial test performance, the following means resulted: Fact, 2.89; 
Relationship, 1.66; Generalization, 3*00; and Control, 2.63. The results 
of comparisons of pairs of means by the t-test are shown in Table CII. 











TABLE CII 


156 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE GENERALIZATION SUBSCORES 
ON THE PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

t 

Significance 

Generalization and fact 

0.11 

0.21 

.8 < p < .9 

Generalization and Relationship 

1.34 

2.41 

.01 < p < .05 

Generalization and Control 

0.37 

0.68 

.4 < p < .5 

Fact and Relationship 

1.23 

2.53 

.01 < p < .05 

Fact and Control 

0.26 

0.54 

• 5 < P < *6 

Control and Relationship 

0.97 

2.08 

.01 < p < .05 


difference favors groups named first* 

On this section of the test the Fact, Generalization and Control groups 
all made significantly higher scores than the Relationship group. No 
other differences were found to be significant. Training in more 
meaningful methods of study failed to produce superiority in transfer 
in this instance. 

The analysis of the subsection scores within each group revealed 
variation in performance in all but the Control group. Mean difference 
tests for the Fact group are presented in Table CHI. 


TABLE CIII 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE FACT GROUP SUBSCORES 
ON THE PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

D 01 

Fact and Relationship 13 

1.76 

0.728 

0.973 

Fact and Generalization 

1.43 

0.728 

0.973 

Generalization and Relationship 

0.33 

0.728 

0.973 


difference must exceed Table Value to be significant at the .05 level. 

difference favors section named first. 














. 

' - • -:c,. l: .. 


. 


. 


V, ; .. : ; ■ • O, ni > ? ' <' , > 

• : ' 










■ 






157 

The members of the Fact group obtained significantly higher scores in 


the fact section than in either generalizations or relationships. 

The results of the examination of the Relationship group's per¬ 
formance in mathematics are shown in Table CIV. In this class, the 

TABLE CIV 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE RELATIONSHIP GROUP 
SUBSCORSS ON THE PRE-TEST IN MAT HEMATICS, ST AGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

D 01 

T_ 

Fact and Relationship 0 

1.67 

0.754 

1.012 

Fact and Generalization 

2.67 

0.754 

1.012 

Relationship and Generalization 

1.00 

0.754 

1.012 


difference must exceed Table Value to be significant at .05 level, 
difference favors section named first. 


mean fact score was higher than either the mean relationship score, or 
the mean generalization score. In addition, the relationship score was 
significantly higher than than in generalization. 

As may be observed in Table CV, analysis of the scores made by the 
Generalization group followed the same pattern as that of the Relation¬ 
ship group. 


TABLE CV 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE GENERALIZATION GROUP 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN MATHEMATICS,STAGES TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

D 01 

Fact and Relationship^ 

1.92 

1.249 

1.697 

Fact and Generalization 

3.33 

1.249 

1.697 

Relationship and Generalization 

1.41 

1.249 

1.697 


difference must exceed Table Value to be significant at the .05 level, 
difference favors section named first. 

















158 

The examination of the scores made on the subsections of the mathe¬ 
matics test seems to indicate that the more meaningful methods produce 
greater flexibility in performance. The Generalization group obtained 
higher scores in what may be termed the less meaningful outcomes, namely 
relationships and facts. The Relationship group, following the same 
pattern, made high scores on facts, also. The Fact group, on the other 
hand, showed no tendency to make high scores in areas in which it had 
not received training. In other words, training in more meaningful 
methods of study does not appear to produce a set pattern for a specific 
type of learning outcome but permits the individual to master outcomes 
associated with less meaningful methods as well. 

In general, the analysis of the results of the test in mathematics 
indicated that the effects of training in a more meaningful method of 
study tended to be transferred to a greater extent from social studies 
to mathematics than did the effects of training in a less meaningful 
method. In addition, it was found that in the examination of the 
results of later test performance in this group, all pre-test scores 
must be held constant, except in the case of the analysis of sub-test 
performance within the Control group. 

Science 

Means and standard deviations for the distribution of scores in 
science are presented in Table C7I. 

Analysis of variance of the total scores in science resulted in 
an F-ratio of 3»8l, significant at the .05 level. This indicates 
variability in performance on the part of the classes in this group, 
and, consequently, pre-test scores will have to be held constant in 





■« 


















■ 


* 




















. 








, 








. 

■ 






















TABLE CVI 


159 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR TEE 
PRE-TEST IN' SCIENCE, STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 



Subscores 







Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

Relation 

20 

14.15 

3.44 

4.45 

1.50 

4.85 

1.35 

4.85 

1.53 

ship 

General¬ 

14 

14.71 

3.12 

4.64 

1.45 

5.07 

1.27 

5.00 

1.75 

ization 

21 

17.14 

3.49 

5-33 

1.53 

5.95 

1.66 

5.86 

1.32 

Control 

19 

13.32 

4.81 

4.26 

2.16 

4.47 

2.12 

4.58 

1.87 


later analyses* To determine the extent to which the effects of 
training were transferred from mathematics to science by the members of 
this group, covariance was undertaken with Pre-test I scores held 
constant. The F-ratio found in this instance was not significant. 
Differences noted in analysis of variance were due to initial differ¬ 
ences in ability to learn facts, relationships and generalizations by 
the methods employed in this study. The training periods evidently 
were not sufficient to produce significantly different performance among 
the classes when the subject matter was changed from mathematics to 
science. 

Analysis of variance and covariance failed to reveal significant 
differences in mean scores in the fact subsection of the test. The 
same result was obtained when scores in the generalization section were 
examined. In this instance, non-linearity of regression was found, and 
therefore only analysis of variance could be employed. Unlike the 
results found with the Social Studies - Mathematics group, where superior 
transfer was made by the Generalization group, the effects of training 

























• - - ' ■ • ■ 












. err; .• .: •: 






















; ' ' ■ ‘'•‘.I 

' 


■ 


' 0 

' 






, 


■ k 


:: 










, 


■ . . ■- 

. 






l6o 

in mathematics did not produce differences in performance on the fact 
and generalization sections of the science test. Since no significant 
differences were found, later analyses may be undertaken without con¬ 
trolling pre-test scores in these areas. 

Significant differences in mean scores were obtained through the 
analysis of variance of results on the relationship section of the 
science test. Pre-test scores in this area must, therefore, be controlled 
during the treatment of later test results. A summary of the t-tests 
employed in comparing pairs of means is presented in Table CVII. 

TABLE CVII 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE RELATIONSHIP SUB SCORES 


ON THE PRE-TEST 

IN SCIENCE, 

STAGE TWO 


Mean 

Difference 

t 

Significance 

Generalization and Fact a 

1.10 

2.15 

.01 < p < .05 

Generalization and Relationship 

0.88 

1.52 

.1 < p < .2 

Generalization and Control 

1.48 

2.80 

p <. .01 

Relationship and Fact 

0.22 

0.38 

.7 <; p < .8 

Relationship and Control 

0.60 

1.04 

.2 < p < .3 

Fact and Control 

0.38 

0.72 

.4 <> p < .5 


difference favors group named first* 


The Generalization group made significantly higher scores than both 
the Fact and the Control groups in this section of the test. These 
findings are in keeping with those noted in the analyses of the mathe¬ 
matics test, namely, that the effects of training in a meaningful method 
of study tend to be transferred to a greater extent in the area of 
relationships. 











. 





l6l 

No significant differences were noted in the sub-test performance 
of any of the classes in this subject matter group. Training in a 
particular method of study in mathematics apparently was not sufficient 
to produce differential performance within any class in the science test. 
Pre-test scores, then,will not have to be held constant, in the later 
analysis of the sub-test performance within any of the classes of this 
group. 

On the whole, analysis of the Pre-test II scores in science did not 
reveal conclusive evidence of the transfer of the effects of training in 
any of the methods employed in this investigation. The only significant 
difference found was in the relationship section of the test, the results 
favoring the Generalization group over the Control and Fact groups. In 
subsequent analyses, the relationship sub-scores are the only ones in 
science that must be controlled by covariance methods. 

Social Studies 

Table CVIII contains a summary of means and standard deviations for 
scores of the Science - Social Studies group in social studies. 


TABLE CVIII 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATION FOR THE 
PRE-TEST IN SOCIAL STUDIES,STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 



Subscores 






Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

21 

10.57 

2.80 

3.48 

1.25 

3.43 

1.36 

3.67 

1.39 

Relation¬ 
ship | 19 

13.37 

3.94 

4.26 

1.59 

4.53 

1.74 

4.58 

1.87 

General¬ 

ization 

19 

14.32 

3.44 

3.95 

1.22 

5.21 

1.69 

5.16 

1.50 

Control 

15 

11.53 

3.70 

3.53 

1.46 

3.53 

1.77 

4.47 

1.69 






















’ v 


. 0.1 ' . ■: 


* 









« 


. i '• . ■ ■ 

* 



- 

. 

' • ' ■- ' ' ‘ 

' ■*; 


' 

' • 










162 


Analysis of covariance with mental ages controlled produced a 
significant F-ratio, indicating that total scores should be controlled 
in later analyses. In investigating transfer, Pre-test I scores, in 
addition to mental age scores, were held constant. On this occasion no 
significant differences were found in mean total scores. The effects 
of training in science were not sufficient to produce differential 
performance on the social studies test. 

The analysis of the three subsections of the test, fact, relation¬ 
ship and generalization, did not reveal significant mean differences 
among the classes of this group* Training in science did not produce 
differential performance in the social studies pre-test. In the sub¬ 
sequent analysis of the subsections of tests involving the Science - 
Social Studies group, pre-test scores will not have to be controlled* 

On the examination of the sub-test scores made by the members of 
each methods group, no significant differences were found except in 
the scores of the Generalization group. After adjustment for differ¬ 
ences in Pre-test I, means in this group were investigated using the 
t-tests, the results being summarized in Table G1X. The adjusted means 


TABLE CIX 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE GENERALI2ATI0N GROUP 
SUBSCORES ON THE PRE-TEST IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

D 01 

Generalization and Fact 13 

1.44 

0.769 

X .032 

Generalization and Relationship 

1.33 

0.769 

1.032 

Relationship and Fact 

0*11 

0.769 

1.032 


difference must exceed Table Value to be significant at the *05 level 
^Difference favors section named first. 











163 

were found to be: fact,3.85; relationship, 5.18; generalization, 5 . 29 . 
Both the relationship and generalization scores were significantly 
superior to that in the fact section* These findings suggest that 
training in the method of generalization results in high performance 
in the learning of relationships, as well as in the learning of general¬ 
izations, but that factual materials are not mastered to the same 
degree* On the basis of these analyses, only the pre-test scores of the 
Generalization group need be held constant in later investigations of 
subscores within each of the classes. 

The examination of the results of the social studies test revealed 
that pre-test scores must be controlled during the subsequent analysis 
of total scores and subsections of the Generalization group. Ho other 
significant differences were found* Apart from variation in the sub¬ 
scores of the Generalization group, no indication was found of training 
in one method of study producing greater transfer from science to social 
studies than any other method used in this experiment. 

Summary 

Analysis of mental ages for classes within each of the subject 
matter groups revealed that this variable should be controlled in sub¬ 
sequent treatment of data in the Science - Social Studies group. The 
classes in the Mathematics - Science group and the Social Studies - 
Mathematics groups did not differ in mean mental ages. 

Pre-test II scores in mathematics must be held constant in later 
investigations involving total scores, fact subscores, relationship sub¬ 
scores, Fact group subscores, Relationship group subscores, and 


. 



164 

Generalization group subscores. 

In science, the only pre-test scores that must be controlled are 
total scores and those made in the relationship subsection. 

The analyses of subsequent tests in social studies require the con¬ 
trol of pre-test total scores and those made by the members of the 
Generalization group on the subsections of the test. 

Analysis of performance on the pre-test in mathematics indicated 
that the effects of a more meaningful method of study, namely, the study 
of generalizations, tended to be transferred from social studies to mathe¬ 
matics to a greater extent than did the effects of less meaningful 
methods of study. In science, the treatment of the scores on the relation¬ 
ship section of the test gave support to this finding. Other areas of the 
science test, however, revealed no significant differences, as did the 
analysis of the social studies test. 

From the results of these investigations it is not possible to draw 
a general conclusion concerning the transfer from one subject matter area 
to another of the effects of training in the study of material for facts, 
relationships and generalizations. 

The analysis of the subsection scores in the three experimental 
classes in the mathematics test indicated that training in the more 
meaningful method of study tended to produce high performance in all 
learning outcomes, while training in a less meaningful method tended to 
be more specific. Some confirmation of this was found in the Generali¬ 
zation group on the social studies test, inhere higher scores were made on 
both generalizations and relationships than on facts, although training 
emphasized generalizations only. In science, on the other hand, no signifi¬ 
cant differences were noted. Evidence again does not permit the formation 






, 

■ 






. 




. 


* 


, 

■ 

. 




. 











































- 


- 








of a general conclusion 











CHAPTER XII 


ANALYSIS OF GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST IN 
MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE AND SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 

After the experimental classes had completed the training periods 
in their second subject-matter area, a post-test was administered to 
all classes. As in Stage One, pre-test scores were subtracted from 
post-test scores to obtain a distribution of gains made during the 
period of training. Analysis of these distributions was undertaken 
to determine the effects of practice with a particular method of study 
on the learning of facts, relationships and generalizations. 

As in the other chapters, the performance of each subject matter 
group is discussed separately, and in the order: mathematics, science 
and social studies. 


Mathematics 


Means and standard deviations for the distributions of gains in 
mathematics are presented in Table CX. 

TABLE CX 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE 
DISTRIBUTION OF GAINS FROM PRE-TEST 
TO POST-TEST IN MATHEMATICS, 

STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 


Subscores 







Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

Relation¬ 

21 

0.38 

2.73 

- 0.81 

1.66 

1.05 

1.63 

0.14 

2.01 

ship 

Generali¬ 

18 

2.61 

2.79 

- 0.72 

1.45 

2.00 

2.00 

1.33 

1.53 

zation 

12 

0.42 

3.42 

-1.25 

1.60 

0.92 

2.23 

0.75 

1.82 

Control 

21 

2.57 

.. 2 t 22 . 

0.19 

1.63 

1.52 

1.78 

0.86 

2.20 


















,N ; . ' 

. 

' 

• .■ 

'I: J j:y. ' ’■ : ... v ' ; ... • ' . 

' - t \ i ■. “tJ. , , ; : *. :. • . :■ . ; : 

- 

' 

. 




. 

. 



■ 

. 

. . 

: 111 

, 

_ 

: 

■ 

- 



. 




Negative scores in this table indicate that the post-test score was 
lower than the pre-test score, that is, there was a loss in score over 
the training period. 

An examination of the gains made in total score was carried out 
by means of analysis of covariance, with pre-test results held constant. 
A significant F-ratio indicated that there were differences in mean 
total gains. Means were adjusted for variations in pre-test performance 
with the following results: Fact, -0.22; Relationship, 2.57; Generali¬ 
zation, 1.68; Control, 2.87. Pairs of adjusted means were compared by 
t-tests, as shown in Table CXI. 

TAELS CXI 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR GAINS IN TOTAL 
SCORE FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

21 

Control and Fact 

3.09 

3.355 

p < .01 

Control and 
Relationship 

0.30 

0.315 

•7< P < .8 

Control and 
Generalization 

1.19 

1.106 

• 2 <. p .1 

Relationship 
and Fact 

2.79 

2.96 

P < .01 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

0.89 

0.77 

• 3<p < A 

Generalization and 

Fact 

1.90 

1.67 

.05< p < .1 


difference favors group named first. 


Both the Relationship and the Control groups made significantly 
greater gains in mathematics than the Fact group. The difference 
between the Fact group and the Generalization group favored the latter 
but did not reach the .05 level. 







C v . ' t v vX OX • 




... 

' 

« ■ • 

. ■ ' - 

, • - t • * ; ’ : '. 

* 




. 


. 




' 


- 

* 


. 


* 


:* 






■ 




id 

. 

■ . . 

:O ; 'o: 

' 










V...,' ,i. : ’..i :. :y, x.'.', I . ; • ' I 

. i 















.. sv. 






168 


The comparison of Relationship and Fact gains indicates an 
advantage in learning by the more meaningful of the two methods 
employed with these groups. This is given some measure of support, 
in addition, by the performance of the Generalization group. The 
improved performance on the part of the Control group must again be 
attributed to experience within their regular classroom program. 

The analysis of the fact, relationship and generalization sub¬ 
sections of the test revealed no significant differences in mean gains. 
The four periods of training in mathematics failed to produce superior 
mean gains favoring any of the methods of study employed in this 
experiment. 

Analysis of covariance, with pre-test results held constant, 
was used to examine the gains in fact, relationship and generalization 
scores made by the members of the Fact and Generalization groups. In 
both groups, no significant differences were noted. Within the bounds 
of chance, gains from pre-test to post-test, made by these groups in 
the subsections of the test, were equal. 

The Relationship group, on the other hand, showed variation in 
sub-test gains. Analysis of covariance, with pre-test results 
controlled, produce an F-ratio of 8 .70, significant beyond the .01 
level. Adjustment for differences in pre-test scores produced the 
following means: fact, 0.85; relationship, 1.75; generalization, 

-0.01. The t-tests were used to determine specific mean differences 


are summarized in Table CXH. 


' 

■ 

' ■ 

Vi."' .Of <■' ‘ • ■ ' ' ' ' : 

' 

‘ ’ • : ; ' - • ' ' V- - :*? ■ . ~ r 1 

. 

•r •’ • •: ' ; • . « • • ■: • ■ ' ' • • 

' 

. 

• ■ ■ ■ 

, ■ '■ . v\ 

, 

„ • : : . 

■ - - 

. 






TABLE CXII 


169 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR GAINS IN RELATIONSHIP 
GROUP SUBSCORES FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN MATHMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Relationship 
and Fact a 

0.90 

1.883 

.05<p < .1 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

1.76 

3.801 

p < .01 

Fact and 
Generalization 

0.86 

1.629 

.1 < P < .2 


differences favor section named first. 

The Relationship group made significantly greater gains in 

relationships than it did in generalizations. The difference between 
the gains in relationships and facts favored the former but failed to 
reach the .05 level. The Relationship group also showed a non¬ 
significant difference favoring the fact gain over the generalization 
gain. Within this section of the test there appears to be a trend 
suggesting that the gains in facts as well as relationships were 
superior to the gains in generalizations. This is in keeping with 
earlier evidence indicating that training in a more meaningful method 
of study produces gains in outcomes associated with less meaningful 
methods as well as gains in the area of training. 

The Control group also showed variable performance on the 
subsections of the mathematics test. In this instance, as may be 
observed from Table CXIII, the gains in relationships were greater 
than the gains in fact. No other differences were significant. The 
differential performance within the Control group likely is the result 
of experiences in learning in the regular classroom. The past 










■ 

« 

. _. .. . . - . . v. i v > - /v.. : ': ; 

- 

■ 

, 

■ 

* 

, 

. -1 ■ 








- 










. 
















170 

experience of this class evidently predisposed it toward the learning 
of relationships rather than facts or generalizations. 

TABLE CXIII 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR GAINS IN CONTROL 
GROUP SUBSCORES FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

D 01 

Relationship and 
Generalization* 5 

0.76 

1.029 

1.376 

Relationship 
and Fact 

1.33 

1.029 

1.376 

Generalization 
and Fact 

0.67 

1.029 

1.376 


^Difference must exceed Table value to be significant at the .05 level. 
^Difference favors section named first. 


The analysis of the distribution of gains from Pre-test II to 
Post-test II revealed that, in mean total gain, the Relationship and 
Control groups were superior to the Fact group. The score of the 
Generalization group also exceeded that of the Fact group, but the 
difference failed to reach the .05 level of significance. The only 
other evidence of differential performance came in the subsection 
gains within the Relationship and Control groups. In the former, 
significantly greater gains were made in relationships than in 
generalizations, while in the latter, greater gains were found in 
relationships than in facts. Although on the basis of total gains, 
training in relationships appears to produce greater gains, little 
supporting evidence was obtained from other analyses in mathematics. 


Science 

The distributions of gains from Pre-test II to Post-test II in 



























• ' 

* 

. 


■ 

. 


...... ' ' , ■ ' : ■ ' : ' J : . •: : ■ '• ' / 


' ■; 6. /f-"',;. •- , n ' r-,', , . ;.•££ c jir.-.v- ^ ',(OVr t:? 


■ ; , V; ' 3 ' ; 7 : - ■ > • . > ' . , , • A ■' 

- „ 

■ ’ < 
lU . ■ ■ ■ - - ‘. 


■ 



' 

■ 


• 

• 

' . 




; '• 

: 

• 


v, ...... v*:..-: v ;i\ ir ' j: f. •: . ;y. 

■ ■ ■ • . ■ . / .■ jera 







171 

science produced the means and standard deviations summarized in Table 
CXIV. 


TABLE CXIV 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE DISTRIBUTION OF 
GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST IN SCIENCE .STAGE TOO 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 





Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

20 

-1.60 

3.81 

-1.15 

1.95 

-0.65 

2.21 

0.20 

2.19 

Relation 

ship 

L- 

14 

-0.79 

3.77 

-0.64 

2.24 

0.07 

1.69 

-0.21 

1.57 

General¬ 

ization 

21 

-2.05 

2.60 

-1.29 

1.45 

- 0.62 

1.75 

-0.14 

1.24 

Control 

19 

-1.47 

3.06 

-0.47 

2.37 

-0.95 

1.68 

-0.05 

2.22 


Analysis was undertaken to determine mean differences in total 
gains, in gains in facts, relationships and generalizations, and in 
gains in the three subsections within each class. In all but the area 
of relationship?, investigation revealed no significant differences. 

On the relationship subsection, variation in pre-test performance 
required control of this factor in the analyses. Although the test 
for homogeneity of regression coefficients was not confirmed, the 
F-ratio being significant at the .05* but not the .01 level, it was 
decided to continue analysis of covariance, since other necessary 
assumptions had been met. This, it was felt, would yield some indi¬ 
cation of the effect of pre-test performance that otherwise would 
require subjective judgment. Adjusting for differences in pre-test 
scores produced the following means: Fact, -0.83; Relationship, 0.04; 
Generalization, -0.05; Control, -1.38. Table CXV reveals that both the 

































YD* 


“c-o yy'- '?.¥■> 

. 

■ • 














t -i ■ 

' 






, 


. 




t . . " ' 

y.y: '.v. ■ . 

■ 

■ 




< ' 


. 


















.;.■ ' ” - - . . • : • Y ... • - - 




■ 

: ' ' 









TABLE CXV 


1?2 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR GAINS IN RELATIONSHIP SUBSCORES 
FROM PRE-TEST TO POST-TEST IN SCIENCE, STAGE TWO 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Relationship and Fact 3 

0.87 

1.67 

.05< p< .1 

Relationship and Generalization 

0.09 

0.17 

.8 < p< .9 

Relationship and Control 

1.42 

2.67 

p < .01 

Generalization and Fact 

0.78 

1.62 

.1< p < .2 

Generalization and Control 

1.33 

2.78 

p< .01 

Fact and Control 

0.55 

1.14 

.2 < p < .3 


difference favors group named first. 


Relationship and Generalization groups were superior to the Control 
group. There is also an indication of higher scores on the parts of 
these groups when compared with the Fact group, but this failed to 
reach the .05 level of significance. 

It would seem that special training in studying material to de¬ 
termine the significant relationships or generalizations within it pro¬ 
duced higher relationship scores than did the usual classroom experience 
of the Control group. The superiority of these methods over the study 
of material for facts is suggested, but not clearly established. The 
four training periods failed to produce differential gains in other 
areas of the distribution. 


Social Studies 


Means and standard deviations for the distribution of gains in social 









173 

studies from Pre-test II to Post-test II are summarized in Table CXVI. 


TABLE CXVI 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR THE 
DISTRIBUTION OF GAINS FROM PRE-TEST TO 
POST-TEST IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 



Subscores 







Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

21 

-0.81 

3.40 

-0.33 

1.85 

-0.14 

1*53 

-0.33 

1.82 

Relation¬ 

ship 

19 

-0.89 

3.74 

0.00 

2.33 

-0.58 

1.30 

- 0.32 

1.77 

General¬ 

ization 

19 

-1.42 

3.32 

0.32 

1.70 

-1.05 

1.51 

-0.68 

1.78 

Control 

15 

-2.67 

4.64 

-0.80 

1.86 

-0.73 

2.25 

-1.13 

1.92 


The analysis of mean gains in social studies followed the pattern 
obtained in science in that, again, no significant differences were 
found. The training periods in social studies were insufficient to 
produce variation in gains from the pre-test to the post-test. 

Summary 

The analysis of gains in mathematics, science and social studies 
produced few positive results. The only instances of significant 
differences in total test performance were found in mathematics, where 
the Relationship group and the Control group made significantly greater 
gains than the Fact group. There was a difference favoring the General¬ 
ization group over the Fact group, but this failed to reach the .05 
level. On this test, also, within the Relationship group, significantly 
greater gains were made in relationships than in generalizations. Al- 

























„• ' ... ■' • V 




. . 


. 

• ■ 

* 

■ 






, 


* 

■ 

* 

. 

. 



























174 

though other differences failed to reach the .05 level of significance, 
it appeared that gains ■were made in order of increasing magnitude in 
the areas of relationship, fact, generalization. 

In the science test, greater gains were made in the relationship 
section by the Generalization and the Relationship groups than by the 
Control group. Khile other differences failed to reach the .05 level, 
the Generalization and Relationship groups both appeared to make greater 
gains than the Fact group. 

In general, the analysis of gains made from pre-test to post-test 
in the second stage of the experiment did not yield clear-cut evidence 
of the superiority of training in any of the methods of study employed 
in the investigation. 


. 

. 

- 

. 




CHAPTER XIII 


TRANSFER IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE 
AND SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE WO 

Twenty-one days after the administration of the post-test, each 
group was given another test, similar in structure to both the pre¬ 
test and the post-test, and equated in difficulty with them. The 
purpose of this test was to determine the extent to which the effects 
of training in the study of material for facts, relationships and 
generalizations were transferred to a new situation in the same 
subject-matter area* 

Transfer test results were examined using analysis of covariance 
(with pre-test scores and mental age controlled where necessary) and 
analysis of variance. Results will be reported for each subject-matter 
separately, and in the usual pattern of mathematics, science and social 
studies. 


Mathematics 

Means and standard deviations for the transfer test in mathematics 
are presented in Table CXVII. 

Analysis of covariance, with Pre-Test II held constant, yielded an 
F-ratio of 7*70 which is significant beyond the .01 level. The means 
for each class, adjusted for pre-test differences, were as follows: 
Fact, 10.35$ Relationship, 11.76; Generalization, 10.5U; Control, 
li*.21. Mean differences were examined by t-tests, which are summarized 


in Table CXVIII, 


• 

. 

’ 



« 

■ - ' ' - 

t ' 1 , 






■ (. ' ' . a- •• ,' . :■ - *'. *■; ' •: • - 






i > ’' •; >- 





. 


~v 


\ 


. 


• ."■■■ Jn D Wad r: ^musixmo ■ w ■■ UaA. 

# .4 


. V,-:;-: •: ■ , " '-'r5 ‘ "t ‘ 




TABLE CXVII 


176 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FCR 
THE TRANSFER TEST IN MATHEMATICS, 
STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 





Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D 

• 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

21 

9.62 

2.6h 

2.90 

i. 5 i 

3.19 

1.140 

3.52 

1.60 

Relation¬ 

ship 

18 

11.72 

14.52 

U .33 

i.m 

3.61 

1.65 

3.78 

2.10 

General¬ 

ization 

12 

12.08 

2.68 

3.83 

1.53 

14.00 

1.35 

14.25 

0.97 

Control 

21 

114.57 

3.26 

5 .H 4 

1 .U 9 

5.28 

1.73 

b.ih 

1.143 


TABLE CXVIII 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FCR TOTAL 
SCCRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE WO 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Control and Fact a 

3.86 

u.275 

p < .01 

Control and 
Relationship 

2 .U 5 

2.623 

.01 < p < .05 

Control and 
Generalization 

3.67 

3.1489 

p < ,01 

Relationship 
and Fact 

I.I4I 

1.539 

.1 p < .2 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

1.22 

1.077 

.2 p < .3 

Generalization 
and Fact 

0.19 

0.170 

p ^ .9 


difference favors group named first 















































177 

The Control group made significantly higher scores on this test 
than any of the experimental groups* Experiences in the regular class¬ 
room appear to have had greater effect on test performance than the 
more restricted approach of the experimental methods. In addition, 
having had fewer demands made of them during the experiment, the 
Control group could conceivably feel more highly motivated toward the 
transfer test. This motivation may have resulted in their higher 
scores. Within the experimental group, the Relationship class made 
higher scores than both the Generalization and Fact classes, although 
the differences failed to reach the .05 level of significance. 

Analysis of covariance with pre-test scores controlled revealed 
significant differences in performance on the fact section of the 
transfer test. The adjusted means for the group were as follows: 

Fact, 3.1Relationship, li.38j Generalization, 3«2li5 and Control, 

5 . 20 . 

Mean difference tests, presented in Table CXIX, again revealed 
the superiority of the Control group. In this instance, however, the 
Relationship group was also superior to the Fact and Generalization 
groups. Training in reading a selection in mathematics to determine 
the significant relationships in it appears to produce superior per¬ 
formance on subsequent testing than does training in facts or general¬ 
izations. 

A significant F-ratio was obtained when the scores on the relat¬ 
ionship subsection of the transfer test in mathematics were subjected 
to analysis of covariance. After adjustment for differences in pre¬ 
test scores, means were as follows: Fact, 3.IiC$ Relationship, 3.68* 


'.) >Y 








v.ioai'Z 




... z::-d ov. 


- 





TABLE CXIX 


178 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR FACT 
SUBSCQRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Control and Fact a 

2.06 

U.870 

p < *01 

Control and 
Relationship 

0.82 

1.872 

.05 P < .1 

Control and 
Generalization 

1.96 

3.750 

p ^ .01 

Relationship 
and Fact 

1.21* 

2.818 

p < .01 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

1.11* 

2.12? 

.01 p < .05 

Generalization 
and Fact 

0.10 

0.186 

.8 < p <. .9 


difference favors group named first 


TABLE CXX 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCQRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Control and Fact a 

1.77 

3.598 

p < .01 

Control and 
Relationship 

1.1*9 

2.998 

P < *01 

Control and 
Generalization 

1.1*5 

2.608 

.01 p < .05 

Generalization 
and Fact 

0.32 

0.539 

.5 p< .6 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

o.ol* 

0.068 

P > .9 

Relationship 
and Fact 

0.28 

0.566 

.5 p .6 


difference favors group named first 






















* 




















179 

Generalization, 3*72; Control, 5.17. As may be observed in Table 
CXX, in this section of the test the Control group maintained its 
position of superiority over the experimental groups. No other 
significant differences were obtained. 

The variances of the classes on the generalization section of 
the test were found to be heterogeneous and, as a result, the 
Cochran and Cox technique was used to examine mean difference. No 
cases were found in which the means differed significantly. Periods 
of training failed to produce differential performance on this sect¬ 
ion of the transfer test. 

Analysis revealed that the scores made on the subsections of the 
transfer test by the members of the Control group differed signifi¬ 
cantly, The results of t-tests used to compare means are included in 
Table CXXI. 


TABLE CXXI 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR CONTROL GROUP 
SUBSCORES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

a 

D o5 

D 01 

Relationsnip, 

, ti , - b 

and Fact 

o.iit 

0.855 

1 . 1 U 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

l.Ui 

0.855 

l.Ht 

Fact and 
Generalization 

1,00 

0.855 

l.lit 

difference must exceed Table value to be 
difference favors section named first 

significant at 

the ,05 level 












180 

Significantly higher scores were made on both the relationship and 
fact sections of the test than on the generalization section* The 
instruction received in the regular classroom appears to produce 
higher performance in facts and relationships than in generalizat¬ 
ions, as measured by this test* 

Since regression was found to be non-linear, analysis of variance 
was used to examine the mean scores made by the Fact group on the sub¬ 
sections of the transfer test. In this instance, no significant diff¬ 
erences were obtained. In an effort to ascertain the influence of 
differential pre-test performance, where this could not be controlled 
through covariance, mean difference tests were undertaken to determine 
the significance of the difference between differences in scores made 
on the two tests. This, in effect, tests the significance of the gains 
made from pre-test to transfer test. The results of these tests are 
presented in Table CXXII. On the pre-test the fact score was found to 
be significantly greater than both the relationship and generalization 
scores. To be non-significant on the transfer test gains in both these 
areas would have to be significantly greater than the gain in the fact 
score. This suggests that the effects of training within the Fact group 
were transferred to a greater extent in relationships and generalisat¬ 
ions, than they were in facts. Since this group received training only 
in the study of facts, it is possible that experience outside the ex¬ 
perimental situation influenced the performance of the group on this 
section of the test. 

With pre-test scores controlled through analyses of covariance, 
no significant differences were noted in the performance of the members 



! 




) v;r 


. 


> ' ' - 




181 


of the Relationship group on the subsections of the transfer test. 

The effects of training in the study of material to determine import¬ 
ant relationships did not produce variations in performance on the 
transfer test. 

TABLE CXXII 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FCR DIFFERENCES IN THE SCORES 
OF THE FACT CROUP ON THE PRE-TEST AND THE 
TRANSFER TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Difference 
on Pre-Test 

Difference on 
Transfer Test 

t 

Significance 

Fact and 
Generalization 

1.U3 

-0.62 

3.1(0 

p < .01 

Fact and 
Relationship 

1.76 

-0.29 

3.7U 

p .01 


difference favors section named first 


Analysis of covariance could not be used to examine the mean scores 
made by the Generalization group since regression was found to be non¬ 
linear. Analysis of variance failed, to reveal significant differences 
in transfer test scores. On the pre-test, it had been noted that the 
scores on the fact section were significantly better than the scores on 
the generalization or relationship sections, and also, that the re¬ 
lationship score was higher than the generalization score. In an attempt 
to account for the influence of pre-test variation in performance, mean 
difference tests were again employed to determine the significance of the 
difference between the differences in pre-test and transfer test scores 
in the areas of fact, relationship and generalization. The results of 
this investigation are summarized in Table CXXIII. 















) 



'■) 


; 




... y-< 


l 


3 











; 


3 . 






o 




) 


) 




*, J • 


■ ' ; \ 


) 









TABLE CXXIII 


182 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR DIFFERENCES IN SCORES OF 
THE GENERALIZATION CROUP ON THE PRE-TEST AND THE 
TRANSFER TEST IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



Difference 
on Pre-test 

Difference 
on Post-test 

t 

Significance 

Fact and 
Relationship 

1.92 

-0.17 

2.38 

.02 < p < .05 

Fact and 

Generalization 

3.33 

-0.1)2 

7.02 

p .01 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

l.ui 

-0.25 

2.095 

.02 p <. # o5 

difference favors 

group named 

first. 




The mean difference tests indicate that the members of the General¬ 
ization group made significantly greater gains in their generalization 
and relationship scores than they did in facts* In addition, greater 
gain was shown In generalizations than in relationships* Although diff¬ 
erences in transfer test scores were non-significant, consideration of 
pre-test performance suggests that the effects of training in the method 
of generalisation influenced generalization and relationship scores to a 
greater extent than fact scores on the transfer test* 

The analysis of the transfer test in mathematics did not reveal 
variations in performance among the experimental classes, as far as total 
scores were concerned* The Control group, however, made significantly 
higher total scores than any other group* The superiority of the Control 
group was also noted as a result of the analysis of fact scores on the 
transfer test* On this section of the test the Relationship group also 
made significantly greater scores than both the Generalization and the 
Fact groups. An examination of scores on the relationship section of 































183 

the test disclosed no significant differences in performance among the 
experimental classes* Again the Control group made significantly higher 
scores than any of the other groups. The Cochran and Cox test revealed 
no significant differences in generalization scores on the transfer test 
in mathematics. The experiences of the children in both experimental 
and control classes were insufficient to produce differential performance 
in this area of the test. 

Within the Control group, analysis of variance revealed significant¬ 
ly higher scores on the generalization and relationship sections than on 
the fact section* There were no significant differences in the performance 
of the members of the Relationship group on the three subsections of the 
transfer test. Analysis of variance disclosed no significant differences 
in subtest scores made by either the Generalization group or the Fact 
group. In both these instances, however, it was not possible to control 
pre-test results in which significant differences had been found. To 
assess the influences of variations in pre-test performance, a test was 
employed that, in effect, measured the significance of the gains made 
from pre-test to transfer test. In the Fact group this analysis in¬ 
dicated that to reach non-significance on the transfer test, signifi¬ 
cantly greater gains were made in the areas of relationships and general¬ 
izations than were made in fact. Within the Generalization group, greater 
gains were shown in generalizations than relationships, and in both of 
these areas than in facts. 

Generally, the analysis of the transfer test in mathematics failed 
to produce evidence indicating superior transfer effects for any of the 
methods of study employed in this investigation. 





Science 


184 


Means and standard deviations for the scores made by the four 
classes in the transfer test in science are presented in Table CXXIV. 

TABLE CXXIV 

MEANS AMD STANDARD DEVIATIONS 
FCR THE TRANSFER TEST IN 
SCIENCE, STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 



Subscores 







Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

20 

13.50 

3.63 

U.80 

1.147 

3.145 

1.61 

5.25 

1.80 

Relation¬ 

ship 

Hi 

13.57 

3.26 

5.21 

1.05 

3.114 

1.56 

5.21 

1.1)2 

General¬ 

ization 

21 

17.67 

2.82 

6.oo 

1.22 

ll.86 

1.80 

6.81 

1.33 

Control 

19 

12.16 

lu36 

3.89 

1.2U 

3.814 

2.148 

1|.1|2 

1.87 


Total scores made on this test were examined by means of analysis 
of covariance, with pre-test scores in mathematics held constant. A 
significant F-ratio was obtained, indicating variations in performance 
among the groups. Adjustment for differences in pre-test performance 
resulted in the following means; Fact, 13.90; Relationship, 13.67; 
Generalization, 16.1|6; Control, 13.lt£. Pairs of adjusted means were 
then tested to determine specific differences. 

As may be observed in Table CXXV, the Generalization group made 
significantly higher scores on the transfer test than any of the other 
groups. These were the only significantly different results obtained. 


























185 

It would appear that, in science, the effects of training in the study 


of material for generalizations are transferred to a greater extent 
than are the effects of training in fact and relationships. 


TABLE CXXV 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR TOTAL 
SCORES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE TWO 



Adjusted Mean 




Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact 3, 

2.56 

2.568 

.01 p < .05 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

2,79 

2.573 

.oi < p < ,o5 

Generalisation 
and Control 

3,01 

2.830 

p .01 

Fact and 
Relationship 

0.23 

0.22k 

•8 <* p < .9 

Fact and 

Control 

o.l(5 

0.1(72 

•6 <• p .7 

Relationship 
and Control 

0.22 

0.210 

,8 ^ p .9 


difference favors group named first 


Significant differences in performance on the fact subsection of 
the test were revealed by analysis of variance. The comparison of 
pairs of means revealed that all the experimental groups made signifi¬ 
cantly higher scores than did the Control group. The Generalization 
group also was significantly superior in performance to the Fact group. 
The difference between the Relationship and Generalization groups fav¬ 
ored the latter and approached, but did not reach, the ,05 level. In 
the area of fact in science, the effects of training in a more meaning- 
























186 

ful method of study, namely, the generalization method, appear to be 
transferred to a greater extent than do the effects of less meaning¬ 
ful methods of study. A summary of the results of the mean difference 
tests is presented in Table CXXVI. 


TABLE CXKVI 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR FACT 
SUBSCCRES CN THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE WO 



Mean 

Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact a 

1.20 

3.0ii6 

p < .01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

0.79 

1.775 

.05 < p < .1 

Generalizati on 
and Control 

2.11 

5.18 

P <• *01 

Relationship 
and Fact 

0.1(1 

0.921 

.3 < p < .it 

Relationship 
and Control 

1*32 

2.996 

p <, .01 

Fact and 

Control 

0.91 

2.236 

.01 -s. p .05 


differences favors group named first 


Analysis of covariance, with pre-test scores held constant, did 
not reveal significant differences in relationship scores* The train¬ 
ing periods in the three methods of study apparently were not sufficient 
to produce variations in performance in this area of the transfer test 
in science. 

A significant F-ratio was obtained when the generalization scores 
were subjected to analysis of variance. To determine specific 














r:' •; 


<L 





3 ' 









' ; ' 


o 



* 









187 

differences, the t-test was used, producing the results summarized in 
Table CXXVII. 


TABLE CXXVII 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FCR GENERALIZATION 
SUBSCQRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE TWO 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact a 

1.56 

3.089 

P ^ 

.01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

1.60 

2.800 

P < 

.01 

Generalization 
and Control 

2.39 

H.579 

P < 

.01 

Fact and 
Relationship 

0.0U 

0.070 

P > 

.9 

Fact and 

Control 

0.33 

1.590 

,1 ^ p 

< .2 

Relationship 
and Control 

0,79 

1.381). 

.1 < p 

.2 


difference favors group named first 


The t-tests revealed a pattern of significant differences identical 
with that found on the analysis of the total scores on the transfer test, 
that is, the Generalization group made higher scores than the Fact, Re¬ 
lationship and Control groups. No other significant differences were 
obtained in this area. Again it may be observed that the effects of the 
more meaningful method of study appear to be transferred to the greatest 
extent. 

Variations in the performance of members of the Fact group in the 
three subsections of the test were revealed through analysis of variance. 
Mean difference tests, presented in Table CXXVIII, indicate that the Fact 














. ' >; • 


. 

























7.J': 




% 


~ 






5 . 


3 ; " i ;j 


v 


■ - - 


' ' 









>/> 




■ ' 



> 




























188 

group made significantly higher scores on the generalization and fact 
sections of the test than on the relationship section. In addition, 
their scores were significantly better on the generalization section 
than on the fact. Since the members of this class received training 
only in the identification of the facts in a selection, with no con¬ 
sideration being given to either relationships or generalizations, it 
seems unlikely that their relatively superior performance on the 
generalization subsection of the test could be the result of the ex¬ 
perimental procedures. Quite possibly, after twenty-one days they 
were influenced more by their regular classroom methods than by the 
restricted methods of the experiment. 

TABLE CXX\aiI 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FCR FACT GROUPS 
SUBSCGRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

a 

D05 

Doi 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

1.80 

0.188 

0.252 

Generalization 
and Fact 

0.1*5 

0.188 

0.252 

Fact and 
Relationship 

1*35 

0.188 

0.252 


difference must exceed Table value to be significant at the .05 level 
difference favors section named first 


The members of the Relationship group, as may be noted in Table 
CXXIX, scored significantly higher on both facts and generalizations 
than they did on relationships. 

















TABLE CXXIX 


189 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR RELATIONSHIP 
GROUP SUBSCORES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE WO 



Mean 

Difference 

Do/ 

D 01 

Generalization 
and Relationship® 

2*07 

0.785 

1.062 

Generalization 
and Fact 

0.00 

0.785 

1.062 

Fact and 
Relationship 

2.07 

0.785 

1.062 

^Difference must 

exceed Table value 

to be significant 

at the .05 level 


^Difference favors section named first 

The higher scores in facts could be the results of training in 
studying materials by a method stressing the relationships between 
facts* Since, in the training periods for this group, no attempt was 
made to develop generalizations as defined in this study, it is diffi¬ 
cult to attribute superior scores in this area to the effects of the 
training period. It may be that the differentiation between relation¬ 
ships and generalizations was not clearly made in this section of the 
experiment* 

Analysis of variance yielded a significant F-ratio with the sub¬ 
scores of the Generalization group* The mean difference tests in this 
area are summarized in Table CXXX, 

Differences in this instance followed the same pattern as was 
found with the Relationship group, in that scores made on the general¬ 
ization and fact sections were significantly higher than those made on 
the relationship section. The effects of training in the generalization 














j") f 


■j. • 




■ 

' ' : ' >i) •' ' 






: 




190 

method evidently were not transferred in a uniform manner, having less 
influence on the learning of relationships than on the learning of 
facts and generalizations. 

TABLE GXXX 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FCR GENERALIZATION 
GROUP SUBSCQRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SCIENCE, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

V 

D 01 

Generalization 
and Relationship^ 

1.95 

0.869 

1.163 

Generalization 
and Fact 

0.81 

0.869 

1.163 

Fact and 
Relationship 

l.llt 

0.869 

1.163 


difference must exceed Table value to be significant at the *05 level 
difference favors section named first 


The analysis of subscores made by members of the Control group 
failed to produce significant differences* Their experiences in the 
regular classroom did not produce differential performance on the three 
areas of the transfer test* 

The analysis of the transfer test in science revealed greater var¬ 
iation in performance than was found in mathematics. Considering scores 
made on the test as a whole, the Generalization group was significantly 
superior to the three other groups. Fact, Relationship and Control* 
Similar results were obtained on the analysis of the generalization 
section of the test, while in the area of facts, the Generalization 
group scored significantly higher than the Fact group, but not the 














>. ' : 












t J; .a ;: 















191 

Relationship group. The latter difference favored the Generalization 
group although it did not reach the .05> level of significance. Anal¬ 
ysis of the relationships scores failed to reveal significant diff¬ 
erences in performance. 

The analysis of the performance on the subsections of the test, 
within each experimental group, did not produce decisive results. 
Significantly higher scores were generally made in facts and general¬ 
izations than in relationships. It is quite possible that this pattern 
reflects the difficulty of the relationship section of the test, rather 
than variations produced by the different methods of study. Although 
differences in difficulty indices did not reach the .05 level. Table V 
in Chapter Five indicates that the relationship section of the test was 
the most difficult. 


Social Studies 

Means and standard deviations for the transfer test in social 
studies are presented in Table CXXXI. 

Total scores made by the four classes were examined by analysis of 
covariance, with mental age and pre-test performance held constant. An 
F-ratio of 2.05> was obtained which was not significant at the .05> level* 
This indicated that apparent differences in the raw scores may be ex¬ 
plained in terms of variations in average mental ability and familiar¬ 
ity with the methods employed in the study. The training periods in 
social studies failed to produce real differences in performance on the 


transfer test, 






TABLE CXXXI 


192 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR 
THE TRANSFER TEST IN SOCIAL 
STUDIES, STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 





Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D* 

M 

S.D* 

M 

S.D* 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

21 

10.38 

Lull 

3.29 

1.23 

3.23 

1.99 

3.86 

1.71 

Relation¬ 

ship 

19 

13.16 

It. 58 

Lu7l( 

1.95 

5.1(7 

1.68 

5.57 

1*92 

General¬ 

ization 

19 

15.32 

3.82 

5.8? 

1.76 

5.26 

1.2U 

5.16 

1.7U 

Control 

15 

11.1(0 

2.67 

3.80 

1.U2 

5.57 

1.51 

3.13 

0.99 


Analysis of covariance of the scores on the fact subsection of the 
test, with mental age controlled, yielded a significant F-ratio. Ad- 

'V 

justment for differences in mental age produced the following means: 
Fact, Relationship, 1**81*; Generalization, Control, 1*.03. 

Table CXXXII contains a summary of the mean difference tests under¬ 
taken to determine specific instances of differential test performance* 
Both the Relationship group and the Generalization group were superior 
to the Fact group on this section of the test* No other differences 
were significant. The effects of training in the more meaningful 
methods of study, in this case, were transferred to a greater extent 
than were the effects of the less meaningful method* 

Examination of scores on the relationship subsection of the trans¬ 
fer test in social studies also revealed significant differences in 






















o • 




j ■ 









TABLE CXXXII 


193 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR FACT 
SUBSCORES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Relationship 
and Fact 3, 

1.1*1 

3.006 

p < .01 

Relationship and 
Generalization 

0.39 

0.783 

•U < p < .5 

Relationship and 
Control 

0.51 

0.991* 

.3 4 p<.li 

Generalization 
and Fact 

1.02 

2.065 

.01 p .05 

Generaliz ation 
and Control 

0.1*2 

0.775 

.U ^ P «c #5 

Control 
and Fact 

0.60 

1.200 

.2 ^ p .3 


difference favors group named first 


performance. As before, analysis of covariance was used, with mental 
age held constant. The means for the classes, following adjustment for 
differences in mental age, were: Fact, 3*36; Relationship, H*56$ 
Generalization, U.87; Control, U.68. Pairs of adjusted means were com¬ 
pared using the t-test, the results of which are presented in Table 
CXXXIII. 

As in the previous analysis, the Relationship and Generalization 
groups obtained significantly higher scores than the Fact group. On 
this occasion, the Control group was significantly better than the Fact 
group as well. No other significant differences were found. Again, the 
results indicate the superiority of the more meaningful methods of study. 


























194 

the methods of generalization and relationship, over the less meaning¬ 
ful method, the study of facts. 


TABLE cmill 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR RELATIONSHIP 
SUBSCQRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 



Adjusted Mean 
Differences 

t 

Significance 

Generalization 
and Fact a 

1.51 

2.915 

p <• .01 

Generalization 
and Relationship 

0.31 

0.59k 

•5 < p <; .6 

Generalization 
and Control 

0.19 

0.335 

•7 ^ p < .8 

Control and 

Fact 

1.32 

2.519 

.01 < p <. .05 

Control and 
Relationship 

0.12 

0.223 

•8 <. p .9 

Relationship 
and Fact 

1.20 

2.1*39 

.01 < p < .05 


difference favors group named first 


The assumption of homogeneity of variance could not be met in the 
distributions of scores on the generalization section of the test, in¬ 
dicating that analysis of variance or covariance should not be under¬ 
taken. Inspection of Table CXXIX revealed that heterogeneity was due 
to the small variance of the Control group. On the elimination of the 
Control group, homogeneity was confirmed and the scores of the ex¬ 
perimental. groups, alone, were subjected to analysis of covariance with 
mental age held constant. This treatment revealed no significant diff¬ 
erences among the experimental groups on this section of the test. 











/ 



* £ ■ ■ ■- ‘ ■ 






















■ ■■ - r . j, ■ 




• :> : '• ' 'a 

. * ' c ' '• ; 

- 

• • • •' / • ■ : . ■ v •• ' • '■■■ ’ : ;r: : * ' ■ v 

. 











' 




. ■ 










■ 


' 


' 


’ V ' J . o' O ’< 




> .! j- acvrjs 















195 


Apparently the effects of training were not sufficient to produce 
variations in performance on the generalization questions of the 
transfer test in social studies. The performance of the Control 
group was investigated by the use of the Cochran and Cox technique. 
Both the Fact group and the Generalization group obtained signifi¬ 
cantly higher scores than the Control groiip, according to this anal¬ 
ysis. Mental age was not held constant, however , and the mean mental 
age for the Generalization group was higher than that of the Control 
group. Undoubtedly, the difference in mental age would reduce the 
mean difference, but it seems unlikely that the difference would be¬ 
come non-significant. The results of this analysis are summarized in 
Table CXXXIV. 

TABLE CXXXIV 

MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR CONTROL GROUP 
SCORES ON THE GENERALIZATION SUBSECTION 
OF THE TRANSFER TEST IN SOCIAL STUDIES, 

STAGE TWO 



t 'o? 

t'd 

t 

Generalization 
and Control 3 - 

2.113 

2.906 

U.l6o 

Relationship 
and Control 

2.112 

2.902 

2.552 

Fact and 

Control 

2.106 

2.881* 

1.570 


difference favors group named first 


Analysis of the scores of each of the experimental classes failed 
to reveal any instances of significant differences. Within each class 
the effects of training in social studies appeared to be transferred 
uniformly. 














-jO 


' 






196 


Analysis of variance of the subscores obtained by the Control 
group yielded a significant F-ratio. Results of the mean difference 
tests are shown in Table CXXXV* 

TABLE CXXXV 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR CONTROL GROUP 
SUBSCQRES ON THE TRANSFER TEST 
IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

a 

D o5 

D 01 

Relationship and 
Generalization° 

1.3h 

0.903 

1.218 

Relationship 
and Fact 

0.67 

0.903 

1.218 

Fact and 
Generalization 

0.67 

0.903 

1.218 


difference must exceed Table value to be significant at the ,05> level 
difference favors section name first 


The members of the Control group made significantly higher scores 
on the relationships subsection than on facts or generalizations. 
Differential performance by members of this group reflect their exper¬ 
ience in the regular classroom and are not the result of special train¬ 
ing in this experiment. 

The analysis of the results of the transfer test in social studies 
produced some evidence that supports the idea that the effects of train¬ 
ing in a more meaningful method of study are transferred to a greater 
degree than those of a less meaningful method. Although differences in 
total scores were not significant at the ,05 level, both the Generaliz¬ 
ation and the Relationship groups made higher scores than the Fact group. 














. ... , ... • : : •• ; •- .. • ' • - 

■ ■ .. • . ■ pi r '. 

■ , ■ ; ■' ■ •. ' v - ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ 1 ■ , ■■ ■' 1 ■ ' 

. . 

■ ••••, ■; . •» .- •• . ■ ' '■■■''• .< ■■ 

1 

, ■ ,. . 

■ 

' 






197 

The superiority of the former groups reached significance on both the 
fact and relationship sections of the test. Again, in the area of 
generalizations, although the differences were not significant, the 
Relationship and Generalization groups ranked higher than the Fact 
group, according to raw scores* 

Training in the three methods of study did not produce different¬ 
ial performance on the subsections of the transfer test on the part of 
the members within any of the groups* 

Summary 

The only instance of significant differences in total test per¬ 
formance occurred in science, where the Generalization group was super¬ 
ior to all the other groups* In both mathematics and science, however, 
differences in scores favored the more meaningful methods, although the 
.05 level of significance was not reached* 

On the fact section of the transfer tests, the Generalization group 
made a significantly higher score than the Fact group, in science and 
social studies. In addition, in social studies, the Relationship group 
made a significantly higher score than the Fact group. The Relationship 
group in mathematics was superior to both the Generalization and the Fact 
groups on the transfer test. 

On the social studies test, the Generalization and Relationship 
groups made significantly higher scores than the members of the Fact 
group in the area of relationships. There were no significant diff¬ 
erences in this area on either the mathematics or the science test, 
although in both instances the raw scores for the Generalization group 
were higher than that for the Fact or Relationship groups. 


) 


- 

;• 


■..•■CT V 


' J ' • 

> ■' - : ■■ '.!■ C ,... '. 

. ' ' •' . •" : : " > 

„ • ‘ V ■ • ' ■' 


• ••• , •' , • ' • : ' :■■■') ' 1 •’> 'XCX 

,-r ' . , ' ' . • ' f V ' ■ 1 * o - , ' :■ r:'/ j ;lb 

t ' if, 2 

' ; ' : ■ ' , : ' '" I -.’ : ; , •> - '■ '• : ■ ' ' • ‘ ■ 

, 

. : : . .: .. ' ‘ : ' ' ' ' • ^ i r - •’ '• ’ 

* .' ■“\ • . ■ i c : '. 

' . ' " r;;; > • xfJ . 

' 

r • , ' ' 

, 

. 





198 

In the generalization section of the transfer test in science 
the Generalization group was found to have a significantly higher 
score than both the Fact and Relationship groups. A similar pattern 
was observed in mathematics and social studies, although in these 
instances differences failed to reach the .05 level of significance. 

Analysis of the fact, relationship and generalization scores 
within each of the groups on the transfer test failed to reveal a 
pattern for the effects of any of the training periods* 

On the whole, the results of the comparison of the performance 
of the experimental classes on the transfer tests in mathematics, 
science and social studies support the hypothesis that the effects 
of more meaningful methods of study are transferred to a greater 
extent than the effects of a less meaningful method. 






CHAPTER XIV 


RETENTION IN MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE 
AND SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 

In an attempt to determine the effects of a passage of time on the 
retention of material learned after training in one of the three methods 
of study employed in this investigation, the multiple-choice test given 
each class as part of the post-test was administered again after a 
twenty-one day interval* The results of this retention test were 
subtracted from those of the post-test to obtain a distribution of 
losses* The analyses of these distributions are presented in the 
present chapter. As before, the order of presentation is mathematics, 
science and social studies. 


Mathematics 

Means and standard deviations for the distribution of retention 
scores are presented in Table CXXXVI. It should be noted that, since 

TABLE CXXXVI 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR RETENTION 
SCORES IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 





Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

21 

0.57 

2.71 

0.52 

1.40 

-0.05 

1.91 

0.10 

1.84 

Relation¬ 

ship 

18 

1.22 

3.61 

0.67 

1.61 

0.06 

1.66 

0.50 

2.01 

General¬ 

ization 

12 

1.17 

2.59 

1.17 

2.04 

-0.25 

1.49 

0.25 

1.29 

Control 

21 

1.24 

3.36 

0.71 

1.42 

-0.43 

1.78 

0.95 

1.53 


















. 

* 

' 

- 





200 


these means represent losses, the lower score indicates superior 
retention* 

Analysis of covariance with pre-test performance held constant 
was employed to investigate mean total scores in retention* The 
resulting F-ratio was not significant, indicating that there was no 
variation among the groups, beyond the bounds of chance. Training in 
different methods of study did not produce differential performance on 
the retention test in mathematics. 

The analysis of the fact, relationship and generalization sub¬ 
sections of the distribution of retention scores also failed to reveal 
significant differences among the groups in retention. 

Similar results were obtained when the scores in the subsections 
of the distribution were compared within each of the experimental groups. 
It appears that, generally, the training received by these groups did 
not result in variations in retention. 

The Control group, on the other hand, exhibited differences in 
performance. The results of t-tests, employed after analysis of 
variance revealed a significant F-ratio, are summarized in Table CXXXVII. 


TABLE CXXXVII 

MEAN DEFERENCE TESTS FOR THE CONTROL GROUP SUBSCORES 
XN RETENTION IN MATHEMATICS, STAGE TWO 



^. Mean 
Difference 

D 05 a 

D 01 

Fact and Relationships 

1.143 

0.859 

1.149 

Fact and Generalization 

0.238 

0.859 

1.149 

Generalization and Relationship 

--:---- 

1.381 

0.859 

1.149 


m x' ■ . . —— --— ---—--— 

^Difference must exceed Table value to be significant at the .05 level. 
Difference favors section named first. 





, :■>, ■ v v." , .■!■■■; 

. . cin 

, 

* 

. 


■ 


' 

■■ 














, 


. .. •, : y ' .. J r s ' r^r; 


■ ' 

, 

. 








- 

* 




- 




, 

. 







201 


This group, through the influence of regular classroom instruction, 
tended to retain relationships better than facts and generalizations. 
On the whole, it appears that training in the three methods of 
study employed in this investigation failed to produce differences in 
retention in mathematics among the groups after a twenty-one day 
interval. 

Science 


Table CXXXVIII contains the means and standard deviations for the 
distribution of retention scores in science, 

TABLE CXSCVITI 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR RETENTION 
SCORES IN SCIENCE, STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 

Subscores 





Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

20 

1.25 

2.69 

0.35 

1.90 

0.15 

1.73 

0.75 

1.52 

Relation¬ 

ship 

14 

2.00 

2.29 

0.29 

1.94 

1.00 

1.31 

0.71 

1.20 

General¬ 

ization 

21 

0.90 

3.oo 

-0.19 

1.66 

0.62 

1.43 

0.48 

1.25 

Control 

19 

1.26 

3.36 

0.47 

1.84 

0.21 

1.55 

0.58 

1.61 


As on previous occasions, analyses were undertaken with total 
scores, subsection scores, and with scores made by the members within 


each group. In science, these investigations revealed no significant 
differences. The training periods failed to produce differential 
retention among the groups in science. 


















. 

■ 

. 









. 


. 


* 

' 

. 








* 






* 


' 




. 


■ 





. 




- 

' 












Social Studies 


202 


Means and standard deviations for retention scores in social 
studies are summarized in Table CXXXIX. 

TABLE CXXXIX 

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR RETENTION 
SCORES IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 


Group 

N 

Total 


Subscores 







Fact 

Relation 

Generalization 



M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

M 

S.D. 

Fact 

21 

-0.43 

3.47 

0.00 

1.34 

0.29 

1.42 

-0.71 

-0.43 

Relation¬ 

ship 

19 

0.53 

2.87 

0.63 

1.42 

0.21 

1.96 

-0.32 

1.6o 

General¬ 

ization 

19 

1.53 

3.13 

0.47 

1.31 

1.05 

1.13 

0.00 

1.97 

Control 

15 

0.53 

3.25 

0.33 

1.29 

0.40 

1.45 

-0.20 

2.14 


The analyses of the total scores and those of the fact, relation¬ 
ship and generalization sections of the distribution again did not 
reveal significant differences among the groups. 

Investigation of subsection performance -within each group also 
failed to yield significant differences except in the case of the Fact 
group. The results of the mean difference test, employed after analysis 
of variance indicated variations in scores, are presented in Table CXL. 

The members of this group retained significantly more generali¬ 
zations than they did relationships. Since this class received 
instruction only in identifying facts in a selection, the results of 
this analysis must be considered a reflection of the training received 
by the members outside the experimental situation. 

































jp ( gl/f r 






"c ; . r y 


Sec 






o 









TABLE CXL 


203 


MEAN DIFFERENCE TESTS FOR THE FACT GROUP SUBSCORSS 
IN RETENTION IN SOCIAL STUDIES, STAGE TWO 



Mean 

Difference 

D 05 a 

D 01 

Relationship and Fact* 5 

0.29 

0.808 

1.082 

Relationship and Generalization 

1.00 

0.808 

1.082 

Fact and Generalization 

0.71 

0.808 

1.082 


difference must exceed Table value to.be significant at the *05 level. 
^Difference favors section named first. 


Generally, the results of the analyses of retention scores in 
social studies followed the pattern of mathematics and science. The 
training periods failed to produce differential retention on the part 
of the groups involved in the experiment. 

Summary 

The analyses of the distributions of retention scores in mathe¬ 
matics, science and social studies, on the whole, failed to reveal 
significant differences in performance. The training periods and 
methods employed in this investigation apparently were incapable of 
producing variation in retention among the groups taking part. 







. 




* 

, 


, 

. 

. 


. 






. 

' 

> V 




- 


































CHAPTER XV 


A SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS OF STAGE TWO 
IN LEARNING, TRANSFER AND RETENTION 

Stage two of the experiment included the tests and training 
periods associated with the second subject-matter area assigned to 
each class. Data were treated following the pattern of stage one; 
that is, analyses were made of the distribution of gains from pre¬ 
test to post-test, of performance on the transfer test, and of the 
distribution of losses from post-test to retention test. 

In addition, the scores made on the pre-test for stage two were 
analysed, with mental age and initial ability in the methods of this 
experiment controlled where necessary. This investigation revealed 
the extent to which the effects of training were transferred from 
one subject matter area to another. 

A summaiy of the results of these analyses are presented in 
this chapter. 

Gains from Pre-Test to Post-Test 


Mathematics 

The analysis of gains in total score revealed that both the 
Relationship and the Control groups made significantly greater gains 
in mathematics than did the Fact group. The difference between the 
Fact and Generalization groups favored the latter and approached, but 
did not reach the .05 level of significance. The examination of the 
fact, relationship and generalization sections of the test did not 






■*■' / i.. . r.. .■■, , ’ - ■ . j- 

. 




. 

* 

• •'/: . ' : .. ■.-‘.f . : ' i: 

. 




. 






. 




. 


- 
















reveal significant differences in gains. 


205 


Within the Relationship group, significantly greater gains were 
recorded in relationships than in generalizations. The members of 
the Control group showed superior gains in relationships than in 
facts, the difference being significant beyond the .05 level. No 
significant differences in mathematics were noted in the subsection 
performance of the Fact and Generalization groups. 

Science 

In science, the analysis of the distribution of gains revealed 
significant differences in only one instance, that of the relationship 
subsection. The Generalization and Relationship groups both made 
significantly greater gains in science than did the Control group. 
There is an indication in this area of the superiority of the 
Generalization and Relationship groups over the Fact group, but 
differences failed to reach the .05 level of significance. 

Social Studies 

In social studies, the analysis of mean gains in total score and 
in the three subsections of the distribution, and the analysis of the 
performance of members within each group did not reveal any instance 
where differences were significant. 

Summary 

Apart from the superiority of the Relationship group over the 
Fact group in total mean gains in mathematics, no evidence was 
obtained through the analysis of gains that would indicate the 





' 

' 


-C. ' ' ■ ■ f . J 


- 

• .v i :•" - ' ■ 

■ 

« 

; . . » , s 

. 

... 1 ■ ■ ■ ■ 

■ ' ■ . ; ■ 



; / i • .■ 


« 

• 

. ■ ’ : • 

■ 




. 

' . ' . 

r. . r . - 




' ■ ' 7 - 



■ 



' 

. • \ fymr ' ■ o 








206 

superiority of any of the methods of study employed in this investi¬ 
gation . 

The pattern of non-significance found from the analysis of the 
subsection scores in mathematics within all classes except those of 
Relationships and Control, indicates that gains, in general, were made 
uniformly in the areas of fact, relationship and generalization. 

Transfer Within the Same Subject Matter Area 

Mathematics 

The analysis of the total scores in mathematics revealed that the 
Control group made significantly higher scores than any of the other 
groups. The Relationship group also made higher scores than both the 
Fact and the Generalization groups, but this difference failed to reach 
the .05 level of significance. The Control group again was superior in 
the fact subsection of the test, but here the Relationship group also 
made a significantly higher score than both the Fact and Generalization 
groups. In the area of relationships the only instances of significant 
differences favored the Control group over the three experimental groups. 
There were no significant differences found in the analysis of the 
generalization section of the test. 

Analysis of the performance of the members of the Control group 
on the subsections of the test disclosed that significantly higher 
scores were made in both relationships and fact than in generalizations. 
Within the Fact and Generalization groups the effects of training 
appeared to be transferred to a greater extent in relationships and 
generalizations than they were in facts. No significant differences 



< i ■ ■ ■: i : ■ ' ’ ' - - 

. 

.i ■: : 

■ • 

* 

• ■: - t ■ . ' ' ' ■ ' 

■ i ' . - - : 

,0\ •. U i ■ ■: •' ' v *■ 

ui-v. ... i'\ ;/ ; ..'/V " : .-.v.; r. I 

; 

. 

<. < ‘L- •>: "• r'icd:l lo ou^-no^s^q 

■ ’ 

■: • ■ : ' . ' • . ■ 





were noted within the Relationship group. 


207 


Science 

The Generalization group made a significantly higher total score 
than any of the other groups in the transfer test in science. On the 
fact section of the test, all the experimental groups achieved 
significantly higher scores than did the Control group. In addition, 
in this section, the Generalization group again was superior to the 
Fact group. The analysis of the generalization section of the test 
yielded the same pattern of results as that of the total scores, the 
Generalization group being significantly better than all the other 
groups. No significant differences were obtained from the relationship 
section of the test. 

Analysis of the performance of the members of the Fact, Relation¬ 
ship and Generalization groups on the subsections of the test revealed 
that in each case significantly higher scores were made in facts and 
generalizations than in relationships. In addition, the members of 
the Fact group scored significantly higher in generalizations than in 
facts. No significant differences were obtained from the examination 
of the subscores within the Control group. 

Social Studies 

No significant differences were obtained from the analysis of the 
total scores in social studies. On the fact and relationship sections 
of the test both the Generalization and the Relationship groups 
achieved significantly higher scores than the Fact group. Also, in the 
area of relationships, the Control group was superior to the Fact group, 






, ..... .. . ... . ..... : ;.. . .... 










■ 


. 

. . ..... 


. 

, ..... 






. 


... : 


'■ . i ,■ , ' ■ : : I 




. 










.. 














.... : 








. 
















- 




* 

















208 


the difference being significant beyond the .05 level. The 
examination of scores made in the generalization section of the test 
revealed significantly better performance on the part of the Fact and 
Generalization groups than the Control group. 

Within the Control group, significantly higher scores were made 
on the relationship subsection than on facts or generalizations. No 
significant differences were obtained on the analysis of the subsection 
performance within each of the other groups. 

Summary 

In general, the results of the analysis of the transfer test in 
science support the view that the effects of training in more meaningful 
methods of study are transferred to a greater extent than the effects 
of a less meaningful method. 

Although there was some variation in performance within the classes, 
results on the whole were inconclusive. It was not possible to 
determine the effects of training in a particular method of study on 
the three outcomes within each class. 

Transfer from One Subject Matter Area to Another 


Mathematics 

The analysis of total score and the scores on the fact sections of 
Pre-Test II revealed that the Generalization group was significantly 
better than all the other groups. On the relationship section, the 
Generalization group made significantly higher scores than the Fact 
and Relationship groups. The Control group, in this area, was superior 
















' 


I/- ' *' ' 




.. 












> ■ 


■ 







. 


. 

■ 

• ' . ‘ 

> ■ 

b - ! .• ; . ;-i 






/r.;:,:.: •\o /-•'C1.' 


. 

■ f 

■ 


■ ' 


■ ■ 








. 



' 

, • • 










209 

to the Fact group, also. The Fact, Generalization and Control groups 
all made significantly higher scores on the generalization section of 


the test than did the Relationship group. 

The analysis of the subsection scores within each group revealed 
variation in performance in all but the Control group. The members of 
the Fact, Relationship and Generalization groups obtained significantly 
higher scores in the fact section than in either generalizationsor 
relationships. In addition, the score on the relationship section was 
significantly higher than that in generalization for both the Relation¬ 
ship and Generalization groups. 

Science 

The analysis of total scores revealed that there were no 
significant differences among the groups in science. The fact and 
generalization sections also did not produce differences in Pre-test 
II. The Generalization group made significantly higher scores than 
did the Fact and Control groups on the relationship section of the 
test. No significant differences were found on the analysis of the 
subscores made on the science test by the members within any of the 
groups. 

Social Studies 

No significant differences were noted in the analysis of total 
scores on the pre-test in social studies. The examination of the 
three subsections of the test also failed to reveal instances of 
significant differences. 

The only significant difference found in the analysis of the 






< 




. 


»- 




V, ■' ■ . '' • ' . " • ' ' V.; » • 


























- 




• •: V f i ' . - . 










■ 

■ 




















, 


















210 

subsection performance within each group occurred in the Generalization 
group. In this case, generalization and relationship scores were 
significantly higher than fact scores. 

Summary 

In mathematics, analysis of the distribution of scores on the 
pre-test appeared to indicate that the effects of training in a more 
meaningful method of study tended to be transferred from social studies 
to mathematics to a greater extent than did training in a less meaningful 
method. Also, within the mathematics test, the analysis of subsection 
scores within the experimental groups revealed that the effects of 
training in a more meaningful method of study seemed to result in more 
flexible performance on the transfer test than do those of a less 
meaningful method. This was suggested by the fact that in the 
Generalization and Relationship groups high scores were made in less 
meaningful outcomes, while the Fact group showed high scores only in 
the area of instruction. The results of the analyses of the science 
and social studies tests failed to support the findings in mathematics 
and consequently a general conclusion cannot be drawn. 

Retention 

Mathematics 

The analyses of the distributions of retention scores in 
mathematics failed to reveal significant differences except in the 
subsection performance of the members of the Control group. In this 
instance, the members retained more relationships than they did facts 




' 




5.03 








' 




. 

i i 


•x;: . ■ ' ; ; • ■ ' . 'i. i • 1 ' ■■ ‘ . 

. 

, 

' • ■ 

: 




■ 


) • - ' f '3 ; :7 07 ■ 





. 








. i 



and generalizations 


211 


Science 

In science, the examination of retention scores failed to disclose 
any instances of significant differences among the groups or in the 
subsection scores made by the members within any of the groups. 

Social Studies 

The examination of total scores and those of the fact, relation¬ 
ship and generalization sections did not reveal significant differences 
among the groups. The members of the Fact group, however, retained 
significantly more generalizations than relationships. This was the 
only instance of which significant differences were obtained on the 
analysis of subsection performance within the groups in social studies. 

Summary 

The analysis of the distributions of retention scores on the 
whole failed to reveal significant differences in performance. Since 
few instances of variation were noted within any of the groups, it 
appears that there was uniformity of retention of facts, relationships 
and generalizations within each of the classes. 

Tentative donclusions 

The analysis of the data for the second stage of the experiment 
permits certain tentative conclusions to be drawn. 

1. Apart from the superiority of the Relationship group over the 

Fact group in mathematics, there was no evidence that training 





, 

■ v v < . : .. ■' v . " , • '■ ■■ > ... ■; c/. j 

. .. 


\ 

. 

t 






■ 




\ 




* i. ' : . •' j - 




, • 








■ 

' 




212 

through one particular method of study produced greater gains 
in learning than training through any of the other methods 
employed in this investigation, 

2 . Gains appeared to be made uniformly in the areas of fact, 
relationship and generalization with all methods of study 
used in the experiment. 

3. Within the same subject-matter area, the effects of training 
in more meaningful methods of study, those of relationships 
and generalizations, appeared to be transferred to a greater 
extent than the effects of the less meaningful method of study, 
that of facts. 

4. Although there was some variation in the performance of members 
within each class on the subsections of the transfer test, 
evidence was inconclusive. The extent to which the transfer 
of the effects of training influenced results within each group 
could not be determined. 

5- The effect of training in a more meaningful method of study 
tended to be transferred from social studies to mathematics 
to a greater extent than did the effects of training in a 
less meaningful method. The results from other subject matter 
groups failed to support this finding, however, and consequently 
a general conclusion cannot be drawn. 

6. The analysis of the subsection results within each of the 

classes on the transfer test in mathematics seemed to indicate 
that training in the more meaningful method of study produced 
greater flexibility of performance than did the less meaningful 




..- ..... .. ... - .... .. .. J . i 

- 

- 

* 

; 

■ * " -■ . < , , ■ . 

■ 

' 

- 

■ 

. 

*■ 

. 

■ * ‘I .; 1 vhy ■><.-. ...v .■. .ov ■<: 



methods. Again the results in science and social studies did 
not support this finding, and hence no generalization can be 
made. 

There was no indication that training in one method of study 
produced greater retention of material after an interval of 
twenty-one days than did training in any of the other methods 
employed in this investigation. 

Retention of facts, relationships and generalizations within 
each of the classes appeared to be uniform for the three 
methods of study used in the experiment. 














c 


. 

' : 







CHAPTER XVI 


CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY 

Conclusions 

The conclusions presented in this chapter result from a synthesis 
of the findings of stage one of the experiments which were reported in 
Chapter Ten and the results of stage two which were summarized in 
Chapter Fifteen. 

1. In the majority of cases, the three methods of study employed 
in this experiment were equally effective in producing gains 
in learning as measured by the difference between scores of 
the pre-test and the post-test. It may be worthy of note, 
however, that where differences in gains occurred, the more 
meaningful methods of study were favored over the less 
meaningful. 

2. Within each of the classes involved in this experiment, gains 
appeared to be made uniformly in the areas of fact, relation¬ 
ship and generalization. 

3. Within the same subject-matter area, the effects of training 
in the more meaningful methods of study, those of general¬ 
ization and relationship, appeared to be transferred to a 
greater extent than did the effects of training in a less 
meaningful method, that of facts. 

4. Although there was some variation in the performance of 
members within each class on the subsection of the transfer 













i \ ■ 

, 

. 

. 

, 

.. 












■ 


. 






. 

; 






test, evidence on the whole was inconclusive. The extent 


215 


to which the transfer of the effects of training influenced 
results within each group could not be determined. 

5. The effects of training in a more meaningful method of study 
tended to be transferred from social studies to mathematics 
to a greater extent than did the effects of training in a 
less meaningful method. Results of the investigation of 
transfer from science to social studies, and from mathematics 
to science, did not support this finding since, in general, 
no significant differences were noted. 

6. The effects of training in a more meaningful method of study 
in social studies appeared to produce greater flexibility 

of performance in mathematics than did the training in a 
less meaningful method. Again, it appears that these results 
are specific for the classes in the Social Studies - 
Mathematics group, since the examination of the other groups 
failed to produce evidence to support this finding. 

7. There was no indication that training in one method of study 
produced greater retention of material after an interval of 
twenty-one days than did training in any of the other methods 
employed in this investigation. 

8. In the majority of cases, the retention of facts, relation¬ 
ships and generalizations appeared to be uniform for each of 
the three methods of study used in this experiment. 


J - - • -• -J- ■- • 

: ' u: ' , ; v 

. 

■ 

■V'j . >. . ' ■ i • ' •■■■ v . J 

, 

; i f . : ■ • ;■ 

Ih '■ ' 

; . 

r 



•, - : 






. 




• 






' 










. 











Discussion of the Results 


216 


As has been noted above, where significant differences were 
obtained in the analyses, the results generally favored the more 
meaningful approach to learning. Evidence to this effect was most 
clear-cut in the area of transfer within the same subject matter field. 
For the most part, the Generalization group was found to have made 
significantly higher scores than the Fact group. There were, however, 
a number of instances in which the Generalization group was superior 
to the Relationship group, and also a number in which the Relationship 
group made higher scores than the Fact group. The total picture 
suggested by these results is that of a gradient of meaningfulness of 
methods of study beginning with the lowest level, the study of facts, 
and extending through the study of relationships to the highest level, 
the study of generalizations. 

Subject to corroboration from other investigations, it would 
appear, then, that pupils should be encouraged to draw conclusions 
from the material presented in class and to justify conclusions 
already made in a reading selection. Stress should also be placed 
on the development of principles and their application. In other 
words, to be most effective, techniques should be employed in the 
classroom which emphasize generalizations rather than the mere facts 
in a selection. 

There were few instances of negative results in the experiment, 
in the sense that a less meaningful method of study produced 
superior results. There were, however, many areas of investigation 








. •. 


I t , t ro liv ' • : cr; no 




J ■ f..;S >; 


• 

: 




, 








• ' 



. 

» ' 

* 








. 



. ( , ,■ - 





















- 

. 








. 




■ . - 





217 

which yielded results that were inconclusive, that is, areas in which 
no differences were found. This was particularly noticeable in the 
measurement of retention. In the present study the students were not 
informed during the initial presentation of the material that they 
would be tested for retention at a later date. It is possible 
therefore that learning was undertaken without the intent to retain 
and that consequently their performance on the retention test was 
affected. 

Although it was found on the transfer test that a more 
meaningful method of study was advantageous in later learning, this 
method did not appear to influence retention. It would seem, then, 
that classroom teachers would be well advised to give emphasis to 
retention during instruction, rather than to rely solely on a 
particular method of study. Further investigation, however, is 
required to clarify this point. 

It should be noted, too, that as youngsters mature in a good 
school situation, there is a natural consolidation of traits, attitudes 
and habits related to methods of study which causes them to become 
relatively rigid and resistant to change. These attitudes and habits 
would have a tendency to blur the effectiveness of the present study. 

It is difficult to see how this situation could have been avoided, 
however, since selections from the grade seven course of studies served 
as the material for the experiment. 

In the light of this, it is possible that the training periods 
employed in this investigation were of insufficient length to overcome 
behavioral patterns resulting from almost seven years of school attendance. 


« 


. 

. 


, . . ■: i " X ' 


, i „ , . 








« 

. . 

, 

. 

i 




218 

Consideration must also be given to the fact that, concerning 
methods, the modem teacher is eclectic, varying techniques to meet 
the needs of the pupils. As a result of this, the students in the 
experimental classes would be unaccustomed to the restrictions placed 
on them during the training periods. Prolonged periods of operation 
with a single method of study would very likely tend to reduce the 
motivation of the class as a whole. This might account for the failure 
of the post-test to produce evidence of gains in learning, while 
significant results were obtained with the transfer test. The post-test 
it may be recalled, was administered immediately following the training 
periods, but before the transfer test there was an interval in which 
the experimenter did not meet the classes. This rest period may have 
resulted in renewed interest on the part of the students when the 
testing program was resumed, a factor which, in turn, would influence 
performance. 

The position of the Control group in the experiment is worthy of 
note. It must not be assumed, as is the case in many other investi¬ 
gations , that the Control group was intended to represent the lowest 
level of attainment in this experiment. Inasmuch as the members of 
this group were working under usual school conditions with their 
regular teachers, it was not surprising that in some instances they 
exceeded the performance of the experimental groups. On the i-jhole, 
the study appeared to indicate that the grade seven classes of the 
Control group were operating for the most part at a higher level of 
meaning than the Fact group, but not at the level of the Generalization 
group. The fact that in many instances there were no differences 


'J ? .. j SOM'Z -■ .. ..... . ... •/. .. ...'. Of; . ■ j :i . i ..... .. i. -... 

■ < 

.. t j r . ft - ;j ■ ■ i.' ' ■ • 

...'■ ' ■ • . .. / ■•!> ■ . ; f ;• .. ■' ■ ‘ 

. 

■ '■ K ' ‘i ... . : ' . . ’ 

£ ; 1 • 

’ 

;.nL ...... ■ ■: •' I ". ■ :. 'u *. ,. ■ 'Y- 






■ 


* 





. 












. 


■ " «,> 't i Y 









, 










• , ... > 

■ 





: ' 

to ... 



' ' 



• • ’ - ’ • ‘ •' ■ ■ > ■■ •• ' '• :i ■ .-. ' V- 

. 

c • *> 0.0 . ; '. ‘‘ > .. . ■ : C or. " ' ' 

■ 

: J C v.-g 

.. ■ '■■■> ' .' ' ■ ; 1 v. i iv ;; /■. . f •; ; •; Y ..• ; ■>;, . ' : 

rf o . 





219 


between the experimental groups and the Control group may also be 
taken as further indication of the stability or set of the students 
toward methods of study after seven years in school. 

Although there were indications that learning with meaning has been 
incorporated into the modem classroom, the failure of the Control group 
to achieve as well as the Generalization group would suggest that learn¬ 
ing with meaning has not reached its maximum in current educational 
practice. Possibly greater emphasis should be given to the development 
of the ability to read for generalizations than is presently the case. 
Since habits associated with methods of study seemed to be resistant 
to change by the grade seven level, it would likely be best to initiate 
this attention to the development of the ability to read for generali¬ 
zations early in the school program. If, however, changes in methods 
of study must be made in the later grades, it appears that considerably 
more extensive training than was employed in the present investigation 
would be required. 

Implications for Further Study 

1. Since the conclusions outlined above must be restricted to the 
classes and grade involved in this investigation, confirmation 
and clarification of the findings would result from a repetition 
of the experiment with other groups of classes. Before this was 
undertaken, consideration should be given to the following 
suggestions: 

(a) To make the findings more general, an attempt should be 
made to secure a truly random sample of classes. 


i'xss * 

■ . ■ ■ 

■ t 

:■ . ' 1 ' ' • 
t ! - 

. '■ 

' 

:rc* I . v-. ; . \ . • [; • . ’ ■■ • - • : i * " ’ ' ' - •• ' ■ '■ ■■ 

. 


j - . .. ’ - • . ' - • ■ < • ' i.b-r^ ■ ..i : ;-' 

. 

t 


. 








. 






• . ' . ■ ' 


2 •’ ' , ' . 




. 




■ 


< 














220 


(b) The number of cases in each subject matter group 
should be increased so that greater confidence 
could be placed in the results of the analysis 
of the data. 

(c) The classes should be matched for mental age, 
socio-economic status and previous educational 
experience in order to restrict sources of 
variation beyond the experimental situation. 

(d) The use of tests standardized on Alberta populations 
would provide more reliable measures and make the 
conclusions of the study more acceptable. 

The relationship between the meaningfulness of the method of study 
employed by students in learning and the degree of retention 
requires further investigation. Providing the pupil, before the 
initial learning period, with the information that there will be 
a retention test might prove to be of value. Conceivably other 
incentives could be utilized to develop a set for retention. 

Since the results of this experiment in grade seven differ from 
those conducted in lower grades, an investigation of the relation¬ 
ship between meaning and learning at an intermediate level, for 
example, grade four, might be a worthy undertaking. Experimentation 
involving high school and university classes should also be con¬ 
sidered in that such results would permit the formulation of 
generalizations to cover the entire range of the educational 


system. 


'£ '; ; i 

« 

. 

: 

x , , 

• * 

■ 




221 


The inclusion of subject matter areas other than mathematics, 
science and social studies would yield a more comprehensive 
representation of the relationship between meaning and learning 
in the classroom. 

If the findings of the present study are corroborated by other 
investigations, experimentation should be undertaken to determine, 
within each subject-matter area, the classroom techniques that 
most effectively emphasize meaning in learning. 

The examination of the transfer of the effects of training in 
a particular method of study from one subject matter area to 
another needs to be extended, since the results of the present 
study were inconclusive. Outcomes of a more detailed investi¬ 
gation would possibly indicate whether the most worthwhile methods 
of study would transfer generally or whether instruction would be 
required in each subject-matter area. 


:.:;S 

, . ;.j w ..,U~. : .. ;j .jT . _ ... - • : J ■ ■' ■ - ■ ■ • ••••' 

' • ■ ' ' 

- 

« 

- 

. 

; ... '• • . :/ 3 : ; - . ■ :...t ■ ’ " -■ "• - -v '*•; 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Anderson, G.L. 11 Quantitative Thinking as Developed Under Connectionist 
and Field Theories of Learning," in Swenson, E.J., G.L.Anderson, 
and C.L.Stacey, Learning Theory in School Situations . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1949. 

Ausubel, D.P., L.C.Robbins, and E.Blake, "Retroactive Inhibition and 
Facilitation in the Learning of School Materials," Journal of 
Educational Psychology . 48:334-43* October, 1957. 

Babcock, C.M.,"The Communication of Meaning," School and Society . 
76:398-402, December, 1952. 

Earlow, M.C., "Transfer of Training in Reasoning," Journal of Educational 
Psychology . 28:122-8, February, 1937. 

Bassett, S.J., "Factors Influencing Retention of History in Sixth, 
Seventh, and Eighth Grades," Journal of Educational Psychology . 
20:683-90, December, 1929 

Bernard, H.W. . Psychology of Learning and Teaching . New York: McGraw- 
Hill Book Company, Inc., 195^ 

Britt, S.K., "Retroactive Inhibition: A Review of the Literature," 
Psychological Bulletin . 32:381-440, June, 1935. 

Brown, G.W., Democracy in Action . Toronto: J.M.Dent and Sons, Limited, 
1952. 

Brown, G.W. , E.Harman, and M. Jeanneret, The Story of Canada . Toronto: 
The Copp Clark Co., Ltd., 1949. 

Brownell, W. A., Development of Children f s Number Concepts in the Primary 
Grades. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1928. 

Brownell., W.A., "Wien is Arithmetic Meaningful?" Journal of 
Educational Research . 38: 481-98, March, 1945. 

Brownell, W.A., and G. Hendrickson, "How Children Learn Information 

Concepts and Generalizations," National Society for the Study of 
Education. Forty-ninth Yearbook . Part I. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1950. 

Brownell, W.A., and H.E. Moser, Meaningful Versus Mechanical Learning: A 
Study in Grade Three Subtration . Duke University: Duke University 
Press, 1949. 

Brownell, W.A., and V.M. Sims, "The Nature of Understanding," National 
Society for the Study of Education. Forty-fifth Yearbook . Part I 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946. 






























223 

Bruene, E., “Effects of the Summer Vacation on the Achievement of Pupils 
in the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Grades, 1 ’ Journal of Educational 
Research . 18:309-14♦ November, 1928* 

Clark, J.R., and R.S. Smith, Growth in Arithmetic. Grade Seven . 

Yonkers-on-Hudson: World Book Co., 1952. 

Cochran, W.G., “Some Consequences When Assumptions for the Analysis of 
Variance are not Satisfied,” Biometrics . 3: 22-38, March, 1947. 

Cochran, W.G. and C.M. Cox, Experimental Designs . New York: John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc., 1957. 

Cohen, M.R., A Preface to logic . New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1944, 

as cited in Van Engen, H., “An Analysis of Meaning in Arithmetic, II’,’ 
Elementary School Journal. . 49: 395-400, March, 1949. 

Craig, R.C., “Directed Versus Independent Discovery of Established 
Relationships,” Journal of Educational Psychology . 47:223-34, 

April, 1956. 

Cronbach, L.J., Educational Psychology . New York: Harcourt, Brace 
and Company, 1954. 

Davis, F.B., Item Analysis Data. Their Computation. Interpretation Use 

in Test Construction . Cambridge, Mass.: Graduate School of Education, 
Harvard University, 1949. 

Davis, R.A. Educational Psychology . New York: McGraW Hill Book Co., Inc., 
1948. 

Deese, J., The Psychology of Learning . New York: McGraw Hill Book Co., 
Inc., 1952. 

Deverell, A.F., and others, Winston Mathematics. Intermediate One . Toronto: 
The John C. Winston Co., Ltd., 1952. 

Dickie, B., The Great Adventure . Toronto: J.M. Dent and Sons Ltd., 1950. 

Dietze, A.G., and G.E.Jones, “Factual Memory of Secondary School Students 
for a Short Article Which They Read a Single Time," Journal of 
Educational Psychology . 22: 586-98, December, 1931. 

Dorsey, M.F., and L.J.Hopkins, “The Influence of Attitude Upon Transfer," 
Journal of Educational Psychology . 21:410-17, September, 1950. 

Douglass H.R., and H.F. Spitzer, “The Importance of Teaching for 

Under standing,“ National Society for the Study of Education. Forty- 
fifth Yearbook . Part I. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946. 

Ebbinghaus, H., Memory, a Contribution to Experimental Psychology . New 

York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University, 

1913. 
























■ r- ’■ 


-r*-i T r - 










3 











C 





- • 

. 

’ 

■ 

. 

. ' ■ ■ : 





224 


Edwards, A.L., Experimental Design in Psychological Research . New 
York: Rinehart and Co,, 1950, 

Fransden, A.N, , How Children Learn . New York: McGraw Hill Book Co. t 
Inc., 1957. 

Freud, H., and N.D. Cheronis, "Retention in the Physical Science Survey 
Course," Journal of Chemical Education . 17:289-93» June, 1940. 

Garrett, H.E., Statistics in Psychology and Education . New York: 
Longman's Green and Co., 1953. 

Gatchel, D.F., "Results of How to Study Course Given in High School," 
School Review , 39:123-29, February, 1931. 

Gates, A.I., and others, Educational Psychology . New York: The 
MacMillan Company, 1949. 

Goldring, C.C., Canadian Citizenship . Toronto: J.M.Dent and Sons, Ltd., 
1950. 

Grant, M.E., "Some Theories and Experiments in the Field of Memory," 
Journal of Educational Psychology , 23: 511-27* October, 1932. 

Griffith, C.R., Psychology Applied to Teaching and Learning . New York: 
Farrar and Rinehart, 1939. 

Gulliksen, H., Theory of Mental Tests . New York: John Wiley and Sons, 
Inc., 1950. 

Hall, J.F., "Retroactive Inhibition in Meaningful Material," Journal of 
Educational Psychology , 46:47-51* January, 1955. 

Hartley, H.0.,"The Maximum F-Ratio as a Short-cut Test for Hetrogeneity 
of Variance," Biometrika . 37:308-12, December, 1950. 

Henderson, K.B., and R.E. Pingry, Using Mathematics. Book Seven . New 
York: McGraw Hill Book Co., Inc., 1956. 

Hendrickson, G., and ¥.H. Schroeder, "Transfer of Training in Learning 
to Hit a Submerged Target," Journal of Educational Psychology . 
32:205-13* March, 1941. 

Hildreth, G., "Puzzle Solving With and Without Understanding," Joumal 
of Educational Psychology . 33:595-604, November, 19^1. 

Hilgard, E.R., Theories of Learning . New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 
Inc., 1956. 

Hilgard, S.R., H.P. Irvine, and J.E. Whipple, "Rote Memorization, Under¬ 
standing and Transfer; An Extension of Katona’s Card Trick 
Experiments," Journal of Experimental Psychology . 46:288-92, October, 
1953. 

































































Hopkins, L.T., "What Are The Essentials?" in J.N.Seidman (editor;. 
Readings in Educational. Psychology . New York: Houghton 
Mifflin Co., 1956. 

Horn, E., "Language and Meaning," National Society for the Study of 
Education. Forty-first Yearbook . Part II. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1942. 

Johannsen, D., M. Stirling, and J. Levine, "An Experiment on Types of 
Memory Ability," Journal of Educational Psychology . 23:28-34, 
January, 1932. 

Johnson, L.M., "Similarity of Meaning as a Factor in Retroactive 

Inhibition," Journal of General Psychology . 9:377-89, October, 1933. 

Johnson, P.O., Statistical Methods in Research . New York: Prentice 
Hall, 1949. 

Judd, C.H., Educational Psychology . New York: Houghton Mifflin 
Company, 1939. 

Katona, G., Organizing and Memorizing . New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1940. 

Kitell, J.E., "The Effects of External Direction During Learning on 
Transfer and Retention of Principles," Journal of Educational 
Psychology . 48:391-405, November, 1957. 

Koffka, K., Principles of Gestalt Psychology . New York: Harcourt, Brace 
and Co., 1935. 

Kolberg, O.W., "A Study of Summertime Forgetting," Elementary School 
Journal . 35:281-8?, December, 1934. 

Lahey, Sister M., "Permanence of Retention of First Year Algebra," 

Journal of Educational Psychology . 32:401-13, September, 1941. 

Limpus, G.H., W.T. Reid, and J.¥.B. Shore, Explorations In Science . 
Toronto: The MacMillan Company of Canada, Ltd., 1951. 

Lindquist, E.F., Design and Analysis of Experiments in Psychology and 
Education . Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1953. 

Maxwell, A. E., Experimental Design in Psychology and the Medical 
Sciences, London: Methuen and Co., Ltd., 1958. 


McConnell, T.R., "Recent Learning Theory: Its Implications for the 

Psychology of Arithmetic," Sixteenth Yearbook. National Council for 
Teachers of Mathematics . New York: Columbia University Press, 1941. 

McDougall, W.P., "Differential Retention of Course Outcomes in 

Educational Psychology," Journal of Educational Psychology , 49:53- 
60, April, 1958. 



































•? 


. 

. 

















226 

McGeoch, J.A., and A.L. Irion, The Psychology of Human Learning . New 
York: Longmans Green and Go., 1952. 

McNemar, Q., Psychological Statistics . New York: John Wiley and Sons, 
Inc., 1955. 

Meister, M., R.E. Keirstead, and L.M. Shoemaker, The Wonderland of 
Science . Chicago: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1948. 

Melton, A.W. and J. Irwin, n The Influence of Degree of Interpolated 
Learning on Retroactive Inhibition and the Overt Transfer of 
Specific Responses,” American Journal of Psychology.. 53:173-203* 
April, 19^0. 

Melton, A.W. f and W.J. von Lackum, "Retroactive and Proactive Inhibition 
and Retention: Evidence for a Two-Factor Theory of Retroactive 
Inhibition," American Journal of Psychology * 157-73» April, 1941* 

Miller, G.A., and J.A. Selfridge, "Verbal Context and the Recall of 

Meaningful Material," American Journal of Psychology . 63:176-185, 
April, 1950. 

Otis, A.S., Manual of Directions for Beta Test . Yonkers-on-Hudson: 

World Book Company, 195^. 

Overman, J.R., "An Experimental Study of the Effects of the Method of 
Study on Transfer of Training in Arithmetic," Elementary School 
Journal . 31: 183-90, November, 1930. 

Palk, H., The Book of Canadian Achievement . Toronto: J.M.Dent and Sons 
Ltd., 1951. 

Parker, B.M., The Ways of the Weather . Evanston, Illinois: Row, 

Peterson and Co., 1941. 

Parker, B.M., Heat . Evanston, Illinois: Row, Peterson and Co,, 1942, 

Reed, K.B., "Meaning as a Factor in Learning," Journal of Educational 
Psychology . 29:419-30, September, 1938, 

Reed, H.B., "Learning and Retention of Concepts, I. The Influence of Set, 
Journal of Experimental Psychology . 36:71-87* February, 1946. 

Ruch, G.M., F.B. Knight, and J.W. Studebaker, Mathematics and Life. Book 
One . Chicago: Scott Foresman and Co., 1942. 

Salisbury, R., "A Study of the Transfer Effects of Training in Logical 
Organization," Journal of Educational Research . 28:241-54, 

December, 1934. 


Schrepel, M., and H.R, Laslett, "On the Loss of Knowledge by Junior High 
School Pupils Over the Summer Vacation," Journal of Educational 
























































r - 


. 


. «f;;r *TBV- ' 


■ 






Psychology . 27:299-303, April, 1936 


22 7 


Siegel, S., Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences . New 
York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1956. 

Smith, V.C., and G.H. Trafton, Exploring Modern Science . Toronto: 

Longmans, Green and Co., 1951. 

Spitzer, H.F., The Teaching of Arithmetic . Boston: Houghton Mifflin 
Co., 1948. 

Stacey, C.L., "The Law of Effect in the Retained Situation with Meaning¬ 
ful Material," in Swenson, E.J.,,G.L.Anderson, and C.L. Stacey, 
Learning Theories and School Situations . Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1949* 

Stephens, J.M., Educational Psychology . New York: Henry Holt and Company, 
1951. 

Swenson, E.J., "Organization and Generalization as Factors in Learning, 
Transfer and Retention ," in Swenson, E.J., G.L.Anderson and G.L. 
Stacey, Learning Theorj.es and School Situations . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1949. 

Technical Recommendations for Psychological Tests and Diagnostic 

Techniques . American Psychological Association, Inc., Washington, 1954. 

Theile, C.L., The Contribution of Generalization to the Learning of 

Addition Facts . New York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, 
Columbia University Press, 1939. 

Theile, C.L., "Arithmetic in the Middle Grades," National Society for the 
Study of Education. Fiftieth Yearbook . Part I. Chicago, University 
of Chicago Press, 1951. 

Thorndike, E.L., Educational Psychology. Volume II . New York: Bureau 
of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University, 1913. 

Thorndike, E.L., "Mental Discipline in High School Studies," Journal of 
Educational Psychology . 15:1-22; 83-98, February, 1924. 

Thorndike, R.L., "Reliability," in E.F. Lindquist, (ed.) Educational 
Measurement . Washington: American Council on Education, 1951. 

Tyler, R.W., "What High School Pupils Forget," Educational Research 
Bulletin . 9:490-492, 1930, as cited in A.I.Gates, and others. 
Educational Psychology . New York: The MacMillan Company, 1949* 


Walker, H.M., and J. Lev, Statistical Inference . New York: Henry Holt 
and Co., 1953. 








































0 


"> 







228 


Wert, J.E., C.O. Neidt, and J.S. Ahmam, Statistical Methods in 

Educational and Psychological Research . New York: Appleton- 
Century-Crofts, Inc,, 195^. 

Woodrow, H,, "The Effects of Type of Training upon Transference," 
Journal of Educational Psychology , 18:159-72, March, 1927. 

Woodworth, R.S., Experimental Psychology , New York: Henry Holt and 
Company, 1938. 













APPENDIX A 


229 


EXAMPLE OF READING SELECTION AND TESTS FOR SOCIAL STUDIES 

SOCIAL STUDIES III 

THE FIRST PEOPLE 


The first Canadians all looked more or less alike. They all had brown 
skins, brown eyes and black hair, erect and graceful bodies, small hands 
and feet. They all used stone tools: knife, axe, scraper and point for 
spear or arrow. The needles and combs used by the women were carved from 
bone, horn or ivory. 

With these poor tools the Indian had to get his food, clothing and 
shelter. For these he depended chiefly on the animal life of the country. 
Each tribe hunted the large animal common in its hunting ground: moose in 
the woodlands, buffalo on the prairies, caribou and seal in the north, 
besides bear, deer, wolf, rabbit, fish and wildfowl which were found 
everywhere in Canada. The Iroquois and Hurons grew corn and tobacco. The 
Cjibways made maple sugar and gathered the wild rice which flourished in 
their region. Small fruits were plentiful in most parts and upon these 
the tribes feasted in season. Deerskin was used everywhere for clothing. 
The women of the coast tribes wove also cloaks of cedar-bark strips for 
common folks, goat*s wool for chiefs, and beautiful ones of bright-colored 
feathers for great occasions. 

Homes were made of whatever materials the hunting grounds supplied. 

The frames had to be of a kind that could be set up and taken down quickly, 
so the Indian invented the wig-wam, or teepee, which was used in all parts 
of Canada. The eastern tribes made wig-wams of poles interlaced at the 












■ 




. 

; , - d . ' v • ii ^ ^ • -V\' • '' - 

. 

* 

. 

t 

. 

. 




■ 














* 


, 






■ 












230 

top and covered with birch-bark. The 0jibway and the Gree used a round- 
topped shelter made of willow boughs stuck in the ground at both ends* 
The western peoples lived in skin covered teepees. The eskimo built a 
log, or snow house, or sheltered in a tent of skin, according to the 
season and the work he was doing. 

The Hurons and Iroquois did a little farming and so built more 
permanent homes. Their "long houses" were apartment houses, 50 yards 
long by 12 wide with a central passage dotted with fires, one to each 
two families. When a young couple married, the household moved the end 
wall of the house along and built two or three yards of new side wall to 
make room for the new family and the new hearth. 

The Facific coast Indians had a steady supply of fish and lived 
much of their lives in one place, so they built houses of lumber. They 
were longer and wider than the Iroquois "long houses", framed with cedar 
posts and beams, and covered with wide cedar planks. They carved the 
posts of the house and carved and painted totem poles to stand in front 
of it. 

With the materials in his neighborhood, the Indian built also the 
different kinds of transport he needed. There were trails, but no roads 
or bridges in Canada before the white man came. In winter the eastern 
tribes moved their goods about on toboggans. The northern people used 
dog-sleds, while the prairie Indian used the travois summer and winter. 
Snowshoes were common everywhere. Summer travel was by canoe. The east 
coast tribes covered their canoes with moose hide, the woodlands people 
used birch-bark, and the west coast people made dugouts from their big 
trees. The birch-bark canoe was a dainty craft, light to handle in the 


. ■ r>%± 

. 

- 

. 


* 

- 

, 

. 

4 


















* . 




- 

' 






231 

water and on the portage, but the Eskimo kyak probably required more skill 
to build and to use. It is as light as a canoe and almost unsinkable. 

There were so few Indians and they used so few of Canada*s resources 
that there was no need for them to practice conservation; but their poor 
tools made it necessary for them to help each other in the battle for food 
and shelter. They did most things cooperatively and so had the comfort of 
company in their hardships. The family was the unit of their social life. 
A few families of kinsfolk joined in a band and a number of bands made up 
a tribe. The natural products of the tribe's hunting-ground belonged to 
all in common. The fortunate hunter shared his game with all. The band 
feasted together and starved together. 

When a child was born, the older women came to help the mother. If 
the baby fell ill, the medicine man charmed away the evil spirits. Indian 
parents seldom scolded their children and almost never struck them. They 
taught them to do the different kinds of work required, and in the evenings 
all drew round the fire to listen to the old men tell stories of the great 
deeds of their forefathers. At 13 the boy or girl spent a few days alone, 
fasting and hoping to dream of a good spirit who would come to guide his 
or her life. Young people married about 18. The groom paid for his bride 
with gifts to her parents. In the new home, the husband hunted, fished 
and made tools and utensils, while the wife brought in the meat and fire¬ 
wood, cooked dressed the skins, and made the clothing. She sewed the tent 
and canoe coverings, too, for the man must have his weapons always in his 
hand to kill game, or to protect his family. 

Leisure hours were filled with wrestling, racing, spear throwing and 
games such as lacrosse, football and shinny which was usually played by 




- v • - v ■■ 

' 

, 




* 
















, 

, 

- 


■ 












* 


. 

' 


* 






- 


, 



. ■■ ■ 'i ■ ;; 









« ■ J 

. 

, 





' 

- 



« 


T ' * 


' 

. 

< 

. 

■ 







232 

the women. Gambling and dancing were the most popular amusements. 

The Indians were religious people. They believed that the natural 
objects and animals about them were inhabited by spirits, and their prayers, 
dances, feasts and ceromonies were performed to win the help of these 
spirits. The medicine men were their doctors and priests. All Indians 
seemed to have believed in heaven and placed food and weapons beside their 
dead to help them on their way to the Happy Hunting Grounds# 

The red men were democratic. Among the woodland tribes each band 
chose as leader a man who was brave, or good, or a skillful hunter; but the 
others followed him only when they thought his plan a good one. They had 
no laws and no police. Good Indians did as their fathers had taught them, 
and the evil doer paid for his sins with gifts to the one he had wronged. 
Those who committed serious crimes were outlawed; the outlaw had to live 
alone and might be killed on sight. 

The prairie tribes had advanced a step further. They were grouped 
into large bands, each governed by a council of its leading men with one 
acting as chief. Here again the power of the leaders depended upon the 
people, who obeyed them only as long as they respected, or feared them. 

Each summer, all the bands of a tribe met, chose their council and head 
chief, and spent two or three weeks in discussing the affairs of the tribe 
and in parties and dances. Later, four prairie tribes: Blackfoot, Blood, 
Piegan, Sarcee formed a confederacy which fought the Gree Confederacy for 
possession of the buffalo plains. 

The farming tribes of the Iroquois Confederacy elected village councils 
of men and women to make rules and keep order in the community. Each tribe 
had also a council of leading men; and over the six tribes of the Confederacy 


, 

. 

. 

, 

' 

* 

, 


* 






, 

■ 

. 

• ■ ■ 

* ’ 

. 




* 














233 

there was a League Council of several chiefs chosen to represent the tribes* 
The famous chief, Hiawatha, is believed to have organized the League 
Council. 

Only the west coast tribes were divided into social classes. With 
them all the members of one family lived in the same plank house, but the 
people in the house were divided into slaves, commoners and nobles. A 
commoner would save for years to give one great feast in order to gain a 
higher social position. The slaves did the hard work of the house and the 
community. 

The greatest gift that we owe to the red man is our broad land which 
they allowed us to take over without making any general war against us. 
Indeed our Indians seem to have been much less war-like than the story books 
and moving pictures make out. When the white folks came as immigrants and 
began taking their land from them, the Indians naturally tried to kill them 
and drive them away. This, with their painted faces and blood curdling war- 
whoops, made the early settlers think of them as frightful savages; but by 
far the largest part of Canada*s dealing with them has been in the way of 
peaceful trade. 

Some of the tribes were poor and wretched, but other were intelligent 
proud people. They gave us hundreds of musical place names for our country 
and added many useful words to our language. Their songs, dance rhythms, 
designs and coloring have enriched our arts; and they have left us one of 
the largest collections of myths and legends possessed by any nation. They 
have taught us also many practical things: to grow corn, potatoes, tobacco; 
to make maple sugar, and play lacrosse. Their trails, their inventions: 
the canoe, teepee, toboggan, and snowshoe; their ways of hunting, trapping, 




co.rtr.sr-p [ n ■ ■ 

f S. ? ■ - , 

* 

. 

,, . .. v. 

. 

: v ■ ' o 

* 

- 

r 

- 

. 

- 

■ 

. : ii 

„ 

* 

r . 7 • ' (■ , ‘A N /■ * ■ 

. 

: < v .. r : .i ■ A : - 

: • ‘ ' 1 i 

, , ; . • .. ■ : ? ■ ■ • - <■••••' 



234 

travelling, making a fire and shelter, were adopted by the white man and 
were used by them in exploring and opening up our country. White men still- 
use these gifts of the Indians, though they are seldom as skillful in doing 
so as their red brothers. 

In return for these gifts the white man tried to Christianize the 
Indians, but did little towards civilizing them. Only in our own day has 
Canada begun to make citizens of her first settlers and fit them into the 
national life. 


In those days, in spite of their many good points, the Canadian Indians 
were still nomads, wanderers and uncivilized people, although the people of 
Europe and Asia had long ago learned to farm. After thousands of years of 
hunting, some clever person thought of taming the wild horses, cattle, sheep 
and pigs, and the people became herdsmen. Probably more thousands of years 
passed before they began to cultivate the wild food grasses: wheat, oats, 
barley, rye. When they had done that, they became farmers. They ceased to 
be nomads and settled down in communities. Farming was the beginning of 
civilization for it tied man to one place. He learned to build a house and 
later towns and cities. There each person could work always at one trade 
and so become really skillful at it. It was in this way that people began 
to be civilized. 

The first people who came to America were still hunters and nomads; they 
seemed to have left Asia before the people there learned to farm. They found 
no food grasses here except corn which grew wild in Central America, and wild 
rice which grew as far north as southern Canada. The tribes that settled in 
Central America and Mexico learned to cultivate corn. They became farmers 





,, 

■ 





•« 

• 


- . . . . 




. 


. 

: : 

- 





. 



- ■ 


; 




- 

. 


* 






and built cities as the people of Asia had done. Slowly farming spread 
north to some of the tribes in what is now the United States and they 
also began to live more settled lives. But the kind of corn they had does 
not grow well in Canada, so the Canadian Indians remained hunters and 
nomads. 

Because of being uncivilized, our Indians could not make use of 
Canada’s good farm-land, nor of the other rich resources that nature had 
given her. To use these gifts, Canada needed civilized people, and they 
were already at her door. 











. 




- 


• ' 








. 






SOCIAL STUDIES TEST III 


23 6 


1* Iroquois village councils contained (a) only the old men (b) both 
men and women (c) only the chiefs (d) only men, 

2, Compared with the Eskimo kyak, the Indian’s birch-bark canoe 

(a) required less skill to build and to use (b) required more skill 
to build, less to use (c) required more skill to build and to use 
(d) required more skill to use, less to build, 

3, The Indians of the plains learned that ”in unity there is strength” 
since (a) they formed confederacies (b) they chose their own leaders 
(c) they always did as their fathers had taught them (d) they were 
nomads, 

4, The most popular amusements for the Indians were (a) gambling and 
lacrosse (b) lacrosse and dancing (c) gambling and dancing (d) wrestl¬ 
ing, and dancing, 

5* "White men often use Indian devices (a) and are equally skillful 
with them (b) but are less skillful with them than the Indians (c) and 
are now more skillful with them than the Indians (d) and are just as 
skillful with them as the Indians, 

6 , Conservation of natural resources is necessary (a) only when white 
men first come to an area (b) when a country is uncivilized (c) when 
large numbers of people use the natural resources (d) when people, 
like the Indians, depended upon nature for food, clothing and shelter, 

7 . Tobacco was first grown in Canada by the (a) Iroquois (b) Cree 



















% 



, 

. 


• 




' 



li 














* 




. 












. 










, 








. 

. 

. 

■ 














237 

(c) Ojibways (d) Blackfoot. 

8 . Compared with the Indians of story books and movies, real Indians 
were (a) much less savage and war-like (b) were much more backward 
in their way of life (c) were stronger and more clever (d) were much 
more savage and war-like. 

9. Civilization, as we know it, depends on (a) people being democratic 
(b) people learning how to domesticate animals (c) people being free 
to move from place to place (d) people living in communities. 

10. Totem poles were made by (a) Cree (b) Pacific Coast Indians (c) 

Hurons (d) Iroquois. 

11. In the battle for survival the Indians were forced to help one 
another because (a) the chiefs told them to work together (b) there 
were too many animals for one person to handle (c) their tools were 
poor (d) they did not know how to work alone. 

12 . Before people could change from wandering to living in communities,they 
had to learn (a) to build houses (b) to tame wild animals (c) a trade 

of some kind (d) to cultivate the wild food grasses. 

13. The Indians of Mexico became farmers (a) long before the Indians 
of Canada (b) long after the Indians of Canada (c) about the same 
time as the Indians of Canada (d) none of these are true since there 
are no Indians in Mexico. 


14. If a commoner could put on a big feast he might become a noble in 
the (a) Iroquois tribes (b) Pacific Coast tribes (c) Cree tribes 







. . 






; . * 


. 




* 


* 






- 


* 

* 




' 






. 

. 







(d) Huron tribes 


238 


15. Aside from the fact that the Indians gave us the land of Canada, 
we would conclude that (a) the Indians made many noteworthy contri¬ 
butions to our way of life (b) the Indian had many things to offer 
the white man, but the whites could not use them (c) although in the 
early days the Indian helped the white man, none of these contri¬ 
butions remain today (d) the Indian contributed very little to our 
way of life* 

16. In the fight for the buffalo plains the Blaekfoot Confederacy 
fought against (a) the Coast tribes (b) the Iroquois (c) the Cree 
(d) the Hurons. 

17* Because they believed in heaven, Indians (a) placed food and 
weapons beside their dead to help them (b) buried their dead (c) felt 
that natural objects were inhabited by spirits (d) went to the Happy 
Hunting Grounds. 

18. Uncivilized people like the early Indians had to depend on getting 
their food, clothing and shelter from (a) the things they could steal 
from the settlers (b) travelling salesmen (c) the things nature pro¬ 
vided around them (d) the supplies provided by the government. 

19. The first Canadians used tools made chiefly from (a) bone (b) 
ivory (c) wood (d) stone. 

20. The first people in America were nomads likely because (a) they 
wanted to see the new country (b) they left Asia before the people 








. 

. ■ . 

t 

. 












* 

, 

. . 

' 

■ 







, 








. 


. 




4 


. 

f 

\.o -O- - ... ... J\... ■ ? ... ... i . 


239 

there had learned to cultivate grain (c) they did not like farming 
(d) they were looking for a passage to the East. 

21. The stability or permanence of an Indian community depended upon 
(a) the nature of the people (b) the advice of the medicine man (c) 
the climate of the country (d) the availability of a food supply. 

22. In Indian tribes, medicine men were (a) doctors (b) priests (c) 
both of these (d) neither of these. 

23. The Indians did not use Canada’s great resources effectively 
because (a) they did not want to settle down (b) they didn't need 
them (c) they were uncivilized (d) none of these reasons are true. 

24. The wigwam was invented by the Indian since (a) the only materials 
available were the skins of animals (b) there was little wood for 
houses (c) he wanted a permanent home (d) he needed a shelter that 
could be set up and taken down easily. 









■ 




, 



» 




. 










. 








, 





T 

' 




* 

' 





APPENDIX B 


240 


EXAMPLE OF READING SELECTION AND TESTS 
USED IN THE TRAINING PERIODS IN MATHEMATICS 

ARITHMETIC IN BUSINESS 


Mr* Goodman operates a shoe store. "When he buys shoes from a manu¬ 
facturer, he must sell them above cost in order to pay the expenses of 
operating the store and to make a profit or gain. The amount that he 
marks the price of shoes above what they cost him is called the mark-up. 
The mark-up may be expressed either as a per cent of the cost or as a 
percent of the selling price. The selling price is the amount that the 
customer pays for an article. 

Suppose that Mr. Goodman pays $4 for a pair of shoes and sells them 
for $6 a pair. We can see that the mark-up is $6 - $4, which is $2. This 
mark-up may then be expressed in two ways: 

(a) as a percent of the selling price - 
$2 is what percent of $6 

$2 = of $6 


2 _ i _ 33 tt 


The mark-up is 33^ 1 ° of the selling price, 


(b) as a percent of the cost - 
$2 = ? $ of $4 



The mark-up is 50 $ of the cost. 

In order to attract customers to his store or to encourage more sales. 












. 




. 

* 

, 




, 


* 


* 

, . 4 ' 






























■ 














241 

it is sometimes necessary for a merchant to mark down the former price of 
an article. The amount that an article is reduced in price from its 
former price is called the reduction. The percent of reduction is the 
reduction compared with the former price. 

Mr. Goodman had a pair of shoes that he originally wanted to sell for 
$15 reduced in price to $12. In this case the reduction is $15 - $12 = $3. 
Expressed as a percent of the former price, this reduction is 

$ 2 = 1 = 0.20 = 20 $ 

$15 5 

When Mr. Goodman orders shoes for his store, he consults a catalogue 
which gives wholesale prices. A wholesale dealer buys and sells only in 
large quantities and usually sells to other merchants or retailers. 

The catalogue price, or list price, is more than Mr. Goodman will have 
to pay. The wholesale dealer gives a reduction or a discount on the list 
price. The reduction in price of an article to a dealer is known as a 
trade discount. Thus H 40$ off” in the cost of a pair of shoes means that 
the net cost to Mr. Goodman is 40$ less than the catalogue price. 

Let us imagine that a pair of shoes is listed in the catalogue at 
$7*50. If a trade discount of 40$ is given, we can find the net cost as 
follows: 

List price = $7.50 Net cost = list price - discount 

Rate of discount = 40$ Discount = 40$ of $7.50 
Net cost = ? Discount = .40 x $7.50 = $3*00 

Net cost - $7.50 - $3.00 = $4.50 
The net cost is $4.50. 

Suppose a boy buys newspapers at the rate of $3.00 for 100 papers and 
sells them at 5 cents each. His mark-up on each paper is 2 cents. If he 


* 

' 

. 

- 








* 


•* 

- 




* 

. 

. 















- ■ 


, 




■ 

. 



. 











- 




. 

- 






242 

sells an average of 80 papers a day, he makes a profit of $ 1.60 

In running a business like that of selling papers, there are no 
expenses; therefore, the difference between the selling price and the cost 
of the papers the boy sells is all profit. Profit, in this kind of business 
is the difference between the money received in payment and the money paid 
out. 

Another boy has a soft drink stand. He buys soft drinks from the 
manufacturer at 80 cents a case of 24 bottles and sells them at 5 cents a 
bottle. The difference between the cost and the selling price of a case of 
drinks is 40 cents. In this instance, the mark-up is not all profit for 
the boy has some expense in operating the soft drink stand. He must pay 
rent for his stand, buy ice to keep the drinks cold and advertise to 
attract people. In this case profit is the difference between mark-up and 
expenses. ’When the expenses are greater than the mark-up it is known as a 
loss. 


♦ 

. 







' 

, ' 






« 


i 

, 






, 






TEST NUMBER THREE 


243 


ARITHMETIC IN BUSINESS 
(FACT) 

!• The selling price of an article is made up of (a) the cost plus 
expenses (b) the cost plus mark-up (c) the mark-up alone (d) the 
cost minus the mark-up, 

2. The mark-up may be expressed as a percent of (a) the selling price 

(b) the cost (c) either of these (d) neither of these. 

3. The amount the price of an article is lowered by a store-keeper 
is called (a) the sale (b) the mark-down (c) the reduction (d) the 
net price. 

4. The percentage of reduction is (a) the reduction compared with 
the former price (b) the reduction compared with the reduced price 

(c) the reduction compared with the list price (d) the reduction 
compared with the mark-up. 

5* A merchant usually buys his merchandise from (a) a retailer 
(b) a wholesaler (c) a factory (d) none of these are correct. 

6 . The reduction in price of an article to a dealer is called (a) the 
net cost (b) the list price (c) the mark-up (d) a trade discount. 

7* The net cost of an article to a dealer is (a) list price - discount 
(b) selling price - discount (c) list price + mark-up (d) list price + 


discount 















244 

8 . The mark-up is (a) selling price - expenses (b) cost - expenses 
(c) selling price + expenses (d) selling price - cost. 

9. In some business profit is the same as (a) expenses (b) discount 
(c) mark-up (d) selling price* 

10. When expenses are greater than mark=up, a business is said to 
operate at a (a) reduction (b) loss (c) profit (d) discount. 












* 







TEST NUMBER THREE 


245 


ARITHMETIC IN BUSINESS 

(RELATIONSHIPS) 

1. The selling price of an article is made up of (a) cost plus 
mark-up (b) the mark-up alone (c) cost minus mark-up (d) cost minus 
expenses* 

2. In order to cover operating expenses and make a profit (a) the 
selling price must be greater than the expenses (b) the mark-up must 
be greater than the cost (c) the mark-up must be greater than the 
selling price (d) the selling price must be greater than the cost* 

3. A merchant may reduce the selling price of an article (a) because 
he is generous (b) because the goods are inferior (c) to attract 
customers to his store (d) none of these reasons are sound. 

4. A wholesale dealer can offer a trade discount because (a) he sells 
only to retailers (b) he sells only large quantities which require 
less handling (c) wholesalers always have sales (d) he is trying to 
encourage more sales. 

5. A house-to-house salesman could sell an article more cheaply than 
a store-keeper could because (a) he sells more articles (b) he has 
fewer expenses (c) his articles are always inferior (d) none of these 
are time. 

6 * Because a man has no expenses in selling papers, (a) profit is 
equal to the difference between selling price and cost (b) profit is 
























■ 










* 


* 

* 

. 








. 

* 


* 

. 











246 


equal to mark-up (c) profit is the difference between money received 
in payment and money paid out (d) all of these are true. 

J7. A store-keeper has many expenses in operating his store. In this 
case (a) profit is equal to the difference between mark-up and ex¬ 
penses (b) profit is equal to the mark-up (c) profit is equal to the 
difference between the selling price and the cost (d) profit is equal 
to the difference between the mark-up and the selling price. 

8 . A loss occurs in a business (a) when the mark-up exceeds the 
expenses (b) when the mark-up exceeds the cost (c) when the expenses 
are greater than the mark-up (d) when any of these occur. 

9 . Vihen a businessman reduces the selling price of goods, the per¬ 
centage of reduction is the reduction compared with (a) the cost 
price (b) the reduced selling price (c) the former price (d) the 
mark-up. 

10. The net cost of articles from the wholesaler is (a) less than 
the list price (b) equal to the list price (c) greater than the list 
price (d) equal to the merchant’s selling price. 








, 








, • 






> 

- 


. 

. 




T 



























* 











. 
















TEST NUMBER THREE 


247 


ARITHMETIC IN BUSINESS 

(GENERALIZATIONS) 

_1. If a man operating a hardware store buys a stove for $200 and sells 
it for $250, the mark-up would be (a) 25$ (b) 20$ (c) either of these 
(d) neither of these. 

2 . A manufacturer sells an article to a store-keeper for $6 and the 
store-keeper sells it for $8. Compared with the selling price, the 
store-keeper ! s mark-up is (a) 25$ (b) 33 1/3$ (c) 75$ (d) none of 
these are correct. 

3. If a TV salesman sells a set for $300 and the set cost him $250, 
the mark-up, compared with the cost, is (a) 16 2/3$ (b) 83§$ (c) 20$ 

(d) 33 1/3$. 

4. If a shoe salesman marks-up shoes 20$ of the selling price, a pair 
of shoes that sold for $20 would dost (a) $4 (b) $16 (c) $24 (d) none 
of these are correct. 

3. Suppose a shop-keeper held a sale at which he advertised that a 
certain article would be selling at a reduction of 10$. If the 
original price of the article was $25, the reduced price would be 
(a) $22.50 (b) $15 (c) $2.50 (d) $24.75. 

6 . An article is in a wholesale catalogue at $20 and a store-keeper 
can buy it for $15. The trade discount is (a) 33 l/3$ (b) 25$ (c) 5$ 
(d) 75$. 
































' 


* 

* 

* 

; 

. ■ 


. 






. 














- ■. 






: ' ■ 


. 


. • ' f ' • : ' 




- 




- . 

. 








248 

7. An article is in a wholesale catalogue with a trade discount of 
30$. The net cost of this article to a retailer is (a) $19.50 (b) 
$4.50 (c) $14.55 (d) $10.50. 

8. A door-to-door salesman who has no operating expenses, buys 
articles at 10 cents each and sells them at 15 cents each. If he 
sold 200 of these articles, his profit would be (a) $20 (b) $10 
(c) $30 (d) none of these are correct. 

9. Suppose a washing machine costs a merchant $300 and he sells it 
for $350. He estimates that in selling each washing machine there 
is a total expense involved of $60 including advertising, rent, 
lights, salesman’s wages, etc. According to this, the merchant (a) 
made a profit of $5 on each machine sold (b) made a profit of $55 on 
each machine sold (c) broke even on each machine sold (d) suffered 

a loss of $5 on each machine sold. 

10. In order to make a profit, the operator of a store must be sure 
that (a) his mark-up is greater than his expenses (b) his mark-up 
covers the cost of the articles he sells (c) the mark-up equals the 
expenses '(d) his mark-up does not exceed his expenses. 






' 

. . 

. 

„ 

4 

' 

* 

, 

* 

, 




. 












APPENDIX C 


249 


EXAMPLE OF LESSON PLANS 

USED IN THE TRAINING PERIODS IN SCIENCE 

LESSON #3 

Winds - Fact 

Stage 1 : Read over the selection ’’winds”. 

Time: 3 minutes. 

St&ge 2 : We have been reading material carefully and marking the important 
facts in order to learn and remember as much of a selection as possible. 
Let’s go over this selection just as we did the other two. 

1. How are winds regarded by men who study weather? (They are considered 
to be a very important part of weather.) 

2. What is wind? (Wind is air moving horizontally.) 

3. When air is moving up and down what is it called? (A current of air.) 

4. What is the cause of wind? (Wind is caused by differences in air 
pressure.) 

5. Which way do winds blow? (Fran regions of high pressure to regions of 
low pressure.) 

6* What does air do when it is heated? (Air expands when it is heated.) 

7. In what direction does a lake breeze blow? (From the lake to the land.) 

8. What are local winds? (They are winds caused by local conditions.) 

9. Name five local winds. (Lake breezes, land breezes, sea gusts, gusts 
from thunderstorms, winds from forest fires.) 

10. What is a high? (A great movement of air out in all directions from a 
region of high pressure.) 





























. 

* 

■ 






, 


x ' 


. 

. 

4 


, - ' • - ' 1 








250 

11. "What is a low? (A great movement of air, in from all directions to a 
region of low pressure.) 

12. Canada is in what wind zone? (The belt of Westerlies.) 

13. In what direction do winds most frequently blow in Canada? (From the 
west.) 

14. What is a cyclone? (A great swirl of air moving across the country. 

It is another name for a low.) 

15. A high is also called what? (An anticyclone.) 

lb. In what direction do highs and lows move across Canada? (They move 
from west to east.) 

17. What use do meteorologists make of information about highs and lows? 
(it is used for the prediction of wind velocity and direction.) 

Time: 15 minutes. 

Stage 3 : Now that we have marked the important facts in this selection, 

re-read it, noting these facts carefully as you read. After you have 

read the selection there will be a short test to see how much you have 

learned. 

Time: 3 minutes. 

Stage 4 : Multiple-choice test on the facts of the selection. 

Time: 8 minutes. 

Stage 5 : The tests will be corrected by the students and the experimenter. 


Time: 5 minutes 





' , 

% 

- 

* 




* 




.. 

- 

, 

. 

, 

, 






* 






: 




LESSON #3 


251 


Winds - Relationships 

Stage 1 : Read over the selection ’’Winds”. 

Time: 3 minutes. 

Stage 2 : We have been reading material carefully and marking the 

important relationships that are found in a selection. Let us proceed 

to do the same thing with this selection. 

1. How may "Winds” and ”currents of air” be compared? 

(a) They are alike in that they are both moving air. 

(b) They are different in that wind moves horizontally and currents 
of air move vertically. 

2. What is the cause of winds? (Differencesin air pressure cause winds.) 

3. A very strong wind is the result of what conditions? (The difference 
in pressure is very great.) 

4. What is the effect of the sun on the land around a lake? (The land 
becomes hotter than the water.) 

5. How does this influence the air? (The air over the land becomes 
warmer than the air over the water.) 

6. What is the result when air is heated? (It expands.) 

7. How would a given volume of cold air compare with the same volume of 
warm air? (The cold air would be heavier.) 

8. What effect does the expansion of the air over the land have on the 
air pressure? (The air pressure decreases over the land.) 

. How may land and water be compared as far as rates of cooling are 
concerned? (Land cools faster than water.) 


9 







T 


■ 


. 

. 

. 

( 

. . 

. 



















* 




252 

10. How are lake breezes, wind from forest fires and sea gusts similar? 
(They are all caused by local conditions or are local winds*) 

11. How may “highs" and "lows" be compared? 

(a) They are alike in that they are both disturbances in the 
general movement of air* 

(b) They are different in that highs are movements of air out from 
regions of high pressure and lows are movements of air into 
regions of low pressure. 

12. "What causes our country to be described as being in the "belt of 
westerlies"? (The movement of air is from the west a large part of 
the time.) 

13. In what ways are "lows" and "cyclones" similar? (They are two names 
for the same thing.) 

14. What results from the forecaster*s study of the highs and lows? 

(He can predict wind velocity and direction.) 

Time: 15 minutes. 

Stage 3 : Now that we have marked the important relationships in this 
selection, re-read it, noting these relationships carefully as you read. 
After you have read the selection there will be a short test to see how 
much you have learned. 

Time: 3 minutes. 

Stage 4 : Multiple-choice test on the relationships of the selection. 

Time: 8 minutes. 

Stage 5 : The test will be corrected by the students and the experimenter. 


Time: 5 minutes 





.. 


* 





' 

* 


. ... y. : . ., 

. 












. 

* 

. 


- 

. 

* 

* 


- 




. 


* 








* 






LESSON #3 


253 


Winds - Generalizations 

Stage 1 : Read over the selection "Winds”• 

Time: 3 minutes. 

Stage 2 : We have been reading material carefully and noting the 
important conclusions that may be made from the selection and the reasons 
for reaching these conclusions. By using this method we hope to learn 
and remember more about the things we study. Let us re-read this selection 
just as we have done the others. 

1. The first important conclusion in the selection is that wind is caused 
by differences in air pressure. Although there is no direct evidence 
to support this in the selection, how do you suppose scientists might 
arrive at this conclusion? (By observing winds and noting conditions 
of pressure.) 

2. What conclusions have been reached about the directions that winds blow? 
(Winds blow from regions of high pressure to those of low pressure.) 
Although there is no real support for this in the selection we can see 
how it is used. If the air pressure at a place A is very much greater 
than it is at another place B, what can we say about the movement of 
air? (A strong wind will blow- from A to B.) 

3* Why have scientists come to expect breezes to blow from a lake to the 
land on a hot summer day? (Land heats fastest, air over land heats, 
expands, reduces pressure, wind blows.) 

4. From the material studied, what can be concluded about the rate of 

heating of land, air and water? (Land heats fastest, water next fastest 
and air least rapidly.) Can this be made more general - that is, does 




















' 


























■ 


* 

> 

. ■ 

. 
















. 


. 






. 


. 










254 


it apply to all solids, liquids and gases? (Yes, it does.) 

5. According to this selection, what conclusions may be drawn about the 
heating and cooling of materials? (Substances that heat rapidly, 
cool rapidly.) 

6. To understand winds other than local winds, what must scientists 
know? (They must know of the procession of highs and lows across a 
country.) 'Why is this important? (They cause the winds.) 

7. What led scientists to conclude that our country is in the "belt of 
westerlies"? (The general movement of air across Canada is from the 
west - there is a constant procession of highs and lows across the 
country from west to east.) 

8. Why does a study of the highs and lows enable a forecaster to predict 
wind velocity and direction? (Differences cause wind, degree of 
difference determines velocity.) 

9. After reading the whole selection what would be a good definition 
of a wind? (Horizontal movement of air caused by differences in air 
pressure.) 

Time: 15 minutes. 

Stage 3 : How that we have marked the important conclusions in this 

selection, re-read it, noting these conclusions carefully as you read. 

After you have read the selection there will be a short test to see how 

much you have learned. 

Time: 3 minutes. 

Stage 4 : Multiple-choice test on the generalizations of the selections. 

Time: 8 minutes. 

Stage 5 : The tests will be corrected by the students and the 

experimenter. 


Time: 5 minutes 














. . - . - ■ • — T ' ' ~ rj ■ '■ -- 






* 


0! 




hi-:, ■ ; e 






, ' • •' ■■ '• , • c’ ■ 





.. 








&£ - 






> ... 








. 






. 






- 


* ■ 









, 












* 

•.i. 






. 






- 







































