University of Alberta Library 


0 1620 3069229 5 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


MESOZOIC STRATIGRAPHY 


OF THE 


FOOTHILLS REGION OF ALBERTA 


H. KUNST 






































©X UBBM 

luiBmflxiisis 









/ * 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/mesozoicstratigrOOkuns 


U'TTJlRGir: OF i\L3SRTA 
Ochool of Graduate Studies 

T !.0 undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and reconmiendad to the Gommittee on Graduate Studies for 
acceptance a dissertation on ’’Mesozoic Stratigraphy of the 
Foothills Region of Alberta”, submitted by Henry Kunst, B.Sc,, 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 


Master of Science. 










STRATIGR/J^HY 


ox tha 

RCOTIIILL: RZGI0!I of ^UoBIilRTA 


l37 


Hanry Kunat, B*Sc* 
jQ-g-SLYtment of Geology, 
UTTIYxl^SITY of KL32RTA 


A Thesis 

Subiaittad to the Uai^erslty ox" Alberta 
in partial ""nl.-^ilrnent of the 
re-yalremants for the degree 
of 

IIASTZR of SCIIHCI 


nonton, Alberta 


Apri 









4 llo 


F 





















LESOZOIG STRAT IG RAPHY OF THUl FOOTHILLS REGION OF ALBERTA 


Table of Gonto^nts, 

Page 

Chapter I Introduction 

Introductory Statement .. 1 

Location and Extent of Area* 1 

Scope of Thesis and Method of Treatment.* 2 

Previous Work2 

Acknowledgments.... 3 

Summary. .. 4 

Chapter II General Geology 

Stratigraphic Sections and Correlation 

Table*. 7 

General Statement,7 
Stratigraphic Section of Turner Valley. 8 

Stratigraphic Section of V/est-Central 

Alberta......... 9 

Stratigraphic Section of Peace River 

Area.10 
Correlation Table of Mesozoic Succession 

in Foothills Region of Alberta.,.,, 11 

Chapter III Stratigraphy 

1. Spray River Formation ~ Lower Triassic 

Introduction... 12 

Previous Work... 12 

Lithology, Distribution, Thickness.,,, 13 

General Statement................... 13 

Banff Area - The Type Section,,,,,,, 15 

Foothills Areas,,,,,... 19 

Palaeontology and Correlation,,,.,,,,, 21 

2. Schooler Creek Formation - Upper Triassic 

Introduction,22 

Previous Work,.. 23 

Lithology, Distribution, Thickness..,, 24 

Palaeontology,.. 25 

G eneral Sta o ement 25 

Faunal Zones,,26 

3. Fernie Shale - Jurassic 

Introduction... 27 

Previous Work.. 27 


























c 



V' 



















ESSA 


Lithology, Distribution, Thickness*•», 29 

Ganoral Statement*... 29 

Fernia and Crowsnast Districts - The 

Type Section*,.,,.,.,.. 31 

Turner Valley,.. 34- 

Moose Ivfountain,.. 35 

West-Central Alberta.,,.,,..,,,,,.., 35 

Peace River Area.37 
Character of the Boundaries,,.,..,,,,, 38 

Faunal Horizons... 39 

4* Kootenay Formation - Lower Cretaceous 

Introduction,.. 45 

Previous Work,.. 46 

Lithology, Distribution, Thickness*,,, 48 

General Statement,, 48 

Crowsnest Pass and Vicinity - The 

Type Section*,,.,,,,,,,,,,, 49 

Southern Distribution.51 

Turner Valley*.. 52 

Moose Mountain and Vicinity,,,....,, 52 

Southern West-Central Alberta,,,,,,, 52 

West-Central Alberta.,,.,.,,.,,,,.,, 53 

Peace River Canyon, ... 57 

Fossils of the Kootenay Formation*,,., 59 

5. Blairmore Formation - Lower and Upper 

Cretaceous 

Introduction,.. 62 

Previous Vi/ork. 63 

Lithology, Distribution, Thickness,,., 64 

General Statement., 64 

Crowsnast Pass and Vicinity - The 

Type Locality,,, 69 

Southernmost Alberta.72 
Highwood Area.73 

Turner Valley. .. 73 

Moose Mountain,75 
Southern West-Central Alberta.,,,,., 76 

V/est-Central Alberta,,,,,,,,,,,,.,., 77 

Peace River Canyon.,,,,,,,.,,.,,,.,, 8l 

Gething Member of the Bullhead 

Mountain Sand stone.82 
Moosebar Shale,84 
Gates Sandstone,,,,,,,,,.,..,,,.,, 84 

St. John Shale,,,,,..,..,... 85 

Dunvagan Sandstone,86 
Flora and Fauna of the Blairmore,,,.., 88 

Flora of the Blairmore,,,,,,.,,,,,., 88 

Flora of the Correlative Beds of the 

Blairmore Formation,90 
Fauna of the Blairmore,92 





















































PaKe 


6 * Crowsnaat Volcanics - Upper Cretaceous... 9^ 

7. Alberta Shale - Upper Cretaceous,,.....,. 100 

Introduction,,,,.100 

Previous Work. 101 

Lithology, Distribution, Thickness.102 

General Statement. .. 102 

Turner Valley - The Type Section.,,,, 103 

Lower Alberta Shale.,,.,,,,. 103 

Cardiura Member,.... 104 

Upper Alberta Shale,... 106 

Southern Alberta.,..,..107 

Bow River Area,.. 110 

Fallentimber Area,..110 

West-Central Alberta.,.,,.,. Ill 

Blackstone Shales... 112 

Bighorn Member,112 

Wapiabi Shal es ... 113 

Borland River Area.,• 114 
Northern West-Central Alberta.115 
Kaskapau Member,11 6 
Badheart Sandstone,117 
Upper Smoky River Shale., ll 8 
Palaeontology,119 

Faunal Zones.. 119 

Important Elements of the Faunal Zonesl21 
Range and Distribution of the Faunal 

Zones.,.,,,,,. 121 

8 , Uppermost Cretaceous 

Introduction,124 

Previous V/ork,... 125 

Lithology, Distribution, Thickness.,,,, 125 

General Statement,,... 125 

Turner Valley and Adjacent Areas -The 

Type Section,127 

Belly River Formation,,,.,..... 127 

Bearpaw Formation,128 
Edmonton Formation,129 
Crowsnest Pass and Adjacent Regions,, I 30 
Disturbed Belt of Southwestern 

Alberta,,..,,. 132 
Southern ¥/est-Gentral Alberta,134 

West-Central Alberta.,.,.,.. I 38 

Northern West-Central Alberta,....,,. 141 

Palaeontology of the Uppermost 

Cretaceous...... 145 

Fauna of the Belly River Formation,,, 145 
Fauna of the Bearpaw Formation.145 
Fauna of the St. Mary River and 

Edmonton Formations,,,, 145 













































i 

-i 


\ 


1 

1 



























Fauna and Flora of the Allison 

Formation,,,.,.146 

Fauna and Flora of the Saunders 

Formation,,,,,,,,,. 147 
Fauna of the Wapiti Formation,,,. 148 

Bibliography, ... i 

Appendix to Bibliography,... xv 


List of Illus trati ons 


Ikp of Foothills and Mountains of Alberta, 
I^p of Foothills Region of Alberta.,,,,.,, 


Frontispiece 
Pocket - bac: 














R? 

■ f.' 




- '-Vi 








J 



..lJ 




CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 


Introductory Statement 

This thesis represents a resume of the literature on 
the Mesozoic stratigraphy of the foothills region of Alberta and 
such contiguous areas as are pertinent to a clearer understanding 
of the discussion. The writer is not acquainted with the field 
relationships of the formations and has, therefore, been forced 
to rely solely on the findings of others. The extent of the 
bibliography shows that much has been done, but there remains, 
nevertheless, a host of problems which require solution. 

Location and Extent of Area 

The area to be considered in this discussion of the 
Mesozoic stratigraphy has been limited by the thesis topic, 
to that portion of western Alberta constituting the foothills 
from the 49th parallel northwestward to the vicinity of the Peace 
river - that is, northwestv/ard to just beyond the 56th parallel. 
It has been found necessary, however, in order to obtain a 
clearer understanding of the formations, to consider contiguous 
areas comprising the Rocky mountain region, and such areas of 


British Columbia which have been found pertinent to the discussion. 















- 2 - 

Instances of such regions are part of the Crowsnest and Fernie 
districts of southeastern British Columbia and the Peace river 
canyon area of the northeastern section of that province. 

Scope of the Thesis and Method of Treatment 

This dissertation reviews the stratigraphy of the 
Mesozoic formations within the area as delimited. Each formation 
is treated as a separate entity. Previous work, lithology, 
distribution, thickness, faunal and floral assemblages, correlations 
within the area, and the relationship of the formation to overlying 
and underlying strata is all considered in the present discussion. 

No attempt is made to study the structure and structural implica¬ 
tions of the area. 

The procedure adopted for each formation has been 
to review briefly the investigations which have been made concern¬ 
ing it, and to point out general relationships. The type locality 
and section has then been discussed, followed by a consideration 
of the areal characteristics and variations of the formation 
from south to north. In conclusion the fossil fauna and flora of 
the formation have bean considered. 

Previous Work 

No study of this nature for the area under consideration 
has been attempted previously. In the main, studies have been of 
a local nature with no regard for regional relationships, Hov/ever, 










- 3 - 


two papers by Dr. P. S, Warren, one on the Fernie shale (I 63 ), 
and one on the Kootenay-Blairmore succession (l65), have been 
of this regional type. Throughout the to;ct of the thesis notation 
has been made of the pertinent references. 

Acknov/ledgments 

The writer wishes to e:cpress his indebtedness to the 
members of the Department of Geology, University of Alberta, who 
have made possible this thesis. To Dr. J. A. Allan for his pertinent 
suggestions and kindly advice; to Dr. P. S. Warren under whose 
direction this work has been carried on, who has devoted so 
generously of his time and knowledge of the stratigraphy of the 
area under review, and who has permitted access to his personal 
library; to Dr. R. L. Rutherford for his constructive criticisms 
and the use of ceriain publications which otherwise would have been 
unavailable; to these men, who have given so liberally of their 
time, their knowledge and their advice in the reading of the 
manuscript, does the writer extend his sincere gratitude. 

Summary 

In this thesis an attempt has been made to provide a 
summary of the stratigraphy of the Mesozoic formations in the . 
foothills region of Alberta, and such contiguous areas as are 
deemed relevant to a clearer conception of the problem under re~ 
viev/. The location and extent of the area, the scope of the thesis, 
the method of treatment, generalized oe l - um iiar sections for the 










- 4 - 

region and correlation of formations within the area, have all 
received attention. Stratigraphical geology constitutes the main 
body of the thesis; a brief summary of this follows. 

Spray River Formation - Lower Triassic 
The Spray River, composed of dark grey dolomites and 
limestones intimately intermixed with shale and some sandstone, 
is developed to a maximum known thickness of 3j000 feet in the 
mountains, but exhibits a rapid thinning towards the foothills 
to the east where its development is extremely limited. It is 
considered to lie for the most part on the Rocky liountain quartzite 
of Pennsylvanian age. The affinities of the fauna are with the 
Lower Triassic of the western States. 

Schooler Greek Formation ■ Upper Triassic 
The Schooler Creek, of Upper Triassic age^ constitutes 
a marine sequence of sandstones, siltstones, and limestones 
developed to a thickness of over 2,500 feet. This formation, as 
far as is known, does not extend south beyond Jasper Park and 
represents a deposit of a northern sea. The Jurassic Pine River 
shales overlie the Schooler Creek, and as yet the lower contact 
has not been observed. 

Fernie Shale - Jurassi c 

The Fernie is represented in the area by about 1,000 
feet of grey to black shale. Although a complete succession of 
faunas has not been found, faunas Sinemurian to Argovian in age 
















hava bean raportad. In the mountains the Fernie overlies the 
Spray River, but in the outer foothills in some parts it rests 
unconformably on the Carboniferous Rundle limestone. The Fernie 
grades upwards through sandy beds into the Kootenay. 

Kootenay Formation ■» Lower Cretaceous 
The Kootenay, a continental succession of alternate 
dark grey-colored shales and drab, buff-colored sandstone, with 
coal seams, is developed to an average thickness of feet in 

the foothills region, with a thickening to the west. The age from 
floral evidence is Barremian of Lower Cretaceous time. 

Blairm o re Formation - Lower and Upper Cretaceous 
A marked resemblance exists between the Kootenay 
aiid Blairmore, but the latter is usually coarser in texture and 
more of a greenish color. A strong conglomerate mai-ks the 
base of the formation and other conglomerates occur higher up in 
the formation. A pronounced thickening of the formation to the 
v/est and to the north exists. The thickness of the Blairmore 
in the foothills varies from approximately 1,000 to 2,500 feet. 

An unconformity between the Kootenay and Blairmore has been observed, 
in some places. The Blairmore is of Lower Cretaceous (Aptian- 
Albian) age except for the upper 200 feet which are considered to 
be Upper Cretaceous (Cenomanian) in age. 

Growsnest Volcanics - Upper Cret ac eous 

The Growsnest volcanics, consisting of tuffs, agglomerates 
and flow rocks, are limited in their areal distribution to the 


















- b - 

Crowsnest pass area and represent the only known occurrence of 
igneous rocks in the foothills region. They overlie immediately 
the Blairmore formation and are overlain by the Alberta shale. 

Alberta Shale - Upper Cretaceous 

The Alberta shale, a marine sequence of Colorado and 
Lower Montana age lying between two series of freshwater deposits, 
is composed of dark gray to black shales divided by a sandstone 
bod. The formation thins from about 2,700 feet in the Turner 
Valley area to nearly half this amount in the vicinity of the 
Peace river. The Alberta shale conformably overlies the Blairmore 
and is conformably overlain by the uppermost Cretaceous continental 
beds. 

Uppermost Cretaceous 

The uppermost Cretaceous beds consist in the main of 
freshwater sandstones. In the southern foothills are§i, however, 
the marine Bearpaw provides a means of division of the continental 
succession into Belly River below and Edmonton above. In the 
foothills, continental deposition was apparently continuous into 


the Tertiary deposits. 













GHAPTKR II 


GENERAL GEOLOGY 

Stratigraphic Sections and Correlation Table 

General Statement: 

The writer has chosen the stratigraphic sec¬ 
tions of three areas to show, in the main, the variation in the 
stratigraphic succession of the Mesozoic formations of the foothills 
region of Alberta. The Turner Valley section is based on a report 
of Hume (54), that of west-central Alberta on a publication of 
MacKay (71), and that of the Peace river area has been dra\TO from a 
number of sources (97), (lOO), (llO), (117), (13^), (147), (177 ). 

The following correlation table of the Meso¬ 
zoic succession in the foothills region of Alberta is the inter¬ 
pretation placed upon these strata by the writer. References to each 
area have been included, but the writer wishes to make it clear 
that these references are merely to the reports from which material 
has been dravm for each area, arid not of any correlation which these 
authors may or may not have made. 









le 




;i -~4 V-f' ,,^' 







STRATIGRAPHIC 

- 8 - 

SECTION OF TURNER VALLEY 

Age 

Fornation 

Thickness 

Feet 

Lithology 



Edmonton 

1,100 - 

l,6oo 

Ss. and sh, in part highly bentonitic; soft 
ss. with ironstones, sh., and coal in 
lower part; heavy bedded, harder ss,' alter¬ 
nating v/ith sh. in upper part 

fc a c ecus 

Montana 

Bearpaw 

150 - 

400 

Shale v/ith some ss. bands, thin coal seams 
and bentonite. In places glauconitic 
bands and pinkish ssl 

© 

u 

o 

u 


Belly 

River 

1,600 - 

l,8oo 

Ss. alternating with green and dark shales; 
a thick coal seam in upper part and a 
thin coal seam about 20 ft, above base 

© 

p- 

p 


Upper 

Alberta 

Shale 

1,700 - 
i,8oo 

Sh. and sandy sh.; marine 

!3 

o 

u 
o 
1—i 

Cardium 

30 - 
40 

Grey ss, and sandy sh. 


o 

o 

Lower 

Alberta 

Shale 

CO 

o o 
o o 

Sh. with thin ss, bands; marine 






i 

1 

© 

p 

o 

© 

s 

t 

U 

o 

u 

© 

Blairmore 

1,050 - 

1,200 

Ss. and green sh.; small amounts of coal in 
upper part at two horizons; lower part of 
brown limy ssJ and Is. alternating with 
dark sh. ; at the base a cgl, and ss. known 
as the Dalhousie ss ; other cgl^ q. sandsf-ories 
higher up 

1 

1 

i 

! 

o 

Kootenay 

20 - 
100 

Broif/n, hard ss,' alternating with dark 
sh. ; coal in upper paiH; 

Jurassic 

Fernie 

200 

Bro^m thin-bedded ss/ at top; dark to 
black sh* with thin, limy bands in lower 
part; marina formation containing phos¬ 
phate material 


































































STRATIGRAPHIC SECTION OF YiffiST-CENTRAL ALBERTA 


Age 


Formation 


Thickness 

Feet 


Lithology 




Brazeau 


11,000 


Freshwater, soft, gray, cross-bedded, green 
ajid brown-weathering ss. and greenish-grey 
sh. with several massive beds of cgl.composed 
of small chert and qtzt, pebbles; one vol¬ 
canic-ash bed and several important coal 
horizons about 8,000 ft, above base 


Wapiabi 


1,700 


Black marine sh. and thin calcareous beds, 
some layers of which contain large ironstone 
concretions 


p. o 


o 


Bighorn 


350 


Mostly marine and some freshwater beds. 
Alternating bromi-weathering grey ss. and 
dark green to black sh., and lenses of chert 
cgl.; thin impure coal seaias occur locally 


Blackstone 


1,700 


Black and green fissile marine sh. with 
lenses and thin beds of impure limestone and 
iron carbonate concretions 


Hard, rusty-brown-waatharing coarse, cross- 


Mountain 

Park 


400 


bedded ss. and olive-green sandy sh. , and 
lenses of rusty-red-weathering cgl*, composed 
largely of small black chert pebbles 


Luscar 


1,700 


Soft, grey ss.' , interbedded id-th dark gray 
sh. and several cgl, lenses* Contains all 
the L. Cret, commercial coal searas of the 
district 


Cadomin 


35 


Llassive, resistant, light-colored cgl., 
composed of pebbles of qtzt., chert, and vein 
qtz* firmly cemented in a clean siliceous 
matrix 


Nikanassin 


1,900 


Dark-grey sh., and brown-weathering grey 
ssl with thin impure coal seams 


Fernie 


1,300 


Black marine fissile sh. and thin beds of 
fine-grained, buff-weathering quartzitic ss. 
A black chert bad and qtzt* cgl. are locally 
present at the base 


02 

u 
® 

^ -H 
O 




Spray 

River 


700 


Thin-bedded, fine-grained arenaceous sh., 
overlain by soft, alternating buff and red 
Isi and grey fissile sh. 














































- 10 - 



STRATIGRAPHIC 

GliJGTIOM OF PiilACE RIViCR ARiilA 

Age 

Formation 

Thickness 

Feet 

Lithology 







Wapiti 

1,100+ 

Freshwater ss. and sh. with small coal 

seams 

CretacoouE 

Smoky 

River 

1,000- 

Dark marine sh. and interbadded ss. A dark 
red, medium- to coarse-grained, porous ss. 
divides the formation into upper and lower 
members 

Upper 

Dunvegan 

450- 

1,000 

Medium-grained, light-colored, cross-bedded, 
massive ss, and thin-bedded, arenaceous 
sh. ; grits and fine cgls. and Is. lenses 
occur locally; coal seams; marine 


St. 

John 

550- 

1,300 

Thin-bedded, dark, hard, friable sh, with 
banded concretions of ironstone 

CQ 

o 

Gates 

50- 

80 

IMssivOf cross-bedded ss.; marine 

o 

cS 

+> 

o 

Moosebar 

■ 8ooi 

Dark, friable sh. and thin bands and irregular 
concretions of clay ironstone 

Lower 

•H 

£{ 

-P 

Gethiog 

Member 

l,400i 

Non-marine ss, and sh.; contains commercial 
coal seams; clay ironstone present 


0^ 

s 




I 

j 

O 

fH 

1—1 

Lower 

Member 

3,000+ 

Conglomerates, grits, and coarse ss, with 
minor amounts of medium to fine ss' and sh. 

Jurassic 

Pine 

River 

600 

Blue-black marine sh.with intercalated Is. 
and some ss. 

Triassic 

Schooler 

Greek 

2,500+ 

Calcareous, very fine sa, calcareous silt- 
stone, and minor amounts of shelly, crinoid- 
al, partly oolitic, argillaceous, and aren¬ 
aceous Is.; weathers purplish 






































































































































































































































CHAPT3R III 


STRATIGRAPHY 


1. Spray River Formation - Lower Triassic 
Introduction 

The Spray River is the oldest Mesozoic formation occur¬ 
ring in the Rocky Mountains and foothills region of western 
Alberta* It extends northwestward from the 49th parallel to the 
vicinity of Jasper Park* In general it lies disconformabiy on 
the Rocky Mountain quartzite of Pennsylvanian age, and throughout 
most of its areal distribution is overlain by the Fernie shale of 
the Jurassic* 

Previous Work 

6'. M. Dawson (l83) while on the British North American 
Boundary'' Commission survey in 1875, orroneously referred the Kintla 
red beds, now known to be Precambrian, to the Triassic* Later he 
assigned a 600-foot series, south of the Crowsnest pass, composed 
mainly of magnesian sandstone and limestone, to a probable 
Triassic or Perrao-Triassic age (24)* The age of these beds is 
not known. It was R, G. McConnell (8?) who, in 1887, along the 
main line of the Canadian Pacific Railway first studied the suc¬ 
cession of rocks now known to be Lower Triassic in age* He 



















- 13 - 


called them tha Upper Banff shed as and considered them to belong 
to the Carboniferous, In 1907 D, B. Dowling (28) working in 
the Cascade coal basin, referred these bads to tha Permian- 
Triassic. On the basis of the species Mo notis circularia, 
found on a branch of the Brazeau river, he in 1911 assigned them 
to the Triassic (84, p. 47). H, W, Shinier (l90) in 1913> and J,A. 
Allan (l) in 1914, placed them in the Permian, In 1916 they were, 
on reliable fossil evidence, assigned to the Lower Triassic by 
L. M, Lambe and E. M. Kindle (58, pp, 37-38). In 1924 Kindle 
(55j p. 124) proposed the terra Spray River formation to super¬ 
sede the name Upper Banff shale. In the same year P. E, Raymond 
(121) found the genus Meekoceras, known to be indicative of a 
Lower Triassic horizon, P. S. Warren (l54) in 1923 made the 
first detailed study of the Spray River formation in its type 
locality near Banff. Other writers, through whose efforts our 
knowledge of the formation has been enlarged, include G, S. 

Malloch (84), B. R, MacKay (71), S, Parejas (120) and L. Telfer 

(153). 

Lithology. Distribution. Thickness 

General Stat ement ? The Spray River foriaation 
comprises a rather diversified group of strata including argilla¬ 
ceous limestones and dolomites, banded calcareous and dolomitic 
shales, and arenaceous shales (154, pp. 38-39). The beds weather 
easily and are now generally found underlying the valley floors 



















14 - 


between some of the mountain ranges. Exposures thus are few 
as the beds are usually obscured by glacial drift and talus. 
Although many of the beds are quite massive, they are subject 
to rapid disintegration and often assume a shaly habit. On 
weathering the strata assigned to this formation may be distinguish* 
ed easily even at a great distance by their dark red or brown 
color* 

The Spray River is known to extend from the vicinity 
of the International Boundary northwestward to at least as far 
as Jasper Park. The formation is mainly confined to the mountains 
but it does appear in restricted localities in the foothills. 

G, S. Hume (47, p. 39) in 1933 stated that the Triassic out¬ 
crops only in the Rocky mountains and foothills where faulting 
and folding has brought it to the surface. He concluded that 
no Triassic is known in the foothills south of the Bow river, 
Jurassic strata resting directly, as far as is known, on the 
Palaeozoic limestones. The Spray River, however, is present 
at the eastern edge of the front ranges at Blairmore. 

In the mountains the maximum thickness of the formation 
in the type locality has been placed at 3>000 feet by Br. Warren*, 
but the formation thins rapidly to the east. The Spray River 
rests disconformably on the Rocker Mountain quartzite of Penn- 


* Personal communication. 


















- 15 - 


sylvanian age (154, p. 38), and its upper contact with the 
Femie shale of the Jurassic is disconformable (153, P» 572). 

Banff A rea - The Type Section; The type 
locality of the formation as given by Kindle (55, P* 124) '*is 
the Spray River gorge, 7 miles above Banff and the adjacent 
exposures at the foot of Rundle Mountain”. Warren (l54, p. 39) 
has described the Spray River as follows: ”The Spray River shale 
consists essentially of calcareous or dolomitic shales and 
argillaceous limestones and dolomites. The rocks are generally 
dark grey to black and many are finely banded. The banding is 
due to alternating layers of dark, argillaceous material and 
light grey dolomite or limestone. Such beds disintegrate easily 
where exposed to the weather and assume a shaly habit. Other 
beds of argillaceous limestone and dolomite are quite homogeneous 
and show no banding. They are extremely tough and very fine¬ 
grained and do not weather easily. Such beds are common in the 
lower part of the formation where they yield an excellent build¬ 
ing stone”. This building stone has been utilized in the construc¬ 
tion of the Banff Springs Hotel, the Administration Building, the 
Banff School of Fine Arts, the Gave and Basin swimming pool, etc. 

In places in the banded calcareous shales near the 
base of the formation beds of nodular limestone occur. Warren 
( 154 ) believed the nodular character of these beds to be due to 




















- 16 - 


the irregular leaching of the calcareous material from the 
surrounding shale. Occurring at irregular intervals throughout 
the formation are beds of pure, grey limestones, dolomites, and 
magnesian limestones of a coarser texture (154-)* In this area, 
a fine-grained textured dolomite containing chert nodules, 
attains a thickness of 142 feet. Another characteristic bed - a 
soft, light grey to yellowish limestone, in many cases porous 
and brecciated - occurs near the middle of the formation. Aren¬ 
aceous shales are developed in some localities, but are limited 
in their distribution and range. In thin sections of some of the 
calcareous and dolomitic shales, small ainounts of arenaceous 
material have been reported (l54), li&id-cracks and rain-prints 
characteristic of the lower part of the formation, are also 
found higher up in the section. True ripple-marks seldom occur, 
many of the so-called ripple-marks which are so prevalent are 
considered merely nodular layers of limestone due to irregular 
leaching (154). 

The following section measured by Warren (l54, pp,40-41) 
shows the characteristic development of the Spray River formation 
in the type locality. 











- 17 - 


Section of Spray River Formation at the 
South End of Sulphur Mountain 


Thickness 

Character of Beds Feet 

Fault-contact with overlying Devonian rocks not 
observed 

Grey, very fine-grained, thick-bedded, magnesian 

limestone 34- 

Dark grey, fine-grained, laminated, dolomitic shales 39 

Grey, fine-grained, thick-bedded, laminated, argil¬ 
laceous dolomite 4? 

Dark grey, fine-grained, laminated, dolomitic shale 129 

Not exposed 110 

Dark grey, fine-grained, laminated, dolomitic, and 

calcareous shales 430 

Light grey, fine-grained, thick-bedded dolomite with 

lenses and layers of grey chert nodules 142 

Black, very fine-grained, thin-bedded dolomitic and 

calcareous shales, many of them laminated 535 

Dark grey, fine-grained, argillaceous, magnesian 

limestone interspersed with beds of fine 
shale 73 

Dark grey, very fine-grained, massive, argillaceous, 

magnesian limestone d 

Grey, fine-grained, magnesian limestone interspersed 
with beds of light grey, medium-grained 
limestone and light grey to buff-colored, 
soft, porous limestone 139 

Grey, fine-grained, thin-bedded, magnesian limestone 33 

Black, very fine-grained, dolomitic shale 31 

Light grey, medium-grained, thin-bedded limestone 8 

Grey, very fine-grained, massive dolomite 69 

Dai'k grey, very thin-bedded, dolomitic shale 50 

Dark grey, ver^^ fine-grained, thin-bedded, argil¬ 
laceous, magnesian limestone 25 

Dark grey, fine-grained, thick-bedded, laminated, 

argillaceous, magnesian limestone 82 

Dark grey, fine-grained, medium-bedded, magnesian 
limestone. These beds are badly folded 
in the section 40 

Soft, light grey or buff-coloured, fine-grained 

limestone with an occasional bed of hard 
fine-grained," rubbly limestone, in many 
cases badly brecciated, and very porous, 
tufa-like limestone 133 














- 18 - 


Dark grey, fine-grained, thick-bedded, argillaceous, 

magnesian limestone 17 

Soft, dark grey, dolomitic shale 37 

Light grey, medium-grained, thick-bedded, magnesian 

limestone 5 

Dark grey, fine-grained, massive, argillaceous, 

magnesian limestone 6l 

Grey, fine-grained, thick-bedded, magnesian limestone 18 

Grey, fine-grained, nodular, magnesian limestone 

interbedded v/ith thin layers of fine, 
black shale 20 

Dark grey, thin-bedded, laminated, argillaceous, 

magnesian limestone 54 

Grey, fine-grained, thick-bedded, magnesian limestone 41 

Dark grey, medium-bedded, laminated, argillaceous 

limestones or calcareous shales 238 

Grey, fine-grained, medium-bedded, magnesian lime¬ 
stone Y/ith thinner argillaceous beds 
variously interspersed 52 

Dark grey, thin-bedded, laminated, calcareous or 

dclomitic shales 374 

Black, calcareous shales with a few beds of fine¬ 
grained, nodular, magnesian limestone 109 

Black, fine-grained, laminated, calcareous shale 
interspersed with beds of dark grey to 
black, fine-grained, argillaceous lime¬ 
stone 64 

Black, very fine-grained, dclomitic shale inter¬ 
spersed with beds of black, fine-grained 
dolomite 153 

Total 3,400 

Underlying formation - Rocky Mountain quartzite 


This thickness of the formation has since been con¬ 
sidered too great, Warren* now assigning a thickness of 3»000 
feet to the strata of the Spray River. In the Banff area 
( 154 , p, 39) the Spray River rests disconformably on the Rocky 

* Personal conanunication. 







< 



t; 









< 



< 









! 

1 












- 19 - 


Mountain quartzite, and its upper boundary is marked by groat 
thrust faults separating it from older overthrust strata. 

Faulting and folding are common throughout the formation. 
Foothi lls Area: Early v/orkers in the 
Crowsnest pass area including McEvoy (90), Leach (61-64), 
MacKenzie (77), and'Rose (123), (124), (125), reported no rocks 
of Triassic age. In 1932 MacKay (72) assigned 350 feet of 
massive, brov/nish, sandy quartzites and thin, shaly sandstones 
to the Triassic, but stated that their age is doubtful as no 
fossils v/ere found. They differ lithologically from the under¬ 
lying quartzites, an erosional unconformity marking the contact. 
These strata were correlated with the Spray River formation both 
on their lithologic resemblance to this formation in the Banff 
area, and because of their stratigraphical position, I'^'lacKay 
stated further, however, that it is not improbable that they 
represent the lowermost beds of the Fernie formation, as they 
merge imperceptibly into the phosphatic beds which contain 
a lower Jurassic fauna. The beds thin rapidly to the east, and 
whereas they are 350 feet thick at Crowsnest, at Blairmore they 
have thinned to 50 feet (73, P- 30B), 

In the Panther river area north of Banff the formation 
consists of a thin-bedded shale, and occurs both in the front 
ranges of the mountains and at the headwaters of the river (153)* 














: - ■-' ,■ ,:: ■; 'Sii*''''- ■ 

nf- 


ll'h-ll 




Vi. s'- 





* ; f'D.'; '.'n^sV 



. r-j. 

s. , 



t 






1 ,:'..uTv ,,.- 


f 


i r'! - ‘ 











- 20 - 


The contact with the underlying Rocky Mountain quartzite is 
here disconformahle. 

In the Mountain Park region northwest of Nordegg, the 
upper beds of the Spray River formation are said to consist of 
white limestones (I63, p. 63). At Jasper, Luscar and Pocahontas 
the Spray River formation was described by Telfer (l53j P* 581) 
as a thin-bedded shale with a disconformable rusty contact 
with the underlying Rocky Mountain quartzite* 

Allan, Warren and Rutherford (5) in their reconnais¬ 
sance mainly along the motor road in the eastern ranges around 
Jasper, included all the Triassic rocks of the area in the Spray 
River formation. The formation was identified both by its 
lithologic character and its position in the section. In this 
area it consists typically of black, thin-bedded, argillaceous 
limestones and dolomites, and black calcareous shales with 
subordinate sandy beds. On weathering it generally assumes a 
rusty brown color and a shaly habit. As exposures along the 
highway are scarce, no good measurements for thickness were 
obtained, but the thickness probably does not exceed 30O or 
400 feet. In 1934 a thickness for the formation in this area 
of 400 to 700 feet was reported by Allan and Rutherford (8,p,31)« 
In this region the Spray River formation lies directly on the 
Rundle limestone and is overlain by the Fernie shale (5)« While 











I 









- 21 - 


thQ section on Folding mountain and Ashlar ridge show the 
lower boundary as well-exposed, nowhere was the contact with 
the overlying Fernie observed (5, P* 242)• 

Palaeontology and Correlation 

In this formation fossils are, as a rule, scarce and 
poorly preserved, but they do occur rather abundantly in 
restricted layers at certain localities. It v/as this paucity 
of organic remains which led to much controversy as to the age 
of the Spray River formation. 

In 1924 the first conclusive evidence of the Lower 
Triassic age of the formation was submitted. In that year the 
Harvard school of field geology under Raymond (121), working in 
the area around Banff, found the diagnostic Meekoceras gracilitatus 
White. This find definitely proved the Lower Triassic ( Meekoceras ) 
age of the formation. Other ammonites described at this time 
were Gvronites aolanatus (White) and Golumbites parislanus Hyatt 
and Smith. The Golumbites fauna is distinctive of the upper¬ 
most Lower Triassic Golumbites 2one of J. P, Smith (191 )• 

Concerning the fauna in the Banff area Warren (154,p.41) 
stated it is largely nev/, but that some of the pelecypods are 
close to, if not identical with, some forms from the Triassic 
(Meekoceras ) bed of the Y/estern States, In this connection he 
mentioned Aviculonecten oarvulus Hall and Whitfield, and 




















; j. 


• -t. 





I 




t 


' ■ 

A 




i, 

















- 22 - 


Aviculopecten idahoensis Meek* Ammonites collected were too 
poorly preserved to admit of identification* Linfcula and 
poorly preserved ammonites were found in the lower beds, v/hile 
higher horizons yielded Aviculopecten and other pelecypods* 

The species of ganoid fishes as described from this 
formation are as follows: Platvsomus canadensis L ambe (57)» 
Coelocanthus banffensis Lambe (58), Acrolepis laetus Lambe (58), 
Belonorhvnchus davi Raymond (121), and Platvsomus brewsteri 


Warren (164)* 

To show the age relationship of the fauna in this area 
to the standard of reference for the world, J* P* Smith’s ( 191 ) 

zonal classification of the Lower Triassic is here appended. 


V, 

Columbites 

zone 



IV* 

Tirolites : 

zone 



III* 

Meekoceras 

zone 

III*c* 

Anasibirites subzone 




III*b. 

Owenites subzone 




Ill*a. 

PseudosaKeceras multi- 





lobatum subzone 

II* 

Genodiscus 

zone 




I. Otoeeras zone 


2. Schooler Creek Formation - Upper Triassic 
Introduction 

The Schooler Creek formation is restricted in its 
development as far as it concerns this thesis, to northern west- 
central Alberta and the Peace river block of British Columbia. 

This latter area is considered as the type section* The formation 










































- 23 - 


is overlain by the Pine River shales of Jurassic age and, as 
yet, the lower contact has not been observed. 

Previous Y/ork 

Sources of inforrnation regarding the stratigraphy of 
this area are limited. In 1875 Selwyn (141, p. 127) collected 
Monotis subcircularis Gabb, an Upper Triassic form, on Peace 
river in latitude 58®10* and longitude 122®10*, Two years 
later Hunter (141, p, 127) obtained the same species on Upper 
Pine river in latitude 55®30* and longitude 122®* In his 
report of 1889 on the fossils from the Triassic rocks of Brit¬ 
ish Columbia, Whiteaves (171) made brief mention of these 
finds and described specimens including Spiriferina borealis. 
Terebratula liardensis , Monotis subcircularis a Popanoceras 
mcccnnelli, and Trachyceras canadense , v/hich he considered to 
be Upper Triassic in age. 

Preliminary work on the Triassic of Peace river v/as 
carried out by McLearn (93) ii^ 1917. Spieker (147) in 1922 
carried on investigations in the British Columbia portion of 
the area, but his report mainly concerned the structure of the 
region. The first report on the lithology and faunal subdivisions 
of the formation is that of McLearn (97) in 1921* It was not 
until ten years later, however, that he described the fauna (107)* 
A paper by Williams and Bocock (177) in 1932 and further important 
papers on the faunas of this formation by McLearn (113-117), 























24 - 


(l86-l89)i followed in later years. 

Lithology, Distribution. Thickness 

It is considered that the Schooler Creek formation 
comprises all the known Triassic of the area. The main devel¬ 
opment of the formation is in the foothills of the Rocky 
mountains along the Peace river in eastern British Columbia. 

Beds of Upper Triassic age have not yet been found as far south 
as Jasper Park, although their occurrence there is quite pro¬ 
bable as the Harvard geological field trip of 1929, under 
Professors Mather and Raymond claimed to have found Pseudo- 
monotis subcircularis , an Upper Triassic form, at Jasper Park 
(120), At an early date Monotis circularis Gabb vrns reported 
farther south from a branch of the Brazeau river (84, p. 47). 

In 1940 McLearn (117, p. 67) described the Schooler 
Creek formation as follows; “It is more than 2,500 feet thick 
and consists mostly of calcareous, ver^^- fine sandstone, 
somewhat less of calcareous siltstone and loss of shelly, crinoid- 
al, partly oolitic, argillaceous and arenaceous limestone,” 

Some of the shelly limestones are massive, while others, because 
of the presence of flat shells like Halobia an d Monotis , have a 
fissile fracture on v/eathering. Thin beds of limestone consist¬ 
ing almost entirely of immature shells of Halobia, 2 to 3 ™a. 
long, occur in the Halobia zone. A somewhat purplish color is 
exhibited by the formation, Williams and Bocock (177, p. 205) 































gave a figure of 3»000 feet as a conservative estimate of the 
thickness of the formation. 

Subdivision of the formation into definite, persistent, 
lithologic units is not readily accomplished. McLearn (117,p. 67 ) 
has, however, designated the uppermost part of the formation 
consisting of dark, carbonaceous beds, including much calcareous 
siltstone, argillaceous limestone, and Halobia limestone, 
as the Pardonet member, and the lower part, which contains more 
light grey, less carbonaceous and more arenaceous beds, the 
lower or grey member, 

Disconformably overlying the Schooler Creek formation 
are the Pine River shales, a probable northward extension of 
the Jurassic Fernie shale (ll7i P« 71)* The basal contact with 
Pennsylvanian strata has not been seen in the foothills, but 
may bo visible to the west in the mountains ( 107 , p. 1 )* 

Palaeontology of the Schooler Creek Formation 

Cen eral Sta tement; The formation is very fossil- 
ifercus at some horizons and localities, all faunas being marine, 
McLeam (141, p. 67 ) has stated: **Amraonoids and pelecypods are 
common in number and diversified in species. Brachiopods are 
numerous at some horizons, but few in species. Gastropods are 
rare and Bryozoa very rare, Crinoid stems are common in some 
limestones. No corals have been collected. Some faunal facies 
consist mainly of amraonoids, others dominantly of pelecypods or 




















- 2b - 


brachiopods. Some layers contain only Halobia or Monotis .** 
Faunal Z ones: Faunal zoning of the Schooler 
Creek formation by both ammonites and pelecypods has been ac¬ 
complished by McLearn (117, p. 68), While the pelecypods lend 
themselves very well to the zoning of the Triassic, they do not, 
however, permit as refined a zoning as do the ammonites. 
Brachiopods are insufficiently distributed throughout the 
formation to afford a basis for faunal zoning. 

The following table by McLearn (117, P* ^8) shov/s the 
ammonoid and pelecypod zoning of the Schooler Creek formation. 



Europe 

Ammonoid faunas 

Pelecypod faunas 


Rhaetian 

Unknown 

Unknown 

Neo- 

Triass ic 

Norian 

Diphyllites 


M. subcircularis 

Distichites 

Drepanites 

Halobia 

M, alaskana var. 

H. ccrdillerana, 

0. cf. mucronata, etc, 

Karnian 

Stikinoceras 


L t poyana 

Meso- 

Triassic? 

Ladinian? 

Nathorstites 

Mahaffy Cliffs 

Red Rock Spur 

M. montini 





























■ ■€ 







-'S; 




. 

-fcfctvO'_1“ ^ 





:)■ 



. 1 - 


V* r*-^-- 


i 


r 





















- 27 - 


Important species of the Schooler Creek formation v/ith 
their zonal distribution include: 

Nathorstites cf, mcconnelli W hiteaves - Nathorstites zone 

Protrachvceras (Trachvceras) canadense (Whiteaves) -Nathorstites 

zone 

Tropites sp. - Stikinoceras zone 

Spiriferina borealis Whiteaves - Stikinoceras zone 

Coenothyris (Terebratula) liardensis (Whiteaves) - Stikinoceras 

zone 


Monotis subcircularis Gabb - Monotis subcircularis zone 


3* Fernie Shale - Jurassic 
Introduction 

The Fernie shale of Jurassic age occurs in the foothills 
and mountains of western Alberta, extending from the vicinity 
of the 49 th parallel northwestv/ard to at least the northern 
boundary of British Columbia* In its northern development the 
formation bears the appellation Pine River sliale. In the south in 
the Foothills, it lies unconformably on the Rundle limestone of 
Mississippian age, while in the Peace river area it rests on the 
Upper Triassic Schooler Greek formation* The change from the 
marine conditions of the Fernie to the freshwater environment of 
the overlying Kootenay is one of gradation* 

Previous Work 

The name '*Fernie shale*’ has surreptitiously crept into 



































2b 


geological literature without the benefit of proper definition. 

To Leach (62) is attributed the first usage of this term in 
describing the rocks of the Blaimore-Frank coal fields. Dawson 
made the first section through the Growsnest and erred in including 
in the Cretaceous the black shales at the base of the Kootenay. 

The early workers in the mountains and foothills followed this 
procedure. Me Connell (8?) and MeSvoy (90) though they noted 
the black shales at the base of the coal-bearing beds, did not 
differentiate them as a distinct formation. Since its designation 
by Leach as the Fernie shales these beds have always been 
separated from the overlying Kootenay. It was not until after 
Dawson’s death, however, that the name Fernie shale was admitted 
to geological literature. 

Among the more recent workers who have contributed to 
our knowledge of the stratigraphy and palaeontology of the 
formation must be mentioned McLearn (92), (97 )> (98), (101), 

(103), (104), (106)« It was his study of the ammonites which led 
to an appreciation of the faunal zones present in the formation. 

S. S* Buckman of England assisted him in this respect. C. H. 
Crickmay (19) contributed with his broad generalized studies, and 
Telfer (153) added much in his search for economically important 
phosphate deposits. The existing knowledge of the Fernie has 
been conveniently summarized by Warren (I63). 













- 2 ^ ‘ 


Litholop:v« Distribution. Thickness 

General St atement : The Fernie shale appears to 
vary lithologically from place to place. This apparent lithologic 
change may be largely stratigraphic as exposures are few, and 
thus the complete formation is rarely observed in any one section. 

Of the general lithology of the Fernie, Warren (l63,p.59) 
stated: '*The fcrrae.tion is composed of a series of shales usually 
dark in colour, commonly sandy, in places calcareous and occasion¬ 
ally slightly bituminous. Clay-ironstone or calcareous nodules 
are common in many localities though entirely lacking in others. 

The sandy shales are generally platy whereas the more argillaceous 
types are more fissile and darker in colour. The calcareous 
shales weather to a light grey colour and assume a fine platy 
character especially when dr^'-. Some sections show the three types 
of shale and this is especially true in the southern extension of 
the formation. Toward the north the formation becomes more 
sandy even to the inclusion of many thin sandstone bods and the 
calcareous type of shales disappear.** 

The base of the Fernie is generally marked by a 
phosphatic bed, which in some localities attains a thickness of 
4 to 5 feet. In the south the persistence of the bed has been 
demonstrated by Telfer (153)» but in some sections farther north 
it appears to be lacking as a definite unit, probably due to a 
change in character of the lower part of the Fernie through the 









1 . 








- 30 - 


introduction of a bed of black chert with interbedded shaly 
layers at the base of the fomiation. The chert bed is es¬ 
pecially well developed in the Cadomin area. At Clearwater it 
consists of chert and limestone*. This basal member, of 
which the phosphatic and chert beds are a part, is up to 125 foot 
thick and is always phosphatic. It is slightly fossiliferous, 

Telfer (l53i P* 589) stated that in general the 
Jurassic phosphatic seam may be divided into: 

(a) An upper yellow marker 

(b) A nodular or oolitic calcareous phosphate bed 

(c) A shale parting 

(d) An oolitic phosphate bed 

(e) A basal marker usually marcasite 

Overlying the basal phosphatic member is a series of 
black shales from 50 to 150 feet thick which are but very poorly 
fossiliferous, 

Warren (163, p, 59) in 1934- stated that an excellent 
horizon marker consisting of calcareous sandstone is generally 
present within the Fernie and occurs from 50 to 150 feet above 
the base of the formation. For this bed he proposed the name 
Rock Creek member of the Fernie, from Rock creek near Blairmore, 
where the bed is well exposed. This member is the ’’Belemnite bed** 
of Telfer, The top of the bed is, in soma places, more calcareous 
than the base, A variation in thickness of the bed of from 5 
to 30 feet exists, the thicker sections being more arenaceous^ 

* Personal communication from Dr. Warren, 


















- 31 - 


the thinner sections more calcareous* A thickening of the bed 
to the east and to the north appears to take place* While 
Belemnites at this horizon are plentiful in some localities, 
as at Cadomin, in most places they are lacking* The Rock Creek 
member forms an important fossil horizon. 

Overlying the Rock Creek member is a series of grey- 
black shales grading into the sandy beds of the Kootenay above* 
These latter sandy beds are but poorly fossiliferous, a fact which 
has been responsible for the inability of assigning to them a 
definite stratigraphic age. 

The Fernie varies considerably in thickness from place 
to place* While a thickness of at least 800 feet can be measured 
in most sections (I 63 , p. 58), thicknesses of 2,800 feet and over 
(90), (65), ( 70 ), ( 72 ), have been reported. Because of the soft 
character of the formation, exposures are fevif, and this, in 
conjunction with imperceptible duplication and faulting through 
orogenic movements, is in large part held responsible for the 
discrepancy in thickness as reported for various sections. Soma 
areal variation in thickness is, however, believed to exist* 

Fernie a nd Gro ws nest Dis tric ts - The Type Section: 
The Fernie shale has derived its nauie from the town of Fernie, 
British Columbia, ajad for this reason the type section may be 
considered to bo in this locality* A thickness of 3>000 feet 
for the formation in this area was reported by McSvoy (90), but 

















- 32 - 


Y/arren (I63, p. 60) considered that, because of the disturbed 
attitude of the strata in this region, no reasonable section 
could be measured. The age of the formation was based on the 


determination of Cardioceras collected by McEvoy in this area, 
and described by Whiteaves (175)* 

Good sections of the formation are exposed about 15 
miles to the east of Fernie in the mountains west of the Corbin 


coal mine. Telfer (163, p. 60) measured the following section 
on Loach creek in this area: 


132 feet 

510 •• 

60 “ 

160 
7 “ 

50 » 
1.5“ 

4 


Overlying beds, Kootenay Sandstone 

Black shale 

Grey calcareous shale 

Black shale with some calcareous shale with 
nodules at base 
Black shale 

Calcareous sandstone (Belemnite bed) (Rock 
Creek memberJ 
Black shale 

Grey limestone (bituminous) 

Phosphate bed 


924.5 feet 

Underlying beds, Spray River Fcrmaticn 


A few miles to the east of this locality Warren (I63) 


assigned a thickness of 8OO feet of beds to the formation, and 
pointed out that the difference in thickness between his and 


Telfer*s sections could probably be accounted for by the repe¬ 
tition or omission of strata. At the phosphate mine about one 
mile v/est of Growsnest the section is 808 feet thick and very 


similar lithologically to the above sections. The strata in these 
























' - 33 - 

three sections are tilted but otherwise not greatly disturbed 
by faulting and folding, and are considered as typical sections 
of the Fernie in the type locality. A section at Corbin inter¬ 
mediate in position betv/een the first tv/o and the last mentioned 
sections, was reported by HkcKay (70) to have a thickness of 
2,800 feet. The strata in this locality are, however, notably 
broken and disturbed* 

KcLearn (104) considered the Fernie in the section on 
the south slope of Grassy mountain near Blairmore, to be resting 
on a quartzite of Palaeozoic age belonging to the Turtle mountain 
group* MacKay (72) assigned a thickness of 900 feet of beds to 
this section which includes 50 feet of strata which are doubtfully 
Jurassic. Calcareous shale in this eastern section is less 
frequent than in the sections to the west* 

Of the lithology of the Fernie in the Crowsnest pass 
area MacKay (73) in 1933 stated that it consists of thin-bedded, 
grey-black and black, fissile, marine shales mth thin-bedded, 
brown sandstone, fossiliferous calcareous grits, and in places 
a phosphate bed at the base containing Gryphaea. Limestone beds 
or lenses occur sparingly throughout the shale (123 )• 

Warren (I63, p. 61) concluded that: ’’The typical 
sections in Crowsnest pass and vicinity, therefore, show the 
Fernie shale to be less than 1,000 feet thick with a considerable 


development of calcareous shale in the west which is absent for 































. 34 - 


the most part in the eastern sections,** 

It is not known to what extent the Fernie extends 
south of the Growanest pass, Dalj'- (20) in his survey of the 
International boundary did not identify the formation there, 
but it is possible that it may be obscured completely by 
detritus and thus have been overlooked. It seems probable, how¬ 
ever, that the Fernie extends into I^ntana for the Ellis form¬ 
ation of Montana is by palaeontological evidence of the same age 
as the upper part of the Fernie, 

Turner Valiev : Inforomtion regarding the Jurassic 
of the Turner Valley area has been obtained solely from well 
logs, Hume (54, p. 3) has described the Fernie here as a marine 
formation containing phosphatic material and consisting of 
brown, thin-bedded sandstones at the top and dark to black 
shales v/ith thin, limy bands in the lo?/er part. The Fernie here 
contains the so-called "Brov/n sand*', a granular brown sandstone 
60 to do feet thick - the top of which marks the Kootenay-Fernie 
contact (52), In the upper of the underlying shales glauconite 
with abundant pyrite is present, and belemnites arid phosphatic 
nodules occur, A belemnite conglomerate in sandstone with 
black, phosphatic pellets, is present about l6o to 170 feet below 
the top of the Brown sand. Between this conglomerate and the 
underlying Palaeozoic limestone are 40 to 50 feet of beds desig¬ 
nated as *'poker chip** shales, from their habit of breaking into 



















- 35 - 


roundad chips. Hume gave the thickness of the Fernie in this 
area as 200 feet. Hera, as at Moose ^fountain, the Fernie shale 
lies disconformably on the Rundle limestone of Mississippian age. 

Moose Mounta in: Cairnes (l5), (l^>), who 
carried out the early work in this area, assigned a thickness 
of 100 to 250 feet of beds to the formation. Hume (72) gave 
the thickness of the Fernie shale exposed in Canyon creek at 
Moose mountain as 205 to 220 feet. It is composed of dark brown 
to black shales with a highly bituminous appearance with inter¬ 
calated calcareous shales, and a development of an arenaceous 
phase in the upper part. In this area the Fernie lies discon- 
formably on the Biississippian Rundle limestone and is overlain 
unconformably by the Kootenay. 

West-Cen tr al Albe rta: In the following 
discussion west-central Alberta is considered as that area which 
extends from the Fallentimber area northwestwards to the vicinity 
of Jasper Park, 

The thickness of the Fernie shale in the Fallentimber 
area was estimated by J^cKay (7^) to be 150 feet. The formation 
was recognized as being present on the Red Deer river, for 
Whiteaves (17^) described a species of Feltoceras collected by 
Bowling from this area. From the Bighorn basin a thickness 
of 722.5 feat of predominantly dark grey or black calcareous 



























- 36 - 


shalas was reported by IvlEilloch (84). He mentioned, however, 
a section between the Red Deer and Clearwater rivers attaining 
a thickness of 2,900 foot, but experienced difficulty in sep¬ 
arating the Fernie from the overlying Kootenay. A complete 
section of the Fernie was measured by Allan (178, p* 35) in the 
head of the small valley entering Blackstone river from the north 
and directly opposite the valley of George creek. The Rock 
Greek member is developed to a thickness of 8 feet in this 
section of 685 feet of Fernie beds. The formation is underlain 
by the Spray River and overlain by the Kootenay. 

To the east of this area in the Saunders Greek and 
Nordegg coal basins, Allan and Rutherford (3) assigned a 
thickness of 250 to 300 feet to the Fernie, the upper part of 
which is predominantly sandstone. The basal bed is black chert 
intermixed with shale. In this section no Kootenay was found, 
the Fernie being considered to carry up to the Blairmore con¬ 
glomerate. Sanderson (139) described the Fernie in this area 
as composed of dark shales, brown, fine-grained sandstones, and 
ferruginous sandy beds. The presence of a Belemnite horizon was 
noted. Sanderson reported a thickness of 400 to 450 feat for 
the Fernie but said there is doubt as to the Triassic or 
Jurassic age of the basal 100-foot limy series. 

Of the occurrence of the Fernie shale in the Mountain 
Park area northwest of Nordegg, Warren (163) remarked that the 
























- 37 - 


formation is well exposed through intermittent exposures. 

The black chert member, containing poorly preserved pelecypods 
and belemnites, is wall developed at the base of the formation 
to a thickness of over 20 feet. About 150 feet above the base 
the Rock Creek member is developed to a thickness of at least 
30 feet. Overlying this member the shales are dark grey to 
black, arenaceous in character, and grade upwards into the 
Kootenay formtion. The Fernie here is underlain by the Spray 
River formation, the upper beds of which are white limestones. 
Because of faulting and folding the true thickness of the Fernie 
has not been accurately obtained. MacKay (71) reported a thick¬ 
ness of 1,300 feet for the Fernie in the coal areas in the vicinity 
of Jasper Park, The Fernie has been recognized in the Smoky, 

Hay and Borland river areas by J. MacVicar (83)* 

Peace River Ar ea; Overlying the Upper Triassic 
Schooler Creek formation and underlying the continental Lower 
Cretaceous beds on Peace river, is a shale of lithologic character 
similar to the Fernie, and occupying the same stratigraphic 
position. The name Pine River formation was given to these strata 
by Spieker (147, p. II 8 ) who assigned them to the Jurassic (|). 

He described them as blue-black marine shale with intercalated 
limestone and some sandstone. He ascribed to them a thickness 
of 300 + feet but the base is not exposed, Williams and Bocock (177) 























- 38 - 


credit to the formation a thickness of 600 feet. This shale is 
also found north of the Peace about half way between Schooler 
creek ajad Ottertail river, and was correlated with the Pine 
River shales by McLearn (177, ?• 207)* There seams little 
doubt, that, lithologically and stratigraphicedly, the Pine 
River formation is the northern extension of the Fernie shale 

( 163 , p. 63 ). 

Character of the Boundaries 

In any section thus far studied the lower boundary of 
the Fernie is disconformable. Where the Fernie shale overlies 
the Lower Triassic Spray River formation the contact is grad¬ 
ational, the phosphatic bed at the base of the Fernie being 
vary similar to some of the beds of the Spray River. Hov/ever, 
\T^ere the Fernie overlies the Rundle limestone of Llississippian 
age, as it does in the foothills, the lithologic change is 
remarkably abrupt. 

In most places the shale of the Fernie grades upwards, 
by the intercalation of sandstone beds, into the overlying Koot¬ 
enay. In only one locality, the Moose Mountain and Turner Valley 
sections, is the contact unconformable. In areas where the Fernie 
is represented by its normal thickness the highest fauna thus 
far found, in the formation is Argovian (cf. p. 39 ) in age. The 
oldest flora cf the Kootenay is said to be Barremian (cf. p. 59 ) 
of the Lower Cretaceous in age. It is thus evident that soma 















- 39 - 


error exists in the section, but a consideration of it lies 
outside the scope of this thesis. 

Faunal Horizons 


To shov/ the relationships of the fauna of the Fernie 


to the European, the following table of the standard European 


nomenclature of the Jurassic is given. 


UPPER JURASSIC 


LOV/ER JURASSIC 
(LIAS) 


( 

( 

( 

( 

( 

( 

( 

( 

( 

( Upper 

( 

( 

I Middle 


Lower 


Tithonian 

Portlandian 

Kimraeridgian 

Argovian 

Divesian 

Callovian 

Bathonian 

Bajocian 

( Aalenian 
( Toarcian 
( Do me ri an 

( Pliensbackian 
( Lotharingian 

( Sinemurian 
( Hettangian 


The earliest knowledge we have of the age of the Fernie shale 
was the identification by Whiteaves (172) of a Sonninian fauna, 
collected by McConnell (8?) in an early reconnaissance in the 
vicinity of Devil’s lake (Lake IiEnnewanka), near Banff. 

V/hiteaves unfortunately placed this fauna in the Lower Cretaceous, 
and it v/as not until later years that the age of this fauna was 
correctly determined to be Jurassic (lOl). 















-h t 




0^*' ■ A 

;.r -m. 


.-7 ^ . . '' ' 


'/'''.(■■A. '■- ' / 

lv '"' 


.■'li'WVv'l 



4M:,. 








.' . '‘'•''■•itL, 

,i?'. 


.'4>...l ' 










1 -V 


.‘..W V* ’ 


: 

'i 














40 - 


It v/as the identification and description by 
Y/hiteaves (175) of a species of Cardioceras, which had been 
collected by Mc3voy about two and a quarter miles northeast 
of Fernie, B. C,, that gave us the first evidence as to the 
Jurassic age of the Fernie shale. This datum was further aug¬ 
mented by the discovery on Red Deer river of an ammonite des¬ 
cribed by ViHiiteaves (17^) as Peltoceras . It was on the basis 
of these two finds that Whiteaves correlated the Fernie shale with 
the Ellis and Sundance formations of the western United States. 
Both genera apparently represent a closely related horizon in 
the Upper Jurassic and correspond to the fauna of the deposits of 
the Logan sea - the Upper Jurassic seaway which probably extend¬ 
ed eastwards across the western United States. An arm of this 
sea extended northwestwards from Montana into Alberta. It was 
thus generally considered that the Fernie shale represented a 
deposit of a northern extension of the Logan sea. I^re recent 
work proved this assumption to be incorrect. VVhile the Ellis- 
Sundance horizon has been shown to be present in the Fernie 
shale at certain localities, most of the formation is older 
than any horizon so far discovered in the deposits of Logan’s sea. 

The lowest fauna so far discovered in the Fernie shale 
is the Sinemurian (Lower Jurassic) fauna from the Fernie area, B.C. 
(160). Telfer obtained this fauna from several localities at 



















41 


the very base of the formation. Poorly preserved pelecypods and 
amnionites were ascribed to the genus Arniotites by Warren (ibO), 
who stated that better preserved material shows that the genus 
is probably Sparnioceras . Warren (lb3) reported that this same 
genus has since been obtained from the base of the Fernie near 
Banff, and a fauna of probably similar age, as yet undescribed, 
occurs in one locality in the Jasper area. As these faunas have 
all been obtained from the very base of the formation, it has 
reasonably been assumed that no faunas earlier than the Sinarnurian 
occur in the Fernie shale. 

From some localities poorly preserved specimens with 
Liassic affinities have been collected. Distinct affiliations 
with ’’ Grammoceras ** were shown by ammonites collected from the 
Fernie district by Telfer from above the Eparnioceras zone. Allan 
and Rutherford (I 63 , p* 66) in the Jasper area collected an 
ammonite which is undoubtedly a Dactylioceratid. A Dactylioceratid- 
like ammonite was also reported from near the base of the form¬ 
ation at Moose mountain by Hume (45)* Both these are Upper 
Lias types, L. W. Collet (I 8 ) also obtained Upper Lias ammonites 
in the Jasper area. He identified these as Hammatoceras insi?yne 
Schubler and Dumortieria or Catulloceras sp. ind., and regarded 
them as Upper Toarcian in age. The significance of these finds 
rests in their demonstrating the presence of several definite 

























Liassic horizons in tha Farnia shale, and in the probability that ' 
most of Lower Jurassic time is raprasantad in the lower part of 
tha formation, i 

Probably tha best known faunas in the Fernia are those ! 
of Bajocian (lowermost Upper Jurassic) age. The first one is 
that found by McConnell (8?) near the north end of Laka Minnev/anka, 
Hera ammonites representing the genus Sonninia (lower Bajocian in 
age) are present together with brachiopods and pelecypods. This 
fauna was originally ascribed to the Cretaceous by Whiteaves 
( 172 ) but was properly placed at a later date by McLearn (lOl), 

As yet tha ammonites have not received full study, but the molluscs j 

i 

represent a very definite group including Qstrea , Plagiostoma , 
Oxvtoma. Trigonia , Astarte. Protocardia and Pleuromya , As yet this 
fauna has not been found elsewhere, 

Warren (I 63 ) has stated that at a slightly higher 
horizon and in the Rock Creek member of the formation a more 
widespread and very prolific fauna occurs. Included are such 
ammonites as Teloceras, Stemmatoceras, Defonticeras , Saxitoniceras , I 
and Zemistephanus together with a variety of other forms including 
Beleinnites . Rhvnchonella . Cucullaea, Inoceramus. Oxvtoma, Cardinia. 
Trigonia. Camptonectes . Entolium. Plagiostoma . Pleuromya. Thracia. 
Arctica . Protocardia and Pleurotomaria , “This fauna has now been 
obtained in practically every locality examined from Crowsnest 
pass to Jasper Park.” (I 63 , p. 66). Crickmay (19) reported it 

















































- 43 - 


in close association with the Sonninian fauna near Lake I>Enrie- 
wanka, Allan 35 ) reported this same fauna from Blackstone 

gap* Belemnites cf* densus M . & H., Tripionia sp. nov., InocerajiTus 
sp* nov., Plagiostoma sp. nov., Cvprina sp. nov. and Pleuromva 
sp. undet. are represented at this locality. Close relationship 
appears to exist betv/een the pelecypods of the three faunas. On 
account of the abundance of specimens which may usually be obtained 
when the horizon is found, this Teloceras fauna will probably 
prove the best horizon marker in the Femie shale. Most of the 
other faunas, especially those of the Lower Jurassic, are known 
from a very fev/ specimens. 

McLearn ( 99 ), (101), (104), reported a fauna of some¬ 
what similar age from calcareous sandstones (Lille member) at 
the top of the Rock Creek member on the south slope of Grassy 
mountain near Blairmore. This is the Chlaws mcconnelli fauna of 
McLearn and consists of pelecypods including Ghlamvs mcconnelli. 
Lima stantoni . Lima whiteavesi. Plagiostoma blairmorensis. Grvphaea. 
Alectrvonia and Camptoaectes . No ajiimonites are present but the 
position of the fauna in the Rock Greek member shows its close 
association with the Teloceras fauna even though the pelecypods 
are quite distinct from those of other faunas found at this horizon. 

Another assemblage of pelecypods together with some 
ammonites appear approximately 450 to 595 foot above the Rock 
Creek member. This is McLearn*s (104) Corbula munda fauna. 






















I r 

















- 44 - 


Pelecypods are very abundant and include such forms as Cucullaea, 
Gervillia. Inoceramus« Oxvtoma. Pseudomonotis . 03trea« Grvphaey.. 
Trjpionia. Camotonectes. Entolium. Lima . Anomia. Modiolus. Pleuromva. 
Protocardia And Corbula . With these occur the ammonite species 
Miccocephalites miccus Buckman, Metacephalites metastatus. B uckman, 
and Paracephalites jucundas Buckman. In describing the ammonites 
Buckman (l82) assigned to them an early Upper Jurassic Proplan- 
ulitan (raiddls Callovian) age. This fauna is abundant in the 
Blairmore region and Warren (I 63 ) has found some elements of it 
in a section farther to the west. The presence of the horizon 
in localities farther north is shown by the discovery by McLearn 
( 103 ) on Kananaskis river of the specimen Seymourites mcevoyi. an 
ammonite of Callovian age. The ammonites and pelecypods of the 
Blairmore region, however, are apparently absent. This fauna may 
prove to be a good horizon marker in the formation. 

Two faunal horizons, as yet unfortunately both identified 
by but a single species and specimen of ammonite, are kno¥/n above 
the Corbula munda or Miccocephalites horizon (l63). The first is 
that from which Dov/ling obtained his Peltoceras occidentale 1/Vhit- 
eaves (17^) on Red Dear river in Rocky Mountain park. This fauna 
is undoubtedly younger than the Corbula munda fauna and as yet 
this horizon has not been recognized elsewhere in North America. 

The second horizon, Argovian in age, is marked by Cardioceras 


canadense Whiteaves (175). Cardioceras has a widespread 




















































- 45 - 


distribution in North America, being one of the characteristic 
elements of the fauna of Logan's sea* It has not, however, been 
found elsewhere in the Fernie shsile and its a:«act position in 
the formation is not known (I 63 ). 

At present, the Cardioceraa fauna is the youngest fauna 
obtained from the Fernie shale. It was presumably found in the 
sandy beds transitional between the Fernie and the overlying 
Kootenay and thus near the top of the formation. In the 
Jurassic as now defined, it would thus appear that faunas of an 
age younger than the Argovian are hardly to be expected. Careful 
search for specimens in the beds transitional between the Fernie 
and the overlying Kootenay avails little, for these beds are 
remarkably barren of fossils, although the strata appears to have 
been deposited under marine conditions. 


4. Kootenay Formation ~ Lower Cretaceous 

Introduction 

In this thesis the term Kootenay is restricted to the 
Cretaceous beds below the conglomerate in all areas. The 
conglomerate is defined as the Blairmore conglomerate or the 
Cadomin conglomerate, depending upon the area. In its northern 
development in the Mountain Park area the Kootenay is locally 
referred to as the Nikanassin formation, while in the Peace river 

















- 46 - 


canyon it forms the Lower member of the Bullhead Mountain 
sandstone. The importance of the Kootenay lies in the exploit¬ 
ation of coal seains which are associated with this formation in 
the southern areas. Reference should be made to the correlation 
table p. 11 of this thesis. 

Previous Work 

In 1886 G. M, Dawson (24) proposed the term Kootanie 
for a succession of sandstones, interbedded with shales and shaly 
sandstones, including ocTcasional beds of conglomerate and a zone 
containing coal seams. In his Kootenay he included the Jurassic 
Fernie shale, the Kootenay, and most of the overlying Blairmore 
f orroation. 

It was on the basis of fossil plant determinations alone 
that a Cretaceous age was assigned to the formation. Sir J.W. 
Dawson (26), (27), determined as Lower Cretaceous some fossil 
plants from the coal-bearing beds in the Kootenay, whereas speci¬ 
mens obtained from the top of the section were believed to 
represent a Dakota flora and were, therefore, Upper Cretaceous in 
age. It was on this basis that the uppermost beds of our present 
Blairmore were excluded from the Kootenay, which term was reserved 
for the Lower Cretaceous. Dawson was cognizant of the presence 
of the conglomerate beds associated with the Kootenay series. 

He postulated a source from the underlying Palaeozoic limestones 
for the chert pebbles in the conglomerate. His section was 












I' 


( 


i 


I 


i 









- 47 


measured in the vicinity of the present town of Colemaji. 

Leach (62) in his study of the Blairmore-Frank coal 
fields in 1902 delimited the different formations as we now know 
them, but did not name them. He recognized our present Fernie 
shale (700 feet) at the base of the section, then the coal-bearing 
beds (Kootenay - 740 feet), followed by a conglomerate bed 
(Blairmore conglomerate - 30 feet) in turn overlain by his 
fourth series, our present Blairmore formation (l,850 feet). The 
conglomerate was always included with the Kootenay by Leach. 

On his return to the Crowsnest pass area in 19^ Leach 
(63) named the formations he had previously delimited. For the 
coal-bearing beds above the Femie he used Dawson’s term Kootenay 
in a limited sense, including with it the conglomerate at the top 
which he designated the Kootenay conglomerate. For the beds 
above the conglomerate he applied the term Dakota? considering 
that there was no evidence of an unconformity here ’’unless the 
conglomerate at the top of the Kootenay should mark a short 
cessation of deposition at that period.” ( 63 , p, 195) 

The Blairmore section was studied by Rosa (123) in 1915 
and 1916 , He used the term Blairmore formation for the beds 
above the conglomerate and included the conglomerate in this 
formation rather than in the Kootenay. He had perceived that 
some of the coal seams of the Kootenay had been eroded off in 








wmmMm 












- 4 « - 


places, indicating an unconformity at the base of the conglom¬ 
erate, In a study of the fossil plants of the Crowsnest section 
Berry (12) in 1929 suggested a Barremian age for the Kootenay 
flora. MaoKay in 1931 (72), 1932 (73), and 1933 (74), restudied 
the stratigraphy and structure of the Crowsnest pass area. In 
all of his reports ho placed the Blairmore conglomerate in the 
Blairraore at its base, and stressed the unconformity which exists 
between this bed and the underlying Kootenay (72, pp, 24-25), 

(73, P. 30), (74, p. 23)* 

The west-central and northwestern Alberta equivalents 
of the Kootenay formation are discussed in papers by Iv5alloch (84), 
MacKay (68), (71), McLearn (93), (97), (98), (110), (117), 

MacVicar (81), (82), (83), Williams and Bocock (177), Spieker (147), 
Allan and Stelck (9), and Warren and Stelck (l68), Warren (l65) 
in 1938 reviewed the general relationships of the Kootenay from 
the vicinity of the International Boundary to the Peace P-iver area. 

Lithology, Distribution, Thickness 

Genera l State ment: In general the lithology of 
the Kootenay formation remains remarkably constant throughout the 
length of its areal distribution. The formation consists of 
alternate dirty dark grey-colored shales and drab buff-colored 
sandstone, ?dth coal seams, and represents freshwater lake or sub¬ 
aerial deposition. The formation, or its equivedents, are known 
to extend almost continuously from the region just north cf the 










- 49 - 


49th parallel northwestward to the Peace River country. The 
thickest sections are in the western part of the area, a remarkable 
thinning being experienced as the beds are traced eastv/ards* In 
most areas it overlies the Fernie shale of the Jurassic, the Fernio 
having passed upwards through a gradational zone into the Kootenay, 
Overlying the Kootenay, and separated from it by an unconformity 
in the Growsnest pass area, is the Blairmore conglomerate* 

Crowsnest Pass and Vicinity ~ The Lo cality; 

Rose described the Kootenay formation in the Crowsnest pass area 
as consisting of alternating sandstones and shales and coal seams, 
with considerable conglomerate towards the top of the section. 
Massive, coarse-grained, cross-bedded, grey sandstones stand out 
prominently. Between these are black shales, sandy shales, and 
the coal seams which, on account of their softer character, have 
weathered more than the sandstones and are usually covered with 
detritus. The character of the sediments - coarse sandstones 
showing cross-bedding, ripple-marks, fossil land plants, and 
shales associated with coal seams - bespeaks of the sub-aerial 
origin of the formation. All the workable coal of the area is 
found in this formation, A prominent conglomerate marks the 
upper limit of the formation on the Alberta side in Crowsnest 
pass and in the Flathead valley, but in Crowsnest area in Brit¬ 
ish Columbia a number of sEDail coal seams occur above the first 


conglomerate 













- 50 - 


One of the best sections of the district is that 
measured by Rose (123, p. 110) in 1916, which outcrops south of 
Crowsnest river at Blairmore, It serves to illustrate the nature 
and succession of the Kootenay sediments in this area and is as 
follows: 

Section of Kootenay Formation at Blairmore 

Feet 

(Conglomerate at the base of the Blairmore formation 
No* 1 coal seam missing but present under the conglom¬ 
erate 1-^ miles to the north whore it has a thick¬ 
ness of 10 to 18 feet* 

Massive, coarse-grained, and cross-bedded, grey sand¬ 
stone with prostrate fossil stems and bits of 
coal 39 

Coal, No. 2 seam 15 

Dark shale 55 

Sandstone, dark grey, cross-bedded 14 

Shale, black, fissile with a few sandy layers 25 

Coal, No. 3 seam 2 

Shale, black, sandy and carbonaceous layers with little 

layers of coal 8l 

Coal, No. 4 seam 4 

Black shale 3 

Coal 2 

Black shale 3 

Sandstone, coarse and cross-bedded 37 

Shale and small coal seams 70 

Ifeissive, grey sandstone, approximately 100 

Below is thin-bedded sandstone and shale assigned to 
the Fernie formation 

450 

For the Kootenay at Burmis at the east end of Crowsnest 
pass, I>&icKay gave a thickness of 400 feet, while farther west at 
Cole^ian the formation has thickened to 800 feet. (73, P* 36B), 
Across the divide in British Columbia, in the Crowsnest field, 


















- 51 - 


MacKay (74-) ascribed a thickness of 3i^l0 feet of beds to the 
forDiaticn, The thickness of the Kootenay is thus seen to increase 
greatly from east to west. Part of the variation in thickness 
is attributable to erosion of the Kootenay sediments before the 
Blairmore formation was deposited, but most of it is imputed to 
variations in depositions. 

South ern Dist ribution: The Kootenay formation 
has never been reported as far south as the International Boundary. 
Daly (20) in his survey of the 49th parallel reported no rocks 
of Kootenay age. In the southern area east of the Clarke range 
Stewart (l5l) found no rocks referrable to the Kootenay-Blairmore 
group, although he mentioned that they might exist in an unmapped 
area immediately east of the front ranges. The farthest south 
that the Kootenay formation is known to outcrop in Canada is in 
the Flathead valley in the mountains just north of the International 
Boundary (79)* The formation is exposed in this basin for about 
six miles but does not extend as far south as the 49th parallel. 

On the South Fork of Oldman river (Castle river), 
MacKenzie (77) gave a thickness of 1,285 feet for the Fernie 
(base not exposed) and Kootenay combined. He included the con¬ 
glomerate, of thickness up to 25 feet, in the Kootenay. Stewart 
(l5l) stated that the total thickness of the Kootenay in the foot¬ 
hills in the disturbed belt of southwestern Alberta is 600 to 750 














- 52 - 


feet, with the coal seams confined to the upper 300 feet. 

Turner Va lley: Slipper (l46) provisionally 
referred 400 feet of tods to the Kootenay formation in the 
Sheep river area in 1921, In Turner Valley Hume (52) in 1939 
reported an average thickness of 20 to 100 feet for the Kootenay, 
but said that some sections may be slightly thicker* He described 
the Kootenay as consisting of brown, hard sandstones alternating 
with dark shales and containing coal in the upper part. (54)* 

The Kootenay formation was recognized by Rose (126) in the High- 
wood coal area where it is typically developed. 

Moose Mountain and Vici nity: In the Moose 
Mountain area Cairnes (l6) reported an average thickness for the 
Kootenay of 340 feet* He suggested that the fossil plants might 
belong to the Jurassic rather than to the Cretaceous* An increased 
thickness is reported for these same beds where they outcrop 
farther west behind the front range at the head of the south branch 
of Sheep creek at the Burns mine (165, p* 12). 

Southern WestTCentr al A l bert a: In the present 
discussion, southern west-central Alberta is considered to include 
that portion of Alberta from the Bow river north to Ram river* 

Between the Bow and Kananaskis rivers Malloch (84, p.34) 
in 1911 reported a probable thickness for the Kootenay of 2,800 
feet, and stated that the uppermost beds have been removed by 
erosion* Information obtained from core samples of V/abash oil well 















- 53 - 


No. 1, Stoney Indian Reserve, near Kananaskis, shows a thickness 
of 599 feet of Kootenay strata (38). Rutherford* reported the 
Kootenay as also exposed at the Roxana well. LlacKay (78) estim¬ 
ated the thickness of the formation in the Fallentimber area 
as 500 feet. In the first longitudinal valley south of the Red 
Deer Dowling (l84, p. 8) gave the thickness of the formation as 
about 1,700. 

Hume (165, p. 13) stated that 150 feet of Kootenay 
beds v/ith coal are exposed on Red Deer river east of Hunter valley 
well. The conglomerate overlies the Kootenay while the base of 
the formation is faulted* At Marble mountain, on Tepee Pole creek, 
a tributary of the James river on the north side, the Kootenay 
is practically gone, the conglomerate resting on the Fernie shale 
which becomes sandy in the upper beds (l65, p. 13)* No coal is 
present at this locality. A section measured on Ram river by 
Evans (38) shows 207 feet of Kootenay v/ith the base covered. 

Mallcch (84, p. 34) stated that in the third longitudinal valley 
betv/een Red Deer and the Clearwater, at least 2,300 feet of 
Kootenay strata remain, the uppermost strata having been eroded 
off. 

West-Ce ntr^ Alber ta; West-central Alberta is in 
the present discussion considered to extend from the vicinity 

* Personal communication. 








rS - ■ 









t 




















- 54 - 


of Kordegg north to the Athabaska river. 

^ In the aj'ea around Nordegg Allan and Rutherford (3) 
have shown that the conglomerate at the base of the Blairmcre lies 
directly on the Fernie, the upper beds of which are sandy and 
probably marine. They have followed the procedure adopted in this 
area of applying the term Kootenay to the coal measures above the 
conglomerate, whereas in other areas to the south, beds above Ti^at 
is considered to be the same conglomerate, are called Blairrnore. 
Stev/art (l50) in 1917 in this same area also referred the coal¬ 
bearing strata to the Kootenay. Sanderson (139) in 1939 reported 
that no Kootenay was present in the area, the Blairrnore conglom¬ 
erate resting directly on the Fernie. 

In the Bighorn coal basin west of Nordegg, Malloch (84) 
reported a thickness of 5»459 feat for the beds which we now term 
Kootenay and Blairrnore, consisting of 3>^59 feet of Kootenay 
beds and 1,799 feet of Blairrnore beds. His subdivision of the 
succession, however, was not made at the conglomerate. Were such 
a division made, the thickness of the Kootenay would then become 
1,467 feet and that of the Blairmcre 3f991 feet. The lithology 
of the formation here is typical of the Kootenay, and the strata 
show an entire want of regularity, the beds differing in thickness 
and character in localities situated at short distances from one 

another. 

^ [cF. 









- 55 - 

North of the Nordegg area along the Blackstone, 

Brazeau and Pembina rivers, Allan and Rutherford (4) employed the 
term Kootenay for the entire Kootenay-Blairrnore succession* 

They subdivided their Kootenay, on the basis of difference in 
lithologic appearance alone, into two members, - the upper, the 
McLeod member, which corresponds to the upper part of the Blairraore, 
and the lower, the Coal-bearing member which includes the lower 
Blairraore, the conglomerate, and the underlying sandy beds. The 
lithology of the Kootenay here is similar to that of the formation 
in the Bighorn basin. Allan and Rutherford (4, p, 24) have 
described their Kootenay irt the area as consisting of alternating 
beds of conglomerate, sandstones, clay shales, carbonaceous 
shales and coal seams. Most of the coal, however, is above the 
conglomerate. No good measurements of the thickness of the 
formation were made in this area. 

In continuing this work to the north to Athabaska river, 
Rutherford (132) employed the same nomenclature. In most of the 
area the bods are too badly deformed for a reasonable estimate 
of the thickness to be made, but on Folding mountain ho reported 
a thickness of 900 feet for the beds below the conglomerate, 

McSvoy (89) in 1899 issued an earlier report on this area. 

Reports on the geology of the area along McLeod and 


Athabaska rivers are also given by MacKay (68), (71). He introduced 








- 5b - 


a naw sat of formational namas to facilitate the mapping of 
geological units in this area, Becauso the tana Kootenay, as 
employed by earlier workers in this area, did not correspond to 
its usage in southern Alberta where it had a definite age signifi¬ 
cance, its use was discontinued by MacKay, He introduced the term 
Cadomin conglomerate for the conglomerate bed of the area, while 
for the formation below the conglomerate he employed the term 
Nikanassin (68, p. 7). This lower member is barren of noteworthy 
coal seams in this area, the coal horizons being present in the 
formation above the conglomerate. In the Brule area LfecKay (68) 
gave a thickness of 1,046 feet for the Nikanassin, while in the 
vicinity of Jasper Park (71) he ascribed a thickness of 1,900 feet 
of beds to the formation. Lithologically, the Nikanassin consists 
of dark grey shales, and brown-weathering grey sandstones with 
thin impure coal seams. 

Our knowledge of the Kootenay north of the Athabaska 
is largely confined to three reports by kfeic Vicar (8l), (82), (83), 
His term Kootenay includes all the coal-bearing beds and extends 
down to the top of the Femie, For the thickness of his Kootenay 
ha gives 3>^00 feet in the southern division of the map-area, and 
2,500 feet in the northern division. Two conglomerate beds each 
approximately 45 feet in thickness enter the section, thus making 
correlation with the Athabaska river section difficult. 





r/B, ;;:■. - «:•■. 

■ ■■-“ ' V ::'. u..;v .!■'.v 

• ..'; "; ' V ;r i': -Bi ■; 1-, ^ 

. .. : ■ ■ . .*.,!■* ' 
a:' . , - . it 

. B" ': >■?:/; 

-.jv -i-d ’ V" ‘bb’'; '',.■ .\. .i-:.'..ut:v' 

: • ■ ., !:d'- , >ii' d-i B ,'!■:> 

-. ,•,:.? .. , . .. .j-' t/w 



;.j ■'■!)!;.j.,i» 





^ ■) : 







':' .'".J ..'... 


.hd'.. 


i V 1 
















- 57 - 


Peace Ri ve r Canyon : The most premising key section 
to the problems of the Lower Cretaceous in the foothills is this 
northwestern area (110, p. l65). Early work in this region was 
carried on by Selwyn (141), G. M. Dawson (21), McLearn (93 )> (97), 
(98), and Stev/art (150). Later investigators included Rutherford 
( 138 ), Spieker (147), Williams and Bocock (177), McLearn (llO), 
( 117 ), and G. R. Stelck (9), (188), 

The Lower Cretaceous of this area was subdivided by 
McLearn (93) 1918 into two formations, the lower, the Bullhead 

Mountain sandstone and an upper, the St. John formation. Sub¬ 
sequently ( 98 ) McLearn has further subdivided the Bullhead Mountain 
sandstone into a Lower member, and an upper member, the Gething 
member. 

In his latest report McLearn (117, p. 72) suggested 
that a conglomerate bed comparable to the Blairmore and Gadomin 
conglomerates, may exist between the Lower and Gething members of 
the Bullhead Mountain sandstone. It is the Lower member which alone 
concerns the present discussion. 

McLearn (98) in 1923 described the Lower member as 
consisting of conglomerates, grits, and coarse sandstones with 
minor amounts of medium to fine sandstones and shale. Some of the 
grits and sandstones show large-scale cross-bedding and some layers 
are ripple-marked. Shale, sandstone, and occasional, fine 









'.iv* 


t: U 

• > 


J. 




t t 


I 







< 






< 







< ’■ 4 '- - 


#(t‘* « • • ^ 

o. 

U . 

L._. j. 

« ' { ■- • t 

fe: . 




conglomerate comprise the basal beds (117, p* 71)* The lower part 
of the formation generally consists of thin and thick bedded, 
grey sandstone of about medium sand grade, and contains a few 
poorly preserved marine pelecypods. Higher up, the formation 
consists of fine conglomerate, sandstone, some dark carbonaceous 
shale, and occasionally very thin coal seams. Impressions of 
large tree trunks and woody debris are present in some of these 
beds. This zone passes gradually into the Upper or Gething member. 
The contact betv;een this Lower member and the overlying Gething 
member is arbitrarily drawn by McLearn where conglomerates and 
grits disappear, coarse sajidstone becomes rare, and medium to fine 
sandstone, shale, clay ironstone, and coal beds become common. The 
thickness of the formation in the vicinity of the Peace River canyon 
is known to be over 3>000 feet, with a thickness of 1,400+ feet for 
the Gething member (98). On Pine river Y/illiams and Bocock (177) 
did not subdivide the Bullhead Mountain formation and assigned to it 
a total thickness of 3>500 feet. In this latter section two beds 
of conglomerate enter. The lower is about 30 feet thick vi^iile the 
upper one is some 20 feet in thickness. 

The upper part of this member is probably of non-marine 
origin although as yet no fossils have been found in it. The 
lower part of this member is to some extent at least marine and 




< 


fj . 














. .J- - 


















- 59 - 


contains some marine invertebrate fossils. 

In the Wapiti river basin Evans and Caley (39) reported 
the probable presence of the Bullhead Mountain sandstone overlain 
by the St. John shale. At the Guardian No, 1. well in Tp. 80, 

R, 12, W6th, two miles east of Pouce Coupe creek, Allan and 
Stelck (9) reported the absence of the Kootenay formation. 

Fossils of the Kootenay Formation 

As a discussion of the Cretaceous formations in the 

area under review has necessitated the usage of European time 

equivalents, the following table of standard European nomenclature 

for the Cretaceous is given, 

UPPER ( Banian 

CRETACEOUS ( (l^estrictian 

( Senonian (Campanian 
( (Santonian ^ 

( Smscherian (Coniacian) 

( Turonian 
( Cenomanian 

LO'ii’/ER ( Albian 

CRETACEOUS ( Aptian 

( Barreraian, 

( . (Hautarivian 

\ Neocomian/« T 
/ vvalanginian 


The life of the Kootenay time v/as almost entirely floral 
and included ferns, cycads and conifers. In 1885 Sir J. W. Dav/son 
(26) described specimens collected by G. M, Dav/son in the Rocky 
Mountain region in Alberta in 1884, as bearing affinities to the 
Cretaceous, Further contributions to our knowledge of the Kootenay 













bO - 


flora have been made by Berry (lO), (li), (12), by Warren (l55), 
and by Bell (70, pp, I 6 O-I 6 IA), (74, p. 63 ). The type locality 
may be considered to be in the vicinity of Kootenay pass, but 
perhaps most of the collections have been made from the Crov/snest 
area. 

The most characteristic and abundant species as given 
by Berry (11, p» 29) from the Grov/snest region are Qnvchiopsis 
psilotoides. Oleandra graminaefolia. Cladophlebis montanensis. 
Cladophlebis heterophvlla. Pterophvllum acutipennis. Podozamit es 
lanceolatus. and Ginkgo arctica . Of those Berry said that the 
Podozamites is not of especially good botanical standing, and all 
the others but Oleandra and Cladophlebis heterophvlla occur also 
in the Lower Blairmore, However, the presence of these two 
forms and the absence of dicotolydonous leaves are the best field 
guides for recognizing the Kootenay* 

Other less common forms which differentiate the Kootenay 
from the Lower Blairmore are Cladophlebis virgin!ensis. Aerosticho- 
pteris fimbri ata, (no member of the genus Acrostichopteris being 
known from the Blairmore, although it continues to the close of 
the Lower Cretaceous in Wyoming and the east), Gycadole pis sp., 
Nilsonia Schaumburgensis. Czekanowskia sp*, Baiera sp., Hageiopsis 
zamioides . and Nageiopsis (?) montanensis . 







































bl 


W. A. Bell examined specimens obtained by IvIacKay 
( 70 , pp. I 6 O-I 6 IA) from the Corbin area to the west of the 
Crowsnest pass. Of the species in this area Cladophlebis virgin- 
iensis Fontaine and Ftilophyllum arcticum Heer ware moat abundantly 
represented. In addition to these two species, which were also 
found in the I^chel coal area, I%cKay (74, p, 6B) reported that 
Nilscnia Schaumburgensis (Dunker) and Pityophyllum graminaefolium 
(Knowlton), as identified by W. A, Bell from the Michel area, are 
common components of the Kootenay flora. A Coniopterl s sp, was also 
found but it is represented but sparingly in the floral assemblage 
of the Kootenay, occurring more commonly in the Lower Blairmore, 

Only a relatively fev/ well preserved plant species were 
obtained from, the Nikanassin formation and the majority of these 
were similar to those found in the Kootenay strata of the Blairmore 
area (71). 

A study of the table of distribution of forms identified 
by Berry (12) in the Crowsnest region, shows that of the forms 
identified, ’’eleven of them are cominon to the Kootenay of other 
areas and six occur in the Bullhead Mountain sandstone; six in the 
Lower Blairmore The only species common to the Jurassic or 

Upper Cretaceous is the composite species Podozoraites lanceolatus. 


which lacks both botanical and chronological significance.” (l2,p,30). 























In the lower part of the Bullhead Mountain sandstone 


some marine invertebrate fossils ware found. These include 
Aucella« good specimens of which were collected by J. B. Bocock 
on Falls mountain, Pino river. McLearn considered that the presence 
of the Aucella fauna shows that the lower part of the Lower member 
of the Bullhead Mountain formation is of Neocomian and early Lower 
Cretaceous age. The Lower member of the Bullhead J/fountain form¬ 
ation may thus possibly be correlated with the Nikanassin formation 
of the Mountain Park area and the Kootenay formation of the southern 
foothills area. Berry (12) hov/ever, considered the Kootenay in 
the main to be correlative with the Barremian stage of the European 
time scale. 

5* Blairmore Formation - Lower and Upper Cretaceous 

Introduction 

The Blairmore formation, in the main of Lower Cretaceous 
age, extends the length of the thesis area, that is, a distance 
of approximately 500 miles from the International Boundary north¬ 
westward to the Peace River canyon. Only in its southern devel¬ 
opment does the formation bear the appellation Blairmore, for in 
its development in west-central and northern west-central Alberta 
it has been subdivided and has been given various names. While in 
the southern foothills the Blairmore is barren of coal, in its more 
















- b3 - 


northerly development the formation contains numerous coal seams. 

In the north, marine conditions of deposition largely superseded 
the continental deposits of the south. 

Previous V/ork 

Most of the strata now grouped in the Blairmore 
formation were first included in the Lower Cretaceous Kootenay 
series of G, M, Dawson (24), The upper part of the formation, 
however, contained fossils determined by J. W, Dawson (26) as 
bearing affinities to a Dakota flora and was therefore of Upper 
Cretaceous age. 

The Blairmore formation as we now know it was delimited, 
but not naiued, by Leach (62) in 1902 during his work on the 
sections at Blairmore and Coleman, He placed about 1,850 feet of 
beds in this division. Our present Blairmore conglomerate was 
included by him in the top of the Kootenay, In 1912 ( 63 ) he named 
this group the Dakota and considered that it overlay the Kootenay 
without evident unconformity unless the conglomerate at the top of 
the Kootenay should mark a short erosion interval. In the following 
year Leach (64) introduced the term Blairmore (Dakota?) for the 
bads above the conglomerate. 

In 1915 and 1916 the Blairmore section was studied by 
Rose ( 123 )* He used the term Blairmore formation for the beds above 
the conglomerate and placed the conglomerate in the Blairmore rather 








b4 - 


than in the Kootenay as he noticed an unconformity at the base 
of the conglomerate. 

On the basis of fossil plant evidence McLearn (92) 
in 1916 suggested a Dakota age for the upper 200 feet and an upper¬ 
most Gomanchean ago for the remainder of the section. Rose (126) 
in the Highwood coal area referred the Blairmore formation to the 
Upper Cretaceous, Stewart (l5l) ih 1919 included the conglomerate 
in the Blairmore and placed the top of the formation at the base 
of the Crowsnest volcanics. In 1932 MacKay (72), (73)# (74), placed 
the conglomerate at the base of the Blairmore and included the whole 
formation in the Lower Cretaceous, 

Berry (12) in 1929 considered the flora of the Lower 
Blairmore to be of an Aptian-Albian age and that of the uppermost 
Blairmore to be Cenomanian in age, Y/arren (l65) in 1938 reviewed 
the regional relationships of the Blairmore formation, special 
emphasis being given to the Blairmore conglomerate. In all cases 
the Blairmore formation includes all the strata in the Canadian 
Rockies described as Dakota, 

Lithology, Distribution. Thickness 

General Statemen t: On the whole, the Blairmore 
formation remains remarkably constant in lithologic character 
throughout its distribution. MacKay (72, p, 22) described it as 
consisting in general of massive, crumbly, sandy shales of various 















colors, including green, grey, bro\vn, red and black, interbedded 
with minor amounts of massive, soft, greenish-grey, coarse-grained 
and shaly scuidstones. Occasional thin beds of ironstone and at 
least one rather persistent bed, 10 to 15 feet thick, of bluish 
grey, shaly limestone which in places is fossiliferous, are present* 

At the base of the Blairmore formation is a persistent 
bed of conglomerate known in the south as the Blairmore conglomerate 
and in west-central Alberta as the Cadomin conglomerate* IifcLearn 
( 117 ) in 1940 suggested the possibility of it being present between 
the Lower and Gething members of the Bullhead Mountain sandstone in 
the Peace River canyon area* This conglomerate has been correlated 
with the Cleverly conglomerate of the United States (59). This 
latter conglomerate, or its equivalents, have been traced from the 
Alberta-Iifontana border to southern Colorado. 

Warren (l65) stated that it varies little in lithologic 
character throughout the foothills and mountains, being composed 
of pebbles of chert and quartzite cemented in a matrix of usually 
calcareous sandstone* The quartzite pebbles vary in color from 
white to a buff or yellow, whereas the chert may be grey, blue or 
pink in color. The proportion of chert to quartzite varies from 
place to place, in some places chart predominating, while in others 
quartzite is more common* Generally, they are well mixed* Variation 
in proportion of matrix to cobble seems to bear a distinct relation- 










- bb 


ship to the position of the outcrop with reference to the old 
shoreline. As a rule, the cobbles,which usually make up over 
50 per cent of the total volume of the bed, appear as the pre¬ 
dominant part of the stratum. 

The Blairraore is a well sorted conglomerate. Although 
a variation in size exists between the pebbles in one exposure 
from those in another, in any one exposure the size remains remark¬ 
ably alike* While an inch in diameter is the average size for 
the cobble and pebbles in the foothills, it may vary from half an 
inch, (seldom sraaller), up to three inches in diameter* In Crows- 
nest pass, in the Michel and Fernie fields, they may be found still 
larger and the amount of sandy matrix proportionately less, such 
changes being accounted for by the proximity of these areas to the 
old shorelines, Warren (l65, p. 10) stated that “it seems to be 
a fact, nevertheless, that the conglomerate disappears towards 
the east not so much by the pebbles becoming finer ana finer, but 
by the pebbles becoming fewer and fewer in the sandy matrix.** 

Variation exists too in the shape of the pebbles* They 
have all undergone water erosion for they are flattened to some 
degree and are roughly oval in outline, although seldom are they 
of the flatness of well-worn beach pebbles. The chert pebbles are 
usually more angular than those of the quartzite even though they 
may be far from their source of supply. Such angularity is probably 
the result of breakage in transit. 

















- 67 - 


The writer has received the following personal communi¬ 
cation from Dr. Rutherford: 

••Conglomerates within the Blairmore formation have been 
reported from several localities in the foothills especially to the 
west of the outer structures (72), (73)* (77), (123), (126). These 
differ from the basal conglomerate in that they frequently contain 
pebbles of igneous rocks mainly fine-grained porphyries. Such peb¬ 
bles have never been observed in the basal Blairmore conglomerate. 
Hume records one of these higher conglomerates on Highwood river 
where it has only a local distribution. Here in section 34- - Tp.l8 
R. 2 - W5th it has a thickness of 75 ^‘QQt and contains numerous 
pebbles of porphyry. Hume (52, p. 7) reports pebbles of similar 
rocks from the Blairmore in some of the wall samples in Turner 
Valley. 

"The conglomerate carrying porphyry pebbles is wall 
developed to the north end of the Moose Mountain structure and is 
well exposed in Tp. 24 R. 7 and 8-W5th. Here it occurs about 1,000 
feet above the basal conglomerate and consists of a coarse sand¬ 
stone zone about 25 feet thick containing numerous lenses of 
conglomerate. It is not so well indurated as the basal conglomerate 
The Blairmore formation or its equivalents are believed 
to extend from just noirth of the 49th parallel to at least as far 
north as the Guardian No. 1 well east of Pouce Coupe river in the 








- 69 - 


Peace River area, a distance of some 500 miles. The formation 
thickens greatly to the west as it approaches the old shoreline. 

For the standard European nomenclature of the Cretaceous reference 
should be made to page 59 of this thesis, 

Crowsnest P a ss, and, Vi_cini_ty-r The Type Loca lit y,: 

Rose ( 123 ) in 1917 described the Blairmore formation as consist¬ 
ing principally of red and green, sandy and crumbly shales with 
interbedded grey sandstones. The base of the formation is marked 
by a persistent and conspicuous conglomerate 15 to 20 feet thick 
made up of black, white and red quartzite pebbles J inch to 2 
inches in diameter and fir?uLy cemented in a sandy matirx. Rose first 
placed the conglomerate in the Blairmore, for he noticed an erosion- 
al unconformity at its base where in places some of the coal seams 
of the Kootenay had been eroded off. He contended that the pebbles 
of the conglomerate were derived from Cambrian and Precambrian 
quartzites to the west. 

Rosa (123) noted the occurrence at irregular intervals 
throughout the formation of conglomerate as lenses in the sand¬ 
stones, One such persistent conglomerate band which looks much 
like the basal conglomerate, but is distinuished by a large 
percentage of crystalline igneous pebbles, occurs about 1,000 
feet above the base of the formation. It is wall exposed on York 
creek one quarter of a mile west of the International Coal and 













- 70 - 


Coke Company’s fan house and again on the hills between Frank and 
Bellevue just north of the Turtle Mountain rock slide, A 10- 
to l5-foot bod of bluish grey, shaly limestone associated with 
shale and limy seindstono was seen to occur at several points. 

The presence of this bed indicates at least temporary brackish 
water conditions. Rose stated that at Passburg this limestone 
band is not more than 50 foot from the basal conglomerate, at Frank 
175 feet from the base, at Blairmore 500 feet, euid north of Cole¬ 
man 550 feet. In 1912 Leach ( 63 ) reported observing on the east 
flank of McGillivray ridge a thin bod of volcanic material consist¬ 
ing of ash rock and agglomerate about 12 feet thick and about 250 
feet above the base of the limestone bed. At no other locality 
did he find a trace of this. Should Leach’s determination of 
the position of this volcanic bed be correct, its occurrence within 
the Blairmore is most unusual, 

r^cKay ( 72 , p. 22), (73i P* 30) described the Blairmore 
formation as consisting of non-marine, light-colored, shaly sand¬ 
stones and sandy shales alternating with red and green shales and 
with massive, hard conglomerate or coarse sandstone at base and 
loose, cherty conglomerate at top. This basal conglomerate is a 
massive, 20-foot bod of coarse, white cherty sandstone in the 
eastern part of the Blairmore district, whereas, in the vicinity 
of Hillcrest and Bellevue, small lenses of chert pebbles appear. 
















f 


: t 


. - ,r 


- ':r:; 










t 








■ifi 





i 













- 71 - 


At least one bed, 10 to 15 feet thick, of bluish-grey, shaly 
limestone which in places is fossiliferous, and possibly several 
beds, of shaly, freshwater limestone, are present in the lower 
part of the formation. MacKay gave the thickness of the Blairraore 
formation as ranging from 2,100 feet at Blairmore to 3|000 feet 
v/est of Coleman. 

The following is MacKay*s (72, pp. 22-3) composite 
section of the Blairmore formation at Hillcrest. 

BYRQM CREEK SECTION 

Thickness 

Overlying formation - Crov;snest volcanics Feet 

Coarse, grey-green, massive sandstone becoming shaly 

towards base 180 

Green sandstone, interbedded with buff-weathering, 

green shale 215 

Green, sandy shale, massive bedded in places; in part 

concealed 211 

Green, shaly sandstone and shale, in part concealed I 30 

Light brown, buff-weathering, sandy shale 43 

Interbedded green shale and sandstone, iron stained 

in places 135 

Coarse, grey sandstone v/ith bands of ironstone I 8 feet 

from top 100 

Green shale 15 

Crumbly, green shale with a few bands of ironstone and 

green-grey sandstone 43 

Green, sandy shale 21 

Fine-grained, green sandstone 12 

Green, crumbly shale in places heavily stained with 

iron 40 

Green, shaly sandstone and shale, iron stained 27 

Fine-bedded, green, shaly sandstone and some shale 3^ 

Grey-green, shaly sandstone with some coarse, grey 

sandstone 27 

Grey-green sandstone 17 

Hard, black shale 1 

Grey, shaly sandstone 14 

Green sandstone and shale; contains a 4-foot bed of 

grey ironstone 250 

















- 72 - 


Concealed 65 
Green, sandy shale 15 
Concealed 20 
Grey-green, fine sandstone 20 
Finely bedded, olive-green shale 43 
Liassive, grey-green sandstone 1 
Green-weathering, grey, sandy shale 7 
Light grey sandstone with layers of grey to black, 

sandy shale 10 
Grey weathering, brov/n to black shale 7 
Llassive, green sandstone 10 
Fine-grained, green sandstone with layers of green, 

sandy shale 70 
Green sandstone vath carbonaceous material, weathers 

buff 13 
Compact, brown and green shales weathering red 29 
Green, compact, sandy shale weathering rusty red 23 
Green, shaly sandstone with ironstone concretions 10 
Green, sandy shale 8 
Grey to green, coarse sandstone 8 
Green-grey, sandy shale 10 
Fine-grained, green, sandy shale 5 
Fine-grained, light buff-weathering, green sandstone 4 
Green shale 29 
Fine-grained, green sandstone, v/ith ironstone concretions 8 
Green vi/eathering, black shale 8 
Thin-bedded, green sandstone 4 
Very compact, dark grey argillite; weathers red-brovm 3 
Fissile, green^weathering, grey shale 10 
Coarse, green sandstone 4 
Black shale with green sandstone lenses 20 
Light grey, finely bedded, shaly sandstone 11 
Compact, argillaceous limestone 10 
Black shale 5 
Concealed 69 
Light grey, coarse sandstone 50 
Concealed, largely green shale, l5-foot limestone bed 170 
Massive, coarse, grey, cherty sandstone (Blairmore 

conglomerate) 20 


Total thickness of formation 2,31^ 

Southernmost Al be rta; The Blairmore forioation 


has not been reported as outcropping along the International 












- 73 - 


Boundary in Alberta. Daly (20) found no trace of it in his sur¬ 
vey of the 49 th parallel. As far as is known the Blairmoro 
formation is exposed farthest south in Canada in the Flathead 
valley in the mountains just north of the International Boundary, 
where the Kootenay-Blairmcre succession is exposed in an area 
about six miles long (79)* 

In the South Fork coal area, Oldman river (77), the 
Blairmore formation is typically developed, MacKenzie reported 
a 4- to 20- foot persistent limestone band, containing some 
fossil shells, from near the middle of the formation, A conglom¬ 
erate band higher up in the formation is distinguished from the 
basal conglomerate, which l/IacKenzie placed in the Kootenay, by 
its greater coarseness, softness and different v/eathering. A 
thickness of 2,500 feet was reported for the formation, 

Highwo od Ar ea: Rose (126) reported the Blairmore 
formation as being typically developed across the Highwood area. 
As well as the basal conglomerate, Rose reported other conglom¬ 
erate bands in the formation. An Upper Cretaceous age was 
assigned by him to the Blairmore. 

Turne r Valley: For the stratigraphy of this 
and immediately adjacent areas reference should be made to the 
reports of Hume (40-47), (49-54), Knowledge of the Blairmore 
formation has been obtained solely from well logs. Hume (52) has 








- 74 - 


described the Blairmore as consisting of an upper part of alter¬ 
nating green, grey and dark shales and sandstone, and a lower 
part of dark shales and arenaceous, limy bands. The two parts 
are separated by a white or grey, granular sandstone known as 
the Horae sand, which occurs about 900 to 1,000 feet below the 
top of the formation. 

Several poorlj'' defined sandstone zones are present in 
the upper part of the Blairmore. Of these the Stockmens and the 
McDougall-Segur are the most important and occur at depths of 
100 feet and 200 to 400 feet respectively, below the top of the 
formation. The McDougall-Segur sandstone consists of sandstones 
separated by some shales with, in some places, a carbonaceous 
zone of thin coaly beds ab the base. A conglomerate with pebbles 
of considerable size, consisting in the main of black cherts and 
quartzites with porphyries in minor amount, in some areas replaces 
part of the sandstone. A thickness of up to 200 feet has been 
recorded for this sand. Beneath the McDougall-Segur sand 
characteristic grey and greenish sandy shales and sandstones with 
occasional plant remains are developed. About 650 feet below the 
top of the formation a carbonaceous layer or coal seam, referred 
to by Goodman (l85) as the Kootenay Coal, forms a fairly persist¬ 
ent marker in well samples. Between the coal and the Home sand 
are grey and green sandstones and shales with coal partings. A 


thin ironstone shell exists above the Home sand 












- 75 - 


Tha lowar part of the Blairmora consists of brown, 
limy sandstones and limestones alternating with dark shales (54-)• 
The limestone beds carry non-marine fossils. Grey and greenish 
shales vdth brcvm limy bands occur 40 foot, and liuay sandstone 
90 feet below the Homo horizon. Foming the base of the formation 
is a conglomeratic and coarse sands-^one knov/n as the Dalhousie 
sand. This is the equivalent of the Blairmoro conglomerate and 
in Turner Valley wells attains a thickness of 20 to 30 feet. 

The Dalhousie, Homo, and McDougall-Sogur sandstones are productive 
oil horizons, in certain areas only, in Turner Valley. 

Hume reported the thickness of the Blairmore in Turner 
Valley as varying between 1,050 and 1,200 feet, a thickening 
to the north and to the west being experienced. A thickness of 
1,200 to 1,500 feet was assigned to this formation in the 
Pekisko Hills by Hume (49). 

Moos e Mo unta in: In this area Caimes (l6) 
reported a thickness for the Blairmore of from 900 to 1,700 feet. 
The basal conglomerate is present here typically developed, 
and averages 10 to 30 feet in thickness. It overlies immediately 
the Kootenay coal measures and for this reason Cairnes referred 
to it as the coal conglomerate. Hume (54) reported the thickness 
of the Blairmore in this area as being over 2,000 feet. The 
forraaticn thickens farther v/est behind the front range at the head 






V ■ 















- 7b - 


of the south branch of Sheep creek at Bums mine (l65, p. 12). 

South ern West~Cantral Al berta; Southern 
west-central Alberta is herein considered to extend from the Bow 
river to Ram river. 

Rutherford (134) reported that only the upper part 
of the Blairmore formation is exposed on Bow river east of the 
front range. Those beds are exposed on Kananaskis river and 
consist typically of alternating beds of shales, arenaceous 
shales, shaly sandstones and sandstones of freshwater origin* 

The total thickness could not be determined as only part of the 
formation outcrops. Hume (54) stated that the Blairmore form- 
aticn may be 1,400 feet thick in the Jumpingpound area* 

To the north of the Bow river in the foothills Hume 
(48) reported that only the upper part of the Blairmore is 
exposed on the west of Wildcat hills. A thickness of 2,000 feet 
was estimated by MacKay (7b) for the Blairmore formation in the 
Fallentimber area. Warren (l65) reported that farther north 
on Red Deer river east of Hunter Valley well, the basal Blairmore 
is exposed. The conglomerate is present, is massive and quite 
thick, and is underlain by the Kootenay (lb5, p. 13)* Hume (l65,p.l3 
reported that the conglomerate with the accompanying sandstone 
can be traced north to James river* Evans (38) gave a thickness 
of 1,902 feet for the Blairmore on Red Deer river. The conglomerate 

















--:-^ 'M 


'. )-'■ ■ 

£':::. 







ec; ■: ' r:' 

■- ■■' f:; 


• 3 >: 









- 77 - 


is 24 feet thick in this section, 

Warren (l65) stated that at Marble Mountain on Topee 
Pole creek, the Blairmore formation is exposed around the 
Palaeozoic fold. The conglomerate, about 35 foot in thickness, 
is well exposed. Duo to the non-deposition of the Kootenay 
formation in this area, the conglomerate rests on the Fernie shale 
A section on Ram river (38) shows a thickness of 2,017 foot of 
Blairmore strata underlain by Kootenay measures, 

West-Central Alberta; West-central Alberta is 
herein considered to extend from the vicinity of Nordegg north- 
westv/ards to the Berland river area. 

In the Nordegg area, Allan and Rutherford (3) termed 
what the writer in this thesis is calling the Blairmore formation, 
the Kootenay, They showed that the conglomerate at the base 
of this formation lies directly on top of the Fernie shales. The 
conglomerate varies in thickness from 10 to 35 feet, while the 
Blairmore attains a thickness of 1,500 feet with an average of 
about 1,000 feet for the area (185). The coal seams of this 
area occur near the base of the formation which is the producing 
horizon in this area, 

Sanderson (139) reported that at Brazeau Collieries 
drilling was carried through at least 1,000 feet of beds which 
were ascribed to this formation. He described the Blairmore as 











- w - 


composed of interbedded dark green and dark grey carbonaceous 
shales and feldspathic sandstones, containing, in the upper half, 
several coal seajns* Thin beds of dark grey and greenish 
chert pebbles, which Sanderson considered to correspond to the 
well known Grit bed of the Turner Valley section, occur near 
the top of the formation. He assigned a thickness to the 
conglomeratic, coarse sandstone member at the base of the formation 
of from 20 to 40 feet, and stated that it is probably the equiv¬ 
alent of the Dalhousie sand of the Turner Valley sequence. 

To the west of Nordegg in the Bighorn coal basin lilalloch 
(84) reported a thickness of 5>458 feet for the Kootenay-Blairmore 
succession. His subdivision into the two formations was not made 
at the conglomerate, (12 feet thick hero) (84, p. 25), and 
resulted in a thickness of feet for the Kootenay and 1,799 

feet for the Blairmore. This is contrary to the normal thickness 
relationships existing between the Kootenay and Blairmore. However, 
were a division made at the conglomerate, 1,467 feet of strata 
would be referred to the Kootenay and 3»991 feet to the Blairmore. 

In this area the conglomerate bed is but 10 feet thick. 

Allan and Rutherford (4) in continuing the work north 
from the Nordegg area along the Blackstone, Brazeau and Pembina 
rivers, used the term Kootenay for the whole Kootenay-Blairmore 
succession. On the basis of lithology alone, they divided it 
















- 79 - 


into two members - the upper, the IvfcLeod member, which corresponds 
to the upper part of the Blairmore, and the lower, the coal¬ 
bearing member which includes the Lower Blairmore, the conglom¬ 
erate and the underljdng sandy beds. The coal horizon is 
mainly in the Lower Blairmore, No good,measurements of the 
thickness of the formation are given for this area. 

In the extension of this work to Athabaska river Ruther¬ 
ford (132) employed the same nomenclature. For this same area 
along the McLeod and Athabaska rivers IiilacKay (68), (71), intro¬ 
duced a new nomenclature for the Lower Cretaceous formations. 

For the conglomerate bed within the area he introduced the term 
Gadcmin conglomerate; for the coal-bearing beds above the conglom¬ 
erate, Luscar, and for the barren Cretaceous bods overlying the 
Luscar, Mountain Park formation, kfecKay ( 71 ) described the Gadcmin 
conglomerate as a massive, resistant, light-colored conglomerate, 
composed of pebbles of quartzite, chert and vein quartz firmly 
cemented in a clean, siliceous matrix. He assigned to it a 
thickness of 3 to 75 feet with an average of 25 feet. The 
contact between the conglomerate and the underlying Nikanassin 
beds (Kootenay in age) in the Brule area (68) is disconformable, 
as evidenced by the erosion in places of some of the lower beds 
before the deposition of the conglomerate. 

Overlying this massive conglomerate are the coal-bearing 



ikM. ■■ 

















bO - 


strata of the Luscar formation. In the Brule area MacKay (68) 
assigned to them a thickness of 1,950+ feet but said that sone 
of the upper beds may belong to the Mountain Park sandstone. 

Farther south at Mountain Park, MacKay (71) assigned a thickness 
of 1,700 feet of soft, grey sandstones, interbedded with dark 
grey shales and several conglomerate lenses to this form8.tion. 

This is the coal-bearing horizon of the district. It is possibly 
correlative with the Lower Blairmore of the southern foothills. 

Overlying the Luscar formation, is a series of hard, rusty 
brov/n weathering, coarse, cross-bedded sandstones and olive-green 
sandy shales, and lenses of rusty-red weathering conglomerate 
composed largely of small black chert pebbles (71). On Brazeau 
river the Mountain Park formation is 825 feet thick, but on McLeod 
river it is only 400 feet thick at Mountain Park, at Gadomin 330 
feet thick, and at Luscar 320 feet thick. If this northward 
thinning of the formation continues it is likely that the Mountain 
Park formation is not represented as a distinct formation in the 
Brule area on the Athabaska, Should it be present in this latter 
area, MacKay stated that the beds have lost entirely their ridge¬ 
forming character and their characteristic greenish color. 

In the area north of the Athabaska, MacVicar (82), (83), 
used the term Kootenay for all the coal-bearing bods and underlying 
strata down to the top of the Femie, For the upper barren beds, 











yi - 


the probable equivalent of the Upper Blairmore, he introduced 
the term Sunset sandstone. LlacVicar (83) stated that it varies 
in grain from fine to coarse and in places passes into a conglom¬ 
erate. He ascribed a thickness of not less than 3>000 feet to 
the formation. Warren (l65), however, believes that klacVicar 
may have included some overlying Bally River beds in his succession, 
believing them to be Upper Blairmore. 

In 1932 , Allan, Warren and Rutherford (5) working east 
of the front ranges at Jasper observed Cretaceous rocks only in 
the Pocahontas valley. They stated that the best correlation is 
with the Lower Blairmore of the Crowsnest district. 

Peac e Riv e r Canyon ; References to strata of 
Blairmore age in the Peace river area are to be found in the reports 
of Selv/yn (141), Dawson (21), Stewart (l52), McLearn (93)j (98), 
( 110 ), ( 117 ), Spieker (147), Rutherford (136)> Williams and Bocock 
( 177 ), Warren and Stelck (168), and Allan-and Stelck (9). McLearn 
in this area showed the Blairmore formation to be represented by 
four members. In ascending order these are as follows: Gething 
member of the Bullhead Mountain sandstone, Moosebar shale, Gates 
sandstone and St. John shale. More recent work by V/arren and 
Stelck ( 168 ) indicated that the Dunvegan sandstone at the top of 
the St. John shale represents part of the Upper Blairmore time. 












Gething M embe r of th e Bu llh ead Mountain Sandst one: 

In 1923 McLearn (98) subdivided the Bullhead Mountain 
sandstone into two members, the Lower member, and an upper member, 
the Gething member, McLearn considered the Gething member as a 
probable correlative of the Luscar formation and the Lower Blair- 
more formation of the central and southern foothills area respective!; 

(no, p. 167). 

The Gething member, described by McLearn (98) as consist¬ 
ing of non-iTi8.rine sandstone and shale, contains commercial coal 
seams. Massive, medium to fine, rarely coarse sandstones, also 
bedded or layered sandstones, are present. Some of the layered 
sandstones are ripple-marked; the finer-grained and thinner layers 
are cross-bedded, having wavy, cut-off, fine bands of dark grains 
or films of shale. Large scale cross-bedding is rare. Rootlets 
are present in a few sandstone beds, A fev/ beds of argillaceous 
sandstone, of carbonaceous sandstone, and of micaceous sandstone 
are present. No coarse grits occur. The nearest approach to 
a conglomerate in the Gething member in the Peace River canyon 
is an 18 -inch bed of sandstone containing small scattered pebbles, 
at the top of the forDiation, South of the Peace on Pine river 
a thick conglomerate zone occupies this position (117> P* 72). 

The coarser sandstones are light in color, white, cream, or pale 















- - 


yellow, while the finer sandstones are light grey or slightly 
brov/nish. The shales, grey to black in color, are present in beds 
2 inches to 10 feet thick, and break into angular fragments* 

The black carbonaceous shales are thin and somewhat fissile* 

Banded shales showing mud-cracks, and banded sandstones with rip¬ 
ple-marks, are common in parts of the section* Clay ironstone 
is present in beds 5 inches to 5 feet thick. 

The thickness of the Gething is considered by McLearn 
(98) to be about 1,400+ feet. It is bounded above by the Moose- 
bar shale and below by the Lower member of the Bullhead Iifountain 
sandstone* The contact with the Lower member of the Bullhead 
Mountain has been drawn arbitrarily by McLearn at the horizon 
conglomerates and grits disappear, coarse sandstones become rare, 
and medium to fine sandstone, shale, clay ironstone and coal beds 
become common* Although the contact of the Gething with the Ivfciose- 
bar is lithologically abrupt, no evidence of an actual break has 
been observed. 

McLearn (98, p* 5) has stated: "The abundance of plant 
remains, the absence of marine fossils, presence of rootlets, 
absence of boring molluscs in the wood fragments, traces of land 
animals - all these, taken together, suggest a non-marine origin 
for the strata of the Gething member." 









C 



5 


’■ -V-J: ' i 


i; 





o-.;r :i.^',’;r' ■ , ^ 


-j, 





:-r^'f 1 


■'.V J^J'.'-^ 













Rfoosebar Shalo 


In the original description by l/IcLearn (93) of the 
Lower Cretaceous rocks along the Peace river in the vicinity 
of Hudson Hope, a subdivision of the strata into two formations 

v/as made as follows: 

Lower (St. John formation 

Cretaceous ( Bullhead Mountain sandstone 

McLearn at this time recognized three members in the 
St. John formation, but it was not until 1923 (98) that he named 
them. The nomenclature for this upper formation as now employed 
is as follows: 

( St. John shale 
( Gates sandstone 
( Moosebar shale 

IvJcLearn (98) described the Moosebar shale as consist¬ 
ing of dark friable shale and thin bands and irregular concretions 
of clay ironstone. A thickness of 800+ feet was assigned to it 
by him in 1940 (ll7). The formation is apparently of marine 
origin. The Moosebar shale was tentatively correlated by McLearn 
(110, p. l68) with the upper portion of both the Luscar formation 
and the Lower Blairmore formation, and the lower part of both the 
Mountain Park sandstone and the Upper Blairmore formation, of the 
central and southern foothills region respectively of Alberta. 
Gates San dstone: 


The middle sandstone member of the original St. John 





















- b5 


formation (93) the Gates sandstone, consists of 50 to 80 feet of 
massive, cross-bedded sandstone with vertical rootlets and prostrate 
stems, McLearn (llD) considered the formation as apparently marine, 
but it contains no diagnostic fossils. The Gates sandstone has been 
tentatively correlated by McLearn (llO, p, 168) with a portion of 
the Mountain Park sandstone and a part of the Upper Blairrncre form¬ 
ation of the foothills belt to the south (llO), 

St, John Shsil e: 

The St, John shale represents the upper shaly member of 
the original St. John formation of McLearn (93)* Below the 
Gates it is comprised of thin-bedded, dark, hard, and friable 
shale with banded concretions of ironstone. It is generally soft 
and plastic, weathering to clay, and is responsible for many land¬ 
slides along the Peace river, A thickness of about 1,300 feet is 
estimated for the member in the vicinity of Cache creak (93 )i at 
the mouth of Commotion creek ( 177 ), and along the north bank of 
Pine river ( 136 ), Farther east along the Smoky river the thickness 
is much less, Rutherford estimating a thickness of 600 feet near 
the town of Peace River (13^)* The thin, even bedding and marine 
fossils point to marine conditions of deposition. 

To the south of the Peace river area in the Y/apiti 
river basin, Evans and Galey (39) reported the probable existence 
of the Bullhead ifcuntain and Fort St, John (inclusive term) forma¬ 


tions - 









Dunvaggn S andstone: 

Lying conformably upon and presenting a gradational 
boundary with the St. John shale is the sandstone and sandy shale 
formation known as the Dunvegan sandstone. As early as 1875 
Selw^m (141) examined the formation, and in l88l Dawson (21) 
applied the name Dunvegan to these ’’Lov/er sandstones and shales’*. 

In 1883 W. Dawson (25) described floral species collected 
by G. M. Dav/son (21) in 1879 from this formation. The formation 
thickens to the west, 530 feet on Peace river and 600 feet on Pine 
river, being the thicknesses reported by Williams ajid Bocock (177) 
in 1932 . Farther to the east in parts of the Peace River and 
Grande Prairie districts an account of the formation has been 
given by Rutherford ( 136 ), 

There is a lateral lithological variation in the Dun¬ 
vegan. From a study of the size of particles and fossil remains, 
Williams and Bocock (l77) concluded that the depth and 
salinity of the Dunvegan sea increased from west to east and from 
south to north. Heavy beds of modiurn-grained, light-colored, 
cross-bedded, massive sandstones which occur in the lower 300 feet, 
follo?/ed by a succession of thin-bedded and arenaceous shale 
strata, characterize the fonaation in the Peace River Block. In 
the west and northwest portions, grits and fine conglomerates, whoso 
coarseness increases to the west, were found. Clay-ironstone 











concretions, large plant stem and tree trunk imprints and casts, 
ripple-markings, worm borings, and casts perhaps of vertical root¬ 
lets, all indicative of shallow water depositional conditions are 
common phenomena, especially in the north and northwest portions. 
The sands generally show carbonaceous fragments, and Williams and 
Bocock reported that coal seams up to 23 inches in thickness occur 
in different localities, and in different horizons in the form¬ 
ation, from very near the base to the extreme top. On Peace and 
Kiskatinaw rivers occurrences of lenses of limestone, probably 
of freshwater origin, and showing cone-in-cone structure, are 
reported. Calcium carbonate appears to be the dominant cementing 
material of the sandstone. 

Bell (112, pp, 112-3) reported that: '’The Dunvegan, 
however, is younger than any part of the Blairmore formtion in 
the Blairmore area; for the Upper Blairmore flora was collected 
at the top of the Blairmore there and it is an older flora than 
the Dunvegan flora,” In 1940 Warren and Stalck (l68, p, 14?) 
stated: "The Dunvegan sandstone is not represented in the 
southern foothills as a distinct formation but it undoubtedly 
correlates with the upper part of the Blairmore formation”. 

From the log of the Guardian No. 1 well in Tp, 80, 

R, 12, W6th, two miles east of Pouce Coupe creek, Allan and Stelck 
(9) indicated that the Bullhead Mountain sandstone, the Mcosebar 









ab - 


shale, the Gates sandstone, and the St* John shale all are 
present in the area. These are represented respectively by 
thicknesses of beds of 1,998 feet, 490 feet, 140 feet, and 642 
feet. 

Flora and Fauna of the Blairmore 

Flora of the Bla irmore : The first account of 
the flora of the Blairmore formation was rendered in 1885 by J, W, 
Dawson (26) in his description of the flora of the Intermediate 
and Mill Greek series of southarEi Alberta. McLearn (92) in the 
Crowsnest field in 1915 collected angiosperms, abundantly from the 
upper 200 feet of the formation, and only extremely rarely from 
below, Cairnes (l6) in the ^bose Mountain area collected a 
probable Blairmore flora from the "Dakota**. In this respect 
J, H, Sinclair (144) remarked on the probable pre-Dakota age of 
this flora. 

Berry (ll) gave the first description of the Blairmore 
floras as collected by McLearn, Berry (ll), (12), stated that, 
while the Blairmore succession shows no apparent physical break, 
two distinct floras are present, one bearing Lower Cretaceous 
affinities and ranging through the lower five-sixths, the other 
of Upper Cretaceous (Dakota) age present in the upper one-sixth 
(200 to 400 feet). 

The most noteworthy distinction between the Kootenay 
and Lower Blairmore flora is, as pointed out by Berry, the sparing 







i 
















.v^v- 


4;<>. JV 




l-i- : :■ . ' 




.l.■^ 


r:.l..\j- ", ' i/;; ;■ 








yi/^rr. 




- ! < ' •'•■' ■ ■’ ,I '. 5v:'"C: 

■• • • ■ ' ■ ■ ■ 'x-'^r 

V . ' • . 

• i 

■ ’ ■ ... 

;,;-F • .. ■ 


r' 













- - 


reprasantation of dicotyledons in the latter and their absence in 
the former, the particular species, Sapindopsis br e vifolia 
being coianion to the late Lov/or and the earliest Upper Cretaceous, 

Of the Lower Blairmora floras only four species with an outside 
distribution and not known froxTi the Kootenay have been determined. 
These are: Sagenooteris mantelli, Nilsonia de n sinerve. Torreva 
dicksonia j-ia, and Sapindopsis br evifolia . 

The e,xact correlation of the Lower Blairmora flora is 
limited below by the supposed Barremian age of the Kootenay, and 
above by the Cenomanian age of the succeeding Upper Blairmora 
flora. Berry favors an ago of the Lower Blairmora flora as rep¬ 
resenting the later part of Aptian and all of Albian time, McLearn 
(no) however, stated that it is pre-Albian in age for it under¬ 
lies stratigraphically the Albian Gastroplites fauna. 

Because of the neither extensive nor varied nature of 
the flora of the Upper Blairmora, coupled with its generally poor 
preservation, exact determination and correlation have been 
difficult. Berry (12) considers Pseudocycas unjiga as one of the 
most abundant and characteristic fossils in the Upper Blairmora, 
This species was first recorded by Dav/son from the Dunvegan sand¬ 
stone and is also represented in the supposed Dakota sandstone of 
the United States, Because of its vary close similarity to 
Dioonites buckianus abietinus which occurs in the Lower Blairmora 


and Lower Cretaceous horizons elsev/here, its use as a good field 





























- 90 - 


index fossil is limited. Berry considers this species an 
undoubted member of the true Dakota flora. 

The Upper Blairmore flora is quite distinct from that 
of the Lower Blairmore, this difference resting not only in the 
number and variety of dicotyledonous leaves in the former, but 
also on the fact that none of the ferns, cycadophytes, or conifers 
of the two horizons is certainly identical. 

Berry considered the Upper Blairmore flora to represent 
an age somewhat older than that of the true Dakota sajidstone but 
still unquestionably of Upper Cretaceous age. In terms of the 
standard European nomenclature. Berry would thus assign a Ceno¬ 
manian age to the Upper Blairmore, while the true Dakota would be 
Turonian in age, and represent the transgressing littoral of the 
Benton sea, 

McLearri however, suggested that the Upper Blairmore 
flora '’would be dated at least as early as Albian or late Lower 
Cretaceous by some palaeontologists, as it is followed strati¬ 
graphic ally by a marine fauna which most would interpret as lata 
Albian'* (llO, pp, l6l-2). On this basis then the boundary between 
the Lower and Upper Cretaceous would fall at the top of the Blair¬ 
more formation in the Blairmore area, and not within it as 
suggested by Berry. 

Flora o f the Correlative _Bed s._o_f jthe Blairmore 
Format.ion ; Bell (68) determined the flora of the Luscar formation 












- 91 - 


to be a Lower Blairraore flora. His conclusion was based on the 
finding of four species which he considered to be typical Lower 
Blairmore forms. These are: Marchajitites blairmorensis, Clado- 
phlebis distans, Sagenopteris mclearni and Athrotaxopsis gran dis. 

MacVicar (83) reported the identification by Knov/lton of 
Zamites acutipermis Hear in conjunction with the marine genus 
Tancredia from the Lower Blairmore (Luscar) formation in the 
Smoky River basin near Grand Cache lakes. The specimens were found 
in association with an 8-foot thick coal seam, 

Allan, Warren and Rutherford (5) reported beds in the 
Pocahontas valley v/hich contain flora most closely related to the 
Lower Blairmore flora. Their flora included Cladophlebis sp., 
Ginkgoites arcticu s (Heer), Ptilophyllum dunkerianum (Geoppert), 
and Athrotaxopsis grandis Fontaine. 

To the northwest the Gething member of the Bullhead 
Ufountain sandstone contains the widely spread foothills flora, the 
Lower Blairmore flora (110). McLearn (93) found, and tentatively 
so identified this flora in 1918. Confirmation of this determin¬ 
ation was made later by Berry (11), and by Beil (llO, p.l65). 

On this basis McLearn correlated the Gething member with the Luscar 
and Lower Blairmore beds of the foothills of central and southern 


Alberta 





























- 92 - 


The following flora included in the Gething member 
ware identified by Barry and their age placed as Kootenay, Lower 
Blairmore, or Bullhead Mountain (177, P* 209), Onychiopsis sp*, 
Torreya dicksoniana, Athrotaxopsis grandis. Sphenolepsis sp., 
Podoza^nitas lanceolatus . Pterophvllum acutipennis (Heer), Berry, 
Athrotaxopsis grandis (cone), Oleandridra graminaefolia Knowlton, 
Baiera palmata , Ginkgo Siberia or arctica , 

Barry (11) mentioned the Gates sandstone as containing 
plant remains. Spieker (147) in 1922 reported from the Dunvegan 
a floral assemblage bearing affinities to the Dakota flora. His 
species included: Proto phyllurn lecontianurn Lesquereux, PI at anus 
latior subintigr e folia (Lesq,) Knowlton, Menispermites reniformis 
Dawson?, Aspidophvllum trilobatum Lesquereux, Pseudoeyeas unjiga 
(Dawson) Berry, PIatanus sp,, and Taxodium sp. Berry (11) and 
Bell (177) have also reported on the flora of the Dunvegan, 

Fauna of th e Blairmor e: From the Blairmore 
formation of the Crowsnest region McLearn (104) reported a few 
freshwater invertebrates, in the main poorly preserved. The 
lowest known fossiliferous horizon is about 230 feet above the base 
of the formation, on Lyon creek, where a bed of fossiliferous, 
yellow-weathering, conglomeratic sandstone contains Unio natosin i. 
-and Unio c f. hamili , and Unio sp. This fauna forms the Unio hamili 


fauna, a non-marine invertebrate fauna. About 520 feet above the 































< 






















- 93 - 


base of the formation and also on Lyon creek fossils are found 
in two layers between two thick calcareous beds. The lower 
layer consisting of shale and argillaceous limestone contains in¬ 
determinate Corbula? young Unio? . and Planorbis . The higher 
layer is of dark shale and carries ostracods, indeterminate young 
Unio and Campeloma? 

McLearn (l64) stated that the highest known inverte¬ 
brates occur at a horizon about 310 feet below the top of the 
formation, or approximately 1,540 feet above the base, in dark 
shales on Castle river, a little above the mouth of Link creek. 

The species Unio douglassi . is found also at this horizon. This 
uppermost known invertebrate-bearing bed is 230 feet below an 
occurrence of the upper or dicotyledonous angiosperm flora and 
175 feet above the highest known occurrence, in this section, of 
the lower or primitive flora, with very rare dicotyledonous 
angiosperms. 

To the north of this area in the IHoosq Mountain district 
Cairnes (15) reported an invertebrate fauna from the Blairmore 
formation, and JMlloch (84, p, 44) reported the Astarte fauna 
from the Bighorn coal basin. McLearn (llO) stated that MacKay 
reported a poorly preserved, in part at least marine, fauna 
containing ** Astarte ** natosini from beds in a faulted area on 


Thornton creek, and which Lfe-cKay considered as belonging to the 




















- 94 - 


lower part of the Luacar formation* 

In northern west-central Alberta the Blairmoro 
formation contains five marine or partly marine faunas, the lata 
Barremian or early Aptian *' A3tarte'* natosini fauna, the Aptian 
Beudanticeras affine - Deshavesites f auna* the early Albian 
Gastroplites fauna, the later Albian Neogastroplites fauna (llO) 
and the Upper Cenomanian PunvejAanoceras fauna (l68)* 

The Punveganoceras fauna has been found in the upper 200 
feet of the Punvegan sandstone and in the basal beds of the Smoky 
River shales* The fauna includes the genus Punvegano c eras * 

The Meogas t roplites fauna (108) occurs 100 or 150 
feet below the Punvegan contact near the top of the St* John shale 
and includes Neogastroplites cornutum (Vi/hiteaves), other species 
of NeogastroPlites. Nucula dowlingi McLearn, and Inoceramus nahwisi 
McLearn* 

The Gastroplites fauna (106) in the Peace River canyon 
comprises Gastroplites kingi McLearn, Inoceramus cf* cadottensis 
McLearn, Panopaea sp., and a starfish. This fauna occurs about 
1,000 feat above the Gething member (ll7) and according to McLeai'n 
(ill) is found in the lower part of the St* John shale, C.R* 
Stelck*, however, has collected Gastroplites from strata below 
the St. John* 

* Unpublished I^Jastar’s thesis. University of Alberta* 









































- 95 - 


McLearn (108) roportad that the Beudanticaras affine 
fauna is unknown in the Peace River cajnyon section* The lowermost 
fauna - the ’’ Astarte'* natosini fauna - is a brackish or a marine 
fauna found in the lower part of the Luscar formation. It includes 
’’ Astarte** natosini McLearn, 

From the Gething member of the Bullhead Mountain sand¬ 
stone McLearn (177, P* 210) identified the following fauna: 
Aucella ?. Pleuromya ? and a sroall belemnite. G, M, Sternberg (177, 
p, 210) has described the dinosaur tracks discovered by McLearn 
in the coal-bearing or lower portion of this member. These are as 
follows: Irenesaur ioas mclearni . Irenesauripas occidentails , 
Irenesauripas acutis . Columbosauripas ungulatus . Gypsichnites 
pacenis . Amblydactvlus gethingi« Tetrapodosaurus boreal is and 
Irenichnites gracilis . 

A representative fauna of the Dunvegan, taken from 
reports of McLearn (97), (112), Rutherford (13^) and Warren and 
Stelck (168) in which the diagnostic forms are listed, follows: 

Unio dowlingi McLearn, Brachydontes multilinigerus Meek, Madtra 
emmonsi Meek, Gorbula pyriformis Meek, Ostrea soleniscus Meek, 
Tellina dunveganensis McLearn, Inocereuaus dunvaganensis McLearn, 
Barbatia micronema (Meek), 

The presence of Dunveganoceras cf, albertense Warren 
in the upper beds of the Dunvegan sandstone permits an Upper Ceno¬ 
manian age to be assigned to the upper part of this formation. The 





















































- 96 - 


lower contact of the Dunvegan with the St, John shale of Albian 
age has not been accurately placed. It follows, hov/evor, that 
Lower Cenomanian time is represented somewhere in the lower part 
of the Dunvegan or the uppermost part of the St, John, 

Complete synchronism betv/een the Blairmore flora and 
fauna is not yet possible. However, as tv/o of the marine faunas 
of the northern section have been found in the v/estern foothills, 
flora-bearing sections, some attempt at showing inter-relationships 
of the flora and fauna has been made. McLearn (llO) contended 
that the ** Astarte** natosini fauna appears to be coeval with the 
Lov/er Blairmore flora in a part of its time range at least; while 
the Gastroplites fauna in the northwest section occurs at a hori¬ 
zon considerably higher than the Lower Blairmore flora. He showed 
that this flora is likely of pre-Albian age at least. 


6. Crowsnest Volcariics - Upper Cretaceous 

As far as is known the Crowsnest Volcanics represent 
the only igneous rock occurrence in the foothills and front 
ranges of the Rocky Mountains. It was G. M. Dawson (24) who first 
noted their presence in l88l. In 1902 Leach (62) mapped the 
formation and submitted a collection of specimens to C. W, Knight 











- 97 - 


for petrographic descriptions. In 1912 Loach ( 63 ) assigned a 
thickness of 1,150 feet to the volcanics west of Coleman, v/hile 
to the east at a point about 2^ miles west of Blairnore, they 
have thinned to 440 feet. Their presence was noted by IvlacKenzie 
( 77 ) in the South Fork coal area in 1912. Two years later this 
same author prepared a paper on the Crowsnest volcanics (78). 

Later reference has been made to them by Rose (123), (125), (126), 
MiacKay (73 )> (74), and Rutherford (137 )• 

The Crowsnest Volcanics are known to outcrop as far south 
as latitude 49®25* and to the north as far as latitude 50®5'* 

In their northern extension they lie completely to the west of 
the Livingstone raaige, while to the south their projected areal 
outcrop widens somewhat to about fourteen miles. The area in which 
outcrops are known to occur is about 550 square miles. A former 
greater areal distribution has been assumed. Because of their 
hardness and resistance to erosion they assume definite topographic 
expression. 

The volcanics attain their maximum thickness about two 
miles east of Crowsnest mountain, and for this reason the centre 
of eruption has been assumed to lie in this area. From here they 
thin rapidly to the east, and somewhat less rapidly to the north, 
south, 6Uid probably to the west. Leach and LiacKenzie agreed that 
the former extension of the volcanics was not over ten miles west 










of Crowsnest mountain. MacKay (73) assigned to them a thickness 
of 600 feet in the east part of the Crowsnest region and 1,800 
feet in the west at Coleman. The volcanics have thinned to about 
1,300 feet about sijc miles south of Coleman (74). 

The Crov/snest Volcanics are a series of tuffs and 
agglomerates, with flow rocks. Rose (123) stated that they vary 
in texture from ash-fine tuffs to coarse agglomerates with frag¬ 
ments of up to 2 and 3 fset in diameter, and that a color range 
from light grey to green, pink and purple is exhibited. I'yfecKay 
( 74 , p. 240) in 1934 described the Crov/snest volcanics as consist¬ 
ing of "waterlaid, thin-bedded, dark grey ash beds which grade 
upward into coarse, massive, olive-green tuffs with bombs up to 
a foot or more in diameter, followed by agglomerates and flow 
breccias interstratified vath waterlaid ash. The tops of some 
of the flows are characterized by a profusion of phenocrysts of 
pink feldspar rariging up to dimensions of 1-g- inches by ^ inch 
and others with large crystals of primary analcite. At some 
horizons, there are large, included fragments of a dark green rock 
having a uniformly textured groundmass with araygdules filled with 
analcite, leucite, and other zeolites." In places the volcanics 
are high in magnetite. Distinct drag folds are evident in places 


in the flow rocks 






- 99 - 


Rutherford (137, p. 67 ) reported that from a locality 
about 1-^ miles west of Coleman the following general sequence, 
in descending order, prevails: 

( 1 ) Ash beds with varying amounts of coarse pyroclastics. 

( 2 ) Beds rich in analcite, 

( 3 ) Ash bods containing numerous fragments and some 
large pieces of pyroclastics, 

( 4 ) Trachytic beds rich in feldspar phenocrysts with 
some bands of coarse pyroclastics. 

(5) Trachytic beds rich in melanite garnet. 

Rock types as determined by Knight were; augite, trach¬ 
yte, tinguaite, andesite and analcite trachyte; while MacKenzio 
determined the follc’wing; aegirite-augite trachyte, melanite- 
bearing trachyte,’latite, and blairmorite (analcite rich), (l23). 

The volcanics generally are stratified and clearly 
waterlaid deposits in part, MacKay (73) reported that they are 
largely non-marine. Thin beds prevail; beds over 10 feet in 
thickness are rare. 

The Crowsnest "^Icanics appear to be underlain 

conformably by the Blairmore formation, and are apparently over- 

lain conformably by the Alberta shale. Both contacts are of a 

gradational nature. The sandstones of the Blairmore formation 

generally become coarser as they approach the Crowsnest -‘yblcanics 

f 

and then pass by the introduction of tuf^aceous material into the 
volcanics. At their upper limit the volcanics usually become 
finer and thinner bedded as they approach the contact with the 
Alberta shale. This upper contact is usually obscured by detritus. 












- 100 - 


Webb ( 169 , p. 1390 ) considered the volcanics as "simply an 
areally developed facies of the upper part of the Blairmore 
formation." 

As yet but a very poor specimen of a leaf is the only 
fossil remains found in the volcanics (104, p. 105)* The Crov/s- 
nest Volcanics must, however, be considered on present evidence 
to be of Upper Cretaceous age, for they overlie beds containing a 
flora which may be as old as Albian or as young as Cenomanian, and 
underlie beds containing a Turonian fauna. On this basis they must 
be Cenomanian or early Turonian in age. 


?• Alberta Shale - Upper Cretaceous 

Introduction 

The Alberta shale, chiefly a marine sequence of Colorado 
and Lower Montana age lying between tv/o series of freshv/ater 
deposits, forms a considerable part of the bedrock in the foothills 
region of Alberta. Faulting and folding associated with erogenic 
movements to the west have brought the formation to the surface 
in numerous belts. The'formation is known by various names 
in the area under discussion, but the writer considers the term 
Alberta shale to be most adequate. 














- 101 - 


Previous V/ork 

The name Alberta shale was first proposed in 1930 by 
Hume (44, p. 6) “for the series of marine shales mostly Colorado 
and Montana in age occurring in Turner Valley and adjoining 
areas betv/een the Blairmore and Belly River formation.” The 
term Benton which previously had most commonly been employed when 
reference to this formation v/as made, was a misnomer for it 
represents only the lower division of the Colorado. Nor could the 
term Colorado shale be used with propriety, for in its definition 
by Eldridge (148) it v;as restricted to the Fort Benton and Niobrara 
of Meek and Hayden and included no beds of libntana age* As a few 
hundred feet of lower Pierre shales of Montana age are present in 
the so-called Colorado shale of the southwestern Alberta area, Hume 
proposed the new formaticnal name Alberta shale to include these 
beds of Colorado and Montana age. At this time a division v/as 
made into two shale members, the Lower Alberta shale and the Upper 
Alberta shale, separated by a thin sandstone, the Cardium member. 

Early reference in the southern area to strata which 
we now term Alberta include McConnell (87)i Leach (62), ( 63 ), 
MacKenzie (77 )> Cairnes (15), (I 6 ), McLearn (91), Rose (126), 

Stev/art (l5l) and Slipper (36), (145), (146). In 1927 Hume (41) 
referred the whole sequence to the “Benton” formation. Rutherford 
( 134 ) in 1927 established the terms Lower Benton, Cardium and Upper 





-A 







- 102 - 


Benton, and in this respect was followed by Hume (42)* Later 
references to the Alberta shale are to be found in the reports 
of Hume (45-54). 

The section in v/est-central Alberta has been reported 
on by Malloch (84), Allan and Rutherford (3), (4), Rutherford (132), 
IifeicKay (71), Warren and Rutherford (l58), Webb and Hertlein (l69) 
and Sanderson (139). ilacVicar (83) has discussed the Smoky, Hay 
and Borland river areas, and Svans and Caloy (39) the Wapiti river 
basin. To the northwest of this area in the vicinity of the Peace 
river, the equivalents of the Alberta shale have been reported on 
by Dawson (21), McConnell (88), McLearn (lOO), (102), (104), 
Rutherford (13<3)» Williams and Bocock (177), ’Warren (l59), (1^2), 
(191), and Warren and Stelck (l68). 

Lithology, Distribution. Thickness 

General Statement: The Alberta shale or its 
equivalents, are known to ejitend for appro:<imatoly 350 miles in 
a northwesterly direction from the International Boundary in south¬ 
western Alberta, to the vicinity of the Peace river. Throughout 
much of the area the formation outcrops, but owing to its non- 
resistant character it has weathered readily and good exposures 
of the formation are consequently few. However, the Cardiuin 
or Bighorn member, being more resistant to erosion, has commonly 











'L-; .^fr;; 


.n 


. •• 




V xi<r . : 


4 i:p 4i -; ; 





" ;X; 
; , 


X .:vv-.rr‘ ;. • . •i-.,-,, 

, . . ■: ■ , ® 




VX,;: • 















- 103 - 


found topographic expression as ridges, and for this reason its 
value as a stratigraphic marker is important. 

The Alberta shale consists in the main of grey to black 
marine shales, sometimes quite fissile and containing clay iron¬ 
stone nodules, A bed of sandstone is generally present within 
the formation and has been used to divide the formation into Upper 
and Lower members. In the south a thickness of about 2,700 feet 
was reported from the Turner Valley area, v/hile to the north in 
the vicinity of the Peace river, the formation has thinned out to 
about half this amount. For the standard European nomenclature 
of the Cretaceous reference should be made to page59 of this thesis. 

Turn er Valley - The Type S ecti on; While good 
exposures of the formation are infrequent anywhere in the area 
under consideration, the Alberta shale has probably been studied 
most closely in the Turner Valley area. It was here that Hume 
(44, p. 6) first introduced the term for these marine beds of 
Colorado and Lower kfcntana age. 

LoYy-er Albe rta S hal e: 

Hume (52), (54), described this lower member as consist¬ 
ing of dark grey to black shale with thinly laminated cross- 
bedded, sandy beds. It is typically marine in origin. At the 
base of the formation is a fairly coarse, quartzitic sandstone 


















- 104 - 


known as the '*grit'*. Fish scales and bones occur plentifully 
in the '*grit" in some localities, Hume stated that in many 
places there are a few feet of dark shales below the **grit'*, 
so that while the "grit" is generally considered as marking the 
contact with the underlying beds of the Blairmore, it in many 
places is actually within the Alberta shales. One rather coarse 
and gritty sandstone member, known as the Jumpingpound sand, occurs 
about 300 feet above the base. It is a very persistent horizon, 
although somewhat poorly defined as it grades into the underlying 
and overlying shales. In Turner Valley the Lower Alberts, shale 
attains a thickness of from 8 OO to 900 feet, A slight northward 
thickening of the formation occurs but Hume doubts that the 
formation is more than 900 feet thick in the Jumpingpound area. 

The lower contact of the marine Alberta shale with the underlying 
typically fresh-water deposits of the Blairmore forms.tion is abrupt, 
without any indication of an intervening period of transition 
from a totally continental to a wholly marine environment. The 
upper contact of the Lov/er Alberta shale with the overlying Cardium 
member is generally of a gradational nature, and is therefore 
arbitrarily drawn at the base of the lowest sandstone band in 
this transition zone, 

Cardium Mem ber: 


The term Cardium sandstone was introduced by Cairnes 






.f i.r^ 


^ ’i" 




rC h 












- 105 - 


(15, p. 29) in 1907* In Turner Valley the Cardium consists 
of 30 to 40 feet of grey sandstone and sandy shale (54, p. 2). 

About 150 feet above the Cardium is a 2-inch pebble-bearing zone^ 
while 100 feet below it another similar pebble band occurs. The 
pebbles of both zones are of blue, green, and black chert and 
quartzite, generally wel^-rounded, Rutherford (134-) stated that 
the average size of pebble was from I /4 to inch in diameter. 

To the west these pebble zones become conglomerates at the top of 
sandstone members and there the Cardium is considered as embracing 
the conglomerate bands and all intervening strata (54). A thick¬ 
ness of 250 to 300 feet is reported from the west. In the Wildcat 
Hills area Hume (48) assigned 350 feet of beds to this member. 

Hume ( 44 ) suggested the possibility that the individual bands of 
the Cardium do not everywhere occupy the same stratigraphic position. 

Slipper (146) in 1921 did not recognize the Cardium 
in the Sheep river (Turner Valley) area. He mentioned, however, 
a sandstone horizon of irregular composition and distribution 
occurring about 700 feet above the base of the A].berta shale. This 
member v/hich undoubtedly is the Cardium, ho designated the Line- 
haiii member. 

The contact of the Cardium and the overlying Upper 
Alberta shale is transitional, although some authors (I 69 , p. 1398) 
state that it is sharply defined. The top sandstone or conglomerate 









- 10b - 


of tho Cardium member is directly overlain by the fine-grained 
dark grey siiale of the basal Upper Alberta shale. In some areas 
a thin band of nodular brov/n-weathering ironstone marks the 
contact. The relationship existing at the lower boundary of the 
Cardium is one of conformity and gradational change. 

Upper Alberta Sh alej_ 

Hume (54-, p. 2) described this member as consisting 
of shale and sandy shale of marine origin. In the upper part of 
the member is a yallow-¥/eathering sandstone termed, in Turner Valley 
only, the Highwood sandstone. In the eastern foothills areas 
as much as 300 feet of grey, sandy, marine shales separate this 
sandstone from the Belly River formation. It is thin or even 
absent in some eastern areas but ¥/estward thickens rapidly. In 
many places it becomes conglomeratic and indistinguishable from 
Belly River strata. In an exposure on Highwood river Hume (52, p.5) 
reported this sandstone as being at least 35 feet thick and capped 
by a thin conglomerate holding greenish grey and black chert and 
quartzite pebbles. Hume assigned a thickness of 1,700 to 1,800 
for the Upper Alberta shale in the Turner Valley area, and stated 
that a very slight northward thickening to Bow river is probable. 

Tne upper 200 to 300 feet of this member contains 
Baculites ovatus and is therefore fifcntana in age; the remainder 
carries the Scaphites ventricosus fauna of Colorado age. The 








4 










- 107 - 


lower contact of the Upper Alberta shale is transitional, although 
it has been reported (I 69 , p. 1398) as sharply defined. The 
upper contact, however, is gradational into the freshwater strata 
of the Belly River formation of Montana age. 

Warren and Rutherford (l58) stated that v/hile the Upper 
and Lower Alberta shales are very similar lithologically, the Lower 
Alberta shales are usually less arenaceous, more fissile, and 
freer from ironstone nodules than those of the upper member. Hume 
( 54 ) considered that the combined thickness of the three members 
of the Alberta shale in the Turner Valley area, is at least 2,700 
feet. 

Southern Alberta: In 1912 Leach ( 63 ) referred a 
series of shales overlying the Crowsnest volcanics and including 
at least two sandstone members, to the Benton, with a possible 
Niobrara age for the rocks towards the top. His lov/er sandstone 
bed, about 12 feet in thickness, consisting of dark colored, 
thin-bedded sandstone, often showing ripple-marks, is separated 
from the base of the formation by about 250 feet of dark grey 
fissile shale with a few thin arenaceous beds. About 220 feet 
above the lower sandstone bed and separated from it by somewhat 
sandy, rusty-weathering shales containing a few clay ironstone 
nodules, is the upper sandstone bed, a very siliceous hard sandstone 
generally dark grey on fresh fractures and weathering to light 
tints. This sandstone is generally 15 to 20 feet thick and because 












- 10b - 


of its hardness and persistent character forms an excellent 
horizon marker. Above this latter sandstone bed are 150 feet 
of sandy shales and shaly sandstones followed by dark rusty- 
v/eathering sandy shales and grey nodular clay shales. Because 
the v/hole succession weathers readily exposures are few. This, 
coupled with minor folding and crumpling, makes a thickness deter¬ 
mination only approximate. Leach recorded 2,750 feet of beds and 
added that several hundred feet more may be present. His best 
sections are on York and Pelletier creeks. Rose (123) 1917 

mentioned these same tv/o sandstone layers. His section on York 
creek measured 3>245 feet. 

To the east in the South Fork coal area, luHacKenzie (77) 
reported a thickness of probably not less than 2,000 feet for the 
Alberta shale, v/hich, in this area, is typically developed. He 
reported a bed of very hard, fine- to medium-grained quartzose 
sandstone, ordinarily 10 to 20 feet thick, but in the vicinity 
of north Kootenay pass 150 feet thick, near the top of the lower 
third of the sequence. This probably represents the Cardium, 

Above this hard band the measures are more arenaceous. Stewart 
( 151 ) in 1919 reported that the Cardium beds are not well repres¬ 
ented along the eastern edge of the foothills of the disturbed 
belt of southwestern Alberta. 

A thickness of 3»250 feet v;as reported for the Alberta 






4 






109 - 


shale at Blairmoro by l/IacKay (72) in 1932. In the follov/ing 
year (73) he mentioned the presence of the two hard, resistant 
quartzitic sandstone bands as described by Leach, and stated 
that they probably represent the Cardiura bands of areas farther 
north. At this time MacKay reported a thickness of 3j000 feet 
for the Alberta shale in the eastern part of the Crowsnest pass. 

Webb and Hertlein (l()9) in 1934- reported a thickness 
for the Alberta shale of nearly 2,000 feet in the area about hUll 
creek. Of this thickness the Upper Alberta shale is represented 
by about 1,500 feet of beds, the Cardiurn by onlj'- about 33 fQet 
and the Lower Alberta shale by 450 feet. In the Crowsnest river 
valley east of Coleman, the Cardiurn member is represented by 33 
feet of interbedded hard sandstones and sandy shales, with a 
2-inch layer of chert pebble conglomerate at the top, whereas 
south of Crowsnest river the Cardiurn is generally 10 to 15 feet 
thick, and is entirely lacking at one locality on Castle river 
(169, p. 1398). 

On Oldman and Castle river in 50 feet of comparatively 
soft, sandy shale in the basal part of the Upper Alberta shale, 
numerous bentonite seams and associated volcanic ash lenses occur 
( 169 ). About 225 feet above the bentonite and ash horizon on 
Oldman river are a few thin, hard sandstone bands. Webb and 
Hertlein (I 69 ) stated that these beds are possibly equivalent to 
the uppermost Cardiurn sandstone band of the region to the north. 









- 110 - 


In the Crowsnest pass area the Alberta shale lies 
conformably upon the Crowsnest volcanics and in turn is overlain 
transitionally by the freshwater measures of the Allison formation 
(169). 

Bow Rive r Area; North from Turner Valley the 
Alberta shale has been reported by Rutherford (13^) along the 
Bow river. Ho mentioned the presence mthin the Upper Alberta shale 
of zones, of no definite stratigraphic position, carrying ironstone 
nodules. The nodules average 6 to 12 inches in diameter and 
weather to a reddish-brown color. Hume and Hago reported its 
occurrence in the Jumpingpcund (44-) and Wildcat Hills (48), (40), 
areas northwest of Calgary. In the Ghost river area sections 
of the Alberta shale, in some cases composite in nature, have been • 
prepared by Webb and Hertlein (I 69 ). 

Fallentimb er ^eaj In the Fallentimber area 
llacKay (7^) reported that only the upper part of the V/apiabi 
formation consisting essentially of thin-bedded, fissile, and black 
marine shales, is exposed. Greenish, sandy shales containing 
numerous bands of sandstone, and of ironstone generally less than 
an inch thick, comprise the uppermost part, while underlying 
these upper arenaceous shales are dark grey and black, massive 
shales, which contain onl}'- an occasional ironstone concretion or 
a fev/ thin, yellowish grey, argillaceous limestone bands, some of 
which hold an Ostrea fauna. The contact between the Wapiabi 

















Ill - 


shales and the overlying freshwater massive sandstones of the 
Bally River formation is clearly defined on Red Deer river and 
Fallentimber creek, but on Little Red Deer river a transition 
zone about 100 feet thick of intorbedded massive shale beds 
and freshwater sandstones exists. Here the lower contact of the 
Belly River formation was drawn by LlacKay at the base of the 
lowest sandstone bed, 

West- Central Albe rta: West-central Alberta 
is herein considered to extend from the Bow river northwestv/ards 
to the vicinity of the Borland river. 

Malloch (84) originally introduced the terms Blackstone 
shales, Bighorn formation and Wapiabi shales in the Bighorn basin, 
for the members which we now in southern Alberta term the Lower 
Alberta shale, Gardium member, and Upper Alberta shale, 

Lfetlloch*s divisions have been found to extend through¬ 
out the foothills belt between the Ghost and Athabaska rivers. 
Numerous sections were measured by Evans ( 38 ) in the region betv/een 
the Bow and North Saskatchewan rivers. Allan and Rutherford have 
reported upon the Blackstone, Bighorn and Wapiabi members from the 
foothills belt/along Saunders creek ( 3 ) and along the Blackstone, 
Brazeau and Pembina rivers (4), The members have been described 
betv/een the £5cLeod and Athabaska rivers by Rutherford (132) in the 
Brazeau area by Sanderson (139), and in the Jasper Park area by 











- 112 - 


IkilacKay (71)* Sanderson (139), however, employed a somewhat 
different nomenclature, and used the terms Lower Colorado shale, 
Bighorn (Cardium) sandstone, Upper Alberta shale, and Brazeau- 
Pierre formation for this sequence. Throughout all these areas 
the members exhibit a decided similarity in lithology (l56),(l69). 
Blackstc ne Shelves.; 

The Blackstone member has been described (l56),(71), 
as consisting of black and green fissile marine shales with lenses 
and thin bads, (usually less than 1 foot thick), of impure lime¬ 
stone and iron c arbcnate concretions. On the whole, however, the 
member is remarkably homogeneous in chare.cter, Mai loch (84) 
assigned a thickness of 1,050 feet to those beds but his section 
was incomplete, A thickness of 1,700 feet was reported by MacKay 
(71) in the Jasper Park area, 900 to 1,000 feet by Sanderson (l39) 
in the Brazeau area, and 1,200 to 1,700 feet by Allan and Ruther¬ 
ford (8, p. 33)* Repetition of strata through faulting makes 
thickness determinations only approximate. To the north in the 
Brule lake region (68), the Blackstone member is 1,700 feet thick 
and is the youngest bedrock of the area. The Blackstone is in the 
main Turonian (156), (169), with a Cenomanian age for the basal 
part (l68). 

The Bighorn member is largely marine in origin but 
some freshwater beds are present. Lithologically, it has been 





( ( 



: fi 


I : .A 




1 














- 113 - 


described variously by different workers in the area* IiilacKay 
(71) reported that in the vicinity of Jasper Park it consists 
of 350 feet of alternating brown-weathering grey sandstone and 
dark green to black shale, and lenses of chert conglomerate, with 
thin local occurrences of coal seams. V/arren and Rutherford (15^) 
described it as being comprised essentially of fine-grained sand¬ 
stone, shaly sandstones, and bands of conglomeratic sandstones, 
while Sanderson (139) in the Brazeau area stated that it is a 
clean, fine-grained, quartz sand member varying in thickness from 
210 to 255 feet. The thickness as reported by Allan and Ruther¬ 
ford (8, p. 31) is 250 to 350 feet. An Emscherian age has been 
assigned to the Bighorn (l56, p. 33)> (1^9, p. 1407). 

Wapiabi Sh ales; 

The Wapiabi shales conformably overlie the Bighorn 
member and consist of a series of black marine shales and thin 
calcareous beds, some layers of v/hich contain large ironstone con¬ 
cretions ( 15 ^), ( 71 ). The presence of these concretions serves 
to differentiate the Wapiabi and Blackstcne shales, concretions 
being notably absent in the Blackstcne shales except for a few 
in the transition zone at the top of the member. North of Brazeau 
river in the McLeod river area, a prominent sandstone very similar 
to the Highwood sandstone, occurs towards the top of the Wapiabi 
( 169 , p. 1403). Thicknesses reported for the formation vary con¬ 
siderably. Sanderson (139) assigned 1,400 feet of beds to the 






114 - 


fornaticn on Chungo creek, Webb and Hertlein (l69) 1,500 feet in 
the Brazeau area, MacKay (71) 1,700 feet in the Jasper Park 
area, Allan and Rutherford (8, p. 31) 1,500 to 2,000 feet and 
Warren and Rutherford (150) 2,000 to 2,300 feet. Sanderson’s 
measurement, however, does not include a 500-foot series at the 
top for v/hich ho has proposed the name Brazeau-Pierre formation. 
Those are the marine strata of Lower Montana (Pierre) ago which 
previously have been included at the top of the Alberta shale. 
Generally speaking, however, the Wapiabi shale is represented by 
an almost equal thickness of similar beds on the Bow river. In 
terms of the European nomenclature the lower part of the Wapiabi 
is Emscherian (Upper Colorado) in age, wheras the upper 200 to 
300 feet are referrable to the Santonian (early Montana) (l5^,p.33), 
{1&2), (169), (131. P. 26). 

Berland River Area; 

MacVicar (83) in 1924 introduced a new set of formation- 
al names for his section in this area. Some ambiguity as to the 
meaning of MacVicar’s terms has arisen. MacKay interpreted the 
Berland River shales as the equivalent of the Blackstone, Bighorn 
and Wapiabi members, while Allan and Rutherford considered that 
the term Berland River v/as used only for the beds equivalent to 
the Blackstone member (8), This latter interpretation was upheld 
by Webb and Hertlein (l69), who concluded that MacVicar*s terms 




■■ ■ 

;r^m 

■ t.- < ■ 





- 115 - 


Berlai'id River shales and Upper sandstones and shales were 
assigned to strata which are undouttodl 3 r the Blackstone, Big¬ 
horn and Wapiabi members respectivelj^. The writer finds great 
difficulty in attempting to correlate MacVicar’s formations, with 
formations or members thereof in other parts of northern v/est- 
central and west-central Alberta, He is inclined to agree, 
however, with the interpretation of MacKay, in so far as the Bor¬ 
land River is considered the equivalent of the Blackstone, 

Bighorn and Wapiabi members* However, it is hero suggested that 
MacVicar possibly erred in considering the Upper sandstones and 
shales as a member distinct from the Borland River shale, and 
that these Upper sandstones and shales may represent a duplication 
of the upper part of the Borland River represented by the Bighorn 
and V/apiabi* This would account for the unusually great thick¬ 
ness of I^cVicar’s section. The 75- to 100-foot thick sandstone 
bed mentioned by I^cVicar as dividing the formation in some places, 
may thus represent the equivalent of the Bighorn sandstone. 

Northern West-C e ntral Albe rta: In the present 
discussion northern v/est-central Alberta is considered as the area 
betv/een the Smoky and Peace rivers. 

In northern west-central Alberta the Smoky River shales 
are considered to bo directly correlative v/ith the Alberta shale 
of the southern foothills area (l68), Dawson first referred to this 










- 11b - 


fornaticn as the ‘‘upper dark shales", and in l88l (21) he applied 
the formaticnal name Smoky River shales to the argillaceous strata 
exposed on Smoky River. In 1919 McLearn (94) subdivided this 
formation on the basis of lithology into three members, namely, 
the Upper shale, the Badheart sandstone, and the Lower shale. On 
fossil evidence, he grouped together the lower tv/o members. The 
name Kaskapau was assigned by McLearn (lOO) in 1926 to the Lower 
shale member. The Smoky River formation was reported by Evans 
and Csdey (39) in 1930 from the Wapiti river basin. The total 
thickness of the Smoky River shales in the vicinity of the Peace 
and Smoky rivers is somewhat less than 1,000 feet (13^)* Slump¬ 
ing of the formation is common, due to the non-resistant character 
of the shales, 

Kaskapau Jle^jrj 

The Lower Smoky River shale or Kaskapau member is 
generously exposed in the valleys of the streams tributary to the 
Peace and Smoky rivers, Rutherford (I 36 ) reported the lowest 
beds of this member as being exposed along the Peace and Smoky 
and tributary streams, while the best exposures of the upper 
beds occur along the Smoky river for some distance below the mouth 
of the Bad Heart river. McLearn (100) described the member as 
consisting of friable dark shales at the very base with dark, rather 
fissile, carbonaceous shale forming the lower half of the member. 















- 117 - 


Friable dark siiales with concretions occur in the upper part, and 
at the very top, just below the Badheart sandstone, thin-bedded 
sandstones and shales are present* Rutherford (13^) 
reported the presence of some thin, fine-grained sandstone beds 
in the lower strata, which apparently were absent from McLearn’s 
section. The concretions, as mentioned above, are of ironstone 
or are pyritic in nature. Decomposition of the pyritic content 
of the shales gives rise to vapors which, on condensation at the 
surface, leave incrustations of crystalline salts (IB^)* McLearn 
(lOO) assigned a combined thickness of 550 feet for the Kaskapau 
and Badheart members on Smoky river. Rutherford, however, assigned 
850 to 875 feet cf beds to the Kaskapau, claiming that if the thick¬ 
ness were less, the Smoky River forma-tion would show, contrary 
to normal conditions, a thinning to the west. The lowermost 
Kaskapau is Cenomanian in age, but in the main the Kaskapau is 
of Turonian age (I 68 ). 

Badhea rt S_an d_stone ; 

Rutherford (13^) described the Badheart as a medium to 
coarse-grained porous sandstone, which is dark red in all exposures 
observed. The red color is apparently inherent and not the result 
of recent oxidation. The sandstone beds average 1 to 5 feet in 
thickness, and are intercalated with thin arenaceous shale beds. 
Occasional bands of chert and old worm borings were observed. The 





I 


< 







1 


i 


i 



■ 

■ 


<r-<ji.'c**-i 1. . -^ ,- 

',;• .'I 

.-' t '• ' •" 

h . - 


I 





- 118 - 


thickneoE of the Badheart varies from 5 to 25 feet (lOO), Expos¬ 
ures of this sandstone member are best observed along the Smoky 
and its tributaries in the vicinity of the mouth of the Bad Heart 
and down the Smoky to near the mouth of the Little Smoky, The 
Badheart sandstone cannot be correlated with the Bighorn or 
Cardium members of the areas to the south. It occupies a position 
stratigraphically higher than those other two members. The Bad- 
heaifc is referrable to the Emscherian (l68). 

Upper Smoky Riv er Shal e; 

The Upper Smoky River shale represents the last invasion 
of the Cretaceous sea into this area. As far as is knov/n no sea¬ 
way ever again entered this region, jjissentially dark colored, 
thin-bedded marine sliales, with a few thin sandstone bands in the 
uppermost beds, comprise the Upper Smoky River shale (13^)* A 
lithologic similarity betv/een the Upper and Lower shale members 
of the Smoky River exists, but clay ironstone nodules are a more 
conspicuous element of the Lower member. The average thickness of 
this upper shale member is 300 to 350 feet. At the top of the 
member a rather abrupt gradation into the freshv/ater deposits of 
the overlying wapiti formation occurs, Ihe upper Smoky River 
shale is Ssmtonian (ijfontana) in age and can be correlated with 
Sanderson’s Brazeau-Pierre formation, with the Upper Wapiabi and 
with the upper part of the Upper /^berta shale. 








- 119 - 


Pala9ontolop:v of the Albarta Shala 

Faunal Zones: Fossils from the Alberta shale 
have been recorded from an early date by McConnell (88), Malloch 
(84), Leach (63), Cairnes (I6), McLearn (91), Rose (123), and 
Stewart (151). Because the correepondenoe between the lithologic 
and faunal zones is limited, zoning of the Alberta shale has been 
difficult. Zoning ms attempted first by McLearn (94) on the 
Smoky river in 1918, At this time he recognized three local 
zones, one with Prionotropis and Inoceramus labiatus, one with 
Inoceran iu s umbonatus and one with Scaphites ven t ricosus . Ruther¬ 
ford’s ( 132 ) succession in the foothills betf/een lifcLeod and Atha- 
baska rivers included, in ascending order, a zone with Prionotropis 
and Inoceramus labiatus, one with Gardium pauperculum and Inoceramus 
n, sp.^one with Scaphites ventricosus and one with Baculites 
0 vatu3 . McLearn (l02) in 1927 recognized four faunas of general 
distribution. In ascending order these are: Inocerajiius labiatus? , 
Prionotropis , Scaphites ventricosus, and Inoceramus lundbreckensis . 
In 1928 V/arren and Rutherford (l56) set forth the following four 
faunal zones of general application; The In oceramus labiatus, 
Prionotropis, Scaphites ventricosus . and Baculites ovatus zones. 

At the base of the Alberta shale below the Inoceraidus labiatus zone, 
they placed a Barren zone which contains fish scales (including 
Ichthvodectes sp,) and Inoceramus corpulentus . The Prionotropis 























































- 120 - 


wool.g:ari- listed from this zone was wrongly identified. (l68). 
Discussion of the faunal zones of the Blairmore region v/as 
made by McLearn (104) in 1929. The possibility of a zone with 
* *Acanthoceras '* in the base of the Kaskapau shale v/as suggested 
by Warren (158) in 1930. Webb and Hertlein (I 69 ) in 1934 published 
a regional paper on the Alberta shale in which they stressed the 
importance of an ** Ac ant hoc eras' * zone, and in which they stated 
that Priootropis occurs only within the range of the Inoceramus 
labiatus zone and therefore does not constitute a zone in itself. 

In 1937 McLearn (112) assigned four zones to the 
Alberta shale. These in ascending order were: the Watinoceras, 
Prionotropis , Scaphites ventricosus , and B^ culites ovatus zones. 
Below the Watinoceras zone he listed ' *Acanthoceras' * faunas. At 
this time he pointed out the relationships, as far as they were 
knov/n, of the Inocerami and the ammonoid species. He stated: 

'*The exact range of each species relative to the range of other 
species of Inoceramus, however, has not yet been fully determined, 
nor has the exact range of each species of Inoceramus relative 
to the range of each ammonoid species been completely worked 
out. There is evidence, however, to show that zoning by Inoceramus 
does not everywhere coincide with zoning by aimaonoids.'* (112, p,119). 

Warren and Stelck (I 68 ) in 1940 stated that the '* Ac anthoc eras '* 
type is not a true Acanthoceras and introduced the name Dunv ok an- 
PCeras in its place. It is here suggested that the zone formerly 























■ 's/: 

si 


















- 121 - 


designated "Barren*' may now be assigned the diagnostic appellation 
Dunveganocer as zone. 

Importa n t Elem ents o f the Faunal Zone s: 

a, Dunveganoceras zone 

Dunveganoceras albertense (Warren), Dunveganoceras poucec oup ense 
Warren and Stelck 

b, Watinoceras zone 

Watirioceras cf, coloradoense (Henderson), Inoceramus labiatus 
Schlotheim 

c, Prionotropis zone 

Prionotropis woolgari. Prionotropis caurinus McLearn, Priono¬ 
tropis hva tti Stanton 

d, Scaphites ventricosus z one 

Scaphites ventricosus M, & H,, Scaphites vermiformis M . & H,, 
Baculites asper Morton, Baculites cf, anceps Lamarck, Inocer- 
amus umbonatu s M, & H,, Inoceramus pontoni McLearn, Gardium 
pauperculum Meek, 

e, Baculites ovatus zone 

Baculites ovatus Say, Desraoscaphites bassleri Reeside, Scaphites 

leei Reeside, Inoceramus lundbreckensis McLearn, Fteria lingui - 

formi s E. & S., Tancredia americana M. &. H. 

Range a nd Dis t ributio n of th^_ j^aun al Zones: 
a, Dunveganoceras zone : The 

fauna of this zone is known to occur in the uppermost bods of the 

Dunvegan sandstone and the basal beds of the Smoky River shale in 







































































- 122 - 


the region of the Peace and Smoky rivers (lOO), (l68), near the 
base of the Blackstone member near Luscar (l58), eind in the 
basal Alberta shale on Castle river (I 69 ). From this latter area 
the species Acanthoceras (Punveganoceras ) albertense v /as collected 
by Webb. In terms of the standard European chronology this fauna 
is of Cenomanian age. 

b. WatinPCeras zone: The 

Watinoceras fauna has been reported from near the base of the 
Kaskapau member on Smoky river (112), from the middle of the Black- 
stone member at Mountain Park, and from beds about 200 feet above 
the base of the Alberta shale on the Elbow river (l58). The fauna 
has also been collected on Tuskoola mountain (112, p. 115), on 
Pine river (112), on Stinking creek in the Wapiti river basin (37), 
and on liUll creek (104, p. 93)* The age of this fauna is Lower 
Turonian. 

0* Prionotropi s zone: Fauna 

of the Prion ot ropis zone have been reported from the Kaskapau (lOO), 
( 112 ), in the uppermost beds of the Blackstone (l58), (ll2), and 
from the Lower Alberta shale (102), (112), (l69)* The Prionotropis 
fauna Is of Upper Turonian age. 

d. Scaphites ventricosus zone: Warren 

and Rutherford (l58) in 1928 stated that, as a rule, Scaphite s 
occurs just above the Cardium sandstone and has been found to 


within 300 feet of the top of the V/apiabi or Upper Alberta shale. 
























- 123 - 


Webb and Hartlein (I 69 , p* 1405) mention the occurrence of Scaphitea 
ventricoau s from beds in the lower part of the Cardiura member. 

** Scaphite3 ventricoaua Meek and Hayden occurs above 
the beds with Prionotropis in the Alberta shale of southwestern 
Alberta, in the Cardium sandstone and lower part of the Upper Alberta 
shale of the Sheep Greek, Bragg Creek and adjacent areas, in the 
lower part of the Wapiabi shale of the Mountain Park area, in the 
Badheart sandstone and base of the upper shale member of the Smoky 
River formation on Smoky River....," (112, p. II 6 ). Previously 

McLearn (96), (lOO), (102), (104), had reported this fauna as also 
occurring in the uppermost beds of the Kaskapau member. 

The Scaphites ventricosus fauna is uppermost Colorado in 
age and is referrable to the Smscherian (Coniacian) pf the 
European nomenclature (l62). Reeside (lOO), (104), would extend 
its range to include Lower Santonian. 

e. Baculites ovatus zone: Warren 

and Rutherford (156) stated that the Bacu lites ov atus zone occurs 
in the uppermost 200 to 3 OO feet of the Alberta shale and in places 
has been found in the lowermost beds of the overlying sandstones. 

Y/ebb and Hertlein (I 69 ) record this fauna in the central ai'id 
northern foothills from about 600 feet belov; the top of the V/ap- 
iabi to within a fev; feet of the Wapiabi-Eelly River contact. "The 
Baculites ovatus zone apparently includes the upper part of the 
























124 - 


V/apiabi in the Ivtountain Park area, part or all of the Upper 
Smoky River shale on Smoky river.'* (112, p. 117). 

Baculites ovatus itself is absent in the aoutiiern 
foothills but McLearn (112) considers InocerarinAS lundbreckensis 
McLearn as diagnostic of this fauna. For the most part the 
range of Inoceranius lundbreckensis McLearn corresponds to that of 
Baculites ovatus, but in some places it is reported to extend down 
into the amrnonoid zone of Scaphites ventricosus . The Baculites 
ovatu s fauna is Montana in age and represents the Santonian 
(Lower Senonian) of the European sections. 

8. Uppermost Cretaceous 

Introduction 

In the foothills areals the various formations of the 
uppermost Cretaceous as recognized on the plains, are not readily 
differentiated. In most cases the marine shale formations Y/hich 
divide the continental beds of the plains did not reach as far 
v^est as the foothills. For this reason all the freshv/ater deposits 
of the area above the Alberta shale have in most cases been group¬ 
ed into a single formtion. Various fcrmational names have been 
assigned to this thick series of continental beds by workers in 


different areas 














-■-■n 




-./ur-ij;? ■■ ;■:: ;- 




'■ :■ 












7 - ■ ■-..: 



■ ■ * ■•> ■ i!.. 







y-i' 




■ 

MX 























- 125 - 


Previous V/ork 

In southern Alberta the Cretaceous above the Alberta 
shale has been referred to as the Allison formation ( 63 ), (91), 
( 123 ), ( 125 ), ( 126 ), ( 102 ), (104), ( 60 ), (12), in the western 
foothills, and the Belly River, Bearpaw and St. Lkry River form¬ 
ation ( 151 ), ( 80 ), ( 131 ), ( 180 ), in the eastern foothills region. 
Some writers have used the term Allison as the equivalent of the 
Belly River formation, whereas others have used the term to imply 
all strata above the Alberta shale, including beds possibly of 
Tertiary age. Farther north, in the Turner Valley area, the 
terms Belly River, Bearpaw and Edmonton (I 6 ), (146), (40-54), have 
been employed. In west-central Alberta various names - Brazeau 
formation (84), (71), Saunders formation (3), (4), (132), (133)» 
Foothills series (8) - have been used for these beds. Still 
farther to the northwest in the Peace river area the strata bear 
the appellation V/apiti (21), (88), (94), (39), (138), (177). 

More detailed descriptions of these formations will be rendered 
in the ensuing discussion. 

Lithology, Distribution. Thickness 

General Statement: The uppermost Cretaceous 
continental deposits extend throughout the foothills area from the 
49 th parallel to the vicinity of the Peace river. Only in the 
southern portions does the marine Bearpav/ shale enter the sequence, 
and then only in the eastern foothills. The series consists of a 














- 126 - 


great thickness of freshwater sandstones and shales containing 
some coal seams. In the Crowsnest region IilacKay (73) reported 
a thickness for the Allison formation of 2,500 feet in the eastern 
part of the pass and 4,000 feet at Coleman, From the Turner Valley 
area a combined thickness for the Belly River, Bearpav/ and 
Edmonton formations of 2,850 to 3>800 feet Y/as reported by Kume 
in 1939. In the Saunders creek basin Allan and Rutherford (3) 
reported an average thickness of 12,000 feet for the Saunders form¬ 
ation, wiiereas in the vicinity of Jasper Park a thickness of 11,000 
feet was assigned to the Brazeau formation by IdacKay (71)* Farther 
north in the Wapiti river basin, 1,100 feet of beds, representing 
only the part exposed, have been assigned to the Wapiti foraation (39 


The following diagram^ shows the characteristic wedging 
of the marine and continental uppermost Cretaceous formations 
of southern Alberta: \/vcj/isrr7 




















































•'i 




r 






iioinmq:; - .i 


& 







- 127 - 


Turner Valley and Adjacent The Ty pe Se ction: 

As the uppermost Cretaceous beds have probably received closest 
attention in the Turner Valley area, the v/ritor, for this thesis has 
chosen this region as the type locality. 

Rose ( 126 ) reported the presence in the Highwood area 
of the Allison and St, IVIary River formations. In the Sheep river 
area Slipper (146) in 1921 assigned 1,900 feet of beds to the 
Belly River, about 100 feet to the Bearpav;, and 1,300 feet to the 
Edmonton, The Bearpaw, in association with the Belly River and 
Edmonton, v/as reported from the Moose Mountain area by Cairnes 
( 16 ), but it has since been shown that no Bearpaw is present 
v/ithin the area. Later reference to these beds is found in the 
reports of Hume (40-54). 

Belly River For mation: 

The Belly River formation consists of a series of non¬ 
marine sandstones and shales. Hume (52), (54), has described 
the upper part of the formation as consisting of coaly shales, 
sandstones and coal seams, the remainder of the formation consist¬ 
ing largely of grey sandstones and dark green and grey shales, 
in part with much ironstone. About 950 to 1,000 feet above the 
base of the formticn is a zone of massive sandstones, which, on 
Highwood river, contains two layers of conglomerate 140 feet 
apart, A Unio bed occurs 90 feet above the lower conglomerate. 


A thin carbonaceous shale layer vdth a thin coal seam about 6 inches 



















- 12i3 - 


thick occurs about 20 feet above the base of the greenish sand¬ 
stones and shales at the base of the formation. This horizon 
is very persistent in this area and while several feet of Belly 
River strata occur below it, it serves as a convenient marker to 
divide the Belly River from the underlying Alberta shales. This 
same coal seam has been seen at a comparable horizon many miles 
north of Bow river. Coal seams occur at the top of the Belly 
River formation in a series of beds that are relatively soft and 
bentonitic. The contact betv/een the Belly River and the over- 
lying Bearpaw is generally considered as the top of this coal 
zone, but owing to the structural complications which have involved 
these coal seams, and to the fact that small coal seams occur v/ithin 
the Bearpav/, the contact is not easily determined. 

Bearpa w Fo rmation: 

As described by Hume (52), (54-), the Bearpaw in the 
main consists of soft, grey shales alternating vath some bands of 
hard, grey, and pink sandstones. Thin coal seams, bentonite, and 
in places glauconitic bands, are present. On Highwood river it 
carries marine fossils but it is considered to be a near-shore 
phase. The equivalent of the Bearpaw formation has been observed 
on Elbow river, but so far it has not been recognized on Bow river 
(54-, p. 2). The thickness of the formation has been placed by 
Hume at 150 to 200 feet, but it may thicken to as much as 400 feet 


in some areas 















- 129 - 


Edmon t on Formation: 

Overlying the marine Bearpaw are the continental 
measures of the Edmonton formation. In Turner Valley this 
formation has been described by Hume (52), (54-)• Soft sandstones 
v/ith ironstones, shale and coal constitute the lower part. In 
most places the base of the Edmonton formation consists of soft 
beds containing coaly and dark carbonaceous shales with coal. These 
beds have generally become involved in structural deformations. In 
a few places, however, the base of the Edmonton is recognizable 
and consists of a fairly massive sandstone, in part conglomeratic, 
in turn followed by the coaly shale and dark shale vdth coal as 
mentioned above. Hume assigned a thickness of 150 feet to these 
lo7/er beds. An oyster bed, in places more than a foot thick, 
composed almost entirely of oyster shells, occurs within these 
lower beds. The upper part of the Edmonton consists of heavy- 
bedded, hard sandstones alternating with shale. In places the 
Edmonton is highly bentonitic. Due to extensive deformation within 
this formation, the exact sequence of beds is difficult to obtain, 
and any statement of thickness needs must be but approximate. Hume 
(54-) in 194-0 reported a thickness of about 1,100 feet for the 
formation on Highwood river. A rapid thickening to the north occurs 
and the formation may be represented by 2,800 feet of beds on 
Bow river. (54-, p- 2). The upper contact with the Tertiary 
Paskapoo formation is marked by a sandstone with coarse pebbles 













- 130 - 


erratically distributed as lenses in the Paskapoo. Pebbles and 
cobbles from 3 to 5 inches in length are present vdthin this 
zone. 

Grov/sne st _Pass aiid Adjacent Reg,io ns: In 1912 
Leach ( 63 ) applied the term Allison Creek sandstones to a series of 
continental, pale greenish to yellowish, light-weathering, soft, 
coarse-textured sandstones lying conformably upon the Alberta shales. 
On McGillivray ridge 1,900 feet of beds interrupted by faulting 
are exposed. Similarity to the lov/er members of the Blairmore 
formation exist but, as pointed out by Leach, these Upper Cretaceous 
sandstones are generally lighter in color, more massive, and do 
not so readily disintegrate into crumbly angular fragments. Although 
no fossils were found he stated that the formation may possibly 
be equivalent in age to the Belly River series. 

The term Allison (Belly River) formation was employed 
by MacKenzie (77) in 1913 in the South Fork coal area, for a series 
of sandstones and shales lying conformably upon the Alberta shale 
and representing the youngest bedrock of the area. Sandstones 
predominate and are mostly white or light grey, sometimes pale 
green, in color. They are rather soft, massive or v/ith shaly 
structure, and often laminated and cross-bedded, Beds of dark 
grey, and light green plastic shales occur. The top of the formation 
was not observed but about 2,000 feet of beds are exposed on the 
west branch of the South Fork river. LlacKehzie reported fossils as 










- 131 - 


being rare. 

The Allison formation in the Growsnest area was 
reported by Rose (l23) as the stratigraphic equivalent of the 
Belly River sandstone of the plains. He assigned 2,500 to 3i000 
feet of beds to the Allison as it is exposed beneath the over- 
thrust older formations, but stated that this thickness probably 
represents the total thickness of the formation. At the base a 
250 - to 350 - foot massive, light grey, cross-bedded, coarse¬ 
grained sandstone containing concretions and ironstone nodules, 
is overlain by fifty feet of grey shale v/ith interbedded non-com¬ 
mercial coal seams. Above the shale are 2,000 to 2,500 feet of 
interbedded, grey sandstone and grey-green shale. The formation 
becomes very shaly towards the top and at several localities 
Rose reported observing black shale and a small coal seam, A con¬ 
glomerate layer v/as noted in one locality. McLearn (91) in 1915 
reported two brackish water and two freshwater faunules from this 
succession. The brackish water forms appear one in the basal sand¬ 
stone member and one in the intermediate shale member. The tv/o 
freshwater forms are from the upper sandstone member, 

IkcKay (73) reported that in the Growsnest area at least 
two coal seams occur near the top of the Allison (Belly River) 
formation. He assigned a thickness of 2,500 feet for the formation 
in the eastern part of Grov/snest pass and 4,000 feet at Colemarj. 

No younger Gretaceous deposits and no strata of Tertiary age occur 





- 132 - 


within the area. 

Distur be d Belt of Southwestern Alberta : In the 
disturbed belt the occurrence of the Bally River, Bearpav/ and 
Edmonton formations has been noted by Stewart (l5l)* Allan and 
Rutherford (l80) reported the presence of Belly River strata in 
the area east of Burmis, and Rose (125) reported the Allison 
formation overlain by the St. Ivlary River on Oyster creek, a trib¬ 
utary of the Oldman. The identification by Stanton of fossils 
from near the base of the latter formation, however, favored a 
Belly River age (125)# Above the basal sandstone member v/hich is 
typically developed, is an orderly succession of westerly dipping 
soft, grey sandstones and shales. Rose assigned a thickness of 
10,000 feet to these upper beds and stated that the St, Mary River 
or possibly even younger formations may be represented towards 
the top. An oyster bod occurs near the base of the series. 

The Belly River fonna^tion is similar lithologically 
to its development in the Turner Valley area. On Oldman river 
Stewart estimated a thickness of 3>000 feet for the formation, with 
a thinning toward the north and south, on Growsnest river 2,500 
feet, and on St, kfeiry river near the 49th parallel about 1,600 
feet. 

In the eastern part of the disturbed belt the Bearpaw 
formation is exposed on all the rivers betv/een the St, Mary and 


Oldman (l5l). On Lee creek Stewart reported a limestone band about 










- 133 - 


1 foot thick about 200 feet above the base of the formation. Throe 
lenses of massive buff-colored sandstone occur in the section on 
Oldman river. From Oldman river south the break between the con¬ 
tinental sandstones and the massive Bearpav/ shales is well 
marked, the transition from Belly River to Bearpaw strata being 
best observed on Lee creek and on Oldman river. The extension of 
the Bearpaw formation northward from Oldman river is observed on Wil¬ 
low creek, but cn Pekisko creek the dark clay shales arjd marine 
fossils of the Bearpaw are absent and the horizon is represented 
by an alternation of sandstones, arenaceous shales and thin coal 
seams, a combination characteristic of the upper part of the Belly 
River and the lower part of the St. llary River formations. No 
complete undisturbed section of the formation was observed but the 
entire thickness, though the formation is only partly exposed, 
is present on Oldman and Crowanest rivers and on Lee creek. With 
due allowance made for repetition by crumpling and folding, the 
maximum thickness was estimated by Stewart to be about 700 feet. 
Lithologically the St. klary River formation is very 
similar to the Belly River formation and deterroination of isolated 
exposures is difficult. The lower part of the St. Mary River is 
generally more shaly and calcareous than the upper and everywhere 
contains coal seams and oyster beds. The sandstones are all fine- 
grai-ned and often exhibit fine cross-bedding and ripple-markings. 

The shale is irregularly bedded aixil in some cases calcareous and 









- 134 - 


concretionary. An excellent horizon marker in the southern area 
is a bed composed almost entirely of the shells of oysters and other 
molluscs, which overlies the coal near the base of the formation. 
This oyster bed attains a thickness of 2 to 8 feet on the Belly 
river and almost 12 feet on Watertcn river. The best sections of 
the formation are seen along the valleys of the St. Ivlary, Belly, 
Oldman, Waterton, Crowsnest and Castle rivers and Lee, Fincher 
and Indian Farm creeks. The thickness of the formation varies, 
Stewart having estimated 1,600 feet for the section on St, Ii&.ry 
river, 2,700 feet on Crowsnest river and 3>000 feet on Oldman 
river. The upper contact of the St. Lfeiry River formation v/ith 
the overlying Tertiary deposits is generally difficult to draw, 
there being a continuation of continental sandstone beds into 
the overlying formations. Where the Tertiary Willow Creek forma¬ 
tion overlies the St. Ivlary River the contact is drawn on a lithologic 
basis, as the Willow Creek formation generally exhibits a 
characteristic red color. 

Southern V/e st-G entral Albe rta; In the following 
discussion southern west-central Alberta is considered to extend 
from the Bow river northwestv/ards to the North Saskatchewan river 
in the Brazeau area. 

In the Bov/ river area Rutherford (134) reported the 
Belly River and Edmonton-Paskapoo beds as being lithologically 












- 135 - 


similar to the development of these strata in the Turner Valley 
area. He was unable, however, to differentiate between the Ed¬ 
monton and Paskapoo, for the succession is one of apparent contin¬ 
uous deposition of freshwater beds. Rutherford estimated the thick¬ 
ness of the Belly River to be 2,500 feet in the eastern part of 
the area and over 3i 000 feet in the v/estern part, and that of the 
Edraontcn-Paskapoo as 3>500 feet. The upper part of the Paskapoo 
and any younger strata that may have been present have been eroded 
off. 

The Belly River and Edmonton have been described from 
the V/ildcat Hills area (48), (40), but the Bearpaw does not ex¬ 
tend north of the Bow river in the foothills of Alberta, The Belly 
River and Edmonton formtions do not differ markedly from their 
development in Turner Valley. At various horizons in the Belly 
River lenticular beds of black chert and grey quartzite pebbles 
are found in the coarse sandstone. Hume (48) reported that in 
some areas a conglomeratic sandstone horizon as much as 4 feet 
thick occurs close to the base of the Belly River beds. Generally 
speaking, the upper part of the formation is more shaly, is softer,is 
lighter in color, and is more bentonitic than the lower part. On 
Little Red Deer river a small coal seam 15 inches thick occurs 
30 feet above the base of the formation and may represent the coal 
occurring at the base of the Belly River formation in the Turner 






- 13b - 


Valley area. Another soain, 1 foot thick and of poor grade 
lignite, occurs on Little Red Deer river 250 feet below the 
contact with the Edmonton formation, Hage reported the thickness 
of the formation on Little Red Deer river as 2,600 feet, with a 
thickening to the north and from east to west. 

In the Wildcat Hills area bentonite in association with 
reddish-brown ironstone nodules is common in the Edmonton, In 
places this bentonitic material forms a white coating on outcrops. 
On the ¥^olo the sandstone beds of the Edmonton are finer grained 
and softer than the Belly River sandstones. In this area, the 
basal bed of the Edmonton formation is a coarse-grained sandstone 
approximately 90 feet thick. In the basal 10 feet several bands 
consisting of pebbles ranging from ^ inch to inches in length 
exist. These pebbles consist predominantly of quartzites of 
various colors, with chert, porphyry, quartz and sandstone pebbles 
in minor amounts, Hume contended that these pebbles had their 
source to the west in the Selkirks, This basal conglomerate is 
well exposed on Little Red Deer river and according to Hume is not 
known to occur south of Bow river. The conglomerate suggests a 
break in sedimentation during at least part of the time when the 
marine Bearpaw formation was being deposited in the areas to 
the south and east. Commercial coal seams v/ere not observed 
within the area, Hage reported a probable thickness of the Edmonton 
formation in this area of 3|000 feet. The Edmonton is overlain 

















- 137 - 


conformably by the Paskapoo formation of Pal eocene a^^e, the base 
of which is marked by a massive sandstone bed (40, p, 4), 

klacKay (7^) reported a similar development of the 
Belly River and Edmonton formations in the Fallentimber area. In 
this region, however, at least two 3~ to 6-foot thick coal seams 
are present in the Edmonton. The base of the formation is marked 
by a bed of conglomerate that ranges up to 1-^ feet in thickness 
and is composed of chert pebbles of various colors, quartz, and 
shale fragments. This conglomerate bed corresponds to the one 
reported from the Wildcat Hills area. Slabs of silicified wood 
and bone fragments of a duck-bill dinosaur wore found in the con¬ 
glomerate on Red Deer river. Because of faulting aijd the presence 
of a heavy overburden of glacial drift, accurate determinations 
of the thickness of the formations wore not possible. llacKay 
reported a thickness of 3>600 feet of Belly River strata on Rod 
Deer and Little Rod rivers and Frozenman creek, whereas to the 
west on Fallentimber and Grease creeks the formation is represent¬ 
ed by at least 3|900 feet of strata. He estimated a thickness of 
3,000 feet for the Edmonton. 

In the area between the Bow and North Saskatchewan 
rivers Evans (38) was unable to differentiate the Belly River 
and Edmonton formations. Coal seams are present in his sections. 
He reported a combined thickness of 8,063 feet for the strata of 








- 13b - 


these tv/o formations, 

We8t"*Gentral Albert a: West-central Alberta is 
here considered to extend from the North Saskatchewan river in 
the Brazeau area to the Athabaska. 

In the Bighorn basin lialloch (84) introduced the term 
Brazeau formation for a series of alternating beds of black and 
brown shale with greenish grey sandstones containing chert pebbles. 
He assigned 1,680 feet of strata to the formation but stated 
that the upper part of the formation had been eroded off. 

I.felloch’s Brazeau formation corresponds to the Belly River sand¬ 
stone of the plains (8, p. 34). 

into 

In 1923 Allan and Rutherford (3) introduced/the liter¬ 
ature a new term - Saunders group - for the thick series of 
continental deposits above the Wapiabi shales in the Saunders 
creek coal basin. At this time they subdivided the Saunders 
group into three parts, Upper Saunders formation and Lov;er Saunders 
formation separated by the Saunders coal series. This term implied 
the equivalent of the Belly River, Bearpaw, Edmonton and perhaps 
some Paskapoo, and is represented by an approximate 12,000 feet 
of sediments. In the continuation of their v/crk in the following 
year, this subdivision of the series into parts was dropped, for 
it was found not to have regional applications. The term Saunders 
formation was then employed to include all these strata. 

In 1934- Allan and Rutherfoixi (8) proposed the term 












- 139 - 


Foothills series for all strata above the Upper Cretaceous marine 
beds in the foothills. This term has the same general application 
as the term Saunders formation and was introduced with a view 
to its use in a regional significance to supplant all former 
terms applied to these strata throughout the foothills region. 

The lithology of the formation varies in no marked degree from 
the development of these strata in the Turner Valley area. "Special 
types of sedimentary beds, such as those composed almost entirely 
of volcanic dust, form local horizon markers, but these have not 
been found to have a wide areal distribution"(8, p* 35). The 
formation shov/s no marked stratigraphic or lithologic breaks and 
thus the placing of the Belly River - Edmonton and Edmonton - Paskapoc 
boundaries is attended with great difficulty and, in most cases, 
has been dispensed with. The lower part of the series is the 
approximate stratigraphic equivalent of the Belly River forination 
on the plains. 

In the Brazeau area Sanderson (139) in 1939 was unable 
to establish the Belly River - Edmonton contact and the upper 
boundary of the Edmonton. Ho estimated the thickness of the Belly 
River - Edmonton on Brown creek as about 5fl50 feet, and the 
thickness of the Saunders on Chungo creek as 6,700 feet. 

In the area between the McLeod and Athabaska rivers (132) 
a distinction between the upper strata of the formation and the 








140 - 


beds near iihe base of the formation is noticeable. Rutherford 
reported that in general the upper beds are softer, not so well 
consolidated, and are more often of a yellov/ish to brownish 
color, whereas the basal beds, especially the sandstones, are 
usually light gray or greenish grey in color. In this area a 
massive conglomerate bed 75 feot thick occurs about 665 feet 
above the base of the formation. To the southeast on Pembina river 
this conglomerate becomes more arenaceous, while still farther 
to the southeast on Blackstone river, it is more of a pebbly sand¬ 
stone than a true conglomerate, with the pebbles occurring as 
lenses in a well cross-bedded sandstone. Northwest of the McLeod 
river several conglomerates occur in the basal Saunders beds, such 
conglomerates being well exposed on the north side of Athabaska 
river opposite the mouth of Prairie creek. In almost all of 
these conglomerates the pebbles are seldom over 2 inches in 
diameter and generally less than one inch. Frequent lenses or 
rows of quartzite pebbles that have diaraeters as great as 12 inches, 
and averaging about 6 inches, occur at different horizons higher 
up in the formation. Such occurrences are generally local having 
but a small lateral or vertical extent. In all of those areas 
between the Blackstone and Athabaska rivers as reported on by 
Allan and Rutherford, a thickness of 11,000 to 13,000 feet has 
been assigned by them to the Saunders formation. 














- 141 - 


liacKay (71) in the vicinity of Jasper Park in 1930, 
e;xtonded Jialloch’s term Brazeau foriuation to include all strata 
comparable to the strata of the Saunders formation. Ho described 
the formation as consisting of freshwater, soft, grey, cross- 
bedded, green and brown weathering sandstones and greenish-grey 
shales with several massive beds of conglomerate composed of 
small chert and quartzite pebbles. About 8,000 feet above the 
base one volcanic-ash bod and several important coal horizons 
were observed. To this formation klacKay assigned a thickness of 
11,000 feet. 

Northern West-Central Albert a: Northern west- 
central Alberta is hero considered to extend from the V/apiti 
river basin to the Peace river. 

In this area the stratigraphic equivalent of the fresh¬ 
water deposits of the uppermost Cretaceous of the central and 
southern areas is the Wapiti formation. In l893 McConnell (88) 
referred the Wapiti River saxidstones on Peace river to a Laramie 
age, McLearn (94) in 1919 employed the term Wapiti formation and 
described the siiata as they are exposed in the Smoky and Peace 
river areas. In his section, in which 900 feet of thick, massive, 
cross-bedded sandstones and grey to dark carbonaceous shales 
are exposed, he reported the occurrence of two coal horizons, one 
a 3-inch to 4-inch bed 180 feet above the base, the other a 








- 142 > 


4-inch bad 580 feat above the base. Rootlets, and in some 
places, flat concretions, occur within the formation. 

The Y/apiti formation was described from the V/apiti 
river basin in 1930 by Svans and Galey (39). In this area the 
entire formation is not exposed, 1,100 feet being estimated for 
the part which outcrops. It consists of sandstone and shale 
and coal seams* The sandstone, light grey on fracture and medium 
to coarse in grain, is frequently cross-bedded and contains bone 
fragments. Along the Wapiti river it weathers to a creaia color 
and in many places weathers out in a pillar-like structure. The 
shale, mainly greenish-grey in color, shows little evidence of 
bedding and crumbles easily on weathering. Tv/o thin seams of 
coal varying in thickness from l8 inches to 4 feet are present. 

Rutherford (138) in 1930 reported the Y/apiti as best 
exposed along the Smoky valley south from the Bad Heart, and in 
the tributary valleys along this part of the river. It underlies 
many of the uplands and is believed to be in part responsible 
for these physiographic features. It is the youngest formation 
in the area and has weathered into typical badland erosional 
forms. Rutherford described the formation as consisting of fresh¬ 
water sandstones and shales. All gradations betv/aeri these tv/o 
facies exist. The units vary in thickness from a few inches up 
to as much as 50 feet, with 10 to 20 feet being more common. 













- 143 - 


Cross-bedding, and concretionary masses in eroded face^, occur 
frequently in the more massive sandstones, The sandstones are 
generally light grey to buff in color and in the main of fine¬ 
grained texture* Poor stratification exists in the shales. A 
division into definite lithologic units is not yet possible. The 
lower 150 to 200 feet, predominantly argillaceous in character, 
consist of compact, poorly strati;fied clay shales that weather 
to variegated colors. Clay ironstone nodules in thin bands 
are coinmon in these shales. Rutherford reported the presence of 
a thin coal seam, varying in thickness from a fev/ inches up to 
2 feet, in these lower beds. It is too thin however, to be 
economically exploited. He also reported the occurrence on Red 
Willow river south of Beaverlodge of some seams of commercial 
thickness at a horizon stratigraphically higher than the V/apiti 
of this area. 

Capping Table Mountain and preserving it from erosion 
is a bed of 390 feet of sandstone, which Williams and Bocock (177) 
have assigned to the Wapiti formation. The contact here with the 
underlying Smoky River formation is indefinite, and has been 
placed at the base of a 50 foot stratum of even-bedded, creamy 
sandstone. Overlying the basal sandstone is a 50-foot bed of 
thin shaly sandstone, in turn overlain by 290 feet of massive, 
brown, red-weathering sandstone cut by vertical joints. Fucoidal 








- 144 - 


forms up to 3/4- inches in diameter are present in the upper 
saiidstones. The narrov/ north-south crest of Bear mountain is 
capped by about 6o feet of nearly flat-lying massive sandstones 
containing lenses of coarse grit. Dark grey, black, green, and 
white quartz and chert pebbles generally less than 3/4 inches 
in diameter comprise this grit. This massive sandstone and grit 
formation is considered the probable equivalent of the capping 
sandstone of Table mountain. 

The lower Wapiti formation is considered the strati¬ 
graphic equivalent of the Belly River formation in the plains 
and foothills of southern Alberta. In the Peace River district 
the Wapiti formation is underlain by about the same thickness of 
shales of Montana age as is the Belly River and its equivalents 
throughout the foothills of Alberta south of the Athabaska. The 
upper part of the Wapiti has been correlated with the Sdmonton on 
a lithologic basis (13^^), (3). The Wapiti formation is thus 
considered the stratigraphic equivalent of at least the Belly 
River and Sdmonton formations. 

V/arren stated: “The occurrence of Desmoscaphites bassleri 
and Baculites ovatus in the upper member of the Smoky River shale 
leads to a correlation of the overlying Wapiti formation v/ith 
the lower part of the Saunders formation of the foothills which 
there immediately overlies the Colorado shale beds containing a 
















- 145 - 


similar fauna." ( 192 , p. 58). 

Palaeontology of the Uppermost Cretacoous 

P^una of t he Belly River Formation : On the v/holo, 
the Belly River beds are remarkably free from either plant or 
animal remains. References to the fossil life of this formation 
in the foothills belt include Stev/art (l5l), Rose (126), Ruther¬ 
ford ( 134 ), Allan and Rutherford (I 80 ), and Hume (48), (52). 
Pelecypods, small freshwater gastropods, dinosaur bones and leaf 
impressions have been found. The fauna includes Ostrea gl a bra, 

Unio consuetus. Goniobaais judithensis. and the dinosaur Laosaurus 
minimus . 

Fauna o f the Bearpaw Formati on: Reference has been 
made to the reports of Stev/art (l5l), Slipper (146), and Hume (52) 
for the fauna of the Bearpav/ formation of the thesis area, Landes 
( 60 , pp. 200-201) has given-a nearly complete list of the Bearpaw 
fauna. Important elements of this fauna include Baculites 
compressus Say, Placenticeras intercalare M, & H., Pjacenticeras 
whitfieldi, Arctica ovata (M. & H,), Ostrea pat ina and Inoceramus 
barabini . 

Fauna o f th e St, I.^ry River and Edmonton Forroations: For 
the fauna of these formations in the area under discussion refer¬ 
ence has been made to the following reports: Cairnes ( 16 ), Stev/- 
art ( 151)1 Slipper (146), Rutherford (134), Evans ( 38 ), Hume (48), 
(52), and Hage (40), 












































14b - 


Included in the fauna are the follovdng epociee: 

Unio danae . Ostrea >!:labr a. Oetrea subtrigonalia , Corb i cula 
occidentalie, Anomia perstrigosa , Melania wyomingensis j Viviparua 
3p,, and Cajnpeloma liinnaeifo rme, none of which are diagnostic. 

Bones of the vertebrates Chegapeosaurus ajid Hypacroaaurus 
have also been collected from the Edmonton formation (40, p, 4). 

Fauna ard F l ora of the Allison Formatio n: The life of 
the Allison formation has been discussed by McLearn (91), (102), 
(104), and by Berry (12), McLearn (104, p. 98) listed three fauna 
and a flora in descending order as follov/s: 

Unio dan ae fauna (freshmter) including Unio danae M. 

& H,, and Sphaerium planum M. & H. 

Zamites alb er tensis f1ora 

Gorbula cf, perundata fauna (brackish) 

Inoceramus cf, lundbreckensis fauna (marine) 

The Inoceramus cf, lundbreckensis fauna (104, p.95-96) 
is a depauperate one, and occurs at levels of 100 and l85 foQt 
above the base of the section as exposed on Gulch creek. The species 
I, cf, l und breckensis itself occurs at the 100-foot level. 

The Gorbul a fauna (104, p, 9^) occurs in the lower coal 
zone cf the Allison formation. In a 4-foot bad of grey and bluish 
shale at about 315 fQQt above the base of the exposed section on 
Gulch creek, a mixed or brackish fauna with Modiolus, Gorbula. and 


Melania was found. This brackish fauna forms the transition from 














































- 147 - 


the marine fauna below to the entirely freshwater fauna of 
the upper Allison above. 

The Zajnites albert ensia flora (104, p. 96 ) occurs 
stratigraphically near the Corbi^la fauna in the lower coal zone 
of the Allison formation. Berry (12, p, 6?) stated that a study 
of the flora seemed to indicate that its palaeobotanical relations 
are with the older rather than with the younger formations of 
the Montana group. Included in this flora are Zamites albertensis 
Berry, Sequoia heterophvlla Velenovsky, Brachvphvllum macrocarpum 
Newberry and Geinitzia f o rmosa Heer, Of these, all have outside 
affinities but the Zamites . 

Also included in the Unio danae fauna (104, p. 97) 
are indeterminate species of- Planorbis . Viviparus and Phvsa . 

T^nc facies, a stream or lake facies in sandstone with Unio danae. 
and a pond or quiet stream facies in shale with Phvsa and Sphaerium. 
are present. Sequoia heterophvlla VelenJ? was reported at 1,725 
feet above the base of the exposed section. 

Fauna and Flo ra of the Saunders Form ation : The fossil 
plants Sequoia heterophvlla Velen., Androvattia sp,? and Cycadocarpus 
collected from the lower part of the Saunders formation, were 
identified by Berry (3, p.. 54), From the upper part of the 
formation. Berry (3, P. 55) determined the fossil plants Pinus sp., 
Arundo groenlandica Heer? and PIatanu s sp. Invertebrates present 


include Unio, Campeloma , Viviparus and Goniobasis (3, p. 55). 



















































- 14a - 


McEvoy ( 89 , p. 26 ) in 1399 recorded the following; fooails 
from the Athabaska river area: Phyaea copei , Patula sp, and Zamites 
or Conulus , as occumng in bods equivalent to the Edmonton forma¬ 
tion. 

Fauna of the Wapiti Formation : No invertebrate faunas 
have as yet been collected from the Wapiti, but a few fragmentary 
vertebrate bones, probably dinosaurian, representing the most 
northerly known occurrence of such in Upper Cretaceous beds, have 
boon reported (13^, P» 31)* 












ON 


BIBLIOCrRAPIIY 

1, Allan, J. A. "Rocky fountain soction betv/oon Banff, Alberta, 


2. Allan, 

and Golden, B. C., along the Canadian Pacific Rail'.vay’.' 

G. S. C., Sum. Rept. 1912, pp. 173-4. 

J. A. "Some probloras relating to the Cretaceous and 
Jurassic stratigraphy in Alberta". Trans. Roy. Soc. 


Gan., Vol. 17, Sec. 4, pp. 117-125, 1923. 

3. Allan, J. A., and Rutherford, R. L. "Saunders creek and 
Nordegg coal basins, Alberta, Ganada". Sci. and 



Ind. Res. Council, Alberta, Rept. 6, 1923. 

4. Allan, 

J. A., and Rutherford, R. L. "Geology along the Black- 
stone, Brazeau and Pembina rivers in the Foothills belt, 
Alberta". Sci. and Ind. Res. Council, Alberta, 

Rapt. 9, 1924. 

5. Allan, 

J. A.; 7/arren, P. S.; and Rutherford, R. L. "A 
preliminary study of the eastern ranges of the Rocky 
mountains in Jasper Park, /ALbarta". Trans. Roy. Soc. 
Can., Vol. 26, sac, 4, po. 225-243, pis. I-II, 1932. 

6. Allan, 

J. A. "A nev/ deposit of gypsum in the Rocky Ucuntains, 
Alberta". Res. Gcun. ^llbarta, Rept. No. 27, 
pp. 27-29, 1932. 

7. Allan, 

J. A. "A new deposit of gypsum in the Rocky Mountains, 
Alberta". Gan. Inst. Min. Met., Ind. Mins. Sec., 1933. 

3. Allan, 

J. A., and Rutherford, R. L. "Geology of central 
Alberta". Res. Goun, Alberta, Rept. No. 30, 1934, 

9. Allan, 

J. A., and Stelck, C. R. "Subsurface formations of 
the Pouce Coupe river district, Alberta". Trans, 

Roy. Soc. Gan., Vol. 34, soc. 4, op. 15-21, 1940. 

10. Barry, 

3. V/. "Lov;or Cretaceous". I!aryla 2 id Gaol. Surv., 

1911 , pp. 118 - 121 , 162 - 164 . 

11. Berry, 

3. \V. "The age of certain Mesozoic geological forma¬ 
tions in v/osterri Canada", Trans. Roy. Sec, Gan., 

Vol. 20, sac. 4, pp. 201-206, 1926. 









11 


12. Berry, IS. \V. "The Kootenay and Lower Blairmora floras. 

Tlie Upper Blairmora flora". G. S. G. Liis. Bull. No.58, 
pp. 23-72, 

13 . Bucknan, S. S. "Jurassic .Vmnonoidea in Mesozoic palaeontology 

of Blairmora ragion, Alberta". G. S. C. Muo. Bull. 

No. 58, pp. 1 - 27 , pis. 1-3, 1929 . 

14. Burling, L. D. "Notes on the stratigraphy of the Rocky 

mountains, Alberta and British Columbia". G. L. C. 

Sum. Kept. 1915, p. 98. 

15 . Gairnas, D. D. "LIooso Mountain district". God. Surv. Can. 

Publn. No. 968 , 1907 . 

16 . Gairnas, D. D. "Moose Mountain district. Southern .Uberta". 

G. S. C. Mem. 61, 1914. 

17 . Collet, L. V/. "Resultats preliminairas de 1’expedition 

geologique de I’Univarsito de Harvard dans les 
Montagnes Rocheuses du Canada (Jasper National Park 
1929 ). Note Ho. 1 Avec une planche". Sxtrait du 
Gompta Rendu das seances de la Sccieto de physique 
at d'historie naturalle de Geneva, Vol, 47, No. 2, 

1930 , pp. 80 - 82 . 

18 . Collet, L. V/. "Sur la presence du Lias suporieur et du 

Bajccian dans les couches de Fiddle creak". Gompta 
rendu des seances da la Societa da Physique et 
d’Histoira naturalle de Geneve, Vol. 48, Ho. 1, pp, 

14-18, 1931 . 

19 . Grickinay, 0. H. "Jurassic history of North .^nerica: its 

bearing on the development of continental structure". 
Am. Phil. Soc., Vol. 70, Ho. 1, pp. 15-102, 1931.. 

20. Daly, R. A. "North American cordillera at the forty-ninth 

parallel". G. S. C. Mem. 38 , pt. 1, 1912. 

21. Dav/scn, G. M. "On the geology of the region betv/een the 

54 th and 53th parallels, from the Pacific coast to 
Edmonton" in Report on an exploration from Port 
Simpson on the Pacific coast to Sdmontcn on the Sask¬ 
atchewan, embracing a portion of the northern part 
of British Columbia and the Peace River country. 

G. S. G., Rapt, of Progress l379-80, Pt. B, pp, 
113-133B. 





22. Dav/son, G. M. "Preliminary report on the geology of the Bow 

and Belly river region, N. \7. Territory, with special 
reference to the coal daposits". G. S, C., Ropt. 
of Progress, I 88 O- 8 I- 82 , Pt. B, pp. 4-8B. 

23 . Dav;son, G. li. "Report on the region in the vicinity of the 

Bow and Belly rivers, North-'.Vest Territory embracing 
the country from the base of the Rocky mountains 
eastward to Ion. 110°45’, and from the 49th parallel 
northward to latitude 5l°20’ ". G. S. C., Rept. of 
Progress 1882-83-84, pt. C. 

24. Dawson, G. M. "Preliminary rept. on the physical and geological 

features of that portion of the Rocky mountains between 
latitudes 49 degrees and 5l degrees, 30 minutes". 

G. S. C., Annual report, 1885, pt. B. 

25 . Dawson, J. V/. "On the Cretaceous and Tertiary floras of 

British Columbia and the North Vi/est Territories 
(v/ith eight plates)". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 1, 
sec. 4, pp. 15 - 35 , 1883 . 

26 . Dawson, J. W. "On the Mesozoic floras of the Rocky raountain 

region of Canada". Trans, Roy, Soc. Can., Vol. 3, 
sec. 4, pp. 1-22, 1885 . 

27 . Dawson, J, \7. "On the correlation of early Cretaceous floras 

in Canada and the United States and on some new 
plants of this period". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., 

Vol. 10, sec. 4, pp. 79-94, 1892. 

28 . Dowling, D. B. "Report on the Cascade coal basin, Alberta". 

G. S. C., pjb. No. 949 , 1907 . 

29 . Dowling, D. B. "Coal fields of Jasper Park, Alberta". G.S.C. 

Sum. Rept. 1910, p. 150. 

30 . Dowling, D. B. "Geology of Roche Miette map area, Jasper 

Park, Alberta". G. S. C. Sum. Rept. 1911, p. 201. 

31 . Dov/ling, D. B. "Geological notes on the Sheep River gas and 

oil field, Alberta". G. S. C., Sura. Rept. 1913, 
pp. 142-149. 

32 . Bowling, D. B. "Geological notes to accompany map of Sheep 

River gas and oil field, Alberta". G. S. C. Mem. 52, 
1914. 













iv 


33• Bov/ling, D. B. "Goal fields of Maiiitoba, Saskatchewan, 
Alberta and eastern British Columbia", G. S. C. 

Mem. 53, 1914. 

34 . Dov/ling, D. B, "Southern Alberta". G. S. C. Sum. Kept. 

1914, pp. 43 - 5 . 

35* Dov/ling, D. B. "The Cretaceous sea in Alberta". Traiis. 

Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 5, sec. 4, pp. 27-42, 1915. 

36 . Dowling, D. B.; Slipper, 3. B. ; and IJcLearn, F. H. 

"Investigations in the gas and oil fields of Alberta, 
Saskatchewan and ilanitoba". G. S. C. Mem. 11 6 , 1919. 

37 . Bowling, D. B. "Bow river coal basin within the Rocky Mount¬ 

ains, Alberta". G. S. G. Sun. Rept. 1923, pt. B., 

pp. 63 - 86 . 

33 . Evans, C. S. "Some stratigraphic sections in the foothill 
region betv/een Bow and North Saskatchewan rivers, 
Alberta". G. S. C., Sura. Rapt. 1929, pt. B, 
pp. 25 - 36 . 


39. 

Evans 

, G. S., and Galey, J. F. "Reconnaissance survey of 
foothill area in Y/apiti River basin, Alberta". 

G. S. C., Sura. Rept. 1929, pt. 3, pp. 36-40. 

40. 

Hag a. 

G. C. "Wildcat Hills raap-area, east half, Alberta". 

G. S. G., Paper 40-2, 1940. 

1 —1 

Hume, 

G. S. "Turner Valley oil area, Alberta". G. S. C. Sum. 
Rept. 1926 , pt. B, pp. I-I 5 . 

42. 

Hume, 

G. S. "Oil prospects near Bragg Greek, Alberta". 

G. S. C, Sun. Rept. 1927, pt. B, pp. 1-21. 

43 . 

Hume, 

G. S. "Oil and gas in western Canada". G. S. C., Econ. 
Geol. series No. 5, 1928. 

44. 

Hume, 

G. S. "The Highwood-Juinpingpound anticline, with notes 
on Turner Valley, new Black Diamond and Priddis 
valley’- structures, Alberta". G. S. C. Sum. Rept. 



1929 , pt. B, pp. 1 - 25 . 

45 . 

Hume, 

G. S. "Oil prospects on the Fisher creek, Tvo-.Pine and 


Birch ridge structures, eastern foothills of Alberta". 
G. S. C. Sura. Rept. 1931, pt. B, pp. 39-58. 








V 


46. 

Hume, 

G. S. "Birch ridge structure, Alberta". G. S. G. 

Sum. Rapt. 1932, pt. D, pp. 68-74. 

47. 

Hume, 

G. S. "Oil and gas in western Canada. Second edition." 
G. S. C., Econ. Geol. series. Mo. 5, 1933. 

48. 

Hume, 

G. S. "The west half of Wildcat Hills map-area, Alberta 
G. S. C. Llera. 183, 1936. 

49. 

Hume, 

G. S. "Pakisko Hills area". G. S. G. Prel. Rept. 1, 
1937. 

50. 

Hume, 

G. S. "Turner Valley, Alberta". G, S. C. Prel. Rept. 
38-7, 1938. 

51. 

Hume, 

G. S. "The stratigraphy and structure of southern 

Turner Valley, Alberta". G. S. C. Prel. Rept. 

38-22, 1933. 

52. 

Hume, 

G. S. "The stratigraphy and structure of Turner Valley, 
Alberta". G. S. C. Prel. Rept. 39-4, 1939. 

53. 

Hume, 

G. S. "Stratigraphy and structure of Turner Valley, 
Alberta". Petroleum in Can., Suppl. Gan. Llin. Journ., 

1939, pp. 43-57. 

54. 

Hume, 

G. S. "The structure and oil prospects of the foothills 
of Alberta between Highwood and Bow rivers". 

G. S. C. Paper 40-8, 1940. 


55. Kindle, E, Li. "Standard Palaeozoic section of Rocky Llountains 

near Banff, Alberta". Pan-Am, Geol., Vol. 42, 

Sept. 1924, pp. 113-124. , 

56. Kindle, S. I;I. "The succession of fossil faunas in the 

eastern part of Jasper Park". Am, Jour. Sci., 

Vol. 13, pp. 190-1, 1929. 

57. Lambe, L. M. "Description of a nev; species of Platysomus 

from the neighbourhood of Banff, Alberta". Trans. 

Roy. Soc. Gan., Vol. 8, sec. 4, pp. 17-23, pi., 1914. 

58. Lambe, L, IJ. "Ganoid fishes from near Banff, Alberta". 

Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 10, sec. 4, pp. 35-44, 

1916 . 










VI 


59. Lamars, C. H, "Tho ori 2 in and correlation of the 

Cleverly congloraerato". Jourri, of Gaol., Vol. 47, 

No. 2, PI'. 113 - 132 , Feb.-'ar., 1939. 

60 . Landes, R. "Palaeontology of tho marine formations of tho 

Montana group'.' (Pt. II of Geology of tho southern 
Alberta plains by Russell, L. 5., and Landes, R. V.'.) 
G. S. C. Mom. 221, 1940. 


61 . 

Leach, 

W. ./. "Growsnest coal fields". G. S. C. 

1901 , pt. A., pp. 69 - 81 . 

, Sum. Rept 

62 . 

Leacli, 

V/. W. "The Blairmore-Frank coal fields". 
Sum. Rept. 1902, pp. I 69 -I 8 I. 

G. S. C. 

63 . 

Leach, 

W. V/. "Geology of Blairmo re Map-area, Alberta". 

G. S. C. Sum, Rapt. 1911, PP. 192-200. 

64. 

Leach, 

V/, W. "Blairmore Map-area, Alberta". G. 
Rept. 1912,' face p. 234. 

S. C. Sum, 

65. 

Leach, 

V/. \L "Burniis, Alberta, to Elko, British 

Columbia". 


12th Inter. Gool. Cong, Guide Book No. 9, Pi-- 22-24, 

1913. 


66. Link, T. A. "Alberta syncline, Canada". A. A. P. G., Bull., 

Vcl. 15 , No. 5, May 1931, pp. 491-507. 

67 . Macoun, J. "Geological and topographical notes on the lower 

Peace and Athabasca rivers". G. S. C. Rapt, of Prog. 
1875 - 76 , pt. V, Appendix 1, pp. 87-95, 1877. - 

68. MacKay, B. R. "Brule mines coal area, Alberta". G. S. C. 

Sum. Rept. 1928, pt. B, pp. 1-30. 

69 . MacKay, B. R. "Cadomin Sheet, Mountain Park Sheet". 

G. S. C. Map 208 A, Map 209A, Publn. Nos. 2157, 2158, 

1929. 

70 . MacKay, B. R. "Corbin coalfield, B. C." G. S. G. Sum. Rapt. 

1930 , pt. A., pp. 154 - 180 . 

71 . MacKay, 3. R. "Stratigraphy and structure of bituminous 

coalfields in the vicinity of Jasper Park, Alberta". 
Can, Inst, of Min. and Met., Trans. Vol. 33, 1930, 
pp. 1306 t1342. 








c 





i 








Vll 


72. LlacKay, B. R. '•Tho Mosozoic-Palaeozoic contact and 

associatad sadiraants, Crov/snost district, Alberta 
and British Columbia". G. S. C., Cum. Rapt. l‘>31> 
pt. B, up. 1-26. 

73* MacKay, 3. R. "Geology and coal deposits of Crov/snost ^jass, 
Alberta". G. S. C. Sun. Rept. 1932, pt. B, pp.21-60. 

74 . MacKay, 3. R. "Michel coal area, B. G., and Coleman South 

coal area, Alberta". G. S. C. Sum. Rapt, 1933> pt.B, 
pp. 1 - 32 . 

75 . MacKay, B. R. "Geological map of Cascade cool basin". 

G. S. C., Map 322A, 323A, Publn. Nos. 2382 ,-3,-4,-5. 

1933. 

76 . MacKay, B. R. "Fallentimber map-area, Alberta". G. S. C. 

Prel. Rept. 38-23, 1938. 

77 . IvIacKenzie, J. D. "South Fork coal area, Oldman river, 

Alberta". G. S. C. Sum. Rapt. 1912, pp. 235-247. 

78 . MacKanzie, J. D. "The Crowsnast volcanics". G. S. C. Llis. 

Bull. No. 4, Nov. 19 , 1914. 

79 . MacKanzie, J. D. "Geology of a portion of tha Flathead cool 

area, British Columbia". G. S. C. Mem. 87, 19l6. 

80 . MacKanzie, J. D. "The historical and structural geology of 

the southern-most Rocky mountains of Canada". 

Trans. Roy. Soc. Gan., Vol. I 6 , sec. 4, pp. 97-132, 
figs. 1-3, 1922 . 

81 . MacYicar, J. "Foothill coal areas north of the Grand Trunk 

Pacific railv/ay, Alberta". G. S. C. Sum. Rept. 

1916, pt. C, pp. 85-93. 

82 . MacVicar, J. "Goal areas northwest of Brule lake, Alberta". 

G. S. C. Sum. Rept. 1919, pt. C., pp. 8-13. 

83 . MacVicar, J. "Preliminary investigations of coal deposits 

on Smoky, Hay and Borland rivers, iilberta". 

G. S. G. Sum. Rept. 1923, pt. B, pp. 2 I- 63 . 

84. Malloch, G. S. "Bighorn coal basin, Alberta". G. S. C. Mem. 

93, 1911. 








Vxil 


85. rarshall, J. R. '‘Upper 31k rivar volley, B. G." G. S. C. 

Sun. Rapt. 1920, pt. B, pp. 7“11. 

86. laorsholl, J. R. "Kananaskis Lakes - Palliser river raap- 

area". G. S. C. Sun. Rept. 1921, pt. B, pp. 91-101, 

87 . McConnell, R. G. "Report on the geological structure of a 

portion of the Rocky mountains, accompanied by a 
section measured near the 5lst parallel". G. S. G. 
Ann. Rept. pt, D, I 886 . 

88. McConnell, R. G. "On a portion of the district of Athabasca, 

comprising the country between Peace River and 
Athabasca river". G. S. C. Ann. Rept. 1890-91> 

Vol. V, Pt. 1, pp. 27-45D, 52-54D. 

89 . Mc.3voy, J. "Geology and natural resources, of the country 

traversed by the Yellow Head Pass route". G, S, C. 
Ann. Rept. Vol. 11, pt. D, I 898 . 

90 . McSvoy, J. M. No title. G, S. G. Sum. Rept. 1900, pt. A, 

pp. 84 - 95 . 

91 . McLearn, F, H. "The Cretaceous sections on the Grov/snest 

river west of the Blairmore sheet, Alberta". G.S.C. 
Sum. Rept. 1914, pp. 62 - 63 . 

92 . McLearn, F. H. "Jurassic and Cretaceous, Grov/snest Pass, 

Alberta". G. S. C. Sum. Rept. 1915, PP. 110-112. 

93 . McLearn, F. H. "Peace River section, Alberta". G. S. G. 

Sum. Rept. 1917, pt. G, pp. 14-21. 

94 . McLearn, F. H. "Cretaceous lower Smoky river, Alberta", 

G. S. G. Sum. Rept, 1918, pt. C, pp. 1-7G. 

95 . McLearn, F. H. "New species of Pelecypods from the 

Cretaceous of Northern Alberta". G.S.C. !lis. Bull. 

29, 1919 . 

96 . McLearn, F. H. "Three new Pelecypods from the Goloradoeui 

of the Peace and Smoky valleys, Alberta". Gaii. Field 
Nat. Vol. 36 , No. 3, Liar. 1920, 00 . 53-56. 

97 . McLearn, F. H. "Mesozoic of upper Peace River, B. G." 

G. S. G. Sum. Rept. 1920, pt. B, pp. 1-7. 








i; 



' 1 ^ 


: 





1 



c 


< 




t ' < 



i 


< 


< 











ix 


93, IJcLearn, F, H. '‘Paaca Rivor canyon coal area, b. C." 

G. S. C. Sura. Rapt. 1">22, pt. B, pp. 1-4'/. 

99. I.'cLaarn, F. K. '’New Palocypcds from the Fernie fcrmticn of 
tha Altertn Juraaoic”. Trans. Roy. Soc. Gan., 

Yol. 18, sec. 4, pp. 39-61, pis. 1-9, 1924. 

100. I.'cLaarn, F. F. "New spocies from the Coloradoan of lov/er 

Smoky and lower Peace rivers, Alberta'*. C. S. 0. 

Nus. Bull. 42, 1926, pp. 117-126. 

101. McLearn, F. K. "Some Canadian Jurassic faunas". Trans. Roy. 

Soc. Can., Vol.. 21, sec. 4, pp. 67-73, 1927. 

102. LcLaarn, F. n., and Hume, G. S. "The stratigraphy and oil 

prospects of Alberta, Caiiada". Am. Ass. Pet. Geol. 
Bull. Vol. 11, No. 3, 1927, pp. 237 - 260 . 

103 . McLearn, F. H. "New Jurassic Ammonoidaa from the Fernie 

formation, Alberta". G. S. C. Mus. Bull. No. 49, 
pp. 19 - 22 , pis. 4-8, 1928 . 

104. McLearn, F. H. "Stratigraphic palaeontology in Mesozoic 

palaeontology of Blairnore region, Alberta". G.S.C. 

Mus. Bull. No. 58, pp. 80 - 117 , pis. 1 - 19 , 1929 . 

105 . McLearn, F. H.; Euckman, S. S.; Berry, E. V/. ''Mesozoic 

palaeontology of Blairnore region, Alberta'*. G.S.C. 
Lius. Bull. No. 58, 1929 . 

106 . McLearn, F. H. "Notes on some Canadian Mesozic faunas". 

Trans. Roy. Soc, Can. Vol. 24, sec. 4, pp. 1-13,' 1930. 

107 * McLearn, F. K. "A preliminary study of the faunas of the 
Upper Triassic Schooler Creek fomaticn, western 
Peace River, B. G." Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vol. 24, 
sec. 4, pp. 13 - 21 , 1930 . 

108 . McLearn, F. H. "The Gastroplites and other Lower Cretaceous 

faunas of tha northern great plains'*. Trans. Roy. 

Soc. Can. Vol. 25, sec. 4, pp. 1-7, pls. 1-2, 1931* 

109 . McLearn, F. H. "Three Fernie Jurassic Amnonoids'*, Trans. 

Roy. Soc. Gan. Vol. 26, sec. 4, pp. 111-117, 1932* 

110. McLearn, F. H. "Problems of the Lower Cretaceous of the 

Canadian Interior". Roy. Soc. Can. Trans. Vol. 26, 
sec. 4, pp. 157 - 177 , 1932 . 






1 











111. McLearn, F. K. "The aiiinonoid genera Gastroplites and 

Neogastrcplites". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vol. 27, 
sec. 4, pp. 13-24, pis. 1-4, 1933* 

112. McLearn, F. H. "The fossil zones of the Upper Cretaceous 

Alberta shale". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 31, 
soc. 4, pp. 111-120, 1937. 

113 . McLearn, F. H. "New species from the Triassic Schooler Creel: 

formation". Can. Field Naturalist, Vol. 5l, I'o. 7, 
pp. 95-98, Oct. 1937 . 

114. IfcLearn, F. K. "Contributions to the Triassic of Peace 

river, B. C." Can. Field Nat. Vol. 51, No. 9, 
pp. 127 - 131 , Dec. 1937 . 

115 . LIcLearn, F. H. "Some Ileo-Triassic Ammonoid faunas of the 

Peace river foothills, B. C." Gan. Field Nat. Vol. 53, 
No. 5, pp. 70 - 71 , Nay 1939. 

116 . IJcLearn, F. H. "Some species of the Ileo-Triassic genera 

Juvavites, Isculites, Sirenites, Himavatites, Cyrto- 
pleurites, Pterotoceras". Trans. Roy, Soc. Can. 

Vol. 33, sec. 4, pp. 51 - 57 , Pl. 1, 1939 . 

117 . McLearn, F. H. "Notes on the geography and geology of the 

Peace River foothills", Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. 

Vol. 34 , sec. 4 , pp. 63-75, 1940 . 

118 . Moore, P. D. "The stratigraphy of the Turner Valley field". 

Ms s. 


119 . Palliser, Capt. John "The journals, detailed reports, and 

observations relative to the exploration by Captain 
Palliser of that portion of British North America', 
wliich, in latitude lies between the British boundary 
line and the height of land or watershed of the 
northern or frozen ocean respectively, and in longi¬ 
tude, tetv;een the v/estern shore of Lalre Superior and 
the Pacific Ocean during the years 1857, 1858, 1859, 
and i 860 ". London, i860, 

120. Parejas, Sd. "Resultats da 1’expedition geologique de 

I'Universite de Harvard dans les Montagnos Rochouses 
du Canada {Jasper National Park 1924). Note No. 3* 
Sur la Trias de la vallee de 1'Athabaska". ilxtrait 
du Gompte Rendu des seances de la Societe de physique 
et d’historie naturelle de Geneve, Vol. 48, Ho. 2, 

1930 , pp. 60 - 67 . 









xi 

121. Raymcnd, P. il. "T\vc now fossil fishos frcu Altorta". 

Am. Jour. Sci. 5 serios, Vol. 10, o. 551, 1925. 

122. Roosido, J. B. Jr. ’’Sono funorican Jurassic ammcnitos of 

the genera Quenstodiceras, Cardiocoras, and Ainoobc- 
coras, Family Cardicceratidae". U. S. G. 5. Prof. 
Pap. 118, 1919. 


123 . 

Rosa, 

B. "Crowsnost coal field, Alberta". G. 5. C. Sum. 

Rept. 1916 , pp. 107-114. 

124. 

Rose, 

E. "Crowsnest and Flathead coal areas, B. C." G.S.C. 
Sum. Rapt. 1917., pt. G, po. 28-35. 

125 . 

Rose, 

B. "Northern part of Crowsnest coal field, Alberta". 

G. S. C. Sum. Rept. 1918, pt. G, pp. 13-17. 

126 . 

Rose, 

B. "Plighwood coal area, Alberta". G. S. G. Sum. Rapt. 
1919 , pt. G, pp. 14-20. 

127 . 

Russell, L. S. "Upper Cretaceous and Lower Tertiary Gastropoda 
from Alberta". Trans. Roy. Soc. Gan. Vol. 23, sec. 4, 


pp. 81-91, 1929. 

128. Russell, L, S. '*Mollusca from the Upper Cretaceous and Lower 

Tertiary of Alberta”. Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vol. 25, 
sec. 4, pp. 9-19, pis. 1-2, 1931. 

129. Russell, L. S. “The Cretaceous-Tertiary transition of Alberta”. 

Trans. Roy. Soc. Can, Vol. 26, sec. 4, op. 121-1')7, 

1932. 

130 . Russell, L. S. "Land and Sea moveraents in the late Cretaceous 

of western Canada”. Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vol. 33, 
sec. 4, pp. 81-99, 1939 . 

131 . Russell, L. S. and Landes, R. \'I. "Geology of the southern 

.llberta plains”. G. S. C. Lem. 221, 1940. 

132 . Rutherford, R. L. "Geology of the Foothills belt between 

McLeod and Athabaska rivers, Alberta". Sci. and Ind. 
Res. Council, Alberta, Rept, 11, 1925. 

133 . Rutherford, R. L. "Geology of the area between Athabaska and 

iSmbarras rivers". Sci. and Ind. Res. Conn. Alberta, 
Rept. No. 15 , 1926 . 

134 . Rutherford, R. L. "Geology along the Bow river between 

Cochrane and Kananaskis, Alberta”. Sci. and Ind. Res. 

Coun. Alberta, Rept. 17, 1927. 










« 


< 


< 











xii 

135 . Rutherford, R. L. ’’Geology of the area hetv/oon North 

Saskatcl'iewan and NcLood rivers, Alhorta". oci. and 
Ind. Res. Ccun. Alberta, Ropt. Ho. 19, 192'J. 

136 . Rutherford, R. L. "Geology and v/ater resources in parts of 

the Peace River and Grande. Prairie districts, Alberta" 
Res, Goun. Alberta, Rept. No. 21, 1930. 

137 . Rutherford, R, L. "Crystal habit of the orthoclaso in the 

Growsnest Volcanics at Coleman, Alberta". Univ. of 
Toronto Studies, Geol. Series, No. 41, pp. 67-68, 1938 

138 . Sanderson, J. 0. G. "Upper Cretaceous volcanic asli beds in 

Alberta". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vol. 25, sec. 4, 

pp. 61-70, 1931. 

139 . Sanderson, J. C. G. "Geology of the Brazeau area". Can. 

Inst. liin. Hat., Yol. 42, pp. 429-442, 1939. 

140. Schuchert, C. and Dunbar, C. 0. "Te:<tboolc of Geology. Part II 

Historical Geology". 3i’d edition. John 'Yiloy and 
Sens, Inc., 1933. 

141. Selv/jm, A. R. C. "Report on ey.ploration in British Columbia". 

G. S. C. Rept. of Prog., 1875-76, ?t. IV, pp. 28-86, 

1877. 

142. Shiiner, H. V/. "Lake Llinnev/anka section". G. S. C. Sum, Rept. 

1910 , pp. 145-149. 

143 . Shinier, K. W. "Upper palaeozoic faunas of the Lake Llinne- 

v/anka section, near Banff, AJ.berta". G. S. C. Bull. 
No. 42, 1926 , p. 4. 

144. Sinclair, J. H. "Cretaceous of Alberta, Canada". Geol. ooc. 

Am. Bull. 27, PP. 673-684, 1916 . 

145 . Slipper, S. ill. "Boring operations in southern Alberta". 

G. S. C. Sum. Rapt. 1915, PP. 116-120. 

146 . Slipper, S. S. "Sheep River gas and oil field, Alberta". 

G. S. G. L:em.*122, 1921. 

147 . Spieker, 3. M. "Tlie petroleum geology of a part of the 

western Peace River district, E. C." Am. Ass. Pet. 
Geol. Bull. Yol. 6; No. 2, pp. 112-138, 1922. 










xiii 


148. Stanton, F. V/. "The Colorado formation a)Ki its invertebrate 

fauna". U. S. Geol. Surv. Bull. lUu. 

149. Stanton, F. V/. "The Lov/er Cretaceous or Comanche series". 

Am. Jcurn. Sci. Vcl. l6, pp. 399-408, 1928. 

150 . Stev/art, J..S. "Gcal mines of v/est control Alberta". G.S.C. 

Sum. Kept. 1916, ^p. 44-lo6,. 

151 . Stewart, J. S. "Geology of the disturbed belt of scuthwost^orn 

Alberta". G. S. C. Mem. 112, 1919. 

152 . Stewart, J. S. "Oil and gas possibilities in northeastern 

British Columbia". G. S. C. Sum. Ropt. 1919, pt. C, 
pp. 3-8. 

153 . Telfer, L. "Phosphate in the Canadian Rockies", Gan, Inst. 

kUn. Met. Vol. 36, 1933, Pp. 566-6o5. 

154 . Warren, P. S. "Banff area, Alberta". G. S. C. lien. 153> 1927. 

155 . Warren, P. 5. "A new cycad from the Kootenay coal measures 

of Alberta". Trans. Roy. Soc. Gan., Vcl. 21, sec. 4, 
pp. 47 - 50 , pis. 1-2, 1927 . 

156 . Warren, P. S., and Rut,herford, R. L. "Fossil zcnes in the 

Colorado shale of xAlberta". Am. Jour. Sci., Vol. I 6 , 
pp. 129 - 136 , Aug. 1928 . 

157 . Warren, P. S. "Sedimentary record in the Rocky mountains at 

about the 5lst parallel". Gan. Field Nat., Vol. 43, 

pp. 23 - 27 , 1929 . 

158 . Warren, P. S. "Three nev/ ammonites from the Cretaceous of 

/Uberta". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vol. 24, sec. 4, 
pp. 21 - 26 , pis. 1-4, 1930 . 

159 . Warren, P. S. "Description of new species of fossils from 

parts of Peace river and Grande Prairie districts, 
Alberta". Res. Coun. Alberta, Rept. llo. 21, 

Append i7v. 1930. 

160 . W’arren, P. S. "A Lov/er Jurassic fauna from Fernie, B, C." 

Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vcl. 25, sec. 4, pp. 105-111, 

pi. 1, 1931 . 










161. 

162 . 

163 . 

164 . 

165. 

166 . 

167 . 

168 . 

169. 


170 . 

171. 

172 . 


xiv 


Warren, P. S. ’’A now palocypod fauna froi; the Foz'nio foriaation, 
Alberta". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vcl. 26, sec. 4, 
pp. 1 - 36 , pis. 1 - 5 , 1932 . 


V/arren, P, S. "Now Coloradoan species frcni upper Peace River, 
British Columbia". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vol. 27, 
sec. 4, pp. 109 - 119 , pis. 1-2, 1933 . 

V/arron, P. S. "Present status of the Fernio shale, Alberta". 
Am. Jour. Sci. Vol. 27, pp. 56-70, Jan. 1934. 


Warren, P. S. "Tv/o new fossil fish from the Canadian Rockies". 
Trans, Roy. Soc. Can. Vol. "^,0, sec. 4, op. 55-57, pi., 

1936. 


V/arren, P. S. "The Blairmore conglomerate and associated 

sediments". Trans. Roy. Can. Inst. No. 47, Vol. 22, 
pt. 1, Oct. 1938 . 


Warren, ?. S. "Age of the Selkirk and Rocky Mountain uplifts 
in Canada". Am. Jour. Sci. Vol. 36 , pp. 66-71, 

July 1938 . 


V/arren, P. S. "Sedimentation in the Cordilleran geosynclino 
in Alberta and British Columbia". Proc. 6th Pacific 
Congress, pp. 245-251, 1939. 


Warren, P. S., and Stelck, C. R. "Cenomanian and Turonian 
faunas in the Pouce Coupe district, Alberta and 
British Columbia". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vol. 34-, 
sec. 4, pp. 143 - 152 , pis. 1-4, 1940. 

Y/ebb, J. B., and Hertlein, L. G. "Zones in Alberta shale 

("Benton" group) in foothills of southwestern Alberta", 
Bull. A. A. P. G.. Vol, 18 , No. 11, pp. 1387-1416', 

1934. 

V/hiteaves, J. F. "Notes on some of the fossils collected 
during the e:ipedition". G. S. C. Rept. of Prog., 
1875 - 76 , Pt. VI, Appsndiic 2, pp. 96 -IO 6 , l877. 

Y/hiteaves, J. F. "The fossils of the Triassic rocks of 
British Columbia". G. S. C., Cont. to Gan. Pal, 

Vol. 1, pt. 2, pp. 127-149, 1889 . 

Y/hiteav 0 s, J. F. "(Fossils) from the Rocky mountains three 
miles north of the east end of Devil's lake". 

G.S.C. Cont. to Can. Pal, Vol. 1, pt. 2, pp.l63-172, 
pis. 22 - 23 , 1889 . 














XV 


173. V/liitoaves, J. F. "Notoc on the aninonitos of the Crotacecus 

rocks of the District of Athabasco, v/ith doDcripticn 
of four new species". Trans. Roy. Soc. Can. Vcl. 10, 
sec. 4, p^,.. 111-120, pis. 8-11, *1092. 

174. VTliitoaves, J. F. "Tlie Cretaceous systoni in Canada". Trans. 

Roy. Soc. Gan. Vol. 11, sec. 4, pp. 3-19) 1093. 

175. V*Tiiteaves, J. F. "Description of a species, of Cardioceras 

from the Crcv/snost coal fields". Ottawa naturalist, 
Vol. 17, p. 65. 1903. 

176 . VJhiteaves, J. F. ••Description of a Canadian species of 

Peltcceras". Ottawa naturalist, Vol. 21, Oo, 1907 

177 . V/illiams, L'. Y. and Bocock, J. B. "Stratigraphy and palaeon¬ 

tology of the Peace River valley of British Columbia" 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vcl. 26, sec. 4, om. 197-224, 

1932. 


APPENDIX TO BIBLIOGRAPHY 

178 . Allan, J. A. Sci. and Ind. Res. Council, Alberta, 6th 

Ann, Kept., Kept. No. 16, pp. 32-46, 1925. 

179 . Allan, J. A. and Sanderson, J. 0. G. "An Upper Cretaceous- 

Tertiary disconformity in Alberta'*, (Abstract) 

Bull., Geol. Soc. Am. Vol. 36 , p. I 6 I, 1925. 

180 . Allan, J. A. ajid Rutherford, R. L. "The stratigraphical 

horizon of Laosaurus minimus, Gilmore". Am. Jour. 
Sci., Vol. 24, pp. 225 - 227 , Sept. 1932. 

181 . Bell, W. A. '•A new Cretaceous conifer from the Blairmore 

series of Alberta". G.S.C., L4is, Bull. No. 49, p. 26 

1928. 

182 . Buckman, S. S. "The ’Kelloway Rock* of Scarborough" Geol. 

Soc. London, Quart. Jour., Vol. 69, pp. 152-168, 1913 

183 . Dawson, G. M. "Geological record of the Rocky mountain 

region in Canada" Geol. Soc. Am., Bull., Vol. 12, 

p. 74 , 1901 . 

184. Dowling, D, B. •’Coal fields of British Columbia" G.S.G., 

Mem. 69 , 1915 . 


















xvi 


185. Goodman, A. J. "The structure of Turner Valley gas field, 

Alberta" Can. Inst, of Min. and Met., Trans., Vol. 

31, PP. 307-356, 1931. 

186. McLearn, F. H. '^New Canadian Triassic a/nmonoids" Can. 

Field Nat., Vol. 54, No. 4, pp. 47-51, Apr. 1940. 

187 * McLearn, F. H. "Triassic of Beattie Hill, Peace river 

foothills, B. C." Can. Field Nat., Vol. 54, pp.79-82, 
Sept. 1940 . 

188 , McLearn, F. H. "Preliminary study of some Triassic pele- 

cypods and sunmonoids from the Peace river foothills, 

B. C." Can. Field Nat., Vol. 54, No. 8 , pp. III-II 6 , 
Nov. 1940. 

189 * McLearn, F. H. "Some new pelecypods from the Triassic of the 
Peace river foothills" Con. Field Nat., Vol. 53, 

No. 8 , pp. 118-120, Nov. 1940. 

190 . Shimer, H. W, "Spiriferoids of the Leike Minnev/anka section, 

Alberta" Gaol. Soc. Am., Bull., Vol. 24, pp. 233-239, 

1913. 

191 . Smith, J, P. "Lower Triassic ajmnonoids of North America" 

U.S.G.S., Prof. Paper 16?, 1932. 

192 . 7/arren, P. S. "Description of new species of fossils from 

parts of Peace River and Grande Prairie districts, 
Alberta" Res, Counc. of Alberta, Append!/, to 
Rept. No. 21, pp. 57-68, 1930. 










I 





^7 
























/<? <fCCoyn/>a/7y /'best's J>y //. Ku/7S/'^ /9‘^. 















B29748 









