

















For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 

( 3 % 












V\-S-00^ R>Wr- 




\ (3 Pv'('O 









Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/mitchell1913 


BERGSON 1 S THEORY OF MEMORY 


A Thesis 

Submitted to the Faculty 
Arts and Sciences of the University of Alberta 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements 
for the Degree of Master of Arts 

by 

EDWIN THOMAS MITCHELL 

1913 




CONTENTS 


Part I 

THE THEORY EXPLAINED 

Chapter Page 

1 Introduction... 1 

2 Space and Time,. ......... 6 

3 Matter and Spirit..,.,,. . 12 

4 Determinism and Free Will.. 18 

5 Brain and Perception. , .. 24 

6 Habit and Memory. 31 

Part II 

THE THEORY VERIFIED 

7 Recognition... 35 

8 Aphasia... 41 

9 Amnesia. 50 

10 The Unconscious... 56 

Part III 

THE THEORY CRITICISED 

11 The World of Images.... 61 

12 Stimulus* Activity* Perception. 67 

13 The theory of Pure Memory,. 78 

14 The Theory of Association. 90 

15 Conclusions....... 99 





























PART I 


THE THEORY EXPLAINED 








- 1 - 


BERGSON'S THEORY OF MEMORY 


Chapter I 
INTRODUCTION 


Every chapter of psychology ends with a confession 
of ignorance. The introspective psychologist accepts 
his own states of mind as facts, and records and an¬ 
alyses them, but ignores their physical basis and other 
relations. The physiological psychologist examines the 
nervous systems of men and animals to determine the 
relation of nerve processes to psychic life. He is 
able to affirm that "the law that some neural process 


accompanies every state of consciousness holds good of 

the higher as of the simpler states". But the Will 

■ 

by which we "seem to concentrate nervous energy from 

places of low potential into the place of highest 

2 

potential" is still largely a mystery to him. More¬ 
over he feels bound to postulate "an existent, an im¬ 
material being in which the separate neural processes 
produce their elementary affectations, which we have 
called the Soul." 1,5 It does not lie within his field 


1 MacDougal, Phy siological Psychology, p.l67, 

2 Ibid. ,p. 167. 3. Ibid., p. 168. 










1 






• • • ' . 


■ 












■ 


; ; ■ 




■ 






’ • 


. 




, 

' 























3 . 









, 





















- 2 - 


to discuss this Will and this Soul. He proclaims a 
sceptical agnosticism and says, "We do not know; let 
us find out". 

But an agnosticism of this kind is a difficult 
attitude even for a trained scientist and quite out 
of the question for the ordinary work-a-day man. James 1 
Will to Believe oame forward to fill the need of the 
hour. It points out that we cannot put off such moment¬ 
ous questions as the reality of Spirit, the freedom of 
the Will, the existence of God. We must live and do, 
and so we must act as if one or other of the alter¬ 
natives involved were true; in fact, to the extent 
to which an idea works out practically, it i£ true. 

On these grounds we are justified in acting on the 
faith that the valuable conceptions of God, freedom, 
and immortality are valid. 

James’ justification of faith or the "Right to 
Believe" in cases where complete scientific evidence 
is still lacking, bears some resemblance to Kant’s 
conclusion, though their methods of arriving at their 
conclusions are widely different. Kant denies that 
we can have knowledge of things in themselves, and 
limits science to the sphere of nature or phenomena. 

But while we can never know, mor ality only requires 








. 






. 


. 


- 







- 

















. 

























- 3 - 


us to be able to think freedom without self-contra¬ 
diction; not to understand it”. 1 The freedom of the 
will can never be scientifically demonstrated, because 
"in its visible acts as a phenomena it is not free , 
but necessarily subject to the law of nature, while 
yet, as belonging to a thing in itselfl it is not sub¬ 
ject to that law but is free”. 2 Thus, while freedom is 
beyond the possibility of scientific demonstration, it 
is not self-contradictory, but on the contrary it is a 
necessary postulate of morality and can be given a 
transcendental proof. "I have, therefore,” Kant says, 

"found it necessary to deny knowledge of God, freedom, 

3 

and immortality, in order to find a place for faith". 

Thus the scientist professes an agnosticism regard¬ 
ing the immaterial; the Kantian acknowledges the limit¬ 
ations of human knowledge and elevates the sphere of 
faith; and the pragmatist confesses the present insuf¬ 
ficiency of ‘the results of science, believes in its 
continuous achievement, but while awaiting evidence 
he justifies the right to believe . 

Bergson comes confessing neither ignorance nor the 
limitations of knowledge; he neither professes agnos¬ 
ticism nor leaves anything to unnecessary faith. The 

1. Watson, Selections from Kant., p.6, 

2. Ibid..p.6. 3. Ibid..p.6. 


























. 



























' 












. 

. 

' 

















- 4 — 


first lines of hie Introduction to "Matter and Memory" 

are: "This book affirms the reality of spirit and the 

reality of matter, and tries to determine the relation 

of one to the other by the study of a definite example, 

that of memory". 1 His conclusion to "Time and Free 

Will" is: "Freedom is therefore a fact, and among the 

2 

facts we observe there is none clearer". In the 

"Creative Evolution" we find the following suggestive 

remark: "Indeed, maturity and old age are,properly 

speaking, attributes only of my body; it is only 

metaphorically dpes&lxgg- that I apply the same names to 

3 

the corresponding changes of my conscious self". 

Equally suggestive is the statement in "Matter and 
Memory": "That which is commonly held to be a disturb¬ 
ance of the psychic life itself, an inward disorder, 
a disease of personality, appears to us,from our point 
of view, to be an unloosening or breaking of the tie 
whidh binds the psychic life to its motor accompaniment". 
It is but a deduction from these statements to the con¬ 
clusion that the psychic life can and does survive the 

death of the material body. Indeed Bergson is widely 

■ 

popular for his apparent support of this doctrine. 

-T—-—-=-■ —-■------■ ——-- -—------- - — —---■ — 

1.Bergson, Matter and Memory,vii 
2 2. Bergsbn, Time and Free Will, 221. 

3. Bergson, Creative Evolution, 16. 

4. Bergson, Matter and Memory, xv 

















: 



■ 

\ : 




. 





. 















: ' 

. 

. 

' ' ' 

■ 

■ 

. 




. 







- 5 - 


It should be interesting, therefore, to see how 
Bergson arrives at these conclusions. If it be 
objected that we should confine ourselves to the 
more limited problem of Bergson’s Theory of Memory, 
it must be borne in mind that memory occupies the 
important position of being at the intersection of min 
mind and matter. His theory of memory is, therefore, 
central in his whole philosophy. Memory,according 
to Bergson, is a definite example exhibiting the 
relation of body and spirit, so that, wrapped up in 
the problems of memory are all the problems of mind 
and matter, freedom and determinism, time and space, 
asrwell as perception, retention, and recollection. 

The plan of the study shall be; (l)how he develops 
his theory of memory; (2)the evidence by which he 
seeks to verify his theory; and (3) a criticism and 
reconstruction of his theory. 



















■ 





















. 


. 



. 










• 





0-:- ^ ' 




•• 




















. 











• 










l v 

/ • 


• 





— 6 — 

Chapter II 
SPACE AND TIME 

Bergson’s theory of space is very similar to that 
of Kant, for what he calls an intuition amounts to 
about the same as what Kant calls an a priori form of 
perception. Like Kant, also, he associates the con¬ 
cept of space with that of number. We teach number, he 
says, by means of objects. The balls or other objects 
set side by side on the table are narrowed down to 
points side by side in space. Whenever we really think 
of the number five, for instance, we conceive it spati¬ 
ally. In fact, the law that two bodies cannot occupy 
the same space at the same time is not so much a physic¬ 
al as a logical necessity; it would be contradicting 
the meaning of -4w0 to have them occupy the same space. 

This gives a clue to the nature of space. n For 
coexistence to give rise to space, there must be an 
act of the mind which takes them all in at the same 
time and sets them in juxta-position; this unique act 
is very like what Kant calls an a priori form of sens¬ 
ibility. ..... If we seek to characterize this act we see 
that it consists essentially of the intuition, or rather 
the conception, of an empty, homogeneous medium. For 
it is scarcely possible to give any other definition 







<Lv.'.A kC; 





■ 






- 



- 










. 















■ 


, 


■ 


■ 



. 


- 7 - 


of space; space is what enables us to distinguish a 
number of identical and simultaneous sensations from 
one another; it is thus a principle of differentiation 
other than qualitative differentiation, and hence it is 
a reality with no quality.” 1 Space,then, is the 
intuition of a medium, homogeneous,infinitely divisible, 
and non-qualitative. It is purely quantitative. 

Time is quite a different matter. To measure 
time arithmetically is to apply number to it, and 
number, as we have seen, applies properly only to 
simultaneity in space. What we constantly do is to 

apply spatial measurements to time and represent time 

■ 

by space, but this is a fallacy. We measure time by 
the distance the hands of a clock have travelled, and 
we represent time by a line or chain. 

It is Kant as well as the astronomers and the 
physicists that Bergson is criticising here; for Kant 
explained time as the form of sensibility by which we 
arrange the sensible maAifold in a”continuous line or 
chain”. This confusion of time with space, Bergson 
says, has always given rise to serious difficulties. 
Heraclitus, Parmenides, Anaxagoras of old, Kant and 
1. Bergson, Time and Free Will , p.94. 

% V 






- 8 ~ 

all the scientists of modern times, have found this 
their stumbling block. No one has yet satisfactorily 
explained time and motion. Some have denied motion, 
some have postulated it, but the paradoxes of the 
Eleatics have come down to us unexplained. 

The confusion consists in substituting for the 
motion itself, the space traversed by the moving bo#y. 
To be sure, the successive positions of the moving body 
do occupy space, but the process by which it passes 
from ohe position to the other has no reality apart 
from a conscious spectator . Motion is not an object, 
but a process, and "in so far as it is a passage from 
one point to another it is a mental synthesis , a 
psyc hic, and therefore an unextended process. 111 

must, therefore, distinguish the two elements in 
motion —the space traversed and the process involved. 
f1 The first of these elements is a homogeneous quantity; 
the second has no reality except in consciousness 11 .^ 

In contrast to Kant*s "continuous line or chain" 
Bergson*s time is a process or an act. "Within myself 
a process of organization or interpenetration is 
going on which constitutes true duration." 1 2 3 


1. Time and Free Will, p.110 

2. Ibid., pll2. 

3. Ibid..p.113 











- 

■; ! s ' ' ' ' ■ ■' 

■ 

' 

' ‘ 

# 

I 

f \ ' ■ 

. 











- 9 - 

And now, Bergson thinks, we can solve Zeno* 3 
riddles. How can Achilles overtake the tortoise? 

Never if we consider space alone, for space is infin¬ 
itely divisible and there are an infinite number of 
positions between two points. And if time can be 
represented by space it is again a mathematical 
impossibility for the same reason. "But the truth is 
that each of Achilles* steps is a single indivisible 
act, and that after a given number of these acts, 
Achilles will have passed the tortoise**. 1 

Bergson sums up his theory of true duration is 
these words: **Below homogeneous duration, which is 
the extensive symbol of true duration, a close 
psychological analysis distinguishes a duration whose 
heterogeneous movements permeate one another; below 
the numerical multiplicity of consciousness, a qualit¬ 
ative multiplicity; below the self with well defined 
states, a self in which succeeding eachother means 
melting into one another, and forming an organic 
whole". 2 

One would be forced to conclude from the expos¬ 
ition in Time and Free Will that time was purely a 


1. Bergson, Time and Free Will, p.113 

2. Ibid.,p.128 









- 

- 










. 

, 

\ 

. 






* 


■ 



























. 






- 10 - 


mental synthesis or a process of "organization of 

consciousness". This, however, is not his full 

meaning. In "Creative Evolution" we find a wider 

application of the word as the following quotations in 

indicate. "The universe endures . The more we stud# 

the nature of time the more we shall comprehend that 

duration means invention, the creation of forms, the 

continual elaboration of the absolutely new". 1 2 3 "Bike 

the universe as a whole, like each conscious being 

taken separately, the organism which lives is a thing 
2 

that endures ". "Wherever anything lives, there is, 

open somewhere, a register in which time is being 
3 

inscribed"• 

Time, then, is not only peculiar to human mind 
and consciousness, but to mind and consciousness in 
every form, and not only to mind and consciousness in 
the narrower sense of these terms, but to life in its 
widest application. Time, therefore, is identical 
with the process of Becoming, the activity of the 
Elan Vital. Time must always be associated with life 
and consciousness, and vice versa. "We were right" 
he says in the concluding chapter of "Matter and Mem- 

1. Bergson, Creative Evolution , p.ll 

2. Ibid, p.16 

3. Ibid. p.17 










. 

■ 

, 

. 

. 

■ 





. 







- 11 - 


ory", ’’when we said at the beginning of the book; 
that the distinction between body and mind must 
be established in terms not of space but of time”, 1 
This being the case the concept of time is ess 
essential to the problem of memory,; for memory 
partakes of the nature of body or matter on the one 
side, and mind or life on the other. The general 
conceptions of matter and life will be considered 
next. 




p.294 


1 .Bergson, latter and_Memory 


j 


























i '~" ■ 





■ 

■ 

■ -i y 











■ 









- 12 - 


Chapter III 
MATTER AND LIFE 

The dualism of quantity and quality, space and 
time, is carried through Bergson’s whole philosophy. 
This dualism is especially marked in his theory of 
matter and life where inert matter and the vital 
impulse are spoken of as the inverse of eachother. 
"Life is a movement, matter is the inverse movement". 1 
He usually pictures life as an upward movement, and 
matter as a downward movement, though "as far as 
matter is concerned we may neglect the flowing with¬ 
out serious error". 2 He therefore describes life as 
a stream flowing through and around the obstructions 
of the land; or as the ocean waves flowing through 
aninto the bays, inlets, and straits of the rocky 
coast; or as the upward striving of a jet of steam 
through the obstructions of the condensing cloud of 
vapor. 

Though inert matter and the vital impulse are 
the inverse of eachother in every respect it is not 
necessary to assume that they have separate origins. 
Bergson’s theory is that they are derived from an 

1. Bergson, Oreative'Evolution, p.263. 

2. Ibid. p.103. 
























. 


' 

. 

■ 


. ■ 

■ 

. 



























. 











- 14 - 


an original impulse which had a definite point of 
origin. The best illustration he can give is that of 
a jet of steam from the crack in the boiler of an 
engine.^ The impulse forces it in a strong upward str 
stream but it condenses into drops and falls back 
like rain. The upward motion represents life; the 
inversion and downward motion represents matter. 
Bergson warns us not to carry the simile too far but 
merely wishes to illustrate how opposite motions and 
opposite characteristics may be derived from a single 
source and impulse! 

The vital impulse started as a single impulse 

but has taken divergent directions as it progressed. 

He likens it to an explosive shell which travels 

through the air for a time and then bursts into 

fragments. Each fragment must also be considered as 

an explosive unit which again explodes * and so on 
2 

indefinitely. "When a shell bursts, the particular 
way in which it breaks is to be explained both by 
the explosive force of the powder it contains and by 
the resistance of the metal. So the way of life 
breaks into individuals and species. It depends, we 
think on two series of causes; the resistance life 

"ff^Bergson, Creative Evolution, p.103 
2. Ibid., p.2S3. 


















. 

_ 






V 

- 
























- 15 - 


meets from inert matter and the explosive force __ 

due to an unstable balance of tendencies—— which life 
bears within itself“. ^ Or, using the simile of the 

stream, he tries to show how how it has divided itself 
into the diverging forms and species. "In reality- 
life is a movement, materiality is the inverse move¬ 
ment, and each of these two movements is simple, the 
matter which forms the world being an undivided flux, 
and undivided also the life which runs through it 

2 

cutting out in it living beings all along the track". 

As the vital impulse encounters matter it thus 
organizes it into living forms, and in doing so it 
divides and takes diverging paths. The time honored 
theory had been that plants have arisen from the 
inorganic world, animals from plant life, and finally 
man from the higher animals. "The cardinal error which 
from Aristotle onwards has vitiated most of the phil¬ 
osophies of nature has been to see in vegetative, 
instinctive, and rational life three successive 
degrees of one and the same tendency,” Bergson 1 2 s 
view would make them the three main highways of a 
diverging impulse. Ke criticises the evolutionary 

1. Bergson, Creative Evolution , p.103 

2. Ibid., p.263 

° Ibid., p.136. 














- 






. 





■ 


r . 







' 





. 


' 


■ . 

. 

















- 16 - 


theories of Laraark, Darwin, Eimer, and others on 
this ground. Evolution, he shows, has not been a 
continuous, one-line development, but a discontin¬ 
uous manjf-lined process. "Animals and vegetables 
must soon have separated from the common stock, the 
vegetables falling asleep in immobility, the animals 
on the contrary becoming more and more awake and 

marching on to the conquest of a nervous system.? 

The evolution of the animal kingdom, apart from re¬ 
gressions towards vegetative life, has taken place 
in two divergent paths one of which led to instinct, 
the oth£r to intelligence... f 2?..The evolution of the 
arthropods reached its culminating point in instinct, 

particularly in the hymenoptera, as that of the 

3 

vertebrates in man". 

Evolution is not even necessarily a progress at 
all. "In many cases we observe a marking time, and 
still more often a deviation or turning back". In 
fact, failure has been the rule. The shell of the 
mullusc and the carapace of the crustacean gave them 
protection but at the cost of futther progress and 
with the penalty of partial torpor. 

1. Bergson, Creative Evolution, p.136 

2. Ibid.,p.141. 

3. Ibid. ‘ p. 109 . See also pp.138 - 139. 










. 

. 


... 





. 

i 


. 






. 














• 



. 






. 









- 17 — 


At one point alone the current has been able to 
flow smoothly and freely. "From our point of view 
life appears in its entirety as an immense wave which, 
starting out from a centre, spread outwards, and which 
on almost the whole of its circumference is stopped 
and is converted into oscillations: at a single point 
the obstacle has been forced, the impulsion has passed 
freely. It is this freedom that the human form registers. 
Everywhere but in man consciousness ahs come to a stand; 
in man alone it has kept on its way". 

In man’s triumphant march Bergson sees no necessary 
limitation. He concludes his section on the meaning of 
evolution with this inspiring picture. "All the living 
hold together and all yield to the same tremendous push. 
The animal takes its stand on the plant, man bestrides 
animality, and the whole of humanity in space and in 
time, is one immense army, galloping beside and before 
and behind each of us in an overwhelming charge, able 

to beat down every resistance and clear the most 

. 

formidable obstacles, perhaps even death"* 1 2 


1. Bergson, Creative Evoluti on, p.280. 

2. Ibid., p.286. 












. 
























. 




' 




' 




■ 


' 


■ 

























- 18 - 


Chapter IV 

DETERMINISM AND FREEDOM 

The relation of inert matter to the vital impulse 
is exhibited in a special manner by the human body and 
mind,representing as man does, the highest attainment 
of life, yet cumbered as he is with materiality. Liken - 
ing life to a rising wave Bergson says: "At one point 
alone it passes freely, dragging with it the obstacle 
which will weigh on its progress but will not stop it. 

At this point is humanity; it is our priveleged situ¬ 
ation.... The matter which it bears along with it and 
in the interstices of which it inserts itself, alone 
can divide it into distinct individuals. On flows the 
current, running through human generations, subdividing 
itself into individuals.... Thus souls are being continu¬ 
ally created, which,nevertheless, in a certain sense, 
pre-existed. They are nothing else than the little 
rills into which the great river of life divides itself"?' 

Bergson then goes on to indicate how the two are 
distinct, yet mutually determine eachother. "The 
movement of the stream is distinct from the river bed, 
although it must adopt its winding course. Consciousness 
is distinct from the organism although it must 

l.Bergs'on, Creative Evolution . p.284. 















\ ' 

■ 





- . , » 

id? 

.... 




. 
























- 19 - 


undergo its vicissitudes", 1 Hence we have a free 
and vital impulse at the basis of the nervous and 
cerebral mechanism; but "the destiny of consciousness 
is not on that account bound up with that of cerebral 
matter".^ 

This doctrine gives Bergson his conception of 
mechanism and freedom, the subject to which his book, 
"Time and Free Will" is devoted. The book precedes 
"Creative Evolution" but the fundamental dualism is 
evident from the first. Just to the extent to which 
we are ruled by habit, by association of ideas, and by 
chains of reason we are mechanistic; in so far as our 
actions are the expression of the deep seated and 
spontaneous vital impulse which is our true self we 
are free. 

"Our perceptions, sensations, emotions, and ideas" 

he says, "occur under two aspects; the one clear and 

precise but impersonal; the other confused, ever 

changing, and inexpressible, because language cannot 

3 

get hold of it without arresting its mobility". 

The former is the intellectual aspect which breaks up 
the flow of consciousness and expresses it in language. 


1. Bergson, Creative Ev olution, p.285. 2. Ibid., p.285 

3. Bergson, Time and Free Will , p.129. 













, 










' 














■ 















- 


■ 




I 
































- 20 - 


The function language is just to break up the 
stream of consciousness or to grasp sections of it. 

The more deep and inexpressible aspect is the instinct¬ 
ive or intuitive self. It is the more complete and 
the more continuous interpenetrating of consciousness* 
This is illustrated by the fact that the beliefs to 
which we most strongly adhere are those of which we 
would find it most difficult to analyse and explain. 1 
What makes them valuable in our eyes is th&t they 
match the general color of all the rest of our ideas# 

These deep-seated conscious states have no relation to 
quantity; they are purely qualitative, it is only in 

proportion as we get away from the deeper strata of 
the self that the conscious states tend to assume a 
numerical multiplicity. At the same time they tend 
to become more and more impersonal and more and more 
capable of being expressed in language. 

The laws of the association of ideas and the 
principles of mechanism apply to the superficial 
aspect of consciousness, but not to the deep-seated 
self. It is characteristic of the intellect to seek 
series of associations and chains of reasons, but it 
does 50 t_follow_that_these_fqrm__the_true_explapation„_ 

Bergson, Time and Free Will , p.136. 












.; ■ , . -r t ia^r\acrc.'i'.feten .»o /: > 0 

. • ■,.■ 5 ... r : ■ r-7. ■■■:■■ . j • r” v: /a •'■•* :0" 

. 


■ ^ *•* . ■ ' . 

. ■ -38-c >i> 

.. , .ivitrtXl*:. " -v.cr.; '>■- ^ lUu ' 

' 

, , o • rvr >7 J'uoioeaoo srii jsj- 1x58 ® 

- ■. 1 ^. 

• ©*:'?• ©a 

,. r ., * , * < . >per:-IK ^0 . to *oen 

. 



- 21 - 


of our actions. We often find ourselves carefully 
weighing motives and deliberating over consequences 
when our mind is already made up as to our course of 
action. We find ourselves defending our beliefs on 
rational grounds when we really hold them because they 
are part of us. We find ourselves calling up a chain 
of antecedents to account for an action th&t has already 
taken place. Observations such as these indicate that 
that association of ideas may be merely an ex post facto 
attempt to account for an action. In reality, however, 

■ 

"between successive conscious states there exists a 
difference of quality which will always frustrate any 


attempt to deduce any one of them a priori from its 



The superficial, intellectual aspect of conscious 
life is partially subject to the laws of the association 
of ideas. Our every day acts usually obey these laws, 
in which cases we act as mere "conscious automatons". 

"It is to these acts, numerous but insignificant, that 

p 

the associationist theory applies". "Here will be 
found within the fundamental self, a parasitic self 
continually encroaches upon the other. Many 

1. Time and F ree Will , p.27 

2. Ibid., p". 167. ' 












- 33 - 


live this kind of a life and die without ever knowing 
true freedom. 

True freedom will consist in acting according 
our whole self, but particularly according to our 
deep seated intuitive impulse. He illustrates his 
meaning extremely well in the following extended 
quotation: "When our most trustworthy friends agree 

in advising us to take some important step, the 
sentiments which they utter with so much insistence 
lodge on the surface of our ego and there get solid¬ 
ified in the same way as the idea of which we spoke 
just now. Little by little they will form a thick 
crust which will cover up our own sentiments. We shall 
believe that we are acting freely and it is only by 
looking back to the past, later on, that we shall see 
how much we were mistaken. But then,-at the very 
minute when the act was going to be performed, some¬ 
thing may revolt against it. It is the deep-seated 
self rushing to the surface. It is at the great and 
solemn crises, decisive of our reputauio$ with others, 
and yet much more with ourselves, that we choose in 
defiance of what is conventionally called a motive, 
and this absence of any tangible reason is the more 
striking the deeper our freedom goes." 

1. Time and Free Will , p. 166. £. Ibid.,p.169. 




















. 

















* 




































. 













■ 






. 

r ■; 1 .. > r 








. 


• ■;' t ■ 'T 













■ 






. . >a r ’ ac •• • '' 



-23- 


11 It is the deep-seated self rushing to the surface. 
It is the outer crust bursting, suddenly giving way to 
an irresistible thrust. Hence, in the depth of our 
self, below the most reasonable pondering, over the 
most reasonable pieces of advice, something else was 
going on —a gradual heating,, and a sudden boiling 
overof feelings and ideas, not unperceived but un¬ 
noticed. If we turn back to them and carefully 
scrutinize them in memory we shall see that we had 
ourselves shaped these ideas, ourselves lived these 
feelings, but that through some strange reluctance 
to exercise our will we had thrust them back into the 
darkest depth of our soul whenever they came to the 
surface. nl 

The action which has been performed in this case 
does not express some superficial association, but it 
agrees with the whole of our most intimate feelings, 
thoughts, and aspirations. This type of action, when 
it expresses our who&e personality and inner life, jLs 
true freedom. 


1. Bergson, Time and Free Will , p.169. 





- 






. 




















. , ■ t ■ - ■ 













X. : ,! ■ ' V 




















-24- 


Chapter V 

BRAIN AND PERCEPTION 

The relation between mind and brain, soul and 
body, spirit and matter has been the source of 
endless controversy. Most thinkers have ranged 
themselves under the heads idealists and realists. 
Bergson points out tuat the beginning of their 
differences lies in their conceptions of matter. 

The idealists ho;d that matter has no existence 
outside the play of representations within the 
mind. The realists make matter the fundamental 
thing outside of which there is no life or mind. 
Bergson thinks that he has settled the controversy. 
"Matter in our view is an aggregate of iimages*, and 
by Image* we mean a certain existence which is more th 
than what the idealist calls a representa tion, and 
less than what the realist calls a thing - -an exist¬ 
ence placed half way between the 5 ! thing? and the 
!representa tion". 1 

Now the brain is only one image among all the 
other images which constitute the universe; it is 

1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , vii^viii. 

























-25- 


part of the material world. .If the brain by its 
disturbances created the world as the idealists 
hold, then by eliminating the brain together with 
its movements the whole universe would be wiped out. 

Nevertheless there is a difference between my 
body and the rest of the universe. As a rule any 
im&ge influences other images in a way which is 
determined and even calculated through what are 
called the laws of nature. My body, on the other 
hand, though like other images it receives and 
gives back movement, yet unlike the rest of the 
world it seems,within certain limits, to choose the 
manner in which it shall react. 1 The body, in 
short, is a priveleged image in that it chooses its 
reaction among the possible ones , and thus exerts 
what Bergson calls a r eal infl u ence . 

What determines this choice is the advantage 
which it may derive from the surrounding images. 

Thi3 implies that the images display in some way 
the advantage which my body may derive from them. 

My perception of a body is just the totality of my 
possible reactions upon it. Distant objects are 

1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.4-5. 






















•• .-r- : 




, ,J( - r-o . - 7 ^ ■ -• ■ >•: 










: r u-, - ■ • ■ '.' 7 ■ -7 » ' r " 





. • 7- r.v, ;; - . , - . -w- f.r»* 


, ■' ': •; - " 






■ 




. 7770 


. 



' 

, • : . . vV : . ■ 

•.'( . .cv • • r i: - \ ! t- : 

. 




■26- 


vague and indifferent; they have but little interest 
for me because they are beyond the range of my 
activity. Those near stand out clearly in their 
size, shape, color, and movement; these qualities 
represent my possible actions of touch and movement. 

My body, being a priveleged image can choose among 
the many possible actions or simply not react at all. 

Stimilus, perception, and reaction are, there¬ 
fore ; closely associated. Indeed, they are parts of 
one complete act. If the stimulus received were 
immediately prolonged into action there would be no 
perception —it would be unnecessary. In the lower 
forms of animal life it is probable that the processes 
of perception and movement are barely distinguished; 
the same prolongations of protoplasm which touch the 
prey mechanically envelope it . Here touch is active 
and passive at almost the same time. "But in the 
measure that the reaction becomes more uncertain, 
and allows more room for suspense, does the distance 

increase at which the animal is sensible of the action 

1 

of that which interests it”. Sight, hearing, and 
smell bring it into relation with more distant images. 

1. Bergson, Matter and Memory, p.22. 









-27- 


At the same time it postpones action making it more 
uncertain, more indeterminate. "Perception is master 
of space in the exact measure in which action is 
master of time". 1 

Thwfc is a wide difference between an object 
being present and being perceived. In the first case 
the image is present, that is, it is bounded by the 
other images and conditioned by them; in the other 
case only the phases of it which interest the agent 
are re-presented. One can conceive of a pure 
perception in which the total image present would 
be re-presented in consciousness, but such a per¬ 
ception exists only in theory. "That which distingu¬ 
ishes it as a present image is the necessity which 
obliges it to act through every one of its points 
upon all the points of all other images, to transmit 
the whole of what it receives, to oppose to every 
action an equal and contrary reaction, to be, in 
short, merely a road by which pass, in every direction, 

the modifications propagated throughout the immensity 
2 

of the universe." Now if perception were a mirror 
it would re-present the toti,l image by reflecting all 

1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.23. 

2. Ibid., p. 28, 









' 























. 






. 

■ 












. 








. 








. 







-28- 


the rays of light. But perception reflects only 
those rays upon which the subject can react, only 
those which the image can influence. This means 
a spontaneity, an indeterminism, a power of choice. 
"Our representation of things would thus arise from 
the fact that they are thrown back and reflected by 
our freedom". 1 

The question now is, how is it possible that 
my body is a prftveleged image, and how is it possible 
that it exhibits this freedom? Sever the afferent 
nerves of the cerebro-spinal chord and perception 
vanishes; the body ceases to be priveleged. The 
section of those nerves has only one intelligible 
effect; that is to interrupt the nerve current which 
goes from periphery to periphery by way of the brain, 
and yet it has by its severance destroyed perception. 

It is commonly supposed that the brain in some 
way provides for the connection between the nervous 
system and perception. But the difference between the 
spinal chord is merely one of complication. In the 
spinal chord the incoming current is reflected at 
once into a definite motor teact; in the second case 
..Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.39 










-29- 


the excitation mounts to the brain and descends 

again to the motor cells of the spinal chord. "I 

do not understand", says Bergson, "I shall never 

understand that it draws thence a miraculous power 

of changing itself into a representation of things, 

and moreover I hold this hypothesis to be useless 

as shall shortly appear".^ 

What, then, is the function of the brain if it 

is not to produce representations? No light would be 

thrown on the question by watching the minute movements 

that take place between cell and cell or within the 

cell plasm. We would only see a highly complex system 

of tracts for conducting excitement. "In our opinion, 

then, the brain is no mare than a kind of central 

telephone exchange; its office is to allow communication 
2 

or delay it." The excitation may concentrate in any 

particular channel, or it may dissipate itself in 

innumerable nascent movements. The office of the 

brain seems to be limited to the transmission and the 

division of movement, and with this peculiarity that 

it permits the stimulation to "reach at will this or 

that motor mechanism of the spinal chord and so to 

3 

choose its effect." 

1. Bergson, Matter and Memory, p.19. 

2. Ibid.,p.19. 









-30- 


The nervous system, then, is in no sense an 
apparatus which can serve to fabricate or even prepare 
representations. Its function is limited to that of 
selecting, on the basis of interest, from the total 
present of the world of images, and, as we shall see, 
from the total past of the world of memory. But as 
a mere mechanism, the brain can be no more than the 
machine by means of which our freedom thus realises 
itself. The mechanism can receive movements and 
prepare movements in this special, selective manner 
only if it is the agent of a vital, free, and spontan¬ 
eous individuality. 

Two problems, therefore, present themselves: 
whence tfeis choice whjch we have observed, and whence 
these representations if they are not the product of 
the brain? The answer leads us directly into the 
problem of memory. 


























- v ; ... ■ . - ■ ■' " ;J ‘ 


■ c . . 




# • 








.... J. • .. . 






. .. . . ■ 

. . ....s • r "' ■■■■'• -' 







-31 


Chapter VI 
HABIT AND MEMORY 

Bergson has now sufficiently emphasised the 
supposition that the body with its nervous system 
can receive* transmit* or disperse motion* but can¬ 
not possibly give rise to representations or memory 
images. It is quite conceivable* however* that in the 
form of motor mechanisms* it can store up the action 
of the past. Images of the past* however* must be 
stored up otherwise. He therefore formulates this 
hypothesis as the foundation of his theory of 
memory: "The past su rvives under two distinct for ms: 
first , in motog mechanisms; , secondly* i n i ndependent 
recollections. nl 

The two forms of memory can be distinguished 
in any case of memorising. A person* for example* 
learns a poem by heart, i.e. by successive repititions 
the words become more and more linked together till 
they become a continuous whole. The memory of the 
poem in this case has all the marks of habit —it is 
acquired by successive repititions of the same effort* 

1. Bergson* Ma tter and Memor y, p. 07 . 





















- 

, 

' 









■ • 

. 

■ ■■ - ■' 






* 

. .. . 






-33- 


n and it is stored up in a mechanism which is set in 
motion as a whole by an initial impulse”. 1 This 
memory, in short, is a habit depending upon a cereb¬ 
ral mechanism, and it belongs to the world of materi¬ 
ality, causality, and automoty. 

But this is not all. Not only can the person 
remember the poem as a whole, but he can remember 
each successive repitition. Each successive reading, 
while it renders the poem more familiar, also stands 
out by itself as a separate experience, ”is entirely 
sufficient to itself, subsists exactly as it occurred, 
and constitutes with all its concomitant perceptions 
an original moment of my history”. 2 3 Unlike the first 
memory which requires a period of time and is worked 
out part by part, this memory is a representation and 
only a representation and can be grasped as a whole 
in one picture. It records in the form of memory 
images "all the events of out daily life as they 
occur in time: it neglects no detail; it leaves to 
each fact, to each gesture, its place and date”. 

This memory belongs to the world of life, freedom, 
and spontaneity. 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.90. 

2. Ibid. 

3. Ibid.,p.92. . 









. 





. 

. 


. 








. 




■ 









' 










■ • 


: 




. 


, 


















. I . . 



-33- 


11 These two memories run side by side and lend 
to eachother a mutual support”. 1 The automatic 
memory has a wider field than is generally supposed. 
By habit we perform the many movements of dressing, 
of finding our way about the streets, and of doing 
the routine of the day*s work. In the same way 
lessons committed to memory may be automatically 
repeated. Some aphasics who are unable to utter a 
word spontaneously can recollect without a mistake 
the words of an air they have sung, or a prayer, or 
the days of the week. 

On the other hand the spontaneous or pure 
memory has a much wider field than the automatic. 

The latter, depending on the nervous mechanism, is 
confined chiefly to the useful. The former is dis¬ 
interested and records all events alike. ”To call 
up the past in the form of an image we must withdraw 
ourselves from the action of the moment, we must 
have power to value the useless, we must have the 

p 

will to dream”. Its scope, then, is infinitely 
wider than that of automatic memory which is only 
a form of habit. 

1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.98. 

3. Ibid., p.94. 









- 34 - 


Both forms of memory are essential. Without 
neural habits we would be ineffective dreamers; 
without pure memory we would be automatons. When in 
normal life we see the automatic memory working by 
itself we call it a ca.se of absent mindedness. Habit 
works itself lut at wrong times or in wrong places as 
in the case of one who starts to get dressed for 
dinner and goes to bed instead. Such conduct suggests 
a mechanism within a living being. "Then you will get 
the image so far found in a 11 laughable objects; 
something mechanical in something living; in .fact, 
something comic. Laughter is a social gesture by 
which we wake up the individual from his mechanical 
actionP 1 Usually when a mistake of this kind occurs 
the individual has a vague feeling of uneasiness, a 
warning of his mistake. He has a feeling that the 
right image is there but it is evanescent, " a phan¬ 
tasm that disappears just at the moment when motor 
activity tries to fix its outline". 1 

We now have before us Bergson’s clearly form¬ 
ulated theory of memory . We see it standing consist¬ 
ent with his theory of space and time, matter and 
life, brain and perception. We now examine the data 
by which he supports his theory. 

1. Bergson, Laughter , p.77. 

















. 









• 




» 











, 




' ■ 







. 









PART II. 

THE THEORY VERIFIED 



- 35 - 


Chapter VII 
RECOGNITION 

If the past survives under two forms, in motor 
mechanisms and in memory images the utilising of 
these past experiences will likewise take place in 
two ways. Sometimes it will lie in the automatic 
setting in motion of the mechanism adapted to the 
circumstances. Sometimes it will consist in an 
active effort of the mind which seeks in its store 
of past representations the one best adapted to the 
present situation. The first would correspond to 
ha bit, the second to pure memory. Both forms of 
utilising past experiences are called Recognition. 
Bergson thinks that the facts of recognition support 
his theory. 

"There is,in the first place, if we carry the 
process to the extreme, an instantaneous recognition 
of which the body is capable,by itself, without the 
help of explicit memory". 1 As one walks about the 
streets of his native town or through the familiar 
buildings, he goes about mechanically without the 
intervention of images or representations. At this 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.i09. 









- 36 - 


stage recognition consists almost entirely of move¬ 
ment and habit. 

But this was not always the case. When in the 
town for the first time he hesitated at every corner, 
called up pictures from memory, and chose between 
alternatives. Between these two states, the one when 
we distinguish only by perceptions, and the other when 
we act automatically without the need of perceptions, 
there are intermediate stages where the object is p 
perceived yet provokes movements which are connected 
with, and called up by, one another. The extremes are 
rarely found in the pure state; the intermediate stages 
are the usual; but there is a progression from one to 
the other. What these facts indicate is that there is 
a connection between perception, memory images and 
the organised motor accompaniment. 

Perception, it has been pointed out, is an 
appeal to activity. When the movements required for 
the activity become well organised perception is no 
longer necessary; recognition takes its place. 
Recognition, therefore, is knowledge of how to act. 

"To recognise an object is mainly to know how to use 
it."^ The truth of this fact is so obvious that 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p. 2 , 11 . 









- 37 - 


observers gave the name "apraxia” to the failure <bf 
recognition which we call psychic blindness. To 
know how to use a thing is to sket&h out the necessary 
movements by motor impulses* that is* to use the 
thing in suppressed movements. The consciousness of 
these nascent tendencies is at the bottom of recognition. 

But we must immediately add that this is not all. 

The psychic life is there too with all the detail of 
its past localized in time. It is limited and inhibited 
by habit which tends to effect an instantaneous passage 
from perception to action. But it "awaits the occur¬ 
rence of a rift between the actual impression and its 
corresponding movement to slip in its images”, 1 Such 
a rift occurs in cases of conflicting tendencies to 
action or obstructions to free response. In these 
cases which necessitate a choice amongst the totality 
of images recognition instead of being instantaneous 
and unconscious becomes deliberate and attentative. 

When we attend to an object it is not only 
superficially recognised but it grows in richness 
and meaning. Attension signifies a state of ‘tension’. 
•In the first place attention involves an adaptation 

1. M atter and Memor y, p. H 3 , 










- 38 - 


of body, a certain straining of body, eyes, ears, 

or muscles which inhibits other sensations and 

movement. On the positive side attention is the 

effort which seeks past memory images to insert 

them into the present perceptions. 1 2 "Memory thus 

creates anew the present perceptions; or rather it 
the perception either 

doubles it %y reflecting upon it its own image, or 

some other memory image of the same kind".' 3 " If 

the memory image will not cover all the details of 

the perceived object further search is made in the 

deeper recesses of memory, until the details drawn 

from memory come to project themselves on those 

details that had at first remained unperceived. 

This operation may go on indefinitely —"memory 

strengthening and enriching perception, which*in its 

turn*becoming wider and deeper draws into itself 

2 

a growing number of recollections". 

This description of attention and recognition 
implies the presence of memory images which go out 
and over lie the object perceived. "Every attentive 
perception truly involves a reflection in the 
etymological sense of the word, that is to say, the 


1. Matter and Memory, p.123. 

2. Ibid., p.123. 














- 39 - 


the projection outside ourselves, of an actively 
created image, identical with, or similar to, the 
object on which it comes to mould itself”The 
recent discovery of centrifugal nerve fibres seems 
to suggest that besides the afferent process which 
carries the image to the centres, there is a reverse 
process which brings back the image to the periphery. 

This explains those countless illusions to which 
we all are subject. We are looking for a person in 
a crowd and see him constantly because our memory 
image overlies every figure that it conveniently can. 

We look over a sheet of proof and miss the most glar¬ 
ing errors because our memory images of the words that 
should be there overlie the actual letters. The 
confusion of the memory image with perception causes 
many a shooting tragedy and explains many a ghost 
story. 

In the act of attention the object and the 
mind may be conceived to be in a state of tension, 
the flow being from object to mind and from mind to 
object. This can be represented mathematically by 
a diagram or it can be conceived in terms of magnetism.. 

1. Matter and Mamory . P.124 























- 








. 


' 

. 





. 












. 


















- 40 - 


or electricity. It is a closed circuit 
for there can be no perception unless 
the object creates in the mind an image 
of perception and unless also the percept¬ 
ual image calls forth memory images which 
go forth and overlie the object. If the 
tension becomes greater more and more 
remote images will be recalled which reveal deeper 
and deeper meaning to reality. With each expansion 
of memory and with each corresponding deepening of 
reality, entirely new circuits are formed* which 
over lie and contain all the others. The largest 
circuit which includes our whole past is repeated in 
each of the smaller circuits which enclose these same 
recollections grown smaller until* on the plane of 
action* memory has narrowed down to become one with 
action. 

Bergson sees in the facts to which he has 
drawn attention some evidence which supports his 
theory* and in his theory the best explanation of 
the facts of attention and recollection. The 
estimation of the value of this evidence will be 
postponed to a later chapter. 


























. 






. 











. ’ 

, 
















- 41 - 


Chapter VIII 
APHASIA 

Bergson skillfully uses the facts of abnormal 
psychologyto support his theory in contrast to the 
associationist theory with its reliance on definite 
brain localization or ’centers 1 . These observations 
are from two main sources: aphasia and other kinds 
of ’mental blindness* resulting from lesions of the 
brain; and amnesia, resulting from an interruption 
or a general weakening of the functions of the brain. 
Both involve failure of recognition. 

If his theory is true, failures of recognition 
are not due to the fact that recollections were 
destroyed along with the portion of the brain con¬ 
taining them; but either because the automatic 
movements of adjustment cannot take place, or, on 
the other hahd, because 11 memories can no longer 
find a fulcrum in the body, a means of prolonging 
themselves in action". 1 Pure memory itself can 
never be destroyed,according to his theory, , but 
the key-board may be destroyed or the strings may 


1. Bergson, Matter an d Memory, p.132 



















- 42 - 


be cut. In the first case the calling up of 
memory images will be impossible,though instaneous, 
automatic recognition by habit will be unimpaired. 

In the second case memory images may be present 
but they do not aid in recognition since they can¬ 
not prolong themselves in action. 

If the associationist theory were correct the 
situation would be entirely different The usual 
explanation is that "the present perception dives 
into th& depths of memory in search of the remembrance 
of the perception which resembles it: the sense of 

recognition would thus come from a bringing together 

1 

a blending, of perception and memory”. But the 
association of a memory with a perception is not a 
sufficient explanation, "For if recognition took 
place in this way, it would always be obliterated 
when the memory image had disappeared, and always 

O 

happen when these images are retained.” But such 
is not the case as the facts of aphasia easily prove. 
"In a case studied by Wilbrs^nd the patient could 
describe with her eyes shut the town she lived in, 
and in imagination walk through its streets: yet once 


1-f Bergsonj Matter and Memory , p.105 
2.Ibid. p.108 










■ 












. 

' 


. 


















- 
















. 












I 


. 














. 


; 

. . 








- 43 - 


on the street she felt like a complete stranger; she 
recognised nothing and oould not find her way”. 1 
This case seems to indicate that psychic blindness 
can occur without the loss of visual memory; that is, 
failure to recognise the perceived object is not 
incompatible with the presence of the necessary 
memory images. 

Inversely, in Charcot’s case, the classic example 
of the complete eclipse of visual images, not all 
recognition of perceptions was obliterated. He could 
not recognise streets and houses to the extent of 
being able to name them; yet he knew that they were 
streets and houses. He did not recognise his wife 
and children, but he knew that they were a woman 
and some children. This means that he could not 
call up certain visual images, yet he could, to 
some extent at least, recognise the perceived object. 

These examples indicate that the power of 
recognition may be destrpyed in either of two ways; 
in some cases the memory image can no longer appear; 
in others, the motor mechanism connecting perception 
and habitual movement,may be disturbed. 

1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.108. 

















“ 








■ 

. , UV - . 

. 

. 








. 









■ 

' 

. 











- 44 - 


Psychic blindness of the second order, in 

i 

which there is no recognition and yet visual memory 
is not lost, is quite common. All observers of psychic 
blindness have noticed the loss of the sense of dir¬ 
ection in their patients. These have lost "the fac¬ 
ulty of co-ordinating the movements of the body with 
the visual impression and of mechanically prolonging 
perceptions in useful actions”. 1 Another character¬ 
istic fact of psychic blindness is that the patients 
are unable to draw with a continuous line. They draw 
detached portions, as in point to point drawing, and 
try to unite them. The faculty of drawing depends 
on organising the outlines of the object by virtual 
action, and drafting them in a continuous line. That 
is, it depends on co-ordinating a motor tendency with 
a visual impression. This is just what the aphasic 
cannot do, and the seat of his trouble is the motor 
organism. 

Word blindness shows similar phenomena. The 
patient is unable to recognise words which he sees 
or to write them. Yet quite often he can write from 
dictation or spontaneously. What is lost is clearly 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p. 116 









. 






• 


















• 







r ' 'X>p 













- 45 - 


the habit of distinguishing the articulations oflhfe 
object perceived, that is to say, of completing the 
visual perception by a motor tendency to sketch its 
diagram’ 1 . 1 

This becomes more easily understood if we stop 
to analyse the act of listening, hearing, and inter¬ 
preting. Two men listen to a conversation carried 
on in a foreign language. One perceives only a 
confused noise of which he can distinguish nothing 
and can repeat nothing. The other distinguishes 
vowels and consonants, words, and groups of words. 

How is it that the same vibrations reaching the two 
men are so different? The one has recollections to 
aid him, the other has none. One has a motor 
diagram prepared to decompose and reconstruct what 
he hears, the other has not. It is maintained by 
the associationists that the auditory recollection 
of words which are called up by association have 
the effect of strengthening the sound impression. 

But surely the noise would be none the more 
intelligible on account of being louder. 

There are other difficulties which are involved 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p. 117-118 





























. 


. 










. 








. 


, 

. 




























- 45 - 




in the associationist theory. They say that the 
auditory recollections are called up by the sound 
impression. "I grant you”, says Bergson, "that the 
memory of a word will call up the sound of that word; 
yet it is necessary,for this,that the sound of the 
word should have been heard by the ear. How can the 
sound perceived speak to memory, how can they choose 
in the storehouse of auditory images, those which 
should come to join them, unless they have been al¬ 
ready separated, distinguished,—in short,perceived,— 
as syllables and as words." 1 In other words this 
theory explains recognition by a process which pre¬ 
supposes that recognition has already taken place. 

Now in word deafness a man is in the same position 
with regard to his own language that we all are in 
regard to a foreign language, and the same difficulties 
of explanation are involved. "The explanation generally 
given of the disease is that the auditory recollection 
of words has been destroyed in the cortex, or that a 
lesion, sometimes transcortical, sometimes sub-cortical, 

hinders the auditive memory from evoking the idea, or the 

2 

the perception from uniting with the memory." The 
explanation would be quite impossible if there were 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory, p.135. 

2. Ibid., p.135-36. 









. 





















- 46 - 


only memories on the one hand and impressions on 
the other. Bergson thinks, however, that his theory 
provides the intermediate stages . 

There are, as we have stated, a few cases in 
which there is a complete survival of acoustic mem¬ 
ory but without recognition. These could be explained 
by the destruction of the tracts which connect the 
auditory organs with the auditory memory centres. But 
considering the fact that recognition can not be ex- 
plained even if these tracts were intact, our account 
of the matter is tftat the motor diagram or pattern by 
which memories are realised is destroyed by the lesion. 

Moreover the whole theory of definite brain 
localization has become very doubtful; and it is on 
this theory that association of ideas depends. Each 
idea and memory image must have a definite storage 
cell. The first objection is that each word, each 
syllable,would have to have its sepatate cell; and 
not only each word, but each hearing of the word,for 

1 e must realise that each time we hear it we have a 
lightly different impression with a different pitch, 
oudness, intonation, and significance. On the face 
f it this is absurd. But if it is only the general 
motor diagram that has to be accounted for there is 













. 

















































' 






. 
























. 




- 47 - 


no great difficulty. The tendency to react will be 
similar, and the consciousness of this tendency con¬ 
stitutes recognition. 

Again, if brain lesion destroys the storage cells 
of specific memories,one would expect certain ideas 
or memories to be totally destroyed, and others to be 

retained in their entirety. This is not what occurs. 

One would expect that there should often be a total 
loss of some particular word or set of words, and 
the safe conservation of others. But this is not 
the usual thing that happens. Sometimes it is the 
whole faculty of mental hearing whidh is abolished, 
sometimes there is a general weakening of the function. 
The fact of importance is that it is the function 

which is weakened or destroyed and not a definite set 

of recollections. This is further proved by the fact 
that the patient may often recover a word or verse if 
he is put on the right track or encouraged. 

It is essential to the associationist theory to 
sharply separate perception, memories, and ideas, and 
to have special ’centres’ for each, with connecting 
fibres to provide for their association. Bergson, 
however, finds them to be parts of one continuous 
process. It is impossible, he says, on the assumplion 








- 48 - 


that they are separate things to reconstitute the 
undivided process. "Nothing is more instructive , 
in this regard, than the history of the diagrams 
of sensory aphasia. In the early period, marked 
by the work of Charcot, Broadbent, Knussmaul, and 
Lichtheim, the theorists confined themselves to the 
hypothesis of an ’ideational centre* linked by 
transcortical paths to the various speech centres. 

But, as analysis of cases was pus lied further, this 

. 

centre for ideas receded and finally disappeared. 

For while the physiology of the brain was more and 
more successful in localizing sensations and move¬ 
ments, but never ideas, the diversity of sensory 
aphasics obliged clinicians to break up the intel¬ 
lectual centre into a growing multiplicity of 
image centres —a centre for visual representation^, 
for tactile representations, for auditory represent¬ 
ations, etc.,— nay, to divide sometimes into two 
different tracks, the one ascending, the other 
descending, the line of communication between any 
two of them. This was the characteristic feature 
of the diagrams of the later period, those of 
Wysman, of Moeli, of Freud, etc. Thus the theory 
became more and more complicated without ever being 












' • 

. 


. 

' 


■ 


. 


- 






. 


- 















. 















. 

. 





' 





■ 


• 











. 











• 

■ 




• 
















- 49 - 


able to grasp the full complexity of reality. 

The complications of the theory of aphasia being 
thus self-destructive, it is no wonder that modern 
pathology, becoming more and more sceptical with reg 
regard to diagrams, is returning purely and simply 
to the description of facts.” 1 

While the theory of association can account 
neither for the facts of recognition, nor for those 
of failure of recognition, the hypothesis which we 
have adopted supplies the clue to both. The ’image 1 
is the totality of our possible reactions upon it; 
our perception is but our power of choice amongst 
the possible actions and is therefore a nascent 
activity; recognition is knowledge how to act. At 
first the impression gives rise to a vague, contin¬ 
uous perception which nevertheless organises nascent 
movements of accompaniment which invite a repitition 
of the impression derived from a previous experience 
Consciousness of these nascent movements, with or 
without accompanying mental images is recognition. 
Inability to organise the motor diagram, through 
aphasic lesion, explains failure to recognise. 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.157-58. 













- 50 - 


Chapter IX 
AMNESIA 

The evidence from the facts of amnesia is 
similar to th&t from the facts of aphasia. Both 
involve loss of memory and recognition. Aphasia 
results from the destruction of certain areas of 
the brain; amneaia results from a general weaken¬ 
ing or interruption of the functions of the brain. 
Sometimes, however, it does seem that definite 
memories are lost. Examining the cases it appears 
that amnesia is of two kinds: one in which there 
is a gradual loss of memories according to Ribot’s 
law; the other in which there is a sudden loss of 
certain memories. The latter of these is generally 
caused by a severe shock, and it is. usually found 
that the memories that were supposed to be lost are 
really there, and may be recovered. One patient, 
for example, forgot the letter F, but it must have 
been implicitly recognised to be detached whenever 
seen or heard. Another forgot all the languages he 
had learned, and the poems he had written, but when 
set to writing verses he reproduced nearly the same 
lines. 





. 


: 

! 

. 

. 


. 

: , ' • 

. 




- 51 - 


But the cases of progressive loss of memory 
are quite different. In these cases first go the 
proper names, then the common nouns, and last of all 
the verbs. Now how could the general weakening of 
the function correspond to loss of specific memories 
if the memories had a local habitation in the brain? 
And why should the disease always attack them in 
the same order? 

Now apply our hypothesis to the case. "Memories 
need for their actualisation a motor ally" and it is 
the verbs which express imitable actions. Hence these 
are the ones which are easiest to recall from memory 
by means of a "bodily effort".^ - Proper nouns, on 
the other hand, are farthest removed from those gen¬ 
eral schematic movements which aid in reproducing 
words. The aid which action gives in recovering 
words is very n6ticible in the gestures of the forget¬ 
ful person, and in the repitition of the initial 

t etter of the forgotten word. 

Introspection also lends its evidence to this 
iew. When we hear words which we wish to understand 
we do not passively wait for the impression to search 


1. Bergson, ^Matter and Mema ry, p.152. 














■ 





. 




. 


; 


, 

- 


. 








\ 








. 


















- 52 - 


out or call up the suitable images. We feel our¬ 
selves adopting a certain attitude according to the 
person speaking, his topic, or his voice. "The 
motor diagram, emphasising his utterance, following 
through all its windings the curve of his thought, 
shows our thought the road." 1 

The central source of error of the association- 
ists is that they confine their attention to the 
elements into which the thought is broken, rather 
than to its continuity. Thought is a continuous, 
undivided process. But, as has been pointed out, 
by means of the motor accompaniment it is broken 
up, decomposed into phases, then recomposed gradually 
into a whole again by successive efforts. The tendency 
is to solidify these phases into * things’ or independent 
images and then to account for the continuity of 
thought by the ’association’ of these ideas. But, 
is we have shown, the attempt to localise these ideas 
In specific brain certres has failed, because they 
are not there. 

The structure of language illustrates our point 
very well. In a language poor in words the words are 
chiefly nouns or verbs of a kind which call up images. 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.153. 











. 



■ 

















■ 


' 


> 







; ; ■ . ■ 1 ■ • 




. • 




, - 













. 










- 54 - 


To understand such a juxtaposition of words 
the mind must, by its own activity, supply the 
continuity of which the word-images are only 
phases. A more highly developed language is rich 
in words expressing relations -—prepositions, con¬ 
junctions, copulas, complicated sentence structures. 
This, however, is but a nearer approximation to the 
continuity of thought; and any language, however elab¬ 
orated, must leave more things to be understood than 
it actually expresses. Its words and their correspond¬ 
ing images are but the guide posts which enable us to 
reconstruct the flow of thought in its continuity. 

It is readily understood, then, that in loss of memory 
the process will be approximately the reverse of that 
followed in the construction or learning of language. 

In summarising these two chapters we may now 
explain how an injury to a definite region of the 
brain, or a physiological weakening of its general 
function, abolishes the recognition of words and 
yet does not destroy perception. Suppose the 
object be removed or the sense organ be destroyed. 

There will still be the possibility of the image 
since the strings are still there. What is lacking 
is the stimulus which will set a multitude of 






- 55 - 


strings vibrating together and thus produce the 
image. The sense organ is the external key-board 
which permits many strings to be struck at once. 

On the other hand, it is not at all inconceiv¬ 
able that a psychical cause could set in motion 
these strings provided it had an arrangement like a 
keyboard. Mow such an arrangement must be the 
region of images; it is the mental ear, the organ 
of virtual images; it is the portion of the brain 
which is symmetrical with the organ of sense. This 
is why real hearing survives mental hearing. The 
sense organ —the external key-board— is there and 
the strings are there; but the internal key-board 
is either lacking or is not capable of functioning; 
memory cannot play upon it. 



- 56 - 


Chapter X 
THE UNCONSCIOUS 

If the past survives in its entirety it is 
natural to wonder why we are not always or perhaps 
ever, aware of the fact. In other words, how can 
we have psychic states of which we are not conscious? 
The answer involves an investigation of the meaning 
and purpose of consciousness. 

Consciousness is a faculty whose end is action, 
a faculty without which all action would be aimless. 
Just as perception selects from the totality of the 
image present those things which have an active 
interest for the organism; just as the intellect 
breaks up the flow of reality and organises and 
selects its material for the service of the mind; 
so consciousness selects from the totality of the 
past that which has a present active interest. Per¬ 
ception is useful quite as much for what it fails 
to reveal as for what it reveals; intellect serves 
the mind quite as much by shutting out the greater 
part of reality as it does by revealing it by bits; 
consciousness serves us as much by concealing most 
of memory as it does by revealing it by parts. Per¬ 
ception breaks up the totality of the image present, 
























. 

. 

. 




























- 57 - 


arragges it spatially, reveals what is of interest, 
conceals what is indifferent, and thus serves in 
preparing suitable reaction; the intellect serves 
the same purpose in regard to reality; consciousness 
serves the same purpose with regard to memory. Per¬ 
ception, intellect, and consciousness have reference 
only to activity. The unconscious is simply that 
part of memory which has no present interest. 

The situation might be represented mathematically 
by a figure of an inverted cone standing on a plane, 
the cone representing memory and the plane being 
the level of activity or n the shifting plane of 
experience”. The broad base AB 
represents the widest field of 
pure memory removed as far as 
possible from activity. The 
point S indicates the present 
and is the place where the image 
of the body is situated. The 



call to activity comes from the plane of experience 
P to which the body with its sensori motor organis¬ 
ation also belongs. It may receive actions and 
give back actions in either of two ways: either 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.211 

























\ 




/ 










- 58 - 


automat ically according to the "laws of nature" as 
all other images do, or freely through the exercise 

of choice. Its pwwer of choice comes from the fact 

■ 

it is in touch with all the totality of the past -— 
with the whole of the cone SAB. The process is very 
similar to that described in connection with the 
discussion of recognition and which we described as 
’attention 1 . 

The man of action is the man who promptly 
summons to his aid all the memories which have 

reference to the situation, and whose action is 

- 

determined accordingly. One who reacts without 
the appeal to the past is the man of impulse. One 
who appeals to memory without the necessity or aim 

of action is the dreamer. 

■ 

If most of the time the past is hidden from us 
it is because our memory is limited by the necessities 
of action. Between the plane of action, however, 
and the plane of pure memory which lies most remote 
there may be a continual movement. Memories con- 

I 

tinually tend to realise themselves in action by 
concentration towards S or to dissipate themselves 
towards AB. In proportion as we search furthur and 
further into the region of pure memory, not by 









- 59 - 


concentrating on the necessities of action, but 
rather by freeing ourselves from that necessity 
and living in the life of dreams, we find our 
whole psychic life repeated at wider and wider 
levels, more and more remote from the immediately 
useful. 

Freedom will consist in reacting, not accord¬ 
ing to the plane of P where action is determined 
by "cause and effect" , but according to our whole 
personality which is bound; up with the deeper levels 
of the past. Freedom in this sense amounts to 
self-determination according to our own deep-seated 
psychic states. It means that our acts reveal our 
personality rather than merely reflecting the acts 
and ideas of the society in which we live. 

The diagram by which Bergson illustrates his 
explanation of the unconscious is, of course, only 
a diagram, and must not be substituted literally 
for nthe facts which it is intended to clarify. He 
has shown figuratively how the past can survive in 
its entirety, how the memories continually tend 
to actualise themselves in action, but how they 
are inhibited by the practical necessities of the 
present situation. The facts of the unconscious are 

























. 


0 a ' ■ - ■ • 


, 


: . . M 




. 


. 

■ 



. 


' 











. 

• . •; -. .y > - a h- y . i-Ef-- - ■ f 







■ 








' 










- 60 - 


therefore in conformity with his theory of memory. 

The facts of dream life are also cited by 
Bergson to confirm his description of the uncon¬ 
scious and his theory of memory. In dreams the 
long forgotten past reappears, often with the 
most unexpected recurrence of minute details. The 
hypnogogic visions are also instructive in this 
regard. So, too, are many of the facts of hypnotism. 
"But there is nothing more instructive in this 
regard than what happens in cases of sudden suf¬ 
focation, in men drowned or hanged. The man when 
brought to life again, states th a t he saw, in a 
very short time, all the forgotten events of his li 
life passing before him with great rapidity, with 
their smallest circumstances, and in the very order 
in which they occurred 1 ’. ^ 

The past, then, survives in its mihutest 
detail. This is true, in some form or other, of 
every conscious being. Bergson says:”... The organ¬ 
ism that lives is a thing that endures. Its past, 
in its entirety, is prolonged into the present, 
and abides there, actual and acting." 2 


1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p. 200. 

2. Bergson, C reative Evolution , p.lS. 











. 

' 

■ 

■ • 




• 


• 



•' ' 






. .. 

■ 






■ 

. • 

■ 






PART III 


THE THEORY CRITICISED 











- 61 - 


Chapter XI 
THE WORLD OF IMAGES 

We shall not at this point enter upon a dis¬ 
cussion of the general foundations of Bergson’s 
philosophical system, his dualism of quantity and 
quality, space and time, matter and spirit. The 
validity of these stands or falls with his theory 
of memory. When he comes to his explanation of 
the ’image’, of perception, and of representation, 
however, we are bordering on the particular problem 
with which we are concerned. Hence we shall begin 
with his woild of ’images’. 

Here, as elsewhere, Bergson is suggestive. He 
reduces the conflicts of science and philosophy, of 
realism and idealism, to a war of words arising 
from the fact that the opposing schools have very 
different points of view. His ’image’ is intended 
as a go-between, as explained in a previous chapter, 
and it can be viewed from the realistic and scientific 
point of approach in its relations to other images 
of the same kind, or from the idealistic and philo¬ 
sophic approach in its relations to the central 
image of the human body. The points of view are not 







' 

•• 

, 

1 ■ 

. ‘ • • t ■ : ! .0 ' 

. 

• . 

■ 







. 


i 

* 





■■ 



• 

■ 












. 


















- 62 - 


necessarily opposed, but they are different, and 
should not be confused. 

Probably everyone will agree that a perceived 
object is-more than our mental representation of it 
and most people will agree that it is something less 
than a self-subs isting thing . Hence we can have no 
objection if Bergson gives it the vaguest possible 
name and calls it an 1 image*. But we shall object if 
we are told that we now have a key to the solution 
of any great problems, such as those which have 
divided the thinkers into opposing schools. Both 
realist and idealist might agree that the object as 
experienced is constituted partly from the stand¬ 
point of sensation or stimulus, and partly by our 
imagery whidh is projected upon it, but such consid¬ 
erations do not settle the question as to what reality 
is in itself and apart from human knowledge and ex¬ 
perience. 

That science and philosophy have different 
points of view is now a matter of common sense and 
Bergson has solved the relation in a way which adds 
little to the common view. It has become a truism 
that science investigates the permanent relations 
of the. universe, and that ethics evaluates; that to 




- 64 - 


The question naturally arises, what about this 
’central image’? Does it belong to the images with 
which science deals or is it different? Bergson says 
that it ’’appears to be a priveleged image”. All 
other images receive and give back motions according 
to the calculable laws of nature, but the living 
organism alone is a centre of indeterminism. His 
logic is: this central image appears to be indeter¬ 
minate: therefore, we must assume for the present that 
it is; experiments indicate that the nervous system 
conditions its freedom; but the nervous system is 
part of the material world and must reflect movement 
according to the law of cause and effect; therefore 
theref must be a psychical force playing upon the 
nervous system as a telegraph operator plays upon 
the key of his instrument or as the central makes 
connections at the telephone exchange. 

But here is where he has failed to satisfy the 
materialist and the scientist. They still insist on 
including the psychic life within the system of nature, 
and can find no place for indeterminism. Even the 
idealist would not postulate a free psychic activity 
apart from determinate laws. When we consider that 
the greatest determinists of all time were also the 

















■ 


' 


. 

' 

... 


■ 


■ 










■ ■ 






. 


... 11 

























- 65 - 


greatest champions of freedom we see that the terms 
may not be so mutually repellent. 

The ancient belief that the mind of man is a 
microcosmos is a fanciful statement of the facj? 
that the mind has arrangements for storing up and 
relating its experiences of the world. The more 
a man's actions are determined by these, the more 
freedom he has. Schiller's definition of freedom 
as self-determination receives more and more 
evidence in its favor, and this, in fact, is 
Bergson's own conclusion.' But whether this involves 
indeterminism or merely complex determinism is 
another question. We favor thie latter view, and 
see no reason for adopting Bergson's assumption, 
but find less and less use for the hypothesis of 
an original psychic force. Freedom, in Bergson’s 
interpretation of the matter, amounts to pure 
caprice. On the other hand, human action,far 
from being uncalculable, is calculated every day 
with fair accuracy by those who have dealings wit2ih 
their fellow-men. The science of psychology has 
nothing to do if human actions are beyond the 
limits of calculation. 
































' 


. 














r 

. 










. 


. 

- 

. 







- 66 - 


Chapter XII 

STIMULUS, ACTIVITY, AND PERCEPTION 

When we attempt to analyse Bergson’s theory 
of perception we find the problem becoming more 
involved. He tells us that, of the total image 
present the body, unlike other images, reflects 
only that which it can influence, only that which 
is of interest, and that this power of choice as to 
what it shall reflect and re-present is an indic¬ 
ation of its indeterminism or freedom. 

In all justice to this theory we must recognise 
a large element of truth. Water, for example, must 
appear quite differently as perceived by the amoeba, 
the earth worm, the duck and the hen. To each it 
offers an invitation or a threat of an entirely 
different kind. The same water will appear quite 
different to the born sailor and the land man, to 
the sanitary engineer and the painter. For each it 
enters into an entirely different set of relations 
and presents different possibilities. This, of 
course, is largely a matter of what is attended to , 
or of the racial history of the organism, or of the 
education of the individual . Bergson is right in 





: 

. * ' 


' 

' 

■ • ■ 

. 

. 


. 

. 

. 















- 67 - 


drawing attention to the selective nature of per¬ 
ception. 

And yet we must not go too far in this. The 
invitation to act is as much a product of our feel¬ 
ing towards the object as of our representation of 
it. Suppress their feelings, and the anacchist 
and the loyalist would have very similar represent¬ 
ations, that is, mental images of the royal process¬ 
ion, but to neither would it present an invitation 
to act. Its is the feelings and impulses which 
pass over into actions of shooting or applauding 
rather than the mere representations of the scene. 

Moreover, our representations appear to be 
wider than our possible actions upon things. It is 
hard to see how the brilliancy of a sunset or the 
beauty of a painting can be an invitation or a 
threat, or how the ever shifting colors of a pea¬ 
cock's tail reflect our possible actions upon it. 

In fact Bergson would have to begin by working out 
a theory of colors in conformity with his theory 
of colors, and this has not yet been done. No 
doubt at least a partial theory of this kind could 
be made plausible. Bees, we know, are angered at 
the presence of black, and bulls at the sight of red. 



























- 



- 68 - 


To men blues are said to be subduing, greens pleasing, 
yellows elating, and reds exciting. Perhaps in the 
history of the race these colors were at one time 
invitations or warnings. * Black may have been' the 
prevailing color of the bears and other enemies of 
the bees; the red which angers the bull and many 
other animals may have been the red of blood. But 
this theory would merely make the color feelings 
vestiges of earlier times; it would not explain 
the facts of color sensation, nor.make color 
perception equivalent to our present active interest. 

The difficulty of making perception correspond 
to the useful is that there so many elements in 
perception which are inevitable, whether they are 
useful or not. The waves of light falling upon the 
eye produce chemical effects as inevitably as on the 
photographic film. Wave beats striking the ear set 
up vibrations as regularly as on a stringed instrument. 
Now Bergson avoids this difficulty by contending that 
this is not perception but sensation. Many impressions 
on the eye, many vibrations of the strings of the 
concha, are never perceived. Perception travels 
from centre to periphery, since it depends on the 
projection of images. Sensation measures our 












- ■ 


■ 


- 








. 


- 























. 


. 

■ 




■ 








- 69 - 


power to absorb; perception measures our power to 
reflect. Perception is outside our body; sensation 
is within. 

Bergson substantiates this position at great 
length and we can scarcely do justice to it in a 
brief treatment. Our criticism is that it gives 
an explanation that is one-sided. He declares that 
we must begin, not with affection, but with action. 
This seems somewhat arbitrary, though not more so 
than to begin with affection in the form of element¬ 
ary sensations and by composition to derive percept¬ 
ion, apperception, and finally, movement. The nervous 
system co-ordinates stimulus and action, and it is 
probably immaterial which is treated first. Indeed, 
it may well be that in rudimentary cases affection 
and action are identical, neither being the logical 
cause of the other. The vibration of a pendelurn 
need not be considered a result of gravity; it may 
more properly be consider a phenomenon including 
gravity. And the beating of the heart, or any of 
the rhymthmical movements are at the same time 
affection and action. It was demonstrated long ago 
that these rhythmical, movements are entirely independ¬ 
ent of the nervous system; that in the case of even 










. 




•. i ru 


. • 








■ 

. 

. 




. 































- 70 - 


such highly developed animals as rabbits, the brain 
and the whole spinal chord may be removed, and 
after the first shock the heart will again start to 
beat? - More recently Professor Loeb has demonstrated 
that the rhythmical movements of the medusae and 
other sea animals can take place without the nervous 
system, and that it depends on such mechanical con¬ 
ditions as the salt solution in which it is placed. 
Even sight may take place unimpaired when the whole 
of the hemispheres have been removed. These facts 
indicate that affection cannot be taken as one thing 
and reaction another, but that they form a single 
act which may, in complex cases, be separated into 
two or more phases. In the lower organisms the 
two phases are identical, and Bergson has pointed thfc 
this out. At the reflex leve?. the two phases are 
identical,or almost so. But in the scale of animal 
life there is a gradual separation of the two, and 
at some stage there arises conscious perception as 
an intermediate link. 

1. Experiments with a view to ascertain the 
principle on which the action of the heart depends 
and the relation which subsists between that organ 
and the nervous system. Transactions of the Royal 
Society . Vol.105, 1805. ————- — 














v . ■; v *; X. ? \ 'yXu: \ ' \t;.j 

' 






c ■ ■ c 

i ' - ■ ■ •• \ - . I' • r- . « ' 'f J 

■ 

' : ■' ’ ' X : ■ 

; : « / ; i ' 

; ■ . \ ' 


' 


r. 


: ■ ‘ . . 


: , 1 

. 


, : ' < 1 . 

. 

. 






' 





- 71 - 


Regarding perception as an intermediate link 
it is immaterial whether we begin with action or 
stimulus. The essential thing is that we recognise 
both factors, and the value of Bergson’s theory is 
that he has transferred attention from a one-sided 
devotion to affection to a consideration of the 
side of action. In this he has probably dofce a 
great service The weary psychological experiments 
in trying to measure perception in terms of stimulus 
have had their day. The central field is now that 
of action—how it is reinforced, inhibited, conditioned, 
or changed, how it is affected by the emotions, and 
how it is guided by deliberation. Bergson seems, 
however, to have gone to the opposite Extreme. 

The inherent weakness of Bergson’s over¬ 
emphasis of the phase of activity is that it makes 
all life teleological. Conscious perception does 
involve representations of final ends, distant goods 
or evils, and so in a sense the higher organisms 
may be said to act teleologically—at least in so 
far as they act reflectively. But to interpret 
all life as teleological is hardly justifiable. 

The turning of the leaves of a plant towards the sun 
has no more connection with the ’end 9 than the turning 












' 

. 






. 






■ 

"i 

. 

i 











-72- 


of the magnetic needle towards the pole. The pur¬ 
suit and ingestion of food by the amoeba is appar¬ 
ently as necessary as the attack on gold by mercury. 
It is a case of stimulus and reaction combined in 
one phenomenon without any intermediate represent¬ 
ation of ends. 

Perception is virtual action in so £&r as it 
is intermediate between stimulus and response. It 
does reveal in the object the possibilities of our 
action upon it, and involves incipient responses to 
the object. Thus far it would be hard to gainsay 
Bergson*s theory. Ho doubt the power has been de¬ 
veloped in the history of the race and in biological 
evolution generally, and has served teleological 
purposes. But this does not mean that it is now 
entirely subservient to the end of action. It may 
be that it is far wider than the useful; that we 
have power to appreciate the useless. Such appears 
to be the case. 

Moreover perception can be studied from the 
side of syimulation quite as profitably as from the 
side of action. The dynamics of sound waves, of 
waves of color, light, and heat, the chemical pro¬ 
perties of the substances we taste and smell, all 

























' 






. 


' 




' 



. 



. 

. 


. ■ 











' 






. 










. 




















-73- 


throw great light on the nature and laws of per¬ 
ception. No complete study of perception can be 
made from the point of view of action alone. When, 
therefore, Bergson says that we must begin with action 
we may reply that it is just as right, and probably 
more logical, to begin with external stimuli and our 
organs for receiving them. 

His contention that perception is outward, that 
it travels from center (the body) to periphery (the 
outside world), again, is only a partial truth. The 
part that is played by the projection of images has 
not been fully explained by psychologists, and is 
very suggestively treated by Bergson. A thousand 
illusions, however, might be taken to show that per¬ 
ception is not in the object but becomes localised 
through education and unconscious judgment. We do 
not hear sounds in the object but we localise them 
there. The ventriloquist could never deceive the 
audience if we actually heard the sound at its 
source. By working the jaws of his dummies and by 
changing his voice to suit their various parts he 
causes us to localise the voice where he wishes. 

But however skillful he may be, we can, by an effort, 
centre our mind on the performer and discover that 









' 

: 

. 








. 











4 - ■ ■ 















. 


. 













' 


















. 












. 

















-74- 


the sounds are coming from his own throat. To 
say that perception is in the object will hardly 
explain the facts. The drunk man who sees two 
moons might well quote Bergson to prove that 
there really are two moons in the sky. The per¬ 
ceptions to which an object gives rise are put 
together or synthesised in the objedt, and this act 
of constructing the object may or ma# not be valid 
and trustworthy. Perception is,therefore, not a 
one-way act but involves a circuit of stimulus and 
response. 

But a problem greater than that of how the 
images can be projected and made part of the con¬ 
stitution of the object, is how we can have such 
images at all. Bergson’s theory of perception 
does not explain it in the least. He compares it 
to the reflection of light . "That which is given 
is the totality of images of the material world 
with the totality of their internal elements. But 
if we suppose centres of real, that is to say, of 
spontaneous, activity, the rays which reach it, and 
which interest that activity, instead of passing 
through the centres, will appear to be reflected, 
and thus to indicate the outlines of the object 




. . 

♦ 

■ 




. 

. 

. 

. 


-75- 


which emits them.Perception, therefore, resembles 

those phenomena of reflexion which result from im¬ 
peded refraction; it is like an effect of mirage.” 1 2 

Now throughout this explanation, suggestive 
though it may be, Bergson is speaking in analogies 
and arguing from assumptions. In what sense is it 
true that "That which is given is the totality of 
images of the material universe"? He is thinking, 
of course , of Faraday’s law: "The lines of force 
emitted in every direction from every centre bring 
to bear upon each the influences of the entire 
universe." This is a highly speculative assumpt¬ 
ion and useless in explaining any given phenomenon. 

We have discredited astrology, but according to this 
law the stars really do exert an influence over the 
fate of the new-born child. There are influences 
relevant and influence remote, potent influences and 
negligible influences; and Faraday’s law, though 
beautiful in the extreme, is hardly a safe analogy 
for the explanation of a specific act such as that 
of a perception. When Bergson says that the totality 
of images of the material universe is present and 


1. Bergson, Matter a nd Memory, -p.30. 

2. Ibid. ,p.31. 






. 

* 

, 

' 

. 




. . 

. 

P . 

' 














. 




-76- 


given, we may well reply that the human mind is not 
omnipresent, nor are all things present to it. It 
is shere mystioism to hold that Hong Kong, New York, 
Venice, Mars, and Jupiter are all present though 
sensation can not absorb, nor perception reflect, 
them. This assumption that the universe is pre¬ 
sent with each individual has its counterpart in 
his still wilder assumption that in memory the 
totality of the past is stored up in the form of 
memory images. 

His analogy between the reflection of rays 
of light so that they form virtual images, and the 
reflection which takes place in the nervous system 
producing representations or perceptions,is too 
vague to admit of serious discussion. Since the 
nervous system does not seem to reflect mechanically 
Bergson must postulate centres of real, that is, 
spontaneous activity. Not only does this seem the 
most unwarranted of assumptions, but it is entirely 
impossible t& see how a centre of activity should 
allow rays of force to pass through or be reflected 
at will . This makes a whole personality instead 
of a mere centre. How can he speak of a centre of 
activity being interested, discarding what is of no 























' 

. 










-77- 


value, and choosing that to which it shall respond? 
These are act3 of a complete personality. 

Psychology must still confess ignorance on 
many of the problems connected with perception. At 
best Bergson is suggestive in his treatment. The 
chief merit lies in his close analysis of the relation 
of perception with action and his indication of the 
probable relation between the development of percept¬ 
ion and the organic needs of the organism in its 
evolution. His suggestion regarding the part of the 
projected image in the constitution of the object of 
perception may also be valuable. All thesegive rise 
to problems for others to work at rather than to 
solutions which we are justified in accepting* 

If we could understand perception we should 
have taken a long step in the direction of an under¬ 
standing of memory. It may be that memory is just 
the reinstatement of the mechanism of perception. But 
if Bergson is right in his contention that perception 
demands centres of indeterminisnm-and we are far from 
admitting that he is—it may be that memory is more 
than the reinstatement of a mechanism. 




-78- 


Ghapter XIII 

THE THEORY OF PURE MEMORY 

A man learns a poem by heart by successive 
repititions. At the end of that time, Bergson 
says, the repitition of the poem will be a motor 
habit. But there is also the memory of each suc¬ 
cessive attempt which is not a motor habit, but 
which 11 is entirely sufficient to itself”, "subsists 
exactly as it occurred", is a representation and 
only a representation", "is embraced in an intuition 
of the mind which can be lengthened or shortened at 
will", "and there is nothing to prevent me from 
grasping the whole of it instantaneously as in one 
picture", 1 Such is the character of pure memory. 

Let us examine these statements one by one, 

(1) It is entirely sufficient to itself . This 
means that it is not conditioned by anything else. 

To test this statement I memorise a short German 
poem. Then after two weeks I try to remember the 
second attempt at reciting it, and the process is 
about as follows: I recall when--just before 
___—________ 

1. Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.91 


























: 

' 






, 






. 

■ 












• . • ; • ■ ‘ ' •• 


■ 















' 

■ 











-79- 


dinner; and where—standing by the table; and the 
circumstances—certain persons listening. I recall 
the fact that I repeated the first stanza correctly 
(I do not have a representation of the stanza in my 
mind when I recall this fact). I remember th a t I 
had to look at the book for some line in the second 
stanza; I can't remember at what point until I 
repeat the stanza to myself; the irregular third 
line recalls my difficulty in learning it and now 
I remember. The third stanza I had to read from 
the book. 

My memory* then* does not appear to be entire¬ 
ly sufficient to itself. It does not work by visual 
images entirely though these are present* but by 
inference and association. And this is the exper¬ 
ience of a great many. Many persons* James tells 
us* have little visual imagination, but many of them 
are of the auditory type* many are of the motor type* 
and* of course* some are strong visularises. Nearly 
all combine the various forms of reproductive imag¬ 
ination. 

Now when Bergson says that pure memory "is 
entirely sufficient to itself he flies in the face 
of all experience. The very basis of memory is 
association. We remember the past by reconstructing 























. 

• . 

. 


. 








. 




. 

. 








. 

. 














, . 




t. ■ , . , . . X..V 






















. 







-80- 


point by point, and filling in the gaps by inference 
and imagination. This is the process which has for 
a long time been known as association, and the pos¬ 
sibility of memory seems to depend, in part at least, 
on this process. If our contention is correct no 
memory is ^sufficient to itself M . 

(2) It subsists exactl y as jLt occurred . Bergson 
gives no accumulation of evidence to substantiate this 
assertion, and we shall show that, from the nature of 
the case, it cannot be proved. What evidence there is 
would seem to be entirely apposed to the theory. 

We all have realised that the habit of forgetting 
is as necessary for effective work as the habit of 
remembering. The person endowed with M total recall M 
would have a memory as cumbersome as it was useless. 

As a matter of fact I shall not remember all the 
successive attempts to learn by heart the poem just 
mentioned, and I cannot remember all the attempts 
even now; to the best of my knowledge the memory of 

I them is entirely lost. Moreover it seems impossible 
that the contraty could ever be established. In 
hypnotism events may be recalled which the individual 

had apparently forgotten; in dreams many long forgot¬ 
ten scenes are brought back • i n crystal gazing even 
























. 
























. 










■ 

■ 






■ 




, 






-81- 


minute details of incidents and scenes which did not 
rise to the threshold of consciousness may be brought 
to light. But few would go so far as to say that a 
complete record is kept of all events exactly as they 
occurred. Striking as these phenomena are they fall 
far short of indicating what Bergson claims. Even 
the apparent unwinding of the whole of an individual’s 
past, as in the case of drowning,is a phenomenon 
which, from the very nature of the case, does not 
admit of analysis rigid enough to substantiate Berg¬ 
son’s thesis. All organisms, trees for example, and 
even inorganic things like the strata of rocks, store 
up the past in some form. But they never keep a 
complete, clearly legible, and perfectly exact record. 
What the human brain stores up, in the same way, is 
in all probability a modification of the structure, 
a habit of reaction, a stratification of periods, 
which makes possible a more or less complete reinstate¬ 
ment of the action and imagery of the past. 

But Bergson admits the biological and physiol¬ 
ogical organism, admits that it stores the action of 
the past in the form of memory habit, admits that it 
is liable to decay and disease. He admits that if 
the organism is not working perfectly there can be 




. 

. 

. 

. 

, 



• 


















. 




' 


■ 

• 










-82- 


no perfect recall or recognition. But he claims 
that this is not because the memory is not perfect, 
but because it can not realise itself in an imperfect 
mechanism. Obviously his thesis can be neither 
proved nor disproved. All we can do is to show that 
his hypothesis is unnecessary and useless. We have 
already shown that it is highly improbable. 

(3) It is a representation and only a represent ¬ 
ation . By a representation he means, as is explained 
in a foot-note, "a mental picture, which mental picture 
is very often a perception.” 1 More widely, he seems 
to mean any of those forms of imagery treated by 
psychologists. 

There is no doubt but mental pictures flash 
before the mind, yet any effort of memory is 
certainly more than such a flash of representations. 

It involves an effort, the concentration of attention, 
a gradual development,point by point, of the picture. 

As we have shown, it involves inference, reason, and 
constructive imagination. It may even be that mental 
pictures are not the main thing in some types of 

1* Bergson, Matter and Memory , p.3 . 9 translator *s 
foot-note. 
















. 








. 







. 










. 






. 











- 83 - 


memory, and some kinds of memory material, imagery 
plays a very secondary or negligible part. It is 
probable that Bergson had the French gift for 
visualising to a remarkable degree, but few of us are 
so gifted, and we would quote from the careful exper¬ 
iments of Galton to prove our contention. 

(4) rt _is embraced in an intuition of the mind 
which can be lengthened or shortened at will ; and 
(5) There is nothing to prevent me grasping the whole 
of it instantaneously . When one concentrates on 
remembering a past scene, the very fact of the con¬ 
centration or focalization prevents the freedom of 
associations which would render the return of the 
image likely. One must travel slowly over the parts 
and gradually, if at all, form the representation of 
the whole. 

Often, however, images which we cannot recall 
by an effort, come of themselves in dreams or in 
periods of relaxation. As Bergson says, we must be 
able to withdraw ourselves from the action of the 
present, we must have the will to dream. But what 
come into our minds when we relax are seldom the 
exact reproductions of past scenes. Children are 
very subject to hypnogogic dreams, and the images 















- 84 - 


which they see are anything but true images of mem¬ 
ory. So vivid are these pictures of imagination 
that they often confuse truth and fancy. The 
dreams of grown people, too, show such an active 
imagination that it is usually difficult to under¬ 
stand where the various elements of the dream had 
their origin. Nor are the images which slip them¬ 
selves in during relaxation altogether reliable. 
Would that they wcEel The mind is more liable to 
work in old tracts during relaxation when the inter¬ 
est of the moment is less pressing, so it ie not 
surprising that memories which would not arise when 
the mind was in tension,now come up uncalled for. 

But to argue from this that there is a pure memory 
which is perfect and which might be instantaneous 
in its grasp is more than the facts warrant. 

Our chief objection to Bergson is not so 
much that his theory is not sufficiently proved, or 
thatit is highly improbable, or even that it is an 
entirely unwarranted assumption which cannot admit 
of scientific proof, as that it does not do justice 
to the study which has already been made of the 
psychology of memory. His theory had already been 
rendered almost unnecessary before he formed it. 











. 






. 

. 

■ 

- 




f l 






■ 

. 


- . 

■ 

. 

' 


■ 











- 85 - 


The first obvious injustice is Bergson's 
comparison of the nervous mechanism to the wires, 
key-board etc. of a telegraphic system or a tela- 
phone exchange. The parallel is good as far as it 
can be legitimately drawn. The nerve tracts do 
carry stimulation in a manner analogous to the way 
in whidh the wires carry the electric current , 
though even here there are important differences. 
And like the telephone wires they are insulated, 
are united into bundles, and lead to a central 
exchange. But we cannot carry the analogy much 
further for there are important differences. 

In the case of the telephone system the wires 
lead without break to the central office where they 
are connected by an external agency, the telephone 
girl, who connects them at will. But in the case 
of the nerve tracts each consists of hundreds of 
separate neurones which must be connected all the 
way from periphery to centre in a manner precisely 
similar to that in which they are connected at the 
"central”. No external cause is needed to insure 
a continuous current in the synapses remote from 
the centre, and it is uniikeIt that the brain will 
require any external psychic force at the centre. 












- 



' 

♦ 



. 





• 

1 










. 


r, ^ 












ii; . 






' ::;-J l.iv - 






- 86 - 


In the human body a large part of the nervous 
system is already organised at birth or shortly 
after. The resistance of the synapses has been 
overcome through generations of use, and so we 
have original physical habits—racial memory it 
has been called in one theory. Other parts of 
the nervous system, e.g* those connected with the 
cerebellum, become organised in a short time, per¬ 
haps more by the hardening of the cell walls and 
by other biological changes than by any effort or 
activity on the part of the child. Co-ordinated 
effort and practice effect orgabisation in other 
parts of the nervous system , and here comes the 
period of play when the child quickly learns to use 
his body, and forms the physical habits of a life 
time. Now there is nothing in the telephone system 
which corresponds to these facts of biological devel¬ 
opment. The telephone system is a physical apparatus, 
the nervous system is biological. The latter can no 
more be compared to the former as a whole than could 
a man to an automaton; they are no more alike in their 
parts than is a free moving amoeba like a small piece 
of wire or an iron filing. 

Even admitting that nervous system conducts 





- 87 - 


movements, and that movement can beget nothing but 
movement, there is no need of yielding ground to 
Bergson*s theory of pure memory. Movement is not 
such a crude elementary thing as at first appears. 
Movement, in the first place,is inconceivable apart 
from matter; it involves space; it involves time; 
it involves energy. The motions of the heavenly 
bodies involve gravitation; those within the body 
involve cohesion; those within the molecule involve 
all the problems of atomic orbits, ionisation, etc.; 
those within the atom are still more complex. The 
various tropisms (heliotropism, geotropism, etc.) 
are specific movements. 

The statement, then, that movement begets nothing 
but movement is a useless abstraction which might in¬ 
clude all that takes place within the universe. The 
reason that it cannot explain memory is that it is 
only one of the many relations involved in any of 
the complex phenomena with which the biological sciences 
deal. 

There is no doubt but that the investigation 
of physiological psychology has been disappointing 
to those who expected to unravel the secret of life 
and of memory by this investigation. But it is one 

thing to admit ignorance, and to turn to more fertile 








.if.-'ic-rc- 

•; 


. 




’ 

. 




■ 













. 

. 




■ 


■ 

■ 






















■ 












. 













- 88 - 


fields, and it is quite another thing to postulate 
a psychic force independent of the nervous syatem. 
This, after all, is just an unscientific way of 
giving a name for our ignorance. The physiological 
psychologists have investigated the mechanism of the 
nervous system, and their•discoveries are interesting 
and valuable; but they have been dealing chiefly in 
statues. Professor Loeb says: 11 It seems to me that 
we can no more expect to unravel the mechanics of 
associative memory by histological and morphological 
methods, than we can expect to unravel the dynamics 
of electrical phenomena by a microscopic study of 
cross sections through a telegraph wire or by count¬ 
ing and locating the telephone connections in a big 
city. 1,1 His statement is peculiarly like that of 

Bergson, but his conclusion is entirely different: 

”If we are anxious to develop a dynamics of the 
various life phenomena we must remember that the col¬ 
loidal substances are the machines which produce the 
life phenomena. But the physics of these substances 
is still a science of the future.”^ This is the 
true trend of physiology, and promises much more 

1. Loeb, Comparative Physiology of the Brain , p.389 

2. Ibid.,p.290. 
















' 

' 

. 

■ 

' 









-• 
















• 1 







. 













- 89 - 


than does any assumption of an original and unknow¬ 
able elan vital. 

It is just this oversight of what is most 
essential to the problem, namely, the continuity 
of matter and life, which makes Bergson so very 
unscientific. He has taken a simple, primitive 
conception of soul and body, and has sought to 
establish it by the most wonderful and diversified 
accumulation of evidence from the whole range of 
the sciences. He has plenty of keen observation; 
he attacks unceasingly the crudities of which 
psychology has been so guilty; and he inspires a 
broader outlook from new points of view. His 
influence can be seen in every psychologist of the 
day, but no one quotes Bergson in support of any 
proposition in psychology or any other field of 
science. 

His theory of pure memory has nothing in its 
favor. In the nature of the case it cannot be 
either proved or disproved; there is no evidence 
which indicates a memory such as he describes; if it 
existed it would be a complete personality duplicating 
the one which we know, and hence only pushes our 
problem back into the unknowable realm of pure spirit. 














- 















. 


' 


. 


. 

. 




- 

■ 

















• 




























. 







• 


- 






- 90 - 


Chapter XIV 

THE THEORY OF ASSOCIATION 

In handling the problem of association of 
ideas more than in any other department psychology 
has been guilty of crudities, Bergson has pointed 
these out with keen insight-—though he has usually 
added to their crudeness in his statement of them. 
His sketch of the history of the diagrams of brain 
centres and association tracts is particularly 
instructive. His conclusion is that the associat- 
ionists were looking for storage cells of ideas, 
images, and memories, and that they failed simply 
because these things were not there. 

They are not there, Bergson thinks, but some¬ 
where else, namely, in pure memory; and this pure 
memory slips in its images into the motor mechanism 
as the demands of action, or the opportunities of 
inaction, require or permit. Bergson*s theory is 
even more crude than that of the associationists. 

He asks, where are the images of memory if they are 
not stored in the brain cells; and he answers, in 
a purely psychical memory where everything is 
accumulated intact. Surely the answer should be 






































' 

























- 91 - 


that the images are simply nowher e. The same brain 
processes which gave rise to sensation and percept¬ 
ion can, by a kind of internal stimulation, recreate 
the image or recover the action of the past. 

This is along the line of the theory proposed 
by Bain and Ribot that perception, once it has 
taken place, modifies the structure of the nerve 
tract to such an extent that it becomes an acquired 
dispoaition, and thus contains the possibility of 
regenerating the perception which caused it. Memory 
is, in short, a biological fact, and what is more or 
less permanent is the brain structure which the 
experiences of every day life have modified. The 
habit memory, according to this theory, is the only 
memory we have, but habit includes visual, auditory, 
olafactory experiences as well as what are called 
motor experiences. 

Bergson 1 s own description of the process of 
actualising memories leaves almost no place for the 
pure memory which he postulates. If there is an inter¬ 
nal key-board which is set in vibration in harmony 
with the external key-board to which it is tuned 
where is there left a place for the psychic force 
to do anything? The machinery for recognition seems 





- 93 - 


complete without it. The re-creation of the imagery 
of past perceptions is provided for, and the project¬ 
ion of images to overlie the objects in space. 

Moreover this description involves a brain local¬ 
isation almost as rigid as that of the associationists. 
Speech centres, auditory centres, etc. are required, 
since Bergson can hardly maintain that any part of 
the brain can respond equally well to the impulses 
from the sense organs which constitute the external 
key-board. This being so, it is hard to see how he 
can afford to condemn so utterly the work of those 
who have so patiently mapped the human brain. 

His point that brain cells do not store ideas 
and images is one which any associationist might 
accept. Bergson has probably done a service in 
emphasising thetneurones do not secrete ideas but 
store up the action of the past; i.e.he has emphasis¬ 
ed the functional view of the associationist theory. 
Admitting the truth of the functional view there is 
still full value to be given to the work of those 
who have localised the centres of brain activity. 

This work has been done too carefully, and has been 
repeated too often, and too minutely, to be over¬ 
thrown by a breath. 





* 


. 


' 

- 




' 




- 93 - 


Recognition, that is, the realisation of memory 
appears to be the ability to respond euitably to a 
stimulus which has been given on previous occasions. 

In some cases it involves only what Bergson calls 
habit or motor memory, as when one walks through 
the familiar streets; in other cases it involves 
reflection and the utilization of mental imagery, 
as when one gets lost in less familiar streets. It 
is a mistake, however, to regard these as memories 
of entirely different kinds. Both involve the 
nervous mechanism, and either is distroyed if that 
part of the mechanism is impaired which the reaction 
involves. 

In Wildebrand*s case, cited by Bergson, the 
patient could describe the streets and houses of his 
native town, but was completely lost if placed in 
the familiar surroundings. Bergson argues that the 
memories are there but cannot realise themselves in 
action because the motor diagram is lacking. But 
the explanation might better be simply that the 
patient can react to the auditory stimulus to the 
extent of visualising the streets and houses, but 
could not react to the extent of organising a suitable 
motor response* There is no purpose served in saying 








' 

. 

■ 









. 








■ 


• ' 

. 






- 94 - 


that the memory is intact but that the motor dia¬ 
gram is lost. What is lost is the ability to respond 
suitably to a visual stimulus; what is retained is 
the ability to respond suitably to an auditory 
stimulus, whether the response demanded is a motor 
reaction or a visual reaction. The location of the 
lesion verifies the description. 

The inverse case which Bergson cites, in which 
not all recognition was lost though all particular 
memories seem to have been destroyed, is merely 
another example of the same kind of thing. He could 
not recognise his own wife and children though he 
knew them to woman and children. This means nothing 
more than that certain specific ’motor diagrams' had 
been impaired, hence recognition,in the sense of 
suitable response,was gone. Certain powers of imagery 
were also destroyed, a fact which had, no doubt, a 
direct bearing on the loss of recognition. The case 
seems to give added weight to the theory of rather 
strictly localised brain functions. 

The cases of word blindness in which the 
patient seemed to have lost all recollection of words 
and poems, yet under certain conditions regained them, 
point to a similar explanation. These cases do not 











- 95 - 


neoessarily suggest a pure memory which has remained 
intact while the.nervous mechanism was not function¬ 
ing. There is nothing to prevent the much simpler 
assumption which directly describes the facts, namely, 
that with the loss of the function went all that we 
mean by memory and recognition. Ihat we call 
memory and what Bergson calls the realisation of 
memories are the same thing; there is no need of 
assuming anything beyond the organism and its function¬ 
ing. 

Bergson assumes that the regaining of memory, 
or the recall of incidents and events which were 
thought to have disappeared for ever, proves the ex¬ 
istence of a memory which stores up the whole of the 
past exactly as it occurred. But alternative explan¬ 
ations are not difficult. In cases of shock there is 
evidence for the hypothesis that the delicate fibrillae 
of the synapses contract, and the synaptic connections 
fail to function. The power of recollection in this 
case is lost only temporarily; nevertheless it jus 
definitely and entirely lost for the time. Softening 
of the brain, on the other hand, means total and 
complete effacement of the traces of the past, and th 
there is no evidence to support Bergson*s thesis that 








- 








. 

. 













. 

. 

■ 










- 96 - 


the memory remains intact awaiting a chance to operate 
a suitable mechanism. 

Where the mechanism is not destroyed but is 
not functioning, there is always the possibility that 
it may recover its normal condition. This may involve 
not simply waiting, but an active effort to relearn, 
as in the case of the word blind poet who re-wrote 
almost the identical poems which he had forgotten. 
Numerous cases have occurred in which relearning has 
been very rapid. This indicates, as Bergson says, 
that what has been lost is the function, not definite 
brain cells with their store of ! images’ and ’ideas*. 
But it does not indicate that the memory was all the 
while intact. 

Besides the possibility of retraining the same 
tracts which have temporarily lost their ability to 
function, there is even a possibility that other 
fibres and other tracts can take over the connections 
and perform the functions which belong ed to the 
portions destroyed. This is a pure assumption,and 
if true, would substantiate Bergson’s claim that 
the localisation of brain functions is not as definite 
as certain morphologists have thought. Interesting 
in this connection is the possibility sometimes put 




















' 


' 

: ■ ' 

. 


i . ■. " • : ■, 

. 

. 

. 



- 97 - 


forward, that the functions which have been lost by 
one lobe of the brain may be taken over after a 
brief retraining by the other lobe. This, again, is 
for the present, pure hypothesis. But, granted the 
possibility of this retraining of the area where 
the function is interrupted, or of a different area, 
what does it indicate? That the memory has remained 
intact awaiting the training and preparation of a 
suitable key-board? The simpler hypothesis involves 
no such assumption. What was lost has been regained, 
namely, the ability to respond suitably to the given 
stimulus. 

Hence we find that the theory of association, 
stripped of its crudities, and given a functional 
interpretation, accounts for all the facts as com¬ 
pletely as does Bergson 8 s theory of a two-fold memory. 
Bergson*s theory requires all the machinery of assoc* 
iaticn, and when we have all the machinery we have no 
need of the Bergsonian pure memory. Even granted that 
a psychic force could play on a material instrument, 
there is nothing left for the psychic force to do. 








. 









■ 










‘ 








* 








■ 









• 


' 



■ 


' 







. 


. 

. 


' 

} . > , v; ;1 

* 





















- 98 - 


Chapter XV 
CONCLUSION 

What, then, shall we do with Bergson*s theory 
of memory? He has criticised psychology with rare 
acuteness and insight, and he has reconstructed in 
a way which is suggestive and inspirational to a 
high degree. But no one would claim that his treat¬ 
ment of this problem which is essentially psychologic¬ 
al will stand any scientific test. The truth seems 
to be that his destructive criticism is good, that it 
was necessary, and that it is re-shaping psychological 
enquiry. Investigations are becoming more careful, 
less dogmatic, and more methodical. But his recon¬ 
struction, though suggestive, is based on a philosoph¬ 
ical system which he never for a moment loses sight of. 
To some, then, it will be stimulating and inspiring, 
but to many it will be a mere avalanche of verbiage, 
a conglomeration of assumptions and visions supported 
by metaphors and analogies and colorful pictures. ^ 

Our criticism is that he has handled a scientific 
problem in an obviously unscientific manner. 

1. See criticism in Hugh S. R. Elliot, Modern 

Science and the Illusions of Professor Bergson . 






























' 




- • 


, 


. 


■ 







♦ 






. 





















. 

. 




















- 99 - 


On the destructive side what we found of most 
value was Bergson's criticism of the storage aspect 
of the associationist theory, and also their account 
of perception and recognition. Bergson, however, 
added to the crudeness of the theory in the statement 
of it, and took no account of the more recent devel¬ 
opments in the direction of a functional association- 
ism* In the direction of the further development of 
this aspect of the theory we found the more promising 
path to lie; Professor Libeb has indicated more 
correctly the true path of science in regard to the 
mechanism of the brain. The work of those anatomists 
who have mapped the regions and ’centres' of the brain 
has thrown much light ofi the problems ftf association, 
memory, and recognition , and further development of 
their work is needed before we have accurate evidence 
on many of the issues raised by Bergson. 

Bergson's application of the data from abnormal 
psychology, especially that of aphasia and amnesia, is 
too scattered and indefinite to be of much value. The 
cases are too few, the information too meagre, to be 
very conclusive. All the facts which he points out , 
however, are open to an alternative explanations, 
and we find that the theory of a two-fold memory is 






■ 


- . - 





' 


















- 100 - 


unnecessary and unwarranted. His skillful use of 
the material does, however, cast considerable doubt 
on the theory of specific brain Idealization. 

On the constructive side the most important 
contribution of the theory is its emphasis on the 
functional aspect of the brain mechanisms, and on 
the activity aspects of perception, thought, and 
memory. The study of these from the side of mere 
sensation had become barren. The new emphasis on 
the activity of the organism threw a flood of light 
on many problems. It is only fair to add that 
Bergson is by no means the originator of the study 
of habit, perception, etc. from the standpoint of 
activity. What Bergson did was to catch the tendency 
of modern psychology and give it vivid expression. 

As a theory of memory Bergson’s leaves much 
to be desired. We cannot prove that there is no 
pure memory in which all of our past remains forever 
unimpaired, because Bergson claims that any apparent 
loss, interruption, or failure is due to the organism 
alone. Hence to disprove his theory is impossible. 
But, by the same token, the theory cannot be proved. 
If his whole philosophy stands or falls with his 
theory of memory, then it floats between heaven and 


. 






■ 












■ 






' 




. 



- 






. » 






































- 101 - 


earth, unsupported except from within. It is quite 
probable that the dualism between body and mind 
which we found so untenable in the explanation of 
memory,has its parallel, equally untenable, in the 
dualism of space and time, quantity and quality, 
determinism and freedom, matter and spirit. 




Finis. 










BIBLIOGRAPHY 


A. WORKS OF BERGSON 

Henri Bergson, Time and Free Will , An Essay 
on the Immediate Data of Consciousness 
(Translated by F.L.Pogson), Library of 
Philosophy, London, Sonnenschein & Co., 1910. 

Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory,(Translated by 
Nancy Margaret Paul and W. Scott Palmer) 

Library of Philosophy, London, Schonnenschein 
& Co., 1911. 

Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution , (Translated by 
Arthur Mitchell), London, MacMillan & Co., 1911. 

Henri Bergson, Laughter , An Essay on the Meaning 

of the Comic . (Translated by Cloudesley Brereton 
and Fred Rothwell), London, MacMillan & Co..1911 


B. COMMENTARIES 

A.D.Lindsay, The Philosophy oj B Bergson , 

London, J. M. Dent & Co. 1911. 

Hugh S. R. Elliot, Modern Science and the Illusions 
of Professor Bergson , With a Preface by Sir 
Ray Lankester, 

London, Longmans Green & Co.. 

C. REFERENCES 

William Macdougall, Physiological Psychology , 

London, J. M. Dent, 1913. 

William James ,P Pf iAQiples of Psycholog y, 2 Vol. 

New York, Henry Holt. 

Jacques Loeb, Comparative Physiology of the Brain 
and Comparative Psychology, 

New York, G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1900. 













































* . 

. 

. 












, 






. 




• 















. 


- 



















' 













































Theodore Ribot, Diseases of the Memory , an Essay 
in the Positive Psychology , 

London, Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.,1906? 
D. ARTICLES* 

H. Wildon Carr, The Philos QPhw of Bergson . 

Hibbert Journal, Vol.viii, 1909-10, p.873. 

William James, The Philosoph y of Bergson , 

Hibbert Journal, Vol. VI J, p.5S3. 

J. H. Muirhead. The Philosoph y of Bergson , 

Hibbert Journal, Vol.IX, 895. 

J. W. Smith, The Pessimism of Bergson , 

Hibbert Journal, Vol. XI. p.98. 

Norman Kemp Smith, The Meaning ofB the Comic , (Review 
of Laughter! , Hibbert Journal, Vol.XI, p?220. 

G. N. Dobson, The Philosophy of Henri Bergson , 
Philosophical Review, Vol,XX, 1911. 

A. W. Moore, Bergson and Pragmatism , 

Philosophical Review, Vol. XXI, July, 1912. 

Edward Douglas Fawcett, Matter and Memory , 

Mind, New Series XXI, 1913, 

J. Solomon, The Philosophy of Bergson , 

Mind, New Series XX, 1911, p.13. 

D. Balaillic, Professor Bergson on Time and Free Will , 
Mind, New Series XX, 1911, p.357. 


♦ Most of the periodical literature referred to 

by Professor Bergson in Matter and Memory was not 
available at the time the above was written. 





































. 

. 

, 




. '■ 


. 








- 


. 






. 




. 


- 















































