For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 
























For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Him 

iMssnsas 

mBBlSlMK 













Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/modernsocialissuOOtutt 

p s 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 
(DIVINITY) 


We, the undersigned, hereby certify that we have read the 
within thesis entitled "MODERN SOCIAL ISSUES IN THE LIGHT 
OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS" submitted by Rev. George Milledge 
Tuttle, B.A., in partial fulfilment of the requirements 
for the degree of Bachelor of Divinity, and we hereby 
recommend its acceptance. 


Edmonton 
Alberta 


April 

1949 













MODERN SOCIAL ISSUES 
IN THE LIGHT OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS 

A dissertation 

submitted to the B. D. Committee of the 
Senate of the University of Alberta 
in candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity 


by 


George Milledge Tuttle 


April, 1949 










TABLE OF CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 1 

I THE CHRISTIAN VIEW OF MAN: A PARADOXICAL BEING I 

II ETHICS OF LAW AND ETHICS OF GRACE 9 

III THE SOCIAL GOSPEL AND THE KINGDOM OF GOD 20 

IV SOME PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN SOCIAL ACTION 40 

V THE POLITICAL ORDER 55 

1) The Roots of Democracy 

2) The Machinery of Democracy 

3 ) The Church and Politics 

4) The Democratic Way cf Life 

VT THE ECONOMIC ORDER 69 

1) The Economic Problem; History 

2) The Present Situation: Judgment 

3) Some Efforts at Solution 

4) The Communist Challenge 

5) Some Principles to Preserve 

VII TOWARDS WORLD ORDER 88 

1) Spiritual Foundations 

2) Political Foundations 

3) Economic Foundations 

4) Immediate and Long-range Tasks. 

5) The Role of the Church 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


118 







INTRODUCTION 







INTRODUCTION 


The story iq/told of a South American Indian woman 
who received a cheque from a missionary for whom she had 
performed a service. Not knowing its real value, hut de¬ 
siring to keep it for sentimental reasons, the native wom¬ 
an had the cheque fra med and hung on the wall-then 

lived on in poverty. Some time later a friend noticed the 
curio and explained its purpose. The cheque was promptly 
cashed to the benefit of the whole family. 

This is a parable of modern life. Our generation 
has received the forms of Christianity; but the forms have 
often seemed without value for the serious business of 
living -- so we live on in poverty of spirit. 

One ought not merely to mourn the fact, but should 
seek to understand the reason for our present state of 
mind. Even though religious words like "sin" and ,, G'Od M 
and "redemption” have lost meaning, most people still 
frankly acknowledge that they are in terrible need of a 
faith which will stand them in good stead. Even the bold¬ 
est in this brave new world admit as much; for bravery 
has proven itself only a shallow optimism insufficient 
for the day. While weaker ones have chosen to go the way 
of despair (and they shall have their reward), there are 
others who have forsaken their previous carefree attitudes 
in favor of seeking surer footing on firmer ground. 




















' 

1 U . . • ' •• r; 






& ' ' ■ 




• ’ 


• ■ 


. 






- 

■--- 
































■' ■/ .* ' ' . : ' ; ; ' 








. .. : 

■ • * ■ ' ' ;> 










> h k 










-il- 


In times like these, of course, there is always 
a *eman* for something new ana spectacular. Witness 
the Search for thrills vrhich lift ueoplo to momentary 
heavens, only to l e t them fall to earth with a thud. 

Among even the most serious-minded folk this same de¬ 
sire for the spectacular is exemplified by th e oft-r e - 
Peated oUeStion concerning a writer or lecturer:"pi* he 
say anything new, anything different?" 

In a searching little hook entitled"Heal Life is 

Meeting", J. H. Claham faces up to this attitude- 

where men acknowledge their nee* for faith but supoose 

that they must look for something new: 

The realities which condition man 1 s life 
do not change* To recall them is not to 
say anything new or startling. The r e al 
difficulty is that men have for so long 
lost their hoi* on these elementary truths 
that their meaning has to a large extent 
leaked away. We talk about them; w e think 
w e understand them. But the words w e use 

about them are empty ana unconvincing. 

we are on a false track, therefore, if w e 
are looking for something new to say. 

Society cannot be save* by wor*s, nor by 
ideas receive* an* communicated at a mere¬ 
ly intellectual level* Cur task is the far 
more difficult one of rediscovering irtv ex¬ 
perience an* action a meaning that has been 
lost. Thp elemental realities of existence 
must enter into and possess our entire being^ 
so that th e y exert their pow e r not through 
what w e say but through what w e are (l) 

Th e re can be no Christian handling of social issues 
without appreciation for the real meaning of the Christian 
faith. W e must be persuaded that Christian language is 


(1) Real Life Is Meeting by J.H. Oldham P. 13 








t 






1 * 
















ill- 


more than worn out symbols, more than jargon, but Is 
actually a Vehicle for r e al ana abiding truths about 
life* If therAis the slightest feeling that w e can 
give a familiar noa to the ola phrases by way of cour¬ 
tesy while passing on to "more important oractical 
oUestions”, th e n w e ar e op e n to frustration in any 
effort at a Christian approach to social issues* There¬ 
fore, our first purpose is to examine the Christian 
grouna for ethical behaviour. Chapters I to IV ar e de~ 
votea to this examination. 

A secona purpose is to investigate the general 
framework within which day-to-day social problems may 
be tackle^. It is p e rhaps a natural tena e ncy to tr e at 
a given social problem in isolation. Apart from their 
wiaer connections, for example, the race issue- or th e 
liquor problem may be wrongly understood ana fanatically 
aealt with* W e need a larger perspective* 

If, ther e for e , w e Seem to ignore questions usually 
r e gard e ri as major social problems, it is only in order 
that w e may clarify the wia e r context within which they 
may b e properly considered* Hence, in Chapters V ana VI 
w e deal with two of the M great associations”, so named by 
the sociologists: first the political and then the eco¬ 
nomic. 







-Iv¬ 


in all the more complex societies the organi¬ 
zations of the political ana economic or^er 
become the comprehensive framework of the 

social structure. n e utral means to 

which .all other interests may be pursued* 
Consequently, giv e n the technological basis 
of communication, they ar e capable of unlim¬ 
ited expansion. Together they constitute the 
great mechanism which m e n must use to obtain 
the objects of their desire* In their deVel- 
'opm e nt th e y establish great forms of social 
ord e r which both liberate an^ limit the ex¬ 
pression of all our primary interests. (1) 

The political ana. economic functions are means 

to human w e ll-being, n e ver e nas in themselves. ¥ e stuay 

them separately, though it is not possible to anaw hara 

ana fast lines between them. V/ages ana working conaitions 

4 

for example, may be determined in part by economic agen¬ 
cies ana in part by political regulation. Th e aistinction 
is not between spheres of activity but between m e thoas of 
action. The economic is usually on e of competing forces; 
the political method has a unifying ana therefore an anti« 
competetive interest. But both proviae that backgrouna so 
necessary e ith e r to understand or to ae&l with social 


orcblem.3 which app e ar at th e level of man’s primary int¬ 
erests: family life, group associations an^ so forth. 

It shoula also be noted that the discussion of th§so mat** 
ters is limited to the situation in Western industrial 
society, A vastly different picture woula be drawn for 
China or India, 


(l) Society: Its Structure ana Changes by R.M. Maclver 

P. 191 










I 


> ! 


t 


. 








■ 










-V- 


It is stated above that the associations of political and 
economic orders are capable of unlimited expansion. Re¬ 
cognition of this fact, and its conscious direction along 
creative lines, is the single greatest concern for mankind 
today. The concepts of the State and the nation confront 
us with a strange contradiction. They are the greatest 
instruments of national security and personal liberty; y©t 
they ar© also the greatest menace through involvement in 
war. This renders the problem of world ord^r the most 
pressing of all modern social issu e s; mad© especially ur¬ 
gent by scientific advances in swift communication and 
atomic fission. In Chapter VII w© consider first th e 
g e n e ral £r©nd toward worl* order and then the role of 
the Church in this resp©ct. 














THE CHBI3TIAN VIEW OF MAN: A PARADOXICAL BEING- 









Chapter I 

THE CHRISTIAN VIEW OF MAN: A PARADOXICAL BEING 

Christian ethics can be understood only in the 
light of Christian theology systematically treated. In 
a comprehensive work it would be well first to state one’s 
theological position, and then describe the ethical prin¬ 
ciples based thereon; but within our limited space a full 
discussion of theology is prohibited. However, we are not 
prevented from making a brief statement about the assump¬ 
tions which underlie all our ethical references. Since 
every system of thought and experience is founded upon 
certain assumptions, our first task is to acknowledge 
these. 

Where shall we cut into the pie?—— with what part 
of the whole shall we begin? It makes little difference 
in the final analysis, for if Christian theology be sys¬ 
tematically conceived, then any one part of the system ul¬ 
timately involves the whole. But there is wisdom in star¬ 
ting at a point which quickly leads to ethical consider¬ 
ations. We shall begin therefore with the Christian view 
of man* 

When the Dean of St. Paul’s, W.R. Matthews, gave a 
series of wartime addresses over the B. B. C., he chose the 

subject: ”What is Man?”. (1) He declared this the most 


(1) What is Man by W.R. Matthews (James Clarke & Co.) 













. 










fundamental of all questions we can ask, a question which 
every intelligent person puts to himself sooner or later. 
Dr. Matthews later commented: "Long after men have ceased 
to ask, f Who will win the war?* they will still be asking, 
T What is man?*" The study of man comes naturally to us; 
it immediately catches our interest. But this very theme, 
the study of ourselves, strangely carries us beyond our 
own inner consciousness, beyond even the physical, social 
and cultural environment to the ultimate questions of time 
and eternity. It presses us on to consider the nature of 
reality. Wot that man himself is the measure of all thing 
Rather, in him the riddle of the universe is brought to 
focus. Hence, any attempt to explain the universe must at 
the same time be an explanation of man; and vice versa. 
Every ideology must in fact be an anthropology. 

In the Christian view, man is a creature who lives 
on two planes. He lives most obviously on the plane of 
time event and history, let his experience bears testi¬ 
mony to another and higher level of existence, the eternal 
order. Various phases have been employed to express the 
notion: temporal and eternal, earthly and heavenly, the 
natural and the spiritual world. What philosophy renders 
in terms of "being and becoming", religion speaks of as 
"God and the world". Ho?^ever described, the substantial 
experience is the same. We are tied here; we yearn for 



r- - •• t : T :■ 

i ' 

• ■ j ' '■ ' ) ’ 

• -f* •vii . i Tj r ' < >o - X 

. 

■ 

.[.!• 7 v... I 7 • • •: ■ ■ .To. 7' ov t y • .' / ■' T. ! o' TOO • 0 ' : 

o tu.; •: • ■ v7 J ; oo ■ 7' r; , o;. ''too./ v Vo:. 7-' . / 

'. : . ; • • - v - . ; -. ■ : ' • • .7 

,• . ' i . 1 ■ 

.. ■ - .■ ■ ■ ■ 

. 1 •. ,7 . • • 1 : •• • ■ 7.- ’ ’ 

. 

. 


V • ! TO' ■ I'O . .*7 " T>- j f. .0 ( - j 1 

£ 0 ‘ i ' 





■ ■ \ r ' ■ T ; r: - c 

7 • i' 7\ "■ " • ,-v ■ v 

• • • ‘ ■ ■ • : 7 . ■ 

■ - •. •: 

' 

i ; 

‘ 

>( ; t V'" f f • ’■ ' o * Or 'Vi u ■ r= ( 0o 



- 3 - 


the beyond. Our sojourn is earthly; our destiny is marked 
out in heaven (to use religious terminology). And most 
fundamental: with all our cunning we cannot shut off the one 
from the other. 

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? 

Or whither shall I flee from thy presence? 

. My substance was not hid from thee 

when I was made in secret. 

How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, 0 God i 

How great is the sum of them.. 

Search me, 0 God, and know my heart; 

Try me and know my thoughts. (1) 

I fled Him, down the nights and down the days; 

I fled Him down the arches of the years; 

I fled Him down the labyrinthine ways 
Of my own mind; and in the midst of tears 
I hid from Him and under running laughter. 


Halts by me that footfall: 

Is my gloom after all. 

Shade of His hand, outstretched caressingly? (2) 

For the record it should be noted that experience 
of this sort implicitly holds a conception of God who is 
at once transcendent and immanent. Otherwise there can be 
no living connection between the two planes of experience, 
between God and the world, or any sense that man’s- destiny 
reaches beyond the temporal order. This theological pos¬ 
ition we acknowledge, without elaboration, as basic to our 
whole position. 

Let us consider further what happens to this crea¬ 
ture man. Soren Kierkegaard defined man as the synthesis 


(1) From Psalm 139 (2) The Hound of Heaven by Francis 

Thompson 











V ) 






X i 
















or.. 


fj ! 

. .. i ' . ■ • T 

< i j .■ i. 


mm 




k / 


v- - J » ' - i - ’ I r‘. ' 1 V’ ) 











- 4 - 


of time and eternity. Then he proceeded to show how men 
shift back and forth between the two as between two poles 
of their nature. He is attracted by one, then drwn to- 
ward the other. Neither alone can satisfy his inmost need 
as man. If either could, then he would cease to be the 
distinctive creature man. He must live with these two 
principles of his nature held in tension, thus marking his 
life by self-contradiction and paradox. It is this inner 
division that is exploited in the writings of Dostoevsky. 

It is the ground also for all experience of tragedy, the 
fact that man is higher than the animals but a little lower 
than the angels. 

What is the Christian interpretation of all this? 
What about a Christian anthropology? J.S. Wale sets it 
forth briefly according to three principles: First, man 
is God*s creature. His ereatureliness may be an inescap¬ 
able fact; but he is lifted above other creatures by hav¬ 
ing been made in the image of God, and by virtue of his 
awareness of that fact.* He knows that somehow he has been 
called into existence in order that he may willingly res¬ 
pond to the creators purposes. He is responsible to God. 
Emil Brunner labels it man*s ^addressability* or * answer- 
ability*, since it does not refer to something which man 
has to do: it is not in the first instance a task to per¬ 
form in response to a demand, but a *yes* to *1 have 




: .U ' 









: 1 ; 



- 5 - 


created and called thee; thou art mine* 1 . As the Westmin¬ 
ister Confession declares, the chief end of man is to 
glorify God and enjoy Him forever. Man is meant for fel¬ 
lowship with God. 

The second principle of Christian anthropology re¬ 
cognizes man 1 s denial of his distinctive endowment as a 
creature made in God*s image. The one who was made for 
fellowship with the Creator is estranged from his maker. 

He thus falls below all other creatures by repudiating 
an opportunity which belongs to him alone. In religious 
language: he is a sinner. And if we follow the implications 
of Brunner*s position stated above, or catch the spirit 
of the Westminster Confession, sin does not refer to a 
broken moral law but to a broken fellowship. Its roots 
are set in man*s self-certainty and pride. He usurps 
the place of God. The famous psychologist, Jung, had his 
own word for it: the ^Godalmightiness^ of man. 

Observe that we have been speaking of man in the 
corporate sense, and not of men as individuals. This sug¬ 
gests the third central thought in Christian anthropology. 
While sin has individual manifestations, and is known only 
through individual consciousness, the real nature of sin is 
never exhaustively described through individual references. 
The lives of men are so intimately bound together that even 
sin presents itself in solidary aspect, *in each the work of 
all; in all the work of each 11 , to use Schlen^piacher * s phrase 








• j ; i "• «( V 

. 


: 5 F. 


; ■ V 











. 






r u ' ■ ' ... ' - V 

c 

-r, i -r ; 1 ^ - ' 

: ■ • ' 

• • " > 0 i ' ! ' V ■ F 


r T s 


. . ■. • - : •: '/• 





- 6 - 


Bostoiev^sky says that in view of the reality of sin the 
solidarity of the race is a terrible fact: "we are each 
responsible for all to each". And Augustine felt the wei¬ 
ght of what he called the "sinful mass". J.S. Whale 
carries the notion right into fields recently investigated 
by certain shools of psychology: 

The work which psychologists are now doing on 
"the collective unconscious" goes to show that 
below not only the conscious, but also the uncons¬ 
cious life of the individual, there is a deep 
layer (as it were) of hidden, inborn forces: 
its content is not individual but universal and, 
as such, beyond the conscious control of the will. 
In speaking thus, psychology is only confirming 
the witness of the New Testament, that humanity is 
subject to possession or infection by evil from 
which no individual can dissociate himself. (1) 

Here then is the empirical fact of universal evil; 

Kant’s "das radikale Bose", But how is it to be accounted 

for? The question confronts all ciasses of thinkers. 

Certain of the philosophers have tried to account for its 

source in a merely negative principle in the universe 

which man must overcome. Their thought is illustrated by 

the figure of a hurdler surmounting the jumps on the 

race-track, yet unable to clear them all. Anthroplogists 

have tried to explain sin as an evolutionary survival from 

man*s animal origin. But neither of these views gives a 

satisfactory account of the moral content of sin and the 

experience of guilt which implies man’s own responsibility. 


(1)Christian Doctrine by J.S. Whale (Cambridge University 

Press) P. 46 









’ ■' * ) 










v:r-' \ 


t 


- 


" ,rl' 






- 7 - 


Indeed, any rational explanation of human sin necessarily 
exhibits a determinist character, no matter how refined, 
thus ruling out freedom and responsibility. Determine 
the cause of a moral fact and it ceases to be moral, since 
morality presupposes freedom in the sense of real choice. 

It is the universal experience of personal responsibility 
and guilt which drives us to assume man’s freedom and 
consequently to acknowledge his sin as an irrational fact. 

It cannot be explained; it can only be expressed. 

The Christian attempt to express the universal 
experience of freedom In the face of the universal fact of 
sin is found in the doctrine of the Fall. It is an irra¬ 
tional conception, since no rational category can contain 
the issue. It is mythological, having the splendid force 
of myth when treated as such, but defeating its own inten¬ 
tion when treated as literal history, which latter has 
brought the doctrine into disrepute. The idea of man’s 
fall from an original perfect state in Paradise is a nec¬ 
essary account of man’s double consciousness: his ’memory’ 
of a divinely intended quality of life along with his feeling 
of guilt. He knows he was made for fellowship with the et¬ 
ernal, yet he constantly denies it by his life. Here are 
the grounds for the continuing feud between the Creature and 
the Creator. 

Rebellious man lives a terrifying life, for the world 






- 8 - 


remains God’s world and he remains God’s creature. His 
alienation from God makes him feel an outcast and a wand¬ 
erer in a far country. He can deny but not destroy his 
endowment as a spiritual being; he can mar but not efface 
the divine image stamped upon him. He cannot feel at home 
in his fathers world; yet because he is still God’s 
creature, he must adheife to conditions of life in that 
world or be destroyed. Life which could have been lived 
in harmony w T ith God is experienced now under God’s harsh 
demand, n the curse of the law*. What might have been im¬ 
parted from God in Idve is by man’s own choice exercised 
in wrath. His bolt for freedom has rendered him prisoner 
in a weary land. He wistfully remembers the paradise 
and tome which once were his. A word from Nicolas Berdyaev: 

The problem of man is utterly insoluble if man 
be considered merely as a part of nature and 
correlative to it. He can only be interpreted 
through his relation to God; he can only be 
understood through the higher and not through 
the lower. Consequently, it is only the religious 
consciousness that has really tried to grapple 
with the problem of man. All theological doc¬ 
trines deal with it. There exists no philosophical 
anthropology in the true sense of the term, but 
there has always been a religious anthropology. 

The Christian teaching is that man is a being 
created by God in His image and likeness, free, 
but through his freedom fallen away from God, 
and in his fallen and sinful state receiving 
from God grace that saves and regenerates him.(l) 


(l)The Destiny of Man by Nicolas Berdyaev (Centenary 

Press; p. 46 







.. 








> :f : . 




r ::c 



' 


il ■ 






»; / /' 






ETHICS OF LAW AND ETHICS OF GRACE 











Chapter II 

ETHICS OF LAW AND ETHICS OF GRACE 

We have already suggested that man*s kinship with 
God is felt in terms of demand upon his life. And he knows 
it is no strage demand. As Paul Tillich says in "The In¬ 
terpretation of History": 

The demand which man receives is unconditioned, 
but it is not strange to him. If it were strange 
to his nature, it would not concern him; he could 
not perceive it as a demand on him. It strikes 
him only because it places before him in the form 
of a demand, his own essence. 

But the demand, which was intended to be angered by a 
"Yes" to God* s love, now presents itself as something to 
"do" in response to God’s command exercised in wrath. Good 
and evil are set over against each other. Everywhere man 
turns, decisions have to be made; to ignore them is at the 
same time to make them. There is no escape from decision 
and action, and no escape from their consequences. It be¬ 
comes a duty to seek the will of God and act accordingly. 

His will is made known through the mutual process of divine 
revelation and human discovery. But, to fallen man, the way 
it opens is always that of the moral law: the things one 
must do and the things from which he must refrain. This is 
what we mean when we say that man lives under the ethics of 
law. 

Legalistic ethics exhibits itself in both religious 
and secular forms. Its religious form is to be seen in 







- 70 - 


pharisaism, perhaps the highest level of religious and 
moral life attained by the Jewish people. Its secular 
form is found in the good citizen of unimpeachable 
character who abides by all the laws of the land. At 
first glance one would say that under the law life reach¬ 
es its highest expression; but there are hidden difficul¬ 
ties. 

In the first place, the ethics of law ignores the 
individual in favour of the group or society as a whole. 

It is always social, whether religious or secular. Soc¬ 
iety determines the rules, which rules are ethical norms 
universally binding. Everyone must fulfil its require¬ 
ments. All that matters to the law, as law, is the ex¬ 
tent to which individuals succeed or fail in their ob¬ 
ligation to adhere to the regulations. No allowance can 
be made for individual differences of personality or the 
variety of conditions under which people actually live. 
True, in criminal law some account Is taken of so-called 
^extenuating circumstances'* as, for example, when a man 
commits a crime under emotional stress. But these allow¬ 
ances only emphasize the point that when dividual cir¬ 
cumstances are considered the law is set aside in part or 
in the whole. Where law is applied, its application is 
universal. The privileged and the handicapped are alike 
in the eyes of the law. This is true of legalistic ethics 
at any level: the laws of the land, social custom, canon 





j, ’ 





1 ■' ' v 











. 


- , • . . V : 



C 










i 



















: 




i: 





' ’ 

• 













. 









. j;- i‘j 




V 


















. 

. ■ : M 








; 1 *0 ■/ 









* 


! •' / 


* 




V ' 



, . 

■ 

. • 








r- ■: i 

V V-;. j. Ko.cJ'- 

,1 




♦ 





■ 










■ / j 

• 








I 


i 



/ 







'■ ri '■ \‘1S t r.i. 

. ' 


r 





!! ; y y. 


t 

1 

: 



► 







■M 





: 












: : ;; 5 ■ 


> : 

{'.■‘SO 







- . - ; j„ 












" i'l . r 










. 


• ■ : > ' 









law and moral law. 


-//- 

Along with its ignorance of the individual, legal¬ 
istic ethics ignores the inner life in favour of outward 
acts. It deals with surface facts* Perhaps it will be 
argued that the proper use of criminal law, for example, 
sometimes does deal with the inner life by «establishing 
the motive for the o±me TT . But in these cases motive is 
taken into account only to establish the certainty of the 
overt criminal act so that proper punishment may be 
administered. The inner fact subserves an external end. 

The same is true for social mores or the moral law. It is 
the outward act which counts regardless of motive or in¬ 
tention; it determines the standing of a person in the 
community or church, and it is the governing factor in 
social relations. Law cannot deal with the evil motive 
which does not issue in an act of disobedience; nor can it 
recognize the good intention which is buried under cir¬ 
cumstance. No social norms, written or unwritten, can 
touch the inner, imtimately personal, unique life of the 
individual* 

Another difficulty: following its own inherent 
logic, the ethics of law inevitably sets up supreme goods 
Dy which everyone is to be judged and brought into line. 

In civil life, we may cite the flag and the required salute 
as a symbol of loyalty; in church life, acceptance of a 
creed or obserifX ance the Sabbath. These are, in truth. 







},•.. ,l ; "■ ' 1 T ; ' 


■ 


. 








•VK’I: 








> :>» 1 v.ri.iJ' &" | 




: ; ; "■ 3 ; 






j '-j' 


■ ’v' ' ;) • I ' i'Vti i i'O ■" v >' O {' 

. ' . , ; .. i 

. • ; t ■ i ' .< ■ 

■ j 








; . i ' 




! 




■ 






' ■ : ' 






. 


' f; C; 

. 

1; - ’ ' l 7 . ; j : 'v..±'\Vc'U< 

■ ' . ' . • . ' : ! • * ■' V- . "I: , ' ; ! 

; ■ i :aa : ~' ' . 1 i ■" • 








V ’ ‘ : .. -T 1 ' ' i 





-12- 


good, It is in their legalistic interpretation where 
harm is done; for then they are set above all other values. 
In the ethics of law, even human beings must be sacrificed 
on the altar of the supreme good. WJjy did Paul of Tarsus 
persecute the first Christians? He did so to preserve the 
strict observance of the Jewish law. And in a later gen¬ 
eration, the Church perpetrated the worst forms of cruel¬ 
ty to preserve souls from hell by forcing the acceptance 
of a creed. 

The most telling criticism of the ethics of law is 
this: it proves, by experience, impotent to deal with man’ 
most fundamental problem—— the fact fcf his sin and the 
need for restoration to God’s fellowship. Try as they 
may, men find the way of the law incapable of lifting 
the burden of guilt or freeing them from the power of 
sin. They still need ^at-one-ment” with God. Not only 
so, but the moral law is deceiving in this respect, for 
it so easily persuades one that fulfilment of God’s de¬ 
mands would surely accomplish the necessary restoration. 

It turns out to be a false hope. He becomes like the per¬ 
son who is so heavily in debt that current earnings are 
only enough to cover the interest thereon; he pays the 
dues faithfully, but can never get beyond the business 
relationship to one of pure friendship with his creditor. 
The analogy must not be carried too far. It merely sug¬ 
gests that man’s basic problem, his broken relationship 



, S'jf; 1'! •• : 

: 

/* ' < .1 ' 



. 

i 




' 







i 

i 

- . 

: ' a 

. 

' 

. : Oitf- 






- 13 - 


with God, is not mended even by adhering as best he can 

to God f s demands. Let Berdyaev sum up the matter: 

The law neither cares about the individual’s 
life nor gives him strength to fulfil the good 
tahich it requires of him. This is the essential 

contradiction of the ethics of law.the 

law is necessary for the sinful world and cannot 
simply be cancelled. But it must be overcome 
by a higher force; the world and man must be 
freed from the impersonal power of the law. (1) 

It is a strange paradox when something manifestly 
good must be fought without compromise. Yet that is ex¬ 
actly the case which Jesus had against the Pharisees. 

He placed publicans and sinners above the Pharisees, the 
unclean above the clean, those who had not fulfilled 
the law above those who had. The very prostitutes are 
closer to God’s Kingdom. Whyf Because they know the true 
measure of their sin as separation from God. They ack¬ 
nowledge the power of sin. They are therefore fertile 

soil for the true seed of salvation-- the grace of God. 

Christian faith and experience declares that what 
man finds necessary to the fulfilment of his destiny 
but is incapable of doing for himself, that God does. 

Human extremity is always God’s opportunity. Man’s 
supreme need is for reconciliation with his Maker; his 
destiny lies in fellowship with God. But we have seen that 
the relationship is not in fact restored by meeting the 
moral demands of God, even in meticulous fashion. Noth¬ 
ing man has to offer, whether of his substance or of 


(1 ) Destiny of Man by Nicolas Berdyaev (Centenary Press) 

P. 95 








' • . ‘ 


- : 

. 


V- . • 



■ 

... 

■ ' ' . ' 






- 

■ ■ ■■' ; •' ■ >• 

■ 



















- 




. 













• 


. ■ ■: (jf' ■ ': ; ';/■ n ■ - : r v.; 

t ; ■. i - , 




- 14 - 


himself, can accomplish his redemption. If he is to ex¬ 
perience salvation at all, it cannot be of his own doing. 
That is the bitter conclusion of those who have struggled 
to achieve through the way of moral law. It is the cen¬ 
tral insight of Chrisitan faith that in the face of human 
helplessness God spoke a new word in the figure of Christ. 
God again took the initiative; he came to man in a man, 
as one ready to share the fate of the world through suf¬ 
fering, declaring forgiveness full and free. The creature 
who has proven unacceptable to God has in fact been acc¬ 
epted by God. The undeserving has been given the status 
he so terribly needs. All other requirements are set 
aside: the only condition is that a man accept the bare 
fact that he is accepted. To the uninitiated, all this 
will appear a meaningless mystery, but to those who have 
been called into Christian experience it is both wisdom 
and power. Passages from the frymns and scripture crowd 
to mind: 

Not the labours of my hands 

Can fulfil thy laws demands; 


All for sin could not atone: 

Thou must save, and Thou alone. (1) 

God commendeth His love toward us, in that, while 

we were yet sinners, Christ died for us... . 

where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. { 2 ) 

Plenteous grace with thee is found, 

Grace to cover all my sin; 


(IJFrom the hymn by Augustus Toplady. (2 ) Romans J5: 8 & 20 










V , ' : : : ■ \ ^ : . O i 

, ■ ; ■ ; : •/ : *•* 1 ! 





- 15 - 


Let the healing streams abound; 

Make and keep me pure within. (3) 

If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature..,. 

.God was in Christ, reconciling the world 

unto himself. (4) 

The Apostle Paul saw and felt these things on the back¬ 
ground of a supreme effort to find satisfaction by way of 
the law. His dismal failure in that way only served to 
heighten his sense that the way of God*s grace was good 
news in tea- truth. What a strange condition for renewal; 
"nothing in my hands I bring". It was incredible but 
true. 

There are many religions which know no divine 
welcome to the sinner until he has ceased to be one. 
They would first make him righteous, and then 
bid him welcome to God. But God in Christ 
first welcomes him, and so makes him penitent 
and redeems him. The one demands newness of life; 
the other imparts it. The one demands human 
righteousness as the price of divine atonement; 
the other makes atonement in order to evoke 
righteousness. Christianity brings man to Bod 
by bringing God to man. The glory of the Gospel 
is the free pardon of God, offered to all who 
will receive it in humble faith. (5) 

The state of grace exhibits its own peculiar 
elite, distinct from the ethics of law. We are in a pos¬ 
ition now briefly to examine its nature. The most no¬ 
ticeable feature of Gospel morality is its sheer energy. 

It is based on a heightening of powers through the grac¬ 
ious activity of God. In psychological terms we might 


(3)From a hymn by Charles Wesley. (4)11 Cor. 5:17-19 
(5)Christian doctrine by J.S. Whale (Cambridge University 
Press) P. 78-79 







-16- 


speak of "released energy 11 . Its demonstration by first 

century Christians led bystanders to suppose that the 

followers of the Nazarene consumed a new and very potent 

liquor. The Acts of the Apostles abound in energy: 

and every great period in the history of the Church has 

been marked by powers newly felt. The true life in Christ 

is characteristically dynamic. 

Christian experience always identifies God as the 

source of the new life in man. These powers come from on 

high. He is the source of impulses to ethical behaviour. 

The moral life is no longer a struggle to perform good 

works as under the law. On the contrary, good works are 

the glad offering of one who lives in the Spirit: 

The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, 
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith 
meekness, temperance. (1) 

We love because he first loved us. (2) 

The first-named of the fruits of the Spirit is love. 

Love is the primary ethical quality of the Christian life. 

We shall examine its character more closely in a chapter 

to follow. Let one question suffice for the moment: 

Does the principle of love surmount the difficulties we 

have discovered in the ethics of law? The chief weakness 

of the latter, it has been pointed out, is its failure to 


(l)Galations 5: 22-23 


( 2 ) I John 4: 19 






Hi;/ if /: tf'wp 11: 

. 

. 




■ , 

X ' - 







- 





t 

1 fe 




_ 

:, 1 



.1 fc't.«I h h '"5 ■ ii -l%:* f,'!'OT 


. 

■ ■ : . ;r- : ' 



-17- 


restore man to God’s fellowship when it would seem so 
sensible a means for that very purpose. The principle 
of love obviates the difficulty, for Christian love is 
conceived as the outcome of redemption rather than its 
means. It is not expressed by the natural man on this 
side of redemption but by the new man on the other side 
of the redemptive experience. 

Another major problem we cited in connection with 
legalistic ethics is its tendency to establish universally 
binding norms. Can Christian love be regarded as a social 
norm requiring legalistic emulation from the individual 
and tyrannical application in society? The answer must 
again be in the negative when we look at the nature of 
love. Love is a response to its own kind, never the re¬ 
sult of regulation, whether by personal effort from within 
or by coercive force from without. Enforced love is a 
contradiction in terms. 

The supreme good, the ultimate norm in the ethics 
of law, is replaced in Gospel ethics by a Personality 
on the Godward side and a personal relationship on the 
manward side. The test-question put to Jesus aroBe from 
a legal interest: ^Which is the greatest commandment? 11 
Surely the answer would distinguish a norm. ^Thou shalt 
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy 
souj , and with all thy mind. This is the ILrst and great 









< 


‘, i' '*■ 






' 


, 


' i' 







' 



■ 








• 





' ■ 





: ’■ V : 









, ' l 


: 7 \ ■■ 


' 

- 


• 



'• 7 '"7; ' , r r ■ < ' 








“ •";> ' ' • ' ' ■ • <\ ' • v .v 











, 

-V V, ; 







. 




■ 

/?■ 

. j.l. 







-18- 


commandment. And the second is like uhto it: Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself”. (1) Neither is obeyed 
as the law is obeyed. The first is a response to the 
grace of God; the second is the fruit of the Spirit, 
which is the work of God’s grace. 

On/i.ts human side the ethics of grace puts man in 
the center. Abstract normative law must give way to human 
interests. Man, and not the good, is the basis of ethical 
judgment. This was the new normality proclaimed by Jesus 
when he was challe^ed on the Sabbath: ”The Sabbath was 
made for man and not man for the Sabbath”. (2) He de¬ 
clared the issue to rest not on the abstract notion 
’’Sabbath 17 to which people were enslaved, but rather on a 
consideration of man’s peculiar needs. Love for man always 
means something of the sort; it is never mere emotion. 

Here is the only sound humanism. 

Note finally that Christian love can never be ex¬ 
ercised in the abstract. We speak easily of loving mankind; 
but this has no meaning apart from love for concrete per¬ 
sons in a real-life situation. So stern is the New Test¬ 
ament on this point that even one’s claim to love God is 
given the concrete test: ’’If a man say, I love God, and 
hateth &is brother, heAs a liar: for he that loveth not 


(l)Matt. 22: 36-39 ( 2 ) Mark 2: 27 







S'. 




? 1 



\ 










-19- 


his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God 
whom he hath not seen?" (1) The principle forces one 
to consider the individual in his setting. Thus, in 
opposition to legalistic ethics, the ethics of grace 
assumes that every moral problem requires its own pe¬ 
culiar solution. 

We have contrasted the ethics of grace and of law. 
The one supersedes the other, but does not do away with 
it. "Think not that I am come to destroy the law", said 
Jesus, "I am come not to destroy but to fulfil." (2) 

Law can never disappear from a sinful world. Law and 
grace co-exist; and, as we shall presently endeavour to 
show, they both have important social implications. 

Our purpose in thus distinguishing them is to avoid a 
confusion which all too often has attended the application 
of Chrisitan ethics to social problems. 


(1) I John 4: 20 


(2) Matt. 5:. 17 








THE SOCIAL GOSPEL AND THE KINGDOM OF GOD 













Chapter III 


THE SOCIAL GOSPEL AND THE KINGDOM OF GOD 

In intelligent discussion of social issues in 
the light of Christian ethics requires some reference 
to ansfciphasis in Christian thought and activity known 
as the ^social gospel". For good or ill the social 
gospel has profoundly affected every phase of the Churches 
life: its preaching, its worship, its missionary en¬ 
deavour and its approach to political and economic ques¬ 
tions* It has been a deep-seated movement with an ob¬ 
servable history. Charles H. Hopkins has performed a 
vital service in tracing the story. (1) 

Within the American scene, Hopkins goes back to 
the year 1865 in his study of the manifestations of social 
Christianity. He finds in that period a religious at¬ 
mosphere exhibiting four distinct emphases: 1) A conven¬ 
tional, orthodox, complacent Protestantism which could not 
or would not take account of social problems as duch. 2 ) 

A few enlightened conservatives who were wrestling with 
the problems created for theology by the new sciences, 
including the science of sociology which was confronted 
with the needs of an industrialized society. 3 ) A strain 
of evangelical hope and fervor which had motivated the 
attack on slavery and intemperance a few years before 

and was still a powerful force in some sections of the 
(1) The Rise of the Social Gospel in American ProtesIxLsm by 

C/icc^/c** //• /r A 



















' 



‘ 

c 




■ 













• v . 


••• ... r : • ■ ■; / •: 


• 




' ' . 


. 









| i 



. 





. ' 

. 

, ' < 







■ ■' ' ' ■ .i'' ■;} 1 






' ' ; 


. 








-21- 


cWurc/i. 4) A left-wing type of rational philosophy, pre¬ 
dominantly Unitarian, which challenged both the assump¬ 
tions and the ethics of orthodox conservatism* 

From the very outset, the challenge centered about 
a re-interpretation of the Kingdom of God. In 1865 Edward 
Beecher denounced the traditional view of a purely spirit¬ 
ual kingdom and declared that the Church was ordained for 
the ultimate purpose of bringing w civil government, the 
state, commerce, political economy, the arts and sciences, 
and the schools, under the influence of God 11 . (:£) While 
there never was a complete black-out of orthodox views, 
it was this sort of statement which carried the day. By 
the 1880*3 the movement was taking conscious shape, and 
the ideal of the kingdom of God as a terrestrial possibi¬ 
lity was making its appeal felt far and wide. Witness a 
characteristic statement of the period on the part of 
William E. Dodge: 

The times dall for an applied Christianity that 
can meet all the needs and relations of man to 
mah. It cannot remain merely defensive, and- 
must prove its adaptiveness to all needs and all 
conditions. The full brotherhood of men under 
one Father and in one household must be its watch¬ 
word, with a meaning never known before. (3) 

It was a mixed company who joined to proclaim the 

new gospel. Figures like Co. Robert G. Ingersoll and Henry 

George were berating a socially ineffective Protestantism, 


(.2) Ibid P. 19 

(3) As reported by Hopkins, Ibid, P. 50. 






_ ; - ... 

. ..n : ■ •; ' f ;' i ■ ■ ... ■ * l:dj$ : •• 

! : t] ' . : " 

: • ' , i- . : ■ 7 ■' ' i 

■ : ■ ' ■ V . V" V : ■: V 




' , ) ' , : i ■ ■ .i '■ ;V „!■; \ ' 

\ („ j i 3 1 ; 1 

' 

* I : : 









•' ^ c;.', 


- 


; 


- 

• ■ ;■ .i ■ T . , 

• ■; ’ • ’ 

r 





-22- 


while Horace Bushnell was endeavouring to ennunciate a 
new theology whose central doctrine declared a living 
Incarnation, adtive in all the processes of life. The 
general trails of thought were being clarified as follows: 

a) Reaction from the traditional otherwordly and individ¬ 
ualistic outlook. 

b) Fresh emphasis on the social and humanitarian aspects 
of the commandment to ”love thy neighbour as thyself”. 

c) Efforts to develop techniques of applying the law of 
love to complicated social questions. 

d) Search for ethical norms in the teachings of Jesus; also 
in the Old Testament. 

E) Salvation defined within a moral frame of reference. 

f) The ultimate social ideal-the Kingdom of God. 

g) The Church must lead in a new social crusade. 

By the 1890’s the social gospel had come of age. 

It had come to terms with the new sciences; it had taken 
a leading part in Church councils; it had even made succ¬ 
essful overtures to the rising labour movement. Hundreds 
of names are linked with a stream of books, pamphlets and 
sermons of the time. We note some of thetr?4har act eristic 
statements: 

The object of Christianity is human welfare; its 
method is character-building; its process is ev¬ 
olution; and the secret of its po?/er is God. 

(Lyman Abbott) 

The immanence of Christ, the vital unity of the 
race, the presence of the kingdom—-these truths 
give to life a new sacredness and to duty a new 
cogency. (Washington Gladden) 

The world in this sociological age needs $ new 
social ideal to direct the progress of civili¬ 
zation. Let the Church fully accept her mission 
and she will furnish this needed ideal, viz., 
her Master’s conception of the kingdom of God 
come upon earth. (Josiah Strong) 

We aim to entrhrone Christliness as the dominant 








- 








v 












• . : ) 






1 , .Q 
' V'- '"i ; 10 









-23- 


principle in industrial, commercial, social and 

political, as well as in individual action- 

the Kingdom of God on Earth is the right Social 
Order wherein every one gets the full reward of 
his labour and the fullest enjoyment of all his 
possessions, (pamphlet of the "Christian Working¬ 
mens Institute”) 

One can sense the prevailing mood of the times. There was 
an earnest desire for the social expressions of Christiania 
Men wanted to translate Chrisitan theory into Christian 
practice; a science of Christian society, in the words of 
Graham Taylor in 1899: "sociology with God left in it". 
Hopkins sums up the period: "The ruling theological ideo¬ 
logy of the day accepted an evolutionary kingdom of God 
to be built upon earth by men of good will, such a kingdom 
being the end result of an almost inevitable progress (2) 
By the turn of the oent u ry the social gospel was 
the dominant note among thinking and influential jeople. 

It had been shaped through difference and debate. In its 
own turn, it began to shape events. Its devotees were no 
longer voices in the wilderness but the recognized leaders 
of civil life. The social gospel had become orthodox. The 
trend was still forward, but its leaders could now with 
safety turn inward to interpret the significance of their 
movement. 

Unquestionably the greatest figure was Walter 
Rauschenbusch, He came upon the Crest of a successful 
revolution in religious interpretation; yet in his persa&l 

(2) Hopkins, Ibid, 


P. 121 









• -t 


V. 











r 


T 






'I 




j 


i 



ro k; 





- 24 - 


life and work was drawn through practical experiences whl ch 
burned the sense of need for a social gospel into his very 
soul* He thus became at once the prophet of social right¬ 
eousness and the arch interpreter of a movement which was 
rapidly reaching its peak. His book published in 1907, 
"Christianity and the Social Crisis" brought Rauschenbusch 
into prominence after years of pastoral work in slum areas 
of New York, study, writing and teaching. His book of 
prayers published in 1910 testified to his deeply religi¬ 
ous basis for social outlook. So profoundly did he feel 
the need for adequate religious gounding for any social 
movement, that this became the theme for his last and 
perhaps greatest book: "A Theology for Today". Rauschenbu¬ 
sch was sensitive to a danger which indeed overtook the 
movement he loved—--a subtle humanizing of the gospel 
until its reliance upon God was little more than a token 
one. Large numbers ultimately joined forces with secular 
political and social agencies. Those remaining within the 
fellowship of the Church saw the fruits of their labours 
in a few isolated experiments in Christian community liv¬ 
ing and in the establishment of Christian social service 
departments designed to keep a weather eye on political 
and economic life. These departments have performed syro*?' 

task by keeping the public informed as to the Christian 
implications of political and economic conditions and by 
exercising pressure among private and public agencies for 








. 











i 





















: i 





■ ' i 


u : '' 'V' i 







- 25 - 


a more just social order. It may also be argued that 
this great upsurge of concern for the social application 
of Christian principles produced a public opinion favor¬ 
able to welfare activities as a responsibility of govern¬ 
ment. 

Assessing the Social Gospel 

Though Hopkinses analysis began with the year 1865, 
he would be the first to admit that the real roots of the 
social gospel geach down to scriptural soil. Biblical 
studies had revealed the prophets as men who fought in 
the social struggles of their own day, always on the side 
of the oppressed, always upholding the rights of the com¬ 
mon poor against the tyrannical rich. Amos, Micah, Jer¬ 
emiah and the rest became models for those in our time who 
seek to establish justice and righteousness in public life. 
Likewise, the modern approach to the New Testament revealed 
the historical Jesus, the man of Galilee who went about 
doing good, who loved the poor and hated any form of pri¬ 
vilege. There can be little doubt that in matters of 
social justice Jesus set himself squarely in the tradition 
of the prophets. Jesus thus became the moral example, 
and the sole Christian duty was to follow in his footsteps 
and do as he did. 

These ideas were not new, but they were brought 
out so clearly that they were like a breath of fresh air 
to Christians for whom religion seemed to have little 














' 








. 

v i ; , : ; ,'y • ,t ■ 








i • - 






•; 

■■ 





: ;i ' i/T 













‘ 
















' 





■ 






• 

■ - .ni>r ; 

' 

« 









;■ -ri ' 






■ 

' 


' 









• 









































- 26 - 


bearing on daily life. All the intricacies of theologi¬ 
cal doctrine could now be set aside as secondary; the 
entanglements of ritual worship could be ignored. Reli¬ 
gion was taken from behind the cloisters onto the highway 
of life. Religion became practical. The dominant desire 
was to serve mankind at every point of human and material 
need, whether through one of the many forms of social ser¬ 
vice or through the more radical approach of changing the 
very structure of the social order. Whatever the means 
adopted, the goals of Christian citizenship were those of 
peace and plenty. 

It was no difficult matter (as indeed it never is) 
to find scriptural support for the new movement. The 
literature of the social gospel highlighted passages like 
the following: 

*What doth the Lord require of thee but to 
do justly, love mercy and walk humbly with 
thy God.* (1; 

"They shall beat their swords into ploughshares 
and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation 
shall not lift up sword against nation, neither 
shall they learn war any more*. (2) 

H Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay 
field to field, till there be no place, that they 
may be placed alone in the midst of the earth.*(3) 


(1) Micah 6: 8 
(2; Isaiah 2: 4 
(3) Luke 6: 20 







. 


• •' » ■ , > 1 • . 


' 







h ■ i:;v t :■ - , . ■ . v> vt' : • " 


r-. 


■ 






-i v 






- 27 - 


"He that hath two coats, let him impart to him 
that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him 
do likewise 11 (1) 

"Blessed are ye poor for yours is the Kingdom 
of Heaven". (2) 

"In Christ there is neither Jew nor Greek". 

The proponents of the social gospel performed a 
vital service in showing unmistakably that religion, 
certainly Christianity, cannot rightly be divorded from 
the actual conditions of men*s lives. If some generations 
of Christians have erred in otherworidly persuits, neglect¬ 
ing immediate relationships of man to man and nation to 
nation, this modern reappraisal of the Gospel certainly pro* 
ved a good antidote. The Church will suffer great loss 
if these newly discovered values are allowed to disappear. 

At the same time, it is our duty to see wherein the 
new mood went to extremes and with what unfortunate con¬ 
sequences. Perhaps the clearest evidence that something w r as 
amiss was the fact that so many who began assuredly to re¬ 
form the world in the name of Christ became disillusioned 
and embittered. They started well but didn T t have staying 
power; they ran out of enthusiasm. Nor was It just the 
fact of failure, but rather that these folk became tired 
failures ——•— darkened spirits who had once held the light 
high. They are to be found amongst all ranks: minister^ 
politicians, teachers and social workers. And the contrast 
between them and the Peters and Pauls, the saints and mart- 


(IjLuke 3:11, Luke 6:20, Galations 3: 58 















: 

' 

. 

: • ' ' ; : !• 

1 . » • . 

■' :r-’) ■ j. t * ' ; : rc , 

■ ' : . . ; ’ ‘ ' 

' 

. ■ j . 

■ 

, • 

, 

. 

• ■ • I 

, / ' 






- 28 - 


yrs, is too obvious to overlook. From a practical 
standpoint the causes are evident in the one-sidedness of 
a religious outlook which concentrates almost solely on 
the acknowledged social objectives of Christian faith to 
the neglect of the spiritual means of Christian effort. 

Prayer and worship had been allowjed to slip. The roots had 
been cut off. The w-ells of inspiration had run dry. 
However it may be described or accounted for, the fact 
is that thousands were alienated from God in their very 
desire to do his will. And now, many of the leaders and 
professional workers in the Christian cause (perhaps the 
more honest ones) have frankly recognized their spiritual 
plight and quit their jobs for other *socially useful" 
work by which they may at the same time support their 
families more adequately. Meanwhile, hosts of the common 
folk are as sheep without a shepherd. 

Why should Christians, honestly persuing Christian 
objectives, thus be disillusioned? Answers to questions 
of this sort can only be suggested by a discovery of flaws 
in the basic assumptions of the proponents of the social 
gospel. One could approach this subject theologically, 
by examining the inadequacies of an over-emphasis on 
immanence in the doctrine of God. He could also atteck the 
question from the standpoint of the nature of man, demon¬ 
strating the exceeding sinfulness of sin and the inevitable 
crash of human systems. The social gospel exhibited a 




- 29 - 


a naive and unfounded optimism in regard to man. But v/e 
shall tackle this at still another point: the conception of 
the Kingdom of God. 

The Kingdom of God 

We have already pointed out the impossibility of 
dealing with modern social issues without reference to the 
social gospel. The same may be said for the Christian 
notion of the Kingdom of God. John Baptist announced the 
coming of a new Kingdom, and a major share of Jesus * 
teaching centers on the nature of the Kingdom of God. No 
one doubts that, in the Christian view of society, both the 
human objective and the divine intention are expressed in 

terms of the Kingdom of God-the reign of God. But v/e 

run into difficulty in trying to determine the nature of 
the Kingdom. When, where and how is it to be established? 
These questions have exercised Christian thinkers from the 
very beginning. At least four different positions have 
been held: 

1. The early Church (up to the end of the 3rd. CenturyJ 
was devoted to the idea of an earthly Kingdom -which would 
be established in the very near future, at the second 
coming of our Lord. There was to be a visible reign of 
complete righteousness in which the saints would administer 
a society based on love and justice until the last judgment. 

2. When the expected leader did not appear in visible 
fashion and, when the Church 'was finally adopted by the 
temporal powers in the days of Emperor Constantine, there 
was a tendency to forget the former hope and accept the 
actually existing order of society as the Kingdom. The 
status quo is the Kingdom, a notion v/hich did not die with 
those early centuries. 







- 30 - 


3* There have been periods when those of a mystical turn 
of mind held sway. They declared that the Kingdom already 
was in existence; not in this order, however, but wholly 
in the world of spirit. 

4. Finally, there have always been those who hold that 
the Kingdom exists neither now row here, but will be inau¬ 
gurated in the reign of God after a last judgment. 

In the twentieth century there has been a clear-cut 
division. Some declare the Kingdom of which Jesus spoke 
to be a new order of society among men, established pro¬ 
gressively by growing good will and by legislative means: 
re-distribution of the world*s goods and services, measures 
of social security, enforcement of international law and 
the like. Others regard the Kingdom as some "far off 
divine event" or, as Ernest Thomas used to say, "a post¬ 
mortem state of experience". Now the social gospel 

lent itself to the former conception and rendered the lat¬ 
ter suspect. At the s&me time, the apparent weaknesses of 
the social gospel have lead Christians again to examine 
the nature and meaning of this admittedly central and yet 
strangely elusive notion of the Kingdom of God. 

Moderns have a feeling for historical accuracy. It 
is spiite to be expected therefore that we should seek for 
the meaning of the Kingdom of God by tracing the history 
of the conception, and particularly, by trying to determine 
precisely wrhat Jesus himself meant by the Kingdom. A 
supreme effort along this line was made by C.C. McCown in 
"The Genesis of the Social Gospel". He finds that in the 











.> 'i: h; 









r 





V 











c. 






i 






- 31 - 


light of history Jesus 1 own conception of the Kingdom was 
shaped first by a cultural inheritance which included 
factors of climate, soil, nomadic experience, international 
entanglements, prophetic messages and apocalyptic hopes. 
Secondly, the actual situation in which he lived influenced 
Jesus' thought of the Kingdom. There was economic dispar¬ 
ity between rich and poor; there were social distinctions 
in relation to birth and piety; there were inumerable re¬ 
ligious sects and factions; and hopes for the future varied 
as between the Zealots who desired the overthrow of Roman 
domination and the Essenes who retreated to a monastic 
life. McCown concludes that the only satisfying message 
to Israel must offer some medicine for economic, political 
and social ills; and he holds that Jesus did actually pro¬ 
pose a revolutionary solution. He finds no evidence for a 
purely transcendental view of the reign of God. Jesus used 
the language of the prophets and the psalmists. He accep¬ 
ted apocalyptic conceptions and acknowledged his role as 
messiah. And yet he brought a new interpretation to-the 
office. The people looked for a violent over-throw of their 
Roman master; they expected annihilation of all evil and 
<gvil-doers; the poor and suffering were at last to escape 
their troubles. For his part, Jesus did not fall in line 
with all these aims. He even counselled submission to Rome. 
His Kingdom was a spiritual one in the truest sense. It 
was not one of earthly government or physical force. Even 







vi't '■ i 


' 











■ ■:. o'f .. v 


, . ' » .1 


- 




. 


■ 






- 32 - 


though a product of social forces, it was purely inward 
and moral. 

Jesus expected the reign of God here upon earth. 

The principles of conduct he enunciated were pre¬ 
paratory to a new life here. they were his 

solution to the social problems of his people (1) 

in this view, the teachings of Jesus realized in the heart 

inevitably affect outward social conditions. Moreover, it 

is essential that social conditions be altered if the ideals 

of Jesus are to gain ascendancy in the life of man. It 

works both ways. It is further held that since Jesus did 

rot foresee conditions under modern democratic institutions, 

the burden of interpretation is upon us to determine our own 

responsibilities in the light of his principles. 

F.G. Grant, in his Gospel of the Kingdom, likewise 

plays the part of historian. He finds that Jesus had to 

employ categories of thought which lay to hand, and that he 

chose these from the Law, the Prophets and the Psalms. His 

Kingdom was neither otherworldy, as interpreted by later 

* 

generations, nor political, as inevitably understood by 
his messianic contemporaries. His doctrine was the purest 
form of theocracy: 

Far from being purely transcendental and other¬ 
worldly, Jesus 1 conception of the Kingdom of God was, 
as far as we can make out from the basic tradition 
underlying the gospels, that of the Reign of God to 
be realised completely upon the soil of Palestine, 
the holy land. Its center was to be here, but its 

influence would reach to the ends of the earth. 

It is an earthly Kingdom, Jewish—yet international 
in aim and purpose; acknowledging no King but God— 
yet diametrically opposed to all programs of violence 

(l)The Genesis of the Social Gospel by G.G. McCowap(A.AKnopf 

1999 ^ 328 













V 


f 










. 









r 

















- 33 - 


like that of the Zealots; at basis a purely 
religious conception, unaffected by the pol¬ 
itical and social termoil of the time -yet 

(since Jesus$ following was widespread) open 
to misifitierpretation as a plan for revolution. (1) 

The conclusions of McGown and Grant are similar. The 

Kingdom was Jesus* practical program for the problems of 

his day, indeed, for all times when rightly understood as 

a spiritual Kingdom. 

In its own right, the historical approach is sound. 
It reveals truth. Yet one cannot help but feel that its 
truths are partial. It cannot comprehend the whole. His¬ 
tory can describe the foundations, but cannot explain the 
^emergence of that which is precisely new, whether it be 
the uniqueness of Jesus’ personality or the new element 
In his teaching. The historians admit that while Jesus 
used the current categories of thought he filled them with 
new meaning; yet there is no real attempt to explain the 
source of the new. 

New Testament scholars generally admit that apfcft 
from the resurrection experiences th-owever interpreted) 
there would be no Christian movement founded on the living 
Christ of faith, but only a memory of yet another in the 
long line of prophets. In other words, events after the 
death of Jesus have a controlling influence on our under¬ 
standing of the meaning of Jesus' life. If this be the 


(l)The Gospel of the Kingdom, F. C. Grant, P .131 












- 34 - 


case, it is false to assume that Jesus own thought concern¬ 
ing the Kingdom should alone be determinative and that in¬ 
terpretations based on Christian faith and experience are 
to be pared away if we are to understnad the nature of the 
Kingdom of God. True, conceptions other than those held 
by Jesus crept into the accounts of his life by the Gospel 
wW'ters and into the letters of Paul. But these form a 
lfegitimate part of a growing idea of the Kingdom which 
cannot arbitrarily be ignored in formulating our thought 
of the Kingdom. 

Evidently the notion of the Kingdom does break the 
thought forms of any single period, and rightly demands re¬ 
statement to meet the needs of another. To acknowledge 
this fact is only to extend the logic of MeGown 1 s own 
thinking. For he assumes that if Jesus was to present a 
satisfactory solution of his nation’s problems he must 
offer some medicine for its economic and social ills in 
this world. Later events proved the need for a fulfilment 
of the kingdom beyond the stage of history. An earthly 
kingdom of God, however spiritual, was no solution to those 
whose lives were frustrated by evil curcumstance and who 
were doomed to die without any sense of fulfilment of their 
destiny. But they did see just that necessary fulfilment 
in the notion of the Kingdom. If we are looking for cat¬ 
egories for understanding the Kingdom we must turn to Ch¬ 
rist/an experience--- the life of faith and devotion. 




















. ■ 











-35- 

Christians have never been able to contain the 
Kingdom within the orbit of one Idea. It always spills 
over into another contradictory thought. This seems at any 
rate to be the case in the New Testament presentation of 
the Kingdom. The Kingdom is here and now an inward pos¬ 
session: 11 The Kingdom of God is within you” (1) And yet 
it is also a future state: "Remember me when thou comest 
into thy kingdom.” (2) The Kingdom is to be realized in 
the world: "There be some standing here which shall not 
taste death, till they see the Son of Man coming in his 
kingdom." (3) But it belongs to another order of exist¬ 
ence: "My Kingdom is not of this world". (4) Again, it 
is like something a man seeks for: "Like unto a man seek¬ 
ing goodly pearls" ( 5 ) yet it comes of divine giving 
rather than human endeavour: "It is your Father’s good 
pleasure to give you the kingdom." ( 6 ) 

In more than a hundred references to the Kingdom 
there is a mocking of any effort to tie it down. Weather- 
head describes the outcome: "All your questions are ev¬ 
asions. Here is the Kingdom. Enter it now. There is the 
Kingdom; work for its coming. It is at once a heavenly 
and an earthly state. When you pray say, ’Thy Kingdom 

come. Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth*." (7) 

(1) Luke 17: 21 ( 5 ) Matt. 13: 45 

(2) Luke 23: 42 ( 6 ) Luke 12: 32 

(3) Matt. 16: IS ( 7 ) in Quest of a Kingdom by Leslie 

(4) John 18: 36 Weatherhead (Toronto: Hodder & 

Stroughton) P. 40. 





■■ . 

. 







■ 










- 36 - 

We are thus thrust into the language of paradox 
in our interpretation of the Kingdom of God; our formula 
must be "both-and" in character. It is both here and 
there; both now and in the future* It is inward, but with 
external expressions. It is to be sought after as a prize, 
yet received as a gift. 

Significance for Christian Ethics 

In Chapter II we drew a distinction between the 
ethics of law and the ethics of grace. That distinction 
now comes to hand in determining the relationship between 
the gospel of the Kingdom and the social gospel. When we 
examine the ethical character of the Kingdom of God as 
portrayed in the New Testament we find reference to such 
qualities as humility, meekness, joy, forgiveness and com¬ 
passion: all of them summed up in the greatest of Christian 
virtues, love. Now we have seen that Christian experience 
reckons these to be fruits of the Spirit. They have their 
origin in God’s grace; ao we have called them the ethics of 
grace. We must conclude then that the Kingdom of God, God’s 
reign among men, is none other than an expansion of the 
ethics of grace. 

While we have held that the ethics of grace are 
primary, they do not do away with the ethics of law. God 
still expresses himself in terms of demand as well as in 
the language of love. Men remain under obligation to re¬ 
gulate their lives in accordance with God’s laws. The de- 






1 













r 








- 37 - 


mand for personal morality and social Justice is still ex¬ 
ercised. And destructive punishment is still due where 
Justice is flaunted. Here is the ground for a message to 
society. The social gospel, properly understood, is an 
expansion of the ethics of law. 

To draw a distinction between the Kingdom of G-od arid 
the social gospel is by no means to suggest that they bear 
no relation to one another. Distinctions, in fact, depend 
on relationships. The notion of the Kingdom first of all 
gives to the social gospel its sanction. The coming of the 
Kingdom involves a mission to the social order; but that 
mission does not bring the Kingdom to fulfilment. Within 
the Christian scheme of the Kingdom of G-od the social gospel 
thus has its recognized limitations. Acknowledgement of this 
fact enables Christians to face defeat in their efforts to 
fashion a better social order without los3 of hope. 

A second important relation lies in the fact that the 
gospel of the Kingdom supplies the motive for the social 
503pel, it is one thing to sense G-od 1 s demand for social 
justice; quite another to enter the lists for social Justice, 
jO give oneself without counting the cost. He who has ex¬ 
perienced the grace of G-od is ready to accede to G-od’s de¬ 
mand for service to society because he looks upon the world 
with compassion. Christian compassion has its source in 
the ethics of grace and its expression in the ethics of law. 

The miscalculation in much social gospel thinking of 





» ' 






- 38 - 

the laat generation was the notion that the Christian aim 
in society is the Kingdom of God. The Kingdom was thus 
defined in terms of a social gospel. The fact, however, 
rests with the contrary. The social gospel has its proper 

setting within the Christian notion of the Kingdom of God. 
Love and Justice 

7/e have interpreted the social gospel as an ex¬ 
pansion of the ethics of law. 7/e must now point out that 
the ethical content of the social gospel is best described 
by the term justice. The gospel of the Kingdom, on the otha? 
hand, is an expression of the ethics of grace, whose primary 
virtue is love. Moreover, just as we have acknowledged 
that the social gospel and the gospel of the Kingdom bear 
important relations to one another, so we find a parallel 
relationship between justice and love. Says Emil Brunner: 

The nature of justice is radically different from 
that of love, yet, deriving from one God, is very 
closely akin to it. The antithesis does not sever 
the bond between them, nor the bond annul the 
antithesis. (1) 

Jos *70? 

According to Brunner, requires that there be sur- 
rendered to each man his due, no more no less. Love gives 
a man not only his due, but in fact gives him more than he 
deserves. Justice is therefore quite rational, while love 
is irrational. Further, justice rests its case on the 

<L 

general dignity of man. It is not conerned in any personal 
Justice and the Social Order, Emil Brunner, p. 125 



















■ 











' 







- 39 - 


way with particular human beings, but only with them in 
their relationships. Justice contemplates systems, each 
man receiving his rightful consideration within the system 
and no more than that. Love, on the other hand, is a mere 
show of feeling when directed toward the mass. It becomes 
concrete only in reference to this or that individual 
person. And since the person is higher than all the sys¬ 
tems in which he is placed (the true aim of systems being 
to serve persons) love is higher than justice. Love is 
higher in the sense that it includes justice, goes beyond 
justice. Within the social systems which make up his life, 
the Christian must first be just; else he could give no 
effect to love. 

Love can only do more, it can never do less, than 
justice requires. A citizen who falsifies his 
income-tax return in order to practice charity can¬ 
not appeal to love in exculpation; love of that kind 
is sheer sentimentality. True love is always more 
than just; it fulfils first the impartial law of 
actual justice. There is therefore no such thing as 
love at the cost of justice or over the head of 
justice, but only beyond justice and through justice. 
Love is always more than the recognition of the 
rights of a human being, but, for that very reason, 
it can never deny that the other has a right to this 
or that on the assumption that there can be no more 
talk of justice where love is. That is only true 
when the other has first got his rights, when he has 
been given his due, not out of compassion but out of 
justice. The labourer has a right to a just wage; 
he is therefore right to protest when the wage to 
which he has a right is offered to him as alms, as 
a gift of love. The real gift of love begins where 
justice has already been done, for it is that which 
is beyond justice. (1) ___ — 


(1) Brunner, Ibid, p. 129 











SOME PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN SOCIAL ACTION 









Chapter IV 


SOME PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN SOCIAL ACTION 

We have recognized that Christian love represents 
the ultimate relation God inte n ds for his children. 

A 

Christians love one another in response to his love. This 
is their foretaste of the Kingdom. At the same time we 
sense the commands of God, his demand for justice among 
men. Every man, regardless of whether or not he has 
entered the state of grace, has a right to common justice. 
The Christian vocation includes working for justice in 
society. But he knows also that he can never fulfil his 
service as a Christian thereby. His deepest ethical need 
is for love; yet, in daily life he is called to act in 
social relationshps which call for justice but do not 
yield themselves immediately to the ethics of love. As a 
citizen of two worlds, the social order and the Kingdom of 
God, he is required to hold these two principles in tension;: 
justice and love. He must always be conscious of a double 
situation: first, an obligation to an impossible ideal: 

”Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven 
is perfect”; and second, living an imperfect life is an 
imperfect society. If he loses sight of either, he forfeits 
his distinctive right as a Christian citizen. (1) 

In a little book entitled ^Christian Ethics and 
Social Policy” Dr. John Bennett gives us guidance in 


(1) Matt. 5:48 









* 












. 

\ 




. 

, 










- 




. 


. 














"4-1" 


selecting a few practical principles of Christian social 
action. He suggests five. We have determined upon four,two 
of which are quoted directly from him but elaborated in 
somewhat different fashion. 

1) Examine the motive, the means and the end of every 
action in the light of Christian love. 

Every act has an end or goal in view, a means for 
attaining that goal and a motive (reason or desire) 
for moving in that direction. For instance, a man 
decides to become a doctor. That is the end in view. 

To achieve this he decides to spend alternate years at 
university and working as a bartender ( means). His 
purpose is to make plenty of money as a doctor and 
retire early (the motive). Now all three must be sub¬ 
jected to the scrutiny of Christian love, which seeks 
the welfare of all who are affected by any act. If 
any one of the three fails to pass the test, then the 
others must also (in that particular situation) be 
adjudged wrong. 

We have sometimes heard the remark: "The end 
justifies the means." Not so in Christian living. 

Only love, in its most stern and tender quality, can 
determine the justice of a given means used to gain 
a desired goal. The choice of wrong means wrecks the 
whole enterprise. And beyond that, Jesus plainly 
teaches that the underlying motives of our action, the 
















































• 

* 





. 












„ 











ti42 ,t 


the inner unseen desires of our hearts, can corrupt even 
the action which outwardly appears to be most loving. 

In regard to any act, therefore, a Christian must 
ask himself three simple questions: 

1. Is my motive compatible with the spirit of love? Am 

I interested in my own gain only, or are the interests 
of others included? 

2. As for the means I am employing, do they occasion 
injustice or harm of any sort to others? Does my 
action help or hinder other people in the living of 
the good life? Does it recognize their full right as 
my brothers? 

3. Regarding the goal I have in view, will its achievement 
be counted a blessing to others as well as to myself? 

Admittedly, it is becoming increasingly difficult 

to assess the love-value of any specific act; for sometimes 

it appears that what is good for one person renders harm to 

another. Moreover, in modern society we are related to 

countless people whom we can never see or know. It is hard 

to estimate the effect of one*s own action on those who 

have such indirect and impersonal relation to us. Then 

again, to be realistic we must accept the fact that it is 

impossible in this world to practice love in any absolute 

sense. But that T s just where the greatest care is needed, 

lest we use this fact as an excuse for selfish behaviour. 

Whatever the difficulties may be, the willingness to let 

love be the guiding principle throughout is the mark of 

the Christian. Through him compassion is let loose in 

the world to perform its healing constructive tasks. 

























' 
































■ 
















- 43 - 


2 ) 

Remain constantly open to self-criticism in the light 
of Christian humility. 

We have seen that the compilicated nature of our 
society leaves us open to error in judgment as to the 
social, political or economic policy which best expresses 
the ideal of love. But more than that, the fact that "all 
have sinned, and come short of the glory of God". (1) 
makes us prone to make corrupt judgments in our own favour, 
whether as individuals or groups. We are apt to assume 
that our way of doing things is right, that our social 
order is somehow divinely ordained, that our nation is in 
the right. And in defence of these narrow interests and 
one-sided perspectives we are prepared to mass all the 
moral influence and all the physical power it is- possible 
to muster. 

Only Christian humility can turn the tables on 
temptations so subtle and insidious. Humility prompts the 
criticism of our most cherished hopes. Humility probes 
the social program we have in hand, teaches us that,there 
is no perfect political party and no social order beyond 

criticism.whether in the Soviet Union or in America. 

Further, Christian humility teaches us to be particularly 
suspicious of convictions which happen to coincide with 
our own self-interest. Humility will save us from 
arrogance, prevent us from exercising tyranny over others 


(l) Romans 3:23 
























































































44 


even in matters where we believe them utterly wrong and 
ourselves right. 

To put the matter another way: all of us come 
under God*s judgment. It is he who has the right to 
declare the right and the wrong in regard to any situation. 
To undertake that work ourselves is to usurp the place of 
God, which is the supreme apostasy. 

Of course, Christians must make immediate practical 
decisions in life and act upon them. Yet humility will 
temper every act. We chart our course in good faith that 
God will vindicate our action; and in equally good faith 
that if we are wrong He will reprove and chasten us. The 
humble man is always open to correction. He may be 
resolute but never cocksure. 

3) 

Seek to know and work for those policies which express 
God^s will in our time, 

M God T s Will in Our Time” is the title of a 

Commission Report presented to the Assembly of the Church 

of Scotland in 1942. (1) It is significant that the 

study was begun in 1940 in the hour of the nation T s 

greatest peril. But this report was no isolated one. 

Similar efforts had been under way in all sections of 

Christendom. Nor were they mere emergency enterprises, 

the result of fear psychology at the height of the war. 

World War 11 had only climaxed many years of soul-search- 

(l) Godts will in Our Time, Student Christian Movement 
Press 36 Bloomsbury St. London, W.C.I. 




















- 


















. 

1 . : 






- 























i 








. 










. 










. ' 




■ 





















- 45 - 


ing by individual Christians and by the Church as a whole. 
What had gone wrong with the world? What was wrong with 
ourselves that we should have come to such a pass? Where 
could guilt be placed? And above all, what next? What 
purpose has God for humanity now, and how can we align 
ourselves with that purpose? 

Christians have always sought to know and to do 
the will of God. But in more recent years a number of 
new notes have been sounded. In the first place, we 
have come to see that the changing conditions of man f s 
life through the centuries have produced varying problems, 
and that the specific solutions suited to one period are 
not necessarily applicable to another. In conformity 
with this principle, historical understanding of the Bible 
persuaded us that much of the counsel on social questions 
offered by the prophets and lesus and Paul was conditioned 
by the prevailing world-view of their time and the current 
social situation. It could not be regarded as binding 
for us today. The same studies, however, brought into 
bolder relief than ever before the timeless moral and 
religious principles which have a bearing on the problems 
of any generation. Thus, while the will of God is unchang¬ 
ing through time, its application to any particular society 
will show decided variation. We don ? t require a new set 
of moral principles. We need only to apply the teachings 
of leaus and of Paul to a world situation which is very 












. 












. 






. 










. 


















, 
















- 

. 





















- 46 


different from anything they experienced. To bear this 
clearly in mind will save us from too easily passing judg¬ 
ment on our industrial capitalism by reference to Jesus 
statements about the rich and the poor; or deciding policy 
regarding the liquor traffic on the basis of His attitude 
to wine. 

The application of Biblical principles to our time has 
necessitated the formulation of certain secondary and 
more specialized principles which show how ideal 

principles are related to particular social issues and 
thus give guidance to the Christian citizen. JH.Oldham 
was one of the first to recognize this necessity to 
determine types of behaviour required of Christians in 
given periods and in given circumstances. These provision¬ 
al principles of behaviour which stand somewhere between 
the universal principle and the particular situation or 
act he called “middle axioms”. The “middle axiom” is 
more specific than the universal moral principle but less 
specific than any particular social program or political 
platform. Experience proves that, first, they provide 
practical ground on which agreement can easily be reached 
and second, they suggest the direction that Christians 
should take in political and economic activities. Here is 
a n illustration in the field of race relations: 

Univeraal Principle ; All races have equal dignity 



































- 


- 




























- 
















. 






' 

. 







































■ 







/ 


- 47 - 


before God. 

Middle Axiom : Equal opportunity must be secured for 
members of all races in sucb matters as employment, housing, 
education, legal protection and political rights. 

Specific Legislation: : It is hereby enacted that Negro 
children shall have free access to any school in the 
village of Kipton. 

4) 

"Attempt to counteract some of the (unfortunate) 
consequences of what we must do as citizens or in some 
official capacity by action of another kind". (1) 

The behaviour of a boy in school forced a teacher 
to implement a ruling whereby the lad was sent home for the 
day. The consequences at home were unhappy to say the 
least. The teacher decided to be on the playground when 
the boy returned to school the next morning so that he 
could share the fun of a ball-game with the boys, this 
boy included. This evidence of the teacher f s interest 
led the lad to abandon hard feelings and become one of the 
best behaved pupils in the class. This incident illustrates 
the principle set forth above. In his official capacity 
the teacher had of necessity acted in such a way as to 
impair his own personal relationship to his pujil; but he 
discovered a way of coming back into the fellowship of 
that boy. 

A Japanese soldier in battle took prisoner a young 

(1) Christian Ethics and Social Policy by John Bennett 

p. 32 



















- 




















. 
















- 

. 


-• 















- 




.. / • .1 v„... v . • •• i-.. 






’ 






























F, 




; 





- 4b - 

Chinese. As they made their way back to the Japanese lines 
they discovered that both of them were Christians. At 
a little wayside church the two men knelt together in 
worship, after which the Japanese soldier delivered his 
prisoner to his superior officers. Here again some of the 
consequences of a duty as citizen were mitigated by "action 
of another kind". 

Acknowledgment must go to Professor Emil Brunner 
for clarifying what happens when people act in any official 
office such as "citizen," "soldier", "teacher" or 
"Employee". There are rules and regulations which bind 
their behaviour. But each of these also lives outside 
his given capacity, simply as a person. And on this plane 
we find our richest opportunities. As Brunner says: 

"actual life consists in meeting another person in love" I) 
Our references to the teacher-pupil problem and 
the two soldiers illustrate this idea on the very simplest 
plate of verson to person relationships. But it holds 
true in wider fields as well. The Christian’s membership 
in a Church, for instance, gives him special opportunities 
for this sort of social action: 

Mote /Vo. ¥■ 

Direct quotation from John Bennett. It is this one 
which seems to us unique in his list of principles 
of social action. Most Christians have practiced it 
many times, dimly feeling it their duty, but often 
experiencing a sense of frustration in the very act. 

Dr. Bennett clarifies the positive values in an old 
form of Christian behaviour. 

(I) The Divine Imnerative, by Emil Brunner (MacMillan 1927) 

p. 228 






. 

- - 

. 

. 

. 

. 












■- 






"... : ■ 


L ■ 






. 


■ 










* M . 


. 

•»* 













- 49 - 

"The fact that I am at the same time both a citizen 
of a nation and the member of a universal Church 
is a source of considerable ethical freedom. Even 
in v;ar, which surrounded us with so many ugly 
necessities, Christians proved to be free to keep 
in existence channels of reconciliation that were 
used as soon as the war ended. In the case of many 
decisions that limit our action, decisions that 
mean taking sides for one movement or party against 
another, membership in the Church furnishes a 
relationship across the line of conflict that may 
modify the conflict itself 1 '.(l) 

We have set down four cardinal rules for guiding 
a Christian to appropriate decisions in social life. 

They offer no easy way to the Christian, nothing cut and 
dried. To keep them in mind at once is itself a difficult 
task. Let us anply them until they become habits. They 
are useful tools for the exercise of Christian citizenship. 


The Part Played by the Church as an Institution 

lust as the individual person cannot exist apart 
from society, so the individual Christain is part of a 
larger body, the body of Christ or the Church. We must 
expect therefore that Christian social action is in¬ 
cumbent not only upon individual Christians but upon the 
Church as a whole. What is this corporate role of the 
Church in society? 

1) Making Christians . In the section above we 
set forth the chief principles by which a Christian may 

be guided in social action-the motive of love, self- 

criticism and so forth. The Church’s primary task is 
to foster these qualities in people. It does so through 


(1) John Bennett, Ibid p .87 









. 

. 

_ 
















, 
















- 50 - 


worship, exhortation and teaching. It provides a ground 
within which people are encouraged to exercise Christian 
virtue and to achieve the community of love in actual 
practice. Fellowship within the Church is a fore-taste 
of the Kingdom. 

The fact that the Church includes people from a 
variety of classes (which in the secular world clash with 
one anotherO) gives her a special opportunity to interpret 
one group to another. A Christian should be led to 
appreciate the needs and desires of those who belong to 
another race or a different economic class. Even more 
important, the Church can do much to help a person realize 
the weaknesses of his own class and to know that his own 
social position tends to determine the character of his 
political outlook. Such self-knowledge or objectivity 
is greatly needed even by those who conscientiously seek 
the good of others. Well-intentioned reformers can easily 
mistake the ideals of their own social background for the 
will of God. 

2) Declaring Principles . Every citizen is 
confronted with many political theories and economic 
policies. He must pick and choose among them. And after 
the choice is made, there are technical problems in 
putting them into practice. In all this the Christian 
has no more natural competence than any other citizen. 















' 






* 




- . 




■ 








■ 


- 




i 

■ 

- 

' 

... 




■ 






... :: 








4 






. 

. . 

■ 















- 51 - 


He is not specially endowed for the regular responsibility 
of citizenship simply because he is a Christian. As Dr. 
William Temple used to say, Christ didn’t come to save 
us the trouble of accurately observing facts and drawing 
correct inferences. However, the Church is entrusted with 
a unique revelation about man and his destiny. Her 
specialized knowledge is in the field of morality. She 
visualizes a new kind of Kingdom. She has a duty to 
declare the principles of love and righteousness upon 
which alone the Kingdom will be founded. Put negatively, 
this means that the Church must judge every social policy 
by Christian morality and declare that judgment to the 
world. Her more positive contribution is made by giving 
moral and spiritual guidance to any citizen open to 
influence when a particular problem presents itself. Take 
a simple illustration. Suppose a government orders 
investigation of conditions in mental hospitals within its 
jurisdiction. Experts are hired to ascertain the facts. 
Their published report shows evidence of mistreatment of 
patients and graft in administration. Such a report 
could be tabled and forgotten. It would be the duty of 
the Church in the name of God and human welfare to 
stimulate the conscience of people towards a clean-up 
of affairs in these institutions. 

3) Warning about Sin . No more suitable word has 
yet been found to describe that strange perversity of 












_■ 




. 

. 


. 

- 
















. 

■ 




. 











. 












« 




. ;. ' .. . 






- 52 - 

human nature by which the best things in life are given 
an evil twist. Blessings are turned into curses. Sin 
can penetrate any order of society no matter what safe¬ 
guards are woven into its structure “Letts change the 
system", we say; but it is never fool-proof. In an 
economic system of private enterprise, sin rears its head 
as unlimited acquisitiveness. In a collectivized system 
of public ownership, one group or another seizes and 
manipulates cower for its own purposes. The Church has the 
painful duty of warning against the notion that salvation 
lies in this or that system. 

In this connection the Church can all too easily 
fall prey to either of two errors. On the one hand there 
is the temptation of self-righteous withdrawal. All the 
practical social alternatives seem so inferior to the 
ideal of Christian love that some Christians refuse to 
work wholeheartedly within any one of them. The second 
error is that of identifying any specific social order 
with the Kingdom of Cod, thereby condemning many people 
to suffer the evils which Christian scrutiny could 
readily uncover. 

4) Setting Her O w n House in Order. This phase 
of the Church T s role can best be described by the old 
saying: “Practice what you preach.“ The Church has an 

institutional structure of her own, involving the raising 











■ 













. 




























■ 








































- 53 - 


and spending of money, employment and dismissal of 
personnel and other administrative elements. Economics 
and politics within the Christian fellowship are very 
easily influenced by the secular environment. Business 
practices which the Church condemns in the industrial 
world are sometimes followed without misgiving in the 

Church-over-worked and underpaid employees, debts 

overdue, pulpit competition, inequalities of salary etc. 
These things put a strain upon, though they cannot break 
the fellowship of men in Christ. Their chief misfortune 
is that they give a hollow ring to the social proclamations 
of the Church. The world smiles with indifference. Yes, 
the Church must put her own house in order. 

None of this is said to detract from these phases 
of social witness within the Church which are already far 
in advance of anything the secular world either demands 
or gets. Nowhere is there a greater feeling of brother¬ 
hood in evidence. No institution possesses so many workers 
whose sense of service is so powerful. Or consider those 
Church pension funds which operate not on the basis of 
salary differentials but on years of service. The Church 
must only move to see that all aspects of her institutional 
life may be seen in a similar light. She will thereby 
increase her right to speak to the world on social 
Questions. 

Having considered the ways in which Christians may 








' .. 

. 

. 


. 


. 





. 







5 * 


undertake social action, we turn now to consider the 
issues of the day. 









\ 










THE POLITICAL ORDER 














Chapter V 


THE POLITICAL ORDER 

Who shall rule? And by what right shall one man 
exercise authority over another? This is the problem of 
government. It was first defined and a certain crude 
solution discovered in that distant day when one caveman 
clubbed another into submission to his will. 

Most people today have at least some notion of 
the long struggle in the development of various govern¬ 
mental forms. The textbooks tell of patriarchal systems 
and oligarchies, monarchies and democracies. It is not 
our business to describe them here; we must take all that 
for granted. Our business is rather to recognize the 
political tradition in which we ourselves are set, to 
understand how we came this way and to determine our 
present political outlook as Christians. 

We speak of ourselves as living in a democracy. 
The democratic answer to the question "Who shall rule?” 
is that the people should rule themselves. To be 
practical about it, of course, there must be certain 
institutions of government whose operation is handled 
by comparatively few people. But the idea is that these 
governing agencies are held responsible to the people 
being governed. Institutions like the ballot, frequent 
elections, political parties and legislatures are all 
designed to achieve this intimacy between the people as 


















































. 




I 























- 56 - 


a whole and the particular persons whom they choose 
temporarily to exercise authority on their behalf. The 
ideal of democracy is well described in the famous 
Lincoln pnrase: "Government of the people, oy the people 
for the people". 


The Roots of Democracy 

It is commonly assumed that our democratic 
institutions were inherited from the ancient Greeks. 
Careful study, however, reveals that while we have been 
influenced by the Greeks- our democratic spirit stems from 
the Hebrew-Christian tradition. It»s roots lie in the 
ancient Hebrew experiences both of slavery and nomadic 
desert life. 

"It is startling to realize that political and 
industrial slavery was the cradle of the first real 
democracy and of the first religion that taught 
loyalty to one God and justice and consideration 
for all men. The Hebrew nation began in a revolt 

against inhuman treatment-The bondage in 

Egypt accomplished this for the Hebrews: it taught 
them to hate political and industrial tyranny of 
every kind. The memory of their own experience 
enlisted their sympathies ever afterward on behalf 

of all victims of oppression.-*-it is this 

strong social element in Isreal^s early religi'on that 
distinguishes it from all other early faiths, and 
that led the Hebrew prophets of a later age to 
reject sacrifices and ceremonies as a means of 
pleasing God and to proclaim justice and mercy and 
love as the sole basis of his favour." (l) 

Prior to their enslavement and for a number of years 

immediately after their escape, the Hebrews lived as 

nomads in desert country. Here again their experience 


(l) History of the Hebrew Commonwealth, Bailey & Kent 
p. 35-36 (New York: Scribners) 










. 






















• ^ 












* 
















-■v#. ------.. 

. 

. 










- 57 - 

promoted a democratic spirit: 

“The very insecurity of the life of the desert forces 
people together in firm solidarity. Class 
distinctions have hardly the chance to soli rfify, 
because there is so little private property. Men 
can own there little more than the horses on which 
they ride, the weapons they use, the clothes they 
wear, and articles of personal adornment. Pasture 
lands and even herds are owned in common." (l) 

In the political termoil of the 8th and the 7th centuries 

B.C. the prophets were quick to recall the common man f s 

rights which had been hammered out in those early years. 

When Jezebel injected despotic notions in^to King Ahab*s 

mind so that he killed the peasant Naboth and took his 

land, it was another ordinary commoner (Elijah) who 

uttered the judgment: "Thus saith the Lord, Hast thou 

killed, and taken possession?-—-In the place where 

dogs licked the blooji of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood 

." (2) And the King, knowing in his heart that 

Elijah was right, repented in sackcloth. This is no 

isolated story. It is typical of the prophetic message 

as declared through Isaiah, Jeremiah and the others. 

When we come to the early Christian era the, thread 
is harder to see. Apparently Jesus himself steered clear 
of immediate political issues. At least he was able to 
retain the loyalty of both Simon the Zealot and Matthew. 
The one desired the overthrow of Home, v T hile the other 

(1) Christian Eaith & Democracy, Gre£ory blastoff, p. 20 

(New York: Association Press) 

(2) 1 Kings 21:1? 












. 














































. 












. 

. 






. 

■ 






































- 58 - 

was a civil servant working for the Roman government. 
Apparently Jesus refused to take sides in the hottest 
political issue of His day. He accepted things as they 
were. How can He thus guide us in matters of citizenship? 
As for Paul, he counselled unquestioning obedience to 
the political authorities. “The powers that be are 
ordained of God", he said. (1) 

There seems to be little of the democratic attitude in a 
statement of that sort, no thought of intimate connection 
between the governors and the governed, nor any acceptance 
of the individual’s right to promote change. 

We misunderstand Jesus and Paul if we take their 
political attitudes at face value and apply them to our 
own times without taking account both of the actual 
political situation of their day and of the general world¬ 
view which they held. We have to visualize the little 
band of Jesus’ followers. At the outset most of them 
were among the poor, the slaves, the outcasts; and even 
the Roman citizens among them possessed neither the right 
nor the power to influence government. The very idea of 
changing the social order would have been thought 
preposterous by the keenest Christians. The idea was 
rather to take defensive measures against the evils of 
the day, to obey the laws when conscience allowed but to 
keep Roman life and culture at arms length, and to 
cultivate the Christian society for the values it could 


(1) Romans 13:1 


























A' ■ 












. ' 


. 








. 

' 














. 


. 

. 
















- 39 


offer both in this life and in the life to come. 

Consonant with this policy was the conviction that the 
end of the age was at hand when all things earthly would 
be consumated. Let Rome have her fling. Her days are 
numbered/ 

But Christians must ask what the message of Jesus 
means for us today. ’’Our position is different. We are 
not merely subjects of the State, we share in the life 
of the state. Modern parliamentary government and 
9 democracy T demand from each his best thought, his 
judgment, his declared preference." (l) For all citizens, 

including those who happen to be Christians, political 
responsibility is regarded as a right and a duty. More¬ 
over, there has in fact been no end of the age. Christians 
must therefore expect Christ to give guidance in behaviour 
towards their fellow men in this present world. If Jesus 
own day-to-day activities left us no political blueprints, 
we are bound to ask what the substance of his message 
suggests for our time. What political forms seem best to 
express the intention of Christ? 

Two points are clear. First, as we have already 
seen, Christian faith does emphasize the essential 
dignity or worth of men under Cod, under Him all have 
equal status. All are created beings, called to be His 
co-workers, though free to decide whether or not they will 

(1) The Message of Jesus For The Life of Today-Ernest Thomas 








. 

. 

. ■ 


■« „ I 

. 




■ 


. 

. 





- 60 - 


enter the fellowship of His work. Secondly, Christian 
faith requires that every man has a duty to serve his 
fellows. And such service is to be exercised beyond the 
measure which is asked fof the ordinary citizen. The 
Christian citizen must be expected to do more than that 
which is his duty to do. 'Whosoever shall compel thee to 
go a mile, go with him twain” (1) Even the right to 
govern or to hold high place in the nation comes under the 
compulsion of the service motive. “They which are account¬ 
ed to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; ■ 
and their great ones exercise authority upon them. But 
so shall it not be among you; but whosoever will be great 
among you, shall be your minister: and whosoever of you 
will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all.” (2) 

Dr. Vlastos suggests the real force of this statement by 
showing that Jesus used the word for “slave”, translated 
less harshly as servant. The slave gives all he has, his 
work, his life. Those who rule are to serve rather than 
dominate. 

These two nations of dignity and responsibility 
have sometimes been buried in the history of the Christian 
Church. But they have never died. Coming to the surface 
again and again they have goaded and inspired men to 
fashion political patterns which give them fuller sway. 

And always the direction of movement has been towards 


(1) Matthew j? :41 

(2) Mark 10: 42-44 









* 





. 










. 













. 










- 












. 










































-61- 

democracy. The Reformation period, for instance, prepared 
the soil for giving the franchise to the coimion man 
through its doctrine of the "priesthood of all believers" 

-the idea that each person has the right to deal 

with God directly without a priest intervening on his 
behalf. Evangelical movements, by reminding men of 
salvation open even to the most wretched persons, aroused 
again the sense of human dignity and outraged the con¬ 
science at the sight of irresponsible and repressive 
government. It is significant that host of evangelicals 
were in the forefront of democratic political reform in 
18th and 19th century England, (l) Careful study of 
early American life and political constitution demonstrates 
the intimate connection between Christian faith and Nev; 
World democracy. In the testing days of Hitler f s Europe 
there was a tendency for Christians to dwell on the 
transcendence of God ajove political considerations. But 
the fundamental Christian intention again triumphed when 
Karl Barth, the greatest champion of other worldly 
religion, acknowledged the need to plump for democracy: 
"When I consider the deepest and most central content 
of the New Testament exhortation, I should say that we 
are justified, from the point of view of exegesis, in 

(1) Eor a well documented discussion of this subject see 
books by:J.Wesley Bready: "England Before and After 
Wesley" - Hodder & Stoughton- 

"This Freedom Whence?" New York/ American Tract 

Society 





.' I 
















’ 















- 






' 



















, 




. 

. 

; 


















- 62 - 


regarding the ’democratic conception of the State’ as a 
justifiable expansion of the thought of the New Testament." 
(l) So much for democracy as we know it today. Granted, 
future generations may discover other governmental forms 
which will express even better the mind of Christ in the 
political relationships of mankind. 

The Machinery of Democracy 

An adequate text on democratic forms of government 
would deal with the various levels of government from 
local to national; and with the several branches which 
function at each level, such as the Legislative body 
which makes the laws, the Administrative which carries 
them into effect and the Judicial which interprets and 
enforces the law. However, we must leave these with 
passing reference only. 

Two elements in democracy as we know it stand 
out as practical expressions of Christian insight: 

1) Majority Rule . The Concept of rule by majority 
necessarily involves the proposition that every person has 
the right to express opinions and influence government 
policies. None shall be ignored, save children and those 
youth who still depend on parental control (determined 
arbitrarily by an age-limit). Through literature debate 
and discussion the citizen has the right to inform himself 
and influence others; and he has the opportunity to 


(1) Church & State, by Karl Barth p. 85 (MacMillan, 19 $?) 














































: 






• 






















• 




























- 63 - 


participate in the final decision by means of the ballot. 

The enemies of democracy are quick to point out 
the limitations of making public decisions by majority 
vote, a simple counting of heads. Why should ignorant 
and inexperienced people enjoy the same voting rights 
as those with knowledge and experience? The question 
appears legitimate on the surface, but it must be ruled 
out when we examine the alternative. Any other system 
concentrates power in the hands of a select few, or a 
class. The lesson of history is that power corrupts its 
possessor in proportion to the measure of power possessed. 
Absolute power corrupts absolutely. It is against this 
prospect that democratic peoples have hammered out the 
principle of universal suffrage. It is worth the price. 
Moreover, the price is not so high as might sometimes 
be imagined; for in actual practice democratic systems 
have resulted in placing men of supreme intellectual and 
cultural qualifications in the highest political and 
civil service posts. At the same time, it is of utmost 
importance for Christians to realize that the same 
condition is not so likely in matters of morality: 

“The quality of government provided by a democracy 
can well surpass that which might be expected from 
the intellectual and cultural caliber of the 
electorate, but it can scarcely rise above the 
moral elevation of the people themselves. Free men 
of high morals and ideals can be expected to select 
as their rulers men of similar character who are at 
the same time noteworthy for their greater 
intellectual and administrative capacities, a fact 







. . ~ : 








. 





- 








■ 



- 



' 

, 






. 















■ 








- 64 - 


that has often been the salvation of the American 
republic. Let, however, the vision of righteousness, 
justice, and altruism grow dim in a democratic 
society, as it did in ancient Rome, and the democratic 
ideal becomes a mockery and a delusion. Evil men 
will gain access to high places, and will bring 
down to ruin the most skillfully devised structure."(1 


2) Civil Liberties . This is the second important element 

in democracy when viewed from the Christian standpoint. 

Majority rule which fails to take account of the needs, 

interests and rights of minorities or of individual 

persons is in danger of becoming another tyranny. 

Paradoxically then, while fighting for the right to govern 

the whole populous through the will of the majority, 

democratic peoples have fought equally hard to preserve 

certain basic individual and group rights against the 

possible excesses of that same majority. For instance, 

a man allegedly steals silver from a jewelry store. No 

matter how sure everybody may be of his guilt, the 

suspect must be accorded a fair trial and his innocence is 

assumed until adequate proof of guilt is presented. Or 

again, even after a majority ruling has been made bn a 

question like Military Service, citizens who oppose the 

measure still have the right to campaign for its repeal 

without intimidation by the majority. In this sense the 

strong protect the weak. It must therefore be expected 

of the Christian citizen that he shall be sensitive to 

any infraction of the rights of minorities, whether they 

(1) A Scientists Approach to Religion- Carl W. Miller 
pp 113-13.4 (New York: MacMillan, 1947) 










- 























■ 




















. 








• 

















• 







. 

















. 






. 

- 

. 

■ 

• - 

. 




- 
































. 


rry 


















- 65 - 


be minorities of opinion, race, religion or any other. 

Party Politics Many a citizen has dismissed a subject 
of discussion with a sneering remark: M It T s party 
politics, thats all”. In a carefully sampled survey of 
youth opinion the Canadian Youth Commission in 1944 
discovered widespread cynicism respecting politics in 
Canada. Politics is regarded somewhat as a dirty game, 
necessary perhaps, but unsavory. A further blow to the 
good name of politics was evident in their choice of voca¬ 
tion. in listing their preferences for life-work, only 
one English-speaking youth and one young French Canadian 
gave first choice to a political career . 

The fact that party politics has fallen into 
disrepute is a matter of grave concern, for democracy 
could not function long without political parties of some 
sort. Parties are a political necessity if there is to 
be continuity to government and adequate means whereby 
scattered opinions may be crystalized into stated policies 
Parties educate the public, organize opinion around' 
specific issues, prepare the stage for the final test of 
opinion in elections. And at least one part must perform 
the highly useful service of providing intelligent 
opposition even after the majority have succeeded to power 
The party at once facilitates majority rule and protects 
minority interest. As such it is a vital element in 
democracy. 





























. 



























. 
















. 













- 66 = 


Unless and until an adequate substitute can be 
found, Christians must share in one political party or 
another. To fail in this is to abdicate a Christian 
function and turn over the affairs of state to those who 
may have little regard for the dignity of their fellows 
and little incentive to serve the public. 

The Church and Politics 

If it may be regarded as a Christian duty to take 
part in politics, especially where democratic procedures 
not only make possible but welcome practical expressions 
of Christian faith, what about the Church as a whole? 
Should the Church support some political party which 
appears most nearly to satisfy the demands of Christian 
living? 'There is nothing in theory to prevent such a 
policy, but in practice the matter is less simple. 

To begin with, political parties are fallible. 

A given party may be right on one issue and wrong on 
another. In committing herself on one particular issue 
the Church ought not to be involved in all others by 
virtue of a party tag. A more important negative factor 
is that while the Church has a right to declare social 
objectives based on her experience in the moral life, she 
is by no means the custodian of experience in regard to 
the methods by which those objectives may best be 

. Yet political parties commit themselves at the 


attained 


























































































- $7 - 


same time both to objectives and to methods for attaining 
them. Perhaps most important of all, however, is the 
historical fact that the Church itself has suffered 
corruption when it has been aligned with any specific 
party and manouvred into a place of political power. 

In another chapter we shall deal more fully with 
the relation of the Church to the social order. For the 
moment, we confine ourselves to the position that the 
Church f s proper political function is first to urge 
political participation upon all Christian citizens 
through some party affiliation; second, to clarify 
political issues in-so-far as they have religious and 
moral implications (and they all do); third, to stand 
watch over the rights of individuals and minority groups 
who are always in danger of tyranny etfen in democractic 
countries. 

The Democratic Way or Life 

It cannot be too strongly stated that democracy 
is more than a system of government; it is more also than 
a set of skills and procedures for handling public affairs. 
Democracy is an attitude of mind which must exercise 
itself beyond the purely political sphere. It is a way 
of life which can be practiced in the home, at school and 
in social relationships. When democracy ceases to permeate 
these other areas of life it can hardly function 





- 68 - 


effectively in government; for successful democratic 
government depends on a constituency steeped in the 
democratic way of looking at life. Democratic citizenship 
is more than a matter of engaging in pre-election discussio] 
and casting one T s ballot. 

Youth in particular can take heart at this point. 
Young people sometimes feel themselves excluded from 
political significance until they have the vote. But there 
are areas of life in which they can express themselves 
in almost every form of democratic institution. Social 
clubs, school and church organizations, youth movements 
of all kinds provide young people with many opportunities 
to live and work democratically. These agencies encourage 
self-discipline, free expression of opinion and, above all, 
action on matters where youth can go beyond discussion to 
implement decisions. There is probably greater value, 
for example, in having a group of young people plan and 
actually construct a ball-park than to have them discuss 
United Nations policies over w T hich they have no immediate 
influence—-—though the latter is also a valuable pursuit. 

Youth organizations which are set up nationally 
and internationally are especially well equipped to yield 
a national and -world consciousness among their members. 
Exchange of literature, conferences across boundaries and 
other means may be used to advantage. Examples: Boy 
Scout Association, YM'hC.A. , Student Christian Movement. 






THE ECONOMIC ORDER 




Chapter VI 


THE ECONOMIC ORDER 

We have considered the importance of political 
democracy for the Christian citizen. We have not suggested 
that its purest forms have been reached anywhere; nor have 
we imagined that most nations now enjoy democratic institu¬ 
tions of some kind. The struggle for political democracy 
will continue. 

During the past century the spotlight has shifted 
from political to economic questions. For generations 
the great watchwords sounded throughout the world were of 
a political character: independence, liberty and franchise. 
Today on every side the important talk is about production 
and consumption, about food, clothing and shelter. Men 
fear economic depression. They demand economic security. 

Of all the freedoms, they cry most for freedom from want. 
They are ready even to sacrifice hard-won political liber¬ 
ties if it appears necessary in order to assure themselves 
of economic security. 

The Economic Problem: History 

The economic system under which we live had its 

origin in a re-discovery of the individual man during the 
14th and 15th centuries. Previous generations had lived 
in a close-knit community. They were bound together by 
a feudal order in which the political duties of each to- 






' 




iv< 









7© - 


wards all were carefully defined, whether a man was a 
a lowly serf or a lord of the Manor, Economic pursuits 
were exercised through craft societies; religious and 
social activities revolved around the Church as the unifying 
institution of the age. The individual^ needs were well 
cared for and in many ways life was satisfying. But 
priority was given to the community, its group agencies, its 
rules and regulations. Then there came a new burst of life. 
It was inspired by the rediscovery of ancient Greek and 
Roman learning with their interest in man as man. The new 
spirit of inquiry led to new ways of looking at the world 

and ordering the facts of knowledge-and above all, 

to new technics af production and communication. The lid 
was off. The old regulated community gave way under pressur< 
of invention and manufacture, travel and trade. An exciting 
new world was born in which emphasis everywhere rested on 
the individual. He was free to think for himself and ex¬ 
press his thoughts. He began to get the vision of the 
ballott in politics; and in religion, was persuaded that he 
could himself approach God without institutional encumber- 
ances. In the realm of economics, which is our imm e diat e i 
immediate interest in this chapter, the great new ideal was 
freedom of enterprise. 

The idea which dominated the new economy was some¬ 
thing like this: If each man is fully free to pursue his 
own interests, then the good of all will be gained. A man 







.. 

. 










. 





■ 


- 






•. 

. 





! 








.. i 




















- 


. 

. 


















- 


.... 







- 71 - 


could manufacture what he desired, set his own price on it 
and sell it in the open market. Likewise he could try to 
satisfy his wants at a time and a price of his own choos¬ 
ing. The only restriction was willingness of others to 
sell and to buy. Thus the interplay of freely bargaining 
persons in an open market worked according to a natural 
economic law known as "the law of supply and demand" by 
which alone the individual marketers would be governed. 
Competing interests thus balanced each other harmoniously. 
This harmony was thought to express the will of God as far 
as the economic relations were concerned. 

For a long time the idea worked well in practice. 
The new methods of manufacture increased industrial output 
tremendously, and for the first time in history it became 
possible to overcome natural scarcity. Living standards 
rose considerably. From a material standpoint the satis¬ 
faction of human need was within reach. Then several 
difficulties presented themselves. 

First, the very machines which promised to banish 
scarcity tended to destroy personality. People we re crowd¬ 
ed together in the vicinity of smoking factories, often 
worked under unhealthy conditions and found machine labour 
an uncreative routine which deadened the spirit. Moreover, 
the relations between employer and employees often lost 
the personal touch. Thousands of workers were unacquainted 
with their employers. There was little to encourage the 
employer to treat his workers in any way different from 

















- 

. 
















' 





. 


















' 






. 





- 

. 

. 

























. 











- 72 - 

commodities to be bought and sold cheaply, a necessary 
adjunct to manufacturing operations. 

Second, the new industrial methods of mass pro¬ 
duction necessarily involved many neople in the processing 
of a single article, e.g. a radio or a pair of shoes. Yet 
the enterprise as a whole would be owned and controlled 
by one man or perhaps a comparatively small number of 
people. Hence, the concentration of wealth in the hands 
of the few, while the mass of employed folk were subject 
to the arbitrary decisions of their employers. The 
suggestion that each worker was free to seek another job 
provided little consolation. In a majority of instances, 
his next job could offer only the same insecure conditions. 
Thus the notion of economic freedom was bound to become 
a mockery to millions of working men. The so-called open 
market was like a vicious chain of circumstance. 

Third, it became apparent that the industrial 
system would operate smoothly and with benefit to all only 
as markets expanded. Adequate sources of raw materials 
had to be discovered and utilized: hence, exploration, 
colonization, plantation and mining in far-«6ff countries: 
with these areas in turn being expected to buy the finished 
products. Modern industry opened up the v/orld; but expan¬ 
sion could not go on forever. Sooner or later the colonies 
and so-called backward peoples were bound to become indust¬ 
rialized. They too sought markets.... and so the race 





- 73 - 


was on for control of materials and markets, international 
competition to the point of war. It is foolish to suppose 
that ''capitalism" (the big bogey for some people) is the 
sole cause of wars. It would be equally foolish to assume 
that the world can be free from war while unrestrained 
competition irritates the international scene. 

We have seen then how the industrial order became 
suspect: by endangering human personality, by subjecting 

hosts of men to the irresponsible power of a few of their 
fellows and by creating the threat of periodic unemployment 
and war. 


Note : One of the worst features to be developed under 

the present economic order is the international cartel. 

"A Cartel is a control exercised over international trade 
by private companies in relation to a commodity or group 
of related commodities so that production is controlled, 
markets assigned and prices fixed, on a world scale for 

self-protective reasons. seeks exclusive domination 

of industry.exercise of such sovereign powers made 

cartels unofficial governments, responsible only to their 
directorates and beyond any single government's control. 
The cartels f restrictive practices increased unemployment, 
unduly limited production below national and world needs, 
increased the cost of living, perpetuated the depression 

." See the 194-6 Annual Report of the Board of 

Evangelism and Social Service, United Church of Canada. 

One simple illustration of cartel action: Long-life 
electric light bulbs are prohibited of sale in Canada. 


The Present Situation: Judgment 

It was Canon F.R. Barry who declared that 
"Christianity is the only great religion which takes 
economics quite seriously". (1) Believing in God, who 

(1) Christianity and Crisis, edited by Percy Dearmer 
(London: Gollancz)p. 588 _ 























































■ 

- 

t 


. 








. 




















} 












74 - - 


entered the world in the physical life of a man, Christians 
have a proper regard for the material bases of human life. 
When Christians have ignored the claims of the physical, 
they have violated God*s purpose: which surely is to 
bring the whole range of human activity into conformity 
with his will. 

Economic crisis rightly rouses the Christian 
conscience. It is not surprising therefore to find Church 
courts discussing the problems of economic order and 
publishing reports to guide Christians and witness to the 
world. One of the most authoritative of these was pro¬ 
duced by the Oxford Conference on Church, Community and 
State (1937)* The conference recognized certain points 
at which a Christian view of life is challenged by the 
present economic order: 


a) The enhancement of acquisitiveness. as 

long as industry is organized primarily not for 
service of the community but with the object of 
producing a purely financial result for some of 
its members, it cannot be recognized as properly 
fulfilling its social purpose. 

b) Inequalities . existence of disparities 

of economic circumstance on a scale which differs 
from country to country, but in some is shocking, 

in all is considerable . (large numbers) are 

deprived of the opportunities of fully developing 
their powers. 

c) Irresponsible possession of economic power 
....power welded by a few individuals or groups 
who are not responsible to any organ of society 

.at the ton of this hierarchy are the leaders 

in the world of finance -the controllers of 

certain great key industries. 

d) Frustration of the sense of Christian voaatioi 
A profound conflict has arisen between the demand 






















, 















. 





’ 

« 






■ 










- 73 


that the Christian should be doing the will of God 
in his daily work, and the actual kinds of work 
which Christians find themselves forced to do with¬ 
in the economic order-many workers must pro¬ 

duce things which are useless or shoddy or des- 
tructiver....even more serious is the constant 
threat of unemployment(1). 


With equal vigour, various denominations have criticized 
the existing order. A Commission of the General Assembly 
of the Church of Scotland lists its wrongs: dominance 
of the profit motive, -neriodic unemployment, destruction 
of good produce in order to maintain the economic structure, 
depersonalization of life in large urban centers and the 
creation of situations favourable to the development of 
war. (2) 

Church leaders at Amsterdam in 1948 wrestled 
earnestly with these great questions. Their real concern 
was with the deepest root of man f s disorder: his refusal 
to see and admit that his responsibility to God stands over 
and above loyalty to any earthly community, ^o mere 
adjustment of industrial realations will solve the real 
problem. They still regarded it necessary, however, to 
clarify certain points of conflict between Christianity 
and the present order: 

1) Capitalism tends to subordinate what should bet& 
primary task of any community — the meeting of 
human needs — to the economic advantages of those 

(1) The Oxford Conference, Offial Report by J.H. Oldham 
(New York: Willett, Clark & Co.) pp.36 - 92 

(2) God»s Will In Our Time (S.C.M. Press) 






- 76 - 

who have most nower over its institutions. 

2) It tends to produce serious inequalities. 

J>) It has developed a practical form of materialism 
in western nations in snite of their Christian 
background, for it has placed the greatest empahsis 
upon success in making money. 

4) It has also kept the people of capitalist count¬ 
ries subject to a kind of fate which has taken the 
form of such social catastrophes as mass 
unemployment, (l) 

Some Efforts at Solution 


Since the earliest stages of modern industrialism 
there have been efforts to mitigate its evils and bolster 
it at points of weakness. Witness almsgiving and charities 
in favour of the poor. There is a fine Christian motive 
behind much of modern charity; and yet there have been 
corrupting elements too. Philanthropy has too often been 
a salve for the rich man f s conscience in the face of the 

consequences of his prosperity-a feeble returning to 

the common man of something which is already his by right. 
The giver is accorded false esteem and the receiver loses 
self-respect. Even serviceable Welfare Agencies which 
rescue the fallen and help the poor must be careful lest 
they stand in the same condemnation. These services are 
necessary under present circumstances. A Christian will 
support them; but he will be careful lest the job of 
cleaning up the evil consequences of a social order should 
hecome an excuse for failure to achieve a more just economy, 
In most democratic countries the people as a 
whole have acknowledged that large numbers are forced to 


(P) Findings and Decisions, First Assembly World Council 
of Churches p. 45 








- 77 - 


live under conditions of economic insecurity. They have 
therefore acted through government to off-set the trouble. 
Examples include Family Allowance, Workman*s Compensation, 
Unemployment Insurance and Old Age Pension. 

To a certain extent, therefore, the security of the 
average man has been recognized as a social 
responsibility. It remains a question whether social 
security measures of this sort can adequately compen¬ 
sate for the casualties suffered in our economy. 

Sometimes one group or class will organize 
to secure more of the benefits which it considers 
its rightful possession. The labour union is a 
good example. By collective bargaining, the strike 
and other means, the union has forced improvement 
in wage-rates and working conditions. Unions have 
sometimes gone to excess in their demands, but their 
excesses have been no more extreme than those 
practiced by the one-time unrestricted industrialists 
The Co-operative is another type of organized effort 
to win for the ordinary man more of his share. Here, 
for instance, is a group of fishermen who find that 
they must sell their fish to a powerful canning 
monopoly at whatever price is offered. They band 
together to process the catch in a cannery of their 
own and then proceed to sell their goods in quantitie 
large enough to give them bargaining power. Some 



■ 












. 




■ 









' 


















. 








' 





- 78 - 


people don’t realize that billions of dollars of 
Co-operative business is done every year throughout 
the world, spreading the profits of industry among 
millions of people. 

It must be noted that none or these methods 
of tackling the economic problem contemplates radical 
changes to the economic order itself. Kven large 
scale co-operatives operate within the competetive 
system. Co-operatives and Labour Unions and Welfare 
Agencies merely seek to equalize somewhat the nrofits 
of industry and benefits of a technological age. 

The Communist Challenge 

What if all these efforts fail? What then is the 
alternative? The most obvious and aggressive option is 
Communism. The reader must turn elsewhere for a history of 
Marxist Communism. Suffice it to say that Karl Marx was 
one of the first to analyse the problems cSf our industrial 
order. He saw and proclaimed that masses of the people 
were dominated in thought and life by economic circumstance,' 
over which they exercised no immediate control. The 
material conditions under which a given group lives shapes 
their ideas, their behaviour and marks them as a particular 
class. The clearest class distinction is between the 
owning-managerial-business tyne and the worker who has 
only the labour of his hands to offer in exchange for 





- 19 


daily bread. In Merx f s view the so-called working classes 
live in actual or potential enslavement to the owners of 
industry. Their only salvation lies in violent revolution 
to gain public ownership of the means of production. Marx 
claimed that the new order must at least begin with 
“dictatorship of the proletariate". Whether Communist 
countries today exemplify what he meant by that is not 
certain, but it is certain that they have a form of 
dictatorship. It is totalitarian in its effect. 

Christians should seek to understand why Communism 
is attractive to millions of neonle today. It makes a 
direct appeal to those who have felt the harsher asnects of 
our economic system; and its appeal is even greater to 
millions in Asia or Africa who have never known the benefits 
which western nations have enjoyed through their industrial 
system. Moreover, the anti-religious teaching of 
Communism is in part due to the record of professedly 
Christian society which has rested too easily in the face 
of inequalities and oppression. The early Christian 
Church exhibited a solidarity with the down-trodden which 
the Church today does not possess. It must be recaptured 
through contrition, understanding and sacrifice. This 
was the note sounded at the World Council of Churches by 

wa y 0 f preface to a careful listing of the points of 
conflict between Christianity and Communism: 




-Bo¬ 
ll The communist promise of what amounts to a 
complete redemption of man in history (i.e. in 
this world) 

2) The belief that a particular class by virtue 
of its role as the bearer of a new order is free 
from the sins and ambiguities that Christians 
believe to be characteristic of all human existence 

3) The materialistic and deterministic teachings, 
however they may be qualified, that are incompatible 
with belief in God and with the Christian view of 
man as a person, made in God*s image.and 
responsible to Him. 

4) Ruthless methods of communists in dealing 
with their opponents. 

3) The demand of the party on its members for an 
exclusive and unqualified loyalty which belongs 
only to God, and the coercive policies of communist 
dictatorship in controlling every aspect of life(l) 


Observe that most of these criticisms of Communism 
are distinctly religious in character. Number four is the 
only exception. We must search elsewhere in the Amsterdam 
report for a statement of the practical danger: namely, 
that to socialize the means of production may lead only to 
new and inordinate combinations of political and economic 
power, culminating in complete totalitarianism exercised 
through, the State. In such a State, little account is 
taken of the individual. He is swept along by the social 
currents, shorn of personal responsibility in ever- 
enlarging areas of life. In the Christian understanding 
of man, therefore, his very nature is violated. 

We have already seen, however, that capitalist 
economy tends to give one man or a small group of men 
control over thousands of their fellows by virtue of 


(l) Findings and Decisions, First Asserndy World Council 
of Churches p. 44 

















. 





. 

. 

. 

■ 










- 81 - 


economic power; we have discussed the evils of such power. 
Under Communism, the concentration of power extends to 
the political as well as economic life. And in both 
systems all the new technical developments of science can 
be used to strengthen the social controls. The ruling 
ideas may be right or wrong, motives good or bad, politics 
radical or conservative. That matters not so much as the 
fact that vast concentrations of power strangle the 
individuals right to act as a moral and accountable 
being under God. 

It is a mistake to imagine that the economic 
problem is one of simple alternatives:—Capitalism or 
Communism? Vie run from a bear, and a lion springs upon 
us. One would like to say that there is a simple option. 

If there is, it was not known to leaders of the Church 
at Amsterdam: 

The Christian churches should reject the ideologies 
of both communism and laissez faire capitalism, 
and should seek to draw men away from the false 
assumption that these extremes are the only 
alternatives. Each has made promises which it 
could not redeem. Communist ideology put's the 
emphasis upon economic justice, and promises that 
freedom will come automatically after the 
completion of the revolution. Captialism puts 
emphasis upon freedom, and promises that justice 
will follow as a bi-product of free-enterprise; 
that, too, is an ideology which has been proved 
false. It is the responsioility of Christians to 
seek new, creative solutions which never allow 
eithef justice or freedom to destroy each other (1). 


(l) Findings and Decisions, First Assembly World Council 
of Churches p.4-5 



















. 








' 


. 

. 

' 

’ . 

. 








- 82 - 

Apparently, we cannot be spared tlie pain of 
struggle in the social order to achieve a system which at 
once guarantees freedom and justice. None of us can see 
it yet. Perhaps we shall be led through a terrible 
darkness before dawn. 

One thing is clear. We are past the.stage when 
things may just drift along. Man must take soundings 
and set his course. We used to ask whether or not the 
social order should be ulanned. That question has become 
obsolete. Since modern methods of social control make 
large-scale Planning possible in a few quick moves, some- 
one will plan whether we like it or not: 


Modern society has to be planned: if we do not 
have a good plan, there will be a plan of some 
kind, and it will certainly be a bad one. The 
vital issue to day is whether it is possible to 
plan for freedom and subject planning to democratic 
control. Unless a way can be discovered to make 
the new techniques serve the purposes of democracy, 
some form of totalitarianism is inevitable. (1). 


We are thus faced with the problem of extending democracy 
from the political field (in which so much has already 
been gained) to the economic field. The only alternative 
is to be caught in some form of totalitarianism, whether 
of a despotic individual or of a particular economic 
group. To be specific: whoever owns or even control the 
major means of production likewise controls the destiny of 


(1) Real Life is Meeting - Oldham P. 75 , by way of 
interpreting Prof. Karl Mannheim. 










- 8 3 - 

of most citizens. If we are to have economic democracy, 
then the people themselves must discover some way of 
controlling the means of production if they are to remain 
in possession of their ov.n destiny, Economic power must 
be made objectively responsible to the community as a 
whole. The possessors of economic power must be answerable 
for the use of that power , Ana whatever the outcome, 

for Christians the principle of stewardship should hold: 
wealth and power are held only in trust. They must be 
taken from the holder who violates the trust. 

Some Principles to Preserve 

Sven though economic issues seem beyond us in 
their hugeness, we cannot escape the responsibility for 
exercising judgment on public policy and making day-to-day 
decisions for ourselves. In Chapter IV we suggested 
certain principles to be kept in mind by Christians. We 
close the present chapter with additional suggestions 
bearing more directly on economic life. 

1) The right to work . That it is a normal man t s 
duty to work has long been recognized, though there have 
been exceptions among so-called upper classes who assumed 
the right to live by the work of others. But work is not 
only the duty of all; it must be regarded as the right of 
all. Grievous things happen to persons who are left 


(1) Real Life io Meeting -- Qldhon - P ?——by '"ay of 

intor - ' n ~pnt,innw Pirnf' — Karl If annho imv 












- 84 - 


without socially useful work over long periods. They 
lose the feeling of significance in society, lose ambition 
and the sense of right and wrong. Unemployment demoral¬ 
izes. We must conclude that one of the basic human rights 
/ is the 

/ right to work. An economic order which denies that right 
to large numbers of people is rendered suspect; and all 
policies which observe that right are to be encouraged. 

2) Humane conditions of work . A technological 
age inevitably requires large numbers of people to work 
at uncreative routine jobs. Depersonalization of human 
life in industry has already been referred to. It need 
not be absolute, for the conditions of employment can 
be adjusted to compensate for the losses sustained. 
Reasonable hours of labour, healthful working conditions, 
adequate rates of pay and accident insurance are examples 
of ways to humanize the economic order. 

3) Security . We have already asserted that the 
greatest demand of the age is for economic security: 
freedom from want as a minimum, and a decent standard 
of living as an ideal. In plain words, the worker has 
a right to know that he is secure in his job and that 
his wages will provide adequately for his family. That T s 
what he means by security. 

Christians are w r ary of the demand for material 
goods, for it so often proceeds from a purely materialist 
view of life. An overconcern for the material leads to 






- 85 - 


luxury sind hoarding which debases human life. However, 
Christians have also come to see that widespread poverty 
and undernourishment tend to lower the spiritual temper 
of a peoole. Individuals among the poor may overcome the 
the haz^ards of orivation. Some of them attain high moral 
and spiritual life; but the vast majority are in fact 
debased by conditions unaer which they must live. The 
spiritual life does not depend entirely on the material, 
but it is exercised through the material and can be 
influenced by it. The Christian must therefore regard 
economic wealth as a means to human well-being: no more, 
no less. He will agree with Proverbs: "give me neither 

povery nor riches - lest I be full, and deny thee, 

and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal and 
take the name of my God in vain.’ 1 (1) He will pray after 
our Lord’s manner: "Give us this day our daily bread", 
having regard for the simple necessities of food, clothing 
and shelter. 

Does the economic order provide the material 
necessities for all? Does it do so steaaily and 
permanently? These are questions which must influence a 
Christian’s attitude towards any economic policy. 

4} Justice The supreme ideal of the Kingdom of 
God is the lav; of love which proceeds from the heart under 
the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. In a sinful world, 


(1) Proverbs 30:8-9 








- 86 - 

however, the Christian is obliged to discover the best 
means for checking human sinfulness in a manner which 
at the same time leaves open the way of love. He works 
towards approximations of love. It is the r)riiiciple of 
justice which settles these approximations. It defines 
the good of each man in relation to all others; seeks by 
the enforcement of law both to promote the agreed rights 
of people and to keep the evil-doer from overrunning the 
rights of his fellows. A Christian will never be 
satisfied with justice alone. He must still exercise love 
which goes beyond justice. Nevertheless, this principle 
of justice is one which Christians recognize as fundamental 
to the social and economic order. 

5) Fellowship . It is often said that man is a 
social animal. He is made to have fellowship not only 
with God but with other people. All human relations 
may be regarded as various forms of fellowship. Two 
people dig potatoes: one may pick them from the ground 
while the other holds the sackl They chat as they work. 
Their work bee canes a basis for fellowship. In other 
words, undertaking a task in common, they are in communion 
with one another. That f s where community begins, at the 
level of sharing work or bread or play. It rises to higher 
levels when people hold in common their ideals, their 
desires and their loves. A society is a network of such 





- 87 - 

fellowships. When these bonds are strong the society is 
strong. When they are strained and finally severed, then 
society itself breaks down. 

In wartime a nation may achieve special unity 
through the dominance of patriotic fellowships when 
people A around the heroes of the cast, the flag etc. In 
peacetime however, one of the most important bases for 
the unity of a nation is the economic one. Is there good 
fellowship in the world of economics? One could hardly 
say so today in view of bitter feuds between Capital and 
Labour, the disaffection of employer and employee in so 
many businesses, suspicion of "white collar people" by 
unskilled labour and cut-throat practice of business 
against business. 

Christians cannot be content with an economy 
based solely on a competetive spirit. Competition is a 
legitimate element in the business world; but it over¬ 
reaches itself when left alone. For Christians, the 
guiding principles of economics must be mutual under¬ 
standing and co-operation. We are bidden to love our 
fellowmen. In the world of economics our love will be 
meaningless sentiment unless expressed in and through 
the actual economic relationships between persons. Here 
is our test of any economic order or of any arrangement 
within the order: does it make or break a real 
fellowship among people? 




’ 


















l 


- 









TOWARDS WORLD ORDLR 


































































































































Chapter VII 
TOWARDS WORLD ORDER 

Basil Mathews related how "the change from wearing 
long hair to having it bobbed threw a whole countryside of 
women-folk out of work in China, for they had made the silk 
hair-nets for millions of Western blondes and brunettes*'. 
Thus one part of our world is linked to another. Most of us 
can cite instances of how the nations have been drawn to¬ 
gether by economic ties. We know too that modern commun¬ 
ications have contracted the world until it seems a small 
place indeed. Our world is a neighbourhood. We do in fact 
live together. This is the One World theme with which we 
are all so familiar. 

But the great question of the age is: "How can we 
stay living together?" Can we survive a neighbourhood brawl 
in the modern world? The old methods of settling internatie 
nal disputes in isolated battles fought by professional sol¬ 
diers are now obsolete. A skirmish anywhere has world-wide 
significance and may easily develop into world proportions. 
Millions of civilians are involved in the struggle and suf¬ 
fer untold hardship in its wake. And now there appears the 
possibility of destruction devastating beyond the range of 
the average man's imagination. These who know most about 
atomic energy seriously admit that it is theoretically pos¬ 
sible for man to induce the disintegration of the planet 
itself. It's a stark alternative. Either we discover means 






■J 














! 


- 89 - 


of living at peace with one another or we resign ourselves 
to complete extinction. 

Some people are not bothered by the thought of ex¬ 
tinction because they have lost all interest in life and 
possess no faith in its final goal. They will drink the 
bitter cup and be done. Others are actually afraid, afraid 
for their own skins. The Christian, however, Is not con¬ 
cerned about annihilation as such. He can face death with 
courage, having faith in another order of life beyond death. 
Even so, Christians are concerned about immorality in this 
wold, And when scientific discoveries greatly increase 
man 1 s power, it is a vital question whether that power will 
be exercised for good or ill. In an atomic age both the 
devil and the angels rejoice at their improved opportunities 
Chrisitan faith approaches the human problem 
with realism. On the one hand it faces the fact of human 
sin. Man does sin against G-od and his neighbour: not sur¬ 
prising then that there is injustice, strife and oppression. 
On the other hand, the Christian view of man made in G-od* s 
own image and of Christ ! s work for his redemption persuades 
us that G-od’s will shall finally prevail, even among men. 

We have a right, therefore, to work for brotherhood, in in¬ 
ternational affairs, leaving the outcome to Providence. 

The present chapter dfescribes conditions which must 
be met before world order is possible. Let us call them the 
foundations of world order, ’While they are intended to be 





. 

. 

. 




- 90 - 


consistent with Christian teaching, it is assumed that hosts 
of non-Christians will give their assent. Happily so *. 
since Christians must have some basis for action in common 
with others. The distinctively Christian contribution to 
world order will be dealt with Later in this chapter. 

1. Spiritual Foundations 

a) Unifying Ideals People will live and work to¬ 
gether only if they can agree on certain fundamentals. A 
basket-ball team, for instance, will hold together as a 
team only if all the players agree on certain methods of 
play and cooperate to play in that manner. By the same 
token the peoples of the world can live in harmony only if 
they accept certain basic viewpoints in commonl The need 
has been expressed in a variety of high-sounding phrases. 

The Malvern Conference, a semi-official group of experts 
in Engl and declare that adherence to the new world order 
should not rest on economics or race or language but upon 
acceptance of certain basic moral values. A church body 
in America speaks of it as a new international ethos. (1) 
An economics professor describes it as M a common eoncensus 
of conviction" (2) But they all are dtiving at the same 
ide a; and in principle, it 1 s the same thing that members of 
the basketball team experience when they’re working as a 
team. 

In all quarters we find an effort to identify those 

ideals and ideas which all peoples might reasonably be ex- 

U) A J»$t **\c( Durable Peace } Federal CouKc/k +/O^v^ckes /?* s* 

P^ok. Geohpe Sc.ku*A. r- Uto.tt'eh-S' t u erf L Ot^cloix 








' 




! 



- 91 - 


pected to accept. And there has been some progress. Take 
some examples. It Is generally agreed by Christians and 
non-Christians, first: That mankind is one in nature. All 
spring from the same root. While there are Individual dif¬ 
ferences between any two persons, there is no reason for 
regarding one as inherently superior to the other. Each 
should have an opportunity to live and work and en^oy lei¬ 
sure. Second, it is widely recognized that in an inter¬ 
dependent world it is in our own interest (if for no other 
reason) to accept responsibility for one another. A third 
idea which has gained acceptance on a world scale is the 
G-olden Rule: "Do unto others as you would that they should 
do unto you". Almost in spite of themselves, men have come 
to realize that this is a rule which must guide them in 
their relations with one another. Hard-headed economists 
support paring down of reparation demands, reduction of tar 
iff barriers and disguised means of giving goods away, such 
as the U.3. lend-lease policy during world War II. Without 
great ideals like this, worked out in permanent practice, 
there can be no international unity. Belief in the common 
humanity of man, responsibility for one another, the golden 
rule and other basic moral ideals happen to be essentials 
for world order. 

b) The '.Till to Achieve World Order : We may know a great 
deal about the need for world peace. We may have found 
considerable ground of agreement among the people 1 s of the 








' 



















■ 






4 














- 92 - 


earth as to how they should behave towards one another. 

But If we have no will to work for peace, then all else 
counts for nothing. The will to do 1 Here is a spiritual 
factor required in every endeavour. Sportsmen call it the 
"will to win"; doctors refer to it as the "will to live". 
However described, it's ESSENTIAL 1 

How much do you want peace? This is the test ques- 
tion put to the will. If you want it enough, you will pay 
for it with toil and sacrifice. You will be willing to give 
up much that you have held dear and to accept many public 
changes which go against the grain of private liking. 

Today there is a groping towards world peace and 
order. The common man desires peace. Industrialists (most 
of them) want it, if only for reasons of security. Scien¬ 
tists have at last been willing to risk reputations in 

their plans for it. And millions pray for peace-some 

fearing destruction; others, impelled by the love of G-od in 
their hearts. Someday perchance all these mingling voices 
will be blended to fashion a new world order in the name of 
peace. "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be 
called the children of G-od". (1) 

c) Cleansing; the Spirit : "Maybe I shouldn’t fefcl this 
way", says one, "but I just hate Germans and Jews". That 
phrase "maybe I shouldn't", suggests the average man's 
awareness that before peace can be an accomplished fact 


(1) Matt. 5: 9 













A 







' 












■ 








- 93 - 


something has to happen deep down inside. There must be a 
change of heart which yields a changed outlook. Even those 
who have renounced religion admit the necessity of changed 
attitudes. They are reluctant to identify the problem as 
a "Spiritual 1 * one, so they employ other terms. The great 
majority of peace-loving people would agree with the war¬ 
time statement of Pope Pius XII in which he declared some 
indispensible requirements of peaceful world order: 

" One , triumph over hate- Two , triumph over 

mistrust- Three , triumph over the distressing 

principle that utility is a basis of law and right, 

and that might makes right- Four , triumph 

over those germs of conflict which consist in two- 
sided differences in the field of world economy 
(insure proper standard of living to every state) 

- Five , triumph over the spirit of cold 

egoism (1) 

jjTe have been considering the problems concerning 
what someone has called the inner front; and .ve have iden¬ 
tified certain spiritual foundations necessary to world 
order. What about requirements of the more "practical" 
kind. 

2. Political Foundations 

International peace cannot be founded on good will 
only . The most pious hopes of men must yet be implemen¬ 
ted through practical channels of organization. Sentiments 
of peace and good-will must be crystalized into rules re¬ 
cognized by ohe nations. This is the prevailing mood, 
that the nations can promote a stable peace only by enter- 


(1) Speech delivered by Pope Pius XII December 1940, 
as reported in "A Just and durable Peace" 













: 


■ 


- 94 - 

Lng into some working partnership which is more than merely 

a formal treaty. This is the thought behind the United 

Nations Organization. Observe the preamble to its Charter: 

WE THE PEOPLES OF THE UNITED NATIONS, 

DETERMINDED 

To save succeeding generations from the sc^ourge 
of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought un¬ 
told sorrow to mankind, and 

To reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, 
in the dignity and worth of the human person, in 
the equal rights of men and women and of rations 
large and small, and 

To extablish conditions under which Justice and 
respect for the obligations arising from treaties 
and other sources of international law can be 
maintained, and 

To promote social progress and better standards 
of life in larger freedom, 

AND FOR THESE ENDS 

To practise tolerance and live together in peace 
and security, and to ensure, by the acceptance of 
principles and the institituion of methods, that 
armed force shall not be used, save in the common 
interest, and 

To employ international machinery for the promo¬ 
tion of the economic and social advancement of all 
people, 

HAVE RESOLVED TO COMBINE OUR EFFORTS 
TO ACCOMPLISH THESE AIMS 

Accordingly, our respective Governments, through 
representatives assembled in the city of San Fran¬ 
cisco, who have exhibited their full powers found to 
be in good and due form, have agreed to the present 
Charter fo the United Nations and do hereby establish 
an international organization to be known as the 
United Nations. 

Those who formed the United Nations were particularly 

concerned about the political foundations of world order. 
They did not start from scratch. The nations already had 
considerable experience in operating world-wide agencies. 


Specialized services such as the International Postal Sefj- 














, 



. 








V 



-95- 

vice, the International Labour Office and the Health Or¬ 
ganization of the League of Nations had been working sucosbs- 
fully for many years. Even the failure of the League it¬ 
self sharpened the wits of those who gathered at San Fran- 
sisco in 1944. In fact, it is unfair to say that the Lea¬ 
gue failed, Rather, the nations failed the League by giving 
priority to selfish ambitions. However that may be, a re¬ 
servoir of experience had been built up toward another 
grand effort to establish peace. 

We shall attempt now to identify the fundamental 
poli^i^cal requirements of world order; and to suggest to 
what extent these requirements have been met. 

1). A Meeting Place : This is a first necessity, a place 
for national representatives to discuss their common pro¬ 
blems, air disputes and seek agreement. In its General As¬ 
sembly the United Nations Organization does provide the 
proper instrument. Even in its infancy the General Assem¬ 
bly has proven a worthy sounding board of world opinion. 

With the proper co-operation of journalists and radio re¬ 
porters each natfen is speedily informed as to where the 
others stand on a particular question. Information is not 
confined to government officials. The people themselves 
may know and weigh world problems. One of the happiest 
features of the Assembly is the manner in which it has 
fostered open diplomacy and plain-speaking. There is less 
sham and secrecy. Moreover, in the open discussions of tte 















: ;-C 


- 96 - 

Assembly the great moral issues confronting the world may 
be clarified. The conscience of mankind can be touched 
and aroused. We are within reach of maintaining an informed 
world conscience on questions like refugees, immigration, 
diplomatic relations and other points of international 
tension. 

2) A Legislative Body : It goes without saying that there 

will be no world stability without recognized laws by which 
the nations may be governed in their relations with one 
another. It can be assumed in other words that world peace 
must be maintained in a manner similar to the maintenance 
of order within any nation or community- by the enaction 

and enforcement of law. The United Nations Charter does not 
provide for world government in this sense at all. True, 
the Utf. recognizes so-called "International Law", a body 
of regulations agreed upon bt various international con¬ 
ferences held over the years. They have to do for instance 
with humane treatment of prisoners of war, handling of man¬ 
dated territories, recognition of coastal waters etc. etc. 
But these rules are really observed as a matter of conven¬ 
ience and good will. There is nothing binding about them 
in the sense that a breach of the rule would bring punish¬ 
ment by recognized authority. 

3) * Method of Determining Justice: If rules and laws are 


to be used at all (whether as enforceable legislation or as 






■> ' "• 




- 
















• I 

■ . ' 












. 


* 



















-97- 

agreed customs) there will be times when a decision must 
be reached as to who has transgressed the law. In any dis¬ 
pute between nations some agency must decide the rights 
and wrongs of the case. After the First World War such 
an agency was set up at The Hague; there an international 
court systematized existing regulations and was prepared 
to sit in judgment on any case brought to it voluntarily 
by disputing nations or referred to it by the League of 
Nations. Accordingly, the United Nations have incorpor¬ 
ated into their organization an International Court of 
Justice. It consists of fifteen judges elected by the 
General Assembly. 

4) A Means of Enforcement : When an opinion graduates to 
general acceptance as law, it automatically carries some 
weight. The very fact that a majority opinion stands be¬ 
hind a law gives it a subtle power. Then again, laws 
exercise a moral force in the minds of citizens and nations 
who value their moral prestige in the eyes of the world. 

But neither of these elements is sufficient to make laws 
effective in all cases. Experience shows that before they 
will be observed with care there must be at least the 
possibility of physical enforcement. The presence of a 
police force in Canada, for example, not only ensures pun¬ 
ishment for lawbreakers and protection for the average 
citizen but also is a deterent of lawlessness which might 
otherwise occur. There must be similar enforcement of law 





























f 










: 












- 98 - 


on the world plane before order can be permanently main¬ 
tained. 

It is here that the UNO shows its greatest weak¬ 
ness. There is no enforcement agency independent of the 
very nations against which force might be directed in 
carrying out international agreements. Certainly this is 

the case as far as the "big five" are concerned-U.S.A., 

Russia, Britain, France and China. They have permanent 
seats on the body within the UHD which is charged with 
keeping the peace of the world. Six other nations are 
elected by the G-eneral Assembly to make up this Security 
Council. But here’s the snag. On all matters, except 
those purely of procedure, the fiipve permanent members 
must be unanimous to make a decision binding. This means 
that any one of the five great nations can block the 

effort of the whole Security Council-a likely event 

whenever any one of the five is seriously involved In the 
particular issue before the Council. This is the now 
famous "veto" power. It was the most hotly debated 
question when the UNO was born # The Veto Power weakens 
the Security Council’s chances of enforcing peace; but 
unless it had been provided for, some nations would pro¬ 
bably have withdrawn entirely. 

The root of the problem, of course is the age-old 
one of sovereignty. Each nation jealously guards its right 
to make all its own decisions unless it happens to be con- 






/ 








, ■ 






■ 




- 99 - 


venient to let others decide. In other words, each desires 
to be a law unto Itself. That's what It means to retain 
one’s complete sovereignty. Lts retention by separate 

nations is a continual threat to peace. Conversely, when 

en 

the: nations are willing to reliqulsh so#e measure of 
their sovereignty world peace will be possible. 

If we may thus speak of a root problem, the analogy 
can be carried further. This root grows in the soil of 
difference and suspicion. It’s a difference of political 
outlook. Look at the supreme case in point: Can Russian 
Communism and Western Democracy live at peace in the 
same world? That's the question which cuts across our 
post-war effort to establish the political foundations 
of word order. Some say: "No”. Stalin is reported to 
have said in 1947: "Yes". But the real ansser remains to 
be seen. 

The ultimate requirements is a properly constituted 
world government, with various divisions of legislation, 
administration etc. That is the obvious goal to aim for. 

Meanwhile, we must work with what we have-The United 

Nations Organization. 






- 100 - 


3. Economic Foundations 

"We believe that economic security Is no less ess¬ 
ential than politics security to a just and durable peace." 
So runs the report of the National Study Conference held 
in Delaware, Ohio, in 1942 convened by A Commission of the 
Federal Council of Churches in America. The Conference 
included outstanding Protestant men and women, who underlin¬ 
ed again the spiritual significance of the economic con¬ 
ditions under which people actually live. 

The finest conceivable world political structure 
could not guarantee world peace so long as economic injust¬ 
ice exists. For these injustices create tensions liable at 
any time ha burst into violent upheaval. 

What injustices? What tensions? Well, most of them 
can be seen in the fact that a few nations dominate the 
world*s wealth, while others struggle to claim their share. 
At the moment, for instance, United States, Russia and 
Great Britain are dominant. They own or control the world's 
sources of raw materials and world markets to a degree 
far in excess of the percentage of world papulation. The 
peoples of India, China dnd Japan have much less. They 
are forced to exis^n a lower standard of living. 

Some people try to avoid the issue by blaiming the 
poorer nations as "backward", whose Unintelligent and lazy 
habits reap a proper reward. Conversely, the more enter¬ 
prising peoples are supposed, fully to merit on w£at they 
have gained in time past. Of course such sentiments don't 

















- 101 - 


ring true in Christian conscience. However, conscience cr 
no conscience, the less fortunate nations live for the day 
when they may take their proper place in the sun by force. 
Their insistent demand for economic equality is a threat 
to world peace as long as inequalities remain. 

Meanwhile, even the great possessing powers eye 
one another with suspicion, lest the one outdo the other 
in the race for predominant power. Thus the tension of 
greed for economic gain is added to the more lfegitimate 
tension of struggle for economic equality. These are 
sources of international friction and open warfare. 

Nothing short of removing the economic Imbalance 
among the nations will make peace possible. Easier said 
than done? Yes ’.But it’s achievment is a must on the road 
to peace. Surely, Christians need no persuasion that 
this is a proper objective, even though the ways and means 
are not yet clear. 

The notion of Christian stewardship gives proper 
guidance at this point. The resources of the earth are 
Grod* s gifts to be used to his glory and in the service of 
all his children. Even rich natural resources discovered 
in our native land cannot be regarded as lucky finds for 
ourselves only, but as providential gifts for all. This is 
no sentimental talk but hard fact. To ignore it means 
final ruin. To follow it brings us one step nearer to 

peace and order in the world. 
















I 













t ' : , v, : c ;,f . i. c .1$ o&-. - \\ 

4 

1 

* 







■ 













- 102 - 


4-. Some Immediate Tasks : a) There should be no delay about 
relief. Millions of God ! s children suffer cold and hunger 
as a result of war <&r natural catastrophe like famine and 
flood. We are called to exercise compassion for brothers 
in need. It's also a matter of self-preservation, since 
poverty breeds disease and war which threatens us all. 

There will always be occasions when relief is a first nec¬ 
essity. It is needed to-day on a scale never known before. 

The fact that, governments, private agencies and 
churches are operating giant serenes of relief is one evid¬ 
ence of hope in a despairing world. There is no excuse 
whatever for Canadians to miss this opportunity to share 
through measures of relif^. b) Rehabilitation differs 
from relief. Rehabilitation programs are designed to help 
people help themselves. Consider the rehabilitation of 
France or Italy. Other nations have to help, them restore 
railway lines, telephone systems, health services and per¬ 
haps make huge loans to set the wheels of industry in motion 
again. Only as war-torn nations are re-established can 
the channels of world trade be open again. In this connec¬ 
tion , it is important also that former enemy countries be 
not burdeisd too heavily with demands for reparation pay¬ 
ments. Amounts set should take into account the ability of 
a people to produce over and above a humane standard of 
living. Any nation overcharged in a reparation plan be¬ 
comes both a snag in world trade and a hotbed of discontent 




. 

- 

' 

. 

• - , ... " . 





- 103 - 


to threaten the peace. 

Some Long-range objectives : Economic conferences 
sponsored by governments. Churches and other agencies have 
laid down objectives which are not Immediately attainable 
but which ought to be goals for the future. A few are 
listed: 1) raise the living standards of the poorer nations 
2) Make Important raw materials equa'ly accessible to all 
nations. 3) Keep channels of trade as open and free as 

possible--" a genuine interchange of materially needed 

commodities must take the place of a struggle for a so- 
called favourable balance". (l) 4) Devise a universal 

system of exchange and a world bank. 

These are some of the problems facing the United 
Nations Organization. They are the special concern of the 
Economic and Social Council within the U.N.O. structure. 

The very existence of this Council is testimony to the 
widespread conviction that world order must rest on eco¬ 
nomic as well as political and spiritual foundations. 

5. THE ROLE OF THE CHURCH 

When the Roman Empire was falling apart, an ancient 
writer declared: f, The world is old, and not even Caesar can 
make her young again." He was right; but he could not know 
that Christian forces were already founding the spiritual 
bases of a new society. 

The empires of our day are likwise due for destruc- 


(1) From the report of the Malvern Conference, England. 










: . 





-104- 


tion unless some pattern of world order can be established. 
We have endeavoured thus far to make that clear. We 
proceed now to ask: What is the Church doing about this 
business of world order? 

At the outset it should be said firmly that the 
Christian Church was not initiated expressly to promote 
an international peace program or to set up a new order 
in the political sense. True, Christianity has a world 
program: to proclaim a message of good news about God in 
Christ. It has world objectives in the sense that it is 
open to all men. Those who accept it live in a new fellow¬ 
ship with one another because of their new relationship 
with God through Christ. This is the new society whose 
final purpose is already seen: "The kingdoms of this world 
are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; 
and he shall reign for ever and ever.” (1) 

Political internationalism, on the other hand, has 
a different goal, namely; a world authority to which all 
nations would owe allegiance hnd by which they would be 
controlled in their relations toward one another. It is 
to be achieved by proce^es of mutual agreement, compro¬ 
mise and even by force in some cases. Once established 

it must be maintained according to laws which have the 
sanction of force behind them. World order of this sort 

is quite different from the Kingdom described in Chapter 
III which " cometh not with observation ”. (2) 


(1) Rev. 11: 15 (2) Luke 17: 20 









-105- 


To distinguish between the political problem of world order 
and the Christian objective for all mankind is by no means 
to say that they are unrelated. Quite the ppposite is the 
case. Christianity is peculiarly compatible with the 
present movement towards world order. In fact, Christian 
forces make some supremely important contributions. Let 
us examine them: 

L. By Declaring the Oneness of All Men 

The story is told of an Indian lad in a mission 
school who pBayed before his examination: "Oh Lord, help 
me to pass my examination. May the whole class pass. May 
the whole school pass. May the whole world pass." We 
smile at the incident, but it does reveal two important 
elements in Christian experience. First, the Christian 
feels impelled to share with others the things he most 
wants for himself. Be it food or health or ideas, he will 
share insofar as he allows free play to Christian impul¬ 
ses. Second, this Christian concern for the welfare of 
others reaches out to all peoples. It knows no discrimin¬ 
ation. 

Elsewhere in these studies (especially in Chapter 
V) we have noted that Christian faith emphasizes the 

essential dignity of all men under G-od. They spring from 
the same source. "He hath made of one blood all nations 
of men for to dwell on the face of the earth". (1) 


(1) Acts 17: 26 









i 






-106- 


Thelr needs and Interests are essentially the same. 

In other words, Christians recognize a "natural 1 ' 
basis for the unity of mankind. It's a basis which should 
not be confused with the stricter notion of Christian 
brotherhood. When the Apostle Paul speaks of "brothers 
in Christ", he means what he says. He is refering to a 
special relationship of intimacy which can be known only 

to Christians-those who hold Christ in common. To 

speak of all men as being brothers in that sense is simply 
wrong. 

It is important for Christians to see that while 
they celebrate a brotherhood in Christ, and while they 

look for "a city-whose builder and maker is God", 

they must at the same time have a basis on which to work 
with non-Christians in the struggl-e for world peace. 
Conviction of the oneness of all men is a good minimum 
basis for action by all men. Take an example of how it 
works: When the Nazi occupation forces in Holland ordered 
all Jews to wear a special badge of identification, large 
numbers of Christians appeared on the streets wearing the 
same insignia. An impulse which is distinctly Christian 
thereby established the solidarity of men as men, regard¬ 
less of religion. 

It is this principle which operates when Christians 
raise their voices against the oppression of conquered Jap¬ 
an or the exploitation of the nature population in South 

















■ 





. 



-107- 


Afrlca. Admittedly, thq|Church has often been silent in the 
face of such evils; but she has also been the custodian of 
a message which stands in Judgment even over her own life. 
It is this voice of Judgment which has been heard 30 stronger 
through her councils and among her far-flung membership in 
recent years. The Church has proclaimed the oneness of all 
men, with good effect . Without this idea firmly fixed in 
men*s minds, they will look in vain for world order. 

2. By Delivering the Captive Llan 

When Jesus began his ministry one of his first acts 
was to align himself with a program laid down by the pro¬ 
phet Isaiah: 

The spirt of the Lord is upon me 
Because he hath annointed me 
to preach good tidings to the poor: 

He hath sent me 

to proclaim Release to the captives, and 
recovering of sight to the blind, 
to set at liberty them that are bruised, 
to proclaim the acceptable year of the L u rd. (l) 

Throughout his ministry Jesus exercised compassion $pon 

suffering humanity. He led people out of ignorance into 

the glorious wisdom of God. He healed the sick and freed 

tormented minds from the powers of darkness. His was a 

liberating influence over body, mind and spirit. 

When the Apostles received their Lord’s command to g> 
and teach all nations, they rightly assumed that he meant 

the gospel to touch the whole of life. So the Church has 
succeeded to the ministry of her Lord, healing the sores 


tl) Luke 4: 16-22 



















- 108 - 


of the world and letting light into dark places. 

Now the point to observe is this: In exercising her 
own appointed mission, the Church has been an important 
factor in preparing the soil for world order.espec¬ 

ially in carrying the gospel to so-called backward peopled 
These people have long been an obstacle to world peace. 

They constitute a stumbling block to the great powers who 
are continually tempted to exploit their weaker fellows 
and to battle with one another over the spoils. Moreover, 
so long as some nations remain ignorant and undeveloped 
they will be unable to share responsibility for any sort of 
world administration. 

The Christian missionary enterprise has served these 
peoples; and never more fruitfully than in the past century. 
Since the days of William Carey in India and the Moffats 
of Africa, an ever-broadening stream of missionary endeav¬ 
our has been carried to the four corners of the globe. In 
its effort to evangelize the world for Christ, it inevitab¬ 
ly carried with it Christ's compassion for men in-every 
area of their need. If they were ill, Christ's healing was 
worked through the Christian doctor, the mission hc^ital 

and community health programs. He fed multitudes of the 
hungry because through deliberate missionary instruction 
in skills of7nodern agricultural science. Christ has 
brought light and hope to millions of men and women as they 









- 








- 109 - 


have learned for the first time to read and write their own 
language. The Church has in fact spear-headed the world¬ 
wide attack on ignorance and illiteracy. 

The Christian Church has gone into all the world to 
bring spiritual liberty to millions who had been haunted 
by extreme poverty and super s\tition, harried by hunger and 
disease, robbed by land-lords and money-lenders, exploited 
by bad governments. Masses of people are thus raised to a 
new level of self-respect. They are becoming conscious of 
themselves as people who can claim rights but must also 
exercise responsibilities in the world of nations. This is 
the political significance of the propagation of the gospel. 
It should not be overlooked in assessing the forces which 
make world order an attainable goal. 

3. By Demonstrating the Unity of All Christians 

Future generations will probably point to the ecumen¬ 
ical movement of the churches as one of the most important 
features of our age. They will review a very strange para¬ 
dox: While the world has been torn apart by two world 
wars, the Christian churches around the globe have been 
drawn closer together. The Church has risen above the 
churches. It is our contention that this trend towards 
the unity of all Christians has profound bearing upon the 
struggle to achieve unity among the nations. 

What is this movement which goes by so strange a name 



















' 


r 




1 




* ; 











- 110 - 


-ecumenical? Let* a look at Its background. Since 

the Protestant Reformation there has been a progressive 
breaking up of the Church into units called denominations 
of sects. Sometimes the breaks have resulted from differ¬ 
ences over petty matters, in which case the Lord of the Ch¬ 
urch has been dishonoured, and Christians should seek for¬ 
giveness. In most cases, however, there were good reasons 
of conscience for the hiving off process. Undue political 
influence exercised through the church, or immoral church 

administration—•-these sometimes led to the formation 

of separate denominations. Others were founded upon new 
insights of faith and practice which met with immovable 
opposition from the leaders of a particular church. Over 
the years the Church has spawned churches literally by the 
hundreds. 

The tide has lately turned. The churches have been 
feeling their way together again. Some contributing factors 
may be listed briefly: 1) Time always eases tensions, es¬ 
pecially where personal feelings may have played too great 
a role in separation. 2) Differences at one time, rightly 
counted important are rendered less so by changing condit¬ 
ions. 3) Hard physical facts have sometimes forced denom¬ 
inations to work together. Witness the building of Union 
Churches in pioneer Western Canada when populations were 

scattered and finances slim. 4) There is evidence of gen¬ 
uine conscience among Christians of many denominations when 








■ 


. 



. 




- 111 - 


they consider the broken Body of Christ. 5) When new 
philosophies of life rise to claim the loyalty of mankind, 
Christians are more ready to waive differences among them¬ 
selves in order to proclaim Christ as the supreme object 
of loyalty. 6) In a divided world Christians have redis¬ 
covered the power of their fellowship to hurdle barriers 
which otherwise keep them apart. 

Observe briefly some of the great landmarks of tte 
ecumenical movement. One of them is the person of John R 
Mott. On his first world journey at the close of the nine¬ 
teenth century, Dr. Mott founded Christian student associa¬ 
tions in coun^try after country; linked established organ¬ 
izations to create the World Student Christian Federation. 
This body has for fifty years been producing outstanding 
leaders for the world church. We should also mention the 
World Missionary Conference at Edinburgh in 1910, followed 
by the creation of National Christian Councils in twenty- 
six countries. These bodies met again in 1928 at Jerusalem 
and in 1938 at Madras. Meanwhile, the leaders of most non- 
Roman communions were meeting at Lausanne in 1927 and Ed¬ 
inburgh in 1937 to discuss problems of Christian unity on 

Faith and Order-what the Church believes and how the 

Church is organized. Questions as to how the Church should 
confront social issues were studied by other conferences 
on Life and Work at Stockholm in 1927 and at Oxford in 1937. 
Thus we see a stream of thought and activity to which there 















-112 


were many tributaries. 

Special mention should be made of youth’s part. 

They had a major share in the movement from the beginning. 
The first World Christian Youth Conference in Amsterdam 
in 1939 and the second in Oslo (194-7) were merely visible 
peaks of youth’s effort. 

The year 1948 is marked as one of fulfilment. The 
vision of a World Council of Churches was finally brought 
to fruition. The new World Council has the task of con¬ 
solidating all the gains of the past. It must also con¬ 
front much unfinished business. Absence of the great Roman 
Church from the fellowship is a problem by itself. Rela¬ 
tions of the World Council to other international agencies 
must be worked out. Above all, means must be found whereby 
the rank-and-file Christian will become aware of his world 
connections and then give that moral support without which 
the Ecumenical Church will be like an empty shell. The 
present movement requires to be strengthened by lesser 
groups and millions of individual Christians. It needs 
the work of many hands, and voices mingled in prayer that 
all may be one. Then and then only will there be a broad 
program of reconciliation among men who regard themselves 
as political or national enemies. 

We have touched on the causes underlying the ecumen¬ 
ical movement. They are a matter of history; some of them 
are material, some spiritual. Those who are closest to the 




, 

- 




. 

' 

. 



. 

. 














- 113 - 


movement, are convinced that the Holy Spirit has been 
active throughout. They continue to seek God*s guidance 
in a process which they believe is inspired by him and 
designed to serve his purposes in the world. 

For the peace and order of the world, the ecumen¬ 
ical movement has undoubted importance. First, the 
Churches have gone far beyond other bodies in taking prac¬ 
tical steps towards unity. Political, racial, cultural 
and even religious differences have been faced frankly 
without yielding their divisive power. The churches have 
given the world a demonstration of unity which it sorely 
needs. They are showing that unity is no mere pipe-dream; 
that it is a possibility. If the Churches can bridge 
great gulfs which have kept men apart so long, then there 
is yet hope for growing unity among the nations. 

Second, the ecumenical movement has helped to shape 
the attitudes of the average citizen in regard to world 
order. Discussions begun by the movement, and the liter¬ 
ature it has produced, have overflowed the bounds of church 
circles. M^ny a Christian pamphlet has strengthened that 
body of public opinion vdiich moves by desire and will to¬ 
wards the realization of a peaceful world. 

Third, the ecumenical movement has not only devel¬ 
oped spiritual ties throughout the world; it has created 
an organization which exists to foster those ties. In- 













+ 

.< 




-In¬ 


stitutions possess staying power of a peculiar sort. The 
very existence of a world-wide institution constitutes 
one more set of forces holding the world together. The 
world Church has a stake in world order. 

One word of cousel: While from both the spiritual 
and the institutional points of view the ecumenical move¬ 
ment provides a kind of international cement for the 
world, we should not assume that there lies its chief pur¬ 
pose. The churches have not suddenly become ecumenical 
in outlcck just to promote world order. However, since 
the true Church is an ecumenical Church, it does happen, 
to serve this greatest of the world*s current needs. 

The Church, which is now in reality a world 
community, may be used of G-od to develop His 
spirit of righteousness and love in every race 
and nation, and then to make possible a just 
and durable peace. For this service Christians 
must now dedicate themselves, seeking forgive¬ 
ness for their sins and the constant guidance 
and help of G-od. (l) 

4. By Developing the World Citizen 

During World W a r II a question was put to Sir 
Alfred Zimmern, the famous Oxford Professor of Interna¬ 
tional Relations: "What is the greatest obstacle that 
stands in the way of the establishment of enduring world 
peace?". He gave a startling reply: "The small-scale in¬ 
dividual." (2) 

The small scale individual is a person whose outlook 


(1) A Message from the National Study Conference on the Chu¬ 
rches and a Just and Durable Peace, Deleware, Ohio (1942)P . 3.3 

(2) The Church in the Changing World Basil Mathews P- _ 











- 













- 

















■ 







r 








- 115 - 


ls go narrow that he cannot or will not look beyond his 
own selfish desires to comprehend the needs of his icigh- 
bour. When this sort of person dominates life, strife 
is inevitable. He is our chief problem. His littleness 
may defeat the greatest world-cause yet known. What can 
we do about him? Gan he be changed so that he looks upon 
the world in a large-hearted way? How quickly we are for 
ced to phrase world issues in terms of the oldest religi¬ 
ous problem How do we get the new man? 

The more the minds of men grapple with the 
political and economic problems of recon¬ 
struction, the clearer it becomes that the 
deepest needs are not met on this plane. 

The despair, fear and revenge which must 
inevitably possess much of the world are 
not to be cast out save by divine forgive¬ 
ness and release of which the Church, not by 
its merits but by God's Ordinance, is the 
messenger and trustee. More important than 
economic and political planning is the re¬ 
creation of broken men and women, the suppl¬ 
anting of hopelessness by hope, of revenge 
by forgiveness, of fear by love. No scheme 
of international reconstruction can avail 
that does not rest v*P°n and arise out of 
minds that desire world fellowship and have 
banished hatred and schemes of mere national 
self-aggrandisement. Without such spiritual 
foundation no enduring structure can be built 
and it is not a foundation that men can lay 
for themselves, but only as they come to the 
knowledge of their dependence upon G-od and are 
able to recieve his enabling power. (l) 

It is always the Church* s business to open the flood¬ 
gates to G-od* s power in Christ to make the "new creature". 


(l) The Christian Church and World Order-A statement 

by the Commission of the Churches for International Friend¬ 
ship and Social Responsibility (Great Britain) 1942. 

S.C.M. Press. 























/ 


. 

e 


. 




' 

















- 116 - 


She hag shown marked success, despite numerous persons 

whose Christian cl^itms are forcefully denied by their own 

shrivelled spirits. Christ has broadened the horizons of 

men and enlarged their sympathies. Christ's "new man" is 

remarkably suited to the present time, when it is required 

that each man's understanding must embrace the whole world. 

The true Christian becomes the world citizen even before 

the world becomes a community. This may be a comparatively 

recent insight in Christian history, but that's the habit 

of Christian truth: to reveal a way for the times. 

Basil Mathews has aptly remarked that the Church's 

business is to create the creators of world order. He says 

so in confidence that this is precisely what the Church is 

doing on a very large scale. But he is not content to list 

only the great names like John R. Mott, whose influence as 

world citizens is so easily recognized: 

You and I, to whatever communion we may belcrg, 
are fellow-members of that comradeship of the 
disciples of Jesus, who across the centuries, 
and today across the whole wide world, hold as 
the central truth of our lives the words which 
the first Christians told each other nineteen 
hundred years ago, "Jesus is Lord". As the 
only world-wide community of all races and 
nations now living among mankind, as the great¬ 
est Community that has even existed; and as the 
one Community that in the Fatherhood of God and 

the Brotherhood of Man has the only secure eter¬ 
nal foundations for world peace, we are called to 
harness all our powers to the spread of His dis- 
cipleship to embrace all mankind. (1) 


(/) The Church in the Changing World, by Basil Mathews, 

p. 89* 








• I 
























. 


■ 






■ 









m 







-117- 


Nation with nation, land with land, 
Unarmed shall live as comrades free; 
In every heart and brain shall throb 
The pulse of one fraternity. (l) 


(1) From a hymn by J. A # Symonds 







BIBLIOGRAPHY 













BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bailey & Kent 

HISTORY OF THE HEBREW COMMONWEALTH 
(New York: Charles Ocribner's Sons)1920 

Barth, Karl 

CHURCH AND STATE (MacMillan) 1939 

Bennett, John 

CHRISTIAN ETHICS AND SOCIAL POLICY 

Bready, J.W. 

ENGLAND BEFORE AND AFTER WESLEY 
(Hodder & Stroughton) 1*138 

Brunner, Emil 

THE DIVINE IMPERATIVE (MacMillan) 1937 

Brunner, Emil 

JUSTICE AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 
(London: Harper Bros.) 1945 

Berdyaev, N. 

THE DESTINY OF MAN (London: The Century 

Press) 1937 

Dearmer, Percy 

CHRISTIANITY AND CRISIS 
.^London: Gollancz) 1933 

Grant, F.C. 

THE GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM 
(New York: MacMillan) 1940 

Hopkins, C.H. 

THE RISE OF THE SOCIAL GOSPEL IN AMERICAN 
PROTESTANTISM (New Haven: Yale University 
Press) 1940 

Maclver, R.M. 

SOCIETY: ITS STRUCTURE AND CHANGES 
(New York: Ray Long & Richard)R. Smith) 
1931 


Mathews, Basil THE CHURCH IN THE CHANGING WORLD 
Matthews, W.R. WHAT 13 MAN? (London: James Clarke & Co.) 


Miller, Carl W. 

A SCIENTIST'S APPROACH TO RELIGION 
(New ¥ork: MacMillan) 194-7 

Oldham, J.H. 

REAL LIFE IS MEETING (London: Sheldon Pres3 

1942 


Rauscheribusch, W. CHRISTIANITY AND THE SOCIAL CRISIS 

(London: MacMillan) 1908 


Thomas, Earnest 


THE MESSAGE OF JESUS FOR THE LIFE OF TODAY 
(Toronto: Ryerson Press) -now out of orint 
1933 







. 






' 














. 










T « 




♦ * 

, 


‘ 


- 




















Vlastos, Gregory CHRISTIAN FaITH AND DEM0RCRAC7 

(New 7ork: As90oiation)Pre33) 

Weatherhead, L. 0. IN QUEST OF A KINGDOM (Toronto: Hodder 

& Stroughton) 1944 

Whale, J.S. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE (Cambridge University 

Press) 1942 


Conference Reports 

THE OXFORD CONFERENCE — Official Report by J.H. Oldham 

(Willett, Clarke & Company) 

Chicago & New 7ork 1937 

A JUST AND DURABLE PEACE— Published by a committee of the 

Federal Council of the Churches 
of Christ in America, 1941 

GOD*S WILL IN OUR TIME — Report presented to the General 

Assembly of the Church of Scotland 
(London: 3.C.M. Press) 19^2 

THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH AND WORLD ORDER -- by a commission of 

the churches for International 
Friendship and Social Responsibility 
in Great Britain (London: S.C.M. 
Press) 1942 

LAMBETH CONFERENCE 1948 — Encyiical Letter from the Bishops 

together with the Resolutions and 
Reports 

FINDINGS AND DECISIONS — First Assembly, World Council of 

Churches, 1948 































































— 























-- 











































B29758 








