Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


THESIS 

1921 

#3 

Morecombe, F»F.G* 

A History of the text of the new 
testament. 

























For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/morecombe1921 



i 


A History of the Text of the Hew Testament. 


P. F. Gr.Moreoomhe. 






CONTENTS 


Introduction. 


The task and problem of Textual Criticism. 

Material. 

1. Uncials. 

Codex Sinaiticus. 

” Alexandrinus, 
w Yaticanus. 
n Ephraemi. 
w Beza£. 

" W. (Washington). 

2* Cursives. 

No. 1. 
w 35 . 

3. Ancient Tensions. 

Syriac Versions 
Armenian ” 

Coptic m 

Ethiopia n 
Ar&ttfdc w 
Latin 19 

4. patristic Quotations. 

Editions. 


Complutensian. 

Erasmus. 

Stephens. 

Elziver. 

Griesbaeh. 

Lachman. 

Westcott and Sort. 
Examination of his theory. 
Yon Soden. 

Examination of his theory, 
Souter. 

English Versions. 

Conclusion 


Bibliography 



















* _ ■ ' 





- 

. 


- 




* 

. . 





A HISTORY OF THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 


The literature of the N.T. must be understood 
historically if understood at all. It must be understood 
as the product of the greatest period of the history of 
religion. 

Christianity as we know it, the religion of 
humanity as it has come to be, the ultimate world-religion 
as we believe it destined to become, is a resultant of two 
factors, Semitic and Aryan, the social and the individual 
ideal. 

Its canonized literature is contained in the N.T. 
and represents the combination.^ 

It is not our problem to study the text itself-- 
that is too great a task, and impossible through lack of 
material—but to study the history of that text; to ascertain 
if possible whether the text now comprising the N.T. does 
really carry us back to H.T. times, and whether it does 
introduce us into the atmosphere of the church of the first 
century. The problem then is one of purity of text, and in 
order to solve such a problem it will be necessary to study 
the history of Textual Criticism, and in this way seek to 
endeavour to arrive at the unity of the H.T. which of 
necessity, must be a unity of diversity, but which will un¬ 
doubtedly lead us to proclaim in spite of such, that the 

1. "Making of the H.T." Bacon, p.847. 









Jf 





* 

■ 

J 

. • 

- 

r ' . 

i 



2 


"word of the Lord abideth for ever." 

Tertullian (200-210) is the first to place a 
definite N T. over against the 0 T, but we must not fail 
to mention that it was Melito , of Sardis, who C.170 
spoke of certain "writings of the new covenant", evidently 
referring to some letters which eventually found their 
way into the N T Canon. 

While the exact reference does not use the words 

"writings of the new covenant" yet the implication is there. 

The exact words are "Accordingly when I went East and came 

to the place where these things were preached and done, I 

learned accurately the books of the OT. and send them to 

2 

thee as written below." 

It is hardly possible to talk of an 0 T. without 
some suggestion of a 31 I, although the N T. is not specific¬ 
ally mentioned. 

This Canon did not come into being all at once. 

At the beginning of the 2nd Century the elements necessary 
to the formation of a N T. Canon were all at hand, but it 
was not until the close of the century that a real canonical 
N T. is set over against the 0 T* Bacon points out that 
"the N T. presents the paradox of a literature born of 
protest against the tyranny of a canon, yet ultimately 
canonized itself through an increasing demand for external 

1. Isaiah 40j8 

2. Eusebius, p.206 







■ 


. 




' 




■ ♦ ? 

. " ■ f&H- 

. 


* -- ~ ' 

, 


. 

' t 

. 

‘ 

* 

’ 

* 


' • > ■ . 








3 


authority. 

The N.T. contains 27 books in its oanon, 

and these nmm were declared to be "an infallible 

2 

rule of faith and practice." 

But we can no longer believe that such is the 
case; the various M.3.S. which have been discovered prove 
that an infallible text is wholly and hopelessly unattain¬ 
able. 

Eealising such differences in the texts of the 

various M,S.S.,textual criticism has sought, and still 

seeks, "by the exercise of knowledge and trained judgment, 

to restore the very words of some original document which 

has perished, and survives only in copies complete or in- 

3 

complete, accurate or inaccurate, ancient or modern." 

The problem truly is a difficult one; if we had 
to hand the original 27 documents there would be no pro¬ 
blem at all, but we have not one of them, and the earliest 
copy we have of any one of them does not go back further 
than the 4th Century, while every fresh copy discovered 
only accentuates the problem, and makes the possibility 
of solution more remote than ever. 

Kenyon says "the province of textual criticism 
is the ascertainment of the true form of a literary work, 
as originally composed and written down by its authors." 

1. Making of the JJ.T. Bacon, p.l. 

2. Making of the N.T. Bacon, p.34. 

3. Text and Canon of the N.T. Pouter, p.l. 




4 


Before the days of printing all books were 
written by hand; they were the product of the copyist, The 
task of the textual critic is to endeavour to the best of 


his ability to overcome and counteract the many errors that 
such copying entailed. Some of these errors were not very 
serious, but serious enough when one considers what trouble 
some of them have caused. For example, simple slips of 
the pen can be readily overcome, because the mistake is 
usually obvious. When the scribe of the Codex Sinaiticus 
writes ' Troccnxc ~rro c >7 <Tix ex' - 7 — 0 ^ 

^\ouv~r<x~x for e k 7 ~o <j /<<x\o cjv ~r~os 
there is no difficulty in either seeing or correcting the 
error." 


Another kind of error is that of omission;-- 

technically known as homoioteleuton—this may be due to the 

similarity of adjoining words. This is shown in John 17:15. 

_» __ 

Dr. Kenyon thinks the text ought to read o u> /< e gcu ~7 ~uo 
** ~7~ & £ s sk ~rou a: o <r^x o c/ All <Vc< 

- 7 - yj ^ cryj s <* CJ -ro US <r /< "7^0 U 7 T O V' ^ u u 

(I pray not that thou wilt take them out of the world, but 

that thou wilt keep them from the evil) but the scribe of 

the Codex Sinai ticus let his eye slip from the first f A" 7 ~oct 


cf 


to the second, and so gives the passage as 


£ y'oC cs(gr~)S~ c* u S 

-T-o c7 -ttqv^ ^oZ (I pray not that thou wilt 

take them out of the world......from the evil one.) 

Many scribes were not scholars, and although 


















t 



















































■ ' ■ 


















■ 




t 











* 





























5 


very clever at their work of copying they were often quite 
ignorant of the meaning of the words which they copied. Quite 
often they completely changed the meaning of a sentence when 
they did not understand the letters through lack of clear¬ 
ness, and when they put in some that they thought resembled 
those which were not quite legible to them. And then there 
are those alterations for which no adequate cause can b© 
given, but which of necessity cause trouble for those who 
are anxious to arrive at the original statements of the 
author of a work. 

As has been pointed out above, prior to print¬ 
ing, ail books were prepared by hand. This meant that 
books were prepared by copyists from sight, or from 
recitation, and thus many mistakes occurred. The differences 
at first may not have been very extensive, but let them 
be continued--which ms indeed the case—then the copy 
three or four times removed from the original would be 
radically different from it* 

The science of textual criticism then, became 
necessary in order to elucidate these mistakes; it is 
possible to get some idea of the task of textual criticism 
when we know that there are in existence some 12,000 
M.S. copies of the 1T.T. no two of which are alike. 


In spite of such diversity Sort thinks thfet the 




r ^ 





- 0 







' 






; j 





6 


"proportion of words virtually accepted on all hands 
as raised above doubt is very great, not less, on a 
rough computation, then 7/8 of the whole. The remain¬ 
ing l/8 therefore, formed in great part by changes 
in order and other comparative trivialities, constitutes 
the whole area of criticism. 

If the principles followed in this edition,-- 
i.e. his edition published in 1881--are sound, this 
area may be very greatly reduced. Recognizing to the 
full the abstinence from peremptory decision in cases 
where the evidence leaves the judgment in suspense between 
two or more readings, we find that, setting aside dif¬ 
ferences of orthography, the words in our opinion still 
subject to doubt only make up about l/6G of the whole 
E.T. 

In this second estimate the proportion of 
comparatively trivial variations is beyond measure 
larger than in the former; so that the amount of 
what can in any sense be called substantial variation Is 
but a small fraction of the whole residuary variation, 
and can hardly form more than a 1/1000 part of the 
entire text." 1 
Material Used in -Writing. 

Before paper was introduced into Europe in the 
thirteenth, or perhaps towards the close of the twelfth 
century, Vellum was used for writing upon, and prior to the 

1. Introduction to the N.T. in the original Greek p.2. 






' 






■ 

. 

. t 

4 


* * 

. 














* . 











& k 


.1, 0 X i 

' 






,«/.<• 




* 

, 






' i>*v' 


: 











7 . 


use of Vellum, nearly all writing was done on Papyrus. 

The period from the time when the original compositions 
were made, to the invention of printing by Caxton in 
the latter part of the fifteenth century, is about four¬ 
teen centuries. This period can be conveniently divided 
into first, the Papyrus period, from the middle of the 
first century to the beginning of the fourth; second, the 
great Uncial period, from the fourth century to the ninth; 
third, the Uursive period, from the ninth century to the 
fifteenth. 

The material used for writing upon during these 
centuries was sometiims vellum, but from the fourteenth 
century onwards, it was mostly paper. The writing in 
this case was small and in a running hand. 

There were two kinds of writing, the literary, 
for use in the transcribing of books, and the non-literary 
hand for use in business documents and private letters. 

The difference between these two would correspond roughly 
to the difference between writing and printing today. 

The non-literary style does not play an important part 
in textual criticism. 

Unfortunately, we have no complete copy of any 
book of the Bible belonging to the papyrus period. There is 
a mere handful of small scraps of copies in existence at the 










































8. 


present time, belonging to the papyrus period (see 



illustration no. 0), and of these belong to 



This is very discourag¬ 


ing, and the papyrus period seems to have no importance 
for us whatever, but Kenyon is most anxious to point 
out that "its real importance lies in the fact that it 
is the period to which the autographs of the N.T. 
belong, and that by indirect means we can learn some¬ 
thing as to the appearance of these autographs, and of 
the conditions under which the Christian Scriptures cir¬ 
culated during the first three centuries of their ex¬ 
istence. " S 


The papyrus was made from the pith of the stem 


of the papyrus plant; the pith was cut in long strips. 
These strips were laid side by side, and another layer 
was laid on top of them at right angles to them. These 
were then fastened together in some way. The sheets which 
varied in size from 6" x 3" to 15” x 9”, were fastened 
together to form a roll, the length of which varied, but 
very seldom exceeded 30 feet. 

The front side of a sheet was called the 
"Recto" side, while the back side was called the "Verso" 


V 


side. This side was usually left blank. 


1 . Kenyon "Textual Criticism of the N.T. t? p.16 

2. Kenyon "Textual Criticism of the H.T." p.18 






* ' 














. 




'■ 






'V 




illoM7 

■) c ^ ' !?c6-' ro'-r#'-±*» ' - 

A ' 6r . '.1 Cvr 0 Y&- ■■ -«<TV." 




t yN r*. ' « •' 

• i\>u v' ■, 

, ,i > SA^ri ■ 7-ON NA-A'.-a 

• a.a !'UN 4Krf:'iN. f ■’yjTi'NCA/v ’ x- 

thc r ws £»*!>-'• N " "*•»"* ■ 
USK-i en.rh'rf »•»’;< •* ’ v .**r-c-.NN> 
f f.'4T&A1 £> ^.I'C-fi 
r.r.'«-(V«ii.M!v, - ■ r .tL.*e---** 

^ H r«(pN.'tA--<u'W n f . 7 ,(P^;'f / >r.c- . 

*'».•« e <•'•>,-; '*S-M■./•«*• 

f ,--r, :'rtc;4 ..<XtfV .£•, '"Ar *W • 

■: .,*» .TOMI-K ^S • r-. ( xfAr’.V r .-•••?J 
S- r, •*' 


'•:='» &«C'!vrV! 


Illustration No. 0 


Print illustrating a papyrus fragment 


he text is a portion of Matthew 1. 















9 


Vellum . 

While papyrus generally bore writing only on 
one side, and being commonly in roll form, was both in¬ 
convenient to consult and could contain only one of the 
longer N.T. books, vellum could bear writing on both 
sides, was in sheets, and therefore capable of being 
bound up as a modern book, and could easily contain the 
whole of the U.T. and the O.T. if need be. 

But Vellum was costly, and this gave the impetus 
to the sale of paper* 

Qstraca , 

In Egypt there have been found many pieces of 
pottery with various portions of scriptures written 
thereon. While they are not of very great importance 
textually, yet they throw some little light on the pro¬ 
blem, We can judge from their presence that they were 
produced from some text which was cufrent at the time, 
They may have been produced by some convert who 
wished to carry around with him some saying of the Jesus 
whom he loved. Where did he get this saying? Was it 
copied from a M.3 . and if so what was the M.S.? Did 
he hear it from some travelling missionary who had with 
him a copy of the sayings of Jesus? This is purely 







>h 


i *■ ^ * 


\l,b. 3 . Oberagyptisches Ostrakon mit Luk 227of., 7. Jahrh. n. Chr., 
u;t im Institut franyais d’archeologie orientale in Kairo. Mit Geneh- 
migung von Gustave Lefebvre in Assiout. 


Illustration No.l 


An ustrakoa containing Luke 22, 70f: 

"Then said all of them. Are you then the son of God? 
And he answered them, Ye say that I am* And they said, 
what other witness do we need? for we ourselves have 
heard of his own mouth, TT 

















. 











10 . 


conjecture, but we are convinced that there was an 
honest effort to preserve the sayings of Jesus. Hence the 
many tablets known as Ostraca which are coming to light 
having written on them portions of the H. I. Page 
illustrates one of these. 

Sources of the J .1, text. 

Souter^in his book on "the text and canon of 
the 1T.T." says that there are three kinds of sources 
available for the reconstruction of the N.T. text in Greek. 
In the first place there are the actual M.S3, written in 
Greek, which are supposed to give the words of the sacred 
text as written by the authors. The second source is the 
translations made from this original Greek. Such a trans¬ 
lation would be as good as the original, if we could be 
sure that such translation was an exact reproduction, word 
for word, accent for accent, of the original. The third 
source is the evidence derived from the many quotations 
from the N.T. made by other writers. 

The beginning of the 4th Century saw a great 
production of Christian literature. Several causes com¬ 
bined to make this possible; the emperor Constantine' em¬ 
braced Christianity, and commanded Eusebius to have 50 
Bibles copied for him. The letter to him reads thus 

"I have thought it expedient to instruct your Prudence to 
order 50 copies of the sacred scriptures, the provision and 

1. Souter ’’Text and Canon of the IT. T. ” p.10 








11 . 


use of which you know to he most needful for the 
instruction of the church, to he written on prepared 
parchment in a legible manner, and in a convenient 
portable form, by professional transcribers thoroughly 
conversant in their art." 

The work was done "with as little delay as 
possible," and "were sent him in magnificent and el¬ 
aborately bound volumes of a threefold and fourfold form.*** 
The elevation of Christianity to the state 
religion was another cause to help forward the production 
of a grekt number of copies of the Scriptures. Another 
cause for the production of such literature was the adoption 
of vellum instead of papyrus as the material used for writ¬ 
ing upon. This made it possible for all the sacred writings 
to be produced in one volume. This change of material 
also introduced a change in the style of writing. 

Vellum is much stronger than papyrus, and this 
allowed a firmer and heavier hand in writing. Another' 
thing to bear in mind is that true economy of spece is 
no longer strictly necessary so that a larger and more 
handsome hand could be used. 

If we follow Souter f s suggestion as outlined 
above we must ignore his first source of the test, that 

"The Uicene & Post kicene Fathers" second series 
Vol.I husebius page 549 


1 . 











12 . 


of the actual MSS, as there is none extant, and pass to 
his second source which deals with the copies made from 
the original text. These are known today as the great 
Uncials, and are designated hy capital letters. 

■*nc uhol ..I : , 

In a paper of this length it is impossible 
to deal with all the Uncials extant. At present there 
are about 156 MSS in all; to attempt to describe them 
would be to defeat the purpose of my task. The more 
important ones will need describing at some length, the 
less important can be studied at your leisure with the 
aid of Scrivener or Gregory. 

u., ? .... ... . : , 

In 1844 Constantin Tischendorf, the great 
German biblical scholar was travelling in the east in 
search of M.S.S. Among the many places that he visited 
was the monastery of St. Catherine on Mt. Sinai. while 
staying there for a few days, he chanced to see in a 
waste paper basket a number of leaves.ox various M.S.S. 

His attention was called because he noticed that some of 
them contained some very old Greek writing, which, upon 
examination, proved to be part of & copy of tl LXX ersion 
of the 0,1, These leaves he appropriated by permission, and 










1 * 
X 


with the appropriation he discovered that there were 
many other M.S.S. in that monastery. In all, he had 
43 leaves which contained parts of 1 Chronicles, 

Jeremiah, Uehemiah, and Esther. He returned to Europe 
and deposited these in the university library of Leipzig. 

But he returned to Mount Sinai in 1853 "look¬ 
ing for more spoil.” Hot getting what he was after he 
returned to Europe but returned again in 1859 when he was 
much more successful. Upon this occasion he entered into 
a conversation with the steward of the Monastery on the 
subject of the Laa, The steward said that he had a copy 
of the LEa and this he produced wrapped in a napkin. 

Imagine the surprise of Tischendorf when he found that 
in addition to the O.f. there was also the U.T. intact, and 
in excellent condition, with the addition of the epistle 
of Barnabas, and much of the epistle of Hermas. This 
was the very M.S. which had been occupying his thoughts 
for 15 years. 

It has been said by some that Tischendorf took 
this M.3. away from the Monastery by stealth, but Gregory 
says that this is not the case. Dr. henyon says that 
Tischendorf persuaded the monks to let him have the M.S. 
sent to Cairo, where a first transcript was made. 
















14 


Eventually the Monks gave it to the emperor of Russia, 
and the M.S. was carried to *^t. Petersburg (now Petrogradj__ 
and let us hope that it has not been destroyed during 
the recent revolution—where, in the Imperial library, it 
has remained ever since. 

The Codex Sinaiticus when complete contained the 
whole Greek bible, but much of the O.T. had disappeared 
by the time Tischendorf got his hands upon it. The M.S. 
contains 346^ leaves; the II.T. and Barnabas with HermaS 
fill 147|. The columns contain 48 lines; each page con¬ 
tains 4 narrow columns about 2j- inches in vfli-dth. Ihere 
are no enlarged initials, but the first letter of a 
paragraph projects slightly into the left-hand margin. 

There are no accents, and pun elation by the first hand 
is rare. Certain abbreviations occur frequently, such 
as the following 0s /VS£ O S, 

X s X^ c<rT ^ s ' 

otos / C* VOS V 3 £ 7T o S f 

iee OodTxX/i t 0~£>S C ' 


Tischendorf points out that 4 scribes wrote 
this M.S. One of the four, whom Tischendorf called A, 
wrote first Chronicles, first Maccabees, the l^st four leaves 
of fourth Maccabees, the whole U.T. save 7 leaves, and 
Barnabas. The. fourth scribe designated D, wrote Tobit, 









Illustration No .2 


Print of Codex Sinaiticus , clearly showing the four 
columns. No accent marks can he seen, and only one 
word written in the margin, which Is €V€0~CxJ 
This shows that the pages contain the text of Ephesians 


MXY^JOJioeruH^ 

! XYAI XOC>j I hx 
fXJO&VJOICAIlOJ-w 
i) icoycl kM 11 ^ 

J e n xcbfyxxp i cv 

MINKMCIPHNM 
X» lOOYHKjfOc H 
MCONKXIKyrpCV 
c yxo r» tToy^KK kvi 
nxi MrToyi<rrkxi 
cxujm puc.» i Mum 
IY*\ otryMMM* n 
INMXCMtTXOn 
MlNlKH6N|l)|0 

rioYpXNiotpeN”# 
KXoajcexexoN- 
HMXCt'NAYlUMII'- 
KXIXROM K'KOtMi 

^INXIMMXCXHOf 

KxIXMaJMCTY^ 

- re N i D111 o H KYT**1 
eNXTAMMlipOC>fF 


Number 2A. 


Thi s print shows the 
insertion more clearly. 





















15. 


Judith, the first three and a half leaves of 
Maccabees, and the 7 leaves in the H.T. not written by A. 

It is interesting to remark that the 7 leaves twice, mentioned 
above, are the tenth and fifteenth in Matthew, the last in 
Mark, the first in Luke, the second leaf of first Thessal- 
onians, the third leaf of Hebrews, and possibly the beginning 
of Revelation. 

The text in this M. 3. is very good; Westcott 
& Hort considered it pre-Syrian. They place it in what 
?- they call the Western text. They consider this text far 
better than any of the M.S.S. except B (Codex Vaticanus.) 

Paleographers usually place the original writing 
of the M.S. in the 4th Century, Gregory insists that we 
do. not know when it was written, but he is inclined to 
think that the best tentative date is the year 551 A.D. 

Could it have been one of the 50 copies which Constantine 
ordered for his own purposes? 

1 

Hor do we know where it was written; Hort is 
inclined to assign it to Rome, while others think it may 
. have been written in Italy or possibly %ypt, perhaps 

Caesarea. 

‘ ... ' 'w‘ 

The next M.S. to be considered is A. I follow the 
order of both henyon and Gregory. So far as we know, 

1. When Hort’s name is mentioned "Westcott & Hort” is meant, 
unless otherwise stated. 











JL O# 


this M. S. was probably written in the last half of the fifth 
Century, and in Egypt. In the year' 1098 it was presented 
patriarch of Alexandria, hence its name "Codes. 

Alexandrinus.” 

In the first of the four volumes there is a 
note written by an Arab to the effect that St. Thecla 
had written the M.S. with her own hand. This cannot be 
the case because the M.S, contains hand-writings which 
differ in style. There may be some truth in the stories 
surrounding the word Thecla, but we cannot be sure. It 
may be that the M. A. was written in a monastery dedicated 
to Thecla (Gregory.) Tregelle. s, however, thinks otherwise. 
He is of the opinion that the reason why some say that it 
was written, by Thecla is that the jtf.T. as we now have it, 
begins with the 25-th Oh, of Matthew, which contains the 
lesson for Saint Thecla*s day. Such a story could very 
easily arise. 

But we do know that Cyril Lucar had this M.S. 
in his possession when he was (1621) patriarch in Con¬ 
stantinople. As he had been patriarch in Alexandria before 
this, in all probability he carried this M.S. along- with 
him when he moved. In the year 1628 it was sent as a 
present to Charles I, king of England, -ventually it found 




17. 


its way into the British Museum where it now resides, 
beautifully preserved in a glass case where it dan be seen 
by all who visit the museum. 

The M.3. contains 4 volumes of moderate quarto size; 
these volumes contain 773 leaves of thin vellum measuring 
12f inches by 10 inches, and written in a firm and fairly 
large square uncial hand, with two columns to the page. Hew 
paragraphs are marked by large capital letters, but if the 
end of a paragraph should happen to come near the beginning 
of a line, the succeeding paragraph is commenced in the 
same lines, while the enlarged capital is placed as the 
first letter in the following line. Thus if a word were 
broken by a hyphen, or rather by its continuance in the 
next line it would look something like this 7/ 0( 

/\oS (Paul) 

The four volumes contained when complete the old 
and Hew testaments, the two epistles of Clement, and the 
psalms of Solomon. This we know from the table of. contents 
at the beginning, although the Psalms of Solomon have com¬ 
pletely disappeared from the M. 8 . Hearly the whole of 
Matthew has also disappeared (as far as Ch. 25°) also 
John VI 50 to 7III 5£ \ Shis latter part which is missing 

should contain the story of the woman taken in adultery. 









i-L-'-- -■ trr;-. tie-... T . 

Illustrating Codex Alexandrinus » showing 
the omission of the quire which contains John 6--8, 
Kenyon has counted the words so omitted,and concludes 
that the "Perlcope Adulterae” was not In A. 










18 . 


but both Kenyon and Gregory agree that it could never 
have formed a part of this M.S. because "by counting the 
lines we can prove that it was not in the book. There is no 
room for it." 1 

It is interesting to note in passing that at 
the beginning of the books a few lines are written in red 
for ornament. 

Certain leaves, to be specific, leaves 20 to 95, 

n 

from the opening verse of Luke as far as 1 Cor. 10 are 

on a coarser parchment, and appear to be from another hand. 

Kenyon says in speaking of Codex A "In contradistinction to 

Codex Sinaiticus, this has been the longest and best knom 

2 

of the early uncial copies of the Greek Bible." 

Strange to say the character of the text of this 
M.S. does not all belong to one distinct type. Kenyon 
points out that the Gospels belong to the type, and i.-'se 

the best representative5of that type, because tity contain* 
a purer text than the Textus Receptus; but the Acts and 
the Epistles together with the Apocalypse belong rather 
to the ^ type. 

The reason for this no doubt is due to the fact 
that when the 4 volumes were compiled they were taken from 
different papyrus rolls. 

1. Gregory Canon and Text of IU T. p.343 

2. Kenyon " " " " ” 58 







19 


.B« Codex Vatican na . 

Dr. Souter calls this the oldest vellum M.S. 
and the most valuable of all existing M. S.S. Its present 
home is in the Vatican library at Rome, where it has been 
since 1481. A catalogue published in 1481 by the Vatican 
library makes a reference to the above M.S. in the follow¬ 
ing words "Biblia in tribus columnis ex memb." It was not 
mentioned in the catalogue published in 1475, so it must 
have arrived some time between the two dates. Ihus it can 
be readily seen that there was in Europe a Codex M.S. 

1| centuries before A, arid 4 centuries before fV . Very 
little was done with this M.S. In the way of investigation 
during this period, and when at last Interest in its in¬ 
herent worth was awakened, permission could not be obtained 
to study it. Several collations were made of it at dif¬ 
ferent times, but they were not satisfactory. When Napoleon 
took this M.S. to Paris, in 1809 it was examined by a man 
named Bag who immediately proclaimed its extreme age and 
great importance. 

But it had to be returned to Italy when Napoleon 
was overthrown, and men like Tischendorf in 1845 and 
Iregelles in 1845 whose interest.had been awakened by reading 
of what Hog had discovered before the M.S, was returned to 













« • 








20 


Rome, were not allowed to make free use of it when they 
were working on the problem of textual aocuracy. Cardinal 
Mai in 1838 undertook the publication of the text, but the 
work was so ppor, that it had to be all done over again 
after his death. Eventually in 1866 Tlschendorf obtained 
leave to examine it; he was granted 42 hours in all to work 
at it, but he began to copy it instead of examining the 
passages that were doubtful. He managed to get 20 pages 
done, but being caught in this breach of conduct, he was 
not permitted to proceed with his investigation. 

The Vatican itself issued an edition of the 
N.T. in 1868. Finally in 1889-90 a photographic facsimile 
of the whole M.3, was published, thus making it possible 
for all scholars to study the text of this M.S. 

The vellum of this M.S. is said to be made 
from antelope skins; the leaves are 10J-” x 10” (nearly 
square), and ten leaves make a quire. The writing is very 
small, neat, and rather heavy, the result of writing upon 
vellum. The M.S. contains 759 leaves; 142 of these belong 
to the JST. T . ; each page contains three columns, and each 
column contains from 40 to 44 lines. Ihe Codex Yaticanus con¬ 
tains both testaments but does not appear to have included 
Maccabees. Almost 46 chapters of Genesis are lacking--Gen. 

1.1—XLVI.26; nearly 32 Psalms are gone, Psalms CY.27—CXXXVII.6 
part of the Epistle to the Hebrews, ch. IX; 14 to the end; also 































- 

. ♦ 

. 








■ 












; . 

■ - • 




■ . 

■ 
















Illustration 4. 

Print of Codex Vaticanus (B) 

This clearly shows the three columns* The 
above text contains the latter part of the Acts of the 
Apostles, aid the last column says that there were 
only 76 souls in the boat® 

But both the B.V# and the A.V. read 276 
souls# See Acts 27:58. 



















21 


the pastoral epistles of Paul, and the Apocalypse. 

Where it was written is not known; some think 
it was written in Bome--Hort does—but Eeadel Harris 
pleads for Caesarea. It is true that there was a great 
library there, but surely that in no way determines the 
place of a book . Its date is uncertain, but the general 
concensus of opinion is that it was written in the fourth 
century. It belongs to the ^ style of text, and is con¬ 
sidered the champion of them all. There is a similarity 
between it and (Sinaiticus.) 

Gregoiy suggests that this text comes from the 
same place as the 2>Z. M. S. Being similar, could they 
have been two of the 50 M.S.S. written at Caesarea for 
Constantine the Great?^ 

"This Vatican M. S. is considered by a great many 
scholars to be the best of all the I.T. M.S.S. The 
Codex Sinaiticus and the Codex Vatincanus are, from the 
standpoint of the history of the text as thus far shown, b 
far the two best witnesses for the oldest text. Wherever 
they were written'and at whatever date, they represent, 
it would appear, as both Tlschendorf and b’estcott and Eort 
thought, good M.S.S. of the second century. 

The word good i s to be emphasised here. If the 
given view be correct, they represent not the current re- 
roughly worked over M.S.S. of the second Century, but such 
1. Gregoiy, 'p.345 

















■ 












! 
















. 






, 






’ 



22 . 


as retained in an eminent degree the text which had come 
to that century from the hands of the original writers. 

The Vatican M.S. shows in the epistles of Paul a few 
readings from those .current M.S.S. of the second Century, 
hut not very many." 1 
Codex 2 p hr a e mi. 

This Mm 5 . is really a "palimpsest, T that is, 
the original writing has been more or less completely 
removed by washing or scraping. Pumice stone was usually 
used in order to create a clean surface, but the work was 
imperfectly done, so that this M.S. along with others, 
has come down to us with double layers of writing. (See 
illustration 5.j 

Gregory says that the Codex ^ T C ,T is like a man 
who has been maimed in the war; its beauty and its ful¬ 
ness are departed. 

The M.S. is in the'national library at Paris. 

This fine old M.S. originally contained the whole Greek 
bible, but much of it has been lost, and it now Survives in 
a sadly mutilated condition, perhaps the original was 
written in Bgypt before the middle of the 5th Century, but by 
the loth century it was thoroughly changed., about thi 
time someone wrote 38 treatises of Ephraim, the Syrian, on 
was left of the M.S. 


Gregory "Canon and Text of the IMT." p.547. 


1 . 








•JR'*®* ". 

r»«w»cr, K’-'fc'-; *<= , o«ot-'SW^ fwl r] 

‘ ffwI n P^ v : ''- ' 


a, 

\r?^f!taft 

_ ,-W 4 -™* 4 KK ,^ , 

. /.^w^wVhTTi^ijCi-i,,: 1 ,*n 




gpaBBB» 

y^O ^> f ooc^Top^v^V^— , \jtUo- a «i 


Illustration Ho, 5« 


This print illustrates a "Palimpsest 
he double layer of writing can be distinctly seen. 








23 


There are now only 209 pages of which 64 
contain portions of the O.T. and 145 belong to the H.T. 

. th this M.S. we re K 

There are usually 41 lines in a column. The uncial 
letters are a trifle larger than any of t-hos$ other 
M.S. mentioned. There are practically no punctuations 
and accents. 

In the m.T. there are fragments of evozy book 
except 2nd John and 1 & 2 The ssaLonians. 

The text of C is more mixed in character than 
that of any other important type. It resembles somewhat the 
A Codex and for this reason is assigned to the 5th Century. 
But the M.S. is now the mere debris of what was once a very 
fine codex. 

Tischendorf did much to recover some portions 
of it, but the work was extremely difficult, and he has 
been blamed for spoiling some of the fragments, by the re¬ 
agents that he used. 

No M.S. surpasses.in interest this great M.S. 
Kenyon thinks It n the most peculiar, and in some respects 
the most remarkable, of the Greek M. S.S. of the U. T.’ 7 -- 
As its name indicates, the history of this text as we know 
it began with Theodore Be 2 a who obtained it from the 
monastery of St. Irenaeus in Lyons. 


/ c#<r<£(Srv\ or /V.7~ 6 





























A 














■ 

- 





































. 






■ 


























24. 

In presenting it to the University of 
Cambridge, he said 'that it had long lain in the dust 
in the monastery of 3t. Ire mens at Lyons, and that it 
had been found there during the civil war of 1562.” In 
1793 ftr. Kipling issued a complete edition of it for the 
university. In 1899 a photographic facsimile of the whole 
M.S. was issued by the Cambridge University press. 

This M.S. differs from all the others mentioned 
in that there is no sign that it ever contained the O.T. 

In its present condition it contains only the Gospels and 
the Acts. The Gospels are arranged in the order very early 
adopted by the Western Church--Matthew, John, Luke, Mark. 

It differs also from the others in having a 
Latin text of the JJ.T. as well as the Greek; the Greek is 
given the place of honour by being on the left p'age, (See 
illus. no.6.) 

The M.S. contains 409 leaves; there is one 
column to a leaf, and each column contains 33 lines. 

This M.3. is full of interest and should receive 
more attention than we can give it, but in this very brief 
reference to it, we cannot overlook the fact that some of 
the mistakes in the text would indicate that the scribds 
native tongue was Latin. We find him sometimes writing 
for /V and sometimes writing C for 


1. Kenyon "Text Criticism of the N. T." p.7 3 









Illustration JTo»' 8, 


A print of Codex Bezae, illustrating the 
type of text, The Creek can be clearly seen on the 
left side, that being the place of honour. On the 
right is seen the Latin, 

The passage Is Luke V:38 to VI:9. 



















26 


It is generally believed that this text was 
written in the West, but of this we cannot be sure. 

It probably belongs to the 6th Centuzy. 

These are the most important uncial M.S.S. 

Many others might have been mentioned, which would have 
to be included in a work of an exhaustive nature, but 
as they are only parts of the H. T. In some cases just 
pages only, and in other cases mere fragments, they have 
been purposely omitted from this essay. 

There is however, another uncial which must be 
mentioned before passing on to the Cursives. If is called 
W, and can be studied from the facsimile copy which Is at 
the University of Alberta. This is unique, as it is the 
only one of its kind that the University possesses. 

The Washington Manuscript. 

Gregozy calls this M.S# W in his list, and von 
Soden in his system of numbering designates it as kTh/4^ 

It i s called W because it will eventually be trans¬ 
ferred to the Smithsonian Institute in Washington A 

complete facsimile edition of the M. S. of the 4 Gospels 
is in the vault of the University of Alberta. 

The late Mr. Charles L. Freer, a citisen of the 

United States, purchased this M. 3. along with £ 3 others, 
from an Arab dealer named All in Giseh, near Cairo, on 

























27. 


December 19th, 1906. 

Sanders says the Arab dealer would not tell 
where he obtained the M.3. S. but Goo&speed will not agree 
with this since he declares that the Arab dealer says 


he got them from Akhmien. 1 This is conflicting evidence; 


perhaps a hint as to their origin may be gathered from 
the M.S.S. themselves. The reference is the prayer for 
a certain Timothy in the subscription to Mark, page 572 
of the facsimile (See illustration Ho. 7). 


If reads as follows 

c (T7~eo(yc 

A^L7To(V7~^J VcX <J T~0 <J 7 ^ 




"Holy Christ, be thou with thy servant Timothy and all 
of his." 

Sanders, of the University of Michigan, thinks 
that this is a reference to the church of Timothy in 
the monastery of the Vinedresser, which was located near 
the third pyramid in Egypt. If this Is so, then it would 
not have been difficult for these M. 3.3. to find their way 
to Cairo. Be that as it may, we are profoundly thankful 
for the discovery of such M.S.S. and while their discovery 
adds only to the great problem of getting at the true text, 

we are not in any way alarmed at this, because we know that 

all study along these lines will not be fruitless. 

The M.S. (i.e. the Gospels) is written on parch- 

1. Biblical World, March 1909, p.201 








* 









' 
























. 






, • - , ■ • ■ 

■ 

■ 

» 






■■ 

. . . 

0 

■ X ■ ,. i y , 






' 















* , 







Illustration ho. 7 


This print' shows the last page of Gotex W. 

It contains part of the long ending to Mark# 

The reference to Timothy can also he seen, and 
has evidently been added by another hand. 








28. 


ment of medium thickness and excellent quality, but it 
has suffered much from age,, wear, and exposure* 

Fortunately, there was a thick broad cover on 
each side of the M.s #f and while the edges of the leaves 
are somewhat dilapidated, thanks to such covers, the text 
is everywhere legible. 

The parchment is Sheepskin, but it has yellowed 
badly with age. Pages 298 and 299 of the facsimile are 
type pages of the beauty and clearness of the text; on 
pages 252, 305, 313, 122, can be seen the rough hair -of 
the skin; while page 337 is a good example of strengthening 
weak spots and holes by pasting on thin pieces of parchment. 

The M.S. contains 187 leaves or 374 pages, and of 
these 37 2 are written. There are two blank pages at the 
end of John. These are marked in facsimile by a plain 
sheet of paper inserted between pages 194 and 195* 

The writing is in one column of 30 lines to the 
page. The lines are ruled carefully and regularly 5.3 mm 
apart. Page 96 illustrates beautifully this ruling. 

The number of letters in a line varies from 27 
to 30. The writing is a graceful, sloping uncial of small 
size. But the writing is not uniform throughout, as can b3 
readily seen by looking at pages 113 to 130 of the facsimile. 
The writer of the first quire of John was a less practised 
penman; the writing is not so clear, nor is it so uniform. 





29. 


How is it possible to account for this different writing 
in the M.S.? It has been suggested that someone inserted 
this quire when he found that the M.S. did not contain it* 
Allowing that such may have been the case, where did such 
a writer get his text? 

Abb.V : •• la tier, 3 * 

There are many abbreviations, and some of the 
most important are the following: os j_ s usually 

written ig. any one of the following ways, i.e. according 
to its case in the sentence: /< ^ S o f A' /< . 

The same method is followed with the word @ £ O S. 
/\ yro -S’ ie abbreviated t o vo -v \/o ucx v/ c 

etc. In fact, the same general method is used in all the 
abbreviations made. 

Punctuation, 

Punctuation is very rare; usually a single 
dot in the middle ox the line is regularly used, A substitute 
for punctuation seems to have been used by leaving small 
blank spaces between the phrases. 

Paragraphs. 

The first letter of the paragraph projects into 
the margin; it is usually twice the size of an ordinary 
letter* Quotations from the Old Testament are indicated 
by marks ( ^ ) in the left margin* Page 247 of the fac¬ 

simile clearly illustrates this. 













30 


The M. S. once contained the whole of the four 


Gospels in the order, Matthew, John, Luke, Mark. This is 
the order known as the Western, the one that to feel that 




it was not a good text, but arose out of a desire to ex¬ 
pand for religious purposes the current type of text. 

That it belongs to the type of text is evidenced 
by the long ending of Mark. This is not contained in any 
of the other uncials mentioned. 

%he Cursives or the Minuscles. 

These are designated by numbers. While it is 
convenient to use these terms interchangeably, we must 
remember that there is a difference between them. The 
Minuscle refers to the small Greek letter as compared to 
the large Greek ones, but the cursive refers to the run¬ 
ning hand which was used in business and letter writing. 

As the demand for books increased, the uncial 
method of writing with its large characters, became too 
cumbersome. An easier style of writing was needed, one 
that would be quicker, and would take up less room. Such 
a style had existed among the Greeks, but it was looked 
upon as the non-literary hand, and had never been extensively 
used professionally in literature prior to the 9th century. 

Hort, in his N.I. in Greek, 1 says "the cursive 
MSS range from the 9th to the 16th centuries. Many of them 


1. page 7 6, 



























v 


















contain two or more groups of books, and about 30, 
the whole N.T. If each MS i s counted as one, irrespective 
of the books contained, the total, number is between 900 and 
1,000." This number is certainly much smaller than that 
given by Kenyon. He says that there are some 3,000 cur¬ 
sive M.S.S. 1 2 3 Gregory mentions 2,584 cursive M.S.S., but 
Mr. Lake says "that there are more than 130 vellum codices 

of the Gospels in the library of the Laura on Mount Athos, 

2 

of"which only ten are included in Gregory*s list." 

The matter does not vitally concern us just 
at present, because it is impossible for us to mention 
them all, yet we must remember that these M.S.S. are in ex¬ 
istence, and as Gregory suggests "they are likely some day 
to give us much information in reference to the history of 
the text. 

MS 1 of the 10th Century, now at Basel, con¬ 
tains the Bf.T. except the Revelation. 

. Erasmus used this in his publication of the 
N.T. Its text frequently agrees with that of B. 

It belongs to the <X type of text. 

MS 33 of the 9th Century is at Paris, It was 
fully collated by Tregelles. Its text Is more of the /f 
type than any other of the cursive M. S,3. of the Gospels. 

1. Criticism of N.T. p.lll. 

2. Journal of Theological Studies, Vol. 1, p.442 

3. Gregory, N.T. 371. 




32 


Eichhorn called it "the queen of the cursives" 
and Hort considered it of very high rank. 

The majority of these cursives are 
in the Vatican library at Rome. They nearly 
all show the Byzantine text; this is what Hort 
called the Syrian. They are practically 
the same as the "Textus Receptus.” 








33. 


The Ancient Versions 


The study of the history of the text of the H.T. 
would be incomplete if one failed to say something about the 
many ancient versions of the original text of the II.T. Space 
only permits the mention of the most important. 

While the .study of the ancient versions is important, 
it must always be borne in mind that the great task is to 
get at the original text, and for this reason, we use the 
translations, but purely as a means to an end. Many of these 
translations are older than the most ancient existing M.S.S. 
in the original language, but we immediately run into dif¬ 
ficulty at this point; how is it possible to ascertain what 
liberties the translators took when doing their work, and 
how far does the translation really represent the true text? 
Even if the true text of the version were recovered, would 
it give us an adequate translation of the original Greek? 

Evidence of this sort must be used with a great deal of 
caution, but in spite of its many shortcoming; , it is of 
the greatest importance, and should throw some light, how¬ 
ever dim, on a very difficult problem. 

In discussing briefly the various versions, I am 


going to follow the order of both Kenyon and Gregory, an 
order which Kenyon considers is both natural and geographical. 


1 


1. The Syriac Versions. 

Syriac or Aramaic was the language spoken in 


1. Page 125. 





34. 


Palestine in the time of Jesus, and which he probably 

spoke, although Dr. A* Roberts thinks that Jesus spoke. 

only Greek. It is natural to suppose that an early 

translation of the h.T. would be made into this tongue; 

indeed, some authorities think that the Gospel of Matthew 

was originally written in Aramaic. There are traces of 

Aramaic in the N.T. such as ,T Talitha cumi 77 ^ and ?f Eloi, 

2 

Eloi, lama sabachthoni 77 , but these are found in Mark, 
not in Matthew. 


prom the first translation, five extant versions 

may in all probability trace their descent; they are the 

Diatessaron of Tatian, the old Syriac, the Peshitto, the 

Philoxenian and Harkleian Syriac,, and the Palestinian 

Syriac. 

1 . 

A. the Diatessaron . 

When Dale wrote his 77 Living Christ and the four 


Gospels 77 this- M. S. was not known. It was written by a 
Syrian mmm named Titian about the year 170, and is a 
harmonisation of the four gospels, what we now ppssess 
is a translation from the which, no douot, was a 

translation from the original oyriac in which it was written 
f the above elate is correct, then It must go back to some 
nreek M.S. of the middle of the second century, and 


possibly much earlier, it is placed among the 

/7 

of text, and resembles and 2? 




-ype 


1 . 

o 


Mark 5:41, 
77 15:34. 






















35. 


B. The Old Syriac. 

- - —-— 

Our knowledge of this version is very meagre. 

For many generations the Peshitto was considered to he 
the earliest Syriac version of the Bible. But a little 
before the middle of the ZESth Century (1842) Dr. Careton 
of the British Museum found among some M.S.S. from the 
llitrian desert in Egypt fragments of an old copy of the 
Syriac Gospels, probably written about the latter part of 
the 4th Century. Just 50 years later, when the Peshitto 
was a subject of great controversy, two Cambridge ladies, 
travelling in the east, discovered in the Monastery of St. 

i a a 

8 pages of the 4 gospels, this PUS. is also placed in 
the 4th Century. 

These two versions, now 'known as the (Gibson- 
Lewis text) Sinaitic and Curetonian M.SUU contain identical 
texts, and agree enough to convince us that they were de¬ 
rived from a common original. It would be very profitable, 
tl l 8 time, to stud sid ie, 

for then we would better understand their intrinsic worth. 

But we -are handicapped, and have only space to make one 
brief reference to a reading which has. aroused considerable 
controversy. Hot having the II.S. before me, I am forced to 
■depend upon Uenyon for my facts. In Matthew l’ uU the Pinaitic 
fc e remarkable reading ?l Joseph, to whom was betrot 
Ma r:• 1 : he T irgIn, begat Jesus , who is called the C1 irist . 

but the Curetonian differs slightl;; rf Joseph to whom was be¬ 
trothed Mary the Virgin, who bore Jesus Christ." 











































' 



























































. 















. 

* 






‘ 





, 

' 


- * ■ 







35. 


What does this Mean? If they are both from a common 
original, then does it im lj that the • i ;r ve ion 

in the mi d oj one as to the virgin 'birth., and seeing this 
opportunity of putting right that which appeared to him 
to be wrong, he inserted the word "begat” in place of 
"bore”? Kenyon thinks this is not the ease; the word 
"beget" does not indicate literal descent, but rather an 
official line of succession. This would be in direct line 
with 0. T. prophecy. 

0. The Peshitto. 


This is the standard version ore the Scriptures 
in Syriac holding that place in the Syrian Churches that 
the Vulgate holds in the Homan Catholic Church, or the 
authorized version in the English Church. It means "the 
simple”, but this meaning is not quite clear, it may 
originally have applied on; w 
tinguish it from the-Hexapla versio: 

«* rn< 


' -.JAA V US'-fc--'j_-' U- -J. W M. M A -L f j O 'w ttUU V/-W Vt .-U. V-> V_l OlAs-l-AMA-L Is. \J 

hd extended■later 
lew Testament also; or it taj ave een ... .isting 
it nr or, a t ia - 1 ... 1 iat c 0 sa r on. 

_ Pe .... 1 L 3 .. ... . . iars, 

a nd c 0 nt a 111 s the s k 01 e 0 i th e OLD 0 ... tc.it , __ 

XX £-/ 0 Ga \X «•- M Ui. — w ... - . -1.J.L. -o <_i UJ.10i.lC lij./ J.._ U C V. \ <0 j. M , 

jo oj \j Jo. ii 1 uii June) » 

"Hoe loo ns \ .ere om i 11 e d b.; c a u s e ti. c p • \; 0 r c : c t 
recomizen as canonical 0; the ~ . rian Church 















37 


Peshitto . 

•as published 

tv A 

. Viidmaui 

and since 

then many oth 

er e 

ditions . 


The Pechitto 

i'- , 

re. erved 

very old, 

and precisely 

dat 

ed. The 


centurp. 




IJ 3 G 11 


iyne ct X' o 


, 

. ... Council L8, 

Mr * r ' w ilia .... ... ... 

. ... ... , ... t !Q ... 

Sorij .. l; _o yr La. Sort an ... ritj ... 

scholar.., ... la c o it not earlier than tlie third or icurtli 


ucnxar, 






;j g i i eve 


the ^ iriait ic - 0 nr o t onian V c r s ion 


e a more ancient stare in the history of the Lyriac Lev/ 

• Dr. . .el •.a . : 

i .. Lag . 11. I.... t .. ....... . ... The eshit 

°< , wi . 

.^s £ 

L. The ^.-iloiicniu-^ ui: . harhlcia:... ^yrlao. 

I:. the year 50G a fresh translation of the Sow Testament into 

... nus, ox Ma , . . 

a ill ct revision or this was made a century later 'by Thomas of 
... r ...... 3" . Lon involved ... . pi icess of colli . : 

.... . _ SS a . --- 

Befo: .. Z . at . . ..— .... : . 























> 










































, 












, 

























- 


’ 




* 



38 


al 2 .lo La . i , a. L 

bean taken from it to supply omission in the loshitto. 

-But in 1CJ2 hr. Gwynn published an account of a 12th Century 
a/^ n.s rs o ** . n. • 

croncli.:ivol^ to be Philoxeniun. 

2ho Philoxenian version us. written' ir free idiomatic' 
this le 7is E : . - cent iry lat er. 

, a ad from t , 

which resembled Code:: Bezae. (D) and its fellow's. 

a 

oh .. . .I t 18th iit .. . ■ ... ... fcw 

copies or the Be Dies translation of 1627 none sons' to Dr. 

R: L i f Qxfoi , - ...... ., a text wa ........ .f. ..... 

_ . '. . C hi ..... c i 3. . - B'lij , .. .i . . . 

A 

printed edition of the version to the present day.' 

t. a, ., sal n tin tan G v r3_. 

In 178 ■_a... Lar, Adler, . atis^ 

on she cyriac versions of the Iff. yarn a desc..iption ant 
collation of a. Gospel lectionary in the Vatican containing 

h. .... .... . ..... r '. : from anj . . .. own. It re doled 

old ‘•Chaldee 11 found in some 2,1* boons, or dialect of 

. , ...... 3 

its rane Adler 1 s lectionar; (MS written at ^ntiocn in 10C0) 
was edited in full- 'by Count Miniscalchi-lrizzo in 1861-4 

*e-ec Xa ge . ........ I... 1 - Mr d .. is 

. . . ... _ . . . h , and .... 2 ar Mr. 

......... another* ... e f ir... . ... c a c — . , 

and the s ec ond .1118. hno s:..: r ..3 was disc overed in 181 d . 







W H 


39 


ilany early editors referred this version to the 


/and p: ... i at in /the 6th C 


U A. 


art of the of forte of Justinian and He radius to 


- i Judea s Samar ia, e .. ia - 

with a renaissance of Palestinian Christianity about the lltl 

G ' *< - 

The Armenian Version. 


Armenia received Christian teaching and the Seri;, - 
turec from Syria. Three Armenian writers of the 3th Century 
state that the. Scriptures were' translated into Armenian 
... . . , b : sc 

_ ... i St. Sa la .... These ;r£.at . ... . _ i... ..... 

iOO A*3). After hie Co . . 3, (4 UP*) 3or 

pic, 

ah this led to a revision os. :he previous wore. 

. i . i . ... _ 3cti.. n ; t..... th ; t...... 1 fche 

Did j r'iac, . , n . - , 

... ri .......... , . 

a 

be identical with that used in ~>t• npiiraim. 


m 




dated 887 A»D* 

The early MSS did not contain the last If verses or 
. . ., . 2 • al 


Mar.u ..nr a 


. Manv on :, Crit icisor r lie L . - ♦ P*-- 

u * tt -r u » ; .148 




40 


eleoi Ai ton. Who was this Aristony perhaps it is meant 

•- •' -- > whom Papias mentions us one of t 0 Usciples 

the JDord • 

—Us , ' , 1a ^ sax It US 

so also is tin. "Pericope Adulterae. n 

__n P_ L’sian 

, . a 1 t _L 

a:: a amir a . 1 0 a : v. ace -00a or ai 0 ■.. informa t ion. 

*- ; Poetic Versions, 

. i 3 .pa .... 

ion. 5 JJl 6 ... ..... 

ra_1 1 . i . Is .... .. -.. .. 3s f fc Sep 

story 0: ... XVIII: £ 4 - 28 ) 

sugyejto that some "imperfect exposition of Christianity haI 

reach ] .. . it 3 a few 5 1 . a: t.. h rd f s ministry. 

It is -almost certain that some- apostles carried the' 
Gospel into Jgypt. It would first came t the Ore eh speahing 
............ a, a 

and in generally. Thus an -ryptian translation u: ill 

not at first he-'necessary. 

flio hieroglyphic script was then obsolete for 

01 any use to Inc missionaries. I- 2 nd Qentury a' ...... 

writing" came -into use union forma d a has. ■ o- - 8 ^ ‘ 

a -. . . language written 

(ireeii characters v/ith rho addition c; other :u. .;ue.r. .orro-„:-a 


1. ■ heni'on "Oritieic... or 


o.lul-iei 








41 


- - '.. Cop i o, 

in the Coptic dialect the native Egyptian versions of the 

• - ■ '. PO £. 

L 

t dspel read his church, 

he did not ~~ l0VI Greok implies that, a Qoptic Bible then 

existed. 

Ai. there raro several dialects in -gypt at this time, 

ii v/a ^ natural that the Scriptures ..would be translated into 
knsn iii order to - bring the stor w ox Jesus, to the people " in 


their own tongue, iT 

‘fhus there sprang into, being three versions .mown 
.pane 


the Bohairic V 


s ic: 


Shis version, eventually superseded all.the others, 
I- : ale., ae :• ,.oo containing conc rete bsshs of the h,2. 

’Tile earliest MS, is dated 889 AS* It is in the British 

........ . , a .. ' .ic. as the "GurzGn Catena." .... . Ls MS* 

f. .., ... pi . ;hat ... text is subs tz .:.... 11^ c ur e, 

it having been faithfully copied since 1 the dnd Goutury* 

MSS ai . . .. 

! , 0 j .. 

Ls Codex . .. . » he . .. version . made the Ap - u lyi -- 


net universally accepted a. a canon! 


00. 


, anc 1 . . II; - XIIs I 


■ 3 op 2 anj 


I,2« ixi 






42 . 


' a • -» xagm a . . 3 

•iiie MSS of the Sahidic are much earlier than those of the 
Bohairic. llie Q xtant LIsS are assigned to the 5th Century.. 

r .-h it x 

3 • ^ — - -- .... -h . 


Thcco M6fc> were found, in the neighbourhood of 
ho,-^.hii . IPagg .Oil and A-thmim. ihes.e MSS are more to be 

ahi a .... I . .. .. l 

Middle Egyptian Yercions while theg might have certain affinities 

, . . . a, i ..., 

ith 0 f 

ai ..... f .. 0 theg . lj j'xist 

fragments* 

flm Bshiopic Yorsicn. 

At the end or the, 5th Gentarc Christianitg :s came 

national , 


All . ....., 3 1... . ate, ti 

7 , € the 

later ones .which represent a test re vised in she 24 th Oentijry. 
this revisici: came rr om an ^rab ic verier.. 

.The Arabic i^rsions* 

Many, translations, of the Bin la were made in 
. u . .... . ig li.it i<_ __ , ac 


>r s so 


g::x reme. 


iried character of their 


... ranslat 102 ... , • 







43 


Syriao, .. frc Ooj... ai .... . . MS* 

• , ... ;h 0 g 

But the predominant version is due to a revision undertaken 
in the Patriarchate of ^.1 email aria in the 13th Oentury* Recently 

. ia MSS * w a Moi _ai, 

lie derived from an older translation than those hitherto .mown. 


tie 


sm versions 


... 9 

the ground is almost wholly occupied li; the Latin versions, 

T of the Latin Bible divides It. i , _ 

... , , 

.. .. . i.■.. .n ... Lc 

Bible of the Roman Oat ho lie Ohurch for 1500 years* 

t.tss differ so greatly bhat ' it e'ems almost impossible 

all c ai ... igii.3. ..... . a ... 

filial, V" a i f 01d H - 

Vers 1 i_ 1f had it s birth, 


_ : 


3 li ... ... ai la , 


and the urly literature was sritten in -••reeh. Hie Did Latin 

, ■ & 

la . .. , al .. ith ... . • - 6 fcwe 8 

_. . ... .. - arliest 

ji., ... fi. . * 


; . . U 


_ • . - - 3 - 


■J 3 «L bj 


68 






44 


■beon in existe. arl’i a . q q ^ 

since lertuillian Imev; of a comx^lete Latin Bible* 

2ho t ,1, ate* 

•.Pama , ..... ope 

-; • Pa - . - At ; . ■ 

this man Jerome oomnenoed an authoritative revision oi the 
Pat B. " ! t I pe*s invitation to him was that he 

should revise the existing text by reference to the original 
tree.: in the h.f-. and to the ^eptuagint in the 0.2. and in 

- pi.- -. . t.'. a] IT .2. ai 

Psali i » u 

process or revision he undertook a translation of the 

... But ;G must .remember that in his IT.2* worr 

r, a re la tor - 

• . His revised version of the Gospels appeared in 

.... . : ...... ..... ... LQ m .- 6 I rfunctc 

So ... . . ....• i ., fulga i a re- 

.tint Jerc.... h . a. v.ve r .a . m 

of the IT.I. led to its genera? acceptance* But it did not 

- ? ■ 

. 

of Pamasus. V. ith its adoption and. popular iff came extensive 

. t , anc - b . .. 

y it. 21 - Tan - a B. - I •• .: f 

Or lea s; ... Ale re . .. . oted rm . 

to improve the text* 

In the 13th Gehtury many copies of the Bf ele, sere 

. Ia g . - - . ' l ■ -. ' 2 - - ~ 


ere ao 


..... e. 


;nor 


to err 








45 


if ill a ... ' Lte pi esa t a .. . . 

4 - 1Io B .. _ 6, a ir/as 

inovni au the preat Idaaarin Bible. The Council cl Trent 

, 

pate as the standard text • .of the Roman Oat;..olio Bible • 

In 1500 the Bintine Vulgate was issued bp the Vatican 

, . , 

,. 

. 

Scripture -l *" 

But 0lament t ill in 1505 suppressed '•.is oi.ition 

and i .. s d ;he G3 _ ntine 3c it . c .. ...t.3r 3... j.. o n ....... 

5 inti no edition in some 5000 places • To bills dap, this 
edition remains the standard tent ot. the no.ian tat. olie 
oh, ! " . Z , . I ., (Sc as ,000) .... 

jju c in V ._lga cg » 

^ .. . ^. . -. 

Is , 

.. 3 Ti _ . , 

... .. . ch , ).ve, . . Q i a. 

to consid-er tho Textual Criticism which -has tancn place in 
the past, and which will to considered tinder the heading/; 

or "hiit ions.” 

■The writing? or the Ohm ch “min,,rs are rer v valua 
_ .. .... . , - mot its 


r »"ppii0-^oi 





46 


1 0 ;:t v/Ii ic.- i s i nf a 11 ih 1 e. ft ha t g ye r portions of c r ip t u r o 

are : .. ... , ,.. s, c . i .. 

record to come MS which the y had 1 of ore them at the tiro® 

, . a to, anc .. . 

- be. , vqj i: :...:.. ... .... 

- on, 

tut he must have had the hour gospels before him; in order 
.o -aho ic r. a harmony possilTe* 

How true to the original test hie harmony ic. 

o* xna o ..o iniv o rot c 1 r c - **ic a. matter ^hat ue cannox go 
into hero* Marc ion the "heretic” ignor od all Hie C-ospeis 
. Xu 3, £ j ng ... ....... ... ayi in 

referred to in v.h in accordance ith hie cun peculiar 
..... T - , - le m........... .. , , 

..... , 3 a, ah id a _ 

. .... , ..... . - x . i _ - a. t ... . .... . a ... c — 

ucrijjim union have u g en careen irom some Xerx at xheir 


U. ^ .. O '^L*, 


one: 


But ... • . ....... ml.hat .. i wri 

• o rive uc rroofs of the test and authority of xhs 


■ — 


M.2. . C c si.nl . , 

sarel <31.• ■ 3 c - 

ju 0 ta. ion in ir various . ox , 

T each. 




1 <5 c* n r"? n 


.110. suen a uuo m •« na u 


f e r 0 .... ore d difforeiit 1 






47 


' j— 0 - x1 X ca »- 0 0-i- oI... C OxlC GI 1100 » i ij.il. U Og u x 1 0 


1C:. . LU Cl cl Cl 1 Hi. i. Q 1’ 0 x 
X.. -w 0110 .. v_l O i-lO 1 Oci-- 0J.U.1 wi.Xct.xi x 


.er 


0|UO tci C 10x1. ■*■*•..... 1 .. cl’10 OXiiC LilOvJ 0 Ol .. ilG 0110 Call OIlip 

o mined Clio uannur in v/ricii lixs 411 o’Luc ion c 0 inc i o.e 

Lai 01 .:_‘j , 0 _ Lius L_.e concensus of a iiiion Lou 


X 10 1 x, 


1 /a- 


HUG . OL. xx0111G wilClll^; VC 0.J 

) 

t an of grace, 

and cnE. call! fe .as 3 0 3. 

at i a : - ion,' ai - 

'Oioi’o i; a.ioijlam ui...i civ epistle to tlio o orxntiiiuxr * In 
L Lai.O ,,up 1 . .... L i 0 m . p 0 to, oc. 0 ill 0 Lone to „ GIL, 

t a _ 1 1 1 0I10. .t} « . 

\ 

it tills is a distinct reference to Llie 


w a 1-0.. 


o 


■on 


I a-ui p oiir. Lo pien too. in Vuiioo . vm .-0 naerx: vx 
jactations influenced the devisors to pat certain passages 

diC ... irV G J. 0 U ijd j-x-l,. w L Xj. O X 

I:. C ii G V X S 0 X’ G X 0 X X 0 ll X U 


in vi o;.. r c ra ns lat x o 11 


UCi 01 x 0 lx 


- v_v •— ux . 


C.1C( 


ncc oner 


WUx. O JLXi 


uvon r o i it c inc iuo x on 


O'... L-. ...... o L.+. 


.on 

















J^v'ev -r^> oc/ e <vv«J 


■O/ 

C<J 


<jPS 7y S e cx O 


<t 7TL 7 ~T]\/ y y ^\ ^ 


RV- 






ill 


S 7 ^ 


<reus 


C TO U S^p{ (T'Ttsfcz+jSf 


V . D 


, 


o JlJ.Cv 


*j o d ww * 

















COM 


49 


mi 


IV 


vrcou or 


X Cl O X 


V 1 LrUu 0 02100 c. 


, 


L i. X* - 


X Oi • xi - ■_ ci >. v-■ 

vicissitudes or xheir earth. 

t . .... _ 

and passed it on 

Lj G O Ciil G G-.*0 1 C G C* ci Li 

3anc , 


rna ^ic •.. ca c... li . uC ceil-* 

i O cgU O icil I Oilo • j- i.. ,01 J 

c L e o a i. o o 

through all' the 
nd in spite cf all 
i. rut ., 

Tne greax in mg for m io no i xQ 
iv o i g ing v i e i.:. a. t o a c a :.i o n a nd 
v . . and ...i . 


/V 

for tin: 


mu inpai’x it io o’ 


a. 0 X OXaiX 


have brief It described the -eater i* 


whien 


i iJ. L! U Xo 


rue text oi 


he critic uiio iv airnioui to find out tv 


move m xnoir oroer nave ;e on 




ions . 


U xi'J la X.... 

moim ion ; j Under the above heading vo mot v tot. out 

• ••!-<-» c .. e .. -.ci.. ..o Uii naCi g Ci all ui.io lid u ena% ixi 

xliii.it '••'ill - r.i.co;j ar„ to give a lixlei liivcoig 

* * - . . ... 
have oravolo attempted to solve the ..if difficult ice o cn~ 
c l j d »v i w .’.1 l o j j r ea o c< tu v — • 


Ci 8 _ 


Ui lixol 


LI OX 


] 

.xi» x —l o 10..1 Ox — v.’ae j- a _—u c 


v evxua. 


. 


.'ar o-e or vuav. vne 


. ia 

in this ooro at JL_. 
chiefip the cons id 
So expert did the.; 


fn 


vevoiar;., oi m. main via vino :. 
l tv.reo conturie.... B.O » Their v;er. 


ra anorenx arm.... 


e c' 


nd pro; 


;G oix viiu r we ir xane vow a ureaa a no 


ft q . 1 - -n Vi r3 fTl fn 

a vaxXx. a_- x. - _.c ex v— x > x » x • V 

• lx ...... On t x . l _ J . ... . e— Xif • i •» 1 • cw • 









50 . 

Alexandria became famous as a seat of learning, and remained 
so until the conquest of Egypt by the Mohammedan Arabs, 600 A.D. 
Origen is looked upon as the founder of textual criticism of 
the Greek. Bible. 

There are many others whom we would like to mention 
in this discussion but we must pass on until we come to the 
Renaissance where we must pause to mention briefly the in¬ 
vention of printing, which great discovery really marks the 
birth of modern criticism. 

In 1454 the first printed document was published 
in hurope. in 1456 the first printed book, the great Mazarin 

bible was published by the (juttenberg Press. Thus a beginning 
was made. 

So liter is careful to point out that the honour 
of printing the earliest edition of the Greek N.f. belongs to 
the distinguished Spanish Cardinal Ximenes, who pub11sheda 
great Bible, known now as the Complutensian Polyglott because 
it was published at the university town of Aleola de Henares, 
whose Latin name was Complutum.(See illus. no.8.). The 
Cardinal undertook this work in 1502 in honour of the 
birthof the child who afterwards became Chas» v. It con¬ 
tained the whole bible, 0.$. in Hebrew, Greek 1 Latin, the 
N.T. in Greek and Latin. 

The H.T* was complete in 1514, but its pub¬ 
lication was delayed until the O.T. was finished; this was in 1517* 


1. Sou ter '’Text and Canon of the 1T.T*‘ ? Pi 94 


































, 

, 

, ■ * 




■ 


















.. 










Illustration ho. C 


Print illustrating the Complutension Polyglott of 
aid showing the Q.T. in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew. 

The Latin is placed in the middle, it bei 
central one for the Homan Church. 


1 1514, 

ng the 



' 1 . II.- - ^ 

Print ^iustrating uompj.utensian of 10 oh Jan. lo!4 t but 
not issued until 1620. 

















51 . 


Another delay took place over a misunderstanding of the 
return of some M.S.S. borrowed for the work, and the 
complete work was not published until 1522. 

It was supposed to be a translation of the 
oldest and most accurate texts obtainable, but Dr. Kenyon says 
that there is no trace of their having used the great Codex 
Yaticanus (B) which is assigned to the 4th Century.'*' 

While this edition may have the honour of being 
the first to lead the way in modern criticism, it was not 
the first to be published. Such an honour belongs to the 


N.I. of Erasmus. 


The printer Eroben of Baslo, hearing of the work 

which Ximenes v/as doing, and having an eye to business, got 

in touch with Erasmus, who was a great scholar, and urged 

upon him the necessity of preparing a Greek I.T. as soon as 

possible. This was in April 1515, and so qui&kly was the work 

done that the edition was ready by March 1516* 

Ojhat such a work, which was executed in about 11 

months, could be thorough, is out of the question, and 


although the preface to the first edition says chat many 

1.5.5. were consulted we. must consider this as an editor T s 
privilege. It is not true, because we know that many ancient 

4.5.5. were not used. Only those which lay ready to the 
liter's hand at Basle, were used, and these were neither good 
10r ancient , lor example, onl, a single M.S. was ns ad for the 


1. Kenyon "Criticism of the II.-• P*"~ 




Illustration No. 9 




1 -1. -• ■:.t ^ - > - 

Print illustrating the third edition of Erasmus 


f 


with 1 John 5:7. 













translation of Revelation!*, and even this -was lacking the 
last 6 verses, which Erasmus made up by re-translation 
from the Vulgate. 


This work is of little critical value, and is 
inferior to the Complutensian, but its 6 years 1 start of 
its rival caused it to exercise a greater influence on the 
history of the II. T. text. It went through 5 editions. 

The edition published in 1522 is worthy of special mention, 
because it contained 1 John 5:7 which was not in the two 
previous editions. (See illus. no.9). The R.O. Church 
objected to it being left out, as it was in the la tin Vul- 
' gate. 

Erasmus replied that if he could be shown a Creek 
text with it in, he would include it in his next edition. 

The challenge was taken up by the E.C. Church, and a special 

2 

Greek text was prepared for the occasion, and Erasmus, not 
knowing of such deception, accordingly kept his word, and pro¬ 
duced it in his next edition which was in 1522. (See illus. 
no. 10). It is a great pity that Erasmus did not kno?/ of such 
deception; the words of above mentioned verse which refer to 
the three heavenly witnesses, got into the text, and persisted 
until the revised version. 

This specially prepared MS is number 61, or Codex 

Montfortianus, and is in Trinity College, Dublin. 

1. See Gregory "Canon & Text of the U.T." p*374 








53 . 


"This text concerning the three heavenly witnesses is not 
contained in any Greek MS# which was written earlier than 
the 5th Century. It is not cited by any of the Greek 
ecclesiastical writers; nor by any of the early Iatin Father 
oven when the subjects upon which, they treat would naturally 
have led them to appeal to its authority. It is therefore 
entirely spurious; and was first cited (though not as it now 
reads) by Virgilius Tapsensis, a Iatin writer of no credit, 
in the latter end of the 5th Century, but by whom forged is 
of no great moment, as its design must be obvious to all."-** 

I find that these questionable words are in the 
authorized version, but are omitted in the revised. 

In 1546 there appeared an edition of the. Scriptures 


from the.hand of Robert Bstienne of Paris, who styled himself 
Stephanus. This edition was f o1lew ed by 5 other edit!ons, 
the latest being published in 1551. In his work Stephanus 
used Erasmus, Oomplutensian, and some 15 MSS. which were 
mostly minuscles, and at Paris. -411 editions after 1551 had 
verse divisions, and each verse was made to read like a 

paragraph. (See Ulus. no.11). 

The third edition which he edited in 1550 was the 
one which made him famous. The test was revised, and gave 
in the margin various readings from the minuscles, and the 
Oomplutensian. This fine- edition is in general the source 
for the so-called Pexfcus Receptuo. 


1. Footnote in Griesbach's translated tert. 






Illustration Ho* 11 


lool 


Print illustrating Stephen^ 1 edition of 
Note that there are verses marked in ink on 


the left page, but none on the right. Probably this 
led to verse (sfctesion after 155 














54 


Beza carried on the good work, and published no 
less than 9 editions between 1565 and 1604. He was in a 
position to do this work because he owned two important 

& (D) anc t e Codex Claromontanus fBg) . 

A & the other 

was of the Pauline Epistles. But his work dif fers very 
little from the work of his great predecessor. 

We now come to the Elziver editions; the first of 
these appeared in Leyden in 1624* They were published purely 
for commercial purposes,, and have very little textual value 
in themselves . But they became very popular almost immediately, 
because they were a sniall size, and could be easily carried 
around. Of the many editions which this work saw, the second 
is the most important, because the preface contains the fol¬ 
lowing words "Textum ergo hates nunc ah omnibus recepturn," 
this is the text which is received by all. 1 

Hence the term "fextus Receptus" arose, and it 
became the text from which our authorised version was trans¬ 
lated in 1611. 

As time went on it was felt by many that the 
received text was not so accurate a reading of the original 
as it might be, so there was introduced v.hax is now known 
as the second period of Textual Criticism, which saw an 


Kenyon "Criticism of the H 


" p.231. 


1 . 








> 

















Illustration No. 1 2 


Print illustrating a number of early Wreek 
Hew Testaments. Notice the size of the so-called "Textus 
Peceptus”—the one being held in place by the open knife— 
compared with the size of the others, especially the 
Stephens'edition. 








55 


accumulation of evidence for the improvement of the text. 
This p3riod covered a period of about two centuries, and 
occupied the energies of many Biblical scholar*;. Many 
new M.3.3. were brought to light, and scholars examined and 
classified them, and although there were many imperfections 
to be pointed out, yet there gradually grew up a vast body 
of materials which helped to establish an increasing stan¬ 
dard of accuracy and completeness. 

It is impossible to deal at length with this 

period of criticism. It began with Brian Walton in England 
who published in 1657 the H.T. in Green, Syriac, Latin, 
Bthiopic, and Persian. He used the Greek text of Stephanus, 
together with,the recently acquired Gouex Alexendrinus^AJ 

His work was carried on by John Pell, but Dr. John 
Mill of Oxford was the‘one who made the greatest use of new 
materials. He collated 8 uncials, among them being, A, 

L, and 5 excellent minuscle^, among them being S3. 

Bentley deserves to be mentioned as one who did 
mud: to help improve the text. But all the work of this 
period was not carried on by Englishmen. On the Continent^ 
there were many scholars who were 3a bouring diligently at 
the problem of the restoration of the original text of the 
H.T. 

In 1 ^ 9 

edition of the II.T. which was based mainly upon the Textue 
Receptus, and only altered when the reading which he believed 






56 


to 1)0 the true one had already appeared in some printed 
form. He thought that there were two types of text which 
he called African and Asiatic, the former included the 
most ancient authorities, while the latter the later. 

fhis was distinctly % move in a new direction, 
and met with the sharp criticism of J. Wetstein. He con¬ 
cluded that the most ancient M.S.S-. "has been contaminated 
from the Latin, and that consequently the later authorities, 
from which the fextus Receptus ms more immediately derived 
contained the more authentic tradition."**' 

J. S. Semler thought that there were three types 
of text which he callddfa) Alexandrian, and derived from 
Origen, and found in the Syriac 0.optic, and Ethiopian ver¬ 
sions; fb) Eastern, which was in vogue in Antioch and Con¬ 
stantinople; and (c) the Western, embodied in the Latin ver¬ 
sions a nd fa th ers. 


But it was left to his pupil Graesbach to carry 
his theory to fruition. He divided the authorities for the 
Pauline Epistles into two families, the Alexandrian and the 
Western; and the Gospels into three families, the Alexandrian 
the Western, and the 0onstantinopolitan. 


In the Alexandrian family he placed the uncials 
C .£.!•, the important cursives 1, IS, SS, 69, the Coptic, 
Ethiopia, Armenian, and the quotations in Origen, Clement 
of Alexandria Eusebius. In the Western, I), the la tin ver¬ 
sions and sometimes the Pe shit to Syriac; in tne Constant in¬ 
opolitan A, and a great number of late uncials and minusfccles# 


1. Kenyon "Criticism of the U.f." P*238 





57 


Griesbaoh's theory, which he received from Sernler and 
elaborated, anticipated that which holds the field among 
N.f. students today. He had 5 "rules of thumb." Probably 
he was influenced by Bengel in this, for his rule of thumb 
was "proclivi scriptioni praesta ardua" (the harder read¬ 
ing is to be preferred to the easier.) 

Griesbach in his work was niched by the fol¬ 
lowing rules: 

I. No reading should be considered unless it has the 
support of some ancient MSS. On this ground he would rule 
out 1 John 5:7. 

II. Families, not single MS are to be used. On this 
ground he would condemn Erasmus for using only one MS, and 
that incomplete, for his translation of the Apocalypse. 

III. Ihe shorter reading is to be preferred. 

IV. The difficult reading is to be preferred; in this 
he is at one with Bengel. 

V. A reading which seems false is to be preferred. 

Shis period comes to a close with Scholtg. through 
out the Textus Heceptus had held its position practically 
unshaken. The new era which was ushered in in 1831 by 
Karl lacfonann was to see the casting aside of the received 
text. 

Phis in precisely what Iackmann did, and having 
done so he set about reconstructing the text from the most 
ancient extant authorities . It was a bold undertaking and 





58 


at fix at me t with opposition, but his sincerity and 
thoroughness won him many frienc , nd his work became 
epoch-making. In rejecting the Stephanus-Elziver text 
he established critical principles, which led to the 
recovery of a more authentic text from the most ancient 
authorities# 


Our brief reference to this third period 
smple y >re to fail to mention the 
name of Tischendorf. Already he is known-to us as the 
discoverer of the Codex Sinaiticus. 

In his wort; he did not limit himself to 
11 Lacfemann f hot? does 


family of texts like G-riesbach. He is not prejudiced in 
favour of Textus Receptus, but with an open mind he honestly- 
faces the problem; in so doing he comes to see that ladc- 
mann is right in attaching a preponderant weight to the 
testimony of the oldest authorities. 

How we come to Westeott and Sort. It will 
be necessary to deal at some length with their work, since 
it is the greatest of its kind ever undertaken so thoroughly 
by Englishmen. Their edition of the Hew Testament was 
published in 1881, and contains a reconstructed Creek 


t ext without apparatus criticus, but 
on various passages; also an elabora 
ing of the principles upon which the 


with critical notes 
te prolegomena treat 
text is constructsd 


Those principles we,must now 


briefly examine# 























‘ 

. • 


' ■ 










' 


















' 

















r 






r ’ 

. 

‘ 









59 


First of all, the internal evidence of readings 
is examined under the headings of "Intrinsic Probability" 
and "Transcriptional Probability." The one refers to the: 

: other to the copyist; what U 
lihely to have written," and "what the copyist is likely 
to have made him seem to write." 

It is not always wise to believe that of two 
readings, the one making the best sense, is the one 
originally written by the author; nor are we wise in be¬ 
lieving that the "Intrinsic Evidence of Headings" is 
a lway s t rus t war t hy. 

Many authors make slips in grammar, and a reader 
noting such would no doubt make a "mental" correction, if 
not a "textual" one. A scribe would no doubt do the same 
thing, which he very often did, and his wort:, though it 
may have had finish, did not always render faithfully the 
au t ho r 1 s me an ing. 

How it is quite evident that a: scribe would 
not consciously introduce a worse reading in place of a 
better. 

But why such introductions at ail? They -only 
add to an already knotty problem. It is impossible to toll 
why such as this was done; .the most we can say is thar it 
was done with the purest of motives. However sincere the 
scribes were, such alterations in *uh@ text constitute 


corruptions, and in course of time, the errors became so 





60 


groat that "each copyist would not shrink from alter~ 

; ;h< 0]... x ]is t- laj i or< o ] > j of 

substituting what ho supposed to be a clearer or tetter 


r epr e cent at ion of t ho mo tt er." 

Yet in spite of all these introductions into 
the text, "the value of the evidence obtained from 
Transcriptional Probability is incontestable . ” It en¬ 
ables us to arrive at some degree of accuracy; but it 
cannot be employed alone* The number of variations is 
too great, and the;; very often conflict. And yet, where 
there is such conflict ion, the best thing to do is to 
fallow the most famous of all canons of criticisnp 
"Proclivi scriptioni Praestal m* ? 

, kw . 'tTeried . be. 


are -contained in the different documents known to the 
textual critic, and in considering these, Westeott and 
Sort enunciated, two maxims which have become fundamental 
in Textual Criticism. 


I. "Knowledge of documents mould precede final Judgment 
upon readings. 

II. "All trustworthy restoration of corrupted texts is 
founded on the study of their history. " 

The xir-jt maxim enables us to arrive at the 



n ^ 4- 

'4-1 Ci Vi 

q o a a Lx. i 

. I t a 1/ 

enables us to study 

4_ . - 

a w 

sole, v... 

in this 

/ay guard against the 


of 

1 ^ in Vi J 1 — 

.1 v i de no c 

or ,... -»' 1 


1. 

o 

rO 9 


is i i, i i - Vj4 _i.ee ~4., 

x< » — • 


n 



V Cl 

II 


11 

40 







61 


Sue second maxim introduces us into the 
Gone a logical evidence for the documents• It enables 
ns l o s cuay tiie r j la u 1011s oj. 'descent or uxxinst . w men 

: . . . s. 

■, 3. a . ... 

doc me 0 nt l are in an;/ say independent of oacli other; while 
are . , . .. a.. 

scattered ^ - - pa t .. / • K • ca -.. ... " clie 

teal . , .ast c 

1 

t' c nt a rid intricacy.” 

But- how are wo to determine the genealogy oi 

c - -.; c ; a..= t . ... d 0 s ... i. y c udj.Lg ...... .... 

in comparison with each ocher« In this nay it may ie 

. . 3 .. r .. 0..._3nt... ha 7 Q a . rig . . 

but tliic miowlcIp3 In turn leads us cc ash sue question 

■ .. ... .... fc-h. fcer.s get ... M.h, fro 1 whic 

. ... _, 

text iron sue original?' 1 

Perhaps this question will never receive' an 

. t 


non 


? u r tllG .u. . I Gr_ ■ .0^ 


will no doubt 


.... re . 1 le ..... 3 


r3c0v 1 r7 0i sne sere: 


... ... ... ... u an mpai ... ... z . 


.nc 


^ 1 n-v c 


s 0 r 0 c 0 v -j i 0 cl 


turn used*. in 


1. h.I. i: 







62 


conj Lot. .... rt ii lils . , 

ry o: a ye* 

This is precisely the work which Hort under- 
o , and the task occupied SO year 
It it. interest in to note the conditions undoi 

. - . ^. .. . - s'/G S tc J j . , 

lightfoot were three college chums who undertook' when 

0.D , f .. .... 

Lth notes. Westcott, was to undertake the Gosp 
ai .. .s ... John, £.sc . . ... ; .. ... .., .. . .......... 

Immediately hort realised chat hi:, task was 

. 

it, . . . Lg - lQ ... ...... 

....... . . i ... . ie f and 


hrogory cal 
ten on tk 


... 

in the following manner s 
1 • rran * 

II* Western. 

III. Alenaiidrian* . 

IV. Ueutral* 

... .. : a .., . 

order. 


i to the V: 

i CEl 1 (. . 

an 

epoch mat: ing piece 

of worn • 

ic 1 1 n h i i'.' 

/ J-L O j... J_i*- 

51 the 

an - 

thor "of the 

best hoc 

. L’it 

n Canon 17 . 






Hort T s 

studies 

led him to 

believe 

that there 


, Yol.2., 0.57,. 










63 


4.X 







; , u VTCS f JD / 

, C<~CVO <JV'7~£S #<vt eoAoyou\/T-o<s 


KV ^ 


A - i-l J 


? 


* 


(a) and 




x« * X • 













■ ■■ . ; 

, 




























• ... V 

' 




* 



, 

, .. ' ■ 












64 



l 


i 


c*. u Oil L 


U C 


» 


t i 



c 

o <>:yc o y ~7~ o 


&£ 0 <S, ^ 3 'C, D,£. 




C. 

O 


<r-ros o <^yc 


OS 7~0 cj & £ Ou 
























. 



. 




* 


. 















' 















65 


(. t o rao &4Sou £ 


<= 

( ^) 


\ c <■ • 


i o S O ^CoS ~T~ OCJ 


, 3 Zs£f^ 


6 eoZ 


certain kbb 


•. . , c occs 7-0LJ 0£O O' T~0 V-rvS' /*Z 


0 y^^LO~7-CS O <s£c>S 7~<U-J ~T~C)CJ^<^^ 


1 / 




_L X-C 1/ if ♦ vJ V_-i Llv 


0 vi ctone© 


&JLuiO k 


■* V 


\, JUsSk u Lij. i 

X* 

iJiiou &r“ 


v i i j. j. i 


tilUG 


ct»\ju <J u Xli; 


X Cv- U. j. xx. 


{a) , 1 0 j f d } C. 


Liu J. iJ.cii-.iU. 


t x 11 u;i b ! ? 'l iis 11 i a ) 


J_ » Juuijt/i j_Ja» ,; 












66 


L9 AutJ zed Yarei .... (g) > "but 

Revised Voil ion is accordin,; jo (a) . 

Xjl• lie x x ju u. Oi: _ur placiii, . ... .. »j yrian ccuc 

r thr e j .. . 

l A_3-Mioene patristic fathers# 

. t (.0 f £. • 

, 1^ , -. - AI ..... , .... .. , 

hell' m to .ascertain' the priority of the Vestern tent to 
the Syriac. And the la tin In there Cyprian and rertullian 
confirm us in our vie;.. 

Sort is convinced that prior to £50 A.D. there 
are two series of readings exhibited in the various 
quotations; these hh calls West:rn and iJon-Woctern. the 
recorded reading:; or h^rcion and Justin Martyr reveal the 

waste: 

whioh v,ere in euist:nce before the micld 1 e of the seconcl 


. ,. . were, . o ;, c ....... 


:. 


ixxj non-westc: i rearing;. .;niei_ ai .ip...._: 

. _ , 

great divergencies in .exist lice by the close of the second 
century. "Before the riddle or the third century, at the 
v .... sari i ■ a ;orical he exi 

, 1 h , - 

distinctively b„rian g he want or attestation iron grougs 
-of docuconts which have j; .r .■. rr. c: cue or nor ancienv x orris 

of text."-** 


%• 






Thu s ' a f iii-d that a critical. t;. d p oi t he 
quotations in.Grech and Xutin fathers down to and includ- 
- ., . a'la - ai ; . ..... r Lai 

inr ' . 

III. 1- ^ v.. . ...1 j-i v 1 . ' _■ _ Kj rj - f B ~ . .a 

- 5 i£ rea ... ]. 

, Ale:. 

readings. Sort" is verp careful to point out tiiat a careful 
atudp or the whole ho dp or fprian readings shews that the 
authors of the aprian tent had “before than documents re- 

, 


rha ^icnandrian, and a shird# 

Souter would callgahis third one the "Heutral” 

r r owi. . .. - -., 

la . 3 na .. . hi ..... - 

..... t ;he . . I c xii -1. a 

and i] ... .2 - ... - 1 - •• - • • . 

oec .. "in aiff. ... lac . om bir _ 35 - - - ; 

... ref j . - nr lie r - , 


t o' th e ir t a a t . a nd inc 1 ina t ion. 
to adopt exclusively one or the 
he: . : :e * Aga ii , 

. .. ' , , 

^ '-dp C- SCnm. .... Jaia. 

‘ _ . - in . - o » 

heii , 01 .10 a deque 1. 


— ii 0 1 h e r a 11 e r na t i v e w a s 

, 

v/on 1 d coir];ine various- 
v:e have noon in cur trier 

. tl; , _. 3 - work 

i 11 1 1’ 0 d uc i ng na np c ha ng 0 a 
earon whatever. 








68 


l‘ oiiL’i: 


Hort concludes 'by ..u w n ihus it i-ay be cl ear 

- i » ■ - y g fc 

- ■ 03 * - v 9 S dOU .. C cl....... 

dociioout::, derived it •; rom a hyri&x. c.. area .a., earlier 

- • If • . i, .. . 

■ y le .: ;.■ c.. 

tiie possibility or probability ci its having existed' not 
onl, in the Western nt in a non-Western Irc-hyr hx... text 
liaa t o }; e ta ' ze n ini o ac c on t • ” I 

Hort also thought that the fulsome ness, of she 

. ■ - ■ ■ - ■ . , -. - ......... ... ] ..... 

Interrciations. 5r By it ' tern ... ..leans certain venues 

-.d h . , - . 

any part 'on the original, text. 

It an. the tendency to naho the text, as full as 

, th 

. .... 3curn _ .. s ... . ..ally . .... ... 


their uiv 


tii sre i s q very g resmap x i on nhau m x hec< 

2 . 


cases rue Wesrern nocnments are ripiru. hern says ‘"me" 

. .e are . . ... is, hi Li ome 3Sy in¬ 

trinsically suspicious, to scy '.he least; rhile the ...stive 
for their' insertion is usually ohvicu h’ The most of uhcse 
. Internoh 

- - h u 3 i are ... 

iiiy are typical illustrations* 

i.jiVS. XV. 1 K^cXXosS/- . 

... . .. ...» • I) . I * • . 

yxh ... . : 

ho X..f, in y • V( ... - oi.,1 

2 * » » ' •* ' 171 


t ha 






- ' 




. 

■ - § 





- 











69 



a • v 1 r, 


,r j 


^ e y-bj v &€ /‘c'l <y S ry 7~^<7 s/. 


cV 1 . /4. Z. 33. 


U j . MIji 


Or _ itiij Uu -< 


^cv ^77 ~r^v 


. iX.iw -Li 


.11 LUO A • v 


AV.LO 


Cl 


v . w n: 




a: 


jri « jj • t > tv 


3XL 1C! 


1/ v_/ -i_ J. t/ J» J- '-V iJ . 


h 


icti: 


rnoniif’ u 10 


r .and 


u ct 


isaC X. -- 


<X 










70 


fraditi c. 


tnep baa a their 'defence on the follow- 


!• - • 

Oj. a fop the Church from the fourth century to the niiie- 

• ' . , 

Church must have been divine 2p 0 aided in its dealing with 

aC3 . 3 .- - ocU II. hat, apart fi 

■ > G *. 0 ■. m — Ider i ... 

•.- ■ ' al; whic all the "ne 

11 ----- ervat 

to thin:: that popularity of the accepted text should: be used 

a garnet ui. a gc op ranee of a text, which has bee:., produced as 

tho result of scholarship which was not attainable in the 
daps of hteaharms • ? V 

“History manes it clear that God in his wisdom 

lias _ er - ... .. . _... .. ia bi... .. tio 

sacred ..... ... . fcii ... . ? 

always sc that its substance van. nor lost or seriously an¬ 


il. Western Te: 


s 


“h., oar hi a . on- - 

ciir ono lo c ; ic a lip e elony n she e.:rbent. the ante- 

.. . .. ...... . t , .. 

later every an reion directly, or indirectIp f-It its in¬ 

fluence . 


1 . 11 T eniua 1 Jr d t icism e d be. : h . - . !l . h : / 0 . 















71 


J- x- cT 



L i.U O g. 


^ w j- C'l- 


Ct U vl J- U a- 


'J e <T O 'cst-os f*- ° otyvtTTS? 7~& 4 


€o$o 


9 V 0 J_L C L 






C O ITU i 




'hk- 











fJA & 

Ola O* c -TO S 


e T '* a ^vde^Trov 


<Uv<xyX">jV Si i-cyiV 

i( 7 ro\S<iLV ator-oZs A"<V-7-^ foe^VfVo( • 


^ ^ y 
/ 






















73 











74 


ClLiTOl-u - Id 

recent diLeaver./ 


mng du oG j a., id mi or<3 


^ mai o xc m r xa o 


0 £la IjllGiiOti 


thio fact yet rre clearly.” 

I t — ■ ch _ , v | UL Q 

. ..... 

OX j&i .G-cillO. X -oi, « 

0 O i-lGxi. ^ U .. .. «L Cg L* ^ . G U J. O •-• — c/ . .cl • L* . •. ->■ — -.• . -i-. n 

, 

, 

- ■ , - t > s 

Mem ioiiin. ir maen. roriincaj no ox a •• • r v a.'.. - oca i* : -*,• 

one .o m.o oxhcct that Irenaono v.ro mcano time. ox 

i 

._ f „ <5~ 

3 parent ;he Old l&tli j ~ 

von snrrGOto ouch i 


llic variantc oi 


:c and **ct 


although they are 


iuice 


S 


O u l-- J - 


h« ‘.-iv’c-eatc rhat mine arci 


£ 

b y no * ille a no c o r.x a i v d 
leriaa 

nC tint 

l 

, h 7 

gI in a ale a: _ , 


.:: g .,...: • - Vor . aiai ., 

iiti - • Qh * 


ill £ 




.o made ccal go ox mo nor.. 


>£ the • ir - •' - 


In per 


» • 

chan. re. , 


a p x 3t 1 


■ o' o i ■ ia 


Liu-. o *- 


changing mo o 


*■© — ""Co 


an nor. 


i . 


.. il .. . - - ci - 3 - 1 x '* -' 










75 














0 




i 

































76 


"P „ l tn:t I o oxi t. in u 


bo rolled on a a good and sound to: 

sign., of deli . . Ke - e . .... 

|.o v;a have 

^ x -• :J - : - : ... - ; . I 

O i 0 L 0 1 . . 1 . ._;. G til ,j 10 0 i. ai i 0 V- 10 * 


•U W C .... 


to: i 

.Q ilncic this tent i 


e one 


IT xj c v .... ^ 1 , 

hut he' thought no nucli or. 
jminoiitl- in the C odear Yatieanus (B) . Q@de:: Siiiaitieuo-. 

2he.se M.S*S# ... . . . i 

n ai ■ It ..... a ) 1 cl 1 o f 


l _ie 


ix • O • Ci • 


; oi iio 
did to 


i*o asenoe so piteh au vr or 1 1p t o o no - 

anc i . as . ..... bl is c's t . . ?■ . u 

... . . a fc f c i a . ta c s* 

But lx ifVe'iss,. a 

Lai% who \ 

. - 1 ., . 

a he vo all • ir L.g.St licit .nnrt it a. h...o . ..lg ^.0. c 

..... II .2 • v/hic . . cap 3-d le 13 . ... .... . , . . 

- ia 1 .... j t ] .... IS 7 place It ... .. 

lean . I. . .it? Poe. m ... ....... ; 


Wile* L 


as it 


author. 




mds? 

. oo c , 


. -. _. s i • 

, an 


. 












77 


CO .. »— v- .... .... Q,i 

i - i— u - ■ 'oo c..a c . - -.r u • 

I c 3. o xiHj^ 0So i — l." o cle to mine .., m r ,.ui 

writ ton* voic writers think that it belong:, to the 

2i .* , 

—> ■—> Pamphilus. ^ ; tn ., ........ f 

laxa] a: It 

. 4-1 ): x .i, a3 

4 

test ad are., •* rat . .. j1 y L i fa 3t i...r a.. i i 

ay wi pri. l . '• •• ' rv 

ca^l § t>i Is tVe Ho , 

it; no one has set at cut changing it. w ^ 

Before we leave Sort we must ascertain his system 
of notation, for without it, it would not he possible to 
read his test intelligently* 

Three kinds of readings are considered 
I. Alternative Readings; II Suspected Readings; III. Re¬ 
jected Readings* 

I. Alternative Readings* 

When two or more alternative readings are con¬ 
sidered, the primary place in the text is given to that 
reading which seems to be the more probable, and in cases 
of equal probability,the. better atl 3d. 5he other readings 


1* Gregory "Canon and Text of the U.T.” p#485 







78 


are considered to be secondary, and may be of three 
kinds*, differing from the primary readings by Omission 
by Addition, or by substitution* 

A secondary reading of the first order, namely 
that of Omission is marked by simple brackets 
in the to::t. c . . Mwtihew VII; S4. A °yocss 

r 7oas ZoyoctJ? wither ; you tq the 
secondary reading. When we look at the text we notice that 

and know Miat 

it is a secondary reading. 

A secondary reading of the second order, namely 
that of Addition is marked by the symbol T 

in the text. 


\fj~au iroas 


V 

«C_ 


XIII:. £8 O ockos without ee*? 

<r p C_ ^ ■ 

reading, ^catas fc.cs the 


reading. 


If we consult the text again we shall find the 


and the word 

at the .foot of the page, signifying that it is an addition, 
and therefore a secondary reading. 

A secondary reading of the third order, namely, 
that of substitution is printed at the foot of the rage 
without any accompanying mark, the words of the primary 

( —7 

reading being included within the marks in the text. 

If we look up Matt. XVI: SO we shall find that 


e7Ter'C / Acrj<re 


V is 




the secondary reading. Stilus we find the above notation 










79 


around the first word, hut the second word is at the foot 
of the page* 

If there should be two or more secondary reading! 

they are put at the foot of the. page with the letter 
between them. Page 52 of Hort's text illustrates this. 

II. Suspected Readings . 

Ii the text should contain some primitive error 

extreme limits of the words suspected to contain an error 
of transcription being indicated by the marks 

Page 555 of the text illustrates this exceedingly 

well. Rom. 11;S2. 

But if there should be no second reading assoc¬ 
iated with the textj it is marked by placed dots between 
the symbols. Book up page 489 text. 

Where either of two suspected extant readings 
might have been printed in the text, one of them is placed 
be tween the symbols. Book ur page 480. 

III. Rejected Readings . 

Those are inserted within double brackets EC -H 
There are some noteworthy passages included in this list. 

- f r 1 1 1 b w 2 i :49 , ■ hie , e sen, is a harmonistic 

corruption. 

l.frf k YI: 9 to ,1 . The. last chapter of Mark ends with 

c % 


n for they were afraid.” 










80 


Hort rejects the rest of the chapter completely. It is 
found in W, But it is wanting in the Vulgate and many- 
other ancient copies. Griesbach, Souter, Mills, 3eholtz 
include it in their texts hut all mark it of very doubtful 

origin, Tischendorf rejected the whole clause. Such a 
passage represents to us an honest attempt to complete the 
Gospel. 

/ ' 
yot £ we cannot for a moment Believe; nor can we believe 

that the present ending is the work -of the author of the 


Gospel. Probably the end of the original work was in some 
way destroyed, an^ in its present condition it represents 
a very early attempt to give It a finished appearance. The 
very famous rejected reading is John VIIs55--VIII:11. This 
is the reading containing the a-tory of the woman taken in 


adultery. It i nd in A,B#0,X,W• 33, and. 

other M.3♦ S• of very great authority. It is lacking in the 

Vulgate, and is not cited by Origen, Chrysostom, and other 
ancient ecclesiastical writers.. It is found in D. It is 

rejected by Hort, but it is included in the texts of § , 

Griesbach, Mills, and Seholtz, but is marked of very doubt¬ 


ful origin by them all. 

Hort, In his Introduction says of this passage 
TI Ho interpolation Is more clearly Western. Hot only is 
it passed over’in silence in every Greek commentary of which 
we have any knowledge, down to that of Iheophylact inclusive 









' 








81 


(Cent. XI-XII) but with the exception of a reference 
in the apostolic constitutions and a statement by an 
obscure Uicon, that it was expunged by the Armenians, 
not the slightest allusion to it has yot been discovered 
in the whole of Greek theology before the twelfth 
Century’’ 1 . With the exception of the Western Codex 
Bezae, the earliest M. S. containing this passage is 
the 8th Century. ^he short section on the man working on 
the Sabbath day belongs in the same class of rejected 
readings as the "pericope adultarae.” It is found 
only in the Codex Bezae, and Hort thinks that it pro¬ 
bably comes from the same source as the former reading. 


If will be readily seen that the theory of 


Hort results in the rejection of a vast number of 
authorities, and a complete reliance on a few uncials. 
The result was that when the Revisfers came together to 
do their work of revision in 1870 Hort r s opinions ex¬ 
erted a great influence over them, since he was on 
the revision committee, and the outcome was the re¬ 
jection of the C* type of text, ana.the greatest 



respect shown for the evidence of 


especially the latter. 

Hort stressed the Uncials, and laid much 
less weight on the cursives. 


1* U.T. in Greek, Yol. 2, p.299 






82 


Tregelles, an obscure English Nonconformist 
minister had cleared the way for Hort, and in so doing, had 
created discussion as to the purity of the text of the Textus 

Receptus. 

1'he more he studied the matter, the more he felt 
that the Textus Receptus should be discarded for a 
better text. In this, he was bitterly opposed by Burgon, 
whose stand was that the Medieval witnesses should be 
recognized. They looked upon the cursives as the true 
text; there were so many because they were so good.- 

This was Yon 3oden f s viewpoint also. 

Now it will be necessary to go into Yon 3oden f s 
theory at some length, since he is the most important 
critic who has carried on work in this field since 
Westcott and Hort. 

Yon So den felt that the time had come for us 
to listen to what the Cursives had to say to us; this 
would mean listening to the Medieval witnesses, 
precisely the viewpoint of Burgon and others. 

It is not possible for me to do justice to 
his work, because of lack of material , but Souter has a 
brief resume of his work, so I am relying on him for 
my information. 

Yon Soden gathers his data together under 


three headings: 




83 


I. 

II. 

according to 
III. 


The notation and enumeration of M.S.S. 

The cl&ssifioation of M.S.S. into groups* 
their textual characteristics. 

The reconstruction of the history of the 


text. 

I. He begins by saying that the M.S.S'. of the 

earliest period never contained the whole Hew Testament. 
From his exhaustive studies he concluded that the H.T. 
was contained in 4 volumes; I. The four-fold gospel, 

IT. Acts and Catholic Epistles, III Paul, IV. Apocalypse. 
According to him the old notation dealing with each of 
these volumes treated them as a separate entity, and if a 
M.S. should be found which contained more than one of these 
four sections, it would be given a different number in 
the list of LI. 8.S. Hon , e know that as early as the 18th 
Century (V/estein 1761-2) capital letters were used for 
uncials, and numbers for cursives. In this way Codex 
Alexandrinus was called A, and the Basle M.S. 1, not 
because they were superior to other M.S.S. but because they 
were first discovered. 

How Von Soden completely ignores this system 
it is too artificial for hiin f he 

distinction between the Uncial and the cursive. So he 

.... 3,3, according to a system, of his own. 


renumbers ail the 
















‘ 



» . 




3 



r 





♦ 








' r ' • 


■ 


• 




« 

-< 

- 


■ 
























84 




d in this w t 


oonoerne 
For exan 


to show the o j ut 


uppose a 


<T 


Whole N*T« it would he known by the symbol c - / ' from 
OC.<Xthn /{h (testament). 5-his would precede the new 
number ascribed to the M.S. 

If only the 4 gospels were contained in th 
M. S. then j ^ from ] 

(g . ) e.g. iV is Led (: O/X/- » In th< 

mil Catholic epistles it would be // fr 
1 ) sn tly, C Paul, 


<=V' frc CX7T0(T 7~oA 

disciple or an apostle. 


< 3 ^ 


meaning a 


Ihe number attached to a M.S. usually 
contains in i t one figure ’/hi ch suggests the century to 
which it belongs. nj , V\/ is called /CSS) 

the 4 meaning that it belongs to the 4th Century. 

and O( M. 3.3. are numbered 1 

to 49, which means from the 1st to the 9th Century; the 
10th Century are marked 50 to 99. For the following 
centuries numbers of .3 ciphers are used; for example, 

121 means a M.S. of the 11th century; 221 means a M.S, c 
the 12th Century; 321 means a M.S. of the 13th Century, 
and so on. 







. 

' - V '. 


t 



































































' 

.. 



, 





















■ 








■ 











; 







85 


Souter thinks that this system is very cumbrous, 
and would discourage its use, but it is essential to know 
it in order to understand Von Soden's text. 

II. The Classification of M.S.S . 

The Gospel MSS are grouped according to their 
general textual character. He uses the form of the"Pericope 
Adulterae, w which he callsfrom Greek A < s 
^adulteres^), and the chapter divisions as criteria. 

The groups are three in number, and are called in 

their order K. H. I. The first, known as E. is from the 
/ 

Greek word meaning common. This group is further 

divided into 5 groups, of which iT* is the oldest and best 
form. 

■j 

K does not contain theincident. von 
Soden thinks that K was used by Chrysostom; it was produced 
at Antioch by Lucian. 

I presume that this text would correspond to 
Hort T s Pre-Syrian text. 

The second group is called // from 
meaning quiet or peaceful. Von Soden thinks that this text 
is to be found in 11 M.S.S. Among them he includes/^ O 33 
He does not think that there is any connection between these 
MSS but he does think that 3 > were loth producedin 

Egypt, and have common origin. For this reason he places 
before 2\7 , because he thinks that it is the purer text. 





















































I 








' 



' 





























lilU3 tr :;tl lip. 14 , 

Print illustrating a 15th Century M. S. 

It is knowi as ’’the Toronto Gospels”. The unique 
thing about this M.3. is that the "Pericope adulterae" 
incident is written around the margin. 




















86 


and has not been corrupted the way has* 

Just at this point he breaks with Hort. The 
H text for him corresponds to Hort r s Western and Neutral, 
and he considers it unquestionably Egyptian. 

The text i s so called because of the Greek 

word meaning 1 *>£; < ? . a/\ 

This corresponds to Hort's Western text, and for Von 
Soden as for Hort, it is nowhere pure. It is best con¬ 
tained in D, and not to be trusted because of its many 
corr^tions, 

Having then these three types of text, he considers 
that they are three re&censions of the one original. He 
thinks that the text used by Origen was earlier than any of 
these re/scensions. Those citations and versions which appear to 
be older than these recensions, he attributes to the in¬ 
fluence of Tati an 1 s Diatessaron. 

Von Soden applies the sane rules to the Acts and 
the epistles of Paul, for him, the H text is the best, 
since it stands much nearer to the original than do the others* 
Much material has been collected by this writer, and 
it fills two large volumes. Gregory says that Von Soden r s 
prospectus tf showed that he either had not read or had not 
appreciated what Tischendorf and Hort had written about 
their texts. 

Concerning the "pericope" passage, it has only a 
frail connection with the text of the N.T., and cannot in any 


1. Gregory "Canon & Text of the N.T." p.465 











T • r 






i 








' ; ■" 1 . 

f 

' , i 








« 






- 













' 




- 


, ' 






* 

1 

a - i'r.cuj' 






. . 

. 

' - xi V. v. : •.! 0 Ji VC &i&*i 


/ ' .. ‘ ' o 

. 

r • • . : ' • ' € 








V r ' r 

\ /• . . 








. . 










87 


offer a standard for the history of the text proper. Von 
Soden's text eventually appeared, but it was so full of 
mistakes that it brought much adverse criticism to bear upon it. 
So discouraged was its author that it is believed in some 
quarters that it caused his death. The text in the opinion of 
professor Jackson will never become popular. 

Souter has a text which forms the text of the 
Bevised Version. 

Before bringing this paper to a close, it would 
be well to trace briefly the history of the Bible in the 
English language 

The U.T. in English has had a very interesting and 

varied history. This history begins away back in the 8th 

Century when the Venerable Bede translated from the Latin 

9 

into the vernacular, chapters 1--VI of John. 

The 9th and 10th centuries saw the translation of 
interlinear glosses on the Psalms. Of these, there are some 
12 M.S.S. extant, the oldest and most important being the 
Vespasian Psalter which was written in Mercia in the first 
half of the 9th century. 

Uext in importance are the XindlsfaTtee gospels, 
belonging to the 10th Century. 

We come to the Gospels proper when there was published 
a little later than the 10th Century what is known as the Bush¬ 
in See article on "Bible" in Encyclopedia Brit., 11th edition. 





i: > 








T 


C 


, 


J ! X ' ' 


























" 










■ 

- 


f !'« ' : : 


- . 

. 

- 

' 

. 










, 








- 






■ 

.r 








88 


worth version. 

J-he 12th Century saw the translation of the Gospels 
into the Kentish dialect of the period. But the real work 
of a complete translation into current English was begun 
by Wyoliffe in the 14th Century. 

xhis version was looked upon with suspicion by the 
orthodox church, but it was work that was well worth while, 
because it led to the translation of 1611. 

This edition gave to us "the earliest complete 
renderings that we possess of the Holy Scriptures into 
English." 

with the invention of printing in the 15th 
Century, great impetus was given to the translating of the 
Scriptures. The first in England to take advantage of this 
new discovery was William Tyndale (1526) "to whom" as Dr. 
Vu'estcott says "It has been allowed more than to any other 
man to give Its characteristic shape to the English bible." 

Miles Coverdale, an August ini an Friar, was the 
next to undertake a translation; this was in 1535. 

Both these publications met with a ready sale, which 
showed to the London booksellers that there was much money 
to be made by increasing the output. Thus in 1537 the 
Matthew 1 s Bible was published, the work of preparation being 
done at the suggestion of two London publishers. The Great 

Bible was published in 1539. 

Prior to this, all translations had been undertaken 






Illustration No, 15. 


Ptint illustrating William Tyndale T s English 
edition of 1526. It is open at the 6th Chapter of 
Matthew, Alongside of it is a Louay Testament open at 
the same chapter. The passage in question is the 


Lord’s Prayer 












89 


b,y private persons, but now there is one published by 
royal authority, and based on Matthew f s Bible. It was an 

entirely new revision. 

In 1560 there appeared the Genevan or Breeches 
Bible, so called because of the way in which Gen. 111^ 
was translated "They sewed fig leaves together and made them¬ 
selves breeches." 

Soon after the accession of sueen Elizabeth an 
attempt was made to improve the authorized Great Bible of 35 39. 
This was done in order to counteract the influence of the 
Breeches Bible which was Calvinistic in its tendency, and did 

approval of the English bishops of the 
Protestant faith. Such agitation on the part of the bishops 
led to the publishing of the Bishop’s Bible in 15.68. 

The §reat Reformation had created the impetus 
for this work of translation and revision; it culminated in 
the authorised version of 1611. 

The Homan Catholic Church viewed with alarm the 
work of revision in the Protestant Church, so they undertook 
to translate their Latin Vulgate into the vernacular. This was 
undertaken in due course, 'and the express purpose of the 
undertaking is revealed in the preface of the Rheims version 
or the speedy abolishing of a number of false and more 
impious translations put forth by sundry sects, and for the better 
preservation of reclaime of many good soules endangered 
thereby.’’ The translation was carried out purely to counteract 
the popularity of the various versions 'which were procurable 








Illustration He. 16 illustration ilo* 17 

Ho. 16 illustrates the introduction to the Bible, dedicated 
by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer. Hotice that it is to the 
King. "God save the King." 

Ho. 17 illustrates some of the English Bibles published 
at different times. 

Their size can be judged when it is known that 
the card standing in front of them is 3" x 5". 

Hotice the iron binding on the "Bishop's Bible." 






















’ 






" 

. . , . 

. 




* 












' 

V ■ ■ • ’ 













■ 







90 







* X /V 

,X^y - *T-^£ 

and readable by those in a position to buy f and who could read* 
X - y B 

was incorporated was not published until 1635, and was 
sued in order to counteract the influence of 


j/ulljLchsd in roll« 

According to my authority 1 the work was rapidly 
_ ' , places is quite unintelligibl 

from the direct reference of the Latin original. 

Below are three- passages taken from the Hew 
Testament of both the Douay and Be vised and compared side 
by side. 


E* V. 

Mark 1; 4. 

John came, who baptised 
in the wilderness and 
preached the baptism of 
repentance unto remission 
of sins. 

1 Cor. 5:7. 

Purge out the old leaven, 
that ye may be a new lump, 
even as ye are unleavened. 

For our passover also 
hath been sacrified, even 
Christ» 

1 Peter 2:2 

As new born babes, long 
for the spiritual milk 
vhich is without guile, 
that ye may grow thereby 
unto salvation* 


Douay 
Mark 1:4. 

John was in the desert 
baptizing and preaching 
the baptism of senatee 
unto remission of sins. 


1 Cor. 5:7 

Purge out the old leaven, 
that you may be a new 
p ast e , as yo u are uni e avened. 

lor Christ our pasch, is 
sacrified. 


1 Peter 2:2 

As new born babes desire the 

___ g , 

that thereby you may grow unto 
salvation. 


1. Encycl. Brit. Article on "Bible." 


































Illustration Do ,16 

Print illustrating the Douay I.T.. It is open at Matthew 
2 6, and the way verse 27 is printed, is meant to mean that 
for the Laity, the sacrament is to be in "one kind" only. 
The passage reads "Drink ye all of this," evidently mean¬ 
ing that the disciples were to drink if all. But both 
the A.V. and R.V. read "Drink ye all of it" meaning that 
all were to participate in both kinds, i.e. that it was 
for both clergy and laity. 
































• i 






■ 










































91. 


The Au thprise d Ve r si on . 

A revision of the Bishop's Bible began in 1604 
and was finished in 1611. It arose incidentally out of 
a Conference between the High Church and Low Church parties, 
convened by James I at Hampton Court Palace in January 1604, 
and originally proposed by Dr. Reynolds. 

Ho real opposition being offered to the suggestion, 
the Ring "wished that some special pains should be taken in 
that behalf for one uniform translation—professing that he 
could never yet see a Bible well translated in -English—and 
this to be done by the best learned in both the universities; 
after them to be reviewed by the bishops and the chief learned 
of the church; from them to be presented to the Privy Council; 
and lastly, to be ratified by his royal authority; and so 
this whole Church to be bound unto it, and none other? 

(Encycl. Brit, on "Bible" v.3, page 902.) 

47 scholars worked on this translation, and when 
they came to settle down to their task, they were guided 
by 15 rules which had been previously drawn up for their 
use and benefit. Chief among these rules were the following; 

I. The Bishop f s Bible to be followed and as little altered 
as the truth of the original will permit. 

II. "When a word hath divers significations, that to be 
kept which hath been most commonly used by the most of the 














-v 








- - 


















' 

: 

, 

oloite £ 

' 

* 





. 

... * ' :' 












" 5- C7 .Hi: ■ : •:,: '/U‘ -.:, ; 

. 



















92. 


ancient fathers, being agreeable to the propriety of the 
place and the analogy of the faith. TT 

III "No marginal notes at all to be fixed, but only for 
the explanation of the Hebrew or Greek words which cannot 
without some circumlocution so briefly and fitly be ex¬ 
pressed in the text." 

IV. The division of the chapters to be altered neither 

not at all or as little as possible, if necessity so require. 

The old ecclesiastical words to be kept, for example, 

the word Church not to be translated Congregation. 1 

It is impossible to ascertain how closely these rules 
£ 

were adhred to, but Dr. Miles Smith writing in the Preface 
of the 1612 edition has this to say "having and using as 
great helpes as were needfull, and fearing no reproch for 
slownesse, nor coueting praise for expedition wee have at 
the length, through the good hand of the Lord upon us, 
brought the worke to that passe that you see." 

The actual work of revision took two and three 
quarter years to complete, and it was finally published in 
1611 with the following title page 

" The Holy Bible conteyning the Old Testament and the 
New Translations diligently compared and revised by his 
majesties speciall .commandement. 

Appointed to be read in Churches." 

It is interesting to ask at whose command was the trans- 

1. These rules are not given in their original order, but in 
order as.they occur to me. See Enoyol. B rit. 






Illustration 1 * 0 . I: 1 

Print illustrating the End printing of the King James 
1611 version. Notice that it contains the Apocrypha. 



Illustration No. 30. 

This print illustrates two editions of the 1611 version. 
The passage is from the hook of Ruth. Ch.3:15, in one 
reads "And she went into the city" (so also the A.V, 
the Vulgate, and the Syriac.) The other reads "And he 
went into the city." (So also the R.V. ) 






























93. 


1 at ion of the Bible ’’appointed to be read in Churches/’ 
because Albert S. Cook writing in the Cambridge History 
of English Literature, says ’’Notwithstanding the current 
use of the term (authorised version) the Jacobean revision 
was never publicly authorised by parliament or convocation, 
privy Council or King. The acceptance which it has en¬ 
joyed has been won chiefly on its merits. 1,1 

But we appreciate the effort made upon this 
occasion, despite the fact that the revision was never 
authorised, and we know that the translation then made, 
has since become the great Bible of the English speaking 
world. 

in-:.- ivO' lsQ'j .-ersion . 

Since 1611 many attempts at amending the version 
of the so-called authorised version have been made, but 
all proved failures, until the year 1870, when the Convocation 
of Canterbury appointed a committee to consider the subject 
of revision, The report of this Committee, was adopted, to 
the effect ’’that Convocation should nominate a body of its 
own members to undertake the work of revision, who shall 
be at liberty to invite the co-operation of any eminent for 
scholarship, to whatever nation or religious body they may 
belong.” This was done, and at the same time negotiations 
were opened with the leading scholars of Protestantism in 

1. Cambridge History of English Literature. Yol.4. 





, 
















l 


* 












, 

. '• _ _ . 
j c 

_ 








■ 




< 


■ . 






' 








I • r 


« 

' 




% 




■ 




. 

. 

















94. 


the United States, so that similar work should he carried 
on in that country. 

In this way the work of revision became wider 
in its scope, and became a wor for the whole of the English- 
speaking Christian world, xhe Homan Catholic Church refused 
to take part in the undertaking. 

The revisers 1 first task was to reconstruct the 
Greek text; in this difficult task they were helped consider¬ 
ably by the united work of Westeott and Hort. 

These scholarly men had studied the great Uncials 
which the men responsible for the A.V. did not happen to have, 
because they had not been brought to light at that time, al¬ 
though they were in existence. 

The intensive study of such rare and valuable 
M.S.S. made it not only possible, but desirable that a new 
version should be made. This was eventually accomplished, 
and while it does not alter the reading of the A.V. to any 
considerable extent, we can believe that it renders more 
accurately the oldest extant texts. Perhaps its very literal 
translation has rendered it unpopular. 

The revision was eventually published in 1881, 
and was received without much enthusiasm. The N.T. received 
most attention, because of the many small changes which had been 
made in certain proof texts held by partisans. The work 






























{ 


T - 

















' 

















c 

. 


















95. 


seemed to be too thorough for the majority of religious 
people; Conservatives in thought were shocked at the 
many radical changes which had been made in the work. 

The revision, even yet, is very unpopular in certain 
quarters, although it is generally conceded to be an 
accurate rendering of the revised text into English. 

It has definitely displaced the older version 


in the cathedral of Canterbury, 
Some differences bet 
Revised Versions. 


Acts 6; 


A. V. 


And as they went on 
their way, they came 
unto a certain water; 
and the eunuch said, 

See, here is water; 
what doth hinder me 
to be baptized. 

And Philip said, If 
thou believest with 'all 
thine heart, thou may- 
est. And he answered and 
said, I believe that 
Jesus Christ is the son 
of God. 

And he commanded the 
chariot to stand still: 
and they went down both 
into the water, both 
Philip and the eunuch, and 
he baptized him. 


and Westminster Abbey, 
iween the Authorised and 


•—50 


B.V. 


And as they went on 
the way, they came un¬ 
to a certain water; and 
the eunuch saith, Be¬ 
hold, here is water; 
what doth hinder me to 
be baptized? 

And he commanded the 
chariot to stand still: 
and they both went down 
into the water, both 
Philip and the eunuch, 
and he baptized him. 


The Revised Version omits verse 37, 

6-7 

1st John 5 


A. 7. 


B.V. 


This is he that came by 


This is he that came by 








• 

, 













* * _ 

. 

■ 

- 

. 

c 

' 


e 

, 


. 

‘ 

- f 

* 

. 

: 










9 6, 


water and blood, 
even Jesu's Christ; 
not by water only, 
but by water and 
blood. 

And it is the 
Spirit that beareth 
witness, because the 
Spirit is truth. 

For there are three 
that bear record in 
heaven, the Father, 
the Word, and the Holy 
Ghost: and these three 
are one. 


water and blood, even 
Je su s Chri st; no t wi th 
the water only, but with 
the water and with the 
blood. 

And it is the Spirit 
that beareth witness, be¬ 
cause the Spirit is the 
truth. 

For there are three 
who bear witness, the 
Spirit, and the water, 
and the blood: and the 
three agree in one. 


The Revised Version fails to mention the three heavenly 
witnesses. 


Since the publishing of the R.V. in 1681, many 
other translations have appeared. 2r. Weymouth published 
in 1902 his "Hew Testament in Modern Speech," which is 
Supposed to be "an idiomatic translation into everyday 
English from the text of the Resultant Greek Testament." 

In undertaking this work he called it "a bona- 
fide translation made directly from the Greek, and is in 
no sense a revision." 1- 

He. endeavours to avoid the mistake that tne Re¬ 
visers made, that of being too literal. 

Each book in the IT. T. is prefaced by an account 
of the date aid authorship; also a brief insight into cur¬ 
rent history and conditions. 

It is impossible at this time to deal at length with 


1* Preface ’IT.1. in Modern Speech. 


« 














97. 


this translation, hut in looking at some of the passages 
which have been considered earlier in t j per, 1 find 
that Dr. ‘.'eymouth omits the. ’’three heavenly witnesses” 
in John 5:7; he also omits verse 37 from Acts 6, and while 
he includes John 7:53—6:11, he marks it doubtful. 

’’The Modern header’s Bible” is another English 
edition of the U.T. and also the 0.T. ‘’The text of the 
Modern header’s Bible is a specially constructed one. It 
is based upon the English B.V. with choice between the read¬ 
ings of the text and margin and such slight changes of 
wording as are involved in the adaptation to modern literary 
structure.” 1 

The book is arranged in the following manner: 

1. Bible History. 0. T.--Genesis to Esther. 

S. Books, of the _ ts: Isaiah to Malachi. 

3. Bil try: Psalms, Lamentations, dong of Songs. 

4. Bible Philosophy: Proverbs, Ecclesiasticus, Ecclesiastes, 
Wisdom of Solomon, Job. 

5. Bible History, N.T.: Luke, Acl f les of Paul, to. 

which are subjoined the other epistles of the U.T. 

6. IT.T. Literature: Matthew, M , John, Bevelation. 

It will be noticed that in the above arrangement., 
several books of the Apocrypha are included. 

The re is another Bngl i ek ver . .. called h * 

1. Preface ’’The Modern Header’s Bible.” 








; \ * 



i 






T 











% 






f 

















of oui Lord Jesus Christ”, th< t The 

There are no divisions into chapters and verses. 

The text is the King James version, 

in which its parts came to those in the first Century who 
believed in our Lord. 1 ’ 

The "Twentieth Century JJ.T.” is a translation into 
modern English made^from the original Creek fW.H. text). 

There is a U.i. which is becoming very popular 
these days; it is known as the “Moffat” translation, and has 
been translated from von hod 1 , true it i 

the text cannot be ascertained by the writer, because a von 
bode., text is unprocurable at present* 

Our brief study of this important subject of 
Textual Criticism has come to a close* We have seen enough 
to realise that it is truly a great field for research work. 

Now what has the future in store for us. when we 
think, of what might yet be done in the field of textual 
criticism? It will be quite a long time before any great 
advance will be made upon the theoiy of Westcott and Hort* 

~o thorough has been their work, that it has left very little 
room for extensive work to be carried on in such a wide 
field. Possibly the future will see more intensive work . 
being done on M. vhioh are accessible; which we hope will 

help to arrive at a greater purity of tne text. 

But then, we do not know. This age is one of dis~ 

ry, and now that the war is over, much mere archeological 














99. 


work will be carried on in the near east, which may result 
in the unearthing of material that will throw new light on 
a subject which is far from complete in detail. Sven some 
of the old monasteries may yet present to the world M.S.b. 

re interesting and precious and 

If such should be the case, then it might create new pro¬ 
blems, but we are hopeful and optimistic. The research work 
of the past has all combined to make the word of God infinitely 
more precious to us, and if the future should see further 
developments along research lines, then we shall but live to 
enjoy the fruits of the labours of those who do but work in 
order to make the unique story of Jesus infinitely more real 


to us. 


>■ 






100, 


Angus "The Environment of Early Christianity" 

Scribners, 1917. 

Bacon "The Making of the New Testament" 

% Home University library. 

Burton and Goodspeed "A Harmony of the Synoptic Gospels" 

Scribners, 1917. 

Cambridge Histoiy of English Literature, Volume IV. 

Article on "The Authorised Version and its Influence" 

Cambridge University Press. 

Hasting’s "Dictionary of the Bible" 


Clarke 1906. 

Encyclopaedia Britannica; article on "The Bible"l]th.e d. Vol. 3. 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. Vol.2, Scribners, 1910. 
Article on "Textual Criticism." 


Gregory "Canon and Text of the Hew Testament;T& T. Clark 1907. 
Souter "The Text and Canon of the Hew Testament"Scribner, 1913. 
Kenyon "Handbook to the Textual Criticism of the Hew Testament" 

Macmillan, 1901. 

Warfield "Textual Criticism of the Hew Testament 

Hodder & Stoughton, 1886. 
Moffat "Introduction to the Literature of the Hew Testament".. 

Scribner, 1917, 

The International Critical Commentary; Volume on "Matthew," 

Scribner, 1907, 

Vestcott and Hort "The Hew Testament in the original Creek," 

volume 2. Harper, 1882, 

MSS. 

Facsimile copy of W 

Collation of % Sanders, Macmillan, 1912, 


Greek Texts. 

Mill' s 

Griesbach 

Scholz 

Hestle 

Souter 

Westcott & Hort 


Samuel Bagster, London. 
Fowler & Wells, Hew York. 

British and Foreign Bible SocietyJ.904. 
Oxford University Press 1910, 
Macmillan, 1914. 


--,-,iish Versions. 

Authorised Version. 

Revised Version. 

Weymouth "Hew Testament in Modern Speech" 

Clarke, 1910. 

Lindsay "The Hew Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ" 

Dent, 1906. 

Moulton "The Modern Reader’s Bible" Macmillan, 1912. 

Moffat Hodder & Stoughton. 


American Version of 1881. 
Douay Version. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 









