Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Murray, James Allan 

The influence of the protein content 
of the ration and other factors, on 
carcass quality in the bacon hog. 1935. 






©X UBB1S 

woiBsroais 

aiamaiiisis 





















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/murray1935 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF AGRICULTURE 


The undersigned hereby certify that they haYe 
read and recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled "The In¬ 
fluence of the Protein Content of the Ration, and 
Other Factors, on Carcass Quality in the Bacon Hog 11 , 
submitted by James Allan Murray, in partial ful¬ 
filment of the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Science* 

PROFESSOR 




PROFESSOR 



































THE INFLUENCE OF THE PROTEIN CONTEND OF THE RATION, 
AND OTKER FACTORS, ON CARCASS QUALITY IN THE BACON HOG 


By James Allan Murray 


A THESIS 

submitted to the Department of Animal Husbandly 
of the University of Alberta in partial fulfilment 
of the requirements for the degree of 
MASTER OF SCIENCE* 


University of Alberta 


June 1, 1935 











. 

• *s. 














Preface 


This thesis is based upon a number of experi¬ 
ments conducted at the University of Alberta during 
the summer of 1934 and the winter of 1934-33* 

I wish to register my appreciation to Professor 
J. P. Sackville, Head of the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, University of Alberta, for placing the 
facilities of his Department at my disposal. Dr® 

Revell and Dr. Shaner, of the Department of Anatomy, 
University of Alberta, have allowed me the use of their 
laboratory and equipment which, along with their advice 
and suggestions, rendered valuable assistance in the 
preparation of the histological materials used in the 
earlier part of this work. For these I wish to tender 
my deepest gratitude and thanks. The co-operation of 
the Swift Canadian Company, Edmonton, made it possible 
to obtain the materials and measurements so necessary 
in this thesis, and for this assistance I am very grate¬ 
ful. I am deeply indebted to Dr. R. D. Sinclair, 
Professor of Animal Husbandry, at the University of 
Alberta, who initiated the experiments reported here 
and who through suggestions, aid and kindly criticisms 
rendered an invaluable service not only in carrying out 
the projects but also in preparing the manuscript. 

The experiments reported in this thesis were 
made possible by a Grant from the Carnegie Foundation 
to Dr. R. D. Sinclair, under whose .supervision the 
investigations were conducted. 











. 

. 

. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page. 

INTRODUCTION. 1 

OUTLINE OF PREVIOUS, CLOSELY RELATED 
INVESTIGATIONS: 

The Importance of Protein in Nutrition. 4 

The Relation of Protein to Growth. 6 

The Effect of Food Protein on Body 

Protein... 8 

Growth and Fattening in the Pig.10 

Carcass Quality Defined....11 

Variations in Carcass Quality......12 

OBJECTS OF UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
EXPERIMENTS. 17 

METHODS OF EXPERIMENT... 17 

EXPERIMENT I . 22 

EXPERIMENT II- ...._.............. 37 

EXPERIMENT III... 46 

A STUDY OF THE CARCASS DATA ON A LITTER 
BASIS.. 62 

A FURTHER STUDY OF CARCASS DATA.__... 68 

SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSES. 7 6 

CONCLUSIONS... 81 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 84 





































. 

.. . 




. 
































THE INFLUENCE OF THE PROTEIN CONTENT OF THE RATION, 
AND OTHER FACTORS, ON CARCASS QUALITY IN THE BACON HOG. 


Canada, at the present time, stands second with respect 
to the volume of pork products that are exported from any one 
country to Great Britain; Denmark holds first place. The British 
Market is very discriminating and any country which hopes to 
maintain a satisfactory status thereon must supply products of 
the highest quality* 

While Canadian bacon occupies second position in the matter 
of volume it unfortunately rates much lower in market value and 
is actually the lowest priced bacon sold in Great Britain. Since 
price levels on such a market are strictly indicative of quality, 
it is clear that the export product derived from Canadian hogs is 
on the average of an indifferent quality. 

Those who have made comparisons of Canadian bacon with that 
from countries such as Denmark, whose product is most highly re¬ 
garded, recognize that there are certain definite weaknesses in 
the Canadian article. These defects have been pointed out by 
various British importers from time to time so that Canadian 
producers and processors have reason to be informed regarding 
the general problems. 

The bulk of the pork products which is shipped to Great 
Britain goes forward in the form of what are known as "Wiltshire 







t 







. 


» 






% 






» 






















• 










* 























Sides”• These sides comprise one entire half of the carcass of 
a bacon hog trimmed according to standard procedure. This side, 
therefore, includes shoulder, middle piece and ham, and in the 
process of distribution in British Shops may be cut into these 
sections and further subdivided. 

In general the complaints laid against the' Canadian ?/ilt- 
shire Sides, as compared for example with the Danish Sides are 
as follows; 

1. The lack of length in the middle piece, which 
portion sells at a higher price than the two 
end cuts. 

2. An excessive weight in the shoulder end. This is 
the lowest price part of the side. 

3. A lack of development of ham. 

4. The entire side shows too high a percentage of 
fat in proportion to lean. 

Expressing the problem in the reverse order, Danish Wiltshire 
Sides show more length of middle piece, carry a lighter shoulder 
with a heavier ham and in general contain a high percentage of 
lean meat to fat. 

Various reasons have been advanced for the low average 
quality of Canadian bacon. It is generally recognized that the 
preponderance of breeding stock of non-bacon type is a major con¬ 
tributing factor. However in addition, a number of the feeding 
and management practices have been questioned as to their effect 
upon the product yielded after slaughter. The prevailing system 
of out-door pig raising which encourages unlimited exercise on 
the part of the growing pig has been compared with the Danish 
system of close confinement during the growing and fattening 






, 

’ 

. 

: . 






♦ 

. 














, 

•• , 




. 
















. 









- 


















- 3 - 


stages. It has been suggested by British importers that this 
system of management leads to the development of a heavy shoulder 
and what is regarded in the trade as "tough" bacon* 

It has been argued that the comparatively high proportion 
of muscle or lean meat-in the Danish Wiltshire Sides is due to 
the widespread use of high protein rations. It is common practice 
in Denmark to feed skim-milk in liberal volume to the growing 
pigs and in addition fish meal at the rate of about 10 % of the 
ration. There is no doubt that the average Danish pig ration 
contains a significantly higher percentage of protein than the 
average ration being fed to Canadian bacon hogs* The question 
which immediately arises is, "Can the amount and percentage of 
lean in the carcass be influenced by the percentage of protein 
fed in the ration' 1 ? This question touches upon a very vital 
issue in connection with the production of bacon hogs in Canada 
because under average conditions dairy by-products are lacking 
and other protein rich feeds are not commonly used. If a 
protein deficiency in the ration leads to the development of 
a carcass containing an excess amount of fat our possibilities 
in connection with high quality production may be limited and 
on the other hand if heavier protein feeding will stimulate the 
production of a "lean” carcass then our feeding practices should 
be subjected to revision* 

With a view to throwing some light on a number of the 
questions which have been raised regarding the influence of 
certain feeding and management practices on the quality of carcass 














- :: •: cLoi-.w. 1c 

- 






. 


. 

i 

' • . 

. 












- 4 - 


in bacon hogs, some experiments were conducted at the 
University of Alberta during the summer of 1934 and the winter 
of 1934-35. It will be the purpose of the discussion which 
follows to present the results of these experiments and at the 
same time to present the results of an analysis of data obtained 
from fairly extensive carcass measurements in the hope that some 
correlations may be established between certain major factors 
which together constitute ©areass quality. 

Before presenting the results of these experiments, how¬ 
ever, it would seem well to briefly present the findings of more 
or less closely related investigations* 

THE IMPORTANCE OF PROTEIN IN NUTRITION* 


In view of the high protein content of all vital tissues 
and organs in the animal body, the importance of the protein 
fraction of animal rations has long been recognized* Armsby (1) 
points this out, and at the same time quotes the reasons for his 
statement by saying: 

"The larger share of the organic matter in the animal 
body aside from fat consists of substances belong¬ 
ing to the group known as proteins. These are of the 
greatest biological importance in that they form the 
basis of cytoplasm and nucleus of the living cell”* 

McCollum (2) Starling (3) and numerous other authorities have 

stated the same thing. Arising from this knowledge has come 

the realization that proteins are a necessary ingredient in 

all animal diets, whether the ultimate object of these be for 

growth, fattening or maintenance* Cameron (4) considers proteins 







< ■ - 
















. 




















t • 








. ' 

\ 





• - 


, 


< 





- 5 - 


to be the most important of the three classes of food-stuffs, 
proteins, carbohydrates and fats, his reasons for this belief 
being that carnivorous animals at any rate can subsist on a diet 
of protein without fat or carbohydrate and can form from protein 
the fat and carbohydrate they require*Lnsk (5) makes a special 
point of the "constant need of protein 1 * and in his conclusion 
corroborates the views already expressed. Armsby (1) Chittenden 
(6) Smith (7) McCollum (2) and other leading authorities on 
nutrition, while their views on the quantities of this ingredient 
necessary vary in many cases, are all of the opinion that pro¬ 
tein is necessary for the proper development and functioning 
of the animal body. 

The pioneer workers on the problem of protein requirements 
centred their interest very largely upon the quantitative aspect 
of the question. The amount of protein necessary for normal 
metabolism was regarded as the major issue. More recently, 
however, the qualitative phase of the problem has assumed a 
prominent position and it is now recognized that the biological 
value of the protein in a ration must be given careful consider¬ 
ation# A protein must contain, in its molecular structure, at 
least one amino acid (4). Osborne and Mendel were among the first 
workers to determine the value of these amino acids in nutrition* 
Since their time it has been found as Starling (3) Henry & 
Morrison (8) Bodansky (9) Mendel (10) McCollum (2) and others 
have pointed out, that the chief value of a protein insofar as it 
is to be used for nutritional purposes, depends primarily upon 
its amino acid content. Henry & Morrison (8) have stated that 




* 

« 


. 

< • 

! 

. 



- 6 - 


in the formation of protein tissue of the animal body all the 
various amino acids are required, hence for normal growth the 
proteins in the food must supply all of these necessary amino 
acids. Since the initial work was carried out along this line 
it has been found (1) that the amino acids themselves vary in 
value , this depending upon their ability to carry out biological 
processes* In any case it may be seen that before any discussion 
on the effect of various proteins on growth or development may 
be undertaken, the quality factor must be considered* 

THE RELATION OF PROTEIN TO GROWTH. 

It has already been stated that protein is necessary 
for both growth and maintenance. The animals in which we are 
interested in this study are those which are immature when 
slaughtered. This is in accordance with the assumption of 
Dietrich (12) who considers a pig 18 months of age mature. It 
also follows the reasoning of Armsby (1) where he speaks of 
maturity in a commercial sense, dictating an animal as mature, 
when it is ready to be slaughtered for market. Following either 
of these arbitrary assumptions, growth, rather than maintenance 
is the biological process with which one is mainly concerned. 

The physiological phenomena/jof growth may be defined as 
the increase of the nitrogenous structural elements of the body. 
This is more specific than using an increase in size as a com¬ 
parative growth criteria^in that, as Armsby (1) points out, 


growth in this sense may occur on a ration barely sufficient or 



. 

♦ < 


. 






. 

. . • . . 

















- 7 - 


insufficient for weight maintenance; which would mean that 
growth may be masked by a loss of fat from the body# This is 
a condition which under ordinary circumstances would not exist. 
Therefore, we have to deal primarily with the normal develop¬ 
ment of the protein in the animal body as it proceeds from 
birth to maturity* According to determinations made by Wilson, 
the body of an eight day old pig is about 80f o water and 187 * 
protein* Using these results and a number of others compounded 
by different workers, Armsby (1) formulates the broad con¬ 
clusion that the rate of growth of protein is relatively high 
in the new born individual, it decreases rapidly at first and 
then more slowly, tending then to become asymptotic to the 
zero line* The results obtained by Hammond (13) in the study 
of the growth and development of sheep, follow this conclusion 
very closely* 

We have seen that growth or the development of protein 
tissue in the body cannot take place unless protein in some form 
has been added to the diet. There must be some connection between 
the graph of protein development as drawn by Armsby and the feed 
to which the animal is subject# Indeed Armsby (1) continuing 
his discussion remarks that in immature fattening animals any 
excess of protein that is added above that required for mainten¬ 
ance is used for growth and development* Smith (7) also verifies 
this conclusion by stating, after comparing the nitrogen excreted 
as a result of protein metabolism from mature and immature animals 
that nitrogenous equilibrium cannot exist in young growing animals, 
meaning that some of the nitrogen from proteins ingested has been 


' ; 

t 

« 

. 

, L 

' 

♦ 


. 






- 8 - 


utilized in the building ap of body tissue. Chaney & Ahlborn 
(14) propound this less technically in saying that at those 
times in life when growth occurs, the protein requirement for 
building is high. 

"Feeds rich in protein tend to build up strong 
muscular frames and large individuals with ample 
blood and fully developed internal organs”* 

This comprised one of the results of an experiment carried 
on by Henry (15) at Wisconsin, in which was compared a ration 
containing shorts and bran as a source of protein, with one in 
which corn was fed alone. From this it is seen that some re¬ 
lation does exist oetween the initial protein development within 
the body and the protein that is supplied during that period* 

THE EFFECT OF FOOD PROTEIN ON BODY PROTEIN* 


The question now arises as to whether the extent or the 
character of this development is in any way affected by the 
quantity or quality of the protein fed. Since there is such a 
definite relationship between the protein ingested and the growth 
of muscle or lean meat, it would seem probable that an insuffi¬ 
cient supply of these nitrogenous compounds would exert a very 
marked effect upon the final product of growth. Shaw (1 6 ) 
states that shortage of protein affects materially the early 
growth of the animal, but has little or no effect during the 
later stages of growth. Speaking over a wider range of time, 
Swanson (17) finds that pigs fed on rations decidedly deficient 
in protein had a very restricted growth, the composition of the 



» 









c 




. 






. 

. 









. . 






- 9 - 


body in this case showing generally a low fat and a high 
water content. While there are few workers who have made 
actual chemical analyses of the animal body as has Swanson, 
a number have made visual comparisons - with respect to the fat 
content - following a low protein diet, and their conclusions 
vary somewhat with those just quoted. Curtiss & Craig (18) 
found that feeding a wide ration, or one high in carbonaceous 
material resulted in a carcass containing excess fat, whereas 
a narrower ration produced a carcass containing more or less 
meat or muscle. Sheldon (19) Duggar (20) and Forbes et al (21) 
have arrived at the same conclusion. Joseph (22) sums this up 
by saying that when the supply of protein is deficient in either 
quality or quantity the amount of body protein is directly 
affected. 

Under conditions where there is an excess of protean 
added, however, we find results which are not parallel to those 
just mentioned. Swanson (17) states definitely that a large 
amount of protein fed will not produce a pig with a high protein 
content. The effect being rather to produce a rapid growth as 
compared to that of an animal on a lower plane of protein nutri¬ 
tion; in both cases the final protein content will be the same. 
Joseph (22) found that a variation of from .32 to .93 lbs. per 
c f w’t live weight per day of protein consumed had no effect upon 
the nitrogenous product. Armsby (1) in reviewing the results of 
a number of experiments dealing with the effect of high protein 
in the diet finds that while the results show that there is some 
advantage resultant of feeding high protein, it is expressed in 






, 

- 

~ 

. 

. 


















. 




. 

■ I 

• . . 

* 




-10 


total body gains, which does not necessarily mean a high 
comparative protein gain within the body* The actual condition 
might be that, the excess of protein supplied over and above 
that required for growth and maintenance is being broken down 
within the body and used either as an immediate source of energy 
or to build up reserve energy in the form of fat. In any case, 
it would appear that an increase of protein added to the diet 
has not been found to result in an increase of protein tissue 
in the animal body* 

GROWTH AMD FATTENING IN THE PIG. 

Judging from what has been said, muscle development and 
fattening while they go on simultaneously,are two distinct pro¬ 
cesses. Armsby (1) considers them to be separate but both in¬ 
volved in the process of growth, the latter being used in the 
wider sense of entire bodily development. He suggests that 
fattening should be timed so that it will be completed when the 
rate of gain of lean meat ceases to be profitable. In discussing 
the influence of feeds on the type of market hogs, Rothwell (23) 

i 

says that one must allow for the maximum muscle and bone develop¬ 
ment before laying on too much fat. Hammond (53) certainly deals 
with these as two distinct processes, emphasizing at all times 
the importance of considering the proportions of lean to fat at 
different stages of development. He suggests that due to body 
development it might be advisable to grow pigs rapidly at first, 
while muscle is developing, and finish them more slowly as fat 




«• 




. . 


. 




. 

. 

. 





- 11 


develops. In any discussion, therefore, where the quality of 
the carcass is the subject, not only must the lean meat or muscle 
and its development be considered, but also the fat and its re¬ 
lation to the nitrogenous tissues# 

CARCASS QUALITY DEFIMCD. 


In connection with the discussion which follows, the 
general term "carcass quality" will be used quite frequently# 

It would then seem advisable at this time, to define this term, 
at least from the point of view of common usage* The term 
"carcass quality" as applied to the bacon hog carcass refers in 
the broad sense to the general dimensions and proportions of the 
carcass, together with the amount of fat which it contains in 
proportion to the lean meat or muscle. The Canadian standard of 
carcass quality is set by the demands of the British market* 
Carcasses of the highest quality are long of side, carrying a 
light weight shoulder and a fully developed ham. The external 
covering of fat should be comparatively light and of uniform 
thickness throughout, so that a cross-section through the carcass 
will have a general appearance of leanness rather than of excess 
fat* The term "carcass quality" also embraces variations in the 
composition of the fat and differences in the histology of 
muscle bundles* 










, 












► 














' 



< ■ 


. 


. 



t 



. 







. 







♦ 






. 




12 - 


VARIATIONS IN CARCASS QUALITY 


Baethge (24) in a number of experiments found that the 
rates of gain of individuals showed a great variation, which 
could be traced to hereditary factors. In a study of the car¬ 
casses of the same animals he concluded that the quality also 
seemed to be linked up with breeding. In fact, as a general 
conclusion he states that; 

"the best reared pigs gave the driest carcasses, 
richest in fat; the worst reared pigs gave the 
worst quality carcass"* 

This same conclusion has been intimated by Joseph (22) in 
his work at Illinois. On the other hand in later work at 
Illinois, it was found that the length of the body varied direct¬ 
ly as the protein fedj(27)The same conclusion was arrived at by 
Schutte & Murray (25)• When feeding varying levels of barley 
in the ration, they found that when barley was fed to the ex¬ 
tent of 45% of the ration, there were produced a greater number 
of higher grade, longer and firmer carcasses* In the Illinois 
report just quoted, it was also found that the lot fed on a 
low protein diet showed a percentage of ham and shoulder that 
was greater than the percentage side, as compared to the other 
lots in which these two were found to be about equal. The results 
obtained in these latter cases tend to show that the actual 
anatomical make-up of the animal may be changed as a result of 
the ration fed* 

The quality of fat with regard to its firmness and the 




- 










: 

















< 


































- 

. 






- 13 - 


relation that factor bears to the fat fed was thoroughly 
investigated some years ago, and it was found that feeds had a 
very marked effect upon the firmness of the fat produced in 
the animal body. However, very little has been done to study 
the physiological deposition of fat resulting from varying 
feeds, or the relation it bears to other parts of the catcass 
when varying factors are imposed. As an illustration, at 
Indiana (26) it was found that the greater the finish the lower 
was the percentage cut of ham and loin and the higher the per¬ 
centage of belly bacon. IT is a relation of this type in which 
we are interested when studying hog carcasses, in that such 
qualities as finish and length of side may be at least roughly 
assessed when viewing the live animal* 

Hammond (13) has conducted carcass studies with sheep 
and hogs, interpreting his results as the relative proportions 
of the body tissues - fat, muscle, bone and tendon. In these 
discussions he brings out the point that the development of 
the animal body is backwards; that is, the neck and shoulders 
of a young animal are always large in proportion to the rest of 
the body, as development proceeds, it does so in a posterior 
direction. First the length increases and finally the depth* 
While there is no doubt that age and its relation to bodily 
development is of vital importance, nevertheless due to the 
standardization of market weights in various countries the age 
factor, and to a greater degree the weight factor, are fairly 
definitely eliminated as variables* This means that any studies 
vhich are made at present upon the relation of quality factors 

































I v 


. 

• - t' < ' **' 

: ; 

* 

t 

< ‘ 

• • 












14 


of the carcass are based upon weights and ages which deviate 

only slightly from the standards and the variability of which 

are not sufficient to warrant their use as a basis for determination* 

A phase of this carcass development which has received 
considerable attention lately has been the relative size of the 
shoulders in comparison with the rest of the body* Emmett & 

Grindley (27) have found that the weight of the shoulder is about 
four pounds greater than the weight of the ham. Since the hind- 
quarter contains much less bone and thus has a higher selling 
value than the forequarters, such a weight ratio of these two 
parts is of great importance, particularly to the packers and 
processors. The ideal conformation would then be a carcass in 
which the shoulders and hams were at least equal in weight. 

According to Hammond*s theory on body development, such a con¬ 
dition should eventually develop, but it does not seem to do so, 
at least within the age ranges to which we are limited. A 
point has been brought up which intimates that exercise might 
in some way influence the development of the shoulder. That is, 
with an increase amount of exercise there might be an increased 
muscular development, the net result being a shoulder which was 
relatively large when compared with the rest of the carcass. 

In an experiment conducted to determine the effects of 
exercise upon both dogs and sv/ine, Kuibs & Berberich ( 28 ) found 
that under conditions of increased exercise there was an in¬ 
crease in the size of muscles. However, Hammond points out that 
long distance runners do not develop large calf muscles. These 
two statements are contradictory, but in either case what manner 




6 

. 

< . . ' : ‘ - 






. 

. 

. 

. . 








- 15 - 


of determination is to be used as a means of specifying either 
an increase in size, or a maintenance of size. It is pointed 
out thqt fattening tends to increase the size of muscle, due 
to the marbling which occurs as a result of this process*(53) 
However, in the participation of exercise, energy is expended, 
which causes a utilization of fat; hence, these two conditions 
if imposed at the same time might tend to offset each other* 

For this reason the actual size of the muscle as a whole would 
not be a very accurate criteria/7for means of comparison. The 
muscle fibres, or those units which go to make up the muscle 
bundles, contain no fat (40) and, hence, would be a more sat¬ 
isfactory integral to use for determination* 

Hammond (13) in presenting the results of his growth studies 
with sheep has made a very complete review on the subject of 
muscle fibre development and has found on reviewing the liter¬ 
ature that results are very contradictory* He quotes Morpurgo (33) 
Halban (34) Schiefferdecker (35) and Hauck (36) to the effect 
that exercise does increase the size of the muscle fibre* 

Schafer (37) and Prenant (38) also quoted by Hammond (13) claim 
that under such conditions there is an increase in the number 
of fibres rather than the diameter of those already formed* The 
results on the effect of nutrition upon muscle fibre size are 
of a slightly more positive nature and tend to show generally 
that the plane of nutrition has a direct bearing upon the develop¬ 
ment of muscle fibres* 

Robertson & Baker (40) found that muscle fibres showed a 
definite relation in size to the adiposity of the animals* From. 


• < 

* 

< 

. 

I 

* 
























. • 










- 16 


this it may be seen that in interpreting the results obtained 
in any muscle fibre measurements, both exercise and nutrition 
must be considered* 

Leighton & Douglas (39), in discussing the effects of 
exercise, bring up the point that exercise increases the amount 
of connective tissue holding the muscle fibres together* Follow¬ 
ing this statement they relate the connective tissue content with 
tenderness, qualifying this by pointing out that the meat around 
the joints where there is a large amount of this tissue, is 
tough* That is, that the tenderest meat is that which has the 
lowest percentage of connective tissue* Hammond (13) quotes 
Isaak (41) to the effect that the thickness of muscle fibre does 
not influence tenderness, but that the latter may be due to the 
amount of connective tissue or to a difference in the structure 
of the muscle fibre* Tenderness is a difficult quality to 
estimate and compare, at least by any methods devised up to 
the present. Meat dynamometers have been used in the United 
States and eating trials have been conducted on numerous occasions 
but neither of these methods have proven to be a very successful 
means of comparison. Hew ever, if we use the connective tissue 
content and the muscle fibre diameter as a criteria/?for tenderness, 
as has been pointed out, there appears to be a relationship exist¬ 
ing between exercise and tenderness which may be computed in terms 
of muscle fibre development and connective tissue development* 

Having reviewed briefly what have been found to be some of 
the important factors in the determination of carcass quality, it 
would now seem in order to proceed with a discussion of the 




♦ 

l . 

. 

. 


( ■ > 

. 

ft . 

' .... ■ j 

5 • : . : . . i jae 









. 

< • 


• i ■ . 


- 17 


experiments conducted at the University of Alberta and which 
form the basis for this thesis. 


EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED AT THE UNIVERSITY OF 
ALBERTA. 


The experiments carried on at the University of Alberta 
during the summer of 1934 and the winter of 1934-33 were con¬ 
ducted with the following objects in view; 


1. To study the effect of exercise and particularly 
"rooting" on the development of shoulder and on 
general carcass quality in the bacon hog* 

2* To compare high and low planes of nutrition when 
applied to inside and outside feeding and to note 
the effect of these factors on the development 
of shoulder and general carcass quality. 

3® To study the effects of feeding several mixed 

protein-mineral supplements in the ration for grow¬ 
ing pigs, upon carcass quality generally, with 
special consideration as to the quantity of 
protein produced. 

4. To note the effect of varying the level of protein 
in the ration on the development of lean in the 
carcass of the bacon hog* 

3® To determine any co-relations which may exist 

between the proportion of lean meat in the side of 
a carcass and other factors of importance in the 
estimation of carcass quality* 


Methods of the Experiments* 

The objects just outlined indicate that the experiments 
consist very largely of a study of the carcasses yielded by pigs 
subjected to varying conditions,as to rations and management. 

All the carcasses studied were treated and measured in the same 


manner* 






































- 

t . • 

♦' :• 

. 

- 






. 











- 18 


When the experimental animals reached standard market 
weights, they were trucked to the Swift Canadian Packing Plant, 
where they were graded, slaughtered and dressed according to 
regular abattoir routine. For a period of from 36-48 hours, 
the carcasses were chilled at a temperature ranging from 28°F - 
34°F; following which they were measured and cut according to 
Dominion Government Advanced Registry standards. Hot and cold 
dressed weights were recorded. 

In all cases the right side of the carcass was used for 
making determinations. Records were made of the following 
measurements: (a) length - distance from the point of the first 
rib to the point of the hip bone, (b) shoulder fat, (c) back fat, 
(d) loin fat, (e) maximum belly, (f) minimum belly, (g) width of 
heart girth, and (h) width at flank. Following this, the half 
of the carcass being used was cut into three sections; the 
weights of these were doubled to represent the corresponding 
part of the entire carcass, and recorded# 

(a) Shoulder. That portion anterior to a cut made 

parallel to the width of the side, between 
the second and third rib. 

(b) Ham. The cut was made two inches in front of the 

hip bone. The portion posterior to this was 
recorded as ham. The feet on both the front 
and hind legs were removed at knees and hocks. 

(c) Middle. That part remaining after shoulder and ham 

was removed. The portion designated as 
middle had the backbone and tenderloin re¬ 
moved, following which samples were taken to 
be used in making further laboratory studies. 

As has been stated, previous to cutting, the carcasses 
remained in the cooler for a period ranging between 36 and 48 

















c. . •. v. • C!\3 1 si 


c 2 8 . o g . ; o : 


. 

. 

- ; c c / I •.; . 

* 

. .' . : z 

. i , y- . . \ ‘ 












. 







. 





• 


* 












* 






























- 19 - 


hours, so that while the tissue was not fresh, time and con¬ 
ditions were such that it had not had time to deteriorate to 
any extent* 

The s amples were taken in all cases from the right side 
of the carcass and immediately posterior to the last rib# Since 
these portions would average about two inches in thickness they 
represented a part of the side cut parallel to the transverse 
subcostal line of the carcass and including on the ventral line 
the last thoracic vertebra* Therefore, there was illustrated 
the covering of fat over the back and belly , the "eye of 
lean” or longissimus dorsi muscle and also the external oblique, 
internal oblique, transverse abdominus and a small portion of 
the rectus abdominus muscles* The inter-muscular fat was also 
clearly defined* These samples were immediately frozen and 
left in this condition until they were needed* 

It was found that on freezing, the outer surfaces tend¬ 
ed to discolor slightly and to lose their original form, thus 
making it difficult to obtain an exact replica# Hence, before 
any work was carried out on these, they were allowed to thaw 
partially and were then split in two* The surfaces exposed 
in this way were normal in color and in good structural conditiai. 

Tracings were made of these samples on small panes of 
ordinary glass with the use of a glass pencil# Following this, 
by mounting the panes over a light, it was possible to transcribe 
the tracings through and on to heavy white paper* Area measure¬ 
ments were made fran these latter copies* 










♦ 




* 




* 








- 20 - 


A planimeter was used to make all measurements* The 
total area of the entire sample was taken, and individual 
determinations on all the muscles were made. From these figures 
the percentage of lean and fat and also the percentage of the 
whole, or of any of the individual muscles could be obtained. 

In these studies, the percentage of the "eye of lean** or longissi- 
mus dorsi muscle and the external oblique muscle as well as 
the percentage total lean were tabulated* 

Histological Methods and Procedure* 


Histological examinations were made on some of the 
shoulder tissue of the animals in Experiment Ho. I* Small cubes 
were taken from the infraspinatus muscle of the right shoulder 
when it was exposed following the cutting of the side.as has 
been outlined. Two samples were fixed for histological study, 
one in Zenker’s solution, another in 10% Formalin solution. 

These were embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 11 microns 
thickness. A third sample was macerated in 20% nitric acid 
for about 24 hours, following which it was washed in a saturated 
solution of potassium acetate and then allowed to remain in 
glycerine. 

The paraffin sections were stained with Mallory’s 
connective tissue stain. Van Gieson’s stain and haematoxylin- 
eosin, in an endeavor to differentiate and, if possible, compare 
the relative amounts of connective tissue present in the various 
samples* The tissue which had been macerated was used in making 
measurements of the muscle fibre diameters. Two slides, mounted 



. " : ij ' iTeJeb 

• • « . 

. 

. 




» 

, 






21 - 


in glycerine, were prepared from each sample, one hundred 
measurements were made from each slide* 'From these, the 
average diameter of the muscle fibres was calculated* 

Weights and Feed Consumption* 

The pigs were weighed on three consecutive days at 
the beginning and the end of the experiment, the averages 
of the se being used as the intial and final weights respect¬ 
ively. Individual weights were taken every 14 days 
throughout the feeding period* The feed consumed during 
the experiment was recorded* 





. 

* 

. 

. • 

» 




- 22 - 


EXPERIMENT NO. I (Summer 1934) 


The Influence of Exercise and "Rooting” on Size of 
Shoulder and Carcass Quality. 

Pigs Used; 

In this experiment three groups, each consisting of 
six individuals, were used. The groups were selected on 
the "litter basis", as uniform a distribution as possible 
being made with regard to size, age, sex, type and general 
thrift. There were allotted to each group, 4 Yorkshire- 
Tamworth crosses, 1 purebred Yorkshire and 1 purebred 
Tamworth. The average weight of all the pigs was approx¬ 
imately 47»5 pounds, and the average age 4^.1 days. 

Method of Housing; 

One lot of the three was fed inside during the entire 
fattening period. These were confined in the shed piggery 
of the University Farm, in a pen 10* x 12*. This latter is 
floored with concrete and supplied with a 7»x8 f wooden sleep¬ 
ing platform. The pigs were bedded in straw which was re¬ 
newed every other day. There was no access to an outside 
runway. 

The other two lots were run outside during the entire 
feeding period. Each being on a plot about 30* x 100*, and 
having access to an "A" type canny house 6* x 8*, bedded 
with straw. 






. 




. - * . • , 

* : 

• t 

.dtiowmsT 

► t 

: . ; 

' 

. 

• * T < ~ ; 

. 

. 

% 









- 23 - 


Arrangement of Groups; 

The following plan was adopted in arranging the groups; 

Group I ; Inside feeding - full grain feed# 

Group II ; Outside feeding - full grain feed# 

Group III ; Outside feeding - limited grain feed# 

Method of Feeding; 

Full and hand-feeding was practiced in the case of Lots I and 
II. Lot III was hand-fed at the rate of 3 pounds of 
grain per 100 pounds live weight, daily# This latter 
group, due to insufficient feed being allowed, made poor 
gains, and it was found necessary to supply them with a 
full grain ration for the last six weeks in order to bring 
them up to market weight# All the feed consumed for each 
lot was recorded# 

Lots II and III were given access to a mixed cereal 
pasture from the outset of the experiment# 

Rations Fed; 

Grain; The grain mixture used in this experiment was 
as follows; 

Beginning to 130 lbs. 

130 lbs# to finish# 


Ground barley 

(3 C.W.) 

40 

60 

Ground oats 

(3 C.W.) 

40 

20 

Ground wheat 

(3-3-N ) 

20 

20 


Protein Supplement; Tankage (50% protein) was fed as 

a supplement to the grain ration at the following 
rates; 

Beginning to 130 lbs; 10% 

130 lbs. to finish ; 8% 














: 

, •• - . - : h g-joiG 

, “ : ; 

: 

: 

- 

. 

. , j-ilgiaw ovil Qbauoq 001 teq aJtarg 

( , i 

. 

, ' ‘ . :» u .' • O' 




. . . ' . ■ 'r . 

. . . 

. - 

; 

: . 

: 


: 

: 













- 24 - 


Cod Liver Oil; Lot I was fed 1 pound cod liver oil per 100 
pounds grain during the first period, that is, until the 
pigs attained a weight of 130 pounds# No cod liver oil 
was given to the two lots fed outside# 

Salt: 1 pound of salt was added to each 100 pounds of the 

grain and tankage mixture in all lots# 

Discussion of Ration & Method of Feeding; 

The grains fed, as may he seen from the grades, were 
of good quality and were in all cases mixed in the ground form# 
Tankage was the only protein supplement fed; while it alone is 
probably not as good as a mixed supplement, nevertheless it 
has been found to contain sufficient of the nitrogenous and 
mineral elements to provide normal growth and development# 

The method of feeding as outlined above was selected 
for two reasons# The first was to vary the amount of exercise 
which the animal could and would take® That is, the lot fed 
inside, not having access to any runway would get a minimum 
amount of exercise; the lot fed outside on full feed would 
11 root” and run depending upon the inclination. The third 
group, however, being on a limited ration and, therefore, in 
a condition of semi-hunger were induced to take a maximum 
amount of exercise and give full play to the f *rooting M instinct# 
The second reason for following the method of feeding 
outlined was to study the effect that limited feeding as corn- 
paired to full feeding would have upon the development of fat and 
lean in the carcass. 





: 










. . 

. 

: 

, : e; • ;; 


, 




; 

« ; • 

- 

t 

- ' i - ; It: 

• rut : 

\ \ < 



- 25 - 


RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT NO, I 


The average daily gain of the three lots is 
summarized in the following table; 

Table I ; Average Daily Gains; 


Av, Initial wt; 
No. days on Expt. 
Av. Final Wt; 

Av. Daily Gain; 


Lot I Lot II 

(Inside )Outside 

full fed) full fed) 

47.75 lbs« 47.0 lbs, 

111 119.5 

217.55 lbs. 220.17 lbs. 216.67 lbs. 

1*55 lbs. 1.44 lbs. 1.01 lbs. 


Lot III 

(Outside 
full fed) 

48.55 lbs. 
167. 


It may be seen from these figures that there was a con¬ 
siderable variation in the rate of growth in the three lots$ 
Lot II, which was full fed, on pasture, showing a decline of 
.09 pounds per day as compared to Lot I which was full fed in¬ 
side, but an increase of .43 pounds per day as compared to Lot 
III, which received only half-feed on pasture. The difference 
between Lot II and Lot I, therefore, would appear to be due to 
the energy expended in the form of exercise in the case of 
the former. That is, some of the feed which was used in the 
first lot to form body tissue and thus demonstrated as an in¬ 
crease in gain, was used in the case of the second lot as a 
souce of energy and thus was not accounted for in bodily 
gains. Lot II and Lot III were both fed on pasture. It may 
be seen that the latter group was receiving insufficient food 
for full development even after allowing for an additional 












: 

: ■' : 


: ♦ 





c 

t 

* 




. 




• t 


. • 

- 



< 








{ .• 

. . 







- 26 - 


energy requirement resulting from this low plane of 
nutrition and the increased exercise which might he expected 
to he the result. 

Following 111 days of feeding, at which time all the 
animals in Lot I had reached market weight, there was very 
little apparent difference in the animals in the first two 
lots other than a clearer and somewhat whiter appearance of 
those fed inside. At this stage, however, the individuals 
in Lot III showed a definite lack of development and thrift. 
Nevertheless, in spite of this retarded growth and general 
unthrifty appearance at this stage, after a period of full 
feeding in which remarkable gains were made, they assumed 
market weight with an apparent condition quite similar to 
those animals in Lot II* 


Feed Requirement for Growth; 

The following table shows the average daily feed 
consumption, and the feed requirement for 100 pounds gain 
in live weight* 


Table II; Feed Required for Growth 
(All weights in Pounds) 


Av* Daily Feed Req ! d for 100 lbs. 
Lot Feed 

No* Consumption Grain Protein 


I : Inside full fed 5.56 
II:Outside " " 5.93 
111 : " § fed 4.08 


324.86 32.01 

368.60 36.28 

364*66 35*48 


Gain 









♦ 

I t 

• • • - ; 

♦ 










. 










- 27 


The ratio of the feed consumed daily in the three 
lots corresponds very closely with the ratio of daily gains 
in the same lots# The difference of #37 pounds, between 
Lots I and II is of relatively little significance, whereas 
Lot III, as would be expected from the method of feeding 
practiced, showed a considerably lower daily feed consumption* 

The feed required to put on 100 pounds of live weight gain, 
however, shows some variation from this ratio. Lot I, fed 
inside with very limited exercise required 334.87 pounds of 
grain and protein to put on 100 pounds of live weight gain. 

Lots II and III, however, required 404.88 pounds and 400.14 
pounds, respectively, of grain and protein to make the same 
gains. 

The result, therefore, of feeding Lots II and III on 
pasture, as compared with Lot I fed inside, was an increased 
feed requirement of 30.01 pounds in the case of Lot II, and 
43.27 pounds in the case of Lot III, per 100 pounds increase 
in live weight. As has been pointed out earlier, one difference 
resulting from these two methods of feeding, is in the amount 
of exercise which the animals take. Therefore, this wide 
variation in feed requirement could, at least in part, be 
accounted for as the increase energy demands of those animals 
fed under conditions where any amount of exercise could be taken. 

A comparison of the feed requirements of Lot II and Lot III 
show that the third lot required 4.74 pounds less feed to put on 
100 pounds gain than did the second lot. It was stated earlier 
that for the major part of the experiment Lot III received about 


t * • 

' 

r • * 

• . 

* ? < . 

* 


< - - < 

j * 

, 

. ‘ 




• - 







- 28 - 


one-half the amount of feed that Lot II consumed per day, 
but that due to the laclc of development this third lot was 
placed on full feed for the last few weeks, following which they 
obtained market weight in as good condition as did the second 
lot. 

Reference to Table I shows that Lot III was in the feed 
lot 47*5 days longer than was Lot II, and showed a correspond¬ 
ingly lower average daily gain. This would indicate that 
normal growth and development took place in Lot III, even when 
the feed was restricted to one-half the amount the animals would 
eat, and that the final weight and condition was obtained after 
a somewhat longer time than was the case in the other lot, 
but with a slightly lower feed requirement. 

The Effect of Exercise and Limited Feeding on 
Carcass Quality. 


Mention has been made of a number of the measurements which 
are used as a criteria for the determination of carcass quality. 
The depth of shoulder fat, back fat and loin fat are measure¬ 
ments of the thickness of fat along the dorsal line at the points 
which the names indicate. The measurements of maximum and 
minimum "belly 1 * were made at points in the centre portion of the 
carcass at strategic points in relation to commercial value. 

These latter are of importance in that they indicate not only 
the thickness of the side of bacon which will result from the 
carcass, but also the amount of trimming which has to be don© 
to make the thickness consistent throughout the side. 









. 


. 

- 

. 



. 







. 

o 

, 




. 



TABLE III; Measurements and Percentage of 
the Cuts of Carcasses. 



Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 


(Inside 

(Outside 

(Outside 


full feed) 

full feed) 

half feed) 


(ins) 

.rins)- 

(ins) 

Average length of carcass: 

30.25 

30.00 

30.25 

% Shoulder of Carcass; 

27.72 

1 , 128.10 

28.28 

% Ham " " : 

22.07 

22.88 

23.19 

Av. Depth of Shoulder Fat; 

1.96 

1.83 

1.73 

11 " " Back Fat : 

1.29 

1.23 

1.21 

" " " Loin Fat : 

1.52 

1.33 

1.44 

Av. Min. Belly Thickness; 

1.03 

1.03 

.93 

" Max. " " ; 

1,88 

1.90 

1.94 


A survey of the data recorded in Table III shows that 
there were no marked differences in the quality of the carcasses 
within the three groups. It will be noted, however, that the 
carcasses from Lot I showed slightly heavier finish than those 
from the other two groups. This is indicated by the fat measure¬ 
ments along the back and also by the fact that the minimum 
belly thickness (measurement at flank) is somewhat less in Lot 
III than it is in Lots I and II. The different methods of 
feeding and management employed did not result in shoulders which 
shewed any significant variation as to percentage of the whole 
carcass. It would appear that unlimited exercise and opportunity 
for rooting did not exert any influence on the development of 
this portion of the carcass. 

It is of interest that there is no difference in the 
length of side as between Lots I and III. This bears out the 
findings of Sinclair and Sackville (42) and is in disagreement 
































: 

: 

. . 

: . 

: . : i 

< .... . • 




. 




• o 

. 










- 30 - 


With those of Rothwell (23) who states that; 

"any system of feeding a bacon hog that tends 
toward the too early laying on of fat and pre¬ 
vents the maximum growth of bone and muscle 
during the first four months tends towards the 
development of a shorter, thicker carcass"• 


Grading of the Carcasses and "Bellies" 


The animals were graded by Government Graders before 
they were slaughtered and designated as "selects" and "bacons"* 
The former of these two is the higher grade and includes 
animals of the optimum length and finish. The grade of "bacon" 
applies to animals somewhat shorter and showing from external 
appearance a somewhat heavier finish. The carcasses were 
graded by a packing plant carcass expert. The "leanest lean" 
carcasses are those which showed the optimum covering of fat, 
ranging from 1" to l|". "Lean" carcasses had a covering of 
from 1^" to 2". The "belly" grading was an entirely arbitrary 
arrangement made by the packing plant expert and referred to 
the thickness of the belly and also the general proportions of 
the side. There are three "belly" grades indicated, excellent, 
good and fair* 



: ' 

. •• . 


* 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 




- 31 - 


TABLE IV: Carcass and "Belly" Grades* 



Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 


(Inside 

(Outside 

(Outside 


full feed) 

full feed) 

half feed) 

Live Grading - Selects 

5 

4 

4 

Bacons 

1 

2 

2 

Carcass Grades - 

Leanest Lean 

6 

4 

4 

Lean 

- 

2 

2 

Belly Grades - 

No. Excellent 

3 

3 

4 

No* Good 

3 

1 

1 

No. Fair 

- 

- 

1 


The gradings presented in Table IV suggest that there 
was little difference in the appearance of the live hogs in the 
various lots when marketed* It is to be noted, however, that 
only one "bacon" was graded out of Lot I as compared with two 
in each of the other groups. The live grades tend to suggest 
father a heavier finish in Lots II and III than in Lot I, a 
condition which was not indicated by the fat measurements shown 
in Table III. The "belly" grading would tend to show that the 
carcasses in Lot III were somewhat deficient in thickness of 
fleshing in the flank region. One carcass in the group obtained 
a rating of "fair". This grading is in line with the measure¬ 
ments shown in Table III. It will be noted that the average 
minimum belly thickness in Lot III was .93 inches as compared 
with 1.03 inches in Lot I. 






- 













- 

. 

» 

* 

. . 






t i ?z 

• ■ 

. 










Detailed Carcass Measurements* 


Detailed measurements ,by means of a planimeter,were 
made on sections secured from each carcass* The total area 
of the entire section was recorded* Following this, measure¬ 
ments were made on the total lean in the section, special 
tabulations being made of the area of the longissimus dorsi 
muscle, or the "eye of lean", and also the external oblique 
muscle or the "streak muscle" as it has been designated in the 
following table * The results of these detailed measure¬ 
ments are recorded in the following table* 


TABLE Y: Detailed Carcass Measurements* 




Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 



(Inside 

(Outside 

(Outside 



full feed) 

full feed) 

half feed) 

Av. 

Total area of cross- 
sections (sq.in.) 

28.20 

23.70 

23.85 

% Lean in cross-sections 

31.88 

33.09 

38.81 

Av* 

Area of "eye of lean" 




(sq. in.) 

3.95 

3.90 

4.37 

Av. 

Area of "streak muscle" 





(sq.in*) 

1.49 

1.63 

1.67 


The data presented in Table Y introduces some factors 
of quality of the carcasses which were not presented in the 
other tables* The total area of the cross sections vary 
somewhat. Those in Lot I are larger than those in either of the 
other two lots, as might be expected, following a reviev/ of 
the fat measurements tabulated in Table I* The percentages of 















* 


. 

. 

. 

* 


_ 










. 


- 

. 

* 

. 


. 






- 33 - 


lean in the cross sections show a marked gradation* Lot I, 
due to the increased finish, shows the lowest percentage of 
lean, and also has a small”eye of lead' and”streak muscle^ 
as compared with Lot III* The sections from Lot II contained 
a higher percentage of lean than those in Lot I* Since there 
was no difference in the size of the" eye of lean 1 of these two 
lots, and only a small difference in the H streak mus cle»,this 
increase in lean must have been quite general throughout the 
section* Lot III is the opposite extreme to Lot I# The per¬ 
centage of lean in the sections was decidedly higher than in 
either of the other two groups. The M eye of lean 1 averaged .62 
and .67 sq* in* larger than in the case of Lot I and Lot II, 
respectively. The”streak muscle”was also somevdiat larger in 
this group than it was in Lot I, although it was practically 
the same as in Lot II* 

Reference to Table I sho?/s that there was a difference 
in the length of time in which these three lots were on experi¬ 
ment. The percentage of lean in the carcass increased with age 
but not proportionally. According to the data, the lean per¬ 
centage of Lot II increased over that of Lot I in eight and one- 
half days, an amount equal to the increase percentage put on 
by Lot III over Lot II in 47*5 days. From this it would appear 
that the age factor alone was not entirely responsible for the 
increased lean in the cross section. Judging from the gradual 
increase in the muscle tissue, the amount of exercise to which 
the animals were subject might have been responsible for this 
gradation. However, according to the figures, there was an 



* ; 

. • . : 1 

* 








, 








. 

« 

t . 

. 

< . 

* 




- 34 - 


increase in size of the"eye of leari 1 in the carcasses in 
Lot III, but none in the other two groups# There was an in¬ 
crease in the "streak musclef 1 of Lot II and Lot III over that 
of Lot I, but no increase in this muscle as between Lot III 
and Lot II# Hence, while the exercise may have had a tendency 
to increase the lean meat, it would appear that increasing age 
was a more important factor. However, neither one of these 
alone was responsible for the additional muscle tissue formed. 

The increase in the size of the"eye of lean"in Lot III 
as compared to the other two lots might also be due to these 
factors of age and exercise. In the case of the latter, how¬ 
ever, it might be expected that if exercise had any effect 
upon the development of this muscle it would show an increase 
in size in Lot II as compared to Lot I. Such, hoe?ever, was not 
the case. The age factor, when considered in relation to the 
muscular development introduces the theory developed by 
Hammond (13) which indicates bodily development in a posterior 
direction. If this is applicable, the development of the«eye 
of lean? 1 takes place at some time following the 120 day feeding 
period. If this development can be accounted for in such a 
manner, we might expect to find an increase percentage of ham 
as well as an increased»»eye of lean f l Reference to Table III 
shows that the carcasses in Lot III showed a slightly higher 
percentage of ham than the other two lots. Hence, the age factor 
and the biological factor of growth may be of prime importance 
when considering the development of muscular tissue in the animal 
body# 






. . 


. . 

' 

t . 

< - 


. 

ve 

. 














. 



< 












- 35 


The results secured by Ellis and Zeller (46) are of 
special interest when viewed in the light of the results just 
presented. In studying the influence of high, medium and low 
planes of nutrition on the composition of hog carcasses, they 
found that the carcasses of hogs on the most restricted feeding 
level of corn and wheat contained a significantly greater pro¬ 
portion of lean meat and yielded a higher percentage of lean cuts. 
The data outlined in Table III is of further importance, 
when it is considered that the animals in Lot III were carried 
on a relatively low plan of nutrition for the greater part of 
their growing period. These animals received about one-half of 
the ration that was allowed to the other two groups. Nevertheless, 
from a survey of the carcass measurements and grades as outlined, 
it may be seen that such a mode of management was not detrimental 
to the carcasses which resulted. This would mean, therefore, that 
normal bodily development must have taken place in spite of the 
restricted diet. The muscular development must have continued 
from birth to maturity to the same extent that it did in the other 
lots, the only difference being that it took a longer period of 
time to reach the final stage. Judging from these conclusions, 
the common practice of "growing out" pigs for a period during 
the summer months, followed by a rapid fattening period in the 
fall, should not have any detrimental effects upon the carcasses 
which are produced. This, of course, assumes that the animals 
have the inherent ability to produce good bacon carcasses. 


. 

. 

, 

. 

. 

. 



TABLE VI: Muscle Fibre Measurements. 
(Infraspinatus Muscle) 



Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 


(Inside 

(Outside 

(Outside 


full feed) 

full feed) 

half feed) 


(microns) 

(microns) 

(microns) 

Av. Size of Muscle fibres: 

67.25 

65.87 

66.13 

Range; 

75.93-60.55 

72.82-61.93 

72.83-60.6' 

The average diameters 

of the muscle 

fibres of the 

infra- 


spinatusmuscle are recorded, according to lots, in Table VI* 

These figures indicate that no appreciable difference was found 
in the diameters of the muscle fibres in the various lots. Within 
each individual muscle there was a great variation in size of the 
muscle fibres, which condition was found in all the samples 
studied. The exercise which was indulged in by Lots II and III 
did not have the effect of increasing the diameters of the muscle 
fibres within the infraspinatus muscle. 

Measurements were also made of muscle fibre diameters from 
the same muscle, taken from the shoulders of four fattened lambs 
of approximately the same age as the hogs, from which samples were 
removed. The average diameter of these fibres was found to be 
39*31 microns. 

Histological Studies. 

Slides were prepared from sections of the infraspinatus 
muscle of each aarcass, in an endeavor to determine ary variation 
which might exist between the connective tissue content of the 
samples. It was found on microscopic examination that there were 























♦ 

- 


. •' . 

: 


• < 














. 


• ’ . 


• ■ * £ W' 

, 

r 




, 





- 37 


differences in the amount of connective tissue present in 
individual slides. However, this method of determination was 
found to be of little value, in that there was not sufficient 
material present in any one section to allow for a definite 
estimation of the connective tissue present. The error result¬ 
ing from any comparisons made on this basis would be very high, 
due to the improbability of obtaining sections from identical 
portions of the samples studied# Chemical determinations of 
the amount of elastin and collagen present, as carried out by 
Mitchell, Hamilton and Haines (4j>) in their studies on beef 
would undoubtedly yield a more satisfactory result# 


EXPERIMENT NO. II (Summer 1934) 


A Comparison of Several Protein Supplements for Bacon 
Hogs, and the Effect of These upon Carcass 
Quality# 


Pigs Used; 

The same general plan of allotment that was used 
in Experiment I was followed in this experiment. 

There were five lots on test. Each lot consisted of 
five individuals - three of which were purebred York¬ 
shires, the other two being purebred Tamworths. The 
average age of all animals at the beginning of the 
experiment was 66 days; the average weight at this time 
was 41.2 pounds* 













< 

< 

. 

. 




* 

- 

t • 







- 38 - 


Method of Housing; 

The five lots were housed in the shed piggery at the 
University Farm. They were confined in pens 10* x 12 
these being equipped with cement floors and wooden sleep¬ 
ing platforms 7* x 8>. Straw was used for bedding# 


Rations Fed; 


Beginning 
to 80 lbs# 


80 lbs# 
to 1^0 lbs. 


130 lbs# 
to finish 


Basal Mixture 80 83 

Protein Supplement 20 15 


90 

10 


The basal mixture varied depending upon the weight of 


the animals, as follows; 




Beginning to 
130 lbs. 

130 lbs, 
to finish 

Barley 

No. 3 C.W. 

40 

60 

Oats 

No. 3 C.W. 

40 

20 

Wheat 

No. 3-3 N. 

20 

20 


The protein supplement remained constant in conposition 
for each lot, throughout the experiment. The following 


mixtures were used# 

Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 

Lot IY 

Lot Y 

Skim-milk Powder 

93 

30 



so 

Tankage ( 50 % Prot.) 


30 

50 

60 

93 

Linseed Oil Meal 

- 


20 

20 


Fish Meal 

Soybean Meal 

- 

13 

13 

- 

- 

Alfalfa Meal 

- 

— 

10 

13 

— 

Iodized Salt 
(.001% KI) 

3 

5 

5 

3 

5 


Cod liver oil was fed at the rate of 15 cc* per pig, per 


day until the end of the second feeding period (average weight 
130 pounds)♦ 
















: 

. 








. 









. 


. 

: ' < c': 





♦ 





< . 




» . 




. 







• • ’ , : r 10 r i 





» 






. 



- 



- 

- 

















• 







. 





- 39 - 


Method of Feeding; 

All lots were full fed, by hand. During the first 
period (up to 80 pounds) they were fed three times a day. 
From then on they were fed only twice daily# 

The dry feed mixtures were measured out to each pen 
and mixed with the water allowance to form a slop# 


Discussion of Ration. 


The premier object of this experiment was to determine the 
value and effect of a number of protein supplements which may be 
fed to bacon hogs. The feeds used were analysed for crude 
protein and ash. The results of these analyses, together with 
the figures for the digestible crude protein as computed from 


Henry & Morrison’s (8) 

tables are 

tabulated as 

follows; 


Crude 

*Dig.Crude 



Protein 

Protein 

Ash. 

Oats 

9.8 

7.64 

2.23 

Barley 

11.3 

8.70 

2.81 

VTheat 

11.3 

9.04 

1.73 

Skim-mil^ powder 

32.85 

32.85 

7.34 

Fish Meal 

65.68 

31.23 

13.19 

Tankage 

37.11 

40.55 

19.90 

Alfalfa meal 

14.12 

**10.02 

10.45 

Linseed Oil Meal 

39.94 

33.93 

4.21 


* Determined on the percentages, as outlined by Henry & 
Morrison (8)# 

** Alfalfa hay - all analyses. 









: 




. 




. 












- 










t *• 




t 

. 


• . \ . 









- 40 - 


The nutritive ratios of the rations fed during the 
experiment are outlined below; 

Morrison 




Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 

Lot TV 

Lot V 

Standard 

First 

Second 

Third 

Period: 

Period: 

Period: 

1:4.68 

1 : 5.12 

1:4.57 

1:5.85 

1:4.40 

1:5.10 

1:3-96 

1:4.50 

1:5-19 

1:4.02 

1:4.55 

1:5.23 

1:3.49 

1:4.05 

1:4.79 

1:4.5 

1:5.5 

1 : 6.5 


The rations fed were at all periods during the experiment, 
narrower than those outlined in the Morrison feeding standard* 
(Henry & Morrison ( 8 ))# This is particularly true in the ease 
of the last period, during which, Morrison advises a ratio of 
1 : 6.5 and in which the widest ratio for any of the five lots was 
1:5*67* Using Morrison’s figures as the optimum basis for 
comparison, it may be seen that all through the experiment the 
animals were receiving a ration which contained sufficient protein 
to carry on the processes of normal growth and development* 

The average daily intake of digestible crude protein for 

each lot conforms very closely to the requirements as outlined in 

Morrison’s Feeding Standards ( 8 )* In this, the requirement is 
set at about . pounds daily, per 100 pounds live weight* Lot I 

was some?/hat lower than this, the intake being .44 pounds per 

100 pounds live weight. This difference was in part due to the 
relatively low protein content of the skim-milk powder as compared 
to the other supplements fed, and also to the low daily feed con¬ 
sumption of this lot. The other four lots shaved an average daily 
intake of crude protein of *51 pounds, .£0 pounds, .48 pounds and 
*51 pounds, for Lots II, III, IV and V, respectively* 



















; 

















, 

• 





* » 



• ; 





* : 

* : 


• 

• 





















. 






. 



<■ • 






» * : . ' 

* 

.. ' 

. 

. 

► 

• - 



. 



• * i? . • « 

. 



. < 

• » 


< • 








- 41 


RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT NO. II 


The average daily gains of the five lots are tabulated 
in the following table; 


TABLE VII* Average Daily Gains. 


Lot V 


114 

41.8 

223*2 

1.38 


No. of Days on Expt. 
Av# Initial Wt.(Lbs) 
Av. Final Wt. (Lbs) 
Av. Daily Gain (Lbs) 


Lot I Lot II 

113 109 

41.14 41.06 

216.6 218.8 

1.31 1*63 


Lot III Lot IV 

112 116 

41.06 41.0 

217*8 218.2 

1.58 1.52 


The figures in Table VII show the response of the se 
groups of pigs to the various rations, as is demonstrated by the 
average daily gains. It may be seen that the gains in all these 
lots were very uniform and were also considerably higher than 
those secured by Sinclair and McElroy (44) in the experiments in 
which they studied the influence of various levels of protein on 
the rate of growth. The highest average daily gain reported by 
them was 1.27 pounds. Lot II showed a slightly higher average 
daily gain than did any of the other lots. However, in no case 
was there a sufficient difference between lots to justify any 
conclusion as to the utility of one supplement when compared with 
another. 

Feed Requirements for Growth. 


The average daily feed consumption and the feed requirement* 
for 100 pounds gain in live weight, for each lot is recorded 


as follows 












: 












.• 




. 

. 


. 

* 

. 




< - 

. 

• •: 

ol ‘ ' vd 

. 

' 

. 

, 







TABLE VIII; Feed Required for Growth 
(All weights in Pounds) 


Feed Required for 


Lot 

Average Daily 

100 rounds Gain. 


No. 

Feed Consumption 

Grain 

Protein 

Total 

I : 

5.14 

294.85 

45.98 

558.85 

II : 

5.31 

285.0 

45.10 

526.10 

III: 

5-38 

296.09 

44.61 

550.70 

iv : 

5.30 

305.13 

45.50 

548.45 

v : 

5-47 

500.84 

44.92 

545.76 

While 

there is some variation 

between the 

five lots, 

both 


with regard to the daily feed consumption and also the feed 
required for 100 pounds gain, there is not sufficient to justify 
the drawing of any definite conclusions. Lot II required a 
slightly smaller volume of feed to put on 100 pounds gain, and 
as may be seen from Table VII also made a slightly higher 
average daily gain. On the whole, however, the figures in 
Tables VII and VIII, with regard to the daily gains and also 
the feed requirements, indicate that all of the protein supple¬ 
ments used were fed in sufficient quantity and had a sufficiently 
high biological value to carry out the normal processes of 
growth and fattening* 


Carcass Measurements* 


The me asurements made on these carcasses and the 
standards of grading were the same as those used in the case 
of the pigs in Expe riment I* 





















. 










. 

.. 
















* 


. 





















- 43 - 


TABLE IX; Measurements and % of the Cuts 
of Carcasses* 


Lot I Lot II 


Lot III Lot IV Lot V 


Av. Length of Carcass : 

% Shoulder of Carcass; 

% Ham of Carcass: 

Av. Depth of Shoulder Fat; 
Av# Depth of Back Fat; 

Av# Depth of Loin Fat; 

Av. Min. Belly thickness; 
Av. Max. Belly thickness; 


(Ins) 

(Ins) 

(Ins) 

(Ins) 

(Ins) 

31.25 

31.70 

31.55 

31.1 

31.85 

27.78 

28.74 

27.96 

28.62 

27.88 

22.98 

22.64 

22.92 

22.70 

22.76 

1.87 

1.58 

1.80 

1.83 

1.80 

1.20 

I .05 

1.30 

1.20 

1.20 

1.60 

1.40 

1.58 

1.63 

1.60 

• 96 

.94 

• 95 

1.03 

1.00 

1.73 

1.70 

1.85 

1.95 

1.80 


The fat measurements outlined in Table IX show that there 


was not a great deal of difference in the covering of fat within 


the five lots. Lot II showed a somewhat lower degree of finish 


than did ary of the other four lots although the "belly” thick¬ 
ness did not vary to the same degree as did the covering of fat 
along the shoulder, back and loin. The carcasses in Lot IV 


carried the most finish generally although there was not a great 


deal of difference between this lot and lot V. It should be 
noted that the depth of back fat in all lots is considerably be¬ 
low the optimum of 1^ inches for carcasses of the "leanest” grade. 
Lack of fat covering on the middle portion was a characteristic 
of all carcasses. 


Live Hog and Carcass Grades. 


The gradings, according to the standards previously out¬ 


lined, are as follows; 













, 
























it 










I 

















































- 44 - 


TABLE X: Carcass and "Belly" Grades* 


Live Grading - Selects 
Bacons 

Carcass Grades - 

Leanest Lean 
Lean 

Under finished 

Belly Grades: 

No. Excellent 
No. Good 
No. Fair 


Lot I Lot II Lot III Lot IV Lot V 


The gradings tabulated in Table X introduce some features 
of the carcasses which are not apparent from the data* in Table 
IX* There was one animal in Lot V which graded "bacon” , no 
intimation of this would be gained from the figures in Table IX. 
With reference to the carcass grades, the same condition arises. 

It will be noted that one carcass in all groups excepting Lot I 
graded "under finished". It would seem that these carcasses 
were placed in this class as a result of an unsatisfactory "belly" 
grading rather than on the basis of lack of back fat, although 
it will be recalled that back fat covering was decidedly marginal. 
Very few of the carcasses with the exception of those in Lot V 
secured an "excellent" belly grading. Generally speaking the 
"belly" grades are unsatisfactory and when this condition is 
considered together with the marginal covering of back fat, it 
becomes apparent that lack of finish was a common weakness in 
all lots* 










. 












— 

. 




- 

- 












, : ■ . 

. < 

.£!! if) Big 

a: \ r i.' 

i c ' L ie . 00 








- 45 - 


Detailed Measurements* 

The results of the detailed measurements made on the 
cross section from each carcass are reported below: 

TABLE XI: Detailed Carcass Measurements* 




Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 

Lot IV 

Lot V 

Av. 

Total Area of Cross 







Section (sq.in.) 

26,58 

25*51 

26.66 

26.99 

27,55 

% Lean in Cross-Section 

38.41 

37*75 

38.64 

36.27 

36.19 

Av. 

Area of 11 eye of lean 11 







(Sq. in.) 

4.39 

4.12 

4.55 

4.38 

4.34 

Av. 

Area of "streak 







muscle (sq.in.) 

1.66 

1.74 

1.75 

1.54 

1.62 


The detailed measurements 

as made 

with the 

planimeter also 


indicate a similarity in all the five lots* There are slight 
variations in the m asurements reported between the lots. Lots 
IV and V show a lower percentage of lean in the side than do 
the other three lots. This difference is not due to the size 
of the "eye of lean* 1 , in that, there are but very slight differ¬ 
ences in the area of this muscle in the various lots. The 
streak muscle is somewhat smaller in the Lots IV and V. However, 
in that. Tables IX and X do not point to an extra degree of 
finish in these two lots as compared to the other three lots, 
this difference must have been largely due to the general muscl¬ 
ing throughout the side. Lot II has the smallest eye of lean 
and it is of interest to note from Table IX that this lot also 
had a slightly smaller % of ham* However, Lot III, which shows 









* 




















. 




, 

. . 










- 







46 - 


the largest “eye of lean" does not show the greatest percentage 
of ham although it is larger than in the case of Lot II. While 
the size of the “streak muscle" does not show any great variation 
it does not follow in size, the “eye of lean", at least in 
these lots. Lots II and III which show the greatest variation 
in size of "eye of lean" have practically the same size of 
“streak muscle". Generally speaking, no one lot deviates from 
the other four to a sufficient degree to warrant any assumptions 
concerning the effects of the rations fed upon the percentage 
of fat and lean in the carcasses. 


EXPERIMENT III (Winter 1934-35) 


The Effect of Varying the Level of Protein in the 
Ration on Rate of Growth and Development of Ham in 
the Carcass of the Bacon Hog* 


Pigs Used; 

There were eight animals placed in each of five lots, 
the general plan of allotment being on the "litter basis", 
in a similar manner to that described in Experiment I. 

All the animals used in this experiment were Tam worth - 
Yorkshire crosses. The average weight of all the animals 
at the beginning of the experiment was 47# 9 6 pounds. The 
average age was 76*45 days. 












t 









, 



» 
















. 

. 




47 - 


Method of Housing; 

The five lots were housed outside during the entire 
period of the experiment. The houses used were of the gable 
type, each being 6» x 8». These houses were banked with 
straw to give additional protection* The animals had access 
to runways, the size of which were 26 * x 80 *• 

Method of Allotment; 

The allotments were made on the basis of the rations 
which were fed, and groups were arranged as follows; 


Percentage Protein 

Start to 

80 lbs. to 

130 lbs. 

80 lbs. 

130 lbs. 

' 'dV}'\ ' ' —— 

210 lbs. 

" "/ <!) \ 


Lot 

I 

Cereal 

Ration 

* 

\ IQ § 

4 

\ i Q J 

4 

\ i 

4 

Lot 

II 

t! 

it 

■¥ 

8 

8 

8 

Lot 

III 

II 

ii 

+ 

12 

10 

8 

Lot 

IV 

tt 

it 

+ 

16 

12 

10 

Lot 

V 

II 

n 

+ 

20 

1G 

12 


Feeds Used; 

The cereal ration consisted of equal parts by weight 
of oats, barley and wheat. The oats graded 3 C.W*, the barley 
3 C.W. , and the wheat from 3N to 6 m. 

The protein supplement fed was mixed in the following 
proportions; 

Tankage 60 lbs. 

Linseed Oil Meal 20 ** 

Alfalfa Meal 13 » 

Salt 3 " 

mr " 

•3 Ids. of ground limestone were added per 100 pounds of feed 
mixture in the case of Lot I. This brought the Ca up from about 
3 grams to 8 grams daily. 













: 

. ' 

T t 

; ' 























. 







• 


















: 



















, 












; 

. . . < 

. . 

: 

. 


. 

. 









48 


Method of Feeding; 

Self-feeders were used in all groups. The supplement 
was mixed with the cereal ration at the rates indicated 
above. Water v/as supplied twice daily to all lots* 

Discussion of Ration. 


The feeds used in this experiment were analyzed for crude 
protein and ash. The results of these analyses together with 
the determinations for digestible crude protein are recorded 
below; 


% Crude Protein *D.C.P. Ash. 


Wheat 

11.3 

9.04 

1.67 

Oats 

8.1 

6.32 

3.40 

Barley 

11.7 

8.91 

2.46 

Tankage 

46.35 

32.91 

25.10 

Linseed Oil Meal 

37.40 

31.79 

4.76 

Alfalfa Meal 

13.63 

** 9.68 

28.77 

* Computed from percentages as outlined 

** Alfalfa Hay - all analyses. 

by Henry & Morrison ( 8 ). 

The nutritive ratios of the rations fed to all 

the experiment were as follows; 

lots, during 

Morrison 

Lot I 

Lot II Lot III 

Lot IY 

Lot V Standard, 

First Period: 1:6.37 

l:5.6l 1:5.04 

1:4.48 

1:4.05 1:4.5 

Second Period: 1:6.37 

1 : 5.61 1 : 5.29 

1:5.04 

1:4.48 1:5.5 

Third Period: 1:6.37 

1 : 5.61 1 : 5.61 

1:5.61 

1:5.29 1 : 6.5 


Discussion of Ration. 


The object of blending the rations in the manner indicated 
was to vary the amount of protein which would be allowed in each 
lot. The nutritive ratios outlined above show the extent to which 
















; 

- * 


. 










. * 

. 

* 




. - 

t ■: ■; *;c ev cti i-fsirt edf >f^ 

: 








' 

















49 - 


that was done. Lot I received a ration, during the entire 
feeding period, which contained the amount of protein advised by- 
Morrison (8) for the last fattening period, or for animals over 
130 pounds in weight. For the first two periods, therefore, the 
pigs were, according to these standards, receiving insufficient 
protein. Lot II was fed a ration containing the amount of 
protein equivalent to that which Morrison (13) advises for animals 
from about 80 to 130 pounds in weight. Up to this 80 pounds of 
weight the animals in this lot were receiving insufficient protein 
and when over the 130 pound weight received an excess of protein 
above the requirement. Lot III received slightly less protein 
than is advised by Morrison. During the period up to 80 pounds 
the ration fed Lot IV conformed with the requirements of Morrison’s 
Standard. From this weight on, however, there was a slight in¬ 
crease of protein. Lot V at all periods during the fattening 
process received a high protein ration. 

The average daily intake of protein for each lot was as 
follows; 



Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 

Lot IV 

Lot V 


(lbs.) 

(Ids.) 

(lbs) 

(lbs.) 

(lbs.) 

Average Daily Intake 
Protein per cwt. 

of 

.41 

OJ 

■St* 

« 

.44 

.45 

.51 


The daily intake of protein was somewhat lower than might 
have been expected judging from the percentages of protein supple¬ 
ment which were added in the ration. This is in part due to the 
average daily feed consumption of each lot, but is largely due to 
the relatively low protein content of the supplement itself. The 







» 


t < 

- •_ 

. 

. 

, , • . 

: . 

. 









- 50 - 


tankage, as may be seen from the analyses recorded, contained 
46.35% crude protein. The supplemental mixture had a crude 
protein content of 39 * 57 ®* 

Armsby (1), in discussing the effect of limited protein 
brings up the question of the mineral requirements. He emphasizes 
the fact that when there is a low protein ration fed, the ash 
content is likely to be low also, and hence, the results from any 
experiment of this type must take this into consideration. The 
following table shows the average daily intake of calcium and 
phosphorus per cwt., in the various lots. 


Lot I Lot II Lot III Lot IV Lot V 
(grs.) (grs.) (grs.) (grs.) (grs.) 


P 2.90 4.08 4.99 5*22 6.89 

c~ 8.16 7.8 8.07 7.98 8.80 


As was mentioned, Lot I received .3 lbs. of ground lime¬ 
stone, ( 96 %caCO^) per cwt. of feed in addition to the regular 
ration, thus bringing the daily intake of Ga up to 8.l6 grams. 
The calcium intake in all five lots was well over the minimum 
of 2.30 grams as suggested by Sinclair and McElroy (44). The 
phosphorus intake may also be regarded as adequate on the basis 
of Spildo»s ( 47 ) recommendation of .357. of the ration. Judging 
from these, any differences which may be found to exist between 
these five lots would not be due to a lack of calcium or 
phosphorus. 















- 





. 

► 

♦ . I 

, 

. . : . j 

< * ' J- 




. 


. 

■. 


* 






. 

. r , o : 

< : ' 

» 


* 


. • 


- 51 - 


RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT III. 


An experiment similar to the one just outlined was carried 
on by Emmett and Griridley (27) at Illinois. There were in this 
case three groups of pigs, receiving a low, medium and high 
protein ration. The animals on the low protein diet received 
on the average of the entire feeding trial a ration which was 
narrower than the lot receiving the low protein in the experiment 
just outlined. However, in their summary, Emmett and Grindley 
state that all the pigs in Lot I, with the exception of one, 
lacked appetite. Most of them were sluggish and had locomotive 
difficulties. All the animals appeared unthrifty and underfed, 
and four died during the experiment apparently as a result of 
poor nourishment. Nothing like this was noticed or occurred in 
Lot I of the experiment being reported. The animals in this lot 
did not look as thrifty as those receiving a greater amount of 
protein. Nevertheless, they were active, had no difficulty in 
walking and as may be seen from one of the ©nsueing tables 
did not lack appetite. 

The average daily gains of the five lots are recorded as 
follows; 


TABLE XII: Average Daily Gains. 



Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 

Lot IV 

Lot V 

No. of Days on Experiment 

141.6 

157.25 

129.58 

155.75 

124.12 

Av. Initial Wt. (lbs.) 

47.79 

47.75 

48.62 

47.71 

47,94 

Av. Final Wt. (lbs.) 

206.62 

210.25 

215.12 

209.75 

212.25 

Av. Daily Gain (lbs.) 

1.12 

1.18 

1.29 

1.21 

1,32 










PLATE I: Showing the Rate of Growth of Individuals 
in the Various Lots, and the average Rate 
of Growth for Each Lot in Experiment III. 






































52 - 


The average daily gains as recorded in Table XII, and 
the graphs shown in Plate I demonstrate the rate of growth in 
each lot. Lot I, which received the low protein ration, made an 
average daily gain of 1.12 pounds. The graphs illustrate that 
the rate of growth in all animals was comparatively slow, one 
of which attained a weight of only 182 pounds after being in the 
feed lot a period of 147 days. The animals in Lot II made on the 
average a slightly better rate of gain than did those in Lot I* 

The graph shows the similarity with which most of the animals in 
this lot responded to the ration, with respect to the rate of 
grcwth. Lot III showed a rate of growth again somewhat greater 
than Lot II and considerably greater than Lot I. The increase 
in the latter case being 15%. The average gains in Lot IV fall 
somewhat lower than those in Lot III. In the case of the former, 
however, it may be noted that one animal which was below the 
average weight at the beginning of the experiment, made very poor 
initial gains and weighed only 182 pounds at the conclusion of 
the 147 day feeding period. The gains of this animal are probably 
largely responsible for the differences in gains which occurred 
as between Lots III and IV. Lot V showed the best average daily 
gains of any of the five lots, there being an increase of 187 ., 
as compared with Lot I. The graph demonstrates that the animals 
in the fifth lot made the most uniform gains, speaking of the group 
as a whole, and as may be seen from Table XII, reached a market 
weight in a shorter time than did those in any of the lots receiv¬ 
ing less protein# 











t ■ 

. 








. - 


. 

• "■ 

, . '• '• -•- 

. 

c 

. 

. 

. c y 




- 




* 

, 

♦ 










- 53 - 


Graph No* 6 - Plate I, illustrates the average rate of 
growth in each lot. It shows clearly the differences in weights 
between lots for the same periods and also corroborates the data 
in Table XII demonstrating the differences in the length of time 
required by each lot to attain market weight. 


TABLE XIII; Feed Required for Growth 
(All Weights in Pounds) 




Average Daily 

Feed Ret 

juired for 

100 lbs. 



Feed Consumption 

Grain ] 

Prot. Supp. 

'•'Total. 

Lot 

I : 

5.80 

496.35 

19.65 

517.04 

Lot 

ii : 

5.62 

456.92 

36.09 

474.85 

Lot 

ill : 

5.77 

406.02 

40.09 

448.20 

Lot 

IV : 

5.55 

404.16 

51.14 

458.0 

Lot 

V : 

6.04 

387.54 

65.30 

456.3 


Gain 


* Salt included. 


Table XIII is of interest in that it demonstrates the 


utility of the various rations fed, with respect to economy of 
utilization in increasing body weight. On comparing Lots I and 
II, it may be seen that an increase of 16.44 pounds of the 
protein supplement resulted in a saving of 59.43 pounds of the 


grain mixture required to increase the live weight by 100 pounds. 
That is, with every additional pound of protein supplement fed 
there was a saving of 3*6 pounds of grain. If the price of grain 
is set at the arbitrary figure of 1 cent per pound, the value of 
the supplement when fed at the rate of 8 % of the ration as compared 
with 4f 0 , is 136.00 a ton. Comparing in a similar manner the 
protein and grain requirements of Lots II and III, we find that 















. 








• 


♦ 





, - 
; 











• * 

. 

• 

: 


• » 

. 

• 

: 


. 

. 


: 


. 

. :> 

* 

: 


. . 

. 

• 

: 



, 

■ 

. 

. 

. I 

. 

< 

. 

. 















M - 


one p ound of protein is equivalent to 7«7 pounds of grain* That 
is, the supplement in the case of Lot III, as compared with Lot 
II, was worth $77*00 per ton. However, beyond this point the 
additional protein fed does not bring about qny saving in the grain 
fed* Comparing Lots IV and III, 11.0^ pounds of protein is 
equivalent to only 1.86 pounds of grain, similarly between Lots V 
and IV, 14.16 pounds of protein replaces only 16.62 pounds of 
grain. It would appear, therefore, that the feeding of the protein 
supplement at the rate of 8f«,, 10f o and 12f e as was done in the case 
of Lot III, had a saving effect upon the grain fed when compared 
with rations containing less protein. Increasing the protein 
supplied oeyond this point, however, showed no advantage# 

Using as the means of determination the total feed consumed 
for the entire period, it is found that Lot III consumed a ration, 
9*4% of which was protein supplement. As was indicated, the 
average daily intake of protein was .44 pounds per 100 pounds live 
weight. This figure is somewhat lower than that suggested by 
Sinclair and McElroy (44), their figure being pounds per day# 
The total feed required in each of the five lots follows the 
same line of gradation as did the efficiency of the protein fed. 

The break also comes at Lot III. Lot I required considerably more 
of the total grain and protein mixture than did any of the other 
five lots. Lot III required less than any of the other groups, 
although there was only a slight difference between this and Lots 
IV and V# 






♦ " :: : dfiD 





< 


« 

. 

, . 






. 

. 

. 

. 

. C w ' 

* ? e 

♦ 

. 

• • t 

. 

% 










55 - 


Carcass Measurements# 


The standard measurements and weights 
carcasses, the average results of which are 


were taken on all 
tabulated below; 


TABLE XIV: Measurements and % of Cuts 
of Carcasses# 


Lot I 

Lot II 

Lot III 

Lot IV 

Lot V 

(ins) 

(ins) 

(ins) 

(ins) 

(ins) 


Av.Length of Carcass ; 30#6l 

30.44 

30.87 

30.29 

30.66 

% Shoulder of Carcass; 2?.3 

27.64 

27.33 

28.04 

28.08 

% Ham of Carcass: 23*64 

23.61 

23.3 

23.51 

23.56 

Av.Depth of Shoulder 





fat; 1.87 

1.73 

1.77 

1.84 

1.86 

Av.Depth of Back Fat; 1.21 

1.03 

1.08 

1.16 

1.11 

Av.Depth of Loin Eat; 1.46 

1.48 

1.50 

1.45 

1.32 

Av.Min."Belly" thickness :.98 

1.09 

1.08 

1.11 

1.08 

Av.Max. " " 1.84 

1.93 

1.97 

1.93 

I .92 

Av.Carcass Wt. (cold) 155«57 

135.30 

160.5 

158.14 

156.60 

Av.Dressing Percentage 





(cold) 74.0 

74.0 

74.6 

74.0 

73.8 


It is worthy of note, in connection with the figures in 
Table XIV, that there was no difference in the average length of 
the carcasses in the five lots. Increasing the amount of protein 
fed to the animals did not cause an increased bodily length. 

There was no difference in the percentage of ham between the lots. 
In the case of the shoulders, however, there is a slight variation. 
The shoulders in Lot I were slightly more than 1% greater than in 
any of the other lots. In that the percentage of ham shows no 
decrease, this gain must have been at the expense of the middle. 
This being the case, it might be expected that the measurements 
for Lot I would indicate this. The lengths are the same in all 













. 


. 




, 




. 


. 










- - 

the groups# The only differences which exist which might in¬ 
fluence this are the slightly lower minimum and maximum belly 
measurements in Lot I. 

The degree of finish in all the lots is fairly uniform# 

Lot I showed as much covering of fat along the top line as did ary 
of the other lots. In fact, the depth of the back fat was greater 
in this lot than in any of the others, particularly Lots II and 
III* these latter two having a marginal covering only. The back 
fat covering in all the lots was below the arbitrary optimum of 
rfe”• The loin fat and shoulder fat was uniform and of sufficient 
depth in all the lots# 

It was mentioned that the "bellies” in Lot I were lacking 
somewhat in thickness throughout, when compared with the other 
lots. However, it may be seen that while these measurements were 
low for this group of animals, they were nevertheless very nearly 

X 

the same as the best recorded in Tables III and IX. Generally 
speaking, therefore, while there tended to be a lack of finish 
along the backs of all animals, the figures in Table XIY indicate 
that there was a marked uniformity between all the lots# 

The average live weights at which the animals in the different 
lots were slaughtered were Mery nearly the same. The maximum 
difference was between Lots I and III, that being 4.?8 pounds. The 
average dressing percentages for the five lots were within the 
range of 73* 87 . and 74. 6 %. This latter finding is in accordance 
with that of Emmett and Grindley (27)# They too found very little 
difference in the dressing percentages of animals fed a low and a 
high protein diet. Had there been any marked difference in the 






. 

. 
























. 


. • • 

t 


t t . ' L 

. 

♦ 




• - 









. 




. 

. 





- 57 -> 


degree of finish in the various groups, resulting from differences 
in the protein-carbohydrate ratio of the rations, it would have 
been reasonable to expect this difference to be reflected in 
wider differences in the dressing percentages# 


Live Hog, Carcass and Fat Grades. 


The live gradings and carcass gradings were carried 
out according to the methods already mentioned* A fat grading 
was also made on all the carcasses, by the packing plant 
grader. It was a purely mechanical determination ascertained 
by pressing on the fat with the finger tip. There were two 
gradings - Firm and Soft. The gradings of the live animals, 
the carcasses and the fat are recorded as follows* 

TABLE XV; Gradings of Live Animals & Carcasses. 


*Lot I Lot II Lot III *Lot IV Lot V 


Live Grading - Selects: 5 7 

Bacons: 2 1 


Carcass Grading- Leanest 

Lean; 6 7 

Underfinished: 1 1 


Belly Grading -No.Excellent: 1 4 

No.Good: 4 4 

No.Fair 2 


Fat Grading - 


No.Firm 
No.Soft 


7 


8 


7 


8 


4 6 

5 1 
1 

7 8 


*0ne animal had not reached market weight at the conclusion of 
the experiment and was not slaughtered. 



















: 


« 


. - 




. 






: 






- 58 - 


The live gradings and carcass gradings are of interest 
when reviewed with the data in Table XIV. Lot I contained two 
hogs which graded "bacon", one of these was the one which re¬ 
ceived the carcass grading of "underfinished". The same thing 
occurred in the case of the animal in Lot II which graded 
"bacon" - it too, was underfinished. This being the case, 

the other animals in these two lots must have had a sufficiently 
high degree of finish to bring the average up to within the 
range indicated in Table XIV. Hence, the ration fed cannot 
have been alone responsible for the lac£ of covering of fat* 

The animals which were underfinished were both over 200 pounds 
live weight when slaughtered and were not litter mates. 

The "belly" gradings show some variation between the 
different lots. Lot II had only one "excellent" "belly", and 
had two which graded "fair". This feature was brought out by 
the measurements in Table XIV in which Lot I showed the lowest 
figures for both "maximum” and "minimum” "belly*. 1 Lots II, III and IV 
were equal with respect to the grading on this portion of the 
carcass. Lot V, however, contained six "excellents", one "good" 
and one "fair". This greater proportion of higher grade "bellies" 
in the last lot cannot be accounted for in the results recorded 
of the actual "belly" measurements (Table XIV). 

Firmness of Fat * 

It is to be noted that the fat on one carcass in both Lots 
I and II graded "soft” according to the hand grading. There were 
no other "soft" carcasses. In order to ascertain whether the 





t ' - 

' 

» 

. 

< * 

. 


. 








- 59 


amount of protein fed influenced the quality of the fat pro¬ 
duced, samples of fat were removed from the same location on 
the back of each carcass in the various lots and a determination 
was made of the Iodine Number* The average results for each 
lot were as follows; 

TABLE XVI; Iodine Numbers of Back Fat# 

Lot I L ot II Lot III Lot IV L ot V 
Av. Iodine Number 6l#l8 59*57 62*64 62*82 6l*01 

From this table it may be seen that there was a slight 
difference in the quality of the fats in the different lots* 

Lot II showed the greatest degree of firmness and Lot IV was 
the softest. However, since there does not appear to be any 
consistent trend, any conclusion as to the effect of the ration 
upon the quality of fat produced would not be warranted. A 
point arises here as to the significance of the Iodine Number 
in connection with the commercial interpretation of soft fat* 

The work of Hankins and Ellis (48) is of assistance in connect¬ 
ion with this point. As a result of extensive study, they 
suggest that fats of iodine number less than 63 are commercially 
"hard" or at least in no way objectionable to the pork trade* 

If we accept this figure it will be seen that the fats from all 
groups in this experiment average below this limit and may be 
regarded as satisfactory from a commercial standpoint. It is 
interesting to note that the two carcasses which were graded 
"soft" by the packing house graders had Iodine Numbers of 60*36 
and 38*80 respectively# 









Lot I : Grain Ration + 4% Protein Supplement 



Lot III: Grain Ration + 12%, 10% & 8% Protein Supplement 



Lot IV: Grain Ration + 16%, 12% & 10% Protein Supplement 



PLATE II: Illustrating Cross Sections taken from 
the Carcasses of Animals in Experiment 
No. III. 










60 - 


Detailed Measurements* 


A same?/hat different method than that previously 
described was used in obtaining the tracings from the cross 
sections* A pane of thin ("frosted”) glass was dampened and 
placed with the smooth side on the cut surface of the sections. 
Through this the details beneath were clearly visible, and due 
to the nature of the glass could be transcribed upon it by means 
of an ordinary lead pencil. This method was found to be easier 
and more accurate than that one used previously* Tracings were 
taken from this glass and area measurements made with the planimeter 
as before. The results of these measurements are reported in 
Table XVII and the sections from which tracings were made are 
shown opposite in Fig. 1. 

TABLE XVII: Detailed Carcass Measurements. 


Lot I 
(sq.in) 

Av.Total area of cross 

sections: 26.14 

> Lean in cross sections: 39*45 
Av.Area of "eye of lean": 4.43 
Av.Area of "streak muscle":1*73 

Upon reviewing the 


Lot 

II 

Lot III 

Lot IV 

Lot V 

(sq 

. inj 

(sq.in) 

(sq.in) 

(sq.in) 

27. 

01 

26.23 

2 6.81 

2 6.00 

43. 

04 

37*66 

40.92 

40.09 

4. 

90 

4.19 

4.56 

4.50 

1 . 

97 

1.72 

1.89 

1.80 


data outlined in Table XVII, it may 


be seen that some variation did occur between the various lots 


with regard to the percentages and measurements tabulated* The 
percentage of lean is higher in Lot II than it is in Lot I* As 
might be expected, the same thing is true of the area of the 
"eye of lean" and the "streak muscle". However, the figures for 


















. 




















* 














: 




. 




. : 

: 

. ♦ 


» * i 

X 

• * 











« 

. 
















Lot III show that it was lower again than Lot I, and those for 
Lots IV and V are approximately the same as those for Lot I. 

Hence, it may be seen that there is no progressive increase in 
the percentage of lean in the carcass as the level of protein was 
increased in the rations of the various lots. A review of the 
data on the individual sections from the animals in Lot III shows 
that there were a number which had a percentage of lean that was 
low in comparison to the sections from the other lots* While 
this variation exists between lots, nevertheless, as has been 
mentioned, there is no evidence to show that increasing the amount 
of protein fed had any tendency to increase the amount of lean 
meat in the carcass. Comparing the percentage of lean meat in 
the sections from Lot I, which received a low protein ration and 
those from Lot V which received a greater amount of protein, it is 
apparent that there was an equal development of muscling in both 
lots. Hence, the biological processes which were involved in the 
development of the lean meat were carried on to the same degree on 
the low protein and the high protein ration. These figures show, 
therefore, that insofar as the development of lean meat is concern¬ 
ed there is no advantage in feeding protein at as a high a level 
as was done in the case of Lot V* 

The carrying out of balance experiments in connection with 
the feeding trials would undoubtedly have been of value in determ¬ 
ining the degree to vsfcieh protein was utilized in the various groups* 
It would appear that when the protein was fed at the higher levels 
a percentage must have been deaminized and utilized for purposes 
of energy or fat production* 




* 

4 , ■ 












t ' 


. 






, 

. 


. 







- 62 - 


A Study of the Carcass Data on a Litter Basis, 


A rather serious difficulty experienced in arriving 
at conclusions from data of this type is the variation which 
exists between individuals within lots. The range for any one 
measurement is very wide within lots. These differences cannot 
be explained on the basis of management practices, at least to 
the extent to which they may be controlled. 

It has been mentioned previously that the greatest possible 
care was exercised when grouping the animals in the three experi¬ 
ments which have been reviewed. This was done on what has been 
designated as the "litter basis". This simply means that all 
the animals in one lot were, as far as possible, litter mates 
of the animals in the other lots on the s ame experiment. This 
is a plan commonly followed in swine experiments and which has 
been discussed recently by Dunlop (49) in the light of Cambridge 
experiments. This method of allotment is followed in an endeavor 
to reduce as far as possible the degree of variability between 
lots and is based upon the assumption that animals of the same 
breeding and thus of the same genetic make-up will react uniformly 
to the particular experimental condition which may be imposed. 

With this in mind it was thought advisable to study as far as 
was possible the data based on a litter analysis. In this case, 
therefore, the animals in any one group would have been subject 
to different feeding or management conditions but would be of the 
same genetic make-up. Thus, the interpretation of the results 
would be based upon the similarity or variability which occurred 





■ 


. r l a Jj ub i\ Ibi 

. * . ■_ .. e; 

. * 

■ : ‘ ' 

. • v- , r Lioh'' c n em 

. 

•A 















- 63 - 


within the litters. 

The litters in Experiment II lend themselves more readily 
to a survey of this kind than do those in the other two experiments 
in that the rations fed were very similar in nutritive value. It 
may be pointed out here, however, that any results indicated will 
only be suggestive since the number of animals in the litters 
under consideration are only five in number. 

Carcass Measurements by Litters, 

The averages of the carcass measurements for the five 
litters which made up Experiment II are as follows: 


Table XVIII; Carcass Percentages and 
Measurements. 



Litter 

Litter 

Litter 

Litter 

Litter 


No. I 

No, II 

No.Ill 

NO. IV 

No. V 


(ins,) 

(ins. ) 

(ins.) 

(ins.) 

(ins.) 

Av. Length of Carcass 

31,7 

31.4 

31.95 

30.85 

31.53 

f 0 Shoulder of Carcass 

27.88 

27.8 

28.18 

28.10 

29,02 

fo Ham of Carcass 

22.38 

22.1 

23.22 

22.5 

23*8 

Av,Depth Shoulder Fat 

1.73 

1.873 

1.725 

1.95 

1*515 

Av.Depth Back Fat 

1.20 

1.275 

1.075 

1.35 

1,00 

Av,Depth Loin Fat 

1.60 

1.525 

1.575 

1.70 

1.40 

Av.Min,Belly Thickness 

1,03 

1.00 

.95 

1.04 

.85 

Av.Max.Belly Thickness 

1.83 

I .85 

1.725 

I .85 

1,70 


Litters II and III were purebred Tamworths, while the 
other three were purebred Yorkshires, 

The average live weights at which all the litters were 


marketed ranged from 215,2 to 222,4 pounds. Having this in 
mind and referring to the data in Table XVIII, it may be seen 
that some of these litters did not possess the same inherent 










. ' 

. , 

• . 


« 








. 


. 






! . • 






. 

, 














- 64 - 


tendency to develop fat, or lean, as the case may he,in a given 
period as did other litters. This is particularly true in the 
case of Litter V. It may be seen in connection with this group 
that not only were the fat measurements along the back consider¬ 
ably below those in any of the other litters, but the "belly” 
thickness was also less than in any of the other groups. Litter 
III also showed a tendency to lack finish, specially along the 
back, and a general thinness of "belly". Litter IV had the high¬ 
est degree of finish and also the thickest "belly". 

There is very little difference in the length of carcasses 
which were produced from the different litters. The percentages 
of ham and shoulder also showed only a slight variation. Lot V 
had a comparably low percentage of middle piece and Lot III whowed 
the same tendency. It is interesting to note the relation which 
exists in these two litters between the percentage middle and the 
minimum and maximum "belly" measurements# 

When the figures in Table XVIII are compared with those in 
Table IX, the differences between litters are more clearly defined. 
From the standpoint of length of carcass all the animals must have 
been very similar in that the degree of difference between these 
measurements as recorded in the two tables is very slight. The 
same thing is true with respect to the percentages of shoulder and 
ham, although for both these figures Litter V is somewhat above the 
general trend. With respect to the fat measurements, however, 
there is a greater variation. For example, there is no lot record¬ 
ed in Table IX which showed the covering of fat that was evident 
for Litter IV. This is the outstanding feature in comparing these 












. 

• a*u« 

* ■ >0 061£*t 

* • 

. 

« 

c 

< 

. 





- 65 - 


two tables. It may be seen, however, that the lack of "belly 11 
thickness for all the lots in Table IX was due to the presence 
of the animals from Litter V and to a lesser degree those from 
Litter III, 

The degree of variability between animals, whether the 
data were considered on the experimental lot basis or on the 
litter basis, was equally great. Such factors as the length of 
side showed differences as great as 2" in both these cases. The 
fat measurements and "belly" measurements also shewed great 
variations between individuals. However, as may be seen from 
Table XVIII, there was a tendency, regardless of the variations, 
for the litter mates to show either a higher or a lower degree of 
finish as a whole when compared with the same animals allotted on 
the basis of the experimental grouping. 

Detailed Carcass Measurements by Litters, 


The results of the detailed measurements for the litters 
are as follows: 

TABLE XIX: Detailed Measurements of Cross Sections, 


Litter 
No. I 

(sq,in.) 

Av. Total Area of cross 

section: 27.85 

% Lean in Cross section: 33,25 
Av.Area "eye of lean" : 3,84 

Av. Area "streak muscle": 1*55 


Litter Litter Litter Litter 
No. II No. Ill No, IV No, V 

(sq.in) (sq.in) (dq.in) (sq.in) 


28.21 24.52 28,36 24.35 

35*76 40.12 32.35 45,78 

4,36 4.42 4,15 5*00 

1.60 1.71 1.69 1.73 


The figures in the above table show trends similar to those 
in Table XVIII. It may be seen that Litters III and V showed 












t * 





- . 






t . • 


























^ t • 

. 




: 

: 






. 

* 






. 

: 

: 

: 

: 

. 







66 - 


definitely a higher percentage of lean than did any of the 
other litters. This corroborates the findings reported in 
Table XVIII with reference to the lack of fat covering in these 
two lots. Litter IV, having the lowest percentage of lean, 
would have the highest degree of finish, which was also brought 
out in the remarks in connection with the figures in Table XVIII. 
It may be seen that the "eye of lean" and also the "streak 
muscle" were larger in the case of Litter V. This would in part 
account for the high percentage of lean in the entire section# 

On comparing the figures in Table XIX and Table XI, it is 
again apparent that the tendency is for the extremes of these 
measurements to fall within a litter. This applies to the total 
area of the cross sections, the percentage of lean, the size of 
the "eye of lean" and in a lesser degree, to the area of the 
"streak muscle". 

The differences between individuals for the total area of 
the sections and the other detailed carcass measurements were 
large. However, the variations between the litter mates was not 
as great as was the variation between individuals in the experi¬ 
mental lots. The range between the maximum and minimum figures 
for the detailed measur anents was much the same as for all the 
litters. 

It has been mentioned that Experiment II lent itself to an 
analysis of this type more readily than did eithe r of the other 
two experiments discussed. However, a survey of the litter data 
from Experiments I and III indicates that the same trends were 
followed as those shown in from Experiment II. There was 


. 

, . .. 

•- 0 ". o . DO ' 




♦ 






• . - ' • • • 

» 

198 ©i{C 
, ♦ 




. 

















- 67 - 


practically as great a variation between individuals in one 
litter as there was between individuals in any one lot. However, 
the tendency was for litter-mates to show a similarity with 
respect to what may be regarded as an inherent potentiality 
in the matter of putting on fat during a given stage of growth 
or to the development of a large ” eye of lean”. 

The analysis of figures for carcass measurements with 
the object of determining any tendency toward similarity between 
litter-mates is of considerable importance. This is particular¬ 
ly true in view of the ever increasing use of the ”litter-group¬ 
ing” method of making up experimental lots. If it can be shown 
that certain strains have the ability to produce carcasses 
containing an optimum amount of lean and fat, a system of in- 
breeding could be developed which should produce animals having 
a sufficiently high degree of similarity with respect to this 
feature of the carcass quality, to reduce the variability to 
a minimum. Experiments having to do with the influence of 
rations and management practices upon carcass quality could then 
be conducted on a much more satisfactory basis. Such findings 
would also be of value to the ordinary swine raiser. With a 
knowledge of this, the development of strains could be followed, 
the result of which would be the production of carcasses of a 
uniformity in type and quality, the like of which cannot be pro¬ 
duced at present with the limited knowledge available of carcass 
and litter relationships. 


- 

* 

, 

. 

. 

. • 

< ■ 

. 








A Further Study of Carcass Data 


One of the objects of this thesis as was outlined 
previously was to determine mathematically whether there were 
any correlations between some of the more important features 
involved in carcass quality# Findings of this type would be 
of value not only to the buyer and processor of pork products but 
also to the producer and breeder. There are certain carcass and 
body characteristics which are readily assessable while the 
animal is alive. Length is an example of one of these. While 
it is not possible to determine definitely the length of an animal 
on the hoof, nevertheless a comparative judgement can quite readily 
be made. The same thing is true of the comparative proportions 
of the hams and shoulders. There are some more or less intrinsic 
features, howsver, such as the size of the "eye of lean" or the 
proportion of lean meat to fat which cannot be determined by a 
visual inspection. If, therefore, some correlation could be 
found between these two types of carcass qualifications, for ex¬ 
ample, length and the percentage of ham or the thickness of "belly 1 ,* 
the gradings of the animals would be more indicative of the gen¬ 
eral carcass quality than is the case when just a few of the 
more important apparent features are taken into consideration# 

In connection with these carcass measurements and percent¬ 
ages, the averages obtained from a large number of carcasses are 
worthy of special note. It might be mentioned that a number of 
these were obtained from Advanced Registry reports on pigs under- 



. I 

. j 

. 

. 

. 

I 

. . t 

{ 







69 - 


going test at the Dominion Experimental Station, Lacombe, 

Alberta, and at the University of Alberta# These pigs were 
undoubtedly of somewhat better breeding and of higher quality 
than the average commercial animals. The rest of the figures were 
obtained from carcasses of animals fed on experiments at the 
University of Alberta during the summer of 1934 and the winter 
of 1934-33 9 a large number of which were included in the experi¬ 
ments previously outlined. 

TABLE XX; *Carcass Measurements* 


Length of Carcass 
Depth of Shoulder Fat 
Depth of Back Fat 
Depth of Loin Fat 
% Ham of Carcass 
% Middle of Carcass 
% Shoulder of Carcass 


30.8 in. 
1.823 in. 


1.13 in. 
1.49 in. 
23#94 
47.32 
28.34 


* Average measurements from 330 carcasses# 


The average figures outlined in Table XX, in that they 
are comprised of a large number of individual determinations, show 
the general trend of these carcass m asurements. It may be seen 
that the fat covering over the shoulder is on the average high and 
when it is compared with the other measurements of fat along the 
back ("loin fat" and n back fat”) is somewhat out of line, thus 
indicating a lack of uniformity of covering. It would seem that 
the ideal of a uniformity of fat covering from shoulder to loin 
is difficult to attain# 

One point of particular interest in connection with Table XX 
is the relationship between the percentage of ham and the percentage 






T 




c 






: 

: 

: 

• : 

. . . • : 

. : 


. ; 




. 

. 








- 70 - 


of shoulder. Hammond’s (13) theory on development has been 
mentioned previously but it does not appear from the data reported 
that the shoulders and hams could make up equal proportions of 
the carcass, in that the percentage of ham is 4.6% greater than 
the percentage of shoulder. In no case was there a carcass in 
which the hams and shoulders were equal in proportion. Hence, the 
ideal proportions, of 30 % middle, 23 % shoulder and 23 % ham, on 
the basis of the cutting practice followed in the Packing Plants, 
would appear to be out of line with the normal anatomical develop¬ 
ment of the bacon hog, at least as it has been bred and reared up 
to the present time. Further averages have been obtained on the 
more detailed features of the carcasses. 

TABLE XXI;* *Detailed Carcass Measurements# 


Maximum "belly" Thickness (in.) 
Minimum "belly” Thickness (in.) 
Av. Area of Cross Sections(sq.in) 
Av. Area of "eye of lean" (sq.in) 
Av. % of lean in Cross Section 
Av. % f, ay© of lean" in Cross 

section: 


1.877 ± .0301 
1.03 ± .0364 

26.44 
4.43 

37.60 ±1.0415 
16.46 + .3014 


*Average measurements from 106 carcasses. 

Judging from the average minimum "belly” measurements in 
Table XXI, it would appear that a measurement of 1 inch may be 


regarded as a satisfactory thickness of "belly" at the point 


where this measurement was taken. 

The percentage of lean in the cross sections averaged 37.6 
percentage. This figure may be compared with thee e obtained by 
Mitchell and Hamilton (50) in their work at Illinois. They made 



. 

. 

. - - 

4 






. - 




. . 
. 

. 


* 

♦ 









71 - 


determinations of the percentages of lean meat, fat, skin and bone 
in the carcasses of animals which had been subject to various 
methods of feeding. The figures they give for the percentage 
of lean in the entire carcass range from 42.3% in a "very chuffy" 
or short overfinished animal to 47.1% in the case of the longer 
and thinner hogs. These figures are somewhat above those ob¬ 
tained for the sections through the middle. This is easily 
understood, however, in that, with the exception of the "eye of 
lean", which makes up only 16.46% of the whole, there are very 
few large solid masses of lean meat in the sections from the 
middle. The individual muscles are interspersed with layers of 
fat, a condition which is not found to the same extent in any 
other part of the body and which is no doubt largely responsible 
for the differences mentioned# 

A number of correlations have been worked out from the 
data obtained on the carcasses of the animals in the three experi¬ 
ments which were reviewed. The correlations between the per¬ 
centage of total lean meat in the sections studied and same of 
the main carcass measurements are tabulated below. 














Q •*>.' t 

■ 

. . • 

. • -,in 

Ia< 


















- 72 


TABLE XXII; Correlations between the % Total 
Lean and Carcass Measurements. 


Length of the carcass 
Depth of Shoulder Eat 
Depth of Back Fat 
Depth of Loin Fat 
Minimum "belly" thickness 
Maximum ’’belly 1 ' thickness 
% Ham of entire carcass 
% Shoulder of entire carcass 


+ 

.5515 

4 .0606 

- 

.5689 

4 .0751 

- 

.2981 

* .0793 

- 

.2163 

4 .0831 

- 

.4751 

i .0674 

- 

.1926 

s .0838 

•fr 

.8802 

4 .1961 

- 

.6291 

± .0526 


From the above table it is to be noted that there is a 
slight positive correlation between the length of the carcass 
and the percentage of lean meat in the sections that were studied. 
This means that the longer pigs had a tendency to show a greater 
amount of lean meat at that point of the carcass where the de¬ 
tailed measurements were made. In connection with the minimum 
"belly" measurement,there is a slight tendency for a negative 
correlation between this feature and the % of lean in the cross 
sections. This would indicate that those catcasses having the 
highest percentage of lean at the point determined also tended 
to have the thickest flank. One very important feature in connect¬ 
ion with Table XXII is the definitely positive correlation which 
exists between the percentage of lean meat and the percentage of 
ham. Therefore, as the ham tended to increase in size when com¬ 
pared to the rest of the body, the proportion of lean meat or 
muscle in the side would tend also to increase. The opposite 
occurs in the case of the shoulder. As the percentage of lean 
meat increases, the size of the shoulder decreases. Judging from 
these relations, we should expect to find a negative correlation 








: 




















. . 














t . 

t 

. . 

, 

. 







- 73 - 


between the percentage of ham and the percentage of shoulder 
at this point. However, the results conflict for there is a 
positive correlation of #74-95 * #0381 between the percentage 
shoulder and the percentage ham# 

The relation that the proportions of the ends of the car¬ 
cass bear to one another is of great importance. It again 
brings up this question of the growth of the animal body and 
the line along which this development takes place. If there 
is a positive correlation between the proportions of the ham 
and the shoulder, it would mean that these two increase at the 
expense of the middle piece of the carcass. In that, as it has 
.been suggested previously, this latter portion is the more 
valuable half of the side, a relation of this kind is of great 
economic value to the producer and processor. If, however, as is 
indicated by the correlations of the percentagetotal lean and 
the percentages of the ham and shoulder, the proportion of the 
shoulder decreases as the ham increases, there is very good 
evidence in support of Hammond’s (13) theory on bodily develop¬ 
ment. This latter would also intimate that at some period during 
the growth of the animal, providing this does not cease too 
early in life, there is a time when the shoulders and hams are 
equal or very nearly equal in proportion. However, as has been 
indicated, the data obtained here is contradictory on this point 
and must be verified either one way or the other before any de¬ 
finite statement can be made upon this point. It may be seen 
from table XXII that there is no relation between the covering 
of fat over the back and the percentage of lean meat in the side. 


- - 

- 

. 

» . • o • 

. 

. 

. ' . 

. I. . • • 

t 


- 74 


Correlations have been computed on the basis of the 
percentage "eye of lean" and the other carcass measurements* 
They are as follows; 


TABLE XXIII; Correlations Between the Percentage 

"Eye of Lean" and Carcass Measurements 


% Shoulder of Entire Carcass 
% Ham of Entire Carcass: 


Depth of Back Eat 
Depth of Loin Fat 


Length of Carcass 


Depth of Shoulder Fat 


+.2179 * *0829 
-.7439 * .0389 
-.6031 * .0334 
-.3418 * .0769 
-.2637 * .0193 
+.9323 * .0904 


There is a negative correlation between the percentage 
of the "eye of lean" and the shoulder fat, and also the depth 
of back fat# This is a finding which is difficult to explain 
on any basis of growth and development as it has been discussed 
up to the present time. There appears to be no reason why there 
should be any relationship between these measurements. 

The most striking and outstanding figure in Table XXIII 
is the high positive correlation between the percentage of "eye 
of lean" and the percentage of ham. In that the "eye of lean" 
makes up a large proportion of the total lean in the cross sections, 
this figure is in line with that in Table XXII which shows a pos¬ 
itive correlation between the percentage total lean and the per¬ 
centage ham. This means, therefore, that the larger percentage 
of ham is associated with the largefc percentage of "eye of lean" 
in the cross sections. Such an arrangement seems reasonable on 
the basis of the anatomy of the animal, since the longissimus 
dorsi muscle, or the "eye of lean" is the only large muscle 




: 





: 








: 












: 




: . . .. ^ T9b j 




: 




■ 








: 











. . .. c 2 *:ol £< • : 


: V j'il 1 

r * » 

> x 








- 75 


which connects the hind quarters with the fore-quarters 
and the central portion of the animal body# This relation 
between these two features of the carcass quality is, therefore, 
of interest not only from the standpoint of the growth of the 
animal but also from the point of view of graders and those in¬ 
terested in the value of the carcass as a whole. 

It is interesting to note that there is no significant 
negative correlation between the percentage "eye of lean" and 
the percentage shoulder. This would intimate that the relation 
between the percentage of this shoulder cut and the percentage 
of total lean as indicated in Table XXII is not as significant 
as the figures would tend to indicate* 

Since length is a factor of carcass quality which can be 
estimated to a comparative degree on visual inspection, ai$r cor¬ 
relation between this anatomical aspect and other features of 
carcass quality would be of interest* The following table shows 
the figures obtained from an analysis of this type: 

TABLE XXIV: Correlations Between Length and 
Oth’er Carcass Measurements* 


Depth of Back Fat : -*0945 - *0795 

Minimum "Belly" thickness : +,0922 - .0863 

Maximum "belly" thickness : +.0622 - .0866 

Percentage Ham : +.2910 i *0797 

Percentage Shoulder +.1881 - .0839 

There is no correlation between the length of the carcass 
and the features of the carcass recorded in Table XXIV. Hence, 
statements to the effect that the longer pig shows a thinner 





- ■ 

. 

















> 

r 


' * 






— I . H 

. 




. ' 



















- 76 - 


"belly” or a lower percentage of ham or shoulder, or a lack 
of fat on the back would scarcely seem to be justified in 
the light of the lack of correlation between the figures 
outlined in the above table. 

SIMMARY OF EXPERIMENTS & ANALYSES. 

The first experiment of the series which has been discussed 
was initiated to determine whether exercise and the porcine habit 
of rooting had any effect upon the development of the shoulder 
of the bacon hog, either with reference to the relative pro¬ 
portions of this part of the carcass, or to the size of the 
muscle fibres within the infraspinatus muscle in the shoulder. 

Due to the method of planning the experiment, it was possible 
to determine the effect of inside full feeding, outside full 
feeding and outside limited feeding upon the rate of gains and 
feed requirements under conditions of this kind, and also the 
effect that these dif ferent modes of management had upon the 
quality of the carcass produced. 

It was found that exercise did not increase the percentage 
of shoulder in the bacon hog, nor did it have the effect of in¬ 
creasing the diameter of the muscle fibres within the infra¬ 
spinatus muscle. The average daily gains in the three lots used 
showed a marked gradation. Those fed inside on a full ration 
made an average daily gain of 1*53 pounds, those on pasture and 
full feed gained 1.44 pounds per day, and those fed on pasture 
and half feed gained 1.01 pounds per day. This latter lot was 



' 

. 

. 

. 












- 77 - 


put on full feed for the last six weeks of the experiment 
but required 167 days to reach market weight as compared to 
111 and 119«5 days in the other two lots# The feed required 
to put on 100 pounds of gain was the lowest in the case of the 
lot fed inside, and was practically the same for the other two 
lots# The results obtained indicated that the only difference 
between feeding full and half feed on pasture with a final fin¬ 
ishing period for the latter group was that those receiving only 
half feed required a longer time to attain market weight. 

The results obtained in the carcass quality determinations 
showed that the carcasses resulting from all three lots were of 
very high quality, those fed inside on full feed having a slight¬ 
ly higher degree of finish than those from the lots fed on past¬ 
ure. There was no difference in the average lengths of the car¬ 
casses within the three lots. The percentage of lean in the 
cross section of the side and also the area of the "eye of lean" 
was greatest in the case of the lot fed outside on half feed 
which indicates that the muscle development continues even when 
the feed consumed is below that required for normal growth. 

It was found from histological studies that it was im¬ 
possible to compare the amounts of connective tissue in sections 
of the size used in making ordinary microscopic examinations# 
Chemical determinations are advised as the most accurate means 
of comparing tissues of this type in sections of meat. 

The object of the second experiment was to determine the 
effect of feeding a number of different protein supplements upon 


► 








- 

, .... . . ... ?i : - : 






- 78 - 


the rate of growth of fattening pigs and also upon the quality 
of the carcasses which resulted. The feeds used were mixed and 
fed in proportions which wculd conform with the requirements 
set out in Morrison’s Feeding Standards (8). 

The average daily gains for all the five lots fed on 
this experiment were uniform and indicated a growth rate for 
the feeding period. There was only a slight difference in the 
feed required to make a hundred pounds of gain, indicating that 
all of the supplements fed were sufficient in quantity and 
quality. The data collected from the measurements of the car¬ 
casses of these animals showed that there was a high degree of 
uniformity between all the lots in respect to the carcass quality. 
It was noted, however, that in all the lots there was a lack of 
finish along the back and a thinness of "belly” in the flank 
region. Therefore, while the data indicated that the supplements 
used were of equal value when compared upon the basis of the rates 
of growth which resulted, or upon the basis of the quality of 
the carcasses which were produced, nevertheless, in all the lots 
there tended to be a lack of finish and thickness of '’belly” 
in the carcasses which would designate them as tending toward 
”underf ini shed" • 

The third experiment of the series was drawn up with the 
object in view of determining whether feeding varying amounts of 
protein in the ration would have any effect upon the quantity 
of lean meat in the carcass, and upon the quality of the carcasses 
generally. The rate of growth and feed requirements were also 


:o c '• v • 

. • ' : -• c 

. 

» . 1 J 

. 



- 79 - 


noted. The experiment comprised five lots of eight animals, 
each lot receiving a different level of protein in the diet# 

One lot received a ration, which according to the common 
standards was low in protein, while another was fed a high 

protein diet; the other three lots were fed rations the amount of 

protein in which was intermediary between the two extremes. 

The rate of growth determined by the average daily gains 
showed a gradual increase from the lot receiving the low, or 4% 
protein level, to the lot receiving protein fed at the levels of 
12%, 10% and 8%# Beyond this point, however, any additional 
protein fed did not produce any appreciable increase in the 
rate of growth. The data for the feed required for growth showed 

that with respect to this phase of the question the point of 

optimum returns was also in the lot which received the 12°/,, 10% 
and 8$, of protein. Those animals receiving less protein than 
that amount required a larger amount of the feed mixture to put on 
100 pounas gain but those which were fed diets containing more 
protein than the amount cited did not show any advantage in the 
utilization of feed. 

The degree of finish on the carcasses was fairly uniform 
for all the lots. It was noted that the lot which received the 
low protein ration with a wide nutritive ratio, did not carry 
a thicker covering of fat over the back than was found to be the 
case in ary of the other lots. The back fat in all the five lots 
was found to measure less than lg-** There was no difference in 
the average length of the carcasses in the five lots, hence, in¬ 
creasing the amount of protein fed did not cause any increase in 



, • 

t ■ , 4 

• : . . 

- 

.. 

■ 

, 








- 80 - 


in length* There was no difference in the average dressing per¬ 
centage between the various lots. The results of Iodine Number 
determinations which were made on the back flat of all the car¬ 
casses shewed that there was no material difference in the degree 
of firmness of the fat produced in the various lots. 

The detailed measurements made on the sections taken from 
the middle of the carcasses showed some degree of variation between 
lots. However, these differences were not such as to indicate 
that the amount of protein fed had any effect upon the amount of 
lean meat produced in the side of the bacon hog* 

In view of the variation which was found to exist between in¬ 
dividuals in the same lot, with respect to the measurements used 
in determining carcass quality, it was thought advisable to analyse 
some of the data obtained, on the litter basis. The carcass 
measurements procured from the animals in Experiment II were used 
to make this analysis. It was found that the degree of variability 
was equally great irrespective of whether the data was considered 
on the experimental lot, or the litter basis. However, there was 
a tendency for the animals in one litter to show either a higher 
or a lower degree of finish when compared with the same animals 
in experimental lots. 

Correlations were computed between a number of the more 
important factors involved in carcass quality. The results obtained 
showed that there was no correlation Detween the length of the car¬ 
cass and such factors as, thickness of "belly”, depth of back fat 
or percentage of ham or shoulder. There was a positive correlation, 
however, between the percentage of the "eye of lean", and the 


* 

- 

, 

, 

. 

. 

. 

* < 

. 


- 81 - 


percentage of ham and an inverse correlation oetween the per¬ 
centage '‘eye of lean" and shoulder and back fat* There was also 
found to be a positive correlation between the percentage total 
lean and the percentage of ham* In connection with the general 
proportions of the carcasses studied, it was found that there was 
a positive correlation between the percentage of shoulder and 
the percentage of ham* 


CONCLUSIONS. 


The following conclusions may be drawn frcm the results of 
the experiments and analyses which have been reviewed in this 
thesis: 

1. Exercise and "rooting" does not tend to increase the 
proportion of the shoulders in relation to the rest of 
the carcass of the bacon hog* 

2. The diameters of the muscle fibres in the "infraspinatus" 
muscle are not increased as a result of the increased 
exercise taken by the animal. 

The carcasses of bacon hogs which received a limited 
grain allowance with pasture for a period of 120 days, 
following which they received a full feed allowance until 
they attained market weight, were of as high a quality 
and contained a higher percentage of lean meat in the side 
than did the animals which received a full feed allowance, 
with or without pasture, during the entire feeding period. 
However, it took the former approximately two months longer 
to attain a marketable weight and finish. 

4. Limiting the grain ration during a period of 120 days 

and thus providing for a "growing period" did not result 
in the production of carcasses showing greater length. 

5* The feeding of the protein supplements outlined in 
Experiment II resulted in a high and uniform rate of 
growth in all lots# 




. 

■ 


' l 

. 

. 






- 82 


6* The carcasses resulting from the animals receiving 
the various protein supplements fed in the second 
experiment were all very uniform with respect to 
quality but on the average lacked finish along the back# 

7* The rate of growth of hogs receiving rations contain¬ 
ing varying levels of protein shewed a gradual increase 
up to the point where protein was fed at the average 
levels of 10%. Feeding protein in excess of this 
proportion did not result in any further increase 
in the rate of growth# 

8. Feeding protein at the average rate of 10% of the 
ration resulted in a saving of the feed required for 
gains when compared with rations containing a lower 
percentage of protein. The addition of protein be¬ 
yond this point did not result in any further de¬ 
creasing of the feed requirements# 

9. Feeding protein at varying levels to the growing bacon 
hog does not vary the percentage of lean meat which is 
produced in the carcass, at least insofar as the sections 
on which measurements were made may be taken to re¬ 
present the proportions of lean meat in the carcass 

as a whole. 

10. The length of the carcass is not affected by the per¬ 
centage of protein which is fed in the diet# 

11# The type of the ration fed, with respect to the amount 
of protein it contains, does not affect materially 
the firmness of the fat laid down along the back# 

12# The average measurements of the carcass as computed 

from 3^0 individuals were - length 30.8 inches; depth 
of shoulder fat, 1.823 inches; depth of back fat, 1.13 
inches; depth of loin fat, 1.49 inches; % ham, 23*94; 

% middle, 47*32 and % shoulder, 28*34. 

13. There is a great variation between litter mates with 
respect to the percentages and measurements of the car¬ 
casses. However, there is a tendency for the animals 
in one litter to show either a higher or a lower degree 
of finish when compared with the same animals placed 

in experimental lots# 

14. There is no correlation between the length of the carcass 
and the percentage of shoulder or ham, the thickness of 
the "belly" or the depth of the back fat. 














































- 





- 







. 




























* 

I. 

















» 




• 0: 







' o'- 












' • : : 


















• 





- 











» ' * ’ c ~ „ r _ . 

. 

“ 

c 


: 

> 

« ' •. • 




, ' •- . .. • _ tc*. J * 


... . v 


>• 


.... 
t ; 

• , , 












( 



t # 
































> 






























. 



















- 83 - 


15« There is a positive correlation between the per¬ 
centage "eye of lean" as well as % total lean, and 
the percentage of ham, thus indicating that the 
size of the ham may be regarded as a criteria as 
to the percentage of lean in the carcass* 

16. An inverse correlation exists between the percentage 
"eye of lean" and the depth of back fat and shoulder 
fat. 

17* There is a correlation of +.7495 *.0381 between the 
percentage ham of the ©arcass and the percentage 
shoulder. 




- 

« 































- 84 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. ARMSBY, H.P: The Nutrition of Farm Animals. MacMillan 

Co., New York, 1917. 

2. McCOLLUM, E.Y: The Newer Knowledge of Nutrition, 2nd 

Edition, MacMillan Co., New York, 1923. 

STARLINC, E.H: Principles of Human Physiology, 3rd 
Edition, Lea & Fehiger, Philadephia, 1920. 

4. CAMERON, A.T: Textbook of Biochemistry, 3rd Edition, 

J. & A. Churchill, London, 1932. 

3* LUSK, G: The Basis of Nutrition. Yale Univ. Press, 

New Haven, 1913* 

6. CHITTENDEN, R.H; The Nutrition of Man. Fredrick Stokes 
Company, New York, 1907* 

7« SMITH, F: A Manual of Veterinary Physiology. 3th Edition, 
Alex. Eger, Chicago, 1921. 

8. HENRY & MORRISON: Feeds and Feeding, 18th Edition, Henry- 
Morrison Co., Madison, Wis., 1923. 

9* BQDANSKY, M; Introduction to Physiological Chemistry, 

John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1927* 

10. MENDEL, L.B: Nutrition - The Chemistry of Life. 

Yale Univ. Press, New Haven, 1923. 

12. DIETRICH, Wm: Swine, - Breeding, Feeding and Management, 

Sanders Publishing Co., Chicago, 1912. 

13* HAMMOND, JOHN: Growth and Development of Mutton Qualities 
in the Sheep. Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh, 1932. 

14. CHANST & AHLBORN: Nutrition. Houghton Mifflin Co., 

New York, 1934. 

13. HENRY, W.A: Wisconsin Sta. Report, No. 7, 1890. 

16. SHAW, T.J: Jour. Min. Agric. , 33, 1928. 

17. SWANSON, C.0: Effect of Rations on the Development of Pigs. 

Jour. Agric. Res. XXI, p.279-341, 1921. 

18. CURTIS & CRAIG: Iowa Sta. Bui. 48, 1900. 

19. SHELDON, G.M: Kansas Sta. Bui. No. 9, p. 107-119, 1889. 

















: . 

* , 

; . t 

> • . . ' . . .. 

: . 

* < t » 

; t 

* , 



: - < 

* t 

; 

. 

: 

V 


. 


: 

* 

: 

- 








: 
















: . " . 'i 







20. DUGGAR, J.F; Alabama College Station Bui. No. 82. 

p. 107-119, 1897. 

21. FORBES , E.B. et al: Ohio State Bui. 283, p.111-132, I9I3. 

22. JOSEPH, W.E: Illinois Sta. Bui. 173, p.289-317, 1914. 

23* ROTHWELL, G.B: The Influence of Feeds and Feeding on 
the type of Market Hogs. Agric. Gaz. of Canada, 

March - April, 1923* 

24. BOETHGE, G; Nutritional Abstracts & Reviews, Vol. II, 

Mb. 3, p.637-8, 1933. 

23. SCHUTTE & MURRAY: Nutritional Abstracts & Reviews, 

Vol. I, No. 3, 358, 1932. 

26. INDIANA. STATION REPORT, 1927• 

27* EMMETT & GRINDLEY: A Study of the Development of Growing 
Pigs. Ill. Agric. Exp. Sta. Report No. 168, 1914. 

28. KULBS & BERBERICH: Investigations on the Influence of 
Exercise on the Development and Composition of 
Internal Organs. Abstracted from Exp. Sta. Record, 

Vol. XXVIII, 272, 1913. 

33* M0RPURG0: quoted from Hammond (13) page 490. 

34. HALBON; Quoted from Hammond (13) p. 490 

33* SCHIEFFERDECKER: quoted from Hammond (13) p.490 

36. HOUCK: quoted from Hammond (13) p.490 

37. SCHAFER: Quoted from Hammond (13) p.490 

38. PRENANT: Quoted from Hammond (13) p.490 

39. LEIGHTON & DOUGLAS: Quoted from Hammond (13) p.337 

40. ROBERTSON & BAKER; Histological Differences in the Muscles 

of Full, Half and Rough Fed Steers. Missouri Exp. Sta, 
Res. Bui. 200, 1933. 

41 ISAAK; Quoted from Hammond (13) P*333« 

42. SINCLAIR & SACKVILLE; A Study of Some Problems in Bacon 
Hog Production, University of Alberta Bui. 13, 1927* 

44. SINCLAIR & McELROY: The Addition of Protein & Calcium to a 
Ration of Small Grains for Growing Pigs. Scientific 
Agriculture Vol. XV. No. 7, 1933* 









* l 






: 













































- 86 - 


43* MITCHELL, HAMILTON & HAINES; Some Factors Affecting 
the Connective Tissue Content of Beef Muscle. 

Jour, of Nutrition, Vol. I, No. 2, 1928. 

46. ELLIS & ZELLER; Effect of Quality and Kind of Feed 

on Economy of Gains and Body Composition of Hogs. 
U.S.D.A. Tech. Bui. 413, 1934. 

47. SPILDO, L.S; Quoted from Sinclair & McElroy, (44) 448. 

48. HANKINS & ELLIS; Some Results of Soft Pork Investigations 

U.S.D.A. Bui. 1407, 1926. 

49. DUNLOP, G; Methods of Experimentation in Animal Nutrition 

Jour. Agric. Sci. Vol. XXIII, Part IV, 1933. 

30. MITCHELL & HAMILTON; Swine Type Studies. Ill. Exp. Sta. 
Bui. 323, 1929. 

. HAMMOND, J; Problems of Feeding and Management in Pig 
Production. The Veterinary Journal, Vol. XC. 

No. 3, 98-102. 


33 




- 


: 

* < ' ' . f - t 

: 

* . - , 

• . J: - ; * 

: 

, , , , 

: 

* 




♦ 

: 

♦ 

: 

. 


. 
























































































