For Reference 

NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 

M.So. THESIS . 

THE OXIDATION OF NATURAL GAS AND METHANE WITH 

GASEOUS OXYGEN OTHER HIGH PRESSURES AND AT HIGH 

TEMPERATURES . 

By 

Victor Thomas, B.Sc. 

Dept, of Chemistry. April, 1936. 


















I 










THESIS 


THE OXIDATION OF NATURAL GAS AND METHANE WITH 

GASEOUS OXYGEN UNDER HIGH PRESSURES AND AT HIGH 

TEMPERATURES : 

Submitted in Partial Fulfilment of the 
Requirements for the Degree of Master 
of Science, 

By 

Victor Thomas, B.Sc. 

Under the direction of Dr.E.H.Boomer. 


Time devoted to thesis work: 11 months 
out of 18 months devoted to M.Sc. Y/ork. 


Time is proportional on basis of 7.0 months for 
an academic year and 4 full courses representing 
one academic year’s work. 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April, 1936 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/oxidationofnaturOOvict 


TARIE, OF CONTENTS 


Page • 

Introduction.. 1 * 

Literature Review*.. .... .. 7. 

Experimental Methods.. 21. 

Materials... 21. 

Apparatus.. 24 • 

Analytical Methods... 45. 

Experimental Results ........................ 56. 

Discussion....... 90. 

Summary... 103. 

Acknowledgement. 105. 

Table of References... 106 . 
































INTRODUCTION 


Gaseous paraffins of low molecular weight are 

available in tremendous quantities and they are continuing 

to attract the attention of the chemist as potential raw 

materials for the manufacture of a great variety of 

chemical products. They are available in large quantities 

in natural gas and are also produced in quantity in oil 

refining processes and in the carbonization of coal. 

Commonly there are satisfactory markets for any 

one of these gases as fuels. However, in some regions 

where the supplies are very great and the market small, a 

great waste may occur. This applies especially to the 

province of Alberta. Wastage has reached in past years as 

much as 6 x 1C 8 cubic feet per day. The Turner Valley 

field in the province of Alberta at present produces 
8 

2.5 x 10 cubic feet per day of which about 10 percent is 
usefully employed. In addition a few million feet of 
stabilizer gas of high value are wasted. This gas consists 
chiefly of ethane, propane and butane. The field at 
present for all practical purposes, is running wide open. 
To-day the reserves in the field are greatly depleted, 

lo 

probably between 3-5 x 10 cubic feet remaining down to 
a pressure at which it could be economically extracted. 
There does not appear to be any 





















2 


possibility in the near future of using this gas in the 
logical way as fuel# The possibility of chemical 
conversion to useful liquid products of high value and 
ease of transportation offer a field of inquiry. Regardless 
of the future of Turner Yalley the province of Alberta 
has available in addition a possible gas production 
estimated at 4 x 10 cubic feet daily, which being dry 
gas is not being removed wastefully# 

The gaseous hydrocarbons are, as a rule, very 
resistant to chemical reactions# They are generally 
stable and only attacked under drastic conditions. 

However, their reactions, with only one important 
exception, are highly exothermic and also involve large 
decreases in free energy. The combination of drastic 
treatment required to initiate the reaction and large 
energy decreases associated with the reaction makes the 
problem of control very difficult. Control of velocity and 
extent of the reaction is, nevertheless, essential. Of 
the series of reactions a hydrocarbon can undergo with 
another reagent, the primary reaction is usually the most 
important in producing a useful liquid or gaseous product 
while the secondary reactions leading to the greatest 
decreases in free energy give products of little of no 
economic value. 

The most promising reactions of hydrocarbons 

















' 










c 













C t 

■4 • 





















C •*’ •' 












■ 
















3 


from the point of view of economic investigations may 
he classified as follows:- 

1. Pyrolysis 
2 • Halogenation 
3* Oxidation 

Pyrolysis of the lower homologues of the gaseous 
hydrocarbons requires high temperatures. However as the 
molecular weight increases, cracking takes place at 
successively lower temperatures. Methane can be cracked 
either by heating it externally or having the necessary 
heat applied internally by partial combustion. The 
ultimate products formed are carbon black and hydrogen 
or water. Controlled pyrolysis will yield olefines, 
acetylene and aromatics to the extent of 12 percent or 
so of the methane. The process is not economical however 
although it is used under certain conditions as a source 
of hydrogen. The aromatics are a by-product. The higher 
homologues of the gaseous paraffins may be pyrolyzed 
readily to form olefines as one of the main pioducts. 

These olefines can be polymerized either simultaneously 
or separately to produce naphthenes, aromatics and other 
higher molecular weight hydrocarbons. The largest 
percentage of the unsaturates are at present polymerized 
to produce motor fuels and low boiling point hydrocarbon 
fractions which are used as solvents in the chemical 










* 









. 
































* 




















4 • 


industries• 

The chlorination of the lower homalogues of 
the gaseous paraffins has in recent years received much 
attention. The chlorination of methane to produce the 
mono-chloro derivative and its subsequent hydrolysis to 
methyl alcohol shows promise. However, a great difficulty 
appears in limiting the reaction to one hydrogen atom 
alone. Brom&nation and fluoration have not been 
investigated a great deal, due no doubt to the fact that 
the initial cost of the materials are of necessity very 
high. Various chlorinated derivatives of pentane have 
been made on a commercial scale. The interest here l&es 
in the fact that higher alcohols can be produced which 
are eventually transformed into solvents for cellulose 
acetate. The mono-chloro derivatives are also used as 
raw materials in the manufacture of f*atty acids, drying 
oils and other similar materials. 

Oxidation is a promising reaction in view of 
the number of reactions possible and the variety of useful 
products such as alcohols, aldehydes, acids and resins 
that may be produced. 

Attempts have been made to oxidize methane 
selectively to carbon monoxide and hydrogen. The process 
is simple requiring only a limited supply of oxygen, a 
high temperature, and a metallic catalyst. More satisfactorj 





J 


? 




* 










■ 










. 












■< 











, 




5 


results have been obtained using steam over a nickel 
catalyst# The carbon monoxide and hydrogen mixture is used 
in the production of synthetic methanol. Further the 
carbon monoxide may be oxidized by means of more steam 
and a suitable catalyst to carbon dioxide, its subsequent 
removal by well known processes leaving pure hydrogen. 

The above two-stage process to produce hydrogen is used 
in the manufacture of ammonia and in the high pressure 
hydrogenation of petroleum products# 

In recent years, the direct oxidation of the 
lower gaseous paraffins with oxygen or air has been 
investigated for the production of any one particular 
product to a greater or less extent by careful control of 
certain variables, such as for example, temperature and 
pressure. Methyl alcohol has been isolated in large 
quantities in the direct oxidation of methane. The 
nature of the reaction is such that control is obtained 
only by the use of elevated pressures. Oxidation at 
atmospheric pressure results in low yields of useful 
products and high yields of carbon oxides and water. 

This present investigation is a continuation of 


( 3 ) 

the one carried out a few years ago on the direct oxidation 
of natural gas in the presence of various catalysts. A 


new apparatus has been designed whereby better control of 
the oxidation reaction may be obtained and an investigation 
















. 









< 



















* 





■ 

























6 


of the variables concerned readily carried out. The 
effect of such variables as pressure, space velocity, 
composition and catalysts were investigated in the direct 
oxidation of natural gas and methane with gaseous oxygen. 

Apart from the primary purpose of the research, 
the production of useful liquid products, considerable 
information regarding the mechanism of oxidation of 
hydrocarbons has been obtained. The universal importance 
of fuels and the processes of combustion makes such 
information of value on this account alone. 








L ITHRATUKE REVIEW : 


7. 


The earlier workers (23) on the oxidation of 
methane assumed that cartoon monoxide and water were the 
initial products, hydrogen being preferentially attacked 
by oxygen. Kersten (20) came to the conclusion that 
Co-rboft monoxide and hydrogen were the primary products 
and if carbon was formed first it burned preferentially to 
carbon monoxide before the hydrogen reacted. Misterli (24) 
put forward the same idea, namely,that the preferential 
combustion of carbon was the first step. Armstrong (2) 
suggested that the oxygen molecule combined with the 
hydrocarbon to form a dihydroxy derivative and that water 
could react with the complex to form hydrogen peroxide. 

However, he had no experimental evidence to support his 
suggestion. 

ihe greater part of the work on the combustion 
of the lower paraffins at atmospheric pressure was done 
by Bone (3) and his collaborators. From the result of 
their lmvestigations they put forward the Hydroxylsti nn 
theory to explain the formation of the various oxidation 
products. The Hydroxylation theory postulated the 
successive formation of hydroxyla ted compounds each of 
which could gain additional hydroxyl groups or lose water 
and b reals dovm in one or more ways . 

According to the Hydroxylation than-ny methane 
would be oxidized through the following stages:- 









' 

' . ■■ ' 

. 























8 


H 2 0 CO + H 2 0 

_OH + / 

CH 4 -9- CH 2 OH -=>• CH 2 -9 CH 2 0 -9 HCOOH 

I v OH J, \ 

CO + 2H 2 CO + H 2 CH 2 O s 

co 2 + h 2 o 

The final products being carbon nonoxide, carbon dioxide 
and water. 

Evidence foj? the Hydroxyl at ion theory Y/as meagre 
at that time since the mono-and di-hydroxy derivatives 
could not be isolated. Bone and Drugman (3) reported 
water and formaldehyde among the first oxidation products 
of methane below its ignition point. No trace of 
methanol was found. 

A characteristic of all direct oxidation 
experiments on methane and other gaseous hydrocarbons 
was the production of aldehydes. Certain investigators 
concluded that another compound was formed before the 
aldehyde and they assumed th&t a form of peroxide was 
built up between the oxygen molecule and the hydrocarbon. 
Because of this the Peroxide theory was bom in direct 
opposition to the Hydroxy la tion theory. 

The Peroxide theory was forcasted by Harries 
(18) who showed that in the reaction between ozone and 
a paraffin a labile peroxide was formed. Ho?/ever, the 
theory as it stands to-day was developed from the great 
amount of work done on the oxidation of liquid paraffins 














■ 








~ 


* 




■ 


- 

- 





























■ 




- 













9 


to explain knocking, in internal combustion engines* The 
theory is based upon experiments with liquid paraffins 
rather than gaseous paraffins* The main workers in this 
particular field being Callendar (11? and Brunner and 
Rideal(lO). 


According to the Peroxide theory a paraffin was 
oxidized as follows 


H 

I 

0 

l 

H 0 
I I 

R — C -C -R 

I I 

H H 



H 


I 

H 


H 

I 

-C — R 


I 

H 



H 

I 

0—0 -C —R 

I 

H 


alkyl hydrogen peroxide dialkyl peroxide 

with the formation of an alkyl hydrogen peroxide or a 
dialkyl peroxide. These peroxides could in turn break 
down to form water, aldehydes, acids and other similar 
compounds. The presence of a peroxide in most of the 
oxidations carried out on the lower paraffins could not 
be detected and hence the Peroxide theory has been greatly 
critieized. 


Egerton (13) does not believe in the 
initial formation of a stable peroxide. He assumes the 
formation of a temporary peroxide which can rearrange to 
form a stable peroxide or decompose into another secondary 
product. Further criticism of the Peroxide theory was 













, 


















»(• »i>W 
■ 




' 



















■ 






* 

< 




































, • 


















j. C i 








10 . 


furnished by Pope, Dykstra and Edgar (28) who worked on 
the vapor phase oxidation of the isomeric octanes. The 
early formation of aldehyde and water in the reaction 
products and their presence under all conditions led them 
to assume that the aldehyde was the primary oxidation 
product. The aldehyde was assumed to decompose further 
to aldehydes of lower molecular weight, carbon dioxide 
and water. With insufficient oxygen carbon monoxide was 
formed besides carbon dioxide. 

Since the Hydroxylation theory explained the 
formation of the various oxidation products more 
satisfactorily,it was in most cases accepted in preference 
to the Peroxide theory. More recent work to be discussed 
later offers confirmation of this theory. 

Bone and Wheeler (4) shoY/ed that when methane- 
oxygen mixtures at atmospheric pressures v/ere circulated 
through a tube containing pieces of porous porcelain 
maintained at temperatures of 500-600 °C. formaldehyde 
was formed in quantities equal to 15-20 $ of the methane 
burned. Small amounts of formic acid were also obtained 
but the presence of methyl alcohol, the assumed primary 
oxidation product could not be detected. The static 
experiments Y/ith methane at atmospheric pressures yielded 
similar results. 

It was not until suitable gaseous oxidation 










11 


oatlysts were used that alcohols in measurable quantities 
were abtained from their corresponding hydrocarbons. 

Layng and Soukup (21) obtained small quantities 
of methanol by oxidizing methane in the presence of oxides 
of nitrogen. They investigated the catalytic partial 
oxidation of various mixtures of methane and ethane with 
oxygen in a dynamic system at temperatures 100-700 °C* 
Catalysts such as copper and silver, oxides of metals, 
and barium oxide did not prove very satisfactory from the 
standpoint of carbon conversion to useful products. Small 
amounts of nitrogen oxide were found to promote the 
oxidation reaction. Auxiliary catalysts used with nitrogen 
oxide appeared to have little effect on the oxidation. 
However, methyl nitrite was shown to have a slight 
promoting action on the partial oxidation of the hydro¬ 
carbons # 

Later Bibb and Lucas (8) pbtained good yields of 
formaldehyde in the partial oxidation of natural gas by 
air, using nitric acid as the catalyst. Under some 
conditions a 4 jo conversion of the hydrocarbon to aldehyde 
was realized, while under other conditions a condensate 
containing 25jS of formaldehyde was obtained* For 
satisfactory yields of formaldehyde the time of contact of 
the gases in the furnace at 700-750 °C. should be less than 
0.5 seconds. The presence of formaldehyde in the condensate 






' [ 



















. 













• (Jfc 







12 


suggested that the oxidation followed the steps postulated 
by the Hvdroxvlation theory# 

None of; the oxidation processes using solid 
catalysts at atmospheric pressure have up to the present 
time given large yields of the initial hydroxyiated com¬ 
pound# Gristesco (12) has reported a process at atmos¬ 
pheric pressure and relatively low temperatures giving 
large yields of methanol by the oxidation of methane. 
Essentially the procedure consisted of bubbling various 
gas mixtures at atmospheric pressure through boiling water 
containing submerged catalysts# The liquid from this 
process was then fractionally distilled to separate the al¬ 
cohols , the uncondensed gases being sent through scrubbers 
to remove the aldehydes. Yields as high as 57 fo are re¬ 
ported upon passing a mixture containing three parts of 
air and one part of methane through the apparatus contain¬ 
ing lead oxide with copper oxide as a supplementary 
catalyst. By using a mixture of carbon monoxide and hyd¬ 
rogen good yields of ethyl alcohol were obtained under the 
proper conditions. The results reported are attractive# 
Efforts were made here to duplicate these experiments 
without any success whatever. 

Generally speaking, oxidation of methane at 
atmospheric pressure has not resulted in yields of 
methanol or formaldehyde of commercial interest# Such 













* 








* 










. 

■ 


















13 


work, however, has clarified greatly the mechanism of 
the process of combustion. 

In recent yeafcs a considerable amount of work 
has been carried out on the explosive combustion of methane 
under pressure and to a lesser extent on the slow 
controlled combustion under pressure# The use of pressure 
offers an obvious means of raising the yield of the 
primary oxidation products at the expense of the gaseous 
products# On the basis of the Hydroxylstion theory the 
over all reactions of importance in yielding useful 
products may be given as follows 

1# 2CH 4 + 0 2 > 2CH 3 0H 

2 # 2 CH 3 OH + 0 2 --> 2CH 2 0 + 2H 2 0 

3. 2CH 2 0 + 0 2 > 2HC00H# 

On the basis of Le Chatelier’s principle, an increase in 
pressure should increase the survival of the alcohol and 
formic acid at the expense of the formaldehyde. The end 
reaction % Q carbon oxides, hydrogen and water are either 
unaffected or opposed by increased pressure# Because of 
this and also to obtain a better insight into the oxidation 
mechanism of the paraffins work at high pressures was 
initiated. 

The explosive combustion of methane has received 
considerable attention from Bone (7) with the object of 
determining the mechanism of combustion. The first work 










14 


reported with the production of methanol by controlled 
slow oxidation is that of Yoshikawa (32). He carried out 
a series of experiments using a flow method within the 
pressure range 12-100 atmospheres, with a gas mixture of 
methane and air in the rationof 1:1, 2:1, 3:1# A decided 
reaction was noted in the range of pressures used at 
temperatures 300-400 °C. The main products obtained were 
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, water, methyl alcohol 
and formaldehyde. An increase in pressure was found to 
favour the survival of the alcohol. The reaction was 
promoted by a little nitric acid vapour at 350 °C. 

Hewitt and Haffner (25) using a static method 
have been able to obtain small yields of methanol. In 
their work an 8.1 : 1 methane-oxygen mixture was allowed 
to react in a steel chamber of 500 cc. capacity at different 
temperatures and initial pressures. Tge effect of 
increasing the pressure from 48.2-150 atmospheres was to 
increase, (1) the rate of reaction for any given temper¬ 
ature, (2) the amount of methanol and formaldehyde in the 
product, (3) the ratio of me.thand to formaldehyde in the 
product. Tiie amount of oxides of carbon represented a s 
much as 70fo of the methane that had reacted. An increase 
in pressure was shown to confirm qualitatively the results 
as predicted by Le Chatelie^s principle and confirmed the 
Hydrox ylation theory. 










15 


Pechler and Reder (29) in order to confirm the 
qualitative results of Newitt and Haffner carried out a 
series of flow experiments at 100 atmospheres pressure• 

At this particular pressure a number of runs were made at 
500 °C« using different concentrations of oxygen. The 
results of their experiments showed that higher temperatures 
were needed than in the case of the static bomb experiments, 
but that better yields were obtained at comparable pressures 
The conversion to alcohol increased with decrease in inlet 
oxygen concentration until at 0.6/S inlet oxygen about 60fo 
of the oxygen appeared in the alcohol® Yields of alcohol 
based on the total carbon burned were as high as 22.3 fo* 

Up to this time no complete systematic invest¬ 
igation of the variables concerned in the high pressure 
oxidation of the paraffins had been carried out. 
Consequently,Newitt and Szego (26) carried out an invest¬ 
igation with the object of finding the order of formation 
of the various oxidation products and the optimum conditions 
for their survival. A flow method was used and the temp¬ 
erature, pressure, rate of flow and oxygen concentration 
so adjusted as to obtain an optimum survival of the useful 
oxidation products. Pressures up to 50 atmospheres were 
used and temperatures within the range 290-340 °C* The 
following table shows the summarized results for the 
-oxidation of methane at 50 atmospheres pressure. 



































■ 


















. 


■ 



















* 




- 


. 


























16 


fo 0 

* in medium 

Temp. °C. 

c 1o CHa burned 

surviving as 




CH 3 0H 

CH 2 0 


60.0 

370 

13.7 

0.8 


5.0 

410 

29.0 

1.4 


3.0 

430 

51.0 

4.1 

A similar set of results was 

- obtained for 

the oxidation 

of 

ethane at 50 

atmospheres 

pressure• 


%Q 

« in medium 

Temp.°G. f 

> GoH. burned 

surviving as 



C 

2 H s 0H CHgCHO 

CH 3 OH CH 3 COOH 

9.9 


290 

23.9 4.9 

16.0 2.9 

5.0 


305 

32.1 4.1 

2.2 2.4 

3.0 


360 

63.2 4,3 

trace 1.1 


By diminishing the 

inlet oxygen 

concentration 

the 

survival of 

the alcohol 

was raised to 

over 50$ of the 


methane burned and over 60$ of the ethane burned. No 
unsaturates or peroxides were formed in any of the runs. 

These experiments and those of other investigators 
emphasized the fact that a low oxygen concentration was 
essential for a high survival of the useful oxidation 
products. 

An investigation, preliminary to the present one, 
was carried out by Broughton!9) on the effect of solid 
catalysts on the reactions. He used a flow method and 
a mixture of 7.5$ oxygen in Viking natural gas. Metallic 
catalysts were found to be efficient while oxides of 
polyvalent metals such as vanadium and tungsten, useful 
in other oxidation reactions, were found to be of no 



















... • .. . 































• 







. 


► 1 

< 

1 

' 

. 











17 . 


catalytic value. To obtain satisfactory yields-it was 
found desirable to work at pressures around 200 atmos¬ 
pheres and at temperatures within the range 300-350°C. 

Wiezevitch and Frolich (31) carried out an 
investigation on the oxidation of various paraffins 
using a flow apparatus. Preliminary runs were made on 
methane, ethane, and a natural gas containing 86.6J5 
methane with small amounts of ethand and propane. Oxygen 
wqs used as the oxidizing medium although air was found 
to give the same results provided that the pressure was 
increased to correct for the diluting effect of the 
nitrogen* Metallic catalysts such as calcium, chromel, 
silver and aluminum were found to give better results than 
empty tubes* An increase in space velocity was found to 
increase the production of desirable products without 
altering the oxygen efficiency or carbon conversion to 
useful products. Increasing the temperature of operation 
from oQ0-5Q0 °C# tended to produce more carbon monoxidepncl 
carbon dioxide, at the expense of the other useful products* 
The maximum operating temperature at 135 atmospheres 
pressure for methane and ethane was 370 and 500 °G. respect¬ 
ively. A few runs made on natural gas. showed that 
methyl alcohol could be isolated in quantities three to 
eight times the amount of formaldehyde. In order to insure 
that the products did not come from the oxidation of the 





■* 













• t ■'* 1 )■ 








.CO * . 

. 


t 



. 


, 




















. 










* 
















18 


methane, experiments were carried out on pure methane under 
the same conditions. The results obtained showed that the 
operating temperature was below the ignition point of the 
methane. However, in some of the runs the amount of 
methyl alcohol formed could not be accounted for if all the 
ethane reacted quantitatively to produce the primary 
oxidation product. This suggests that in the presence of 
the ethane some of the methane reacted. 

With natural gas at 135 atmospheres pressure, 

5.4$ inlet oxygen concentration and a temperature of 390°C. 
a product containing 30.3$ methyl alcohol, 3.3$ form¬ 
aldehyde and 0.5^ formic acid was obtained. One cubic 
he ter of the natural gas yielded 0.0615 litres of alcohol 
with small quantities of formaldehyde and formic acid, 
ine total amount of useful oxidation products corresponded 
to 16.2$ of the inlet oxygen and 3.7 fo of the total in¬ 
going carbon. 

This work showed that yields were only high if 
whe oxygen concentration was low and suggests that any com¬ 
mercial process will have to be circulatory in nature. 

The unoxidized hydrocarbon will be separated from the 
liquid products, oxygen added, and the mixture passed 
through the reactor again. 

Ho theory up to the present has been able to 
explain the mechanism of combustion of paraffins at high 











19 


and low pressures. The Hvdroxvlation theory has explained 
fairly satisfactorily the analytical hut not the kinetic 
data. Recently, Norrish (27) has put forward a theory 
to explain all the facts now at hand on the combustion of 
the hydrocarbons. Whild the Hydroxylation theory is 
satisfactory from the point of view of explaining the 
origin of the products, it can be critisized for the kin¬ 
etics of the reactions, 

Norrish disagrees with the Hydroxylation theory 
as to the origin of formaldehyde in the oxidation of 
methane. He regards the formaldehyde as the primary 
product while the alcohol is only formed under special 
conditions. His theory is based upon the existence of 
free radicles or molecular fragments which are produced 
when hydrocarbons are heated to high temperatures. The 
use of free radicles in explaining the mechanism of a re¬ 
action is generally accepted as justified and is usually 
used. The production of free radicles and a mechanism 
involving a chain reaction has been suggested by Norrish 
for the oxidation of methane. He assumes as primary reac¬ 
tions, 

0 + CH 4 -CH 2 : + H 2 0 

CH 2 : +0 2 -CH 2 0 + 0 

and so on. The chain can be terminated by either of two 
ways, 

















< ■ C 
































. . 



















' 






, 










’ 

. 





















20 . 

0 + CH 4 + X’ -^ CH 3 0H + X 

0 + surface -> l/2 0 2 

where X> stands for a hydrocarbon molecule having the ned- 
essary energy of activation# 

From the above equations it is seen that an in¬ 
crease in pressure favors the survival of the alcohol 
since a ternary collision must take place before its 
formation# A reasonable explanation of the predominance 
of aldehydes at low pressures and of methanol at high 
pressures is given by the theory# Norfish also claims 
a satisfactory interpretation of the kinetic data on 
oxidations # 

The literature records many patented processes 
on natural gas# On the whole } the literature on the 
oxidation of the lower paraffins is scanty and no com¬ 
prehensive investigation covering all controlling factors 
has yet appeared# The present work is an attempt in this 
direction. 













e 





















* 




* 




. 

. 






. 

. 




■ 




















































21 


EXPERIMENTAL METHODS# 

Materials # 

Natural gas from the Viking field was used in 
the preliminary work# On analysis in a modified type of 
Bureau of Mines gas analysis apparatus it showed the fol¬ 
lowing composition. 

CH 4 - 90.79 <$, 

C 8 H 6 - 3.50 $ 

N* - 5.71 $ 

Higher hydrocarbons such as propane were present in small 
amounts and are included in the ethane figure# Since 
the natural gas was odorized with mercaptans and alkyl 
disulfides it was necessary to purify it before use# The 
method of purification will be described in allater section* 
In the later experiments Cracked gas was used# 
This gas was prepared from Viking natural gas by remov¬ 
ing the heavier hydrocarbons by pyrolysis. A series of 
experiments based upon previous work (17) showed that 
pyrolysis at a temperature near 780 °C. and the proper 
rate of flow resulted in the decomposition of all 
hydrocarbons in the gas except methane# The products 
of pyrolysis were removed in a very simple manner to be 
described later. The Cracked gas which will be called 
Methane hereafter showed the following average analysis 

CH 4 - 94.3 jo 

N 2 - 5.6 fo 




























. 






* 

' 





. 


. 








* 















. 









22 


Impurities { C 2 H 4 , H 2 ) - 0.1 JS 

The catalysts used in this investigation were 
copper, glass, enduro steel and silver# The copper 
catalyst was used in small pieces 3/l6 * * square and 3/32* 
thick which were cut from a copper gasket ring# The 
weight of the copper used was 39*8 gms. with a total 
volunfof 4.46 cc. Prior to being used it was activated 
by alternate oxidation and reduction at 350 °C. Air was 
used as the oxidizing medium while hydrogen and methyl 
alcohol vapours were used as the reducing agent. In the 
earlier experiments on natural gas the copper catalyst was 
poisoned frequently and this necessitated its removal 
from the reactor to be cleaned. It was found by experience 
that if the copper catalyst was cleaned with dilute nitric 
acid rather than by activating by the above mentioned 
method the yields were not changed. Consequently in 
later experiments the copper catalyst was always cleaned, 
in case of poisoning, with dilute nitric acid to bring back 
its former activity. 

The glass used was obtained from a 1/8” 
diameter soft glass tubing which was cut into lengths 
of approximately 3/8”. The total weight of the glass 
used was 8.16 gms. 

Enduro steel was used in the form of machine 
turnings# These were thoroughly washed with ether to 
remove any. or grease. The total weight of the 











, 














. 









. 


















* 


’ t 

* 











. .. . 





















23 


turnings used was 17.13 gms. with a total volume of 
2.20 oo. 

Silver was used in 3/16*’ squares which were cut 
from a silver sheet 0.0004’* thick. The surface was 
cleaned with warm dilute nitric acid and washed thoroughly 
with distilled water. The total weight of the silver 
catalyst used was 15.35 gms. with a volume of 1.46 cc. 















. 

: . . . : ' :: ! 




/ f 





























24 


Apparatus» 

The pyrolysis apparatus is shown in Figures 
1 and 2# The process consisted essentially of cracking 
the higher hydrocarbons and odorant sulphur compounds 
and then removing the undesired products of the reactions * 

The flow of gas was controlled by observing the 
flowmeter ,A, and manipulating the inlet stopcock# The 
gas was passed through a calcium chloride drier ,B, to a 
0.75*’ quartz tube ,G, heated to 780 °C. over a length of 
12 inches, in which conversion of the ethane, heavier 
hydrocarbons and sulphur compounds in the natural gas to 
liquids, methane, olefines, hydrogen, and hydrogen 
sulfide occurred# The gas was then passed through a 
glass wool filter ,D, to remove mast of the tar, through a 
soda-lime tower to remove sulphur compounds and to an 
activated charcoal absorber ,F, which removed to a great 
extent the heavier hydrocarbons# The gas was next scrubbed 
by sulphuric acid in the tower ,G, holdinga&bout 400 cc# 
concentrated sulphuric acid containing about ifo silver 
sulphate as catalyst. The acid was heated to 70 °C# with 
a gas burner# Continuous circulation of hot sulphuric 
acid was obtained by the glass and mercury pump ,G, as 
shown. This scrubber removed the olefines completely. The 
sodium hydroxide scrubber ,H, removed any sulphur dioxide 
produced by the reduction of the sulphuric acid and 







, 

r ; , V* V » . 


. 





t ' 


*01 -JT-'.: t c. 5 i.r|pxX:.l 

. 

. - 











t C, - 



« « 



* 





(. ^ 




' 










c t 
















25 . 



Pyrolysis Apparatus. 





































































































































































26 



Pyrolysis Apparatus 























27 . 


oxidation of the sulphur compounds. The gas was then 
passed over 2 killograms of copper oxide ,1, at 400 °C. 
which oxidized the hydrogen, carbon monoxide and any traces 
of unsaturates left to carbon dioxide and*water. The bulk 
of the water produced was retained in the water trap, after 
which the gas was led through a smaller copper oxide tube 
at the same temperature to remove the last traces of hyd¬ 
rogen. A soda-lime tower removed the carbon dioxide ' 

produced over the copper oxide. By varying the rate of 
flow and temperature to give the optimum conditions it 
was possible to prepare 40 cubic feet of gas per day. The 
composition of the gas was 94.5 - 0.5 $ methane, 5.3 - 0.5$ 
nitrogen with 0.2 $ or less of other gases chiefly hydrogen* 
The variable amount of methane was produced from the ethane 
due to aLight variations in the temperature of the pyrolysis 
tube. The consumption of chemicals per 100 cubic feet of 
gas prepared was 1000 cc. technical grade sulphuric acid, 

50 gms. calcium chloride, 50 gms. activated charcoal and 80 
gms. soda-lime. The charcoal was re—activated when sat¬ 
urated by distillation with super-heated steam at 300 °C. foi 
20 minutes. All temperatures were measured with thermo¬ 
couples and were held constant to 5 ° of the desired temp¬ 
erature, by manual control of the heating current through 
the rheostats. The purified gas was stored in water-sealed 
gas holders from which it was pumped into the high pressure 









■ 







■ 
















- - 




. 













fl 






< 

, 














. 









* - .. . 










28 . 



Figure 3. 

Compressor and Gas Storage Svsten. 

The Rix three stage compressor is shown in 
the right background, and the storage cylinders 
in the left foreground. 


































29 


storage system ( Figure 3 ). 

. 

Two high pressure systems were used in this 
work, one with natural gas-air mixtures and the other with 
methane-air mixtures. 

In the experiments with natural gas-air mixtures 
a relatively simple procedure was possible. Partially 
dried air was stored under operating pressure in storage 
tanks of such capacity that during the course of an 
experiment the pressure drop would be relatively small, 

50 lbs* or so* Natural gas was stored similarly but at 
a pressure some 500 lbs* smaller thaA that of the air* 

The air was passed through a steel tube containing solid 
potassium hydroxide to remove traces of water and carbon 
dioxide before being admitted through the control valve 
to the reacting, system. A check valve in thes line offered 
some safeguard against the accidental entry of gas from 
the reacting system to the air storage. The natural gas 
was passed first through 93 fo sulphuric acid contained in 
a steel bottle to remove or destroy odorant sulphur 
compounds in the gas, then through a tube containing solid 
potassium hydroxide to remove sulphur dioxide produced 
in the acid bottle and finally through absorbent charcoal 
to remove traces of impurities. From the charcoal tube, the 
gas was led through a check valve to the control Valve 
leading to the reacting system. 
















■ 


t 

< 






























• ' 








. 























■ 
























30 





CQ 


Figure 4. 

High Pressure Storage and Control 
System for Methane-Air Experiment, 



















































































































31 . 


The high pressure storage and control system 
for the methane-air experiments is shown diagrammati- 
cally in Figure 4. Gages ,K, and ,L, show the storage 
tank pressures* Both gases before compression into 
their storage tanks were passed over solid calcium 
chloride# The air storage ,A, was of such size that 
the pressure drop during a run was so small as to cause 
little difficulty in controlling the composition of the 
methane-air mixtures. Final purification of the air 
from carbon dioxide and water was obtained in the high 
pressure vessel ,C, containing flakes of sodium 
hydroxide. The air storage was connected by a valve 1 
through a check valve to the control valve of the reacting 
system. The methane storage tank ,B, was connected 
through valve 2 to the pressure control tank ,D, 
scrubber ,E, and the subsidiary storage tank ,F,. The 
purifier contained, in order, calcium chloride 
and activated charcoal to remove traces of water and 
olefines in the gas. 

Before making an experiment the air pressure 
was made at least 500 lbs. higher than the operating 
pressure to be used and only dropped slightly during 
the course of an experiment. However, the methane 
storage was of necessity small and means were devised 
to prevent any appreciable pressure drop during an 








- 




. 

















• 32 . 


experiment. A hydraulic pump ,G, was used, to introduce 
a 50 c /j glycerine-water mixture from the reservoir ,H, 
into the pressure control tank ,D. The glycerine-water 
mixture did not dissolve excessive amounts of the gas 
and was without corrosive action on the metal parts. 

The operation of the pump was controlled as shown by 
the pressure in the tank ,D, through the high and low 
contacts on the gage ,J,. When the pressure dropped 
about 10 lbs. below the desired value the low contacts 
closed, energizing the relay shown which started the 
motor ,M. The consequent introduction of the liquid 
to the tank ,D, resulted in a pressure rise. When 
the pressure exceeded the desired operating pressure 
by about 10 lbs. the high contacts closed, the relay 
opened and puraping stopped. This method of pressure 
control was found highly satisfactory, total pressure 
variations being 20 lbs. or less which was without 
serious effect upon the control of the reaction mixture 
or the reaction temperature. The gas under constant 
pressure was connected by valve 3 through a check valve 
to the control valve of the reacting system. 

The system used to control the oxidation 
reactions is shown diagrammatieally in Figure 5. 
Photographs of the same apparatus are shown in Figures 
6 and 7. The needle valves 1 and 2 used as control 














. 


, < 


“= c 











, 










* 










































. 

























Reaction, Condensing and 
Collecting System. 
















































































































34 


valves admitted the gaseous hydrocarbon and air 
respectively to the apparatus. These control valves 
were electrically '.heated and maintained at a nearly 
constant temperature of about 90° C. An arrangement of 
adjusting screws was fitted to them in order that fine 
adjustment of the position of the valve stem was possible 
with consequent ease of control of gas flow. Heating 
these valves to a constant temperature was necessary 
to prevent freezing and to prevent changes in rate of 
flow due to temperature variations. The design was 
such that the valve stems did not rotate but moved 
only parallel to their axis. From the control valves 
the gases passed into the mixer ,A. 

The mixer ,A, consisted essentially of two 
parts 5 a piston ,B, and the main body. The piston ,B, 
which had a spiral groove cut into it over its length, 
fitted snuggly into a hole drilled in the main body. 

The gases entered at the bottom of the piston ,B, and 
in travelling up the spiral groove were thoroughly 
mixed before entering the reactor ,E,. At the bottom 
of the piston was a seat which formed with the piston a 
check valve, in that, it prevented the mixed gases 
from entering either of the supply tanks should the 
operating pressure be suddenly raised by an explosion 
in the reactor. The check valves placed in each of the 





I 

































- 













< 




» C { . ■ , 






















' 




















■■ 

■ 










\ A v 












o o ® 







Figure 


























































36 




igure 


































37 


high pressure supply lines acted as an additional 
precaution against mixed gases getting into the storage 
system# From the mixer ,A, a sample of the mixed gases 
was taken through the electrically heated expansion 
valve ,C, to the gas analyzer while the remainder was 
passed through the safety valve ,D, to the reactor ,2* 

A record of the pressure during a run was obtained by 
means of the recording pressure gage ,F. This gage was 
calibrated at intervals by comparison with a dead weight 
piston gage. The gas mixture after passing through the 
reactor ,E, was led directly to the bottom of the water- 
cooled high pressure bronze condensed *G. This condenser 
was chromium-plated on the inside to prevent corrosion by 
the liquid products of the reaction. The gases leaving 
the high pressure condenser were expanded to atmospheric 
pressure through the heated expansion valve ,H. All 
tubing subsequent to the reactor and fittings were of 
copper or other non-ferrous metal to resist corrosion. 

The final removal of oxygenated compounds, was affected by 
means of the ice condenser ,J, the water scrubber ,K, 
and the calcium chloride tube ,L. The flowmeter ,N, 
indicated the rate of off-gas flow and the total volume 
of gas passed was recorded by the calibrated wet test- 
meter ,0. A continuous sample of the inlet and off 
gases was obtained with the aid of the constant head 
sample bottles ,P, and ,M. 




















4t avi 


. ■ 

* c 















< « 




■ 




















e 













Figure 3. 


Continuous Gas Analyzer 




























































































39 


The composition of the inlet gas was obtained 
by means of a continuous gas analyzer shown-in Figure 8# 
The gas analyzer was a combination of a-thermal 
conductivity cell and a Wheatstone bridge circuit. Its 
construction was a modification of the Shakespeare 
Katharometer. The two cells,C*, and,C 2 , of about 3.5 cc. 
volume were cut out of a single block of copper and con¬ 
tained the resistors ,Pi,and ,P 2 , of 36 ga^ge platinum 
wire. Both platinum wires, coiled into a helix, were of 
identical resistance, about 1 ohm. The lower ends were 
connected to the brass hairpins ,H 1} and ,H a , the other 
ends being connected to heavy brass rods ,D*, and ,D 2 , 
threaded through insulating bakelite plugs as shown. 
Copper tubes of 3/16** outside diameter were soldered 
into both the cells ,C 1} and ,C 2 , as shown to permit 
the passage of air and air mixtures into their respective 
cells. The gases were introduced through the bottom of 
the cells in order that they be given sufficient time to 
come to the bath temperature before coming into contact 
with the platinum wires. The rate of the gas flow in 
the two cells was not more than 10 cc./min, below which 
rate the readings were independent of the rate of gas 
flow. The bath temperature was kept constant by means 
of the thermostat ,T, which controlled a 40 watt lamp ,L, 
wired as heater. The bath contained mineral seal oil. 










c 

. 

< 


















' 

' 















40 . 


The electrical system was a Wheatstone bridge, the plat¬ 
inum wires ,P*, and ,Pa., forming two arms of the bridge. 

Resistances ,R i? and ,R*, were equal and about 45 ohms 

n 

in magnitude. R* and R 2 were 2.1 ohms and 4.0 ohms 
approximately. A galvanometer ,G, v/as placed across the 
arms and current was supplied by a battery ,33, connected 
in series with an ammeter ,A, and a rheostat ,R 3 . The 
adjustable resistance ,R 2 , was of the type of platinum 

XX 

wire in mercury (22). Resistance ,Ra. , could be 
introduced into the circuit by means of switch ,S, and 
in this way altered the range of the instrument. In 
operating the gas analyzer a definite current was 
passed from the battery through the bridge with the 
result that the platinum wires were heated 100-200 °C. 

It was found by experience that the current must be 
kept below 0.58 amps^ otherwise the air-hydrocarbon 
mixture ignited in the cell producing a marked 
discontinuity in the calibration curve. The bridge was 
balanced by the mercury slide-wire ,R 2 , its setting 
depending upon the difference, in resistance of the two 
platinum wires which,in turn, depended upon the 
thermal conductivity of the gas in the cells. The 
thermal conductivity of any gas mixture is a definite 
function of its composition and thus the composition 
could be determined. The instrument was calibrated on 

















. ? 


, 
































■ 



















Reactor 

























































several mixtures of two gases of known composition. 

For any particular current a graph could he plotted 
showing composition versus position of adjustable 
resistance ,R 2 . One cell ,C Aj contained pure dry air 
as a reference gas,the unknown mixture of hydrocarbon 
and air being passed through cell ,C 2 ,. The instrument 
showed with ease a change in composition of 0.2^ by 
volume of gas in air. During an experiment the 
resistance ,R 2 , was set for the desired composition and 
the control valve 2 (Figure 5) adjusted in order to 
keep the galvanometer reading at zero indicating constant 
and desired composition. 

The reactor ,E, is shown in detail in Figure 9. 

Et consisted essentially of a main body ,B, which was 
constructed from high nickel-chromium-austenitic steel 
of such dimensions that the maximum safe working pressure 
was 4,000 lbs. at 500 °C: The mixture to be heated 
entered the reactor through the water-cooled extension 
,A, by way of a glass tube in the plug ,D, to the 
catalyst chamber ,E. The products left by a glass tube 
through the outlet plug ,F, to the high pressure condenser. 
Cooling water passing through the copper coil ,H, kept 
she steel plug ,A, and the outlet end of the plug ,D, 
at a temperature below that necessary for reaction and 
similarly cooling water through the coil , J, kept the 












. 
















' < .• « ^oAB'Sirlu 











< • 




- 












■ 




. 




m 




i ■ 


















43 . 


plug ,F, cooler than the reacting temperature. 
Consequently, the reacting gases ?/ere at reacting 
temperatures only in the catalyst chamber or when in 
contact with glass. This was found to be an essential 
procedure, otherwise reactions accurred in ,A, and in 
the outer end of ,F, resulting in carbon formation and 
uncertain results. The effective volume of the catalyst 
chamber was 12.7 cc. All interior surfaces were copper- 
plated to eliminate the possibility of ferrous surfaces 
contacting the reacting gases. It was found necessary 
to replate the interior of the reactor at frequent 
intervals because the copper plate scaled off on areas 
of the steel from time to time. The reactor was heated 
electrically by the winding shown and the temperature 
was measured by means of a calibrated Fe-Gonst. thermo¬ 
couple placed in the thermocouple well , G. Placing the 
thermocouple in an internal well permitted the 
temperature to be obtained at the centre of the catalyst 
chamber. The reaction temperature was maintained 
constant at any desired value, - 2°C. by a potentiometric 
type of recording temperature controller. 

The operating procedure in an experiment was 
developed and standardized with experience to give 
controlled operation and unambiguous results. The method 
of obtaining the desired mixture in the reactor consisted 













c 








44 • 

essentially of connecting the gaseous hydrocarbon storage 
directly through one of the control valves, opening the 
expansion valve ,H, (Figure 5) to the approximate final 
desired position and adjusting the flow of air through 
the other control valve until the desired composition was 
obtained as shown by the composition of the gas bled to 
the analyzer through the valve ,C. A great deal of 

care was necessary in admitting the air since its 
pressure in the reactor must he kept below the operating 
pressure of the experiment, otherwise air would tend to 
pass into the hydrocarbon storage* The pressure in the 
reaction apparatus was always that of the gaseous 
hydrocarbon storage. Finally the expansion valve ,H, y/as 
set by reference to the off-gas flowmeter to give the 
desired rate of flow* The pressure during an experiment 
was maintained constant by operation of the hydraulic 
pump as described previously. A minimum excess pressure 
in the air storage of 500 lbs. was found to be necessary 
in order to provide satisfactory control on the inlet 
gas composition. When using natural gas its storage 
pressure was fixed initially at about 50 lbs. above 
the desired pressure. This procedure took care of the 
pressure drop during the preliminary process of adjusting 
the gas composition and gave an average pressure throughout 
the experiment of the desired value. The pressure drop 



. 








. 

< 


. 

- 

■ 

. 













. 


' 














45 . 


during an experiment was usually in the neighborhood 
of 75 lbs# During operations the expansion valve 
feeding the gas analyzer was so adjusted that the lag 
between a change in the gas composition in the mixer 
and its indication on the analyzer wa® about one minute# 
When flow rate, composition, pressure and temperature had 
all reached the desired steady states the high pressure 
condenser was blown out and the recovery system from 
the expansion valve ,Ii f ( Figure 5 > to the gas meter ,0, 

(• Figure 5 ) connected# The inlet gas sample bottle and 
finally the off-gas sample bottle were connected# About 
iifteen minutes were allowed to elapse before connecting 
the off-gas sample bottle# The rate of flow of water 
irom the sample bottles, and consequently the rate of 
sampling during an experiment was kept constant by use of 
a constant head aspirating device# In this manner a 
representative average sample of the off-gas was obtained# 
The volume of the off-gas sample was measured and added to 
the reading of the gas meter. 


Analytical Methods. 

At the conclusion of an experiment the liquid 
products were blown out of th© high pressure condenser 
into the ice condenser. The gain in weight of each item 
in the recovery system and the total off-gas flow as 






46 


measured on the gas meter were recorded* In the majority 
of the experiments no liquid products were obtained in 
the ice condenser and it was very seldom that the water 
scrubber gained more than 0,04 gms. The efficiency of 
the water scrubber was tested by placing another scrubber 
after it in one of the runs and carrying out an analysis 
for the various oxidation products on its contents at 
the conclusion of the run. It was found that the amount 
of methylnalcohol, formaldehyde and formic acid recovered 
was less than 0.5 $ of the amount obtained from the high 
pressure condenser and ice condenser. The contents of 
the calcium chloride tube were also examined. At the 
highest rate of flow used, the amount of oxidation 
products obtained was negligible. A faint odor of 
formaldehyde in the off-gas from the gas meter was 
shown to be of no consequence by measurements with a 
charcoal absorber in the line before the gas meter. 

These tests demonstrated conclusively the efficiency of 
the recovery system. The contents of the high pressure 
condenser, ice condenser and water scrubber were added 
to a 100 cc. volumetric flask and the whole made up to 
100 cc. with distilled water. Aliquot portions were 
taken for the analysis of methyl alcohol, formaldehyde 
and formiccacid. 

The off" gas sample las collected over an 































~ 




- 

K 




















' 










<■ 

% 






■ 












47 * 


aqueous solution of 20 sodium sulphate and 5 fo sulphuric 
acid* The inlet gas was collected over water* All 
analysis were carried out in duplicate in an improved 
Bux-eau of Mines type of apparatus* Carbon dioxide was 
determined in potassium hydroxide solution, olefines in 
fuming sulphuric acid and oxygen in alkaline pyrogallate 
solution. Carbon monoxide and hydrogen were determined 
by combustion over copper oxide at 300 °C, methane and 
ethane by slow burning with oxygen on a platinum filament. 
A Petersto compensating burette with mercury as confining 
liquid was used. Agreement between duplicate analysis 
Was good, m connection with certain ambiguous experiments 
tne off-gas was analyzed by another and more precise m 
method (19)similar in principle to the method of ultimate 
organic analysis with excellent agreement. Further, in 
order to remove any doubt as to the representative nature 
oi the gas sample, analysis were occasionally carried 
out on instantaneous off- gas samples with satisfactory 
results showing that the off- gas did not change 
appreciably in composition during an experiment. Analysis 
of the gas samples after various intervals of storage 
over their respective confining liquids also showed no 
changes. 

Methyl Alcohol Determi.nr.t.i on . 

Only one method appears in the literature 
whereby methyl alcohol may be determined rapidly and 










' 















■ 

• ■ 

■ 

» ( 





. 











■ 




* . 











■ 
















and quantititatively in a mixture of organic'a cids, 
aldehydes and esters. The method in question is that 
due to Fischer and Schmidt( 16 ). 

Essentially the procedure depends upon the 
formation of methyl nitrite which .is not very soluble 
in acid and alkali and is consequently very easily 
volatilized. The liberated methyl nitrite is passed into 
an acidified solution of potassium iodide where it is 
saponified and the nitrous acid liberated reacts with 
the hydriodic acid forming free iodine. The iodine 
is then titrated with a standardized solution of sodium 
thiosulphate and subsequent calculations are based on 
the fact that one molecular weight of methyl alcohol 
is equal to one molecular weight of sodium thiosulphate 
as shown by the following reactions. 

NaI\T 0 2 + CH3COOH -^ CH3COG .E'a + HLmG 2 

ch 3 oh + mo z -ch 3 no^+ h 2 q 

2 mo 2 + 2 hi ---> i 2 ■ + 2 m + 2 h 2 g 

Is +eHa 2 S 2 0 3 ——-> 2Na 2 S 4 0 6 + 2 Nal 

The method of Fischer and Schmidt as described 
by them did not give satisfactory results. Consequently , 
the author made investigations with the result that a 
slightly modified method was developed which will be 
shortly outlined. When strictly adhered to the results 
obtained were reliable and reproducible. 





































• 






» 






' 











49 



o 

H 


<D 

W 


■H 


m 




Apparatus for Methyl 
Alcohol Determination, 




























































Apparatus for Methyl 
lieohol Determinations• 

































51 


The apparatus used in the determination of 
methyl alcohol is shown in Figure 10 and 11* It 
consisted essentially of a reaction flask ,B, a meyer 
tube ,E, and a guard flask ,F f The inert gas from the . 
high pressure storage was passed through the scrubber 
,A, containing water* before being introduced to the 
bottom of the reaction flask as shown* Carbon dioxide, 
nitrogen and methane were all found, to.be satisfactory 
for this purpose* Methane was used in most of the 
determinations since large quantities were available. 

A separatory funnel inserted on the top of the reaction 
flask permitted .the introduction of the reactant while 
a drain cock at the bottom allowed the removal of the 
products. A by-pass permitted the reaction flask to 
be isolated at any time. The U-tubes ,C, and ,D, contained; 
in order, solid sodium nitrite and sodium bicarbonate, 
their function being to convert any vclaiJCazed methyl 
alcohol to methyl nitrite and to remove oxides of 
nitrogen before the gases passed into the meyer tube 
containing an acidified solution of potassium iodide. 

It was found necessary to replace the sodium nitrite 
and sodium bicarbonate frequently and after doing so a 
blank determination was made* The guard flask ,F, 
contained an acidified solution of potassium iodide, 
its function being to saponify any methyl nitrite 



















52 


which might escape through the meyer tube* A water trap 
,G, prevented the accidental entrance of air into the 
apparatus since the success of this method depended 
upon the complete elimination of oxygen from the apparatus. 
The flowmeter ,H, measured the rate of gas flow* 

In carrying out a determination the air is 

, 

first displaced in the apparatus with the inert gas. 

To the guard flask and meyer tube are added 15 ec» of 
potassium iodide solution, containing 4 gms, of 
potassium -iodide, 10 cc. of concentrated hydrochloric acid 
and finally distilled water to make the final volume 
in each case 30 cc, and 65 cc, respectively. The inert 
gas stream is then by-passed from the reaction flask into 
which is introduced a definite volume of the diluted 
condensate, 10 cc. of saturated sodium nitrite containing 
4 gms. of urea and finally 20 cc, of 25fo acetic acid. 

The reaction flask is then connected directly to the inert 
gas stream and the flow is adjusted to 150 cc. / min. 

The methyl nitrite formed is completely liberated in one 
hour but it is necessary at the end of that time to isolate 
the reaction flask from the system and continue passing 
the inert gas for 15 minutes to insure the complete 
removal of oxides of nitrogen. The contents of the iodine 
solutions are then combined and the liberated iodine 
is titrated with N/lO sodium thiosulphate. The value 
of the blank analysis is taken into consideration when 









c. ; 










■ 
















e 




V 

- 

* •• 


c 















































53 


making a calculation# 

Determinations made on known amounts of absolute 
methyl alcohol gave results showing better than 09 lo of 
the theoretical value# To obtain good results it was 
essential to keep the gas flow constant during an 
experiment, completely eliminate oxides of nitrogen and 9 
finally^prevent any accidental access of air to the 
apparatus# All determinations were made in duplicate# 

The limit of error allowed between duplicate 
determinations was 0.5 
Determination of Formaldehyde # 

Formaldehyde was determined by Romijn’s cyanide 
method (30) which is specific for this compound# The 
procedure for the determination of the excess potassium 
cyanide, outlined in Allen’s organic analysis (1) was 
modified to permit a more rapid determination. 

A lG cc. portion of the diluted condensate is 
treated with excess potassium cyanide. For the quantities 
of aldehyde dealt with about 11 cc# of N/lO potassium 
cyanide are added. The potassium cyanide combines with 
the aldehyde forming a soluble addition compound, one 
molecule of aldehyde combining with one molecule of 
potassium cyanide. The whole is then added to 10 cc. 
of N/lO silver nitrate, acidified with concentrated nitrig 
acid# The excess potassium cyanide combines with the 




' 















’ 

■ 

■ 




. 








54 


silver nitrate forming insoluble silver cyanide which 
is then filtered off* The filtrate is then made up to 
100 oc. with distilled water and titrated with N/lO 
potassium thiocyanate using ferric alum, as the indicator* 
A blank analysis is made and the difference between this 
blank result and that obtained by titrating the filtrate 
after the addition of the aldehyde solution gives the 
amount of N/lO sulphocyanate corresponding to the silver 
not precipitated by the excess cyanide* From this the 
amount-of aldehyde can be calculated. This method is 
accurate in the presence of acetaldehyde providing the 
solution is titrated within a reasonable time after the 
addition of the potassium cyanide. 

Determination of Formic Acid* 

Formic acid was determined by titrating with 
standard alKok • 

A 10 cc. portion of the diluted condensate 
is warmed to expel carbon dioxide and titrated with 
.05 N sodium fotjroxide. In the majority of the samples • 
copper formate is present. In these cases an excess of 
sodium hydroxide is added to 10 cc. of the diluted 
condensate, the whole heated to boiling, filtered to 
remove precipitated copper hydroxide and back titrated 
with .05 N sulphuric acid. 

Combus tion Analysis. 













' 

, 

, 

. 

, 













. ..: ’ ■» • • 





55 


An ultimate organic analysis was made on some 
of the diluted condensates* This analysis was carried 
out to determine whether all the carbon was accounted for 
in the condensate by the chemical determinations* About 
a 5 cc* portion of the diluted condensate, whose density 
was previously determined was used as the sample* The 
method consisted of weighing a small glass bulb provided 
with a capillary, which after filling was sealed to 
prevent loss in weighing. The hulb was then placed in 
a boat, the tip of the capillary tube broken off and 
the whole placed into the combustion tube in the furnace. 
Ihe remaining part of the analysis was identical with 
that used for solids as described by Fischer (15). All 
analysis showed conclusively that over 98^ of the carbon 
in the condensates was present in the various oxidation 
products determined. This left no doubt as to the accuracy 
of the chemical analysis and further showed that the 
amount of other carbon compounds present was practically 
negligible. 

















' 

; 












































' 





















56 


a: I;..:./, ^, 

The results may he divided into two sections, 
namely, those dealing with natural gas-air mixtures on 
the one hand and methane-air mixtures on the other• The 
effect of temperature,rate of flow and inlet gas 
composition on the survival of the useful oxygenated 
compounds was determined for both mixtures while the 
effect of pressure was only determined for methane-air 
mixtures* The data obtained for the different variables 
is shown in the accompanying tables and no further 
explanation need be given here since, with the sample 
calculation given later, they are self explanatory. 

Unless otherwise stated, copper was used as the catalyst 
in all the experiments* Since the interior of the 
reactor was copper-plated the steel walls did not exert 
any catalytic influence* However, it’ must be born in mind 
that in using the other calalysts the copper lining of the 
catalyst chamber was always in contact with the reacting 
mixture. Many experiments are not tabled, several that 
were incomplete or subject to poisoning being left out 
together with many duplicate experiments* 

All calculations were based on 100 litres of inlet 
gas at N*T.P. This was found necessary since in some 
experiments the volume of the off-gas differed a great 
deal from the volume of the inlet gas which made it 
impossible to draw comparisons as regards the total carbon 

















57 


burned and the weight of the liquid products from the 
off-gas volumes. Since no means of direct determination of 
the in-gas volume were available, the volume conversion 
factor between the inlet gas and the off-gas was found 
by using a carbon balance. On the basis of many analytical 
tests of various kinds, it was concluded that carbon 
balances were reliable. Carbon balances were found 
to be more accurVate than nitrogen balances since in 
most of the experiments- the percentage of nitrogen in 
the off-gas was very small. A method of differences had 
to be used and small errors in nitrogen estimations 
would result in large errors in the balance calculated. 

The nitrogen balances agreed, however, within the 
limit of error. Oxygen balances, as will be pointed out 
later, were of no value, large surpluses and deficiencies 
occurring frequently. Traces of higher hydrocarbons were 
obtained in the off-gas for the majority of the methane- 
air experiments. However, since the percentage of the 
unknown hydrocarbons was very small all the carbon 
formed during the combustion analysis was attributed to 
methane. 

The results of experiment 69 may be taken as 
typical and the necessary calculations are illustrated to 
show the method used. Calculations of the same type 
were made for all the experiments. 














58 


El [II 


jDa Id si • — 


In-Gas 

Analysis 

Off-Gas 

Analysis 

o 2 

10.33 

C0 2 

2.15 

ch 4 

46.8 

o 2 

0.68 

G 2- cl 6 

1.21 

H 2 

1.16 

n 2 

41.66 

GO 

3.23 



GH 4 

45.1 



n 2 

47.56 

Total 

Volume of off-gas 

.0 ...X. 

./e 

- 99.3 L. 


Weight of products in condensate 
GH 3 0H 
GH 2 0 
HGOOH 
H 2 0 

Calculations 

Grams of carbon in CH 3 OIi = 12 x 1.94 
Grams of carbon in GH 2 0 

n-^nrro _ • TTA^n 


1 • 94 gras 
.134 
.065 
9.52 


12 x 
32 

1.94 

or 

* 

it 

12 . 

30 x 

.134 

= .0537 

12 x 

.065 

- .017 

46 

Total 

= .798 

50.72 

X 12 X 

99.3 = 27.1 


100 22.4 

Total weight of carbon in products = 27.9 gras 

Weight of carbon in 22.4 litres of in-gas 


— 49tt22 X 12 


Vo 1 ume in-gas 


100 


Volume off-gas = 27.90 x 22.1 

5.91 99.3 


= 5.91 gms 

1.068 


Volume off-gas / 100 litres of in-gas at N.T.P. 

= AQ2. = 93.7L. 

1.068 

Weight of products / 100 litres of in-gas at N.T.P. 

CHgQH = 95.7 x 1.94 = 1.84 gras 

99.3 

CH 2 Q = 95.7 x .134 = . 

99.3 


126 


























59 


ch 3 gh 

CHo 0 

KC&OH 


H 2 G 

Total 


Total 


KC00H = 93.7 X,.0650 

—• .0613 

99.3 

HsO = 93.7 x 9.52 

=8.98 

99.3 

Weight of condensate 

=11.01 gms 

carbon and Oxygen in liquid products*.' 

Carbon 

Oxygen 

.692 

.92 

.0504 

.0673 

.016 

.0427 

8.00 

.758 gms. 

9.03 gms. 

carbon burned ' 

/ 100 litres 

at N.T.P. 

= 5.38 x 12 x 93.7 

= 2.70 gms. 

100 22.4 

condensate 

= .758 

= 3.46 gms. 

°/q of total carbon burned 

to :- 

CH s 0H = .692 x 100 

= 20.0 

3.46 

CH 2 0 = .0504 x 100 

= 1.45 

3.46 

HCOOH = .016 x 100 

= 0.46 

3.46 

Total 

21.91 


Total carbon in / 100 litres of in-gas 

~ 26.4 gms. 

A3./ 

- 14.76 gms. 


= 49.22 x 12 x 100 
100 22.4 

% of total carbon in oxidized = * /GO 

W£. of oxyyer?// 00 /l 

// 7 - ? qs 06 A/. 77 P, = 10.55 x 32 x 100 

100 22.4 


Weight of oxygen in off-gas / 100 litres of in-ga 


= 4.44 x 32 x 95.7 

100 22.4 


5.94 gms 































Table 1. . 



Table l.A, 


fixuerfoment No. 47 

48 

49 

50 

f -51 

52 

62 

63 

64 

Temperature °C. 250 

300 

350 

350 

350 

350 

350 

350 

350 

Pressure in a tins. 142 

Off Gas Flow L./Min. 0.96 

In-Gas Analysis: 

137 

147 

150 

150 

199 

185 

185 

185 

0.97 

0.80 

0.51 

0.84 

0.84 

; ■ I 

0.76 

0.77 

0.98 

0 3 15.0 

14.8 

14.9 

14.9 

15.0 

14.8 

6.81 

8.62 

3.53 

CH 4 26.7 

26.6 

26.2 

26.2 

26.7 

26.6 ' 

61.0 

53.3 

76.7 

C 2 H 6 0.85 

0.88 

0.87 

0.67 

0.85 

0.88 

2.02 

1.76 

1.93 

N2 57.45 

57.72 

58.03 

58.03 

57.45 

57.72 

30.17 

36.33 

17.6 

Off-Gas Analysis? 

C0 2 0.85 

0.43 

1.4 

3.0 

2.81 

3.9 

1.86 

2.16 

1.16 

0 2 15.55 

14.65 

1.46 

2.2 

0.75 

0.80 

0.52 

0.84 

0.42 

h 2 


2.1 

1.1 

1.44 

2.60 

0.31 

0.63 

0.21 

CO 


3.0 

3.8 

4.02 

4.40 

1.67, 

2.27 

0.79 

ch 4 


23.1 

24.4 

23.9 

23.6 

66.0 

53.8 

79.5 

C 2 H 6 


2.2 

0.4 

0.49 

0.80 

0.80 

0.70 

0.54 

n 2 


66.8 

65.1 

66.6 

63.9 

28.8 

39.6 

18.2 

Volume In-Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 

Condensate. gms./lOO L. ln-qas 
TefcoJ . 

ot MT.P 

1.22 

1.15 

. 1.13 

1.19 

1.11 

1.07 

1.03 


9.07 

9.34 

9.43 

11.76 

8.17 

9.29 

4.o8 

ch 8 oh 


0.018 

0.264 

0.246 

0.291 

1.29, 

1.13 

0.654 

ch 2 o 

HCOOH 


0.013 

0.086 

0.088 

0.051 

0 . 2 ol 

o.o35 

0.173 

0.034 

0.145 

0.026 

h 2 o 


9.04 

8.99 

9.10 

11.42 

6.64 

7.95 

3.25 

7 » Alcohol in Condensate, 


0.198 

2.84 

2.60 

2.48 

15.8 

12.1 

16.0 

Carbon Oxidized, gms./lOOL, 


1.94 

3.30 

3.36 

3187 

2.27 

2.73 

1.33 

Carbon to Compounds. 

msJ 100 L, 


0 .O 12 

0.134 

0.128 

0.131 

0.503 

0.575 

0.312 

% of Total Carbon In 

Oxidized, 

Yields as $ of Total 


13.0 

22.1 

22.1 

25.6 

6.52 

8.96 

3.07 

Carbon Burned to: _____ 

CH a 0H 


0.348 

3.01 

2.76 

2.84 

21.4 

15.6 

18.6 

ch 2 o 

HCOOH 


0.275 

1.04 

1.05 

0.53 

3.55 

0.32 

2.55 

0.40 

4.4 

0.51 

Total 


0.623 

4.05 

3.81 

3.35 

25.35 

18.37 

23.54 


Yields as J 6 of Total Inlet 


w *ygen xo: 

CH 3 OH 

ch 2 o 

HCOOH 

H a 0 

Total 

0.042 

0.034 

38.1 

38.18 

0.621 

0.215 

37.6 

38.44 

0.577 

0.22 

38.0 

38.8 

0.692 

0.13 

48.4 

49.22 

6.69 

1.11 

0.191 

61.0 

69.05 

4.57 

0.75 

0.251 

57.6 

63.11 

6.21 

1.54 

0.36 

57.5 

65.61 

of Total Inlet Oxygen 

Accounted for: 

62.3 

79.8 

71.6 

88.4 

98.2 

108 

120 










60 


.Oxygen in condensate = 9.03 


Total = 14.97 gms. 

jo of oxygen accounted for - 14.97 x 100 

14.76 

= 101*2 


Yields 

rl? 

as jo 

of total inlet 

oxygen to:- 

CH 3 0H 


= .92 x 100 

14.76 

« 6.23 

CH 2 0 

— 

.0672 x 100 
14.76 

= .455 

HC00H 

— 

.0427 x 100 
14.76 

= .288 

h 2 o 

m 

8.00 x 100 

= 54.2 


14*76 _____ 

Total 61.17 

Natural Gas. 

Preliminary experiments made on natural gas-air 
mixtures are shown on Table 1. These experiments were 
made with oxygen and the gaseous paraffins present in the 
natural gas in the approximate stoichiometrical 
proportions for the formation of methyl alcohol. 
Experiments 47, 48, and 49 were made to determine the 
initial ignition temperature of the natural gas. At 
temperatures of 250 °C. and 300 °C 3 . shown in experiments 
47 and 48, the operating temperature was too low to 
produce any appreciable oxidation of the natural gas. 

The large survival of oxygen and the small percentage 
of carbon dioxide in the off-gas with the non-appearance 
$f any liquid products illustrates this very well. 








































61 


However, on raising the temperature to 350 °C. a 
vigorous reaction took place accompanied by explosions. 
These could be detected easily by the releasing of the 
safety valve and were distinctly audible being 
accompanied by a sharp metallic click in the reactor* 
During the explosions a copious layer of carbon was 
deposited on the catalyst. This deposit of carbon was 
probably formed in part by pyrolysis of methane in contact 
with hot metal and by the reactions postulated by Bone 
(7) to explain the results of explosions of methane under 
pressure* The amount of heat liberated during these 
explosions was enormous, bearing in mind the large mass of 
the reactor ant the small amount of oxygen involved, since 
the recorder temperature rose as high as 20 degrees above 
the operating temperature* The explosive reaction 
was apparently stimulated by steel surfaces and in 




future experiments the inlet and outlet plugs of the reactor 


were cooled with water* By this procedure the explosions 
of the mixture were prevented except over copper in the 
reactor and the survival of the useful oxygenated 
products was increased* In all the reactions where 
explosions did not occur, no trace of carbon was found in 
the reactor, its fittings or on the catalyst* This is 
very well shown in Table 1 by comparing experiments 
50-52 inclusive with experiment 49 in which the coaling 
coils were not attached. The condensate in all the 















X 









* . 

- 












Table 11. 


Experiment No, 

76 

77 

66 

67 

Temperature £ C • 

350 


— 

— 

Pressure in Atms. 

185 

•— 

— 

— 

Off-Gas Flow L./min. 

0.85 

0.78 

0.84 

0.86 

In-Gas Analysis: 

o 3 

3.47 

3.76 

6.15 

8.45 

ch 4 

78.0 

76.4 

63.8 

54.0 

c 2 h 6 

1.02 

1.88 

2.11 

1.79 

n 2 

17.51 

17.96 

27.94 

35.76 

Off-Gas Analysis: 

co 2 

0.53 

0.61 

1.26 

1.76 

o 2 

0.21 

0.32 

0.21 

0.74 

h 2 

0.53 

0.47 

0.56 

0.82 

CO 

1.30 

1.21 

1.98 

2.57 

ch 4 

78.7 

77.8 

68.1 

55.8 

c 2 h 6 

0.65 

1.1 

0.38 

0.31 

n 2 

18.08 

18.49 

27.5 

38.0 

Volume In-G^s 

Volume Off-Gas: 1.04 

Condensate, gms./lO© L In-qos 

1.04 
at NT.P. 

L.l 

1.08 

Total 

4.73 

4.42 

7.48 

8.60 

CH 8 0H 

1.74 

1.73 

2.16 

2.06 

ch 2 o 

0.195 

0.198 

0.202 

0.159 

HCOOH 

0.034 

0.031 

0.049 

0.063 

H 2 0 

2.76 

2.46 

5.07 

6.32 

jo Alcohol in Condensate,36.9 

39.0 

28.8 

23.9 

Carbon Oxidized, gms. 

/ 100 L. 

1.68 

1.68 

2.45 

3.0 

Carbon to Compounds, 

gms,/ 100 L, 

0.742 

0.739 

0.904 

0.856 

% of Total Carbon In 

Oxidized, 

3.94 

3.92 

6.73 

9.73 

Yields as $ of Total 

Carbon burned to: 

CH3OH 

38.7 

38.8 

33.2 

25.9 

ch 2 o 

4.64 

4.75 

3.32 

2.12 

HCOOH 

0.02 

0.48 

0.52 

0.51 

Total 

43.86 

44103 

37.04 

28.54 


Yields as $ of Total 
Inlet Oxygen to: 


CHjOH 

17.5 

16.1 

12,26 

8.54 

CH 2 0 

2.1 

1.97 

1.23 

0.70 

HCOOH 

0.473 

0.401 

0.385 

0.365 

H 2 0 

49.4 

40.8 

51.5 

46.8 

a Total 

69.47 

59.27 

65.38 

56.41 

7° of Total Inlet 0 2 





Accounted for: 

107.0 

99.0 

101.4 

95.0 


60 69 


0.83 o.83 

10.8 10.33 

43.8 46.8 

1.45 1.21 

43.95 41.66 

3.29 2.15 

0.55 0.68 

0.53 1.16 

1.22 3.23 

47.1 45.1 

0.51 0.12 

46.8 47.56 

1.15 1.07 

9.28 11.01 

1.46 1.84 

0.137 0.126 

0.015 0.061 

7.67 8.98 

15.7 16.7 

2.7 3.46 

0.608 0.758 

10.8 13.1 


20.3 20.0 

2.02 1.45 

0.14 0.46 

22.46 21.91 


4.75 6.23 

0.473 0.455 

0.068 0.288 

44.1 54.2 

49.39 61.17 

85.0 101.2 


58 

59 

__ 

182 

0 .80 

0.82 

12.0 

13.2 

38.8 

33.4 

1.21 

1.1 

47.99 

52.3 

3.31 

3152 

0.65 

0.52 

1.17 

1.03 

2.11 

1.97 

40.1 

34.2 

0.1 

0.63 

52.6 

58.13 

1.14 

1.17 

10.14 

9.80 

1.37 

0.96 

0.114 

0.101 

0.016 

0.011 

8.64 

8.73 

13.5 

?.9.82 

3.12 

2.93 

0.665 

0.402 

14.2 

15.3 


16.5 

L2.34 

1.46 

1.39 

0.14 

0.10 

18.1 

13.73 


4.02 

2.55 

0.356 

0.288 

0.066 

0.039 

45.1 

41.2 

49.54 

44.08 

86.3 

81.5 












<v 






62 


experiments consisted mainly of water with only small 
quantities of the useful oxygenated compounds® The 
weight of the condensate in experiments 51 and 52 was about 
the same, namely, 9.4 gras. The two experiments were 
made with different rates of off-gas flow and yet the 
yields of the useful products obtained did not differ 
appreciably. The percentage of inlet carbon burned was 
22.1. An increase in pressure from 150-199 atmospheres 
shown by experiment 52 did not change the yield of 
useful products or the weight of the condensate to any 
great extent. However, the percentage of the total inlet 
carbon burned was increased from 22.1-25.6. The 
experiments at this high oxygen concentration were not 
very promising but they showed that a low concentration 
of the natural gas or a high concentration of oxygen 
was detrimental to the survival of the useful oxygenated 
products. 


Effect of Inlet Oxygen Concentration. 

The effect of inlet oxygen concentration on the 
survival of the useful oxygenated compounds is shown 


in Table 2. The percentage of the total carbon burned 
surviving in the total oxygenated compounds and alcohol 
with respect to the inlet oxygen concentration is shown 
by Graphs 1 and 2 on Eigure 12. The yields fall off 
linearly with an increase in oxygen concentration in 















YIELDS AS PERCENT OF TOTAL CARBON BURN, 



PERCENT OXYGEN IN MIXTURE. 


Figure 12 


PERCENT ALCOHOL IN CONDENSATE 




























64 


the mixture. The conversion of the total carbon 
burned to the total oxygenated compounds and methyl 
alcohol was 44.03 Jo and 38.8$ at 3.76$ oxygen 
concentration while at 13.2$ oxygen concentration 13.73$ 
and 12.34$, respectively. An increase in the oxygen 
concentration in the mixture decreased the amount of 
carbon going to formaldehyde and formic aacid to a lesser 
extent than the amount going to methyl alcohol. This 
is shown very well in Figure 12, in that, the Graphs 1 
and 2 tend to converge at higher oxygen concentrations. 

The percentage of alcohol in the condensate in 
relation to the inlet oxygen concentration is shown by 
Graph 3 in Figure 12. The percentage of alcohol in the 
condensate drops off linearly with an increase in the 
oxygen, the straight line paralleling the yield almost 
exactly. A low oxygen concentration in the mixture was 
essential in obtaining a high percentage of alcohol in 
the liquid products as well as a high yield. 

Graphs 1 and 2 shown in Figure 13 show the 
relationship existing between the grams of carbon 
oxidized per 100 liters of iftlet gas and the percent 
of total in-carbon oxidized plotted against the inlet 
oxygen concentration. They measure, of course, the 
same thing and show increased methane consumption with 
increased oxygen concentration as might be expected. 












X ' w« ' • ; ' 











. 


5 








' 





65 


They are of interest when considered in conjunction 
with the graphs of Figure 12, showing decreased yields 
of useful products with increasing oxygen concentration# 

As the percent of carbon burned increases from 4 to 8, the 
yield drops from 45 Jo to 30 fo approximately, the oxygen 
going from 3 to 8 jo* 

The oxygen survival was small and varied, 
relatively, greatly showing no relationship with the yields 
or in-gas oxygen content# The same result was obtained 
with the carbon monoxide and dioxide as individuals 
in the off-gas analysis# However, the combined oxides 
of carbon increased with an increase in the inlet 
oxygen concentration. The percentage conversion of 
oxygen to useful products was always smaller than the 
conversion of methane but followed in general the same 
course, the conversion decreasing with increasing 
oxygen concentration# The erratic variation in oxygen 
recovery, varying widely from less than to more than 
100^ was inexplicable# The phenomena will be discussed more 
fully later# 

During the experiments shown in Table 2 the 
catalyst was poisoned frequently and this necessitated 
its removal from the reactor to be cleaned# A low 
conversion of carbon to useful compounds v/as a good 
indication in showing that the catalyst was working 
inefficiently# Some results obtained by using a 


























. . 

. 









PERCENT TOTAL CARBON 


66 



Figure 13# 
























































meriment No. 

55 

Tabl e 3 

59 

Temperature SC. 

350 

350 

pressure in atms. 

188 

182 

Off-Gas Flow L. /Min. 

0.62 

0.82 

In-Gas Analysis: 

0 2 

12.68 

13.2 

ch 4 

35.56 

33.4 

c 2 h 6 

1.19 

1.1 

N a 

50.57 

52.3 

Off-Gas Analysis: 

co 2 

3.6 

3.52 

o 2 

0.7 

0.52 

h 2 

0.8 

1.03 

CO 

2.9 

1.97 

ch 4 

36.4 

34.2 

c 2 h 6 

0.2 

0.63 

n 2 

55.4 

58.13 

Volume In-Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 

1.17 

1.17 

Condensate^ ©ns./ 100L. 

In-qoS a 

y NT P 

11,23 

9.80 

CH3OH 

1.30 

0.96 

CH a O 

0.127 

0.101 

HCOOH 

0.014 

0.011 

h 2 0 

9.79 

8.73 

Alcohol in Condensate 

, 11.6 

9.82 

Cartoon Oxidized, gms/ 

100 L. 

3.52 

2.f2 

Carbon to compounds. 

gms,/ L, 

0,544 

0.402 

% of Total Carbon IN 

Oxidized, 

17.3 

15.3 

Yields as $ of Total 

Carbon Burned to: 

CH 3 0H 

13.9 

12.34 

ch 2 o 

1.44 

1.39 

HGOOH 

0.11 

0.1 

Total 

15.45 

13.73 


Yields as of Total Inlet 

r\ 'o 



CHjOH 

3.60 

2.55 


ch 2 o 

0.375 

0.288 


HCOOH 

0.055 

0.04 


H 2 0 

48.3 

41.2 


Total 

52.83 

44.08 

f> of Total 

Inlet Oxygen 


81,5 

Accounted 

for: 

92.2 


53 

77 

80 

81 

79 

350 

350 

350 

350 

350 

168 

185 

188 

185 

188 

0.93 

0.78 

1.0 

1.04 

1.30 

12.9 

3.76 

3.68 

3.66 

3.73 

34.9 

76.4 

75.3 

75.4 

75.3 

1.15 

1.88 

2.42 

2.63 

2.66 

51.05 

17.96 

18.6 

18.31 

18.31 

3.0 

0.61 

1.07 

0.95 

2.45 

0.3 

0.32 

0.21 

0.21 

0.5 

2.7 

0.47 

0.42 

0.53 

0.5 

4.3 

1.21 

1.08 

1.24 

1.21 

33.8 

77.8 

78.5 

77.6 

75,0 

0.2 

1.1 

0.81 

1.5 

1,48 

55.7 

18.49 

17.9 

17.97 

18.86 

1.14 

1.04 

1.04 

1*04 

1.03 

11.04 

4.42 

4.56 

4,26 

4.17 

1.06 

L.73 

1.60 

1.72 

1.83 

0.103 

0.198 

0.166 

0.151 

0.185 

01016 

0,031 

0.037 

0.040 

0.033 

9.88 

2.46 

2.76 

2.35 

2,11 

9,58 

39.0 

35.1 

40,3 

44.0 

3.87 

1.68 

1,78 

1.86 

2,67 

0.446 

0.739 

0,68 

0.716 

0.771 

19.5 

3.92 

4.16 

4.31 

6.17 


10.3 

38.8 

33.8 

34.6 

25.8 

1.06 

4.75 

3,72 

3.25 

2.77 

0.1 

0.48 

0.54 

0.57 

0.32 

11.46 

44.03 

38;06 

38.32 

28; 9 

2.89 

16.1 

15.3 

16.5 

17.3 

0.277 

1.97 

1,68 

1.55 

1.86 

0.054 

0.401 

0.49 

0.536 

0.425 

44.2 

40.8 

46J9 

40.2 

35.3 

47:42 

59.27 

64.4 

58,79 

54.89 

88,4 

99.0 

111,0 

Lo5 .0 

L46;0 






t; 





67 


poisoned catalyst are shown on Table 1A. Three 
experiments were made at different oxygen concentrations 
and by comparing them with identical experiments in 
Table 2 the lower efficiency of the carbon conversion is 
at once obvious* For example, at 3 #47^ inlet oxygen, 
Experiment 76, the total yield to the useful oxygenated 
compounds based on carbon was 43*86^ when the catalyst 
was working efficiently but when poisoned, as in 

. I 

Experiment 64 with 3*53 d jo oxygen, the yield dropped to 
23*53 fom In these experiments with natural gas the catalyst 
was poisoned frequently and great care was necessary to 
keep the purification system working efficiently* It 
appeared to be essential that undesirable products from 
the sulphuric acid scrubber be eliminated* It was also 
found necessary to keep the reacting system free from 
oil and other higher gaseous hydrocarbons* There exists 
a possibility that the catalyst was mildly poisoned or 
somewhat inactive in all these experiments* Its 
effectiveness was however reproducible* 

Effect of Rate of Flow * 

The effect of rate of flow on the survival of 
the useful oxygenated compounds is shown in Figure 14 
and the results are shown in Tables 3 and 3A. Graphs 1 and 
2 in Figure 14 show the yields of the total oxygenated 
compounds and methyl alcohol ait 3*7 fo inlet oxygen while 











68 



Figure 14, 





















t 






















68 


Graphs 3 and 4 show the effect at 13*0$ inlet oxygen# 
The flow rates are those of the off-gas at N.T.P# and 
cannot he used to calculate space velocities in the 
reactor* They are of comparative value however and 
are certainly known * All the experiments were made at 
350 °C • and at a pressure of approximately 185 
atmospheres# Within the range investigated the yield 
decreases with an increase in off-gas flow, an effect 
more noticeable at the lower oxygen concentration# 
Graphs 3 and 4 are not particularly reliable because 
of pressure changes in successive experiments# 

The percentage of alcohol in the condensate 
did not change appreciably with an increase in off-gas 
flow rate. In experiments 77-79 inclusive,shown on 
Table 3A the percent of alcohol in the condensate 
increased from 39.0 to 44.0 with an increase in the rat 
of off-gas flow from 0.78 to 1.30 litres per minute# 
These experiments were made at a low inlet oxygen 
concentration* However, at high inlet oxygen concent¬ 
rations the percent of alcohol in the condensate 
decreased from 11.6 to 9.58 with a change in the 
rate of off-gas flow from 0.62 to 0.93 litres per 
minute* The results of these experiments are shorn 
in Table 3# The changes in alcohol concentrations 
are relatively small# 

The total weight of the liquid products 






Table 


Experiment No* 

72 

73 

74 

75 

Temperature 0 C. 

350 

350 

350 

350 

Pressure In Atms• 

185 

185 

135 

185 

Off-Gas Flow L./min. 

0.87 

0.68 

0.7.9 

0-71 

In-Gas Analysis: 

^2 

3.95 

3.82 

3.80 

3.69 

CH 4 

74.8 

74.7 

75.5 

75.7 

0 2 H # 

2.05 

2.24 

2.0 

1.93 

^*2 

19.2 

19.24 

18.62 

18.68 

Off«Gas Analysis: 

co 2 

1.92 

1.40 

0.84 

0.74 

o 2 

0.34 

0.32 

0.38 

0.53 

H 2 

0.42 

0.35 

0.42 

0.37 

CO 

0.85 

0.84 

1.35 

1.27 

ch 4 

76.7 

77.6 

77.7 

76.7 

c 2 h 6 

1.40 

1.39 

0.97 

1.1 

n 2 

18.37 

13.10 

18.34 

19.29 

Volume In*Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 

Condensate, gms./lQO L. 

1.06 

1 n- cjqs air 

1.06 

N.TP. 

1.05 

1.03 

Total 

3.83 

3.88 

4.20 

4.06 

CH 3 OH 

1.09 

L.30 

1.68 

1.64 

ch 2 o 

0.144 

0.156 

0.18 

0.175 

HCOOH 

0.019 

0.023 

0.032 

0.033 

h 2 o 

§.58 

2.40 

2.31 

2.21 

Alcohol in Condensate. 

28.6 

33.5 

40.0 

40.3 

Carbon Oxidized, 

gms./lOQ L. 

1.88 

1.69 

1.83 

1.73 

Carbon to compounds, 

gms ,/100 L. 

0.477 

0.56 

0.714 

0.696 

% of Total Carbon 

In Oxidized, 

4.45 

4.0 

4.3 

4.07 

Yields as Jo of Total 

Carbon Burned to: 

OH 3 OH 

22.0 

29.0 

34.5 

35.6 

CH 2 0 

3.06 

3.7 

3.94 

4.03 

HCOOH 

0.26 

0.35 

0.45 

0.5 

Total 25.32 

fields as 4 of Total Inlet 

33.05 

39.0 

40.13 

Oxygen to: , 

CH 3 OII 

9.77 

11.96 

15.4 

15.6 

CH 2 0 

1.36 

1.53 

1.76 

1.78 

HCOOH 

0.232 

0.288 

0.403 

0.44 

H 2 0 

*40.7 

39.4 

37.8 

37.4 

Total 

52.06 

53.18 

55 .36 

55.22 

Jo of Total Inlet 0 2 


Accounted for: 116.0 106.0 162.7 105.0 








70 


changed very Slightly with a change in the off-gas flow* 
At low inlet oxygen concentrations the condensate 
decreased from 4*42 to 4*17 gms# This is shown in Table 
3A» On the other hand at a high inlet oxygen concent¬ 
ration a minimum weight of condensate was obtained in 
the range of flow investigated as shown by Experiment 59 
in Table 3* An unexpected result was in the negligible 
relative variation in formaldehyde and formic acid 
production* One might expect these higher oxidized 
products to decrease, relatively, with increasing rate 
of flow. 

Table 4 shows a series of experiments made 
with a poisoned catalyst while investigating the effect 
of rate of flow on the yields of the useful products* 

The catalyst was poisoned in Experiment 72 and it is 
interesting to note that in the following experiments 
the yields based on the total carbon burned increased 
with the use of the catalyst* This effect suggested 
that the impurity causing the poisoning of the catalyst 
was gradually removed* However,the normal yield 
( Experiment 77, Table 2 ) was not obtained until the 
reacting system was taken apart, cleaned with ether and 
the catalyst purified before making any further 
experiitE nts. 

Effect of Temperature* 


The effect of temperature at 12*7 d ]o inlet oxygen 

















Experiment No. 

57 

Table 

53 

V. 

56 

92 

Temperature °C 

325 

350 

375 

325 

pressure in Atms. 

180 

168 

178 

185 

Off-Gas Flow L./Min. 

0.8 

0.93 

0.86 

0.9 

In-Gas Analysis: 

o 2 

12.7 

12.9 

12.5 

3.98 

ch 4 

35.7 

34.9 

36.4 

73.65 

c 3 h 6 

1.2 

1.15 

1.2 

2.73 

n 2 

50.4 

51.05 

49.9 

19.64 

Off-Gas Analysis 

co 2 

3.0 

3.0 

2.6 

0.63 

o 2 

2.6 

0. 3 

0.6 

0,39 

h 2 

1.3 

2.7 

2.4 

0.47 

CO 

2.5 

4.3 

5.5 

0.14 

ch 4 

37.7 

33.8 

34.3 

74.6 

C 2 H 6 


0.2 

0.3 

2.53 

n 2 

52.9 

55.7 

54.3 

21.24 

Volume In-Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 

1.16 

1.14 

1.09 

1.03 

Condensate, gms/lOOL. 

Totol 

ln-qas 

9.89 

at N.T.P. 
11.64 

13.47 

4.40 

CH 3 OH 

0.953 

1.06 

0.695 

1.70 

ch 2 o 

0.153 

0.103 

0.093 

0.147 

HCOOH 

0.008 

0.016 

0.024 

0.026 

^ h 2 ° 

8.78 

9.88 

12.66 

2.53 

% Alcohol in con- 

9.62 

9.58 

5.16 

38.6 

densate. 

Carbon Oxidized, 

gms/100 L. 

2.99 

3.87 

4.29 

1.10 

Carbonetio Compounds 

Gms,/ 100 I• 

0.437 

0.446 

0.306 

0.703 

%lef Total Carbon 

In Oxidized, 

14.7 

19.5 

20.6 

2.6 

Yields as $ of Total 

Carbon Burned to: 

CH3OH 

12.0 

10.3 

6.1 

58.0 

CH 2 0 

2.04 

1.06 

0.86 

5.53 

HCOOH 

0.143 

0.1 

0.14 

0.62 

Total 

14.2 

11.46 

7.10 

64.IB 

Yields as $ of Total 

Inlet Oxygen to: 

CH3OH 

2.62 

2.89 

1.95 

15.0 

ch 2 o 

0.448 

0.277 

0.278 

1.38 

HCOOH 

0.029 

0.054 

0.092 

0.322 

H 2 0 

42.8 

44.2 

63.3 

35.2 

Total 

45.9 

47.42 

65.62 

51.9 

t of Total Inlet 0 2 

Accounted for: 

93.0 

88.4 

107.0 

78.5 




Table VA. 



86 

87 

93 

88 

85 

a t 

325 

325 

350 

350 

400 

<4 "*• 

185 

185 

185 

186 

185 

1 & 

0.95 

L.O 

0.94 

1.08 

0.94 

\. 0—0 

4.1 

3.89 

4.22 

3.63 

3.71 

3-U 

72.2 

74.7 

72.35 

77.1 

73.8 

n >. / 

2.76 

2.14 

3.26 

2.61 

2.03 

• O 

20.94 

19.27 

20.23 

17.24 

19.88 

1*7- **- 

0.58, 

0.58 

0.19 

0.74 

0.21 

0.47 

0.19 

0.53 

. M t- 

O. 0 

0.63 

0.50 

0.37 

0.56 

0.53 

7 <0 

0.63 

0.72 

0.21 

0.63 

0.53 

74.9 

75.8 

73.1 

78.75 

75.1 


1.81 

2.01 

3.45 

1.79 ; 

2.68 


21.45 

20.2 

21.92 

17.61 

20.63 


1.03 

1.02 

5.06 

1.05 

1.05 

1.05 

\ - Crx3 

5.36 

4,65 

4.20 

4.85 

a- i \ 

2.20 

2.12 

1.80 

1.83 

1.97 

lot 

0.194 

0.187 

0.153 

0.224 

0.198 

* OH •+ 

0.063 

0.057 


0.028 

0.02 

♦ o\ 

2.90 

2.70 

2.70 

2.12 

2.66 

vi; 

41.0 

41.9 

38.7 

43.4 

40.6 



1.55 

1.57 

1.22 

1.35 

1.37 

~~ 

0.922 1 

0.89 

0.738 

0.785 

0.826 


3.73 : 

3.72 

2.90 

3.10 

3.24 

- 


53.3 

51.0 

55.5 

51.0 

54.3 

— 

5.02 

4.77 

5.0 

6.65 

5.75 

r- 

1.06 

59.38 

0.95 

56.72 

60.5 

0.54 

58.19 

0.37 

60.42 

- 

18.83 

19.14 

15.12 

17.8 

18.72 

— 

1.78, 

1.82 

1.36 

2.31 

2.0 


0.755 

44.2 

0.715 

43.3 

40.2 

0.372 

36.8 

0.257 

45.0 

- 

65.56 

65.0 

56.7 

57.28 

66.0 

_ _ 

87.0 

88.6 

81.0 

83.0 

87.0 













<r. 


? 


t 


t! 


ti 







71 


, Experiments 53, 56, and 57, is shown in Table 5. A 
considerable drop in yield accursed with an increase 
in temperature . The yield of useful compounds based 
on the total carbon burned fell from 14.2 to 7.1$ for 
a 50° rise from 325 to 375°C., while the oxygen 
conversion to the liquid products increased from 45#9 
to 65.62$* The increase was mostly as water. The 
percentage of alcohol in the condensate decreased 
and the percentage of the inlet carbon burned increased 
with a rise in temperature. More ethane survived 
at the higher temperatures as shown by the off-gas 
analysis. Higher temperatures should favour the complete 
oxidation of. the ethane with respect to the methane, 
since of the two gaseous paraffins ethane has the lower 
ignition temperature. The results suggest the 
formation of higher hydrocarbons in the reactions 
rather than survival of ethane. The percentage of carbon 
monoxide in the off-gas increased with a rise in 
temperature while the percentage of carbon dioxide 
remained practically constant. This series of experiments j 
showed that at high inlet oxygen concentrations a low 
operating temperature was necessary to obtain higher yields' 
of the useful oxygenated compounds. 

Table 5A shows a series of experiments made to 
determine the effect of temperature on the yields of the 
oxygenated products at a lower inlet oxygen concentration* 
































- 





72 . 


namely, about 3.9 jo* Higher yields were obtained than in 
previous experiments shown in Table 2, using similar 
operating conditions suggesting an improvement in the 
catalyst with age. Experiments 77 and 93 shown in 
Tables 2 and 5 A show the increased yield very well. This 
series of experiments presented other peculiar results 
for which no explanation could be obtained. They were the 
last experiments made with natural gas. Practically all 
the ethane survived in these experiments. This was very 
unexpected since in most of the previous experiments only 
a small percentage of the original ethane survived. The 
procedure used in making these experiments was exactly 
the same as in previous experiments and no explanation 
is lorthcoming to explain this peculiar behaviour. One 
may look to the catalyst surface as tire source of this 
peculiarity and assign to it the power of preferentially 
oxidizing the methane. Duplicate experiments made at the 
same temperature did not check satisfactorily which was 
expected since different amounts of ethane were burned 
each time. No definite relation between temperature 
and yield was obtained. The amount of the total inlet 
carbon burned was about Z$ while the amount of alcohol 
in the liquid products remained in the neighborhood of 
40^ by weight. At 425°C# unknown compounds in the off-gas, 
probably higher hydrocarbons, interfered with the carbon 
monoxide and hydrogen determinations with the result that 






















' 
























- 










YIELDS A5 PERCENT OF TOTAL CARBON BURNED 



CVJ ---- - 

2 3 4 5 6 7 

PERCENT OXYGEN IN MIXTURE 


Figure 15 















































Experiment No. 

115 

99 

116 

Temperature §C 

475 

475 

475 

Pressure in Atms. 

184 

184 

184 

Off-Gas Flow L./min. 

0.84 

0.80 

0.81 

In^Gas Analysis: 

o 2 

3.22 

4.86 

5.53 

ch 4 

80.0 

72.5 

69.1 

n 2 

16.78 

22.65 

25.37 

Off-Gas Analysis: 

co 2 

0.34 

0.58 

0.63 

o 2 

0.16 

0.47 

0.32 

H 2 

0.26 

0.26 

0.37 

CO 

ch 4 

81.4 

74.9 

72.9 

n 2 

17.84 

23.79 

25.78 

Volume In-Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 

1.04 

1.04 

1.09 

Condensate, gms./lOO L. !n- 

To to) 

qa.5 at N.T P 

3.78 5.05 

5.44 

CH 3 0H 

1.60 

1.66 

1.57 

ch 2 o 

0.078 

. 0.051 

0.077 

HCOOH 

0.0304 

0.0441 

0.0514 

HOH 

2.07 

3.30 

3.75 

fo Alcohol In Condensate, 

42.2 

32.9 

29.0 

Carbon Oxidized, gms./lOO L, 

, 0.815 

0.96 

0.939 

Carbon Oxidized, to 00 m- 

pounds, gms,/ 100 L. 

0.642 

0.661 

0.628 

% of Total Carbon In 

Oxidized, 

1.90 

2,48 

2.54 

Yields as $ of Total 

Carbon Burned to: 

CH 3 OH 

74.0 

65.3 

62.8 

CH 2 0 

3.82 

2.16 

3.28 

HCOOH 

0.98 

1.20 

0.87 

Total 

78.8 

68.66 

66.95 


Yields as $ of Total Inlet 
Oxygen to: 



CH 3 OH 

17.44 

12.06 

9,96 


ch 2 o 

0.905 

0.399 

0.522 


HCOOH 

0.46 

0.443 

0.278 


h 2 o 

40.0 

42.6 

42.4 


Total 

58.81 

55.5 

53.16 

of Total 

Inlet Oxygen 




Accounted 

for: 

73.6 

76.3 

69.0 


117 

475 

184 

0.77 

6.93 

63.0 

30.07 


0.87 

0.32 

0.45 

66.4 

31.96 


L.08 


6.27 

1.15 

0.07 

0.0306 

5.02 

18.5 

0.90 

0.469 

2.66 


48.2 

3.12 

0.91 

52.23 


5.84 

0.376 

0.215 

45.2 

51.63 


67.6 


118 

475 

184 

0.83 

7.a 

62.7 

30.3 


0.95 

0.13 

0.05 

66.6 

32.27 

1,09 


6.43 

1.27 

0.081 

0.0324 

5,05 

19.7 

0.975 

0.508 

2.90 


49.2 

2.16 

0.86 

52.22 


6.37 

0.563 

0.225 

45.0 

52.16 


66.4 


119 

475 

184 

0.79 

7.9 

56.9 

35.2 


0.97 

0.24 

0.58 

0.11 

61.5 

36.6 


1.11 


4.88 

0.69 

0.079 

0.0249 

4.09 

14.1 

0.821 

0.298 

2.70 


31.6 

3.84 

0.90 

36.34 


3.09 
0.377 
0.154 
32.§ 
36.21 


50.4 


137 

475 

134 

0.78 

8.63 

55.4 

35.97 


1.37 

0.13 

1.84 

0.21 

58.6 

37.85 


1.10 


8.05 

0.621 

0.076 

0.0244 

7.33 

7.72 

1.04 

0.270 

3.52 


22.4 

2.95 

0.62 

25.96 


2.54 

0.329 

0.138 

53.1 

56.1 


73.0 







.liable U± 


Table Vll 


A 


jsperlment No. 

151 

146 

144 

Temp erature ^ • 

475 

475 

475 

pressure in Atins. 

231 

231 

231 

nff-Gas Flow L./Min. 

0.84 

0.84 

0.84 

rn-Gas Analysis: 

o 2 

3.18 

4.42 

6.73 

ch 4 

79.8 

74.3 

63.9 

n 2 

17.02 

21.28 

29.37 

Off-Gas Analysis: 

co 2 

0.53 

0.63 

1.05 

o 2 


0.05 

0.16 

h 2 

0.5 

0.55 

1.55 

CO 

ch 4 

82.5 

77.5 

0.11 

67.2 

n 2 

16.47 

21.27 

29.93 

Volume In-Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 

1.05 

1.06 

1.09 

Condensate, gms./lOOL. !n-qas 

at NT P 


Total 

.3.26 

4.81 

6.61 

CH 3 OH 

1.34 

1.67 

1.54 

ch 2 o 

0.0604 

0.0833 

0.0965 

HCOOH 

0.0195 

0.0447 

0.0435 

h 2 o 

1.84 

3.02 

4.93 

fj Alcohol In Condensate, 

0 41.0 

34.9 

23.3 

Carbon Oxidized, gms, 
/100 L. 

0.798 

0.99 

1.19 

Carbon Oxidized, to 

compounds gms/lOOL. 

0.531 

0.677 

0.63 

% of Total Carbon In 

Oxidized. 

1.87 

2.49 

3.48 

Yields as $ of Total 

Carbon Burned to: 

CH 3 OH 

62.7 

63.2 

48.6 

ch 2 o 

3.03 

3.36 

3.24 

HCOOH 

0.63 

1.18 

0.95 

Total 

66.36 

67.64 

52.8 

Yields as $ of total 
inlet Oxygen to: 

CH 3 OH 

14.75 

13.34 

8.57 

ch 2 o 

0.711 

0.708 

0.665 

HCOOH 

0.296 

0.494 

0.331 

H 2 0 

36.1 

43.1 

48.1 

. Total 

51.86 

57.64 

57.66 

fi of Total Inlet 0 2 

^counted for: 

67.7 

72.2 

73.0 


143 

154 

153 

155 

156 

475 

475 

475 

475 

475 

231 

141 

141, 

141 

141 

,84 

0.89 

0.90 

0.89 

0.84 

,74 

2,77 

4.42 

6.32 

8.35 

,9 

81.6 

74.3 

65.7 

56.6 

,36 

15.63 

21.28 

27.98 

35.05 

,26 

0.53 

0.79 

1.05 

1.23 

,13 


0.13 

0.11 


,03 

0.55 

0.63 

1.39 

0.63 

,34 



0.24 


,0 

84.15 

76.8 

68.6 

59.1 

,24 

14.77 

21.65 

28.71 

39.04 

,09 

1.05 

1.04 

1.09 

1.08 


20 

2.69 

4.29 

6.32 

8.43 

694 

1.01 

1.30 

1.35 

0.778 

0633 

0.0657 

0.075n 

0.10 

0.0973 

0523 

0.0246 

0,0409 

0.0423 

0.0477 

40 

1,59 

2.87 

4.83 

7.51 


,46 

37.6 

30.3 

21.3 

9.22 

,08 

0.683 

0.967 

1.19 

0.954 

,30 

0.414 

0 .561 

0.557 

0.344 

,67 

1.57 

2.43 

3.40 

3.16 

,2 

55.7 

54.0 

42.2 

30.6 

30 

3.80 

3.12 

3.36 

4.07 

25 

0.94 

1.12 

0.93 

1.26 

75 

60.44 

58.24 

46.49 

35.93 

80 

12.76 

10.26 

7.47 

3.26 

270 

0.885 

0.642 

0.592 

0.436 

293 

0.434 

0.449 

0.328 

0.277 

8 

35.7 

40.4 

47.7 

63.0 

16 

49.78 

51.75 

56.09 

66.97 

5 

68.0 

71,@ 

74.5 

80.5 


0 , 

8 , 

54, 

36 

1 , 

0 , 

2 , 

0 

58 

38, 

1 

8 

0 

0 

0 

7 

8 

1 

0 

3 

24, 

2 

1 , 

27, 

2 , 

0 , 

0 

52, 

56, 

72, 










74 


yields of the useful products could not he calculated * 

This unknown constituent was not removed by potassium 
hydroxide or fuming sulphuric acid but did not interfere 
with the operation of the copper oxide tube* Moreover, 
it interfered with the use of cuprous chloride as a 
reagent for carbon monoxide* Combustion analysis by two 
methods on the whole gas gave good checks however# One 
of the experiments ,425°G• ; No 91, is included, without' 
of course the yield data which could not be obtained 
because figures were lacking for carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen* The results are similar, as far as they go, to 
those obtained at lower temperatures* 

METHANE * 

Effect of Inlet Oxygen Concentration # 

The effect of inlet oxygen concentration on 

the survival of the oxygenated products at three pressures, 

namely, 141, 134 and 231 atmospheres is shown in Figure 15. 

The experimental results for the above three mentioned 

pressures are shown in Tables 7A, 6 and 7* Graphs 1 

and 2, 3 and 4, 5 and 6, show the yields of the total 

oxygenated compoundsand methyl alcohol, respectively, 

both based on the percent of the total carbon burned 

for the previously mentioned pressures* The yields drop 

off very rapidly at higher oxygen concentrations, more 

so than with the natural gas-air mixtures* At low 
oxygen concentrations, the yield passes through a 


















/ 


s, 


's 














75 


maximum as the pressure is raised from 141 to 231 
atmospheres• This is surprising and contrary to 
expectations based on Le Chatelier’s principle* One would 
expect a continually increasing yield with increasing 
pressure* An explanation must be sought in the kinetics 
of the reaction* At higher oxygen concentrations the 
yields were decreased to a greater extent at the highest 
pressure than was true at the lowest pressure. This is 
well shown in Figure 15 where the yields at oxygen concent¬ 
rations greater than Qfo at 141 atmospheres pressure were 
greater than those at 231 and 184 atmospheres pressure. 

The yields at high oxygen concentrations were not changed 
greatly by pressure changes. However, control of fhe 
reaction was difficult and duplicates were not always 
possible. 

Figure 16 shows the percent of alcohol in the 
condensate and the weight of the condensate in grams per 
100 litres of in-gas plotted against the percent of oxygen 
in the mixture. Graphs 1 and 2, 3 and 4, 5 and 6, refer 
to 141, 184 and 231 atmospheres pressure, respectively. 
Graphs 1, 3 and 5 refer to the percent of alcohol in the 
condensate, Graphs 2, 4 and 6 to the grams of condensate. 

The percent of alcohol in the condensate dropped nearly 

■ 

linearly with increasing oxygen content in the mixture 

while the weight of the condensate rose linearly. In 
other words, th@ smaller the condensate, the greater was 









" 


■ 












' 









76 


j> 



\ 


GHS. CONDENSATE/lOO L.MXTURE NJP 


















































77 . 


the concentration of alcohol in the liquid products. 

The percent of the total carbon oxidized and 
the weight of the carbon oxidized per 100 litres of 
in-gas for pressures of 141, 184 and 231 atmospheres is 
shown by Graphs 4 and 3, 6 and S, 8 and 7 in Figure 13, 
At low oxygen concentrations the carbon oxidized rises 


gradually to a maximum or nearly a constant region near 

Qo L 


> oxygen, the yields, Figure 15, drop rapidly. These 
graphs for methane are of the same general nature as 
similar graphs for natural gas. Figures 12 and 13, but 
differ in not being linear. Ho definite relationship 


was obtained between the carbon dioxide and carbon 
monoxide in the off-gas. Carbon monoxide only appeared 
at the higher oxygen concentrations and was seldom 


detected at the lower oxygen concentrations. It is 
significant of the effect of ethane on the reaction that 
carbon monoxide appeared in the off-gas in every 
experiment with natural gas regardless of conditions. 

Tne formation of carbon monoxide in the methane exper¬ 
iments only at high oxygen concentrations may be 
connected with the formation of traces of higher 
hydrocarbons in many of these experiments. While 
combustion analysis on the off-gas from the methane 
experiments showed traces of higher hydrocarbons 
frequently, the amount appeared to be greater at 
nigher oxygen concentrations. 



"V--, . : 













i' t 




4 

4 


















Table Vlll 


Table Vlll A 


Experiment No, 

Tempe ra ‘ ture ° 0 • 
pressure in atms. 
Off-Gas Flow L./min. 

140 

139 

138 

142 

143 

149 

150 

147 

145 

146 

148 

360 

390, 

390 

425 

475 

390 

425 

425 

475 

475 

506 

231 

231 

231 

231 

231 

231 

231 

231 

231 

231 

231 

0.79 

0.80 

0.93 

0.80 

0.84 

0.90 

0.84 

0.88 

0.86 

0.84 

0.87 

rn-Gas Analysis: 












o 2 

8.74 

8.54 

8.30 

8.74 

8.74 

4.28 

4.48 

4.42 

4.42 

4.42 

4.42 

ch 4 

54.9 

55.8 

56.7 

54.9 

54.9 

74.8 

73.8 

74.3 

74.3 

74.3 

74.3 

M Ns 

36.36 

35.66 

35.0 

36.36 

36.36 

20.92 

21.72 

21.28 

21.28 

21.28 

21.28 

Off-Gas Analysis: 












C0 2 

2.28 

2.08 

2.16 

1.68 

1.26 

0.84 

0.79 

0.83 

0.73 

0.63 

0.73 

o* 

0.47 

0.16 

0.13 

0.26 

0.13 


0.11 


0.13 

0.05 

0.05 

h 2 

0.47 

0.63 

0.61 

1.34 

2.03 

0.37 

0.50 

0.53 

0.89 

0.55 

0.82 

CO 


0.16 

0.10 

0.29 

- 0.34 







ch 4 

58.7 

58.7 

59.35 

58.4 

58.0 

77.8 

77.8 

77.4 

77.2 

77.5 

77.1 

n 2 

Volume Off-Gas: 

38.08 

38.27 

37.65 

38.03 

38.24 

20.99 

20.8 

21.24 

21.02 

21.27 

21.3 

1.14 

1.12 

1.11 

1.12 

1.09 

1.06 

1.08 

1.06 

1.07 

1.06 

1.06 

Condensate, gms./lOOL: m-qas at NT- R 









Total 

8.55 

8.69 

8.44 

8.39 

8.20 

4.84 

4.73 

4.79 

4.70 

4.81 

4.48 

CH 3 OH 

1.74 

1.91 

1.85 

1.37 

0.694 

1.74 

1.72 

1.63 

1.66 

1.67 

1.42 

ch 2 o 

0.116 

0.114 

0.104 

0.0908 0.0633 0.109 

0.081 

0.078 

0.0743 0.0833 0.0769 

HCOOH 

0.0707 0.0407 0.0411 0.0596 0.0523 0.0273 0.026 

0.0412 0.0454 0.0447 0.0361 

h 2 o 

6.63 

6.63 

6.43 

6.87 

7.40 

2.96 

2.90 

3.04 

2.92 

3.02 

2.94 

$ Alcohol, Conde.nsate20.4 

22.0 

21.9 

16.4 

8.46 

35.8 

36.4 

34.0 

35.3 

34.9 

31.8 

Carbon Oxidized, gras. 

t 








1.036 



/ 100 1. 

Carbon Oxidized, to 
compounds, gms/ 1Q0L 
fo of Total Carbon In 

1.80 

1.84 

1.83 

1.51 

1.08 

1.13 

1.078 

1.073 

0.99 

0.95 

0.575 


. 0.731 

0.773 

0.745 

0.567 

0.30 

0.703 

0.698 

0.645 

2.70 

0.672 

2.61 

0.677 

2.49 

2.39 

Oxidized, 

6.13 

6.18 

6.05 

5.13 

3.67 

2.81 

2.75 

Yields as$ of Total 
Carbon Burned to: 








57.2 

60.4 

63.2 

56.3 

CH 3 0H 

37 .0 

38.8 

37.8 

34.2 

24.2 

58;0 

60.2 

CH 2 0 

2.58 

2.48 

2.26 

2.42 

2.30 

3.85 

3.02 

2.91 

3.16 

3.36 

3.24 

HCOOH 

1.03 

0.58 

0.59, 

1.03 

1.25 

0.62 

0.63 

0.99 

1.15 

1.18 

0.99 

Total 

41.61 

41.86 

40.65 

37.65 

27.75 

62.47 

63.85 

61.10 

64.71 

67.64 

60.53 

Yields as $ of Total 
inlet Oxygen to: 

CH 3 OH 

ch 2 o 

HCOOH 

h 2 o 

Total 

7.00 

0.498 

0.396 

47.3 

45.19 

7.80 

0.498 

0.232 

48.3 

56.83 

7.80 

0.468 

0.242 

48.3 

56.81 

5.51 

0.388 

0.333 

49.0 

55.23 

2.80 

0.27 

0.293 

52.8 

56*16 

14.2 
0.95 
0.31 

43.2 
58.66 

13.46 

0.68 

0.286 

40.3 

54.73 

12.9 

0.652 

0.455 

43.1 

57.11 

13.2 
0.637 
0.50 

41.3 
55.64 

13.34 

0.708 

0.494 

43.1 

57.64 

11.33 

0.655 

0.40 

41.7 

54.09 

1° of Total Inlet 0 2 



82.2 

76.5 

72.5 

77.8 

73.2 

73.3 

74.5 

72.2 

73.0 

^counted for: 

82.8 

81.0 













- 









' 








78 


The total oxygen conversion to the liquid 
products was not constant and it varied erratically with 
inlet oxygen concentration at 184 atmospheres pressure. 
However, at pressures of 141 and 231 atmospheres the oxy¬ 
gen conversion to liquid products rose slightly with an 
increase am the inlet oxygen concentration. It will he 
noticed that the oxygen recoveries are always less than 
100J®, frequently hy very large amounts. This is 
generally true of all methane experiments and has not been 
accounted for in a satisfactory manner. 

Effect of T-emnerature, 

The variation of yields of the total oxygenated 
compounds and methyl alcohol based on the total carbon 
burned with temperature and pressures of 231 and 184 
atmospheres at 4#42jl and 4,85 jo inlet oxygen are shown 
in Figure 17 and in Tables 8A and 10# Graphs 1 and 2, 

3 and 4, in Figure 17 sho?/ the yields of the total oxy¬ 
genated compounds and methyl alcohol at 184 and 231 
atmospheres pressure # respectively. 

The optimum operating temperature was approx¬ 
imately the same at both pressures being in the 
neighborhood of 460°C# The graphs are somewhat 
conventional but do represent generally the results of 
many experiments at low temperatures, 400°C# or less, 
where duplicates were very difficult to obtain. The 











79 



Figure 17. 






















































experiment No, 

123 

126 

125 

Table IX. 

134 127 

> 

135 

130 

133 

132 

136 

137 

475 

Temperature 0 C • 

340 

350 

360 

360 

360 

375 

390 

390 

390 

425 

pressure in atms. 

Off-Gas Flow L./min. 

184 

184 

184 

184 

184 

184 

184 

184 

184 

184 

184 

0.84 

0.84 

0.62 

0.79, 

0.99 

0.81 

0.82 

0.85 

0.85 

0.78 

0.78 

T n -Gas Analysis: 

1 o 2 

8.64 

8.64 

8.64 

8.70 

8.64 

8.60 

8.71 

8.68 

8.54 

8.74 

8.63 

GH4 

55.4 

55.4 

55.4 

55.0 

55.4 

55.5 

55.0 

55.2 

55.8 

54.9 

55.4 

N 8 

35.96 

35.96 

35.96 

36.3 

35.96 

35.9 

36.29 

36.12 

35.66 

36.36 

35.97 

Off-Gas Analysis: 

co 2 

0.50 

2.00 

2.16 

2.52 

1.92 

2.42 

2.09 

2.52 

2.52 

1.79 

1.37 

0 2 

8.15 

0.11 

0.32 

0.11 

0.16 

0.11 

0.05 


0.11 

0.21 

0.13 

H 2 

0.24 

1.16 

0.71 

0.68 

1.16 

0.58 

0.82 

0.61 

0.71 

1.16 

1.84 

CO 


0.63 

0.63 

0.11 

0.42 

0.11 

0.18 

0.11 

0.11 

0.21 

0.21 

ch 4 

56.1 

58.55 

58.1 

58.1 

59.5 

57.9, 

59.1 

58.3 

58.1 

58.0 

58.6 

n 2 

35.01 

37.55 

38.08 

38.48 

36.84 

38.88 

37.76 

38.46 

38.45 

38.63 

37.85 

Volume In-Gas 

Volume JDflf-Gas: 

1.02 

1.10 

1.10 

1.13 

1.11 

1.11 

1.11 

1.13 

1.11 

1.11 

1.10 

Condensate, gms./lOOL. 

Tobol 

trr -qas a 

fc NT P. 

8.53 

8.71 

7.95 

8.48 

8.27 

8.75 

8.34 

8.35 

8.39 

8.05 

ch 8 oh 


1.54 

1.75 

1.48 

1.58 

1.59 

1.76 

1.63 

1.61 

1.08 

0.621 

CHgO 


0.125 

0.150 

0.130 

0.121 

0.113 

0.118 

0.111 

0.113 

0.112 

0.763 

HCOOH 


0.0388 0.0479 0.0392 0.0463 0.0367 0.0432 0.0219 0.0306 0.0286 0.024^ 

HgO 


6.83 

6.76 

6.30 

6.73 

6.53 

6.83 

6.58 

6.60 

7.17 

7.33 

$ Alcohol In Condensate 

9 

18.1 

20.1 

18.6 

18.6 

19.2 

20.2 

19.5 

19.3 

12.8 

7.72 


Carbon Oxidized, gms. 

/100 L. 

0.0262 

; 1.92 

2.09 

1.84 

1.78 

1.86 

1.81 

1.90 

1.92 

1.42 

1.04 

Carbon Oxidized, to eom- 
jjounds, gms,/ 100 L. 


0.642 

0.73 

0.621 

0.655 

0.637 

0.721 

0.646 

0.646 

0.456 

0.27 

f of Total Carbon In 
Oxidized, 

0.883 

6.49 

7.06 

6.27 

6.00 

6.25 

6.15 

6.42 

6.41 

4.84 

3.52 

Yields as $ of Total 
Carbon Burned to: 

CH3OH 

CHgO 

HCOOH 

Total 


30.2 
2.60 
0.53 

33.3 

31.6 

2.86 

0.60 

35.06 

30.3 

2.81 

0.56 

33.67 

33.4 

2.72 

0.68 

36.8 

31.4 

2.41 

0.49 

34.3 

36.8 

2.60 

0.62 

40.02 

32.2 

1.54 

0.30 

34.04 

31.7 

1.54 

0.40 

33.64 

28.5 

3.16 

0.54 

32.2 

22.4 

2.94 

0.62 

25.96 

Yields as tfo of Total Inlet 











UI ygen to: 

CH a OH 

CH 8 0 

HCOOH 

HgO 

Total 


6.28 

0.542 

0.219 

49.5 

56.54 

7.13 

0.647 

0.272 

48.8 

56.84 

5.98 

0.56 

0.22 

45.3 

52.06 

6.42 

0.523 

0.26 

48.7 

55.9 

6.50 

0.639 

0.208 

47.3 

56.65 

7.11 

0.504 

0.242 

49.2 

57.06 

6.58 

0.478 

0.127 

47.4 

54.59 

6.65 

0.495 

0.181 

48.2 

55.53 

4.33 

0.629 

0.162 

51.3 

56.42 

2.54 

0.329 

0.138 

53.1 

56.1 

u 0f T °tal Inlet Oxygen 
Counted for: 

97.0 

81.7 

86.3 

79.5 

79.6 

81.6 

80.0 

81.0 

83.7 

79.2 

73.0 









Table X 


Experiment No, 

94 

95 

Temperature^ C • 

350 

375 

pressure in Atms. 

184 

184 

Off-Gas Flow L./Min. 
In- Gas Analysis! 

0.73 

0.70 

o 2 

4.86 

4.96 

ch 4 

72.9 

72.0 

n 2 

22.24 

23.04 

Off-Gas Analysis: 



C0 2 

0.95 

0.95 

o 2 

0.26 

0.21 

H 2 

0.24 

0.19 

CO 



ch 4 

75.45 

74.8 

n 2 

23.1 

23.85 

Volume In-Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 

1.05 

1.07 

Condensate, gms./lOO 

LV \n-qas ob NT.P. 

Toto} 

5.00 

4.78 

CH 3 OH 

1.67 

1.57 

CH a O 

0.134 

0.115 

HCOOH 

0.084 

0.0286 

h 2 o 

3.12 

3.02 

$ Alcohol In Condensate, 33.3 

32.9 

Carbon Oxidized, gms 

./iool; 1.18 

1.13 

Carbon Oxidized, to com- 


pounds, gms,/ 100 L. 
f of Total Carbon In 

0.702 

0.657 

Oxidized, 

3.03 

2.93 

Yields as of Total 

Carbon Burned to: 



CH,(M 

52.7 

52.2 

ch 2 o 

4.53 

4.08 

HCOOH 

1.85 

1.67 

itijfLSSjts -*5©tal 

59.08 

57.95 


Yields as $ of Total 
inlet Oxygen to: 



CH 3 OH 

11.9 

11.12 


CH a 0 

1.02 

0.873 


HCOOH 

0.837 

0.715 


H a 0 

39.7 

38.1 


Total 

53.46 

50.81 

of Total 

Inlet Oxygen 



^counted 

for: 

79.0 

72.6 


96 

97 

98 

99 

100 

101 

400 

425 

450 

475 

500 

350 

184 

184 

184 

184 

184 

184 

0.78 

0.66 

0.79 

0.80 

0.74 

0.74 

5.03 

4.85 

4.85 

4.85n 

4.85 

4.85 

72.6 

73.0 

73.0 

72.5 

72,5 

72.5 

22.36 

22.15 

22.15 

22.65 

22.65 

22.65 

0.74 

0.65 

0.63 

0.58 

0.63 

0.97 

0.53 

0.24 

0.16 

0.47 

0.26 

0.26 

0.16 

0.23 

0.21 

0.26 

0.21 

0.16 

74.2 

75.4 

75.5 

74.9 

75.2 

75.3 

24.37 

23.48 

23.39 

23.79 

23.7 

23.31 

1.05 

1.04 

1.04 

1.04 

1.04 

1.05 

5.17 

5.38 

5.25 

5.05 

4.75 

5.26 

1.73 

1.82 

1.76 

1.66 

1.40 

1.74 

0.158 

0.139 

0.0586 

1 0.0508 

0.0474 

0.148 

0.0604 0.0814 0.0441 0.0441 

0.0305 

0.0505 

3.22 

3.34 

3.39 

3.30 

3.27 

3.32 

33.4 

33.9 

33.6 

32.9 

29.6 

33.1 

1.11 

1.09 

1.02 

0.96 

0.878 

1.22 

0.732 

0.763 

0.698 

0.661 

0.557 

0.727 

2.85 

2.80 

2.61 

2.48 

2.26 

3.14 


58.8 

62.5 

65.1. 

65.3 

60.2. 

53.4 

5.07 

5.07 

2.26 

2.16 

2.16 

4.85 

1.42 

1.94 

1.12 

1.20 

0.93 

1.08 

65.92 

69.51 

68.48 

68.66 

63.29 

59.33 


11.24 

13.20 

12.73 

12.06 

10.10 

12.58 

1.172 

1.074 

0.449 

0.399 

0.366 

1.146 

0.584 

0.818 

0.440 

0.443 

0.307 

0.507 

39.8 

43.0 

43.7 

42.6 

41.8 

42.8 

53.8 

58.09 

57.32 

55.5 

52.57 

57.14 

77.7 

75.3 

72.8 

76.3 

70.2 

81.2 































80 


exothermic nature of the reaction interfered particularly 
with the temperature control at lower temperatures# It 
was peculiar that the reaction was easily controlled at 
350°C* but was highly erratic at 375°C. 

The stability of the catalyst was shown in ex¬ 
periments 94 and 101, the catalyst having been used at 
all temperatures up to 500°0. between these experiments 
without affecting apparently its activity. At higher 
temperatures and 184 atmospheres pressure no difficulty 
was found in obtaining satisfactory duplicates. However, 
at 231 atmospheres pressure duplicate experiments would 
not check. This is well shown by experiments 145 and 146 
at 475°C. and experiments 150 and 147 at 425°C. in Table 
8A* The temperature control in all these experiments 
was good and no difficulty ?/as had with' the other variables 
concerned. It appears that the catalyst was changing its 
surface at the time or else impurities were entering the 
reacting system. 

The effect of temperature on the yields at 184 
and 231 atmospheres pressure at an oxygen concentration 

of 8.7$ is shown in Figure 18. The data are from Tables 

_ . 

8 and 9. The optimum temperature of operation was in the 
neighborhood of 390°C. An increase in pressure raised the 
optimum working temperature very slightly. The yields at 
both pressures dropped slowly with an increase in 











* 



; X i?'S 


> 

' 










YIELDS -AS PERCENT OF TOTAL CARBON BURNL 



TEMPERATURE °C 


Figure 13 




























































82 


temperature. 

The weight of the condensate for any one 
pressure and mixture remained practically constant 

with a change in temperature# In some of the experiments 

' 

an increase in temperature above the optimum working 
value decreased the weight of the liquid products# The 
percent of alcohol in the condensate did not change 
appreciably with temperature# In all these experiments 
there was a rough inverse correlation between weight and 
composition of condensate as shown, for example, in 
Figure 16# 

The percent of the total carbon burned decreased 
with an increase in temperature# This effect is shorn in 
Table 10 and may be accounted for by the increase in space 
velocity over the catalyst with rising temperature. 

A rise in temperature did not result in 
significant changes in the off-gas composition nor did 
it result in carbon monoxide formation# However, at 
high inlet oxygen concentrations carbon monoxide, in 
quantities as high as 0#63$ in the off-gas, was obtained. 
Tables 9 and 8 show the variation of carbon monoxide in the 
off-gas for pressures of 184 and 231 atmospheres. 

No very clear relationship existed between the 
yield of the liquid products based on the total inlet 
oxygen and the temperature of operation. A rise to a 
maximum at 425 to 450°C. is indicated. 




















83 



Figure 19. 












































Table XI 


Experiment No, 

108 99 

no 

111 


475 475 

475 

475 

pressure in atms • 

Off-Gas Flow L./Min. 

184 184 

184 

184 

0.66 

0.80 

0.89 

1 .03 

rn-Gas Analysis: 

0 2 

4.85 

4.85 

4.87 

4.95 

ch 4 

72.7 

72.5 

72.7 

72.3 

n 2 

22.45 

22.65 

22.43 

22.75 

Off-Gas Analysis: 

C0 2 

0.63 

0.58 

0.53 

0.63 

o 2 

0.31 

0.47 

0.21 

0.16 

h 2 

0.11 

0.26 

0.26 

0.11 

ch 4 

75.0 

74.9 

75.5 

75.2 

n 2 

23.95 

23.79 

23.5 

23.8 

ynlnme Jjfi“Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 
Condensate, gms./lOO L. 

1.05 
| n-qas a 

1.04 
t N.r.P. 

1.05 

1.06 

TcU) 

5.06 

5.05 

5.25 

5.28 

<p,OH 

1.64 

1.66 

1.70 

1.69 

ch 2 o 

0 . 04720.0568 OiOeO 1 / 

’ 0.0698 

HCOOH 

0.0404 0.0441 0.0339 

’ 0.0299 

h 2 o 

3.33 

3.30 

3.46 

3.49 

j# Alcohol In Condensate, 

Carbon Oxidized, gms. 

32.4 

32.9 

32.4 

32.1 

/ 100 L. 

0.967 

0.96 

0.943 

0.99 

Carbon Oxidized, to Com- 

Pounds, gms,/ 100 L. 

0.646 

0.661 

0.673 

0.675 

% of Total Carbon In 

Oxidized, 

2.48 

2.48 

2.42 

to 

U1 

05 

Yields as of Total 

Carbon Burned to: 

CH a 0H 

63.8 

65.3 

67.8 

64.4 

ch 2 o 

1.95 

2.16 

2.57 

2.82 

HCOOH 

1.09 

1.20 

0.96 

0.79 

Total 66.84 

Yields as $ of Total Inlet 

68.66 

71.33 

68.01 

Oxygen to: 

CH 3 OH 

11.85 

12.06 

12.28 

12.02 

CH 2 ° 

0.366 

0.399 

0.466 

0.529 

HCOOft 

0.405 

0.443 

0.338 

0.295 

H 2 0 ' 

42.9 

42.6 

44.3 

44.2 

Total 

55.52 

55.5 

57.38 

57.04 

of Total Inlet Oxygen __ _ 

^counted for: 

74.0 

76.3 

72.0 

72 .U 


105 

106 

104 

103 

475 b 

475 

475 

475 

184 

184 

184 

184 

0.47 

0.66 

0.73 

0.91 

5.05 

4.96 

4.45 

4.85 

72.6 

72.3 

74.2 

72.5 

22.35 

22,75 

21.35 

22.65 

0.74 

0.74 

0.74 

0.71 

0.42 

0.16 

0.11 

0.18 

0.26 

0.16 

0.11 

0.32 

73.3 

74.9 

77.0 

75.2 

25.28 

24.04 

22.04 

23.59 

1.04 

1.06 

1.06 

1.05 

5.10 

5.08 

4.66 

5.01 

1.45 

1.46 

1.46 

1.50 

0.0423 

1 0.0417 

r 0.0462 0.0832 

0.0618 

l 0.0370 0.0319 0.0510 

3.55 

3.54 

3.12 

3.38 

28.4 

28.7 

31.4 

30.0 


0.97 

0.946 

0.947 

0.973 

0.587 

0.573 

0.575 

0.611 

2.50 

2.45 

2.39 

2.51 


57.3 

57.8 

57.9 

58.0 

1.74 

1.76 

1.96 

3.42 

1.67 

1.02 

0.88 

1.37 

60.71 

60.58 

60.74 

62.79 


10.08 

10.36 

11.52 

10.82 

0.314 

0.316 

0.389 

0.639 

0.597 

0.365 

0.350 

0.512 

43.9 

44.7 

43.9 

43.4 

54.89 

55.74 

56.16 

55.37 

77.0 

73.0 

74.0 

75.0 























- 












84 


Effect of Bate of Flow* 

The effect of rate of flow on the survival of 
the useful oxidation products at 360°C. and 475°C. with 
an 8.6 fo and 4.85J& inlet oxygen concentration at 184 
atmospheres pressure is shown in Figure 19. The results 

of the experiments are shorn in Table 9, including 

✓ 

experiments 12^, 134 and 127, and Table 11* Graphs 1 
and 2, 3 and 4 in Figure lg show the yield of the total 
oxygenated products and methyl alcohol at 4.85 and 8.6 
percent oxygen in the mixture. Increase in the rate of 
flow in the range investigated was of little effect on the 
yields of the useful products. A maximum appears in 'one 
case and a minimum in the other but they are barely 
outside the variation between duplicate experiments. 

The same result was not obtained in the natural gas-air 
experiments in which the yields to useful products 
decreased appreciably with the rate of off-gas flow. 

Table X1A. shows the effect of rate of flow on the yield 
when the catalyst was poisoned. Whild very much lower, the 
yields are practically independent of rate of flow. 

The amount of inlet carbon burned at 8.64 'fo and 
4.35 fo inlet oxygen concentration did not vary a great 
deal with the rate of flow and was in the neighborhood of 
6.5 fo and 2,5 fo, respectively. The oxygen conversion to 
Jhe liquid products and the oxygen recovery were not 

















' 













Table Xll.. 


Experiment No, 

157 

158 

159 

160 

161 

Temperature 0 C • 

475 

475 

475 

475 

475 

Pressure In Atms. 

141 

141 

141 

141 

141 

Off-Gas Flow L./Min. 

0.85 

0.88 

0.84 

0.90 

0.88 

In-Gas Analysis: 

o 2 

8.57 

8.85 

8.68 

4.35 

4.52 

ch 4 

55.7 

54.5 

55.2 

731.85 

73.8 

n 2 

55.73 

36.65 

36.12 

21.15 

21.68 

Off-Gas Analysis: 

C0 2 

0.97 

1.08 

2.02 

1.05 

1.00 

0 2 
h 2 

0.76 

0.53 

0.11 

0.97 

0.13 

0.9° 

0.05 

0.87 

CO 

ch 4 

60.3 

58.9 

0.11 

58.3 

77.6 

77.5 

n 2 

37.97 

39.49 

38.49 

20.32 

20.58 

Volume In-Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 

1.10 

1.10 

1.09 

1.00 

1.06 

Condensate, gms./ 100L. 

Total 

In-qos 

7.95 

Qb N.T.P 

8.39 

7.99 

4.09 

4.08 

CH3OH 

0.231 

0.436 

1.23 

1.07 

1.20 

CH 2 0 

0.0427 0.0705 0.0971 0.0947 0.091 

HCOOH 

0.0375 0.0654 0.0586 0.0293 0.0193 

H 2 0 

7.63 

7.82 

. 6.60 

2.90 

2.77 

fo Alcohol In Condensate,2*9 

5.2 

15.4 

26.2 

29.2 

Carbon Oxidized, gms. 

/ 100 L. 

0.583 

0.734 

1.56 

1.01 

0.994 

Carbon Oxidized to Com- 
j pounds, gms,/ 100 L. 

0.114 

0.209 

0.518 

0.449 

0.487 

1 fo of Total Carbon In 
Oxidized, 

1.96 

2.52 

5.30 

2.39 

2.51 

Yields as fo of Total 
i Carbon Burned to: 

ch 8 oh 

14.9 

22.4 

29.6 

39.8 

45.0 

ch 2 o 

2.91 

3.84 

2.48 

3.78 

3.66 

HCOOH 

1.65 

2.31 

0.97 

0.77 

0.51 

Total 

1 

19.46 

28.55 

33.05 

43.35 

49.17 

Yields as f of Total 
Inlet Oxygen.to: 

CH 3 0H 

0.945 

1.74 

4.99 

8.63 

9.17 

ch 2 o 

0.186 

0.301 

0.556 

0.813 

0.752 

HCOOH 

0.215 

0.362 

0.329 

0.329 

0.206 

h 2 o 

55.7 

55.3 

47.5 

41.5 

38.2 

Total 

57.05 

57.7 

53.37 

51.27 

48.33 

fo of Total Inlet Oxygen 
Accounted for: 67.5 

69.0 

78;Q 

78.2 

70.0 













C; 



















85. 

related in any way to the off-gas flow rate. The 
weight and composition of the condensate did not change 
appreciably with the rate of flow. Alcohol was present 
to the extent of 19 jo by weight of the condensate at the 
higher oxygen.concentration used and 32.5^ at the lower. 

The rate of flow as given refers of course to the 
whole gas. Changing the oxygen concentration changes 
the actual rate of flow and care has to be taken in mak¬ 
ing comparisons between the behavior of different gas 
mixtures. The small effect of changing the rate of 
flow,however,permits the conclusions that rate of flow in | 
the range used is of little consequence. 

Other CatsT imts . 

j-aoles 12 and 13 show experiments made with an 
empty reactor and with the following catalysts-copper, 
glass, enduro steel and silver. No definite results were 
ootained with the empty reactor because duplicate 
experiments would not chedk. The yields in duplicate 
experiments varied considerably as did also the weight 1 

of the condensate and the percent of the total carbon 
oxidized. The same result was obtained with high and 
low concentrations of oxygen in the mixture. Because of 
■.he increased volume of the autoclave due to the absence 
of the catalyst the space velocity was very small and this 
no doubt was responsible in part for the erratic results 












1 




Table Xlll 


Experiment No, 

115 

114 

1 153 

162 

163 

164 

Catalyst. 

Copper 

glass 

Copper 

Enduro 

Enduro 

Silver 

Temperature®C. 

475 

475 

475 

475 

475 

475 

pressure in atms. 

184 

184 

141 

141 

141 

141 

Off-Gas Flow L./Min. 

0.84 

0.85 

0.90 

0.77 

0.88 

0.89 

In-Gas Analysis: 

OS 

3.22 

3.16 

4.42 

4.45 

4.42 

4.22 

ch 4 

80.0 

80.2 

74.3 

74.° 

74.3 

74.3 

n 2 

16.78 

16.64 

21.28 

21.55 

21.28 

21.28 

Off-Gas Analysis: 

co 2 

0.34 

0.37 

0.79 

1.08 

1.05 

0.68 

o 2 

H 2 

0.16 

0.26 

0.18 

0.13 

0.63 

0.63 

0.82 

0.18 

0.66 

CO 

ch 4 

81.4 

82.0 

76.8 

78.0 

78.0 

0.05 

77.9 

Na 

17.84 

17.34 

21.65 

20.29 

20.13 

20.53 

Vp^ume In-Gas 

Volume Off-Gas: 

1.04 

1.04 

1.04 

1.07 

1.06 

1.07 

Condensate, gms./ 100 L. 

T*fc$L 

\rt-qas at 

3.78 

N TP 

3.91 

4.29 

3.82 

3.65 

4.51 

CHgOH 

1.60 

1.71 

1.30 

1.13 

1.03 

1.25 

ch 2 o 

0:078 

0.0644 

0.075 

0.0515 

0.0502 

0.136 

HC00H 

0.0304 

0.0305 

0.0409 

0.0419 

0.0422 

0.0254 

H 2 0 

2.07 

2.10 

2.87 

2.60 

2.53 

3.10 

j) Alcohol In Condensate, 

42.2 

44.0 

30.3 

29.6 

28.2 

27.8 

Carbon Oxidized, gms. 

/ 100 L. 

0.815 

0.867 

0.967 

1.00 

A 

0.947 

0.902 

Carbon Oxidized to com- 

pounds, gms,/ 100 L. 

0.642 

0.678 

0.561 

0.458 

0.419 

0.535 

% of Total Carbon In 

Oxidized, 

1.90 

2.02 

2.43 

2.50 

2.38 

2.27 

Yields as Jo of Total 

Carbon Burned to: 

CHgOH 

74.0 

74.2 

54.0 

42.5 

41.1 

52.3 

ch 2 o 

3.82 

2.97 

3.12 

2.08 

2.14 

6.04 

HC00H 

0.98 

0.92 

1.12 

1.09 

1.15 

0.74 

Total 

78.8 

78.09 

58.24 

45.67 

44.39 

59.08 


Yields as Jo of Total 


CHgOH 

17.44 

19.0 

10.26 

8.95 

8.20 

10.43 

CH 2 0 

0.905 

0.761 

0.642 

0.433 

0.428 

1.21 

HCOOH 

0.46 

0.47 

0.449 

0.458 

0.466 

0.294 

h 2 o 

40.0 

41.6 

40.4 

36.6 

35.9 

46.0 

Total 

58.81 

61.73 

51.75 

46.44 

44.99 

57.93 

1 of Total Inlet Oxygen 







Accounted for: 

73.6 

78.5 

71.8 

69.0 

67 .5 

77 .5 











86 


obtained. The possibility of uncontrolled reaction for 
relatively long periods of time and the uncertainty of 
the temperature in the gas mixture are contributing 
fastors. These results with the empty autoclave were 
of prime importance. They showed, that in order to get 
controlled oxidation, first, the space velocity must be 
above a certain minimum value and second, a good heat 
conductor to maintain uniform temperature throughout the 
reacting gases was necessary. It may be true also that 
the reactions of value are surface reactions, requiring 
a surface that is under fair temperature control to 
dissipate the heat of these exothermic reactions. Previous 
work (9) demonstrated this same point, that large gas 
spaces were detrimental. 

The effect of different catalysts on the oxida¬ 
tion of methane is shown in Table 13. As regards the 
yields to useful products copper, glass and silver were 
equally good. Silver, however, tended to produce more 
formaldehyde than either copper or glass. By comparing 
experiments 153 and 164 it is seen that silver produces 
about twice as much formaldehyde as copper when used 
under identically the same conditions. However, the 
total amount of carbon burned in each case was the same. 
Enduro steel was a very poor catalyst since controlled 
combustion could not be obtained with its use and 
consequently, very lo?/ yields resulted. All the catalysts 







. 





37 


used did not have the same volume and so the space 
velocity would be different in each case* Comparisons 
as regards yields cannot be overstressed because of this 
fact. For example, the silver used had a much smaller 
volume than the copper with the result that the mixture 
was in contact with the silver for a longer period of 
time. This would account, no doubt, for the larger 
amount of formaldehyde surviving with the silver, more 
opportunity for the oxidation of the alcohol occurring. 

The effectiveness of glass as a catalyst was 
unexpected. Glass is not a good conductor of heat and 
the temperature control should be poor. It is concluded 
that the reactions on glass follow a different course and 
are much slower than on metals so that the heat is liberw j 
ated more slowly. One also may suggest that all the 
reactions took place on the copper-plated interior walls 
of the reactor, the function of the glass being merely 
the suppression of undesirable gas phase reactions such 
as occurred with the empty autoclave. 

The ineffectiveness of the ITi-Cr-Fe alloy, Enduro 
steel, may be attributed to the metals of which it is 
composed. They promote complete oxidation, and further, 
all form oxides that are not easily reduced. Copper 
and silver form readily reducible oxides and it is 
beleived that this property has a great deal to do with 










33 . 


their effectiveness in the reaction. Visual inspection of 
the copper catalyst after use suggest® very strongly the 
presence of cuprous oxide on its surface. The enduro steel 
catalyst showed little change after use. 

Oxygen Balances: - 

The oxygen balance did not check, the recovery in 
gaseous and liquid-products of the reactions ranging 
from 60^ to 146$a in different experiments. Recoveries 
over 100 fo were obtained only with natural gas. The 
discrepancies were very great in some experiments and 
there was no definite relationship between the oxygen 
accounted for and the different variables investigated. 
Since a deficiency of oxygen was always obtained in the 
methane-air experiments a series of experiments were 
made to trace the missing oxygen. The first possibility 
tested was the retention of oxygen by the catalyst, an 
almost certain occurrence on a small scale but unlikely 
to explain tha large losses observed. It was with this 
point in view that glass was used as a catalyst, a 
catalyst which would absorb no oxygen. However, the . 
results obtained were similar to those with copper a 


recovery of only 7&.5JS of the oxygen being obtained. 




Again the walls of the reactor might absorb some of the 
oxygen at the operating temperatures that were used. 
This possibility was examined by isolating the reacting 
system at the completion of an experiment and after 















W-J 


allowing the whole to reach room temperature, samples 
of the mixture were withdrawn for analysis. The analysis 
of the mixture showed it to have about the same 
composition as the off-gas obtained in the normal 
experiment. The oxygen content was however a little 
high, explicable since all the gas in the high pressure 
system was not passed through the catalyst chamber. A 
further possibility investigated was the formation of 
gaseous oxygen compounds which would not be determined 
in the off-gas analysis. Consequently the off-gas in 
one of the experiments was passed through a quartz tube 
heated to 1100°C. at which temperature methane and any 
higher hydrocarbons would be cracked whilfe any oxygenated 
carbon compounds being less stable would decompose 
certainly to carbon, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide 
and water. A sample of the cracked off-gas was analyzed 
and it was shown to have the same oxygen content as the 
original gas before heating. The methods of analysis 
of condensates were confirmed on pure substances and 
further, whole samples were analyzed for carbon and 
hydrogen by the methods of ultimate organic analysis 
with excellent agreement between the methods. Impossible 
as it may appear, nevertheless the fact remains that all 
the oxygen entering the reactor did not come out in the 
liquid and gaseous products and it appears unlikely that 
the lost oxygen remained in the catalyst, ho solid 





c 






, 

. 

* 








t 














90. 


compounds formed in the reactor or in the system in 
any case. The recovery of surplus oxygen in the natural 

gas experiments is just as puzzling. One is forced to the 

conclusion that failure to balance oxygen is connected 

with the reactor, probably in combination with the 

copper, and it is hoped that further tests will clear up 
the point. The quantity of oxygen lost, and for that 
matter the quantities gained in the natural gas 
experiments, are so large in many cases, however, as to 
cast some doubt on absorption by metal as an explanation. 
Weizevich and Frolich (31) in their experiments on the 
oxidation of natural gas and methane only accounted for 
70$ of the in-going oxygen. With experiments on the 
oxidation of propane only about 40$ of the oxygen was re¬ 
covered in the products. They offer no explanation but 
apparently must have had the same difficulty in 
accounting for all the oxygen as experienced here. 
Discussion . 

Im the previous sections the results have been 
presented together with some discussion of the salient 
features. In general it may be concluded that the yield 
of useful products depends primarily on oxygen 
concentration and temperature. They depend to a lesser 
extent on the pressure of operation and only slightly 
on space velocity at least within the range used. 

Catalysts are of importance, apparently fulfilling two 








91 


functions. A catalyst should provide a suitable reaction 
surface and one satisfactory surface appears to be that 
of a metal easily oxidized and reduced. Further, the cata¬ 
lyst must fulfill either or both functions of providing 
uniform temperature distribution and reducing the free 
gas space to a minimum. Gas phase reactions and uncont¬ 
rolled temperature are both detrimental. The weight of 
condensates varied little from experiment to experiment 
for anyone oxygen concentration but did of course decrease 
as the oxygen content of the in-gas decreased. The 
alcohol content of the condensate paralleled the yield, 
the water content increasing as the yield went down. 

The general features of the results may be ex¬ 
plained reasonably well by a mechanism involving fea¬ 
tures of Bone’s Hvdroxvlation theory (3) and Norrish’s 
Chain theory (2V). Obvious confirmation of the general 
truth of Bone’s theory lies in the production of large 
amounts of methyl alcohol together with formaldehyde 
and formic acid in smaller amounts. The dependence of 
yield on oxygen concentration and the fact that a high 
pressure is necessary for the production of useful 
products are details explicable on this theory. Finally 
tests for peroxides were always negative suggesting 
that the peroxide theory is not applicable. 

Bone’s theory does not offer a satisfactory- 
explanation,- however, for many observations regarding 





























c 







92 


the minor products of the reaction and the kinetics of 
the reaction# It is beloved that Norrish’s theory 
clealrs up many of these points and the fallowing theory, 
combining aspects of both, is presented# 

The primary reactions suggested are two, a 
surface reaction between methane and oxygen and a 
homogeneous gas phase reaction between methane and oxygen# 
Both reactions require activated oxygen ; in the first, 
the oxygen may be absorbed on the catalyst surface or 
combined with the catalyst, for example as cuprous 
oxide, and in the second, the oxygen may be as activated 
of in the atomic form# The source of theaatomic or 
activated gaseous oxygen will be discussed later. We 
may write the surface reaction as:- 

I 

GH 4 * 0 S -——^ OH3OH (1) 

or CH 4 + Cu a 0 > CH 3 OH + 2Cu* 

The methanol may survive or proceed to formaldehyde or 
formic acid by Bone’s mechanism through further oxidation. 
This reaction is required by Bone as the first stage in the 

! 


A chain reaction which is broken by (1) above. Je may 


oxidation of methane and moreover it is admitted by 
Horrish as a reaction that occurs; in the latter 
theory it plays the role of a chain breaker. The 
homogeneous reaction may be taken from Liorrish as.— 

GH 4 + 0* — ♦ CH 2 : + H 2 0 (2) 

CH 2 : + 0 2 —^ CH 2 0 + 0 + 13) 








< 




93 


also postulate the occurrence of the reactions 



n CH 2 : ——- 

-*• ( ch 8 ) n 

(4) 


ch 2 o —- 

CO + h 2 

(5) 

or 

CH*0 + 1/2 0 2 ■ 

-^co + h 2 o 

(6) 


all of which are known to occur in other work. 

Low oxygen concentrations favor methanol 
production and one may conclude this from reaction (1) 
above. This is only to be expedted since with a limited 
supply, and a good catalyst, most of the oxygen in the 
reactive form will be on the catalyst. The methanol 
formed will survive in large partj to undergo further ox- 
idation it would have to compete with the much larger 
quantity of methane present for oxygen. However, at 
high oxygen concentrations a considerable amount of 
activated oxygen may be expected in the gas phase. 
Methanol might be expected to oxidize further, the 
whole Bone series of reactions moving further toward 
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and water. 

A further and probably more important effect 
of high oxygen concentrations will be the promotion of 
the reactions in Horrish’s theory, (2) and (3) above. 
These are homogeneous reactions and should be promoted 
by increased oxygen concentration in the gas phase 
whereas the reaction (1) above is heterogeneous and re¬ 
latively independent of oxygen concentration once 







- 

■ 








. 






. 





< 

i ( 


■ 











94 


the catalyst surface is covered. Hence one might expect 
an increased production of aldehydes and higher 
hydrocarbons, reaction (4), at high oxygen concentrations. 
However, as is well known, aldehydes are very reactive 
compared to alcohols and hydrocarbons and little would 
survive. Rather an increased production of carbon 
monoxide, carbon dioxide and water would result. In the 
methane experiments, the reduction in methanol yield, 


the production of carbon monoxide and the increased traces 
of higher hydrocarbons only at high oxygen concentrations 
is explicable on this basis. At low oxygen concentrations 
methanol is the primary product and the amount of aldehyde 
formed is so small as to give no carbon monoxide. The 
reactions (3) and (4) are nearly if not entirely suppress¬ 
ed under these conditions. The occurrence of explosions 
at the highest oxygen concentration used is readily 
explained on Norrish’s theory through the formation 
of aldehydes in large amounts.. The reactive nature of 
the aldehyde, compared to methanol and methane would 
account for the explosions. 

Summarizing, it is proposed that two primary 
reactions occur, (1) and (2) above, the first being 
heterogeneous and desirable leading to the Bone 
mechanism of oxidation, the second being a homogeneous 
chain reaction yielding formaldehyde and gases but 
no methanol and so undesirable. The relative proportion 




















95 


of each in the whole reaction depends mainly upon 
oxygen concentration, the proportion of the second 
increasing with increasing oxygen concentration * 

Increasing the pressure of the reactants would 
affect the two reactions. With increasing pressure, 
reaction (1) should be promoted through Increased velocity 
and shift in equilibrium. Moreover, further reactions 
in the Bone series would be suppressed. However, the 
pressure of methane only would be effective, the effect 
of increased oxygen pressure being small on the 
assumption that the catalyst is practically saturated 
with oxygen at all concentrations. Reactions (2) and 
(5) will be increased in velocity by increase in pressure 
or concentration of both methane and oxygen with 
oxygen probably the most important reagent. These are 
detrimental reactions. The observed results at low 
oxygen concentrations that there is a maximum in the 
pressure-yield relation follows on the above theory. 

As the pressure is raised at constant oxygen concentration, 
reaction,(1), the^predominating reaction, and at the 
same time reactions (2) and (3) are promoted. It is 
conceivable that the velocity of reactions (2) and (3) 
increase more rapidly with pressure than reaction (I), 
the velocity depending on two reactants in the former 







. 

» 




< 


v« 











96 


case as against one reactant in the latter. Ultimately, 
and presumably above 184 atmospheres pressure for the 
experiments in question, reactions (2) and (3) predominate 
and the yield of methanol falls. As the oxygen concent¬ 
ration in the gas is increased, the effect of pressure 
should change, reactions (2) and (3) being favored at 
the expense of reaction (1) and ultimately a decrease in 
pressure should favor reaction (1). This was found 
to be the case (Figure 15)) at 8-9$> oxygen where the 
minimum pres sir e of 141 atmospheres gave the highest 
yield of methanol. 

The effect of temperature is more or less 
obvious. Once the ignition temperature is reached, the 
effect of increased temperature is to increase the 
velocity of ail reactions, the secondary reactions in both 
mechanisms as well as the primary. At sufficiently high 
temperatures depending on the oxygen concentration the 
oxidation and decomposition of the primary products 
methanol and formaldehyde to carbon monoxide, carbon 
dioxide and water will be so extensive as to result in a 
decrease in yield. This has been observed, the 
optimum temperature being nearly independent of pressure 
but dependent on oxygen concentration. 

The effect of space velocity on the reactions 
is not so clear. One might say at first, sight that 
increasing rate of flow should result in increased yields 










97 


of the primary products but such was not the case. The 
conclusion to be drawn is that within the range of 
space velocity used, the reactions were always complete 
or there was no time for further reaction. Neither 

methanol or formaldehyde are stable with respect to their 

and 

decomposition products carbon monoxidehydrogen^ 
formaldehyde least of all under the conditions used. 

methane equi/th*as we// os 

However, the A methanol equilibrium,with carbon monoxide 
and hydrogen will be set up and in the presence of an 
excess of methane the whole system will shift toward 
methanol, a conception that may explain the survival of 
methanol independently of the time of contact. None of 
the catalysts are good catalysts for the methanol 
synthesis at high pressures, although copper is an 
excellent promoter of good catalysts. The alternative 
conception is that in the range of space velocities used 
insufficient time for decomposition of methanol was 
allowed. Both conceptions may play a part. The low 
yields found in experiments v/ith the empty autoclave 
(Table 12 1 is explicable on the basis of both space 
velocity and Norrish’s chain reaction. The space velocity 
was much smaller in these experiments and the time re¬ 
quired for methanol decomposition may have been reached. 
The more likely explanation of the low yield however, is 
the predominance of reactions (2) and (3) above through 
the large gas phase in the empty autoclave with sub- 



' 

. 









98 


sequent decomposition of the aldehyde formed. 

While the action of catalysts has been discussed 
in part, some further remarks regarding the effect of 
glass and enduro steel may be of value in the light of 
the above mechanism. The inaction of enduro steel may 
be attributed to its failure to absorb or combine with 
oxygen to any extent. This alloy, of the stainless 
type, is characterized by its resistance to oxidation. 
Consequently only the copper walls of the reactor would 
promote reaction(l), the reactions (2) and (3) taking 
place in the gas spaces between the enduro steel chips. 
There would be a consequent fall in yield as observed* 

The reason for the efficiency of glass as a cat¬ 
alyst is not clear. One can suggest that it is a good 
catalyst for reaction (1) either through the adsorption 
of oxygen or methane, which is unlikely, or through some 
power of activation of the reactants. It is interesting 
to note that in the work of Bone and collaborators (3) on 
the oxidation of methane at atmospheric pressures, 
satisfactory surfaces such as porcelain, silica or glass 
were the most effective in promoting aldehyde formation. 
The assumption made by Bone was of course that methanol 
was the primary product. As an alternative, it may be 
suggested that the glass was not a catalyst at all but 
served the purpose of a deactivator of oxygen and broke 
the chains efficiently in N-orrishjS reaction. 








i 



( 


c ( 







c 


5 






£ 









99 


Consequently, the predominating reaction would be on the 
copper peactor surfaces to methanol. 

The efficiency of silver may be attributed to 
the same property effective with copper, namely, its 
ability to absorb oxygen and its ease of oxidation and 
reduction. The observations of large amounts of 
formaldehyde with silver is not new and is somewhat 
inexplicable. The greater solubility of oxygen in 
silver with:the possibility of a higher active concent¬ 
ration in the surface may account for the phenomenon.m 
Methanol would be oxidized to- formaldehyde or active 
oxygen may be liberated from the silver promoting 
reactions (2) and (3)« 

Returning to the experiments with natural 
gas, particularly those in Table 5,the behaviour of 
ethane is of interest. Sometimes all or nearly all of the 
ethane disappeared, the amount of methanol ..produced 
comparing with the ethane and frequently being greater. 
More interesting however are those experiments where 
the ethane in the oqf-gas was nearly.the same as in the 
in-gas. Connected with the ethane is the reduction in 
temperature of the reaction, by 15-25°C., when using 
natural gas # as j — . t. —-—- —— 1 

. - 

in ;:v nmnt - r j - . Moreover it appeared to be able to 

cause oxidation of the methane at temperatures lower 















than normal 


ane 


100 

taken 


The oxidation o 



ing mechanism 


CK3 *“ Clig ~r 1 j 2 Og 


CII 3 luHg »oil 


+ 



l 

j ij. 3 «wHO + H 2 0 


1/2. C 


x 


CH3OH + CO 


CH 4 + CO 


Betv/een ethane and acetaldehyde, an intermediate stage 
analogous to the reaction (2) in ilorrish’s theory may 
intervene* The condensates from the natural gas 
experiments showed traces of ethyl alcohol by the 



ethyl alcohol could be detected*from, the methane 
experiments# The formation of acetaldehyde with its 
subsequent oxidation to methyl alcohol will explain, the 
observed results that frequently the ethane burned 
could account for most of the methanol formed# The 
Oxidation of the methane at low temperatures nay be 
accounted for by assuming the decomposition of acet¬ 
aldehyde to produce activated molecules, the methane 
being able to react directly with the oxygen and the 
carbon monoxide to activate other methane molecules* 
Alternatively we may assume the formation of free radicle 


from the ethane as in Norrish’s theory which are able to 
activate either methane or oxygen# Those experiments 
in which the ethane apparently survived are explicable 












101. 


on the basis of free methylene groups formed according 
to reaction!2) of Norrish’s theory. They will 
polymerize as in reaction (4) and may be hydrogenated 
with the formation of ethane. More probable is the 
formation of cyclo-propane a fairly stable hydrocarbon 
easily mistaken for ethane by the methods of gas analysis 
used. While .all gas analysis combustions were in • 
duplicate and checked, the small amounts of higher 
hydrocarbons above methane found could easily have been 
ethane or cyclo paraffins. The method of calculation, 
based on a small difference in large quantities, was 
such that efchane would not be distinguished from cyclo¬ 
propane in the gas. The presence of higher cyclo-paraffinsj 
would interfere with the carbon monoxide and hydrogen 
determinations and may account for the difficulties 
of analysis found wi%h some of the natural gas 
experiments. 

There remain two observations for which no 
explanation can be offered at present. The reference 

: : 

is to the survival of the oxygen in all experiments and 
to the failure to obtain oxygen balances. The survival of j 
traces of oxygen is real, many tests under various 
conditions showed it to be present in the off-gas, not 
as an accidental impurity but as a constituent leaving 
the reactor. The failure to obtain oxygen balances has 
been discussed, the present state of attempts to trace 

i 


















t 







102 


the discrepancy suggests that the origin lies in the 
reactor and the catalyst. 

Finally the hearing of the results on the ut¬ 
ilization of natural gas may be discussed. The yields 
of methanol that nsay be obtained reach 75under 
optimum conditions and some formaldehyde and formic 
acid are also produced. There is no reason to doubt 
that the yields can be raised still further. They 
are, hov/ever, high enough to warrant commercial 
investigation of the process as a source of methanol in 
competition with the water gas process. The process 
will have to be a circulatory one, present evidence show¬ 
ing that only low oxygen concentrations can be used in 
the production of high yields. Naturally pure oxygen 
will be required in place of air. Against these 
disadvantages may be set the two-stage nature of the 
water gas process and the more complicated high pressure 
apparatus• 

















103. 


Summary. 

The effect of temperature, rate of off-gas flow 
and composition on the yields of the useful products 
in the oxidation of natural gas-air and methane-air 
mixtures has been investigated. The effect of pressure 
on the yield of the useful products was obtained in 
addition to the others for the methane-air mixtures. 

A large percentage of oxygen in the natural 
gas or methane was found to be inimical to the survival 
of the useful oxidation products. At higher oxygen 
concentrations the yields fell off more rapidly in the 
methane-air mixtures than in the natural gas-air 
mixtures. 

An optimum temperature of operation was 
obtained in the methane-air experiments. The optimum 
temperature of operation v/as found to decrease writh an 
increase in the percentage of oxygen in the mixture. 
Increased pressures did not change the optimum temperature 
of operation to any great extent. Low temperatures of 
operation, preferably around 350 °G S are desirable in the 
oxidation of natural gas at 185 atmospheres pressure. 

Pressures up to 184 atmospheres can be used 
advantageously at law oxygen concentrations to increase 
the survival of the useful products in the oxidation of 
methane. PIoY/ever, higher pressures are not desirable 





. 


















: 

■ 








.04 * 


since the yields of the useful products decrease# At 
high oxygen concentrations low pressures are more 
favorable for the survival of the primary oxidation 
product. 

Space velocity in the range investigated is 
of little consequence in the oxidation of methane but 
is of some importance in the oxidation of natural gas. 

Metallic catalysts of the active:.type as 
typified by silver and copper are efficient. Iron is 
detrimental to the reactions involved. 

Methyl alcohol, the primary oxidation product, 
was obtained in yields as high as 74,. of the methane 
oxidized, another 44 appearing as formaldehyde and 
formic acid. The liquid products contained up to 42.2 jo 
by weight of methyl alcohol. Lower yields were obtained 
with natural gas. 

Bone’s Hydroxylation theory does not offer a 
satisfactory explanation for the minor products of the 
reaction and the kinetics of the reaction. However, 
Norrish’s theory explains many of these points. A 
mechanism combining aspects of both was presented to 
explain the observations made. 










. 


' 







105. 


ackno uiadgiiaatt , 

The writer wishes to express his sincere thanks 
to Dr. E. H. Boomer, who directed this research and whose 
helpful advice, kindly criticism and generous assistance 
has enabled this work to be completed. 

Grateful acknowledgement is made to the Carnegie 
Corporation Research Grant Committee for a grant enabling 
the writer to carry on this work; and to the National 
Research Council of Canada for the provision of apparatus 
and facilities together with the cost of maintenance and 
supplies: and to the Department of Chemistry of the Univer¬ 
sity of Alberta for space and services in their laboratories 

The advice of the various members of the staff 
of the Department of Chemistry has been sought on many 
occasions and is deeply appreciated. 





c 

. . - ' -A « 

* 



















106. 


REFERENCES : 

1. Allen* Commercial Organic Analysis. Vol. 1. 261. 

2. Armstrong. J. Chem. Soc. 83, 802 (1905). 

3. Bone and al. J. Chem. Soc. 83, 1088 (1904). 85, 

1637(1904). 87, 1232 (1905). 89, 660 (1906). 

P. Chem. Soc. 21, 220 (1905). 

4. Bone and Wheeler. J. Chem. Soc. 81, 535 X 1902). 

5. Bone. Proc. Roy. Soc. (London). 134A . 243 (1932). 

6. Bone and Allum. Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) 154A . 

578 (1932). 

7. Bone, Townend and Newitt. Gaseous Combustion at High 

Pressures. Longmans Green and Company. London(1929] 

l 

8. Bibb and Lucas. Ind. Eng. Chem. J21, 633 (1929). 

9. Broughton. The Direct Oxidation of Natural Gas at 

High Pressures. Master 5 s' Thesis. Library, Un. of 
Alberta. (1932). 

10. Brunner and Rideal. J. Chem. Soc. 1162 (1928). 

11. Callendar. Engineering. 123, 147, 210 (1927). 

12. Cristesco. Fuel in Science and Practice. Vol, 1. 


23 (1935). 

13. Egerton. Nature. 121, 10 (1928). 

14. Egloff and Schaad. Chem. Reviews. 692 (1929). 

15. Fischer. Lab. Manual of Organic Chem. John Wiley 

and Sons, Inc. New York. (1934). 

16. Fischer and Schmidt. Ber. 57B, 693 (1924). 593 , 


Fischer and Schmidt. 














t 


■ 

C . . ..... 

. 

, 


c t 



■ 






107 


679 (1926), 

17. G-ishier. The Pyrolysis of Alberta Natural Gas. 

Master’s Thesis. Library, Un. of Alberta. (1931). 

18. Harries. Ann. 343, 311 (1905). 

19. Johnson. The Vapour-Liquid Equilibria in Hydrocarbon 

Systems. Master’s Thesis. Library, Un. of Alberta. 



(1936) 




20. 

Kersten. 

J. Prakt, Chem. 84, 

311-317 

(1861). 

21. 

Layng and 

Soukup. Ind. Eng. Chem. 20, 

1052 (1928 

22. 

Maass and 

Wright, J.A.C.S,. 

43, H03 

(1921). 

23. 

Marek and 

Hahn. The Catalytic 

Oxidation 

of Organic 


Compounds in the Vapour Phase. Th® Chemical Catalog 
Company. New York. (1932), 

24. Misterli. J. Gasbeleucht. 48, 802 (1905), 

25. Hewitt and Haffner. Proc. Hoy. Soc. (London) 134A, 

591-604 (1932), 

26. Newitt and Szego. Proc. Hoy, Soc, (London) 147A . 

555 (1934), 

27. Norrish. Proc, Roy. Soc. 15 0A . 36 (1935). 

. 

28. Pope, Dykstra and Edgar. J.A.C.S. .51, 1875 (1929), 

29. Pichler and Beder. Z. Angew, Chem, 46, 161 (1933). 

30. Romign. Z, Anal. Chem, 36, 19 (1897), 

31. Wiezevitch and Frolich. Ind. Eng. Chem. J26, 267(1934) 

32. Yoshikawa. Bull. Inst. Phys. Chem, Res. Japan. 10, 


305 11931) 



















































