For Reference 




NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


OXIDATION STUDIES 
OF 

SOME ALBERTA COALS 


M.R. WARDLE 










(2x 1IBB16 

wmmwM 












UN I VSR SIT Y OF /fgB OR TA 
LINAARY 


Regulations Reg ir-J. in a T as s a n c. As s a: t a Lions 

rypescript copies oi theses a c Lss .. tations foi Master’s 
and Doctor’s decrees deposited in the University of Alberta 
library, as the Official Copy of the -acuity oi Graduate Stu 3 >s, 
may be con ulted In fcl sference I sa in^ Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
Lsi< the work was done. Some ■ art ents an willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, . through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
regarc to priority rights of tne author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used, 
•'hen permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub1ishe d work. 

This chesis or dissertation has been used in accord.ance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user. 


Please sign below: 


Ins titution 


Date 


Signature 











































































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/oxidationstudiesOOmils 





THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


OXIDATION STUDIES OF SOME ALBERTA COALS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF 

MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY 


by 

MILS ON ROSS WARDLE, B.3c. 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 
APRIL, 1951. 





University of Alberta 




TKe. 1 ^ 

VSS \ 

* 41 


Faculty of Arts and Science 


Department of Chemistry 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled n Oxidation Studies of 
Some Alberta Coals% submitted by Milson Ross Wardle, 
B.Sc*, in partial fulfilment of the requirements for 
the degree of Master of Science♦ 









•: ... . ... ,, 

t 

; - i , , w • ’ t ■ < 

, : , • j ' ' - - 




V. 












ABSTRACT 


The effects of oxidation on three Alberta subbituminous coals 
have been studied, and it was found that this rank of coal was readily- 
attacked by air at atmospheric pressure, nitric acid, and alkaline 
permanganate. 

It has been shown that natural oxidation by air, or weathering, 
rendered more than $ 0 % of a subbituminous coal soluble in alkalis* The 
soluble material, or humic acids, was found to be esterified only with 
difficulty and highly resistant to both reduction and dehydrogenation. 

The effect of concentration of nitric acid on yields of degrad¬ 
ation production has been studied, and shown to be analogous to the effect 
of time of oxidation* The two major degradation compounds from these 
oxidations were identified as oxalic acid and picric acid. It has been 
shown by chromatographic separations that about twenty other simple 
compounds were produced, but that the bulk of the coal substance was con¬ 
verted to humic acids and to acids intermediate in complexity between the 
benzenecarboxylic acids and the former. 

Spectrophotometric investigations of two esters resolved 
chromatographically from the products of alkaline permanganate oxidations 
indicated the presence of structures involving keto-enol tautomerisra in 
these esters. 

Ultimate analyses and ultraviolet absorption spectra showed 
that humic acids, produced by the methods of oxidation studied, and from 
both bituminous and subbituminous coals, are similar. 





























- 




* 


* 






* 









„ 





















PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


Although the following investigations were initiated with the 
aim of developing some method for the chemical utilization of coal, 
e.g., as a source of fertilizer, active carbon, water purification 
agents, etc., the general purpose was subsequently changed to a study 
of the chemical constitution of coal as revealed by oxidation reactions. 

Preliminary experiments were undertaken at the Research Council 
of Alberta in the Fall of 19^9 > and it is hoped that from these initial 
investigations, a long-term program of research may be projected which 
will eventually make an appreciable contribution to the knowledge of 
coal chemistry. 

The work was carried out under the direction of a committee 
composed of Dr. R. B. Sandin of the Department of Chemistry of the 
University of Alberta, and Mr. W. A. Lang and Dr. G. W. Hodgson of 
the Research Council of Alberta. Sincere appreciation is extended 
to the members of the committee for their helpful advice and guidance 
during the course of this work. 

The author also wishes to extend his sincere thanks to the many 
members of the staff of both the Research Council of Alberta and the 
University of Alberta who have so generously given of their time and 
assistance. In particular, the author is indebted to Mr 0 Edward 
Sherlock, who initiated the permanganate oxidations, for considerable 
help with the laboratory work. Grateful acknowledgment is made to 
Mr. J. F. Fryer for the determination of the ultimate analyses 
recorded hereunder and to Mr. Jack Groot for the diagrams and graphs. 









TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

lo Introduction 1 

2 C Coal Samples 17 

3# Ammonium Humates 23 

Experimental Procedure 23 

Results and Discussion 23 

Chemical Studies of Ammonium Humates 26 

Esterification 26 

Reduction 27 

Dehydrogenation 28 

iu Preparation of Humic Acids by Nitric Acid Oxidation 

and Their Separation by Solvent Treatment 30 

Apparatus 30 

Experimental Procedure 30 

Oxidation 30 

Extraction 32 

Results and Discussion 3h 

5* Investigations of the Filtrate from Nitric Acid 

Oxidations Ul 

General Properties of the Filtrate ill 

Paper Chromatography Ij.8 

Columnar Chromatography $0 

Description of a Typical Chromatographic 

Pattern of the Ether Soluble Fraction of 

the Filtrate Adsorbed on Alumina or Filter 

Paper 53 

Chromatography of Filtrate Solids on 
Silica Gel 


5k 








. 





























. 





















/ 





. 


■ ■ • ' . - ' i A 










Page 

6* Properties of Fractions of Filtrate 55 

Oxalic Acid 56 

a-Yellow 57 

Yellow 1 57 

Yellow 2 59 

Orange 3 59 

Yellow 5 59 

Orange 6 63 

General Discussion and Conclusions Concerning 
the Identification of Compounds from the 
Filtrate 6k 

7* Esters of Soluble Acids Produced by Alkaline 

Permanganate Oxidation of Coal A 6? 

Experimental Procedure 69 

Oxidation 69 

Esterification with Diazomethane 70 

Chromatographic Separation of 
Methyl Esters 73 

Discussion 77 

8. Spectrophotometric Examination of Humic Acids 

and Soluble Acids 79 

Experimental Procedure 79 

Discussion and Results 81 

9* General Discussion 8JU 

10* Literature Cited 87 

11* Bibliography 93 

12o Appendix 9k 











- 









I 



\ 




' 

* 












INTRODUCTION 


















i 


















INTRODUCTION 


One of the few unequivocal facts about coal is that it is formed 
from decayed vegetable matter. Any elaboration of this statement, 
however, is fraught with speculation and conjecture. Which of the 
chemical entities occurring in plants (celluloses, lignins, proteins, 
etc.) was the source of the bulk of the coal substance, and how one 
(or more) of these compounds was converted into a series of carbonaceous 
substances ranging from peat to graphite is still a matter of vigorous 
controversy (82). It seems evident that the vegetable products were 
metamorphosed by the action of heat and pressure, and perhaps, too ? 
by bacteria, but the reactions of the coalification process are 
unknown. 

The determination of the exact origin of coal is of course 
handicapped in that it is often impossible to verify hypotheses 
experimentally in the laboratory® On the other hand, the constitution 
of coal ( 4 , b$) can be investigated in the laboratory by chemical and 
physical methods, but with the enormous impediment that coal cannot 
be brought into true solution without preliminary degradation. The 
number of papers published on investigations of the chemical consti¬ 
tution of coal applying a variety of techniques to circumvent this 
stumbling block is enormous. Because of the impossibility of discussing 
this work even briefly, only reference to some of the more important 
review articles will be made. 

Stopes and Wheeler, in a series of eight papers followed by a 
bibliography (109), have reviewed the work up until 1921*. A summary 






t 












' 


. 

, 

u 

: 

: ' ’' • - ‘ k 

t 

. , 

x 

. v' . ' v ; '> n : 

„ • ■ ■ ■ ■ 


* 


" 




• 

' 










• 



’ 



* 



• 

. 

' 




' . 



■ 


. ■ 


• ■ • - t . : 








V 

* 





2 


of existing knowledge of the constitution of coal was published in 
19Ui by Horton et al. (57), and this review has been kept up to date 
by the same author by a series of annual progress reviews, the last 
of which appeared in 1950 (58). These papers present the highlights 
of the results of investigations of the structure of coal, and include 
comprehensive bibliographies. The relation of the physical consti¬ 
tution of coal to its chemical characteristics has been treated in 
review form by Lowry (8l). 

Of the tools available to the chemist, such as oxidation, 
reduction, hydrolysis, halogenation, and so on, oxidation has been 
one of the most fruitful in establishing the structure of organic 
molecules. With a low molecular weight compound, identification of 
the oxidation products often readily leads to a knowledge of its 
structure. As the molecular weight of the substance increases, 
however, the results are less revealing of the constitution of the 
original substance. With bituminous coals, whose chemical and 
physical properties indicate a network or tridimensional type of 
condensation polymer formed by the linking of predominantly cyclic 
structures, a complicated series of oxidative degradation products is 
to be expected. Because, however, oxidation takes place with convenient 
velocity with a Td.de variety of oxidizing agents at a temperature such 
that there is little probability of internal structural changes, and 
because over 80$ of the carbon of such coals can be converted to 
alkali soluble substances of moderate molecular weight by these mild 
procedures, oxidation has been used extensively for the investigation 
of carbonaceous materials. Because too, such a large proportion of the 
degradation products consists of polycarboxylic acids of a type perhaps 











■ 



■' . . 








. !'. :.C 



* 


i •. 1. 







* 

. i ■ x . ' . 

■ 


' 

. 

X 


t 




: , • ■■-■a"} 

. 


■ ■ : 



' 


* • 

-■ - !' 

, ' 


. : . ! >J - • I t ' ■ £ '■ 

»" ■ . . ’ . ■ • '■ >; .. • 

' : ' 180*. ' • 1 V* ■ 

• t 

* 

' 






3 


suitable to the synthesis of resins, the possibility of obtaining 
products of commercial value is not absent, (39, 60 , 11?)♦ This 
technique was therefore applied to the study of Alberta subbituminous 
coals which are particularly susceptible to oxidation. 

According to Howard (80) the oxidation of coals can be broadly 
divided into three stages. 

(1) The first stage consists of a surface oxidation, in which 
oxygen is added to the coal in the form of acidic groups. The rate 
is a function of rank, temperature, oxidizing agent and surface area. 
Acidic surface groups are apparently present before any appreciable 
alkali solubility appears. There is considerable evidence to indicate 
the formation of pei>-oxygen linkages (65), which are decomposed with 
the liberation of carbon monoxide above 70°C. 

(2) On continued oxidation, a large fraction of the coal is 
converted to alkali soluble, acid insoluble compounds which have been 
termed ”regenerated humic acids”. When freshly precipitated, they 
resemble hydrated ferric oxide, but they dry to shiny black flakes 
which when finely ground are reddish brown in color. This stage is 
accompanied by the evolution of the oxides of carbon together with the 
formation of lower molecular weight polycarboxylic acids of unknown 
constitution which are soluble in alkaline, neutral, and acidic media. 
The humic acids are far from homogeneous, but have a similar type of 
structure, differing chiefly in molecular weight. 

(3) On continuing the process which produced the humic acids, 
or by applying more drastic methods of oxidation, the humic acids are 
ultimately degraded to the soluble acids. This transformation from 








•V- • •, : t .h . ; .. v' - 

■ 

?. * • 

, ; . " ' ' 

. 

* 






* 

■ 


■ 




: 

. 


- 




t ' 




r ".' : : : ' ‘ " • • : 

. ' , ' ■ ; ' ' ' 

. ... ,• : • ' : ' ' ' • 

* 

: 

- 

" 

' . ■ . 

r. 

, 





h 


Stage 2 to Stage 3 is accompanied by the production of carbon dioxide, 
until, if the oxidation is sufficiently prolonged, all of the carbon 
is converted to carbon dioxide. Stage 3 is characterized by definite 
color changes, which may be indicative of changes in internal structure 
of the molecule. Aqueous solutions ranging in color from deep reddish 
brown to pale yellow are obtained with a wide variety of oxidizing 
agents* 

Oxidation With Nitric Acid 

The early work with nitric acid was aimed at distinguishing 
between and classifying various carbonaceous materials such as lignites, 
coal, coke, amorphous carbon, wood, charcoal, and graphite. The products 
were seldom examined in any manner but qualitatively! only in a few 
experiments were definitely identified products reported, and in still 
fewer the amounts ( 13 ). 

In 1879, Guignet reported the presence of oxalic acid and 2 , 14 , 6 - 
trinitroresorcinol in the nitric acid oxidation products of a bituminous 
coal (51). Donath isolated a number of compounds produced by the 
action of nitric acid on brown coal, and suggested that a nitroso 
compound was formed (3U): the formation of such a linkage has yet to 
be established. Schellenberg (100) and Marcusson (86, 87, 88) 
independently carried out nitric acid oxidations of coals and humic 
acids, and published a number of polemical papers, the one against 
the other, as to the nature of the products. Marcusson found that 
a third of the nitrogen added in the reaction between nitric acid and 
brown coal could be split out again by refluxing with hydrochloric 




* 

. 

* 

(... ' .• . :x ! ; . ■ .• 1 r . • ; 



. : ' r : :Jt ■ .• ;> . . : ' ' • 

* * ' - * ■ t 

» f ! 

*, : 


■ 

s - ' - • " i. . : : * . . ' 

* 

: 


* 


v, .. : . It ;v . 


. : : v > ' ' ' ' 



, 




LI l 


' ; 














5 . 


acid, and therefore suggested that this reagent may have been held 
in oxonium structures. 

Progressively more compounds were identified in the degradation 
products, particularly with the advent of the work of Fuchs, who, 
perhaps more than any other man, studied the humic acids intensively. 
The following compounds have been identified in the products of the 
reaction between nitric acid at various concentrations and coals, 
lignites, peats, and humic acids: oxalic acid (3h, 37, U3, 5l), 
acetic acid (37), propionic acid (3U), butyric acid (3W, capredc 
acid (3U), succinic acid (37), pyromellitic acid (37, 1*3), trimesic 
acid (U3), benzenepentacarboxylic acid (i;3, 68), mellitic acid 
(U3, 68), picric acid: 3% of humic acids (37), k 9 $% of humic acids 
(U3), 2,U,6-trlnitroresorcinol (5l)« 

Howard and his co-workers (67, 68) concluded from work with 
this reagent that 30 to %Q% of the oxygen in coals was in the fora 
of ether linkages. The data all pointed to the presence, even in 
the soluble acids, of nuclei other than the simple benzene ring. 

Charmbury (2?) has described a process for converting ‘’soft** 
coal into a brown dye by an initial treatment of the coal with nitric 
acid to produce a starting material® This process has been patented. 

The work of Kinney, Polansky, and Gauger (72) on the preparation 
of humic acids from bituminous coals by nitric acid oxidation and their 
separation from mineral matter and fusain by solvent treatment was 
applied to Alberta cpals. Commercial methods of extraction of the 
humic acids were proposed. Among the uses which were suggested for 
the extracted material were the manufacture of dyes, active carbon. 











t ■': 




t 















■ 


. . : ■: \ : ' ' : ' , . : 






* 

; 








■:! 








■ 

. : i (. : 








■ 

' ! v ■ ' <. ^ ' ■ 

' 

' . • 

. ■ ' , 









6 . 


water purification reagents, and resins, and particularly carbon 
black* 

Oxidation with Alkaline Permanganate 

The most significant results in the degradation of coal by 
oxidation have been obtained by reactions in alkaline media, the 
rates of which are a useful criterion of rank (93, 9k) • Oxalic and 
mellitic acids were definitely identified in the early work (102). 

Donath showed that both brown and bituminous coals furnish copious 
amounts of oxalic acid when oxidised with alkaline permanganate (33)* 

The most important work with this reagent was done by Bone (XU, 

15, 16, 17) on a series of coals and related substances. Quantitative 
determinations were made of the distribution of the carbon from the coal 
among the oxidation products, and all the members of the benzenecarboxylie 
acid series, with the exception of benzoic, were definitely identified 
from a fraction of carbon classified as ”benzenecarboxylic”. Although 
it is not so stated, this fraction was measured as a difference quantity, 
and represented that portion of the carbon not found in such simple, 
readily determinable forms as acetic, oxalic, or carbonic acids. With 
high-rank carbonaceous materials, it amounted to as much as $0% of the 
carbon. The acids in this fraction, intermediate in complexity between 
the humic acids and benzoic acid, are probably ,f benzenoid n , but only a 
small portion were of the benzenecarboxylie acid series. The yield of 
any single benzenecarboxylie acid from such oxidations seldom exceeds 
1% of the original coal (with the exception of penta- and hexacarboxylic 
acids), and the total benzenecarboxylic acids, 10% (71). 


The papers of Bone and his co-workers, and the investigations of 







' 










i 


* 


: 








t • 






, 




' t •' L. ' V ' ! ' . ' ! ' ' 

. 

' 

’ ■ : ' • ' ' < 











" ' 









7 


Howard (68) have shown that a large fraction of the methyl esters of 
the mixed or intermediate acids (which Bone erroneously termed M benzene- 
carboxylic*’) is not distillable even under conditions where the methyl 
ester of the highest member of the series, hexamethylmellitate, distils 
rapidly without decomposition (101). 

One of the most important contributions to the knowledge of the 
constitution of coal made by oxidation studies is Juettner f s work on 
the relation between the yield of mellitic acid and the rank of 
carbonaceous material oxidized (6 9, 70). In a series from bituminous 
coal to natural graphite there was a general increase in the yield of 
mellitic acid with rank. This hexabenzenecarboxylic acid can be formed 
only by oxidation of condensed carbocyclic structures (120) of which 
the simplest that has been shown to yield mellitic acid on oxidation 
is triphenylene, or of compounds composed of a completely alkylated 
benzene ring such as hexamethylbenzene, or, of course, mixtures of the 
two types of compounds. Because both the ultimate composition and the 
pyrolytic behavior (1, 66, 83) of coals indicate a decrease rather than 
an increase in aliphatic structure in higher-rank materials (with no 
aliphatic structures in graphite), it was concluded that the increase 
in yield of mellitic acid with rank reflected an increase in the amount 
of condensed carbocyclic structure in the higher-rank materials. The 
yield of mellitic acid obtained from a high-rank coal, such as anthracite, 
indicated a degree of condensation of the same order as a coke prepared 
by heating a bituminous coal to at least 700°C. The yield of benzene- 
carboxylic acids other than mellitic constituted a greater fraction of 
the products of the oxidation of low-rank carbonaceous materials than 
in the case of high-rank substances, showing a much smaller degree of 


■ 


















.. ' i <;• ‘ 

. 


i C> i 

' • ' ft. ^ Cv.'-lr-ei 


' 


■ ■ , .. . t . ' • 

'hi 

.. .. 

- 

' - : :.,! . I ■ t 

t ~ ■ •>:. • 

. 

, 


... 















8 


condensation for the former. 

Alkaline permanganate oxidations have also been carried out on 
the insoluble matter in coal tar by Green (1|6, it?, U8, U9, 5o). 

Humic Acids 

The tern ’’humic acids” has been used to describe preparations of 
’’humus” obtained by various types of treatment of soils, peats, coals, 
and composts; to describe preparations obtained by treatment of carbo¬ 
hydrates with mineral acids (18, 20, 35, Ul, 63, 81*, 85)I and to 
describe almost any dark-colored preparation front organic material, 
without bearing in mind that it represented only a ’’preparation” and 
not specific chemical compounds. Further confusion was introduced by 
non-eritical comparison of the synthetic products with those from 
natural substances. Waksman sums up a chapter on the chemical nature 
of humus by saying: 

’’After a century and a half of intensive study, our knowledge 
of the chemical nature of humus and its constituent groups, 
including the ’humic acids’ is still in a highly confused 
state” (118). 

For many years, even the existence of the humic acids was debated 
when it was generally agreed that a group of compounds deserving of 
the name did exist, a controversy ensued as to whether their acidic 
properties were due to adsorption or to distinct acid groups in the 
molecule (2, 3, kk, 113). Only the more important properties of the 
humic acids will be discussed here, with particular emphasis on their 
anomalous behavior. For an extended treatment of the humic acids, 
reference may be made to Lowry or Waksman (see Bibliography). 















. 

- 

< . : - 

. • .( ' 

<■ 

. ' ■ .. . 

" - ■ 

. „ ■ 




9 


The humic acids, as their name implies, are polybasic acids, 
amorphous in nature and difficult to isolate in the pure state, most 
preparations probably consisting of mixtures of related substances. 

The only functional groups -which they are known with any certainty to 
possess are COOH and OH, while from one third to one half of their 
oxygen content is contained in unreactive structures, probably in ether 
form, or in heterocyclic rings. Only recently, Howard (59) has isolated 
significant amounts of furan compounds in the hydrogenation products of 
the esters of the intermediate acids produced by the action of molecular 
oxygen on bituminous coal in the presence of alkali, Coumarone and two 
homologues have been identified in coal tar, but the weight of benao- 
furans is never more than 0.1$ of the original coal. In addition, the 
isolation of such compounds from coal after subjecting it to so violent 
a treatment as heating it to 1000°C* can hardly be taken as substantial 
evidence of the existence of furan rings in the coal molecule. To sum 
up, the exact nature of as much as 50$ of the oxygen in the humic acids 
remains a mystery. 

Since the humic acids consist of a series of molecular sizes 
analogous to polynerie homologous series, molecular weight determinations 
on any given sample represent only an average value, and that average 
depends not only on the method of obtaining the humic acids, but also 
on the method of determination of the molecular weight (77, 105)• 
Colligative methods are particularly subject to suspicion because of 
the strong associative tendencies of the substances. Equivalent 
weights are of the order of 200 to 300 (31, 101+), and molecular weights 
are around 1000 (12, 1+0, 95, 98, 99, lilt, 121). 



; ' ' 


* 

- 

■ t • J 

v • '• ' v * ' ■ '■ - " 

' ‘ i > ' 


' 

, 

, 

. 

' 

« 



' ■ . . - . ' ' 


. 

: ' J 

* . ' ' ■: ' ' ' 

, ' . • ' ' • .... ■ 

T 

, 

. , • : , ■ ■ ■ 




10 , 


Analysis reveals the presence of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, 
nitrogen, and sulfur in the proportions of approximately C-6o$, H-3$, 

0-3W, N-2$, and S-l$. That they contain ring systems is indicated by 
the C/H ratio, and by the products of hydrolysis and oxidation* The 
exact nature of the nitrogen linkage, like that of the oxygen, is 
unknown, although there is some evidence to indicate that it is very 
firmly fixed in the carbon nucleus, possibly in 6-membered heterocyclic 
rings (10, 7h, 96). 

It is the nucleus of the humic acids, about which so little is 
known, that confers on them many remarkable and unique properties 
which set them apart from most classes of organic compounds. These 
properties have by no means been adequately explained. No satisfactory 
inner structure for their nuclei has been suggested which accounts for 
their peculiar properties. 

Perhaps the most outstanding physical property of the humic acids 
is their lack of any tendency to soften or sublime when heated, even 
in vacuo. When heated above the temperature at which decarboxylation 
and dehydration occur, the residue also fails to soften or sublime. 

The molecular weights of the humic acids are too small to permit the 
formation of cross linkages between the original molecules, binding the 
whole into one unit. The possibility that the nonvolatility is due to 
esterification reactions between the carboxyl and hydroxyl groups of 
adjacent molecules is eliminated on the ground that no experimental 
evidence has been obtained to support this postulation. In addition, 
the hydroxyl groups are phenolic or enolic in character, and therefore 
rather unreactive to esterification. Even when heated under dehydrating 
conditions, the molecular weight is not increased appreciably, and so 








11 . 


condensation oetween molecules does not account for their 
infusibility (lOi*). 

The nucleus of the molecule is undoubtedly responsible for the 
unusual associating abilities of the humic acids (10U). The carboxyl 
and hydroxyl groups cannot adequately account for this property. 

The deep color of the humic acids is highly resistant to both 
oxidizing and reducing agents. This resistance is quite unusual for 
the common color producing groups of organic compounds. The molecule 
is perhaps not large enough for steric hindrance to account for this 
remarkable stability. An elucidation of the nature of the color- 
bearing groups would be of great significance, but it seems to have 
attracted little attention. 

At the present time, there are two general theories being proposed 
to account for the properties of the humic acids. Neither account for 
all the properties. Howard has suggested that the nuclei are composed 
of condensed aromatic rings. On the other hand, Kinney and his co-workers 
are of the opinion that the nucleus contains groups of carbon atoms 
which have been stripped more or less of other atoms, and which tend 
to approach the state of "amorphous” or graphitic carbon. The latter 
theory well explains the properties of anthracites, but there are 
serious objections to it as an explanation of the behavior of such low 
molecular weight bodies as the humic acids, not to mention the soluble 
acids. Since these compounds represent such a large part of the coal 
structure, more complete knowledge of their constitution is of utmost 
importance to coal chemistry. 




. 



‘id • • . .... 


„ 

' 

y 

* • ' ' : ! 

' 

■ 

' - 


«■ ■ - ' ' '! 


• 

1-,'" 

'■ o. : 

* 


. 

■ ' : ■ . •-'/ • ■ > 

• • • 




, 

• 


• 

* 









12 


Spectrophotometric Investigations of Coal and Related Substances 

Absorption spectrophotometry (21), a technique which has thrown 
so much light on the structure of large and complex molecules, seems 
to have been virtually ignored by coal chemists until recently. As 
early as 1899* the structure of isatin, for which two formulae, viz., 
lactam and lactim structures, had been proposed, was elucidated by the 
ultraviolet absorption spectra of the two possible methyl ethers (52). 

The phenolic structure of phloroglucinol was proved in an analogous 
manner. Since then, a great deal of information concerning the structure 
of such complex materials as styrene, compounds belonging to the purine 
group, alkaloids, lignin, etc., has been gained from spectrophotometric 
studies. The keto-enol equilibrium of aceto-acetic ester was quanti- 
tatively investigated by this technique. 

In the field of coal chemistry, however, this powerful tool for 
the elucidation of structure of high molecular weight materials has 
only recently been applied. With the exception of the work of Cannon 
and Sutherland who determined in detail the infrared spectra of coals 
and coal extracts, and thereby established the presence of certain 
bonds and groups, there are practically no other references to the use 
of absorption spectrophotometry for the structural analysis of coal* 

In 1930, Thiessen (lilt) determined the absorption spectra of four 
types of humic acids in a narrow range of the spectrum, 500 to 700 
millimicrons, and concluded that the various fractions termed Acetone- 
soluble humic acids, nitre-humic acids, bromo-humic acid”, and "humic 
acids from brown coal” were all similar, and that the spectra of these 
materials in the ultraviolet region would probably be more interesting. 




















13 


This is the only reference to spectra of humic acids, although other 
investigators have recently determined the ultraviolet curves (73). 

Jones and Neuworth (6U), and later Glenn and his co-workers (8, 

9, 92, 123) applied absorption spectrophotometry in conjunction with 
chromatographic separation to isolate and identify several products 
(121;) of coal hydrogenation, while Lahiri (76) used ultraviolet spectra 
of the fractions obtained chromatographically to examine benzene pressure 
extracts of coal (bitumen). 

Cannon and Sutherland (22, 23) determined the infrared absorption 
spectra between 10,000 and 7lU cm. for a low rank coal in (a) very 
thin section, (b) pyridine extract, and (c) a H shock-heater n film. 

Spectra were also obtained of pitch distillates and of humic acids 
produced by oxidation of the same coal with hydrogen peroxide, permanganate 
and other reagents. The following configurations were identified in 
these spectra, vis., OH with the hydrogen of the hydroxyl bonded to some 
other atom, CH of both aliphatic and aromatic nature, C-G in carboxylic 
acid groups in the humic acids, and -oc-OC- in aromatic rings. The 
humic acids showed both strong hydroxyl and carboxyl absorption. 

Only the humic acids showed a strong band at 169? em.“^j normal 
for carboxylic acids. There was also fairly definite proof that 0*0 
in the ester and acid anhydride forms (the latter has often been 
postulated as the type of linkage in which much of the oxygen of coal 
is bound), was absent from all the materials examined. The presence 
of simple aromatic material in coal and its extracts was established 
by the band at 1620 cm.“^ 





- \ ■ V «. 

; • 

, 

, 

- } jii . 'V - 

% . ■ . . '■ ^ ■ : V 

- 

« 

- . ' ' ■ ■ ■ . 

„ • - • - - 

. 

* ■ , 


« * 

■ 







Ik 


An interesting point of the investigation was the discovery 
that all the coal extracts and distillates, including the humic acids, 
contained strong bands between 1200 and 1250 cm. ^ Such bands are 
common to many aromatic ethers. 

Cannon and Sutherland*s 

’’general conclusion from this work is that infra-red analysis 
can profitably be applied to coal and its extracts. As the 
technique improves and as more data become available on the 
spectra of pure compounds, it should be possible to estimate 
the proportions of various groups present in coal, such, as OH, 

C=G, CH (attached to saturated and unsaturated carbon atoms) 
and even degree of aromatisation* Ultimately one may hope 
that the basic structural unit will be identified and at least 
valuable information will be obtained concerning the chemical 
groupings present in such a unit. If there is no predominating 
unit in the coal structure, chemical and physical methods now 
being pursued will presumably enable some separation of the 
various units to be made and infra-red analysis will be of great 
value in following this separation and finally identifying the 
separate units”. 

Somewhat similar considerations apply to ultraviolet spectroscopy. 


Fertilizers 


For many years papers have appeared in the literature discussing 
the use of carbonaceous materials as fertilizers. These papers, many 
of which make extravagant claims about the beneficial effects of such 
fertilizers, have dealt with raw peat, ammoniated peat, humic acids, 
ammonium humates, raw coal, and activated coal* No better authority 
than Waksman (119) can be quoted on the use of coal products as 
fertilizers. 

”At best, these preparations have only limited application, and 
most of them have proved to be practically worthless. The use 
of some can be recommended, but only after very careful testing. 

The favorable effects which have been observed occasionally, have 
been shown to be due to the mineral constituents of the preparation, 
to its amphoteric properties, or to the absorption of complexes 
which are injurious to plant growth.” 




























I 






















15 . 


Wyatt and Leahey (125) carried out experiments to compare the 
relative merits of various fertilizers, including a coal fertilizer, 
"phoska-elsyn", on gray wooded and black soils of Alberta. They 
concluded: 

"In our experiments phoska-elsyn was inferior to any of the 
fertilizers with which it was compared and in a fair proportion 
of the trials gave no significant increases. It failed to 
substantiate the claims made for it." 

It was compared with ammonium phosphate, ammonium sulfate, single super¬ 
phosphate, triple superphosphate, gypsum, sulfur, and potash. Another 
paper bearing on this question is that of Carlyle and Newton (2U). 

Crowther and Brenchley (32) have demonstrated that the effect 
exerted by ammonium humates upon plant growth is not greater than the 
equivalent amount of ammonia used in the form of ammonium sulfate. The 
subject of ammonium humates and related substances as fertilizers is 
treated in considerable detail by Waksman. 

The suggested beneficial effect exerted upon plant growth by the 
addition to the soil of brown coal, either in powdered form or after 
saturation with ammonia, or after nitration and saturation with ammonia, 
requires confirmation and further study, as do also the suggestion that 
humic acids have a highly stimulating effect upon the fixation of 
nitrogen by bacteria, and numerous other hypothetical assumptions. 

The possibility of obtaining an alkali soluble carbonaceous material 
suitable as a fertiliser without any oxidation treatment other than 
natural weathering processes, and some chemical studies of the ammonium 
humates, seemed worthy of investigation. Work at The Pennsylvania State 
College indicated that it might be desirable to have on hand some 










16 


information concerning the nitric acid oxidation of low-rank Alberta 
coals. Many factors determine the yield of humic acids from such 
oxidation procedures. Since the effect of concentration had not been 
investigated, it seemed advisable to arbitrarily fix the other variables, 
and to study the influence of this factor on the yield of the various 
degradation products. Because one of the greatest handicaps to the 
large-scale chemical utilization of coal is the lack of knowledge of 
the exact chemical structure of the oxidation products, an investigation 
of the degradation compounds, beginning with the simplest, was under¬ 
taken. Since these compounds are by and large the same regardless of 
the method of oxidation, potassium permanganate oxidations were also 
studied in order to avoid the complicating introduction of nitrogen. 

The success with which the techniques of chromatography and 
absorption spectroscopy have been applied to other complex chemical 
systems prompted their use in these investigations* 










EXPERIMENTAL SECTION 













17 


COAL SAMPLES 

The coals studied are all of subbituminous rank and Upper 
Cretaceous Age. Coals A and C belong to the Edmonton Formation while 
Coal E belongs to the Belly River Formation. Because all these coals 
are younger than those belonging to the Lower Cretaceous class, and 
because too all are relatively far removed from the mountains which 
evidently exerted pressure on the early carbonaceous material causing 
it to increase in rank, they are particularly susceptible to degradation 
processes. 

Unless otherwise specified, the following considerations apply 
to all of the coal samples studied. The coal was ground in a com mill 
to pass 10 mesh, and when a portion of the sample was to be used, it 
was dried for four hours at 105°C* in a vacuum oven provided with a 
natural gas leak to prevent oxidation. 

Since neither the moisture nor the mineral matter in coal is 
a part of the fundamental coal substance, and in order to compare 
analyses of coals differing widely in their water and mineral matter 
contents, the ultimate analyses are reported on a dry basis and on a 
dry mineral matter-free basis. It is to be expected that the mineral 
matter in coal is not the same as the ash left when the coal is burned, 
either in composition or weight. The relation between them varies, but 
the average value of the ratio of mineral matter to ash for Alberta 
coals is 1.1. This factor has been used to convert the coal analysis 
to a mineral matter-free basis (106, 108). 

The rank of the coal is expressed on the A.S.T.M. classification, 
i.e.,for the coals studied here, they are classified according to the 
calorific value of the mineral matter-free coal, but moist as the coal 











18 , 


occurs in the seam. 


Coal A. Laboratory Sample No. h29-h9 

This sample was taken from the five-foot seam of the No. 2 
strip pit of Mine No. Ul9 of the Alberta Coal Co., Ltd., Wabamun on 
August 5, 19U9* The coal is in the Pembina Area, and is of subbituminous 
B rank. The sample was taken near the point where the seam outcrops, 
and had been exposed for at least 11 months by stripping operations] 
thus the coal had been well weathered. Its physical appearance was 
dull, brown, and fibrous. While it was extremely friable, the 
unweathered coal from the same mine was much less friable and black 
in color. 


Coal B. 


strip pit 


August 5, 


Laboratory Sample No. k3Q-h9 
This sample was taken from the five-foot 
of line No. 1;19 of the Alberta Coal Co., 
19h9» The coal was freshly stripped and 


seam of the No. 3 
Ltd., Wabamun on 
not weathered. 














* 






































19 


Table 1 

Ultimate Analysis of Coal A 


Element 

Dry 

Dry, mineral 
matter-free 


Percentage by weight 

Carbon 

56.8 

66.8 

Hydrogen 

2.9 

3 all 

Sulfur 

0.2 

0.2 

Nitrogen 

0.8 

0.9 

Ash 

13.5 

— 

Difference(oxygen, undetermined, and errors) 

25.8 

28.7 


Table 2 

Ultimate Analysis of Coal B 


Element 

Dry 

Dry, mineral 
matter-free 


Percentage by weight 

Carbon 

67.2 

lh.6 

Hydrogen 

U.3 

k.8 

Sulfur 

0.2 

0.2 

Nitrogen 

0.9 

1.0 

Ash 

9.0 

— 

Difference(oxygen, undetermined, and errors) 

18.1; 

19.U 














■ 






3 

































■ 









- 















20 , 


Comparison of Weathered and Unweathered Coal Samples 

Coal A differed from Coal B in one major respect: the 
former had been weathered for almost a year. Gaseous oxygen reacts 
with appreciable velocity with bituminous coals, and even more readily 
with subbituminous coals, at room temperature. The reaction appears 
to be one of addition with the formation of a surface complex (38)5 
simple adsorption being ruled out because of the impossibility of 
recovering the oxygen except as oxides of carbon. Products of the 
weathering reaction are water, carbon dioxide, and, surprisingly, a 
small amount of carbon monoxide. The presence of acidic surface 
groups is indicated by solubility in alkalis, although they are formed 
before any appreciable alkali solubility appears. 

Comparison of the two ultimate analyses shows that the 
weathering reaction has caused a marked decrease in carbon and hydrogen 
contents with a large increase in oxygen content. These changes have 
thrown the coal analysis completely off the coal band (89), If the 
analyses are recalculated so that the sum of the percentages of carbon, 
hydrogen, and oxygen, on a dry, mineral matter-free basis, equals 100, 
and these analyses plotted on a triangular graph as in Figure 1, the 
changes which the coal has undergone can be readily seen when the 
three vectors for the loss of water, loss of carbon dioxide, and 
addition of oxygen are drawn in, and then compared with the resultant 
experimentally determined vector: the line joining the two analyses. 

From such a graph, it is at once evident that the reaction is characterized 
mainly by the addition of oxygen, and that the loss of water and carbon 
dioxide plays only a minor role. 

The extent of weathering was so great as to cause a change 
in the physical characteristics of the coal. While the fresh coal was 





. 


. 








' 


c. 


i. < 1 i. 


1 












GRAPHICAL ANALYSIS OF WEATHERING REACTION. 


Loss of H 2 0 

\ 

c 



Figure 1 




















21 . 


black and quite solid, the weathered coal was brown and extremely 
friable. 

Goal C» Laboratory Sample No. 15>-li8 

This sample was a channel cut 2 in. deep and 2 in. wide 
taken from the top to the floor of the seam of the No. 1107 Black 
Nugget Mine at Dodds. This coal is in the Tofield Area, and is of 
subbituminous C rank. 


Table 3 

Ultimate Analysis of Coal C 


Element 

Dry 

Dry, mineral 
matter-free 


Percentage by weight 

Carbon 

66 m h 

7 5.5 

Hydrogen 

lu3 

h.9 

Sulfur 

0.6 

0.7 

Nitrogen 

— 

— 

Ash 

10.9 


Difference(oxygen, undetermined, and errors) 

17.8 

18.9 































•. . .. :.. - - - ■ • 



' 













22 


Goal E. Laboratory Sample No, 1+02-50 

This sample was taken from Mine No. II 4 . 0 U of the Bimwell Coal 
Co., Ltd., and sent to this laboratoiy for briquetting tests. The 
mine is in the Brooks Area, and the coal is of subbituminous B. rank. 
This coal was much less friable than Coal A, and considerably brighter 
in appearance. 


Table U 

Ultimate Analysis of Coal E 


Element 

Dry 

Dry, mineral 
matter-free 


Percentage by weight 

Carbon 

69.9 

75.7 

Hydrogen 

h»h 

U.8 

Sulfur 


—— 

Nitrogen 

1.6 

1.7 

Ash 

7.0 

— 

Difference(oxygen, undetermined. 

and errors) 17.1 

17.8 


I 

















■ j ■{ i 








23 


AMMONIUM HUMATES 

It was suggested that a potential fertilizer of some nitrogen 
content might be obtained by the extraction of low-rank Alberta coals 
with ammonium hydroxide. The following experiments were undertaken with 
this end in mind. 

Since, of any subbituminous coal, a weathered sample is likely 
to give greater yields than a freshly mined coal. Coal A was studied 
first. 

Experimental Procedure 

Twenty grams of the coal sample, weighed to the nearest mg., 
were stirred with 100 ml. of 15 N ammonium hydroxide for two hours at 
room temperature. The mixture was transferred to two 75 ml. centrifuge 
tubes, and centrifuged for h5 minutes in a Number 2 International 
Equipment Company Centrifuge. The supernatant liquid (Extract No. 1) 
was filtered into a weighed dish, and the solid residue again extracted, 
but this time with only 25 ml. of ammonium hydroxide, for two hours. 

The mixture was centrifuged and filtered as before (Extract No. 2). 

This process was repeated until only a negligible quantity of humic 
acids was extracted. The extracts were evaporated to dryness on a 
steam bath, dried for four hours in vacuo at 105°C., and weighed. The 
residue was similarly dried and weighed. 

Results and Discussion 

The humic acids extracted from coal by concentrated ammonium 
hydroxide were similar in appearance to those generated by nitric 
acid, viz., alkaline solutions were of an intense red-black color, 
and the dry solid was black when coarsely fractured and brown when 
finely ground in a mortar and pestle. They were precipitated by mineral 
















acids in a black, voluminous form; difficult to filter and to wash 
free of inorganic ions. 

Comparison of the ultimate analysis of the ammonium humates 
presented in Table 5 with that of the original coal (see Table 1, p.19) 
shows that the hydrogen and nitrogen contents are greater for the 
ammonium humates, whereas their carbon and oxygen contents are lower. 

Table 5 

Ultimate Analysis of Ammonium Humates from Coal A 


Element 

Dry 

Dry, 

ash-free. 


Percentage by weight 

Carbon 

58.it, 

62.8 

Hydrogen 

3 06 

3.9 

Nitrogen 

5.3 

5.7 

Ash 

7.0 

— 

Dif f erence(oxygen, 

undetermined, and errors) 25.7 

27.6 


The nitrogen and hydrogen is not only increased by the formation of an 
ammonium salt, but also by the adsorption of ammonia. This sorption 
probably also accounts for the high weight of residue in all three cases. 
The carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen contents of these humic acids are 
comparable to those for humic acids generated by other methods. 

Paper chromatograms of the ammonium humates at three different 
concentrations were run with ethanol. None of the material was eluted 
from the spot with this solvent* 

It is evident from Table 6 that of the three coals examined, 
only the weathered coal was appreciably soluble in ammonium hydroxide. 







' 


, \ * L. ' .; . S ; li'OO 


■ 


■ ’ 

*s . ■ ; 








25 


That ca. 50 % of the coal can be brought into solution by this reagent 
indicates the extent of weathering, or in other words, the formation 
of acidic groups in the coal substance on prolonged exposure to air. 

Table 6 

Ammonia Extraction of Coals 



Held, 

% of original 

coal 

Coal Sample 

Coal A 

Coal C 

Goal E 

Ammonium 

humates 

52.70 

0.75 

0.73 

Residue 

53.78 

103.90 

99.96 

Residue plus 
humates 

106 .1*8 

lOlt.65 

100.69 


The nitrogen content of the ammonium humates was As a 
fertilizer, this does not compare favorably with 21 % nitrogen for 
ammonium sulfate and 3S% for ammonium nitrate, and would be a serious 
disadvantage from the point of view of transportation. This drawback 
might be partially offset by the possibility of such compounds leaving 
desirable organic residues in the soil. The nitrogen from the ammonium 
humates would probably be slowly available and less readily washed away 
by rainfall, 

A simple extraction of the coal with ammonium hydroxide would 
obviously be insufficient to produce a potential fertiliser. Even the 
Tofield coal, which is in the Edmonton horizon (the youngest of the 
three geological horizons in which coal bearing beds occur in Alberta), 
and therefore most likely to be soluble in alkalis (107), shows only 
negligible solubility. Some pre-oxidation before extraction would be 
necessary. 













. : 


- 













i ■. 


- 












* 










' £ 


/ 


: 






V 

■ ■ -i, 

1 ' 


:. • C 

















26 


If the problem of nitrogen fertilizers from coal is to be 
investigated, it might be well to consider the possible introduction 
of nitrogen into low-rank coals by a solid/gas reaction, which would 
have enormous advantages over any wet process if undertaken industrially. 
Goal treated with nitrogen dioxide and ammonia gases, both of which 
could be recycled, in the presence of a catalyst, might pick up a 
considerable amount of nitrogen. 


CHEMICAL STUDIES OF AMMONIUM HUMATES 

Ammonium humates for the subsequent chemical investigations 
were prepared by extracting 100 g. of Coal A with 500 ml. of IjN 
ammonium hydroxide for five hours in a 1000 ml* flask with mechanical 
stirring. The mixture was allowed to stand overnight, and then the 
extract separated from the residue by three passes through a Sharpies 
centrifuge i cleaning the bowl each time and washing the residue with 
water. The alkaline solution of humic acids was evaporated to ca. 500 
ml., and neutralized to congo red test paper with dilute hydrochloric 
acid. The precipitated acids were filtered, washed with water, and 

V 

dried in vacuo at 105°C. These acids were used in the following 
experiments of esterification, reduction, and dehydrogenation. 
Esterification 

Paper chromatograms of the humic acids showed no resolution 
of these compounds. It was thought that, although the free acids could 
not be readily fractionated chromatographically, perhaps their esters 
might show some resolution. Accordingly, an attempt was made to prepare 
the ethyl esters of these compounds. 
















*, 























c. 




t 




c. 






1 J C 














27 


Five grams of the acids were added to 50 ml. of 98% 
ethanol saturated with dry hydrochloric acid gas at 0°C* The mixture 
was allowed to stand for six days with occasional shaking. Over this 
period, the ethanol became dark brown* The mixture was filtered, the 
residue washed with ethanol until the filtrate was colorless, and the 
filtrate evaporated to dryness. The residue was dried at 105°C. in 
vacuo and weighed* 

Of the five grains of humic acids subjected to esterification, 
four grains remained insoluble in ethanol* Paper chromatograms of the 
ethanol soluble fraction run with ethanol showed only a single dark 
band, not at all well defined, but the material did run from the spot 
down the strip* On putting the ethanol soluble material on a 
chromatographic column of alumina, it ran straight through without 
being adsorbed* The failure of these esters to show any resolution 
on paper is indicative of high molecular weight and complexity. Thus 
neither alumina nor filter paper show any promise of effecting a 
fractionation of these humic acids or their esters* 

Of the ethanol soluble material, only about 20% was soluble 
in ether* The humic acids were therefore by no means completely 
esterifieds the actual yield of ether soluble material would be 
about h% of the humic acids* 

Reduction 

The zinc dust/zinc chloride melt has been recommended (2?) 
for the reduction of polynuclear quinones and hydroxy compounds to 
aromatic hydrocarbons, and so seemed worth applying to the humic acids 
in the hope that some simple degradation products might be obtained 
that could be identified. 




























28 


By grinding with a mortar and pestle, 

2*0 g. humic acids, 

2.5 g. zinc dust, 

2.5 g. sodium chloride, 

12.5 g* zinc chloride, 

were intimately mixed, and transferred to a 50 ml. distilling flask 
fitted with a like flask to serve as a condenser, and a thermometer 
immersed in the center of the mixture. The acids were heated with a 
free flame to 200-29Q°C. over which range fusion of the mixture occurred. 
There was no distillate. 

The residue was transferred to a beaker and warmed with dilute 
hydrochloric acid until no more hydrogen was evolved, filtered, washed 
with water and dried. The residue was completely insoluble in benzene 
and in ether. Approximately the same amount dissolved in 95$ ethanol 
from the residue as dissolved from the humic acids before the attempted 
reduction. 

The absence of any distillate or ether soluble reaction 
products indicated that no alcohols or aromatic hydrocarbons had been 
produced, and the investigations were not pursued further. 

Dehydrogenation 

The preceding experiment indicated that hydrogen could not 
be readily introduced into the humic acid molecule. On the other hand, 
it was not considered impossible that hydrogen could be removed. 
Accordingly, an attempt was made to dehydrogenate the humic acids. 

Five grams of humic acids were intimately mixed with 10 g* 
of powdered selenium metal by grinding in a mortar and pestle. The 
mixture was heated continuously for U8 hours at 30Q~330 U C. according 
to the procedure of Diels and Karstens (36). The temperature was 









it : ' : : r ' v- ■■ 







■V 




; 











t 








.. J 












■ : 


' 









29 . 

maintained by heating a bismuth/cadmium alloy bath in a ceramic pot 
mounted in an electric bowl-type heater controlled by a Variac. 

Only a very little hydrogen selenide was evolved during the 
two days heating indicating that the humic acids had undergone little 
or no dehydrogenation. This was confirmed by the absence of any benzene 
or ether soluble material from the residue. It seems likely that at 
least part of the coal substance is hydroaromatic in character* and 
since almost no work has been done on the dehydrogenation of humic acids* 
such a line of approach might prove interesting. 


) 















30 , 


PREPARATION OF HUMIC ACIDS 

BY NITRIC ACID OXIDATION AND THEIR SEPARATION BY SOLVENT TREATMENT 

The following investigations were undertaken, applying the 
extraction procedures of Kinney, Polansky, and Gauger (72), to deter¬ 
mine whether the commercial methods suggested by these authors were 
applicable to Alberta coals* It was of particular interest to know 
how much of a subbituminous coal could be converted to humic acids 
soluble in a mixed solvent of acetone and water by mild oxidation 
with nitric acid* The following flow sheet schematically illustrates 

t 

the series of operations employed to separate the coal degradation 
products* 

Apparatus 

The apparatus in which the oxidations were carried out con¬ 
sisted of a three liter, three-necked flask immersed almost completely 
in a large enamelled pail, fitted with a constant level device, forming 
a water bath, which was kept at the boiling point of the water by a gas 
burner* The left-hand neck of the flask was fitted with a water con¬ 
denser from which a glass tube led to the fume hood vent to carry off 
the oxides of nitrogen copiously evolved during the oxidation. The 
central neck contained a rubber stopper holding a motor driven, glass¬ 
ring stirrer, and the right-hand neck was closed with a rubber stopper, 
except when it was necessary to make an addition of the coal sample 
through a powder funnel* 

Expe rimental Procedure 
Oxidation 

Each of the coal samples was ground in a corn mill, a portion 
riffled out for analysis, and the remainder set aside for the subsequent 











31 


FLOW SHEET ILLUSTRATING SEPARATION OF NITRIC ACID OXIDATION PRODUCTS 


coal 


nitric acid 
oxidation 


filtration 


filtrate 

solids 


ethanol 

soxhlet 

extraction 


liquid/liquid 

(HCl/ether) 

extraction 


insoluble 

products 


acetone/water 
extraction 


ethanol 

soluble 


ethanol 

insol. 

(inorganic) 


ether 

soluble 


— l 

ether 

insol< 


humic 

acids 


ether 

soxhlet 

extraction 


ether 

insol* 


fusainous 

residue 

plus 

inorganic 

material 


ether 

soluble 


Chromato graphy- 


orown area 


tan area 


yellow 8 


yellow 

orange 

yellow 


7 



- ethanol soluble 



water soluble —• 
re chromatography 


— rechronu— orange, ye 11 cm, orange, yellow 

rochrom#-- orange-brown, brown, 3 oranges 
—— yellow 5a, yellow 5b 


orange 4 

orange 3 
yellow 2 
yellow 1 
a - yellow 





























ll 









• .— ~ . 








' 





■ ■ 





c 












32 


experiments. The coal was dried for four hours in a vacuum oven with 
a natural gas leak (to prevent oxidation) at 105°C., and, except where 
otherwise noted, 100 g. of dry coal were weighed out for the oxidations. 
Over a period of five hours, the coal was added to 400 ml# of concent¬ 
rated nitric acid* plus the appropriate quantity of distilled water, 
with constant stirring and at a temperature of ca. 97°C. provided by 
the water bath. Heating and stirring were maintained for an additional 
three hours after the last addition of coal. The reaction mixture was 
allowed to stand overnight, and in the morning sufficient water was 
added to make the total volume of liquid up to two literso The mixture 
was stirred for 30 minutes, then filtered with slight vacuum, and the 
residue washed with 1200 ml. of water. The residue, or insoluble pro¬ 
ducts, was dried in vacuo at 105°C. for four hours. 

Extraction 

From the dried, insoluble products, 20*0 g. were weighed 
to the nearest mg., and extracted with a 60;40 solution of acetone; 
water (by vol.) according to the procedure of Kinney, Polansky, and 
Gauger (72). The oxidized coal was added slowly with stirring to 100 ml. 
of the solvent in a 400 ml. beaker. After all the treated coal had 
been added, the mixture vras stirred for four hours at room tempenature 
The suspension was then centrifuged in two 75 ml. tubes for 50 minutes, 
and if necessary, the liquid extract ms decanted from the residual 
coal into another centrifuge tube and recentrifuged* The residues 
were combined in a single centrifuge tube with 25 ml. of fresh solvent, 

* ”C.P. Reagent Nitric Acid”. Min. 70^, Sp. Gr. at 60°F., 

Min. 1.42. Canadian Industries Limited, Montreal, Quebec. 

An attempt was made to add the acid to the dry coal with disastrous 
results. Even with efficient cooling of the mixture, the coal foamed 
so vigorously on coming into contact with the nitric acid that it was 
carried out of the flask. 





















33 


and stirred again; this time for two hours. This process was repeated 
a third and a fourth time with 25 ml. of solvent in each case. 

The results in Table 7 show that the bulk of the humic acids 
was extracted with the first quantity of acetone/water solution. Four 

Table 7 

Successive Solvent Extractions of Nitric Acid-Treated Coal E 


Nitric acid Per cent, of insoluble material extracted 

concentration 


% by wt. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Total 

18.3 

78.86 

3.89 

1.86 

0.98 

85.59 

50.8 

64.78 

4.19 

2.02 

Xo06 

72.05 

59.5 

59.20 

3.73 

1.35 

0.79 

65.07 


extractions were made in every case, and the extracts weighed individ¬ 
ually, but only the total weights of extracts are recorded hereunder® 

The liquid extracts were filtered through a Whatman No. 1 
filter paper into weighed, flasks, one ml. of a solution of 100 p.p.m. 
of $81066 General Electric Silicone Additive in water added to prevent 
the frothing which rendered distillation impossible without the anti¬ 
foaming agent, and the solvent removed by vacuum distillation on a 
steam bath. The humic acids so extracted were dried in vacuo at 
105°C. for four hours and weighed. 

The following flow sheet schematically represents the pro¬ 
cedures employed to separate the humic acids from inorganic material 


and fusain 






























t 


h , 












3h 


coal 

nitric acid 
oxidation 

filtration 

r- 1 -, 

filtrate insoluble 

products 

acetone /wa te r 
extraction 

I 

centrifugation 

extract fusainous 

residue 

I plus 

distillation inorganic 

material 

humic 

acids 

Results and Discussion 

1# Solvent Extraction of Raw Coals 

Four acetone/water extractions of untreated Coal A and 
Coal G yielded only and 0*6^ humic acids respectively# Thus* 

these subbituminous coals, even when extensively weathered, contain 
no very large quantities of acetone/water soluble humic acids# On 
the other hand, a mild oxidation with nitric acid causes more than 
5C^o of the coal to become soluble in this solvent mixture# 

2. Action of Nitric Acid on Three Coals 

A comparison of the action of nitric acid on three dif¬ 
ferent coals is presented in Table 8# It is evident that the Tofield 
Coal, Coal C, was most readily attacked by nitric acidi even more 













35 


Table 8 



Action 

of 70% Nitric Acid on 

Coals A, C, 

and E 



Yield, 

percentage of coal 

Yield of 

Coal 

Mineral 
matter 
of coal 

Humic 

acids 

Insoluble 

products 

Fusainous 
residue 

humic acids 
%> of insol, 
products 

A 

14.9 

20,8 

44.0 

23.2 

47.2 

C 

12,0 

4.7 

18.0 

13.3 

26.4 

E 

7.8 

16.1 

25.5 

9.4 

63.0 


readily than the weathered coal. All but 18% of the original coal 
was converted to soluble products and carbon dioxide and via ter. This 
is to be expected because Goal C was not only the coal farthest removed 
from the mountains, but also younger geologically and of lower rank 
than Coal E. 

The high proportion of insoluble products from Coal A is at 
first somewhat surprising, but no doubt can be explained by its high 
fusain content which is not attacked to any extent by nitric acid 
(79, 103), In addition, its physical appearance was fibrous, woody, 
and dull. All these facts suggest a high fusain content. 

This hypothesis is lent further support by the value for the 
amount of unattacked coal which is nearly twice that for the other two 
coals. The fusainous residue also appears to depend on the mineral 
matter content of the original coal. The fraction of the degradation 
products insoluble in acetone/Wter no doubt consisted largely of 
fusain and inorganic material. 

The yield of humic acids is of course low for Coal C because 
degradation went beyond the humic acid stage to products of lower 




















1 



, 


' 

























36 


molecular weight. In fact, approximate determinations of the quantity 
of filtrate solids from each of the three coals showed that as much as 
25% of Coal C was converted to carbon dioxide and water, while the 
proportion was much lower in the case of the other two coals. The 
yield of humic acids as a percentage of the original coal is greatest 
for Coal A, but of course lower than the yield from Coal E when calcul 
ated as a percentage of the insoluble products because of the high 
fusain content of Coal A. 

3. Influence of Concentration of Nitric Acid 

By and large, the only factor by which the seven oxidations 
of Coal B differed from each other ms in the concentration of nitric 
acid; the quantity of nitric acid was the same in all cases. 

The proportions of degradation products obtained by nitric 
acid oxidation of this coal are tabulated in Table 9. 

Table 9 

Effect of Concentration of Nitric Acid on Oxidation of Coal E 


Nitric acid 
concentra tion 
% by weight 

Humic 
acids 
% 0 of coal 

Insoluble 
products 
% of coal 

Fusainous 
residue 
% of coal 

Humic acids 
% of insol. 
products 

9.5* 

55.6 

70.0 

14.4 

79.5 

18.3 

47.4 

55.4 

o 

• 

CO 

85.6 

30.3 

33.7 

44.3 

10.6 

76.0 

41.1 

28.3 

38.7 

10.4 

73.1 

50.8 

25.7 

35.7 

10.0 

72.1 

59.5 

19.7 

30.2 

10.5 

65.1 

70.0 

16.1 

25.5 

9.4 

63.0 


Half quantities used. 








* 





37 


When the above yields of degradation products are plotted 
as a function of the concentration of oxidant, it is evident from the 
curves of Figure 2 that: 

(a) if the concentration of the nitric acid is greater than 15^, the 
process of producing soluble acids and humic acids is complete, and a 
further increase in concentration does not attack any more of the coal 
substance, but rather the humic acids* The amount of unattacked coal 
remains constant at ca» 1Q$ with concentrations of nitric acid greater 
than 15^o* The failure of high concentrations of nitric acid to pro¬ 
duce larger yields of htimic acids than the lower concentrations is 
undoubtedly due to degradation of the humic acids themselves to lower 
molecular weight compounds by the excess oxidant* As pointed out in 
the introduction, if the oxidation is continued for a sufficient length 
of time or if more drastic conditions are applied (as is the case here), 
the humic acids will be degraded completely to lower molecular weight 
compounds soluble in acid as well as in alkaline aqueous media* This 
transformation is accompanied by the formation of carbon dioxide, and 

if the oxidation is carried far enough, of course all the carbon appears 
in that form* In the case of Coal C, it is evident that this stage is 
reached in less time than is the case for Coal E. 

(b) the yield of humic acids as a percentage of the original coal 
rises to a maximum (ca* 56%) at a nitric acid concentration of approx. 
10%, and then drops off gradually at higher concentrations in a linear 
manner* That this curve does have a maximum value is shown more 
clearly when the humic acids are expressed as a percentage of the 
insoluble products as in Figure 3. 

i 

i 





















■ 




• 


' .. 


' 










NITRIC ACID OXIDATION OF COAL 





CONCENTRATION OF NITRIC ACID-%BY WT. 













001 





o o o o 

oo <x> CM 


sionaodd 3"i9mosNi do im Aa%-saiov oiiaidh 




CONCENTRATION OF NITRIC ACID -% BY W T. 









38 


Dr. Howard has commented upon the similarity of the kinetics 
of oxidation and hydrogenation of bituminous coals (59). Comparing 
the rate curves for oxidation with those for hydrogenation, the yield 
curve of humic acids corresponds to that of bitumen, and the acid 
soluble yield curve to that of the distillable fraction from hydro¬ 
genation, and the curve for unreacted coal is the same in both cases. 

How the curves of Figure 2 bear a remarkable resemblance to 
the rate curves for the nitric acid oxidation of a bituminous coal (67), 
which, as it was pointed out above, resemble the rate curves for the 
hydrogenation of bituminous coal. Increase in time of oxidation seems 
to have much the same effect as increase in concentration of oxidant. 

The analogous behaviour of the time and concentration variables is 
strikingly shown by Figure 4 in which the yield of oxidation products 
is plotted on a logarithmic scale. The result is a straight line, 
indicating the resemblance to a first order reaction. 

Thus, if humic acids were to be generated by nitric acid 
oxidation on an industrial scale, not only would a careful choice of 
coal be necessary, but also a delicate balance between time and con¬ 
centration to maintain optimum conditions from the point of view of 
yield and cost. 

4» Properties of the Extracted Humic Acids 

Both the "natural” (extracted from untreated coal) and the 
”regenerated” (extracted from oxidized coal) humic acids were completely 
soluble in 4^ sodium or potassium hydroxide solution, and were precip¬ 
itated by mineral acids* IThen precipitated from alkaline solutions 
and filtered, it was impossible to wash the acids until the filtrate 
was colorless. The colored filtrate was probably due to slight solu¬ 
bility of the acids in water and/or peptization. 










001 



nvoo do im a a % - aid 1 a 


CONCENTRATION OF NITRIC ACID-%BY W T. 









39 


(a) Acetone/water soluble humic acids from untreated Coal fa 
paper chromatograms of these humic acids were run with a 10^ solution 
of phenol in water (in which they were soluble) at three different 
concentrations* The spots remained colored, and some of the material 
streaked down the paper strip, but there was no resolution of the 
acids* 

(b) Acetone/Wter soluble humic acids from oxidized Coal A (56): 
like the humic acids from the untreated coal, those from the oxidized 
coal showed no resolution on filter paper* When 15 of 2.0, 2.5 

and 5.0^ by wt. solutions of these humic acids in 60/40 acetone/water 
were spotted on paper strips and developed with water, only continuous 
streaks were produced on the paper* In the same way, there was no 
fractionation with solutions of phenol in water. 

A solution of these humic acids was made up in 90/l0 acetone/ 
water by volume and put on a column of alumina. The column was slowly 
developed with gradually increasing concentrations of water: first 
70/30, then 60/40, and so on® The acids were definitely adsorbed by 
the alumina, but there was no resolution into sharp bands® There was 
some indication of more or less distinct areas, but the differentiation 
was not great enough to be used as a criterion of separation into 
fractions. 

It is evident from Table 10 that by and large humic acids 
from different coals have approximately the same carbon contents 
although the percentage of carbon in the original coal may vary con¬ 
siderably. It is remarkable that the Pennsylvania bituminous coals, 
which are of higher rank and greater age, yield humic acids of much 
the same composition as those from the Alberta coals studied. Complete 






. 

. 

















•O.’ " 




•‘.o’. 




1 











. 






























Uo. 


Table 10 

Carbon Content of Original Coal and. of Humic Acids Producod Therefrom 


Coal 


Coal 

Dry, mineral 
matter-free 
% carbon 

Humic acids 
Dry* ash-free 
% carbon 

A 


66.3 

61.7 

C 


75.5 

58.9 

Tp 

oJ 


75.7 

59.3 

Pennsylvania 5 


86.3 

63.0 


Eckerd procedure 


ultimate analyses of these humic acids and of the fusainous residue 
can be found in the Appendix* Nitric acid oxidation at temperatures 
above 100°C* produces humic acids of lower carbon content (116), 

That the humic acids are similar in another respect is 
indicated by their absorption spectra ( vide infra ). 


*Prepared by the oxidation of a Pennsylvania bituminous coal with 
concentrated nitric acid for 18 hours at 95°C«, followed by alkaline 
extraction and reprecipitation with hydrochloric acid (26), 














•; . Ctf j. : v : , : 












hi. 


INVESTIGATIONS OF THE FILTRATE FROM NITRIC ACID OXIDATIONS 

The filtrate from the foregoing oxidations represented a 
mixture of compounds which, it was thought, could be resolved into 
more homogeneous fractions in a less empirical manner than could the 
humic acids* Because most of the substances in the filtrate have the 
same anomalous properties as the humic acids, it seemed wise to begin 
any investigation designed to discover something of the structure of 
the humic acids with the simplest compounds, and to work from the simple 
to the more complex* Accordingly a somewhat more intensive study of 
the filtrate was made than of the other fractions of oxidative degrad¬ 
ation products* 

Genera.! Properties of the Filtrate 

The filtrate was an intense orange color, and on standing, 
a reddish-brown, amorphous precipitate came down slowly* On evapor¬ 
ation, the solids isolated were orange-red, but if heated for any 
length of time they turned brown to black* They were extremely hygro¬ 
scopic* 

When samples of the filtrate solids were dried at 105-110°C., 
they fused, became quite dark in color, and expanded into a porous 
mass which was somewhat plastic before cooling* In order to dry 
samples for the following ultimate analyses, they were allowed to 
stand over ^anhydrone” in a vacuum desiccator at 30°C* for a month, 
over which period of time they slowly lost weight. 

That the solids from the filtrate resulting from the 70^ 
nitric acid oxidation of Goals C and E were very much the same in 
ultimate composition is shown by Table 11* This similarity is surpris¬ 
ing when one considers that the comparison is made between analyses of 












two empirical fractions from different coals. 


Table 11 


Analysis of Filtrate Solids from 70% Nitric Acid Oxidation of 

Coals C and E 


E lernent 

% by wt., dry ash-free 

Coal Sample 

Coal C Coal E 

Carbon 

48.4 

45.7 

Hydrogen 

2.6 

2.7 

Nitrogen 

4.0 

3.4 

Difference (oxygen, undetermined, and errors) 

45.0 

48.2 


The carbon content of these acids is about 15% lower than 
that of the humic acids. A truly amazing property of the compounds 
of the filtrate is their oxygen content. Mellitic acid, the highest 
member of the benzene carboxylic acid series has an oxygen content of 
56%. The members of this series of acids have the smallest possible 
aromatic nucleus. Certainly the acids found in the filtrate solids 
must have a larger and more complex nucleus to account for their 
molecular weight, their thermal instability, and the failure of a 
large fraction of their methyl esters to distil. Yet, in spite of 
this large nucleus, their oxygen content may be as high as 48%. The 
periphery of the molecule must be very nearly saturated with carboxyl 
and phenolic hydroxyl groups, and the nucleus must contain some oxygen 
in cyclic form. That some of the cyclic oxygen linkages are found in 
a furan structure has been established by Howard (59). 

At least part of the nitrogen in the compounds from the 
filtrate was released, as shown by the copious evolution of oxides of 







































b3o 


nitrogen, by heating the filtrate solids with dilute hydrochloric 
acid# 

The dry solids from the evaporation of the filtrate were 
soluble in acidic aqueous media, and it appeared that the organic part 
was completely soluble in dilute alkaline solution but that a portion 
of the mineral matter present in the filtrate was precipitated# They 
were soluble in 90/l0 ace tone//rater, glacial acetic acid, furfural, 
and pyridine water mixtures# They were insoluble in petroleum ether, 
benzene, acetone, and pyridine# 

Ten grams of the filtrate solids from the 70^ oxidation of 
Coal A were extracted with ether in a soxhlet apparatus# At the end 
of one half hour the ether was still colorless ; it was slightly colored 
after two hours, and the intensity of color did not increase appreciably 
after four hours of extraction# The yield of ether soluble material 
was 0#3 go, or of the filtrate solids® 

It was discovered, however, that all of the organic matter 
could be extracted from the filtrate solids with 95% ethanol® That 
portion remaining in the soxhlet thimble was found by ignition to be 
almost completely inorganic material# In the case of the 70 % oxid«= 
ations, this ash represented 20fi for Coal A, 9% for Coal C, and 8% 
for Coal E of the filtrate solids# As much as 60 % of this ethanol 
extract was then found to be soluble in ether# 

It was also found that, in the presence of dilute hydrochloric 
acid, over 50^ of the organic material of the filtrate was soluble in 
ether# It therefore seems likely that the insolubility of the filtrate 
solids in ether was due to salt formation of the degradation products 
with the inorganic material from the mineral matter of the original 




















coal, Ethanol is apparently sufficiently polar to cause some hydrolysis 
of the salts, rendering them soluble in ether, and when the presence 
of the free acid form was ensured by the addition of hydrochloric acid, 
a large fraction of the filtrate solids was soluble in ether on liquid/ 
liquid extraction. 

To obtain an ether soluble fraction of the filtrate solids, 
a liquid/liquid extraction apparatus as shown in Figure 5 was con- 
structed. Ether, boiling in the right-hand flask, passed through the 
connecting am to the condenser, from which it ran into the central 
glass tube and ultimately into an acidic solution of the filtrate 
solids in water in the bottom of the left-hand flask® It percolated 
through this aqueous solution and ran back through the connecting arm 
to the flask from which it originally came® Thus, a continuous supply 
of fresh ether was passed through the acid solution of filtrate solids 
until the ether came over practically colorless. 

Judging from its chromatographic behaviour, the ether soluble 
fraction obtained in this manner was identical with that obtained by 
soxhlet extraction of the filtrate solids with ethanol followed by a 
soxhlet extraction of the ethanol extract with ether. Both these 
techniques were employed to obtain ether soluble portions of the filt¬ 
rate for chromatographic investigation® The separations are represented 
schematically in the following flow sheet. 























CONTINUOUS LIQUID-LIQUID EXTRACTION APPARATUS 

FOR USE WITH SOLVENT LIGHTER THAN WATER 



Figure 5. 

I 

1 




























hS. 


filtrate 

solids 


filtrate 

solids 


, * ethanol 
' ' soxhlet 
extraction 


ethanol ethanol 

soluble insoluble 

| (inorganic) 

ether 


( 2 ) 


ether 

soluble 


soxhlet 

extraction 


ether 

insoluble 


liquid/liquid 
(HCL/ether) 
extraction 


(S) 


ether 

soluble 


ether 

insoluble 


t 


The chromatographic patterns of the ethanol extract (1), of 
the ether extract of the ethanol extract (2), and of the ether soluble 
fraction obtained by liquid/liquid extraction (3), -were all very sim¬ 
ilar on both filter paper and alumina® In the case of the simple 
ethanol extract (1), however, the brown and tan areas were in much 
greater proportion than in the case of that material limited to sol¬ 
ubility in ether® Since it ms desired to work with a fraction con¬ 
taining as high a proportion of simple materials as possible, the 
ether soluble material was obtained for chromatographic separations® 
Estimates of the total solids in the filtrate from a part¬ 
icular oxidation and the proportions soluble in ethanol and in ether 
were made by examining the filtrate from the 30 % oxidation of Coal E* 

It was thought that the evaporation of the filtrate to dryness on a 
steam bath no doubt caused considerable further degradation, and there¬ 
fore a simple weighing of the dry solids from such an evaporation would 
yield values lower than the weight of solids actually present in the 















filtrate at the end of the oxidation proper. Accordingly, the filt¬ 
rate from the oxidation of Coal E with 30^ nitric acid was not evap¬ 
orated to dryness, but reserved for the following determinations. 

Three 25 ml. samples were pipetted into weighed ground 
glass flasks, and vacuum distilled at a temperature below 30°C. 

These were dried and weighed, and the average of the three determin¬ 
ations was 0.401 - 0.006 g. of solids per 25 ml. of filtrate. The 
total volume of the filtrate from this oxidation was 3,050 ml., and 

so the total solids present were x 3050 ~ 48.9 g., or approx- 

25.0 

imately 50^ of the coal. 

The above experiment was repeated, with the exception that 
the 25 ml. aliquots were first neutralized with ICBo sodium hydroxide 
solution (by wt.) before distillation using congo red test paper to 
indicate the end point. It was impossible to use an internal indic¬ 
ator because of the intense color of these solutions. The average of 
three determinations gave 10.4 £ 0.1 ml. as the volume of sodium hydr¬ 
oxide solution required to neutralize 25 ml. of the filtrate. The 
weight of the sodium salts of the acids was 2.63 1 0.01 g. 

Assuming that the sodium hydroxide neutralized only residual 
nitric acid from the oxidation, 2.21 g. of sodium nitrate would be 
produced. Subtracting this from 2.63 g. for the total solids leaves 
0.42 g. for the weight of organic material which compares favorably 
with 0.40 g. found by the distillation of the acid solution. 

The same experiment, substituting litmus paper for the 


Congo red test paper to indicate the end point, was repeated. The 
average of three determinations gave a volume of 11.8 ml. of IQ % 
sodium hydroxide for complete neutralization. Subtracting 10.4 ml 

























U7. 

from 11*8 ml. gives 1.4 ml. for the neutralization of the organic acids. 
Taking the weight of the latter as the total weight of organic matter, 
i.e., 0.40 g., the average equivalent weight of the organic acids was 
calculated to be approximately 90, 

Therefore, in this particular oxidation, approximately 50$ 
of the coal was converted to soluble acids with an equivalent weight 
of the order of 90. 

The results of a liquid/liquid extraction with ether of a 
200 ml. portion of this filtrate, made acidic with five ml. of concen¬ 
trated hydrochloric acid, are given in Table 12. 

Table 12 

Liquid/liquid Extraction of Filtrate from 30$ HNOg Oxidation of Coal E 


Fraction 

Yield of fraction. 

grams 

From 200 ml. 

In total 


aliquot 

filtrate 

Ether soluble 

1.4 

21.4 

Ether insoluble, ethanol soluble 

1.4 

21.4 

Ethanol insoluble (inorganic) 

0.2 

3.1 

Total 

3.0 

45.9 

Calculated, from vacuum distillation 

3.2 

48.9 


Thus, in the case of the 30$ oxidation of Goal E, a portion 
of the soluble acids corresponding to about 20$ of the coal was soluble 


in ether 
























U8. 


PAPER CHROMATOGRAPHY 

Because only micro amounts of material were available in 
many cases, the technique of paper chromatography (29) was employed 
to make trial separations and to investigate the homogeneity of 
fractions* The chief merits of the method were its ability to cope 
with minute quantities of material, and to effect separations with 
little expenditure of time* In addition, a variety of solvents could 
be investigated as to their suitability for carrying out separations, 
and from, such experiments valid predictions could be made as to the 
behaviour of the filtrate materials on columns of alumina* 

(a) Apparatus 

Figure 6 is an isometric drawing of the apparatus used for 
the paper chromatographic separations in the following investigations* 
Essentially, it consisted of a means of supporting the paper strips, 
dipping into a supply of solvent, enclosed in a chamber to provide an 
atmosphere saturated with the vapor of the solvent employed for devel¬ 
opment of the chromatograms. 

The chamber consisted of a battery jar 5 closed by means of 
a glass plate 1 supported on a rubber gasket 2 to provide a seal* The 
air in the jar was kept saturated with solvent vapor by two shallow 
pans of solvent 4 in the bottom* A glass boat 8, made by sealing the 
ends of a length of pyrex tubing and then grinding off about one 
quarter of the tube horizontally, contained the solvent 9 into which 
the paper strips 3 dipped* The solvent was carried up and then down 
the strips by capillary action, washing down the spot of material under 
investigation, which was spotted on the filter paper in such a position 
that it came just below the supports for the strips 7* The boat ms 









I 




■ 










i 


, 














5 












GLASS PLATE 
2 ) RUBBER GASKET 
BOAT 

SUPPORTS FOR PAPER STRIPS 
RETAINING TUBE FOR PAPER STRIPS 
SOLVENT 

SUPPORTS FOR BOAT 
SUPPORTS FOR PAPER STRIPS 
PAPER STRIPS 
5 ) BATTERY JAR 

PANS OF SOLVENT 


Figure 6. 


PAPER CHROMATOGRAPHY APPARATUS 


































































































U9 


suspended at the top of the jar by two lengths of glass tubing 6 held 
in position by the tension of rubber stoppers, inserted in their ends, 
against the wall of the battery jar# The paper supports 7 were pos¬ 
itioned in the same manner. A length of glass tubing 10 prevented 
the paper strips from falling out of the boat. 

It was also possible to carry out two-dimensional paper 
chromatography with this apparatus. 

(b) Procedure 

Strips 1 cm# wide and approximately 40 cm. long were cut 
from sheets of Whatman No# 1 Filter Paper, and lightly folded 5#5 cm# 
from one end so that they would fall vertically over the supports 7 
in Figure 6. The folded end of the strip was warmed on a hot plate 
provided with an asbestos cover, and a solution of the imterial to be 
resolved carefully put on the paper, drop by drop, from a micro pipette, 
in a spot not more than 6 m.m# in diameter just below the fold,# The 
solvent was allowed to evaporate after each addition from the pipette 
so that the spot would not become too large# The strips were then 
suspended in the apparatus, and would be completely developed over¬ 
night# 

The strips were filed in a notebook by fastening them to 
plain sheets of paper with cellulose tape# 

(c) Mixed Paper Chromatograms 

Because the quantities of compounds isolated from the filtrate 
seldom exceeded a few milligrams, the technique of mixed chromatograms 
was applied. 

From the literature, and from the behaviour of the compounds 
in general, it seemed probable that certain compounds, e#g.» 2,4,6- 



















5o, 


trinitroresorcinol, might be present in the filtrate* The technique 
of mixed chromatograms made it possible to determine whether a part¬ 
icular chromatographic fraction was likely to be one of the suspected 
compounds* In other words, it was possible to say that a fraction ms 
not a certain compound. 

Three paper chromatograms were necessary to make a determin¬ 
ation} one of the unknown compound, one of the known substance, and 
the third a mixture of the two compounds* By running these three 
strips simultaneously and comparing the positions of the bands, it 
was usually possible to determine whether the unknown compound ms 
identical with the known substance* If the paper chromatogram of the 
mixture of the two substances yielded two distinct bands, then of 
course the compounds were different* On the other hand, if the mixed 
chromatogram showed only a single band, and if the band from each of 
the three strips ms approximately the same distance from the original 
spot, then it ms likely that the unknown ms identical with the known 
compound. 

COLUMN CHROMATOGRAPHY 

In order to carry out separations on a scale much larger 
than that possible by the methods of paper chromatography, chromato¬ 
graphic columns of alumina were employed. Perhaps no technique other 
than columnar chromatography (110, 111, 115) has been so successful in 
separating the constituents of a complex mixture. Since, to our know¬ 
ledge, it has never been applied to the oxidation products of coal, 
investigations of the soluble nitric acid oxidation products were car¬ 
ried out employing this method of fractionation. 






51 , 


(a) Apparatus 

The apparatus consisted of a tube or column proper made from 
a discarded burette or from a length of pyrex tubing of appropriate 
diameter with the bottom end pulled out to form a narrow exit and the 
top slightly flanged* The bottom end of the tube was fitted with a 
rubber stopper and filter flask to catch the eluate while the top ac¬ 
commodated a separatory funnel to provide a reservoir of fresh solvent* 

A piece of absorbent cotton was inserted in the very bottom of the col¬ 
umn, and on top of this, a perforated porcelain plate if the column of 
adsorbent were to be extruded* The absorbent cotton was saturated with 
the solvent to be employed in making up the column* It vras important 
that no air bubbles be introduced into the column, and so the cotton 
7/as thoroughly wetted first by allowing it to stand in a pool of solvent. 
A cork ring of about 2 m.m. thickness and slightly smaller In diameter 
than the tube, floating on the layer of solvent above the adsorbent, 
was found to be effective in preventing the incoming solvent from dis¬ 
turbing the upper zone of adsorbent* The apparatus 7/as firmly fastened 
to a burette stand in a vertical position sc that the bands would, as 
far as possible, be resolved in a horizontal position on the column* 
Imperfections of packing, temperature changes, and other effects caused 
some deviation from this ideal behaviour* 

(b) Procedure 
(1) Packing 

Two methods of packing the column with adsorbent were employed* 
Both were wet methods* Dry packing techniques were tried with disap¬ 
pointing results: the solvent showed a considerable tendency to channel* 
Regardless of the mathod of packing, the glass column had to be scrup¬ 
ulously clean* For columns of 3 cm* or less in diameter, it was found 












52 


that the most satisfactory packing procedure consisted of making a 
slurry of the adsorbent and the initial solvent in a beaker, and then 
pouring this with continuous stirring into the column, taking care 
not to introduce air bubbles into the slurry while stirring* In order 
to remove any air bubbles, and to ensure uniform packing, the column 
was gently tapped with a length of glass rod covered with a piece of 
heavy rubber tubing* The tube was filled to the top with the slurry, 
and allowed to stand until it showed no further signs of settling, 
whereupon the solution to be fractionated v/as introduced through the 
separatory funnel. 

Ether soluble fractions of the filtrate for chromatographic 
separation were dissolved in 95 % ethanol at concentrations of about 
5;** When this solution was first added to a column, of alumina, the 
bulk of the material dissolved in the ethanol was adsorbed in a hetero¬ 
geneous band at the top. This band grew larger as the solution was 
introduced. When the separatory funnel was empty, 95^ ethanol was 
added, and the heterogeneous band developed with this solvent and sub¬ 
sequently more polar solvents (ethano 1/4/a ter mixtures of varying 
proportions, water) until the resolution of the bands was such that 
separation could be effected by either of the two methods outlined 
below. 

The columns could be easily shut down by closing the top of 
the separatory funnel with a rubber stopper, and the arm of the filter 
flask with a cork or short length of rubber tubing and pinch clamp. 

For columns of diameter larger than 3 cm*, another form of 
wet packing in which the tube was first filled with solvent, and then 
the adsorbent poured in, was found quite effective* The details of 
this procedure are described by Williams (122). 

















53 


The alumina used for the separations was "Reagent Aluminum 
Oxide Merck, Suitable for Chromatographic Adsorption"# No# 71707# 

Merck and Co#, Inc., Rahway, N.J., U.S.A# 

(2) Separation of Bands 

Two methods of separating the bands were employed# 

(1) Liquid Chromatogram. This procedure consisted of prolonged 
elution of the column with progressively more polar solvents or 
mixtures thereof, and catching each fraction in the filter flask# 

Strain (112) has arranged solvents suitable for developing chromato¬ 
graphic column in a series of increasing eluting power# 

In any chromatographic column, the band observed at the 
surface of the glass is by no means cylindrical in shape# Its shape 
is more that of a paraboloid with its apex in the center of the column# 
Thus, the liquid chromatogram technique was limited by the uncertainty 
of knowing exactly when a band had started to leave the exit tube of 
the column# 

(ii) Extrusion. By carefully drying the column to a "suitable" texture 

by drawing air through it with a vacuum pump, the column could be 

pushed out from the bottom, and the bands cautiously separated with a 

spatula# Each fraction was then removed from the adsorbent by washing 

or soxhlet extracting it with the appropriate solvent# 

Description of a Typical Chromatographic Pattern of the Ether Soluble 
Fraction of the Filtrate Adsorbed on Alumina or Filter Paper* 

On development with ethanol, the chromatographic pattern of 
the ether soluble fraction of the filtrate (illustrated in Figure 7) 
consisted of six major bands# 

a-Yeliow was not adsorbed, but percolated straight through 
the column quite rapidly# Yellow 1 was the first and by far the largest 






























CHROMATOGRAPHIC PATTERN OF 
SOLUBLE PRODUCTS FROM NITRIC 
ACID OXIDATION OF COALS A AND E 



- JBr o\a/ tl Are cl 


— TTccn Area, 

— Yellow 8 

- Yellow 7 

— O ra.rzge 6 

--Yellow 5 



. Orange 

~~ O r<xrx.ge 

- YcILopv 


A 

3 

2 



Figure 7 














band* It was of a clear greenish yellow color, moved quickly down the 
column, and was easily eluted* A very narrow and faint band, yellow 2, 
followed yellow 1. Oranges 3 and 4 followed closely on yellow 2. They 
were both narrow, densely colored bands* Yellow 5 was the next major 
constituent, but was not present in as large quantities as yellow 1* 
Ethanol/water mixtures were required to move yellow 5, and it could 
only be completely eluted by pure water* Orange 6 was a narrow, 
intensely colored band* Yellows 7 and 8 moved out of the tan area 
only on development with 'water* 

The alumina was faintly colored between all the bands. 
Chromatography of Filtrate Solids on Silica Gel 

Because the nitric acid oxidation products were so strongly 
adsorbed on alumina, a small column of silica gel ms made up to see 
if better resolution might be obtained with this adsorbent* An ethanol 
solution of filtrate solids #as put on this column, and it was found 
that none of the material whatever was adsorbed. It was noticed, 
however, that the dark brown materials formed the leading edge, while 
the yellow and orange compounds formed the trailing edge as the solution 
moved down the column. 

The experiment ms repeated with a less polar solvent, butyl 
acetate, with similar results* 


’’Davison Silica Gel”. Ho* 22-08-X1926. Mssh Size, through 200. 
Davison Chemical Corporation, Baltimore-3, Md*, U.S.A. 








- 









■ 





















55 , 


PROPERTIES OF FRACTIONS OF FILTRATE 

The isolation and characterization of compounds from the 
filtrate was seriously handicapped by the small quantities available* 
Probably 95 % of the material in the filtrate (excluding the inorganic 
material) ms composed of amorphous acids of lower molecular weight 
than the humic acids, but whose properties differed very little from 
those of the latter except for solubility characteristics. The re¬ 
maining 5% or so was made up of substances which could at least be 
fractionated chromatographically from the complex mixture, but since 
the 5% itself was composed of at least 25 discrete compounds, which 
altogether represented not much more than 3% of the weight of original 
coal (100 g.), each constituent was not present in very great quantity. 

In order to remove at least part of the amorphous acids, the 
ether soluble fraction of the filtrate, which could be obtained by 
either of the two methods outlined above, was used for the chromato¬ 
graphic studies. The ratio of simple compounds to amorphous acids 
was somewhat greater in this fraction, but still discouragingly low. 

The chromatographic pattern on both filter paper and alumina 
was, by and large, the same for all three coals and for the oxidations 
at different concentrations. The proportions of the different bands, 
however, varied somewhat from one oxidation to another. 

The following is a list of some of the properties of constit¬ 
uents isolated from the filtrate. The gaining of information was 
limited by the small amounts of material available for study and by the 
tendency of all the substances to oil, making crystallizations difficult 
and often impossible. 










Oxalic Acid 


Evaporation of the filtrate resulted in the formation of 
some crystalline material* In the case of the filtrate from the 
oxidation of Coal E with 50 % nitric acid, this crystalline material 
was separated from the mother liquor and identified as oxalic acid 
in the following manner* 

The crude material was washed with water, and then recrystal- 
lized four times from water* The crystals were washed after each 
succeeding crystallisation with ic© water* The crystalline compound 
gave a white, finely divided, crystalline precipitate with calcium 
ion in distilled water, and decolorized potassium permanganate solution 
made acidic with dilute sulfuric acid* It gave a bulky precipitate 
with pyridine in acetone solution* A small portion of the crystals 
was melted with diphenylamine over a free flame, cooled and dissolved 
in ethanol* A bright-blue solution was produced*(61). 

Four melting point determinations of separate samples of 
the crystals dried on a porous plate gave values of 99*0 to 100*2°C* 
(uncorr*); accepted value for oxalic acid 100 t 1°C. (61), and the 
anhydrous material melted at 188*0 to 188*1°C* (corr*)j accepted 
value for anydrous oxalic acid 189*5°C* (62). 

A derivative, oxanilide, was prepared according to the pro¬ 
cedure of Mulliken (61), and it melted at 246.0 to 247.0°C. The 
accepted melting point of oxanilide is 246°C* (61), 

It is of interest to note that no oxalic acid could be found 
by the investigators at the Pennsylvania State College in the degrad- 

* 

This color is not given by formic, acetic, propionic, succinic, 
glycolic, citric, tartaric, benzoic, phthalic, or tricarbaHylic 
acids* 















57 


ation products produced by nitric acid oxidation of their bituminous 
coals* The comparisons of the Pennsylvania with the Alberta coals 
made elsewhere in this thesis have pointed to similarities, e*g*, the 
analysis and ultraviolet absorption of the humic acids generated 
therefrom# They appear, however, to be dissimilar in the respect 
that no oxalic acid is produced on oxidation with nitric acid of some 
Pennsylvania bituminous coals. 
a-Yellow 

This fraction ran through alumina columns unadsorbed* All 
attempts to crystallize any of this material met with failure# It 
was soluble in ethanol, acetone, butanol, butyl acetate, and glacial 
acetic acid; slightly soluble in ether and chloroforms and insoluble 
in benzene* 

Crude a-yellow did not decolorize bromine in carbon tetra¬ 
chloride, and so it is unlikely that it is a phenol® It did not react 
with a saturated solution of sodium bicarbonate, and so it is unlikely 
that it is a carboxylic acid# These conclusions are borne out by its 
chromatographic behaviour# At least part of a-yellow was volatile with 
steam# 

On vacuum distillation at a pressure of about 10 m*m# of Hg#, 
approximately 30£$ distilled over between 65 and llO^C# There appeared 
to be fractions at around 65, 80, and 110°C* The remaining 70f 0 turned 
reddish black in the distilling flask# The distillate was only very 
slightly yellow and had a faint ester-like odor* 

Yellow 1 

Misleading results were at first obtained on investigation 
of yellow 1 because it formed a salt with the alumina adsorbent# Later 
yellow 1 was definitely identified as 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (picric acid). 










■ 

















58 


Aluminum was identified from the yellow 1 as it was eluted 
from columns of alumina by recrystallizing the salt from 1 N hydro¬ 
chloric acid solution, removing the free acid by extraction with ether, 
and testing the aqueous acid residue with the ammonium salt of aurin- 
tricarboxylic acid (75, 126)® This aluminum salt of yellow 1 melted 
with decomposition between 190 and 202°C. (uncorr.)• Rast molecular 
weight determinations in camphor on the aluminum salt of yellow 1 gave 
an average value of 313, The theoretical value for the aluminum trip- 
icrate is 714 grams per mole® 

The free acid was crystallized from 1 N hydrochloric acid 
solution to a constant melting point of 121*5 to 122 P C. (uncorr.). 

An authentic sample of picric acid gave a melting point of 121.5 to 122.0°C. 
(uncorr.). The accepted melting point for picric acid is 122.5°C. (53). 
Mixed melting points of yellow 1 with picric acid were in the range of 
121.5 to 122.0°C• (uncorr.). On heating yellow 1 with potassium, 
cyanide in aqueous solution, an intense red color was produced (90). 

The acridine derivative of yellow 1 was prepared (91), and it melted 
at 245 to 250°C. with decomposition. A reported value for acridine 
picrate is 256-8°C. (42). 

A quantitative determination of the picric acid produced by 
the oxidation of Coal E with 60fo nitric acid, by weighing it as the 
acridine picrate, gave a value of ImOfo of picric acid, expressed as a 
percentage of the weight of original dry coal. Direct weighings of 
picric acid from the other oxidations of the same coal sample indic¬ 
ated that no less than 1% was produced. 

Mixed paper chromatograms of yellow 1 and picric acid run 
with ethanol yielded a single yellow band. 










5 ? 


Yellow 2 

Yellow 2 m is soluble in water, ethanol, and ether* Like 
yellow 1 it formed an aluminum salt with the adsorbent* The literature 
reviewed in the introduction suggested that the presence of 2,4,6- 
trinitroresorcinol in the filtrate was not unlikely* Mixed paper 
chromatograms of yellow 2 and an authentic sample of 2,4,6-trinitro- 
resorcinol (styphnic acid) run with ethanol indicated that it ms not 
thi s c omp ound• 

Orange 3 

Orange 3 was soluble in ethanol, acetone, and water* It 
also formed an aluminum salt with the adsorbent* This salt cam© out 
of ethanol as dark orange crystals, whereas the free acid was yellow 
in color* Paper chromatograms of the latter run with ethanol gave 
four bands: three faint yellow bands, which my well have been 
impurities, preceding an intense yellow band® 

A mixed paper chromatogram of the free acid of orange 3 and 
styphnic acid indicated that it was not this compound* As in the case 
of yellow 2, the amount of materia-1 available was insufficient for 
furthe r inve s tigation s• 

Yel low 5 

Crude yellow 5 was soluble in water, dilute solutions of 
alkalis, ethanol and acetones slightly soluble in ether, chloroform, 
and benzene. It was very difficult to separate from the orange 4 band 
chromatographically* It formed an aluminum salt with the alumina® 

There was no color change on heating the crude material 
with a solution of ferric chloride, and so it is unlikely that yellow 5 
is a phenol* Attempts to crystallize the free acid from ethanol, 
ethanol/water mixtures, acetone, and acetone/water mixtures yielded 










; 







* 
































60 , 


only a yellow oil* 

Some of the yellow 5 did, however, crystallize from benzene, 
in which it mis only slightly soluble. This material, melting at 
183-4°C. (corr.), was very acid to litmus, very soluble in water; a 
bright orange color at pHs greater than seven and a yellow color in 
acidic media. No precipitate was produced on boiling this substance 
with an ethanol solution of acridine. Hence it is unlikely this mater- 
ial is a phenol. 

Subsequent investigations established that yellow 5 was a 
mixture of two compounds. Vacuum sublimation, rechromatography, and 
spectrophotometrie analysis all showed the presence of two discrete 
substances. The following flow sheet schematically shows the separ¬ 
ation procedures and properties of the two fractions. 

As indicated in the flow sheet, vacuum sublimation at a 
pressure of 8 m.m. of Hg and a temperature around 140°C. yielded two 
distinct substances on the cold finger; (a) a yellow gum, and (b) 
light yellow crystals. 

The yellow gum (a) was crystallized from benzene. It melted 
with decomposition from 167 to 174°C. A mixed melting point determin¬ 
ation with styphnic acid gave a value around 140°C. This material did 
not give an orange color when heated with a solution of ferric chloride, 
whereas an authentic sample of styphnic acid did. This component of 
yellow 5 is obviously not styphnic acid. 

The yellow crystals (b) were mechanically removed from th© 
cold finger and their melting point determined. They softened at 100°C. 
and melted between 120 and 122°C. (corr.). This melting point was not 
depressed by an authentic sample of picric acid (m.p. 121.5 to 122.0°C.), 
but was significantly depressed by p-nitrophenol, m.p. 114°C. (55) and 
2,4-dinitrophenol, m.p. 113°C. (54). The last two compounds were tested 











61 


FLOW SHEET SHOWING INVESTIGATIONS OF YELLOW 5 


yellow 5 

eluted from initial column of alumina 
with ethanol/water mixtures 

removal of ethanol and 
water by distillation 

decomposition with 1 N HC1 
solution 

ether 

extraction 


e ther alumina 

extract 

removal^of ether 
by distillation 

free acid of 



gum yellow 

solid 


spectrophotometrie 
analysis of fractions 






















62 


because it was thought that small quantities of these substances might 
be present# Since picric acid is produced by these oxidations, it is 
of course possible that nitrophenols containing fewer than three nitro 
groups could be produced, although it is improbable considering the 
ease with which three nitro groups can be introduced into a molecule 
of phenol# One is tempted to jump to the conclusion that yellow 5 is 
a picrate which is ruptured on sublimation, i#e#, the yellow crystals 
(b) are picric acid# Rechromatography of the free acid of yellow 5 
did not support this hypothesis# Insufficient material prevented the 
identification of the two components# 

On rechromatographing the free acid of yellow 5, two distinct 
bands were obtained; (a) a light yellow band which was easily eluted 
from the alumina column with ethanol/water mixtures# It had formed a 
salt, and all attempts to crystallize it yielded only a yellow gum# 

The other band (b) was a dark yellow color and very firmly adsorbed at 
the top of the column# It was removed by extruding the column and sox- 
hlet extracting the alumina with water# All of the yellow color was 
not removed from the adsorbent by this extraction# On conversion to 
the free acid, the component of this band ms a light yellow color# 

If yellow 5b were picric acid, as the properties of this fraction 
obtained by vacuum sublimation suggested, it would be much more readily 
eluted from alumina# 

Spectrophotometrie examination of each of these fractions 
obtained by rechromatography definitely established their individuality# 
The absorption spectra of the two compounds 'were determined in water 
in the range 220 to 1,000 millimicrons. The spectrum for yellow 5a 
contained an inflection at 260 tojjl suggesting a benzene ring in its 
molecular structure, and an absorption peak at 370 m/JL indicating the 












63 


presence of one or more nitro groups* On the other hand, the spectrum 
of yellow 5b showed two absorption maxima; one at 340 my and another 
at 405 mjA. The exact significance of these two peaks has not as yet 
been determined* It should be possible to throw considerable light on 
the identity of the constituents of yellow 5 by comparison of their 
abosrption spectra with those of known compounds. 

To sum up, ye1low 5 is a mixture of two compounds both of 
which contain acidic groups* Yellow 5a is an aromatic nitro compound. 
It may form a pic rate which is ruptured when the yellow 5 band eluted 
from the initial chromatographic column is converted to the free acid 
by the addition of hydrochloric acid* In this case, yellow 5b would 
be picric acid, as suggested by the mixed melting point determination* 
Orange 6 

The ethano1/Water mixture by which orange 6 was eluted from 
columns of alumina was distilled off under reduced pressure, the 
residue converted to the free acid by the addition of dilute hydro¬ 
chloric acid, and the solution extracted with ether, which vias then 
removed by distillation. 

Only part of the orange 6 so isolated was soluble in ethanol 
The remainder was soluble in water* And so two fractions of orange 6 
T were obtained; orange 6, ethanol soluble, and orange 6, -water soluble 
These were separately chromatographed on columns of alumina, the first 
with ethanol and the second with water. 

Orange 6, ethanol soluble. 

This column, when developed with ethano1/water mixtures, 
showed seven bands. At least three of these bands were impurities; 
yellow 1, yellow 2, and orange 3, all occurring in minor quantities. 



















64 


The major band consisted of a broad orange band at the top of the 
column, and then below - this two small yellow bands separated by a thin 
orange band# 

Orange 6, water soluble. 

On development with vmter, there was some slight fraction¬ 
ation, but it was by no means clear cut# Five bands appeared; orange- 
brown, brown, and three oranges, listed from the top to the bottom of 
the column# On extruding the alumina and cutting out the bands, they 
could not be removed from the adsorbent by soxhlet extraction with 
water# 

General Discussion and Conclusions Concerning the Id entifica tion o f 
Compounds from the Filtrate 

It has been shown that the two major degradation compounds 
other than carbon dioxide and water from the nitric acid oxidation of 
Alberta subbituminous coals as described above are oxalic acid and 
picric acid* The yield of picric acid from a coal of subbituminous 
B rank is no less than 1% of the original coal# 

About 20 other compounds capable of identification occur, 
but no single constituent represents as much of the original coal sub- 
stance as do oxalic and picric acids# These compounds can be resovled 
from the filtrate by means of chromatography« The properties of these 
relatively simple degradation products suggest that many of them are 
nitrophenols, benzenecarboxylic acids, and benzenecarboxylic acids 
with nitro and/or hydroxyl groups as well# It is evident that, if 
investigations were undertaken on a sufficiently large scale, these 
compounds could be separated from the filtrate and identified. 

The bulk of the coal, however, is converted to two classes 
of products; the humic acids and the soluble acids# Constituents 























65 


from either of these groups of compounds cannot be "identified” so to 
speak, because many of their properties are peculiar to them alone, 
and set them apart from known classes of organic compounds. The 
characterization or elucidation of the structure of these degradation 
products is hampered by the difficulty of separating them into pure 
compounds. About all that has been done at the present time is to 
isolate more or less empirical fractions. The identification of tne 
simple compounds, while certainly of interest, does not attack the 
real problem; the structure of the soluble acids. 

The properties of orange 6 seem to indicate that the com¬ 
pounds of this fraction may belong to the soluble acids. In particular, 
the orange 6 water soluble fraction is interesting. The tenacity with 
which its constituents are adsorbed on alumina, the initial homogeneous 
appearance of the orange 6 band as a whole and then the diffuse separ¬ 
ation on rechromatographing, and the position of the band on the column 
all indicate the similarity of this fraction to the tan and brown areas 
higher up which are made up of soluble acids. 

For efficient separation by means of chromatography, it is 
most important that the column should not be overloaded with a mixture 
of compounds differing greatly in molecular weight. It is evident 
that the technique of chromatography has been abused somewhat in the 
foregoing experiments, but the latter do show that there is some pos¬ 
sibility of separating the soluble acids into fairly homogeneous 
fractions. Further initial fractionation of the filtrate by means of 
solvents would be of assistance, but a considerable improvement in 
separation would result if the soluble acids were esterified and only 
those esters which could be distilled put on a column. Pressures as 
low as 25 microns would probably be necessary to distill the butyl 


esters 











66 


Howard (11) was able to separate esters of the water soluble 
polycarboxylic acids produced by the oxidation of bituminous coal with 
oxygen into 12 fractions, the first of which had a molecular weight of 
300 and the last 900* By no means all of the esters were distillable* 
Distillation was accomplished by means of falling film and centrifugal 
types of molecular stills at very low pressures* Sufficient starting 
material ms obtained from experiments conducted on a pilot-plant 
scale* Howard hopes to carry out chromatographic separations of 
these ester fractions of narrow molecular weight range (59)* 

Such an attack on the structure of the soluble acids seems 
to be a very promising one, but space and equipment considerations 
rule out the advisability or even ability of undertaking such work 


here 











67 


ESTERS OF SOLUBLE ACIDS PRODUCED BY ALKALINE PERMANGANATE OXIDATION 
OF COAL A 

The nitric acid oxidation of subbituminous coals, although 
it readily degraded the coal substance to some products resolvable by 
chromatography and produced large yields of the soluble and humic acids 
suffered from one serious disadvantage: the introduction of nitro 
groups* One of the primary aims of the oxidation studies ms the 
identification of degradation products. Since the addition of sub¬ 
stituent nitro groups to these compounds only complicated their ident¬ 
ification, oxidation studies using alkaline permanganate were initiated 

This reagent readily attacks bituminous and lower-rank coals 
at moderate temperatures, converting some of the carbon to carbon di¬ 
oxide. As in the ca.se of nitric acid, humic acids, “soluble acids”, 
and benzenecarboxylic acids are produced. It was thought that an 
examination of those acids of a slightly more complex structure than 
the benzenecarboxylic acids would be of interest. 

Accordingly, the following experimental work was carried 
out. Coal A was chosen for the experiments because it was at least 
5($ soluble in dilute alkalis, and therefore the reaction of the 
carbonaceous material and the permangante would take place with much 
greater velocity than if a coal insoluble in alkalis were used, 
necessitating the suspension of solid coal particles in an aqueous 
alkaline medium. The accompanying flow sheet schematically illustrates 
the operations to obtain the methyl esters of acids of molecular weight 
greater than the benzenecarboxylic acids. The latter, which are not 
colored, probably appeared in the colorless fraction of the benzene 


eluted esters 


'- 











■ 


/ 


; ■ J 



■- 


. 


;i£vj 






* 




* 









> • ^ - JC i 



















■ 













68 


F1M SHEET ILLUSTRATING PRODUCTION AND ISOLATION OF METHYL ESTERS OF 
SOLUBLE ACIDS FROM ALKALINE PERMANGANATE OXIDATION OF COAL A 


coal A 


I 

filtrate 
humic acids 


extraction with 
lO/o NaOH solng 


residue 


KLS 1 O 4 

oxidation 


filtration 


filtrate 


acidulation 


f iltrate 
sol* acids 


filtration 

I 


unreactek humic 
acids and MhOg 


a) 


l 

residue 
humic acids 


( 2 ) 


EtOH 

extraction 


EtOE sol. 
acids 


residue 

inorganic) 


removal of EtOH 
by distillation 

esterification 
with diazomethane 


c hroma to g rap hi c 
analysis 


benzene 

eluted 

esters 

I 


colorless 

fraction 


colored 

fraction 


rechromatography 
yellow 1 ester 
orange 2 ester 


chloroform 

eluted 

esters 


ethanol 

eluted 

esters 


1 

water 

eluted 

esters 


rechromatography 
orange 3 ester 

orange 4 ester 
orange 5 ester 

















69 . 


Experimental Procedure 
Oxidation 

To a solution of 100 g# of C#P# sodium hydroxide in one 
liter of water in a three-liter, three-necked flask, 100 g. of dry 
Coal A were added with efficient mechanical stirring. The mixture was 
maintained at 100°C# by means of a water bath for two hours with con¬ 
tinual stirring* After standing overnight, the supernatant liquid was 
decanted and the residue washed with 500 ml# of water# 

The decanted extract and the washings of the residue were 
combined, filtered, and returned to the three-necked flask which was 
heated to 100 e C# on a water bath# Over a period of five hours, 150 g a 
of C#P. potassium permanganate were added portion by portion with 
efficient stirring# The permanganate could not be added rapidly or 
in large portions because of the vigorous effervescence which it pro¬ 
duced# The mixture was stirred for another hour after the last 
addition of the permanganate, and allowed to stand overnight* 

In the morning, the manganese dioxide and unreacted humic 
acids were filtered off, and the residue washed with 250 ml# of water# 
The filtrate was acidified to Congo red test paper with hydrochloric 
acid, heated on the steam bath to coagulate the precipitate, and 
filtered# This second filtrate was then evaporated to dryness on the 
steam bath, and the solid extracted with 95% ethanol until an almost 
colorless extract was obtained# The extract was distilled to dryness, 
and again extracted with ethanol to free it from any remaining inorganic 
salts# This final extract was filtered, the ethanol distilled off, and 
the acids dried in a vacuum desiccator over phosphorous pentoxide. 












70 


Esterification with Diazonethane 

Approximately 20 go of the water soluble, ethanol soluble 
acids were taken up in a minimum quantity of 95^ ethanol, and trans¬ 
ferred to a 500 ml# distilling flask fitted with a dropping funnel and 
condenser. This apparatus was erected in the fume hood. Approximately 
15 g. of diazomethane* in ether solution were added dropwise through 
the dropping funnel to the ethanol solution. Nitrogen was evolved 
immediately. The acids were initially precipitated by the ether, but 
subsequently redissolved on being partially esterified. The mixture 
was allowed to stand overnight after all the diazomethane had been 
added. When nitrogen evolution ceased, the distillation flask ms 
warmed gently to drive off any remaining diazomethane into a flask 
of glacial acetic acid and ether into which the adapter from the con¬ 
denser dipped. Distillation was continued, adding more ether through 
the dropping funnel if necessary, until the ether in the condenser was 
colorless, and for some little time afterwards• Under no circumstances 
were the contents of the flask containing the esters and residual diazo¬ 
methane, if any, allowed to approach anywhere near dryness* 

The esterified acids were transferred to a separatory funnel, 
washed with sodium bicarbonate solution until acid free, and then three 
times with small volumes of water. The last washing ms almost colorless. 
They were extracted from the aqueous solution with ether, the ether was 
distilled off, the esters distilled with benzene to dry them, the last 
traces of solvent removed under reduced pressure, and then the esters 
were dried in a vacuum desiccator. 

*The diazomethane used for the esterification reactions was prepared 
from nitrosomethylurea (5). The latter was synthesized from ammonia 
and dimethyl sulfate (6). The nitro some thy lurea was stored in a 
vacuum desiccator kept in a refrigerator until it was necessary to 
prepare the diazomethane. 















71 


The oxidation procedure and subsequent esterification with 
diazomethane were carried out three times. 

The use of diazoraethane as an esterification reagent had 
several disadvantages. The synthesis of nitrosomethylurea, which could 
not be readily purchased from any of the well known supply houses, was 
a time-consuming and expensive one# The mechanical difficulties of 
preparing a large quantity of diazomethane were a serious drawback to 
the production of sufficient of the esters for characterization. For 
these reasons, not to mention the hazards involved when handling diazo- 
methane, a fourth oxidation was carried out, and the esterification 
attempted using dimethyl sulfate in alkaline medium, as described be¬ 
low (19). 

Twenty grams of ethanol soluble acids from the oxidation of 
Coal A were dissolved in 800 ml. of water with 15 g. of C.P* sodium 
hydroxide, and transferred to a three-liter, three-necked flask pro¬ 
vided with efficient mechanical stirring, a dropping funnel, and a 
reflux condenser. The solution of acids was heated to about 90°C. on 
a water bath, and 40 ml. of dimethyl sulfate* added slowly through the 
dropping funnel over a period of 40 minutes. At the end of this time 
the solution was acidic. Another 15 g. of sodium hydroxide iri 75 ml. 
of water were added, bringing the solution back to a pH greater than 
seven, and then 75 ml. of dimethyl sulfate. This process was continued, 
alternating between a basic and an acidic medium by the addition of 
sodium hydroxide and dimethyl sulfate with heating and stirring, until 
a total of 100 g. of sodium hydroxide and 400 ml. of dimethyl sulfate 
in 11 separate portions had been added. 

* 

u Methyl Sulfate, Practical.” Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, Hew York, 

U.S.A. 















72 


The material was tested periodically by removing one or two 
ml. from the reaction vessel and shaking it in a small test tube with 
an equal volume of benzene or ether* None was soluble in either of 
these solvents, although as the esterification proceeded, a large pro¬ 
portion of the acids became insoluble in the water in the flask unless 
it was strongly alkaline* In order to prevent hydrolysis, the last 
neutralization was made with sodium bicarbonate, but still an ether 
extraction of a small sample of the mixture showed only a slight color. 

The reaction mixture was allowed to cool, and a 100 ml. 
portion was extracted with ether* Almost no material went into the 
ether layer. It therefore appeared that only very small amounts of 
esters could be produced with this reagent because of the ease with 
which the esters were hydrolyzed. 

With regard to the oxidation and subsequent esterification 
with diazomethane, two modifications might well increase the yield of 
desired products. In the first place, since by no means all of the 
alkali soluble material from the coal was converted to water soluble 
acids, a larger quantity of potassium permanganate coupled with longer 
time of oxidation v/ould probably increase the yield. Because the 
formation of manganese dioxide tends to slow dorm the reaction, and 
because the soluble acids themselves are in time degraded to carbon 
dioxide, a step-wise oxidation would seem advisable. In such a pro¬ 
cedure the unreacted coal 1, separated from the manganese dioxide by 
dissolving the latter in mineral acid, would be combined with the humic 
acids precipitated on acidulation 2, and the whole subjected to oxid¬ 
ation again. In the second place, since a large portion of the water 
soluble acids was only partially esterified or not esterified whatever, 
at least twice as much diazomethane is recommended in any further 
experiments• 










73 


When the filtrate from the oxidation was neutralised with 
hydrochloric acid, the solution effervesced vigorously. Obviously a 
large fraction of the carbon of the humic acids was converted to carbon 
dioxide. The water soluble acids were a clean orange-red color, but 
as washing of the residue was continued, the filtrate changed to a 
dirty dark brown color. The yield was 20 % of the weight of original 
coal. 

Chromatographic Separation of Methyl Esters 

The crude esters from the esterification of the water soluble 
acids with diazomethane amounted to about 16 % of the weight of original 
coal. On drying, they consisted of a dark brown oil which only partially 
solidified to a tarry mass on cooling. They were dissolved in benzene, 
and put on a column of alumina 2.7 cm. in diameter and approximately 
70 cm. long. The column was first exhaustively eluted with benzene, 
and two fractions were collected: the first material Yfhich came 
through the column before the eluate became colored, and a second 
fraction of all the colored material that could be eluted with benzene. 
The column was then eluted with chloroform until the eluate was again 
colorless, then ethanol, and finally with water. Thus the following 
fractions were collected: 

(a) benzene eluted 

(1) colorless fraction 

(2) colored fraction 

(b) chloroform eluted 
(o) ethanol eluted 
(d) water eluted. 

On development with benzene, the initial chromatographic 
column showed a series of ill-defined colored areas. In the earlier 














74 


stages of development, these were as follows; 

(1) pale, dirty yellow 

(2) dirty, greenish hrown 

(3) green 

(4) brown 

(b) deep brown 

These semi-bands moved away from the firmly adsorbed material at the 
top, leaving an area of almost colorless alumina. Some residue 
remained at the top of the column, part of which was then eluted with 
chloroform, and so on. The same general considerations apply to the 
column on elution with the more polar solvents; there were no sharp 
lines of demarcation, only diffuse areas of different color. 

Fraction (a,2) was rechromatographed on alumina. It was 
put on the column from solution in benzene, and the column was devel¬ 
oped with a 50/50 (by vol.) benzene/chloroform solution. Two bands, 
closely following each other, and not too well defined, were produced; 
yellow 1 ester, and orange 2 ester. 

Fraction (b), the chloroform eluted esters, was put on a 
fresh column of alumina from solution in chloroform. On development 
of the chromatogram with chloroform/ethanol mixtures with gradually 
increasing percentages of ethanol, three orange bands were produced; 
orange 3, orange 4, and orange 5 esters. 

All the esters or fractions thereof were soluble in benzene 
and in chloroform. All could be precipitated from benzene with petrol¬ 
eum ether; the ease of precipitation increasing from the colorless 
esters to the water eluted compounds. The latter may well be unchanged 
or only partially esterified acids. 







75 


The column of crude esters was examined under ultraviolet 
light, and showed no appreciable fluorescence. 

Attempts to crystallize the ester fractions invariably- 
yielded a dark brown oil of a very sticky nature. Prolonged heating 
in solvents on the steam bath caused part of the material to become 
insoluble, probably the result of decomposition and/or polymerization. 

On standing over long periods of time (six months or more), the esters 
became virtually insoluble in chloroform or benzene, and turned black 
in color. 

Yellow 1 Ester 

On standing in a refrigerator for several months, a few small 
crystals formed from the oil in chloroform. They softened at 113°C. 
and melted very sharply at ll5°C. (corr.) with some decomposition. 

The crystals were of am orange-brown color, but on melting changed to 
a greenish-yellow liquid. On solidifying, the color did not change, 
and remelting the green-yellow amorphous solid, the melting point was 
again found to be 115°C. The crystals were probably unit pyramids of 
the orthorhombic system, but may have been of lower symmetry (monoclinic 
or triclinic). Due to distortion, it was difficult to ascertain their 
exact system. The crystalline material was much less soluble in the 
solvents mentioned above than the amorphous compound. Approximately 
2.5 mg. were sent to Dr. R. Norman Jones, Division of Chemistry, 

National Research Council, Ottawa, for spectrophotometric analysis. 
Orange 2 Ester 

Orange 2 was precipitated from benzene with petroleum ether, 
dried, and weighed. From one run, the total quantity was 3*3 mg. It 
was slightly soluble in carbon disulfide and carbon tetrachloride, and 




, 

* 

. 


. 

» 


- ' 

■ 






. . >.. 



. 


* 






i :v'C . 'Ur: 



i 













76 . 


soluble in chloroform. This sample was also sent to Dr. Jones for 
spectrophotometric analysis. 

Yellow 1 and Orange 2: Spectrophotometric Analysis 

Dr. Jones determined the absorption spectrum of both yellow 
1 and orange 2 esters in chloroform over the range 3600 to 1550 cm7^ 

The only well defined absorption band was at 1730 cm? 1 in both samples, 
and this can be attributed to a carboxyl group of a carboxylic ester. 

Dr. Jones reported further that both the spectra showed very 
little structure, and their general appearance seemed to indicate quite 
complex compounds. There was no indication of a non-associated hydroxyl 
group, but an associated hydroxyl group could be present ( vide infra ). 
The spectra in the range investigated showed no evidence of any aromatic 
material. He also concluded that yellow 1 was essentially the same as 
orange 2. 

There was a suggestion of a weak band at 1600 cmT^ which might 
be attributed to an ethylenic double bond in the spectrum of orange 2. 
Considering the source of the substance, this band was probably caused 
by impurities. 

Ultraviolet Absorption Spectrum of Yellow 1 Ester 

The ultraviolet absorption spectrum of the crystalline yellow 
1 in chloroform was determined using a Hilger Spectrophotometer, Model 
H.700.302 Td.th parallel-faced cuvettes of 10 m.m. path length. 

Although the spectrum in the range 3600 to 1550 cmT* 1 showed 
no evidence of aromatic structure, the ultraviolet absorption in 
Figure 8 indicates the presence of aromatic linkages. According to 
Dr. Jones, the absorption bands in the range 260 to 290 njjuL suggest 


keto-enol tautomerism, 















T 



CO O 


-Z x 
o o 


CL 

cr 

o 

co 

GO 

< 


cr 

Ld 

h- 

co 

UJ 


o 

> 

< 

cr 


3 


$ 

C 


Id 

> 

Ll. 

O 


00 <X> (XI 

o o o o 

a 11s n 3a nvoiido 


o 


230 240 250 260 270 280 290 300 310 

WAVELENGTH- MILLIMICRONS 








77 , 


Hibbert (97), from quantitative studies of the methylation 
of humic acids from lignite, concluded that the smallest lignite humic 
acid "building unit" must contain eight hydroxyl groups, two of which 
were apparently associated with keto-enol isomerism. The above spectro- 
photometric data is the only direct experimental evidence of such a 
linkage in the more complex acids derived from coal. 

Discussion 

The only acids which have definitely been identified in the 
degradation products of coal as a result of alkaline permanganate 
oxidation have been members of the benzenecarboxylic acid series or 
simple aliphatic acids such as carbonic, oxalic, acetic, and succinic. 

No acids or esters thereof have been crystallized from the soluble or 
humic acid fractions. 

The chemical and physical properties of yellow 1 and orange 2 
esters, on the other hand, do not correspond to the general properties 
of the benzenecarboxylic acids. The color, melting point of yellow 1, 
thermal instability, chromatographic behavior, and in particular the 
absorption spectra, all set them apart from known esters. It is therefore 
extremely likely that they are esters of those acids intermediate in 
complexity between the humic acids and the benzenecarboxylic acids. 

The situation with regard to the separation and characterization 
of these compounds is much the same as that for the acids from nitric 
acid oxidation found on the chromatographic column in the vicinity of 
orange 6 and above. Since the "soluble" acids undoubtedly represent a 
series of compounds analogous to a polymeric homologous series, it is 
to be expected that any unique compound would represent only a small 
fraction of the whole of the soluble acids produced. It is then evident 
that any experiments projected to elucidate the structure of any 











t ', 

- i.. 








. 

, 

. • •' 

’ 


. . : I 




• * ' 

, 

* 

, 

■ 




- 

' 









78 


particular acid from the soluble acids should be designed so that 
chromatographic separations can be applied to, say, $00 g. of one of 
the solvent eluted fractions from the initial column. The quantities 
of any one of the more homogeneous fractions obtained by the above 
experiments have been much too small to provide sufficient information 
for characterization. In the case of orange 2 ester, 3*3 mg. were 
produced from 100 g. of coal. Thus, to produce 10 g. of this ester, 
even in an impure state, it would be necessary to start with well over 
a quarter of a ton of coal. Hence, when it is recommended that the 
experiments be carried out on a larger scale, a pilot-plant scale is 
indicated. From operations of such a nature, Howard has available, as 
mentioned in the nitric acid discussions, narrow fractions of the esters 
of the soluble acids. On a pilot-plant scale, molecular oxygen could 
be substituted for potassium permanganate. 

The alkaline permanganate oxidations have shown that it is 
possible to isolate individual compounds, from the complex mixture 
of degradation products of coal, which have the properties of those 
’’soluble acids” whose structure is as yet unknown. 





79 


SPECTRQPHOTOMETRIC EXAMINATION OF HUMIC ACIDS AND SOLUBLE ACIDS 

The classical techniques of organic chemistry were of little 
value in the examination of the higher molecular weight nitric acid 
degradation products of coal, and so the absorption spectra in the 
ultraviolet and visible ranges of the spectrum of various fractions 
were determined. Absorption spectroscopy provided not only a means of 
examining the structure of the bulk of the degradation products, but 
also a means of comparing humic and soluble acids prepared by a variety 
of methods from different coals, and a method of determining whether 
any fractionation had been effected by chromatographic methods of 
separation. 

Experimental Procedure 

All the humic acids or soluble acids examined spectrophoto¬ 
me trie ally were dissolved in 0.1 N NaOH solution at a concentration of 
approximately 25 p.p.m. The concentration was approximate because of 
the difficulty of removing all the inorganic material from the acids. 

The absorption spectra were determined with a Hilger 
Spectrophotometer, Model H.700.302, using parallel-faced cuvettes of 
10 m.m. path length. The blank in all cases was 0.1 N NaOH solution. 

The slit width was varied throughout for maximum sensitivity. 

(a) Humic Acids. 

The various types of humic acids were dissolved in 0.1 N 
NaOH solution, filtered through a medium porosity fritted glass crucible, 
precipitated with hydrochloric acid, filtered, washed with distilled 
water, and dried for four hours at 105°C. in vacuo. Solutions of 
25 p.p.m. of the following acids were made up in 0.1 N NaOH solution, 
and their absorption spectra in the range 200 to 700 millimicrons 


determined, 







. 






: ■ ? 






•. ■ >■ ■: 




'■* 

: •: Vi • ).'• 

* 

. <.; u " ' ' 

. .1 ; 'a t ’ ■; ■ v • '■ v ' 

. . ' >i .. . • Jli ‘ . 


, 




' j ' 






1 ■ j 






* 


* 


J t " * ) : * ■ 




, 


■ " ! ' 


■ 


. • ‘ ' .. • 

. *. ■ ' 


: 




• ■' t* 


. 











80 , 


“Alberta A, weathered 11 - humic acids solvent extracted from the insoluble 
products from the 70 % nitric acid oxidation of Coal A. 

“Pennsylvania” - humic acids from nitric acid oxidation of Pennsylvania 
bituminous coal according to the procedure of Eckerd (26)* 

“Alberta E, not weathered” - humic acids solvent extracted from the 
insoluble products from the 70 % nitric acid oxidation of Coal E. 

“Permanganate Oxidation” - humic acids produced by the alkaline permanganate 
oxidation of Coal A ( vide supra ). 

“Solvent Extraction” - humic acids obtained by the solvent extraction 
of untreated Coal A. 

(b) Soluble Acids: 

The filtrate solids from the seven oxidations of Coal E were 
combined and exhaustively extracted in a soxhlet apparatus with 95 % 
ethanol. The ethanol was distilled off, and an ether soxhlet extraction 
made on the ethanol extract. The ether was removed by distillation, 
and the extract taken up in 95 % ethanol, and then put on a column of 
alumina 72 cm. long and four centimeters in diameter. This column was 
exhaustively eluted with 95 % ethanol. All the simple components were 
removed by elution, so that only the “soluble acids” remained on the 
column. 

The column was extruded and cut into four sections, each 18 

cm. long. 

1-18 cm. reddish brown color 
18-36 cm. bright yellow-brown color 
36-514 cm. light yellow-brown color 
5U-72 cm. light sand color 

The acids were removed from the alumina by washing it with a concentrated 
solution of sodium hydroxide: the ease of elution increasing with 
decreasing intensity of color. The alkali was then neutralized with 
hydrochloric acid so that the solution was acid to litmus paper, and 













1 . 


■ 




■ 




















81 


part of the organic material extracted -with ether. Far from all the 
acids were extracted with ether by shaking the two layers in a separatory 
funnel. 

The acids so isolated were dried for six hours at 105°C. in 
vacuo, and then solutions of the 1-18 and 36-5U fractions, which appeared 
to be the most homogeneous, were made up in 0,1 N NaOH solution at a 
concentration of 25 p,p,m. of soluble acids, and their absorption spectra 
in the range 200 to 600 millimicrons determined. 

Discussion and Results 
(a) Humic Acids, 

The absorption spectra of humic acids prepared by nitric acid 
oxidation of various coals are shown in Figure 9* The most striking 
property of these curves in their remarkable similarity. Not only are 
the curves practically identical in shape, but also the intensity of 
absorption is very nearly the same for all three coals. Thus, at least 
in those properties which the absorption spectra reflect, humic acids 
from widely different coals are the same when produced by the same 
technique. 

The absorption spectra of humic acids prepared from Coal A 
by various methods are shown in Figure 10. It is evident that the 
"natural” or solvent extracted humic acids from the weathered coal are 
not as intensely colored as those produced by oxidation. Certainly 
part of the absorption of light by humic acids is due to acidic groups 
such as phenolic hydroxyl, as shown by the intensification of color 
when the medium is made alkaline (30, 78). 

The curve for the permanganate produced acids falls off more 
sharply than the others, suggesting that these acids may be of lower 
molecular weight and/or more homogeneous. 















■ v ■ ■ ' 


. 








- 




. 




' 




* * 

* ■ • 




i 

n 




. 








■ 








' 








* 


' 


, 


' 












' 

,, 


‘ ' 

\ 



' 

. 











82 


The general shape of the curves of both Figure 9 and Figure 
10 is quite similar to the shape of the absorption spectra curves of 
lignin (7). Both lignin and humic acids differ sharply from simple 
aromatic compounds in that the light absorption does not end abruptly 
at around 380 millimicrons as in the case of pure aromatic compounds* 

The exact significance of this departure from the behavior of aromatic 
substances is not known. 

(b) Soluble Acids. 

The absorption spectra of the two fractions of soluble acids 
separated chromatographically are shown in Figure 11. It is at once 
evident that fraction 1-18 is not the same as fraction 36-?!;. 

It is quite probable that the curves of Figures 9 and 10 show 
no absorption maxima or inflections because the humic acids are such 
a heterogeneous mixture that any peaks would be smeared into a continuum 
or blurred. With increasing homogeneity, peaks should become more 
pronounced and show up more clearly. That this may well be the case 
is indicated by the spectra of Figure 11. Fractions 1-18 and 36-5U 
represent compounds which have been fractionated to some extent from 
a more complex mixture. Fraction 36-5U shows an absorption maximum at 
ca 0 ijlO millimicrons. With further fractionation of these acids, 
probably by means of an adsorbent not nearly as strong as alumina, it 
should be possible to obtain fairly homogeneous samples of the soluble 
acids whose absorption spectra might well reveal something of their 
structure. 

Comparison of Figure 9 with Figure 11 shows that the humic 
acids are less intensely colored than the soluble acids. At 300 
millimicrons, humic acids from Coal E have an optical density of 1.06 
whereas the soluble acids from the same coal have an optical density 








A1ISN3Q "IVOIldO 


200 300 400 500 600 700 

WAVELENGTH - MILLIMICRONS 





















A1ISN3Q “IVOIldO 


1 










200 300 400 500 6Q0 700 

WAVELENGTH - MILLIMICRONS 












PTICAL DENSIT 



Figure 11* 



























































. 














83 


of 0.22 at the same -wavelength and concentration. This relationship 
is in accordance -with Howard’s view that the intensity of color of 
these organic acids is a function of the extent of oxidation, and hence 
bears a definite relationship to the fraction of the carbon of the 
original coal appearing as carbon dioxide in the oxidation procedure. 
Howard is of the opinion that the nature of the color-bearing groups 
in the oxidation products of coal, although it has attracted little 
attention, is certainly of considerable significance. Careful 
chromatographic fractionation of the soluble acids combined with 
spectrophotometric examination shows considerable promise of revealing 
something of the nature of the groups responsible for the remarkable 
chromophoric properties of these acids 0 












!N 




. 

■ 

, 

- 

. ■ '' 

' 

' 








GENERAL DISCUSSION 


That Alberta subbituminous coals are readily attacked by 
oxygen at atmospheric pressure is evident from the analyses of the 
weathered and unweathered Wabamun coal. The reaction, in less than 
a year, causes an increase in oxygen content of 10$, accompanied by 
the development of solubility in alkalis. 

The material soluble in such alkalis as ammonium hydroxide, 
termed here ammonium humates, has the properties of a polybasic acid. 

It is esterified only with difficulty, and is highly resistant to both 
reduction and dehydrogenation. Its molecular complexity and heterogeneity 
prevent its resolution by means of chromatography on filter paper or 
alumina. 

Humic acids similar to those obtained by alkali extraction 
are produced by a mild treatment of these coals with nitric acid. Like 
the ammonium humates, they are not resolved chromatographically with 
filter paper or alumina. They are soluble in alkalis and mixtures of 
acetone and water. Their ultimate composition corresponds veiy closely 
to that of humic acids generated in a similar fashion from older and 
higher rank coals from Pennsylvania. 

Accompanying the humic acids from the nitric acid oxidation 
of coal are simpler compounds which are not only soluble in alkalis, 
but also in aqueous media over a wide pH range, in ethanol, and partially 
soluble in ether. At a 30$ concentration of nitric acid, about 5>0$ of 
Coal E is converted to these substances, half of which are soluble in 
ether. These compounds are of an intense orange-red color, and are 
extremely hygroscopic. Unlike the humic acids, they fuse, even at low 
temperatures. They are characterized by a much lower carbon content 











■ 




: C; 

. 

■ 


\ 








* 









' v ' v 



■ V ■ ' ' ■ ■ ‘ , '• 'U: : 


, 


. 

. 

* 

. 

- 

# 


. 

* 








■ 

• 




- 

. 

- 

. 












85 


(ca. U5%) 9 and by a remarkably high oxygen content: about equal to 
that of the carbon* Part of the nitrogen is present in some form 
other than in a ring structure or in nitro groups, because it can be 
readily split out by heating with dilute hydrochloric acid. 

These soluble acids readily form inorganic salts* That 
phenolic groups are probably present is suggested by the intensification 
of color on solution in alkaline media* Titrimetric analysis indicates 
an equivalent weight of the order of 100. 

A small fraction of the degradation products is made up of 
even simpler compounds such as oxalic and picric acids. Probably about 
20 compounds capable of identification are present, judging from the 
chromatographic pattern* The simplest compounds are adsorbed near the 
bottom of a column of alumina, and the more complex near the top* The 
soluble acids themselves show little initial resolution on alumina. 

Compounds ranging from carbon dioxide to humic acids are also 
obtained by the alkaline permanganate oxidation of an alkaline extract 
of Coal A. The proportion of simple substances produced is no higher 
than in the case of the nitric acid oxidations. Esterification of the 
ethanol soluble acids produced by permanganate procedures is accomplished 
only with difficulty, and by no means are all of the acids completely 
or even partially esterified by diazomethane. The bulk of the esters 
are of sufficient complexity to prevent chromatographic resolution on 
alumina, but an extremely small proportion may be fractionated into 
five bands. The properties of the compounds of two of these bands suggest 
that they may well be esters of the so-called ’’soluble acids”, i.e*, 
compounds similar to those from nitric acid oxidation which appeared 
on alumina columns as brown and tan areas. Spectrophotometric analysis 
suggests the possibility of keto-enol tautomerism in their structure. 
































■ 










. ■ • • - irt 0 ■ ' ■ , : ?■ ! ; • / 

• . t ■ 

, 








* 

. 

... •. : ' - ' • ' -- - ' 


'.. . j; 






o 




. 


„ 


. 


* , :. . ’ • • , ' • . •• , 0 - ■ - . '■ • , " ' 






' 








• ; . - 


















86 


Esters of the benzenecarboxylic acids are to be expected in the products 
from these permanganate procedures, and the fraction termed '’colorless” 
esters may consist of these simpler compounds. 

Humic acids show considerable absorption of ultraviolet 
light. In this respect, too, humic acids produced by a variety of 
types of oxidation, such as air, nitric acid, and alkaline permanganate, 
are similar. Once again, although the humic acids may be generated 
from coals differing in age and rank, their properties are much the 
same. The shape of the spectral curves in the ultraviolet is similar 
to that of the curves for lignin. 

That the soluble acids from the nitric acid oxidation of a 
subbituminous coal can be fractionated to some extent by chromatography 
is shown by the absorption spectra of two chromatographic fractions. 

The upper fraction on the column is sufficiently homogeneous to show 
an absorption maximum in its spectrum at UlO millimicrons. 







■ 

. 

. 

. 

«, 3 ' „• . 


. 










♦ 


. 

' . 

, 



. 

, 























87 . 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

k. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 
9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 

liu 

15. 

16 . 

17. 

18 . 

19. 

20 . 

21 . 

22 . 

23 . 


LITERATURE CITED 

Ahmed, M-D., and Kinney, C.R., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 72, 556-9 (1950). 

Albert, R.S., Z. prakt. Geol., 17, 528-9 (19 )• Through C.A., 1^, 

3179 (1910). 

Ibid ., 1 9j 72 (19 ). Through C.A., 1727 (1911). 

Anon., J. Inst. Fuel, 22, 30l|. (19ti9). 

Arndt, F., Organic Syntheses, l£, 3-5 (1935). 

Ibid ., U8-50. 

Aulin-Erdtman, A #> Tappi, 3£, 160-6 (19^19) * 

Basu, A.N., and Glenn, R.A., Fuel, 27, 96-9 (19U8). 

Ibid ., 2 9j 13U-7 (1950). 

Beet, A.E., ibid ., 108-9 (191|0). 

Berman, N., and Howard, H.C., ibid ., 29, 109-11 (1950). 

Ibid ., Anal. Chem., 21, 1200-2 (I9li9). 

Bethelot, M.P.E., Ber., 2, 57-9 (1869). 

Bone, W # A., and Quarendon, R., Proc. Roy. Soc., 110A, 537-U2 (1926). 

Bone, W.A., Horton, L., and Ward, S.G., ibid. , 127A, 1+80-510 (1930). 

Bone, ¥.A., Parsons, L.G.B., Sapiro, R.H., and Groocock, C.M., ibid ., 
li;8A, 1+92-522 (1935). 

Bone, W.A., and Bard, B.J.A., ibid ., 162A, 1+95-501 (1937). 

Bottomley, ¥.B., Biochem. J., 9j 260-8 (1915). 

Buck, J.S., Organic Syntheses, !£, 102-1; (1933). 

Burian, 0., Brenstoff-Chem., 6. 52-1+ (1925). Through O.a., !£, 

185U (1925). 

Cannon, C.G., B.C.U.R.A. Bull., 10, 165-77 ( 19h6 ). 

Cannon, C.G., and Sutherland, G.B.B.M., Trans. Far. Soc., 1+1, 

279-88 (19^5). 

Ibid., Nature, 156, 2l*0 (19^5). 






























88 


24. Carlyle, R. E., and Newton, J.D., Can. J. Research, C20, 68-84 

(1942). - 

25. Charmbury, H.B., To Pennsylvania Bituminous Coal Research, Inc. 
U.S. Pat., No. 2,339,837. Jan. 25, 1944. 

26. Charmbury, H.B., Eckerd, J.W., LaTorre, J.S., and Kinney, C.R., 

J. Am. Chem. Soc., 67, 625-8 (1945). 

27. Clar., E., Ber., J72, 1645-9 (1939). 

28. Clarke, H.T. A handbook of organic analysis. 4th Ed. Edward 
Arnold & Co., London. 1940. p. 248. 

29. Clegg, D.L., Anal. Chem., 22 , 48-59 (1950). 

30. Coggeshall, N.D., and Lang, Eleanor M., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 70, 

3283-92 (1948). — 

31. Collett, A.R., and Brown, C.F., Fuel, 17 , 356-62 (1938). 

32. Crowther, E.M., and Brinchley, Yf.E., J. Agr. Sci., 24, 156-76 

(1934). — 

33. Donath, E., and Dietz, H., J. prakt. Chem., 60 , 566-76 (1899). 

34. Donath, E., and Braunlich, F., Chem.-Ztg., 28, 180-2; 953-4 
(1904). 

35. Eller, ?f., Brennstoff-Chem., 3, 49-52; 55-6 (1922). Through C.A** 
16, 2315 (1922). 

36. Fieser, L.F. Experiments in organic chemistry. D. C. Heath and 
Company, Boston. 1941. pp. 456-8. 

37. Francis, W., and Wheeler, R.V., J. Chem. Soc., 127 , 2236-45 (1925) 

38. Ibid ., 2958-67 (1927). 

39. Franke, N.W., and Kiebler, M.W., Chem. Ind., 58 , 580-1 (1946). 

40. Fuchs, W.» Brennstoff-Chem., 9, 178-82 (1928). Through C.A., 23, 
1403 (1929). 

4!. Ibid ., 400-2. Through C.A., 23, 2944 (1929). 

42. Ibid ., Fuel, 9, 583 (1930). 

43. Fuchs, W., and Stengel, W., Ann., 478 , 267-83 (1930). Through C.A. 
24, 2467 (1930). 

44. Ganguli, A., Phil. Mag*, _7, 317-20 (1929). 






















89 


45. Gillet, A., Research, 2, 407-14 (1949). 

46. Green, S.J., and Ward, S.G., J. Soc. Chem. Ind., 67, 422-3 (1948). 

47. Green, S.J., and Thakur, B.J., ibid ., 423-6; 436-7* 

48. Green, S.J., and JiEukherji, S.M. , ibid ., 438-41. 

49. Ibid ., 68, 16-9 (1949). 

50. Green, S.J., and Thakur, B., ibid ., 69 , 238-44 (1950). 

51. Guignet, E., Compt. rend., 88 , 590-2 (1879). 

52. Hartley, W.W., and Dobbie, J.J., J. Chem. Soc., 75, 640 (1899). 

53. Heilbron, I.M. Dictionary of organic compounds. Eyre and 
Spottiswoode, Ltd., London. 1937. Ill, p. 487. 

54. Ibid ., I, p. 632. 

55* Ibid ., III, p. 217. 

56. Herbert, S.A., Charmbury, H.B., and Kinney, C.R., Fuel, 27, 

168-9 (1948). — 

57. Horton, L., Randall, R.B., and Aubrey, K.V., Fuel, 23, 65-80; 

100-9 (1944). — 

58. Horton, L., J. Inst. Fuel, 23, 91-5 (1950). 

59. Howard, H.C., Private communication. 

60. Ibid ., Ind. Eng. Chem., 35 , 156-61 (1943). 

61. Huntress, E.H., and Mulliken, S.P. Identification of pure organic 
compounds. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hew York. 1941. p. 99. 

62. Ibid ., p. 116. 

63. Jonas, K.G., Brennstoff'-Chem., j3, 52-5 (1922). Through C.A.* 

16, 2315 (1922). 

64. Jones, R.C., and Neuworth, M.B., Petroleum, _6, 192 (1943). 

65. Jones, R.E., and Townend, D.T.A., J. Soc. Chem. Ind., 68, 

197-201 (1949). 

66. Juettner, B., and Howard, H.C., Ind. Eng. Chem., 26 , 1115-8 (1934). 

67. Juettner, B., Smith, R.C., and Howard, H.C., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 

57, 2322-6 (1935). 









90 , 


68. Ibid., 59, 236-41 (1937). 

69* Juettner, B., ibid., 208-13. 

7°. Ibid *, 1472-4. 

71. Kent, C.R., Fuel, 19, 119-25 (1940). 

72. Kinney, C.R., Polansky, T.S., and Gauger, A.YT., The Penn. State 
College Bull., Mineral Ind. Station Bull. No. 44. 1946. 

75. Kinney, C.R., Private communication. 

74. Kinney, C.R., Eckerd, J.W., Rexford, Pauline, and Charmbury, H.B., 
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 70, 392-4 (1948). 

75. Koller, P.S., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 55, 2437-8 (1933). 

76. Lahiri, A., Fuel, 24, 66-73 (1944). 

77. Lansing, W.D., and Kraemer, E.O., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 57, 1369-77 

(1935). ~ 

78. Lemon, H.W., ibid ., £9, 2998-3000 (1947). 

79. Lilly, V.G., and Garland, C.B., Fuel, 11, 392-400 (1932). 

SO. Lowry, H.H., Editor. Chemistry of coal utilization. John Y/iley 
& Sons, Inc., New York. 1945. pp. 346-9. 

81* Ibid ., J. Geology, 50 , 357-84 (1942). 

82. Ibid ., Ind. Eng. Chem., 26, 133-9 (1934). 

83. Ibid ., 320-4. 

84. Maillard, L.C., Ann. Chim., 7, 113-52 (1917). Through C.A., 11, 
2010 (1917). 

85. Ibid., Compt. rend., 156 , 1159-60 (1913). 

86. Marcusson, J., Z. angew. Chem., 34, 521-2 (1921). Through C.A., 
]£, 1496 (1922). 

87. Ibid ., 31, 237-8 (1918). Through C.A., 13, 2751 (1919). 

88. Ibid ., J. Soc. Chem. Ind., 38 , 98-9 (1919). 

89. McCulloch, A*> and Sherlock, E., Fuel, R8, 135-41 (1949). 

90. Mulliken, S.P. A method for the identification of pure organic 
compounds. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York. 1904. II, p. 253. 









































91 


91. Ibid »> II# pp* 33-4; 253. 

92. Neuworth, M.B., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 69, 1653-7 (1947). 

93. Niyogi, B.B., Fuel, 17, 228-9 (1938). 

94. Olin, H.L., and Waterman, Ind. Eng. Chem., 28, 1024-5 (1936). 

95. Ostwald, W., Z. physik, Chem., 1, 97-109 (1887). 

96. Pearson, A*R*# J* Soc. Chem. Ind., 42 , 68-72 (1923). 

97. plunguian, M., and Hibbert, H*, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 57 , 528-36 (1935). 

98. Roy, A.N., and Howard, H«C., J. Phys. Coll. Chem., 53, 1033-42 
(1949). 

99. Samec, M., and Pirkmaier, B., Kolloid-Z., 51, 96-100 (1930). 

Through C.A., 24, 3343 (1930). 

100. Schellenberg, A., Brennstoff-Chem., £, 384-6 (1921). Through 
C.A., 16, 2978 (1922). See also; C7 a., J3, 2836 (1912); _7, 1277 
(1913); 13, 2751 (1919); 15, 3548 (1921); 16, 1496 (1922). 

101. Schulz, G-., and Howard, H.C., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 68, 991-4 (1946). 

102. Schulze, Fr., Ber., 4, 802 (1871). 

103. Shotts, R.Q., Mining Eng., 187 , 889-97 (1950). 

104. Smith, R.C., and Howard, H«C., J* Am. Chem. Soc., 57 , 512-6 (1935). 

105. Ibid ., 58, 740-2 (1936). 

106. Stansfield, E«, and Sutherland, J.W.* Trans. Am. Inst. Mining 
Met. Engrs., 88, 614-26 (1930). 

107. Stansfield, E., and Gilbart, K.C., Ibid ., _90, 165-70 (1932). 

108. Stansfield, E., and Lang, W*A., Report Ho. 35, Research Council 
of Alberta, 34j 74-8 (1944). 

109. Stopes, Marie C., and Tfheeler, R.V., Fuel, 3, 3-11; 63-7; 97-105; 

129-33; 179-84; 196-204; 254-61; 288-97; 3ZQ-55; 356-60; 393-5; 

395-9; 439-52 (1924). 

110. Strain, H.H., Anal. Chem., 21 , 75-81 (1949). 

HI. Ibid ., 22, 41-8 (1950). 

112. Ibid. Chromatographic adsorption analysis. Rev. Ed. Interscience 
publishers, Inc., Hew York. 1945. p. 66. 

























92 


113. Stremme, H., Z. prakt. Geol., 18, 389-92 (19 ). Through C.A., 

1386 (1911). 

114. Thiessen, G., and Engelder, C.J., Ind. Eng. Chem., 22, 1131-2 
0-930)* 

115. Vahrman, M., B.C.U.R.A. Bull., 10, 305-14 (1946). 

116. Van Krevelen, D.W., Fuel, 29, 269-84 (1950). 

117. Wakeman, R.L., and Weil, B.H., Ind. Eng. Chem., 34, 1387-93 (1942). 

118. Waksman, S.A., Humus. 2nd. Ed., rev. The Williams and Wilkins 
Company, Baltimore. 1938. p. 63. 

U9. Ibid ., p. 372. 

120. Ward, J.J., Kirner, W.R., and Howard, H.C., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 

£7, 246-53 (1945). 

121. Weiler, J.F., Ward, J.J., and Howard, H.C., ibid ., 64, 734-6 (1942) 

122. Williams, T.I. An introduction to chromatography. Chemical 
Publishing Company, Brooklyn. 1947. 

123. Wolfarth, J.S., and Glenn, R.A., Fuel, 28, 253-7 (1949). 

124. Woolfolk, E.O., Orchin, M., and Storch, H.H*, Fuel, 26 , 78-9 (1947) 

125. Wyatt, F.A., and Leahey, A., Sci. Agr«, 17 , 1-10 (1936). 

126. Yoe, J.H., and Hill, W.L., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 49, 2395-407 (1927). 











t * 9 t 
























93 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(1) Bangham, D.H., Editor* Progress in coal science* Butterworths 
Scientific Publications Ltd., London. 1950. 

(2) Bone, W.A., and Himus, G.W. Coal; its constitution and uses. 
Longmans, Green and Co., London. 1936. 

(3) Kreulen, D.J.W. Elements of coal chemistry. Nijgh & Van 
Ditmar N.V., Rotterdam - The Hague. 1948. 

(4) Lowry, H.H., Editor. Chemistry of coal utilization. John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York. 1945. 

(5) Proceedings of a conference on the ultra-fine structure of 
coals and cokes. British Coal Utilization Research Associ¬ 
ation, London. 1944. 

(6) Waksman, S.A# Humus. 2nd ed., rev. The T/illiams and Wilkins 
Company, Baltimore. 1938. (2000 references). 






























APPENDIX 



















95 . 



TABLE 15 

Ultimate Analysis of Fusainous Residue from 

10 % HNO 3 Oxidation of Coal E 

Element 
% by wt. 

Dry, 

Dry ash-free 

Carbon 

52.0 58.8 

Hydrogen 

3.2 3.6 

Nitrogen 

lt .0 U.6 

Ash 

11.6 — 


Difference(oxygen, undetermined, and errors) 29*2 33.0 





























B29762 






