






tix mm 

rasEBSiaais 

amaaiinsB 























THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


PREDICTING FRESHMAN SUCCESS IN SEVEN SCIENCE 
AND TWO BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION COURSES 
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 

by 

JOHN ZUROWSKY 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


April, 1959 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/predictingfreshmOOzuro 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and recommend to the Faculty of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled Predicting Freshman Success 
in Seven Science and Two Business Administration Courses 
at the University of Alberta,” submitted by John Zurowsky, 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
of Master of Education, 



PROFESSOR 


PROFESSOR 


PROFESSOR 


















: :: • • . ' b j.,' I:.: " o ^ *»•...« v. so. ::i 

: ' < . vinb o. ;; ;; 

dr. ■ 1.';‘ j -. X ,• 


. V 








. 








ABSTRACT 


This study sought answers to the following two 
questions: 

1. How well do the Grade XII Departmental Exami¬ 
nations predict success in the University of Alberta? 

2. Is the addition of other variables such as 
psychological tests and Grade IX Departmental 
Examinations of value in improving prediction of 
success in the University of Alberta? 

In all, sixteen prediction variables were used in 
an attempt to predict freshman success in seven science 
courses, two business administration courses, and the univer¬ 
sity average. Students from the 1956-1957 freshman class at 
the University of Alberta comprised the sample chosen. This 
group was chosen from the group tested in the spring of 1956 
by the Alberta Matriculation Study Subcommittee. 

The approach involved selecting the best individual 
predictors and developing prediction batteries for each 
criterion. Major groupings of the prediction variables 
were: (l) Grade IX Departmentals ; (2) Grade XII Departmental, 
School and College Ability Tests (V and Q), Cooperative 
English Mechanics of Expression, and Cooperative English 
Reading Comprehension (Part II); and (3) all sixteen vari¬ 
ables in combination. 

Important findings were as follows: 

1. The best individual predictors of the Grade IX 




■ 

. 

. 

.. - 

. 




. 




- 



iv 


Departmentals were Social Studies B (Language), 
Mathematics, and Science. The same variables were 
also the most useful in the development of multiple 
prediction batteries from the Grade IX group. 

2. The best individual predictor of the Grade XII 
Departmentals was the Science Average. Next best were 
Mathematics Average and Social Studies, respectively. 

3. The SCAT and Cooperative tests were found to be 
inefficient as individual predictors and contributed 
little to the prediction batteries developed. 

4 . The best results generally were obtained by 
combining all the variables as a team; however, the 
batteries developed from the group of five Grade XII 
Departmentals seemed most practicable considering 
efficiency of prediction in relation to time and effort 
expended. 

5. The Grade XII Science Average showed strong 
relationships in all the batteries developed. Other 
contributing variables were Grade XII English, Social 
Studies, and Mathematics Average. 

Important conclusions were: 

1. Some Grade IX Departmental Examinations seem more 
promising than others for guidance and predictive purposes. 

2. Some Grade XII Departmental Examinations seem 
much more promising that others for a more effective 
counselling program in the High School. 

3. The most efficient predictions can be made with 
the multiple regression equations for the prediction 
batteries developed. 


, 

' . 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

- 

. 

. 











ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The author is grateful to Dr. C. C. Anderson, 
Mr. A. J. B. Hough, and Dr. J. H. M. Andrews for 
their careful reading and criticism of this thesis. 

Many thanks are extended to Dr. Donald B. Black 
to whom the author owes an especial debt of gratitude 
for all the suggestions, help in computation, and 
criticisms received. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. BACKGROUND AND THE PROBLEM. 1 

Background of the Problem. 1 

Definition of the Problem. 6 

Discussion of the Problem. 7 

II. SURVEY OF THE LITERATURE . 12 

American Research in Prediction. 12 

Intelligence or Aptitude and Success at 

University. 13 

Achievement and Success at University ... 22 

Other Factors and Success at University . . 31 

Canadian Research in Prediction . 38 

Trends and Pertinent Implications . 45 

III. DESIGN OF STUDY. 50 

Samples. 50 

Data. 51 

Predictor Variables . 51 

Criteria. 58 

Statistical Treatment . 59 

Interpretation of Findings . 61 

IV. RESULTS OF THE STUDY. 62 

Predicting with the Grade IX Battery. 62 

































vii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Predictive Value of the Grade XII Battery, 

SCAT (V and Q) and Cooperative English 
Test Battery, and of the Two in 

Combination. 7 4 

Predictive Value of All Prediction 

Variables As a Teamed Combination. 78 

V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION . 81 

Individual Predictors . 81 

Predicting with the Grade IX Battery . . . • 83 

Predictive Value of the Grade XII Battery, 

SCAT (V and Q) and Cooperative English Test 
Battery, and of the Two in Combina-tion . . 84 

Predictive Value of All Prediction Variables 

As a Teamed Combination. 87 

Multiple Regression Equations . 89 

VI. SUMMARY .. 93 

REFERENCES... 98 

APPENDIX.105 














LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Predictor Variables. 53 

II. Criterion Variables. 54 

III. Means, Standard Deviations, and Variances 

of the Sixteen Predictor Variables and of 

the Chemistry Criterion (N = 336 ). 63 

IV. Means, Standard Deviations, and Variances 

of the Sixteen Predictor Variables and of 

the Physics Criterion (N = 83) 64 

V. Means, Standard Deviations, and Variances 

of the Sixteen Predictor Variables and of 
the Mathematics Criterion (N = 137) .... 65 

VI. Means, Standard Deviations, and Variances 

of the Sixteen Predictor Variables and of 
the Accounting and Commercial Lav 

Criteria (N = 31) .. # 66 

VII. Means, Standard Deviations, and Variances 

of the Sixteen Predictor Variables and of 

the Botany Criterion (N - 65 ). 67 

VIII. Means, Standard Deviations, and Variances 

of the Sixteen Predictor Variables and of 

the Zoology Criterion (N = 127). 68 















.. 



. 









. , 








...... 

.... 







. 

' 

. 






ix 


TABLE PAGE 

IX. Means, Standard Deviations, and Variances 

of the Sixteen Predictor Variables and of 

the Geology Criterion (N= 43 ). 69 

X. Means, Standard Deviations, and Variances 

of the Sixteen Predictor Variables and of 
the Geography Criterion (N - 46) 70 

XI. Means, Standard Deviations, and Variances 

of the Sixteen Predictor Variables and of 
the University Average Criterion (W = 529) . 71 

XII. Validities for the Sixteen Predictors of 
Freshman Success in Each of the Ten 

Criteria •..»••••••••• . 72 

XIII. Relative Beta Weights, Corrected Multiple 

Correlation Coefficients, and Sample Sizes 
for the Seven Grade IX Predictors of Success 
in Each of Ten Criteria at the University of 

Alberta.73 

XIV. Relative Beta Weights, Corrected Multiple 

Correlation Coefficients, and Sample Sizes 
for the Five Grade XII Predictors of Success 
in Each of Ten Criteria at the University of 

Alberta.... . 75 

XV. Relative Beta Weights, Corrected Multiple 

Correlation Coefficients, and Sample Sizes 




































. 


. 

. 



























. 









X 


TABLE PAGE 

for the SCAT (V and Q) and Cooperative 
English Tests (Mechanics and Reading) As 
Predictors of Success in Each of Ten Criteria 

at the University of Alberta.76 

XVI. Relative Beta Weights, Corrected Multiple 

Correlation Coefficients, and Sample Sizes 
for the Seven Grade XII and Two University 
Entrance Test Pred_ictors of Success in Each 
of Ten Criteria at the University of Alberta 77 
XVII. Relative Beta Weights, Corrected Multiple 

Correlation Coefficients, and Sample Sizes 
for the Grade IX, Grade XII, SCAT, and 
Cooperative English Predictors in Combination 
As Predictors of Success in Each of Ten 
Criteria at the University of Alberta ... 79 


XVIII. Multiple Regression Equations and Standard 

Errors of Estimate for Grade XII Predictors 

in Table XIV . 92 

XIX. Identification of Predictor Variables by 

Umbers. 106 

XX. Intercorrelations of Predictors and Chemistry 

Criterion (18) (N = 336). 107 

XXI. Intercorrelations of Predictors and Physics 
Criterion (IS) (N = 83) 


108 







■ 


, . , 

• ' • • . 






xi 

TABLE PAGE 

XXII. Intercorrelations of Predictors and 

Mathematics Criterion (18)(N = 137) .... 109 

XXIII. Intercorrelations of Predictors and 

Accounting (17)(N = 31) and Commercial 

Law Criteria (18) (N = 31) ..110 

XXIV. Intercorrelations of Predictors and Botany 

Criterion (17) (N “ 65) .Ill 

XXV. Intercorrelations of Predictors and Zoology 

Criterion (18) (N = 127).112 

XXVI. Intercorrelations of Predictors and Geology 

Criterion (17) (N = 43) .113 

XXVII. Intercorrelations of Predictors and Geography 

Criterion (17) (N = 46) 114 

XXVIII.Intercorrelations of Predictors and University 

Average Criterion (17)(M = 529) . 115 








. 

. 

. . .. 

• , 

....... 




. 


, 





PREDICTING FRESHMAN SUCCESS IN SEVEN SCIENCE 
AND TWO BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION COURSES 
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


CHAPTER I 

BACKGROUND AND THE PROBLEM 

Background of the Problem 

Since the time of the ancient Greeks, the search for 
truth has been a deep and persistent value in the culture of 
Western civilization. It is good to pursue knowledge for its 
own sake and also because of the benefits which flow from it. 
Furthermore, now it may be that survival of the free world 
will depend upon knowledge. As our lives grow in inter¬ 
dependence with those of other peoples, as technology 
increases the complexity of our industry and economy, as 
communication and transportation shrink time and distance, 
and as everyday occurrences must be interpreted against a 
background of many unseen relationships the capacity for 
abstract thought becomes of steadily increasing importance. 
Men must depend more and more upon the best utilization of 
the special abilities of each as they become more and more 
dependent upon each other, for their jobs, their food, their 
enjoyment, and their security. It is imperative that our 
society evaluate the effectiveness with which its intellec¬ 
tual resources are being employed. 



: . 

- -a ’•(: 





■ ; 










2 


One of the major educational problems that confront 
Canadian society today is the use of human resources: is it 
possible to select university students in such a -way as to 
avoid the serious -wastage that now takes place? The means 
of selecting university students was one of the four major 
problems considered at the conference on Canada 1 s Crisis in 
Higher Education, held at Ottawa, November 12-14* 1956 
(Bissell, 1957, p. vi). The above is a question of tech¬ 
nique, back of which lie questions of purpose: Whom should 
we educate? for what? in what quantity? Such questions are 
matters of national concern, but leadership in the formula¬ 
tion of answers must rest upon the universities (College 
Entrance Examinations Board, 1954* P* 3)• 

Canadian society has become highly dynamic. There 
is expansion at an unprecedented rate, the population is 
rising rapidly, businesses are being multiplied in size and 
number, the labour force is becoming increasingly specialized, 
government services are being expanded, and new social 
problems are being created (MacKenzie, 1957, p. 190). There 
is urgent need for leaders and administrators in this type 
of society. In the field of scientific and technological 
progress, in the humanities, and in the social sciences the 
contribution of the universities to Canadian development 
and progress has been fundamental. 


. 

. " 

. . 

. 

• 

. 

• i ■ 


3 


An awareness of the "crisis 11 in Canada f s higher 
education was precipitated by the prediction of Dr. Sheffield 
in 1955 that Canadian universities must expect to double the 
number of students within ten years and quadruple the number 
within twenty years (Woodside, 1958, p. 17). There are 
several indications that the prediction is coming true, and 
may even be too low (Woodside, 1958, pp. 17-23), (Bissell, 
1957, pp. 3-7). Figures for the 1957-58 term show that 8.8 
per cent of our college-age youth are now going to college. 
This has already far outrun the predictions (¥oodside, 1958, 
p. 22). On the local scene, registration in the University 
of Alberta has risen from a total of 3,4-66 in 1951-52, to 
about 6,000 in 1958-59, and it is expected to increase 
steadily over the next six years to a total of close to 
10,000 by 1964-65 (Alberta Government, 1959). Undoubtedly, 
the University of Alberta will be among those universities 
experiencing increases at a greater rate than the average. 

A future such as this proposes major tasks in removing 
as far as possible the purely financial impediments which 
stand in the way of those qualified for higher education, 
and in providing adequate university facilities. The pres¬ 
ent inadequacy of university finance (MacKenzie, 1957, pp # 
191 -192) and the need for efficiency in our economy raise 
the question "Who should go to university?" There is a 
discrepancy between what should be and what is when failure 









' . ,c J :• : . \ : r 

Co coco 

• . L. i •; /• • ; .. . 

* . <c 

^ C : ■: 0 . 


£ .. ... 




■ » f . , / vc . ,: c c.. 

. - : . ~ 

Cl <. 

< ' t' : 

j L : • t ■: 

■ i /' c i ' ;.! ,_c> 

C : c . - ... • ■ :t ;; ■; . 1 • i ... . . ' ~ 

- * 

. • . - . j 

* : ' ■' ' c ’ : . . .1 v ■ i:c. c: 

t : : ^ ;.t: : ci — • ■ ... ., ;ii 






4 


rates now prevailing in Canadian universities are examined - 
a failure rate of 30 per cent is common (Jackson & Fleming, 
1957, p. 76), (Mathews, 1957, p. 114)• It is quite apparent 
that many of those now enrolled in our universities lack the 
qualifications for success, but, on the basis of information 
available we are utilizing to the full the talents of proba¬ 
bly no more than one-third of our academically gifted young 
men and women (Jackson & Fleming, 1957, p. 76). The 
necessity for better utilization of the available human 
resources is forcing the universities to take action. 

As for who should go to college, Woodside (1958) 
amply stated that: 

From the point of view of the individual those who 
desire more education and have capabilities which could 
be further developed should go. From the point of view 
of society the ablest of its youth are surely the ones 
who should get the training . . . The most intelligent 
should go, and the most industrious; the most gifted 
and the most persistent, (p. 52) 

Dr. Sidney Smith (1954 )> former President of the University 

of Toronto, simply said that n the universities should receive 

. . . students who are intellectually and morally able to 

profit from higher education.” (p. 6) However, such young 

people are not necessarily a wastage of human resources if 

they do not go to university (Woodside, 1958, p. 70). 

It is in identifying these young people that complex 
problems arise. Of the numerous factors which purport to 


• T 






. 


. 


o : .o z^rbi. c 










$ 

... 

, ' .. C 

••= V.1- . J 

... 

- ;• • . I"-.' 3.0 ■ v o ; - • . . q 

• . , ■. j! <.s 



5 

indicate success in the university, those that are currently 
being employed should be thoroughly evaluated. Thus the IQ, 
aptitude tests, and matriculation marks are immediately 
subject to study. In Canada, and of particular importance 
to this study, in Alberta the matriculation standing obtained 
on the Department of Education examinations is foremost in 
needing evaluation. Appropriate matriculation standing must 
be presented to gain admission to the University of Alberta. 

Several studies are now being conducted to evaluate 
the situation; Alberta and Ontario (Jackson & Fleming, 1957, 
pp. 94-98) and the Atlantic Provinces (Canadian Education 
Association, 1958, p. 1) are in the forefront with their 
projects. Concern in Alberta over the validity of the 
present system of selecting students for university education, 
and the merits of alternative systems led to the appointment 
of the Matriculation Study Committee, a subcommittee of the 
Joint Committee to Coordinate University and High School 
Curricula (Evenson & Smith, 1957). The subcommittee 1 s terms 
of reference were set up as follows: 

1. Test the validity of Grade IX examinations and 
other tests as a measure of success in (a) Senior High 
School and (b) University; 

2. Test the validity of Grade XII examinations as 
a measure of success in (a) Senior High School and 
(b) University; 

3. Test the validity of success in non-academic 




. 

. 

■■ 

. 






. ■ • ■ * 

* 

. 

* . 

. 









6 


subjects as a measure of success in University; 

4. Study the experience of other universities in 
testing other types of matriculation programs, (p. 65 ) 

After an exploratory study. The 1951 Freshman Survey 
(pp. 66-67), the Matriculation Study Committee launched 
further investigations. From various data collected, the 
committee aimed at answering several questions, of which, 
those pertinent here are as follows: 

1. Is the best potential university material being 
selected on present criteria? 

2. Would one or two additional criteria (that is in 
addition to Grade XII results) improve our present 
selection methods, (p. 68) 

Definition of the Problem 

The present practice of admission to the University 
of Alberta on the basis of the student 1 s Grade XII standing, 
and the use of obtained scores on psychological tests after 
admission for counselling purposes raise the following 
questions: 

1 . How well do the Grade XII Departmental Examina¬ 
tions predict success in the University of Alberta? 

2. Is the addition of other variables such as 
psychological tests and Grade IX Departmental Examinations 
of value in improving prediction of success in the Univer¬ 
sity of Alberta? 

Aspects of the second question are: 





. ,, ;r 4 

. . . . 

: 

;. .. . . ■ . , : :-r i : r ■ : ■ : 

' i : . r 0.i.' vu 

. 

■ :> 

. 

, ..1. ; ..L.,J ... 

, . . 

:• 




7 


(a) Is it possible to identify potential university 
students well before admission, perhaps at the end of 
Grade IX? 

(b) Is it possible to reduce the testing time 
required for the Grade XII departmental examinations 
program? 


Discussion of the Problem 

Most university registrars affirm that matriculation 
standing is the best single criterion of admission to 
university (Woodside, 1958, p. 56). Further, Dr, Andrew 
Stewart (1954 )> former President of the University of 
Alberta, stated that l! in our experience there has not yet 
been devised any basis of predicting success in university 
examinations, as satisfactory as success in high school 
examinations. 11 (p. 41) However, the inadequacies of this 
practice have created a general demand by the universities 
for more information. 

Prominent among other practices is the growing 
interest in aptitude testing. In the United States, the 
College Entrance Examination Board gives these tests. 

Many leading American universities are using College Board 
scores with varying emphases as an aid to selection. The 
evidence of American research indicates that aptitude tests 
are of value for prediction purposes, but expecting a test 



J... YyYY . Y'-J ‘ ~ ■ -Y •: Y ' .■ 

V. YY., 

Y ;t ...... Y U '" Y O'J ' J ' Yi , Y ■ ... Y ■ J 

..Y'Y- ; 'i : ; Y- rC-Y; ■ .Y. - ...1 Y Y /.;.Y T 0' Y’ Y "Y : YYv. .-‘I 

Y,- 'i ■ 01 \ 


.!..X...Y. , . ,.:Y_ 

• .oi- 

fF ' -y : ■ iO Jy YIYCtl .Y Y ■. fJ . . Y . YYT- 

. . ■’l , v ■ . (■>.' . .. ,' f t e . • ••• • y^' - yyyiyy 

- C • Y Y .,.Y-' .YY . -t YYY. V Y" .Y.Y' Y Y Y ".-yv.Y;:. t • ' r Y,Y .1 . 

.... ■ ‘ ' .)!. . ■ :,t •- : it y. ':~9 :d 


... y - , , v . y •. ■ 

* ■ -. . 1 .: 


, 

■ . Y.; • : , ' , Y ■ yY y: y yy.. ,., ./ ■ . ■■ /.„ 

: -Y.- Y ' YY.; V Y• Y y 




8 


to predict in the same way if there is variability of the 
students being studied or if courses make such different 
demands of the performance of students is another matter. 
Local validity studies should be made. Hence, this study 
was undertaken with local validation of an aptitude test 
as one of the major purposes. 

The present practice of using the Grade XII average 
as the selection factor for admission to the University of 
Alberta raises the problem of differential admission 
requirements. Subjective interpretations of high school 
marks have their limitations. The approach of improving 
prevalent guidance and counselling procedures by means of 
multiple correlation coefficients and multiple regression 
equations seems potentially to hold the greatest promise 
(Angell, 1959, pp. 418-419). From the viewpoint of being 
more useful to guidance in high school, data should be 
available earlier than at the present time. Since old 
Departmental Examinations are often given to Grade XII 
students as Easter Examinations, the results could be used 
for prediction purposes. 

Though there have been many investigations on overall 
areas such as prediction of average marks, there have been 
fewer studies in regard to particular courses or course 
areas. In a recent study, Baker and Baker (1956) proposed 


that: 


■ 

. 

-■ r . 

. V 

..... .. , ... . 

■ r ‘. ■ . .. .. ... C 

■ 

• ' v t • 

' . - : j ■ . : 





9 


If high school experience prepares for some courses 
better than for others then part of the failure to 
predict University success from high school experience 
completely is due to the fact that the programs of study 
of the students are not identical, (p. 315) 

The implications of the study were that the actual courses 

taken must be considered in any attempt to predict success 

in the University (pp. 315-318). 

In this investigation seven freshmen courses in the 
sciences and two business administration courses, as well 
as the year 1 s average were selected for study. The relation 
of the predictor variables to success in the selected cri¬ 
teria was considered. Four approaches were undertaken: 

(1) determining the best combination of Grade IX variables; 

(2) the best combination of Grade XII variables; (3) the 
best combination of aptitude and Cooperative English Tests 
scores; and (4) the best combination of both. Grade XII and 
Grade IX variables when considered together. The task was 
to determine the optimum combination of predictor vari¬ 
ables for prediction of freshman success in the selected 
criteria. 

The proposed values of the results of this study 
were to provide information for planning future studies to 
improve selection and placement by admission officials at 
the University of Alberta, and to provide information which 
would improve guidance and counselling practices. 

Such information would save time and money for the 



10 


students. It would encourage those who possess the neces¬ 
sary ability and achievement to make the sacrifices which 
may be involved. Furthermore, it should lead to better 
adjusted students. 

At the present time, a considerable amount of money, 
time, and effort is spent by the Department of Education in 
Alberta for carrying out is program of departmental exami¬ 
nations. If the examinations are of insufficient value for 
university admission purposes then a re-examination of the 
practice is in order. Perhaps equally efficient measures 
could be obtained with a shorter testing program aided by 
other factors such as accrediting by the high schools. 

Then, too, the Grade XII results are not available for use 
until a short time before the students enter university. 

One major advantage of aptitude tests is that they can be 
administered earlier in the Grade XII year and the results 
would be of practical value for guidance workers. 

There is much gained by pushing further back into 
the school life of the pupil, attempts to predict his suc¬ 
cess in university. In order to pursue the matriculation 
curriculum in the high school, to earn the necessary credits, 
and to plan for the goal of a university education, plans 
should be made early in the student 1 s school life. The 
major decision of a university education should be made no 
later than the end of Grade IX (Billhartz & Hutson, 1951> 


- ’■ - ■ " ' ■ . ' . , ,: ‘• 

, 

♦ 


1 . r v ; , ... \ ■ .. , tw 




, 








« '■ ■ - • ' ... •' ' ' ■ ■■ • • . ■ ;.i:- ' -. ,) ;■ -V ■; . vl O 

* 


11 


p. 547). Hence the proposal in this investigation was to 
determine the value of the results in Grade IX Departmental 
Examinations as an aid to making the decision. Such infor¬ 
mation would certainly place high school educational 
guidance for a higher education on a sounder basis than at 
present. 



CHAPTER II 


SURVEY OF THE LITERATURE 

American Research in Prediction 
Prognosis is an educational problem of major 
importance. It involves the prediction of future growth 
(including learning), success, or adjustment of individuals 
and of groups, from records of certain behavior. The 
prime purpose of prediction studies is to provide informa¬ 
tion for the guidance and counselling of individuals. 
Generally, prediction is more accurate if the range of 
behavior is more restricted (Monroe, 1952). Upon accurate 
prediction instruments hinges the crux of the problem of 
selection and admission of university students (Sarbin and 
Bordin, 1942)• 

For predicting success in university the problem is 
one of finding in individuals measurable characteristics 
which are correlated with success in that institution. 
Multitudinous studies have been made on the relations 
between various factors and university success. From the 
long list, factors such as the following have been found 
to produce results of varying significance: intelligence, 
aptitude, achievement, motivation, persistence, attitude, 
personality, interest, age, sex, time spent in study, read¬ 
ing ability, athletic activity, personal history, rank in 



■ : ' ' . .■;' - ;: .... 

... 1 •' . : \ : I .•••■■ ■" . 

. 

~ *’* 'A..: ' ■ c:' ' / '■..•> v ' f 

. . ' :v.. u( 

' -Ci •' 

- ■' - ■ -i. v" ■ ■ ■ - [ 

* •’ ■[ 

* • — / - ' : ' r V' ‘ : jo.- 1 C „■( no.::' T/CT^C! { 

* 

:: .... ' 





13 

high school class, determination to go to college, English 
expression, study habits, and empathy. Then, also, there 
has been recognition of spontaneous and uncontrollable 
factors which cannot be foreseen and will introduce a meas¬ 
ure of error in any forecast. Unpredictable distractions 
such as health conditions, social circumstances, sexual 
distractions, home problems, temporary moods, sets, and 
fatigue are among such factors. Furthermore, the element 
of luck is not to be disregarded. This is truly a baffling 
array which confronts the research worker in prediction. 

The purpose of this survey was to study research 
reports and writings on the relation of intelligence, apti¬ 
tude, and achievement as factors for predicting university 
success. Also, some insight was obtained in regard to the 
role of other variables receiving attention in educational 
research. The goal was to develop an idea of progress in 
prediction research to date, and of the possibilities which 
promised improvement. Relevant findings were to be used as 
a basis for this study. 

Intelligence or Aptitude and Success at University 

That university students are a somewhat homogeneous 
group and tend to be of above average intelligence is gen¬ 
erally agreed (Eysenck, 1947). A mean IQ of 109* with a 
S.D. of approximately 12 was reported by Traxler (1940) 





* 


. 

. 

- 



. 


, 

* 




14 

who brought together the results of testing in United States 
colleges. Hollinshead (1952) stated that an IQ of 110 or 
more is necessary for college success (pp. 14-15). Thus 
the top 20 to 25 per cent of the American population is eli¬ 
gible for university (pp. 14-15). 

The usual method of prediction with intelligence 
tests has been to correlate the test scores of the students 
with marks after one, two, or more years. Eysenck (194?) 
in a survey of some 600 articles presented the following 
findings: 

1. Correlations of between 4*0.5 and-f0.6 have been 
obtained between tests of intelligence and university 
achievement. 

2. Equally high coefficients have been obtained by 
correlating standing at school with university achieve¬ 
ment. Considerable accuracy had been achieved by 
combining high school standing and intelligence tests 
for prediction. 

3. Higher predictive accuracy is more likely with a 
battery of tests than with any one test. 

Though concluding that the relationship between intelligence 
and success was not very useful for prediction, he sug¬ 
gested that there could be improvement by more attention 
as to a suitable choice of test, ample testing time, and 
use of adequate and more powerful statistical treatment. 
Also, the reliability of the criterion used to establish 
validity must be considered. Studies are needed to obtain 
evidence about the reliability of examinations at the 



, >. :r • -t •. r ^ 

. ( ; * ■ , ’■ ■ ■ : .. ‘‘ - ' ' < •: . 




, 4 .' -4 

. 

- 

. 

. . 

- 


15 

university level (p. .23) . 

Other reviews were given by Cornell and Gillette 
(1950), Hastings and McQuitty (1954 )> and Thorndike (1956). 
Cornell and Gillette stated that the trend was away from 
tests of general intelligence and toward highly specialized 
aptitude tests. They reported correlations between intel¬ 
ligence tests and educational achievement ranging from .32 
to .78. Hastings and McQuitty reported that the studies 
they had reviewed were still searching for "the factor or 
factors which account for discrepancy between the predic¬ 
tion by cognitive-intelligence data and the actual results 
in terms of achievement. 11 (p. 168 ) Evidence was also 
presented which indicated the need for local validity 
studies. Thorndike noted that there has been a considerable 
impetus in the production of aptitude batteries for specific 
purposes. The factors measured have designations such as 
verbal, spatial, numerical, and reasoning. The prediction 
studies reviewed were concerned with validating these 
special aptitude tests. In regard to predicting college 
grades the correlations ranged from .40 to .43. 

On the general topic of educational aptitude tests 
and forecasting college achievement, Crawford and Burnham 
(1946) have contributed extensively. They regarded 
"aptitude” as describing 11 an individual* s current poten¬ 
tialities to acquire various knowledges and skills.” (p. 3) 


vo' vov.,;- <vvvt survival V£m#o|| 

. 

. 


• :• ' - ..V : ' . t .\.v ij • ;.r i;;h ■ 


* 

: . ■•:' cr . • V .. . : . ,. .V. vv'v .,o ' 

. .. 

. 

■ : " . . • 

- ■ ■■ . ::.■ 

Ef-., V uo" c;f ;. i: '1; 



16 


The field covered in this publication was limited to the 
area of measuring educational aptitudes, that is, abilities 
to acquire knowledges and skills needed for success in 
schools and colleges (p. 4)• Due to limitations in dis¬ 
criminating power of achievement criteria they stressed 
that no prognostic test could be expected to correlate 
higher on the average than .70 with school grades (p. 67)• 

As to technique, multiple correlation was noted as a power¬ 
ful method since it provides a means of determining what 
efficiency can be expected from a teamed combination of 
factors, each appropriately weighted (p. 69). Then, local 
studies were recommended to determine reliability and 
validity rather than inferring from other studies, unless 
the conditions were comparable (p. 75). 

As to correlations of intelligence tests with aca¬ 
demic grades, Crawford and Burnham stated that the typical 
ones range from .40 to .50 (p. 89). Because of wide dis¬ 
parity in differences of ability of the groups examined and 
of differing situations applicability of these correlations 
to a particular situation was inadvisable. However, they 
did report some data on major tests. The American Council 
Psychological Examination (ACE), which has been widely used 
and studied, was reported as having an average correlation 
around .50 with college scholarship (p. 91). Reference was 
made to the ^University of Minnesota Studies in Predicting 


j 1 : ... «. . : J .. .r , .. . 

■ ; . .?, '■ . '• •' :X 'I '' c.. 

. 

dv j 

:.3© X o .• v ’. ■ ic- /• : • 1 ."0 

'■ ■ . . . : :! ■ . .;C‘;. , X 

. X. 

. :ro. . .'j : . ... XX.. r: -Ir.rvi 4 v X .. 

.. X , ,/ 4 . v r \ . X ' J. :'.l 

. • , . f ... -...J .''. •. 

„/, oci 4 o 1 .oos'a :■* J; biJd* 3 

. 

- . ' ’ . ..1 . '«• X 4 . r. s TC v 

. 

. . .. 

■ ^ X:' fX : j : ■ e.‘;X f :; 

. 

t . J . • :X 

. 


17 


Achievement" (1942) where neither general scholastic 
aptitude tests nor specific achievement measures correlated 
better than about *45 with college grades. Multiple cor¬ 
relations were in the .60s, in particular, a coefficient 
of .63 was reported between high school percentile rank and 
ACE scores with first-year and two-year honor point ratios 
in all subjects. An important conclusion was that an 
aptitude test in combination with high school rank was 
more economical in time and money if only one test was to 
be used. Recommendations given for improvement were the 
placing of prediction on a differential basis, that is, 
estimating probable achievement in different courses or 
curriculums, and the increased use of objective tests to 
improve and stabilize the criteria (pp. 129-33). 

In a summary of certain validity correlations for 
aptitude tests administered to Yale Freshman classes of 
1944 and 1945 , coefficients ranging from .40 to .60 were 
claimed as being of significance. However, Crawford and 
Burnham cautioned about the limiting circumstances such as 
restrictions in the range of scores due to selection (p. 162). 

In addition to these general surveys, several par¬ 
ticular studies in the area of intelligence and aptitude 
were reviewed. Barrett (1952) undertook a study to vali¬ 
date Q and L scores of the ACE for differential prediction 
in college mathematics. The results obtained indicated 


* 

I . .. ■ . ' ( 'i Xooa! :: 1 f ' i :-\:: vi „ ).o 

. - ■' - ; ' ' ■ . 

. t.. :;j v,v. -,o $ . .■ * 7:>v : ! . ; ax 


' 


* ■ .. - 

. 

. 

. 


IB 


that quantitative scores did not consistently predict 
achievement in mathematics courses significantly better 
than did linguistic scores. Thus the conclusion was that 
quantitative scores should not be used for differential 
prediction in mathematics. Total scores were no better 
nor worse. 

Also reporting on the differential predictive value 
of the ACE Psychological Examination, Wallace (1949) pre¬ 
sented individual and multiple correlations on the relation 
between Q, L, and T scores on the ACE and course grades. 

The correlations were small and there was only a slight 
difference in the early predictive value between Q and L 
scores. However, he cautioned against application of these 
results to other institutions which may have different 
circumstances. 

In a study of veteran and nonveteran students, 
Frederiksen and Schrader (1952) reported a median correla¬ 
tion of the ACE Psychological Examination with college 
grades as .47. A weighted composite of ACE total score and 
high school standing provided a median multiple correlation 
of .60 for veteran students and .68 for nonveteran stud.ents. 
These results were indicated as being useful for predicting 
freshman success. 

The value of certain intelligence tests for long 
range prediction of college marks was studied by Rosenfeld 




\ 

. 

1- \tr ■ ■ ' ' ■ ■ • r .« -Y. r d <- ■ ■ ■ ■ . , •' ..' 

7 -L '■ f 

u : ./ *1 r i • .. . • •.o X.. ■: i kv. i v 1 i i. - 

. ^ . , . 

dr-xcle - 

. ~ ■- 

. 

* h: 

, 

. 

■ 


19 

and Nemzek (1933). A correlation of .46 was reported for 
the Detroit Advanced Intelligence Test IQs with honor 
point averages, which was equal to that of intelligence 
tests in general. Another attempt to push back the time 
factor in prediction, by Byrns and Henmon (1935 )> had 
previously indicated a high degree of constancy of scholas¬ 
tic aptitude as measured by the ACE and Ohio State Univer¬ 
sity Psychological Test. An interesting conclusion was 
that measurement of aptitude for college work could be 
made as far down as the fourth grade, thus not having to 
wait until the student has completed high school. Thorndike 
(1947) showed that so far as intelligence is concerned 
information can be obtained at the beginning of the high- 
school course, and perhaps even in the upper elementary 
grades, which is substantially as accurate as that obtained 
near the end of the course. 

Fusfeld (1949) advised that consideration be paid to 
many qualifying factors such as earning one 1 s way through 
college, athletic pursuits, and others, before attaching 
any significance to the numerous correlations calculated 
between course grades and the ACE Psychological Examination. 
After reviewing most of one thousand studies in the field 
of predicting scholastic achievement, Travers (1949) came 
to the conclusion that there was actually little contri¬ 
bution to knowledge made by them in relation to their 


. 

- 

. 

. 


. . L 






. , ■ 






’ J '- T ' : ' ‘ ' : :fC ' • • ‘ c 














20 


voluminousness. The reasons that he gave were: needless 
repetition of studies, disregarding unplanned events in 
the individual 1 s life, and obscurity in regard to the nature 
of the criterion. Thus he advised consideration and study 
of these factors to improve the prediction of academic 
aptitude. 

According to Stuit (1950) the three most significant 
developments in aptitude testing were: (l) more differen¬ 
tial aptitude tests; (2) better definition of norms; and 
(3) greater emphasis being placed on the criterion in the 
validation of aptitude tests. 

Deridder (1953) in a study of the relation between 
gross scores on the ACE and academic success concluded that 
results of aptitude tests differentiate only moderately 
well between successful and unsuccessful students. He 
also suggested that errors in prediction might be attri¬ 
buted to the personal-social-emotional adjustment of the 
individual. 

Another aptitude test, the Differential Aptitude 
Test (DAT), was found by Wesman (1952) to be of greater 
predictive value for girls than for boys. In regard to 
the wide range of validity coefficients reported for this 
test, he suggested that causes might be such as courses of 
the same name having a different nature, variability of 
the students being studied, particularly if they have been 




• ; I * ■ - • V 

• •:!... . ■ */. .'ll ' V rv •. j e> 

v ■ • ■ - , oa ,, ... a) ■ . 'f ..at a ;> sm ;j 'to 


. 

* 



21 

sectioned according to ability, and the practice of 
rewarding for factors unrelated to real achievement of 
academic knowledge and skills. 

Cooprider and Laslett (1943) studied the predictive 
values of two special aptitude tests, the Stanford Scien¬ 
tific Aptitude Test and the Engineering and Physical 
Science Aptitude Test. These were compared to the rela¬ 
tionships of two scholastic aptitude tests, the ACE and 
the Ohio State University Psychological Test. The criteria 
were grade-point averages in several subject matter fields 
at the college level. The study was carried out at Oregon 
State College. Correlations ranging from .37 to .64 were 
reported. There were no better results from the special 
aptitude tests as compared to the tests of general scho¬ 
lastic ability. An exception, however, was that the 
Engineering and Scientific Aptitude Test had closer corre¬ 
lation with grades in biological science than did the ACE. 

McQuarry and Willard (1952) indicated that there 
was a high correlation of the intellectual variables with 
the grades received in first-year college chemistry. A 
direct positive relationship between grades received and 
ACE total percentile score was a typical finding. However, 
extreme caution was advised in individual prediction. 

Recently, Holland (1958) reported a study of a high 
aptitude sample, the National Merit Scholars. The purpose 




.. 

. „• 

♦. 

' - 

. 




22 


was to provide a summary of their scholastic achievement 
and to determine the predictive validities of selection 
and background variables. The findings were that the 
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) and High School Rank (HSR) 
had useful validities for predicting freshman grades for 
this group. For more efficient predictions the use of 
more homogeneous sub-groups, multiple correlation, and 
prediction within rather than across colleges was 
suggested. 

According to Tyler (194^), if we accept our schools 
as they are, it is possible to appraise educability for 
most school courses primarily in terms of verbal facility 
and secondarily in terms of quantitative factors so far as 
the factors now measured by intelligence tests are con¬ 
cerned. Also, a rough indication may be obtained of the 
mental age required on specified intelligence tests for 
success in particular school systems. These were glean¬ 
ings from research of the last fifty years. 

Achievement and Success at University 

Encouraging reports of various research studies 
which had shown that scores on educational achievement 
tests and grades in related fields of study were useful 
for predicting success in various subject matter fields 
were noted by Stuit (1950). Though aptitude tests in 




23 


specific subject matter fields such as science, foreign 
languages, mathematics, and vocational subjects have been 
used successfully as predictive measures, differential 
aptitude test batteries and achievement test batteries 
have offered some advantages. The batteries of tests 
probably offer more useful information per unit of time 
than do specific subject matter aptitude tests. Thus the 
future should show a greater emphasis on differential 
aptitude tests and achievement test batteries (p. 30). 

In an effort to resolve the distinctions between 
aptitude and achievement tests, Levine (1953) reported in 
summary that the differences "tend to break down concep¬ 
tually to differences in degree or relative emphasis.” 

(p. 524) As to the types of achievement tests there appear 
to be two: those given at the end of a course of study to 
measure the outcome of instruction and those given before 
instruction and used as an aptitude test. The latter type 
is used for prediction. Generality of subject matter 
content seems to be the basic difference between the second 
type of achievement tests and aptitude tests, achievement 
tests being the more specialized ones. In practice, the 
use of a suitable combination of aptitude and achievement 
tests was recommended (p. 524)• 

Hurd (1944) proposed that prediction tests must be 
closely related in type and abilities sampled to the 


: . . , v : v r 

t r- _ 

• " . ■; •" > \t ■ r;.;i i.;l' 

. ■- ; o ': ■ . ;■ " ; v . ; : • ’• t e•, 

■ 

■ 

■ 

» \ 

. 

• c.r ... 

, . 

c*"' • ■ >■: ef . , 1.r‘.:cc ; 

•' .. '■ •. j , ? . n 


. . . Vt . " •: •. .v vri jiJG.Cjorivar? l 

■ • 

• - < .• 


. 






24 


achievement which is being predicted. Thus, for example, 
to predict scholastic achievement in a college mathematics 
course, tests involving the expected skills in mathematics 
should be used rather than general intelligence tests. He 
substantiated his thesis with a reported correlation of 
.90 + .02 between student ranks on an institutional test 
in basic science given in nursing education at the Medical 
College of Virginia, with average student ranks on entrance 
tests. The entrance tests included the ACE, the Otis Test 
of Mental Ability—-Higher Examination, and local tests in 
reading and arithmetic. A limitation of this study was 
the small sample (N = 40). 

A general picture of the relation between a battery 
of achievement tests and college scholarship was presented 
by Monroe (1950). Using as a basis Segel ? s reported median 
correlation of .545 and Durflinger* s median correlation of 
.475, the conclusion was reached that achievement test 
batteries were almost as valuable for prediction as the 
accumulated high-school record. 

Noteworthy work in this field has been done by the 
College Entrance Examination Board in the United States. 

In a recent report (1954 )> the secondary school record 
was claimed as being superior to rank-in-class as an 
index of probable college achievement. Using a combi¬ 
nation of school averages and averaged College Board 


. . . 

DC fO 

• ;t 

t 

. 

■ , ' : • .. . - 

. ' . = 


. 


- • ■ • • : Ct 

. 

. 


. <( . : 

* V • 







25 


scores on aptitude tests and achievement tests, by means 
of multiple correlation, they obtained high relationships. 
Prediction scores versus freshman average showed a corre¬ 
lation of .55. A correlation coefficient of .67 between 
prediction made before admission and average grade 
achieved during four years on a four-year basis was 
obtained. Between predictions made before admission and 
the single term average which was closest in size to the 
prediction a correlation of .91 appeared. Thus entrance 
data seemed to be valid over a considerable period. The 
data used was limited to Yale University (pp. 76-92). 

As validation studies and applications of achieve¬ 
ment tests often included validation and application of 
tests of intelligence, aptitude, and personality, the 
classification of any particular study in this survey was 
somewhat arbitrary. In the studies reported in the liter¬ 
ature the predictors generally used were rank in high- 
school class, grades in high-school courses, tests of 
scholastic aptitude and achievement, intelligence, and 
several non-cognitive factors. Bloom and Heyns (1956) in 
a review of various studies indicated that there were 
feelings of frustration in attempting to summarize all 
the prediction research being done in an effort to raise 
the correlation coefficient over .50. 

Schoepfle and Arnold (1953) reported that the 


. 

r. v , (•- r 

. 

. - x" . ■ ■ ■ . t - : 

' 

- i'.M \i: ■. • . . 

■ • 

•O • "' :j;o.p I'-0< l/S:.;. 7:. ,c. Sc JcQtiOB 

' 

:: . :: . • , 1 : v - 

' 

. . ./ <:c • 


26 


correlation of college grades with high school grades 
showed that a good grounding in mathematics is essential 
for success in college physics. Also, they presented 
evidence that the Ohio State University Psychological 
Test and the complete high school grades provided good 
college guidance and planning. Interest was indicated 
as an important additional factor. The results of the 
Cooperative English Test in Reading, Vocabulary, and 
Comprehension confirmed the fact that reading and vocab¬ 
ulary are important in science. The investigators also 
stressed the importance of clear and correct expression 
in English. 

A study at Purdue University, by Remmers and Elliot 
(1949), found that from a battery of tests administered 
to the freshman class of 1947, the locally-prepared tests 
in Physical Science, English, and Mathematics were gener¬ 
ally superior to the ACE in relation to first semester 
grades in various curricula. They pointed out that their 
results were in line with the median correlation of .44 
between intelligence tests and college scholarship and the 
median correlation of .545 between general achievement and 
college scholarship as reported in a summary by Segel. 

By correlating four tests with grade point averages 
based on the first-year grades of the 1951 freshman class 
at the University of Missouri, Chappel, and others (1954) 














, . x’ ,i'U i .v, o 

. - r . ■ 

x - j? . . ■ . loo 

. 

, 

, 

•... c : :■< ' .'. XX ■ :Ssj 

. 

. 


{ v v - ..... c 


•*.' ' .... . ..' . .x, .. . ..; •: ' ■; ' r 1 x ; 

TOO ■' 

. . 

. 

0 





27 


obtained multiple correlation coefficients ranging from 
.441 to .557 in various curricula. Grade point averages 
were computed by assigning a value of 4 to A, 3 to B, 

2 to C, 1 to D, and 0 to F. 

An attempt to predict grades in specific college 
courses was reported by Wallace (1951). A battery of six 
examinations was administered to students entering the 
University of Michigan, in the fall of 194V. The tests 
were the ACE, the Cooperative English Tests on vocabulary 
and reading, the Iowa Foreign Language Aptitude Exami¬ 
nation, and three locally-prepared tests, one for mathe¬ 
matics, another for visualization, and one for science 
and social studies vocabulary. Test scores were corre¬ 
lated with grades in a variety of freshman courses and 
with grade averages. Although the individual correlations 
were small, the differential predictive power was in favor 
of the instruments selected or designed to indicate 
aptitude in particular areas. A multiple R of .554 "was 
obtained between the average grade for the first semester 
and a combination of eight test variables from the battery. 
This result was considered satisfactory in view of the 
limitations presented by unreliability of grades and by 
the nonintellective factors involved. Caution was advised 
in generalization of the results. 

Dissatisfaction with results of students enrolling 


. 

. 

. 

. ... lo . 

- 

'" • ' 1 . " . ,:C ... r; 

. 

. 


?>: I dr? cf 

‘ 


.. 






. 






28 


in mathematics courses at Wasburn University in Kansas, led 
to a search for better means of prediction for guidance 
purposes. Reporting on this investigation, Seigle (1954) 
presented multiple correlations ranging from .626 to .831. 
These on the average were stated to be large enough for 
group prediction and valuable for individual prediction. 

Lehman (1954) tested the hypothesis that students 
at the opposite ends of the scale after their first quarter 
at college differed in certain important ways from the 
beginning of their college career. After testing 110 girls 
entering Ohio State University as freshmen in home eco¬ 
nomics, two propositions were suggested. These were that 
poor performance in the first quarter may be due partly to 
ineffectiveness in the use of tool subjects—reading and 
arithmetic—and to serious personal problems. Remedial 
work was suggested as a solution for the first factor. 

A study by Webb and McCall (1953) considered the 
relative validity of several aptitude and achievement tests 
and high school averages for predicting first year grades. 
Multiple correlations ranging from .554 to .790 were 
reported (N = 154)• Validities for single predictors 
ranged from .40 to .61 for freshman English (N = 130). 

Differential prediction of academic success in four 
college curricula at Brigham Young University was reported 
by Stone (1954)• The major college areas were commerce. 


* 

, .C.i > ,r ' ** ■ t*If. S.jC 08 & , < : 

\ 

. «■..1 v ; i '$ . v \ 3 .) ■ ■■... 



.r • o :y.': I. X ■ o *x Xc,< X n^ci 

■ 


, ' r * rar I t : '• .. c’j •: ■ 

. .. 

1 VI 1 :- '■ C .' Jl'f ' 

. . 

.. • 

. 

. 

, :C ' b . . \ 

. 






29 


elementary education, physical sciences, and social 
sciences. The most efficient battery for predicting 
success in commerce and elementary education included the 
total high school grade-point average and the ACE Total 
scores. The respective Rs were .633 and .731. A battery 
including the high school average, ACE Total, and the 
Cooperative General Culture Test (Literature and General 
Science) was the best team for prediction in the physical 
sciences. The multiple R was .733. An R of .507 was 
obtained for the social science predictor battery which 
included the high school average, ACE Total, and CGCT 
General Science. The high school grade-point average was 
the best single predictor. Also, reliability coefficients 
were computed for the criteria. These clustered around .80. 

The relation of scholastic background to success in 
college physics was studied by Adams and Garrett (1954)• 
Pearson product-moment correlations were calculated for 
the relationships between the variables. The findings 
showed poor articulation between college physics and various 
types of high school work. However, high school records 
were better predictors of success in college physics than 
any of the entrance tests ranks. Achievement in college 
physics had a relatively high relationship with achieve¬ 
ment in first year college mathematics (r * .435). 

There was a lack of studies on predicting college 























* . . 






i 

* 

- : . ■ 

. 





l 



:l-.rrjcv 



. 








* 

• • = 

. 


30 


success from junior-high-school years. However, one 
extensive investigation at the University of Pittsburgh, 
as reported by Billhartz and Hutson (1941)> "was reviewed. 
From a study of 3>317 pupils the findings showed that 
college success can be predicted at the end of junior 
high school. A correlation of .561 £ .027 signified a 
marked relationship between junior-high-school marks and 
college marks. However, college achievement varied con¬ 
siderably for any given level of junior-high-school 
scholarship. The partitioning of junior-high-school 
marks did not increase the correlation coefficient 
markedly. Correlating the IQs with college quality-point 
averages yielded a coefficient of .369 £ .035. This was 
in line with the findings of other investigators. The 
Standord Achievement Test ! s correlation with college 
quality-point averages was .359 £ .036. Thus the scholar¬ 
ship record was the best predictor of college success. 
These findings are of substantial import for guidance 
programs. 

Recently, Angell (1959) stated that "Multiple 
differential and multiple absolute prediction may very 
well be one of the really major advances of truly practi¬ 
cal value in the areas of academic prognosis and academic 
counselling." (p. 423) In this approach the University of 
Washington multiple differential prediction program is 


, 

. ‘ ... .- ■ ' ilSCD 

-• 

r[. 

T . ' • • • 1c ■ o ; 


... 

. 4 . .( 

.. . i . ; 

. . . . .. ■ c . 1: ■ .V 1 ;! . • ... : 


. 4- 

* 

. - V.CTr. 

■ 1 










. 













31 


particularly noteworthy. Black (1951), in extending the 
research program at the University of Washington, partic¬ 
ularly the study of Angell and others, found that: 

1. There was no or very little relationship between 
the number of credits in particular high school subject 
areas and achievement in any university area. 

2. Grade point averages in certain high school 
subjects do not contribute to university success. 

3. No one set or pattern of admission requirements 
is valid for all areas of the University. 

4. Regression equations developed by Angell and 
others in a previous study proved to remain valid for 
a subsequent freshman class. 

5. Many students fail because they elect courses in 
which their predictable chances of failure exceed their 
predictable chances of success, (pp. 212-220) 

A major recommendation was that m general prediction 
of university success and university admission be replaced 
by differential prediction and differential university 
admission. 11 (p. 221) 

Other Factors and Success at University 

In a survey of studies on non-cognitive factors and 
their relation to college success, Eysenck (194?) concluded 
that there were some promising correlations reported. 

School standing, personal data sheets, vocational interests, 
and neurotic traits were among particular factors cited as 
bearing relation to success at college. Furthermore, an 
appropriate combination of tests as selected by multiple 




32 

regression and factorial techniques was proposed as being 
more powerful for prediction purposes than any single test. 
He also stated that the major limitation of many studies 
was that they were not based on any general theory, but 
were merely accidental successes among large numbers of 
failures (pp. 27-29). 

Traxler and Jacobs (1950) noted a trend toward the 
evaluation and improvement of instruments used for person¬ 
ality appraisal. In this regard, the Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory was receiving the most attention. 

Of interest to further research was a summarized study 
which related persistence with college grades. A persist¬ 
ence test had raised the multiple R from .58 to .65, when 
included in a test battery. Symonds and Hessel (1950) 
reviewed another recent area of research in personality 
measurement. This area is the development and educational 
significance of projective techniques. Considerable work 
has been done at the college level with the Rorschach in 
attempts to relate personality with college success. The 
aim is to account for discrepancies on intelligence tests 
and college grades. 

McQuitty and Hastings (1954) stated that: 

There was still much concern with attempts to find 
the factor or factors which account for discrepancy 
between the prediction by cognitive - intelligence 
data and the actual results in terras of achievement. 

(p. 168) 


■ ' ^ - ...... «... ^ 

; vV 

—^ c-o ;.. . - : . ; ’ i'J-J:- • ■ o ' ■ ■ .■* :"J. 'X r-^.- " 

*"'■ : . -:r . . r ?•, i: 

: C 

. 

. 

: 


33 

Thus far, however, the disparity had not been explained. 

A recent review by Furst and Fricke (1956) con¬ 
sisted of a chapter on the development and applications of 
structured tests of personality. They reported of new 
inventories appearing to measure the nonintellectual 
factors associated with academic achievement. There were 
limitations noted in these inventories and studies of 
them. The use of obvious study-habits questions or easily 
faked statements, not testing the students before they 
began their classroom experiences, and not correlating the 
scores with other predictors were the criticisms made. 
Another major criticism of personality inventories is that 
subjects can distort their responses. Evidence was pre¬ 
sented from studies of relations between the MMPI and 
cognitive performance. The findings were that the achieve¬ 
ment of students with high MMPI profiles could not be 
predicted well with scholastic aptitude tests, and a number 
of items on the MMPI were found that discriminated students 
with discrepant Q and L scores on the ACE (p. 44)• Rothney 
and Heimann (1956) mentioned the use of a sentence- 
completion technique in a study of scholastic underachieve¬ 
ment and the use of the Rorschach and TAT as projective 
techniques in the prediction of teaching success. The 
results were deemed not useful for application. 

Several particular studies in this area of prediction 


in 

. 


, 

. 

■ V ■■■ 

. . . • . V j: • 

. 


: V ■ ■■■■ !.[*,; I»j« iSsf-i', 


. . 


■ "• :r • •' • T 



34 


research were reviewed in this survey. Gough (1953) 
indicated that there was a different constellation of 
factors which entered into success at the college level. 

He cited, in particular, that self-sufficiency and inde¬ 
pendent judgment were more important for success in college 
than they were in high school. Tyler (1948) in discussing 
educability stated that there was a significant correlation 
of motivation with school success. He gave a correlation 
of .30 as being average for the relation between interest 
and marks in school with intelligence held constant. Also, 
motivation was acquired from a variety of sources: school 
experiences, parents 1 attitude toward the school, cultural 
contacts, and attitudes of the child* s peer group. Moti¬ 
vation is quite fixed at Grade IV or V, and thus may be 
used for early prediction of later success. 

The use of projective tests in predicting college 
achievement was investigated by Chahbazi (1956). A multiple 
correlation coefficient of 0.633 was obtained on the basis 
of a battery of eight predictor variables which included 
two projective tests. The coefficient was 0.512 when the 
projective tests were excluded and only the other six 
variables were used to predict first-term college averages 
of 224 students. The difference between these two coeffi¬ 
cients was significant at the 1 per cent level. Thus 
inclusion of the two projective tests enabled the account- 


. 

. 

.Jr 'ilc.S: 

...1 ;.i0.htAV 

, 

, ^ \ v :■> 

• ■; ,• : : : 

' 

. 

. 



35 


ing of 40 per cent of the variance of first-term college 
averages, whereas only 26.3 per cent was accounted for 
without including them. 

Hertel and Di Vesta (194^) found that the high- 
school average was the most important single factor 
(r = .525) of five factors evaluated for predicting the 
college average in a college of agriculture. A multiple 
correlation of .64 was reported to he of limited value for 
individual prediction. A measure of motivation, and 
measures which correlated high with the criterion and low 
with each other were suggested as possibilities for improv¬ 
ing prediction. 

An attempt to gain insight into the relation between 
personal adjustment and academic aptitude and achievement 
was made in a study by Assum and Levy (1947). After com¬ 
paring a maladjusted group with an adjusted group, no 
significant difference was found between the two groups in 
regard to academic ability. However, the adjusted group 
was significantly better in academic achievement. 

Another study by Chahbazi (1957) reported an attempt 
to evaluate an inventory on study habits as related to the 
prediction of college achievement. The multiple correla¬ 
tion coefficient was raised from .536 to .569 by adding 
the Cornell Orientation Inventory to a battery of predictor 
variables. Thus 3*2.3 per cent of the variance of freshman 


. 

, 

* 

. . 

♦ 

‘ ■ "'X - ' c : • 

' 

- . v -j . 

■ 

. 


36 

averages was accounted for rather than 28.7 per cent with¬ 
out the inventory. This result offered promise for 
further research in this area. 

A study on the validity of two temperament scales 
in predicting quality point averages (QPA) was made by 
Bendig (1958). A combination of a vocabulary scale drawn 
from the Cooperative Vocabulary Test and the Need Achieve¬ 
ment Scale gave a multiple R of .29 in predicting quality 
point averages in college. The best single predictor of 
QPA was the Need Achievement Test (r = .23). 

Chambers (1957) found that empathy and scholastic 
aptitude are different abilities. Each contributed sig¬ 
nificantly to scholastic success. Empathy was defined as, 
"the imaginative transposing of oneself into the thinking, 
feeling, and acting of another and so structuring the 
world as he does." (p. 282) 

Abelson (1952) found that there were sex differences 
in the standard error of predicting of college grades. 

This was so in general where high school average was used 
as a predictor (alone or in combination). The S.E. of 
prediction was significantly smaller for girls than for 
boys. Thus, he suggested that it may be more useful to 
consider boys and girls as belonging to different popula¬ 
tions and to analyze their data separately in predictive 
studies. That women obtain significantly higher grades 



37 


than men and tend to perform more nearly in accord with 
their measured ability than do the men were among the 
findings of Jackson (1955). 

Mallory (1955) concluded that biographical and 
personal history data result in increased predictive 
effectiveness of first semester college marks. 

The nature of secondary school teaching and course 
work received in high school as possible indices of subse¬ 
quent success was investigated by Johns (1954)• A positive 
relationship was revealed between good teaching in the 
secondary schools and success in freshman English. 

Exploring patterns of course work which result in effec¬ 
tive college preparation and appraising personality traits 
were two other suggested areas which require further 
research by those concerned with prognosis. 

The importance of goal aspiration as a motivational 
device was discussed by Weigand (1953). Evidence was 
obtained that there were two dimensions called goal orien¬ 
tation and goal involvement which were operating and were 
powerful motivating devices which helped to determine the 
success or failure of the students which were interviewed. 



33 


Canadi a n Research in Prediction 

In comparison to the numerous studies in prediction 
reported from the United States those from Canada are 
relatively scarce. However, there have been several 
important Canadian investigations and others are in pro¬ 
gress at the present time. The adequacy of the external 
achievement examinations, often called departmental exami¬ 
nations, as a predictive device for university admission 
has been and is of major concern. Though the admission 
requirements of Canadian universities vary widely, they all 
have a common factor of reliance on the departmental tests 
(Jackson and Fleming, 1957, p. 93). 

No close comparisons can be made in this area with 
American studies because no such system exists there. 

Instead they use factors such as high school rank or average 
and college entrance tests. Tests prepared and administered 
by the College Entrance Examination Board (CEEB) are the 
most widely used.. Such tests are perhaps the closest coun¬ 
terpart of the departmental examinations. The major 
differences between tests such as those of the CEEB and the 
departmentals is that the former emphasize aptitude rather 
than acquired knowledge and are more objective. However, 
the general effectiveness of the two instruments when used 
for predictive purposes may be compared (Fleming, 1955, 

P. 17). 






... ,. _:.: . :'. i. 

■ 

-■ 

, 

,. " " 1 .. k! 

' 

. • , 

» 

' 

- 




39 


The province of Ontario has contributed noteworthy 
studies on the relation of external achievement examinations 
and other factors with success in university. The Cameron 
Study (1939) investigated the relation between the results 
of the matriculation examinations conducted by the 
Department of Education and success in four Ontario 
universities. Those students who entered the Faculties of 
Arts for the first time in the autumn of 1932 were selected 
for study. The net totals were as follows: University of 
Toronto (802), University of Western Ontario (215 ), Queen f s 
University (163), and McMaster University (159). A sub¬ 
stantial positive relationship was found between Upper 
School and first-year university average marks. Simple 
correlations ranging from .437 to .679 were reported in 
this respect. Thus, it was conclusively demonstrated that 
students with high Upper or Middle School marks had a 
better chance of success in university than those with low 
marks, but this relationship was not exact. Among other 
findings it was shown that there was a great deal of 
variation in correlations between matriculation subjects 
and university marks in the same subjects, the highest 
correlations usually being in languages. A suggested 
reason for this was the relatively high statistical reli¬ 
ability in these subjects. Also, a comparison of dif¬ 
ferent courses, especially the Honour Courses, showed 


. 

■ 

' 

. 

, 

■ . ■ . . • 

: dv 





40 


that they varied considerably in difficulty among themselves. 

Woodside (1958) stated that "the intelligence quo¬ 
tient cannot ... be taken as an arbitrary or conclusive 
measure of fitness for university studies." (p.54) He 
supported this statement with reference to studies such as 
the one by Jackson and Fleming in 1956 and the Toronto Vice- 
Principals 1 study (pp. 54-55, 72-74)• The Vice-Principals f 
study also showed clearly that those with the best matric¬ 
ulation standing did best at university (p. 57) . Further¬ 
more, the age of the student at the time of registration 
was shown to be the surest indicator of university success. 
Thus students who entered the University of Toronto at the 
age of 16 1/2 to 17 1/2 did far better than those who were 
older (p. 6l). 

A similar general conclusion in regard to intelli¬ 
gence and university success was made by Matthews (1957). 

He suggested that the reasons why students with adequate 
ability to pass actually failed were to be found in factors 
such as adjusting to college life, choosing the wrong course, 
lack of interest, and a naturally perverse nature (p. 119). 
Mathews believed that the greatest single cause of academic 
failures was lack of interest (p. 118) . He was also of 
the opinion that the provincial matriculation papers and 
university examinations were not very reliable. Thus an 
additional criterion such as a confidential report, at 












■ . - . 


. 




■... . v. : -' ■ -c '. £ : '$ i 

. ; ;i ■ ,0 •. nv:;: o .;„;t 

, •'". •• ■. " / I .. : ■ i > i . ; :t ' i 

.. . ; •; v . • . or.'.d 30 0:■ .u : ’ :' 0 


■ 

. c .:': *J c r ,.ilJ p; ' CiC.LS: 

* 


. 







41 


least for the doubtful cases, was advocated (pp. 117-18). 

In an effort to improve the predictive value of 
Grade XII results for first-year success in university, 
Fleming (1955) studied the effect of the high school 
environment. The group chosen for study was a net total 
of 824 students who entered the Faculty of Arts of the 
University of Toronto for the first time in 1951. 

Generally, the findings indicated that predictive accuracy 
was greater for students from a favourable background than 
for those from an unfavourable one. Sex, age, and the 
length of the interval between high school graduation and 
university entrance were the factors other than those 
related to the school background which influenced the 
accuracy of prediction. The Grade XIII average in itself 
was not considered to be of much use. 

Some other discoveries, though not statiscally 
tested, resulted from observations made by Fleming. The 
ones pertinent to the present investigation were thus 
particularly noted. First, the simple correlations of .460 
and .590 between the Grade XIII and university averages for 
the General and Honour groups, respectively, and .561 for 
the two combined showed reasonable promise for further 
work in this area. These results were apparently as 
useful for predictive purposes as any device used in the 
United States. Second, the prediction of university 


. 

. ' ' 

. . 

- 

. 

. 

. 





42 


success was more accurate in terms of averages than in 
terms of individual subject marks. Third, the prediction 
of university mathematics from Grade XIII algebra, geometry, 
trigonometry, and the Grade XIII average was fairly good 
in the Honour group. Fourth, the prediction for the 
university natural science group, including physics, 
chemistry, geology, and astronomy, from Grade XII physics 
and chemistry was relatively unsatisfactory in the Honour 
group. A better prediction was obtained from the Grade 
XIII average. These findings were suggested as being of 
value with respect to any differential prediction procedures 
(pp. 29-31). 

That Ontario has launched more comprehensive research 
was noted in regard to the Atkinson Study of Utilization of 
Student Resources. This investigation was set up to evalu¬ 
ate the future success of some 9000 Ontario Grade XIII 
students of 1956 (Jackson and Fleming, 1957, pp. 95-98). 

Fleming (1958) recently reported on the progress of 
the Atkinson Study. After preliminary analysis the students 
were placed in three categories: those enrolling in univer¬ 
sity, those enrolling in other educational courses, and 
those entering employment. Later these groups were 
reclassified into seven destination categories such as 
those entering Ontario universities beyong the Grade XIII 
level, those entering non-Ontario colleges and universities. 


- 


. 

t . • . eo^:; ::: ■ J ^ ^ 

. 

. 

. 

* 

. 


■;. ■ ••.. .:V ... J. ■. 

■ 




■ ■ ‘ -■ .... . 



43 


those entering employment immediately, and others. For 
data collected as a measure of success, marks and grades 
have been the criterion in the academic courses. These 
will be related to variables such as aptitude scores and 
others in combination with Grade XIII results in an 
effort to improve university admission requirements and 
form a better basis for guidance. That a study beginning 
at the Grade XIII level is limited in value for research 
purposes has been demonstrated by the first reports 
released (p. 9) . Only a thorough study of the entire 
secondary school period will ultimately bring any adequate 
solution to the problem of student wastage. 

There have been individual investigations on the 
predictive value of departmental examinations and a major 
study is in progress in Alberta. Black and Ulmer (1949) 
concluded that the predictive efficiency of individual 
Grade 9 scores for equivalent Grade XII scores was little 
better than a guess. They recommended that consideration 
of a complexity of factors each appropriately weighted would 
be more satisfactory. Nelson (1949) in a study of predic¬ 
tion of achievement in first-year engineering found that 
high school mathematics - science averages and the Iowa 
Physics Aptitude Test were the best individual predictors. 
High school averages alone were found to predict 25 per 
cent better than a guess. Maclnnis (1953) indicated that 



44 

certain results from the Grade IX departmental were useful 
for counselling and for predicting matriculation success. 

The relative class standing seemed to be the most efficient 
single predictor (p. 64 ). 

The work of Black (1958) raised doubts as to the 
value of the Grade IX Departmentals in Alberta. His study 
indicated that the Principal* s ratings and a test of aca¬ 
demic aptitude could be substituted for the departmentals 
as a basis for promotion (pp. 235-36). 

Evenson and Smith (1957) outlined the scope of the 
Alberta Study of Matriculation presently in progress. 

From various data collected, the validity of the Grade XII 
examination results for selection purposes, the value of 
adding scholastic aptitude tests, and the value of stand¬ 
ardized achievement tests are major factors to be studied 
in an effort to improve the prediction of university success. 
The tests used were a battery of College Entrance Exami¬ 
nation Board (CEEB) achievement tests and two aptitude 
tests developed by the Educational Testing Service (ETS). 

A random sampling process was used to select the number of 
cases for the achievement tests (p. 69 ). The total sample 
of Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores was 5,318, and of 
the School and College Ability Test (SCAT) scores, 6,450. 

The results of all tests and all other factors considered 
were recorded on I.B.M. punched cards, and were to be 


. 

•; . . •• 

...'tl ■ V-“ 

/- ... ' ■ ,■ ' ' ' • ■ 

' 

, 

' 

. 

: . 

■ : . : . , . , 7 : ' < ■ o 

. 

. . 





45 


available for further analysis. 

Trends and Pertinent Implications 
Although the most valid method of finding out whether 
a student will succeed in university is an actual tryout, 
such a trial-and-error approach has rarely been used in our 
universities. The resulting cost and inefficiency in 
regard to the individual and society would be unwarrantable. 
Thus there has been increasing concern over finding better 
means of forecasting or predicting the chances of univer¬ 
sity success. The hazard of fallibility in predictions 
made intuitively or from casual observations necessitates 
a scientific basis for prediction research. 

Even with such a basis, it is improbable that con¬ 
sistently perfect prediction will ever be achieved. The 
best forecast can only be considered with reference to a 
specific time; the future holds events and circumstances 
largely or totally unforeseen. However, this should not 
deter the search for factors presently related to success 
in university nor in attempting to improve the ways of 
using them to obtain optimal predictive efficiency. 

That the problem is highly complex has been demon¬ 
strated by the numerous factors shown to be involved and 
by the variability of their respective influences. The 
findings of various studies have shown that intelligence 




46 


or aptitude, achievement tests, and average high school 
marks are among the best single predictors of university 
success, but, more valid predictions could be obtained 
by using a teamed combination of these measures. The 
batteries of measures have been further expanded by the 
addition of measures of factors such as interest, study 
habits and attitudes, and persistence. Although a 
relatively recent trend in prediction research, the use of 
these additional factors has shown significant promise to 
improve the accuracy of prediction. 

For predicting success in university, the results 
of various studies have indicated that tests of specific 
aptitudes, interests, and achievements are the best. The 
trend toward differential prognosis indicates the recog¬ 
nition of the fact that quite different types of thinking 
ability are required for success in different fields of 
study. A particular aim of the differential prediction 
techniques is to escape from domination by the concept of 
a general intelligence index (Crawford and Burnham, 1946, 
p. 192). 

It was evident in the present survey that fewer 
prediction studies were made using results in specific 
courses or course areas as the criterion, in comparison 
to the wide use of university averages. Baker and Baker 
(1956) indicated the necessity of considering actual 



47 


courses taken in predicting success in the university. 
However, they also cautioned about the possibility of a 
particular course being not altogether defined. Thus, 
there may be essential differences in the same course 
given by different people at different times (p. 313). 

As to statistical techniques used, multiple corre¬ 
lation has proved repeatedly to be more powerful than 
simple correlation. Although more valid results have thus 
been obtained, the fact that few Rs of more than .70 have 
been reported has indicated that a ceiling was reached. 

A value of .70 yields a forecasting efficiency of approxi¬ 
mately 28 per cent better than non-test prediction. 

Though indicating significance, the results of 
prediction research have not been proposed as of much 
value for individual prediction. Many investigators were 
noted as advising caution in the use of their findings 
for counselling. Furthermore, there was emphasis on the 
importance of taking into account the comparability of 
circumstances before inferring or generalizing from pre¬ 
viously obtained data. Crawford and Burnham (1956) stated 
that correlations: 

Afford an index of how much dependence can be 
placed upon guidance measures under circumstances 
like those wherein the original correlations with 
appropriate criteria were derived, (p. 74) 

Thus there was need for local studies to determine 




3 - ■■ ■ • > 

: ; ■ . 1 ■ * " v e .■ ■' .* ) » * - r oH 

. " - ■ •> .. ■ ■ ■ *'• 1 ; ■ " 

- 

» 

, J . . <$ ~ j '■*! % I ■■ C a £ 1 

*. ■ v; . I: : j: ; . : ' ,.oI . !0 :- ( t : TC 


, ■ ' : . . ■ c 1 z . : . ' 

. 

« 

. : : \:hr. »: : x 

■ 











48 


reliability and validity anew whenever possible (p. 75). 

The limitations of previous research have led 
investigators to consider and question several aspects of 
the prediction problem. They have questioned the relia¬ 
bility of university marks, tried to improve the relia¬ 
bility and validity of the predictive battery, and have 
stressed the importance of clarifying the aims and objec¬ 
tives of the universities. Also, in general, they have 
sought for measures which correlate high with the crite¬ 
rion and low with each other. 

The implications of this survey to the present study 
were mainly the following: 

1. The use of departmental results for prediction in 
Ontario has shown promise for further investigation as to 
their local validity. 

2. The inclusion of scholastic aptitude and specific 
achievement tests to form a battery with the departmentals 
was considered to be an approach that would yield fruitful 
results. 

3. There was evident need to determine the local 
validity of these aptitude and achievement tests. 

4. The use of multiple correlation promised a means 
of selecting the best combination of variables for predic¬ 
ting each criterion. 

5. The use of results in specific university courses 




49 


as well as the university average for criteria was con¬ 
sidered to he a more comprehensive approach than using 
the latter alone. 

6. The need for more research in long-range 
prediction justified the evaluation of the Grade IX 
departmental results as factors for prediction. 

7. Though there was no consideration given to other 
factors related to predicting success in university, such 
as interest, persistence, age, and the like, it was assumed 
that they were operative in this investigation. 

8. It was hoped that this effort would make a sub¬ 
stantial contribution to the Alberta Matriculation Study. 



CHAPTER III 


DESIGN OF STUDY 

This study was delimited in scope to the prediction 
of freshman success in seven science courses and two 
business administration courses at the University of 
Alberta. A description of the samples, data, predictor 
and criterion variables, statistical treatment, and inter¬ 
pretation procedures employed is the major topic considered 
here. 


Samples 

The group chosen for study consisted of freshman 
students entering the University of Alberta in 1956 on 
whom the required data was complete. In the spring of 
1956, the Alberta Matriculation Study Subcommittee carried 
out a survey of the Grade XII students of that year. To 
strengthen its study the subcommittee had added the 
Cooperative School and College Ability Test (SCAT), Form 
1A. A total of 6450 Alberta Grade XII students, which 
represented for practical purposes the total population, 
wrote the SCAT. The University of Alberta administered the 
Cooperative English Tests (Form A and the Reading Compre¬ 
hension portion of Form C2) as part of its freshman testing 
program in the fall of 1956. Thus only those freshman 



* 

♦ . 


. 

. 

. 




51 

students who had the SCAT and Cooperative test scores, and 
Grade IX and Grade XII Departmental Examinations marks 
were selected for the present investigation. 

This left a net total of 529 students for the 
University Average criterion sample population. For each 
course criterion the sample population was as follows: 

(1) Chemistry, N = 336, (2) Physics, N = 83, (3)Mathematics, 
N = 137, (4) Accounting 1, N = 31, (5) Commercial Law, 

N = 31, ( 6 ) Botany, N = 65, (7) Zoology 1, N - 127, 

( 8 ) Geology 1, N = 43 , ( 9 ) Geography 1, N = 46 . The same 
sample was used for the Accounting and Commercial Law 
criteria. 


Data 

The data used for this study were the results 
obtained by the selected students on the predictor and 
criterion variables. These variables have been listed in 
Tables I and II. The predictors and criteria were num¬ 
bered to facilitate their placement on the intercorrelation 
tables. 


Predictor Variables 

There were three main parts to this study. In Part 
I, the predictor variables used were the Grade IX Depart¬ 
mental Examinations (Variables 1, 2, 3, 5 > and 7 in 





52 


Table I)• The Grade XII Departmental Examinations, the 
SCAT (V and Q) , and the Cooperative English Test (Tests A 
and part of C2) formed the predictor battery in Part II 
(Variables 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 in Table I). 
For Part III, the test battery consisted of the Parts I and 
II batteries in combination. Also, the SCAT and Cooper¬ 
ative tests were combined as a battery. Each part of the 
study sought to determine the effectiveness of various 
predictor variables for both over-all freshman success and 
success in the specific subject-matter areas. 

The Grade IX and XII Departmental Examinations are 
administered each year by the Alberta Department of 
Education. The students write these tests during the 
latter part of June. Promotion to Grade X and admission 
to the University of Alberta, respectively, are based on 
the results of these tests. With the exception of the 
Grade IX reading test and the general test, the tests are 
prepared for the Department of Education by appointed 
school officials and are subject to review and approval by 
an examination committee in each subject. Instructions 
provided for the guidance of those setting examinations 
always stress the importance of curricular validity. To 
assure reliable marking separate reading committees for 
each subject or for each paper of each grade are appointed. 
Ordinarily these committees consist of teachers who in the 



53 


TABLE I 

PREDICTOR VARIABLES 


Variable 

Number 

Predictor 

Grade IX Departmentals 

1 . 

Gr. IX General Test 

2 . 

IX Reading 

3. 

IX Literature 

4. 

IX Social Studies A 

5. 

IX Social Studies B 

6 . 

IX Mathematics 

7. 

IX Science 

Grade XII Departmental 

8. 

XII English 

9. 

XII Social Studies 

10 . 

XII Science (X) 

11 . 

XII Mathematics (X) 

12 . 

XII Foreign Language (X) 

Grade XII Psychological Test 

13. 

SCAT V 

14. 

SCAT Q 

University Entrance Tests 

15. 

Coop. English Mechanics 

16 . 

Coop. English Reading 
Comprehension 

























54 


TABLE II 

CRITERION VARIABLES 


Variable Criterion Numbe f of *» Ue 

Number m Appendix 


18 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Chemistry 40, 42 

XX 

18 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Physics 40, 41 

XXI 

18 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Mathematics 1,3,5,40,45 

XXII 

17 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Accounting 1 

XXIII 

18 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Commercial Law 41 

XXIV 

17 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Botany 1, 5 

XXV 

18 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Zoology 1 

XXVI 

17 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Geology 1 

XXVII 

17 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Geography 1 

XXVIII 

18 

• 

• 

• 

• 

University Average 

XXIX 

















.... 





■ 










.... 



.... ... 



.... . 



. . . 



.... 













55 


current year have been teaching the subject to be read. 

For each subject there is a supervisor whose duty is to 
determine the final marking scheme and to ensure the 
maintenance of a uniform standard. Approximately normal 
distributions of final scores are obtained by a scaling 
operation. This keeps the percentage of passes and the 
median mark constant from subject to subject and from 
year to year. 

Both the Grade IX and Grade XII Departmental 
Examinations are composed of a variety of objective ques¬ 
tions, written short answer, and full essay type questions. 
The major emphasis is on the objective and short answer 
type. Answers are written in spaces provided in the 
question booklet; however, special answer sheets are used 
for the purpose of scoring objective questions by IBM 
scoring machines. The time for each test varies from one 
and a half to two and a half hours for the Grade IX tests 
to three hours for the Grade XII tests. 

Both the Grade IX General Test and the Reading 
Test are standardized tests. The former is a test of 
academic aptitude. All of the Departmental Examinations, 
except the Grade IX General Test, may be termed as specific 
achievement tests. It should be noted that test B in 
Grade IX Social Studies is a test of language. 



56 


Some further comments on the Grade XII predictors 
are pertinent. As noted in parentheses in Table I, average 
scores were calculated and used for Science, Mathematics, 
and Foreign Language. The Science mean was obtained from 
marks on two subjects of the Biology, Chemistry, and 
Physics group. Which two marks were averaged depended 
upon which combination the student had taken. In Mathe¬ 
matics, the average score was that of Mathematics 30 and 
Mathematics 31> if both subjects were taken. Mathematics 
31 marks are assigned by the teacher. French was the 
Foreign Language course taken by a large majority of the 
Grade XII students. 

The psychological test and the university entrance 
tests included in the Grade XII predictor battery were tests 
developed by the Cooperative Test Division of Educational 
Testing Service. An academic aptitude test, the School 
and College Ability Test (SCAT), Form IA, is intended 
primarily to measure the ability of college freshmen and 
sophomores to succeed in future academic work. There are 
four parts or subtests, two of which (Parts I and III) 
yield a Verbal Score (V) and the other two (Parts II and 
IV) yield a Quantitative score (Q) . Also, a Total score, 
based on all four parts, can be obtained. The test items 
are all multiple-choice items; the student has to choose 
the best answer from among five choices presented. The 



57 


time allowed in minutes for each part is as follows: 

Part I, 15; Part II, 20; Part III, 10; and Part IV, 25. 

For interpretations, the raw scores on the four parts are 
converted by means of tables on the reverse side of the 
scoring key into a Verbal score, a Quantitative score, 
and a Total score. These three converted scores are then 
translated into percentile ranks through the use of norms 
tables. Norms based on a large sample of students tested 
in the fall are presented in the Manual for Interpreting 
Scores. Reliabilities obtained by using the Kuder- 
Richardson Formula are reported in the Technical Report 
(pp. 10-11). An analysis for grade 13, the mid-grade of 
Level 1, showed a reliability of .9 2 for the Verbal score, 
.93 for the Quantitative score, and .95 for the Total score. 
However, it was stated that since these results are for 
complete grade groups, they are over-estimates of the 
reliability for a grade within a school (p. 11). 

The Cooperative Tests in English are subject-matter 
achievement tests of a highly factual nature. Test A, 
Mechanics of Expression, is a 40 minute test with three 
parts. The parts are on grammatical usage, punctuation 
and capitalization, and spelling. Answers are recorded on 
a separate answer sheet. Raw scores or scaled scores can 
be obtained which may be transmuted into percentile ranks. 
Test C2, Reading Comprehension, Higher Level, is also a 


. 

, „ i l 

. 


* ' ■;■ 

- 

* 

l 41 . v 

. .. * 

' • 




40 minute test with two parts. These are vocabulary and 
reading. The procedures used for recording answers and 
scoring are the same as those for Test A. Local norms 
are prepared and used by the University of Alberta. Only 
the Reading Comprehension part was administered by the 
University. 


Crite ria 

The final averages obtained by the freshmen sample 
in all university subjects were used as the University 
Average criterion variable. In each of the courses the 
respective criterion variables consisted of the final 
marks given by the instructors. Groups of like courses 
were combined, e.g. Chemistry 40 , 42, to provide an N of 
meaningful size. These final averages and marks were 
obtained by the students in the spring of 1957. 

All the data were recorded on I.B.M. punched cards 


for analysis. 





. 

» 

. 


. - 

. 







■ C. , ' , .1. : : .-v • ' ■ :■ ’B vA. 


. 

♦ - . . .. .• • ■ ■. •: ' ■ 

. 

. , ... . ' . . ■ . ■■ ■ ■ . ' 






Statis t ical Treatment 

For each sample the means, standard deviations. 


59 


variances, and intercorrelations of all variables were 
computed.^ The validity of each predictor was also deter¬ 
mined. The intercorrelations and validities for each 
criterion were arranged in tabular form. Thus there were 
four 17 by 17 and five 18 by 18 product-moment correlation 
matrices (See Appendix). Within each matrix the block 
numbered 1 to 7 vertically and horizontally represents the 
Grade IX predictor intercorrelations; the block numbered 8 
to 16 vertically and horizontally represents the Grade XII 
and University entrance test predictor intercorrelations; 
the combined group of predictor intercorrelations is numbered 
1 to 16 in the same manner. The numbers of the validity 
coefficients have been listed in Table II. 

Subsequently, the corrected multiple correlation 
coefficients and the relative beta weights of each of the 


4he intercorrelation matrices were derived from the 
punched card data using the University of Washington IBM 650. 
Special recognition for this work is made to Dr. D. B. Black 
of the University of Alberta, and Dr. Don Decker, Director, 
Computational Center, Dr. August Dvorak and Dr. Calvin R. 
Wright, Division of Counseling and Testing Services, all of 
the University of Washington. These calculations were 
financed by a research grant from the Alberta Advisory 
Committee on Educational Research. 






60 


predictors were determined for each criterion. This was 
done in three parts: first, using the Grade IX predictors; 
second, using the Grade XII and University entrance test 
predictors; and third, using the two batteries in combi¬ 
nation. Also treated in like manner were the SCAT and 
Cooperative tests combined as a battery. 

A method proposed by Horst and Smith (1950) was 
used to obtain the multiple Rs and the beta weights. It 
is more rapid than the conventional methods. By an iter¬ 
ative procedure those variables which together yield the 
largest multiple correlation with the criterion are 
selected in sequence. Rapid estimates of the regression 
weights and the multiple correlation at that point are 
available after every iteration (p. 271). In an empirical 
comparison of three multiple correlation techniques, 

Gordon (1954) found that, in general, the Horst composite 
has a slightly lower validity than the composites selected 
by the Wherry-Doolittle or Cowles-Crout methods. However, 
this was stated to be a function of the approximate values 
of the regression weights rather than of the variables 
selected for the composite. Furthermore, the time saved 
by the Horst method was said to vary with the degree of 
accuracy desired. However, much time could be saved if 
the same basic table of intercorrelations among the 
predictor variables could be used for all samples. The 



61 


general conclusion was that the Horst technique was satis¬ 
factory and time saving and gave results which were accu¬ 
rate enough for most practical problems (pp. 133-37). 

Interpretation of Findings 
All results were presented in tabular form. In 
each part of the study, the best single predictors and the 
relationship to the criteria of the set of predictors when 
combined as a team in a test battery were noted. An 
indication of the value of the tests for predicting fresh¬ 
man success in the selected criteria at the University of 
Alberta was obtained. In conclusion, the chief impli¬ 
cations of the principal findings for guidance purposes 
were discussed. 










. 

. 




■ < . 


















CHAPTER IV 


RESULTS OF THE STUDY 

The results of this study were arranged and reported 
in tabular form. Tables III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, 
and XI show the means and standard deviations of the pre¬ 
dictor and criterion variables. Table XII shows the valid¬ 
ities of the individual predictor variables. 

Predicting with the Grade IX Battery 

The results in Table XIII show that: 

1. The multiple correlation coefficients ranged 
from .278 to .551* with a median of . 414 * 

2. All the multiple correlation coefficients, except 
the ones for Commercial Law, Botany, and Geology, were 
significant at the .01 level. The R for Botany was signif¬ 
icant at the .05 level. 

3* Grade IX Science made the largest contribution 
in the battery selected for predicting Geography scores. 

4. The same and only two tests. Grade IX Social 
Studies B (Language) and Mathematics, comprised the team 
for predicting success in the Physics and Zoology criteria. 

5. Of the batteries in which the Grade IX General 
Test was included, only the ones predicting success in 
freshman Mathematics, Commercial Law, and Geography had a 
significant R. 



, t :y , ■ v : ■ ,,. , v , vx y . . " . ■ 

. 

. 

■ . 'i :V ' ... ; i . 

, 

. : y:-, • /• j. .:: 

: : . . • •. . . n 

* 

. 


63 


TABLE III 

MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND VARIANCES 
OF THE SIXTEEN PREDICTOR VARIABLES AND OF 
THE CHEMISTRY CRITERION (N = 336) 


Variable 


Mean S.D. Variance 


Predictor Variables 


Gr. IX General Test . . 


76.00 

13.53 

183.2 

IX Reading .... 


75.21 

14.43 

208.1 

IX Literature . . . 


35.43 

6.73 

45.3 

IX Social Studies A 

• • • • 

72.68 

14.06 

197.7 

IX Social Studies B 

• • • • 

78.90 

12.60 

158.7 

IX Mathematics . . 


79.37 

12.28 

150.8 

IX Science .... 


77.35 

13.54 

183.4 

Gr. XII English .... 


67.61 

10.41 

108.5 

XII Social Studies . 


72.45 

10.36 

107.3 

XII Science (I) . . 

• • • • 

71.84 

9.94 

98.8 

XII Mathematics (X) 

• • • • 

69.66 

11.32 

128.1 

XII Foreign Language 

(X) . . 

68.16 

11.53 

134.0 

SCAT V . 


38.37 

8.90 

79.2 

SCAT Q . 


43.17 

5.04 

25.4 

Coop. English Mechanics 

• t • • 

57.54 

9.58 

91.9 

Coop. English Reading 


- 27.88 

8.38 

70.3 

Criterion Variable 





Chemistry 4 0 , 42 • • • • 


60.23 

13.99 

195.7 


NOTE: For SCAT (V and Q), Cooperative English 
Reading (Part II), and Grade XII English, raw scores were 
used. For the other predictor variables, raw scores were 
divided by two. 

























. 






: 
























64 


TABLE IV 

MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND VARIANCES 
OF THE SIXTEEN PREDICTOR VARIABLES AND OF 
THE PHYSICS CRITERION (N = S3) 


Variable Mean S.D. Variance 


Predictor Variables 


Gr. IX 
IX 
IX 
IX 
IX 
IX 
IX 

General Test . 

Reading . 

Literature . 

Social Studies A . . . . 
Social Studies B . . . . 

Mathematics . 

Science . 

75.41 

76.07 

35.42 
74.66 
78.72 
76.28 
75.76 

13.59 
13.93 
6.60 
13.BO 
12.52 
13.47 
14.03 

1 84.8 

194-0 

43.6 

190.5 

156.8 
181.4 
196.8 

Gr. XII 
XII 
XII 
XII 
XII 

English . 

Social Studies . 

Science (X) . 

Mathematics (X) ._. . . 

Foreign Language (X) . . 

68.54 

71.41 

68.59 

65.39 

68.73 

10.68 

10.01 

9 • 44 
11.92 
10.72 

114.1 

100.2 
89.1 

142.1 

114.9 

SCAT V 
SCAT Q 


38.23 

41.99 

8.73 

6.09 

76.3 

37.1 

Coop. English Mechanics .... 
Coop. English Reading . 

53.83 

26.33 

9.36 

8.75 

37.6 

76.5 

Criterion Variable 




Physics 

40, 41 . 

56.22 

13.39 

192.9 


NOTE: For SCAT (V and Q), Cooperative English 
Reading (Part II), and Grade XII English, raw scores were 
used. For the other predictor variables, raw scores were 
divided by two. 






































65 


TABLE V 

MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND VARIANCES 
OF THE SIXTEEN PREDICTOR VARIABLES AND OF 
THE MATHEMATICS CRITERION (N = 137) 


Variable Mean S.D. Variance 


Predictor Variables 


Gr. IX General Test . . 
IX Reading .... 
IX Literature . . . 
IX Social Studies A 
IX Social Studies B 
IX Mathematics . . 
IX Science .... 

• • • • 

• • • t 

79.33 

78.28 

36.28 
74.98 
82.09 
80.56 
80.13 

14.01 

14-54 

7.59 

14.59 

11.37 

12.74 

13.41 

196.2 

211.3 
57.6 

212.9 

140.8 

162.4 
179.7 

Gr. XII English .... 
XII Social Studies . 
XII Science (X). . . 
XII Mathematics (X) 
XII Foreign Language 

• • • • 

(X) . . 

69.66 

73.76 

71.65 

70.48 

70.09 

10.56 

10.62 

10.31 

11.38 

12.56 

111.5 

112.9 

106.3 

141.2 

157.8 

SCAT V ... . 

SCAT Q . 


40.28 

44.51 

8.30 

4.77 

77.4 

22.7 

Coop. English Mechanics 
Coop. English Reading 

• • • • 

59.17 

29.55 

9.32 
8.40 

96.5 

70.5 

Criterion Variable 





Mathematics 1, 3 , 5 , 40, 

45 . . 

58.32 

17.96 

322.5 


NOTE: For SCAT (V and Q), Cooperative English 
Reading (Part II), and Grade XII English, raw scores were 
used. For the other predictor variables, raw scores were 
divided by two. 































66 


TABLE VI 

MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND VARIANCES OF THE SIXTEEN 
PREDICTOR VARIABLES AND OF THE ACCOUNTING AND 
COMMERCIAL LAW CRITERIA (N = 31) 


Variable 


Mean S.D. Variance 


Predictor Variables 


Gr. IX General Test . . 
IX Reading .... 
IX Literature . . . 
IX Social Studies A 
IX Social Studies B 
IX Mathematics . . 
IX Science .... 

• • • • 

• • • • 

75.16 

75.55 

32.77 

71.77 
78.97 
75.26 
77.00 

12.80 

15.46 

6.13 

14.21 

10.29 

13.20 

13.07 

163.8 
239.0 

37.6 

201.9 
105.3 
174.1 
170.7 

Gr. XII English .... 
XII Social Studies . 
XII Science (X) . . 

XII Mathematics (X) 
XII Foreign Language 

• • • • 

• • • • 

(X) . . 

65.13 

70.4-5 

67.32 

65.42 

63.94 

11.80 

10.12 

7.53 

9.95 

10.05 

139.3 

102.5 

57.4 

99.0 

101.0 

SCAT V . 

SCAT Q . 


37.87 

44 • 94 

7.61 

4.12 

57.9 

17.0 

Coop. English Mechanics 
Coop. English Reading 

• • • • 

57.03 

31.61 

9.89 

8.37 

97.9 

70.1 

Criterion Variables 





Accounting 1 ..... 

Commercial Law 41 ... 


61.29 

62.03 

12.96 

9.36 

167.9 

37.6 


NOTE: For SCAT (V and Q), Cooperative English 
Reading (Part II), and Grade XII English, raw scores were 
used. For the other predictor variables, raw scores were 
divided by two. 











































































. 
















67 


TABLE VII 


MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND VARIANCES 
OF THE SIXTEEN PREDICTOR VARIABLES AND OF 
THE BOTANY CRITERION (N = 65 ) 


Variable Mean S.D. Variance 


Predictor Variable 


Gr. IX General Test . 

IX Reading . 

IX Literature . 

IX Social Studies A . . . . 
IX Social Studies B . . . . 

IX Mathematics . 

IX Science . 

72.46 
74-18 
35.91 
76.33 
78.85 
76.40 
74-75 

15.15 

13.02 

6.14 

13.01 

11.55 

11.91 

13.26 

229.4 
169.6 

37.7 

169.2 

133.5 
142.0 
175.9 

Gr. XII English . 

XII Social Studies . 

XII Science (X) . 

XII Mathematics (X) ._. . . 

XII Foreign Language (X) . . 

69.37 

71.34 

69.58 

62.29 

70.09 

8.61 

9.43 

11.84 

11.49 

12.11 

74.2 

89.9 

140.3 

132.0 

146.5 

SCAT V . 

SCAT Q . 

38.77 

41.09 

8.16 

5.55 

66.5 

30.8 

Coop. English Mechanics .... 
Coop. English Reading . 

59.71 

27.63 

8.82 

6.96 

77.7 

48.4 

Criterion Variable 




Botany 1, 5 . 

58.32 

16.52 

273.0 


NOTE: For SCAT (V and Q), Cooperative English 
Reading (Part II), and Grade XII English, raw scores were 
used. For the other predictor variables, raw scores were 
divided by two. 























































. 

a --to n>:.. 

. . . 

„ . . 

. 

. 



* 













68 


TABLE VIII 

MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND VARIANCES 
OF THE SIXTEEN PREDICTOR VARIABLES AND OF 
THE ZOOLOGY CRITERION (N = 127) 


Variable 


Mean 

S.D. 

Variance 

Predictor Variables 





Gr. IX General Test . . 
IX Reading .... 
IX Literature . . . 
IX Social Studies A 
IX Social Studies B 
IX Mathematics . . 
IX Science .... 

• • • • 

• • • # 

75.76 

77.49 

38.08 

77.11 

77.41 

76.25 

72.67 

H.53 

14.27 

6.19 

12.20 

12.60 

13.37 

14.19 

211.1 

203.5 

38.3 

148.8 

158.8 

178.9 

201.3 

C-r. XII English .... 
XII Social Studies . 
XII Science (X) . . 

XII Mathematics (X) 
XII Foreign Language 

t • • • 

• • • • 

(X) . . 

72.97 

70.86 

69.63 

63.21 

68.71 

9.85 

9.67 

10.28 

10.11 

10.58 

97.1 

93.5 

105.7 

102.3 

112.0 

SCAT V . 

SCAT Q . 


39.16 

40.56 

9.04 

6.32 

81.8 

40.0 

Coop. English Mechanics 
Coop. English Reading . 

• • • • 

61.33 

29.40 

8.42 

9.00 

70.9 

80.9 

Criterion Variable 





Zoology 1 . 

• • • 

57.63 

12.71 

161.6 


NOTE: For SCAT (V and Q), Cooperative English 

Reading (Part II), and Grade XII English, raw scores were 
used. For the other predictor variables, raw scores were 
divided by two. 






















































. 







. 




.» ... 







• . 



« 

• 


» 





. 



























. 

* 





. 



* 

- 


* 




* 

. . . 




• 







. , • 

. 




. 

,, 


V 


. 






. 

• 








. 

* 

. 



• 






. 



• 









. 







. 




» . 










. 


, 




# 












* 


. 


. 


* 








. 























69 


TABLE IX 

MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND VARIANCES 
OF THE SIXTEEN PREDICTOR VARIABLES AND OF 
THE GEOLOGY CRITERION (N = 43) 


Variable 


Mean 

S.D. 

Variance 

Predictor Variables 





Gr. IX General Test . . 
IX Reading .... 
IX Literature . . . 
IX Social Studies A 
IX Social Studies B 
IX Mathematics . . 
IX Science . . . 

• • ♦ • 

• • • • 

72.47 

75.03 

35.74 

73.95 

75.79 

72.30 

73.40 

13.41 

10.25 

6.43 

14.90 

I2.4O 

12.62 

13.22 

179.8 

105.0 

41.4 

222.1 

153.3 

159.4 
174.3 

Gr. XII English .... 
XII Social Studies 
XII Science (X) . . 

XII Mathematics (X) 
XII Foreign Language 

• • • • 

• • • • 

(X) . . 

67.77 

70.28 

67.28 
61.65 
67.05 

10.14 

9.21 

10.18 

10.43 

12.61 

102.8 

34.9 

103.7 

108.8 
159.0 

SCAT V . 

SCAT Q . 


38.88 

40.84 

6.65 

5.77 

44-2 

33.3 

Coop. English Mechanics 
Coop. English Reading 

• • • • 

55.74 

27.40 

10.76 

6.87 

115.7 

47.2 

Criterion Variable 





Geology 1 . 


63.77 

10.04 

100.9 


NOTE: For SCAT (V and Q), Cooperative English 
Reading (Part II) , and Grade XII English, raw scores were 
used. For the other predictor variables, raw scorew were 
divided by two. 







































- 




. 
















- 







.. 




* ■ f'j ■ ■ ■■ 








- 






















70 


TABLE X 


MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND VARIANCES 
OF THE SIXTEEN PREDICTOR VARIABLES AND OF 
THE GEOGRAPHY CRITERION (N = 46 ) 


Variable Mean S.D. Variance 


Predictor Variables 


Gr. IX General Test . 

IX Reading . 

IX Literature . 

IX Social Studies A . . . . 
IX Social Studies B . . . . 

IX Mathematics . 

IX Science . 

75.06 

78.72 

37.36 

75.55 

80.34 

76.43 

76.19 

15.21 

12.00 

6.41 

11.93 

11.67 

12.67 
14.16 

231.5 

144.1 
41.1 

142.4 

136.2 

160.5 
200.4 

Gr. XII English . 

XII Social Studies . 

XII Science (X) . 

XII Mathematics (X) .... 

XII Foreign Language (X) . . 

72.17 

73.19 

66.96 

61.60 

68.09 

9.43 

9.42 

10.34 

12.38 

11.18 

89.9 

88.8 

106.9 

153.3 

125.1 

SCAT V . 

SCAT Q . 

39.23 

40.53 

9.77 

5.34 

95.4 

28.5 

Coop. English Mechanics .... 
Coop. English Reading . 

59.43 

29.11 

10.44 

7.39 

108.9 

54-6 

Criterion Variable 




Geography 1.. 

62.47 

8.86 

78.5 


NOTE: For SCAT (V and Q), Cooperative English 

Reading (Part II), and Grade XII English, raw scores were 
used. For the other predictor variables, raw scores were 
divided by two. 








































71 


TABLE XI 


MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND VARIANCES OF THE 
SIXTEEN PREDICTOR VARIABLES AND OF THE 
UNIVERSITY AVERAGE CRITERION (N = 529) 


Variable Mean S.D. Variance 


Predictor Variables 


Gr. IX General Test . 

IX Reading . 

IX Literature . 

IX Social Studies A . . . . 
IX Social Studies B . . . . 

IX Mathematics . 

IX Science . 

75.73 

75.83 

35.82 

73.52 

78.76 

78.25 

76.68 

13.98 

14.27 

6.84 

13.91 

12.43 

12.42 

13.61 

195.5 

203.6 
46.8 

193-4 

154.6 

154.3 

185.3 

Gr. XII English . 

XII Social Studies . 

XII Science (X) . 

XII Mathematics (X) . . 

XII Foreign Language (X) . . 

68.73 

72.29 

70.24 

67.21 

68.62 

10.61 

10.21 

10.42 

12.29 

12.20 

112.7 
104.2 

108.7 
151.1 

148.8 

SCAT V . 

SCAT Q . 

38.74 

42.65 

9.06 

5.31 

82.2 

28.2 

Coop. English Mechanics .... 
Coop. English Reading . 

58.19 

28.62 

9.73 

8.56 

94.7 

73.2 

Criterion Variable 




University Average . 

60.96 

10.58 

111.8 


NOTE: For SCAT (V and Q), Cooperative English 

Reading (Part II), and Grade XII English, raw scores were 
used. For the other predictor variables, raw scores were 
divided by two. 













































VALIDITIES FOR THE SIXTEEN PREDICTORS OF FRESHMAN SUCCESS IN 
EACH OF THE TEN CRITERIA 


72 


n 


X 

d P 


> 0 
•H > 

Pi <1 


ttf) 

O H 

0 

O 


O 


p xr\ 

O *X 

pq H 


i—l 

> 

o3 

• X 

-P 

o 

O H 

X o 
-p X* 
cd *\ 

S ^ 


X * 

PM o 

X" 


02 

X" 


LT\tO C\f n \0(0^'4-OHOOH n}-H O 
XcOP20-cOrHONCOOP2t)Ol>ON^002t> 
XnO X CO fH 02 r-H rH 

* * * * * * * * •< if K ¥ f * H 

¥ #***5*fc**-** * $ * * 

X'OnOnOOnXXI >‘-0020 XXnD ^T\ 02 
Ov0OtX)O!>020202C0OC0C0I>C0O 
P 2 rHrHrHcococoP 2 XnO X 02 02 02 H 


* 7 *■ ^ *: * v* 

* ^ 

IX^f^HiO^OiOHfiOCOOOitO COnO 

02t)0v0O0--^-C0t0r0's0l>O£>I> l OfO 
CO 02 02 H^OiAH^tOC^c^OiHOO 


¥ . 

~J< ^ ^ 

sj-C2 O lAOtO OC2 OtO >^tO O H 
tO vO ON IT\ XtO mXtO On 0 CO CO X CO I> 
HHOHOHOOO NfstOH O^H H 

O2XOWN02l>I>O22>XCOrHO20N‘-OiX) 
tO OiONNONOXX^OONrHXOHO-iocy 
i—! i—! i—! i—I 02 CO cO i —\ CO 0- CO CO 02 i—! O O? 

*. * * * 

'¥ V x ¥ ^ V 

I>I>COOH'<2-ON02-tOONl>-cO^OHO 
OtOOtQOcoOH -to2v0D0\0 O oro 
O O H rH 02 02 02 H XI> NfCOHHOO 

* -V 

* * % Y 

0N2>02O2I>C002'^-0N0Nt0N0H-^*HO 
02C0O r—I 02r—I nO C0 1 -TM>C0O0nU002O 
OCMHOnJ-cOO^ H^-vt-^fOHOiHH 

% ¥ *• V 

U>C0HO2O\002v0t)0v0Ou0H cOnO H 
CO CO O- ONCOONvOxOtO HtX) X02 vO XnO 
HHOOjrONtHO XnO xfcnOcocOH 

jc *• * #• * * *-**■* * 

¥. ***;*•*. 

-tH O2v0 voXnO OOHOOxtHstO 
-^02 02 02I>ONONONt)002HsOHrHtOO 
020fHHCOC0 02r-JCO'vO's0^f02c002rH 

* & *• ¥ >i. i ^ Y 

¥ X *■ * V * >< * * 

iO-tHCMO\OC>OC20i(>OOOOs}- 
HHOC2C^HOOOO«3COH'tHO 
r—I H rH 02 CO XC\| O COO XXrH CO H H 

2<**k**-****ii * * Y * 

* •*: * *x-**.2cYY*;**-Y 2 * 

UO ONsO cou^to cOHOHOH'<tO 
^•OOOfOH^OiOOCO COnO H O to 
i—! t—I i—! i—! CO CO CO 02 XnO LT\ XP2 CO 02 rH 


uo 

ON 

xo 

02 

02 

xo 

xo 

vO 

O 

X 

CO 


• 


ON 

co 

xn 

X 

i—l 


• 


O 

2> 

02 

02 

02 

H 

• 


O 

XP\ 

to 

NO 

1—1 


• 


xo 

1—1 

X 

CO 

O? 


• 


i—1 

H 

i—1 

co 

CO 


• 


o 

i> 

ON 

co 

cy 

i—i 

• 


o 

co 

vO 

to 

02 


• 


o- 

NO 

to 

CO 

02 

co 

• 







< 

m 






P 









/~s 




0 

P> p> 


•p 



0 

0 


0 IX 




t> 

0 0 


0 



0 

0 

0 

0^-S N^ 


• • 


< 



0 


0 

•H 

•rH 

O 

•HIX 


X d 



-P -P 


EH 


P 

"d 

■d 

•rH 

d w tuo 


O 0 



X X 




0 


0 

P» 

0 Pi 


0 0 


-P 

0 0 


H 

&J0 

-P 

-p 

P> 

0 

0 x: P> 0IX cd 


S (X 


•H 

o o 


0 


0 

CO 

CO 

B 

O 0 CO Owj 




0 

•H *H 


p 

•rH 

P 



0 

0 *H Pi 


X X 


P 

Ch Ph 


0 

X! 

0 

• 

• 

XI 

0 H • 0 X • 


0 0 


0 

•H *H 

P 

0 

0 

-P 

o 

p 

-p 

•H MOrl-P P 


•H «H 


t> 

X X 

o 

0 

0 

*H 

o 

o 

0 

0 X 0 0 0 0 


i—i r—I 

P 

•H 

txO bD 

-p 

O 


XI 

CO 

CO 

S 

CO W CO co s 


tuo £xO 


X 

•H -H 

o 









X X 

X 

x> 

CO CO 

•H 

X 

X 

X 

[xj 

X 

X 

X M M M M M 


(X (X 

0 

rH 

\ . 

d 

M 

M 

M 

M 

tH 

M 



•H 


% ^ 

0 







K<H kX Ks* 

rS rS rS rS rS 


• • 

d ii 



p 








eh EH 

P. Ph 1 

! 0 



a, 

• 






• 

<d <H 

O O 1 

X J23 




P 






p 

o o 

O O 





O 






o 

CO CO o o 





O 

O 

0 

•H 

XI 

P> 


0 

p 

Pi 

d 

s 

fckO 

X 

•H 
-p 
0 
I—I 

X 

o 

H 

0 

o 

Pi 

•H 

d 

0 

-P 

-P 

•H 

B 

o 

0 

0 

£ 

Pi 

o 

•H 
-P 
0 
r—I 
0 
P 
P 
O 
O 

0 

hfl 

0 


0 0 
> t> 
0 0 


iAH 
O O 















































RELATIVE BETA WEIGHTS, CORRECTED MULTIPLE CORRELATION 
COEFFICIENTS, AND SAMPLE SIZES FOR THE SEVEN 
GRADE IX PREDICTORS OF SUCCESS IN EACH 
OF TEN CRITERIA AT THE UNIVERSITY 
OF ALBERTA 


73 



• 

• • • • t> • • CV 


•H 

0 s • • • • i—1 • • if\ 


£> O 

rH • • • • 0^ • 


CO 

• 9 9 9 


9 

.a 

ICM>- cr\tO •CVCNivO-4- 


p 

vOc^HOtSO *OiAH\0 

i 

vO cti 

rH 0^ -vt * C<~\ -ct* CXJ CV 



99999 9999 

t | 

to 


1 

u 



o 

pq 

H-vf • to • • CO 

-p 

9 

vOMX)OiO • ifN • • H 

o 

CO 

i—1 i—1 c°\ cn ">3" • i—1 • • t—! 

•H 

m • 

• 9 9 9 9 9 9 

TJ 

CO 


0 



U 



Ph 





• • CV • . • • o • • 

X 

9 


M 

CO 

• • H • • • • • 


^ • 

• . 

• 

CO 

1 I 

lH 



O 



in 



O 

9 

• • to cv • to • • • • 

Ch 

P 

. • lPk 0n •£> . . . . 


C'VH 

• • 1—1 CN? *1—1 • • • • 

to 

f-q 

9 9 9 

P 


1 1 

rC 



bO 



•H 



0 




• 

o «VT\* • • • to • r— 1 


nzJ 

to • --3* • • • • CV • ir\ 


CV ctf 

o • cv • • • • cv • o 

p 

1 0 

9 9 9 9 

0 

pc: 

II II 

pq 




9 

• • CV • t''- IfX • -sfO • 


EH 

• • <r\ • vn H • vO £> • 


i—! • 

• • CN? • 0^ CV »CVH • 


O 

9 9 9 9 9 

1 1 



HH^H'AtOOHOOO 


O 

OCVO^O2>t0O'<i-O 

PS 

c*\ -^tcv <r\ c^v m -4- 



sO c^k £> h i— 1 tr\t> c^vo on 

h 

2? 

e^to c^k t^k c^vO cv 



H H in 



m 



cv -t 






mH O 0 



O't-'tHH cJ3 



* * ~<t H aj 


O mbO v\ Jh 

O 

!>S "4* ^ Pi ^ *N|—! 1—1 !>a 0 


?H C^'H cdH £ > 


P 0 «s p •_!! t>» |>j pi) <cj 

0 

0 O i— ! Pi {>> ao tuo aj 

+ 

5 

*H *H • pi . a O O P • 

•H 

Smp|og£iir)HtiD> 


0 Sp a s p o o o -H 

O 

SPlnioooo00P 

I 




•H 

p 


EH 

O 


Law Botany 1, 5, and Geology 1, were significant at the .01 level. The 
Commercial Law was significant at the .05 level. 






















74 

6, All predictors except Grade IX Science contributed 
to the relationship with the Mathematics criterion, 

7. Of the beta weights listed in the battery for 
predicting freshman Mathematics scores, the ones for Grade 
IX Reading, Literature, and Social Studies A are negative. 
Reading, in particular, contributed a negative weight to 
each battery in which it was included. 

Predictive Value of the Grade XII Battery, SCAT (V and Q) 
and Cooperative English Test Battery, and of the Two in 

Combi na tion 

From the results shown in Tables XIV, XV, and XVI it 
is evident that: 

1. The highest multiple correlations were obtained 

by combining the Grade XII Bs^ttery and the SCAT (V and Q) and 
Cooperative English Test Battery. These correlations (in 
Table XVI) ranged from .614 to .727 with a median of .681. 

2. Every multiple R for the SCAT and Cooperative 
Battery of predictors was lower than the corresponding value 
obtained for the Grade IX Battery. Table XVI shows that the 
SCAT scores made a contribution in the prediction of success 
in the Accounting and Botany criteria only. Adding the 
Cooperative English Mechanics Test to the Grade XII Depart¬ 
mental Examinations Battery improved the prediction of 
success in Accounting, Commercial Law, and Geology. The 
Cooperative English Reading Test contributed to improving 
















75 


TABLE XIV 

RELATIVE BETA WEIGHTS, CORRECTED MULTIPLE CORRELATION 
COEFFICIENTS, AND SAMPLE SIZES FOR THE FIVE GRADE XII 
PREDICTORS OF SUCCESS IN EACH OF TEN CRITERIA 
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


Beta Weights for Gr.XII Predictors 


Criterion 

N 

R c 

s 

Eng. 

9 

S.S. 

10 

Sci.X 

11 

Math X 

12 

F.L.X 

Chemistry 40>42 

336 

.698 

• • • 

.062 

.566 

.139 

• • • 

Physics 40,41 

33 

.698 

-.085 

• • • 

.722 

• • • 

• • • 

Math.1,3,4,40 ,45 

137 

.653 

-.112 

• • • 

.400 

.348 

• • • 

Accounting 1 

31 

.655 

• • • 

.315 

.509 

• • • 

• • • 

Comm. Law 41 

31 

.604 

• • • 

. 443 

.327 

• • • 

• • • 

Botany 1,5 

65 

.720 

-.126 

• • « 

.759 

• • • 

• • • 

Z oology 1 

127 

.715 

-.083 

• « • 

.744 

• • • 

• • • 

Geology 1 

43 

.526 

-.257 

• # • 

.336 

.257 

• • • 

Geography 1 

46 

.608 

• • • 

.288 

.433 

• • • 

• • • 

Univ. Average 

5^9 

.656 

• • • 

.120 

.425 

.154 

.087 














76 


TABLE XV 

RELATIVE BETA WEIGHTS, CORRECTED MULTIPLE CORRELATION 
COEFFICIENTS, AND SAMPLE SIZES FOR THE SCAT (V AND Q) 
AND COOPERATIVE ENGLISH TESTS (MECHANICS AND 
READING) AS PREDICTORS OF SUCCESS IN EACH 
OF TEN CRITERIA AT THE UNIVERSITY 
OF ALBERTA 





Beta Weight 

for Predictor 

Criterion 

N 

H c 

SCAT 

COOP. 

ENGLISH 




V Q 

Mech. 

Read. 


Chemistry 40,42 

336 

.360 

.202 

.263 

... 

• • # 

Physics 40,41 

33 

.324 

• # • 

.340 

... 

♦ « • 

Math.1,3,4*40,45 

137 

.333 

.147 

.257 

.174 

-.189 

Accounting 1 

31 

.337 

-.226 

.241 

.337 

• • • 

Comm. Law 41 

31 

.180 

• • • 

.254 

• • • 

• • • 

Botany 1,5 

65 

.105 

.163 

• • • 

•.. 

• • • 

Zoology 1 

127 

.281 

.148 

.311 

-.128 

• • • 

Geology 1 

43 

.336 

• • • 

.346 

-.370 

.231 

Geography 1 

46 

.304 

• • • 

• • ♦ 

• • • 

.336 

Univ. Average 

529 

.326 

.134 

.211 

.093 

... 
















pq 

s 

pq 

<U 

EH 


Si 

f-J a 
pq pq eh 
cd > co 
(dH(xI 
O CO EH 
O 

w pq 

KWO 

JEhS 

0-4 <A 

h Pd pc; 
EH o eh 
JPhS 

O pq 

25 co 

pq X 

ONE 

WHH 
eh CO CO 

o Pd 

Pd S > 
Pd PL, M 
O S S 

CO 

•* o 

CO Q s 

O Q 
M •'S 
pq co <d 
S eh 

S M 
<d pq i—i 
EH H X 

pq o 
PP m pq 
Ph Q 
pq Ph <d 
> pq Pd 

MOO 

< ° 
i-d 


pq 

eh 

Ph 

O >H 
EH 
K M 
O CO 
<d Pd 

pq pq 

S M 

m s < 
to EH 
co pd 
co pq pq 
pq W pq 

O EH O 
O < 
to EH 

CO <! Ph 
O 

Ph <d 

O M 

Pd 

co pq 

od eh 

o M 
EH Pd 

o o 

M 

Q 

pq 

Pd 

pp 




• 

o 

. mo • 



vO cti 

• •••••• to i —1 • 


• 

H 0 

. 02 co • 


Oh 

Pd 

• • 

cn 

O 



Sh 

O 

• 


o 

O 


• • vQ vO l> • • co • m 

-P 

m o 

• • to vO vO • • • CO 

o 


H 0 

• • o 02 cv • • co . o 

•H 


g 

• • • • • 

cd 



1 1 

CD 




Ph 



.'<*••••• 

Oh 





1—1 


• 



• 

Ph 

EH 


1 

O 




o 

o 



O 

CO 


• • .. 



CO> 

•••o •••••• 

■rf 


t—1 

• • • x-. 

Pd 



• 

flj 



1 

•s 


IX 


EH 


• 

.o- 

<d 


02 o 

.z> 

o 


rH • 

. o 

CO 


Ph 

• 



IX 


M 


H S 


M 


0^ • CO • » ••sO *1—1 

X 


r—1 -P 

co • cy • • • • X- • m 


ctf 

M • CO • • • • 02 • rH 

• 


s 

• • • • 

Ph 




o 


IX 

• 


Ph 


\0 02 vO vO rn I> -<tCO H O 

O 


O *H 

v0020X'-<tl>-'4-'<t-'3-02 

4h 


M O 

mi>^mooi>i>--t 1 'O l -o 



CO 


tf) 




-P 




S 1 

i 



fcuO 


• 

c\i • • h co • • • m 02 

*H 


CO 

\Q • »\Q to • • • m i — 1 

0 


o • 

O • • CO m • • • H M 



CO 

• • • • • 

ctf 




•P 




0 


• 

• imn • • • co m • • 

pq 


ClO 

• to m • • • to J> • • 


co Pd 

• OM • • • O CV • • 



pq 

• • • • 

It 11 




to to covo cv r> m 


o 


OOHAH^CVHHvOm 


Pd 


\Q vO vO X vO X X vO vO vQ 




vO CO X H M m X CO vO O 


s 


co to co co co vO 02 '^X '02 

co M M m 




m 




02 " 4 - 
X" * 




•krl O 0 




O X" X" Mi — 1 &0 

M ctf 


£ 


O m bn m Ph 


o 


X*s Pd *sM M X 0 


•H 


Ph co *H ctf i — 1 S > 


Ph 


-P 0 «N-P Eq X X P<<d 


0 


91 OH Pi X M ti) flj 


-P 


•H M • pd • Pd O O Ph • 


•H 


g 03t! o g cdHH U0> 

0 X-P O g -P O O O -H 


pH 


1 

o 


SSojoooo00Pd 
oPL,S<dOpqxooo | 


77 








































78 


prediction in the Geology and Geography criteria. 

3. All beta weights for the Grade XII English 
variable were negative. 

4 . The Grade XII Science Average had relatively 
large beta weights in all prediction batteries except one, 
as shown in Tables XIV and XVI. The exception was the 
battery selected for predicting success in the Commercial 
Law criterion where Grade XII Social Studies contributed the 
largest weight. 

5. The Grade XII Foreign Language Average contributed 
only in the battery selected for predicting University 
Average scores. 

6 . Grade XII Social Studies and Mathematics con¬ 
tributed to the prediction of several criteria. 

Predictive Value of All Prediction Variables 

as a Teamed Combination 

Table XVII shows that: 

1. The multiple correlation coefficients ranged 
from .658 to .741 with a median of .708. 

2. The highest R found in this part of the study, 
and furthermore in the whole study, was .741. In fact, 
two coefficients of this size occurred, one for the 
battery of tests selected to predict freshman success in 
Accounting, the other for the battery predicting success 
in Botany. 









RELATIVE BETA WEIGHTS, CORRECTED MULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS 
AND SAMPLE SIZES FOR THE GRADE IX, GRADE XII, SCAT, AND 
COOPERATIVE ENGLISH PREDICTORS IN COMBINATION AS 
PREDICTORS OF SUCCESS IN EACH OF TEN CRITERIA 
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


79 




• 

• • • • • C<~\ • • • 



W> 




tO Pi 

• o • • • • i—| • • • 



PQ 

• • 

1 1 



• 




•H 

• • • • • • • O • 



I> O 

• • • • • • • O' A • 



CO 

• • 



• 

to 




CV • • • •'vO • • to • 



p 

h • • • • cv • • cv • 



vO cd 

• • • 

Ph 


s 

1 1 1 

O 




P 




o 


PQ 

to • ITv -4- • • • <TA • • 

•H 


• 

i —1 • cv to • • • to • • 

nd 

X 

^ CO 

i—1 • C'i C^v • • • rH • • 

<D 

M 

• 

• • • • 

Ph 


co 

t 

P-t 

0 

<cl 

tO •£> • • to • £> • • 

!h 

Td 

• 

ir\ • • • 

O 


-tco 

O • • « H • o~\ • • 

Cm 

cd 

• 

• • • • 



CO 

3 1 3 


Jh 



P 





O 

• 

• • O • • • • to • i — 1 



4^ j 

• • u~\ • • • • tO • UA 

•H 


C'VH 

• • H • • • • CNi • O 

0 


t-q 

• • # 




1 1 

cd 


« 

nd 

• • O'- to.. 

P 


cv cd 

• • U"A i—j.r-i 

0 


0 

• • rH "3" • • • • • r-i 

PQ 


PQ 

• • • 

1 3 1 



• 

E-i 

• • • • -4- • to i> • to 



H • ; 

1 • • • • 0 • tO • -T 



e 

• • • • • 0 cy • 0 




• • • • 




-ttO vO H 1 > O C^tO 


o 


O 0 s 0 s 1— 1 "T1— 1 !>• 1— 1 








vO H H c^vO O 


is; 


to c^\ cr\ t~\vO 

<r\ H H lt\ 




ir\ 




-<*• 




cvi ** 

^ 0 




•M—1 "-t 0 




O r— ( !—I txO 

•-t -<r H cd 


Pi 


0 «nW 3 LT\ Sh 


o 


Pi £ *\(H H 0 


•H 


Ph «*-H cd H ^ > 


fn 


P m rH p ^ 1 >> pL,<C| 


0 


wo ol >> ufl to) cd 


P 


•H -H • pi • Pi O O Ph • 


•H 


S wpl O g fljHH 


Jh 


0>sPogpooo-H 


O 


^4Qcdoooo00P! 

OPL,S^OPQES 300 Qd 


(Table continued on next page) 























TABLE XVII (continued) 


BO 




TD 

. to o • 


• 

vO d 

.02 C"- • 


o 

rH 0 

.oj cv • 


s 

CP 

• • 


w 




. 

• 



Ph 

,P 

• •vOrHO • • • • to 


o 

m o 

• • O' m ~<t • • • • -3" 


o 

i—1 0 

• •rH'4‘02 • • • • O 


o 

S 

• • • • 

1 




• cy • o cn • • • • 

P 

EH 

-^•cy 

\O»CO»rHC0*»« # 

O 


i—i 

o •o • no • • • • 

P 



• • • • 

O 



i 

•H 

o 







0 

CO 


• • • 02 • O • • • • 

P 


co> 

• • • o • • • • • 

CH 


i—i 

• • • CO • i—1 • • • • 




• • 

P 



1 1 

o 




<H 






• 

• • • • • 02 • • • o 

p 



• • • • • O' • • • to 

,P 


i—i • 


to 


Ip 

• • 

•H 




0 


IX 


ts. 

M 



H 


02 • rH • • • • CO • O' 

d 

ix! 

rH P 

in • to • • • • rH • '<2* 

! P 

i—1 0 

<—1 • CO • • • *02 • i—1 

0 


s 

• • • • 

PQ 

0 




•d 

IX 




• 

O' 02 O- 0- co m co HD co in 

0 

O -H 

0'020'>-ncoin^-coinc\2 



rH o 

in £> 02 m p to 2> m in P- 



CO 



O 

• 

l> to co 



CO 

• • hah • • • *02 



O' • 

• • • i—! O- • • • • i—1 



CO 


i 



m 




02 "t 
-3- * 




*\ i — | O 0 




O "H" '"■■T i—1 i—1 

'<r ^ ^ "T rH ctf 


P 


o m ho in jh 


0 


*\ P JX »n i—1 i — | |>5 0 


H 


H CO rl (d i — 1 ,P {> 


P 


P m *xp p >-» X, Pi <3 


0 


W O rH P X, b£) cD cti 


P 


•HP ♦ P • P O O Ph • 


H 


gW r pOgPHH'QO> 


Ph 


0 IXP O g P O O O -H 

O 


r p r pc\3OOOO00p 






























CHAPTER V 


CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 

Individual Predictors 

In Table XII, it is evident that the Grade IX 
predictors have in general low or negligible relationships 
with the criteria. The Grade IX tests which might be 
expected to have the highest relationship to the criteria 
did prove to be promising predictors. Attention is drawn 
to the importance of achievement in language for success 
at university. The Grade IX Departmental Examinations in 
Social Studies B (Language) , Mathematics, and Science were 
found to be the most useful in predicting success in the 
freshman course criteria and in the University Average 
criterion. The next best predictor seemed to be a test 
of academic aptitude, the General Test. 

The median correlations of Grade IX Social Studies B 
(Language), Mathematics, and Science with the various cri¬ 
teria were .330, .318, and .296, respectively. The accuracy 
with which such correlations enable us to predict (through 
the regression equation) individual scores in the freshman 
courses may be determined from E, the coefficient of fore¬ 
casting efficiency. From formula (38), E = l - J 1-r 2 , 
(Garrett, p. 176), the efficiency of the highest corre¬ 
lation obtained, between Grade IX Mathematics and Geography 1 









82 


(r - .532), in predicting the criterion scores may be put 
at 15 per cent. In terms of the coefficient of determination 
(r ), an r of .532 means that 28 per cent of the variance of 
Grade IX Mathematics scores is associated with the varia¬ 
bility in Geography 1 scores. Thus not much confidence can 
be placed in predictions made from the Grade IX results. 

Relatively, the standardized aptitude and achievement 
tests were inferior for prediction purposes as compared to 
the Grade XII Departmentals. The SCAT (V and Q) , Cooper¬ 
ative English Mechanics, and Cooperative Reading scores 
were in general not significantly related to the criteria, 
and had substantially lower correlations than did the best 
Grade IX predictors. The best individual predictors of the 
Grade XII Departmentals were the Science Average, Mathe¬ 
matics Average, and Social Studies, respectively. Of value 
was also the Grade XII Foreign Language Average. 

Median correlations for Science Average, Mathematics 
Average, Social Studies, and Foreign Language Average with 
the criteria were .621, .480, .409, and .370, respectively. 

Of all the individual predictors, the most outstanding and 
useful relationships found were those that existed between 
the Grade XII Science Average and each of the ten criteria. 
The only exception to this conclusion was that the Grade 
XII Social Studies scores were better predictors of the Com¬ 
mercial Law criterion than were the Science Average scores. 






83 

In comparison to the low value for the best Grade IX 
individual predictor, the correlations between the Grade XII 
Science Average and the criteria were high. The efficiency 
of the highest correlation obtained (r z .720), between the 
Grade XII Science Average and Botany, in predicting Botany 
scores may be put at 31 per cent. In terms of the coeffi- 
cient of determination (r^), an r of .720 means that 51 per 
cent of the variance in the Botany criterion has been 
accounted for. It is evident that much greater confidence 
can be placed on predictions made on the basis of the Grade 
XII Departmental Examinations, particularly the Science 
Average, than on predictions made on the basis of the Grade 
IX results. 


Predicting with the Grade IX Battery 
In the part of the study that dealt with the predic¬ 
tion of success by using the Grade IX predictors as a teamed 
combination only a slight improvement over the results 
obtained on the basis of the best individual predictors was 
achieved. Grade IX Mathematics, Social Studies B (Language), 
and Science, in that order, seemed to be the most useful, 
since they contributed considerably to prediction in each 
criteria which had a significant R. 

The battery selected for predicting University Aver¬ 
age scores was the most promising. The four tests included 






84 

were Grade IX Reading, Social Studies B(Language), Mathe¬ 
matics, and Science. Mathematics had the largest beta 
weight. The obtained R of .408 for this relationship 
means that the efficiency of the selected battery of tests 
predicting University Average scores may be put at 9 per 
cent. In terms of the coefficient of determination (R ) , 
this battery of predictor tests accounted for 17 per cent 
of the criterion variance, as compared to 14 per cent 
accounted for by the best individual predictor. Such 
results are too low to warrant the setting up of regression 
equations. 

Predictive Value of the Grade XII Battery, SCAT (V and Q) 

and Cooperative English Test Battery, and of the Two in 

Combination 

There was a marked difference in the size of the 
multiple correlation coefficients for the SCAT and Cooper¬ 
ative Battery as compared to those for the Grade XII 
Departmentals Battery; the latter correlations were con¬ 
siderably higher. Very little improvement was obtained by 
the two batteries, as only three increases in the sizes of 
the coefficients were of any importance. These were for 
the batteries selected to predict freshman success in 
Accounting, Commercial Law, Geology, and Geography. The 
greatest improvement was in the prediction of Accounting 
scores where the R was increased from .655 to .727. 
















35 

Again, the best team of predictors for each criterion 
in this part of the study did not produce any substantial 
improvement as compared to the results obtained on the basis 
of the best individual predictors. For example, the 
obtained R of . 656 , in Table XVI, for the relationship 
between the selected team of predictors and the University 
Average criterion means that the efficiency of the selected 
battery of tests predicting the criterion scores may be put 
at 25 per cent. The efficiency for the corresponding best 
Individual predictor was 22 per cent. In terms of the 

p 

coefficient of determination (R ) , this battery of tests 
accounted for 43 per cent of the criterion variance, as 
compared to 40 per cent accounted for by the best individual 
predictor. 

The negative beta weights for the Grade XII English 
variable, as well as the negative weights for SCAT (V and Q) 
in Table XVI, may be evidences that the testsare "suppres¬ 
sion variables." Levine (1952) stated that "an effective 
suppression test is one which measures only the non-valid 
variance which is present in an otherwise valid test 
(predictor)." (p. 313) Thus when negative weights appear, 
it is with variables whose criterion correlations are low 
as compared with those for which they are suppressors. 

In the case of the negative weight (-.406) of the 
SCAT V score for the Accounting criterion, the zero order 





86 


correlation of the V scores with Accounting scores was only 
.021, while its correlations with Grade XII English, 
Cooperative English Mechanics, and Cooperative English 
Heading were .744* .570, and .578, respectively. In the 
case of the negative weight (-.164) of the SCAT Q score for 
the Botany criterion, the zero order correlation of the Q 
score with Botany was only .105, while its correlation with 
the Grade XII Mathematics Average was .535. The zero order 
correlations were obtained from Tables XXIII and XXIV in the 
Appendix. Evidently in both situations these scores were 
acting to suppress the non-valid variance of the prediction 
variables. 

The Grade XII Science Average proved to be the most 
useful predictor, since it was included in every prediction 
battery in this part of the study. Though a promising 
individual predictor. Grade XII Foreign Language Average 
proved to have a negligible relationship with the criteria 
when included in a team of predictors. 

The strong relationships of Grade XII Social Studies 
and Mathematics Average when they were considered to be 
among the best individual predictors was re-emphasized by 
their contributions in Several prediction batteries. 


. . 

■ 

* 

''■:7 : v ' . \ '.7a.-| 

. 



. 

« 



87 

Predictive Value of All Prediction Variables 

as a Teamed Combination 

The median R of .708 in this part of the study 
indicated strong relationships as few coefficients exceed¬ 
ing this value have been reported in other studies. To 
interpret the efficiency of these results, an example 
using the highest R value obtained may be presented. Thus, 
the obtained R of .741* for the relationship between the 
selected battery of tests and the Botany criterion, means 
that the efficiency of the battery in predicting Botany 
scores may be put at 33 per cent. In terms of the coeffi- 

p 

cient of determination (R ), an R of .741 means that 55 per 
cent of the variance of Botany scores has been accounted 
for by the prediction battery used. 

Correlations of this magnitude are great enough to 
indicate that the combined measures provide a really useful 
prediction of how well a particular student is likely to 
succeed in his freshman year in regard to any of the cri¬ 
teria. The results in Table XVII indicate the ceiling in 
predictive efficiency that can be reached by optimum com¬ 
binations of the predictor variables available for this 
study. However, from the viewpoint of practical 
applications of these findings, the economy of time in 
the calculation of the predicted scores must be considered. 
In comparison to the efficiency achieved with using only 







88 


the five Grade XII Departmental as a team, or only the best 
individual predictors, the array of predictors in the bat¬ 
teries developed by using all the variables as a teamed com¬ 
bination seems somewhat superfluous. Also, except for the 
prediction of Accounting and Geology scores, the addition of 
SCAT V and Q, and Cooperative English Tests to the Grade XII 
Departmentals did not improve the efficiency of prediction 
to any appreciable extent. 

A strong relationship was found to exist between 
certain Grade XII Departmental Examinations and success in 
the criteria used. The findings presented seem to support 
the thesis proposed by Hurd (1944) "that prediction tests 
intended for prediction alone should be of the same type 
and in the same field as the achievement which is being 
predicted.” (p. 218) Further, he also stated, "that when 
achievement is measured by a comprehensive objective test, 
a good battery of entrance tests of a similar type will 
predict future achievement much more accurately than we 
have been able to do heretofore.” (p. 219) The Grade XII 
Departmental Examinations seem to be worthy of consideration 
for inclusion in such a battery. 

Keeping in mind the limitation that the reliabilities 
of all the Departmental Examinations and of the criterion 
variables were not known for this study, any applications 
of the findings presented should probably be made with 



89 


reservations. However, for the long-range aspects of 
prediction the results obtained from the Grade IX predictors 
are significant and should provide useful information for 
guidance purposes. For the purposes of selecting possible 
university students, the results of this study should be 
used qualitatively. The strong relationships found should 
make more effective the counselling of students planning to 
study any of the seven science or two business administration 
courses at the University of Alberta. 

Multiple Regression Equations 

From the findings and considerations thereof, it seems 
that there are three possible ways which are quite practi¬ 
cable for predicting freshman success in the seven science 
courses, the two business administration courses, and the 
University Average at the University of Alberta. These ways 
are as follows: 

1. Predicting with the best individual predictors. 

2. Predicting with the battery of the five Grade XII 
Departmental Examinations variables. 

3. Predicting with the battery of the five Grade XII 
Departmental Examination variables in all criteria except 
Accounting, Geology, and Geography. In these three excep¬ 
tions a slight improvement in predictive efficiency can be 
obtained by using the batteries selected in Table XVI, 
instead of those in Table XIV. 





«. •; Y • . •• • - ' 

■ 

. 












. 










. 




. 








. 



. . 











90 

In general, there is greater efficiency of prediction 
obtained by methods two and three, respectively, than by 
method one. However, unless greater refinement is desired, 
method one offers the simplest and quickest means of 
predicting the various criterion scores. The best individual 
predictor was found to be the Grade XII Science Average. 
Commercial Law is the only criterion which can be predicted 
more successfully with another variable than the Science 
Average predictor. Grade XII Social Studies is the best 
predictor of success in Commercial Law. 

Predicting with the battery of the five Grade XII 
Departmental Examination variables shows promise of being a 
practicable and quite efficient means of making predictions. 
The batteries of selected tests are quite brief, the number 
of predictors varying from two to four, and mostly two. It 
is important to note again (in Table XIV) the relatively 
high predictive power of the Grade XII Science Average. Most 
of its beta weights are larger than the combined weights of 
all the other contributing predictors. 

To predict the various criterion scores, multiple 
regression equations were developed for predicting freshman 
success in each criterion, using the data in Table XIV. 

These equations and the standard errors of estimate are 
shown in Table XVIII. 





91 

To illustrate what may be done with the regression 
equations the following example is presented. In order to 
predict a student 1 s University Average score knowing that 
his marks were 60 in Grade XII Social Studies, 65 in 
Science Average, 60 in Mathematics Average, and 70 in 
Foreign Language, these obtained scores would be substituded 
for X 9 , X-^q, X-^> and X^, respectively in the regression 
equation developed for predicting University Average scores 
(Table XVII). His predicted University Average score would 
be calculated as follows: 

Y 10 = .12(60) + .43(65) + .13(60) + .08(70) + 7.59 

Y 10 r 56.1 

Thus, the predicted University Average score for this 
particular student is 56. Further, since the standard error 
of estimate was 7.95 , the chances are about seven in ten or 
two in three that the "most probable" University Average 
score forecast for students with similar predictor scores 
will be in error by +8 points or less. 


■ 

. 


. . c. ■ 4 







MULTIPLE REGRESSION EQUATIONS AND STANDARD ERRORS OF 
ESTIMATE FOR GRADE XII PREDICTOR BATTERIES 
IN TABLE XIV 


92 




-p 

0 

CD 


W 

co 


0 

o 

•H 

-P 

0 

0 

U* 

W 

0 

o 

•H 

CO 

CO 

0 

P 

U) 

0 

« 


0 

o 

•H 

P 

0 

+5 

•H 

P 

O 







0 

OCVU^~<t-ON|>c^ r H(N m 



0 

O 0\0 C- moo 

M 


P 




M 


O 

OOmCM>Ht) 0 t 0 l>O 

X 

0 

•H 

i —1 

i—i 



CiO 0 




0 

•rH 

0 



CNi 

0 

0 

P 



i —1 

0 

P 

Pi 



X 

P 

o 


- 4 " m 

in 

to o 

O 

P «4 

0 

O O' 

CM 

O m 



0 

• • 

• 

• • 

0 

0 

P 

VTv 

o 

z> 

O 

0 

O 

i —1 rH 




0 

o 




0 


0 


£ 


X 




to C^OC^CNiWMTs^C^ 

rlO«M>'vD rj''t(VOrl 


O 


ifMHOH 

C \2 


oooooooooo 
X X « X >< X >< X X 

OvOOSOvOCVfiOHcn 

to C iX) O CT' on -<}- -3* 


•f ~M~H-4- 


O0fiOOOt5OtO«OO'O 

O !—I r-! H CM CM H 

It III 

II II II II II II II II It II I 


HCMcn-^-invOC-tOOH 


in h 

0 

tcD 

ni -sj- ^ 

0 

-<t r\ 

P 

HO > 

0 

'N'-'t-<t 0 

> 

O —10 

<*J 

*-< 3 - m 

i—1 

O *n MH 



] t>sH 0 0 •'rH i—I 

I p . -> -H —* 

O 
P 
0 


0 O 
•H *H 


•n *H 
WH-P 
0 

_ 0 
0 0 O 
S-P O 

,0 ,0 0 O 

O Ph S <S 


0 


S>> tiO 

0 o 

0 i—I 

-P o 
o o 


i>>p 
. 0 *H 

>5 0,0 

M Ctf ^ 
O P 0 
H txO > 
O O -H 
0 0 0 


O W N O O 1=) 


0 

0 0 0 

rl 

0 0 -P 
-P P 
0 0 0 
O > P 
<3 0 

0 

0 0 £ 


O >H 
•H 


0 

o 

O +3 CiO 
0 0 0 
s *H 
0 0 0 
0 ! ,0 0 
P -P o 
0 Ph 

0 S 0 P 


0 0 
P 0 


0 P H 
CVaO O P 


rlctf O 

« P 
0 0 0 
0 t> 0 P 


0 


0 < H 

0 P 

0 0 

*\ o • 

H 0 >> 0 

i—10 H £ 
}xj H 0 0 
O > 0 
•\ CO *H P 
O P 

|—| «N O 0 

X 0 0 0 

0 PhP 

•\ -H 0 

00 0 g 
X 0 p o 
p p 

CO •'P 
0 

fcuO 0 


to 

><} f 


0 (lirl 

•H P 0 
.. O 0 0 
W O >0 

eh r 0 <*1 ,H 


> 

•v 0 *H 
0 ttO0 
0 0 0 

•H 0 «H 

H 

t»0 0 P 
0 0 O 
H 0 P 
























CHAPTER VI 


SUMMARY 

The relationships between various predictor vari¬ 
ables and success in certain criteria have been examined 
for the 1956-57 freshman class at the University of 
Alberta, There were three main parts to this study: 

1. The relationships of only the Grade IX Depart¬ 
mental Examinations were determined. 

2. The relationships of only the Grade XII 

Departmental Examinations, the School and College Ability 
Tests (V and Q scores), the Cooperative English Test A: 
Mechanics of Expression, and the Cooperative English Test 
C2: Reading Comprehension, Higher Level, were determined. 

3. The relationships of all variables in parts 1 
and 3 in combination were determined. 

An attempt was made to predict freshman success in 
seven science courses, two business administration courses, 
and the university average. Thus, ten criterion variables 
were involved. These were as follows: Chemistry, Physics, 
Mathematics, Accounting, Commercial Law, Botany, Zoology, 
Geology, Geography, and the University Average. 

From the validity coefficients calculated, the best 
individual predictors were selected. In all three parts of 
this study the most efficient batteries for predicting 


* 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

■ • : 



94 


freshman success in each criterion were selected by means 
of a multiple correlation technique. The beta weights 
involved were presented in tabular form. 

The more important findings of this study are as 
follows: 

1. The best individual predictors of the Grade IX 
variables were the scores obtained on the Departmental 
Examinations in Social Studies B (Language), Mathematics, 
and Science. Median correlations were .330, .313, and .296, 
respectively, for each variable. Only a slight improvement 
over the results obtained from the best individual predictors 
was achieved by the most efficient teamed combinations. 
Multiple Rs ranged from .278 to .551* with a median of .414* 
Again, Grade IX Mathematics, Social Studies B (Language), 
and Science scores were the most useful, since they contri¬ 
buted considerably to prediction in each criteria which had 

a significant R. Somewhat surprising were the strong 
relationships found between the Grade IX Social Studies B 
(Language) test and the various criteria. 

2. The best individual predictor of the Grade XII 
Departmental Examinations was the Science Average. A corre¬ 
lation of .632 between this predictor and University Average 
scores was the highest of all zero order correlations 
obtained for predicting the University Average criterion. 

The next best individual predictors of the Grade XII 



95 

Departmentals were the Mathematics Average and Social Studies, 
in that order. Relatively, the SCAT and Cooperative English 
Tests used were found to be inefficient as individual predic¬ 
tors. They were also inefficient as a battery and contri¬ 
buted little when teamed with other batteries. 

3. Greater improvement in predictive efficiency was 
achieved by increasing the number of variables in the predic¬ 
tion battery, however, considering the actual improvement 
obtained in relation to economy of time and labour for the 
practical application of the results, it seems that the 
batteries selected from the five Grade XII Departmentals 
would be most useful. These batteries are brief, consisting 
of two to four predictors. The Grade XII Science Average 
was included in all the batteries. The relatively high 
predictive power of the Science Average was clearly shown 
by its beta weights which are larger than the combined 
weights of all other contributing predictors. Other contri¬ 
buting variables in these batteries were Grade XII English, 
Social Studies, and Mathematics Average. Some promising 
relationships shown by the Foreign Language Average as an 
individual predictor were not present in the prediction 
batteries. 

The multiple correlations ranged from .526 to .720 


with a median of .655. 




. 

. 

. . 

. 

- 

. 






* 

. 


. 



. 

. 

. 


96 


On the basis of the findings of this study there 
were certain conclusions: 

1. Specific achievement tests such as the Grade IX 
and XII Departmental Examinations seem promising for 
guidance and predictive purposes. 

2. Certain Grade IX predictors showed very signifi¬ 
cant but low relationships with the criteria. The impli¬ 
cations of these results are that the findings would be of 
value, but for guidance purposes only. 

3. The much stronger relationships found between 
certain Grade XII Departmental Examinations and the criteria 
are very promising for a more effective counselling program 
for students planning to enter the science field at the 
University of Alberta. 

4. More efficient predictions can be made generally 
with the use of prediction equations for the Grade XII 
batteries selected, however, for a quick and economical 
estimate the counsellor could make valuable use of the 
relationships found for the best individual predictors. 

3. Since the reliabilities of all the Departmental 
Examination tests prepared locally and of all the criterion 
variables were not known for this study, any applications 
made of the findings presented should be made with this 


limitation in mind. 



97 


Some suggestions are offered as follows: 

1. The systematic investigation of certain predictor 
variables which appeared to be suppressors seems in order 
for the purpose of including them as suppression variables 
in any future attempts to improve the prediction batteries 
developed in this study. 

2. An attempt to remove the limitation of unknown 
reliabilities of the Departmental and the criteria should 
be made. Perhaps a standardized achievement test with 
equal curricular validity could be substituted for the 
Departmentals found to be most valuable for prediction. 
Another approach to ensure greater certainty in the predic¬ 
tions made would be to conduct a similar study with another 
freshman class in order to determine how nearly the find¬ 
ings are duplicated. 

3. Finally, some measure of the non-cognitive factors 
involved should be included in the battery of predictors 
used in any future study. A test of persistence or a survey 
of study habits are examples suggested as being promising 

on the basis of other studies done in this area. 



REFERENCES 


Abelson, R. P. Sex differences in predictability of college 
grades. Educ. psychol. Measmt , 1952, 12, 638 - 644 . 

Adams, S., & Garrett, H. L. Scholastic background as 

related to success in college physics. educ. Res. , 
1954, 47,545-549. 

Alberta Government. University of Alberta serves 6,000 
students. Within our borders, January 1959. 

Angell, M. A. Multiple differential prediction—significance 
for college academic counseling. Personnel guid. J. , 
1959, 37, 418-423. 

Assum, A. L., & Levy, S. J. A comparative study of the 
academic ability and achievement of two groups of 
college students. J_g. educ. Psychol. , 1957, 38, 307-310. 

Baker, Elizabeth C., & Baker, G. A. Factor analysis of high 
school variables and success in university subjects for 
the first semester in the university. Jh exp. Educ. , 
1956, 24, 315-318. 

Barrett, Dorothy M. Differential value of Q and L scores on 
the ACE Psychological Examination for predicting 
achievement in college mathematics. Psychol. , 1952 , 
33, 205-207. 

Bendig, A. V. Comparison of the validity of two temperament 
scales in predicting college achievement. J^ educ. Res. , 
1958 , 51, 605-609. 

Billhartz, W. H., Jr., & Hutson, P. W. Determining college 
ability during junior-high school years. Sch. & Soc. , 
1941, 53, 547-552. 

Bissell, C. T. Canada 1 s crisis in higher education. In 

C. T. Bissell (Ed.), Canada 1 s crisis in higher education . 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1957. Pp. 3-7. 

Bissell, C. T. Introduction. In C. T. Bissell (Ed.), 

Canada*s crisis in higher education . Toronto: University 
of Toronto Press, 1957, Pp. iv-vii. 
































„c 





1;i-L.. 








- • 




. . , 


. 






. 

. 







99 


Black, D. B. Prediction of academic success in the 
University of Washington. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, Univer. of Washington, 1951. 

Black, D. B. A study of the relationship of the Grade IX 
Principal* s Rating to performance on the Alberta 
Grade IX Departmental Examinations. Alberta J. educ. 
Res. . 1958, 4, 227-236. 

Black, D. B., & Ulmer, H. F. The value of grade IX 

departmental examinations in predicting success at 
the grade XII level. Unpublished Master 1 s thesis, 
Univer. of Alberta, 1949. 

Bloom, B. S., & Heyns, De V. Development and applications 
of tests of educational achievement. Rev, educ. Res. . 

1956, 26, 72-88. 

Byrns, Ruth, & Henmon, V. A. C. Long-range prediction of 
college achievement. Sch. & Soc. , 1935, 41, 877-880. 

Cameron, M. A., & Associates. The relation between 

matriculation marks and the achievement of students in 
the University of Ontario . Department of Educational 
Research, University of Toronto, 1939. 

Canadian Education Association, Information Service. 
Atlantic provinces. News l etter , May-June 1958. 

206 Huron Street, Toronto 5, Ontario. 

Chahbazi, P. Use of projective tests in predicting college 
achievement. Educ. psychol. Measmt , 1956, 16, 538-542. 

Chahbazi, P. Analysis of Cornell Orientation Inventory 
items on study habits and their relative value in 
prediction of college achievement. educ. Res. , 

1957, 51, 117-127. 

Chambers, F. M. Empathy and scholastic success. Personnel 
guid. J*, 1957, 36, 282-284. 

Chapel, T. L., & others. The differential prediction of 
A achievement at the University of Missouri. Educ. 
psychol. Measmt , 1954, 14, 724-725. 

College Entrance Examinations Board. College admissions. 
Vol. 1. Educational Testing Service. P.0. Box 592, 
Princeton, New Jersey, or P.0. Box 27896, Los Angeles, 
27, California, 1954* 









































, -' t 


. 

. ■ . ' . i■ :i C 

» ’■** t . - : - 

. 

* ' «. . * 


•a 

. , 

, 











100 


Cooperative English Test. Percentile ranks for high school 
and college students . Cooperative Test Division, 
Educational Testing Service. 20 Nassau Street, 

Princeton, New Jersey, or 4^40 Hollywood Boulevard, 

Los Angeles, 27, California. (No date). 

Cooperative School and College Ability Tests. Manual for 
interpreting scores and Technical report . Cooperative 
Test Division, Educational Testing Service. Princeton, 
New Jersey, and Los Angeles, California, 1957. 

Cooperative Tests. Manual of directions . Cooperative 

Test Division, Educational Testing Service. 20 Nassau 
Street, Princeton, New Jersey, or 4&41 Hollywood 
Boulevard, Los Angeles, 27, California, 1951. 

Cooprider, H. A., & Laslett, H. R. Predictive values of 
Stanford Scientific and the Engineering and Physical 
Science Aptitude tests. Educ. psychol, Measmt , 1948* 

8, 683-687. 

Cornell, Ethel L., & Gillette, Annette. Construction and 
educational significance of intelligence tests. Rev . 
educ. Res. , 1950, 20, 17-26. 

Crawford, A. B., & Burnham, P. S. Forecasting college 
a chievement . New Haven: Yale University Press, 194&. 

Deridder, L. M. Relation between gross scores on the ACE 
and academic success. Jh educ. Res. , 1953* 46 * 

353-358. 

Evenson, A. B., & Smith, D. E. A study of matriculation 
in Alberta. Alberta J. educ. Res. , 1957, 3* 62-71. 

Eysenck, H. J. Student selection by means of psychological 
tests—a critical survey. Brit. J. educ. Psychol. , 

1947, 17(1), 20-39. 

Fleming, ¥. G. Factors affecting the predictive accuracy 
of Ontario grade XIII results . Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 1955. 

Fleming, ¥. G. Progress of the Atkinson study of utilization 
of student resources. Canad. Educ. , 1958, 13(2), 3-10. 

Frederikson, N., & Schrader, ¥. B. The ACE Psychological 
Examination and high school standing as predictors of 
college success. J. appl. Psychol. , 1952, 36, 261-265. 
















































101 


Furst, E. J., & Fricke, B. G. Development and applications 
of structural tests of personality. Rev, educ. Res. . 

1956, 26, 26-55. 

Fusfeld, I. S. On the ACE Psychological Examination. 

Sch. & Soc. . 1949, 70, 117-118. 

Garrett, H. F.. Statistics in psychology and education . 

(4th ed.) New York: Longmans, Green and Co., 1953. 

Gordon, Mary A. Empirical comparison of three multiple 
correlation techniques. Educ. psychol. Measmt , 1954, 

14, 133-137. 

Gough, H. G. What determines the academic achievement of 
high school students. cN educ. Res. . 1953, 46, 321-331. 

Hastings, T. J., & McQuitty, J. V. Use of tests in 

educational personnel programs. Rev, educ. Res. , 1954, 
24, 166-171. 

Hertel, J. P., & Di Vesta, F. J. An evaluation of five 

factors for predicting the success of students entering 
the New York State College of Agriculture. Educ. psychol 
Measmt . 1943, 3, 389-395. 

Holland, J. L. Prediction of scholastic success for a high 
aptitude sample. Sch. & Soc. , 1958, 86, 290-293. 

Hollinshead, B. S. Who should go to college . New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1952. 

Horst, P., & Smith, S. The discrimination of two racial 
samples. Psychometrika , 1950, 15, 271-289. 

Hurd, A. W. The problem of the prediction of college success 
J. educ. Res. ", 1944, 33, 217-219. 

Jackson, R. A. Prediction of the academic success of college 
freshmen. educ. Psychol. . 1955, 46, 296-301. 

Jackson, R. W. B., & Fleming, W. G. Who goes to university? 
In C. T. Bissell (Ed.), Canada 1 s crisis in highe_r 
education. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 

1957. Pp. 75-110. 

Johns, K. Jr. The quality of secondary school teaching as 

a factor in the prediction of academic success. J_*. eo-uc. 
Res. , 1954* 48, 219-223. 



















































.. d i . . 





102 


Lehman, Ruth T. Forecasting the academic achievement of 
college freshmen. Educ. res. Bull. . 1954, 33, 113-121. 

Levine, A. S. A technique for developing suppression 
tests. Educ. psychol. Measmt, 1952, 12, 313-315. 

Levine, A. S. Aptitude versus achievement tests as 

predictors of achievement. Educ. psychol, Measmt . 

1958, 28, 517-525. 

Maclnnis, M. J. The guidance value of grade IX depart¬ 
mental examinations and other selected factors in 
relation to matriculation of composite high school 
students. Unpublished Master 1 s thesis. University of 
Alberta, 1958. 

MacKenzie, N. A. M. Government support of Canadian univer¬ 
sities. In C. T. Bissell (Ed.), Canada 1 s crisis in 
higher education . Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 
1957. Pp. 187-197. 

McQuary, J. P., & Willard, J. E. What factors determine 
student achievement in first-year college chemistry? 

J. chem. Educ. , 1952, 29, 46O-464. 

Malloy, J. The prediction of college achievement with 

the Life Experience Inventory. Educ. psychol. Measmt . 
1955, 15, 170-180. 

Mathews, T. H. Academic failures. In C. T. Bissell (Ed.), 
Canada T s crisis in higher education . Toronto: Univer¬ 
sity of Toronto Press, 1957.. Pp. 114-122. 

Monroe, W. S. (Ed.) Encyclopedia of educational research . 
Rev. ed.) New York: Macmillan Company, 1950. Pp. 874- 
894- 

Nelson, L. D. The prediction of achievement in first- 

year engineering. Unpublished Master 1 s thesis, Univer. 
of Alberta, 1949. 

Remitters, H. H., & Elliot, D. N. Curricular differences 
in predicting scholastic achievement: applications to 
counselling. educ. Psychol. , 1949, 40, 385-394* 

Rosenfeld, M. A., & Nemzek, C. L. Long range prediction 
of college marks. Sch. & Soc. , 1938, 47, 127-128. 







































. 


- - «. . . . .. ' ... . 


























—■ 

, 


. 










t . 2 - 






I 


■ 




. 

. 

. 










. . : . 


* 

. 


. . 

y ic 

- ; * - • 






. , . 


. 










103 


Rothney, J. W. M., & Heimann, R. A. Development and 

application of projective technics. Rev. educ. Res., 
1956, 26, 56-71. 

Sarbin, T. R., & Bordin, E. S. New criteria for old. 

Educ. psychol. Measmt , 1941, 1, 173-136. 

Schoepfle, G. K., & Arnold, D. L. Correlation of high 
school and college grades. Amer. J. Phy. , 1953, 28, 
537-539. 

Seigle, W. F. Prediction of success in college mathematics 
at Washburn University. J^_ educ. Res. . 1954, 4V, 
577-538. 

Smith, S. University entrance—net and screen. Sch. guid. 
Wkr. , 1954, 9, 5-15. 

Stewart, A. The n schools 11 and the Tt universities. f! Canad. 
Educ., 1954-55, 10(l), 34-42- 

Stone, J. B. Differential prediction of academic success 
at Brigham Young University. Appl. Psychol ., 1954, 
38 , 109 - 110 . 

Stuit, D. B. Construction and educational significance of 
aptitude tests. Rev, educ. Res. , 1950, 20, 27-37. 

Symonds, P. M., & Hessel, Marth G. Development and 

educational significance of projective technics in 
personality measurement. Rev, educ. Res. , 1950, 20, 
51 - 62 . 

Thorndike, R. L. The prediction of intelligence at college 
entrance from earlier test. educ. Psychol. , 1947, 
33, 129-143. 

Thorndike, R. L. Development and applications of tests of 
special aptitudes. Rev, educ. Res. , 1956, 26, 14-25. 

Travers, R. M. W. The prediction of achievement. Sch. & 
Soc. , 1949, 70, 293-294. 

Traxler, A. G. What is a satisfactory IQ for admission 
to college? Sch. & Soc, , 1940, 51, 462 - 463 . 

Traxler, A. E., & Jacobs, R. Construction and educational 
significance of structured inventories in personality 
measurement. Rev, educ. Res. , 1950, 20, 33-50. 






































. . t . 

~ ■ • » 

. 0 . . 




, L- 







. 




























a; 





104 


Tyler, R. W. Educability and the schools. Elem. sch. J. . 
1943, 49, 200-212, 

Wallace, W. L. Differential predictive value of the ACE 
Psychological Examination. Sch. & Soc. , 1949, 70, 
23-25. 

Wallace, W. L. The prediction of grades in specific 
college courses. J_j_ educ. Res. , 1951, 44, 537-597. 

Webb, S. C., & McCall, J. N. Predictors of freshman grades 
in a southern university. Educ. psychol. Measmt, 

1953, 13, 660-663. 

Weigand, G. Goal aspiration and academic success. 

Personnel guid. J., 1953, 31, 453-461. 

Wesman, A. G. The Differential Aptitude Tests. Personnel 
guid. J., 1952, 31, 167-170. 

Woodside, W. The university question . Toronto: Ryerson 
Press, 1958. 



















. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 














APPENDIX 












































































106 


APPENDIX: TABLE XIX-IDENTIFICATION OF PREDICTOR VARIABLES 

BY NUMBERS 


Variable Prediction 

Number Variable 


1 .Gr. IX General Test 

2 . IX Reading 

3 . IX Literature 

4 . IX Social Studies A 

5 . IX Social Studies B 

6 . IX Mathematics 

7 . IX Science 

8 . XII English 

9 . XII Social Studies 

10 .. . XII Science (X) 

11 . XII Mathematics (X) 

12 . XII Foreign Language (X) 

13 . SCAT V 

14 . SCAT Q 

15 . ... Coop. English Test: Mechanics 

of Expression 

16 . Coop. English Test: Reading 

Comprehension 
































• ' .I'Tv ■' 


; . 

. 

.*? , ■ . 
















xO 

CO 

CO 

II 


to 




o 

M 

Pi 

M 

H 

M 

Pi 

o 

M 

PS 

EH 

co 

M 

S 

w 

W 

o 

Q 

:: 

<U 

CO 

Pi 

o 

EH 

o 


a* 

EP 

o 

CO 

s 

o 

M 


o 

o 

Pi 

w 


• 


U^OvOO^^roO^rHOrHI^rH-^OrH^^O 

-p 

to 

-x$-vo I> t> CO rH r-HOfO CAO 

•H 

rH 

HHHHn^CACM -4-vO >A-^fV0(NiH\OO 

p 


rH 

o 




t> 

O ^xO to xO CO O to Ch O ^£> lAftO O LAO st 
rH O'' rH c\i O CV VOvQ xO H £> 'tO ‘A'AOOIA 
02rH02 02 C0-4-C002-<2-OVOiO02C0C\202Ox0 

1 — 1 


i — 1 


xO 

cOI>-OrHrHC v -tOO2cOxOrH'xt-vorx.0NOvoiO 

-xtl>02OrHrH02*OrHx0rHOC0t0t0OOt0 


rH 

imAincAst(\(^insj-(VoiHv£) Ais^o AiH 

1 — ) 


VO 

02 2>t0 VOxQxO rH-^CVrHi>I>tOU^OO^OrH 
\0OVO0''x0VO02rHO2l>lO02vOVOOt0VOO 



VO VO-^xO -^COCOxO C00202"4-VOC0O-xt0202 

H 


* 

Ox0x0O02P2x0c0O02x0l>I>OUA£>f)0O 
xO !T\rHNlACM>tX)rH\OlA(n(AOlAttOUArH 


H 

"tCOC\2COCO^COrH CO CO ^02 NO0CV0CA 

1 — 1 



O- to co 0 x 0 -xtvovniop-t>-^-O0-t0 vo vo -x}- 


co 

■NfOHO s £>\OrHI>H\£)AiHOcAiAr r \CT'vO 


rH 

■AvOvO ^sO V0x0 02 02 

H 


02 

00£>col>xOE>v002*ocoO'x2-I>2>'xtI>rH 

C0x00202x0OHx0OOC0OHC002I>-xi-C0 


H 

02 02 02-tcococ\2cocovoioocoo2'xi-rHiO'xi- 

rH 

0 

rH 

02x0 VA'vf'-tvO rHHvovoOCOO-xOO-rH ~<ft> 
CAiAOOtOOO W -x^-xO OCAC2 1AIAHI>OA 

0 

rH 

02 HOHA|VACAAiCAv0OlA0l-tOi02lAiA 

r-1 


H 

P 



0 


02 O 02 xO tO rH ^ OC^O l A l AC^02HvOOH 

•H 

o 

C0C0t0t0rHO02x002Ov0Ox0xDI>x0rHO 

P 

H 

02020202'4-vO'x2-C0voOx0voc0C0C\202Ox0 

0 


H 

t> 


x^-voxO V0 02 tO H xO 02>vo02*0002COOO 
*OOxOvOOl>0~vo002^i-OrHrH02rHxOO 

o 

O' 

CO ~<f co cOxO co -xf-'tO vococovococo-^-xf-x}- 

•H 

! 

1—1 

-P 

| 


O 


I> -tCOiOI> COxO O\0 O HvO iACA-<t02t0 H 

*H 


>AOO't l AOlAO >AvO O2\0 H 10x0 CO 

■d 

to 

^xO xO lA'-tcACOO ~xf CO 02 CO HD H xO vo 02 02 

0 

p 


rH 

P-. 


02 -<t-^-lOs£) 02 O SO H -4-rH I> 10x0 H to 0 CO 


O I>xQ !> -to- Ou-M>020rHrHI>0202u-\-3- 
•"t "t-HfCOvO -^O CO ^ ^ CO 02 -^COCOCOCOCO 

1—1 



Ox0t0C0*xfrO02C0t0Hx0x0-<t02x0I>C0t0 

C>cot002020I>0£>000 Nv OO Nl ArH02rH 

CO CO 02 sflAO -3" CO CO U~\ vo CO 02 -4" CO 02 -xfCO 

1—1 


1 

to to 0 - CO 0 -xfxO I> 02 to -xfO- xO 02 xO H xO VO 


in 

vO 'xJ-vo-xtO 02 stiAOHt0\0O‘Ar^0HC^C0 
-<J-VO-xf VO O V0\0 -xf xO -<t02 co^co-^t^coco 
rH 



rH O O O COCOVOVOlOsO sfCOOO VO rH to CO 



rH 02 0 02 I> -x^xO t00020020002l> 



VOvO VO 0 VO ^ CO VO CO 02 rH xfr CO xO CO 02 rH 
rH 



02 to 0 0 C" to ^cOvO 02 VO0- COxO tO 0x0 MO 


co 

HHO 02 vot 0 xDOx 0 t 0 O 02 rHHvo 02 Ht> 

VO xO 0 VO -<t 02 -xt'xO C002002x002-4-vo02rH 

1—1 



O- OtO OtOxO -xj--xtvo0x00t0x02>£>-x}-0 


02 

OOH-t^coI>00 covoxO CO vo CM> O vo 
xO OxOxO VO CO -<txO x^" 02 1 —1 02 xO CO VO VO 1 —I i—| 

1 —1 


1—1 

OE>02Ht0002C — 0202OC v -O02C0Ovo 
OOHrHxOI>OvovocococO 'X^xO xO xf H -xf 
0x0 vovo-xfrco-xtxj-C002 0202 *0-xt vo vo 02 H 

_J 

•H 0 

P i—1 

0 P 

rn 

1 

H 02 CO -xt voxO OtO OO rH 02 CO-^vOxO O- CO 

> 

0 

1 — 1 rH rH 1 — 1 1 — 1 1 — 1 1 — 1 rH rH 


w 

EH 

o 


en 
<1) 
I —I 

p 

0 


p 

0 

> 

O 


-P 

o 

•H 

T* 

0 

P 

P« 


0 

P 

-P 

Cm 

O 


CuO 


£ 


P 

0 

P 


O 

-P 

0 

O 

£ 

0 

P 

0 

Cm 

0 

P 

P 

O 

cm 


X 

M 

X 

0 
r—I 

P 

0 

EH 

0 

0 

CO 

0 


107 





















INTERCORRELATIONS OF PREDICTORS AND PHYSICS CRITERION (l8)(N = 33) 


108 


• 


^^J-HC\iI>v 00 NOC\|CVOOC''OO-' 3 -rHO 

p 

to 

HHO^OlHO^OOCO^HstHOvOO 

•H 

H 

rHPPOic^'<tCVOr^I>'<f-<tHc^sHHvPsO 

Ph 


i — 1 

o 





^<M>c<^- 4 -ONi>o^OPOOpvr>c^-sM>OrH 

OPO N OOI>I>- 0 '<tONOO N CNOI>vOOP 


i — 1 

C\* C\J rH vfvps »Ps vj-c^s '<tCO c^s -4-CV H o VPs 

rH 


P 

O0NO£>\0C\it0VPvt)0C'J'OO04<N*PsOr'--t 
"t H CO to P CO VPs >tO vO OW) iPsiTsOvO O 


rH 

vOvOiAPkCVH^iACNiHHO^^vrsOHH 

rH 


ITS 

0 °sC^OHCsJOI> 0 NC^H 0 ^rH ~<ttO O vAsj-O 

C\> C°s - 4 -vO vPsONC^vpsvnipsOiI>-tOOOvpsr-H 


i — 1 

P P "tP VPs -s^sO vpsxO 0 IACV H 

rH 



rH O vnvO C^p to »PvONOvpsc^ r HOCOC\ 2 c r vO 

On ~'tP C^HcnOM>PP^OOOiTst- ^ 

sfc^p VPyC^H s^VAH CO O P 
rH 


( — 1 



ONsj-iAO(^ff)M^HsJ-HtX)OH IPs F- 

H tO f^P (O^HOONOPOOtOtOWH 


1 — 1 

PJ>pvpsvnoiipsi>pcN)cvHOcnvpsvnc^H 

I — 1 


<N 

ON VPs rH 0 ONp c^p C\i CVsj-OtO r°\HOP O 
W^~-tOC\ 2 '<t<Ncot>-'tvPsC\!OPl>I>C>ONCO 


rH 

OOOc^srs|'CVH>AcninOHHOiOsi-s}- 

H 


rH 

I>COsr-|OC r M>tX>ONl>rHO-tH VPsC^sO O ON 
cAiACVHO(^Ol>OiC^OWOPWPOt )0 

cd 

rH 

HHHC^nP C'>rHC^£'-OvpsOivpsCOr-|I>''t 

0 


1 — 1 

r—i 



P 


-sj-VPs p-\P> OON~<i-C\* 0 'OrHCy-ci-ONrHC^ONC\* 

cd 

O 

c^I>OtOtOHOsj-ifNO(V»AOiP>AOONO 

•H 

rH 

HHCVD sj-p '<*‘C\i~-tOC'-vnc\*-tC\*rHOOl> 

Pi 

Cd 


1 —1 

> 


stH C^H O'P CVP O CM> Oi H O^t^tOP C\J 


ON 

PONHsj-HOCNiOOinOisi-OMAsr-tO 

C^-^^^^-c^-^-vrsO^tr^siPisO H r°s CN 2 -<t cn 

pj 

o 


H 

•H 


c^oN-^i>c^c^oopc\zoNpcNivpsasvnoo 

P 


c r vt»z>-o-tONOOO'<tr-i>oi>vnvnooN 

o 

to 

VPsvO VPsVPsVPsOiPOvPsCNiHrHD^C^SPVPiC^O 

•H 


1 — 1 

P 



0 


0 s C"- tO P VPs tO O O Oi -^tO i> tO I> tO On Qn 

Ph 


O^rHC^CVPONOOOiOOc^sHOc^stOC-a^ 

04 

t> 

'tP ^P p vnop -^--tc^cvvA vr\vO 

1—1 


P 

oa^ONj>c^otoJ>PCM>P c°»p o c\j i>p 

c^tO C'-OvrsOONONOrHCMCVC^vpsONp^rH 
C^VCVHVPs'<i-OVPsCNi O^PP -t Oi P -<t H VTN 
rH 


VPs 

nc^iHONO cn vp, 0 ^ on O c^ONC^c^CsiP OnI> 
rH -tP 00 O iPsvO sfdto O -<ttO H vpsto O CN 2 
sfvnc^sOO -4*P vp, £— tc^^vrssrwTNCVvpsc^ 

1 —1 



CviC^-stOONtP-p^rHPOOONpHt^^C^ 
HONtOOtOOWO - 4 -tO HC\ 2 PI>ptOOC \2 

VPs VPs -^-O P VpsP) VPs ~<2" C°s C°S c°s vp, <^s -sf Oi 

rH 


c^v 

P" O O ''4* 1 —1 0 s to c°s C^S 1 —! 1 —1 VPs VPs O O C°s 1 —1 

tO^OtOPJ>o°sI>rHOCVtO C°sp s)-(nONO 
-tP O ~>tcrsrH~<i’VpsCVCsirHOPC\2'HtU->rHrH 

1 —1 


C\2 

P- O O C°\ C°s On IP- 0 s 1 — 1 vp\ CO VPs -<3- O C°s On P — 4 * 

P O -sJ-ON-^-tO rHtOONl>iPsI>tO- 4 *Cr\HHrH 

P O P VPs vps c\i p p -' 4 ‘ i — 1 i — IOC"" -tP PCVH 
rH 

1 

rH 

o p~ p- oNsa^ONc^s-t-^-r-ooNH co o - 4 -vp, 

OP to rH H Cr\OC^sP <r\vr\02rH0NC\2-<tOrH 
OP Sj-Spsi-Pssfsncv H HOP sfp p CV rH 

•H 0 

i i 

pH f— 1 


cd P 

r—1 OJ VPsp E> to ON O rH 02 Cn-4-VPsP J> tO 

[> cd 

i—1 i—! H i—li—li—1 rH i—li—1 


CO 
<1) 
i—I 
P 
cd 
•H 
JH 

cd 

> 

CJ 

o 

•H 

-P 

O 


"d 

0 

(h 

Ph 

0 

•p 

4h 

O 

W) 

PJ 


fH 

0 

rQ 


o 

-p 

0 

O 

PJ 


NOTE: Decimals omitted. 










: ^; o ny q.- : i- H ns 

C, }•■• -y ; ■ /'! ' O OO H H V' V': O H H 

/V. !•-•• !■■■..■• : ■ i . • J/ ') O Hi, w, ; f- - ?~, !■■■ 


-G C • O; 'O - J -■' 'v' / > r 

. i ' ■ : 

", ; ri ■ • H . --./--I- - , 




. . ■. '■ 1 H 0 e " : • ■« Hi • 

H ■’ - ‘ H !- : H ' • ' / H V; 1 CU .*! ' G- 


■- - • ; / P • 


o n H o co/n 
, / o . - ,■>. r 


f o. ' 


o I , (■■} 1 .: r :> c;- Cl-" i' ■ C'ttV o G 

--a j r-s r* O ■<) 0-* Cv H ••'i O H H 3 c 

n t ; ' . r> H • r ;• . ■ ■ ' ('• - v ■ 


H K > , <; fo 
i 3 : 


! ■ - /"•» OJ ns i o O 


> 0/C f • .H ' •" -i. •• V '• ■ - 

■ • - v- - .u - : 






r . i ns •- ■ H -0 - - /' ■ C b 

" :• t ■' ■ / h- , ■ ( '• / O \ 


i r > 




" J r ,S ’r 


- \ "■ ■ v / •> ■' ! 




: ■ <■ 

r - 


.< •- 




H 




- •: U ■ ' /.; v, r^C-y O <i '"i/ ‘ s 

orwrJ''iO ■ r OC^Ot O--1. n-n> 

r- yS rv C C■ 'i "If </ '/ ■' 


■ /■, ‘ •• 1 ; r'.y - c t fY 

3 r . <;- = ..; <c ■' 

■ y: i'o c ■ ns ns /: C"y\ - c ■ rs rv c. 0-C,' v--' 

S-. 

C ■ <s ' c. o c ■ -.i r -, (/ - ^ -rx / :• • * 

• , ■ : ,'») . J/'D '■ r. ■ ■ ■: , C ; : o ' -'j € • 

.i - ■■ ■. o r -C‘> ■; - / ■ k ' /'■■■ 

- , ! ■■, / '.•••, n . ■■ - / ■ ,;. /■ o (d • j ;• . >■ 

■ ' ( ■ ,• -.1 rc h-1>" CsJ CC i ■ i. y-' b 

• nn P i. • < 1 ■■ r o /»') ns 


; ) ’C ' 




■ 

. •. - rn r • /' ;■ i ■ ■ i > •; •• C: ■ C ."t ; . •"i i , . 

rn CC C'n-.rj n \' C - !•• • v- - -'3 O- 

:: / ■ ■ 

i~- -, f. ; <,■> ru c ■ ; • O * ■ c 




f . 


rc ns ? - . . 

' H i ' 

■ ■ : o- : ; Hi ■ o.' o r ■ ns a- C- 




i- r '“H - . /c H i > av o.-/w ,-r> /»- 

, ■ r > r. H H v> su 


■ ■- '/ *> ' i •'/ > ;• - j " 

..: / ' /'o o- / <0 /'3 H H “ <: k 

' ■ cp v- G- f G ! b 


- ■ -3 c-'CP V i n, , V !- : co r Q ns 

: 


! 

i 





INTERCORRELATIONS OF PREDICTORS AND MATHEMATICS CRITERION (18)(N = 137) 


109 


• 


-^■rH CNivO m -4-vO C^inHOO^trH-tC^-OO 

•p 

to 

^•CVCNiniC^ONONONtOOsiiHsOrHHtOOsOO 

•H 

rH 

(XiOHHnncVH onxO xO -tCMnWHmO 

Fh 


1—1 

O 

t> 

O OIn H O'OO O H mHC^ O I>tO nfO O 
ONOtOCVI>I>iHCv2rHin^tHtOonOOOvO 


rH 

-<tmon^t»<tin'<t's^ini>aNsO in 

rH 


xO 

r-ttocMOONONvoi>sOHino^-mono~'tc^ 

O xO on on ~<frx£> 'tl> O l> invD ^(MCdOOO 


rH 

vO ininnnHnsj-strioiH^si-inonH 

rH 


m 

ONvOl>£>ONONvO'tC\lOtOC s -inO<OonCO'^- 

mxOxoontoxOrHtoOxoonoNtotooonoto 


1—1 

vO in'-^•sO '<tin-^tin-HTn-^-'<tin-^-o m ^3*02 

H 


•>fr 

cv Hc^mcn^ta^vomototoi>ooirnc^rH 
i> "4-to ooNCVono-totooNonotonionrH 


H 

m-'4-o2ononmonononon'3-c2ono-'4-->3-mcn 

rH 


on 

m on H xo mto to -^cnHmi>o*>in-to '-t 
rH wtoi>J>tootoxOooxOOonto -tto h 


(—l 

vO\0\o -4- -<}* on -^vO m on on "to onmxo on 02 

rH 


C\2 

o rHONOo2cvmoxONxotoor-tor-oi>o 
inaxHincvontoxOin-^inoooNONxOiHxo 


H 

on CN5 on m cNt -^-^xo \0 o h-H \0 

rH 


rH 

minniOxO ^ 02 to to to O to into to m h O 
to qnxO on m on to o axvo o mcMO onmsfn 

03 

rH 

-<r 02 cn~sf-^men-'4‘-<ti>OvO on-3-cv on xo 

0 
_ _1 


rH 

2 


ontOCMOrHHontOl>OtOvOrHOOrHinH 

cd 

o 

ON onvO ^inHON ( HONOxO'^-ONONsO£>mcV 


1—1 

on 02 on onmxo "3--<2-m o i> xo on on on rH i> xo 

Fh 

03 


rH 

> 


HHHONrHmi>HOi>toONonincvvOHin 


On 

OvOxO OtO^-OHOONOmvO o O H to 
^on-xt-xtinon-xtino insj-sfmnNtH-inrn 

£ 

O 


rH 

•H 


into -^02 on rH m o H to to on -h-xo -<m> o r> 

-P 


vnHONHtOtOC\iOHHOxOtOOtOl>OiON 
m minmxtH-si-o m ~<fxO on in -3- -t rH 

O 

to 

•H 


rH 

T3 

CD 


on in on on on h o m i> on c\2 mto qnxOxO o xo 



c\2 ONonmmxOOcvoNONtotoi>onH-tHON 

0. 

I> 

in ~<j-in-3-xO mo -4‘-<t~<i-ono2'<2*on~<i-on~-tc\2 

rH 


xO 

cnxOrHonr-OrHHonrH-^cvto-tONONON-t 
\0 On -si* tO xO OxOtOl>rHONOntO 02 xO xO £> Ox 
m^'tmiAO in-4-onxQ mmonmmrHmon 

rH 


in 

to ONHHOD-ONONHHxOOimc^ONONONm 
o r~ xo i> o xo mto to m m 02 z> ox to -xti> o 
m^mmomxO'4mmxj-s}-xj-on'tfn'trn 

r—1 


"t 

onvDHOHononoiONtooovOonoodxo 
cno2xDOi>tomrHO-xtonmi>ONoncno202 
m v0 -H'O m in m-4-on->t-xt-HtonxO on-^tiH 

rH 


on 

to OOrHrHHON-tHONCVONrHCSr-CVC-CV 
onto OxOxo -H-onoNxOxOxo h to to xo onto e2 
xo mo sj-msj-mins}-oncnonxo CNi >tmmH 

H 


02 

02 OOxOONxOmtOrHtOmHOnrHxOtOONrH 

to otocNjr-ONONrHxoonaNONCV -^-xo xo o 02 
xo 0 mxO -<i‘on'<tmoncN202c\lxO sj-mmcno 

rH 


rH 

O o2toontoonoNmrHonmomi>ONiHO-xt 

OtoononOxOo2mo on to mHCMmoo^x)- 
OxOxO mminmm-xtm^onxO mxOxO ~<t02 

•H 0 

rl 

Fh i—1 


dj & 

rH 02 on-^mxO 2>tOO'OrHC2on'<2-mxOI>tO 

1 > 

rH rH rH i — 1 i — 1 rH rH i — 1 rH 


T3 

<D 

-p 

-p 

•H 

s 

o 

w 


H 

cti 


•H 


O 

0) 


Q 


Eh 

O 

{25 


0 

0 

CO 

Oj 


Table XIX for reference to numbering of the prediction variables. 












' • • j ! 

» !' ( : 

■ . . • • > I ■ ■ : , o , 


- - .• • ! ..' ;.-'c ■ - j i 

■ ■ 

. ' ; i r •: .: '• - v > v- ■ m : 


. ' * o, , . ■ : ■ .. ; '■ ■ ■ ; 

: ' • , ; - j i o O 

: •>: ' ! • ■ ■■ :• ; f > ! ,• ■ •. /V t !.< 














i 

/■■*> m t" 1> c-i o/i* • 












.1 rn i • 




. t ■ 




■•v y ■» w" ■"> h-, C h-i ■ i ‘‘i 

Of- ns o. <» o H/ .v 

. , _ ,-fU 


■ C- ; "• />, 

/ ■> ' 


- . t ■■ I. r." ,• v v- o- o o 

/ ■ 




AO H A-/A 'V" rv- y ; r 


' 1 : :■ i > r ; 


: f .. ■ ■ ; y ■ , "7 * , 7'“. - i 


rw rw <?✓ O O 


- • , j ; 


•"> <" . - j •. / H 


O' 












! 













INTERCORRELATIONS OF PREDICTORS AND ACCOUNTING (17)(N = 31) AND 
COMMERCIAL LAW CRITERIA (18)(N = 31) 


no 


0 


O^C^CVOc^CV-^-ONONtOvOHH-HOOO 

•H 

to 

02cooH02H40covoo-oooonvoo2£>onO 

P 

1—1 

OWHOs^^cMH^sj-H-f^HCN/HHiAO 

0 

•P 


H 

•H 


votO HOiOvOfNjvOWvOOiAH CO 40 H O O 

1 h 

c- 

COcOt>ONCOON4040tQ rH tQ ~4 CM 40 H40 O ON 
HHOtMO'tHO -440 4CO O C^OrlO VO 

H 

O 

1—1 



Ct 02 co O vo H C"- 440 IM>-in(oOI>OrlO 


vO 

4coH--4tO stH l> Onoo-4-41> CV On o vO t> 
cOvoco-4O2OO-4vOO202~4vocOvoOHH 

i— 1 


1 — 1 



!>Hl> 0 HC\)CVr r M>-ir\iXNC r \O‘AO!>'^)H 


vo 

cOOtOtOtOVOt>HC \2 CO 40 vo t> 02 O O-4 02 


i—l 

40t>O2t>CO4C\2VOVOO2O2VOVOVOC0VOCOH 

H 



CM sfH 0 I> sj-OvO o O OflOvO O oo 0 sf 


-4 

vOCOtOtOGNC\2tO-4£>--'4COHC\2002C\240VO 


i— 1 

if\>AO 0 HvOHCMCMir\inH‘CMOiA 00 CM 

H 



MmMmmOOstc^O-M-CMOvOOtOHH 


co 

sfHCAONstHiA -440 HVOO2OO2I>-I>O20N 


H 

-44) 4) st(M H -to (M cmnO H 

H 



CO0N-4tO 020 CO CO O vo Qn O 02 tO COVOVO40 


02 

'OOOnI>ia!>OO s 0D—<fO CM H cnsfsfO 


rH 

CM -tH COCOCOH CM iAsf0O s}-st-iAsfcO0 

H 



40 CO vo 4 to lA-tH COO ONs}-uvrM> O 0 


rH 

CO-440 COOtOHH^coO -4*0 CO 40 -4tO CO 


H 

CMcMOCMOst’HH^r'OcOH^CMCM • 4 H' 

i— 1 

0 

0 


iOir\ 020 NHHOc 00 NOc 0 ir\OO>XM>v 00 N 

02v0O20Nt02>C0O2C0OC0I>H-tC0C0H£> 

H 

O 

rft 

rH 

H H O H O >AH H 0O1> 'tCNi iCiOj 02\0 n^ 



H 

fH 


0 NHC 0 -^- 02 C 002 '^O 0 NHOC 0 OC^v 0 t 00 N 

0 


HCMONOCOvOCMHO CO 4 CO 40 I> 02 ON to VO 

> 

ON 

~4vO 02 <040 02 H -40 CO CO vo 4 02 vo vo 410 

£ 


i— 1 

o 


^OtO !> O sf^O 4 co 4 co -440 co -440 -4" 

' H 


VO O On -4 to sj-Nj-OHCMHONsj-sl-HlNsOCO 
CO-4H xCM (MHO-4HH02IHMVO *<40 H 

-P 

to 

O 1 
•H ] 


H 

T5 


c 0 Ht 0 Ovo 0 NO-tC\ 2 Ovoc 0 VOiOCVI >0202 

0 


O CO O H On tO O -4O2COHOvot0l>H4040 

5h 

t- 

sj-lOsj-iA co sf o HHHHHCOHOiOHN 

P< 


H 

1 



OHVOO(OOONtOHtOOO4CMHsO0 
to ON CO -4* O O tO -44) I>t 0 l>HO 2 vo--t 0 NH 


40 

-4C002'4020-4P202 VO >4 CO <040 ^040 

H 

j 1 

i 

! 

02>sOvOOtOV0002H-402voi>HvoOt^ 
HvoCMOOOONtOtOtOO vo -4 -on tO tO CO 02 


VO 

-440 C0C0O02c002vDOOC0C0HC002C0-4 

H 



OHCMO 0 QNOr > “ ~40 n votO vocOtO 002 02 

O-402Ol>'4H-4'O0NC0I>aNt0t0-40NH 


^4 

V 0 v 0 coOco-4vo-4cOH02co-4cor--4CMO 

H 



\OOnO CMvO vOfiOtO 0 CM 04 O 2 HI> 0 HO 2 
O2C0O02O2C0O0N0N02vD0NC0t0t0-4I>O 

] 

co 

! 

-4voOc0C002-4H02OOH's0O02c0OH 

i— 1 



02O0NHJ>HHC0HvO0N0NVO-4H02t0l> 

CO O co -4 voqncoO 02 40 -40 H COO cococo 


02 

!> O vovOnO co vo —4" vo i—| 02 -440 vo£> ioh 02 

H 



0024DOnOOCOVOOnvo-4cOI>02I>OnvoOn 

O COCN2 CJNHtO r- VOrl 02 <040 -4VOC0-4C002 

1 

1 | 

H 

OI>-4vo-4-4-4c0-4H 02 02 '4vov0c0HO 

1 _ _1 

•H 

0 

r—1 

Fh i—1 


0 P 

H 02 C0-4v0v0 2>tOONOH02cO-4vO\OZ>tO 

1 > 

0 

i—1 i—1 i—1 i—1 i—1 i—1 i—li—i r—1 


w 

0 

H 

cd 

•H 

Fh 

0 

> 

a 

o 

•H 

-p 

o 


•H 

0 

Jh 

ft 

0 


•p 

cm 

O 

tuO 




•H 

0 


rQ 


Td 

0 

■P 

-P 




o 


w 

i—I 
CO 

a 

•H 

O 

0 

Q 


• • 

H 

EH 

O 

a 


o 

-p 

0 

o 

a 

0 

Fh 

0 

Ch 

0 

p 

Jh 

O 

ch 


X 

M 

X 


0 




















Ill 


IPv 

vD 

II 


S 
O 
I—I 

pa 

w 

EH 

M 

P4 

o 

in 

<4 

EH 

O 

pq 


co 

PS 

o 

EH 

o 

M 

Q 

n 

P4 

a, 

o 

CO 

o 

M 

< 

i 

K 

ec; 

o 

o 

04 

w 


• 


C-I>ont>H-4'OCM-4'Oor-rnin,HOO 

-p 


C0001>00I>cnC-H4'CMM0 00 M0O(>cnO 

•H 

1—1 

O OHH(M WNHsj-p^t^HHOOO 

P 


rH 

O 

MO 

mi>tO00 -4" on C- on CM CM O no^si-noo 
OOHOMOC-MOCOMDOvDOon^-CMOcn 


i—1 

s^sj-mcv cm (VH'tnHHCM in on on o o 


m 

1—1 

m 0 m H - 4 -on CM 00 CM 0-4-00 O OO (OH 
i> -4* -4^ CM H in o 00 t> ~4" O CM O' 


(—1 

on -4 cm -4"mm on -4--4 "cm on cm on m o no 


-4 

i—i 

CMOOMO-4-m£>-4-£>-MOOOCMMOOO-4-m 

m-4-i>oMOcnmmcM-4-i>cMMOO-4-£>o 


i—1 

mo m on on m m - 4 -cm - 4 -on on on H - O m on H 


On 

i—l 

mcMoomcMOcncnoooooOMOOoon 
-4-oor-cMoo-4-omocM-4-OMon- on mo 


i—1 

- 4 - m in - 4 -- 4 -on cm m in - 4 -cm cm 0 - 4 - on m rH 


cm 

1 —l 

00 -4-mcMononmoont>i>ooocMooonr- 

^t'CM>HOMOO N -'<tCMOOO'^CMOOOOO 


rH 

H H cMsj-sj-ncM cm mmino cm ntM cv on 


l—1 

I—1 

H -4-MO - 4 -MO M000Ov0t>OI>O00-4-O0' 

O' MO OO to - 4-0 MO inHOOCM£>OMOvO 

0 

i—1 

H HHononMOoncMmi>oincMononH-4- 

0 


1—1 

H 

d 


0 0 0 0 - 4 -mr- cnM) Ot>r-OOMDOCMO 

cd 

o 

CM CM>mCOCMOHvOOHOOsfiAOCM 

•H 

rH 

h H cm cm ^ in on on mo oc-m-4-cncMHr- 

P 

cd 


1—1 

> 

! 

1 - 4 -H 00 00 00 0 c -0 0 mo mo on on i> cm cm- 4 - 

d 

1 oj 

I mOHOOO-4CMOOvOmcMmc\iHvO-4- 
on-4-ononininon-<tOMO mncnM-Mon'i 

o 

•H 

1 

1 

H 

-P 

l 

m- 4 -cm on cm cm 00 0 0 on 0 0 on- 4-00 on cm 

o 


OMor-oosomc—ooHMO -4- 0 on cm 00 h 

•H 

00 

on - 4 -m on -4 "<}~cm 0 - 4 -on cm cm m cm - 4 -- 4 -H 

d 

0 


,—1 

p 


HOHCMinOOOOl>-P' w OOinOI>CMC-0 

PL, 


H CMOOOOcnHOC-CMOOO-4-m -tMO £> 

£> 

- 4 - on cm on mo mocMononcncMCMsfonncM 


MO 

1—1 

oncMMomooocMOmMOoncMinonon-4- 
00 m 00 mo cm 0 H m - 4 -cm "4" mo O on -4-t"- on 
m on m vO O msj-mmvo in on m in cm cm 


1 

1 —l 


in | 

cm onOHOomcMoo -4 -mo on m in - 4 --4-h 

O CM -4-in 0 CM on MO OOOOOOOOMOOMOC- 
- 4 - in on m 0 MO MO -4*m-4-on-4--4'-4‘mcM CM 1 



H 1 
MO OinOHinCMontOO-4"CMOMOHOOl> 


-4" 

0 00 mOmMOCOOOOmOHCMOOOOO 
cm iACMOminonononcMon4-ton-4CMH 


on 

1—1 

0 momOMO 1—1 cm 00 O mo m 0 0 on 00 on 
-4* 0 O m - 4-00 00 C- H i> 0 c- r- n- -4*H r- 1 
4 40CMononcMmrncMHCVinoncvi^H 


CM 

1 —l 

M) OmOcnCMO-4-HO-4--4-CMCTsCM>t> 

CM O OtO CM inCMMO CT'O'-MO OCO sfsrOCO 

1 in 0 -4-in in- 4 -on-4"-4-H H H m m- 4 -- 4-0 

I 

i 

H 

1 —1 

OMOOMOCMcnHm-4-oHoomcMm. inr- 

O oKoOra H 0 on cm 0 - 4 *- 4 " m no 

O insJ-CMsj-onsj-fnnHHH -4-MO on -4- 0 

1 

•H 

0 

H 

P i—1 


CTj d 

HCMon-4-mMor-oooOHCMon -4*mM0 z> 

> 

cd 

1 —ii—ir— 11—1 1 — 11 —ir—ir —1 


d 

0 

+5 

-p 

•H 

a 

o 

tn 

i—l 
0 
£ 
•H 
O 
0 
Q 


Eh 

O 


cd 


'See Table XIX for reference to numbering of the prediction variables. 































' 


i ■ . ! • ' ■ i-- 






< V<J : , H ' ■ ' 


’ 


.'A. ' 

' 

1 ' ■: •; ■ v • ‘ /"•; ■ ' ■' ' 

' 

>f . ; ■■ ■ j,- ■, ■- <r ' ■ > . CV r ’^ r ' 


;p l 'p~ 'i>- rv r’v n-, cv cf e O O O '' 

! ■ ' O C . n- : o.- - . • C ' - ' C 

■ 

■ 

■ Hi 1 :■ - 





INTERCORRELATIONS OF PREDICTORS AND ZOOLOGY CRITERION (13)(N r 127) 


112 


• 


CM4"OincMi>£>cM£>4'onr-HCMOintocMO 

-p 

00 

to CNJOvOvOsJ-stmOH >tOrHMnC\iir \0 

•H 

i-4 

HHrHH(V00rH01>00lNHOCV\OO 

P 


rH 

O 




X 

iAHsj-0O^(>CVHvO -<tONsj-sOO0OW 1 
H O C- vO mo o on 4 - O oo l> 4* on to O CM O >n 


i — 1 

rHCMoncMon-^t-^i-onmooonononrHOonOvo 



rH 


vO 

cMOMOtoincMCMD-onmonoonoinoroto 

l>rHincMMOMOrH[>-Oinr-|onoOOOCMCM 


i — 1 

4-in4-oncMCMoninoncnonomcn4-ooncM 

i — 1 


in 

oo i —I mo o oo '4' i—1 cm i—I -4 i—l 04 in i — i o m o in 
oncMOJ>on2rHin-trHOoooooocMn 


rH 

inin~-4-inrH"4-minoc\ionH on mo o -4-0 O 

H 


X- 

MO£>M)MOOOOO£>inMOtOHOrHOMOO 

onrHCT^OOOoni>vOOOrHOOvOOOOtOC^ 


rH 

vomsj-inmmsj-noninonOxOcnHH 

i— i 


on 

mo in 4-m cm to rH cm oo cm oto o h m on -4 -cm 
4-mtoo4-HMOcn4-oi>4-OM)ooonrH 


i—1 

m£> in in 4 - 4 - on mo 4'4‘H cm O on on in m cm 

rH 


cm 

I>0'4‘HCMOHHOvX)'4*OOOOOCMOOrH 

tomoonocMMOOOotoo-tCAtocn-to 


1—1 

OHHCMononcMCM~4-onHOcMOHOonon 

t— i 

0 

1—I 

oo o -- 4 - 4 ) £> to mo mo in mo o -to^\D H cn-ton 
CMHCMOin-<tOrHCMCOOOOi^OOrHI>-4 

' 0 

H 

oncMHCMHmcMoncM-<tOrHriinonononon 

i—1 


i— i 

42 



0 


inoooO\Oinonrii>OvOvOCM ms^iAvo 4 - 

•H 

O 

r-H 4) o on CM vO OnmC"-OOOOOrHrHinOOrH 

P 

i—1 

cm cm ononsJ-mmsfiAO ^ on on cm onto c- 

0 


rH 

f> 

a 


m-4'-4-a'onooonooJ>-inoooi>HonHi> 
inOO-4-OCMCMonCMO!>CMO -400 -4-0 0 0 

o 

O | 

i cm on on on so-4-- 4 -on o in cm- 4 -- 4-0 o on in on 

i -H 


i— i 

1 _p 



* o 


rHmsOOOOOOOrH4>HCMOCMt>CMCM 

•H 


cm H cm ir\!> w -to cm ‘ah o on^o IOC- 4 iA 

TJ 

00 

4 -mo m in on 4- 4* o on -4* on cm 4) on m in on h 

1 0 

I P 


i— l 

I ^ i 

! | 

-4--4-00 4HOOO on on MO HHOHCM(>!> 


| 

! 

1 1 

I h on h oo-4* on o-4-on on o vo vO H rH on-4- 
1 4 - - 4 * - 4 - on \0 m 0 -4 -4" in cm cm on -4- on on -4- on 

H 


| 

MO 

! invO'4-cMOOvDOOomoooooO-4'CM-4‘i> 
HOOOOHOonCMOjvO-4-CMrHcnCMsOO-4- 
4in44mo in4-4-inmon-4in-4CM -4on 

1 —l 



l> in on- 4-0 0 H 0 onxO l> cm cm O 00 m 0 cm ! 


in 

H ononvo 0 rH-4-r-CM cm m 0 - 4-0 OMDMD vO 1 
4 -in - 4 -- 4-0 in vO on mo -trHon-tonrHCMoncM 

rH 


4- 

-40rHO'4-CM-4'OOOvOrHin\OOOOOOin 

'OOrHOooooinoonoonotoocMvOso 
A\OM) o-4'4oninononcMCMinininoncMrH 

1 —l 



cm on 0 rH on- 4-00 mo - 4-00 -4-4- 4 - 4 ) mo mo 4-0 


on 

OOCMOHonoOrHCM4-I>CMJ>OOOOini>0 
4 -mo 0 mo 4 - 4 - 4 -on on H rH m 4 - 4 - 4 -on rH 1 
H 


1 

cm 

rHOonJ>tnMD4-^n4-ooOinI>rHOrl4- 
4" 0 cm 0 on 0 on 1—1 00 mo 1 —l m in 1—1 cm i —1 0 C4 

MO 0 mo mo in in 4 -mo cncM(4rHt>minincMr-H 
rH 


i—i 

OrHCM4-I>in-4-rHinint)Oi>MOMOtocMincM 

O -4 to M5 HHrHCMinHCMtO-4ononi>HtO 

0 MO 4" m 4" 4" 4" 4* CM CM ono in MO in 4 - 1 H rH 

•H 0 

P i — 1 

0 42 

ri 

rHCMon4-msDi>t)OOOrHCMon4-mM5i>to 

1 > 

0 

1 — li —1 1 —i >—li—1 1 —1 r—If—If—1 


T) 

0 

■P 

-P 

•H 

g 

o 


O 


0 
0 
i—i 

rO 

0 

•H 

P 

0 

> 

£ 

O 

•H 

4-3 

O 

•H 

TO 

0 

P 

CL 

0 

•p 

Ch 

O 




£ 


•H 

P 

0 

rQ 


O 

4-> 

0 

O 

£ 

0 

P 

0 

Cm 

0 

P 

P 

O 

«m 


X 

H 

X 

0 

i—I 
P 
0 
Eh 

0 

0 

CQ 

0 









































■ 

■ ' ■ rn , ■ ■ , ; 













































* ■■ 






' 




























- 





























































K 














! 


















































TABLE XXVI 

INTERCORRELATIONS OF PREDICTORS AND GEOLOGY CRITERION ( 17 )(N = 43 ) 


113 


-p 

•H rH 
Ph 

o 


vO 


rHvO 'tCVOU-AOtOOCVOtOiT\iOI>rHO 

fOvOOMA -ttO *r\ -ttO 00 ^r^c^-<to ^£>0 

HHOHOHOOOsl-'t^HCMHHO 


CMAtOO-^iAc^sj-HCNjiAtOOHOOH 
"tvO U^ 0 ^'<tHC\imcr\CVCVC^‘^C\!r o \OrH 


i IT\ 


-t 


0 ^ 


cv 


CV ^ CV ^ £> HD CV CV rH O O vO -t O O C"~ 

O <r\ in -tvO O t> O^A CV -tvO O^A o rH O O I 

-t^o -ti>vOvo <r\ -3 - cta c<a cv -t -t -t o c^h I 


Z>rHc^^tOt)0OHt50O -ttO HO ^HtiO 
vO CV *Ov CV O' O 1> -t-t C'AvO Ost-OH^sj- 
-tc°\ -t-tvO u'\rH<rA-t-t-tc' 0 iO-tcVCV 


rHCT\CVOC<V£>rHCVI>\OJ>CVOrHvOOCr\ 
o'MfAtO CM>i>-t 1 4>OCVCVi>0 -tO t> c°\ 

-t*r\ -t -tin m cv m-t-t o°v "t O r^stiAH 


OmOHCVHOtOvQCVOrHOCVtOa'tOtO 
mcv COvO inNHtOOCN)HOJ>Onc^rr\ 
HCN|H'tr\ir\H( r )^vdvOOs}-sj-si-C^(^ 


CO 

0 

rH 

£t 

cd 

•H 

Ph 

cd 

> 

d 

o 

•H 

■P 

O 


cd 

0 


oncv c^tio c^vO -tvO OOOrHZ>-tO>nO 
-tvO >A(>C 0 "^\0 vO^tr-Or-ICVVDvOrHO 
cvOrHcncnincvcvcni>OvOcn-tcvcv-t 


j 


rO 

cd 

•H 

Ph 

cd 

> 

C 3 

o 

•H 

-P 

O 

•H 

d 

0 

r-t 

0, 


o 


to 




!>0 CV -ttO H’AvOcnOOO'^OHCVW 

O CV -ttO to o vO \D nJ-O O (V Oi 

CVO C^C^st-sJ-CV CD\si-0 1>vD '4- 


Z>CVmrHcrAvOrHO^OonOCVI>tOCVrHO 
H -tO CV vO -t\£> OO V-sj-O O -t* CV ovco 
Hcncv-t^c^cV-tO -tcnm-tcncncno 


tOC^J>C v 'NOC n vOOO^vOvOVDO>2HCV -ttO 
-tO (TMOr-OvOOOvOvOtOcn-Vc^CV-t 
C<^ LTMT\ -<t ov c^\ rH O -t C°l CV <TA m rH "t *-CA O 


C^UVOCMT-CVOOrH m -ttO H O (TAC^O 
a^~<H>u-\c^I>OvOvOvOvO H -t l> f> I> m 
C^(Oy<TACV-t-tOrHCVCVCVrHCV^C^CVO 


Tj 

0 

Ph 

&A 

0 

si 

■p 

4 -i 

O 

UQ 


•H 

Ph 

0 

S> 


O 

-P 


vO 


Ov£) CV -tO O CV 0G\v0 HvOvOC-tO'-Omm 
t0Ot0mcVO£>t>-tJ>-tCVt>OO -ttO 
OV-t CV vO cno -tOven-t^^CACrAvOvO rH rH 


in 


HV) O OAO O C^vO t^CO C°iCV tO 

DOm^OiOO CV CA!> o to to U~\ £> O vO -t-t 
cn*n irwD O cn-tCAcnsfcAcvAJA -tvo VO 


-t 


tOcnOOcn-tOC-rH -ttO HOV^OCV 
!>IA O O O CTUAtO CV to OV) OCM V^ 1 ^ 
C°\ CCA '<7* O vO vO CV -t-tcnc^-t-t-tC'-cnr-H 


<n 


VTNvO OOOCVO£>mcVcnOCVcncVtO-t 
OO O O *nt 0 c^A O 'tiCNtOtO cauaVO 
-t-t O-t^CVC^U'ACVcnrHrH-'tcn-t^O 


CV 


o O vO (TAnO vO *On (TA CV O CV m C°\ i—I m LfA vO 
(VO OIA^AO VO VW0 CV UAO) nOvO 
-to "t CCA IT\ ~t ov ITA (TA o O CV m m^O vO H 


O O m to i—I O C°\ to IT— P— C°\ O i—I £ C\2 O i—I 
O CV O' o 00 to o -t rH O -t cn <TAVD O mt0 
O -t —t c°v on on m on rH CV CV (—I —t —t —t —t <—I 


d 

0 

4-3 

4-3 

•H 


a 


o 


0 


cd 


•H 


O 

0 

I—) 


• • 

w 

EH 

O 


0 

O 

a 

0 

Ph 

0 

0 

Ph 

Ph 

O 

Cm 

X 

I—I 

X 

0 

rH 

rO 

cd 

EH 

0 

0 

CO 

cd 


•H 0 
Ph i—I 
Cd rO. 

> cd 


(V CAtUAvO I>0 0^0 H CV c r )'t'ti\0 

I _I _I _I_I _I _I _I 












TABLE XXVII 

INTERCORRELATIONS OF PREDICTORS AND GEOGRAPHY CRITERION (17)(N 


114 


vO 

II 


• 


t>cocorHmoxo 20 -rHtotooo 2 to coxo o 

-p 


02 to xo oi> -<t co to covoo-o-oo-mcoo 

•H 

1 —1 

ncvwHcAOmHsj-mnfac^HOcao 

p 


1—1 

O 

xO 

cotomtoi>intoxocoo'-xt0020co0x0 
in to -H-xO '4-£>mo2corHtoo20co 


rH 

inin-tcvoocninmOrHOP-nic^ocn 

1 —l 



cocotoocorHi>cotoo-i>too2rHOcoco 

totocr'C\2rHcooo2~<H>-ocotoooo2io 


rH 

(^HO^OlcnHstHOOOC^HOCVO 1 


"fr 

1—1 

CVONHin^xDOOxtMa^yOOHODO 

l>c>intOrHcvocnrH'xi-CN)cvtoootx>i>- 


1 —1 

inCNiCVOOisJ-HCVC^HmcVOOHOiH 


co 

1 —1 

o2r>inHcooo2cocMnoo20x0020202 
in - 4 -in rH xO 02 -<M> 02 xO --t O o to co rH 0 


1—1 

in xo m - 3 - co 02 ~<No 100020002020-02 

1 —l 


02 

02 tO O -ttO I> H 02 OxO t> O 02 02 tO O O 
-<t co 02 coto (tmiAOHOiMM cocot> 


1—1 

c^OHnncvctcvsi-insj-oooiOOn 


H 

<—1 

0 mto sj-i^vo mvo rHxO o t> o co o- ^to 

OO^Ot0rH-<fn2OcnOH-tC\2O(NI> 


rH 

^(VCVOWinrtH WmOsfcvmOHn 

a 


rH 

inrHtOD-OOtOHxOOvOxOmi>Z>OtO 

0 

O 

02 h into coxo cococoocooxo^o-mvo 

rH 

1 —1 

HHC^Hmc^si-o WOminoHOOm 

d 

c\j 


1 —l 

•1—1 


rH-^-cvxooi>cnrnOxOHOo-4-to on h 

p 


rHHinn2rH-t-4-cnooomcvH'<M>cn 

c\j 

O 

cococo-<}--<trHin-<2-oo202-H'ino2 r Hco'xt 

> 


1 —l 

Pi 


coctxo WHvOHonHvO wrao coxo i> 

O 


o~<2-oo2in-xt-3-ococoo2ini>coo2 -^-to 

•H 

to 

•-t in-t in cn cv 00 H cv xo 02 -4* m h ! 

-P 

O 


rH 

•H 


0 m cnto to 0 0 «H onto m h c\2 0 1> to 02 

d 


OHto ‘no(>OH'<tctsj-(t^OOvOO ! 

0 

£> 

co m co co m co o -4-m -<r co co -<t H H com 

fn < 
cu 

1 

1 

1 —1 

xO 

OtOl>OrHOOx02>OxOC v -OxOHmo 
O'O-CO'^'xtOO-4- '^■xO H tO 02 02 CO -t 
WOCOOJ stOnC2HCOiflCV02H-COOO 

H 


in 

t0ms002OHt0rH0^Omt0C0O2C0l>m 

02 O 0 s to 0 -H* 0^ m rH CO tO cOxO 1 —1 1 — 1 to 0~ 
02C0-^-^O-<tmc0''4-m02C0C00202OC0 



I—1 

'tOxj-O 02 OC 002 v£)Osj-sj-H i nO( 0 H 

00 H OtO xfooi OIDO OOrHtOOi 00 
s}-stx|-Oxi-02C0»nstHOC0si-Oc0 02 H 
rH 


i 

co 

to rH O ~<}-xO O COxO o2totoomrHtomco 

I (OHOHOOtOO VMnxj-OiiAOO 'H'vO 

02 ~v2"02 CO CO "^CO 02 02 rH m 02 O *'4'02 


* 

rH 

OOrHOmtomcO'xfrHmtoO-cootoco 
OOxJ-OOOxj-xj-HHOCOsrOtO ^to 
mo-<t'H*coommcOrH020x002rHmo2 


1—1 


rH 

O O to 'Xfto OOCOrHm0020202COCOO- 
OODDCOOiOOOHWOxJ-OOCOiAOi 

Omo2'<2-02 02cO'^-coH-^o2mmcomco 

1 

1 

•H 0 

H 

in H 

H 02 fOsJ-iA\0 OtO CT'O H 02 COxfiAvD i> 

aj d 

> aj 

1—It—If—1 1—If—1 1—1 1—ll—1 


CO 
0 
I —I 

d 

•H 

P 

a5 

> 

Pi 

O 

•H 

-P 

O 

•H 

d 

0 

n 

0 

-p 

C»H 

o 

tuO 

Pi 

•rH 

p 

0 

d 


£ 



O 


■P 


0 


o 


Pi 

• 

0 

d 

P 

0 

0 

■p 

Cm 

-p 

0 

•H 

fH 

g 


o 

SH 


O 

W 

Ch 

rH 


0 

5x1 

pl 

1—1 

•H 

X 

O 

0 

0 

Q 

rH 


d 


aj 

• • 

EH 

M 


EH 

0 

O 

0 

5s; 

CO 


oj 


























■ 






/ •: .. ■ ■ 

■ 

. 

■ 

! 


- i > ■ 








- 

1 

■ • 

' 

1 

•{ , C :■ . 

}■•»■•> , . - i r > 








i 





























INTERCORRELATIONS OF PREDICTORS AND UNIVERSITY AVERAGE CRITERION (17)(N = 529) 


115 


• 


"t0NC)N£>0Nxt"t^-m02O"t *<fsO m 02 O 

-p 

O 

Ov£>OncoOI>020202coOcocoI>coOnO 

•H 

i — 1 

CVHHHC^n^CV -3x0 m -~t 02 02 02 <H O 



i — 1 

O 

nO 

mi> to cO£> r\ir\OvO o cOvO "ttO E> O 02 
0^r"C\iOv0HrHuxoOOt)0"4‘0 N £>O0^ 


i — I 

iA^MAC^U)(VC^iAnHHH\OWsj-OH 


m 

i — 1 

On O to H 0- to -HtvO "t02 D" t> to 02 O O- m 

rH m r H'3-rH0NO0NC0C002C'"rH"tOl>C0 


rH 

in m "4 -nO 


"t 

rH 

O HstHOHC^COO CO "tt)0 mo 02 tO nO 
0\0 to \0 to on "t m to conO O "3-0 "3-on £> 


i — 1 

"3* CO rH 02 02 "3* CO rH 02 CO "3“ 02 02 O CO 02 02 


co 

1 — 1 

tOJ>02HONND02HONC002xOOmtO"3'"t 

"3-tOHONurM>rHOrHOH020"3-rH^-CO 


i—1 

m vO no "3" "3* 02 "3"nO mcoo2cooo2mxoo2 


02 

i—l 

rH O mo -t 0 s 02 C" 02 to co O \D to 1> vO -t 
02t0rHO!>v0C0mc0C0C0O02OI>t0C0 


rH 

02 02 02 "3-CO CO 02 CO "tm "t O CO 02 CO H "t 


i—1 

rH 

t0HOt0t0OvQC0O2s0OC002 "t*> COO 
roOommoomnoooHvOOioo 


rH 

02HOH02m02H cOnO O sfOi s}T2 H m 

cd 


H 

tOtOmcM> 02 tOH "to vO to CO CO 02 O 02 

CD 

o 

COHOHHOHOHOCOCOOCOCOOCO 

i—1 

1—1 

H 02 0202"t--t"t02mOv0mC0C002 H nO 

r Q 

cti 


1—1 

•H 


"tmHrH02t00NC0O"f02 02OO "tvO m 

Jh 


"t COnO 2>rHmmmOrHrHCOrHtOC0002 

cd 

O 

co "t co covo co "t " 3-0 m co "t m 02 co co "t 

> 


1—1 

£ 


rn £> to to "tvO OOcOHCOOHtO\OONO 

o 


mtotocoo20Nmomi>mml>mc5Nmo2 

•H 

to 

"tmmm"to2coO"to2rH conO h m m 02 

-p 

o 


rH 

•H 


rH C0m02l>t00l>0t0v0 0202c0"tm"t 

'd 


HO0it002OOmmHOC0H"3OH02 

CD 

t> 

"t "t"t cOnD "to C0"t"tcv 02 "tCO CO CO CO 

Ph 


H 

Q-i 

vO 

C0mJ>v0"tOt0xDt0O2O0Nv0rHt0C0"t 

O "tto HfiOOONONmr-OvOOOOHO 

C0C002"t"tO"tO2C0-3-mc002-^-C002C0 


m 

i—1 

c*- OOvO O "tl> "t02 J> to "3-0 CM> C" O 
rHHC0HOt00202HHm0-mt0HN0O 
"t m "t m O "3 "nO "t nO "t 02 co "t 02 "t co co 


-3- 

i—1 

CM>t0Ov0N002t0rHOt0OHHH COnQ 
2>rHOOHrHtOCO£>rHmO OnO "tOtO 

"tvO mo m"tcomcoo2rH"t"to2vO co rH 


co 

1—1 

to co o to oomto Hmomo 2 "tto to o 

OOOOfOt0 02tONDOONHHtOH020N 
mvoom"t02"tmcoo2002NOrH"tm,H 


02 

1—1 

mocot>comcoO-mtOrHOl>rHl>l>0 

02 O O H rH "tl> to co H o- to to nO mO-vO 
no OsONOmcO"3-m"to2rH02NOcommrH 


i—I 

1—1 

O m to On c*- co H m "tto toHtoOomt 

O 02 O t" H ON rH rn -tto 00 02 "t ON H coo 
OvO m"t"tcO"t"tcoH 02 02 m-tmmo2 

1 

•H 

CD 

rH 

PH l—1 

rH 02 CO "t mvO OtO OnO HCV cO"tmvD O 

Cti rQ 

> 

Cti 

i—1 (—! rH rH i—1 i—1 i—1 rH 












' 













O ' ~... 






■ 



















i ^ hn ■, ■. ; , 


. 




















































