For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FR OM T HIS ROOM 







UBMS 

aiBBMWSIS 



University of Alberta 
Printing Department 











UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
LIBRARY 


Regulations Regarding Theses and Dissertations 


Typescript copies of theses and dissertations for Master's 
and Doctor's degrees deposited in the University of Alberta Lib¬ 
rary, as the Official Copy of the Faculty of Graduate Studies, may 
be consulted in the Reference Reading Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supervision the work was done. Some Departments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan service 
of the University of Alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. Written permission of the 
author and of the Department must be obtained through the University 
of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. When permission 
has been granted, credit must appear in the published work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance with 
the above regulations by the persons listed below. The borrowing 
library is obligated to secure the signature of each user. 


Please sign below; 


Date 


Signature 


Institution 























. 

' 

. 


































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/psychologicalbasOOrobi 














THE UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BASIS OP AXIOMATIC MATHEMATICS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OP GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OP THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OP DOCTOR OP PHILOSOPHY 


DIVISION OP EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 


by 

FLOYD GRANT ROBINSON 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


APRIL, 1959 



UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read and 
recommend to the Faculty of Graduate Studies for acceptance, a 
thesis entitled, ”The Psychological Basis of Axiomatic Mathematics,” 
submitted by Floyd Grant Robinson, M.A., B*Ed., in partial fulfilment 

of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, 

~ 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 

FR0FE3&QEL 


April, lp5>9 





, 




r 














ABSTRACT 


This thesis arose from an attempt to resolve a 
pedagogical dilemma faced by the secondary school mathemat¬ 
ics teacher by providing a common ground for the research- 
oriented psychological approach of the elementary mathemat¬ 
ical education, and the pure mathematics orientation of 
advanced mathematical education. It seemed that a partic¬ 
ularly useful type of theory would give emphasis to the 
limits which commonly appear in the student*s mathematical 
performance. 

To meet this need, a theory of mental operations was 
proposed which employed the notion of an underlying hyper¬ 
cathexis energy. This energy, which results from the 
conservation of primitive cathexis through increased mental 
organization, is used to power the independent thinking of 
the super-organization of central processes. The possession 
of hypercathexis allows the organism to deal in an anti¬ 
cipatory way with its environment through the activation of 
neural structures which represent an internalization of 
systems in the exterior world. 

Two principal schema of mental operation were pos¬ 
tulated. In Type A functioning, hypercathexis is expended 
in a sequence of * operation-storaget couplets. Progress in 
this sequence would seem to be potentially unlimited. 








« ' 


iv 


although several causes of induced upper bounds were fore¬ 
seen. In Type B functioning, which is encountered in 
situations involving logical or utility choice, the avail¬ 
able hypercathexis is divided between alternatives, with the 
result that natural upper bounds can be expected* 

The structure of axiomatic mathematics was next 
considered and mathematical ability was defined in terms of 
the individual’s expected performance with respect to this 
structure* The ability to comprehend mathematics was 
denoted Level I ability and was found to involve Type A 
mental functioning. A second type of ability (Level II) was 
required to deal with gaps in the deductive sequence. If 
the individual filled the gap by a non-random procedure 
which generated successive choice points, then his behaviour 
was described as problem-solving (Level II); this ability 
was seen to involve Type B functioning. A treatment of 
Level III ability, the creative aspect of mathematical 
performance, was considered to be outside the range of our 
available concepts. 

The experimental work was designed to corroborate 
various aspects of the theory including several predictions 
made from it. A semi-clinical approach was employed In 
which a battery of standardized and experimental tests was 
administered to 106 high school students. 



V 


In three studies at Level I, the comprehension time 
was found to be a non-linear function of demonstration 
length* Two * factors 1 emerged in this area; the most import¬ 
ant one was closely related to the speed of performing 
simple mental operations and exhibited high correlations 
with Otis IQ. This was interpreted to mean that the speed 
of performing simple mental operations was dependent upon 
hypercathexis level. A further experiment, which employed 
comparisons of grade 10 and grade 12 groups matched in Otis 
IQ, suggested that the mental energy level does not increase 
once the stage of formal mental operations is reached, and 
that further gains in mental performance may be attributed 
to the development of energy-conserving strategies. The 
experiments also supported the theory in showing that group 
pressures may cause a lowering of upper bounds in Level I 
performance. 

The studies at Level II were largely devoted to the 
solution of geometry problems. The experimental results 
again corroborated the theory in that 90$ of the students 
demonstrated upper bounds which were predictable within the 
experimental time limit. Again, the student who made contin¬ 
ued progress did so by categorizing the propositions in such 
a manner that a continuous refinement of strategy balanced 
the increase in the number of propositions. Once the student 




■ 

* 


r , 






* 

■ ■ , \ f 




lo' ■ • ■■: 










•-> 1 ■ .'V y-C; lr/-\ li ,1- 


i 


’ 

: ■ c * • ?r ' o‘*;.r . : 

„ ' ■ < . .. - 

„ 

. 

ns ^ ■.. .<■ J . •. u 

■ . ■ > > ■, ■ - ■ ! ; . ■ : ■' 





vi 


reached an upper bound, he tended to add propositions to his 
repertoire without increasing his power of analysis. A 
further study of logical behaviour at and above the upper 
bounds gave rise to serious doubts concerning the alleged 
value of geometry as a training in the techniques of correct 
thinking. It also appeared that a priori prediction of 
geometry problem-solving ability was not feasible, but that 
a »trial 1 method would likely be useful, 

A further investigation of the overachiever in 
geometry was undertaken. This study revealed that many 
students of mediocre IQ tended to do well in geometry and 
that the key to the overachievers * success lay in an intense 
motivation which was manifested in a willingness to 
persevere. There was some indication that the source of 
this extreme ego-involvement with mathematics could be 
traced to a period of social maladjustment. 














,, ... • ' 




























I 






. 

, . ■ 

. 




i .Li' 


■ 

. . 








■ 

>;• L v- ■ . • 0 £ i 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The author wishes to convey his gratitude to the many 
people who have contributed in one way or another toward 
making this thesis possible. He is particularly indebted to 
the supervisory committee, to it*s chairman Dr. C. C. Anderson, 
and to the divisional chairman Dr. G. M. Dunlop for their 
interest in the thesis and for the encouragement they have 
given over the past two years. 
























- 






, 

* 











TABLE OP CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. INTRODUCTION . 1 

Elementary Mathematical Education . 1 

1. Content and Grade Placement ....... 2 

2. Learning Theory . 2 

3. Specific Classroom Practices . 3 

Influence on Secondary Education . . . 3 

Advanced Mathematical Education.. . Ij. 

1. Control of Curriculum. 5 

2. The Effect of Increased Enrolment .... 6 

Secondary Mathematical Education . 7 

1. Content and Placement. 7 

2. Learning Theory . 8 

3. Specific Practices ... . 9 

Statement of Thesis Problem . 11 

II. A THEORY OP MENTAL OPERATIONS. 12 

Use of Models. 12 

Levels of Description. ll| 

Energy. 17 

The Homeostasis Model . 20 

Evolution of the Brain. 21 

Maturation of the Brain .. 22 

Types of Mental Operation. 30 


























:o 











ix 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Type I. 30 

Type II. 32 

1. Utility Decisions ..... . 32 

2. Logical Choice ............. 34- 

Interaction in Thinking. 35 

Energy Distributions in Reality 

Directed Thought ..... . . 37 

1. Type I. 38 

2. Type II ................ . 4-0 

III. THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BASIS OF AXIOMATIC MATHEMATICS 4.2 

The Structure of the Axiomatic System .... 44 

1. Undefined Elements . .. 44 

2. Undefined Terms ............. 48 

3. Axioms .. 48 

4. Operations ..... . 4? 

5. System of Theorems ........... 48 

IV. LEVEL ONE ABILITY .. 50 

Upper Bounds In Level One Performance .... 58 

1. Natural Upper Bounds .......... 5? 

2. Depression of the Upper Bound ...... 60 

3. The Creation of Gaps .. 81 

V. LEVEL TWO “-THE MATHEMATICS PROBLEM.. . 64 . 

The Geometry Problem .. 68 

The Psychological Problem of Logical Choice . ?2 





























X 


CHAPTER PAGE 

Attempts to Quantify Problem Difficulty . . . 74 

1. Standard Methods . 74 

2. Uncertainty Measure of Problem Difficulty 7 $ 

3. Numerical Example.. 81 

VI. CREATIVE ABILITY—LEVEL THREE. 84 

Summary—Chapters II-VI . ..... 86 

VII. PRELIMINARY DATA .. 91 

Pilot Study. 91 

The Autumn Investigations . 92 

1. Population . ...... 92 

2. The Tests. 94 

3. Testing Programme .. 96 

Preliminary Statistical Data. 97 

Matched Groups. . 97 

VIII. LEVEL ONE PERFORMANCE AND GROUP PRESSURE .... 102 

Lawfulness and Level One Performance.102 

Experimental Design. 105 

1. Hypotheses and Time Limits. 10 $ 

2. The Test Battery ............ 110 

3. Testing Procedure . Ill 

Analysis of Results . .. 114 

1. Preliminary Analysis. 114 

2. The Existence of Upper Bounds.115- 

3. Guessing Behaviour in Group Situations . 119 


























' . 



















xi 

CHAPTER PAGE 

4. A Closer Study of Guessing.124 

5. Individual Performances.125 

Further Statistical Considerations . 129 

1. Reliability Estimates.. . . . . 129 

2. The Constants k-^ and k ^ .130 

Summary . ............ 133 

IX. GAP FILLING AND STRATEGIES.137 

1. The Test . ..138 

2. Test Battery ......... . 140 

3. Subjects and Testing Procedure . 141 

Analysis of Results .. • 142 

1. Comprehension Scores. 142 

2. Gap Filling. 145 

Strategy Analysis . 146 

(a) Horizontal Position Correction ..... 147 

(b) Alphabetical Position Correction .... 147 

(c) Single Position Correction . . 148 

1. Criteria for Rating Strategy ...... 149 

2. Gap-Filling Time Curves for Strategy 

and Non-Strategy Groups ......... 151 

Strategy Formation and IQ .......... 153 

Summary ................... 157 

X. THE COMPREHENSION OF TOPOLOGICAL CONCEPTS ... 160 

Subjects and Procedure ....... . 160 




























xii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Results.165 

Individual Studies . .... 16? 

Summary .. 1?0 

XI. PROBLEM SOLVING UNDER FINITE UNCERTAINTY 

THE GEOMETRY STUDY—PART ONE . ..173 

1. Objectives of the Geometry Study .... 175 

2. Procedure ........... . 175 

3. Population ....... . 176 

4. Problems Used ..177 

5. The Course Outline ...... . 176 

6. Teaching Procedure ........... 178 

7. Preliminary Scoring and Tabulation . . . 182 

The Measurement of Problem Difficulty .... 182 

1. The Deductive Measure of Problem 

Difficulty. 185 

2. The Uncertainty Measure of Problem 

Difficulty. . 186 

The Pilot Study: Analysis of Individual 

Problems .. 191 

Prediction Diagrams ............. 197 

The Continuous Refinement of Strategy .... 202 

XII. THE GEOMETRY STUDY—PART TWO .......... 207 

Consistency of Performance in Geometry .... 207 

Boundedness of Problem-Solving Behaviour . . . 211 






























xiii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

1. Category One.212 

2. Category Two.214 

3. Category Three...214 

4. Category Pour.215 

Problem-Solving Profiles ... . 216 

Further Profile Analysis ••.•••••... 224 

Comparison of Grade 10 and Grade 12 Scores . . 226 

The Effect of Repeating Problems ..229 

Individual Performances ....••••••• 231 

1. Problem-Solving Behaviour below, 

at, and above the upper bound.231 

2. The Extent of Illogical Behaviour 

in Geometry . .......... 238 

3. Effect of Expectation of Solution .... 241 

Summary. 242 

XIII. PROBLEM SOLVING UNDER INFINITE UNCERTAINTY . . . 245 

Test Battery, Subjects, and Procedure .... 245 

Results .......... . „ . 248 

1. Reliability ............... 248 

2. Distribution of Upper Bounds ..249 

3* Analysis of Errors at Higher Levels . . . 252 

Factors Influencing Hypothesis Formation « . . 254 

1. Practice Effects ...... . 255 




















4 ... 6 ....... . 

















xiv 


CHAPTER PAGE 

2. The Effect of Temporary 'Sets’.256 

3. The Effect of Long-Range Strategies . . . 25? 

Matched Groups . 259 

Summary . . . ... . . 2 62 

XIV. CORRELATES OF PROBLEM-SOLVING ABILITY.261}. 

Individual Predictors of Problem-Solving 

Ability in Geometry.. 264 

Multivariate Prediction of Ability in Geometry 267 
Intercorrelations of Strategy Formation . . . 2?0 

Sex Differences , . . . . . 275 

Rural and Town Students ..277 

Expectation Toward Mathematics . . 279 

XV. THE PROBLEM-SOLVING SYNDROME. 281 

1. Selection of Overachievers. 282 

2. Sources of Information ......... 282 

3. Comparison Groups. 286 

The Problem-Solving Syndrome.286 

XVI. SUMMARY OF THEORY AND FINDINGS.' 293 

Theory . .......... 293 

Experimental Findings ..... . 296 

1. Studies at Level One.296 

2. Studies at Level Two .......... 29 8 

Implications for the School ..302 

Suggestions for Further Research . 306 
















































XV 


PAGE 

GLOSSARY.309 

BIBLIOGRAPHY.312 

APPENDICES.32? 






LIST OP TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

1. Objective Relative Frequencies in the Uncertainty 

Analysis of Problem One. 70 

2. Probability Table for Uncertainty Analysis of 

General Geometry Problems . 76 

3. Experimental Tests.. . . . 95 

4. Non-Standardized Sources of Information . . . . . 96 

5. Means and Standard Deviations of Grade 10 and 

Grade 12 Groups on Standardized Tests. 98 

6* Means and Standard Deviations for Matched Groups . 100 

7. Experimental Design: The Effect of Group Pressure 

on Level I Performance ....... . 107 

8. Distribution of Questions by Stages in Number 

Series Test Battery. Ill 

9. Distribution of Upper Bounds in Level One 

Performance . . . ....... 115 

10. Percentage of Subjects with Sufficient Time for 

Solution at Each Level ....... . 118 

11. The Relative Proportion of Profile Types in the 

Individual and Combined Grades . 118 

12. Guessing Under a Gradient of Group Pressure . . . 121 

13. Total Number of Students Guessing at Each Stage- 

Level . 122 

















ms 



























, 












JO v> a 





,:) r.f ■' 












xvii 


TABLE PAGE 

14. Distribution of Upper Bounds in Level One Ability 

Under Three Different Conditions of Testing . . 127 

15. Reliabilities for One-Stage and Two-Stage Problems 

in Level One Number Series ..130 

16. Means and Standard Deviations of k^ and k 2 for the 

Matched Groups . 131 

17. Correlations Between k^, k£ and Otis for the 

Matched Groups . 132 

18. Permutation Battery for Gap-Filling Test ..... 141 

19. Means (Time in Seconds) and Standard Deviations 

for L^, L 2 , L^ Scores for Matched Grade 10 and 
Grade 12 Groups. 143 

20. Product Moment Correlations Between the kj, L]_ and 

Otis Scores. 144 

21. Means and Standard Deviations of the G^, G^ 

Scores for Matched Grade 10 and Grade 12 Groups 145 

22. The Number of Possible and Correct Answers in 

Relation to Gap Length.148 

23. Strategy Formation at Levels G 2 and G^ for the 

Matched Groups in Grades 10 and Grade 12 ... . 15>0 

24. Relationship Between Otis IQ and Strategy 

Formation at Levels G]_ and G 2 for the Combined 
Groups.153 










- * 




















xviii 


TABLE PAGE 

25. Relationship Between Otis IQ and Strategy 

Formation on Ordering Tests, Grade 10 and 12 . 0 l$k 

26. Lesson Schedule for Instruction in the 

Comprehension of Topological Concepts . 163 

27* Representatives for Elementary Topological 

Concepts . ....... 169 

28. Geometry in the Ontario High School ....... 177 

29. Stability of Problem-Solving Performance . 183 

30. Subjective Probabilities for Uncertainty Analysis 

Model B .. 188 

31. Subjective Probabilities for Uncertainty Analysis 

Model A.189 

32. Subjective Probabilities for Uncertainty Analysis 

Model C . ..190 

33. Reliability of Prediction of Relative Performance 

on the Basis of First-Quarter and First-Half 

Performance.209 

34o Profile Types in the Solution of Geometry Problems' 218 
35® Classification of Profile Types for 69 Grade 10 

Students .................... 219 

36. Predictability of Location of Practical Upper 

Bound in Terms of Placement at End of Successive 
Quarters. 220 













. 


I 


xix 


TABLE PAGE 

37. Individual Profile Showing No Gain in Practical 

Upper Bound.221 

38. Mean Upper Bound Scores over Pour Consecutive 

Intervals for the Grade 10 Group (N=69) . . . . 225 

39. Stability of f 50$-point f Measure of Upper Bound 

for Grade 10 Group (N=69) .. 225 

40. Comparison of Grade 10 and Grade 12 Matched Groups 

in Geometry Performance . ... . 227 

41. Number of Correct Solutions by Difficulty 

Categories for the Matched Groups in Grades 10 

and 12 Respectively. ...» .228 

42. Increase in the Number of Correct Solutions Upon 

Repeating Problems .. 230 

43* Distribution of the Ratio: (Correct Solutions) to 

(Incorrect Solutions), for Grades 10 and 12 . . 240 

44* Distribution of the Ratio: (Correct Solutions) to 
(Wrong and Partially Correct Solutions, for 
Grades 10 and 12 . ... 240 

45. Problem Battery--Infinite Uncertainty . 247 

46. Reliability Estimates for First-Order Number 

Series .............. . 249 

47. Upper Bounds in Problem Solving Under Infinite 

Uncertainty (Level II), A Comparison with Upper 
Bounds in Level I Performance . ... 250 




















* 











. 




■ 












XX 


TABLE PAGE 

48. Analysis of Solutions for Level II Number Series- 

Grade 10.253 

49. Analysis of Solutions for Level II Number Series- 

Grade 12.2^3 

50. Practice Effects in First Order Number Series . . 255 

51. The Effect of Temporary ! Sets ! on the Solution of 

First-Order Problems . 257 

52. Postulated and Experienced Order of Difficulty for 

Level II Number Series. 258 

53. Mean and Median Scores for Grades 10 and 12 

Matched Groups . ..... . 260 

54 * Comparison of Upper Bounds in Level II Series for 

Grades 10 and 12 Matched Groups ........ 261 

55. Number of Correct and Incorrect Solutions to 

Level II Number Series Above Order One- 

Matched Grade 10 and Grade 12 Groups.261 

56. Single Predictors (Grade 10) and Single Correlates 

(Grade 12) of Problem-Solving Ability in 

Geometry ..... . 265 

57. Intereorrelations of Four Predictors of Geometry 

Ability—Grade 10.268 

58. Intereorrelations of Four Correlates of Geometry 

Ability—Grade 12.269 

59. (3 Coefficients and Multiple R for Grades 10 and 12 269 












- 





























' 













TABLE 


PAGE 


60. Intercorrelations of Four Measures of Strategy 

Formation—Grade 10.272 

61* Intercorrelations of Four Measures of Strategy 

Formation—Grade 12.2 72 

62. Intercorrelations of Three Indices of Guessing— 

Grade 12.274 










♦ 




















* * 





r":.. 




















LIST OP FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1* Schematic representation of model construction . . 13 

2. Energy sources in formation of phase sequences . . 24 

3. Successive operations in storage.. . 30 

4. Energy distributions in reality directed thought . 37 

5. Level-time curves illustrating the adverse effect 

of group pressure. 39 

6. The diagrammatic illustration of the limit point 

of a sequence. 57 

7. The decrease in comprehension under linear 

demonstration time.. . 59 

8. Motivation as a utility decision ......... 60 

9. Illustrating problem, from the differential calculus 64 

10. Diagrammatic representation of gap-filling 

procedures .. 67 

11. Geometry problem 1 illustrating uncertainty 

analysis ............. . 68 

12. Analysis diagram for geometry problem one .... ?1 

13. A three-stage finite difference number series . . 103 

14. Three profile types of level-time curves . 116 

15. A schematic representation of 1 guessing* in number 

series. 124 

16. Two profiles with individual and group results . . 126 






























V. 











xxiii 


FIGURE PAGE 

17. Permutations on four elements.138 

18. Sequence of mental steps in the solution of a 

third-order permutation.. . . 139 

19. Gap filling in the permutation sequence.li|0 

20. Schematic representation of a permutation gap of 

length three ..li|6 

21. Gap length and comprehension time under three 

levels of strategy formation . ... 1$2 

22. The relationship between Otis IQ and strategy 


formation as a function of task difficulty . . . 155 

23. Seventy-five per cent comprehension curves, 

percentage comprehension, and logical demonstra¬ 
tion times for elementary topological concepts . 166 


24. Geometry problem illustrating a deviation from 

the analysis strategy. 192 

25. Geometry problem illustrating deviation from the 

analysis strategy . ...... 193 

26. Geometry problem illustrating the superiority of 

the uncertainty measure. 195 

27. Geometry solving performance over the first four 

propositions. 199 


28. Use of combined uncertainty and deductive measure 

in the prediction of geometry performance . . . 201 


29. 


Geometry problem 4 


203 












- 

















V i. 
















xxiv 


FIGURE PAGE 

30. Geometry problem representative of difficulty 

category one.212 

31. Geometry problem representative of difficulty 

category one.213 

32. Geometry problem representative of difficulty 

category one...213 

33. Geometry problem representative of difficulty 

category one . ....... 213 

34. Geometry problem representative of difficulty 

category two. 214 

35. Geometry problem representative of difficulty 

category two . ...... 214 

36. Geometry problem representative of difficulty 

category three ..... . 215 

37. Geometry problem representative of difficulty 

category three . ....... 215 

38. Geometry problem representative of difficulty 

category four. 216 

39. Geometry problem illustrating performance at 

difficulty level below the upper bound . 232 

40. Geometry problem illustrating performance at 

difficulty level slightly above the upper bound 233 

41. Geometry problem illustrating performance at 

difficulty level above upper bound ....... 234 




























. 











XXV 


FIGURE PAGE 

4 2. Geometry problem illustrating performance at 

difficulty level far above upper bound . 236 

43. Geometry problem illustrating performance at 

difficulty level far above upper bound . . . . . 237 

44* Geometry problem illustrating the effect of an 

expected solution . . 241 

45. Utility measurement of ego involvement in 

mathematics.284 

46. Geometry problem employed in the measurement of 

perseveration. 285 






















CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

The contemporary high school teacher of mathematics 
faces mamy unsolved pedagogical problems. His domain— 
high school mathematics—has remained practically invul¬ 
nerable to many attempts to uncover its psychological 
dimensions. This thesis attempts to introduce a unified 
point of view in this area, by providing a theory of 
mathematical ability which unites current psychological 
principles with mathematical content. 

In order to appreciate the necessity of the type 
of theory proposed, and to allow a comprehensible statement 
of the thesis problem, it will be necessary to make a brief 
preliminary survey of certain critical influences which 
bear upon the high school mathematics teacher. We consider 
these forces as emanating from two principal sources: 

(a) elementary mathematical education, and (b) advanced 
mathematical education. Some characteristics and lines of 
influence of each will be considered in turn. 

Elementary Mathematical Education 

The most outstanding development in this area in the 
last fifty years has been the research-reorientation of 
educational theory and practice. This has made possible 
a consolidation of opinion on certain basic issues. 
























- • 


. 










* 







. 

■ :: t 

. 

* 

. 

. 

, ’ 








2 


1. Content and Grade Placement . There has always been 
agreement that the elementary school curriculum ought to 
teach the number facts and skills necessary to carry on the 
computations of everyday life. Educational research has 
buttressed this position by determining the content which 

is appropriate to a particular age level. Readiness studies 
(Buckingham, 1930; Gunderson, 191+0) have ascertained the 
child»s ability to handle number concepts on entering school, 
and have made possible a systematic arithmetic program in 
grades one and two. Again, the proper grade placement of 
topics has been extensively investigated (Smith, 1950; 

Thiele, 1938), so that while agreement is not complete 
(Washburne, 1930; Washburne, 1939 ) 9 there is a sufficient 
body of experimental evidence to defend current practices. 

2. Learning Theory . The first systematic psychology 
of arithmetic based on a well-developed theory of learning 
was put forward by Thorndike (1922). This rigid connection- 
ism (based on the law of practice) was, in time, attacked 

by exponents of the Gestalt position (Wheeler, 1935) so that 
the years 1930 to 1950 witnessed an extremely heated and 
outspoken contest in the professional literature (Brownell, 
1935; Knight, 1930; McConnell, 1941? Skinner, 1954)* Never¬ 
theless, by 1952, there was fairly general agreement that 
arithmetic should be taught "meaningfully", i.e., in accord¬ 
ance with the meaning theory put forward by Brownell (1935). 










. 


- 













- 

■ 














. ' ' ' ; ' ’ ' > 

■ 

... 

. 






3 


The ^meaning* theory conceives of arithmetic as a 
closely knit system of understandable ideas, principles, 
and processes. According to this theory, the test of 
learning is not mere mechanical facility in f figuring f . The 
true test is an intelligent grasp upon number relations and 
the ability to deal with arithmetical situations with proper 
comprehension of their mathematical as well as their prac¬ 
tical significance. 


3. Specific Classroom Practices . A large proportion 
of the 1,413 research papers published by the end of the 
year 1945 (Buswell, 1951) have substantiated experimentally, 
specific procedures for the classroom. Representative of 
the type of research done is Brownell and Mosers 1 well-known 
proof of the superiority of the decomposition 1 method of 
subtraction over the * equal-additions * method. 


Influence on Secondary Education 

No one will claim that the field of elementary 
mathematical education has solved all its problems. Yet It 
has accumulated a sufficient body of proven facts and prin¬ 
ciples to offer its teachers a framework within which they may 
work with confidence. The high school teacher of mathematics, 
in so far as his training includes educational psychology, 
is exposed to principles which have--as far as mathematics 
is concerned—been tested and found applicable only at the 
elementary level. For example, when educational psychology 
textbooks discuss basic principles of learning theory, they 
usually fail to distinguish between applications at the 








. j ^ ' 1 


% : 





F 















•- 










. 

■ 1 








; 1 





5 






4 


elementary and secondary levels, despite the fact that few 
applications have been made beyond the early stages of the 
elementary grades (Dyer, 1956). Consequently, it may be 
said that one disturbing force to which the high school 
teacher is subjected, is the expectation that he will—or 
can—apply in his area, the results or principles derived 
from research conducted in another area. Indeed, it turns 
out that research at the secondary level has been noticeably 
unsuccessful, and many high school teachers have concluded 
(Savage, 1956) that research findings are not applicable to 
their work: at all. 

Advanced Mathematical Education 

In sharp contrast to the psychological orientation 
at the elementary level, mathematical education at the 
college and university proceeds almost entirely without 
reference to psychological principles in questions of content 
and placement, learning theory, and specific lecturing 
procedures. Occasional pseudo-psychological excusions into 
mathematical creativity (Hadamard, 1945) 9 multiple-correla¬ 
tion predictions of college marks from high school mathemat¬ 
ics grades (Douglass, 1936), and a few factor-analytic 
investigations of mathematical ability at the college level 
(Coleman, 1956), fairly well represent the extent of the 
influence of psychological thinking at the advanced level. 
Indeed, it is likely that most mathematicians regard their 







' 






t : • 










' ' ■ 

■ 














- 






' 






. 














. 








' 









5 

work to be philosophically rather than psychologically 
oriented. 

1. Control of Curriculum . The mathematicians main 
line of influence in secondary education has come through 
control of the curriculum--a curriculum which has been consid¬ 
ered by the mathematician as preparatory to university 
mathematics. Historically, the last major revision in the 
high school mathematics programme in the United States, 
dates back to the Committee of Ten (1894)• In this respect, 
Kinney and Purdy (1952) remark. 

Because the purposes of the sequence were cultural 
and disciplinary, primarily designed for college preparation, 
it is not surprising to find that no psychologist or sociol¬ 
ogist was included on the committee, and that none of the 
committee members had a record of close contact with youth. 
This may account for the fact that no differentiation in 
purposes was recognized between the secondary school and 
college. 

According to a recent study (Dyer, 1956), the only 
major change since that date has been the gradual disappear¬ 
ance of solid geometry, and the introduction of a general 
mathematics course at the grade 9 level. 

The mathematicians influence over the high school 
curriculum has been further strengthened by the control of 
standards (through departmental examinations), the writing 
of textbooks, and the control of courses for the mathemat¬ 
ical training of prospective teachers. 













. 


















■ 


. 









. 




. 

. 








. 























6 


2. The Effect of Increased Enrolment . At the 
university level, increased enrolment probably means that 
more students are being provided with an opportunity to 
continue their education; it does not necessarily imply, 
however, that the quality of the student entering is declin¬ 
ing. At the high school level, on the other hand, the 
average I.Q. of the incoming student has most certainly 
declined over the past few decades, since the percentage 
of students entering high school at the present time is 
more than eight times as large as it was in 1900 (Kinney, 
1952, p.33). Thus, mathematics courses designed for 
approximately 10 % from the upper part of the intelligence 
distribution are now offered to a group which includes a 
large proportion of students of mediocre ability. This 
condition has only partly been offset by the offering of 
more options in the larger schools. Under the circumstances, 
it is not surprising that many students are not able to cope 
with the mathematics courses offered to them. 

In summary, it may be said that a second disturbing 
force acting on the contemporary mathematics teacher arises 
from the fact that he is expected to teach university 
preparatory courses designed for an intelligent minority, to 
a relatively unintelligent majority, most of whom will never 
progress through, or beyond, the high school. 











. 



' 








■ • 





























. 


* 












■ . . . 













7 

Secondary Mathematical Education 

The unsatisfactory position of the high school 
mathematics teacher has already been indicated—and will 
become clearer by a consideration of the three areas listed 
under elementary education. 

1* Content and Placement . The early studies of 
Thorndike (1924) discredited the then-current belief in the 
’mental discipline* values of algebra and geometry. Since 
that time, curriculum planners have been careful to exclude 
from the proposed aims of mathematics courses any statement 
which might be construed as a belief in ’faculty* psychology. 
However, it is still clear that a great deal of transfer 
is expected. For example, one of the six objectives for 
the geometry course as set down in 1940 by the Joint Commi¬ 
ssion to Study the Place of Mathematics in Secondary 
Education, was the following: "Understanding of deductive 
science and ability to apply the deductive method to non¬ 
geometric arguments 11 . After reviewing studies (Ulmer, 1939) 
which attempt to verify such claims, Dodes (1953) points 
out that the ’home-made* tests used to verify transfer are 
of doubtful validity, and consequently the supposed merits 
of the high school mathematics curriculum as a promoter of 
desirable mental attitudes or abilities remain in the realm 
of supposition rather than experimental fact. 





















, 




, 





. 

. 




I 

. 




- 

■ 










, : 







8 


Not only has the psychological value of the curric¬ 
ulum been cast into doubt; its mathematical value is now 
maintained to be questionable. At the present time, there 
is a movement in progress to "modernize" the high school 
mathematics curriculum. The current literature abounds with 
articles by professional mathematicians (Van Duren, 1958) 
who point out that the ideas with which the secondary school 
mathematics student has contact are of ancient vintage— 
predating in fact, Newton*s invention of the calculus. 
Moreover, they contend that large sections of the algebra 
and geometry courses could be deleted with no ill effects— 
even for those few proceeding to university mathematics. 

The time saved would be devoted to such modern ideas as set 
theory, symbolic logic, and statistics. Although similar 
themes have been heard before, (Thorndike, 1923), it is 
possible that the next few years will witness some major 
revisions in the high school curriculum. 

2. Learning Theory . It has already been pointed out 
that learning theory has been little applied to mathematics, 
beyond the elementary level. Thorndike’s (1923) discussion 
of algebra from the connectionist point of view, and 
Wertheimer’s (1945) applications of Gestalt psychology to 
geometry represent the main applications of pure learning 
theory at the secondary level. It is, therefore, probably 









« 
























. ‘ i. 








* 

, 






4 




i T 








9 


not unfair to say that the high school mathematics teacher 
makes little use of any systematic theory of learning in 
his teaching (Dyer, 1956). 

3. Specific Practices . Most attempts to justify the 
specific practices of the high school classroom have yielded 
negative or inconclusive results. The results of expe¬ 
riments to determine: the optimum size of classes (Schunert, 
1951 ) 9 the superiority of deductive or inductive methods of 
teaching (Michael, 19i+9)* the optimum amount of homework 
and the effect of easy and hard marking (Schunert, op. cit.), 
the optimum frequency of tests (Johnson, 1938), and the 
effect of the academic training, background, and experience 
of the teacher on the achievement of the pupils (Schunert, 
op. cit.), have not endorsed or supported any particular 
practice to the exclusion of others. 

The full implication of the position of the high 
school mathematics teacher is now clear. For while his 
mathematical training and subject matter field are oriented 
toward the axiomatic systems which are characteristic of 
modern mathematics, his pedagogical training is oriented 
toward psychological principles which have proved success¬ 
ful only in the elementary area and which do not seem to 
apply to secondary school mathematics. Unfortunately, the 
lack of congruence which exists between these bi-polar 









. 


. . .. * 

- 

. „ 

. 

■ 
















, : :<>( 2i a a:::> a: 


- 

■ 



10 

forces has left the high school teacher in a state of 
uncertainty, without a frame of reference with which to 
defend or examine his classroom practices. 

One is tempted to say that a solution to these 
problems will eventually come through an improvement in 
learning theory, and one expert has declared that we must 
rebuild our learning theories, moving beyond the *well- 
controlled-animal» point of view to a * complex-human-being f 
theory (Buswell, 1956). 

There are many aspects of learning theory (Hilgard, 
1957* p*8); the emphasis given to the various parts under¬ 
goes a change as we move up the educational scale. In the 
elementary school, where we assume that it is necessary 
for every child to learn a certain minimum amount, the 
question of how the individual learns has been given the 
greatest attention, but in the selective practices of the 
high school and university, the emphasis shifts to a consid¬ 
eration of hox '7 much the individual can learn. The latter 
question is certainly of crucial importance to the high 
school mathematics teacher who has to deal with large 
numbers of students who seem to be unable to progress beyond 
the very elementary stages in mathematics. A theory of 
mathematical ability which would allow the prediction of an 
individuals progress to a certain level in an axiomatic 
system is badly needed at the present time. Such a theory. 



























. 

* 















- 

- 

. 








■ 

, 




11 


in providing a framework and concepts for the direction of 
research in secondary school mathematical education, would 
go a long way toward a solution of the outstanding problems 
in that area. 

Statement of Thesis Problem 

This thesis attempts to advance and substantiate a 
theory of mathematical ability with the following 
characteristics: 

(a) It should be capable of alleviating the bi-polar stress 
on the mathematics teacher by describing performance in 
mathematics (particularly in the axiomatic systems of 
modern mathematics) in terms of current psychological 
principles. 

(b) It should explain the apparent limits in the mathemat¬ 
ical performance of students In terms of cognitive, motiva¬ 
tional, and classroom variables. 

(c) It should distinguish between the types of mental tasks 
required in mathematics and should describe an individuals 
limit in terms of attainment of a certain level in a scale 
of difficulty in each type of task. 

Section A of the thesis Is devoted to the development 
of this theory, and Sections B and C to its experimental 
verification. 













. 























, 






* .. . • .... . ‘ 


1 .u o 

■ \ <: ■ :•( :;a l:‘.> ' f :: - r.;v " 






. 


, 

r . 





SECTION A 


A THEORETICAL CONSIDERATION 
OP THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BASIS 


OP AXIOMATIC MATHEMATICS 





CHAPTER II 


A THEORY OP MENTAL OPERATIONS 

This chapter presents those ideas concerning the 
operation of the brain which are prerequisites to the devel¬ 
opment of the theory in the following chapters. 

Use of Models 

Most of the theorizing in this thesis--and in contem¬ 
porary psychology--may be viewed as degrees of approximation 
to *model construction*. A model^ represents a way of 
dealing with complex phenomena by means of a comparison 
with an analogous situation, usually one in mathematics or 
physics. The process may be schematized as in Pig. 1. 

After simplifying some f real-world* situation S by 
reducing it to its essential variables, the model constructor 
then maps S in a one-to-one fashion on a mathematical or 
physical system S’. Once the mapping is complete, he can 
apply to S’ established theorems of mathematics and physics, 
proceeding without obligation to interpret these operations 
in terms of »events* in the real world. When a result I? is 

*^A more thorough account of the logical relationship 
between theory and model may be found in Braithwaite (1953, 
Gh. IV). 




! orfc /u 



; '.j: 

, n {S 









: vr- -M.' (0 






r ■ - ' 


■I ' :■ : : o 




■ ' ' 1 ' - 


. " ' • • 


.. 

•-o'J- ";/v j 

; ■■ - v ; : i !. 1 H 

■ ■ . + ‘ • ' ' • ■ '■ ! 

. " • ' ■ • ■ Cl C. ' : ; 

/ l 

f - ' ■ . ■ : . - 

.. ' • ' : ' ■ : ‘ 

1 ; . ■ ;. i - ' " ■ ■ ; ' : ' : ' ! ■ 

r. Tro li-r.S ■ ~ ~*'f' 

/. VI ; :r- . .r' i • 1 '■ ; v" : ^ 

■ *]..< • V ' 1 . ; • • 

: j c ■ y::' J ’ '• - ‘ . 

. i.>£ 




) 

, ' ' ' 1 : 






13 


s 




1 

1 



1 

1 

Mathematical 

I 

-T-» 

| 

or Physical 
System 

Mapping 



M 

\ 



I Application of 

I mathematical or 

I logical principles 


<r 


Mapping 

M# 


I 


s/— 

Result R expressed 
in mathematical 
formulae 


Pig. 1. Schematic representation of model construction. 


obtained, it is mapped back onto R and is then subjected 
to interpretation: if it yields results not given as 
properties of the original system S which are potentially 
verifiable by means of an experiment performed on S, then 
the model is a useful one. If the model yields results 
which are not new, or results which contradict such 
experimental evidence, then the model is a useless one, and 
may be discarded. 

Although model construction would seem to be inev¬ 
itable in scientific thinking, most of our psychological 
models lack explicit mathematical formulation. Consequently, 






























■'_., ■ '*■ 1 ■ ) ).■ ■ - ; ' 0' : X C/:'t •: 

;.) ,:>■■■ ^v; r 'i: •1 .hr; h odao t-; / • < i • 

7 ; .v, - . ' h •• ■: h :• : V.' ^ 

-d t . ■ 7 ^ ■ r' ■•■■■ ■ • 

■ 

4 ■ ; 

. .. : .j :il , . : i: j m h : ' c - :''h I : ' 

■ ' ■ 

. 













it is often not clear when we use a term, whether we imply 
by it some property intrinsic to the phenomena under 
investigation, or whether we have merely borrowed a term 
from the nomenclature of the physical analogy. Nevertheless 
with these reservations in mind, we go on to construct what 
is, in effect, a model for the operation of the brain. 

Levels of Description 

The gamut of scientific description advances by 
increasing levels of organization and complexity from the 
subatomic to the cosmic. Within this range, the scientist 
must choose the level of description which most naturally 
fits the phenomenon which he is investigating at any given 
time. In particular, the psychologist has found it advanta¬ 
geous to describe human behaviour by employing neural, 
psychic, and social models. 

Proceeding up the scale of increasing complexity 
of organization, we encounter at each level, phenomena 
which cannot be completely analysed into the units of the 
level below. Thus the ego construct at the psychic level 
is not equatable to any known compound of neural structures. 
This state of affairs is not surprising, for if complete 
decomposition were possible, then a single system of concept 
would suffice in psychology. As things stand, however, 
theorists have developed separate systems of nomenclature 









.. -. 


’ 0 


v 


:] 1'f.T &!'JO ■ 













1 





nr-".'. ' L s' ■: 






"j■ '■'" j 3 *; oJL 








■ 




n U;J( .. ■ - 


C; 


;• r " ‘ /. '! . , i f v.-' 1 


n < • ( 






■ * '• ■ , •" , i-' .’.v. 1 O’j ;'v ■ : :-:o %'o0>O.b 

■ ’ •! * •; , 1 i • ; 1 1 

■. • •; • :: ., ’ • • ■ \ n in ■■ ’ ' •• ; 1 ' 


15 


and constructs appropriate to each level. Moreover, the 
natural desire for * complete* systems (Hilbert & Ackermann, 
1950) has not only resulted in the development of single- 
level systems (i.e., employing concepts at one level), but 
has also created a taboo against multiple-level theorizing. 
Thus a psychologist using physiological concepts tends 
either completely to discredit psychic concepts, or to 
reduce them to physiological terms. 

In many cases, it may be possible for the pure 
psychologist to operate successfully with a one-level ap¬ 
proach. This is particularly true in laboratory situations 
which have the effect of reducing the dimensions of 
behaviour by controlling conditions so that psychic and 
social variables can be ignored. However, the controlled 
laboratory method has been disappointing in its contribution 
to educational psychology, so disappointing, in fact, that 
Buswell (1956), in speaking of learning theory, implied 
that this type of investigation may be invalid as a technique 
for studying human behaviour at the level of complexity 
which is necessary for educational practice. 

The problem investigated in this thesis illustrates 
the inadequacy of a one-description-level point of view. 

We are interested in the problem solving behaviour of the 
student within the mathematics classroom. In particular, 
we are concerned with the extent to which performance is 



16 


bounded. One major determinant of upper bounds is the 
physiological structure of the brain together with the 
operations which it is able to perform, because brain 
structure must necessarily set limits to the work which the 
brain may perform. Actual performance, however, depends 
as well upon such motivational variables as ego-involvement, 
persistence, and level of aspiration. Thus, psychic 
concepts must be considered. Moreover, since the student 
is influenced by others in the group, we are compelled to 
introduce interaction concepts as well. 

When educational psychology achieves the status of a 
more exact science, one of the problems with which it will 
first have to deal is the extent to which concepts from the 
three levels may be used in the description and explanation 
of a single piece of behaviour. At the present time, we 
use the *layer 1 method of description. Thus standard works 
in educational psychology discuss physical, mental, and 
social aspects of behaviour separately, confining the 
separate descriptions to different sections of the text. 

A complete description will require an integrated treatment, 
which will show how neural, psychic, and social phenomena 
interest to determine performance at a specific time. 



17 


Energy 

The notion of energy cuts across the boundaries of 
the three levels of description, and for this reason would 
seem to be the natural concept to employ in describing 
interaction. The problem then reduces to a consideration of 
the relationship between the electro-chemical energy of the 
physiologist and the psychic energy (cathexis) of such neo- 
Freudian theorists as Rapaport (1951), and Colby (1955). 

Freud originally conceived of cathexis in chemical 
and electrical terms, and did not modify his position 
radically in his later thinking. His final remarks on 
energy appear in his Outline of Psychoanalysis (19i|0): 

We assume, as other natural sciences have taught us 
to expect, that in mental life some kind of energy is at 
work; but we have no data which enable us to come nearer 
to a knowledge of it by analogy with other forms of energy. 

More recently, psychoanalysts have become concerned 
about this concept, and there has occurred a tendency to 
present cathexis as a postulated form of energy 11 in addition 
to known mechanical, thermal, electrical, and chemical 
forms ft (Colby, 1955, p.28). He further maintains that 
"cathexis energy cannot as yet be converted into other forms 
of energy by any logical or empirical means”. He adds, 
however, "But maintaining the continuity of integrative 
levels in science, we can say that cathexis energy (CE) 
bears some relationship to other forms. For example, CE at 










; J E 5 

lflO - 


0 ;. 

i-j r j (•>.>6 ; M’ 



£0 3 

■ 

..ft. 

t 

:o.lj ;?; 


:: ,;V> 0 -■ 'i - 

V'J 



,: : j. 



0X3 

' 






ao • 

1 

;■ -X v/ 


. . ■ - 



. 



■;i ' > 

:■ 

•ri - 

c:d 

($ 

■ -*■■■• V : ‘ 

o 

:•> d ■ 


■ ' > 


/ 

j 7U 


* 

; v • • . . ■ 

1 , 


■X) 


\ 

i ■ ■ c 

L> ft 




' 


f 


*; >v ; :.zj$ •.'.'■■■ 



'V . ’ 

. 


. > 



: -j ' ■ .. 

.• -a', 





- 



I. 

■c 




n 


A 

• . 

... ' '■ \ 

XOI . 



3 . -i- 



.. t: :v • , :v.i 

. 

, .. : t 




b;u 





. 



: • 0 ' ' 

3 v : ... -o '.A ;o;:^.L ;■ • -V:;;. • r: -' ■' - 

' - - * .Croii 

■ ■ 

J ICO - '' 5 , ■'*'<■ •*- ! ‘ " 

• 1 

. ' • ' ■ 

m- • • ' • • i\ / '• v ' - : 



18 


least does not disobey the principles formulated for other 
forms of energy". 

The central concept of f drive* offers further 
illumination concerning the relations which may be pos¬ 
tulated between cathexis and »ordinary* energy. Colby 
(ibid., p. 38) describes drives as originating in certain 
internal biochemical processes which are "somehow brought 
into connection with drive schemas", i.e., structural 
components of the psychic apparatus which are powered by 
cathexis. But since the biochemical processes are them¬ 
selves describeable in ordinary energy terms, the arousal 
of cathexis in this psychic system is correlated with a 
physiological energy change. Again, when the drive schema 
is energized, it impels the "motion or action of the 
organism toward the environment" (ibid., p. 38). Here, an 
expenditure of cathexis in the psychic system is correlated 
with an expenditure of physiological energy in the neural 
system. 

Thus it often happens that, when cathexis energy 
transformations are postulated within the P.A. at the 
psychic level of conceptualization, ordinary energy 
transformations occur in the physiological system at the 
neural level of conceptualization. When, in describing 
behavioural phenomena at the neural level we invoke the 
particular form of physiological energy which Hebb (1949) 




■' 1.4 


■ M '.1 




■ I. v/ >-.!•:/ 


; O UC ... J'Xi'h 




: . , . 






■■■ ; 


, •. »r: i 


, ■ 




f ,■> fYl 


-r 


■ 


- . . 






. .. 4 w,:\ 

•. 4 ■■■; 








19 


denotes 1 central facilitation 1 , we can, and will assume that 
if we were to shift our frame of reference to the psychic 
level, we should often find cathexis energy in play. 

The problem of a suitable language in which to 

describe a dual system of constructs is a very perplexing 

one and would probably be best handled by developing a 

meta-system in which the object of study becomes the 

language and permissible combinations of constructs of the 

2 

various levels of description. 

No such formalization has been attempted here. 
However, when a statement such as "phase sequences may 
be activated by a cathexis powered central facilitation" 
occurs, it is to be understood as a statement in the 
language of the meta-system which is intended to convey 
the idea that the activation of a phase sequence (a neural 
construct) can be accomplished by a form of energy which 
is called central facilitation at the neural level of 
conceptualization, but which implies the expenditure of 
cathexis in a psychic conceptualization of the same process. 


^This would present a field similar to meta¬ 
mathematics as outlined by Kleene (1952). 





' , .f.L •; * ' ) tg V' 1 1* » ' ' : -iO'. *' ? 'y-''On ; ^ '> 


' ' ' j ■ ; • 

.v ro . ' ; •> r; >1. ; p*.r ?■ 

X >- ; 

- . ' : * • ' . - 


j ;,i ! ;• / ",;•) t., ;:,'0 J r vl J ;0 0 ... V X -C j 

„ 

' 

r : . • a i ;J u; : 0 '0,.: k ; i' : : ' ; 1 f. O' 0 J 'i ' , 0 . VO )'V j n K 1 

til r i.-0 Xxol ouOO .J 'C.£ .C SuO i J t ■ Os v.l UC U-J ■ ad', 

0, r 3 ni J ■ Oo.t 0:0 SJO OOOJ ;;VO 0 j > a l » 0 OuJ t.j '>0 

.>:• t >.b .: o -.1 ,-o o : ,^j:\ry \ v :o -. ; j v' '.-kb to o;*p gou’bol 

> ■ ■ : ■ r 

'• r ' • f ■> ‘i gJ he * : " s: : g. - g ' < ri$ snoo 

I ‘ : e tvi 

. ! ■ r, '".j. : o r :: -. . bi - 'fj-: ■•o oi'OgO 

X;> j:ic 1: X s:r. 11 .e• r d‘o ••go;• ... yi‘: r-y^,y?> 

v 

* ' ! 1 . 



20 


The Homeostasis Model 

An organism is conceptualized as a type of gen¬ 
eralized machine in constant interaction with its envir¬ 
onment. The machine consists of a set of interrelated 
variables (body temperature, pulse rate, etc.); both the 
organism and its environment may increase in complexity 
during the life history of the organism through a gradual 
extension of the organism 1 s range of sensitivity to include 
interaction 1 or 1 social 1 forces in the environment* 

The fact that the organism maintains a rather 
remarkable stability in the face of an extremely changeable 
environment has given rise to the concept of homeostasis 
(Cannon, 1920). According to this principle, the displace¬ 
ment of a variable from its position of equilibrium is 
conceptualized as a »need f —and is counteracted by an act of 
the organism which brings into play additional variables-- 

the overall effect being to confine each variable to a 

3 

region which lies within certain * critical limits 1 . The 
organism has at its disposal a quantity of primitive 
energy—usually called psychic energy (Colby, op. cit., 

3 

•^Ashby (1952) demonstrated how a single variable 
may be controlled by the enlargement of the variable phase- 
space through the introduction of a second variable. He 
conceived of the brain as performing a rapid sequence of 
switching operations until the phase point is located within 
a region of stable equilibrium. 




.'w' .... . 

j • f. ,.i .ip. j £ £ > •••• : : J.:. *.v :> 

. .. •. P . « ■ ; ; i 

: . . .. . ' i ■ 

■ 

; : y\ . : f : / V . P P • J..U - T ■' i t ; i ' ' h 

■ ' . ■ " ■ si . i >i ine, 

• , : V : • P 'P-Y: ' . % * OP : VO ? P O . r : -j 0 PVy ii Cli f 

' 

- 1 "; o Prri:o Jvv.vn.i ns.tiiJBg'jCC. o ■ -■ ■ "i tfo/j'.l oxf': 

; 

.. • ; r ' " * \ o' •' ; A'-pv; p-“.' 

' . : j v ■ \ / 

• i - - ’ . v 

-:r '.( • M 

‘ ‘ .. ' 

-J v-'oo = ; j l vo» oo ,7 3-i •: J. ■ t: i. rv ;:6*i 

' . > ; .j' i • :0 J ! .0 

. , . : v >UC : 

':■} •• . I j ' .07 " ! ■ P. ' / • i 0 ' 

?-o o « •••■ • ;i ■ .ip;:) >r v-/>• v poo) od \.*m 

■ '7 1 J" *"/ !j ,. L >a. 1 i. , t \t ■; o £ qe 

■ ■■ , . 

. : • = .t p.i f?;.* v >■ ‘-.p :><■:) MoliwE 

, a: ; i 




21 


p. 28)—which it utilizes to maintain its overall equilib¬ 
rium, The displacement of a variable beyond a threshold 
level determined by the complete configuration of variables 
at the given time, results in a state of drive, and in the 
utilization by the organism of its available energy to 
reduce this drived. 

Evolution of the Brain 

The history of the evolution of the brain is a 
history of the growth of independence of the organism from 
the environment. Elementary organisms are environment 
bound, i.e., obligated to expend energy to obtain incentives 
(need satisfiers) in their immediate environment. Any 
radical change in the environment may result in uncontroll¬ 
able displacements in some essential variable—and the 
extinction of the organism. 

The independence of the higher organism is reflected 
in two ways: 

(a) The higher organism is able to explore the present 
environment without physical involvement. The evolution 
of differentiated sens© organs allows the organism to 
explore environmental conditions without exposing its main 
body to unknown and potentially dangerous conditions of the 

^Freudian theory refers to the investment of energy 
in instincts as 1 cathexis * (Hall and Lindsey, 195>7» p. 36). 







’ 

; J ' 






j - : ri'=r, / 1 a>t i. ; •- 


) I i V 


f. . r ■ ■ , : 






> ; .. 




’ w j. ‘ ! i • i. ’) vU XP v P 


■ • . . ; ' I 






J o C. 0 
? ... *; 


O 


. 




T . -i ■ i C- r;r. ■■ 

• . : • ' t sc " j 


V { 


■ ■ ' 




•• .1 






*. i f; 


.JU ,.S JiO 

. ? ■: •. •••■) ■ 





22 


environment. With the later development of the distance 

receptors, the environment could be explored up to any 

£ 

distance within the range of these receptors . 

(b) The higher organism is able to envisage the results of 
its future actions in the environment by enacting them 
internally in f miniature» and thereby is able to choose 
appropriate actions with regard to their consequences in 
terms of the future need-structure of the organism. This 
anticipation of future needs relieves the organism from the 
constant necessity of immediate adjustment. By this means, 
the immediate adjustment of the primitive (and human infant) 
organism is extended to the long range adjustment of the 
mature human organism^. 

Maturation of the Brain 

Since the human infant at first resembles the prim¬ 
itive organism, there remains to be explained: 1. how the 
mind gradually acquires the ability to perform function (b), 
and 2. the sort of mental functions or operations involved 

^This position is taken by Thurston© (1927, p. 69 ) 
who considers the phylogenetic development of intelligence 
in the light of the principle of protective adjustment»* 

^According to Rignano (1923* p. 19)* 

"By increasing the power of predicting external events, the 
intellect succeeds constantly in devising new means, more 
indirect and more complex for attaining certain ends. 11 

Similar themes are expounded by Binet (1901+) and 
Piaget (1951). 





i‘, G CiT 




■J 


l .. 


T 


■ 


‘lo i yS. •. i 


■-L ' l 'j" ' L 










■ 


o 


•• CM 0 ci L ' 


\1 






L' ; -' i 


; . 


i 












:yr 


) 


f,' 5 ' 


h . r , . . . , . 

t . • 'ni: 

- 


• v- . i ■: to 1 • / \:< 5 


1 


_ •: c > 
















> 

:• ; : • , 

- 




23 

in this performance. From birth onward, there is a gradual 


mapping of the exterior environment on the sensory cortex 
of the brain?. Since the association areas and neural path¬ 
ways of the brain are finite and the environment with which 
the organism will eventually have to deal is potentially 
infinite, the mapping must proceed in a many-to-one fashion. 
This type of mapping would result in the formation of 
equivalence classes, i.e., sections of the environment which 
the organism can, in some respect, treat as equivalent. 
Primitive equivalence classes are formed around the basic 
needs (e.g. class of edible foods, class of dangerous 
objects), but the process later seems to become autonomous. 
The physiological process involved in the formation of 
equivalence classes is difficult to describe briefly, but 
it involves the establishment of related groups of neural 
circuits (phase sequences) by virtue of their common central 


?Hebb * s (I9I4.9) theory, based on contemporary knowl¬ 
edge of the physiology of the brain, offers a plausible 
account of how- continued stimulation from the environment 
causes a non-random lowering of synaptic resistance 
(neurophysiological postulate, p. 62). Thus the super¬ 
position of external stimulation upon the spontaneous firing 
of the association areas (p. 121) results in the establish¬ 
ment of primary electrical circuits--the so-called f cell 
assemblies f . 




... : i : • / ; •••■•; ■ C '• o • ' ' . ' 1 ’• 

; ■ • ■ [r' 

-j-t: v rj;,": ' .■ ",*;o o ;J 

- 

. • ■ ■ ... . : ■ : t - 

" 

' 

. , 

• • 

• ' ■ ■ ' ' . ■ ' 

. j . oJ ■ /' ’ ' ■ ■■■' L f.»s o 


.( . ' 

. 

• ' 

e •:> ■ i ■ ■ ? n t •. y; y O ' )C X. • 

. ' . t F 

• • • . ' ; • - . ■; - • • • ; •. ' . /: ■■ 'U/ d • -vW 

, ' 





24 


facilitation through the cathexis (i.e., primitive energy) 

O 

accruing to a particular need 0 . 



Pig. 2. Energy sources in the formation of phase 
sequences. 

Each phase sequence is formed under the influence of 
two sources of stimulation: the sensory stimulus from the 
i f th incentive I^, and a central facilitation C, whose 
source of energy we assume to be the cathexis accruing to 


^Rapaport»s (1951) theory, which emphasizes the 
central aspects of the organization of the organism has 
difficulty explaining the secondary process--the contact of 
the organism with reality. Hebb*s theory explains this 
domination of the brain by the environment, but is less 
successful with (and minimizes) the influence of the primitive 
structure and energies of the organism. However, since the 
formation of phase sequences is influenced by both sources, 
(Hebb, 1951, p. 121), it would seem feasible to combine both 
points of view by supposing that the hypercathectic energies 
of Rapaport are manifested in the spontaneous neural firing 
which provides the basis of central facilitation. 












. . 






» 




















■ 









































3 




* 


■ 






^ ■ - .■ . ' . • . L , e '• 


t ! 

-- 

' 

■ 

. 

* 


















25 


the common need N. Since a given need could presumably 
manifest itself—as central facilitation—in a particular 
pattern of spontaneous firing, we might expect more than a 
chance relationship between the neural loci of the phase 
sequences corresponding to the incentive 1^, l£, and I^. 

Objects in the environment can, of course, belong 

to more than one equivalence class* Wot only do the classes 

intersect, but there exists a hierarchy of classes of in™ 

q 

creasing generality and inclusiveness * As soon as a 
rudimentary system of classes has been established, the 
organism tends to classify its subsequent experiences 
according to the existing categories^"®. 

This type of organization of behaviour implies a 
saving of the cathectic energies powering the need system, 
for as the members of a class are functionally equivalent, 
they may stand one for another in relation to the satisfac¬ 
tion of a need, thereby eliminating the necessity of a 


®This argument is in harmony with Bruner (1956, 1957) 
who treats categorization as the principle cognitive 
function of mental operation. 

two items of experience are compared, the most 
economical method of comprehending them would be to relegate 
to them a class common to both. However, since a class is 
defined by a relation common to all its elements, there 
would seem to be a tendency, based on the natural mode of 
operation of the brain toward the establishment of relations. 
This closely approximates Spearman*s (192?) principle of 
the »education of relations*. 



£ £ 












/.! 0 


■c\ v.(. 




!U 


J 






n • ' ' ■ : ' ■ ' A 

r .11 i : 0 

[ 




. :-o i :vr; c- ;J‘ ^ uv 



. L-o 

L 




.:. ; . , rl: 



„ r 









> , ■■ o 3 . i.h 






. s ■ ■ ' ■ ' •' ■ : 

;■ ... . ■ ■ f ■■■■•.. 

l /■■ '£o i :j : x»..r. •./’ <>. • • ■ I ■ br'&t.z tb^v 

[j : *. J: • r .' ILo , - : n •" 






/ . t si 

; .• o , 

•) • i ■ ”>i o *oo > 

, 

. 

, - ; .-j ; . . uc; • •••:■ >:9 3 2 biHOW 

Ico 

• i • ■ ■ , ' ■ : o : ■ oi r ' s l £ IT 





26 

search for a specific member of the class. The surplus 
energy, released to a super-organization of the central 
processes—usually conceptualized as the ego (Rapaport, 
p. 702)—is used to carry on the ^reality testing* function 
(b) of the * secondary process*. The super-organization of 
central processes (S.C.P.) uses part of its energy to gain 
freedom from the immediate and disruptive demands of the 
organism*s needs by a process which, in effect, neutralizes 
part of the energy invested in that need--thereby keeping 
its potential below the level required for entry into 
consciousness. 

The remaining energy (attention cathexis)—a quantity 
which would normally fluctuate depending on the momentary 
overall displacement of the need variables—can be used for 
the independent (i.e., independent of need) operation of 
the S.C.P. The S.C.P. also gains partial independence from 
external stimuli, for while these stimuli are necessary in 
the formation and consolidation stages of phase sequences, 
central facilitation by itself may suffice to activate the 
mature phase sequence. Consider, for example, the physical 
act of moving a small pebble from the left edge of a sheet 
of paper to the right edge. Through the performance of 
similar or near-similar acts many times in the past, the 
operation consisting of perception of object, physical move¬ 
ment, and perception of result, is organized into an 




- 

.:■ 




. ? • 

MV, 

■ . ' 

oSiil .' V L .2''.’Xi ■) mc'/x Lz-k. !.!€%* ;■> i; • ' ' • ,( xx J 

* ' r. ■’■■•■ V ■ 

' 

• .■ ....'■ to •. . ■ u - . ■ ■ .' ' i' ■ ■ 

, u : ' . ■ 

V • i . *. o ?■. ■ l ;> ,;u> •:. . ■: u r . 1 ;; m3 

;i • ■ > .. • . •. .■ ' j. . •. / O' ' v 

, : : 1 . ' ; • ..... . > i ■/ I 1 • ■i/i 

> } .*• • 'J . 1 ' vj '• , ■ ’ • ” ■ ... -t*. U. vi 

. •. » 

. , ' . 

■ . . • II: 

J . ' . ' . ■ • :■. -• ■ ’■)•=. 'Si ■ r ■ , i:o •*; • 

. - ■ . ■ 



27 


integrated pattern of phase sequences. 

When the act is performed mentally 11 , a phase 

sequence is activated which belongs to what might be termed 

a representative of the class of pebbles. When attention- 

cathexis is first directed to the neural locus corresponding 

to the concept ‘pebble*—there seems to be a tendency for 

central facilitation, to activate the whole neural locus; 

however, continued *attention 1 , i.e., central facilitation, 

results in the activation of a specific representative or 
12 

locus . 


11 It will be convenient to use the adverb ‘mentally‘ 
to refer to centrally-directed operations. 

^If the neural locus representing a concept consists 
of individual circuits whose potential decays with time, 
then after the initial activation of the whole field, the 
activity of individual circuits would tend to decline at a 
rate which would vary directly as the circuit resistances* 
However, the resistances tend to be broken down through 
repeated activation--and the most frequently encountered 
member of the class would have a phase sequence whose poten¬ 
tial decays more slowly than others. Thus it would follow 
that the first global impression of a concept soon partic¬ 
ularizes into a specific representative. This would seem to 
be true of concepts (house, fender) whose specific instances 
are clearly distinguishable. For concepts whose specific 
instances are not distinguishable (line, point), the 
representative probably stands for a ‘neural average‘ of 
cumulative experience. There would, moreover, be required 
a constant expenditure of retention-cathexis to maintain the 
concept in a ‘general f form. This point of view was 
advanced by Thurstone (192?) in his theory of ‘inhibition*. 





„ 


777 7 7 '" ; 7 

: 7 j. • : 


. 

1 


L; m. 


77 .-7 7,; 

■ 





...i 


7.07' V 


• 



« 




' 

7 7 


:• ) 







0 


- 

:• 7 : '> 7 


- i 


■ < 

■ . ■ 




7/; 

0. 


• 77 ':: .'.7- 

■ 



* 


:i l • 7 ■ ■ 3 



■ 


7 'i 

. 



' 


■ * 




' 

■' - ' 

; •- f. 

0 , . . i . > ' ,< -■ ■■ ■- -r : ' 7 ' ’■ ’• V».'i 

j ... : ■ 

7 ; , ,, . 77 7. 'i. 7 ..-7 7 lo \ ? d I.V tu OB 

■ ■ 

:. I ■ t 

• • : ; >7 7 :j -.y ' r , IJ ■' 7 l.jruv 77 :j 70 qo*X 

■ 

, ■. ; ■’ 

' 

. . ■; ' .( 7 ■ 7XJBX J 

; ■ • ' 

• • ... • ' 1 . ' > ' , P ; ' r. 1.7 00 ■ 

1 '■ I ■ : : 

7 .-.j'. • . ' 7; ■ ' ; 

; . f ■ . . ■ ; , ■ , ’ 1 ■ .! ■ V7 

, •- ' • : 7. - r ; 

. • 7 

' . . : 7 7- I ■ ' , . 7 . y y. 


28 


The potential of the centrally activated phase 

18 

sequence corresponding to the representative would be 
much lower than the phase sequence resulting from the 
perception of a pebble in the exterior environment, since 
the potential of the latter phase sequence would be in¬ 
creased by a sensory stimulation. 

Similarly, the phase sequences corresponding to the 
imagined physical act are activated in their turn, at a 
potential sufficient to activate the final phase sequence-- 
viz., the visualization of the customary 1 ^ result, but 
insufficient to stimulate the musculature to overt physical 
action^. Thus the phase sequences corresponding to the 


13 1 Imagining 1 need not always be carried on in terms 
of representatives. It may be possible, for example, to 
imagine any particular non-representative stone. But this 
Imagining would necessitate a larger expenditure of energy, 
and would perhaps even require direct support from sensory 
stimulation. Thus we can imagine a chair, moving across a 
room, but to imagine this particular chair may require 
looking at it first. 

•^Rignano (1923, pp. 170-171) dealt with the 
necessity of a result following its antecedent action: 

That once the tendency of a given quantity towards a 
given limit is recognized, we can imagine this last as already 
attained by the quantity Itself, and take the limit simply 
in place of this latter—this rests upon the general 
psychological fact for all reasoning whatever, that the fact 
of seeing in imagination the possibility of performing certain 

operations or experiments leads naturally to their being 

imagined as already performed. 

■^This point of view is supported by the work of 
Jacobsen (1932) and Max (1935) who demonstrated that the 
process of thinking or imagining is accompanied by the arousal 
of minute electrical currents in the musculature concerned. 


























. • >r< ' ■ 

• . , • 

. , ; ? - • . ; ■ -c:v.f;J of ■ -■•’ . •''•■■■■ . 


. •• ’ 




c :; i JihrLOf 0, o ■ o 00 o i • £ / ip - "■ ! ■? : ' ' • ;a ' T - ! - 




- 




' 


... , ■: v • o . : ; . " ‘ ' v 

% 

* 

■ 








.. . 

. 

~-:i. 

* 














•/ . . . .. : : • ■ ;( 

f'O'O'f ; 

• . } £ . . •’ - .. ■ • i 8 'O'LfH'. 







29 


mental act are low-potential repetitions of the phase 
sequences usually activated in the corresponding physical 
act. 1 ^ 

It follows that the operations which the mind may 

imagine as performed on a representative are those resulting 

from possible physical operations performed on a class 
17 

member. This fact will be important in a subsequent 
study of the operations in axiomatic mathematics. 


^-^Some comparisons may be made here, with Piaget 1 s 
(1952) postulated * stages* of development. In the pre¬ 
op er at ional stage (before seven years) the child f s reasoning 
is dominated by perception of external stimuli (Berlyne, 
1957). ?or example, when the pre-operational child picks 
coloured balls out of a short, thick, glass tube, and 
places them in a long, thin one, he believes that their 
number has increased--since the level is now higher. At the 
age of seven or thereabouts, the child acquires the ability 
to perform * concrete 1 operations, i.e,, f reversible intern- 
aliz.able actions*. These actions--serial ordering 
operations, formation of classes, establishing relations 
between classes--can at first be performed only with objects 
in the immediately present environment. But by the attain¬ 
ment of 12 years, a stage is reached in which the child 
performs formal operations, reasoning with propositions and 
hypotheses. 

The gradual emergence of thought as independent of 
sensory perception is in harmony with what has been said 
above. In the concrete operation stage, mental organization 
is not sufficiently complete to provide sufficient attention- 
cathexis for independent operations (as in the *pebble* 
example). Consequently, the additional excitation of 
external sensory stimuli is necessary to initiate the 
sequence. In the formed stage, however, the adolescent is 
able to apply formal operations to what are, essentially, 
class representatives. 

*^For example, most people, even after watching the 
construction of an Euler one-sided surface—i.e., a surface, 
every point of which can be transversed. by a single line, 
are unable to visualize the motion of an object around it 
until they have actually traced out such a locus with their 
fingers. 





‘ 








■ ' ) ; ; • : f , j.. ’ ‘ ) "" '-XL •- -L : : 

. 

. . ., ■■ V X ' t'/i,; • ' XO.lXO J ...... 

4 ■£ v . v / .< xl . • ».8©X OX -X £ ■ • XO'l 'Xi's.v.. :XIf .X 

■ 

; 

. . IX ■ ' ' 1 ’ ' . ' ' ' ; 


4 ' 

, • - * ■ * 

. 

•. - . X 

'• . ■ 

, lx ' • ' ’ ’■ • 

_ 



• 

. 

.. . 




. 

. 


. 

• 




, 





■ 

■ - x ■ vi 







« 









* 

• 1 Oj X x 

<• . ; ■ ■ .• ■: ,; ■ . ■. xx 

, X V. . * ’ 

. X • 

' 

T1 

, ■ \ f'O X.: < J ' : 'n '• , : ■ ‘ 

- 

J . v " . ■ 9 , • :-X„ • ■; ■ ■. 

jo ; ■ • .xx ' x II .x • .• 

* 



Types of Mental Operation 
For our purposes, two principal types or modes of 


30 


mental operation will be distinguished* 

Type A 

Operations performed on representatives will be 
designated *Type A*. They may be single operations (as in 
the pebble example), or they may be compounded, in which 
case, some kind of storage* must intervene. Consider, for 
example, the following “directions* 1 questions from the 
Stanford-Binet scale: *A man walks one mile west, then one 

mile north, then one mile east. How far is he from his 
starting point?* The question is attempted without the aid 
of pencil and paper. 



An individual attempting this question mentally, 
begins by activating the series of phase sequences 











' 


t 









■ ' ■ -■ ' ".I O'O 1 : i f 





. ' „ ■ ? ■ ' - -■-< . ' i- 

... >. ■%: ...; f ; a-ir-jc. ^.(t 


, 


J 


!•> 


£ ;• > . :j( 


Mi: 0> 




, . 




I . 





1 








... 




31 


18 

corresponding to movement I—>11. After a slight delay, 

(to read further instructions), the individual takes the 
result, which has meanwhile been * stored* in position II, 
and initiates phase sequences corresponding to movement 
II—>111. If the delay at position II is sufficiently 

lengthy, the stored reference point (the result of the first 
operation) may be lost, in which case, the Initial phase 
sequence I—>11 must be reactivated. However, the reac¬ 
tivation time of I—>II would be less than when the 
operation was first performed, so that the individual would 
progress beyond point II (to III, let us say). Thus, by a 
rapid sequence of operations, storage, and recycling, the 
individual is able to visualize a sequence of operations 
each of which is performed on the result of a previous one. 

It is in order to ask at this point, if the number 
of steps in the problem could be increase d to the point 
where the individual could no longer achieve a solution. 
Theoretically, there would seem to be no limit as long as 
a supply of hypercathexis is available, for, in each re¬ 
cycling, the circuit resistances are gradually removed until 
a stage is reached where the results of the first operation 

l^The phase sequences, essentially electrical 
circuits, would have a potential which decays with time until 
the potential of the * image* of the transposed element falls 
below some critical limit. The interval between the initial 
activation and the falling below the critical limit, can be 
considered as * storage time*. 



<x; ' - f 1 J >- 

; ■ . - - •" • 





i ’■ ■ n . o n ■ : 

) ■ „ . ‘ ' • ' ; ' ' 

, IJ; ■; •' ■/ t ■ < 

■ ■ : o 



32 


are permanently stored. Presumably at this point, the 
individual could begin his recycling operation at II, then 
at III, thus gradually attaining a starting point further 
along the series. (This is actually what happens when the 
results of an operation are given a special name or symbol). 
However, artificial limits tend to be ’induced* for reasons 
which will be explained in a subsequent section. 

Type E 

When the organism moves away from direct interaction 
with the environment, it creates for itself a region of 
activity in which it may exercise choice. The phenomenon 
of choice presents one of the most intriguing and yet 
elusive ideas in contemporary psychology—an idea which has 
resulted in scores of models, and of course, the inevitable 
controversies. It will be profitable to distinguish two 
general types of choice situations: 1. utility, and 
2. non-utility. 

1. Utility Decisions . The concept of utility is 
difficult to define, and while some writers (Edwards, 195>1) 
accept it as an undefined term, it is informative to view 
utility from the point of view of the homeostasis model. 

The utility of an object refers to its ability to 
bring the overall displacement of need variables closer to 
equilibrium--the greater the movement toward equilibrium, 
the greater the utility. However, since more than one 






33 

variable may be influenced by the given object, the problem 
arises as to how one should combine the displacements of two 
or more variables. This gives rise, in turn, to the problem 
of a scale for rating utilities. Specifically, is it poss¬ 
ible to quantify the extent of the preference of an 
individual for object A over object B (cardinal utility) or 
can we merely say that A is preferred to B (ordinal utility)? 

It would appear that at a specific time, an individ¬ 
ual possesses a hierarchy of needs. When he is to choose 
between two objects (let us suppose it is a choice between 
two foods) he 1 imagines 1 the consequences of the possession 
of each. This Imagining amounts to a low-potential activa¬ 
tion of the phase sequences corresponding to a real act of 
eating, and is followed by a similar activation of the 
phase sequences corresponding to the satisfaction derived 
from eating, i.e., the toward-equilibrium displacement of 
need variables. Thus, by imagining the choices in turn, 
the individual Is able to perform what might be called a 
^miniature* displacement of existing need variables. We can 
visualize at a choice point a rapid summation of the dis¬ 
placements following each imagined choice. 

The psychological difficulty of a choice lies in 
the fact that the results of the summation resulting from 
each possible choice must be simultaneously compared. Since 




34 


a summation exists as an activated phase sequence whose 

potential decays with the passage of time, the simultaneous 

comparison can only be approximated to by a rapid altern- 

19 

ation between each choice. 

2. Logical Choice . In a logical choice situation, 
the individual again faces a series of alternatives; however, 
the alternatives themselves do not, in this case, have a 
utility value, but may be regarded as means to an end which 
does possess utility. An example would be a rat trying to 
choose between paths in a maze which leads to food. When 
a logical choice is encountered in a mental problem, the 
problem solver performs mental operations in which he weighs 
the relative likelihood of a particular choice leading to 
the utility object. As In the previous case of utility 
choice, likelihoods must be retained and compared, a problem 
which presents difficulties when they are nearly equal. 


^This would be true If the alternatives were of 
approximately the same attractiveness; choice becomes easier 
as the difference between the ’summations’ representing each 
alternative increases. In this case, each alternative 
could be compared at times separated by a finite time- 
interval. 

So far, only situations in which the individual is 
certain to obtain a known incentive (’riskless* decisions) 
have been considered. In the more general type of ’risky* 
decision, the separate alternatives have different possible 
outcomes, each with their own utility and expected frequency. 
In this case, the assumption of ’rational’ behaviour leads 
to the hypothesis that the individual will choose the 
laternative with the high expected utility. (Marshack, 1956, 
Edwards, 1951). 








• ,0.i . I': * • • I • IB ‘ • - 


i". 


;; , • • ; :• ' .< %. • . 1 -■ w ; 


^ . ,‘j Li 








: i 1 ■■f ■. ■ • • ! i ‘ B *- : . 


, ' 


, ■ I; >• 6 is. i o.l - t ___ 

) : : ■ > .. ' . I ' : ' 

• v . u > . •' ■. V - i tx; 

. ■ i: ■. 

, ;i . ... ^ . .,; . j /; i . ; - '■ i ' i. ■ • ; • • ■ ; *• ■* 

1.1 . ’ ' 

„ : 

',m; . i V - O ■. ' : ->0 > 


o - • ' ■ - 




' 

? > 

; ^ : , ■ : ' •' 

„ 

> i i l ' ’ \ . - o 

■ ' ■ ■ ' 

. 

■ x ■ ; . i , k, . a c n ■ 

’ ' . 

, 




35 


This type of decision is of major importance in the 
discussion of mathematical ability and its elaboration is 
left to a later chapter. 

In both utility and logical choices, there is 
competition between alternatives, and consequently, a 
division of the available hypercathexis. Not only does 
this distinguish Type B from Type A processes, but it also 
implies that the division of the available hypercathexis 
could, if alternatives were sufficiently numerous, cause a 
lowering of the amount of hypercathexis given to each 
alternative to the point where ’rational* choice behaviour 
becomes difficult or impossible 0 Under these circumstances, 
it is conceivable that the individual’s choice would be 
made by dealing inadequately with, or by ignoring, some of 
the alternatives, i.e., by manifesting behaviour that can be 
construed as ’illogical’ or ’irrational*. The proof that 
this does in fact, happen, is one of the major objectives 
of the experimental part of this thesis and lends support 
to the theory so far advanced. 

Interaction in Thinking 

In what has been said so far, we have considered the 
individual ’in isolation’; no attention has been given to 
the possible influence on thinking due to the presence of 
another person or group of persons. Since much of our think 
ing is done in the company of, and often in competition with 


















. 




' 

E 

. 

:• 7 .. 

t 1 : • t ' ' 








i ; 






t ' ' '§ « 




, 





























others, it will be necessary to give some attention to this 
problem. 

When organisms group together to form a society, 
they presumably do so because the individual is better able 
to satisfy his needs through interaction with the group 
than in isolation (Davis, 1948* P* 25)« However, since the 
unhindered pursuit of incentives by any individual could 
dangerously disturb the need variables of another individual 
there arises the necessity of group constraint on the free¬ 
dom allowed in the satisfaction of needs. In essence, the 
individual attains a sensitivity to the opinion of others 
by acquiring the ability to see himself In the dual role 
of subject and object. 

The child finds it to his advantage to anticipate 
the effect his actions will produce on others, and he 
gradually acquires the capacity to look at himself through 
the eyes of the collective potential * others* which Mead 
(1934, p. 140) calls the ^generalized other* 1 . This ability 
is internalized for the same reason that physical operations 
are, viz., internalization allows their performance in 
f miniature* and the lack of necessity to perform a poten¬ 
tially dangerous act overtly. However, if the individual 
were completely and immediately subject to the capricious 
evaluations of a segment of the »generalized other*, no 
independent action would be possible at all. In other words 



. 

• ,, • _ o ..r e ■■.!.'! • • ■ 1 . 

. . , .. 

• .-v •!a . o„ • . ^ a: 

. o 

i. ) \ 

■; r:- otf ci .1 , VI 1.1 dt) oVi 

■ ■ ■ 1 ’ . ■ . • ' i ' . ' • ' f -j ■ . 

' l f it, ■. 1. . 

■ - . ; ! : * Mi 

. 1 . (Oj . , 

■ , « : « • 

'.■ r .. : . : ' .<"'0 >•- ■ "i 




37 


to develop a basis for action, the individual has to have 
a somewhat stable concept of himself (self concept) which 
does not fluctuate radically in the face of what he 
perceives to be variations in his evaluation by the gen¬ 
eralized other. The necessity of protecting the self 
concept becomes a TT need M which may play a prominent role in 
determining limits in the mental operations considered. 

Energy Distributions in Reality Directed Thought 

The foregoing discussions may be summarized by means 
of Fig. if. 


S 


Sensory 

Stimuli 


_ _ ___!__ 

l Cerebral I 
I Processes i 



Fig. 4. Energy distributions in reality directed 
thought. 


The energy entering into that activity of the cerebral 
cortex which is referred to as »thinking 8 stems from two 
principle sources: (a) external sensory stimulation. 










38 


(b) central facilitation. The latter represents a balance 
between the need-cathexis and hypercathexis. Thinking, 
ordinarily involves some combination of the three inputs, 
but two tendencies may be distinguished as the human 
organism matures: (a) a movement away from an S-N direc¬ 
tion of thought, and (b) a gradual independence of the H 

21 

source from the S and N sources. 

In the type of thinking processes that we have 
denoted Types A and B, the H source is primary but may be 
influenced advantageously or disadvantageously by variations 
in the S and N inputs. They are discussed in turn. 

1. Type A. The general disruptive nature of 
irrelevant external stimulation need not be discussed 
further, but the question of needs requires elaboration. We 
will imagine that an individual is engaged in a Type A 
process. It was stated earlier that there would seem to be 
no theoretical limit to the number of successive levels to 


^Russell (1952) constructs a gradient of thought 
along a dimension of diminishing Influence of exterior 
sensory stimuli. 

21 

The complete independence of centrally controlled 
thought does not seem to be possible. Studies in sensory 
deprivation (Bexton, Heron, Scott, 1954) reveal that a long 
term lowering of sensory inputs beyond a critical limit 
results in the disruption of organized behaviour patterns. 



























■ 












j 

* 

■ 



l l }: .... 







which the individual could progress. Let us suppose further 

22 

that the individuals ‘level-time* function is given by 
C 2 and that he is working in a class situation where the 
average time for the group is given by 



Pig. 5>. Level-time curves illustrating the adverse 
effect of group pressure. 

It seems reasonable to suppose that the individuals 
expectations x^ith respect to his own performance depend to 
some extent on the performance of the group. If the 
individual is aware of his relatively poor performance. 


22 

The curve represents a graph of the relationship 
between the time required to perform step-like functions 
(such as Type I) and the ‘level 1 reached. Since the process 
consists of successive repetition of the sequence: 

Operation-> storage-> operation-> storage - - > 

we may speak of each (operation- > storage) couplet as 

defining a ‘level 1 . 



















. j. i.-. ?:•/ . .. I: 0/ J . do tod 


, V .. ' o.i. . J ^ ; s ' 

or:.; j o'O lz •' ddl > s: ■ C S- dK o-; nl dd 


id S 

J ! .i rd 


. 



i » f ■ 

. d • ... • •• ' . 

; . : .... .,.v: 

. • .;. •. ■ .' I' ■ ' l :> ■ "■ ■ A Ci : ■/ ..' o 


■ 

, • : , ■ ■ ■; •••> • ■ • ■. VA 

‘ 

: i 



















4o 


there would arise a need to 'save face' (protect the self 
concept) by arriving at answers in times which correspond 
more closely to the group time than to the time that the 
individual would require to obtain a correct solution. 

The activation of this irrelevant need would give 
rise to a partial disorganization of central control,^ a 
disorganization which would presumably increase as the 
individual falls further behind. One way in which he could 
resolve this difficulty would be to exhibit behaviour which 
might be interpreted as guessing. This would result in a 
curve C^, where the last two points represent incorrect 
answers. Thus the upper bound^ evidenced in the 
individual's performance would be caused by the situation 
and should need not be construed as the lack of ability to 
perform the task in question. 

3. Type B . Here again, the H~source is of paramount 
importance, but the influence of the 'needs' variables may be 
of positive or negative value depending on whether we are 
dealing with a utility or a logical situation. In a utility 


^The loss of central control would follow the 
decrease in hypercathexis which results from the activation 
of an irrelevant need (i.e., irrelevant to the task to which 
hypercathexis is directed). 

2 ^An upper bound refers to a point or level above 
which the individual's performance is inadequate. 





1 • i.w fxlor:; r : ox.tx ■ Bn.Dd:l 


■ 

' 


{•: v-o oaoo ' 

n:; lyj \ od:,- n ' 

; ; - : < ;f 

'. ' • 



' ' ;i . . ' C . ' ?:>* XL : 



• . 




,■ ■ ■ , 

■ ; ■ ( X ' ' -' l : r 


i ' ■ • ' . 

■ : 



■ 1 

>x ■ ‘ " 

. 


: 

;• 



0'7.1 )'? ." t 

bb - ' hlfj c yi . 

. . 

■yf i: 


j tv- v 




Li' 

; 


„ 

lx ; ,i : ; 

OCi. V\f CO U J 1 k L • C : * \i ‘ f ' 

■ 

:: f J V Imi.i 


I : : . , " i ■■ ■ ■ ■ '' - n ' ' 

, 


, . I ■ . ; ; : . 


• ■ ■: ' •: ' ' . r, . .: 

. . 




4i 


situation the total displacement of need variables defines 
utility so that an increase in a particular need may 
actually make a decision easier. In the logical choice 
situation, the incentive does not reside in the choice 
itself and an increase in intensity of need would deplete 
the available hypercathexis thereby lowering the limits 
which already seem to exist. 


25 

In this case, we would expect to find that a high 
need (i.e., strong drive) group, having less available 
hypercathexis, would show greater tendency to give insuffi¬ 
cient attention to the available choices--whereas a 
moderate-need group would display greater wavering or 
uncertainty. These are the results reported by Bruner et.al. 

(1957). 























I • 


j 





; r\ 

. 

■ 

•• 









. 







■> ; 












• ' .’r < 





■ 







■ ' ■ ■ : 








• * . 

. 

: v. --••• : • > L ■ i o ■ 

- 

- 











CHAPTER III 


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BASIS OF AXIOMATIC MATHEMATICS 

In considering the problem of a definition of 
mathematics we have to distinguish between the philosophical 
question concerning its proper domain (Hamley, 1934) and the 
psychological question concerning the mental functions or 
operations required in its performance* This thesis deals 
explicitly with the latter problem—although the two ques¬ 
tions are not unrelated* 

A survey of the history of mathematics (Smith, 1929) 
reveals a startling parallel between the development of 
mathematics as a system of knowledge and the maturational 
development of the brain. Considering algebra and geometry 
separately, each at first passed through a stage of concrete 
operations (in Piaget f s language), where counting was 
performed on the fingers and measuring involved comparison 
of lengths with the hand or foot. At this stage, mathemat¬ 
ical thinking could be carried on only In connection with 
an immediate environment, and was therefore completely under 
the domination of sensory stimulation* Through a long, slow 
process, algebra and geometry gradually gained independence 






' 

■ - . 




•. ;■ ; . '' - .-•o-'i. • .• ■, ' ' • 

. 

} - ifiO ' . j ; ~ -- - : ' ■ ' ■■■■' ; : ■' 

« 

■,' i ' . • : . > 

. . . ' 

, 

: ' . ' . . ; , . 1 ) s . ' 

'■ ■ ; , .. >. , . ; ..'li; ]' ' ;v.j. .. .... i ... ■ CjO 

: t . ... ; .; ,J .. . : -n- lu 

f : f J 

• • t 

,. # • ■■ : j ■ •. ib n 

i 




1+3 


from perception of the external world, becoming intern¬ 
alized as a set of operations performed by the brain on 
1 abstract * elements. In short, that »axiomatic 1 method 
which characterizes modern mathematics (Robinson, 194&, p. 5>) 
represents a transition to the formal stage in which 
operations are performed on Representative elements* 

(e.g. point, line) through a central process powered by 

p 

hypercathexis. 


^•Rignano (1923, p. llj.6), states: 

"Thus arithmetical calculation is comprised solely of 
a series of operations, all of which have been materially 
performed in the past, but now, on the contrary, are 
performed in thought alone . The long and very slow evolu¬ 
tion of this transition, the difficulties met with by 
primitive peoples in reaching the stage of counting a number 
of objects greater than the number of fingers on one hand, 
or two hands, or of fingers and toes together, the slow 
evolution of the abacus and its persistence even into rel¬ 
atively recent times, the late, and for so long, excessively 
imperfect compilation of the mnemmonic * tables* of addition, 
and later of multiplication, and the very slow evolution of 
the calculus of fractions, all this shows how very great 
were the difficulties which man had to overcome in empi¬ 
rically discovering one by one, the results of certain 
operations of calculation, before he was able to reach the 
stage of performing the operations in thought alone." 

p 

It is an interesting historical fact that the 
axiomatization of geometry preceded that of algebra by some 
2,000 years. However, in some respects, Euclid*s work is 
still representative of the * informal* stage, for these 
imperfections which were later to be challenged (Veblen, 
190l|),—congruence by superposition and the celebrated 
* fifth* postulate are cases in point—are clearly due to the 
domination of perception of the external world. The complete 
axiomatization of geometry and algebra took place about the 
same time, viz., in the latter part of the 19th century. 








, 

' . 






JO..IJL, * 






. rZa 








1 

* 

■ 










■ . ; 


■ 

. ?, . 
. I 














kk 


The formalization of mathematics undoubtedly ranks 
as the greatest single event in its history. It is, 
however, to be understood not as a historical accident, but 
as the inevitable consequence of the mind*s attempt to free 
itself from the domination of its environment. The thesis 
that the mental functions utilized in axiomatic mathematics 
consist of ^operations* performed on representatives will 
be examined further in the following section. 

The Structure of the Axiomatic System 

In order to have a point of reference for the follow¬ 
ing discussion it will be useful to examine a specific set 
of axioms (Appendix A). Although the axioms for projective 
geometry were chosen (Robinson, 1946) we could equally well 
have used those of symbolic logic (Hilbert and Ackerman, 
1950), general topology (SierpInski, 1952), Euclidean 
geometry (Veblen, 1904), non-Euclidean geometry (Woods, 

1904) or of any other branch of modern mathematics. 

The following components of a modern mathematical 
system are illustrated in these examples: 

!• Undefined elements . Inherent in the chain of 
deductive argument is the necessity of starting somewhere; 
thus an axiomatic system begins with classes of undefined 
elements. It has previously been pointed out that the 
psychological necessity of dealing with classes results from 
the many-to-one mapping of the environment on the brain. 





. . .1 . . ■■ ' 

* 

: t -< •.v. .. j 

< • O • . . - 

. 

. 

o ’ ■ £ Kfuid 

, 

■: • : v • : . 

• r.?.■ ■ ' • )- 














In geometry, the undefined elements are point and 
line. These geometric entities have the special property 
that they retain their identity independently of one f s 
point of viewing them. Thus they have enjoyed a special 
role in the mapping of the environment on the brain. In 
particular, the central processes are able to activate low- 
resistance representatives of these classes. 

In algebra, we began with a class of elements A, B, 

C, without specifying their Identity.^ However, from both 
a historical and mathematical point of view, these classes 
of elements can be identified with such entities as numbers, 
points, or lines, with which the individual has had previous 
experience.^- 


^Mathematicians commonly speak of *abstract 1 elements 
or the * abstract f nature of mathematics (Rosenbaum, 1958). 
This notion needs some qualification. A symbol x is 
abstract in the sense that It can be a representative of 
any one of many different classes, or of one of many elements 
within one class, but there is a suggestion in the impli¬ 
cation that u mathematics is independent... In some sense .., 
of empirical knowledge 1 * (Kenner, 1958) which seems contrary 
to the principles of operation of the brain. An abstract 
symbol must be attachable to some class—i.e., to some 
neural locus—or it could not be mentally represented and 
comprehended at all. 

^After dealing with the concept of class over a 
period of time, the individual may adopt a representative 
class. Thus upon reading the expression: "let a, b, c, ... 
be a class of elements..." many people immediately picture 
a vague cluster of dots. 



i 















. ; . vr: 

j L; i: - ■ 


fl:, 


. 


;"U ' r 




. 













o 








I: Hi: 


. 








. 




, ■ • ■; • ’• ;• . • 








/ 


. 













. 


> . ■ 







.! 




■ 



» o » 





' , 










t « . ■ : ' 






• 
































, 


, , 





, ' 


V • t • * <p> ,• t 

' 





2. Defined terms. Definitions are statements of 


relations which hold between the term to be defined and 
the * *represented* undefined terms. In projective geometry, 
for example, a 1 plane* is defined in terms of lines, points, 
and the relation of * lying on* and *passing through*. 

2. Axioms . The axioms are accepted as true s tate- 

ments (Allandoerfer, 19^7, p. 69) about the defined and 

undefined elements^ from which further true s tatements are 

to be generated. The choice of axioms is completely at the 

disposal of the system constructor except that an attempt 

is made to ensure that the entire system of axioms possesses 

the following properties: 1. independence, 2. consistency, 

/ 

and 3. completeness (Hilbert and Ackerman, 1928, p* 34)• 


^Some mathematicians distinguish between axioms as 
“statements of fact** and postulates as “conditions to be 
satisfied 11 (Huntington, 1904, p« 1?2). This distinction, 
which has existed primarily in geometry, is apparently 
disappearing, leaving the word * axiom* to refer to any set 
of conditions adopted as the basis of an abstract science. 

^The criterion of * independence» of the set of axioms 
reflects the desire to reduce the set to the smallest 
possible number of axioms. * Consistency * is imposed so the 
system will not generate self-contradictory results. 

* Completeness» is a more difficult concept, but it means 
essentially that any statement which is phrased in the 
’language* of the system can be proven to be true or false 
by a proof which is itself entirely phrased in the language 
of the system. The latter condition has proven to be 
difficult to achieve--as the celebrated Godel therem 
illustrates (Katsoff, 1949). 

The axiomatization of mathematics represents a pure 










t 









* 

1 






5. 





: 

~ 

: 

. i 







t 










47 


From a psychological point of view a necessary- 
condition for the comprehensibility of the axioms is that 
they must be verifiable by reference to some class of 
objects previously experienced (and therefore capable of 
mental representation). Thus, while the associative law 
of algebra may be written: 

ao(boc) = (aob)oc, 

the individual can be said to comprehend this statement 
only because he is able to verify it by reference to 
specific representatives of a class. In this case, for 
example, he may substitute integers for a, b, c, and the 
arithmetical ( + ) for the undefined operation ? o f . 

4* Operations . When the axioms or true statements 
have been specified, some means of combining true statements 
to generate new ones must be provided. These rules take the 
form of operations to be performed on the given elements. 
These may be formalized by definition, such as the addition 


form of model construction. A complex system in the real 
world—the real number system for example--is mapped on a 
structure consisting of five axioms (Peano f s axioms). 
Starting from these axioms—and without further reference 
to the real-world system—the mathematician through a series 
of mental operations can reconstruct all the properties of 
the number system. In other words, he has followed the 
basic mode of operation of the brain by mapping a complex 
segment of the exterior environment into the smallest 
possible number of elements in terms of which it can be 
comprehended. 



























. , • • ; : , v ' : • >■< - 





’ 

t 




















vi. • >€- 5 u «•■ ■' i 




*i’-, - ’ i: i ■ -i 










. 

•. - • .. • ■■■ ■ ' : ' - ' ■■ • 

* 


















48 


( + ) and multiplication ( • ) of number theory (Robinson, 
1946, p. 74) and the “rule of subs titution 11 of the calculus 
of propositions (Hilbert and Ackerman, 1923, p. 28) or they 
may be informal implied operations as the ordinary rules 
of combination of the propositional calculus are implied in 
projective geometry. 

5. System of Theorems . The application of the 
permissible operations to the original statements (involving 
the undefined elements) generates a sequence of *true* 
statements. The more important ones, usually those which 
will be used as reference points, may be labelled 1 theorems*. 

The list of essentials of a modern mathematical 
system is now complete. Prom a psychological point of view, 
an axiom system begins with representative elements which 
are subjected to certain operations. Each mental operation 
represents the reactivation of a phase sequence (through a 
central process powered by hypercathexis) which is, in fact, 
the motor component of a neural locus established during the 
performance of a physical act . ( Mathematics represents a 
pure form of attention-cathexis directed thought in that its 

?Rignano devotes three chapters of his book. The 
Psychology of Thinking (1923, p. 141-208) to a historical 
and psychological demonstration of the thesis that 
mathematical operations represent internalizations of 
physical actions, which could be performed overtly but are 









* 

, ' - ; "' ’ • 

. 

* 








e- b-x'.i’muso 

















, 

. 








, 
















. , . 

. 




















. 



", ... ;U> : :> ';T.' >:• ; 

' •' ‘ ,• V J ' ;..v. 

. •- i. 

■ 




1+9 


■ representatives» (point, line, element) are devoid of 
specific content. 


performed mentally instead. This work is in accord with 
Piaget, who considers "mental operations" to be 
"internalized physical operations". The physical nature 
of such important mathematical ideas as ordering, 
corresponding, function, and the taking of limits is 
obvious (Hamley, 1923). Moreover, the concept of an 
■operation* as an action performed on an element can only 
have psychological meaning as a type of movement, which, 
in turn, means that an operation can only be represented 
through an activation of a phase sequence corresponding to 
some movement which is performable externally* 








, 


! •’: . '■ m - ■'>' ’ 

. ;j h 






• ■ 

o 

. 

. 

lO 



, , ■ : ' > . . 


; 

Olft ‘ •' •; > 


■ 



* 



1 ' 

• . < - ' • • ! 

• ' ; ; ■■ 1 : • 

. 

• o i;: o., - • • T ovsrn 

t ' 

. • 

} £ ifit* 0£ 





CHAPTER IV 


LEVEL ONE ABILITY 


The student of mathematics who progresses far enough 
to encounter the axiomatic scheme described in the last 
chapter may exhibit various types of performance in relation¬ 
ship to this structure. Mathematical ability, then, could 
be defined in terms of relative performance in one of these 
tasks. Consequently, it is not unreasonable to speak of 
different kinds of mathematical ability--corresponding 
essentially to different modes of mental operation. 

From the first encounter with the axiomatic method 
in the high school, through to graduate courses in pure 
mathematics, the student f s major role could be described 
as comprehension of a system already developed. It is 
important at this point to investigate the psychological 
significance of the word comprehension .^ 


^The finished axiomatic system consists of a chain 
of theorems emanating from the axioms. Passage from one 
link to the next is demonstrated by deduction--a special 
form of which is the syllogism: 



TTIJ 


However, there is no necessary correspondence between the 
exhibited steps of the deduction and the -underlying 
psychological processes by which the conclusion is reached. 
Under the circumstances it may be wise not to refer to 
deduction as a mental process or a form of reasoning, but 






















■. 








>. 7. •7', 



ro 1 x t ■ - • fl •*x e o v m to o a e 








. 


. 


L i 

• 

I 

' 



. 4 , 









\ ■ 

. . 1 « 



- 




' 




j. •.Jv.yfft 



• 










' 

. ' ' ' 

x ■■ ■ ■ • o ' ' ■" - ■'' 


■ J' ' ; • .') \ , ' O i •• • 

' ' V .■ M ' ; 

.... 


' r a: •> ■ : . v ' • 

■ ■ ;. 

. ; • i;-' r . v-.; "■ - ••• - .u~-;oIor.!'o^.cq 

: • •' 7/ . J f. ■ ■■ .>“ 7' ■ • -:?j ni 

:■■■; . .7 ' 7 ... . lio f : ^ ‘Mjtt b 





5i 


Initially, the comprehension of the axioms means 
that they can be enacted on the representatives of some 
class known to the individual. Thus the * commutative 1 law 
of algebra 

aob = boa 

p 

has meaning for a student because he knows that he can 
substitute the ordinary integers and the operation * + » to 
get 

3+2 = 2+3 

Similarly, the student of projective geometry comprehends 
Axiom IV because »point* and *lines* are elements for 
which he has representatives available, and the mental 
manipulation of points (or lines) is part of his mental 


rather as the method of exhibiting the results of reasoning,. 
This point of view was put forth by Binet (1907) and is 
reiterated by Vinacke (1952). 

Induction may have greater claim to the status of a 
genuine psychological process. Essentially, it involves 
the attribution of some property of a member of a class to 
all members of the class. This would seem to be closely 
related to the process of division of the external environ¬ 
ment into classes. 

2 

According to Carnap (1942), an individual can be 
said to comprehend the *meaning* of a symbol if he knows 
where it applies. Conversely, he would not know the 
*meaning» of the symbol unless he knew at least one place 
where it applies. 




. - ': ■ vr. ■ u ■> ■" - 

r. v i : OJ nun v r.r.t 

■ 


• • * • o lt ‘• 




■ • : O':'.. 

• ' ’ ; / • • •. • ■' < 




" ■ 




: 


■ ; 

, C: J , * iiiVP C67C ' j --.V ‘V'S-i Efd Of! 




, 

P 

, ■ ' 

■ 

, ■ ■ ■ 


, 

l - * :■* -0 ' ■ :> O 1 


. 



52 


' £ l I 

repertoire of internalized operations." 

This kind of basic comprehension, which involves 
imagined operations performed on primitive elements and 
which gives rise to the subjectively felt * truth* of the 
axiom, will be denoted primary reference . 

The development of an axiom system could conceivably 
proceed by primary reference alone, but it usually does not 
do so. To understand the reason for this, we will consider 
the demonstration of the solution of the following simple 
problem to a grade nine student who, as yet, has no know¬ 
ledge of algebra: 

When three is subtracted from a certain number, the 
result is eight. Find the number. 


^An »internalized * operation is one which has been 
performed externally sufficiently often that it possesses 
a well established neural pattern capable of low-potential 
internal excitation. 

4Many students report that while trying to picture 
a line, they experience a feeling of motion, as though 
the line were actually being drawn before them. Again, 
most people do not seem to be able to imagine more compli-- 
cated geometric figures (e.g. triangles), without imagining 
a line being traced around the outside. The perception of 
a triangle is not a static affair, but involves the rapid 
traversing of its circumference (Hebb, 1949 , p. 85) so that 
the feeling of movement during the reactivation of this 
perception may be due to the physical movement of the eyes, 
or the hand as in tracing it, or both. Consequently, the 
activated neural components of physical action may vivify 
static as well as dynamic images. 





■ ' • ■ 

, 


■ 


. 










' 






. 






; 








: . ; 


. 


'■ ; ' '■ • 


; . • . 1 . . - ■ s ;; o 

_ 


: •}}*. • - r- • . 

' 

, 

- 




■ 

■ 



53 


The demonstration of its solution readily lends 
itself to primary reference. For we can picture (even draw 
perhaps) a set of elements—and three removed. We then have 
two clusters, one containing eight elements, the other, 
three elements. Physical replacement of the three elements 
gives a set of eleven. 

When the student has mastered some elementary 
algebra, a solution can be demonstrated as follows: 

X-3 = 8 
X = 8+3 
X = 11 

The demonstration is now different in this respectj that 
while there is still physical manipulation (of the symbols), 
there is no longer manipulation of the primitive elements 
(points) of the system. The manipulation now proceeds by 
means of a set of rules, devised for the sake of economy. 

A list of rules (as supplied to a grade nine student) would 
be: 

(a) All the terms containing the unknown are collected 
on the left hand side of the equation. If a term is ! trans¬ 
posed 1 across the equal sign, then the sign is changed. 

(b) All the terms not containing the unknown are 
brought to the right hand side. 

(c) The terms on each side are added algebraically. 

(d) The number on the right hand side is divided by 
the co-efficient of the unknown term. 

We can, of course, solve this problem mentally by picturing 
the equation, and by imagining the physical transposition 












. 


• -- ' ' " 

..' . . in ■ ' ' ■ - - ■ : "■ 

* 

* 


£ * a 

. 

- v.‘ \ ■ " ‘ - : I"::. 


. f ■ 

: 

. 

. - 

. ' . ' .. >V . . > ' » -• ■ 1 

. 



54 


of the terms. This mental act (which represents the 
internalization of the physical act of transposition), 
again obtains its Correctness* by reference to a physical 
act which may be performed. But since this physical refer¬ 
ence act proceeds according to an arbitrary set of rules, 
introduced for the sake of economy, rather than by the 
operations performed on the primitive set, we say that the 
subjectively felt * truth* of the mental act is established 
by secondary reference . 

Secondary reference—and the successive consolidation 
of rules or results—allows mathematical systems to develop 
along a vertical dimension. For once a result is establish¬ 
ed, it acts as a reference point and abnegates the necessity 
of returning to the axioms as a starting point^ for subse¬ 
quent demonstrations. Reference points need not be expressed 
as a set of rules. The theorems of any axiom system--as for 
example, the propositions of Euclidean geometry--act as 

reference points for the further development of the deduc¬ 
ed 

tive chain. ^ 


^This is a major reason for the power of mathematical 
thinking, as well as a source of its difficulty. A student 
may learn historical facts, or new words, by a process which 
is essentially horizontal—one fact not necessarily relying 
on the previous one. In mathematics, however, the loss of 
a reference point may render the deductive chain unintell¬ 
igible from that point onward. 










a Wl‘1 ■)■■■' 

. 




: , ■ i-a ■ ' " ;i I 


. 

. 

i - .1 ‘ 1 

' ! ' ’ 


: • U 

* f 

. 


. 

- 

. 

j 



55 

The student may encounter two situations with regard 
to comprehension of a system: 

(a) He may be supplied with a complete demonstration 
of an argument. The simple example above will suffice to 
illustrate this point. Here the student*s role is prin¬ 
cipally verification (by secondary reference to the rules or 
results of the system). If the operation which leads from 
step n to step n+1 of the development is stated specifically 
(e.g., ”transpose”), then the individual performs this act 
mentally and verifies the result by checking it against the 
recorded result. If the operation between the steps is not 
specified, however, then the individual must locate It 
(from among the permissible operations and results of the 
system), apply it, then verify mentally. 

(b) In many computational situations, the rules are 
sufficiently well formulated that the individual can perform 
them himself. This is the case in all of the high school 
algebra as well as in a great part of differential and 
integral calculus, solution of systems of equations, and so 
on. In this case, the individual is convinced of the 
correctness of his argument because he has performed a 
series of manipulations according to the set of rules, and 
he has previously established (or has seen established) the 
correctness of these rules (again through primary or 



... ■ . '1C! 

t * 

.. 

■ _ 

. * 

. 

■ v' ' *. : - •• ’ 

. - ’• ' 

j'iB a,-!. Hr- Bin ret. o - 

.. 

; . i\ ■ 

. -jv ' -ji :v ■; :.r -j 1 . • c-iii a. , ■, rio 

” ,;.ri 0 Cl jl J> 1 ; ' ’ L: V ‘ . •'.» 

: 

■ ;• ; • . } " 1 1 v , ■ u 7 " ' IlOO 




56 


secondary reference).^ 

It will likely be agreed that the type of ability 
demonstrated in situations (a) and (b) is of a necessary, 
but rather elementary nature. For the purpose of having a 
convenient label, we will use the term Level I ability to 
refer to the individuals relative performance in these 
types of tasks. From the point of view of mental functions. 
Level I ability, which involves a set of operations 
performed on representatives, the storage of reference 
points, and further performance of operations on the 
reference points, requires the type of mental performance 
previously described as Type A. 

Upper Bounds in Level One Performance 

The dependence of Level I ability on Type A function- 
ing suggests that the former may exhibit the induced upper 
limits which are found to exist in the latter. The obvious 
difficulty which many students experience in their attempts 
to comprehend mathematics warrants a closer examination of 
forces which determine these upper bounds. 


Of course, the bane of the rule-application method 
is that a student often acquires rules which are faithfully 
applied without being understood. Nevertheless, even this 
kind of performance can be useful when a purely computa¬ 
tional end is in view. 

















. * \ • . . 
















.:: ' .. ' ■: , . u v , - 








. 

. jVc < 




■ 


. v: -J. 


i 






;: . : > ’ qv;- ? vci 




. . t 








, 




• • . . • ... 

. 

. 

. ; 





57 


1. Natural Upper Bounds . A prerequisite for the 
operation of Level I ability is a supply of hypercathexis 
which is sufficient to fix successive reference points. 

This reaches particularly large proportions when a reference 
point involves a f condensed 1 symbol (Rignano, 1923, p. 16). 
This can be well illustrated by the notion of the limit of a 
sequence. 

By definition, a sequence X^, X£, . . . is said to 
possess the limit L if subsequent to the choice of any 
number e, however small, one can find an integer N such that 
<e for all values of n >N (Sokolnikoff, 1939, p. 6). 

The dependence of this notion on a sequence of 
physical operations is easily demonstrated. We suppose that 
the series (x^j can be represented by points on the line in 
Fig. 6. 


X n -L 



Pig. 6. Diagrammatic illustration of the limit point 
of a sequence. 

We take a small length e, and construct the interval L^e. 
When we try to visualize the existence of a limit point 
























• . • 

...... ..... , •; . - ' ■ . .. - "V' : ■ ..•> 5 i t-Sid* 

: 

. 






t 




at' . Vi&b r 


.... ' . r. : , : ; “ 


■ fcv ! •• , 


. ■■: ■ : ■ 




■; r r 




.• i-r o l • 

s 

■ 


. . ■ 












. 

. • 


•• j - f L i ' V od v.' n&rfVJ 












58 

(according to the above definition), we imagine the physical 

* drawing* of the sequences, moving from left to right, until 

point after point falls within the small interval. (The 

author visualizes a series of vertical strokes being drawn 

on the line.) Thus condensed within the symbol lim X n 

n~*<?o 

is an infinite number of implicit physical movements.7 

The consolidation of such reference points requires 
a considerable expenditure of hypercathexis. As we proceed 
up the inverted-pyramid structure of mathematics, the 
number of reference points increases, since every new 
theorem adds one more to the accumulated list. The hundreds 
of definitions and theorems in a book such as Sierpinski*s 
General Topology (195>2), coupled with the fact that the 
later theorems require a storage in memory of the results of 


7The condensation principle gives to the differential 
calculus its tremendous power, (*pow@r* being defined by the 
number of physical operations which would be needed to 
replace the symbol). When we recall that a result dy/dx of 
an infinite number of operations can itself be used as an 
element in another sequence 

d(dx/dy) 

: 

then we begin to appreciate in some measure the economy that 
is introduced into human thinking through the use of the 
condensed symbol. 























. 

..I - ■ ■ ■ ' v’- 


' 









V. 












. 

. 

? ?; >•• t 'i ; 

■ . ' 


* 








59 


preceding theorems, gives some idea of the tremendous 
continued supply of attention-cathexis which is necessary 
for a mastery of an axiomatic system. Nevertheless, the 
continued progress along the deductive chain which occurs 
under the application of a constant supply of attention- 
cathexis (as in Type A functioning) indicates that upper 
bounds in Level I performance should only appear for one of 
the following reasons: (a) the attention-cathexis supply is 
depleted through the cyclic fluctuation of basic needs. 


Q 

°This does not mean that all the reference points 
established to the end of the n*th theorem will be used to 
establish the (n+1) f st theorem, but they are all potentially 
usable, and unless a substantial proportion of them are 
retained, the development becomes incomprehensible. 

The perennial difficulty which students experience 
in comprehending mathematics lectures is based on the fact 
that while comprehension is probably an exponential function 
of deductive length (C-,), mathematicians tend to develop 
their arguments in a linear fashion (Cp). This inadequate 
allowance for storage results in a diminishing comprehension 
curve (C^). 



Required time for 
comprehension 

Demonstration time 
Relative comprehension 


Pig. 7* The decrease in comprehension under linear 
demonstration time. 






■ ■ ... ' -vu'. v t". . '. - " .o-r.iJ [.Sir ;x;o 

- ; - k- ■ ■ - t . ^ ; ■■■ 

: . .• ' Jv X - • • '• V * -3'' -• - - ' v -°- 

■; :: ■■ : • ' X '■ ' ' ' X- ' !' r - ' 

■ !• -v ‘;;j-■ jv,. ; vr.- ■ f v:> \yo ixc '©no o.oi^Uj 

.. , ; - • . : * x ; ' " ' -• 

! v'V -: -. ” 

' •»* ‘ . . •; x \ : ; 


■ 

. 

.... . O' . 

! , : 

, 

J 


: , 

, 


, . 

' 



60 


(b) the existence of low motivation results in a disinclina- 

o 

tion to apply available hypercathexis to the task at hand. 

2. Depression of the Upper Bound . In addition to 
difficulties inherent in the axiomatic method due to its 
very nature, and to the mental and motivational equipment 
of the student, certain other forces may act which tend to 
depress the upper bound of achievement in the axiomatic chain 
These forces can be considered as artificial in the sense 
that they cannot be attributed to the student, and could 
presumably be eliminated under ideal circumstances. 


Motivation can be understood as a utility choice 
situation in which the individual weighs—against an 
existing need configuration--the respective utilities of a 
corrent solution on the one hand and some extraneous 
behaviour (such as daydreaming) on the other. 


Choices Available 



Attempt 

Solution 

Extraneous 

Activity 

Utility 

Satisfaction 

Pleasure 


derived from 

derived from 


correct solution 

extraneous 

ability 

Probability 
of Success 

P< 1.0 

p=1.0 


Pig. 8. Motivation as a utility decision. 


This is a type of f risky* decision, for the probability of 
a satisfactory solution Is less than certainty. As this 
probability decreases through repeated experiences of failure 

















v [: 'r. it , vrixl to {•<&) 

■: ■■ j , j '£ V S.^/V' • 0\) 



. 





r ; 







(ip.; 






:V : T 


rt: 


j u;i . ■■ • P 




. 


■J Pd 


0:>. : .V>; D J.. P'j 

VO • Lt ’ j-? ' 

:v 







•v >d.-: 



/ : V " £. 

i ,) 

’ 

1 ' ' 


■ i j: " ■ ..v..c<> 

■ 

.. ... 


■ 

.' .V u ■ i ' a 



* 

0 '■ ’ v w udL ■' 'v;, d 

. . J, : ‘ U V 



. . 








61 

3. The Creation of Gaps , While the phenomenon of 
gaps is best illustrated in such highly formalized systems 
as the calculus of propositions where the permissible 
operations are specifically defined, similar argument can be 
advanced for any system. 

Let us suppose that the system in question utilizes 
n operations in the development of the sequence S^, S^ + i, 
S N+2* • • • Suppose further, that each successive step 
is generated by combining one of the previous 

reference points with S^, using for this purpose one of the 

_ 10 
n rules. 

We have seen that if the demonstration of the 
transition from to is accompanied by a statement 

of the operation applied and the previous result used, then 
the student»s task is mainly on© of verification. If, 
however, follows Sjj without explanation, then the 

student must find which operation was used to combine which 
statement with S^. We shall say in this case that a ! gap* 
of one unit length has been created; moreover, if we assume 


the expected utility (Siegel, 195>7) to be derived from 
attempting the problem decreases as well, thereby increasing 
the likelihood that the individual will exhibit behaviour 
indicating a preference for extraneous behaviour. 

•^This is probably the simplest case which could 
occur. The algebra is deliberately approximate and useful 
for purposes of illustration only. 













■ 

. 












. 












o • 

. 














j', - 




■ 

* 


1 ' ■ 











62 


that the individual is obliged to fill the gap by combining 
the previous statements with by a random selection among 
the permissible operations, then there would be n*N possible 
choices* For a gap of length L, the number of possible 
choices will be of the order of n^(W+L) j/NJ . Ignoring the 
crudeness of the algebra, the essential point remains that 
the number of possible random choices”—and the subsequent 
difficulty for the student—increase rapidly as steps in 
the proof are omitted* ^ 

We can now summarize discussions from this and the 
preceding chapters by postulating three possible reasons 
for the lowering of the students potential upper bound in 
mathematical comprehension; (a) the effect of group 
pressure, (b) inadequate time to consolidate reference 
points, (c) the creation of gaps. 


^Unfortunately, it is fashionable to present 
mathematical expositions in an extremely terse form, and to 
prefix tremendous gaps in the development with the statement 
n it is obvious that . . .**. 





j H\ i 


f r s! 




' : 


. • > i x ' qo 




? i oi - 


.2 


> o 


' 


i o 



; ' . • ' 


0." 



ao o ph 'il§ o : i ,.C" 




ox 


.Ur. fioi 


rr, 






i J. I iC t© ;;.vT :v C 








L 






i a 




(•;) . ■ ;J i u;©q 





CHAPTER V 


LEVEL TWO - THE MATHEMATICS PROBLEM 

The generation of a mathematical proof evolves a 
sequence of true statements S^, s n+i* ... If a system 
has been developed to the stage and if the student is 
asked to demonstrate the result S^ + ^, he may complete the 
intervening gap by responding in a random manner. However, 
some situations are of sufficient importance that they tend 
to recur, and In this case it may be possible for the student 
to develop a strategy—i.e., a non-random method of 
procedure in the face of a sequence of events whose range 
is known.^ When the latter type of behaviour occurs in 
conjunction with an axiom system,, we shall refer to it as 
problem solving and shall assign it the label J Level II 1 
ability. 

An example from the differential calculus will 
illustrate points to be discussed subsequently (Phillips, 
192 ?). 


^The definition of strategy employed here represents 
a partial generalization of the strategy* of the theory 
of games (Girshick, 1954)* In the present usage the term 
strategy* will imply: (a) the repetition of certain types 
of events, (b) the awareness on the part of the subject of 
the possible range of events, (c) the formulation by the 
subject of a more or less clearly defined plan to deal with 
the occurrence of a particular event in a specific manner. 

















; ' r : ' 

' 




- 

■ 














. 


. 


-no , , . 

0;.; i . ■ ' , • ‘ - ■ ■. : : ! 

* 

’ 

! rr Y .t J .j \ -y j :■ \ >' l * .lL: 

* 

.Li;.’: ? r .?o r!\r?>■ -yi£ ' L-.LL^if^cn ft* 

'• ... : •. ■ 


■ "; :• • •< ■; ; ‘ '.L ' ■ 

. 




’ 

- 

- 

, ... ; m t :.>i . \ ' ' ■ ■„.. • .■ 

. 

■ 



64 


The problem reads as follows: 

n A rectangular sheet of paper is 6 inches wide. It is 
folded so that the bottom right hand corner touches the 
left edge of the sheet. Find the longest length that the 
crease may have. 



Fig. 9. Illustrative problem from the differential 
calculus. 


We may first remark that the student must have some 

2 

knowledge of the calculus before a solution is possible. 
If, in addition, the question is recognized as a ’maxima" 
minima’ problem, then the student would have available a 


2 

In particular, the student must be acquainted with 
the theorem which provides the means of determining the 
maximum and minimum values of a function. 













. 













« - 

. .i. 

' 


' 













65 


strategy which may be formulated in the following terms: 

(a) Select a variable OC , the variation of which is 
associated with the variation of s, 

(b) Express s as a function f(oc,k) of this variable 
and numerical constants only. 

(c) Set d [f ( oc,k)]/doc = 0, solving the resulting 
equation for the value oc = cc 0 which gives the maximum or 
minimum value of s. 

(d) Find f(a 0 ,k), thus obtaining the maximum 
(or minimum) value of s. 

The important difference between the ^rules’ (above) 
and the rules of Level I is that while the latter specify 
a direct set of operations leading to S^ + ^., the former 
generates a sequence of choice points . Choice is the essence 
of the problem situation. In the problem above, the appli¬ 
cation of rule (a), for example, leads to a choice involving 
the location of cx, If we take oc to be an angle, there are 
9 possible angles (viz., three at E, three at F, and three 
at G) which may vary as s varies. As the student acquires 
experience, in this type of problem, he does not remain 
indifferent among the possible alternatives. Experience may 
have taught him that angles adjacent to s and involving 
original dimensions of the diagram are more likely to yield 
solvable equations upon differentiation than other angles. 


















. 

.. ' , ' ; :■■■'■. f - ?' ‘ ;/■ ■. i) 

1 . . •; . ’ I \ ' 

' :* -■ ..I : ocJ ! ;■ ■ i ' - 

, 

t . ■ ' ■ ■' ' ■ 

■ 

. 

. ; ■ ■: . : . ■' ■' ■ ■ ' ■ ; 







■ /j 1: > 






j j 'i -; i. 

. "V 




• t " •• •. 




• t ;i , •; ' . , . , . '■ ) ■ ■ " ■ . '' 

. 

.. ' ; : ^ - i, < '£■■.( ‘I0 -- -T -■ ' . 









66 


3 

In this case he would favour Z GPC and Z-FGC. If, in a 

given set of problems this choice of angle (for the sake of 
a name we will call it an Adjacent-original* choice) does 

k 

in fact lead more readily to a solution than other choices, 
then favouring this choice will give an advantage to the 
problem solver over a second problem solver who makes his 
choices at random* 

If we continue the problem and try to express s as a 

function of oc and the given constant 6, we encounter 

further choices in the method of procedure. However, as 

this provides no new developments, we leave the problem here. 

The solution to this problem moved forward from a 

known theorem (concerning the value of the derivative of a 

function) to the result. Often, however, the problem solver 

moves backward from the desired result S to some known 
g N+K 

theorem Sjj. The situation is represented schematically in 
Pig. 10. 


3we could say that his * subjective probabilities* for 
these alternatives were high (Cohen, Dearnaly, Hansel, 1957). 

^■The * adjacent-original * choice would be said to have 
high objective probability. 

^In many problem-solving situations the student works 
in both directions, balancing an analysis against deduction. 





v . .. "K 










-I' - 






. 


■ 

' ■ 




■ 


• ■ 


. 


• v •. • ■ ", ? ■" : : ■ *■ .. ■ ■ ■ ■ - 1 '• 




E - 1 






s. . , . ■ Ij ■■ O ri.J o i ixi 

















67 



Pig. 10. Diagramatic representation of gap-filling 
procedures. 

Prom a consideration of the above problem, and a wide 
variety of others from elementary, secondary, and advanced 
mathematics we can abstract a set of conditions under which 
problem solving may be exhibited: 

(a) The individual is able to perform the set of 
operations which are permissible within the system and has 
an adequate knowledge of the reference points in the system. 

(b) The individual has a strategy , a general method 
of attack or procedure. 

(c) One or more steps of the strategy generate choice 
among alternatives. 

(d) The individual possesses a set of subjective 
probabilities which represent the extent to which he favours 
one alternative over another. 

(e) Each alternative has an »objective* probability-- 
i.e., a relative frequency with which it leads to success in 
a set of problems of this type. 






' 















„ • ;■ ' ■ ic'i. f ^ 
















































. 


* - : ■ - ■ 






68 


The Geometry Problem 

In keeping with the objectives of this thesis, we will 
give special attention to the type of problem which Is 
encountered by the high school student. The algebra course 
in the secondary school is largely devoted to computational 
facility through the use of rules. In Euclidean geometry, 
however, the student encounters the first mathematics course 
which deals largely with the solution of problems. 

We consider the following problem which is presented 
to a student some time early In the grade 10 geometry course. 



Fig. 11. Geometry problem 1 illustrating uncertainty 
analysis. 

We will also suppose that the problem occurs in the 
set of problems following Proposition IV (Book I), and that 
the student understands, in a Level I sense, the following 
reference points: 

(T^) Definition : There are 180° in a straight angle 


(straight line) 



































' : • -v : ■' - 

. 




69 


() Proposition I : If two straight lines intersect, 
the vertically opposite angles are equal* 

(T^) Proposition II : If two sides and the contained 
angle of one triangle are respectively equal to ti>ro sides 
and the contained angle of another triangle, then the 
triangles are congruent. 

(T[j_) Proposition III : In an isosceles triangle, the 
angles opposite the equal sides are equal* 

(T^) Proposition IV : If three sides of one triangle 
are respectively equal to three sides of another triangle, 
then the triangles are congruent* 

It is possible to develop a strategy in geometry 
because the results which the student is asked to prove 
constitute a finite set of the form: 

(D x ). Prove: LX = LY 

(Dp). Prove: line AB = line CD 

(D^). Prove: AABC = ADEF 

(Dj^). Prove: line AB I! line CD ^ 

At each choice point the individual will have to choose 
between the alternative methods (T^) of establishing the 
type of fact under question (D^)* We will suppose that the 

^Other problems can be reduced to these. For example, 
D : Prove line AB = 2(line CD) is reduced to Dp by dividing 
AB in half or by doubling the length of CD. 













































. 

* 

0 '.’D :: ; ■■■ ■■■ ■' . - || J 




* 











70 

objective frequencies for each alternative in the given set 


of problems can be represented by the following table. We 

will assume that the possible alternatives for each are 

7 

known to the problem solver' and that the subjective 
probabilities may or may not be equal to the objective 
probabilities. 


Table 1 

Objective Relative Frequencies in the 
Uncertainty Analysis of Problem 1 




Proposition 

Used 


Type of Fact 

A 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

line = line 

- 

» 

1.0 

- 

- 

D> 

ill 

0 

- 

- 

♦ 6 

- 

• 4 

z. = z_ 

.2 

• 1 

.3 

.3 

.1 


The strategy involves an analysis which follows from 
the repeated application of this sequence of questions: 

(Q-l_) What kind of fact am I to prove (e.g. line=line)? 
(Q 2 ) Wlmt propositions can be used? 

(Q^) Where can this proposition be applied? 

(Q,|^) What facts must I have before I can use it? 

?In the experimental investigation reported later, this 
condition was ensured by providing each student with a table 
















, : £ , • . ; > , 1 ■ . >' t ' ' X 

, . ; . • , . f : £ \ X; i 

. c,,,;, vcv.-cry,:- tt ±in : <:ro~ V.U ^n.r. -w- 

* 

X 

. ■: '• • - 

. : • ■ ' - ' • ' • . 


... : ?c;.h'X i i 



. 

r 1, .■ • ■" j 

■ • . . • <, .'v! ■,);; 1. " . / G r0 ' ‘ : ' ■ 

;-.j; . )\\ c u: ; ; :.o i. 

; h . ■ 0 . X ' 1 ‘ ' 

■ 





I 


X M ■ 





ftX , gu’ 






71 


If the strategy is applied to the problem given above 


it generates the sequence of choices shown in Pig. 


12 . 


8 


Choice 


I. 

II. 

III. 


IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 



VIII. 



SOLVED 


Pig. 12. Analysis diagram for geometry problem 1. 


showing (without relative frequencies) the possible altern¬ 
atives for each D^. 

Q 

°The symbolism means 11 the question Q-j. leads to 

the answer 11 . 









































.. .. 1. '■ .. ' -- ... ’■ '■ u '; : ; ' r 

, 


t' .... ' - 






.V. il;'... 





















72 

The Psychological Problem of Logical Choice 

The analysis diagram illustrates the sequence of 

choices generated by the problem-solving strategy; it shows 

the line of correct choices which lead to the solution. The 

mental operations involved in the solution seem to be 

o 

considerably less direct however. 

The initial question leads to the identification of 
the type of fact to be proved. This presents no uncertainty 
because it is specifically stated in the *Required». Q 2 can 
also be answered without making a choice, because there is, 
at this point in the student*s geometrical life, only one 
proposition which proves the required fact. presents 

the problem-solver with his first choice between altern¬ 
atives, for the equality of the lines would follow from 
proving any of four pairs of triangles congruent. At this 
point the individual seems to consider each of the triangles 
in turn, and tests the necessary conditions for congruence 
(two sides and a contained angle) against the diagram as it 
stands. Since T 2 is not directly applicable to any of the 
triangles, the student imagines possible additional facts 

^The description which folloi^s is based on the 
observations made during a period of approximately 100 hours 
which the author spent listening to and recording the verbal 
solution of geometry problems. (Details are reported in the 
experimental section.) 






« 

[ > . ■■ . • r j 

. 

. 

. ,■ ; j ) ' - v K l 


■ 

n 



73 


which would allow him to apply T ^ in each case. Thus, if 
his thinking were verbalized, it would take the form: 

"I could use T 2 in AABE and AAED if I had ABAE=ZEAD. ” 

n I could use T 2 in ABEC and ADEC if I had ABCE=AECD. ft 

"I could use T 2 in £ABE and AGED if I had AE=EC, 

AB=CD, and ZBAE=AECD. 

”1 could use T 2 in ABEC and AAED if I had AE=EC, 

BG=AD, and ABCE=AAED." 

Thus the various alternatives are not dismissed at 
once, but each retains a possibility of application sub¬ 
sequent to the proof of some additional fact or facts."^ 

Since none of the additional necessary facts are directly 
available, the chain of verbalization must be carried further. 
Thus the argument proceeds: n I could use T^ in __ if I had 

_ which would require _ I! Thus there is competition 

between alternatives and a resulting division of the 
attention-cathexis. 

It is interesting to offer a conjecture as to what 
will happen when the alternatives become so numerous, and 
the chain so lengthy that the available attention-cathexis 
is depleted below an effective level of operation. It would 
seem that the individual in these circumstances must either 
ignore some of the alternatives or terminate the chain 
prematurely. In the latter case, the statement ”1 could use 

10 In the choice between triangles, the alternatives 
are not listed in the table; similar arguments hold for the 
latter type of decision. 



- 








. ' . ■ ■ 




■ ■ 

■ 








. 






riJb nj'-'.c \ ... ?, r.; o ■ 

■ ■ .j; . ; - V cJ-'.'Si '■ . 

: . . ‘ ' ' ■ '* . 

. 

■ 


. 


, 


, .! J: *. ’ * ■ r . .. ? ■; J ; y IS. So: > o-if 

* 

.. 



74 


T^ in A ABE and AAED if I had L BAE= Z.EAD n , might become: 

ft I can use T 2 in A ABE and AAED because I have Z_BAE= Z_AED n . 

Thus the chain would be terminated by assuming a fact which 

XI 

still remains to be proved. 

In those cases where the laternatives are covered by 
the table, the individuals behaviour is further influenced 
by the subjective probabilities which he attaches to each 
alternative. The alternatives of higher subjective 
probability are likely to be elaborated further and returned 
to more often than alternatives of lower subjective probabil 
ity. 

Attempts to Quantify Problem Difficulty 

1. Standard Methods . The possibility of obtaining 

1p 

an objective measure of problem difficulty Is an attrac¬ 
tive one for several reasons. At the present time, the 
standard procedure for ascertaining the difficulty of a 
problem is to administer it to a group of students and to 
determine a difficulty coefficient based on the percentage 


Hoften the individual makes the assumption with the 
full knowledge that it is an assumption. This kind of 
behaviour can sometimes be interpreted as a face-saving 
bluff. 


l P 

x ^An objective measure would be one which can be 
calculated once the possible alternatives and the probabilit 
ies are known. In other words, it would depend on the 
structure of the problem itself, without having reference to 
a particular group of students. 

























'■ *'.I ' -J ■ 






t i’- i- ^ 

; i ^ :>v o dj 'vd 




er‘ix$ 










, 








. 




: . .. 1 ; ■ .■ • ’ i -i v 


. 

' ■ , J: •• J J ?<_>r ■:::<;ro t:vd&d 

¥ 

. ' .-rof : 

. 










75 


who succeed. Unfortunately, this method is difficult to 

apply when the problem-solving time may be measured in hours. 

Moreover, the difficulty index applies only to the group in 

which it was obtained, so that this measure has a comparative 

13 

but not a predictive value. J Again the group method glosses 

over the psychological difficulties of the problem itself. 

Under the circumstances, it is not hard to understand 

why there is no standard for the high school teacher to 

follow in determining problem difficulty, except to use the 

demonstration (or deductive) length of the solution. Thus, 

the solution to the example treated above could be written: 

Prop. IV--—-— > AABC= A A CD 

Defn. of congruence—> L BAC~ A DAG 

Prop. II- —» AABE=AAED 

Defn. of congruence—> BE=ED 

This method in itself does not necessarily correspond 

closely to the experienced difficulty of the problem because 

it does not follow the natural psychological development of 

the solution. 

2. Uncertainty Measure of Problem Difficulty . A 
measure which follows the psychological processes involved 
in the solution must take account of the amount of choice 


•^Thus we cannot predict, for example, that student X 
will be able to solve three out of 5 problems at difficulty 
level Y, although this type of prediction Is most useful 
when we consider segregating s tudents on the basis of ability. 













< 

*' 






, 




' ' ' ' ; ; . 


' ' / T ' ■' ‘ ^ 4 






, 






- 








. 

. 

. 


* 





■ 




■ 




- J - J . 

■ 

. • . ■ « 






76 


available at each decision point, or the amount of mental 
experimentation necessary to choose a correct alternative. 
One method of estimating the necessary experimentation would 
be to first calculate the possibility of a correct choice by 
an *a priori* selection among the alternatives, using the 
relative frequencies of the table, but without performing 
mental experimentation. If the probability of a correct 
*a priori* choice is high, then the amount of necessary 
experimentation would be low, and vice versa.^ 

For this purpose we present Table 2 in a generalized 

form. 

Table 2 

Probability Table For Uncertainty Analysis 
of General Geometry Problem 



Proposition Used 

Type of Fact 

T i 

t 2 

• • ♦ 

T 

r 

D i 

p i,i 

P l,2 


P l,r . 

D 2 

P 2,l 

P 2,2 


? 2,r 

• 

• 

• 





D k 

P *,l 



p k, r 


■^This method is used by Cronbach (1952, p. 9) in his 
development of an information measure for psychological tests. 















v •• . ■ " • ' : •• •' ■ ■; 

■ 

. 

r 

■ 


. 



■ 0 



.. T < '. : >-,) 7 7 .", 

f lni ' . 











77 

The are the types' of decisions that are made in 

geometry. For example, might represent an f angle 

decision 1 , i.e,, a choice among all the propositions T^, 

Tg, ... • T r , all of which can be used to prove that one 

angle is equal to another. The number p.. represents the 

1 J 

relative frequency with which the laternative Tj will be 
the »correct 1 one to use in a decision which is made 
within the set of problems to which this table applies. 

If represents the total number of decisions in 
the set of problems and if n^. is the number of times T^ is 

used to make a decision, then, 

r 

Pij =n ij/ N i» f=i n ij =N i 

Suppose a choice point involves a decision which calls 
for proposition Tj. Prior to the performance of the 
* thought * experiment, the probability that the individual 
could make the correct choice from a knowledge of the table 
alone is and the probability that he could (by 

knowledge of the table alone) correctly make the n^j 
decisions of this type which occur in the set is 













* 








. 


' 




, ■ 




- 








78 


Thus the probability of his making all the decisions of 
the type correctly is 

TT 

1 

The geometric mean over the decisions of the type will 
be 

TT Pi /U 

j = l 


This may be called the »a priori 1 probability of a correct 

15 

decision (using knowledge of table values). However, 
before a correct choice can be made, the probability of its 
being correct in that given situation must equal unity, and 
the logarithm of this probability must be zero. The 
logarithm of the *a priori* probability is 

r r 


log 


7r 

3=1 



£ 

3=1 


p i3 l0 S p i3 


and this quantity must be raised to zero at each choice 
point. 


■^This is the estimated probability of a correct 
single choice (Gronbach, 1952, p. 9). 

















. 










. 













. clxi x£. 










79 


The difficulty of the choice, or the extent of the 
mental experimenting necessary to raise the probability to 
zero, is, therefore, on the average, 

r 

0 -X 
j=i 

r 

= p ij 



^Shannon (1949, PP. 19-22) develops a similar 
formula. He begins by asking, 

“Suppose we have a set of possible events whose 
probabilities of occurrence are p^, p£, . . .p n . The proba¬ 
bilities are known, but that is all we know concerning which 
event will occur. Can we find a measure of how much choice 
is involved in the selection of the event or how uncertain 
we are of the result?** 

He suggests that the uncertainty function 
H (p^, P 2 , . . .Pn) should have the following properties: 

(a) H should be continuous in the p^. 

(b) If all the p^ are equal, and p^=l/n, then H 
should be a monotone increasing function of the n. With 
equally likely events, there is more choice or uncertainty, 
when there are more possible events. 

(c) If a choice be broken down into two successive 
choices, the original H should be the weighted sum of the 
individual values of H. 

Shannon then proved that the only H satisfying the 
above assumptions is of the form 

n 

H = -K p.log p., K a position constant 
i=± 1 




' f. • ’ “■ 



* 















■ -• ’ ■ ■“ . - S . 

t ■ * ’ ’ 

t 

. 

v-' o c ' 

* * •' 

_ 

■ . .... - ' • 

f: - i 

o w’: t-'/o :\b 








80 


This is the identical with Shannon f s uncertainty measure. 
If a problem contains s decision points, and if we assume 
that the sequence of decisions is independent, then the 
problem difficulty can be represented by the expression 

s r 



^Pij-log PlJ 


This derivation assumes that the individual has 
knowledge of the quantities p-jj, i.e., that his subjective 
probabilities coincide with the objective probabilities. 
Suppose, however, that the subjective probabilities are 
numbers which are not necessarily equal to By a 

derivation similar to that above, we may arrive at a problem 
difficulty 


U. 


s r 

=_Z Z p-.log w 
z i=l j=l 1J 


Moreover, it can be proved that Uq^U^. 

We have so far dealt with the class of decisions 
for which *a priori 5 probabilities p-y are tabulated. There 
is, however, another class of decisions that may arise where 
the probabilities have not been previously tabulated. In 
these cases, we will assume that any choice (without mental 
experiment) would be made strictly on the basis of chance and 
we will assign equal 5 a priori 1 relative frequencies to them. 



' 























■ ■ ... - ' ' • 

* 

■ ■ 

. ■ 

. ... ... J v. ... ;. : :: 


. .. .. .; • ,1 : ■■ . : : ■ ' ■■ 


. 

■ 

... . ; , 

« ■ •••- • • ’■ 

I. , V.,f : tiyVi " 







81 


(As an example, we might consider the choice of triangles 
in the problem dealt with*) 

The formula 

N 

u =" Z ,Px l0 S Px 

X=1 

has many interesting psychological properties which streng¬ 
then its claim to be a measure of choice or uncertainty. 

(a) The value of U is a maximum when the probabil¬ 
ities of each alternative are equal. This is in agreement 
with common sense--the most difficult decision is between 
alternatives of equal likelihood. Moreover, if there are 
no alternatives, and therefore no choice, U then takes the 
value 0. 

(b) The maximum value of U increases as the number of 
alternatives increases. Clearly, increasing the number of 
alternatives should increase the available choice, 

(c) The amount of uncertainty is increased if the 
individual does not know the objective probabilities-- 
i.e., if there exist discrepancies between ! subjective 1 and 
Objective 1 probabilities. 


3* Numerical Example . We next apply the uncertainty 
to the example considered above, in the following cases: 

Case (a) . w ij=Pj_j 

Choice at III, C IXI =- x Pmlog^ P m 

m=l - 

=- (.25log2.25+.2f>log 2 .25+. 25log 2 .25+*25log 2 »25) 
= log 2 k 

= 2.00 units 3 "' 


^?The choice of logarithms employing the base two is 
a matter of convenience, and stems from the extensive use 
which is made of binary systems in communication systems. 








•.'■ c i ": : .' ' • 


■ 




. 














C .L-.,- ’ 




. 












' " ’ . - / ^ -• \v r [- * 

„ 


, 






: 










’ 






- ■ , . 


. “ 




■' rj 








c, . . '■ ■ •(' • n j; ■ .. i -H 






82 


r 

Choice at VI, Cyj=-51 p-.log p.* 

3=1 2 

=-(.2 log2+.1 log.l+.3 log .3+.1 log .1) 

=-(. 4644 +. 3322 +. 5211 +. 5211 +. 3322 ) 

= 2.17 units 

Total uncertainty 4*17 units. 


Case (b) . w-jj p ± j 
Suppose that w i2 =w l4 = *^ 


Then, 


and that w n =w~ 0 =w 00 =w_, =w nr ,== # 2 

31 32 33 34 35 

<^2 will lead to a decision with 
2 


Z p i3 log w ij 

3=1 


c II = “i*° log »5-o log .5 
= 1 unit of choice. 

4 

G III = " Z: Pre l0 S2 Pm 

m=l 

= 2.00 units as before. 

5 

C VI““ r Pijl°S w ii 
3=1 J J 

=-(.21og.2+.l log.2+.31og.2+.31og.2r.l log.2) 
=-(1.0 log 2 .2) 

= logg 1° “ logg 2 
= 2.32 units. 


Total amount of choice 5.32 units 















... 








83 


This case shows clearly how an ignorance of the 
probabilities can increase the difficulty of the problem. 
Thus, a Mine decision* increases in difficulty from 0 units 
to loO unit and an 1 angle decision* increases in difficulty 
from 2.17 units to 2.32 units. In this, the model shows 
agreement with our psychological intuition. 

The utilization of the choice or uncertainty formula 
is intended to give a measure of problem difficulty which 
corresponds more closely to the psychological processes 
entering into the solution than does the deduction measure. 
On the surface the formula seems to have a number of desir¬ 
able properties which are in agreement with our psycholo¬ 
gical intuition. The psychological validity of the formula, 
however, will be tested in comparing the theoretical 
difficulty of a problem with the actual difficulty exper¬ 
ienced by the student in attempting to solve it. 




’• • 

’ 






■ 

' 


- 

- ! ■ v ' *■ 


CHAPTER VI 


CREATIVE ABILITY—LEVEL III 

A third function which may be performed within the 
axiom system—and one which the mathematician will undoubt¬ 
edly regard as true mathematical ability—is the creative 
function. This may be demonstrated in many ways--of which 
the following are illustrative: the postulation of a set 
of axioms for an existing system (Peano), the correction of 
faults in an existing system (Veblen), the modification of 
axioms in a system (Gaus), the development of a new type of 
mathematical operation (Newton). For the most part, the 
creative work of the mathematician takes the form of an 
extension of existing systems. 

Creative mathematical ability represents in a way, 
the ultimate manifestation of a desire—and a necessity— 
to comprehend an infinite environment through the medium of 
a finite brain. The mathematician constructs classifications, 
or categories, which not only encompass existing systems 
but which provide a basis for the interpretation of as yet 
unknown systems-—even to the extent of leading to their 
discovery. Thus, in building algebraic structures the 
mathematician not only exhibits the logical properties of 
such existing systems, but provides a basis for discovery 
and interpretation of new systems. 
















, -x ui 


; o ; '. 


; '• ... '' .' , •> ■' ..N' C v >< 






It, s0 i:TI 

n , ■ ' " ' ; : : 

, 

•/,; i j.xo.L; ' «; J' . '■ -x/ c-L oxX: 

■-.j xx V ; . 

* 

':n . t.. , J.uO- ; • 0 

■ 

l ' 

*. . ' , . • ■ ' : - 

. 

, 






■ , : 








85 


The psychological basis of creative ability is, for 
the most part, unknown. At the present time, we do not 
seem to have suitable concepts to deal with creativity; 
moreover, it is expressed over periods of time of such 
length that practical experimentation has been virtually 
impossible. 

It is difficult to find a discussion of creative 
ability which does not invoke Wallas T (1926) four steps. 
According to this theory, the solution must be preceded by 
a period of conscious preparation . The problem is then 
relegated to the subconscious during a period of incubation 
in which the conscious mind either rests or deals with some 
other problem. Then, often with startling suddenness, a 
suggested solution comes in a moment of illumination . The 
tentative solution is then verified . 

While there is general agreement with Hilgard»s 
(1957* p. 246) suggestion that f, Wallas ? four steps in 
thinking are suggestive, but not a full scientific theory”, 
we nevertheless find this scheme used in duscussions of 
creative ability by Vinaeke (1952), Montmasson (1931)* 
Patrick (1952), and others. In particular, Hadamard (1949) 
describes many of the creative acts of the great mathema- 
ticians in these terms. 

The striking thing about creative thinking is that 
it does not proceed wholly under the influence of conscious 















. 




s ' 


















: 


- 


. 




. 










* r 












, . iq ' . ' ■ , 

. 




86 


effort; there is even some suggestion that the moment of 
illumination comes, as it were, after attention has been 
1 turned off* the problem. Attention-cathexis brought to 
bear on a problem continually activates competing altern¬ 
atives. Creativity on the other hand seems to involve the 
embedding of existing classes in more inclusive ones—of 
which the existing ones are special instances. 

It is possible that the neural structure of the brain 
provides the basis for the physical integration of the 
neural circuits corresponding to concept classes. Attention 
plays merely an introductory role; it establishes the 
critical requirements and activates the necessary neural 
components. 

Summary--Chapters II-VI 

This section purports to present a summary of the 
theoretical framework outlined in the preceding chapters. 

The theory may be described as an attempt to provide a 
psychological basis for the study of mathematical ability, 
by employing a theory of mental operations which steers an 
independent course through the positions of Hebb, Rapaport, 
Piaget, Rignano, Ashby, and Bruner. 

The brain, evolving and maturing as an instrument 
which facilitates homeostatic equilibrium, is organized 
under the influences of environmental stimulation and 




' - ■ ■ 

- : ■ ' ' : 

- : V . ! : \ ' : { - r ; : ' 

---1 Ct :oo " 'i'.■ * ' ■ 

* 

v,r. :c> I ‘ r : [.i v-hoi\^£> 

. ' ' 

'.y '■/ ' •, : ...v/ ■ Of J 

’ f . ■ • ■ ' ‘ ' ' 

■ 

- ~ ^ o • ; .' 

' 

. . . . • ■ - : ' ■ ■ : : 

: ; :■ ;■■'o o.-: ;• -- 

, ' . • ■■ /-■ , ■ • v — 

, 

. - ■ <. r- ••• "■ t \ ‘ ' '■ > ff., O 


87 


central facilitation. The external organization proceeds 
through a mapping of the environment on the association 
areas of the brain, thus effecting a division of the complex 
environment into functionally equivalent classes. As a 
result of this organization, the organism need expend less 
of its equilibrium-producing cathectic energies. Part of 
the surplus is used for internal regulation; part is at the 
disposal of the ego to power its reality-testing function. 

The brain enables the organism to maintain long range equil¬ 
ibrium through its ability to visualize the results of its 
possible actions--!© perform, as it were, mental experiments. 

In f mental experimentation 1 , external objects can be 
imagined by reactivating the phase sequences normally ac¬ 
tivated in their perception; they can be mentally manipulated 
through the performance of mental operations—again a 
reactivation of phase sequences established in the original 
physical action. Mental manipulations are often performed 
on specific representations--neural loci to which the 
T concept 1 field narrows in continued attention. The attain¬ 
ment of the ability to perform mental experiments through 
attention-cathexis is a maturational process which proceeds 
through states of diminishing domination by perception of 
the external environment. Attention-cathexis-directed 
thought manifests two principal modes of operation. Type A 
processes in their purest form involve the manipulation. 





. * 

. . ; : .. . : : v 1 ,v< ; : , ■ n '■ 1 - 

. 

■ ,• ' ■ •' • : • ; * *i 

’ > . • 

* 

_ 

. • , , •... ■' ' ■' 1. iJ:?: ^oq 

, C ; o .1, . - > . ? ■ ■!. ■ ? - '■ 

'■ •' :1 0 ,, ! -T. 

fji ..L : .}■ •/!'j. >; ' >.. ‘ . ■- Y, ' ■■■ • : • ■: V-'5 v ' ■<* : 

v tv ■ ; - 

l rj"" ; v,‘ r. ■■ J: ; O *.;0 1 o 

, • - . ■" ' ; ■ . 1 ■ 

■ ; ■ ■' . . .... • ' ' ' ' 1 

■ ■ 

foa . • ;r. f . 

- i - : 

. 

; t . 7/ • I: - i •: '. ■' \ : 







88 


storage, and further manipulation of representatives. Type 
B processes involve decision or choice situations where there 
is a resulting competition between mental states which 
requires that they be separately activated. 

The three-way participation in cerebral control 
beti>reen external stimulation, need-drives and hypercathexis 
is further complicated by the reflexive character of the 
ego, which develops a need for stable self-perception. This 
means that situational variables can cause a redistribution 
of the need-hypercathexis balance, thereby depleting the 
available supply of hypercathexis. Thus artificial limits 
may be induced in Type A performance and the natural limits 
in Type B performance may be seriously reduced. 

Mathematics seems to have passed through stages which 
resemble the maturation of the human brain. The history of 
mathematics clearly reveals an informal-operations stage in 
which mental operations were closely tied to corresponding 
physical acts. In the development of axiom systems, 
mathematics entered the stage of formal operations. Diff¬ 
erent types of ability can be distinguished in terms of the 
students* performance within the axiom system. A fundamen¬ 
tal type of ability is necessary for the comprehension of 
mathematics. It requires the performance of mental 
operations on the basic elements of the system (point, line, 
element), the storage of results, and the performance of 







,, K-. ■ riC-l&xli’&W 

. : 

I 

. .. X r: .:>'),':X;< 6 •■■■6 

: . 




; ,: 



. 



>- T x»/O' -X’f'T 


, • 1 ' 



. 

CO 

. , i, j: ... • ' ■ 

■; ' j 

X'X iv b rip t: ‘ 




: . . . saw; : ■ ■ 

. .f' X* iXiX'X 


. ' - ■■ ’ 

■ 

- 

, 


; ,;i; Id 

i . .! '• ■ • ' ' 

■3 til 

■! I 


t 


. . -j ; riy ", C ". ■ ■ 

" 


... : : • . ", .rn ' ' ' 


1 

• ■ o S: , 

. ; ' '• 

• 

; r ■ ■■ ' 0 

X ■; ' .■ X ) • • r 'X ‘ 


t : .. ■ 

; . ■ ' v ■ i: ' 5 • - 


. 0 

..." ' ' ' 


!,bXXv !XXb:,)1 


■ 




L i 


'• U; ... 








' ■ V ) 

: . : ( X. -I;: ■ 5 XX- X 

■ 

, , .. - ; "X r: " 

. 







89 

further operations on the results stored. This in fact, is 
a pure example of Type A functioning, and it carries the 
suggestion that mathematics has gradually evolved until it 
conforms with the natural mode of mental operation. 

It would seem that low motivation is the only natural 
force tending to set an upper bound to the individual's 
performance in Level I tasks, but that an artificial low¬ 
ering of this upper bound may be caused by (a) presentations 
which allow inadequate time for storage, (b) gaps in a 
presentation, and (c) the necessity to save 'face' in a 
group situation. 

Frequently the student is obliged to fill in a gap 
in the deductive chain. If he does not exhibit a random 
performance of operations, but rather exhibits a strategy 
which causes him to make a sequence of choices between 
alternatives, then we describe his behaviour as 'problem 
solving'. This is a clear case of logical uncertainty, and 
some attempts can be made to quantify problem difficulty 
when the subjective and objective probabilities of the 
alternatives are known. Level II ability, requiring as it 
does a partition of the available hypercathexis, appears to 
have natural upper bounds which may again be depressed in 
group situations. 

Finally, creative ability in mathematics involves 
the formulation of axiom systems or the modification and 


; 

■ ' ■ ■ 

' ' ■' ! 

.no 




* 






■ 






90 


extension of existing ones. Little is known about the 
psychological processes involved except that creative 
thinking seems to require a partial freedom from attention 
in which the brain performs an integration of neural fields 
which correspond to concept classes. 


- 


; 
























SECTION B 


STUDIES AT LEVEL ONE 








CHAPTER VII 


PRELIMINARY DATA 

At the thesis meeting in April, 1958, it was agreed 
that the major emphasis of the experimental work should be 
concentrated on the study of the solution of geometry 
problems and on the hypothesis that when a student faces a 
series of problems of increasing complexity, he reaches a 
predictable level, or upper bound, beyond which he is unable 
to deal adequately with the problem. At the same time, it 
was agreed that a test or tests of Level I ability should be 
constructed and that behaviour in this area should be 
investigated. 

Pilot Study 

The months of May, June, and July of 1958 were spent 
in an attempt to pursue these two main objectives. On the 
one hand, it was feared that the macroscopic view to be 
gleaned from the group studies of problem solving proposed 
for the autumn would gloss over the subtle psychological 
processes involved unless a preliminary microscopic investi¬ 
gation was first conducted. It was therefore thought to be 
advisable that a prelininary intensive study of problem¬ 
solving behaviour should be undertaken. Four potential 
grade 10 students were hired for this purpose, and their 
verbalized solutions of a large battery of geometry 






. 




, 

, i- 1 " '>.. - r 

. • -• • ‘ ! »0 

, ' - ; ■ •: ' • • > ; 




4 


. 

. .J 


. 




oil bJjjorta aao cj'i a^aiv.euo>d 


* 


i . : 

^ ' X :• a<-;- >v,: •' ■' avaaio. nd as ai; 

bo i i;v. : !i . . ■ 

t : ' - V 

0 

. , ' : •. • : ■ : 

1 ' . -1 

. • 

■■ :.. - X '•/■- a j • • ■ k) 





92 


problems--which included the proposed autumn battery--were 
recorded and analyzed. This occasion also provided an 
opportunity to select and reject problems for the later 
battery. In all, the experimenter had close to 100 hours 
of this kind of experience prior to the autumn investigations; 
the details are reported in a later section. 

At the same time, various existing tests were 
examined, especially the now classical set proposed by 
Rogers (1918), and others were constructed in an attempt to 
discover a Level I test with a high degree of lawfulness-- 
i.e., it was hoped that a test could be found in which 
T difficulty level ? and f tim.e* were related in a manner which 
might be approximated by a mathematical equation. Subjects 
for the latter experiments were enlisted from the graduate 
students and caretaking staff present during the summer 
session. 

The Autumn Investigations 

1. Population s Several factors which entered into 
the choice of a population will be considered In turn: 

(a) The programme had to be conducted in a school in 
which the grade 10 geometry course was taught as a single 
uninterrupted unit, commencing at the beginning of the school 
year. This condition was not met In Alberta where algebra 
and geometry are mixed considerably, but the Ontario 
curriculum suited the proposed programme. 




:v Q'V.i. 

.LI. ■ ' U : "'7 


iol ivr 

«: 














) 






j, l7. ; 


£ J. , . ' 4 ■ ■ ■ , " ,ii 7; > J.. 7 O > , 'i , ■ : '.£< ■' 

. ‘ 1 • # ■ ■ 
..L-., 7 ! /:■' • Lj L. "7.731 


., ...7, . j. £ . J > oIL j <7 • 

' •; '■ -r: ,7‘,i v , 777/ ' 7 7 o' r 7 7, 

r- J :7 7 . : . : 7'v 'V. ' '*;3 £ ' V 1 ■ ' ' 3 0 *L73'iO 


• ' ■ 

xO 1 ' ' “ ' ' 


7 


f • 


: ' : : 7|: 


ti J 


L 


‘ 




L 



i',; "7.7 ■; . v , ■ i. r v - '6 Jj-ix./...-' ^oficpL 








' L JO J 

0 K i 

' ■ . ), 


■. " .. * - • 


r 


JO.-L? 7; t ,7 ; ,7': 70q; 7 ; '.7:,:- 0 7 70;' 0 7 




o»- h 3: ■' ■ ■ or -i: (. 3 ; 




i ) .0 . 7 : . j . 1 . • i i : 




I 3 1 ;\:. 1 t j. 7 .rr/r £> I • 




> / : : 




G 






93 


(b) The proposed battery for the autumn testing 
included individual tests which required approximately two 
hours of testing time per subject. After the inevitable 
contest between the desire for intensive study on the one 
hand and statistical significance on the other—the number 
100 was chosen as the size of a population which might 
satisfy both requirements. 

(c) The long-range stability of upper bounds in 
problem-solving ability in geometry could best be tested by 
studying the performance of a group of students who had had 
a year f s previous experience and who would be covering 
essentially the same material for a second time. The grade 
12 course ordinarily begins with a review of the grade 10 
work, including, to a large extent, the same problems. 

It seemed desirable then, that the population should 
consist of two grade 10 classes and one grade 12 class, the 
latter acting essentially as a comparison group. In this 
case however, it was important to have some knowledge of the 
type of instruction that the grade 12 group had received in 
their introductory course. 

(d) The stringent scheduling of the testing and 
interviewing periods required that the experimenter be 
given considerable freedom to rearrange and interrupt 
regular class periods. Moreover, the tests themselves 
required--as will become apparent later—unusual co-operation 














..i f /: • ■ ■ v ■ •;. : ■■ : r - - ' -''' - f ■ • ■" >• 

' j • ' „ . ' ' ' f ’ i : ( ■ 

:>■ ••no j " i': o7\~3. ' f s. ‘Xv-’j: P i i 3rk:; nos-' >--a ;$ oodnoo 

i — '• v . . 3 ■ '' ' . 'j ■ ■ 

j . f . < I ‘ " ■/•'.. ' . ; ) • v? ' ) J. 

’ ' ' ; ' 

~ 1 - 

' 

. 13 i 

■. •„) ; .. : •. . . -f 

* 

■ "i. m.- rj.i: > - :'.L 






. . ' • . • , . L 

■ ■’.<> ■ : . . ■ ; > • ■ 4 . •• J " ... v.: 

P V 16 SI 9 ! i . ’ (. 1 . BOf e . >1 p r ■ OWj ‘ O j Z '■ : C£&& 

. ' . •' ■ : 3 /:.! 1 ' : i t r 

■ j ■ . 

' 

, ii 7 r ’ ' V > !■ *.rj n : 7. f 7''kf 



d •. Id ' < 

' a. r . f f, .. 

-iff 





) i..' i * x 





. ■ ' v r : ■ < , :• •:. r ,7, .. .O' ■ 

... - * • [ ■ 







94 


and enthusiasm on the part of the students. 

These considerations led the author to conduct his 
experiments in the district high school in which he had 
previously been employed as a teacher of mathematics—a 
modern, medium-sized school situated 75 miles north of 
Toronto, in an area whose economy derives mainly from dairy 
farming and small industry. 

2. The Tests . In addition to the tests constructed 
specifically for the purpose of this thesis, a wider 
variety of standardized tests was employed to give an 
adequate coverage of the subjects 1 abilities and to allow a 
basis for comparison and interpretation of the new battery. 
The standardized battery may be listed as follows: 

1. Differential Aptitude Tests--Burnerical Ability. 

2. Differential Aptitude Tests—Space Relations. 

3. Dominion Advanced Group Test of Learning Capacity. 

4. Gordon Personal Inventory. 

5* Hoitzman-Brown Survey of Study Habits and 
Attitudes. 

6. Kuder Preference Record--Vocational Form. 

7. Minnesota Counseling Inventory. 

8. Otis Quick Scoring Mental Ability Tests—New 
Edition—Form Gamma. 

9. Revised Minnesota Paper Form Board Test. 

10. Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal. 









;j r f* 0 ' i I ' ' - ■ ■ :n ' h 

, . r ' , ; ■" J, •. : :.rJ JX O.I: JG, OQ "Of : ;S£:!l ; 

L ; , . ;; [•>'-' i ciX> JaiXa lb .>rb ol: 

:o ■' • r. G .G'- ‘ '-:o^ : y;x 

O'- v i .te > X'O l „ 

, > ' ' n ; . . . *i 

O O 0 

■ v ‘ ■ :> ■ r> . .• ■ I civ o - vr aX vxl ' li . :' 


a$ cr : ’ * l ? ? ^ J '>-- '. j ~0 00* ‘Cj’V 

f; : o . 'ox! ol bn- oo -o'. ( X V: ° ; 

■ • ' ■. '. . . ■ 

- >• ■ : ;: - - ] . X » 1 ; C : t lG L J ' • ' ' .1; ' , i 


~-r '■■■■ : f. t : i t . . , ;’o.: • • ' ■ ' * 

: ■■ 


ft 


■ 













95 


Brief descriptions of each test, including statis¬ 
tical data are listed in Appendix B. 

The experimental battery included the tests listed 
in Table 3. Each test will be discussed in turn as it is 
encountered in the experimental work. 

Some additional non-standardized sources of informa¬ 
tion are included in Table 4* The three questionnaires may 
be found in Appendix B. 


Table 3 

Experimental Tests 


Name of Test 

Method of Testing 

Time 

Allowance 

1. Finite Difference 
Number Series, 

Level I 

Group (main study) 

Individual (pilot 
study) 

70 min. 

40 min. 

2. ^ap-Filling 1 Test 

Individual 

45 min. 

3. Geometry Problems 

Group (main study) 

15-20 hrs. 


Individual (pilot 
study) 

25 hrs. 

4. Number Series, 

Level II Tests 

Individual 

20 min. 

5. Ordering 

Individual 

30 min. 














0 


, 




■ * . 1 ■ ; ■ : i - - 

■ 


- 








: j ■ 


' . Lu 









. ;• ' w 




,, l ■ ." “.'c ■■ 




ntjVsfi | O ,-J v (■ I 0O V..>V' 

. ■ . \ 

; r .:V 






■ ■ - ■ • - 

■■ .-< • 












. 

t 








Table 4 

Non-Standardized Sources of Information 


96 


Name 

Content 

1. Ontario School Record 

School marks, health record, 
teachers ! reports from grade 


one on. 

2. Questionnaire A 

Socio-economic data. 

3. Questionnaire B 

Subject preferences, level 
of aspiration. 

4* Questionnaire C 

Extended questionnaire 
concerning variables which 
might influence mathematical 
performance. 


2. Testing Programme , The autumn investigations 
extended over 11 weeks—from the opening of school in 
September through to mid-November. The group tests were 
administered in the school library, where standardized 
testing procedures could be simulated. Individual tests 
were administered in the guidance office, which was turned 
over to the experimenter for his private use during his stay 
in the school. 

The battery of standardized tests and questionnaires 
required approximately 7 hours for the students to complete. 
The geometry tests were administered intermittently during 
the regular geometry periods (taught by the experimenter) 











. ... . •; , - V ■ » b 

‘i V ■ 

, 


. . 

:; . . • . . - ■--* ■ ' ■ ' ■ '' ■' ‘ 

>•', •> •• •- . , .... ., - ' ~ i I) . ■ .f •: 13 i) 3 '■'•••; * 

. *: j ;)d; m'J, £ j ”5. 5 : fi litlb.y 

I ■ . < o x. 

- 

■- : -'O 

. > ;•> ri';.> . 

• 

. ... :■< ‘ > :< J -.,..; y; ::: , ■ i ■ ■ *•:i A/ys.crrr; qx V T 

: . . . ... ■ . } • , h o.i • 1 / O ■ 

.< .. . q , ;• ox -i .l . -.:.pvj 








97 


and represent from 15 to 20 hours of the student*s time. 

The individual tests required a further two hours of testing 
per subject. Thus the conclusions reached in this thesis 
are based on data representing approximately 25 hours of 
testing time per subject. 

Preliminary Statistical Data 

Table 5 presents some statistical data concerning the 
experimental population. It is apparent, and natural, that 
the grade 12 group, as a result of two additional years of 
maturity and school selection, should be markedly superior 
in the mean scores on all tests. Some idea of the overall 
intellectual status of the group may be gauged from the fact 
that the median score for the grade 10 group centered near 
the 50th percentile on the appropriate norms for that grade, 
while the median grade 12 score usually registered somewhere 
above the 60th percentile on the grade 12 norms. While 
recognizing the dangers in applying foreign norms, it is 
probably safe to consider the grade 10 group to be near 
average, and the grade 12 group to be somewhat above average 
in general ability. 

Matched Groups 

In several instances it was desirable to compare 
performances at the grade 10 and grade 12 levels. However, 
since the grade 12 group was, to some extent, superior in 













t ■ . ■ : . : • . 

„ 





,) • ... . 







kf'ipa.tivioocsQO j*d ;b .Ooicrrs bfftoa f .)-Jao&a*xq ^ 


. 

s' 1 ) j ' ■ 

■ „ 

. 

,■ I 

- , ■. i . >.■ x " ' ^ - 




. • • - . I 

. 

* ... 

■j C • j. f‘f :.‘i . ‘1 ' ' 

. 




Means and Standard Deviations of Grade 10 and 12 Groups on 

Standardized Tests 


98 


OJ 

f—j c^- 
CA 

0 

T* II 
c6 

Percentile Hank 
of Median Score 


60 

60 


CM 

1A 


-d* 

O- 

99 

U ^ 










o 


O 

CO 


M3 • 






00 

CA 

rH 

rH 

rH O 

"LA 

v£» 

r— 

CO 


rH 

♦ 

• 

• 

• s 

o 

• 

• 

• 


P 

CO 

vO 

rH 

CO 

O 

o 

o 

o 


CO 



CM 


rH 

rH 

H 

rH 






CO • 








CM 

M3 

d Q 

M3 

O' 


CM 


CM 

• 

• 

* 

>5 £ 

• 

o 


« 


rH 

pH 

-d- 

pH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


s 

rH 

CM 

1A 

I>-pH 

1A 

pH 

M3 

-d - 



pH 



pH 


pH 




id 0 










d d 










erf o 










Cd o 










CO 










0 










rH d 


O 

1A 


O 


IA 

IA 


•H Crf 
-P *H 


1A 

-d" 


1A 


-d* 

IA 


d tj 









o 

0 0 









H CA 

O g 









vO 

d 









0 

0 <H 









tj i! 

PH o 









crf 










d S 

- 









P 



O 


CM • 



CM 

00 


o 

rH 

CM 

• 

1>- 

<9> 

sO 

9 

.8 

mo 

M3 

• : 

-=± 

CA 

O 

• 


P 

O' 

M3 

O 

CO 

o 

o 

CO 

CO 


CO 



CM 


rH 

pH 








GO • 







SO 

u\ 

M3 

d o 

CO 

CM 

vD 

o 


O 

• 

9 

• 

>5 s 

• 


* 

• 


pH 

ai 

co 

u\ 


O'' 

CM 

rH 

CO 



o 

rH 

0A 

ITvCM 

-d- 

o 

IA 

CA 



rH 



rH 


H 








0 




rH 






&0 




Crf 






<rf 














-P 




rH 


rH 



d 

crf 




Crf 


Crf 

£0 


0 

p 




Q 

rH 

O 

-P 

<y 

to 

CO 


-P 


•H 

Crf 

•H 

•H 

H 

crf 



CO 


d 

•rH 

fciO 

P 


rH 

crf 


0 


0 

-P 

O 

Crf 

d 

P 

-p 


E-i 

G? 

e 

Crf 

rH 

w 

O 

1 

O 



M 

d 

P 

O 


•H 

d 

to 





CO 

d 


d 

O 

0 



m 



o 


•H 

TO 

£ 



•H 

Eh 

Eh 

d 

d 

s 

-p 

d 



-P 

<U 

< 

£ 

-p 

O 

crf 

•H 



O 

P 

Q 

o 

CO 

P 

3 
















































99 


natural ability, comparisons would have had little meaning. 

In this connection, two groups of 30 students—one at each 
level (Table 6)—were matched in the following way: 

(a) Person to person matching on the Otis IQ. 

(b) Equal group means and standard deviations on the 
Dominion IQ. 

(c) Group equality in some lesser variables, such as, 
proportion of good and poor algebra students, proportion of 
town and rural students, and scores on study habits. 

Reference to their respective norms indicates that 
median scores In both groups ranged above the 60th percen¬ 
tile on most tests. It would be feasible then, to consider 
the differences in performance to be due to the effect of 
two years of maturation and experience. 

It is of considerable interest to enquire just exactly 
what change occurs in this two year period with respect to 
mental performance in general. Both groups had reached the 
stage of formal mental operations, so that in one way, w© 
would expect no new type of mental function or operation to 
emerge. On the other hand, the mean raw score on certain 
standard IQ tests rises until the early twenties. However, 
this score reflects the result of experience to a degree 
which cannot be accurately determined. 

The significance of differences between correlated 
means was calculated for the matched grade 10 and 12 groups 








dO'd 

[' ;. V 

r ’ l 

£ ! ■ V 

< . *' i, 

L < 

• 

■ 

i 








■ ■ ) 


< 

: ' .... ; IK 


• 




; 





V- V.J ■ 

' 

-- ’ • 

-I , 











: )t[ (j j 

l ■ J - 






. 


D - . 































* 


. 


, 


■ 



n 








o-in r ; c . 


f 


: • J- 

■ 




; ij.lJ 

















. 




i 



. 




■ v \) ] 

ft- d 


r- r; 

, >: 



•* ‘Ikd 


j ' ’ ■ 






• '■ odd ;. • - - I:.- :•. noron ^: I 

- 0 * • • ' 1 'O : 

• o '■ v. :; t vo . <. ;.i o on. non d o n , 3, 'ju; r;"’ o 

' ' ■ \ * . J' ’ : • ' f " ' 

: a cd :• ; • 7 d: s£Jonon.1 n r '-in ” 2: - 

J ‘j ■ < ; i ■: ■ . ' 1 C 1 ’ \ • D . •, i' 

■■ 


Ki d DS ' In; ■ ,l 1)1 il 8q JO' 

c; 

no i n » ■- j . ; -in Inn 

f.d )0' 

, . • -1 

< ' . ■ >£4 *. 

oqo 1. ,/ r- .m Jj>$ .o'.,. 

.•> 


: k j fin ' 'j; 

O D * \.-i' ID:: 0.0 ''') O' 

j.:.u.;ow 


. 

v. d o: jo -ed m; 

, 





. ’ •/ ; < , l J ,'k. /‘j 

\ I/.; C' odd 1 Id 

r i ?. ■. :.!: i . i 


o 

• ■; ‘id J‘I.in 

or .. ;. - 

‘.con o.Mb' 


» - j i 

'■ .[ / ;.K>K o i'of; 

.. ■, Koldwj 



0 





Means and Standard Deviations for Matched Group 


100 



Significance 

of Difference 

in Means 


Not sig. 

Not sig. 

60 

•H 

ro 

-P 

o 

s 

o 

60 

♦H 

CQ 

-P 

o 

Not sig. 


Sig. at 

.01 level 



• 

o 










s 










o 

o 


vO 


00 




C\J 

o 

rH 

vO 

OJ 

H 

vO 


A- 

OJ 

rH 

• 

• 

• 


« 

• 



iH O 

Q 

vO 

sO 

o 

oo 

O 

vO 


O 

PA 

(D 

CO 



OJ 


rH 



rH 

T5 II 










Ctf 










in S 










P 


• 










m « 










fn O 









OJ 

s 

PA 

-d 

o 

ON 

ON 

1A 

vO 


1—1 


• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 


S 

!>— rH 

PA 

oo 

ON 

ON 

co 

vO 

ON 



rH 

OJ 

-d 

o 

PA 

o 

_d 

1A 






rH 


rH 





• 

o 










B 










co 

co 


-d 

ao 



sO 


o 

-d 

-d 

rH 

u\ 

1A 

o 


rH 


rH 

• 


• 

• 

• 

e 


• 

o 

P 

vO 

vO 

ON 

a- 

sO 



o 

i—i 

CO 



H 






o 










© PA 




















CvJ II 










in fS5 


• 










CQ « 










o 






aJ 



o 

s 

PA 

CO 

vO 

a- 

a- 

_d 

PA 


H 


• 

• 

# 

« 

« 

* 



S 

1A rH 

rH 

OJ 

co 

ON 

co 

1A 

_d 



rH 

OJ 

-d 

o 

PA 

o 

-d 

1A 






H 


rH 





© 




rH 






w 




aS 






< 




•H 










-P 






rH 

rH 



a5 



Ih 



Ctf 

a5 



ft 


CQ 

© 



O 

O 

rH 

OP 

CO 


-P 

© 


-p 

•H 

•H 


IH 



•H 

a5 


CQ 

60 




aj 


,Q 

rH 


© 

O 

© 

-P 

d 

-P 


a$ 

P 


Eh 

rH 

§ 

05 

o 

O 

OP 

ta 

8 



O 

p 

ft 

•H 

CQ 

H 


P 



a 

!25 

CO 

Cl 

© 



O 



O 



•H 

jH 

GQ 

"d 

© 




EH 

Eh 

S 

8 

•H 


-P 



rd 

<u 


o 

•H 

-P 

+3 

o5 



o 

P 

P 

P 

s 

O 

CO 



Percentile rank of median score 



































n 






i 






101 


using the method set out by Garrett (1953, P* 226). As 
shown in the table, the Watson-Glaser is the only test 
which shows a significant difference; in other words, as 
far as mean scores in spatial and numerical ability are 
concerned, the two groups could be considered as samples 
drawn from common or equivalent populations. This problem 
is reconsidered in later sections. 


77 7 7 .L ■■ 



CHAPTER VIII 


LEVEL ONE PERFORMANCE AND GROUP PRESSURE 

Level I ability was previously defined as the contin¬ 
ued reiteration of the following sequence: performance 
of operations, storage of results, performance of operations 
on results. While progress in such a sequence would seem 
to have no obvious natural upper bounds, the theory sugges¬ 
ted that it would be possible to induce artificial upper 
bounds in a variety of ways. One of these restrictions 
arises from the fact that logical behaviour-—manifested in 
this case as Level I performance—is very much a function of 
situation, and the theory suggests that an individual 
embedded in a certain social context may prefer to be 
’illogical* rather than deviate too radically from the 
group. 

Lawfulness and Level One Performance 

If the brain performs mental operations by the 
activation of phase sequences through a hypercathexis 
powered central facilitation, it Is reasonable to believe 
that primitive mental operations will be performed—under 
constant conditions of motivation and attention (i.e., 
within a fairly small time interval)—at a consistent rate. 
This would be, in fact, a special statement of Spearman*s 






- 



i 



j . •' "7 


‘ ■ ■■ ■ : . ! 


! 


k\J< 




j. V'V 


jj 








o 


! . ’ 


■ 








■ : 




AuJ &CvC 


') :ir 


,vIxl-tt 







103 


law concerning constant output. It would be a further 
reasonable assumption that a Level I-type task might be 
constructed in which ’step’ and ’time 1 are related in a 
manner sufficiently definite to allow mathematical formula¬ 
tion. Furthermore, in view of the fact that the decay of 
’storage’ might well involve exponential functions--to use 
an analogy from the theory of electrical circuits--!! would 
not be surprising to find that the ’step-time’ function is 
essentially exponential in form. 

After experimenting with several standard tests, the 
author discovered that a special variety of the time-honoured 
’number-series *--constructed by means of the calculus of 
finite differences (Hartree, 1949, p* 38)—seemed to satisfy 
the lawfulness requirement. Consider, for example, the 
following sequence of numbers: 

1 , 3 , 6 , 12 , 23 , 

The method of obtaining the number required to fill the 
blank is illustrated in Fig. 13. 


Stage 3 
Stage 2 
Stage 1 


/ \ / V 

A/\/ \7 . 

2 3 6 11—»18 


/\/\/\ / V 
1 3 6 12 23- 


* 41 


Fig. 13. A three-stage finite difference number series. 












•J'i ;ri: ■ 

. ; . i • ■ 

| • . 



■■ < 

; ■ : C ' ' 



’ " ' V 

r ' h> 


• ■. 


■\"-Vr 

•!'t V 

. 

: ^ 

; ' . ■ ' ; 


1 :• ( ' . f. i " 


' ' ■ '■ ‘ ■' ■'' ? 



.■ V • . .O' > 

■ - j C 5 ' 


... . * , •• 

j ' •.'..’mV; i ; <•• 

: • i 1 


* 

, *>:.■ ... i. v-.i: 

; : >.■■/ • v .... ; . - -:■> :0 


, • ■ ■ •: -r$ 



- 

; ,, / .j 


, ■ , • fijO V: . ) • ’ j'' J j 


jolno, Oils '"’ : 0 -:'C^ 

.p ‘Xj 

. ** ..... ! ; . . ' ■t , ■ ., 



> ■A , ' ! ' 

'vo. .;•: v.f.i/ -vK 3 xrtJ^x 


{ . ■■ is ,c c-fr< ' 1 






... 


t 





-I . : 1 

O’ J • 





104 


Each number in the second row (from the bottom) in 
Fig. 13 represents the difference between the two numbers 
in the first row which are immediately below and to either 
side of it. When situations of this kind are dealt with 
mentally, (i.e., without the aid of a means to record 
successive rows), and when the rule-of-solution is provided, 
the sequence of mental operations becomes: subtraction, 
storage, subtraction-on-results stored,, This is, then, a 
rather simplified Level I situation. Designating each 
complete row as one * stage f , we could then refer to the 
series as a three-stage number series. 

Preliminary studies of individual solutions led to 
the belief that this type of series possessed the useful 
property that the time required for solution 1 could foe 
expressed by the equation 

t=k x e k 2 S 

Here S is an integer representing the number of * stages* in 
the series, and and k 2 are constants depending on the 
particular individual (personal constants). 

^The equation represents the natural solution time 
for a N-stage series, i.e., the solution time under relativ¬ 
ely constant conditions of attention and motivation. 

2 

While the equation gives a good approximation to the 
required time for the solution of individual series of com¬ 
parable arithmetical difficulty, the lawfulness of the 
*stage-time» curve is greatly increased by averaging the 
required times of a number of such series at each level. 





I 


■ 


SIX. 


) ■ " : ■ ■ ■' f r 

o• c! ■ 

vv. r:.. r < /.( • I *.'<£. ■ 1 . x 

: , „ . i: ' ■; . * * 

< ' : ' - : ■ 1 ■ ' ! 

: ■ , or,.; ; v ; -r ■. t lo ■ crjr.r :xi ;r 

■ , 

* 

... > , : : ix:r ■ : f >0 

" •' ■ ■ - : 

■ I f z ' l i . f ' ' ‘ I ' X * 1 ' 

- ' ■ ' 3 ' ' 

['i.roo' ' h • ' i ' ' : [ ; 0 13 - ' 

.DO to Z'Xu?) Zri'X OO 1.000 O.) O OXS? 


' 


• r, £,' .. ' J ' ' ■■ ; ' l '■ 

, , 1 • 

: ;.l.i.':..;.' ’V : : . . ■ r-x 1 




>;'o,; BJ.oooroo'-o;;: 

, . ■ . 


o tipi 

• ■ .. ■ ■ 


coo: 'i >..o : ■ ■: : 

Oo . O ■ ■ t o ' Ao> ; ' :■' ; ; r.O0 i 0 f! J': 5 .OO r £ Jj.Tp'Q* 

.. 

■ 5 ■ ■ ' ' - 




105 

This equation allows us to predict the time required 


for the solution of an N-stage sequence, provided that the 
solution times corresponding to any other two series N^, Nj 
are known. The equation also coincides with the theory in 
that it predicts no limit in Level I performance, since a 
series of any difficulty (say S^) could be * solved* 
provided that the quantity of time 

t=k x e k 2 S k 

was available, and that motivation toward, and attention to, 
the problem continued throughout this time interval. 

It occurred to the author that the finite difference 
number series could prove to be immensely useful in the 
study of Level I performance in group situations, since 
once the constants and kg were determined for each 
subject, the * stage-time* function would be completely 
determined, and deviations from the theoretical predicted 
values could be attributed to group influences (assuming 
continued motivation). 

Experimental Design 

1. Hypotheses and Time Limits . The experiment 
centered about two hypotheses: 

1. H-^: The equation t~k^_ e^S^ gives, for our experimental 
group, a workable approximation to the time t required for 
the solution of an N-stage series. 






j; *>, »-ji .L; ' 


a l/l H'p:-- 


t 





106 


In order to test this hypothesis, a battery of number 
series was constructed beginning with one-stage problems and 
gradually increasing in difficulty to 7-stage problems. 

2. H 2 : Group pressure results in the creation of artificial 
upper bounds in the performance of many students. In other 
words, a substantial proportion of the upper bounds shown 
in individual performance profiles do not result from the 
imposed time limits or lack of ability, but rather from 
forces originating within the group situation. 

Since the theoretical curve is determined by two 
points, the testing of required that each »stage-time* 
curve should contain at least three points, (including one 
check point), i.e., that all subjects should have adequate 
time to solve at least one, two, and three-stage problems. 
Moreover, it was further desirable that some of the 
individual curves would contain as many as four, five or 
more points a 

At the same time, the examination of required that 
at least part of the battery should be administered in a ' 
group situation. Moreover, since the theory indicated that 
the amount of *guessing*3 exhibited would be a function of 

^The term *guess* is used here, and throughout this 
section in a rather special sense. An individual will be 
said to have *guessed* at the solution of a particular series 
if he offers an incorrect solution, and if it is evident 
from his * stage-time* graph that he has spent an inadequate 
amount of time attempting the solution. 




3 <:;t r . ;; i v />v -v. ‘ 


M ; . , 0"'i 3 - 3 ' W,iaaL :-&<i b > J ■■ - «*** 5 

■■■ 

" ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ • 

. 

• . 

% ' \ •. : ■ : ‘ : ' • 

. 

- ;■ ■ • ■ ■ ■ ■■■ 

- ... ■ ‘i ■ ■ • • 

; i Li L; •>: ) t - ; 

•■■■•"■ 1 ; • • “ 

. : . J . V,; ■ . , :: > - rf - ■ ' ‘ 


■ 




, 

, 

j . )• £ ■ • ■ ■ - - : : 

• j P I. . I.f ' " ' 

. • - ' 


• -v, J : , - - ‘ / • C 

■ ■ - : * ■ 

. 

.• ) ,>; .r, ,. L >.v 


' ( 


■ . .i * V 1 


107 


group pressure, which in turn, would depend on the overall 
group performance, it seemed desirable to set up a gradient 
of group pressure by suitably controlling the time allowance 
at each stage-level. Thus, if meagre time limits allowed 
few students to complete a particular question, the pressure 
exerted on the slower student to *guess* would likely be less 
that if the time allowances were so ample that all except 
the student in question were able to complete the given 
series. Specifically, it was decided to control the time 
limits so that the number of students who would have suffi¬ 
cient time (at successive stage-levels) to offer a correct 
solution would decrease.^" The prelininary experience with 
individual curves was used to estimate time limits to fit 
as closely as possible to the following experimental design. 

Table 7 

Experimental Design: The Effect of Group Pressure on 
Level I Performance 


Stage 



w alternate arrangement might have been to keep the 





















■trjJJi'’ ! ; ;0' r Xv.- •' ; rr ; i ,' Ip 

: ; - ■) ... o. ■ 


( 


fj. J. 


I 






> 


O'J fi i 


■) 







■ • i 


0 






V 



X f 







108 

The symbols employed in this table may be interpreted as 
follows: 

A: Percentage of students who have sufficient time- 

according to their theoretical curves and the time limits 
imposed—to offer correct solutions at the level specified. 

B: Percentage of students who have inadequate time 

to offer a correct solution. 

C: Proportion of students in category B who ’guess’, 

i.e., who obtain an incorrect solution in a time which is 
considerably less than the theoretical time required for the 
solution. 

D: Proportion of subjects in category B who refuse 
to guess, and who therefore offer no solution. 

If is correct, the percentage of the ’potential* 
guessers (B) who do, in fact, guess (C) ought to decrease 
as group pressure declines (A). Thus, a necessary condition 
for the truth of Is that the should form a monotone 

decreasing sequence. 


percentage ’passing* at each level constant, (at 50% let us 
say,) and to study the guessing behaviour of the slower half. 
However, the experimental design employed here corresponds 
more closely to the normal classroom situation in which the 
students work on a set of exercises of increasing difficulty, 
with the result that the number of students completing 
successive problems steadily decreases. 






■ V ; }j ,■! -/,>• J. /. O il-'-d vV'inv:^ ■■■■:. 

j,L ■ > . I , bV< O O ■■■I. oo.biJ'd' 0 o - ‘ 0-i^ *:i’f> 

r : r • V ■*.; V- ■:> ■,/ o V o -r.: 000# 00 

• • , , v.r . , ; , ! ■ ■' 1 ;• ■' • •• ' 

j 1 * . ’ >> w ' i ■ ■ .■ ■■ ; ' - 


ou 






U *: • 0‘3 I > 


1 I •>.£ : 


L • .. . >0 

. ■■■’ a• ■;i' £: 

' . .. > ■ J n j - ■■ ■ 

} ; \ ; ! ' O' : 


, i o v v ' x ■..> > l; .1. 


l ■ ' 


' ) ’ : ■ 

■■ ■ Cj i . V i ■ ; 

• ‘x.S; ; ■ 

;i . i ■ 


: 


! - . 1 

j :;?r , 0 0 c- " O j . -i " T 00 ‘I 






■ 

■ 

■ 

r'o/dtr , :: no Ur. nb a: ntoonooolo 1 

■ or l 1 0 ©*b&xo 

■ r.'.j, J.c.r f od '0 -Jt: b Vo jj •.> i 


: 


J/O a 


j 


a;o : 
: 

• -. V V 


( . 

. 

via, oJ.o o* o: rf 

! , ) t ’ 

no 

OVj'.' "■ ' ’ ' 




109 

The question of a sufficient condition for the truth 
of H 2 is somewhat more subtle. The membership of class C 
may be divided into two categories: (a) those subjects who 
suffer forces postulated under and (b) those subjects who 
are genuinely indifferent to the correctness of their 
answers and who consequently fill in the answers in a 
haphazard way merely to * get the thing done*. Although 
there are several possible reasons for rejecting the second 
alternative, the most convincing evidence of high motivation 
came from first hand observation of the group in the exper¬ 
imental setting. 

If we suppose, however, that both 1 group pressure 1 
and ! indifferencs* play some part in the exhibited guessing 
behaviour, our main concern then, becomes which factor plays 
the prominent part. If indifferent guessing were the more 
prominent cause of membership in category G, then we would 
expect a decrease in the Restraint 1 coefficient R defined 
by the formula 

R i= n 

where i is the stage-level. On the other hand, an increase 
in where I is an integer representing a step level, must 
be interpreted as showing the dominant influence of group 
pressure. 

Thus, the first phase of the experimental design makes 







r 






v, rr; > 






d B'j c-i 


.. 


) 


j 


; Q-' o 






110 


allowances for the testing of both hypotheses, although the 
later arguments, removed as they are from the phenomena 
under investigation, do not provide the satisfaction of 
direct proofs. If group pressure causes upper bounds to 
appear, then removal from the group of an individual who 
shows guessing behaviour ought to result in a significant 
improvement in his performance—an improvement manifested 
in an upward extension of his upper bound. The second phase 
of the experiment is intended to consolidate the findings 
of the first phase by examining changes in the upper bounds 
when group pressure is removed. 

2. The Test Battery . It was pointed out that the 
prelininary investigation showed that the lawfulness of the 
relationship between time and stage increased if the value 
of t for a given S was calculated as a mean or median t for 
several problems of comparable arithmetical difficulty at 
that S. 

With this consideration in mind the following battery 


was prepared (Table 8): 




- • 


. 

*vol ,i ■. i.oo : t >„. r , r '-v '^:-v ■?■ pov i:^. ■ 

■ ' ; ■ : : \ / ' • - - ! ■ ’ < ■ •' ' r : * "■ ; 

* 

■ . ; * t >':£ ». 3 • ' : ■" ' ‘ : ' ' ' ' 

”, { ; : , A . ) ht -X.BC?9^'<T && W 





Ill 


Table 8 

Distribution of Questions by Stages in 
Number Series Test Battery 


Stages 

No. of 
Problem.s a 

Method of 
Timing 

Allowed Time 
Limit/Question in 
Group Testing 

i 

20 

Total time 
for 2 sets 
of 10. 

15 Sec. 

2 

8 

individual 

40 Sec. 

3 

k 

individual 

115 Sec. 

b 

b 

individual 

240 Sec. 

5 

k 

individual 

j 300 Sec. 

7 

b 

individual 

450 Sec. 


a The problems may be found in Appendix C. 


The group battery was administered in two individual 
testing periods, each of approximately 45 minutes duration. 
For the subsequent individual testing, the first two 
problems at stage-levels 4* 5* and 7 were used. Three 
practice series were also provided at levels 1, 3 and 5 
respectively. 

3. Testing Procedure . While part of the battery had 
to be administered as a group test, calculation of k]_ and 
required that the times for individual solutions be recorded. 













p'vi-.- % AK, 


’ 






112 


It was necessary, therefore, to devise a method whereby the 
student could keep an accurate record of his own times. 

This was accomplished by means of a large mechanical counter 
ordinarily used to keep scores at athletic games. An 
assistant had been trained previously to manipulate the 
dials (twisting a dial caused an increase of one in the 
units register), so that the device showed the time in 
seconds. The assistant checked this time against a stop¬ 
watch every 5 seconds—thus the time shown on the counter 
differed from the true time by a small fraction of a second 
at any given time. 

The items were presented on individual sheets of a 
small booklet;--tearing off the top sheet exposed the first 
question—this was in turn removed to expose the second 
question, and so on. 

At a given signal, the subject would begin a partic¬ 
ular item, recording his answer (in ink) and the time shown 
on the clock if he was a.ble to finish. When the predeterm¬ 
ined time had elapsed, the order was given to stop 
immediately, with no further writing. Then the clock was 
reset and the signal given to begin the following question. 

The series above stage one were presented in a random 
order (within each testing period) so that the subject did 
not know what the time limit would be. Moreover, since the 
subjects were not allowed to record an answer after the t ime 




'M ■'■■■■>. 




: 


' 


■:v^ 


Q & 


' 

r ' 



113 


was called, it can be said that the wrong answers do not 
result from a last-second attempt to *beat the clock 1 . 

For three days prior to the experiment, the students 
had been given short periods of training in which they 
recorded the time of intervals whose length was known to 
the experimenter. By checking the accuracy of those times, 
the author was convinced that the times recorded during the 
experiment were correct to the nearest second. 

The effect of group pressure was deliberately 
emphasized in this experiment. While solving the series, 
the student was in the normal »concentration* position, 
with the head bent toward the paper. The subjects were 
instructed to sit erect as soon as they had finished, on 
the pretext that this would give the experimenter an 
indication when to proceed to the next problem. Thus it 
was quite apparent to the slower members of the group that 
they were, in fact, falling behind. 

It is unnecessary to labour the fact that the success 
of an experiment of this kind depends to a large extent on 
the co-operation of the subjects. This was especially true 
with regard to the recorded times. It was pointed out to 
the students that their performance would not be compared 
to other students* (which was, of course, not true), and 
that the scores would not, in any event, be used to their 
disadvantage. The general enthusiasm of the group—stemming 


m 



!( 




' > 





> .1 ■ • U 




114 


from the fact that they were being allowed to participate 
in a 'psychological experiment*—convinced the experimenter 
that he was receiving full co-operation. At the end of the 
testing period, which consisted of two intervals of 45 
minutes each, there was general reluctance to terminate the 
experiment. 

In the individual testing, considerable care was 
taken to convey to the subject the idea that he could take 
as long as he wished to complete a question. Moreover, it 
was suggested that the solution would require a considerable 
amount of time, and that a correct solution was more 
valuable than a fast solution time. 

Analysis of Results 

1. Preliminary Analysis . The median time for correct 
items at each step-level was used as the subject's time at 
that level. If the subject scored no items correct at some 
level, the median time for the incorrect items was cal¬ 
culated and recorded for later use. Thus there was a 
maximum of 6 scores available for each subject. In some 
cases, of course, the subject would offer no solution at a 
particular level and there would therefore be fewer than 6 
scores for him. 

The scores were used to plot a graph between S and log 
t. Of the 106 graphs obtained, 103 exhibited a relationship 










1 


0 "i 




-- 


■ . •. o 1 ' : ' 


i' hjjjO.w 0 S X : i 


I i i 


■ 6a ■ 0" ; 






115 


which was clearly linear over the first £ stages. As a 
first analysis, each point on the graph was marked according 
to the following classification: (a) correct solution, 

(b) solution correct except for a small error which could be 
interpreted as a mistake in computation (e.g., l\2G instead 
of 427), (c) incorrect solution. Three of the graphs 
obtained in the experiment are shown in Pig. li|. 

2. The Existence of Upper Bounds . We recall that an 
individuals performance in a Level I-type task possesses an 
upper bound if the subject is unable to solve all series 
with a number of stages S^, where > S^. The distribution 
of upper bounds under the experimental time limits is shown 
in Table 9. 


Table 9 

Distribution of Upper Bounds in Level One Performance 



Stage 

No Upper 

Bound 

Shown 

Contradic- 

tory 

1 

2 

3 

k 

5 

Grade 10 

7 

22 

19 

10 

5 

0 

k 

Grade 12 

0 

7 

11 

9 

6 

0 

3 

Total 

7 

29 

30 

19 

11 

0 

7 

% (N=96) 

7 

30 

31 

20 

12 

0 

7 

Cumulative % 

7 

37 

68 

88 

100 

- 

- 





















' 

; . ■ 


V i 




: l : 




ort-i 

: '. 


& 

Y •. f - 

, 




; ..lO 





<X : ' 


: ■> • - i 



Y : • 



■ 



■ • YV 

- Y .. 

‘ n •' Or> 





■ 




. 



■ ; '■) • r 

f ' 

; ' > • 



. 






' 


. . , .. * 

~ 

. 

ry o ri r :; : ... • . .- .■ ;. 






, - 1 .■ ’ i : ; . 0 . ■■ 



■ 

■ 


' 










• . ' : '■ •• 




' ' • \ 


. 







116 



Description 


Type A 

No guessing- 
no solution 
offered when 
insufficient 
time given. 



Type B 
Guesses at 
level 4—but 
then ter¬ 
minates the 
guessing. 


Type G 
Continues 
to guess. 


Pig. 14. Three Profile Types for Level-time Curves 














































„ 





. - 












_ 


. . 













117 

In order that a true upper bound should exist, it 
was necessary that all the series containing a number of 
stages which exceeded should not be solved* If was 

not solved, but was solved for some t>l, then the 

subject did not, in fact, exhibit a true upper bound (in 
psychological sense), and the result was considered 
contradictory. The existence of true upper bounds in the 
Level I performance of 96 (of 103) of the subjects was 
clearly defined, and we can say, therefore, that all but 
7 of the individuals solved all the series up to a certain 
stage, and that having failed to obtain a solution at that 
stage, they then failed to obtain a solution at any sub- 
sequent stage. It is in order to enquire to what extent 
these upper bounds were caused by the time limits imposed. 

This question may be dealt with in two ways. An 
indirect method will allow, in addition, a check on the 
extent to which the experimental design was realized. 

Table 10 shows the percentage of subjects at each level who 
had adequate time, according to their theoretical curve, to 
offer correct solutions at the level specified. 

It is evident that the desired gradient was realized 
to a satisfactory degree. It is also apparent that the 
time limits were not the major cause of the upper bounds 
shown In Table 9 . For example, while 97$ of the subjects 
had ample time to solve stage 3 problems, only 63 $ offered 
correct solutions (Table 9). 




b'J r;\x ■ -v •'■o'. 7 ' 







'?;•'- oovioion '' ' v ;.: of.;.:or ■ 

- 

. 


■ s 1 ? ' ' 

I . •. V uOf 


■ ■ . ' 5 , . 

. ; - O -O- i: o i > iry^q 

• . , ■ ' , * 

. . ■ ■ . 1 - • ' 

' 

v/, r ,0 . i .. r-.p, : ;0 o;/ fa j l:i: r < * "•/, ' ■ . J. :i 0 


■ 

' 




. 

' 






■■.IT . . •=; ; j -.j) 


* 







o : o.o ) 

, c r J: , 






J o' ■ ' 





ol 


o: o iovol rooo :io o 


vj v ■ 

v -4 




or . \ p .. o Joo > 

Or -o; "'■I' jo 


: 

Or 


. 

„ -■ 

. . ■ - V 


■ L i. | 





,/. . J u : Jo .■ o, \t i j- f-J o.oOJv - : J. J'.OjJ 

X 


. 


. 

«;;i ; . J. 

.. OOO' 

u 1 J to V 


, 



• . . 



r; '."'.Jo JO. 










118 


Table 10 

Percentage of Subjects with Sufficient Time 
for Solution at each Stage 



Stage 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

7 

Grade 10 

100 

100 

97 

67 

29 

0 

Grade 12 

100 

100 

97 

75 

33 

0 

Total Group 

100 

100 

97 

69 

31 

0 


The problem may be dealt with more directly by 
referring back to the three graphs considered earlier 
(Fig. II 4 .). The stage-time curves tended to be divided among 
these basic types as shown in Table 11. 


Table 11 

The Relative Proportion of Profile Types 
in the Individual and Combined G-rades 



Type A 

Type B 

Type G 

Not Clearly 
Defined - 

Grade 10 

20 

22 

20 

5 

Grade 12 

14 

6 

15 

1 

Total Group 

34 

28 

35 

6 

Percentage 

N =103 

33 

27 

34 

6 




























m 





■■ "X 



?'x 


■ 







119 


The upper bound in the Type A profile was clearly 
caused by the time limits imposed. In the Type C graph, on 
the other hand, the subject had obtained an incorrect 
solution before the allotted time had elapsed, and the 
divergence of the solution times from the theoretical 
required times must be explained by some factor or factors 
other than the time limit. The Type B profile shows both 
influences, but the upper bound was set initially not by the 
time limit, but by guessing behaviour, so that these cases 
can also be regarded as showing artificial upper bounds not 
caused by the time limit. It is clear, then, that while 
restrictions in time naturally tend to cause limitations 
in Level I performance, these restrictions, in many class¬ 
room situations, may be of less importance than other forces. 

3* Guessing Behaviour in G-roup Situations . Up to 
this point we have been prodding the periphery of the 
* guessing* behaviour problem. The necessary and sufficient 
conditions for the truth of Hg were previously stated as 
follows: 

1. Necessary: the form a decreasing sequence, 

2. Sufficient: the | R^j form an increasing sequence. 

In order to determine the membership in class C, an 
exact criterion had to be established for the meaning of the 
term *guessing*. Many of the incorrect answers had 
exhausted the necessary time as calculated from the »step- 




[ . ti'lcMq - ; • , b u ■. " ’' 

v l 

i a : • ■ , . rf r •“')■ : > 

• ■ I r . j : 1: i : X ;loM X ■> V. ;n uclX;: X >a 

• • ■ . - ' u tni • ' - 

X m/ ‘‘i j;' ■ ; X. ; / .Kip' * . X : 

, 

o;j,r . x . ' XX .*: •. 1 1 ■ . i ■ -j. : • • i - ! « ! ! ’. 

■ ~ V •, X;. : ,jr ... ’ •. . V . i .. .’ • U - ■- p 

‘ 


oi 

. 

- 


J.xO 





r ; ’XX a i‘i i n'5*i 


Xo 7 ; uxm a. 

i . ' : . . 

• ' : 


0*% 


s s 

8 

is : 



; 





•:x. X':." x. >; 





* 


: ■ 


Jx'xi'-':. • 

.X:;!’Xv:: ^ v xx:xx -X X. 


' • : ' ■; ;.x o 


: . i’i X. r 


, . ■■ ■ 1 ■ ' 

"i > ■ ’ 

; XX'X' 




1 







JX'.5 x\.L X’ . "v o X., 8,;. osM nx<Svwi£ S'C-P cX woiTf.o fil 


« 

./ : r -f . x> ■ . '■ X : : n.C X:;;. J >3 ‘ 'X X ’X K XX,- j j G X'X.X ■ \ .L'biO 



120 


time 1 curve and could be interpreted as resulting from 
temporary lapses into ineffectiveness, rather than from 
»guessing* in the ordinary sense of the word. The criterion 
established was that the point representing a *guess* should 
be sufficiently below the stage-time curve that it could not 
be considered as a chance deviation from this curve. If the 
number of points was large and if we assumed ’errors’, in 
the form of deviations, to be normally distributed about the 
stage-time line, then a plausible criterion would be that 
the deviation of the »guess* should be of such magnitude 
that it could only arise 5 times in 100 by chance (i.e., 
that the deviation should be at least 1.9& times the 
standard deviations of the deviations). While the number 
of points in our case is extremely limited, the criterion 
has a definiteness which makes it useful. For most of the 
graphs—as for example, in our illustrative cases— 
inspection revealed which points represented guesses, so 
that the actual computation of standard deviations was 
required only in a few doubtful cases. 

Table 12 shows the results of the computations for 

{h} and {%) • 

It is clear that as the gradient of group pressure 
declines, the proportion of those students who have insuff¬ 
icient time for solution and who guess, also declines. At 
the same time, the proportion of students in category B who 





mv 




:c Tj n. 




-) 


f * 


. 


.K- 'O 


, • 


O *X t? Vlf LCXf| 








; 




) 


■■, > i -• \j 


■ ■ ? • 1 o 




f :> ,t ■ 


. 


i, ao e p oij r bo j * c ’v:--:r 


v 








■ 







' • 1 






•i. » 









121 


Table 12 

Guessing Under a Gradient of Group Pressure 



! Stage 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

7 

A 

100 

100 

97 

69 

31 

0 

B 

0 

0 

3 

31 

69 

100 




100 

90 

66 

40 

n 



0 

.10 

.34 

.64 

R i 



0 

.11 

.32 

1.60 


show restraint in not guessing increases with the result 
that the coefficient of relative constraint increases as 
well. 


Moreover, the decreases in the are of such 

magnitude that differences in the proportions D„ „ 

x n“ x n+l 

and D r R are significant at the .05 level, except for 

n n“ n n+l 

the pair anc * ^R-^-R^* when the small number of guesses 

at level three (N=3) fairly well precluded the possibility of 
establishing significance. In any case both the necessary 
and sufficient conditions for H 2 seemed to be satisfied. 

So far, the guessing behaviour of a special sub¬ 


group (B) of the whole test group has been examined. This 
choice was one of convenience, for it provided a well- 
defined group with which to work. However, some of the 















: L . j . 

-rjv v: ( ;to A xxx-vxvl 'J 



: .ij :. • ' • -*x. 

.■•■■■■' • '■ ■• ‘ 

„ 




. . ■ ■■■■'■ 


•X Vj v.; ■ 






i. 




■ 


... j. - j... K"C' O i iv,,,". 

"* 

. ' ■ - . . . ' ' ’ 

... . * • ■ • V • ■ ■ . t-'-: ‘ - ? 

.T: .* 

■ ■ • • ‘ - . ■. ■ .'.. . '. •.. >l .'' ' ‘ • '• <■ • • 







122 


subjects who guessed did not belong to category B, so that 
it is well to consider the guessing behaviour of the whole 
group. 

Table 13 

Total Number of Students Guessing at each Stage-Level 



2 

3 

4 

5 

7 

Number *Guessing 1 

2 

12 

37 

54 

4i 

Percentage Guessing 

Who Are Below the 






Group Median 

100 

100 

80 

72 

53 


The table indicates that the subjects who guessed at 
the lower levels were those who fell behind the group. At 
the higher stage-levels, however, some subjects of superior 
performance (relative to the group) exhibited guessing 
behaviour. 

The subjects in the latter group were often those who 
had fast initial times, and who were able to keep well ahead 
of the median group performance at the lower stage-levels. 
Prom interviews conducted in connection with the individual 
testing, it was learned that these subjects develop personal 
expectations in terms of their performance relative to the 
group. For example, the subject who had by far the fastest 
times at all levels up to and including stage l \. 3 began to 
guess at stage £, although he still had adequate time for 















K-v^ f 








,> ' 


0 . 






J 


t 




< r D' 


. 


; i 




- . ■ 


n# x ; \L 



:■ 



■ ■ 




x:.i j 0' .. 




123 


solution. When questioned about his faulty solutions at 
stages 5 and 7, he explained that his experience with the 
group had shown him that he usually could solve mental 
problems as fast as anyone in the group. In the series 
experiment* he found—true to his expectations—that he was 
the first to be finished at the lower levels* but while 
working on a stage 5 problem, he noticed that some students 
had already finished (he did not realize* of course, that 
these students had guessed). He stated that he was tem¬ 
porarily flustered* and that he began to suspect that he 
was tr making the problem harder than It really was n . 

Other students of superior performance suggested that 
they had adjusted their performance to the speed of two or 
three rivals. The slower subjects almost Invariably 
expressed their embarrassment at falling behind the group. 
Many of them admitted that they had guessed at the higher 
levels, protesting that they did not wish to *look stupid 

In summary, it was very clear that the performance 
of the group of subjects was influenced by pressures 
emanating from within the group. The first source of group 
influence was manifested as a fear of falling noticeably 
behind. For those subjects whose superior performance 
abnegated this fear, a second source of pressure was exerted 
via an expectation concerning their performance relative to 
a certain segment of the group. While the first source 


; : 


In: : 

) V . - :■■■■ a/.: 1 i 

.Vi VIi 


: ■ - i>o 1 




. r 


. 


. 

v, .. . ■ * 

■ 


. I j 

; 5 ;•> • ■ , :; ! i 




E.-v.;:= rr: tv.- 1 .:. ; U v: 

- 

7 ; 'id ' i 7 ; |, 

,o: .cc . g, o ? ‘X,;; . > g o.. <., - p;voUH & V 

; : ; ■: n; ■■•;• -•gg, go-.. ' ■ ■■ .gv. »j ■' ptios 

; . ■ , e l i '! '■ . 

r, :i . J i : . 



124 

seemed to be the most powerful, both were capable of causing 
guessing behaviour. 

4. A Closer Study of Guessing . The word ’guessing 1 
has been frequently used throughout this section to mean 
the inadequate treatment of a series resulting from an under¬ 
expenditure of time. An examination of the answers, however, 
indicated that in this, as well as in other tests to be 
considered subsequently, little genuine ’guessing 1 , in the 
ordinary sense of the word, actually occurred. To give 
concreteness to the discussion, the diagram for the example 
considered on p. 103 is reconstructed, together with a 
diagram representing a ’guess’. 



Fig. 15. A schematic representation of ’guessing’ in 
number series. 

The guess in this illustration resulted from the 
simplifying assumption that the series is a two-stage, when 
in fact, it is a three-stage series. The assumption resulted 
from taking inadequate time, either to store the first row 
of reference points or to operate on this storage. Subjects 








. 


; ... ■ >' 


i • .r.. ; o= & - 

„ 


: , ;; ■ • ■ ‘ t ' ' 

■ 




* 


.. 


r:. i .;: 1 ■ vrl J ‘ 'go .• ,t g c.cc oil* 




- 


- ■ > 1 . ■ :■ ; ’ ' r - ' * ' • 

. • ■ ::u ■ 

; ■ ■■■ , ■: . ■ ■' “■ ' 

* ■ 

. 

■ ’ \o ' 1 ' 













: 














: i g ■; ' :• V' rt;v ! ..: rr0. 


, ' 


.. 




■ S' 'V 


: 





125 


who offered the above solution for an series, usually 
treated all subsequent series as though they too were S^»s # 

In other words, a student who was under pressure to 
guess usually made what to him seemed to be a reasonable 
simplification, by ignoring part of the data. 

5. Individual Performances . The battery for 
individual testing consisted of two problems at each of the 
stage-levels j+, 5, and 7*^ Under the conditions of 
individual testing, the subject was allowed and encouraged 
to take all the time he needed; the result was a general 
raising of the upper bounds. 

We first consider two of the profiles presented earl¬ 
ier. 

We notice that the subject while extending 

his correct answers up to level 5* still exhibited guessing 
behaviour at stage-level 7. 

The distribution of the upper bounds with unlimited 
time allowance is shown in Table ll|. In order to compare, 
performance in the individual and group testing situations, 
the time limits for the latter situation were superimposed 

^It had originally been intended to employ both 
grades in the individual testing. However, the extremely 
long intervals of time required for stage-level 7 made this 
impracticable; consequently, only the grade 12 group was 
used. 






=.;• ;j.\ o' fj.r 






u 


' J ' ; '■ * 


■1C'. '■ 







.1. : 0‘i 















u '.)• K.y''JSi 0 0 











126 


Code 


Log t 



X Ind'l test. 
•O X Group test. 

--Time limit 

group test. 
Time -step 
curve. 


E.W. Gr. 12 



L i l 2 l 3 l 4 l 5 l y 


Pig. 16. Two profiles with individual and group 
results in Level One Performance. 









127 


on the former, so that it became possible to calculate the 
upper bounds which would have been exhibited had the time 
limits been imposed. Thus both subjects considered above 
would have had upper bounds at S^. The distribution of 
these upper bounds also appears in Table 14. 

Table 14 

Distribution of Upper Bounds in Level One Ability 
Under Three Different Conditions of Testing 

(N=36) 


Stage 



1 

2 

3 

k 

5 

7 or 
above 

Contradic¬ 

tory 

A. Group Testing 

0 

7 

11 

9 

6 

- 

3 

B. Individual 
testing (no 
time limits) 

0 

0 

0 

7 

12 

17 

0 

C. Individual 
testing (time 
limits as in A). 

0 

0 

3 

23 

10 


0 


The upper bounds exhibited in the individual testing 
situation seemed to be higher (significantly) than those in 
the group situation. The null hypothesis that the distribu¬ 
tion of upper bounds was independent of the testing situation 
was tested (for A and C) by the sign test (Siegel, 1956, 
p # 68) and was rejected at the O 01 level of significance. 

A substantial part of the raising of the upper bounds 














O O ' i 







r j ' j ' 




$ (, 


\ ! 







Si ') 









: 


,( 


"X ©n 




.o 




\ - j 





128 


resulted from a decrease in guessing, particularly at the 
lower levels.^ There was also a decrease—again at the 
lower levels—of those points which represent incorrect 
answers, and yet which result from a complete consumption of 
the available time (these were earlier attributed to 
temporary lapses in efficiency). 

The distribution of finite upper bounds under 
category B is somewhat disturbing, for from the point of 
view of the theory, no natural upper bounds ought to appear 
if the student is given sufficient time. However, while 
guessing behaviour is reduced in this face-to-face testing 
situation, it is by no means eliminated. Many students 
seem to carry their performance expectations (in terms of 
time) into the individual testing situation, so that, they 
manifest guessing behaviour even under the strongest assur¬ 
ances from the experimenter. Again, it is likely that some 
students would be more self-conscious concerning their slow 
performance in face-to-face situations, than if they are 
working in the group. Indeed, the author would not be 
tempted to conclude that guessing effects tend to be less in 

^Since the times obtained in situation 0 continued to 
provide a good fit to the*stage-time* curve obtained In 
situation A, the effects of practice could not have been 
large enough to contribute substantially to the general 
raising of the upper bounds. Actually the theoretical curve 
gave a close fit to the observed values for the first 5 
levels; at level 7, however, the theoretical curve tended to 
overestimate the observed values. 



■ : ' ,X r ; ■■ - 


'O' r..; 


r O J, . •! O 0 000- 0' 7 r >. ,• .0 "707,'i b'0‘. X‘ 0 bOi 

■ ;■ 

- ■ . i-i • • 1 -■ : v 

- . : j >. • ... ’ o' ; : - . <. o ■ 

■ . •. 1: t ■ ■ ■ ■ ' -' 

.o j 




. o, or 'J roro : : 

. 

■ 7 i! 

ol iu . : J 

\j 7 " oi c ■■ -■ o' ~ . . 

> i ■ 

/ - : o. ,j as) • 


,.' j. 


oX,i.i; "j X: o r . o ■.. v oo i . o '. 

c : i v-c ~ 7 ’ X n-' l: "■ 

-. • . ‘ i . 

c; . : / •: , , X,, . ; ... -• ' ■ ■ .' 7 ; ■ ' : 

1 ' ' O j' ‘I ' ' ■' -7 0 ' ' ' 

. ... ... ... O — ' ' ' ■ 

UO L ‘'.X o j?X •.) ' " • - 

■ ; ‘o.. 7 -v r•:) ;; ■ ..o 7‘1 ~ . 7 X ■ ol .;> o *: 0 'O: O'J"7.7q 

. 


OO -SO! 


1 7 0 7 .1 ■:) C j O '■ 


;7. ,i7 ; J' 7 ’>.n• > 07 r; . oJ 


.7 ; •: i ' ; .. ■ - • ‘ ■' ' 

j.0 X- 




cph 




' . 1 : . ' 


./•:■ 7 


* • 


X 




129 

T face-to-fac© T situations in general—an experiment reported 
later shows that momentary ®sets ! can be induced in the 
face-to-face situation which result in extreme displays of 
guessing* What we can conclude is that in this particular 
experiment* it was possible to make significant reductions 
in the amount of guessing manifested by the subjects. 

Further Statistical Considerations 

1. Reliability Estimates * The fact that the points 
at successive levels fit closely to a straight line* itself 
offers some evidence for the reliability of the series at 
each level* However, a more direct calculation was 
possible, because the items--at least above stage one—were 
timed individually. The reliability coefficient at stage- 
level one was determined by calculating a product-moment 
coefficient of correlation between the average time per 
series, determined by dividing the total time of each sub¬ 
test (10 questions) by 10. At stage-level two, the median 
time for the odd-numbered series was correlated with the 
median time for the even-numbered series. Beyond S 2 9 the 
frequency of errors and the occurrence of upper bounds made 
the calculations impossible. However, it is probably safe 
to assume that reliability coefficients of the same order 
would exist at these upper levels. 




1 


■ ■ • •••• ■ ■- nl 

. : . ’ , . \ • . , 0 J - 

■ 

' 

.* t: ;?o ' ■ ■ ■ ■ _ 

* . . . 

; • » . ■' • ' 1; t I: . . ■■■ • . • ; ■ 

. 

* 

* 70 . jo: jv. avci jo noJ:d o j.oo,ooo ‘s.o UK‘ : 'vCot"s.\io 00 


- .07 

0 J . I-"- o 









. 

, > 


. 




4 . 

' i O'.-:. 

;.. 

ooo,;^ 





) J . ?, • 

J -0 


^ i KS 

■ ■ . 

j • 0 L 

i > A : 

o; 

, 


• 

■ ■: -i v 1 ; 

. 



• 

. 

. 


■ 



JO: 0: 0 




3 


J j J 0" i'l 


V .!>;.•:• :iy J f i _• 



■ 

1 > HO 

* 


•■?. '007 j 

, .' J- :.[ 

■ ; o J..JO t rfw 

‘I . ;• 


• 

i.O i 

. j f 





... ' rid 

j ijj •' od 






. 


• 

qsr . o.O.O 

... 

ioloco r 



130 


Table 1$ 

Reliabilities for One-Stage and Two-Stage Problems 
in Level One Number Series 



Grade 10 (N=67) 

Grade 12 (N=36) 

Split-half 

.70 

• 7k 

S 1 

Corrected by 

Spearman-3rown 

cn 

CO 

• 

.85 

Split-half 

.73 

.76 

s 2 

Corrected by 
Spearman-Brown 

1A 

CO 

• 

.87 


The reliability of the whole battery at both levels 
was estimated by means of the Spearman-Brown formula 
(Garrett, 1953, p. 34D- 

2. The Constants k i and k? » The ! time-step 8 equation 
can be written in the form 

log t=k 1 +k 2 S 

Mathematically, k-j_ is the intercept of the straight line on 
the log t axis—it represents the time for one-stage 
problems corrected by means of the general configuration of 
the points constituting the straight line* Since the line 
often passed through the initial point, a very high 
relationship between Lq and kq would be expected, so that the 
product moment coefficient of correlation of *93 is not 
surprising* Moreover, since no direct estimate of the 











>, r 


■ 


; . ' s . . 







.. ■ . ■ i . ’ - 


•. :r 


'' " .-‘I*. ..)• 








- 

... . 

■ 

> 

. 

•/,. ; ... ■ ,■ V — ",r.A w 30X. cd 

; ; - ' I ' ■ 

■ 

. - 


"ti: oXd o • ■;: 






131 


reliability of is available, we will assume that k-^ has 
the same degree of reliability as the closely related L^, 

The constant kg is the slope of the stage-time curve, 
and represents the rate at which log t increases from level 
to level. Here, no direct estimate of the reliability of 
kg was possible. 

The values of and kg were computed from the graph 
for each subject, and a further investigation was made 
concerning the psychological meaning of these constants. 
Table 16 presents means and standard deviations of k^ and 
k 2 for the matched groups. (The results for the whole 
groups were comparable.) 


Table 16 

Means and Standard Deviations of k^ and kg for 
the Matched Groups 



Grade 1G 

Grade 12 

Total 

Mean k^ 

6.41 

6.85 

6.63 

S.D. k x 

2.28 

2.78 

2.59 

Mean kg 

46.5 

47.5 

47.0 

S.D. kg 

9.60 

10.9 

10.3 













132 


Table 17 

Correlations Between kj, k 2 and Otis for 
the Matched Groups 


Grade 10 

Grade 12 

Total 

k i 

k 2 

k i 

k 2 

k i 

k 2 

-.63 

.35 

-.63 

.33 

-.63 

.33 


The constant k^ represents the speed of performing 
subtractive mental operations with little storage, and 
undoubtedly depends upon the hypothesized attention-cathexis 
or mental energy which the subject has at his disposal. 

This ability does not seem to change much between the grade 
10 and grade 12 levels; in fact, the data show a slight ad¬ 
vantage (not significant) in favour of the grade 10 group. 

This would suggest that once the stage of formal mental 
operations is reached, the »peak f attention-cathexis level 
tends to stabilize, so that advances in mental performance 
result primarily from improved strategy (i.e., advantageous 
deployment of existing hypercathexis) rather than from an 
increased speed of mental operation (increased hypercathexis). 

Since the speed of performance for simple mental 
operations would be proportional to the available hyper¬ 
cathexis (or mental energy), it is not surprising that a 
fairly high correlation existed between k^ and Otis IQ. 






















■ . 









133 


It is probable that this coefficient is contaminated some¬ 
what due to inequalities in arithmetical training and 
experience. In a later experiment a »pure* mental operation 
(i.e., not influenced by previous experience), yielded 
coefficients with the Otis in the neighbourhood of .80. 

The constant k^ 9 which again showed no significant 
change from the grade 10 to the grade 12 groups, probably 
should be interpreted as representing a storage function. 

The barely significant (.05 level) coefficient of corre¬ 
lation between k£ and the Otis suggests that the individual 
who scores high on the Otis performs the initial simple 
mental operations much more rapidly than the slower subject, 
with the result that there is a slight tendency for him to 
show a greater proportionate increase in time required for 
solution from step to step. However, since k^, in contrast 
to k^, lacks an independent existence, arguments employing 
this constant can only claim second-order plausibility. 

Summary 

Two main results emerge from this investigation. In 
the first place, it’is clear that the formula provided a 
workable estimate of the comprehension time for the number 
series constructed by the calculus of finite differences. 
Graphs obtained ingroup and individual testing situations 
corroborated this finding. Not only does this have 




r t 


. >r 



U ij 



i: / c 


i'\ 



o vfl 


b : i-odo^i >? 





134 

practical value in that it provides a measure against which 
group-induced perturbations in a special type of cognitive 
behaviour can be studied, but it has theoretical v alue in 
that the equation constants (k^ and kg) can be given further 
psychological meaning. 

The constant k^, representing the speed at which a 
simple type of mental operation is performed, correlated 
highly with the Otis IQ. The energy theory proposed in the 
earlier sections would suggest that the speed of mental 
operations depends upon the amount of attention-cathexis 
available—so that the observed high correlation indicates 
that Otis IQ is substantially a measure of the average 
quantity of attention-cathexis which the subject brings to 
bear on the mental task. Under f steady state 1 conditions-- 
high motivation, and short intervals of time--mental 
performance was fairly constant, yielding reliability 
coefficients of the order of .85# 

The constant k 2 suffers in that it is secondarily 
derived from the level-time curves, and so one must be 
cautious in its interpretation. However, It seems to 
represent a storage function, and if we sought a physiolo¬ 
gical correlate, we should be tempted to think of the natural 
resistance in the neural circuits which Hebb conceptualized 
as ’phase sequences 1 . In any case kg showed a small, but 
positive correlation with the Otis, Indicating that high IQ 






J 


f 


' : . 




■11 




135 


tends to be reflected in a type of mental organization 
which operates at high speeds at the lower levels but requires 
relatively large increments of storage time in passing from 
level to level. 

The second finding was that Level I performance 
exhibited many instances of induced upper bounds in a group 
testing situation structured to approximate normal class¬ 
room procedure in which students attempt a set of exercises 
of increasing complexity. In this situation, the amount of 
* guessing *—which is manifested in a more or less systematic 
ignoring of part of the given data—covaried with a gradient 
of group pressure defined by the proportion of students in 
the group who were able to obtain solutions in the time 
allotted. 

Part of the test was repeated in an individual testing 
situation in which the subject was encouraged to use 
sufficient time to obtain a correct solution. The fact 
that this led to significant increases In the upper bounds 
under the same time limits gave further support to the 
hypothesis that these upper bounds are, to some extent, 
group-induced. Further Inquiry led to the belief that the 
subject tended to evaluate his own performance (and to 
adjust his solution times) in terms of the performance of 
the whole group or some segment of it. 




;,0 


& it l 


:r- ' . j . ■, ■ '■) 


i m c i :( 


. v 



' ■» L. 




OU' 


0: ,- 






136 


The preceding example is part of a larger thesis 
which considers the operation of so-called * logical* 
behaviour—i.e., the unbiased examination of the entire body 
of relevant evidence—to be very much dependent upon the 
situation. Indeed, the student in the classroom who finds 
guessing less painful than complete thinking is not in an 
unusual situation, for in everyday life we normally exhibit 
just sufficient logic to disguise the incompleteness of our 
considerations, and we are easily forced into Illogical 
behaviour through the desire to avoid unpleasant situations. 

In any case, this virtually unexplored area is of 
great importance to anyone who would consider group perform¬ 
ance or testing, and it is returned to later in a different 
context. 


... 

• ■ 

■ 

, 

c V ■ v ■ 

•s • 

4 



CHAPTER IX 


GAP FILLING AND STRATEGIES 

The theory predicts that the occurrence of a gap in 
a deductive sequence will cause an increase in comprehension 
time, because the individual is obliged to search among the 
possible operations of the system in order to locate the 
one which has been applied. Although a purely random search 
is possible in theory, two factors militate against its 
occurrence in practice: (1) The immediate context provides 
clues as to which operation has been applied; (2) The 
recurrence of a certain type of gap leads to the develop- 
ment and application of a strategy for dealing with it. 

The results of a previous experiment suggested that 
once the human brain attains the stage of formal operations 
and has available a quantity of hypereatheetic energy which 
fluctuates and yet which possesses a definite upper bound— 
the maximum rate of performance of simple mental operations 
does not increase. At the same time, some aspects of mental 
performance, as shown on intelligence tests for example, 
reach a maximum about the twentieth year of age. There is 
here, an implication that the increase in level of perform¬ 
ance results not so much from an increase in the quantity 
of attention-cathexis, but rather from an increased effic¬ 
iency in its expenditure. This takes place through the 


o - i- • 

>if htt.- •. ■ ■ ' o , ■ ■ 

• .. • w . ■ • ■ • • • ’ ■' 

. 

■ 

, * \ • f ' Vi 001 

~ - . ! v ; ... 

_ 






•:>o Xxut ; 


Vpi ■ 



i .f ; ■' ' <•-' 

> - ' . 

, 

ii . • ' ■' t r •• c • r o : ' 

- ' . - v.- "f: >v ,; .f* ■. >t; jt , ’ > r u r. ‘10; 

■ . 





138 

development of strategies which formulate systematic methods 


of approach to situations which tend to recur in the subjecths 
experience. 

Three hypotheses thus emerged to give direction to 
the experimental procedures: 

1. H^: Random, or near-random behaviour—identified by the 
absence of a strategy--leads to increases in comprehension 
time which becomes greater as the gap lengthens. 

2. Hp: The repetition of a certain type of gap gives rise 
to the development of strategies for dealing with it. 

3. H 3 : The gap-filling behaviour of a grade 12 group is 
characterized by strategy formation to a greater extent than 
a grade 10 group equated on Otis IQ. 

1. The Test . In order to provide a simplified gap 

situation, a test was devised involving permutations on four 

elements. 

(A) © © ® 

Pig. 17. Permutations on four elements. 

The permissible primitive operations in this simple 
system are the six permutations: I^, 1 ^ 3 , 1 -^, ^ 23 9 ^Zh^. 9 - 
13 ^. The letter ! I ! may be translated as »interchange» and 
the subscripts indicate the position of the elements to be 
interchanged, so that the operation I^ performed on the 
original »axiom 1 yields the result 

® © © ® 

Second and third-order operations are defined in a similar 




- ■' . : ; ‘5 I •: . : : . J x;:S "■ ' ■■ S v f> > r ' 

; 




j io :• cj r '-S' : ■’ c’ c, S' o • n f: :■ f;x rK 








' 




n - 






- 




- 


: 1 


J”, :/ : l.“. ! ;, J / ! ^ V.K i. ; ‘1 f .OVi' X' - ; •’ 3 1 / X -X'. E Ct 8 '.I 0’ t X'U G , - ; ■ : ■ 

. 






■::: -i. 










.. . 


: ; f f • 







' 









:J! X" > XiO’j •. 



. 




G xx 


' 

: 







‘ 




■ 

■ 




139 

manner; thus, the necessary mental processes involved in the 


comprehension of the operation (or sequence of operations) 


34, 24, 12 raa ? be 

elaborated 

as . 

follows: 



Initial Reference 
Point 

© 

© 

© 

© 


X 3k 

© 

© 

© 

© 

Storage 1 

Operation 
on Storage - 

© 

© 

© 

© 

Storage 2 

Operation 
on Storage - I 

© 

© 

© 

© 

Result 


Fig* 18. Sequence of mental steps in the solution of 
a third order permutation. 

The performance required here is the typical Level I 
sequence of: operation—^storage—»operation-on-storage. 

The permutation operation is perhaps, a *purer f one than the 
arithmetical operation used previously, in that it was 
unlikely that any of the students had had extensive practice 
with it. 

So far, only the * comprehension * side of the test has 
been considered. Suppose, however, that the subject is 
presented with the original * axiom* and result, as ill¬ 
ustrated in Fig. 19. He is, moreover, asked to find the 
two operations which have been performed on the axiom to 
produce the result. It is conceivable that he might first 
consider each of the 6 permissible operations which could 



U 






have been performed on the axiom, store each result, and 
then consider each of the 6 possible operations applied to 
each of the 6 stored results. In this way, he could pick 
out the pair or pairs of operations which combined to give 
the answer. 


Axiom: 

© 

© 

© 

© 


Operation 1 

I * 

o 

f 

/ ~ \ 
yu 

Storage 1 

Operation 2 

© 

© 

© 

© 

Result 


Fig. 19. Gap filling in the permutation sequence. 

However, some modification of this completely random 
behaviour is invariably in evidence. The subject may first 
notice that the element ©is out of place and may perform 
operation 1-^ on the original set, thereby moving(5) to its 
correct position in the result. The element(A)would now 
occupy the third position and the further operation I ^ is 
necessary. This is one of the possible strategies consid¬ 
ered in the later analysis. 

2. Test Battery . The test battery was designed to 
give a representative measure of both comprehension and gap¬ 
filling times for each of the first, second, and third order 
operations. 

The comprehension questions provided the operations, 
while the gap-filling questions provided the results and 





. ' ' 

c ;1: l A Lvi ^ - 1 .' 

: 1- 

Vi 


.0 ' ' * . ■ :m 'C ' 

■. ' ro*> \ k ■' 
j y - ,' 


i ., 

. 










X oj: j -‘j ■ J 

! >1 Cf ' ? )' 


iv. 




* 


J ' ' . t " 




; . I )iiu 


■ 

. 






• ■ 










, 














i4i 


inquired about the operations; thus the questions were in 
one-to-one correspondence. The battery included 20 of the 
24 possible permutations on the four letters A, B, C, D-- 
the four excluded were the identity permutation (a simple 
first order operation) and three second order operations 
which did not involve moving at least one element twice and 
which had been found to be unrepresentative of that level. 
Since the multiple operations may b© stated in more than one 
form, care was exercised to ensure that no particular element, 
position, or anticipated strategy would be favoured. 


Table 18 

Permutation Battery For Gap-Filling Test a 



G omp r ehen si on 

Gap-Filling 

1st Order 

6 

6 

2nd Order 

8 

8 

3rd Order 

6 

6 


a The individual problems may be found in Appendix G. 


3. Subjects and Testing Procedure . The 60 students 
of the matched groups were tested individually and the 
solutions were timed with a stop-watch. As a preliminary 
introduction to the notion of permutations, the simpler set 
of three elements was considered, but no strategy was 











142 


suggested. 

The comprehension questions at each level were given 
first, and were immediately followed by the gap-filling 
questions at the same level. The entire test required 
approximately 45 minutes of administration time per student. 
No computing aids of any kind were allowed for either test. 

At the mid-point and end of each level of the gap¬ 
filling tests, the subject was interrogated to determine 
which method he was using to fill the gaps. Thus 6 such 
check points were established, so that the experimenter was 
able to use these verbal reports, in conjunction with the 
answers themselves, to determine for each subject, the 
degree and type of strategy formation and the consistency 
of application employed at each level. 

Analysis of Results 

1. Comprehension Scores . The subject f s score for 
each level and on each test was determined by computing the 
median time (in seconds) for the correct solutions offered. 
Table 19 presents some data concerning the comprehension 
scores. 

The difference between grade 10 and grade 12 means 
was not significant at any level, providing further evidence 
that the speed of performance of simple mental operations 




■ j. U:> 




i . ■' 



' 




, 


-■ 










• i •' - ’ " : ' t 

" > • - - • • ' • 

. 

, 






:• , : : : *■■...V 


' '' ' •> ' . ' . . . ^ 

.. r.\ v J .00 • / - 10" O'-:* uc;-r> | 

. 

1 . i J.J r. ■ ■ 





143 


does not change radically after the stage of formal opera¬ 
tion is reached. 


Table 19 

Means (time in seconds) and Standard Deviations for 
L]_, L 2 , Scores for Matched Grade 10 
and Grade 12 Groups 



L i 

l 2 

l 3 

M 

5.85 

13.1 

25.7 

Grade 10 




S.D. 

1.58 

5.60 

11.2 

M. 

5.71 

12.3 

24.3 

Grade 12 




S.D. 

1.28 

5.78 

11.4 

M 

5.78 

12.7 

25.0 

Total 




S.D. 

1.46 

5.68 

U.3 


The data provided some corroborating evidence for 
observations made in the previous experiment. We first 
notice that the increases in the mean group times from level 
to level are again nearly exponential--the time roughly 
doubling between levels. A majority of individual profiles 
show a fairly good fit to an exponential curve, but since 
only three points are available, the relationship was some¬ 
what tenuous and the curves were not drawn. 

An odds-evens product-moment reliability coefficient 
was determined for the 60 scores at L]_ and amounted to .77* 
with a corrected (Spearman-Brown) coefficient of *87. 











• % H.. i. • 1 j*. ■ . J. *. •< 






, 











* 



, 

■ 

r* 

' " ' i V . , v ' • 

•) ■ ::-.i ■■ ' ' ■■ ■■ ■■■ - 

- o ,sL: < / ' -v: ' • - J: - tIho 

- j ■ 

, 

, j { ■■■ ■ •. • ■ 







ili-4 


The interrelationship of the L-^, k-^ and Otis scores 
are shown in the following table. 


Table 20 

Product Moment Correlations Between 
the Li and Otis Scores 



Grade 10 

Grade 12 

Total 


Lx Otis 

Lx Otis 

Lx Otis 

k l 

+•87 “.63 

+.83 -.63 

+.84 -.63 

1—1 

1-^1 

-.79 

-.80 

-.80 


The two matched population were pooled on the grounds 
that they are comparable in mean and standard deviation and 
the scattergram reveals one homogeneous cluster of points 
rather than two separate clusters. 

The scores correlate somewhat higher (-.80) with 
the Otis than does k]_. It was suggested previously that 
the ipure* permutation operation would probably be less 
contaminated through previous experience. The k-^, 
correlations are very high, exceeding, in fact, the correla¬ 
tions of the Otis with either test. In this connection, one 
is almost tempted to postulate the existence of a mental 
factor—an attention-cathexis powered facility in the 
performance of simple mental operations. 















1 






* 

' 






4 




, 














145 

2. Gap Fillin g. Table 21 presents the essential data 
concerning the gap-filling scores at each level and for each 
grade. 

Table 21 

Means and Standard Deviations of the Gt, Go, Go Scores 
for Matched Grade 10 and Grade 12 Groups 



a l 

g 2 

g 3 

M 

Grade 10 

S.D. 

5.48 

2.11 

30.6 

71.9 

M 

Grade 12, 

S.D. 

5.39 

2.12 

24.0 

43.8 

M 

Total 

S.D. 

5.34 

2.12 




We notice first the departure from logarithmic form; 
the increment in times between G^ and Gp is nearly qua¬ 
drupled (doubled for comprehension times) while the times 
are doubled (approximately) between Gp and G^. There is an 
indication here of the development of time-saving strategies 
between Gp and G^. Moreover, the significant differences 
between grade 10 and grade 12 scores at Gp and G^, coupled 
with the non-significant differences in comprehension times, 
suggests that the grade 12 group was, in fact, exhibiting a 
greater amount of strategy formation. This provided an 













L ' .iy- --"'■J" 

j . *1 . 

. '1k> ' 


‘'iO'.;-- ■>' 

: ■ 


■ 

■ 




. 

. V ; ' ' • ' . ‘ ' ' 

. 

' 







' 

;■ ( , . ... .... ... . '. 1 > .. • •• 5 -* 

« 

■ - . . 

, 



indirect confirmation of • We also notice that while the 
gap-filling time at G-^ was slightly less than the comprehen¬ 
sion times, the gap-filling times for G 2 , G^ were markedly 
and significantly larger than the comprehension times. 

These microscopic considerations will be followed by closer 
observations of individual strategy formation. 

Strategy Analysis 

We recall here that a strategy has been defined as a 
non-random method of dealing with recurring situations 
within a certain area of experience. The essential require¬ 
ments of a strategy are consistency, explicit definition, 
and effectiveness, and the overall *goodness ! of a strategy . 
is measured by the gain which it affords in time or effort 
over a purely random approach. 

Within the experimental framework, three types of 
strategy seemed to emerge, and are discussed briefly in 
order of their frequency of occurrence. 


Given Axiom 

® 

© 

© 

© 


Operation 1 

O 

'w* 

i i 

O 

Storage 1 

Operation 2 

' \ 

i I 

N.y 

'' 

vr 

O 

v_/ 

O 

Storage 2 

Operation 3 

© 

© 

© 

© 

Result 

Pig. 20. 

Schematic 

representation 

of a permutation 


gap of length three. 




II 



i 0 




> ' 




J. : C.Q 




n ?>€ g 






’ 


- 






■ 





r. , 










147 


( a ) Horizontal Position Correction . By far the greatest 
proportion of strategies (approximately 75%) proceeded by 
performing operations in a left-to-right direction which 
moved the out-of-order elements into their new positions. 
Thus,(5) is the first element in the result which is out of 
order; consequently the operation Iqq must have been 
performed on the original set, resulting in the new order 

© © ® ® --Storage 1 

(3) is the next element whose position in Storage 1 differs 
from its position in the result; thus the next operation, 
performed this time on Storage 1, must have been 123 * The 
new Storage is, 

© © © © —Storage 2 

Finally, the element(§) is out of position, and the required 
operation on Storage 2 is 1^. Thus the required sequence 
of operations is Iq^ 23 ^ 34 * The high frequency of strat¬ 
egies which followed the normal direction of movement in 
reading and writing is probably to be expected. 

(b) Alphabetical Position Correction . Approximately 25% of 
the strategies employed a procedure in which the positions 
of the elements are corrected in order of their occurrence 
in the alphabet. Thus, the position of( a) is corrected first, 
by performing the operation Iq 2 * on the original set, 
yielding the order 

© ® © (d) --Storage 1 




" ... ' : 1 v - ‘ ' 1 ' ' ' ' ■ 1 - i ^ 1 2.}: 

• ■ • - 

■„ < . * , . ■ r :r ,f ' \ -■ i • ~ ~ '< 

, 

r . . -• ■ : v - ■ .. .■ ... ..J ■■ ’.! ■ - - ;■ ' ■ ■■ 

■ ■ • 

. 

. 

« 

.. 

i 

.... ^ ; :r. . 370 r' 7 ' > " - : "> . ■ ■ ■' ^ : 1 • ' -• ’ 1 ' 

. ; . . . i. 

'■nff77 r )(fn'V7 ‘io .i'tt b'o.o o*->xi4 ;io 

■ ■ • ■ <* ■ 





on 


The position of(B)is corrected next, the operation 1^ 

Storage 1 yielding 

© © © © --Storage 2 

The final operation 1-^ on Storage 2 corrects the position of 
(c) and the required sequence is 1^2 ^ 3 * 

This solution yields a different answer from the 
horizontal-position-correction strategy; there are, in fact, 
various answers, the number of which depends on the level* 


Table 22 

The Number of Possible and Correct Answers 
in Relation to Gap Length 


Level 

Correct Answers 

No. of 

Possible Answers 

G i 

1 

6 

G 2 

3 

36 

g 3 

14 

216 


It is apparent that the probability of obtaining a - 
correct answer by chance is so small that it can be ignored. 

(c) Single Position Correction * The most efficient strategy 
greatly reduced the memory load in the solution, and involves 
a modification of the preceding strategies. Here we may 
work from any of the four positions—we use the second for 
















: : ■ ' ■ 

. r I . • i: 



■ l- 










1 : : 


■ : ■ ■ 


. 

ft 

- 


■ 





: - 


, 







: ^ •, « ■ )«’■ ; a± b.t o | . • - ; v - >; - v ■ 

- 


* 


•• ■ ' 


■ 




149 


purposes of illustration. The element A occupies this 
position in the result; thus B has been moved out of this 
position, implying the performance of I^. This operation 
would bring D into the second position—and so is requir¬ 

ed to move it into the third position. This operation 
brings C into the s econd position and I^\ is required to 
move it into the first position. Thus the sequence of 
operations is I 2 ^ 21 • This strategy--which requires 

only the retention of the position of one element—was 
clearly formulated and consistently applied by only one 
student in the group of 60. 


1. Criteria for Rating Strategy . Strategy formation 
probably varies along dimensions of increasing explicit 
formulation and consistent application. The 6 verbal 
reports, in conjunction with the answers given by the stud¬ 
ent, were used to assess the degree of strategy formation 
at each level. The performance at a particular level was 
assigned the label describing the degree of strategy forma¬ 
tion which was in evidence over the larger part of that 
level. The criteria for the three levels were set down as 
follows: 

A. Complete Strategy : This was defined to be any strategy 
with the following properties: (a) Complete consistency of 
application, (b) Complete accuracy of application. 




* 

' - V 

. 

, 

, 

- 

' 

■ 

■ 

■.■Ur ...... h.,1. ■ 


i$o 

B. Partial Strategy : This was defined as any strategy which 


violated either (a) or (b), but not both, once in three 
applications or less frequently. 

C. Inadequate Strategy : This was defined to be any strategy 
which violated either (a) or (b) more frequently than once 
in three applications, or which violated both criteria to 
any extent at all. 

The following table provides a summary of strategy 
formation in both grades. 


Table 23 

Strategy Formation at Levels G 2 and - G 3 for the 
Matched Groups in Grades 10 and 12 



L 2 

L 3 


A 

B 

c 

A+B 

A 

B 

C 

A+B 

Grade 10 

1 

4 

25 

5 

1 

7 

22 

8 

Grade 12 

4 

12 

14 

16 

8 

12 

10 

20 


It is apparent that the grade 12 group Is superior in 
categories A and B. If we combined these two categories, 
thereby dividing each of the matched groups into strategy* 
and f non-strategy 1 subgroups, the superiority of the grade 
12 group is demonstrable statistically.^ 

lr The gap of length one was so easy to complete that 
the detection of a strategy and its division into categories 
A, B, and C was not possible. 






















I r-T.l •: Y.Uf-" 





* 


lv U' V..; '■ '■ ■ ' : '■ - '*■ : ... 


: 

i 

• 










V. . 

' 


' ■ ' ' ' 




.- ; - 










■ 

: i ’ ■ 

■ v ;; ' ' " 


■ 










151 

The hypothesis that the two matched groups are drawn 
from the same population or populations with equal propor¬ 
tions of * strategy* and 1 non-strategy» members was tested 
by means of and was rejected at the .0$ level in both 
cases. Thus the superiority of the grade 12 group in 
strategy formation has been demonstrated directly and 
indirectly. 

2. G-ap-Pilling Time Curves for Strategy and Non - 
strategy Groups . The mean times for each matched group and 
the combined group have previously been considered. It is 
also useful to consider the effects of the various levels 
of strategy formation upon the time required for solution. 
Fig. 21 illustrates this situation. 

The results are obvious enough. A superior strategy 
allowed gaps to be filled in times which were less than the 
corresponding comprehension time; an inconsistently applied 
strategy required times which were somewhat larger than the 
comprehension time; a very weak strategy soon caused 
reconstruction times to become formidably large. 

The preceding discussion has some important implic¬ 
ations for the normal mathematical exposition. Here, the 
more-or-less random occurrence of types of gaps precludes 
the possibility of a systematic development of strategies, 
so that when gaps occur, they become a formidable, if not 




. 

♦ 

' 






' 

. 

, 

. 


. 

* - 


152 


Code 



Fig. 21. Gap length and comprehension time under 
three levels of strategy formation. 











153 


insurmountable barrier to comprehension. 

Strategy Formation and IQ, 

One would expect IQ and strategy formation to co¬ 
rrelate highly. This seems to be implicit in 1 adaptation * 
definitions of intelligence--!or superior strategy formation 
over a wide variety of activities surely implies superior 
adaptation. 

The data provided an opportunity to examine these 
beliefs. The product-moment correlation between gap-filling 
times (G-^) and Otis IQ for the whole group amounted to .57, 
indicating a significant but not markedly high relationship. 
To study the relationship at levels and G^, the popula¬ 
tion was dichotomized in two dimensions, as illustrated in 
the following table. 


Table 24 

Relationship Between Otis IQ and Strategy Formation 
at Levels G^ and for the Gombined Groups 



Above 
Mean IQ 

Mean IQ 


Mean IQ 

Below 
Mean IQ 

Adequate 

Strategy 

9 

12 

Adequate 

Strategy 

13 

13 

Inadequate 

Strategy 

21 

18 

Inadequate 

Strategy 

17 

15 


N=60 



N=60 



G 2 



G 3 









' ■ .■> f':T• C.f) v 








■* 




• ' 

' 




. 

. 

* 

. 








,, .. .. 




■\..Y J ' ' L : .\ 
















i 




'Y;t :;v ■:?/.'j i(\ 











154 


An estimate of the relationship at each level was 
found by computing corresponding phi-coefficients (Garrett, 
p. 3^7). These turned out to be -.10 and -.037 at levels 
G 2 and G^ respectively; consequently, we can say that the 
data do not bear out the hypothesized high relationship 
between IQ and strategy formation. 

Since this result runs somewhat contrary to normal 
expectations, a supporting result (which is not directly 
related to gap-filling behaviour) is introduced here. A 
series of ’ordering* problems (Appendix B) of the type 

T is less than L. 

B is greater than A. 

A is greater than L. 

Which is the greatest? 

gave rise to a second strategy-formation situation; again, 
it was possible to establish criteria for judging the 
effectiveness of the strategy. When the population was 
dichotomized, as in Table 24* and phi-coefficients calcu¬ 
lated, the following table was obtained. 


Table 25 

Relationship Between Otis IQ and Strategy Formation 
on Ordering Tests, Grades 10 and 12 




Significance 

Grade 10, H=67 

.30 

,oi<p <.o5 

Grade 12, N=37 

.35 

.oi <p <.o5 

















155 


In this case the individual coefficients, although 

relatively small, were both significant at the .05 level, 

and the combined results were significant beyond the .01 

p 

level. The relationship between IQ and strategy formation-- 
as it emerged from the two tests employed-»was somewhat 
complex and is represented diagrammatically in Pig. 22. 


£ 

© 

<D £ 
5 O 
-P *H 
© -P 

CQ oj 

•H O 

,£ fx, 


w 

£ >> 


O bO 
•H © 
-P -P 
ctf ctf 

rH £ 

© -p 
CEJ 00 





© O* 
CQ M 

o 



Increasing Complexity of Mental Task 


The .05 
level of 
significance 


Fig. 22. The relationship between Otis IQ and 
strategy formation as a function of task difficulty. 


^In addition, a comparison of the matched grade 10 
and grade 12 groups employing the sign test showed the latter 
group to be significantly superior in strategy formation. 

(.oi< p <.05). 









■ 





2 ; "lO'ltf / ii, v i. : 

: . ; i' *.■ .1'r\>, 










; : • . : 1 ' ^ 0 -:> 
















f 4 




. - V 1. 












' : ■ 






. 




.■;! • ,/r : ;■ 





























156 

Several explanatory remarks are required to interpret 
this curve. 

(1) The difficulty of obtaining an estimate of 
strategy formation for mental tasks of small gap length was 
mentioned previously. If, however, the speed of performance 
is taken as the best estimate of strategy formation, then 
the observed product-moment r of .57 gives an estimate of 
the relationship between strategy formation and IQ in tasks 
of smallg ap length. The size of this coefficient is not 
surprising, since the mental task required in problems of 
small gap length is not far removed from the direct applica¬ 
tion of mental operations, and this has previously been 
shown to correlate highly with Otis IQ. 

(2) The relationship between Otis IQ and strategy 
formation in tasks of gap lengths two and three yielded 
negative phi-coefficients of near zero value. 

(3) The longer tasks of the ordering battery again 
showed a small but significant relationship between strategy 
formation and IQ. 

One possible explanation of the low relationship 
exhibited in the centre of the curve is that the more 
intelligent subject is able to perform simple mental opera¬ 
tions quickly and is thus able to succeed in tasks of median 
difficulty while employing a strategy which would be inad¬ 
equate if used by the weaker student. The observation of 


' 


• i • ,k . . ‘Xt , ■ j V.:: i $ 

V;I '/• :.ni. j^vo 1 o v,oJ :o .t:k ■ 

; v-.f-i'-r ,i ■ ; iu ckk.v o l/ vi n ? 

■ 

U) .... ■: ■ , ) . 

. 

- 

■ 

- i ■ • 

r = • *■ r "' r ' 

u i k v.;.-v ■ : ' ■ ••• • , 

. 

. ■ ■ k k v: : k- ■ ' • ; • ‘X y ■ a 1 * m ** : ’ 1: . ■ 1 : l ; - 

. 

■ 

k; J' ■ • ■ 

, 



157 


students attacking the ordering problems supported this 
hypothesis. Many of the superior IQ students persisted in 
the use of an inadequate strategy (in this case memorizing 
the position of the elements). As the problems became 
harder there occurred for these subjects, a period of re¬ 
organization and experimentation, during which their 
exhibited strategies were inconsistent. At the same time, 
the low IQ student, if he developed a strategy at all, 
tended to do so earlier, because his relatively inferior 
performance of mental operations (and storage) made the 
early problems more difficult for him. In any case, the 
relationship between IQ and strategy formation was in no 
case very high. 

Summary 

This section provided further evidence for the 
hypothesis that the time function of the operation 
storage operation-on-storage sequence is exponential in 
nature. High intercorrelations of Otis IQ, and L]_ 
suggest that these three tests measure, to a large degree, 
the ability to perform simple mental operations, an ability 
which Is linked in theory to general energy level (hyper- 
cathexis). 

A simplified gap situation was created in which the 
subject had to reconstruct a sequence of omitted operations. 









j,L 











• . 


- 










158 


This setting allowed a study of strategy formation, i.e., 
ways of effecting savings in time through systematic modes 
of procedure in situations which tend to recur. While 
strategy formation varied along a continuum—from a near¬ 
random approach on one extreme to well-defined, consistent 
strategies on the other—three levels were distinguished 
for the purpose of experimentation. As might be expected, 
particularly well-defined and effective strategies resulted 
in a saving (as compared to comprehension time) over a gap 
of any length. However, poorly-defined or inconsistent 
strategies led to rapidly increasing increments in required 
solution time (above ordinary comprehension time). 

Two important findings emerged concerning strategy 
formation. The first was that while the grade 10 and grade 
12 groups showed comparable comprehension times, the latter 
group was significantly superior in strategy formation on 
two distinct tests. 

A second, and rather provocative result, was that for 
the students investigated here, the relationship between 
Otis IQ and strategy formation was complex, but not markedly 
high. In other words, the formation of a successful 
strategy seemed to depend on some quality over and above IQ. 
Indeed, after observing such behaviour over a period of 150 
hours, the author was convinced that many students of high 
ability persisted in the use of inadequate strategies 


: ■ ■ ' ‘ : 

> / fH ' ", W ' 

- 

- - 


■. v \n 












- 


( : i r- 7 Uy : -XO-'x 

- 


■: 




' 

,■/' • ; 

' 

rio , n;o.I:-J7 s. 


_ 

■ . U ■/ L),': ■ .> ’■ 1 ' " 

, , ■ y : : 'i ' •• 


■ - 


. ■ ■ •; 


1 ) v': 1,.. : . H.J 


" ■ ■ v ' • ' ' 

, 

' 






. 

, 






159 


because their superior performance (of operations) allowed 
them to succeed where weaker students (using the same 
strategy) would fail. Often, then, the strategy formation 
of the subject of mediocre ability resulted from a necessity 
not felt by the subject of high IQ,.3 

The concept of strategy^---although virtually 
neglected (outside the theory of games) at the present time-- 
may ultimately provide a useful supplement to our speed- 
oriented concept and tests of intelligence. There are long 
range aspects of adaptation which would be universally 
accepted as manifestations of intelligence, and yet which 
may not be fairly assessed by the standard, short interval 
intelligence tests. 


3 

This discussion brings to mind the related and 
apparently unresolved controversy as to whether Einstellung 
is more prominent in intelligent or unintelligent subjects. 
(Miller, 1957). 

^-The repeated application of tests of cognitive 
ability gives rise to v ariability in scores which is often 
discussed in terms of *function fluctuation* (as dieting- . 
uished from test error). One determinant of fluctuation 
must surely be linked to the differential development of 
strategies. 




























- 










■ 


• • c V.; : ; ' : : ; ..1 ' : '• •••" 


. 

. 








CHAPTER X 


THE COMPREHENSION OF TOPOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 

The movement on foot for the introduction of tmodern* 
mathematics into the high school accepts, although seldom 
states explicitly, two assumptions: (a) it is possible to 
teach modern mathematics so that it will be comprehended by 
the high school student, (b) there is something to be gained 
in doing this. 

The second assumption may never be more than mere 
opinion, and the first has received scant attention. The 
account which follows describes an experiment in which 
grade 12 students were introduced to general topology. This 
occasion offered an opportunity to study the effect on 
comprehension of the lecture method of mathematical exposi¬ 
tion, and to investigate the difficulties encountered by 
students in the comprehension of axiomatic mathematics. 

Subjects and Procedure 

The grade 12 group was available for this experiment 
since their course of study was somewhat more flexible than 
that of grade 10. This group was divided into two sections, 
subsequently referred to as Group A and Group B. The groups 
were equated in intelligence (mean Otis IQ of 111) and were 
of roughly the same general accomplishment in their previous 









5 

- 


' 

■ 

• : , ... ' , ; . - ; i ' ' v 0?-0: : > ' .tr 3 

, 
















a. . ‘.. 1 









» . 




- 








161 


work in mathematics. The experimenter was able to do this 
by virtue of his acquaintance with, and participation in, 
their previous mathematical training. Augmented by three 
grade 11 students, the groups numbered 20 students each. 

The material to be covered was taken from the first 
few pages of Sierpinski f s C-eneral Topology . It represented 
approximately the amount that would be covered in a 50 
minute university mathematics lecture. The subject matter 
headings in their order of presentation are listed as 
follows: 


1. Undefined terms: element, set, subset, null set. 


2. Definition: 

3. Definition: 
i|. Definition: 


Frechet (V) space. 

limit point of a (V) space. 

derived set. 


5. Definition: Topological equivalence of (V) space. 

6. Theorem 1: Two (V) spaces Kq and K£ consisting 
of the same elements are topologically equivalent, 

(we assume that each element is contained in each 
one of its neighbourhoods) if and only if, to every 
neighbourhood U, of an element in Kq there exists 

a neighbourhood of that element In which is 
contained in U, and vice versa. 


The objective in Group B was to adapt the pace and 
method of teaching to ensure that a certain minimum percent¬ 
age of the subjects would comprehend the material. The 


material was delivered in daily periods of one-half hour ! s 
duration, although the full time was not always used. At 
the end of each numbered section, the subjects were asked 






4 



. 



; 




. 






: , 













. 







T 

1 



, 






. 




» 








* 









i. 




. 






. 

I ■' i' .'JL ! ■ r ' : i' ■ 




. ) V : ' •». ' 












Lr 








162 


to indicate whether they felt that they comprehended the 
section. If 75$ or more of the class responded in the 
affirmative, a comprehension test was given. If less than 
this proportion responded in the affirmative, the section 
was explained again and further examples were given. 

Each student had been previously given a 6-page 
booklet—after each section had been demonstrated, the 
subject was asked: (a) to indicate whether he felt that he 
had comprehended the section, (b) to answer a question 
designed to measure this comprehension. The comprehension 
questions may be found in Appendix C. 

Various means were employed to keep motivation high 
in both groups throughout the experiment. For example, 
it was intimated to both groups that the topology score 
would contribute a substantial share to the term mark. 

Thus, while estimates of group motivation are fairly well 
confined to subjective impressions derived from the testing 
situation and thestudents* response, it will be maintained 
that general motivational level In each group was high-- 
at least at the beginning of the session. 

Throughout the session with Group B, questions from 
the class were not only encouraged, but responses were 
evoked from the class In the normal teaching manner. The 
schedule for Group B is shown in Table 26. 

The experimenter kept a close record of the time 


- 















? 






0 . 


.. \ i 


:nc.d 



■ 



: 



• 




• 







■ i , 0 









ro V 





* 


1 1 

. 

. 















. 

- 




L o. • 










: 





p 


* 




... ... 








r-\. v-'-ip i 


. 


‘IP 8 3 T 1 :3 <Vj 















.. 5 ' • ■ J ' V ■ - 

’ 


, 






163 


Table 26 

Lesson Schedule for Instruction in the 
Comprehension of Topological Concepts 


Lesson 

Topic 

Number 

Content 

I 

1 

Sets, subsets, null set 


2 

Frechet (V) space 

II 

3 

Limit point of a (V) space 


4 

Derived set, closed set 

III 

5 

Topological equivalence 

IV 

3 

Topological equivalence 


6 

Theorem I 

V 

6 

Theorem I 

VI 

6 

Theorem I 

VII 

6 

Theorem I 

























. . . 




















164 

actually spent on each section of the work by marking times 
on a prepared set of lesson notes which were used with both 
sections. 

The material was delivered to Group A in a manner 
designed to approximate closely to the mathematics lecture. 
The material was set out in logical fashion, with every 
attempt made to reduce gaps. At each step, representatives 
were introduced in the form of examples (a minimum of two 
at each numbered step), and the development of the arguments 
proceeded at a very slow pace, requiring in excess of 8? 
minutes. 

The amount of material covered per lecture was the 
same as the Group B, except that Theorem I was divided 
into two parts. Again, the *lecturing 1 time was consid¬ 
erably less than the teaching time. Students in Group A 
were not encouraged to ask questions, but explanations and 
examples were given where they were requested. A check on 
comprehension time was maintained throughout the experimen¬ 
tal period by means of the test employed with Group B. 

As with Group B, no note-taking was allowed or 
assignments made during the experimental period. In short, 
the chief difference between the two experimental groups 
was in the method of delivering the material and in the 
time employed. 


:r. ■ j-fi • ■' x-LL:.:. ■ : o/j 

■ 

. 

. 

. 











, 

. 




* 



. 

' ,i ; : ■ ' • ' 




. 


■ - 



■ ■ 



■ ■ ■ 


* 

) 

' 

t 



- 

. : ■ , r :; 



• 






' V ;; r , .r'v:;n " , 






. • j '% ■> ■ 





165 


Results 

The demonstration times for each section of the work 
(topic) with G-roup A were marked off cumulatively along a 
time axis (Pig, 23). Thus, in this scale of unequal time 
intervals, the logical-demonstration-time curve appears as 
a straight line. The comprehension curve, giving the 
proportion of students comprehending the material up to the 
end of a specific position (as determined from the 
comprehension tests) has been superimposed on the curve. 

It is contended that the curve represents what 
happens when the student is faced with the traditional 
mathematics lecture. In fact, the 8? minute session in its 
entirety might be considered equivalent in many ways to a 
single mathematics lecture. 

In Group B, demonstration time had been adjusted so 
that a relatively constant proportion of the subjects 
comprehended the material, thus allowing a study of the 
nature of the * time-comprehension * curve. It is apparent 
from Pig. 23 that comprehension-time is not a linear 
function of demonstration units x —but appears rather to be 
an exponential type function. 

Prom this microscopic point of view, the real problem 

^The units of demonstration time were those employed 
in the lecture development of the material with Group A. 


























* 

' "‘i.o 

. 

— 




• ■ [■ ... , :■ : - • 1 :;., >; 














• -j ..l c : a.:: 








Percentage of Group Comprehending 


166 



Fig. 23. Seventy-five per cent comprehension curves, 
percentage comprehension, and logical demonstration times for 
elementary topological concepts. 


Time in Minutes 



















167 


of linear presentation time as opposed to logarithmic 
comprehension time readily becomes apparent. The *lecture* 
delivered to Group A, started from first principles and 
with 100$ comprehension by the students. The normal 
mathematics lecture, beginning from some advanced point and 
utilizing the results previously acquired, usually starts 
from a level of comprehension below 100$ and would likely 
have a higher rate of falling off in the proportion of 
students comprehending. Under these circumstances, the 
explicit advantages of a f lecture 1 approach to the learning 
of mathematics is highly questionable. It Is, in fact, 
almost traditional that students find mathematical exposi¬ 
tions, even those which purport to begin from first 
principles, difficult or Impossible to follow for any length 
of time. It would seem a tenable conclusion, that mathemat¬ 
ical comprehension must be ! taught* in the sense that a 
contact must be established with the group, and that 
adjustments in demonstration rate must be made to fit the 
logarithmic nature of comprehension. Or, barring this, the 
individual must be allowed to pursue the study of mathemat¬ 
ics on an individual basis--thus making his own allowances 
for storage time. 

Individual Studies 

Shortly after the conclusion of the experiment, and 
in the course of individual interviewing in connection with 









168 


another test, the subjects were questioned concerning the 
mental representatives which they employed for topological 
concepts and the difficulties which they had encountered in 
comprehension. Two specific questions were put to each 
subject: 

(a) When you hear the word ! set* (subtest, (V)-space, 
limit point), what is the first impression (or picture) that 
comes to mind? 

(b) What happens to this *image* (picture) when you 
continue to direct attention (concentrate) to it? 

The answers which were given most frequently for the 
first three concepts are listed in the following Table 27* 
The subjects were also asked to provide sketches for first 
impression and continued attention * images ». 

The main features of the psychological comprehension 
of topology are exhibited in this analysis. We notice 
particularly, the first general impressions giving way to 
specific representatives, the general awareness of movement 
and the development of particular representatives (as for 
example, the 3~element topological space). Which represen¬ 
tatives are stored, of course, depends on the examples used 
by the demonstrator. It is likely that if a two-element 
topological space had been employed consistently in 
demonstrations, it would have been stored as the represen¬ 
tative for topological spaces. 


- 

.... vr : £ \ -££' ] £- :v v - : - 1 ■ ' ■■■ ;0<; ^ 

« 

: 

f ; -■ . \ ■■ ' 

’ ■ ■ 




' 


" " : ‘i -V , ■' •' '■ 




J ■' 


» 

1 - '■ • ' ' 

v ■ v • » 

. 

; ■ - ; < : 1; •' ? - 
; ■' - 

-re t ?.j. 0v) b^£'- 


•" ■; ; O IbCfOJ' 














Table 2? 

Representatives for Elementary Topological Concepts 


Concept 

First 

Impression 

Continued 

Attention 

Mathematical 

Definition 

Set 

A vague 
impression 
of a cluster 
of points. 

CD 

G-radually the iden¬ 
tity of a single 
point emerges— 
usually visualized 
as a small circle. 

CD 

Undefined. 



Subset 

A small clus¬ 
ter embedded 
in or surroun¬ 
ded by a smal¬ 
ler cluster. 

A sensation of move¬ 
ment, picking out, 
(sometimes pointing 
to) specific 
elements in a set. 

Undefined 

CD 

/ • • 

f m A 

» «> _ J 





(V) 

Space 

An impre¬ 
ssion of a 
horizontal 
and ver¬ 
tical 

c onfiguration 
of points. 

C. 

1. A horizontal 
listing (movement) 
of a few elements 
(usually three) 

(a, b, c). 

2. The vertical 
listing of each 
element 

( a, b, c ) 
a 1 

A set K of 
elements in 
which with 
each element 
a there is 
associated 
a certain 
class of sub¬ 
sets of K 
called 

neighbourhoods 
of a. 

jT\ c~~ - 

b i 

0 



c 

3. The listing of 
elements of the 
horizontal set 
after each element 
in the vertical set. 

( hlC c C 

a = (ajbTDcD* 0 ) 
b * ( ), ( ) 
c = ( ), ( ) 


































170 


A further investigation was made concerning the 
representatives utilized by the subjects in Group A who had 
succumbed to the logical presentation. It occurred almost 
without exception that the point of breakdown in comprehen¬ 
sion coincided exactly with the stage at which adequate 
representatives failed to be formed—although a correct 
verbal enunciation of a definition or result sometimes 
continued beyond the comprehension breakdown point. 

This brings into focus the often discussed connection 
between verbalization and mathematical thinking. In this 
admittedly limited and special case, the verbal definition 
performs a ’steering function* with respect to the activation 
and manipulation of representatives, so that while the 
verbal definition may be carried along in memory, it is the 
representative which enters into extensions or elaborations 
of the definition or results. Without adequate representa¬ 
tion, the verbal statement is entirely inadequate. 

Summary 

A preliminary distinction was made between 
T lecturing* and ’teaching*. The former is concerned with a 
step-by-step logicald evelopment of a deductive sequence; 
the latter implies a correspondence between the demonstra¬ 
tion rate of the teacher and the comprehension rate of the 
student. There is undoubtedly a continuum here in the degree 




i\\n\ • •• 


. 





i 







171 

to which the comprehension problem of the subject is 
ignored. 

For purposes of experimentation, the effect of 
demonstration at two points on this continuum were examined 
in connection with the introduction of some elementary 
concepts of general topology. The first of two groups of 
grade 12 students (who had been matched in intelligence and 
general mathematical accomplishment), were presented with 
the material in a manner which would approximate to a 
Superior 1 mathematics university lecture. As might have 
been expected, a logical development which was essentially 
linear in time led to a rapid decline in comprehension over 
the whole group. The chief difficulty seemed to be that 
inadequate time had been allowed for the storage of 
representatives—although verbal definitions were often in 
evidence beyond the last point of comprehension. 

It was then decided to see what kind of time allot¬ 
ment was necessary to maintain a fixed level of comprehen¬ 
sion in the group ( 75 %)* The development proceeded as 
before, except that adequate allowances were made for 
storage, and great care was taken to supply and reinforce 
representatives. In this case, the comprehension time 
curve seemed to be roughly exponential over the first few 
concepts. 

The experiment, crude and unstatistical as it 




: ■ 


;;r., 

\ 0 













» 



» 




. 




■ 

• ■ 4 ! ' A 



i 

■.-bj ::V,tk C ; 


■ :■■■■:•■ " ■ . 1 






' ^vv-'.o 











■ - 

. 


' 



' 

\ ■ 








■ 

[ 



. 





t *u,j "'y;p 






■ 


■ 

■ 



* 































. 


















■ - V 



* 








- 








- . 













* 












■* 


■ 




172 

undoubtedly is in some respects, nevertheless provides many 


points of agreement with the theory. It shows the import¬ 
ance of representatives and adequate storage time, and it 
suggests that the exponential time function of the 
ioperation-storage-operation-on-storage* sequence (which was 
derived in rather artificial situations) may be valid in 
more complex mathematical systems. In any case, it 
indicates that the assumption of linearity between demonstra¬ 
tion and comprehension times—an assumption on which the 
mathematics lecture is based--is psychologically invalid. 










* 










. 

. 









CHAPTER XI 


PROBLEM SOLVING UNDER FINITE UNCERTAINTY 
THE GEOMETRY STUDY—PART I 

The geometry study investigated problem-solving 
behaviour over a period of 11 weeks in order to test the 
hypothesis, advanced on the strength of the energy theory, 
that some kind of upper bound would be exhibited. In other 
words, it was postulated that when an individual attempts a 
series of problems of increasing complexity, the division of 
available attention-cathexis among an increasing number of 
alternatives would eventually render the individual 
incapable of dealing with this complexity. In this case, it 
would seem likely that he would either T give up* or behave 
f illogically* by ignoring some of the alternatives, thereby 
decreasing the subjective problem difficulty. 

Moreover, if the upper bound is early established, 
it would allow prediction of subsequent performance in 
problem solving. 

At this point, it may be wise to examine the notion 
of prediction a bit further. The first point which must be 
made is that there are several kinds of prediction. The 
most common type uses the multiple-correlation technique to 
predict performance in a given area from a set of character¬ 
istics (scores) measured prior to the behaviour being 






V ,£> ‘X-OC'JiV 


' 


: i i 










. i • 


f t : 3* 






) ? 

' 





174 


predicted. A second variety, uses predictors measured at 
the same time as the behaviour under question. A third 
method uses a sampling technique—and predicts later behav¬ 
iour from initial behaviour of the same kind. 

Prediction of the first kind is undoubtedly the most 
valuable—provided that valid measures of the criterion are 
available—for it would allow a before-hand selection of 
students who are likely to succeed at, and who therefore 
should attempt the various school subjects. However, the 
author, arguing from evidence to be presented later, doubts 
the existence of high a priori correlates of geometry 
problem-solving ability. Again, while it seems possible to 
find Contemporary* correlates of an ability which is 
measured after considerable experience in an area, these 
correlates are not necessarily good predictors, because they 
have been measured at the wrong end (with respect to time) 
of the behaviour in question. 

The * sampling* kind of prediction would allow the 
teacher to make adjustments (such as ability grouping) with¬ 
in the class, after assessing ability through its early 
manifestations. The practicability of such predictions 
depends on the existence of early-manifested and stable 
upper bounds. 

We postulate, then, that in a long-term situation. 


the individual tends to find that his performance relative to 





. „ , : ■ • . •; 

- i ) l 

: .0 ‘-.iOo . j " • q 1 >l :u • fooJ 3/x';I 

V ' : ■’ / ■ .i ; ■ 

* 

■ ■ • ' 


• 1 , • 

’■ •" ‘ ’ ; ' r -. • '• 

. ji 

• ■ -v • . ' . : ' 

!. ■ 1 'a ’ 

• . ■* 

■ 

> «, : • : 

t 

- 

; 

, 

■ 



. ■ ; • ' •: . ‘j . ; : ... . “j 

:v‘ ;, 1>: “;j ia • > o,crx 

■ 3 1 

' , ■- 0 


' • • •/ v Lw) as> ■ . * i ■ ' ' s "• ■ : • 


■ , 

r u '•(••I 



- 



. 


; 


- ; 

;■ 'J ; ■■ > ry>e .jgaiej 


. 









175 

the class attains a steady value. Thus guessing (or *face¬ 
saving 1 ) patterns would tend to be relatively stable over 
long periods of time. Moreover, the initial upsurges in 
motivation which often occur at the beginning of the term, 
soon give way to the long-range motivation which the student 
constantly brings to the academic side of his life. In 
summary, then, there was reason to believe that the total 
interplay of forces and pressures would cause behaviour to 
stabilize to the extent that it would become predictable. 

1. Objectives of the Geometry Study . The main 
objectives of the geometry study can noitf be listed as an 
attempt to answer the following questions: 

(a) Does the student reach a stable level of perform¬ 
ance, so that it is possible to say that student X has a 
chances in b of solving problem Y in a given classroom 
situation? 

(b) Is it possible to construct a scale of difficulty 
for geometry problems against which problem difficulty 
levels can be measured? 

(c) At what stage is such prediction possible? 

2. Procedure . The geometry study was comprised of 
two phases. 

(a) A pilot study employed four students for a period 
of time from 20-25 hours each. This semi-clinical 
investigation was conducted with a view to determining the 
course of mental processes followed in the actual solution 
of geometry problems. 













, 










* 


' • • . ■ • 












■ i 






1 A : - ‘ ' 


' 

..... : ;■ ... J..i r V-A.'. ; V ■■ ' A ' .A" - 1 i A 
















- 

. 















. j.,} A. .a "to QPSitfQV 

* 







176 


(b) The autumn investigation encompassed an 11 week 
period, beginning with the opening of the school in 
September, 1958 through to mid-November. Details of the 
autumn investigation are elaborated below. 

3. Population . The subject population consisted of 
two grade 10 groups (N=69) and one grade 12 group (N=37)> 
yielding a total population of 106 subjects. The grade 12 
group‘d had received instruction in grades 9 and 10 from, the 
author, and so were well known to him. Data concerning age, 
IQ, and scores on standardized tests were listed in an 
earlier chapter, (p. 98). 

Euclidean plane geometry is studied for something 
more than the first half of the grade 10 course and again 
constitutes the course of study for the entire grade 12 
year. The geometry programme is illustrated in Table 28. 

The experimental geometry course devolves largely 
around the use of the ruler and compasses, the acquisition 
of a geometric vocabulary and the discovery of some elemen¬ 
tary geometric facts through measurement. 

The author took the regular classes in geometry with 

^In Ontario, the secondary school curriculum is of 
5 years’ duration; thus the grade 12 students are in their 
second-to-last year, and are not subject to external 
departmental examinations. 




• ' 

. 


' ■ ' '' ' 

, 

: ' ' ’ ■ : - 
■ ': ■ ' ■ ■; •. 1 ■' i : - ■' vi - : : ... k.~ 

■ 

. 

- 














, 




177 


the grade 10 and grade 12 groups. Each class received one 
35 minute lesson a day, five days a week. In all, the 
learning period extended over 50 lessons, or approximately 
30 hours. During this time, the author acted with the full 
authority of the regular teacher with respect to assignment 
of marks, disciplinary measures, and general classroom 
management. 


Table 28 

Geometry in the Ontario High School 


Grade 

Duration 

Subject Matter 

9 

3 weeks 

Experimental Geometry 

10 

4-5 months 

Euclidean Geometry--Books I and II 

12 

9 months 

Euclidean Geometry Review Books I 
and II, Books III, IV, and V. 

13 

9 months 

Analytic Plane Geometry. 


4. Problems Used . The author felt obligated in some 
respect to follow as closely as possible the normal course 
of study for both grades. For, not only would a disruption 
of 50 lessons duration be intolerable to school authorities, 
but the relevance of research findings to the ordinary 
classroom teacher depended upon close correspondence to 
their conditions of teaching, especially with regard to 
subject matter. Thus, the problems were selected, for the 









"■ 7\> •' 





■ 




i i /. 






r 


- 




• * ' 




u :v r 7 - ■! ;yyo o '-'.C : 7 

, 



■ 








■ 

■ >o.o I:v - 

, 


. • 

■ 

. 

■ 





v ...... / oi i ' 





■ 

■ 





• . • 










178 


most part, from the textbook in current use in Ontario 
(Petrie, 1954). In the pilot study, all the problems foll¬ 
owing each proposition were employed and analysed for 
suitability in the main study. Some of these were later 
deleted, largely because they were duplications of earlier 
ones or involved unusual constructions. The final battery 
numbered 86 problems for the grade 10 group and 92 problems 
for the grade 12 group. Moreover, to facilitate comparison 
between the grades, over half of the grade 10 problems 
appeared in the grade 12 battery. 

5. The Course Outline . Some of the propositions of 
Book I contribute In no substantial way to problem solving. 

In particular, the Construction 1 propositions are of this 
kind. These were dealt with rather lightly and no problems 
were assigned after them. The complete system of axioms, 
definitions, and propositions is given in Appendix D. 

The system does not—as is well known-give a complete 
mathematical axiomatization of Euclidean geometry. Never¬ 
theless, it is the system used in the schools, and for that 
reason was employed in this study. 

6. Teaching Procedure . The teaching method followed 
the normal classroom approach. After a preliminary discu¬ 
ssion of the axioms and the deductive method in general, 
each proposition was then taken in turn and its proof 







: , $ s ■ ■ ■■ : 

•_ i V. • : , , . j - 

: . . - 

-t 0 ; * 

;> 3f ■ 1 . < 9 1 *1 ■ o: ;i X 1 ■ . £ $ : ■ 1 

, . 

• . £ • 

: •; - ; ' ■ v ■ •- t \ 

... — ‘ - : £ ■ 

. . 

” _ * 






179 


developed with the assistance of the class. Considerable 
care was taken to explain and reinforce the major reference 
points (i.e., the propositions) and tests were administered 
to ensure their comprehension. This was considered import¬ 
ant because the theoretical discussion of problem solving 
assumed * comprehension 1 of reference points. 

After each major proposition, a battery of problems 
was administered, beginning with very easy and immediate 
applications of the proposition, and advancing in difficulty 
until a point was reached where no solutions were forth¬ 
coming from any member of the class. 

The problems were presented on mimeographed sheets of 
paper on which a diagram, a statement of the given facts and 
a statement of the required facts were given. The student 
was also required to record the beginning and finishing time 
for each problem in locations provided for that purpose. 

A typical sheet is shown in Appendix D. 

The problem battery usually extended over more than 
one period. The student worked at his own pace, and it was 
frequently pointed out to him that the number of problems 
attempted was not so important as the correctness of the 
solutions which were offered. Thus the student was in no 
ostensible way competing against time limits, nor was he 
T pressured T to keep up to other members of the group. In 




180 


fact, every attempt was made to minimise guessing behaviour 
by concealing the differences in rate of performance by 
different subjects in the group. 

The work of each student was examined and marked 
daily so that evidence of upper bounds was readily available. 
The sequence of problems was continued until it was evident 
that each student had reached a point where he was solving 
problems incorrectly or had given up. At this point the 
sequence was terminated and a new proposition introduced. 

Each period during the problem session was introduced 
by considering problems which had been attempted by all the 
students on the previous day. All problems were solved 
using the strategy* previously defined, as illustrations 
of its method and certainty of success. 

To further ensure the availability of the problem* 
defining strategy, each student was provided with a 
^problem-solving sheet 1 (Appendix D). Here the steps of the 
strategy were explicitly stated and a table showing the 
permissible propositions for each type of decision was given. 
The subjects were allowed, and expected, to keep this sheet 
available and to make use of it during the problem-solving 
sessions. 

The author had observed in his own teaching, that the 
cumbersome notation employed--this is particularly true of 
angles--caused an unnecessary extra source of confusion. 


, ’ ' r,j ■ ■ • . 

:o ; ‘ i> oJ -i oir BQoim^eTrlh rite ^'il&^ociocr 

. 

.'i ft ..• t ' o' \t,' V7 .■ o 

v.i !; (’.o, r -• r ; c ". • ‘".o. -;o" ' obo 

■ ■ ; >' - •' l : o • , 

' 

■ ■ . r ‘ ' 0 

• ... ; • . . , . ■'/ ■ ■ .•> . • - >t;. 'O ■ ■, i. 

- 

' : 01. V : ’ ■ ■ 

. •■■■.■■■■' '' • • : •' 

-r i 

' 

- 

, 

. O '0'.: :' r 

' ; ■ i. - - J. ■ 3 ! ' 





181 


Moreover, the traditional demonstration of the »proof J which 
requires the elaboration of each item compared, soon involves 
so much sheer writing that the student may spend by far the 
greater part of the allotted time writing down proofs rather 
than thinking, For the purposes of the experiment, an 
abridged notation was used which substituted algebraic 
symbols whenever possible and which required only the 
elaboration of the logical steps in the proof. 

Various means were employed to maintain optimum 
motivation including the usual appeals to term marks. In 
addition, the problem series began with problems of diff¬ 
iculty index zero, so that all students had at least period¬ 
ic experiences of success. The author also wrote remarks 
on the solutions which were intended to convey the impre¬ 
ssion that the student*s work was satisfactory and that 
continued effort would be rewarded with at least a pass mark, 
irrespective of actual results. Fortunately, the author was 
able to make good this promise. 

No outside assignments were given, nor were textbooks 
of any kind employed in the class, or available to the 
students. Thus, the problem-solving activity of the stud¬ 
ents was confined to the classroom. At all times, the 
students were impressed with the necessity of working by 
themselves and asking for help was systematically discouraged. 




• e 

■ 


, 








'■ 




: I, ’ . . • . ", . ' > 




11 n !,'•■:> .mm v " 

. 




- 

rjjiv $j 

• 

„ 




.. 




" .\. \ O-j i i i K ' 

- 

. 

■ . 

. 


182 


7. Preliminary Scoring and Tabulation , The daily 
work of each student (each problem) was analysed and entered 
on a large sheet under the following headings: 

(1) Solution Correct. 

(2) Solution nearly correct: one minor error. 

(3) Solution partly correct: one major error. 

(4) Solution incomplete, but correct as far as given. 
(5>) Solution incomplete: partial solution contains 

errors. 

(6) Incorrect solution: complete and contains two 
or more major errors. 

(7) No solution offered. 

(8) Time required for any of the above solutions. 

(9) Original or unusual solutions. 

(10) Logical Errors: 

(a) Assumption of facts not given. 

(b) Misuse of proposition: stating proposition 
where required facts are not given. 

(c) Use of an illegitimate authority; generally 
a proposition not yet taken. 

(d) Assuming what is to be proved. 

(e) Illogical conclusion from two given premises. 

(f) Bluff: an argument which concludes with the 
required facts but which is not based on a 
logical analysis. 

(g) Omission of necessary steps. 

Thus, for each individual, and each class, a complete 
day-by-day record of problem-solving performance was avail¬ 
able. In all, approximately 9,000 problems, representing 
investments of the students* times ranging from a few seconds 
to half an hour, were analysed. 


Measurement of Problem Difficulty 

Two measures of problem difficulty have already been 
indicated and demonstrated. It will be the purpose of this 
section to examine these further in the light of the present 






» 




a, 


„ 

. 




: 


■V( 




. . 

■ 'i ... ’ ... 

I ' ; 


, ■ . r JijXo 

- 

* 



* 




; 

' 

. 

' ' I 

l)<: \i f. . * \ . !: ? i : ■ 1 : 

. u-; \ ! :■ ; ‘ *' r • /• j - . •" ■ -V J 

Jr 'S.i « ' t . ■ 




- 








183 


investigation,, 

The following table shows the problem-solving 
performance of a grade 10 student over the four consecutive 
quarters of the experimental period. The entries represent 
the percentage of problems in each cell which were correctly 

p 

solved by the subject in question. 

Table 29 

Stability of Problem-Solving Performance 


Index of Problem Difficulty 

01234 


First Quarter 

100 

67 

25 

0 

Second Quarter 

100 

75 

33 

0 i 

Third Quarter 

100 

75 

25 

0 

Fourth Quarter 

100 

75 

33 

0 


It is clear that this subject exhibited a well- 
defined upper bound since he solved no problems beyond 
difficulty index 3. However, it is important to note that' 
not all problems below the upper bound were solved; in fact, 

^This profile has been chosen for illustration purp¬ 
oses because it is exceptionally well-defined. A measure 
of the stability of the scores at each level of difficulty 
is given by the intra-class coefficient of correlation 
(Haggard, 1958) which has a value of .97 in this case* 





















the percentage tended to increase gradually over successive 
categories of decreasing problem difficulty. It is also 
evident that in prediction of performance in this case, 
something more than a statement of upper bounds is possible, 
viz., that the student is likely to solve all problems in 
the interval 0-1, approximately three-quarters of the 
problems in the interval 1-2, approximately one-third of the 
problems in the interval 2-3 and no problems above difficulty 
index 3* It may well be that for educational purposes (in 
the sense of classroom grouping), this student would be 
considered to have a practical * upper bound of 2, since he 
solves less than one-half of the problems in subsequent 
categories. 

Another consideration centres around the ! strength 1 
of the measure of problem difficulty. In the profile above, 
for example, problem difficulty was assessed from the diff¬ 
iculty index (percentage pass) converted to a standard 
score. If the first-half and last-half upper-bound scores 
are correlated for all members of the group, the coefficient 
which results is a measure of the stability of the individ¬ 
ual^ performance relative to the group. This does not 
exclude the possibility that trends are present within the 
group, and so the existence of a high coefficient may be 
taken as a necessary, but not sufficient condition for the 





, 


- 


v* 


> - : : ’ : • •, , L ■ . i S :i C OiJ 




.^ f o . «■■■• ' • - r ■ ' . - j • v ' v • : * >0 •> 

■ • •• f. ■: : 






* 


. i 








. 


, 





















185 


existence of upper bounds. 

While this type of stability may be adequate for deal¬ 
ing with individual differences within the classroom, the 
existence of upper bounds requires that problem difficulty 
be measured independently of the group. For the external 
quantification of problem difficulty, we must resort to 
model construction, i.e., we suppose that the individual 
solves the problem in a certain manner, and on this assump¬ 
tion, we calculate the number of operations performed, and 
hence infer difficulty. We must realize at the outset, 
however, that models are only approximations to reality. In 
the attempt to quantify, we must necessarily gloss over many 
of the subleties of human thinking. 

Two models have already been considered: the deduc¬ 
tion model, and the uncertainty model. They will be exam¬ 
ined in turn in the following pages. 

1. The Deductive Measure of Problem Difficulty . Since 
the deductive measure—i.e., the number of statements 
required in the proof—is used as a basis for assigning 
marks by many high school teachers, it is well to estimate 
its validity as a measure of problem difficulty. For this 
purpose, the deductive lengths of the 86 problems of the 
grade 10 battery were determined, and profiles constructed 
similar to the one shown above. The determination of deduc¬ 
tive length was made on the basis of the listed axioms and 





186 


deductions of the system (Appendix D) and so represents a 
refinement of the teachers 1 measure. The correlation between 
deductive length and the standardized, experienced diff¬ 
iculty index amounted to .66 (N=86). Moreover, the consis¬ 
tency of the practical upper bounds (defined in this case 
as the level in the difficulty scale above which the 
individual will solve less than one problem in two) is 
indicated by the first-half, second-half coefficient of ♦Sip. 

While neither correlation is spectacularly high, 
there is some indication here that the traditional method 
is moderately valid, and there is a strong indication that 
upper bounds—even though defined in this somewhat crude 
measure, do exist. 

2. The Uncertainty Measure of Problem Difficulty . In 
the development of the uncertainty model, it was seen that 
some assumption had to be made concerning the subjective 
probabilities* Each assumption gives rise to a different 
variation of the uncertainty model* 

(a) Model A : w i;j =l/N i1 

In this case, the subject gives equal weight to the 
various propositions. It has been shown that this tends to 
maximize the difficulty of each decision. 


(b) Mbdel B ; 





• ' ; ■ ; 

5 : ‘ ; ■ •' ' 

'■ . 

- . , . 

v ^ ' ,< ><;.* ' ■ ; ■ ■ •’ ■' " \ ;r - " ■ • ' : '0 ■ *' 

}- - - . 

i 

- rr ys.or ‘ luf r ' ^ , ^ 

. 


I 

/f > : ; V-. ; ' V,.: - ■; fv ; ' *• ; ' o - '■*' O' r ■ 

- - : j ' • ■ ■ \ . : d . . ' : ' ) ‘".i V ' r ' 

■ 

: { " 





187 


In this case the subjective probabilities are equal 
to the objective probabilities for the set in question. 

This would seem at first glance to be an unrealistic assump¬ 
tion, because it can be argued that the subject beginning a 
set of problems cannot know what the relative frequencies 
will be until he has, in fact, finished the set. 

Offsetting this, however, is the effect of •proposi¬ 
tion dominance*. The fact that a particular proposition 
precedes a set of problems tends to give strong emphasis to 
the particular proposition as the proper choice for a 
certain type of alternative. Thus, a strong subjective 
probability for the particular proposition is introduced. 

It also happens that the set of problems following 
the proposition does tend to use this proposition extensive¬ 
ly, so that p^. is high for the proposition in question. 

Thus there occurs a fairly close matching^ of p. . and w... 

J J 

Model G: w..^relative frequency up to the problem 

-———— i j 

in question. This model appears quite plausible on the 
surface. It will be shown however, that it leads to some 


3There seems to be, in fact, a definite psychology of 
problem construction. The test constructor aims primarily 
at providing a sequence of increasingly difficulty applica¬ 
tions of the proposition in question (thus proposition 
dominance 1 ), and beyond, that he invokes previous proposi¬ 
tions in a more-or-less random fashion. The matching of the 
subjective and objective probabilities occurs because the 
student acquires a sensitivity to this method. 










. 1 •• - f s - v ■ V ■ ■ 

■/; ", . ... ' v : ■ 1: i ■.... :• • ‘ < • 

J oc ■ ■ : : ' i- 1 




. 

■ ■ 


1 














„ 












■ 




















• 1 

. > i<); • > j 1 


, 






i 

. ' 


- 

. 














188 

unrealistic results in not allowing for 'proposition 
dominance 1 . 

The models were compared in the pilot study by consid¬ 
ering the table of reference of a student who is just about 
to attempt the set of problems following Proposition III. 

Following Model B, the relative frequencies for the 
set of problems is given in Table 30. 

Table 30 

Subjective Probabilities for Uncertainty Analysis 

Model B 


To 

Prove 

Axiom A 

I 

II 

III 



.14 

0 

.10 

.76 

Theoretical 
difficulty of 
angle decision 
=1.03 units a 

k 

it 

k 

0 

0 

1.0 

0 

Theoretical 
difficulty of 
line decision 
=0.00 units 

<1 

ill 

<3 

0 

0 

1.0 

0 



a The difficulty of the decision is calculated in each 
case by means of the uncertainty formula 

U=-Z P ± log 2 wi 

This illustrates very clearly the phenomenon of 


'proposition dominance*; here. Proposition III dominates 













■ 








. 


• . .. . : 5 .. 



, 








•;' 1 ■ : 


% ■ : i 






• . - ) if . 













- 










* 






























. 












189 


the angle decisions in the set of problems following it 0 

Suppose next that the individual is operating accord¬ 
ing to Model A. He would then possess the following table 
of reference. 

Table 31 

Subjective Probabilities for Uncertainty Analysis 

Model A 


To 

Prove 

Axiom A 

I 

II 

III 


A_ = Z_ 

.25 

.25 

.25 

.25 

Theoretical 
difficulty of 
angle decision 
=2.00 units. 

It 

0 

0 

1.0 

0 

Difficulty of 
line decision 
=0.00 units 

0 

in 

< 

0 

0 

1.0 

0 



We notice here, the expected increase in the diff¬ 
iculty of angle decision. 

Again, suppose that the individual is operating 
according to Model C, in which case he possesses Table 32 
at the beginning of the exercise. 

The relative frequencies under III are all zero 
because Proposition III has not yet been used in a choice 
decision. In this case, the quantity 


















11; J j 1 t lit ifi'.i ' ■ -tx t ■ o : ■ : 



■ 


. 







io •> 

j ; ‘'V 












. 


:■ : : . -io ■ i; r.; *•; -> or: i o • ' * < o\> ro . Q» 

r ' : ’ o t 

■ ; i ■ • 5 ... 

; £ ., ' ■ . ■ ■ O ‘ ., ' ; ; "■' '■ i * i' V - O ■ ; 

, 

- I : ■ £ . S-‘ ).I: o • i | 

i .i . . • •• * ■ ■ 






190 

U=-ZPi log wj 

=-(.14 log. 53+0 log. 314+,10 log . 151+.76 log 0) 

= OO 


Table 32 

Subjective Probabilities for Uncertainty Analysis 

Model C 


To 

Prove 

Axiom A 

I 

II 

III 


.515 

.304 

.152 

0 

-£=J. 

0 

0 

1.0 

0 

< 

ill 

< 

0 

0 

1.0 

0 


Thus, if we proceeded with this set of probabilities, 
the first problem would have a calculated difficulty value 
of infinity. If the entries in the probability table were 
assumed to be the relative frequencies at the end of the 
first problem, then a similar calculation gives: 

U=4.20 

which is again, far too high. If we assume that probabilities 
are equal to the relative frequencies at the end of the set 
of problems, then, 

U=l.80 

which lies closer to the Model B value of 2.00 than the 
Model C value of 1.03. This model completely ignores the 



















191 


effect of proposition dominance which proved to be a very 
real effect in the problems under consideration. This model 
was therefore dismissed as inadequate to explain the 
observed difficulty. 

Models A and B were compared in terms of the accuracy 
of their assessment of problem difficulty as compared to 
experienced difficulty. In both the summer and autumn 
studies. Model B proved to yield results corresponding more 
closely to experienced difficulty and it will be used in 
all subsequent discussions. 

An estimate of the validity of the uncertainty model 
is given by a correlation of .8? with experienced difficulty 
at the grade 10 level^ (N=86). A first-half, second-half 
profile correlation of .90 indicates that the practical 
upper bounds (defined as for the deduction model) exhibited 
considerable stability, and it is evident that this measure 
offers some improvement over the deductive measure. The 
circumstances which favour one measure over the other are 
considered in the following section. 

The Pilot Study: Analysis of Individual Problems 

The pilot investigation was conducted before the data 
allowing estimates of model validity were available. In 

^-The deductive and uncertainty measures are substan¬ 
tially related, yielding a product-moment r of .70 for the 
grade 10 battery (N=86). 





<<■;: bi'-vo'-tj ■ 

f ■ " ft }i '■ ' " 1 

C 0 

. 

14 

V :• ■ i ■ ■ - • J. • 

: I ‘ 


. i, JL \ ; ■ 1 O d 

' 

' 



. ' 0 ■ L 

1 ■ 0 




„ - ■ 




r; '> ' e: f /Id,; 



J 




r . *s ' - 









* 

. 

. 

■ 

; •' ' •. ' . ' •' t ‘ : ' 

_ 

n jo ; * yn :, ... v ?. .?'• m; y;/ ' o *: >. ' 

, 

uJ: • _: i. 





; Jo 11 




. L •; 




- 

- 



192 


many ways, the study of individual solutions corroborated 
this later data and showed the particular areas where the 
two models failed to correspond to the method actually 
employed in solution. Some particular instances are consid¬ 
ered below. 

1. Solutions to the easier problems, especially 
those which followed immediately after a proposition, tended 
to deviate from the analysis strategy. The following simple 
example followed immediately after Proposition XVIII. 

Given: XP=Z.Q 

Prove: PR=QR 

R 

Fig. 2l|. Geometry problem, illustrating a deviation 
from the analysis strategy. 

Here, the analysis strategy would require the 
individual (under to consider all the possible proposi¬ 

tions which may be used to prove that one line equals 
another, and to make a choice among the three resulting 
alternatives. However, the fact that this problem followed 
directly after Proposition XVIII usually led to an immediate 
enunciation of this authority as proof. 'There was little 
evidence of a consideration of alternatives in the verbalized 







193 


solutions of problems of this kind. Generalizing somewhat, 
the analysis approach was seldom in evidence until a gap 
length of two or three units was involved.^ 


2. Another deviation from the analysis strategy was 
seen in the tendency toward Spontaneous* deduction—without 
regard to its relevance to the solution—which often took 
place when a diagram occurred which obviously belonged to a 
particular proposition. The example below illustrates this 
point. ^ 



Pig. 25. Geometry problem, illustrating deviation 
from the analysis strategy. 


This problem occurred after Proposition II; its 
solution requires the congruence of triangles ACB and ACD. 


^The uncertainty measure lends to compensate to some 
extent for the increased number of prepositions (T^) through 
the principle of ^proposition dominance*. 

^Again, this situation is to be thought of as a 
deviation from the analysis strategy which is nevertheless 
adequately dealt with by the uncertainty formula. It happens 
that spontaneous deduction usually occurs in conjunction with 
a fairly complex diagram, and in this case the uncertainty 
measure tends to be high as well. 





o; 

: ' 

. : . ! 


ncfltslyab 'xuf'oGCU ;*■ 

■: ■> .. . ■ ■ ■■ ' 

; 






194 


A surprisingly large proportion of students immediately 
marked L AEB=Z-CBD, although this contributes nothing to the 
solution. In fact, it further distracts and divides atten¬ 
tion from the proper analysis. 

An even stronger urge to make the * obvious deduction* 
seems to attend the configuration, 

A 



B 


C 


in which the angles B and C are almost invariably and 
immediately marked equal (in complex diagrams) whether or not 
this contributes to the solution. It is not suggested here 
that the practice of ’spontaneous* deduction is always 
deleterious; it often happens that if such results are mark¬ 
ed on the diagram, without obscuring its essentials, the net 
result is a decrease in the gap length. 

Having considered two cases which show the analysis 
strategy to disadvantage, we next consider a case where the 
superiority of this method over the deduction model becomes 
obvious. 

3. The uncertainty estimate of difficulty is invar¬ 
iably closer to experienced difficulty, if there is consid¬ 
erable complexity of geometric configuration in the problem 




' 


Mo . . . '': V ■ }: 













■ ■- " 














- . * 








■ 


, . ■ : i "< ■ ' 

. 


; .. ,-rJ v.\- V> : ..- 0 -U..> 
















195 


under study. 

This is particularly true in cases such as the 
following, in which triangles overlap. The problem occurs 
after Proposition II. 


A 



Given: AB=AC 
AD=AE 
Prove: DC=BE 


Pig. 26. Geometry problem, illustrating the 
superiority of the uncertainty measure. 


The deductive proof inself involves only two state¬ 
ments : 

Proposition II—► AABE=AADG 
Definition of Congruence—>BE=DC 
However, the uncertainty analysis shows clearly the 
effect of the multiplicity of triangles, for any of 5 pairs 
of triangles may be considered as a possible choice to prove 
the required fact. A recorded verbal solution will be 
valuable at this point. The solution is set out as it 
appeared on the sheet employed by the author to record 
solutions in the pilot study. 

The subject here was a fifteen-year old boy, with a 
Wechsler IQ of 112—a boy who proved to be a slow, but 
effective problem solver. 






. . • 

. .. ■ ' ' ' t 

. 



; : 'J 


[ ii ; ■ , .- i' ^ V ? '■ 1 : C • • i’ 1 ; ■)' : . v. 

. ", • 



' 


■ zl j 

■ Oifij 



olaboooq r, v ho*%tY&i 


o % 


0 . 0 


l r. ii ■ ■ v ■ ■ ) 


» 

'J i 




* 





■; O ' ■ 0 .) ■ ; V'.o b o’^ol o; 






. 

■ 

’ 


■o- 

. 

| • - - V 

oowo • : 



, 

J bovo-iq i v S r . v, 


- . i 

j: 



. 





196 


Time 


Sub j ect’ s 


Behaviour 


Comment 


0-20 sec. 


30 sec. 


Reads problem aloud. Begins by Following 
tracing out lines to be proved analysis 
equal. Looks at problem-solving strategy, 
sheet. "I need congruent 
triangles to use Proposition II." 


Traces lightly over ADXB and 
AEXC. Marks XDXB=XEXC. Pauses, 
looking for sides. "I’d need DX 
or BX,--(Pause), but they’re 
part of what I’m supposed to 
prove. Let’s see, what else?" 


Considers the 

most obvious 

alternative. 

Dismisses it 

temporarily 

while going on 

to other 

triangles. 

Spontaneous 

deduction 

exhibited. 


90 sec. 


150 sec. 


240 sec. 


Traces out ABDE and ADCE, Enumerating 

ADBC and AEBC, ADXE and alternatives. 

ABXC. (Pause). 


Returns to ADBC and AEBC. 
"Let’s see—I’ve got BC common 
and BD (pause) equals EC." 
(Demonstrates and marks on 
diagram.) "Maybe if I can 
prove Z.B=AC (pause)--they both 
have two smaller pieces." 

After a pause, considers ABDE 
and ADCE. Traces out known 
sides. "We still don’t know 
the angles." 

Traces out AABE and AEBC. 

Turns page sideways. "Wo." 
Very long pause. 

"Well, let’s see—I want to 
prove a line equals a line so 
I need Proposition II, and 
congruent triangles. There’s 


Examines an¬ 
other alterna¬ 
tive and makes 
some deductions 
which do not 
contribute to 
the solution. 


Comes back to 

analysis 

strategy. 








z 








, 














. 

, 


" i ' 

. 

. 


* 

t > Xi A 


. 


. 




197 


Time 

Subject»s Behaviour 

Comment 


ADBC and AEBC, etc., (lists all 
he had before and pauses after 
each, reconsidering its 
possibilities). r *'There must 
be some more. 11 (Draws each 
pair separately.) 


480 sec. 

Locates AABE and AADC and 
solves at once. 

Solution 
obtained in 

8 minutes. 


The impressive thing about this solution was the 
return to the analysis strategy when an equilibrium point 
was reached, and the inability to completely dismiss the 
various alternatives from mind. The uncertainty concept 
seems to give an accurate picture of the difficulties en¬ 
countered in this case. 


Prediction Diagrams 

Since both measures of problem difficulty have some 
validity and tend to complement each other to some extent, 
it would seem conceivable that some combination of them 
could be used to advantage, particularly with reference to 
prediction. One-dimensional prediction graphs are common 
enough in psychometric measurement (Wesman, 1949)5 they 
consist essentially of a scattergram of scores, a prediction 
variable plotted against the criterion variable. This idea 





















. 
















: . 






* 








































° 




, 





198 


was extended in the present case to two dimensions—the 
’uncertainty’ and ’deductive* measures of problem difficulty 
were used as the rectangular co-ordinates of each problem 
for the subjects of the pilot study (Pig* 27). The correct 
solutions are recorded in blue, the incorrect in red, and 
the time of solution is written under each problem. The 
numbers recorded along the axes represent solution times 
for correct, incorrect, and combined questions in the given 
row or column respectively. The percentage of correct 
solutions in each row and column is also given. 

Upper bounds in both the uncertainty or deductive 
measures are in evidence here; in addition, the profile 
shows a regular decrease in the proportion of problems 
solved as the difficulty level rises. Judging from the 
solutions offered, the area of ’mastery*--i.e., the region 
of the plane in which the student can solve a majority of 
problems—seems to be roughly within the region defined by 
the equation, 

(Deductive measure) + (Uncertainty measure) =Constant 

This would indicate that a suitable estimate of 
problem difficulty would be given by the sum of the two 
separate measures. Such a measure would tend to rectify the 
tendency of the uncertainty measure to overestimate the 
difficulty of problems of small gap length, and the tendency 





; ’ ! . ■> ■ ; : 

V :) vi 1 > ^ ; • n' 

* 

> : 4 ,OWS f • ■- ■ 


’ 

. „ 

, ft> ir i '. :j' •.K'tutyij 

‘ ' ' 1 , '' O I:-"; - " : ■ 

; o " r .1 r ■ o VO'X 

• 

■ 


' - - > * - • - : ■■■'.' 


_.. 

' 

} ( ■ i 

^ , J -J-j . ".V' ’“V ' : ' ' ■■ ,o'V| 

: ■ ' . ' ■' ' >X.\;< ' ' " ' ■ 


, ' 











199 


o 








a- 

. vO 



o 







1 Pv 


o 

El? 

o 

tel* 

£1 £ 

tit 

t4 

o 

111? 

Ell 




•4- 

-d" 

CA HI 

U\ 

O 

-d* 

H 

|2|| 


l>lS 

p|™ 

H* 

a 3 

bI pi? 
pi t 

* s 0 
Pis as 

til 

W$ 


CO 

CM 

—8 

o 

-d- 

CM 

a-^t 

o N -^t 

CM 

tA 

A- 

i—! 




4 

H ^ 

Elf Pil 

Mm 0 S 

Ml# EIS 

a* 

*! 

iaR 

£l$ 

\a$ 

ti° 


CM 

1A 

H 

qsH 

)S^ 

O' 

-it 

sH 




=l§ 

\Z) S 

o 

tl? 

Q 

i=» t: 

PS 

H $ 

Is Is I 

w? 

i-i is \;\'? 
US 1-|^ 


A~ 

OO 

o£ 

vO 

rH 

-ct 

A- 






0 St 

u\S 

1=12 
o* 

o . . Vo 
o of (=1 


C 

A- 

CM 

O 

O 

rH 

A- 

CM 

oo 

a- 

vO 

1A 


CO 

CM 

i—i 


-P 

O 

<D 

fn 

fH 

O 

o ; 



O o 
co ro 
■^-=t 

O O sO 

CO O vO 
rH CO OJ 

CO CO 

a-\a o 
fH CM CM 

A- O-M- 

co a=co . 

COrH 

o o 

M3 vO 




O 

°o ; 

CM 

U\ 

1A 

CO 

00 . 

o i 

o 

_cd_ 



Fig. 27 . Geometry solving performance over the first four propositions. 
























































































































200 


of the deductive measure to underestimate the difficulty of 
problems involving complex figures. 

The study of the time required for solution also 
offers some points of interest. The average solution times 
for successive intervals in both dimensions show regular 
increases; moreover, the increases for the correct solutions 
seem to be approximately linear on the uncertainty scale. 
(This becomes more evident when several profiles are put 
together.) If true, this would indicate that the raw un¬ 
certainty measure offers an interval scale of difficulty 
(if we assumed that problem difficulty is proportional to 
time required for solution). 

The diagram can be used to predict the probability of 
success on future problems. If the measures are weighted 
equally, the expected value of the probability of success 
for each cell may be obtained by averaging the percentage 
passes in the row and column corresponding to the given 
cell. Similar calculations can be made for the expected 
time 0 

The success of such predictions can be assessed from 
Pig. 28, where the solutions for 28 problems following 
Proposition IV have been recorded. The outcomes of the four 
easiest and the 8 hardest problems were correctly predicted. 
Moreover, in the ’region of doubt’—i.e.. 


near the upper 






, 

■ , 


. 
















, 


















. 1 

* 

, 

k >/.' 1 j ■ uji: b ■ > ' 'v .• • V rU5 _i' l ^ 





201 


ft! 







CO 

o- 

MD 

U\ 

-=± 

on 

CM 

rH 

O 













INI 




UN 

oo 

U\ 

UnO o 
00 

UN 



f&t 

0 a 0 
& 0 0 

sat if 

Hi ii 

m 

$ 

£ 



O' 

8^3 

on 

\ t- 

W 




SBf 

$32 It 

$gs 

1$ H $ 

OfJ ^ CVi 

m 

8b § 

ON 

co 

ON 

^vo r- 

sO sC> 

r-~ | 

o 

8 







J8gl 

ON 

O 

ON 

O' 







• 









Actual % 
Expected % 

CT' 

£>- 

o 

UN 

-=t 

ON 

CM 





V\ SO so 
ON ON CD 
H IA 4- 

-3- t— 

U\ u\ o 

rH -=t ^ 

c*- ^ 

H H 

H! H 

O o 

vO vO 

CM CM 




o 

O 

H 

O 

UN 

O 

9 


Actual % 



o 

CO 

C\l 

u\ 

un 

on 

00 

Expected fc 


Pig. 28. Use of combined uncertainty and deductive measure in the prediction of 
geometry performance. 








































202 


bound (square region in centre)--the predicted percentage of 
passes (1|0? 0 ) agrees closely with the actual observed value 
(37 %). Again, the predicted times for both correct and 
incorrect solutions show a fair amount of agreement with the 
observed values. 

In general, it is possible to say that this student 
exhibited predictable stability in geometry performance, and 
while the prediction was made after four propositions had 
been covered, prediction after two propositions would have 
been nearly as accurate. 

The Continuous Refinement of Strategy 

Some profiles did not exhibit the clear-cut upper 
bounds illustrated in the above example. Some students 
exhibited steady increases in the upper bound, measured over 
successive time intervals; others shoiked a steady decrease. 

The former group are of particular interest to us 
here, not only because their potential as problem-solvers 
would seem to be almost unlimited, but because they have 
somehow managed to escape from what might seem to be--from 
the point of view of the theory--necessary limits to their 
performance. In a later chapter, some personality character¬ 
istics of this group will be considered; for the present, 
the recorded solutions of another problem will be examined, 
since it reveals how the superior problem-solver modifies 



' 

- 

' 

, 

• jq - .... . 

. 

: v, . ; ■ ■ - . ■ v I'. : ' > •' ■ ■ ■ ■ • ' * ' v - 

:/ n\.; , ' < r 

.... 

- 






the static strategy to his own advantage. The solution will 


be set out, as before, in the fashion in which it was 
recorded. 



Fig. 29. Geometry problem 4* 


Time 


Subject f s Behaviour Comment 


0-10 sec. 


20 sec. 


Reads problem. Marks DB 
DC equal, also marks L B 
equal to ZC (=X). 


and The spontaneous 
deduction exhib¬ 
ited here, turns 
out to be useful 
in this case. 


"Prove one angle equal to 
another--!! would not be 
congruence here--or parallel 
lines--it must be angles 
within a triangle. Proposition 
XVI or III." (Pause),—"XVI 
in this case." 


Seems to have 
divided angle 
decision into 
three general 
categories. 


40 sec. Marks XDAF~a, XDFA~b, then 3 Directed 3 

marks XEFC=b. deduction. 

50 sec. "To compare b and a, we have 

to get them in another tri¬ 
angle." Traces out triangles 
with pencil. 










B.f -l'' d' l 


r .o2 .r 






. 












•0 

. 


. 


i:do jj 

. 

. 



0 




. ■ 









204 


Time 

Sub j e c t 1 s Bella 1 vi our 

Comment 


"a+x=90° inAABE." 

Pause. 


70 sec. 

Marks AFEC=90°. "InAFCE, 

More * directed* 


b+x equals 90°. Therefore 
b+x equals a+x and a equals 

deduction. 


b . n 

Solution in 85 
sec. 


The subject in this case was an extremely bright 15 
year old boy, and the problem occurs in the exercise follow¬ 
ing Proposition XVIII. It appears that the subject was 
still following the main path of the analysis strategy, but 
that he had effected further division within the general 
categories of the basic strategy provided him. Thus, 
instead of a general * angle decision 1 , he employed three 
angle decisions based on congruency, parallelism, and rela¬ 
tions among the angles of a triangle. Moreover, he seems to 
consider only the latter possibility-—we might say that he. 
had high subjective probability for it—so that, in effect, 
the choice narrowed from 7 to two propositions. Thus, one 
characteristic of the problem solver who makes continued 
progress in geometry, is that he counteracts the increasing 
multiplicity of propositions by organizing them into cat¬ 
egories which he associates with certain geometrical 








! 


' 

. 

' 


„lY 










* 












■ 








. 

- 

. 

i. ! - -■ 




. .. ... 1 3 




.itt 


.. J.Y 0;YO d.ii’3 ; 

- i ... 




. ' „ ' - ' ' 

: ' . . . > . Y ' • 

: . . 1 ,. . "y' ■ ■ - 


V/X X : . .-Y';.' 

e ' . . ... .. 

.• ■- YI'; . ' . ' X., . . • ' - ■ Yi- 

. r £:: ■ 'y.y y t .1. '. . .;.o x x.xx xcxxo 

' . ■ . ■ • v •. Jy: ' : i ' . : 

■ ■ , : 

: =. v; ;• '. o •» x.; •:? Y- '.x> 

;^ ,.;>, : xx ■ y;yy! 0*1 5 






205 


configurations. 

This principle of increasing complexity of organiza¬ 
tion can be set against claims for any genuine discovery. 
Very few instances of originality actually occurred in the 
solution of geometry problems in the study. In fact, the 
occurrence of the necessity for any new 'type* of proof— 
such as equality by congruence, or indirect proof--invar- 
iably rendered the pupil incapable of obtaining a solution. 
What we do find, in so-called * original * proofs, is usually 
a transfer of technique. 

Another important aspect of this proof is the occu¬ 
rrence of 1 directed T deduction. In this problem, marking 
ZJ3 equal to ^LC, Z.DFA equal to ^EFC and ziCEF equal to 90°, 
all contributed to a reduction of gap length and consequent¬ 
ly, to a reduction in the number of analysis steps required. 

The subject was later asked to explain what prompted 
him to mark these angles. It happened that the first 
deduction (viz., Z.B=ZC) was truly spontaneous, accomplished 
without any particular thought of its consequences, indeed, 
accomplished before the problem had really been considered 
at all. This was not true with respect to the other 
deductions, however. For example, when the subject marked 
^-DFA=Z.CFE, he had decided that angles -DAF and AFD would have 
to be related to angles in other triangles and he felt that 
the equality of zLAFD and £CFE had something to do with this. 






206 


although he was not certain just what this connection was. 
Thus, the deduction in question was not undirected (as for 
example, ^DFE=£AFC would have been) but was directed toward 
some phase of the analysis. 

Two results stand out in this discussion. When we 
construct models, we are employing a static method of look¬ 
ing at the subjects behaviour. The model does not ad¬ 
equately allow for the incorporation of broad sections of 
experience into patterns. However, the basic hypothesis 
concerning the constancy of hypercathexis remains, but the 
individual who establishes successively higher equilibrium 
points manages to escape from the constant equilibrium level 
which would result from a fixed strategy. 

While the analysis and deductive methods of determ¬ 
ining problem difficulty are to this extent inadequate, 
since they tend to overestimate problem difficulty for 
students adopting generalized strategies, yet it will be 
shown in the following chapter that they are useful in that 
they do assess and predict problem difficulty for a majority 
of subjects. 







* 

, 

• 


-- 




















CHAPTER XII 


THE GEOMETRY STUDY—PART II 

This chapter deals in part with the evidence obtained 
from the autumn study, which can be construed as supporting 
the hypothesis that stable upper bounds will occur in the 
students T geometry solving performance* A preliminary over¬ 
view will be provided in order to give some measure of 
coherence, since the chapter might otherwise appear somewhat 
fragmentary. 

We shall first consider the question of the stability 
of problem-solving performance relative to the group (*weak ? 
stability). Then, the problem of 1 strong 1 stability (i.e., 
measured independently of the group) will be approached in 
three ways: 1. ! category* boundedness, 2.the effect of 
repeating problems, and 3»comparison of the matched grades 
10 and 12 groups. 

In a final section, the behaviour of one subject on 
problems which are below, at, and above, the upper bound 
will be considered. 

Consistency of Performance in Geometry 

It was mentioned in the previous chapter that a 
necessary, but not sufficient, condition for the existence 
of upper bounds would be the consistency of scores relative 












, ■ . • - 

■ . 




! J. 0 














. . ; . • . :: v 




• •; j ) /. o i w ; -I').' " ' ■■■ / ! • 

• » ( 

1 u .) r ' ;> ... ... i'. : \ ■ • • ; 0/ ') ‘1 /X : ■ x • • • vi ;• a. ; .i T: 

■;.n . x ; ‘ .■ v ; r ■ 1 . : ' : '• '-Xx/x 

. 

. 

, 


,; jr/xu 'o cx sA)no l .:1 x £>iu Xic.; :rj. 

..... 1 . • 
"•V d ... : ■ X x\; : - : •*10 yx>,. X ..u:) $ 









20 8 


to the group. Indices of difficulty (percentage passing) 
for each problem of the autumn battery were computed for 
grades 10 and 12, and then converted to C scores, measured 
from an arbitrary zero of -2.00 O’. 

Prom these scores, profiles were constructed similar 
to the one discussed previously. It was obvious from an 
inspection of these proviles that intra-individual perform¬ 
ances are highly consistent while inter-individual perform¬ 
ances varied considerably. Although intra-class coefficients 
for the T best’ and f worst T profiles were significant beyond 
the .01 level, this does not tell us much, since significance 
of the intra-class coefficient would be a minimum require¬ 
ment for relative stability. 

It was decided to calculate a product-moment coeffi¬ 
cient of correlation in the following way: The term work 
was divided into four sections, each consisting of 6 levels 
of difficulty. The percentage of problems solved correctly 
was computed for each cell. The percentage values were 
* smoothed T to offset the effect of arbitrary intervals. The 
resulting values were treated as the percentage solved at 
the centre of the interval in question. The interval values 
were checked until a pair was located in which (a) X^> 50, 

(b) 50. This upper bound was obtained by linear 

interpolation between the midpoints of these two Intervals. 









■ 


- 


I f 






' 















i i 


. 

, 

\, i. . -'O - 




o .?.x o 








. . 




\ • o 




o 








; J u.' o •; f • 


■ 


S" D 


■ 




; _v : ■: vrj ■ i JT>o v i 










■ 




' ■ ' 


■■ % 














•• 




d 











209 


Product-moment correlations were calculated between 
performance over the last half of the term and performance 
over (a) the first quarter, and (b) the first half* The 
results for grades 10 and 12 are shown below* 

Table 33 

Reliability of Prediction of Relative Performance on the 
Basis of First-quarter and First-half Performance 



Grade 10 

! Grade 12 

First Quarter 



and Second Half 

• 

co 

o 

.89 

First Half 



and Second Half 

C\J 

o 

© 

.93 


It is apparent from the table that the performance 
in geometry is highly consistent (relative to the group) at 
both grade levels. If we consider the subject ! s steady 
performance value to be defined by the work of the second 
half of the term, then the relative ! steady» position of the 
individual within the group can be predicted by the end of 
the first quarter (three weeks) with fair accuracy. Heed¬ 
less to say, prediction at the end of the first half Is even 
more accurate. This means that the teacher who has an accur¬ 
ate record of the students* performance can estimate 
relative ability within the class with sufficient accuracy 









■ 


•- 












■ s: 



' 

. 

1 



• 




. O’M 



. 












. ■ 

bU& 


■ ■ . . i) ' ■ [ : !) 

: 'i r * 

1 


; l ,) l : ■ ■' 

■ \ .. ' . JEM - ‘ 

— > „ . . 

. 

. . ;m . -i f • . •. • ;; . S'0:> •••. mm 

j . ■ . .... * . . . . . . ' ■ \ . 








210 


to divide into ability groups on this basis, and can be sure 
that such groups will be stable over fairly long intervals 
of time* Two observations may be made concerning the coeffi¬ 
cients. In the first place, their substantial size resulted 
from the fact that there existed an extremely wide variation 
in the ability to solve problems. At both grade levels, the 
best student solved approximately 10 times as many problems 
as the weakest student. (These distributions are reported 
later.) 

The increase in the grade 10 coefficient suggests a 
preliminary period of adjustment—at least for some students. 
However, once the adjustment or levelling off is accomplish¬ 
ed, the relative performance seems to remain stable over 
very long intervals of time. Indeed, the product-moment 
coefficient of correlation between the marks assigned to the 
grade 12 students by the author two years previously (i.e., 
when they were in grade 10) with the score earned in grade 
12 amounted to .88. 

An estimate of the reliability of the whole battery 
as a measure of relative geometry performance was made by 
inter-correlating the two halves and correcting by the 
Spearman-Brown formula. Thus a reliability coefficient of 
.96 at the grade 10 level (N=69) is obtained. This is not 
really surprising, since the battery represents from 16-19 






211 


hours of the students’ time. 

Boundedness of Problem-Solving Behaviour 

During the autumn investigation, the author had an 
opportunity to attend a district meeting of high school 
mathematics teachers and to explain his views concerning 
upper bounds in geometry performance. Most of the teachers 
concurred in the opinion that students do exhibit such 
bounds, but they questioned the practicability, from the 
teacher’s point of view, of expressing upper bounds in ”a 
rather meaningless unit of measurement”. 

When these teachers discuss the difficulty of a 
geometry deduction they employ a verbal scale which corre¬ 
sponds in part, to the problem’s occurrence in a sequence of 
problems of increasing complexity and in part to the number 
of propositions employed in its solution (deductive length). 
Thus, they speak of ’immediate applications of a proposition’ 
and ’two-step problems’ to indicate two orders of increasing 
problem difficulty. 

A combination of the uncertainty and deductive 
measures was employed to divide problems into four categories 
to which descriptive terms could be applied which would be 
meaningful to the teacher. To do this, the two measures for 
each problem were computed, converted to O' scores, and 
averaged (the distributions of problems in each measure were 







' \ 


■■v' J|V'M::f. 


, . - . . 

... ' - ■ ; ■ . \ " ; V .. ' : 

. 

: ■ ■ 












v;cX'T:a::> ,:•! .» 




. 


■ 




, 


: j. ;,r: ■/< : ^ r '- '> ' • 

' 

• “ v *! ? : . ■ r ■ ' • • f CfJ 


: . 




■-) rV ‘‘I 


' J ' J i 


: ' ; ■ 

o.» . 


;• • vi: c- .t r : 


0 l ■ ■ 

■ ; ■ 

; 

„ 

> 


- 


. f 


■ w-.'/ 








212 


comparable). 

A scrutiny of the results revealed two fairly well- 
defined clusters; category 1, cr < -2.0, which covered the 
easiest problems, and category 4* cr > +2.0, which covered the 
hardest problems. The remaining problems were divided into 
two equal-difficulty intervals: category 2, -2.0<cr<o , and 
category .0<cr<2.0. The four categories can be defined 
in the teacher’s descriptive terms as follows: 

1. Category One . The problems in this category could 
be further subdivided into four grades of difficulty. 

(a) Immediate application of a single proposition. Diagram 
similar to a proposition. 

Example: (following Proposition XVIII). 

Given: diagram 

Prove: AC=BC 



Fig. 30. Geometry problem representative of 
difficulty-category one. 

(b) Immediate application of a single proposition, but some 
part (e.g., a line) necessary for the proposition 
requires identification. 

Example: (following Proposition II). 








213 



Given: Diagram as 

marked. 

Prove: zp=ZR. 


Pig. 31. Geometry problem representative of difficulty- 
category one. 


(c) Immediate multiple application of a single proposition. 
Example: (following Proposition XVI). 



Given: Diagram as 

marked. 

Find: x, y and z. 


Fig. 32. Geometry problem representative of 
difficulty » category one. 


(d) A semi-immediate application of a single proposition; 


some obvious fact needed first. 
Example: (following Proposition II). 



Given: OA, OB, OC, 

OD, are radii 
of a circle. 

: ZAOB=ZDOC 

Prove: AB=DC 


Fig. 33. Geometry problem representative of 
difficulty - category one. 





. 







, 
























. 

• 









. . ■ 

- . 


' - 

. 



,, 

« 







214 


2. Category Two . The problems in this category were 
almost all two-step problems (i.e., involving two proposi¬ 
tions) in which the application is straightforward and the 
diagram is not complex. 

Example: (following Proposition XVIII). 



Pig. 3i|. Geometry problem representative of 
difficulty - category two. 

Example: (following Proposition XVIII). 



R Given: 

Prove: SN=NR 


Diagram as 
marked. 


Pig. 35. Geometry problem representative of 
difficulty - category two. 


3. Category Three . The problems in this category were 
for the most part, of two kinds. 

(a) Two-step problems with some complexity of diagram 
(especially overlapping triangles). 

Example: (following Proposition XVII). 






















■ 


CJ O 















: v * 
























. 




























£:> iD'X'itSS 




' 

, 

. 


















215 


A 



Given: AB=AC 

: ZEBC=XDCB 
Prove: DC=BE 


Fig. 36. Geometry problem representative of 
difficulty - category three. 

(b) Three-step problems which are relatively straight¬ 
forward. 

Example: (following Proposition XIV). 



Given: P and Q are 

the centres of 
the given 
circles. 

PA, PE, and QD, 
QB are radii 
of the circles. 
AP || BQ 

Prove: PE jj DQ, 


Fig. 37* Geometry problem representative of 
difficulty-category three. 


Ij.. Category Four . Problems were assigned to this 
category if they were more difficult than those in the 
previous categories. 

Example: (following Proposition IV). 



















' 








- 

: '. • - 




i; . 1 c 






. 




. 





14 

, ) • ' 




; • ■ , • 

, . 

















A 


216 


Given: Diagram as 

marked. 

Prove: AD=AE 


Pig. 38. Geometry problem representative of 
difficulty - category four. 

It seems apparent enough that the combined measure 
of problem difficulty did effect a division of problems 
along a gradient of natural difficulty. 

Problem-Solving Profiles 

Profiles were again constructed for each student* 
showing the proportion of problems solved in each difficulty 
category, and for each quarter of the term work. In order 
to analyse the profiles in greater detail, each cell was 
marked ! + f or ? - ! depending on whether the proportion of 
problems correctly solved in the cell was greater than, or 
less than .50.“ The practical upper bound was defined to 



-*-The difficulty category containing the upper bound 
need not have been defined by the constant .50. However, in 
view of a forthcoming discussion of the illogical aspects of 
problem-solving demonstrated in the solution of problems 
beyond the upper bound, it would seem that .50 would be the 
most natural choice. 






, 

' 

„ 


; , 

* 


- 

' 

L , , 








217 

lie in the highest difficulty category for which the subject 
solved correctly more than one-half of the contained problems. 

The profiles fell under three general headings which 
may be described as follows: (1) exhibiting a stable upper 
bound over the four intervals, (2) exhibiting an increasing 
upper bound, (3) exhibiting a decreasing upper bound. 

Certain subtypes which appeared under these general headings 
are shown in Table 34* 

The first row in Table 34 shows the profile types in 
which improvement over the four quarters is so small that the 
practical upper bound for the second half-term resides in 
the same category as the upper bound for the first quarter. 

Thus prediction, in this case, would be possible at 
the end of the first quarter of the work. The other 
profiles were capable of similar interpretations. 

Table 35 shows the complete classification of the 69 
grade 10 profiles. 

Several observations need to be made with respect to 
this table. 

(a) Predictability of the location of the upper bound 
at the end of the second half can be made with fairly high 
accuracy after the first quarter. 

Table 36 illustrates the predictability of performance 
when the upper bound appears in the first category in the 






: . ■ 

. v ; '. :: .: ,: . ■ . J ; • „ 'v. j ■ - - : - 

_ . 


. 














' , ?. ••• 1 

* 




-/O O';; ' \. vo . :/y. 


, , 1 - 

; „ \ ■ ...v. • 

' 

, 


a ■ 

.. io • • . • > 










■ 




i.?i '■ * . ^ O'i'-'.w ... - • - •• ^ 

' i '1 'if : 

. \ ■>..;* • ; ' ■ .. ■. ; ' '■ ■’ ■■ : ■ : ■■■"■ 

, : ' . .]• ■: i .• : - ■ ■’ . / 

\ ■ ! . it ■■ 








Table 34 

Profile Types in the Solution of Geometry Problems 


218 





d 

rj 

d 

d 

d 

H 

d 



0 
**'rd 
d P 
n 

P 0 

o d 

d P 

P 0 

O d 
d P 

o 

d 

P 0 

o d 
d p 

§ © 
o d 

d p 



Stable upper boui 
predictable from 
first quarter. 

Increasing upper 
predictable from 

second quarter. 

Increasing upper 

predictable from 

third quarter. 

Increasing upper 

not predictable. 

Decreasing upper 

predictable from 

second quarter. 

Decreasing upper 

predictable from 

third quarter 


-P- 

X X 

i X X 

i XX 

i X 




03 

X X 

XXX 

xxx 

X X 




00 

X X 

XXX 

X X X 

X x 




H 

X X 

XXX 

xxx 

X X 





H 00 

c^d 

■H CO CO 

oo’d 

00 03^0- 
O’ OO 

S& 



1 

-B* 

i i 

i i i 

9 1 1 

9 1 




03 

X X 

9 X X 

9 XX 

I I 




00 

X X 

XXX 

xxx 

XX 




r—1 

X X 

XXX 

xxx 

X X 





H 00 
Od 

rH 00 00 
O’O’W 

CO 03 

OOO 





Pt 

1 1 

! I l 

I 1 9 

9 1 



oo 

03 

00 

a a 

X X 

I i 1 

9 X X 

9 9 1 

§ X X 

9 i 

9 X 




H 

X X 

xxx 

xxx 

XX 





rH 00 

O’ ixj 

rH 00 CO 

o’o 5 m 

CO 03_ct 
OOO 

o3_p- 

oo 




-P* 

9 i 




i i i 

9 9 1 

r—i 

03 

00 

i a 

i i 




9 a a 

X 9 1 

8 a a 

X 9 a 


r—l 

X X 




XXX 

xxx 



H 00 
a? tn 




rH CO 00 

O’O’tb 

CO C3_d- 

O O’O’ 

Below 1 

-P - 

03 

00 

H 





1 3 9 

9 i 1 

9 i a 

X 1 a 

I 1 3 

a i a 

a a a 

X 9 9 







rH CO CO 

OO’d 

CO 03^j- 

O O’O’ 


S U g 5 h 

!h (D Jh <D 
0 -p CD -P 
-P -P 

<n <H 

O «H O 


c 

u 

© 

-P 

u 

ci 

-P 

0 

Sh 

•H 


U -p 
Ih © 

0 P 

-P u o 
U ctf 
ctf pi 4 h 
O' p 0<H 
ctf 

d d 
d -p 
Jh -P 

•H p W 
^ O 03 
P <H rH 


<H Ih 'h ^ ^ 

O C O O O 

id id .id id 
Jh Ih Ih Jh 

O O O O O 

12 3 : 15 S ^ 


H 00 of'pt-IA 
O’ o o’ o O’ 


0 

d 

o 

o 


















, 






1 1 


IS 111 


I 


1 






1i 


I 




■ 

' 


1 V 1 ! 1 


5 


Si 1 l S lit 

l 5 1 SI ! t 1 






o 


i * ; 




) 


s 


s 


i 


S 5 J 
) S t 


: < < 



! > if) S i 


I I J J \ 1 
IIS S i i 
ill 1 -i * 
: > ; t : 


























219 


Table 35 

Glassification of Profile Types for 69 
Grade 10 Students 



Location of 

Upper Bound 

at End 

of Term 


Below 1 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Total 

Predictable in 
first quarter 

3 

28 

9 



40 

Increasing; 
predictable in 
second quarter 




4 

1 

5 

Increasing; 
predictable in 
third quarter 



5 

5 

1 

11 

Increasing; 
not predictable 



1 

1 

3 

e; 

> 

Decreasing; 
predictable in 
second quarter 

6 

1 




7 

Decreasing; 
predictable in 
third quarter 

1 





1 

Total 

10 

29 

15 

10 

5 

N =69 

% 

14 

42 

22 

14 

8 














220 


particular quarter of the term work given toy the heading 
along the top line. The headings along the side indicate 
the category in which the upper hound will toe located at the 
end of the second half (fourth quarter in the case of column 
three). Thus, if an individual^ practical upper bound was 
located in the first category at the end of the first quarter, 
there were 61 chances in 100 that it would still be there at 
the end of the second half, 18 chances in 100 that the upper 
bound would be located in category two, and 21 chances in a 
hundred that the upper bound would be located below category 
one. 


Table 36 

Predictability of Location of Practical Upper Bound in 
Terms of Placement in First Category at End of 
Successive Quarters 



Located 

1st 

in First 

2nd 

Category at End of: 

3rd quarter 

Stay in 1st 

61 % 

73%o 

89%o 

Go on 2nd 

18% 

22 %o 

&fo 

Go on 0th 

21% 

0%= 

6%o 


(b) Of the 31 subjects, whose upper bounds fell below 
category two in the first quarter, only 6 showed significant 
rise to move up a category. Evidently, poor problem-solving 
performance is not only demonstrated early, but it remains 













;jp a:; 1 


, ■ , . 1 ■ , . 

,'"j ■■ ac Xi::| 

... M . 

a 



1 . ■» 

!.l L 

: ' 

. 



■ 

■ 





\) £ ': 

. 

■ 

' j t 

• 

X, J - 






j ; :j "/>■; t.:f III r- LX-a:. ;;j OaXl.OOj; a: aro IX a*^v 

■ 

i ■ ■ . ,. 

‘ o rr. v it> I 


. : ' ■ 

' . , , V - ■ ■ . : • • • •: ’ 


--..a 











.1 : . . ■■■■ 'i 












. . i - ' 


. XX. 





J 


. 

■ 

. '• o 








221 


consistently poor. 

(c) Sixteen of the 21 subjects who showed a rise of 
one or more categories were above the first category at the 
end of the first quarter. Similarly, 7 of the 8 subjects 
who dropped a category were originally in category one. 
Consequently, if the teacher had assumed that those students 
whose upper bounds were below category two at the end of the 
first quarter, would stay there, he would have been correct 
in 79 % of the cases. 

(d) There was an increase in the general level of 
problem-solving over the first three-quarters of the term, 
since 21 subjects showed a gain of one or more categories, 

8 show a loss of one category, and 0 remain constant. 

Again, many of the 4° who did not show a full category gain, 
did show a partial gain. For example, the student whose 
profile is shown in Table 37* seemed to make a partial, slow 
gain while his practical upper bound remained in category 
one. 

Table 37 

Individual Profile Showing No Cain in Practical Upper Bound 



1 

2 

3 

4 

First Quarter 

• 90 

o 

CVJ 

© 

0 

0 

Last Half 

1.0 

.40 

0 

0 



















' . ■’ i ■ ■ :j ■ . . " . ) v.' , VO 

■V ■ ■ - 

* - 

•. '";o ;i ... > . 

) j ‘ • > : 0 

do;: i .. •.• - i : 

■ V V : ...C . ; ' ! . \ 

t ‘' ' ' " " 

. 

* 

. ■ . 

. 


' 

„ ■ ' 

*.-■» ' r. J'V ’ 1 ■.■ : o v-‘ J: 0 .riw 

) 

\ ' .!.. . 0*iV V V. ,X1; > ’ .1.:' • j . OCO Jj 

; " . ■ ••.. .. • , i ;..! 

- 

■ 

■- 

, 

. 

. 










. • 


:: ■■ , ■ .. , .0 , ; V- •- J J. XV ... /J. Vv - .Vi. 






222 


(e) The overall performance of a large proportion of 
students was so poor that one can legitimately question the 
extent to which these individuals made any genuine progress 
in the ability to solve problems. At the end of the fourth 
quarter (11 weeks), 33 of the 69 students were solving less 
than half of the problems in category two, and 1C of these 
were able to solve less than half of the problems in cat¬ 
egory one. 

In other words, no more than half of the subject 
population was able to proceed much beyond immediate applica¬ 
tions of the propositions. These weaker students did not 
seem to accomplish much more than to learn the individual 

p 

propositions and where they applied. Even so, the author 
would claim that the performance of the experimental group, 
because of the precautions taken to provide a strategy and 
maintain contact with the students* progress, was superior 
to the performance of students in comparable grade 10 groups 
in Ontario. Unfortunately, the teacher in the ordinary 
classroom has no opportunity to properly assess the problem¬ 
solving activities of his students. 

(f) The 10 students who retrogressed in performance 
present an interesting group. One would be tempted to say 

P 

Most of the subjects in this subgroup were able to 
solve nearly all the problems in category one, and on the 
average, one problem in four in category two. 



, 0 ' '■ O 

' 

. 

i 


■ ■') L '■ 

: 

6 d 5 



. 


XU'MViO. Xiri ■{*}% 

. 

. .■ \ ■ ■ v‘ j; > i .; ■; ■. 1 ■ • 


i / . * 

: . . itJ ' f * ■■ '' : 

i!J*) if 

* 

■ ■ t ■ 1 " • Vi ;s 

JL obi, r<l 

■;; \ • ■■ !'■' ■'■>I J-j - ' » . 

. 

■ 

- 

■ ' . 

■ ■•: ?;.■ rt. ? : ; 

■ 




„ 




i 

• ■ ■ 




223 

they were not sufficiently motivated, and had not taken the 
trouble to master the propositions. This may be true in a 
few cases; however, the author can say from personal acquain¬ 
tance with the group, that a majority of these students were 
highly motivated--and were very much concerned with their 
poor performance. One subject, in fact, was constantly 
seeking help from the author, and although many hours were 
spent trying to convey the simple ideas to her, progress was 
practically non-existent. She never seemed to comprehend 
the necessity of citing evidence for her arguments—triangles 
were congruent, for example, not because sufficient evidence 
was at hand to invoke a proposition which proved congruence 
but rather because u they looked equal 11 , or, n they just were 11 . 
This kind of * thinking 1 would seem to have something in 
common with what Bartlett (1958) calls 1 argument by asser¬ 
tion 1 . 

(g) The examination and analysis of profiles showed 
that of the 69 students, the upper bounds of lj.0 could be 
predicted from the work of the first quarter, of an addi¬ 
tional 12 from the second quarter, of 12 from the third 
quarter, and of the remaining 5 at or beyond the fourth. 

Thus, the upper bounds of 64 of the 69 seemed to be predict¬ 
able within the experimental period with sufficient accuracy 
to form a basis for ability grouping. 


' 


I. 

. 

,.q v; 

lOO ' ' '.‘.5 IV , V 
















■■ ■ ' ■ 


. -■ ' 


■ . ' ' . 

' i ' ■ ■ , 

■ 


rf .U..ho {l/CVV ; 


: ViV o 'V 

XiW.t t 




- 

, 

. 

. 


V 

. 

: < ),;i t ■ • ■ ■ 

. • ■■ 

> ‘ • pi 

• ■ . . ' a i 

■ . v cv . ' v ■ cw c,v I 

; ‘ • VV ■' ■ .■ 

\ . ■ ' " it l 

o d. 

i ■ ■ c o . ■ •' 

■ - Cj 'C* r 'J ■- . ‘ 

' ■ , 1 , ' • ' . 

. 

>‘j 1 . 1 f! .) 1 ' Oo , 



224 


Further Profile Analysis 

In order to obtain a more specific measurement of the 
upper bound to use in subsequent calculations, the profiles 
were subjected to two further analyses. 

(a) For a first measure of the upper bound, the 

7 smoothing 7 process and determination of the $0% point were 
carried through as before for each quarter, and for the 
second half of the term work. 

(b) As a second measure of the upper bound, the 
subject was given credit for the number of categories 

7 covered 7 in each quarter. Thus the subject whose profile 
appeared on page 221 would be said to have covered 1.1 
categories in the first quarter and 1.4 categories in the 
second quarter. Both measures represent an attempt to 
reduce a profile--which is essentially a multivariate 
quantity--to a univariate score, and something is undoubt¬ 
edly lost in the process. However, for practical purposes, 
either measure is likely adequate to represent the upper 
bound, since both are sensitive to the relative strength of 
performance and to changes in performance from quarter to 
quarter. 

Table 38 shows the mean performance for both measures 
of upper bound over the four categories. 

We first notice the general increase between the first 
and second quarters and the levelling off which is evident 


















, ■ 




- 














. 



















. 

* 

' 

• . 


■ . 




. 

. 




„ ■ 

, 

:;, f: r j.:'" ■ j I; \ ..." : . ■ 4 :i y» 
. ; I . ‘ i‘ i ■ . ' ' > 

. . 

■ 

LX U4 v ;>I "d' 1 •.r ,j.:' "V'xO J''liJUp i-000; 











between the third and fourth quarters. This fact, of course, 
corroborates the individual profile analyses discussed 
earlier. Since the correlations between the two measures is 
very high (the scores are, in fact, practically identical), 
either may be used as a measure of the upper bound. 


Table 38 

Mean Upper Bound Scores over Pour Consecutive Intervals 
for the Grade 10 Group (N=69) 



$0% Point 

No. of Categories 

First Quarter 

1.19 

1.17 

Second Quarter 

1.29 

1.30 

Third Quarter 

1.42 

i.4i 

Fourth Quarter 

1.38 

1.37 


r=.97 


The intra-profile reliabilities are of interest since 
they measure the stability of position relative to the group. 
Table 39 shows the correlations for the l 50$-point ff measure. 

Table 39 

Stability of f 50^-point f Measure of Upper Bound 
for Grade 10 Group (N=69) 


First Quarter-Second Half .70 

First Half-Second Half .81;. 


























■ 

. r> a ~ ^ «. ■ 










'•'i • 

















■ ' , / - - ■ : ! .. ' 


... 


• : • 


xi, . >■... : . ... 












226 


If the first-half-second-half correlation for *5>0$- 
point’ scores was used as an estimate of the reliability of 
the test as a measure of upper bounds, the coefficient, 
corrected by the Spearman-Brown formula, would amount to ,91. 

A check on the validity of the »50/£-point f as a 

measure of upper bounds was provided by correlating this 

score (based on the whole test) against the number of 

3 

problems solved. For, in the experimental programming, the 
student was presented with repeated series of problems of 
increasing difficulty. If the student possessed an upper 
bound he would tend to reach approximately the same point 
on the difficulty scale for each set ofproblems. Thus the 
number of problems solved would be proportional to the upper 
bound. Since the product moment coefficient of correlation 
amounted to .96 in this case, it may be assumed then, that 
the »5>0$-point ’ may be used to represent the subject’s 
geometry performance with some confidence in its reliability 
and validity. 

Comparison of Grade 10 and G-rade 12 Scores 

In the previous section, it appeared that the perform¬ 
ance of the vast majority of students reached an upper bound 
within the experimental period. As a long-range check on 

3The latter score was first converted to a standard 
score with a mean of 50 and a standard deviation of 10. 






r 

.... . — .... v ■ 


i ■ ■ 0 - 

4 

. 

:i r. • = •: * f : ■; \ i ■ ' ; - ‘ , 0 : "> . ' '.)■ X '■) " C 


• ■ :• - - •: : .. ..<•\' r. • : - ; ^ > : 

’ i’-J { ■ » s ' 


r j •' '• •.. ' ■ '' ■ o ,’>■ • X ■ ' :■ ■ "' v ’ 


" * i " V - r • ■ 1 •! ■ ’ ■ 


. 

’ 


. 

; 

J ' 1 



■ . • • - - j 

. 


: . J ■ ■ ■ • 


1 •• ' C-i "-j 



; " ■■ ■ : .) j ,■ ■ .v: :>{) . a ■, .i / '■ ) ' 

. 


: ■; ■■ ■ ’ -' ''■ 

.. ‘ ? ...' 1 ' - ; ' 

.i 

. . ' ' ) ' i: . 

ao ; ' • > 

» ■ . 

• v -I. ■ . v.j • : 






227 


this stability, the performance of the matched groups in 
grades 10 and 12 were compared. 

Approximately half of the problems administered to 
the grade 10 group were also included in the grade 12 
battery. This set of problems was culled to remove any that 
showed temporary practice effects, so that those which 
remained could be considered of equal absolute difficulty for 
both groups. 

The experienced difficulty (per cent passing) was 
computed for each of these problems and a comparison appears 
below. 

Table [j.0 

Comparison of Grade 10 and Grade 12 Matched Groups 
in Geometry Performance 



Grade 12 
Superior 

Grade 10 
Superior 

Ho Difference 

First half 




(21 problems) 

14 

4 

3 

Second half 




(21 problems) 

9 

10 

2 


In the first 21 common problems, performance of the 
grade 12 group was significantly superior (P .05) to that of 
the grade 10 group; in the last 21 problems the performances 
were comparable (x^ test applied in both cases). 










.. '' 

. 

... 1 ■■■ '■ ' 

■ 1 1 i " ' 






- 







. 

' . " ... ' g 





228 


The suggestion here, which agrees with the observa¬ 
tions of previous sections, is that the majority of grade 10 
students attained their upper bounds within a period of 
approximately 6 weeks (on the average). This is further 
pointed up in an analysis of the solution of the common 
problems according to the difficulty categories previously 
defined. 


Table Ipl 

Number of Correct Solutions by Difficulty Categories For the 
Matched Groups in Grade 10 and Grade 12 Respectively 




Category 



1 

2 

3 

4 

First Grade 10 

Half 

140 

61 

72 

9 

of Term Grade 12 

141 

96 

130 

25 

Second Grade 10 

Half 

118 

94 

58 

15 

of Term Grade 12 

122 

96 

61 

22 


The performance of the grade 12 group was again 
superior for categories two, three, and four in the first 
of the term, but the group performances were comparable over 
the second half. The slight advantage in favour of the grade 
12 group was caused by 5 students who made repeated gains 
throughout the second year. 














. 

■ it : ' \ ■ . ' 







• - ' • 


: : ■ 




«*.. ■’■■■" .. 






























■ ■. ; 











• 

' 





. 




- 

. 







229 

It may be plausibly argued, then, that the repetition 
of a year's work in geometry does not seem to lead to a 
further increase in the complexity of problems which are 
correctly analysed by the majority of students. In fact, it 
appears that most subjects reach an upper bound shortly after 
they encounter geometry, and that from this time onward, 
they learn new propositions without increasing the depth to 
which problems are analysed. 

The Effect of Repeating Problems 

A third way to test the stability of performance is 
to study the effect of repeating problems. Most teachers of 
mathematics believe that a student will profit from being 
shown how to solve problems which he cannot do by himself. 

In fact, there is an unwritten law in the teaching profession 
to the effect that the student must be shown such solutions. 

However, the energy theory would not support such a 
view. If a student's upper bound lies in difficulty cat¬ 
egory H, then no amount of coaching (outside sheer memoriza¬ 
tion) would result in his being able to solve problems in 
category N+L unless an Improvement in strategy effects a 
raising of the upper bound. 

This question is examined in Table If. 2 , where two 
repeated problems in the grade 10 battery and four repeated 
problems in the grade 12 battery are considered. 






230 


Table 42 

Increase in the Number of Correct Solutions Upon 
Repeating Problems 


Grade 10 


Problem 

Number 

Number of 
Solutions 

Comments 

a 5 

1 

Problems in same exercise. 

#i ( 



(20 

2 

Difficult problem. 

(35 

26 

Problems in different exercises. 

#2 ( 



(42 

18 

Problem 42 has higher uncertainty 
index than 35. 


Grade 12 


. (9 

13 

Gain not significant. 

#1 ( 



(87 

17 


(12 

4 

Significant gain. 

#2 ( 



(86 

22 

Additional proposition available 



for use in the solution. 

(54 

11 

Gain not significant. 

#3 ( 



(88 

16 


(59 

6 

Gain not significant. 

#4 ( 



(89 

7 









































* 






. O;. 



. 








. 


















231 

There is no evidence here of a gain due to repetition, 
except in one case (grade 12, #86). It turned out, however, 
that the majority of students who obtained a solution on the 
problem’s second occurrence, had available on this later 
occasion, a proposition xfnich made the solution easier. 
Sonsequently, the assumption that the demonstration of a 
problem will increase the probability of its solution is a 
very tenuous one indeed. 

The second pair of the grade 10 repeat problems 
presents an interesting case; a problem readministered 
(after the solution was demonstrated) resulted in a decrease 
in the frequency of correct solutions. This apparent 
contradiction can be explained in uncertainty terms, however, 
since the uncertainty difficulty index of the problem was 
greater in the second probability context than in the first. 

Individual Performances 

1. Problem-solving behaviour, below, at, and above 
the upper bound . If the arguments of the previous section 
are accepted, then one can deduce that the majority of 
students—using a given strategy and having a fixed maximum 
quantity of attention-eathexis--will only be able to solve 
problems up to a certain level of complexity. At this point, 
the energy supply will become inadequate and the theory has 
suggested that the highly-motivated and ego-involved student 









■ 


. ' 

* 

.. <... xx . .\x : xx;,C-,. ..x ,V ., 

v.5: ! :v" 'i .i r."v>' : ';i "...o, v m ~.v l, r 


. 

J ; . ‘ 



. . 

- 

. 

■ o ■ 


’ 0 


' '" L I )ji t ■ 

rrl r :i X vX c 'i‘ HiX ‘X 

•. 

; , i ( ■■ ■ ■ = I . ■■ •' x ’ ■ , 

■ '. .• 



, 


. 


:, ■■ i j ■ j i o ■ . • ■ 

©■ . /?■< i "( (. V X i 1. 


• ; . . “ 

uo ':xiOrii: xiixo i:.v; •• ■' xx; : 

*.. . . 




hi x.i’i ?. ; : u:xVvXL'r' j ^rHS"d 


e v'.Cx,'■ ' - - i■ ; • ' "■ 

■ 

} : ... . ■ 

- 

• 






232 


will ignore alternatives, thus reducing the subjective 
difficulty of the problem to a level which he can manage. 

Perhaps the best way to examine the hypothesis is to 
consider the solutions offered by a student as he approaches 
his upper bound and attempts problems beyond this point. 

The following 5 problems are part of the battery 
which followed Proposition XVII. The subject here was a boy 
with an Otis IQ of 10l|, and a »50$-point f 0 f i # 2 in geometry. 
It is fascinating to watch the struggle of this highly 
motivated student as the problems gradually become too 


Given: Diagram as marked. 

Prove: AB=AC 

Proof offered : 

(AABD and A ADC 
ZBAD=kDAC 
ZADB=AADC 
AD is common. ) 

XVII—? AABDSAADC 

AB=AC 

Pig. 39. Geometry problem illustrating performance 
at difficulty level below the upper bound. 


difficulty for him.^ 

(a) Problem One . 

A 



k 


The red markings on the diagram were those made by 


the subject. 














, 





























233 


Problem one is one of the easiest problems of the 
first category. The subjects solution is consistent with 
his expected behaviour, since his »50^-point ! rating 
indicated that he should be able to solve nearly all the 
problems in this category. 

(b) Problem Two . 


A D 



Given: Diagram as marked 

Prove: AD=BC 

Proof offered : 

XIV—> Z.a=Zb (AD || BG ) 

XIV—> 4x=Z.y (BA || CD) 
XVII—> AABDSABCD 


In AABD and A BCD 

BD is common, 

Ab=Xa 

Xx=Xy 

/.AD=BC 

Fig. 40. Geometry problem illustrating performance 
at difficulty level slightly above upper bound. 


This is actually the thirdproblem in the set; the 
second problem belonged to the first category and was 
correctly solved. 

In problem two, the subject was evidently following 
the analysis. There is also evidence here of some directed 
deduction. Realizing that two triangles are needed, the 
subject has drawn a diagonal and deduced the fact that £a~Xb. 














* 

. . ' 

. ' 




* 













. 












- 

. 

, 

. 












234 

Following the analysis table, he apparently knew that he had 


to use either Proposition II or Proposition XVII. If we 
attempt to verbalize his subjective elaboration of altern¬ 
atives it might read as follows: 

n To use Proposition II, I would need AB=CD and Z.ABD=ZJ3DC. u 
,T To use Proposition XVII, I would need L ADB=£DBC and either 
ZBAD=ZJ3CD or AADB=ZDBC. U 


This uncertainty state has been resolved by reducing the 
alternatives through what is essentially an assumption until 
the verbalized solution could be subjectively stated as 
follows: 

Tl I can use XVII, because I have XBAD=Z.BCD. ,r 
Invoking Proposition XIV as an authority is apparently 
intended to cover the bare assumption with a thin cloak of 
plausibility. 

(c) Problem Three. 


A 



Given: AB=AC, and 

diagram as marked. 

Prove: DC=BE 

Proof Offered : I—> a=b 

XVII—> ADFB54EFC 


In^DFB andAEFC 
DB=ED 
Aa=Ab 
LD-C E 


.*.DC=BE 

Fig. 4l• Geometry problem illustrating performance 
at difficulty level above upper bound. 








l:\ ' ' ■ ; 

’ 






' 

.I ! • : , ■■ .1 ..‘V • \ 

?V' $.£)&& X. -p&vd ;v .’> 

■ 




o ■ i. ■ 


d 







t 

V'X ^0 iJ'lriO' 

, : ' ■ " v " ' 


■ - . • 

■ f I' ■' ' > !. 

biovxtl 

T.ai: 






235 


This problem, which again belonged to the second 
difficulty category illustrates even more clearly the 
subject*s logical inadequacy in the face of uncertainty. 

The fact to be proved (line=line) again called for a choice 
between Proposition XVII and Proposition II. The subject 
seemed to favour Proposition XVII, probably because proposi¬ 
tion dominance was strong in this set or problems. The next 
choice involved the selection of triangles. Here, the 
spontaneous deduction of the fact a=b, apparently led the 
student into difficulty since it gave the triangles DBF and 
EFC high subjective probability as the correct choice. 
Consequently, the other possible pairs--including the correct 
pair—were not adequately considered. Again the analysis was 
followed to a point where its subjective complexity exceeded 
the subject’s upper bound. At this point the subject made 
an uncertainty-reducing assumption which decreased the 
subjective difficulty of the problem., and thereby rendered 
it solvable. 

(d) Problem Four . 

Problem four belonged to difficulty category three. 

The subject was now well over his head in difficulty and did 
not really approach an adequate analysis. He identified the 
type of fact to be proved, and when an elaboration of the 
possibilities generated a complexity which was completely 
beyond his power to deal with, he considered the most 




■■ ■■ - ’ 

; £ :ih «c>j : ■ ' •; ■ * ■:> \ vp 

■ 

\ . i J. : bo ,o 


- c ' 

ij ■ j o '■ •' 





)n\ ■ 

; ;■ : • •..?,j‘.o ■ 1 i!\ v ■ 1 '.-'bo . r :y J '■ 




' . :/ ■ 


.b-.< u 


} 



t, 


5 

, .. . ; 5 

• ' 




. 

■ 

' t ' ' ” " ' ' * •' ■ 

l ; a . ■ • • - 

t ■ ! 




236 


immediate propostion which allowed him to prove congruence, 
viz.. Proposition II. Realizing that he needed RLM= SLN, 
and seeing no way to prove this, he tried to conceal this 
fact with a weak bluff. Only the faintest outline of an 
analysis is apparent here. The subject has apparently given 
up the task of obtaining a completely logical solution, and 
is merely aiming at plausibility. 


L Given: Diagram as marked. 



/.RM=NS 


Pig. i|2. Geometry problem illustrating performance 
at difficulty level for above upper bound. 


(e) Problem 5 . 

This problem, which belongs to the fourth difficulty 
category was so far beyond the subject T s capacities that he 
disregarded the necessity of offering even a plausible 
solution. In fact, the final statement is in no way connec¬ 
ted with the spontaneous deduction that the subject has 
exhibited., One gets the impression here, of the drowning 





' 

- 


i 


. 








. 




- 








. 

























• > . •; - 












’' I 0 ..U • • " 

' 

. . . 

. . > • , -i..; ' .• . •, ' " ■ i >■ ■ . . '"X'j.lr. " 







237 

man catching at straws. Solutions of this kind become quite 
incoherent at times * and the subject merely * sprays ! the 
area with irrelevant statements before giving the required 
conclusion. 


G-iven: 0 is the centre 

of the circle. 

: LM || MP 

Prove: NA=BP 

Proof Offered : 

I— >z.a~Z.b 

II— -*ALOM=AROS 
ALCM &AROS 

MO~RS 
LO=SO 
LB.-L'o 

'.’,NA=BP 

Fig. 43 . Geometry problem illustrating performance 
at difficulty level far above upper bound. 

A complete case history of the subject reveals that 
his performance in every set of problems showed the same 
pattern as he approached and passed beyond his upper bound. 

Many subjects, of course, merely stop offering solu¬ 
tions when the problems become too difficult. Others 
develop extremely sophisticated arguments when they find 
themselves unable to solve problems, attempting to bury an 
unwarranted assumption in a welter of directionless deduc¬ 



tion 











... 




> ... ... 




' 




.o-j • "V :. ... .!. : 






>. U . L.J f'i J. ,:j jO I C C x aoN'-Ui irVs. x J O-'iV... .-r TvfCtSJ 

' 

. 






238 


The logical pattern revealed in the above illustra¬ 
tions was found running through the problem-solving 
behaviour of all subjects who offered solutions for problems 
above their upper bound. The sequence of logical behaviour¬ 
al stages may be summarized as follows: 

(a) Problems below upper bound --Ad equate analysis. 

(b) Problems near (but above) upper bound —Analysis 
followed partially. Assumption at some choice point with¬ 
out further consideration of possibilities. 

(c) Problems above upper bound —Plausible solution 
attempted. The alternatives at the first major choice point 
listed, and sufficient assumptions made to employ the most 
obvious alternative. 

(d) Problems far above upper bound --In the case of a 
sophisticated subject, the method of attempting to conceal a 
bluff often took the form of a very lengthy argument in which 
alternatives were generated to a point where they became 
extremely numerous and difficult to deal with. At this 
point some assumption was made. 

In the case of a weaker student, the method often 
began with any obvious deductions which could be made from 
the diagram. To these were compounded an array of state¬ 
ments—usually quite illogical-™concerning the alleged 
implication of various propositions, and offered in an 
apparent effort to bedazzle or confuse the reader. 


2. The Extent of Illogical Behaviour in Geometry . At 
this point, it is pertinent to examine the extent of illo¬ 
gical behaviour in the experimental problems. Table 43 
partitions the population into groups on the basis of the 
proportion of correct solutions offered, to incorrect 
solutions offered. 

It should be remembered here, that the numbers 











239 


reported are to some extent depended upon the particular 
battery used. However, since the battery corresponds to the 
problems ordinarily presented to the grade 10 and grade 12 
students in Ontario, it may be claimed that the proportions 
do not exaggerate the extent of illogical behaviour in the 
typical classroom. The ratio is distributed so that approx¬ 
imately 6 5% of the whole population offer more correct 
solutions than incorrect, and 35% offer more incorrect than 
correct solutions. In this classification, however, only 
those solutions which were seriously incorrect were consid¬ 
ered to lie in the T wrong* category. When the ratio of 
correct solutions to the sum of wrong-plus-partially-correct 
solutions was computed and tabulated, the distributions as 
shown in Table 44 resulted. 

In this case, only l±6% of the population offered 
more correct than incorrect solutions. The claim that 
geometry affords the student an opportunity to practice and 
develop systematic and logical methods of analysis should be 
soberly weighed in the light of actual classroom conditions. 
Indeed, for a majority of students in the normal classroom, 
geometry would seem to provide more exercise in the use of 
illogic than in the use of logic. Under these circumstances, 
it is difficult to imagine that any positive transfer will 
take place when the s tudent attacks problems in real life. 




* • . 

■ ' 


* 

. 

. 

■ 

_ 

, 

: , ) .'..7 1.[ , 

: „'j ' : ' • i : - : :■ . > ' 


o I; 1 b ■. ' ' : 

:..i ioi'.:' o... V'j r -o 1 '■ oa . ^ ■■■*?;< w-. Q' ‘■" 


1 


■ 


J.-:* '■ •) o'; 

, r • 



. : 

> 







- 

•V":.h ' . ' ■ ' •' J ' 



' 




240 


Table 43 

Distribution of The Ratio: (Correct Solutions) to 
(Incorrect Solutions), for Grades 10 and 12 



Above 

5-i 

2-1 

1-1 

1-1 

1-2 

1-5 


10-1 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 



10-1 

5-i 

2-1 

1-2 

1-5 

1-10 

Grade 10 

5 

8 

16 

15 

12 

ii 

2 

Grade 12 

9 

5 

5 

6 

5 

5 

2 

Total 

69 (65%) 


37 (35%) 


Table 44 

Distribution of the Ratio: (Correct Solutions) to 
(Wrong and Partially Correct Solutions), 
for Grades 10 and 12 



5-1 

2-1 

1-1 

1-1 

1-2 

i-5 


to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 


10-1 

5-i 

2-1 

1-2 

1-5 

1-10 

Grade 10 

3 

10 

18 

16 

20 

2 

Grade 12 

1 

13 

4 

8 

9 

2 

Total 

49 (46*) 

57 (54%') 



































3. Effect of Expectation of Solution , A rather 


interesting result turned up when some information concern¬ 
ing a diagram used in the solution of a problem was acciden¬ 
tally omitted. The incompletely-stated problem read as 
follows: 

Given: ABCD is a parallel¬ 
ogram. 

Prove: AA=90° 

Fig. 44. Geometry problem illustrating the effect 
of an expected solution. 

The result, of course, simply cannot be proved from the 
given information. Nevertheless, 21 of the 37 grade 12 
students presented an argument which concluded with the 
required fact. 

The geometry student is nurtured on problems, nearly 
all of which are solvable. In time, he comes to develop a 
high expectation that the problem which confronts him at the 
moment will be solvable, provided that the proper analysis is 
made. When he encounters one which looks relatively easy, 
but which is, in fact, incapable of solution, he often 
believes that he has overlooked some simple fact. If he 
fails to find a solution, and if he is sufficiently ego- 
involved to see an ego threat in his inability to find one, 
then he is only a short step away from inventing a plausible- 





. 

’ ... • ■ 

. ■ 





• 



. ■ •• • • . i 

' 


r ;, 




„ 















* 











t 

* 











. . 

. 

t - ' •' ■ ' .. >"f ■' . : * ■: ■ 

• ■ 

, ■ 

, 





looking solution 


Summary 

Three sources of evidence offered support for the 
5 boundedness 5 hypothesis of the energy theory. In the first 
place, the majority of students (79%) reached their 5 natural* 
level of performance within the first three weeks, and, from 
that time onward did not make sufficient gains to have moved 
into a higher category by the end of 11 weeks. The perform¬ 
ance of all but 5 of the 69 grade 10 students exhibited 
upper bound-S within the experimental period. 

A second source of confirmation came from studying 
the increase in the frequency of correct solutions when 
problems were explained to students, and then repeated. 

There was no evidence of a significant gain here, and it 
appeared that if the problem difficulty is above the student 5 
upper bound, an explanation in itself will not extend the 
upper bound to the point that the student will be able to 
solve the problem at its second occurrence. 

The third confirmation came from comparing the freq¬ 
uency of solutions of problems common to the batteries 
administered to the matched grades 10 and 12 groups. The 
performance of the grade 12 group was significantly superior 
on the problems which occurred during the first 5 weeks, but 
once the grade 10 students reached their optimum level, the 





a ' 

■ 


' ■ • f ■ t 

, 






J: -V 






ip pfXOPX.P J 

CP' .n.r 


- j " ■ ■ 

. 


o ■ • 

, . .... , . • 

t ; 

' 

' !■ - P' •■} • i ' ' ' •• - ■ -- 


• t L ' ;> . 0 . ’ : ■ : . 

■ 'r '• P jip; 'p- ' \ t J Pi :.J Pi: 0( 'PP f 

. ../ , -v.) . *< ' > 

■ ip ' ‘.-"i " ,p ' f..-; i.'p-P." ( .P;p p' 

■ p '.rp-p,. • ■:■; 1. j ■ ; p ; .1 .• . r 

■ . p , r.. , ' . ■ ' V p 

•i ' 

- 



performance of the two groups was comparable. 

In summary, it would seem that approximately half of 
the grade 10 population was not able to proceed much beyond 
the immediate applications of the propositions. Moreover, 
for those students who continue to grade 12, it seems (for 
the vast majority of students) that all that a second year 
of geometry accomplishes is to add a number of reference 
points without increasing the students* power of analysis. 

Much more alarming than the general inability of a 
large segment of the s tudent population to make much 
progress in geometry, is the type of behaviour exhibited 
when the student encounters a problem which is too difficult 
for him. For, while the inability to solve a problem is 
regrettable, the willingness to force a solution to fit a 
preconceived conclusion is surely a dangerous mental habit 
to encourage in the student. And yet, if our population is 
a representative one, it would seem that a majority of 
students spend the greater part of their time illogically 
reducing problems which are too difficult for them. 

It would be unfortunate if this attitude carried over 
into the students® everyday life, where the complexity of 
the problems encountered is usually so vast that immediate 
solutions are simply not available. It would likely be to 
the advantage of the student, if he were able to suspend 




244 

judgment in the face of problems which are too difficult for 
him to deal with adequately. However, our school subjects-- 
and geometry in particular--are strongly ‘solution 1 oriented. 
The student is never rewarded for refusing to offer a 
solution; in fact, partly-correct solutions usually earn the 
student marks on an examination. It may be that the day-by¬ 
day t eaching of geometry systematically destroys the very 
attitude of impartial inquiry which it claims to inculcate. 







CHAPTER XIII 


PROBLEM SOLVING UNDER INFINITE UNCERTAINTY 

The previous study dealt with problems in which the 
alternatives were finite in number. However, when the 
matter is considered at any length, it becomes apparent that 
such situations form the exception rather than the rule— 
for problems in real life rarely present a well-defined, 
enumerable set of alternatives; thus, the first illusion of 
a limited number of alternatives invariably gives way to a 
vast complexity of factors. 

In this section, we were interested in the extent of 
strategy formation in infinite uncertainty situations, and 
in the extent of guessing and simplification which occurs 
at this level. 

Test Battery, Subjects, and Procedure 

Considerable thought was given to the construction 
of a battery of problems which would satisfy the following, 
requirements: 

(a) The problems should generate a potentially in¬ 
finite set of alternatives. 

(b) The battery should consist of problems of 
increasing difficulty, so that a measure of upper bounds is 
present. 

(c) The problems—at least at the lower levels-- 
should be numerous enough to allow a determination of 
reliability. 



' *K •/ ' 0 

; ’ ■ 


■ 


■*— 

■ - 


' { . ' ’ l 








, 

. : ■ 

. 


. 



• 

■ 




- r, o 

: -j > . i . Z ■ ' 

7i.. : ■ 

~ • . 1 •• . I z ... ' a >J I ■: -• 

' 



246 


(d) The problems should be systematically varied so 
that the principle used to solve one would not necessarily 
solve its successor. 

(e) Some consideration should be given to the 
location of problems so that the practice effects, if any, 
could be assessed. 

The author employed the previously mentioned number 
series which were constructed by the principle of finite 
differences."' These series can be considered as instances 
of problem solving under infinite uncertainty, for a reason 
which will become apparent upon examining a specific series. 
For example, when the student encounters the series: 

2 , 5 , 13 , 22 , 84 , _. 

he will undoubtedly begin by considering the relationship 
between the first two numbers. However, it is possible to 
formulate an infinite number of possible relationships 
between them; thus £ is three more than two, 5 is three 
times two less one, 5 is two squared plus one, and so on. 

One or more of the possible relationships is tested on the 
second pair of numbers, and those surviving, on the third, 
and so on. The chief reason why the individual is able to 
solve such series at all is that he seems to possess a 
preferred order of testing hypotheses, i.e., certain altern¬ 
atives have high subjective probability. 

■^The investigation presently considered was carried 
out prior to the use of the number series in the group 
experiments. 













j 








< i r- j 




■ 


, 



' " • • ."/ : . ' .1 ' ' ■■ ."... "■ ■ 

. , ' . ... ; ■. • ■ ' . ‘ ■ c 

, ■ . . , 

. 

. 

! ax . ! " ‘ '■ ■ 

r J’i.C. J' ; r, *Y.iO£l, 




! 




. 

' 


. 





- . ( " >fi : '.i' r 






247 


Number series with differences of orders one, two, 
three, and four were embedded in a set of miscellaneous 
number series to yield the following battery. 

Table 45 

p 

Problem. Battery—Infinite Uncertainty 


Practice 

A - First-order difference (increasing). 

B - Second-order difference. 

G - Pattern. 

D - First-order difference (decreasing). 


Set A 

1. First-order (increasing). 

2. Pattern. 

3. Second-order. 

4 . Multiplication. 

5. First-order (increasing). 

6. Rhythm. 

7. Third-order. 

8. First-order (decreasing) 

9. Division. 

10. Second-order. 

11. Fourth-order. a 


Set B 

1. First-order (decreasing). 

2. Pattern. 

3. Second-order. 

4 . Division. 

5 * First-order (increasing). 

6. Rhythm. 

7. Third-order, 

8. First-order (increasing). 

9. Multiplication. 

10. Second-order, 

11. Fourth-order. 


a Not used unless subject solved third-order series. 


In the multiplication series, each successive member 
of the series is obtained by multiplying its predecessor by 
a fixed constant. The rhythm series of the type, 

5 , 10 , 15 , 


2 


The actual problems may be found in Appendix E. 













is, in fact, a first-order difference series, but it is of 
the type that children chant when * counting by 5*8*. It 
seemed likely that such series would be recognized in less 
time than other first-order series because of this familia¬ 
rity. 

The problems were typed on individual cards which 
were presented ot the subject one at a time. The time for 
each solution was recorded with a stop-watch, together with 
the correct or incorrect solution. 

Before the testing session began, the following 
directions were read to the subject: 

On these cards you will find a set of numbers, 
followed by a blank. Your job will be to look at the 
numbers and see if you can figure out what number should go 
in the blank. You will find some of the questions to be 
very easy, but some will be difficult and will require a 
considerable amount of time to solve. In any case, you may 
take as long as you please to do them. Remember that 
accurate solutions are more valuable than fast solutions. 

The first four are practice questions. 

At this point, the four practice cards were presented. 
If the subject solved any problem incorrectly, or if he was 
unable to solve it, then help was given, but no g eneral 
method of solution was indicated. In the battery proper, 
no help of any kind was given, nor was any writing or 
computing allowed. 


Results 


1. Reliability . Median values of the three first- 








1 


' 

' 

. 






' 










\ o o : n-t 






* 








’ 

. 

, 




- 

. 


■ •,. • ; •: ■, . ■ ; '■ ... • : 

* 



249 


order series scores on each half of the test proper were 
correlated, yielding the reliabilities shown in the following 
table. 


Table 46 

Reliability Estimates for First-Order Number Series 




Corrected by 


Product- 

Sp e arman-Br own 


Moment r 

Formula 

Grade 10 (N=69) 

• 70 

.83 

Grade 12 (N=37) 

.86 

.93 


The high reliabilities are surprising for two reasons. 
In the first place, normal problem solving itself seems to 
be a somewhat erratic process and *discovery* times tend to 
vary. Again, the total duration of the test (6 questions) 
was approximately 45 seconds and 36 seconds for grades 10 
and 12 respectively. It would seem that the subjects, and 
this is especially true of grade 12, tended to attack the 
problems in a highly consistent manner. In fact, a product- 
moment correlation of .77 (corrected to . 87 ) existed between 
the grade 12 times on problem A-#l and A-#5, although the 
latter problem was considerably more difficult. 

2. Distribution of Upper Bounds . The upper bounds 
were readily determined in this case by t aking the highest 




















l 


■ , ■ - 



. 

— 











. 

j. • ■- ki :.o i u - ' 


■; oc>- 


; 




. 


* 

. 




• 





. 





. 

- 


: ; C •' *- ' 


_ 










, 



* 

■ 



. 








2^0 


level at which the subject solved one or more problems 
correctly. The results for both grades are shown in Table 
47, and are there compared with the upper bounds which were 
exhibited in the group test in Level I performance (Chapter 
VII). 


Table 47 


Upper Bounds in Problem Solving Under Infinite Uncertainty 
(Level II); a Comparison with Upper Bounds 
in Level I Performance 




Order 



1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Grade 10 

Series Level II 

41 

25 

1 

0 

0 

N=6? a 

Series Level I 

7 

24 

21 

10 

5 

Grade 12 

Series Level II 

10 

21 

5 

0 

0 

N=36 a 

Series Level I 

0 

8 

13 

9 

6 

Total 

Series Level II 

51 

46 

6 

0 

0 

N=103 

Series Level I 

7 

32 

34 

19 

11 


a Three cases were deleted from the Level II Series 
which corresponded to the missing cases in the Level I Series 
data. The contradicting cases in the Level I data were 
recorded as the lowest level which could be interpreted as 
the upper bound. 


It must be remembered, of course, that the Level I 
test was not really a set of problems, since the rules for 
solution had been provided* Nevertheless, this latter score 
provided a minimum estimate of the student T s potential 































j ■V 

. 










































. 






, 

. 

.'•.V -5 










251 


problem-solving level; minimum, because we saw that this 
level could be raised if group pressure was reduced. In 
other words, it provided us with an estimate of what the 
student was able to do in terms of the operation-storage 
schema, provided that he knew how to proceed. For this reason, 
it was a convenient measure against which problem solving 
could be compared. 

The first thing which impresses one on looking at 
this table, is the outstanding lack of problem solving exhib¬ 
ited. Almost half of the total population solved no problems 
beyond the first order. Moreover, there was no evidence of 
a strategy development during the completion of the battery. 

For example, the number of correct solutions for the first 
second-order difference problem (A-#3) amounted to 31* while 
the correct solutions for the last second-order difference 
problem (B-#10) numbered 28. 

One may legitimately ask whether a student can b e 
expected to develop a strategy for dealing with a set of 
alternatives which is potentially infinite. Indeed, the 
energy theory would predict little progress when attention 
is divided among a large number of alternatives. What is of 
more interest here, is the type of strategy employed by the 
student who consistently obtains a false solution. The 
following sections consider the matter at greater length. 



. t - 


■ 




a.-’swv ^ uvnVojrM <xM' f -V.q< ^ p'A % Is.- 

■jits i ■ ' " ■ 

. 

„ ' ■ 


i ;} j 

. ,;■■ . ■ : : '■ : v / v'ffi 

, 


f i ■• 


:i .VJ 


■ 






; > : 


1 ■■■■ 

■ 1 ■ ■ 


■ 




ivft •;> c . > .r" z fe •? T '&£. 

\ 

! 


r ’■ " 

♦ V..: 

. 




252 

3. Analysis of Errors at Higher Levels . In Tables l\.Q 
and 49, the results of the analysis of individual solutions 
are exhibited under the categories listed. 

Several things emerged from these tables. In the 
first place, a significantly greater proportion of second- 
order problems were solved as first-order problems than as 

3 

second-order problems by the grade 10 group. At levels 
three and four, the proportion of problems solved as types 
of a lower order was again significantly greater than the 
proportion solved correctly. 

In the grade 12 group, the proportion of correct 
solutions was larger for the second-order (not significant), 
but the proportion of problems solved as a lower order type 
for orders three and four was significantly greater than the 
proportion solved correctly. 

One alarming result was that the proportion of 
students who offered no solution did not show an Increase 
as the problem difficulty level rose. This was in sharp 
contrast to the group tests. In which there was a significant 
increase in the proportion of students offering no solution 
as the difficulty level rose. Ve shall interpret this to 

3 The sign test was employed in which the subjects 
performance was marked »+» or depending on whether he 
solved the larger proportion of second-order problems as 
second-order or as first-order questions. Significance was 
tested at the o 05 level in each case. 














. • ■ . 






. 

' 



. 


. 






. . . , . ■ '■ . ■ ■■• » ~ » ■ i ' ; • • ?■/ w ^c>.cn ttu 

, 




253 


Table 48 

Analysis of Solutions for Level II Number Series—Grade 10 



Order 


2 

3 

4 

Solved Correctly 

44 

1 

0 

Solved as First-Order 

147 

75 

22 

Solved as Second or Third-Order 

- 

- 

4 

No Solution Offered 

11 

18 

7 

Response Not Classifiable 

69 

37 

34 


Table 49 

Analysis of Solutions for Level II Number Series—Grade 12 



Order 


2 

3 

4 

Solved Correctly 

60 

8 

0 

Solved as First-Order 

45 

29 

13 

Solved as Second or Third-Order 

- 

9 

5 

No Solution Offered 

7 

10 

9 

Response Not Classifiable 

32 

16 

9 























mean that whereas the student who had the rules, guessed 
because he was under pressure to do so, the problem solver 
deluded himself concerning the correctness of his solution. 
Expressed otherwise, it would indicate the relative ease of 
self-deception which comes from a systematic ignoring of part 
of the given data. It also indicates that the subjects were 
willing to attack problems far beyond their comprehension by 
bringing this systematic over simplification into play. 

Factors Influencing Hypothesis Formation 

The number series presents an infinite array of 
alternatives. Within that array, the student seemed to make 
a finite selection. In this section, we will consider some 
factors which influenced this selection. 

The battery contained 8 first-order series mixed in 
with the general battery so that one principle would not 
suffice to solve consecutive items. The series were 
originally chosen to be of equal difficulty. Once the 
choice of series was made, they were randomly assigned to 
the 8 possible positions. 

It seemed to be a reasonable hypothesis that the 
alternatives which would occur to and be tested by the 
student, would depend upon two sources: (a) habitual 
strategies which expressed themselves in constant modes of 
approach to the series, (b) temporary *sets* (subjective 





. 

* 


- 


; 












- 


' 












„ 

... 

. 




■. ' : ■ t ■ ••• : 










255 


probabilities to favour and test a particular alternative) 
induced by the structure of the test battery. Under these 
circumstances four factors would seem to be involved in the 
experienced difficulty of a series: (1) long-range subjective 
probabilities favouring particular alternatives, (2) probabil¬ 
ities induced by the position of the series within the 
battery, (3) the inherent difficulty of the question, (Ip) the 
effect of practice on computing speed. 

1. Practice Effects . Since some of the subsequent 
argument will assume no appreciable practice effect, this 
hypothesis will be checked at the outset. Table 50 lists 
the mean times in seconds for the first and last three 
problems for both grades. 


Table 50 

Practice Effects in First Order Number Series 



Mean Time Per Problem 

For First Three Problems 

Mean Time Per Problem 

For Last Three Problems 

Grade 10 

7.33 sec. 

7*53 sec. 

Grade 12 

5.94 sec. 

6.03 sec. 


An examination of the problems in question shows that 
both sets of three contain two increasing, and one decreasing 
series, and that the numbers involved (and the increments) 










. 

. 


'hu, ‘1© ■ &U\ 

J ' ’ • ’- 



■ 

,brtC'v r ic>a,.. 

i 




* 



: 


! 




• 






» 


' . . • • 


■ €? 11/ ‘ i OiiX. 

, 

■ . ■■ . - ■ - ' 



. l 0 jg( i \ ■■ ( *■.. : ■■ :rlR , 




" r ' '' ' ."ii . : 

• 


'' ■ ' 






257 


problems were randomly assigned to their respective cells, 
the probability of the observed agreement in the order of 
difficulty would be very small, much less than .01 in fact, 
so we may dismiss the hypothesis that positional effects are 
not present.^' 

Table 5l 

The Effect of Temporary 'Sets' on the Solution of 
First-Order Problems 


Gradient of Decreasing Similarity 
Time in Seconds 


Type of Problem 
Following 

D i 

D 2 

d 3 

Mult.and 
Div. 

Pattern 

Grade 10, N=69 

5.92 

6.39 

7.91 

8.73 

12.1 

Grade 12, N=37 

4-30 

5.21 

6.01; 

7.16 

8.95 

Difficulty Hank 






For The Whole 






Group 

i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

3. The Effect of Long-Range 

Strategies. Over and 

above momentary sets operate certain long-range strategies. 


These ingrained modes of dealing with sequences of numbers 
produce their effect in the delimitation of alternatives. 


^-The phenomenon of * set* seen here lends further 
plausibility to the assumptions underlying 'proposition 
dominance ’. 













. 










: : 






. .. 










- 




' V 




. 

■ : . . " ' 

■' ■ ' ■ • : 

. 

1 : ■' • - V,' :: =v 




' ' ' ; " ' >: '■ - L ' f. 




257 


problems were randomly assigned to their respective cells, 
the probability of the observed agreement in the order of 
difficulty would be very small, much less than .01 in fact, 
so we may dismiss the hypothesis that positional effects are 
not present.^ - 

Table $1 

The Effect of Temporary »Sets ! on the Solution of 
First-Order Problems 


Gradient of Decreasing Similarity 
Time in Seconds 


Type of Problem 
Following 

D i 

D 2 

D 3 

Mult.and 
Div. 

Pattern 

Grade 10, N=69 

5.92 

6.39 

7.91 

8.73 

12.1 

Grade 12, N=37 

4.30 

5.21 

6. Olj. 

7.16 

8.95 

Difficulty Hank 
For The Whole 
Group 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 


3. The Effect of Long-Range Strategies . Over and 
above momentary sets operate certain long-range strategies. 
These ingrained modes of dealing with sequences of numbers 
produce their effect in the delimitation of alternatives. 


^-The phenomenon of ! set J seen here lends further 
plausibility to the assumptions underlying Aproposition 
dominance f . 













; ■ 











: .. . . , • . 

: ; • . ?;.f . , ■■■.•. . ... .j,. x a a yd 1 }; 

■ 

fo 




258 

The battery was constructed so that differences in the speed 
of solution could be compared for different types of series. 
The first line in Table 52 presents the postulated order of 
difficulty on the hypothesis that the subject, when presented 
with a card, would first respond to the general pattern or 
configuration of numbers, and that if no pattern existed, 
he would test the hypotheses in the order of their highest 
subjective probability. Since the subjective probability 
would likely depend upon the frequency of occurrence in the 
individuals past experience, this would mean that addition, 
subtraction, multiplication and division hypotheses would be 
tested in that order. The experienced order of difficulty 
is given in the second line of Table 52. 

Table 52 

Postulated and Experienced Order of Difficulty 
for Level II Number Series 



1 2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Postulated 

Order 

Pattern Rhythm 

D l 

Mult. 

Div. 

D 2 

D 3 

Experienced 
Order (Whole 
Population) 

Rhythm D^_ 

Pattern 

Div. 

Mult. 

d 2 

d 3 


A series of t-tests yielded the following results for 
both the grade 10 and grade 12 groups. 












' ■ ■ ioi 



. •; . ■. : •' ", V ■ ' ’ .* ■'' : >■ • .V" *,'o 

. 

. 




- 

« 


: ■ ■ ■ : - 

■ 

» 






















, 












, ■ 











259 


(a) The rhythm pattern required significantly less 
time (P .01) that all the others. 

(b) The D£ and D^ series requires significantly 
greater time (P .01) than all the other series. 

(c) The differences between solution times for 
successive steps in the sequence: D-j_, Pattern, Division, 
and Multiplication, series were not significant, but the 
Addition-Subtraction series (D-^) required significantly less 
time for solution than the Multiplication-Division series 

(P .01). 

There is general agreement, here, with the notion 
that the subjective probability of an alternative, and 
therefore its order of testing, is determined by the freq¬ 
uency of its occurrence in the past experience of the 
subject.^ Thus most subjects had such high expectancy for 
difference series that they could recognize and solve these 
problems faster than a simple pattern such, as 
1 , 2 , 2 , 1 , 2 , 2 , . 

Matched G-roups 

The matched groups at the grade 10 and grade 12 
levels were compared as in the previous experiment* The 

-^This conclusion is subject to the reservation that 
it was not entirely possible to take out or remove the effect 
of temporary sets in this last analysis, and it is possible 
that such effects acted differentially on the various types 
of questions. 

















. 

. 

. , . 







5 ' ^ '■ ' V ' " ''A- ^ ' 




' ’ ' • • '• > ’ > 








' ■ 




• _ ■ j 




■ . - : • ■ , /■ ■- 

; 

/ ■ . 

. . - > ■ 








' 


. , \ j l '• 




















260 


mean and median scores are presented in Table 53. 

Table 53 

Mean and Median Scores for Grades 10 and 12 Matched Groups 




Mean of Average 

Mean of Median 



Times in Seconds 

Times in Seconds 

Grade 

10 

7.27 

6.43 

Grade 

12 

6.41 

5.81 


In both cases, a comparison of means showed the grade 
12 group to be faster, but in both cases the differences 
just failed to reach significance at the . 05 level* Combining 
this result with Table $ 1 9 it would seem to be a safe 
inference that the grade 12 student has a better-defined 
strategy, and that his strategy is less affected by temporary 
1 sets 1 . The large discrepancy between mean and median 
scores was caused by the fact that some subjects seem to 
1 block* on one or two questions, thus raising the mean with¬ 
out seriously affecting the median* 

A second source of comparison involved the frequency 
of solution of problems above first-order differences. An 
examination of upper bounds (Table 54) indicated the 
superiority of the grade 12 group* 

Table 55 contrasts the number of problems of orders 



























































. - o . ■, 






. 


. 

j’ i. ; ■ . ‘ > • 


































261 


Table 54 


Comparison of 
Grade 

Upper 
is 10 

Bounds 
and 12 

in Level II Series 
Matched Groups 

for 

Order 


1 


2 3 

4. 

Grade 10 

15 


14 i 

0 

Grade 12 

9 


18 3 

0 


Table 55 

Number of Correct and Incorrect Solutions to Level Number 
Series Above Order 1—Matched Grade 10 and 12 Groups 



Grade 10 

Grade 12 

Solved Correctly 

26 

47 

Solved as First Order 

99 

80 

% Correctly Solved 

20.8 

37.0 

















262 

two and above which are solved correctly with the number 
solved as first-order problems. 

While neither result was significant at the .05 
level, the combined evidence, together with the first-order 
results indicated the superiority of the grade 12 group 
beyond reasonable doubt. 

This would indicate that the grade 12 group was 
either influenced less by temporary sets, or that the addi¬ 
tional two years of experience with numbers has altered 
their permanent subjective probabilities concerning altern¬ 
atives in number series. The latter hypothesis is made 
plausible by the fact that the intervening grade 11 algebra 
course contained a section on arithmetical (D-^) series and 
geometrical (M) series. 

Summary 

Many social and personal issues with which the 
student must eventually come to grips are so complex as to 
present almost infinite uncertainty. In this section, the 
logical behaviour of a group of students in one infinite 
uncertainty situation was studied. No evidence of positive 
strategy formation during the test period was found. Rather, 
the student seemed to bring into the testing situation a set 
of well-defined subjective probabilities which delimited and 
established an order of precedence among alternatives. 



* 



■ 

. 


<■ ; 













. 


• 







. 


. 











- 

. 







263 

These subjective probabilities were clearly related to past 
experience, for the high expected frequency of difference f 
series resulted in their being recognized in less time than 
simple patterns of numbers. 

A great deal of negative strategy formation was found, 
however. More problems of the second order and above were 
solved as problems of the first order than were solved 
correctly. This was again partly attributable to temporary 
sets introduced within the battery, and partly to the 
permanent first-order expectations. The regretable thing 
here, is again, not so much that the subject could not solve 
the problems, but that he was willing to offer solutions 
which were clearly inconsistent with the complete data 
presented. What this means in effect is that if a subject 
has a strong preconceived notion, he will conveniently 
ignore that part of the data which contradicts his limited 
hypothesis. 






- 




- 




- 






* 


- 

. 




















CHAPTER XIV 


CORRELATES OF PROBLEM-SOLVING ABILITY 

Individual Predictors of Problem Solving Ability in Geometry 

It was seen in the geometry study that problem¬ 
solving ability could be accurately assessed by the end of 
the first three weeks. It would, of course, be more useful 
to be able to make a completely a priori prediction. This 
section examines the extent to which this is possible. 

The standard battery of tests which was administered 
at the beginning of the experimental period, provided a set 
of scores which could be interpreted, in the case of grade 
10, as predictors, and in the case of grade 12, as correlates, 
of geometry problem solving ability.^ 

Several observations may be made in connection with 
Table $ 6 . 

The first unusual finding was that Otis IQ ranked 
second among the single predictors at the grade 10 level, 
and third among the single correlates of geometry ability at 
the grade 12 level. A further analysis of individual cases 

1'The high correlates of ability in geometry at the 
grade 10 level need not necessarily be good predictors of 
geometry ability in general. We would leave the word 
^predictor* to refer to a variable whose value may be determ¬ 
ined prior to the behaviour to be predicted. The covariation 
of certain variables with geometry ability at the grade 12 
level can be partly attributed to the selection methods used 
in the school. 






- 




. 

. 



, 





: ■ . : ■ 


' 

u • • • 






. 



v.i'. 'v ■ 1 ic v 

, 



1 | ' ■ , 1 : 

' 



.. . r , 



r,;> > r ;V;0 ,_f ;; ' - .?■ t f/J 


: ''. r : 

* 


, 

. 

, 



265 


Table 56 

Single Predictors (Grade 10) and Single Correlates (Grade 12) 
of Problem-Solving Ability in Geometry 3 - 



Grade 10 

Grade 12 

1. Chronological Age 

-.19 

-.n 

2. D.A.T. Numerical 

.40 

. 66 

3. D.A.T. Spatial 

.43 

.71 

4. % 

-.23 

-.35 

5. k 2 

-.02 

-.09 

6. Minn Spatial 

.32 

.42 

7. Otis 

.42 

.57 

8. Study Habits 

.08 

.24 

9. Watson-Glaser 

.25 

.55 

r D=.Cl foP g rade 10 

is . 31 , p p =.o5 ls 

.23 

P p=.01 fop g pade 12 

is .42, r p=<05 is 

.31 


a The measure of problem-solving ability employed here 
and throughout was the 50^-point. 






















266 


revealed that at the grade 10 level particularly, many 
superior problem solvers had mediocre Otis IQ*s; conversely, 
some students with very superior IQ*s were very poor problem 
solvers. The rise in the correlation for grade 10 to grade 
12 can probably be explained by the fact that the low IQ- 
high problem solver may never reach the academic course in 
grade 12, since verbal limitations mean that his school 
marks will be generally low. 

The grade 12 correlations between the standard tests 
and the geometry scores were all higher than those for grade 
10. The small number of subjects in the grade 12 (sample 
N=37) precluded the possibility of establishing significance 
for individual coefficients, but the whole array of coeffi¬ 
cients is significantly higher for grade 12 than for grade 
10. Again, this probably means that the high-ability, low- 
motivation student who lowers the correlation coefficient 
drops out before grade 12. 

The large difference in predictive value of the 
Watson-G-laser between the two grade levels requires special- 
attention. The author suspects that this test may have been 
too difficult for many students of the grade 10 group 
despite the fact that the test manual indicated standardiza¬ 
tion down to the grade 9 level. 

The high correlations with the D.A.T. Spatial at both 
levels is somewhat surprising. The contribution of spatial 


- 


■ . • • :i ■ 


/no : : 1 

p/pq K, :f :rO'ji'oa' i:n0„iuc :: ; f :q; . ? i<vj:^c;q.ac : '. 

- \;.c oq l x r tW ■ o ( nn ? ! j I 1:< 

:..cp;0, :;.-v' ,:: : J io- a:) ^ s>'hoe 





hon rrr.y \:'ibd ' >L 

■ 

v.c:-' ‘is--/.Co 1 ‘' ^.Oiiouq: Tiq^rl \ 

) ■ ' ■ f ' ■ .' 

' 

m 


c ’I £i’0 0 8 q • ’ 


. 

• ■ ■) ■' i "■ .'. 0 

* 








■ 

. 

.;p.q .. ..■• ,; ->o v.q. 

’ 

■oi ; o 

■ 




, 


• 

. 


, . . 


* 

m ■• : :j ; 0 ■ >,?. :< 1 '■ ' ' ’ ■ 



267 

ability to geometry performance has long been argued and it 
cannot be said to have been settled yet. There is nothing 
in the plane geometry diagram which would seem to require 
the ability to visualize how an object would appear if 
rotated in space, or the ability to visualize the three- 
dimensional shape of an object which would result from fold¬ 
ing a given two-dimensional form. 

Both geometry problems and the spatial test require 
extreme and continued attention, however, and in both, the 
subject is heavily penalized for incautious behaviour. The 
high IQ-low spatial subjects usually showed a surprising 
number of incorrect answers, both in the D.A.T. Spatial and 
in problem solving. 

It is apparent that little relationship existed 
between geometry problem solving ability and either K-^ or ^ 2 * 
This fact seems to agree with the theory, which sees 
comprehension as a psychological function, distinct from 
problem solving. 

In summary, it may be said that while there seemed to 
be several sizable correlates of geometry at the grade 12 
level, no individual prediction variable at the grade 10 
level was sufficiently large to allow accurate prediction. 

Multivariate Prediction of Ability in Geometry 


Only 5 of the original predictors showed correlations 



. , ... r : " C 

* 














- 


« . . 


•- . 


i i 


- i 

. 









268 


with geometry which were significant beyond the *05 level. 
Since the two spatial tests were highly intercorrelated, the 
Minnesota was dropped, leaving the following four predictors: 

(1) D. A.T. Numerical 

(2) D.A.T. Spatial 

(3) Otis 

(4) Watson-Glaser 

In Table 57 and Table 58, the intercorrelations 

between these variables have been listed. The coefficients 

2 

were determined by the Doolittle method (McNemar, p. 183), 
and they, together with the multiple coefficient of correla¬ 
tion, appear in Table 59. 


Table 57 

Intercorrelations of Pour Predictors 3, of Geometry Ability 

Grade 10 



1 

2 

3 

4 

Geom. 

1 


.12 

.45 

.25 

.40 

2 



.24 

.25 

.48 . 

3 




.6k 

.42 

4 





.25 


Code: 1. D.A.T. Numerical 3. Otis 

2. D.A.T. Spatial 4. Watson-Glaser 


^The assumption of linearity of regression was 
checked by inspection of the scattergrams. 












. , - 

, 



- 




















. 

■ 

v •. . ,v ■ f , - ; -v-' 














* 
















... 

■ ... 

, 









269 


Table 58 

p 

Intercorrelations of Pour Correlates of Geometry Ability 

Grade 12 



1 

2 

3 

k 

Geom. 

1 


j .66 

.31 

.1+0 

.66 

2 



00 

-d- 

• 

.23 

.71 

3 




<M 

1A 

• 

.37 

k 





.33 


Code: 1. D.A.T. Numerical 3. Otis 

2. D,A # T. Spatial 4. Watson-Glaser 


Table 59 

3 Coefficients and Multiple R for Grades 10 and 12 



Grade 10 

Grade 12 

1. D.A.T. Numerical 

.232 

.173 

2. D.A.T. Spatial 

00 

O 

. 

.1+76 

3. Otis 

.233 

.080 

4. Watson-Glaser 

-.076 

.331 

r 5.123!+ 

.63 

.82 

r 2 3.i234 

.396 

. 680 























Again, the D.A.T. Spatial emerges as the best predic¬ 
tor, while the Otis is relegated to the third and fourth 
positions of importance in grades 10 and 12 respectively. 

The combined predictors explain approximately 40$ of 
the variance in problem solving scores at the grade 10 level 
and are clearly inadequate for accurate prediction at the 
group, let alone the individual, level. It would seem, then 
that it may be impossible to predict the progress that the 
student will make in geometry problem solving without 
actually sampling some of this behaviour. 

Intercorrelations of Strategy Formation 

Level I mathematical ability emerged as a distinct 
cognitive function--the two tests in this area showed high 
intercorrelations. It is of interest to enquire to what 
extent the measures of problem solving are related. More 
particularly, we are interested in finding out whether 
strategy formation is a general factor which runs through 
the several tests, or whether it Is specific to a particular 
test. 

Four measures of strategy formation were used: (1) 
gaps, (2) Level II series, (3) ordering, and (4) geometry. 
The method of deriving the gap score has been previously 
discussed. A similar scale was set up for the ordering 
problems. The series score was t aken as the subjects 





. . * 

.■ 

, i. 1 nt o 


■ 

* 


. 

. • . . : - : ’ • .. , . c, - o 







271 

exhibited strategy and was evaluated on the basis of whether 
he did (+) or did not (-), solve correctly, problems at, or 


above second order differences. The geometry limit score 
was taken as a measure of strategy formation for that test. 

The results of intercorrelating the four tests are 
shown in Table 60 and 61. 

The significant intercorrelations for the grade 12 
group suggests the presence of a common strategy-formation 
factor running through them. This is especially noteworthy 
when the diversity of situations is considered. Three of 
the grade 10 coefficients were significant and three were 
positive but not significant. The generally low inter¬ 
correlations have undoubtedly been influenced by the fact 
that the grade 10 group exhibited little strategy formation 
on any test. 

If we probe beyond strategy formation for underlying 
personality traits, we immediately find an inverse relation¬ 
ship between the tendency to guess and the amount of 
strategy formation exhibited. This is natural enough, 
because the individual who does not form an adequate 
strategy, must either guess or refuse to offer a solution. 
The product moment coefficient of correlation between 
* guessing* socres and limit scores in geometry amounted to 



^The guessing score in geometry was determined from 







, 


. 


.13 : 


' : 














I , f;- oV',:va:l 










. 











V ■. .. i ' .■ ■■■ ' •, • . r-.'j /■:. : ; *.e i 

• • 

. . ■ . 


■ 

| e.ri'rj bar a.h&x/s, o^'i 

„ ■ ' , '■ ' ' ' "■■■•■•'.. • ' 

: .(■•■>:. ; . v . xr \ -1 ' n : ' 4 /i• i - : rr "M 

'' 




K 'C'l . •■'•*■ J> ". ! *J • / 


• ‘35 





2?2 


Table 60 

Intercorrelations of Pour Measures of Strategy Formation 

Grade 10 



Gaps 

Level II 
Series 

Ordering 

Geometry 

r bis=^ 0 "" 

r bis=* 16 

r. , =.32* 
bis 

Gaps 


-e- 

n 

• 

-4 

cj) =.53*"* 

Series 



cfc> =.19 


Table 

61 


Intercorrelations of Pour Measures of Strategy Formation 

Grade 12 


Gaps 

Level II 
Series 

Ordering 

Geometry 

r bis=-^** 

r bis=-S0** 

rbi S =.47** 

Gaps 


4 =.40* 

4> =.5i' ;H: ' 

Series 



<t> =.36* 


Significant at . 05 level 
Significant at .01 level 



































' 

. 







. 


•- > 


. 


. 












































. . - : 






' 


























' 

, , 1 ... 





















273 


The tendency to guess--or the lack of caution--is 
characteristic of the poor problem solver in every area. It 
should follow then, that significant correlations would be 
found between indices of guessing in different situations. 

The hypothesis may be investigated by examining Table 62. 

It turned out that only one of the three indices was 
significant, although the other two were positive and 
approaching significance at the .05 level. It is interesting 
to note the relatively high correlation between the two 
indices of guessing in group behaviour and the relatively 
low correlation between indices from group and individual 
situations. 

It would seem, then, that the individual develops a 
stable guessing pattern which is a function of his position 
in terms of performance relative to the class, and which runs 
through both problem solving and comprehension behaviour. 

The consistency of the index depends on the fact that he 


the formula. 


G= n 2 
n-|+n 2 

where N 2 =number of problems solved incorrectly, 

N n =number of problems attempted, but no solution 
1 offered. 

The coefficient G- thus represents the relative proportion of 
problems that the subject is unable to do, for which he 
subsequently offers an incorrect solution. 










■ - - 

- 

. 


. ... . . 


j , ' '■ • ■: , j ' ■' '■l 


. 


: j 

u 












' ' H; ' * > ■ I - J 


r ■, * , • l n 1 




. 

v / . . . . * ■ - 

: 














. 

. 

, 





274 


tends to find himself in the same position relative to the 
class over long periods of time. 

Table 62 

Intercorrelations of Three Indices of Guessing^--Grade 12 



Level I Series 

Level II Series 

Geometry 

r bis=*^ 

r bis=-32 

Level I Series 


4> = .26 


-iKf Significant at .01 level. 


Apparently the guessing patterns for the grade 10 
students had not yet crystallized. This was perhaps due to 
the fact that they were in a newly formed group and had not 
yet clearly perceived their position within the group. In 
any case, the three coefficients for grade 10 were all 
positive and of the order of .3 for the group-group correla¬ 
tions and of .2 for the group-individual correlation. 

^The guessing score (dichotomy) was determined as 
follows: 

(a) Level I Series: guessed (-) or did not guess (+) 
at stage 5. 

(b) Level II Series: solved second-order problems 
as first-order (-) or as second-order ( + )♦ 
























:U/ \ 






. - 


. 




■ 












. 

- 

, 



; • ■ ■ . ; ; / \ S); . ' ) ■ ‘‘SO ' < ", 




. 






' 


'■ 

















275 


Sex Differences 

The question of sex differences is naturally and 
invariably raised in any study of mathematical ability. 
There is a common belief that boys are superior to girls, 
especially with respect to ability in geometry. The data 
provided an opportunity to examine such differences. 

The general finding was that for the sample employed 
in this investigation, no substantial or statistically 
significant difference was found in mean performance scores 
between the sexes in any of the standard or experimental 
tests, or in geometry performance. 

Slight differences were observed in favour of the 
boys in the D.A.T. Spatial, the Minnesota Form Board, the 
Watson-G-laser, and in the geometry limit scores. Small 
differences favouring the girls existed in the Otis IQ, the 
Dominion IQ, the Brown-Holtzman Study Habit Inventory. 
Scores on all other tests were nearly identical. 

It has often been found, and is a commonly accepted 
fact that in the general population the boys’ performance 
on spatial tests is markedly superior to the girls’. The 
fact that this did not prove true in our sample, coupled 
with the slight superiority of the girls’ IQ, might suggest 
that we actually had a relatively inferior group of boys. 
This in turn, might be argued as a possible explanation of 






J. x ' . ■■■e-j iv- , ■ . i. . / ' ^ . 

' 

' ■ : - ' : '■ t 


. . . ' 

- 

: - 

. 


. 

! . . 

, ■ . ■ ■ 

. . . ■ . f UiJ‘ . • ' 

, ■ . 

, 

■■ 



276 


the lack of sex difference in geometry performance. 

Although this question cannot be settled here, the 
author doubts the importance of * spatial* ability—as 
measured by the tests employed in this study—as a factor in 
success in plane geometry. 

What would seem to be important--and some evidence 
can be cited—is the part played by the sensitivity to 
different sex roles, and their relationship to geometry. A 
recent study by Kelland (195>9) indicated that in our secon¬ 
dary schools, the boys achieved the greatest status — in the 
eyes of teachers, parents, and pupils—by high performance 
in mathematical and scientific subjects, while the girls 
achieved status through high performance in verbal subjects. 

Two facts tended to support this argument in the 
present study. The following, rather provocative question, 
was put to the students at both levels (Questionnaire 1, 
# 11 ): 

fT Do you think that boys should do better than girls 
(of equal intelligence) in mathematics? M 

The interesting result is that while girls at the grade 10 
level (especially those who perform well in mathematics) 
invariably answered, tt Mo ,T , to the question, girls at the 
grade 12 level were more evenly divided on the issue. In 
other words, it seems that the grade 10 girl has not singled 
out areas in which boys are expected to excel, whereas grade 


■ 






..... 1 






' 




. 

- 


+ ■ 

- • j 










Ii « VS.'* v xr l) 

. 


■>= : . ■<: ■ ? ’ . :■ r.5 = . 

. • ■: . 


!-: ':.w-; : . :.':j Ca- ; , : • > ... 

■ • -L 

, 

. 


. 






277 


12 girls have differentiated such areas* 

Another interesting fact was found in the score on 
the conformity scale of the Minnesota Counseling Inventory. 
For the boys, no clear pattern emerged in the relationship 
between conformity and geometry performance at either level. 
For the girls, however, high geometry performance correlated 
with relatively high conformity at the grade 10 level, and 
with relatively low conformity at the grade 12 level. There 
is also an indication—although it is not statistically 
significant--*that high performance in geometry among grade 
12 girls is associated with a low social-relationships score. 

There is some indication here, that the girl who 
performs well in a *male * area, tends to flout her prescribed 
role to some extent, and may suffer socially for doing so. 

Rural and Town Students 

The population was fairly evenly divided among rural 
and town students. Contrary to expectations, the rural 
students held a superiority in mean geometry scores at the 
grade 12 level (significant at .05 level), while the diff¬ 
erence in mean IQ was not significant. Differences at the 
grade 10 level were not significant. Since the finding 
seems somewhat contrary to accepted doctrine, it was examined 
in greater detail. 

An examination of other test scores revealed that the 



, . 

, 

■ 

_ 


. . ■' ■ 1 • 

- 

w . J- 


' 


u 

' 


. 

• ' 

. „ i 

, 

. 

. . 



278 


town group was superior in the so-called skill subjects, 
arithmetical computation being a prime example. On the other 
hand, the rural group seemed to be better at arithmetical 
and geometrical problem solving. It may be that the rural 
student, who is left to work out his problems more-or-less 
by himself, is, in the long run, provided with a better 
training in problem solving, which must be, in fact, a 
solitary process. Comparative studies of achievement rarely 
include adequate measures of problem-solving ability. 

It might be possible to interpret the rural student ! s 
superiority in geometry at the grade 12 level in terms of 
superior motivation. One might expect to find apathy toward 
school among some farm and twon students at the grade 10 
level; many students are, in fact, *waiting out* the legal 
school leaving-age requirement. However, when the apathetic 
rural student reaches age 16, he invariably leaves school- 
on the one hand because his parents are inclined to adopt 
the igo-until-you-fail» policy, and again because a readily 
available and steady source of occupation is ready to absorb 
him. 

The apathetic town student, on the other hand, is 
eligible only for the most menial sort of labour, and so he 
is often found in the higher grades of school. 



















. 


4 








- 

- 








, 

' 

. 


. 

. . 

— 






■ 


* 


, 








279 


Expectation Toward Mathematics 

It is often contended that a student 1 s performance in 
mathematics may be influenced—beneficially or adversely—by 
the expectations that he carried with him when be begins the 
mathematics course. These expectations probably emanate 
from two main sources: (a) early experiences in mathematics, 
(b) experiences of parents or siblings in mathematics. 

Dealing with (a) first; by far the greater part of 
our population (64$) found public school arithmetic to be 
one of their easier subjects, while only 29$ put geometry in 
the same category. Moreover, there was strong agreement 
(10%) in declaring geometry to be harder than algebra. 
Eighty-five per cent of the superior geometry students (top 
half) and 44$ of the weaker students found arithmetic fairly 
easy. Thus we may say that almost all the students who were 
later to perform well in geometry had early expectations of 
success, while about half of the students who were later to 
do poorly, had early expectations of failure. 

These observations are supported by answers to the 
question (Questionnaire 1, #4), 

tt When did you first become aware that mathematics 
was going to be easy (or difficult) for you?” 

Again, a majority ($1%) had made this decision in 
public school (grade 6 was mentioned most frequently). The 
beginning of algebra convinced another 19$, while the final 



... 

. “:ri‘ rid U ' •' •> ■ v* r -U* ■ d o ' 

* 

♦ 

" 


- 

' ' 

(■ 

. (vie 

i$.L ' ■ O ' ' U , 


..•< o ,,u-... • ; .. .'..-f : ■ 





280 


3>0% did not seem to decide until they encountered geometry. 
There was striking indication from the answers that many 
students felt that they could handle the computational and 
comprehension parts of arithmetic and algebra, but that they 
had found problem solving difficult—as early as grade six. 

With regard to category (b), most of the students who 
performed well in geometry (QQ%) claimed that their parents 
also found it easy, while of the weak students claimed 

that their parents had also found mathematics difficult. 
Several extreme cases of overachievement (i.e., mediocre IQ 
and high geometric performance) could be partially linked to 
expectations derived from parents. For example, the highest 
performing grade 10 student—a girl with an Otis IQ of 102-“ 
when questioned about her performance in geometry, said that 
she knew geometry would be easy for her because her mother 
had always stood at the top of the class in mathematics. 


■V 

> J 

: .. , ' 

^ t 

„ 

„ . 

. 

• — ' ' ^ 

... . ■ - ■ ■ ■ " - 


CHAPTER XV 


THE PROBLEM-SOLVING SYNDROME 

Problem-solving ability, as defined in this thesis, 
appears to be a fairly general cognitive factor, which shows 
only moderate correlation with Otis IQ, and which seems to 
have no outstanding predictors in the cognitive area. In an 
attempt to find non-cognitive correlates of this ability, 
the author correlated standardized geometry limit scores 
against a variety of personality and socio-economic var¬ 
iables. 

The results were meagre and rather discouraging—the 
chief results have already been discussed under sex diff¬ 
erences, expectations toward mathematics, and rural and town 
students. 

The study of overachievers In geometry turned out to 
be a more fruitful task. The author was somewhat surprised 
to find during the course of the investigation, that many 
low IQ students displayed a relative problem-solving ability 
far beyond what one would expect from their overall perform¬ 
ance in school subjects and in the standard aptitude tests. 
It was decided to subject the marked overachievers to a more 
careful scrutiny with a veitf to determining which non- 
cognitive factors were most in evidence. 














. 


' ' • • I 0 

; .y. ■ , A >'j. ». ■■A ; ' ‘C 

' ? 




' - • 


. 











o o 


. 

- 

; ;r j i */'■ ij 1 ) t, „ 1 r i A ' \ T s i AC 

j , . . ' t A' i 1 " 

. ■ U ' 1 : 

;J ; ' v.y ■Aj A' :; A a 

CyA,; ■' V; v, ;;1 3 c A A 1 ',A Ai O C A AVA,A i C 


282 


1. Selection of Overachievers , The geometry limit 
scores were converted to standard scores with a mean of 5>0 
and a standard deviation of 10. The IQ scores for the 
combined group (N=106) were treated in the same way. An 
overachievement index was defined as follows: 

- Standardized Geometry Score 
A = Standardized IQ ~ 

The 20 students showing the highest indices were chosen for 

special study. The group could be broken down in several 

ways: (a) 10 boys and 10 girls, (b) 10 grade 10 students 

and 10 grade 12 students, (c) 12 students with IQ below 106 

(the population mean) and 8 students above 106.^ 


2. Sources of Information . Information concerning the 
students came from many sources. The standardized tests, 
experimental tests, and questionnaires have already been 
referred to. Complete school records, dating back to the 
students* entrance into public school were also used. Each 
student was interviewed three times in the course of the 
experimental period. Again, half of this group had been 
members of the author*s mathematics classes for a period of 
two years. Moreover, the author was aquainted with the home 


^Seven of the 10 students who made continued gains in 
geometry were included in this group. The three remaining 
students possessed sufficiently high IQ’s scores to lower 
their overachievement index below the critical value* 









; ' ■ . ■ ■ . ■ < •• 

* 

* 




: (•- 5 t ;> •• ‘ I: ~ 


■ 

* 


■ ' , - ■ ' 


. 

4 


?<i> 

- 


. 

■ ■: \ ' ;Jr; , S .ar ;i:: - 

. : ' : i; / . •< 







■ 

•U:.. 





283 

life of the majority of these subjects, and had many contacts 
with the students outside the school situation. When every¬ 
thing is considered, it would appear that there was avail¬ 
able, a fairly complete picture of the student, not only as 
an individual within a mathematics classroom, but also as an 
adolescent in his daily life. 

At this point, two tests, which have not as yet been 
mentioned will be discussed. 

(a) Subjective Utility of Mathematics . The author devised 
this test to measure the relative subjective value to the 
student of achievement in mathematics as compared to achieve¬ 
ment in verbal subjects. The basic principle employed was 
the indifference curve* (Edwards, 1952), a device used to 
estimate the rate of exchange employed by the subject to 
compare the utility of one commodity to the utility of a 
second commodity. The method is ullustrated in Fig. 45* 

The subject was first required to indicate his level 
of aspiration (i.e., the mark he expected to obtain) in 
mathematics and in English. The resulting pair of marks 
were plotted on co-ordinate axes. The student was then asked 
to imagine that he was in a position to bargain for his 
mathematics mark. He was asked what loss he would take in 
his English mark to acquire (1) a gain of one mark in 



- 

1 c:--y : o 


< J 



! 1 ' - 


* 

. 

• . 

: -i s • J : ■: 

•• - . 





284 


mathematics, (2) a gain of two marks in mathematics, (3) a 
gain of 5 marks in mathematics, and so on. Again, he was 
asked to indicate what increase in the English mark would be 
necessary to compensate for (1) a loss of one mark in 
mathematics, (2) a loss of two marks in mathematics, (3) a 
loss of 5 marks in mathematics. 


A 


CQ 

•H 
i—I 

bO 


£ 


<D 

ro 

cd 

© 

Sh 

G 

£ 

H 

A 


V 

© 

CO 

a* 

© 

ti 

o 

© 

Q 


\ 

\ 

Jk 





\ 

\ 

\ 




—-Y— 

\ 

\ 

\ 


el of Aspiration 



> 

1) 

1^1 



V 

\ 

\ 

\ 




i 

\ 

\ 

\ 


Decrease <-—-———— -> Increase 


Mathematics 

Fig. 45* Utility measurement of ego involvement in 
mathematics. 


Each answer yields a pair of f mark* coordinates, and 
the set of points represents combinations of marks which are 
of equal *value* to the student. If the valuation is 
consistent, a smooth curve may be drawn through the points 
and the rate of exchange determined. 

In the illustration above, the student was willing to 






























285 


sacrifice two marks in English to gain one in mathematics; 
again, he required an increase of two marks in English to 
compensate for a loss of one mark in mathematics. We may 
infer from this that the mathematics mark has a greater 
subjective value to the student than the English mark, and 
we may further infer that the student is ego-involved with 
mathematics to a greater extent than with English. 

This test was applied to all the students in the 
population. 

(b) Perseveration . The author devised a problem intended to 
measure the student’s willingness to persevere at a problem¬ 
solving task. The following geometry problem looks plausible 
enough, but is, in fact, incapable of solution under the 
stated conditions. 

Given: AC=BC 

AF=FG=GA 
£AFG=4ABC 
Prove: EBFA=aAGC 

(note: use A, I, II, 

HI, IV only . ) 


Pig. I 4 . 6 . Geometry problem employed in the measure¬ 
ment of perseveration. 

The problem was assigned on Friday, for the following 
Monday. It was pointed out to the student that the problem 









. 

t 

■ 

» ; ; V 






■ 

. 

■ 


. 










, 




. ■ . ; ' i;V ;. ; . 

■ . - 

- 














..r 
















. 











286 


would provide a real test of problem-solving ability. Each 
student was required to complete and sign a statement to the 
effect that he had not received help with the problem and 
that the solution time recorded was correct. 

Only one student in the entire population came to the 
conclusion that the problem could not be solved. It was of 
interest, here, to see how long the student would persevere 
in what had been made out to be an important problem before 
giving up, or offering an inadequate solution. 

3. Comparison Groups . In order to determine non- 
cognitive correlates which were peculiar to overachievers 
in geometry, some reference or standard group had to be used. 
When statements are employed in the following section which 
indicate that a relatively high incidence of some character¬ 
istic was found in the overachiever group, it is to be 
understood that the incidence was high relative to the 
population as a whole (N=106). 

In a few connections, comparisons were made between 
the overachievement group and a group of underachievers in 
geometry, chosen by means of the same index. 

The Problem-Solving Syndrome 

One cannot have had contact with a group of superior 
problem solvers in mathematics without having been impressed 
by their intense motivation. In fact, the necessity of 




[1 ' 7 7 .1 ' ; )': '' :; ' ' : V 1 



• . : v\t n f: 3 : ' ' 

r> a;. , B . \ ' ' " B\'i '■ 1 i ' ' ' ' } " ' : ^ 

? ; . ••;.o ' 

' 

. 

■ 

* . ; ; , : .: ,.' _ . * 

. ■■■ 

V j; if l o d; , <& ' d f i d 3 <t B ox bfi . c. 

o '■ w; : ' , ,'c>j \ ; : - • ; o 1; b i; h/,-;./ro*x ' ■! 

0.1 } 

: . ' 

O : • . ‘ ' ' : f. ' v 

. $ r ■ ■ .. '' i 

■ 

d >;• h}.'0;} Bi L V d ■■ >Ui & ,v '' v ' 1 

if f;o:d • r ' 0 t if. Sbn i J: . JtfOfC# 

. 



287 


strong motivation can b© argued in terms of traditional 
reinforcement theory. We have previously thought of motiva¬ 
tion as a willingness to expend an available amount of energy 
in a given direction. The expenditure will continue (or 
response will be made) for a period which is determined by 
the number of successes (or reinforcements) experienced by 
the subject. 

Comprehension and problem solving differ radically 
with respect to the frequency of reinforcement per unit of 
energy expended. Imagine a student following the develop¬ 
ment of a mathematical argument—the solution of a quadratic 
equation, let us say. At each step, the individual performs 
an operation mentally and checks his mental product against 
the recorded result. Thus there is reinforcement at each 
step, which takes the form of satisfaction at having followed 
the argument to the point in question. 

In problem solving on the other hand, reinforcement 
comes only when the problem is completely solved; the 
intervening mental states, in which alternatives are in 
competition, provide a feeling of dissatisfaction, which 
would be opposite in effect to reinforcement. 

The overachiever in geometry shows his intense 
motivation by his willingness to persevere longer than the 
normally motivated student. In the perseveration test, the 
20 overachievers claimed an average of 120 minutes spent in 








-V ' 1 ■' ' 

* 




' 


* 









0 





. 



■ 

1 


' . 



. 

. 








* ■ 

. . '■ . v".; : c , : ' i O : ■ 1 <> l ■ 

. 

. vi 

. 


288 


an attempted solution, compared with the population average 
of 46 minutes, and the underachievers 1 average of 18 minutes. 

Probing beyond this obviously superior motivation, 
one naturally searches for its origin. It is well known 
that the middle class student in the North American culture 
is strongly motivated toward school achievement, since high 
school marks pave the way for social and occupational 
advance. However, this motivation is of the relative 
variety, since relatively high marks are all that is required. 
And since respectable marks can be had in geometry, without 
being able to solve problems, middle class school motivation 
in itself does not imply the intense ego-involvement seen in 
the overachiever. 

The author suspects that a strong attachment to 
problem solving in mathematics often originates in a period 
of the student ! s life in which he may be suffering from what 
might be termed social maladjustment. Several pieces of 
evidence support this point of view. 

When the overachievers were contrasted with the whole 

group, it was found that the former showed a relatively 

p 

large incidence of high scores on the social relationships 

p 

A high score on any scale of the Minnesota Coun¬ 
seling Inventory is indicative of poor adjustment in that 
area. 



: yl ,f j ' ■ ' :1 ; t ' ' ' : ' : 



■ 


V i 


* 






' 


: ' " j ; • L ' ' ; ■ ■ : 

;■ j! : 


■ 

. 

■ ■ i) '• 

r y •' ; . . .. ; . , ,y •; ., _ .. yr.: . i •' , , 1 ,, V 

.. . . " L .£J '• - r':.. , i'L i 

. V < - 

«-■ ’ . • fl ■}!■■■■ ■■ j o v'/c • K v ; (S3 .-'1 ■■■ 

■ ■ l 

• o : \ ■ ■ ■ ' . 

.. - . : ■ 




289 

and leadership scales on the Minnesota Counseling Inventory. 
Moreover, these students seemed to have a very restricted 
circle of close acquaintances, and were usually to be found 
by themselves, or in the company of one close friend. They 
were seldom seen at school dances, were relatively inactive 
at athletics, and showed little overt interest even at the 
grade 12 level in members of the opposite sex. There 
emerges the impression of the geometry overachiever as a 
somewhat lonely individual who somehow lacks the ability to 
enter into a sympathetic contact with others. 

Since the overachiever tends to feel inadequate in 
ordinary social intercourse, he shuns school areas in which 
verbal displays are necessary, and where success depends to 
some extent on the ability to * sell oneself 1 to the group. 

In mathematics, he finds an area of certainty, in which he 
can prove his worth merely by producing answers whose 
correctness is independent of group evaluation. 

The student who adopts mathematics as a measure of 
compensation, establishes a very tenacious hold indeed. He 
is, of course, intensely ego-involved in the outcome of a 
particular problem, and for that reason he is willing to 
persevere. One aspect of his ego-involvement is shown in the 
fact that mathematics has a relatively high utility value 
for him. 

The overachiever identifies intelligent behaviour 


e .. 

I...... * ■ *j . \ ■ 3 rd sa . , i \ 

V ■ - 

* i 

• : , ,i . ' . 

. 

. 

O-j ■. I . ' ■ 

. , ■ ■.. . '■ ' - ■ : ■ 

■i £*■:.; .r .... m ‘isv -4 a r s r o -Oi a;. 7 ■■ 707 . 

r.'V, 07> . ;/0,\0- 7 [1.0777 , :0 ‘.'.7: 0:0 C v'Vp : ,C ! '70C7 

' ■ ■ . ' .. ■ ; - \ Q ' . 

< 0' ' ' • • > • - 




, 

■. , ' i ' ■»i . ■ ’> ■' ■ ■ ' ■ 

v 

• • ; : ; i - . 

■ ■ 


* 


290 


with problem solving, rather than with verbal activities. 

This may be partly due to an attempt to rationalize his fear 
of verbal performance in the same way that he rationalizes 
his avoidance of normal adolescent activities. 

In extreme cases, performance in mathematics may 
become the central prop of the individuals self-concept. 

Thus a problem which the subject cannot solve becomes a 
threat. This is evidenced in the intensely motivated student 
whose pleasure at solving problems is far exceeded by his 
humiliation and self-disgust when he occasionally fails. 

This intense ego-involvement, amounting at times to a 
logical compulsion, explains the absolute motivation of the 
overachiever, which far transcends the relative motivation 
of the ordinary middle class 1 achiever 1 . The overachiever 
solves problems, not only to earn marks, but because failure 
to do so threatens the area of competence around which his 
self-concept is built. 

One aspect of absolute motivation--!.e., the desire 
to be correct rather than to earn marks--is manifested in 
the overachiever *s caution and his refusal to guess. The 
group under study showed significantly less guessing behaviour 
on the three available indices of guessing. 

Out of this caution, this tendency to sit back and 
survey the possibilities before leaping ahead, grows the 





■ .. " .J ■ , ' ■ . r h f . : • * 

. ■■ ■ ' ■; i : 

: 


> -; . 1 : .Co ooa ■ ;< o.- x>o i 1 v; H* 



. ■ , 

■■; 1 ; j . 0 *, 7 | s*> i-j.i'JJ .k't-UQO 




. • . 

0; o.'V > o '). 

' ' . . . '■ ! 


- 


. . . 


. 


' 

. 


■ • ", i ■■■. O 

j- .■■■■■ ; j': c ■, -V- . •'? o'' 

* 

, , - - . ■ 

• 


, 



A . ■ "... ■ J • ,> 


'■ ' ■ ; . 

. 

o ' •• 1 o> ■ ;j co’ 

. 

■ 

til 

•, o . o o • . : . .... : 1 - o 



291 

geometry overachiever 1 s significantly superior scores on all 
the tests of strategy formation. For strategy formation 
involves a preliminary assessment of the problem and a bring¬ 
ing into play of that combination of abilities which will 
yield a solution while minimizing the energy expenditure. 

Of course, it is because caution and strategy formation are 
positively related, that Otis IQ, which is largely a measure 
of speed, itself correlates rather poorly with strategy 
formation. 

In summary, we may say that the overachiever in 
problem solving often manifests personality traits which 
indicate that he is attempting to compensate for inadequate 
social relationships. While the student who possesses these 
characteristics together with moderately strong innate 
ability may go on to make satisfactory progress in advanced 
mathematics, one raises a moot question if he enquires 
whether, in the long run, the overachiever may not profit 
more from a better social adjustment, and a poorer problem¬ 
solving ability.^ 


^The ’compensation* explanation of outstanding ability 
can easily be overstated. The foregoing account has dealt 
solely with some negative aspects of overachievement, discuss¬ 
ed in terms of the rather nebulous concept of ’social mal¬ 
adjustment’. At the same time it must be recalled that we 
were dealing here with overachievers, who, by definition, 
could not have been in the extremely high intelligence range. 
The three remaining students among the 10 who made continued 



' 

- . «. 

• • ■ c; j: . : O' ■ ■? ■ - V 5< -V US. 

\ ' ■ . ■ , t 

- 

. 


. 

foi 

* 

■ j ' o < ■ - 

-- 


* 

:> . . rv • . ; -i =.l b-"i 

■ 

, 

J.4 : : /.,L ' r'.' • - ■ i>X;roo 

■ 




292 


progress in geometry, were of very high IQ. These students, 
who in the author f s opinion, would, have the best chance in 
succeeding at university mathematics, could not reasonably 
be classified as cases of Compensation*. It would certainly 
seem to be plausible to argue that over and above the 
negative aspects of the mediocre-IQ, high-geometry over¬ 
achiever, emerged the somewhat intangible aspects of the 
ability of the high-IQ geometry achiever aspects which merge 
at the higher levels with the creativity of the professional 
mathematician. 













■ 

. ■' . • 

. 

• •• ... - ' . 

• : o ■ . - 

? li.-j-o ' . ■' '■ ■■ n ' rt V .1 B 

. • 






































CHAPTER XVI 


SUMMARY OF THEORY AND FINDINGS 


Theory 

This thesis presented an energy theory of mental 
operations, and applied it to the problem of mathematical 
ability. 

When thinking is considered from a phylogenetic and 
maturational point of view, it seems apparent that the brain 
has evolved to serve the principal function of facilitating 
homeostatic equilibrium. This function is accomplished by 
extending the region within which the organism can anticipate 
possible disruption of its equilibrium. In short, the 
organism is able to plan for, and deal with future events 
because it acquires the power to construct and manipulate 
systems imaginatively. 

When one attempts to explain how the brain acquires 
its anticipatory powers, one immediately encounters energy 
considerations. While the brain is electrically active from 
birth onward, its early activity is disorganized, and the 
extent of * central 1 as opposed to Environmental 1 control of 
cerebral processes is vastly limited. During this time the 
brain is under constant bombardment from external stimuli, 
and there occurs a mapping of the external world on its 
association layers. Gradually, objects in the exterior 





• . . . : " t : . • ; - ' 

f ' .. ... ' ' i a; ■: A ; a ■ A ■ :i ■ -A v A- 'A. 

. . 

' t A 

. 

■: - ' .... A A . 

■ 

. .... • . : . : 

}. ■ , . , : ; . , 

., ' - ■ : :. I 1 A ■; A3 r . .. • -• ' J' ! 3 $... 1 ■ 

. 

t . . 

, . , .i A. A ' A 'v ' A A A A - ■ ■*, C A ' !X > 

A . ■ - A •. : 


294 


environment come to be represented internally by a certain 
complexity of neural organization and activity,. 

At some point in the maturation of the brain, the 
representation of the exterior object can be centrally 
activated without assistance from the exterior energy source. 
Similarly, representatives can be mentally manipulated, i.e., 
manipulated in * imagination*. Since this imaginative 
activity is equivalent to the activity which would be caused 
by an external source of energy, we are obliged to postulate 
as well, an internal source of energy. At the same time, we 
are obliged to move from a neural to a psychic level of 
description, and to invoke the concepts of ego and cathexis. 
While one cannot equate cathectic and physiological energies, 
the obvious interaction between neural and psychic events 
renders safe the assumption that some part of the two 
energies are isomorphic under operations of increase and 
decrease. 

The amount of residual hypercathexis, and hence, the 
possibility of central control, depends upon the contemporary 
state of activity of the organism*s configuration of needs. 

In this respect, the hypercathexis level seems to bear an 
inverse relationship to the strength of needs. 

When the interaction of organisms is considered, a 
third, or social level of description is reached from which 
arises the notion of self-concept* Since the enhancement of 


•• O' 




■ - ■ 


. ■ , ■■ . . I ■ •; IX V; • 

. 

’ - i ,1 ; - i'-'- • 

• , •. ■ 1 - ' 

' ■ : 1 • * 

' * -' l x h C : 

tv!$ ; : - . . . . 

. ■ ■ ' ■ )V '' 

o ■ •' r io a :i q.oo' .c-ov . x box . iv :: x ■:[ l i >■■'■^'1' 

, ■ (V v :y J - X :i , J : ^.... ' 1 ■' XX o XX; ■ X-.LXdlX 

; ;U : XXx *; o'XIX VJjOivdo x iw 

. 

‘"■'I o 

.. - 

' 

- . ’ 



295 

the self-concept operates as a need, it is capable of causing 
a redistribution of the cathexis-hypercathexis balance. 

Two primary schema were proposed for centrally- 
controlled thought. The first, which might be called the 
Undivided energy' schema (Type A), consisted of a sequence 
of operation-storage couplets. The second, or 'divided 
energy' schema (Type B) occurred in situations where logical 
or utility choices were to be made. 

The axiomatic system in mathematics was next consid¬ 
ered, and levels of ability were distinguished in terms of 
the student's task within the system. Comprehension of 
mathematics, denoted Level I ability, seemed to fit the 
'undivided energy' schema; in fact, one is tempted to argue 
that mathematics has evolved until it corresponded to this 
basic mode of mental operation. The energy theory offered 
no reason for supposing that comprehension should possess 
natural upper bounds. Hox^ever, it was seen that low 
motivation-understood as a utility partition of available 
energy--could result in an application of insufficient 
hypercathexis to the comprehension task, and that upper 
bounds would appear in this case. Again, it was postulated 
that adverse interaction (at the third level of description) 
could pose a threat to the self-concept, and that this in 
turn, could result in a redistribution of the cathexis- 
hypercathexis balance, resulting in the appearance of 


• . • ' ’ - ' I • 

- £ 

; . « t ' 

■■ ■ f ' (V. : . • ' .. . • 
































■ 



i- I 


- 








f ' ' 






t 



r .l.v. 



t 





k. : 




t 



s 




! 





' ■ ■■ 


















« 



























- 


. : 


v 
















■ 








B Cj: 




— 












; . •: .. ■ 











* 






, • ,i. . 













■ 

i ■ 







«. ■' 



- 


■<. . , • 







.... „o - . • . .» . i 1: . i;... - ■■ c 5 o s. ■: 1 . , i : ';x - (y ■< pi 




296 


induced upper bounds. 

A mathematical problem was said to originate when a 
gap occurred in the deductive sequence, and when the subject 
developed, or was presented with, a systematic method of 
filling the gap which generated successive choice points. 

Thus problem solving (Level II ability) corresponds to the 
f divided energy 1 schema, and the theory would predict 
natural upper bounds. Again, low motivation and group 
pressure were seen to be capable of lowering the potential 
upper bounds. 

The third, or creative function (within the axiomatic 
system) had to do with the creation of axiom systems and the 
extension of existing systems in fruitful directions. Since 
our knowledge of this area is inadequate to form the basis 
of a science, no attempt was made to extend the theory to it. 

Experimental Findings 

The experiments were designed to corroborate specific 
aspects of the theory. Consequently, two major areas of 
experimentation emerged, comprehension (Level I) and problem 
solving (Level II). 

1. Studies at Level One . Two tests of comprehension 
were designed for experimental use. One test employed number 
series constructed by the theory of finite differences. The 
second test employed permutations on four elements. The 







* 

- 


















. 

- 

- 








. ' 


. 

■ ' ■ 










, 

. 


' . • 




. 




■ ■./ ■■' ■ •;.r 




. .. ) J 






297 


principal results may be summarized as follows: 

(a) In both cases, the operation—^storage—>operation- 
on-storage sequence possessed a time function which was 
noticeably exponential, for the first few operation-storage 
couplets at least. There was some evidence in the case of 
number series that the curve overestimated the required 
comprehension time beyond the fifth couplet. 

(b) While there was no evidence to show the necessity 
of natural upper bounds in comprehension, artificial upper 
bounds were induced in a group-testing situation which was 
carefully controlled to exert pressure on the individual. 

When the time limits were controlled in such a manner that a 
gradient of decreasing group pressure was created, guessing 
behaviour declined significantly. Moreover, when group 
pressure was completely removed, the subject made significant 
gains in their upper bounds. 

(c) The two measures of the speed of performing simple 
mental operations correlated highly with Otis IQ and with 
each other. It would seem plausible to infer a relationship 
between energy level and speed of operations. 

(d) No significant differences were observed in the 
rate of performance of mental operations between grades 10 
and 12 groups matched on Otis IQ. It would seem, then, that 
once the stage of formal mental operations is reached, 
further maturational processes do not increase the maximum 




■ ■ • • ' 

- . ■ ■. ■ . . . • : 

■ ' 

» /' '■ - .■ ' ; > 

v. ■>. .. k>: . on :i 

. 


a .i . • - ■ . c :i . ■ • ' 6 - d a: 

. • . .. ' ■■■-'■ " ■■ '. x 'j‘ ‘ • .. ■' J. j.o 1 -: ' f< . «'i. ; ( - 

i ■ . 1 ' 

. ' ' ' 

,J 'Cv ■;>! r; L • : o ■ 'i ' . ' •> ' ?.o*i<r 

. 


. 

* 

.. ■ 0 ;...X :.V J ’ ' L ■ •; ' : ' ; 



) 



• jf v-i 1 -'. V : 7c; 



' 


i-ir t. j o s X 


t 

: 0 : . ■*, ■ vj". M 




"... r ■ . ■ \ : ■:■ . ■■ • /m nl iki«Ecvo ! rr;; jjifio /j.nx -t j n\ 


298 


energy level. 

(e) A comparison of the grade 10 and grade 12 matched 
groups showed the latter group to be significantly superior 
on two tests of strategy formation. At the same time, while 
the relationship between strategy formation and Otis IQ, 
seemed to be a function of task difficulty, this relationship 
appeared to be generally low for both tests. 

(f) A study of the comprehension of topological 
concepts revealed that in a situation employing standard 
mathematical material, comprehension time again appeared to 
be on closer to an exponential, than to a linear, function of 
deductive length. It also appeared that grade 12 students 
were capable of comprehending topological concepts, provided 
that adequate representatives were available, and sufficient 
time was allowed for storage. 

2. Studies at Level Two . The major emphasis was 
given to the study of geometry problems, or problem solving 
under finite uncertainty. The principal findings are listed 
below. 

(a) The deductive and uncertainty measures of problem 
difficulty both gave fairly accurate estimates of the 
experienced problem difficulty. The uncertainty model in 
particular gave considerable insight into the difficulty 
encountered by the student in his attempts to solve problems. 



■ . .■ ‘ 

, 

. 

. 

. 

* 


, 


' 

. • • 

, 

. 




299 

(b) When the deduction and uncertainty measures were 
combined to form a single index of problem difficulty, the 
division of problems on the basis of this index yielded 
categories which could be given conventional descriptive 
verbal labels. 

(c) In terms of the difficulty categories employed, 
the performance of most geometry students seemed not only to 
remain stable relative to the group over a long period of 
time, but to be predictable by the end of a three week 
'trial run 1 in geometry. In particular, the student who 
was only able to solve direct applications of the proposi¬ 
tions by the end of the first three weeks, seemed from that 
time onward, only to add propositions to his repertoire 
without increasing the depth to which he could analyse 
problems. 

(d) Several pieces of evidence supported the 'bounded¬ 
ness 1 theory of problem solving* All but 5 of the grade 10 
students showed predictable upper bounds in performance 
within the 11 week period. Again, repetition of problems 
did not seem to cause a rise in the incidence of correct 
solutions. Finally, a comparison of the matched grade 10 
and grade 12 groups showed that once the grade 10 group had 
reached their upper bounds, no significant differences could 
be found in the frequency of solutions of common problems. 

At the same time, a small minority of students 




BIS 


. ; . . ■ 


■ 


- 




i 


Ov :j ’ -i ; l ■' 


. ■ 

\o. *v$vo o5 V7\t;tx\j3£c 

■ ■ 


i.i Vi..;,: ■-;t 






3 




, 

. 

\ i • 


* 


; ■ o. f 1 ..V 7 




■j;V T, o; i 1 '.cO 7,707 ’VJ r " ;; 7on. 

■■ . • 

. 


' ' « ;V*. ' : 1 






« 






V; V'' . > 


■’ ' . - ‘ . x . V 





300 


(roughly 10$) seemed to make continued gains in raising 
their upper bounds. These students employed a refinement 
of the standard strategy in which they made a further 
classification of decision types. Each type was associated 
with a particular geometrical configuration. The refined 
strategy caused a decrease in the problem uncertainty which 
in turn resulted in a decrease in subjective problem diff¬ 
iculty. Consequently, a fixed amount of energy would 
establish a higher upper bound with the refined strategy 
than with the fixed strategy. The student who made continued 
progress in problem solving seemed to effect a continuous 
refinement of strategy. 

(e) An analysis of behaviour near and above the upper 
bound showed that while the individual was able to produce a 
complete analysis below his upper bound, the analysis 
gradually broke down when he attempted problems above his 
upper bound, and the individual then made assumptions which 
had the effect of decreasing the problem difficulty. The 
subject gradually moved from an attempt to be logical, to 
an attempt to be plausible, and finally offered an outright 
guess in an apparent attempt to bluff his way through. 

While some students offered few solutions when they found 
that the problems had become too difficult for them, yet 
there was enough guessing in evidence that a majority of 
students gave more incorrect than correct solutions. 


• • ; 

. ■ 

■ ■ .. • . " i ' ■ 

■ 

' 

•. 1 ... . 1 .I i . 

■ .... i.- . ■ ;.J. ■ . v •' > ■' - 

- ... 

. 

. . . : .. o - . 

. . , 

« 

■ 




0 




: 

■ 



• 



’ . *. f 0: 






■ 


. 



. 

i'U U 


* 


olu.o 4 i ; 3.:: •• •; h>; 


8d;t b£ff 




... u ■ ) 


■ 




.... . ... 


;..:u 

* 



. ' j...vi . • J ; . Lj ■ • ■■■• J ;■ 


■ 


. 


. . . ; ■' 




. 


'j *;3oj n\l • >&'.* 

. 






... "3 ' 

. j- 


. 


0 i ifj j C»OT .00 . i t) 


■ 











301 


(f) In problem solving under infinite uncertainty, 
little evidence of strategy formation was found within the 
experimental period. Rather, the student brought pre¬ 
determined strategies into the testing period. These fixed 
strategies, together with some momentary expectations 
generated by the structure of the battery, determined the 
solutions offered by the student. Here again, an alarming 
number of students blindly applied inadequate strategies, 
and by ignoring part of the data, obtained solutions which 
were clearly contradicted by the complete facts. 

(g) Four measures of strategy formation showed 
positive and statistically significant correlations at the 
grade 12 level. Moreover, strategy formation was not highly 
related to Otis IQ,. In particular, geometry problem solving 
scores and Otis IQ correlated to the extent of .4 to .5. 

(h) A multiple coefficient of correlation, using 
geometry as the criterion, and (1) Otis IQ, (2) D.A.T. 
Numerical, (3) D.A.T. Spatial, (4) Watson-Olaser, as 
predictors, amounted to .63 for grade 10 and .82 for grade 
12. In both cases, the D.A.T. Spatial was not only the best 
individual predictor, but also showed the highest weight, 
while the Otis ranked third and fourth (in weight) for 
grades 10 and 12 respectively. It was inferred from the 
grade 10 predictors that an accurate prediction of geometry 
performance could best be made by the preliminary trial 


. . • • . . 

. 

' 

■ 

. 

. 

„ ’ . 



■ 


V .. 








. * , 

1 


■ 

■ ■ •" - 


, ' ~ ; ■ L r ; 

, 

• 

i 

- . ■ ■ v-' 


, , „ 

■ . * 

: i 0 '■ 1 






302 


method* 

(i) An investigation of non-cognitive correlates of 
problem solving ability was carried out for the whole 
population* Sex differences in the sample were observed 
only to the extent that grade 12 girls showed a sensitivity 
to the fact that mathematics is, by social definition, a 
»man»s* area* 

It was apparent that the successful problem solver 
developed early expectations of success, partly through his 
public school experiences in mathematics, and partly from 
parental experiences in, and attitudes toward, mathematics* 

The study of the overachiever in geometry revealed 
that his most outstanding characteristics were an intense 
motivation which manifests itself in a willingness to 
persevere, a cautious attitude toward guessing, and a strong 
ego-involvement with the outcome of problem solving* There 
was some evidence to support the hypothesis that the problem 
solving drive may originate in a period of social maladjust¬ 
ment. 

Implications for the School 

It seems to the author that a simplified energy 
theory of mental operations could be of considerable use to 
the teacher of high school mathematics. Of particular 
importance, is the notion of the non-linear time function of 
the operation-storage couplet, and the consequent necessity 



• ' .. •• j r ■ 

. 

' 

. . ' '■ ■ . " < . ■ . a' ; ' 

* 

olXcifj 

. • 

■ 

■ ■: , ! . . 

- KJo • 

■ 

.; XOi. : : 

■ 

■ 

, • - 





303 

of adequate storage time. When the teacher accepts the idea 
that his teaching of the comprehension of mathematics ought 
to be primarily concerned with the demonstration of operations, 
then he will have a theoretical basis from which to work— 
something which is, at present, lacking. It will mean that 
the verbalization of operational rules will be reduced to a 
minimum, while physical demonstrations will be maximized. 

The teaching of the operational rules of signed 
numbers is a case in point. Current textbooks offer verbal 
rules for the subtraction of negative numbers which are 
completely meaningless from the point of view of operations 
performable on physical objects. A method more in keeping 
with the physical basis of comprehension--and one which even 
the slowest student seems to be able to comprehend--explains 
subtraction in terms of performable movements on a line 
diagram. 

At the same time, the importance of group influence on 
comprehension cannot be ignored. In a class with wide diff¬ 
erences in mathematical comprehension rates, the slow 
student is not only expected to produce answers, but is made 
constantly aware of his slow performance. Under these 
circumstances, we must expect to see a great deal of that 
illogical behaviour which can be subsumed under the general 
heading of »guessing*. 

In any case, a theory of logical behaviour, which 






• ' ■ . - : 

! ;) r.v &c\$ f io .^njfcoo.'jo.j otff "od," 

, o Y ( X..i ■* ' ■ ■ ; 

' 1 ■ r ‘K. -;w i 1 / ; i. ■" n ■: : v\ 

■ * . i - . t 

■ - r> i ■ rr . .;. . ■ j. ., ; i - '.?/•;/ .<H 

i ': ■ - . . l-; 

-■- ■) L , o' I ■; ' 

’■■ j ■ 1 ^;t-‘ 'i .... 1.1,i.>i ; y <[±.. ...I ..0; O'. 

c 

" ' - - .... a ' ' ■ 

• " '• £%* 0 - f > O j . .'V..." '. I o > )WO'XS 

• ■■ ‘ ' 




. 

: 

‘ ■ 1 

; ' . ' T 4 

. X 5 ‘ to l 1 , ■ 

» ' ... 

. . .. 

. . ' ■ 





304 

treats the individual as though he were thinking in a social 
vacuum, is thoroughly inadequate as an explanation of 
observed behaviour. Perhaps the whole theory of the 
* logical* man is unrealistically idealistic. In the vast 
part of the individual*s life, the desire or need, to be 
logical is subordinate to more fundamental drives. If we 
should find it desirable to attempt to maximize the student*s 
logical output, then careful controls must be established 
within the classroom to allay these more fundamental needs. 

The present study also has something to say in 
connection with problem solving. The geometry course of the 
high school has often been attacked in the past, chiefly on 
the g rounds that no observable transfer has been manifested 
with regard to logical behaviour. In other words, the 
contention has been that geometry is more or less ineffective 
as a general method of developing the ability to reason 
correctly. 

The author would contend that geometry may, in fact, 
be harmful to a majority of the students who are at present ' 
obliged to study it. It is difficult to see how anything 
of positive value can emerge from a training in which the 
student, through assumptions, circular reasoning, and plain 
bluffing, reduces complex problems to a level at which he 
can deal with them. The present study was conducted under 
conditions of organization, motivation, and individual 






t.t ■■ ... 1 • •' 52 v1 .. f ' 

... 

: . 

? " i •• : . : ; 

■ \ - ■... J i. • n; o. ', . o 

3.; o,! ooo. ho'- of ..^ 

. i\ O ' . . ' •> : ' .1 i 


•. ' ■. ; 

. ■ 0 "■ '; o; 

. ' . 

.. A.} 'J ' • O ' 


..O' ... V: : O ( v 


r \ 




. 

„ ' ■ 

■ 

OO ,. , '■ • :o . :.. .. 1 ’O, . j j . ■ O | 

. 

* 




v. f ' ■ .. . . . • " - 

■ ... o . . . ■■ . , ' i»; ‘ • ; .. 

- 

■ 

■ ' ; • ' ' •- 




305 


attention to students* work which can scarcely be equalled 
in ordinary day-by-day teaching. The author suspects that 
logical output in the typical classroom under a not-too- 
well-qualified teacher, may be very small indeed. Unfort¬ 
unately, the classroom teacher is in no position to assess 
the daily products of each student*s thinking. 

It we continue to teach geometry in the high school, 
some kind of strict ability division must be effected within 
the classroom, so that each student attempts problems which 
he has at least a fair chance of solving. This thesis shows 
how such a division is possible, provided that the teacher 
is allowed sufficient time to make the necessary preliminary 
asses sments. 

Again, more emphasis must be given to the notion that 
many real-life prlblems, and perhaps the vast majority of 
important ones, do not readily lend themselves to complete 
and final analysis. In light of the fact, the most important 
mental characteristic which we should attempt to inculcate in 
the student is the desire to suspend judgment in the face of 
problems which his mental powers are inadequate to deal with. 
This may well involve a reshifting of emphasis in the assign¬ 
ment of school marks, so that the individual*s performance 
is not judged solely on the number of solutions or part 
solutions that he produces. 




- ■ • ■ ' ■ ; ‘ r ■ r .'■= . . 0 £ ■ C ' jv! ; HO l' ~ 0 . 1 . 0.1 


- i ,: '!••••' : ..1 X cv: : ' y 

. y ■?> ’ ' - ' . si 

. ' : r. . . 

■' . 

. 




. 

0 Ij i: \u> : : 

• ' ■. ; , 1; ; t :>•. >‘'i; c.: ■ ■ • J 


. 


:• 1 - V / ' . .. i: ■. .. . >Xd l lu 

j 


■ 

1 

% 


! - ;r•, • 


VLB > j 


* 





• -a:. , o. . 


. V. 1 • 


: 

- 

1 ■ > • , ' j. 

■ 


■ , ; </ J'. - . .c 


j \ ! 



306 

Finally, if the basis of the tenacious attachment to 


problem solving lies--as the author suspects--in a type of 
social maladjustment, the educator must decide whether the 
extremely ego-involved problem solver might not ultimately 
profit more from an extension of his social adequacy. 

Suggestions for Further Research 

(1) The effect of group influences on individual 
thought and performance remains a practically untouched 
area. It is scarcely necessary to elaborate Its implications 
for the classroom. It may turn out that the notion that 
problem solving can be taught in a group situation is 
psychologically invalid. 

(2) In view of the * non-linearity of comprehension* 
hypothesis proposed in this thesis, the author suggests that 
a series of experiments be carried out at the university 
level. The hypothesis is put forward here, that university 
mathematicians assume and lecture on the linearity hypothesis, 
and that comprehension of the typical mathematics lecture 
will be found to be very small. 

(3) It would seem worthwhile to extend the concept 
of strategy. The energy theory postulates the existence of 
a primitive source of mental energy, which is reflected in 
the speed of performing operations at a low order of diff¬ 
iculty. Strategy formation comes into play when the 



' 


„ 




1 ; - _ 


: 









r o;: 


- 


w ■ • .r i o 








• • 






... ,L 


. 




■■ • 










307 


individual attacks problems which tend to recur in his 
experience. It involves the development of an approach 
which brings the particular combination of the individuals 
abilities into play which will minimize the energy expendi¬ 
ture necessary to obtain a solution. 

While strategy formation would seem to be an import¬ 
ant aspect of intelligent* behaviour, there seems to be 
little in the standard IQ test which assesses this ability. 

( 4 ) The upper bound approach to mathematical perform¬ 
ance would seem to be a useful one, and capable of extension 
at the high school and university levels. This point of 
view is somewhat at variance with current research in 
educational psychology in which emphasis is put on discovery 
of methods of improving on what the individual can do rather 
than finding out what levels are closed to him because of 
limitations in innate ability. 

The author believes that every student is capable of 
comprehending some part of mathematics. However, differences 
in individual rates of comprehension are so great that the 
slower student cannot possibly follow the development in the 
time allotted, since school teachers operate under the 
requirements of a rigid syllabus and must adjust their 
exposition so that a fixed quantity is covered in a given 
time. 

Under these circumstances, there are many students who 







v .• • o ’ 

r-f v | 












j 'X. v-» 





* > e.vi‘3 

*s:- 








• 















- 






, 







j. •■■■■'. :i [ 

- 

















t- 







i 

* 













- 

















• 
















■ 













•": r>, ■ ; 

' 








' 





■■J £ 












■ 





















# 























* 













. 





















. ■') ...j >j.. .b : ' £■ J'b.Uii C£ V. 'I': 





308 


are incapable of profiting from the study of mathematics 
under normal classroom time requirements—even when the best 
methods of instruction that are currently known are used. 

It would seem feasible, and desirable, to be able to estimate 
that in a specified class situation, a given individual will 
not progress beyond a determinable level in mathematics. 

This thesis has shown how such estimation can be made in 
geometry, and a similar technique would undoubtedly be 
applicable to other mathematical areas. 

The next few years may witness great changes in the 
mathematics curriculum at the high school level. There is 
some danger in assuming that a change in subject matter will, 
in itself, remedy the ills of mathematical education. The 
real problem does not lie here, but in discovering the 
psychological processes which underlie mathematical ability. 
It is to these underlying processes that our research must 
be directed. 


"W ? ) : f., i J 


, i ! ' 




, . : 




i'3b si.*;- -ivo-fr 




j > Cv 'll) J 


!.; d ..rid 




, 


• . 



GLOSSARY 


attention-cathexis : the application of hypercathexis in a 

given direction. 

cathexis * the primitive energy which powers the organism*s 
effort to satisfy its basis needs. The term was 
originally used by Preud who equated it to physiolo¬ 
gical energy. More recently, a critical evaluation 
of the term has resulted in a more cautious interpreta 
tion of its status as energy. 

cell assembly : the hypothesized elementary electrical 

circuit which are formed in the brain as a result of 
a continued pattern of stimulation from the envir¬ 
onment . 

central facilitation : the process of activating or inten¬ 
sifying the activity of neural structures by an 
energy transformation which does not emanate directly 
from an external source. 

drive: an aroused condition of the organism based upon 

deprivation or noxious stimulation, including tissue 
needs, drug or hormonal conditions, and specified 
internal or external stimuli. 

ego : In Freud's tripartite division of the personality, 

the part corresponding most nearly to the perceived 
self, the controlling self which holds back the 
impulsiveness of the id in the effort to delay 
gratification until it can be found in socially 
approved ways. 

homeostasis : an optimal level of organic function, maintain¬ 

ed by regulatory mechanisms known as "homeostatic 
mechanisms", e.g., the mechanisms maintaining a 
uniform body temperature. 

hypercathexis : the cathexis which remains over and above 

the amount required for the primary process. An 
accumulation of hypercathexis results from the 
increased efficiency of the organism which accom¬ 
panies its maturational growth and experiences in the 
environment. Hypercathexis is employed by the ego in 
the performance of the reality testing function and is 
often used synonymously with the term 'psychic energy* 













I 'ji; I 


' 

„ . 

' ' 

■ 

. 

' 


>']: a v V"'". 

- 

- 





J *:> 1 






. , 

1 

. . . - 


■ 

£ 

. . 

, . . 

. ■ ■' • ■■ . , ■ ... .. • ?>.: ■ i - i 





310 


incentive: a tangible goal object which provides the 

stimuli that lead to goal activity. 

Level I ability : the comp rehensional aspect of mathematical 
performance relative to an axiomatic system; the 
performance of the permissible operations on the 
primitive elements of the system and the storage of 
successive reference points. 

Level II ability : the gap-filling aspect of mathematical 
performance relative to an axiomatic system. Level 
II ability (problem solving) implies the existence of 
a gap-filling strategy which generates successive 
choice points. 

Level III ability : the creative aspect of mathematical 
performance relative to an axiomatic system. It 
implies the creation of new axioms or axiom systems 
and the extension or inter-relating of established 
systems. 

level of aspiration : a goal that the individual sets as 

something he expects to achieve or strives to achieve. 
Reaching that goal is interpreted by him as success, 
falling short as failure. 

phase sequence : a network of cell assemblies of varying 
degrees of complexity. 

primary reference : the source of the subjective feeling of 
the »correctness * or f truth* of elementary mathemat¬ 
ical operations which follows from the performance of 
internalized physical operations upon the primitive 
representatives of a system. 

secondary reference : the source of the subjective feeling 
of the correctness of a mathematical development 
which proceeds by the application of rules whose 
truth has previously been established by primary 
reference. 

set : a preparatory adjustment or readiness for a particular 

kind of action or experience. Used as a synonym for 
Einstellung. 

storage: temporary storage refers to the maintenance of the 

state of activity in a neural structure above a 
critical operational level. Permanent storage refers 
to the modification of the neural structure (synaptic 
growth) to the extent that central activation of the 
neural structure becomes possible. 
















- 




. ' • I 




. 

,• ■>$ v •: J . , , : 8 

- 

: : ... . . 


■ ' . 










, 

‘ 


' 

• i 




.j 


■ 

. ' 










i; 0 i ; 


. 

. 1 . ! 

■ 


■> r. 

■ X/.'C * 1 

J; 


■ 


■* 

. 

• > l 11 

, 





311 


storage time : the interval between the initial activation 
of a phase sequence system and its employment in 
further mental operations. 

strategy : the t em implies three conditions: (a) the 

repetition of events of certain types, (b) an aware¬ 
ness on the part of the individual of the possible 
range of events, (c) a more-or-less clearly formulated 
plan on the part of the individual to deal with the 
occurrence of a particular event in a specific way, 

subjective probability : the relative frequency with which 
an individual expects an event to occur, in contrast 
to objective frequency, the relative frequency with 
which it actually does occur. 

Type A schema : a form of mental operation which in its 

purest form is represented by the operation-storage- 
operation-on-storage schema. It may be said to be 
an undivided energy model in that no competing 
mental states are encountered. 

Type B schema : a form of mental operation in which attention- 
cathexis is divided between competing alternatives of 
the f utility» or f logical » type. 

upper bound : a sequence of numbers is said to have an upper 
bound if it is possible to specify some number which 
is not exceeded by any member of the sequence* 









BIBLIOGRAPHY 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Allandoerfer, C. B # Deductive methods in mathematics; in 

Insights into modern mathematics . Twenty-third yearbook 
of the National Council of Teachers in Mathematics. 
Washington, D.C., National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics, 1957, 65-100. 

Anderson, G. L. Quantitative thinking as developed under 
connectionist and field theories of learning. In 
Learning theory in school situations . University of 
Minnesota Studies in Education , No. 2. Minneapolis, 
Univ. of Minn. Press, 1949, 40-73* 

Anderson, T. W. Probability models for analysing time 
changes in attitudes. In P. F. Lazarsfeld, (ed.). 
Mathematical thinking in the social sciences . Glencoe, 
Ill., Free Press, 195k• 

Ashby, W. R. Design for a brain . New York, John Wiley & 
Sons Inc., 1952. 

Ashby, W. R. An introduction to cybernetics . New York, 
Wiley, 1956. . “ 

Barakat, M. K. A factorial study of math, abilities. Brit . 
J. Psychol., Stat. Sec ., 4, 1951, 137-156. 

Bartlett, Sir Frederick. Thinking, a psychological and 
social study . London, Routledge and Paul, 19$ 7"* 

Barr, F. Urban and rural differences in ability and attain¬ 
ment. Educ. Res . (Brit.), 1, 1959, 49-59* 

Berlyne, D. E. Recent developments in Piaget»s work. Brit . 
J. Psychol ., 48, 1957, 1-12. 

Bexton, W. H., Heron, W., Scott, T. H. Effects of decreased 
variation in the sensory environment. Canadian J . 

Psychol ., 8, 1954, 70-76. 

Biggs, J. B. The development of number concepts in young 
children. Educ. Res. (Brit.), 1, 1959, 17-34* 


Binet, A. The psychology of reasoning , Chicago, Open Court 
Publishing" Co."7^907* ~ 






























314 


Blackwell, A. N. A comprehensive investigation into the 
factors involved in mathematical ability in boys and 
girls. Brit. J. educ. Psychol., 10, 1940, 143-153. 
212 - 222 . ' 

Boole, G. An investigation of the laws of thought . New 
York, Dover Publications, 1951. 

Bowers, J. E. The difficulty of one-step arithmetical 

problems in relation to the type of fundamental number 
operations involved. Unpublished Ed.D. thesis. 

University of Toronto, 1955. 

Braithwaite, R. B. Scientific explanation^ a study of theory , 
probability and law in science . Cambridge, University 
Press, 1953. * 

Breuer, D. The problem of quantification in psychological 
sciences. Psychol. Rev ., 65, 1958, 8-13. 

Brown, K. E. Research in teaching high school mathematics. 
Math. Tchr ., 5l, 1958, 5?8-585. 

Brownell, ¥. A. Psychological consideration in the learning 
and teaching of arithmetic. In The teaching of 
arithmetic . Tenth Yearbook of the National Council of 
Teachers of Mathematics. New York, Teachers College, 
Columbia University Bureau of Publications, 1935, 1-32. 

Brownell, W. A., et al. Arithmetic in grades one and two : 

A critical summary of new and previously reported 
research . Duke University Research Studies in Education, 
No. 6, Durham, N.C., Duke University Press, 1941* 

Brownell, W. A. A problem solving process that succeeds 
arithmetic we neeT“'3¥ri'ei , Boston, Ginn & Co., 1958~. 

Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J. J., Austin, G. A. A study of 
thinking . New York, Wiley, 1958. 

Bruner, J. S. et al. Contemporary approaches to cognition . 

C arabridge, Harvard University Press, 1957. 

Buckingham, B. R. & MacLatchy, Josephine H. Number abilities 
of children when they enter grade one. Report of the 
society*s committee on arithmetic. Twenty-ninth Yearbook 
of the National Society for the Study of Education. 
Bloomington, Ill., Public School Publishing Co., 1930, 

473-524. 




























315 


Buswell, G. T. The psychology of learning in relation to 
the teaching of arithmetic. In The teaching of 
arithmetic . Fiftieth Yearbook of the National Society 
for the Study of Education, Part II. Chicago, National 
Society for the Study of Education, 1951, 143-154* 

Buswell, G. T. Needed research in arithmetic. In The 
teaching of arithmetic . Fiftieth Yearbook of the 
National Society for the Study of Education, 1951, 282- 
297. 

Buswell, G. T., with the cooperation of Kersh, B. Y. 

Patterns of thinking in solving problems . University of 
California Publications in Education, 12, 11, Berkeley 
and Los Angeles, University of California Press, 1956, 

63-148. 

Buswell, G. T. Educational theory and the psychology of 
learning. J. educ. Psychol ., 1956. 

Carnap, R. Introduction to semantics . Cambridge, Mass., 
Harvard University Press, 1942. 

Cattell, R. B. Personality traits associated with abilities 
With verbal and math, abilities. J. educ. Psychol., 36, 
1945, 475-486. 

Cattell, R. B. Factor analysis . New York, Harper, 1952. 

Cherry, E. C. On the validity of applying communication 
theory to experimental psychology. Brit. J. Psychol ., 

48, 1957, 176-188. 

Clarke, S. C. T. Clear thinking in geometry. Unpublished 
M.Ed. thesis. University of Alberta, 1943. 

Cohen, J. C., Dearnaley, E. J. and Hansel, C. E. M. 

Measures of subjective probability. Brit. J. Psychol ., 

48, 1957, 271-275. 

Colby, K. M. Energy and structure in psychoanalysis . New 
York, Ronald Press Co., 1955. 

Coleman, R. H. An analysis of certain components of 

mathematical ability and an attempt to predict mathemat¬ 
ical achievement in a specific situation. Unpublished 
Ph.D. thesis, Indiana, 1956, Reported in Dissertation 
Abstracts, 1, 1951, 2-62. 


























316 

Crawford, D # H. An introductory study of the consistency of 
marking mathematics papers. Alberta J. Educ. Res., 5, 
1959, 31-40. 

Cronbach, L. J. A generalized psychometric theory based on 
information measure. Urbana, Ill., College of Education, 

195T. ~ 

Cronbach, L. J. and Gleser, C. G. Psychological tests and 
personal decisions . Urbana, Ill., University of 
Illinois Press, 1957* 

Croxton, F. E., and Cowden, D. J. Applied general statistics . 
Englewood Cliffs, N. J., Prentice-Hall, 1956. 

Davis, K. Human Society . New York, Macmillan Co., 1949. 

Davis, R, C. The domain of homeostasis. Psychol. Rev. 65* 
1958, 8-13. 

Dewey, J. How we think . Boston, Heath, 1920. 

Dodes, I. A. The science of teaching mathematics. Math. 

Tchr ,, 46, 1953, 157-166. 

Douglas, C. K. Relation of high school to college mathemat¬ 
ics marks, Sch, Rev ,, 44, 1936, 615-619. 

Duncker, K. On problem solving. Psychol. Monogr., 58, 

No. 5, 1945. 

Dyer, H. S., Kalin, R., Lord, F. M. Problems in mathemat ¬ 
ical education . Princeton, N.J., Educational Testing 
Service, 1956. 

Edwards, W. The theory of decision making. Psychol. Bull. 

51, 1954, 380-417. 

Fehr, H. F., McMeen, G., and Sobel, M. Using hand-operated 
computing machines in learning arithmetic. Arith. Tchr . 

3, 1956, 145-50. 

Fehr, H. F. Theories of learning related to the field of 
raathematics. Twenty-firs^ Yearbook of "the National 
Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Washington, D.C., 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 1953, l-4l« 

Fehr, H, F. Breakthrough in mathematical thought. Math . 

Tchr , 52, 1959, 15-20. 

























317 


Fleming, C. M. Class size as a variable in the teaching 
situation. Educ. Res . (Brit.), 1, 1959, 35*47• 

Freeman, G. L. The energetics of human behaviour . Ithaca, 
N.Y. Cornell University Press, 1948'. 

Freud, S. The basic writings of ... New York, Modern 
Library, Inc., 1938. 

Freud, S. An outline of psychoanalysis . New York, W. W. 
Norton & Co. Inc., 1949• 

Gagne, W. Problem solving and thinking. Annual Rev. of 
Psychol., 10, 1959, 147*171. 

Garrett, H. E. Statistics in psychology and education . 

New York, Longmans, Green & Co., 1953«» 

Gibb, E. G. A review of a decade of experimental studies 

which compared methods of teaching arithmetic. J. educ. 
Res . 46, 1953, 603-708. 

Gilchrist, J. C. Social psychology and group processes. 
Annual Rev, of Psychol ., 10, 1959, 233-263. 

Girshick, M. A. An elementary survey of statistical 

decision theory. Rev, educ. Res ., 5, 1954* 448*487. 

Glaser, R., Schwartz, P. A. Scoring problem solving items 
by measuring information. Educ. Psychol. Measmt ., 14, 

1954* 665*670. 

Glaser, R., Damrin, D. E. and Gardiner, F. The tab item. 
Educ. Psychol. Measmt . 14, 1954* 283*294* 

Glennon, V. J. and Hunnicut, C. W. What does research say 
about arithmetic ? Washington, D. C., Association for 
Supervision and Curriculum Development, 1952, 45* 

Guilford, J. P. Factor analytic study of navy reasoning 
tests. Educ. Psychol. Measmt . 14, 1954* 301-325. 

Guilford, J. P. The structure of the intellect, Psychol . 
Bull ., 53, 1956, 267-293. 

Gunderson, Agnes G. Number concepts held by seven-year-olds. 
Math. Tchr ., 33, 1940, 18-24. 
























|H 







* 





318 

Hadamard, J. The psychology of invention in the mathematical 
fieldo Princeton, N.J., Princeton Univ. Press, 1945. 

Haggard, E. A. Intraclass correlation with the analysis of 
variance . New York, Dryden Press, 1958. 

Hall, C. S., and Lindsey, G. theories of personality. New 
York, Wiley, 1957. 

Hamley, H. R. Relational and functional thinking in mathema- 
tics. Ninth Yearbook of the National Council of Teachers 
of Mathematics, Teachers College, Columbia University, 

New York, 1931].. 

Hartree, D. R. Numerical analysis . Oxford, The Clarendon 
Press, 1952. 

Hartung, M. L. Motivation for education in mathematics . 

Twenty-first Yearbook of the National Council of Teachers 
of Mathematics, Washington, D.C., National Council of 
Teachers of Mathematics, 1953, 42-68. 

Havighurst, R. J. Can mathematicians and educationists 
cooperate? Math. Tchr . 30, 1937, 211-213. 

Hebb, D. 0. The organization of behaviour . New York, John 
Wiley Inc., 1949. ~~ 

Henderson, K. B. and Pingry, R. E. Problem solving in 
mathematics. Math. Tchr ., 43, 1950, 228-269. 

Hertzberg, F. and Lapkin, M. A. A study of sex differences 
on the primary mental abilities test. Educ. Psychol . 

Measmt /, 14 , 1954, 687-689. 

Hick, W. E. Information theory and intelligence tests. Brit . 

J. Psychol ., 42, 1951, 183-194. 

Hilbert, D. and Ackermann, W. Principles of mathematical 
logic . New York, Chelsea Publishing Co., 1950. ' 

Hilgard, E. R. Theories of learning . New York, Appleton- 
Century-Crofts, 195b. 

Hilgard, E. R. Introduction to psychology . New York, 
Harcourt-Brace, & Co., 1957. 







































319 


Hills, J. R. Relationship between certain factor analysed 
abilities and success in college mathematics. Educ. 
Psychol. Measmt ., 17, 1957* 615-622. 

Hoel, L. An experiment in clinical procedures for arithmetic. 
In Emerging practices in mathematics education . Twenty- 
second Yearbook of the National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics, Washington, D.C., National Council of 
Teachers of Mathematics, 1954* 222-232. 

Hoffman, L. R. Homogeneity of member personality and its 
effect on group problem solving. J. abnorm. soc. 

Psychol . 1958, 27-33. 

Humphrey, C. The problem of the direction of thought. Brit. 
J. Psychol ., 30, 1940, 183-196. 

Hunter, I. A. The solving of three-term series problems. 

Brit. J. Psychol ., 48 , 1957, 286-299. 

Huntington, E. V. The fundamental propositions of algebra, 
in J. W. A. Young (ed.). Monographs on topics of modern 
mathematics , New York, Dover Publications, 1955. 

Inhelder, B. and Piaget, J. The growth of logical thinking 
from childhood to adolescence l London, Rutledge and 
Regan Paul, 1958. 

Jacobson, J. E. The electro-physiology of mental activities. 

Amer. J. Psychol ., 44* 1932, 667-694- 

Johnson, D. M. Problem solving and symbolic processes. 

Annual Rev, of Psychol ., 1, 1950, 297-309. 

Kattsoff, L. 0. A philosophy of mathematics . Aimes, Iowa, 
Iowa State College Press, 1949. 

Kelland, N. The prestige value of certain aspects of the 
educational program in Alberta composite high schools, 
M.Ed. thesis (in preparation). University of Alberta, 

1959. 

Kenner, M. R. Meta-mathematics and the modern conception of 
mathematics. Math. Tchr ., 5l* 5* 1958, 350-357. 

Kenney, J. P. and Keeping, E. S. Mathematics of statistics . 
Part 2. New York, Van Nostrand, 1954* 























t 












320 


Khinchin, A 0 I. The mathematical basis of Information theory . 
New York, Dover Publications, 1957. 

Kinney, L. B. and Purdy, C. R. Teaching mathematics in the 
secondary school. New York, Rinehart & Go. Inc., 1952. 

Kleene, S. C. Introduction to meta-mathematics . New York, 
Van Nostrant Co., Inc., 1952. 

Knight, F. B. Learning theory in arithmetic . Report of 

Committee of National Society for the Study of Education 

Part One , Twenty-ninth Yearbook of the National Society 

for the Study of Education, Chicago, University of 
Chicago Press, 1930, 145-267. 

Koehler, W. Gestalt psychology . New York, Liveright, 1929. 

Lazerte, M. E. The development of problem solving ability 

in arithmetic ! Toronto, Clarke, Irwin & Co., Ltd., 1933. 

Lazarsfeld, P. F. Mathematical thinking in the social 
sciences , Glencoe, Ill., Author, 1954* 

Lee, D. M. A study of specific ability and attainment in 
mathematics. Brit. J. educ. Psychol ., 25, 1955, 178. 

Leeper, R. Lewin f s topological and vector psychology, a 
digest and a critique T Eugene, Oregon, University of 
Ore g on Pres s, 194 5 * 

Lewin, K. Principles of topological psychology. New York, 
McGraw-Hill,' 1936. 

Lewis, H. An experiment in developing critical thinking 
through the teaching of plane demonstrative geometry. 

Math. Tchr ., 43, 1950, 411-413. 

Lord, F # E. A study of the spatial orientation of children. 

J. educ. Res ., 34# 1941# 48l-505. 

Lorimer, F. The growth of reason. New York, Harcourt Brace 
& Co., 1929. 

MacKay, J. G. An analysis of the abilities of difficulties 
in geometry 1 as taught in Alberta high schools. 
Unpublished M.A. thesis. University of Alberta, 1943. 












































321 

McConnell, T # R. Recent trends in learning theory and their 
application to the psychology of arithmetic. In 
arithmetic in general education . Sixteenth Yearbook of 
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. New 
York, Teachers College, Columbia University, Bureau of 

Publications, 1944* 143-154* 

McNemar, Q. Psychological statistics . New York, John Wiley 
& Sons Inc., 19557 

McKellar, D. Imagination and thinking, a psychological 
analysis . London, Cohen and West, 1957• 

Marshack, J. M. Probability in the social sciences, in 
P. P. Lazarsfeld, Mathematical thinking in the social 
sciences . G-lencoe, Ill., Free Press, 1954. 

Massimiano, C. C. The influence of the study of plane 

geometry on critical thinking. Math. Tchr. 49* 1956* 

151 - 153 . 

Max, L. W. An experimental study of the motor theory of 

consciousness III action-current responses in deaf-mutes 
during sleep. Sensory stimulation and dreams. 

J, Comparative Psychol .. 193* 1935* 469-486. 

Mead, G. H. Mind, self, and society . Chicago, University of 
Chicago Press, 1934* 

Meder, A. E. (JR.) The maneuvers in set thinking. Math. 

Tchr ., 51* 1958, 578-585. 

Michael, R. E. The relative effectiveness of two methods of 
teaching certain topics in ninth grade algebra. Math . 
Tchr. 42, 1949* 83-8?. 

Michael, W. B., Zimmerman, W. S., and Guilford, J. P. An 
investigation of the nature of spatial relations and 
visualization factors in two high school samples. Educ. 
Psychol. Measmt . 11, 1951* 5H-577. 

Michael, W. B. Differential testing of high level personnel. 
Educ. Psychol. Measmt . 17* 1957* 475-489. 

Miller, G. A. and Frick, F. C. Statistical behaviouristics 
and sequences of responses. Psychol. Rev . 56, 1949* 
311-324. 

























; 










322 


Miller, G. A. and Selfridge, J. A # Verbal context and the 
recall of meaningful material. Amer. J. Psychol. 63* 
1950, 173-185. 

Miller, K. E. Einstellung rigidity, intelligence and 

teaching methods. Brit. J. Psychol . i|8, 1957, 32-48. 

Milner, P. M. The cell assembly, Mark II, Psychol. Rev., 

64, 1957, 242 - 253 . 

Oldham, H. W. A psychological study of mathematical ability. 
Brit. J. educ. Psychol., 7, 1937, 269-286 and 8, 1938, 
16 - 28 . ” 

Pallensen, L. C. An investigation of the reasoning 

processes employed in a first course in demonstrative 
geometry. Unpublished M.Ed. thesis. University of 
Alberta, 1943. 

Patrick, G. Creative thought in artists, J. Psychol., 4* 

1937, 35-73. 

Petrie, P. A. et al. Intermediate mathematics, book four . 
Toronto, Gopp dark, 1954® " 

Phillips, H. B. Calculus. New York, John Wiley Sc Sons, 

Inc., 1927. 

Piaget, J. The psychology of intelligence . New York, 
HarcourtTHBrace, 1950. ~~ 

Piaget, J. The biological problem of intelligence. In 
Rapaport, The organization and pathology of thought . 

New York, Columbia UnlversTty Press, "1951# 174-1927 

Piaget, J. Principal factors determining intellectual 

evolution from childhood to adult life. In D. Rapaport, 
The organization and pathology of thought . New York, 
Columbia University Press,"”1951 # 154“174* 

Piaget, J. The child*s conception of number , London, 
Rutledge & Paul, 19527 

Plank, N. Observations on attitudes of young children 
toward mathematics. Math. Tchr. 43# 1950, 252-263. 


Polya, G. Mathematics as a subject for learning plausible 
reasoning. Math. Tchr . 52, 1959# 7-10. 
















5 








l " 












. 








i 





323 


Price, H. V. Needed research in the teaching of science and 
mathematics. Sch. Science and Math . 57, 1957, 389-390. 

Quastler, H. Information theory in psychology , Glencoe, Ill., 
Author, Free Press Publishers, 1955. 

Rapaport, D. The organization and pathology of thought . 

New York, Columbia University Press, 1951* 

Rignano, E. The psychology of reasoning . New York, Harcourt, 
Brace & Co., 1923# 

Roberts, C. A. Sex differences in children . Report series 
#2, Ottawa, Mental Health Division, 1958. 

Robinson, G. de B. The foundations of geometry . Toronto, 
University of Toronto Press, 1946. 

Rogers, A. L. Experimental tests of mathematical ability 
and their prognostic" value . Mew York, Columbia 
University Press, 1918. 

Rosenbaum, R. A. Sweet are the uses of generality. Math. 
Tchr., 51, 1958, 87-95. 

Rourke, R. E. K. Some implications of twentieth century 
mathematics for high schools. Math. Tchr . 5l, 1958, 

78-87. 

Russel, D. H. Children»s thinking . Boston, Ginn & Co., 1958. 

Russell, N. M. Arithmetical concepts of children. J. educ . 
Res., 30, 1936, 6^7-663. 

Savage, L. J. Theory of statistical decision. J. Amer . 
Statis. Assoc ., 46 , 1951, 55-67. 

Savage, M. E. Knowledge of educational research possessed 

by Ontario high school mathematics teachers. Unpublished 
M.Ed. thesis. University of Toronto, 1957. 

Schunert, J. The association of mathematical achievement 
with certain factors resident in the teacher, in the 
teaching, in the pupil, and in the school. J. exp. Educ ., 
19, 1951, 219-238. 

Shannon, C. E. and Weaver, W. The mathematical theory of 
communication . Urbana, Ill., University of Illinois 
Press, 1949. 



































324 


Siegel, S. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioural 
sciences" Toronto, McGraw-Hill, 1956. 

Siegel, S. Level of aspiration and decision making. Psychol. 
Rev., 64, 1957, 253-262. 

Sierpinski, W. General topology . Toronto, University of 
Toronto Press, 1952'. 

Skinner, B. F. The science of learning and the art of 
teaching. Harvard educ. Rev ., 24, 1954? 86-97. 

Smith, D. E. History of modern mathematics . New York, 
McGraw-Hill Book Co., 19^9. 

Smith, R. R. Meaninp;ful division. Math. Tchr., 43, 1950, 

12 - 18 . 

Sokolnikoff, I. S. Advanced calculus. New York, McGraw- 
Hill Book Co., 19397 ' — ~ 

Spearman, C. E. The abilities of man, their nature and 
measurement . London, Macmillan & Co., 1927. 

Stone, M. M. Some crucial problems in mathematical 

instruction in the limited states. Sch. Rev. 65, 1957, 
64-78. — 

Taylor, J. G. Experimental design, a cloak for intellectual 
sterility, Brit. J. Psychol ., 49, 1958, 106-116. 

Thiele, C. L. An incidental or an organized program of 
number teaching? Math, Tchr ., 31, 1938, 63 - 67 . 

Thorndike, E. L. Psychology of arithmetic . New York, 
Macmillan, 1922. 

Thorndike, E. L. The psychology of algebra . New York, 
Macmillan, 192 jTI 

Thorndike, E. L. Mental discipline in high school studies. 

J. educ. Psychol . 15, 1924, 1-22, 83-98. 

Thorndike, E, L. The measurement of intelligence . New York, 
Teachers College, 1927* 

Thurstone, L. L. The nature of intelligence . New York, 
Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1927* 










































325 


Thurstone, L. L. Primary mental abilities . Chicago, 
University of Chicago Press, 1938. 

Thurstone, L. L. Factorial studies of intelligence . 

Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 19^17 

Thurstone, L. L. Multiple factor analysis . New York, 
Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1947* 

Thrall, R. M., Coombs, C. H., and Davis, R. L. Decision 
Processes , New York, Authors, Wiley, 1954* 

Tuttle, L. and Satterly, J # The theory of measurements , 
London, Longmans, Green & Co., 1925. 

Twenty-first Yearbook of the National Council of Teachers 

of Mathematics. The learning of mathematics, its theory 
and practice . Washington, D.C., National Council of 4 
Teachers of Mathematics, 1953. 

Ulmer, G. Teaching geometry to cultivate reflective 

thinking: an experimental study with 1239 high school 

pupils. J. exp. Educ ., 8, 1939, 18-25- 

University of Illinois Committee on School Mathematics. 

High school mathematics, first course, teachers* edition. 
Urbana, Ill., University of Illinois Press, 1953* 

VanDuren, W. L. (Jr.). The maneuvers in set thinking. 

Math. Tchr ., 51, 1958, 322-335. 

Veblen, 0. The foundations of geometry, in J.W.A. Young, 

(ed.), Monographs on topics of modern mathematics . New 
York, Dover Publications, 1955, Chapter 1. 

Vernon, D. E. The structure of human abilities . London, 
Meuthuen, 1950. 

Vinacke, W. E. The psychology of thinking . New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 1952. 

Wallas, G. The art of thought. London, C. A. Watts & Co., 
Ltd., 1926. 

Walker, H. M. & Lev, J. Statistical inference . New York, 
Henry Holt & Co. Inc., 1953« 

































326 

Washburne, C. W. The grade placement of arithmetic topics: 
f a committee of seven* investigation. Report of the 
society f s committee on arithmetic . Twenty-ninth 
Yearbook, part 2, National Society for the Study of 
Education, Bloomington, Ill., Public School Publishing 
Co., 1930, 641-670. 

Washburne, C. W. Work of the committee of seven on grade 
placement of arithmetic. Child development and the 
curriculum. Thirty-eighth Yearbook, part 1, National 
Society for the Study of Education. Bloomington, Ill. 
Public School Publishing Co., 1939* 299-324. 

Weaver, J. P. Six years of research in arithmetic instruction. 
Arith. Tchr . 4* 1957, 89 -IOO. 

Wertheimer, M. Productive thinking . New York, Harper, 1945. 

Wesrnan, A. G. Expectancy tables--a way of interpreting test 
validity. Test Service Bull ., New York, Psychological 
Corporation, 38, 1949. 

Wheeler, R. H. The neif psychology of learning . Ninth 
Yearbook of the National^^uncTr^of Teachers of 
Mathematics, Nex^r York, Bureau of publications. Teachers 
College, Columbia University, 1935. 

Wilson, K. Information theory approach to psycholinguistics. 

J. abnorm. soc. Psychol., 49, 1954, 35“49. 

Wisely, E. An approach to problem solving. Arith. tchr., 

4 , 1957, 125 - 129 . 

Woods, P. S. Non-Euclidian geometry, in J. W. A. Young, 

(ed.), in Monographs on topics of modern mathematics . 

New York, Dover Publications, 1955, Chapter III. 

Woody, C. Knowledge of arithmetic possessed by young 

children. Bull. Sch. Educ., Indiana Univer., 1930, 50- 

85. 

Wrigley, J. The factorial nature of ability in elementary 
mathematics. Brit, J. educ. Psychol ., 78 , 1958, 6 I- 78 . 


Wrightstone, J. W. Influence of research on instruction in 
arithmetic. Math. Tchr . , 45, 1952, 182-197. 

















APPENDICES 









APPENDIX A 


THE AXIOMS OP PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY 


Let us consider a class of undefined elements which 
we shall call ’points’. An undefined subclass of points we 
shall call a ’line*. It is customary to represent points by 
capital letters A, B, C, . . . and lines by small letters 
a, b, c, . . . If a point belongs to a sub-class which we 
have called a line, we shall say that it is ’on’ that line; 
conversely, we shall say that the line is ’on’ or ‘passes 
through’ the point. For formal statements it is convenient 
to use the word "on” in both senses, though n passes through 11 
is more familiar in the latter connection. We shall say 
that two lines which have a point in common are ’concurrent 
in’ or ’intersect in’ that point, and that any three points 
of a line are collinear. 

We now make the following assumptions concerning 
points and lines: 

I. There are at least two distinct points. 

II. Two distinct points A and B determine one and only 
one line on both A and B. This line we shall call AB (or BA), 
and speak of it as ’joining* A and B. It is not difficult to 
prove from II that if C and D are distinct points on AB, then 
A and B are points on CD; also, that ’two distinct lines 
cannot have more than one common point’. 

III. If A and B are distinct points, there is at least 
one point distinct from A and B on the line AB. 

IV. If A and B are distinct points, there is at least 
one point not on the line AB. 

V. If A, B, C, are three non-eollinear points, and D 
is a point on BC distinct from B and C, and E is a point on 
CA distinct from C and A, then there is a point P on AB such 
that D, E, P, are collinear. 

Definition. If A, B, C are three non-collinear points, the 
’plane* ABC is the class of points lying on lines joining C 
to the points of line AB. 

VI. If A, B, C, are three non-collinear points, there 










• . : , , . 

- 

' 

tee ifttvzoo 

, ■ 

* 

; ■; ! 











329 


is at least one point D not on the plane ABC, 

Definition , If A, B, C, D are four non-coplanar points, the 
1 three-dimensional space* ABCD is the class of points lying 
on lines joining D to the points of the place ABC* 

VII* Any two distinct planes have a line in common. 


/ 





APPENDIX B 


DESCRIPTIONS OF STANDARDIZED TESTS AND QUESTIONNAIRES 


1. Differential Aptitude Tests—Numerical Ability (Form A) 

According to the manual, T, The numerical ability items 
are designed to test understanding of numerical relationships 
and facility in handling numerical concepts. The problems 
are framed in the item type usually called f arithmetical 
computation 1 , rather than what is usually called * arithmet¬ 
ical reasoning. ,!l The author*s claim that the test offers a 
measure of numerical ability, uncontaminated by verbal 
elements. 

Corrected split-half reliability coefficients of the 
order of .88 are reported ingroups with standard deviations 
equal to 8.7* Testing time is 30 minutes. 

2. Differential Aptitude Tests—Space Relations (Form A) 

This test is designed to measure both the ability to 
visualize an object constructed from a picture or pattern 
as well as the ability to visualize how an object would look 
if related in various ways. Thirty minutes are required in 
actual testing time for this test. 

Corrected split-half reliability coefficients and 
standard deviations are listed as .91 and 23.0 respectively. 

3. The Dominion Advanced G-roup Test of Learning Capacity 

(Form A). 

This is a 30 minute, 75 item omnibus-type intelligence 
test which boasts parallel form reliability coefficients of 
.85 (SD=10.2) at the grade 10 level and .90 (SD=12.9) at the 
grade 12 level. For the combined grades 10 and 12 sample 
(N=107), the correlation between the Dominion and Otis amount¬ 
ed to .89. 

ij.. The G-ordon Personal Inventory 

A 15 minute inventory designed to measure four aspects 
of personality: Cautionsness. Original Thinking, Personal 
Relations, and Vigor. Percentile norms for high school are 
provided. 










331 


5* Hoitzman-Brown Survey of Study Habits 

The test provides a measure of study methods, motiva¬ 
tion for studying, and certain attitudes twoard scholastic 
activities important in the classroom. Norms are provided 
for college and high school (separate norms for male and 
female), 


Split-half reliability coefficients of ,83 are quoted 
in the manual (SD=11.2). The test shows very low correlations 
with most tests of ability, but correlates reasonably high 
with school grades (some correlations reported as high as 
.66). This test would therefore seem to be useful in conjunc¬ 
tion with a test of ability in a multiple correlation predic¬ 
tion of grades. 

6. Kuder Preference Record- —Vocational Form B 

The Kuder was designed to allow a systematic approach 
to the problem of vocational choice in terms of expressed 
interest. Interests are measured in ten broad areas: 

1. outdoor, 2, mechanical, 3. computationa, I}., scientific, 

5. persuasive, 6. artistic, 7. literary, 8. musical, 9. social 
service, and 10. clerical* 

Profiles may be compared with those for a wide 
variety of occupational groups. Reliabilities coefficients 
are supplied for each scale and cluster about .8?. 

7. Minnesota Counseling Inventory 

This test, designed primarily for students in grades 
9 to 12, contains many items from the Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory. It requires approximately 5>0 minutes 
for administration and yields 9 scores altogether. 

A validity score and a questions-not-answered score 
gives a preliminary screening for invalid tests. Three 
scores assist in Identifying areas in which students may be 
adjusting particularly well or poorly. These are the scores 
on the Family Relationships (F.R.), Social Relationships 
(S.R.), and Emotional Stability (E.S.) scales. The remaining 
four scores provide information more directly related to the 
methods students employ in making adjustments. These scores 
are those of Conformity, (C.); Adjustment to Reality (R), 
Mood(M), and Leadership (L) scales. 

Norms are provided which allow the conversion of raw 
scores to standard scores for grades 9~10 and 11-12, with 










f/'J ■ ‘ ■ J.l .» 

. 

’ . ■ ' : ‘ v 

. 


. . 








J Vi : 


































'■ ■ •) • 






332 


separate norms for boys and girls. Criterion group scores 
for the interpretation of each scale and for both sexes 
range from .56 to .93. 

8. Otis Quick Scoring Mental Ability Tests (Gamma E.M.) 

This omnibus-type intelligence test contains 80 items 
requiring 30 minutes testing time. The manual reports 
corrected split-half reliabilities of .92 (S.E. meag =3.0). 

9. Revised Minnesota Paper Form Board Test —Series AA 

The test consists of a series of two-dimensional 
diagrams into separate parts. For each diagram there are 
few figures with lines indicating the different shapes out 
of which they are made. From these, the subject chooses the 
one figure which is composed of the exact parts that are 
shown in the original diagram. 

The test requires 20 minutes to administer and reports 
»interform* reliabilities of .85 (SD not given). 

10. Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal (Form A) 

A 99-item, minute test designed to provide problems 

and situations which require the application of some of the 
important abilities involved in critical thinking. It 
contains five subtests: 

Test 1. Inference . (20 items) Designed to sample 
ability to discriminate among degrees of 
truth or falsity or probability of certain 
inferences drawn from given facts or data. 

Test 2. Recognition of Assumptions . (16 items) 

Designed^to sample ability to recognize un¬ 
stated assumptions in given assertions or- 
propositions. 

Test 3. Deduction . (25 items) Designed to sample 
ability to reason deductively from given 
premises; to recognize the relation of 
implication between propositions; to determine 
whether what seems an implication or necessary 
inference between one proposition and another 
is indeed such. 

Test 4. Interpretation . (24 items) Designed to sample 
ability to weigh evidence and to distinguish 
























U i. 












333 


between unwarranted generalizations and 
probable inferences which, though not 
conclusive, or necessary, are warranted beyond 
reasonable doubt. 

Test 5* Evaluation of Arguments . (ll| items) Designed 
to sample ability to distinguish between 
arguments which are strong and important to 
the question at issue and those which are 
weak and unimportant or irrelevant. 

Percentage norms are provided for high school and 
college students. Whole-test interform reliabilities ranging 
from .81 (SD=12.0) to .93 (SD=l!j..O) are reported. The 
reliability coefficients of the individual scales range from 
.36 to .73. 










- 

. 

* 

* 

. 




* 


* 


























Subject Preferences and Level of Aspiration 


334 


Name : 
Grade: 


Instructions : Pill in the following questionnaire by making 

entries to the following directions: 


Column 1 : Rank the subjects listed in the order 

(1, 2, 3, etc.) that you enjoy them most, 
with your best-liked subject marked 1, etc. 

Column 2 : Rank the subjects according to the marks 

that you receive in each, with your highest 
subject marked 1, etc. 


Column 3 : Rank the subjects according to the time spent 
in each one, with the subject requiring most 
time ranked 1, etc. 


Column 4 : Enter beside each subject the mark that you 
would be satisfied with in that subject. 



Enjoy 

Most 

Highest 

Marks 

Spend 

Most 

Time at 

Expected 

Mark 

Science 





English 





French 





Latin 





Mathematics 





P.T. 





Shop (H.Ec.) 















































j 

, 




















335 


Socio-Economic Data 

Student Information Sheet 

1. Name __ Age: Y rs. M onths 

2. Present Address__ 

3. How many years have you lived at this address?_ 

4. Address prior to this?___ 

5. Do you live with your parents?_ 

6. Father’s Occupatio n M other’s Occupatio n _ 

7. No. of younger brothers and sisters Older 

8. Religious Denomination 

9* How far do you intend to go in high school? 

10. Would you be interested in attending university?_ 

11. Could you afford to go to university? 

12. What kind of work do you intend to do when you complete 

your education?________ 

13* What grade did your parents reach in school? 

Fathe r Mother 

14. What is the highest grade reached by any of your 
brothers or sisters? 























. 

, 

■ .. • 




:hv ; ai;' -: ;jov 

£ 














■ 


. 






















336 


Geometry Background Data 


Student Information Sheet 


1. Do you find this yearns Geometry to be one of your 

easier or harder subjects?_ 

2. Did you find Algebra to be easier or harder than Geometry? 


3. Did you find public school arithmetic to be one of your 
best or worst subjects?_ 

4* When did you become aware that mathematics was going to 
be easy (or difficult) for you? 

5. Gan you offer any reason why you should find mathematics 
easy or difficult? ______ 


6. Did either of your parents (brothers or sisters) find 
mathematics difficult? Elaborate 


7. Was either of your parents (brothers or sisters) very 
strong in mathematics? Elaborate 


8. When you entered high school did you expect to find 
mathematics difficult? 

9. Do you think that mathematics requires a special ability 
or talent? 

10. Do you think that the solution of a mathematics problem 

requires more intelligence than the understanding of a 
poem? ____ 

11. Do you think that boys should do better than girls (of 

equal intelligence) in mathematics? __ 

12. Which of the following reasons for studying mathematics 
most nearly applies to you? 

a. the desire to obtain a high mark (or pass). 

b. pleasure derived from solving problems. 

c. have to study because on course of study. 

_(be honest) 






















337 

13. In what way do you think that a student will profit from 
a study of geometry? Explain.______ 


li|. What mark do you think would fairly represent your work 
in geometry this term?_ 

15. What mark would you be satisfied with for this yearns 

work? __ 

16. What is the longest time that you have ever spent trying 

to solve a problem? Elaborate. _______ 














, 

, 


. 




. 




. 




















































APPENDIX C 


LEVEL I TESTS 

Number Series--Level I 


A. Step-level 1 


1. 

2, 

5, 

8, __ 

11. 

ii. 

8, 5, _ 

2. 

2, 

7, 

12, _ 

12. 

3, 

8, 13, _ 

3. 

15, 

11 

, 7, _ 

13. 

2, 

6, 10, _ 

4. 

22, 

16 

, 10, __ 

14. 

3, 

11, 19, _ 

5. 

5, 

13, 

21, _ 

15. 

30, 

21, 12, _ 

6. 

4, 

10, 

16, _ 

16. 

22, 

16, 10, _ 

7. 

22, 

15 

, 8, __ 

17. 

1, 

8, 15, _ 

8. 

17, 

13 

, 9, __ 

18. 

5, 

9, 13, _ 

9. 

3, 

9, 

15, __ 

19. 

21, 

15, 9, _ 

10 

• 2, 

12 

, 22, __ 

20. 

3, 

13, 23, _ 

B. 

Step-level 2 




1. 

i. 

3, 

7, 13, __ 

5. 

2, 5 

, 10, 17, _ 

2. 

2, 

3, 

7, 14, __ 

6. 

3, 5 

, 10, 18, _ 

3. 

1, 

7, 

12, 20, 

7. 

3, 7 

, 13, 21, _ 

4 . 

3, 

5 , 

9, 15, _ 

8. 

2, 5 

, 9, 14, _ 


C. Step-level 3 

1. 2, 5 , 10, 18, 30, 3. 5 , 6, 8, 12 , 19, 

2. 1, 2, k, 13, 29 , __ 4 - 3, 4 , 7, 15, 31, 









339 


D. Step-level 4 

1. 2, 4, 7, 12, 21, 27, 

2 . 2 , 3 , 7 , 16 , 33 , 62 , 

E. Step-level 5 

1. 1, 2, 5, 11, 23, 47, 93, 

2. 2, 4, 8, 15, 26, 52, 98, 

F. Step-level 7 

1. 2, 4, 7, 13, 25, 49, 97, 192, 376, 

2. 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 129, 263, 

3. 1, 2, 5, 11, 22, 42, 81, 163, 339, 

4. 1, 2, 4, 9, 21, 47, 100, 206, 417, 


3. 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 63, _ 

4. 2, 3, 5, 9, 19, 43, 94, _ 


3. 1, 2, 4, 9, 20, 41, 

4. 3, 4, 7, 13, 25, 48, 









340 


Permutations and Gap Filling 

© © 

Gap Filling 

© © © 

© © © 

© © ® 

© © © 

© ® © ^ 

B. Test Set 


Permutations 

Gap j 

Pill: 

Lng 


i. 

I 24 

7. 

© 

© 

© 

© 

2. 

I 12 

8. 

© 

© 

© 

© 

3. 

I i4 

9. 

© 

© 

© 

© 

4- 

*34 

10, 

■© 

© 

© 

© 

5. 

I 13 

11, 

,© 

© 

© 

© 

6. 

I 23 

12, 

,© 

© 

© 

© 


A. Practice Set : (a) 

Permutations 


12 


13 


•23 


23, 

13 

12, 

13 











Permutations 

Gap Filling 

13. 

I 24»i4 

21 .® © © © 

14. 

*23,34 

22.® © © © 

IS. 

I 23,24 

23 .® © © © 

16* 

I 12 ,14 

24 .® © © © 

17. 

I l3,23 

25.® ® © © 

18. 

*34,14 

26.© © © © 

19. 

I 12,23 

27. © © © © 

20. 

*13,14 

28.® © © © 


29. 

*12,24,23 

35.® 

® © ® 

30. 

i 34, 14,24 

36.© 

© © © 

31. 

I 12,13,14 

37.® 

© © © 

32. 

*34,23,13 

38.® 

© © © 

33. 

I 23,12,24 

39.® 

© © © 

34- 

1 i4, 34,24 

40.® 

© © ® 











342 


Ordering 

Practice Card A : A is larger than G. 

A is smaller than J. 
Which is the smallest? 


Practice Card B : X is smaller than Y. 

W is larger than Y. 

Which is the largest? 

Practice Card C : N is smaller than K # 

K is smaller than X. 

Z is smaller than N. 

Name the letters in order of size. 


1. K is smaller than R. 

R is smaller than L. 
Which is the smallest? 

2. H is larger than L. 

H is smaller than 0. 
Which is the largest? 

3. A is smaller than Z. 

K is larger than Z. 
Which is the smallest? 

4# R is larger than J. 

G is larger than R. 
Which is the largest? 

5. N is larger than Q. 

N is smaller than W. 
Which is the smallest? 

6. H is smaller than N. 

N. is smaller than S. 
Which is the largest? 

7. C is larger than M. 

K is larger than C. 
Which is the smallest? 


8. 

U 

is 

smaller 

than V. 


M 

is 

larger 

than V. 


Which is the 

largest 

9. 

A 

is 

smaller 

than B. 


D 

is 

larger than B. 


C 

is 

smaller 

than A. 

10. 

X 

is 

larger 

than K. 


N 

is 

smaller 

than Z. 


X 

is 

smaller 

■ than N. 


K 

is 

larger 

than Y. 

11. 

N 

is 

larger 

than B. 


B 

is 

larger 

than R. 


P 

is 

larger 

than H. 


H 

is 

larger 

than N. 


T 

is 

larger 

than P. 

12. 

K 

is 

larger 

than J. 


P 

is 

larger 

than L. 


X 

is 

smaller 

than S. 


L. is larger than K. 
M is smaller than J. 
X is larger than P. 

13. N is smaller than A. 
V is larger than Z. 

L is smaller than M. 
A is smaller than Z. 
P is larger than P. 

N is larger than P. 

L is larger than V. 









Topological Comprehension Teat 

1. Set and Subset 


343 - 


(a) Name four subsets of the set (a, b, c, d). 

(b) Name three subsets of the set consisting of all the 
students in the first row. 

2. (V) Space 

(a) Construct a (V) space consisting of five elements in 
which each element has a different number of neighbour¬ 
hoods. 

3 . Limit Point 


Define neighbourhoods of the space (a, b, c, d) so that 
the element *c* is the only limit point of the subset 
(a, c, d). 

4 * Derived Set 


Define neighbourhoods of the space (a, b, c, d) so that 
the derived set is null. 


5 . Topological Equivalence 

Test the following (V) spaces for topological equivalence: 


V-l (a, b) 


V 2 (a, b) 


nhds. of a: a , 

a, b 

nhds, of a: a , 

a, b 

nhds. of b: b 


nhds. of b: b , 

a, b 

6. Theorem 1 





Demonstrate the ! necessary* part of the theorem, using the 
topologically equivalent spaces whose neighbourhoods are 
defined as follows: 


V-l (a, b) V 2 (a, b) 

nhds. of a: a nhds. of a: a , a, b 

a, b 


nhds. of b: 


nhds. of b: 


a, b 










f. ' '■ * 


l 

, 


( ■ , 

J . 


I 



. 


- 


0 ' •: '. nr... 

: ; i 

. 

. 

- ' 

. . 

■ • » ■ . 

. 


iO ■i.Uli: / l f ,M:; 

j.-'- v 1 

n,. jf'd j 

■ 

■ 

• 


* 


■ .. . . 


' 


• ;-'/i v / . .. 

■ 

■ 







APPENDIX D 


STUDIES AT LEVEL II 

Axioms and Definitions In Grade 10 Geometry 

Undefined terms : point, line. 

Defined terms : ( angle, triangle, circle 

( straight angle contains 180° (A) 

( congruency 

Axioms : 

(1) Equality 

(2) Addition 

(3) Subtraction 

( 4 ) Substitution 

( 5 ) Multiplication 

(6) Division 

(7) Completion 

(8) Coincidence 
Propositions : 

I. If two straight lines intersect, the vertically 
opposite angles are equal. 

II. If two sides and the contained angle of one 

triangle are respectively equal to two sides and 
the contained angle of another triangle, then the 
triangles are congruent. 

III. In an isosceles triangle, the angles opposite the 
equal sides are equal. 












, 













, 

* 


''t ' v ; -'C • ' -jX^C'X J-'r- ; • f 

« 










345 


iv. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XXII. 


If three sides of one triangle are respectively 
equal to three sides of another triangle, then 
the ti*o triangles are congruent. 

If a transversal cuts two straight lines making 
the alternate angles equal, then the lines are 
parallel. 

If a transversal cuts two parallel straight lines, 
then the alternate angles are equal. 

The sum of the angles of a triangle equals 180°. 

If two angles and one side of a triangle are 
respectively equal to two angles and one side of 
another triangle, then the triangles are congruent. 

If two angles of a triangle are equal, the sides 
opposite the equal angles are equal. 

If the hypotenuse and one side of a right-angled 
triangle are respectively equal to the hypotenuse 
and one side of another right-angled triangle, 
then the triangles are congruent. 

If two sides of a quadrilateral are equal and 
parallel, then the other two sides are equal and 
parallel. 

In a parallelogram, the opposite sides are equal, 
the opposite angles are equal, etc. 


XXIII 



•' ■ J. 

■ 

. 

. 


. 

x La . 

: • :■ ' ! •• ■ , ■ . 

' 

. 

, ... , • ' \ ' ■' i > 

. - . 

)3i; Ir,j ■■ • . . , - ■ . Xi 





















346 


NAME 

GIVEN: 

DIAGRAM 

TIME 

GRADE 

PROVE: 

AB=AC 


( 59 ) 





A 



( 60 ) 


GIVEN : PQ, RS TIME 

PROVE: PT=TS 


P Q, 



TIME 





























347 


Number Series—Level II 





Practice 

Card 

A: 

1, 3, 5, 


• 





Practice 

Card 

B: 

2 , 4 , 8 , 







Practice 

Card 

C: 

1 , 2 , 1 , 

2 , 

. 1 , 

2 , _• 




Practice 

Card 

D: 

17, 13, 

9, 

• 


A,l: 

2 , 

5, 

8 , 



B,l: 

11 ; 

, 8 , 

5, _ . 

A,2: 

2 , 

i. 

1 , 2 , 1 , 

i, _ 

• 

B,2: 

1 , 

3, 

3, 1, 3, 3, _• 

A,3: 

1 , 

3, 

7, 13, _ 

• 


B, 3: 

2 , 

5, 

10 , 17, 

A,4: 

3, 

6 , 

12 , 



B,4: 

24, 

, 12 

'■> 6, 

A, 3: 

2 , 

7, 

12 , 



B,5: 

3, 

8 , 

13, 

A, 6 : 

5, 

10 , 

15, 



B, 6 : 

3, 

6, 

9, _• 

A, 7: 

2 , 

5, 

10 , 18 , 30 , _ 


B,7: 

5, 

6, 

8, 12, 19, 

A, 8 : 

15 

, 11 

■9 7,_• 



B, 8 : 

2 , 

6, 

10 , _. 

A,9: 

40 

, 2C 

>, 10 , 



B,9: 

5, 

10 , 

20 , _. 

A,10: 

2, 

3, 

7, 14, _ 

• 


B,10: 

3, 

5, 

10, 18, 

A, 11: 

2, 

4, 

7, 12, 21 

., 37, 

) , 

B,ll: 

1, 

2, 

4 , 9, 20, 41 , __ 





PROBLEM SOLVING SHEET 


348 


Use Proposition 



















> 

M 

\ 





III 

\ 





H 

H 






M 







Prove 

1! 

\J 

1) 

< 

in 

<i 




i 


CO 




a 


*—- 


o 


<D 


H 


HI 


Eh 


rQ 

c- 

CO 


Cd 

TJ 

W 


EH 

<D 

P 



•H 

Of 


0 

i—1 

M 


<D 

ft 

o* 

CO 

ft 

CO 

0) 


cd 

W 

> 



W 

o 


0 

Eh 

Jh 

o~ 

rP 


Ph 

0 


P 


w 

a 


o 

2 

o 

W 

-p 


•H 

CO 


H 

-p 


H 


•H 



a 

60 

P 

s 

cd 

o 

o 

CD 

o 

ft 

>H 



o 

-P 

60 

& 


o 

a 

ft 

> 

cd 

o 


<n 

ft 

*H 

60 

ffi 


-P 

•H 

ft 

*H 

,d 


O 

m 

-p 



O 



"d 

ft 

P 


a 

o 

od 


•H 

in 

o 


is! 

ft 

0 


-P 

-P 

P 


cd 

cd 

0 



« » t * 

H CM cr\ 


facts would I need before I can use it? 





























































