

For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


@X MBBIS 

MWIBSIW&S 

aiBBransis 
























ABSTRACT 


The purpose of this thesis is to trace the growth of the Al¬ 
berta farm movement from the founding of the Edmonton Agri¬ 
cultural Society in 1879 down to the amalgamation convention of 
January, 1909, which resulted in the creation of the United Far¬ 
mers of Alberta. 

Despite the pioneer work of Frank Oliver and the directors 
of the Edmonton Agricultural Society in publicizing the agrarian 
grievances in the North-West Territories, it was not until the 
coming of the railway to Strathcona in 1891 that the farm move¬ 
ment in Northern Alberta took a more militant form. The ap¬ 
pearance of the Patrons of Industry in the Edmonton area early in 
1892 gave the first impetus to the organization of farm unions at 
a wide variety of Alberta points. As active as the Patrons were 
in protesting existing freight rates and high tariffs, terri¬ 
torial membership in the Order rapidly declined after the Liberal 
victory in the federal elections of 1896. Patronism and Laurier 
Liberalism were so much alike that the former steadily lost its 
economic and political strength in Canada. 

Although the passage of the Manitoba Grain Act in 1900 
seemed the solution to the unrest on the prairies over the opera¬ 
tions of the Winnipeg grain combine, it was not long until the 
farmers of Western Canada were organizing under the banner of the 
Territorial Grain Growers* Association (the T. G. G. A.). This 
latter body, however, did not make any appearance in Alberta until 
1905, a period of no less than four years after its inception at 
Indian Head. A partial explanation for this failure of the 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/riseofunitedfarmOOembr 


T. G. G. A* to appeal to the Alberta farmer may be found in the 
rival activities and expansion of the Farmers’ Association of La- 
combe whioh soon became known as the Farmers’ Association of Al¬ 
berta. The F. A* A. not only sought to organize the Alberta far¬ 
mer, but to run a candidate in the federal elections of 1904. 

When Colonel J. J. Gregory, the F. A. A. standard bearer, 
met defeat in the Stratheona federal constituency, the organiza¬ 
tion he represented also was at an end. Yet in a matter of months, 
if not weeks, W. J. Keen was active in the Edmonton area seeking 
to enlist the support of Northern Alberta farmers for the Ameri¬ 
can Society of Equity and its principle of "controlled marketing”. 
Followed shortly by the organization of aT. G. G. A. local in 
Stratheona, the Society of Equity soon found itself in conflict 
with a farm body that could point to its Canadian origin and decry 
direction from officials in the United States. Renamed the Alberta 
Farmers’ Association after the territorial reorganization on 
September 1, 1905, the Stratheona Grain Growers launched a power¬ 
ful drive to win the support of the farmers of the province. Ef¬ 
forts were made to amalgamate with the Society of Equity in both 
1905 and 1906, but it was not until late in 1908 that a series of 
disasters caused the latter body to adopt a spirit of compromise 
in negotiating with the A. F. A. The amalgamation convention of 
January, 1909, ended the fatal division in the Alberta farm move¬ 
ment. 
















. 


' 




■ 


' 



THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE RISE OF THE UNITED FARMERS OF ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 

OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY 


BY 

DAVID GRANT EMBREE 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


September, 1956 









- 
























. 



























ii 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I* FRANK OLIVER, THE EDMONTON AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY* 

AND THE RISE OF THE UNITED FARMERS OF ALBERTA. 1 

II. THE COMING OF THE RAILWAY TO EDMONTON AND THE 

GROWTH OF AGRARIAN AGITATION. 20 

III. THE MANITOBA GRAIN ELEVATOR COMPANIES AND THE 

GROWTH OF AGRARIAN UNREST IN ALBERTA.. 41 

IV. THE EMERGENCE OF A MILITANT FARM MOVEMENT IN ALBERTA.... 79 

V. THE ALBERTA FARMERS’ ASSOCIATION AND THE SOCIETY OF 

EQUITY TAKE UP THE CAUSE OF THE ALBERTA FARMER.....102 

VI. THE ALBERTA FARMERS’ ASSOCIATION AND THE SOCIETY OF 

EQUITY STRUGGLE TO AMALGAMATE (Part I).134 

VII. THE ALBERTA FARMERS’ ASSOCIATION AND THE SOCIETY OF 

EQUITY STRUGGLE TO AMALGAMATE (Part II).167 

VIII. THE ALBERTA FARMERS’ ASSOCIATION AND THE SOCIETY OF 

EQUITY STRUGGLE TO AMALGAMATE (Part III).196 

IX. THE ALBERTA FARMERS’ ASSOCIATION AND THE SOCIETY OF 

EQUITY STRUGGLE TO AMALGAMATE (Part IV).235 

BIBLIOGRAPHY... 263 

APPENDICES.....270 
































r c 


















"Farmers ought to bear in mind that 
as they are by far the most numerous 
class they have the largest share of the 
public burthens to bear, while they are 
less favorably situated than others who, 
if the public imposts become intoler¬ 
able, can gather up their property and 
leave: but the farmers who cannot move 
their land must remain with it and bear 
the burthen from which others are es¬ 
caping; and experience must have taught 
them that every business, professional 
man or mechanic that goes leaves a 
greater share of the public burthen to 
be borne by them*" 


Frank Oliver on the eve of 
his election to the House 
of Commons, June 22, 1896* 












* 


. 


: 


■ 




■ 









' 






' 










CHAPTER I 


FRANK OLIVER, 

THE EDMONTON AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY, 

AND THE RISE OF THE UNITED FARMERS OF ALBERTA 

When the Alberta Farmers’ Association and the Canadian 
Society of Equity decided to unite in January, 1909, the new farm 
body which thus appeared on the Alberta agricultural scene was a 
climax to the organizing efforts of Edmonton district farmers over 
a period of thirty years* Heretofore, the western origins of the 
United Farmers of Alberta have been credited to the Territorial 
Grain Growers’ Association, founded at Indian Head late in 1901, 
but closer examination of territorial events before the turn of 
the century reveals that the story goes back to 1879. It is, in¬ 
deed, with the work of the Edmonton Agricultural Society and the 
publicity accorded this nascent farm movement by The Edmonton 
Bulletin that one finds a more historically reliable starting 
point for an account of the Alberta antecedents of the U. F. A. 

It is, however, not because the Edmonton district "had the 

honor of holding the first agricultural exhibition in the North- 
1 

West”, nor because the Edmonton Agricultural Society was "the 

2 

first ever organized in the North-West", that the nucleus of the 
U. F. A. is depicted here as being found in what is now the capi¬ 
tal of the province. Such a conclusion is based, instead, on the 
definite and successive links in membership which are discovered 
when one examines the executive lists of the Edmonton Agri¬ 
cultural Society, the Strathcona branches of the Territorial Grain 









t t 










. 















































( 








■ 




2 


Growers* Association and of the Alberta Farmers* Association, the 

Alberta branch of the Society of Equity, and finally, of course, 

3 

the U. F. A* itself* These links go back to the early 1880*s, not 
long after the Edmonton Agricultural Society was re-organized in 
response to the editorial promptings of Frank Oliver, but they be¬ 
come much more numerous in the later 1890*s, particularly with the 

organization in 1894 of the South Edmonton or "Strathcona** Agri- 
4 

cultural Society. Such other offshoots from the parent body during 
the 1890*s as the St. Albert and Fort Saskatchewan Agricultural 
Societies are also not lacking in names familiar to the 
T. G. G. A., the A. F. A., the Society of Equity, and the U. F. A. 

If it had not been for Frank Oliver, the pioneering publisher 
of The Edmonton Bulletin , little or no record of the first 
stirrings of territorial agricultural activity would be available 
today. Even though the minute books of the Edmonton Agricultural 
Society do not seem to have been preserved, one has but to turn to 
the files of The Bulletin for detailed accounts of the individuals 
and the events associated with the growth of the society during 
the 1880*s and the 1890*s. Since The Bulletin under Oliver*s di¬ 
rection made such a special point of publicizing the growing agri- 

5 

cultural activities in the Edmonton area, it is possible to note 
several prominent names in the work of the local agricultural 
society which keep recurring as the farm movement in Northern Al¬ 
berta broadened in scope from the humble beginnings of 1879. If 
more complete membership lists were available, it is likely that 
an even larger number of similar links between the early farm 
groups in Alberta would be established. 

The executive work of George Long of Namao in the formation 
of agrarian organizations in Alberta is a particularly good 


















1 





























' 




■ 











3 


example of the line of continuous development which may be traced 

from the earlier years of the Edmonton Agricultural Society to the 

emergence of the United Farmers of Alberta in 1909. Long was an 

executive member of the Edmonton Agricultural Society as early as 

1883 and later served as president of that body for several years. 

After the formation of the province of Alberta in 1905, he worked 

as an organizer for the Society of Equity, in whose ill-fated co- 

6 

operative activities he lost heavily, and he was a member of the 
committee which succeeded in uniting the re-named Canadian branch 
of this body with the A. F. A* To climax this lengthy career of 
leadership in the fight for the rights of the Alberta farmer, 
George Long was elected to the first Board of Directors of the 
newly-formed U. F. A. in January, 1909. 

Entirely apart from the case of George Long, a significant 
number of other links between the Edmonton Agricultural Society 
and later Alberta farm bodies may be established, even though the 
membership lists now available are far from complete. Daniel Ma¬ 
loney, the Society’s first president after its re-organization in 
1882, became an Alberta organizer for the Patrons of Industry in 

1894 and on February 11, 1907, was elected the first president of 

7 

the newly-organized St. Albert branch of the A. F. A. Matthew 
McCauley, the first mayor of Edmonton, was a director of the 
Society as early as 1882 and later served for many years as presi¬ 
dent. When the Strathcona branch of the T. G. G. A. changed its 
name late in 1905 to the Alberta Farmers’ Association and launched 
a province-wide membership drive, McCauley, who was still an 

active farmer, worked as an A. F. A. organizer in the district 
8 

east of Edmonton. John Cameron, a later president of the Edmonton 
Board of Trade, first became a director of the Edmonton Agri- 






























- 














. 




























t 




r . 

. i 

< 














. 












. 




4 


cultural Society in 1890 and subsequently was associated with the 
Strathcona farmers who supported the T. G. G. A. and its suc¬ 
cessors, the A. F. A. and the U. F. A. If only the period from the 
re-organization of 1882 down to the coming of the railway in 1891 
is taken under consideration, one finds there were several other 
directors of the Edmonton Agricultural Society who joined both the 
A. F. A. and the U. F. A. These include James Earner, a director in 
1885, Leander Fulton, a director beginning in 1887, and William F. 
Stevens who was first elected a director in 1890* So far as rank- 
and-file members of the Edmonton Agricultural Society during this 
period are concerned, one may establish, despite the lack of com¬ 
plete membership lists, that James McKernan, H. M. Quebec, and 
James Eye later belonged to the A. F. A* or the U. F. A. or both. 
Adequate records might reveal other such connections between the 
Edmonton Agricultural Society and later Northern Alberta farm or¬ 
ganizations. 

The first beginnings of the Edmonton Agricultural Society, 

which practically coincided with the founding of Edmonton’s first 
9 

newspaper, followed closely the rise of agricultural activity in 

the area now known as Northern Alberta. Before the coming of the 

railway this activity was confined in the North-West Territories 

to agricultural settlements about such important trading posts as 

Fort Edmonton and Prince Albert which depended entirely on the 
10 

local market. By the 1880’s, however, Edmonton district farmers 

were in a position to produce an export surplus, but the lack of 

rail communication temporarily forced them to curtail their pro- 
11 

duction. Writing in 1892, just after the completion of the Calgary 
and Edmonton Railway, Frank Oliver reviewed the agricultural 
growth of the community in the following words: 








c 
























t 

■ 

< 
















5 


Edmonton is the oldest agricultural settlement in the 
Northwest, farming having been carried on here by the 
Hudson’s Bay Company and afterwards by settlers for over 
50 years. The first farming by settlers was probably 
done in the 60*s, it increased considerably during the 
70*s, and still more rapidly in the early 80*s when it 
was confidently expected that the C. P. R. would come by 
way of Edmonton. When that expectation was not realized 
there was a decline for some years.... 12 

Yet it was in this frustration of the hopes of the Edmonton dis¬ 
trict farmer that one finds the genesis of territorial agrarian 
unrest. 

An early indication of the growing agricultural vigor of the 
Edmonton district was the organization in September, 1879, of the 
Edmonton Agricultural Society with Lieutenant-Colonel W. D. Jarvis 
as president, Richard Hardisty as vice-president, and George Yerey 
as secretary-treasurer. The twelve directors, whose names, unfor¬ 
tunately, do not seem to be available, included three from Edmon¬ 
ton, three from St. Albert, three from fort Saskatchewan, and 

13 

three from other nearby settlements. This first executive of the 
Edmonton Agricultural Society courageously adopted a resolution 
declaring October 15, 1879, as the date of Edmonton’s first agri¬ 
cultural exhibition, ”To manifest to the World and ourselves what 

latitude 53 degrees, 30 minutes, in the North-West is capable of 
14 

producing”. The exhibition was a success and, possibly, may have 
had something to do with the increased agricultural activity in 
the Edmonton area during the following year. In December, 1880, 
Frank Oliver reported in one of the earliest issues of his pioneer 
paper that since May 1, 1880, nearly $16,000 worth of agricultural 
machinery had been brought in, which he considered remarkable ”for 
a new settlement struggling as it is against high freight rates 

15 

and one thousand miles of bad roads between it and civilization”. 
However, the Edmonton Agricultural Society, subsequently, seems to 













































. 






- 

. 




, 


















e • t 


{ 






. 










6 


have fallen upon more difficult times. The fall show for 1880 was 
16 

disappointing, and by November 5, 1881, Frank Oliver was forced to 

report in an editorial that "Gur agricultural Society, the first 

ever organized in the North-West, appears to have gone decidedly 
17 

dead". On September 9, 1882, Oliver told his readers that, al¬ 
though Edmonton had had the honor three years before of holding 

the first agricultural exhibition in the North-West, later 

18 

"interest in the society fell to zero". He then demanded, first, 
that, if necessary, a new society be organized and, second, that 
the work of holding an exhibition be undertaken as quickly as 
possible to offset the propaganda against Edmonton then being dis¬ 
pensed freely by other western communities desirous of attracting 
settlers. 

The speedy response to Oliver’s candid editorial attests to 
his rising influence in the growing community. On September 30, 
1882, only three weeks after the editorial outburst just de¬ 
scribed, The Edmonton Bulletin was able to report the revival of 
the defunct Edmonton Agricultural Society: 

The meeting for the organization of an agricultural 
society in the school house on Wednesday evening last 
was attended by about 40 residents of the immediate 
neighborhood. None of the settlers from a distance ap¬ 
peared, probably owing to the fact that the announcement 
was made such a short time beforehand. 

Mr. D. Maloney was appointed chairman and stated in a 
few words the object of the meeting. Having formerly 
been president of an agricultural society in Manitoba 
for several years he explained the plan on which such 
societies in that region were run.... 

M. McCauley understood that there had been an agri¬ 
cultural society here before, and asked for information 
in regard to what had been done by it.... 

The chairman thought it was better to proceed with 
the organization of this society first and then the of¬ 
ficers could call upon the old society for explanations. 



. 














: 











. 






« 






























7 

After considerable moving, seconding, objecting and 
general discussion, D. Maloney was chosen president..,. 

In response to the request of the president Mr. D. 

Ross, as a member of the old society, gave a short ac¬ 
count of its proceedings.... 

Subscriptions were called for by the chairman and $58 
was subscribed at once of which $48 was paid in. 

A directors* meeting was held at once.... It was de¬ 
cided that the exhibition be held on Thursday, the 19th 
of October. 19 

The interest taken in this exhibition was such that the directors 

of the society decided on the evening of the show **to acquire a 

tract of land to be used for exhibition purposes** and to appoint 

the secretary to seek **a grant in aid of the association for the 
20 

present year** from the territorial government. 

Although there were some discouraging aspects to the 1882 ex- 
21 

hibition, the impetus provided by the re-organization of the Ed¬ 
monton Agricultural Society carried over sufficiently to the fol¬ 
lowing summer for the directors to hold a meeting on July 3 to 
frame a constitution and by-laws for the more efficient governing 
of the farm body. President Matthew McCauley laid before the 
meeting a copy of the Manitoba statute referring to agricultural 
societies, several clauses of which were adopted by the meeting, 
including those pertaining to the election of officers. At the 
same time a motion was carried by the directors, with certain 
alterations, that the exhibitions at Edmonton would henceforth 

follow the rules laid down for the eighth annual exhibition of the 

22 

Provincial Agricultural and Industrial Society of Manitoba. The 
decision to follow the Manitoba law governing agricultural socie¬ 
ties, it might be added, resulted in no appreciable alteration of 
the Edmonton body*s organization or structure when the territorial 
government adopted late in 1886 an ordinance for the incorporation 


„,.. 










■ 




. 


i 


■ 

























8 

23 

of agricultural societies in the North-West Territories. 

Subsequent events were to show that the decisions of 1882 and 
1883 laid a firm foundation for the re-organized Edmonton Agri¬ 
cultural Society. Despite various fluctuations in the success of 
the annual exhibitions, which would be expected in a frontier com¬ 
munity, the society had a continuous history down to the turn of 
the century. It never again, for example, failed to hold some sort 
of annual exhibition which, indeed, seems gradually to have become 
part of the social life of the district. During the 1890 f s, as has 
already been indicated, various district societies branched off 
from the Edmonton Agricultural Society when the farmers in the 
areas concerned found themselves capable of sustaining their own 
agrarian group; yet the story of the parent body at Edmonton con¬ 
tinued to be one of progress which matched the growth of the area 
it served. By 1900 the exhibition side of the society’s activities 
became so complex that it was necessary In that year to in¬ 
corporate a separate organization, the Edmonton Industrial Exhibi¬ 
tion Association, with a capital stock of $15,000 divided into $25 
24 

shares. It Is interesting to note, however, that even with this 
event the connection with the later IT. F. A., already discussed, 
is not lost, for a study of the minute books of both the Edmonton 
Industrial Exhibition Association and its successor in 1908, the 
present Edmonton Exhibition Association, reveals that such pro¬ 
minent U. F. A. leaders as D. W. Warner, George Long, and Sice 
Sheppard served as directors of either or both of these offshoots 
from the Edmonton Agricultural Society. 

While Frank Oliver’s support in the revival of the dormant 
Edmonton Agricultural Society was important, it was but one aspect 
of the leadership this colorful editor provided in forming the nu- 








































■ 


' 




























. 

. 

. 













9 


cleus of a territorial agrarian protest. Indeed, if the Edmonton 
Agricultural Society had never existed—or, in fact, if there had 
been no agricultural societies in the North-West Territories—his 
editorials dealing with territorial agrarian problems could be 
taken as a starting point in the rise of farm agitation in Al¬ 
berta. Almost from the date of the first issue of his Edmonton 
Bulletin , Oliver's pioneer paper became, in the words of his bio¬ 
grapher, n a powerful influence on such public opinion as then 

existed throughout the North West, and the tireless and outspoken 

25 

champion of the rights of the North West settler”. The publicity 
he gave to the petitions or memorials of the Edmonton Agricultural 
Society formed only one part, however signifleant, of his crusade 
against policies and conditions which hindered the territorial 
farmer. In his role as a critic of federal inertia and mismanage¬ 
ment in the administration of the North-West Territories, Oliver 

attacked the ”*land lock* constituted by the railway land grants 

26 

and the colonization companies”, exposed the monopolistic aspects 
of the C. P. R. f s agreement with the federal government, advocated 
as early as 1881 the construction of a Hudson 1 s Bay Railway to 
break the C. P. R. monopoly, laid bare the ways in which the 
federal lands policy retarded western immigration, scored the stu¬ 
pidity of the mineral and timber regulations in the Territories, 
and supported the struggle for territorial responsible government. 

In all this editorial activity Oliver was not only taking up the 

27 

cause of the farming communities of the Canadian West, but he re¬ 
vealed himself as the territorial counterpart of George Brown and 

the Grits who had been the party of the frontier in Ontario poli- 
28 
tics. 

Frank Oliver, however, went to special pains to make The Ed- 















'■ it 

. 

, 

- 







' '' 















































. 



10 


monton Bulletin more than "a clearing house for North West grie- 
29 

vances". During the 1880*s and 1890*3 an endless chain of articles 
appeared which gave practical everyday advice to the farmer and 
which covered a wide range of topics all the way from how to treat 
horse mange and "black leg** to the best methods for avoiding smut 
and repeated suggestions that Edmonton district farmers establish 
much needed cheese factories and creameries by cooperative action. 
The correspondence columns of The Bulletin were also made freely 
available to all farmers who wished to air their grievances or to 
discuss less contentious topics. At the same time Oliver most per¬ 
sistently and untiringly publicized the advantages of the North- 
West for settlement. Countless articles were published discussing 
in detail all those territorial features, particularly in Northern 
Alberta, that would interest the prospective farmer-settler. Down 
to 1900 one may say, in fact, that Oliver*s paper was a miniature 
Grain Growers* Guide for all those territorial farmers who chose 
to consult its columns. 

One of the most interesting and significant aspects of Frank 

Oliver's interest in the territorial farmer*s grievances is his 

news reports and editorial comments on the growing agrarian unrest 

in Manitoba which helped keep the territorial farmer aware of the 

need for marketing reform. Beginning on November 24, 1883, with a 

news report that, "Meetings of farmers are being held throughout 

30 

the province agitating against the monopoly of...the elevators", 
The Edmonton Bulletin continued to carry brief, but pointed, news 
flashes concerning Manitoba’s developing agrarian protest. While 
the early background of this protest during the 1880*s and most of 
the 1890*s is not described in the standard works on Canadian farm 
movements, it is apparent from Oliver’s news reports that late in 
















' ♦ 

' 

. 






. 












< 






. 




. ! 

' 








11 


1883 farm unions of various types were being formed in Manitoba 
"with the avowed intention of obtaining redress of the grievances 
complained of, which are railway monopoly, land regulations, ele¬ 
vator monopoly, heavy duties on agricultural machinery, and non- 

31 

ownership of lands by provinces"* By December 15, 1883, The Edmon¬ 
ton Bulletin was able to report, "The farming population is on the 
warpath" with "Indignation meetings, meetings to protest, meetings 
to assert, meetings to organize and various other kinds of 

meetings...held in all parts of the country and numerously at- 
3S 

tended". The immediate cause of the trouble seems to have been the 

spread in the price of Number 1 hard wheat which varied from 65# 

33 

at Brandon to 98# at Minneapolis. Observing that, "The horny- 

handed sons of toil do not object so much to the lowness of the 

price as to the vast difference in the prices obtained at dif- 
34 

ferent markets", Oliver found in their complaint an opportunity to 
attack his special btte noire , the "Syndicate", better known as 
the Canadian Pacific Railway Company: 

The trouble may be expressed in one word, monopoly. 

The G. P. R. Co. have a monopoly of the carrying trade 
of the country. They have decided not to receive grain 
at any station at which an elevator is situated except 
through the elevator. The Ogilvie milling and grain 
buying company own almost all the elevators at the 
principal points and as a consequence they have a 
monopoly of the wheat trade at all such points. This 
fact they take advantage of to lower the price of grain 
to such a point as their elastic consciences will allow 
them.... 

The farmers did not begin to kick at the right time. 

When it was proposed to saddle Manitoba and the North- 
West with a railway monopoly to last for twenty years 
was the time for them to have expressed their disap¬ 
proval, on the principle that an ounce of prevention is 
worth a pound of cure, but blinded by partyism and the 
hope of receiving immediate advantage they welcomed as 
sublime statesmanship what now, only three years after, 
they are threatening rebellion and annexation on account 
of.... 


This is only the beginning. Seventeen years must 



































. 














, 






. 5 








- 










. 











12 


elapse before the syndicate monopoly will be ended, and 
if the farmers feel the burden difficult to bear this 
one season how much more difficult will it be each 
season of the succeeding seventeen, when the monopoly, 
now in its infancy, and with its attention fixed upon 
other matters, shall have had time to study up the 
question of what rates the traffic will bear and other 
little matters most interesting to the farming com¬ 
munity? .... 35 

In the months that followed this editorial explosion, Oliver con¬ 
tinued to report faithfully various events in the Manitoba 
agrarian agitation. By March, 1884, the farm unions of that pro¬ 
vince were able to hold a convention in Winnipeg where they 
passed an anti-immigration resolution that caused a newspaper 
furore throughout Canada. This resolution, adopted on March 5, de¬ 
clared "that in the opinion of this convention the burdens laid 
upon the people of Manitoba are so great that agricultural opera¬ 
tions cannot be made to yield a fair profit; that immigration be¬ 
fore the removal of these burdens will profit neither the province 
nor the immigrant, and that this province cannot advise immigrants 

to settle in the province until full redress from the grievances 

36 

complained of by the convention has been made". Such an outburst 

of agrarian radicalism evoked much criticism in Eastern Canada, 

but Frank Oliver defended the Manitoba farmers in taking such a 

course of action and hammered at the federal government and the 

C. P. R. for having created the conditions under protest. He 

finally advised the farmers of Manitoba that "having put their 

hands to the plow they must not look back but must meet threats 

37 

and opposition by defiance and determined action", it was many 
years before Manitoba farmers were able by concerted action to 
right the wrongs they, apparently, began to protest in the 
1880* s, but it is significant that readers of The Edmonton Bulle- 
























. , . « 


■ ; - \ ~ . : 










■ 





































































13 


tin, meanwhile, were kept well posted on the agrarian situation in 
that province. Indeed, one finds in The Bulletin files down to 
1900 more news of the growing farm unrest in Manitoba than of 
rural agitation elsewhere. 

Returning to the work of the Edmonton Agricultural Society, 
it is important to note that the decade from its re-organization 
down to the coming of the railway to Strathcona witnessed a 
growing agrarian protest on the part of the society which para¬ 
lleled that conducted by The Edmonton Bulletin . The two campaigns 
of protest. In fact, are at times indistinguishable and both ul¬ 
timately must be credited to Frank Oliver whose generosity with 
his limited newspaper space gave the local agricultural society an 
audience throughout the Territories. The earliest recorded attack 
of Edmonton*s organized farmers on the federal government is a 
unanimous resolution passed by their agricultural society early in 
1884. This resolution, which was but the beginning of a long 
territorial controversy over government contracts for farm pro¬ 
ducts, attacked "the letting of the Indian department flour con¬ 
tract without allowing the people resident here an opportunity of 
38 

tendering on it". Oliver, of course, wrote an editorial on the 
matter and the subject x^as discussed with some heat in the cor¬ 
respondence columns of his newspaper. The charge made in one of 
these letters that the Edmonton flour was of poor quality seems to 
have been not without foundation, for on March El, 1885, when the 
Department of Indian Affairs finally did advertise in The Bulletin 
for the delivery of flour in Edmonton, it met with an editorial 
blast from Oliver for needlessly demanding such a high quality, 

even though he did approve of the Departments action in doing 

39 

"what had been demanded for three years". This event, however, did 









« 5 

■ 










■ 


C 
















< ’• 

. 











. 






14 


not mark the end of the Edmonton Agricultural Society’s dissatis¬ 
faction with the handling of government contracts in which its 
members were interested. In September, 1888, the society found it 
necessary to forward a resolution of protest to Sir John A. Mac¬ 
donald and Colonel Herchmer, the commissioner of the North-West 
40 

Mounted Police. Although this action of the Edmonton Agricultural 
Society was supported by a number of bitter letters to The Edmon¬ 
ton Bulletin , the society’s directors seem to have achieved little 
with their complaints concerning the letting of the hay and beef 
contracts. The Prime Minister, burdened, no doubt, with many other 
cares of office, passed the communication on to subordinates, 

while the police commissioner flatly refused to meet the executive 

41 

of the society for a discussion of their charges. 

In the summer of 1884, about six months after their first 
protest over the awarding of government contracts, the Edmonton 
Agricultural Society addressed petitions to the Lieutenant- 
Governor at Hegina, first, for a grant-in-aid to expand the work 
of the society, and, second, for the construction of rail and 
other communication systems to potential market areas. The peti¬ 
tion to receive a grant-in-aid was based on the common practice in 
the provinces for local governments to encourage agricultural as¬ 
sociations by financial assistance. A grant of $200 was received 
from the North-West Council as a result of the request, but it was 
not until the measure for the incorporation of agricultural socie¬ 
ties became law that such financial assistance was regularized in 
the Territories. The second petition, however, was not so speedily 
attended to by the territorial government. Circulated throughout 
the district by the directors of the Edmonton Agricultural Society 
during the summer of 1884, this petition pointed out to the Lieu- 






































■ 




. - - 























. 



















15 


tenant-Governor that most of the population of the Edmonton area, 
then over 5,000, consisted of farmers who were beginning to pro¬ 
duce an agricultural surplus. Yet there was "no line of railway 

42 

nearer than two hundred miles" and the farmers of the district, 
therefore, found their surplus grain and cattle precluded from an 
adequate market. The Edmonton farmers complained further that be¬ 
cause of these conditions they found it difficult "to obtain 
credit from or to pay their debts to the merchants and the trades¬ 
men of the said district or elsewhere, and therefore the means of 
gaining more than a bare livelihood and certainly the means of im¬ 
proving their condition are at present totally unavailable to 
43 

them". The most obvious solution to the complaint of the society 

was, of course, a Calgary and Edmonton railroad, which received 

44 

much editorial support from Frank Oliver, but the petitioners in¬ 
dicated a more novel way out of the difficulty when they claimed 
their natural market lay to the north and north-west where they 

stated there was "a population of fifteen thousand Indians about 

45 

the water system tributary to the Mackenzie River". The objective 

in this section of the petition was a northern "wagon and cart 
46 

trail". In the course of time, however, this demand was allowed to 
recede from view while the Edmonton Agricultural Society and Frank 
Oliver concentrated on securing the Calgary and Edmonton railroad. 

The need for this railroad looms large in the editorial com¬ 
ment of The Edmonton Bulletin for a number of years preceding the 
momentous autumn of 1891 when, at last, the first locomotive ar¬ 
rived in Strathcona. Oliver continually emphasized the export 
benefits that the completion of the proposed railway line would 
bring to Edmonton. He repeatedly pointed out the possibilities of 
British Columbia as a market for Northern Alberta and in 



































. 




























• 





























16 


September, 1890, he went so far as to say: 

....an immense market for flour is opening up in China 
and Japan and already enormous quantities of Oregon 
flour are shipped to those countries by the C. P. R. 
steamers. That flour might just as well come from Edmon¬ 
ton as Oregon.... 47 

Almost on the eve of the completion of the much discussed railway, 
Oliver, radiant with optimism as to the future the coming of the 
steel would hold for the Edmonton area, hopefully declared: 

The near approach to completion of the C. & E. rail¬ 
way renders it advisable that the question of its effect 
upon this settlement should be considered in all its 
bearings.... Of those articles which can be cheaply, 
certainly and abundantly produced here we must raise 
more than we consume and must find a suitable market for 
the surplus. The experience of the past years has shown 
that this district is pre-eminently adapted to the pro¬ 
duction of cattle, oats, barley, potatoes, butter and 
eggs. Other products such as wheat and flax, horses, 
sheep, hogs, etc. can be raised here as well as in any 
other part of the Northwest or Manitoba, but the first 
mentioned are unquestionably our specialties. A good 
market for all these products exists on the British Co¬ 
lumbia coast, which at present draws its supplies 
chiefly from Manitoba and California. We have an advan¬ 
tage in distance over Manitoba and in quality over Cali¬ 
fornia, so that our far western location, ordinarily 
considered a disadvantage with a view to markets, is our 
great advantage, and the one upon which we can most con¬ 
fidently rely. 48 

Yet the railway, when it came, served merely to intensify the 
agrarian protest of the previous decade and to cause it to enter 
a second phase which called for a new type of action far beyond 
the capacity of a farming group mainly devoted to the holding of 
annual exhibitions. 


1 The Edmonton Bulletin , September 9, 1882, p. 2. 

2 Ibid. , November 5, 1881, p. 2. 

3 See Appendices A and B. 

4 MacEwan, Grant, Agriculture on Parade , Toronto, 1950, p. 68. 

5 In an interview on June 2, 1954, C. H. Stout, a retired 
journalist, informed the author that Oliver "always had the 
farmers at heart”. In his years as a reporter for The Edmonton 
Bulletin from 1915 to 1927, Stout vividly recalls how Oliver 
steadily insisted that full reports be published of all agri- 















. 
















J 















. 








■ 


. 









. 






' 



























17 


cultural fairs, exhibits, meetings, etc. While this refers to a 
later period than that under discussion, it indicates how Oli¬ 
ver’s earlier enthusiasm for the cause of the farmer became a 
life-long interest. According to Stout, Oliver also owned a 
farm which failed to pay and which eventually was sold to help 
meet his debts. 

6 Sharp, Paul F., The Agrarian Revolt in Western Canada , Minnea¬ 
polis, 1948, p. 34. 

7 The Saturday News , February 23, 1907, p. 9. 

8 Minutes, The Alberta Farmers’ Association, Strathcona Branch, 
December 27, 1905, to January 9, 1909. 

9 The first issue of The Edmonton Bulletin is dated December 6, 
1880. 

10 Mackintosh, W. A., Prairie Settlement: The Geographical 
Setting , Toronto, 1934, p. 46; Morton, W. L., The Progressive 
Party in Canada , Toronto, 1950, p. 3. 

11 Mackintosh, op. cit. , p. 46. 

12 The Edmonton Bulletin , March 5, 1892, p. 3. With regard to Oli¬ 
ver’s emphasis in this remark on Northern Alberta agriculture, 
it is not without interest to note a comment which appeared in 
The Edmonton Bulletin on January 2, 1899 (p. 2). Referring to 
the annual report of the Calgary and Edmonton Railway for 1898, 
The Bulletin observed: 

....In order to prevent mistaken conclusions from being 
drawn it may be well to mention that of the grain ex¬ 
ported more than half was raised in the Edmonton district 
and was shipped from South Edmonton. While Southern Al¬ 
berta produces the bulk of the cattle, Northern Alberta 
produces the bulk of the grain, and it is in the most 
northerly part accessible to the railway that grain 
growing has proven most successful, and has been most 
generally gone into by the farmers. A few years ago the 
Edmonton district was laughed at as a grain producer by 
people who bounded their ideas of climate by lines of 
latitude. Now it shows a more rapid increase of grain 
production than any other district of the west, and it 
hasn’t yet got fairly started.... 

13 The Edmonton Exhibition Association Limited, 75th Anniversary 
Edition of the Grandstand and Souvenir Programme , Edmonton, 

19 53. 

14 Ibid. 

15 The Edmonton Bulletin , December 20, 1880, p. 3. 

16 Ibid. , December 27, 1880, p. 3. 

17 » November 5, 1881, p. 2. 

18 September 9, 1882, p. 2. 

19 Ibid. , September 30, 1882, p. 3. 

20 Ibid. , October 28, 1882, p. 3. 

21 Ibid. , p. 2. 

22 Ibid. , July 7, 1883, p. 4. 

23 See Appendix C for the provisions of this ordinance. 

24 MacEwan, op. cit. , p. 69. 

25 Waddell, William S., The Honorable Frank Oliver , unpublished 
M. A. thesis, University of Alberta, 1950, p. 25. 

26 Ibid. , p. 3. 

27 It is of some interest to note the agrarian demands contained 














































« 


c 










, 

' 

, 

t 








. 























































r 






( 






« 




















18 


in the following manifesto issued by The Edmonton Bulletin on 
November 7, 1885 (p. 3): 


OUR WANTS 

For fear that the hon. minister of the interior may 
forget that there is such a place as Edmonton in 
existence, and as petitions are the order of the day, the 
BULLETIN suggests the following as the more prominent of 
the rights, requirements and desires of the region com¬ 
prised in the Edmonton land district or northern half of 
Alberta, and particularly of the Edmonton settlement: 

1. That squatters f rights be recognized in full. 

2. That the dues on settlers 1 wood and hay be abolished. 

3. That the price of pre-emptions be reduced to $1 an 
acre, and that the privilege of homesteading instead 
of purchasing the pre-emptions be allowed. 

4. That the odd sections be thrown open for settlement, 
and the colonization (?) societies, which now hold 
large blocks of these lands be compelled either to 
fulfil their agreements or relinquish their claims. 

5. That residents of the district be allowed every op¬ 
portunity to compete for the supply of all government 
requirements, whether of material, labor or supplies, 
within or adjacent to the district. 

6. That the issue of scrip to half-breeds be completed. 

7. That pending the construction of a railway the trail 
from Calgary through Edmonton to the Athabasca 
Landing be made a permanent highway and kept in re¬ 
pair by the federal government, and that the 
necessary old trails throughout the district be sur¬ 
veyed and set apart as main highways. 

8. That the navigation of the Saskatchewan be still fur¬ 
ther improved, and that a railway outlet to Hudson f s 
Bay be opened. 

9. That reliable telegraphic communication be estab¬ 
lished with Battleford and Calgary. 

10. That the district be accorded representation in the 
house of commons. 

11. That responsible local government be accorded the 
territories and funds allowed that government from 
the federal treasury in proportion to the amount paid 
into that treasury by the people of the territories. 

28 Waddell, op. cit. , pp. 3-4. 

29 Ibid. . p. 32. 


























. 







_ 















































19 


30 The Edmonton Bulletin, November 24, 1883, p. 1. 


31 Ibid, 


32 Ibid, 

33 Ibid. 


34 Ibid, 

35 Ibid, 

36 Ibid, 

37 

38 

39 

40 


Ibid, 


Ibid. 


Ibid. 


Ibid. 


41 Ibid 


42 Ibid. 


43 Ibid 


December 1, 1883, p. 
December 15, 1883, p 


2 . 


, April 12, 1884. 

, January 19, 1884, p. 3. 

, March 21, 1885, p. 3. 

, September 15, 1888, p. 3. 
, October 13, 1888, p. 2. 

, July 12, 1884, p. 3. 


44 Examples of editorials of this nature are many 
appeared in The Edmonton Bulletin on September 
April 16, 1887, may be cited as typical. 

45 The Edmonton Bulletin , July 12, 1884, p. 3. 


46 Ibid. 

47 Ibid.* » September 6, 1890, p. 2. 

48 June 28, 1891, p. 2. 


but those which 
27, 1884, and on 


























CHAPTER II 


THE COMING OF THE RAILWAY TO 
EDMONTON AND THE GROWTH OF AGRARIAN AGITATION 

The optimism with which Edmonton district farmers awaited the 
completion of the rail link to Calgary is indicated by the de¬ 
cision of the directors of the Edmonton Agricultural Society on 

August 15, 1891, to take part in the Winnipeg Industrial Exhibi- 
1 

tion. By exhibiting at what was already an important agricultural 
fair, they hoped not only to pave the way for export markets when 
a rail outlet was completed, but to emphasize to prospective immi¬ 
grants that the Edmonton area possessed many attractive agri- 

2 

cultural possibilities* Yet the arrival of the first locomotive at 
the Strathcona station late in October, 1891, did not bring im¬ 
mediately the rich returns anticipated from the earliest days of 
agitation in Northern Alberta for rail communication with Calgary* 

In view of their recent and remarkable successes at the Winnipeg 
3 

Exhibition, Edmonton district farmers must have found the high 
freight rates charged by the Calgary and Edmonton Railway Company 
particularly frustrating. They were not slow, however, to take ap¬ 
propriate action* 

On November 7, 1891, Daniel Maloney, the former first presi¬ 
dent of the re-organized Edmonton Agricultural Society, placed the 
following significant advertisement In The Edmonton Bulletin : 

PUBLIC MEETING 

At a public meeting held in Poplar Lake school house 
on Tuesday evening November 3rd, it was moved by Mr. 

Geo* S. Long, seconded by Mr. John Kennedy and carried 
unanimously that a public meeting of the farmers of the 





















s < 

* 

< 

. 













t 


















21 


districts of Edmonton and St. Albert be held in the 
Curling Rink, Edmonton, on the afternoon of Thursday, No¬ 
vember 19th, 1891, commencing at 1 p. m. for the purpose 
of discussing a means of securing a reduction in the ex¬ 
port railway rates on grain and other produce of this 
district. 

A full attendance of farmers and business men is par¬ 
ticularly requested. 

4 

D. MALONEY. 

Nearly 100 farmers responded to this call for a public meeting 

which took place in Fielder’s Hall rather than in the curling 

rink. William Gust, a former executive member of the Edmonton 

Agricultural Society and the pioneer large-scale farmer of the Ed- 
5 

monton district, was elected chairman, while W. Fielders, who, ap¬ 
parently, contributed the use of his hall, was chosen secretary. 

In his opening remarks Gust declared that what the Edmonton dis¬ 
trict farmers wanted in the matter of freight rates was "10 cents 

6 

a hundred to Calgary and 30 cents to the coast". Only rates re¬ 
duced to this level would permit the agricultural producers of the 

7 

area to "live and make a little money". Following a line of argu¬ 
ment soon to become familiar in the agrarian assault on the privi¬ 
leged position of the C. P. R. in Alberta affairs, the speaker de¬ 
clared further, "At present the railway enjoys the benefit of half 
of all our improvements, for of all the land in the country they 

own half, and besides they want more than half our crop for 

8 

hauling it to market". Daniel Maloney supported Gust’s intro¬ 
ductory attack on the freight rate situation by stating it was 

"necessary to take very urgent steps to get better rates for our 
9 

produce". At most, he pointed out, the Edmonton farmer was not 

able to get more than eighteen cents for oats, whereas "a fairly 
10 

reduced rate west" would secure him thirty cents. At the same time 
wheat which was not then worth more than sixty cents at most to 


























« 







■ 

























c 


















22 


11 

ship east "would he worth ten or fifteen cents more" if fair rates 

were charged by the railway interests. Maloney concluded his 

speech by pointing out that Northern Alberta farmers had "the 

power to keep out settlers, if that is necessary, to bring the 

12 

railway people to their right mind". 

The progress of the discussion in Fielder*s hall was slowed 
down momentarily by a chance reference to certain resolutions that 
had been prepared previously for presentation to the meeting. Mal¬ 
colm McKinlay objected to such a procedure and stated that the re¬ 
solutions "should be passed by unions of the farmers in their own 
13 

settlements". Despite McKinlay 1 s claim that resolutions passed at 

14 

Edmonton only "would be of no more value than a basket of chips", 
the meeting paid more attention to the advice of an influential 
leader of the Edmonton Agricultural Society. George Long answered 
McKinlay f s criticism of the way the organizers of the meeting 
wished to proceed by saying that the prepared statement expressed 
his views and by asking that it be read. Long r s very considerable 
influence in Edmonton agrarian circles had sufficient weight, ap¬ 
parently, to quiet McKinlay for a few minutes while Fielders, the 
secretary, read the prepared memorial. McKinlay renewed his ob¬ 
jections when the statement of grievances was put to the meeting 
as a resolution, but he was ignored and the resolution was carried 
almost unanimously. A committee consisting of William Oust, Mur¬ 
doch McLeod, Baniel Maloney, Thomas Hutchings, J. T. Turner, and 
William Edmiston, all former executive members of the Edmonton 

Agricultural Society, was then appointed to present the resolution 

15 

to the appropriate C. P. R. authorities. 

The representations made to the Canadian Pacific Railway were 
not without some effect, for on February 6, 1892, The Edmonton 

















' 




















. 


. 

. 























. 

































23 


Bulletin was able to report a reduction on the grain rates from 

Edmonton to Calgary. Although these rates were still considered 

16 

”almost prohibitive”, they do seem to have given some stimulation 

to Edmonton’s export trade in grain. A little more than a month 

later W. Fielders, who had participated in the protest meeting of 

the previous November, is reported as erecting a grain warehouse 

17 

on Edmonton’s Jasper Avenue, while on April 16, 1892, The Bulletin 
reported that during recent weeks Edmonton had sent by rail fif¬ 
teen cars of wheat, three cars of barley, fourteen cars of oats, 
five cars of potatoes, and four cars of fat cattle to such points 

as North Bay, Donald, Calgary, Xnnisfail, Cochrane, Canmore, 

18 

Field, and Vancouver. 

The farmers of the Sturgeon river settlement, however, were 
not content to let matters ride with the presentation of a 
memorial to the C. P. R. authorities. They seem, indeed, to have 
been determined to launch a more militant form of farm organiza¬ 
tion than that offered by the Edmonton Agricultural Society. With 
George Long as chairman, a meeting was held on December 1, 1891, 

19 

in the Sturgeon school to discuss the need for ”a farmers’ union” 

in the district. In the lively discussion, which is reported to 

have taken place at the meeting, J. H. Long argued that such a 

union would facilitate the exchange of information regarding the 

best farming methods, and would be ”a means by which communication 

with distant markets might be opened up and thus enable the far- 

20 

mers to secure the best possible price for their produce”. In fur¬ 
ther support of the proposed union, George Long, Malcolm McKinlay, 
W. H. Carson, R. Bailey, W. Nicolson, Thomas Wilson, C. Carson, 

C. Whalen, R. Kelly, and D. Craig joined together in the claim 
that the new agrarian organization would enable Sturgeon farmers 

































































































24 


to secure their imports more cheaply. A motion was then carried 
instructing the chairman and the secretary to obtain copies of the 
constitutions of other farm unions and to call another meeting for 
formal organization when this information was available. Almost 
identical steps for the formation of farm unions were taken, 

21 

first, at a meeting in the Belmont school on December 12, 1891, 

22 

and, secondly, at a farm meeting one week later at Poplar Lake. 

This flurry of activity late in 1891 to form farmers’ unions 

23 

provided the rapidly spreading Order of the Patrons of Industry 
with a foothold in the Edmonton area early in 1892. The first step 
in the direction of Patronism seems to have been taken by the 
Sturgeon farmers, just mentioned, when they reconvened on April 13, 
1892, to consider the information secured by their provisional 
chairman and secretary. They agreed at this second meeting to or¬ 
ganize a branch or lodge of the Patrons of Industry and elected 

M. Gummings as president, George Long as vice-president, J. H. 

24 

Long as secretary, and D. Craig as treasurer. While records of 

Patron activity in Northern Alberta are scanty, one gathers the 

impression from The Edmonton Bulletin that Patronism was a major 

agrarian force in the area during the 1890’s. By December, 1892, 

there is record of the Little Mountain Lodge of the Patrons of In- 
25 

dustry, while in April, 1893, a meeting was held in the East Ed¬ 
monton school under Patron auspices to consider the erection of a 
26 27 28 

creamery. Other meetings held at Poplar Lake, Belmont, and the 

29 

Sturgeon river settlement to discuss the founding of local 

creameries seem to have been at least partly Patron-inspired, 

though some credit must be given to Frank Oliver for his editorial 

30 

support of such action. On March 14, 1893, Dalton McCarthy, the 
independent M. P. for North Simcoe, read to the House of Commons a 













. 














































25 


communication he had received from the Glover Bar lodge of the 

Patrons of Industry asking that something he done about "the heavy 

freight rates" and "the duty now existing upon farm machinery and 
31 

binding twine"* This resolution, which McCarthy cited to the House 
as typical of 113 Patron submissions sent to him from the West, 
not only stressed that the Clover Bar Patrons found themselves un¬ 
able to "advise our friends to come to this country to become 
agriculturists under existing burdens", but that the government 

was "unwise...to pursue their proposed immigration policy unless 

32 

the burdens are reduced". In August, 1893, when the Honorable 
T. M* Daly, the Minister of the Interior, visited Edmonton, a 
Patron representative delivered a major address at the public 
meeting held in the visiting minister's honor. P. C. Hamilton, who 

is simply described in the newspaper account as the "secretary of 

33 

the patrons of industry" concentrated in his address on the grie¬ 
vances of the district farmers. Hamilton told the minister that 
these included the high tariff on binder twine, coal oil, barb 
wire, and farm machinery, and he claimed it was a well known fact 
territorial farmers had to pay considerably more for these 
articles than they could afford. The government, he asserted, was 
protecting the manufacturers at the expense of the farmers, even 

though the latter represented the greater part of the Canadian 
34 

population. On February 3, 1894, a meeting was held in the St. Al- 

35 

bert school to organize a lodge of the Patrons of Industry. Daniel 
Maloney, who acted as chairman, explained the constitutional 
framework of the Order. Malcolm McKinlay addressed the meeting on 
the need for agrarian organization, while the local M. L. A., An¬ 
tonio Prince, expressed his sympathy with the farmers' efforts to 
increase their influence and to better their position. The most 






























. 



■ 





























, 




26 


important speaker, however, seems to have been the Reverend Father 
Leduc who discussed the objects of the Order and expressed his ap¬ 
proval. A lodge at St. Albert was organized, accordingly, with an 

36 

initial membership of fourteen. Less than two weeks later The 

Bulletin reported that T. G. Hutchings of Poplar Lake and Daniel 

Maloney of St. Albert had been appointed organizers for the 

Patrons of Industry in the District of Alberta and were presently 

to travel south to organize lodges in the settlements along the 

37 

Calgary and Edmonton Railway. 

This appointment of Hutchings and Maloney as Alberta or- 

38 

ganizers coincided with the territorial flood tide of Patronism. 
Their trip south to the settlements along the Calgary and Edmonton 
Railway was, in fact, immediately preceded and followed by an out¬ 
burst of convention activity. Less than two weeks before the news¬ 
paper announcement of the appointment, a Patron meeting had been 

held at Poplar Lake to discuss what The Edmonton Bulletin called 

39 

"the education question". At this gathering, which included repre¬ 
sentatives from St. Albert, Sturgeon River, and Clover Bar, as 
well as Poplar Lake, a committee, consisting of Malcolm McKinlay, 

Daniel Maloney, and George Long, was chosen to consider the matter 
40 

further. On March 10, 1894, a Patron convention of delegates from 

each lodge in northern Alberta was held in the Edmonton council 

chamber. The chairman was Thomas Hutchings, who is now referred to 

in the local press as the Patron president, while Malcolm McKinlay 
41 

acted as secretary. On April 3 of the same year a meeting was held 

in Clover Bar at the farm of Thomas Daly, a director of the newly- 

formed South Edmonton Agricultural Society, to organize the 

Patrons of Industry residing south of the river into "a county as- 
42 

sociation". The delegates, who are reported as being from the 








. 

. 

* 

f ■ - ' « • 


















































various sub-associations affected by the project, voted to form 

the association under the name "South Edmonton" and to meet regu- 

43 

larly on the second Saturday in each month. 

Since the Edmonton convention of March 10, 1894, is the first 
major Patron convention in Northern Alberta to be fully reported 
in the contemporary press, the resolutions adopted on that date 
are a landmark in the territorial history of the Order. Although 
numerous subjects were discussed by the delegates, the burning 
issue seems to have been the building of a bridge at Edmonton in 
order to provide easy access to the railhead across the river in 
Strathcona. Only the high freight rates charged by the Calgary and 
Edmonton Railway overshadowed the bridge question as a major grie¬ 
vance of merchants and farmers alike in the Edmonton district. In 
November, 1892, a petition for the federal construction of a 

bridge at Edmonton was forwarded by the people of the area to the 

44 

Minister of the Interior at Ottawa, but without result. At the 
public reception in 1893 for the Hon. Mr. Daly, Prank Oliver spoke 
of the need for such a bridge, while Dr. H. C. Wilson, the presi¬ 
dent of the local Liberal-Conservative association, charged the 

federal government was negligent in not requiring the railway com- 

45 

pany to cross the river at Edmonton. On March 3, 1894, only a week 
before the Patron convention,ageneral meeting had been held in Ed¬ 
monton for a discussion of the bridge question and for the se¬ 
lection of a delegation to go to Ottawa to urge prompt federal 
action in the matter. Although the meeting was not under Patron 
auspices, a motion was moved by Thomas Hutchings, seconded by 
Daniel Maloney, and passed by those present urging "that the 
bridge was a public necessity in the interests of the general de¬ 
velopment of the country, and requesting the government to provide 


- 




































, 

. 



















. 










28 


46 

for its construction at an early date". On March 10, however, the 
Patrons minced no words in the adoption of a tactlessly worded re¬ 
solution which concluded with the suggestion "that a form.. ..letter 
be printed and that each Canadian regardless of party forward a 
copy to the member of parliament representing the constituency 
from which he originally came with the request that although we 

are so far off, he assist in removing the disadvantages under 

47 

which we now labor for lack of a bridge”. 

While the furore over the bridge is a characteristic agrarian 
demand, it is curious to find that an educational issue evoked 
from the assembled Patrons at Edmonton a direct threat to take in¬ 
dependent political action. Apparently based on the work of the 
education committee chosen at the Poplar Lake convention in 
February, a resolution was moved by Daniel Maloney, seconded by 
H. McKay, and passed by the Patron delegates that normal school 
students should not be required to go to Regina for their training 
on account of the expense involved. If normal school facilities 
were not made available at Edmonton, the convention delegates 

pledged themselves ”to send representatives to the assembly at Re- 

48 

gina at the next election who will give effect to our request”. 

The two remaining Patron resolutions passed on March 10, 1894, 
equally reflect the problems of the pioneer farmer on what was 
then the Canadian frontier. The first of these asked for the ap¬ 
pointment of road and bridge supervisors to ensure a more advan¬ 
tageous expenditure of public money. For this purpose each 

electoral district, the Patrons claimed, should be divided into 

49 

several sections with ”an overseer” in each. The final resolution, 
which was moved by Murdoch McLeod and seconded by George Long, de¬ 
manded that to reduce the costs of collection in small claims 






. 












































29 


cases "three commissioners he appointed to adjudge regarding sums 

under $200", with "sessions to he held three times a year and no 

lawyer allowed within precincts" and with the commissioners* fees 

50 

and other court costs to he kept at a minimum. 

The months that followed the Edmonton Patron convention of 
March, 1894, witnessed a steady expansion in Patron activities in 
Northern Alberta. The Glover Bar meeting on April 3, 1894, already 
referred to, made two significant additions to the Patron program 
drawn up on March 10. The newly-formed South Edmonton County As¬ 
sociation of the Patrons of Industry resolved unanimously: 

1st* That this meeting does not approve of the scheme hy 
which the Government would give 35,000 acres of land to 
the town of Edmonton or any other corporation for the 
construction of a bridge or for any other purpose, as we, 
the patrons of industry of South Edmonton, believe that 
all public lands held by the government should he given 
to actual settlers only. Also that as residents of the 
Northwest Territories we pay more money per head into 
the treasury than the people of the east, yet in that 
part of our Dominion the government spends hundreds of 
thousands of dollars in places where a barren land musk¬ 
ox could not find food enough to live on for two months 
in the year; and we are thoroughly convinced that a 
traffic bridge across the Saskatchewan at Edmonton is 
badly needed; but as it is a public work we believe that 
the government should pay the whole cost out of the 
general revenue of the Dominion. 

2nd. That it is the opinion of the farmers assembled 
that at the next meeting of the Legislative Assembly an 
absolute exemption law should be passed similar to that 
passed in Manitoba. 51 

On May 12, 1894, another meeting of the same county association 
took up the question of dividing the District of Alberta into two 
separate electoral districts. The Patrons present felt the 
interests of Northern and Southern Alberta were so at variance be¬ 
cause of the predominance of ranching in the latter that no other 
step would give the northern area some semblance of representation 
in the House of Commons. As it was, the Patrons charged, the prob- 


< 


















j i 

. 










: 




. 











































30 


lems that beset the mixed farmers of Northern Alberta were not 

brought before the federal government until they bore the expense 

52 

of sending a delegation to Ottawa. In line with the Patron protest 
in Ontario and Manitoba, the South Edmonton County Association al¬ 
so placed itself on record at this meeting as unanimously con¬ 
demning the federal government "for the petty reductions recently 

53 

made in the tariff". Here the Patrons argued "that with the ex¬ 
cessively high tariff and exorbitant freight rates on machinery, 
coal oil, groceries and other articles which we require, the far¬ 
mers had to economise at every point to be able to square their 

accounts at the end of each year and keep the sheriff at a re- 

54 

spectable distance". To make matters even worse, "the government", 
according to the South Edmonton Patrons, "seems to be afraid of 
our intellectual development" when "it must needs place a prohibi¬ 
tive tariff on the reading matter which we enjoy in winter, and 

55 

also on the light to read it by", in the following June the 

Patrons of Industry north of the Saskatchewan River unanimously 

affirmed their support for the division of the Alberta electoral 

district into two constituencies so that more balanced territorial 

56 

representation in the federal house would be possible. 

June, 1894, also marked the beginning of the Patron drive in 
Northern Alberta for representation in the territorial legis¬ 
lature. In what turned out to be the only real contest in the Ed¬ 
monton district, so far as the Patrons were concerned, the lines 
of demarcation between farmer and town dweller were quickly drawn. 
On June 30 at St. Albert a public meeting was held in Chevigny f s 

hotel under Patron auspices to select "a farmer candidate" to re- 

57 

present the St. Albert riding at Regina. About two hundred persons 
were present, of whom, the greater number were not members of the 










■ c 

. 

f - 















. 











. 




t * 

_ 






. 

t 


. 


31 


Order. J. R. Donovan, the Patron chairman, refused, however, to 
accept the renomination of the sitting member, Antonio Prince, on 
the grounds that the latter was a lawyer and could not possibly be 
placed before the voters as "a farmer candidate”. The impasse 
created by Donovan’s refusal to recognize the nominee endorsed by 
the majority of those present was solved when the Patron minority, 
which numbered not more than fifty persons, withdrew to the lodge 
room of the Order and proceeded to select a more suitable candi¬ 
date. Nominations of true "farmer candidates" resulted in the 
names of Daniel Maloney of St. Albert, Malcolm McKinlay of Stur¬ 
geon River, and a Mr. Moret of Egg Lake being placed before the 

58 

re-organized meeting. A ballot favored the redoubtable farm 

leader, McKinlay, whose gift for speech-making at agrarian rallies 

led him to be called "the great word painter" by one of his con- 
59 

temporaries. Although McKinlay "signed a bond of $500 to see the 

60 

election through as a farmers’ candidate", he seems to have had 

some doubts later concerning his ability to carry the riding for 

the Patrons and he quite unselfishly withdrew in favor of Daniel 
61 

Maloney. In the elections held at the end of October, 1894, Ma¬ 
loney, running on a Patron platform, won the St. Albert con- 

62 

stituency by a large majority. 

Meanwhile, the other Edmonton district ridings were filled by 
63 

acclamation. Frank Oliver, who was currently giving much publicity 

to Patron activities in his newspaper and who was to run for the 

64 

federal house in 1896 with Patron support, secured the Edmonton 

seat unopposed. F. Fraser Tims, the secretary of the Fort Saskat- 

65 

chewan Agricultural Society, was petitioned by the voters of the 

66 

new electoral district of Victoria to stand for election. Although 
Fort Saskatchewan Patrons had held a meeting earlier to discuss a 












. 

«, ' 







. ■ 




c 

< 







, 



t * 






, 



















. 


. 









32 


67 

candidate for the Victoria riding, they seem to have decided sub¬ 
sequently not to oppose Tims in his decision to accede to the pe¬ 
tition just mentioned. It is quite possible that Tims was a member 
of the Order, but, unfortunately, no proof of membership appears 
to be available. Commenting editorially on the Edmonton district 
elections, The Bulletin remarked that, "The issues involved in the 
elections seem to have been personal and local rather than general 

and therefore they cannot be claimed as a great victory, moral or 

68 

otherwise, for any one except the members elected". Referring to 
the St. Albert constituency where the only real contest in Nor¬ 
thern Alberta took place, The Bulletin observed: 

....Mr. Prince was defeated chiefly on the grounds that 
he was a professional man and a non-resident. This was a 
strong cry in a purely farming constituency. At one 
stage of the contest, the French Canadian farmers of the 
Morinville settlement attempted to get Mr. Prince to re¬ 
tire in favor of a local man selected from amongst them. 

This he declined to do, and in consequence a large num¬ 
ber of them voted against him. Mr. Maloney, the success¬ 
ful candidate, is a farmer of the district and was the 
nominee of the patrons of industry. 69 

These comments, coming from the organ of one of the participants 
in the elections, are a reasonably fair appraisal of the results, 
but one cannot avoid the feeling they unduly minimize Patron in¬ 
fluence in the electoral contest. 

Patronism continued to be a lively political force in Nor¬ 
thern Alberta for at least two more years. In March, 1895, fol¬ 
lowing his endorsement by a Liberal convention in Calgary the pre¬ 
vious February 27, Frank Oliver issued an election manifesto to 
the electors of the federal constituency of Alberta in which he 
offered himself as an independent candidate at the next general 
election. In this manifesto, which was published in The Bulletin 


throughout the months of March, April, and May, Oliver informed 







































5 




















. 

t 


. 











« 




< 
















. 

























c 





33 


the voters of the riding he had ’’been assured of a strong support 

70 

by the patrons of industry in Northern Alberta”. While this state¬ 
ment in itself may be taken as a fair indication of the political 
importance of Patronism at the time, it is even more significant, 
in view of Oliver’s later decisive victory at the polls, that The 

Moose Jaw Times referred to him as the "personification of Patron- 
71 

ism”. The eagerly anticipated general election did not take place 
until June 23, 1896, but Oliver’s hold on the Patrons of Northern 
Alberta does not seem to have weakened during the meantime. In¬ 
deed, he re-affirmed his agrarian backing when he renewed his po¬ 
litical campaign in 1896. Oliver’s public speeches laid no small 

72 

stress on the farmer’s plight under Conservative government, and 
his published election address to the voters on June 1, 1896, em¬ 
phasized points which were sure to evoke agrarian sympathy, name¬ 
ly, a tariff for revenue only, an end to railway monopoly, lower 
freight rates, the abolition of regulations which interfered with 

the settler, an increase in the size of the homestead area, and, 

73 

generally, a better deal for territorial residents. Punning on 
such a platform, which was very similar to, if not identical with, 
the tenets of Patronism, Oliver was assured of a solid farm vote 
on election day. Conservative speakers, moreover, alienated Al¬ 
berta constituency farmers by various inept attempts to defend the 

high tariff which Oliver had attacked repeatedly in the editorial 

74 

columns of his newspaper and which he maintained was the chief 

75 

issue in the election. One such campaigner at Fort Saskatchewan, 

for instance, enraged the farmers of that district by telling them 

the reason they had to spend so much money on machinery was their 

76 

carelessness in leaving it exposed to the weather. When the 
election results were known, the feeling of the western farmer 







; 










C i 
















c 


■ 


r 

I 

















« n : 





















. 


t 










. 









34 


about the outcome was expressed aptly by the editorial comment of 

The Bulletin that, "One buncombe speech even by Sir Charles Tupper 

does not pay the West for the high price of supplies, the low 

price of produce, the high railway rates, the untaxable railway 

lands, the isolated settlement, the vexatious timber regulations, 

the commercial stagnation that exists throughout the Territories 

77 

under recent conservative rule". 

The election of Frank Oliver to the House of Commons marks 

the high point of Patron political activity in Northern Alberta. 

The Order subsequently supported Matthew McCauley against A. C. 

Rutherford in the electoral race for the territorial seat vacated 
78 

by Oliver, but McCauley’s victory in this contest on August 4, 

1896, appears to have been the last in which Alberta Patrons took 

79 

any part as an organized body. When Robert McKernan, who had been 

80 

a Patron as early as 1893, announced himself in 1898 as a farmer 

candidate for election to the territorial legislature, he made no 

reference at all to the Patrons of Industry in his published mani- 

81 

festo to the voters of the Edmonton district. It is even more sig- 

82 

nificant that when McKernan subsequently retired from the contest, 

apparently because of McCauley’s decision to stand for re- 

election, the latter likewise made no reference in his campaign to 

83 

the Patrons who had helped him materially in 1896. Yet McCauley 

won at the polls on November 4, 1898, over both A. C. Rutherford 

84 

and H. H. Robertson. Thus it would seem that in Northern Alberta, 
as in the rest of Canada, Patronism became a dead issue political¬ 
ly with the rise of the Liberals to power under Wilfrid Laurier. 

The Liberal victory on June 23, 1896, did not bring an im¬ 
mediate solution to the clamor over C. P. R. freight rates which 
had caused the Northern Alberta farm movement to become militant, 









c 

c 












< 






' 




« 


















< 










* 


' 






















• 








• 

. H 



( 



















35 


but some measure of relief was not too far away. During the summer 
of 1897 the whole western freight rate question was resolved in a 
novel fashion by the Laurier government. Breaking away from the 
precedent of pure charter granting set by the Conservatives in 
their dealings with the railway interests, the Liberals now com¬ 
bined legislative control of freight rates with the subsidization 

85 

of railway construction. In an agreement with the Canadian Pacific 
Railway the federal government undertook to grant a subsidy of 
$11,000 per mile for the building of a line from Lethbridge via 
Fort Macleod through the Crow f s Nest Pass to Nelson, B. C., pro¬ 
vided that the C. P. R. authorities bound themselves to certain 

86 

conditions governing western freight rates. Although the Crow's 
Nest Pass Agreement was a brilliant climax to a decade of conten¬ 
tion in the west over C. P. R. freight rates, Frank Oliver was 
reluctant to acknowledge Laurier's adroitness in solving the prob¬ 
lem which had caused so much trouble for the Northern Alberta far¬ 
mer : 


....It is to be regretted that the new government has 
not seen fit to reverse the policy of railway monopoly 
in the west, which was the policy of their predecessors. 

In this mam they have certainly disappointed the people 
of the west; but at any rate they have made terms on be¬ 
half of the people with the railway company, which in 
itself is a new departure. The value of the terms will 
depend on how the arrangement is administered hereafter. 

They are at least a recognition that satisfactory ser¬ 
vice for the money paid has not been given by the rail¬ 
way company; they are a recognition of the special 
interests of the west; but the west must depend upon the 
exertions of its press and representatives to secure the 
valuable enforcement of the arrangement.... 87 

Although Oliver did not mention it, the Crow's Nest Pass Agree¬ 
ment was in a very real sense of the word the climax of the agita¬ 
tion he and the Patron leaders had conducted in Northern Alberta 
practically from the moment the last spike was driven on the Cal- 












- 

■ 

' 















. 









. 











I . . 



















' 




36 


gary and Edmonton Railway in 1891. Many battles remained to be 
fought with the railway interests, but the farmers of Northern Al¬ 
berta at this point, at least, had found that consistent and or¬ 
ganized protests would bring results. 

Liberal action in meeting western protests over the pro¬ 
tective tariff was slightly more prompt than the disposal of the 
freight rate problem and again emphasized to the Alberta farm 
population the value of organized protest. Early in 1897 the 
Liberal answer to the general western outcry against the "National 
Policy" was revealed with the presentation of the Fielding tariff 

to the House of Commons. According to The Bulletin , this tariff 

88 

"was plainly framed with a view to the agricultural interests". 
Protective tariffs on the farmer’s necessities had been reduced, 
while whatever protection might be said to exist on his produce 
remained unchanged. The Bulletin regretted that the reduction of 
the protective duties on essential farm articles had not been as 
great as the farmer had a right to expect, but acknowledged sub¬ 
stantial and important changes: 

....Binding twine and barbed wire are to be free after 
the present manufacturers have had an opportunity to dis¬ 
pose of their stock, which is only fair to them. Steam 
machinery and hand tools have been considerably reduced. 89 

Criticism of the tariff reductions provided in Fielding’s budget 

address centred particularly around the following matters: 

....a small cut has been made on coal oil. While the re¬ 
duction of a cent a gallon is not great, it is supple¬ 
mented by the privilege of importing in tank cars, which 
it is estimated means a further reduction of about a 
cent and a half; or a duty of five cents a gallon, as 
against practically seven and a half cents previously 
prevailing. Binders and mowers have not been reduced, as 
they already enjoyed the protection of only a 20 % 
tariff. It is on this point, and on the coal oil duty, 
that complaint is made by the patron members that their 
expectations have not been fulfilled. The iron duties 
having been reduced, they consider that the duties on 











. 

. 














. 




















t 







4 

. 












.... 

. 






* 










37 


agricultural machinery, already standing at 20$, should 
have teen proportionally reduced, as under the new ar¬ 
rangements the manufacturer is better off than he was 
before. They, also, consider that the coal oil duty 
should have been squarely cut in half, if not altogether 
abolished. Notice of a resolution to this effect, re¬ 
garding implements and coal oil, has been given by Mr. 
Douglas, of East Assiniboia.... 90 

As with the Liberal solution of the western freight rate problem, 
many spirited political controversies were yet to arise over 
tariff issues, but, undoubtedly, there were few Alberta farm 
leaders at the time who would not have admitted that the year 1897 
marked a favorable turning-point in the fortunes of western agri¬ 
culture . 


1 The Edmonton Bulletin , August 22, 1891, p. 3. 

2 See the editorials in The Edmonton Bulletin for August 22 
September 12, September 19, and September 26, 1891. 

3 The Edmonton Bulletin , October 3, 1891, p. 2. 


4 

Ibid., 

November 7, 1891, p. 1. 

5 

Ibid., 

October 19, 1899, p. 4. 

6 

Ibid., 

November 21, 1891, p. 2. 

7 

Ibid. 


8 

Ibid. 


9 

Ibid. 


10 

Ibid. 


11 

Ibid. 


12 

Ibid. 


13 

Ibid. 


14 

Ibid. 


15 

Ibid. 


16 

Ibid., 

February 6, 1892, Supplement. 

17 

Ibid., 

March 19, 1892, p. 1. 

18 

Ibid., 

April 16, 1892, p. 3. 

19 

Ibid., 

December 5, 1891, p. 2. 

20 

Ibid. 

21 

Ibid., 

p. 1. 

22. 

Ibid., 

December 26, 1891, p. 1. 


* 


23 Like the Grange, which they supplanted with ease in both 

Canada and the United States, the Patrons of Industry were of 
American origin and were primarily a farm body. Unlike the 
Grange, however, the Patrons sought to achieve the betterment 
of agrarian conditions by independent political action. Thus 
this politico-economic association, which was founded in Port 
Huron, Michigan, in 1887, came to fill a void on the Canadian 
scene ignored by the Grange. When the organizers of the Patrons 


of Industry arrived in Canada in 1889 they catered to a growing 
feeling among Canadian farmers that distinct agrarian represen¬ 
tation was needed to secure justice from both the provincial 




























c 






c e 



















« 







38 


and federal legislatures. The political platform evolved by the 
Canadian Patrons included the maintenance of the British con¬ 
nection, the reservation of public lands for actual settlers, 
rigid economy in the civil service, the simplification of the 
laws, a reduction in the machinery of government, the abolition 
of the Canadian Senate, tariff for revenue only, reciprocal 
trade between Canada and the rest of the world, no government 
grants to railways, the use of municipal voters* lists in 
federal and provincial elections, the conformity of electoral 
districts with county boundaries as far as the principle of re¬ 
presentation would allow, the legislative protection of labor 
against combinations and monopolies, and the appointment by the 
county of all its officials except the county judges. Quite 
apart from their political program, the Patrons also attempted 
to re-organize Canadian retail business. In Michigan a type of 
cooperative purchasing was put into effect under which the 
Patrons bought only from retailers who promised to sell goods 
to members of the Order at not more than twelve per cent profit. 
In Ontario the same plan was tried out by the Patrons, but the 
maximum profit was restricted to ten per cent. The Order also 
sought to enter the Canadian manufacturing field by organizing 
its own joint-stock companies, but success in this direction 
was only temporary. 

24 The Edmonton Bulletin , April 16, 1892, p. 1. 

25 Ibid. , December 19, 1892, p. 8. 


26 Ibid. 


27 Ibid. 


28 Ibid. 


29 Ibid, 


30 Ibid. 


, April 27, 1893, p 
, March 19, 1892, p 
, April 2, 1892, p. 


1 . 

3, and March 26, 1892, p 
4. 


5. 


February 6, 1892, p. 3. 


31 Wood, Louis Aubrey, A History of Farmers * Movements in Canada , 
Toronto, 1924, p. 144. 

32 Ibid. 


33 The Edmonton Bulletin , August 14, 1893, p. 2. 

34 Ibid. 

35 Ibid. , February 5, 1894, p. 1. 

36 Ibid. 

37 Ibid. . February 15, 1894, p. 1. 

38 Early in 1891 Manitoba farmers were being organized into sub- 
associations of the Order, particularly in the region of 
Portage la Prairie. By the fall of 1891 the Manitoba Patrons 
had gained sufficient strength to meet at Portage la Prairie 
and establish the Grand Association of the Patrons of Industry 
of Manitoba. At a meeting of this body on February 24, 1892, at 
Brandon, the executive announced that one hundred sub-associa¬ 
tions had been formed in the Canadian West, a few of which, it 
was reported, were in the North-West Territories. Whether or 
not these sub-associations or lodges included farmers in what 
is now the province of Alberta is not known, but it would seem 
unlikely. The formation of the Sturgeon Patron lodge, it will 
be noted, took place a few months after this Brandon meeting. 

By 1895, when Patronism in the Canadian West had reached its 
maximum strength, the lodges of the North-West Territories were 
permitted to form their own Executive Board, but no record of 
the lodges thus represented by a central territorial body seems 
to be extant. 

















Vw 





t 












c 


c 









November 14, 1892, p. 6 
August 14, 1893, p. 2. 


39 The Edmonton Bulletin , February 22, 1894, p. 1* 

40 Ibid* 

41 Ibid* , March 12, 1894, p. 2, and March 15, 1894, p 

42 Ibid* . April 9, 1894, p. 4. 

43 Ibid. 

44 Ibid* , 

45 Ibid* » 

46 Ibid* , 

47 Ibid* , 

48 Ibid* , 

49 Ibid* 

50 Ibid* 

51 Ibid. , April 9, 1894, p 

52 Ibid* , May 21, 1894, p. 

53 Ibid* 

54 Ibid* 

55 Ibid* 

56 Ibid*» 


3* 


March 5, 1894, p* 
March 12, 1894, p 
March 15, 1894, p 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 


4. 

4. 


57 Ibid * , 

58 Ibid* 

59 Ibid* . 

60 Ibid* , 


June 4, 
July 5, 


1894, 

1894, 


June 13, 1902, p 
July 5, 1894, p* 


1 . 

1 * 

3. 


61 Ibid. t October 25, 1894, p. 1* In connection with McKinlay's 
withdrawal from the electoral contest, it is interesting to 
note that following his nomination on June 30, 1894, he pub¬ 
lished this notice in The Edmonton Bulletin for July 5, 1894 
(p. 4): 


NOTICE. 

To the electors of St. Albert* 

GOTTIMEN: —Having been nominated as a farmers r candidate 
for the representation of St. Albert district 
in the Northwest assembly, I hereby give notice that if a 
more suitable farmers * candidate Is selected within 40 
days from this date I will resign in his favor* 

MALCOLM McKINLAY. 


Sturgeon River, July 2nd, 1894, 


62 The Edmonton Bulletin, November 1, 1894, pp* 1 and 4* 


October 25, 1894, p. 1 
March 4, 1895, p. 2* 
September 24, 1894, p. 
September 20, 1894, p. 
June 28, 1894, p. 1* 
November 5, 1894, p. 2 


March 4, 1895, p. 
March 14, 1895, p 
June 1, 1896, p* 

p. 1. 


2 . 


1. 

1* 


63 Ibid* , 

64 Ibid* * 

65 Ibid., 

66 Ibid* * 

67 Ibid* . 

68 Ibid* . 

69 Ibid* 

70 Ibid*, 

71 Ibid.* 

72 Ibid* , 

73 Ibid* * 

74 For a good example of these 
"Squeezing the Farmer" on page 2 
May 18, 1896. 


editorials, see the one entitled 
of The Edmonton Bulletin for 







































c 




« 



c 




t * 
C 


« 


Q O • 















- : 












. 


c 

• c c 

c 






40 


75 The Edmonton Bulletin , April 1, 1895, p. 2* 

76 Ibid. , June 4, 1896, p. 3. 

77 Ibid* f July 9, 1896, p. 2. 

78 Ibid* » June 29, 1896, p* 4, and July 20, 1896, p. 4. 

79 Ibid* » August 6, 1896, p. 4* 

80 Ibid, , April 27, 1893, p. 1. 

81 Ibid* , July 25, 1898, p. 1. 

82 Ibid* t September 26, 1898, p* 1* 

83 See the files of The Edmonton Bulletin from September 26 to 
November 7, 1898, inclusive* 

84 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 7, 1898, p* 1* 

85 MacGibbon, D. A*, Railway Rates and the Canadian Railway Com¬ 
mission , Cambridge, Mass., 1917, p. 78* 

86 Innis, Harold A., A History of the Canadian Pacific Railway , 
London, 1923, p. 184. 

87 The Edmonton Bulletin , July 8, 1897, p. 2. 

88 Ibid* » May 3, 1897, p. 2* 

89 Ibid, 

90 Ibid. 























CHAPTER III 


THE MANITOBA GRAIN ELEVATOR 
COMPANIES AND THE GROWTH OF AGRARIAN UNREST IN ALBERTA 


While Edmonton district farmers were looking forward to 
better returns under the Fielding tariff and the Crow’s Nest Pass 
Agreement, it became very apparent that they would not lack the 
grain elevator facilities needed to handle an increased export 
trade. Before the summer of 1897 the Manitoba grain companies had 
not considered Northern Alberta a sound investment for the con¬ 
struction of country elevators, but it was now no longer possible 
to ignore the steady expansion of grain production in that region 
Commenting on the extensive elevator construction north of Red 
Deer during 1897, The Edmonton Bulletin noted: 

....the great grain buyers of Manitoba, who a very few 
years ago would have laughed to scorn a suggestion as to 
the necessity of elevators for the storage of grain for 
export in Northern Alberta, have taken up most actively 
the question of supplying the need which has arisen. 
Henceforth Manitoba has a direct financial interest in 
the success of farming in Northern Alberta which cannot 
help but be advantageous to us. Although cut off from 
the productive sections of Manitoba by hundreds of miles 
of uncultivstable country. Northern Alberta has become 
annexed to the wheat area of that province by the advent 
of the Manitoba buyers here, and the wheat interest both 
east and west is proportionately strengthened. 1 

The invasion of Northern Alberta by the Manitoba grain interests 
was reflected further in The Bulletin during the winter of 1897-8 
Late in December, 1897, for example, agents of the Dominion Ele¬ 
vator Company and of the Manitoba Grain Company were in Fort Sas- 

E 

katchewan to select business sites, while in January, 1898, 
Nicholas Bawlf, the president of the Northern Elevator Company, 
visited Edmonton and reported to The Winnipeg Free Press that a 
















, 






























. 














c •' 





t 









c 




c 

. 



































42 


good market existed for Edmonton oats in the Kootenay region and 

3 

that the rush to the Klondike had increased the local demand. 

The growing interest of the Manitoba grain companies in the 
Edmonton district raised many high hopes for the future prosperity 
of the Northern Alberta farmer, but such hopes were tempered by 
the knowledge that the growing volume and importance of the grain 
business in the more settled portions of Western Canada had pro¬ 
voked many rural complaints concerning the treatment accorded the 

farmer by the elevator companies. This source of western agrarian 

4 

unrest first became evident in Manitoba and remained for many 

years a leading rural grievance in that province. By 1897, in 

fact, the alleged existence of an elevator combine in Manitoba was 

5 

the subject of considerable comment in The Edmonton Bulletin . The 

farmer there and in what is now Saskatchewan accused the grain 

companies, as well as their local agents, of deliberately working 

against his interests by incorrect weighing and grading, by paying 

unfair prices, by exacting exorbitant handling charges, by not 

cleaning the grain, by refusing to give special bins, and by re- 

6 

sorting to various monopolistic practices. The spread of the Mani¬ 
toba grain interests to Northern Alberta and the steady growth of 
the wheat surplus in that area neatly coincided, moreover, with 
the furore in the House of Commons over the first Douglas bill for 
the regulation of the alleged elevator monopoly in Western Canada. 
While the abuses which the Patron-supported member for East As- 
siniboia sought to rectify were more apparent in Manitoba and pre¬ 
sent-day Saskatchewan, his parliamentary efforts in this direction 
not only won the immediate and enthusiastic support of the member 
for Alberta, Frank Oliver, but they were reported in detail in The 
Bulletin for the benefit of its many rural readers. 





























c 

. 

. 












c 


43 


Owing to the many ramifications of the first Douglas hill in 

the history of the western farm movement, an explanation of its 

origins and purpose will not he out of place. In order to minimize 

the various problems involved in hauling grain to and from railway 

7 

shipping points in Western Canada, standard elevators holding 
25,000 or more bushels of grain came into use. These grain ele¬ 
vators, which were costly to erect, were generally owned by the 
large milling companies and other grain-buying interests, 
practically all of whom had their headquarters at Winnipeg close 
to the famous Grain Exchange. While there was no question of the 
greater convenience afforded all parties concerned by the use of 

the grain elevator system, it must not be thought that the farmer 

8 

was dissatisfied with the flat warehouses formerly in vogue. Ac¬ 
cording to Wood, the western farmers, in fact, "were well satis¬ 
fied with the warehouse system because they received a fair price 

for the grain brought in, and were not heavily burdened with 
9 

storage charges”. In places where flat warehouses were not avail¬ 
able the farmer loaded freight cars from his own vehicle; some 
farmers, indeed, preferred to load their own cars for consignment 
east even when warehouse facilities were available. There would, 
however, have been no trouble over the construction of grain ele¬ 
vators if an announcement had not been made in the fall of 1897 by 
the leading carrier in Western Canada, the C. P. R., with respect 
to future grain shipments on its lines. Under the new regulation 
it was provided that if an elevator of a certain standard and ca¬ 
pacity had been erected at any C. P. R. shipping point, the com¬ 
pany would only accept grain at that point through that elevator. 
The enforcement of such a regulation, of course, would bring a 













« 
















. 

' 

' < 




















' ? 

■ 

t 





































44 


greater volume of business to the elevator-owning corporations and 

naturally led to the charge in The Winnipeg Tribune and elsewhere 

that these corporations had pooled their interests and had brought 

the C. P. R. into this conspiracy against the farmer in order to 

10 

consolidate their newly-established position. It was not long 

until this combine appropriately became known as "the syndicate of 
11 

syndicates". The opposition aroused by the action of the G. P. R. 
was based on the claim that under the Railway Act a railroad as a 
common carrier was compelled to accept and load freight offered at 
any of its stations without any option as to how the freight 
should be placed on the cars. The farmers of the west charged that 
under the arrangement the C. P. R. had made with the grain-buying 
interests this provision of the Act was violated with the result 
that both the farmer who wished to load his own cars and the owner 
of a flat warehouse were deprived of their elementary rights as 
defined in the statute. The difficulty encountered in this pro¬ 
test, however, was that the terms of the Railway Act then in force 
were so general that an individual shipper attempting to enforce 
his acknowledged rights would find the process costly, tedious, 
and barren of real results. 

To deal with this difficult situation created by the G. P. R., 

James Moffat Douglas, the Member of Parliament for East Assiniboia, 

introduced a bill in the House of Commons on February 14, 1898, 

for the regulation of the storage and transit of grain in Western 

Canada. This bill, which has been called "the first shot fired by 

the farmers in their long struggle for a better system of grain 
IS 

marketing", was sponsored by a man whose association with the 
agrarian cause went back as far as 1883. Even though he was a 
Presbyterian minister at the time, Douglas was keenly Interested 















c 






* 


- 




. 








. < 

.... ^ 
















. 

t 


. 










< 










45 


in that year in the work of the short-lived Manitoba and North- 

13 

West Farmers r Protective Union. Later he took up both farming and 
politics and was elected to the federal House in 1896 with a very 
considerable measure of Patron support. When Douglas introduced 
his bill to the House of Commons in February, 1898, both he and 
those who supported him made three main charges against the ele¬ 
vator combine which they sought to curb. These charges were that 
an open market no longer existed for the wheat of Western Canada, 
that the various wheat deliveries to the elevators were skilfully 
mixed by company agents to enable inferior grades to pass in¬ 
spection and be sold as No. 1 hard, and that the elevator system 
made it possible to falsify the weights of the farmers f grain de¬ 
liveries. The charge that an open grain market had ceased to exist 
was based on the claim that representatives of the major grain 
interests met daily in Winnipeg, agreed on a buying price for each 
western shipping point, and sent telegrams to each of these points 
listing quotations which the agents of the combine would obey. 
Thus, it was charged by the western M. P. r s, it was to the advan¬ 
tage of the newly-organized grain combine to secure the coopera¬ 
tion of the C. P. R. in choking off wheat deliveries to other than 
the standard elevators erected by the member companies. Before the 
combine was alleged to have come into existence in either 1896 or 
1897 the farmer had profited through the competition which had 
existed between the different grain buying interests, no matter 
whether they were owners of standard elevators or of flat ware¬ 
houses. By 1898, Douglas and his supporters maintained, competi¬ 
tion was not only being thwarted, but, if the C. P. R. found it 
difficult to cope with the amount of wheat being delivered, the 
prices offered by the combine would be appropriately lowered. The 












c C 






C 

' 





















. 













■ 

. 

< 














46 


main abuse arising from price manipulation, however, was the 

financial loss incurred by the farmer: 

•...a farmer would be given, for example, seventy-seven 
cents a bushel for his wheat at an elevator centre in 
Manitoba; the charges thereafter to Buffalo would be: 
elevator storage, one and one-half cents, rail to Fort 
William, thirteen and one-half cents, and lake transpor¬ 
tation, two cents for each bushel. The wheat laid down 
in Buffalo would have cost the grain dealer ninety-four 
cents a bushel, but if the ruling price in Buffalo on 
the day in question were ninety-eight cents, he would 
realize in consequence four cents a bushel on the tran¬ 
saction. The House of Commons was given to understand 
that the legitimate profit for a large purchaser of 
wheat was a fraction of a cent per bushel. Roughly esti¬ 
mated, $1,000,000 was said to have been lost by the far¬ 
mers of the West through the juggling of wheat prices 
during the year 1897. 14 

In other words, the principal object of the alleged combine was to 
keep a wider margin between the buying and selling price of grain 
than was possible under the competitive conditions of pre-combine 
days, and the enforcement of the railway shipping regulations 
against flat warehouses and the farmer who wished to load his own 
cars was the logical sequel to the formation of such a combine 
among the Winnipeg grain buying interests. As Frank Oliver ex¬ 
pressed it in his report on parliamentary developments to The Ed¬ 
monton Bulletin : 

....while the combine made possible a legitimate saving 
in expenses, its main object was to keep down the price 
of grain to the farmer. And the principal lever by which 
that object was attained was the regulation of the rail¬ 
road company against receiving grain from farmers * wagons 
or from flat warehouses, thereby preventing men of any- 
ting but large capital from going into the grain busi¬ 
ness, and so assuming to the combine increased profits at 
the cost of the farmers. 15 


The other charges made against the elevator combine by Doug¬ 
las and his supporters may be explained more briefly. The conten¬ 
tion that inferior grades of wheat were mixed with better grades 
before shipment east centred mainly around the difficulty of dis- 










* 


■ ' i 

■ 

. 

« 

« 

« 

t c < 






, 

■ 









l 


. . 













■ 

< 


























47 


tinguishing between the No. 1 and No. 2 grades of hard wheat. It 

was thus easy for a grain buyer to tell a farmer his wheat graded 

No. 2 and to pay him accordingly. Yet skilful mixing of authentic 

second grade wheat with grain of the superior quality would make 

it possible to ship and sell the whole consignment as grade No. 1. 

Such a practice, according to Wood, netted the elevator companies 

of 16 

an additional profit/two to four cents per bushel. The charge that 
the elevator system made it possible to falsify weights arose from 
the different weighing-in practices of the flat warehouses and the 
standard elevators. In the former a farmer could watch the 
weighing process, but in the latter he could not, with the result 
that he entertained some doubts—which seemed not without justifi¬ 
cation in many cases—of the accuracy of the certificate of weight 
which was handed to him. One other charge made by the western Mem¬ 
bers of Parliament may be mentioned, even though it was regarded 
as of lesser importance than the three allegations already dis¬ 
cussed. This charge concerned the feeling of many farmers that ex¬ 
cessive dockages were being levied for uncleaned wheat. Most far¬ 
mers had neither the time nor the facilities to clean their grain 
after threshing. When the grain arrived at the elevator, it thus 
contained various impurities such as dirt and weed seeds. Some 
grain agents would clean the farmer's consignment and levy a 
"dockage" or deduction in accordance with the weight of the im¬ 
purities removed. Certain other elevator companies, however, 
cleaned only a pound of the grain delivered and made a propor¬ 
tionate deduction on the farmer's entire consignment. Naturally, 
this practice of estimating the dockage led to many charges of dis¬ 
crimination against the farmer. 

Despite the various rural grievances against the Winnipeg 














, 




l 




















- 



* 


■ 








■ 

* 















' 


. 

- 


« 


. 

. 





















48 


grain interests discussed in the House of Commons, the first Doug¬ 
las hill concentrated on the right of the farmers of Manitoba and 
the North-West Territories either to ship their grain through flat 
warehouses or to load it themselves into railway freight cars. The 
bill also arranged for a better system of distributing freight 
cars to prevent such situations as occurred in Edmonton late in 
1897 when grain dealers, finding themselves short of cars, paid 

below the market price in order to protect themselves against the 

17 

possibility of a future drop. The fate of the first Douglas bill 

in the House of Commons, however, was not too encouraging to its 

supporters. According to Frank Oliver, a C. P. R. lobby was 

"strongly in evidence around the Commons" while the bill was under 

discussion and a compromise was arranged "whereby the provision... 

requiring grain to be accepted from farmers 1 wagons was struck out 

and a time limit placed on the loading of cars from flat ware- 
18 

houses”. But the parliamentary quarrels over this compromise were 

so bitter that the bill finally was dropped on the understanding 

the government would provide stronger enforcement of the principle 

contained in the Railway Act that a carrier must accept freight 

19 

from anyone who offered it. 

Although the first Douglas bill failed to become law, several 
gains were made as a result of the parliamentary struggle it had 
caused. The Honorable A. G-. Blair, the Minister of Railways, was 
now on record as stating that, if the G. P. R. were denying far¬ 
mers the right to load directly from their wagons, the company was 

20 

violating Section 246 of the Railway Act. In view of this opinion 

from such an authority and the parliamentary uproar over its 

ruling of the previous year, the G. P. R. during 1898 withdrew all 

21 

restrictions against the loading of grain from farmers* wagons. In 




..' 

- 




. , 











c 







































■ 








. 

, 















49 


addition, both the railway company and the Winnipeg grain 
interests were now aware that any monopolistic arrangements they 
might make would be subject to parliamentary investigation of some 
sort. Finally, the entire matter was brought to the personal at¬ 
tention of Sir Wilfrid Laurier during an interview with the author 
of the Douglas bill who presented the Prime Minister with a memo¬ 
randum signedby himself and six other members of the House of Com- 

22 

mons, including Frank Oliver. It became apparent, however, during 
1898 that, since the G. P. R. had acted upon only one of the 
western complaints concerning its handling of grain shipments, a 
second Douglas bill was inevitable. 


During the interval between the failure of the first Douglas 
bill and the introduction of the second a year later, the rising 
conflict between farmer and grain buyer in Northern Alberta became 
the subject of considerable newspaper comment. This conflict, 
which a cynical Manitoba farmer would have said was unavoidable 
with the arrival of the Winnipeg grain interests in the Edmonton 
district, was made the subject of a Bulletin editorial on 
January 12, 1899: 

The division between the farmers and buyers at Edmon¬ 
ton as to the value of different grades of wheat is as 
wide as ever. The battle rages chiefly around Ladoga, of 
which a great deal is produced in this district. The 
buyers grade the best of this as No. 3 hard or 1 nor¬ 
thern and value it at 13# a bushel less than No. 1 hard. 
George Imerson, of Stony Plain, informs the BULLETIN 
that a number of samples of wheat have been sent by dif¬ 
ferent farmers on Stony Plain to Fort William to be 
graded, and that in one case which he knows of Ladoga 
was graded as No. 1 hard, and in a majority of other 
cases as No. 2 hard. It averaged quite as high in grade 
as the red fife. Apparently the wheat was graded as to 
quality and appearance with very little if any regard to 
variety. 


In support of the above Mr. Imerson says that on De- 












. 







50 


cember 16th be shipped a car of Ladoga wheat to Thompson 
Sons & Co., grain and commission merchants, Winnipeg. On 
the day upon which he loaded the car he was offered 33# 
by one of the buyers on No. 3 basis. This was the best 
offer he could get. He shipped 300 sacks of wheat as a 
car load. The return which he received on arrival of the 
car at Fort William was 678 bushels of No. 2 wheat, 
worth to him on January 2nd, 44-J# at Edmonton; 11-J# a 
bushel over the price offered him in Edmonton, or |77.97 
on the car load.... 23 

The same issue of The Bulletin carried a strongly worded letter to 

the editor from T. G. Pearce of Agricola reporting that a sample 

of wheat which had been graded No. 2 in Edmonton was forwarded to 

Winnipeg where it was officially graded and "pronounced No. 1, and 

24 

extra heavy to the bushel". Referring to this incident and to the 

opinions he had secured from grain dealers in Detroit, Minneapolis, 

and Tacoma concerning Alberta wheat samples, Pearce declared, 

"These facts cannot be disproved, and they show most conclusively 

that we farmers have been the victims of grain dealers and millers 

to such an extent that we are forced to organize to protect our- 

25 

selves in the future". "Grievous injury", Pearce felt, had been 

done to western settlement "by forcing new settlers to pay high 

and unjust prices which the low values paid for wheat do not justi~ 
26 

fy". Yet the only remedy Pearce was able to suggest in this letter 
was the nebulous statement that, "By hearty co-operation and or¬ 
ganization we the hard fisted sons of toil can exert a power which 
will make itself felt to the highest degree, not only by securing 
honest grading of wheat, &c<>, as well as fair values, but we can 

do much to promote the material progress and settlement of the 
27 

country". A month later, though, Pearce wrote another letter to 
The Bulletin in which he claimed Northern Alberta farmers had 
"honestly earned the reputation of being ignorant blockheads 

28 

without sufficient intelligence to combine to protect ourselves" 






< 

( 











c * 

< . • -*?. • - 


* 

















' 

■ 

. 


c 














' 








t • « 


e 










51 


and suggested they follow the example of farmers in England and 

Ontario by "organizing joint stock companies to manufacture and 

29 

sell their own produce"* 

Pearce f s proposal does not seem to have received much atten¬ 
tion, but it is significant that his letter either coincided with 
or grew out of the discussions then taking place in the Edmonton 
district with regard to the construction of farmer-owned flour 
mills. While these ventures resulted from the serious shortage of 
local milling facilities and not the activities of the Manitoba 
grain companies, they did offer the Northern Alberta farmer an al¬ 
ternative method for disposing of part of his crop. The first step 
toward cooperative milling in the Edmonton district seems to have 

been taken by the former Patron leader, Daniel Maloney, at what 

30 

was reported as a"Farmers ' Co-operative Meeting at Glengarry". On 
February 2, 1898, the farmers of Glengarry, Riviere Qui Barre, and 
Morinville met at the Ryan farm to see if they might not build a 
grist mill to serve their needs. Maloney, who was also the sitting 
M. L. A., acted as chairman and explained to the meeting the re¬ 
quisites of a joint-stock company. After some discussion in which 
the charge was made that the farmers "were at present the slaves 

of the manufacturers, and not the least burden that they had to 

31 

bear was set on their shoulders by the mills now operating", the 

decision was made to issue shares with the value of twenty dollars 

each. No stockholder, however, could own more than ten shares. 

It was not easy, apparently, to secure share subscriptions 

for the proposed Glengarry mill. On April 2, 1898, at a farm 

meeting held in the Glengarry school, the chairman, Daniel Maloney, 

32 

admitted that farmers usually "were suspicious of new practices". 
In defending his conviction that the farming population should not 


. 

r 

f 
















. 






« 




. 













3. 







< c 





< 


■ 






. 



. . 

e 











. 


{ 

C c 

c 


be fearful of organization as a joint-stock company, Maloney 
pointed out that only unity would bring strength to a rural com¬ 
munity. Part of the difficulty in securing support for the project, 
however, seems to have arisen from a dispute over the location of 
the farmers 1 mill. At the meeting on April 2, St. Albert and Edmon¬ 
ton were proposed as building sites, but no decision seems to have 
33 

been reached. The newspaper record during the ensuing months would 
indicate that the project was shelved, but the elaborate organiza¬ 
tion which took place in December, 1898, to take up the question 
of a farmer-owned mill at Edmonton points to wide and active dis¬ 
cussion during the preceding summer. At a farmers* meeting in Ed¬ 
monton on December 10, 1898, which was held "to discuss means of 

34 

remedying the present low price of grain", a proposal to build a 
farmers* mill was brought forward after a resolution concerning 
C. P. R. freight rates had been passed. It was agreed that on De¬ 
cember 27, 1898, a committee of twenty-six Northern Alberta far¬ 
mers would meet to consider all aspects of the mill issue. 

Although many farming communities were represented on this 
committee, some rural centres seem to have decided late in 1898 to 
go ahead with local milling ventures separate to the Edmonton pro¬ 
ject. No competition with the latter, though, seems to have been 
intended or expected, since a number of farmers supported both the 
local and the Edmonton enterprise. In this way the quarrel over 
location was ended. On December 22, 1898, the farmers of Morin- 

ville were reported as trying to form their own company for "a 

35 

flour roller mill of 50 barrels a day capacity", an enterprise 

which became a reality with the incorporation of the Morinville 

36 

Milling and Elevator Company in the spring of 1899. December, 1898, 
was also the month in which Fort Saskatchewan farmers decided to 






« 

< ' 

» 




























t 












' 








c 









































. 

















. 

















53 


proceed with a cooperative mill venture, and early in January, 
1899, it was reported in reference to a public meeting in the Bea¬ 
ver Creek school that, "The mill excitement is as great at Edna as 

37 

at other centres of population in the Edmonton district"* Mean¬ 
while, the Edmonton meeting scheduled for December 27, 1898, was 
held as planned and tentative arrangements were made for the or¬ 
ganization of a farmer-owned joint-stock company to be called the 

38 

Farmer’s Milling and Elevator Company of North Alberta. 

Only two of the mill projects discussed late in 1898 and 
early in 1899 were actually built. These were the Morinville 
Milling and Elevator Company, previously mentioned, and the Far¬ 
mers’ Milling Company of Fort Saskatchewan. In July, 1899, the 

latter received its formal Incorporation and a board of directors 
39 

was elected. This company, which represented a curious combination 

of cooperative and joint-stock company principles, appears to have 

been fairly successful In Its operations, but a disastrous fire on 

January 16, 1901, put a sudden end to an unusual farmer-owned 

40 

business enterprise. The shareholders made an effort to re-build, 

but, owing to a failure to cover the former structure by adequate 

insurance, they found themselves unequal to the financial strain 
41 

involved. Less than two months later the property of the burned- 

out company was purchased by a private investor and a new charter 

of incorporation, which retained none of the former cooperative 

42 

principles, was secured. 

The Morinville Milling and Elevator Company did not last much 
longer than its Fort Saskatchewan counterpart, even though the 
mill erected by the farmer-owners Is still standing at the time of 
writing. According to Caspar Lavallee, one of the shareholders, 
the project was beset with financial problems from its very be- 




■ I 


. ' 
















« 






. 








< 




. 

















« 



C 

{ 

♦ 

C 




H 








■ 










54 

ginning. Owing to a shortage of money in the district, contribu¬ 
tions of labor and lumber were accepted as payment for share cer¬ 
tificates, and throughout its existence this backward financial 

condition of the Morinville area made it extremely difficult for 

43 

the mill to operate in competition with more wealthy rivals. The 

mill was bought out in 190E by a group of investors which in- 

44 

eluded J. A. Powell, the purchaser of the ill-fated Fort Saskat- 

45 

chewan milling enterprise. 

With the collapse of the Fort Saskatchewan and Morinville 

projects, the "mill excitement" was regarded, no doubt, as having 

ended in complete and dismal failure. Yet in retrospect one sees, 

rising on the ashes of so many ruined hopes, the massive outlines 

of the grain elevators of such farmer-owned and U. F. A.-supported 

enterprises as the Alberta Farmers* Go-operative Elevator Company 

46 

and the Alberta Wheat Pool. 


It was against the background of rising discord between far¬ 
mer and grain buyer in Northern Alberta that Frank Oliver reported 
in full in the columns of The Bulletin the trials and tribulations 
which attended the progress of the second Douglas bill through the 
House of Commons in the spring of 1899. This bill, which amplified 
the terms of its predecessor and which led ultimately to the monu¬ 
mental Manitoba Grain Act, sought once more to restore the flat 
warehouse to its former position in the western grain trade. The 
bill, however, was much more upsetting to the elevator interests 
which had worked for the rejection of the previous bill in that it 
proposed to appoint a chief inspector who would supervise the 

storage and transit of grain in Western Canada and who also would 

47 

control the weights and dockages recorded in all grain elevators. 










€ 












' 































55 


Such a measure was now as of much interest to the Alberta farmer 

as it was to his Manitoba counterpart who had quarrelled with 

grain companies as far back as the early 1880*s. 

Oliver's colorful and caustic commentary on the vicissitudes 

of the second Douglas bill in the House of Commons indicated the 

extent to which the elevator and railway interests were prepared 

to go "to preserve the monopoly at present existing in the western 
48 

grain trade"* "It was", he wrote, "a sight to cause gods and men 
to weep to see this aggregation of philanthropists, led on by 
R. P. Roblin and N* Bawlf, protest before high heaven their 
anxiety to protect the western farmer from the ruin that must 

49 

overtake him with free competition in the purchase of his grain"* 

According to the Alberta M. P., the sole argument advanced by 

these "philanthropists" to prove their point "was that they did 

50 

not want competition", even though the bill in question only asked 

"that the farmers of Western Canada be accorded the most elemen- 

51 

tary rights of private citizens"* Regretfully, Oliver reported 

later that the second Douglas bill "was thrown down with the usual 

dull sickening thud by the special committee appointed to deal 
52 

with it"* As on the former occasion, "A large contingent of the 

grain trade philanthropists were on hand" while both liberals and 

conservatives "stood up manfully with voice and vote to protect the 

western farmer from the consequences of a mistaken Idea that he 

ought to have a free competitive market for the sale of his pro- 
53 

duce"* Oliver was so bitter over the result that he charged the 

agents of "the combined monopolies of railways, banks and elevator 

owners" with being merely present "to attend the funeral" since 

54 

"the corpse had already been arranged for"* "The members of the 
committee", he wrote, "rejected general statements as to existing 








? 

, t 


















«. 












- 












4 

; 

. 

. 










. 


















56 


abuses because they were not particular instances, and they re¬ 
jected evidence of instances of abuses because they were only 

55 

single cases and did not necessarily prove a general condition”. 

Owing to the presence of three cabinet ministers on the committee, 

the fiery editor of The Bulletin maintained further that it was 

both "idle to deny” and impossible to excuse” the responsibility 

56 

of the Laurier Government for the decisions reached. 

In fairness to the parliamentary committee appointed to con¬ 
sider the second Douglas bill, it should be mentioned that the 

committee members had approved supervision of the western grain 

57 

trade by a government inspector. Only the clause dealing with flat 

warehouses had been rejected. Douglas, however, considered this 

clause so vital that he resorted to the public press to stir up 

popular indignation over the issue. Both The Winnipeg Tribune and 

The Toronto Telegram , accordingly, gave special prominence to such 

accusations concerning the committee’s action as the following: 

It is a terrible blow to our whole West and, of 
course, we know where to place the blame. It was the 
cold steel of Clifford Sifton that did it—the mis¬ 
chievous scheming of Clifford Sifton is the cause of 
our defeat. 58 

The Winnipeg Tribune heightened the effect of this attack upon the 
Minister of the Interior by adding some editorial remarks con¬ 
cerning the influential grain merchants who, it claimed, had dic¬ 
tated the result by travelling to Ottawa and making certain repre- 

59 

sentations there "in private” to the "right” people. The Toronto 

Telegram went even further with the pointed assertion that Sifton, 

in an effort to crush the flat warehouse clause of the Douglas 

bill, had selected six eastern members for the special committee 

who could be counted upon to protect the corporation interests 
60 

involved. Despite Sifton’s cavalier treatment of these charges 

















■ 











■ 
















. 





















« 








C 









■ 

















i 


57 

against him when speaking in the House on June 3, 1899, the 

Laurier Government realized that certain political dangers might 

he encountered if western complaints over the grain shipment issue 

61 

continued to he ignored. In July, therefore, Sifton announced he 
had "decided to recommend the appointment of an independent com¬ 
mission to look into the complaints of farmers in regard to ele- 

62 

vators in Manitoba and the North-west”. Sifton promised the House 

of Commons that the proposed royal commission would be composed of 

men thoroughly independent of the interests involved in the grain 

transit quarrel so that an unbiased picture of the situation in 

the West could be obtained. The commission, moreover, would work 

during the parliamentary recess so that whatever legislation was 

63 

found necessary could be introduced at the next session. 


On October 7, 1899, the federal government announced the mem¬ 
bership and the purposes of the royal commission which Sifton had 
discussed the preceding July. The notice of the hearings to be 
held by the commission, which was distributed throughout Manitoba 
and the Territories, referred to the commissioners as having been 
"appointed by his excellency the governor-general-in-council to 
Inquire into and report upon certain alleged irregularities which 

are claimed to exist In the shipping and transportation of grain 

64 

from the province of Manitoba and the Northwest Territories”* 
while the accusations outlined In the terms of reference for par¬ 
ticular Investigation by the royal commission were listed as fol¬ 
lows: 

1st.—That the vendor of grain is at present sub¬ 
jected to unfair and excessive dockage of grain at the 
time of sale. 

2nd.—That doubts exist as to the fairness of the 



: ... V / ;; 






c 


- 










. 


. 






. 








■ 


















. 













58 


weights allowed or used by owners of elevators. 

3rd.—That the owners of elevators enjoy a monopoly 
in the purchase of grain by refusing to permit the 
erection of flat warehouses where standard elevators are 
situated, and are able to keep grain below its true mar¬ 
ket value, to their own benefit and the disadvantage of 
others, who are specially interested in the grain trade, 
and of the public generally. 65 

The notice concluded, however, with the statement that the com¬ 
missioners had been authorized to take evidence concerning "any 

66 

other grievances or subjects connected with the said grain trade". 

From October 21, 1899, to February 8, 1900, the royal com¬ 
mission on the western grain trade held eagerly-awaited hearings 
at twenty-two points all the way from Edmonton to Fort William. 

The first hearing was held at Edmonton where the evidence pre¬ 
sented to the commissioners reflected the growing conflict between 
farmer and grain buyer in Alberta. It is important to note, though, 
that the flat warehouse had not yet arisen as an issue in this 
area. As The Bulletin pointed out In October, 1899: 

....There having been no agreement between the railway 
company and the elevator men on the G. & E. line, the 
company have so far made no restrictions as to shipment 
of grain at any point, whether an elevator was there or 

not.... 


Edmonton is probably the most important single point 
of direct shipment In the whole country. We have always 
enjoyed the privilege of shipping in any way that the 
shipper thought best.... But we want the present condi¬ 
tion continued. Looking to the mines of British Columbia 
as a market, there are openings for private dealers here 
as there are not in the solely wheat growing regions, 
having only the market at Fort William.... 67 

However, the other sources of western agrarian unrest, which had 

become inextricably bound up with the grain shipment issue, were 

already causing trouble in the Edmonton district. Reference has 

been made previously to the controversy over the grading of Ladoga 

wheat, while a G. P. R. announcement issued less than two weeks 







‘ 










I 


■ 




















, 




















' 











.... 

« 

_ 















59 


before the sitting of the grain trade commission in Edmonton gave 
the farmers of the district additional cause for complaint when 
they made their submissions to the commissioners. This announce¬ 
ment was to the effect that, unless freight cars were loaded or 

unloaded within twenty-four hours of arrival, demurrage would be 

68 

charged at the rate of two dollars per day. Only five days before 
the sitting of the royal commission in Edmonton, The Bulletin came 
out with an angry editorial denouncing this charge as quite un¬ 
necessary in Strathcona since enough cars loaded with merchandise 

would be arriving until Christmas to provide for the grain being 
69 

exported. Pointing out that Edmonton shippers required more time 
because of the ferrying problem across the river, The Bulletin al¬ 
so noted: 

....As the larger part of the grain going from here is 
for sale in British Columbia, and only goes forward as 
ordered, there is not that tremendous rush to get it out 
before navigation closes that prevails in the purely 
wheat growing districts. It is therefore at all times 
easier and more economical for the company to handle 
grain from this point than from any other in the west— 
on account of so seldom having to bring in empties. 

....the more the farmer gets for his grain the more mer¬ 
chandise he can and will buy, and the more high class, 
and therefore profitable, freight the company will have 
to haul.... To allow only 24 hours is to strike a severe 
blow at the price of the principal crop of the district. 70 

Despite these and other grievances of the farming community around 
Edmonton, the attendance on October 21, 1899, at the hearing of 
the royal commission was not very large. The main reason for this, 
of course, was the extremely short notice of the sitting that Ed¬ 
monton necessarily had to receive, owing to its selection as the 
starting point of the commission’s itinerary. The chairman, in 
opening the hearing, explained that the decision to give Northern 
Alberta less time for preparation was based on the lack of a 


























; 


.... 

O C 














. 














o < . 




< 

• «' ' ‘ f ' 



















60 


71 

quarrel there over shipment through elevators. Nevertheless, nine 
farmers and three grain dealers were present, and their represen¬ 
tations to the commissioners seem to have included all the impor¬ 
tant issues affecting the Alberta grain trade in the fall of 1899* 
The following summary of the farmers r submissions, which appeared 
in The Bulletin , is particularly enlightening on current agrarian 
discontent in the Edmonton district: 

Although there were from four to six buyers on the 
market for wheat there was apparently no active competi¬ 
tion. In the case of wheat the bid of the first buyer 
was seldom or never raised. All agreed on this point, 
which to their mind was evidence of an understanding 
amongst the buyers. 

Several of the farmers complained of unfairness of 
the weights, giving instances. Some thought a town weigh 
scale would be a sufficient remedy. Others thought a 
close government inspection would be best. Still others 
thought the best way was for the farmer to have scales 
of his own. One instance was of a man losing thirteen 
bushels on two loads. The next day when the buyer knew 
that he had purchased a set of scales he was given two 
pounds over the weight shown by his own scales. 

The difference In the price of No. 1 and No. 2 grain 
on the Edmonton market was to 8# while the difference 
at Fort William was only 2-j£ to 3#. 

The farmer who was in a position to ship grain on his 
own account could generally get about what it was worth 
from the local buyers, sometimes getting five cents a 
bushel more than his neighbor with equally as good grain 
who it was known could not ship. 

One farmer who had arranged to ship a car on his own 
account found the difference between what he was offered 
on the Edmonton market and what he was offered at Fort 
William selling by sample was 5# a bushel. He did not 
ship because he had agreed with an elevator owner to 
clean the grain for a cent a bushel. After he had put 
half a car into the elevator he found that it had been 
mixed with other wheat, compelling him to sell to the 
elevator man at his own price. He sold the balance of 
the car without shipment. He was present when a neighbor 
who was shipping a car was offered a bushel more by a 
local dealer when the grain was in the car, than the 
neighbor could get for it by single load before the 
dealer thought that the farmer could or would ship him¬ 
self. 

























. 








5 

, 


- 

. 











. 


. 

• . i 





















61 


All agreed that the privilege of free shipment was 
valuable, whether exercised or not, as it enabled the 
farmer to some extent to hold the buyers in check. 

The limit formerly allowed for loading a car was two 
days, and was frequently exceeded without objection by 
the company. Recently the time for loading had been cut 
down to 24 hours. All agreed that it was practically im¬ 
possible for a farmer to load a car within 24 hours 
after its arrival, out of which had to be taken the time 
required by him to get notice of the arrival of the car* 
Forty-eight hours was necessary if the privilege of 
loading direct to cars was to be of any practical value 
to the farmer. 

All expressed themselves satisfied with the existence 
of the right to load cars direct from wagons or from flat 
warehouses, provided a reasonable time limit were al¬ 
lowed, and would object strongly to regulations com¬ 
pelling them to handle their grain through elevators only. 

From flat warehouses situated directly at the track 
cars could be loaded in 24 hours without serious diffi¬ 
culty. The erection of platforms at sidings would be of 
great assistance in loading grain from wagons direct to 
cars. 72 

The Edmonton grain buyers, who appeared before the royal com¬ 
mission, seem to have confined their submissions to the twenty- 
four hour demurrage order of the G. P. R. which, they felt, "would 

practically drive them out of business, owing to the distance from 

73 

the station and the difficulty of crossing the river". To compel 

them to maintain warehouses on both sides of the Saskatchewan so 

that cars could be loaded in twenty-four hours "would increase the 

74 

expense which would come off the farmer’s price". Otherwise, the 
arguments advanced by the Edmonton grain buyers closely paralleled 
those that appeared in the Bulletin editorial on the demurrage 
question. It is significant that only nine days after the Edmonton 
sitting of the royal commission a body of G. P. R. officials ar¬ 
rived in Strathcona and offered the following concessions for the 
receipt of freight: 

24 hours for Strathcona dealers. 

48 " " Edmonton ” 











- 








t 

. 








. 


. 


' 







. 


« 
















































62 

72 hours for Fort Saskatchewan, St. Albert, and other 

outlying points. 75 

Upon the completion of the remaining sessions of the grain 
trade commission, a report was presented in March, 1900, to the 
federal government in which the commissioners made clear their 
conviction "that proper relief from the possibility of being com¬ 
pelled to sell under value and of being unduly docked for cleaning 

is only to be had by giving the fullest obtainable freedom in the 

76 

way of shipping and selling grain". They, accordingly, recommended 
that the railroads be compelled to furnish cars to those farmers 
who wished to ship their own grain, that loading platforms be per¬ 
mitted at railway shipping points to expedite matters for these 
farmers, that flat warehouses be allowed to continue their opera¬ 
tions without hindrance, that efforts be made to increase trans¬ 
portation facilities during October and November, that a law be 
passed to Gompel elevator and warehouse owners to guarantee the 
grades and weights of a farmer’s grain, and that a government of¬ 
ficial be appointed to have complete authority over all grain 
transactions in the West. Careful study of these recommendations 
readily indicate why the Manitoba Grain Act, which was based large¬ 
ly upon them, became the Magna Carta of the prairie farmer. 

As would be expected, the passage of "the grain bill" through 
the House of Commons was a stormy affair which resulted not only 
in a number of amendments but in an even larger number of frayed 
tempers. Frank Oliver, who clashed with Laurier on the issues in¬ 
volved in the bill and who charged both the latter and Tupper with 
trying to please the G. P. R. on the elevator question, described 

the proceedings for his readers as "one of the greatest jokes on 

77 

the western country that has yet been recorded". "The funny part 


























' • 





























. 















, 







t 


' 


63 


of the affair 1 *, he wrote, W was that while the farmers of the west 
considered that they were the sufferers and were being robbed by 
reason of the prohibition of free buying and selling of grain, the 
minister of inland revenue, the premier and the leader of the op¬ 
position. . .declared that the farmers were...taking the part of 

socialists or robbers and attempting to confiscate the property of 
78 

the G. P. R.” The arguments used by the Minister of Inland Revenue 

in particular were singled out in Oliver’s report to The Bulletin 

as ”a style of argument not worthy of the petty-foggery of a 

79 

police court, to say nothing of the House”. Although the Alberta 
M. P. calculated from the findings of the grain commission that 
the elevator monopoly had cost western farmers more than $500,000 
in 189S, both Laurier and his Minister of Inland Revenue claimed 
it would be ”confiscation and socialism” to compel the G. P. R. 

80 

”to allow accommodation for flat warehouses on its right of way”. 

”This willingness to do dirty work for the C. P. R.”, Oliver 

81 

wrote, ”is not a hopeful sign”. However, when the Manitoba Grain 
Act finally became law, he endorsed the measure as the best that 
could be obtained under the circumstances then prevailing in Ot¬ 
tawa, and even cited the Act a few months later during the 1900 
federal election campaign as a reason for voting Liberal. In a po¬ 
litical meeting held in the Ross Hall, Strathcona, in September, 
1900, he told his listeners, ”Xf they liked elevator monopoly and 
the other abuses complained of, they know how to have them con¬ 
tinued, all they had to do was to return a conservative govern- 
82 

ment”. 

By the terms of the Manitoba Grain Act a Warehouse Com¬ 
missioner with headquarters at Winnipeg was appointed to supervise 
the grain trade west of Fort William. Charles G. Castle, a farmer, 



. ■ . ■ 1 

■ 



; 










. 

■ 









. 








C 

t - > 

* 

t 

* 



64 

who had served on the western grain trade commission, was given 
this important post and in his new capacity virtually was em¬ 
powered "to function as an attorney-general for the grain 
83 

growers". The wide powers given to the Warehouse Commissioner in¬ 
cluded: licensing and bonding of all operators of country and ter¬ 
minal elevators; control over the shipping and storage of grain in 
and out of elevators and cars; investigation of all complaints 
concerning incorrect weighing or grading, excessive dockage, 
failure to supply freight cars within a reasonable time, or any 
other form of fraud or intimidation connected with the grain 

trade; and institution of legal proceedings at government expense 

84 

"whenever he considered a case proper therefor". Under the Ware¬ 
house Commissioner's supervision, moreover, government weigh- 
masters were to be located at the principal shipping points. 
Several other provisions of the Act were aimed particularly at 
giving the farmer the greatest possible freedom in the shipment 
and selling of his grain. Farmers were specifically given the 
right, if they so desired, to ship through a flat warehouse or by 
loading their own cars. In order to facilitate the latter alterna¬ 
tive, the Act called for the construction of a loading platform 
upon the written request of ten or more farmers who lived within 
twenty miles of a shipping point. No charge was to be levied by a 
railway company against the farmers either for the building of the 
platform or for its use. Demurrage, however, could be assessed if 
a farmer took more than twenty-four hours to load a car allotted 
to him. In this connection, it should be noted that the Act re¬ 
quired the railway companies operating in the West to supply cars 
without discrimination, no matter whether the cars requisitioned 
were to be loaded from a standard elevator, a loading platform, or 


. 























« 






' 















. 

































£ 


« 

tf 





65 


a flat warehouse. With regard to the latter, it was provided fur¬ 
ther that, in the case of farmers too far away from a shipping 
point to load cars without incurring demurrage, the Warehouse Com¬ 
missioner, upon the written application of ten or more farmers 
living within forty miles of a shipping point, would authorize the 
construction of a flat warehouse with a capacity of not less than 
3,000 bushels. In order that a farmer might accumulate a carload 
of grain in the warehouse at a lower handling charge than was 
possible in a standard elevator and at the same time preserve the 
identity of his grain, he was allowed five clear days to fill the 
warehouse bin assigned to him. However, if more than one flat 

warehouse were allowed at any shipping point, the farmers then 

85 

would have to pay for the site and the trackage required. The 
Manitoba Grain Act also prescribed a whole series of standard 
forms to govern the buying, selling, and storage of grain in the 
West. These included grain-purchase tickets, graded-storage 
tickets, "special-bin" receipts, and flat-warehouse receipts. Re¬ 
turns were required, at the discretion of the Warehouse Com¬ 
missioner, of the amount of grain handled and stored, the grades 
and weights in and out, etc., in any country elevator. Terminal 

elevators, meanwhile, were not only forbidden to mix grades, but 

86 

had to file weekly reports of the quantity of each grade stored. 

Coming as it did at the opening of the twentieth century, the 
Manitoba Grain Act seemed the threshold of a new era in the 
Canadian West. This agrarian Magna Carta appeared, indeed, to mark 
the close of the farm unrest in Manitoba and the Territories that 
had been slowly developing since the early 1880 f s. Actually, it 
did no more than end the first phase of the western farm revolt. 
Unforeseen difficulties in the enforcement of the Act gave rise to 












. , 

. 

. 




< 

















. 





















. 

" ii 

t 1 1 t | 










, 








66 


an era of rural discontent which culminated in the political 
prairie fire of the 1920*s. The legislative endeavor to control 
the highly technical and widespread economic activities coming 
within the scope of the Act, involved, moreover, various un¬ 
avoidable complexities which finally convinced many farmers they 
should turn to the cooperative organization of grain elevators. 


As far reaching as the Manitoba Grain Act was in bringing the 
western grain trade under strict legislative supervision, it was 
not broad enough to obviate the circumstances leading to the oats 
controversy which shook the Edmonton farming community late in 

1901. This controversy, which lasted well into the early months of 

1902, caused the Northern Alberta farmer to conflict more sharply 
with the Winnipeg grain interests than any of the conditions that 
had given rise to the Manitoba Grain Act, 

The origins of the oats trouble in the Edmonton district were 

nearly as strange as the controversy itself. On December 4, 1901, 

the Edmonton grain buyers suddenly stopped their purchases of oats 

without a warning of any kind. As far back as December 7, 1900, 

there had been rumblings amongst the farmers of the district con- 

87 

cerning the existence of an oats combine in Edmonton, but now they 
were sure of market manipulation by both the local buyers and 
their overlords in Winnipeg. On December 2 and 3, 1901, the price 
paid in Edmonton for oats had varied from twenty-six to twenty- 
eight cents, a happy state of affairs which was simply a continua¬ 
tion of the unexplained "boom** in oats that had prevailed through- 

88 

out the previous November. In the minds of some observers, however, 
there was a sinister side to the sudden generosity of the grain 
trade toward the oats producer. On November 11, 1901, Frank Oliver, 



















4 



















67 


in taking note of what was going on in the local oats market, 

voiced a suspicion that it was "an effort on the part of the big 

Manitoba grain combine to prevent the government contract from 
89 

being filled". The government contract in question was an agree¬ 
ment Canada had made with the British War Ministry to supply oats 
for use in South Africa. By paying higher prices than called for 
in this agreement, Oliver suggested, the grain interests were 
hoping the contract would not be filled in time and the letting of 
such contracts would be discredited in future. The balance of the 
Alberta crop would then be bought up by the Winnipeg combine at 
whatever prices they cared to pay. On December 6, his worst sus¬ 
picions quite amply confirmed, the editor of The Bulletin charged: 

There being no natural cause for the drop in the mar¬ 
ket, there must be an artificial one, and it is not far 
to seek. The band of philanthropists composing the Winni¬ 
peg grain combine, who from the moment the government 
contract was signed have exhausted every endeavor to pre¬ 
vent its being filled, knowing that so very little oats 
has yet gone forward on the contract that it is now 
physically impossible to fill it within the time limit, 
have come to the sage conclusion that they don’t have to 
pay high prices any longer and have decided not to. The 
oats which under that contract would have left the conti¬ 
nent and thereby relieved the market to the benefit of 
the holdings remaining in the farmer’s hands are now in 
the hands of the combine to be used to depress the price 
of his remaining holdings to the western producer, while 
supplies can be held back so as to enhance prices to the 
eastern consumer. 90 


The sudden cessation of oats purchases, however, was but one 

facet of the conspiracy that "the grain trade philanthropists" 

were apparently hatching in Winnipeg. On December 3, 1901—just 

one day before the refusal to buy any more local oats—telegrams 

were received in Edmonton from Winnipeg giving notice that the 

Western Grain Standards Board had decided to classify damaged oats 

91 

"as No. 1 Alberta oats and No. 2 Alberta oats". This body, it 













• ? V f. , 


































{ 

' 



















































68 


should be explained, had been set up in 1889 by the federal govern¬ 
ment to determine the standards controlling the annual inspection 
92 

of western grain. It is important to note that the Western Grain 

Standards Board included a considerable representation from the 

grain trade, but later this interest was excluded completely with 

the result that today the Committee on Western Grain Standards, as 

the Board has been known since 1930, is composed mainly of western 
93 

grain producers. The public outcry in December, 1901, that met the 
decision of the original Board to attach the name "Alberta" to all 
damaged western oats can well be imagined. The editorial wrath of 
Frank Oliver knew no bounds in attacking a decision which he main¬ 
tained was so "rotten" that a proper description could "scarcely 
94 

be put in words". Charging that the key men in securing the Board’s 
decision were members of the Winnipeg grain combine, Oliver ob¬ 
served : 

....by applying the name Alberta only to damaged oats 
conveys the idea that the Alberta crop was the chiefly 
damaged crop of the West. This could only have the ef¬ 
fect of injuring the reputation of Alberta oats general¬ 
ly and therefore lowering the price.... As a matter of 
fact both last year and this Alberta oats have been 
quoted in the Winnipeg market at prices above Manitoba 
oats because of their superior quality. The principal 
reason Prof. Robertson had in attempting to supply the 
British war department was to get the superior quality 
of Alberta oats before the outside world. In no other 
part of the continent of America could a contract for 
half a million bushels of oats weighing 38 pounds and 
over to the measured bushel have been filled.... 

....And that a body of supposedly respectable men oc¬ 
cupying a partially official position should use that 
position to depreciate the value of such crop to the 
benefit of themselves and their colleagues constitutes 
a scandal of the first magnitude and shows clearly that 
the responsibility of dealing with grain standards can¬ 
not safely be left to any such body. An immediate demand 
should be made for the revocation of the powers which 
they have so rankly misused. The grades fixed are the 
strongest condemnation of the resolution. To class oats 
weighing 37 pounds to the bushel as injured when 34 
pounds is standard weight reads like a joke if it were 












. 








































. 

.... 






, . « . 












.... 














69 


not such a serious matter,... 95 

The foregoing was but the opening shot in Oliver r s editorial cam¬ 
paign against the controversial ruling of the Western Grain 
Standards Board. On December 9, 1901, he emphasized the implica¬ 
tions one could draw from the lack of an Alberta representative on 
the Board and he also noted the feeling among local farmers that 

the annual wheat grades had been "fixed" regularly for the benefit 

96 

of the grain dealers. On December SO Oliver’s persistent editorial 

campaign gathered fresh momentum when the Winnipeg newspapers were 

scored for maintaining a "conspiracy of silence" concerning "the 

effort of the Manitoba grain combine to unduly depress the price 

of Alberta oats by manipulating the decisions of the western grain 
9? 

standards board". The Winnipeg Commercial , in particular, was 
singled out for a sharp editorial reprimand because, according to 
Oliver, it had "without cause or provocation" gone "out of its way 
to accuse the government 1st of securing the oat contract from the 
war department for political purposes and 2nd of trying to pur¬ 
chase Alberta oats under their market value when 1st, the action 
taken was only in response to urgent requests of the boards of 
trade and business men’s associations of Northern Alberta and 2nd 

when the contract was an important if not the chief cause of the 
98 

advance in price". The editor of The Bulletin concluded, there¬ 
fore, that the purpose of The Commercial "was to uphold the po- 

99 

sition and serve the interests of the Manitoba grain combine". So 
that The Commercial and its Winnipeg contemporaries would not be 
in any possible doubt as to the position of The Bulletin on the 
oats issue, Oliver concluded this editorial with the following 
pointed recapitulation of his remarks during the previous two 


weeks: 







.... 

- 




. 


















< 










. 





















. 




. 
























70 


The allegations of the Bulletin have been and are: 

1. That a combine exists amongst a number of the princi¬ 
pal grain dealing firms having headquarters at Winni¬ 
peg. 

2. That this combine is represented on the Western Grain 
Standards Board. 

3. That the combine used its representation on the 
Standards Board to improperly establish standards in 
respect of Alberta oats. 

4. That the effect of these improper standards was in¬ 
tended to be to depress the price of Alberta oats be¬ 
low their fair market value. 

5. That the standards so improperly established should 
be revoked forthwith by the authority of the inland 
revenue department. 

6. That the board which has allowed its powers to be so 
prostituted should be abolished. 100 

To answer Oliver 1 s repeated editorial attacks, The Winnipeg Com¬ 
mercial endeavored to explain the origin of the decision which had 
caused all the uproar. The other Winnipeg papers, meanwhile, pub¬ 
lished various explanatory articles, but not editorials, on the 
101 

oats controversy. The disputed resolution had been sponsored by 

F. W* Thompson, the manager of the Ogilvie Milling Company and a 

102 

member of the Grain Standards Board for some years. The Ogilvie 

Milling Company, along with several others, had found that when 

shipments of Alberta oats began to arrive in Winnipeg late in 1901 

103 

the oatmeal produced was black in color. Frost was the cause of 
the trouble, but the shipments in question were found quite satis¬ 
factory in every other respect. Sather than label such frosted 

oats as "feed” or "rejected", the Standards Board had created the 

104 

special "Alberta" grades for marketing purposes. To the redoubt¬ 
able Frank Oliver this explanation was, of course, not too con¬ 
vincing, especially when one took into account the fact that all 
damaged western oats were to be labelled "Alberta". Since the 
Ogilvie Milling Company had become involved in the controversy, he 
pointed out that their oatmeal mill was unable to run full-time 


















. 

. 

. 






. 






. 
























* 



. 








< 

















« 


< ■■ •* 









t 




71 


the previous year owing to a shortage of Manitoba oats suitable 
105 

for milling. The Brackman-Ker oatmeal mill in Strathcona, however, 

had run continuously during the same period, a situation which, it 

was suggested, offered sufficient proof of the quality of Northern 

Alberta oats, to say nothing of the demand which extended as far 

106 

away as the Kootenay region. This contrast in the previous opera¬ 
tion of the two mills caused Oliver to remark that damaged Mani¬ 
toba oats would be passed off "under the name of Alberta while 

107 

good Alberta oats will be classed as Manitoba". Oliver, though, 

was not able to deny that some Alberta oats might have been 

touched by frost, but the extent of such damage, he felt, had been 

grossly exaggerated in Winnipeg; frost, moreover, was a natural 

phenomenon not confined to Alberta. To dispose of the explanatory 

articles the other Winnipeg papers had published when it was clear 

The Bulletin was not going to let the oats issue drop, Oliver 

wrote a long sarcastic reply which contained no new arguments, but 

which did conclude with a ringing challenge to the grain combine: 

....Apparently the manipulators of the grain combine 
calculated on Alberta submitting to the rank injustice 
of the standards board rather than risk discussion of 
the question of whether Alberta oats—that is Edmonton 
district oats—were frozen or not. But that was one of 
the numerous miscalculations of the board in this con¬ 
nection. No doubt they are surprised and indignant to 
find that the press and public of Alberta instead of 
submitting cringingly to their rotten decisions call 
them and those who made them by their right names. But 
the combine will run against lots of surprises in their 
endeavor to handle Alberta oats as they have hitherto 
handled Manitoba wheat. The combine is a big institution, 
but this is a big country, and they don’t own all of it 
yet. 108 


Meanwhile, the various interested groups in the Edmonton area 
held meetings to protest the action of the Western Grain Standards 
Board, but the resolutions passed at these meetings were essential- 





' « 










» ; 
















. 








* 

V 



















; 


< 



. 





















.... 

, 

' 

a 

. 

. 


















< . • 

■ 





72 


ly a repetition of the arguments which had appeared in The Bulle¬ 
tin , On December 6, 1901, the Edmonton Board of Trade placed on 

record its emphatic disapproval of the newly-created "Alberta" 

109 

grades for western oats. A few days later the Strathcona Board of 

Trade "decided not to pass any resolution for the benefit of the 

Grain Standards Board until returns showed the effect of their 

110 

grading on the oats market". At a public meeting held in the Edmon¬ 
ton fire hall on December 26, 1901, and presided over by Mayor 

K. W. Mackenzie, a resolution was adopted for transmission to the 

111 

Minister of Inland Revenue. T. W. Lines, the manager of the Brack- 

man-Ker oatmeal mill in Strathcona, informed the meeting that just 

an hour before coming to the fire hall the local grain dealers had 

met in private session and passed a resolution condemning the 

112 

action of the Grain Standards Board. Various grain dealers, far¬ 
mers, and other interested persons followed Lines in addressing 
the gathering, but not much was said or done at this meeting to 
add to the points previously brought out by The Bulletin . James 
McKernan, who suggested a local grain board, emphasized one fact 
which particularly had caused the Strathcona district to resent 
the decision of the Grain Standards Board. In 1900 the South Ed¬ 
monton Agricultural Society had sent an exhibit of local oats to 
the agricultural exposition in Paris, France, which had stood 

113 

first when the oats entries from all over the world were judged. 
John A. McDougall, who moved the resolution passed by the meeting, 
remarked that, "The gentlemen of the standards board would compare 
very favorably with Bret Barters Heathen Chinee for r ways that are 
dark and tricks that are vain 1 ", and, in sponsoring the resolution 
which had been prepared beforehand, he charged that the grain 
dealers on the Board "had committed a pure act of robbery in 



























! 



















< 

t 











•, 

















, 




73 


114 

trying to get our oats at less than their value”* It hardly needs 

115 

to he added that the resolution was carried unanimously* Finally, 

it may he noted that early in 1902 the Wetaskiwin Business Men's 

Association held a meeting on the oats issue and placed itself on 

record as condemning the action of the Western Grain Standards 
116 
Board. 

The fiery editorial dehate between Frank Oliver and The 
Winnipeg Commercial on the Standards Board and its alleged con¬ 
nection with the Manitoba grain combine continued during the early 
months of 1902, but, despite the bitterness of the exchanges which 
took place, no new information was turned up concerning the contro¬ 
versial oats ruling of the Board. The Bulletin , supported by The 

Regina Leader , continued to claim that The Commercial had "been 

117 

found serving the dirty turn of a ring of grain thieves”, while 
the latter paper tried the best it could to justify the decision. 
Late in January, 1902, the Winnipeg Board of Trade, apparently 
goaded into action by the persistent stream of invective from Oli¬ 
ver's pen, forwarded a resolution to the Minister of Trade and 

Commerce calling for a full investigation of the Edmonton charges 

118 

concerning an oats "scandal”. About a month later the Edmonton 

Board of Trade answered this resolution in turn by demanding that 

two Alberta representatives be appointed to the Western Grain 
119 

Standards Board. The federal government, however, had begun al¬ 
ready to do something about the oats troubles in the west. The 
first step was a relaxation by the Department of Agriculture of 

the strict standards which had been set up for the purchase of 

120 

oats to be shipped to South Africa. This, of course, made the ful¬ 
fillment of its contractual obligations in this respect con¬ 
siderably easier. Later, the federal authorities, working in con- 






































? 


. 






« . 









' 








. i . :• 




. 












































< 






74 


junction with the Territorial Department of Agriculture and the 

C. P. R. , found another export outlet for western oats in Austral- 

121 

ia which suffered severe drought in 1902. The last and most im¬ 
portant step was a parliamentary amendment of the general grain 
inspection act with regard to oats raised west of Lake Superior. 

In a report to The Bulletin , published on May 30, 1902, it was ob¬ 
vious that these revised provisions met with the approval of the 
member for Alberta: 

....A new grade of extra No. 1 is established with a 
weight of thirty-eight pounds to the bushel. Grades Nos. 

1, 2 and 3 remain practically as before except that 
black oats cannot now be graded above No. 2. Probably 
the most important feature of the amendments is that 
oats are taken from under the control of the Western 
Grain Standards Board so that hereafter that body of 
philanthropists will not be able to use their official 
positions for the advantage of private speculation, as 
far as oats are concerned. 122 

Despite this fairly prompt correction of a violation of the public 

trust, the suspicion and ill will left in the mind of the Alberta 
123 

farmer by the oats episode of December, 1901, had a significant 
bearing on the emergence of a militant farm movement in the Edmon¬ 
ton district, particularly when it coincided with certain troubles 
arising from the operation of the Manitoba Grain Act. 


1 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 25, 1897, p. 1. 

2 Ibid. , December 30, 1897, p. 4. 

3 Ibid. » January 17, 1898, p. 2. 

4 Wood, Louis Aubrey, A History of Farmers* Movements in Canada , 
Toronto, 1924, p. 123. 

5 The Edmonton Bulletin , September 23, 1897, p. 2. 

6 Buller, A. H. Reginald, Essays on Wheat , New York, 1919, p. 68. 

7 Concerning the standard elevator question, the following ex¬ 
tract from pages 13-4 of Patton, Harald S., Grain Growers* Co¬ 
operation in Western Canada , Cambridge, Mass.., 1928, is in¬ 
formative : 

As the number of grain growers multiplied, and as the 
scale of individual operations expanded, the inadequacy 
of...flat warehouses became acutely apparent. A few 



















... 

■ 











.... 

- - 

.C ■ ; 










■ 


■ 






























. 












t « - 

c 


* 






t 


, 


















75 


wagon-loads flooded their shallow bins, while the slow 
process of loading cars...necessarily restricted the ve¬ 
locity of car circulation.... Similar conditions had been 
met in the American wheat belt by Peavey’s invention of 
the endless cup conveyor, making possible the handling of 
grain in bulk and the utilization of its flowing proper¬ 
ties in binning and loading, through the substitution of 
the elevator for the flat warehouse. With a view to re¬ 
lieving the acute seasonal strain on its limited rolling 
stock, the C. P. R. decided to offer inducements to at¬ 
tract capital and enterprise into the provision of a more 
adequate and expeditious system of initial storage and 
loading. Accordingly the company made it known that to 
any individual or company erecting at any shipping point 
a "standard" elevator of not less than 2.5,000 bushels* 
capacity equipped with steam or gasoline engine and 
cleaning machinery, special concessions would be extended 
in the form of a free lease of site on the railway’s 
property, and of an agreement not to allow cars to be 
loaded through flat warehouses, or direct from farmers* 
wagons, or otherwise than through such elevators. 

8 The nature of the flat warehouse is made clear in the following 
extract from page 55 of Buller’s Essays on Wheat : 

Elevators first came into existence about the year 
1880. Before this time the only receptacles for wheat 
along the railway line were small flat warehouses built 
by grain dealers. Farmers brought their wheat to these 
warehouses in sacks and sold it to the dealers, who 
shipped it in car lots to Winnipeg for sale. The flat 
warehouse was divided into two by a passageway running 
across the middle from the front to the rear, and each 
end was sub-divided into bins. The bottom of the bins was 
on a level with the ground. The machinery consisted of a 
scale in the passageway, a trolley for pulling the sacks, 
and a small four-wheeled grain cart for handling the 
wheat in bulk. The cart was propelled by hand along a 
light rail which ran through the passageway to the rail¬ 
way track. When a dealer wished to ship his grain away, 
he pulled or pushed it to a railway car in his grain 
cart. The handling of grain is much more efficiently done 
by an elevator than by the old flat warehouse, and on 
this account the latter has fallen into disuse. 

9 Woo&, op. oit. . p. 160. 

10 Ibid. , p. 161. 

11 Ibid. 

12 Johnson, Gilbert: "James Moffat Douglas", Saskatchewan 

History, Vol. VII, Ho. 2 (Spring, 1954), pp. 47-50.- 

13 Ibid. 

14 Wood, op. cit. % p. 162. 

15 The Edmonton Bulletin . May 12, 1898, p. 2. 

16 Wood, op. cit. . p. 162. 

17 The Edmonton Bulletin . December 16, 1897, p. 7. 

18 Ibid. , May 12, 1898, p. 2. 




























1 / : 

. . « 

' 

. 













< 

, 

* 

. . 




c 



























. 

. . 




















i 


. 



76 


19 The Edmonton Bulletin , May 19, 1898, p. 2. 

20 Wood, op. cit. , pp. 163-4. 

21 Ibid. , p. 164. 

22 The Edmonton Bulletin , May 19, 1898, p. 4. The memorandum ap¬ 
pealed to Laurier, in the absence of more specific legislation, 
to take such action under the provisions of the Railway Act 
that would ensure the western farmer the right to ship his 
grain under the following conditions: (1) The producer may load 
cars directly from his vehicle by means of suitable platforms 
or otherwise, and may be allowed reasonable time to do so; (2) 
Where flat warehouses do exist or may hereafter be erected, 
grain may be shipped through the same, and no discrimination 
shall be made against such warehouses in favor of the standard 
elevators; (3) Where grain is shipped directly from vehicles no 
charge shall be made by any elevator owner or other person for 
such privilege, and where grain is shipped through flat ware¬ 
houses no person other than the owner of the warehouse shall be 
entitled to make any charge for said privilege; (4) Where the 
supply of cars is insufficient, such cars as are now furnished 
shall be divided equally among the applicants until each has re¬ 
ceived one car, and after that the car shall be distributed in 
proportion to the amount of business transacted. 

23 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 12, 1899, p. 2. 

24 Ibid. 


25 Ibid. 


26 Ibid. 


27 Ibid 


28 Ibid. 


29 Ibid. 


30 Ibid. 


31 Ibid. 


32 Ibid. 


33 Ibid. 


34 Ibid. 


35 Ibid 


36 Ibid. 


37 Ibid 


38 Ibid. 


39 Ibid. 


40 Ibid. 


41 Ibid 


42 Ibid. 


February 13, 1899, p. 2. 


February 14, 1898, p. 
April 11, 1898, p. 2. 


3. 


, December 12, 1898, p. 1. 
, December 22, 1898, p. 3. 
, June 1, 1899, p. 3. 

, January 12, 1899, p. 4. 

, December 29, 1898, p. 2. 
, July 17, 1899, p. 1. 

, January 18, 1901, p. 6. 

, January 21, 1901, p. 6. 

, March 1, 1901, p. 6. 


1 . 


43 Interview with Caspar Lavallee, May 16, 1954. 

44 The Edmonton Bulletin , September 22, 1902, p 

45 Ibid. , March 1, 1901, p. 6. 

46 Despite the brevity of its existence, the Morinville project 
provides an interesting connection with the later U. F. A. Ac¬ 
cording to Caspar Lavallee, seven of the nine directors of the 
Morinville Milling and Elevator Company were members of the 
Society of Equity when that organization expanded its activi¬ 
ties in Northern Alberta. These seven, along with most of the 
other Morinville members of the Society, became U. F. A. sup¬ 
porters after the amalgamation in 1909. The Fort Saskatchewan 
milling enterprise may have had a similar connection with the 
U. F. A., but there seems to be no evidence either to prove or 
disprove such a supposition. 






























c 










c c 





77 


47 

Wood, 

op. cit., p* 

164. 



48 

The Edmonton Bulletin, May 18, 

1899, p. 2. 

49 

Ibid. 

, May 25, 1899 

), p. 4. 



50 

Ibid. 





51 

Ibid. 

, May 18, 1899 

* * P • 2 • 



52 

Ibid. 

, May 29, 1899, p. 2. 



53 

Ibid. 





54 

Ibid. 





55 

Ibid. 





56 

Ibid. 





57 

Wood, 

op. cit., p. 

164. 



58 

Ibid. 





59 

Ibid. 

, pp. 164-5. 




60 

Ibid. 

, p. 165. 




61 

Ibid. 





62 

The Edmonton Bulletin, July 

20 

, 1899, p. 2. 

63 

Ibid. 





64 

Ibid. 

, October 23, 

1899, p. 

2. 


65 

Ibid. 





66 

Ibid. 





67 

Ibid. 

, October 19, 

1899, p. 

2. 


68 

Ibid. 

, October 16, 

1899, p. 

2. 


69 

Ibid. 





70 

Ibid. 





71 

Ibid. 

, October 23, 

1899, p. 

4. 


72 

Ibid. 





73 

Ibid. 





74 

Ibid. 





75 

Ibid. 

, November 2, 

1899, p. 

4. 


76 

Wood, 

op, cit., p. 

166. 




77 The Edmonton Bulletin, June 8, 1900, p. 4. 


78 Ibid, 

79 Ibid. 

80 Ibid. 

81 Ibid. 

82 lbid. , September 28, 1900, p. 6. 

83 Patton, op. cit. , p. 24. 

84 Ibid, 

85 It was the provisions governing flat warehouses that caused so 
much storm and fury in the House of Commons when "the grain 
bill" was being piloted through its various stages by Glifford 
Sifton. The government had intended originally to place the 
minimum capacity of a flat warehouse at 6,000 bushels, but in 
the face of a determined demand to permit the farmers to have 
warehouses of any size they might choose, Sifton reluctantly 
compromised by reducing the minimum capacity to 3,000 bushels. 
But protests against making the farmers financially responsible 


for the construction of additional flat warehouses at a 


shipping point were crushed by the government f s majority in the 
House. 

86 Patton, op. cit. , pp. 23-5; Wood, op. cit. , pp. 166-8. 

87 The Edmonton Bulletin , December 7, 1900, p. 5. 

88 Ibid. , December 6, 1901, p. 2. 

89 Ibid. , November 11, 1901, p. 6. 

90 Ibid. t December 6, 1901, p. 2. 

91 Ibid. 

92 Patton, op, cit. , p. 27. 
















































. 


c 

< 


c 




c 

















c 


t 




c 








' 






c * 



t 



78 


93 MacGibbon, D. A, 
p. 193. 


The Canadian Grain Trade, Toronto, 1932, 


2 . 


95 

Ibid. 





96 

Ibid., 

December 

9 , 

1901, p. 

2. 

97 

Ibid., 

December 

20, 

1901, p. 

2. 

98 

Ibid. 





99 

Ibid. 





100 

Ibid. 





101 

Ibid., 

December 

23, 

1901, p. 

2. 

102 

Ibid., 

December 

20, 

1901, p. 

4. 

103 

Ibid., 

p. 6. 




104 

Ibid. 





105 

Ibid., 

December 

20, 

1901, p. 

4. 

106 

Ibid., 

pp. 2 and 4. 


107 

Ibid., 

p. 4. 




108 

Ibid., 

December 

23, 

1901, p. 

2. 

109 

Ibid., 

December 

9 , 

1901, p. 

3. 

110 

Ibid., 

December 

16, 

1901, p. 

5. 

111 

Ibid., 

December 

27, 

1901, p. 

3. 

112 

Ibid. 





113 

Ibid.; 

it should be 

noted also that 


a news item covering this 
success of the Strathcona oats exhibit may be seen on page 1 


of The Edmonton Bulletin for November 9, 1900. 

114 Ibid. 

115 Ibid. 

116 Ibid. , January 10, 1902, p. 4. 

117 Ibid. , January 6, 1902, pp. 3 and 5. 

118 Ibid. , January 31, 1902, p. 2. 

119 Ibid. , February 28, 1902, p. 5. 

120 Ibid. , December 30, 1901, p. 5. 

121 Ibid. , August 25, 1902, p. 2, and October 27, 1905, p. 3. 

122 Ibid. , May 30, 1902, p. 4. 

123 Interview with Caspar Lavall^e, May 16, 1954. 

































t 




c 


c 


c 


c 
















CHAPTER IV 


THE EMERGENCE OE A MILITANT FARM MOVEMENT IN ALBERTA 

It will be recalled that in the previous chapter an allusion 
was made to certain difficulties which not only interfered with 
the successful operation of the Manitoba Grain Act but caused the 
western farm revolt to enter a second phase. Of these difficulties, 
the seasonal shortage of freight cars was by far the most trouble¬ 
some; indeed, it almost immediately became a hot western issue 

when the crop of 1901 surpassed all expectations as well as all 
1 

previous records. In addition, this shortage was made even more 
acute by the pronounced preference for the loading platform shown 
by those western farmers who avoided dealing with the elevator 

a 

companies. In spite of all parliamentary efforts to save them, 

flat warehouses thus continued to disappear from the western hori- 
3 

zon, but, instead of easing the shipping problems of the C. P. R., 
the corresponding increase in the popularity of the loading plat¬ 
form only served to augment the car allocation problem. It should 
be noted, though, that some of the protective features of the 
Manitoba Grain Act encouraged a considerable body of farmers to 

patronize the elevator companies because of the labor the standard 

4 

elevator saved and the services it made available. However, the 

farmer with one or more car loads of grain to sell was tempted to 

use the loading platform so that he might save eighteen dollars a 

car in elevator charges, receive government grading and dockage, 

and sell on the basis of prevailing spot prices at the Winnipeg 
5 

Grain Exchange. But the loading platform was useless unless the 
railway companies promptly supplied the necessary freight cars. 


















. 













•• ' ; 




















« t 


. 

■ 









■ 


< 




. 



80 


Consequently, the car shortage of 1901, which hit elevator agent 
and farmer alike, revived the western agrarian discontent that had 
led to the passage of the Manitoba Grain Act, Here the farm com¬ 
plaint centred around the alleged preference shown to the elevator 

companies in the allocation of cars at those prairie points where 

6 

they had been requisitioned by both grain buyers and farmers. The 

general atmosphere of suspicion in rural areas created by the 

vagaries of C. P, R, car allotments was darkened further by the 

formation of the North-West Elevator Association. The latter was 

regarded as the twentieth century version of the old Winnipeg 

grain combine that had sought "to bump the bumpkins" prior to the 

parliamentary struggle of J. M. Douglas for government supervision 

of the western grain trade. The new purpose of the reorganized 

grain combine was, according to prairie pundits, the outwitting of 

the government agents responsible for the enforcement of the Mani- 
7 

toba Grain Act. 

By November, 1901, the railway companies were so far behind 

in moving east the western wheat harvest of 60,000,000 bushels 

that the situation was referred to in rural circles as the "wheat 
8 

blockade". The G. P. R., the principal carrier in the Canadian 

West, had only 7,000 freight cars for all purposes in Manitoba and 

the North-West Territories, thus making it impossible to come any- 

9 

where near fulfilling the farm demand for cars. By the end of De¬ 
cember, 1901, both The Bulletin and the farmers of Northern Al¬ 
berta were up in arms over the car shortage which by that time had 
reached the Edmonton district. At the public meeting in the Edmon¬ 
ton fire hall on December 26, 1901, referred to in Chapter III, 
the "wheat blockade" was made the subject of a resolution that 
only took second place in the general discussion to the oats 





e 

" 


e 













■ 















. 




. 














- 

< 





















81 


10 

controversy. It is, however, one of the oddities of western agrar¬ 
ian history that the Edmonton district did not at this critical 
juncture take the lead in organizing a militant farm movement in 
the North-West Territories. Agrarian agitation had been an im¬ 
portant feature of the farm areas surrounding both Edmonton and 
Strathcona as far back as the early 1880’s. In addition, there 
were farmers In Northern Alberta at the time who only a few years 
later were to prove themselves capable farm leaders. There was, 
moreover, a newspaper readily available which time and time again 
had shown itself extremely sympathetic to the cause of the western 
farmer. The hour, too, was certainly at hand. Edmonton was not 
only enraged over the oats ruling of the Western Grain Standards 
Board, but It was seriously inconvenienced as well by the n wheat 
blockade". Despite all these circumstances, from which an or¬ 
ganized farm movement easily could have emerged, it was not at Ed¬ 
monton or Strathcona, but at a town, forty miles east of Regina, 
that the Territorial Grain Growers’ Association had Its origin. 

Whatever the reasons may have been for Alberta’s failure in 
1901 to take the lead in a territorial farm movement, the or¬ 
ganization of an aggressive agrarian association at Indian Head in 
eastern Assiniboia was based on good and sufficient causes. Indian 
Head was at the time one of the principal territorial shipping 

centres and it was, therefore, a leading victim of the "wheat 

11 

blockade". By November, 1901, the shipping situation in the town 
was so bad that only twenty-five per cent of a three-million 

12 

bushel wheat crop had been forwarded to the head of the lakes. Yet 
the farm protest at Indian Head had a relatively inconspicuous be¬ 
ginning. In November, when the blockade was at its peak, the 
secretary of the local agricultural society summoned the members 








c : 



























* 




. 

























‘ 




















82 


to an extraordinary meeting in the town hall to protest the car 
13 

shortage. The meeting was so successful it was not long until a 
new body was planned that would be capable of a much more aggres¬ 
sive program than the local agricultural society. W. R. Motherwell 
and Peter Dayman, inspired by the expressions of farm solidarity 
in the Indian Head town hall, went ahead on their own authority 

and called another farm protest meeting for the afternoon of De- 
14 

cember 18. Since the evening of the same day was to witness a de¬ 
bate between Premier Roblin and Premier Haultain over the rival 

claims of Manitoba and the Territories to a portion of Assiniboia, 

15 

the town of Indian Head was certain to be thronged with farmers. 
The ensuing meeting, which took place in a fanning mill, is one of 
the great historical landmarks of the western farm movement. The 
formation of the Territorial Grain Growers’ Association was en¬ 
dorsed, with Motherwell as provisional president, and a meeting to 

16 

ratify a constitution was agreed upon for January 2, 1902. 

The first annual convention of the Territorial Grain Growers’ 
Association was held at Indian Head only six weeks after the close 
of this constitutional ratification meeting; yet the recruiting of 
new members in East Assiniboia had proceeded so rapidly that by 
February 12, 1902, the opening day of the convention, the Associa¬ 
tion was composed of twelve local branches and four affiliated 

17 

agricultural societies* The convention passed a variety of resolu¬ 
tions dealing with farm marketing problems and ranging all the way 
from censure of the G. P. R. for a shortage of locomotives in the 

west to a demand that wheat be graded according to its milling 
18 

value. The most important resolutions, however, were those ’’whose 

explicit, business like character contrasted significantly with 

19 

the vague and spacious declarations of the old Patrons’ lodges”. 






. 










. 
















« . 




















« 


. 










. 





. 





83 


These resolutions, which shortly became the basis for the 1902 
amendments to the Manitoba Grain Act, read as follows: 

That section 42 of the Manitoba Grain Act be amended 
to empower the Warehouse Commissioner to compelall ^ 
railway companies to erect every loading platfo:nr/JSy the 
said Commissioner within thirty days after said approval 
is given, and in default the Commissioner shall have 
power to impose penalties on such defaulting railway, 
and collect same through the courts, and that this 
amendment come into force on May 1, 1902. 

That railway companies be compelled to provide far¬ 
mers with cars to be loaded direct from vehicles, at all 
stations, irrespective of there being an elevator, ware¬ 
house or loading platform at such station or not. 

That the Grain Act be amended making it the duty of 
the railway agent, when there is a shortage of cars, to 
apportion the available cars in the order in which they 
are applied for, and that in case such cars are misap¬ 
propriated by applicants not entitled to them, the 
penalties of the act be enforced against such parties. 20 

It is, perhaps, not without significance that the wording of the 
parliamentary amendments, just mentioned, bear a striking resem¬ 
blance to that of the foregoing T. G. G. A. resolutions. 

Following the first annual convention the T. G. G. A. member¬ 
ship drive of the preceding six weeks continued to gain momentum. 
By the summer of 1902, the expansion of the Association was such 
that one writer aptly remarks, "All that summer, pacing the rapid¬ 
ly growing wheat, the Territorial Grain Growers* Association 
spread and took root till by harvest time it was standing every¬ 
where in the field, a thrifty and full-headed champion of farmers T 

21 

rights, lacking only the ripening of experience". This rapid rise 

of the T. G. G. A. as a spokesman for the discontented grain 

grower is of tremendous significance in the development of the 

western farm movement. The Manitoba Grain Growers* Association, 

established In March, 1903, was a direct result of the organiza- 

22 

tion of a T. G. G. A. branch at Virden the preceding January* With 


. < ; ' : . >■ - i r ' ■ ■ V : 














t 















« 






















: « 




< ; 




. 








« 


, 













- 














«' 







84 


the formation of the province of Saskatchewan in 1905, the 

T. G. G. A. became, accordingly, the Saskatchewan Grain Growers* 

23 

Association. In Alberta, meanwhile, the T. G. G. A. had taken root 

early in 1905 in the form of a branch at Strathcona organized 

24 

under the leadership of Bice Sheppard. In December, 1905, fol¬ 
lowing the creation of Alberta as a province the preceding Septem¬ 
ber, the Strathcona branch of the T. G. G. A. was renamed the A1- 

25 

berta Farmers* Association. It was in January, 1909, that the 
latter amalgamated with the Canadian Society of Equity to form the 
United Farmers of Alberta. 

By May 19, 1902, the Laurier Government, faced with both a 

parliamentary uproar and general unrest on the prairies over the 

wheat blockade, bowed to the inevitable and introduced a dramatic 

26 

series of amendments to the Manitoba Grain Act. These revisions 

were so extensive that Frank Oliver was led to comment, "What two 

years ago was denounced by the highest authorities as socialism is 

27 

now the law of the land accepted by all 1 *. Even more significant, 

he felt, was the failure of the Manitoba grain combine to release 

the "tide of opposition" which had characterized Its previous re- 

28 

ception of regulatory legislation. All the various amendments to 
the Manitoba Grain Act that became law in the spring of 1902 had 
Important effects on the western grain trade, but three of the re¬ 
visions made fundamental changes In the relations between the 
railway companies and those farmers who did not want to ship their 
grain through standard elevators. Every restriction formerly 
existing on the construction of flat warehouses and loading plat¬ 
forms was now removed. The railway companies, for example, were 
compelled henceforth to permit the erection of any number of flat 
warehouses on their right-of-way that might be required by the 




. J . 

. 






. 








. 








c 
































' 






■ 

. 













85 


Warehouse Commissioner, Loading platforms, moreover, had to be 
built by a railway company within thirty days of receipt of notice 
from the same authority. Of all the amendments to the Manitoba 
Grain Act, however, the most notable was the "book of public 
record", better known to the grain trade as the "car-order book". 
Under this provision of the revised act each railway station agent 
was directed to maintain "a book of public record" in which ap¬ 
plications for freight cars were to be entered and kept for 
examination by any interested party. These applications would be 
filled by the railway company in the order in which they had been 
received, provided that sufficient cars were available to fill all 
orders. If the company did not have sufficient cars to fill all 
orders, then the cars would be divided amongst the applicants in 
such a way that one car would go to each applicant until all were 

supplied. Any remaining cars would be divided equitably amongst 

29 

the applicants according to their requirements. It was the attempt 
by the G. P. R. to ignore this new feature of government pro¬ 
tection for the grain grower that brought the T. G. G. A. one of 
its greatest victories and gave the newly-formed farm organization 
enormous prestige in the west. 

When the crop of 1902 proved to be even greater than the 

record one of the preceding year, western grain shipping difficul- 

50 

ties were intensified. The T. G. G. A. executive, observing that 

the G. P. R. was either unable or unwilling to obey the amended 

car-distribution clauses of the Manitoba Grain Act, laid a formal 

complaint before the Warehouse Commissioner against the station 

agent at Sintaluta, a territorial town now located in the province 
31 

of Saskatchewan. Such a test case for an infraction of the legis¬ 
lative requirements concerning the allotment of cars focused the 




• f 


i 














, 

















' 

■ 

. 


















86 


attention of the west upon the legal proceedings at Sintaluta. The 

resulting conviction of the C. P. R. agent for a violation of the 

Manitoba Grain Act was appealed by the railway company, but the 

Supreme Court upheld the unanimous decision of the three magis- 

32 

trates who presided at the Sintaluta trial. Upon receiving word of 

the higher court’s judgment on the case, the C. P. R. gracefully 

surrendered and immediately ordered all its agents to obey to the 

letter the legal requirements governing the use of the car-order 
33 

book. The prestige the T. G. G. A. now held in the west may well 
be imagined. 

Despite the meteoric rise of the T. G* G. A. as the spokesman 
of the western farmer, its expansion into Alberta and the Edmonton 
district, in particular, was comparatively slow. Reference already 
has been made to Rice Sheppard’s leadership in 1905 in founding 
the Strathcona branch of the T. G. G. A., but why it took three 
years for such a militant farm body to reach this centre of agrar¬ 
ian agitation is not too clear. A partial explanation, at least, 
for the slow progress of the T. G. G. A. throughout Alberta may be 
found in the growth of a farm movement not previously mentioned in 
the published works on western farm unrest* Indeed, the Farmers’ 
Association of Lacombe, later renamed the Farmers’ Association of 
Alberta, may be described as the forgotten forerunner of the 
U. F. A* To tell the story of this body, however, it is necessary 
to glance back briefly at events in Lacombe during the late 1890’s. 

By 1898 a determined band of Lacombe district farmers had be¬ 
come so incensed over the prevailing prices of essential commodi¬ 
ties they called a public meeting for May 28 to discuss the forma- 

34 

tion of a cooperative society. Under the chairmanship of the local 

35 

Justice of the Peace, G. Fletcher, who was also a farmer, the 








. 




„ 

. 






■ 




. 


e 






c 


■ 









. 




. 














. 











87 


meeting examined several forms of cooperative organization and 

finally voted to adopt the Eochdale system advocated by several 

recent settlers who had belonged to cooperative societies in the 

British Isles* A canvas of the farmers of the district was then 

arranged, and, when it was apparent a sufficient number of farmers 

would give their support, a second public meeting was held on 

36 

July 30, 1898, to work out the final details of the project. The 

provisional committee, which was appointed "to commence operations 

37 

so as to catch the fall trade", made its plans on a grand scale. 
Twelve acres of land were purchased to provide space not only for 
a store and other buildings, but to provide pasture for the mem¬ 
bers’ horses and cattle which the committee hoped "to handle in 
38 

the future". In addition, affiliation with the Manchester Whole¬ 
sale Co-operative Society Limited was planned to enable the La- 

combe body "to buy direct from their mills in Lancashire, York- 

39 

shire and elsewhere". It even was anticipated that local beef and 
grain could be exchanged for the textile products shipped by the 
Manchester organization. The Lacombe Co-operative Society, however, 
collapsed in 1899 because of insufficient finances, credit diffi¬ 
culties in dealing with wholesalers, the failure of prospective 

members to support the organization, and the hostility of the 

40 

local banks and merchants. With the sale of the physical assets of 

41 

the society to Andrew Urquhart, a local merchant, this first ef¬ 
fort of the Lacombe farmers to organize seemed a total failure. 

Even for the purposes of the present study, the brief ill- 
fated existence of the Lacombe Co-operative Society would be a 
forgotten incident in the early history of the Alberta farm move¬ 
ment, were it not for the organizational work of Colonel J. J. 

42 

Gregory, the founder of the Farmers’ Association of Alberta. "The 





0 

c ' t 

c c 

. 












■ 




















. 




















• 


. 












' 

. 



• 










88 


Colonel”, as he was familiarly known in the Lacombe district, had 
arrived there in May, 1893, just one month after his future son- 
in-law, Finley B. Watson, settled in the area. Colonel Gregory, 
who was of United Empire Loyalist stock, came from the Niagara 
peninsula, but the spring of 1893 did not mark his first visit to 
Western Canada. Having been a militia officer in Ontario, he had 
served with the rank of colonel in the North-West Rebellion. Al¬ 
though Colonel Gregory returned east at the close of the rebellion 
and remained there for nearly eight years, he could not readily 
forget the prairie country. He came of a family of farmers and 
early in 1893 it seemed to him that breaking virgin prairie in the 
west offered both a challenge and opportunities he would never 
find in Ontario. By 1898, though, "the Colonel" had become con¬ 
vinced Alberta agriculture would not be profitable unless the far¬ 
mer organized to protect his rights. Influenced by Patron coopera¬ 
tive activities in Ontario, Gregory was one of the small group who 
first advocated the formation of the Lacombe Co-operative Society 
and, although this organization finally assumed the form of a 
Rochdale cooperative, he gave it his full and vigorous support. 

However, his son-in-law, who came of an Ontario Patron family, 

whether 

doubted/the Lacombe venture would be successful and remained out¬ 
side the membership. Even though Gregory and Watson differed over 
the feasibility of this cooperative project, the failure of the 
latter did not keep them from trying to promote the formation of 
some sort of farm union to protect the farmer's interests. Since 
both held executive posts In the local agricultural society, their 
efforts in this direction were more effective than would otherwise 
be possible, but several years were to pass before the Farmers' 
Association of Alberta became a reality. 







. 

- 










■ 










« 




















. 














. 












. 










. 















• - ■' ■: • ■' \ " t > 



89 


By the end of 1902 agrarian unrest in Alberta had reached the 
point that Colonel Gregory felt confident more positive steps 
could be taken for the formation of a farm union. In view of the 
successes of the Territorial Grain Growers T Association, it seems 
illogical that Alberta farmers would not be content to establish 
local branches of that body, thus augmenting T. G. G. A. strength 
in the west. Such factors as the distance from Indian Head, the 
feeling that the T. G. G. A. was meant primarily to serve the 
needs of the Assiniboia wheat grower, and a certain degree of pa¬ 
rochial feeling amongst Alberta farmers contributed, apparently, 
to Gregory’s conviction that a locally-centred agrarian organiza¬ 
tion was what the Alberta district farmer wanted. During December, 
1902, Colonel Gregory became so interested in two farmers* letters 
to The Edmonton Bulletin that he made his first contribution to 
the correspondence columns of that newspaper. The first of these 
letters was written by William R. Ball, a close friend of Rice 
Sheppard and later a member successively of the Alberta Farmers’ 

Association, the Canadian Society of Equity, and the United Far- 
43 

mers of Alberta. Ball at that time appears to have been more 

interested in writing to Winnipeg newspapers about farm problems 

44 

than to the Alberta press, but in what seems to have been his 

first letter to The Bulletin he came out in support of a western 

45 

"union of farmers and all the laboring classes”. In advocating 
such a union "for protection against railway and other combines”, 
Ball pointed out: 

All classes of industries are organized. The manu¬ 
facturers of the country have an organization repre¬ 
senting over 1,000 different firms and they are able to 
keep on the duty on foreign-made goods against the 
avowed free trade policy of the government. Brick layers 
are organized and they get five and six dollars a day. 

Railway engineers are organized and they get from $100 














e 

* 

. 


« 



















< 































« 







. 










: 



















90 

to $150 a month. Hailway companies are organized and 
they get about 75# out of every dollar's worth of grain 
the farmers raise.... 46 

The union Ball proposed was "to extend all over the Northwest 

Territories and Manitoba, with headquarters at Regina", and every 

school district was "to be organized into a branch society which 

47 

would meet once a month to discuss our grievances". Just why Ball 

chose to ignore the T. G. G. A. is not clear, unless he considered 

that body incapable of expanding into the farmer-labor coalition 
48 

he suggested. Whatever Ball’s reasons were for sidestepping the 

T. G. G. A., he clearly agreed with its membership on one thing— 

the inadequacies of the C. P. R. in the west. "Our countrymen in 

South Africa", he wrote, "never suffered half the injustice at the 

49 

hands of the Boers that we do from the C. P. R." The thought that 

the profits of railway enterprise might be benefiting a relatively 

small number of stockholders particularly upset Ball. By way of 

contrast, he compared territorial farmers to "a herd of cattle 

50 

driven over the plains by the cowboys". Like the cattle* Ball 
maintained, the farmers did not know their own strength; other¬ 
wise, they "would not be driven by the tens of thousands to be de¬ 
prived of half the proceeds of our toil by a few railroad stock- 

51 

holders without any consideration". The other letter to The Bulle¬ 
tin which attracted Colonel Gregory’s attention appeared a few 
weeks after the Ball outburst and contrasted sharply with it in 
tone and subject matter. T. G. Pearce of Agricola, finding himself 
burdened with inquiries from potential immigrants to the Edmonton 
district, wrote to The Bulletin in an effort to answer all his 
correspondents promptly by a public reply that would serve also to 
dispel the doubts of others contemplating settlement in the area. 
As with all contemporary material addressed to prospective western 




























• t' 





















. 











. 


f 












... 

. c c 










. 


. 
















« 


. 














. 












91 


settlers, the picture that Pearce painted of farming conditions 

and rewards around Edmonton was not likely to dissuade immigrants 

52 

from coming further west than Winnipeg. Such a glowing description 
irked Colonel Gregory as much as he had been pleased by Ball’s de¬ 
mand for a greater degree of agrarian organization in the west. 
Commenting on the two letters in his reply, published on January 3, 
1903, Gregory pointed out first that the subjects discussed by the 
two Edmonton district farmers were "in some respects similar”, but 
"if the writers are of the same opinion on the condition of the 

farmer and his facilities to make monev in this country, their 

53 

letters do not convey that impression". He agreed with Ball that 

"excessive freight rates, railway monopolies and other combines" 

54 

were "obstacles in the way of the farmer’s prosperity". When it 
came to selling his produce, moreover, the farmer had "compara¬ 
tively no protection": 

....The price of whatever he has to sell is governed by 
the great principle of supply and demand, which is the 
correct principle, no doubt, for the earth’s productions# 

If, however, between the railways, the manufacturers and 
retailers, his dollar is clipped on all sides and likely 
to so continue it would perhaps be well for the farmer to 
consider the question of protecting his interests the 
same as other classes, the manufacturer or other branches 
of industry.... 55 

Turning to Pearce’s letter, Gregory observed that its contents 
forced Central Alberta farmers to conclude the Edmonton district 
had "no grievance": 

....The quantities of grain per acre spoken of in the 
letter, the ease with which stock can be produced, and 
the prices and handy marketing facilities in both cases, 
makes a quarter section as good as a gold mine. While we 
are not questioning any of the gentleman’s statements, 
we must confess that our experience has not been nearly 
so flattering. No doubt the farmers of the Edmonton dis¬ 
trict are fortunate In a good local market, more so than 
almost any district in the Territories, which enabled 
the writer to present so favorable a showing.... 56 






► 
























{ ' 

. 









.« 
















: 
















, 




















■ 









































92 


Gregory ended his reply with a brief discussion of the best tempo¬ 
rary solution to the immediate problem of "the low value in grain 
and high freight rates": 

.••.Condense the grain, convert it into butter, beef and 
bacon and save transportation charges. In coarse grain 
there is very little value in pounds and transportation 
charges absorb a very large share of the value, while in 
the animal products of the farm where the value in pounds 
Is far greater the percentage on its value for freight as 
compared with grain is almost nominal. Many of the far¬ 
mers here in Central Alberta are evidently realizing 
their situation, as is shown In more interest being taken 
than ever before in stock feeding and the dairy Industry, 57 

Whatever may have been the truth concerning the contrast in farm 
returns between Northern and Central Alberta in 1902, the rural 
agitation in the Edmonton district, which became very apparent 
early in 1903, contradicted Pearce’s letter. At the same time, 
this agitation, which will be discussed in the next chapter, gave 
further encouragement to Colonel Gregory in his belief that Al¬ 
berta needed a farm movement separate to the organization so 
rapidly gaining strength in the eastern half of the Territories. 
While there was no published reply from Pearce, Ball, or anyone 
else to Gregory, it was not long until the latter took the first 
steps for the founding of the Farmers’ Association of Alberta. 

On April 4, 1903, the organization of the Farmers’ Associa- 

58 

tion of Lacombe was completed. The press at this point loosely re¬ 
ferred to the new body as the Farmers’ Association of Alberta, 
owing to the well-known ambition of the founders to create an ag¬ 
gressive farm union that would go far beyond the Lacombe district, 

but, until branches began to appear elsewhere, this title was not 
59 

formally adopted. Contrary to local expectations, Colonel Gregory 

was not made the president of the association, but the co-founder, 

60 

Finley B. Watson, was elected vice-president. By acting only as 































f . 


















« 













C t. 























, 






93 


one of the two secretaries allowed by the constitution, Gregory 
kept his hands remarkably free for the political objective he al¬ 
ready had hopes the association would be able to achieve. The 
meeting on April 4 seems to have been a very enthusiastic one. The 
Lacombe Advertiser reported the farmers present as "expecting to 

be well repaid both socially and financially" by their new venture 

61 

which they anticipated soon would "become strong and influential". 
By July, 1903, local support for the Farmers* Association had in¬ 
creased to the point that some consideration was given to what po¬ 
sition the membership should take in the next federal election. A 
news release to The Advertiser covering the association’s July 
meeting is informative: 

The Farmers* Association of Alberta is,perhaps, 
making a move in advance of similar organizations in 
other parts of the Dominion, in reserving under their 
constitution the privilege of exercising in elections an 
influence as a body or even making nominations. 

A candidate might be found on either side of the 
house, but it must be the farmer’s interest and country 
first every time, party afterwards.... 

...to guard against any contingency the lecturer at 
the association’s last meeting introduced the subject of 
representation for this district, which was briefly dis¬ 
cussed and left as unfinished business to be taken up at 
the next monthly meeting. 

We might say the aim of the organization is for 
mutual instruction and protection and to forward the 
interests of the farmers in every honorable and legiti¬ 
mate way. 

Some are of the opinion that the association is 
hostile to the tradesman. This is a mistake. You might 
as well say the object of the mercantile association is 
to antagonize the farmer’s interest.... 62 

August, 1903, marked a turning-point in the development of the La¬ 
combe farm body. At the regular meeting held in that month the as¬ 
sociation voted to accept the branch applications already re¬ 
ceived, and, accordingly, appointed F. B. Watson, A. L. Whitten, 










t ■ t 















' 















' 








. 

■ 


















. 




. 














5 

, 










94 


P. Makepeace, and S. H. Welsh, as delegates to assist wherever 

possible in the formation of these and other branches. In view of 

this decision to expand, the formal change of name, previously 

mentioned, was adopted. At the same time the membership felt it 

would be unwise to take up the question of political action until 

the success of the drive for expansion was known. Thus the issue 

of what the F. A. A. should do in the next federal election was 

63 

deferred until the following November. 

By November 7, 1903, the F. A. A. membership campaign had 
been so successful that, upon reviving the issue of political 
action, the main branch of the association voted decisively in 
favor of running a candidate in the new Strathcona federal con¬ 
stituency. Colonel Gregory was chosen unanimously as the F. A. A. 

standard bearer and preliminary preparations were made for an in- 

64 

tensive campaign to secure rural support. The reaction of the pro- 
Liberal, pro-farmer Edmonton Bulletin to this news is of more than 
passing interest. All editorial comment on the Lacombe movement, 
even up to the eve of the 1904 federal elections, was avoided, 
but, according to Finley Watson, the news accounts were colored in 
one small, but important, respect. The following excerpt from The 
Bulletin for December 14, 1903, is a case in point: 

The Farmers’ Alliance, an organization started quite 
recently in Lacombe for the furtherance of the interests 
of farmers, is making itself felt in the Strathcona con¬ 
stituency. A series of meetings have been held and a 
candidate nominated to contest the Strathcona con¬ 
stituency in the approaching Dominion elections. Colonel 
Gregory, Lacombe, was the choice of the convention. 

Colonel Gregory and Messrs. Watson, Makepeace and Kolter- 
man, who are the mainstays of the movement, are now ad¬ 
dressing meetings. Dates and places of meetings have 
been arranged for until Christmas, and it is the inten¬ 
tion of the gentlemen interested to hold meetings to or¬ 
ganize alliances in every part of the constituency. On 
Saturday [December 12] •Finley Watson and H. W. Kolterman, 










< 

J . ■ - c ' 




■ • 


■ 










. 

















, 




. 
























95 


of Lacombe, spent a few hours in Edmonton, being in the 
vicinity of Strathcona arranging meetings. They say 
their movement is being well received by the farmers 
generally. 65 

The use of the word "alliance" in the above and other accounts, 
which appeared in The Bulletin after the F. A. A. decided to go 
into politics, was, according to Watson, an effort to discredit 
the Lacombe movement by identifying it with the ill-fated Farmers* 
Alliance in the United States. Whatever may be the truth of this 
charge, it does seem odd that The Bulletin suddenly was unable to 
call the association by its correct name after the decision to 
enter the federal political arena. On the other hand, the fol¬ 
lowing news report from Lacombe, reprinted in The Bulletin early 
in 1904, publicized the F. A. A. point of view: 

Some of the party wire pullers say the candidature of 
Colonel Gregory will split the parties. Who compose the 
parties in this constituency? The true answer is, *The 
farmers*. We are not divided amongst ourselves to any 
great extent. A few may adhere to their old party, but 
the great majority are for a man of their own. In Mr. 

Gregory we have a man who farms every day in the year, 
gets his living by farming and that alone. Therefore his 
committee appeals to the farmer individually to work to 
secure his return by a large majority. 66 

From the foregoing reports in The Bulletin , it will be apparent 
that no time was lost in organizing the F. A. A. campaign to elect 
Colonel Gregory. Less than a month after his nomination his cam¬ 
paign committee had gone as far north as the towns of Strathcona 
and Edmonton to make arrangements for public gatherings at which 
he would speak. By the middle of December, 1903, "the Colonel" had 

reached Wetaskiwin in the course of his first speaking tour to 
67 

Northern Alberta. On December 19 he addressed a public meeting in 
68 

Leduc, while on December 23 he spoke to a farm gathering in Strath- 
69 

cona. According to Finley Watson, January and most of February, 
1904, were occupied by F. A. A. organizational work at other nor- 







* 


























c 

. 


■ 







. 












C 







. 

























. 

* 


. 







96 


them points during the course of which Gregory spoke as far east 

as Vegreville. On February 23, 1904, "the Colonel" was reported by 

70 

The Bulletin as visiting Edmonton. Two days later he addressed two 

meetings in the Ross Hall, Strathcona, one in the afternoon, the 

71 

other in the evening. Since the latter was a public meeting of 

farmers and "mechanics" which was addressed by members of both 

"the Labor party" and the F. A. A. "on the political and social 

72 

questions of the day", it is not surprising to find that William 

R. Ball, the exponent of a western farmer-labor coalition, was one 

73 

of the evening speakers. The afternoon session was strictly a far¬ 
mers* meeting, with the sole purpose of establishing a branch of 

74 

the F. A. A. in Strathcona. The speakers were Colonel Gregory, 

Makepeace, Ball, J. W. Cluff, and a man named Cook, while the 

75 

chairman was Rice Sheppard. Although the meeting was poorly at¬ 
tended, Gregory did succeed in forming the Strathcona branch of 

the F. A. A.; the initial membership of seven, however, did not 

76 

hold out too much hope for F. A. A. success in that area. Despite 

the subsequent failure of the F. A. A. to take root in Strathcona, 

the afternoon meeting of February 25, 1904, is of much historical 

significance for it proves the existence of a connection between 

the F. A. A. and the work of Rice Sheppard one year later in 

founding the Alberta Farmers* Association. Sheppard*s presence at 

the meeting on February 25, his membership in the F. A. A., and 

his subsequent support of Colonel Gregory in the federal elections 

of 1904 indicates where some of his ideas for organizing an Al- 

77 

berta farm movement originated. 

Unfortunately, practically no newspaper or other records are 
available of Colonel Gregory*s campaign speeches. The Lacombe Ad¬ 
vertiser gave full coverage to his program, but contemporary files 









c 

















. 








* 


■ ? 





. 



























. 










’ 








' 






97 


of this paper are not extant in Lacombe or elsewhere. Except for a 
chance quotation from The Calgary Albertan , The Edmonton Bulletin 
carefully avoided outlining the planks in n the Colonel’s” politi¬ 
cal platform. Other Alberta papers, meanwhile, seem to have paid 
little or no attention to the venture of the F. A. A. into federal 
politics. The quotation from The Albertan , which The Bulletin did 
see fit to publish, referred to a political meeting held in Ponoka 
in July, 1904, and read as follows: 

....Colonel Gregory, the independent candidate, also ad¬ 
dressed the meeting. He spoke in favor of the nationali¬ 
zation of railways, protection for the farmers and 
government loans to farmers, but praised the present 
government for their administration of public affairs. 78 

According to Finley Watson, the principal points Gregory empha¬ 
sized in his campaign were a demand that the federal government 

follow the example of its New Zealand counterpart in making money 

79 

available to farmers at low interest rates, the expansion of co¬ 
operative activities amongst the farming population, an increase 
in the number of government creameries and experimental farms in 
Alberta, and a widening of the market in British Columbia for Al¬ 
berta farm products. Another point in the F. A. A. program is 
difficult to understand when the political nature of Gregory’s 
campaign is taken into account. This was ”a strong British line”, 
as Watson describes it, which aimed to maintain the British con¬ 
nection and ward off all undesirable American influences in 
Western Canada. Gregory and his associates, who were either from 
the British Isles or from United Empire Loyalist families in On¬ 
tario, were upset by the political attitudes of the farmer- 
settlers coming to Central Alberta from the United States. The La¬ 
combe district at the time, Watson claims, was almost entirely 
from Ontario and strongly resented the intrusion of settlers who 









' 






























£ ' •* ' 

























■ 























' 






. 




98 


were not loyal to the British connection. However justified 
Gregory and the F. A. A. may have been in adopting this anti- 
American policy, it certainly did not bring them many votes on No¬ 
vember 3, 1904, and it may have alienated a considerable number of 
voters who otherwise would have supported an independent farm 
candidate. 

The final returns for the Strathcona federal constituency re¬ 
vealed how completely the F. A* A. had failed to capture the po¬ 
litical imagination of Alberta farmers. Compared to the 3,863 
votes for the successful Liberal candidate and the 1,878 ballots 

cast in favor of the Conservative nominee, Colonel Gregory T s 130 
80 

votes made The Bulletin's fears of "a close election" appear ri¬ 
diculous. After such a disaster at the polls the F. A. A. was 
finished as a farm movement. Sven if its leaders had disavowed any 
further political ambitions, farmers still would have been unable 
to take the organization seriously. Needless to say, the collapse 
of the F. A. A. put an end to all thoughts of independent politi¬ 
cal action by Alberta farmers for many years to come. Only the 
social, economic, and political unrest caused by the First World 
War tempted the rural population back into the political arena, 
and even then the decision to go into politics was against the 
personal wishes of the U. F. A. president. The political rebuff 
suffered by the F. A. A. is, indeed, a tribute to the hold the 
two-party system had at that time in the west. It is possible to 
cite other factors for Colonel Gregory's defeat, namely, the anti- 
American touch to his program, the shortage of funds, and the lack 
of the campaign machinery available to the two established parties, 
but, according to Finley Watson, the greatest obstacle confronting 
the F. A. A. campaign committee was the Alberta farmer who was 









' ■ : '■* 




< " 1 


. 


. * « 















. 

. 














« 














■ 

■ 


- 








99 


convinced, he should seek his economic salvation within the pre¬ 
vailing political framework. The influential classes in the towns 
played an important part in holding the average farmer to this 
point of view. In fact, Colonel Gregory, sensing the general rural 
allegiance to the two-party system, was ready several times to 
dissuade the F. A. A. executive from going ahead with its politi¬ 
cal plans. Only the constant urging of his son-in-law to go right 
on with the campaign to see what the farmers really would do on 
the polling day kept "the Colonel" in the electoral fight. Finley 
Watson’s point in his arguments with Gregory on this matter was 
that, even if the election deposit were forfeited, it would he 
worth the expense to find out how loyally Alberta farmers would 
support an independent candidate pledged to serve only their 
Interests. Despite the subsequent blow to all F. A. A. hopes in 
the Strathcona electoral contest, the organizational work involved 
did much to facilitate matters for the A. F. A. and the Society of 
Equity which shortly were to appear on the Alberta farm scene. 


1 Patton, Earaid S., Grain Growers’ Cooperation in Western 
Canada , Cambridge, Mass., 1S28, p. 31. 

2 Wood, Louis Aubrey, A History of Farmers’ Movements in Canada , 
Toronto, 1924, p. 169. 

3 Patton, op. cit. , p. 30. 

4 Ibid. 

5 Ibid. , pp. 30-1. 

6 Ibid. , p. 31. 

7 Ibid. 

8 Wood, o.p. cit. , p. 171. 

9 Ibid. 

10 The Edmonton Bulletin , December 27, 1901, p. 8. 

11 Wood, op. cit. , p. 173. 

12 Ibid. 

13 Ibid. » p. 172. 

14 lbid. , p. 173; Moorhouse, Hopkins, Deep Furrows . Toronto, 1918, 
p. 50. 

15 Wood, op. cit. t pp. 173-4. 

16 Ibid. , p. 174. 

17 Ibid. , p. 175. 

18 Ibid. 





























c 







- 'i : ; ’ 1 :• ’ ,! ' 5 '■ 

■ 

. c 




? ’ 





100 


19 Patton, op. cit. , pp. 34-5. 

20 Ibid. , p. 34. 

21 Moorhouse, op. cit. , p. 53. 

22 Wood, op. cit. , pp. 180-1. 

23 Ibid. t p. 200. 

24 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers f Association, Strath- 
cona Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905. 

25 Ibid. 

26 Wood, op. cit. . p. 176. 

27 The Edmonton Bulletin , May 23, 1902, p. 2. 

28 Ibid. 

29 Ibid. 

30 Patton, op. cit. , p. 35. 

31 Ibid. ; Wood, op. cit. , pp. 179-80; Moorhouse, op. cit. , pp. 

54-5. 

32 Wood, op. cit. , p. 180; Patton, op. cit. , p. 36; Moorhouse, 
op♦ cit. , p. 57. 

33 Patton, op. cit. . p. 36. 

34 The Edmonton Bulletin , August 4, 1898, p. 3. 

35 Interview with Finley Boyd Watson, co-founder of the Farmers’ 
Association of Alberta, November 18, 1954. 

36 The Edmonton Bulletin, August 4, 1898, p. 3. 

37 Ibid. 

38 Ibid. 

39 Ibid. 

40 Interview with F. B. Watson, November 18, 1954. 

41 Interview as above. 

42 Unless otherwise noted, the references to Colonel J. I. Gregory, 
the Lacombe Agricultural Society, the Farmers’ Association of 
Lacombe, and the Farmers’ Association of Alberta are based on 
information obtained in interviews with F. B. Watson on June 4, 
July 4, and November 18, 1954. Exceptional statements of fact, 
however, are confirmed by further reference to the information 
obtained from Finley Watson. 

43 Sheppard, Pice: "What Brought About the Alberta Farmers’ As¬ 
sociation”, an unpublished essay; "Twenty-Five Years in the 
Great North-West”, an unpublished manuscript autobiography. 

44 Interview with A. Balmer Watt, December 14, 1953. 

45 The Edmonton Bulletin , December 1, 1902, p. 7. 

46 Ibid. 

47 Ibid. 

48 In connection with Ball’s idea of a western farmer-labor coali¬ 
tion, it is important to note that he had been a mechanic in 
the United States before coming to Alberta and taking up 
farming. According to George Bevington, from whom this informa¬ 
tion was obtained In an interview on March 4, 1955, Ball was 
more truly a representative of the working class than anyone 
else In the early Alberta farm movement. 

49 The Edmonton Bulletin , December 1, 1902, p. 7. 

50 Ibid. 

51 Ibid. 

52 Ibid.* » December 29, 1902, p. 6. 

53 Ibid. , January 3, 1903, p. 3. 

54 Ibid. 

55 Ibid. 

56 Ibid. 

57 Ibid. 





































« * 


. 




. 








































c 


t « 




, 



101 


58 The Edmonton Bulletin , April 28, 1903, p. 1. 

59 Interview with F. B. Watson, June 4, 1954. 

60 The Bdmonton Bulletin , April 28, 1903, p. 1. 

61 Ibid. 

62 Ibid. , July 20, 1903, pp. 3-4. 

63 Ibid. , August 24, 1903, p. 1; interview with F. 
June 4, 1954. 


64 The Edmonton Bulletin, November 10, 1903, p. 1. 


65 

66 

67 

68 

69 

70 


Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
Ibid., 


Ibid. , 
Ibid. . 

71 Ibid. t 

72 Ibid. 

73 Ibid. , 

74 Ibid. , 

75 

76 


Ibid. 

Ibid. 


December 14, 1903, p. 4. 
January 5, 1904, Supplement. 
December 16, 1903, p. 4. 

1903, p. 8. 

1903, p. 6. 

1904, p. 4. 
1904, p. 4. 


December 22, 
December 21, 
February 23, 
February 24, 


February 

February 

February 


27, 

24, 

27 , 


1904, 

1904, 

1904, 


3. 

4. 
3. 


B. 


Watson, 


77 According to Finley Watson in an interview on June 4, 1954, he 
and Sheppard often argued at meetings of the Northern Alberta 
Old Timers 1 Association as to the origins of the farm movement 
in the province. Sheppard was insistent it started in Strath- 
cona with his formation of a branch of the T. G. G. A. in 1905, 
but Watson was equally insistent the body founded by Gregory in 
1903 deserved this credit. In interviews with others connected 
with the Alberta farm movement, the. author has received the 
unanimous opinion that Sheppard was extremely egotistical about 
the part he had played in originating the A. F. A. and the 
later U. F. A. 

78 The Edmonton Bulletin , July 29, 1904, p. 2. 

79 It is interesting to note that Ball had referred in some detail 
to New Zealand’s farm loan system in the letter which so at¬ 
tracted Colonel Gregory’s attention in December, 1902. 

80 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 19, 1904, p. 8. 

81 Ibid. , November 5, 1904, p. 2. 
























CHAPTER V 


THE ALBERTA FARMERS’ ASSOCIATION AND 
THE SOCIETY OF EQUITY TAKE UP THE CAUSE OF THE ALBERTA FARMER 

The agrarian discontent in the Edmonton district, which early 
in 1905 had played a part In the emergence of the F. A. A*, con¬ 
tinued to grow until a determined group of Strathcona farmers in 
1 

March, 1905, were driven by prevailing agricultural conditions to 
establish a branch of the T. G. G. A. in their community. The com¬ 
manding lead this T. G. G. A. local was to take in the growth of 
the Alberta farm movement far exceeded the expectations of the 
handful of men who founded it. From a small T. G. G. A. branch on 
the Canadian agricultural frontier, the Strathcona body soon be™ 
came the driving force behind the Alberta Farmers’ Association by 

virtue of Its considerable contributions of money and organizers 

2 

to the work of expansion throughout the province. The Strathcona 
branch of the A. F. A., moreover, made a significant contribution 
in 1908 to the negotiations leading to the successful amalgamation 
with the Canadian Society of Equity In January, 1909. It was only 
fitting, therefore, that the newly-created United Farmers of Al¬ 
berta, which emerged from this amalgamation convention, should de¬ 
cide that Its ’’Union No. 1” would be located in Strathcona. 

Just as the story of the Lacombe farm protest movement of 
1903-4 revolves about the unique personality of Colonel Gregory, 
the rise of the Alberta Farmers’ Association cannot be told with¬ 
out reference to the controversial figure of Rice Sheppard. This 

Strathcona farmer, who had arrived in the district from England In 
3 

1898, was destined to play a vital role in the Alberta farm move- 




















< 






































. ■*. 




/* C 

, 





































103 


ment until his political activities in 1921 caused him to be re- 

4 

called from the U. F. A. Board of Directors. Although Sheppard’s 

personality was such that he made enemies in many quarters, there 

can be no doubt that his highly emotional disposition and approach 

to the Alberta farmer’s problems helped him to dramatize the need 

5 

for rural organization in a way that few others could have done. 
Taking up farming not long after his arrival in Edmonton, Sheppard 
soon found that the Alberta farmer’s lot at the turn of the cen¬ 
tury was not too profitable. In a short time his savings were ex¬ 
hausted and he was in the unenviable position, as he saw it, of 

6 

having to ’’depend on returns from the land”. Commenting on the 

situation with which he and his large family were then confronted, 

Sheppard remarked that the only factors which kept Alberta farmers 

’’from going under” were cheap land ”and the fact that the labor of 

7 

the wife and family never got paid”. 

Feeling as gloomy as he did about agricultural conditions in 

Alberta, Sheppard found in William R. Ball a kindred spirit who 

did much to crystallize his views on political and economic 
8 

questions. Ball, It will be recalled, was the exponent of a 
western farmer-labor coalition who in December, 1902, had at¬ 
tracted the attention of Golonel Gregory with his novel proposal 

for organizing the victims of monopoly. Sheppard’s graphic de- 

9 

scription of his first meeting with Ball is a striking revelation 

of the radical thinking of the men who led the way in founding the 

Strathcona branch of the T. G. G. A.: 

....We had first met at the lumber camp in the Beaver 
Hills where his brother, John Ball, had a portable saw 
mill and did sawing for the settlers..., I was getting 
out some building logs, and posts when I first met my 
friend, W. R. Ball. We had some arguments in the cook¬ 
house at the saw mill; both W. R. and his brother, John, 
the owner of the mill, were advanced thinkers. But W. R. 













' 


t 



. 
















■ 


s 




- 

. 

.... 

c' 





was the talker. They both had great faith in Alberta’s 
future, but realized fully the need of the settlers 
taking more interest in their country’s affairs. There 
was such earnestness in this man’s talk and manner that 
I got quite interested in him. Banks and the money 
question, transportation and markets, roads and bridges, 
a western outlet for our produce, schools for the rural 
districts, a demonstration farm or farms to prove what 
could be done with our land, and so forth, were all 
talked over in that old cook-house by the old box stove. 
Several men would be crowding around the stove on the 
long winter evening after the day’s logging and sawing. 
Ball was looked upon as a bit of a crank and as he would 
argue and pound the old slab table now and again in his 
earnestness to impress the less thinking men, they drew 
long whiffs of their pipes and winked at each other, 
never expecting that it would ever go farther than talk. 

’Look at this country’, says Ball, ’with all its 
great natural resources--timber, coal, silver, gold, 
iron, tin, lead, copper, oil, gas, salt, fisheries-- 
millions of pounds of it in our lakes up north, then our 
lands. Gee, if I were the Government, I would show you 
what I could do to make this country the best to live in 
in this world. There wouldn’t be any banks as we have 
them. I would create a national bank. Talk about your 
Gold Standard, why a wheat standard is better. You can’t 
feed the world on gold.’ 

’Yes, but you bet your life you can buy all the grub 
you want if you have got lots of gold’, interjected one 
of the non-thinkers. 

’But you ain’t got the gold and you never will have 
any if you keep working and doing no thinking. You don’t 
look after the important end of your business, the mar¬ 
keting. We are such chumps, we raise the crops, sweat 
ourselves all summer grubbing stumps and breaking land 
to raise crops; then when we have raised it, we go to 
the elevator man and say what are you paying for it. He 
gives you what he thinks he will. You grunt about it be¬ 
cause it’s about half what you should get; but you ain’t 
got the stamina in you to get together and try and do 
something.’ 

’Well, Ball’, I answered, after finding he was really 
sincere, *1 think all that is needed is a leader, some¬ 
one to make a move. Why don’t you put your thoughts into 
action, call a meeting, and try and start something?’ 

’Well, you see’, says Ball, ’They look on me as a 
kind of a crank’. The men winked and laughed again. 

’Then, you see, I am not much of an organizer. You live 
close to town, Sheppard* You’re the man to take hold of 
that part and get up a meeting. Tell us what you think; 
you don’t say much about it. I have been doing all the 
talking so far.’ 










c 










. 1 




, ■ 

( i 































{ < 

, 

... . ■■■ '■ i ■■ ■ ■ • 










■ 














e 

. 






















. 




' 






V* 




, 















. ’ 














105 


’Well, perhaps you have been so interesting that one 
would rather listen than talk. But I must say, Ball, I 
agree with a lot you have said, at any rate if we are to 
he able to make the headway that we should in this great 
country, some matters must be adjusted. We must remember 
that at all stages of the world 1 s history there have 
been exploiters of the workers and no place is more open 
to the exploiters than a great new country. If the 
settlers do not take an interest and protect their 
country against such, they will soon find that the ex¬ 
ploiters will entrench themselves so strongly that they 
will require a lot of shifting in the near future. After 
all we have ourselves to blame, if we simply possess the 
land and allow others to take the fruits of our toil. A 
lot of people see no sense in working hard if they can 
live on others. They are parasites, nothing better. But 
it’s up to us to say if they are to live on us. Better 
take a plunge into something that will make them get off 
your back, Ball.’ 

’Gee whizz, I like your talk’, said Ball. ’You’re a 
man after my own heart. Say, Sheppard, one day can I 
call at your house and have a real talk on this matter?’ 

’Sure, any time you feel like it, Ball.’ 

’Gee, it will be the first chance’, said Ball. ’I can 
see right now the beginning of something. Let’s get up a 
great mass meeting in town and get every farmer in the 
country to it. Gee, then there will be something doing.’ 10 

As Ball enthusiastically had predicted, there was ’’something 

doing” shortly after this conversation at his brother’s lumber 

camp in the Beaver Hills district, but it is important to note 

first that in 1903 several farmers’ meetings in the Edmonton area 

had preceded Sheppard’s efforts to organize the farmers of Strath- 

cona. 


Although Sheppard clearly implies in his memoirs that during 
the winter of 1904-5 Ball regarded an Edmonton farm protest 
meeting as a new idea, newspaper records indicate ”W. B.” had been 
an active participant in several such gatherings as early as 
January 5, 1903. Ball’s letter to The Bulletin in December, 1902, 


which attracted the attention of Colonel Gregory, appears, in fact, 

















































c 

, ' l 



































106 


to have been the beginning of his efforts to awaken Alberta far¬ 
mers to the need for rural cooperation. In January, 1903, at a 
meeting of Glover Bar farmers to discuss the current hot issue of 

government ownership of railways, Ball delivered the opening ad- 

11 

dress. He was followed by several other speakers who included his 
brother, John, Philip Ottewell, and W. F. Stevens, all of whom 
were later to play important parts in the development of the Al¬ 
berta farm movement. Following the flow of oratory on the delin¬ 
quencies of the C. P. R., it was moved by William R. Ball and se¬ 
conded by William Wilkerson, "That it is the opinion of this 
meeting that it would be to the interest of the farmer and the 
laboring classes that the government own and control the railways, 

and that we consider it a gross injustice for our representatives 

12 

to give away our money or lands without the consent of the people". 

When this motion was carried, another resolution was moved by 

W. F. Stevens and seconded by William R. Ball, "That a committee 

be appointed to draft a resolution asking the member to use his 

influence in inducing the government to withhold money and land 

13 

appropriations for Intercolonial railways". The motion was carried, 
but there is no record of any subsequent action. 

On February 12, 1903, a notice was published in the press in¬ 
forming Edmonton district farmers and "all laboring classes" that 
on February 21 a mass meeting would be held in Edmonton for the 

discussion of various railway matters, including the issue of 

14 

government ownership. Prior to the mass meeting, a preparatory 

gathering was held in the Salisbury school house on February 9, 

15 

1903, under the chairmanship of George Ball. When his brother, 

"W. R.", was called upon to address the group, the latter launched 
into a diatribe against the G. P. R. in which he pointed out that 


- 

c . . ; t 

, . - 


. 















■ 










« ' 


107 


"at the coming session of parliament a number of railways were 

likely to ask the government for subsidies, and it was the duty of 

the people of the Northwest Territories to create a strong public 

sentiment against the government subsidizing any road, without at 

16 

least reserving a limited control of rates”. Although Ball held 
the C. P. R. up as a particularly nefarious example of the ills of 
private ownership, he emphasized in his address that the blame did 
not lie with the C. P. R. stockholders, but "with our representa¬ 
tives who have not been alive to the interests of the people whom 

17 

they represent and whose interests they are bound to serve”. 

At the Edmonton mass meeting on February 21, 1903, the main 

speaker was the editor of The Winnipeg Tribune , R. L. Richardson, 

18 

who was known throughout the west as "the farmer’s friend”. Like 

William R. Ball, Richardson was convinced "that the Canadian 

people had contributed more cash and lands than the entire rail- 

19 

road system of Canada cost”. Following an address by Frank Oliver 
and the adoption of a resolution favoring the extension of the 
Intercolonial Railway to the Pacific, Ball rose to read a lengthy 
resolution that included a demand for government loans to the 
people at low interest rates and a statement of the need for far¬ 
mers’ meetings in every school district to discuss western trans- 
20 

portation problems. Apparently by a previous arrangement with 

George A. Clapp, the chairman of the gathering, Ball followed up 

the meeting’s acceptance of his resolution by reading a paper on 

the marked differences between Intercolonial and C. P. R. freight 
21 

rates. 

Action upon Ball’s proposal for farmers* meetings in every 
school district seems to have had little success, possibly because 
of the rival activities of the F. A. A. mentioned in Chapter IV. A 



































' 







































108 


committee of five, which included Ball and Philip Gttewell, was 

appointed by the mass meeting on February 21 to arrange future 
22 

farm gatherings, but the committee f s efforts in this direction 
seem to have been singularly unsuccessful. According to The Bulle¬ 
tin , a meeting was held in Edmonton in March, 1903, "for the pur¬ 
pose of organizing a political reform society" which would aim "to 
secure government ownership of railroads and other reforms that 

were embodied in a resolution that was passed at the mass meeting 

23 

held in Robertson Hall on February 21st". Those scheduled to be 

24 

present were delegates from the local improvement districts, but, 

even though two representatives from a local labor union put in an 

appearance, the attendance was such that the organization of an 

association was not attempted. A committee, consisting of George 

Bevington, W. A. Deyel, and William R. Ball, was appointed instead 

to make arrangements for calling another meeting on the following 
25 

April 2, but there is no record that it ever took place. With the 

collapse of the plans for an agrarian political reform society, 

Ball seems to have lost interest temporarily in organizing an Al- 

26 

berta farm movement. His name disappears from contemporary news¬ 
paper accounts of farm activities until Colonel Gregory made his 
campaign tour of Northern Alberta during the winter of 1903-4. As 
mentioned in Chapter XY, Ball appeared on the public platform with 
"the Colonel" on February 25, 1904, but his revived plea for a 
farmer-labor coalition appears to have met with little or no re¬ 
sponse. It was not until Ball joined forces with Rice Sheppard 
early in 1905 to found the Strathcona branch of the T. G. G. A. 
that he met with success in organizing an Alberta farm movement. 


According to Rice Sheppard, William R. Ball called at his 


















c 



































, 





' 














■ 




« 

« 



















109 


home not long after the lumber camp conversation quoted earlier 

and renewed the discussion of what might be done to organize the 
27 

district farmers. Agricultural distress during the fall of 1904 

seems to have been particularly conducive to the success of their 

plans for a new farm movement in Alberta: 

....the first load taken to market proved that again we 
were to be deprived of our just portion of the profits 
of our labor. Short weights, dockage, and low grades 
caused our crops to sink below the possibility of 
meeting the costs of production; therefore, store bills 
and the needs of the family for the winter ahead could 
not be provided for. This was the time of year when most 
all the settlers got a little excited and wanted some 
action taken. The best of wheat opened at 50 cents, most 
of it was graded down to 35 and 40, oats 16-18 and 20 
for choice milling but few were bought as milling. Pork 
and beef were still at 2-J* to 3-§- cents, eggs 10 cents, 
and butter 10 to 12-J-. 28 

Previous rural action on the marketing problem is described by 

Rice Sheppard as not going beyond the discussion stage: 

....The country being new and the farmers scattered, and 
with so much work on hand in clearing and breaking land, 
building, etc., it was no wonder that they had so little 
time for looking into the more important part of their 
business, that of marketing. If they did ever meet to 
talk over their troubles in this way, it would be at a 
country dance or evening party, and all that would come 
of it would be a discussion that they were strictly up 
against it, and what can we do; the reply from most pre¬ 
sent would be we can’t do anything, we got to put up 
with it, so things went on in this way until it grew so 
bad that something had to be done.... Happily the winter 
of 1904, with its unprofitable prices being paid for 
produce, roused a few men to action.... 29 

As will be gathered from the last sentence, Ball’s talk with Shep¬ 
pard at the latter’s home in the fall of 1904 proved to be more 
than idle discussion. The two Strathcona farmers ’’decided to call 
a meeting at the East Edmonton school house”, but delayed the date 

for the gathering until their plans could be ”well talked up with 

30 

all farmers we could meet on the road or in town”. Subsequent de¬ 
velopments are described by Sheppard as follows: 






. 
























* 


- 


























' 2 s 


. 





























‘ 







1 

















110 


.•..This kind of advertising went on till February; then 
the meeting was called for 8 p. m. at East Edmonton 
School. That evening W. R. Ball turned up at my home for 
supper. At 7:30 we started for the meeting place. It was 
a 30-below-zero night with icy particles being driven by 
a bad east wind into our faces. It did not look very 
promising for a good turn out. We plodded forward 
through the snow drifts a mile and a half, then entered 
the little dark cold school house. We lit our lantern, 
rustled some wood, started a fire in the stove, and got 
a little warmth into the cold room. At 9 p. m. we were 
still the only ones present. With all the talk of the 
hard times and bad prices, it seemed that it would end 
as with most by grumbling. We began to lay plans for the 
calling of a meeting in town when we heard the shuffling 
of feet outside the door and voices. In came three other 
farmers and that constituted the first meeting of far¬ 
mers for organizing the farmers of Alberta. We talked 
until 12 p. m. , but even then the majority was afraid 
nothing could be done, and on a vote being taken on 
shall we call another meeting in town and try and start 
the organization, the vote stood Ball and Sheppard for, 
Lang, Gratrix, and D. Fulton against. But majorities do 
not always rule and did not on this occasion. Ball and I 
were determined to go ahead, so I put down 50 cents and 
asked the rest to do the same, so we could get some 
posters printed calling a mass meeting in town. It was 
understood that this 50 cents should stand as part of 
the membership fee, if we started the organization. I 
had the honor of being made treasurer and was instructed 
to get the posters out as soon as possible. The meeting 
was called for March 5th, 1905, in Ross Hall, Strath- 
cona.... 31 


It will have been noted that Rice Sheppard describes the East 
Edmonton school house meeting of February, 1905, as the first to 
organize the farmers of Alberta. The inaccuracy of this claim has 
been made abundantly clear in the present study, but, even if 
Sheppard were referring only to the winter of 1904-5, his claim 
still would be incorrect. On November 21, 1904, the following 
notice appeared in the columns of The Edmonton Bulletin : 

A meeting of farmers will be held in Poplar Lake 
school house on Tuesday, November 22, at 7:30 p. m., to 
select a representative for nomination as candidate for 
the coming Territorial election. Also to discuss the 
grain question. A large attendance of farmers from Tur¬ 
nip Lake, Namao, Sunnyside, Coronation, Horse Hills, 

Belmont and Poplar Lake is urgently requested. 32 








. 








« 




4 


: 










• 




























































, • . ' «'' 

. 







. 



















■ t. .U . . ' 

i r \ ! 




. 



















Ill 


The meeting was held as scheduled and the Poplar Lake Independent 

33 

Liberal Association was organized. This in itself, of course, did 
not constitute the organization of a farm movement, but, following 
the political portion of the meeting, such intense interest was 
manifested by the farmers present in "the grain market question" 

and the grain combine which was said to exist in Edmonton that a 

34 

farmers 1 association was organized on the spot. An "information 

committee", moreover, was appointed to secure instructions con- 

35 

cerning "the running of Farmers 1 Associations". It was this de¬ 
cision to seek information which seems to have given the American 

36 

Society of Equity its first foothold in Alberta. William J. Keen 

of nearby Turnip Lake convinced the Poplar Lake farmers that the 

37 

solution to their troubles lay in this society with its slogan of 

"controlled marketing to compel profitable prices for all farm 
38 

products". 

Unfortunately, it is not known just when the Poplar Lake far¬ 
mers decided to transform their Interim association of November, 
1904, into the Canadian Branch of the American Society of Equity, 

but an excerpt from The Bulletin for February 1, 1905, indicates 

39 

the decision could not have been made later than January 28: 

A general meeting of the Canadian Branch of the Ameri¬ 
can Society of Equity was held in Poplar Lake school on 
Saturday 28th ult.... The cause which started this or¬ 
ganization is the constantly widening space between the 
price paid the producer and the selling price to the con¬ 
sumer. Capitalists, speculators, millers and middlemen, 
the farmers believe, create this unnatural widening 
space between the producer and the consumer. The aim of 
this organization is to have the price of farm produce 
set in a natural way by the supply and demand of the 
world—not in an arbitrary way by manipulators. Local 
Unions have already been formed in Poplar Lake, Belmont 
and Turnip Lake school districts, nearly every farmer in 
each district joining.... Plans were adopted to send 
literature to the secretaries of school districts in Nor¬ 
thern Alberta... 40 







c 




t . < 























■ « 








. 









.... 












112 


By March, 1905, notices of Equity meetings appearing in The Bulle¬ 
tin would indicate the Society had spread beyond the places men¬ 
tioned above to such centres as Stony Plain, Spruce Grove, and 
41 

Namao. 

Although the Society of Equity obviously had a head start in 
organizing the farmers of the Edmonton district, Bice Sheppard was 
not in the least deterred from continuing his efforts to organize 
the farmers of Strathcona as a branch of the Territorial Grain 
Growers’ Association. Not long after the meeting in the East Edmon¬ 
ton school, Sheppard was present at a gathering in the Babbit Hill 
school house which was held on the afternoon of February E2, 1905, 

to hear W. J. Keen explain the constitution of the Society of 
42 

Equity. This was a much better attended meeting than the one Shep- 

43 

pard and Ball had called and was comprised, according to the press 

report, of "representatives from the Oliver, East Edmonton, Otosk- 

wan, Spruce Dale, White Mud, Great West and Babbit Hill school dis- 
44 

tricts". Following Keen’s address, the discussion period was high¬ 
lighted by Bice Sheppard’s proposal that the farmers of the area 
band themselves together under the banner of the T. G. G. A. and 
ignore an organization which was of foreign origin. No definite 
conclusion was reached by the meeting, but a committee, consisting 
of two representatives from each school district, was appointed to 

meet one week later at Ellerslie "to consult and discuss the two 

45 

schemes...presented by Mr. Keen and...Mr. Sheppard". It was agreed 

that after the committee had met, a meeting would be "called for 

46 

the purpose of forming a farmers’ association". 

47 

While little record remains of the Babbit Hill and Ellerslie 
discussions, a very full account of the arguments then being used 
by Keen and Sheppard is afforded by their exchange of letters in 























































. 












c 








< 4 

. 
















< 
























■ 


113 


the columns of The Bulletin early in March, 1903. Actually, the 

letter which touched off the newspaper debate between the two farm 

48 

leaders appeared on February 18, but it was not intended as the 
opening shot in a battle over the relative merits of the 
T. G. G. A. and the American Society of Equity. The letter in 
question, which was written by Bice Sheppard as a commentary on 
the farm situation in the Edmonton district, appears to have been 
the first he submitted to any Alberta newspaper. Sheppard’s pur¬ 
pose in thus publicly discussing the local farm problem was two¬ 
fold. He sought, first, to emphasize the need for the organization 
of Alberta farmers, and, second, he wished to express an opinion 

on an acrimonious debate which had gone on for months in The Bulle- 

49 

tin concerning the prices paid for district farm products. William 

J. Keen, however, grasped the opportunity provided by Sheppard’s 

letter to publicize the work of the Society of Equity. In a letter 

to The Bulletin , written on February 27, 1905, and published on 

March 1, Keen, as "Deputy President and Organizer”, stated that he 

wished to draw Sheppard’s attention to n the American Society of 

Equity of North America” which had been founded to solve the very 

50 

problems that had been causing trouble in the Edmonton district. 

To say that he wished to inform Sheppard of the existence of the 

Society of Equity was, of course, little better than flippant when 

he knew quite well that Sheppard had been present at the Babbit 

Hill meeting on February 22. Keen’s explanation of the operation 

of the Society, which, he said, was "attracting a great deal of 

the attention of our farmers here through the work of the Canadian 

branch”, is of considerable interest: 

....This society is founded on a platform, broad and wide 
as our own vast country, yea more it is designed not only 
for National but for Inter-National work, as indeed it 





























































' 


C 






' 

t 






















t 



























114 


must, as farmers’ troubles are practically the same the 
world over. The cause of the trouble is the same, there¬ 
fore the remedy when found will apply the world over, 
whether the farmer produces wheat, cotton or tea and 
coffee and breadfruit, and the remedy has now been found. 

The platform of our society is justice and equity to 
all and when this is backed up by a million or more 
strongly organized farmers they will carry such a weight 
that no political party, no railway monopoly, no imple¬ 
ment trust, no clique of buyers or association of specu¬ 
lators will dare oppose them with a shadow of success. 

The Society of Equity, Mr. Editor, will not only remedy 
all Mr. Sheppard’s troubles, but will do more, it will 
solve the farm labor problem, it will obtain profitable 
prices for all a farmer grows. 

Where it is working with only a very small minority 
of farmers as members, it is adding hundreds of dollars 
annually to their incomes, no wonder its members are al¬ 
ready hundreds of thousands and will soon be millions. 

The farmers of the Edmonton district are already fast 
organizing into this society, they know it is the thing 
they want, and they are enthusiastic about it, and are 
determined to spread the good news far and wide. 

Mr. Sheppard mentions several other troubles of a 
more local nature, which should be remedied and can 
easily be, when the farmers are organized, even the 
troubles caused us through the ’forgetfulness’ of our 
representatives both at Ottawa and Begina. 

My object, Mr. Editor, is to draw the attention of 
the writer of the article and every other troubled far¬ 
mer in this beautiful Canada of ours and urge them to 
examine the plans of the American Society of Equity and 
they will be convinced of its power and worth. Eull and 
free information can be obtained from almost any inhabi¬ 
tant of the Poplar Lake, Belmont, Turnip Lake or Namao 
school districts where our society is in full working 
order.... 51 

In view of the fact that Sheppard already had heard Keen explain 
Equity principles at the Babbit Hill meeting, his reply to this 
letter was characterized by a remarkable restraint: 

I am well aware that the American Society of Equity 
of N. A. is doing business in this district, but I do 
not consider that our farmers will be wise in accepting 
that association without first going into details and 
finding out if it is the best for them that is going. 

For my part I think it is not. It Is a good thing for 
the farmer of the States as it applies more to con- 









- 






































< 




< 1 







. 


. 











115 


ditions existing there. But the time has arrived for the 
farmers of Alberta to act for ourselves and I am satis¬ 
fied we have men as able and as ready to run our own af¬ 
fairs, as any men of the States. We would be belittling 
ourselves to look outside our own country for a remedy 
for our troubles, and we need not do so. We have already 
in existence the Grain Growers’ Association of the 
N. W. T. and also of Manitoba. A grand work has been 
done by them and they are ready to receive us and give 
us the benefit of their experience, and if we join them 
we are keeping in our own country thousands of dollars 
that will, if we join with the States, be sent out of 
our country.... 

But farmers don’t join anything for a week or two. 
Wait for the mass meeting being arranged for and then 
you will have the matter laid before you plainly and we 
can start on the right footing. 52 


The mass meeting mentioned in Sheppard’s reply to Keen was 
the one agreed upon at the last Edmonton school house in February, 
1905. It was to have taken place in the Boss Hall, Strathcona, the 
following March 5, but for some reason, now unknown, was postponed 
until March 22. The delay may have been connected with the Ellers- 
lie meeting which, it will be recalled, was scheduled for the pre¬ 
vious March 1. No record, however, can be found of the Ellerslie 

deliberations on the relative merits of the two schemes presented 

53 

by Sheppard and Keen at the Babbit Hill gathering. Despite the un¬ 
fortunate oblivion which thus has descended upon such an important 
discussion, it would appear that Sheppard’s proposal for organiza¬ 
tion as a branch of the T. G. G. A. must have held up fairly well 
to the committee’s analysis. Otherwise, the Strathcona meeting of 
March 22 would not have been so highly successful. The official 
minutes of this historic rally, which resulted in the organiza¬ 
tion of the Strathcona branch of the T. G. G. A., indicate that a 
number of meetings, not mentioned elsewhere, may have followed the 
Ellerslie gathering and postponed the date for the Boss Hall as¬ 
sembly: 













































































. 












■ 




. 








... ' 




. 


















































































' 


















. 






116 


On March 22nd, 1905, a good meeting of farmers was 
held in Ross Hall, Strathcona, being the outcome of 
several meetings held around the district for the pur¬ 
pose of getting the opinion of farmers on organization 
and what society was most favored. It was found that 
most all were in favor of the T. G. G. Asso. and for the 
organization of a branch of same this meeting was called. 
After a few short addresses from some of the interested 
farmers, it was thought wise to at once organize and 
this proved a wise step as nearly every farmer came for¬ 
ward and joined. The minutes of previous meetings were 
read and part of the constitution and by-laws of the 
Territorial G. G. Asso.,.. Moved by W. F. Stevens, se¬ 
conded by G. A. Clapp that this organization be known as 
The Strathcona Branch of the Territorial Grain Growers’ 
Association. Carried. 54 

Sheppard’s description of this inaugural meeting in his manuscript 
autobiography throws an interesting sidelight on the election of 
officers: 


....It was a fine afternoon and a real good turn-out of 
farmers—nearly 100—were present. One thing to be 
guarded against was a feeling that prevailed that those 
pushing the matter were looking for some prominence In 
the movement. Ball and I knew this and had decided not 
to accept nominations for President, but to nominate 
some person that had not as yet been active. This was 
arranged and carried out. After some really progressive 
speeches had been made, a call for membership resulted 
in forty-six becoming charter members..., 55 

The officers elected at the Strathcona meeting included a number 

of farmers who were later to play important roles in the expansion 

of the Alberta farm movement. Daniel Webster Warner, who had come 

to the Edmonton district in 1898 as an immigration delegate from 
56 

Nebraska, was elected President. After some discussion by the 
meeting concerning the importance of the post of Secretary-Trea¬ 
surer, it was agreed by all those present that Rice Sheppard 
should hold this office, while Ralph Weir would become Yice-presi- 
dent. The original vote of the charter members would have given 

Sheppard the latter position, while Weir would have been the 

57 

Secretary-Treasurer. The Directors elected were George Ball, 

G. Black, Joshua Fletcher, D. S. Fulton, J. Govenlock, G. McAl- 




. 




















. 





' 




! 










. 



















117 

58 

lister, W. Place, W. F. Stevens, T. H. Stewart, and A. Weisbaugh. 
Following the election of officers and the acceptance of a resolu¬ 
tion to meet one month later, the members of the newly-formed 

Strathcona branch of the T. G. G. A. listened to an address by 

59 

Charles Burnell on the "workings of the A. S. of E. of N. A." Just 
why such an address would be given at a meeting for the organiza¬ 
tion of a rival to the Society of Equity is far from clear, but 
Burnell's arguments, whatever they may have been, failed to shake 
the loyalty of his T. G. G. A. listeners. 

Despite the appearance of the Grain Growers on the rural Ed¬ 
monton scene, the organizing activities of the Society of Equity 
do not appear to have lost their momentum. In a letter to The 
Bulletin , published on March 25, 1905, W. J. Keen optimistically 

reported the Society as "rapidly forging ahead" in Northern Al- 
60 

berta. He ignored the recent developments in Strathcona but he did 
outline in some detail how local Equity unions had been organized 
at Spruce Grove and Stony Plain. In an apparent effort to fore- 
stall further expansion of the T. G. G. A. in the Edmonton dis¬ 
trict, he concluded his letter with the appeal: "Farmers, awake 

61 

and investigate this plan! There is money in it for you." A few 

days after the appearance of this message to the farmers of Nor- 

62 

them Alberta, another "Equitist", who chose to remain anonymous, 

came out in the columns of The Bulletin with a blistering attack 

on "the Edmonton oats combine" which he alleged was responsible 

63 

for a recent drop in the price of oats. After laying bare the ma¬ 
chinations of the local grain trading interests, the anonymous 
correspondent then issued an impassioned appeal to Edmonton dis¬ 
trict farmers to join the Society of Equity: 

My brother farmers, how long will you sit idly by 















C 






' 


• e 




■ 






t 










■ 










• 

















C 

. 













. 









118 


while your business is destroyed, your wives and families 
impoverished and your farms made useless and valueless?., 

.. Let me ask you whether a largely increased income will 
not remedy almost all your troubles, and this we can 
guarantee as soon as we have organized the farmers of 
this country.... The spectacle, brother farmers, of thou¬ 
sands of us being at the mercy of half a dozen avaricious 
grain dealers is one that does violence to your manhood 
and intelligence. Become organized and for once and for 
all time put an end to it.... 64 

This letter contained no direct reference to the emergence of the 

Strathcona Grain Growers, but its general tone, as in the case of 

Keen's appeal, reflected an "Equitist" fear that the Territorial 

body would supplant an imported farm movement. The expansion of 

the Society of Equity during April and May, 1905, was, however, 

sufficiently encouraging to justify holding a convention in Edmon- 
65 

ton on June 3. Reporting on this event as an indication of the 

growing strength of the Society in Northern Alberta, Keen, as 

66 

"Secretary of the Executive Committee", informed The Bulletin that 
two important decisions had been made at the convention: 

It was decided to reorganize the executive committee 
giving representation to all the unions and to meet the 
growing needs of the work which is pressing upon us and 
which clearly shows from direct correspondence that the 
farmers all over this vast country are keenly alive to 
the fact that something must be done and that quickly to 
prevent widespread suffering among the agricultural com¬ 
munity. . , , 

The new executive will soon be ready for business and 
one of their first efforts will be to make out a list of 
prices for our next crop and we earnestly request every 
farmer to watch for this list and govern himself ac¬ 
cordingly. 67 


Details of the Society's growth after the close of the June 
convention received scant attention in the press, but the few news 
reports that did appear in The Bulletin concerning Equity activi¬ 
ties indicate considerable expansion in the Edmonton area. On 
July 20, 1905, the Glover Bar branch of the Society met "to hear 








. 

•, : ... . ' it 

J ..... 

■ 




... «. v i. 


Jfc* 
















. 




t 




■ 





■ 







■ 












119 


tiie report of the committee appointed to get quotations on binding 
68 

twine”. According to the news report, those present "were much 

pleased to learn that the committee by co-operating with other 

committees from other branches of the society have been able to 

69 

get twine at a reduction of 2-J- cents per pound". In August the Ed¬ 
monton preparations to celebrate the proclamation of Alberta as a 
province led to an incident that not only revealed the growing 
strength of "Equity" in Northern Alberta, but a basic weakness 
throughout the entire span of the Society*s existence in Canada. 

On August 11 The Bulletin , in outlining the organizations wishing 
to take part in a mammoth parade on Jasper Avenue, commented: 

The American Society of Equity have intimated their 
desire to take part in the celebration. This organiza¬ 
tion is strong throughout the district and what it does 
it will do well. It is composed entirely of farmers and 
has been formed to promote their financial interests. It 
is active and progressive. 70 

On August 24 The Bulletin mentioned in a discussion of the pre¬ 
parations for the inaugural celebration that, "The Canadian branch 

of the American Society of Equity is supplying four wagon loads of 

71 

grain for arch decorating In the city", while on September 2 It 

reported that the "Mammoth Parade" had Included a float of the 

"Earners* Society of Equity preceded by wagons decorated with 

72 

grains and grasses". Although there was no intimation at the time 
just why such a curious change of name had taken place by Septem¬ 
ber 1, the reasons for the transformation were made public by 
W. F. Stevens on June 1, 1907, in a letter to The Saturday News . 
Replying to a bitter attack on A. F. A. policies, which had ap¬ 
peared in The Nor*West Farmer , Stevens traced the history of the 
rivalry between the A. F. A. and the American Society of Equity 
and noted that the members of the latter association "observed... 








* 






. 


















. 


■- 





- 





























120 


when they appeared before any municipal body and asked for favors 

and concessions, they were reminded that theirs was a foreign or- 
73 

ganization". As an instance of this difficulty experienced by the 

Society, the A. F. A. secretary cited the reaction of the Edmonton 

authorities when the Equity representatives demanded they be given 

"the place of honor" in the inaugural procession on September 1, 

74 

1905. "They obtained it", he wrote, "only after considerable 

difficulty, and then only at the last moment, when they appeared 

with their name changed to ’Farmers* Society of Equity*, instead 

75 

of ’American Society of Equity’." 

The Strathcona Grain Growers, meanwhile, had commenced to ex¬ 
pand, but their efforts in this direction do not seem to have be¬ 
come extensive until the winter of 1905-6. Although the contem¬ 
porary press is silent concerning this phase of T. G. G. A. 
activities in the Edmonton area, Rice Sheppard describes the work 
of organization in these passages from his memoirs: 

....the Strathcona Branch could not rest with a lonely 
hranch in this part. The officers pushed forward the or¬ 
ganization of other branches and the following winter a 
lot of work along this .line was done. And the Associa¬ 
tion of today owes much to the men who gave their time 
and money, when no funds could be drawn upon for this 
purpose. Many a cold bleak drive away into the country 
districts was undertaken after a hard day’s work, a 
meeting held, a branch organized, and then a drive back 
home in the midnight zero to be ready for the next day’s 
work on the farm, and in this way the first winter no 
less than 12 good branches were organized, and meetings 
held in many other districts.. 76 

....credit is due the Strathcona Local for not only 
pushing the organization, but to a large extent its 
active members financed the work of both the Local and 
Central until some returns came in from new locals. All 
work was done without pay at this time. The officers 
would take their own teams and drive away twenty or 
thirty miles to a settlement and organize a local, and 
then drive home in the night. It was hard and uphill 
work, for many farmers felt it was impossible to get 
farmers to cooperate, but the officers never faltered, 
but worked and forged ahead as only true pioneers can. 










. ■ ; «\ 

. 







* 










*> ! j 



. 


. 

'• 




■ 











c 

♦ 






. 






< 


. 




...» 


i •• 














c 


121 


The leaders of the movement at that time were looked 
upon and talked of as cranks by the storekeepers, banks, 
and the big interests. They did all they could to dis¬ 
courage the movement..., 77 

While details are lacking concerning the expansion of the Strath- 
cona Grain Growers during the spring and summer of 1905, it would 
appear that vigorous efforts must have been made by the charter 
members to attract support long before the winter of 1905-6. 
Otherwise, the Strathcona local would not have been able to hold 
its own against the more aggressive methods of the Society of 
Equity which not only had a full-time organizer but sought news¬ 
paper publicity on every possible pretext. The mere fact that by 
December 9, 1905, the T, G. G, A. local in Strathcona was able to 

emerge as the Alberta Farmers* Association, with a central execu- 

78 

tive to handle the affairs of all branches, is a clear indication 
of how firmly the movement had become established. 

There is little doubt that the way in which the new .Strath¬ 
cona farm body took up the hog market issue contributed much to 
its later expansion. For some time the problem of profitable 

prices for pork products had been causing much trouble not only in 

79 

the Edmonton area but elsewhere in the North-West Territories. 

W. F. Stevens, for example, shortly after his election as a di¬ 
rector of the Strathcona T. G. G. A., wrote a letter to The Bulle¬ 
tin in which he scored the stupidity of the advice given to hog 
raisers at farmers* institutes, "What we need”, he wrote, ”is a 

little definite information as to the reason why Alberta pork can- 

80 

not hold its own at home against the Chicago product”. Feeling 
grew so strong about this question that on April 22, 1905, at the 
first monthly meeting, the Strathcona Grain Growers appointed a 
committee to find out the number of hogs exported from Alberta and 



. . . , V 












< 



U 



























. 


. 
































- 


' 







122 


the quantity of pork products imported by the merchants of Edmon¬ 
ton and Strathcona. The committee members, who were selected by 

President Warner, included W. F. Stevens, J. D. Foster, T. H. 

81 

Stewart, George Ball, Joshua Fletcher, and Bice Sheppard. By June, 
1905, the committee’s investigations had reached the point thatr 
Sheppard was able to write an official letter to The Bulletin ad¬ 
vocating a joint move by both the district farmers and the "towns- 

82 

folk” to solve the hog market problem. A surprising revelation in 

his letter was the support of the Society of Equity: 

♦...At the request of the Society of Equity, whose 
meeting I attended a few days since in Edmonton, I placed 
before them the reports we have received on the import 
question, and it was clearly seen that we are suffering a 
great wrong, and I was asked by that Society if I would 
kindly publish the matter for the benefit of both town 
and country, and with the permission of the management 
and members of the Strathcona branch of the T. G. G. As¬ 
sociation, I have much pleasure in doing so.... 83 

If the Society of Equity could be so interested in the T. G. G. A. 
committee’s report that It asked for publication in the local 
press, the effect on those farmers, who were yet undecided as to 
which body they should join, may well be imagined. Although the 
committee met with local boards of trade and government officials 
on the hog market situation, it was not until some time after the 
T. G. G. A. local had reconstituted itself as the Alberta Farmers 1 
Association that the campaign to improve the local pork market ob¬ 
tained official action. In the meantime the determined agitation 

against the depressed condition of local pork prices continued to 

84 

attract rural support for the Grain Growers. 

From the foregoing outline it will be evident that by Septem¬ 
ber 1, 1905, when the Province of Alberta came into existence, 
there were two new, but well established, farm organizations ready 
to represent the farmer within the newly-created provincial frame- 





< 

. ■ 5 






1 < I 






■ 















C 


' 



' 

.... 



















■ 


' - 



< 

. . . 

. 



















. ■ 




123 


work. These two farm groups were rivals for the support of the Al¬ 
berta farmer, hut some degree of cooperation, it will he noted, 
had been reached already on the hog market issue. It was not long 
until this cooperation was extended to other fields, and, even 
though hitter quarrels resulted from the efforts to amalgamate the 
two farm associations, the cooperation that did take place indi¬ 
cated union might yet he possible. 

Following the proclamation of Alberta as a province, the 
first farm problem to receive the joint attention of the Strath- 
cona Grain Growers and the Society of Equity was the matter of 
grain prices. At the regular monthly meeting of the former on 
September 9, 1905, President Warner reported on an Equity proposal 

to discuss with T. G. G. A. representatives n the matter of fixing 

85 

prices for our grains this fall". It was agreed by those present 
that Warner, D. S. Fulton, and Bice Sheppard should form a com¬ 
mittee to negotiate with the Society of Equity on the price prob¬ 
lem and that a special T. G. G. A. meeting should be held on 

86 

September 23 to consider the matter further. The special meeting, 

after some discussion, approved the action of the Glover Bar 

"Equitists" in withholding oats when the price fell below thirty 

cents and refusing to sell wheat "for less than Winnipeg prices 
87 

less freight n . The local T. G. G. A. membership, however, was not 
compelled to follow these Equity prices; members were simply re¬ 
quested to hold their grain, if at all possible, until the sug- 

88 

gested price level had been reached. Wo record exists of what 
transpired between the T. G. G. A. committee and the Society of 
Equity in their price negotiations, but it would appear from, the 
T. G. G. A. minutes of November 11, 1905, that a joint effort was 
made to hold to the prices mentioned earlier. On that date Warner 


; f- 


- 

? . 








„ 


. 


. 

< 












' 




. 

, 




















. ' 






















. • • 


t 



124 


informed the meeting that the price of thirty cents on oats had 

89 

proved "a little high”. In view of the local market situation and 

the recommendation of The Farm and Ranch Review that western far- 

90 

mers stand firm at twenty-eight cents for oats, he suggested that 
the membership sell at this price. In case members found them¬ 
selves forced to sell before twenty-eight cents was offered local¬ 
ly, Warner named the chartered banks in Edmonton which had assured 

91 

him they would advance money on grain in storage. While many im¬ 
portant details are lacking concerning this early effort to con¬ 
trol the marketing of grain in the Edmonton area, it is worth 
noting that, by supporting the Society of Equity in this matter, 
the Strathcona Grain Growers had conceded the very principle on 
which the rival association was founded—the controlled marketing 
of farm produce. 

Another circumstance which gave rise to cooperation between 

the Grain Growers and the Society of Equity was the decision of 

the federal government to investigate the operation of the Canadian 

tariff. W. S. Fielding, the Minister of Finance, announced on 

July 6, 1905, that the investigation would take the form of either 

92 

a commission or a special committee of the House of Commons. By 
August 23, however, the Laurier government had reached the con¬ 
clusion such an important subject merited the attention of a com¬ 
mission made up of cabinet ministers with authority to conduct 

93 

hearings in all provinces. Although the newly-appointed tariff 

commission began its hearings in September, 1905, sittings in the 

prairie provinces were delayed until the following December owing 

to the difficulties that would be encountered while the western 

94 

harvest was in progress. Alberta’s two farm associations, mean¬ 
while, were busy making plans for their submissions to the com- 



- 

c 













« 




■ 




■ 












. 


. 


. 























125 


95 

mission when it arrived in Edmonton. On October 14, at a monthly 
meeting of the Strathcona Grain Growers, Rice Sheppard moved a re¬ 
solution, which was carried unanimously, that a committee of seven 

96 

be appointed to meet the tariff commission. On October 19 the 
Clover Bar branch of the Society of Equity instructed its repre¬ 
sentative on the executive board ”to propose at the next meeting 
...that a committee be appointed to act in harmony with a similar 
committee of the Grain Growers to appear before the tariff com¬ 
mission which is soon to visit Edmonton and to present the views 

97 

of the farmer on that subject”. The committee subsequently ap¬ 
pointed by the Society of Equity worked with the T. G. G. A. re¬ 
presentatives, as proposed by the Clover Bar local, but at the 
final joint committee meeting on December 9, 1905, it was decided 

the two organizations should present their resolutions independent- 
98 

ly. Consideration of the date on which this decision was reached 

would indicate that the failure of an amalgamation parley the day 
99 

before had made further cooperation on the tariff problem inap¬ 
propriate. 

On December 12 the memorials presented by Alberta’s two farm 
associations at the Edmonton sitting of the tariff commission re¬ 
vealed that the farmers of the province, no matter which body they 
belonged to, felt much the same way about the rural problems 
created by federal tariff policies. The Alberta Farmers’ Associa¬ 
tion, as the Strathcona Grain Growers were now known after their 

reorganization on December 9, maintained that ’’freedom of trade is 

100 

a natural right of the people of any country”. The Society of 

Equity, for its part, did not attempt to define universal free 

trade as ”a natural right”, but it did charge the federal high 

101 

tariff policy with being ’’unnatural”. A principal point in the 




























. 

. 


e 






. 



























. 






« ■■ 



. 














126 


A. F. A. memorial was the belief that the farmers of Canada were 

being "called upon to bear unnecessary and unjust burdens for the 

102 

benefit of other and less important lines of production". In simi¬ 
lar vein the Society of Equity in its submission accused eastern 
manufacturers of using the high tariff schedule to create "a pur¬ 
chasing preserve" in the west for their products, thus obliging 

western farmers "to pay more for their goods than the same 

103 

articles are supplied to farmers in other countries". The diffi¬ 
culty of this situation was intensified, according to the Society, 
by the fact that "the farmers of this portion of Alberta are in 
competition with the farmers of all other parts of the world in 
the sale of all farm products" and by the operation of the Canadian 
tariff which had "the effect of raising the price of nearly every¬ 
thing the farmer purchases...but little effect in raising the price 

104 

of the products he has to sell". The A. F. A., meanwhile, argued 
further that "the imposition of a duty results in Increasing the 
price of the home manufacturer’s article by practically the amount 
of the duty imposed, and that the greater portion of this in¬ 
creased price has to be paid directly or indirectly by the farming 
105 

community". Although the A. F. A. went into much greater detail on 

the subject of specific tariff changes, the reductions requested 

by both farm bodies were generally similar. While the Society of 

Equity simply asked "that the tariff on all agricultural imple- 
106 

meats be reduced", the A. F. A., In demanding "a very substantial 

107 

reduction in the duty on farm implements", added a sharp criticism 
of the Canadian manufacturers of this equipment. The Society of 
Equity protested to the tariff commission "against an Increase in 
the tariff on lumber as asked by those in the lumber business, as 
this is a most necessary article for settlers on these prairies 










< ■ 








. 













\ i' 








. 

• 









c 






















127 


and any increase in price would have the effect of entailing hard- 

108 

ship on the settlers generally”. The A. F. A., on the other hand, 
attacked the lumber problem in a slightly different fashion. 
Claiming that Western Canadian development had been '’retarded by 
the high price of lumber”, the A. F. A. spokesmen, who appeared 
before the commission, stated that since ”the American and 
Canadian lumber companies are each asking for protection against 
the other leads us to believe that there is a good deal of humbug 
in the claims of both parties, and we believe constitutes a suf¬ 
ficient reason why Parliament should carefully investigate the 

matter with a view to making a substantial reduction in the duty 

109 

on lumber and possibly placing it on the free list”. Other tariff 
matters raised by the farm associations at the Edmonton hearing 

included an A. F. A. statement that ”we deem a duty on wheat and 

110 

barley of no value to the Alberta farmers whatever”, an Equity 

protest against an attempt of the British Columbia fruit growers 

111 

to secure an increase in the tariff on imported fruit, A. E. A. 

sunport for the continuance of the current duty on American hogs 
112 

and pork, and, finally, an A. F. A. suggestion "that the Govern¬ 
ment endeavor to establish closer trade relations with all parts 

113 

of the Empire and especially with the Mother Country”. 

The close of the Alberta sittings of the tariff commission in 
December, 1905, coincided with what may be regarded as the entry 
of the Alberta farm movement into a new and crucial phase of de¬ 
velopment. Although the organized farmers of the province were now 
working within the new provincial framework, which placed the seat 
of government at the centre of agrarian discontent, they were 
seriously handicapped by the division within their ranks. While 
serious issues affecting the Alberta farmer’s interests would 

















• • ( 




. 


. 


« 


. 

• 


















. 


c 














. 























. 






C 


128 


bring a ready response from both farm groups, if not concerted 
action, two separate organizations could not hope to have the 
strength a united agrarian front would have. Since no responsible 
member of either the A. F. A. or the Society of Equity failed to 
perceive this, the struggle to amalgamate the two farm associa¬ 
tions is the central theme of the period from 1906 to 1909. 


1 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 1. 

2 Ibid. » pp. 43-4. 

3 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West", an 
unpublished manuscript autobiography. 

4 Rolph, William Kirby, Henry Wise Wood of Alberta, Toronto, 1950, 
p. 110. 

5 All the former farm leaders interviewed by the author readily 
acknowledged Rice Sheppard’s ability in this respect, even 
though several of them admitted hostility to him for such 
reasons as personal vanity and failure to be an efficient mem¬ 
ber of the U. F. A. executive. 

6 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West". 

7 Sheppard, Rice, "What Brought About the Alberta Farmers’ As¬ 
sociation", an unpublished essay. 

8 Interview with Herbert E. Nichols, February 1, 1954. 

9 Sheppard clearly implies in his memoirs that he had not met 
Ball until the winter of 1904-5, but several reasons exist for 
doubting his accuracy in this regard. George Bevington, who had 
come to the Edmonton district in 1893 and who first met Shep¬ 
pard in 1898, ran a thresher for the farmers in the Strathcona 
area, including both Ball and Sheppard. In an interview with 
the author on March 4, 1955, he stated it would have been im¬ 
possible for Sheppard and Ball not to have met before 1904. The 
latter had a homestead six miles east of Sheppard’s farm prior 
to that date and It, therefore, would be incredible if the two 
did not know each other until the winter of 1904-5. Both be¬ 
longed to the same school district and both did their marketing 
in the town of Strathcona. Bevington, moreover, claims to be 
able to remember that the two were well acquainted prior to the 
date mentioned In the Sheppard papers. Another circumstance, 
which would seem to contradict Sheppard’s claim not to have met 
Ball until the winter of 1904-5, lies In the newspaper report 
of the mass farm protest meeting in Edmonton on February 21, 
1903, mentioned later in this chapter. According to The Bulle¬ 
tin for February 23, 1903 (p. 2), "a committee, composed of 
Messrs. Sheppard, McDonald, Brox, Ottewell and Ball, were ap¬ 
pointed to arrange for dates and places of meeting, etc." While 
the Sheppard in the foregoing account is not more precisely 
identified, there is little reason to doubt that the party in 
question was Rice Sheppard. A final piece of evidence is the 
most conclusive of all on this matter. On page 96 above re- 









' <'• 5 1 










, 







« ' t 


I 








« 






’ 


■ 








' « 

! 

i 


. 




: c 

' t y * 

* 


. 








. 


. 


; V' 








. . 




129 


ference was made to the fact that on February 25, 1904, Ball 
addressed two meetings in Strathcona held for the benefit of 
Colonel Gregory. The Edmonton Bulletin for February 27, 1904 
(p. 3), states that the chairman of the afternoon session was 
Rice Sheppard. 

According to George Bevington, an explanation for the ap¬ 
parent inaccuracy in Sheppard’s account may lie in the rivalry 
between the two for the distinction of organizing the Strath¬ 
cona branch of the T. G. G. A. It was generally felt at the 
time that Ball had done more to lay the groundwork for the 
later developments in Strathcona, but Sheppard through his 
greater ability as an organizer and public speaker was able 
later to appear as the founder of the new farm movement. Ball 
was tedious to listen to when addressing a public gathering, 
although he could be effective with a small group of farmers. 
Sheppard, on the other hand, was at his best when speaking to a 
large audience. Before 1905 Ball was far better known than 
Sheppard to the farming population of Northern Alberta, but 
after 1905 Sheppard’s high executive position in the A. F. A. 
placed Ball in the background. 

10 Sheppard, Rice, ’’Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West”. 

11 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 23, 1903, p. 4. 

12 Ibid. 


13 Ibid. 


14 Ibid 


15 Ibid. , 

16 Ibid. 

17 Ibid, 


February 12, 

p. 3. 


1903, p. 1. 


p. 1. 

February 23, 


1903, p 


18 Ibid. , 

19 Ibid, , 

20 Ibid, 

21 Ibid. 

22 Ibid. 

23 lbid. , March 21, 1903, p. 3. 

24 With regard to the apparent decision of the committee appointed 
on February 21 to hold a convention of farmer delegates from 
the local Improvement districts, it is of some importance to 
note that only one such district seems to have sent representa¬ 
tives to Edmonton. According to the news report in The Bulletin 
for March .21, 1903 (p. 3), the convention considered a resolu¬ 
tion from Local Improvement District No. 459, favoring govern¬ 
ment ownership of railroads, before making the decision to 
postpone further organization until April 2. Dp to the time of 
the March convention the rural news columns of The Bulletin , 
which were very extensive in their coverage, refer only to the 
preparatory meeting of the local improvement district just men¬ 
tioned. According to The Bulletin for March 19, 1903 (p. 3), 
the meeting took place at Agricola at the home of Ernest 0, 

Just on March 10, 1903, and unanimously adopted the resolution 
which was read at the Edmonton convention. 

25 The Edmonton Bulletin , March 21, 1903, p. 3. 

26 Ball at this point may have been disillusioned by a curious lull 
that took place in the spring of 1903 in the efforts to organize 
the farmers of the Edmonton district. It will be remembered this 
was the period during which the Lacombe Farmers’ Association so 
expanded its activities that by the summer the organization felt 






























' 














II 

























. 






: 













130 


strong enough to become a provincial body. Edmonton district 
farmers may have been waiting to see what the Lacombe society 
would accomplish, but this is doubtful. A letter to The Bulle¬ 
tin in May (May 21, 1903, p. 4) from George A. Clapp, the 
chairman of the mass meeting in Edmonton the previous 
February 21, would indicate a temporary indifference on the 
part of Northern Alberta farmers to any pleas that were made 
for rural organization. At the end of July, 1903, Clapp still 
felt no better about the apparent inability of Edmonton dis¬ 
trict farmers to organize. In another letter to The Bulletin 
(July 31, 1903, p. 3), he noted the recent news of the ex¬ 
panding work of the Lacombe Farmers* Association and stated 
that it led him "to again urge upon the farmers of our own dis¬ 
trict the importance and necessity of forming an association". 
Commenting further on the local situation at a time when the 
Lacombe farmers seemed to be making such remarkable progress, 
Clapp remarked, "It looks as though the Edmonton district is 
going to be behind in this matter**. 

27 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West". 

28 Ibid. 

29 Sheppard, Rice, "What Brought About The Alberta Farmers* As¬ 
sociation** . 

30 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years In the Great North-West". 

31 Ibid. 

32 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 21, 1904, p. 2. 

33 Ibid. » November 25, 1904, p. 3. 

34 Ibid. 

35 Ibid. 

36 Interview with George Bevington, March 4, 1955. 

37 Wood, Louis Aubrey, A History of Farmers* Movements in Canada , 
Toronto, 1924, p. 199. It may be added here that a letter 
written in July, 1904, to The Bulletin (July 27, 1904, p. 6) by 
W. J. Belfrage of Poplar Lake indicates the idea of controlling 
farm prices by mutual agreement was not new to that community. 

38 Taylor, Carl C., The Farmers* Movement, 162Q-192Q , New York, 
1953, p. 366. 

39 A letter from Thomas J. Stacey of New Lunnon, which appeared in 
The Bulletin for December 28, 1904 (p. 5), may indicate that 
the organization of the Canadian Branch of the American Society 
of Equity at Poplar Lake did not take place until very late in 
December, 1904, or early in January, 1905. 

40 The Edmonton Bulletin , February 1, 1905, p. 6. 

41 Ibid. , March 2, 1905, p. 8, and March 21, 1905, p. 8. 

42 Ibid. , February 28, 1905, p. 5. 

43 Sheppard, Rice, "What Brought About the Alberta Farmers* As¬ 
sociation”. 

44 The Edmonton Bulletin . February 28, 1905, p. 5. 

45 Ibid. 

46 Ibid. 

47 It is possible that Joshua Fletcher was referring to the Rabbit 
Hill meeting when he made the following remarks at Belmont on 
February 8, 1906 ( The Bulletin , March 17, 1906, p. 3): 

....He told of the first meeting at Rabbit Hill and how 
at a subsequent meeting Mr. Keen accepted an invitation 
to explain the working of the society. 



























t 


■C 


















c 













? C 






t ' c 

C ! « 

• c ? 

• c 

c 

. 




131 


The meeting was very large and representative. The 
speaker said that he himself was chairman on that oc¬ 
casion and that he had no trouble to secure for Mr. Keen 
a good attentive hearing. 

Mr. Keen had put a resolution to the house that this 
meeting he in favor of adopting the constitution of the 
A. S. of E. All attempts to get anyone to second that re¬ 
solution met with failure. 

The discussion that followed was to the effect that 
headquarters in a foreign country was a dead letter.* It 
was a handicap to us in all our efforts, particularly our 
legislative work. 

The meeting then proceeded to appoint a committee to 
select an all-Canadian proposition. This committee repre¬ 
sented seven school districts, Mill Creek, Oliver, Otask- 
wan, Rabbit Hill, White Mud, Sprucedale and Great West. 

Their decision was for the Territorial Grain Growers T As¬ 
sociation until such time as Alberta became a province.... 

48 The Edmonton Bulletin , February 18, 1905, p. 6. 

49 This newspaper debate, which reveals how seriously the market 
situation was affecting the Northern Alberta farmer in the fall 
of 1904, may be traced in editorials and letters in the fol¬ 
lowing issues of The Bulletin up to the time of the Sheppard- 
Keen correspondence: November £6, 1904 (p. 3); December 13, 

1904 (p. 6); December 28, 1904 (pp. 3 and 5); January 21, 1905 
(p. 6); January 23, 1905 (p. 6); February 11, 1905 (pp. 3 and 
6); and February 13, 1905 (p. 3). 

50 The Edmonton Bulletin , March 1, 1905, p. 7. 

51 Ibid. 

52 Ibid. , March 3, 1905, p. 7. 

53 It should be noted, however, that in a letter to The Saturday 
News on June 1, 1907, W. F. Stevens refers to the evenings of 
discussion which preceded the formation of the Strathcona 
branch of the T. G. G. A. One of these probably was the Sllers- 
lie meeting. This letter, in which Stevens summarized the argu¬ 
ments used in the discussions "against the Equity plan as ap¬ 
plied to Alberta conditions", is given In its entirety in Ap¬ 
pendix D. 

54 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 1. 

55 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years In the Great North-West". 

56 The Edmonton Bulletin , October 10, 1898, p. 1. It may be added 
here that The Bulletin for March 20, 1899 (p* 4) reported War¬ 
ner as having settled In the Edmonton district. 

57 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 2. 

58 Ibid. , pp. 2-3; The Edmonton Bulletin , March 24, 1905, p. 4. 

59 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 3. 

60 The Edmonton Bulletin , March 25, 1905, p. 7. 

61 Ibid. 

62 According to George Bevington, this term for a member of the 
Society of Equity was in common use in the Edmonton district 
from 1905 to 1909. Interview on March 4, 1955. 

63 The Edmonton Bulletin, March 30, 1905, p. 6. 

64 Ibid. “ 







































t 


« 







132 


65 An advance notice of this convention appeared in The Edmonton 
Bulletin on May 16, 1905 (p. 8). 

66 According to a news item in The Bulletin for August 8, 1905 
(p. 5), this "Executive Committee" or provincial board of di¬ 
rectors met "in the city hall, Edmonton, first Saturday in 
every month at 1 p. m.” 

67 The Edmonton Bulletin , June 6, 1905, p. 5. 

68 Ibid. , July 27, 1905, p. 3. 

69 Ibid. 

70 Ibid. , August 11, 1905, p. 4. 

71 Ibid. , August 24, 1905, p. 8. 

72 lb id.- , September 2, 1905, p. 1. 

73 The Saturday News , June 1, 1907, pp. 6-7; this letter is repro¬ 
duced in its entirety in Appendix D. 

74 Ibid. 

75 Ibid. 

76 Sheppard, Rice, "What Brought About the Alberta Farmers’ As¬ 
sociation". 

77 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West". 

78 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, pp. 31-3. 

79 According to The Edmonton Bulletin for March 10, 1905 (p. 8), 

The Regina Standard had commented early in the same year: 

A farmer sells a hog at four and a half cents a pound. 

It is shipped to Winnipeg where it is worked up into 
’breakfast bacon’ and it is shipped back, and sold to its 
former owner at 20 cents a pound. The railway makes a 
double profit, the packing house a single profit, and the 
farmer no profit at all. 

80 The Edmonton Bulletin , April 4, 1905, p. 7. 

81 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, pp. 4-5. 

82 The Edmonton Bulletin ., June 22, 1905, p. 7. 

83 Ibid. 

84 Interview with George Bevington, March 4, 1955. 

85 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 14. 

86 Ibid. , p. 15. 

87 Ibid. , p. 20. 

88 Ibid. 

89 Ibid. , pp. 27-8. 

90 Warner was referring to an article entitled "Hold Your Oats" 

which had been reprinted from The Farm and Ranch Review In The 
Edmonton Bulletin for October 27, 1905 (p. 3). ' 

91 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 28. 

92 Wood, op. oit. , p. 239. 

93 Ibid. 

94 Ibid^, pp. 239-40. 

95 The tariff commission of 1905 held two Alberta sittings, one at 
Edmonton, the other at Calgary. The two provincial farm as¬ 
sociations, however, only made submissions at the Edmonton 
hearing because at the time their organizational activities ap¬ 
pear to have been confined to the northern half of the province. 

































- 









■ 


















. 

J 










133 


96 


97 

98 

99 

100 

101 

102 

103 

104 

105 

106 

107 

108 

109 

110 
111 
112 
113 


According to The Bulletin for December 12, 1905 (p. 7), the 
only organizations represented at the Calgary sitting of the 
tariff commission were the Alberta Horse Breeders’ Associa¬ 
tion, the Calgary Board of Trade, and the Knight Sugar Gompany 
of Raymond. 

Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strath- 
cona Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, pp. 25-6. 

The Edmonton Bulletin , October 23, 1905, p. 1. 

Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strath- 
cona Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 31. 

See Chapter VI for further details concerning the failure of 
this amalgamation parley on December 8, 1905. 

The Edmonton Bulletin , December 13, 1905, p. 2. 


Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. t 
Ibid. 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
Ibid., 
Ibid. 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. 


P* 

P. 

P* 

P- 

P* 

P* 

P* 

P- 

p. 

p. 


3. 

2 . 

3. 

2 . 

3. 

2 . 

3. 

2 . 


2. 


















e 




« 





CHAPTER VI 


THE ALBERTA FARMERS* ASSOCIATION AND 
THE SOCIETY OF EQUITY STRUGGLE TO AMALGAMATE 

Part I — The Early Rivalry, 

The amalgamation of the Alberta Farmers* Association and the 
Canadian Society of Equity on January 14, 1909, was the climax of 
nearly four years of negotiations that are unique in the history 
of the western farm movement. Despite the obvious need for con¬ 
certed action to solve Alberta’s pressing agricultural problems, 
doctrinal differences kept the two farm bodies from merging until 
changed circumstances gave rise to a spirit of compromise late in 
1908. Efforts, however, to amalgamate the two associations began 
not long after their inception. As early as September 9, 1905, 

President Warner broached the subject of a merger with the Society 

I 

of Equity at a regular meeting of the Strathcona Grain Growers. It 
is possible that Warner previously had been sounded out on amalga¬ 
mation by interested "Equitists", but, unfortunately, available 
records do not reveal the exact origin of his proposal. The 
special meeting of the T. G. G. A. local, held on September 23, 
1905, to consider grain prices, agreed that the committee ap¬ 
pointed to fix these prices in cooperation with the Society of 

2 

Equity should also bring up the amalgamation question. At this 
point the wording of the T. G. G. A. minutes leaves much to be de¬ 
sired, but the implication is strong that the idea of a merger 

with the Society of Equity originated entirely with the Strathcona 
3 

group. On October 14, 1905, at a regular T. G. G. A. meeting, 

3A 

President Warner once more brought up the amalgamation issue. He 






















































, 4 














t 








> ■ 










135 


also stated that, in view of the proclamation of provincial 

status, the association should reconstitute itself as soon as 
4 

possible. When the ensuing discussion clearly indicated a general 
feeling in favor of reorganization and amalgamation with the 
Society of Equity, Kice Sheppard promptly introduced a lengthy re¬ 
solution which included the following proposals: (1) the appoint¬ 
ment of a committee "to draft a constitution and by-laws” for pre¬ 
sentation at the next meeting; (2) the extension of an invitation 
to "our friends of the Society of Equity” to attend this meeting 
"so that our new organization will be started on a good founda¬ 
tion”; and (3) the acceptance of the name, ”The Alberta Farmers f 

5 

Association”, for the new organization. Sheppard*s comprehensive 

resolution resulted in a protracted discussion, but, finally, when 

Joshua Fletcher made a motion "that the resolution as presented by 

the Secretary-Treasurer be accepted”, he was seconded by W. Lang 

6 

and the proposals were carried on a show of hands. 

On October 19, 1905, only a few days after the acceptance of 
Sheppard*s amalgamation resolution by the Strathcona Grain Growers, 
the Clover Bar branch of the Society of Equity made the following 
decision: 

Another matter of importance which came up for dis¬ 
cussion was the proposed amalgamation of the various 
farmers* organizations of the Province into one associa¬ 
tion. The sentiment of the meeting was unanimously in 
favor of such a union, and Mr. Keith, the representative 
on the executive board, was instructed to use his in¬ 
fluence to that end. A majority of those present were of 
the opinion that the new organization should be known as 
*The Alberta Farmers* Association*. The chairman an¬ 
nounced that a resolution had been passed by the Grain 
Growers* Association consenting to the proposed union.... 7 

This news item, coupled with Sheppard*s optimistic report to The 

Bulletin on his amalgamation resolution, prompted a Eivi^re Qui 


Barre member of the Society of Equity to take issue with the 





















, 


















. J 




3 





■ 










■ - ' 



























« 


. 

« 
























156 


T. G. G. A. Secretary-Treasurer. In a letter to The Bulletin on 

Sheppard's remark "that the time had arrived to form a strong as- 

8 

sociation under the name of the Alberta Farmers’ Association”, 
Nestor Noel commented: 

We have already the T. G. G. A. What is the matter 
with the Grain Growers? No good? Looks like it, as its 
members started the new concern. What is the matter 
with the American Society of Equity? Bad too? Why? Mr. 
Sheppard does not say. He thinks he has only to ’decide 
that the time has arrived’, frame a new constitution by 
adding to the constitution of the G. G. A. a few 
clauses stolen from the constitution of the A. S. of E., 
call a ’monster meeting’ and...the members of the A. S. 
of E* will all jump into the ring, and shout ’Hurrah 
for the Alberta Farmers’ Association!’ Too optimistic, 

Mr. Sheppard. It is poor work to destroy what is built 
already for the fun of building again, and build on a 
worse plan. Same as a sensible farmer would not trade a 
good horse raised In the States for a poor one simply 
because the latter was born in Strathcona, our fellows 
of the Society will not throw away their organization 
so sound, so lively and so rapidly spreading over the 
country, for that questionable scheme of the Strathcona 
Grain Growers. 

But just tell me, what are you after? Amalgamation? 

We shall be glad to accept you in our midst and it. will 
cost you only a few cents each to join the Society of 
Equity. It is the only possible way of amalgamation. 

Now, instead of working towards amalgamation you are 
going away in the wrong direction, as instead of two 
organizations, we shall have three. 

Is the fire of patriotism burning too hot In your 
heart? And do you object to the name ’American’? We are 
ready to change it and call our society ’Canadian 
Society of Equity’. We must keep the words ’Society of 
Equity’ because they express the aim and the object of 
our organization and shall be Its common name all over 
the world. 

Do you want independence for our Alberta affairs? A 
special constitution for Alberta giving us the most 
complete independence has been submitted to the members 
by the undersigned and is approved already by the... 
general secretary, Mir. Tubbs.... 9 

Noel then quoted from a letter he had received from Tubbs at the 

Society’s Indianapolis headquarters in which the general secretary 

stated that the constitution, alluded to above, was ’’practically 





















■ 















- 






■ 

« 

, 











■ 






. 




■ 

t 








157 


10 

perfect as it is, and needs scarcely any revision”. Having thus 
disposed of the question of foreign control, Noel proceeded with 
his public interrogation of Rice Sheppard: 

Do you want, as you say, profitable prices for farm 
products always? Controlled marketing is the only way to 
get them, and the Society of Equity the only farmers T 
organization specially built for that purpose; and co¬ 
operation with American farmers is necessary to attain 
that result. 

Do you want a large and strong organization? The 
A. S. of E. is not three years old and has over 150,000 
members, and with its wonderful power of organization is 
rapidly spreading all over the States and Canada. 

Do you want a small one? Organize a local union on 
the plan of the S. of E. It is just the thing to make 
farmers stick together and to manage your local affairs 
according to your own Interests. 

Do you want capable leaders, good and honest manage¬ 
ment? Join the S. of E. You will have as president, Mr. 

BverItt, the founder of the Society, author of the 
’Third Power’, Mr. J. P. Stelle, associate editor of Up- 
to-Date Farming, and M. W. Tubbs, the general secretary. 

Ask any secretary of a local union who has conducted 
correspondence with the headquarters and he will tell 
you that the management there is simply perfect. Here in 
Alberta you will have officers elected by the delegates 
of the local unions and liable to be relieved by them if 
not discharging their duties properly. You will always 
know what the society is doing, how your money is ex¬ 
pended and you will have a say about it. 

What else do you want? Just let us know and perhaps 
we shall find some way to satisfy you. 

When we joined the Society of Equity we knew what we 
were doing. We like its name, we like its object, we 
like its plan, we like its teachings, we like its 
management, we like its leaders and there is no reason 
why we should not be true and loyal to them. 11 

Rice Sheppard could not allow such an open challenge to his amal¬ 
gamation resolution to go unanswered, but, before a reply could be 
published, the T. G. G. A. discussions of the resolution were re¬ 
newed on November 11, 1905, at the regular monthly meeting in 
Strathcona, Only two days after the publication of Noel’s letter, 
President Warner found it necessary to report to the membership 








. ; : ''W 




. 
















r 






t • < 








' 









. 



























. -.£ iuy i ' E 







138 


"that the Society of Equity was not feeling just as ready as he 

had hoped to throw in with us", hut "a meeting would he held on 

12 

the 8th of December to go into the matter with our Committee". 

Mr. Keith, mentioned earlier as the Clover Bar representative on 
the Executive Board of the Society of Equity, then addressed the 
Strathcona Crain Growers on the amalgamation issue. Although there 
was what he called "some misunderstanding" between the two as¬ 
sociations, Keith "hoped that on the 8th of December at the 

meeting of our Committee matters would be satisfactorily ar- 
13 

ranged". He concluded by reporting that "two or three Lodges had 

. 14 

decided to join the Alberta Farmers’ Association", but the 

T. G. G. A. minutes do not indicate where these Equity lodges were 
15 

located. 

It was against this background of mounting "Equitist" op¬ 
position to amalgamation that Rice Sheppard was compelled to frame 
an answer to Nestor Noel. That the latter had appointed himself a 
spokesman for the Equity farmer opposed to the A. F. A. did not 
make the task any lighter. Noel’s lucid discussion of the issues 
at stake might well win the wavering over to "controlled 
marketing”, while an inept public reply could seal the fate of the 
nascent A. F. A. On November 17, 1905, The Bulletin , under the 
heading, "The Union Contemplated", published Rice Sheppard’s de¬ 
fence of his action in fostering a merger of the two local farm 
bodies. Although Sheppard was not the equal of Noel as a letter 
writer, he was able to advance some telling arguments against mem¬ 
bership in the Society of Equity as then constituted. Pointing out 
that there was a general feeling "much more good" could "be de¬ 
rived from one strong organization than from many small ones", 
Sheppard emphasized that his amalgamation resolution had been 









. 


















. 



















. 

















' 


• 






■ 




‘ 






























139 


introduced at the T. G. G-. A. meeting on October 14 in an earnest 

desire "to save time and...to have our views ready to lay before 

16 

...members of both societies". Joint action on the matter had been 

thwarted previously by harvest difficulties. In the belief that 

both societies had "been doing good work", the T. G. G. A. purpose 

was now "to take the good of the two and unite them into one 

17 

strong organization that will be an all-Canadian one". Sheppard 
stressed the latter point and indicated he would "not accept any¬ 
thing less than an all-Canadian organization managed by men living 

18 

in Alberta who are well posted in the affairs of the farmers". He, 

in fact, challenged Hoel to state if he thought "our friends in 

the States would consider it wise to ask Canadians living in Al- 

19 

berta to manage an Association for them a thousand miles away". In¬ 
deed, he asked, what would the American attitude be "if we were 
bold enough to enter the States and talk about managing the af¬ 
fairs of their farmers through the officers of a Canadian institu- 
20 

tion...?" At the same time Sheppard made it clear he was "not 

going to throw any slurs at the S. of E." because he had "too much 

respect for it", even though Foei had shown "bad taste" in be- 

21 

littling the Strathcona Grain Growers. He did not care, moreover, 

what name was used for a new Alberta farm body "so long as it is 

22 

not detrimental to the welfare of the Association". Sheppard 

claimed he was "not prejudiced against the name of the A. S. of 

E.", but he knew "of many farmers who would not join under that 
23 

name". "As we enjoy the privileges derived by living under the 

Canadian flag", he remarked, "we must be prepared to make some 

sacrifice and rather than cling to a name, cling to reason and 
24 

principle"* It was true that Hoel had indicated "Equitist" willing¬ 
ness to call the society "the Canadian Society of Equity", but such 
















. 






■ 

. 









, ' 




■ 























. 




. 








t * j .. 












. 



140 


a change in name was of little value because of the determination 

"to retain Messrs. Everitt, Stelle and Tubbs...as managers of our 

25 

so-called Canadian society". Yet, Sheppard asserted, the T. G. G. A. 

had "no intention of creating a third society", only a desire "to 

strengthen what has been built up by placing it on a more sub- 

26 

stantial and useful foundation". "We are not", he wrote, "pre¬ 
paring for a fight, but rather for a marriage feast when the two 

shall be united as one and all our farmers take their stand, 

27 

shoulder to shoulder, under our banner." 

Noel, meanwhile, had become more truculent in his attitude to¬ 
wards amalgamation with the Strathcona Grain Growers. In a letter 
published the same day as Sheppard’s defence of the T. G. G. A. 
position, he predicted that the Society of Equity would not "com¬ 
mit suicide just to please the promoters of the Alberta Farmers r 

Association", nor would "the G. G. A....consent to amalgamate in 
28 

the S. of E." However, the publication of Sheppard’s reply to his 
first letter caused Noel to adopt a more conciliatory tone. Ob¬ 
viously surprised, he admitted there were "quite a few things on 

which Mr. Sheppard and my humble self are perfectly of the same 
29 

opinion". Since one of the points on which they agreed was the 

need "to save time and to have the farmers of the province or- 

30 

ganized as soon as possible", Noel excused his previous remarks on 
the grounds that something must be done to arouse rural interest in 
the current movement for organization. "My purpose in starting this 
controversy in the Bulletin", he wrote, "was to save time by trying 
to clear the way for the discussion of this question of amalgama¬ 
tion, so that the matter could be settled at our convention on the 
31 

8th of December". Sheppard’s arguments, nevertheless, failed to 
dissuade Noel from continuing to support the Equity connection with 










, , .. [e • 
















. 




■ 




























. 

. 

. 










141 


the American headquarters at Indianapolis. Sheppard had asked in 

his letter why a provincial government had been established in Al- 
32 

berta. Although the T. G. G. A. Secretary-Treasurer had answered 

his own question by stating that "the business could not be as 

33 

well managed from Ottawa", Noel carried the argument to its ap¬ 
parent logical conclusion by observing, "Mr. Sheppard is a good 
patriot and I hardly think he would be in favor of forming an 

independent state In Alberta and break loose altogether from the 

34 

Dominion and from England". Similarly, Alberta "Equitists" did not 

35 

wish "to break loose from our Indianapolis headquarters". An 
international farm organization, Noel argued, would be "more ef¬ 
fective" and would have "more chances of success than a small pro- 

36 

vincial association". To conclude his reply to Sheppard, Noel 

listed two features of the proposed Alberta Farmers’ Association 

which he and other "Equitists" found objectionable and which he 

feared would either make an amalgamation agreement impossible or 

37 

result in "an ill-matched union that would not last". "We do not", 

Noel wrote, "like an association so much under the control of 

Government officials and where so much power is left to the execu- 
38 

tive". But even more objectionable was the fact that the A. F. A. 

was "not built to accomplish our purpose, namely Controlled 

39 

marketing by farmers’". Although Noel had "more faith in the 

40 

Society of Equity alone than in the proposed amalgamation", he 
felt hopeful some good would be achieved by the two farm associa¬ 
tions, even If they chose to remain independent of one another. 

"It will always be possible”, he wrote, "for the farmers of both 
organizations to work together for some definite purpose, and to 

stand shoulder to shoulder when their common interests are at 
41 

stake". Sheppard, however, failed to answer this letter, possibly 






- 





























































? 


- 




* 






142 


because he did not wish to comment further in the public press so 
close to the date set for renewed deliberations on the amalgama¬ 
tion issue. 

On December 8, 1905, the meeting between the T. G. G. A. com¬ 
mittee and the Society of Equity, alluded to earlier, took place 

on schedule in Edmonton. Three accounts of the discussions are 
42 

available, but each of them reflects such personal bias that one 
could be excused for thinking three different meetings were being 
described. Rice Sheppard, a T. G. G. A. representative, prepared 
minutes of the negotiations for the official records, but he seems 
to have been so annoyed over his limited part in the proceedings 
that he cut his version to the barest minimum. In a letter to The 
Bulletin in February, 1906, W. J. Keen made an incidental reference 
to the events on December 8 which is considerably more informative 
than the T. G. G. A. minutes, even though he suppressed certain 
facts detrimental to himself. As mentioned in the previous chapter, 
The Saturday News on June 1, 1907, published an A. F. A. version of 
the difficulties with the Society of Equity which had been prepared 
by the provincial secretary, W. F. Stevens. This account, though 
written from an A. F. A. standpoint, is much clearer as to the 
exact sequence of events at the conference. Whatever their re¬ 
spective shortcomings, it is from these three narratives that one 
must reconstruct the story of a meeting that easily could have 
altered the whole course of the Alberta farm movement. 

Except for W. J. Keen, who acted as chairman of the meeting, 
it is not now known who the Equity delegates were to the amalgama¬ 
tion parley on December 8, 1905* D. W. Warner, Rice Sheppard, and 

45 

W. F. Stevens, who were the only T. G. G. A. representatives, 
placed before the assembled delegates "the constitution and by- 







- 


























' 






. 











































143 


44 

laws" approved by the Strathcona branch on November 11. It was the 

presentation of this proposed A. F. A. constitution which ended 

all hopes of union and, apparently, caused much ill feeling 

amongst those present. Keen states that the constitution offered 

by the T. G. G. A. committee "had previously been placed before 

all our local unions and they were prepared to vote upon it when a 

member of the Society of Equity made a motion that the constitu- 

45 

tion be not voted upon but withdrawn". In their accounts of the 
proceedings, Sheppard and Stevens agree that an "Equitist" re¬ 
quested the withdrawal of the A. F. A. constitution, but Stevens 

goes further and identifies Keen as the person who made the re- 
46 

quest. According to both Sheppard and Keen, Warner withdrew the 
constitution only because Stevens favored such action, but Shep¬ 
pard was angered that Warner did not ask him for his opinion when 

consulting Stevens. As the official T. G. G. A. minutes expressed 

47 

it, "The third party should have been consulted, but was not". The 

A. F. A. constitution no sooner had been withdrawn, however, "than 

a resolution was introduced by an Equity delegate asking that the 

48 

Grain Growers amalgamate with the Society of Equity" and proposing 

"that a committee of each society meet together and draft another 

49 

constitution...agreeable to both". Again Keen is identified by 

Stevens as the "Equitist" who "claimed the floor and requested that 

50 

that resolution also be withdrawn". The offending motion was 

promptly withdrawn, but it was at this point that both the 

T. G. G. A. committee and the Equity delegates from Clover Bar left 
51 

the room. Before leaving, though, the Grain Growers issued "an in¬ 
vitation. . .to any members of the Society of Equity to attend our 

52 

meeting on the 9th Dec., as we would reorganize at that meeting". 
Keen relates, however, that after they had left the room "the 











< 

. 

- 

' 























. 
















. 













c 

















. 











. 


. 



144 


gentlemen who now represent the Alberta Farmers T Association came 

back to ask that no ill-feeling be kept up over the matter, but 

that both societies work along peaceably together to organize the 
53 

farmers". "They were assured", Keen wrote, "that the Society of 

Equity would not and did not have any but friendly feelings toward 
54 

them". Yet Keen followed up this statement of friendly intentions 
with the remark that "the Equity Society refused to amalgamate on 
the constitution offered....beause [the a. F. a/] being so inti¬ 
mately connected with the Government as they were, and receiving a 
Government grant as they frequently told us they would, the Equity 

Society was afraid they would be ’taken in and done for’ as far- 

55 

mers have been from time immemorial". 

Keen’s published objections to the proposed A. F. A. constitu¬ 
tion, it will be noted, repeated a criticism Nestor Noel had made 
in his debate with Rice Sheppard in the columns of The Bulletin . 

The intimate connection with the newly-formed provincial government 
which the Society of Equity thus laid at the door of the A. F. A. 
may be attributed to the Honorable A. C. Rutherford’s membership 
in both the Strathcona T. G. G. A. and its successor. The first 

premier of Alberta, however, had owned a farm for some time in the 
56 

Strathcona district and it was only natural he would belong to a 
local farm body. It is unlikely, though, that this circumstance 
was a major factor in causing the failure of the amalgamation ne¬ 
gotiations on December 8, 1905. 

Despite the setback received the previous day, the Strathcona 

Grain Growers proceeded on December 9, 1905, at their regular 

monthly meeting to reconstitute themselves as the Alberta Farmers’ 
57 

Association. Although they were compelled to take this important 
step without the support of the general membership of the Society 





. 

. 









■ 



. , . ; . .. 
















r 


















. 
















. 






























145 


of Equity, the former Grain Growers were joined in the Strathcona 

58 

fire hall by the Clover Bar "Squitists" who, apparently, had voted 

the night before to withdraw from the American organization and 

59 

throw in their lot with the proposed A. F. A, Thus, with at least 
two locals already assured, the meeting unanimously resolved that 
Strathcona should be the headquarters of the new provincial farm 
body and that the President, Vice-president, and Secretary-Trea¬ 
surer of the Strathcona local should act temporarily as a central 

executive with powers to set up additional branches wherever 
60 

possible. The election of these officers brought to light a clash 
of personalities which had been developing for some months and 
which later caused much trouble when the U. F. A. went into poli¬ 
tics. After D. W. Warner had been elected President, W. F. Stevens 
was proposed for the Vice-presidency. Warner objected to this 

motion saying "he had wished to retain Mr. Stevens as Secretary- 
Si 

Treasurer". His attempt to persuade Ealph Weir and H. M. Quebec to 

withdraw their nomination of Stevens as Vice-president evoked a 

reply from Quebec "that he had heard no kick against our present 

62 

Secretary and he did not wish to withdraw the motion". This com¬ 
ment silenced Warner with the result that Stevens was elected 
63 

Vice-president. Eice Sheppard was then chosen to fill the position 

64 

of Secretary-Treasurer. The six new A. F. A. Directors were Philip 

Ottewell, John 0. Parminter, G. Peel, Joshua Fletcher, T. H. 

65 

Stewart, and D. S. Fulton. 

Although relations must have been strained between the newly- 
elected A. F. A. President and Secretary-Treasurer after the 
election incident on December 9, it is to their credit that they 
worked wholeheartedly together in urging Alberta farmers to estab¬ 
lish branches of the Strathcona association. While the Vice-presi- 


- 






V 

■ 






































- 















. 









• 




. 

- - ' ■' 





























146 


dent looked after the details of A. F. A. sponsorship of a seed 

66 

grain fair at Edmonton, Warner and Sheppard pursued the matter of 
expansion with such success they were able to report to a Di¬ 
rectors ’ meeting on December 27, 1905, "that arrangements had been 
made with three settlements to hold meetings for organization, the 
first to be held on the 28th Dec. at Kay, the next at Fort Sas¬ 
katchewan on the 30th Dec*, and on Jany. 5th, ’06, at the Baker 
67 

School District". Warner and Sheppard, moreover, formulated plans 
for the printing of the A. F. A. constitution and by-laws in Eng¬ 
lish, French, and German in order that the purposes and method of 

operation of the new farm body would be widely available in an un- 
68 

distorted form* The failure to secure the bulk of the Equity mem¬ 
bership at the amalgamation parley on December 8, 1905, was, of 
course, the main reason for the speed with which Warner and Shep¬ 
pard took up the matter of expansion. 

The developments in Strathcona and Glover Bar during December, 
1905, were likewise a severe setback to the Equity cause, but 
Keen’s first public statement after the historic meeting in the 
Strathcona fire hall on December 9 contained no direct reference 
to the A. F. A. On December 18 The Bulletin published a letter 
from Keen which outlined the decisions reached on December 8 by 

the "delegate convention of the farmers’ new society, the American 

69 

Society of Equity, Canadian Department". According to the chief 

Equity organizer for the province, measures were adopted at this 

convention "that will give us large funds as well as a sound and 

70 

practical working plan". When Keen considered the way in which the 
Society had won support during the preceding year, although it had 
"no funds and no definite plan of work behind it", he felt confi¬ 
dent "the Equity" would not now be long in becoming "the most 




. 
















, 








. 


c > 






* 













. 





































147 


71 

noted and profitable movement" ever placed before Alberta farmers. 
Of even more importance, though, was the action taken on Decem¬ 
ber 8 to put "controlled marketing" into effect in the Edmonton 
district. This step, which was in line with the main purpose of 
the Society’s organization, was described in some detail in Keen’s 
letter so that local farmers would be convinced only "the Equity" 
could cope with the perennial problem of low prices. The "Minimum 
Price List" adopted at the Edmonton convention by the Equity dele¬ 
gates was to be placed in the market office and members and non- 

members alike were urged to hold firm in refusing to sell below 

72 

the prices indicated. Whether or not the announcement of the "Mini¬ 
mum Price List" attracted membership away from the rival A. F. A. 
is not now known, but there seems to be little doubt that in this 
particular instance "controlled marketing" was not too effective 
in dissuading Edmonton district farmers from letting their produce 
go at little better than cost. The market quotations appearing in 
The Bulletin both before and after the posting of the list were 
consistently lower than what the Society of Equity demanded and do 
not reflect any appreciable attempt to withhold produce until 
prices were more favorable. 

Near the end of December, 1905, a newspaper article prepared 
by the A. F. A. to attract supporters gave rise to an open clash 
with the Society of Equity over recent events in Strathcona and 
Clover Bar. On December 29 The Bulletin so expanded its format that 
it was possible to include a special "Farmers’ Page", and, to mark 
the inauguration of this new feature, the A. F. A. organizers were 
granted space to explain the reasons for the formation of their as¬ 
sociation : 


The farmers of Northern Alberta feel that there is 






































* 








S 










. 
































. 


. 




















148 


need of an organization which would unite every farmer 
in the province in one strong organization. The Grain 
Growers’ Association partially fills the bill, but is 
too narrow in its constitution and appeals only to the 
grain grower. What is wanted is an Association that will 
embrace every farmer whether a grain grower or stock 
raiser. Consequently the members of Grain Growers’ As¬ 
sociations and of the American Society of Equity in the 
vicinity of Edmonton have drafted a constitution which 
they thought would be wide enough to cover every farmer, 
and organized what they called the ’Alberta Farmers’ As¬ 
sociation’.... 73 

The statement that ’’the American Society of Equity in the vicinity 

of Edmonton” had joined in the organization of the A. F. A. drew 

an immediate response from the irrepressible W. J. Keen. Although 

The Bulletin subsequently published a letter from D. W. Warner 

stating that a copyist had left out two important words in the dis- 
74 

puted sentence, Keen already had rushed into print with a series 
of remarks not calculated to heal the wounds left by the failure 
of the amalgamation parley on the preceding December 8. Dis¬ 
agreeing with the claim that the A. F. A. constitution ”would be 
wide enough to cover every farmer”, Keen pointed out that ’’narrow¬ 
ness” was one of the principal reasons for its rejection by ’’some 

75 

five hundred” members of the Society of Equity. Keen then implied 

that the recent A. F. A. efforts to effect an amalgamation were 

but another example of ’’several cunning attempts” to hurl the 

76 

Society of Equity ”into the political cauldron”. Meanwhile, Keen 

asserted, ’’the great plan of ’Controlled Marketing’.... is 

77 

spreading almost of itself”. ’’Once we have Canada organized”, he 

wrote, ’’the world will be organized, for our plan is adopted in 

78 

England, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, and Australia.” 

Despite Keen’s optimistic hopes for future ’’Equitist” expan¬ 
sion, the A. F. A. continued to attract support early in 1906. 

The Fort Saskatchewan organization meeting, alluded to earlier, 


















. : 





' 




























C 












: 




















































1 


C 







149 


took place on schedule and resulted in the formation of another 
79 

A. F. A. local. The meeting, it may he noted, was under the chair- 

80 

manship of Frank A. Walker, the local member of the first Alberta 
legislature, a circumstance which probably added color to Equity 
suspicions there was a sinister alliance between the A. F. A. and 
the provincial administration. A. F» A. success at Fort Saskat¬ 
chewan, however, represented only one of the many centres visited 
by Warner and Sheppard during January, 1906. A list of meetings 
for just one week of that very busy month in A. F. A. history re¬ 
veals that these organizers spoke to farm rallies at Colchester on 
January 22, at Spruce Dale and the White Mud School on January 24, 

at Mill Greek, Beaumont, and the Great West School on January 25, 

81 

and at Leduc in both the afternoon and evening of January 26. Al¬ 
though A. F. A. expansion at this point tended to emphasize Nor¬ 
thern Alberta rural centres, as indicated in the foregoing list, 
the farmers in the southern portion of the province already had be¬ 
gun to organize under the new agrarian banner. At the first 
A. F. A. annual meeting, held in the Strathcona town hall on 
January 30, 1906, W. R. Dobie was not only able to report a mem¬ 
bership of eighty in the Pincher Creek local, but "much interest” 

82 

generally in southern farming communities. Less than two months 
later this growing southern support, for A. F. A. objectives ap¬ 
pears to have led President Warner to visit that section of the 
province. While details of his tour are none too plentiful, it is 

known that the A. F. A. chief executive addressed the members of 

83 

the Gardston Farmers f Institute on March 14, 1906. Warner’s pre¬ 
sentation of A. F. A. purposes to the meeting was so successful 
that The Gardston Star was able shortly afterwards to report■"the 


permanent organization of the Gardston branch of the Alberta Far- 















* 

















. 






■ 









. 




' 

. 

? 

























. 











150 


84 

mers’ Association". A further indication of A. F. A. success in 
Southern Alherta may also he deduced from the decision of the cen¬ 
tral executive in April, 1906, to hold a convention or general 
meeting of all locals in Calgary on May 9. Commenting on this con¬ 
vention call and the widening sphere of A. F. A. influence, The 
Saturday News remarked: 

....The association is speedily attaining the object 
that it set before itself, to become the representative 
farmers r organization of the whole province. In its 
initial stages it was confined for the most part to Nor¬ 
thern Alberta. But it is reaching out rapidly and this 
Calgary gathering will further accentuate the movement. 85 


The Society of Equity, meanwhile, does not seem to have over¬ 
looked the possibilities afforded by the growing farm population 
in the southern part of the province. Although details of the 
Society’s southern activities are lacking for 1906, it is apparent 
that by 1907 "controlled marketing" was attracting some attention 

in that area. On May 9, 1907, The High River Times reported that a 

86 

branch of the Canadian Society of Equity had been "formed here re- 
87 

cently", while in June it noted that the local membership had the 

construction of their own flour mill and elevator under considera- 
88 

tion. On June 6, 1907, the Southern Alberta News outlined the pro¬ 
ceedings of a large Equity meeting in Macleod which completed 

89 

plans, for a 250-barrel flour mill. A company capitalized at $5,000 

had been formed and the mayor of Macleod, J. J. Grier, was ap- 

90 

pointed general manager. On July 26, 1907, however, an Equity- 

sponsored farm rally in Raymond failed to materialize, apparently 

91 

because of a lack of interest. 

The A. E. A. drive for membership in 1906 inevitably entailed 
further clashes with the Society of Equity. At the first A. F. A. 


annual meeting in January, 1906, President Warner, in discussing 





. 

. 

c C 










■ 
























, 




















- 


■ 









{ 










. 





' 
























• 










151 


the work of organization in the Leduc district, "reported that the 
Leduc branch of the American Society of Equity, which had been es¬ 
tablished there about a month ago, had decided to cast in their 

92 

lot with the Alberta Farmers* Association**. A Belmont delegate, 
meanwhile, told the gathering **the Belmont branch of the American 
Society of Equity requested that a delegate from the Alberta Far¬ 
mers* Association be present at their regular meeting on Feb¬ 
ruary 8, as they wished to arrange for union with the Alberta Far- 
93 

mers* Association*** Publication of such, remarks, of course, did 
not contribute to harmony between Alberta’s two farm bodies, but 
Equity annoyance over these newspaper items was minor compared to 
the furore evoked by The Bullet in*s account of an organization 
meeting in Saron, six miles south of Leduc. This meeting, which 
was held on January 27, 1906, and reported in the press on Feb¬ 
ruary 10, was addressed by the indefatigable D. W. Warner and 
94 

Joshua Fletcher. Warner, who spoke first, commenced his address 

with an explanation of why the farmers of the province should be 

organized. Granted that organization was necessary, it naturally 

followed, according to Warner, "that the Alberta Farmers* Associa- 

95 

tion was the best suited to the people of Alberta**: 

....the Territorial Grain Growers* Association, with 
headquarters at Indian Head, had failed to meet the 
wants of the people of this new province of Alberta. 

The headquarters were too far away and it could do 
nothing to help the farmer with his hogs, beef, butter 
and eggs, and could never be of much use except to the 
farmer who lived further east, and could ship his grain 
to Winnipeg. One other organization was offered to us, 
that was the Canadian branch of the American Society of 
Equity.... 

This organization, the speaker said, had good objects 
in view, but like the grain growers was too far away and 
could be of little use to us while devoting so much of 
its time to the culture and sale of oranges, lemons, 
bananas, Indian corn and cotton. 


















■ 




* 




' 








{ 1 













. 












i 






, 







• 




. 


.... 




« 






. 
















152 


Mr, Warner said that he had farmed in the United 
States for many years and he was sure that no Canadian 
society could go over to the American side and establish 
a branch and he believed that the people of Canada would 
rather support their own institution and take an honest 
pride in doing so. He said that the farmers of Alberta 
must depend on the province of British Columbia and the 
new markets of Japan and China and the farmers could 
take care of these only in one way, that is to all join 
together in an association with headquarters right here 
in Alberta and look after their own business. 96 

Joshua Fletcher, in supporting Warner's remarks, informed the 

gathering that before coming to his farm near Ellerslie he had 

farmed in British Columbia. "According to the Vancouver market", 

Fletcher claimed, "the farmer here did not receive enough for his 

products, and...the merchants and tradesmen suffered as well as 

97 

the farmer himself". Meanwhile, "the speculator took advantage of 

them all", but the speaker maintained "that all the honest and best 

98 

business men of this country were in sympathy with the farmer" in 

the organization of an Alberta agrarian movement. Yet there could 

not be any doubt as to which association the Alberta farmer should 

support. The Society of Equity, Fletcher charged, "was coercive and 

out of date", while the A. F. A, "was commercial and suited to the 
99 

present day". He had had "considerable faith" in the T. G. G. A., 

but "this organization from the United States was the worst thing 

...the farmers could take hold of" because "no Canadian Government 

could be influenced by an institution with headquarters in another 
100 

country". Since Fletcher believed that a much greater effort should 
be made to cooperate with the federal Department of Agriculture, 
dependence on an American-led farm body, he felt, would be particu¬ 
larly harmful. "If...the Government ever made an attempt to 
help...", he remarked, "the opposition, no matter which party was 
in power, would block the way, but an all-Canadian organization 
could go to Ottawa or Edmonton and say what was wanted for the 


' 

' 






f . . I i « ■ 








. ■ 






















. 








. 




i 







. 





















. 










153 


Canadian farmer, and was asked for by the Canadian people, and in 

all reason, either the Liberals or the Conservatives would grant 
101 

it". Thus, the speaker reasoned, the A. F. A. "could keep out of 

party politics", whereas "the American Society would certainly 
102 

draw them in". The latter, Fletcher charged, "had come in here and 

stated that they cared nothing for the Government and wanted to 

103 

stay as far from it as possible". The Equity proposal "to join hun¬ 
dreds of thousands of farmers together and force the Government to 

104 

give any legislation the society asked" would make participation 
in party politics inevitable. A government refusal to meet the far¬ 
mers* demands would force the Equity membership into the political 
arena so that the offending party could be replaced. The A. F. A., 
meanwhile, "no matter what political party was in power,...kept 

the Minister and Deputy Minister of Agriculture as honorary members 

105 

of its central body in Strathcona". "In that way", Fletcher as¬ 
serted, "it always had the Department within reach and could do 

business just as the farmer does business with an honest merchant, 

106 

and an election could only change the man but not the relationship". 

Once more, W. J. Keen took up the Equity cause when it was 

under attack, and, once more, his contribution to the debate over 

the relative merits of the two farm organizations was not designed 

to hasten the achievement of amalgamation. In a letter to Tjhe 

Bulletin , published on February 16, 1906, Keen used Fletcher*s 

Saron address as an-occasion "to make the distinction between the 

two farmers* societies a little more plain, so that farmers may 

107 

have no excuse for confounding them". "At first", Keen explained, 

"we did not quite see how this was to be done, because the Alberta 
Farmers* Association claimed that they were after the same objects 
as the Society of Equity, only they preferred to obtain them in a 











I 






, 


. 








m-'-- 






























■ 




















154 


little different way,—but they have changed front considerably 

since and we are indebted to the ’Gentleman living near Ellerslie’ 

108 

for making it so plain that none but a fool may be deceived”. Com¬ 
menting that it would "be necessary...to go back a little way to 

properly explain where the difference between these two societies 
109 

started”, Keen then gave his version of the unsuccessful amalgama¬ 
tion negotiations on December 8, 1905, referred to earlier. Al¬ 
though he seemed to think "the flag of peace was flying” at this 
meeting, Keen expressed surprise that a few weeks later an Equity 
organizer touring the Strathcona district "encountered such bitter 

opposition...a special convention of the Equity Society...decided 

110 

to withdraw him altogether”. As the person who had "the honor of 
being the means whereby the ’Idea’ started in this district", Keen 
was not a little annoyed to find that "since then the Alberta Far¬ 
mers’ Association have had things all their own way...unless it 

happens that an Equity man is around, or that the farmers do not 

ill 

ask too many questions". Turning to Fletcher’s political 

references, Keen not only accused the A. F. A. of being "somewhere 

on the inside track", but he observed pointedly "that no revolution 

for the betterment of the people has ever gone on its way unopposed 

by greed and corruption or ever yet been encouraged by the existing 
112 

governments”. "The Society of Equity....", he added, "did not be¬ 
lieve the Alberta Farmers’ Association was what it claimed to be, 

113 

and, thanks to Mr. Fletcher, now we are sure of it". With regard to 

"our connection with the States, which our opponents made such a 

time about", Keen noted "that all business that has been transacted 

has been transacted by Canadian farmers at Edmonton....our head- 

114 

quarters at present". Since Dp-to-Date Farming , published at 


Indianapolis, was "the only agricultural paper that has yet dared 




. e 




, 












, 





. 



. 



















• • C ' > 













































155 


to stand up and say that the farmer should put his price on his 

own goods", the Equity membership in Canada would "hang tight" to 

the American official organ until a Canadian publication "dared to 

115 

come out and stand up for us in this fight". 

Joshua Fletcher appears to have ignored Keen's remarks on his 
Saron address, but the differences between the two farm leaders re¬ 
ceived considerable attention in the correspondence columns of The 
Bulletin . One farmer named A. Sparling, who claimed to he "outside 
the working of either society", took Keen to task for his short¬ 
sighted political attitudes. "Granting that the Government is com¬ 
posed of a lot of swindlers, as Mr. Keen would have us believe, 
would it not be better", he wrote, "to keep in touch with them and 

keep our eyes on them instead of turning our backs and letting 

116 

them do with us as they see fit"* The main portion of his letter, 

however, contained a vivid expose of A. F. A. and Equity efforts 

to organize the farmers of the Beaumont district: 

...the first open battle took place at Beaumont and the 
second at Colchester, then Mr. Owens moved out.... 

Messrs. Warner, Sheppard, Gerrard and Fletcher held a 
meeting in the Beaumont school house. The meeting, was 
got together on short notice and the room was about half 
filled. When the speeches were over it was quite late, 
and the farmers arranged to meet again on a certain date 
and organize.... 

To keep this appointment Mr. Fletcher went to Beau¬ 
mont in company with Mr. Ewan McDonald. When they ar¬ 
rived they found the room packed to the doors and Mr. 

Owens in possession. This gentleman had spent two days 
among.the people and demanded at once that the work of 
organization be laid over and the merits of the two 
societies be discussed. Mr. Fletcher protested but Mr. 

Owens carried his motion all through the house, and 
promptly took the floor and talked for two hours and a 
half, and at twenty-five minutes after ten sarcastically 
asked if Mr. Fletcher had anything to say. This gentle¬ 
man then took the platform and spoke for thirty minutes 
and everyone was satisfied that Mr. Owens* question was 
answered in a way that came as a surprise. 

Mr. Owens then rushed to the platform and gave a 





. 






\ il 










' 5 












.. . . ■ - . ' ; ■ ' ' 5 . ■■■ r- '■ 




- ■" - • >. 5 ■ o ■ ■ ^ 

{ 


















. 






« , . . 














■ 









, 


i 










156 


furious display of temper. 117 

Unfortunately for Owens, this action only served to seal the fate 
of "Equity" in the Beaumont district. When a vote was taken "a 
very large majority was in favor of the Alberta Farmers r Associa¬ 
tion", and, according to Sparling, "the French people are satisfied 

118 

that they did the right thing". 

While the Equity cause in the Saron dispute was not enhanced 

by Sparling f s contribution to the discussion, it did gain some 

strength when W. R. Bail, a former founder of the A. F. A*, took 

issue with Joshua Fletcher in the public press. Ball had left the 

A. F. A. to join the Society of Equity and almost immediately had 

been appointed an organizer for his newly-adopted association. Just 

when Ball split with the A. F. A. is not recorded, but it was 

119 

either late in 1905 or very early in 1906. Although Ball was not 
the popular figure in the farm movement that Fletcher was, his for¬ 
mer important connection with the A. F.. A. , combined with his fre¬ 
quent public utterances both on the platform and in The Strathcona 
Plaindealer , would be influential in drawing attention to Equity 
principles. Bail's principal argument in favor of the Society of 
Equity revolved about his favorite theme of the farmer's struggle 
against monopoly. "Monopolies", he wrote, "are our one common enemy 
and it is not necessary to emphasize to thinking men the importance 

of being in touch with farmers of all countries thereby aiding one 

120 

another to secure profitable prices". The foundations of a farm or- 

121 

ganization, he felt, should "be laid broad and deep" without any 
regard for artificial boundary lines. Since "the farmers of Canada, 
the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and Den¬ 
mark meet in one common market, viz., Britain, with their pro- 
122 

ducts", then an organization must be created of sufficient magni- 




. 

C : 

. 

. 



























« 






















■ 

























157 


tude to give purpose and meaning to their efforts to improve the 

marketing position of agriculture. Ball emphasized he did "not 

wish to belittle the efforts of any society formed to better the 

condition of the farmers", but the fact could not be ignored that 

123 

"thousands of farmers from all over the continent of America" were 

behind the Equity cause, while only a few hundred supported the 

A. F. A. To the charge that the Society of Equity was "an American 

society", Ball had a pointed reply: 

....Our reply is, no more so than the trade unions that 
have their headquarters in the States. The monopolists 
used the same howl about the trade unions being af¬ 
filiated with the United States because they knew that 
if they in Canada had trouble with their workmen they 
could send to the States for men but that is impossible 
under an international federation. The same logic ap¬ 
plies to farmers, the conditions being the same. We must 
work together the same as the unions who have been in 
the business for years and made a success of it. 124 

Fletcher's remark that the Society of Equity was "coercive" and 

"out of date" particularly exasperated Ball. He accused Fletcher 

of "throwing dirt at the A. S. of Equity" and claimed it was "the 

greatest rot to say we could not expect to have any influence with 

the government when we are united with the farmers in the United 
125 

States". As for being "out of date", Ball felt such a charge "does 
126 

not need any reply". He ended his remarks, however, on a concilia¬ 
tory note by stating that the Society of Equity endorsed "the ap¬ 
peal of the Alberta Farmers f Association in asking farmers to wait 
until they have heard both sides of the question" and agreed to "a 
friendly arrangement" by which "both societies" would "have repre¬ 
sentatives. . .meet at the same time and place and at the close of 

the debate...the farmers [would] decide which society shall be or- 
127 

ganized". 

The quarrel over the Saron meeting now became so heated that 
J. A. Everitt, the president and founder of the American Society 















. • • • • 

. 

. 






















, 

. 
























. . . 
















158 


of Equity, was drawn into the dispute. Francis G. Glare, the secre- 
tary-treasurer of the ill-fated Belmont union, had forwarded a 
newspaper clipping concerning the Saron episode to the Indianapo¬ 
lis headquarters, and, upon receiving the Everitt pronouncement on 
A. F. A. criticism, promptly sent the same to The Bulletin . 

Everitt emphasized in his letter to Clare "that when we say Ameri¬ 
can, we refer to all America, and particularly to Canada and the 

United States, which are practically one in their interests as... 

1E8 

great grain and stock producing countries". Despite this unanimity 
of interests, Everitt was convinced separate headquarters could he 
maintained by the Canadian body, even though close cooperation 
would be essential to the smooth functioning of the Equity plan: 

If the Canadian farmers think they are strong enough 
to solve their problems of marketing their crops and. 
securing profitable prices without the farmers of the 
United States helping them, then I say ’Amen’, and ’Suc¬ 
cess to you*. If, however, the Canadian farmers think 
they would be strengthened by all the farmers in the 
United States with them, and back of them, holding up 
their arms and strengthening them in all their demands 
for equity, then I say by all means the A. S. of 1. 
should be one for all North America. The Canadian farmer 
surely will get more benefits...by co-operating with the 
farmers of our country. Your country needs a head¬ 
quarters of its own, but it should be a headquarters of 
the A. S. of E. That is, you can have your own A. S. of 
E. and headquarters and the two headquarters can co¬ 
operate with each other. 

I have given the matter much thought. I am satisfied 
there is much to commend in the idea of the United 
States and Canadian farmers co-operating with each 
other, and there is much to be lost and lack of uni¬ 
formity will result if they work separately. Again I 
will challenge any person, or any set of people in your 
country to devise a better plan than the A. S. of E. 
plan. Therefore, if you do not join with us under our 
standard, you are bound to steal from us our plan and 
work for the same objects. 

I would think that the farmers of Canada would be too 
manly to appropriate everything that the A. S. of E. has 
and stands for, without as much as thanking us or co¬ 
operating with us. 129 

Turning to the A. F. A. contention that good relations must be 





c < 


















. 

I 0 . 

I ■ t ■ . ■> • : 

. t : 

c ■ 

fc 

. 

' 

J 

. 



159 


maintained with the federal and provincial departments of agri¬ 
culture, Sveritt observed: 

Admitting that Canada has a department of agriculture, 
we will also say the United States has a department of 
agriculture, and it has had a department of agriculture 
for a great many years, yet it is a fact, and every far¬ 
mer knows it, that this department has not solved the 
farmer’s problems. Instead they are becoming more serious 
every year, and new ones frequently arise. I predict that 
it is the same way with the Canadian department of agri¬ 
culture. We want to ask you whether the Canadian depart¬ 
ment of agriculture has been everything that the farmers 
could wish in solving their problems, in giving them good 
prices, in guaranteeing and giving such legislation as 
they need? If it has done this, then I admit that you do 
not need any Society of Equity by any name whatever. You 
have nothing to complain of; you should be perfectly 
satisfied, but X want to ask you in all fairness, are you 
satisfied? Is your business on a basis that it should be? 

Are you getting prices in proportion that you are paying 
other people for the goods that they produce, manufacture 
or sell to you? These are questions that will answer them¬ 
selves, or any person can answer as soon as asked. 130 

Although Sveritt did not feel direct political action by the 

Society would be needed, he conceded that the farmers of the United 

States and Canada would be a potent political force if they all 

would rally to the Equity banner: 

The A. S. of E. is not a political party, and I have 
never been able to see the slightest indication that 
there is any danger it ever will be, more than that, I 
will say that I have never been able to discern the 
least necessity for the A. S. of E. ever being a politi¬ 
cal party or babbling with partisan politics. At the 
same time it will be useless to deny that when the far¬ 
mers of the United States or the farmers of Canada were 
organized, that they would exert a powerful influence on 
any party that is in power to compel them to give them 
such legislation as is for their interest in equity; by 
virtue of their great number and the Importance of the 
business that they represent they would certainly exert 
such a power. It is a power that they have a right to 
exert, and In exerting It in equity, they would not only 
be doing good to themselves, but benefiting every 
legitimate industry, and institution and profession in 
the country. 131 

While Everitt’s letter was generally conciliatory in tone, it just 

was not enough to allay the suspicions many Alberta farmers enter- 

132 

tained concerning association with an American organization. 



















•e 












• 



















t 


. 

' 




160 


It will be recalled that the first A. I. A. annual meeting 

was informed the Belmont branch of the Society of Equity "wished 

133 

to arrange for union with the Alberta Farmers T Association". Ap¬ 
parently on the invitation of the president of the Belmont union, 

A. F. A. delegates were on hand in the local school house on 

134 

February 8, 1906, "to explain the policy of their organization", 
but their right to be there was challenged before a single one of 
them had a chance to speak. The events which followed both during 
and after the meeting is an example of the petty spirit that re¬ 
sulted from the growing rivalry between the two farm organiza¬ 
tions. Although it is not entirely clear how many A. F. A. repre¬ 
sentatives were invited, it would appear the number sent to Bel¬ 
mont was interpreted as an attempt to overawe the meeting. No less 
than four A. F. A. organizers, including Warner, Sheppard, and 
Fletcher, were present and,much to their embarrassment, were the 

subject of a lively discussion between the president, W. A. Wilson, 

135 

and the secretary-treasurer, Francis G. Clare. The latter had in¬ 
vited W. J. Keen and two other prominent Equity organizers to the 

136 

meeting and attempted, accordingly, to prevent the A. F. A. dele¬ 
gates from presenting the arguments for amalgamation with their 

organization. The decision of the meeting, however, was "to hear 

137 

the visitors from the south of the river". Fletcher spoke first, 

and, although he professed embarrassment in attempting "to speak 

138 

where his invitation was in dispute”, his address did not fail to 
live up to the atmosphere of tension created by the unseemly 
wrangle just concluded. "He was", he said, "not disposed to draw 
unpleasant comparisons, but would aim to correct a misunder¬ 
standing which had gone abroad": 

....It had been stated in several places, once in his 










■' < v 3 


. 






. 


■ 






. 






t ■ 










< 


» 






1 . ' ' v . ' - ' . . ■ - ■ - • ■ ' 1 


























. 






t 




. 




. 










161 


own presence by Mr. Owens at Beaumont, that Messrs. War¬ 
ner and Stevens had left the American Society of Equity 
and taken the local society to which they belonged with 
them and formed a new organization south of the river..*. 

Mr. Owens had said at Beaumont that these men had done 
this partly to make offices for themselves. Mr. Fletcher 
...wanted it understood once and for all that neither Mr. 
Stevens nor Mr. Warner had anything to do with the first 
movement for an all-Canadian Association south of the 
river.... 139 

Not to be outdone by his colleague from Ellerslie in raking up the 

quarrels that had accumulated during the past year, B. W. Warner 

thanked Fletcher for disproving "the old falsehood which had been 

140 

so often stated" and announced "he had another grievance yet". 

"That", he stated, "was in reference to the effort that had been 

141 

made to amalgamate the two institutions last fall". Warner then 
proceeded to explain the failure of the amalgamation parley in De¬ 
cember, 1905: 

...the Territorial Grain Growers T Association had ap¬ 
pointed a committee to meet the American Society of 
Equity and that committee had drawn up a constitution 
representing their ideas and expected the A. S. of E. to 
do the same. Then from those two a suitable one could be 
arranged. By this means he had hoped they would quickly 
come to terms. Mr. Warner said that he did all he could 
to have a vote taken to decide if the meeting was in 
favor of amalgamation or not, but those gentlemen from 
Poplar Lake obstructed the vote and insisted on con¬ 
fining the discussion to the prepared constitution and 
telling the people that the Territorial Grain Growers T 
Association expected them to swallow their constitution 
or nothing. ’So*, continued Mr. Warner, r I want it dis¬ 
tinctly understood that Mr. Keen prevented the union and 
is now responsible for the battle that has been carried 
on*. 142 

Despite the fact that Keen and two other Equity organizers were 

present, "organization under the A. F. A. constitution" took place 

143 

after the close of Warner r s remarks. Glare was so angry over this 
turn of events that he took the matter up in the public press where 
he charged the A. F. A. delegates with acting "in...an unseemly 
manner" at Belmont when they sought "to organize at another 





. . . 

- 




- 


.... 






. 


. 






: 










o 








e ' ' - 


■ 

. f 


. 






162 


144 

society’s meeting". Such behavior, he told The Bulletin , "speaks 

145 

volumes ’not in their favor”’. Although Glare is not too clear on 

the point, it would appear that a small group under his leadership 

retained the Belmont affiliation with the provincial headquarters 

146 

of the Society of Equity. 

Examination of the available records of the rivalry between 
the A. F. A. and the Society of Equity down to the summer of 1906 
not only makes it apparent that the A. F. A. was the stronger of 
the two bodies, but that the antagonism which followed the ill- 
fated parley of December 8, 1905, indirectly reflected an intense 
desire on both sides to unite the farmers of Alberta into one or¬ 
ganization. It is to the credit of the A. F. A. that the first 
step in the direction of renewed amalgamation negotiations was 
taken at the Calgary convention in May, 1906. At the evening 
session on May 9 the following resolution was adopted: 

Whereas the convention of delegates of the various 
branches of the Alberta Farmers’ Association, in common 
with all Alberta farmers who earnestly desire the most 
perfect organization of those engaged in agriculture, 
deeply deplores the fact that the forces of Alberta far¬ 
mers have been divided through the establishment of the 
Society of Equity and the Alberta Farmers’ Association 
with practically identical objects. 

Be it resolved that we appoint a representative com¬ 
mittee to arrange a conference with a representative 
committee of the Society of Equity with a view to making 
an earnest effort to arrange a basis for amalgamation 
and formation of an all-Canadian and provincial organiza¬ 
tion of forces in the common cause of improved agri¬ 
cultural conditions. 147 

Despite the earnest hope expressed in this resolution for agrarian 
unity in the province, the second attempt at amalgamation, which 
followed the action of the Calgary convention, nearly destroyed the 
Alberta farm movement. 









- 


























■ 













■ 


163 


1 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 14. 

2 Ibid. , p. 21. 

3 Ibid. 

3A It would appear that between September 23 and October 14, 1905, 
there was no discussion of the amalgamation question by the 
T. G. G. A. committee appointed to fix grain prices in coopera¬ 
tion with the Society of Equity. On November 17, 1905, in a re¬ 
ply to Nestor Noel, published in The Bulletin , Rice Sheppard 
made the following nebulous reference to the success of the 
amalgamation discussions prior to the regular T. G. G. A. 
monthly meeting on October 14: 

We appointed a committee to meet a committee of the 
A. S. of E., but, being harvest time, it was difficult to 
get the committees together and when the meeting was 
called, the notice sent to our president did not arrive 
in time for him to call his committee and meet our friends 
of the S. of E. A few days later our monthly meeting took 
place and the matter of re-organization came up again for 
discussion and our members were in favor of moving in the 
matter at that time so that our friends of the A. S. of E. 
would know r how we stood and also to save valuable time. 

4 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 22. 

5 Ibid. , pp. 22-4. 

6 Ibid. t p. 24. 

7 The Edmonton Bulletin , - October 23, 1905, p. 1. 

8 Ibid. , November 9, 1905, p. 3. 

9 Ibid. ; see also the correction in the wording of this passage 
which appeared in The Bulletin for November 17, 1905 (p. 3). 

10 Ibid. , November 9, 1905, p. 3. 

11 Ibid. 

12 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 28. 

13 Ibid. , p. 29* 

14 Ibid. 

15 Ibid. 

16 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 17, 1905, p. 3. 

17 Ibid. 

18 Ibid. 

19 Ibid. 

20 Ibid. 

21 Ibid. 

22 Ibid. 

23 Ibid. 

2.4 Ibid. 

25 Ibid* 

26 Ibid. 

27 Ibid. 

28 Ibid. 


29 

Ibid., November 

27, 

1905, 

p. 4. 

30 

Ibid. 



31 

Ibid. 




32 

Ibid., November 

17, 

1905, 

p. 3. 

33 

Ibid. 









































164 


34 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 27, 1905, p. 4. 

35 Ibid. 

36 Ibid. 

37 Ibid. 

38 Ibid. 

39 Ibid. 

40 Ibid. 

41 Ibid. 

42 In a speech at Belmont on February 8, 1906, D. W. Warner did 
make a reference to the amalgamation conference in Edmonton, 
but it is too brief to be classed as an account of the course 
of events on December 8, 1905. This reference is quoted in its 
entirety on page 161 of the present study. 

43 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 29. 

44 Ibid. 

45 The Edmonton Bulletin , February 16, 1906, p. 4. 

46 The Saturday News , June 1, 1907, pp. 6-7. This letter, it 
should be noted, is given in its entirety in Appendix D. War¬ 
ner’s Belmont address, which was delivered with Keen in the 
audience, confirms Stevens’ contention that the latter did not 
speed the cause of amalgamation on December 8, 1905. Warner’s 
remarks appear on page 161 of the present study. 

47 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 30. 

48 The Saturday News , June 1, 1907, pp. 6-7; Appendix D. 

49 The Edmonton Bulletin , February 16, 1906, p. 4. 

50 The Saturday News , June 1, 1907, pp. 6-7; Appendix D. 

51 The Edmonton Bulletin , February 16, 1906, p. 4. The other two 
accounts imply that the T. G. G. A. committee withdrew at this 
point. 

52 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, p. 30. 

53 The Edmonton Bulletin , February 16, 1906, p. 4. 

54 Ibid. 

55 Ibid. 

56 Ibid. > September 21, 1905, p. 8. This, it should be noted, is 
but one of many references that were made In The Bulletin to 
Premier Rutherford’s Strathcona farm. See also the annual execu¬ 
tive lists of the South Edmonton Agricultural Society in Appen¬ 
dix A for an indication of the interest that Rutherford took in 
the work of that body. 

57 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, pp. 31-4. 

58 A detailed account of the reasons for this action of the Glover 
Bar branch of the Society of Equity may be found in Stevens’ 
statement to The Saturday News on June 1, 1907 (pp. 6-7). See 
Appendix D. 

59 The Edmonton Bulletin , December 29, 1905, p, 6; Moorhouse, Hop¬ 
kins, Deep Furrows , Toronto, 1918, p. 144. 

60 Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers’ Association, Strathcona 
Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905, pp. 32-3. 

61 Ibid. . p. 32. 

62 Ibid. 

63 Ibid. 

64 Ibid. 

65 Ibid., p. 33. 








































. 

; 






f . 


A 






X . . 




« ' 










« 


• t : 


: 

. 


C * t 


. . ' ' ■■ t * 






, t e 










- 









165 


66 Minutes, The Alberta Farmers* Association, Strathcona Branch, 
December 9, 1905, to January 9, 1909, p. 36. 

67 Ibid. , pp. 36-7. 

68 Ibid. , p. 37. 

69 The Edmonton Bulletin , December 18, 1905, p. 2. 

70 Ibid. 

71 Ibid. 

72 Ibid. 

73 Ibid. , December 29, 1905, p. 6. 

74 According to the letter in question, which appeared in The 
Bulletin for January 11, 1906 (p. 6), the two words omitted 
were ”a portion” before the phrase ”of the American Society of 
Equity In the vicinity of Edmonton”. It is also important to 
note that in Warner*s corrected version of the disputed sen¬ 
tence the words ”Grain Growers* Associations” were amended to 
read ”the Grain Growers* Association”. This change in the 
original wording leaves little doubt that there was only one 
branch of the T. G. G. A. in Alberta at the time of the 
creation of the A. F. A. 

75 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 6, 1906, p. 6. 

76 Ibid. 

77 Ibid. 

78 Ibid. 

79 Ibid. t p. 1. 

80 Ibid. 

81 The Saturday News , January 27, 1906, p. 10. 

82 The Edmonton Bulletin , February 3, 1906, p. 6. 

83 Ibid., April 7, 1906, p. 3. 

84 Ibid. 

85 The Saturday News , April 28, 1906, p. 6. 

86 This change of name did not go into effect officially until 
early in 1907. See Appendix D for an interesting comment by 

W. F. Stevens on the use of this new name following the failure 
of the amalgamation conference on December 8, 1905, and prior 
to the receipt of official approval from the Indianapolis head¬ 
quarters. 

87 The High River Times , May 9, 1907. 

88 Ibid. , June 19, 1907. 

89 The Southern Alberta Daily News , June 7, 1907. 

90 Ibid. , July 30, 1907. 

91 Ibid. 

92 The Edmonton Bulletin, February 3, 1906, p. 6. 

93 Ibid. 

94 Ibifl* , February 10, 1906, p. 5. 

95 Ibid. 

96 Ibid. . 

97 Ibid. 

98 Ibid. 

99 Ibid. 

100 Ibid. 

101 Ibid. 

102 Ibid. 

103 Ibid. 

104 Ibid. 

105 Ibid. 

106 Ibid. 

107 Ibid., February 16, 1906, p. 4. 

108 Ibid. 
















































? I 

c 










c 


„ ' . I.. 

' ' : . j { i :Ji; v'j 

. • . r , i w ■ 




• . t 


. . 




. 


c -asw ti. 




. 

: * 















166 


102 The Edmonton Bulletin , February 16, 1906, p. 4. 

110 Ibid. 

111 Ibid. 

112 Ibid. 

113 Ibid. 

114 Ibid. 

115 Ibid. 

116 Ibid. , March 5, 1906, p. 3. 

117 Ibid. 

118 Ibid. 


112 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West". 

120 The Strathcona Flaindealer , March 2, 1906, p. 7. 

121 Ibid. 

122 Ibid. 

123 Ibid. 

124 Ibid. 

125 Ibid. 

126 Ibid. 

127 Ibid. 

128 The Edmonton Bulletin, March 27, 1906, p. 5. 

122 Ibid. 

130 Ibid. 

131 Ibid. 


132 Interview with George Bevington, 

133 Supra , p. 151. 

134 The Edmonton Bulletin , March 17, 

135 Ibid. 

136 Ibid., March 27, 


137 Ibid. , March 17, 

138 Ibid. 

139 Ibid. 


1906, 

1906, 


140 Ibid. 


141 Ibid. 


142 Ibid. 


143 Ibid. 


5. 

3. 


144 Ibid. , March 27, 1906, p. 5. 

145 Ibid. 

146 Ibid. 

147 Ibid., May 12, 1906, p. 2. 


March 4, 1955. 
1906, p. 3. 







































c 













: j . ■ 





. 

. 


. 


. 









CHAPTER VII 


THE ALBERTA FARMERS’ ASSOCIATION AND 
THE SOCIETY OF EQUITY STRUGGLE TO AMALGAMATE 

Part II — The Lacombe Disaster and Its Repercussions. The Second 

Attempt at Amalgamation Ends in Failure. 

The members of the provincial executive of the Society of 
Equity were so pleased with the A. F. A.’s amalgamation resolution 

that on August 10, 1906, a joint meeting was held in Edmonton to 

1 

act upon the suggestion made in Calgary the previous May. John M. 

Moran, Nestor Noel, and a man named Wallace represented the 

Society of Equity, while the A. F. A. delegates were George Ball, 

2 

Thomas Daly, and R. N. Whillans. Naturally, not much could be done 
in the way of an amalgamation convention until harvesting opera¬ 
tions were over for the year, but it was finally agreed that the 
best method of renewing union negotiations would be to hold simul¬ 
taneous conventions of delegates from the locals of both associa- 

3 

tions at Lacombe on November 1 and 2, 1906. There, it was hoped, 

4 

"a scheme for union might be put through”. 

The prospect of amalgamation had a salutary effect on the 
petty bickering between the Society of Equity and the A. F. A. 
which had led up to the Calgary resolution favoring the union of 
Alberta’s two farm bodies. The public airing of differences be¬ 
tween various A. F. A. and Equity members through the medium of 
the press came to an abrupt end, the undignified efforts to entice 
individuals and, sometimes, whole locals from one side to the 
other vanished from the provincial scene, and the executive or¬ 
ganizers of both associations ceased to declaim against one 












' , 







' , 

; 

e 




, 
















c 


0 -. ■ . 






- 










. f • 

* 







168 

another on the public platform. Indeed, a study of the Alberta 
press during the summer of 1906 would lead one to suspect a con¬ 
spiracy of silence had been agreed upon by a. F. A* and Equity of¬ 
ficials in order that the Lacombe negotiations would not be jeo¬ 
pardized by the kind of public discussion which had preceded the 
first amalgamation parley on December 8, 1905. Undoubtedly, the 
hope of union did much to pacify feelings amongst those farmers 
who had been most vocal concerning the relative merits of the two 
farm movements, but the sudden termination of press reports dealing 
with the various efforts to win more supporters would indicate 
either that all attempts to expand ceased when amalgamation seemed 
likely, or that directives were issued by the central headquarters 
of each body to keep controversial material out of the newspapers. 
Both these explanations, of course, may be correct. At the same 
time, however, it must be noted that two much discussed agri¬ 
cultural problems became so serious during the summer of 1906 that 
royal commissions were appointed to carry out official investiga¬ 
tions of the complaints coming from western agrarian circles. The 
work of preparation for the public hearings entailed by such 
government inquiries not only called for some semblance of unity 
on the part of Alberta farmers, but probably made the need for 
amalgamation appear more real. 

News of royal commissions being appointed or about to be ap¬ 
pointed literally engulfed the A. F. A. and the Society of Equity 
as they moved toward a second attempt at amalgamation. In July, 
1906, another grain commission inquiry was ordered by the federal 
government in response to the insistent requests of the western 

grain growers’ associations for an investigation into the operation 

5 

of the Manitoba Grain Act. The news of this inquiry, it will be 





















' 

































< t 




















_ 










. 

5 ' 




169 


noted, preceded the joint meeting in Edmonton which laid the basis 

for the A. F. A. and Equity conventions in Lacombe. At the very 

time this joint meeting was taking place, western newspapers were 

full of the news of the part being played by the Hon. W. T. Finlay, 

the Alberta Minister of Agriculture, in persuading the other 

western provinces to hold a joint inquiry into the truth of 

charges that a beef combine was denying the producer a just return 

for his product. Finlay’s efforts were successful and in October, 

1906, the membership of the Beef Inquiry Commission was announced 

6 

by the provincial governments concerned. Thus the actual amalgama¬ 
tion negotiations took place at Lacombe but a few weeks after the 
release of this information and only a month before the commence¬ 
ment of the Alberta hearings of the federal Grain Commission. 

Never was there a more suitable time for a union of the organized 
farmers of the province. Controversy between the two agrarian as¬ 
sociations was at a temporary standstill and the call for a united 
farm front was unmistakable while official investigations were 
being conducted into western agricultural marketing conditions. 

Yet the anticipated amalgamation did not take place when the dele¬ 
gates assembled in Lacombe at the beginning of November, 1906. The 
reasons for this failure to unite at such an opportune moment form 
one of the most absorbing chapters in the history of the western 
farm movement. 

Despite the unfortunate outcome of the Lacombe amalgamation 

negotiations, there were, apparently, no forebodings that obstacles 

would arise to the union of Alberta’s two farm organizations. On 

7 

October 6, 1906, The Saturday News observed: 

The gathering of farmers at Lacombe at the end of the 
month, at which delegates from all the local unions of 
the Alberta Farmers’ Association and the Society of 



t 






■■ ^" 5 





































u 






. 









. t 



. 























170 


Equity are expected to be present, should result in the 
organization of one strong body, which will be able to 
speak in the name of the agriculturists of the province 
in a way which will compel a hearing. Sentiment is 
running very strongly for union and there is no reason 
for believing that the efforts of those who are aiming 
to bring it about will fail. 8 

On October 20, 1906, The News reported that, "All over Alberta 
farmers have been electing their delegates to next week’s con¬ 
ference at Lacombe, when it is hoped the farmers’ Association and 

the Society of Equity will be united in one strong body, thoroughly 

9 

representative of the agricultural interests of the province", 

while a week later the same paper hopefully remarked that, "The 

outlook at the time of writing is excellent for a successful 

gathering of the agriculturists of the province at Lacombe...and 

10 

the indications are...one strong organization will be formed". On 
November 3, 1906, however. The Saturday News w r as forced to record 
the collapse of the amalgamation scheme: 

The dramatic element is not as a rule very strongly 
in evidence at farmers’ gatherings. But there was an ex¬ 
ception last week when in Mobley's Hall at Lacombe, the 
delegates of the rival agricultural organizations of Al¬ 
berta met face to face in an endeavour to unite the two 
bodies. They came, they saw, but they didn’t fall on 
each other's necks. In union is supposed to be strength. 

In such a union as would have been formed had this pro¬ 
ject gone through, the chances would have been poor for 
anything but a succession of internal squabbles, which 
would have supplied the newspapers with plenty of 
readable copy but which would have prevented the or¬ 
ganization from doing anything like effective work. 11 


To describe the steps which led up to the disastrous turn of 

events at Lacombe, it should be noted first that the two farm con- 

12 

ventions met separately on November 1. The Equity delegates were 

presided over by Colonel J. J. Gregory, who, it will be remembered, 

had played such an important part in the emergence of the ill-fated 

Farmers’ Association of Alberta, while the secretary of the 

13 

gathering was W. J. Keen. Gregory appears to have been invited to 
















t * 














< : C 






' 




- 






- 

. 






OL ' ( 






171 


preside, not as the Lacombe delegate to the gathering, but as a 
prominent member of the Society who happened to reside in that 
centre. It is also possible that his former connection with an Al¬ 
berta farm movement made his presence as chairman seem desirable 

at a conference mainly devoted to the problem of uniting Alberta’s 

14 

organized farmers under one banner. The A. F. A. delegates, mean¬ 
while, were presided over by D. W. Warner and Rice Sheppard who, 

15 

in the absence of W. F. Stevens, acted as secretary. Both conven¬ 
tions sought at first to clear away a considerable amount of rou¬ 
tine and other accumulated business before settling the amalgama¬ 
tion issue. This procedure, however, was easier to place on a con¬ 
vention agenda than it was to carry out. The union problem hung 
like the sword of Damocles over the heads of the assembled dele¬ 
gates and until it was solved only tentative decisions could be 
made concerning the business of both associations. Keen, in fact, 
told The Bulletin in his report on the Lacombe deliberations that 
"until the question of ’Amalgamation’ was settled, for or against, 
...much of our other business could not go on; so a committee was 

i 

appointed by both societies to meet together and endeavor to ar- 

16 

range a basis of agreement”. Later on in his report, Keen noted 

that when the union issue had been resolved the ’’farmers’ business 

society” was able to complete on the last day of its sessions ’’four 

17 

times the business...we had done the previous two”. 

The Lacombe amalgamation committee, which Keen mentions in his 

report to The Bulletin , consisted of six members, three from each 

association. The A. F. A. representatives were Joshua Fletcher, 

S. N. Barker, and Rice Sheppard, while at the preliminary meeting 

Colonel Gregory, Keen, and M. A. Strang appeared for the Society of 
18 

Equity. The following day, however, it was found that a startling 




















. 


. 


















■ , 








■ 





















' 
























t 


■ 

. 




. 













172 


change had taken place in the Equity delegation. Colonel Gregory 

19 

had been replaced by William R. Ball. Although this action was re- 

20 

garded by the A. F. A. representatives "as a bit of bad faith", no 

reason was offered by the Society of Equity for Gregory’s removal. 

Yet, according to The Saturday News , "the cause was evident to all 

21 

who followed the proceedings". Since "the Colonel" had been "most 

22 

conciliatory towards the claims of the Alberta Farmers" at the pre 

liminary meeting, the only question which appeared likely to give 

any serious trouble was a name for the new organization. Despite 

A. F. A. protests over the change in the Equity delegation, the 

Society refused to allow Gregory to return to the deliberations. 

The negotiations were resumed, but, because Ball "was known to be 

an extremist", the A. F. a. now "naturally assumed that...the 

chances were poor for the other side to be reasonable in its de- 
23 

mauds". 

When the amalgamation committee resumed discussion of the pro 
24 

posed union, "it was found", Keen told The Bulletin , "that the 

’name’ was the sticking point of the negotiations, neither com- 

25 

mittee wishing to entirely give up theirs". The names under con¬ 
sideration, however, were narrowed down finally to the following 
three contributions from Sheppard, Keen, and Ball, respectively: 

"The United Farmers of Alberta", "The Farmers’ Union of Alberta", 

26 

and "The Alberta Farmers’ Society of Equity". In view of their in¬ 
ability to agree on any one of these names, the amalgamation com¬ 
mittee decided that the choice should be made by a joint meeting 

of the two conventions with the delegates balloting on the prin- 

27 

ciple of "one man, one vote". The committee members then returned 

to their respective conventions with this proposal, but the 

A. F. A. delegates became so involved in a lengthy debate over the 










- 

C 












. 


. ' < 










































■ f i 








. 









. 

















173 


issue that the Equity convention went ahead with the preparation of 

28 

the necessary ballots. This work, though, was not enough to occupy 

the Equity delegates and, becoming impatient, they sent a messenger 

29 

"to enquire the cause of the delay". 

The A. F. A. convention, meanwhile, had decided that either of 

the names mentioned by Sheppard and Keen "would be acceptable", but 

30 

"The Alberta Farmers 1 Society of Equity....would never do". Since 
Keen himself had suggested "The Farmers 1 Union of Alberta", a re¬ 
solution was proposed favoring this solution to the difficulty. At 

this point, however, "some delegates pointed out...there were other 

31 

considerations besides that of the name". These "considerations", 

The Saturday News reported, could be described as follows: 

....They understood that this meeting was called together 
to form a union of Alberta farmers. Would the members of 
the Society of Equity agree to restrict the operations of 
the new body to Alberta? They did not wish to go out of 
the province and come in conflict with other organiza¬ 
tions. Would it not be well to make this a condition of 
the union? It was at last agreed that it should be made 
so and Mr. Woolford was dispatched with this ultimatum.... 32 

Keen and The News , it should be noted, differ slightly in their re¬ 
ports of the circumstances leading up to the dispatch of an 
A. F. A* messenger with the so-called "ultimatum". According to 
Keen, the Equity action in sending a messenger to find out "the 
cause of the delay.».brought back a member of the Alberta Farmers 

to our convention with a note which was written in the shape of an 
33 

Ultimatum 1 ". The Kews , on the other hand, indicates that Woolford 
was sent without any reference to Equity impatience over the delay 
in the proceedings. 

Apparently confident amalgamation was now just a matter of 
selecting a name, the Equity delegates were astounded when the 
A. F. A. "ultimatum" arrived stating that no voting could take 
place until it was clearly understood the new association would 











' 




. 

4 






















' 5 ■ ... 










.... 










5 




3 








■ 















174 


not organize outside Alberta. "This", Keen remarked, "was so unex¬ 
pected and so strange that again a messenger was sent with an ur¬ 
gent request for the whole convention to attend our meeting and 

34 

discuss this new objection". The arrival of the A. F. A. delegates 
at the Equity meeting place soon brought the entire amalgamation 
proceedings to a dramatic climax. After the A. F. A. decision had 
been outlined by President Warner "in a brief and forcible ad¬ 
dress", John M. Moran of Fort Saskatchewan rose and delivered a 

speech which The Saturday News described as "hard to match" in 

35 

both "lucidity of expression and compactness of argument". Moving 

"that the Society of Equity accept the terms of their ’brother 

farmers’", Moran stated it had been his "opinion all along that 

only a provincial organization was desired" and that he could "not 

see how there could be any difficulty about...a union, once a name 

36 

had been decided upon". His motion, however,"was...one upon which 

37 

only the members of the Society of Equity could vote" and as a re¬ 
sult a fundamental cleavage within Equity ranks soon became pain¬ 
fully apparent. When George Sutherland of Spruce Grove seconded 

Moran’s motion, Keen jumped to his feet and "took strong ex- 

38 

ception" to the views that had been just expressed. "If this 

proposition were accepted", Keen declared, "the essential prin- 

39 

ciple of their organization would be abandoned". The basic concern 

of the Society was the control of prices for their products "and 

40 

to do this they had to go outside the province". As Keen expressed 

it later in his report to The Bulletin , "the ’great plan of 

equity’...is built ’big, broad and deep’" so that "to shut us up 

41 

in one province" would "destroy us altogether". J. T. North of 
Stavely and M. A. Strang of Claresholm "vigorously supported" 

Keen, Strang in particular "making an impassioned appeal" to the 






, 

; 















... ' . . 


c ’ f 




’ 


c o o o 














■ 



I 









■ . 

. 


. 

. 

. 







175 


42 

delegates "’to stand by equity™. Under the influence of this dis¬ 
play of oratory, tension mounted in the hall and, according to The 

43 

Saturday News , "the situation became a feverish one". When the 

chairman, Colonel Gregory, "tried to hurry matters along" by 

starting "to put the question", he was interrupted by North who 

44 

claimed the right to speak. The ensuing dialogue between the two 

is reported to have taken the following form: 

’Well, don’t take all night about it’ came from the 
chair. 

’I wish to inform you, sir’, replied the Stavely dele¬ 
gate, ’that I’ve stood about as much from you to-day as 
I’m going to stand. I may be guilty of the atrocious 
crime of being a young man and I do desire to pay the re¬ 
spect to age that is its due, but I am here as the dele¬ 
gate of a local union and I claim the right to speak as 
such.’ 45 

With North’s opinions on the issue out of the way, Colonel Gregory 

proceeded to explain why he was "anxious to have the union brought 
46 

about". Although Strang interrupted "the Colonel" at this point to 

inform him that as chairman he "was only supposed to speak with 

the permission of the meeting.the meeting had the benefit of 

47 

the Colonel’s views nevertheless". When, finally, Gregory did put 

the question to the assembled Equity delegates, Moran and Suther- 

48 

land failed to secure any support for their resolution. Amidst 

Equity exuberance over the defeat of the motion, the majority of 

the A. F. A. representatives prepared to leave, but one of their 

number, A. E. Rogers of Stavely, rose to say that the union pro- 

49 

ject should not be abandoned so quickly. Appealing to the A. F. A. 
delegates to stay so that a vote might yet take place on amalgama¬ 
tion, Rogers received a tremendous ovation from "the Equity men" 

which, unfortunately, only served to make his convention col- 

50 

leagues more hostile to union. The subsequent developments de- 




. ' 

t 

; V 








. . . 









’ ' 

' 


. ? t - 

? f 5 

. 










e « 

e 














. 






{ 



176 


stroyed all hope of a merger until the fall of 1908: 

....The Association delegates resented this demonstration 
very strongly, claiming that it was equivalent to an in¬ 
sult, and moved out in the middle of an Equity man f s 
speech. *Good riddance to you*, shouted some from a front 
bench and the conference, from which most people expected 
so much, was at an end. 

It was dusk by this time and there was evidently no 
light available in the room, so in the semi-darkness the 
Equity members settled down to consider by themselves 
what was to be done. Mr. Moran, whom no one at any stage 
of the game could accuse of lacking the courage of his 
convictions, rose to say that he thought the secretary 
should be impeached for what he had done to balk the 
union. Mr. North and others passed some equally compli¬ 
mentary remarks about the chairman. Mr. Owens told the 
gathering that after a man had gone through all that he 
had for the cause of Equity, he was not disposed to 
abandon it lightly. It was, he said, the greatest move¬ 
ment in behalf of humanity that had been inaugurated 
since the birth of Christ two thousand years ago. 

*1 can*t understand what these members of the Alberta 
Farmers* Association mean*, he exclaimed. 

*You don*t understand what you mean yourself*, came 
from Mr. Moran. 

But it was evident that the latter*s small party had 
lost the day. In the meanwhile the Earners* Association 
had reassembled in their own hall and decided that 
nothing more could be done and that they would have to 
proceed to build their organization up on its original 
basis. 51 


The dismal collapse of the Lacombe negotiations recalls the 
failure of the first amalgamation parley in Edmonton and the 
bickering which followed over the American connection of the 
Society of Equity. In view of the emphasis that was then placed on 
this aspect of Equity activities in the province, it is difficult 
to understand why the question of restricting the new organization 
to Alberta would not have been the first matter settled in the La¬ 
combe discussions. It is equally difficult to understand why the 
A. E. A. should be the one to raise the issue. The Society of 
Equity had consistently made it clear that the cooperation of the 





* 

t 


. ? ' . 


* 








t : • 






. 
























. 
























177 


farmers of many lands was essential to the successful functioning 
of their plan for marketing agricultural produce, and A. F. A. of¬ 
ficials, even more consistently, had emphasized they would "have 

enough to do to look after the interests of the farmers of Al- 
52 

berta", although they did qualify their remarks by stating the 

A. F. A. would be "willing to co-operate with similar organiza- 

53 

tions in other provinces when this is deemed advisable". It, there¬ 
fore, would be expected that the Society of Equity would have de¬ 
manded an immediate understanding concerning the scope of the 
activities to be undertaken by the proposed new farm body. Instead, 
the whole issue was raised as an after-thought when the consumma¬ 
tion of union was near at hand. In view of the Keen outburst that 
the scheme he supported was "big, broad and deep", one would 

wonder why at the beginning of the union negotiations he himself 
had not 

/raised the question of how far the amalgamated societies should ex¬ 
tend their activities. It is possible, though, that weariness of de¬ 
bate in the early months of 1906, the appearance of two royal com¬ 
missions on the western agricultural scene, and eagerness to unite 
when amalgamation at long last seemed close at hand had caused all 
parties concerned to overlook the fundamental cleavage between the 
two organizations. The Saturday News had noted that many farmers 
were complaining the rivalry of the A. F. A. and the Society of 

Equity Involved "unnecessary waste of time and resources" and were 

54 

demanding "that the two bodies should get together". It may be, 
then, that the impetus for amalgamation came from the rank-and- 
file members, whereas the officials elected to carry out this 
mutual desire found themselves unable at the last moment to resolve 


doctrinaire differences. 





. . , ; . j 1 -I vr:-:;.. to 

1 ; . : 

4 

. ; ~ ■ L' * * • 


< 


























■ c 








. 


- 


, ■ ■■' ■ 





178 


As would be expected, the flood of comment concerning the La- 
combe disaster was nearly as harmful to the Alberta farm movement 
as the actual failure to amalgamate. The silence In the press con¬ 
cerning the affairs of the two associations which preceded the 
union negotiations was now replaced by a series of charges and 
counter-charges that revealed how divided the organized farmers of 
the province were in the running of their affairs. With respect to 
editorial opinion, probably the most important came from The 
Saturday News t the weekly which in January, 1907, became the of¬ 
ficial organ of the A. F. A. Sadly regretting "that the farmers of 
the province cannot unite in the formation of one strong organiza¬ 
tion", the editor admitted, nevertheless, that "no one could be 
present at the meeting at Lacombe and reach any other conclusion 

than that time is simply wasted in trying to bring together the 

55 

two bodies that were there represented". Yet The Saturday News 
chose to lay the blame entirely at the door of the Society of 
Equity. The attitude of most of the members of the Society, the 
editor claimed, would require the A. F. A. to subscribe to their 
ideas: 

....The meeting was called for the purpose of forming a 
provincial association of farmers. But the supporters of 
the Equity movement refused to restrict it to that. What 
was there then for the Alberta farmers to do but to 
withdraw from the negotiations? They had absolutely no 
alternative. The Equity ideas may be all right or all 
wrong. The fact remains that if we wait for the repre¬ 
sentative farmers of Alberta to subscribe to them, we 
can never have what will be a provincial farmers* as¬ 
sociation in a true sense. 56 

The Mews concluded, therefore, that "those who have the interests 

of Alberta agriculture at heart" would rally to the support of the 

organization whose members included "men of first-rate ability, 

57 

thoroughly representative of what is best in their calling". De- 












. 

















* . » 


. 


: , ■ 













. 

. . 




. 

...» 

. \ u ju- . 




■ 










. 



. 





















179 


spite an existence of "barely a year", the A. F. A. not only had 

"made its influence felt in all parts of the province", but "a 

58 

future of the greatest usefulness" could be predicted. Now that 

the Lacombe conference had ended in disaster, the Alberta Farmers 

could "count more than ever" on The Saturday News doing all that 

59 

lay in its power to advance their interests. It was thus in¬ 
evitable that this Edmonton weekly would be selected as the of- 

60 

ficial organ of the A. F. A., but the Society of Equity, meanwhile, 
had to struggle along without the backing of any Canadian news¬ 
paper until it launched The Great West early in 1907. 

Upon reading the editorial remarks of The Saturday News , John 

Moran took exception to the inference that since "there was some 

61 

wrangling...no unity could result". "I would like to ask", he 

wrote, "how else unity could result than by letting the truths and 

62 

falsities of both parties fight until the truths triumphed?" Far¬ 
mers, he told the editor of The News , were "a heterogeneous lot" 

and it was "only by wrangling out the opposing elements that homo- 

63 

geneity can be arrived at". In this way, Moran maintained, "the 

64 

best views" and "the best men" would be "brought to the top". "It 

is only by agitating the sieve", he added, "that the fine flour 

65 

can be separated from the bran and shorts". Moran felt The News 

had inferred that since Equity officials were lacking in diplomacy 

at Lacombe, the Society of Equity should be abandoned by Alberta 
66 

farmers. Angered by such an implication, Moran retorted that the 

Lacombe imbroglio was not the result of an A. F. A. objection to 

its rival*s "platform, constitution or principles", but an "absurd 

and unreasonable" opposition to "the mere word * equity*" which 

67 

"suggested socialism". While Moran claimed to be almost the only 
"Equitist" at Lacombe who "was willing to abandon that very nice 








■ 














t. , .. 



























t 


<■ 










. 































. •' 


180 


word rather than disagree with my brother farmers of the Alberta 

Farmers’ Association", he still firmly believed "that the word 

•equity’ was in use long before the word ’socialism’ in its pre- 

68 

sent sense at least". Even if "equity" did suggest socialism, sure¬ 
ly that was the best argument which could be advanced in favor of 
socialistic principles. "Lots of us", Moran remarked, "know very 

little about socialism, but if equity forms its foundation, it 

69 

rests on a solid basis". As much as the A. F. A. might be opposed 

to using the word, the members of the Association would not deny 

that they believed in justice, impartiality, and "even-handed 

70 

action" which simply were synonyms for "equity". To conclude his 

rebuttal, Moran informed The News it had failed to. perceive that, 

so far as the Society of Equity was concerned, "the chief hindrance 

to union...was, and is, the suspicion...the Alberta Farmers’ As- 

71 

sociation is merely a veiled form of a political association". Un¬ 
til this suspicion could be removed, he asserted, no one who had 

any regard for the welfare of the Alberta farmer would "blame the 

72 

Society of Equity for feeling averse to the union". 

The Saturday News now found itself in conflict with the state¬ 
ments of two prominent "Equitists" concerning the outcome of the 
Lacombe parley. Neither the Moran letter nor Keen’s report to The 
Bulletin could go unanswered without appearing to verify the rea¬ 
sons they gave for the inability of the two bodies to amalgamate. 
Keen’s remarks caused greater annoyance to the editor of The News 
because "the secretary of the Society of Equity leaves the im¬ 
pression that the failure to agree upon the name of the new or¬ 
ganization was responsible for the failure of the two associations 

73 

of farmers to unite". Since the A. F. A. had agreed to the name 
Keen himself had suggested, his version of the Lacombe proceedings 























c 






- 












t ' ' 

, 




- ■ ; { • « • 
i'J. ' 




: ; t 




. 




. 


. 


. 















181 


was something more than misleading. As the editor of The News saw 

it, the true cause of the Lacombe disaster was "the declaration by 

Mr. Keen and others that they could not agree to the stipulation 

that the new association was to restrict its organization work to 
74 

Alberta". Moran and G-regory had clearly recognized that "the idea 
of the conference was to unite the farmers of Alberta into one pro¬ 
vincial body", but the majority of the Equity delegates did not 

understand that if the Society "desired to enter into this body, 

75 

it had necessarily to give up its Equity principles". Canadian far¬ 
mers generally, The News pointed out, were organizing by provinces 
and it seemed obvious, therefore, that Alberta farmers would 
suffer if they refused to follow the same method. 

Moran's interpretation of the collapse of the union negotia¬ 
tions not only elicited a lengthier reply from The Saturday News , 
but a more conciliatory one. He, of course, commanded more respect 
in pro-A. F. A. circles than Keen because of his last-ditch 
struggle to make amalgamation a reality. The News agreed with 
Moran "that the wrangling which took place at Lacombe was no abso¬ 
lute bar to a union of the two organizations", but, it maintained, 
"the unfriendly feelings...between individuals", which were thrown 

into sharp focus by the negotiations, were "not calculated to in- 

76 

crease the efficiency of the new body, if it had been formed". As 
in the editorial criticism of Keen's report, The News emphasized 
the clash over the scope of future operations as the main obstacle 
to union. In this discussion, however, it went further and pointed 
to Keen's strenuous opposition to the Moran proposal to give in to 
the A. F. A. on the issue as the direct cause of the fatal rupture 
in the negotiations. "Mr. Moran", The News reminded its readers, 


"felt so strongly in regard to Mr. Keen's attitude that he de- 








< 










. , 




. 


. 






. 






. 




; 

c • . 









182 


dared he thought the secretary should he impeached for burking the 
77 

union". At this point, the editor argued, "there was no disagree- 

78 

ment whatever in regard to the name of the new organization". In¬ 
deed, Keen’s proposed title, "The Farmers’ Union of Alberta", had 
been accepted on both sides. Thus, The News concluded, it was 
pointless for Moran to insinuate that difficulties over a name or 

A. F. A. "superiority in diplomacy" had anything to do with the 

79 

breakdown in negotiations. At the same time The News felt com¬ 
pelled to observe that if, as Moran argued, the A. F. A. objection 
at Lacombe "was not to the platform, constitution or principles of 
the Society of Equity", there was a contradiction with the Keen as¬ 
sertion that to give up operations outside of the province "was to 

80 

abandon the essential principle of the Equity movement". "How", 

The News asked, "can it be said then that the Alberta Farmers’ As¬ 
sociation had no objections to the principles of the Society of 
81 

Equity?" Concerning Moran’s suspicion the A. F. A. was a disguised 

political association, The Hews dismissed the charge by noting 

that no references of this nature occurred in the Lacombe addresses 

of the Equity delegates and by asking why Moran was "willing to 

join hands" with the very organization he was accusing of de- 
82 

ception. The News ended this critical pronouncement on the events 

at Lacombe and Moran’s explanation of them by suggesting a novel 

solution to the amalgamation question: 

....The objects of the two bodies are altogether diverse 
and they must remain apart. But might individual farmers 
not belong to both? It is perhaps possible to take part 
in what Is aimed to make a world-wide movement, and at 
the same time belong to an organization which restricts 
itself simply to organizing the farmers of the province, 
dealing with matters which affect them as citizens of Al¬ 
berta, and uniting with similar organizations in other 
provinces to effect some object which requires co-opera¬ 
tion. But as far as the union of the two bodies them¬ 
selves is concerned, if it is brought about, it will 







t 

. 











. 

' 

. 

. 


r 

. 

1 

.... 

■ 





183 


simply be when one of them consents to adopt the prin¬ 
ciples of the other. 83 

Few, if any, farmers adopted this way out of their organizational 

difficulties. To have done so would have been evading the issue 

posed by the failure of the Lacombe parley. 

The Farm and Ranch Review , meanwhile, took a particularly dim 

view of the way the Alberta farmer’s affairs had been handled at 

Lacombe. Brushing aside doubtful suggestions such as that proposed 

by The Saturday News , the editor of The Review offered a drastic, 

but courageous, solution to the union stalemate: 

....Our advice is to ’turn the rascals out’. The men who 
attended the conference as duly elected and accredited 
delegates were sent there to assist in effecting an 
amalgamation. Some were earnestly desirous of doing so, 
but were overruled by a set of fanatics and selfish of¬ 
fice-seekers, whose uncompromising attitude finally 
wrecked the movement. These men must be called to time. 

Each local branch of both organizations should forthwith 
call a meeting and insist upon their representative 
giving an account of himself. A resolution should then 
be passed, directing the officers of the central or¬ 
ganization to take steps forthwith to bring about another 
joint meeting, and care should be exercised to send as, 
delegates men of common sense, and furnish them positive 
instructions to remain at the post until an amalgamation 
is effected on the most equitable terms possible. 

We have no hesitation in stamping the men who finally 
blocked the fusion of the two societies as being a most 
dangerous element in the ranks of organized agriculture 
in Western Canada. The time will come when the Western 
farmer will pay these men out in their own coin and rele¬ 
gate them to the back benches, where they belong and 
should have been kept. 

The two societies were formed with identical objects 
in view. In matters of detail only do they differ. No 
earthly reason can be named why amalgamation should not 
be effected and one strong body formed to take the place 
of two weaker elements, who in the future will probably 
spend most of their time villifying each other until the 
main question will be rather how to neutralize the work 
of the competitor than how to advance the interests of 
the farmer. Down with the enemy! 84 


While the Society of Equity was unable to find much comfort 














: . 5 














* 











' 








. 




. 

A 


















. . 1 A 


■ 
















184 


in the 001111116111 of the Alberta press on the Lacombe conference, it 

had to endure even worse criticism in the editorial columns of the 

western agricultural press published outside the province. The 

Farmers T Advocate , an influential paper which The Saturday News 

85 

was pleased to call "a really great agricultural journal”, had so 
belittled the Society 1 s behavior at Lacombe that a North Battle- 
ford reader, H. C. D. Gildemeester, wrote an angry letter to the 
editor defending Equity principles. Gildemeester f s closing remarks, 
which proved particularly exasperating to The Advocate , were as 
follows: 


If the object of your paper is only to teach farmers 
how to grow big crops, then, Mr. Editor, I can explain 
your attitude towards this Society of Equity; as in this 
case you are backing the speculators and capitalists. 

If, on the other hand, you really take the farmers 1 
interest at heart, as you profess you do,then, Mr. Edi¬ 
tor, fall in line, and back the farmers who support your 
paper; fight with us against the speculator; give us 
Equity editorials; in short, support the coming power, 

’The Society of Equity 1 . 86 

The Advocated reply indicated how completely Equity policies 
either at Lacombe or elsewhere had failed to impress the most im¬ 
portant Winnipeg farm paper prior to the advent of The Grain 
Growers 1 Guide : 

We regret that we are unable to please our correspon¬ 
dent by adopting the two final sentences in his last 
paragraph as our rule of life. We deplore exceedingly 
the Intolerance which dictates the second last paragraph 
of his letter; because this paper does not beat the drum 
for the S. of E. is no sane reason for stating that It 
Is backing speculators and capitalists. It may as well 
be understood right here and now that if that opinion as 
expressed by our correspondent is a governing one in the 
S. of E., we beg to venture the statement that we do not 
believe it In the interests of Canadian farmers that 
such a society should be encouraged.... We read the re¬ 
ports mentioned, the one he prefers not being available 
at the time when wanted, but even In that report it will 
be found that the S. of E. appears in an unfavorable 
light compared with the Alberta Farmers 1 Association; 
for example, in the changing of committees and the in- 























' 




: 


. , . ■ ^ 


< ' • < 

, .. '• ■ ■ : . 

. * 


. 

























































. 
























. 























, , , , 













* 




, 












185 


sistence that Equity must be part of the name of the 
amalgamated society to be formed. Further, we believe 
the A. F. A. is wise in its decision to limit its opera¬ 
tions to Alberta. There is plenty of good work to be 
done there without infringing on the territory of the 
Saskatchewan Grain Growers. 87 

The Advocate was incorrect in stating that the Society of Equity 
had insisted on the inclusion of "Equity" in the name of the amal¬ 
gamated association, but, otherwise, the editorial was accurate. 
Interpretation, however, was much more significant than accuracy. 
The wide circle of rural readers who subscribed to The Advocate 
could not help but be Influenced by an editorial opinion which was 

left unchallenged by any newspaper published in Canada. 

88 

The Nor’West Farmer also became Involved in a dispute with 

one of its readers over the Lacombe affair In much the same way as 

89 

did The Farmers* Advocate . Answering a man named Boerma, who was 
an organizer for the Society of Equity at North Battleford, The 
Nor’ West Farmer remarked: 

Our correspondent congratulates the Canadian Society 
of Equity upon its firm stand against the proposal to 
make the amalgamated organization an exclusively Alberta 
Association, and bases his arguments against the Alberta 
Farmers’ Association on the assumption that Its members, 
led by President Warner, are provincial and narrow in 
their views and see no advantage in co-operation or 
intercourse with outside organizations. This assumption 
is entirely unsubstantiated by the facts, and it is here 
that the case made out against the Alberta Farmers’ As¬ 
sociation by our correspondent breaks down. If he had 
been at the Lacombe convention and listened to the dis¬ 
cussion of this question by members of the A. F. A., he 
would have had this erroneous idea immediately dispelled. 

At that time Mr. Warner and other members of the Associa¬ 
tion without exception expressed not only their willing¬ 
ness but their desire to co-operate with outside or r 
ganizations in any way possible to further the farmers’ 
interests, and it was even suggested that a Dominion As¬ 
sociation be formed with the provincial societies as sub¬ 
associations. This surely does not look like pro¬ 
vincialism. 90 

The Nor’ West Farmer even went a step further than its con¬ 


temporaries and sought to discredit the principle upon which the 









' 

. 

- 

. . ■ 


■ 


















■ 


















„ • . . : . t- v 




. ' . • 

« 






. 

0 


■ 


: 




[ 'X 1 • 






186 


whole concept of "Equity" was based. Its correspondent had re¬ 
marked that the A. E. A, proposed "to secure every cent for their 
grain that market conditions warrant", while the Society of Equity 

claimed its "first and foremost object must be to alter market 
91 

conditions". In a carefully considered conclusion to its editorial, 
The Nor’ West Farmer wrote an effective analysis of this dif¬ 
ference between the two farm bodies: 

The idea...is to estimate the output of farm produce 
the world over by accurate crop reports, and calculate 
what any particular article is worth at a given point, 
and then demand that price and accept nothing less. In 
other words, the farmers, rather than the dealers, are 
to estimate the value of their produce and fix the price. 

The scheme also involves regulating the world’s output 
of farm produce so that the supply will not be too great 
and force the market down. 

The magnitude of such an undertaking is apparent to 
anyone, and so far as we are aware the results as yet 
have not been particularly reassuring. Wheat crops are 
being harvested in different parts of the world at al¬ 
most every season of the year, and nobody can tell posi¬ 
tively until the harvest is over what the yield will be. 

So it is in other lines. No farmer can tell until after 
harvest what his crop will yield, much less can he guage 
and control the output of various foreign nations; the 
world’s yield, from year to year, is largely in the 
hands of nature, and over her laws we have but limited 
control. Of course, the placing of a reduced acreage in¬ 
to any crop would afford a reasonable assurance that the 
yield would decrease; but as Canadian farmers are, in 
their export trade, largely in competition with foreign 
countries, the scheme of ’controlled marketing’, in 
order to be really effective in a large way, would need 
to be world wide. As to the feasibility of enlisting the 
farmers of the world in such a movement, we leave our 
readers to decide. 92 


In the midst of the losses sustained by the Society on the 
western editorial front, the cause of "Equity" was discredited 
further by a sharp literary duel that took place in the Alberta 
press between W. R. Ball and a mysterious correspondent who at 
first signed himself ”H. D." The letter writer, who indicated that 
he lived at Beaver Lake, fired the first shot by sending a letter 



. 

s 

. 

< 

. 

/ >' to m n. r 




• 


. 






• 



• 




187 


to The Vegreville Observer berating the way in which Colonel Gre- 
gory had been replaced on the Lacombe amalgamation committee: 

We know a little more about the Lacombe convention, 
and it appears probable from all accounts that the 
Society of Equity is chiefly to blame for the mis¬ 
carriage of the negotiations; indeed, it looks as though 
the guiding spirits of this society had pretty well 
settled matters in their minds before the convention 
opened; if not, for what reason was Col. Gregory, the 
moderate, sensible and conciliatory delegate appointed 
at the outset, withdrawn for the uncompromising, short¬ 
sighted, self-sufficient individual to whom the failure 
of the convention is chiefly attributable. Were a new 
convention to be called, with delegates bearing an im¬ 
perative mandate from their constituents, the result 
would probably be very different. Failing this, members 
of local unions of the Equity will have to consider if 
it will not be to their interest to leave this Society, 
name and all, and join the A. F. A. This does not mean 
that we are in favor of restricting the field of opera¬ 
tions to Alberta alone; but the question is not im¬ 
portant because so soon as powerful and successful or¬ 
ganizations are at work in the several provinces their 
common interests will bring them together. 93 

The Saturday Kews not only reprinted this letter promptly, but the 

editor indicated some pleasure in the message it contained. Ball, 

who was one of the most prolific letter writers produced by the 

94 

western farm movement, naturally could not be expected to take 

criticism of this type without striking back. It is to his credit, 

however, that his reply to The News was not abusive: 

....Row, what has there been in my past history to war¬ 
rant H. B. in making such a sweeping assertion? ....it 
would reflect upon the intelligence and good judgment of 
the G. S. of I, to choose me as.vice-president of an 
organization of about 50 societies and 1500 members, if 
I were the kind of man H. B. has painted. It is not 
necessary at this late date to go into the details of 
the work of that committee or why I was chosen. That has 
all been threshed out by the members of the Equity and 
not one to my knowledge has found fault with the stand I 
took on the question upon which the two socjy^ies dif¬ 
fered, Our people knew my sentiments before I was placed 
on that committee. Eemember the second committee had 
full powers, and I was not willing to accept a name that 
I did not believe our society would approve of, nor 
would I consent to confine our operations in the pro¬ 
vince of Alberta without first submitting the whole 
matter to the popular vote of the two societies in joint 





- 


< 

e 

~ 

'■ : '• 

t - 

- 

. 

■ 










c ' 




. 

' 

■ 


• m * 

t 

i.. - , •. 




c > j: •• 




188 


convention. Now, H. D., I am satisfied that there are 
more members even of the Alberta Farmers who blame their 
leaders for the failure to unite, than they do the short¬ 
sighted, uncompromising, self-sufficient individual you 
claim I am. Let us hear from you again, H. D., but the 
next time sign your name in full so we may know who you 
are and your motive; when you attack a society like the 
Equity and its officer, you ought to let the public know ■ 
who you are. 95 

Ball’s challenge to ”H. D.” to reveal his identity was a fatal er¬ 
ror. Henry Deby, the president of the Beaver Lake branch of the 
Society of Equity, informed the editor of The Saturday News he was 
pleased ”to come before the curtain” and to challenge Ball’s as¬ 
sumption that all the members of the Society heartily endorsed the 
stand he had taken at Lacombe: 

....The members of this local union...were greatly in 
favor of amalgamation, and they fail to see of what con¬ 
sequence the name could possibly be, provided the result 
were attained. ’United Farmers of Alberta’ was altogether 
good enough for them. They regret that it is too late for 
details as they are just as much in the dark as the first 
day; and while readily discarding all offensive epithets, 
they would fain renew the question, and ask: Why was Col. 
Gregory withdrawn, and replaced by the individual (with¬ 
out adjectives) to whose intervention the failure of the 
convention seemed chiefly attributable?.... 96 

The revelation that ”H. D.” was the head of an Equity local was a 
source of no little embarrassment to the Society’s provincial 
executive and it is significant that neither Ball nor any of his 
colleagues attempted a reply. Deby’s second letter, indeed, seems 
to have been the last public discussion of the Lacombe negotia¬ 
tions in the western farm papers. It was not until the fall of 
1908 that the amalgamation of Alberta’s two farm groups came up 
again for general discussion and on this occasion the result was 
much happier than in 1905 or 1906. In January, 1909, the name, 
’’United Farmers of Alberta”, which Deby had mentioned so ap¬ 
provingly, became a reality. 





« . t • ' ■ • • 

■ . i § 

t ■ . 

. ’ 

■ 









: 


















4 . ' 






. 

. : i 

! • 








. 


*J\auX 

. 


189 


Earlier in this chapter reference was made to the appointment 
of the Grain Commission of 1906 and the way in which news of 
another inquiry into the western grain trade facilitated A. F. A.- 
Equity amalgamation negotiations. As the Alberta sittings of the 
Commission followed the Lacombe rupture by only a few weeks, the 
evidence submitted indirectly reflected the doctrinaire attitudes 
still dividing the provincial farm movement. By their presence at. 
the hearings, the officials of the A. F. A. not only indicated 
their belief in the value of such a government investigation, but 
they sought to use the hearings as proof that their organization 
was the true spokesman of the Alberta grain grower. The Society of 
Equity, meanwhile, by ignoring the Commission, implied that govern¬ 
ment-controlled inquiries would not solve the producer’s problems. 
Whatever the validity of these outlooks on the federal efforts to 
rectify abuses in the grain trade, the representations the Com¬ 
mission did receive revealed how disturbed the farmers of the pro¬ 
vince were over their returns for tilling the soil. The evidence 
submitted also made it clear that, so far as Alberta was concerned, 
the Manitoba Grain Act had fallen short of its goal; reading be¬ 
tween the lines of the submissions on this subject, it was equally 
clear that united agrarian action was an urgent necessity in the 
province. Yet, as unhappy as the Alberta farmer appears to have 
been in the fall of 1906, the Society of Equity failed to make an 
official appearance at the hearings. 

Several reasons may be offered for the indifference of the 
Society to the Grain Commission, but any one of them may not be a 
complete explanation. It is possible, for example, to point to the 
dissension within the Society over the disastrous turn of events in 
the amalgamation deliberations and the short interval of time that 


' 

. 












. 






. 

, , < . 










- 


' 






190 


elapsed between the Lacombe parley and the arrival of the Grain 
Commission in Alberta. It is more likely, though, that the pro¬ 
vincial executive were convinced their approach to agricultural 
problems would be scorned by the commissioners in their report. 
Since the latter officials owed their appointments to the Liberal 
government at Ottawa, the Equity executive, which repeatedly had 
accused the A. F. A. of being a disguised branch of the Liberal 
Party, may have felt there was no point in submitting evidence. On 
the other hand, Equity indifference to the sessions of the Grain 
Commission may have resulted from the tense organizational struggle 

which at that very moment was reaching a climax in the parent body 

97 

of the Society in the United States. While it is unlikely the Al¬ 
berta executive was pre-occupied just then with the American 
quarrels over Everitt r s methods for putting "the great plan" into 
effect, it must be conceded that the decision to ignore the Grain 
Commission may have arisen from all the circumstances mentioned. 

Whatever may have been the motives of the Society of Equity in 
failing to make an official submission to the Grain Commission of 

1906, there can be little doubt that its apparent weakness at this 

critical time caused the A. F. A. to loom larger in the eyes of the 

Alberta farmer as his champion against the machinations of the 

grain interests. Indeed, from the fall of 1906 to the fall of 1908 

the A. F. A. never missed an opportunity to publicize the efforts 

it had made to advance the cause of Alberta agriculture, and, with 

such events as the Grain Commission hearings to draw upon, the as- 

98 

sociation could claim that these efforts had been substantial. The 
successful completion of the A. F. A. annual convention in January, 

1907, moreover, materially aided the association in launching this 
campaign for Increased membership. Uo discordant elements made 












, - ‘I- 




. 






r 
































- 






.... 










; ? 



191 


themselves evident during the Calgary discussions and a lengthy, 
hut practical, series of resolutions were passed which had the far¬ 
mer r s interest at heart. 


Perhaps the most significant repercussion of the amalgamation 
quarrel at Lacombe was the recognition the A. F. A. received short¬ 
ly afterwards from the Saskatchewan Grain Growers 1 Association. By 
accepting an S. G. G. A. invitation to send a delegate to its Re¬ 
gina convention in February, 1907, the A. F. A. secured an im¬ 
portant talking point in the drive to convince the Alberta farmer 
of the value of membership in a wholly Canadian organization. The 
Society of Equity, the very farm body that had been so strongly op¬ 
posed to restricting its work to one province, was not even in¬ 
vited to send a representative. The A. F. A., consequently, could 
argue that their organizational difficulties were fast becoming an 
integral part of the Canadian farm movement without any suspicion 
of encroachment on the territory of other provincial groups. 

In reporting to The Saturday News on the Regina proceedings, 
Joshua Fletcher, the Alberta delegate, revealed that previous 
A. F. A. promises of cooperation with other provincial farm or¬ 
ganizations had become a reality: 

....The usual toasts were responded to with enthusiasm 
and before I knew, my name was down to respond to the 
toast, ’Sister Organization’ in adjoining Provinces. Re¬ 
ferences made to sympathy and co-operation between the 
S. G. G. A. and the A. F. A. were received with much en¬ 
thusiasm. Representatives from the Manitoba Grain 
Growers’ Association following up the local speakers 
made it clear that united action between the Grain 
Growers’ of Saskatchewan and Manitoba and the Alberta 
Farmers’ Association was at the present time a reality 
and carried with it a bright future for the farmers of 
the three provinces..,. 99 

Obviously, the A. F. A. was now able to refute one of the most im- 




■ 




■ 






















. 

. 










. 




















































. 












192 


portant arguments against amalgamation that had been raised by the 
Society of Equity during the fateful Lacombe negotiations. The 
A. F. A. secretary, in fact, was not slow to publicize the coopera¬ 
tion which grew out of the Segina conference. In a circular distri¬ 
buted throughout the province in May, 1907, Stevens emphasized 
that one of the five general policies of the A. F. A. was coopera¬ 
tion "with other organizations within the province and with far¬ 
mers and kindred organizations in other provinces for the improve- 

100 

ment of conditions affecting all". In amplification of this fifth 
point in the A. F. A. program, Stevens remarked further: 

As an illustration of the above we might mention that 
we are now co-operating with the farmers T organizations 
of Ontario, Manitoba and Saskatchewan, to prevent a rise 
in the rates for transporting grain east of Fort William. 

We are also in receipt of a request from the Fruit 
Growers 1 Association of Ontario to co-operate with them 
to remedy the one-sided condition which exists in the 
ordering, loading and unloading of cars....This condition 
is complained of by the fruit growers of Ontario, by the 
grain growers of Manitoba and Saskatchewan and by the 
livestock growers of Alberta and it is the purpose of 
this association to co-operate with all in an endeavor to 
remedy this Injustice. 101 

Whatever Equity officials may have thought about A. F. A. success 
in developing these friendly relations with other Canadian farm 
bodies, they appear to have kept their opinions to themselves. Em¬ 
barrassment over the refutation of an Equity strong point at La¬ 
combe may have enforced silence, but it is more likely that the co¬ 
operative projects launched by the Society T s central executive in 
January, 1907, made any consideration of recent A. F. A. activi¬ 
ties quite out of the question. In thus ignoring the A. F. A. *s 
latest move in the struggle to win the support of the Alberta far¬ 
mer, Equity official circles in the province undoubtedly felt 
their victory was only a matter of time anyway, now that the 



- 










• i* . 


{ 












. 

. 

' 

- 0 

.... 























c t 








e 


193 


Society had hit upon cooperative "business enterprises as proof of 

the soundness of their organization. Not many months, though, were 

Equity 

to elapse before it was painfully apparent that the Alberta/execu- 
tive not only had made a very expensive blunder, but actually had 
hastened the day of amalgamation with the rival A. E. A. 


1 The Saturday News , November 3, 1906., p.' 2. 

2 Ibid. 

3 Ibid. 

4 Ibid. 

5 The Edmonton Bulletin , July 23, 1906, p. 4. 

6 Ibid. , October 6, 1906, p. 6. 

7 The Saturday News was an Edmonton newspaper which had commenced 
publication on December 23, 1905. 

8 The Saturday News , October 6, 1906, p. 4. 

9 Ibid. , October 20, 1906, p. 11. 

10 Ibid. , October 27, 1906, p. 11. 

11 Ibid. , November 3, 1906, p. 2. 

12 The Equity delegates, other than Keen, who represented Edmonton 

included J. B. McEachren (Turnip Lake), G. Yilleneuve (Lamou- 
reux), T. Bendiksen (Solberg) , G. Sutherland (Spruce Grove), 

A. von MIeleiki (Spruce Vale), R. G. Owens (Independence), 

R. E. Dickson (Lacombe), E. Lee (Macleod), W. R. Ball (Salis¬ 
bury), J. T. North {Stavely), M. A. Strang (Claresholm), L. I. 
Auten (Namao), A. Rafn (Bon Accord), George W. Tolley (Macleod) 
and John Moran (Eort Saskatchewan). 

13 The Saturday News , November 3, 1906, p. 2. 

14 The A. E. A. delegates, other than Warner and Sheppard, were 
listed by The Saturday News (November 3, 1906, p. 2) as follows 
P. W. Buchanan, Pincher Greek, 116; W. Heatly, Beaumont, 48; 
George Ball, R. Weir, J. Govenlock, and J. Eletcher, Strathcona 
90; T. H. Woolford and E. N. Barker, Gardston, 117; T. Balaam, 
Vegreville, 117; A. E. Rogers, Stavely, 41; Albert Ottewell, 
East Glover Bar, 40; P. A. Carnell, Eishburn, 40; W. E. Wilkin¬ 
son, Glover Bar, 16; J. S. Deverell, Heather Brae, 33; H. Wes¬ 
ton, Golchester, 29; J. W. Howard, Conjuring Greek, 29; W. T. 
Eddy, Gowley, 39. The figures in each case indicate the number 
of local members represented. 

15 The Saturday News , November 3, 1906, p. 2. 

16 The Edmonton Bulletin, November 2, 1906, p. 6. 

17 Ibid. 

18 The Saturday News, November 3, 1906, p. 2. 

19 Ibid. 

20 Ibid. 

21 Ibid. 

22 Ibid. 

23 Ibid. 

24 Although The Saturday News fails to mention it, Keen makes the 
claim in his account of the Lacombe parley ( The Edmonton Bulle¬ 
tin , November 2, 1906, p. 6) that at the preliminary meeting 
the Equity delegates submitted a tentative constitution "with 





























yvx.) 

I 


. 

• ■ * ? j * 


c * 




» * c 





4 




« 




• 




.* 


. 

. V 

- • < . ; ~ 



■ 

. 

- v r • j.i '1 


« (* 

{ ' • 




? 




e 

. « 


■ 

* 




’ , 


• 






: 



« 

. 



. 

■ 








: 

















194 


the name of the society left blank". This draft, Keen claimed, 
n met with a good reception" and, at the request of the A. F. A. 
representatives, "the secretary of the Equity Society was asked 
to attend and read it before the Alberta Farmers* convention on 
the next morning". After hearing the secretary, the A. F. A. 
convention not only voted that the amalgamation committee 
should continue sitting but its three representatives should 
have the "power...to finally settle the new name of the amalga¬ 
mated society". 

£5 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 2, 1906, p. 6. 

26 The Saturday News , November 3, 1906, p. 2. 

27 Ibid. 

28 Ibid. 

29 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 2, 1906, p. 6. 

30 The Saturday News , November 3, 1906, p. 2. 

31 Ibid. 

32 Ibid. 

33 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 2, 1906, p. 6. 

34 Ibid.- 

35 The Saturday News, November 3, 1906, p. 2. 

36 Ibid, 

37 Ibid, 

38 Ibid, 

39 Ibid» 

40 Ibid. 

41 The Edmonton Bulletin , November 2, 1906, p. 6. 

42 The Saturday News , November 3, 1906, p. 2. 

43 Ibid. 

44 Ibid, 

45 Ibid, 

46 Ibid, 

47 Ibid. 

48 Ibid, 

49 Ibid, 

50 Ibid, 

51 Ibid. Since the account furnished by The Saturday News is of 
major importance in determining the reasons for the disastrous 
turn of events at Lacombe, it is pertinent to mention here that 
its accuracy Is indicated by the failure of such a prolific 
letter writer as W. J. Keen to dispute it and by the assurance 
of J. M. Moran that it was "in the main correct as to facts" 
( The Saturday News , November 24, 1906, p. 10). In a letter to 
the editor of The News Moran did take exception to certain edi¬ 
torial Interpretations of the Lacombe deliberations, but he 
failed to dispute one single statement of fact (November 24, 
1906, p. 10). 

52.The Saturday News, November 3, 1906, p. 2. 

53 Ibid. 

54 Ibid. 

55 Ibid, 

56 Ibid. 

57 Ibid. 

58 Ibid. 

59 Ibid. 

60 See the statement which appeared in The Saturday News for 
February 9, 1907 (p. 9) concerning its relations with the 

A. F. A. and the stand It had taken over the outcome of the La- 













































. 





























-y 

■ 

. 



















195 


combe negotiations. 

61 The Saturday News , November 24, 1906, p. 10. 

62 Ibid. 

63 Ibid. 

64 Ibid. 

65 Ibid. 

66 Ibid. 

67 Ibid. 

68 Ibid. 

69 Ibid. 

70 Ibid. 

71 Ibid. 

72 Ibid. 

73 Ibid. , November 17, 1906, p. 11. 

74 Ibid. 

75 Ibid. 

76 Ibid. , November 24, 1906, p. 10. 

77 Ibid. 

78 Ibid. 

79 Ibid. 

80 Ibid. 

81 Ibid. 

82 Ibid. 

83 Ibid. 

84 rbidt.» December 1, 1906, p. 10, 

85 SMALlj December 22, 1906, p. 10. 

86 Ibid. 

87 Ibid. 

88 According to The Saturday News (February 2, 1907, p. 11), The 
Nor T West Farmer was "the only other paper of general circula¬ 
tion" to send a representative to the Lacombe parley. The News , 
of course, had its own representative at the conference. 

89 It is interesting to note that on June 1, 1907, The Saturday 
News published a very detailed reply to Boerma's charges which 
had been prepared by f. F. Stevens, the A. F. A. secretary. 

This letter is reproduced in its entirety in Appendix D. 

90 The Saturday News, February 9, 1907, p. 8. 

91 Ibid. 

92 Ibid. 

93 Ibid. , December 29, 1906, p, 10. 

94 Interview with A. Baimer Watt, December 14, 1953. 

95 The Saturday News , February 2, 1907, p. 11, 

96 Tbid. , February 23, 1907, p. 9. 

97 Taylor, Carl G., The Farmers* movement, 162C—1920 ,. New York, 
1953, pp. 375-6; Bahrner, R. Bv, "The American Society of 
Equity", Agricultural History, XIV (January, 1940), pp. 33-63. 

98 Following the failure of the Lacombe negotiations, the 

A. F. A. revived its membership campaign by issuing a prepared 
statement to several Alberta newspapers in connection with the 
associations first anniversary. This informative press re¬ 
lease, which marked a new departure in A. F. A. publicity 
methods, may be seen In The Saturday News for November 24, 

1906 (p. 11). 

99 The Saturday News , March 9, 1907, p. 16. 

100 Ibid. , May 18, 1907, p. 5. 

101 Ibid. 
























































< *. 

. 




. 










? ° 

< *. 








f . ' . 0 J : ■■ • 

C • c ■ ; 


■ t .. - 












! * 




■ 






! . >. • 








. . 


: t • 






CHAPTER VIII 


THE ALBERTA FARMERS* ASSOCIATION AND 
THE SOCIETY OF EQUITY STRUGGLE TO AMALGAMATE 

Part III — The Canadian Society of Equity» Limited; the Cause of 

“Equity" Loses its Appeal in Alberta♦ 

Wherever the blame may lie for the failure of the amalgama¬ 
tion proceedings in November, 1906, there can be little doubt that 
the Equity executive was thoroughly alarmed by the hostility of 
the agricultural press to its Lacombe policies. Consequently, as 
the year drew to a close, the provincial high command of the 
Society drafted a bold plan of action for 1907 that would not only 
boost the morale of the rank-and-file, but challenge the A. F. A. 
to do something better for the Alberta farmer. The first step in 
this rejuvenation of the Society*s Alberta activities was an ap¬ 
plication to the Indianapolis headquarters to allow the provincial 
body to be known as "The Canadian Society of Equity". According to 
both the President and the District Manager of the American or¬ 
ganization, the Alberta application took the form of an "earnest 
solicitation" for "a special dispensation" that would offset "some 
feeling regarding nationalism in Canada". While there was some 

2 

surprise in the Indiana headquarters over this "remarkable request", 

President Everitt felt it was "reasonable and...asked in good 
3 

faith". Although he acknowledged the Canadian contention "that 
there was a feeling against the word *American*••.because it had 
come to be monopolized by the citizens ©f the United States", 
Everitt emphasized that without the Canadian affiliate the move¬ 
ment he headed could not be "truly an American Society". The cause 
of "Equity", however, would "eventually...become world wide in its 














: , ' i. 








C'V 








; , ‘.. ' • 




. . ~ - 




- 




. . - 1 " t ; /a . : •* ;: 





















■•'v j -J’ 






197 


5 

establishment** and the Alberta request, accordingly, was granted 
in order to facilitate the achievement of this lofty global ob¬ 
jective. Just when the old designation, w The American Society of 
Equity, Canadian Department**, was discarded is not known, but it 
must have been either late in 1906 or very early in 1907. The pro¬ 
vincial incorporation of **The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited** 

6 

on January 15, 1907, would indicate that December, 1906, is the 
more likely date. 

The propaganda value of the Alberta Society*s new name may be 
questioned, but there can be little doubt that, so long as Up-tp- 
Date Farming was the official Equity organ in the province, the 
charges of American dictation would be difficult to refute. The 
provincial executive, therefore, coupled the official change of 
name with a decision to publish an Equity newspaper at Edmonton, 
the Society*s Alberta (and Canadian) headquarters. Arrangements 
for this journalistic venture appear to have been completed late 
in February, 1907, for on the following March 8, W. J. Keen dis¬ 
cussed the **favorable prospects** of The Great West with a Bulletin 
7 

reporter. The first edition, he said, had numbered 2,000 copies, 

8 

while the second would **be increased this week to 3,000**. Although 
the bulk of the subscribers would be Alberta residents, it should 
be noted that Keen*s figures would include the scattered Equity 
groups elsewhere in Western Canada who lacked provincial organiza¬ 
tion. 

Despite the significance of these efforts to **Canadianize** 
the Society’s activities in Alberta, their importance was dwarfed 
by the decision to sponsor a provincial farmer-owned cooperative 
project. The latter, however, was the only policy adopted after 
the Lacombe disaster that fell far short of its objective, but, in 






i. ; . .. ^ ii ' . i •• . 

% 

■ ■ 

; ... ' .... m.V’ •• 

- . . ... 4 ! . . . . •' h i - : 






« 






. 


> ; •: .... ... • • ■ ■ - ’-.I ■■ 

t( n j ■ : 1 .< .:. v/V*..' 

•: ;■ ~ j ; •. / a. >i r - .\i : t ■ ..... ... i < 

. , , J. -• ' ; x - ■ i 


- ■ 


. , \ . :i '■ • 

.... , ■ M.ac • ■ , • ■ *> - 


■ 

. 

i . ' . : : 


. 




. . 






. 




. 








-■ ' < ..- : i-d-i . ' 



198 


so doing, the cause of "Equity" was destroyed forever in Western 
Canada# Never, indeed, was a more disastrous decision made by an 
Alberta farm body than the day on which the Edmonton headquarters 
launched "The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited"• The Society 
had neither the membership nor the resources to carry out the 
grandiose scheme proposed by the central executive, and Alberta 
agriculture was not sufficiently advanced to support such a com¬ 
prehensive undertaking. The fact that a division existed in the 
provincial farm movement only made the chances of success much 
more remote# But even before it became obvious that the Equity 
company would go bankrupt, the organizers of the venture found 
themselves in serious doctrinal difficulties with Indianapolis 
over competition with private business# By daring to endorse co¬ 
operative action and the elimination of the middleman, the Alberta 
executive collided sharply with the Everitt conception of "con¬ 
trolled marketing". If the provincial organizers had had the fore¬ 
sight to let their cooperative ideas simmer until the American 
headquarters had resolved a factional struggle within its ranks, 

"The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited" would have been in line 

9 

with the post-Everitt practices of the parent body# As it was, 
however, Everitt, upon hearing of the Alberta heresy, threatened 
the provincial rank-and-file with excommunication if the work of 
their leaders was not undone. The unauthorized publication of his 
letter of condemnation not only resulted in much public embarrass¬ 
ment and loss of prestige for the Alberta executive, but it un¬ 
doubtedly robbed the new Equity company of valuable financial sup¬ 
port. Even though the wrath of Indianapolis had been visited upon 
their luckless heads, the directors of "The Equity Limited" had 
gone too far with their project to admit of retreat, and, risking 


: • - * ' 

- 

. 




* 


* 

■ 


: V- • !•: ' . . * ■ • <■ j r : , •. i-J. :p •- ' 

■ 

. 


. 

* 




. 

. 

- 

. 

. .. . • " ' : b :iL' . 


199 

an open break with the American executive, they continued on their 
dizzy course until bankruptcy in the fall of 1907 ended the Al¬ 
berta experiment. Already seriously weakened by the clash with 
Everitt, the Canadian Society of Equity now was placed in an ex¬ 
tremely difficult position with the unfavorable publicity stemming 

from the financial collapse of their cooperative venture and the 

10 

ill will of the shareholders who had to make good the loss, as a 
result, the long-awaited amalgamation with the A. F. A. that 
seemed next to impossible after the Lacombe conference soon became 
a reality. 

Following the provincial incorporation of "The Canadian 
Society of Equity, Limited", a well organized and comprehensive 
publicity campaign was launched to convince the Alberta farmer 
that his economic salvation lay in the ownership and control of a 
wide variety of business enterprises. According to the official 
prospectus, issued at Edmonton on January 23, 1907, the new com¬ 
pany aimed "to build and operate elevators, warehouses, mills, 
stock yards, etc., to buy and sell all manner of farmers* supplies, 
to operate cheese factories and creameries and generally to carry 

on all kinds of business which may be carried for the benefit of 
~ 11 

farmers". The ultimate objective of the company was "to take the 

place of the middleman...and to secure to its shareholders the 

dividends which have hitherto been wrongfully carried off by the 
12 

speculators". Quoting the familiar maxim that "In union there is 
strength", the prospectus proceeded with the challenging statement 
that: 

....If the farmers of Canada stand together and fight the 
trusts with their own weapons they cannot fail to receive 
a just and equitable proportion of the general prosperity 
hitherto denied them; if they offer nothing but a dis¬ 
jointed and individual opposition to their enemies they 






■ 






* 










t 






' 














,. ' •• " ■. - • : 




. 




* 

, • . • ■. ; v; f. ■ ■ . . - ■ 1 


. 


■ < f -■ 


. 










’ 




.... 




* ' • 


■ 


.... 


200 


will still fail and deservedly fail to receive it. 13 

In view of the ambitious ideas contained in the prospectus, it is 

surprising that the initial capitalization of the project was set 

at only $60,000 with the provision that no farmer-shareholder 

14 

could own more than five shares. It was intimated, however, that 
after the first offering of 1200 fifty-dollar shares had been sub¬ 
scribed, the capitalization might be increased when circumstances 
warranted. On May 15, 1907, such an increase, in fact, was 

authorized, with the total capitalization then being set at 
15 

$250,000. A loan of $12,000, though, had to be secured from the 

Merchants f Bank of Canada to help meet the immediate need for more 
16 

capital* The directors of the company, the prospectus announced, 

would be compensated at the rate of three dollars a day, plus 

travelling expenses, while the company^ secretary, W. J. Keen, 

would be paid a straight salary of $1,000 a year, plus expenses, 

17 

to devote his whole time to the affairs of the cooperative. Despite 

the controversial part he had played at Lacombe in the quarrel over 

the amalgamation proceedings, John M. Moran of Fort Saskatchewan 

was chosen as president of the new company, while William R. Ball 

18 

was named Vice-president. The slate of directors consisted of 

D. B. Wilson (Namao), R. Pearson (Claresholm), A. von Mieleiki 

19 

(Calgary), A. A. Shaw (Nanton), and J. Sanford (Strathcona). 

During the ensuing months Equity organizers covered the pro¬ 
vince promoting the sale of shares in the most ambitious coopera¬ 
tive enterprise ever offered the Alberta farmer. Fortified by their 

20 

missionary zeal and a two per cent commission on all shares sold, 

these organizers appear to have done their work most effectively. 

Early in March, 1907, the company secretary reported optimistically 

21 

to The Bulletin that his organization "was booming". "The farmers", 



■ 

. 


. ' . . . : . ' . , • • ■ • *. '■« ’. '•* J ■ 




- 

. 


. 


.. . . . •: ; - ' ' < - 


. 

. 


■ 




- 






i : 






. 










5 


201 


Keen remarked, "have awakened at last to the efficiency of the 
22 

equity plan”* The company promoters, moreover, were stated to be 

nearly finished their task of canvassing the Alberta members of 

the Society. "The stock of the company". Keen added, "has been 
23 

nearly all sold", a state of affairs he sought to explain by com¬ 
menting, "The prospectus is plain and the payments so easy that no 

24 

difficulty has been experienced in selling the shares". There was, 

indeed, no limit to Keen*s optimism. "The hay market of Edmonton", 

he declared, "...is practically in the hands and control of the 

25 

society and...the oat market has been raised 3£ a bushel", a cir¬ 
cumstance which the secretary sought to attribute directly to the 
work of Equity officials. "Within a year", Keen claimed, "all the 

farmers* markets in Alberta will be in the control of this or- 
26 

ganization". On April 9, 1907, John M. Moran, the company presi¬ 
dent, was no less confident than Keen when discussing Equity af¬ 
fairs with a Bulletin reporter. Moran had been busy all winter 
throughout the province organizing branches of the Society and he 
was now starting on "a trip down the C. P. R....to arrange for the 
erection of elevators at a number of different points, which will 

be controlled solely by the Society of Equity, and built with 

27 

funds raised by farmers* joint stock companies". "To date", he re¬ 
ported to The Bulletin , "enough stock has been subscribed to erect 
elevators at nearly a dozen different places and it is the aim of 
the society to have at least one Equity Society elevator at every 

principal point between Edmonton and Lethbridge inside of two 
28 

years". Although there is not too much evidence to clarify the 
point, it would appear from Moran’s remarks and other scattered 
pieces of information that some of the Equity elevators were built 
by local farmers* companies which may have received some financial 




' • . : ' 

5 ' 


: ? 


' ' * " 


" • >■ ' 




■ ■ • 




. 

■ 

■ < 

■ ■ 


..... . . 










' 




.... 

. 




■ 

■ 









29 

help from the provincial cooperative organization. 


202 


On May 21, 1907, less than a week after "The Equity Limited" 
had increased its capitalization by $190,000, a letter was sent to 
the Alberta membership from Indianapolis which marked the beginning 
of the end for the Western Canadian cooperative. The first of two 
letters from the American headquarters condemning the Alberta 
heresy, it was signed by John Mulholland, the "District Manager" of 
Equity activities in the United States. Mulholland f s pronouncement 
on "The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited" was forwarded private¬ 
ly to Alberta locals and thus did not even appear in Up-to-Date 
Farming . Yet scarcely two weeks after the letter was drawn up and 
printed at the Indianapolis headquarters, it was published in The 
Strathcona Flaindealer and reprinted by the official A. F. A. 
paper. According to The Plaindealer , Mulholland f s communication 
was "placed in our hands by a representative of the Canadian 

30 

Society of Equity...for the information of members of the order". 
Whatever the merits of this explanation, the letter had become pub¬ 
lic property throughout the province and as such constituted a hard 
blow to both the Edmonton headquarters of the Society and the di¬ 
rectors of the allied cooperative enterprise. 

After reviewing the circumstances under which the original re¬ 
quest for a change of name had been granted, Mulholland proceeded 
in his message to charge that the true purpose in the affair had 
been not "to overcome any feeling of pride on the part of our 

Canadian brothers", but "to advocate secession from the parent 
31 

society". Instead of assuaging nationalistic feelings in Alberta 

by their action, those responsible for the request promptly 

"started to create that very sectional feeling they were so 

32 

anxious a short time before to allay". This, Mulholland claimed, 






. ; 

.i 


. < . 

. 

I i . ' '.? t ■ 

* " . 




■ 














? 








. 


■ 





203 


had been "their intention all along" and now they were seeking "to 
drift from the policy of controlled marketing in the interests of 
the farmers of America, tear down the work of years, and at the 

same time throw the farming class of Canada down by establishing a 

33 

private company limited". Unfortunately, the District Manager had 

received no intimation of the decision to increase the company’s 

capitalization, for it was on the point of inadequate funds that 

his criticism was mainly based. He felt so strongly on the matter 

that this portion of his condemnation was printed in capitals: 

...THEIR PROSPECTUS...SHOWS HOW RIDICULOUS THE ENTIRE 
PROPOSITION IS. WHY, $60,000 WOULD NOT PUT UP AND EQUIP 
THE ENGINE ROOM IN ONE FIRST CLASS ELEVATOR, SO YOU CAN 
SEE IT^ALL ROT ABOUT BUYING STOCKYARDS, OPERATING CHEESE 
FACTORIES, ETC. THE TRUTH IS, THEY ARE GOING TO TAKE THE 
PLACE OF THE MUCH DESPISED MIDDLEMEN THEY HAVE BEEN 
TALKING ABOUT AND TELLING YOU HAVE BEEN ROBBING YOU FOR 
YEARS, BUT NO ONE IS TO RECEIVE ANY BENEFITS FROM THIS 
COMPANY UNLESS HE IS A SHAREHOLDER. 34 

Enthusiastic "Equitists" like Keen and Moran must have been 
stunned by the Indianapolis pronouncement on the folly of their co 
operative project. While the recent increase in capitalization in¬ 
directly supported Mulholland’s financial criticism of the under¬ 
taking, it would seem that the Alberta executive had not antici¬ 
pated a charge of deviation from the principles of "controlled 
marketing". The inadvertent publication of the rebuke in two wide¬ 
ly read Alberta farm papers only made matters infinitely worse as 
an open quarrel between Indianapolis and Edmonton over "The Equity 
Limited" would not only threaten the current drive for new members 
but it would frighten away potential subscribers to the second 
offering of shares in the cooperative enterprise. Yet as severe as 
Mulholland f s remarks may have appeared at the time, they were mild 
compared to the ultimatum soon to be delivered to Alberta "Equi¬ 
tists" by J. A. Everitt himself. 



. 

. 

■ 


. 







. .. 



. 

. 









. 


. 

' 




■ 


' 

■. : : • • > . ... J ■ ' : . : 1 ' 

' ' • - 




; . ' ; . ; ' ‘ 

, 


■ 


. 








. 



204 


Apparently not satisfied that Mulholland*s warning would carry 
sufficient weight with his Alberta following, Everitt, the presi¬ 
dent and founder of the American Society of Equity, forwarded a 
letter to every Canadian subscriber to Up-to-Date Farming that 

went into much more detail as to why the Indianapolis headquarters 

35 

found "The Equity Limited" so objectionable. Issued barely a week 

or two after the Mulholland admonition, Everitt's letter, like its 

predecessor, suffered unauthorized publication by The Saturday 

News . The Strathcona Plaindealer apparently refused to handle the 

second Indianapolis communication because of a threatened lawsuit 

over its action in printing the first, but The News lost no time 

in publishing the Everitt ultimatum. According to the editor of 

The News , no less a person than D. W. Warner, the first A. F. A. 

36 

president, brought a copy of the communication to his office and 

one is tempted, therefore, to suspect Warner was also responsible 

for giving the Mulholland letter to The Plaindealer . Since the 

former A. F. A. chief executive had been "at one time a member of 

37 

the Society of Equity", he seems by a chance error in the Indiana¬ 
polis headquarters to have continued to receive Up-to-Date Farming 
and other official memoranda. Thus placed in the remarkable 
position of being able to read Equity correspondence not intended 

for non-members, Warner succeeded by rather questionable means in 

* 

adding greatly to A. F. A. strength in the struggle for control of 
the Alberta farm movement. 

Although the Everitt ultimatum, as published in The Saturday 
News for June 22, 1907, is a much more thorough analysis of the 
conflict between "controlled marketing" and the Alberta coopera¬ 
tive experiment, its review of the circumstances surrounding the 
application for a change of name is so similar to Mulholland's 










' 

. 

V 

. 

T : : » . .• ... . ' 1 s : "Is OV?u 


- 






- 


1 




. 


. 


. 


. 


. ... 


. 

' • , ■ 




t 




. 

■ 

- 


. 


• ; t 




205 


version that it is obvious the same person prepared both accounts* 
Indeed, the literary style and the method of presentation used 
throughout the two letters would indicate remarkable collaboration 
between President and District Manager in their attempts to con¬ 
demn ”The Equity Limited”• After explaining his reasons for 
agreeing with the Alberta executive that it would be wise to alter 
the name of the Canadian subsidiary, Everitt noted how the new af¬ 
filiate had proceeded to sponsor an incorporated company "with a 
capital stock of sixty thousand dollars”, even though the parent 
body was ”an incorporation without any capital stock, and without 
any intention of conducting any business resulting in profit to 
the members or stockholders, except as each member will be 

38 

profited through the sale of his crops at profitable prices”. 
Pointing angrily at the inadequate initial capitalization, Everitt 
then excoriated the folly of the provincial executive in the Mul- 
holland manner: 

THE ABOVE IS QUOTED FROM THE PROSPECTUS AND TO ANY 
GOOD BUSINESS MAN OR ANY MAN OF FAIR DISCERNMENT, MAKES 
THE PROPOSITION RIDICULOUS ON ITS FACE. THE CAPITAL 
STOCK OF SIXTY THOUSAND DOLLARS WOULD NOT BE SUFFICIENT 
TO DO ANY ONE OF THE THINGS MENTIONED IN THE OBJECTS—NO, 

NOT ONE-HUNDREDTH ENOUGH TO EQUIP ANY ONE OF THESE OB¬ 
JECTS WITH THE NECESSARY PLANTS AND UTILITIES AND 
OPERATORS. AND TO DO ALL THIS THEY HAVE SET OUT IN THESE 
OBJECTS WOULD REQUIRE A CAPITAL STOCK RUNNING INTO MANY 
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS; WHILE IF IT WERE POSSIBLE TO RAISE 
THE MONEY AND TO UNDERTAKE TO CARRY OUT THE OBJECTS, IT 
WOULD REQUIRE THE EMPLOYMENT OF THOUSANDS OF EMPLOYEES, 
EXCEEDING THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN THE GOVERNMENT SER¬ 
VICE OF YOUR COUNTRY. 

When we further consider the nature of the business 
that this f Canadian Society of Equity, Limited* proposes 
to engage in, its great variety, diversity and extent of 
the territory to be covered, also the nature of the com¬ 
modities to be dealt in, oftentimes of a very perishable 
nature you can begin to conceive of the magnitude and 
intricacies of the business, and it should not take a 
very shrewd person to conclude at once and forever, that 
it is entirely impracticable, not to say impossible. 


• o 

. 






. 


. 




. 

' 

. 


. . 




' 




, 










: 















. 








1 



. 



■ t * 





206 


BESIDES, IF IT IS CONCEDED THAT THEY WILL BE ABLE TO 
CARRY OUT THE UNDERTAKING ALONG THE LINES AS PLANNED, IT 
MEANS THAT THEY MUST DESTROY ALL THE INSTITUTIONS NOW EN¬ 
GAGED IN THESE LINES BEFORE THEY CAN SUBSTITUTE THE NEW 
PLANTS OR INSTITUTIONS. IN DOING THIS THEY NATURALLY WILL 
ARRAY AGAINST THEM ALL OF THESE POWERFUL INSTITUTIONS, 
CORPORATIONS, AND INDIVIDUALS. THIS IS CONTRARY TO THE 
DECLARED PURPOSE OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF EQUITY, WHICH 
IS TO NOT INTERFERE WITH ESTABLISHED BUSINESS BUT RATHER 
TO REGULATE THE PRESENT ESTABLISHED BUSINESS AND INSTITU¬ 
TIONS AND USE THEM IN EQUITY FOR THE PEOPLE. 39 

While Everitt, like Mulholland, had not heard of the recent in¬ 
crease in the capitalization of the Equity enterprise, it is quite 
apparent that, even if the news had reached Indianapolis in time, 
the additional #190,000 would not have altered his low opinion of 
the company*s financial prospects. Such a reaction to "The Equity 
Limited” was harmful enough, hut, when published in conjunction 
with Everitt's other conclusions, the effect was disastrous. The 

presidential declaration that the Alberta affiliate had "departed 

40 

from the true principles of the American Society of Equity" must 

have confused members and non-members alike, especially when it 

was accompanied by Everitt*s shocking announcement "that it would 

be very unwise indeed for old members of the American Society of 

Equity to affiliate themselves with the new society, as well as 

for non-members of the society to give them any encouragement 
41 

whatever". "Every person", Everitt added, "who wants to see better 

conditions established in your country at the earliest possible 

moment should remain faithful to the true American Society of 

Equity and do all in its power to build it up and extend its scope 
42 

and usefulness". As if he already had not made matters sufficient¬ 
ly difficult for those in control of the Alberta Equity movement, 
the president and founder then issued the following appeal to his 
followers north of the forty-ninth parallel: 

....Do you want the true Society of Equity (it is im- 




- 


t 








' 

. 


. 

£ 

' 

, 


- 


; 






: • ’ 

. 

' 

. 






























■ 
























207 


material whether called American Society of Equity or 
Canadian Society of Equity) to be established in your 
country? If so, you should oontinue to support it by 
paying your dues to the National Union and continuing 
your subscription to the official paper, UP-TO-DATE 
FARMING, and on these propositions we are now seeking 
your verdict. 

Please consider this matter very carefully. It is of 
the greatest importance to you and of equally great im¬ 
portance to our members and our society in this country. 

We consider you as brothers; the interests of the two 
countries are identical; therefore, they should be 
mutual. You need the help of this country to solve your 
farmers* problems, and this country needs your co-opera¬ 
tion and assistance. I believe your own judgment will 
tell you that the plan now being promoted by the private¬ 
ly owned company, the Canadian Society of Equity, Limi¬ 
ted, is destined to fail, and its failure will mean that 
you mm will be put back, probably years, in the final 
solution of your problems. But should you, on the other 
hand, remain loyal and do what you can for the upbuilding 
of the true American Society of Equity, we will give you 
more assistance than we ever did in the past, and the 
writer believes that he can safely promise before many 
months that the American Society of Equity can be estab¬ 
lished throughout your country as it will be throughout 
the country that borders you on the south* Therefore let 
us now stand as one man, not only in each of our 
countries, but in both of them. Let no boundary lines di¬ 
vide us, but let us march onward, hand in hand, with one 
object in view, that is, the securing of profitable 
prices for our crops and all other good things to which 
farmers are entitled, with one plan for its accomplish¬ 
ment, and that, the plan of the American Society of 
Equity, which has been so ably championed by your best 
friend—Up-to-Date Farming—and thus we will establish 
freedom for our nations individually and internationally 
and bring freedom and independence to all the farmers on 
the American continent. 43 

Everitt, however, was not so foolish as to assume that a mere ap¬ 
peal to reason would drive the straying Alberta "Equitists" back 
into the orthodox fold. He, accordingly, coupled his nebulous pro¬ 
mises of "more assistance" with a specific threat to cancel all 
Canadian subscriptions to Up-to-Date Farming if the cooperative 
heresy were not immediately repudiated. Under the Equity form of 
organization such a threat was a serious matter as no one could 
receive the official American organ without holding a membership 









. 

- 

' 

.... . , • u ■ 






;«c 






. 

. 

» i 

, . 

., , ./ ; .i ■ ■ ' ■■ ' : • ‘ • 

. 

, 











- 

i. i ,i... 

' 

. 







208 


in a branch of the Society that had been approved by the Indiana- 
44 

polis headquarters. Receipt of the paper was the symbol of member¬ 
ship, even though there were prominent agricultural leaders in the 
United States who denounced the Equity movement as "a visionary 

scheme to fool the farmers and to build up a tremendous circula- 

45 

tion for Up-to-Date Farming" . "Unless I receive a favorable re- 
sponse...", Everitt told his Canadian brethren, "I will, with re¬ 
grets, be obliged to cancel your subscription, and the current is- 

46 

sue, June 1, will be the last one that you will receive". Yet the 
high priest of "Equity" gave no hint of just how his Alberta fol¬ 
lowers were to go about undoing their sponsorship of the coopera¬ 
tive venture, nor did he indicate what he thought "Equitists" 
living outside the province should do to purge themselves of all 
taint in the natter. All he could say, instead, was that, "As the 
paper is better now than ever before, as it is doing greater work 
than ever before, and as you are, or should be, more vitally 

interested In the outcome of the present campaigns than ever be- 

47 

fore, I cannot conceive of you letting the paper stop". 

Now that Everitt had added his weight to Mulholland's in the 
condemnation of the Alberta heresy, the embarrassment of Equity of 
ficials throughout the province may well be imagined. From the 
earliest days of the movement in the Edmonton district, all the A1 
berta apostles of "Equity", and W. J. Keen in particular, had 
quoted and referred to Everitt as the personification of "con¬ 
trolled marketing" and had given the impression the provincial 
body was in complete accord with the Indianapolis headquarters. To 
be so abruptly and unexpectedly anathematized by the patron saint 
of the Society was a bitter blow that hurt all the more when the 
Everitt-Mulholland repudiation became public property within a few 









* 

- 




. J v.1 , 


. 

* 








. ' ■' - ' . ■' ' ' ■« •' ■ 










? . < : * ■ 


. 


t 


















. 




. 


. 












209 


weeks of the decision to increase the capitalization of "The Equi¬ 
ty Limited". It was, in fact, on the matter of the unauthorized 
publication of the letters from Indianapolis that the Alberta 
executive took action. Since The Strathcona Plaindealer had been 
the first to publish the Mulholland admonition, the editor of that 
paper, J. Hamilton McDonald, became the initial object of attack. 

On June 21, 1907, McDonald acknowledged on the editorial page that 
he had been in receipt of a communication from an Edmonton firm of 
solicitors demanding a retraction of the letter on the grounds 
"that the article in question contains matter tending to expose 
the Canadian Society of Equity, Limited, and its officers, to con¬ 
tempt and ridicule, and the statements therein contained are un- 
48 

true"* McDonald, accordingly, declared his willingness to retract 

anything that might have damaged the new cooperative venture and 

he added the significant remark that the Mulholland letter had 

been published at the "request of a gentleman whom we understand 

49 

was a member of the Society of Equity". There is little reason to 
doubt that the former member in question was D* W. Warner. 

On June 22, 1907, only a day after the publication of Mc¬ 
Donald^ retraction, The Saturday News had the temerity to print 
the Everitt ultimatum. The outraged directors of "The Equity 
Limited" now demanded through their solicitors that the editor of 
The News retract not only the Everitt remarks, but the reprint of 
the Mulholland warning from the columns of The Plaindealer * Once 
more Equity legal representations were successful. Unlike The 
Plaindealer . however, The News noted first "that it was in the pub¬ 
lic interest to give publicity to the statements of the officials 
of the American organization", but, in publishing the two contro¬ 
versial letters, the paper had "no desire to wrongfully injure 














. 

. 

' • ’ ‘ " 1 




... • ■ ■ * 


■ ■ 1 . C 1 ' *t ■ ■: 




. 


. 
















-££•:. • 1 '•*' 








_ 


. 

, • .. 




210 


50 

either of the parties to the dispute". "If any of the statements 

that appeared in either of these articles are not founded on fact", 

51 

the editor added, he was "perfectly willing to retract them". Af¬ 
ter acknowledging that the Equity cooperative had increased its 
capitalization from the amount mentioned in the Everitt-MulhoHand 
rebuke to the sum of $250,000, The News then pointed out that it 
could not investigate the accuracy of the other statements appear¬ 
ing in the Indianapolis letters, but, if the Equity officials in¬ 
volved wished "to make a rejoinder to any or all of these state¬ 
ments", their remarks would "be given the same prominence in the 

52 

columns of this paper as were the original letters". Although some 
significance may be attached to the fact that no Equity official 
accepted this generous offer of the A. F. A. organ, it is more 
than obvious that the "touchy” attitude displayed by the Society 
over the actions of The Plaindealer and The News led directly to 
the sharp cut in press references to Equity activities in Alberta 
after the publication of the Everitt ultimatum. 

There is also little doubt that this news "black-out" is the 
main reason for the failure of the Alberta press to report of¬ 
ficial action on the threat of expulsion. The Great West must have 
reported all the developments in detail, but, unfortunately, no 
files of that publication appear to be in existence. To make 
matters more difficult, there is no record elsewhere of what de¬ 
cision was reached on the subject of the Everitt ultimatum. Up-to- 

Date Farming for 1907 does not even refer to the Alberta heresy, 

53 

let alone what was done about it, and the official records of the 

Indianapolis headquarters which might solve the mystery do not 

54 

seem to have been preserved. One may conclude, though, that since 
"The Equity Limited" continued to enjoy the support of the 










. 

. 

... ' ■ ■ 

. 

. 

* 

■ 

- 

* 

■ 












211 


Society's provincial executive, the latter must have decided to 

ignore Everitt and take the consequences* Individual members north 

have 

of the forty-ninth parallel may/disassociated themselves from the 
Canadian headquarters at Edmonton and guaranteed their affiliation 
with Indianapolis by signing a pledge, but the Alberta body, as a 
whole, never severed the connection with their cooperative off¬ 
shoot* Those who remained "Canadian", however, seem to have exer¬ 
cised a high degree of caution when they considered putting more 
money into the condemned enterprise* Everitt, meanwhile, may have 

failed to carry out the threatened excommunication because of the 

55 


growing quarrels at the council board in Indianapolis and the re¬ 
peated charges In the United States that he had turned the presi- 

56 

dency of the Society into a dictatorship. 

The fortunes of "The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited" de¬ 
clined steadily after the clash with Indianapolis over cooperative 
action and by August, 1907, it was apparent that the company was 
headed straight for bankruptcy. Yet in June of the same year, when 
the Everitt-Mulholland letters were causing so much embarrassment 
for the provincial executive, the president of the cooperative 
looked to the future with undiminj^hed optimism. Returning to Fort 
Saskatchewan after a business tour of Southern Alberta, J* M. Moran 
cheerfully informed the press in both Calgary and Edmonton of the 
arrangements he had made "in the towns in the south for the 

erection of mills and elevators at various places where the members 

57 


of the company wish to have them established". Meetings of the 
board of directors, moreover, had been held at both Macleod and 
High River where a number of important resolutions were adopted and 
"a general policy" drawn up "with regard to the distribution of the 
assets of the society to be utilized in the construction of mills 


t vi 

. 

•• ' 

. 

■ : £ • 














. 

. 

■ 

. 




. 




. ■ 




. ,. : 








- 

- 




. 




Q- 




' . 




' 

















212 


58 

and elevators at different points". According to Moran, 250-barrel 
flour mills would be erected at Macleod and High River, while ele¬ 
vators with a capaoity of 40,000 bushels each would be built as 
quickly as possible at Claresholm, Stavely, Parkland, Nanton, Cay¬ 
ley and Carstairs so that the current crop in those centres could 
59 

be received* The company, the president added, had also ordered 

eight cars of binder twine from the Kingston penitentiary which 

would be sold to members at a saving of two and one-half cents per 

60 

pound over the prevailing retail price. To conclude his survey of 

Equity prospects, Moran noted that "notwithstanding the stringency 

of the money market, the farmers are in a good financial position 
61 

to ensure success". Southern Alberta opinion, meanwhile, appears 
to have been behind Moran in the confident attitude he displayed 
when talking to the press. On June 14, 1907, for example, the 
editor of The Claresholm Review commented: 

The members of the Canadian Society of Equity are for¬ 
tunate in having at their head Mr. John M. Moran a man of 
high educational standing and keen integrity. He is a 
farmer and one of the foremost agriculturists of Alberta. 

Mr. Moran is the founder of the Canadian Society of Equi¬ 
ty, Limited, of which he is its president and general 
manager and it is safe to say that while he can be in¬ 
duced to stay at its head the company will be a success. 62 

Three weeks later the editor of The High River Times was as confi¬ 
dent as his Claresholm counterpart that "The Equity Limited" would 
serve the farmers well, but he tempered his enthusiasm for the 
local milling project with a note of warning: 

The opinion prevails among a few people (very few, 
though) that the Equity flour mill will never be built. 

We fail to see why not. The farmers, who have given their 
notes amounting to the grand total of $35,000, are, 
largely, good men and true, who would have no difficulty 
in paying double the above amount if called upon to do 
so. But the members of the society must exercise great 
caution in selecting officers and local managers and by 
so doing they will ensure success to the Society of Equi¬ 
ty and the flour mill....capable and trustworthy men must 




. 

to 

. 




. 




. 










. 

. 

■ j \ : * 1 - 














. 

. 





213 


be in charge of the organization, otherwise the society 
will go to the wall* In our opinion the society as a 
whole should have a voice as to whom should be their of¬ 
ficials, and in selecting men much attention should be 
paid to their ability and honor* Elect good men and the 
Society will be bound to succeed. 63 

In view of the signs of difficulty that began to appear on the 

Equity horizon by the end of July, 1907, it is possible the Clares- 

holm editorial opinions were based on keen observation rather than 

commonplace moralizing. 

Early in August, 1907, the sinking financial condition of 
n The Equity Limited" could be held no longer from the shareholders 
throughout the province. Drastic measures had had to be taken to 
ward off possible disaster, and, since one of these was the tempo¬ 
rary suspension of The Great West * the general membership had to 

64 

be informed of the unfortunate turn of events. By the middle of 

August, the affairs of the Equity company had reached such a low 

ebb that all the directors, with but one exception, had resigned 
65 

their posts. During the third week of August an Equity share¬ 
holders* meeting was held in the Brant school house "for the pur¬ 
pose of demanding an extraordinary meeting...to consider the ad- 

66 

visability of winding up the...company". The immediate cause of 

the meeting was reported by The High River Times as a "refusal of 

67 

the banks to advance money on the farmers* notes". "The farmers", 
said The Times , "do not wish their notes to stand as interest- 
bearing notes when it has been found impossible to raise suf¬ 
ficient money on them to enable the flour-mill scheme to be 
68 

carried through". Robert Pearson of Claresholm visited High River 

in 

on his way to the Brant protest meeting and/so doing gave the local 
press further information on Equity developments. Although Pearson 
was referred to by The Times as "the only director of the Society 








. 

. 


& 
















- 


< 


. 


. 

■ 




* 

t 1 










■ 





















214 


of Equity who did not resign his position at a meeting recently 
69 

held in Edmonton", he, apparently, did not divulge the reasons for 

the mass resignations* Despite the now obvious weakness of the 

Society's cooperative project, the sole remaining Equity director 

was determined that the company should not yet go out of 

existence* "The company", he said, "was incorporated and...it had 

now so many widely divergent interests throughout Alberta that the 

70 

winding up of the same could not be thought of". Indeed, "it was 

71 

an unwise move to even suggest such a thing at the present time". 

Financial difficulties, moreover, held no terrors for Pearson: 

♦...most of those who had taken shares in the society 
were in a position to pay their notes off in cash or at 
least to pay a portion of it at once. The mill once up, 
the balance of the money necessary could be raised on 
security of the building from a loan company and, he 
thought, could be got for five years for about seven per 
cent, interest. The elevator scheme at Claresholm was 
being carried through in that way—the farmers paying 
down what was necessary to enable a start to be made and 
the remainder got from a loan company.... 72 


Even though Pearson and Moran struggled manfully to keep "The 
Equity Limited" from completely falling apart, the inevitable 
could not be put off much longer. The company's annual meeting, 
which had been scheduled for the end of September, 1907, was de¬ 
layed until the middle of November so that it, apparently, would 
coincide with a similar gathering of the Society proper. Possibly 
because of the extent of Equity cooperative activities in the 
southern part of the province, both events were held in Calgary. 
Meeting at the Harmonic Hall in that city on November 13, 14, 15, 
and 16, the delegates convened first to discuss the tangled af¬ 
fairs of "The Equity Limited", then proceeded to the routine busi¬ 
ness of the Society itself. While the ensuing deliberations were 
to deal the provincial organization a more shattering blow than 








. 

, 

... . * . ■' 


, 










' 








. ■ w ■ * - ■ ■.■ 




. . . . w . ! ■ - ■ ; .• : 

... ■ ; ■ \ ' l 'i j i .... ■ . ■>. - < • 


.... 

- 


• u • - . - :■ .= :■ . r * f * 








r • i 


<1 L'fl 









215 


the ill-fated Lacombe conference, the delegates appear to have 
maintained an outward semblance of confidence and hope for the 
future as they assembled in the southern centre. W. J. Keen, for 
example, in talking to a representative of The Morning Albertan on 
November 12, looked forward expectantly to the intensive organiza¬ 
tion of Saskatchewan and Manitoba under the Equity banner: 

When seen by the Albertan, Mr. Keen was very enthusias¬ 
tic over the future of the society, and said, although 
practically in its infancy, there were already eighty- 
five unions, with over 3,000 members, in Alberta. 

At present organization had been confined principally 
to Alberta, but in the future Saskatchewan and Manitoba 
would receive attention, and then the farmers would begin 
to reap the benefits of the seeds they were at present 
sowing.... 

During the present convention the society will have 
present something like sixty delegates, besides the fra¬ 
ternal delegates of the Grain Growers 9 Grain Co. of Mani¬ 
toba and Saskatchewan, the Trades and Labor Congress, and 
a delegate representing the provincial labor unions. 

Plans will be discussed looking towards amalgamation 
or co-operation of these three forces.... 73 

Although the Morning Albertan reporter mingled with the twenty 
Northern Alberta farmers who accompanied Keen on the trip to Cal¬ 
gary, they do not seem to have differed with the general secretary 
on the Society's future prospects. 

The presence of labor representatives at the Calgary Equity 
convention, which Keen announced as if it were a matter of course, 
was the most sensational feature of the ensuing deliberations. Al¬ 
though the resulting alliance between the forces of “Equity* and 
labor did the Society nearly as much harm as the failure of the 
cooperative experiment, the contemporary press gives no clue as to 
who originated the idea. However, the fact that William R. Ball was 
the vice-president of the Society at the time leads one to suspect 
he had something to do with it. His earliest efforts to organize 




; 

*" ' '• 

5 ' 


. 

c • 


« 


•; :i ■ ' i : 






;, t • ‘ ; ' ; • . \ .. j 




. 






C 










I 


£16 


Alberta farmers had been directed towards farmer-labor cooperation, 

and it would be nothing short of incredible if he did not use his 

high Equity position to achieve this elusive goal. Other members 

of the provincial executive may have felt that affiliation with 

the labor movement would be a means of diverting attention away 

from the cooperative disaster, but it is more than likely that 

Ball was the first to make the suggestion. Plans for the farmer- 

labor alliance appear to have been laid somewhere in July or 

August, 1907, as the twenty-ninth annual convention of the Trades 

and Labor Congress of Canada, which took place in Winnipeg on 

September 16, was attended by the Equity provincial organizer, 

74 

R. C. Owens, The efforts of the latter "to look into the ways of 

75 76 

the Trades and Labor Congress" and the address he delivered were 

so successful that R. P. Pettipiece, the western organizer of the 

International Typographical Union, was invited to represent the 

77 

Congress at the Society's Calgary conference in November, Dis¬ 
cussing his presence at the Equity annual meeting with a Morning 
Albertan reporter on November 13, Pettipiece indicated such 
T. L, C. interest in the possibility of affiliation with a farm or¬ 
ganization that he had attended recent sessions of the American 

Society of Equity in St, Paul, Minnesota, where he was much im- 

78 

pressed by the extent of the movement in the United States, While 
in Calgary he intended to examine critically the aims and objects 
of the Canadian Society "so that he could report as to the feasi¬ 
bility of an affiliation with the Trades and Labor Congress in the 

79 

same way as the other labor unions were at present doing". Ex¬ 
panding further on the proposed alliance, Pettipiece added: 

By affiliating with the congress, the equity society 
will get the co-operation of all the other unions. If 
their objects are, as I think they are, for the purpose 




4 

. 




. ■ . j \. ; • v, « - •< 






' 

* 


■ 




- >i - ^ ■ 




: ■ i :m ; 






t 

■ 

' 






- . : • '■ - • 

. 


' 

i ' ■ 

. 



217 


of holding their products to take advantage of the mar¬ 
kets, they should have no difficulty in arranging an af¬ 
filiation, as the object is similar to the trades unions, 
when they are controlling the labor power. If this 
society is after the co-operative store business of 
buying and selling, their chances will not be very great. 

The farmers need some protection as they are at pre¬ 
sent being fleeced every day...from all quarters. 80 

Whatever suspicions Pettipiece may have had that Alberta "Equi«* 

tists" were "after the co-operative store business" must have been 

quickly dispelled when he heard that their delegates had howled 

down a proposal to give the moribund "Equity Limited" a new lease 

on life. 

The morning sessions, however, of the first (and last) annual 

meeting of the Equity shareholders, which assembled in the Harmonic 

Hall on November 13, 1907, gave no hint of the storm that was to 

come. With J. M. Moran in the chair and A. von Mieleiki acting as 

secretary, the shareholder-delegates, who represented a total of 

631 votes, listened without comment to "the reading of the minutes 

81 

of the regular meetings during the past year". In the afternoon, 
though, the Calgary Herald reporter assigned to the conference 
sensed that "all the delegates...seemed charged with a superabun¬ 
dance of repressed feeling, waiting for a vent, and the majority 

82 

present seemed to desire the winding up of the present company". 

The "overwhelming majority" who demanded that the cooperative 

83 

"close up shop" were led by Thomas Mar gat z of the Brant local which, 
it will be remembered, had demanded in August that the Equity com¬ 
pany go out of business. Following the reading of the financial 
statement for the year, a bitter attack on Moran and his handling 

of the company*s affairs was launched and, according to The Calgary 

84 

Herald , "was led and virtually spoken by Mr. Margatz": 


....He asked why Mr. Keen, the secretary at one time, had 





; 

. 

■ 

. 


- 










- 





. 


: 




. ' . 








■ 


• • 


J 

= ' , " - ■ 


... 


. ' 














f ' 

' 










218 


bean paid his salary in advance, and why he had refused 
to act last night. He asked why the society purchased a 
lot in Edmonton, and he asked why the farmers* notes were 
not devoted to the erection of flour mills and elevators 
as had been the intention. 85 

The point is not clarified in the contemporary press, but it would 
appear that Keen had resigned as company secretary the day before, 
thus giving rise to Margatz* question as to "why he had refused to 
act last night". The reference, however, to the alleged misuse of 
"the farmers* notes" is more easily explained. The directors of 
"The Equity Limited", in a moment of reckless optimism, had pur¬ 
chased a timber limit in the belief that they would be able to own 

86 

and control a chain of lumber mills. Moran, meanwhile, failed to 
answer the Margatz queries in a fashion that would satisfy an 
angry and aroused meeting. Commencing with the apologetic claim 
"he had done his best", the beleaguered president gave the fol¬ 
lowing reply to the Brant delegate: 

...the lot was an asset of the company, being situated in 
the very heart of Edmonton. He and the directors had seen 
fit to purchase it, figuring that it would be cheaper in 
the end to own their own property and offices than to pay 
the large rentals which they were doing. He said the lot 
still remained, and that it was still worth the money. 

The reason Mr. Keen had refused to act he could not 
explain. Mr. Keen knew best his actions. Mr. Keen had 
ceased to draw a salary for some time past, as the ex¬ 
penses of the society, and the small, or practically nil, 
income were too far apart to allow the hiring of a secre¬ 
tary. Since Mr. Keen had turned in his books they had 
lain in the safe of the secretary pro. tem....If there 
was any discrepancy in the accounts, due to Mr. Keen, 
then it was up to Mr. Keen to explain or rectify them. 

The financial statement had not been made out by the 
regularly authorized auditor of the company, as he had 
been too busy; but they had been audited by one of the 
city of Edmonton*s auditors. 

Mr. Moran also stated that the company could not be 
run for nothing, and that some expenses were necessary. 

He had not promised the farmers that every cent they put 
in the society would be used to build elevators and 
flour mills. 87 


. 

. 




fcl>> 

. 




. 








. - 


,£ !." . Vi ■ . ;ac, ■ 

■ 




. 


■ 


. ■ 

. * 

■ 


. 

' 




■ 

W 

■ 




. 


. 



219 


In the vigorous and lengthy discussion which followed, it could be 

"plainly seen that the great majority present were not in favor of 

88 

Mr* Moran*s administration"* Moreover, it was apparent to nearly 
all the shareholder-delegates that the only solution to the co¬ 
operative fiasco was to drop the entire project* Thus, when David 
Grier, the mayor of Macleod, was nominated as the new president of 
the company, he "arose and stated emphatically that the only con¬ 
dition under which he would accept the nomination was the under¬ 
standing that he should proceed to wind up the business of the 
89 90 

company"* Grier, accordingly, was elected by acclamation. Moran 

then sought to retire in favor of his successor, but the latter 

"expressed a wish that he would remain in the chair until the end 

91 

of the meeting, and the delegates expressed a similar desire"• 

Once more Grier stated his intention of winding up the affairs of 

92 

"The Equity Limited" and he was applauded vociferously". Moran*s 
remarks at this point were characterized as "splendid" by the Cal¬ 
gary Herald observer: 

I congratulate you on having selected a very able, a 
very honest and a very reliable man as president of this 
company. I can also congratulate myself on being relieved 
of the duties* I have brought a great society together, 
not from any ill will toward the farmers nor towards my¬ 
self, but with a view of bettering them. I, myself, am a 
thousand dollars poorer now than I was when the company 
started a year ago. 93 

When the meeting followed with a unanimous vote of thanks to 

Moran "for his efforts in their behalf during his incumbency of 

office", the former president "showed the only feeling which he 

94 

had displayed during the whole meeting"* "For an hour", remarked 
The Calgary Herald , "he had been badgered by his opponents, and he 
had retained a calm exterior, but at the close of his speech, when 
he thanked those present for the vote of thanks, his voice broke": 




8 

. . 














. • • 


. v ■ ... ■ — J i . ; J. ■; ■ -'v •:<> . ,-u : *>< ; -j ’ ” ',.U! , ’ i / 


' 














. 

‘ 


- 

- 

- 

. 
















220 


f I can hardly express my sorrow and regret at having 
been unable to make this company the success I wished’* 
he began* ’I have made a grand try, gentlemen, and I have 
got together a grand lot of men. It is a splendid company, 
and should do splendid work for the farmers. As it is I 
am not afraid to go down to my grave knowing, as I do, 
that I have done what is right and honest by you.* 95 

In view of the way in which the flood of critioism had affected 
Moran, it is not surprising to learn that he returned almost im¬ 
mediately to Fort Saskatchewan and allowed the Equity vice-presi¬ 
dent, William R. Ball, to act as chairman for the sessions of the 
96 

Society proper. Meanwhile, the ejection of the other company of¬ 
ficers was completed, but not without incident. J. Terborgh was 
the unanimous choice of the meeting for vice-president, and it was 

agreed that Thomas Margatz should "be recommended to the new board 

97 

of directors as secretary-treasurer”. The six directors, who were 

then nominated and elected, included Henry Wise Wood, Hiram Long, 

98 

W. J. Greer, Thomas Margatz, R. C. Owens, and M. R. Matheson. Just 

as a motion was being made to "adjourn at once, subject to the 

call of the new board of directors”, R. C. Pegler arose to address 
99 

the meeting. He was permitted to speak, but when ”he stated that 
the wish of the union which he represented was that the company 
proceed with the good work, reorganize if necessary, but never al¬ 
low the work to drop..., the powerful opposition faction.*.howled 

Mr. Pegler down, with stamping feet, whistling, rude remarks, and 
100 

a few hisses”. "Mr. Pegler”, The Calgary Herald commented, "...had 

figured that the delegates would be courteous enough to listen to 

101 

him, but they, apparently, very apparently, were not”. 

With the cooperative muddle thus handed over to a new board 
of directors for solution, the provincial executive of the Society 
of Equity proceeded immediately to pursue its new pet project of 
an alliance with the Canadian labor movement. At the opening ses- 



* 

, 

' . \ 

■< 

■'£ * 

. 




» 






. 








. .. Jt i; . 302 . 






... .. , . ■ ■ - - ' • ■ ■ > - 










. 






. 










221 


sion of the Society’s third annual meeting on November 14, 1907, 

the first major speaker was Thomas A* Crerar, the recently elected 

president of the Grain Growers’ Grain Company, but the labor men, 

who followed the future Progressive leader on the platform, at- 

102 

tracted much more attention* Crerar laid bare the machinations of 

the private grain interests and the unfair methods of the Winnipeg 

Grain Exchange in dealing with the farmers and the Grain Growers’ 

Grain Company in particular* Although the youthful president 

showed forcefully "how the members of the exchange were making 

105 

money out of the farmers", his appeal to those present to get be¬ 
hind the fledgling farmer-owned company failed to evoke much re¬ 
sponse, possibly because of a general disillusionment over the 
fate of "The Equity Limited"* The Grain Growers’ Grain Company, 
after all, was little more than a year old and its success at the 
time was far from assured* 

When the labor representatives spoke, they were decidedly 
more successful in their efforts to secure Equity support. A Cal¬ 
gary labor man, A* Henderson, who was described in the local press 
as "prominent in labor circles here", wished to see "if a mass 

meeting of the farmers and the trades could not be arranged for at 
104 

some future time". "The wish of the Trades and Labor council", 

Henderson remarked, "was to have such a meeting, and to hear from 

the farmers and from the trades": 

...the interests of the trades and the farmers were 
identical, and would always remain so; ...the desire and 
aim among both classes should be to have parties repre¬ 
sent them in the legislature who had been chosen from 
their own ranks, and would thus have interests which were 
identical with the farmers and trades instead of directly 
opposite to them, as so often happens at present.... 105 

After Henderson had ended his address by suggesting that socialism 

was "the only party for either farmers or trades", another labor 


. 

. 






. 


. 






.. 


. 














' 








. 


- 

: 


. 

.... 






222 


speaker, referred to only as '^President Masters of the Trades and 

Labor council*, spoke briefly in support of his colleague’s re- 
106 

marks. Almost immediately, the convention chairman arose to speak 

in favor of a mass meeting of labor men and Equity farmers. *We 

know”, declared Vice-president Ball, "that the capitalist press 

tell the farmers to keep out of political organizations, and that 

107 

they also tell the church to keep politics out of the pulpit** *lt 

is time”, he added, *we did something for our own class, and I 

108 

support the proposed mass meeting*. Ball had scarcely resumed his 
place when an Equity delegate, R. C. Pegler, moved *that the con¬ 
vention take steps toward completing arrangements with the Trades 
and Labor council for the mass meeting*; the motion was carried 
and it was agreed that the rally would take place on the evening 

of the following day, even though to do so meant the cancellation 

109 

of an Equity social engagement. Committees representing the forces 

of labor and of "Equity* were then appointed to complete the 

110 

necessary arrangements for the rally. 

Although the contemporary accounts of the November 15 mass 
meeting are fragmentary, it is clear that the farmers and working¬ 
men present not only sought to prove they had grievances in common, 
but even went so far as to determine who had the more difficult 
economic problems. No major clash of interests developed during 
the discussions, and, while a minority of the Equity delegates did 
decide finally to oppose any alliance with labor, the proposed af¬ 
filiation was approved. In welcoming the farm representatives to 
the gathering at the Calgary Trades and Labor hall, President Nor¬ 
ton, who seems to have been the local T. L. C. head, gave voice to 

his belief "that the labor unions could not co-operate with a 
111 

better lot of men*. Speaking for the Equity delegation, Vice-presi- 




. 


. ... , - ; - ' . i« 




f 

. 






* 






■ 


* 


'■ 1 ■ ' ’ 


. 
















. 

\ •/ v.i ) iC • • - : t 


223 


dent Ball, who was also chairman of the rally, addressed the 

meeting on the immediate and ultimate objectives of his organiza- 
112 

tion. After a labor representative, referred to only as "Brother 

Brown”, made some remarks about the affiliation move, an Equity 

delegate, who was later to symbolize the Alberta farm movement, 

rose to say "that the farmers did not come off nearly so well as 
113 

the labor men". "Schools in the country", stated Henry Wise Wood, 

"were too far apart and young children could not go, especially in 

the winter, thus their children were brought up without education, 

114 

and they had to be put to work early in life". Just what purpose 

the future U. F. A. president had in mind is not explained in the 

press accounts, but he did conclude with the remark that "he was 

going back to his union and preach equity, and hoped the other 

115 

delegates would do the same". In view of later developments, it 

would appear possible that Wood already had made up his mind that 

the proposed affiliation would not do. It was at this point that 

B. P. Pettipiece, the most important T. L. C. speaker present, 

gained the floor and delivered a bombastic address which seems to 

have been the major event of the evening. As Pettipiece saw it, 

most Western farmers and workingmen had left Eastern Canada because 

they "were not satisfied with...conditions, or perhaps were forced 
116 

out to get work". The main portion of Pettipiece f s address dwelt 
on the work of the Trades and Labor Congress and the problems com¬ 
mon to both the farmer and the workingman, but, as in a previous 
speech before the Equity convention, he did acknowledge certain 
difficulties peculiar only to agriculture: 

....While the labor man has practically only himself to 
look after, the farmer has wife, daughter, ox and ass. 

The labor man has to work a certain time for a certain 
wage, while the farmer has longer hours and his wage Is 
uncertain. Therefore the farmers were certainly entitled 








. 




. 




. , -1 i . ' • ■ ■ 






. 


' . .. ' .Vi '■ " " v4 ' t • v -t ‘ 




* 


: ■■ A. ' 




. 


* 


V. 












- 

. 

. 




.... 











224 


to something. 117 

After a hitter attack on the tactics of management in British Co¬ 
lumbia, Pettipieoe declared that w the capitalists" in that pro¬ 
vince "were skinning the labor men.,.every day, and the only dif¬ 
ference with the farmers is, they are skinned wholesale once a 
118 

year”. Yet the farmer was "truly in a peculiar position" and should 

not mix farming and politics, even though labor in British Columbia 

119 

had resorted to political action* "If", declared the speaker, "the 

farmers contented themselves with controlling the produce of a 

120 

country, then they could control the capitalists"* Pettipiece then 

concluded his address with both words of encouragement and a 

warning to his Equity listeners: 

....The present policy of the Equity society appeared to 
be on the lines of the trades and labor congress, and 
they should have no difficulty in affiliating, and when 
this was done they would be one of their unions, and 
would have full privileges of the treasury, but if the 
farmers stepped into the buying and selling way of other 
concerns, which would be all right for the farmers on 
the inside, but all wrong for those outside, then they 
were overstepping the congress rules. 121 

Owing to the lateness of the hour and the length of the Pettipiece 

oration, the remarks of several speakers, scheduled to follow the 

Vancouver trade union leader, had to be curtailed and two dele- 

122 

gates did not get a chance at all to address the gathering. One 

Equity man, referred to only as "Brother Mansfield", told of the 

forty-five years it had taken him to obtain his own home, a story 

that was concluded with an outline of "the wrongs suffered by the 

123 

farmers from those holding the capital". A. Henderson, the labor 
man, mentioned previously, "considered the meeting the most im¬ 
portant ever held in Calgary": 

....The farmers certainly had to get some protection. 

They were in the present condition of having to sell at 
the price offered them, but when they went to buy any- 


. 

1 

•__ 










. 


: 


— 

, . ; ■ : .. 

■ 

- 




. 




- t . 


■ 

. 




. 

* 






. 


225 


thing, they had to pay what was asked. The middlemen got 
what they should get, yet the laborers respected the 
middleman and considered him a little god. 124 

The official organizer of the Canadian Society of Equity, R. C. 

Owens, noted that "wealth was always produced by labor": 

....In a community of wealth, the producers were the ones 
in poverty. What the equity had done in the States could 
be done in Canada. The cotton growers received the full 
benefits of the society; they were selling at four and 
five cents per bale, but now it is never less than ten 
and has been as high as fifteen cents. 125 

The last speaker was, perhaps, the only labor representative at 

the rally who perceived that the proposed affiliation might not 

work in practice. "Brother Brown", who earlier in the evening 

seems to have stirred Henry Wise Wood into taking the floor, 

126 

"wanted to know a little further about the society". "In some in¬ 
stances", he said, "it was not possible for the farmers and labor 

127 

men to agree on certain points". Just what was done about Brown’s 
query is not reported in the press accounts, but it is clear 
he failed to stop the meeting from agreeing that on the following 
day the Equity delegates would give full consideration to this 
resolution: 

Whereas, we the delegates of the Canadian Society of 
Equity, in convention assembled, at Calgary, Nov. 14, 15, 

16, 1907, recognize the identity of interests between 
the workers of the world; and 

Whereas, for the first time in the history of the 
labor movement in Canada, the farmers, represented by the 
Canadian Society of Equity, and the Trades and Labor Con¬ 
gress of Canada, voicing the needs and aspirations of 
over 50,000 organized workers, have seen fit to exchange 
fraternal delegates for the purpose of unifying their 
interests; and 

Whereas, the Trades and Labor Congress of Canada has 
unequivocally declared their absolute independent politi¬ 
cal action on the part of the working class, separate and 
distinct from the present two old parties (Liberal and 
Conservative), both of which stand for the present form 
of property ownership, and 


: 

■ 

. 


. 


«... 

. 

. 

. : t. . 






' 


. . ... ' . : 




. 










. 

- j - 

. 

. 


; - 


- 


. 

i 

• 4 


; 




226 


Whereas, we believe that only in the collective owner¬ 
ship of the things used collectively (with production for 
use, instead of profit), lies the solution of the problem 
confronting the workers. Therefore be it 

Resolved, that we re-affirm the position and attitude 
of the Trades and Labor Congress of Canada, and pledge 
ourselves to affiliate, if possible, and do everything in 
our power to wrest the reins of government from the 
domination of the ruling class, and to promote the unity 
of purpose between the farmers and industrials of Canada; 
and be it further 

Resolved, that the delegates of the Canadian Society 
of Equity here assembled, report back to their respective 
locals, urging a demand for the union label upon all 
manufactured goods, including printing of all kinds, pur¬ 
chased by members of this society. 128 

The labor delegates, meanwhile, had approved the above resolution 

and the affiliation proposal; all that remained was the majority 

vote of the Equity convention and the approval of the T. L. C. 

headquarters. 

With the resumption of the regular Equity sessions on the fol 
lowing morning, the first item of business was, of course, the is¬ 
sue of affiliation with the T. L. C. The provincial executive, no 
doubt, hoped to have the matter rapidly disposed of, but the re¬ 
sulting discussion occupied the whole morning sitting. Overnight, 
opposition to the proposed alliance had developed so quickly that 

the convention found it necessary to delete the first, third, and 

129 

fourth paragraphs of the affiliation resolution. This modification 

served to win over a considerable number of n Equitists n who were 

alarmed by some of the ideas contained in the resolution, but it 

failed to placate nine delegates who, under the leadership of 

Henry Wise Wood, were determined that no alliance should take 
130 

place. At the beginning of the morning session, the future U. F. A 
president had "strongly recommended that the society refrain from 

joining forces with the labor men, on account of principles in- 

131 132 

volved". "The farmer", he noted, "was an employer and capitalist". 




■ 




. 


V 

' 

- 


x 

. 




■ . 




















. 








, 




I 

. 


t ' 


' 

- 










227 


However, when the convention calmly proceeded to do no more than 
remove the most objectionable clauses of the affiliation resolu¬ 
tion, Wood rose once more to say that w the union men have every¬ 
thing to gain, the farmers were getting nothing, and, further, the 

133 

co-operation would be no good to the farmer". Although the Wood 
faction were unable to convince the other delegates that a farmer- 
labor alliance was unrealistic, they almost immediately brought 
in the following minority report which sought to clear their names 
of all responsibility for the new move: 

Whereas, the majority of the delegates of the Canadian 
Society of Equity present at our annual meeting on Satur¬ 
day, Nov. 16th, committed our society to the policy 

(1) Of boycotting certain papers on account of 
their management of their own business; 

(2) To the principles of socialism and other prin¬ 
ciples that our society has not declared in 
favor of, and that we believe to be detrimental 
to the best interests of the farmers; and 

Whereas, our local unions, not having considered these 
principles, should have been consulted before this serious 
step was taken; and 

Whereas, we believe that some of the members present 
were unduly influenced by the visiting delegate of the 
Trades and Labor Congress, and 

Whereas, we do not believe said delegate had any real 
consideration for the best interests of the farmers, but 
showed a disposition to force us to sacrifice every 
personal interest to the advancement of the interests of 
his own organization; and 

Whereas, we believe the whole proceeding set the 
Canadian Society of Equity before the world in a false 
light, we believe it has given the said society a serious, 
if not death blow; be it therefore 

Resolved, that we, the undersigned delegates, having 
used our utmost endeavor to ward off this blow, do now 
take this opportunity of expressing our deep regret that 
it has been taken, and, further, that we declare that we 
cannot affiliate a farmer society, from which all the 
fundamental principles of its interests have been taken. 134 

Apparently shaken by the presentation of this minority report, the 


- 

' 




. 




. 

,, 




. 


• f 

• ' ' • • •• « 






t 

' 








- ‘ f : ‘ V "°^ ' 

i ; . 










. >. 


. 


■ 

, f ■ f i • 1 

t - - « 

. 


228 


Equity resolutions committee then rewrote the modified affiliation 

resolution in such a way that it would he even less offensive to 
135 

the Wood faction. Although the second revision contained no re¬ 
ference to the "union label" issue, it was still unacceptable to 
the rebel group when placed before the convention. The delegates, 
however, endorsed the amended wording and authorized the prepara¬ 
tion of a letter to R. P. Pettipiece which would promise that 
Equity farmers "would co-operate with the labor men in demanding 
the union label" and would refuse "to patronize a number of Winni¬ 
peg publishing houses who did not comply with the union demands 
136 

for the label". By December, 1907, the T. L. C. headquarters had 
accepted the Equity farmers as an affiliate, and the provincial 

executive had named The Great West "as the labor paper for Al- 

137 

berta". The latter action, though, was accompanied by a request 
that the price of shares in the Equity printing establishment be 

reduced "so that the labor man could take a greater interest in the 

138 
paper". 

Although provincial press files are lacking in information on 
the point, it would appear most unlikely that, after the convention 
rebuff, the anti-labor faction would have failed to present their 
case to the unions they represented. Yet these Equity unions would 
not be the only ones torn by dissension over the affiliation issue. 
Some of the members of the locals, which had been represented at 
Calgary by pro-labor delegates, must have expressed concern, if 
not outright disapproval, of a T. L. C. connection for Equity far¬ 
mers. In Alberta in 1907, as in all the years of the pre-1914 
period, the word "socialism" carried a distasteful connotation to 
most property owners which was not unlike that associated with 
"bolshevism" and "communism" during the post-1917 and post-1945 



: - A 

* 


. 




■ 

. 






i 














■ 


■ 

. 




■ 




: ce 1 


229 


139 

decades* To affiliate with a body that had openly espoused such 

revolutionary ideas must have been sheer anathema to not a few 

loyal "Equitists", particularly those who were more well-to-do. 

Meanwhile, the comments of the Alberta press on the new farmer- 

labor alliance were not conducive to peace within the Equity fold. 

Not a single provincial paper, except possibly The Great West , 

spoke in favor of the decision made in Calgary, and two widely read 

journals. The Morning Albertan and The Saturday News , openly at- 
140 

tacked it. 

In the months that followed the close of the Calgary conven- 

141 

tion, the cause of "Equity" was not advanced by the unfavorable 

publicity which accompanied the closing out of the affairs of the 

Society 1 s ill-fated cooperative experiment. While the provincial 

press tended to ignore the alliance with labor, both weeklies and 

dailies reported with monotonous regularity on the course of the 

bankruptcy proceedings before the Alberta Supreme Court. In July, 

1908, the decision of Mr. Justice Stuart to issue "a call of $9 

142 

per share" to wind up the affairs of "The Equity Limited" received 
front-page attention in many Alberta papers, and served only to re¬ 
mind shareholders and non-shareholders alike of the magnitude of 
the blunder perpetrated by the Society's provincial executive. The 
bitterness of those who faced the loss of money over and above 
their original Equity investment may well be imagined. One out¬ 
raged Equity farmer, for example, informed The Advance and Southern 
Alberta Advertiser that many of the Macleod members of the Society 

believed the cooperative disaster had given the organization "a 

143 

black eye" from which it would "never recover". Shortly afterwards, 
the editor of the same paper told his readers that he, too, had 
been "wounded by the explosion of a #50 note, and the wound is not 









. . i . t 
























. ' - 1 


. 




, •; • : ■ a . i .. •' ' ■ 


i 

' 


- 

. ' ' 

■ 

. 

■ 

. 

, 






230 


144 

healed over yet". By August, 1908, when the editor had paid the 

additional nine dollars required by law, he was so enraged over 

the whole Equity fiasco that he termed it "the most monumental 

145 

piece of —> knavery ever sprung upon an unsuspecting public". Ex¬ 
planation of the dash appearing in his comment, fortunately, was 
withheld. 

During 1908 little or nothing seems to have come out of the 
T. L. C. affiliation which the Equity executive had tried so hard 
to obtain at the 1907 annual convention. By July, 1908, The Great 
West , which some months earlier had become the official T. L. C. 
journal in Alberta, had gone out of existence and its physical as¬ 
sets were put up for sale to help pay for the Equity debts under 
146 

judicial scrutiny. Alberta labor, apparently, was either not pre¬ 
pared to support an official journal, as desired by the T. L. C. 
executive, or, possibly, the Great West editorial staff was unable 
to produce a paper that would interest the workingman. Whatever 
the reasons for the collapse of the Equity organ, it was but 
another vestige of the internal weakness of the Society and a fore 
runner of the overtures made by an Equity leader at the 1908 Edmon 
ton Exhibition to an A. F. A. official for a renewal of amalgama¬ 
tion negotiations. With the trail of disaster that the Canadian 
Society of Equity now had behind it in the province, the outcome 
of the third attempt at amalgamation was practically a foregone 
conclusion. 


The Strathcona Flaindealer , 

News, June 15, 1907, p. 6, 
The Strathcona Flaindealer , 

News . June 15, 1907, p. 6. 
The Saturday News , June 22, 
Ibid. 

IHcET 


June 4, 1907, p. 8; The Saturday 
and June 22, 1907, p. 8. 

June 4, 1907, p. 8; The Saturday 

1907, p. 6. 














t' ( 

- 

• u 












. 
















. 

. ■ ; • 



























.. . t * 

< ' 9 




, 

* < 

. 

. . ( 

t { • 








231 


6 The Alberta Gazette . January 15, 1907, p. 8. 

7 The Edmonton Bulletin . March 8, 1907, p. 6. It should he noted 
that not a single issue of The Great West appears to have been 
preserved anywhere in either Canada or the United States* 

8 The Edmonton Bulletin . March 8, 1907, p. 6. 

9 Taylor, Carl C., The Farmers’ Movement. 1620-1920, New York, 
1953, pp. 378-84* 

10 Moorhouse, Hopkins, Deep Furrows , Toronto, 1918, pp. 143-4; 
Wood, Louis Aubrey, A History of Farmers’ Movements in Canada , 
Toronto, 1924, p. 20(1); Patton, Harald S*, Grain Growers’ Co¬ 
operation in Western Canada . Cambridge, Mass., 1928, p. 115. 

11 Prospectus, The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited, Edmonton, 
January 23, 1907. The only known copy of this prospectus is 
contained in the file, ’’The Canadian Society of Equity, Limi¬ 
ted*’, in the office of the Registrar of Companies, Government 
of the Province of Alberta, Edmonton. 

12 Prospectus, The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited, Edmonton, 
January 23, 1907. 

13 Ibid. 

14 Ibid. 

15 ”The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited”, a file in the office 
of the Registrar of Companies, Government of the Province of 
Alberta, Edmonton. 

16 Ibid. 


file in the office 
the Province of 


17 Prospectus, The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited, Edmonton, 
January 23, 1907. 

18 ’’The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited”, a 
of the Registrar of Companies, Government of 
Alberta, Edmonton. 

19 Ibid. 

20 Ibid. 

21 The Edmonton Bulletin . March 8, 1907, p. 6. 

22 Ibid. 

23 Ibid. 

24 Ibid. 

25 Ibid. 

26 Ibid. 

27 Ibid. . 

28 Ibid. 

29 Supra . 


April 9, 1907, p. 1. 


pp. 151—2. 

30 The Strathcona Plaindealer . 

News . June 15, 1907, p. 6. 

31 The Strathcona Plaindealer . 

News . June 15, 1907, p. 6. 

32 The Strathcona Plaindealer , 

News, June 15, 1907, p. 6. 

33 The Strathcona Plaindealer , 

News , June 15, 1907, p. 6. 

34 The Strathcona Plaindealer , 

News , June 15, 1907, pp. 6 and 8. 

35 The reason for including Canadian members who were not Alberta 
residents was not given, but Everitt may have thought that 
”Equitists” in other provinces might also be tempted to 
espouse cooperative action unless advised that to do so was a 
violation of "controlled marketing”. 

36 The Saturday News , June 22, 1907, p. 8. 

37 Ibid. 


June 

4, 

1907, 

p. 

June 

4, 

1907, 

P- 

June 

4, 

1907, 

P* 

June 

4, 

1907, 

P* 

June 

4, 

1907, 

P* 


8; The Saturday 
8; The Saturday 
8; The Saturday 
8; The Saturday 
8; The Saturday 






































. 


. 


, 

. 




i 


t ,■ 


I. 4.' f ■ ■ * 

• , 

■. . 






. 

. 




* . - - 

. 

* •; , : • ; l 

■ 

. • 

. 

,t . '.’:0 

. 

* 

77.77 ‘ • 

. 

. 

* 

* 

. 


■ ■ • * .' 


• • - ■ ■ t . 






? 






■ n. - « . 

■ 






, 









232 


38 The Saturday News . June 22, 1907, p. 8. 

39 Ibid. 

40 Ibid* 

41 Ibid. 

42 Ibid. 

43 IPP* 8 and 10. 

44 Taylor, op. cit. . pp. 369-71. 

45 Ibid. 

46 The Saturday News . June 22, 1907, p. 10. 

47 Ibid. 

48 The Strathcona Plaindealer . June 21, 1907, p. 4. 

49 Ibid. 

50 The Saturday News , June 29, 1907, p. 1. 

51 Ibid. 

52 Ibid. 

53 Letter to the author from Miss Lila Brady, Reference Librarian 
for the Indiana Division of the Indiana State Library, Indiana¬ 
polis, February 8, 1956. 

54 Ibid. 


55 Taylor, op. cit. . p. 376. 

56 Letter from Miss Brady, February 8, 1956. 

57 The Calgary Herald , June 19, 1907, p. 11. 

58 The Edmonton Bulletin . June 18, 1907, p. 1. In his conversations 
with the press, Moran does not seem to have referred to an 
earlier directors’ meeting that was held in Calgary on May 15, 
16, and 17, 1907. He did, however, read an interesting synopsis 
of the business transacted at that meeting to a special session 
of the Fort Saskatchewan local of the Canadian Society of Equi¬ 
ty on June 22, 1907 .^This synopsis may be seen in The Fort Sas¬ 
katchewan Reporter ##June 27, 1907 (p. 1). 

59 The Calgary Herald . 1 June 19, 1907, p. 11; The Edmonton Bulletin . 
June 18, 1907, p. 1. 

60 The Calgary Herald . June 19, 1907, p. 11. 

61 The Edmonton Bulletin , June 18, 1907, p. 1. 

62 The Claresholm Review . June 14, 1907, p. 2. 

63 The High River Times , July 4, 1907, p. 4. 

64 The outline of these measures which appeared in The Great West 
was reprinted in The Fort Saskatchewan Reporter for August 8. 
1907 (p. 3). 

65 The High River Times . August 22, 1907, p. 3. 

66 Ibid. , p. 1. 

67 Ibid. 

68 Ibid. 

69 Ibid., p. 3. 

70 Ibid. 

71 Ibid. 

72 Ibid. 

73 "the Morning Albertan . November 13, 1907, p. 1. 

74 Ibid. . November 14, 1907, p. 1; Hopkins, J. Castell, The 
Canadian Annual Review of Public Affairs—1907 (Toronto, 1908), 
p• 283. 

75 Ibid. 

76 Hopkins, op. cit. . p. 283; The Morning Albertan . Nov. 14, 1907. 

77 Ibid. 

78 Ibid. 

79 Ibid. 

80 Ibid. 

















































. 


t 




el C 







JL 







233 


The Cal gary Herald . November 13, 1907, p. l. 

82 » November 14, 1907, p. 8. 

83 Ibid. 

84 Ibid, 

85 Ibid. 

86 Moorhouse, op. cit. . p. 143; Wood, op. cit. . p* 200; Patton, 
o^cit^, p. 115. According to The Calgary Herald for July 31, 
1908 (p. 2), the Canadian Society of Equity paid $75.00 for the 
timber limit. 

87 The Calgary Herald . November 14, 1907, p. 8. 


89 Ibid. 

90 Ibid. 

91 Ibid. 

92 Ibid. 

93 Ibid. 

94 Ibid. 

95 Ibid. 

96 Ibid. , p. 1. 

97 Ibid. , p. 8. 

98 Ibid. 

99 Ibid. 

100 Ibid. 

101 Ibid. 

102 The Morning Albertan , November 15, 1907, p. 1. 

103 Ibid. 

104 The Calgary Herald . November 14, 1907, p. 1. 

105 Ibid. 

106 Ibid. 

107 Ibid. 

108 Ibid. 

109 Ibid. 

110 Ibid. 

111 The Morning Albertan , November 16, 1907, p. 1. 

112 Ibid. ; The Calgary Herald , November 16, 1907, p. 1. 

113 The Morning Albertan , November 16, 1907, p. 1. 

114 Ibid. 

115 Ibid. 

116 Ibid. 

117 Ibid. , November 15, 1907, p. 1; The Calgary Herald , November 15, 
1907, p. 1. 

118 The Morning Albertan , November 15, 1907, p. 1. 

119 Ibid, ; The Calvary Herald , November 15, 1907, p. 1. 

120 The Calgary Herald , November 15, 1907, p. 1. 

121 The Morning Albertan , November 15, 1907, p. 1. 

122 Ibid. . November 16, 1907, p. 1. 

123 Ibid. 

124 Ibid. 

125 Ibid. 

126 Ibid. ; The Calgary Herald , November 16, 1907, p. 1. 

127 The Morning Albertan , November 16, 1907, p. 1; The Calgary 
Herald , November 16, 1907, p. 1. 

128 The Morning Albertan , November 16, 1907, p. 1; The Calgary 
Herald , November 16, 1907, p. 1. 

129 The Morning Albertan , November 18, 1907, p. 1; The Calgary 
Herald , November 18, 1907, p. 1. 









































































234 


130 The Morning Albertan , November 18, 1907, p. 1; The Calgary 
Herald, November 18, 1907, p. 1. 

131 The Morning Albertan ,, November 18, 1907, p. 1. 

132 Ibid. 

133 Ibid. 

134 Ibid. ; The Calgary Herald . November 18, 1907, p. 1. 

135 This second revision may be seen on page 1 of both The Morning 
Albertan and The Calgary Herald for November 18, 1907. 

136 The Morning Albertan , November 18, 1907, p. 1. 

137 » December 17, 1907, p. 1. 

138 Ibid. 

139 Interview with Norman Priestley, March 20, 1956. 

140 The Morning Albertan , November 16, 1907, p. 3; The Saturday 
News . November 23, 1907. p. 1. 

141 The 1908 provincial executive appointed by the Equity conven¬ 
tion was as follows: President, R. C. Owens, Edmonton; Vice- 
president, A. von Mieleiki, Calgary; Secretary, W. J. Keen, 
Edmonton; the Board of Directors, Nestor Noel (Rividre Qui 
Barre), R. C. Pegler (Nanton), A. Duffield (Wetaskiwin), and 
J. F. Steinacher (Edmonton); Organizer, R. C. Owens. ( The 
Morning Albertan . November 18, 1907, p. 1). 

142 The Calgary Herald . July 31, 1908, p. 2. It is of some 
interest to note that, according to the file in the office of 
the Alberta Registrar of Companies, "The Canadian Society of 
Equity, Limited" ceased to exist as an incorporated company on 
October 14, 1911. It, apparently, took over three years to 
satisfy all the claims of the company f s creditors. 

143 The Advance and Southern Alberta Advertiser , February 4, 1908, 

p. 1. 

144 Ibid. . March 10, 1908, p. 4. 

145 Ibid* * August 25, 1908, p. 4. 

146 The Calgary Herald . July 31, 1908, p. 2, 

































CHAPTER IX 


THE ALBERTA FARMERS♦ ASSOCIATION AND 
THE SOCIETY OF EQUITY STRUGGLE TO AMALGAMATE 

Part IV -- Strength and Weakness in the A. F# A.: "The United 

Farmers of Alberta, Our Motto Equity". 

Just as Equity fortunes went from bad to worse after the La- 
combe disaster, those of the A* F. A. improved steadily and by 
January, 1909, the latter organization was strong enough to absorb 
its former rival# As early as January, 1907, at the A. F# A. an¬ 
nual convention in Calgary, President Warner felt the association 
would soon enter a period of tremendous expansion throughout the 
province# In an obvious reference to the unfortunate events at La- 
combe only a few months before, the retiring A# F# A. chief execu¬ 
tive declared, "We have been sailing our craft on turbulous waters 

1 

but feel that there are smooth seas ahead"# "All the old branches", 

he observed, "were adding largely to their membership and new ones 

2 

[werej being constantly organized"# According to The Saturday News # 
in commenting on the outcome of the Calgary convention, one reason 
for this continued A# F. A. growth was the sterling quality of its 
provincial executive. "Too often in farmers f organizations", com¬ 
mented The News, "the individual, who is familiarly known as the 

3 

r crank*, comes to the fore". "This", added the editor, "Is not the 

case with the A. F. A. and it is on that account that it is making 

4 

so strong an appeal"# Rice Sheppard, in describing the course of 
events after the Lacombe negotiations, gave a similar, but more 
detailed, explanation for A. F. A. success in the period up to the 
amalgamation of January, 1909: 




















■ ■ 

. 








- 


- 


■ 


* 3 ' 


. 

- 




. i-:.; . . 










‘ -J * 

f 






















. 

• ; . '• . . t' i- 1 








, 

■ 








■' . t •> i I 1 







236 


..•.And so the amalgamation failed and both organizations 
went about their work in their own way. The Alberta Far¬ 
mers became the stronger of the two. One reason perhaps 
was that their leaders were more careful in the work they 
undertook, it being mostly educational and social, while 
the Society of Equity branched off into various business 
undertakings that became failures and got them into a lot 
of trouble. The Alberta Farmers* Association kept closely 
in touch with the other provincial organizations, and al¬ 
ways when any move of importance was made, they cooperated 
with them. Many of the improvements and amendments to the 
Grain Act and trade were obtained by joint delegations 
going to Ottawa and pressing for the same, but the Society 
of Equity for the next three years went their own way.... 5 

The A. F. A. Secretary-treasurer, meanwhile, felt that the pro¬ 
vincial executive had followed w a moderate business-like policy" 

which, he claimed, "had won to a remarkable degree the confidence 

6 

of the farmers and of the public at large". "It does not seem to 

me", added W. F. Stevens, "that the farmers are going to be bene- 

7 

fited by an organization which promises extravagant things". 
Whether or not these are fair appraisals of A. F. A. and Equity 
qualities of leadership in the post-Lacombe period, it is apparent 
from the accounts of farm activities in The Saturday News and The 


Alberta Homestead that the A. F. A. was emerging as the major 

agrarian force in the province. While The News and The Homestead 

8 

were successively A. F. A. organs, their weekly news releases un¬ 
doubtedly indicate increased support for the organization, even 
when allowance is made for the exaggeration to be expected from an 
official paper. During the latter half of 1908 the growing strength 
of the A. F. A. is particularly in evidence. 

The A. F. A., though, did run into difficulties when at¬ 
tempting to convince the farmers of the province of the benefits to 
be derived from membership. Late in 1907, for example. Sice Shep¬ 
pard issued an appeal for A. F. A. support that revealed reluctance 
on the part of some farmers, even in the well organized Strathcona 







. 

- 

, t . 

• . 

. 


t - . 




. : . c. • !•’ . ■ t ■ '‘ ■ 


. 






. 










. 


; '■ r .'i 

. 




* 

. 

■ . 

: . . 

< • - * 

, 











237 


distriot, to throw in their lot with either of the two rival farm 

bodies. These farmers, Sheppard explained, were inclined to say, 

9 

”1 want to see how they get along before I join”. Two other 

classes of farmers, who held back from joining either provincial 

farm association, particularly exasperated Sheppard. One group 

felt they were ”on their feet and don’t need an association to 

10 

look after their interest”. The third group, who avoided associa¬ 
tion membership, irritated Sheppard more than either of the other 
two. These were the farmers ”who are smart enough to see that al¬ 
though they have not invested a dollar in the association they are 
receiving just the same benefit as others do who are members, and 

so they say: Why should I give my dollar and time when I fare just 

11 

as well as the other fellow?”. The president of the A. F. A* 

Innisfail branch, however, did not share the Strathcona director’s 

cynicism in determining the reasons why some farmers would not 

join the association. Writing in The Alberta Homestead for March 25, 

1908, James Speakman stated that his organizational efforts had 

led him to believe ”that most farmers outside our branches have 

very vague ideas and often erroneous impressions in regard to the 

12 

aims and methods of our association”. ”It is not apathy”, he re- 

13 

marked, ”but want of knowledge which keeps many from joining us”. 

Experience in the Innisfail district had convinced the local 

A. F. A. executive ”that many farmers are ripe for our movement” 

and ”that more publicity and organizing are greatly needed and will 
14 

surely pay”. ”If we are to be successful in some of the larger 

things we are trying to do”, Speakman concluded, ”we must have the 

15 

power of large numbers”. Despite the conditions alluded to by Shep¬ 
pard and Speakman, the only immediate hindrance to A. F. A. expan¬ 
sion appears to have been a shortage of organizers. On July 3, 





’ 






, 




' 

- 




i 




■ 






. 

. 








■ 

J 

. 

' , * 


■ 

' 


. 


' 










238 


1907, for example, when the Secretary-treasurer presented a report 

of the general condition of the association to the provincial 

executive, he noted "that since the last annual convention 15 new 

branches had been established and that applications were in from 

several points asking for an organizer, but as all the officers of 

the association are engaged in farming, it was next to impossible 

to find any one who could spare the time to attend to that part of 
16 

the work". 

The most important factor behind the steady increase in 

A. F. A. membership throughout 1907 was, perhaps, the way in which 

the association took up the issue of a government-owned pork 

packing, beef canning, and beef chilling plant. In this endeavor 

the A. F. A. provincial executive was joined by the Central Alberta 

Stock Growers 1 Association, a circumstance that brought the former 

into close contact with a branch of the Alberta farm movement which 

17 

hitherto had ignored the wheat grower. According to The Saturday 

News, the basis for the demand that the provincial government 

should enter the meat packing business was a widespread rural be- 

18 

lief "that a meat trust already has the province in its grip". 

"Should the meat packing business fall also into the hands of the 

trust", observed The News , "the lot of the farmer would be the same 

19 

in Alberta as it is in the United States". On March 15, 1907, the 

growing agitation against "the meat trust" came to a head when a 

joint delegation of the A. F. A. and the Central Alberta Stock 

Growers appeared before the Honorable W . T. Finlay, provincial 

Minister of Agriculture, and demanded that the Alberta government 

"undertake the equipment and operation of a pork packing, beef 

20 

canning and beef chilling plant". In their formal submission to 
the minister, the two associations pointed to the "strong desire" 




■ 

etitg 


. 


. ' 






. 

■ „ •: V- j • ; ‘ , ■ ' -• * ■ ■ 


C 
















. 


1 












. 

. 


■ 


239 


for such a plant "among the farmers and stock growers of the pro¬ 
vince", the "numerous articles which have from time to time ap¬ 
peared in the public press", and the various resolutions adopted 

21 

by a number of interested organizations in the province. 

Despite the vigor of the A* F. A. campaign to convince the 
government it should enter the meat packing business, the Alberta 
cabinet delayed any decision on the matter until a royal com¬ 
mission could report on meat marketing conditions in the province. 
While the delay that necessarily followed enabled the A. F. A. to 
prepare strenuous briefs for submission at the commission 
hearings, it also gave western packing companies sufficient time 

to plan the additional facilities so badly needed by the Alberta 
22 

stock raiser. When, finally, the commission reported its findings, 

new packing plants were under construction in the province and the 

government could argue that it should not endanger the extensive 

23 

private investment involved. The commission, though, did make a 

recommendation that "the government consider the advisability of 

assisting in the erection of at least one pork packing plant to 

24 

be located in the district between Calgary and Edmonton". Thus the 
A. F. A. was able to claim a partial victory. However, in the re¬ 
port, made public on December 26, 1907, the commission had ac¬ 
cepted the suggestion of many farmers at the hearings that they 

should share with the government in the financing of the proposed 
25 

packing facilities. While the farmers who made this suggestion had 
hoped to encourage the government to take action, the net effect 
of their offer was to ruin the entire project. The Rutherford ad¬ 
ministration, subsequently, proposed the construction of a pork 
packing plant at a cost of $100,000, provided that the swine 
breeders of the province would contract to supply 50,000 hogs a 






- 1.3 
























• * ' ' 

' ' 


. 

. 

■ 

t 




240 


26 

year and to take all their hogs to the government plant. A cash 

penalty was provided for any farmer who had entered the contract 

27 

and who failed to comply with the latter provision. According to 

Rice Sheppard, it was this requirement which "killed the proposi- 
28 

tion". Another commission recommendation, meanwhile, put an end to 

the suggestion that the government erect a beef canning plant. "It 
not 

would /be wise for the government to establish a canning factory", 

the commission reported, "until those in course of erection at Ed- 

29 

monton and Medicine Hat are given a trial". The lack of any real 

grievance in the beef trade was the basic reason for the com- 

30 

mission f s attitude in this matter. 

The A. F. A., no doubt, was gratified that its agitation over 

Alberta meat marketing conditions had led to a commission recom- 

31 

mendation for the appointment of a livestock commissioner and 

government acceptance of the suggestion. Yet when the cabinet 

32 

choice for the new post was announced in June, 1908, the associa¬ 
tion was torn by dissension which not only damaged its strong 

33 

position in the province but hastened amalgamation with the tot- 

34 

tering Canadian Society of Equity. In view of the heavy responsi¬ 
bilities of the new government office, which sought to give the Al¬ 
berta stock grower every possible assistance in the marketing of 
his product, the choice of the Rutherford administration fell upon 

William F. Stevens, the extremely able A. F. A. Secretary-trea- 
35 

surer. Stevens readily accepted the appointment and submitted his 

resignation to the A. F. A. provincial directorate. While the re- 

36 

signation was not to become effective until July 3, 1908, the 
A. F. A. president lost no time in publicly denouncing the circum¬ 
stances surrounding the appointment, including an alleged change 
in Stevens 1 attitude toward association policy during the months 








. 




* 

. - . 




. 






. : • 


. ... 

. 














. 

. • ■ . . , . . . ' ; ' J 

' 

* 

. 



241 


before the government announcement. In a fiery letter to The Al¬ 
berta Homestead , published on June 10, Joshua Fletcher threw presi¬ 
dential discretion to the winds and charged that his Secretary- 
treasurer had allowed prior knowledge of the cabinet decision to 
influence his official relations with the government in a way that 
was most detrimental to the association. "Taking a survey of the 
whole matter", Fletcher declared, "it would appear that our secre¬ 
tary has been bribed into submission and into deceiving all the 

rest of us and of making a very improper use of the trust reposed 
37 

in him". To conclude his anti-Stevens diatribe, the A. F. A. 
president demanded that the Secretary-treasurer cease to be as¬ 
sociate editor of The Homestead and he called upon the general mem¬ 
bership to send as many delegates as possible to the provincial 
directors* meeting in Calgary on July 3 so that the association 

might be fully acquainted with the executive discussion of matters 

38 

arising from the pending resignation. According to Fletcher, "the 

life of the Association" depended upon "a satisfactory adjustment" 

of A. F. A. affairs after the loss of the Secretary-treasurer to 

39 

the Alberta civil service. 

Stevens, naturally, could not allow the uncouth presidential 
pronouncement to go unanswered. Having been shown the Fletcher re¬ 
marks in advance of publication, the newly-appointed livestock com¬ 
missioner had sufficient time to prepare a reply which appeared in 
The Homestead on the same day as the letter of accusation just 
cited. At this point, though, the retiring A. F. A. Secretary- 
treasurer chose to show some moderation in dealing with a public 
statement that easily could have been the basis for a lawsuit. 

After noting that Fletcher was a bachelor with no domestic re¬ 
sponsibilities of any kind, Stevens proceeded to explain that re- 






, 

J 

X 


i - 

0 












. 






* 

. 


- * 

. 

. 











242 


cently he had been harrassed with difficult personal circumstances 
which had made it hard for him to attend to some matters as expe¬ 
ditiously as the A. F. A. president seemed to desire. Fletcher, 
however, had been even more negligent on the most important aspect 
of association policy. Despite the fact that "the man from Ellers- 
lie" had had more time to attend to A. F. A. matters than anyone 
else in the organization and the fact that he had been sent to Ot¬ 
tawa by the association two years before to help clear up the 
grain question, he had done nothing to solve a crucial problem 
worrying the farmers of the West. Such indifference was all the 
more serious as the Partridge plan for a government monopoly of 

the grain business was threatening to become a national issue 

40 

rather than a Prairie matter only. It was, perhaps, not without 
significance that in his reply a week later Fletcher ignored most 
of the Stevens observations and concentrated on the sequence of 
events which had led up to the appointment of the new Alberta live¬ 
stock commissioner: 

In these days when definite information regarding the 
attitude of the Provincial Government toward the meat in¬ 
dustry is so hard to obtain, almost any farmer may be ex¬ 
cused if he hazards a guess. Everything seemed to move in 
the right direction up to the point where our Association 
nominated Mr. Stevens and Mr. Bower as the two farmer mem¬ 
bers of the proposed committee of investigation, then a 
long and ominous silence followed. 

During the interval Mr. Stevens refused to act with 
the secretaries of the Manitoba and Saskatchewan Associa¬ 
tions to have the three Premiers hold a conference on the 
grain elevator question. Also at this time Mr. Stevens 
writes to the Government to withdraw his name as a 
possible member of the meat investigation committee and 
not until after he has done that does he notify the Presi¬ 
dent of the Association. Promptly then Mr. Rutherford re¬ 
fuses the President the privilege to call his officers to¬ 
gether to name a substitute. 

Then a letter comes from the Minister of Agriculture 
to the President of the Association to say that the beef 
end of the question has been dropped, only the pork 










0 

fcff-f 


' 




. • 

' 4 " 










! ,H L . ' - ■■ 

. 














; 


4 

* 

. 


.i : . . • * j “ 

. 








243 


packing proposition will be investigated and that the 
committee for that has not yet been appointed. Quickly 
follows the announcement that the Minister of Agri¬ 
culture has offered Mr, Stevens the position of Live 
Stock Commissioner and Mr. Stevens resigns his position 
as secretary of the Association. Now all this would 
prove very little in a court of law, but it has been 
sufficient to make a very large number of farmers des¬ 
perately suspicious that the lowest form of corruption 
has been used and Mr. Stevens got a lucrative position 
as a bribe to fool the Association, and the average far¬ 
mer clinches his argument by pointing out that it never 
took all this nonsense to establish the University nor 
to spend a million dollars on a telephone system. 

Sven if there is no truth in this phase of the case, 
still it will be believed by enough people to do a world 
of harm. 41 


As with the first Fletcher letter of accusation, The Home¬ 
stead published a reply from Stevens alongside that of his accuser. 

42 

However, the former associate editor of the A. F. A. paper chose 
to ignore the pointed chronology of events which Fletcher had out¬ 
lined, and concentrated, instead, on an address delivered in Feb¬ 
ruary by the A. F. A. president at the Edmonton convention of the 
association’s branches in Clover Bar. Since the main subject for 
discussion at the convention was scheduled as "the meat question”, 

the committee in charge of arrangements had seen fit to invite 

43 

prominent members of both political parties to the gathering. 

While the provincial Conservatives ignored their invitations, a 
fair number of Liberal stalwarts did put in an appearance and in¬ 
cluded such notables as the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, 

the Mayors of Edmonton and Strathcona, and several Members of the 

44 

Legislative Assembly. Discussing Fletcher’s part in the ensuing 

proceedings, Stevens remarked: 

....He [FletcherJ was selected as the speaker of the 
evening on behalf of the association. I explained the 
object of the meeting to him. He held the floor one hour 
and fifteen minutes and never put forth a single argument 
in favor of the Association on the meat question; but in- 




. 

. 

. 

V 

. 


■ 

. 
















.... ■■■■«■• 
.... : I . . 


' 


. 




. 






. 










. 


. 


. 

. 




. : 


244 


stead he critioized, found fault, condemned and de¬ 
nounced. He criticized Mr. Rutherford because he had not 
caused flags to be displayed over the school houses. He 
found fault with the Minister of Public Works because he 
did not personally inspect roads and bridges. He con¬ 
demned the attitude of the Canadian Manufacturers* As¬ 
sociation on the tariff question, and wound up with a 
general denunciation of the C. P. R. And this is what the 
legislators heard from the man who was appointed to sound 
the key note of a meeting gotten up expressly to inform 
them of the attitude of the Association on the meat 
question. 

Now, why did Mr. Fletcher ignore the purpose of this 
meeting and weary his audience with matters entirely ir¬ 
relevant to the issue? 

Did he have any convictions on the question then? If 
so, what were they, and why did he not say what they 
were? 

The A. F. A. has been working on this question for 
more than two years; he has been president one and a- 
half years but in all that time I have never heard a 
single argument In favor of it from Mr. Fletcher—not one. 

As to whether or not I have been bribed into silence 
on the packing question the future will tell; in the 
meantime I insist that the man who accuses me of having 
been bribed to silence shall not be the man who has always 
been silent. 45 

With this denunciation of Fletcher*s alleged ineptitude as A. F. A. 

president, the unseemly newspaper debate between the associations 

two leading officials came to a sudden end, but not without having 

46 

created factions within the organization. Fortunately for the 
A. F. A., the provincial press ignored the dispute and, by the 
time the directors* Calgary meeting took place, tempers had cooled 
sufficiently for the Stevens* resignation to be accepted without 
further incident. At the meeting the retiring Secretary-treasurer 
was tendered a vote of thanks **for his good and efficient ser¬ 
vices**, and, according to The Homestead , the A. F. A. Yice-presi- 
dent, Thomas H. Woolford, spoke **at some length in most eulogistic 

terms of the retiring official, describing him as big in stature 

47 

and big in mind, one of the balance wheels of the association**. 



5 r , r 

. 

. 

. 

* 

. 

■ 

. 

* 

1 


» ■ * ' * 

. 








• • * - 
















. 




I • 




. 






: 

. 


. 

. ■ • ■< ’ 






( . 





245 


While the harm that already had been done to the A. F. A. proved 

to be only temporary in nature and the membership lists continued 

to swell during the last few months of 1908, it is significant 

informal 

that less than two weeks after the Calgary meeting/negotiations 
were resumed for the amalgamation of the two provincial farm 
bodies# The prospect of at last uniting with the Canadian Society 
of Equity, undoubtedly, offered A. F. A# officials and members 
alike a welcome diversion from the bitter clash over the Stevens T 
appointment. 


It is an unusual feature of the Alberta farm movement that 
the amalgamation negotiations, which resulted in the creation of 
the United Farmers of Alberta, were initiated in July, 1908, by 
the two men who in 1905 had played a conspicuous part in organizing 
the Strathcona branch of the T. G. G. A. It is also remarkable that 
in the summer of 1908 neither of the two men concerned held par¬ 
ticularly high posts in the two farm bodies they represented. Al¬ 
though he had been prominent the year before, the quarrels over 
"The Equity Limited* had removed W. R. Ball from any connection 
with the provincial executive of the Canadian Society of Equity, 
but his influence in that organization, no doubt, was still con¬ 
siderable. Rice Sheppard, meanwhile, was an A. F. A. provincial di¬ 
rector, as well as Secretary-treasurer of the Strathcona branch. 
Previously, however, Sheppard had been Vice-president of the pro¬ 
vincial body and, when the amalgamation was consummated in January, 
1909, he emerged as the first U. F. A. Vice-president. It is , in 
fact, in the words of this influential A. F. A. figure that the 
story of the resumed amalgamation negotiations are best related: 

....It was at the summer Agricultural Fair in Edmonton in 







I 


' ... 1 

• , , 1 








- 

... ■ - , . ' ' • . ' 

* 




. 


. 

.0 ■ .; ' : X ' ...... 1; • C**..'i ■ 1 




■ 

■ ■ iv L i .110 

' 












« 










• . 



246 


1908 that W. R. Ball, who had left the Alberta Farmers 
and joined with the Society of Equity, came to me at the 
fair to talk over the matter of another attempt at amal¬ 
gamation.... After a long conversation, with many argu¬ 
ments for and against, I told Mr. Ball that, if their or¬ 
ganization would make a clear-cut proposition that I 
could support, I would^JWhat I could to bring the amalga¬ 
mation about. This was agreed and later he reported that 
they had terms to submit. 48 

Although Sheppard does not mention it in his memoirs, the next 
step in the renewed amalgamation negotiations after the pre¬ 
liminary conversation with Ball would appear to have been an invi¬ 
tation to attend an Equity executive meeting. Writing to the local 
press in August, 1908, about this new turn of events in A. F. A.- 
Equity relations, Sheppard remarked: 

Last week I was invited to attend a meeting of the of¬ 
ficers of the Society of Equity held in Edmonton, and it 
gave me much pleasure to be able to meet with our friends 
under such pleasing circumstances, for I soon found that 
we are practically one in our aims and objects. I gave 
them to understand that anything I said at that meeting 
must be understood to be unofficial and only my own 
opinions on the matters discussed. I was delighted to 
find that everyone present at that meeting was strongly 
in favor of something being done to bring our two or¬ 
ganizations together. This was to me the most interesting 
part of the proceedings of that meeting, although many 
other important matters were discussed. 49 

Describing to the press his reaction to the friendly attitude dis¬ 
played by the Equity executive, Sheppard asserted that in his 
opinion **no greater work w could be attempted and **no nobler act 

performed by either of the two associations than that of uniting 

50 

the forces of the two**. **Xt is my intention**, he commented, **to do 

all in my power to forward this grand work, and I trust the matter 

will be taken up by all our branches, and that all will give vent 

51 

to their feelings on the matter**. "Never**, Sheppard added, **was 

the time more favorable, and never the unity of farmers more 

52 

needed than at the present**. Addressing himself to A. F. A. of¬ 
ficials and organizers throughout the province, the A. F. A. di- 


■* 

. . * - * 

. 

♦ 

. 




. 




« 




- 








. •. I 

. 

I • •' • ... • ■■ 

. 

. 

' 

to 

. • . .. ' .J ■ 

, 

. 




>3 it ae 


■ . 








. . 


247 


rector from Strathcona declared: 

...•It is the duty of every officer to let by-gones be 
by-gones, and each and all strive to bring about the 
grand union of the two. It is my opinion that thousands 
of the farmers are staying outside our ranks solely on 
account of the fact that two organizations exist in this 
province, and they feel sure that both are on the wrong 
track. I have yet to meet the man who thinks that two 
associations should exist in this province, then why not 
make a determined effort to unite?--once united what a 
mighty force that Association would be. Consider the 
energy and power wrapped up in 92 per cent of the popula¬ 
tion of this province. Consideration must be given the 
request of this large force, and the just rights of the 
farmer shall be forthcoming in the near future. 53 

It was, apparently, after this conference with the Equity executive 
that HIT. R. Ball gave Sheppard the "clear-cut proposition" mentioned 
in the latter*s memoirs. Unfortunately, though, there is no record 
of what the terms were, but they must have been reasonably at¬ 
tractive as in September, 1908, a joint conference of A. F. A. and 
Equity officials was held to consider another attempt at amalgama¬ 
tion. According to the annual report of Edward J. Fream, who had 
succeeded W. F. Stevens as A. F. A. Secretary-treasurer, the joint 

meeting adopted a draft constitution which was then printed and 

54 

copies distributed to the branches of both organizations. No action, 
it would seem, was to be taken on the tentative constitution until 
the regular A. F* A. annual meeting in January, at which time the 
Society of Equity would arrange to have the necessary delegates on 
hand to carry out the proposed amalgamation. Meanwhile, little or 
no public criticism appears to have developed over the constitu¬ 
tional basis of union; even the critical Joshua Fletcher spoke 

favorably of the terms at a meeting of the Strathcona A. F. A* on 
55 

November 14, 1908. 

Unlike the ill-fated attempts which preceded it in 1905 and 
1906, the amalgamation convention held in January, 1909, is one of 




* 

c 

* 

- 

; 

•' 4 








* ■ 






“ • • ' 








■ 




■ 

' 


, - i .... 
























. 






248 


the great and happy moments of the Alberta farm movement. As the 
full-page headlines in The Homestead so aptly expressed it: 

A CONVENTION WHICH WILL GO DOWN INTO HISTORY — THE 
UNITED FARMERS OF ALBERTA A REALITY — THE SCENES 
WHICH FOLLOWED THE COMPLETION OF THE AMALGAMATION PRO¬ 
POSALS — THREE DAYS FULL OF HARD AND STIRRING INCIDENTS 56 
Although many details are lacking concerning the arrangements that 
preceded this memorable convention, it seems to have been agreed 
that January 13, the first day of the A. F. A. annual meeting, 

would be devoted to the union issue. The Equity delegates, mean- 

57 

while, would meet elsewhere, but, if the amalgamation negotiations 

were successful, the two bodies would then unite for the sessions 

on January 14 and 15. In opening the A. F. A. deliberations in the 

Mechanics’ Hall on January 13, President Joshua Fletcher declared 

that the association "had no antagonism towards other classes’* and 

58 

felt "that they all had their general interests in common”. ”A11 
that they wanted”, he declared, ’’was that barriers should be re- 

59 

moved which prevented farmers from obtaining their simple rights”. 

Turning to the amalgamation question, President Fletcher remarked 

60 

that ”it was a straight business proposition”. He asked, therefore, 

that ”prejudices” be ”laid aside” and after a decision had been 

61 

reached ”that the minority should accept the result gracefully”. 

E. A. Partridge, the originator of the Grain Growers’ Grain Com¬ 
pany and a fraternal delegate to the convention, then followed the 

A. F. A. chief executive on the platform to express the hope that 

62 

”the amalgamation scheme would go through”. 

Acceptance of the union proposals, however, was not so expe¬ 
ditious as Fletcher would appear to have desired. Following the 
flow of introductory oratory, James Speakman, the president of the 



- 


— 




t ' L . . 

i t 


. , 

■ 

. 

■ 






. 

. 






, : . . V, , ' . ' t ■, K i !• • • • “ . , • - 








. 

■ , ■ 


. 








. 


. 


249 


A* F. A* branch at Innisfail, rose to move w that the general prin- 

63 

ciple of having one society be approved". John McKinley of Spruce 

Grove seconded the Speakman motion, but he hardly had done so when 

J. Wilson, also of Innisfail, jumped to his feet and "moved that 

64 

the proposed amalgamation be not entertained". According to The 

Homestead, Wilson*s reasons for this action were as follows: 

....He compared the two Associations to two business 
firms, one that had been a success and the other a 
failure. Then the latter came along and asked the former 
to take it in. He did not believe that such a union could 
be a source of strength to the firm that had prospered.65 

Although the Wilson motion was seconded, it did not get very far in 

the convention. Rice Sheppard angrily told the delegates at this 

point "that if this amalgamation was blocked by the Alberta Far- 

66 

mers* Association, he would be a member of the Society of Equity", 

while Ralph Weir of Strathcona observed: 

I have sat here and listened for a while, and I cannot 
tell where we are at. All I want is instruction on the 
question. 67 

i 

Wilson thereupon withdrew his motion and Speakman moved "that the 

68 

meeting take up the proposed constitution clause by clause". At 
this juncture there is a wide variance in the newspaper accounts 
of the confusing course of action followed by the convention in 
acting upon the resolutions that had been so hastily placed before 
the meeting. The narrative in The Homestead becomes so lamentably 
thin that one wonders if its representative bothered to stay for 
the rest of the afternoon session, while the version in The Bulle¬ 
tin is vague in places and seems to contradict some statements in 
the official A. F. A. paper. The Bulletin commentary, however, is 
generally more detailed and does bring out several salient points 
concerning the delegates* attitude on the union issue. Starting 
from the beginning of the amalgamation discussion, it reads as 






. 


< 




* 

* 






. 


• ■ ■ ■ 


. 




. 

* 


' 

, . . !. v 0 ! v. ' U . • ' • ••••■ 










. 












. 

, 















follows: 


....The convention had the draft constitution before them 
and every delegate came from the branch societies with 
the intention of supporting it on general principles, 
but, on the other hand, there was hardly a delegate who 
did not have instructions to object to certain clauses of 
the proposed constitution. The result was that when the 
question came before the convention there were the most 
diverse opinions as to how it should be handled. Presi¬ 
dent Fletcher had a most unenviable task in his efforts 
to keep control of the meeting. Anticipating a strenuous 
session he pleaded at the outset for self-restraint and 
self-control on the part of the delegates and for the 
most careful consideration of every possible phase of the 
question. It cannot be said that the first part of his 
plea was heeded. At times three motions with numerous 
amendments were before the meeting at once and frequently 
three and four delegates claimed to have the floor at the 
same time. 

The first point made was the unanimous vote that the 
constitution be accepted on general principles. Then came 
the question whether it be accepted in its entirety or 
amended. Every delegate wished to see the consummation of 
the union of the two organizations, but for two hours 
there was a tumultuous debate as to the constitution. Not 
one specific objection was made to the clauses of the 
constitution and it developed that there was in reality 
no serious objection. 69 

Both The Bulletin and The Homestead are in agreement that at six 
o*clock in the evening a show of hands was taken as to whether or 
not the constitution should be accepted as drafted. The vote was 
forty-three to twelve for acceptance, but several who opposed the 
motion asked for a ballot because of the large number of absten¬ 
tions. When the ballot was taken after the supper adjournment, it 

showed an overwhelming vote of 101 for the draft constitution with 
70 71 

fourteen opposed. Only three ballots were spoiled. 

While "great enthusiasm" is reported to have met the announce¬ 
ment of the result of the balloting, an even greater expression of 
feeling swept the A. F. A. delegates when D. W. Warner rose to move 
that the vote be made unanimous. Seconded by Thomas Woolford, the 
motion received a thunderous ovation, and, according to The Bulle- 



































' 

* 

- : , •: ' } ■ : .. ' 

- 

' 

' 

. 

. 


fJ .:v, .! .. i. v. 


'■ 

\ r, 

, 

. 

- 






. 


' • ■ < ' • • • V 


‘ 


■ 




















251 


tin, "a most magnanimous spirit was displayed for the remainder of 

72 

the evening session”* "One after another of the dickers’”, The 

Bulletin reported, "withdrew their objections in humorous speeches, 

73 

and one and all hailed the new organization". Before the close of 
the meeting, the A. F. A. Secretary-treasurer, Edward J. Fream, 
"read a communication from Secretary Thamer of the C. S. of E. re¬ 
questing that a committee of three and the secretary be appointed 

to meet a similar committee from the sister organization to ar- 

74 

range for the joint convention". The request was accepted and Rice 

Sheppard, James Bower, and J. W. Howard were chosen to act with 

75 

Fream in the matter. The Equity committee, meanwhile, consisted of 

76 

G. Maygard, A. Rafn, H. Bell, and J. H. Thamer. It was agreed that 

the A. F. A. representatives would "meet the other committee on 

the following morning at eight o’clock and arrange for the joint 

77 

meeting which was [to bej held at nine". 

Although the contemporary press is silent on the subject, 
another committee would appear to have been appointed at the 
A. F. A. evening session on January 13. This was a committee se¬ 
lected by the convention to settle the question of a name with an 
equal number of Equity representatives after the evening adjourn¬ 
ment. The draft constitution, that had caused so much trouble 

during the afternoon session, had been left blank in those places 

78 

where the name of the association normally would appear, but it 
does not seem to have been the desire of either organization that 
the choice of a new name should be made by the joint convention on 
January 14. Even though their deliberations lasted well past mid¬ 
night of the 13th, the committee sat until it had been agreed 
unanimously that the amalgamated body would be known officially as 
"The United Farmers of Alberta, Our Motto Equity". According to 





. 


. 

- 

' 


I . 

, 






- 

. '.• 


... 




■ 




i L • ' 


' 






- 


■ 

' 

i ■. A;. • i 








ni 



252 


Rice Sheppard, one of the participants, the events which led up to 

the selection of this name were unusually dramatic: 

.•..That afternoon the amalgamation was consummated and 
the two were one. But one thing remained to be done. The 
most difficult question to settle was the new name. A 
committee was appointed with instructions to report the 
next morning the name agreed upon. Six men from each or¬ 
ganization were named on the committee, being Mr. J. 

Fletcher, Pres., Alberta Farmers, Mr. R. C. Owens, Pres., 
Society of Equity, and Messrs. Carswell, Sheppard, Fream, 
Bell, Jameson, Rafn, Thamer, McDonald, Ball, and Long. 

This committee met at 8:00 p.m. and sat until one the 
next morning before a name was decided upon. Our friend, 
Owens, was very determined that the word ’Equity’ should 
be embodied in the new name, and so all sorts of names 
were submitted, such as ’The Farmers’ Equity Association’, 
’The Alberta Union of Equity’, ’The Farmers’ Equity 
Union’, etc. Just before one o’clock in the morning, the 
Chairman, Mr. George McDonald, said, ’Men, will you just 
take five minutes more, and don’t anyone speak, but just 
think for a name, and then present it’. At the end of 
five minutes all began again to present the name thought 
of. Most of them were very like those mentioned before. 

I was most anxious about the name, so much often depends 
on the name, and I have always said the name was God- 
given, for while that five minutes were passing, I had 
asked God to give us a name, and the name that came to me 
was ’The United Farmers of Alberta, Our Motto Equity’. I 
presented the name and the Chairman said, ’Gentlemen, 
that name warms the cockels of my heart, we must accept 
it, The United Farmers of Alberta, we are truly united, 
brought close together, our motto Equity, which means 
justice to all men’. And Mr. Owens at once said, ’I will 
accept that name*. And all agreed it should be presented 
in the morning. And we parted for the night, all glad to 
get to our hotels for a night’s rest. In the morning the 
name was presented to the convention and accepted unani¬ 
mously. From that time the organization did very ef¬ 
fective work and the membership grew apace. 79 


At the opening of the A. F. A. morning session on January 14, 
Edward Fream read the report of the joint committee delegated to 
meet earlier at eight o’clock. At the same moment his Equity 
counterpart, J. H. Thamer, was reading the same report to the other 
convention. According to The Homestead , the report "recommended 
that both societies wipe off all liabilities so that the new As¬ 
sociation may start with a clean sheet, and that each turn over all 







.... 

. 

. 

. 

, * : 

1 

“ .■ ' ‘ : t ' 

, ; . • ■ ■■■■*.. ■ , • 

. 

. 

„.C. > , 7 . . ' - ' ■ - : : i ? • 

f 

? 

u , f ”ir . •> r* i ' 

t . .. i t j . .‘-. f 

f '.:r: - ?: ' 

■ ’ 


1 





. 








* 










■ 













253 


information regarding its locals now in existence and that have 

80 

been in existence in the past". Although "the full active list of 

81 

the two societies was reported as about 5,000", the committee felt 
that voting by proxy should not be permitted in the joint conven¬ 
tion on January 14 and 15, and that the principle of "one man, one 

82 

vote" should be adopted exclusively. Shortly after the presentation 

of this report to the A. F. A. delegates, A. Rafn of the Canadian 

Society of Equity "appeared to convey the greetings of that body 

and to state that all was now ready for the amalgamation to be com- 
83 

pleted". James Speakman, accordingly, "was appointed a delegate to 

84 

invite the Society of Equity to the A. F. A. hall". There are few 
more dramatic moments in the Alberta farm movement than the ap¬ 
pearance of Speakman a few minutes later with the Equity convention 
and tlte stirring announcement by the Innisfail delegate, "It is my 

duty to present to you the other section of the United Farmers of 
85 

Alberta". Then, to the tune of "For They Are Jolly Good Fellows", 

the Equity representatives moved down the aisles and found places 

86 

in the convention room. 

At the Joint convention, which followed, Joshua Fletcher and 
Edward Fream acted as interim chairman and secretary, respectively, 
until the officials of the new amalgamated body could be chosen. 
After the election of Fletcher and Fream, the provincial Minister 
of Agriculture was the first to address the gathering. It was ap¬ 
propriate , as The Bulletin pointed out, that the Honorable W. T. 

87 

Finlay "should be the first to address the union convention", but 
it was even more appropriate that, as the cabinet official mounted 
the platform, a former A. F. A. delegate, M. D. Geddes, arose to 
declare> "Now that the bride has arrived and we have a minister (of 
agriculture) on the spot, should not the formal wedding ceremony 



' 


s 

4 




; ’ ' ? 


* 


* ' 

. 


' 






’ 




. 


' 

- ; .■ ■' 

, 

. 




. 










< © 




254 


88 

proceed”. Finlay*s remarks fitted the occasion admirably. After 
telling his audience that to be present at the amalgamation con¬ 
vention W was one of the happiest moments he had experienced in his 
89 

official capacity”, the Minister declared, without reservation, 

”that he never felt more strongly the responsibility and honor of 

his position than he did in addressing a united farmers* organiza- 
90 91 

tion of Alberta”. "God speed the unity which has risen among you”, 

he added, ”and the efforts which you make for building up this 
92 

great province”. ”The farmers of Alberta, now that they were 

93 

united, could”, he felt, ”all look forward to one leader”. ”May 

your success in the future as farmers of Alberta”, concluded the 

94 

Minister, ”be even greater than in the past", R. C. Owens, the for¬ 
mer Equity president, followed Finlay on the platform. Now that he 
had become a member of the amalgamated body, Owens, who was once 
an Equity organizer, felt everything should be done to build up 
the strength of the new organization. He issued a plea, therefore, 
"for the support of the agricultural societies all over the pro¬ 
vince", and he expressed the hope that "a travelling lecturer” 

95 

would be appointed to promote the enlistment of new members. The 

morning session then concluded with an election of officers in 

which voting by proxy was disallowed and "nominations for officers 

96 

were to be unlimited". By noon, however, the delegates had got no 
further than the election of James Bower of Red Deer and Rice Shep¬ 
pard of Strathcona as President and Vice-president, respectively, 

but it was agreed that the other necessary officials would be 

97 

chosen at the evening session. 

Although no more elections were to take place until the 
evening, the afternoon of January 14 was not devoted to routine 
convention business. Instead, the entire U. F. A. delegation, on 



, 









. 




5 


* 










' • : 




. 

■ 












. 


» ■ 

' 

: yiH . i i. 






t ’ 










. 

■ 

■ 




255 


the Invitation of Premier A. C. Rutherford, attended the opening 

98 

session of the Alberta legislature. While the Premier, no doubt, 

felt this was one means of ensuring friendly relations between the 

new farm body and the Liberal administration, it is one of the 

ironies of Alberta political history that it was the very same 

U. F. A., then just half-a-day old, which drove Premier Stewart 

from power in 1921 and held the reins of government for fourteen 

unbroken years. Yet thoughts of political action do not seem to 

99 

have been in any of the delegates* minds as they met in the Me¬ 
chanics* Hall at 1:30 in the afternoon on January 14 before pro- 

100 

ceeding in a body to the legislative building. The Bulletin , how¬ 
ever, furnished its readers with a colorful description of the 
event which gave some inkling of the shape of things to come: 

To the thinking mind there has not been seen in 
Sdmonton for many moons such an impressive group of hu¬ 
manity as the long procession of more than 100 prosperous 
farmers of this province wending its way to the legis¬ 
lative hall to witness the opening of the final session 
of the first legislature of Alberta. 

A striking assemblage these men made, as they marched 
down the snowy Sixth street hill. They proceeded In line f 
four abreast, this hint of organization in their pros¬ 
perous ranks indicating strongly the new position which 
the farmers of this continent are making for themselves 
in the human family. They represented the United Farmers 
of Alberta, an organization with over 5,000 members of 
this class of the community which is a most powerful 
factor in the upbuilding of the province. 

Prosperous, intelligent, alert westerners, they all 
seemed. Their marching was made only the brisker by an 
atmosphere somewhere about 30 degrees below, for the day 
was one of still western cold which the true westerner 
’does not feel*. Arriving at the hall, the United Farmers 
were ushered into the visitors* galleries. Coming as they 
did from every portion of the province, they made a fit¬ 
tingly representative and probably the most interesting 
assemblage yet in attendance at the legislature. 101 


Returning to the unfinished business left behind when they ad¬ 
journed for the opening of the legislature, the U. F. A. delegates 



. 


Lt. ' 

9 


. [. 'j: x . . 








. 

■ 

. 











■ 

n.r 3 . . m. 

- 

L 




. .. , . 


' 

* 

. 


: 

. ■ dC 3t . : • . ' ... 

■ 

. 



256 


promptly disposed of a number of matters arising from the amalgama¬ 
tion agreement. The latter were taken care of at the evening ses¬ 
sion on January 14 and during the greater part of the morning 
sitting on the 15th, while a large number of resolutions that had 
been prepared by a special committee were acted upon during the 
closing sessions of the convention. The delegates, in addition, 

heard Thomas Woolford of Cardston report on his work with the 

102 

Grain Growers’ interprovincial council. A little later, the same 

speaker read a paper to the convention on the problem of marketing 
103 

Alberta grain. On Saturday morning, January 16, the newly-elected 

provincial executive met in the offices of the Edmonton Board of 

Trade to clear away all items of business that the departing dele- 

104 

gates had entrusted to their care. 

Fortunately, the business of both the convention and the pro¬ 
vincial executive were completed without the slightest suggestion 
of a controversy that might upset the apparent harmony between the 
two former rival associations. Even the blanks in the draft 
constitution were filled in without incident. "Considerable dis¬ 
cussion" did take place as to the number of provincial directors 
to be elected to the central executive and the geographical areas 

they should represent, but, finally, it was agreed that the di- 

105 

rectors would be chosen from the federal electoral districts. Since 

the new Tice-president was from the Strathcona constituency, it was 

considered that the farmers in that area were sufficiently repre- 

106 

sented and only six directors, therefore, were elected. Care was 

taken in the ensuing balloting that three of the directors selected 

would be from the former Canadian Society of Equity, while the re- 

107 

mainder were former members of the Alberta Farmers’ Association. 

also 

What the local press described as "a lengthy discussion"/took place 






.. . 






- 




. ' - 

, 

. -• .• • . • L- . i ■ ■ • ■ ' 






















- 

. 

- 


- 


. 



. 











257 


108 

over the issue of a membership fee. Some delegates favored an an¬ 
nual levy of two dollars, but the urgent need for increased member¬ 
ship resulted, finally, in a continuation of the old A. F. A. rate 

109 

of one dollar per year. Although the subjects covered in the reso¬ 
lutions submitted to the convention ranged all the way from the 
pork packing question to such diverse matters as C. P. R. coal 
rights, the more rapid erection of school districts, and the prob¬ 
lem of "pocket gophers and ground squirrels", only a minimum of 

110 

discussion was required to receive the delegates* approval. 

It is, however, in one of the most important decisions made by 
the first U. F. A. convention that one finds, next to the actual 
amalgamation, the greatest single example of the spirit of compro¬ 
mise and good will that dominated the gathering. As The Edmonton 
Bulletin pointed out: 

The question of the official organ, one of the most 
important considerations before the U. F. A. convention 
and one on which the most controversy was expected, was 
sprung on the delegates at the session on Friday after¬ 
noon. When the vote was put, three propositions were to 
be voted on: (1) ’The Grain Growers’ Guide’; (2) ’The 
Alberta Homestead’; and (3) that the point be left to 
the directors to decide. The vote was cast in favor of 
the Grain Growers’ Guide.... Ill 

Before the vote had been narrowed down to these three alternatives, 

two Alberta farm papers gracefully withdrew from the competition. 

Some delegates had proposed The Great West , which was revived after 

the collapse of "The Equity Limited", but, for reasons that are not 

explained in the contemporary press, the editor, J. H. Thamer, re- 

112 

fused to have his newspaper considered. Thamer, though, did hint 
"that the Great West would become the property of the ’Grain 

113 

Growers’ Guide’ in case the latter was made the official organ", 
and it is just possible that is exactly what he wished would 
happen. As the former provincial Secretary-treasurer of the Equity 





■ C C . 









j 

* 

- 

■> . 

r , . _ ■ , ■' ». 

, •'• Vr 11V 






< 









258 


organization, Thamer had played an important part in the amalgama¬ 
tion negotiations; one is tempted, therefore, to speculate that he 
may have felt no useful purpose would be served by foisting the 
Equity paper upon former A. F. A. members. The latter, it will be 
noted, had made no particular attempt to insist that their news¬ 
paper be accepted as the official organ of the new association. 

The Farm and Ranch Review , meanwhile, was not allowed to stand for 
election. According to The Bulletin , M. D. Geddes of Calgary, who 
was associated with the Southern Alberta publication, explained 

"the position" of the management and flatly withdrew the paper from 

114 

the race for U. F. A. official approval. Unfortunately, The Bulle¬ 
tin does not report what Geddes told the convention in explanation 
of his action. 

While not a convention delegate, A. Balmer Watt, the editor 
of The Alberta Homestead , was present during the discussion and 
was invited to speak concerning the attitude of his paper to of¬ 
ficial recognition by the U. F. A. Noting "that there was room for 

more than one agricultural journal in Alberta", Watt stated that 

115 

he wished to leave the choice "entirely to the convention". He em¬ 
phasized, however, "that The Homestead had always striven in the 

past to serve the farmers 1 interests, and it would continue to do 
116 

so in the future”. Despite Watt’s reticence on the subject, the 
fraternal delegates from Saskatchewan and Manitoba, E. A. Part¬ 
ridge and Thomas A. Grerar, were more aggressive in attempting to 
convince the convention that The Grain Growers’ Guide should be ap¬ 
pointed the official U. F. A. paper. Partridge, in particular, did 
his utmost to win the delegates’ support for The Guide . He not only 
promised that, if the U. F. A. would endorse this Winnipeg farm 
paper, a provincial office probably would be set up in Calgary, 








0 

t « ■■ ■ , 

. 


i ■ • < - . 


' 




: • 












, 




. t i 




' 






1 

. 

. 


< 






- 







259 


but Representative writers’* would be appointed to look after the 

117 

special interests of the various rural districts. While Partridge’s 

promises would be difficult to resist, it would appear likely that 

many former A. F. A. members supported The Guide for fear of of- 

118 

fending the Equity faction which had never liked The Homestead . 

Entirely apart from the reasons for the choice, the election 

of The Guide as the official U. F. A. organ was nearly the most 

important decision to come out of the amalgamation convention in 

January, 1909. By giving their support to The Guide and all that 

it stood for, the (J. F. A. not only came under the influence of 

the greatest agricultural journal ever published in Western Canada, 

but it gave the prairie farm movement a solidarity that would have 

119 

been difficult to achieve in any other way. Several years had to 

elapse before the delegates to the first U. F. A. convention could 

realize the significance of the choice they had made in nominating 

The Guide as their spokesman, but, almost immediately, in a small, 

but effective, way, the presence of this outstanding farm paper in 

every U. F. A* home had a subtle solidifying influence upon the 

members of the two former rival associations. Shortly after the 

U. F. A* decision that The Guide should be the official paper, the 

editorial staff in Winnipeg tactfully changed the format and for 

many years to come the front cover featured a symbolic feminine 

figure called "Equity", at whose feet appeared the inscription: 

But crown her queen 

And Equity shall usher in 

For those who build 

And those who spin 

And those the grain who garner in 

A brighter day. 


1 The Saturday News , January 19, 1907, p. 10. 

2 Ibid. 





















' 


<v 


■ ' ■ 


, .. ■ . 

3Z~-l-h 








. 




« ■ ■ : ‘ 1 ’ 


" • - ' 












. 

■ 


. ■ • ■ 

















260 


3 The Saturday News , January 26, 1907, p. 10. 

4 Ibid. 

5 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West". 

6 The Saturday News . January 19, 1907, p. 10. 

7 Ibid. 

® The Alberta Homestead , which was an outgrowth of The Saturday 
News, was first published by A. Balmer Watt in January, 1908, 
and was adopted almost immediately by the A. F. A. annual con¬ 
vention as the new official paper. With the launching of this 
new journal, devoted exclusively to the interests of the Al¬ 
berta farmer, The News became a paper for the town dweller. 
(Interview with A. Balmer Watt, December 14, 1953.) 

9 The Saturday News . November 2, 1907, p. 2. 

10 Ibid. 

11 Ibid. 

12 The Alberta Homestead . March 25, 1908, p. 3. 

13 Ibid. 

14 Ibid. 

15 Ibid. 

16 The Saturday News . July 13, 1907, p. 6. 

17 Interview with J. J. Bowlen, Lieutenant-Governor of Alberta and 
pioneer western stock raiser. May 12, 1954. 

18 The Saturday News . March 23, 1907, p. 9. 

19 Ibid. 

20 ibid. . March 16, 1907, p. 16. 

21 Ibid. 

22 Sheppard, Rice, "What Brought About the Alberta Farmers* Associa¬ 
tion" and "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West"; The Al¬ 
berta Homestead . March 18, 1908, p. 1. 

23 An interesting commentary on this argument may be found in the 
article,"Don*t Get Queered", which appeared in The Alberta Home¬ 
stead for March 18, 1908 (p. 1). 

24 The Saturday News , December 28, 1907, p. 1. 

25 Ibid. . January 11, 1908, p. 2. 

26 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West". 

27 Ibid. 

28 Ibid. 

29 The Saturday News , December 28, 1907, p. 1. 

30 Ibid. , January 11, 1908, p. 2. 

51 Ibid. , December 28, 1907, p. 1. 

32 Ibid. a June 13, 1908, p. 3. 

33 There can be little doubt that by the spring of 1908 the A. F. A. 
was stronger than it had ever been before. The Canadian Society 
of Equity was at its lowest ebb, while A. F. A. ranks were con¬ 
tinuing to swell in numbers. An article, which appeared in a 
special edition of The Homestead (April 15, 1908, p. 17) dedi¬ 
cated to provincial resources, admirably illustrates the general 
feeling early in 1908 that the A. F. A. had become the spokesman 
of the Alberta farmer. The article is entitled "Farmer*s 
Interests Safeguarded by an Intelligent Organization". 

34 Interview with A. Balmer Watt, December 14, 1953. 

35 The Saturday News . June 13, 1908, p. 3. An informative article 
on the career of W. F. Stevens may be found in the Provincial 
Jubilee issue of The Edmonton Journal (Section Four, p. 12) 
which appeared on September 1, 1955. 

36 The Alberta Homestead , June 10, 1908, p. 1. 

37 Ibid. 







































' 

. 

. 



- 

. : . ; 

. 


- ■ » < ■ •' < • 








- 

• . 

. t 

. I « 


c 



■ 

, , ; 

-,i•••. : 

•:? dr. 

. 





261 


38 The Alberta Homestead , June 10, 1908, p. 1. 

39 Ibid* 

40 Ibid* 

41 Ibid* , June 17, 1908, p* 1. The meat investigation committee, to 
which Fletcher alludes in this letter, was a body set up by the 
provincial government as a sequel to the commission hearings in 
1907 on Alberta meat marketing conditions. 

42 According to The Saturday News for June 13, 1908 (p. 3), 

Stevens already had given up his position with The Homestead , 
probably as a result of the Fletcher protest noted earlier* 

43 The Alberta Homestead , February 12, 1908, pp. 1-2; The Saturday 
News , February 15, 1908, p. 3. 

44 Ibid* 

45 The Alberta Homestead , June 17, 1908, p. 1* 

46 Interview with A. Balmer Watt, December 14, 1953* 


47 The Alberta Homestead , July 8, 1908, p. 2. 

48 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West". 

49 The Saturday News , August 15, 1908, p. 6. 

50 Ibid* 

51 Ibid* 

52 Ibid, 

53 Ibid, 

54 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 14, 1909, p. 5, 

55 Minutes, The Alberta Farmers* Association, Strathcona Branch, 
December 9, 1905, to January 9, 1909, p* 143* 

56 The Alberta Homestead , January 20, 1909, p. 2. 

57 In Rice Sheppard*s "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West" 
the following comment is made: "As at Lacombe we met first in 
separate halls.* *" 


58 

59 

60 
61 
62 

63 

64 

65 

66 

67 

68 

69 

70 


The Alberta Homestead , 

Ibid* 

p • 3* 


January 20, 1909, p, 2* 


Ibid* , 

Ibid* 

Ibid* 

Ibid* 

Ibid* 

Ibid* 

Ibid* 

Ibid* 

Ibid* 

The Bdmonton Bulletin , January 14, 1909, p* 1* 
Ibid.; The Alberta Homestead , January 20, 1909, 

January 20, 1909, p. 3. 
January 14, 1909, p* 1* 


71 The Alberta Homestead , 

72 The Edmonton Bulletin , 
Ibid. 


73 __ 

74 Ibid* 

75 The Alberta Homestead , January 20, 1909, p* 3. 

76 Ibid* 

77 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 14, 1909, p* 1. 

78 Ibid., January 15, 1909, p. 1. 

79 Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years 

80 The Alberta Homestead , January 20, 

81 Ibid* 

82 Ibid* 

83 Ibid* 

84 Ibid. 

85 Ibid. 


p. 3. 


in the Great North-West", 
1909, p• 3• 



















































1 




- . . . 





262 


86 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 14, 1909, p. 1. 

87 Ibid, 

88 The Alberta Homestead , January 20, 1909, p. 3. 

89 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 14, 1909, p. 1* 

90 The Alberta Homestead , January 20, 1909, p. 3. 

91 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 14, 1909, p. 1. 

92 The Alberta Homestead , January 20, 1909, p. 3. 

93 The Edmonton Bulletin, January 14, 1909, p. 1. 

94 Ibid. 

95 Ibid. 

96 Ibid. 

97 Ibid. 

98 Ibid. 

99 Interview with Henry E. Spencer, May 22, 1954. Spencer, it 
should be noted, was an A. F. A. delegate at the amalgamation 
convention. 

100 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 14, 1909, p. 1. 

101 » January 15, 1909, p. 1. 

102 Ibid. 

103 Ibid. 

104 Ibid. , January 16, 1909, p. 1. 

105 Ibid. * January 15, 1909, p. 1. 

106 Ibid. 

107 Ibid. 

108 Ibid. 

109 Ibid. 

110 The Alberta Homestead , January 20, 1909, p. 4. 

111 The Edmonton Bulletin , January 16, 1909, p. 1. 

112 Ibid. 

113 IbicU 

114 Ibid. 

115 Ibid. 

116 Ibid. 

117 Ibid. ^ 

118 Interview with A. Balmer Watt, December 14, 1953. 

119 For an estimate of the influence of The Grain growers* Guide , 
see pages 36-7 of Paul F. Sharp*s The Agrarian Revolt in 
Western Canada (Minneapolis, 1948). 




































3 



{ 

- 


* 




C 













* 















- 


: c ■ « 

• • . ' - 5 






, • 

. 

; - 

. . 






V 

■ 

. . •. . ' . . ■ 

■ ■ . ... i{ ■ . •. ... . ■ ;; . ■■ ; . : .. i. 

. 








a 1 : 

























BIBLIOGRAPHY 


A* PRIMARY MATERIALS 


X. Personal interviews with : 

George Bevington, an early member of the Alberta Farmers* 
Association and the leader of the monetary reform group 
within the United Farmers of Alberta, December 3, 1953, 

April 7, 1954, and March 4, 1955. 

J. J. Bowlen, Lieutenant-Governor of Alberta and pioneer 
western stock raiser, May 12, 1954. 

Robert E. English, Agricultural Statistician for the Alberta 
Department of Agriculture, January 19, 1954. 

Mrs. E. H. Gostick, Alberta Provincial Librarian and former 
Social Credit M. L. A., November 16, 1953. 

William Irvine, author of The Farmers in Politics and suc¬ 
cessively prominent in the work of the Alberta Non-partisan 
League, the U. F. A., and the C. C. F., October 5 and 14, 
1953. 

Caspar Lavall6e, former member of the Morinville Milling and 
Elevator Company and of the Canadian Society of Equity, 

May 16, 1954. 

John F. Lymburn, former U. F. A. Attorney-General in the Al¬ 
berta Government, September 11, 1953. 

J. J. MacLellan, a director of the U. G. G. from the time of 
its inception and former U. F* A. Minister of Public Works 
in the Alberta Government, December 10, 1953. 

Roy C. Marler, President of the Alberta Federation of Agri¬ 
culture, December 2, 1953. 

Clare M. MeKinlay, author of The Honorable Irene Parlby . 
October 14 and December 7, 1953. 

Fred N. Miller, former Principal of the Olds Agricultural 
School and Assistant Manager of the Edmonton Exhibition As¬ 
sociation Ltd., January 28, 1954. 

member 

Herbert E. Nichols, former/of both the A. F. A. and the 
U. F. A. and the custodian of the Rice Sheppard papers, 
November 15, 1953, February 1, 1954, April 4, 1954, and 
March 4, 1955. 

Norman Priestley, former U. F. A. Vice-president, December 8, 
1953, January 13, 1954, and March 19-20, 1956. 

Richard Gavin Reid, former U. F. A. Premier and Provincial 






< 1 I 




t 



t 








-■ ■ ' 



"V • 




- 

. 



- 




' 

. 



: 




.. , - . 


« 

1 

, ■ '■ : ‘ * . 




. a • V ; ■ - ; 


. 







I 











- 



. 


. ; ? . ; v • 

• 

* 




i ■ ’ i . ' < 1 - 





e 

* 








« • 

, L 




■ 

« 

. < 






Treasurer in the Alberta Government, September 8, 1953, 
October 15, 1953, and April 12, 1954. 


264 


Sidney W. Sheppard, son of Rice Sheppard and prominent Al¬ 
berta livestock raiser, November 15, 1953. 

C. H. Stout, a reporter for The Edmonton Bulletin from 1915 
to 1927 and an intimate acquaintance of the Honorable Frank 
Oliver, June 2, 1954. 

Finley Boyd Watson, son-in-law of Colonel J. J. Gregory and 
former Vice-president of the Farmers* Association of Al¬ 
berta, June 4, July 4, and November 18, 1954. 

A. Balmer Watt, former editor of The Saturday News , The Al¬ 
berta Homestead , and The Edmonton Journal . December 14, 1953, 
and May 31, 1956. 

II. Correspondence with : 

Miss Lila Brady, Reference Librarian for the Indiana Di¬ 
vision of the Indiana State Library, Indianapolis, February 8, 
1956. 

John Edward Brownlee, former U. F. A. Premier of Alberta, 
September 7 and 14, 1954. 

Mrs. Irene Parlby, former U. F. A. Minister without Port¬ 
folio, April 25, 1954, and May 10, 1954. 

III. Unpublished works : 

About 

Sheppard, Rice, **What Brought/the Alberta Farmers* Associa¬ 
tion**, an unpublished essay In the possession of Herbert E. 
Nichols, Edmonton. 

Sheppard, Rice, "Twenty-Five Years in the Great North-West", 
an unpublished manuscript autobiography in the possession of 
Herbert E. Nichols, Edmonton. 

Sheppard, Rice, "The U. F. A. in Politics", an unpublished 
autobiographical essay in the possession of Herbert E. 

Nichols, Edmonton. 

Minutes, The Edmonton Exhibition Association Ltd. Unpublished. 
Located in the offices of the Association on the Exhibition 
Grounds, Edmonton. 

Miscellaneous papers relating to the organization and the 
early period of the Edmonton Agricultural Society. Unpub¬ 
lished. Located in the offices of the Edmonton Exhibition As¬ 
sociation Ltd., the Exhibition Grounds, Edmonton. 

Minutes, The Territorial Grain Growers* Association, Strath- 
cona Branch, March 22, 1905, to December 9, 1905. Unpublished. 
In the possession of Herbert E. Nichols, Edmonton. 









. 

. 




. 








' ' 


1 


- 


; 

. 




- 

q 

■ ■ <. 








« 

- . «■ ■■ • .. ■ 

■ 

■ 

- 










- 


. 






. 

. 


. 

' 


< • 

: .■ .. 

. 


. 




■-> ;i j 

' - . 

. 




265 


Minutes, The Alberta Farmers* Association, Strathcona Branch, 
December 27, 1905, to January 9, 1909. Unpublished. In the 
possession of Herbert E. Nichols, Edmonton. 

Minutes, The United Farmers of Alberta, Strathcona Local 
Union Number 1, December 28, 1912, to December 10, 1921. Un¬ 
published. In the possession of Herbert E. Nichols, Edmonton. 

IY. Government documents : 

The Alberta Gazette . January 15, 1907, p. 8. 

n The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited", a file in the of¬ 
fice of the Registrar of Companies, Government of the Pro¬ 
vince of Alberta, Edmonton. 

Y. Reports and Proceedings : 

The United Farmers of Alberta: Constitution and By-laws 
adopted by the convention, January 14, 1909. 

The United Farmers of Alberta: Constitution and By-laws» 1912. 

The United Farmers of Alberta: Annual Report, 1909-55. 

The United Farmers of Alberta: Program and Resolutions, An¬ 
nual Convention, 1910-55. 

YI. Contemporary pamphlets : 

Prospectus, The Canadian Society of Equity, Limited, Edmonton, 
January 23, 1907. 

VII. Newspapers and periodicals : 

The Advance and Southern Alberta Advertiser (Macleod, Al- 
berta), 1907-9. 

The Airdrie News (Airdrie, Alberta), 1908-9. 

The Alberta Homestead (Edmonton, Alberta), 1908-9. 

The Bawlf Sun (Bawlf, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Camrose Canadian (Camrose, Alberta), 1908-9. 

The Camrose Mail (Camrose, Alberta), 1907-8. 

The Calgary Herald (Calgary, Alberta), 1896-1909. 

The Canadian Annual Review of Public Affairs (Toronto, On- 
tario), 1901-9. 

The Cardston Star (Cardston, Alberta), 1907-9. 


The Carstairs Journal (Carstairs, Alberta), 1907-9 
























- < 

. . . . ■ ■ V..'. t 

. 


• - : 

■ 








- 

„ . , . . . - - 




: 

. 

' 






: t " • ' ' 

: ’ • [/;.„ . . -. ' ’ "V. . 








t ■ ■ ; '• ■ •- ' ;• 

„ - ? . 

, ~ . t 

C S‘ -J li t 

- 






266 


The Claresholm Review (Claresholm, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Crossfield Chronicle (Crossfield, Alberta), 1908-9. 
The Daysland Press (Daysland, Alberta), 1907-9. 



(Didsbury, Alberta), 1907-9 


The Edmonton Bulletin (Edmonton, Alberta), 1880-1909. 

The Edmonton Journal (Edmonton, Alberta), 1903-9. 

The Edmonton Weekly Journal (Edmonton, Alberta), 1904-5. 

The Farmers* Advocate (Winnipeg, Manitoba), 1896-1909. 

The Fort Maoleod Gazette (Fort Macleod, Alberta), 1882-3, 
1891, and 1894-1902. 

The Fort Saskatchewan Reporter (Fort Saskatchewan, Alberta), 
1907-9. 

The Grain Growers* Guide (Winnipeg, Manitoba), 1908-21. 

The Gleichen Call (Gleichen, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Hardisty Enterprise (Hardisty, Alberta), 1908-9. 

The High River Times (High River, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Innisfail Province (Innisfail, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Lacombe Advertiser (Lacombe, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Leduc Representative (Leduc, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Lloydminster Times (LjLoydminster, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Macleod Gazette (Macleod, Alberta), 1907. 

The Magrath Pioneer (Magrath, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Mannville Telegram (Mannville, Alberta), 1908-9. 

The Medicine Hat News (Medicine Hat, Alberta), 1906-9. 

The Medicine Hat Times (Medicine Hat, Alberta), 1906-9. 

The Morning Albertan (Calgary, Alberta), 1906-9. 

The Nanton News (Nanton, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Okotoks Review (Okotoks, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Olds Gazette (Olds, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Fincher Creek Echo (Pincher Creek, Alberta), 1907-9. 






























, ; /-V : r ’ .' • ■■ 

. ' . 1 ; 

' , { ' •• .' 

+ - , < 

■ 

i « ■ 

' 

' - 

' 

- ■ ' , : 

. ■ 1 . 

< 

■ 


V.oi 

■■■ 






. 






















267 


The Ponoka Herald (Ponoka. Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Raymond Chronicle (Raymond, Alberta), 1907. 

The Red Deer Advocate (Red Deer, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Red Deer News (Red Deer, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Saturday News (Edmonton, Alberta), 1905-9. 

The Sedgewick Sentinel (Sedgewick, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Southern Alberta Daily News (Lethbridge, Alberta), 1907. 
The Stettler Independent (Stettler, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Strathcona Chronicle (Strathcona, Alberta), 1907-8. 

The Strathcona Evening Chronicle (Strathcona, Alberta), 1907-8 
The Strathcona Flaindealer (Strathcona, Alberta), 1903-9. 

The Taber Free Press (Taber, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The TofieId Standard (Tofield, Alberta), 1908. 

Up-to-Date Farming and Gardening (Indianapolis, Indiana), 1907 
The Vegreville Observer (Vegreville, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Vermilion Signal (Vermilion, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Western Globe (Lacombe, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Wetaskiwin Post (Wetaskiwin, Alberta), 1907-9. 

The Wetaskiwin Times (Wetaskiwin, Alberta), 1907-9. 

B. SECONDARY MATERIALS 

I. Unpublished secondary works : 

McKinlay, Glare Mary, The Honorable Irene Parlby , unpublished 
M. A. thesis, University of Alberta, 1953. 

Waddell, William S. The Honorable Frank Oliver , unpublished 
M. A. thesis, University of Alberta, 1950, 2 v. 

II. Published secondary works : 

Bahmer, Robert H., M The Society of Equity", Agricultural 
Hi story . January, 1940, pp. 33-63. 

Blue, John, Alberta. Past and Present . Chicago, 1924, 3 v. 
Buller, A. H. Reginald, Essays on Wheat , New York, 1919. 






























. 

- 










. e 


.. 

- 


, 




t . . ' .. ' _ ' 






- 

. < • : 

. . «i . • - 














. 

. 1 - . 




. 


: 








,, e 





Dafoe, John W. t Clifford Sifton in Relation to his Times. 
Toronto, 1931. ~ 


268 


The Edmonton Exhibition Association Ltd., 75th Anniversary 
Edition of the Grandstand and Souv enir Programme, Edmonton, 
1953. — - 

Glazebrook, George P. de T., A History of Transportation in 
Canada , Toronto, 1938. 

Hopkins, J. Castell (ed.), Canada: An Encyclopedia of the 
Country , Toronto, 1898, 6 v. 

Innis, Harold A., History of the Canadian Pacific Railway , 
Toronto, 1924. 

Irvine, William, The Farmers in Politics , Toronto, 1920. 

Johnson, Gilbert: "James Moffat Douglas", Saskatchewan History , 
Yol. VII, No. 2 (Spring, 1954), pp. 47-50. 

MacEwan, Grant, Agriculture on Parade , Toronto, 1950. 

MacGibbon, Duncan Alexander, The Canadian Grain Trade , 

Toronto, 1932. 

MacGibbon, D. A., Railway Rates and the Canadian Railway Com¬ 
mission , Cambridge, Mass., 1917. 

Mackintosh, W. A., and Joerg, W. L. G. (editors), Canadian 
Frontiers of Settlement , Toronto, 1934-6, 9 v. 

Macpherson, C. B., Democracy in Alberta , Toronto, 1953. 

MacRae, Archibald Oswald, History of the Province of Alberta , 
Calgary, 1912, 2 v. 

Moorhouse, Hopkins, pseud. (Herbert Joseph), Deep Furrows , 
Toronto, 1918. 

Morton, W. L., The Progressive Party in Canada , Toronto, 1950. 

Patton, Harald S., Grain Growers f Cooperation in Western 
Canada , Cambridge, Mass., 1928. 

Rolph, William Kirby, Henry Wise Wood of Alberta , Toronto, 

1950. 

Sharp, Paul F., The Agrarian Revolt in Western Canada , 
Minneapolis, 1948. 

Skelton, 0. D., The Life and Letters of Sir Wilfrid Laurier , 
Toronto, 1921, 2 v. 


Taylor, Carl C., The Farmers* Movement, 1620-1920 , New York, 
1953. 






























. . . 

. ; 








- ; ... . , * • 


. 


. .. 


■ 

" 


. 

. 






{ « • .. . 

. , ■ . ■ 

■ 

-• 


.: ' ..‘j/;-.; < 


















, . . . . 


, - , -, . . 


. 








. Or I 








. . . , 


■ 




■ 


. 




. • -J J.-:. 








269 


Wiest, Edward, Agricultural Organization in the United States , 
Lexington, 1923. 

Wood, Louis Aubrey, A History of Farmers* Movements in Canada , 
Toronto, 1924. 









270 


APPENDIX A 

THE ANNUAL EXECUTIVE LISTS OF THE RE-ORGANIZED EDMONTON 
AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY AS REPORTED IN THE EDMONTON BULLETIN . 

1882 

President: D. Maloney. 

1st Vice-president: J. Reid; 2nd Vice-president: W. Cust. 
Secretary-treasurer: W. Stiff. 

Directors: M. McCauley, M. McLeod, 7/. S. Robertson, A. Taylor, 

G. Gagnon, A. D. Patton, and J. Fraser. 

1883 

President: M. McCauley. 

1st Vice-president: E. Brousseau; 2nd Vice-president: R. Belcher, 
Secretary-treasurer: W. Stiff. 

Directors: D. Ross, George Long, J. Coleman, C. Stewart, 

S. D. Mulkins, A. D. Patton, and F. Lamoureux. 

Auditors: J. A. McDougall and A. Dunlop. 

1884 

President: M. McCauley. 

1st Vice-president: G. Gagnon; 2nd Vice-president: G. Long. 
Secretary-treasurer: W. Stiff. 

Directors: D. Ross, R. McKernan, E. Brousseau, A. Cameron, 

S. Cunningham, F. Provost, and A. Hutchings. 

Auditors: J. A. McDougall and A. Dunlop. 

1885 

President: M. McCauley. 

1st Vice-president: D. Ross; 2nd Vice-president: G. Gagnon. 
Secretary-treasurer: W. Stiff. 


































. 




! ’ ■ 

■ 






















; 










. 
















» 














. 



271 


Directors: George Long, Sturgeon River; D. Maloney, St* Albert; 

R. McKernan, South Side; T. G. Hutchings, Little 
Mountain; G. Sanderson, Edmonton; James Earner, Clover 
Bar; J. B. Quesnelle, St* Albert. 


1886 

President: R. McKernan. 

1st Vice-president: George Long; 2nd Vice-president: John Turner. 

Secretary-treasurer: Rev. John H. Howard. 

Directors: M» McCauley, D. Ross, D. Maloney, Thomas G. 

Hutchings, G. A. Blake, James Kelly, and D. E. Noyes. 


1887 

President: George Long, Sturgeon River. 

1st Vice-president: D. Maloney, St. Albert; 2nd Vice-president: 
T. G. Hutchings, Little Mountain. 

Secretary-treasurer: John H. Howard, Edmonton (until August); 

James Martin. 

Directors: M. McCauley, Edmonton; G. A. Blake, Little Mountain; 

J. T. Turner, Clover Bar; W. H. Carson, Sturgeon 
River; James Martin, Edmonton; Leander Fulton, South 
Side; George Hutton, Sturgeon River. 

Auditor: J. A. McDougall. 


1888 


President: George Long. 

1st Vice-president: D. Maloney; 2nd Vice-president: J. T. Turner. 
Secretary-treasurer: James Martin. 

Directors: M. McCauley, M. Groat, John Looby, all of Edmonton; 

D. Craig and G. Hutton, Sturgeon River; L. Fulton, 
Clover Bar; R. Me Kern gin, South Side; A. Hutchings, 
Little Mountain. 

Auditor: J. A. McDougall. 


1889 


President: George Long. 

1st Vice-president: D. Maloney; 2nd Vice-president: M. McCauley 












j » . • 





















. 

■ 






- 




































■ 































272 


Secretary-treasurer: James Martin. 

Directors: A. Cameron and D. Craig, Sturgeon River; Hugh McKay, 

Little Mountain; W. Edmiston, Clover Bar; R. McKernan, 
South Side; M. Groat, D. S. McKay, and James McDonald, 
all of Edmonton. 


1890 

President: Matthew McCauley, Edmonton. 

1st Vice-president: George Long, Sturgeon River; 2nd Vice-presi¬ 
dent: W. Walker, Clover Bar. 

Secretary-treasurer: James Martin. 

Directors: John Cameron, John Loohy, Thomas Hourston, all of Ed¬ 
monton; J. C. C. Bremner, Clover Bar; William Stevens, 
South Side; Hugh McKay and M. McLeod of Little 
Mountain; L. Harnois, St. Albert; D. B. Wilson, 
Sturgeon River. 


1891 


President: Matthew McCauley. 

1st Vice-president: J. C. C. Bremner; 2nd Vice-president: George 

Long. 

Secretary-treasurer: Campbell Young. 

Directors: J. Looby and John Cameron, Edmonton; W. Stevens, 

East Edmonton; W. Walker, Clover Bar; M. McLeod, 
Belmont; R. Kelly and D. B. Wilson, Sturgeon River. 


1892 


President: Matthew McCauley. 

1st Vice-president: Murdoch McLeod, Belmont; 2nd Vice-president: 
J. C. C. Bremner, Clover Bar. 

Secretary-treasurer: Campbell Young. 

Directors: Robert McKernan, South Edmonton; W. H. Stephens, East 
Edmonton; F. Adamson, Clover Bar; William Walker, 

Fort Saskatchewan; John Looby, Edmonton; D. C. Robert¬ 
son, Edmonton; George Long, Sturgeon River; Robert 
Kelly, Stuigeon River; Alexander McNabb, Stony Plain; 
Thomas G. Hutchings, Poplar Lake. 

Auditor: John A. McDougall. 






* 












: 

























. 


■ 

' 













. 








. 
















1893 


£73 


President: Matthew McCauley. 

1st Vice-president: George Long; 2nd Vice-president: William 
Walker. 

Secretary-treasurer: Campbell Young. 

Directors: Murdoch McLeod, W. Clark, J. F. Adamson, Robert 
McKernan, John Cameron, W. H. Stephens, J. R. 
Brenton, Alexander Adamson, D. C. Robertson, 

J. Eccles, and Robert Kelly. 

Auditor: John A. McDougall. 


1894 


President: Thomas Hutchings. 

1st Vice-president: Matthew McCauley; 2nd Vice-president: 
George Long. 

Secretary-treasurer: J. K. Turnbull. 

Directors: C. J. Haworth, William Clarke, Donald Ross, 

R. Dinwoodie, John Cameron, D. C. Robertson, 

W. H. Stephens, Hugh McKay, Joseph Rye, Murdoch 
McLeod, John R. Brenton, and Robert Kelly. 

Auditor: John A. McDougall. 


1895 


President: Matthew McCauley. 

1st Vice-president: T. G. Hutchings; 2nd Vice-president: 
Count de Gazes. 

Secretary-treasurer: J. R* Turnbull. 

Directors: Joseph Rye, D. C. Robertson, W. McKay, Donald 
Ross, George Long, C. Haworth, John Cameron, 
Robert McKernan, W. Clark, Murdoch McLeod, 

W. H. Stephens, M. Groat, Hugh McKay, K. Powell, 
Robert Kelly, and George Hutton. 

Auditors: John A. McDougall and A. G. Randall. 


1896 


President: Matthew McCauley. 

1st Vice-president: Thomas Hourston; 2nd Vice-president: 
Count de Gazes. 








. 




. 










































. 




. 








* r ; ' - ■' ' . xo - 





























Secretary-treasurer: J. R. Turnbull. 

Directors: Joseph Rye, D. C. Robertson, W. McKay, George 
Long, Donald Ross, William Clark, Murdoch 
McLeod, Malcolm Groat, Hugh McKay, Robert Kelly, 
George Hutton, and J. S. Doze. 

Auditor: John A. McDougall. 


N. B. — After 1896 The Edmonton Bulletin ceased to report 
the annual elections of the Edmonton Agricultural 
Society, but it did continue to list the executive 
changes in the South Edmonton (or "Strathcona") 
Agricultural Society which are given below from the 
time of its inception in 1894. 


THE ANNUAL EXECUTIVE LISTS OF THE SOUTH EDMONTON (OR "STRATH- 
CONA n ) AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY AS REPORTED IN THE EDMONTON 
BULLETIN. ‘ 


1894 


President: Robert McKernan. 

1st Yice-president: R. Dinwoodie; End Tice-president: 

T. Stewart. 

Secretary: H. Wilson. 

Treasurer: R. Ritchie. 

Directors: J. Jackson, E. H. Sache, L. Fulton, R. Tindale, 
T. Daly, W. Fogel, F. Ellett, ¥. Brunelle, 

C. Black, J. McGregor, A. McLean, and J. J. Mac¬ 
kenzie. 


1895 


President: Robert McKernan. 

1st Yice-president: R. Dinwoodie; End Yice-president: 

T. Stewart. 

Secretary-treasurer: H. Wilson. 

Directors: T. Daly, T. Jackson, W. H. Stephens, A. McLean, 
L. Fulton, G. Black, A. G. McLeod, A. Schatz, 

R. Tindale, T. Allen, W. D. Carscadden, and 
F. Ellett. 


Auditor: M. Mackenzie 


















- ' 






‘ — * 

. 


































: 









... : ■ . : 


* 








. 
















< 










275 


1896 


President: Robert McKernan. 

1st Vice-president: A. McLean; 2nd Vice-president: 

W. H. Stephens• 

Secretary-treasurer: H. Wilson* 

Directors: R. Ritchie, R. Dinwoodie, T. Henderson, L. 

T. Jackson, J. Gainer, J. D. Renault, A* W 
Frank Ryan, W. J. G* Dickson, B. S* Seaman 
Hawkins, and R. Tindale. 

Auditor: M* Mackenzie. 


Mot reported. 


Mot reported. 


Mot reported. 


1897 

1898 

1899 


1900 


President: James McKernan. 

1st Vice-president: T. Daly; 2nd Vice-president: 

Rice Sheppard. 

Secretary-treasurer: A. W. Toll. 

Directors: J. W. Dole, J. W. McLaggan, F. Seamen, J. 

J. J. McKenzie, R* Ritchie, C. C. Ellett, 
Cully, W. Daly, I*. Greatrix, A. McLean, T. 
Donald Ross, I. Doze, W. D. Carscadden, J. 
R. McKernan, J. C. Andrews, and K. Wilson* 

Auditor: A. C. Rutherford. 


1901 


Fulton, 
Toll, 

, D. M. 


r. Duggan, 
r. Mac- 
Rooney, 
Porte, 


President: A. McLean. 

1st Vice-president: T. Daly; 2nd Vice-president: Mr. Miller 
Secretary-treasurer: M. McIntyre. 






. 


. 






f 


> , '■ . . 

* . 

. 






: 








. 






















: 


■ 




, : ■ 








* < 


. . 

• , 




. 




















Directors: W. D. Carscadden, W. Daly, R. Sheppard, J. McLaggan 
C. C. Ellett, J. Inkster, T. Gretrix, T. Henderson, 
F. Seamen, A* W. Toll, James Porte, J. J. McKenzie, 
J. H. McDonald, Mr. Cameron, and James McKernan. 

Auditors: J. Blain and A. C. Rutherford. 


1902 


President: A. McLean. 

1st Vice-president: T. Daly; 2nd Vice-president: F. 0* Seamen. 
Secretary-treasurer: M. McIntyre. 

Directors: W. D. Carscadden, R. Weir, M. A. Worth, Stephen 
Swift, H. H. Crawford, T. Rooney, L. V. Hogan, 

T. Gratrix, A. W. Toll, R. Ritchie, J . B. Miller, 

J. H. McDonald, W. C. Tuttle, R. Sheppard, and 
Joseph Bishop. 

Auditors: A. C. Rutherford and J. W. Blain. 


1903 


Not reported. 


1904 

The Edmonton bulletin for April 30, 1904 (p. 5), carried the 
following news item: 

The incorporation charter of the Strathcona in¬ 
dustrial Exhibition Association has just been se¬ 
cured. The new association will purchase the pro¬ 
perty of the South Edmonton Agricultural Society 
which will cease to exist. 



. 

. 








X 




• 




., . > .. ' • * . . ‘ . ' - 




. . . .... 

. . .... 

. . . . . • * t 

' «< t - 

. 


. 




, 


















■ 







• 




















. 
























277 


APPENDIX B 


THE ANNUAL EXECUTIVE LISTS OF THE TERRITORIAL GRAIN GROWERS* 
ASSOCIATION (STRATHCONA BRANCH), THE ALBERTA FARMERS* ASSOCIA¬ 
TION (THE STRATHCONA AND PROVINCIAL EXECUTIVES), AND THE UNITED 
FARMERS OF ALBERTA (THE PROVINCIAL EXECUTIVE DOWN TO 1921). 


I. THE TERRITORIAL GRAIN GROWERS* ASSOCIATION (STRATHCONA 
BRANCH): 


1905 

President: Daniel W. Warner. 

Vice-president: Ralph Weir. 

Secretary-treasurer: Rice Sheppard. 

Directors: George Ball, C. Black, Joshua Fletcher, D. S. 

Fulton, J. Govenlock, G. McAllister, W. Place, 
W. F. Stevens, T. H. Stewart, and A. Weishaugh. 

II. THE ALBERTA FARMERS* ASSOCIATION: 

1905 

President: Daniel W. Warner. 

Vice-president: William F. Stevens. 

Secretary-treasurer: Rice Sheppard. 

Directors: Philip Gttewell, John 0. Parminter, C. Peel, 
Joshua Fletcher, T. H. Stewart, and D. S. 
Fulton. 

N. B. ■— The above also constituted the executive of the 
Strathcona Branch. 

1906 

The •provincial or central executive : 

President: Daniel W. Warner, East Edmonton. 

Vice-president: Rice Sheppard, Bast Edmonton. 

Secretary-treasurer: William F. Stevens, East Edmonton. 

Directors: W. R. Dobie, Pincher Creek; William Heatley, 
Beaumont; Thomas Baalim, Vegreville; Albert 
Ottewell, East Clover Bar; A. WIerzba, Spruce 























* * « 

• c • ' : 

■ . • . ' 1 ■■ * 






1 



























Dale; R. N. Whillans, To fie Id. 
The Strathcona Branch.; 


President: Joshua Fletcher, Ellerslie. 

Vice-president: D. S. Fulton, East Edmonton. 

Secretary-treasurer: Rice Sheppard, Strathcona. 

Directors: J. Govenlock, Ellerslie; G. Peel, Sandy Lake; 

George Ball, Salisbury; J. Groves, Rabbit Hill 
B. T. Williams, Clover Bar; A. Scatchy, Col¬ 
chester. 


1907 

The provincial or central executive : 

President: Joshua Fletcher, Ellerslie. 

Vice-president: Thomas H. Woolford, Cardston. 

Secretary-treasurer: William F. Stevens, Clover Bar. 

Directors: Rice Sheppard, Strathcona; George Ball, Strath 
cona; Henry Jamieson, Red Deer; George Mac¬ 
Donald, Olds; T. W. Harris, Raymond; E. N. 
Barker, Cardston. 

The Strathcona Branch: 


President: Joshua Fletcher. . 

Vice-president: George Ball. 

Secretary-treasurer: Rice Sheppard. 

Assistant Secretary-treasurer: J. Govenlock. 

Directors: D. W. Warner, M. Smeltzer, D. S. Fulton, E* A. 
Walker, W. Lang, and R. Weir. 

1908 

The provincial or central executive : 

President: Joshua Fletcher, Ellerslie. 

Vice-president: Thomas H. Woolford, Cardston. 

Secretary-treasurer: William F. Stevens, Clover Bar. 

Directors: (Southern) L. H. Jelliff, Cardston; George 
MacDonald, Olds; E. Carswell, Penhold; 
(Northern) Henry Jamieson, Red Deer; Rice 








: 






, <$ 


■ 

. 












: 

- 
















Sheppard, Strathcona; Thomas Baalim, Vegreville. 
The Strathcona Branch: 


279 


President: F. H. Herbert. 

Vice-president: T. Daly (until April 11, 1908); Ralph 

Weir (until the formation of the if. F. A. 
in January, 1909). 

Secretary-treasurer: Rice Sheppard. 

Directors: J. Govenlock, M. Smeltzer, George Ball, D. S. 
Fulton, E. A. Walker, and W. Deane. 

N. B. — No executive lists are available for the Society 
of Equity during the period of its activities in 
Alberta. 

III. THE UNITED FARMERS OF ALBERTA (THE CENTRAL EXECUTIVE): 

1909 

President: James Bower, Red Deer. 

Vice-president: Rice Sheppard, Strathcona. 

Secretary-treasurer: E. J. Fream, innisfail. 

Directors: L. H. Jelliff, Spring Coulee; W. A. Dixon, 

Fishburn; A. von Mieleiki, Calgary; George Mac¬ 
Donald, Olds; George Long, Edmonton; Thomas 
Baalim, Vegreville. 

1910 

President: James Bower, Red Deer. 

Vice-president: W. J. Tregillus, Calgary. 

Directors at Large: James Speakman, Penhold; D. W. Warner, 

Clover Bar; L. H. Jelliff, Spring 
Coulee. 

Directors for Constituencies: 

Victoria—T. H. Baalim, Vegreville 
Edmonton—George Long, Namao 
Strathcona—F. H. Langston, Rosenroll 
Red Deer—E. Carswell, Penhold 
Macleod—J. Quincy, Barons 
Medicine Hat—E. Griesbach, Gleichen 
Calgary—A. von Mieleiki, Calgary. 

Secretary-treasurer: Edward J. Fream, Innisfail. 



- 




. - 












. 

: 











: J 




















c 










280 


1911 

President: James Bower, Red Deer. 

Vice-president: W. J. Tregillus, Calgary. 

# 

Directors at Large: J. Speakman, Penhold; D. W. Warner, 

Edmonton; J. Quinsey, Noble. 

District Directors: P. S. Austin, Ranfurly; G. S. Long, 

Damao; J. k. Pointer, Strome; E. Cars¬ 
well, Penhold; M» E. Sly, Strathmore; 

J. E. Ostrander, Gleichen; G. W. 
Buchanan, uowley. 

Secretary-treasurer: Edward J. Fream, Calgary. 

1912 

Honorary President: James Bower, Red Deer. 

President: W. J. Tregillus, Calgary. 

First Vice-president: A. Cochran, Stettler. 

Second Vice-president: D. W. Warner, Edmonton. 

‘Third Vice-president: M. E. Sly, Strathmore. 

Fourth Vice-president: J. Quinsey, Noble. 

Directors: P. S. Austin, Ranfurly; G. Bevington, Spruce 
Grove Center; J. R. Pointer, Strome; E. Cars¬ 
well, Red Deer; H. Sorensen, Strathmore; G. W. 
Buchanan, cowley; W. S. Henry, Bow Island. 

Secretary-treasurer: E. J. Fream, Calgary. 

1913 

Honorary President: James Bower, Red Deer. 

President: W. J* Tregillus, Calgary. 

First Vice-president: J. Quinsey, Noble. 

Second Vice-president: W. S. Henry, Bow island. 

Third Vice-president: Rice Sheppard, Edmonton. 

1‘ourth Vice-president: E. Carswell, Red Deer. 

Directors: P. S. Austin, Kanfurly; G. Bevington, Spruce 

Grove Center; J. R. Pointer, Strome; D. Bucking¬ 
ham, Stettler; H. Sorensen, Strathmore; J. H. 
Lennox, Granum; A. Rawlins, Alby. 





: 


. 









. .* ' 








: 


, ; : 

., . 



: 



.. ■ : 








t < - , 

. 

; , . t ; 

• 









. 

- 

. 

■ 





Honorary Secretary: E. J. Fream, Calgary. 
Secretary-treasurer: P. P. Woodbridge, Calgary. 


281 


1914 

Honorary President: James bower, Red Deer. 

President: W. J. Tregillus, Calgary. 

First Vice-president: D. W. Warner, Edmonton. 

Second Vice-president: James Speakman, Penhold. 

Third Vice-president: E. Carswell, Red Deer. 

Fourth Vice-president: Rice Sheppard, Edmonton. 

Directors: P. S. Austin, Kanfurly; F. C. Clare, North 

Edmonton; E. G. Vickery, Strome; D. Buckingham, 
Stettler; H. W. Wood, Carstairs; J. Quinsey, 
Nobleford; W. D. Trego, G-leichen. 

Honorary Secretary: E. J. Fream, Calgary. 

Secretary-treasurer: P. P. Woodbridge, Calgary. 

1915 

Honorary President: B. W. Warner, Edmonton. 

President: James Speakman, Penhold. 

Vice-presidents: H. W. ?food, Carstairs (1st); S. S. Dunham, 
Lethbridge (2nd); Rice Sheppard, Edmonton 
(3rd); W. D. Trego, Gleichen (4th). 

District Directors: 

Victoria District -— P. S. Austin, Kanfurly 
Edmonton District — George Long, Namao 
Strathcona District — H. G. Vickery, Strome 
Macleod District •— G. W. Buchanan, Cowley 
Calgary District — J. A. Bishop, Beddington 
Red Deer District — D. Buckingham, Stettler 
Medicine Hat District — E. E. Sparks, Jenner. 

Secretary-treasurer: P. P. Woodbridge. 

1916 

Honorary President: D. W. Warner, Edmonton. 

Honorary Secretary: E. J. Fream, Calgary. 

President: H. W. Wood, Carstairs. 


- 








* . , rX SJ .» • ; : 

* 






. « 

a • 

a t ’ 

. 











- 





■ 

♦ 













; 










e ' ~ 

- 


. . 











First Vice-president: W. D. Trego, Gleichen. 

Second Vice-president: S. S. Dunham, Lethbridge. 
Third Vice-president: Rice Sheppard, Edmonton, 
Fourth Vice-president: James Weir, Parkland. 
Directors: 

East and West Calgary---A. A. Hall, Crossfield 

East and West Edmonton—A. Rafn, Hon Accord 

How River—J. E. Hlore, Craigmyle 

Battle River—J . W. Wood, Wainwright 

Strathcona—P. Baker, Ponoka 

Victoria—J. L. Sparrov/, Sedgewick 

Red Deer—D. Buckingham, Stettler 

Macleod—G. D. Sloane, Cayley 

Medicine Hat—E. E. Sparks, Jenner 

Lethbridge—Paul Madge, Milk River. 

Secretary-treasurer: P. P. Woodbridge, Calgary. 

1917 

Honorary President: D. ¥. Warner, Clover Bar. 
Honorary Secretary: E. J. Fream, Calgary. 
President: H. W. Wood, Carstairs. 

First Vice-president: W. D. Trego, Gleichen. 

Second Vice-president: James Weir, Parkland. 

Third V'ice-president: J. W. Wood, Wainwright. 
Fourth Vice-president: S. S. Dunham, Lethbridge. 
Directors: 

East and West Calgary—A. A* Hall, CrossfieId 

East and West Edmonton—A. Rafn, Bon Accord 

Bow River—J. E. Blore, Craigmyle 

Battle River—Henry Spencer, Edgerton 

Strathcona—P. Baker, Ponoka 

Victoria—James Miner, Bawlf 

Red Deer—Walter Parlby, Alix 

Macleod—G. D. Sloane, Cayley 

Medicine Hat—A. J. H. Donahue, Foremost 

Lethbridge—W. A. Hamilton, Lethbridge. 

Secretary-treasurer: P. P. Woodbridge, Calgary. 




t, 



















A « . 







! i ■ . • k : . 

. . ; . : 








< 



« 


* 




283 


1918 

President: H. W. Wood, Garstairs. 

First Vice-president: P. Baker, Ponoka. 

Second Vice-president: W. D Trego, Gleichen. 

Third Vice-president: J. W. Leedy, Whitecourt. 

Fourth VLce-president: Rice Sheppard, South Edmonton. 
Directors: 

East and West Calgary—Wm. Lowe, Crossfield 

East and West Edmonton—W. F. Bredin, Bredin P. 0. 

Bow River—G. A. jjorster, Nateby 

Battle River—H. E. Spencer, Edgerton 

Strathcona—C. W. Carroll, Leduc 

Victoria—F. W. Smith, Sedgewick 

Red Deer—Joseph Stauffer, Olds 

Macleod—S. S. Sears, Ranton 

Medicine Hat—Charles H. Harris, Fairacres 

Lethbridge—T. 0. King, Raymond. 

Secretary-treasurer: P. P. Woodbridge (resigned in 

February, 1918); H. Higginbotham. 

1919 

President: H. W. Wood, Garstairs. 

Vice-president: P. Baker, Ponoka. 

Executive: H. W. Wood, Garstairs; P. Baker, Ponoka; W. D. 

Trego, Gleichen; E. Greenfield, Westlock; Rice 
Sheppard, South Edmonton; Mrs. Walter Parlby, 
Alix (Ex-Officio). 


Directors: 

Battle River—H. E. Spencer, Edgerton 
Bow River—G. A. Forster, Nateby 
Medicine Hat—G. H. Harris, Oyen 
Victoria—F. W. Smith, Sedgewick 
Lethbridge—Lawrence Peterson, Barnwell 
East Edmonton—A* Rafn, Bon Accord 
West Edmonton—W. F. Bredin, Bredin 
Macleod—G. D. Sloane, Cayley 
Red Deer—Joseph Stauffer, Olds 

East and West Calgary—Geo. G. Huser, Crossfield 
Strathcona—Geo. F* Root, Wetaskiwin. 

Ex-Officio: Mrs. J. F. Ross, Duhamel; Mrs. Nellie Carr, 
Birdsholm. 

Secretary-treasurer: H. Higginbotham, Calgary. 






- 


: 

, ' 







■ 

. : ; 


c 


? 


■ 


284 


1920 

President: H. W. Wood, Carstairs. 

Vice-president: P. Baker, Ponoka. 

Executive: H. W. Wood, Carstairs; P. Baker, Ponoka; W. D. 
Trego, Gleichen; H. Greenfield, Westlock; 

A. C. Muir, Provost (resigned in July, 1920— 
replaced by S. S. Sears, Wanton); Mrs. M. L. 
Sears, Wanton (Ex-officio). 


Directors: 

Battle River—H. E. Spencer, Edgerton 
Bow River—G. A. Forster, Wateby 
Medicine Hat—C. H. Harris, Oyen 
Victoria—F. W. Smith, Sedgewick 
Lethbridge—Lawrence Peterson, Barnwell 
East Edmonton—A. Rafn, Bon Accord 
West Edmonton—W. F. Bredin, Bredin 
Macleod—S. S* Sears, Wanton (replaced by R. S. Law, 
Claresholm, when promoted to the executive) 
Red Deer—L. M. Gaetz, Red Deer 

East and West Calgary—C. H. McFarquhar, Cremona 
Strathcona*—Rice Sheppard, Strathcona. 

Ex-Officio: Mrs. K. Maguire, Carstairs; Mrs. w. B. Gunn, 
Paradise Valley. 

Secretary-treasurer: H. Higginbotham, Calgary. 

1921 

President: H. W. Wood, Carstairs. 

Vice-president: Percival Baker, Ponoka. 

Executive: H. W. Wood, Carstairs; Percival Baker, Ponoka 
(died during 1921, replaced by E. J. Garland, 
Rurnsey); H. Greenfield, Westlock (replaced by 
H. C. McDaniel, Whitla, when elected Premier of 
Alberta); it ice Sheppard, South Edmonton; S. S« 
Sears, Wanton; Mrs. M. L. Sears (Ex-Officio). 


Directors: 

Battle River—H. E. Spencer, Edgerton 

Bow River—G. A. Forster, Wateby 

Medicine Hat—C. H. Harris, Oyen 

Victoria—G. E. Roose, Camrose 

Lethbridge—Lawrence Peterson, Barnwell 

East Edmonton—A. Rafn, Bon Accord 

West Edmonton, South—Geo. Bevington, Winterburn 

West Edmonton, Worth—W. F. Bredin, Bredin 

Macleod—Stephen Lunn, Pincher Creek 










. a 1 : 




















s 

* 






: 










- 

- • - 

- 


. ... , 



- 

. 


. 














t 












* 

■ 




- 












285 


Red Deer—L. M. Gaetz, Red Deer (replaced by D. W. 
McKinnon, Red Deer) 

West Calgary—C. H. Macrarquhar, Cremona 
East Calgary—H. E. G. H. Scholefield, Crossfield 
Stratbcona—D. W. Warner, Claresholm (replaced by 
A. Lunan, Kort Saskatchewan) 


Ex-Officio: Mrs. O. S. Welch, Gleichen; Mrs. K. B. Gunn, 
Paradise Valley. 

Secretary-treasurer: H. Higginbotham, Calgary. 


N. B. — The variations that may be noted in the presenta¬ 
tion of the preceding executive lists are a result 
of the several sources from which this information 
had to be obtained. 


, 





* ; . ■ 

. 


. 




. 

, 





. 




286 


APPENDIX C 


THE NORTH-TOST ORDINANCE OF 1886 FOR THE INCORPORATION OF AGRI¬ 
CULTURAL SOCIETIES AS REPORTED ON PAGE 4 OF THE EDMONTQN BULLE¬ 
TIN FOR FEBRUARY 12, 1887. 


"1. An agricultural society may be constituted by order 
of the lieutenant-governor on receipt of a declara¬ 
tion in form provided signed by not less than 50 
persons over 18 years of age, residing within an 
area of 20 townships, the said area to constitute 
the boundaries of the society. 

2. *The order shall be published in the Canada Gazette 

and a fee of six dollars must accompany the de¬ 
claration, which shall go to the funds of the 
territories. 

3. A meeting for the election of officers of the society 
may be called by any five members by notice posted in 
five conspicuous places within the district of the 
society, at least fifteen days before the day of 
meeting, the place to be determined by the lieutenant- 
governor. 

4. The annual members ' fees shall not be less than one 
dollar. 

5. The object of these societies shall be to encourage 
improvement in agriculture, by procuring seeds, 
plants and animals of new and valuable kinds, by 
offering prizes in excellence in any agricultural pro¬ 
duction or operation, by offering prizes for essays 

on agricultural subjects. 

6. Any funds of the society may be expended on any ob¬ 
ject not inconsistent with those authorized by the 
ordinance. 

7. The annual meeting shall be held on the first Monday 
in each December, when there shall be elected a 
president, two vice-presidents, a secretary-treasurer 
and not less than seven directors, and an auditor; a 
second auditor to be appointed by the president then 
elected. 

8. Meetings of officers shall be held pursuant to ad¬ 
journment, or called by written notice of the presi¬ 
dent, or in his absence of the senior vice-president, 
at least ten days before the day appointed, and at 
any meeting five shall be a quorum. 








* 

. 

< 

. 

. 

* e ' 



t - 

2 






, • 












, 











. 


287 


9. The officers and directors shall prepare a detailed 
report of the proceedings of the association for the 
year for presentation at the annual meeting, to¬ 
gether with such remarks upon the agriculture of the 
district as the directors are able to offer* 

10. There shall also be presented at the annual meeting 

a detailed statement of the receipts and expenditures 
for the year. 

11. These statements and reports shall be entered in the 
society’s journal and signed by the president or 
vice-president, and a copy shall be sent to the lieu¬ 
tenant -governor. 

12. The officers and directors shall answer such 
questions touching agriculture as the lieutenant- 
governor may require. 

13. When a society has been organized under the ordinance 
the lieutenant-governor-in-council may grant to it, 
out of the funds of the territories, a sum not ex¬ 
ceeding the amount subscribed by the society. 

14. Each society formed under the ordinance shall be a 
corporation, with a corporate seal, under the name of 

the Agricultural Society of __, and shall 

have power to acquire and possess real estate and to 
dispose of the same for all the purposes of the said 
society. n 



* 








. 


. • 

. . ■ - . ’ 








■ - • - / . -• - ■ - • ; : 

. 




■ 




... v ' ' ‘ ..■. ' . . ‘ •: ■ v ' . r 












































288 


APPENDIX D 


On June 1, 1907, The Saturday News published the 
following detailed and highly informative reply to The Nor’- 
West Farmer concerning the failure of the Alberta Farmers’ 
Association and the Society of Equity to amalgamate at La- 
combe : 

THE POSITION OF THE A. F. A. DEFENDED AGAINST CER¬ 
TAIN ATTACKS. 

To the current number of the Nor’-West Farmer, Mr* 
Stevens, the secretary of the Alberta Farmers’ As¬ 
sociation, presents a comprehensive defence of the 
course of that body in reply to certain attacks that 
have been made upon it, which should be carefully read 
by everyone having the interests of Albertan agri¬ 
culture at heart. It presents a complete review of 
the history of agricultural organization in the pro¬ 
vince. The letter in full is as follows: 

Several weeks ago I noted an article in the Nor’- 
West Farmer signed by G. Boerma, of North Battleford, 
in which that gentleman criticized D. W. Warner, ex¬ 
president of the A. F. A., on account of his attitude 
at Lacombe on the question of amalgamating the two 
farmers’ organizations operating in Alberta. 

As Mr. Boerma has evidently over-looked certain 
important facts, is apparently misinformed as to 
others, and has drawn rather large conclusions from 
still other facts, I take the liberty of making a few 
comments on the question which he has raised. 

Mr. Boerma’s first criticism of Mr. Warner is that 
during the proceedings at the Lacombe convention he 
showed himself to be narrow and provincial. On this 
point I wish to say that on May 9th, 1906, at a con¬ 
vention of the A. F. A. held in Calgary, a Committee 
was appointed with instructions to endeavor to meet a 
similar committee of the Society of Equity ’with a 
view to arranging a basis for an amalgamation and the 
formation of an all Canadian and provincial organiza¬ 
tion’. 

In accordance with these instructions a joint 
meeting of representatives from both organizations 
was held in Edmonton, August 14th, and arrangements 





















, 

- 

: . .. * * 








. 






i 




* 





- 












. 
















289 


were made for the Lacombe convention, at which place 
the present president of the Society of Equity moved 
that the proposition of the Alberta Farmers* Associa¬ 
tion to confine organization within the province be 
accepted, and stated that he did not see how they 
could do otherwise as the convention had been called 
for that very thing. Now, as Mr. Warner and the other 
delegates of the A. F. A. had authority only to sup¬ 
port the proposal for an all Canadian and provincial 
organization, and as we have the opinion of the 
president of the S. of E. that the convention had 
been called for that purpose, we do not see in what 
way Mr. Warner is open to criticism for shaping his 
conduct in accordance with his instructions and with 
the purpose for which they had met. 

Mr. Boerma*s next contention is that Mr. Warner is 
inconsistent in his objection to organizing in oppo¬ 
sition to an association already in existence, because 
the Alberta Farmers* Association was organized in op¬ 
position to the Society of Equity, which was already 
in existence. In order to present this matter clearly 
I am forced to treat it at considerable length. When 
the farmers of the Strathcona district decided to or¬ 
ganize, there were in existence in the North-West 
Territories, of which Alberta formed a part, branches 
of the American Society of Equity and of the Terri¬ 
torial Grain Growers* Association. The Grain Growers 
were strong in the then territory of Assiniboia, and 
had begun to organize in Alberta; the American Society 
of Equity had some three or four branches on the north 
side of the Saskatchewan river. 

When these Strathcona farmers met to organize, re¬ 
presentatives of both the S. of E. and of the G. G. A. 
were present and were called upon to explain the pur¬ 
poses and claims of their respective associations. Two 
evenings were spent in discussion and not until a third 
meeting had been called was the matter finally decided 
and an organization effected. During the discussion on 
this question the following arguments were brought out 
against the Equity plan as applied to Alberta con¬ 
ditions : 

The Equity plan is for the farmers to set a minimum 
price on their products and hold till they get it. 

It was argued that this is not applicable to a new 
country like Alberta because few farmers are able fi¬ 
nancially to hold their grain indefinitely. Few have a 
borrowing power sufficient for such a movement, few 
have granaries fit to hold grain after the winter 
months, and few settlements have roads that can be re¬ 
lied upon at all times for marketing grain extensively. 




. 


- 






290 


It was admitted that the scheme might apply in the 
United States to crops of which that country is the 
principal producer, such as corn, tobacco, and cotton, 
also to those crops of which she consumes more than 
she produces, such as sugar, but in such crops as 
nearly the whole world produces largely, such as 
wheat, she will never accomplish much until she ceases 
to figure as an exporting nation, and then only on 
condition that her present tariff be retained. 

As wheat is the principal export cereal of Western 
Canada and is destined to become that of Alberta also, 
it was held that what is needed here is an organiza¬ 
tion that will assist the farmers in getting their 
crops on the world’s markets at the least possible ex¬ 
pense; an organization that will interest itself in 
preventing excessive elevator charges, securing proper 
weights and reasonable rates of transportation, re¬ 
moving artificial barriers, the effect of which is to 
multiply charges, and securing conveniences which will 
reduce the expense of shipping and storing grain, and 
disposing of livestock. Economical marketing, it was 
held, would be more beneficial than controlled 
marketing. These are the arguments that were brought 
out by those farmers who, two years ago, founded the 
Strathcona branch of the Territorial Grain Growers’ 
Association, of which Mr. Warner was elected presi¬ 
dent; and in the light of the two years* experience it 
may not be out of place to note to what extent these 
arguments were correct. 

We find that as the S. of E. became established in 
the cotton, tobacco, and corn belts it succeeded in 
securing to the farmers there a fair share of the 
prosperity existing in that country and the minimum 
prices were often approached and sometimes realized; 
but in the wheat belt the prices of Liverpool ruled 
just as they did where the Society did not exist. In 
1904 there came a failure in the wheat crop of the 
United States to the extent that for a twelvemonth it 
practically took that country out of the list of wheat 
exporting nations, and with the aid of a duty of 25# 
per bu., the dollar mark was reached* In the following 
year a normal crop was harvested and the wheat markets 
of the United States were forced into harmony with 
those of the rest of the world. 

The following spring the celebrated ’farmers* strike’ 
was declared, at the close of which the president of 
the American Society of Equity boasted that the strike 
had succeeded at every point, excepting on wheat, and 
he ascribed the failure on that point to the fact that 
his mind was so much occupied with other lines that be¬ 
fore he knew it an enormous ’visible’ had piled up, so 
that further resistance in that direction became use¬ 
less. 


. 






■ 














' 

- 

, 

* 

, ' 






■ 






: 

. 




















t 

. 


























• 

























































































2 

. 




























. 































291 


For tke present year a new and bolder programme is 
announced. It calls fbr tbe pledging or pooling of the 
wheat crop from a specified number of acres in the 
wheat producing states, which, if given, will again 
practically take the United States out of the list of 
wheat exporting countries. If the amount of grain 
asked for is pledged, the dollar mark may again be 
reached in the United States, and the move will be 
heralded as a great success, but it is worth remarking 
that the success will come by bringing about arti¬ 
ficially the very condition that the Strathcona 
farmers said would have to exist before dollar wheat 
could be maintained even in the United States. 

But how is it with the Society of Equity in Canada? 

We hear less about controlled marketing as applied to 
wheat and oats than we did a year ago, but the press 
is being filled with large promises of elevators and 
flouring mills, which are to handle the farmers’ grain 
at cost. Economical marketing in these crops is taking 
the place of controlled marketing just as the farmers 
of the Strathcona district two years ago said it ought 
to do. 

During the interval in which the Strathcona farmers 
were discussing the organization question, those of 
Clover Bar, ten miles east of Strathcona, attracted by 
the Equity plan, followed the example of their neigh¬ 
bors on the north side of the Saskatchewan, and or¬ 
ganized under that association. But their geographical 
position brought them into frequent contact with the 
Strathcona Grain Growers, and the fact that several of 
their members were members of the Strathcona body also, 
naturally led them to make numerous comparisons between 
the methods and purposes of the two organizations. They 
observed that practically all of the American settlers 
in the district identified themselves with their local 
society, while about one half of those of British birth 
remained aloof. 

Only in those markets that were being supplied chief¬ 
ly by the farmers of Alberta, such^the local and British 
Columbia markets for hay, oats and fresh pork, could the 
Equity principle be applied, but as the producing power 
of Alberta was developing faster than the consuming 
power of British Columbia, it would be but a short time 
before our oats, as well as our wheat, would have to go 
upon the world’s market and be sold according to the 
prices ruling there. It was therefore evident that an 
association working along the lines of the Grain Growers’ 
Association would be of more assistance in the marketing 
of Alberta’s staple products than would the withholding 
policy of the American Society of Equity. 

The latter society observed that when they appeared 




. 




























. 


* 

* 

* 

. 

« 

. . 






. 


. 



292 


before any municipal body and asked fbr favors and 
concessions, they were reminded that theirs was a 
foreign organization. At the time of the inauguration 
of the province, when they, with the other branches 
of the society, demanded the place of honor in the 
procession, they obtained it only after considerable 
difficulty, and then only at the last moment, when 
they appeared with their name changed to ’Farmers* 
Society of Equity’, instead of ’American Society of 
Equity’. 

Those American farmers who had settled in Glover 
Bar came to Alberta with a view to making it their 
home and to becoming Canadian citizens, and they saw 
that they were being placed in an unfavorable light 
before the public, and that their Canadian fellow- 
members were growing weary of being placed in a simi¬ 
lar light. When it was proposed that inasmuch as the 
Territorial Grain Growers’ Association was about to 
reorganize and form a provincial body for Sas¬ 
katchewan, those of Alberta would have to do likewise, 
these men felt that as the Society of Equity as then 
constituted was not fully adapted to conditions 
existing here, the time was ripe to form a provincial 
association which should combine the principle of con¬ 
trolled marketing on those products which are consumed 
locally and in British Columbia with that of economi¬ 
cal marketing on those which go upon the markets of 
the world; an association that might take its place 
alongside other organized bodies of Alberta and ex¬ 
press its views on public affairs without first having 
its members questioned as to the extent to which these 
views had been moulded by outside influences, and they 
gladly assented to the proposition. 

Accordingly a draft of a constitution was made and 
a special committee appointed in September, 1905, to 
deliver and explain it to the secretary of the execu¬ 
tive board of the American Society of Equity and to 
the Strathcona branch of the Grain Growers’ Associa¬ 
tion. 

The Grain Growers took the matter up at their regu¬ 
lar monthly meeting in October and accepted the invi¬ 
tation. The Society of Equity took it up at their 

annual meeting in November. One delegation reported 
that it had been instructed to vote in favor of amal¬ 
gamation; the remainder appeared to have been pledged 
to support a plan which had been sprung in the mean¬ 
time, to reorganize the Society so that instead of 
being an integral part of the American Society, they 
would,in the future, be known as the Canadian branch 
of that body. 

A second meeting was called for December at which 

the delegates stood as before, and the opinion ex- 


t 

« 

; 

; 




. 


- 

' 










. 
















- 

. 











pressed being largely against the proposed amalgama¬ 
tion, the chief organizer of the Equity Society re¬ 
quested that the proposition be withdrawn. This was 
no sooner done than a resolution was introduced by an 
Equity delegate asking that the Grain Growers amalga¬ 
mate with the Society of Equity. Again the chief or¬ 
ganizer claimed the floor and requested that that re¬ 
solution also be withdrawn. This was done and the 
Clover Bar Equity and Strathcona Grain Growers* dele¬ 
gates withdrew and joined hands to form the Alberta 
Farmers’ Association, upon the plan which had been 
outlined, while the remaining Equity delegates pro¬ 
ceeded to re-organize and form the Canadian branch of 
the American Society of Equity. 

Just what difference the new arrangement made in 
the connection between the Canadian and American 
branches we never clearly understood, and the prime 
movers in it seemed to be as much at sea as ourselves. 
The head of the delegation sent to appear before the 
tariff commission ten days later, upon being 
questioned on that point, declared that all con¬ 
nection had been severed; while the official corres¬ 
pondent in his account of the attempt at amalgamation, 
which appeared in their official organ three months 
later, said: ’The great reason why we did not amalga¬ 
mate is because we did not want to sever our con¬ 
nection with our headquarters at Indianopolis’. Which 
statement is correct we will not venture to say; it is 
simply a case of ’you pays your money and you takes 
your choice’. 

During the discussion that took place on the 
question of amalgamation, one of the Clover Bar dele¬ 
gates stated that the farmers of that settlement, both 
American and British born, had come to the conclusion 
that what the farmers of Alberta need is an organiza¬ 
tion that will not repel any nationality, an organiza¬ 
tion under which farmers of all nationalities may meet 
without danger of arousing national prejudice or pre¬ 
ference. This idea was scouted by a large number of the 
Equity delegates present and the head organizer of that 
body, when speaking on the question of reluctance on 
the part of British born subjects to joining an Ameri¬ 
can organization, stated that in all his travels he had 
never once heard such a thing mentioned, but three 
months after the formation of the Canadian branch of 
the A. S. of E., the secretary of that body was filling 
the agricultural press of Western Canada with articles 
headed ’The Canadian Society of Equity’, while as late 
as May the offic ial correspondent, writing in the of¬ 
ficial organ, wrote under the caption of ’American 
Society of Equity, Department of Canada’. In June a 
convention was held in High River, after which date all 
public news was given out under the name of the 
Canadian Society of Equity and the Canadian column in 










» 








' 

















• 







. 


















. 





















■ 











1 { ;v 




















■ 

- 


' 














. 


. 
























■ 





294 


the official organ at Indianopolis ceased and thus, 
after seven months of wobbling, the Society of Equity 
in Canada did in June what its former members in 
Clover Bar endeavored to persuade it to do. 

From these facts, every one of which we are pre¬ 
pared to substantiate, it is apparent that the Al¬ 
berta Farmers’ Association is the successor of the 
Clover Bar branch of the American Society of Equity 
and the Strathcona branch of the Territorial Grain 
Growers’ Association; that both of these were or¬ 
ganized when both had an open field, and neither any 
prior rights, and that the A. F. A. was the result of 
an honest effort to unite all the farmers of Alberta 
into one body in practically the form in which the Al¬ 
berta Farmers’ Association now exists and which the 
Society of Equity is by degrees taking on. 

But aside from these facts we wish to lay down the 
proposition that the presiding officer of a Canadian 
organization may decline to organize in opposition to 
another organization operating along similar lines and 
not be guilty of inconsistency, even though the as¬ 
sociation over which he presided was organized in op¬ 
position to a foreign organization operating along 
different lines. 

Mr. Boerma makes several contemptuous references to 
Mr. Warner as a ’dumper’ and intimates that he is de¬ 
void of judgment in the marketing of his crops. His 
logic seems to be that whereas Mr. Warner favors a 
provincial organization, therefore he sells his crop 
as soon as he threshes regardless of price. Con¬ 
cerning Mr. Warner’s business capacity I have but to 
say that he started life at the age of twenty-one with 
nothing; he is now under fifty years of age, he owns 
500 acres of well improved land within four miles of 
the heart of Edmonton, he has an excellent outfit of 
horses and one of the best herds of cattle in his 
settlement. He has all last year’s and the greater 
portion of the previous year’s crop still in his 
granary. He obtained his wealth not by inheritance, 
speculation, nor by trading with his neighbor, but 
through his judgment in disposing of them. And while 
we have no intention of prescribing rules of conduct 
for others, we make it a rule" ourselves when we meet 
men of that calibre to refrain from offering any sug¬ 
gestions regarding business as applied to farming. 

As harvest time approached a year ago the press of 
Alberta had joined in one grand chorus about bumper 
crops and as the buyers were providing interludes 
about low prices, Mr. Warner was appointed by the pro¬ 
vincial government as a commissioner to go to British 
Columbia to extend the markets for Alberta farm pro¬ 
ducts. The amount of information which he gathered. 


t 




















295 


and the clearness and the conciseness of his report 
were a surprise to the government and his warmest 
friends. The most important feature of his report was 
the manner in which he set forth the need of a ter¬ 
minal elevator at the Pacific coast. Mr. Dobbie, of 
the Pincher Creek branch, was the first to call at¬ 
tention to the need of such an institution and a re¬ 
solution was adopted by the convention of the A. F. A. 
in February, 1906, asking the Dominion Government to 
look into the matter. In the following June Mr. J. 
Fletcher was sent by the Association to testify before 
the Committee on Agriculture and Colonization, and was 
especially instructed by the executive to call at¬ 
tention to that question. But to Mr. Warner was given 
the privilege of studying the matter at close range, 
and his report shows that it was studied carefully and 
well. When the Royal Grain Commission visited Edmonton 
he repeated his argument, and although that body, be¬ 
cause of shortness of time, had almost decided not to 
go further west than Alberta, he, together with other 
members of the A. F. A., who spoke on the subject, 
were able to persuade them to continue their work to 
the coast, and in their report they recommended almost 
verbatim what Mr. Warner asked for. 

To-day the press of Vancouver is lamenting the want 
of a large storage elevator in which Alberta’s crop of 
hard spring and winter wheat might have been stored 
instead of being forced eastward, and it is calling 
attention to the loss which that city and the farmers 
of Alberta sustain because of her inability to fill 
the large orders for hard wheat which are now coming 
from the Orient, and which are directed to other 
countries. 

Mr. Warner and the other leaders of the Alberta 
Farmers’ Association may not possess that largeness of 
understanding which is doubtless necessary to compre¬ 
hend all the beauties of the Equity plan, but they 
have a way of seeing and doing a few commonplace 
things which we trust are sufficiently numerous and of 
sufficient importance to entitle them to an existence 
for a while longer, and we will have to ask our friend, 
Mr. Boerma, to be charitable with them in case they 
should fail to act upon his modest injunction to unite 
with the Canadian Society of Equity and adopt con¬ 
trolled marketing as their motto—especially since the 
leaders of that body are relying much less on it to¬ 
day than they did when the doctrine was still new to 
them. 


















J 





* » . 

t 1 

, 




































































c 























































































