For Reference 


OT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 










@X JIBBW 

wmiBSitaais 

attminsis 



j 





' 


3 * 







UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 
(DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL ECONOMY) 

We, the undersigned, hereby certify 
that we have read the within thesis en¬ 
titled “Production and Marketing of Beef 
Cattle from the Short G-rass Plains Area 
of Canada 11 submitted by F. Albert Rudd, 
B.A., LL.B., in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of 
Arts • 


^. ql • 



Edmonton, Alberta, 




























' 




































UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 
(DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL ECONOMY) 


A THESIS 

PRODUCTION AND MARKETING- OF BEEF 
CATTLE FROM THE SHORT GRASS PLAINS 
AREA OF CANADA 

Submitted in partial fulfilment of 
the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts 

- By - 

F. .Albert Rudd, B.A., LL.B. 


Lethbridge, Alberta 


April, 1 





















































CONTENTS, 


A e 3 o 

10 3 ^ 


Chapter Page 

I The Economic Importance of the Short 

Grass Plains. 1 

II Utilization of the Range Area,Part 1 29 

II Utilization of the Range Area,Part 2 62 

III Ranch Organization and Cost of Pro¬ 
duction, Part 1. 87 

III Ranch Organization and Cost of Pro¬ 
duction, Part 2 . 122 

IY Grading............................. 1 51 

Y Transportation.,.... 1 79 

YI The Export Market.. 228 

YII The Domestic Market................. 254 

YIII Particular Legislation Affecting the 

Live Stock Industry... 

IX Conclusion,... 

APPENDICES 


A The Constitutional Relationship of the 
Federal and Provincial Governments Af¬ 
fecting the Beef Cattle Industry.. 286 

B List of Persons and Organizations Inter¬ 


viewed in the Course of this Survey.... 287 
C List of Persons and. Organizations from 

Whom Written Submissions were Received 288 
D Bibliography.... 289 














Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/rudd1935 


PRODUCTION AND MARKETING OF BEEF CATTLE 

■ 

FROM THE 

SHORT GRASS PLAINS AREA OF CANADA. 

CHAPTER I 

THE ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE OF THE SHORT GRASS PLAINS 

The status of the beef cattle industry is one of the 
outstanding problems of Canadian agriculture to-day. When 
this industry is localized and analysed in relation to the 
various cattle producing areas the complexity of the pro¬ 
blem becomes apparent. This is particularly and undeniably 
true of the area now under consideration where ranching 
only, on a large scale, with heavy capital investment is 
practised and where no subsidiary industry is conducted 
for additional security. 

It is customary to consider the beef cattle industry 
in Canada generally as a mere adjunct of agriculture and 
not as a separate pastoral or ranching industry. Because 
of this it is difficult to procure statistical or other 
information which pertains alone to the industry of range 
production of beef cattle. In many instances requisite 
information is entirely lacking and unobtainable. General 
agricultural statistics are a matter of record but spec¬ 
ific reliable and official information on the ranching 
phase in itself is a ’rara avis 1 . Government agricultural 
records in Canada - Provincial and Federal - could in 











































■ 















- 2 - 


many instances be made of more practical value by way of 
prompt application if sufficiently regimented to isolate 
the factors appertaining to the cattle ranching industry. 
It is unfair to say this industry is a mere 'adjunct* of 
agriculture and it is definitely not true of Western Can¬ 
ada. Here it is a most vital part of prosperity generally 
and particularly so in the pure ranching area which is 
here about to be reviewed. Owing to the paucity of in¬ 
formation on a particular but most vital phase of Canad¬ 
ian agriculture it is often most difficult to draw com¬ 
parisons but it affords some reason at least for what may 
seem to be undue reference herein to the records and in¬ 
formation being compiled by the Dominion Government Range 
Experiment Station at Manyberries, Alberta. This institu¬ 
tion is unique in Canada in so far as it is concerned 




with the practical solution to the problems affecting the 
cattle ranching industry of Western Canada. The estab¬ 
lishment of this Station in 1926 was a wise step with far 
reaching significance. Its site now comprising 28 sections 
or a total of 17,920 acres in the centre of the Short 
Grass Plains Area was wisely chosen and the policy it has 
followed most deservedly commendable. The practical con¬ 
tributions rendered, and being rendered, by those officials 
who conduct this Station and guide its far seeing policy 

are of inestimable value. This, it is hoped, will be 
made abundantly clear in the course of this survey. 


















































































It is obviously impossible to locate precisely the 
boundaries of a geographical area such as that of the 
Short Grass Plains, They can be outlined with sufficient 
accuracy however for all practical purposes. The Western 
Plains area which was set apart for grazing in the recom¬ 
mendations of the Federal Government Investigating Com¬ 
mission in 191 and upon which the Grazing Regulations 
of 1922 were based, was outlined briefly as follows^ 
Starting at Field and running straight East through Drum- 
heller to a point approximately South West of Saskatoon 
1 07 0 West longitude, thence South East to a point North 
West of Moose Jaw 1 06° West longitude, thence straight 
South to a point South West of Moose Jaw, then South East 
to 49° latitude, at 1 04° West longitude, following the 
International Boundary, thence West to 114° West J-ongitude f 
thence North West to the Crow’s Nest Pass and to Field. (1 ) 
The outline as given above must be somewhat modified - 
particularly in its Western extremity - to properly re¬ 
present the boundaries of the Short Grass Plains. The 
mountain and foot hill section not being geographically 
a plains area, must be excluded from the area covered by 
this present survey, as cattle conditions are not iden¬ 
tical in the two areas. The modified Western boundary 
would run approximately from the International Boundary 

South of Cardston through Cardston to Lethbridge, thence 

(1 ) Report of Ranching and Grazing Investigation Commis¬ 

sion, 1913* Department of the Interior, Ottawa. 












due North to the point of intersection of the Red Deer 
River in Township 30 with the North boundary of the area 
as before defined* A map of the area is appended. (1 ) 

The area thus segregated would comprise approximately 
8,000,000 acres in the Short Grass Plains Dry Area proper 
or approximately 10,000,000 acres if the foot hills sec¬ 
tion in the West was included in the grazing area. Stat¬ 
istics of the number, character and size of ranches in 
this area are exceedingly difficult to obtain if in fact 
accurate records of such are kept. Such information cover 
ing the whole area could not be obtained for the purpose 
of this study. 

Considered in relation to Canada as a whole this area 
has one outstanding weakness in its long distance inland 
from the Atlantic ports. It is further handicapped by a 
long ocean haul to the United Kingdom market. This has 
created for the western stockman one of his major problems 
that of transportation cost. On the basis of 1933 trans¬ 
portation rates one government authority has said - “Costs 
of shipping cattle from western Canada to Great Britain 
are heavy. The expense of transportation, handling and 
selling often totals 30 per cent of the gross returns for 
the cattle. When cattle of slightly inferior quality or 

finish are shipped the total costs are often considerably 

(1) Compiled by L.B. Thomson. 













































































- 5 - 

more than 50 per cent of the gross’ 1 . (1 ) These figures 
are verified by the Western Stock Growers 1 Association. 

The rancher regards himself as the aggrieved party when 
as a producer he must pay high freight rates on his cattle 
east to the ocean shipping point or to eastern interior 
markets and as a consumer must pay freight west on manuf¬ 
actured consumption goods. This situation is aggravated 
in effect when the ocean rate is added in export shipments. 
This rate even on the basis of $12 set in 1 921 is regarded 
as high in comparison with present cattle prices on the 
United Kingdom market. The rate has recently been raised 
to $15 in the face of falling cattle prices. It is the 
adverse aspect of the economic principle that the source 
of raw material should be close to the consuming market. 

On the other hand due to the lack of manufacturing in the 
West the cattle producer along with the producer of many 
other primary products must be prepared to import his man¬ 
ufactures over a considerable distance. He is not the 
only producer who may have cause to complain in this res¬ 
pect. It must also be remembered that the transcontinental 
railways give good service, though it is not beyond im¬ 
provement. Dual traffic of raw products East and manuf¬ 
actures West is a natural result of Canada’s development. 
Such complementary traffic is generally true of a young 

country and from the social point of view is even desirable 

(1 ) Hon.Geo.Hoadley - ’’The Live Stock Industry.” Minutes 

of Evidence before the Stevens Commission of the House of 
Commons, Ottawa, April 26th, 1934, p. 26. 

























































- 6 - 


as it affords a balance in the national economy that 
might otherwise be lacking* The strain may be somewhat 
relieved by use of the Hudson Bay Route but as yet this 
is not a commercial outlet of importance for Canadian 
cattle. 

Considered in the light of relationship to the United 
States market the Short Grass Plains Area is not so un¬ 
fortunately situated. If that market was again open to 
Canada for its feeder cattle the producing area under re¬ 
view would be in a singularly fortunate position. The 
American market is regarded by the western Canada stock- 
man as his natural market. Close proximity to large 
centres of population is essential to economic and cheap 
production of beef and such would be provided in the great 
cities of Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Spokane, and 
others if the tariff embargo on Canadian cattle was re¬ 
moved. An outlet also might then more easily be found 
for periodical surplus such as that which existed on our 
market inventory in 1934 and also for the more important 
increment which has been creating an accumulating surplus 
over a period of years past. An emergency surplus of some 
123,000 head in western Canada which occurred in 1934 due 
to drought in part of the range area consisted mainly of 
poor grade stock which had to be disposed of as boneless 
meat and tankage. Government assistance carried with it 
a restriction that tankage could not be sold in the United 














































n 

I 


Kingdom nor could the boneless meat be consumed in either 
Canada or the United Kingdom• Had a market for this class 
of product been available in the United States it would 
have been of considerable value at this time* Some auth¬ 
ority is of opinion it would have been better to have des¬ 
troyed this class of product than have attempted to find 
a market for it. (1 ) In the light of so much poverty and 
actual food shortage in parts of the world such a proced¬ 
ure would seem difficult to justify. The Short Grass 
Plains Area of Canada merges in the south into the North¬ 
ern Great Plains Area of the United States comprising 
Montana - east of the Rocky Mountains - the northeastern 
quarter of Wyoming and North and South Dakota lying west 
of the 1 00th meridian, except a small area in North-Cen¬ 
tral North Dakota. This area comprises a total of approx¬ 
imately 1^2,000,000 acres of which 17 , 0 C 0,000 acres are 
devoted to crops - including hays, cereal and forage 
crops,(2) The range acreage of this area is therefore 
in the neighborhood of 133 , 000,000 acres. With the ad¬ 
dition of the Canadian area there is a total of some 
143,000,000 acres of range land in this section of North 

America. This international zone in itself is a sizeable 

(1 ) W.C. McKenzie. 

(2) Wilson, Wilcox, KLemmedson and Parr - "A ^>tudy of 
Ranch Organization and Methods of Range-Cattie Pro¬ 
duction in the Northern Great Plains Region'*. United 
States Department of Agriculture, Technical Bulletin 
No. 43, p. 3» March 1?28. 









With the 


- 8 - 

and natural inter-trading area in heef cattle, 
total consuming population of the two contiguous nationals 
standing in the ratio of approximately 13:1 it would ap¬ 
pear that there is here a great potential market for Can¬ 
adian range heef cattle if and when that market can he 
again opened to us. There are hut weak grounds for optim¬ 
ism in this respect at the present time. 

In an analysis of the productive aspects of the Can¬ 
adian Short Grass Plains Area attention must he given to 
four factors, namely - topography, soil, climate and for¬ 
age cover. The economic value of any range area for pro¬ 
duction rests fundamentally on these features. The area 
under review is especially well endowed hy nature in these 
fundamentals. 

This range area is typically prairie land suitable 
and fitted hy nature only for hona fide ranching purposes. 
It is not and never will he a farming area. Attempts have 
been made in the past to break up this land to produce 
wheat and other cereals. Such attempts have always ended 
in disaster to the individual and in destruction of valu¬ 
able native range surface. The area in many places is 
strewn to-day with the wreckage of deserted farms and 
even drifting soil. It is uneconomical and plainly un¬ 
reasonable to he T wheat-minded 1 in what is only meant hy 
nature to he a purely ranching area. Short grass range 
browsing surface with an average annual precipitation of 













_ o „ 

13 inches can never be converted into fields of golden 
grain shoulder-high! The extreme southeastern section of 
the area South west of Weyburn has been thus broken up 
and stands to-day as silent witness of the folly of at¬ 
tempting to convert pure range land to a farming basis. 

It is to-day a virtual desert after 4 years of drought 
and will take millions of dollars to re-habilitate as range 
land, if indeed this can ever be accomplished! This fact 
was apparent to the Federal Government investigation com¬ 
mission in 1913 when they admitted homesteading with dis¬ 
aster had taken place and suggested the victim be allowed 
to sell his improvements to a range lessee and be given 
re-entry right outside of the restricted range area and 
the lessee to have the right of lease over the abandoned 
homestead.(1 ) The Tilley East Area north of Medicine Hat 
thus misappropriated as farming land has cost Canada 
millions of dollars besides the tragedies to the people 
thus deluded. It is said that the range areas of Sask¬ 
atchewan alone wrongfully used for farming purposes would 
cost $40,0t0,000 to re-habilitate in 1934! In spite of 
these disasters however approximately to 1 Ofo of the 
whole Short Grass Plains Area is to-day under farm condi¬ 
tions near the traversing railway lines. 

The topography generally is that of large sections 

of le vel land separated by gently roll in? areas or by 

(1) Report of Ranching and Grazing Investigation Commis- 

sion,1 91 3»Sec.1 3 » Department of the Interior, Ottawa. 





















































1 u - 


coulees and ravines. Such features provide ideal range 
surface as cattle of the various types - bulls, cows, 
calves, heifers and steers can forage with the minimum 
loss of energy in range movement, as a result heavier 
bulls can be used on the plains than in the foot hills 
or mountain area and foot trouble is minimized. Such 
topography also provides ample shelter especially where, 
as in the Short Grass Plains, the winter is open and 
grazing is possible throughout the year. Although winters 
are at times severe and considerable snow coverage occurs 
and encrustation, the severity is usually of short dura¬ 
tion and is further alleviated in the southern Alberta 
area by the warm Chinook winds entering the plains from 
the Crow T s Nest Pass. Unimpeaded winds further aid in 
maintaining minimum snow coverage. One of the most vital 
economic aspects of the topography of this area has been 
the practicability of utilizing range surface slopes to 
provide ample water supply by trapping surface run-off 
moisture in depression reservoirs. This has to date 
proved a satisfactory and most economical method of pro¬ 
viding a natural water supply. The nature of range top¬ 
ography together with that of sub-surface soil strata also 
makes possible the development of artesian wells. If and 
when funds are available, the area can obviously be im¬ 
proved by the installation of wind mill machinery. This 
































■ 

















- 11 


is a more expensive method of providing water supply how¬ 
ever and would not as recognized practice be feasible under 
present price levels. 



The Cypress Hills section in Alberta and Sask¬ 
atchewan in the centre ot the Short Grass 
Plains Area provides a typical view of range 
land. (1) 

Soil and climate are the vital factors affecting for¬ 
age cover. The soil produces a highly nutritious forage 
under normal climatic conditions in this region. "Most 
of the soils of the Short Grass Area, although somewhat 
lacking in nitrogen and phosphorus, are sufficiently fer¬ 
tile to produce a fair growth of vegetation in years of 
adequate rainfall. The surface soil on the uplands is 
mostly a very fine sandy loam mixed with varying amounts 

O-f—silt.._ A definite "hardpan" layer occurs at a depth 

(1) Reproduced by permission of the Dominion Range Station. 
















12 - 


varying from six inches to two feet. This layer repres¬ 
ents the depth to which Moisture usually penetrates. On 
the flats the soil is mostly a gumbo clay, which is lower 
in organic matter but usually higher in moisture content 
than the upland soils".(1) There is a high alkaline 
content in certain sections while others are characterised 
by shallow depressions known as ’burn-outs’. These may 
vary in size from mere spots to roughly circular areas 
50 feet in diameter. They exhibit a marked deficiency 
in plant nutrients and have little or no humus content. 
Available forage surface is still further limited by the 
’badlands 1 or heavily eroded areas in the coulee sections. 
Here exposed hard clay surface devoid of vegetation and 
impervious to moisture serves as a watershed to the 
coulee floor. The total acreage however thus withdrawn 
from range pasture is small, comprising approximately 8 
of the total Short Grass Plains Area. 

The climate of this area is typical of what might be 
called a f dry belt’. Meteorological records kept at Med¬ 
icine Hat - a section typical of the whole area - show 
over a period of 30 years from 1 900 - 1 930 an average an¬ 
nual precipitation of 11.33 inches, and over a total of 
30 years from 1 884 - 1 933 an average of 12.87 inches. 
Average precipitation at the Dominion Range Station sit¬ 
uated in Township 2 , Range 4 , West of the Fourth Mer¬ 
idian. for a period of 8 years from 1928 - 1934 inclusive 
(1 ) E.W.Tisdale - "Our Native Pasture Plants - Their 

Characteristics and Distribution", p. 1 







- 13 - 

was 11 .>2 inches. Total or average annual rainfall how¬ 
ever is not the most important factor. (1) High summer 
temperatures together with frequent warm winds create a 
low humidity and a high rate of evaporation hy experiment 
shown to he three times as high as the average rainfall. 
Seasonal variation must also he taken into consideration. 

A most favourable feature of precipitation in this plains 
area is the high proportion of rainfall in the months of 
April, May and June. Out of the 11.35 inches given above 
as the annual reainfall for Medicine Hat over a 30 year 
period 4.75 inches fell during these three months or over 
409& of the precipitation occurred during 23 fo of the year, 
luring this period of the year also temperatures have 
not reached a maximum and evaporation is less which per¬ 
mits moderately favourable conditions for the growing 
period of vegetation.(2) A combination of such factors 
produces in this area a type of vegetation highly drought 
resistant but fortunately at the s-dme time a type of grass 
coverage highly nutritive in protein and other mineral 
elements upon which range cattle can be raised of a qual¬ 
ity second to none in the world to-day. 

To correctly estimate the economic value of any 
range area an analysis of its forage cover must be made. 

The productive value of forage cover - including water 

(1) L.B. Thomson. 

(2) E.W.Tisdale - op. cit. p. 1 . 































. 






























14 - 


supply - is the vital factor in any range area. Since 
the inception of the Dominion Range Station in 1 926 de¬ 
tailed studies have "been conducted on the native vegeta¬ 
tion. This work commencing in the spring of 1 927 has been 
consistently and scientifically carried out not principally 
for the purpose of botanical research but rather from the 
angle of practical economies in order to fixate the pro¬ 
ductive power of the range' forage by determining its 
nutritive value for the feeding of livestock. Samples of 
vegetative cover have been consistently collected in all 
stages of growth, from various sections of the area and 
at different seasons of the year. These have been chemic¬ 
ally analysed by the Division of Chemistry of the Central 
Experimental Farm, Ottawa, and the results have been tab¬ 
ulated in their relation to feeding value. 

The vegetative cover of the plains area is chiefly 
composed of low-growing plants w r ith well developed root 
systems and small leaf surfaces. The family of grasses 
with shallow but extensive fibrous root systems are easily 
adaptable to drought conditions and therefore make up the 
bulk of the vegetation. 

The grasses may generally be said to fall into two 
main divisions based on their adaptation to seasonal rain¬ 
fall. The first group is one of early and q.uick growing 
varieties which may flower or produce seed before June 
and cure on the stalk by the middle of August. It is this 

















I 








■ 


. 

- ; 











- 15 - 

group which provides the succulent and nutritive spring 
and summer pasture on the plains. The second group con¬ 
sists of later maturing varieties which are very hardy 
and may lie dormant during severe drought and revive 
again under precipitation. They do not produce seed in 
drought periods. The grasses generally are perennial 
from the root and crown. 

Plants other than true grasses native to the plains 
area consist chiefly of species with Small leaf surfaces, 
fibrous or deep tap root systems and woody stems. Some 
have succulent stems such as Cactus. All such plants are 
perennial - some from the root and crown only, others from 
all or part of the stem as well. 

Such an analysis however must be supplemented by a 
knowledge of the volume of the various species present 
in the vegetative cover and the specific values of each 
as range forage. Such can only be obtained by a close 
scientific analysis of the range vegetative surface and 
by a chemical analysis of the plant species. The volume 
and character of the various species of plant growth is 
determined in the Short Grass Plains by means of quadrats, 
transects and charts in a manner to be subsequently des¬ 
cribed. It has been thus determined that l, the great bulk 
of the vegetation is composed of relatively few species. 
Grasses form about 7^^ of the vegetative cover on most 
of our range lands, and over 9096 of the grass cover is 






































- 16 


made up by six species, five of these being true grasses 
and the sixth a member of the closely related sedge fam¬ 
ily. These chief species are Grama grass (Bouteloua 
gracilis), Spear grass (Stipa comata), Bluejoint (Ag- 
ropyron Smithii), June grass (Koeleria gracilis), Meadow 
grass (Poa 5pp.) and Nigger Wool (Carex filifolia). All 
produce highly palatable and nutritious forage”.( 1 ) 

Chemical analysis of the vegetative cover considered 
in the light of the needs of the feeding animal is the 
only manner in which the true economic value of a range 
grazing area can be determined. Many hundreds of samples 
of the principal and of the less important grasses have 
been collected at the Dominion Range Station since 1927. 
These have been collected under various soil, climatic 
and seasonal conditions and under all growth stages, from 
the early spring and summer months to the post curing 
stage in the fall and even after winter exposure. A typ¬ 
ical grass analysis on a dry matter basis appears in the 
following table. The five principal grasses analysed in 
Part A are Spear grass (Stipa comata), Grama grass (Bou¬ 
teloua gracilis), Bluejoint (Agropyron Smithii), June 
grass (Koeleria gracilis) and Meadow grass (Poa species). 


(1) E.W. Tisdale - op. cit. p. 3 . 















’ 


























• 



































- 17 

- 





"Part A - Nutritive Value of Western Rame Plants 

Four Year Average for 

Five Principal Grasses. 



Water- 

•Free 




Carbo- 



Phos¬ 


Growth Stance 

Protein hydrate 

Fibre 

phorus 

Calcium 


<?0 

fo 




* 

Leaf.... 

19 

47 

24 


0.31 

0.57 

Flower.. 

11 

91 

31 


0.37 

0.43 

Seed.. 

9 

53 

32 


0.30 

0.39 

Cured..... 

5 

55 

32 


0.18 

0.56 

After Winter exposure 

5 

52 

% 


0.17 

0.49 

Part B - Nutritive Value of Less Common Species in Leaf 


Sta^re 








Carbo- 



Phos¬ 


Name 

Protein hydrate 

Fibre 

phorus 

Calcium 


9* 


1° 


<fo 

* 

Nigger Wool (Carex 
filifolia)......... 

Alkali grass (List- 

19 

48 

23 


0.52 

0.65 

ichlis stricta).... 
Sand grass (cala- 

17 

49 

27 


0.60 

0.30 

movilfa longifolia) 
Ring grass (Muhlen- 

11 

32 

33 


0.49 

0.30 

bergia cuspidata).. 
Slough oat grass 

11 

34 

28 


0.37 

0.60 

(Deschampsia atrop- 
urpurea). 

17 

48 

27 


0.45 

0.50 

Tall Fescue grass 






(Festuca scabrella) 

11 

49 

30 


0.45 

0.42 

Hooker f s Oat grass 
(Avena Hookeri).... 
Oat grass (Danthonia 

.1 0 

30 

33 


0.30 

0.25 

intermedia). 

16 

47 

30 


0.46 

0.32 

Beard grass (Andropogon 





scoparius).. 

Silver sage (Eurotia 

1 0 

30 

33 


0.24 


lanata). 

Salt Sage (Atriplex 

22 

46 

22 


0.52 

1 .40 

Nuttallii).. 

23 

46 

12 


0.72 

1 .70 

Wild Pea (Ctenophyllum 




pectinatum).. .. 

Russian Thistle 

28 

44 

20 


0.72 

0.77 

(Salsola Pestifer). 

17 

-47 

12 


0.86 

4.1 3" 

(i) 

(1 ) S.S. Clarke - 11 Our Grazing Resources 


The Chemical 

Composition of our Native 

Forage 

and 

its Value 

for 

Livestock Production”. p* 

3- 






















































. 








. . » 




















The high protein content of the principal grasses in 
the leaf stage and its gradual diminution to in the 
cured stage in the fall and to 3^ after winter exposure 
is obvious from this chart* The carbohydrate content in¬ 
creases with maturity and diminishes under winter exposure. 
The fibre content increases with winter exposure. Species 
lowest in protein are highest in fibre content. The 
grasses provide sufficient phosphorus in the leaf stage of 
spring and summer but with gradual curing to fall and 
winter become decidedly lacking in this mineral for proper 
animal nutrition. Protein and phosphorus content show a 
very marked relationship. They vary directly in percent¬ 
age content but together vary indirectly to crude fibre 
content. The nutritive value of a grass can usually be 
judged by this factor and on this basis the grasses on 
the Short Grass Plains stand high in grazing value. The 
calcium or lime content exhibits the only stable content 
factor fluctuating only slightly according to seasonal 
plant change. This mineral is also fortunately stabilized 
at the correct requirement level for beef cattle. The 
last four plants in the above chart are technically non- 
grasses but are particularly high in protein, phosphorus 
and lime content, the protein and phosphorus decreasing 
with maturity. 

Apart from the true grasses and on a similar basis of 
chemical analysis, the non-grasses or broad-leaved forage 






' 

■ 






. 

■ 










19 


has been classified on the basis of its nutritive value. 


A few of the more common species in this category divided 
on a three-fold basis are presented in the following 


table: 


f ‘Broad~leaved plants, classified according to their 
palatability for range cattle. 


Plants readily eaten 
by cattle 


Plants not 

readily eaten 


Poisonous 

Plants 


Atriplex Nuttaliii 
(Salt Sage) 


Atriplex argentea 
(Salt Bush) 
Eruotia lanata 
(Silver Sage) 
Endolepis Suckleyi 
(Pigwe ed) 

Chenopodium Album 
(Lambs quarter) 


Salsola pestifer 
(Russian Thistle) 
Ctenophyllum 
Pectinatum 
(White Pea) 
Diholcos bisulcatus 
(Purple Pea) 
Homalobus tenellus 
(Trailing Pea) 
Geoprumnon 
Crassicarpum 
(Buffalo Bean) 
Vicia Americana 
(Purple Vetch) 
Vicia sparsifolia 
(Purple Vetch) 


Achillea lanulosa 

(Yarrow) 


Antennaria micro- 
phylla (Cat-Paws) 
Artemisia frigida 
(Prairie Sage) 
Artemisia cana 
(Sage Brush) 
Cheirinia inconsp- 
icus (Prairie 


ilragallus galis- 
ides (Purple 
Loco) 


Chrysopsis villosa 
(Golden Aster) 
Chrysothamnus 
frigidus (Rabbit 
Brush) 

Comandra pallida 
(Bastard Toadflax) 
Dasiphora fructicosa 
(Shrubby cinquefoil) 
Bondia depressa 
(Sea Blite) 

Eriogonum flavum 
(Umbrella Plant) 
Grindelia squarrosa 
(Gum Plant) 

Gutierrezia Sarothrae 
(Brown Weed) 

Hymenoxys Macounii 
(Colorado Rubber Plant) 
Lygodesmia juncea 
(Skeleton Weed) 
Paronychia sessiliflora 
(Whitlow-wort) 

Psoralea lanceolata 
(Sand Vetch) 

Sarcobatus vermiculatus 
(Greas ewood) 


Aragallus gracilis 
(Yellow Loco weed) 
Delphinium bicolor 
(Dwarf Larkspur) 
Equisetum arvense 
(Horsetail) 
Thermopsis Rhom- 
Rocket)bifolia (Prairie 
Bean) 

Toxicoscordion 
venenosum 
(Death camas) 
Cicuta maculata 
(Water hemlock) 





























- 




























20 


Plants not 
readily eaten 

Selaginella densa 

(little Club Moss) 

Sphaeralcea coccinea 
(Globe Mallow) T *(1 ) 

The palatability of forage plants depends mainly on stage 
of plant development, season of the year and class of live¬ 
stock on pasture. Such plants as Sand grass, Russian 
Thistle and Lambs Quarter are eaten readily in the early 
growth and leaf stage, while Prairie Sage, Purple Pea, 

White Pea, Salt Sage and Silver Sage are eaten mainly 

' 

when mature. Prairie Sage is eaten by cattle more readily 
in winter than in summer and more often on higher ground 
than in depressions. Sea Blite, Brovina Weed, Prairie Bean 
and Gum Plant are with rare exception, never eaten by any 
class of livestock. Death camas rarely poisons cattle but 
readily poisons sheep. The reverse is the case with Lark¬ 
spur. 


It is only from such analyses that correct pasture 


utilization policy can be derived. These are basic factors 


in the economic production of quality range beef. This 
is a field of scientific research in which up to the last 


decade little work has been done in any part of the world. 


Since that time pasture utilization research has received 

more attention but it is a field in which very much work 

(1) S.E. Clarke - “Pasture Investigations on the Short 

Grass Plains of Saskatchewan and Alberta 11 . Reprinted 
from Scientific Agriculture, Vol. OL, No. 11, July 
1930, p. 737• 



























■ 

■ • 






















- 




































- 21 - 


remains yet to be accomplished. Experiments in the British 
Isles, New Zealand, Australia, South Africa and the United 
States have added much to our knowledge but in the final 
analysis it is essentially a regional study and each area 
will have its own peculiar characteristics. 

From the highly valuable and unique experiments in 
agrostology carried out by the officials of the Dominion 
Range Station on the Canadian Short Grass Plains certain 
very definite practical applications have been and are 
being made. It is now accepted practice that spring 
pasture must not be over-grazed the previous fall or 
win-cer in order to allow sufficient roughage for mixture 
with the green grass high in protein and water content. 
Gains on early spring grass will be low, reach a maximum 
in summer and decrease again in the fall season. The 
weight gain decreases with the decrease in protein content 
but the fall increase of carbohydrate content in the for- 
age provides hardiness in the cattle to withstand low 
winter temperatures. Deferred and rotational grazing 
practices to suit the type and nature of pasture cover 
can be followed to allow cattle maximum feeding value per 
unit area of pasture. The time for feeding supplemental 
mineral foods can be determined and the type of mineral 
to be fed. The known deficiency in lime and phosphorus 
of the native forage in the cured stage can be overcome 
by feeding a mixture of three parts bone-meal to one 







































- 




































































- 22 - 


part of salt or by feeding mono-calcium phosphate with a 
high percentage phosphorus content* This material can 
be obtained cheaply from the smelter of the Consolidated 
Mining and Smelting Company at Trail, British Columbia* 
Considerable hay can be cut on the range area and by chem¬ 
ical analysis the early flower stage has been determined 
as the best time at which to harvest most grasses. 

Because of the economic nature of the Short Grass 
Plains Area which is being thus scientifically analysed, 


there is produced in this area to-day the best beef cattle 
in the world. Considering, for purposes of cattle inven- 


tory, 

the Short 

Grass Plains 

Area as 

consisting 

of 

1 0,000 

,000 acres 

, the total number of 

cattle in 

the area 

is apparent from 

the following table: 





"Numbers of 

Cattle 




Southern Alberta and 

Southwestern Saskatchewan 


S.W. Saskatchewan 

S 

. Alberta 


Div. 

1931 

1 921 

Div. 

1931 

1 921 

3 

46,649 

55,574 

1 

88,267 

59,673 

4 

75,472 

60,925 

2 

109,343 

83,288 

8 

65,497 

86,438 

3 

53,898 

45,626 

7 

- 57.179 

65 .596 

4 

92.875 

105.444 


244 J21 . 

268.533 


544.585 

294.051" 


, % (D 

(1 ) L.B. Thoms on - "Am Economic Study of Beef Cattle Rais¬ 
ing on the Range Areas of Alberta and Saskatchewan, 

1 932". p. 3* 

Note: 1931 figures have been revised in this chart to con¬ 
form with final census returns as given in "Livestock 
on Farms by Census Division, Saskatchewan,1 931 " pp 
4-3* "Livestock on Farms by Census Division,Alberta, 
1931 ". pp 4-3, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, final 
Bulletin Nos. XIV and XV respectively. 






















* 























. 


































. . 













i. 


, . 


: 











- 23 - 

Considerable land misused for farming in Alberta has been 
reclaimed for its more natural use of ranching which fact 
accounts for the increase in cattle inventory in this 
province during the decade# The figure for Saskatchewan 
on the other hand has gradually decreased. On the basis 
of statistics provided by the Department of Agriculture, 
Regina, the cattle population of the Saskatchewan area 
for other than milch cows could be estimated for 1934 at 
approximately 218 , 000 . 

Considering cattle inventory under two classifica¬ 
tions - ’milch cows’ and ’other cattle’ - the one a gen¬ 
eral dairy group and the other a general beef group - 
there were 764,000 ’other cattle’ in Saskatchewan in 
1931 and 732,000 in Alberta, or a total of 1,316,000. 

The Short Crass Plains Area produced in that year 
389,1 80 or 38.8376 of the total. The total production for 
Canada of cattle other than milch cows was 4,626,000 in 
193*5 of which the Short Crass Plains Area produced 12. 7376 . 

The average farm value per head of farm cattle other 
than milch cows in Saskatchewan in 1 931 was $22.00 and in 
Alberta $24.00. Applying these valuations for purposes 
of comparison to the beef cattle inventory of the Sask¬ 
atchewan section of the Short Crass Plains Area gives a 
valuation of $3,383,334 and similarly for the Alberta 
section a valuation of $ 8 , 263,192 or a total of 
$13,630,726. The total valuation for the Province of 


















































, 








. 























24 


Saskatchewan in 193*1 was$1 6 , 8 u 8 ,000 and for Alberta 
$18,048,000 or a total of $34,836,000. The Short Grass 
Plains Area therefore produced 39.1 Gfi of this total valua¬ 
tion. The corresponding total valuation for Canada in 1 931 
was $114,828,000 of which therefore the area under review 
produced 11 . 8896 . (1 ) 

It must be borne in mind that such compilations pre¬ 
sent a general picture only and serve to present a back¬ 
ground for the economic importance of the Plains Area in 
Canadian agriculture. The figures cited cannot be wholly 
just to range cattle in the area for the simple reason 
that statistics are not available which apply to range 
beef cattle only. Range cattle in this area both as to 
quality and price are on the average above cattle raised 
under farm conditions and marketed through stock yards. 

Very much of the latter is nondescript off-type stock. 

Since statistics provide no other means of comparison 
than the use of the classification * other cattle* exclud¬ 
ing milch dairy cows, that grouping was used. Bearing in 
mind the obvious injustice involved in mixing our range 
cattle in that grouping, their economic significance be¬ 
comes of even much greater moment than the above figures 
indi e. 

A factor of real significance in the Short Grass Plains 

Area is the complementary nature of its feeding areas. 

(1 ) Compiled from "Live Stock and Animal irroducts Statist¬ 

ics, 1 933 ff Agricultural Branch, Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics, Ottawa, Ontario. 

















. 








■ ' 




















- 





















































- 25 - 

Stocker and feeder cattle are produced on the plains area 
and if sold as finished stock are finished off grass. 
Probably not more than 1 Oft of range stock are finished in 
range feed lots on supplementary grain hay and concentrates 
Such finishing is carried out in the central and northern 
parts of the area where farming methods prevail and the 
winter fattening feeds are available. The Provinces of 
Saskatchewan and Alberta are most admirably suited by 
nature for the production and finishing of cattle of the 
highest quality to suit present market demands. This fact 
involves the much discussed question of marketing our sur¬ 
plus grain by the cattle finishing route. Western range 
cattle can also be finished in Eastern Canada if sufficient 
grain is available. The last 100 pounds of finishing 
places a bloom on cattle which is less subject to trans¬ 
portation shrinkage if put on in eastern feed lots. The 
shipping of western course grains East for this purpose 
however is a questionable procedure owing to high freight 
rates. On the other hand finishing bloom put on in the 
West is subject to probably 10 96 transportation shrinkage. 
This can be recovered in the stock yards and even on the 
boat but it must in that case be put on twice. In western 
finishing allowance must be made for shrinkage in transit. 

Feeding trials have been in progress in Alberta for 
a number of years. Among these may be mentioned those at 
the University of Alberta, the Lethbridge Experimental 

























































. 


















. 














- 26 - 

Farm and those under the contract feeding plan between 
breeders and feeders. Cattle are better finished when 
finished in feed lots and command a higher price. This 
price will generally be such as to provide the maximum 
return for grain. The margin of profit on a dollar T s 
worth of grain so fed is shown in the following table: 


“University 

of Alberta Feeding 

Trials 

Return for every dollar f s worth of grain 

when fed t 

and margin secured each year: 


Winter 

Return for 


feeding 

a dollar’s 


period 

worth of grain 

Margin 

1920-21 

$ 1.26 

$1.14 

1 921-22 

3.05 

3.11 

1922-23 

2.16 

2.62 

1923-24 

2.20 

2.05 

1924-25 

1.59 

2.67 

1925-26 

1.74 

1 .98 

1926-27 

1.97 

2.43 

1927-28 

1 .40 

1 .48 

1928-29 

1 .02 

.43 

1 929-30 

2.70 

2.18 

1931-32 

1 .76 

.45 

1932-33 

1 .60 

.42 


. 

00 

-3 

$1 .7 5 


In every year, even including labour feeding cost, there 
was a margin in marketing grain through cattle, over cur¬ 
rent elevator prices. With higher grain prices and exceed¬ 
ingly low cattle prices this practice would not seem so 
desirable at the present time but it would appear to be a 
normal and logical method of marketing excess grain stocks. 
From this brief analysis it is obvious that the Short 

grass Plains Area is admirably situated and suited for its 

(1 ) Prof. J.F. Sackville - "Marketing of drains through 

Beef Cattle”. Report of the World Exhibition and 
Crain Conference, Regina, 1933* 



























































Two year old Western Hereford Range Steers raised by 
Gilchrist Brothers Limited, Wildhorse, and sold through 
the Dominion Range Experiment Station to the Central 
Experimental Farm, Ottawa, for feeding trials. The type 
that gives good returns to the grower in pounds of beef, 
good returns to the feeder and sells better on the- ex¬ 
port market* (1) 

The continuance of production of quality beef cattle 
in the Short Grass Plains Area depends on sound pasture 
utilization policy. The range is at present much over- 

stocked and over-grazed. The range cattle industry would 

(1 ) Rep reduced by pe rmi s s i on oft he” D omTni on Rang e S'fc at i on. 


- 27 - 

production of quality beef cattle. The type of cattle 
which has been found by long experience to be best adapt¬ 
able to plains conditions in this area is the Hereford, 

This breed is hardy, a great rustler and exhibits herd in¬ 
stincts of most economic value to the range stockman. This 
breed will give maximum return on investment under range 
conditions, 






































































































28 


seem to be one rather of contraction than expansion. 
Recent drought periods and record low prices concur in 
further enhancing this tendency. Present grazing regula¬ 
tions are not consistent with the grazing capacity of the 
range area and pasture depletion has been an inevitable 
result. Sound range policy however, including a revision 
of grazing regulations, with the necessary co-operation 
between the Federal and Provincial Governments and all 
parties concerned, will ensure for this area its right¬ 
ful place as one of Canada ? s most vital economic regions. 
















CHAPTER II 

UTILIZATION OF THE RANGE AREA 
Part 1 

The amount of edible and nutritional pasture forage 
for range cattle is the most important factor from the 
standpoint of beef production on any range area. In the 
Short Grass Plains Area the vegetative cover has been 
closely studied over a period of years in relation to 
cattle production and valuable conclusions as to the most 
efficient pasture utilization practices have been reached. 
This work has been conducted by the Dominion Range Exper¬ 
iment Station, Manyberries, Alberta, in conjunction with 
Gilchrist Brothers with whom the Station co-operates in 
experimental work. The findings here are proving to be 
of the greatest assistance to the range cattle industry 
as this is the only study being continuously and scient¬ 
ifically made on the ranches themselves of the problems 
which affect this area. 

Over-grazing and unequal grazing of these lands must 
be avoided if the most economical use is to be made of 
them. Over-grazing will in time denude the edible grass 
cover to the point where inedible and even injurious weeds 
will choke out what grass remains. Even temporary over- 
grazing and under-grazing is not conducive to the highest 
long term average return from the pasture per cattle unit 
feeding. In the early history of ranching in western 


- 29 - 








.. - - • 








.. 

. 














■ .~ . .. - . - 





. 

* 

























- 30 - 

Canada when the range was f open ! the matter of pasture 
utilization did not call for close study. Range cattle 
production in this area has to-day under closed range 
conditions developed into a highly organized and a highly 
specialized industry, in which no factor hov;ever insignif¬ 
icant, can he allowed to escape the attention of the succ¬ 
essful range producer. With the fencing of the ranges and 
the placing of them on a lease rental and deeded land tax 
basis it is imperative that the maximum return be obtained 
from the pasture land so enclosed. In approximately 
10,000,000 acres in the range area here under review there 
are in the neighbourhood of 10,000 grazing leases now 
issued. In the words of one who has made a most careful 
scientific study of the native pasture resources of this 
area in relation to cattle production - “Since these 
range lands are better suited to grazing and livestock 
production than to grain growing, they may be regarded 
as permanent grazing resources. This being the case, it 
is imperative that a definite policy be formulated for the 
administration of such lands and that proper grazing prac¬ 
tices be followed in the use of them. In order to be ec¬ 
onomically sound, methods of grazing must take cognizance 
of the plant-animal complex; they must ensure the maximum 
utilization of the range and the upkeep of the pasture in 

a high state of production" . (1 ) __ 

(1) S.E. Clarke - "Our Crazing Resources - The Chemical 

Composition of our Native Forage and its Value for 

Livestock Production", p. 1. 



























■ 

C 






























■ 

. 


















- 31 - 


The nature and abundance of the vegetative cover to¬ 
gether with the water supply and shelter are factors there¬ 
fore which require close analysis in determining the prac¬ 
tical utility of a range area. In any given climate these 
factors are paramount in the production of range cattle. 

To obtain most economic production pasture utilization 
and ranch organization must be based on the known facts 
concerning vegetative cover. The animal body as a living 
and growing organism requires certain specific nutrients 
if it is to develop into a well finished beef animal. To 
the extent to which these elements are lacking or insuf¬ 
ficient in the pasture cover to that extent they must be 
otherwise supplied or the pasture area per unit feeding 
be increased. Certain grasses and edible plants will have 
more of one element than another and more at one season 
than another and one pasture area may contain more of 
these plants than another. In particular if cattle are 
to be sold as grass finished stock it is even more im¬ 
portant that the richest pasture be secured with a chem¬ 
ical composition of optimum value as beef cattle forage. 

In other words what the rancher to-day has to know is 
the carrying capacity of his range. 

The Short Grass Plains Area proper has been estimated 
at a minimum of 8,000,000 acres and is situated in the 
Pry Area of the Provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
Problems affecting the ra nge producer are considerably 


















' 

































- 32 - 

more acute in this region which gives added importance to 
the results which the Dominion Range Station is securing. 

The work is conducted in close co-operation with those 
supervising similar research in other parts of Saskatchewan, 
Alberta and British Columbia. There is also the friend¬ 
liest of feeling and scientific co-operation existing be- 
tween the officials at the Canadian Station and those en¬ 
gaged in similar work in the Northern Great Plains Area 
of the United States and similar producing areas. The 
Canadian Station has now been in operation 9 years, suf¬ 
ficiently long for many conclusions of great value to be 
reached, as to the carrying capacity of these lands and 
as to their best utilization. Experiments on pasture 
utilization and ranch organization are going on and are 
incomplete at the moment of writing but already results 
have been secured which have proved of great practical 
value to the industry. 

The Short Grass Plains Area has a low carrying cap¬ 
acity owing to the small percentage of grass cover. As 
the result of studies carried out by Dr. S.E. Clarke, 
Agrostologist at the Station, up to 1932 the following- 
statements were made - “On the Range Experiment Station 
fields, comprising 13,600 acres of typical grazing land, 

15 ft of the ground was occupied by grass and by edible 
weeds. This leaves 73 of the ground either bare or 
3overed with weeds that have practically no forage 


























. 

' 







































- 33 


value’ 1 . (1 ) 

Although the grazing capacity of the range land must 
vary with the location and with the climate, particularly 
as to precipitation, there is no variation in either fact 
in the Short Grass Plains Area to which the above quoted 
figures would not apply. The very nature of the climate 
and soil in fact has produced in this area a vegetative 
cover with a variation in chemical composition according 
to the season of the year most appropriate for the pro- 
duction of range beef cattle. Both factors are such as 
to make possible not only highly nutritious summer graz¬ 
ing, but efficient winter pasture and a high degree of 
finish off grass alone. 

The percentage of surface on the range lands which 
is unsuitable for grazing due to coulees, erosion or 
alkali deposits is extremely small. An additional per¬ 
centage is affected by what are known on the range as 
1 burn-outs T . The characteristics of typical range land 
in the Short Grass Plains are stated to be as follows - 
'•The short-grass plains of southwestern Saskatchewan 
and southern Alberta comprise the largest range areas in 
Western Canada at the present time. The topography of 
these plains is gently rolling and in places they are cut 
by deep river valleys and by canyon-like coulees. The 

soil varies from a light sandy loam to a heavy clay loam, 

(1 ) L.B.Thomson - "Economics of the Ranching Industry 

in Alberta and Saskatchewan". Report presented at 

Regina, January 1 6 th, 1932. P. 2. 































































, • 














- 34 - 

with certain areas strongly alkaline. Large areas are 
spotted with so-called * "burn-out 1 depressions which vary 
in size from a square foot to several square rods and on 
which there is no humus and little or no vegetation. The 
average annual precipitation is approximately 13 inches. 
When not overgrazed, these plains produce a fairly good 
cover of palatable and nutritious grasses, except on 
such portions as may be strongly alkaline or badly eroded.” 
(1 ) Photographs produced below are typical of these two 


aspects in the Canadian Short Grass Plains Area. 



acteristic of deep coulee sections of the 
Plains area and due to slope erosion takes 
place with the consequence of sub-soil out- 
_ crop and loss of forage surface. __ 

(1 ) S.E. Clarke - ,f Pasture Investigations on the Short 

Grass Plains of Saskatchewan and Alberta". Reprinted 
from Scientific Agriculture, Yol. X, No.11, p. 734 . 

(2) Reproduced by permission of the Dominion Range Station. 























A typical ! burn-out ! section in southeastern 
Alberta, There is not sufficient organic or 
mineral content here to promote forage cover 
under range climatic conditions. 

The accessible vegetative cover of the range is 
highly productive and with appropriate methods of reg¬ 
ulated grazing will give a high maximum return in the 
form of well developed beef cattle. Owing however to 
the fact that, with the exception of recent experiments 
to which reference is made herein, such regulated graz¬ 
ing practice has not been followed in the past there has 
been a serious decline in the grazing capacity of the 
Short Grass Plains. The forage cover of the range is 
life itself to the grazing herds. To the extent the 

range grass and other edible forage is insufficient for 

( 1 ) Reproduced by permission of S.E. Clarke, op.eit. p.735. 


























' 


. 

' 



































- 36 » 

proper feed in character and amount to that extent must 
winter feeding in the feed lot be carried out. Outside 
of native pasture, winter feed in the form of hay and 
concentrates is very costly on the range as with the ex¬ 
ception of some hay they are not produced on the range and 
must be imported or the cattle shipped out to the feed. 
Either process is costly and adds to the cost of produc¬ 
tion far in excess of its true proportion as purchase of 
feed must take place when prices are high due to demand 
and therefore when the potential margin of profit on sale 
of the animal is reduced to a minimum. 

’’There has undoubtedly been a serious decline in the 
carrying capacity of the grazing areas and, after all, 
this is the heart and soul of the business. A lower cap¬ 
acity means less thrifty stock and more feeding during 
the winter. Winter feed is one of the limiting factors, 
and it is one of the big problems of the rancher to-day. 
Therefore, when consideration is being given to the bus¬ 
iness, the question of carrying capacity, the investment 
necessary to use the production policies must be consid¬ 
ered before any intelligent analysis can be made of the 
industry”.(1 ) 

In determining the carrying capacity of any given 
range area it is first essential that the precise nature 

of the forage cover be obtained. When the number and type 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson - fl Economics of the Ranching Industry 

in Alberta and Saskatchewan”, p. 12 . 























































































- 37 - 

of plant species is teiown and their chemical composition 
determined pasture utilization policies can then he organ 
ized and not until then. The chemical analyses of our 
common range forage has been given in Chapter I. It is 
therefore only necessary at this time to describe the 
modem scientific method of determining the nature of 
the vegetative cover. 

The underlying principle is that of close analysis 
of and experiment on a small area representative of the 
general range pasture. This study is carried out by us¬ 
ing four kinds of plots briefly described as follows - 

?t (1) Permanent, list quadrats. These are perman¬ 
ently staked out and vary in size from one square meter 
to 100 square meters. This kind of quadrat is used when 
the purpose of the study is to determine the increase or 
decrease of a few species only. A record is kept of the 
number of plants of each of these species, of the number 
of culms, or of the area covered, and of the height, 
vigour, and seed production of the plants. On a piece of 
squared paper a rough map is made, showing the position 
on the quadrat of the individual plants of each species 
under observation. 

“( 2 ) Permanent, charted quadrats. These are per¬ 
manently staked and have an area of one square meter each 
Mapping is done by the aid of a pantograph (Figure 4 ). 

It takes two to operate this instrument, one to move the 






















•» 















- 


. 





, 

























■ 






















- 38 - 

pointer around the plants and to call out the name of 
each plant, and another to mark the names on the map* 

By this method, mapping can be done Quickly and accurately 
The maps are 1/I 6 of 1 square meter in size or approxim¬ 
ately 10 inches square. They show the position and area 
covered by each shoot or clump of vegetation on the quad¬ 
rat . Seedlings are indicated by means of points. Symbols 
are used in accordance with the method outlined by Clement 
( 1 ) Mapping is done at intervals of two or three years 
and even very minute changes in the vegetal cover can be 
detected and measured accurately. Notes are taken also 
on the height and density of the principal species, on 
seed production, and on such influencing factors as loca¬ 
tion, altitude, slope, exposure, soil type, distance from 
watering places, salting places, paths, gates, etc., in¬ 
jury done by rodents or insects and nature of vegetation 
on the surrounding area. On Form 1 is presented the data 
concerning quadrat No. C-8l, mapped in 1929 , and in Figure 
9 is shown the map of this quadrat. 

"(3) Permanent, mapped and listed quadrats. These 
have an area of one square meter each. A frame divided 
into square decimeters is used, thus each division equals 
one per cent of a square meter. On a form, there is tab¬ 
ulated the name of each species found on the quadrat, the 

number of Plants of each species and the area in per cent 

(1 ) F.E.Clement - "Plant Succession and Indicators". 

The H.W.Wilson Co., New York, 1928 . 












































* 

„ 








. 






































. 








■ 


















- 39 - 

occupied by each species. On a piece of squared paper a 
free-hand sketch is made, showing the location of each of 



the principal species on the quadrat. 

f, (4) Permanent, mapped and listed transects. These 
are essentially the same as mapped and listed quadrats, ex¬ 
cept in size and shape. In width they vary from one to 
four decimeters and in length from one to several meters 
according to the length required for the inclusion of such 
environmental conditions and vegetative species as are to 
be studied. Transects are used both alone and in conjunc¬ 
tion with quadrats, and are of great value in studying the 
correlation of environmental factors and vegetal types* 
and in the study of plant migration**. 


Figure 4. Charting a quadrat. A frame w r ith cross 
wires is used now in place of the one shown. The 
map is one-sixteenth of the size of the quadrat or 
approximately 1 0 inches square. 























- 


















































40 - 


Form I 

Quadrat No# C.-81. 

1 • Date Charted - Sept. 19» 132? 

2. Location - Sec. 13, N.E. 30 yards from fence and 30 
yards N.E. of fence brace. 

3 . Character of Site - (a) Elevation - Open prairie, 

3000 feet. 

(b) Exposure and slope - East slope of 4 degrees. 

(c) Soil - Sandy loam. 

4. Plant type » (a) Principal species on surrounding area - 
Bou. St. Kol. Ag. A.f. Eu. 1 . Gut. S.d. 

(b) Density of vegetative cover - A fair cover, large 
patches of Bou. 

(c) Height of vegetation - Bou. 1 ,, -3 W; # St. 3” -1u*'. 

Kol. 4 ,f -8». 

(d) Seed production - A small amount of St. Kol. and 
weeds. Bou. and Ag. will not produce seed this 
year. 

3 • Summary of Quadrat Data - 
(a) Grasses - 


Symbol 

Bou 

St. 

Kol 

. Ag. 

Totals 

Number of specimens 

1 2 

52 

1 

1 

66 

Area occupied sq.. cm 

2612 

784 

38 

16 

3430 

" " percent 

26.1 2 

7.84 

^8 

.16 

34.5 U 

(b) Broad Leaved Plants - 

Symbol 

A.f. 

Gut, 

f 

Eu .1 . 

Totals 

Number of specimens 

12 

1 


4 

1 7 

Area occupied sq.. cm. 

464 

76 


78 

61 8 

,f " per cent 

4.64 

/Zi 


,--•ifi. 

6.18 


6 . Relative Forage Value of Quadrat ... 

7 . Distance of Quadrat from nearest watering place - 
1/2 mile. 

8 . Remarks - Bou. - Bouteloua gracilis, St.- Stipa Comata. 
Kol.- Koeleria gracilis. Ag.- Agropyron Smithii. A.f.- 
Artemisia frigida. Gut.- Gutierrezia sarothrae. Eu .1 .- 
Eurotia lanata. S.d.- Selaginella densa. 



















* 

, - . " . '.y;M 








■ 

* 

. 

* 










. 












■ , 

■ . 














- 41 - 



Fig, Map of Quadrat, 

No. C-8l . (1 } 

These studies have been made on areas different in 
soil and climatic conditions as well a$ on areas subjected 
to different grazing practices including total protection 
from grazing, continuous summer grazing, deferred and ro¬ 
tational grazing, early spring grazing, grazing in late 
fall and summer grazing with protection during spring. 

It is thus possible to obtain accurate information on the 
reaction of the vegetative cover to various grazing prac¬ 
tices. In this wav can be determined the plant species 
(1 ) S.E. Clarke - ’’Pasture Investigations on the Short 

G-rass Plains of Saskatchewan and Alberta”, pp. 743, 
744,745 746 . Photographs reproduced by permission 
of the Author. 





























































































































































. 











* 









42 


most readily consumed by cattle and those species less 
readily consumed or entirely rejected. The chemical com- 
position of all plant species being known it is an easy 
matter to determine what chemical or mineral elements the 
animal requires for normal growth. The relation of over- 
grazing to noxious weed infestation is also determined by 
means of these experiments. It has been found that on 
over-grazed pasture when the edible forage cover has been 
removed inedible weed infestation results. The grasses 
first to disappear have been found to be such types as 
stipa comata (spear grass), Koleria gracilis (June grass), 
Poa laevigata (Meadow grass), Poa reflexa (tall Meadow 
grass), Poa triflora (Feather grass). These are tuft 
grasses with an early spring growth and are therefore at¬ 
tacked by cattle first. The smaller grasses soon follow, 
including such species as Agropyron Smithii (Blue Joint), 
Muhlenhergia Cuspidata (Muhlenbergie), and Bouteloua grac¬ 
ilis (Blue Grama Grass). The latter is the characteristic 
grass of the Short Grass Plains. 

On the disappearance of these grasses, due to over- 
grazing, which are the very f life blood T of the range, the 
two most common weeds to first appear are Gutierrezia 
sarothrae (Brown Weed) and Artemisia frigida (Wormwood or 
Prairie Sage). The first weed has a long tap root and 
appears on heavy clay soils, silted areas or eroded areas 
late in the season. The other weed appears mostly on 





- 









' • 


' 












. 








































































- 43 - 

loam or sandy loam soils* Either weed is seldom eaten 
by cattle. Additional weeds will soon appear if over- 
grazing continues, among which may be Opuntia polyacantha 
(Cactus), Artemisia cana (Sage Brush), A.gnaphaloides 
(Dwarf Sage Brush), Selaginella densa, (Little club-moss), 
Paronychia sessiliflora (Whitlow-wort), Sideranthus spin- 
ulosus (Iron Weed), Hymenoxys Macounii (Colorado Rubber 
Plant), Eriogonum flavum (Umbrella Plant) and Chrysopsis 
villosa (Golden Aster).(1 ) 

Ample verification of these facts can be found on 
any pure range area. At the Northern Great Plains Sta¬ 
tion in North Dakota the quadrat and transect method is 
also used and similar conclusions to those in the Canadian 
area have been reached. In the Jornada Range Reserve in 
South West New Mexico it is found that Gutierrezia fur- 
furacea (Snakeweed) a heavy bunch weed is one of the first 
noxious weeds to cover the range when over-grazing occurs. 
At the Northern Great Plains Field Station near Mandan, 
North Dakota, it has been found that the best indicator of 
over-grazing is Artemisia frigida (pasture sage). Cattle 
do not like it and it therefore is able to take advantage 
of the weakened vitality of the edible grasses and in¬ 
crease in extent and size per unit area of pasture. 

The great danger in over-grazing practice is that if 

it is not corrected as soon as observed the range will 

(1 ) S.E. Clarke - op. cit. p. 747 . 


































































































- 44 - 


eventually become sterile as a forage area. Inedible 
weed infestation will be encouraged to the point where 
the range may become a desert. Reclamation of the range 
will then be extremely costly and may even be impossible. 
Maintenance of the range at its maximum capacity must al¬ 
ways be the primary concern of the range cattle producer. 
"That depreciation of the range will result from over¬ 
stocking under any system of use is obvious, and too much 
emphasis can not be given to necessity for care, first in 
adjusting grazing use so as to give the main forage plants 
as much chance to grow as possible, consistent with good 
management of the stock, and then to avoid putting more 
stock on any area than it will carry under the plan of 
use decided upon 1 . (1 ) 

With the true facts on the characteristics of the 
native vegetative cover scientifically secured and the 
reaction of the cover to grazing practice known by re¬ 
presentative experiments, the producer is now in a posi¬ 
tion to intelligently plan a pasture utilization policy 
for his whole range area. 

In this connection experiments at the Dominion Range 
Station are being carried out with a view r to determining 
the correct carrying capacity of these range lands or the 
proper acreage per cattle unit at any and all seasons of 

the year. In other words as well as the question of the 

(1 ) Jardine and Forsling - "Range and Cattle Management 

during Drought". U.S. Department of Agriculture, 

Bulletin No. 1 u31 , p. 31; May 1922. 







. 


■ 


* 








































‘ 















- 45 - 




response of the grazing lands to the cattle there is the 
reverse side of the response of cattle to the grazing land. 
There is here considered the relation of weight, age and 
type to grazing capacity taking into account the changing 
composition of the forage cover at different seasons of 
the year. The question of grazing intensity is also care¬ 
fully studied. By scientific observation and close super¬ 
vision results of the most vital significance have been 
secured. It is interesting to note the conclusions reached 
in these investigations, now in the eighth year of scien¬ 
tific tabulation, in the light of definite confirmation 
in the Northern Great Plains Area of the United States 
where conditions are very similar to our Short Grass 
Plains region and also in the light of Government grazing 
regulations effective in the Short Grass Plains Area at 


the present time. 

In the light of these facts grazing projects are 
being conducted at the Dominion Range Station in con- 




junction with Gilchrist Brothers who supply stock for this 
valuable research work. Typical range area is divided into 
sections of various sizes and a definite number of cattle 
assigned to each for a recorded period. The ultimate and 
most important fact emerging from these investigations 
is the maximum carrying capacity of the range. The basic 
problem of the rancher in the final analysis is to determine 
the maximum amount of beef of the required Quality he can 
































, 













■ 
































. 

. 



























raise on his range area without over-grazing or inherently 
damaging the pasture cover. He must know how to conserve 
the native forage cover as that is his cheapest and most 
valuable asset as a range producer. The more return he 
can get from this asset the lower will be his cost of pro- 
du ct i on. 

One project under observation has been continuous 
summer grazing. It has been found that pasture contin¬ 
uously grazed actually does better than pasture not grazed 
at all. To observe this a small section of a few asquare 
feet is closed off from grazing in various positions on 
the range. The sections never grazed do not appear to 
have as good an average grazing value per unit area as 
does the grazed land. This of course is true only if the 
range tested is not overstocked. 

For a pasture that has become depleted due to over- 
grazing a project has been devised to aid in restoring 
fertility and cover. This method allows for some late 
summer grazing but not in the spring and early summer per¬ 
iod when the seed is being shed. Grazing here is mainly 
in the fall or winter months. This treatment nay have to 
be repeated until such time as the re-seeded area affords 
the desired cover. The time required for recovery will 
depend on the extent of depletion and on such factors as 
climate and soil in the particular area. Rotational graz¬ 
ing to allow seeding every three years followed by use as 
winter pasture is desirable. 










. 






. 






































. 


















- 47 


A project somewhat similar to the preceding is that 
of deferred and rotational grazing. In this case a field 
may he isolated during the growing season until such time 
as it reaches maximum forage value. An adjacent field may 
he grazed during this time. When the first field has grown 
up to maximum forage value cattle are turned in upon it. 
While this field is thus in use another may he deferred 
for the use of these same cattle when the first has been 
grazed down to a certain point. It may thus he possible 
to feed a certain group of cattle, possibly a group for 
early finish either by grass alone or by grain, on the 
best of the pasture all the time. This practice will not 
allow any pasture to become over-grazed and at the same 
time allows the pasture cover to repeatedly replenish it¬ 
self as each section can at some time be deferred until 
the late summer or fall and grazing only take place after 
the seed is shed. 

Further experimentation has been carried out in re¬ 
gard to seasonal grazing. Apart from the fact that no 
pasture at any time should be over-grazed it is equally 
true from the standpoint of pasture utilization that even 
partial grazing may be over-grazing in the light of pasture 
requirements for the following season. It has been deter¬ 
mined in this connection that a pasture which is to be 
grazed in the spring should not be closely grazed the 
previous summer. Considerable grass cover should be left 





























■ 

' 






, 




. 






' 








































- 48 - 

to cure on the stalk and be utilized the following spring 
with the green grass high in protein content. After winter 
exposure the grass coverage is higher in carbohydrate and 
fibre content and much lower in protein content than when 
in the leaf stage of early spring. A mixture of the two 
stages of growth is therefore advisable to give the animal 
adequate roughage as well as a more balanced ration. This 
practice of necessity requires that a system of rotational 
and seasonal pasture grazing be followed as grazing cannot 
continue in the selected pasture over the fall and winter 
months if a sufficient percentage of cured cover is to re¬ 
main until spring. In fact the best practice is to set 
aside an area for fall and winter pasture only. This area 
should take full advantage of topography to afford maximum 
shelter for winter ranging and yet such as will allow only 
the minimum of snow coverage during severe winter weather. 
In the illustration following cattle are shown on winter 
range. 







' 




? 











■ 











































- 49 









Cattle of Gilchrist Brothers on winter pasture. 

This illustrates an adequate type of winter 
range which can he procured if correct season¬ 
al graging practices are followed. 

The cured grama grass on the Short Grass Plains offers 

in itself a well balanced ration for carrying cattle 

through the winter. Where severe snow cover, especially 

with encrustation, occurs and the winter pasturage cannot 

be reached it is essential to have auxiliary feed in the 

form of hay or concentrates. Where, as in this area, -only 

pure ranching is conducted and on an extensive scale with 

thousands of head of cattle on wide range pasture it is 

necessary owing to climatic conditions to either have on 

hand, or have access to, a reserve of feed from year to 

Cl ) Reproduced by permission of the Dominion Range Station. 



















































- 50- 

year. The shortage of feed in 1933 is sufficient proof 
of this necessity when owing to drought, high summer tem¬ 
perature and grasshopper damage there was a dangerous 
shortage of winter feed. Winter weather began in October 
and heavy snowfall in December. Shrinkage losses were 
heavy and death losses would have also been heavy if 
finer weather had not occurred. Feed on the range is 
the foundation of the stockmen T s business and too much 
attention cannot be given to ways and means of conserv¬ 
ing this vital resource. 

The ultimate test of the value of any such means 
however must be found in the return of marketable beef 
of required quality per unit of grazing area. If so 
many pounds more of beef of desired quality can be 
raised per acre and still the pasture coverage not be 
depleted, then the practice being followed is obviously 
desirable. The economic principle in question here is 
the same whether cattle are produced under range con¬ 
ditions on native pasture or whether they are produced 
on smaller areas on cultivated pasture. Experiments on 
fertilized pasture in Quebec are said to have shown that 
the carrying capacity of fertilized pasture is double 
that of unfertilized pasture. It was further shown here 
that on fertilized pasture 341 pounds of beef were pro¬ 
duced per acre whereas on unfertilized pasture only 150 
pounds were produced. Under extensive native range 










. 

* 


















, 


















■ 























- 51 - 

con&itions fertilization is out of the question but jud¬ 
icious pasture utilization along the lines discussed above 
take its place. The effect in the long run will be the 
same; to produce the maximum amount of quality beef per 
acre or other grazing unit and at the same time keep the 
carrying capacity of the grazing area in its maximum 
producing condition. 

In considering the question of the response of cattle 
to the grazing land and attempting to arrive at a correct 
pasture utilization policy for any one area several factors 
must be taken into account. These will include such fea¬ 
tures as soil, climate, water supply, winter food supply, 
nature of native vegetation, age and type of cattle to be 
grazed, topography of the land, and the seasonal changes 
in the composition of the pasture forage. 

In this connection some very valuable experiments 

have been carried out in the Short Grass Plains Area. One 

of these concerns the gains in weight of different classes 

of cattle grazed at different seasons of the year. It has 

already been shown that the native cattle forage on the 

plains varies in chemical content from season to season. 

(1 ) This variation is admirably suited to the production 

of range beef cattle. The high protein content of the 

spring grass is badly needed after wintering when the 

cattle are inclined to be lean. Gains will then continue 

t&til the maximum nutritive value of the gra s s is reached 
^ ) Chapter I, p. 'l 7 . 













■ 

....-■•0 

* 








. 

. 







* 


■ 





















- >2 - 

in late June or early July. The young stock will grow 
fairly quickly, the calves will obtain plenty of milk and 
the steers, especially 2-year-olds, will exhibit the maxi¬ 
mum gain in pounds per day. With the curing of the grass 
on the stalk in the late summer and fall cattle gains w T ill 
decrease owing to the rapid decline in protein and phos¬ 
phorus content in the grass but fleshing becomes firmer, 
soon to be of value in facing the rigcuib of winter. Cattle 
at this time are also in the best grass finished condition 
for marketing. The fully cured grass can also be used for 
winter pasture and if the weather is not too severe little 
if any supplementary feeding will be required. 

A study of the daily gains of cattle of various ages 
for the different seasonal grazing periods was made at 
the Dominion Range Station over a 5-year period. The re¬ 
sults of this investigation are presented in the following 
table: 

11 Cains in Weight of Different Classes of Cattle 


1928-1932 


Calves : 

Yrlg. 

Heifers 

Yrlg. 2 year 2 year 

Steers Steers Spays 

Age a 

Cows 

No.of years 
weighed. 

2 

5 

4 

4 2 

2 

Ave. No.per yr 

50 

1 98 

144 

28 20 

55 

Spring Period: 

Ave .initial 
weight........ 


387 

41 6 

699 566 

1 055 

Ave.daily gain 

- 

1.72 

1 .75 

2.01 1.83 

-.26 

Summer Period: 

Ave.daily gain 

1 .66 

1 .89 

2.00 

2.21 1.94 

1 .85 

Fall Period: 
Ave.daily gain 

1 .62 

.67 

• 79 

0 

c— 

0 

CO 

• 

-.71 

Ave.final wgt. 

41 5 


743 

1 060 874 

1110 






















- 53 - 



Calves 

Yrlg. 

Heifers 

Yrlg, 

Steers 

2 year 
Steers 

2vear 

Spays 

Aged 

Cows 

Total 

ave.gain 

308 

327 

361 

308 

55 

Total 

gain. 

daily... 

1 .44 

U52. 

1 .69 

1 .47 

.25 


(1 ) 


The data in this 5 year experiment can be taken as 
fairly representative of average range conditions. Factors 
of economic importance are that 2-year-old steers exhibit 
a greater gain than any other age or class; cows register 
a loss in the spring calving period and on the dry fall 
pasture when still giving milk to the calves; calves make 
the highest individual gains, and the rate of gain in the 
fall decreases in comparison with the spring and summer. 

Cattle can then be marketed after September 30th without 

. 

any apparent loss of weight and yearlings if moved to feed 
lots about October 1st are in best condition to finish on 
grain without loss of weight and reach the market when 
few finished stock are being sold. 

In considering the question of weight gains the fac¬ 
tor of winter feeding is important. Experiments have 
shown that the most economical winter feeding practice is 

that which provides for the animal just the amount required! 

, 

to maintain its weight during the winter season. Under¬ 
feeding or over-feeding during winter will result in de¬ 
creased gain on grass the following spring. In so far as 

over-feeding in winter is concerned it has been described . 

(1 ) R.Hi Carlyle - "The Kespnnse of Cattle to our Grazing 

Lands", p, 2, 

























- 

























■ 




































- 54 - 

particularly as to she-stuff, as a pure economic waste. 

In 1 931 calves wintered at the Dominion Range Station were 
well fed and gained 84 pounds. The summer gain on grass 
was only 226 pounds. Calves wintered to just hold their 
fall weight gained 329 pounds on summer grass. The first 
lot in the following fall weighed only 7 pounds more than 
the second lot. The extra food given the first lot to 
obtain a gain of 84 pounds in winter was therefore prac¬ 
tically wasted. For economical production a calf should 
just be fed sufficient to maintain its weight the first 
winter. In the spring and summer this calf as a yearling 
should put on weight at minimum cost. Older cattle may 
even lose a little weight in winter and still make high 
summer gains. These results have been verified in the 
United States range areas. It has been established at 
Havre, Montana, that a cow gaining as high as 100 pounds 
in winter will raise a calf the following summer weighing 
at weaning time no more than a calf raised by a cow which 
just held her fall weight, or even by one which lost some 
weight. It is clearly then an economic waste to over¬ 
feed this cow. 

Investigation into the economic relationships of 
supplementary winter feeds to native grass has been carried 
out at the Dominion Range Station for the past 4 years. 
Similar experiments at the United States Station at Havre, 
Montana, where conditions are very much the same as those 























. 















, 

■ 

. 












- 55 - 

in the Canadian Short Grass Area have tended to confirm 
the conclusions reached. The location, type and basis of 
operation of the ranch will largely determine the winter 
feeding requirements. In those sections of the grazing 
area in the Short Grass Plains not covered by heavy snow 
blanket or which are subject to warm Chinook winds, graz¬ 
ing is possible throughout most or all of the winter season. 
In other sections however or in adverse winter weather in 
any section supplementary feed must be used. 

The chief feeds used on the range for winter feeding 
are oats, rye, wheat, prairie or slough hay, clover,alfalfa 
and com. Oat hay in the dough stage, spring rye and fall 
rye in the dough stage are successfully used as winter 
feed. Alfalfa and sweet clover are best fed with straw 
for roughage and to balance the ration. Crested wheat 
grass and slough grass cut before seeds are formed is also 
good feed. 

The hay substitutes now being used are straw, straw 
and oilcake, Russian Thistle, grain concentrates, and mill 
feeds. Straw will not replace hay for calves but will for 
older stock to the extent that a cow can winter on 500 
pounds of hay and 1400 pounds of straw. Cows will winter 
on 1 to 2 pounds of linseed oilcake per day with straw 
depending on their fall condition. Russian Thistle should 
be cut green and mixed with grain hays in eq[ual proportions. 

With grain concentrates roughage must be used. It 










_ 

' 

' • 







' 






- 




. 



- - - - 



















. 


« 







* 












’ 




. 






























has been shown that - 

"1 lb, of grain will replace 2 lbs. of hay for a calf 
2 lbs.of grain will replace 3 -6 lbs. of hay for a mature 
cow. 

If more grain than the above is fed, it is more than 
is necessary for maintenance. Of all the grains, wheat is 
preferred, followed closely by oats and barley. Rye is a 
good feed but the other grains are preferred. Frosted 
wheat pound for pound, is as good as sound wheat and shrunk 
en wheat makes good feed. 

Oilcake - Linseed oilcake is a valuable concentrate. 

Its use in wintering cattle depends entirely on its cost 

in relation to grain and hay. For mature cattle - 

1 lb # of oilcake will replace 3 lbs. of hay 
1 lb. of oilcake will replace 2-5 lbs. of grain. 

For calves, one-third of a pound of oilcake has been 
used successfully and has replaced 2-3 lbs. of hay per day 
in the ration, or 40 lbs. of oilcake per calf saved approx¬ 
imately 33 0 lbs. of hay during the winter".(1) Oilcake 
gives bloom and vitality to beef cattle and enables them 
to withstand severe weather conditions in the spring. 

Mill feeds such as bran, shorts, and other mill treated 
feeds are not as good as whole wheat and are about equal in 
value to good hay as a winter feed. Oat hulls for example 
owing to low protein and high fibre content are only equal 
in feeding value to straw. It is not the general practice 

to finish on the range in feed lots. In the few c^ses 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson - “Feeds for Wintering Cattle in the Dry 

Area", p. 3 . 













. 

' 



- 





















. 









. 

. 






■ 


































. . 













- 57 - 


where it is practised wheat has been the principal feed 
with straw and hays for roughage.(1) 

A factor of very considerable importance to carrying 
capacity both with respect to summer and winter feeding is 
the age of the animal. Some years ago in Texas a nutrition¬ 
al chemist, Dr. Frap, determined a definite ratio to exist 
between the age and kind of animal and the forage consumed. 
The Frap ratio is given in the following table: 


"Cows..., 


Steers 

0).... 


Heifers (2). 


Steers 

(2).... 


Heifers (1 ) ,.. . , 

... .87 

Steers 

( 3 )-... 


Calves.. 

... .39 

Bulls., 


. . . 1 .23 " (2 ) 

In applying this 

ratio to s 

1 ranch unit 

of 530 

cattle with 


selling ages ranging from calves to 3 -year-olds it was 
found that the carrying capacity on a percentage basis 
was calves 89 ^, yearlings 94 fo, 2-year-olds 96 ^, and 3 - 
year-olds 1 00 96 . Calves require so much less grass that 
in this instance it would have been possible to have in¬ 
creased the herd 38 head before reaching a parity with the 
basis of selling 3-yea*r-old stock only. It is obviously 
an advantage from the standpoint of carrying capacity to 
sell younger stock. Owing no doubt largely to this fact 
there has been a gradual change to operation on a cow and 
calf basis in Southern Alberta the past few years. To 
this end experiments on feeding calves and finishing as 


baby beeves as well as feeding and finishing of yearlings 

have been made at the Lethbridge Experimental Farm for the 

(1) James Mitchell. 

(2) L.B. Thomson - "Age of Marketing in Relation to Ranch 
Organization". p. 3 . 























. 


. 












. 

. ■. 












■ 




































- 38 - 

past 3 years. These experiments have been performed on 
range quality stock from the Plains Area but using Pry 
Feed Lot projects with various rations. The table here¬ 
with shows average results on 4 groups of young stock, 
winter fed at the Lethbridge Experimental Farm: 


!, Table Showing Grains made and Feed Required by Calves 
and Yearlings Finished in Pry Lots on Various Rations, 



I 

II 

III 

IV 


Calves 

Calves 

Calves 

Yearlings 


Hay 

Hay 

Hay 

Hay 


Grain 

Grain 

Grain 

Grain 

Line 

Hand Fed Beet 

Self Fed 

No. Item 


Pulp 



3 . Ave.Initial 





weight........lbs • 

445 

444 

441 

771 

4, Ave. Gain.....,lbs. 
3, Ave.daily gain 

348 

383 

447 

1 49 

per head......lbs # 

1 .49 

2.10 

2.32 

1 .62 

6 . Feed consumed 





per calf:.lbs . 





7 . Roughage.lbs # 

1674 

1332 

1 071 

1447 

8 . Grain.........lbs. 

1390 

1437 

2313 

738 

9 • Pulp..lbs. 

10. Ratio of rough- 

2062 



1 : 0.83 

age to grain..lbs. 

1 : 0 .94 

1 : 2.16 

1 : 0.32 

11 , Feed consumed 





per lb.of gain: 

4.8 




12 . Roughage......lbs. 

4.0 

2.4 

9.7 

1 3 . Grain...lbs. 

4.0 

3.8 

3.2 

3.1 

1 4. Pulp..lbs. 

13* Ave.Paily con¬ 


3.4 



sumption of 
feed: 





16. Roughage..... ,1bs. 

9.4 

8.4 

3.3 

13.7 

17 . Grain....lbs. 

7.8 

7.9 

12.0 

8.2 

18 . Pulp ..........lbs. 


11.3 


ri 


<1 ) 


Although these figures are averages only and considerable 
variations may be expected from year to year yet it is 
again obvious the calf is the cheaper animal to feed and 

fatten. The gain in weight, both total and daily, is 

(1) Lethbridge Experimental Farm - Feeding Trials, 

1930-31 . 


























- 59 - 

greater than the yearling and the feed consumed per pound 
of gain is generally lower and this is a vital guiding 
factor. 

These results as would be expected substantially con¬ 
firm feeding statistics at the Dominion Range Station, 

There it has been shown that calves fed under shelter for 
allO day winter period require 8-10 pounds of hay per 
day or using clover, alfalfa, oat hay, crested wheat grass 
and blue joint with no grazing required 1000 pounds of hay 
per head to carry them through the winter. If these calves 
had been allowed some grazing 2 pounds of hay per day would 
have maintained them. Yearlings at the Dominion Range 
Station have been found to require 12 to 14 pounds of hay 
per day for a 110 day period but could lose 50 to 70 pounds 
without interfering with the next season’s growth. Calves 
on the other hand fed to gain as much as 85 pounds show 
little if any more gain than those which just maintained 
their weight on a much smaller ration. It is a waste to 
over-feed the calf. Beef cows may require 15 to 18 pounds 
of hay for maintenance but in any event it is not advisable 
to feed protein feod to older stock as not growth but 
maintenance only is desirable. 

It should be unnecessary to remark that there are 
many factors which will affect carrying capacity and feed¬ 
ing rate. Location of the range in relation to browsing 
ability of the stock, the supply and quality of winter 






































- 60 » 


feed, the distribution and amount of water, weather con¬ 
ditions, quality and type of cattle, and the rancher's 
ability to care for his stock are all important factors. 
Such factors together with general production policy, will 
also affect the quality of beef produced. It is stated 
for example that: "Nearly 30,000,000 acres of land in 
Argentina are seeded annually in wheat, com, oats, barley, 
and linseed. Fully 23,000,000 acres are laid down perman¬ 
ently in lucerne and improved pastures, while between 
80 , 000,000 and 100 , 000,000 acres of good natural pasture 
land are devoted to the raising of prime cattle, the maj¬ 
ority of which eventually go on to the lucerne to be fin¬ 
ished for the chilled beef trade. 

"Argentina is one of the principal livestock coun¬ 
tries of the world, supplying fresh meat of the best Qual¬ 
ity at a cost of production probably less than that of any 
other country. A steady advance has been maintained in 
the development of this industry over the past sixty years, 
particularly in the case of cattle and the breeders have 
set themselves out to maintain a very high standard in 
their animals. Of the 32,000,000 head of cattle in the 
country, it is estimated that fully two-thirds are typic¬ 
ally pure British breeds, in which the Shorthorn predom¬ 
inates. It is this breed which provides the major portion 

of the chilled meat for Great Britain ".(1 ) In suite of 

(1 ) H.W.Brighton - "Argentina Live Stock Breeding Require¬ 

ments" - Department of Trade and Commerce, Commercial 

Intelligence Journal, No. 1 324,April 13 th, 1933 , p. 362 . 















. 




















; 









' 




















' 


















- 61 - 

the many varied factors involved the results above deter¬ 
mined are nevertheless true and vital to the livestock 
industry. Adverse conditions in any of the inherent 
factors will increase the food consumption per animal and 
the food consumption per pound of gain, and of necessity 
increase cost of production. 










CHAPTER II 


UTILIZATION OF TEE RANGE AREA 
Part 2. 

The carrying capacity of any range area is vitally 
affected by the volume and distribution of the available 
water supply. In the Dry Area of the Short Grass Plains 
where this problem is most acute far reaching investiga¬ 
tions have been made. Waver projects have been carried 
out on the Dominion Range Station property and on the 
Gilchrist ranches. In this area where the average rain¬ 
fall is less than 13 inches the solution to the problem 
lies in devising methods to conserve the run-off water. 

The essential factor is not the total precipitation how¬ 
ever, but its distribution and variation according to 
locality. Local variations in temperature and wind vel¬ 
ocity will materially alter the effect of precipitation. 
Snowfall is even more important than rainfall as it is 
largely the former which determines the supply for reser¬ 
voirs. This will be increased if the sub-soil is frozen 
previous to heavy snowfall as spring run-off will then be 
at its maximum. Sloughs or springs do not give a natural 
permanent supply of water in the plains area. In only 4 
years in the past 40 years have Such sources proven adequat 
Cheap and simple methods have been followed here to take 
advantage of the undulating character of the range surface 
for water flow and of the frequent depressions as catch- 
3asins. 









- 62 


































































































- 63 - 


Studies are being made as to the size, type, and lo¬ 
cation of watering places in relation to grazing capacity 
as well as in relation to evaporation, precipitation and 
other factors. Over a period of 6 years at the Dominion 
Range Station experiments have been made with earthen 
dams to catch the spring run-off. These have been shown 
to be most satisfactory and to be the cheapest water system 
on any range area. The installation cost has worked out at 
10 cents per acre and repair work at 1 /2 cent per acre over 
the first 4 years. With cattle grazing on a basis of 60 
acres per head - the proper basis for this area - the in¬ 
vestment cost has therefore been only $6.00 per animal and 
the repair cost only 30 cents per animal or a total of 
$6.30 per head for the whole watering cost on the range. 
Dams can be constructed for $ 400.00 and less to give ad¬ 
equate service. A 13 foot reservoir to cover 43 acres 
would serve 2,000 acres of range at an approximate cost 
of $ 130 . 00 . "The cost of constructing reservoirs depends 
upon the topography of the land and the amount of water 
stored in a given area for the amount of dirt moved in 
the dam. This varies in different parts of the short 
grass plains".(1) 

It is not necessary to have a large watershed sur¬ 
face for these reservoirs. The dam should be built 

across a small coulee or the outlet of a depression and 

( 1 ) E.S. Hopkins - "Range Land Investigations" - Report of 

the Dominion Field Husbandman - Department of Agric¬ 
ulture, Ottawa, Ontario, Year 1330 , p. 36. 














- 64 - 


should be high enough to conserve a sufficient amount of 
water for the number of stock using it. It should also 
allow surplus water to run off without causing damage to 
the structure. 

The native range surface is well suited to provide 
adequate spring run-off. The soil is not too porous and 
at the same time is firm and hard at the surface. This 
feature, together with conveniently located slopes and 
depressions, enables artificial reservoirs to be easily 
constructed. The most desirable location consists of a 
wide bottom coulee with a narrow outlet where the dam can 
be constructed at minimum expense. The retaining soil 
should preferably be of heavy clay composition to provide 
an impervious basin. Seepage loss in sandy soils may 
off-set the economic value of the artificial range reser¬ 
voir. 

The best time to locate a reservoir site is in the 
spring when the melting snow and spring rains indicate the 
natural course o'f run-off w r ater. The best time to con¬ 
struct and repair dam sites is in the fall when precipita¬ 
tion is at a minimum and maximum surface is available for 
working. A coulee served by maximum watershed surface is 
desimble. The watershed should not be cultivated and 
should preferably be undisturbed native sod covered with 
native grass. 

Retaining wall and spillway construction is simple 























. 






- 65 - 

but important. Typical earth dam specifications provide 
for a structure 8 feet across the top when complete with 
a bottom width 5 times the height of the dam plus the 8 
feet of top width. This gives a 3 : 1 slope on the water 
side and a 2 : 1 slope on the dry side of the dam. The 
3 : 1 inside slope offers greater protection against wave 
action which on an open wind swept range area is a factor 
requiring consideration. The sod should be placed in thin 
layers and laid when moist. The excavation pit should be 
at least about 1 0 feet from the outside foot of the dam. 

To protect the inside of the dam against wave action rip¬ 
rapping is advisable. Well laid rock rip-rap is prefer¬ 
able but failing this a brush covering should be allowed 
to grow. Sage brush, willows, buckbrush or tall weeds 
are useful for this purpose. 

Spillway construction must be carried out to provide 
adequate facility for surplus run-off water from the res¬ 
ervoir. The essential point in this structure is that the 
surplus run-off must not affect the walls of the dam. It 
is advisable also that it does not cause too great erosion 
after it leaves the reservoir. The spillway outlet should 
be at least 3 feet below the top of the dam to allow 
plenty of free-board space and prevent escape of water 
over the top of the dam during excess flood. The correct 
free-board space must be determined by experience in the 
particular area in which it is used. 






















. 

■ 


: 








: 








« . 

- 
























. . . 











































- 66 - 


A further feature of significance is the depth of 
water which is desirable. The water should not he so 
shallow as to permit wading across by the cattle in order 
to avoid pollution and it should be deep enough to provide 
water throughout the grazing season for the number of cat¬ 
tle in the vicinity of the reservoir. Provided the body 
of water is large enough and deep enough in the central 
portion wading of cattle on the edges is not a disadvant¬ 
age. It may even be of assistance in extreme hot weather 
and during the attack of heel flies. The depth of water 
desirable is the maximum consistent with other construc¬ 
tion factors, as the deeper the water the less the evapora¬ 
tion. Shallow depth and large surface area will produce 
maximum loss by evaporation in a storage reservoir. Ex¬ 
periments extending over 1928 , 1 929 and 1930 were made on 
this problem at the Dominion Range Station covering 5 
reservoirs of distinct construction in 3 different fields 
at various locations. At the same time comparison was 
made with an evaporation tank. The object of this project 
was to determine the relation of the continuous water sup¬ 
ply to the continuous cattle inventory to be served. The 
loss registered is evaporation and seepage. The results 
appear in the following table: 






. 





. 














' 




















Loss of Water in Reservoirs and Evaporation Tank 

Part A Part B 

Loss of water from Reservoirs Loss of water 


- 67 


M 

§ 

EH 

£ 

B o 

O -H 
U p 
'H a? 
U 
o 
Pi 


o 

K\ 

ON 


OX 

CM 

ON 


GO 

CM 

ON 




o 


bo 

KS 


O nO 


P 


O T- 


P td 

>s 03 03 

H d r d 
d H O O P 
pj O ® LT\ d 
CO CO K\ >1 

P 

-P 

xj a 

tyD d OOO 

•H O • • 

p HM) o 


O CM 

• ® 

NO T- 


UN O NO C— CM r- ON ONnO tNOOJM) O 
K\CO CM C CM O NO ^ CO CO OnnO CM O 




- ON'3 o <3 r- C—CO O On C"~ K\GD 
O r— LT\ LTAnO CM NO CO O T- i — NO nJ" 


CM CJ CM nJ- CM ^-^rex-^KX, 


JCO 

NN| 




^ CO ^ KA sf -=t NAOO OOO 

r-^ON lT\OG KA K\ CT-OG Nj- oo 


CM K\t- cm KA^fr K\CM cm 


O CM CM NO ^ CM NO NO NO NO CM CM O 
O T- *— NACMr-CMKAKAKAKAr-x—O 


OO 


O^CMnO^CM ^i-CONO nJ-nOnQCM o 
O CM T- NACM X— CM ^ NACM NANA,— O 


dOCM ^vOoO^nOnOnDnO^OOO 
o r- CM tCN'it CM KMAKNKNCMnO O O 


d o CM nJ*nD OnO no M-CDCOnOnC CM O 

>H ••••••*••••*•• 

Or-OJKNOKMACM^d-rAlAr-O 


• nO CM M-nO^nOnOCOOJnO Nf O O CO 
-H fAr- CM NACM NA NAnJ- c— NA CM CM O O O 


CM 


u * 

• . 


CD • 

• • 


P H 

£ • 

• O 

e-H 

CD 03 

ir\K\ 

£ o 

P CD 

r — 

£3 03 

d Pi 

O 


£ o 

o p 

£ Vi 

. d 

p 

•H O 

Pi 

NO 

O 

O <D 

r“ r- 


O 


£ 

xJ d 

•H r-) 

CD Q) 

p Pi 

•H *H 

03 p, 

£ 

U f-\ 

CD >s 

CD p 


fd EH 

P CO 

<tj 


••• *.. 

' • •••••••O**03 

• * O • r- • lc^NA .OX 

v- lt\ NA ip na ir\ na tr\NAO 

\NA,- x- o r- n 

O O O O -p O -H 

OC.pO.pO.p-P o-p 
’ P P P P NO p £ 

NO NO NO t— x— NO «H 

• x— • ® rH 

o> <d >& >» * * pp • • d 

* t>s £ t|D ttf) p* p< p PP 

tddddpddcDCDooo 


X2 

p 

LT\ 


.03 


03 

CD 

Xi 

o 
£ 
•H 

OO CO 

CO c— UN 


Nt CO NN 

NA ->t 


p « 

O « 

O * 

03 
O 03 
p O 


03 <J} 
03 

O j 


U 

Pi 03- 
tlf 
o 3 
U 
CD 
> 
d 


03 H 
tiO d 

o? «H 

u £ d 

(DrIP 

> CS O 
<4 # eh 


CO 

NA 


Pi 














































- 68 - 


Although reservoir A .29 showed the largest loss it is 
accounted for by the fact that 281 cattle were served by 
it until August 13th, the driest period, whereas B .27 had 
no cattle drinking from it until August 15th and then there 
were two other reservoirs in the field in use* B .27 serv¬ 
ing 281 cattle to August 15th was dry by that date* Thus 
A *29 w r as shown to be the more economical reservoir and 
the water kept in better drinking condition. The cattle 
using B .27 in 1 929 lost weight due to the contaminated 
condition of the water* In the Short Grass Plains Area it 
would be safe to estimate a total average loss of 48 inches 
The comparison of B.36 and 0*23 show r s the affect on evap¬ 
oration of depth of water and area of surface. Comparing 
the total loss from the reservoirs serving cattle contin¬ 
ually with that from the free water surface of the tank 
there is not a great loss by seepage from a settled reser¬ 
voir. The greatest loss occurs during June, July and 
August when hot dry winds create a condition of very low 
humidity and very high evaporation. 

The distance cattle are required to walk to water is 
important. It has been determined on the range ranches 
that cattle cannot walk over 1 1/2 miles to water and 
thrive as they should. If they are required to walk over 
2 miles three things happen - first, there will be an ec¬ 
onomic waste of grass as the range beyond the 2 mile limit 
will be under-grazed; second, the grass cover surrounding 






the water-hole will be over-grazed or even totally des¬ 
troyed by tramping, and third, the cattle will tend to walk 
off their gains and finish. In 1929 in a field of 3,740 
acres the pasture beyond 1 1 /2 miles from the water-hole 
was only grazed The area within 1 1 /2 miles was badly 

over-grazed. These facts lead to the logical conclusion 
that reservoirs should be as frequent as possible and so 
placed as to be within 1 1 /£ miles of the stock to be 
served. This means a number of smaller reservoirs rather 
than one or two large watering places. Large reservoirs 
encourage over-grazing, unequal and uneconomic grazing and 
place a premium on unthrifty stock. Based on thes-e factors 
a typical range water-hole is illustrated below. 



Cattle of Gilchrist Brothers used by the Dominion Range 
Experiment Station. Adequate water supply is vital to 
range beef production. This can be economically served 















- 70 - 

by simple utilization of topography to trap surface 
run-off. (1 ) 

Conservation and control of run-off moisture is also 
of real value for irrigation purposes on the range. Con¬ 
struction of small cheap spillways from a reservoir or 
even diversion by cross furrows on a hill-side will serve 
to irrigate a large area for hay or cultivated crop for¬ 
age. In one instance at the Dominion Range Station a 
furrow across a slope diverted water to native grass-land 
increasing the yield from 250 pounds per acre to nearly 
1 ,000 pounds per acre in a single season. Even if a 
stream can be tapped or a pump must be used utilization 
of water to produce hay or cultivated forage crops is a 
vital factor on the range in the supply of winter feed. 

Of the crops which can be thus grown in the Plains Area 
for supplementary feed the principal ones are the grain 
hays, wheat, oats, rye, sweet clover, corn, alfalfa, 
Crested Wheat grass, Brome grass and Western Rye Grass.(2) 
All surface water in Alberta belongs to the Crown in 
the right of the Province and a license must be obtained 
to divert or store same. This is freely granted to 
ranchers however by the Provincial Director of Water 
Resources, in the best interests of the livestock industry 
The same incentive would be extended by the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 

(1 ) ReproduceaTTy "permissTon""of the Dominion Range "Station 
( 2 ) S.E, Clarke - "The Feed Situation". 











- 




















































. 

■ 



























- V 


A final feature in the utilization of range land to 
he considered is the type of stock raised in the grazing 
area. It is the considered opinion of ranchers after 
many years of close observation and experience that the 
Hereford is the best breed for range stock. This breed 
is more hardy, a greater rustler, and will make a better 
use of the range area than either the Aberdeen-Angus or 
Shorthorn. The Hereford bulls will also distribute them¬ 
selves better among the cows than will the other breeds 
and this is a vital factor in obtaining maximum percentage 
calf crop at minimum cost. The stock raised by 
H.S.Gilchrist on the Ranch and by Gilchrist Brothers 
is Hereford stock. No better beef cattle are produced 
anywhere in the world than are found on these ranches. It 
is not necessary that the Hereford be a registered pure 
bred to be the best beef animal or to be the best for the 
range. It must however be sufficiently of pure Hereford 
blood to have the genuine Hereford characteristics re¬ 
ferred to above and to produce prime beef for market re¬ 
quirements , 

With the above array of established and irrefutable 
facts before him the range producer is now in a position 
to determine the correct carrying capacity of his range. 
n Studies on the carrying capacity show that 40 acres per 
head for the summer period of 7 1/2 months is not too much. 
During 1 928, 1 929 and 1 930 there was no improvement in the 




































. 

' 

. . 



































, 


























- 72 


grass- cover. During 1 931 the amount of land required for 
winter grazing was studied and, up to date, the allowance 
of 20 acres per head for 4 1/2 months is not too much. 

The fields at the Range Station are typical of a large 
portion of the Short Grass Plains. There are, no doubt, 
areas of grazing land that would have a higher or lower 
carrying capacity, hut generally, it is believed that 60 
acres per head is required to maintain an animal for one 
year on the Short Grass Plains 11 . (1) It is decidedly nec¬ 
essary that grazing regulations always recognize the true 
carrying capacity of this area. These relationships are 
established on the basis of the true facts determined by 
scientific experiment in the manner above discussed. 

They are confirmed by experienced ranchers in the area 
with over 40 years 1 experience - involving the grazing 
of cattle under the old open range and under the modern 
closed range conditions. These conclusions as to fact 
determined by the scientist by the most modem of scien¬ 
tific methods completely confirmed by the experienced 
practical rancher in the area cannot be ignored if the 
naximum use is to be made of these range lands. 

It is most unfortunate however that these basic facts 
a-re at present being ignored by Federal Government Regula¬ 
tions governing grazing lands in the Short Grass Plains 

Area.With respect to carrying capacity these Regulations a re 

[1) L.B. Thomson - ^'Economics of the Ranching Industry in 

Alberta and Saskatchewan, 1932 ,f . p. 3 . 












- 73 - 

based on Section 6 of the Qrder-in-Council of April 12th, 
1922 - "(6) The Lessee shall, within each of the three 
years from the date of the lease, place upon the tract of 
land leased not less than one-third of the whole number of 
stock, owned by him, which is required to be placed upon 
the leasehold, namely, one head of cattle or five sheep 
for every thirty acres covered by the lease, and shall 
during the rest of its term maintain stock thereon owned 
by him in the proportion of one head of cattle or five 
sheep for every thirty acres of land leased. If upon in¬ 
spection by an Appraiser of Grazing Lands it is found that 
the leasehold will support more stock than the number 
stated herein, the Minister of the Interior may require 
the lessee to place additional stock on the leasehold. The 
lessee must not graze stock other than his own on the 
leasehold. 

The word "cattle" means bulls, oxen, cows and horses 
at least one year old TT .(1) The lessee is further required 
to take an oath annually that he is complying with Section 
6 . "(8) The lessee shall, within one year from the date 
of execution of the lease on behalf of the department, 
furnish a statutory declaration showing that he is the 
owner of and has the required number of stock on the lease¬ 
hold, and non-compliance with this requirement shall render 
his lease subject to summary cancellation. The lessee will 

f e required f thereafter, to furnish a sworn return to 

1 ) TI Regulations Governing Grazing Lands in the Provinces 

of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta and in the 
Peace River Tract in the Province of British Columbia'* 
p. 4. Ottawa 1924. 







- 74 - 

the department on the 1st of July, in each year, and at 
such other times as the department may decide, showing 
the number of head of stock on the leasehold”»(1 )(2) 

The disparity between fact and requirement is very 
obvious. The Regulations would appear to be inapplicable 
to the present condition of the grazing area. They may 
have been suitable when the range was open or before 
1905 under North West Territories jurisdiction but range 
conditions are radically different at the present time. 

At the time of open range conditions there was no such 
thing as regulated production of range beef or systematic 
pasture utilization as is necessary to-day. The emphasis 
at that time was probably reasonably placed on increased 
production and the range area was supposed to be used to 
the limit of its capacity. That is not the situation to¬ 
day. The emphasis now is not upon mass production of 
range cattle from a given area but rather on regulated 
production to suit the period demands of the market and 
the closed range must be so utilized- as to be preserved 
for the future as well as the present at its maximum 
carrying capacity. Yet in spite of these substantiated 
facts the present Regulations place the emphasis on the 
wrong point by insisting on maximum production. This is 
shown by Sections 6 and 8 above and also by Sections 11 

and 12 which read as follows - 1 (11) A lease, whether 

{1) op. cit. p. 4. 

(2) Adopted by Province of Alberta under O.C. 656-31 . 










■ 

■ 











. 






' 












»4 * 













. 

























* 









- 75 - 

granted under these or prior regulations, cannot be as¬ 
signed without the consent of the minister. A lessee 
desiring to assign his lease must pay all outstanding 
rental and furnish the department with a properly exe¬ 
cuted, unconditional assignment of the lease, a registra¬ 
tion fee of $3.00 and evidence from the proper official 
of the Provincial Government that all provincial taxes on 
the lands covered by the assignment have been paid. If 
the assignee is an individual a statutory declaration 
from him that he is a British subject must be furnished, 
while if the assignee is an incorporated company a stat¬ 
utory declaration from the president, secretary or manager 
that the company is incorporated under the laws of the 
Dominion of Canada or under the laws of a province of the 
Dominion and that the president, vice-president and a 
majority of the directors of the company are British sub¬ 
jects, must be furnished. In no case shall an assignment 
be allowed unless the lessee has complied with clauses 
(6) and (8) of these regulations by placing upon the lease¬ 
hold not less than one-third of the whole number of stock, 
which is required to be placed thereon and has furnished a 
statutory declaration showing that he has done so, and 
that the said stock was owned by him, but this condition 
shall not be applicable to leases granted under prior 
regulations and brought under these regulations in accord¬ 
ance with the next following clause. 









■ 

’ 


























. 











iG 

















- 76 - 

"(12) The holder of a lease acquired under former 
regulations which has less than five years to run, irres¬ 
pective of the area contained therein, may relinquish his 
lease and acquire one under these regulations, on the con¬ 
dition that, upon inspection by an Appraiser of Grazing 
Lands, the lands affected are found to be unfit for agric¬ 
ultural purposes, and that the lessee is utilizing the 
leasehold to its full extent for stock-grazing purposes." 
(1 ) 

It would therefore appear to be high time that the 
Dominion and Provincial Governments concerned so amend 
their grazing Regulations as to be more in accord with 
actual range conditions. If this is not done and these 
Regulations are enforced as at present constituted the 
stockmen in the Short Grass Plains Area will shortly have 
to go out of business and in addition the whole range area 
will be set back by eni^orced over-grazing. Regulations 
in a matter of this sort should be sufficiently elastic 
to be easily modified in accord with changing conditions 
in the range area and those modifications should be made. 
The Regulations should be modified at once to provide for 
at least 30 and even 60 acres per head of stock. This 
would tend to afford a desirable check to prevent over 
production - now enforced by the present Regulations - 
but which is a fact in any case, and would also tend to 

stimulate easy and economic production of only the best 

(1 ) op. cit. p. 3. 



















































. 

































. 


■ • 










- 77 


fed and finished range quality beef, A Government expert 
on range grazing conditions should then be employed to 
constantly observe the actual pasture utilization on the 
range and thus be in a position to give expert advice on 
grazing requirements. If it is found at any time this 
advice requires a change in the existing grazing regula¬ 
tions that change should be made at once. The only way 
satisfactory and correct regulations can be made and en¬ 
forced is by the governing authority knowing the actual 
range conditions and acting in accord therewith. 

Further argument for amended Regulations arises when 
considering the question of rentals and taxes in relation 
to carrying capacity of the range. Section 9 of the Re¬ 
gulations reads : n (9) The lessee shall pay an annual 
rental at the rate of 2 cents per acre for every acre 
covered by the lease, payable half-yearly in advance u # (1 ) 
Taxes on deeded grazing land amounts to approximately 2 
cents per acre in the Short Grass Area,(2) Rental and 
taxes have been established at 1 5ft of the operating costs 
in the cattle industry. If the cost of upkeep in improve¬ 
ments - such as for water and fence - apart from their 
initial cost, is added the total amounted on the 1 932 
cattle inventory to 24.4of the total cost of production 
or $3«49 per head per year. This is a fixed cost and 
increases in proportion if the cow does not produce a 

calf that.year. This rental and tax cost is higher than 

(1 ) op, cit. p. 4. 

(2) The grazing permit fee in the Province of Alberta 
is 4 cents per acre under Sec. 1 . O.G, 654-31 . 







- 78 - 

on similar range areas in other countries, such as on the 
Montana Range of the United States or in Australia* In 
Australia where the average grazing capacity is 50 acres 
per head rental and taxes amount to only 6/10 cents per 
acre whereas in the Canadian Short Crass Plains they amount 
to 4 cents. In so far as the carcass beef trade is con¬ 
cerned Canada must compete with Australia on world markets 
under this handicap. Under normal price levels this would 
indicate that the Government should reduce rentals and 
taxes more in keeping with the low carrying capacity of 
these range lands. This is even more the case at Present 
when beef cattle prices are the lowest in history! In 
effect the carrying capacity should determine the rental 
and taxes. 

This leads to one further factor arising out of the 
present Regulations requiring amendment. Security and 
permanency of tenure are vital requisites to any stock- 
man who wishes to preserve and improve his graging area. 

The pertinent ruling here is an amendment to Section 1 of 
the 1922 Regulations. This amendment reads - fT (1 ) (d) The 
Minister of the Interior is authoriied to issue twenty-one 
year grazing leases on vacant Dominion lands unfit for 
agricultural purposes in the Provinces of Saskatchewan and 
Alberta where the granting of such leases will not injur¬ 
iously affect the interests of any bona fide established 
industry in the district; and also renewal twenty-one year 












. 


, T 

. 

' 

* 





- 79 - 

leases covering lands now held under lease on condition 
that, upon inspection by an officer of the Department of 
the Interior, the lands affected are found to be unfit 
for agricultural purposes, that the lessee is utilizing 
the leasehold to its full extent for stock grazing purposes 
and that the granting of such leases will not injuriously 
affect the interests of any bona fide established industry 
in the district”. (1 ) Section 13 has further bearing on 
this, reading as follows - rf 0 3) Should the Minister of 
the Interior, at any time during the term of a lease, 
think it to be in the public interest to withdraw the 
whole or any portion of the lands included therein, pro¬ 
vided such lands are required in connection with any 
system of irrigation v/orks or for sale under the irriga¬ 
tion system, he may, on giving the lessee three years* 
notice, withdraw such lands or cancel the lease; but any 
improvements owned by the lessee on the lands so with¬ 
drawn may be removed by him or he shall be entitled to 
compensation therefor, the amount of such compensation to 
be decided by the Department of the Interior iT .( 2 ) In an 
area such as the Short Grass Plains and the contiguous 
grazing area where only cattle ranching can be conducted 
and where farming cannot be conducted, there should be 

no obstacles placed in the way of the bona fide rancher 
(1 ) "Amendements and Additions to Regulations Governing 
Grazing Lands in the Provinces of Manitoba,Saskatch¬ 
ewan and Alberta and in the Peace River Tract in the 
Province of British Columbia**. Ottawa 1?24. 

( 2 ) op. eit. p. 3 . 































_ 








' 
















who wishes to build up his business. The successful 
ranching business is not built up in a few short years. 
Many men have been 40 or 50 years in the business. Breed¬ 
ing to market requirements, developing a sufficiently 
elastic ranch management system and carrying out consist¬ 
ent policy on ranch improvement are factors which can only 
be properly developed over a long period of time. Security 
and long term concession in the matter of land tenure are 
essential to this end* Such considerations as these 
raise the question of the advisability and practicability 
of state aid to industry. It can be considered in the 
present connection first from the point of view of the 
producer and of production costs. As an operating cost 
only, apart from development cost to utilize the land, 
rental and taxes in this Canadian range area are cal¬ 
culated to amount to 1of total operating cost in the 
cattle industry and 12.2in the sheep industry. This 
cost added to necessary development cost has been found 
to amount to 24.4T& of total production cost. The ques¬ 
tion at issue here is whether or not rent and taxes are 
too high in relation to the carrying capacity of the 
range and in the light of necessary production costs. 

State assistance to any industry whether direct or 
indirect must only be considered in the light of the 
particular circumstances of the case. In order to guage 
accurately the justice or injustice Involved and to 





- 









. 










■ 








. 








♦ 





* 


. 






















estimate fairly the social effects involved, comparisons 
of cases with similar features are often of value. The 
contiguous grazing area of British Columbia as a case in 
point pays a rental of 1 0 cents per acre during spring and 
fall on a basis of 15 to 20 acres per animal for these 
periods. During the intervening summer period from June 
to November the rate charged is 55 cents per head. This 
is a high rate compared to the plains area but the carry¬ 
ing capacity is approximately 509 & more. The Provincial 
Government offsets this cost further by conducting range 
improvement work apparently absorbing the cost and there¬ 
fore not placing any additional tax on the animal sold. 

Comparable grazing areas in the United States are 
assisted by the state through range improvement in water 
facilities, fencing, stock trails and conservation range 
practice. Lease rental and taxes in Montana on mountain 
ranges amount to l 6 . 5 f° of the cost of production, on 
foot-hill range amount to 20 . 7 ^ and on prairie range 
with a lower carrying capacity to 21 .9^* In Colorado the 
ratio is 15.876 and in Wyoming it is 11 . 196 .( 1 ) In 1924 in 
the Northern Great Plains region of the United States - a 
region similar to the Canadian area - the total cost of 
production covering 504 ranches was $22,028. Lease 

rental and taxes amounted to $ 6.2 24 or 28 . 296 .( 2 ) The 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson - ”Economics of the Ranching Industry in 

Alberta and Saskatchewan, 1 932. p. 8. 

(2) Wilson,Wilcox,Klemmedson and Parr - "A Study of Ranch 
Organization and Methods of Range-Cattle Production 
in the Northern Great Plains Region”. U.S.D.A.,March 
1928, Technical Bulletin No. 45* P# 58. 
























' 




■ 





. 














- 




, 


- 





















. 










- 82 


state range improvement work here keeps down the cost of 
production to the producer to that extent and off-sets 
high lease rental and taxes. The Canadian producer has a 
total cost of 24.4 f> to hear himself. 

In Australia the individual states operate their own 
lands except in the North West Territory where the Federal 
Government controls. There are 75,000,000 acres in New 
South Wales known as Western Land Leases used for grazing. 
Rental is based on the classification of the land and its 
carrying capacity which varies from 40 to 60 acres per 
head, the average being 50 acres per head. The average 
rent is $ 3.60 per section or 6 / 1 u cents per acre. Under 
similar conditions in the Canadian area rent and taxes 
are 4 cents.(1 ) 

From the standpoint of social welfare as a whole 
apart from that of the producer in particular it may be 
said that state aid in any form extended to the beef cattle 
industry in the Short Grass Plains Area can well take into 
account the success of such aid as extended in the areas 
above considered. A desirable co-operation between state 
and private interests has existed to the general welfare 
of the community. If an industry is an asset to public 
welfare it should be retained. If private interest be¬ 
comes financially unable to protect it there is some 

.justification for state intervention. It must however be 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson, op. cit. pp. 7-8. 











. 
















/ 






























' 













. > 
















- 83 - 

cautiously carried out. Efficiency must not be impaired 
which generally means private initiative under incentive 
is better than state management under patronage. Any 
state aid should not be suoh as to lead to actual control 
of the industry. That is not the function of government» 

The Canadian range cattle producer does not want to lose 
control of his industry. He could utilize such assistance 
as would enable him to improve his own production policy 
but such assistance need never mean control of the industry. 
It can react to public welfare much better when such an 
eventuality is thoroughly safeguarded. 

The total agricultural wealth of Canada in 1 933 was 
estimated as $ 3 , 230 , 994 , 000 . Livestock accounted for 
$403,1 33,000 of this total.(1) This at least indicates 
that the livestock industry in its best form is worth 
preserving. It must of course be remembered that any 
direct aid to an industry must in theory at least be added 
to its ultimate cost. The guiding factor in the long run 
may well be the purchasing power of the consumer to over¬ 
come this ? extra 1 cost. The same might well apply to what 
might be called the short run policy of assistance in the 
form of spasmodic relief to industry such as was occasioned 
in the beef cattle industry in the drought area in 1934 . 

In practice however there is no T extra 1 cost by state or 

other assistance. The production costs will be character-. 

(1 ) "Live Stock and A n imal Products Statisti cs, 1 933” , 

Agricultural Branch, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, 
Ottawa, Ontario, p. 10 . 








































































’ 















* 








- 84 


istic for the area in any case. If however the private 
producer cannot meet these costs and sell at a reasonable 
profit he must sell below cost or go out of business which 
in turn is not good for the community as a whole as his own 
purchasing power and spending ability is lost to society, 
fhe loss of the poor manager ho?/ever is not so much to be 
deplored and he has gradually disappeared from the 
cattle industry. A government on the other hand may well 
afford even to directly assist an industry temporarily or 
1 nurse 1 it and yet absorb the cost owing to its large 
scale organization, its public backing and its departmen¬ 
tal organization. In so far as there is gain to the 
community as a whole and in so far as it does not lead 
to control of industry itself, state assistance as a tem¬ 
porary aid can be justified. In the Canadian range area 
it would largely be negative in the removal of impediments 
to the industry both on the range itself through grazing 
regulations and with respect to transportation in the re¬ 
moval of unnecessary delaying regulations. Government 
assistance in range improvement work as is done in British 
Columbia, in the United States by the National Forest 
Service, and in Australia, but is not done by Alberta 
or Saskatchewan would be a factor in reducing costs to the 
Producer at least and increasing utility as well as doing 
much to restore and maintain confidence in the range 
cattle industry. Positive in ‘ fche form of fire guards, 



















' 





. 


















































- 85 - 

construction of range watering facilities by the use of 
dams where practical, and of windmills where dams are not 
feasible, have been suggested however as means of assist¬ 
ance to the range producer.(1) Assistance which the ran¬ 
cher requires also includes easier credit facilities. Inter¬ 
mediate and long term credit is essential to an agricul¬ 
tural industry. The interest rate should be as low as 
practicable talcing into account the risk involved, pre¬ 
ferably not over Such organizations as the Canadian 

Farm Loan Board, the Dominion Agricultural Credit Company 
Limited and various rural credit societies and farm loan 
boards if prepared to extend long term credit at low in¬ 
terest would off-set the need of any state assistance. 

Long term credit is characteristic of and essential to 
long term range production of beef cattle. The brief for 
the range cattle producer placed before the Alberta Tax 
Inquiry Board in October 1 934 on behalf of the Western 
Stock Growers 7 Association contained the following recom¬ 
mendations - 

T? 1 . Arrears of taxes be worked out in forms of range im¬ 
provement such as a policy of conservation of water, fenc¬ 
ing and other management practice which would promote more 
efficient land utilization. 

IT 2. Levying a rate of taxation that stockmen can afford 
to pay, and making proper provision for collection. 

T? 3. Fixing a flat rate of rental and taxes on all grazing 


(1 ) James Mitchell. 


















. 































































- 86 


lands and collecting them through one agency® 

"4. In view of the fact that many adjustments in taxes 
have been made in the past, it is recommended tkat these 
adjustments be discontinued and reasonable rates charged* 

"5. That consideration be given to rates of taxation in 
relation to other beef and mutton producing countries, 

7T 6. That taxes be levied according to productive, rather 
than fictitious value of land. 

TT 7. That on all abandoned farm lands taxes be disregarded 
until a complete re-grassing is obtained'*.(1 ) 

It is thus obvious that in so far as administration of 
these lands is concerned administration policy has not been 
in accord with the true facts concerning the area. If 
administrative policy, governmental or private, is to be 
efficient it cannot function when it neglects or ignores 
fundamental facts and fails to adjust itself to changing 
conditions. The recommendations suggested above would do 
much to enable many ranchers to realize at least a minimum 
return on investment and others to at least meet operating 
expenses. This is a general need in the range area to-day, 
resulting not only from depression conditions but from in¬ 
adequate administrative policy and requirements for many 

years past. 

(1 ) L.B.~~Thorns on. 







. 











i 









. 






















. 









CHAPTER III 


RANCH ORGANIZATION ANN COST OF PRODUCTION 
Part 1 . 

These two topics are interrelated and inseparable 
and therefore naturally lend themselves to corporate treat¬ 
ment. Based on the fundamental economic principles of 
range utilization already discussed it is proposed here to 
analyse betsic cost of production as it relates to the 
ranch alone. Transportation costs to market will then be 
the only cost of production item remaining. The discussion 
on this topic will be deferred until the ranch production 
costs are considered. The rancher can now be taken to 
know the economic value of his range for his particular 
purpose and how best to utilize its forage resources. It 
now remains for him to relate to these factors his ranch 
organization programme and to determine in his particular 
case those practices which will produce for him at minimum 
cost the optimum flow of beef of the desired duality for 
the market which he serves. 

Efficient ranch organization policy must of necessity 
be built up over a long period of time. There are many 
factors involved and many which require study from a long 
term point of view. A rancher must build his business up 
gradually and economically efficient so as not only to 
take care of the present but provide for adaptation to the 
future. Ranch policy once formed is not easily changed; 




























. 


















. 
















88 


there is a large degree of rigidity due to fixed costs and 
other standard factcsrs. Organization policy however should 
have maximum flexibility in order to allow for adaptation 
to constant change in the market. From the standpoint of 
the producer the market is the ultimate goal of the beef 
industry and it is the factor which holds the whip-hand 
over the producer. He must either meet the demands of the 
market or go out of business. It is a feature of the inev¬ 
itable economic law of Supply and Demand. The year 1 933 
was probably the worst in the whole history of the range 
cattle industry. Ranch costs - due to a hard winter and 
lack of feed - were at the maximum and market prices at a 
minimum and many ranchers were barely making their cost of 
production. 

Considered in relation to normal price theory the 
producer found himself in the position of having to cater 
to a market in which the purchasing power was at a low 
ebb and yet his own costs of production had not decreased. 
Normal price may be stated as "the price which will bring 
upon the market just that supply for which buyers will be 
willing to pay enough to cover the costs of producing and 
marketing that commodity and yield a reasonable net profit" 
(1) The 1933 situation was not an isolated case. The 
normal price level had been falling since the peak was 

reached in 1928 . The industry in order to conform to 

(1 ) Maynard, Weidler, Beckman - "Principles of Market- 

ing". p. 339. 




■ 




' 

































- 


































- 89 


1 effective* demand has been one of contraction rather than 
expansion. If such low prices continue it is only to be 
expected some producers will be forced out of business. 

This might conceivably restrict the supply on the domestic 
market and raise prices for those remaining in business to 
allow a reasonable net profit. This would not apply in 
the same manner to our export United Kingdom market as 
supply there is regulated by periodical quota. Thus on 
the domestic market in the long run the lower limit of 
normal price might tend to be fixed by the production and 
marketing costs of the least efficient or marginal producer 
while the upper limit or maximum price would be fixed by 
what buyers would be willing to pay for the existing supply. 
Governmental control or q.uota restriction in export market¬ 
ing may well alter the relationship of price to cost of 
production. The export price has been one more easily 
resembling market price theory as distinct from normal 
Price theory. It is characterised by uncertainty and 
fluctuation over short periods rather than by steady min¬ 
imum rise or fall over a long period. 

As to reasonable net profit the industry regards 6 fo 
as justified on the basis of recent cost of production. 

In an analysis of cost of production factors on the range 
area in 1931 involving 10,000 cattle it was determined 
that the average rancher was operating at a minimum. A few 
factors such as rental and taxes, labour, interest on 





































































- 90 - 

■borrowed capital and purchase of supplies were amenable 
to reduction but it was found only rentals and taxes 
could be reduced. This latter reduction would give stab¬ 
ility but must be permanent as the industry in normal times 
would be unable to bear a higher taxation than that then 
existing. On the basis of these costs and to recover 6go 
on investment it cost $ 7.25 cents per pound to produce a 
calf; 6.98 cents to produce a yearling, and 6.42 cents to 
produce a 2-year-old. Prices for first class cattle at 
the Moose Jaw Feeder Show were respectively 6.83 cents; 

6.02 cents, and 5.55 cents, denoting a loss for each type 
respectively of 40 cents per cwt.; 96 cents, and 87 cents. 
Prices in ordinary stock yards would have been still lower 
as range cattle are superior to average stock yard cattle. 
( 1 ) Since 1930 prices have steadily fallen and the average 
stockman has therefore each year been still less able to 
meet the price of his market because he has been unable to 
control his costs of production accordingly. In view of 
this fact it would seem reasonable to allow a 6^> profit if 
the industry is to be economically operated. If the market 
allows the range producer 6^ on his investment and total 
production cost his business is in a sound state of econ¬ 
omic development. 

This return should not be unfair to the ultimate 

consumer if distribution costs after the beef is sold by 

(1 ) L.B, Thomson - if Economics of the Ranching Industry 

in Alberta and Sq.skat chewan". p. 6. 









. 

' . • 


♦ 








■ 






. 







. 

■ 





























91 


the producer were brought more into line with production 
costs. The consumer himself is partly to blajne for the 
high retail cost of meat by his ever increasing demands 
for distribution services. Unfair distribution price 
spreads after sale by the producer is a major factor in 
high ultimate re-sale price to the individual consumer. 
Distribution costs may be said to be in line with produc¬ 
tion costs when they are commensurate with necessary 
services required to enable effective and economic pro¬ 
duction. It is on this basis that net profit should be 
distributed in the production and distribution medhanism. 

If the element of monopoly or *big business 1 is allowed 
to exercise too great an influence in the distribution 
process, undue profits may easily be made by the monopol¬ 
ist at the expense of other distributing agencies and of 
the ultimate consumer. Marketing of livestock like that 
of any other agricultural product requires many middle¬ 
men agencies. Stock yard agencies, commission men, rail¬ 
way companies, forwarding agents, ocean carriers, receiv¬ 
ing agents, finishing agents if cattle are sold as 
feeders, packers, wholesale butchers and retail butchers 
are among the necessary agencies in modem cattle and 
beef distribution. In so far as each is a necessary agency 
it should be allowed a charge sufficient to cover its own 
costs and necessary risk. Any charge above this as net 
profit should be in strict proportion to a fair profit 












. 

































































- 92 - 


for the other agencies on the same basis. A fair price 
spread is such as will enable an agency to stay in busin¬ 
ess with a reasonable profit taking all the circumstances 
into account. This could well be fixed by the producer 
and allowed to function all along the line to the consumer. 
One authority cites the mass buying and selling of chain 
stores in the meat trade as a reason for buying of low 
grade cattle by the independent butcher and packer if he 
is to compete on retail prices. This reduces the price 
of the better grade of meat.(1 ) Such action must lead to 
unfair price spreads and undue middlemen profits. 

The ranch organization and costs relative thereto 
which are discussed here refer to the area of the Short 
Grass Plains where the range is utilized only for the 
practice of pure ranching. Range land proper in this 
area is quite unsuited for the growing of wheat or other 
cereals and is not adaptable to general farming purposes. 
Owing to topographical features a small percentage of the 
range area is also unfit for range pasture but it is also 
totally useless for any other form of productive agricul¬ 
ture . Climatic and soil conditions produce a type of 
forage eminently suited to production of range feeder 
cattle but such conditions have proved disastrous to 

attempts at general farming:. The proper economic use of 

(1 ) Hon. H.H. Stevens, in an address at Lethbridge, 

Alberta, September 1st, 1934. 















. 






' 













. 






























. 












- 93 - 

this land is therefore that of ranching only. The most 
profitable, and strictly speaking, the most ’economic’ 
use of this land in the long run can only be that of'pure 
ranching. In the northern and western portions a gradual 
change takes place to mixed farming in connection with 
which organization and costs would be on a quite different 
basis. It is necessary to bear this point in mind in 
order that the necessary unity of subject matter through¬ 
out these Chapters may be more easily followed and in order 
that relevant statistics be correctly interpreted. Speak¬ 
ing of the quality of product produced in the area under 
review it has been stated in evidence - ’’These men are 
the producers of some of the most superior beef in Canada, 
if not indeed in the entire British Empire”,(1 ) It must 
also be borne in mind that there will be variations from 
section to section even within the Short Grass Area and 
that each individual stockman in the business will have 
his own problems and his own attitude to their solution. 

The purpose here however is to analyse typical examples 
and cases which are true to type on the average of the 
plains area as a whole. 

Ranch organization is a prerequisite universally 
recognized for production at minimum cost. The less this 

organization itself costs consistent with maximum effic- 

(1 ) Eon. Geo. Hoadley - ’’The Live Stock Industry”. Brief 

presented to the Stevens Committee of the House of 

Commons, April 26th, 1934. Minutes of Evidence,p.1 9. 








- 94 - 


iency the greater will "be the return. Where the basic 
principles of the ranching industry are formulated, as 
they should be, on a long term basis and built up oyer a 
life time of effort, organized production is proved to be 
indispensible to success. Argentine, the United States 
and the cattle producing areas of Great Britain are proof 
of this. The beef industry in Argentine is planned for 
the market which it serves. The methods developed over a 
period of years have led to a monopoly of the chilled meat 
trade on the United Kingdom market at the present time.(i ) 
In the Northern Great Plains region of the United States, 
the ranching area in Montana, North East Wyoming, and 
North and South Dakota west of the 1 00th Meridian, con¬ 
tiguous to the Canadian area, ranching has long been the 
most important industry. Besides location, this region 
has many features almost Identical with those of the Can¬ 
adian area. Of this area it has been said - "Changed ec¬ 
onomic conditions in the cattle industry as it came out 
of the depression period following the World War demand 
that many adjustments be made in ranch organization. 

These same economic forces, still at work, make necessary 
the careful selection of methods and practices in produc¬ 
ing cattle to get the greatest income".(2) In the need 
for systematic production of beef cattle the Canadian 

area offers no exception to the general rule. If we a re 

(1) See ante p, feo7^~~ ~~ ' 

(2) Wilson,Wilcox,Klemmedson, Parr - "A Study of Ranch Or¬ 
ganization and methods of range-cattle Production in 
the Northern Great Plains Region". U.S.D.A. Bui.No.45, 
p. 2, March 1 928. 





















































































- 95 - 

to compete successfully on the export market we must or¬ 
ganize for it. "If producers, as a result of supply reg¬ 
ulation, are to enjoy greater economic security, they must 
make active efforts to produce what the consumer wants, 
and to keep their production costs down. In matters of 
quality, production efficiency may involve higher costs; 
farmers are, therefore, apt to disregard quality improve¬ 
ment in had times hut will pursue it once more when times 
are better. There is thus a tendency for higher prices 
to he associated with higher costs, although it should he 
possible to counter this tendency by lower costs due to in¬ 
creased efficiency in the form of better stock management". 
(1) What applies at present to Great Britain in this res¬ 
pect under the Elliot policy applies T mutatis mutandis 1 to 
the range area here under review, and Great Britain herself 
is our one and only export market of commercial importance 
to-day. Unless the United States market is again opened 
up to the Canadian producer Great Britain will probably 
remain the one market of commercial importance for live 
cattle, for a very long time at least. 

"The function of a cattle ranch is to produce beef. 
Success or failure in cattle ranching depends on produc- 

tion out Put« its cost, and the price received 11 .(2 ) It is 

(1) "Report of the Reorganization Commission for Fat Stock 

for England aid Wales,1 934 , Ministery of Agriculture 
and Fisheries, London, England". p. 59 . 

(2) G.A.Brennan - "The Main Reasons why Cattle Ranchers 
Succeed or Fail", p. 5 , Agricultural Experiment Station, 
University of Nevada, Reno, 1 933• 














- 96 - 

a question in other words of most efficiently relating 
ranch organization to market demands. This will have a 
hearing on ranch policy and on cost of production. With 
this in mind the Short G-rass Plains Area present at the 
present time a series of problems for the cattleman. Many 
of these in themselves open up fields for prolonged and 
detailed study. It is the intention here to present a 
brief analysis of a group of factors of major Importance 
in the Short Grass Area xo-day. These will include such 
topics as age of marketing in relation to range and ranch 
organization and costs of production, land tenure, range 
improvement, ranch improvement, lease rental and taxes, 
depreciation, death losses and insurance charges. A sep¬ 
arate preliminary discussion oi each of these factors will 
serve to present them In their true relationship to ranch 
organization and production costs as a whole. 

One of the most important and far-reaching of these 
problems at the present time in the light of present chang¬ 
ing market demands in the United Kingdom, is to determine 
the age of marketing in relation to weights required and 
to fit this economically into the ranch policy. It is now 
a,n accepted fact that the tendency in United Kingdom re¬ 
quirements is for the lighter type of animal weighing in 
the neighbourhood of 800 to 1 ,1 00 pounds. There is a 

narket for heavier and older c.ittle but it is a limited 
narket and one which is very sensitive therefore to price 












' 












































- 




. 






























- 97 - 


fluctuation. It is not a safe policy at the present time 
for the stockman to base his ranch organization on the 
older and heavier weights and build up his market policy 
around that class of animal. Present market tendencies do 
not indicate that such a policy would tend to stability for 
the individual in the live-stock business. The point in 
question here is to determine the factor in market require¬ 
ments which exhibits the most permanency and which in the 
future is likely to remain characteristic of the market. 

At the present time that factor would appear to be the 
light weight beef animal. If this is to remain true over 
a long period in the future ranch policy must be organized 
or reorganized around this factor. It is therefore with 
this end in view that cattlemen in the range area are to¬ 
day gradually reorganizing on a cow and calf basis. From 
the standpoint of production requirements the vital factor 
is the carrying capacity of the range. On the basis of 
these two factors the stockman can safely build his 
production policy to meet market requirements. Owing to 
the many factors of rigidity in range and ranch policy and 
to the life-time of effort involved such changes in policy 
cannot be effected quickly. The age marketing basis of the 
range herd can only be modified slowly and this is added 
reason why such changes must only be effected for very 
sound reasons. 

The reasons for the present tendency in weights how- 



























■ 













- 

* 

■ 













- 98 - - 

ever would appear on analysis to warrant the change in 
policy. They emanate from fundamental changes in modern 
society. The continued growth of cities,increase in urban 
population - with increased use of apartment dwellings and 
housekeeping suites - shows a tendency to purchase meat in 
extremely small quantities at more frequent intervals. The 
growth of motoring, the change in the status of the home 
through the increase of women in business, and the varied 
complexity of modern life w r ith its hurry and bustle have 
led to a demand for smaller joints of meat and even to a 
decline in cooking and to an increase in the use of pre¬ 
pared foods. Small steaks, chops, small roasts and other 
cuts command prices even at times for second quality higher 
than similar cuts from heavy weight carcasses. Even re¬ 
vised scientific cutting of the carcass cannot off-set 
this demand owing to coarser beef texture, excess fat and 
larger and heavier bone content. This tendency has been 
growing since the war and has received added impetus with¬ 
in the past 10 years. Possible increased demand in the 
future from hotels, restaurants, steamships, work camps 
and similar sources for the heavier beef animal will not 
off-set an assured much greater increase in the demand for 
fche light weight animal. Furthermore the price premium is 
efficiently great in favor of the lighter weights that a 
shange in policy from the present is warranted. It is in 
bhe light of these facts which emerge from a sound analysis 







' 1 






- 




- 


- 

- 













■ 












• 
























* 


• 




















- 99 - 

of present market tendencies and conditions that the 
rancher producer must construct his producing policy. 

To relate these facts to cost of production the fund¬ 
amental factor is that any change will increase cost of 
production. In so far as this increased cost can he re¬ 
couped in the market returns ultimate or immediate it is 
economical; in so far as it cannot he recovered it is not 
advisable. The basic factor will he feed. In a change to 
lighter cattle winter supplemental feeding will he increased 
as more cows and heifers must he fed and range feeding will 
he decreased. Depreciation in cows and replacement heifers 
would increase, hull purchase would increase, and increased 
supplemental feeding, whether on the range by range improve¬ 
ment or on the northern feed lots, would increase the cost 
of production. Increased breeding stock involves greater 
risk and requires Quicker turn-over. Two policies are sug¬ 
gested. One is to winter feed for weight gain the young 
cattle to he marketed and finish off grass for market the 
following summer. The other is to utilize the extra feed 
to finish older steers off grass. This practice however 
though economical because only range pasture is used must 

he carefully considered in the light of present market de- 

% 

mands. Whatever method is adopted if young light weight 
stock is what is required effective feeding and management 
are necessary if cost of production is to he kept down and 
at the same time choice quality beef produced. The stand- 



















. 












, 


' 

' 

. 






■ 

: 
























point of the British producer on this point is of special 
interest - "Indifferent feeding and management, especially 
during the first year, have had effects on conformation, 
and, thence, on quality. The majority of calves destined 
for the "beef market go through a prolonged store period 
during which they grow hut do not fatten. The result is 
that they may not he ready for slaughter until 2 1/2 to 
3 years old, and even then, do not generally exceed 12 cwt. 
live weight, whereas calves of dual purpose or heef types, 
if Properly fed from hirth during a shorter store period, 
may he sold fat, weighing say, 9 1/2 to 10 cwt. live 
weight at 20 to 24 months old. From a heef producing point 
of view, therefore a prolonged store period is inefficient 
in that it is responsible for slow maturity and accentuates 
any faults in conformation - and ultimately, of course, in 
carcase quality - due to the use of low-grade parent stock 
and inefficient rearing in the calf stage". (1) 

From the standpoint of carrying capacity selling 
younger cattle is more economical as they eat less than 
older cattle and are less time on the range as feeders. 
Finishing off range grass or selling as feeders especially 
2 and 3-year-olds is the most economical basis of produc¬ 
tion. With all factors considered including carrying cap¬ 
acity. cost of winter feed and the percentage calf crop ^ 

(1) "Report of the Reorganization Commission for Fat 

Stock for England and Wales", p. 60. 
























. 
























■ 
















• 






















' 












- 1 01 - 

the following table based on three years * experiment shows 
that the 2 and 5 -year-old has the lowest cost of produc¬ 
tion per pound of beef prior to going to the feed lot: 


"Co st pe r Pound of Beef for Different Ages of Cattle 


Class 

Ave. wt. at 

marketing, Total cost 
less shrink per head 

Cost per 
pound 


lbs. 



Calf... 

388 

$ 28.13 

7.25 cts. 

Yearling. 

710 

49.38 

6.98 " 

Two-year-old.., 

1 000 

64.1 6 

6.42 " 

Three-year-old. 


78.44 

LJJ J1 "1.1 1_ 


This experiment based on monetary values in the years 
1926, 1927 and 1928 shows the costs as determined from a 
study of 10,000 head of cattle on ranches running from 
300 to 3,500 head per ranch. These ranches were based on 
selling 2 and 3-year-old steers, Hone were on a cow and 
calf basis selling younger cattle. Due to climate, local¬ 
ity and price spreads for different ages as applicable to 
1932 it would not have paid these ranches to revert to a 
basis of selling young stock. These cost figures are on a 
basis which would allow interest returns on investment 
if sold at then current prices. 

Present conditions and tendencies however are such, 
that if market requirements are to be met it would seem 
inevitable that on the average and typical Short Grass 
Plains ranch the change to a cow and calf basis which has 
been slowly taking place the past 10 years should continue. 

If this is to be the typical basis in the range area it 
(1 ) L.B. Thomson - "Cost of Production of Ra nge~’£at’tI"e’ T7 T 

p. 3* 



















. 






' 


. 


















' 

< 

■ 


























• • 
















will therefore be of special interest to analyse the cost 
of production on the range of young stock suitable to the 
changed market demands. The following table shows costs 
in this connection based on an average ranch unit of 
1 ,508 head with a comparison between the abnormal calf 
crop in 1 931 of 75 fo and the normal calf crop of 60?&- 

"Gost of Producing A Calf 
Cow and Calf Ranches 


Ave.Unit - 1508 cattle:?08 cows producing 680 calves - 


9 08 " n ’ 

Investiment Expenses 6 

Interest on land.. 

" on improvements.......... 

TT on cattle. , , . .... 

" on other livestock... 

” on feed and supplies..... 

** on equipment.. 


75 crop 
5 45 calves - 
uOfa crop 


$1530 

883 

3481 
85 
21 6 
250 


Total investment expenses.. 
Operating Expenses: 

Taxes and rent... 

Labor charges.. , 

Feed and salt............ 

General supplies. 

Ranch expenses........... 

Other expenses........... 

Depreciation on buildings 
fT " equipment 

Breeding charges. 


$6445 

.$1756 
2237 
1 205 
1286 
744 
526 
777 

651 

1 654 


Total Operating Expenses .. $11260 

Total Investment Expenses per Cow... $ 7 .10 
Total Operating Expenses per Cow.,.. 12.00 

Total Expenses per Cow... 19.10 

Total Expenses per Calf with a 7596 Calf Crop.. $2:6. (4) head 

" IT ,r Tr " IT 609& TT " .. 32.4?) " 

Cost per Pound: 

Average weight at Weaning Time - 400 lbs, 

75f° Calf Crop less 3 # shrink... 6.71c per lb. 

. Tt _. TT TT " ” . 8,57 ,* " " "(i) 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson - "An Economic Study of Beef Cattle Rais¬ 
ing on the Range Areas of Alberta and Saskatchewan, 
Preliminary Report, 1532 " - p. 11. 























































- 1 03 - 

This table also serves to show the cost items which norm¬ 
ally enter into cost of production of range cattle. Oper¬ 
ating expenses determined from a series of ranches divided 
into four groups on the basis of selling appears in the 
following table. The wide variation in cost per animal 
unit here was due mainly to local geographic conditions. 
" Cost of Running Cattle on Ranch es 


Different Ranches selling Calves, Two-year-olds, Three- 
year-olds and Mixed. _____ - 


Cost per Animal Unit 


Selling 

Calves 

Selling 

2-year 
Steers 

Selling 

3-year 

Steers 

Selling 

Mixed 

Ages 

Investment cost. 

•• $ 6.30 

$ 6.00 

$ 5.93 

$ 12.49 

Operating Cost.. 

.. 10.15 

11.94 

.. 7 , 89 .. . 

11.00 

Total. 


$ 17.94 

$13.82 

$23.49”(1 


Considering the standard cost items it is clearly evident 
that the 3-year-old steer costs the least to produce. 
Premium prices for the lighter and younger animal must 
therefore continue to be considerably higher to fully 
warrant the change in policy in Question. 

The market demands well finished light weight cattle. 
If the rancher is to do the finishing an analysis of his 
finishing costs must also be made. The cheapest type of 
finish will be that provided by the range grass cover. 
Since the range area is at present over-grazed and since 
it is subject at times to prolonged severe winter weather 
with heavy snow cover grass finish cannot be depended 
upon to provide cattle for the market in fit condition at 

gtat.ed,. ,peri od, alxe ajj,._ _.This factor _is vital ..in_ m arketing, _ 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson - op. cit. p. 12. 











— 


, 








. 

' 






’ 


■ 

- 





























. ... 










1 04 - 


not only from the standpoint of utilization of boat space 
for shipping but also for maintaining position on a com¬ 
petitive market. Supplemental feeding must therefore be 
relied on to assure stability in feeding policy for finish¬ 
ing cattle. Since the bona fide range area is unsuitable 
for grain growing the feed must be brought in or the cattle 
sent out to the finishing areas. Grass finished cattle 
might well be equal in quality to those finished with sup¬ 
plemental feed such as grain and concentrates but the 
question in the range area is to get sufficient of that 
grass in its most fattening stage to produce cattle at a 
stated time. One insurmountable difficulty is that grass 
finished cattle will reach their optimum grass finish con¬ 
dition at the peak of the fattening stage of the grass. 

This will be approximately the identically same time every 
year and that may not be the most opportune time for market¬ 
ing even if well finished as a glutted, market may be the 
result. In the considered opinion of one prominent rancher 
naintaining continuous supply of quality cattle to the 
narket consists not in consigning shipments at regular 
Intervals but rather in being able to supply the market in 
Its slack periods and when demand is made.^ bnly artific¬ 
ially controlled finishing will guarantee t hat ability to 
the producer. Range hay and some irrigation crops can be 
grown on the range by judicious irrigation and use of 

water run-pff_but grain and concentrates are in a _ 

(1 ) R.S. Gilchrist. 





























. 































- 1 05 


different category. To finish his own cattle the stockman 
on the range might have to dispose of some of his cattle 
inventory at low prices in order to buy grain for the re¬ 
mainder. There is not sufficient stability in that pro¬ 
cedure. Outside of selling as feeders which may be con¬ 
sidered the soundest policy for the range area, supplemen¬ 
tal feeding by grain on grass and complete contract feed¬ 
ing off the range are the two standard methods of fitting 
cattle for market. These will provide the finished article 
for the ultimate market and after all Someone somewhere 
has to do the finishing. Some attention will therefore be 
given to each of the above two methods* 

With respect to finishing on the range an experiment 
was commenced in 1933 at the Dominion Range Station where¬ 
by the spring calf is taken off grass about August 15th 
after weaning and is placed directly in the dry feed lot. 
Here a fattening ration is fed by self feeders until Dec¬ 
ember 15 th and the calf is then marketed to catch the 
market in a most favourable mood during the Christmas sea¬ 
son. The ration employed is a mixture of alfalfa hay, 
grain and flax oilcake concentrate, together with required 
minerals - salt and bone meal. This experiment has not 
yet been sufficiently checked to afford reliable data but 
it would appear to be a possible method of meeting a slack 
market with well finished light weight cattle as baby beef. 
The price at that time for this class should be most favour* 
able but it must be sufficiently so to more than overcome 


_ - 










’ 























































. 






‘ 

























- 1 06 - 

the high cost of a 4 month feed lot finishing period. To 
off-set this cost there will be a credit factor however 
in decreased pasture requirement after August 15 th but 
unless this method of marketing is adopted for consider¬ 
able inventory this factor vail not be very cogent as the 
calves are on part milk diet up to the time of commencing 
the finishing period. 

For the finishing of older cattle on the range area 
to sell as 2 -year-olds or 3 -year-olds the procedure of 
feeding a grain supplement while on grass may be followed. 
In this case the spring calf would be carried through the 
following winter, if possible on range forage alone, so 
as to just maintain its weight. The gains of the ensu¬ 
ing spring and summer on grass would then be increased 
during the following winter by supplemental grain feeding 
while still on grass. If the grass cover was insufficient 
owing to severe winter weather hay supplement would have 
to be added. The purchase of land for hay production 
is the chief food cost on the range and the more hay the 
range itself can produce the better, sufficient at least 
to provide a carry-over from year to year. This method 
would provide finished 2 or 3 -year-old cattle for market¬ 
ing during the spring or summer period. The economic 
value of this policy will depend on the cost of grain and 
hay as well as on the market price at the time of selling. 
In a survey conducted over 23 typical ranches from 1 926 






























' 


■ 





















































- 107 - 


to 1931 inclusive she production of 3-year-old feeder 
cattle was shown to be the mosx economical. As this is 
a basic factor in economical finishing, especially with 
grain on grass, costs are important. The following table 


shows a typical return on investment for different ages 
marketed as feeders: 




Selling 



, 

Calves 

2-yr.olas 

3-yr.olds 

Mixed 

Ave.number per ranch.... 

1508 

362 

2001 

2943 

Ranch income.. 

237 c 

231 

6743 

291 0 

Return on investment.... 
Rate of interest return 

1170 

nil 

3343 

1710 

on investment. 

1 . 

1 96 If 


.46#'*' 


(1 ) 


The interest return of 3 . 3 ^ is partly due to increased 
cattle inventory amounting to 27-31^ of receipts in one 
year. The absence of return on 2-year-olds is signif¬ 
icant of market trends at present. These ranches were 
all efficiently operated but they had to draw on their 
reserves in order to meet market demands for younger 
cattle. If this is the precarious margin in the produc¬ 
tion of feeder cattle which is the rancher’s soundest 
production policy, it is even more unstable when applied 
to finishing cattle when both feed costs and market prices 
over a long period exhibit quite wide fluctuations. In 
view of this the market price must be such as to more than 
compensate for the cost of putting on the added gain. If 

grain is not put on at a profit it is of no value to the 
(1 ) L.B. Thomson - rt An Economic Study of Beef Cattle 

Raising on the Range Areas of Alberta and Saskatch¬ 
ewan, Preliminary Report 1932", p. 8. 

















* 


r 






— ■ • ■. . 




. 




























- 1 08 - 


producer. Finishing "by grain on grass has been studied 
on the blue grass range of West Virginia. On a test of 
2 lots of good and medium steers during 1926, 1 92 7 and 
1928 the cost of gain in relation to profit was as shown 
below: 



























O 















0 CM 

p 














Y— 

d r- 

Pi 



• 











■» _ - 

d * 

p 



d to 











fc 

P Pi 

d d 



0 P 


to 

0 





nD UN 


On ON UN 

CM: 

C5 •> 

£ CD 



^ 0 


to 

d 





C" CM 


Nj- on CM 

O 

C— 

d >a 


CM 

0 


d 

o 


i 9 

i 8 

9 1 9 

On CM 


CM • 1 8 8 • 

• 

>Jr- 

8 



<*P 

d 

p 






» 


Y- Y- 

CO 

R2 CM 

• KN 


-P 

pqeo 

o u 






y— 


1- 

"=t 

• 

d 


O 













d rH 

0 <D 


\A 

• to 












0 d 

CD 43 



d P 


0 


d 




c— 


c-~ onvo tr~ c 

N T 

P PQ 

P 



0 0 


0 


•H 

s i 

8 1 

9 8 8 

C~~ Y- 


NNvjD C— UN 1 

NO 

Q • 




^ 0 


d d d 




GNKN 


K\ • • * 

• 

0 <tj 

^ P 



•P 

d 

P 

d P 




*• 


CM UN y- CM 

NO 

«H • 

*H O 



oj to 

o o 

d 

O 




Y- 


Y- 

UN 

'H (d 

•h Cm 















<J * 

d * 



0 












to 

d TO 



P 





CO c 

On CM 

O K\0 



o 


0 » 

d 



•H 





r- 

LT\ vj- 

x- c-o 



Nj* 


d to 

• S3 



-P 





ON On 

• 

• • t 

9 9 


1 8 8 1 • 8 

8 


W d 



£ o 







Nb U\ r— 



NO 


• 

P c 



WrQ 







CM 





P s 

(D pn 















•H 0 

(D 



d to 












rH 0 

-P O 



o P 


to 

0 





K\t- 


CO Y- KN 

__ 

d d 

0 o 



o 0 d 

0 

d 


9 9 

8 8 

9 9 1 

n}- c— 


CM CO O 

UN 

d ^ 




O 0 

o 

d 

o 





O CM 


CM • 1 9 l • 

* 

Q? c3 

<h 



*p 


P 

rH 





*> »• 


y- CM 

NO 


C P 



PQ CO 


C5 <d 





y— r— 


Y— 

•n}- 

d d 

CD 


-P 













d o 

0 Pi 


o 

d to 












d 

d 


i-q 

o p 


0 


d 








rH 

>H 10 



C 0 

d 

0 


•H 




UN CM 


C— K\nO nn c— 


d d 

d <D 



C5 0 

o 

d d 

d 

9 8 

9 1 

3 I) I 

p- vO 


Y- UN ON VO 1 CM 

o 

C p 

t»o o 



~p 


P 

d P 




O KN 


KN • • • • 

• 

•rH d 

•H 



<3$ to 



d d5 






CM UN, y— KN 

cr- 

P 0 

d P 











* - r” 


,— 

UN 

O 0 

£ Pi 



0 












0 0 

d 



P 





NO d" 

OO vO 






d rH 

to 



•H 





o\^ 

C LT\ 

O ON o 



liN 


O pi 

10 CD 



-P -P 





ON O 

• 

UNtN'O 



NO 


P Pi 

-P rH 



d o 





•* 


« • • 

i 1 


1 9 9 9 *1 

9 i 

Ph d 

43 d 



W Pi 





T — 


LT\ LT\ y— 





CO 

t.c to 







to 


CM 





«H 

•H 







d 







0 d 

CD d 







d 







0 -H 

£ £ 







d 







PQ d 

d 







o _ 

— z: 

Sr tz tr 

Sr Sr 


sees -co-go- 

40 

e P 

P 







Pi 





8 


C5 

CD H 












• 0 

• 

8 

0 d 














bn 

0 -H 













0 

d d 

d p 













b: 

O . H 

to *H 







-p • 

• * 

• • * 

■p • 


' * P * rH M 

p 

0 d 

d 







43 • 






d 

rH 0 

d *h 







bOP 

« • 


bjn+s 


• • O • O O 

43 

•H 0 

d 







•H 43 


• • • 

•rH 4d 


• • » Y— O 

o 

& PR 

d d 







0 tiod 

• d d 

• • rH 

0 b.Q d 

* d —i y— P 


^ O 

d 







£ -H *H 

• -H 0 

• * d 

? -H 

•H 

p d P 0 

0 

P d y~ 

P d 







0 d 

• d 0 

• • 0 

0 

d 

0 d d 0 0 P 0 

P 

o d KN 

0 ~ 




0 



P £ bD 

* tiO'H 

* * 0 

P ^ 

0 :H(DP 

d 

d d on 

-P P 




0 



0 

• 

0 £ 

0 


d 0 Pi 0 P 

P Y- 

d 0 




-p 



P P 

*'“ N p P 

bn d d 

S P 

P d P 0 d h j 

0 

d d 

•H CD 




M 



d 0 0 

0 0 0 

d P 0 

0 0 

0 

0 rH CD 0 0 p 

d 

^ 0 >5 

> -P 







•H -P -p >5 -p -P 

n-P 0 

d B 

0 UN 0 Pi 0 O O 0 

P 

* 0 P 

to 







£ d d d d d 

•H tO 10 

0 0 

0 CM 0 P 0 O -H ;0| 


W p d 

0 







•H *H d *H *H 

w d 

d 

d 

-ddfl p 

CR! 

o to ps 

br P 

• 






rH £ £ 

£ £ 

-p O 

»H to 

0 

*00 O rH Pi tO 

o 

d . d 

d cd »d 






d 

O 

dn?p 

d 


0 P d P 


rH *P d 

P PR O 






♦H rH rH ^1* 

i P 0 -P 

•H rH 

r-< 

S> >i !>iP -H 0 .H 

0 

W Oh) 

0 

•H 






-p d d 

r- H r! 

O 43 O 

p d 

d 

d rH rH Op 0 «H 



1> 10 

P 






•h d -p 

wH -H O ^ O 

•h d p 

rl d O >ri H O 

•H 

/-> 

<c! -P 

0 






d -H o 

d d 


d *h 

o 

d d d d P 


Y— 

,*2 *H 

P\ 






hPh 

P P 


H R P 

P9 P M CO id 


S - 






























- 110 - 

Particulars as to feed used and o’osts would of course not 
be applicable' to our Short Grass Plains without consider¬ 
able variation but the chart is here designed to show re¬ 
lationship only. Grain feeding increased selling price 
over 1 Oft in both grades. The medium grade showed a margin 
of $ 6.07 per 100 pounds as compared with $ 5.62 for the 
poorer grade. The margin on grass alone for each grade 
was $ 4.85 and $ 4.38 respectively. These years were years 
of peak prices compared to the drastic fall in cattle 
prices to present levels. At those prices this experiment 
indicated that an increased gain as high as 3776 on summer 
pasture for 3-year-old steers might be obtained at a profit 
by feeding grain and concentrate. The margin was not large 
even under these conditions and when applied to the Canad¬ 
ian area at present prices might well be negligible. 

Cost of feed as applicable to the Short Grass Plains 
has not decreased in recent months and cattle market prices 
are below the 1931 level from 1 1 /2 to 2 cents per pound. 

As cost of finishing is based on the price of grain and 
present market requirements call for well finished light 
weight cattle the.following table is of interest to in¬ 
dicate gain in relation to feed consumed: 


- _ Gram Hay __ Gain _ 

"Calf............... 200C lbs. 1300 lbs. " 400 lbs. 

Yearling...... 2230 " £000 " 300 " 

2-year-old. 7 50 _1 5095 ” 200 fT " 

(1 ) 


The arain here used is barley and the hay is alfalfa. Tvues 
(1 ) After L.B. Thomson. 


















' 




- 









































- 111 - 

and rates of feeding will vary grain and other require¬ 
ments and consequently costs. Self-feeding and hand¬ 
feeding grain will vary the amount required as will also 
the age and condition of the stock. If hay is reduced the 
grain consumption must increase which will consequently 
increase costs. Taking the above requirements as typical 
however for an average finishing period which for calves 
would be approximately 197 days, costs as based on market 
quotations for Friday, November 16th, 1 934 on the Leth¬ 
bridge market would be as follows: 

"Grain Hay Overhead Total Cost per 
Charge Pound 

__________„___ of Gain __ 

Calf.". $14.79 $ 8.25 $6.00 $29.04 $0.07 

Yearling.. 16.64 11.00 4.50 32.14 0.10 

2-yr.-olds 5.14 17.02 3.00 2 5.56 0.12"fn 

The above chart is based on the cost of barley F.O.B. 

Lethbridge at 33 1 /2 cents and first cut alfalfa hay, 

baled, at $11.00 per ton. An overhead feeding charge of 

1 1 /2 cents per pound of gain is assessed to cover labour, 

handling charges and other items incidental to dry feed 

lot fattening. It is assumed the cattle are self fed. 

As compared with results of calf feeding trials at 

the Lethbridge Experimental Farm for 1931-32, the cost 

per pound of gain for calves is now 3 cents higher, the 

cost then working out approximately at 4 1/2 cents for 

Group 1.(2) These figures have since been substantially 

confirmed in 1932-33 when the cost per pound of gain was 

nearer 5 cents, _______ __ 

(1 ) Constructed on basis of Thomson Chart. 

(2) See p. 112. 




















"Financial .Statement of Calf Feeding Trials Conducted during 1.931-32. 

_ Lot I Lot II Lot III 

Cost of Calves, 


- 112 - 


K\ 

ITMTN, O K\ r- 



KM 

CHOO 'sd- CM ON CM NO 

LO 

OQ 

• 


o 

KM 

NO 

Nt CM KM c~~ ~ x— 

• 

• 

H* 

OnOO «M- 

km 

ON 

CM 


oo 

CM 

49 

■€9 

CM 

ir\ 

-€9- 


ON 

lf\ 

OJ 

LfM 

OJ 

49 


LT\ 

ON 

• 

KM 

Nt 

CM 

49 


OnD On 

O ON 

CM r- 

OOCO 

KM CM 

ON 


• • 

• • 

r—K\CJN 

CM O 

T- H* 

KM c— km 

CM KM 

KM r— 

x— 

CM 

r— *— 

49 

49- 

49 




UM O 



LT\0 IT\ 


LT\ KM 


LT\ O 

LP\ KMO 


• • 


UMKM 

• • • 


KM KM 


• • 

KM KM KM 


4949 


KM KM 

49-4949 




4949 



-P -P 



P P P 


cfi a? 


P P 

o3 o3 a? 




o5 a? 








CM CO 



O 'M'OO 


NO t- 


CM CM 

On r— O 


CM ON 


OOO 

NO CM KM 


NO 


tH Nt 

KM CM t— 




KM KM 



id id 

M 


ncJ id id 

M 

o5 0 ? 

M 

id *d 

M 

o3 oS ®5 

M 

0 0 

M 

o5 a5 


0 <D 0 


X! Si 


0 0 

-P 

.£ Si 

43 


P 

jd 

O 


O 

Nf CM 

O 


Hi 

OO UM km 

iHi 


Hi 

co 00 


C-Nj- O 0 CM 

ON 

CM 

x _ 

KM x— CO On t — 

LT\ 

ON 

KM 

• • • • • 

• 

• 

• 

O r— CO O CM 


nJ- 

c— 

UM'M- LfMKM-r- 


ON 

H" 

V— 


CM 

LfM 

49 



49 

NO KM ON C— CM 

CO 

LfM 

O 

HM3nO KMCO 

c~~ 

O 

O 

• • • « • 

» 

m 

• 

t- ONLfMOOCO 


NO 

O 

OOCO KM_. 


KM 

CO 



CM 

H- 

49 


49 

49 





rH 




o3 




•H 




u 




p 




<h 


£ £ d & d d £ 


O 


0000000 

-p -p -p -p p> -p -p 


id 

H 


u u u u u u u 

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
ft ft ft ft ft ft ft 


H 

0 

P 

ccS 


0000000 



OOOO 0 UMO 


10 




0 


C—LfM UMO O cm no 


i> 


t— r— KM CM 


rH 


494949494949 49 





p 

O 


+3 -P PP P P P 

W 



06 aJ aJ a? cs5 a5 a? 

O 

CH 

id 


O 

0 

0 

kMj 



0 

o5 

id 

p 


Si 

0 

10 



0 

0 


a? 

<P 

0 

C 

rH 0 

rH 

rH 

P 

a? h w S K ftp 

a5 

0 ? 

10 

*H fn P cf Cti H H 

P 

P 

0 

rH o 3 £•) rH d c5 

O 

O 

0 

<tj FQ O pq pH pH CO 

EH 

Hi 


Table Carried Forward 





















113 


o 

• 

LC\ 

CO 

LT\ 



-P 

o 

Hi 


CVJ 

K\ 

NO 

*9- 


£■*• 09^ 

i 

0 

0 

£ 

£ 

8 

ON cm O O 

O vO O OJ 

r- t-CO O O C- 

CO C~" 0 LT\ 

■*t ur\0 On 


• • • • 

• • • ♦ 

t — ^ ^nOnO On 

ONCO nO 0 

CO CM VO ON 

T— CO N"\ LT\ r~ 

C''* C— r — 

T- On t— 

K\r- 

LO\ 

KNCvJ 

-€/?- 





to 



TO 





0 


IT\ O 

0 



to 


UT\0 LT'nO fc|D 


OCO 

b0 



0 


Oco ir\0 u 


. . 

u 


UT\0 

bn 


.... a! 


LT\ rt 

CtJ 


OOO 

R 


LT\ 'vj' Nj- Si 


40-4Q- 

si 


• • 

R 

TO 

O 



0 


LT\ 

si 

0 

0 


-P -P 

0 


-eH-ea 

0 


-P -P -P -P O fctD 


o5 a? 

0 c»o 



0 

«—! 

a? ctf ctf a? R Pi R 



54 R R 


P» -p 

0 bn 

a? 

g3 *h h 


03 -H U 


cd CCS 

R R R 

O 

R rH R 


K\0 




a5 *H H 


cmnOnO 0 ^ nd -p 


CO ^ 

d *d +3 


H <—! d 

U 

nO K\nD 0 m jj 0 


Nf nO 

tQ ?1 (D 


IT\LT\ d 'd +3 

O 

*~oo cr-'vt- R co u 


■r- t— 

R a! to 


O ON 0 R 0 


nD K\ r-H jd 


T— 

M XJ 


K\3 

R a? to 


rH 



to 


NO NO Hi Si 

IQ 

ti »d nrf to W a] 


•O »d 

to to a? 

M 


to 

R 

a? ctf c6 <?5 W to -p 

Ht 

a? 0 ? 

to to -p 

Hi 

cR •d 

tQ 10 Ctf 

U 

M 

0 0 0 0 0 0 O 

H 

0 0 

000 

Hi 

ctf a? 

to to p> 

R 


Si Si Si si Hi Hi EH 


X3 .R to Hi EH 


0 0 

0 0O 

-P 

-P 


-P 



-P 

H d hi hi P 

0 

O 

OO tr\,_ <m 

O 

CM 


O 




Hi 


Hi 

t— 


to 

COCO 



Profit per group $ 80.43 $ 84.60 $ 55.66 

Profit per head 5.03 5.89 3.48 

Cost per cwt. #ain . 4.55 4.63 5.20 rT (1 ) 

TTT Lethbridge Experimental F o^"^^inan^al Statement Calf Feeding Trials, 

1 931 -32. 

























-114- 

The average gain per head for the self-fed group in this 
case was 397*73 pounds. 

The other common method of finishing cattle is the 
breeder-feeder contract system. This method should be 
well adapted to Alberta and Saskatchewan where the south¬ 
ern portions of both provinces are by nature pure grazing 
lands for producing feeder cattle and the central and 
northern portions have abundant feed for supplemental 
winter feeding and finishing. To utilize these two com¬ 
plementary features the contract system was devised. The 
working of this plan affords in itself a topic of wide 
proportions. It is the purpose here to confine its con¬ 
sideration to its basic principles, the most successful 
type and an outline of typical costs. The latter will be 
obtained by reference to recent feeder trials and exper¬ 
iments at feeding institutions. 

Ranchers in Alberta place cattle on shares with the 
farmer in the feeding area. The farmer agrees without 
other obligation to use his feed to finish the cattle to 
desired requirements. To arrive at a basis of equitable 
contract feeding is a most difficult and complicated pro¬ 
cedure as the two interests involved are not necessarily 
interested in the same way and do in fact find it diffic¬ 
ult to obtain mutual agreement and satisfaction. In order 
to facilitate mutual agreement such factors as age, rate 
of gain on the feed of the particular area, cost of feed, 













' 


. . ' 





























' 


. 

. 

■ 















































-115- 

water supply, care and like factors must be a matter of 
common acceptance. These factors will also be varied ac¬ 
cording to feeding area and will tend to fluctuate con¬ 
stantly. In a discussion of this question one prominent 
rancher expressed the opinion it would be better if the 
feeder bought the cattle outright. He would then have 
full responsibility and would tend to take greater interest 
in fattening the cattle since they would be his own and 
since he would therefore have to take the full repercuss¬ 
ion of the market whatever that would be after marketing 
the cattle himself.(1 ) Since each ranch is a character¬ 
istic unit in so far as its particular policy is concerned, 
it might seem that it should even stand on its own feet to 
the extent of finishing its own cattle if finished stock 
is to be marketed. That however is not always feasible 
in the Plains Area as before discussed and if change of 
title cannot be effected to the feeding area a sharing 
basis in ultimate profits must be secured as a basis of 
agreement. Farmers generally do not care to take fill 
responsibility under a change of title and are not gener¬ 
ally in a position to buy outright large herds of cattle 
to finish for market at their own expense, or to assume 
the risks incidental thereto. 

Probably the most successful contract to date and the 

one with most potentialities for agreement is the "Inven- 

toried In vestment Plan". The basic principle of operation 
(1) R.S. Gilchrist^ ---- 
























. 





























-116 


is that ultimate profit is divided on the basis of each 
party 1 s investment. This would seem to be most fair but 
agreement must be reached on the difference in cost of 
gain for different ages. To be of value to the grower 
there must be at least a spread of 1 cent per pound be¬ 
tween the cost of gain for a calf and for a yearling. To 
determine the equity in each particular case an analysis 
of the cattle inventory must be m&de and of the feed con¬ 
sumed in relation to pounds of gain. A recent study made 
by the Dominion Range Station involving 75,000 cattle over 
11 ranches with an average unit of 530 is summarised be¬ 
low. Average heifer replacement was 1556 to raise calves 
as 3-year-olds. Computed weights for comparison were 
calf, 400 pounds; yearling, 7 00.pounds; 2-year-old, 1,000 
pounds; cows, 1 ,000 pounds. 








































117 


"d 

rH 

O 

co 


0 

Pi 

<g 


to 

0 


SP 


*d 

-P Oj 

Pi Q> 
0 tU 
Pi 


Q) O 
CH KN 
<Pi lin 


•H 

P 1 


rH -P 
CD *rH 
Si Pi 

to si 
0 o 
•H PS 
Pi eg 
o cd 

8 

0 

i> 

PI 

M 


0 

rH 

-P 

-P 

Cg 

O 


TO 


>X3 

<H 

i —! 

• 0 

O 

to 0 

* 


Pi 

P 

t>j 

TO 

* 

0 

CM 

rH; 


eg 

ttf 

CO 

Pi 


•H 


rH 

rH KN 

rH 

rH K' 

0 

g ON 

CO 

pH T- 

to 

* <p 

* 

TO O 

Pi 

,0 0 


hH P3 

rH 


Pi 


eg 

TO 

0 

0 


i—1 

rr^ 

ttf 

CO 

PO 


•H 


H 


rH 

rH NN 

0 

H ^ 

CO 

» 

eg ON 

P«H t- 


* <P 

TO 0 

to 

S> TO 

0 

Him 

> 

rH 


(g 

TO 

O 

0 


rH 


eg 

2 

CO 

•H 


rH 


i—! 

rH K' 

0 

rH K' 

CO 

<g O' 


co ^5 o> 


o 


o 



o 


o 

t * 

o 


o 



o 


o 

n-"- CM 

o 





o 


*vT 

* 

oo 


CM 





r — l 

Pi 

CM 


CM 



vD 


T— 

• 








r— 


CO 


CM 



r— 



Pi 

CM 


KM 



VO 



O 









•H 









-P 









eg 









N 

LT\ 

CO 

CM 


KM 

r— 

CH vO 

•H 

CO 

CM 

vO 

o 

vO 

vO 


KN 

Pi 




KM 




LT\ 

eg 




,— 





*10 









Pi 

o 


o 


O 



O 

o 

o 


o 


O 



o 


o 


NO 


c- 



KN 

si 

T“ 


vO 


On 



c- 

o 

KM 


CM 





o 

Pi 









eg 









pel 

t— 


OO 


v~ 




O 

K\ 


KM 


c— 




-P 









Pi 









o 









•H • 









-P 









eg 

OO 

r — 

T- 

vO 

v— 


OO 

LTN 

i—1 

O 

KM 

c-~ 

■H- 

C— 



KN 

0 

CVJ 



r- 




UN 

PS 









Pi 









•H 








o 


O 



O 




o 


o 



O 




"M’ 


o 



H" 




L£N 

•H 

c\ 



NO 




O' 

-P 

KM 



LfM 





0 








M 









Pi 

On. 








eg 

K\ 



H- 









r “ 





<P 









o 

o 

CN 

x — 

CM 



o 

CM 


vO 

KM 

H- 

CO 



T- 

KN 

0 

CM 



r — 




LO 

bo 











• 

« 

• 


• 


• 



• 

• 

• 

» 

• 


• 

1 


• 

• 

• 

0 






• 



« 

• 



Pi 


• 



» 

• 

» 


o 


• 



a 

• 



TO 


• 

• 

• 

• 




a 


/•- V 

«<-n 

• 

» 




o 


CM' 

r — 

• 


r—» 



.d 



w-• 

• 

T— 

CM 









«- ^ 


• 

• 


TO 

TO 





• 

PP 

• 

Pi 

Pi 

TO 

TO 

TO 


TO 


• 

0 

0 

TO 

Pi 

Pi 

TO 

rH 

p5 

TO 

«H 

CH 

!> 

0 

0 

rH 

<g 


£ 

•H 

*H 

rH 

0 

0 

rH 

-P 

..—- 

O 

0 

0 

eg 

-P 

«P 

P* 

o 

^— 

O 

to 

w 

o 

CO 

CO 

PQ 

EH 

—' 






















According to this chart in selling calves there are nearly 
12,000 pounds of beef less than by selling yearlings or 2- 
year-olds. In relation to cost of gain this would amount 
to a very considerable cost item. It may be said that a 
minimum spread of 1 cent per pound should be allowed be¬ 
tween the cost of gain for a calf and the cost of gain for 
a yearling irrespective of the type of feeder contract 
employed. On the basis of 1 932 prices if the finished 
yearling sold for 1 /2 cent per pound less than the calf 
the returns for each would about equalize. This is shown 
in a sample comparison: 

H Calves on Contract - Cost of gain 3 cts. per lb. and 

selling at 3 cts. 

Calves - 36400 lbs. at 3 cts. $2820.00 

Cows - 39000 lbs. at 2 1 /2 cts. 975.00 $3793.00 

Yearlings on Contract - Cost of gain 6 cts.per pound. 


Selling 
at 5 cts 

Gross sales at 3 cts. $3450.00 
Feeder ? s share at 6 cts 1962.00 

Breeder ! s share $3488.00 

Cows (31 000 at 2 1/2 cts )775.00 

$423 3 • OQx 


Selling 
at 4 1/2 cts 

$4903.00 
1962.00 

$2943.00 

775.00 

$371 8.00 ?T (1 ) 


Considering feeder contracts therefore from the standpoint 
of meeting the market with well finished young stock there 
must be a premium placed on calf finishing if an equitable 
and workable contract is to be obtained. 

The Red Label Beef Breeders and Feeders Association 

with headquarters in Lethbridge. Alberta, evolved in 1950 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson - op.cit. pp. 3-4. 

x Total should read $4263.00 


































; 








: 

. ! 

. 




- 









is . 




. 




- 


■ 




















- ii v 


a feeding plan for baby beef which has met with some 
considerable success. The essential features of this 
scheme involve feeding of calves under specified condi¬ 
tions supplied by the grower and on marketing the rancher 
or grower is paid on the initial feeder weight 1 1 /2 cents 
per pound less than the finished selling price. The 
feeder thus gets 1 1 /2 cents per pound on the feeder 
weight and the full selling price per pound on the gain 
per pound. Thus ’'if a calf weighs in at 400 pounds, and 
when finished weighs out at 750 pounds, selling for 
10 1/2 cts. per pound, the rancher would be paid for his 
400-pound calf at the rate of 1 0 1 /2 cts, less 1 1/2 cts, 
or 9 cts. per pound, which would be $36.00. The farmer 
who fedthe calf would get 1 1 /2 cts, per pound on 400 
pounds, which would amount to $6.00 and 10 1/2 cts, per 
pound on the gain of 330 pounds, which would amount to 
$36*75# which, added to the $6.00, makes $42*75 for feed¬ 
ing the calf. An insurance fund of $1 .00 per head is put 
up by fhe feeders to coyer any losses by death, as the 
risk is theirs while feeding. Any surplus in this fund 
is returned pro rata to the farmers when the cattle are 
all sold".(1 ) 

The difficulty has been in all contract feeding to 
satisfactorily reconcile the interests of two distinct 

classes of producer - the rancher grower of feeder stock 

(1) Hon.Duncan Marshall, Minister of Agriculture, i-rov- 

ince of Alberta, 1 909-1 321 , now Minister of Agriculture 

Province of Ontario - “Farm Management rT • p.115» 











- 
























- 

■ c . 

- 

- 

■ 



■ 

* ; •* » & Ml t$w. { ;" 









r 


























1 20 » 


on the one hand and the farmer feeder of finished stock 
on the other. Provided however that sufficient attention 
is paid to the spread in cost of finishing different ages, 
it would appear that some form of equitable arrangement 
providing for a sharing in ultimate profit based on the 
amount and value of each party's investment, offers the 
most likely solution to a difficult problem. The Inven¬ 
toried Investment Plan when modified as suggested.is the 
most concrete scheme yet evolved on this basis. A copy 
of this plan as at present in use is appended, together 
with a copy of the contract required by the Dominion Ag¬ 
ricultural Credit Company, Limited, of Regina. Schedule 
"A" pertaining to costs applies only to yearling finish¬ 
ing. A similar schedule would apply to other weights and 
ages. Cost figures as here used are exemplary only - not 
absolute. Owing to rise in grain prices the figures for 
gain on feed would have to be revised upward to 8 cents 
per pound to meet gra,in prices as in October 1934. It 
will be noted Section 8 provides the basis of contract. 

The net selling price as determined from Section 11 will 
be evolved from the gross selling price received by the 
grower, wherever and whenever, he transfers title in the 
cattle. The transfer may be on a domestic market or on 
a foreign market. "The ultimate value of beef cattle is 
what they will bring at the abattoir. If the price of 
feeder cattle is based upon this VcPLue it will be fair 












:■ 




















- 

■ 










' 

' 



















- 1 21 - 

to all concerned. This is the basis of the plan in 
Southern Alberta 11 .(1 ) With reference to the plan of 
the Red Label Beef Breeders and Feeders Association of 
1930 however both parties agreed to market only through 
the feeder T s marketing agent - the Southern Alberta Co¬ 
operative Association, Limited - and the basis of returns 
was not strictly one of investment equity. The plan of 
1930 for this Association was modified in the fall of 
1934 to one on an investment equity basis, insurance and 
other costs being shared on the basis of equity of vested 
interest. In the short time of operation to date the new 
basis has worked with success. Considerable importance 
may be attached to the marketing experiments of the South¬ 
ern Alberta Co-operative Association as this Association 
has marketed approximately 13,000 cattle over the period 
1929 to 1934.(2) 


T"l~5 Hon. Duncan Marshall””! — ] 5 T~cit ^ ^ ^ ^ 4 ', 

(2) W.C. McKenzie. 


































































CHAPTER III 


RANCH ORGANIZATION AND COST OF PRODUCTION 
Part 2. 

There remains for consideration supplemental feeding 
costs as they affect the feeder. It is the feederts res¬ 
ponsibility to produce a well finished product which will 
meet market demands and be satisfactory to the owner pro¬ 
ducer. If ultimate profit is to be divided on the basis 
of equity of investment it is essential that feeding 
costs be kept at the minimum consistent with quality of 
finish desired. Under present price schedules this is 
most difficult as grain prices in particular have risen 
considerably and cattle prices have fallen to record low 
levels. Cattle finishing by supplemental winter feeding 
is a very expensive business. An analysis of recent 
typical feeding trials is here presented in order to more 
clearly portray the part played by supplemental feeding 
costs. 

Since 1 930 'the Lethbridge Experimental Farm has 
conducted feeding trials with range calves and yearlings. 
The Department of Animal Husbandry of the University of 
Alberta has also conducted in recent years winter feeding 
trials using range steer and heifer calves and farm 
raised skim-milk fed calves. The dual character of the 
University experiments affords valuable comparisons as 
between young range stock and young farm stock in the 
matter of finishing for market. 


1 22 - 











' 


























■ . 


















. 












- 123 - 

Cost of finishing range calves and net returns to 
the feeder as determined by a feeder contract based on the 
principles of that referred to above of the Bed Label Beef 
Breeders and Feeders Association of 1 930 is illustrated in 
the following table: 

“Statement of Costs and Returns on Forty-Eight Calves 
if Finished under Contract> 


Purchase weight. lbs. 19,904 

Average purchase price'(per cwt) 

$1 .90 spread. $ 9.39 

Total purchase cost. $ 1 ,064.36 

Insurance at $1.00 per head.... $ 48.00 

Handling charges at $0.08 cwt.. $ 29.93 

Feed Cost.... $ 963 .1 7 

Total cost of finished calves $ 2,109.46 

Selling weight... lbs. 37,409 

Ave.selling price (per cwt.)... $ 6.83 

Total returns. $ 2 , 969.86 

Net returns. $ 460.40 

Net returns per steer....... $ 9.99 ,T (1) 

The net return per unit as shown here would be high in 
the light of present high grain prices and low cattle 
prices. The figures are of value however in illustrating 
the method of determining net returns. A more up-to-date 
and detailed analysis of feeding costs for a similar 
feeding test involving 48 range calves from the ranch 
of Mr. G-eorge Ross of St. Kilda is shown below: 


(1 ) Lethbridge Experimental Farm, Department of Animal 

Husbandry* 1 930-31 # 

































■ 

- 


■ • 

■ 



















. 

















- 1 24 


Fh 

«h 

o 

IQ 

•P 

tG 

O 

o 

O 

P 

cti 

a 

e 

Jj 




Pi 



o 

CP 

PP- 


PVD r~ 

r- d- 

P 


NO NO 

CO NO p 

Pi 





H3- 



IP 

K\ 

O O 


COvDr- 

CO ON 

n}- 


P CP 

O On p 

54 



0 


o > 















ch 

0 


P M 



IP 

d - 

CM ON 


ONIP-^- 


N}- 


P Nf 

CKr-ND 

IQ 


0 

p 


£b 

✓'“N 




•dCO 


PI t— r — 


P 


o 

CM r— 

0 


0 




rd 








T_ 


p 

P 



pq 

rd 



crt 












1 P 



0 


Pi M 

0 


r— 

y- 

"d T— 


ON POO O 

t-M5 

CM 



CO ■■ 




Fn 


0 H si 


CM 

CM 

CM d* 


LT\ K\ O O NO C~~ 

O 


"t 

Nf 

a? 


8 



O W 



• 

* 

• • 


• • • • 

• • 

• 


» 

0 



to 


P 

,_ 


K\ 

IP 

d" CM 


CPvD P p 


o 


nO 

p 

<H 


G 

0 


cb 

V— 




POO 


CM r- t— P 


T— 


v— 

p 



0 

> 











P 


P 

p 

0 


a? 

i—i 










K\ 





Jp 


Fh 

d 





o 


CO T- 


p ON -3- OvDCO 

NO 


IP P 

CO CO NO 

P> 



o 


0 H 



LT\ 

CM 

o tp- 


CPPOCQnO • 

■M" 


t— P 

^ Pr- 



rH 



O M 












P PNG 



a? 

P 


P M 



IP 

rp 

CP CO 


On C— d" IP 


NO 


PP 


p 

o 


^3 





PCX) 


Wr-r-P 


p 


Pr- 

p 

•rH 


p 

<M 











p 


P 

p 

0 


0 
















Co 


6 

rd 


P» 



o 

NO 

d - 

P d- poo 

NO v- 

,— 


PnO 

o PP 

0 


•H 

0 


P 



ip 

GO 

p 

ON p P 3 

(PCO 

O 


pP 

Ooo p 

& 


Sh 

54 


O M 












! 


0 

■H 


P w 



fp 

IP 

(P 

p ON pco 


NO 


pNf 

OnOnO 

i U 


Pi 

o5 

• 

t5 





CM 

O PCM T- 




P T- 

Pd- 1 

0 


K 

-P 








•C— 



p 


P 

p 

H 



JO NN 

Pi 













rH 



o 

i 



o 

nO 

d- CM 


P r- P 

NT NO 

p 


v- NO 

p PP 

0 


0 


CM 

p 



IP 

o 

s— P 


O CVl M- 

CPP 

CO 


Nt" P 

ppp 

<M 

0 0 

bn 

TO 

K> 

O M 














•d >d 

£ o 

P 



rp 

d" 

CPCP 


p p O 


vt 


P Nt 

NO ONnO 


0 

•H 

P 


tP 




• • 

CM CM 


d* CM CM 


Nf 


Pt- 

p 

0 

-P 

M 

P 






<d 

r— 




P 


p 

p 

> 

0 

40 

-p 

• 





o 









0 

0 

44 

0 

p 

40- 



•€0- 

C 0 --H -e0--fe9--€0<0-c0-c0--ee--e0«e- 

40 


4040 

404040 

O 

to 

-P 

P4 

0 





P 









O 

a) 

0 


-p 





0 










0 

Pi 

P 

p 




a * 

, 

• * 


• • • • 

• 9 

• 


% <a 

•9 • 

-P 

p 

« 

P 

•H 



rd 

- rH 


• » 


• • » • 

• • 

0 


• » 

44 

•LT\ 

o3 

{5 



o 

* 0? 

• bp 

• • 


• • • • 

• * 

0 


• o 

43 O • 

bD 

0 






•H 

- «H 

• 0 

<* « 


• • • • 

• • 

p« a 

0 -P 

^ 0 • 

♦H 

10 

'0 • 

bp 0! 



P 

• p 

• *H 

• • 


• • • • 

• • 

o 

O rH 0 

O bo • 

8 

1 — 1 


P 4d 



0 

• p 

* rd 

* <® 


• • • • 

« • 

0 

0 


0 


o5 

P 

•H 

p 



Ph u~\ 

P 0 

* • 


• • * e» 

• • 

ftCH m * 

M M O 

m 


'aJ = 

P 





r- p 

*- 0 

54 0 

P* 

0 0 0 0 

54 0 



to 

0 0 0 

8 

0 

40 P 

to 




>a 

• 0 

• pH 

o o 

o 

o o o o 

o o 

i—i 

10 Vl 0 

Pi Pi <3 

0 

0 

WP 





P CD -p 

r— 

ppppp pppp 

a5 

0 

o bo 

- 0 

■P 

0 

p i 

p 




!u3 

«H 

H 





•H 

> 

0 

nO -P p 

*H 

44 

Wcm 

•H 




PI 

• o5 

0 

u p 

P 

p p p p 

0 0 

H rH 

0 a? 

40 m in 



p 


•H 

> 


Pda><L>o>000000 

-p d -P 44 


O 0 

-P 

0 

-HON 

a 

O rd 

PH PiPiPiPiPiPiPi^P^ 

O aj O 


-P O -H 

to 

0 

aj^= 

•H S 

O *r» O 

M *d 


a? 

O 

eg 

S 

i—1 


•H 

<t| O LAO 1^,0 0MT\O O 

0 bp a> 


»d rd 

O 


•H *• 

0 


M 

O CM 0 _r\0C"K\00 

Ch 0 O O 


rd 0 0 


rd 

pto 

M 


0 

bp . 

•H -P $4 


0 0 tO 

0 

0 

'■p 1 —! 

Ph 


Pi 

0 LT\ K\CM ^T\0 KNCMnO NN, 

rd rd 03 


pcH p 

to 

to 

a5 




■H T— r- r- T- KN CM NN, 

0 0 rH M 


rH P 

0 

d 

ch-h 

SH 


M 

M 404040 4040404040-40 

.d 0 a? p 


d 0 P 

XI 

4^ 

O 0 

O 


O 

P 

'h cm p to 


}> l> 

-P 


EH 

ch 


ch 

fP -P-P-P-P-P P-P-P-P 

•H P 


O «H 


0 

-P 




c?c5a3c?o?a?c?o3d 

Ch ch 0 .h 


P 40 O 

-P 

0 

P br 

no 


rd 

nd 

OOf-i 


♦H 03 

a? 

0$ 

0 P 

0 


0 

0 

aJ - 


cl ra 

44 


S'H 

0 


0 

0 ofl 

-P -P 0 


br -p p 

-P 

>! 

f**d! 



Fh 

Fh Si H 

to to ch 0 


•H P 


0 

H to 




a3 

0 0 O -H 


0 chi ch 

0 

44 

o5 *H 



ch 

ch a? 0 

00 -p 

10 rH O 0 

0 

•p 

Pi p 

0 


0 

O «H >s B 

0 0 

P 

,O0 0 

rd 


0-H 




rH 0 -P 

rH rH -P 0 

P 

a? Pi 

P 

si 

PiF^ 

-P 


-P 

■PdrHa?topXPiP>0 

d a? d p-i 

P 

0 to 

O 

0 


to 


to 

TOCHM0P>d^rHrHP 

P -f 5 rd tO 

•P 

rH -P p 


•H 


0 


0 

OHd^ldMrHd^ 0 

OO 0 

0 

0? 0 rH 

P 

42 

T— 

0 


0 

O <=r| pq fe: O pq Ph (H crj pq 

EH EH M P4 CO {25 hH 

w 

> 





































- 1 25 - 










(r~- 


<D «d 

»> *d 





KM KM 


O CO 


rP d * 

£45 





• • 


a • 


0 d d «d 


cr- 

CM 

CM ^tvMD 

VO r- O 

CQ 

On r — 

O r - 

X Cl? <1) 

P<H 0 


on 

T- 

t— vD r— 

r- lc>,- sh CM 

CM 

NO 


P X •Pp 

d d *h fd 


r— 


K\ 

•st -sf COCO 

p 

KM 


>) 

o ^ t>s d d 




CM IP 

LT\ ON 

p 



bp bO 0) «H 

SPrHH 

d «H d d d 
tU <tj w pq w 









•H -H d 0 

d rd d CO 

d 0 pq 







UM 




P CD p 

PH •* 

• 




ON LT\ 


NO CM 


Ch bDrP 

M X p 

X 




• . 


• » 


<d H d'M a? Q) <D 

0 

C~~ 

CM 

T— no CM 

O OOP" 

0 

KM CM 

ON CM 

0 P -H Fh 

P PsP 0 

cp 

CP. 

,— 

T— -St P 

vO LT\ p- ON 

CO 

P 


P H d 

ftd 0 rO 


r— 



ON p- CO CO 

CO 

P 


O 0 0 -P 

S’ d *>rHd P|P 



CM P 

P ON 

p 



d ro a> 0 

O c H> s ddpPH 








X pH CD 

d H d d d 0 d 

0 








d 0 pq 

O d *d 

es <jJ Id pq trj 3 p 

CO 








O 05 flP 

. 









Qi d 0 

p 







OO 


H S W ^ 

ph d X 





O CM 


CM CM 


d O 

M d 0 0 





• » 


• • 


•n g X ro 

P X P 


c— 

CM CM ^ O 

O LTMCM p- 

CM 

On CM 

CM 

Fh P d 



ON 


r- NO VO 

vX> LT\ LT\ O 

ON 

P 

,— 

eh O-rlH 

d d - P 


,— 


P "M - 

p- p-CO ON 

km 

P 


-P £ Pi 

o Fh !>>rP 




tM P 

trS O 

UM 



bo 

d h d 0 





,— 





dJ < W co 









•H 0 0 0 

d l> H H 
0 *H Fh Fh 

X 







NO 


0 ro d d 

H d 0 





CO LT\ 


C CM 


fp d fq pq 

P >>Pi 





• • 

ON 



. rp 

P^rH 0 „ 


d- 

CM CM Nj- CM 

CM r- t- C~- 

p 

UMCM 

CM 

^ 2 »g 

H H H M 

d d ‘Hd 


ON 

T“ 

*— nO CM 

cm ipir-co 

KM 

P 


o d !>} d P 


T— 


P •■si- 

p- P C—ON 

UM 

P 


a? *H 'H -H 

d H d d 0 




CM p 

UM O 




O —- «d <d 

tU H W W 10 









0 0 



• 


• • CQ 

» • » • 

* bC 

1 • • 

• » 

d -P 0 0 



• 


• • rO 

* 0 • • * 

• s 

• • id 

• P • 

CO P*H PsH 





PH • rH 

• fP *io • br 

• -H 

• m d 

• d • 

P T— 





d • »0 

• p • p • d 

• P 

* ,Q 0 


O KMP »d 





o • PHrP 

• P • «P • “H 

• 0 

• rP 

• w • 

1—1 d 



• d 


d * d P 

10 d w • • p 

• H 

* -p 

* 0 e 

ro >* 0 d 



• «H 


5)010 Opp 0,0 ft • 0 

• Pi 

• fd d 

• |> * 

-p X to W 





!>5 d d HI H d * rp 

. g 

• d 

• ,P • 




. 0 


R d bD« 

CH • O 10 fP 

• O 

• 0 0 

• d • 

d ~X 


i 

1 ’ ^ 


•p »d 

» o •> d p S 

» O 

• d 0 

• G • 

M O p p 



H P 


rH rH tPrH O 

♦ 

• >■ 

® e 

0 P d -h 



d p 


0 0 O O 

d p d o 

. 0 

* d rp 

• 0 • 

PS 0 ^ 



*h d 


•P i —! 

•h d p d * 

• ,P 

» 0 d 

» rrj • 

X X 



d O 


P P P P 

d bn d O p 0 

♦ P 

• Pi 0 

• d • 

>; 



P „ 


PP^JP-HP P rP 

• P 


* d H 

Ola 0 



ch 


d d be bO 

0 p bop 

• d 

• d "d 

* bn d 

T- bD «-1 



d o 


O G -H -H 

0 s: 0 XJ -H p 

• G 

10 -H 0 

* tH 

>* d d 



•H 


0 0 xl. x: br 0 d 

w 

P d 

• »d d 

d Fh -H d 



d 


Cp Ch te p H P d s: O JO Cp rH bn W 

rP d P 

d 0 -d pq 



V 3 0 


o o 

d 0 „ 

rP O 

•H 

d 0 

S X 0 



>>P 


rp rp 

bn-H bo ^ iPdi 


* !>» d 

•P G 0 

s e 0 bi 



d E 


d d d d 

d-p d d o 

»P d rP rP P 

d 0X1 

d 0 p d 



X d 


0 0 -H .H 

•H P P rp d 

d *h 

d .p ch 

prop 

CO r> -H 



R 


P P p p p d p d-H R 

•h d 

•h d 

0 ch ch 

o Pi »d 



cp 


S S »H »H 

0 -h 0 d ch p 

d br 

: d *d Fh 

d d3 «P 0 



O rP 

PH d d R R rH rH -P dp 

P Ojj 0 O 

d 0 0 



d 

d 

d d -h -h 

ft 4) ftCH 0 be 

0 

0 

p 

rp •d CO P*H 



d d 

o 


e be S bn 

0 bn 0 bn d 

d rd 

d o 



0 *H 

d p P P P 

odCrHdHPddd 0 ch 0 d 

X »H X *d 



X br bo d d d d 

GdGd ddpdpdp 

O p 0 

d d p d 



E *H 


R P P p 

0 -p 0 p 

0 

0 & 

e 

EH 0 »H d 



2 d 


•H O O O 

0 J> 0 

P> 

> d 

d 

= P4£W 



£5 O 


(^H E-h EH E-h 

<r! EH EP 


<t! {25 

1^ 






























- 126 - 


> 







OnO 





<- T— 


M 







• • 





• • 




,-nO 


CM ft- 



C^ON 


CM IT\ 



A~ On 

<— 

fk 


CM ltn 


NO rj- 



aoo 


O O 





ft 

. 

CO NO 





IA-M- 


><3-00 





o 


NO r~ 







r— 





ft 


T- CV1 












o 














M 














M 














M 







H" Lf\ K\ 





KNCM A 









• • • 





• • • 


ft 


0 r- 

NO 

r- O 

00 fA rA a a 


OOO 


iA T- C~~ 



NO On K> 


0 


NM^VO LT\LTs 

On rr\co * 3 - «<*• 


OOr-r- 


H Cvl O 



t— 


O 


CO IT\ 

T— 

NO O A 


CM kJ-nO 


CM OO C“- 





u 


r- 

CVJ 


K\0 On 




r— CM 





c!J 


<- CM 

K\ 


t- CM CM 









M 














M 




LA 



»AK\ 





NO O 






• 



® • 





• • 


ft 


ONvO 

CO On 



H* CO 


00 H- 



•sj* CM 


ft 


r- CO 


la-M" 



O CM 


r- C~— 



y— 


Oj 


O ><fr 





cm ir\ 


ON K\ 





ft 


T— CO 







CM 





cb 


r- CM 



















OnO 





CA r— 


M 







• • 





• • 




ACM 


aoo 



CM O 





■Mr K\ 


ft 


LA r- 


LT\LTN 



Oco 


Ooo 



®— 


3 


CO O 





CM LT\ 


On LA 





o 


O r- 







CM 





ft 


t- K\ 












cb 
















w w 

W 

w m 

to W IQ W IQ 


W W W 


W tQ IQ 



0 w m 





PPPP,O 


&&& 


PrQ,Q 



Ol O* rP 




rH «H 

«H 

«H rH 

rH rH H rH rH 


rH rH rH 


HHH 

rj 


HHH 



0 • 

• » 


• • *_ 

• • • • • 


• • • 


• • 

H 

O 


• • • 



Jft • 

® • 


• * *— 

• • • • • 


• • • 

ft 

• « 

•H 


• • • 



43 • 

• * 


• • 

• • • • • 

• • 

• • • 

0 

• » 

-p 


• • • 






• • >6 

• % • • • 

ft 

• • • 

Pi 

• • 

Pi 


• • * 



ch • 



• • & 

* • • • • 

•H 

• • • 


• • 

a 


• • • 



O • 

• • • • 


• • 

• * • • • 

cd 

* » a 

ft 

• • 

ft 


• • • 




rd * * 


« • rd •• 

• • • • • 

bo 

« <B> ® 

0 

• • 

m 


• t • 



rd » 

0 . . 


• • 0 M 

• * • • • 

• 

• • • 

•H 

• • 

ft 


• • • 



ft • 

3 * • 


• • 8 M 

• ♦ • • • 

-p 

* • • 

-P 

• ® 

0 


• • • 



0 . 

ft • • 


• • ft M 

• • • • • 


• • • 

& 

• • 

0 


• • • 




w ♦ • 


• • m 


0 

• • • 

8 

• • 



• • • 



-P * 

ft • • 


• • ft ft> 

• • • • • 


• • • 

ft 

• • 

rd 


• t • 

• 


08 • 

0 • • 


••Oft 

• % • « • 

ft 

• • • 

w 


0 


® • » 

LA 



0 • • 


• •OO 

• • • • • 

0 

• • • 

ft 

• •> 

0 


-»«>>& 



iO • 



• * ft 

• • • • • 

Pi 

« • « 

0 

• » 

Fd 


• • • 

• 


1 —1 • 

«d • • 


• • rd CiJ 

• • • % • 


• • ® 

0 

* • 



• • • 

Pi 


rH • 

0 . • 


• • 0 

• • • » • 

«d 

• • • 


• « 

>s 


• • • 



ft * 

0 • • 


••0ft 

• • • • • 

0 

• • • 

rd 

• • 

rH 

• • 

• % • 

• 


O • 

<H • • 


• • *H *H 

• • • • • 

8 

• « % 

0 

• « 

•H 

* • * 

-P 





• • 

• • • • • 

ft 

• • • 

0 

• ® 

cd 

«H 

9 • • 

•H 


Ch l 

«H * • 


• rH'H m 

• • • • H 

m 

• • • 

ch 

• • 

P 

cd 

• • % 

O 


O rH 

O • • 


• cd 0 0 

• • • • cd 

ft 

• • ♦ 

• • 

• * 


O 

• • ♦ 



cd 



• 0 t> 

• • • • 0 

0 

• • • 

0 

• 0 

0 


• • • 

• 


ft -H 

•ft • • 


• B -ft rH 

• • • • S 

0 

• % ♦ 

bOH 

• • 

bo ft 

• • • 

Pi 


0 ft ft • ft 


• ft cd 

• ft • • 


• ft • 

cd cd 

• ft 

cd 

0 

• ft • 

O 


O? -ft 

ft • *H 

Pl-P 0 ft O 

• *H Pi-ft 0 »d 

• *H Pi ft O 

• •HP 

ft 

Pi 

••HP 




O PS (d rH r—1 ft O 

5>s Cd rH rH ft 

0 P5 Cd rH 

0 

>5 Cd r-1 

0 


r*s Cd rH 



ft 

B cd ft 

ft 

cd 0 & 

cd ft ft 0 } 0 

0 

cd ft ft 


cd ft ft 



cd ft ft 

<— 


£ 

<3 w e> 

£j 

to pq <«J 

WCSfHCQpqPHlxtcftfH 


W ft 

<d 


W OPh 

— 















































- 12? 


In explanation of this particular test and of the 
statistics derived therefrom it may he said in the main 
that conclusions of previous years 1 study since 1930 were 
substantially confirmed. The calves were a group of out¬ 
standing uniform feeders. The feed was in the same pro¬ 
portions for all groups changing from barley or wheat 
200 ; oats 200; bran 100 at the beginning of the trial to 
barley or wheat 400;oats 100; bran 100; flax 30 at the 
end of the trial. Grain had been fed for about 2 weeks 
previous to being shipped from the ranch and for 1 week at 
the Experimental Farm previous to the actual date of trial 
commencement. As to effects of feeding, Groups III and IY 
grew more than Groups I and II but did not show as high a 
finish. Calves of Groups I and II were classified as 
prime baby beef for shipment to Great Britain. In Group 
III 1 had died, which accounts for divergent items in 
this group, 2 were graded as seconds and the remainder 
graded as tops. In Group IY 1 was graded as cull owing 
to barley awns lodging on the back of the tongue affect¬ 
ing feed, 1 was graded as second and the remainder graded 
as tops. The tops were exported to Great Britain. As 
to food consumption the reverse consumption of hay and 
grain as between Groups I and IY and the increased grain 
consumption of Group I as compared w T ith Group II indicated 
that wheat was superior to barley as a finishing grain. 
Beet pulp, readily eaten by the calves, was purchased 









at the Raymond Sugar Factory at 33 cents per ton hut from 
the standpoint of cost per pound of gain, this product 
could not he hauled economically further than 10 or 13 
miles from the factory. Feed prices including grinding 
were higher to the farmer hy this cattle finishing route 
than if sold direct to the elevator. Wheat was the cheap¬ 
est and best finishing feed and registered a greater net 
return. 

From the Lethbridge feeding experiments, of which 
the above is typical, the following deductions can safely 
be drawn? 

1 . Self feeding grain, especially wheat, to calves 
is sound practice only when grain prices are low or on a 
parity with hay prices. The high grain prices of the 
fall of 1934 and eoexistant low cattle prices would not 
appear to warrant self feeding grain to calves. The 
ration would have to be more carefully apportioned in 
relation to final prices. 

2 . Beet pulp is a satisfactory fattening ration 
giving good finish and bloom but owing to its high water 
content and present prices cannot be hauled economically 
more than 10 miles. 

3 . Highest grain consumption per 100 weight of g.tin 
is during the final finishing period. 

4. Finished calves can be produced in Alberta up to 
a standard sufficiently high to meet the demands of the 



























■ 




; 





- 

































. 






















- 129 - 

most discriminating market in the world - Great Britain. 

The feeding trials which have been conducted at the 
University of Alberta for the pset 2 or more years are of 
such a nature that extracted reference to them would be 
of very little value to stockmen referring to this thesis. 
These experiments are based on a 5-point objective and 
although this objective has not as yet been wholly at¬ 
tained and verified, it must be considered as a unified 
effort in a most important field of study. In order 
therefore not to detract from the very great value at¬ 
tached to this work, a copy of the feeding trials for the 
winter of 1953-34 is appended. This experiment is typical 
of the research being carried on at this institution and 
is of sufficiently recent date to reflect costs and 
prices as they now operate. 

In the face of feed cost facts as they are revealed 
by these highly scientific and exact experiments under 
practical feeding conditions it is stated that fewer 
cattle from the range will be placed in the feed lots for 
the winter of 1934 - 35 * This is due to the low price of 
beef and to the high price of barley and oats - the high¬ 
est that has been paid for 4 years. One prominent rancher 
has 500 head on feed but another who is stated to usually 
place 400 to 500 head on feed lots in the Uanton area is 
reported to have sold 400 head in October averaging over 
1,400 pounds at a price of 3 cents per pound. Under 














































* 




















-130» 

these conditions it would appear that producing quality 
feeder cattle only is more than ever the cheapest and 
safest policy for the range producer at the present time. 
However, prime finished young cattle must be produced and 
the costs of same must be divided between two factors - 
production of the feeders and finishing of the feeders. 

Ho matter how great these costs may be and whether or not 
they are performed by one agency, they must be created 
and borne by the producer if the industry is to survive 
as a means of supplying the - market with prime quality 
fresh meat, 

Finishing costs as they have been considered in 
their relation to present market demands and in their 
relation to the range producer are however only an item - 
though an important one - in the stock grower’s balance 
sheet. In the production of quality feeder cattle, which 
after all is the keystone of range production, there are 
many other factors involved. One of the greatest of these 
is the percentage calf crop in the ranch herd. This factor 
based on bull policy and replacement heifer breeding 
policy is absolutely fundamental to economic herd mainten¬ 
ance. Selection of purebred Hereford bulls is advisable 
in the Short Grass Plains. Although the range producer 
does not have to produce purebred registered stock and 
should not aim to do so because of cost there are two 
reasons for selecting this type of bull. They have 




- 131 - 


the quality of best adapting themselves to environment 
and as purebred the best beef strain for this range area 
is assured. 



a prime assurance of quality beef and good calf 
crops on the Canadian Short Grass Plains, Bulls 
purchased by Gilchrist Brothers from purebred 
stock of Mr. Mure, High River. 

The essential objective of a range area is to produce re¬ 
quired quality commercial beef and this can only be assured 
by constant use of purebred bulls coupled with a replace¬ 
ment of quality heifers of the best beef type - which for 
the Short Grass Area is the Hereford breed. This policy is 
vitally necessary over a long term of years to assure an 
industry being built on sound foundations. This has been 
Proved by ranchers in Alberta with as much as 36 years 

experience and is verified bv range experiments bot. h, ill ^.... 

(1 ) Reproduced by permission of the Dominion Range Station. 

















' 






































■ 































Canada and the United States. Young hulls only should he 
used in the breeding herd and their average period of ser- 
vice restricted to 3 years commencing their full service 

at 2 years of age. One hull is assigned for service to 

■ 

25 cows. In smaller herds bulls may be used to 6 years 
and as they are frequently traded to smaller herds their 
depreciation is figured on this age. For production of 
replacement stock however a hull should not he used after 
3 years of age. The Hereford hull is desirable on the 
range not only from the standpoint of keeping up the strain 
hut this breed of hull will serve the herd indiscriminately 
and forced distribution of hulls through the herd is not 
so much necessary. An Aberdeen-Angus hull mil tend to 
segregate w r ith the coy/. Heavier hulls can he used on a 
plains area than can he used in a foot-hill or rocky area. 
Sore-footed or range taxed hulls due to range topography 
will not give maximum service. The hull should he kept 
well fed at all times and in maximum service condition. 

This applies also to the breeding herd generally. Over¬ 
stocking with consequent lack of sufficient forage will 
aore than off-set the use of good hulls in the herd. Laos: 
of growth and development in either parent stock will 
quickly deteriorate the whole herd. Range authority places 
the relationship here as 40fo breeding and GOfi feeding. One 
af the deterrent factors to sound production in Canada is 
bhat f armers or any producers may use any type of hull 













- 133 - 

even purebred in nondescript herds and thus owing to lack 
of governmental or other regulations continually produce 
low grade stock to depress an already low market. If this 
policy is ever to he remedied it must come through out¬ 
right prohibition by a body able to supervise and enforce 
its decrees or, in the opinion of one of the best informed 
ranchers in Canada, by making the market returns on such 
low grade cattle so inadequate as to make it totally im¬ 
possible on the dollar basis to produce this quality.(1 ) 
Next in importance to bull policy in increasing the 
percentage calf crop f is the breeding heifer replacement 
policy and breeding herd control. "To attain a first- 
class breeding herd after having begun the cattle business 
with inferior breeding cows requires several years T con¬ 
structive breeding with good bulls 11 . (2) The basic cow 
policy should then be to build up on a young herd - well 
conditioned - preferably purebred and bred as 2-year-olds 
to prod-uce a calf as 3-y ea **-olds. The calf should be 
weaned early and the cow given maximum time to take full 
advantage of range forage. 


(1) R.S, Gilchrist. 

(2) Virgil V. Parr - "Beef.Cattle Production in the Range 
Area". U.S.D.A. Bulletin No. 1393, p. 21, January 1 923 























- 134 - 



(1 ) 

Well bred, well nourished Hereford heifers are vital 
to a sound replacement breeding policy. Complemen¬ 
tary to a correct bull policy the foundation of the 
ranch business is thus assured in the production of 
maximum ca-lf crops of quality beef unsurpassed any¬ 
where in the world.Heifers on the Short Grass Plains, 

The maximum breeding age is about 9 years which leaves 7 

years of productive life for breeding purposes. With a 

view to increasing calf production, experiments have been 

carried out in Oregon, U.3.A., and have been started at 

the Dominion Range Station, in breeding yearling heifers 

to produce a calf as a 2-year-old. Special precautions 

. 

must be taken in the range area with this policy and in 
view of certain mitigating factors it is doubtful if such 
a policy from a long term point of view is advisable. The 

consensus of opinion based on years of experience is 

(1) Reproduced by permissiHh”of“THe Dominion Range Station. 



































1 35 


that breeding yearlings involves an increased death rate; 
the retarding of growth; a loss of weight and development 
in the calves; a heavy extra feeding cost and increased 
risk; a lower percentage calf crop in subsequent years, 
and frequently sterility in later years. In view of 
these facts and notwithstanding the rise in prices, the 
experiments in Oregon of some few years ago are of in¬ 
terest. The following conclusions were reached - 

"1 . Calving at 2 years of age reduced the percentage 
of calves at the ages of 3 an & 4 years, but not at the 
ages of 3 and 6 years. 

2. Early breeding did not affect the size of the 
calf at weaning or in subsequent years. 

3. 2-year-old heifers raising calves were slightly 
less in weight at 4 years of age than those raising 
calves as 3-year-olds. 

4. The effects of early breeding were not changed 
by light or heavy winter feeding, nor by the use of silage 
or barley in addition to alfalfa hay. 

5 . Cows producing their first calves as 2-year-olds 
were more profitable than cows producing their first 
calves as 3- , y e ar»olds. The difference in profit at the 
end of 4 years was $ 36.15 per head. 

6. The heifers were wintered on straw and alfalfa. 
This combination was more economical than straight 
alfalfa" . (1 ) 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson - "Age of Marketing in Relation to 

Ranch Organization". p. 8. 






- 136 - 

This is only one experiment and the conditions under which 
it was carried out are not similar to those of either the 
Northern G-reat Plains Area of the United States or to those 
of our Short Grass Plains. The Oregon experiment was con¬ 
ducted in a mountain or inter-mountain grazing area where 
at least the feed factor would he more advantageous than 
on the Canadian prairie range. However although this ex¬ 
periment may he more in the nature of an exception which 
proves the general rule, it does indicate possibilities of 
increasing the income per cow provided it is practised in 
small unit herds not over 300 and provided good management 
is followed to give all possible protection to the breed¬ 
ing cow and to the calf. 

When considering the practical possibilities of the 
policy of breeding yearling heifers such influencing 
factors as feed shortage and over-grazing, lack of water 
supply, adverse climatic and like deterrent features must 
be taken into account. The answer to success or failure 
may well lie in these factors and not in the policy as 
such. The practice may develop into sound procedure in 
the plains area if adverse feed and climatic conditions 
can be overcome. The question is even raised that 2- 
year-olds when bred, under the present policy, may be too 
fat and the breeding of yearlings might increase calf crop 

percentage. Whatever policy is followed all factors must 
be taken into account in order to maintain efficiency of 

























- 137 - 


production and turn-over. 

To implement sound breeding principles in the range 
breeding herd segregation of the herd to isolate the 
yearlings should be practised and the date for dropping 
calves suitable to the climatic conditions of the range 
should be determined. "Controlled breeding is very im¬ 
portant. Through it are governed the season of calving, 
the age at which the heifers are bred to calve, and the 
breeding age of bulls. The general practice is to turn 
the bulls into the cow herd about #uly 1st, which permits 
calves to be dropped as early as the following April. Most 
of the calves are dropped in May and June, and considering 
the danger from severe storms that sometimes occur in 
April, this season is early enough under the prevalent 
conditions on the large ranches that depend upon natural 
shelter for protection. Small ranchmen who have suffic¬ 
ient sheds can consider breeding for earlier calves, es¬ 
pecially if the plan is to feed out or sell feeder calves. 
In addition, large operators with 200 or more cows, who 
expect to sell feeder calves in the fall can consider 
means of sheltering earlier calves and can breed for them 
accordingly".(1 ) As conditions in this area are very 
similar to our own the same rules may be applied with only 

minor exceptions. The safest rule is probably to have 

(1) Wilson,Wilcox,Klemmedson and Parr- "A Study of Rancn 

Organization and Methods of Range-Cattle Production 

in -che Northern Great Plains Region" . U.S.D.A. Bui. 

No. 45, p. 47, March 192b. 












- 138 - 


May as the calving month when on our large range area 
only natural topographic protection can be afforded. The 
calf can then reach an average weight of 4G0 pounds at 
weaning time and be well conditioned to undergo winter 
feeding. Heifers not required for breeding purposes 
should be spayed if it is not possible to segregate them. 

The application of Such principles as a cove dis¬ 
cussed should, all things considered, produce a maximum 
calf crop under given range conditions. The result of 
such practises in the United States up to 1922 is por¬ 
trayed in the following table: 


"Average number of bulls for each 1 00 cows and 
average number of calves from each 100 cows. 


State 

Bulls 

Calves 

State 

Bulls 

Calves 

Ariz ona.... 

... 6 

57 

New Mexico, . 

5 . 

66 

California, 

... 3.73 

73.35 

Oregon. 

4.04 

75.74 

Colorado... 


69.3 

Utah. 

4 

69 

Idaho...... 


75 

Washington.. 

3.72 

79.48 

Montana.... 


75.8 

Wyoming. 

3.52 

73.2 

Nevada. 


70 " 



(1 ) 

The average for 

Southern 

New Mexico up 

to 1922 

is 


stated to have never exceeded 50fo. From 1 91 6 to 1 91 9 the 
average was only 37 . 556 . A comparison of these figures 
with Canadian figures in the Short Grass Plains indicates 
that a very sound breeding policy is being followed by the 
Canadian range producer. In a survey covering the years 
1927 to 1931 inclusive conducted by the Dominion Range 

Station following an intensive survey in 1926 by the 

(1 ) Sardine and Forsling - "Range and Cattle Management 

During Drought". U.S.D.A-. Bulletin No. 1 031 , p. 38 , 

May 1922. 




















































: 







■ 






- 

, . 




















. - . 

. 















- 139 - 

Dominion Experimental Farm Branch indicated that on a 
basis of 10,000 head of cattle on various ranches the 
average calf crop was 73 /> and for the year 1931 was 
70 , 4 /o. Mitigating factors such as mild winter and good 
weather in the calving season had a bearing on these 
figures but in any case these figures are much above the 
average for all Western Canada. The accepted normal calf 
crop under our range conditions is 60/> to 63 / 0 . The breed¬ 
ing heifer replacement percentage varies greatly from 
ranch to ranch running as high as 50 />, but a working 
average of 13 /° under present necessarily controlled pro¬ 
duction will serve as a basis of suitable herd maintenance. 
An increased calf crop under open market conditions means 
lowered cost of production but increased investment and 
labour expense and under present highly restricted market 
conditions these factors register added importance. 

In the matter of winter feeding female breeding stock 
range experiments have shown that cows in good fall con¬ 
dition should just be maintained through the winter; thin 
cows should gain about 100 pounds; thin cows produce Just 
as good calves as fat ones but should be fed well after 
calving for milk supply; well pastured 00 ws in summer 
consume less hay in winter and produce a better calf; hay 
maintenance ration is 16 to 20 pounds per day per cow; 
winter pasture is advisable if available. Heifer calves 
should just be maintained in weight during winter. Year- 











-140- 


ling heifers in good condition off summer grazing can lose 
30 pounds without injury. Poor condition yearlings must he 
fed well to keep up in winter. 




In connection with winter feeding on the range with 
a view to producing finished baby beef or yearlings a 
method known as the “Montana Method of Beef Production" 
has some merit here. Calves must be well fed on alfalfa 
and 3 pounds of grain daily. They are then turned out on 
spring pasture the last of May and supplemental grain fed. 

In September they are placed in a dry feed lot for 6 weeks 1 
finishing. They are then able to take advantage of a slack 
October market for grain finished young stock. Profits as 
high as $ 23.00 more per head over those fed on hay and 
grain only have been obtained. 

A final factor of special reference to production 
age is the disposal of aged cows. In the light of present 
conditions in the drought areas and the necessity of govern¬ 
mental aid in providing feed and disposing of poor grade 
stock the problem is enhanced. It is still further a pro¬ 
blem in the light of present market demands for young 
stock. An outlet may be found in the farming areas but 
care should be taken to see that farmers do not use these 
cast-off cattle for breeding purposes to create a further 
drug of low grade stock on the beef cattle market. The 
tendency from the trend to produce young stock will be 


















. 

. 

. 


- 




. 






1 41 - 


to increase the percentage of old cows. There might he a 
possible outlet abroad for this growing surplus in the form 
of processed meat and extracts, one suggestion being the 
Orient (1 ) but it would appear that the domestic market 
must absorb most at least of this type of meat in one 
form or another. Whatever the outlets nay be they must be 
continuous and capable of absorbing an ever increasing per¬ 
centage of this class of stock. It may well be a matter of 
some doubt if our Canadian packing plants could absorb 
this surplus or if a market could be found within Canada 
for all of the processed product. The present policy of 
Governments concerned with drought area cattle would seem 
to indicate this view. This particular feature of old 
cow surplus however is a part of the still greater problem 
of a general accumulative surplus of all forms of beef 
cattle in Canada over a period of years and as such will 
receive further treatment when the general domestic and 
foreign market is under consideration. 

From what has now been reviewed it is apparent that 
range production of beef is by no means a simple process. 
There are still other factors with attendant costs to 
which at least some attention must here be given. The 
matter of land tenure has been considered in another con¬ 
nection ( 2 ) and what was then said with reference to the 

necessity of Ion.? term tenure applies with e M ual force 

( 1 ) R.S. Gilchrist. 

( 2 ) Pasture utilization, see Ante p. 78 . 























" 

































when fences, water holes, hay areas and other improvement 
investments have to be made. Security of tenure is a 
vital factor when improvements in the form of fixed cap¬ 
ital have to be carried out. One large ranch visited in 
the course of this survey has 325 miles of fence enclos¬ 
ing a lot of non-producing land. The owner stated that 
40fi of grazing cost is made up of rentals - taxes and up¬ 
keep of fences and similar equipment. The remaining 
is mostly wages and feed. Range improvement cost in the 
form of fences is exemplified by work on the range area 
of the Range Station which had no fences on it when estab¬ 
lished. Initial cost per acre to build the fence was 30 
cents or $18.00 per animal unit. The upkeep has amounted 
to 2.3 cents per acre or $1 .38 per head per year. It 
would cost $130.00 per mile at least to erect an efficient 
retaining fence. Although some fencing on the home ranch 
may be cheaper yet specialized fencing here such as 
branding corrals, dehorning chutes and segregation fencing 
would bring the cost fully as high. 

The costs involved in water supply have already been 

considered in connection with range utilization (2). Salt 

and bone meal mineral is an important item for health and 

efficient pasture utilization through proper distribution 

of the mineral. Experiments have been conducted on this 

matter in relation to mineral deficiency in range forage 
(1) See Ante p. 63 . 

























: ~ 

. 


' 





















. 






, 

. 




s 

- 



























- 143 - 

but cost data are not yet available. Weathering loss in 
1 93 O registered 3 O.I. 7 & for block sa.lt and 31 .396 for loose 
salt , 

Labour is the largest individual item of expense. 
Figures involving 1 0,000 head on variously located, ranches 
running from 300 to 4-COO head per ranch show labour to 
amount to $ 3.61 for a calf, $ 4.38 for a yearling and 98 
cents for a 2 or 3 -year-old steer. Operator or family 
labour is not included. It would be legitimate practice 
to do so however. Hay harvesting takes most labour which 
accounts for the high labour cost of younger stock. 
Saddlemen and general ranch labour comprise the labour 
item. In' the economic survey by the Range Station in 
1 932 labour comprised 27 . 8 of the cost of production. 
General equipment is a large item. This involves 
besides ranch constructions, such items as machinery, 
wagons, sleighs, trucks, engines, dipping vats, mowers, 

plows, seeders, harness and saddles, horses. On one 

. 

ranch alone running 4000 head the equipment investment 
was over $20,000.00. Ranch construction items involve 
dwellings, barns, trap corrals, watering places, drilling 
of wells, dipping vats, bunk houses, machine sheds, black¬ 
smith shop, shelters and similar items. 

Lease rental and taxes have also been dealt with but 
it may be here pointed out that their high rate in relation; 
to carrying capacity has amounted to 1396 of operating 


















_ 







■ 

. 

' 

' 















. 


- 


















. • 












1 44 


costs alone. This does not include cost necessary to de¬ 
velop the range which amounts to an additional 9 . 4 or a 
total of 2 A Aft of the total cost of production and has 
amounted to $3.49 per head per year. This is irrespective 
of the calf crop and on the basis of an over average calf 
crop of 7 the cost of land alone per calf would be $ 4 . 63 . 
These costs are based on 1 932 figures and would even now 
be slightly increased. 

Depreciation includes such items as building and 
equipment and has been determined at 3^* This is probably 
conservative especially in the light of present increased 
costs. Depreciation on bulls is based on the difference 
between the buying and selling price of the bull figured 
on a service life of 6 years. Depreciation on female 
breeding stock has been considered as part of the general 
problem of disposal of excess surplus. Range forage may 
easily depreciate if proper methods of conservation are 
not followed. There is thus a saving element here which 
does not apply to other depreciating items. Consumable 
ranch supplies might be considered under this head as they 
incur a constant and continual cost item. 

Death losses and insurance are final items of cost 
which must appear in the balance sheet. Insurance is one 
of the more fixed cost; items but death losses are variable 
depending as they do very largely on climatic conditions 
and different management practices. Over a period of 3 
years the death loss has been established at 3 ^, 




. 























. 













. 


. 


















In so far as organization and cost of production is 
concerned it now only remains to place these various cost 
items in their positions on typical balance sheets repres¬ 
entative of ranch costs in the Short Grass Plains Area. 


The cost figures here used are those for 1 932 but they are 
quite sufficiently modern to reflect the financial status 
of the range stockman to-day. On the basis of actual 
prices paid in 1932 for good hay land and lease improve¬ 
ments a ranch carrying 1 ,000 head had the following in¬ 


vestment : 

'‘Land.. $17,123.00 

Leased land..... 12,300.00 

Improvements.,.. 9,14-0,00 

Equipment.. 3,030.00 

Cattle. . .. 43,300.00 

Horses. 1 .990.00 £9 0.305.00 ”(1 ) x 

Investment comparisons are well illustrated in the follow- 

ing table involving 1 ,796 cattle: 

“Economic Analysis of the Range Beef Industry Ranch 

Investment . 

Average Investment for 25 Ranches in 3.aita, & S.W.Sask. 

Invest- Per cent 

ment of total 

Land ............. .7777 89 ,39l‘ ~~~~47TT~ 

Buildings,fences and improvements,. 16,633 8.9 

Cattle. .. 67,736 35.2 

Other livestock... 3,170 1.8 

Feed and supplies... 6,410 3,3 

Equipment.. . 4.894 2.7 


Total.... 1 88 .476 1 00.fl»(2) 

In this survey cattle were valued under normal conditions 
and not under present abnormal prices. The valuations 

were cows $4u.Q0: yearling heifers $95.00: 2-year heifers 

(1) L.B. Thomscon - “Economics of the Ranching Industry 
In Alberta ani Saskatchewan”. p. 2. 

(2) L.B,Thoms on - “An Economic Study of Beef Cattle Rais¬ 

ing on the Range Areas of Alberta and Saskat chewan 1 '.p .4 
y Total should read $ 8 9 .3_QfL*-QfL«----- 























































■ 

. 










: 










■ 




: 




















. 




- . 

. . 

. 











- 146 


$40.00; calves $ 25 . 00 ; yearling steers $ 35 . 00 ; 2 -year 
steers $45.00; 3-year steers $55.00 and bulls $150.00. 

The various investment figures here cited were considered 
quite conservative valuations, as in some cases such as 
in purchasing deeded crop or hay land, the valuation was 
actually less than the purchase price paid. 

In summary of the matter of cost of production, the 
final answer to success or failure lies in the rate of 
interest return on investment. Investment in this sense 
is to be understood as including fixed capital and oper¬ 
ating expenses or total outlay in the business. If based 
on annual operation the fiscal year for the stockman is 
from October 1st to September 30 th. As stated hereto¬ 
fore, irrespective of prices paid or obtained, the pre- 
ducer is considered as entitled to a margin of 6 ^ interest 
return on total cost of production. The cost of produc- 
tion of range cattle at various ages has been revealed 

/ I 

by the survey conducted in the years 1926 , 1 927 and 


4928.(1) Considering the relationship of this rate of 




cost of production to actual prices received reveals the 
real and rather dismal situation of the producer at the 


present time. In the light of present oattle prices even 


as low as 3 cents per pound these cost of production fig¬ 
ures clearly demonstrate the fact that many ranchers at 
the present time are not only not making cost of production 


but are actually forced to sell below cost. Below are 

(1 ) See Ante p. 1 01 . 














: . 


■ 






















' 




































- 147 - 

shown the average prices received at the Moose Jaw Feeder 
Show for a period of 6 years - 1926 to 1931 inclusive. 

These prices are for first class feeder cattle of the type 
produced in the Short Grass Plains and above the standard 
of the average sold through stock yards, which is generally 
true of range feeder cattle from the area under review. 
'■ Relation of the Cost of Production to Market Price . 


Cost of Prices at Difference 

Production Moose Jaw per 


Feeder Show 1 uO lbs. 

Calf. $7.23 cwt * $ 6.83 cwt. .40 

Yearling.. . . . .. . 6.98 rr 6.02 " .96 

2-year-old. 6.42 » 5.55 r? .87"(n 


The average market price for August, September, October and 
November would be about 1 cent less per pound so the above 
comparisons are fairly representative. For the past number 
of years up to the present depression period the cattleman 
has not therefore been making 696 on his investment and in 
fact has been barely meeting expenses. Since 1931 the 
situation has become obviously worse. A summary of costs 
for the years 1927 , 1928 and 1929 involving 10,000 cattle 
appears in the following statements: 


" Summary . 

Cost of calves per 100 lbs. live weight... $ 7.23 

Cost of yearling steers per 100 lbs,live weight,... 6.98 
Cost of 2-year-old steers per 100 lbs,live weight.. 6.42 

Cost of 3-year-old steers per 100 lbs.live weight.. 6.1 3 

Cost of running a breeding cow for one year........ 21 ,1 0 

Cost of Producing: a calf with a 7 5 ?'° calf crop...,., 28 .13 



(1 ) L.B. Thomson - "Economics of the Ranching Industry 

in Alberta and Saskatchewan", p. 6 . 

























. 
















■ 


' ■ ' 




‘ 

' 







. 

- 









. 






















- 1 48 - 


"Cost of Production per Head of Range Cattle of Different 


Ages on the Short Grass Plains 






Year¬ 

2 

-year 

3 

-year 

Investment Expense 


Calf 

ling 


old 


old 

Int . on land investment at 

6# 

$2 

.1 2 

$3 

.13 

$1 

.?8 

$1 

.62 

Int.on cattle TT 

»t 

3 

.60 

3 

.00 

3 

. 60 

4 

.3 0 

Int.on improvement TT 

tr 


.73 


.73 


*73 


.73 

Int.on equipment TT 

TT 


.20 


.37 


.13 


.1 0 

Int.on work stock n 

rr 


.12 


.1 2 


.1 2 


.12 

Total investment expenses 

# ♦ e 

$6 

• 79 

$7 

• 33 

$6 

.60 

$7 

.09 

Operating Expenses 



.83 


83 


.83 . 


.83 

Int.on borrowed capital.. 

• • • 

$ 1 

1 . 

1 

1 

Rent and taxes .. 


2 

.14 

2. 

82 

1 

. 63 

1 

.63 

Labor. ... 


3 

.61 

4. 

38 


.38 


.38 

Depreciation on improvements 




66 





and equipment .... 


1 

.33 

1 . 

1 

.03 

1 

.03 

Veterinary and vaccine. .. 



.23 

« 

12 


.03 


.03 

Bookkeeping, etc. ........ 



.08 

. 

08 


.08 


.08 

Fuel and repairs for cars 

9 









trucks and engines .... . 



.43 

. 

43 


.43 


.43 

Miscellaneous ranch supplies 


.82 

. 

82 


.63 


.40 

G-eneral supplies . 



.20 

, 

20 


.20 


.20 

Depreciation on bulls .... 


1 








Death losses ............. 


1 

.50 

1 . 

50 

1 

.00 


.50 

Total Operating Expenses. 


$14 

• H 

14 

.06 

7 

.98 

7 

.19 

Total Expenses ........... 


$21 

.10 

21 

.43 

1 4 

.38 

14 

.28 

Total cost per calf with 

a 









75# calf crop 

$28 

.1 $ 








Total cost per head . 


$28 

•LI 

02 

.58 

64 

A. 

. ! 0 


.44" 


r 


The first table indicates on a basis of weight the total 

cost per 100 pounds - the weights being taken from the 

Dominion Range Station records over a 3 year period.(2) 

The cost per 1 00 pounds cited for different ages would 

have to be obtained to realize 6# interest return. A 

typical ranch balance sheet covering the years 1926 to 

1 931 appears below : __________________ _ 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson -"Cost of Production of Range Cattle ,f , 
PP. 2-3. 

( 2) See Ante p • 1 01 . 



































.’ ... 







. 







. 

. 




















- 149 - 

‘ 1 Statement of Receipts and Expenses - 1931 


In measuring the success of the business, it was 
deemed advisable to use the rate of return on investment . 


Receipts and Expenses . 

Average number of Cattle per Ranch 1796 head 25 Ranches 


Ranch Receipts ; 

Cattle sales .. $19,129 

Other livestock.. 350 

Crop sales.. 69 

Miscellaneous sales. .. 

Increase in Inventory............ 1 .355 


20.962 

Ranch Expenses : 

Current expenses..... 11,677 

Cattle purchases ... 9 ,426 

Depreciation, buildings and fence 667 

Depreciation, equipment. 426 


1 8.1 96 


Total Receipts... 

Total Ranch Expenses..... 

Ranch Income... 

Operators labor..... 

Ranch Return on Investment........... 

Ranch Investment... 

Rate of int. return on Investment.... 

Current expenses per animal unit. 

Total expenses per animal unit.. 

Investment expenses 696 per animal unit 
Total expenses of all kinds per animal 

unit.... 


20,962 

11J96 

2,766 

1*20 


1 .56 
1 8F?47g 

0 

$6 


83 

.5 0 


1 O.13 
6.30 


1 6.4V 1 (1 ) 


Current expenses per animal unit here do not include de¬ 


preciation, interest on investment and owner T s time. Ro 

interest on borrowed capital is allowed. The increase 

in inventory was mainly in numbers - not in values. If 

1931 or 1932 values were taken there would have been a 

decided decrease in inventory and the ranches in question 

would have barely met operating expenses. As it was the 

interest return was only Q.85#>. On individu al ages the 
(1) L.B. Thomson - r, An Economic Study of Beef Cattle 

Raising on the Range Areas of Alberta and Saskatch¬ 
ewan” . p. 6. 



























































• ■ . * • . '... r.c.; 
















: . . 

. . . 










. : . 




. 


. 

* 









































- 1^0 - 

investment return as determined on this survey has already 
been considered.(1 ) This would he still more true in the 
light of 1934 price levels. 

There are no figures later than for 1 931 available 
relative to ranch organization and production costs in the 
Short Grass Plains Area* The above review up to that year 
however may be considered a fair analysis of the position 
of the stockman in 1934 and 1933* Costs have not altered 
to any appreciable extent when production of feeder cattle 
only is concerned. If finishing is considered costs have 
increased to the extent at least of the rise in grain 
prices which is reflected in a minimum rise in cost of 
from 2 to 2 1/2 cents per pound of gain on supplemental 
feed. At the same time cattle prices have fallen since 
1931 from at least 1 1/2 to 2 cents per pound. In view 
of this pulling apart of complementary factors very few 
ranches are to-day meeting operation costs and are there¬ 
fore existing on reserves, and no ranches in the Short 
Grass Plains are making any interest- on investment. In 
summing up the position of the range producer In Canada 
at the present time therefore there would seem to be some 
force in the argument of a prominent ex-Minister of State 
that 11 it is wrong to fix price at the point of ultimate 
delivery; price should be fixed at the source' of produc¬ 
tion” . ( 2 ) ____ 

(1 ) See Ante p. 1 07 . 

(2) Hon. H.H. Stevens, in an address at Lethbridge, 
Alberta, September 1 st, 1934® 









































































; . 









CHAPTER IV 


GRADING. 

This topic of necessity must he very restricted in so 
far as actual results are concerned. Information here rel¬ 
ative to the export market is unobtainable for the simple 
reason that Canada has no grading system in force for ex¬ 
port beef cattle or for export beef. The same is true for 
the domestic market relative to live cattle. The only fielc 
at the present time in which official grading and standard¬ 
ization is in force is in the domestic beef trade. This 
is not as it should be but for this reason statistical and 
other facts in this connection relative to the field of 
the present review are entirely lacking. Owing to this 
paucity of desirable and essential information direct re¬ 
ference can here only be made to the domestic beef grad¬ 
ing policy and such inferences drawn for the live cattle 
industry and for the export market as reason would seem 
to suggest• 

Having traced thus far the raising of the beef animal 
to the marketable stage and given some consideration to 
costs in connection therewith* we come to a final factor 
which will determine market returns. This factor is the 
standard of product which the producer has finally produced. 
Outside of transportation cost from place of production to 
the market this is the final production factor. It is at 
the same time the first point at which the producer taps 

his market and gets a direct reaction from his market. He 

- 151 - 














- 152 - 


is now soon to oome into full contact with this final 
arbiter of his fate as a beef cattle producer. Here the 
inevitable economic law of Supply and Demand will aid in 
rendering the final decision and the grade and standard of 
animal product which the stockman offers will play no small 
part in that decision. It is contended on behalf of the 
beef cattle producer to-day however that the law of Supply 
and Demand is not allowed to function as it should to fix¬ 
ate price. It is maintained free competition does not 
exist whereby the grower can obtain his proportionate share 
of the ultimate price. On the contrary it is claimed 
middlemen interests, such as packers, have a virtual monop¬ 
oly over price. Lamb is cited as a case in point in 1934. 
The feeder could have paid the grower as high as 4 cents 
per pound and have made a profit but offered only 2 3/4 
cents per pound. The price finally ranged from 3 to 3 1 /2 
cents per pound and largely because of a demand for lamb, 
Canada importing approximately 4,000,000 pounds. It is 
contended the demand on the domestic market for beef cattle 
is controlled largely by packing interests.(1 ) 

To the extent that monopoly actually does exist by 
any agency in any form it is not in the general interests 
of society or of the industry that it should continue. 

Free competition under such control as to prevent cut¬ 
throat practice and to promote equitable distribution of 

profit is more in the interests of general welfare. _, 

(1 ) L.B. Thomson. 







- 133 - 

Packers or producers should not he in a position to mon¬ 
opolize price. The tangible form of the final decision 
is the actual price obtained and from the standpoint of 
practical economics the success or failure of the stockman 
as a beef cattle producer rests on those factors which 
make up the dollar basis of return on investment. 

With respect to standardizing and grading beef on 
the domestic Canadian market there are two general factors 
being considered - purity and quality. The principal leg¬ 
islation affecting the first is the Meat and Canned Foods 
Act passed by the Federal Covernment in 1907 * This Act 
with amendments to date insures pure,sanitary, wholesome 
meat which of course would in this respect be suitable for 
both domestic consumption and export. This legislation 
has however nothing to do with quality. Under this Act 
all slaughter buildings must conform to lighting, ventila¬ 
tion, plumbing, water supply and drainage regulations. 
Walls and floors must be moisture proof and utensils must 
be of metal or other sanitary material. All inedible 
Products must be segregated for treatment in special com¬ 
partments , 

jurisdiction of the Act extends to all establishments 
concerned with the meat industry. Stock yards, pens, 
stables and similar places of detention come under the 
direct supervision of the Veterinary Director General of 
the Health of Animals Branch of the Department of Agricul- 




ture. The work is organized under a Chief of the Meat 


and Canned Foods Division, assisted by Division Super¬ 
visors for producing regions, District Supervisors for 
large centres, local Inspectors for meat establishments, 
and Veterinary Inspectors who do the actual inspection. 

All of these officials are fully qualified and experienced 
veterinary surgeons. 

With a view only to determining wholesomeness of 
product animals are inspected immediately prior to slaughter 
and the carcass continually examined thereafter until re¬ 
leased for sale. All defective or diseased animals are 
isolated for slaughter and the resultant carcass either 
partially or wholly condemned. Special treatment for con¬ 
demned meat, such as steam pressure reduction in sealed 
tanks, transforms such meat into fertilizer, animals foods 
or other products. Processing of edible meat involving 
the mixing of spices, or other curing or pickling treat¬ 
ment is also under supervision and must conform to such 
regulations and chemical analysis as will insure a pure 
and wholesome product for ultimate human consumption. 

When regulations such as the above have been carried out 

! 

the meat thus graded for purity is marked by a Government 
stamp ff Canada Approved". This is a non-iniurious ink 
marking showing a crown inside a circle with a number 
inset to indicate the number of the packing plant at v/hich 
the product was prepared. Such is the Canadian hall-mark 










' 


. 

■ 





■ 


. 

. 











- 155 - 

of purity now officially recognized and accepted on the 
export as well as on the domestic market, Canada-may thus 
be said to have a Federal meat inspection service to-day 
equal to that of Germany, Argentine, England, Australia, 

New Zealand or any competitive meat Producing country in 
the world. This has been accomplished in the short space 
of 27 years and to-day it is said some 70 packing and 

slaughtering establishments come under the Act necessit¬ 
ating an inspection personnel of some 150 full time vet¬ 
erinary inspectors and an equal number of lay assistants. 
This all lies behind the official stamp of purity which 
as one writer in reviewing the subject has said - '‘The 
mark "Canada Approved 41 is a guarantee accepted all over 
the world that the meat has been obtained from animals 
inspected before and after slaughter, prepared under 
sanitary conditions and with which every care has been 
taken to ensure a sound, wholesome and clean product fit 
for human consumption",(1) 

While Canada thus has an efficient meat inspection 

, 

system it has up to the present time been confined very 
largely to the export meat trade. It is said that approx¬ 
imately 40f<> of domestic consumption Is now "'Canada Approved 
meat. It has further been decried by local stockmen that 

the poorer grrade of meat is retained for domestic con sump- 

(1 ) A.E, Cameron - "Protecting the Buyers of Export Meats 4 *' 

Canadian Trade Abroad, Voi. Ill, November 1934,P*9. 























r 














- 



























' 












. 









- 156 - 

tion while all of the best grade is exported. Be that as 
it may statistics indicate a very noticeable increase in 
the domestic consumption of branded meat. This was one 
of the main supporting factors in the market for the year 
1933 . As finances improve further Federal Inspection ser¬ 
vice can be effected and more efficient abattoirs can be 
constructed. From the standpoint of economy and unified 
national policy it would seem advisable that Federal con¬ 
trol remain dominant in this field* This is particularly 
so in so far as the export phase must continue to remain 
a most vital factor in the beef cattle industry and fur¬ 
ther so when advocating the beef cattle industry of Canada 
as a national industry rather than as a regional or pro¬ 
vincial industry. 

Branding of beef however does not consist of rec¬ 
ognizing purity standards only; quality also must be con¬ 
sidered. This is a comparatively recent development in 
the industry. Official grading of beef for quality is now 
carried out under the Dominion Beef Grading lolicy put into 

' j 

effect in 1 929 by the Livestock Branch of the Department 
of Agriculture. Quality grading is confined to meat for 
domestic consumption only. There are only 2 classes offic¬ 
ially recognized covering the 2 top grades of beef. Be¬ 
sides being required to come up to the TT Canada Approved IT 
standard for purity these meats must also conform to 
specifications for age, texture, tissue structure, marbling, 










' 






. 






















■ 




-- 














' 















■ 
























- 157 - 

finish, tenderness, tensile strength or elasticity, car¬ 
cass conformation and similar features which a discriminat¬ 
ing market demands. When a combination of Such features 
in any one carcass reach one or other of 2 specified stand¬ 
ards it is officially marked accordingly. By means of a 
toothed roller, the cogs of which are inked with a non- 
injurious fluid, two rippled lines are engraved lengthwise 
on one side of the carcass. The only two grades recognized 
are 'choice’ and ’good’. For the highest or choice grade 
this hall-mark of quality is red and for the second or 
good grade the mark is blue. Such an official marking is 
now recognized as the standard of quality in beef for dom¬ 
estic consumption. 

To extend this marking to beef for export would re¬ 
quire its official recognition by foreign Governments as 
already in practice is the case with the standard of 
purity marking. Such a recognition is no doubt slightly 
more difficult to obtain for the reason that there are 
numerous factors which underly quality many of which are 
subject to individual interpretation and unanimity of op¬ 
inion is therefore not easy. There is no reason to assume 
however that such difficulties are insurmountable f What 
has been possible for purity of product should also be 
possible for quality. 

There is a divided opinion among stockmen and certain 
marketing agencies on the feasibility of grading of live 



. 




























, 

. 




' 

















- i 38 - 

cattle for the market and various suggestions have been 
marie. There should be no ground for such an opinion how¬ 
ever with respect to the advisibility of grading if a 
practical plan can be devised. The cardinal and fundamen¬ 
tal rule of marketing practice for the producer of any 
product is that he must study and cater to the consumer 
demands of his market. Many an exporter has neglected 
that rule to his sorrow. Canada is a young country in 
the family of trading nations and as an exporting country 
to a. highly competitive world market must carefully and 
soundly construct her trading policy. Her export producers 
have not yet reached the stage where they can dictate to 
their market. It is highly doubtful if they ever will and 
still more inadvisable that they should. The line of max¬ 
imum economic return to both producer and consumer does 
not lie in the direction of dictation by either party but 
rather in close co-operation to continuously satisfy 
mutuality of interests. 

With respect to beef, statistics ably prove the 
desirability of grading standards. The same proof should 
apply T mutatis mutandis T to the grading of the live animal. 
Branded beef sales over a 3 year period in the 6 main beef 
Producing provinces of Canada are shown In the following 
table: 







- 




' 










. 




■ 


- 




. 


































- 159 - 


■Branded Beef Sales 




By Provinces 

and" Brand 

Province 


Red Brand 

Blue Brand 

Total 



lbs. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

British Columbia 

1..1955 

2 , 178,230 

423,495 

2,601,745 


1932 

1 ,754,31 9 

359,695 

2 ,1 14,014 

1 ,600,561 


1931 

1 , 417,617 

182,744 

Alberta......... 


984,321 

2 , 213,766 

1 , 773,206 

3,198,087 


1932 

629,611 

2,402,8l 7 


1931 

473,236 

1 , 183,470 
2 , 394,333 

1 ,656,706 

Saskatchewan.... 

,..1933 

169,587 

2,563,920 


1932 

157,641 

1 , 679,350 

1,836,991 

1 ,493,01 6 


1 951 

209,701 

1 , 283,315 

Manitoba........ 

.**1933 

1 ,005,195 

3 , 169,261 

4,174,456 
2,948,1 88 


1 932 

985,1 32 

1 , 963,056 


1931 

560,541 

2 , 031 , 6 u 0 

2,592,141 

Ontario......... 

.**1933 

3,855,1 82 

9,443,954 

1 3,299,1 36 


1932 

2,751 ,913 

4,906,71 6 

7,658,629 


1931 

2,474,502 

4 , 633 , 816 

7,108,318 

Quebec.. . . 

,..1933 

1,693,100 

3 , 152,165 

4,845,265 


1932 

1 , 256,265 

3,531,864 

4,788,1 29 


1931 

1 .21 0.961 

1 .579,245 

2.790.206 

Total... 

• ..1933 

9,885,655 

20,796,974 

30,682,609 


1 932 

7,534,881 

14,213,88? 

21,748,768 


1 931 

6.346.558 

1 0.894.1 90 

17.240.748" 


(1 ) 










This chart indicates the present trend on the domestic 


market. There has been up to 1935 a steady average gain 
in consumption of branded beef amounting to a total of ap¬ 


proximately 75/6* The Province of Alberta stood in fourth 
Place in the year 1 933* It is said that in respect to 


meat generally - branded and nondescript - the Canadian 
market absorbes a total of approximately 600 , 000,000 
pounds per year or 60 pounds per capita. Beef production 


in Great Britain is quoted on an average of 952,000 tons 
per annum for the 5 year period, 1928 to 193*2 as compared 

with 291 .000 tons per annum for Canada during the same 

(1) “Annual Market Review, 1933“, Department of Agricul¬ 

ture, Live Stock Branch, p• 11. 



























- 1 6.0 - 


period. Excluding for Great Britain approximately 100,000 
tons per annum from Ireland and taking into account on 
the basis of 1930 marketings approximately 29,000 to 
50,u00 tons exported from Canada to Great Britain - the 
equivalent of live cattle exports - beef production in 
Canada is approximately 2/3 that of Great Britain. 

A study of marketing practice in other countries only 
serves to substantiate the facts as applicable to Canada. 
Selling of cattle by grade and dead weight was begun in 
Great Britain in 1930 operating through the markets of 
London and Birmingham. Although this scheme is yet in the 
experimental stage the results have been most satisfactory. 
The method and its advantages are stated as follows: 

* 4 (1 ) Cattle proceed direct from the farm to the Abattoir. 

(2) The price according to grade is determined before 
the cattle leave the farm. 

(3) The farmer is paid for the exact quality and weight 
of beef that he has produced. 

(4) The scheme shows the farmer the class of cattle in 
demand in each centre. 

(3) Insurance provisions cover the farmer against loss 
from carcase condemnation. 

From the experience gained, it seems clear that the 
system is the best, if not the only satisfactory, way of 
selling cattle on description to a wholesaler at a dist¬ 
ance, and there is no reason why it should not be extended 
in due course to all wholesale meat markets of any size. 

The experiments which have been carried out in 1933 on a 





























' 

* 

. 




■ 










































- i 61 


similar scheme for the grading of lambs have been equally 
satisfactory. It is further probable that bulls, cows, 
ewes, pork pigs and sows could also be handled in a sim¬ 
ilar manner, and we recommend that the Ministry should 
press on with its investigations with this object' 1 .(1) 
Thoroughly competent and impartial graders who have the 
confidence of both producer and consumer are of course 
essential to the success of such a scheme. The British 
scheme follows the suggestion of a previous investigating 
commission in 1930 which in speaking of sale on a basis 
of dead-weight grade said - ff We attach considerable im¬ 
portance to the development of this system of sale, now 
made possible by the National Mark scheme, as considerable 
economies in cattle marketing costs should thereby be 
effected”. ( 2 ) 

In the United States as elsewhere the difficulties 
of grading live beef cattle with the many variables in¬ 
volved as contrasted with the fixed standards possible 
for'a less perishable product such as wheat have been 
fully recognized. Nevertheless the Bureau of Agricultural 
Economics have worked out standard grades for cattle calves 
hogs and sheep, the standards for slaughter cattle, calves 

and vealers being official. Although the other grades are 

(1 ) "Report of the Reorganisation Commission for Fat Stock 

for England and Wales, 1 934”, p. 68, Ministry of Agric¬ 
ulture and Fisheries, London. 

(2) "Report of an Inter-Lepartmental Committee on the 

Grading and Marking of Beef,1930", P#33, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Fisheries and Scottish Office, Great 
Britain, London. 








. 
















. 






* 

* 

■ 

' . 











- 162 - 


not enforced by mandatory legislation they are available 
for adoption by the industry. Trade standards however 
have developed in practice which hare enabled buyers and 
sellers to conduct a high volume trade on mere description. 
Most sales are however conducted by inspection. Sale by 
inspection and sale by description should not be confused. 
They are not one and the same thing until such time as 
the graders and their standards are officially recognized 
by the trade and in all the competing markets. That should 
be the goal of the trade and efforts continually be n&de 
to attain it. Grading has been defined as Tr the final 
sorting of cattle into smaller groups and individual an¬ 
imals in each group vary but slightly from each other in 

the essential characteristics. It is described as an at- 

■ 

tempt to evaluate individual animals for specific uses. 

( 

A feeder buyer may .judge an animal or group of animals, 
as “medium” or ,r good ,T grade feeders, whereas a packer 
buyer may at the same time judge them as “common 11 grade 
slaughter cattle”.(1) Seven grades of slaughter steers 
are recognized in the United States, namely - prime, 
choice, good, medium, common, cutter and low cutter - for 
each of which there are special characteristics based on 
conformation, finish and quality. Considerable variation 

exists in the grading of feeder steers in different __ 

(1) Anderson and Benton - “Classes and Grades of Cattle 

and Calves Marketed from North Dakota, 1 929”, p. 11, 
Agricultural Experiment Station, North Dakota Agric¬ 
ultural College, Fargo, North Dakota. 



















































































- 1 63 - 

American markets and in feeding trials which results in 




considerable confusion. Based on a sample of 13,914 steers 
marketed in North Dakota in 1929 approximately 90^ of the 
feeder steers marketed graded ’medium 1 and T common 1 and 
only 0.9 graded ’choice’. There were not sufficient 
’prime’ steers to affect statistics. These figures in¬ 
dicate a too strong tendency to favor the ’common 1 grade 

. 

at the expense of the better grades and to retard an in¬ 
crease in the value and returns from live stock. 

More generally speaking the American practice is to 
classify beef into broad classes as steer, heifer or bull 
beef and then to sub-classify on the basis of age and sex. 
The meat of vealers and calves is not considered as beef. 
The meat is then graded on the basis of conformation, 

finish and quality and the 7 grades are further arranged 

. 

to show the range of quality within the grade. Conforma¬ 
tion is taken to mean shape, build, contour, or outline 
of the animal or carcass; finish as the amount of fat 
outside and inside of the animal’s body or carcass, and 

quality as the character of the lean meat and the ratio 

. 

between lean, fat and bone. In view of the present ten¬ 
dency to demand younger light weight cattle and in view'of 

the effect that age and feeding conditions have on the 

■ 

character, consistency, texture and color of the flesh, 
the American policy has provided for a grouping of meat car- 
casses into veal, calf, yearling and mature beef divisions. 












. 

. 





: 
























* 

































- 164 - 


"From the standpoint of economy and practical trade ethics 
these divisions are necessary. The differences between 
carcasses of yearling beef and carcasses of mature beef 
are as great as the differences between veal carcasses and 
calf carcasses. 

"Yearling beef differs from mature beef principally 
in the quantity and distribution of fat, and in the color, 
texture,and firmness of the flesh. There are also slight 
differences in conformation. Grade for grade, yearling 
carcass beef lacks the thickness and evenness of fat which 


characterize mature beef. Yearling beef also lacks firm¬ 
ness of flesh as compared with mature beef. Yearling beef 
that possesses marbling generally is lacking in this res¬ 
pect as compared with mature beef of the same grades. 

The color of the flesh of yearling beef is lighter red 
and possesses a pinkish tinge which is not found in mature 
beef. The texture of yearling beef generally is much 
softer and smoother. The bones in yearling beef are soft 
and are therefore more easily cut or sawed. The cartil¬ 
ages attached to the spinal column are large, pearly 
white, and relatively soft".(1 ) In the matter of age in 
relation to quality and palatability experiments conducted 
at the Iowa Experiment Station in 1930 .indicare a definite 


relationship exists between age and value of the 'cuts 


which can be secured as well as between age and palatabil¬ 


ity of the meat. The following charts indicate these relat< 
ionshius 


j. uiio ax - _ _ __ _ 

(1) W.C.Davis - "Market - Classes and trades of Yearling" 

Beef". U.S.D.A., Circular Ho. 208, 1932, p. 2 





































. 





































1 65 


0 

i> 

•H •' 1 

Pi to 

•H 

o to 

-P al 
ft 
ro 

ft 0 

d 

O 03 
-P 

ft 

TO 0 
ft O 
ft ft 

al to 

d Pi 


P> q 

* S 

ft ft 
o 0 

ftM 
O >—• 
•H 
-p 
ft 
o 
ft 
o 
ft 
ft 


ft 

ft} 







ft 

rd 



- 

03 

0 O NV -st 


CO 

NA 


vO 


ft 

0 

O 

COvOvOvO NAP 

- P 

TO 

ft i LT\ NA NV 


CTn 

CV! 


CTN 


0 

ft 

UA Kv 

r— CP Ox O ft OX ft 

• P 

>srd 

TO 

• • • 


• 

• 


« 



TO 




} rH 4APO A 


KV. 

O 


u 


i ft ft 

CP CVI 

ft CP ft ft T~ CVJ cc 

) N~- 

O O 

ft 

CO ft VC 


T- 

K - 




o o 

ft 

CO VD 

CVJ CVJ r- 

A 

£ 

03 

T~ P 







'5; 

ft 

T— 



ft 

pq 

V“~ 







ft 

pq 




ft 









ft 





d 

TO 








ft 

TO 




0 

ft 

po o 


P~ 

^A 


CO 


0 

ft 

c—• o 

vD O OX ft CO ft p 

N> 

l>s nd 

TO 

VO LA VO 


CO 

c-~ 


vO 



0 

VO v£) 

^— O vC t— lA ft N" 

N> 

8 i—i ft 

• • • 


e 

o 


• 


8 ft rft 




o o 

0 

vOCO LA 



CO 


vi- 

TO 

O O 

0 

VO LA 

LA CPCO LA CP CV! vO 

A 

P 

0 

O ft LA 






ft 


0 

O LA 


P 

ft 

pq 

CO ft 






TO 

ft 

pq 

CO 











ft 







ft 







C 


rft 





TO 

PNAvO 


r~ 



T— 

« 

' 

0 

C—vC 

Ox A Ox Ox OX O 0 s 

P 


ft 

A NA LA 






i 


ft 

CVJ LA 

OQ r- OXCO vO O O 

VO 

8 TO 

TO 

• • • 


• 

♦ 


• 


i m 

0 




ft to 

ft 

ft p na 



T— 


vO 

LA 

ft bf- 

ft 

ft fA 

NACO NA NAt- A CO 

^— i 

d ft 

-P 

NA<AxO 



T— 




ft ft ft 

NAvD 

A CV! r~ 

CO 

0 -H 

a3 

OvO 






ch 

TO *H 

ft 

O 



H ft ft 

T- 






C 

Hhr 





TO 







TO 


TO 



b<! ' 


ft 

pN\ A 


C" 

r“ 


0 s 

TO 


ft 

(PCV1 

LA NA A O O CPNA 

& 

i TO 

0 

VD K\C^ 


CVI 

vX) 


vO 

ft 

1 TO 

TO 

VO p 

O NANA ft A LAvD 

vf 

ft toft 

• • • 


• 

• 


• 

O 

ft tiO»d 




a? ft 

0 

NAO ft 


UA 

CO 



TO 

ft ft 

TO 

NAft 

LA CPCO LA Ox la 

A - 

TO *H 

0 

O K\IA 


r* 




CO 

TO ft 

TO 

O LA 

T- T—• t- 

P 

M ft 

pq 

vO NA 



♦ 



K> 

M ft 

Pq 

ft) 


C 

ft 








n 

ft 

nft 





TO 








•H 

TO 





TO ft 


PPOX 


CO 

vO 


CP 

H 

TO ft 


CPCA 

OxO naOP OX T- r- 

r— 

0 0 


vO t— CO 


vO 

T- 


CO 

•H 

0 0 


vOCO 

vO LAcK'tPNX. A 

vO 

J> -P 


• • t 


• 

» 


• 

rQ 

> ft 





ft ft 


K\0 NV 


NA 

r— 


LO 

ft 

ft ft 


NA ("A 

NACO ^ NX. a r- p 

CN 

a3 d 


CVJ OXvD 


T- 

,— 



ft 

ft ft 


CVJ vO 

A CVJ t— 

plf 

o pq 


ON LA 






ft 

O Fq 


Ox 


C 









ft 






TO 


O NAr- 


vO 

vO 


r— 

ft 

TO 




Je 

TO ft 


LT\ NA ft 


vO 

NA 


N> 

F4 

TO ft 


O r~ 

CO LA CP A! NA NACO 

^ : 

0 0 


• * • 


» 

• 


• 


0 0 


irv^ 

O Cp LA CO CO r-vO 

oo 

»> ft 


-T\vO OJ 



CO 


-=t 

TO 

t> »d 





ft TO 


lt\go ir\ 


T — 




b£ 

ft 0 


LAs CVI 

LA CP CP LA C V- LA 

o 1 

03 TO 


rovr- 






ft 

ft TO 


LA LA 


p < 

o Fq 








ft 

O Pq 


NA 


H 



* • % 

ft 


• 



0 








« * » 

ft 

• 

ft * 



> 





• n 



• • • 

ft 

• 

•H • 



<1 





• < 



• • 43 

O 

» 

O • 








* C 



* ft ft 

ft 

• 

r—{ * 

ft 





• 0 

* • * • • TO 

« 



» Hi TO 


• 







TO ttf 

• • 0 * • >! 

• 5 



• O «H 

• 

«H » 






ft ft 

• • ft 0 * i>sft 

. < 



* ft ft 

o 

• 

O * 

O 





ft ft 

• • o ft 0 ft -H 

* i 



^00 


• 

• 






ft 

• • O O ft -H ft 

• r 



ft TO Pi 0 ft 

TO ft 

TO ft 




M TO 

* • TO O O ,H ft 

• ( 



ft TO 

tuT 


*t0 ^ 





ft o 

* TO TO O o3 03 

* £ 



ft to bp 

a3 


0? 

ft 





d ft 

• ft £ to d d 

* 



xi ft ri' 

ft 

©■P ©-P 

0 




ft TO 

© O Rift cH o 

TO 



TO ft »H 

ft 

5> 

ft > 

ft 

5> 




ft P 

ft o 0 03 TO 

ft J 



TO 

TO 

•H 

TO -H 

0 

•H 




TO 

O TO H ft W W TO 

o c 



• ft TO 

TO ft 

TO H 

TO ft 




• b£ 

O 0 TO TO 

O r 



ft ft TO 

ft 


ft 

ft 





ft ft 

TO 0 « • p| TO 0 

TO t 



£ O ft 

TO 

o 

0 O 

0 

O 




£*H 

ft ft ft ft ft d 

< 



O ft 

Pi ft 

Pi ft 

Pi ft 




TO 

a3 d o O 0 ft .H 

r—! P 



0 * • 

% 


• 

• 





TO TO 

£ -p J> f> rc : O O 

d 



p> 0 0 

TO 


0 

0 





|> 0 

o M fli d R 'H *H ' 

ft 



•H > > 

i> 


> 

> 





•H ft 

ft 0 H H TO d ft 

o ^ 



Pi <tJ <4 <4 


<A 

Oj 





IPi P> 

<r| Eh pq Pq Eh p> P> 1 

EH -■ 


k’S 

-P TO 
»H -P - 
ft 0? A 
d ft p 

d CQ A 

or 

d • 

0^0 
ft O ^ 
-P ft 

fl .5 

TO ft -P 
ft O TO 
H 
-P H 
TO d d 
toft FQ 


TO ft d 
- ft £ 

H 0 O 
a] S H 
S *H *> 
H ft TO 


TOM - 

TO 

H ft 
d ft 
ft <tj 
O d 
-P O 
TO «—I *H 
TO ft ft 
ft « 03 
TO -H ft 
d ft to 

) TO 


8 ft a3 
0 


ft 

0 

> 

•H 

-P 

TO 

0 

ft 

TO 

0 

ft 

O 

LT\ 


-ee- 

ft 

d 

vO 

ao 


■69- 


d 

fti -p 


rC 
' t *" ert 

CVJ 0 

^ft 


ft -H 1 ^ 
•H ft . 

ft fcjpVC r~<; 

•H ° o 

ft P,r! 

03 ft -g 


03 


TO 


~ft TO PO 

^ to M 
TO «Jp 
«H O q 

















































- 1 66 - 


Live weight was taken in considering value of cuts as 
dressing percentage is not lost sight of as is the case 
in taking carcass weight. The palatahility test indicates 
that roasts from yearlings and 2-year-olds are preferred 
to those from calves which were inclined to he flat, in¬ 
sipid and tasteless. Best flavor came from roasts of 
steers 20 to J>0 months of age. 

Argentine affords a further example of the practical 
application of grading to the heef industry. Although 
this country ships no live cattle yet it exercises a rigid 
control over its cattle from the rearing of the animal on 
the farm or ranch until its carcass is sold on the market 
for local consumption or exported. There is a veterinary- 
inspection service under the Ministry of Agriculture and 
animals cannot he moved from farm to farm or to the pack¬ 
ing plant without an inspection permit. Inspectors are 
paid hy the Government hut this expense is defrayed hy a 
set inspection charge per head for all cattle inspected. 
The best quality Argentine heef is chilled and almost all 
sent to the United Kingdom while the poorer quality is 
frozen and shipped to Continental countries. The follow¬ 
ing chart indicates the value to an exporting country of 
grading its produce. One argentine gold peso is equiv¬ 
alent to % cents Canadian at par. 


Country 


Argentine Gold Pesos 

1 05, f 6.5,357 
5,201 ,316 
2,176,745 


United Kingdom 
France........ 

Belgium.. 

United States. 



















. 






























































- 1 67 - 


Italy...... 

G-erraany, . . . 
Netherlands 


898,265 
857,826 
734,803"(1 ) 


Prime Quality preserved by scientific chilling has given 
Argentine a monopoly of the United Kingdom trade whereas 
the Continental marketings have shown a continuous decrease 
in recent years indicating the slump in exports of inferior 
quality meat shipped frozen - which is also an inferior 
method. 

A major weakness in the whole matter of grading has 
been the failure to pass back a proportionate return to the 
grower of high grade stock, A principal reason for this 
is to be found in the marketing of two much low grade 
stock from which the whole market has suffered. An effec¬ 
tive grading system should distribute to the primary pro¬ 
ducer, and all necessary agencies in production, the ap¬ 
propriate share of returns based on necessary price spreads. 
It is said that 7of the stock passing through the stock 


-( 2 ) 


yards is nondescript stock; 'Much of this is exceedingly 


low grade and the general price level falls at the expense 
of the better grades. Legislative or other control over the 
production of such stock will be exceedingly difficult to 
apply, especially if any degree of compulsion is involved. 
The most effective method of stopping production of Such 
stock is to make its production unprofitable. This can 
only be brought about by a slow process of educating 


(1) H.W.Brighton - '‘Argentine Meat Export Trade”, Depart' 


ment of Trade and Commerce, Commercial Intelligence 


. . Journal, Yol.L, No.1 366 ,February 3rd, 1934, P*163 
(2) R.S. Gilchrist. 




















~ 








. 






. 






. 






































- 168 - 


consumer taste, by legislative control over breeding 
practice, live stock grading and regulated marketing. The 
dollar return on the market, operating out of supply and 
demand* will be the ultimate deciding factor. This ques¬ 
tion was recently supported by the Minister of Agriculture 
for the Province of Alberta. "There is need for a renewed 
educational campaign that the merits of graded beef be 
known to the consuming public, and that the consumption of 
the graded products be still further increased. It may 
be pointed out that so far no premium has found its way 
back to the primary producer of beef suitable for grading. 
The prices paid for cattle qualified for the red and blue 
label, when hung on the ra.il, and those not suitable for 
grading, choice though they may be, are one and the same." 
(1 ) Speaking in the same connection the Minister deplored 
the fall in per capita consumption of beef. "In 1 929 the 
per capita consumption was 66.97 lbs.; in 1930 , 63 . 69 ; 
in 1931* 37*93 and in 1932, 36.02. The establishment 
of two grades of beef, Red Label and Blue Label, in 1928 
was designed to increase the consumption of good quality 
beef. This policy was amazingly successful. In 1931, 

1 7,240,748 pounds of the tw r o grades were consumed; in 1 932 
consumption of these two grades had increased to 30 , 682,609 

pounds".(2) The advisability of grading and marking the 

(1) (2) Hon. George Hoadley - "The Live Stock Industry" 

Brief presented to the Stevens Committee of the 

House of Commons, April 26th, 1934. Minutes of 

Evidence, p. 28. 



























. 

. 


* 















- 1 69 - 

lower grades of "beef was also considered, the suggestion 
being made that the consumer would not only tend to buy 
better beef and reject the poorer but would also know 
exactly what he was getting. The retailing of under-fin¬ 
ished low grade lean meat affords easy profit at the ex¬ 
pense of the healthier and more desirable finished high 
grades. The demand for the poor grades must be lessened 
if permanent proportionate returns to the producer are to 
be had. This of couirse carries with it the assumption 
that with a gradual elimination of lower grades the higher 
grades are not unduly increased in price. The producer 
of even the very best quality of product must learn to 
co-operate with, and to cater to, the demands and purchas¬ 
ing powder of his consumer. 

Various suggestions may be made to apply to the grad¬ 
ing and standardizing of live Canadian cattle. As time 
and circumstance permit such improvements can be effected 
as should ultimately bring about a national cattle grading 
policy. In the first place it would seem that standards 
now in effect in fat stock shows be brought more into line 
with ordinary and practical market requirements. It is 
the consensus of opinion that in the past the prize winning 
entrant at a fat stock show has been over-fed for the pur¬ 
pose and awarded first place on appearance rather than on 
its merits as a high grade animal under practical market 
demands. Such a practice has been styled a pure economic 













. 













. 

. 

■ 

' 














- 170 - 

waste and that is obviously true. In a recent study of 
this question the Western Society of Animal Production 
appointed a special committee who made an exhaustive in¬ 
vestigation which has.resulted in a most valuable contri¬ 
bution. The objectives of this committee were set out by 
resolution as follows: 

u Whereas the average beef consumer today is demanding 
cuts from the light, well but not over-finished animal. 

Whereas this definite trend seems to make necessary 
careful consideration and, inevitably, considerable or¬ 
ganization in the business of breeding and feeding beef 
animals with a view to producing at the least possible 
cost the finished article in best demand by the consumer. 

Whereas the show-ring is a necessary medium in any 
educational re-organization on the above lines. 

Whereas it has often been claimed that present show¬ 
ring standards for fat cattle do not appear to assist in 
the development of what may be termed the utility beef 
animal. 


Therefore, be it resolved that a committee be ap¬ 
pointed to carefully survey the whole situation in beef 
cattle production with a view to bringing in recommenda¬ 
tions at the next annual meeting".(1 ) 

Evidence was collected by this committee in Canada from 

all the different branches of the beef cattle industry, 

including producers (commercial feeders, showman and 

growers), butchers and meat packers, prominent judges and 

Government officials, University professors, departmental 

heads in the Provincial and Federal Governments and beef 

graders. In addition evidence was obtained from the Unite d 
(1) Thomson, Jones and Shaw - "Report of Special Committee 
on the Relation of Show Standards to the Demand of the 
Meat Trade, 1931 ", pp. 1-2, Western Canada Society of 
Aminal Production. 



















: 



































- 


■■ 
























. 
























-171 


Kingdom, the United States, Australia and New Zealand, 

Over 33 prominent producers in Western Canada, 22 leading 
"butchers and all packers were canvassed. The professional 
showman naturally upholds present standards out the utility 
producer does not. To cite only one representative opin¬ 
ion in Canada, a leading packer stated that: "In future 
we will not be interested in bidding on over-finished show 
cattle, and we believe it is time for this question to be 
taken up with the cattle feeders. It will interest you 
to know that the butchers will not buy these over-fed 
cattle at anywhere near the price they will pay for cattle 
which are well finished but not wasteful. It is our opin¬ 
ion that cattle finished good enough to pass as Govern¬ 
ment Standard Red Branded Beef is plenty good enough for 
our most exacting trade, and any money spent in fattening 
cattle in excess of this standard is actually money thro™ 
away".(1 ) A representative opinion from the United King¬ 
dom was that of a recognized international authority on 
stock judging- -The position with us at our National Shows 
has for some years been considerably modified, partly owing 
to the changed demands of the public, and partly to the 
greater discrimination of our judges against the over-fed 
and wasteful animal. If a show such as you have at Toronto 
and other centres is not educational, then there is no 

point in holding it, and the men who acqe pt the work of 
(1) Thomson, Jones and Shaw, op. cit. p. 6«» 

























: 















' 

























making the awards must ever he mindful of the serious res¬ 
ponsibility they undertake in demonstrating to the producer 
just what the goal is to aim at. In judging fat cattle 
there are in my opinion two main factors to hear in mind; 
firstly, an animal that is profitable to the producer, 
and secondly, one which is acceptable to the consumer. 

The difficulty mainly arises in blending these two main 
principles 11 .(1 ) The cost of putting on 'show* finish, 
the selection of judges who are competent to relate show 
standards to consumer demand, the training of students to 
become such judges, the intensive study of carcass utili¬ 
zation and other similar factors are fields of study in 
which much can be accomplished. 

A further suggestion lies in the field of live cattle 
inspection. A staff of competent and experienced inspec¬ 
tors, the key and responsible officials of which should 
be experienced veterinary surgeons, could be placed at the 
export ports and at the main regional centres throughout 
Canada where beef cattle are marketed. In this way both 
the domestic and export market could be controlled. This 
subject was considered by the Minister of Agriculture of 
the Province of Alberta in the recent inquiry. rr To 
protect the reputation of Canadian cattle in Britain as 
well as the work of both western and eastern men who are 

earnestly endeavouring to send only choice anim a ls over- 
(1) Walter Biggar - G-range Farm, Dalbeattie, Scotland. 

Report of Special Committee on the Relation of Show 

Standards to the Demands of the Meat Trade, p.8. 



















' 









. 





























"A 

























- 173 - 

seas, anfl to ensure that the quota space is used in Such 
a way that it will he of maximum benefit to the Canadian 
cattle industry, it is strongly recommended that an In¬ 
spector he immediately placed at seaboard for the purpose 
of inspecting export cattle shipments, and that full 
authority to refuse ocean transportation to any cattle 
unsuited for the British export trade he vested in this 
official # 

11 We say seaboard as the official check. We, natur¬ 
ally, would not want people to move their cattle to Mon¬ 
treal if they could not ship them; so you would have to 
take care of that” .(1) Regional inspectors as above sug¬ 
gested would prevent unqualified cattle being shipped to 
seaboard. An extension of the present Federal Government 
meat inspection service to include that of live cattle 
might be of value here in the general interest. 

The live stock industry is essentially a national 
industry and should be so treated. It may be regional 
as to type of animal produced such as is the case In the 
particular area of this review - the Short Grass Plains - 
but from the standpoint of a marketable product either 
on the domestic or export market the industry is primarily 
national. The closest co-operation is therefore necessary 
between the Federal Department of Agriculture and the 

Departments of the several provinces. Particula rly... is_ t his 

(1) Hon. George Headley - Evidence before the Stevens 

Committee,House of Commons,Ottawa,April 26th, 1734, 
Minutes of Evidence, p. 23* 















- 174 - 

so with respect to export* The product abroad is a product 
of Canada in the broad sense, not of the individual Prov¬ 
ince in the narrow sense. It is therefore necessary that 
a national grading policy for quality as well as purity 
be established and internationally known and. recognized. 

One of the objections raised against the present beef 
grading policy for quality - Red and Blue Label -is that 
the consuming public are ignorant of its true meaning and 
have not been educated on it. In this connection a state¬ 
ment recently made by the Western Stock Growers Associa¬ 
tion reads as follows: "'The cattlemen 1 s criticism of this 
policy is that no adequate effort has been made to explain 
it to the buying public (with the result that in every 
City in Canada, certain butchers, exhibiting the health 
of animals branch stamp of approval and indicating it as 
the blue brand, have fraudulently capitalized on the 
policy) and that no adequate return has been made to the 
producer of branded beef."(1) The producer and consumer 
must co-operate in all ways possible for mutual advantage. 
Competition is based on sound knowledge of market condi¬ 
tions. This is recognized by leading marketing experts. 
"The fact that there has been a great growth in the demand 
by our consumers for branded beef, red label brand, and 

blue label brand beef, which two brands come from high 

(1) The Western Stock Growers 1 Association - "The 

Western Canadian Cattle Industry". Brief presented 
to Special Committee of the House of Commons on 
Price Spreads and Mass Buying, March 23 rd, 1734iP.3» 























. 








: 

. 








































A 












13 


class animals,, keeps the local packer, the big packer, in 
the market at all times for animals of the highest quality 
to cater to that demand. The local packer, to supply his 
own demands for branded beef, is a very keen competitor of 
the export buyer--. (1 ) It does not follow that only high or 
top quality beef need be produced. There will always be a 
demand for lower grades but the basic consideration is 
that the market for one grade only should not be allowed as 
at present to affect the whole market - particularly when 
the lower grade of meat is so unreasonably below standard 
in so many cases. In the United Kingdom market there 
is a demand for lower than prime quality but that is no 
reason - even if both grades are shipped together - why the 
discriminating British buyer should not be able to choose 
his grade of purchase to suit his price without affecting 
the whole market. The matter is well summed up by an 


American marketing specialist - ,r The essential thing is to 




have the stockman know what grade of animals he is producing 1 ; 
and selling, and to have the consumer know what grade of 
meat he is buying. When that is true the producer can 
easily determine whether he is getting the market price for 
his stock and whether he is producing the thing that brings 
him the greatest net profit. The consumer, in turn, can 
know whether he is paying a fair price for what he ^ ets“'f?„) ! 


(1) J.M.McCallum -‘“Proceedings of the Standing Committee 

on Agriculture and Forestry, 1 933 il Minutes of Evidence 
Senate of Canada, p. 37 , 

(2) C.E.G-ibbons - ,r Buying and Selling Live Stock by Grade, 
p.7, U.S.D.A. Address Blacksburg,Virginia,Dec.1 7 th, 
1929 by Senior Marketing Specialist, Division of 


Livestock, Meats and Wool 

















■ 

























- 

* 









































— 

' 









- 176 - 

Finally cattle grading policy like the whole beef 
cattle production policy of which it is a part should be 


a long term consideration. The question goes back to pro¬ 
duction policy over many years to produce a type of product! 
that by heredity is of high grade. The question of grad¬ 
ing for market then becomes very much more simple and ef¬ 
fective, There is not then the handicap of attempting to 
grade a product for a discriminating market when that 
product has few discordant and aberrant factors in its 
history. Argentine is an example of a country which 
breeds and grades for its export market over a long term 
of years. Denmark in the bacon industry is another such 
example. It controls the Wilshire market of the United 
Kingdom to-day. Canada generally can well profit by the 
successful policy of her competitors. 

The question of grading policy in the final analysis 
must be based on its fundamental function which is to 
bring the producer and his market into effective co-opera- 
tion. Particular demands of the market in the form of 


grade and quality must be met by the grower. If supply 
and demand are then aliowed to operate normally without 
hindrance from outside factors the grower can expect to 
benefit on a basis of price spread for the qualities 
which he produces. It is then the task of the producer 
to so arrange his production policy as to overcome the 
costs of production relevant to the various grades 


























































- Ml - 

required. Such should he the normal action of economic 
production of beef or beef cattle. 

As in the case of most industries to-day however 
normal economic action is the exception rather than the 
rule. Outside forces intervene to upset the balance. In 
the case of beef cattle production abuses also exist. Very 
low grade cattle are at times dumped on the market to the 
detriment of prices generally. M§at or cattle of a quality 
which should not be sold for human consumption should be 
kept off the market. There can be no legitimate demand 
for that class of product. Where the regional character¬ 
istics of a market rightly demand a w r ide range of quality, 
a grading system should be such as to enable the producer 
to meet all those demands but the lowest quality should 
not be so low as to sacrifice quality to purchasing power. 
Wherever throughout these pages suggestions are made,such 
as by freight or commission differentials, for keeping off 
the market low class cattle and for encouraging the market¬ 
ing of better class cattle, it is the above type of low 
class stock to which reference is made. It is fully rec¬ 
ognized by all agencies that a legitimate regional demand 
may well exist on any market. Religious preference, nat¬ 
ionality grouping, industrial occupation, social orienta¬ 
tion and climatic environment are all factors which bear 
on quality demand. An industrial section of the United 
States would require a coarser and low r er grade of meat 





































































-178- 


than a University centre in the United Kingdom or of a 
section of the Roman Catholic Irish Free State. Such 
demand however should he met if at all possible by dis¬ 
tinct production for the region so that the lower grade 
for one region does not leven the whole market for the 
producer generally. Shipments if possible should origin¬ 
ate for the particular region of the market in question 
and retain their identity throughout. In that way a grad¬ 
ing system can more effectively pass back to the producer 
a more equitable distribution of profit through price 
spreads on different grades. 















CHAPTER V 


TRANSPORTATION. 

Few consumption goods are produced in the immediate 
vicinity of the consuming market. They must he transported 
from the primary producing area to the processing area and 
finally to the ultimate consuming area. Live heef cattle 
as produced in the Short Grass Plains well exemplify that 
rule. Transportation as here reviewed will he understood 
to cover both domestic and foreign markets hut to extend 
only to the placing of the cattle or of their products on 
the market. It does not include retail distribution 
after change of title on the market. Two main features 
of transportation practice, both as to live cattle and to 
their carcass products, will he briefly considered, namely 
cost and methods. 

With the exception of British Columbia - a most im¬ 
portant region of the domestic market -the Short Grass 
Plains Area is hampered by the fact of great distance 
from its ultimate consuming export market which to-day 
is the United Kingdom. In so far as the domestic market 
is concerned transportation is wholly by land and is of 
two types - rail and truck. Long haul, mainly to eastern 
Canada, both for domestic and United Kingdom consumption, 
is rail haul by only two competing transcontinental lines 
operating at present under very adverse economic conditions 
and located on a narrow ribbon of territory .just north of 

the International Boundary stretching from the Atlantic to 

-179- 














' 


, 

. 


. 


. 

























- 1 80 - 


the Pacific Oceans. Short haul in the immediate vicinity 
of railroad feeding centres or of large consuming centres 
is largely by motor truck and to-day exhibits its vital 
influence on the income of stock yards. Ocean haul to the 


. 


United Kingdom market is by ocean freight or tramp steamer 

ill! 

which may be either a partially fitted or wholly fitted 
cattle boat and is by one or other of two main routes, 
namely - ex Montreal, St. John or Halifax, or ex Port 
Churchill. The latter route is as yet in the experimental 
stage. The commercial exclusion of Canadian beef cattle - 
both as stores or feeders and finished stock - and of beef 
cattle products from the United States market since 1J21 
has changed the whole orientation of transportation to the 
export market to its present form. The American market 
is Canada’s natural market for beef cattle and if that 
market were again opened one of the major problems of the 
Short Crass Plains producer would be solved, namely - trans 
portation cost to a large consuming area. Until Such is 
the case again the range producer in this area must cope 
with adverse transportation conditions which to be apprec¬ 
iated must be analysed in the light of production cost and 
consumer demand. 

■ 

Taking first the case of transportation of live cattle, 
which is of most direct importance to the Short Crass Plains 
stockman, the present situation becomes more clear when 
considered in the light of past developments. Methods of 




























































































. 















- 1 81 


shipment have changed little although services have im¬ 
proved and have become more scientific. Rates on the 
other hand have varied considerably as have conditions af¬ 
fecting rates. Cattle off the range are either driven to 
the railroad loading centre or transported by truck. The 
latter method, has the double advantage of speed and re¬ 


duced shrinkage but in the case of large shipments the 
first advantage would be off-set by the number of trips 
required which would greatly increase cost. Truck shrink¬ 
age statistics are as yet in the stage of evolution and 
owing to the many variable factors involved not wholly 
reliable but for general comparison purposes it is a known 
fact truck shrinkage is less than railroad shrinkage. This 
is natural because of use only on short haul and feeding 
in transit is not necessary. Railroad shrinkage however 
has been a matter of long study and may be gauged in its 


effect from the following table based on a trial shipment 
in 1 926: 

“Shrinkage in Rail Shipping 
Loss per Head from Experimental Farm to Montreal 
Number Shrinkage Per 

of Head From To Distance per steer cent 


36 


32 

21 
1 2 
83 


Lethbridge 

Winnipeg 


Winnipeg 

Montreal 


Total Lethbridge Montreal 

Rosthem Winnipeg 

Indian-Head Winnipeg 

Brandon Winnipeg 

Winnipeg Rosth¬ 
em, Indian Head 
and Brandon) Montreal 


miles 

lbs. 


?68 

11 6 

8.0 

1 41 2 

Jli 

4.0 

21 80 

181 

12.0 

456 

77 

6.2 

315 

113 

.9-1 

132 

31 

3.3 

1 41 2 

68 

1 1 .2 




















































: 








. • 






■ 










- 1 82 


Number 
of Head 

From 

To 

Shrinkage 
Distance per steer 

Per 

cent 




miles 

lbs. 


23 

Ottawa 

Montreal 

1 12 

1 35 

11.6 

22 

Lennoxville 

Montreal 

1 1 0 

1 28 

8.6 

20 

Kentvilie 

Mont real 


L12 

12.5” 


(1) 


Considerable variation in shrinkage may be expected it 
the cattle are not uniform and if not properly attended. 

The main drop occurs during the first day or two of travel, 
hence the high percentage loss in the Lennoxville steers. 

In this particular shipment the Lethbridge steers recovered 
130 pounds per steer while resting in Montreal prior to 
ocean shipment or in other w r ords suffered a total shrink 
of only 3 . 48/0 from original feed lot weights. In order 
to avoid the necessity of replacing finish in this way it 
might be advisable to over-fatten in the Western feed lot 
to take care of the loss. With respect to ocean trans¬ 
portation the shrinkage is considerably less. Temperature, 
space and feeding conditions are better and there is less 
interference with the cattle. Stockmen contend however 
that the assessment on shrinkage is unfair. A flat rate 
of 3 is deductable against loading weight and is charged 
against the producer irrespective of the conditions under 
which the cattle are moved to the shipping point. They 
may have lost much en route to the rail loading centre 
and 3# further is removed dust the same. 

(1 ) Department of Agriculture, Dominion of Canada, Expert 

imental Farms Branch - ^Shipping Cattle to Britain , 

1926, Bulletin Bo. 62, new series, p. 10. 

Bote:’Distance 1 column is inserted. 





























. 

' 

























. 


















- 1 83 - 

A major transportation oos\ item is that of stock 
yard charges. In so far as the large producer is con¬ 
cerned he mainly avoids local stock yard charges through 
selling direct to local cattle buyers. The average qual¬ 
ity of range cattle from the Short Grass Plains is above 
that marketed through stock yards. Eventually however 
all cattle transported domestically to the packer or to 
the eastern feed lots or to the foreign market must pay 
stock yard charges. Those going direct to Montreal on 
through-shipment avoid local stock yard charges but those 
at Montreal or other necessary stopping points form an 
item in the cost of production balance sheet of the 
producer. 

A stock yard has only service to sell. It does not 
buy and sell stock but operates solely as a place where 
seller and buyer may be brought together for sale and 
purchase and to accommodate cattle in transit by Provid¬ 
ing feed, water, yardage, weighing facilities and attend¬ 
ants, and may issue regularly statements of live stock 
prices in the yard. It acts as a centre of operation for 
live stock commission houses and packer buyers. In the 
sense of live stock exchange centres they are comparable 
to the auction system as It operates in the United Kingdom 
and other markets. The Canadian stock yard has been des¬ 
cribed as an I? hotel for live stock 11 . It renders services 
similar to those of an hotel. There are at present 8 









. 





. 










■ 


- 
















. 

. 



' 

■ 










' 









- 1 84 - 


public stock yards in Canada brought under jurisdiction of 
the Live Stock and Live Stock Products Act of 1 91 7 . These 
yards are situated at Montreal, Toronto, Winnipeg, Moose 
Jaw, Calgary, Edmonton, Saskatoon and Prince Albert. There 
are none east of Montreal or west of Edmonton although a 
yard in Vancouver is to be brought under the Act. These 
yards are severally owned by either or both of the two 
railway companies, or by joint stock or limited stock 
companies. 

Stock yards have three sources of revenue - the 
charges for unloading, yardage, and feed. Every yard 
charges $1 .00 per car for unloading and $1 .00 for re¬ 
loading. This charge goes to the company owning and op¬ 
erating the yard.O ) Stockmen make the criticism that 
certain yards which are not under the control of the Live 
Stock and Live Stock Products Act are allowed to take ad¬ 
vantage of the Act by assessing and collecting this $2.00 
charge. Two examples only of many such are the yards at 
White River and Homepayne which are operated by the 
transportation companies for through billed cattle. Under 
the Criminal Code cattle cannot be confined on railway 
cars for more than 3 6 hours without unloading, rest, feed 
and water.(2) On the long rail haul from west to east 
cattle must be rested at points en route to come within 

the Code. It is contender! that the charge made by the 

(1) J.M.McCallum - "Proceedings of the Standing Committee 

on Agriculture and Forestry, 1 933", Minutes of Evidence, 

Senate of Canada, p. 29* 

(2) Criminal Code, Sec. 344, s.s. 1 , 



































































- 185 - 

yards is excessive for the amount of labour and time in¬ 
volved . Every yard makes a yardage charge to cover locked 
pens for the stock; running water; attendants to feed, bed 
and clean pens; use of government and yard tested weigh 
scales; service of government approved weigh masters; and 
the issuance of scale tickets indicating date, weight, 
owner, commission merchant, class of stock and sale price* 
This charge is 25 cents per head for cattle, except in 
Alberta where it is 35 cents; 10 cents for calves at 
eastern yards, and 15 cents at western yards. This charge 
is irrespective of the time the cattle are confined in 
the yard. They will remain the minimum time as the stock 
yard is the most expensive place to feed an animal.( 1 ) A 
criticism made by stockmen in this connection is not that 
the charge is excessive when all the services rendered are 
taken advantage of but is excessive when the flat rate is 
charged for only some of those services. Export cattle 
originating in the west for example usually pass through 
the local yard only for the purpose of weighing yet the 
full fee of 35 cents is assessed.(2) It is contended this 
is out of line for the single service required. There is 

apparently no provision for a proportionate charge in this 

■ 

case. The third source of yard revenue - feed - provides 

the most contentious criticism at the present time. Stock 

( 1 ) J.M.McCallum - op. cit. p. 30 . 

(2) Western Stock Growers 1 Association - ’The Western 
Canada Cattle Industry", brief presented to a Special 
Committee of the House of Commons, March 23rd,1934»P7 • 


















































. . 
















— 




















- 186 - 


yards will not permit the user of the yard to provide 
his own feed. As stock yards are at presented operated 
this is the sole variable factor, wherein the yards can 
adjust prices to cover repairs, replacements, and interest 
on investment. It is contended hy the stockmen that hay 
which can be purchased for $7•00 or $8.00 per ton and 
sold for $20.00 in the yard allows a price spread for out 
of line to that requisite for a reasonable profit to the 
stock yard company. The producer insists this spread 
should be reduced to allow him a little more profit on 
his end of the business. Hay in Montreal yards is said 
to be even higher and ships are at times over stocked with 
feed to the United Kingdom markets which is unsaleable on 
arrival. 

On behalf of the stock yards it is claimed that the 
yardage charge merely pays for labour and management and 
that the $1 0.00 per ton profit on hay is only adequate for 
replacements, repairs and interest on investment. Neither 
the stock yards Service Branch of the Federal Department 
of Agriculture or the yard managers' would appear to be 
satisfied with that principle but the only way in which 
necessary yard profit can be realized if hay profit is- 
reduced Is by increasing yardage costs. At present these 
are stated to be the cheapest on the North American Con¬ 
tinent and range from 10 to 15 cents lower than those 
prevailing in United States markers. To sell hay at cost 









, 














■ 

, 







. 







' 

, 


■ 




































- 1 87 - 

in the yards and divert the former profit to yardage costs 
would mean, it is stated, an incree.se of 1 0 cents for 
cattle and j? cents for calves. (1 ) There is however no 
compulsion to use the yards under Government control at 
all and this increase might well he sufficient to drive 
custom away to the packing house yards,, particularly 
truck custom. Stock yards complain at present that they 
are- not getting the business and yet their fixed charges 
on plan^upkeep must go on. Cattlemen contend on the other 
hand that the very reason they are not getting the volume 
business is because of rheir excessive charges. A solu¬ 
tion to the problem has not yet been found. 

It would seem however if yard charges could be based 
on the amount of yard service utilized by the shipper and 
on the amount of time his cattle make use of the yards 
one criticism would be met. The present flat rate charge 
must of necessity work injustice in many cases. Further¬ 
more if feed charges 'were reduced to a point where lost 
patronage could be recovered it would undoubtedly lead to 
increased volume when live stock conditions improve. If 
good will in thus co-operating with the producer can be 
created such a long term point of view should be worth 
considering by the yard companies. That the loss of 
yard patronage under government control is a matter of 
no small moment is indicated in the following represent¬ 
ative opinion - '‘Permit me to state a strong opinion ex¬ 
ists in Western Canada that a large volume o f traffi c. a 
(1 ) J .M. Me Galium, op. 'cTFrWrW^ r lTIT ™ ~ 




















. 






















■ 






































♦ 















- 188 - 

volume sufficient to make possible a downward revision of 
the various charges made by the stockyard companies, has 
been diverted from these institutions to the packing 
houses, solely through the excessive nature of the levies 
made against producers, 

11 Chief among the functions of the stockyards markets 
is the establishing of livestock prices. There is a very 
firm conviction in the minds of many producers that in the 
decrease in the volume of livestock routed through Public 
stockyards, this main function is being defeated, it com¬ 
plete enquiry into all angles of the present marketing 
system, to include the part played therein by packers, 
stockyards companies and commission agents, and at which 
Producers may have full opportunity to air their griev¬ 
ances, is a pressing need. This enquiry, to be complete, 
should include study of the need and. value of custom 
slaughtering facilities, and the value and practicability 
of auction selling as compared with the present method" (l r ) 
The better class range stock does not pass through local 
yards and none of the high class export range stock is 
sold in Canadian yards. If the yards lose also much of 
the lower class trade they can hardly be expected to act 
as wholly satisfactory sources of statistical and price 
information. 

(1) Hon, George Hoadley - "The Live Stock Industry." 

Brief presented to the Stevens Committee of the House of 
Commons, April 26th, 1934. Minutes of Evidence,p.22, 












* 

































' 




















’ v 













- 1 $9 - 


With fespect to the place of live stock yards in the 
heef cattle industry generally it must "be admitted that 
they perform useful services, particularly for cattle of 
lower grade than range stock off the short G-rass Plains 
and for stock destined for domestic consumption,* In the 
common interest however it is only fitting that all nec¬ 
essary stock yards he required to operate under such con¬ 
trol as will promote the general interest* There should 
he more yards under the control of the Live Stock and 
Live Stock Products Act than the 8 now so controlled. 
Packers 1 yards should also he brought under the Act * The 
regulation of buying and selling on the yards should he 
strictly supervised including all operations of the com¬ 
mission houses. 

In the light of a market for the meeting of seller 
and buyer they might he improved by the use of the live 
stock exchange as used in the United States, A live 
stock exchange may he composed of commission firms, pack¬ 
ing agencies, growers, shippers and financial agencies. 

Its main function would he to set up rules governing opera¬ 
tion of the stock yards market. Included in such control 
would he the regulation of buyers, slaughter and sale of 
diseased or injured stock, treatment of stock and methods 
of payment for purchases. An efficient exchange can be¬ 
come an important factor in adjustment of freight rates, 
regulation of trucking business, and in the promotion of 

































- 

































-190 - 

helpful legislation. Such an exchange operates with ef¬ 
fect in Chicago.(l) Montreal, Toronto and Winnipeg would 
he similar centres in Canada. 

The development of the auction is another possibility 
in Canada. A live stock auction can serve to bring seller 
and buyer together on a cash transaction basis. There 
must of course be sufficient volume of buyers to offer 
sufficient competitive bids and thus prevent a forced 
acceptance of a ridiculously low bid. Provision can be 
made for withdrawing the cattle unless a certain price 
is offered.(2) The use of this provision will depend on 
the general or normal price level and on the particular 
condition of the individual auction. Whatever methods 
to improve the stock yard situation are adopted the nec¬ 
essary functions they perform in the general economy must 
be realized and all interests duly considered. 

A further cost item in close relationship to that 
of the yards is the fees forcommission houses. In a 
country of great distances such as Canada producers are 
not unmindful of the very valuable services rendered by 
these middlemen in bringing buyer and seller together nor 
of the office organization necessary to adequately per¬ 
form commission functions. The charge is fixed at $ 17*00 
per car or deck for cattle and $12.00 to $ 13.00 for 

calves. In 1932 the price was reduced to $15.00 for 

(1) (2) Maynard, Weidler and Beckman - '‘Principles 
of Marketing' 7 . pp. 473, 4-73. 























.u 











. 



























* 
















- 191 - 

heavy cattle going to seaboard up to 19 head per car with 
a charge of 80 cents per head for each additional animal 
until the maximum of $17.00 was reached.(1) The producers 
contend this charge has more justification hut does not 
take into account the value or grade of the cattle. The 
charge is a flat rate no matter what the price of the 
stock may he which the producer contends is unfair. The 
commission men contend the $ 17.00 rate as applicable to 
rail transported cattle is low when compared to the truck 
stock commission of 80 cents to $1.00 per head. There is 
much more service to render truck stock than rail stock 
hence the higher commission hut in spite of this trucking 
of stock to market is increasing and becoming better or¬ 
ganized over short hauls. It would seem however that 
commission selling is one place where the system can be 
made more elastic and a premium placed on the marketing 
of better class stock by reducing the commission of $ 17.00 
At the same time a desirable check to the production of 
low grade stock could be enforced by raising the commis¬ 
sion against this class and thus make its production un¬ 
profitable. Commission agencies would however have to be 
under common control in order to shift the present em-‘ 
phasis from mere quantity to quality. A further improve¬ 
ment in commission selling might be affected by giving 

the accent an incentive to encourage the marketing of 

(1) J.M.McCallum - “Proceedings of the Standing Committee 

on Agriculture and Forestry, 1933*- Minutes of Evidence 

Senate of Canada, pp. 33 - 3&* 











, 




- 

. ' 

















■ 







- 192 - 

better class stock. If his commission for selling it is 
to be reduced something in the form of state grant based 
on his volume of quality sales might prove a valuable 
method of raising the general level of quality and price. 

A further irritating item to stockmen is a condemnation 
Insurance charge. The health of Canadian cattle makes 
this charge unnecessary but it is enforced. 

In the matter of marketing costs and method thus far, 
exclusive for the moment of rate structure, there would 
seem to be a need for more flexibility in order to allow 
the producer to reduce his marketing cost and incidentally 
his production cost. In the matter of shrinkage regula¬ 
tions, stock yard, feed costs, commission charges, improve¬ 
ment of stock and returns therefrom, condemnation insur¬ 
ance and elimination of unnecessary services there would 
appear to be some room for adjustment in order to more 
fully co-operate with the producer who at the present 
time is operating under the lowest cattle prices in histoid 

The matter of rate structure now calls for brief 
analysis. Rail, truck and ocean transport must be con¬ 
sidered. Railroad rates are the main bone of contention. 
The railway companies contend that relative to specialized 
services provided for the live stock business and in view 
of operation during a period of declining freight revenues 
their rates are low and at the minimum level commensurate 
with continuance of the traffic. Though live .stock should 
































































































-193- 

be of the highest quality and condition relative to the 
intended market in order to reflect a low freight rate 
yet the railway companies must he prepared to accept all 
kinds and grades of stock in order to promote diversifica¬ 
tion of the industry and provide the raw material for 
packing houses as w r ell as contact export ports. The 
Qriminal Code making it necessary that stock trains stop 
over every 36 hours and unload, together with the care 
and attendance required make'the stock traffic one which 
the railways are not over anxious to handle and certainly 
one on which they will he slow to decrease the rates, A 
further undesirable feature which the railways emphasize 
is the return journey of empty cars. Stock cars are a 
type of specialized equipment and one which- is incapable 
of adaptation to return cargo. A fundamental principal 
of railway operation is that rate structure must be so 
organized that a rate on one way traffic must be raised 
to take care of the return traffic of the empty cars. 

This is a factor of importance on long distance haul such 
as from the Short Grass Plains loading points to Montreal 
or to the Maritime ports. It is claimed on behalf of 
cattlemen however that stock cars are used from time to 
time to transport lumber and similar products. Besides 
the general contention of fixed charges irrespective of 
traffic, the railways contend that their rates are low 
enough now to permit free movement of live stock to dom- 










■ 



















■ 






. 



































-194- 

estic markets and to seaboard; that the rate is a compar¬ 
atively small factor in the marketing cost, and that the 
principal factors affecting producers’ returns are Quality 
of stock and market conditions. "The important considera¬ 
tions in economical marketing are to have the highest 
quality of product, to ship in such quantities as will 
take advantage of the lowest freight rates, and to sell 
when the supply is small in relation to the demand :T .(1 ) 

It is only common sense that the railways should desire 
steady volume traffic of high quality or of finished or 
feeder cattle as the market requires but in the light of 
present and immediate future practical conditions that 
situation Is still largely utopian. The volume of traf¬ 
fic simply does not exist for very good and sufficient 
reasons, A low flat rate however on all classes of stock 
is undesirable. There is room here for yet another incen¬ 
tive to producers to improve the quality of their stock by 
allowing a lower rate on better class stock and assess¬ 
ing a higher rate on the poor class stock. The object or 
extent of freight rate differentials should not be Such 
as to promote marketing of top quality only but such as 
to prevent the marketing of beef decidedly below good 
edible quality. Any such freight differential should be 
in the mature of a price differential which on the basis 
of grade must be sufficient to cover the extra cost of 

production. Reducing the freight rate would allow the 

TT) ^Y7JTTclcma!T~^~ rr ir^ndnn^ —~~ 

Edition, p. 597* 




























. 











. 


■ 













, 















' 

. 















- 195 


producer of the quality returning a higher price, to re¬ 
duce his cost of production and better enable him to meet 
the extra cost of producing the higher quality. The dif¬ 
ferential should not be applied to adversely affect supply 
ing a market with a justifiable regional quality demand. 

It should be used to shut out the type of beef which It is 
not in the general interests of society to produce or 
market. The same result can be obtained through standard¬ 
ization in relation to the market provided the low undes¬ 
irable grade is certain of elimination at the source of 
production. It is at least uneconomical to include low 
grade stock in shipments of quality cattle. That this 
principle is recognized by co-operative and other shipping 
agencies is apparent from the following statement - “To 
make up a carload lot of steers by including four or five 
earners is very much like paying freight on the screenings 
in a carload of grain. Far too heavy an annual freight 
bill is paid by our farmers in shipping poor quality stock 
over hundreds of miles of railroad and far too many 
squashy, grass fed cattle are shipped, no attempt having 
been made at finishing. The lesson seems hard to learn 
but learn it we should, as economy ceases to exist when 
wasteful methods are adopted or high freight charges paid 

on low class Produce 11 (1 T _ _____ __ 

(1 ) Department of Agriculture, Province of Saskatchewan - 
•'Co-operative Live Stock Shipping*', 1 923, p, 
















' 









































■ 












■ 

. 




























-196- 

The other side of the picture must now he examined. 
The producer-shipper is pleased to recognize the up-to- 
date railway equipment for handling meat products and a 

through rate on live cattle hut what he objects to as a 

. 

live cattle producer is the ant equated rolling stock of 
the railways and the high rates on live cattle in the 
light of present prices and production costs. Rates as 
they have been in effect since 1914 are shown in the 
following tables: 
tr Table 1 : 

Freight Rates on Cattle, sheep and Hogs in Carloads, from 
Stations in Alberta to Montreal and Eastern Canada points 

West Thereof. 


From 

Sept *1 

1 91 4 

CO J.i .1 c 

Mar.15 
1 918 

c xi u o y c 

Aug. 1 2 
1 91 8 

A 1 UVJ 

Sept. 

1 920 

J- U 0 * 

13 Jan.1 

1 921 

Aug .1 3/21 
to date 

Calgary..... 

90 

1 03^ 

1 08 % 

1 48 % 

1 43 

114% 

Coronation.. 

90 

103^ 

108 % 

148% 

1 43 

1 nk 

Edmonton.... 

94 

1 03% 

1 08 % 

148% 

143 

1 14% 

Lethbridge.. 

90 

1 03 % 

1 08 % 

1 48% 

1 43 

114% 

Macleod. 

90 

1 03% 

1 085!$ 

1 48% 

1 43 

1 14k 

Stettler.... 

93 

1 03 % 

1 08 % 

148% 

1 43 

1 14% 

Wetaskiwin., 

94 

1 03% 

1 08 % 

1 48% 

1 43 

1 14% 

Table 2: 







Freight Rates 

on Cattle, in carloads from Various Western 

Canada Stations to 

Eastern Ports for Export 


Rates in 

cents per 1 00 

lbs. 



June 1 . 1 91 6 

Au 

s. 1.1921 to date 



To 



To 






West 


West 


Montreal 

Quebec 

Saint : 

Montreal 

Quebec St. 

From 




John 


J ohn 

Calgary.. 


90 

93 

93 

114 % 

114% 121 

Edmonton. 


90 

93 

93 

114% 

114% 121 

Moose Jaw.... 


86 

91 

91 

1 1 0 % 

110 % 117 

Prince Albert 

♦ * • • 

89 

94 

94 

113% 

113 % 120 

Winnipeg..... 


60 % 

65% 

65% 

85 

85 91%": 

Three upward 

revisions and 

two downward 

(1 ) 

revisions still 


(1 ) Hon.George Hoadley - "The Live Stock Industry" .Minutes 

of Evidence presented before the Stevens Committee of 
the House of Commons,Ottawa, April 26th, 1934, PP* 23 - 














































- 197 - 

leave cattlemen paying the same rates they paid 14 years 
ago. It is also stated that the present carload minimum 
weights are too high as a basis xor freight charges. It 
will be noted in Table 2 that there is an additional 6 1 /2 
cent rate to Altantic ports such as Saint John. There is 
also required on this winter traffic one extra day of tran¬ 
sit feeding to Saint John and two days to Halifax. These 
combined items raise the present shipping cost to the pro¬ 
ducer by approximately $3.00 per head. It is stated by 
authoritative ranching opinion that though the railways 
require about 10 carloads of cattle daily their rates are 
set about 30above what the Short G-rass Plains rancher 
can pay under present conditions. It is estimated 9 
tons of railway rolling stool; are required to transport 
one passenger. This is claimed to be far out of line and 
if applied on a comparable basis to cattle freight trans¬ 
portation would be still further out of line as this traf¬ 
fic can stand it still less. In relation to population 
Canada is over capitalized in railway investment. Rail¬ 
ways are essentially monopolistic and can be especially 
so in Canada if the United States market remains closed to 
us. This was exemplified in at least one case in 1917 
when 400 head of cattle were refused a requested rate by 
the Canadian Pacific Railway and were then driven south to 
contact the Great Northern Railway and shipped over that 
road to Chicago at 20 cents per 100 pounds cheaper. The 





















••• - 

■ 




















- 
























-198- 

Canadian Railway is then said to have q.uiok.ly offered a 
rate hut it was too late. Such a case well illustrates 
the working of competition and also of the law of Supply 


and Demand. 

The western producer is to-day demanding a return to 
the 1916 rate of 90 cents insxead of the present rate of 
$1 ,143g. He also requires reduction in the 0 1/2 cent winter 
rate to Atlantic ports. The producer contends live cattle 
for export should have an export rate as is the case with 
animal products and grain. In March 1934 grain for dom¬ 
estic use had a rate of 40 1/2 cents per 1 00 pounds from 
Calgary to Vancouver; for feed purposes a rate of 30 cents 
and for export a rate of 20 cents while at the same time 
from Calgary to Montreal fresh meats for domestic consump¬ 
tion carried a rate of $1.88 per 100 pounds and for ex¬ 
port a rate of $1 ,64. On cured meats from Calgary to 
Quebec for domestic consumption the rate was $1 ,60 and 
for export it was $1 . 23 . Cattlemen contend with seeming 
reason that similar provision should he made for the live 
cattle industry.(1 ) 

A further contention of the western range cattle pro¬ 
ducer in the Short G-rass Plains Area is a reduced rate* for 
feeder cattle from the range to the feed lot. The rate 
for this type of traffic is based on the common railway 
practice of charging higher rates for local haul than for 

through haul. Such a practice is upheld by the Board of 

(1) Western Stoch: Growers 1 Association - "The Western 

Canada Cattle Industry" brief presented to a Special 
Committee of the House of Connons,March 2 3 »1 934, P . 11 . 


f' 































































■ 







* 



















- l?9 - 

Bailway Commissioners. Through haul in this sense refers 
to Canadian lines only. Cattlemen consider the local rate 
out of proportion to the distance. The same would apply, 
though possibly with somewhat less force, to transporta¬ 
tion to eastern feed lots. These are not used to the 
extent of western feed lots and in any case there is a 
greater proportionate return on distance covered. 

A strong contention at the present time by western 
live cattle producers is for a fee&ing-in-transii rate. 

As in the United States a dual movement of cattle from 
the south-west ranges to the corn belt area and from 
there to the markets as finished beef takes place so in 
Canada there is such a movement to western and eastern 
feed lots such as in Ontario, and then to market as fin¬ 
ished cattle. It is claimed that if feeder cattle could 
be given a through basic feeding-in-transit rate en route 
to market allowing for stop-over at a feeding point to 
finish not only the cattle producers but the railways also 
would gain. The basic local rate would be paid in any 
case and the railway would profit to the extent of the 
added gain of the cattle after finishing. Such a rate 
would undoubtedly tend to increase traffic to feed lots 
both east and west and increase railway traffic volume. 

It is said about 1 20,000 head annually .were moved in the 
late 90 ts and early in this century when the rate was JO 
cents whereas in 1933 the number moved by the railways 


























































•• 

























- 2 00 


was only 5 0,000 at the rate of $1 .1 4 1/2. So far the 
railways have refused to consider these rate reductions 
and they are now to he pressed before the Board of Rail¬ 
way Commissioners. 

Transportation of cattle to market by motor truck 
has been increasing in recent years. In 1932 the equiv¬ 
alent of 5,200 ears of live stock was delivered by truck 
to the Toronto Union stock yards as compared with 10,800 
cars by rail.(1 ) Other authority states truck receipts 
at the Toronto yards in the early part of 1 935 amounted 
to some 45?& of total deliveries. (2) A proportionate in¬ 
crease in truck deliveries will apply to other stock 
yards in Canada - the increase depending on the location 
of the yard and the development of trucking business. 

Much of the increase will be due to hog traffic as com¬ 
pared to cattle traffic. The rapid expansion of Trucking 
live stock to all main stock yards in Canada is shown in 
the following table: 


(1 ) J.M.McCallum - '^Proceedings of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture and Forestry,1 953 41 • Minutes of Evid¬ 
ence, Senate of Canada, p. 34 . 

( 2 ) H.P.Kennedy - op. cit. p. 55 . 









« 


















- 














- 








: 


















■ . . 











"Percentage of Total Sale Stock Delivered to Stock Yards 

by Truck 


Cattle Calves 



Truck Percent 

Percent 

Truck Percent 

Percent 


Re- 

by 

by 

Re¬ 

by 

by 


ceipts truck 

truck 

ceipts 

truck 

truck 

Stockyard 

1933 1933 

1 932 

1 933 

1 933 

1 932 



* 

* 


¥> 

fo 

Toronto.. 

84,51 4 

30.76 

25.13 

54,1 64 

54.98 

48.49 

Montreal (W) .. 

5,583 

9.1C 

8.07 

24,726 

21 .62 

21 .56 

Montreal (E),. 

5,330 

32.10 

31.31 

17,923 

54.38 

44 .91 

Winnipeg...... 

1 6,1 89 

9.93 

13.03 

8,690 

1 8.06 

# 

Calgary. 

11 ,360 

29.44 

32.61 

2,256 

36.73 

64.12 

Edmonton...... 

7,479 

27.17 

30.87 

2 , 36 c 

36.00 

38.96 

Prince Albert. 

1 ,41 4 

79.66 

67.98 

311 

94.5 3 

74.06 

Moose Jaw..... 

2,645 

22,48 

21.20 

896 

22.59 

34.45 

Saskatoon (U). 

6,373 

70.24 

61.55 

2,878 

80.80 

85.14 

Saskatoon (P). 

1 J77 

75.94 

~ 

781 

92.54 

- 

Regina........ 

2,647 

55.87 

- 

1,273 

64.49 

- 

Battleford.... 

586 


* 

123 

- 

_ 

All yards 7. . .. 

145^297 

24.04 

21 .52 

116.381 

i!L67 

'37.36 ' 

#Cattle and calves combined in 1932 



Hogs 

Sheep 

and Lambs 


Truck Percent 

; Percent Truck 

Percent Percent 


Re¬ 

by 

■by 

Re- 

ny 

by 


ceipts 

truck 

truck 

ceipts truck 

truck 

Stockyard 

1 933 

1933 

1 932 

1933 

1 933 

1 932 



1 ° 

* 


fo 

* 

Toronto....... 

92,151 

39.47 

38 .67 

79,299 

40.32 

39.47 

Montreal (W),. 

18,899 

9.23 

8.83 

12,336 

9.39 

11.58 

Montreal (E).. 

11,659 

60.28 

38.73 

9,827 

74.87 

68.31 

Winnipeg. 

19,454 

7.33 

7.14 

16,701 

21 .32 

21 .29 

Calgary....... 

32,303 

35.91 

44.23 

7,085 

41 .69 

35.1 3 

Edmonton...... 

27,649 

30.32 

31 .09 

5,851 

44.23 

29.47 

Prince Albert. 

15,491 

74.28 

33.11 

766 

73.47 

66.81 

Moose Jaw..... 

13,499 

50.83 

48.34 

4,136 

29.41 

16.68 

Saskatoon (U). 

41 ,516 

61.36 

33.98 

3,434 

83.49 

58.50 

Saskatoon (P). 

10,331 

88.93 

- 

1,707 

- 

- 

Regina........ 

9,493 

69.52 

- 

1,875 

- 

- 

Battleford.... 

6.638 


_ 

264 

_ 

— 

All yards..*.. 

299^083 

28,54 

24.07 

143^281 30.38 

.28.93 " 


(1 ) 


This table refers to live stock as trucked to stock yards 

only. Similar increases in marketing by truck direct to 

slaughter houses would be likely although specific 
(1) Annual Market Review, 1933, Department of Agriculture, 
Live Stock Branch, Dominion of Canada, Ottawa, 5 . 13 * 
x Percentage All Yards denotes total truck.receipts 
as a percentage of total sales, not. given m the 

1 933 Report• 








































■ 


* 

. 


























202 


statistics are not available. It is to be noted that 
the above remarkable expansion is over a one year period 
only. Referring to the trucking situation the Federal 
Department of Agriculture has also stated - T, Xt is re¬ 
ported that during the year the delivery of trucked stock 
to yards at any time during the forenoon, a,nd without any 
pre-knowledge of their arrival being available, was a most 
unsettling factor in the market. It is further stated 
that trucks were responsible for the delivery of a consid¬ 
erable percentage of unsatisfactory stock. This statement 
has reference to delivery at the larger stock yards. All 
other carriers of live stock have their business under 
reasonable regulation, and are subject to a strict super¬ 
vision. There is no obvious reason why the trucker should 
have privilege or licence in doing business over his com¬ 
petitors, particularly in view of his relative lack of in¬ 
vestment and interest in the industry and trade' 1 . (1 ) 

The advantages in the use of trucks for live stock 
is compared with rail haul include the adaptability of the 
truck to short haul traffic for less-than-carload lots. 
Railways are usually not anxious for this traffic and com¬ 
petition is therefore not so keen. Shrinkage is less by 
truck, feed or water in transit is not required and cattle 
are usually only en route a few hours. The trucker is als 
a free agent and can transport cattle whenever they are 

ready for market ; there need be no delay . f . or ^t ran s p j art at io n 

Pi ) op. cit. p. 15• 

















. 






















. 



. 


■ 

























































i 













- 203 - 


facilities. Loss of life is lessened and marketing is 
speeded up. The risk to the shipper may actually he less 
by truck than by rail.(l) Moreover trucked stock con¬ 
tribute little if anything to upkeep of stock yards through 
feed consumed. Their main contribution is through yardage. 
Owing to the frequent deliveries per day in small lots of 
all grades of stock the commission firms have more work to 
do on trucked stock but with the exception of Saskatoon 
and Edmonton in 1933 ho extra charge is made.(2) Shippers 
by rail have to pay full stock yard charges, including 
feed and have in-transit feeding to take care of as well. 
The improvement of highways and of th.e truck itself tend 
in the long run to give impetus to the traffic. Trucks 
are used also as feeders to the railway where a direct 
haul to market is too long. The limitation to economical 
trucking comes mainly from the type of road surface and 
the time required for the journey. If the route is too 
long the stock will deteriorate too much before reaching 
the market. Trucking involves less capital expenditure 
and is more amenable to quick contraction or expansion 
than railway transportation. In view of obvious advant¬ 
ages however it is not surprising that trucking of cattle 
bo market is increasing. 

_ The matter of truck rates is an unstable factor. It 

!1 ) W.T.Jackman - "Economics of Transportation^, p. 778 . 

2) J.M.McCallum - "Proceedings of the Standing Committee 


on ^Agriculture and Forestry, 1 933 s 
Senate of Canada, p. 34. 


Minutes of Evidence 






































' 



. 


■ 





































204 - 


is largely regional in character and individual in con¬ 
struction owing to the lack, of any control and the highly 
competitive nature of the business. Compared with ser¬ 
vices rendered by railways however which must operate under 
vast capital expenditure and under more or less fixed con¬ 
ditions beyond their control the trucker can set a more 
flexible rate structure to take most advantage of his 
position. The fact that a producer has some stock ready 
for market but yet not enough for a carload by rail may 
induce him to employ a trucker. The rate in such eases 
may be much higher than a car lot rate by rail. In some 
cases it is cited as double the relative rail rate.O ) A 
case is cited of trucking hogs at 40 to 5 0 cents per 100 
pounds from Hay Lakes in Alberta to Edmonton whereas a 
carload of 20 hogs rail carried over the same route after 
paying stock yard and commission charges realized a rate 
of 1 8 1/2 cents,(2) On the contrary however a case is 
cited by prominent ranch opinion of the carriage of a 
single animal by rail at $6.00 which was carried the same 
distance by truck for $1 . 50 . Such instances indicate the 
competitive nature of trucking rates and the flexibility 
that is possible. Relative to distance and services ren¬ 
dered however truck rates are generally higher than rail- 

road rates. The main exception occurs in the relative 

(1) J.M.McCallum, op, cit. p. 33 . 

(2) A.W. Burrell, op, cit. p. 62. 





















• 









. 



' 





■ 



, 

. 














- 205 - 

rates for less than car lot shipments - the peculiar field 
of trucking* 

It would seem however that owing to the peculiar ser¬ 
vices which can he rendered by the motor truck in the 
live stock business it will become a permanent feature of 
the general transportation mechanism. In the interests of 
society generally however it is only to be expected and 
desired that motor trucking should be subjected to more 
control by the state. 

Ocean transport applying as it does to export bus¬ 
iness only plays an important part in the laid down cost 
of cattle on the foreign market, and in this connection 
is of special interest to the Short Grass Plains Area as 
a chief originating centre for high quality export beef 
cattle. To properly handle the traffic boat-s should be 
specially fitted as are railway cars. Pens it is con¬ 
tended should be constructed which can carry 6 to 1 0 
head of young stock to be sold as baby beef and boat 
divisions 1 for older cattle as reaffirmed in 1925 to 
carry 4 head for $48.00, and if re-arranged to carry 6 
head of calves or young stock, the per capita, rate would 
be reduced from $12.00 to $8.00. It is claimed even then 
light weight cattle would pay more in proportion than 
heavy weight stock/” 5 ^Feed accessories asmay be required, 
must be provided to insure safety, health and care for 

the cargo. The g eneral cond.itions up to the present in 
(1 ) Hon. W. A. Bu chanan, op . cit. p. 4 3 ~ 
































' 


































- 206 


the Canadian export cattle market have not induced the 
fitting of cattle boats on a large scale. Even yet it 
is advocated that economical shipping consists in a bal¬ 
anced cargo of grain and cattle. In 1 932 however with 
Government assistance 9 vessels were fitted for the 
cattle trade and an agreement made fixing a rate of $12.00 
on heavy cattle and a rate of $10.80 on cattle under 1 ,00C 
pounds at time of ship loading. This agreement expired 
on December 31st, 1938 and the. rate has since risen to 
3 pounds or $ 13.00 subject to 1 Oft reduction for light 
weight cattle. Prior to 1 921 the rate was as low as 
$ 7.00 to $ 8.00 per head for cattle 300 to 400 pounds 
heavier than are now being shipped'.' ^ There are only a few 
lines engaged in the trade w r hich all go to Liverpool, 
Birkenhead, or Glasgow. Some calls are made at Cardiff 
but exceedingly few direct to the Smithfield market at 
London, aithoug there was constructed near Tilbury 
Docks in 1933 one of the most modern ana fully equipped 
landing wharves in the world with abattoirs, feeding 
and selling facilities. There is accommodation here 
for 700 head. The first shipment by the 3.3. T Neiderholm ! 
consisting of 608 head left Montreal on December 3 th,' 

1 933 and arrived at London on Decmber 23 th in better than 
usual condition. In % ite of the holiday season they were 
effectively marketed. T Space T is the ship room required 

by one animal and is booked as far in advance as the 
estern^“o”ck~Growers 1 Association - "The Western 
Canada Cattle Industry", brief presented to a Special 
Committee of the House of Commons, March 1 , 






























. 

. 

. 
















. 


































- 207 - 

shipper ean "be certain to he able to utilize it as he 
must ^ay for all space ordered wheoher utilized or not. 
Space is however not always available when required. 

Considering three export routes via Montreal, Mari¬ 
time ports or by Churchill on Hudson 1 s Bay comparative 
transportation cost figures are of inrerest. The estim¬ 
ated average cost of shipment based on 1935 figures 
appears in the following statements: 










Estimated Average Cost of Shipping Cattle to G-reat Britain, via Montreal 

Based on Average Weight of 1 J 00 pounds per Head _._____ 

Calgary, Moose 

Edmonton Saskatoon Jaw Winnipeg Toronto Montreal 


2 08 








£ 3 - 

















, p 


















^ Q 


© 

bn 




bn 



o 




o 



o o 



o 

o 


Onoq 

•H 

bD 


p 







o~ 



IX\ o 



NO 

NdOJ 


CM Nt 

XQ 

0 



•H 



• 


1 


* 



• * 



• 

• 


• • 

P 

Pi 



i—1 



o 




o 



kS- CM 




CM 


O'CM 

O 

•H 



P 










r— 




CM 


CM 

© 

P 



•H 



r— 















P 



P 



■w» 














P 

•H 



CO 

















o 




nd 














o 



0 




P 


cr> 

ON 


LT\ 


o 



o o 



o 

Nr 


©1 

no 

• 



P 


CM 

T— 


t— 


O' 



LT\ 3 



NO 

■C— K\ 


IXN, lO 

•H 

XQ 



o 


e 

• 


• 


* 



* » 



» 

« * 


9 • 

» IQ 

nd 



• r4 


o 

K\ 


o 


o 



OJ 



Nj- 

LT\ CM 


O'CM 

XQ 

0 



o 










X- 




CM 


CM 

rH P 

0 



OD 0 

















*H Crf 

V 



• Xi 

















crf o 




O p 














! o 


© 

P r© 

0 





LO 

1-0 


o 


o 



O o 



o 

ip 


<r~ C" 

0 

0 



-CO- V 


CO 

K\ 


vD 


O' 



LT\0 



nO 

O'ON 


0-0 

rd O 

P 



o 


« 

• 


• 


* 



• ® 



• 

• • 


. » 

P 

X 



« o 


o 

ON 


o 


o 



H- OJ 



H- 

T— OJ 


KM rd 

P 

p 



IQ P >i 










X— 




K\. 


fP 

O IQ 




pop 

















V nd 

p 



i—! *h br' 














o 



P 

o 



p P 















© 

IP crf 




O Crf -H 


o 

nO 


LT\ 


o 



o o 



o 

r- C 


O' JN 


o 



O .H nd 


X— 

,— 


ON 


O' 



LfN O 



NO 

ON r — 


CO fO 

9 

£ 



OOP 



» 


* 


» 



• • 



• 

♦ • 


» > 

o # 

p 



* 0 o 


t— 

OJ 


o 


o 



Nt CM 



Nj- 

Nt NM 


NO NN 

*S5 O 




r- P Pi 



X— 







x—. 




Ip 


K\ 

O 

0 



Pi IQ 

















P P 

P 

<» 


P 0 0 













© 


© 

P XQ 

•H 

0 


0 fP P 


CM 

CO 


UN, 


o 



o o 



o 

IP 


o\o 

Crf 

P 

P 


nd P 


,— 

KM 


ON 


C" 



LO\ O 



NO 

r- CM 


O K> 

jp a 

crf 

C 


P o 


- • 

• 


• 


• 



• « 



• 

» • 


« • 

o o 

0 



p ® © 



OJ 


o 


o 



Nrf OJ 



nJ- 

ipfp 


O' K' 

p 

P 

!>» 


0 



,_ 







X_ 




fp 


IP 

0 V 


rH 


bp bC P 

















0 

be P 

9 

P P 0 

















CO nd * 

0 

O 

P 

•H Crf Pi 

















sg., crf rH 

Pi 


»h «p jd Pi 














© 


© 

dr 0 crf 

•H 

t>» Crf 

be o p 


H- 

o 


o 


o 



o o 



o 

O ip 


NO CM 

0 P rH 

p 

■H M X! 



LT\ 


K\ 


O' 



LT\0 



NO 

O'CM 


NO Nt 

P 

P H 

bD 0 0 IQ 


• 

® 


* 


# 



• ® 




» • 


• • 

• P P 

•H 

Crf 




r— 

OJ 


,— 


o 



He cm 



'd- 

p IP 


O' K' 

IQ 0 P 

p 

0 

V 0 



X_ 







T— 




IP 


Ip 

rH Pi O 


XQ 

a 

0 O x! 













ii‘ 

■ee- • 


-60- 

•H ^ V 

d 

op p 


• 

• 




• 0 



9 e 




• « 


• • 

Crf © 

o 


IQ P 0 


IQ 

• 



8 

• bD 

*. 

«* 

♦ • 


nd 

p 

* /-N 


« • 

pop 


0 


p p o 

o 

X 

• 

p 

• 

?! 

* crf 

to 

0 

• * 

?! 

crf 


• nO 

St 

rd • 

0 st -H P 

P 

IQ 

crf crf P 

CM 

a 

rH 

• 

o 


o 

• V 

0 

o 


•H 

0 


rd —' 

crf • 

nd 

XQ 

•H 

0 

O P 


nd 


oj s 

• p 

Pi p 

• • 


Pi 

• 

crf » 

i 

0 ^ 

- bp 

0 

d 


p 


O 

crf 

10 

__ 


* crf 

o 

crf 

• • 

bn 


• 

0 ,a 


rH 

P 0 P 


crf 

d 

P p IQ 

CM 

CM 

O 

CD -P i—I -P 

* X! 

p 

p 

• • 

?! 

p 

9 

jd 1—1 

0 


C bO*H 


0 rH 

O Crf o 

T _ 


m 

erf 

crf 

l K 

*. 

P 

• ♦ 

•H 

0 

9 


P 

P P 

V P P 

a 

P 

© 

Pi O 

r& 

e$ 

(D 



o 

0 




iq 


,— ! 

Pi 

• 

u u 

P 

0 0 

crf crf 

o 


P p 

p 

P 

o 

P 

IQ 

^ bn KM p 

• ^ 1—i 



0 0 

O 

Pi P 

CM P P 

IQ 

•Hdpio 

O' 

0 


P 

P 

cq a 


•H nd —' 

0 

?! 


Pi Pi 

Pi 


© .H V 

P 


be crf -h 


Pi 

Pi 

P 

P 

IQ 

rMi *H p 

*> 

crf 

IQ 

•H 




0 0 

• bo 

P nd 

•H Xi 

ri 



0 

o 

O 

Crf rH 

crf 

iq 

0 p 


crf 


0 0 

0 

IQ XQ 

c br *h 

XQ 

0 

0 

0 P p 

fjrH 

CD p Xl 


O rd nd 

o 

0) ?? 

rd 

p 


IQ XQ 

a 

P P 

Pi P P-p 

a 

0 

P 0 

r O 

P X! 

-p 



£ X 

hr 

hr: 

?! 

•H 


?! ?! 

•H 

0 0| 

>H O P 

? 

P) HH P IQ 


Crf 

hr o 

O nd cm crf 


crf 

P »H 

crf 

p 


0 0 

P 

Pi P 

P X! 

0 

bD 

P 

P 0 

6 

xi 

P 

•H 


P 

p 


£ 

£ 

0 0 


Pd 


Pi Pi *H 

X X 

P © XQ 

a 

•H 

p 0 © 


0 

rd 


crf 


o 


‘Pi p 

IQ 


X X 

P 

0 0 

Crf P P 

pi 

XQ 

crf 

Crf i> p 

if? 

p 

p 

P 

0 

>;,rH bO 


IQ 

V 

0 p 


0 0 

Crf 


X -H P 

•H 

P 

0 

0 p nd 

X! V 

Crf P 


c5 d d H 

• 

IQ 

crf 



& 

rH rH 

O £ 0 X3 

O 

© 

© O 0 

rX 

tr 


P r-N 

0 »H 

0 


O ci 

?! 

0 

✓—N 

rH «H 

crf crf 

co a CO 

© O O O p 

•H 

rH nd 

o 

O 

?! nd 

0 

Crf P crf 

0 

P lt\ crf crf 

B 

^ p 

0 






0 

•H 

0 

p 

o 

p crf Vi 

p! 0 0 

pi 



P P 

c 

c o 

0 ^ 

✓—-V 



—* 


P 

erf 

0 


p 

o 



o 

K 



O O 

P EH E-i 

CO r— 

CM 


KN p ur\ 


pin PC5 |p 


CO 

Pi 



O pH 



HHFi 



—' 





























(6) Nearly all charges are on a per head basis, therefore the cost per 
pound will vary according to the weight of the animal. 


209 



CO 







0 







u 







a -p 

• 69 - 






0 £ 







d O 














0 







-p 







d 







s 0 

-€ 9 - 





• 

0 ^ 






<H 

d O 






d 

Fh EH 






0 







d 







-P 








0 





0 0 

o 

P 

' 




m vd 

(S; 

•H 





® e 


a d 

•€9 




k\ 0 

O 

p d 




1 

r— 

•P 

H *H 




1 



Fh 






0 







-P 






0 ur\ 


0 





O ON 

o 

e 0 





« * 

« 

O 0 

69 - 




CM O 


d 0 d 





CM 


F *4 ^ *-a 






0 







tO 







-P 

>s 






to 

d 

OOO 

0 OfO 0 0 

0 0 

OOO 00000 

O <SJ 

o 

1? 

O Lf\, LT\ 

O i_r\“cr\ lt\ O 

0 ir\.x\Lr \0 O ir\ir\ir \0 

LT\ N~\ 

o 

a tor 

- 69 - • • • 






O rH 

r- CM r~ 

•r- CMjCM r- r- 

v— CM CM - T— t~ ©U CM r— 1—• 

O r- 

d 

d d 





K\ 

0 

(h 0 






xl 


• • ♦ 

• • • « • 

• » 

oo» * • • • • 

6 . 

p 


• • » 

• • • • ♦ 

• -a 

9 » * ® * ® ® * 


o 


• • * 


• 9 

• • * » • « • « 

• d d 





• • 


* 0 d 

rd 






« p» 0 



• • • 

• • • • * 


• • • • • • ♦ * 

* 

d 


• • • 

• • • • • 

• • 


• 0 



• • • 

* * • » * 

« • 


9 H 

*d 


d • d 

• to • d • 

• to 

• d • ® to • d « 

* -P 

0! 


o 5 • d 

• nd • d • 

• rd 

• d • • X • d • 


0 


O d 0 

» d d O • 

• d 

do* * d d 0 * 

* d 



d 

• d d 

* d 

d * * d d 

• 0 



d 0 £ 

* >s 0 d • 

* >s 0 d * • !>» 0 p • 

d 



0 -H 

• «H • 


•H * • ‘H * 

d k\ 



Pi d 


* d d • • d d 

O CM 



•H £ 

• *H *H ?> • 

• «H • 

H » » «H *H ^ • 

•w» 



•> d 

• d • 

* 

d • * d * 

d 

0 


-P >» 6 

• h>}F-p 

• • >3 >S d -P 

0 »d ' 



d d -P 

• d d -p d 

* d 

d -p d *• *dd-pd 

P d 

d 


0 xl to 

t^X rd tO O 

box x 03 0 h bodd to 0 

0 




•• d 

d 

0 £ 

p xl 



t^T. tO tO 

^ .h to to to bp 

•• -H tO 

to to bp > -h to to to tip 

0 

•H 


»* C 0 0 

d <d 0 0 0 d 

bf j <d 0 

0 0 dd'd 000 p 

O d 

d 


*H i—! 1 —! d> d rH iH rH -H 

<D -crt rH rH rH *H Ph C$ rH rH 1 — 1 *H 

O 0 

Xl •• 


d fd d d 

0 ^ ci dti 

ft 0 eg 

d d *d 0 d d d rd 

Pi 

CO CM 


d cSPP 

0 H P P ^ d 

•HHPPP d ©HrQPP d rH 



bjD 0 

to d 0 

d d 

0 -p d 0 

d -P 

<* 


H pCVJCV) 

O CM CM CM }H 

dpDCMCMCMH”Hd>CMCMCMjH-P W 

O 


d 

O 

•H 

X 

0 0 

> 25 ' 


0 

s* 



EH E 3 








































From From From ” From From 

Calgary Moose Winnipeg Toronto Montreal 

_ Jaw ________________ 


- 21 0 


LO 

LT> 

o 


o 

vG 

o 


o 

vD 

O 


o 

VO 

O 


o o o o 

o o 

O H" LT\ O 

OwC 

9 • • » 

« •» 

T- ox CM T— 

K\0 

Pi • * * 

. 

rH TOW . . . 

* 

0? O <D rH • • • 

• 

CD rH CS • • • 

9 

?h Pi a! «p » • * 

• 

+3 9 . 0,00 • » * 

9 

X ft -p • P* * 

» 

o a? •-st • • ri • 

9 

^ «H H Pi » a • 

9 

•H a3 • eg • 

9 

bOH CD W O • £ • 

• 

£ 03 Pi nd • -r-L • 


•HSu^ * * 


rH in Q? *H * * 

» 

rl ^ O |>} * ctf • 

• 

•H O ^ IQ • Pi -P 

9 

rO £ 0 • -P £ 

9 

bp*H H * IQ O 

» 


S xi • 

bo o-h»)P w m bn 


^ hfO-d 0 CD £ 

»d 

O C? CD C\) rH i— i *H 

o3 

Pi • O 0 H Cti rC> 

0 

^43 r H«Hr C j r O r O (tf 

H> CO £ £ O 

Jd 

£o cm cti vO cm *H 

Pi 

£ o 

0 

C -P 

PM 






























- 211 - 




rH 



















0 




Ctf 





o 












o 


£ 




0 

o 


o 

o 

On 

ON 

c ■ 

ON 


LT\ 


p 




o 

ONOO 


£ 




u 

CM 


P 

Ip 

IP 

CM 


P 


P 


p 




o 

OJ H- 


p 




p 

« 


• 

• 


• 


* 


e 


* 




• 

« * 


■H 




£ 

CM 


o 




o 

P 


o 


o 




X — 

b-CM 

, v _ 

£ 




JO 

CM 



CM 




CM 









CM 


o 


rH 


Pi 

sa- 


















•H 


d 







O 














£ 


CD 


O 



















bn 


£ 


P 

H* 


o 

H- 

O 

P 


ON 


o 


p 




o 

Nf O 


<3 


-p 


£ 

,_ 


P 

H - 

r— 

,— 


P 


NO 


p 




o 

p UN 




£ 


o 

• 


* 

» 


* 




* 


* 




• 

• • 


£ 


O 


£ 

P 


o 

H" 


T~ 


P 


o 


o 




r- 

C- CM 


o 




o 

cv] 



CM 




CM 









CM 






eh 

SO- 


















0 


£ 





















0 


0 


be 



















P 


t> 


0 





o 












O 


P 


Q 


p 

P 


o 

p 


,- 


NO 


o 


p 




o 

T~ C" 


•H 




•H 

cr- 


p 

o 

MO 

CP 


CP 


NO 


p 




o 

c-~o 


a 


IQ 


£ 

« 


• 

• 


* 


» 


* 


* 




* 

a a 


a 


+3 


£ 

T— 


o 



O 


P- 


o 


o 




,_ 

PKN 


o 


£ 


•H 

P 



rp 




p 









P 


O o 


O 



•SO- 


















CM 


PM 







o 












o 


bp Nt 


0 


0 

t- 


o 

r— 

AS* 

T— 


CM 


o 


p 




o 

c~- p 


*H J 


a 


0 £ 

ON 


P 

CM 

nO 

CP 


ON 


NO 


p 




o 

CO P 


•b 


•H 


o d 

• 


■-. 

• 


• 


« 


« 


• 




• 

a « 


£ T- 


-P 


O P 

H- 


o 

H' 


o 


Nh 


o 


o 





NO P 


d "M- 


•H 



P 



tp 




p 









P 


p 


£ 



■SO 


















CO • 


d 





















p 


3 

© 

; £ 



















0 p 



CQ 

o 



















£ 


a -p 

o 





o 












o 


o • 


o 

£ 

p 

P 


o 

p 

A? 

• r _ 


H - 


o 


p 




o 

ON c~ 


ch p 


£ 

0 

d 

T- 


p 

n}- 

NO 

IP 


T- 


NO 


p 




o 

o p 


0 P 


<H 

a 


* 


* 



» 




* 


« 




® 

a a 


POnH 


p 

0 

P 


o 

H- 


o 


P 


o 


o 




,— 

C" p 


r~~ 

d 

0 

•H 

d 

P 



fP 




P 









p • 


0 

0 

r-! 


CO 

SO 


















O d 

£ 

-p co 




















£ t£ 

*£ 

-p 


- £ 

















o 


0 d 

£ 

d 


O 





o 











o 

NO CM 


rb £ 

o 

o 


£ p 

o 


o 

O 


r _ 


T _ 


o 


p 




o 

NO Nt 


•H d 

»«=i 

i 



d £ 



p 

O 

NO 

CP 


CP 


NO 


p 




• 

* • 

m 

> o 


bn 


bo o 

* 


a 

• 


« 


* 


• 


• 




T— 

c~- p 


d 

£ 


rH a 

p 


o 

P 


o 


p 


o 


o 





p 

•H 

CH 

•H 

•rH 


d*£ 

p 



IP 




p 










d p o 


Pi 


o PH 

so- 












£ 

£ 


<9 


p 

O 


Pi 








p 



br 


*>5 

* 

•H 

0 

0 

• 

• * 

0 

0 

0 

•H 



• 





• d 

• 

» 


£ 

e 

d 

K o 


a 

•- 

• 

» <b 

<b 

0 P 

p 

Jd 



• 


• 

u 

• £ 



•H 

• 

d 

d p <d 


£ 


Tp £ 


0 d 

0 

CO 



a 

0 

• 

0 

* 0 

• 0 

• 


d 

* 


<H 

0 

£ 

d 

9 

d £ 

£ P £ 

O 




• 

P 

• 

Pi 

* Pi 

• bn 

* 


d 

• 

0 

•H 0 

0 

c 

a 

0 O 

o 

£ 0 

o 

<£ 



X* 

0 

• 



* £ 

♦ 


o%SH £ ch <£ 

0 

• 

Si P 

Vi 

£ co 

r 

o 



♦ 

o 

• 

p 

• p 

• d 

• 


i— i 


o 

td ^ 

P-s •* 



f-i 

o 



•H 





rH 

o 

• 

si 

• xi 

* si 

• 


0 

rH 

•« 

Ch 

0 

o 

p 

£ £ 

CM p: - 

«b 

IQ 



ctf 


• 

bn 

* bf> 

• o 

* 


£ 

i 

0 

0 

O 

rH 


0 

0 0 


P3> 

d 

-P 



0 »b 

• 

•H 

• -h 


• 


« 

0 p 

£ p 


d 



■P P 

• 

8 £ 

0 

0 



£ 

£ 

• 

0 

* 0 

• bp 

• 


d 

£ 

0 

O 0 

0 

0 fb 

0 

* -V 

o 


£ 

o 



P 

d rH 

£ 

» £ 

* £ 

• 


0 

P 

O 

O 

P 

a 

£ 

£ 

0 0 

}25 P 0 


o 



£ i>a d 

<H 

« «H 

• -H 

• 


0 

£ 

O 

£ o 

0 


d 

d 

0 0 


Si 0 

rb 




o 


0 


• 

• Jj 

• 



o 


£ 

O 

0 


«h £ £ 

P 

be £ 

rH 

rH 



S 

M 

£ 

rH 

* H 

• o rH 




0 

O rH 

O 

0 

0 «b 

0 0 

£ 

•H O 

O 

d 




o P 

d 

* d 

• P 

d 


br 


d Hd d 


a p 

b Pi P- 


£ 



o 

c 

£ 

£ 

* £ 

* .H 

0 


£ 

p 


® P, 

£ 

4 H 

£ 

O 

K M 



^3 

o 



p p 

o 

o 

• o 

* > 

£ 


•H 

d 

d p o 

0 p 

C 

£ 

0 0 

O PH fb 

0 

•H 




0 



* *H 

rb 0 P 


d 

• 

>, in .h 

^3 

•H 

£ rH 



* £ 


PP 



IQ 



P P P 

d 

£ 


d 

o r y 

P 

bo 

£ 


•rH 

rH rH 

0 PM d 

X 

•H 



P 

0 

p 

•H 

s -H 

0 0 

o 


o 

p 

o 

P »H 

•H 

d 

£ 

d 

d d 

0 



• rC 



IQ 

0 

d 

nc 

OfC ^ W 

|2? 


rH 

0 

o 

d to 


0 

£ P P 

CO 



O «b 



O 

0 


TO 

•b 

0 



£ 


p 






o o 


r— 


*sj <c! 





«*} 


IP 





CO 






EH EH 


-- 






























- 21 2 - 

The above figures are as presented in the minutes and 
though in part out of date serve to show the relevant 
costs involved. Rail freight per head from Alberta is 
incorrectly quoted and should read $12.60. Ocean freight 
should read on a basis of 60/ or $14.67 on the exchange 
rate as effective for Stirling in Montreal on the week 
ending December ^ r Jth t 1934 of $4.8921. Selling expenses 
in Great Britain at this present exchange rate should read 
20 / or $4.8921 , Revising these figures thus as they re¬ 
late in particular to the originating shipping points 
for the Short Grass Plains Area only the figures for 
Calgary-Edmonton, Saskatoon and Moose Jaw then read as 
follows: Total expense per head - $38.66, 38.09 and 37.87 
respectively. Total expense per pound - 3 * 31 , 3.46 and 
3.44 cents respectively. Additional Maritime shipping 
costs should read as follows: Costs to Montreal - $38,66, 
38.09 and 37*87 respectively. Less stock yard costs at 
Montreal totals - $37.96, 37.39 and 31*11 respectively. 
Total expense per head - $ 40 . 62 , 40.03 and 39.83 res¬ 
pectively. Total expense per pound - 3.69, 3.64 and 3.62 
cents respectively. It must be especially noted that 
rail freight cost is per pound while ocean freight cost 
is per head as is also selling cost in Great Britain, 
Animals under 1 ,000 pounds get a 1 0fo discount below the 
full transport cost. The total weight of the animal 
carried has thus a special bearing on the actual cost 














■ 

. 











* 












. 


: 

, 





t * 


~ 

. . 

. 












- 213 - 

per pound of the animal sold. The reason for the extra 
winter shipping cost by way of the Maritime ports is 
discernible from Chart 2, On this particular estimate 
this amounts to $1 .98 per head in each case. 

The following accounts of actual shipments in the 
month of September 1933 under the prevailing ocean rate 
of $12.00 indicate both on a per capita and gross basis 
the high percentage of transportation, handling and sell¬ 
ing costs in the gross returns. The following chart in¬ 
dicates the per capita expense on an actual shipment via 
Montreal to Birkenhead or Glasgow on cattle averaging 
slightly over 1 ,200 pounds: 

,j Canadian and British Charges Assessed Against Shipment 
of 80 Steers Shipped from an Alberta Ranch during S,ept- 


ember. 1953. _ __ 

Canadian Expenses. 

Rail Freight at $1.1 4*................ $13-91 

Feed charges en route... ....... 1 .343 

Feed and wharfage at Montreal,....... 1 .1 21 

Fodder on ship... 2.735 

Ropes, buckets, etc.,,. .. . 30 

Loading and marking, .. ,10 

Tagging..... .05 

Cattlemen 1 s wages .. . 55 

Stamps and cables .. 03 

Montreal brokerage at $17* per car... .85 

Ocean freight.. 12.00 

Marine insurance..................... .5 0 33*51 1 

British Expenses. 

Wharfag e........ ..... .19 

Landing.............................. .06l 

Veterinary inspection................ .081 

Lairage.............................. .809 

Droving,. .487 

Luck... 243 

Commission,.. 2.45 4.1 01 

Total of Canadian and British Expenses....... $57.61 2"ffj 

(1 ) Hon, George Hoadley - n The Live Stock Industry", Min¬ 


utes of Evidence presented before the Stevens Committee 
Blouse o.i* Commons, Ottawa,April 26,1 934, P# 26 




























- 















' 




* 

- 





. 




■ 






1 




1 



















On this shipment the average gross return per steer was 
$ 6 l .01 from which a deduction for expenses of $ 37.61 
left an average per capita return to the producer of 
$23.40 or a net return of $1 .932 per 100 pounds. This 
was a shipment of high quality stock. On rail freight 
alone a per capita cost of $ 3.98 per head would have 
been saved if the old tariff of 90 cents per 100 pounds 
prior to 1 9*21 had been in effect. The ocean rate of 
$ 12.00 is high in proportion to the value even of this 
good duality stock. It is even more out of line to-day 
at the rate of approximately $ 13 . 00 , especially in view 
of low cattle prices. 

There is an opinion that the Welsh market offers op¬ 
portunity for Increased Canadian export trade in live 
beef cattle.(1) Figures for the above shipment were 
verified and duplicated in every detail by a shipment in 
September 1933 from Medicine Hat to Cardiff, The average 
weight in this case was 1 ,212 pounds, and per head ship¬ 
ping cost $ 33.311 . 

The following detailed statement on a shipment from 
Lethbridge to Liverpool in September 1933 tabulates clearly 
the itemized costs as prevailing to-day on which at present 
prices the range producer of the Short Grass Plains must 
calculate his net income. This is a shipment with an 
average weight of 1 ,000 pounds which is more in line with 

present United Kingdom market demands and one whic h p a id 

(TTHTTs, Cole. 













. 

































4 










' 

( 

















• • 






- 213 - 

an ocean rate more in line with present exchange rates. 

It will he noted the net returns on this class of stock 
was considerably higher indicating the economic soundness 
of meeting market requirements which is always reflected 
in higher prices. This diipment is therefore soundly re¬ 
presentative of the export shipping situation to-day, 

“Cost of Shipping Twenty Head of Finished Cattle to 
Liverpool from Lethbridge . 

Rail freight, Lethbridge to Montreal,,., $229.00 


Cle aning car............................ .73 

Straw, etc, for car.*....,..*,.,,,,,..,. 3.00 

Sanding car,............................ 1.00 

Lethbridge: 6 bales hay.... 7 *5u 

2 bales straw,..,,..,*....... 1.30 

Moose Jaw: 3 bales hay.................. 2.13 

2 bales straw. 7.00 

Loading and Fire Insurance... 2.13 

Winnipeg; 7 Laies hay... 18.90 

2 bales straw.. 1 .30 

Loading and Fire Insurance,... 2.13 

White River: 517^ lbs. hay.*.. 6.47 

2 bales straw.............. 2.32 

Loading and Fire Insurance. 2.00 $ 287.39 

Stock Yards at Montreal: 

Loading and unloading cars.. 2.00 

Fire Insurance........................ .13 

Hay..... 1 9.78 21 .93 

Ocean Feed: 

40 bales hay at $1 2 . /2 0 00 lbs.........., 33.34 

2 y Q bales straw at $ 9 . 00/2000 lbs..,..,, 1 .33 

Crain feed.. 1 8.62 35.69 

Ocean Charges; 

Ropes.. 3.74 

Hails................................. 1.20 

Hatchets, forks, lanterns ............. ,50 

1 man... 1 .5 0 

Roping and marking.... 1 .50 

Wages 10 men. . .. 10.00 

Tagging at 5 cts per head,.............. 1 .00 

Shipping master at 5 cts per head,,,.... 1 .u0 

Marine insurance at $100. per head at 5/8^> 12.50 
Handling at 50 cts per head..,,.*,...,*. 10.00 4 2.94 

Ocean freight at $13.50 per head(prepaid) 270.00 

Total expenses to Liverpool............. $ 670 .15 

Cost per head. ... ,$33*30 
























































- 21 6 - 


B r ought For wa rd 


$678.13 


Charges in Great Britain (Liverpool) 
(Sold 1 3 head alive - 3 sold on hooks) 

Wharfage... 

Droving... . . . . 

Veterinary fees .... 

Gust oms............................... 

Slaughter house dues.................. 

Killing, carrying. ... 

St raw................................. 

Cartage of straw...................... 

Cartage... 

Refrigeration... 

Cables........ — ..... . . 

Commission. ..... 

Total cost of 20 head of catfctle.. . . . . . 


$12.13 


48.-60 98.1 4 


8.7 0 

2 . A 7 ) 

3.89 

2.43 

7.04 
4.86 
2.43 
1 .00 


2 .43 


2.18 



Total cost per head 
Total gross returns 
Total expenses. 


$ 38.82 


1 ,488.44 


Net returns ........ 

Net return per head 


$ 33 . 60 “ 


776 .29 

712 .15 


» I J 

(1 ) 


The above shipments hav© all been by way of Montreal 
or the Maritime ports of Halifax or St. John. 

A route as yet in the experimental stage but one of 
considerable potentiality is that of Hudson Bay ex Port 
Churchill. Shipments by this route have not yet reached 
sufficient volume to stabilize statistics but the follow¬ 
ing statement relevant to a test shipment late in 1933 ’ in¬ 
dicates the possibilities of this route as compared with 
the present costs by way of Montreal: 


(1 ) Department of Animal Husbandry, Lethbridge Experimen¬ 
tal Farm* September 1 933 , 



































’ 


. 








- 

, 

. ,. 


. 

: 























- 21 7 


'Montreal and Churchill Shipments Compared 



Montreal 

Montreal 

Churchill 


Heavy 

Light 

"Trial” 

Freight,feed,yardage to 
ship................... 

$ 17.28 

$8.99 

$5..59 

Ocean Feed: 

Hay and straw,. 1,90 


1.87 

3.61 

Grain,.,. .96 

2.86 

.94 2.81 

none fecL^.fel 

Rope,pails,tagging,etc. 

.32 

.34 

.47 

Ship T s wages........... 

.30 

.30 

.50 

Broker fees (handling). 

.30 

.30 

.23 

Marine Insurance....... 

.84 

.36 

2.90 

Ocean freight 

1 5.00 

1 3.50 

15.00 

Totals.............. 

P- 

$27.40 

$28.32' 


~itt 


The British selling costs are approximately the same no 
matter what route over is followed and averaged here $ 3.90 
per head or a total of $ 32,22 to market this consignment 
which amounted to 200 head from Alberta. The first item 
includes costs until placed on the ship. To make the 
Montreal heavy shipment more comparable it might be re¬ 
duced to $ 1 5 -86 being the result of a rate of $1 . 13 ^ from 
Prince Albert on steers weighing an average of 1 ,424 pounds. 
The actual shipment was from Alberta. Of this corrected 
total $ 13,43 would be freight and $2.41 would be feed and 
yardage for stops at Moose Jaw, Winnipeg, White River and 
Montreal. The Moose Jaw stop would be eliminated on a 
shipment from Prince Albert with an average saving of 82 
cents per head. Thus the total cost of a heavy shipment 
from Prince Albert to Montreal would average approximately 
$13.04 registering a saving in favor of the Churchill 
route of $9.43 per head. The Moose Jaw stop was also 
eliminated from the Montreal light shipment of feeder 


(1 ) Macdonald Holmes - statement in^ "TmT^Caspat ollewan 

Farcer" on shipment by Western Stock Growers 
Association. 








































. 

















♦ < 

’ 

' 


% 


























■ 

, 























- 









- 21 8 - 


cattle from Alberta thus accounting for the figure of 
$8.^9* Corrected to the Prince Albert to Montreal rate 
these cattle would cost for the first item approximately 
$ 8.92 per head on 700 pound animals showing a saving of 
$ 2.70 in favor of the Churchill route. It will he noted 
the two highest cost items are hay and insurance. Trans¬ 
portation of feed to this port adds to its cost and the 
hazards of the route due to its northern location account 
for high insurance rates. The route however is cooler 
and therefore more suitable for summer and early fall 
shipments of stock. It is also considerably shorter - 
approximately 200 miles over the Montreal-Liverpool route. 
The large grain storage elevator provides an ample supply 
of grain for feed or for supplemental cargo. Yardage 
though yet limited could easily be extended and"improved® 
Most recent statistics relevant to the Hudson Bay Route 
as compared with shipments ex Montreal or St. John re¬ 
veal the possibilities of the route in no uncertain man¬ 
ner. Itemized transportation costs show little variation 
over various routes. The total per capita cost is the 
basic ultimate factor in determining the economy of any 
route. The following recent statistics on shipments re¬ 
veal the route relationship on this basis. On a total 
of 11 shipments ex Montreal or St. John to Glasgow in¬ 
volving 252 head the total per capita transportation cost 
was $434.27 or $4i.29 per head average. On a total of 4 



























' 



















































- 21 9 - 


shipments by the same route to Birkenhead covering 263 
head the total per capita cost was $ 163.47 or $40.86 per 
head average. On one shipment to the Smithfield Market 
at London of 147 head the average expense was $ 38.60 per 
head. On all 16 shipments the grand total average shipping 
expenses per head was therefore $40.23. On 3 shipments 
made in the autumn months of 1934 ex Montreal to the 
United Kingdom market the average per capita expense was 
$41 .34. On 3 shipments ex Port Churchill in October 1933, 
August 1934 and October 1934 the per capita shipping costs 
were $38.10, $ 38.80 and $40.76 respectively, showing a cost 
of $ 39.22 per head average. Compared with the total aver¬ 
age shipping expense per head ex Montreal or St. John on 
the first 1 6 shipments this shows a balance in favor of 
Port Churchill of $40.23 — $ 39.22 or $ 1 . 03 . With respect 
to the last 3 shipments ex Montreal the balance in favor 
of Port Churchill is $41 .34 — $ 39.22 or $ 2 . 32 . It is 
thus proved that even with the much higher insurance rates 
and ocean rates the Hudson Bay Route is cheaper. The 
ocean rate on the August shipment ex Port Churchill was 
73/6 and on the October 1934 shipment was 77/6, consider¬ 
ably higher than the Montreal rate of 60/. The Churchill 
rate could be lowered still further if regular volume 
traffic could be diverted through this route. One among 
other items that could be so reduced is insurance. This 
could be taken out at a lower rate on a number of shipments 













- 




, 










. 

, 






5 




. 

- 

























- 22 0 - 

if these were guaranteed. The route also reflects less 
shrinkage in cattle.(1) 

To account for the small volume of traffic over this 
route to date it must he horne in mind that in addition 
to the above deterrent factors, the port of Churchill does 
not enjoy regular boat service. If volume could be in¬ 
creased the service might be obtained but there would 
still be disadvantage of a frozen port for approximately 
8 months of the year. This will always be one, if not 
the most vital, deterrent factor in this route. The United 
Kingdom market demands a supply throughout the year. The 
Montreal and New Brunswick routes are in a much better 
position to cater to that demand. Furthermore these 
routes are well established and fully equipped and com¬ 
petition with them by the newer route is difficult to make 
effective. 

With respect to live cattle it would appear therefore 
that transportation costs are the principal factor in 
marketing live stock after they are ready for the market. 
The expense of transportation handling and selling often 
amounts to 50fo of the gross returns on high grade stock 
and over this percentage on lower grade stock. The West¬ 
ern Stock Growers 1 Association are on record as stating 
that out of 4,000 head marketed by that organization in 

1953 the majority had transportation, handling and selling 

(1) Compiled on statistics contributed by Saskatchewan 

Co-operative Livestock Producers Ltd., per J.C.Haclmey. 































< . 












. 























, 
























221 


costs in correspondence with the above percentages. Men 
in the business with long experience as well as G-overnment 
officials are at one on that point, “The transportation 
cost is the biggest individual item in the marketing of a 
car of live stock” .(1) Suggestions for improvement would 
seem to lie in establishing feed lot rates, feeding-in¬ 
transit rates and through export rates, with a reduction 
in the domestic rate from the Short G-rass Plains Area from 
$1 .1 4 1 /2, $1 .1 3 1 /2 and $1 ,1 0 1 /2 to ?0 cents ex Montreal 
The ocean rate should also be brought more into line with 
these reductions. Stock yard charges - especially as to 
feed - commission charges, unloading ana loading charges 
should also be scaled downwards. This would probably nec¬ 
essitate assistance to G-overnment controlled stock yards 
which to date they have not asked for, but such assistance 
could do much in the adjustment or removal of present bar¬ 
riers. Items like condemnation insurance and shrinkage 
charges could he taken care of if a national grading and 
veterinary inspection service were established to grade 
cattle and beef on a basis of quality as well as Purity 
for both the domestic and export market. 

Canada ! s main hope on the export market is in live 
cattle but the chilled meat trade is not negligible and 

reference may here briefly be made to the situation now 

(1) J.M.McCallum - “Proceedings of the Standing Committee 

on Agriculture and Forestry,1 933"* Minutes of Evidence 

Senate of Canada, p. 33* 







































- 

















. 













■ 


. 


' 















_ 









222 


prevailing. Shipping of chilled meat to England is not 
a profitable business. This has been apparent as far back 
as 1 923 and beyond. Transportation costs in Canada on 
dressed beef are higher than on live cattle being at 
present from Winnipeg to Montreal for dressed beef $1 .11 
per 100 pounds while for live cattle that rate is 83 cents. 
Producers' of live cattle object to a decrease in the 
dressed meat rate as it would endanger their business 
still further. A rate reduction in one would most cer¬ 
tainly lead to a demand for reduction in the other. This 
fresh meat rate is claimed also to be so out of line with 
Jhe live stock rate and so low, as to permit the eastern 
packer using western cattle to undersell the western 
packer .(1 ) 

In 1923 a shipment of 30 steers killed and shipped 
as chilled meat from Montreal to London realized "'a gross 
price of $ 3.93 per cwt. on the live weight at Montreal. 
After taking into account the expenses of shipping to 
Montreal, it realized a net price of only $ 2.96 per cwt. 

The price the meat sold for in London was 4s,23gd. per 
stone or 12 1/2 cents per pound for hind-iuarters and 
2 s.^d. per stone or 6 cents per pound for fore-Quarters». 
(2) This experiment confirmed in 1 926 reflected very low 
prices due to heavy Argentine shipments at the time, a 

dull retail market, and to a lack of knowledge and study 

(1 ) Hon.Geo.Eoadley - "The Live Stock Industry* Evidence 

presented before the Stevens Committee,April 1934,1123' 
(2) Department 0 f Agriculture,Canada, "How Should Canada 

Export Beef Cattle”, pamphlet IJo.39,* l ew series,p.11 , 

1 92 3 « 







































. 

' 






/ 













- 

- 









- 223 - 

of the market previously. The meat was also improperly 
wrapped and spoiled slightly on re-shipment from Liverpool 
to London. It should have been landed direct at London. 

In 1926 the comment on an identical shipment was - “To 
summarize this phase of the experiment, it may he said that i, 
the chilled beef shipment gave a decidedly poor return due 
to lack of uniformity in weight of carcasses; lack of 
knowledge of requirements of the Smithfield Market as re¬ 
gards manner of slaughtering, trimming and Quartering; and 
being sold on a very low market due to the dumping of Argen¬ 
tine chilled beef. Even had these agencies not been at 
work, the expense of shipping chilled beef coupled.with 
the low returns for It as compared with the return for the 
live animals, makes the profitable shipment of chilled bear , 
practically impossible ".(1 ) 

Modern methods in the chilled meat trade and relevant 
costs as they relate to the United Kingdom market are ap¬ 
parent from the following statements. This information 
concerns a typical shipment of 7 quality baby beef car¬ 
casses or 14 sides shipped from St. Boniface, Manitoba to 
the Liverpool market. This shipment was made late in 1933 | 

or early in 1934. 

"Dressing ; 

Beef for the English Market is especially dressed. 

The chin bone must not be scribed. The flank should not 
(1 ) Department of Agriculture, Dominion of Canada,Experim¬ 
ental Farms Branch - Shipping Cattle to Britain", 
Bulletin No. 62, new Series, p. 13 , 1926 . 








































■ 



























■ 










. 


















224 


be dropped as is customary with Beef for the Canadian 
trade and they do not want the Beef shrouded. Otherwise, 
the dressing is the same as for the Canadian trade. 
Chilling : 

In order that the animal heat should be completely 
removed, it is desirable to chill the Beef for at least 
36 hours and if possible for 48 hours , 

Shipping : 

The Hind quarter is severed from the forequarter 
leaving three bones on the hind -(10 bones on the Front) 
each quarter is weighed separately, graded, wrapped in a 
cheesecloth sack, then in a burlap sack, sewing the sack 
tightly and neatly around the Beef. Tag showing the grade 
and the weight is attached and similar information sten¬ 
cilled on the burlap sack. 

Loadin g: 

it is desirable to have the Beef loaded in refrig¬ 
erator cars as quickly as possible so that the Beef will 
not be affected by the outside temperature. The Beef is, 
of course, hung In the car and a temperature of from 28 
to 34 degrees maintained while enroute to seaboard. 

Loading on Steamship : 

Each quarter is hung in the boat chamber and it is 
the custom to load the Hinds on one side of the chamber 
and the Fronts on the other side. A temperature of from 
28 to 32 degrees is maintained but it Is desirable to 
keep the temperature around 29 degrees if at all possible. 




























- 
















MTJU 

■ 










Costs . 

... •03^c 

...-. 59.4fo 

........ 9.26 per 

stateme nt .85 c " 


- 225 . 

Statement of 

Live cost of Baby Beef... 

Dressing percentage... 

Gross Dressed Cost............... 

By-Product value, as per attached 

Net cost... 

Out of pocket expenses (killing and 

chilling)... 

Out of pocket costs,f.o.b. Winnipeg..... 

Cost of wrapping in cheese cloth and 
burlap................................ 

Icing car or protecting against frost... 

Inland freight.......................... 

Ocean freight........................... 

Landing charges - Customs,entry,cartage, 
carriage,tolls and our Agent T s commis¬ 
sion for supervising. 

Shrinkage.. 

Total shipping expense... 

Total cost delivered.................... 

Selling price,... 

Less, seller T s commission....... 

Net price realized.... .5 1 3 / 16 d 

Equivalent, at $5.00 rate of exchange 
Loss per 1 00 lbs....... 

By-Product Test Covering 35 Yearling Cattie 

Hides : 

10 No.1 Light Native Steer Hides, 492 lbs. at .07 


100 lbs 


8.41 

ri 

rr- it- 


If 

M H 

8776 

If 

it rr 

,17 

TT 

if ri¬ 

.06 

II 

ft 11 

1.11 

If 

If ri 

1 ,62 

rr 

TT If - 

.55 

ii 

rr ri 

.05 


IT II 

iiSi 

rr 

tt rr 

12.32 

6 a 

3 / 1 6a 

per 

lb. 

13 / 1 6a 

12.09 per 

1 00 lbs 

• 23 

11 

rr- it- 


Extreme 

II 


2 No.2 
7 No .1 
1 No.2 

5 No .1 Light Branded Steer 


No.2 
No.1 
No.2 


Native Cow Hides 

ir tr rr 


1 03 
281 
43 
21 3 
36 
202 


TT at .06 


at 

at 

at 

at 

at 


08 

07 

05^3 

08 ^ 


Total value...................... 

or $ 3.18 per head. 

Edible Fats : 

Edible tallow produced - 591 lbs, 
or '.65 per head. 

Casings; 

3 sets wide beef middles........ 

8 sets regular beef middles...., 

1 set wide beef rounds.......... 

33 sets medium beef rounds......, 

% set domestic beef rounds...... 

28 pieces wide beef bungs.-... 

5 pieces med. beef bungs,.. 

33 special casings............... 

33 regular weasands.............. 

33 medium bladders 

Total value of casings,.$29•30 or 


00 

CO 

ft 

at . 07 ^ 

at 3 

5/8 

c 

at $1 

.13 

per set 

at 

.90 

in it? 

at 

• 45 

TTf IT; 

at 

,30 

itr IT' 

at 

.29 

rr rr 

at 

• 17 

each 

at 

• 13 

if 

at 

.03 

«• 

at 

• 02 '2 _ “ 

at 

• 30 

dozen 

, 89 c 

per 

head. 


$1 05.1 0 


21 .43 





































' 




' 


“ • 

- 

, 




























- 226 - 


Fancy Meats : 

Beef liver, 237 lbs ... .03 

Beef Tongues, 11 3 lbs... .08 

Beef Hearts ,72 lbs. ..... , 02 

Beef cheeks, 83 lbs,.... ,02 

Beef head meat, 1 0 lbs. ............... , 01 Y z 

Beef tongue trimmings, 17 lbs... .01 % 

Uncleaned beef tripe, 304 lbs......... .01^ 

Beef Weasandmeat, 1 2 lbs, ............. ,02 

Ox tails, 34 lbs....... . ,03 

Beef sweetbreads, 10 lbs.. .07 


Total value of Fancy Meats...$ 34 .80 or $1,03 per head. 
Total value of By-products... 190.62 or $ 3.77 per head. 
Less expenses in processing By-products 73.22 or 
$ 2.28 per head. 

Net value of By-Products, $113.40 or $3.49 per head. 
This is equivalent to eighty-five per hundred on the 
weight of the dressed meat f! .(1 ) 




The domestic marketing of by-products as given above 


would apply on the average per 1 00 pounds to the shipment 
of 7 baby beef carcasses. The only by-products not covered 


above are the inedible fats, bones, horns and hoofs for 


which there is no profitable market at the present time. 


On the more usual shipments of beef from fair quality 
plain grass steers shipped to the Smithfield market the 


demand was for better quality and an increase in quarter 


weights from 140 pounds to 175 or 200 pounds. The baby 


beef consignment had an average weight for sides of 222' 
pounds. The demand was strong for this quality of beef 


but in somewhat heavier sides. 

These experiments prove that Canada can prepare and 
ship chilled meat of desired quality to the United Kingdom 
market but it is not as profitable as the live cattle trade. 

Furthermore Canada in this trade has to face a virtual 

(1) Contributed by Canada Packers Limited,per W7 b. Tranter* 





























. 


: 


, 

- 























































- 227 - 


monopoly of the market by Argentine which country has 
specialized over a long term of years in the ohilled meat 
business and more recently in the chilling-in-transit 
business, English invested capital in Argentine further¬ 
more operates against the Canadian meat producer. Canad¬ 
ian transportation costs, particularly as related to the 
Short G-rass Plains Area of the west are comparatively high 
both for live cattle and any export meat products from 
this area. This is due largely to the long rail haul as 
compared with the short rail haul in Argentine and long 
ocean haul. The cattle areas of Argentine are close to 
the export ports and her meat processing is highly devel¬ 
oped and close to the source of raw material. These facts 
only further serve to indicate that in Canada the general 
level of beef cattle quality must be high in keeping with 
the general level of transportation costs. 












CHAPTER VI 


THE EXPORT MARKET 

Maintenance of a steady export market is a vital nec¬ 
essity to range "beef cattle production in the Short Grass 
Plains Area as indeed it is to the beef cattle industry 
over the whole of Canada. Specific statistics as to the 
volume and type of export marketings as compared with dom¬ 
estic marketings in relation to beef cattle only are not 
available. Percentage relationship in this connection is 
a matter of divided opinion but common estimation in the 
industry places export marketings at approximately 1596 
and domestic marketings at 85 Owing to the congested 
condition of the domestic market due to surplus produc¬ 
tion the small export percentage continues to exercise a 
dominating influence. Speaking of the outlook in 1933 for 
1934 the Federal Department of Agriculture stated - "The 
export market for beef and live cattle is bound to be a 
controlling factor, and should Great Britain’s efforts to 
improve live cattle prices for the British farmer be 
successful, the situation would be most favourable for 
Canadian cattle imports. The voluntary restriction of our 
novement into the British market to the movement of the 
corresponding quarters of 1933 does not appear at the 
moment to be particularly detrimental, in view 1 of an ap¬ 
parently moderate volume of exportable qualities of cattle. 
Naturally, any restriction is irksome, even though ultim- 

- 228 - 









. 

- 














;: x - J ' 




■ • 


-■■ ■ • - .... „ v O . .-I 


■ 

- 

■ 




























- 







- 229 - 


ately It may prove a help rather than a hindrance 1 ’. {1 ) 

With respect to the United Kingdom market it has also been 
stated - “'The relative sales value of cattle in Canada and 
the United Kingdom, and a very favourable exchange situa¬ 
tion, were responsible for a substantial increase in our 
exports of live cattle, luring 1935 we shipped to the 
United Kingdom 30,317 head, as compared with 16,368 in 
1 932 . The total value of the exports in 1 933 is given as 
$3,198,194, or almost $ 2 ,000 ,000 more than in 1 932 . A 
very good boat service was secured, and shipments were 
remarkably steady in volume throughout the year. Brices 
were not such as to secure a very large net profit, but 
at the same time were sufficient as to compare well with 
those existing on the home market. The removal of these 
cattle from domestic consumption was a stimulating factor 
in our market. 

"The movement of cattle during 1 934 has so far been 
under voluntary restriction to the volume exported during 
the same periods of 1933 * An export from Canada during 
1 934 of the same volume as during the previous year would 
serve to strengthen the domestic market here 1 ’.( 2 ) The 
domestic cattle market is peculiarly sensitive to the ex¬ 
port situation and any easement in that direction has an 
enhanced bearing on the home market. The temporary outlet 

obtained in the United States in. the early part of 1 935 
(1 ) (2) Annual Market Review’, 1 933, Department of Agricul¬ 
ture, Live Stock Branch, Dominion of Canada, 
Ottawa, pp. 12 - 14. 






__ 









. 
















' 









■ 








• 























I 







- 230 - 

caused an almost immediate rise in prices on local west¬ 


ern markets. An outlet for finished range cattle, through 
drought conditions in the Western States enabled the v/est- 
Canadian producer to ship over the high tariff wall and 
selling at 6 cents or over still make a profit on the 
Chicago market. Prices for stock yard cattle, 1 choice 7 to 
good 1 butcher steers rose on the Calgary market between 
February 1 9th and March 6th, 193b from $4.23 - $9*23 to 
$4.73 - $6.23* No domestic factor occurred to cause that 
increase. It was reaction to sudden release of pressure 
on the domestic situation. These facts must continue to 
have a vital bearing on the production of beef cattle in 
the Short G-rass Plains of Canada where stock of desired 
quality is so largely produced both for home consumption 
and for export. It is demand and supply that primarily 
regulates price in the beef cattle industry. The slight¬ 
est increase in demand on the export market has a magnif¬ 
ied effect on domestic prices. Effective demand is the 
vital factor. As soon as this increases prices will be¬ 
gin to respond. "It is ----- the consumers 1 outlay which 
is the proximate cause in the determination of prices. 
Demand ijs the consumers 1 outlay". (1 ) Purchasing power 
of the consumer as reflected in effective demand and as 

met by effective production are the significant determin¬ 
ants of price. Effective production is that which can 
(1 ) R.Gf rHawtr^y”!™ 7 ’’Cur’r"en'ey 'lind Credit" . p. 39—- 













' 




. 










■ 

. 
















* 






■ 

j . . 








- 231 - 

meet costs and overcome deterrant factors so as to enable 
placing of the product on the market to meet the demand. 
The domestic market is overstocked with a more or less 
static demand. The export market in the United Kingdom 
is under constant quota regulation subject to short per¬ 
iodic revision which creates a highly unstable situation. 
The place and form of consumption is secondary in import¬ 
ance in the beef cattle industry at present - volume de¬ 
mand and outlet is vital. Over-production on the range 
is due to the antiquated government regulations which are 
based on an obsolete carrying capacity of *30 acres whereas 
the actual capacity is nearer 30 acres per animal unit. 
Provided production costs can be met domestic price levels 
in the range beef cattle industry are highly sensitive to 
export and domestic demand in any form. The reaction to 
demand need not necessarily be simultaneous but it will 
take effect in this case almost at the outset and it must 
not be forgotten that the industry is one concerned with a 
perishable commodity. Out of a total of 33,006 head ex¬ 
ported to the United Kingdom in 1933, Alberta alone con¬ 
tributed 1 0,488 head or a total of 19-79 t&«( 1 ) In addition 
to this figure, each year a number of Alberta feeder stock 
are sent to Ontario feed lots and re-exported overseas 
from that Province under Ontario export statistics. The 

same is true of Saskatchewan and the Short Grass Plains 

(1) Hon. George Hoadley - ,f The Live Stock Industry”. 
Minutes of Evidence presented before the Stevens 
Committee of the House of Commons, Ottawa, April 
26th, 1934, p. 4. 










































* 



























. 

■ 








- 














- 232 - 


generally. The Western Stock Growers 1 Association alone 
in 1931 marketed in the United Kingdom 7,000 head out of 
a total of 20,000 marketed in that year. In 1933 the same 
organization marketed 4,000 head all except 300 head com¬ 
ing direct from western ranches.( 1 ) With an increase in 
cattle inventory, particularly in the west, out of all 
proportion to the very slight increase in human popula¬ 
tion in Canada, the range cattle industry is therefore 
vitally interested in maintaining a steady export outlet. 
Restricted exports have a depressing effect on domestic 
heef cattle price levels, especially when the domestic 
market has been suffering over a period of years from a 
gradually increasing surplus of beef cattle. 

There is only one export outlet as the mainstay of 
the export beef cattle industry to-day and that is the 
United Kingdom. Other outlets are of only minor present 
importance. Before analysing market conditions however 
certain fundamental principles of export marketing prac¬ 
tice should be considered as they relate to the beef 
cattle industry. 

A constant knowledge of the market is absolutely 
essential. The producer must have his agents on the mar¬ 
ket constantly in touch with consumer demand. Market 

study to be wholly effective must enable the cattle 
( 1 ) Western Stock Growers’ Association - ‘‘The Western 

Canada Cattle Industry”, brief presented to a Special 
Committee of the House of Commons,March 23rd*1934. 

P. 6. 















- 233 - 

producer to forecaste market trends sufficiently accurately 
and sufficiently far in advance for him to he able to or¬ 
ganize his production practice to meet the demand when it 
arises. This applies to any producer, large or small, 
who is in the business of exporting. The smaller producer 
does not necessarily have to have his own full time agents 
but may utilize the services of market experts who are 
acting for other producers. The essential fact is that no 
producer can afford to neglect a close and continual study 
of his market if he intends to cater to its demand or 
follow an efficient and profitable production and market¬ 
ing policy. The producer must also realize that he is 
only one = though granted an important one - of the many 
economic agencies in the beef camtle industry. Efficient 
market; study will include a constant knowledge of the 
functioning of the various middlemen agencies including 
governmental regulation and financing, which exist be¬ 
tween himself and the ultimate consumer. The consumer T s 
purchasing power as well as his particular and. ever chang¬ 
ing requirements are the vital concern of the wise producer 
In this manner the producer and exporter will obtain a 
wider view and a more just appreciation of his own position 
as a factor in the economic welfare of society. In this 
connection the exporter should co-operate in every way 
with the Government Trade Commissioners and any agencies 
which in any way can be of assistance to him, Eis own 
agents should co-operate with the Trade Commissioners 








■ 






































■ 

. 

■ 























- 234 - 


whose business it is to laiow their market demands and 
interpret them to the Canadian exporter. The. value of 
such a practice is well shown to-day when it is now an 
established fact that the United Kingdom market, demands 
well•finished light weight cattle ranging from 900 to 
1,100 pounds. High quality baby beef of this type is in 
the highest demand and fetches the highest price. The 
tendency in this market has been in this direction for 
some years past. It is now so important that for the past 
1 0 years the western range producer has been gradually re¬ 
vising his whole ranch organization to meet it. It must 
be worth while to do that and Is important enough to nec¬ 
essitate such reorganization. Apart from particular cases 
it is contended generally however by the cattle producer 
that the proportionate return from the higher price Is 
not handed back to the producer to cover his additional 
cost of production and allow him a reasonable share in 
the excess profits. Additional grain and, other feed lot 
costs, often in the face of rising grain prices durirg; 
the finishing period, require a market price sufficiently 
high to cover these and afford a proportionate share in 
excess profits to the agencies whose costs have been in¬ 
creased, Producers contend that distribution and middle¬ 
men agencies absorb more than their proportionate share 
of profit as the result of the higher price, leaving the 
producer at a disadvantage and without a sufficient incen¬ 
tive to produce the quality commanding a higher price. 















■ 




. 

















' 












































- 233 - 

In the interests of all agencies concerned and of society 
as a whole the higher price obtained for higher quality 
should he distributed proportionately among the agencies 
of production and distribution on the basis of cost and 
risk. The market would then be better served and all ag¬ 
encies more fairly treated* Some have even gone so far 
as to regard the ability to meet this trend as the solu¬ 
tion of Canada 1 s cattle problem* u Not only the domestic 
market in Canada and the export market in Great Britain 
but the market in the United States which we hope to 
again have opened to us at some future time, all demand 
this well-finished, light weight beef and everything tends 
to indicate that the demand for this quality material will 
continue and increase rather than diminish as time goes 
on' 1 . (1 ) 

Knowledge of the market is useless unless there is 
ability to meet Its demands. That calls for organization* 
In the case of range production of beef cattle this is a 
highly complicated matter. The industry is one built up 
only over a long term of years, with a heavy capital in¬ 
vestment, much of which is in fixed charges and the pro¬ 
duct itself is a perishable commodity. The ranching bus¬ 
iness is essentially individualistic. Each ranch has its 
own geographical and economic area and must in great meas¬ 
ure stand or fall on its own merits. Ranch policy must 

first suit the local conditions. In suite of these facts, 

nT’^rof. T7M7"‘S{iaW.- -^——— — ~— 














' 

' 




■ 










. 












- 2^6 - 

or more probably because of them, the range producer must 
strive to co-operate with his neighbour and as fellow part¬ 
ners in the vital business of exporting to a common market 
strive together to build up a goodwill for Canadian beef 
cattle by producing and exporting the best quality demanded ' 
by the market* At the same time care must be taken to 
build up a ranch policy which will be as flexible as pos¬ 
sible and cattle Inventory so regulated as to be most 
readily and effectively adaptable to changes in market 
demand. The ^resent reorganization being carried out to 
meet the demand for light weight young cattle is the best 
example of the functioning of this principle. The Canad¬ 
ian live stock industry is not so regional as to prohibit 
the production of a standard quality product from each 
and every production area. The known high quality of 
Short Grass Plains stock easily enables this area to fit 
in with a scheme national In scope to export a high quality 
or desired quality product. In fact this area can well 
set the standard for quality. 

A factor which the cattle industry cannot continue to 

ignore is that of co-operation. For some years past there 
' 

has been antagonism between the cattle producer and the 
packer. There is among western range cattle producers 
themselves divided opinion on the advisability of this 
attitude. The packing industry Is charged by many producers 
with taking advantage of intense organization, a heavy 






















. 

















. 













. 

■ 

. 














- 237 - 

working capital investment and utilization of its own 
feed lots in competition with feeding organizations, to 
exercise an unfair control over stock yard prices. It is 
contended that fluctuation in stock yard prices is largely 
due to the packing interests making varied short term 
purchases such as day to day or week to week and then may 
stay off the market for a further period hy drawing 
supplies from their own feed lots. The packer also buys 
directly outside the stock yard market and ships direct to 
his feed lots or to his plant. It is contended the packer 
has thus two means of profit at his disposal. In direct 
purchases the packers are not required to purchase on a 
"basis of grade as they would he on the public stock yard. 

By way of passing hack to the primary producer a more 
equitable share in profits it is suggested hy the producer 
that packers in direct purchase or in transactions on their 
own yards he required to conform to all rules applying to 
public stock yards. Packers 1 purchase and sale prices 
should he published, scale tickets issued and prices placed 
on a grade or quality basis. This vrould tend to stabilize 
prices and enable the producer to more effectively co-re- 
late his production costs to his market price. It is 'not 
suggested that packers be prohibited from direct purchase 
as the producer is entitled to sell to whom he wishes but 
the packer should be controlled. The packer to the extent 
that he is a free agent, especially with reference to 







- 






. 

















. 























- 









' 

























- 238 - 

operation of his own feed lots, is in a position to drive 
down prices to producers and make an enhanced cost on the 
processed product. This does not necessarily mean monopoly 
control of prices. The producer is not forced to Sell to 
the packer. By force of circumstances however and being 
largely unorganized the producer may he at a disadvantage 
in "bargaining with the highly organized packing concern. 

(1 ) On hehalf of the producer it is claimed the packers 
in Canada in 1932 paid $66,000,000 for animals and mater- 
erials and $ 10 , 000,000 in wages. Plant value of products 
was $91 , 000,000 giving a gross return of $1 5 , 000 , 000 * 
Capital investment was $33,000,000 of which $34,000,000 
represented land, build.ings and machinery. A return of 
$ 13 , 000,000 on a capital investment of $ 33 , 000,000 allows 
a gross return of 33 / 0 . (2) It is claimed this would allow 
a substantial net profit which is not shared with the 
primary producer of the raw material. Nevertheless on 
behalf of the packing industry it is duly recognized that 
indispensable services are rendered generally In a most 
efficient manner, especially in those establishments under 
government inspection. The packer must not fail to re cog- 

nize the part Played by the producer of his raw material 

(1 ) Hon. George Hoadley - a ’The live Stock Industry**. 

Minutes of Evidence presented before the Stevens 

Committee, House of Commons, Ottawa, April 26 th, 

1 934, pp. 8 - 21 . 

( 2 ) op. cit. p. 9 . 








- 






' 








■ 




































■ 

. 


. 





- 

















- 239 - 


nor must the producer under-estimate packer services. 
Representative packer opinion states - 

‘•It is evident that the best results all round can 
he obtained only by effective and harmonious co-operation 
between Farmer and Packer* Unfortunately such co-operation!'' 
has not yet been achieved. This is not due to innate vice 
on either side. It is due to imperfect understanding. 

“In the past a certain lack of confidence has marked 
the attitude of the Farmer towards the Packer. This is un¬ 
fortunate for the Packer inasmuch as it has subjected him 
to spasmodic criticism. But the penalty of it falls 
chiefly on the Farmer. 

“The duty of all interested in the Canadian Live 
Stock Industry is to bring about an atmosphere of con¬ 
fidence and harmonious co-operation between the Famer, 
who produces the Live Stock, and the Packer who sells it. 

n The opinion is still expressed at times that the 
Packer takes an unfair toll by way of Profit. The --- 
$12,000,000.00 --- which the Canadian Farmer loses (or 
fails to make) each year on Hogs alone, is more than the 
total profits of the Canadian Packing Industry in the 
last fifteen years ,T .(1 ) 

The item of $1 2,000,000 refers to the statement that in 
the case of hogs if the Canadian producer had raised the 

quality of his hogs to one more approaching that o f . 

(1 ) J.S.McLean - Seventh Annual Report and Balance Sheet 

of Canada Packers Limited as at March 29th,1934,p.1 0. 








- 































































. 




















- 



















240 


Danish hogs he would have received an additional 
$12,000,000 on the marketing of 6,000,000 hogs. 

In view of the more intensive organisation of the 
packing industry generally, of its financial strength and 
its T safe-guarded f position in purchasing its raw mater¬ 
ial as opposed to the unorganized and financially weak 
position of the primary range producer it would seem that 
the onus is upon the packer rather than the producer of 
establishing an equitable share in the reward of industry. 
It is not only a matter of adjustment of cost, it is also 
a matter of assumption of risk. In the interests of the 
industry and of economic welfare generally it is advisable 
in the treatment of either item to avoid monopoly on the 
one hand and excessive competition on the other. Suffic¬ 
ient decentralization in the packing industry by permitting 
more independent firms to remain in business in order to 
promote a healthy competition is advisable. Transfer of 
additional risk from the packer to the producer in order 
to allow the packer to operate on a smaller margin, even 
if feasible does not seem justified owing to the unpro¬ 
tected position of the range producer and to the high 
amount of risk he is already bearing. With reference to 
improvement of quality it must be borne in mind additional 
costs are involved. What applies to hogs in this respect 
applies also to cattle, "The —- $1 2,000, OuO.00 - — per 
year mentioned above is only part of the penalty suxfared 

















' 




. 


■ 













, 




















’ f ■ " “ 













241 


by the Farmer for an imperfect ^realization of the market¬ 
ing problems of Canadian Live Stock. The Packer receives 
the Live Stock from the Farmer. He sells the product to 
the Consumer. His position as middleman imposes on him 
the duty of advising the Producer the kind of products 
for which the Consumer will pay the highest price. And no 
one else can do this so well.”(1 ) The producer in the 
past has not been as efficient in marketing as he might 
have been. A greater amount of producer co-operation and 
a more thorough appreciation of mutual problems as be¬ 
tween producer-packer and other middlemen will go far to 
establishing efficiency to the benefit of general welfare. 
It is a matter of individual and group interest in many 
cases behind all of which lies the spur of the profit 
motive. If there was a little less emphasis throughout 
the industry, and in all indust rites to-day, on the urge 
to make money profit out of it, and a little more emphasis 
on the prid.e of achievement in producing a worth while 
product, there would be less faction and greater harmony. 
Each agency would not only benefit more than at present, 
but commercial ad.vantage would be more equitably divided 
and greater general stability would follow. The maximum 
efficiency of the Canadian cattle industry can only be 
attained when all these agencies from the producer to the 
ultimate consumer abandon any selfish motives they may 

possess and if necessary make individua l sacrif l.ce^^fpX^—. 

(1 ) J.S. McLean, op. cit. p. 















































' 






. ? 






. 

‘ 


' 







242 - 


the good of all. j| 

There is here a role to he played hy the state. If 
Government is to enter more fully into business, as it 
seems inevitably it must, then in the live stock industry 
it should endeavour by process of careful guidance to foster" 
a necessary harmony and co-operation between the various 

II 

production and distribution agencies which at present does 
not exist to the most desirable extent. Such assistance 
based on sound knowledge of the problems involved will be 
well repaid by increased economic health in the industry. 

A final factor is that of catering to the market. 

This is not a casual or momentary thing but a principle 
to be observed continually as long as the market is to be 
served. Changing demand and characteristic demand must 
be studied and met. The human element is vital. Whims 
and fancies rank with statistics here. Human desire how- 
ever odd will remain to be satisfied. Quality and purity 
of product, degree of finish, method of preparation, 
means and conditions of transport, quantity and price are 
some of the factors to be considered. Most of these 
factors are self-explanatory. Those of quality and quan¬ 
tity must especially not be loosely considered. Quality 
is that which is to suit your market. It does not neces¬ 
sarily mean top quality only. Quality or grade must be 
such as will economically bear the cost of processing and 

of transportation and must of course be pure for human 

consumption. There may however well exist in the export 

' 





















- 































• 



• 



- 







. 

. 














* 





- 243 - 

or domestic market regional quality demand. Such is true 
of the United Kingdom market where the Jewish population, 
the iron and steel workers, and the leisure classes all 
present a market for different grades of beef. This does 
not mean that we should ship low class cattle. Our qual¬ 
ity should be the best which the market demands but what 
it does mean is that the poorer grades of cattle should 
not be mixed with the best grade of cattle and offered 
indiscriminately to any market. The market should be 
studied and contacts made with the agencies representing 
the particular region of the market to be served, and if 
at all possible cattle shipments should retain their 
identity en route to serve that particular market. In 
this way poorer grade stock will not lower the price of 
best quality stock or tend to adulterate the good name of 
Canadian cattle abroad. Standardization of product on a 
basis of quality and grade will react to the benefit of 
the producer as well as the consumer. Standardizing of 
product and catering to the market will ensure premium 
Price, most economical use of the markets by meeting reg¬ 
ional demand, reduction of risk by shipping only the qual¬ 
ity for which a demand exists and will also consequently 
raise the demand curve. Elimination of low grade stock 
can be effected this way provided there is sufficient com¬ 
pulsion, economic or legal, to prohibit the marketing of 

such stock,(1 ) Th e matter of supply is sometimes musunder- 
(1 ) Maynard",T/ei'dl"erBeckman - "Jt'rincipTes "of Marketing''. 
pp. 302 - 307* 



















Z44 - 

stood. It is not continuous supply that is needed although' 
that is what transportation companies would prefer. It is 
rather the ability to be always ready to supply the market 
in its slack season or when periodic demand arises and to 
take thereby best advantage of market opportunities. The 
market must never be glutted but continually fed to just 
under its demand. 

It is but to summarize the above principles to say 
that controlled production has its counterpart In con¬ 
trolled marketing. Organization for marketing is greatly 
assisted to-day by such bodies as the Western Stock 
Growers 1 Association, the W T estern Canada Live Stock Union, 
the Western Canada Society of Animal Husbandry, the Red 
Label Beef Breeders 1 and Feeders 1 Association, the Can¬ 
adian Society of Technical Agriculturists, the Industrial 
and Development Council of Canadian Meat Lackers and sim¬ 
ilar organizations. These however are primarily fact 

finding bodies which with the two exceptions above are 

. 

regional only in their control. It is doubtless due to 
the necessity of exercising some nation wide active con¬ 
trol over cattle production in relation to the export 
market that the new Natural Products Marketing Act of 
1934 was put into effect by the Federal Government. In 
so far as this legislation as it affects the beef cattle 
industry can bring about an efficient system of controlled 
marketing, overcome the present hostility to it by amend- 








. 

■ 

. 

. 

' 

. 







- 245 - 

/ 

ment if necessary, and obtain satisfactory co-operation 

■ 

from the several provinces through enabling legislation, 
it will doubtless prove of ultimate benefit to the industry* 
If it can serve to most effectively regulate supply with 
respect to demand, both as to quality and quantity at the 
same time making necessary compensation to the producer it 


will do a great deal. If it can serve to increase demand 
it will do still more* 

The United Kingdom market for live beef cattle is 
the main prospect for aiding the industry. Cattlemen 
must, therefore study, organize for, cater to and cultivate 
that market and become in time firmly entrenched on It. 

A brief analysis of this market may now be made In rela¬ 
tion to the principles above outlined. Like most countries 




to-day the United Kingdom is not immune to the craze of 
economic nationalism. This has some justification however 
when the plight of the British home producer is considered. 

I 

Brought, low prices and excess imports have all combined 
to put the home industry in Ireat Britain in the worst 
position it has been for many years. Following the Ottawa 
Agreements of 1932 and the Report of the Reorganization 
Commission published in 1934 the British Ministry of-Agric¬ 
ulture has determined to. restrict and regulate imports of 

i 

all meat products more closely and to offer more protection 
to the home producer. 

Importing' of live c^ttel from the Irish Free State 





































* 












- 






















- 246 - 

into England further accentuates the difficulty for 

Canada - the only other source of live "beef cattle for 

- 

England outside of home production. The Irish imports 
tend to increase the autumn glut on the English market, 

Irish Free State imports for 1929 were 749,370; 1 93 0 - 
834 , 962 ; 1 931 - 738 , 967 ; 1 932 - 625,906,(1 ) ana in 1 933 - 
582,174.(2) Canadian exports to the United Kingdom market 
in 1 930 were 5,400; 1 931 - 27 ,1 48 ; (. 3 ) 1 932 - 16,568 and in 
1933 - 50,31 7*(4) These figures portray the small part 
played by the Canadian producer of live beef cattle on 
this market in comparison with that of the Irish Free 
State, a part of the Empire least inclined to amicable 
trade relations with England. A more recent adverse 
development is the proposed agreement whereby after March 
31 9 1935, Irish cattle imports will be increased approx¬ 
imately 1/3 over 1 934 or about 1 50,000 head in return 
for increased coal imports from England, The Canadian 
producer it would seem has good reason to substantiate his 
claim to a greater share in that market, Canada is in 
effect on a quota basis in this market alsq, arranged by 
the United Kingdom on a quarterly basis. The Canadian 

•producer is in constant fear of restriction in this quota 

(1 ) W.A/Silson - ‘‘United Kingdom Cattle Market Conditions" 

Department of Trade and Commerce,Commercial Intelligence i 
Journal,Vol .XLVIII ,Ko .1 51 6,Feb,1 8 th, 1 933,P* 2 04, 

(* 2 ) W. A. Wilson - “Cattle and Meat Import Trade of the United 
Kingdom" ,op, cit.Vol .L,No. 1 577 ,April. 21 ,1 954 ,p. 6 l 1 . 

( 3 ) Annual Market Review, 1 933,Dive Stock Branch,Department 
of Agriculture,Ottawa, p, 14, 

(4) Live Stock Market and Meat Trade Review, 1931 ,Department 
of Agriculture,Live Stock Branch,Ottawa,p .1 4. 












- 











■ 





_ 




' 







« 






















; 

' - 













- 247 - 

and in fact considerable variation has existed. For the 
first two months of 1 934 the quota shipped was 4,469 and 
3,438 head respectively or a total of 7 , 907 . Had this 
rate continued the first quarter quota would have been ex¬ 
hausted by March 1 st. An arrangement was made however 
whereby the Canadian quota was increased to 20,200 head 
for the first six months. This figure was increased to 
approximately 23,000 for the last six months of 1934. 

A reference may now be made to the Scottish market. 
The periodical Canadian cattle sale at Glasgow reflects 
the demands of this market. Scottish home production is 
relatively stable not varying over 6 fo from the normal in 
the 7 year period 1 923 to 1 931 . The total volume of 
Scottish home production represents the carcasses of some 
433,000 cattle and 72,000 calves raised by 60,000 farmers 
and crofters. Import of store animals has special sig¬ 
nificance here equal to that of home breeding. Finished 
animals are imported mainly from Ireland and Canada. The 
Canadian producer - especially in the Short Grass Plains 
Area - would therefore be well advised to cultivate this 
market and pay special attention to the following observa¬ 
tions - "Canadian store cattle are well liked in Scotland. 
They are strong and healthy, and feed up well after a few 
weeks T keep. The better class of Canadian stores are al¬ 
ways in demand and invariably sell at a slight premium 









■ 




















. 




... ■: " ■ ' ' , . . : L 

. 

- 




. 









- 248 


. 

over Irish cattle. It is realized, that the Canadian market, 
like the market in Scotland* prefers the young, well-bred 
cattle, and, unfortunately, the surplus of these for ex¬ 
port does not provide a sufficient number to ship only 
this class. Until Canadian breeding generally is on a 
higher level, some of the rougher class will find a way to 
the British markets. Too much stress, however, cannot be 
placed upon the necessity for Canadian farmers to continue 
to improve their breeding herds, and for shippers to send 
over only young bullocks of good class and quality. Rough 
and inferior animals, apart from the low return which they 
inevitably bring, are detrimental to the Canadian trade in 
general”.(1 ) Writing on this market further in review of 
1933 operations it was stated that - "It cannot be too 
strongly emphasized, and the events of 1935 confirm this 
fact, that Canadian farmers should bend every effort to 
continue to improve their breeding herds. They should en¬ 
deavour to send an Increasing quantity of their prime 
quality, light, young store animals to this market, and, 
in addition, prohibit the export of rough, unsuitable an¬ 
imals which are sometimes loaded to the detriment of the 
Dominions trade In Scotland. Aberdeen-Angus and Shorthorn 
crosses of good class, approaching two years of age, and * 

from 8 to 1 0 cwts, , are preferred, and will always command 

(1 ) A.J.Tingley - "Marketing of Live Stock in Scotland". 

Department of Trade and Commerce, Commercial Intel¬ 
ligence Journal, Vol. XLIX, No. 1554* Nov. 11th, 1 935* 

P. 774. 























. 












• 


• 





. 

















. 




. 

. 




* .. 


. . 














- 249 - 

a premium over other sorts ",(1 ) The Hereford Short Grass 
Plains cattle can fully equal either the Aberdeen-Angus 
or Shorthorn in meeting the demands of this market. 


Prices in Scotland averaged for Canadian live cattle 
around 38 / per live cwt. on the Glasgow market in the be¬ 
ginning of 1 933 falling in the summer to as low as 30 / for 
poorer grades. Prices returned to 38 / in December hen 
there was a shortage of Ganad.ian cattle. Prices in England 
and Wales can be gauged from the following table: 

^Average Annual Prices of Fat Stock in England and Wales 


Compared with Pre-War years 


Year 


Fat 
Per ' 

Cattle 
live cwt, 

Index of prices 
(1 911 =1 3 _ 1 00) 

Fat Cattle 

1924 


53 s 2 d 

133 

1925 


52 

7 

131 

1926 


49 

0 

1 41 

1 927 


44 

3 

1 27 

1928 


48 

1 

1 38 

1929 


46 

3 

1 33 

1930 


46 

2 

1 33 

1931 


42 

7 

1 22 

1932 


39 

11 

113 

1933 


. 33 

2 

1 01 » f 2 ) 

The gradual 

fall 

in prices 

in the British industry is ap- 

parent from 

this 

chart and 

suggests 

a reason for restric- 


tion of imports. 

In summing up the United Kingdom market situation It 
is apparent that improvement for the future lies in im¬ 
proving- the grade and quality of export store or feeder 

(1) G.B,Johnson - “Canadian Cattle Trade with Scotland, 

1 933 ,i 'j op,cit, Vol, 1, No, 1370,March 3rd, 1934,p. 303 . 

(2) “Report of the Reorganisation Commission for Fat 
Stock for Englandand Wales, 1934 ", Ministry of 
Agriculture and Fisheries, London, p. 23 , 




































. 

' 












- 






- 










T 































* 



t 




















- 250 - 

stock which have probably the best advantage in the Scot¬ 
tish market. Drought conditions in England have restricted; 
our feeder outlet in that market and room for improvement 
here lies in catering to the demand for light weight fin¬ 
ished stock and to attempts to stabilize quotas at in¬ 
creased levels and have them definitely set at longer 
periods than the quarterll period now in operation - at 
least six months. Instability and uncertainty in the ex¬ 
port cattle business as well as high costs can be greatly 
overcome on this basis. Argentine monopoly of the chilled j 
meat trade and Australian control of the frozen meat trade 
preclude any successful attempts of entering the market 
in those commodities at the present time and immediate 
future, 

Outside of the actual market of the United Kingdom tfe j 
the only other market with high potential importance is 
the United States. This is the natural market for Canada 
and for range cattle produced as feeders on the Short 
Grass Plains Area, This is an outstanding example of the 
damage to industry which tariffs of a foreign country 
can bring about. Tariff schedules in effect on Canadian 

cattle exports to the United States since 1 885 are given 

' 

in the following table: 

r, 1 885 , 20 ft on all cattle. 

1 890 j Cattle over one year $1 0 . each, 
under one year $ 2 . each. 

I 894 , 2096 . 

I 897 , (Dingley tariff) cattle under one year $2 each 
Others if valued under $14 ,$3«75 each. 

If valued over $14,27 



































■ 












' 

. 







































; 




















- 251 


M '1 909» (Payne Aldrick) Same as Dingley tariff of 

1 897 * 

19^3? (Underwood) All cattle free, 

1921 , Tariff of 3 Ofo on all cattle, 

1922, (Fordney McCumber) Cattle over 
1050 lbs, 2c per lb,, under 
1 05 0 lbs» l^o per lb. 

1930, (Hawley-Smoot) Cattle less than 700 lbs, 

2>£c per lb. Over 7 00 lbs. 3 c per lb."(1 ) 

This market has absorbed as high as 500,000 head of Can¬ 
adian cattle in one year but since the exclusive tariff 
of 1930 the market has been totally lost to Canadian pro¬ 
ducers. Drought conditions in 1934 and shortage of feed 
make very doubtful the opening of this market for some 
time for Canadian feeder cattle, A few finished cattle 
have recently been shipped, one consignment of 1 0 cars to 
Seattle in September, but this was likely for replacement 
purposes only in emergency. Shortage of feed has actually 
led to negotiations for shipment of feed from Canada. 

Such factors are not promising in the outlet for feeder 
cattle in the United States. Prices at the beginning of 
1 933 in Western American markets are however high due to 
scarcity of beef cattle of the better class which the 
plains area of western Canada produces. Prices in the 
neighbourhood of 6 cents a pound there might allow con¬ 
siderable trade in Canadian cattle in spite of the present 
high tariff. This accounts for occasional small spasmodic 
shipments at present. Only continuance of prices at this 

or a higher level would warrant any hope in this direction 

(1) Western Stock Growers 1 Association - "The Western 



March 23rd, 1934, 










- 











. 


' 

. 




, « 











. 

. 






. 




. 














. 




. 

V ■ : : ■ 














■ 


■ 


. 










, 







however. Finished stock also come under this tariff. 
The decline in meat exports also is apparent from the 


following table: 



1 t 

Cattle Production and 

Exports 



Cattle 

Inspected 

Exports in 

Terms of 

Cattle 

Year 

Population 

Slaughter 

(Cattle, Calves and Beef) 




Grt > Br. 

U.3.A. 

Total 

1927 

9 , 149,663 

1 , 148,032 

9,5 53 

397,389 

421 ,366 

1928 

8 , 771,659 

1 , 113.374 

406 

341 ,684 

350,1 76 

1929 

8 , 842,362 

1 , 116.647 

1 3 

31 4,328 

322,040 

1930 

8 , 937,000 

978,234 

5,940 

65,800 

81 ,2°2 

1931 

7 , 991,000 

963,112 

28,313 

25,371 

64,634 

1932 

8 , 511,100 

937,989 

19,853 

1 3,711 

43,21 0 

irn 

8.874.500 

1 .092 .428 

66.257 

6.111 

82.353" 


(1 ) 


Calves are included in the above figures and beef is here 
converted to cattle on the basis of 45 0 pounds per head. 

The increase in 1 933 to: the United Kingdom and steadjr de¬ 
crease in exports to the United States are easily apparent. 
The effect of the Hawley-Smoot Tariff in 1 930 so restricted 
cattle exports as to cause them to back up in Canada and 
seriously depress the domestic market. The continuance of 
the United Kingdom market is the one salvation left for 
live cattle prices to-day. 

Other possibilities in the export market for Canadian 
live beef cattle are commercially non-existant at the pres¬ 
ent time. The only commercial prospects that do exist are 
for processed meats and these are extremely meagre and pro¬ 
blematical, There does exist a market in Japan for hides 

and skins. Out of 16 countries supplying Japan in 1 933 

(1 ) Contributed by the Industrial and Development Council 

of Canadian Meat Packers per F.M. Baker. 1934 . 





























- 253 - 


the most important being Manchukuo with 393,282 pounds, 

China w r ith 163,948 pounds and the United States with 

135 ,7^-0 pounds - Canada supplied only 4,322 pounds. The 

demand is for fresh month-old take-off, city or packer 

prepared. They must he well cured and certified as to 

weight. Approximate prices as on October 24th, 1934 were: 

"Cowhides, wet salted, 20 to 30 pounds, average 25 pounds, 
Canadian $9*20 per 100 lbs, c.i.f. 

Calf skins, Canadian $ 9 . per 100 lbs. c.i.f. 

Kip skins, Ganadian $6, per 100 lbs, c.i.f. 

Steer hides, Canadian $8. per 100 lbs, c.i.f. fT (1 ) 

fhe possibility of an outlet in the Orient for the Poorer 
grades of Canadian processed meats in the form of canned 
meats, canned soups and extracts has been suggested. Trade 
recognition of the U.S.S.R. by Canada might open a possible 
outlet even for live cattle. Reciprocal trade relations 
of this nature however with Russia have not met with ap¬ 
proval in Canada. Supplying of canned meats and meat 
products as an outlet for poorer grade stock and of cutters 
and earners to other Empire countries such as South Africa, 
India and British Island possessions might well receive at¬ 
tention as much of the food consumed by Europeans at least 
in these areas is imported canned food. The outlook there¬ 
fore in the export market is not bright and the exporter 
is forced to rely almost solely on the United Kingdom 
market for live beef cattle of high quality as the main¬ 
stay of his business. _ 

(1 ) P.V.McLane - "’Market for Hides in Japan". Depart ne nt 

of Trade and Commerce, Commercial Intelligence Journal, 
Vol.LI, Ho,1607, November 17 th, 1934,P* 768. 












- 


e 


~ 

- 






■ 



• 

. . 

; : c ? r ' 

. 


* 





■> 




- 













' 

' 












• ’ 

V • , 











CHAPTER YII 


THE DOMESTIC MARKET. 

The local domestic market is at present the one of 
maqor economic importance to the live beef cattle industry 
of Canada generally. The domestic market is not of the 
same vital importance to the industry of the Short Grass 
Plains as this is a region more specifically suited for 
the production of high quality export cattle. In so far 
however as this quality of cattle are consumed in Canada 
the importance applies as prices for quality range stock 
are not reflected back to the range producer. There is 
not yet in the domestic market a sufficient differentia¬ 
tion in the consuming public whereby quality demand can 
be segregated and catered to as such to enable a return 
to the producer commensurate with the cost of high quality 
production. Poor grade cattle are allowed to be produced 
without restriction and dumped on the market to lower the 
whole price level generally, with the result that the pro¬ 
ducer of low grade stock gets a return far more in propor¬ 
tion to his cost of production than does the producer of 
quality stock. As long as that situation continues poor 
stock will be produced. The only effective way to eliminate 
poor grade, under-finished stock from the public market is 




to nuke its price such as to render irs continued produc¬ 




tion an economic impossibility. The elimination of 


- 2^4 - 






























































' 




















- 2^3 - 

profit from its production would be an effective remedy 
but that is a situation difficult to create. The produc¬ 
tion of this stock is the livelihood of many people. They 
would have to be economically diverted to some other in¬ 
dustry. To bring about the effective low price in the 
first place would require.a long period of consumer educa¬ 
tion against the low grade. It would further involve an 
efficient system of marking all grades under state regula¬ 
tion, It would require a still more vital factor - the 
raising of the average purchasing-power of the economically 
weak classes whose purchases at present must be largely 
responsible for the existing demand for- this grade of beef. 

Conditions in the export market vitally affect the 
domestic market. Many factors in the export situation are 
in the first instance domestic. Transportation is only 
one- of many such. Much of the domestic situation - partic¬ 
ularly as It affects beef - has therefore already been 
considered. Export freight rate structure is precisely 
domestic freight rate structure as there Is no such thing 
as an export freight rate at the present time, limited 
export demand or restricted export markets is immediately 
reflected by a backing up on the domestic market with a 
constant fall in prices. The continual uncertainty of 
the United Kingdom short term quota Is a matter of 
constant anxiety to the Canadian producer. A very high 
Percentage of overseas sales are made locally by over- 




- 256 - 


I 

/; 


agents and. frequently prices paid by overseas buyers win 
rule the market at western points. 

A feature of importance on the domestic market as it 
affects the Short Grass Plains is the market for this area, 
in British Columbia. It has been stated that In 1 935 this 
province alone took approximately 61 *000 head from Alberta, : 
this being more than the whole number exported to the United! 
Kingdom for that year which amounted to 50,31 7 head .(1 ) 

This market must therefore be catered to as a valuable out¬ 
let. Although there is opinion which suggests British 
Columbia might welcome some such means as internal tariffs 
to regulate inter-provincial imports yet it is doubtful, If 
even permissible, such measures would be applied to live 
range cattle from Alberta as the plains area in this 
Province and Saskatchewan is the natural producing area 
of high quality range cattle for this market. Outside of 
any unredeemable drought sections this area and Canada 
generally is eminently Suited for the production of qual¬ 
ity cattle. Sparse population, large graging areas, gen- 
erally plentiful feed, northern latitude, active people 
are factors which tend, towards a meat producing and a 
meat consuming people. The industry is and must remain a 
vital integral feature of the agricultural system. 

The factor of major importance on the domestic mar¬ 
ket is that of surplus production in relation, to demand, 

This may be characterised as immediate and accumulative. 

The former re l ates to an emergency situation in re la tion 

(1) S.G-. Carlyle.' 










■ 





















. 
























. 


















to periodical drought conditions which in 1934 reached 
major importance. Both Federal and Provincial Governments 
in the main area in Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta 
have had to combine for the settlement of this problem. 

w 

Three modes of attack have been possible, namely, shipping 
drought low grade cattle to market for processing; ship¬ 
ping the better grades to feeding areas for finishing, or 
shipping feed in to the cattle. To date all three of 

these methods have been adopted in part. It has involved 

some 123,000 surplus head. The type of co-operation that 
should exist at all times in the industry has been brought 
about here by an emergency situation in which Governments, 
packers and railways have co-operated to remove the surplus 
stock. They could not be processed into the domestic chan¬ 
nels as prices would still further decline and actually 
did for a time in anticipation. Apparently some of this 
class of meat has found its way into the trade however and 

attempts have been made to sell it over the block, but it 

at present is a drug on the market. It has been suggested 
that there might be a possible outlet for this class of 
meat in foreign countries where large armies and navies 
are being maintained. Some boneless meat has been recently 
exported to Japan. It is stated however by marketing opin¬ 
ion that it would have been better to have totally destroyed 1 
these cattle and thus leave the legitimate market stock 

anaffected. (1) Avenues such as Kennel Clubs. Zoos__and_ 

(1) W.C.McKenzie. 
























. 
























- 238 - 

Fox Farms have been more than filled by regular supplies 
and Fox Farms absorb all edible beef by-products except 
lungs. The export market is restricted to Great Britain. 
"And Great Britain has served notice that shipments must 
not exceed those of last year - a total of about 6 , 0 - 0 000 
lbs. in all. The surplus which Canada should wish to ship 
normally (i.e. without any drought area product) would be 
much more than 6,000,000 lbs."(l) The above figure refers 
to 1935’ The Governments concerned were therefore driven 
to reducing low grade canners to stock food such as for 
hogs. Packers have co-operated by processing this meat 
at cost as low as $ 2.00 to $ 2 .)U per head. 

The cumulative aspect of the problem is even more 
serious. This problem is international in scope. "The 
numbers of cattle in twenty countries, which support some¬ 
what more than one-quarter of the w r orld T s total, reached 
137 , 000,000 head in 1933 , an increase of 2 percent above 
1932* The increases were principally in Canada, the United 
States, the United Kingdom, France, and New Zealand. Other 
important countries, not included in this list owing to 
lack of recent estimates, have tended to increase rather 
than decrease their supplies".(2) As before reviewed 
cattle population in all Canada has only fallen from 
9,1 49,663 in 1927 to 8,874,300 in 1 933 while total consump- 

tion has fallen from 421 .366 to approximately 82.37 3.*3) 

(1) Contributed by Canada Packers Limited, per J.S.McLean. 

( 2 ) Annual Market Review, 1933* Department of Agriculture, 
Live Stock Branch,Dominion 0 f Canada,Ottawa,p. 8 

( 3 ) See Ante p. 232 . 





- - 




. ~ 

, 

1 


< 








~ 










- 

- 

' 

■ 
















, 

. y v ■ s ; 

, 










- 239 


In 1 928 and 1 929 when figures were on a par for population 
with 1 933 ,exports to the United States were heavy. Since 
the Hawley-Smoot tariff of 1 93U the closing of this market 
caused a further surplus on the domestic market with con¬ 
sequent lower prices. Reduced cattle breeding folio ed 
by 1931 but 1934 shewed a still further increase over 1933 
Per capita consumption also fell steadily at the following 
rate - 1929 - 68.13 pounds; 1 930 - 63*79 pounds; 1931 - 
37 *93 pounds; 1 932 - 36.02 pounds and 1 933 - 62.00 pounds. 
It has been suggested that an increase in per capita con¬ 
sumption of only 23 pounds would eliminate the annual sur¬ 
plus, Domestic marketings of cattle and calves with 
values from 1928 to 1932 are stated as follows; 


1 Value of Domestic Marketings 

Year Cattle Calves 


1928 $81,000,000 $7,900,000 

1929 73,300,000 8,900,000 

1 930 47 , 700,000 3,600,000 

1931 33 , 300,000 3 , 700,000 

1932 24,700,000 2,700,000 


The Marketings in these five years were as follows 
Year Cattle Calves 


1928 ^Tc 76 o 3 


1929 921,123 436,707 

1930 676,076 333,063 

1931 699,496 338,509 

1 932 61 9,300 333,21 3 ”( 1 ) 


The decline here is obvious. Some increased outlet might 
be found in using earners, cutters and boners for stock 
food or fertilizer and even of some better grades for 


(1 ) The Western Stock Growers* Association - "The Western 

Canadian Cattle Industry 1 *, a brief presented to the 
Special Committee of the House of Commons, March 2 >rd, 

1934 , P. 2 . 










































. 



■ 














< 

' 






, 

, 

, 

. 





, 








- 260 - 


beef extracts or prepared meats for human consumption. 

It would seem still more advisable to prohibit by national 
breeding regulations the production of low grade stock ex¬ 
cept as local demand for legitimate trade requires, Such 
low grade stock must in all cases be kept out of the ex¬ 
port market and out of the domestic market for best grades. 

( 

Effective breeding control, together with effective land 
utilization on the range dry area and scientific govern¬ 
ment subsidy when and where needed should do much to lessen 
the problem of surplus production. Controlled production 
and marketing such as is intended by Such legislation as 
the Natural Products Marketing Act 1934 If cautiously ap¬ 
plied and skilfully administered should, be of much assis¬ 
tance, However any plan for removal of surplus beef cat¬ 
tle production must provide for continual removal and leg¬ 
itimate expansion in production when markets become avail¬ 
able, Surplus must therefore be understood in Its deeper 
significance before its solution can be found. ''The point 
is that before cattle prices can recover strongly our 
surplus of cattle must find a market. What is our surplus? 
Some people like to think of it as the number we exported 
last year for instance. On that basis If we go back to 
192S with smaller cattle stocks than now, we see that our 
then surplus was roughly 390,000 head of cattle, and that 
when beef consumption in Canada was some 3 lbs. more than 
in 1933, or 30,000,000 lbs. or roughly another 10,000 







~ 





































































































261 


head. On that basis then, our problem is not with the 
surplus of a mere 3 0,000 or even 1 23 ,000 head, but of 
something over 400,000 head ."(1 ) In other words perman¬ 
ency and stability in profitable prices are intimately tied 
up with the problem of surplus production and with effec¬ 
tive purchasing power of available consumers to absorb 
this surplus. 

What has been said with respect to rail transporta¬ 
tion rates in relation to the export market applies on 
the domestic market as they are the same. It is claimed 
that in addition to lower through rates, feed lot rates, 
feeding-in-transit rates with stop over privileges, lower 
stock yard and commission charges, there should also be 
lower course grain rates to facilitate movement of feed 
and lower costs to the producer. This is a matter of re¬ 
adjustment of rates to be taken up by the Board of Rail¬ 
way Commissioners v/hen brought before them. 

Domestic price levels for cattle and calves have been 
steadily declining for a number of years. In the follow¬ 
ing table this decline is shown as a matter of record on 
all the stock yards under Government control: 


(1 ) Contributed by the Industrial and Development Council 
of Canadian Meat rackers, per F.M.Baker. 1 934. 











. 








' 















































- 26k! - 


•‘Yearly Weighted Average Prices per Cwt. of the Total 
Sales on Stock Yards. 


Cattle 




iii 2 

1 931 

1 950 

L 92 Q 

1 928 

Toronto., 

.$ 3 . 60 . 

$ 4.1 0 

$4.93 

$7.20 

$8.20 

$8.50 

Mont real..... 

, 2.90 

3 • 60 

4.-25 

3.80 

6.43 

6.40 

Winnipeg.*.., 

. 2.43 

3.03 

3.75 

5.50 

6.95 

7.15 

Calgary.,... . 

. 2 . 3 C 

3.30 

3.95 

5.90 

7.10 

7.50 

Edmonton...,. 

. 2.40 

3.03 

3.80 

5.75 

6.60 

6.73 

Prince Albert 

. 1.9? 

2.60 

3.25 

5.03 

6.00 

6.35 

Moose Jaw.,,, 

. 2.03 

2,90 

3.50 

3.10 

6.70 

6.80 

Saskatoon,.,, 

. 2.23 

2.90 

3.40 

3.55 

6.95 

6.10 

All markets,. 

. 3.00 

3.60 

4.5 0 

6.35 

7.55 

1*05 

Calves 

Toronto,...,. 

. 4.80 

4.90 

6.60 

9.90 

12.70 

11.70 

Mont real..... 

• 3.35 

3.30 

4,65 

6.60 

8.15 

7.83 

Winnipeg..,,. 

. 3.40 

3.73 

3.00 

7.60 

9.05 

9.00 

Calgary. 

. 2.70 

3.83 

3.10 

7.65 

8.55 

8 . 6 C 

Edmonton..... 

. 2.90 

3.30 

3.23 

7.25 

7.60 

8.10 

Prince Albert 

. 2,23 

2.33 

3.80 

5.60 

7.00 

7.00 

Moose Jaw..,, 

. 2.80 

3.33 

4.20 

6.60 

8.30 

8.50 

Saskatoon.,.. 

. 2.93 

5.45 

4.50 

6.90 

. 7.60 

8.60 

All markets.. 

• 3-73 

4.00 

5 .40 

7.90 

9! 65 

_iiiQl'lll 


It will he noted that the yards in closest proximity to 
the Short G-rass Plains Area - Calgary, Edmonton, Prince 


Albert, Moose Jaw and Saskatoon - exhibited prices con¬ 
siderably below the average in every year. The above 
prices would be based on the market which-sets the price 
for all Canada, probably Toronto or Montreal. Lying be¬ 
hind these declines is the matter of price fluctuations 
from month to month in each of the above years. This 
factor has contributed to constant unsettling of the in¬ 
dustry. In view of these facts it is well to recall cost 
of production figures as they relate to range beef cattle 

in the Short Crass Plains Area.( 2 ) It will be recalled 

(T) Ammar'ISrket’" Review, i 9 3 2 jl 9 33 , Department of Agric¬ 

ulture, Live Stock Branch, Dominion of Canada,Ottawa, 
pp. 37 and 3 b respectively. 

( 2 ) See Ante pp, 1 01 - 1 03 . 


























, 














!. 






















e 


























- 263 - 


cost per 100 pounds by age was for a calf - $7.23; a 
yearling - $6.98; a 2 -year-old - $ 6 . 42 ; and for a'3-year- 
old - $ 6 . 13 . It is therefore again obvious that at 
present price levels the range operator is not only not 
meeting cost of production but is actually faced with 
bankruptcy if he attempts to remain in business. 

In searching for indications of price improvement it 
is advisable to refer to beef cattle price cycles over a 
term of years. ‘ i: The beef cattle cycle in Canada during 
the 40 years studied shows three periods of high prices. 
The centre of the first high period was about the years 
1900 and 1901 . The next high point was 1 91 4 and the last 
apparently 1928. Thus the 3 peaks of the cycle have oc¬ 
curred 14 years apart".(1) Over the period extending 
from 1890 to 1930 Prof. Hope has determined that the 
three high points were approximately 26^, 31# and 41 fo 
respectively above the normal price level. Actual prices 
in 1919 were higher than in 1914 but relative .to the nor¬ 
mal price level the peak was in 1914 . The rapid and 
steep decline in the post war period to 1 923 was largely 
due to increasing cattle population and accumulating sur¬ 
plus. Prices fell in spite of a temporary check due to 
a rise In the general price level from 1 91 7 to 1 920 . 

This gave a further impetus to an increase in cattle in¬ 
ventory which jumped from 6,000,000 in 1914 to 10,000,000 

in 1919 . Thus increased inventory in the face of rapid 

(1) E.C.Hope - "Live Stock Cycles in Canada". p 7 c 2 . 1 930 . 



















. 










< 












- *<£64 - 


price fluctuation and inability to adjust production 
paved the way for the decline recorded when price defla¬ 
tion started in 19 f 2u. With cattle population standing 
at 8 , 874,300 in 1 933; the United States export market losi;; 
the only available export market heavily restricted, and 
with a gradual reduction in domestic per capita consump¬ 
tion of beef from 68.13 pounds in 1 929 to 62 pounds in 
1933 the immediate outlook for cattle prices does not 
seem bright. This is all the more significant when these 
facts are related to the regular 14 year swing in the 
cattle cycle. Prices at the nadir in 1 920 to 1 923 might 
be low from 1 934 to 1 939 approximately and an upward 
trend might then take place. This would be normal action 
of the cycle. If it operates normally it carries some 
hope but it is difficult to see how many ranchers can stay 
in business that long und.er present prices. Future action 
of price cycles is mostly however a matter of pure conjec¬ 
ture as so many disturbing factors may enter, such as 
drought, emergencies, tariff revisions, currency changes 
or outbreak of war. It is therefore not advisable to 
base policy on possible or estimated future trends in the 
price cycle. 

Considering price levels at the Toronto Market they 
have reflected from 1 833 to 1 93'2 five distinct cycles in 
the purchasing■power of beef. Each cycle has had an av¬ 
erage duration of 14 1/2 years the last peak being reached 
in 1928 . Peak purchasing power should therefore not be 
































- ^63 - 


expected again until 1 94 ‘l or 1^43. 

Factors which should operate in the meantime on the 
domestic market to "bring this about should include more 
co-operation between the packer and primary producer as 
well as between transportation and other distribution 
agencies and the producer. Less desire on the part of a 
few as middlemen agencies to turn cattle into profit 
dollars and more altruism for the good of all will tend 
to stabilize the industry at maximum profit production. 
Studying, organizing for, and catering to, the market is 
an absolute essential. Grading, selecting and inspecting 
beef cattle based on a far sighted policy of breeding only 
quality stock to meet the demands of a consuming market 
which is being continually educated on meat, consumption 
is sound policy. Those in charge of Canadian Agricul¬ 
tural policy are alive to the wisdom of this course* 

,J Whiie discouraging price levels which have ruled in 
Canada during the past two years on cattle of all classes 
have admittedly made it difficult, if not impossible, for 
many stock growers to show a profit regardless of the 
practice which they are following, the soundness of the 
principle of catering to the market with cattle for which 
there is the broadest demand both at home and abroad will 
undoubtedly be demonstrated as conditions improve. Even 
during this period of depressed prices it has been possible 
through the Beef Grading Service, to rapidly increase the 






















































' 















- ^66 - 


demand for properly finished young eattie for the domestic 
market. At the same time cattle of these weights and fin¬ 
ish shipped to the BriTish market have sold at a consider¬ 
able premium over heavy cattle going forward at The same 
time ,, .( 1 ) Restrictions of imports of competing meat pro¬ 
ducts should be tightened. The evolution of a national 
policy for the industry is essential. The Natural Products 
Marketing Act should go far in this direction towards the 
setting up of some such body as a National Live Stock 
Marketing Board or other machinery to lessen the evils of 
distribution now complained of and create for the primary 
producer an incentive to improve this most vital industry 
in the national wealth of Canada, 


( 1 ) Contributed by the Department of Agriculture,Ottawa, 
per G-eo.B, Rothwell, Livestock Commissioner# 



















CHAPTER VIII 


PARTICULAR LEGISLATION AFFECTING 
THE LIVE STOCK INDUSTRY. 

Brief reference may now be made to legislation which 
has developed special significance for the live stock in¬ 
dustry at the present time. 

The transporting of cattle in Canada with respect 
to care en route comes under Jurisdiction of the Criminal 
Code, The pertinent section in this connection reads - 
(1 ) "No railway company within Canada whose railway forms 
any part of a line of road over which cattle are conveyed 
from one province to another province, or from the United 
States to or through any province, or from any art of a 
Province to another part of the same, and no owner or 
master of any vessel carrying or transporting cattle from 
one province to another province, or within any province, 
or from the United States to or through any province, shall 
confine the same in any car, or vessel of any description, 
for a longer period than thirty-six hours without unlading 
the same for rest, water and feeding for a period of at 
least five consecutive hours, unless prevented from so un¬ 
lading and furnishing water and food by storm or other 
unavoidable cause, or by necessary delay or detention in 
bhe crossing of trains; and no such railway company, and 
no owner or master of any vessel plying from one province 
to another province,or within any province or from the 


- dGl - 



















. 









■ 













- 268 


United States to or through any province, shall convey 
or transport any calves under the age of three weeks other 
than calves at foot of milch cows or purebred calves on or 
over any of its lines of railway or on any such vessel. 
(1922, c.l 6 ) w ( 1 ) The section further reads - ( 4 )“Cattle 
so unloaded shall he properly fed and watered during such 
rest by the owner or person having all custody thereof, or 
in case of his default in so doing, by the railway company, 
or owner or master of the vessel transporting the same, at 
the expense of the owner or person in custody thereof; and 
such company, owner or master shall in such case have a 
lien upon such cattle for food, care and custody furnished 
and shall not be liable for any detention of such cattle-' * 
( 2 ) In transportation involving this time limit transpor¬ 
tation agencies have no other alternative to that of stop¬ 
ping at stock yards for the purpose mentioned unless the 
car or vessel utilized provided proper space and opportun¬ 
ity for rest, food and water on board. The usual fee for 
unloading and reloading is $ 2.00 which is charged to the 
owner of the cattle. The producer regards this as excess¬ 
ive but whatever charge is made the duty must be performed. 
Stock yard charges in connection are controlled by the 
Live Stock and Live Stock Products Act with the exception 
of those yards not within the purview of this Act. Two 
such are White Biver and Homepayne where the railway 

controls the yards. Stockmen ob.ie ct to the $ 2.00 charge 

(1 ) Criminal Code, Section 344 s sTTT~~ 

( 2 ) Criminal Code, Section 344 s s ( 4 ) 






- 269 - 

being made at these points as they are not controlled by 
the Act. In justice it must be pointed out that in so 
far as the thirty-six hour time limit applies to these 
points it is not the Act which governs but the Criminal 
Code and unloading must take place. The amount of the fee 
is another matter but in'any case they charge only what the 
yards under the Act charge. 

With respect to quality and purity of beef the Beef 
Grading R e g ula ^i° ns ^ or Red an<3 - Blue Lable beef as applic¬ 
able to the domestic market apply only to beef killed in 
plants under Federal Inspection. These are enforced by 
the Federal Department of Agriculture through the staff 
of the Veterinary Director General. In this connection it 
is contended these grades should be extended to include a 
still lower grade or grades such as a Yellow Label in 
order that the consumer may know more fully the (Quality 
of meat he is buying and be charged accordingly. It will 
be of still further benefit when this grading is extended 
to the export trade and officially recognized on the ex¬ 
port market. In connection with purity the standard 
governing is that applied by the T Canada Approved 1 regula¬ 
tions which are those in force under the requirements of 
the Meat and Canned Foods Act 1907 •( 1 ) This is also ad¬ 
ministered through the office and staff of the Veterinary 
Director General. These regulations apply to the domestic 

market and act as a standard for the small export meat 

( 1 ) Revised Statutes of Canatf.a, 1927 , Chap. 77. 








- 

- 

' 































































- 270 - 


"business. In conjunction with the high standard under 
these regulations meat must at all times be fit for human 
consumption. This is covered by the Criminal Code of Can¬ 
ada which provides that - 

"1 . Svery one is guilty of an indictable offence and liabl 
to one year T s imprisonment who knowingly and wilfully ex¬ 
poses for sale, or has in his possession with intent to 
sell, for human food, articles which he knows to be unfit 
for human food. 

*• 2 . Every one who is convicted of this offence after a 
previous conviction for the same crime shall be liable to 
two years 1 imprisonment. 3 . 5-36 V, C.29, S. 194 J, ( 1 ) 

The legislative feature which provides much conten¬ 
tion at the present time is that which governs prices 
charged by stock yards under government control. The Act 
governing is the Live Stock and Live Stock Products Act 
1923 . The legislation relative to control of prices reads 
!r The Owner, lessee, occupier or operator of every stock 
yard shall manage such stock yard in conformity with 
written rules and regulations and shall submit such rules 
and regulations and a schedule of the fees and charges 
to be charged for live stock using such stock yards to the 
Minister for his approval'*. ( 2 ) On behalf of primary pro¬ 
ducers it is contended the Act: is being so interpreted 
under this section as to protect live stock yard companies 

unduly. Prices are permitted, such as those charged far 
(1 ) Briminal Code, Section 224 . 

( 2 ) Revised Statutes of Canada,1927, Chap• 2 C,Sect ion 12 , 

s s (1 ). 





I 






* 












































































- 271 


feed, at rates which are considered »exorbirant by the live 
stock shipper. It is contended that operations of commis¬ 
sion men, packers* agents and other middlemen operating on 
the yards are not sufficiently controlled and further undue 
prices are charged to the primary producer. The yards 
maintain their schedule of prices, is under government con¬ 
trol and must be approved by the Minister of Agriculture 
and they have been allowed only such rates as. will enable 
them to operate to meet expenses and a reasonable profit. 
They maintain their one essential source of profit is 
feed - other charges merely meeting expenses on invested 
capital® They claim they do not want to ask for govern¬ 
ment subsidy but would have to do so were their scale of 
charges reduced. Stockmen contend the Act should be re¬ 
vised in the light of present cattle prices to allow the 
primary producer a share In profits. 

Legislation which is destined to play a most vital 
part in the marketing of live beef cattle and beef products 
and in the industry generally was passed in 1 934 . The 
first Act to be considered in this connection is the Nat¬ 
ural Products Marketing Act 1 934.(1 ) This Act is now in 
process of application'and its effect cannot yet be fully 
gauged. Its broad features in the light of the live stock 
industry of western Canada may briefly be reviewed, 1 Nat¬ 
ural product* is defined as including animals, meats, and 

all other natural 'products of Agriculture and of t he___ 

( 1 ) Statutes of Canada,1 934, 24-23, George V, Chap. 37 . 




























. 




' 











■ 

. 

























. 















- 272 - 

forest, sea, lake or river and any article of food or 
drink manufactured from such. It therefore generally in¬ 
cludes all natural products except those of the mine. It 
provides for a Dominion Marketing Board with wide powers, 
among which, are time and place of marketing, exemptions, 
compensation for incurred loss or due to currency deprec¬ 
iation, loans, registration and licensing of producers, 
statistical returns, co-operation with local or provincial 
hoards, charges and tolls. Besides restriction or regula¬ 
tion of imports and exports the Act provides for marketing 
schemes, among which can he a live Stock Marketing Board 
for all Canada with which Provincial Governments can co¬ 
operate through local enabling legislation. The creation 
of a national Live Stock Marketing Board has been strongly 
urged by western cattle producer organizations 9 The crea¬ 
tion and setting up of local boards and the passing of 
the necessary Provincial enabling legislation is the stage 
which has been reached to date. The chief objection to 
this Act is its very wide and sweeping powers and the 
element of coercion which it applies to the live stock in¬ 
dustry. The latter objection Is voiced particularly by 
the smaller producer and possibly by the producer of 
stock not generally up to the high standard of quality 
produced on the large ranches of the Short Grass Plains 
Area. In so far however as this legislation and its 
future amendments can serve to overcome present opposition 








- ^73 - 

and function on a basis of harmony with the necessary 
enabling legislation of the provinces in regard to the 
live stock industry as well as to effectively raise prices 
to the producer by controlled marketing of his product, 
it will do much that is required. It must be borne in 
mind however that no legislation however perfect can work 
against the economic law of Supply and Demand - more es¬ 
pecially in the case of a perishable commodity like cattle 
which must be marketed at the correct time. 

It is contended by marketing specialists that the 
Act will enable the producer to get a more appropriate 
price for his stock as local T scalpers’ and cut-throat 
competition will be eliminated, large retail chain stores, 
packers and other powerful interests wall have to buy at 
controlled prices. Indiscriminate buying and selling of 
cattle will be prohibited through the system of licensing 
Producers. In reply to the argument raised by certain 
Producers that they lose control of their business, under 
the Act it is pointed out that they'have lost control of 
it now through present uncontrolled marketing methods and 
on the contrary the present legislation will restore to 
the producer more control than ever as the state is only 
providing the machinery under w/hich controlled marketing 
can take place to bring greater returns to the average 
primary producer.(l ) The evolution of state controlled 

marketing will most probably lead to taxation of the_ 

(1 ) W.C.McKenzie, 








- 274 - 

industry as in Argentine, to defray marketing cost. This 
can he placed on such a basis as to he fair to all pro¬ 
ducers. With the assistance of controlled production in 
relation to demand and of the compensations under the Act 
for losses incurred when its provisions are carried out, 
the relationships of cost of production to cost of market¬ 
ing and ultimate market price should he much more stable. 
The law of Supply and Demand it is contended is not per¬ 
mitted at present to function to legitimately control 
price owing to cut-throat competition and other evils.(i) 
This will he overcome under the Act by specific provision 
against such practices. On the other hand it cannot he 
said that the lav; of Supply-and Demand does not exist 
for the live stock industry to-day. Interpreting that 
economic principle to mean that if a market is supplied 
to meet its demand in quality, quantity, time and form 
the market will react in the form of prices, is true to¬ 
day as it has ever been. If outside influences intervene 
such as uncontrolled competition, exchange controls, cur¬ 
rency variations, governmental action or like factors 
are allowed to alter the normal effect of supply as it 
relates to demand, that is no reason for saying the normal 
action of the economic principle would not operate if 
these influences were removed. The fact an object is 
not seen in the dark is no reason for assuming it is not 

there. It is to he hoped however that: those who may he 

(| ) L.B. Thoms on. 










- m 5 - 


placed in charge of the administration of the Natural 
Products Marketing Act will act with the greatest tact 
for as in the case of all social legislation, particularly 
of this type, the greatest good of the greatest number 
must be the guiding principle. Many producers will have 
lessons that may be hard to learn but if the Act is to 
function as it should for the benefit of society as-a 
whole, learn them they must. Controlled marketing by the 
state is a field in which great good can be done, if 
wisely administered. It is also one in which great dis¬ 
sension is easily caused and even harm done if administered 
in such a way as to arouse suspicion of favour to sect¬ 
ional interests. The operation of this Act together with 
that of central banking in Canada as it may affect national 
credit and price levels may well be watched with interest 
by all concerned in the live stock industry. 

The last piece of legislation which deserves refer¬ 
ence is the Bank of Canada Act, 1 934.(1) This legisla- 
tion establishing a central bank in Canada is considered lo¬ 
cally and with reference to its effect on the internat¬ 
ional money market as it might affect cattle prices. 

Credit extension direct to cattle producers is provided 
for at present by the Bank Act 1 871 and subsequent amend¬ 
ments. **The Bank may lend money to a farmer and to any 

person engaged in stock' raising upon the security of his 
live stock: provided however that such security shall not 

( 1 ) Statutes of Canada, 1 9^4, k!4-2i>, Geo. V. Chap.4^. 




























. 










. 









. 
















































- ziG - 

include and shall be deemed not to Include any live stock 
which on the 1 st day of July, One thousand, nine hundred 
and twenty-three, was by statutory enactment exempt from 
seizure mnder writs of execution*.(i ) This policy how¬ 
ever is restrictive in scope and regional in character* 
The Banx of Canada is prohibited from extending direct 
agricultural credit. *22. The Bank shall not, except 
as authorized by this Act, (a) engage or have a direct 
interest in any trade or business whatsoever..»*( 2 ) 

Short term loans can be extended however to the lederal 
or Provincial Governments or chartered banks.( 3 ) Its 
main function will be through its control over legal 
tender and bank reserves to regulate credit and to give a 
unified national aspect to Canadian fiscal policy* Gen¬ 
eral easement and stability in the credit market should 
redound indirectly to the benefit of all industries, in¬ 
cluding that of range beef cattle production. Operation 
of tne Bank of Canada and the effect it may have on price 
levels will deserve the closest attention of those inter¬ 
ested in the range cattle industry. Supply of primary 
products, such as beef cattle, in relation to demand and 
price should then be more effectively controlled. 

( 1 ) Revised Statutes of Canada,'! 927 » Chap .1 2 ,Sec. 88 s ITTz 

( 2 ) Bank of Canada Act, Statutes of Canada, 24-23, 

George V, Chap. 43 , Section 22 a. 

( 3 ) op.cit. Section 2 'i ,s s (e) (f) (k). 






CHAPTER IX 


CONCLUSION 

In attempting to present an impartial analysis of 
some major factors in the heef cattle industry in the 
Short G-rass Plains Area in particular, effort has con¬ 
stantly heen made to he fair to all parties concerned and 
to review only such related aspects as hav© special hear¬ 
ing on the live cattle industry in the area under consid¬ 
eration, In this connection a reference to the heef in¬ 
dustry was essential and references from time to time to 
the industry outside of the plains area equally essential. 
In thus having attempted to produce a hroad picture of 
the industry the importance and relation of its inter¬ 
dependent parts has heen the objective* The privilege of 
reference to voluminous authority off the highest standing 
has made this possible. It is regretted that a brighter 
past and more hopeful future could not he portrayed hut 
the excuse is to he found in having attempted to present 
facts just as they are. 

It may generally he said that improvement of condi¬ 
tions lies in the direction of retaining and if possible 
extending the United Kingdom export market and in extend¬ 
ing the domestic market, under, in both cases, an improved 
distribution system. Although little has been said with 
respect to the consumer due to the restricted scope of 
this inquiry, which did not include an analysis of the re¬ 
tail trade, It is again and finally emphasised that 


- 277 




- 278 - 

catering to consumer demand is the answer to success or 
failure* The consuming market, with its characteristic 
purchasing power and demand, is the final arbiter* If 
the consumer can be educated so much the better but his 
purchasing power is the vital consideration. This must 
not be forgotten in the light of much that has been said 
with reference to higher prices for the producer and 
with reference to the producer point of view generally. 

In view of the advent of state controlled marketing and 
of the necessity for revision of government regulation^ 
already in force as they affect the live stock industry on 
the plains, it seems that the role of government in the 
matter of beef production and distribution will increase 
rather than decrease. The range producer does not want 
to be subsidized but he does want a just interpretation 
by the state of his problems as an economic unit of value 
to society. Where the state already controls, such as in 
gracing regulations and taxation, and intends to assume 
more control, such as in marketing, its regulations must 
be so flexible as to permit of necessary modification from 
time to time and modification must be made when the facts 
of the case so demand. State assistance to an industry 
of economic value to society need not take the form of 
direct subsidy. To be of value in the long run it is often 
of more value if not so given. Vested interest through sub¬ 
sidy on the part of the state would lead to control and it 




- 279 - 

is not suggested in these pages that the state should sub¬ 
sidize the Canadian cattle producer. State control of 
production policy in an industry such as here reviewed 
would not be advisable even if it was possible. Neither 
the industry, the government nor society generally would 
desire such an extension of orthodox government function 
into the realm of private interprise. What the state 
can do however is remove obstacles and where its necessary 
regulations exist, see that they are properly integrated 
and correlated for the benefit of general welfare, Var¬ 
ious producing and distributing agencies must learn to 
take a larger view and with true altruism work in greater 
co-operation towards a greater return for all. 

In conclusion reference may be made to the special 
plight of the producer in the ^hort . C-rass Plains Area 
to-day, as expressed by one of many years T experience in 
agriculture - "Before concluding I would draw your partic¬ 
ular attention to the plight of the beef ranchers in 
Southern Alberta, For years these men have been at the 
mercy of our tariff makers or unmakers. At one time they 
found a profitable outlet for their grass cattle in the 
United States, To-day they are completely cut off from 
that market. From time to time restrictions have been 
imposed on exports to G-reat Britain, and to-day this out¬ 
let is greatly restricted. The ranches are in the position 
of having done everything possible, over a period of 
thirty years, to meet the requirements of the markets 





- 280 «r 

available to them, and time and time again have been re¬ 
buffed in their endeavors. 

-These men are the producers of some of the most sup¬ 
erior beef in Canada, if not indeed in the entire British 
Empire. 

“I am saying this for the Alberta ranchers, but I say 
it for the ranchers in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

They are men of the same kind. 

w Their production is the base upon which rests the 
splendid reputation enjoyed by Alberta grain finished 
cattle, including the Red Label Beef which has established 
such an enviable record in G-reat Britain and the larger 
consuming centres in Canada. Unless immediate action is 
taken to.relieve their situation many of these men will 
be forced out of business and if this occurs the entire 
beef industry of Canada will suffer a severe blow, 

. ,j Any steps necessary to sustain the beef ranching 
business, however drastic and any reasonable expense 
which the Federal Treasury may incur in this connection, 
is fully justified by the present situation. The beef 
ranches of Alberta must not- be allov. T ed to go into bank¬ 
ruptcy. Tremendous sums have been spent in sustaining 
other branches of agriculture. The ranchers have received 
no assistance in the past. They have relied on their own 
rugged individualism to carry them through periods of 
falling prices, drought and other hardships since they 










- 281 - 

first established themselves on their ranches, but the 
present combination of circumstances working against them 
has proven overwhelming, 

•'I may say at this point, that when. I came down here 
last November I asked the principal men doing business 
for what you would call the whole ranching business of 
our province, to give me an estimate of the percentage 
of the debts that they could pay if their whole asseta 
were realized, and the answer was, not more than 2 0 per 
cent of their debt u .(1) The economic status of the range 
beef cattle industry has been critically analysed in the 
course of this review.' It bears' out the above general 
statement. 

From the standpoint of practical economics the pro¬ 
ducer is primarily concerned with prices. For guidance 
in the future the following principle is submitted for 
his consideration - ir When prices are rising or falling 
the most important consideration for the live stock pro¬ 
ducer is the relative position of live stock prices when 
compared with all prices. In other words, if all prices 
are high, are live stock prices relatively high or low? 

Or if all prices are low are live stock prices relatively 
high or low? The easiest and quickest method to ascer- 

tain this is to express the price of live stock as a per- 
(1) Hon. George Hoadley - “The Live Stock Industry”. Min¬ 
utes of Evidence submitted to the Stevens Committee 
of the House of Commons, April 26th, 1 934* p. 29* 







- 282 = 


centage of all other prices. This is done by dividing 
an index of live stock prices by the index of all-whole¬ 
sale prices and multiplying by 1 00 . The wholesale index 
of all commodities is used as an index of the general price 
level for lack of a better measure. The final results of 
this calculation will be referred to in this paper as 
“purchasing power". It really expresses the wholesale 
price of live stock in terms of all other wholesale prices, 

“'When the purchasing power of any kind of live stock 
is calculated by this method for a long series of years 
it is found that there are fairly definite recurring 
cycles of purchasing power with a reasonable degree of 
periodicity, that is in length of timing from peak to 
peak or trough to trough of the waves. 

“The purchasing power of beef cattle in Canada has 
completed 5 distinct cycles since 18 , 56 . The peaks of 
these cycles occurred in 18,56, 1 871 , 1 8 84, 1 902, 1 91 4 and 
1 928. The average duration was 14 1/2 years, we are still 
in the downward phase of the 6 th cycle which started down 
in 1929* 

“The cycle is self perpetuating, outside influences 
appear to have little influence. After one or two years 
of rising prices some farmers begin to expand their 
cattle enterprise. But it takes from 5 to 5 years before 
the farmers 1 decisions bring a greater supply of cattle 
to the market. In the meanwhile the shortage becomes 












- 283 — 

more acute causing a sharp peak in prices. But the peak 
does not last very long. The efforts of the farmers are 
finally crowned with success; marketings increase and the 
price Breaks. Apparently the first break is not heeded 
as. a warning and as the farmer is by nature a hopeful 
being he continues his. expansion programme very often 
being aided and abetted by the advice of bankers, busin¬ 
ess men and others. Finally after a few more years of 
low prices he becomes thoroughly disgusted and restricts 
his breeding. The supplies then become relatively scarce, 
the price moves up and the cycle repeats itself'*.(1) 
Working on the basis of the cycles as determined since 
1836 and the last peak prices being in 1928, the next; 
period of high price levels should occur in 1942 . 

To bring about stability under these conditions it 
has been stated by other high authority that - -'agricul¬ 
tural production in all countries is dependant primarily 
for its success upon environmental or natural conditions; 
that in Western Canada, these natural conditions control 
to a greater extent than is generally realized our agric¬ 
ultural production, and that because of these facts the 
alternatives to present farm practices are limited. 

“This being the case, I am inclined to the belief 
that the ultimate solution lies, not in restrictive meas¬ 
ures applied to grain production, but rather in the dir- 

ection of a change in our methods of product ion a nd 

(1 ) Prof.E. C.Hope - “Live Stock Price Cycles“ r pp. 1 - 2 . 

1935. 













- 284 


marketing in order that a greater diversity of agricul¬ 
tural products suitable for export may be developed*'. (i ) 

If in the study that has here been made it should 
appear the producer has been accorded over emphasis it 
is with no direct intention that such should be the case. 

It is not the intention to convey that the producer is 
the only major factor in the beef cattle industry# The 
range producer himself would be the last to claim any 
Such honour. He is however one major factor - a most im¬ 
portant one - for without raw material no industry can 
exist. Attempt has been made to analyse the position of 
the producer in relation.to range beef production as a 
whole including his relation to other agencies which play 
an essential part in placing cattle or beef on the market# 
It is realized much more could be said on behalf of these 
other agencies - such as those of transportation - but it 
is hoped in view of the immensity of the problem In re¬ 
lation to society as a whole that sufficient has been said 
to indicate their vital functions in range beef production 
as it applies under the Canadian economy. What might ap¬ 
pear a slight excess of technicality has been found neces¬ 
sary in order, as a problem in applied economics, to afford 
a sufficient background upon which to base observations 
and draw conclusions. The Canadian economy is a varied 
economy but one intimately connected with agriculture, 

Considered in relation to t hat economy as__a._vdioAe_ the_, . 

(1 ) Dean A.M.Shaw - "Alternatives to Grain Growing in the 
Prairie Provinces". p. 10 f 1934, 









- 28j? - 

production of range beef cattle in the Short Grass Plains 
Area is a factor of no little concern but one which may 
well be developed for the greater benefit of society if 
science and reason are permitted to prevail. 







Appendix A: 

The Constitutional Relationship of the 

Federal and Provincial Governments Af¬ 
fecting the Beef Cattle Industry. 

The respective powers herein are set out in the 
British North America Act, 1867 as follows - ,f In each 
Province the Legislature may make Laws in relation to 
Agriculture in the Province, and to Immigration into the 
Province; and it is hereby declared that the Parliament 
of Canada may from Time to Time make Laws in relation to 
Agriculture in all or any of the Provinces, and to Immi¬ 
gration into all or any of the Provinces; and any Law of 
the Legislature of a Province relative to Agriculture or 
to Immigration shall have effect in and for the Province 
as long and as far only as it is not repugnant to any 
Act of the Parliament of Canada%( 1 ) In the light of a 
present need for a national agricultural policy for 
Canada affecting live stock and in the light of the 
present demand for amending the British North America 
Act in relation to a unified Canadian foreign policy - 
this section assumes special significance. The Section 
is not specific and in view of the present Natural Pro¬ 
ducts Marketing Act, 1934 will need to be interpreted in 
the widest sense and in the spirit of fullest co-operation 

between the Governments concerned. 

(1 ) British North America Act,~lT 3 67, Section 93 . 


- 286 - 















Appendix B: 

LIST OF PERSONS.AND ORGANIZATIONS INTERVIMED IN THE 
COURSE OF THIS SURVEY. 

Byers, Jack - Manager Western Stock Growers 1 Association, 
Calgary, Alberta. 

Cole, D.S. - Canadian Government Trade Commissioner, 

New York City, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Gilchrist,R.S, - Managing Director, Gilchrist Brothers., 
Wild Horse, Alberta. 

McIntyre, W.H, - Rancher, Magrath, Alberta. 

McKenzie, W.C. - Secretary Red Label Beef Breeders 1 and 
Feeders 1 Association. 

Manager Southern,Alberta Co-operative 
Association Limited,Lethbridge , Alberta. 

Rasmussen,K. - Department of Animal Husbandry, Lethbridge 
Experimental Farm, Lethbridge, Alberta. 

Reid, F.H. - Superintendent Lacombe Experiment Station, 

Lacombe, Alberta. 

Ross, Geo. - Rancher, St. Hilda, Alberta. 

Sinclair, Prof.R.D. - Associate Professor of Animal 

Husbandry, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta. 

Stapleton, W.J. - Rancher, Medicine Hat, Alberta. 

Stretton, H.G. - Ticket Agent, Canadian Pacific Railway 
Company, Lethbridge Alberta. 

Thomson, L.B. - Officer-in-Charge Dominion Range Exper¬ 
iment Station, Manyberries, Alberta. 

Wilson, W.A. - Canadian Government Animal Products Tro,de 
Commissioner, London,England. 


- 28 ? - 










































. 






















■ 

















Appendix C: 


LIST OF PERSONS AND ORGANIZATIONS FROM WHOM WRITTEN 


SUBMISSIONS WERE RECEIVED. 

Baker, F.M. - Western Representative, Industrial and 
Development Council of Canadian Meat 
Packers, Winnipeg, Manitoba. 

Boles, D.H. - Director of Lands, Department of Lands and 
Mines, Edmonton, Alberta. 

Byers, D.H. - Manager, Byers Mink and Fox Farm, Fort 
Saskatchewan, Alberta. 

Campbell, M.V. - District Supervisor Beef Grading, Depart¬ 
ment of Agriculture, Canada, Live Stock 
Branch, Field Service, Calgary, Alberta. 

Carlyle, S.G. - Live Stock Commissioner, Department of 
Agriculture, Edmonton, Alberta, 

Clements, H.E. - Department of Natural Resources, Grazing 
Lands Branch, Government of the Province 
of Saskatchewan, Regina, Saskatchewan, 

Hackney, J.C. - General Manager, Saskatchewan Co-operative 
Livestock Producers Limited, Saskatoon, 
Saskat chewan. 

Light, P.E. - Chief of Markets Intelligence, Live Stock 
Branch, Department of Agriculture, Ottawa,, 
Canada• 

McLean, J. 3 . - President Canada Packers Limited, Toronto, 
Ontario• 

Mitchell, Jas. - Rancher, Medicine Hat, Alberta. 

Rothwell, Geo.B. - Live Stock Commissioner, Department 

of Agriculture, Ottawa, Canada. 

Shaw, Prof. A.M. - Dean of Agriculture, University of 

Saskat chewan,Saskat o on, Saskat chewan. 

Smith, G, Ennis - Superintendent Experimental Fox Ranch, 

Dominion Experimental Farms, Summers!ie, 
Prince Edward Island, 


Thomson, L.B. 
Tranter, W.B# 


Officer-in-Charge Dominion Range Exper¬ 
iment Station, Manvberries, Alberta. 


Manager 

Limited, 


Beef 


Department 

Boniface, 


. Canada 

Manitoba. 


Packers 









































- 


- 

- < 

— 



' 





. 



- * 



. „ . r 










' 











Appendix D: 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Government of Canada. 

Department of Agriculture - Experimental Harms Branch: 
Carlyle, R.H., Dominion Range Station: 

"The Response of Cattle to our Grazing Lands" . 

Clarke, Dr.S.E, - Agrostologist,Domini on Range Station: 
"The Heed Situation” 

”0ur Grazing Resources - The Chemical Composition of 
our Native Forage and its Value for Livestock 
Production 1 * 

"Pasture Investigations on the Short Grass Plains 
of Alberta and Saskatchewan" 

Hopkins, E.S. - Dominion Field Husbandman - Report 1 93c 
"How Should Canada Export Beef Cattle" Pamphlet No. 39 . 
Lethbridge Experimental Farm: 

Beef Feeding Trials, 1 932-33 

Costs and Returns on Calves Finished under Contract 
Feeding Trials, 1*930-31 

Finishing Beef Calves - Financial Statement of Calf 
Feeding Trials, 1 931 -32 
Shipping Cost Statement, 1933* 

“Shipping Cattle to Britain"', Bulletin No, 62 
Tisdale, E.W. - Dominion Range Station: 

“Our Native Pasture Plants - Their Characteristics 
and Distribution" 

Thomson, L.B., Officer-in-Charge Dominion Range Station: 
"Age of Marketing Cattle in Relation to Ranch 
Organization" 

"An Economic Study of Beef Cattle Raising on the 
Range Areas of Alberta and Saskatchewan", Pre¬ 
liminary Report, 1932 
"Cost of Production of Range Cattle" 

"Economics of the Ranching Industry in Alberta and 
Saskatchewan", 1932 

"Feeds for Wintering Cattle in the Pry Areas" 
Department of Agriculture - Live Stock Branch: 

Annual Market Review, 1932 
Annual Market Review, 1 933 

Live Stock Market and Meat Trade Review, 1931 
Bank Act, 1 871 
Bank of Canada Act ,1934 
British North America Acts, 1 867-1 91 9 
Criminal Code of Canada 
Department of the Interior: 

Ranching and Grazing Investigation Commission, 1913 
Regulations Governing Grazing Lands in the Provinces of 
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and in the Peace 
River Tract in the Province of British Columbia, 

1924, and Amendments. 

Live Stock and Live Stock Products Act, 1923 


- 289 







Meat and Canned Foods Act, 1907 
Natural Products Marketing Act, 1934- 

Senate of Canada - Proceedings of the Standing Committee: 
on Agriculture and Forestry, "Conditions of Export 
Trade in Cattle and the Cattle Industry Generally", Nos. 

2 and 3, 1 933* 

Burrell, A.W., Edmonton, Alberta, Manager of Edmonton 
Stock Yards 

Kennedy, H.P., Toronto, Ontario, President, Edmonton 
Stock Yards, Limited- 

Light, P.E. , Market Services, Live Stock Branch, Depart¬ 
ment of Agriculture, Ottawa 

McCallum, J.M. r Stock Yards Services, Live Stock Branch, 
Department of Agriculture, Ottawa. 

Department of Trade and Commerce: 

Commercial Intelligence Journal, Yol.XLYIII,No.1 31 6; 

Yol.XLVIII,No #1 324; Yol.XLIY,No. 1 334; Yol.L,No.1 566 ; 
Yol,L,No . 1 370 ; Yol.L,No.1 377 ; Yol .LI ,No.1 607 . 

Live Stock and Animal Products Statistics, 1333 . 
Livestock on Farms by Census Divisions , 1 331 ,Alberta. 
Livestock on Farms by Census Division^, 1 331 , Saskatchewan 
Stevens, Hon. H.H. , Minister of Trade and Commerce; 
Chairman of the Special Committee of the House of 
Commons on Price Spreads and Mass Buying,1334 

Government of the Province of Alberta. 

Department of Agriculture: 

Koadley, Hon. Geo., Minister of Agriculture: 

"The Live Stock Industry", Minutes of Evidence Before? 
the Stevens Committee of the House of Commons, 
Ottawa, April 26th, 1 934- 
Department of Lands and Mines: 

Regulations Governing the Issue of Grazing Permits on 
Provincial Lands, (O.C.634-31) 

Regulations Governing the Leasing of Grazing Lands, 

(o.c.636-31) 

Government .of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
Department of Agriculture: 

Co-operative Livestock Shipping, Bulletin No.74 ,1923 
University of Saskatchewan: 

Shaw, A.M., Dean of Agriculture - 

"Alternatives to Grain Growing in the Prairie Prov¬ 
inces" . I 

Hope, E.C., Professor, Department of Farm Management: \ 

"Livestock Price Cycles", July 1 933 . 

"Livestock Cycles in Canada", June 1930 

Government of Great Britain. 

"Report of an Inter-Departmental Committee on the Grading 
and Marking of Beef" , Ministry of Agriculture and v 

Fisheries and Scottish Office, 1 930 J 













- 291 


"Report of the Reorganisation Commission for Fat Stock 
for England and Wales", Ministry of Agriculture and 
Fisheries, 1934 

Government of the United States of America, 

Black,W.H., Warner,K.F., and Wils on-,-C. V. - "Beef Produc¬ 
tion and-Quality as Affected-by Grade of Steer and 
Feeding Grain Supplement on Grass' 1 , Technical Bulletin 
No.21 7, 1931 , U.S.D.A. 

Davis, W.C. - "Market Classes and Grades of Yearling Beef", 
Circular No.208, 1932, U.S.D.A. 

Gibbons, C.E., Senior Marketing Specialist, - "Buying and 
Selling Livestock bjr Grade", 1 929? U.S.D.A. 

Jardine,Jas.T., and Forsling,C,L. - "Range and Cattle 
Management During Drought", Bulletin No .1 Cgl,1922, 
U.S.D.A. 

Parr, V.V. - "Beef-Cattle Production in the Range Area", 
Farmers* Bulletin No.1 393 , 1 923? U.S.D.A. 

Wilson, M.L., Wilcox, R.E., Klemmedson, G.S., and Par,V.V.- 
"A Study_of Ranch Organization and Methods of Range- 
Cattle Production in the Northern Great Plains Region", 
Technical Bulletin No.43 f 1928, U.S.D.A. 

Government of the State of North Dakota. 

Anderson, G.H. and Benton, A.E. - "Classes and Grades of 
Cattle and Calves Marketed from North Dakota. - 1 929", 
Agricultural Experiment Station, North Dakota Agricul¬ 
tural College, Fargo, N.D., Bulletin No.234,1932 

Government of the State of Nevada. 

Brennan, C.A. - "The Main Reasons why Range Cattle Ranchers 
Succeed or Fail", University of Nevada, Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Reno, Nevada, Bulletin No.1 33,1 933 

Government of the State of Iowa, 

Helser, M.D., Nelson, P.M., and Lowe, B. - "Influence of 
the Animal T s Age Upon the Quality and Palatability of 
Beef", Agricultural Experiment Station, Iowa State 
College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts, Ames* Iowa, 
Bulletin No.272, 1 930 


General» 

Canada Packers Limited - Seventh Annual Report and Balance 
Sheet as at March 29 th, 1934 
Canadian Trade Abroad, The MacLean Publishing Company, 
Limited, Toronto, Ontario, A.E.Cameron - "Protecting 
the Buyers of Export Meats", November 1 934 
Eawtrey, R.G. - "Currency and Credit" 

Eolmes, Macdonald - in "The Saskatchewan Farmer" 

Jackman, W.T. - "Economics of Transportation'*' 

Marshall, Hon. Duncan - "Farm Management" 






- 292 


Maynard, H.H., Weidler, W.C., Beckman, T.H, - "Principles 
of Marketing 11 

Sackville, Prof.J.P., Department of Animal Husbandry, 
University of Alberta - “Marketing of Grains through 
Beef Cattle" Report of the World Exhibition and Grain 
Conference, Regina, 1933 

Thomson, L.B., Jones, E.W., and Shaw, A.M* - "Western 
Canada Society of Animal Production", Report of a 
Special Committee on the Relation of Show Standards to 
the Demandsof the Meat Trade, 1931 

Western Stock Growers’ Association - "The Western Canadian 
Cattle Industry", a Brief for Presentation to the 
Special Committee of the House of Commons on Price 
Spreads and Mass Buying 

















SPECIAL COLLECTIONS 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA LIBRARY 


REQUEST FOR DUPLICATION 


I -wish a photocopy of the thesis hy 

. /-) 3 BR ~T /? U O D. ___(author) 

entitled_ P ft 0 Duel / O AJ c.^e-i /71 /] JR £/£ T/A/ Cr 0 / 
~P££F (L ftT7L£ 6 A) TUB 3 Mo 
O /^/)S5 PA. A? / /V' 5 /L £ Aj/) £>/) 

The copy is for the sole purpose of private scholarly or scientific study 
and research. I will not reproduce, sell or distribute the copy I request, 
and I will not copy any substantial part of it in ray own work without per¬ 
mission of the copyright owner. I understand that the Library performs 
the service of copying at my request, and I assume all copyright responsi¬ 
bility for the item requested. 


Date_Name and address 


Pages copied_Signature 

fh A P ' Gr/?/9 Z /h'Cr 

Pusil^d. IkLjJJ/L 



& / fj 0£jri£ 





















Mimeograph Ho* 73 


EXEERIMENP 124 

CATTLE FEED I TO- EXPMIMENP 
Nov. 9, 1933 to May 21,1934 


Reported by 

J. P. Sackville & R.D.Sinclair 
Department of Animal Husbandry, University of Alberta. 


The five experiments reported herewith are a 
continuation of projects that have been under way at 
this institution for two or more years and include the 
following: 

(1) A comparison of range steer and heifer calves 
with respect to rate of gain, feed requirements 
and suitability for market purposes. 

(2) The possibilities of finishing farm raised, 
skim-milk fed calves as baby beef and a com¬ 
parison of these with range-bred calves. 

(3) A study of the question of '’degree of finish' 1 
from the point of view of cost of production, 
market premiums, and suitability for the retail 
trade with yearling steers. This particular 
trial is also linked up with a comparison 

of self and hand-feeding of grain. 

(4) The influence of feeding ground limestone on 
the rate and economy of gain for finishing 
calves. 

(3) The economics of the cattle finishing business 
in relation to the profitable marketing of 
farm-grown feeds. 






EXPERIMENT 124 


STEER vs HEIFER CALVES 


Project No# 1 

A comparison of range steer and heifer calves 
with respect to rate of gain, feed requirements and 
suitability for market purposes. 


Results; 


The average daily gain was practically the same 
in both groups, being 1*56 lbs, and 1.51 lbs. for the 
steers and heifers, respectively# 

The feed costs per 100 lbs# gain was slightly 
in favor of the steer calves (140 per 100 lbs#) 

The steers were valued when finished at $4.25 per 
cwt. as compared with $4.00 per cwt, for the heifers. 
This margin of .250 per cwt. resulted in the steer 
calves breaking even while the heifers shewed a loss 
of over $ 2.00 per head. 

While there was practically no difference in the 
gains made by the two groups, the heifer calves showed 
a somewhat higher degree of firish at the end of the 
192 day feeding period than did the steers. Notwith¬ 
standing this fact, the heifers were valued 250 less 
per cwt. less than the steers. Apparently heifers are 
discriminated against on the hoof on the general 
assumption that the heifer carcasses are not looked 
upon as favorably as steer carcasses in the meat trade. 
In order to have avoided a loss on the heifers, it 
would have been necessary to buy them approximately 
500 per cwt. cheaper at the feeder calf stage. 


(See following table) 








EXPERIMENT 124 


STEER CALVES vs HEIEBR CALVES 


Lot I 

Steer calves 

Oat Hay- 
Grain 

Oil Meal 

Lot III 
Heifer calves 

Oat Hay 
Grain 

Oil Meal. 

Humber of calves 

12 

12 

Bays fed; 

192 

192 

Av. Initial weight; 

496 .ll 

440.69 

Av. Final weight; 

795.28 

731.39 

Av. Gain; 

299.17 

290.70 

Av. Daily gain; 

1.56 

1.51 

Av. Daily feed; 



Oat Hay; 

6.18 

6.16 

Grain; 

7.13 

7.11 

Oil Meal; 

.80 

.80 

Salt: 

.016 

.04 

Feed required per 100 lbs. Gain; 



Oat Hay: 

596.33 

407.17 

Grain; 

457.39 

469.36 

Oil Meal; 

51.23 

52.72 

Salt; 

1.03 

2.38 

Feed cost per 100 lbs. gain; 

$ 4.70 

$ 4.84 

Initial cost (at farm) per cwt; 

$ 3.80 

V>J 

% 

OO 

O 

Initial value per head; 

$17.33 

$ 16.75 

Cost of feed per steer; 

$14.07 

$14.08 

Interest (7f 0 number of days on 



trial); 

.64 

.62 

Total cost per steer; 

$32.04 

$31.44 

Necessary selling price to 



break even; 

$ 4.24 

$ 4.30 

Selling price per cwt; 

$ 4.25 

$ 4.00 

Profit per head; 

.06 

-$ 2.19 

Actual margin 

.45 

.20 






V "2 








-4- 


EXPERIMENT 124 

RANGE CALVES vs SKIM-MILK CALVES 


Project No. 2 

The possibilities of finishing farm raised, skim- 
milk fed calves as baby beef and a comparison of these 
with range-bred calves. 


Results; 


The skim-milk fed calves made somewhat higher 
daily gains in the feed lot than the range calves. The 
comparative gains were 1.73 lbs. and 1.3° lbs. for the 
skim-milk fed and range calves respectively. 

The daily consumption of both hay and grain 
was greater for the skim-milk fed calves. This additional 
feed was, however, utilized to good advantage as revealed 
by the fact that the cost of gains in this group was 
slightly lower (400 per cwt.) than it was for the range 
fed calves. 

At the close of the experiment six of the skim- 
milk fed calves had attained a degree of finish that 
would be considered of good killing quality, while the 
remaining four were only fair. This reduced the average 
valuation of these calves to $3#33 per cwt. as compared 
with $4.25 for the range calves. The lower feed costs 
together with the greater margin in the case of the 
skim-milk calves resulted in a profit of $1*38 per head 
while the range-bred calves just broke even. 

This result points to the possibility of the 
mixed farmer finishing a fair percentage of the skim- 
milk calves into acceptable baby beef at the yearling 
stage. 


(See following table) 











V ,T 











-5- 1 

EXPERIMENT 124 

RANGE CALVES vs SKD^MILK CALVES 


Lot I 

Lot IV 

Range Calves 

Pail-fed calves 

Oat Hay 

Oat Hay 

Grain 

Grain 

Oil Meal 

Oil Meal 


Number of steer calves 


12 

10 

Lays fed: 


192 

192 

Av, Initial weight; 


496.11 

449. 

Av. Final weight; 


795.28 

781.3 

Av. Gain; 


299.17 

332.3 

Av. Daily gain; 

Av. Daily feed; 


1.56 

1.73 

Oat Hay; 


6.18 

7.6? 

Grain; 


7.13 

7.20 

Oil meal; 


.80 

.80 

Salt; 

Feed required per 100 lbs. Gain; 

.016 

.05 

Oat Hay 


396.93 

443.38 

Grain 


457.39 

416.1 

Oil Meal 


51.23 

46.1 

Salt 


1.05 

2.93 

Feed cost per 100 lbs. 

Gain; 

|4.70 

|4.50 

Initial cost (at farm) 

per cwt; 

\*l 

o 

CO 

0 

$2.45 

Initial value per head; 
Interest (7% number of 

days on 

$ 17.33 

$11.00 

trial); 

.64 

.40 

Cost of feed per steer; 


$ 14,07 

$32.04 

$14.95 

$ 26.36 

Total cost per steer; 
Necessary selling price 

to 

break even; 


$ 4.24 

$ 3.37 

Selling price per cwt; 


$ 4,25 

$ 3.55 

Profit per head; 


.06 

$ 1.38 

Actual margin; 


,45 

1.10 












- 6 - 


EXPERIMEKT 124 

DEGREE OF FINISH IN RELATION TO PRODUCTION COSTS. 


Project No, 3 

A study of the question of "degree of finish" from the 
point of view of cost of production, market premiums and 
suitability for the retail trade with yearling steers. 
This particular trial is also linked up with a comparison 
of self and hand-feeding of grain. 

Results; 


Keeping in mind the fact that the degree of finish 
was the primary object in this particular trial, limited 
hand-feeding was practised in the case of lot VI. In 
other words, the aim was to feed approximately one-half as 
much grain to this group as was consumed by the self- 
fed group. 

The greater average daily grain consumption (5*3 lbs) 
in the case of the lot self-fed was naturally reflected 
in a considerably greater average daily gain (.36 lbs.) 
for this particular lot. The feed cost per 100 lb-s. of 
gain-was practically the same in both groups ($ 4.96 and 
|5*04) which indicated that the heavier grain feeding 
was, from the point of view of economy of gains, quite 
justified. The higher degree of finish in the case of 
the self-fed steers warranted a premium of ,30$ per cwt. 
and this combined with almost equally economical gains 
resulted in a greater profit per head of $ 3*51 for the 
heavy grain fed lot. 

A complete report w T ith respect to carcass yields and 
grade, together with the suitability for the retail trade 
of the two lots, will necessarily be delayed until 
slaughtering takes place. 

Self-feeding of grain to yearling steers proved a sat¬ 
isfactory practice. The cattle were on self-feeders at the 
end of the first 3 weekst finishing period and no digestive 
disturbances were noted at any time following. The average 
daily gain, daily grain consumption, as well as feed costs 
per 100 lbs, of gain all point to the success of this 
method of feeding grain. 

A return of 34$ fbr oats and . 48 $ for barley when marketed 
through the self-fed yearling steers adds further proof of 
the advantage of utilizing home grown grains for making beef. 

(See following table) 

















EXPERIMENT 124 


FULL vs LIMITED 

FEEDIIC OF 

GRAIN 


Lot V 

Lot VI 


Grain 

Grain 


Self-fed 

(£ full feed) 


Oat Hay 

Oat Hay 


Grain 

Grain 


Oil Meal 

Oil meal 

Number of steers 

9 

10 

Days fed 

192 

192 

Av. Initial weight; 

860,92 

838.67 

Av. Final weight; 

1282.03 

1210.30 

Av. Gain ; 

421.11 

331.83 

Av. Daily gain; 

Av. Daily feed; 

2,19 

12,36 

1.83 

Oat Hay 

20.99 

Grain 

10,83 

3.53 

Oil Meal 

.80 

.40 

Salt; 

.03 

.03 

Feed required per 100 lbs. Gain; 


Oat Hay 

5 63 .68 

1145 .34 

Grain 

493.77 

301.95 

Oil Meal 

36.49 

21.96 

Salt n ^ _ _ 

..!♦ ZZ 

,1.79 

Feed cost per 100 Ids. gain; 

$4. 9b 

$5* 04 

Initial cost (at farm) per cwt; §3.00 

$ 3.00 

Initial value per head; 
Interest (7fo number of days 

$ 25.83 

$ 23.76 

on trial); 

.93 

.95 

Cost of feed per steer: 

$ 20.90 

$17.75 

$44.45 

Total cost per steer; 
Necessary selling price to 

£ 47.67 

$ 3.67 

break even; 

§ 3.72 

Selling price per cwt; 

0 4.33 

$ 4.05 

Profit per head; 

$ 8.09 

$ 4.58 

Actual margin; 

C> 1.33 

$ 1.05 















- 8 -: 


EXPERIMENT NO. 124 
MINERALS EOR FATTENING CALVES 


Project No. 4 


The influence of feeding ground limestone on the 
rate and economy of gain for finishing calves. 

Results; 


The feeding of ground limestone resulted in an 
increased consumption of grain (.18 lbs. per day) 
and a greater average daily gain, the figures being 
1.70 lbs. for the limestone group and 1.56 lbs. for 
the non-limestone lot. Notwithstanding the greater 
gains, the limestone fed group did not show the finish 
of the other lot at the end of the trial period. 

There was evidently more of a tendency to grow bone 
and frame than to put on flesh. 

Adding ground limestone to the grain did actually 
result in a lowering of cost of gains and on the basis 
of the amount of grain replaced the feeding of lime¬ 
stone could have been justified. 

The calves fed limestone lacked considerably in 
finish at the close of the experiment as compared 
with those in the "no limestone" group. As a result 
they were valued at 50 $ less per cwt. The lower 
valuation meant that they showed a loss of $3«20 
per head while the "no limestone" lot broke even. 

It would appear that feeding the ground limestone 
to these particular calves resulted in a "growthiness" 
which was not accompanied by the thickness of finish 
neoeccary to bring the top market price. 


(See following table) 













- 9 - 


EXPERIMEOT 124 

MINERALS FOR FATTENING CALVES 


Lot I 
Oat Hay 
Grain 
Oil Meal 


Lot II 
Oat Hay 
Grain 
Oil Meal 
Minerals 


Number of steer calves; 

12 

12 

Days fed; 

192 

192 

Av. Initial weight; 

4^6.11 

463.14 

Av. Final weight; 

733.28 

792,22 

Av. Gain; 

299*17 

32‘?,08 

Av, Daily gain; 

1*36 

1,70 

Av. Daily feed; 



Oat Hay 

6.18 

6*48 

Grain 

7.13 

7*31 

Oil meal 

, 80 

,80 

Ground Limestone 

- 

. 12 ' 

Salt 

.016 

. 02 J 

Feed required per 100 lbs. gain; 



Oat hay 

396.93 

380 , 32 : 

Grain 

457.39 

428,96 

Oil Meal 

51.25 

46.83 

Ground limestone 

- 

7.21 

Salt 

1.03 

1,47 

Feed cost per 100 lbs, gain; 

$4.70 

$ 4,46 

Initial cost (at farm) per cwt; 

$ 3.80 

$ 3.80 

Initial value per head; 

117*33 

$17*67 

Interest (7% number of days 



on trial); 

„ 54 

.65 

Cost of feed per steer; 

$14.07 

f14.59 

Total cost per steer; 

$32.04 

$ 32.92 

Necessary selling price to 



break even 

$ 4.24 


Selling price per cwt; 

4 4.25 

I 3.75 

'rofit per head 

.06 

-$ 3.20 

Actual margin 

.45 

- .05 





OUTLINE OF EXPERIMENT: 


Animals Used: 


Twenty-four steer calves, twelve heifer calves and 
twenty yearling steers purchased from Sidey Brothers, 
Cadogan, alberta, were used in this year ? s trial, Ell 
were range bred, of Shorthorn breeding, were on the thin 
order but would grade from good to choice feeders. The 
calves were weaned just prior to shipment to the 
University Farm on October 25 . The calves, together 
with the yearling steers were placed on a ration of 
oat green feed with a small allowance of whole oats 
and bran on their arrival at the farm and previous to 
the start of the experiment on November 9* * 

The skim-milk fed calves were purchased in the 
Alix district, were sired by a Shorthorn bull showing 
some dairy breeding and were out of grade Shorthorn 
cows. In ago they would range from eight to nine 
months, wore well grown but carrying little flesh and 
could be regarded as a reasonably good type of pail-fed 
calves. They had been weaned shortly prior to pur¬ 
chase. The treatment of this group from the time they 
arrived in Edmonton until going on food was the same as 
that mentioned in connection with the range-bred calves. 

Allotment; 


The range calves were divided into groups of twelve 
each and the yearlings and pail-fed calves into groups 
of ton. As oven a distribution as possible with respect 


to weight, 

color and 

condition 

ms Fed: 




Lot 

I 

12 

calves 

- cut oat 

Lot 

II : 

12 

caL ves 

- cut oat 

Lot 

in : 

12 

calves 

(heifers) ■ 

Lot 

iv : 

10 

calves 

(pail-fed 

Lot 

v 

10 

yearlings - cut 1 

Lot 

vi : 

10 

yearlings - cut . 


grain - oil meal - 
limestone 
»at hay - grain - 
- oil meal 
>at hay - grain - 
-oil meal 

• - grain - oil meal 
(self-fed) 

■ -tt grain ration - 
-oil meal. 























Grain Ration for Calves; 


First 30 days - whole oats. 

Second 30 days -(coarsely ground oats - 2 parts 

( ground barley - 1 part 

Balance - ( ground oats - 1 part 

( ground barley - 1 part 

Grain Ration for Yearlings; 

First 30 days - 1/2 oats -1/2 barley ( 

) ground 

Second 30 days - 1/3 oats - 2/3 barley ( 

Linseed Oil Meal;: 

Oil Meal was fed to all lots, except Lot VI, 
according to the following plan; 

First 30 days - 1/4 lb. per head daily. 

Second 30 days - 1/2 » ” ” » 

Balance 1 " " 

In Lot VI, one-half the above amount was fed, 

Plan of Feeding; 

With the exception of Lot V, the schedule of 
feeding was as follows; 

Grain was fed at 7 A.M. and 4 P.M. 

Linseed Oil Meal was fed mixed with the grain. 

C ut Oat Hay was fed at 7*40 A.M. and 4.40 P.M, 

Grain not consumed was weighed back forty minutes 
after feeding and hay not consumed was weighed back 
before the next feeding of grain. 

In the case of Lot V that were self-fed grain, the 
steers were started on a mixture of equal parts oats and 
barley (ground), hand-fed at the rate of 2 lbs. per head 
daily. This was rapidly increased until at the end of 
20 days, grain was being loft in the feed trough. The 
self-feeder was then brought into use. At the commence¬ 
ment of the second month the grain ration was changed to 
1/3 oats and 2/3 barley (ground) and this was continued 
throughout the balance of the tost period. 

Salt; 

Salt was kept before the groups at all times. 



















- 13 -' 


Minerals; 

Finely ground limestone ms fed mixed in the grain 
at the rate of 1 lb. per 100 lbs. of grain during the 
first month of the feeding period. This was then in¬ 
creased to l^lbs. per 100 lbs. of grain until the end 
of the trial and in addition, ground limestone was 
offered free choice. 

Watering: 

All lots were watered twice daily at approximately 
9 A.M. and 3.30 P.M. 

Shelter; 


All lots had the run of a straw shed partially open 
to the west with small exercising yards adjoining. 
Feeding was done inside. 

Weighing: 

Each animal was weighed on three consecutive days 
at the beginning and end of the experiment. The 
average of three weights was used as the initial and 
final weights respectively. In addition, individual 
weights were taken every thirty days during the trial. 

Carcass Data; 


An effort will be made to secure all information 
possible with respect to the carcasses within the 
various groups. This will include dressed yields and 
the grading of the carcasses with a view to determin¬ 
ing their suitability for the retail trade. 

Valuation of Animals; 

The valuation of all animals at the commencement of 
the test was based on the actual cost of the animals 
laid down at the feed lots. The animals were purchased 
on the basis of delivery to Edmonton and this price 
represented the 'value placed on the animals at the 
commencement of the test. The final valuation was 
based on the estimates given by a member of one of the 
prominent Commission Firms, together with the cattle 
buyer for one of the larger Meat Packing Companies 
in Edmonton, and represented the relative value of 
the various groups for the week commencing May 21. 








' 












- 14 - 


Valuation of Feeds; 



Oats 

| . 23 </■ 

per 

bus. 


Barley 

tip « 26 $ 

?» 

ir 


Linseed oil Meal - 

$32.00 

tr 

ton 


Salt 

$ 1.20 

»? 

cwt. 


Ground limestone - 

| 1.13 

it 

ft 


Oat Hay 

$ 3.00 

!» 

ton. 

Description 

of Feeds: 




Oats ; 

Graded 2 C.W. of good 

quality, 

reasonably 


cle an and free from other grains. 


Barley: Graded 3 C.W. would be considered a good 

standard grade. Practically clear of weeds 
and foreign grain. 

Linseed Oil meal; Prepared by the Alberta Linseed Oil 
Co. Medicine Hat, Alberta. Guaranteed analysis 
Crude protein 33y°: fat 3lf<>: crude fibre 7if°* 

Oat Hay; Cut in the medium dough stage, slightly 

weathered, was fairly fine in straw and would 
be regarded as a good average in feeding 
quality. 

Limestone; Obtained from Capital Seed and Poultry 

Supply, Edmonton. Chemical analysis showed 
94.38calcium carbonate. 

Salt; Coarse stock salt. 


Analyses of Feeds; 

Oats 

Barley 

Oil 

Meal 

Moisture 

12.84 

13.12 

12.46 

Fat 

4.18 

2.14 

7.00 

Protein 

10.74 

11.61 

39.94 

Fibre 

10.07 

4.62 

7.01 

Ash 

3.01 

2.20 

4.21 

Carbohydrates; 

39-16 

66.31 

29.38 





















i 


i 


! 


I 

i 






J 










DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


p. 


CO N\ 

pc* 

P os 
P 

P rH 

P 

P 



S 

CO 

a 

p 

°5i 

p 

M 

p 

p 

CO 

p 

g 

K 

p 




@ p 
m p 

H P 
p p 
p 

pH 


OJ 

iH 

-P 

fl 

0 

a 

0 


& 


p 


Mimeograph No* 73 



day of 
BETWEEN: 


MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT made this 
19 . 


of 

in the Province of ~ . 

hereinafter called the " c ;roier ,r 


OF .THE FIRST PART 


-and- 


of 

in the Province of 
hereinafter called the "feeder*'" 


OF THE SECOND PART 


TIilS AGREEMENT WITNESSETH: 

THAT the feeder, being desirous of obtaining cattle 
for finishing, agrees to accept cattle from the grower and the 
grower agrees to supply cattle to the feeder on the terms set out 
hereinafter. 

1, The feeder expressly warrants he is in a position 
to receive cattle on his farm or feedlot, having provided feed, 
water, tank heater and shelter necessary for the successful finish¬ 
ing of said cattle, 

2, The feeder will feed and water the cattle furnishing 
feed and water in such quantities and qualities as necessary to 
properly finish the cattle. 

3, The feeder will use his best efforts to fatten and 
finish the cattle delivered by the grower. It shall not be con¬ 
sidered the sole fault of the feeder if single animals, due to 
individual physical disorganization, fail to finish properly, if 
the remainder of the cat tie show evidence of proper care, 

4, The feeder will allow no other live stock in the 
same feedlot where the cattle specified in this contract are fed. 

3. The feeder, or his representative, is to inspect the 

cattle, as to health, age, weight, quality and general condition at 
the grower’s ranch, and before they have been driven to the rail¬ 
road loading point for shipment to the feeder’s feedlot. After 
such inspection, and after acceptance of the cattle by the feeder, 
he must be satisfied with the cattle supplied by the grower except 
that the feeder will not be responsible for improper castration of 
the cattle. All cattle which prove to be stags or bulls after 
being delivered to the feeder must be removed by the grower within 
days after a notice in writing specifying the number 
of stags and bulls has been mailed to him at his address as herein 
stated, and after the expiration of the said period for the removal 
thereof the grower shall pay the feeder ten (10) cents per day for 
each stag and (or) bull not removed within the said period. 

6, The title and ownership of the said cattle shall re¬ 

main wholly in the grower, 

7« The grower shall supply at the farm or feedlot of 

the feeder on Section in Township , in 

Range , Rest of the Meridian, in the 

Province of , cattle as follows: 

_ head of calves, 

__head of yearlings, 

_ head of two-year olds. 















Ovv 



























- 2 - 


8. Tho basis of settlement will be the inventoried in¬ 
vestment plan as outlined hereinafter and the grower will pay to 
the feeder, as his remuneration, from the not returns, if and when 
received by him in money, such sum as may make the shares of the 
parties hereto in such net return proportionate to their respective 
investments in the finished product. 

(a) The value of tho grower’s investment will bo 

cents per pound of the calves, cents per 

pound of the yearlings and cents per pound of the two- 

year olds placed by him in the feeder’s farm or feodlot. 

(b) The value of tho feeder’s investment will be 

cents for each pound of gain made by tho calves, 

cents for each pound of gain made by the yearlings, 

and cents for each pound of gain made by the two-year 

olds, while in the feedlot. 

9. All cattle fed under this contract will be woighed 
in to the feeder’s lot as follows and this weight will constitute 
tho grower’s investment as of clause 8, section (a) above: 

(a) Tdierc the grower has livestock scales at his 
ranch, or within a reasonable distance not exceeding three (3) 
miles from his ranch, cattle will bo weighed up on a three (3) 
per cent, or overnight shrink. 

(b) Where cattle are weighed at a point more than 
three (3) miles from the grower’s ranch, tho cattle will be weighed 
up without shrink. 

(c) Where cattle are shipped hy rail, or driven in 
and weighed at the scale nearest to tho place of feeding, and more 
than three miles from the grower’s ranch, the grower will be en¬ 
titled to feed and water cattle before weighing. 

10. The gain in tho feedlot shall be the difference be¬ 
tween the grower’s delivery weight as outlined in clause 9 and the 
weight of the finished cattle at the public scales nearest the 
feeder’s lot loss three (3) per cent, shrink, except: 

(a) When it is necessary to ship the cattle by train 
to the stockyards before weighing, in which case off car weights 
will constitute the finished weight. 

(b) And in cases where animals are lost or removed 
during the feeding period, the average weight of the individual 
original cattle of tho same age shall constitute the basis for 
computing tho original weight of all tho finished cattle. 

11. Tho net return or net selling price shall mean the 
amount of money received from the sale of the finished cattle 
after all railway, yardage, commission, insurance, marketing 
agent’s charges and other regularly incurred charges of and inci¬ 
dental to the selling thereof have been deducted from the gross 
soiling price. Freight charges in the shipment of cattle to the 
feeder’s feedlot shall be advanced by the grower and shall be de¬ 
ducted from the gross selling price in determining the net returns. 

12. In case of losses through death or otherwise from 
the time of the delivery of the cattle to the feeder till tho sale 
thereof, the grower shall lose the animal or animals lost, and the 




i:: • 







c:' 

i: 

••• ni 


r* ‘ 













- 3 - 


feeder shall lose his right to remuneration in respect thereof. 

Losses must he reported in writing to the grower, or 
his assignee, the notice being mailed within twenty-four (24) hours 
after the death occurs, sotting forth the cause of the death if this 
can be ascertained. 

13. The selling of the finished cattle shall be placed in 
the hands of a marketing agent to bo mutually agreed upon. 

(a) Before any sale is made the feeder and grower 
must mutually agree that the cattle are suitably finished and that 
the prospective returns will be satisfactory, having due regard to 
the general level of livestock prices. 

(b) The finished cattle may not be consigned for ex¬ 
port sale without the mutual consent of both parties, 

14. Schedule "A" attached hereto will constitute an ex¬ 
ample of the method of determining the remuneration of the feeder 
and returns to the grower under this contract. 

15. So long as the feeder observes and carries out the 

terms of this agreement the grower shall advance, or cause to be 
advanced, to the feeder from time to time as the cattle increase in 
weight Dollars ($ ) for each one hundred 

pounds of such increase, and the Feeder agrees to repay to the grower 
at the time of the sale of the said cattle, and in any event not 
later than the first day of June next, the total amount of such ad¬ 
vances with interest thereon at the rate of six (6) per cent, per 
annum from the respective dates thereof till payment, and the total 
amount of such advances and interest shall bo a first charge on the 
fecder ? s remuneration for the care and feeding of the said cattle. 

16. It is in the contemplation of the parties hereto and 
is agreed that the grower may grant, assign and transfer all or part 
of his interest in, to and under this contract and in the cattle 
covered thereby to Dominion Agricultural Credit Company Limited, 
hereinafter called the "company", and that in the event of his so 
doing the feeder shall hold the said cattle in trust for the company, 
and it is further agreed that if, and as long as, the company has any 
interest in, to or under this contract, or in or to the cattle cov¬ 
ered thereby, or the proceeds thereof: 

(a) Notices as to stags and bulls and of loss of 
cattle to be given under paragraphs 5 and 12 hereof respectively 
shall be mailed to the company to Regina, Saskatchewan, and to any 
other person designated by the company, instead of to the grower. 

(b) In the absence of scales at the fecdlot increase 
in weight for the purposes of paragraph 15 hereof shall be absol¬ 
utely determined by the estimate of the company’s representative or 
representatives as to the weight of the said cattle. 

(c) The company may at any time or times, but shall not 
be obliged to, enter upon the feeder’s premises and inspect the same, 
and the cattle and feed and water supplies and, notwithstanding any¬ 
thing contained in paragraph 13 hereof, the company shall have the 
sole right of sale of the said cattle (and in its own name) and the 
solo right to determine the fitness and readiness of the said cattle 
for market and the time, place and method of marketing the same, and 
to receive the entire proceeds thereof, and the company shall distri¬ 
bute the said proceeds pursuant to the terms of the said contract. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have hereunto 
sot their hands and seals the day and year first above written. 

SIGNED, SEALED AND DELIVERED j 

In the presence of ) 

) 

as to execution by the grower) 
as to execution by the feeder 


■ 


' ■ ■ 












' 


- 

■ 









,i- •*• - - - v — ~ .. — -.. +■ ~, i- 1 - 


. 


■ 

\ 

‘ 

; 

, 





w 

0 

> 

•H 

(!) 

O 

(1) 

pc; 

-P 

U 

cd 

P 

xi 

o 

cd 

P 


<1 


w 

d 

d 

d 

-p 

0 

PC 

o 

xi 

-p 


&D 

d 

•H 

d 

•H 

d 

O 

-P 

0 

P 

d 


0 

nd 

•H 

d 

P 


o) 

ai 

o| 

O 

h| 

@j 








































































































Guide in Determining the Returns Each Party Receives 
REEDING CONTRACT FOR 6 50 POUND YE ARLING 



Feeder’s price per pound gain is the estimated cost» 











































































































SCHEDULE "A” 

Guide in Determining the Returns Each Party Receives 
PE EPING CONTRACT EOR 6^0 POUND YEARLING 



Feeder 5 s price per pound gain is the estimated cost 





















































































































>> ^ 
+= Si 
U <i| 
cti 


ffij 

o! 


Eh 

S’ 1 

o 
o 


Oj 

u 

il 

el 



Feeder’s price per pound gain is the estimated cost 





























































































o 

co 


t>> ^ 

t 5 

& # 


01 


6\ 

SI 


N 

Eh’ 

S 


0 



Feeder*s price per pound gain is the estimated cost. 



























































































Guide in Determining the Returns Each Party Receives 



I 

1 

j 




' 






T ’ 




1 

-p 






I 









d dl 





[ 








j 

O -Hi 

£q cdi 
-P c3 
CO 

O •! 
> ,Q 

d rHj 

H 




i 

1 

! 


1 

1 

i 













d- 

d. 




d. 

d- 

d. 


| 

d- 

d 

d- 


h|n 

H|02 

d. 

d- 

d. 

H|W 

h|« 

rH|c« 



Pi 

UN 

kn 

KN 

i cr\ 

LT\ 

LTN 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 

nO 

NO 


! 

1 

to o 
- p] 
P ■ . 
o o 
d o| 




1 

i 

j 



J 

i 







| 

CD *H* 
O d| 




j 


j 








j 

Pm PRj 
-1 




1 

■4——-j 


j 

.. f 









pi 

CVJ 

OO 

KN 

■r- 

i CO¬ 

1—1 

—4* 

LO\ 

c 

i—l 

LTN 

CM 

CO 

KN 


i 

o| 

OO 

o-~ 

C 

ON 

c~- 

d- 

;—i 

c 

C\J 

d- 

O' 

i—1 




o 


v 

1 ^ 

■7 


o 

j 


r- 

a 

a 



d 0 

KN - 

CO 

K\ 

i cnj 

CO 

d- 

CJ 

o~- 

KN | 

rH 

NO 

CM 


! 

•h SH 

C\J 

CVl 

KN 

i ^ 

CM 

i<N 

! CM 

CM 

KN ; 

CM 

CM 

KN 



cd ct ! 


. 


j 



i 








G5 ; 




1 



| 


J 

KN j 





I 

P! 

OO 

CVl 

O' 

K. 

ON 

lon 

I KN 

ON 

CO 

CM 

O' 



d O: 

1-1 

O' 

CM 

! o 

t— 

LTN 

j CO 

c-~ 

cr-~ 

KN 

C'- 

OO 


! 

d di 

9 



a 

a 

i 

r. 

t 


J 

5> 

» 



d oi 

d - 

o~ 


1 ^ 

CO 

CM j 

LTN 

i ON. 

KN 

NO i 

o 1 

d- 


1 

o o. 
PM PmI 

1 —1 

R 

CO 

1 H 

H 

ELI 

1 

1-1 

CM 1 
. 1 

iH 

OJ 

OJ 



O rH; 

o 

o 1 

O 

! o 

O 

o 

1 o 

o 

O ^ 

“ 

o 

o 



K\ cd : 

o 

LTV 

O 

o 

LT\ 

o 

o 

kn 

O j 

O 

KN 

o 


i 

CVl -Hi 

4 


•• 

c 

a 


a 

7 


a 

» 

o 


! 

Oi 

OO 

tr- J 

’ c— 

CO 

to- . 


CO 

c— 

O' 

CO 

c~- 

c— 

Hi 

Eh| 

KN 

•d 

-1 

LO\ 

{ KM 

d - 

LTN 

KN 

d- 

KN 

KN 

d- 

KN 

1-1 

CR 

I 

.T? 

KN 

O' 


o 

O 

d- 

CM 

i—1 

d- 

KN 

i—1 



Gd 

KN 

rH 

O 

i d- 

o 

; ^ | 

LON 

On 

KN 

c- 

ON 

O' 


i 

P 

A 

* 

-i 

1 s 

0 

■* 

ti 

c 

a 

• 

a 

e 

P 

1 

d of 

KN 

On 

LT-> 

CM 

CO 

KN 

1 —1 

NO 

CM 

o 

KN 

H 


1 

•H U 

CM 

CM 

K\ 

| CM 

CM 

fO\ j 

CM 

CM 

KN 

CM 

CM 

KN 

0 1 

cd cd 
ct 

p 






i_L 







B 


CO~ 

KN 

O 

i O 

O 

o ! 

NO 

OO 

ON i 

NO 

O' 

ON 

o 

d o 

vO 

OO 

O 

J. NO 

' o 

d" i 

i ^ 

O 

NO 

CM 

o 

CO 

Pm 


d d| 

• 

i> 

o 

j t 

* 

'* j 

< a 

• 

• 1 

a 

a 

a 



d q> 

nO 

O . 

LOs 

! 

CM 

NO 

| CO 

KN 

c— 

ON 

d- 

OO 

o 

o o 

i—1 

CM 

CM 


CM 

CM 1 

1 1 —f 

CM 

CM 

l—1 

CM. 

CM 

o 

il 

j| 

PM pMj 




1_ 


_l 

h_ 






c— 

O rH|i 
o cd; 

O 

O 

o 

7 - 

I ° 

; o 

j ° i 

! o 

O 

O 

o 

O 

o 

PR 

i 

1 O ! 

o 

O 

! O 

o 

° 

° 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

j ! 

KN-P • 

• 

a 

* 

o 


° 

« 

a 

a 

a 

a 

P*H 


o!j 

i o 

o 

o 

\ o 

O 

O 1 

i o 

O 

o 1 

O 

o 

o 

|| 

EHjl 

d 1 

LTV 

NO 

d" 

LOS 

^ [ 

1 d- 

kn 

NO j 

d- 

kn 

NO 



. ^4 


I 


; 

__ . 

— H 

..... 

__ 

f 


L 


<dl 

p'l 

1 1 


c— 

1 i—1 

~On' 

c~- j 

i ° 

KN 

° | 

NO 

o 

d- 

PR 


o 

CK 

NO 


- ON 

KV 

ON ; 

o 

CM 

L^ j 

1—1 

CM 

CM 

Eh 

1 

m 

• 

o 

> 

> 

0 

o 

1 

• 


• 

a 

a 



d oi 

00 

CO 

d- 

I i—1 

c~- 

CM il 

H 

NO 

1—1 

O 

KN 

o 

oi 

o 

i 

•h di 

cd cdj 


CM 

KV 

j CM 

CM 

KN | 


CM 

KN 

OJ 

OJ 

KN 


l ; 

cd 

. 



— 



r 







P{! 

i o i 

NO 

KV 

1 ON 

H 

KN j 

° 

KN 

O 

d- 

O 

NO 

1-7? 

\ ; 

; d Oil 
. d dli 

1 O 

OO 

NO 

! o 

i—1 

° 

° 

CM 

KN 

co 

KN 

O' 

|—1 

i a i 

1 3 1 

n 

<, 

i 

> 

- il 

| ® 

a 

e 

a 

a 

* 

Q 

d ol! 

1 ON j 

KN 

OO 

° 

LTN 

O }| 

i H 

NO 

i—1 

i—1 

' O' 

CM 

Hi 1 i 

O Oil 

1 H ! 

CM 

CM 

! 00 

CM 

KN. ij 

1 CM 

OJ 

KN 

CM 

CM 

KN 

P-1 


PR Pm 

i 





_ _ i 

1 _ 






Pm 

i -i ! 

-pi ! 

oJ 


CM 

O 

j o 

O 

*! 

o II 

! o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 


Pi 1 

KN Cd 1 

1 0 , 

KN 

O 

! o 

LON j 

° i 

i ° 

kn 

O 

O 

KN 

O 



kn -hi 


0 


i 1 

c | 

* 1 

! a 

o 

a 

• 

• 

• 


•Hi i 

O 

CM 

CM 

hO, 

CM 

CM 

KN jj 

| CM 

CM 

KN 

CM 

CM 

OJ 


CDj j 

Eh 

d 

K\ 

NO 

d- 

LTN 

no 

1 d 

KN 

NO 

d* 

kn 

NO 


&\ | 



_ 



. - - , -1 

_ „J\ 








coj j 


d- 

1 o- 

O 

f ON 

NO 

~ ■ • ■ n 

k\ ; 

F~"-~ 

KN 

cr~ 



O' 

ON 


_ 1 

©! 

kn 

1 H 

OO 

1 d- 

OO 

CM i| 

| 

nO 

OO 


KN 

d- 


Pi ! 

CD! 


9 

i c 

'J 


c 

■ j, 

i u 

< 

a 

• 

a 

• 


! d oi 

j 00 

! CO 

KV 

r— j 

NO 

: CJ 1 

1 CO 

kn 

d* 

ON 

d - 

ON 


ns' ] 

! -H d 1 

! OJ 

CM 

K\ 

CM 

OJ 

! KN 

j CVl 

CM 

CM 

(—1 

OJ 

CM 


o 

cd cd 




i _ 

_ 

L_ l 








p! i 

■: cd 

1 NO 




j 









Ct, 1 

i Pi! 


KN 

O 

{ i—1 

d* | 

c—- [; 

to- 

KN 

O 

d- 

KN 

i—1 



! d Oi 

j d- 

CO 

CM 

1 LON 

H 

1 c " 

1 -d 

KN 

OJ 

KN 

d* 

KN 


<rJ‘ | 

j d dl 


i ® 

• 

j 0 

o ! 

a j 


c* 

a 

a 

a 

a 


di i 
3| 1 

i d O; 

j i—1 

1 NO 

CM 

! CM 

OO | 

kn 

KN 

ON 

KN 

d" 

o 

NO 


o co: 

CM 

CM 

1^ 

' CM 

CM 

KN 

CM 

CM 

KN 

CM 

KN 

KN 


O 

PM Pm 

; __ 

1 


i_ 

1 

L.J 



1 






oh 

If 

1 ° 

1 ° 

O 

i o 

° I 

° I 

i o 

O 

o i 

O 

O 

O 


p'l 

o cd 

1 o 

° 

O 

i ° 

° 

° 

1 o 

o 

O I 

O 

O 

O 


o 1 

I d -P 1 

1 • 

| , 

n 


c 

! » i 

i O 

• 

• 

a 

a 

• 


0 

o 

i d 

! LT\ 

NO 

1 d- 

LTN 

NO 

1 d- 

kn 

NO ! 

i d- 

KN 

NO 


EH 

d- 

i ^ 

NO 

t d- 

LTN 

NO 

S d- 

KN 

NO | 

d- 

kn 

NO 


of 


j 

1 




1 







3 


[ 





| 








•Hi 



,L.. 


i _.... 










p 

PM 

W 


r— 


h 


r' ' 



" "" t 

i 






d o 

•H C 

' d. 

i d. 

d- 

j d. 

d- 

i 

1 d.| 

i 

d. 

dJ 

d. 

d- 

d. 



r—1 T- 
i—1 

i d- 

i 

! ^ 

nO 

j d- 

LO\ 

NO 

: d 

KN 

no| 

d - 

kn 

NO 



o P- 
V) 

ij 

j 


| i 

d_ J 


! 

i_ 



1 

! 

1 

1 




Feeder f s price per pound gain is the estimated cost 































































































IN CONSIDERATION of tho sum of 

Dollars ($ ) paid to him at or before the ex¬ 

ecution of these presents, the receipt thereof is hereby by him 
acknowledged i and of these presents, , in 

the annexed contract and herein called the -rower'*, hereby grants, 
assigns and transfers unto Dominion Agricultural Credit Company 
Limited, heroin and in the said contract called the "company", all 
his right, title and interest in, to and under tho said contract 
and in and to tho cattle referred to therein, and in and to any 
moneys now or hereafter to be payable to him thereunder# 

The company agrees with the grower to make such pay¬ 
ments of freight and, unless and until tho option hereinafter gran¬ 
ted be exorcised by the grower, to make to the feeder therein named 
such advances as by tho said contract the grower is obligated to 
make, or to cause to bo made. 

AND IN consideration of the company entering into 
this agreement, , herein and in tho said con¬ 

tract called the ^feeder", hereby agrees with the company that so 
long as tho company has any interest in, to or under the said 
agreement, or in or to tho said cattle, or in or to any moneys 
payable to the grower or to it under the said contract, that he 
will faithfully observe and perform all tho terms of the said con¬ 
tract by him to be observed or performed and agrees to hold tho 
said cattle in trust for tho company. 

AND IN consideration of the company entering into 
this agreement tho grower and the feeder jointly and severally 
agree with the company that if in tho opinion of tho company the 
cattle are at any time not receiving proper care, or if in the 
opinion of tho company the feeder has failed to perform or observe, 
or has for any reason become unable personally to perform or observe 
tho whole or any part of this agreement by him to be performed or 
observed, or if tho feeder should die, or if the cattle or any 
thereof should become liable to distress for taxes, or if the com¬ 
pany should for any reason consider its position insecure, the com¬ 
pany may forthwith, or at the first time thereafter when in the 
opinion of the company it may be done with the least loss or injury 
to the cattle, at its option, repossess the said cattle, and having 
repossessed the same may forthwith sell the said cattle or may make 
such arrangements for their care and feeding as it may in its absol¬ 
ute discretion see fit, and the feeder shall forthwith repay to the 
company any and all expense incurred by it in, for and (or) incid¬ 
ental to such repossession, care and feeding and arranging therefor, 
with interest from the time or times of tho incurrence of such ex¬ 
pense at the rate of six (6) per cent, per annum. 

Tho company may retain the amount of any indebtedness 
of the grower or of the feeder to it at any time or times from any 
moneys in its hands which would otherwise be or become payable to 
the grower or feeder respectively. 

Tho company hereby gives to the grower an option, 
irrevocable within the time for acceptance heroin limited to repur¬ 
chase the said contract and all the rights of the company therein, 
thereto and thereunder, and all the rights of the company in and 
to the said cattle and in and to any moneys payable to it thereunder 

The purchase price to be paid by the grower for such 
repurchase shall be tho total of; 

(a) Tho said sum of 

Dollars ($ ) paid by the company 

to the grower as part of the consider¬ 
ation for this agreement, 




t 








- 2 - 


(b) All of the freight paid by the company 
(if any), 

(c) All moneys then payable by the feeder to 
the company under the said contract or 
this agreement, and 

(d) All expense incurred by the company (if 
any) for railway, yardage, commission, 
insurance, marketing agent*s charges and 
other regularly incurred charges of and 
incidental to the selling of the said cattle, 

together v/ith interest at the rate of six (6) per cent, per annum 
on the said respective amounts from the respective times of the dis¬ 
bursement or incurrence thereof by the company till the payment of 
such purchase price. 

The option hereby given shall be open for acceptance 
up to but not after the first day of June next, and may be accepted 
by paying the said purchase price in cash, or its equivalent, to 
the company at its head office in Regina, Saskatchewan. If at the 
time of the exercise of the said option by the grouor, uithin the 
time so limited for the acceptance thereof, the said cattle shall 
have been sold, a urit-ton order from the grower to the company to 
deduct the said purchase price from the selling price of the said 
cattle shall be considered as cash to the extent of the said selling 
price received by the company and not payable by it under the terms 
of the said contract to the feeder, and the company shall thereupon 
pay to the grower the remainder of the said selling price so received 
by it and not so payable by it to the foodor. 

Time shall be of the essence of this agreement. 

IN WITNESS THEREOF the grouor, feeder and the company 
above named have executed this agreement this 
day of 19 » 


WITNESS: ) 

) 


) 

as to execution by the grower) 


as to execution by the feeder 











of 


I, of , in the 

Province of , the grower so called in the 

annexed contract between myself as grower, and 

as feeder, and in the assignment thereof from myself to Dominion 
Agricultural Credit Company Limited, hereby assign to 

, hereinafter called the “bank", as 
further and additional security for the payment of my indebtedness 
to it, with interest thereon, which indebtedness has already been 
incurred in the ordinary course of the business of the bank, all my 
right, title and interest in, to and under the option granted to me 
by Dominion Agricultural Credit Company Limited in and by the said 
assignment, and all the right, title and interest accruing to me 
under the said contract and assignment in the event of the exercise 
of the said option. 


AMD I hereby nominate, constitute and appoint the 
manager for the time being of the branch of the said bank at 

, in the Province of , 

as my true and lawful attorney with full power to exercise all my 
rights under the said option as fully and completely as I myself 
might do, and authorize the said bank and (or) its said manager on 
my behalf to pas' - the purchase price to be paid by me to Dominion 
Agricultural Credit Company Limited under the said option and to 
receive any moneys that may bo payable to me under the said contract 
or the said assignment on and by reason of the exercise of the said 
option. 


IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and 
seal this day of 19 • 


SIGNED, SEALED AMD DELIVERED ) 

in the presence of ) 

) 

) 

) 

\ 


) 


) 


' 

' 

: 

■ 

. 



















QHAZINQ AWA.5 


1JX 


HLALTA ana 

SCA)LE 35 MILES TO ONE INCH 



fry/s 











































































































































































































































































































SPECIAL COLLECTIONS 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA LIBRARY 


REQUEST FOR DUPLICATION 


I wish a photocopy of the thesis by 

F~ . UDD. _(author) 

entitled_ tXLdJLXJL r//va „/ 

' /Z&BF d /9T77-7F a AJ t V £ 

O P7~/9/As'S a F £, /) aj/) £>/) 

The copy is for the sole purpose of private scholarly or scientific study 
and research. I will not reproduce, sell or distribute the copy I request, 
and I will not copy any substantial part of it in ray own work without per¬ 
mission of the copyright owner. I understand that the Library performs 
the service of copying at my request, and I assume all copyright responsi¬ 
bility for the item requested. 


Date_Name and address 

f±± bJcR nui UcMjuzujza 

1±J£L - Lt±JL 67 


Pages copied_Signature 

/)] A ^ " 6r/?/9 1 tbJ(r 

tjm. . 









































