For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


I 






0JC UBMS 
?ihtorshwis 










RURAL ELECTRIFICATION IN ALBERTA 


PART I 







UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
(Department of Political Economy) 


A Thesis 


RURAL ELECTHIFIEiTI.QN- _IN_ALBE£'lTA 


Submitted in partial fulfilment 
of the 

requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts 

(Master* s Program: six graduate courses in addition to this 

thesis) 

by 

Algie R. Broun 


University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta. 


March 31, 1944 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/ruralelectrificaOObrow 


~T h e s i 

tf-4- 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

Special acknowledgement is made to the members of the 

Department of Political Economy of the University of 

Alberta for the valued assistance and advice they have 


given. 










TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Pase 

I Introduction 1 

a. Problems 1 

b. Initiation of the Study 5 

c. Approach to the Alberta Problem 6 

II The Attitude of Farm People to Electric Power 8 

a. Expressions of Interest 8 

b. Attitude to Convenience 9 

c. Rating of Farms 15 

d. Farmers’ Electrical Knowledge 17 

e. Knowledge of Uses and Costs 19 

III The Uses to Which Electrical Power May Be 

Applied £4 

a* Domestic Uses 24 

b. Production Uses 27 

c. Community Uses 45 

d. School Uses 44 

IV Alternative Sources of Power 47 

a. General Considerations 47 

b. Alternative Sources of Domestic Power 48 

c. Alternative Sources of Production 

Power 51 

V The Ability to Pay For Electrical Power 55 

a. The Added Cost of Electrical Energy 

over Existing Sources of Power 55 

b. Measures of Cash Income Available 

for Expenditure on Power 59 










Page 


VI The Relation Between the Cost of Electrical 

Energy and the Amount Used 64 

a. Capital Costs and Installation 64 

b. Rates and Consumption 72 

c. Relation of Income to Power Instal¬ 

lation and Consumption 74 

VII Promotion of Rural Electrification 77 

a. General Promotion 77 

b. ’’Self-Help" Promotion 73 

c. Extension of Technical Knowledge and 

Uses of Electrical Power 79 

d. Extension of Knowledge of Comparative 

Costs of Electrical and Other Power 82 

e. Creating Attitudes Favourable to the 

Uses of Electrical Power 83 

f. Summary of Machinery for Demand 

Creation 


85 





















- 





1 


RURAL ELECTRIFICATION IN ALBFRTA 


I IHTROmCTION 


a. Problems 


A study relating to rural electrification for any 


area is a difficult and involved undertaking as it concerns 
itself with a large proportion of our rural people for whom 
ordinary farm service is the primary need. It introduces econ¬ 
omic, technical and social problems—all interrelated. Of these 
three the technical aspects are most readily determinable and 



less controversial. The social and economic aspects present 
problems widely recognized but relatively more difficult of 
solution. The degree of importance attached to each will be 


very influential in any proposed plan. 


Whatever other considerations influence the problem 


it is recognized that in the end someone must pay, not only 
for installation and appliances, but for maintenance and energy. 
Financing and paying for an electric programme may be undertaken 
in either of two ways. The farmer may assume full responsibil¬ 
ity, or the financial burden may be shared by the government. 


If the farmer is to assume the full financial burden 


involved his demands for power may be quite limited. Under 
present farming practices the demand for electric energy is 


















o . .; 




■ .. . 




.... •. 


.'.'I 










quite elastic. Certainly the demand, under average conditions, 
for other farm equipment such as a plow or a pump is less elastic 
than for electrification. This elasticity in relation to electric¬ 
ity gives rise to many problems, unpredictable in any proposed 
scheme. The benefit and utility aspects of electricity have been 
developed fully; unfortunately the body of information relating 
to the economic and financial side is severely limited. In any 
new area where a proposed scheme is to be undertaken only trial 
and error will determine many factors relating to costs. 

If the government aids or makes a definite grant towards 
the promotion of rural electrification it reduces the costs to 
the farmer and thus affects his demand for power. As compared 
to total costs of electrification borne by the farmer a govern¬ 
ment aided, scheme may have some of the following effects: 
encourage more farmers to electrify, encourage a greater con¬ 
sumption of power, and encourage the purchase of more equipment. 

As a result the general farming situation may be improved through 
an extended electrification scheme aided by government funds; 
on the other hand, this expenditure may result in some other 
governmental undertakings being neglected. In certain areas 
where the costs of providing power are excessive other more 
urgent needs for public funds should be considered first. 

Obviously the foregoing only introduces part of the 
problem. Other considerations include a study of rates and 











5. 


consumption, uses and advantages of power, and in general the 
attitude of fanners to rural electrification. As pointed out 
by various writers discussing the economic aspects of rural 
electrification, before any attempt to accurately balance costs 
against advantages much more data are needed than are a.t present 
available. 

Thus, keeping in mind the problems of electrification 
and a realization that considerable important data are not avail¬ 
able the following report endeavors to discuss in more detail 
the problems mentioned in the previous-paragraph and at the same 
time consider some of the economic and social effects. 

The first part of the report discusses the farmer* s 
attitude towards electricity and his knowledge of it. In most . 
cases the attitude is very favourable; however, there are some 
cases and some areas where farmers are less interested than 
others. There are certain well grounded reasons why this situa¬ 
tion exists and explanations are offered. 























I 


















4. 


Secondly, the report discusses other aspects of farm 
electrifi ation. The technical uses of electrical power are 
readily determinable—already over 200 useful electrical 
appliances have been listed for farm use* On the other hand, 
the economic effects resulting from an^investment in farm elec¬ 
trification, together with possible changes in productive activ¬ 
ities, presents real problems. No definite answer is attempted, 
instead aspects of the problem are considered in order to reveal 
the scope and some of the effects of a farm electrification 
programme. Reference is also made to the alternative sources of 
power on the farm and to the ability of the farmer to pay for 
electrical energy. 

The latter part of the report is concerned with the 
promotion or "demand creation" for central station power. Sug¬ 
gestions are given for the different avenues that may be used 
for this promotion v/orh. 

Part II is a summary of the townships surveyed and 
the districts selected for study. It is designed to throw some 
light on the representativeness of the township sample as 
compared with the district as a whole and to add other statistic¬ 
al material related to the problem of rural electrification. 

From time to time throughout this report reference will be 
ma.de to Part II when this material can be used for added emphasis 


or illustration 




b. Initiation of the Study 


"I am not interested in power.” Seldom will the 
farmers of Alberta say this when the extension of rural electrif¬ 
ication is under discussion. In fact, throughout the Province 
farm people are anxious that some action be taken to promote a 
greater extension of central station power. Prospects of this 
talcing place are evident. It seems the stalemate in rural 
electrification in Alberta may be near an end, as it was in 
the United States about 1955. In that year an executive order 
by President Roosevelt creeled the Rural Electrification Admin¬ 
istration, authorizing it ”to initiate, formulate, administer, 
and supervise' a program of approved projects with respect to 
the generation, transmission and distribution of electric energy 
in rural areas.” 

President Roosevelt believed Federal aid was imperative. 
”In a speech at Barnesville, G-a., the President stated: 

’There was only one discordant note in that first 
stay of mine at Warm Springs. When the first-of-the month bill 
came in for electric light for my little cottage I found that 
the charge was 18 cents a kilowatt hour—about four times as 
much as I paid in Hyde Park, N. Y. That started my long study of 
prooer public utility charges for electric current and the whole 

y 

subject of getting electricity into farm homes.’” 
l/ Slattery, Harry. Rural America Lights Up, p. 27. 








6 . 


Shortly after this statement by the President definite 
action was taken to extend power to the farming areas. In 1955 
the Rural Electrification Act was passed to give financial aid 
to organizations, mostly cooperatives, in extending electricity. 
The R. E. A. was established in the United States because 
farmers were not receiving power from established utilities as 
extensively as conceived by themselves and their leaders. In 
Alberta the situation is somewhat similar. As a result the 
Research Council of the Province has undertaken an investigation 
into the field of rural electrification with a view to the 
extension of rural, lines. 

A study similar to the one now in progress in Alberta 
was made by the Manitoba Electrification Enquiry Commission in 
1942. The government of the latter province has a tentative 
plan ready for the post war period, whereby they propose to extend 
power to 25,000 farms in 10 years. Conditions in the two prov¬ 
inces are somewhat similar and it may be 'possible to consider 
related information and to cooperate in certain fields. Further 

mention with references will be made to parts of the Manitoba 
Report on Rural Electrification. 

c. Approach to the Alberta Problem 

During the summer of 1945 the Alberta study wa^s begun. 




















■ 


rv. : . 


























7 . 


First of all maps were made of the Province to show present power 
lines and the density of population of all the tov/nships. Mapping 
of the Province in this way revealed areas that were approximately 
similar in farm population. With this information from the maps 
and further supplemental information, including the census, the 
Province was divided into sixteen districts for closer study. A 
township was chosen in each of the sixteen districts for a careful 
farm to farm survey. Information on any type of power, whether 
gasoline or windcharger was obtained. The "Farm Electrification 
Survey 1 ' summary for each township in Part II illustrates the 
type of information gained. At the same time the township was 
mapped, shoeing the location of each farmstead and any already 
existing power line. 

After all the field work was done the records for each 
township were summarized. These summaries, together with the 
district data are found in Part II. Such information as acres 
per farm, acres improved, number of livestock, number and con¬ 
dition of buildings and the average ratings of the farms are 
shown. Considerable importance is attached to the ratings given 
to farms as these are used as a basis for drawing in the proposed 
power lines and from this the average cost per farm for the line 
is obtained. Additional information for each township and 
district is contained in Part II and reference will occasionally 


be made to it. 













8 . 


II THE ATTITUDE OF FARM PEOPLE TO ELECTRIC POWER 

a• Expressions of Interest . 

Not all farms within an area will take electric power. 
Some farmers are very anxious to be connected up, whereas a 
smaller number are not interested. A careful, systematic promotion 
campaign will be necessary in order to persuade the latter to use 
power for the benefit of themselves and the system as a whole. 

It would not be in the best interests of the farming community 
as a whole to go into an area and just "cream skim" the very 
best customers. 

When each farmer was interviewed during the survey he 
was asked to consider the possibility of installing power. No 
suggestion of a line going by his place in the near future was 
mentioned; instead he was asked to indicate his probable reaction 
if in years to come power could be made available. In response 
to a query of this kind most of the farmers indicated emphatically 
that they were interested, a few were not sure and a small number 
declined to express an opinion. Farm women were just as enthus¬ 
iastic if not more so than the men. The electric lights, rather 
than any other use of power, ranked foremost in their minds as 
the greatest benefit, as most farm homes use coal oil lamps of 
some type as the source of light. 









9 . 


A number of enthusiastic statements were expressed by- 
farm people regarding electricity. One farm woman said, "It would 
be a dream come true". She would like to electrify fully; that 
is, put in lights, frigidaire, iron, toaster, washing machine, 
vacuum cleaner and a water pressure system. This was not an un¬ 
reasonable desire on her part as they were financially able to 
install power if it were available. One farmer said he "surely 
would put it in", another expressed it in a different way but 
with the same enthusiasm, "I ! d put it in in a minute if I could 
get it". 

During the survey many farmers ?7ere interviewed, and an 
attempt was made to discover their attitude towards electric 
power. This is a very intangible problem, consequently only sub¬ 
jective impressions can be expressed. These impressions are. often 
gathered from the remarks made by the farmer concerning his future 
plans and probable uses of power. In addition to information 
gathered during the interview, actual observations of the farmstead 
help reveal the probable reaction of the farmer. In general 
there are three attitudes—keen interest, indifference, disinterest 
These correspond in some degree to the ratings, "good", "fair" 

and "poor", given to each farm as found in Telle 1. 





































10 


















11 . 


These two pictures of farmsteads illustrate unfavourable 
and favourable prospects for power. In the one case buildings 
are poor and machinery is scattered around; in the other the 
farmstead is well organized, neat and attractive. These conditions 
do not occur by accident, instead there are fundamental reasons 
and these are directly related to any extension of electric power. 
Further discussion of these factors relating to the attitudes 
of farmers follows. 

(l) The Nationality of the Farmer. 

In Part II each district is summarized under seven 
headings, one being "Population”. In some of the districts, 
e.g., Calgary, the proportion of the population of British races 
is high, whereas, for others it is quite low, especially for 
districts north and east of Edmonton. The percentage of prospects 
rated "good" or "fair" for the last mentioned districts is low. 
There are a number of explanations for this. One may be the 
nationality of the people rather than possible physical or economic 
factors. Many of these people are from Central Europe and have 

as yet not fully acquired all the attitudes and practices they 
will later adopt. Here a greater amount of educational and 
promotional work will probably be necessary for extensive rural 
electrification• 





12 . 


(2) Demand for Other Goods and Services. 

As a producer and a consumer the farmer has many com¬ 
peting demands for goods and services. If he acts intelligently 
he will tend to secure the goods and services from which he 
receives the greatest utility. For some commodities the demand 
will be elastic, for others inelastic. The elasticity of demand 
for any good or service will be affected by: first, the variety 
of uses; second, habit, custom and tastes; third, very high or 
low relative prices; fourth, the number of substitutes for the 
good or service; and fifth, the degree of necessity. 

Two other factors affecting the elasticity and utility 
of any good or service may also be mentioned—the biological 
make-up of the individual and the environmental conditions. In¬ 
difference may be attributed to these and definitely it will 
affect the attitude of the farmer to power. A few will be content 
to carry on as they have done for years. They will not give 
intelligent consideration to their problem and hence remain 
ignorant of new ideas. Ignorance may be a result' of environment¬ 
al conditions and if this is the situation it may often be 
overcome by intelligent instructional methods. 

(a) Knowledge of Uses of Power. 

Not all farmers are fully aware of the uses to which 
power may be applied for domestic and production purposes. 






















* 







J' : 









13 


Familiarity with all the uses of energy will result in a fuller 
understanding and more appreciative attitude towards electrif¬ 
ication. 

(4) Future Plans. 

The probable future moves of the individual will 
influence his attitude towards power. In 3ome cases he may 
plan to sell and retire in a short time, so may not wish to 
maize further expenditures. On the other hand, if he plans to 
continue farming his interest may be keen and active. 

In some cases the foregoing factors affecting the 
attitude towards conveniences will be a drawback. The general 
situation is, however, very encouraging. Over the Province as 
a whole most of the farmers are classified as owners; they 
are progressive, energetic operators. To these successful 
farmers will fall part of the task of helping to promote 
rural electrification on farms with special drawbacks. 

Two other considerations, although factors not dir¬ 
ectly affecting attitudes, need to be mentioned and will be 
discussed separately. 

(l) Owner or Tenant Farms. 

From observations of rented farms it is generally 
tirue that the appearance of these farmsteads is not as attrac¬ 


tive as those of owners. The renter has not the same interest 












14 


in keeping the place in good repair as he may not be there very 
long. In order to get the fullest labor efficiency both the 
renter and the owner must be made aware of the added advantages 
to both with regard to convenience and organization; especially 
would this be true of electric power. 

Even though the 'owner may show some hesitation in 
spending the money for installation he will probably sooner 
or later realize it would be to his own advantage. The costs 
borne by the landlord, in the majority of cases, will be only 
wiring which will be from $100 to $200, depending on the situa¬ 
tion. Other things being equal, if power is available on his 
farm he will be able to secure a tenant who will operate his 
farm with equal ability in the organization of the agents of 
production. If he fails to electrify he will tend to get an 
inferior type of tenant and thus lower the normal competitive 
return from his land. Action by the landlord will probably be 
more conservative and less enthusiastic; he will likely delay 
at the outset, but in the long run economic considerations 
will be sufficiently great to cause him to install power. 
Certcdnly the close proximity of a power line to the landlord 1 s 
property will enhance its value. 

On the other hand it is reasonable to suppose the 
tenant might be induced to bear some of the costs. He is 
really receiving more benefit for domestic and some production 







15 


uses than the landlord. An arrangement whereby the tenant pays 
an amount at least equal to the interest on the investment would 
seem to be a legitimate sharing of the costs. 

No data showing the number of connections for rented 
farms in Alberta are available; however, if the situation in the 
United States may be taken as a guide it is definitely encourag¬ 
ing. This is especially important as some of the districts 
studied have a high percentage tenancy, as shown in Part II. 

(2) Prices of Farm Products. 

Farmers are entrepreneurs and, as such are readily 
affected by price fluctuations. Low prices during the depres¬ 
sion years have resulted in a desire by farmers for parity 
prices of farm produce. This lack of assurance regarding the 
future situation of farm prices has a very definite bearing on 
the farmer 1 s final decision towards power. 

c. Hating; of Farms . 

Enthusiasm alone is not sufficient to support a power 
line. Farmers must be willing to make certain expenditures 
for initial costs, such as appliances, and also be prepared to 
pay regular monthly billings. An attempt was made during the 
surveys to determine the farmer* s status in this regard, that 

is, to rate him "good", "fair”, or "poor". This rating is the 
outcome of many factors subjectively totalled in the mind of 




■ 












t 














16 . 


the surveyor. Such things as size, appearance and number of 
buildings, and the degree of mechanization on the farm were all 
taken into consideration. The number of livestock also has a 
bearing on the rating. Large producers of hogs and chickens 
generally have good hog and chicken houses and. brooders. Light 
and heat in these places is very important. One farmer in a 
township surveyed had 3,000 chickens. They were scattered 
around in separate chicken houses besides being housed in two 
layers in the loft of the barn. These people would, as they 
expressed it, n give anything to get lights”. Another place 
similar to the one above had 1-,E00 chickens> but the difficul¬ 
ties were the same. Thus, the presence or absence of livestock 
gives some indication as to the rating of the farm. 

The size of farm is also a factor in determining the 
ratingj however, this size is variable depending on the district. 
For instance in one township the average size of farm is 
213 acres, while in another area the average size is just under 
a section. A small mixed farm is typical of the first township 
and the farmer could readily install power. Generally, however, 
a farm of the same size in a wheat growing area would not 
yield sufficient returns to enable the farmer to make electric 
power expenditures. After taking into consideration the 
foregoing influential factors each farm was. r:ted as explained. 
This rating was also influenced by the attitude of the farmer. 





17 . 


A summary of all the ratings is shovai in the following table. 


Table 1.—-Ratings of Farms in Alberta Townships Surveyed 


District 

: Township Hear 


Proportion of Farms Rated 
. "Good" : "-Fair" : "Pnnr" 




t 

% 

cf 

p 

II 

Brooks 


28 

27 

45 

III 

Claresholm 


49 

20 

31 

IV 

Langdon 


32 

15 

53 

V 

Olds 


39 

22 

39 


Three Hills 


64 

22 

14 

VI 

Castor 


41 

19 

40 

VII 

Clive 


74 

'19 

7 


Stettier 


33 

24 

43 

VIII 

Rimbey 


64 

23 

13 

IX 

Killam 


56 

33 

11 

X 

Camrose 


37 

45 

18 • 

XI 

Vermilion 


48 

12 

40 


Clandonald 


50 

35 

15 

XII 

Ellerslie 


73 

17 

10 

XIII 

St, Paul 


51 

46 

25 

XIV 

Mundare 


33 

6 

61 

XV 

Pickardville 


28 

35 

37 

XVI 

Grande Prairie 


55 

19 

28 


A number of the farms were rated ’’good” without hesita¬ 
tion. Already they have installed gasoline plants or wind- 
chargers of their own. A few farmers have had their own power 
for some time, while others have just recently put in their 
plants, still others have plants on order. These conditions in¬ 
dicate that farmers are definitely interested in power. 


d. Farmers’ Electrical Knowledge . 

Has the average farmer sufficient knowledge of 
electricity? This, of course, depends on his needs. He will hot 

































18 . 


be required to go into many of the technic 1 details ordinarily 
expected of an electrical engineer. The theory of electricity 
and full explanations as found in text books will have no mean¬ 
ing for the f rmer; instead he will be confronted with practic 1 
problems arising out of the -operation of his machines, such 
as minor repairs and line connections. 

The average city housewife ! s knowledge of electricity 
extends little beyond the operation of her appliances, such as 
the plugging in of the iron, switching on the lights, etc. 

The housewife on the farm will not be required to know more 

4 . 

than her tom companion. On the other hand, the farmer rill be 
confronted with more involved electrical problems if he is to 
make full use of his ready servant. He may wish to use the 
motor that runs his separator and washing machine to fan his 
grain; or he may wish to make a brooder for his chickens. One 
farmer confronted with the problem of making a brooder for 200 
baby chicks rigged up a cover, then put in four 100 watt bulbs. 
The glare from the light was cut down by painting over the 

bulbs. The biggest part of the work was running the wires to 
the brooder and for guidance in doing this the farmer copied 
the installing procedure'in other buildings. Many situations 
such as the foregoing will arise on the farm, and in most cases 


farmers will be able to solve them. Farmers are more and more 








19 . 


becoming -ccustomed to handling machinery; many farmers now 
use small engines, crushers, tractors, combines, and threshing 
m chines and it may reasonably be assumed they can operate 
electrical equipment as successfully. Considerable help may be 
given to farmers through various mediums; these will be dealt 
with later under the heading ’’Demand Creation”. 

e. Knowledge of Use s and Costs . 

’’More than 200 ways in which electrical devices can 
help the farmer have been developed, and scientists are working 

1/ 

constantly to extend the list.” 

Reference to a. list of appliances for the home and 
farmstead seems to indicate their use covers many of the'farm¬ 
ing activities. At the present moment in the development of 
electrification the problem is not lack of labor saving, and 
comfort creating electrical devices, but their availability and 
costs. 

Farmers do not know ail the uses to which power can 
be applied, but to them this is not the chief drawback; rather 
it is the initial costs and the payment for power. Information 
on wiring, type of appliance, installation, operation and 
uses of equipment is generally readily available. In addition, 

1/ Report of Rural Electrification Administration for 1958, 
p. 12. United States Government, Washington, D. C. Janus.ry 
1959. 










20 . 


farmers may be instructed to make appliances for themselves and 
develop their ingenuity. 

"When wiring time comes, inquiries begin to pour into 
REA from housewives asking about wiring, plumbing, lighting, the 
most efficient and economical appliances and what not. The 
menfolk want to know how electricity can profitably be used in 
dairying, stock raising, truck and fruit farming, in short all 
branches of agriculture. Expert information means a better life 

u 

for the farm home and load on the line." 

The problem of high costs raised considerable discus¬ 
sion in the United States, especially after the R. E. A. began 
operation. Here in Alberta the same problem faces those who 
are considering rural electrification. 

Some comment on the present situation is necessary. 

A number of the townships surveyed have power lines running 
through them but few farms are connected up. A power line 
goes through the township surveyed at Killam, and it has ease¬ 
ment from many of the farmers but not one has power. Just 

south of Edmonton in another township studied, only one farmer 
had power. The line ran diagonally across his land and for 
this easement the company contracted to put in power. A number 


1/ Slattery, Harry, op. cit., p. 35. 










21 . 


of farmsteads are quite close to the line, in some cases only a 
few hundred feet away. This is not .n isolated condition as 
power lines extend into many parts of the Province servicing 
towns and villages hut "passing up" the farmers. Whatever reas¬ 
ons the power companies may have for not inviting farm users, 
to the farmer the chief objection is cost. 

A number of the farmers near the power lines have 
carefully inquired into the cost of power for themselves. Their 
understanding is as follows: they will be required to pay a 
service charge each month varying from $6 to $7 plus cost of 
installing. This cost of installation in many cases would be 
legitimate, but a number of farmers wonder why, if a line should 
be brought down a mile of road to their home and they pay for 
this mile of line that the company should own it. 

Often at the end of a survey record, some discussion 
takes place with the farmer regarding costs. The general 
opinion is they want power but the cost must be reasonable. 

They are not sure what a reasonable rate would be but it certain¬ 
ly is not as high as ^6 to $7 per month. 

The same attitude must not be allowed to develop in 
Alberta as was at one time strong with the utilities in the 
United States. 

"The utilities asserted that rates were not an 








essential factor. The real question for decision, said the 
companies, was, did the f rmer want electricity, and could he 

1/ 

be shown that there was money in it for himself?” 

"The objections of the CREA committee did not lead it 
to investigate or make any reports on the subject of consumer 
r tea, or costs to the companies generating, transmitting and 
delivering current to customers 1 meters. It was assumed that 

zj 

rural extensions should be made profitable to the companies.” 

Further evidence that rates cannot be ignored is 
found in another quotation from Harry Slattery. 

"From the power companies 1 viewpoint the second endeavor 
to promote rural electrification was another selling campaign. 
Research, experimentation, education and publicity by unbiased 
but cooperating agencies of the highest character were added to 
ordinary soliciting and advertising. This was expected to 
dissipate the farmer* s skepticism, and induce him to install 
service and purchase appliances. 

"The first essential of success was ignored because 
it was impossible for an average farmer to pay cash for con¬ 
structing the lines, or contract for expensive wiring and 

5 / 

equipment." ' 


l/ Slattery, Harry, op. cit., pp. 20-21. 
2/ Ibid., p. 20. 

5/ Ibid., pp. 25-24. 







23 . 


The foregoing quotations le; ve no doubt that power 
costs are important, yet sometimes too much em h sis is focused 
on this alone. There seems to be some tendency among farmers 
to stress energy costs end forget that the cost of installation 
and appliances form major expenditures. It will be necessary 
to inform some farmers that a substantial initial outlay of 
capital will be necessary in order to make use of power. This 
educational work to extend the farmers 1 knowledge of uses and 
costs will need to be done at all times, but especially before 
actual construction of some lines in order to give time for 
consideration of the financial responsibilities. 



t v v. r J.J' $ if'.' o:*T 

. 

. . n. • ,.j ; ; - - . V\/ " 

■ . j'i ■ c r. # : ;• : 0' ! * ■ i 

. - . ' .i. . : , ... • • ' t 

? 

' j :• : j.i : - !.:> ... J:J- a " i‘ .. :■ ... ; >\ ■ 




0:!J 


. 


... C 



















24 


III THE'USES TO TOUCH ELECTRICAL POTOE IhX BE / "..'LIED 

a. Domestic Use.a 

Electricity, one of the most versatile aids afforded 
by modem science, is supplanting many of the old methods of 
operating machines. It is said that the uses of electric 1 power 
on the farm are only limited by the ingenuity of the farmer 
himself. Electricity is pumping water more cheaply than it can 
be done by hand. It is making available modern plumbing in the 
farm home, banishing the drudgery of washday, and in many ways 
contributing to the enjoyment of modern living. The number of 
advantages could be continued, in fact it has already been point¬ 
ed out there are over. 200 appliances listed for- the use of 
electricity on the farm. This, of course, includes appliances 
for domestic and production uses. 

The Manitoba Report on rural electrification takes 
the view that the use of electricity on the farm is not paral¬ 
lel to the use of electricity in the town. Instead the farm is 
thought of as a miniature factory as well as a residence where 
the need for electric power is more varied. Farm families 
usually do their own washing and churning; besides these activ¬ 
ities power can be used for many outside purposes such as 

running the cream separator, milking machine, milk cooler and 


brooder 













l 







> OC :: •: ■ ; ,o 



25 . 


Fnen farmers install po ,r er it is generally domestic 
appliances that come first; this is not surprising as the lack 
of conveniences is very evident in most farm homes. An examina¬ 
tion of the following table taken from the Manitoba Report shows 
the number of farms reporting and the proportion using various 
appliances. Only four of the items listed are found in over 50$ 
of the farms reporting and all outside appliances, such as a 
brooder, fall below 10$. 

Table 2.—-Number and Percentage of Farms Reporting Various 
Electrical Appliances^ 

: Farms Reporting (100^=1,106) _ 

Appliance: Number : Par Cent 


Iron 

990 

85.5 

Radio 

986 

89.2 

Washer 

828 

74.9 

Toaster 

577 

52.2 

Hot Plate 

540 

30.7 

Refrigerator 

251 

22.7 

Vacuum cleaner 

209 

18.9 

Range 

184 

16.6 

Clock 

155 

14.0 

Fan 

120 

10.8 

Water system 

117 

10.6 

Water heater 

108 

9.8 

Cream separator 

98 

8.9 

Milking machine 

89 

8.0 

Heating pad 

86 

7.8 

Sewing machine 

77 

7.0 

Air heater 

49 

4.4 

Waffle Iron 

46 

4.2 

Brooder 

45 

4.1 

Rangette 

45 

4.1 

Chum 

38 

3.4 

Percolator 

31 

2.3 

Bottle washer 

28 

2.5 

Mixer 

27 

2.4 

Incubator 

25 

2.3 

Milk cooler 

21 

1.9 

Ironer 

17 

1.5 










' : 
























26 . 


Footnote to Table 2z 

^A Farm Electrification Programme, Table 17, p. 157. Report 
of Manitoba Electrification Enquiry Commission. 1942. 

Considerable similarity exists between the saturation 
figures for the Ontario Hydro users of appliances and the ones 
shown below. Figures for Alberta showing saturation are not 
very complete. There are in all some 500 farms in the Province 
using central station power and approximately another 5,000 with 
individual plants. A survey of some farm plants in Alberta 
reveals the following uses of power. 


Table 3.—Number and Percentage of Alberta Farms Reporting Various 
Electrical Appliances Operated by Gasoline Plants 


Appliance 

: Farms Reporting 1 31=lQQ$I_ 

.1 _TTumbar»Per. Cent 

Lights 

31 

100.0 

Washing Machine 

20 

64.5 

Vacuum Cleaner 

11 

35 • 5 

Radio 

10 

32.2 

Pumping Water 

5 

16.1 

Pressure Water System 

5 

16.1 

Separator 

4 

12.9 

Iron 

3 

9.6 

Milking Machine 

2 

6.4 

Churn 

1 

3.2 

Frigidaire 

1 

3.2 


Other useful data on farm homes can be obtained from 
the Dominion Housing Census for 1941. Over the Province as a 
whole 87$ of the farm homes are heated with stoves and heaters and 

11$ with hot air furnaces. Wood is the chief source of fuel 
for both heating and cooking, only 1.2$ use electricity for 
































/ 













this purpose. More significant information of the same nature 
showing the proportion of farm homes with various conveniences is 
as follows: 


Electric Lighting 

5.5% 

Electric Vacuum Cleaner 

1.2% 

Bathing Facilities 

4.5% 

Flush Toilet 

2.5% 

Refrigeration 

17.7% 

Telephone 

18.1% 

Radio 

72.9% 


There is no shortage of evidence to show that farm homes are not 
fully equipped with modern convenient, labor saving appliances. 

If they could be completely modernized with electric appliances 
a large part of the load building programme would be taken care 
of. 

b. Production Uses . 

The foregoing tables indicate that present electric 
power on the farm is mostly confined to light and other house¬ 
hold conveniences and is not being widely used for production 
purposes. Electric lights in the chicken house give an 
excellent example of productive use of power; in fact, all poultry, 

hog and dairy producers can make good use of electric facilities. 

Records show that in Alberta domestic uses claim by 
far the largest consumption of electric power. It is not argued 
that in any scheme the domestic uses should be decreased, but 
instead increased and at the some time the uses of power 


extended in production, 










28 . 


Productive uses may be divided into the following general 

1 / 

classes according to the nature of the farming activity. 


(l) Mixed Farming 



f2) Fruit and market gardening 
( 0 ) Poultry raising 

(4) Hog raising 

(5) Dairying 

(6) Grain growing and ranching 


It is expected appliances for any one of these farming practices 
will do some or all of the following: make the work more con¬ 
venient, lower the marginal cost of production, or increase 
output. 

(l) Mixed Farming. 

Mixed farming constitutes a combination of the more 
common branches of agriculture, and is most common throughout 
Alberta. Some of the equipment required for specialized branches 
of Agriculture may not be operated advantageously on a mixed 
farm but there are other appliances more adapted to a general 
farm practice. Some of these uses of power include: 


(vi) 

(vii) 


(i) Fanning mill 
Feed grinder 
Pig and chicken brooders 

(iv) Shop equipment 
Water system 
(vi) Cream separator 




Lights 


1/ This does not include eveiy branch of Agriculture. 









The diversity of mixed fanning requires that formers 
exercise gre- ter care in selection of appliances than the form¬ 
er with a specialized line. More alternative uses of power 
are open to the mixed farmer and wise choice of these to obtain 

y 

the greatest return for capital expenditure is required. 

Various factors will affect his choice, such as: 

1. Availability of water. 

2. Relative size of each farming enterprise. 

3. Degree of mechanization. 

4. Nearness to town. 

• 5. Size of family. 

6. The selling prices of farm products. 

7. Area in which he lives. 

3. Cost of appliances and the amount of power 
used. 

In many cases electric power will encourage farmers to engage 
in new lines of production that will increase farm income. 

H. A. Morgan has the following to say about electricity and 
.mixed farming: 


54 In farm operations, electricity makes for greater 

diversified production. Increased financial returns are oos- 

sible. Overspecialization may be combatted and a. better ad- 

2 / 

justment to markets achieved.” 


1/ Information and statistics respecting electric power and 
equipment can be secured from various sources. The Agricultural 
Index contains a long list of Bulletins and Circulars concern¬ 
ing the use of electric power for the farm. 


2/ Third ' orld Power Conference, p. 










50 . 


(id) Fruit and Market Gardening. 

This branch of Agriculture is not as prominent in 
Alberta as in some other parts of the Dominion. Truck farming 
does take place near the larger cities and with the introduc¬ 


tion of dehydration plants the industry may rapidly increase. 


rhe following 


U-L O.WCU. 


fully used: 


(i) Vegetable dehydrator 

(ii) Hotbed heaters 

(iii) Greenhouse heating 

(iv) Refrigeration and storage 

(v) Vegetable washing and grading 

(vi) Water system 

The last one on the list is readily recognized as an essential 
for market gardening, unless a favourable natural water sup ly 
is available as occasionally happens. 

Vegetable dehydration is beginning to assume a more 
important role in production, especially since the war. 

,5 Wars often bring major changes in food processing. 
The Napoleonic Wars brought canning. Our Civil War brought 
condensed milk. The First World War brought the really big 
development of evaporated milk. In the Second World Yfar the 

u 


accent is on dehydrated foods.” 


l/ Wickard, Claude R.,- Secretary of Agriculture. Feather¬ 
weight Foods. The Saturday Evening Post. October 17, 194 . 








31 . 


Factories are being erected in the prairie provinces 
for dehydrating vegetables and some interest is also being 
taken in the process by small gardeners. Beans, peas, beets, 
carrots and other vegetables that will not keep well through 
a season may be dehydrated using electricity to supply the 
heat • 

(3) Poultry Raising. 

Rural electrification studies indicate that power 
is the poultryman 1 s "right hand man", especially since there 
has been a definite increase in production. From a study of 
the township samples in Part II an estimate of the number of 
chickens per farm can be obtained, e.g. in one the average is 
116, in another it is 218. In many cases farmers are expand¬ 
ing their egg production even under the adverse conditions 
of winter with the shorter hours of daylight. 

Research definitely shows that the hours of daylight 
in winter are not sufficient to keep the hens active from 13 
to 16 hours a day. This results in a marked drop in production 

from b'dfo to 9C$. In order to counteract this drop fanners 
put lanterns in their chicken houses early in the morning and 

in the evening. This procedure is troublesome and dangerous 
end does not receive general approval among farmers. They 
would prefer to substitute electric power. 







■ ; 





















■: r '■ 







-j ,l'.o 







At many experimental stations, colleges, and univer¬ 
sities, especially in the United States, experiments are con¬ 
tinually being carried on to determine the most practical uses 
of electric energy for the poultry-men. Bulletins can be 
obtained for almost any problem involving power, sue 1 ! as, 
methods of dimming lights, all night light for layers, and 
poultry brooding systems. Probably the most important use of 
all is for lights, especially from the economic standpoint. 

Egg prices generally are higher during the fall and winter 
months—the time when egg production falls off. This fall 
in production can often be avoided by supplying adequate 
light. Lights are also used to shorten the period of molt, 
as more activity during this period shortens the time and 
starts the hen producing sooner. With a large flock this is 
an important factor. 

An imposing list showing what lights accomplish 
can be obtained. Only a few are mentioned here: greater 
fall and winter production, increased annual production per 

bird, shortening of the molting period, earlier maturity of 
the late hatched birds and greater convenience. To illustrate 
the first of these a graph is shorn below. 









Percentage Egg Production 1930-1951.. 
No Lights and Morning Lights Compared 1 


(* 

?o 

4 * 

& 

20 

10 









~yoJoc. f/or\ 

tjr - - 

I 

I 

i 

i /?3 

0-3/ 

IS 

\ 

\ 

\ 




i 

i 

i 






i 

\ i 

\ i 

\i 







(\ 

1 \ 

/ \ 

l \ 




\ 

r 

i 


y . 

imp L 

W/4A 

ifi ts 
3 

\ 

/ 

\ 







he he'tj Ala 

In Fob rrVy Zip 

k* /if 

i A 

»? y\K<f 

*>j 1 Zfo 

V Zf 









^Rhys, I. W., N.D.P. and Raymond T. Parkhurst, B.Sc. (Agr.), 
M.Sc. Methods of Artificially Lighting Winter Layers. A 
report from The National Institute of Poultry Husbandry 

Harper Adams Agricultural College, Newport, Shropshire. 

Bull. S, p. 9, Chart No. 3. September, 1931. 













34 . 


Wherever possible, electric brooders are replacing 
the use of hens as mothers. Less space is required, less 
time is consumed in care when all the chickens are in one 
place, and in general the mortality rate is lower. 

It is evident from the foregoing some of the more 
general uses of power to the poultryman are as follows: 

(i) Lights 

(ii) Brooders 

(iii) Incubators 

(iv) Water system 

(v) Egg Candler 

An examination of different lists reveals some 20 to 30 uses 
of electricity for poultry. Some of these will add to con¬ 
venience, others to increased production, while others will 
help to decrease costs. As previously mentioned, information 
can be obtained on practically all of these uses. A number 
of bulletins are listed here. 

Electricity on the Poultry Farm by L. J. Smith and Harry 
L. G-arver, Agricultural Experiment Station, Pullman 
Washington; Bulletin No. 148, December, 193:. 

Poultry Brooding Systems, The Pennsylvania State College 
School of Agriculture and Experiment Station, 
Pennsylvania; Bulletin 340, March, 1937. 

Hints to Poultrymen, New Jersey Agricultural Experiment 
Station, New Brunswick N. J. Vol. 24, No. 4, 

Apri1-May, 1937. 





55 . 


(4) Hog Raising. 

The number of specialized hog r nchers in the Prov¬ 
ince is relatively sma.ll. A more common procedure is to raise 
hogs along with other livestock on the farm. Those farmers 
who have only hogs are generally located near a town where 
they can obtain buttermilk from a creamery or waste from a 
large institution, such as an army centre. 

The uses of power on a hog ranch are not as numerous 
as for a dairy or a poultry farm. Some of the main uses 
include: 

(i) Brooder 

(ii) Lights 

(iii) ffater system 

(iv) Feed grinders 

The first of these is recognized as being quite essential 
for success with winter farrowing. The surveys indicate many 
of the farmers have not adequate hog houses; often they are 
straw piles, straw sheds, log sheds and old bams. If the 
weather is warm and the sows are well bedded the young pigs 
will survive; on the other hand if farroving takes plane in 
sub-zero weather many of the young die. Some farmers report 
total loss of litters, others 50^. An electric hog brooder 
in the hog house or stall often eliminates the unprofitable 
situati n mentioned above. 






56 . 


A farmer in Manitoba reports his success with the 

brooder. 

"Last January I had ten sows coming in with their 
litters. I inter litters for the last dozen years 

end always had trouble because of the cold; losses were 
huge. La.st winter I used an electric brooder lamp and I 
cannot speak too highly of its efficiency. I could direct the 
rays onto the sow in the pen, the bedding was dry and warm 
and I saved practically all my young pigs. When I figure 
this amount in actual dollars saved, it would pay for the 

u 

whole outlay of installation." 

Farmers 1 opinions of this nature can be substan¬ 
tiated by experimental data from colleges and universities. 


l/ Report of Manitoba Electrification Enquiry Commission, 
op. cit., p. 55. 

































57 


Table 4.—Results of Trials with Electric Pig Brooders 
During Spring Farrowing at Davis'^* 


Type of : 
Equioment .* 

Year 

gn-nrill fit ed 

: Humber 
: of 

: Litters 

: Humber : 

: of Pigs : 

: F rrowed^: 

Humber : 
of Pigs: 
Lost^r 

Per Cent 
Lo st , 


1955 

g 

14 

o 

14 

Radiant 

1956 

5 

55 

4 

11 

brooders 

1957 

_6 

48 

_7 

15 


Total 

15 

97 

15 

15 


1955 

8 

65 

15 

20 

Underheat 

1956 

5 

55 

4 

11 

brooders 

1957 

_6 

46 

__5 

11 


Total 

19 

146 

22* 

15 


1955 

5 

24 

15 

54 

Regular 

1956 

10 

71 

15 

18 

farrowing 

pens 

1957 

11 

88 

£8 

52 


Total 

24 

185 

54 

29 

Hovers 1955 

without heat 

5 

25 

15 

65 


^Tavemetti, James R., and E. H. Hughes* Electric Pig Brooders, 
p. 5, Table 1. University of California, Berkeley, California, 
Bull. 618. December, 1957. 

^Does not include pigs dead at birth. 

^Includes pigs killed or dying of natural causes up to 10 days 
of age. 


’’Electric pig-brooders were successful in reducing 
the loss of pigs during the first 10 days after birth. In 
three years* trials the loss was reduced about 50 per cent. 

’’Practically no difference in results was obtained 
with the two types of brooders used—namely, underheat and rad¬ 
iant. The radiant brooder had certain advantages in cost 





















58 


and operation over the underheat. 

"The initial and operating costs of the brooders was 

u 

low enough to make their use economically feasible.” 

The other appliances mentioned add to the success of 
hog raising. Hogs can get along without lights, but like cows, 
they require regular amounts of water. An electric water pres¬ 
sure system can be installed to keep water in front of the 
animals at all times. Scientific feeding of a balanced ration 
together with a plentiful supply of water enables the farmer 
to finish his hogs in the six months* time. 

Some difference of opinion exists with regard to the 
use of electric power for crushing. In most cases it would 
require a larger motor to operate a crusher than to operate 
other farm appliances, such as the farm pump. Quite often far¬ 
mers have their own tractors and do their crushing with this 
power. In such cases when satisfactory power is already on the 
farm a capital expenditure for a new electric motor may not 
be justified. However, an objection farmers raise to the use 
of a tractor is the difficulty starting it in cold weather. 

If the farmer crushes a large amount of grain, then 
stationary electric power may be more efficient and less 

1/ Tavemetti, James B. and E. H. Hughes, op. cit., p. 8. 





. ,7 . :j'. , 7 - 'v r : : -7/7-7 7 •• k ?: 

)X 

, . .. ■. ’ > . 7 





_ 

Ur' ' . T. 




.. 7; . r 




* 

• ;; ; 

• o-’i .. ? . ; 7 

. 












. 


. 




•; j J ■ ’ .. . 



















■ 










.7 . • .• o - 7 






. 

' 








• ■ ■ 






' 




7 v 






. 



39 


costly, or if the amount is not large a cooperative plan among 
several farmers may be worked out to solve the problem of 
crushing in cold weather. 

(5) Dairying. 

The following list includes some of the more general 
uses of power on the dairy farm: 

(i) Cream separator 

(ii) Feed grinder 

(iii) Lights for barn and milk house 

(iv) Milk cooling 

(v) Milking machine 

(vi) Water heater 

(vii) Water pressure system 

This list does not exhaust the uses of energy, neither will 
all the above appliances reduce the labor problem. Studies 
have shown that proper cooling of the milk will result in a 
better product and hence a better price. Other studies have 
demonstrated the great importance of an adequate water supply 
at a proper temperature. Animals reduce their intake of water 
when it is obtained from an ice filled trough, and this reduc¬ 
tion in the consumption of water retards growth and milk 
production. According to the Manitoba Report a simple heater 
can be constructed for a small amount. Wherever possible it 
would be most satisfactory to have water in front of the cows 
at all times; this could be accomplished by installing an 
electric water pressure system. Other dairy operations may 
be handled with a greater degree of efficiency. A motor 




v - ’ V • :o , J-■■ 




■ 




. i Id ‘ ' 

- 

... 




• - 





. 

-■ • ■ . 

d 

: ■ n U ' ' ' ■ . 

■ 


, 

L...id r- ; :• : 

.! : • , •• : • ... 

■ 





40 


driven separator would eliminate the variations in the test 
of cream and result in a more standard product. Fluid milk, 
shippers in the United States are realizing that the time is 
rapidly approaching when they will not be able to continue 
commercial dairying without electricity. Milk must be deliv¬ 
ered cool and have a low bacteria count. In order to accom¬ 
plish this electric coolers, sterilizers and a water pressure 
system ere all essential. 

"The California dairy law requires that on dairy 
farms all equipment coming in contact with milk be thoroughly 
washed and sterilized, each time used, by exposing it for at 
least 15 minutes to water or water vapor having a temperature 
above 170° Fahrenheit. To meet this requirement, steam is 
commonly used for the sterilizing, and often also for heating 
wash water. Various types of steam-generating equipment are 
available, including those using electricity as a source of 
heat. Electric sterilizers, developed about 1924, are now 
popular because of simplicity, low fire hazard, automatic 
operation, ease of installation, cleanliness, freedom from 

y 

odors, end the small amount of attention they require." 

1/ Tavemetti, James B. and K. F. Mclntire. Electrical 
Sterilising Equipment for Farm Dairies, p. 5. University of 
California, Berkeley, California, Bull. 650. June, 1941. 







. 












41 


(6) Giviin Growing and Ranching. 

Grain growing as the sole farming occupation is 
confined primarily to the southern part of the Province where 
production appears highly variable depending on weather con¬ 
ditions and prices. Recurrent periods of favourable and un¬ 
favourable production have resulted in considerable speculation 
as to the advisability of continued use of some of this land 
for grain growing. Surveys indicate the existence of sparsely 
settled, sub-marginal end marginal land in the Special Areas, 
and over the whole Special Areas territoiy "there are few 
townships with more then 36 occupied farmsteads, that is, one 

y 

farm family to every square mile." 

Conditions for all the grain growing areas are not 
as unfavourable as the above; however, all the farms are 
generally larger than those in mixed farming areas. In most 
cases all operations are carried out with power equipment, 
operated out in the fields. Two characteristics, namely, 
large farms with sparse population and the field activities 
of the farmer, limit the possibilities for extension and 
uses of power. On the other hand, if the grain farmer does 
carry on some mixed farming practices power may be more exten- 

1/ Stewart, A. and W. D. Porter. Lend Use Classification in 
the Special Areas of Alberta, p. 50. 1942. 










. : 



J; ' 

















; , . .. . 





' 




42 


sively used. 

Some of the probable uses of power under farming 
conditions outlined above may be: 

(i) Lights 

(ii) Water system 

(iii) Machine shop 

(iv) Grain cleaner 

Some similarity exists between grain farming and 
ranching with regard to power, but it would be an error to 
draw too close a comparison. In both cases farms are relative¬ 
ly far apart, and engaged in a productive enterprise less 
adapted to varied uses of power. Often ranches are so far 
apart that the only reasonable solution to their electric prob¬ 
lem would be the installation of individual plants. 

It is evident from the foregoing discussion that 
most branches of Agriculture can use power in many ways in the 
process of production. Like any other economic good or service 
it will tend to be employed as a factor of production only so 
long as a greater return is received. This return may be in 
various forms, depending upon the factors farmers consider 
necessary in order that their net advantage will be greater. 
These considerations include time saved, added convenience, 
decrease in cost of production, and other advantages or 


disadvantages 





.0 




; . ’ ; 


o. 























43 . 


c. Community Uses . 

Rural electrification is bound to have a wholesome 
effect on rural people and their activities. Not only can 
it be installed on the farm, but in buildings used by the com¬ 
munity, such as the church, school and community hall It is 
quite probable the total consumption of energy for the 
latter uses will not be large; this, however, may not be the 
chief consideration. From the social point of view, 
proper electric lighting adds tremendously to the effectiveness 
and enjoyment of many community activities. 

Other obvious uses of power in the country include 
the servicing of country stores, service stations and elev¬ 
ators; these have a social as well as a commercial value. 
Probably the most important use of power in the community is 
for the school; this is discussed more fully in the following 


section 









j:< rm:t% 


v 




' 








■ 








.r. 




:■ 












44 



A Community Store and Feed Mill 
that could use Power. 


d. School Uses . 

In the last fe?f years the curriculum for Alberta 
schools has been changed and broadened to introduce and promote 
more and varied courses. Two courses, especially, have found 
new prominence—Home Economics and General Shop. The equipping 
of schools to take advantage of these two fields of education 
has not been general in all districts. Schools favourably 
situated in cities, toms and villages have power to run 
electrical appliances, whereas, some small outlying village, 
hamlet and country schools are not so fortunate. 

Throughout the Province of Alberta there are 2,953 
one-roomed schools and 353 two-roomed schools. These schools 
do not enjoy the advantages of electric power. Almost 56 % 
of the elementary and intermediate school population attend 















45 


non-urban schools—59,716, the elementary and 19,397, the 
intermediate. 

About 32# of the rural school pooulation are in grades 

1 / 

7, 8, and 9, the grades that begin domestic and shop courses. 
The Home Economics course covers the range of activities found 
in the ordinary home, such as washing, ironing, cooking and 
sewing. Electric power is quite essential for running the 
band saw, press drill and lathe. In these courses general and 
technical information is acquired that will enable the student 
to more fully understand the applications of mechanical and 
electrical equipment. In addition, the extension of electrical 
power to schools would also actively influence the promotion 
of power on the farms. 

The uses of pov/er for schools is not confined to the Home 
Economics room or the General shop. Lights for classroom work 
are quite essential during the short hours of daylight in the 
winter. Many of our older schools are not well lighted; con¬ 
sequently, the student farthest from the windows does not 

receive sufficient light. Other opportunities for using power 
may be encouraged, such as, running water from a pressure 
system, radio, hot plates for lunches, and a motion picture 
machine. 

1/ Thirty-seventh Annual Report of the Department of Educa¬ 
tion of the Province of Alberta, p. 85, Table 2. 1942. 














46 


Many schools are today in a position to receive power; 
they are right beside the power line and have all the other 
essentials. Two schools-one at Spruce Grove and the other at 
Wall Lake—serve as examples. Both are two-roomed schools, 
both have basements for shops, and both have power passing 
right by. The future extension of power throughout the rural 


r ^ 



Wall Lake School. 


areas and to schools has tremendous significance in rural 
education; it presents a challenge and an opportunity. As 
our social and economic problems of the farm become more 
complicated, more demands will be made on the rural schools 
and here electricity may help meet these demands. 







47 , 


IV ALTERNATIVE SOUItCES OF. POWER 


a. General Consldei-.ati.oiis . 

Mention has already been made of the many uses for 
electric power on the farm, both domestic and productive. How¬ 
ever, the existence of many uses of electricity does not imply 
that it is to the farmer* s advantage in all cases to use 
electric energy for all practical purposes. In many cases, 
energy in some form is already operating many of the appliances 
on the farm, for example the windmill and the small gasoline 
engine. Furthermore, the farmer may have sufficient family 
help; consequently his desire for added power may be consider¬ 
ably lessened. 

For heavy draught work many farmers have tractors and 
use these also for stationary belt work, such as chopping grain. 
Whether it would be to the farmer* s advantage to substitute 
a large electric motor instead of the tractor for heavy belt 
operations is questionable. It will depend on the added 
convenience, the alternative uses of the motor and the relative 
costs and operating expenses. 

In the case of smaller appliances being operated 
by small gasoline engines or wind power the advisability of 
installing electric equipment will depend upon the salvage 






V I- •"' - - r -' ' • V, 


‘ 




\ 


TO' Oj 



. 




■■■•■ L T.,,. 0 ' 


- * I ; •••: • :' 1 ) 






48 


value of the present equipment, the relative operating expenses, 
the added conveniences and other advantages or disadvantages. 

If the farmer is using a small gasoline engine or windmill he 
may hesitate to set it aside or salvage it and instal.1 an 
electric motor. On the other hand, he will not have alternative 
sources of power for some appliances, e.g., the frigidaire. 

When this is the case his decision to purchase certain equip¬ 
ment will be simplified. However, the presence of alternative 
power for the operation of various appliances complicates 
the problem for the farmer. Further discussion of these con¬ 
siderations together with tables showing the present farm 
situation may be better dealt with under separate headings. 

b• Alterna tive Sources, of Domest i c Power . 

Central station power can be used to operate many 
domestic appliances as indicated by the table on page 25. 

Surveys reveal that individual plants and windchargers can 
also operate most of these appliances, especially if sufficient 
capital is invested to get large equipment. Throughout the 
Province there are approximately 5,000 individual plants. In 
some cases the equipment is large enough to supply power for 
a number of home uses; however, this is not the general 
situation. Assuming, however, neither individual plants or 
central station power is available, some of the more common 






49 . 


appliances on the farm are operated as follows: 


Refrigerator 
Vacuum Cleaner 


Lights 

Iron 

Radio 

Washer 


Churn 

Pump 


Gasoline and kerosene 
Gasoline and flat iron 
Batteries 

Gasoline engine or by hand 

Ice as substitute 

None 

Gasoline engine or by hand 
Engine, windjnill or by hand 


The above list need not be continued to emphasize the fact 
that convenient alternatives to electric power axe not 
readily available. Further evidence as to the degree of 
modernization provided in farm homes may be obtained from 
the following data. The first tabulation was token from 
studies conducted in the Bonnyville and Red Deer districts by 
members of the Economics Division, Dominion Department of 
Agriculture 


Bonnwilie 


Red Deer 


% 


% 


Method of Lighting 

Electricity 
Mantle lamps 
Coal Oil, only 


5.8 

49.0 

47.2 


15.5 

47.2 

22.7 


KftU d Ocnvftniences 

Sewing machine 

Telephone 

Radio 

Power washer 

Sink 

Cistern 

Running water 

Sewage disposal 

Bathroom 


86.8 

1.9 

77.4 
54.0 

26.4 
5.8 


92.1 

49.8 

95.1 
61.6 

58.9 

12.8 

11.5 

10.5 

14.5 















.. i 






.... . .. .. 

. ' 

’> j' : ; o . o . 


. 





. 

. 




or. 

j 


.{ ’.£ •/ ...‘.0 


* r 







50 


Table 5.—Method of Lighting on Manitoba Farms 


1 


Method 


s -Uwnfcej-J-g£jL.Cea.t. .Q.f. Total 


Electricity 41 8 
Gasoline 51 10 
Kerosene ___ 408 _ __ 82 


^Report of Manitoba Electrification Enquiry Commission, op. cit., 
p. 156, Table 15. 


This table qualifies previous evidence that a greater 
proportion of farm lighting is done with kerosene than by any 
other means. 


Table 6.—Number end Percentage of Farms Surveyed Reporting 
Various Electrical Appliances Operated by Individual Plants 

and Windchargers 


Appliance 

: Farms Reporting (100^=42) 

1 _Number _s_Per Cent 

Lights 

42 

100.0 

Washing Machine 

25 

59.5 

Radio 

15 

35.7 

Vacuum Cleaner 

12 

28.5 

Pumping Water 

5 

11.9 

Pressure Water System 

5 

11.9 

Cream Separator 

4 

9.5 

Iron 

4 

9.5 

Milking Machine 

2 

4.8 

Chum 

1 

2.4 

FriM.daj.re- 

1 

2.4 


The table reveals that a few appliances, namely, the 
washer, sewing machine and the radio are fairly common even 
though no form of electric power is available, and that indiv¬ 
idual plants and windchargers increase the number of conveniences. 


































51 


However, where no form of electric energy is used no suitable 
alternative source of power is employed. Consequently, some 
appliances, e.g., frigidaire, vacuum cleaner, are not found in 
many homes. 

c. Alternative Sources of Production Power. 

The application of power to all forms of farm produc¬ 
tion has been continually increasing. In recent years more 
stationary engines and tractors have gone out to farms than 
ever before; however, this does not entirely solve the power 
problem. It is not expected that electric energy will give a 
complete solution to the foregoing, but in most cases its uses 
can be extended beyond those of the small gasoline engine. 

Under previous headings the various uses of power to 
the mixed farmer, dairyman, poultryman, etc., were enumerated. 
As is the case for domestic appliances, many of the productive 
uses of power can be supplied by individual plants or wind- 
charges when central station power is not available. Assum¬ 
ing that no form of electricity is used what common alter¬ 
natives are being employed? 

Cream separator Gasoline engine, hand power 

Feed grinder Gasoline engine 

Lights Gas or kerosene lantern 

Milk cooling Cold water or ice 






■ 






' 

' 








j q 






v 










'in - . ■ 





52. 


Milking machine 
Water heater 
Brooders 
Incubators 
Fanning mill 


Gasoline engine 

Wood and coal 

Wood, coal and kerosene 

Kerosene 

Gasoline engine, hand power 


This list does not include all the appliances previously men¬ 
tioned, but it does indicate how farmers carry on without 
electric power. For those farms where no small gasoline 
engine is used hand power is practically the only substitute. 
The number and size of all small engines on farms was not 
determined in the field surveys; however, the sample township 
tables in Part II indicate whether or not the farmer has 
power for pumping water and the percentage of farms with 
tractor equipment. The Manitoba Report shows 533 engines on 
495 farms and for engines under two horsepower (the size 
probably used for pumping) the number is 114 or about 35$ of 
the total. 

It is evident from the Manitoba Report and the sample 
data that there is a fair amount of power equipment on the 
average farm. Thus, when the farmer is confronted with the 
situation of changing to electric energy his decision will 
be a difficult problem, as already pointed out at the begin¬ 
ning of this chapter. Some will be ready to change over 

directly to regular power without persuasion, whereas promotion, 
suggestion and demonstration will be necessary for others. 





















! 



53 


V THE ABILITY TO PAY FOR ELECTRICAL POWER 

a. The Added Cost of Electrical Energ y over Existing Smimfta 

of Power . 

Farmers will be veiy anxious to compare the costs of 
electric power with the costs of their present sources of energy. 
They will give consideration to more than just the economic 
aspects, as they will be influenced by other expected services 
and satisfactions. It will be necessary to show many farmers 
some of the actual costs they are now incurring under their 
present sources of energy in order to induce them to change 
to central station power. There is generally a tendency among 
people to consider less carefully their present set-up and view 
with some disfavor a new proposal. Many country people keep 
no accounts and therefore have no accurate record of such 
items as the cost of fuel for small engines, the cost of fuel 
for lighting, the cost of operating a radio for a year and 
other related expenditures of this nature. A careful survey 
table showing the costs of existing sources of power on the 
average farm would be veiy useful for electrification prom¬ 
otion. 

No table is available for Alberta similar to the one 
in the Manitoba Report, hence the latter is shown. 













i. 









54 


Table 7.—Average Annual Expenditure on 478 Manitoba Farms 
for Substitutes for Electricity-*- 


Substitute 

: 

Average Annual Cost 

Fuel for lighting 


$ 

9.07 

Fuel for power 


11.54 

Fuel for cooking 


52.56 

Ice 


7.60 

Radio battery 


11.06 


^Report of Manitoba Electrification Enquiry Commission, op. 
cit., p. 159, Table 24. 


From surveys conducted by members of the Economics Division, 
Dominion Department of Agriculture, in Alberta it was found 
that the average annual expenditure for fuel for lighting on 

9 

156 farms is $7.77. 

It is possible to use the above table and get the 
average annual cost of substitutes for electricity on Manitoba 
farms for certain items. 


Fuel for lighting 

$ 9.07 

Fuel for pov/er 

11.54 

Radio battery 

11.06 

Total for the 5 items 

$51.67 

Average monthly cost 

2.64 


If the cost of fuel for cooking and ice is added to this the 
total expenditure is $71.65—an average monthly cost of 
$5.97. The average cost of fuel for cooking is a rather in- 

















, o. .. 


Li; 








. i , 


. 


. i. ■ h 


. ■ • 












< ' TUT; i. 01 \ 

, ■ •, vc . ':/ ; v ; : ' r; L; : :' 

ji ':l ■■ o : *:v/ ; c-.! <.i' ,/ YtiJ. - 

..... ' 




'• ‘ ; : !A ' O.'i / 






( p 






.. $ 


')■< o : n m. 









55. 


definite figure. Some of this cost may be included in gen¬ 
eral house heating; nevertheless these figures furnish a 
partial basis for comparative costs. The farmer must realize 
he is making an average expenditure of from $5 to $6 a month 
under his present organization without the added services of 

u 

electric power. If he uses an individual plant as the source 
of energy for various appliances his average monthly expenditure 
will be $7.25. This was found from a survey of a number of 
individual plants within the districts selected for study. 

Table 8.—Average Annual Costs of Private Electric Plants 
on 31 Alberta Farms 


I&gffi-:-Coat. 


Depreciation: 

$ 

Plant 

13.50 

Batteries 

29.79 

Maintenance 

3.06 

Operation 

40.69 

jyffXgge Xftt.aJL. 

87.04 


1/ It should be borne in mind that a direct comparison under 
present costs ($3 to $6 a month) with costs under electric 
power is not entirely justified. A greater investment is neces¬ 
sary for electric po?/er, e.g., costs of wiring: therefore, 
other costs are involved such as interest on investment and 
maintenance. Furthermore, the use of electricity for cooking 
may not become general practice. 




















jvr.o v... 



. 





j 








56 


Other average figures include: 

Average cost of engines $217*06 

Average cost of batteries 195.96 

Average cost of both $413.02 

Not all farmers could report separate costs of 

plant and batteries, but gave a total figure for both. The 

average of the total cost figures is slightly less than the 

total of the two separate items above. 

Average cost of whole plant $405.78 

Average cost of wiring $114.80 

Average life of plant 18.08 years 

Average life of batteries 7.24 years 

Information on windcharger plants is also shown. In some 

cases these plants are small and are only used to light four 

or five bulbs; therefore, costs shown are probably toe low. 

Table 9.—Average Annual Cost of Windcharger Plants 
on 11 Alberta Farms 


. . in. i - - —r~rrr rr : r--trrr: 

Item _:__ Cost 

$ 

Depreciation: 

Plant 4.00 

Batteries 25.00 

Maintenance 1.00 

Operation _»-5P 

Average Total ___5.0, ,50. 

















> . 






). 


J- 


■ 











57 


Other average figures found include: 


Average cost of windcharger $188 

Average cost of batteries $152 

Average cost of wiring $113 

Average life of windcharger 54 years 

Average life of batteries 7 years 


Under favourable average conditions electric energy 
will make possible the following: 

(1) More and varied appliances. 

(2) Much greater convenience—less drudgery. 

(5) Greater safety—especially in lighting. 

(4) Saving of time and care. 

(5) Incr ease in production, e.g., poultry. 

(6) Insurance protection at lower cost. 

(7) Probable lower cost of operation if the 
farmer is a large user. 

Apart from the foregoing, other considerations will enter 
into an appraisal as to the advisability of installing power, 
and will in many cases outweigh added costs. However, 
these added costs include more than the monthly payment for 
energy. The question may then be well asked—what are the 
other added costs? 

In the first place, the farmer is equipped to carry 
on without regular power. He has an investment in lamps, 
radio, pump engines, washing machine, etc. Some of these 
appliances can be converted to use electric power without 
much added expense, e.g., an electric motor can be put on 



: : <■ ' 





■ 


! 

' 

■: ■ 


A - ! • ' 




r . ..... cs - . : 







• / • -j . i-‘ . 

.it riJ ■ 


,‘‘f f' : ■ ; .»i'J 



. 

. . .: . x 




. : • , 




J 


j" *: ♦ x'-.v.'o _ lir-y-i j,;- l.J 

■ 

• . j J1' <• 1 ,: ■'..! ■ <]: 

■ -j.' ' ..J ■ c <; a 

It; . . .. i i ' ' 1 ) '. j " ■ r. 












58 . 


the washing machine. However, in other instances, e.g., the 
radio, a new appliance would be required. If the farmer can 
sell his discarded equipment reasonably and make a substantial 
cash contribution for new electric appliances his position 
is much improved. This may not always be the case; consequent¬ 
ly some farmers will continue to operate a few appliances on 
other than electric power rather than sell them at a loss 
and buy new ones. 

In the second place there is the added cost of 
installation. It may be possible to get financial assistance 
for this, but in .any event the final cost will be borne by 
the farmer. Variations will be evident. Some farmers will 
wire more buildings than others; again others will install 
more appliances. Whatever the procedure, the added costs, 
namely, loss on discarded appliances, installation, and new 
equipment will cause many to malce a careful survey of their 
present and future prospects. In addition they will want a 
fairly comprehensive demonstration of the costs and advantages 
before signing a contract for electric power. To do this 
it will be necessary to carry on an extensive education and 
promotion programme with many individual users. 



j. .. c j | 






1 

* 



. ; , . i -,feD'V, vy-i ft.1 a ifl , ";.LUf* : 

1 V. £ 



. 


: ■ 


yi 50 









59 . 


Measures of Cash Income Available for Expenditure on 

Power . 

In certain areas of the Province farmers are now 
ready and anxious to install electric power. Some are in a 
position to finance the added expenditures, others are not. 

In all there are three classes: 

(1) Those financially able to install power. 

(2) Those requiring assistance. 

(3) Those unable to install power with financial 
assistance. 

A determination of the farmers’ general financial status, 
then, will be helpful in deciding where power should be ex¬ 
tended. The Special Areas of Alberta have many farmers on 
submarginal land who have received considerable government 
aid. Power could not be extended there without large finan¬ 
cial support. From the very prosperous districts to the poor 
ones, there is then a shading off, where it becomes no longer 
feasible to extend power lines. 

No statistics are available to show that farmers 
have cash on hand ready to expend it on power or other alter¬ 
natives. Instead information is available that will to a 
certain degree indicate the farmers' financial standing and 
their ability to pay for power if they choose. The following 
measures may be applied: 











60 


(1) Farm Income Data. 

The Census for Canada has information for each of the 

2 / 

seventeen Census Divisions of the Province. Such information 
as the following can be obtained: 

(a) Average yields of principal grain crops by 
census division. 

(b) Area in crop, summerfallow and new breaking. 

(c) Area and production of field crops by census 
divisions. 

(d) Livestock populations by classes in census 
divisions. 

(e) Livestock marketing by census divisions. 

(f) Poultry population by census divisions. 

(g) Assessed value of property by census 
divisions. 

The boundaries of the sixteen areas for electrical 
study are not confined to the Census Divisions, but reliable 
information on each area can be obtained from the above data. 
This would give some indication as to the income of each 
farmer. For example, the average cash return per farm from 
the sale of crops and livestock for each census division can 
be found. This may be useful in making comparisons of districts. 

(2) The Expressed Opinion of the Farmer. 

This should be a reliable guide. When a farmer is 


1/ Agricultural Statistics of Alberta, prepared by Agricul¬ 
tural Extension Service, Department of Agriculture. Published 
by the direction of Hon. D. B. MacMillan, Minister of Agricul¬ 
ture. November, 1941. 










61 . 


presented with a contract to sign for power he will take stock 
of his financial position. If the greater majority of the 
farmers hesitate and feel they have not sufficient cash income 
then a power project will not likely succeed. 

(3) Tax Arrears and -Public Ownership of Land. 

Other things being equal, a district with small tax 
arrears should be in a more favourable financial position 
than one with accumulated back taxes and many publicly owned 
parcels. 

(4) Surveys, e.g., as carried on by the P.F.R.A. and the 

Dominion Economics Division. 

A Land Use Classification study was carried on in the 
Special Areas of Alberta, where land was classified for certain 
production as submarginal, marginal and supramarginal. Further 
studies were also carried on in the Peace River and other parts 
of the Province. In addition, a dairy study is being conducted 
in cooperation with the Dominion and Provincial Governments. 

In the preliminary report a summary of costs and returns is 
presented. From this the average operator*s labour earnings 
for a year were as follows: $1,288 for 45 wholemilk farms; 

$772 for 49 inspected cream farms; $694 for 85 churning cream 

u 

farms; and $579 for 25 cheese milk farms. 




62 


Footnote to p. 61s 

^Patterson, H. L. A Preliminary Report on an Economic Survey 
of Farms Producing Dairy Products for Sale in North Central 
Alberta from June 1, 1940, to May 31, 1941. Prepared for in¬ 
formation of cooperators April 1943, p. 3, Table 2. 

Information of this nature, however, is not available 
for all parts of the Province. What is available can be used 
with confidence if properly interpreted. 

(5) Past Financial Assistance. 

During the depression and drought years farmers were 
given assistance in various forms: seed grain, feed and direct 
relief. Some areas received more assistance than others. In 
general those farmers that were able to cany on Ydthout help 
were in a more favourable financial position. This situation 
is not confined to individual farmers but to districts as a 
whole. This information could serve as another basis in 
determining the ability of farmers in any particular area to 
finance electric power. 

(6) Electrification Surveys. 

Part II of this report contains information on each 
district selected, together with township data. The district 
data indicate the average size of farm, average improved 
acres per farm, the average total value per farm, the average 
value of farm building and other related information. Refer- 















■ . - 1 '' : ■ 



O' ' 


. 









( 













! 

















65 


ence to the township surveys reveals such information as the 
average number of livestock per farm, average improved acres, 
proportion of farms with cars and tractors and condition of 
buildings. Most of this data can be used as a measure of the 
district’s ability to support an electrification programme. 

In addition to these tables relating to each district, a 
summary of all the districts in the tentative service area is 
included after District XVI. The district and summary data 
can be compared to show relatively favourable or unfavourable 


conditions 

















_ . ./ n;' 


.) 





64 . 


VI tkf. relation between the cost of electrical energy 
AND THE AMOUNT USEP 


a• Capital Costs a nd Installation . 

To begin with a number of prices of appliances will be 


given; some are pre-war and some are present prices. Secondly, 
a summary of these will be given to obtain some estimate of 
costs. 


Quotations were received from one Edmonton Department 
Store as follows: 


Washing Machine 
Electric Range 
Frigidaire, 4 cu. ft. 
Frigidaire, 6 cu. ft. 
Vacuum Cleaner 
Iron 
Ironer 

Estimates from an electric 


$ 94.95 and up 
139.00 and up 
245.00 

245.00 to $545.00 
45.00 to $122.00 
5.00 and up 
150.00 to $250.00 

supply house in Edmonton 


were also obtained: 

Washing Machine 
Frigidaire, 4 cu. 
Electric Range 
Vacuum Cleaner 
Iron 
Toaster 


$ 95.00 to $125.00 
ft. 238.00 and up 

154.00 to $296.00 
25.00 and up 
2.75 and up 
2.00 and up 


Radios have a wide range of prices. Small mantel sets sell 
as low as $15.00 to $20.00 to the large combination sets 


around $350.00. 












65 


Estimates on the costs of wiring were obtained from 
a study of 15 gasoline plant users, the average being $115.00 
per house. One city electric company estimated the average 
cost of wiring and fixtures for a six-room farm home to be 
approximately $125.00; this of course, does not include the bam and 
other buildings. Therefore, $150.00 is probably a more accurate 
figure. 


Using the above estimates of prices, a minimum range 
of costs can be approximated. 


Table 10.—Estimates on Proposed Packages 


1. A minimum package, consisting of 

Cost of wiring house and fixtures $150,00 

Washing machine 95.00 

Vacuum Cleaner 25.00 

Radio 50.00 

Iron . 5.00 

$523.00 

2. An intermediate package, consisting of 

Cost of wiring house and fixtures $150,00 

Washing machine 95.00 

Frigidaire 238.00 

Electric Range 139.00 

Vacuum cleaner 25.00 

Radio 50.00 

Iron 5.00 


&7.Q1LQ& 


These estimates are taken from the quotations given 
by the department store and the electric supply house. In all 



















. 










' . 


• ■ 



. 







' 







66 . 


cases the minimum costs are quoted. Although new prices on 
a number of appliances were not obtained. Table 10 serves as 
a partial guide to costs for anyone wishing to install power 
at the minimum. 

The Manitoba Report proposes to offer electrical 
wiring and equipment to farmers in three standard packages as 
shown in the following table. 


Table 11.—Proposed Standard Packages of Electrical Wiring 

and Equipment^ 




List 1939 Net 1939 

I 

A minimum package, consisting of: 





Cost of wiring house & outbuildings 

$150.00 

$150.00 


Washing machine 


100.00 

60.00 


Miscellaneous small appliances 


50.00 

30.00 




$300.00 

$240.00 

II 

An intermediate package: 





Cost of wiring house & outbuildings 

$225.00 

$225.00 


Washing machine 


100.00 

60.00 


Miscellaneous small appliances 


50.00 

30.00 


Refrigerator (6 cu. ft.) 


225.00 

135.00 


Fractional motors and adapter 


100.00 

90.00 




$700.00 

$540.00 

III 

A complete package: 





Cost of wiring house & outbuildings 

$250.00 

$250.00 


Washing machine 


100.00 

60.00 


Miscellaneous small appliances 


50.00 

50.00 


Refrigerator (6 cu. ft.) 


225.00 

135.00 


Motors and adapter 


225.00 

202.50 


Electric radio 


100.00 

60.00 


Electric range 


125.00 

75.00 


Pressure water system 


600.00 

540.00 


Vacuum cleaner 


50.00 

30.00 



—to 

j 7PS QQ fljSRg-KO 

















!\C ,o 'ih . XOt; 

■I *; ‘ 

*sSj: . J £' S'- 1 '. ^ jr i J - :i - 

... 

•'S - ■'•■/x: X,. v!'.C 

; ■ i i%' 

. .. ‘ V'u. . V. Oi'X i..U 

. - - • 

* 

on rji-s ' 

.>•; 'i 

Sfi ;j. i " 


.<. . o’ - „ 


' )Di7i .' 

.. ;J; 

Jit 










’ 





•. j.-4 




r.. 


• • 











67 . 


Footnote to Table 11: 

^Report of Manitoba Electrification Enquiry Commission, op. 
cit., p. 127, Table 30. 

At the present time in Alberta only an approximation 
can be made regarding costs of wiring and appliances. The 
minimum a farmer could spend and use power at all would be 
about $300. To use a moderate amount the expenditure would be 
between $600 and $700. To electrify fully, that is to modernize 
the home with all conveniences, such as a water system, plumb¬ 
ing, frigidaire and also to equip the rest of the farmstead 
with all required appliances the costs would range from 
$1,000 to $1,500. It is to be remembered these estimates do 
not include tap-off expenditures which may be considerable 
if the house is some distance from the road. It is evident 
then, that a considerable investment would be required and 
farmers will often be hesitant before taking the initial step. 

In the United States considerable success has been 
achieved in reducing the costs of wiring and appliances, 
especially since 1935. In many instances farmers were unable 
to electrify fully as costs were too high to insure full use 
of energy. Expert information and technical skill, however, 
produced equipment at lower prices suitable to the farmers’ 


needs. Such things as meters, light and plumbing fixtures, 
coolers, and transformers all came up for consideration and a 



.... J' 




















: > 

















68 . 


way was found to manufacture or purchase these at substantial 
reductions. This problem has aroused considerable discussion 
wherever farm electric power has been planned or extended. 
Furthermore, the variations in costs of many appliances 
between the U nited States and Canada has been strongly crit¬ 
icized. 


"The following comparative prices were secured from 
a company manufacturing in both countries: 


Apoliance 

Price in 
Canada 
Prewar 

Price in 
United States 

PT’ownt' 

Refrigerator, 6 cu. ft. 

$295.00 

$159.00 

Refrigerator, 4 cu. ft. 

199.00 

120.00 

Special coffee maker 

11.50 

7.95 

Waffle iron 

8.75 

6.95 

Coffee maker 

8.75 

6.95 

Percolator 

6.95 

5.95 

Turnover toaster 

4.40 

5.95 

Sandwich grill 

9.50 

8.95 

Waffle grids for grill 

3.50 

2.50 

Special iron 

7.95 

6.95 

Iron 

2.95 

2.95 


"An examination of existing prices convinces this 
Commission that to a major extent the feasibility of develop¬ 
ing an expanded programme of .farm electrification will 
depend on the degree to which reductions can be obtained in 
the prices of electrical appliances and apparatus used in 













69 


y 

the extension of farm service.” 

This view is not confined to the Manitoba Commis¬ 
sion alone but is general throughout the farming population. 
From the farmer* s point of view he is not sure that prices 
of producers’ goods will be relatively favourable, thus 
allowing him to embark on a considerable electrification 
expenditure. Furthermore, the farmer has other financial 
commitments often involving considerable expenditure, such 
as land payments, new buildings, equipment, livestock, and 
general improvements. 

These costs will be competing with other farm costs, 
e.g., electricity. It is not to be expected that results for 
electricity will be most successful, if the prices of applian¬ 
ces and installation remain high. Response will be more 
enthusiastic if farmers know a low price policy has been 
embarked upon in order to give them power. Several solutions 
for this problem have been suggested. 

(1) Establish a Commission to purchase and dis¬ 
tribute electrical supplies in bulk. 

(2) Purchase from the United States with a sub¬ 
stantial tariff readjustment. 

1/ Report of Manitoba Electrification Enquiry Commission, 
op. cit., p. 162. 










70 


(3) Call for bids from present manufacturers. 

(4) Follow the procedure of the R. E. A.—have a 
maximum price and find a manufacturer to 
produce the good. 

Some such procedure as the above will need to be adopted in the 
post-war period in order to reduce costs. 

According to the Manitoba Report on a Farm Electrif¬ 
ication Programme they have experimented with somewhat similar 
procedure to (l) above and have recommended it become standard 

y 

practice. 

Article 4 of the Atlantic Charter sets forth the free 
flow of international goods as one of the peace objectives. 

This same adjustment was recommended to a considerable degree 
by the Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial Relations. 

During 1930-32 the tariff between United States and 
Canada was sharply raised and practically every branch of the 
iron and steel industry received added protection. This resulted 
in a marked reduction in imports relative to home production in 

the case of textiles, automobiles, electrical apparatus. These 

. 

efforts to check the fall in employment by reducing imports 
benefitted mainly the Eastern manufacturer. Insofar as the 
relative improvement of incomes in these places was due to the 
maintenance of prices resulting from higher tariffs, they were 

1/ Report of Manitoba Electrification Enquiry Commission, 
op. cit., p. 166. 









. 


■ . !: - . • 


■ . 

X\l 

■ , : ■ • 

. .. •• ' 

. 

::o . ’ • ' . ’ v ■■ , ■; .<>. .. : i 




v . :. . ■ ?•. 'iu. J. : ’v 

. ;iJ' . v .t, .i !. . 

: 

rCv \’ . .. J\. bnx n 

c . .. \J J. •; v ; : : r.i ... ■J.J 

. - ■ 4 ■ ■ • " 







71 


V 

harmful to the rest of the countiy. 

This increase in protection, it is pounted out, help¬ 
ed the manufacturing industry, but had tariffs not been raised 
the purchasing power of exporters would have been greater and 
the expansion of other industries such as gold mining and 

y 

electric power would have been more rapid. 

Since the war more constructive action has been 
directed towards the solution of the tariff problem. There 
are, however, other factors at work, partly influenced by 
war activity, that will affect the costs of electrical ap¬ 
paratus, Mass production of equipment on a scale before 
undreamed of has taken place. Scientists have been at work 
in every field developing new and better supplies of all 
kinds, electrical equipment, metal substitutes and plastics. 

Out of war experience will come a newr era of post-war 
achievement. Advertising, newspaper and magazine articles, 
and scientific reports are all moulding public opinion for 
the development in the future. In many cases these new 
achievements and greater production will result in a lower 

1/ For reference see Report of the Royal Commission on 
Dominion-Provincial Relations, Book I, pp. 158-9. 

Zj Ibid. 







L . u. 

































72 . 


unit price. This may have a very beneficial effect on all 
electrical appliances and thus in a measure reduce costs to 
farmers. 

b. Rates and C o nsumption . 

The problem of rates is one of the most important in 
any electrification scheme. These rates will be affected to a 
very considerable extent by the areas selected and the density 
of the farm population. If power were only extended to the 
better areas with a high density it is conceivable a reasonably 
low rate could be set. On the other hand, if 30 % to 50$ of 
all farms are to receive central station power then additional 
costs will be involved and hence rates increased. 

When the sample surveys were taken a careful mapping 
of the farms in each township was made and a rating was given 
to each farm. On the basis of this information the estimated 
cost per farm for line construction was obtained. The average 
j estimated cost of all farms connected was found to be $594.78 
or approximately $600. Other costs i^ere obtained from differ¬ 
ent sources on operating expenses and the cost of energy per 
kwhr at the farm. Allowing for depreciation and interest on 
investment the following rates appear to be necessary for the 

Alberta situation. 










73 . 


A minimum net monthly hill would be $4.80 up to 20 
kwhr, with a discount of 1C# off the even dollar and addition¬ 
al consumption over 20 kwhr would be 5£ a kwhr. Using the 
above rates the total monthly cost and net revenue can be 
shown for various consumptions. 


Monthly Consumption 
kwhr. 

Total Cost' 1 ' 

r 

Net Revenue 
$ 

20 

5.20 

4.80 

30 

5.37 

5.10 

40 

5.53 

5.40 

50 

5.70 

5.70 

60 

5.86 

6.00 

70 

6.03 

6.30 

80 

6.19 

6.60 

90 

6.36 

6.90 

100 

6.52 

7.20 . 


^*As pointed out in a previous footnote, p. 55, a comparison 
of these monthly costs as suggested on p. 55 is not strictly 
valid. 


No information is available to show what the yearly 
consumption of farms will be, but it is assumed to be about 
600 kwhr. At present the average annual consumption of farms 
served by the Canadian Utilities is about 800 kwhr; for the 
farms served by the Calgary Power Company the average 
reported consumption is about 1,500 kwhr. These two quotations 
are from select groups and therefore estimates based on these 
figures would be far too optimistic. 

Whatever the consumption, the success of any scheme 














74 . 


will depend to a great extent on the amount of energy used per 
farm. With the rates as suggested it may be possible to cover 
estimated costs with a consumption of 600 kwhr per year. An 
intensive load building campaign may result in more than 600 
kwhr being used per year; this will be dependent on a number 
of factors. Chief among these are the area selected for service, 
the income of the farmers, the price of appliances and the 
amount of effort devoted to an educational promotion programme. 
Of these four factors it is generally considered the income of 
the farmers is the most significant of all. 

c. Relation of Income to Power Installation and Consumption . 

Under previous headings estimates have been given on 
the probable cost of installation and monthly consumption. 
Briefly they were as follows: a minimum installation would 
be $500, moderate $600 to $700 and fairly complete electrifica- 
| tion would be from $1,000 to $1,500; all quotations exclude 
| tap-off. The minimum consumption billing would be $4.80. 

These estimates point to a substantial investment in electrif¬ 
ication if farmers intend to make a reasonably adequate use 
of power. 

If the rate structure is approximately the same 
as previously indicated there is good reason to assume the 
















75 . 


added cost of power over the minimum at will not be a 
big factor. Paying a minimum bill of $4.80 for only 20 kwhr 
would not be good practice ; thus, if farmers can afford the 
minimum bill it seems likely the rate structure of a kwhr 
beyond the 20 kwhr would induce them to use more. In some 
areas the high net bill may be more than farmers can be per¬ 
suaded to pay. 

The relation of income to power installation and the 
purchase of appliances depends on a number of factors. In the 
first place, farmers* activities vary, certain productive 
activities requiring more power than others. As already pointed 
out, the poultryman may use power more in producticn than the 
grain grower. Secondly, the operator may have more opportune 
investments and/or urgent needs for his capital than for 
electric energy. If the income is reasonably large and other 
competing wants at the time are small then an expenditure on 
electrification may be made. On the other hand, if for 
various reasons the income is low end other constant and 

varying costs must be met then an expenditure on power cannot 
be expected. This is an important consideration. In the 
older, better settled areas payments on land, buildings, 
machinery and livestock may not be as great a financial 
responsibility as for newer areas. It is evident then that 




. 


76 . 


the amount of income farmers are willing to expend on power 
varies with districts and cannot be accurately determined. 

It is, however, reasonable to suppose a greater proportion 
and larger amount of income will be forthcoming for electric 
energy in the older, better established districts. Even this 
cannot be fully assumed if low farm prices and crop failures 
occur periodically. 








77 


VII PROMOTION. OF RURAL ELECTEIFlC^TIOy 
a. General Promotion . 

It is generally recognized that if a farm electrif¬ 
ication programme is to succeed an extensive educational 
and promotional programme is required. The most effective 
place to do this educational and load building work is right 
on the farm in contact with the farmer and his own particular 
set-up. 

At the outset it will be necessary to inform the 
user of all the terms, conditions, cost of appliances, cost 
of power and the uses and advantages of energy. This will 
require the services of trained personnel, who can advise 
each farmer intelligently on all matters during the early 
years of the project. As time goes on less frequent visits 
may be sufficient and other methods employed. More specific 
information on these extension and promotion methods is con¬ 
tained in the following parts of this section. 

Before going on to a consideration of the different 
methods of promotion a word of caution seems necessary. 

Like some other farm requirements electrification may be the 
subject of a high pressure selling campaign. If this is 
the case farmers may invest too heavily in power, and this 

will be a detriment, as occasionally happens in the purchase 









78 . 


of farm machineiy. Therefore, full information is necessary 
in order that farmers can come to an intelligent decision 
regarding their own particular situations without being 
unduly persuaded by outside influences. It should be borne 
in mind then that very careful judgment will need to be 
exercised by those in administrative positions in order to 
determine the optimum promotion programme. Once this decision 
has been reached, promotion work can be carried on through 
various organizations. 

b. "Self. Helo n -Pr-omption . 

It has been suggested that the attitude of the farmer 
is affected by his degree of familiarity with the knowledge 
and uses of power. There are a number of avenues that may 
be successfully used in securing user participation in the 
development of and responsibility for farm distribution lines. 
Organizations among the users may assist in securing contracts, 
building up consumption, possibly patrolli n g the line, making 
minor repairs, billing and collecting, and such other activ¬ 
ities as to further the full development of rural power. 

Considerable emphasis has been placed on "self help" 
organizations under the R. E. A. It has not always resulted 

in a substantial saving of money but has been influential in 







79 . 


getting a higher saturation and greater consumption from the 
beginning. 

c. Extension of Technical Knowledge and Uses of Electrical 

Power . 

The extension of technical knovjledge and uses of 
electrical power is primarily an educational problem and the 
degree of success of any rural electrification scheme will 
depend in large part on the promotion and extension work 
carried on to educate people to use and operate electrical 
power. It will be desirable to enlist the cooperation of all 
farm extension services to the greatest possible extent, as 
success or failure of power in Alberta will be influenced by 
the amount of power used. 

Effective extension of knowledge can be carried on 
through various activities and educational programmes. 

(l) Public Schools. 

> 

As indicated earlier in the report approximately 
32$ of the enrollment in non-urban elementary and intermediate 
grades is in the intermediate section If shop courses were 
extended to the boys and probably some of the girls, valuable 
technical training and knowledge of the uses of power could 

be taught. These students would influence their parents and 














80 . 


in time their knowledge to their own farm situations. 

(2) Agricultural Schools. 

Agricultural schools also serve as a media for 
extension work. Special courses could be offered on the 
technical aspects, e.g., wiring of buildings, inst allin g 
motors, reading meters, also demonstrations of the uses of 
power and of "Make it Yourself" devices. 

District Agriculturalists, although primarily- 
interested in other branches of agriculture could promote in 
various ways the use of electric power. 

(3) Maintenance Men and Technicians. 

Wherever the power line goes maintenance men and 
technicians will be required. Of all the educational agencies 
these men are best qualified to give technical advice to the 
farmer. The technician can advise the farmer as to the 
type of wiring, size of motor to install, care and operation, 
and many other related problems. In addition, he can do 
much to promote the use of power. 

(4) Farm Equipment Shows. 

A quotation will illustrate the possibilities 

here; 

"Most spectacular of the educational activities 
carried on by the E. E. A. itself during the fiscal year 
1941, as in previous years, was the farm—equipment show. 





81 


This show travelled through a large part of the East, Middle 
West, and South, attracting larger crowds than ever before. 
Besides a wide variety of factory-built farm equipment and 
household appliances, the show included a liberal exhibit of 
devices which any fanner handy with tools can make or assemble 

V 

in his own workshop at trifling cost. n 

(5) Experimental Stations. 

In the summer experimental stations and sub-stations 
hold field days to present new ideas and practices to the 
farmer• Here an excellent opportunity is available to dem¬ 
onstrate the possibilities of power. Research and experimr- 
entation can also be carried on at these stations to deter¬ 
mine the most efficient appliances in utilizing electric 
energy. This information from each station can then be cor¬ 
related and presented to farmers in various forms. 

(6) The Extension Department under the Provincial 

Government• 

All agricultural extension workers could cooperate 
to promote the growth of electrical development. 

1/ Report of the Administrator of the Rural Electrification 
Administration, 1941, p. 5. United States Department of 
Agriculture, Washington, D. C. 













82 . 


(a) By us© of the radio. 

(b) By use of moving pictures. 

(c) By demonstration and advice of trained 
personnel, e.g., Horae Economics Graduates. 

d. Extension of Knowledge of Co mparative Costs of Electrical 

and Other Power . 

The question of comparative costs is one of paramount 
importance to farmers. Before they change to electric power 
they will endeavor to analyze their situation to decide if 
this change is financially feasible. Farmers will need some 
guidance in this matter and may obtain it from such sources 
as: 

(1) Test Areas. 

Three or four districts in the Province to be set 
up as experimental areas to determine: 

(a) The average amount of money involved in dis¬ 
carding or selling some non-electric equipment. 

(b) The cost of installation of power. 

(c) The cost of appliances. 

(d) Average monthly cost of power and consumption. 

! Then, through various agencies distribute this information to 

districts likely to obtain power. 

(2) Experimental Stations and Sub-Stations. 

If these are electrified, and are fairly typical 
of the area, cost studies can be obtained in this way. 

(3) Other Governmental Sources. 

Information relating to the problem may be gathered 
















85 . 


from other provinces and the United States; this may then be 
extended through present agencies to the farmers. 

e. Creating Attitudes Favourable tr> th e Uses of Electrical 

Power . 

The foregoing organizations, namely: 

Public Schools > 

Agricultural Schools and D. A.'s., 

Maintenance Men and Technicians, 

Farm Equipment Shows, 

Experimental Stations, 

The Extension Department, 

will be agents in creating a favourable attitude towards the 
use of electric power. There are, however, other influences 
affecting the decision of the farmer: 

(1) The Cost of Appliances. 

If costs are reasonably low the introduction of a 

new appliance will receive a much better reception. Farmers 

in the United States were not willing to purchase a milk 

1 / 

cooler at $£00 to $500, but were willing at $70. 

(2) Low Cost of Operation. 

Some appliances require more energy for operation 
than others, e.g., the operation of a stove requires more 
power than some other appliances. A combination of high 
initial cost and a high cost of operation will have an 


l/ Slattery, Harry, op. ci., p. 69. 









i. '* 


/ ■- 





I u . . 



. 




- , ■ 





- ;.i • 



. 




' 




. 















84 


unfavourable effect on electrification. 

(5) An Increase in Production. 

Tills will have a very favourable effect on farmers* 
attitudes. Lights in the chicken house, power to operate a 
chicken or hog brooder will increase the cash return to the 
operator. 

(4) Reduction in Costs. 

This may be the result of an increase in production 
through the operation of a more efficient appliance by electric 
power. 

(5) Convenience. 

Convenience, especially to the housewife, will be a 
paramount factor in determining her attitude towards the 
installation of electrical energy. 

“It is pumping water more cheaply than this can be 
done by hand, and making modem plumbing available, in most 
regions for the first time. It is banishing the drudgery of 
washday and making it easier for the farm housewife to keep 

her house clean and orderly. It is running refrigerators and 
milk coolers less expensively, as well as more efficiently, 
than ice. It is providing a convenient and economical method 
of cooking, even for big families hungry from the harvest 
field. It is making work lighter; contributing to enjoyment 










85 . 


of the comforts of modern living. The essence of what elec¬ 
tricity has done, thus far, is suggested by the slogan of one 

of the new electric service cooperatives in Illinois: 'Elec- 

1 / 

trified farms beat moving to town 1 ." 


f. Summary of Macliinery for Demend Creation . 

This topic has been discussed under previous 
headings and will only be summarized here. 

Methods: 

(l) Through all organizations of the Provincial 
Government related to agriculture. 

(g) Through some organizations of the Dominion 
Government related to agriculture. 

( 5 ) Through agencies of Public Utility companies. 

(4) Through advertising. 

(5) Through the Provincial Department of Education 
in schools. 

(6) Farmer organizations. 


-- _ ----- 

1/ Report of Rural Electrification Administration, op. cit., 
I 1938, p. 11. 

















RURAL ELECTRIFICATION IN ALBERTA 


PART 11 


GENERAL FEATURES OF THE SIXTEEN DISTRICTS 
IN THE POTENTIAL SERVICE AREA. 





























PREFACE 


In the introduction of Part 1 it is explained that 
this report is divided into two parts. The various problems 
and aspects of farm electrification discussed in Part 1 relate 
to the general farming situations. 

Part 11 is more specific. It is intended to reveal 
more detailed information relevant to the study in order to 
make evident certain significant differences and similarities 
in the selected areas. Actual data for each of the district 
and township samples are shown and this statistical material, 
together with the short description of each district, substantiates 
i number of generalizations in Part 1. This information was 
also used in the preparation of a report on Rural Electrification 
:Ln Alberta by Professor Andrew Stewart, Department of Political 
]economy. University of Alberta, and appears as an appendix to his 
work. 













CONTENT S PART 11 


DISTRICTS 


PAGES 

Introduction 


1-5 

District 1 

Warner-Coutts 

6-8 

District 11 

Irrigated Districts 

9-15 

District 111 

Drumheller - Cardston 

14 - 18 

District IV 

Calgary 

19 -22 

District V 

Olds - Carstairs 

23 - 28 

District VI 

Drumheller - Castor 

29 - 33 

District Vll 

Red Deer 

34 - 38 

District Vlll 

West Fringe 

39 - 43 

District IX 

Wainwright 

44 - 48 

District X 

Wetaskiwin 

49 - 53 

District XI 

Vegreville 

54 - 59 

District Xll 

Edmonton 

60 - 64 

District Xlll 

North-East Fringe 

65 - 69 

District XIV 

Smoky Lake - Mundare 

70 - 74 

District XV 

North - West Fringe 

75 - 79 

District XVI 

Grande Prairie 

80 - 85 

Statistical Summary 

of Districts 

86 - 

Summary of Districts 


87 - 91 









1 . 


PART 11 

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE 16 DISTRICTS IN THE POTENTIAL SERVICE 
AREA (1) 

As indicated in the text of the report on "Rural Electri¬ 
fication in Alberta" the defined potential service area was divided 
into 16 districts within -which conditions generally were relatively 
uniform, and between which significant differences were apparent. 

Some characteristics of these districts can be described 
from Census data; and the relevant data in Census reports were 
extracted and summarized. Additional material was obtained from 
surveys of sample areas in each of the districts, with the exception 
of District 1. The information from these two sources is brought 
together in part 11. 

The location of each district is shown in the accompanying 
map (Figure l). The municipal and improvement districts included 
in each of the largest districts defined for this study are shown 
in the tabulation of census data under each district. The 16 
districts, and the locations of the sample areas in each district, 
are as follows: 

(l) Surveys in the sample areas were conducted by Calgary Power 
Company, Canadian Utilities Limited, Economics Division, Dominion 
Department of Agriculture, and the Research Council of Alberta. 













2 . 


No 


1 . 


2 . 


3. 


4. 


5. 


6 . 


7. 


8 . 

9. 

10 . 
11 . 


12 . 

13. 


14. 


15. 


16 . 


DISTRICT 
Description 
Warner - Coutts 
Irrigated Districts 
Drumheller-Cardston 
Calgary 

■)lds-Carstairs 

Drumheller-Castor 
Red Deer 

West Fringe 
Wainwright 
Wetaskiwin 
Vegreville 

Edmonton 
Nth.-East Fringe 
Smohy Lake-Mundare 
Nth.-West Fringe 
Grande Prairie 


SAMPLE AREA 

Legal Description Nearest Town 

Tp.20;Rge4;W.of 4th M. Brooks 

Tp.l2;Rge.25W.of 4th M. Claresholm 
Tp.23;Rge.27;W. of 4th M. Langdon 
Tp.32;Rge.l;W.of 5th M. Olds 
Tp.31,Rge.24;W. of 4th M. Three Hills 
Tp.38;Rge.l3;W. of 4th M. Castor 
-Tp.40;Rge.25;W. of 4th M. Clive 
Tp.39;Rge.l9;W. of 4th M. Stettler 
Tp,43;Rge.2;W. of 5th M. Rimbey 
Tp.44;Rge.l4;W. of 4th M. Killam 
Tp.47;Rge.l9;W. of 4th M. Camrose 
Tp.52,Rge.6;W. of 4th M. Clandonald 
Tp.50;Rge.6;W. of 4th M. Vermilion 
Tp.51;Rge.24;W. of 4th M. Ellerslie 
Tp.59;Rge.8;W. of 4th M. St. Paul 
Tp.53;Rge.l5,W. of 4th M. Mundare 
Tp.58;Rge.2;W. of 5th M. Pickardville 
Tp.71,Rge;8;W. of 6th M. Grande Prairie 


In this appendix each district is described briefly in 


terms of the following features; 









r;0 V. : 











Figure X 


























































































3 . 


(1) Physical features 

(2) Type of farming 

(3) Population 

(4) Size of Farm 

(5) ; Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

(6) Value of farm property 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample 

Summary taken based on, first, the sample survey, and 
second, the Census reports follow the descriptive material for 
each district. 

The census tabulations are, it may be assumed, on a 
comparative basis, and provide a reasonably accurate description 
of the general conditions at the time the Census enumerations were 
made. Some material from the 1941 Census was not published at the 
time part 11 was prepared, consequently, data from the 1936 census 
has been used when information based on the later census would 
clearly have been preferable. Even when 1941 Census data have been 
used, allowance must be made for such changes as have occurred since 
that year. 

As the Sample areas were surveyed in 1943 the information 
from them could not, at best, be wholly comparable to the data from 
earlier census years. However, the data from the sample areas 
reveal defects which are attributable to other factors. In large 
part these defects are due to the fact that the surveys were conducted 
by different agencies, using somewhat different forms, and interp¬ 
reting particular questions in somewhat different ways. For example, 
the tabulations for some sample areas are more complete than others; 







4 . 


and the interpretation of acres worked was not uniform. 

While proof is lacking it is also possible that leek of uniformity 
affects the ratings given farms in different areas. 

The object of the survey of sample areas was to secure 
descriptive material which would be representative of the district 
in which the sample area was located. At the conclusion of each 
section in part 11 reference is made to the apparent representative¬ 
ness of the sample. It is clear that the degree of representative¬ 
ness varies. In some cases the data for the sample area compare 
closely with the census data for the district. In other cases 
there is noticeable divergence. Where differences between the 
sample data and the district data appear significant, the conclusion 
may be that, from the point of view of farm electrification, the 
sample area is either better or poorer than the average for the 
district as a whole. This limits the validity of generalizing from 
the sample to the district. 

While not all sample areas could be considered repres¬ 
entative of the districts they are located in, some are better and 
some poorer. This means that where the sample data are used to 
reach conclusions for the whole service area some compensation occurs. 
This would be true for example in using the ratings of farms based 
on the samples. In some districts this would tend to overestimate 
the probable connections; in other cases to underestimate the prop¬ 
ortion of farmers who might take power. To the extent that these 
errors are compensating the estimated saturation for the whole 








5. 


service area may be more accurate than the estimate for any 
single district. 

The data presented in part- 11 have already served a 
useful purpose in connection with the preparation of the report 
on "Farm Electrification in Alberta". If at any time a programme 
of farm electrification were undertaken, it is felt that the 
description they provide of conditions in different fanning areas 
of the Province would prove useful to persons connected with the 
administration or supervision of such a programme. 


v 









6. 


DISTRICT 1 - WARN ER - COUTTS 

(1) Physical Features . 

District No. 1 is a small area on the southern 
boundary• It is in the brown and dark brown soil zones of the 

prairie. Most of the land is level and bare with occasional 

variations. The grass cover is typical of the semi-arid regions; 
consequently a high acreage per animal is required for pasture. 

(2) Type of Farming . 

The area has two special types of farming; wheat growing 
and ranching. One of the largest ranches in Alberta is within 
the area, also a number of sheep are raised on the short prairie 
grass. Drought and insects are the two chief drawbac; s, especially 
the former. 

(3) Population . 

About one-third of the population is of British races, 
the rest are mainly of Scandinavian and German stock. The population 
decreased from 1936 to 1941 and may decrease more; however, the 
number of farms increased which may alter the situation if the 
hazards of nature do not make it too difficult to secure a reasonable 
return for productive effort. 

(4) Size of Farm . 

Of all the districts selected for study, No. 1 heads the 
list as to size of farms. This is partly due to the following; first, 
the area chosen is small; secondly, the inclusion of large ranches 
greatly influences the average size, also it is a wheat farming area. 


















7. 


The average number of farms per township is about 26— less 
than one per square mile—with an average of three quarter 
sections improved land per farm. 

(5) Percentage of Tenant Farmers. 

The percentage tenancy is low, partly because the area 
is not .wholly wheat growing but includes as well cattle and sheep 
ranches in which at least part of the land is owned. 

District 1 ranks first in value of total property per 
farm. Large wheat farms and ranches account for this situation; 
and a fair proportion of this value is farm machinery. The value 
of farm buildings indicates a substantial investment—an advantage 
from an electrification point of view. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample. 

No township data were secured in this district. The 
information available is to be found in the Census and in Dominion 
government reports on areas in Southern Alberta. 

Present knowledge points to a reasonably good picture 
from the standpoint of the farm and its ability to support power. 
The greatest drawback is the distance bet?/een farms, which is no 
doubt too great to justify the extension of electrification to a 
!Large proportion of the farms. 





































\ 











8. 


DISTRICT 1 - WARNER-COIfTTS 
Data from 1936 and 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1956) 

3,702 

Total Rural. Population 

(1941) 

3,479 

Decrease of Population 

(1956-41) 

223 

Farm Population 

(1956) 

2,853 

Non-Farm Population 

(1956) 

849 

Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 

3 Vf> 

Total Acres in District 


702,427 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1956) 

190 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

202 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1956) 

246 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

827 

Number of Farms (1936) 


682 

Number of Farms (1941) 


770 

Increase in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

88 

Average Size of Farm - Total Acres (1936) 

898 

Average Size of Farm- Improved Acres (1936) 

461 

Total Acres in District 

per Farm (1941) 

912 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

14/6 

Value of Farm Property - 

Total (1956) 

$15,273 

Value of Farm Property - 

Buildings (1956) 

1,895 

Percentage population of Br. Races. 

Zl% 

M.D.'s & I.D's. Included 

in the District. 

5, 6, 36. 















9. 


DISTRICT 11 - IRRIGATED DIST RICTS_ 

(1) Physical Features . 

The irrigated districts are situated mainly in the semi- 
arid plains of the province. The soil changes from brown on the 
eastern side to dark brown on the western fringe, the greater 
part being within the brown soil zone. The topography for the 
greater part is level to undulating; the rolling sections are 
limited and mostly confined to grazing. The native cover is typ¬ 
ical of the short grass zones of the great plains; 

(2) Type of Farm . 

At present four types of farming predominate in the 
irrigated districts; specialty crops, grain type, livestock and 
mixed farming. Some of these types have developed as a result of 
accessibility to markets, such as the specialty crop in the more 
southerly districts adjacent to sugar factories. The grain type 
has prevailed in the more northerly parts, while scattered throughout 
the area are the livestock and mixed farming types. The proximity 
of grazing areas to the irrigated districts combined with the high 
production of feed on irrigated land has resulted in the development 
of a limited livestock feeding enterprise. 

Irrigation removes the fear and possibility of drought; 
however, grasshoppers and beet web-worms cause some damage, but in 
the main are kept under control. 

(3) Population . 

Since the forming of the irrigation districts both the rural 














! O' 


• ' ■;'f ■ -J- • 





















10. 


and the urban populations have increased. Probably the chief 
reason for the increase has been the change over from large grain 
farms to smaller more intensified farming. Increase may be expected 
to continue as long as there is an outlet for specialized products. 

The population is made up of many nationalities, the greater prop¬ 
ortion being British, Scandinavian and German. 

[4) Size of Farm. 

Size of farm varies widely; in the north where specializ¬ 
ation is less developed the average size of farm is probably about 
one half a section, whereas in the more specialized parts of the 
south the average size will likely be one quarter section or less. 
]’arms on the edge of irrigation will likely be larger as they will 
include grazing and dry land. This may be the reason for the 
variation in the district and sample data. 

(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers . 

There is a definite relationship between type of farming 
and tenancy. The higher tenancy occurs in the wheat farming areas 
and decreases with the smaller more specialized farms. As irrigation 
has developed there has been a change from wheat farming; this has 
had an effect on tenancy. Probably the district data for tenancy 
Is somewhat out of line and the sample indicates more the actual 
situation in irrigated areas. Some purchase of land for investment 
nay also affect the percentage tenant farmers. 

(6) Value of Farm Property, 

The value of buildings varies considerably with the district. 














. , • • • v . f : r 

. - ; -v . v •• . 


■ .. . . >' 


■ 


■ -:v * O 


... a? *r '• , 

■ * o. '■>"■’ o !j 

% ; ■ . r. J '" : o 

,.. ■ • 


■. : c • • •: •• ; 






, 










. 


r ■ • v 








• r • :: - 


■ 

. ■ t tin •' 














; ■ " 


•! 


• i 








11 


The average value of buildings in the Canada Land is $700, 
whereas for beet farms it is over $1,300. Not all buildings 
would be worth putting power in; this is indicated by the sample. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample . 

The irrigated areas present the most variable districts 
of all those selected. In one part the emphasis may be on beets 
and livestock, in another grain or mixed farming. The situation 
around Brooks is not the same as at Taber, therefore, it is 
difficult to make the sample apply to all. The district summary 
and the sample data give some guidance; nevertheless when a 
proposed electrification scheme is being planned a fuller under¬ 
standing of the varying situations ?dll be necessary. The District 
data., it will be observed, do not cover the Eastern irrigation 
District; as the sample data were secured from the vicinity of 
Brooks. 












12 



FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 


Tp. 20 Rge. 

14 W. of 

4 Meridian. Tp. near 

BROOKS 

Good Prospects 

39 

Per Cent Good 

28* 

Fair Prospects 

37 

Per Cent Fair 

27* 

Poor Prospects 

63 

Per Cent Poor 

45# 

Owner Farms 

no 

Per Cent Owned 

79* 

Tenant Farms 

29 

Per Cent Tenant 

21* 

Total Farm Pop. 

523 

Average Farm Pop. 

3.8 

Average No. Acres per Farm 

263 Worked per Farm 

198 


Proportion of Land Improved^ 


75# 


Total Cattl e 5282 Averag e 26 T otal Horse s — A verage 


Total Hog s 6921 A verag e 49 T otal Chicken s — A verage ~ 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 4.5# _Average De t h 85 ft , 

Power for Pumpin g 2 _^Percentage_ 1# __ 


Grain Chopped per Far m 2662 B u. Chopped by own tractor_ 79# 

Other means on Far m 1% _Off Far m 


Stucco 


Proportion having Cars_ 

Type ) Fram e 145 
of ) 

House) Percentage 100 P ercentage_0. 

Rooms per House_ 4.7 __ 


Other 


Percentage 


Condition of House: Goo d 26 
Condition of Barn: Goo d 26 
Area per Barn 840 _ 


Fair 


28 


Fair 


# Poor 46 _# 

26_ % Poor 48_ % 


Sq. Ft. Other bldgs, per Far m 3.7 
_ To Water 82 ft. 


Distance House to Barn 195 ft. 































































































DISTRICT 11 - IRRIGATED DISTRICTS. 


Data from 1936 and 1941 Census Reports. 

Total Rural Population (l936) 12,694 


Total Rural Population (1941) 

13,618 

Increase of Population (1936-1941) 

924 

Farm Population (1936) 

10,990 

N.on-Farm Population (1936) 

1,704 

Proportion of Non Farm Pop. (1936) 

16$ 

Total Acres in District 

895,164 

Acres per Rural Person (1936) 

71 

Acres per R.ral Person (1941) 

66 

Acres per Farm Person (1936) 

81 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

525 

Number of Farms (1936) 

2,262 

Number of Farms (l94l) 

2,350 

Increase in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

88 

Average Size of Farm - Total Acres (1936) 

392 

Average Size of Farm - Improved Acres (1936) 

284 

Total Acres in District per Farm (1941) 

381 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

28$ 

Value of Farm Property - Total (1936) 

§11,092 

Value of Farm Property - Buildings (1936) 

$ 1,520 

$ Population of British Races 

36$ 


M.D.'s. & I.D.&s. included in the District 


(x) 37,38,66, 
67, 97. 


















13. (Cont'd) 


(x) It is understood that there are approximately 1,200 
farms on irrigated land in the Eastern Irrigation District. 
The above data do not cover this district. 












14. 


DISTRICT 111 - DRUMHELLFR-CARDSTON 


(l) Physical Features. 

The district lies within two soil zones —black 
and brown, with the greater portion in the latter. Of all the 
districts outlined for study this one is the largest. From 
the boundary near Cardston it extends north to Drumheller, west 
to the foothills and east past Vulcan. All variations in topo¬ 
graphy are to be found, from rolling foothills on the west to 
level prairie. Two or three rivers cut across the area breaking 
the monotony of many miles of prairie. Very little bush cover is 
found except on the western side. 

(2) Type of Farming . 


According to the 1936 Census of the Prairie Provinces the 


area is classified as wheat farming. Some parts of the district are 
more specialized than others. In the black soils wheat areas the 
percentage of specialized wheat farms is less and diversification 
:.s greater. A fair proportion is in natural cover which is used to 
pasture sheep and cattle. Precipitation is not always adequate; 
besides insect pests and soil drifting add to the hazards of farming. 

(3) Population . 


The district data reveal a decrease in both population 


and the number of farms, but the proportion is not great. Of the 
population, 57$ are of British origin; the rest are mainly 
Scandinavian, German, Dutch and Russian. 



Size of Farm. 


















15. 


As a general rule farms in the area are large with 
the trend to even greater acreages. The proportion of rented 
land is high and farmers can often easily expand by renting 
available land near their own farm. The average distribution 
of farmsteads is just under one per square mile, and this density 
of farms is not favorable to electrification. 

(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers. 

According to the 1956 Census showing farm classification 
there is a smaller proportion of owners in the wheat class than 
any other type of farming. The district data substantiates this 
statement; it shows a percentage tenancy of 30— the highest of 
all the districts. 

(6) Value of Farm Property . 

This area has the second highest property valuation per 
farm of all the districts. A fair proportion of this value will 
be machinery as the area has a high machinery valuation per farm. 

The value of buildings per farm ranks second among all the districts 
selected, with Calgary as first. This high average value of farm 
buildings is encouraging if only the farmsteads were closer together, 
thus cutting down the average cost of line per farm. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample. 

District 111 covers a large area; therefore, the prob¬ 
ability of variations of the sample with the district becomes 
greater. It is generally recognized the western side of the 
area is in a more favourable farming area; this is true of the 











IF,. 


Claresholm sample. Most items on the sample summary give 
a good farming picture—many proportions are high, likely 
higher than for the district as a whole. A measure of the 
district’s productive ability based on the sample study may 
need several adjustments resulting in a less favourable picture. 













rr 


FARM ELECTRI FI CATION SURV EY. 


Tp. 12 Rge. 

25 

W. of 4 Meridian. 

Tp. near CLARESH0I 

Good Prospects 

50 

_ _Per Cent Good 

49$_ 

Fair Prospects_ 

21 _ 

_Per Cent Fair 

' 

Poor Prospects 

52 

Per Cent Poor 

51% 

Owner Farms 

58 

Per Cent 0\7ned 

56$ 

Tenant Farms 

45 

_Per Cent Tenant 

44% 


Total Farm Populatio n 567 A verage Farm Populatio n 5.6 _ 

Average Number Acres per Far m 514 W orked per Far m 509 (x ) 
Proportion of Land Improve d $9 %.,_ 


Total Cattl e 985 A verag e 9.5 T otal Horse s — A verag e- 

Total Hog s 5.615 A verag e 55 .1Total Chicken s — A verag e 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 98% _^Average Dept h 116 ft '.. 

Power for Pumping_ 67 Percentage_ 65$ _ 

Grain Chopped per Far m 1.0 59_Bu. Chopped by own Tracto r 64$ 

Other means on Far m 0% _Off Farm_36$_ 

Proportion having: Car s 88% T ractor s 91% Telephone s 7 9$ 

Type ) Frame_ 105. Stucco_4 O ther_~___ 

of ) 

House) Percentag e 96 _Percentage 4_Percentag e — 


Rooms per house_ 6.1 


Condition 

of House: 

Good 

50 

% 

Fair 

22 

% Poor 

28_% 

Condition 

of Barn: 

Good 

47 

.3 

Fair 

26 

Jo Poor 

27 % 


Area per Bar n 1.534 Sq. Ft. Other Buildings per Far m 5.4 
Distance House to Barn_ 178 ft. T o Wate r 90 ft. __ 


(x) Acres worked per farm includes all land that can be cultivated 













































































18 . 


DISTRICT 111 - DRUMHELLER - CARDSTON 
Data From the 1936 & 1941 Census Report. 


Total Rural Population (1936) 36,056 

Total Rural Population (l94l) 34,644 

Decrease of Population (1936-1941) 1,412 

Farm Population (1936) 31,085 

Non-Farm Population (1936) 4,971 

Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 16$ 

Total Acres in District 4,378,020 

Acres per Rural Person (1936) 121 

Acres per Rural Person (l94l) 126 

Acres per Farm Person (1936) 141 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 881 


Number of Farms (1936) 7,678 
Number of Farjns (1941) 7,399 
Decrease in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 279 
Average Size of Farm - Total Acres (1936) 541 
Average Size of Farm - Improved Acres (1936) 374 
Total Acres in District per Farm (1941) 592 


Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

Value of Farm Property - Total (1936) 

Value of Farm Property - Buildings (1936) 


30$ 

$ 12,220 

$ 

1,917 


$ Population of British Races 

M.D.’s & I.D.’s Included in the District 


57$ 

8,9,10,39,68,69, 


98,89,128,129,157,159,189, 190,191,217,213,219,247,243- 










19 


DISTRICT IV - CALGARY 

(1) Physical Features , 

Although a part of the district is in the black soil 
zone, the greater portion lies within the shallow black. The 
eastern half of the area is typical of the prairie, level to gently- 
rolling, The western half has a varying topography from level to 
hilly, with valleys and coulees here and there. Considerably more 
bush cover is found on the western half, besides there is a varia¬ 
tion in grass cover tOYfards the west, 

(2) Type of Farming . 

Different types of farming are to be found in the Calgary 
district. To the east conditions are more typical of the prairie 
and wheat farming is prominent. Around Calgary and to the west 
considerable emphasis is on hogs and dairy. No definite statement 
regarding the position of each type of farming can be made, instead 
the general picture is expressed. Calgary district occasionally 
suffers from drought but not to the same extent as areas farther 
east. 

(3) Population. 

The Calgary area is one of the oldest in the province and 
shows now almost three quarters of the population of British races. 
The population has increased slightly; however, this may be due to 
the war and the increase in the prices of farm products that are 
produced relatively close to an increasing market. 

(4) Size of Farm . 













20 . 


As previously pointed out wheat farming is more typical 
of the eastern portion of the district. The two summary tables 
bear this out. The sample was taken around Langdon, east of Calgary, 
and the average size of farm is 100 acres more than for the area as 
a whole. 

(5) Percentage of Tenant Farmers . 

The city of Calgary is situated within the area and 
naturally around this centre will be hog ranching and dairy farming. 
From observation of all the districts with farming of this type, the 
percentage tenancy is low. This is the general situation around 
Calgary. It is to be noted the sample has a much higher tenancy 
than for the district due to more wheat farming. 

(6) Value of Farm Property. 

Calgary district stands first in average value of buildings 
and third for value of total farm property. If the value of build - 
ings is a criterion of their worth for installing power, then most 
buildings in the Calgary district should be in a favoured position. 

The sample data does not substantiate this too strongly. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample . 

Aflfcer £efer§nc§, to both summary tables there is evidence of 
variation, e.g., in size of farm, and tenancy. It has been 
suggested the sample township reflects more wheat farming. The varia 
tion is not important, however, if all types of farming are prosperous 
on the other hand the average distance farms are apart is important. 

On the whole District No. IV presents an encouraging picture. 











21 . 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY . 

Tp. 25 R ge. 27 W . o f 4 Meridian. Tp. nea r LANGDON 

lood Prospects_17_ Percent Good_32^_ 

Fair Prospects^_8_Percent Fair_ 15% _ 

Poor Prospects_27_ Percent Poor_ 55% _ 

Dwner Farms_25^_Percent Owned_ 67% _ 

Tenant Farms_ 17 Percent Tenant_33^_ 

Total Farm Populatio n 159 A verage Farm Populatio n 5,06 

Average Number Acres per Far m 511W orked per Farm_ 511 (x) 

Proportion of Land Improved_ 100% _ 

Total Cattl e 895 A verag e 17>2 T otal Horse s — A verag e — 

Total Hog s 2,252 A verag e 42,9 T otal Chicken s —A verag e — 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 96% A verage Depth_ 85 ft. _ 

Power for Pumpin g 58 _Percentage_ 75% _ 

}rain Chopped per Far m 1/952 B u. Chopped by own Tracto r 87% 

Dther means on Far m 0% _Off Farm_ 15% _ 

Proportion Farms Having: Car s 79% T ractor s 87% T elephone s 52% 

Type ) Fram e 49 S tucc o 5_Othe r _ 

of ) 

House) Percentag e 94 P ercentag e 6 P ercentag e — _ 

Rooms per House_ 6.8 ___ 

Condition of House: Goo d 42 % Fai r 17 % Poo r 41 _^ 

Condition of Barn: Goo d 52 % Fai r 52 _% Poo r _ _56 _ %___ 

Area per Bar n 1.574 S q. Ft. Other Bldgs, per Far m 4.6_ 

Distance House to Bar n 167 ft T o Water_ 70 ft. _ 


(x) Acres worked per farm includes all land that can be cultivated. 




























































. . , .. ■ 

. 

.•. 

. 1.S VU&4 

. 1 . ' : % 

' ; ' 'i r •; • 

■ '.. ' ■ . 

... ‘. t . ......... •’ : ' 

- 

.'.,j ; '. : fi • u 

. . . t. • ■ 0 . -J)' 

.j i. ■ tC 

' 

. . • - . ■ ' ( 

' 

: . . ! • 

.. .. . . . T ': 

.. 1 : .p 

.. •' : : ‘ 


• .* .. • 'v 

• 1 • '' ■ • ' " ••••■•. • -J. ( j 















22 . 


DISTRICT IV - CALGARY 


Data from 

1936 & 1941 - 

Census Reports. 

Total Rural Population 

(1956) 

8,327 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

8,828 

Increase of Population 

(1936-1941) 

501 

Farm Population 

(1936) 

6,553 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

1,774 

Proportion of Non-Farm Pop.(1936) 

27$ 

Total Acres in District 


686,253 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1936) 

82 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

78 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1936) 

105 


Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 387 


Number of Farms (1936) 1,630 

Number of Farms (1941) 1,581 

Decrease in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 49 

Average Size of Farm - Total A.cres (1936) 403 

Average Size of Farm - Improved Acres (1936) 232 

Total Acres in District per Farm (1941) 434 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 20$ 


Value of Farm Property - Total (1936) $11,614 

Value of Farm Property - Buildings (1936) $ 2,385 

£ Population of British Races 72$ 

fl.D.’s and I.P.’s Included in the District 220-1 
















23 . 


DISTRICT V - OLDS- CA R STAIRS 

(1) Physical Features. 

Three soil zones are found within the district; dark 
brown in the south-east corner, then shallow black in the centre 
and black on the west side. The topography is generally 
level to undulating; here and there it becomes slightly hilly vdth 
occasional valleys and coulees. The bush and.grass cover on the 
eastern side is typical of the prairie, while the western part is 
representative of the parklands with poplar and willow bluffs. 

(2) Type of Farming . 

According to the 1936 Census, showing types of farming, 
the area is mostly wheat growing with sope mixed farming including 
cattle and swine. The greatest emphasis on wheat is in the eastern 
half, while a number of well known purebred stock farms and ranches 
are to be found in the west. Such towns as Olds, Didsbury and 
Carstairs are well known as centres of a good farming area. The 
Agricultural School at Olds helps to stimulate and improve general 
farming practices. The sample study near Olds suggests a strong 
trend to livestock farming with an average of 27 cattle and 52 hogs 
per farm, whereas the sample at Three Hills is lower for hogs and 
considerably lower for cattle. 

(3) Population. 

The area is rather unicue in that the population dropped 


over 1,000 and yet the number of farms increased. This drop in 
population has been mostly from the farm as the non-farm population is 















24 . 


not large enough to account for this change. The war and 
a changing to livestock production because of better prices 
should explain in part the above. About one-half the pop¬ 
ulation are of British origin, the rest are mainly of German, 

i 

Dutch and Scandinavian stock. 

( 4 ) Size of Farm. 

Size of farm will vary from the wheat growing portion 
to the more mixed farming parts. It is to be expected the 
density of farmsteads will be greater in the western half of the 
area. Around Olds the average size of farm is just over one- 
half section, the average for the district as a whole, while for 
Three Hills it is larger. 

(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers . 

Twenty-one percent of the farmers in the district are 
renters whereas there are twenty-three percent in one sample 
survey and five percent in the other. If present farm prices 
continue it is quite probable the percentage will decrease. 

At least the number of farms is increasing slightly which is an 
encouraging sign. 

(6) Value of Farm Property . 

The area has enjoyed a fairly prosperous period in the 
past. There are many fine farm homes with large barns and a 
number of other buildings, also the land as a whole has a high 
acreage value. The sample study has a good proportion of the 
houses and barns rated "good” or "fair”. 













25 


(7) Representativeness of the Sample . 

In some respects the sample varies from the district 
as a whole, e.g. the number of livestock per farm will be greater 
than for the eastern part, as pointed out earlier. On the other 
hand the average size of farm, the percentage tenancy, and the 
general picture of the buildings seems to correspond fairly well. 
The sample should be quite representative of the western part; 
however, it may be somev/hat optimistic for the area east of 
Three hills, even though the percentage "good" near Three ^ms 
is quite favourable. 






26 . 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 

Tp. 52 Rge. 1 W . o f 5 Meridian. Tp. Nea r OLDS _ 

Good Prospects_52_Per Cent Good_39$_ 

Fair Prospects_30_Per Cent Fair_22$_ 

Poor Prospects_52_Per Cent Poor_39$_ 

Owner Farms_ 105 _Per Cent Owned_ 77$ _ 

Tenant Farms_31_Per Cent Tenant_23$_ 

Total Farm Populatio n 518 A verage Farm Populatio n 5.9 

Average Number Acres per Far m 415 W orked per Farm 401 (x) 

Proportion of Land Improved_ 97$ __ 

Total Cattl e 5629A verag e 27 T otal Horse s — Averag e — 

Total Hog s 6945 A verag e 52 T otal Chicken s — A verag e — 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 100$ _Average Dept h 85 ft. 

Power for Pumping_ 111 _Percentage_ 85$ __ 

Grain Chopped per Far m 5647 _Bu. Chopped by Own Tracto r 75$ 

Other means on Farm: 5$ _Off Farm_ 52$ _ 

Proportion Having: Car s 89$ T ractor s 74$ T elephon e 58$ 

Type ) Fram e 155 _Stucco_ 6 O the r 2 _ 

Of ) 

House) Percentag e 94.3% P ercentag e 4.5% P ercentag e 1.4% 

Rooms per House_ 5.6 ___ 

Condition of House: Goo d 44 $ Fair 25 $ Poor 51 _$ 

Condition of Barn: Goo d 54 $ Fai r 28 $ Poo r 58 $ 

Area per Bar n 1.568 Sq. Ft. Other Buildings per Far m 4.8 


Distance House to Bar n_. 17a ^ T n Wate r 115 ft. 

^ ^ulUvaW e . d PSr farm inc ludes a11 iand that can be 

















































































27 . 



FARM 

ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 


Tp. 31 Rge. 

24 W. 

of 4 Meridian. Tp. near 

THREE HILLS 

Good Prospects 

27 

Per Cent Good 

64% 

Fair Prospects 

9 

Per Cent Fair 

225? 

Poor Prospects 

6 

Per Cent Poor 

14 % 

Owner Farms 

40 

Per Cent Owned 

95% 

Tenant Farms 

2 

Per Cent Tenant 

5% 


Total Farm Populatio n 147 A verage Farm Populatio n 5.9 


Average Number Acres per Far m 514 W orked per Far m 442 
Proportion of Land Improved_ 86% _ 


Total Cattle_Averag e 16 T otal Horses__Averag e 5.8 


Total Hogs Average 42 

Total Chickens Average 

241 

Proportion of Farms 

with Wells 

1005? 

Average Depth 

128 ft. 

Power for Pumping 

36 

Percentage 

86% 


Grain Chopped per Farm 2.000 

Bu. Chopped by own Tractor 

55% 

Other means on Farm 

5 % 

Off Farm 

425? 


Cars & Trucks per Farm 1.26 

Tractors per 

Farm 1.16 Telephones-24$ 

Type ) Frame (x) 

Stucco 

Other 


of ) 

House) Percentage 

Percentage 

Percentage 


Rooms per House 

£.4 




Condition of House: 

Good 

% Fair 

% Poor 


Condition of Barn: 

Good 

% Fair 

% Poor 

% 


Area per Bar n 1260 S q. Ft. Other Buildings per Farm_ 
Distance House to Barn 150 ft. To Water_ 


(x) No data secured for some items. 
































































; 


■ r ;, 



: ■ r: 









































28 . 


DISTRICT V OLDS-CARSTAIRS. 

Data from 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1936) 

18,969 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

17,897 

Decrease of Population 

(1936-1941) 

1,072 

Farm Population 

(1936) 

17,208 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

1,761 


Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 10$ 


Total 

Acres in District 


1,695,909 

Acres 

per Rural Person 

(1936) 

89 

Acres 

per Rural Person 

(1941) 

95 

Acres 

per Farm Person 

(1936) 

99 

Acres 

per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

963 


Number of Farms (1936) 4,064 

Number of Farms (1941) 4,077 

Increase in Number of Farms (1956-1941) 13 

Average Size of Farm - Total Acres (1936) 406 

Average Size of Farm - Improved Acres (1936) 279 

Total Acres in District per Farm (1941) 416 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 21$ 


Value of Farm Property - Total (1936) 
Value of Farm Property - Buildings (1956) 


$Population of British Races 
K.D.'s & I.D.'s Included in the District 


$11,130 


$ 1,311 
51% 

278-281, 308-311 










DISTRICT VI - DRUMHELLER-CASTOR 


(1) Physical Features . 

Practically all of the district is within the dark 
brown soil zone. Parts of the area may be classified as semi- 
arid and at various times the district has suffered from a series 
of dry years. The topography is mostly level to gently rolling 
with occasional coulees and creek beds traversing certain areas. 

The native grass cover is of the short variety typically found on 
prairie regions; some trees, namely, poplar and willow grow in 
occasional bluffs. 

(2) Type of Farming . 

In the past this area has been a wheat growing country, 
now the emphasis is swinging to mixed farming. Present market prices 
for livestock and quotas on grain have resulted in a marked increase 
in the number of livestock. Cattle are raised, particularly on the 
open grazing land. The township sample shows an average of 26 head 
per farm, this is the highest average shown for any of the northern 
samples. Dry years have lessened considerably the amount of land 
under cultivation and fields that were once cropped are now returning 
to grass to pasture cattle. 

(5) Population . 

A drop in population of about l/l3 took place between 1936-41. 
Since more emphasis has been on mixed farming in the last few years 

this decrease may have stopped. The average farm population for the 
district as a whole is lower than for the sample study. 















50 . 

(4) Size of Farm . 

The average size of farm is over 3/4 sections, 
this means farms are quite far apart. The abandonment 
of some farms and the returning to grass of.once arable land 
will make it possible for more cattle to be raised. If this 
becomes the situation then farmsteads v/ill be even less dense 
throughout the.area. 

(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers 

Twenty-five percent of the farmers are renters. The 
sample survey indicates even more. It is expected that the 
proportion will be relatively high as past drought years in the 
area would tend to encourage renting rather than investing in 
farming land. Immediate future prospects for a lower proportion 
of tenancy are not very promising. 

(6) Value of Farm Property . 

Throughout the area there are a number of abandoned 
homes. The occupied farmsteads for the most part suffer from a 
lack of paint, however, there are a few good farmsteads with large, 
well-built homes. On the whole the buildings cannot be classified 
as good. The average value of farm property is over $8,000 but 
it is important to remember that the average size of farm is large. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample . 

Variations in density of farms exists throughout the 
area. A fair density exists in an area around Delia, then it thins 


out all along the south and east of the district. Very few 
















51 


townships show a well settled farm population. The sample 
survey only included 31 farms. The number of acres per farm 
and the number of acres worked per farm as shown by the sample 
correspond closely enough with the district data. For the 
greater part of the area the sample study seems to reflect the 
situation in most of the district. The condition of the farm 
buildings and especially the sparse population presents barriers 
to the extension of central station power. 










52 . 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 

Tp. 58 _Rge. 15 W . o f 4 M eridian f Tp. Nea r CASTOR 

Good Prospect s 15 _Per Cent Good_ 41 % _ 

Fair Prospect s 6 _Per Cent Fair_18g_ 

Poor Prospect s 15 _Per Cent Poor_41^_ 

Owner Farms_21_Per Cent Owned_ 68% __ 

Tenant Farms_10_Per Cent Tenant_52|_ 

Total Farm Populatio n 156 A verage Farm Populatio n 5 _ 

Average Number Acres per Far m 546 _Worked per Far m 288 

Proportion of Land Improved_ 53 % __ 

Total Cattl e 795 Averag e 25.6 Total Horses 274 A verag e 8.8 

Total Hog s 945 A verag e 50.4 T otal Chicken s 5110 A verag e 100 .5 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 11 % A verage Dept h 59 ft. 

Power for Pumpin g 5 _Percentage^_ 16% _ 

Grain Chopped per Far m 85 % _Bu. Chopped by own Tracto r 29% 

Other means on Far m 6 % _Off Farm_ 65% _ 

Proportion having: Cars 77% T ractor s 52% T elephone s 29% 

Type ) Fram e 29 Stucco_2_Othe r _ 

of ) 

House) Per centag e 95.5 P e rc entag e 6.5 _Perc entag e 


Rooms per House_ 5>1 


Condition of House: Good 

29 

% Fair 

45 

% Poor 

26 

% 

Condition of Barn: Good 

30 

% Fair 

50 

% Poor 

40 

% 

Area per Bara 1.066 So. 

Ft. 

Other buildings 

per farm 

5.2 


Distance House to Barn p 

39 f»+ 

^To Water 


200 ft. 











































































• S V 


i 











■ 




gj 



































KJ • 


DISTRICT IV - CASTOR-DRUMHELLER 
Data From 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population (1936) 13,753 

Total Rural Population (1941) 12,762 

Decrease of Population (1936-1941) 991 

Farm Population (1936) 12,787 

Non-Farm Population (1936) 966 

Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 8$ 

Total Acres in District 1,910,381 

Acres per Rural Person (1936) 139 

Acres per Rural Person (1941) 150 

Acres per Farm Person (1936) 149 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 1,978 

Number of Farms (1936) 3,568 

Number of Farms (1941) 3,388 

Decrease in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 180 

Average Size of Farm - Total Acres (1936) 499 

Average Size of Farm - Improved Acres (1936) 275 

Total Acres in District per Farm (1941) 564 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 25$ 

Value of Farm Property - Total (1936) $8,140 

Value of Farm Property - Buildings (1936) $1,355 

$ Population of British Races 58$ 

M.D.'s & I.D.’s Included in the District 277,306-7 


334,336-7,365-6,395 








54 , 


DISTRICT - Vll - RED DEER 

(1) Physical Features. 

The soil in the main is heavy black loam of good weight 
and depth; only the south-east portion of the district lies in 
the shallow black soil area. The topography of certain portions 
is rolling to hilly, whereas other parts may be described as 
undulating to gently rolling. The bush cover is typically park¬ 
land and in the main the native grass is abundant for hay or 
pasture. 

(2) T ype of Farm . 

Red Deer is another district typical of mixed farming. 
Considerable emphasis is placed on milk production and hog raising. 
Red Deer is the centre of a large canned milk factory. A large 
proportion of the improved land produces coarse grains and hay, with 
wheat production playing a less important role. 

(5) Population. 

According to the census data the district suffered a slight 
decrease in population and a more than proportional decrease in the 
number of farms. However, the decrease in population is too small 
to make any significant conclusions and it may be reversed next 
census. Red Deer is one of the oldest established districts in 
the province, with 68$ of the population being British. It is 
to be expected it will remain fairly steady in total farm people. 

(4) Size of Farm. 


Slightly over a half section is the average size of farm. 














35 . 


with about half under cultivation. The average for the district 
would be about 2 farmers per square mile. Certain parts, e.g., 
around Red Deer will be above average density, whereas eastern 
parts, e.g., around Nevis will be less densely populated. 

(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers . 

The percentage tenant farmers is relatively high for this 
district. Both the district data and the sample survey agree on this 
high proportion. Considerable land in the area is owned by mort¬ 
gage companies and this would account in part for the above. The 
future interest in farm electrification by absentee landlords, is as 
yet an undetermined factor. 

(6) Value of Farm Property . 

'The average total farm property in the district is $7,532, 
buildings $1,376. As the average size of farm is 342 acres this 
would give approximately $7,000 per half section. 

(7) Representativeness of the S a mple. 

Two township surveys have been made within the district, 
one near Clive the other iusar Stettler. For the district as a 
whole the sample at Clive may give a somewhat optimistic picture. 

The opposite might be true of the Stettler study. Probably an 
estimate between the two would give the best approximation. In 
any case, if power is to be extended to any part of the Province 
the prospects in the Red Deer district would appear to be encourag¬ 
ing. 












oo • 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURV EY 

Tp. 40 Rge. 25W . o f 4 M eridiafa. Tp. nea r CLIVE 

Good Prospect s 52 _Per Cent Good_74$__ 

Fair Prospect s 15 _Per Cent Fair_19$_ 

Poor Prospect s 5 P er Cent Poor_7$_ 

Owner Farm s 49 _Per Cent Owned_72$_ 

Tenant ‘Farms_ 19 _Per Cent Tenant_28$__ 

Total Farm Populatio n 256 Average Farm Populatio n 5.8$ 
Average Number Acres per Far m 515 j6 W orked per Far m 216.5 
Proportion of Land Improved_ 69$ _ 


Total Cattl e 1002 A verag e 14.9 T otal Horse s 464 Averag e 6:8 


Total Hogs 3808 Average 

56 

Total Chickens 

7869 Average 116 

Proportion of Farms 

with Wells 

95.6 Average Depth 88 ft. 

Power for Pumping 

43 

Percentage 

63 

Grain Chopped per Farm 2270 

Bu. Chopped by 

own tractor 60$ 

Other means on Farm 

6$ 


Off Farm 

34$ 

Proportion having: Cars £ 

58$ 

Tractors 68$ 

Telephones 54$ 

Type ) Frame 64 

Stucco 1 

Other 

8 

of ) 

House) Percentage__ 

87.7 Percentage 1.4 

Percentage 10.9 

Rooms per House 



5.3 


Condition of House: 

Good 

58.6 

$ Fair 27.2 $ Poor 14.2 $ 

Condition of Barn: 

Good 

52.9 

$ Fair 25.7 

$ Poor 21.4 $ 

Itrea per Barn 989 

So. 

Ft. 

Other Bldgs, per Farm_2 


Distance House to Barn_19 R £+., T o Water 185 ft 






























































I 






















37. 


FARM ELE C TRIFICATION SURVEY 

Tp. 59 Rge. 19 W . o f 4 Meridian. Tp. nea r STETTLKR 

Good Prospects_ 15 P er Cent Good_35%______ 

Fair Prospects_11_Per Cent Fair_ 24% ____ 

Poor Prospects_ 20 Per Cent Poor_42$_ 

Owner Farms_42_Per Cent Owne d 91% _ 

Tenant Farms_4_Per Cent Tenan t 9% _ 

Total Farm Populatio n 121 Average Farm Population_ 5,5 _ 

Average Number Acres per Far m 645 _Worked per Far m 412 _ 

Proportion of Land Improved_ 64% _____ 

Total Cattle_Averag e 40 Total Horses_Averag e 8.1 

Total Hogs_Averag e 84 T otal Chickens_Averag e 14 1 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 91% Average Dept h 120 ft. 


Power for Pumping 19 

Percentage 86% 


Grain Chopped per Farm 4500 Bu. Chopped by own Tractor 

455? 

Other means on Farm 14% 

Off Farm 

4156 


Cars & Trucks 1,14 ___ 

^Tractors,86 

Telephones 

45% 

per Farm 

Type ) Frame (x) 

per Farm 

Stucco___ 

_Other_ 


of ) 

House) Percentage 

Percentage 

Percentage 


Rooms per House 6.2 

Condition of House: Good 

% Fair 

% Poor 

% 

Condition of Barn: Good 

% Fair 

% Poor 

_ % 


Area per Bar n 1500 So. Ft, Other Bldgs, per Farin 


Distance House to Ba ra 145 ft. T o Water 
( x ) No data secured for some items. 




















































































58. 


DISTRICT Vn RED TOER 
Data from 1956 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1956) 

19,618 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

19,495 

Decrease of Population 

(1956-1941) 

123 

Farm Population 

(1956) 

18,011 

Non-Farm Population 

(1956) 

1,607 

Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 

9$ 

Total Acres in District 


1,650,989 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1956) 

84 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

85 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1956) 

92 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

1,027 

Number of Farms 

(1956) 

4,616 

Number of Farms 

(1941) 

4,494 

Decrease in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

122 

Average Size of Farm - Total Acres (1936) 

542 

Average Size of Farm - Improved Acres (1936) 

161 

Total Acres in District 

per Farm (1941) 

367 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

23$ 

Value of Farm Property - 

- Total (1956) 

$7 ,.532 

Value of Farm Property - 

- Buildings (1956) 

$1,376 

$ Population of British Races 

68$ 


M.D. 1 s & I.D.’s Included in the District 


358-40,567, 

396-9. 











39. 


DISTRICT Vlll - WEST FRINGE 

(1) Physical Features. 

The general topography may be described as gently 
rolling, although parts are rolling with several creeks and valleys. 
The area lies within two soil zones— the black and the transition 
or grey bush soil. The area is dotted with tree growth, mostly 
poplar and willow. Towards the west this growth increases as part 
of the area is in the bush region. 

(2) Type of Farming . 

Mixed farming is the chief occupation with special emphasis 
on cattle and hogs. Barley and oats are the chief grain crop, 
and these are mostly for feed. The district seldom suffers from 
drought and generally produces an abundance of hay and coarse 
grains. The township sample is quite indicative of a mixed farming 
area. The average for cattle and horses is quite high, while 
for hogs it is 72 per farm. 

(3) Population. 

Parts of the area have been settled for a long time, whereas 
other parts have just been recently opened up. The west part of 
the district is the frontier that is being pushed wider year by 
year. Thus it is to be expected there will be an increase in 
population as shown by the census. The increase of 213 farms is 
partly a result of the increase in population. Over fifty 

percent of the population are of British races; two other groups 
well represented are the Germans and Scandinavians. 


















40. 


(4) Size of Farm. 

As it is to be expected the average size of farm is 
not large. Considerable bush has been a barrier to the improving 
of large acreages. The district data indicate an average of 
3 farmsteads per square mile. However, the sample study is not 
quite as encouraging, the table shows less than 2 farmsteads per 
section. The size of farm is representative of a mixed fanning 
area. Probably the trend will be tov/ard larger farms in the older, 
better parts of the district and for a time, smaller farms on the 
west edge near the bush. 

(5) Percentage Tenant farmers . 

i 

The percentage tenancy is low for the district. This 
situation is typical of all the three districts that comprise the 
fringe area in the northern part of the Province. Although other 
barriers to electrification exist the owner-tenant problem is less 
acute than for other areas. 

(6) Value of Property. 

For the district as a whole the average value of property 
is not high. The average for buildings is less than #1,000, 
indicating that many are not worth installing power in. In some 
parts, however, buildings may be described as good, with frequent 
well-painted frame homes and stucco houses. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample . 

There are two or three indications that the district and 
sample data are not in agreement. The average number of acres per 
iarm and the average worked per farm for the 


sample are 














41 . 


considerably more than for the district. The type of house 
and condition seem to show a better class of building than 
might be expected from an average of $964 for buildings. Good 
and fair prospects for electrification are almost 90$; this may 
be high for the district. A careful conclusion based on the 
information in the tables as to the representativeness of the 
sample is difficult. However, there is some evidence it may be 
on the optimistic side. 










42 . 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 

Tp. 45 R ge. 2 _W. o f 5 M eridian. Tp. nea r RIM3EY 

Good Prospect s 54 _Per Cent Good_64/6 __ 

Fair Prospect s 12 _Per Cent Fair_23j£_ 

Poor Prospect s 7 _Per Cent Poor_13|_ 

Owner Farms_ 45 _Per Cent Owned_ 85% 

Tenant Farms_8_Per Cent Tenant_15^_ 

Total Farm Populatio n 196 _Average Farm Populatio n 5.7 

Average Number Acres per Far m 590 W orked per Far m 221 


Proportion of Land Improved_ 57% 


Total Cattle 

1,146 

_Average_ 

21.6 m t i tj 424 . 8 

lotal Horses Average 

Total Hogs 

5 ,,817 

Average 

72 Total Chickens5 f 153Average 97.3 


Proportion of Farms with Well s 94% A verage Depth_8 7 ft. 


Power for Pumping_ 55 ____Percentag e 6 6%_ 

Grain Chopped per Farm 2.645 B u.Chopped by own Tractor 67% _ 

Other means on Farm: 12% O ff Farm:_ 21% _ 

Proportion Having Car s 81% T ractor s 66% T elephone s 42% _ 

Type ) Fram e 42 _Stucc o 5 _ Othe r 6 __ 

of ) 

House) Percentag e 79.2 Percentag e 9.4 Percentage 11.4 

Rooms per House_ 4.8 _ 

Condition of House: Good 55.8 % Fai r 45.4 _% Poo r 20.8 _ % 

Condition of Barn: Goo d 28 _% Fai r 20 _ % Poo r 52 _% 

Area per Barn: 1.057 _Sq. Ft. Other Bldgs, per Farm_3^2_ 

Distance House to Bar n 192 ft. T p Water_ 115 ft. _ 

























































































43 . 


DISTRICT VllT - WEST FRINGE . 

Data From 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1936) 

18,189 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

19,345 

Increase of Population 

(1936-1941) 

1,156 

Farm Population 

(1936) 

16,418 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

1,771 

Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 

11$ 

Total Acres in District 

1,519,078 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1936) 

84 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

79 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1936) 

93 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

858 

Number of Farms 

(1936) 

4,274 

Number of Farms 

(1941) 

4,487 

Increase in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

213 

Average Size of Farm - 

Total Acres (1936) 

266 

Average Size of Farm - 

Improved Acres (1936) 

119 

Total Acres in District per Farm (1941) 

339 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

13$ 

Value of Farm Property 

- Total (1936) 

$5,236 

Value of Farm Property 

- Buildings (1936) 

$ 964 


$ Population of British Races 53$ 


M.D.’s & I.D.*s included in the District 


341-2, 371, 400-1, 
450-1, 460. 












44 . 


DISTRICT IX - WAimVRIOHT. 

(1) Physical Features. 

For the most part the soil is a shallow black with 
some dark brown in the southern corner. The topography is 
level to gently rolling with occasional hills and coulees. 
Practically all of the district is within the parklands and includes 
Wainwright Park. 

(2) Type of Farming. 

Mixed farming, with considerable emphasis on wheat growing 
is the chief farming activity. On the average farms are fairly 
large with a good proportion being under cultivation. The type of 
farming carried on in certain parts of the district is in many ways 
quite similar to the farming in the southern part of the Province, 
e.g., around Vulcan. 

(3) Population. 

The district data show a decrease in population and in the 
number of farms. The to?/nship survey shows an average farm 
population of 3.7; this is somewhat lower than the average for the 
district. 

(4) Size of Farms. 

Both the census data and the sample survey indicate large 
farms. This would mean that farmsteads are fairly far apart. A 
decrease in the population will likely result in still larger farms 
and fewer per township. This is a drawback from the point of view 

of electrification as farms are farther apart and hence the costs of 
construction will be greater. 























45 


(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers. 

According to the district data the percentage tenant 
farmers is the same for Wainwright as it is for Wetaskiwin(l9$). 

The proportion is not too large if in the future it does not 
increase; however, the sample studies in both districts are 
considerably more (Wainwright 32$). There is some evidence to 
show that larger farms have a higher percentage tenancy. If 
this is the case then the Wainwright area will, under present 
conditions, tend to increase in number of tenant farmers—a prospect 
not favourable to electrification. 

(6) Valu e of Farm Proper ty. 

The census indicates the average value of farm buildings 
to be $1,252. Certainly, indications show that most of the build¬ 
ings are worth installing power in. The average value of farm 
property as a whole is $7,122. In the township studies 90$ of 
| the houses are of frame construction and on the whole 57$ were 
rated good and 35$ fair. Only about 50$ of the barns were rated as 
in good condition. The homes as a general rule are large, the 
average number of rooms being 6.7. Most buildings in the township 
studied have been up a long time and some are in need of repair. 

This can be said for a fair proportion of the district as a whole. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample. 

The number of acres per farm and the number of acres 
worked per farm are greater in the township studied than for the 
district as a whole. Other townships around the one studied are 















46 , 


very similar. This is true of practically all the west end of 

the district. Farther east the picture is not always as encour¬ 

aging. Census information of each township within the district 
shows some areas, especially in the eastern part, as being quite 
sparsely populated. The township studied is then really more 
representative of the western half of the district and it is quite 
probable that the exclusion of some more sparsely populated parts 
of the district would be necessary. 






47 . 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 


Tp. 44 Rge. 14 W . o f 4 M eridian. Tp. nea r KILLAM 


Good Prospects 

24 

Per Cent Good 

56% 

Fair Prospects 

14 

Per Cent Fair 

35% 

Poor Prospects 

5 

Per Cent Poor 

11% 

Owner Farms 

28 

Per Cent Owned 

88 % 

Tenant Farms 

13 

Per Cent Tenant 

32% 

Total Farm Pop. 

153 

Average Farm Pop. 

3.7 

Average No. Acres 

per Farm 499 

.5 Worked per Farm 

328.9 

Proportion of Land Improved 

66% 


Total Cattle 665 

Average 16. 

2 Total Horses 346 

Average 8.4 


Total Hog s Ij212 A verag e 29.6 T otal Chicken s 6,556 A verag e 154.6 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 100$ _Average Dept h 92 ft. 

Power for Pumpin g 55 P ercentage_ 85 % _ 

Grain Chopped per Far m 1,282 _Bn. Chopped by own Tracto r 57 % 

Other means on Farm: 8 % _Off Farm_ 55 % _ 

Proportion having Car s 71^ T ractor s 54 %> T elephone s 57 %> 

Type ) Fram e 58 S tucc o — _Othe r 4 _.. _ _ 

of ) 

House) Percentag e 90.5 P ercentag e — P ercentag e 9,5 

Rooms per House___ 8,7 _„_ 

Condition of House: Good 57.2 % Fai r 55.7 %__ P oor_ 7.1_ % 

Condition of Barn: Goo d 51.2 % Fai r 51.7 _ % Poor_17.1 % 

Area per Bar n 1.269 _ ,S n. Ft. Other Bldgs, per Far m 2.2 

Distance House to Bar n 201 ft. To Water_114 ft.___ 





























































































48 . 


DISTRICT IK - WAINWRIGHT 

Data from 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population (1936) 

24,467 

Total Rural Population (1941) 

21,667 

Decrease of Population (1936-1941) 

2,800 

Farm Population (1936) 

22,730 

Non-Farm Population (1936) 

1,737 

Proportion of Non-Farin Pop. (1936) 

8% 


Total Acres in District 2,922,186 


Acres per Rural Person (1936) 

119 

Acres per Rural Person (1941) 

135 

Acres per Farm Person (1935) 

129 

Acres per NortiFarm Person (1936) 

1,682 

Number of Farms (1956) 

6,110 

Number of Farms (1941) 

5,581 

Decrease in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

529 

Average Size of Farm - Total Acres (1936) 

419 

Average Size of Farm - Improved Acres (1936) 

215 

Total Acres in District per Farm (1941) 

524 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

19% 

Value of Farm Property - Total (1936) 

$7,122 

Value of Farm Property - Buildings (1936) 

$1,232 

% Population of British Races 

58% 


M.D. T s & I.D.&s Included in the District 362-3,391-4 

421-2-3-4-5,451- 













DISTRICT 3 i - WETASKIWIN 

(1) Physical Features . 

Practically all of the district is a black soil, 
except for a small portion in the north-east corner, which is 
mostly grey wooded. The topography varies throughout, although 
in general it may be spoken of as gently rolling. The Battle 
River runs through the area making certain sections rolling and 
-hilly, on the other hand much of the land is quite level. The 
area is within the parkland; consequently it is dotted with tree 
growth, mostly willow and poplar. 

(2) Type of Farming . 

Wetaskiwin district typifies well a mixed farming area. 

Of the improved land, a good proportion produces coarse grains, also 
most farms have seeded hay and pasture. Livestock emphasis is on 
cattle and hogs, with some farmers owning purebred beef herds. The 
district seldom suffers from extreme drought, high wind, or insect 
pests and generally produces an abundance of hay and coarse grains. 

(3) Population . 

The census shows an increase in population for 1941 over 
1936. This is also reflected in an increase in the number of farms. 
The average farm population as shown by the township survey agrees 
well with the district data. About 1/3 of the population is of 
British decent, while a large proportion are of Scandinavian stock. 

( 4 ) Size of Farm. 

The average size of farm for the district is slightly 


under a half section, with approximately half of this under 














50 . 


cultivation. This indicates an average of two farmers per 
square mile. The west half of the district may be more thickly 
settled than indicated above as in the eastern half of the area 
the sample study shows larger farms with more emphasis on wheat 
growing. 

(5) Percentage of Tenant Farmers. 

According to the census the proportion of tenant farmers 
is about 1/5. This is not unduly high if it remains under l/5. 

The sample study shows 29% tenant farmers. This is a recent figure 
and is influenced by men joining the services. 

(6) Value of Farm Property . 

Total value of farm property is $7,425, buildings $1,384. 

As the average size of farm is just under 300 acres this shows a 
good average price per acre. The district is old, well established, 
and shows a reasonably high real estate value. 

(7) Repr e sentativeness of the Sample. 

After taking a careful farm-to-farm survey of the township 
it was found that a U-shaped area existed in the north of it, not 
typical of the township as a whole. This lowers the township*s 
average picture. Other townships around Camrose are in a somewhat 
similar position, e.g., a river, or lake cuts off part of the 
area. This physical characteristic tends then to lower the repres¬ 
entativeness of the township. On the whole the picture for the 
district may be more encouraging. The survey shows only 37$ as 











51 . 


good prospects; around Wetaskiwin there may be considerably 
more, certainly the district represents one of the better farming 
areas of the Province. 












52 . 


FARM EL E C TRIFICATION SURVEY 


Tp. 47 Rge. 19 

W. of 

4 Meridian. Tp. 

near CAMR0SE 

Good Prospects 

21 

Per Cent Good 

37 % 

Fair Prospects 

25 

Per Cent Fair 

45% 

Poor Prospects 

10 

Per Cent Poor 

18/6 

Owner Farms 

56 

Per Cent Owned 

71 % 

Tenant Farms 

15 

_Per Cent Tenant 

Z9% 

Total Farm Pop. 

212 

__Average Farm Pop. 

4.2 

Average No. Acres 

per Farm 

554.1 Worked per 

Farm 271 


Proportion of Land Improved^;_ 81# _ 

Total Cattl e 1.09 1 Averag e 21.4 Total Horse s 291 Averag e 5. 7 

Total Hog s 2.261 Averag e 44.5 T otal Chickens 6440A verag e 12 6. 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 96% A verage Dept h 120 ft. 

Power for Pumpin g 44 _Percentage_ 86# _ 

Grain Chopped per Far m 1,791 . _Bu. Chopped by own tractor 55# 

Other means on Farm: 6# _Off Farm_4 1# _ 

Proportion Having Car s 86# Tractor s 65# Telephones 55# 

Type ) Fram e 49 __Stucco_ — Other_ 2 _ 

of ) 

Percentag e 96.1 P ercentag e — Percentage 5. 9 

Rooms per House__ 5jA_______ 

Condition of House: Good 57.5 # Fai r 50.9 # Poor 11.8 # 

Condition of Barn: Goo d 24 # Fai r 58 # Poo r 58 # 

krea per Bar n 1166.7., S q. Ft. Other Bldgs, per Farm_2.__ 

distance House to Bar n 21 8 ft. T o Water_ 154 ft ._ 











































































53 . 


DISTRICT X - WETASKIWIN 
Data From the 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1936) 

39,622 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

40,215 

Increase of Population 

(1936-1941) 

593 

Farm Population 

(1936) 

34,870 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

4,752 

Proportion of Non-Farm 

Pop. (1936) 

14^ 

Total Acres in District 


2,391,065 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1936) 

60 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

59 

kcres per Farm Person 

(1936) 

69 

^cres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

503 

]lumber of Farms 

(1936) 

8,045 

Number of Farms 

(1941) 

8,189 

Increase in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

144 

Average Size of Farm - 

Total Acres (1936) 

288 

Average Size of Farm - 

Improved Acres (1936) 

163 

Total Acres in District per Farm (l94l) 

292 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

19/6 

Value of Farm Property 

- Total (1936) 

$7,425 

Value of Farm Property 

- Buildings (1936) 

$1,384 

1o Population of British Races 

29£ 

H.D.'s & I.D.'s Included ^ the D . str . ct 

426-9, 456-9 
486-9. 














54 . 


DISTRICT XI - VEGREV ILLK 

(1) Physic a l Features: 

Most of the area is situated in the black soil zone, 
although the transition soil belt extends into the district part 
way. For the most part the district is level to gently rolling, 
with occasional parts somewhat hilljr. In some places numerous 
sloughs and small lakes occur, also some creeks and coulees. 

The native grass cover is of medium length, typically found in 
the parkland regions; some parts are almost free from tree growth, 
while others are dotted with bluffs. 

(2) Type of Farming. 

At ome time the area produced considerable wheat; now 
the emphasis is mainly on raising livestock. The present quotas 
on wheat and the favourable livestock prices have stimulated this 
change. Coarse grains, some flax and seeded hay and pasture 
iccount for the greater part of the seeded acreage. Beef cattle 
plus some dairy products and hogs constitute the main source of 
income. Like most of the districts in the northern part of the 
Province, it is not affected by extreme drought and crop production 
is reasonably certain. However, towards the south and east of 
the area the above general statement will not always apply. 

(5) Populat i on. 

A drop in population of almost 2,000 took place between 
L936-41; at the same time there ?/as a decrease of 255 in the number 
Df farms. In a relatively good mixed farming area it is not 

















- 




' • ; 










' ■ . 


i 


' 










55. 


likely this decrease in population and number of farms will 
continue; possibly by now it has reached a point of stability. 
Thirty-nine percent of the people are of British races, while 
Ukranisns and Germans make up most of the remaining population. 

(4) Size of Farm . 

In this district the average size of farm is a half¬ 
section and half of this is cultivated. This would mean an 
average of 2 farms per section, an encouraging density figure 
for probable electrification. 

(5) Perce ntage Tenant Farmers. 

The percentage of tenant farmers is 15 for the district 
and 6 for the sample. Quite probably the present percentage is 
somewhere between the two figures; at least it is not too high 
to be a serious drawback. 

(6) Value of Property . 

There are occasional parts of the district that may be 
described as "spotty". As a result of various physical character¬ 
istics,e.g., alkali or transition soil, they are not very prod¬ 
uctive. This affects the general average value of land; never¬ 
theless the values shown in the table are reasonably good and 
would reflect an area of good productive capacity. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample. 

The Vegreville district is much the same in shape as the 


Sfainwright one just south of it. As pointed out in the Wainwright 
summary the west end of the district may give a more encouraging 













. ... ro 















































! . .:i : ...V-' 




■ • : ... • . • • 

•i -; : f J .. n- ^ j -.. : • J -i-J . - 

r.X : . . : ' ■ ' -• 






! ■ 




V • 






56. 


picture than the eastern part. This may to some extent be 
true of the Vegreville area. The Clandonald sample selected 
is fairly central and should be quite representative. Variations 
in the two tables appear, while at the same time the sample 
survey seems to reflect in a fair measure the general data. An 
accurate statement of representativeness is difficult to make— 
the sample data may err a little on the optimistic side. 








57. 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 

rp. _ 52_ Rge. ___6 , W . o f 4 M eridian. Tp. near CLAN DO N ALD 

Good Prospects_ 24 _Per Cent Good_50$,_ 

Fair Prospects_17_Per Cent Fair_55$_ 

Poor Prospects_7_Per Cent Poor_ 15$ _ 

Owner Farm s 44 _Per Cent Owned_ 95.6$ _ 

Tenant Farms_ 5 P er Cent Tenant_ 6.4$ _ 

Total Farm Population 1 71_ Average Farm Populatio n 5. 6_ 

Average Number Acres per Far m 418 Worked per Farm_ 208 

Proportion of Land Improved,_ 50$ ___ 

Total Cattl e 787 A verag e 16. /Total Horse s 574 A verage_ Q _ 

Total Hpg s 1965A verag e 41.8T otal Chicken s 54GSA verag e 74.4 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 95. 7___ Average Dept h 65 ft . 

Power for Pumpin g 19 _Percentag e 40$ _ 

Grain Chopped per Far m 1554. 9 Bu. Chopped by own Tracto r 28$ 

Other means on Farm; 8$ _Off Farm_64$_ 

Proportion having; Car s 66$ Tractor s 50$ Telephone s 58$ 

Type ) Fram e 46 S tucc o 0 _Other__ 

of" ) 

House) Percentag e 95.9 Percentag e 0 _Percentag e 6.1 


Rooms per House_^5.J9 


Condition of House; 

Good 

22.5 

$ Fair 

46.9 $ Poor 

30.6$ 

Condition of Barn; 

Good 

22.7 

$ Fair 

37.7 $ Poor 


Area per Barn 

679 Sq. Ft. 

Other Bldgs, per Farm 

2 


Distance House to Bar n pnA -p+ _Distance House to Wate r 548 ft. 


























































































58. 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 

Tp. 50 Rge. 6 W. of 4 M eridian. Tp. nea r VERMILION 

Good Prospect s 12 _Per Cent Good_ 46% _ 

Fair Prospect s 5 _Per Cent Fair_12# 

Poor Prospect s 10 _Per Cent Poor_ 40% _ 

Owner Farms_ 21 _Per Cent Owned_84#_ 

Tenant Farms_4____Per Cent Tenant_ 16% _ 

Total Farm Populatio n 69 _Average Farm Populatio n 4.5 _ 

Average Number Acres per Far m 640 _Worked per Far m 570 


Proportion of Land Improved_ 58# _ 

Total Cattle___Average 52 Total Horses_Averag e 15 

Total Hogs_Averag e 68 Total Chickens_Averag e 155 

Proportion of Farms with Wells 100 # _Average Dept h 1 0 1 ft. 

Power for Pumping_ 15 _Percentage_ 94# _ ... 

Grain Chopped per Farm 4,520 _Bui Chopped by own Tracto r 75# 

Other means on Farm:_ 12.5# _Off Farm 12.5# _ 

Cars & Trucks per Farm: 1.25 T ractor s .69 T elephone s 87 # 


Type ) Frame_ (x) Stucco___Other __ 

I ) 

House) Percentage_Percentage_Percentage_ 

Rooms per House__.6.5____ 

Condition of House: Good_# Fair__ % Poor_# 

Condition of Barn: Good__ J% Fair_# Poor_# 

Area per Bar n 1,600 ____Other Bldgs, per Farm_ 

Distance House to Bam_jgg. f t. D istance House to Water 

(x) No data secured for some items. 












































































59. 


DISTRICT XI - VEGrREVI LLE, 

Data from 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1936) 

27,026 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

25,162 

Decrease of Population 

(1936-1941) 

1,864 

Farm Population 

(1936) 

24,192 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

2,114 


Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 9/6 


Total Acres in District 1,998,214 

Acres per Rural Person (1936) 74 

Acres per Rural Person (1941) 79 

Acres per Farm Person (1936) 80 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 945 

Number of Farms (1936) 5,822 

Number of Farms (1941) 5,587 

Decrease in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 235 

Average Size of Farm - Total Acres (1936) 315 

Average Size of Farm - improved Acres (1936) 164 

Total Acres in District per Farm (1941) 358 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 15$ 

Value of Farm Property - Total (1936) $6,401 

Value of Farm Property - Buildings (1936) $1,076 

$ Population of British Races. 39$ 


M.D. ! s & I.D.’s Included in the District 


481-5,511-515. 













bU. 


DISTRICT Xll - EDMONTON 

(1) Physical Features. 

Edmonton district lies within the dark soil belt 
of the parklands. Much of the land is clear and improved al¬ 
though some bush still is evident throughout the area. The 
land is mostly level, with some parts gently rolling. The 
district is considered one of the most productive in the 
Province. 

(2) Type of Farming. 

In general, mixed farming is the predominant activity 
throughout the district, although specialized farming, such as 
dairying, hog ranching and chicken raising are also common. A 
reference to the summary tables indicates relatively small farms 
with a high average of livestock per farm. The 20.2 average 
for cattle included dairy and beef, but in the Edmonton district 
this refers almost entirely to dairy cattle. The average per 
farm of hogs and chickens is also indicative of a more specialized 
mixed farming area. 

(5) Population. 

Both summaries indicate a healthy farm population picture. 
Forty-five percent of the population are of British races and 
the Census shows an increase for 1941 over 1936. The average 
farm population is over 4 and also the proportion of non-farm 

population indicates possibilities for future electrification. 













:• vo 









61. 


(4) Size of Farm, 

Both tables show a small average number of acres 
per farm. This is significant as it means there are on the 
average about 3 farmsteads per section—a very favorable factor 
for farm electrification. 

(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers . 

The percentage tenant farmers for the district is 15, 
and for the sample it is only 4$. This may indicate a tendency 
to more owner farms in the area and the proportion may drop below 
the 15$ in the future. This is an advantage from an electrification 
point of view. 

(6) Value of Farm Property . 

In the northern districts studied Edmonton stands 
first in value of farm property. Value of buildings show a fair 
investment that would indicate buildings are worth installing power 
in. On the average, farms are small in the district and the high 
average total value of property shows good productive capacity 
of the farming area. 

(7) Representativeness o f Sa m ple. 

Many factores seem to indicate that the Edmonton district 
is a good one for the extension of electric power. The number 
of farms is on the increase, also the population and the value of 
property is relatively high. The size of farm and acres improved 
for the township agree quite v/ell with the district as a whole. 
Considering all the factors, size of farms, livestock, cars, tractors 











' 




62 


and value of property, indications are that the township 
studied is fairly representative and may not be an overestimate 
for the district as a whole. 


t 







65. 


Tp. 51 Rge. 

FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 

_£4 W. of 4 Meridian. T p . near ELLKRSLIE 

Good Prospects 

76 

Per Cent Good 

73? 

Fair Prospects 

18 

Per Cent Fair 

17% 

Poor Prospects 

10 

Per Cent Poor 

10% 

Owner Farms 

95 

Per Cent Owned 

96? 

Tenant Farms 

4 

Per Cent Tenant 

SL 


Total Farm Populatio n 406 _Average Farm Populatio n 4,1 


Average Number Acres per Far m 254 Worked per Farm_ 154 

Proportion of Land Improved_57$_ 

Total Cattl e 2002 Averag e 20.2 T otal Horses 609A verage_6^.1_ 

Total Hog s 4752 Averag e 47.8 Total Chickens 21.6 05 Averag e 218 .2 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 97% _Average Dept h 145 ft. 

Power for Pumping_72_Percentage_75$_ 


Grain Chopped per Far m 2818.8 B u. Chopped by own Tracto r 64% 


Other Means on Farm: 

z% 


Off Farm 


34$ 


Proportion having: 

Cars 

90? 

Tractors 

66? 

Telephones 

13? 

Type ) Frame 

87 


Stucco 

6 

Other 6 


of ) 

House) Percentage 

88 

Percentage 

6 

Percentage 

j6_ 

Rooms per House 

5.7 






Condition of House: 

Good 

60.9 

% Fair 

29.3 

% Poor 

9.8 % 

Condition of Barn: 

Good 

55.4 

% Fair 

23.9 

% Poor 

20.7 % 

Area per Barn 1544.1 


Other Bldgs. 

per Farm 

3 

Distance House to Barn_^ 


Distance 

House to Water 

155 ft, 










































































:.) :>■ J 







t ■ 


* 










f; ■ 





































64. 


DISTRICT Xll - EDMONTON 


Data from 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1936) 

19,529 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

20,206 

Increase of Population 

(1936-1941) 

607 

Farm Population 

(1936) 

16,712 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

2,817 

Proportion of Non-Farm 

Pop. (1956) 

17$ 

Total Acres in District 

878,859 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1936) 

45 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

43 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1936) 

53 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

312 

Number of Farms 

(1936) 

3,743 

Number of Farms 

(1941) 

3,823 

Increase in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

80 

Average Size of Farm - 

Total Acres (1936) 

223 

Average Size of Farm - 

Improved Acres (1936) 

148 

Total Acres in District 

, per Farm (1941) 

230 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

15$ 

Value of Farm Property 

- Total (1936) 

$8,384 

Value of Farm Property 

- Buildings (1936) 

$1,783 

$ Population of British Races 

45$ 


M.D.’s & I.D.»s Included in the District. 517-9,543-9. 











65. 


D ISTRICT Xlll - NORTH-EAST FR INGE 

(1) Physical Feature s. 

Practically all of the district is a transition soil, 
although a small part is classified as black. There is consider¬ 
able variation in the topography; in places it is level to 
gently rolling; in others it is rolling and hilly, especially near 

the river. In places rocks and stones are a serious obstacle to 

cultivation and sometimes sloughs and lakes are frequent. Consider¬ 
able tree growth of willow and poplar is to be found throughout 
the area. 

(2) Type of Fa r ming. 

The district is predominantly mixed fanning with the 
emphasis on hogs. Not a great amount of wheat is produced; the 
majority of the cultivated acreage is devoted to barley and oats 
with small amounts of seeded hay and pasture. Seldom does the 
district suffer from drought or insect damage; thus there is 

reasonable assurance of good crops with an abundance of feed. The 

average livestock kept per farm, as shown by the sample, indicates 
a substantial mixed farming area. 

(3) Population . 

A sms.il proportional increase in population is shown for 
the district, with a fair proportional increase in farms. The 
total farm population is about 9,000 and the total number of farms 

about 2,000. This gives an average farm population of 4.5. Like 
the west and north-west fringe districts selected, the north-east 















66 . 


fringe area is a comparatively new area of settlement, and 
large families are often very helpful in developing new land. 
Ukranians and French comprise the greater part of the population; 
only 20 % are of British origin. 

(4) Size of Farm. 

As indicated before the area is comparatively new 
and it is to be expected farms will not be large. The census shows 
an average of 99 acres improved and 239 acres as the average size 
of farm. The latter figure would mean an average of 3 farms per 
section. 

(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers. 

Both the district and the sample data show a low 
percentage tenancy; thus in this area the problem of tenancy would 
be small. 

(6) Value of Property. 

A Ioyj average value of farm property—less than §4,000— 
is given for the district. Buildings are valued at §745. Generally 
speaking buildings can be classified as either fair or poor. A 
| large percentage are of log construction; however, many farmers are 
anxious to build new homes as soon as material is available. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample . 

The district and sample data are generally in agreement. 

It is evident from both that buildings are in most cases fair to poor. 
The prospects for electricity reveal 68$ are either fair or poor. 

The percentage tenancy is in quite close agreement; also the 














67 


average farm population is the same for both. Some variation 
occurs in size of farm and the number of improved acres. 

It must be remembered this is not a well developed 
area and that in a few years from now the picture may be radically 
changed. At the moment it seems the sample is fairly repres¬ 
entative and that the number of good prospects is low. 










68 . 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 


Tp. 59 Rge. 8 W. of 4 

Meridian. Tp. near ST. 

pahl 

Good Prospects 15 

Per Cent Good 

21% 


Fair Prospects 22 

Per Cent Fair 

46$ 


Poor Prospects 11 

Per Cent Poor 

25% 


Owner Farms 40 

Per Cent Owned 

Q7% 


Tenant Farms 6 

Per Cent Tenant 

1356 


Total Farm Population 228 

Average Farm Population 

5 

Average Number Acres per Farm 

332 forked per 

Farm 

152 

Proportion of Land Improved 

46% 



Total Cattle 507 Average 11 

Total Horses 335 Average 

7.3 

Total Hogs 1704 Average 57 

Total Chickens3492 Average 75.9 

Proportion of Farms with Wells 

93.5 Average Depth 

32 ft. 

Power for Pumping 5 

Percentage 

.6$ 


Grain Chopped per Farm 1396 

Bu. Chopped by own Tractor 28$ 

Other means on Farm 2$ 

Off Farm 70% 



Proportion having: Gar s 50$ T pactor s 55$ Telephone s -- 


Type ) Fram e 8 _Stucc o — Othe r 59 

of ) 

I House ) Percentag e 17 P ercentag e — P ercentage 85 _ 

Rooms per House___ 5.6 _____ 

Condition of House: Goo d 20 _Fai r 55 _$ Poo r_ _27_$ 

Condition of Barn: Goo d 15.5 $ Fai r 44.4 $ Poo r 42,_5_ % 

Area per Barn: 612.1 _Other Buildings per Far m 1.5 


Distance House to Bar n pno -p+ D istance House to Water 268 ft. 















































































69 . 


DISTRICT Xlll - NORTH-EAST FRINGE . 
Data from 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1936) 

10,305 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

10,588 

Increase of Population 

(1956-1941) 

283 

Farm Population 

(1936) 

9,022 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

1,283 

Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 

14£ 

Total Acres in District 


608,031 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1936) 

59 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

57 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1936) 

67 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

474 

Number of Farms 

(1936) 

1,917 

Number of Farms 

(1941) 

1,967 

Increase in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

50 

Average Size of Farm - Total Acres (1936) 

239 

Average Size of Farm - Improved Acres (1936) 

99 

Total Acres in District 

per Farm (l94l) 

309 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

1(# 

Value of Farm Property 

- Total (1936) 

$3,831 

Value of Farm Property 

- Buildings (1936) 

$ 745 

% Population of British Races 

20/6 


M.D. r s & I.D.’s Included in the District 


543-4,573,605. 








DISTRICT XIV - SMOKY LAKE - MUNDARE. 

(1) Physical Features . 

The greater part of the area lies within the black 
soil zone; however, a part near the top is transition or grey 
wooded soil. There is considerable variation in the topography, 
ranging from level and undulating to rolling and hilly. Dotted 
throughout the district are quite a number of sloughs and lakes; 
also the northern part is cut by the North Saskatchewan river. 
Considerable bush is found in soj|e parts, while in others only 
occasional bluffs are found on farms; the grass cover is typical 
of the parklands. 

(2) Type of Farming . 

The area is classified as mixed farming with the emphasis 
on swine. Barley and oats are the chief grain crops with some land 
in seeded hay and pasture. The district seldom suffers from drought 
and generally there is plenty of feed and coarse grains. Draught 
power is supplied by both horses and tractors; in the sample three- 
quarters of the farms had tractor power. 

(5) Population. 

The district is predominately Ukranian, with some Roumanian, 
Polish, German and eight percent of British races. Contrary to most 
of the fringe areas District XIV showed a decrease in population and 
in the number of farms between 1936 and 1941. 

(4) Size of Farm. 

There is a wide spread between the average acreage for the 
district and the sample survey. More emphasis is put on cultivated 














71 . 


land and the production of grain crops near Vegreville than in 
other parts. To the north around Sjoolgr Lake and the fringe, farms 
are smaller; considerable work has still to be done in clearing 
land. It is evident the trend is towards larger farms in tholder 
parts of the district. 

(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers 

Certainly the problem of tenancy is not acute in this area— 
only 8$ of the farmers are renters. It is to be expected this 
percentage may remain quite low, at least the sample study coincides 
with this situation at present. 

(6) Value of Property . 

Type and construction of farm buildings vaiy throughout 
the area. In a number of cases the old buildings erected on first 
settlement have been replaced by good frame buildings; on the 
other hand log structures with a mudded wall are not uncommon. Some 
of these buildings are definitely not worth installing power in. 
Considering the total value of property and the value of building 
for the province as a whole the average for the district is low. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample . 

A comparison of the two tables suggest there are some 
variations, especially in size of farm and cultivated acres. The 
number of tractors together with the reporting of two lighting 
plants in the township survey will not be typical of the general 
situation. Certain other variations occur and the probable 


conclusion is that the sample is above the average. It is not 












_ 

'***"’ . ■ , 




■ 


. 

■ 




« 

■ 


: j 

“ 1 " * " 






; 

■ 








■ 

■ 








- 


. 


• • 




.. 

- 

■ 

- v V • ' 

' 

■ 




: 


- V 




: . ... 

. • 




'• US*. 



72 . 


likely the classification of farms"good","fair", and "poor" 
will err on the pessimistic side. 













73 . 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 


Tp. 53 Rge. 15 

W. of 

4 Meridian. Tp. Near 

MDHDARE 

Good Prospects 

20 

Per Cent Good 

33$ 

Fair Prospects 

4 

Per Cent Fair 

6% 

Poor Prospects 

37 

Per Cent Poor 

61$ 

Owner Farms 

51 

Per Cent Owned 

84$ 

Tenant Farms 

10 

Per Cent Tenant 

16$ 

Total Farm Population 131 

Average Farm Population 4.6 

Average Number Acres per Farm 508 Worked per Farm 405 

Proportion of Land Improved 

80$ 


Total Cattle 

Average 

. 22 Total Horses 

Average 8.2 

Total Hogs 

Average 

40 T 0 tal Chickens 

Average 193 


Proportion of Farms with Wells_96_ Average Dept h 62 ft. 

Power for Pumpin g 17 P ercentage_61^_ 

Grain Chopped per Far m 2020 __Bu. Chopped by own Tractor 45% 


Other means on Farm:_ 52% _Off Far m: 25% 


Cars & Trucks per Farm: Cars 1 Tractors .75 Telephones 

64$ 

Tvne ) Frame (x) 

Stucco 

Other 


of ) 

House) Percentage 

Percentage 

Percentage 


Rooms per House 

6 



Condition of House: 

Good % Fair 

% Poor 

% 

Condition of Barn: 

Good % Fair 

% Poor 

$ 

Area per Barn 1250 

Sq. Ft. Other Bldgs. 

per Farm 



Distance House to Barn_ 165 ft. T o Water 


(x) No data secured for some items. 













































































74 . 


DISTRICT XIV - SMOKY LAKE- MIJNUARF. 
Data from 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


^otal Rural Population 

(1936) 

29,449 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

28,310 

Decrease of Population 

(1936-1941) 

1,139 

Farm Population 

(1936) 

26,967 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

2,482 

Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 

9% 

Total Acres in District 

1,276,420 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1936) 

43 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

45 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1936) 

47 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

514 

Number of Farms 

(1936) 

5,536 

Number of Farms 

(1941) 

5,421 

Decrease in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

115 

Average Size of Farm - 

Total Acres (1936) 

223 

Average Size of Farm - 

Improved Acres (1936) 

130 

Total Acres in District 

; per Farm (1941) 

235 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

8% 

Value of Farm Property 

- Total (1936) 

$5,274 

Value of Farm Property 

- Buildings (1936) 

$1,007 

% Population of British Races 

8% 

M.D.*s & I.D. T s Included in the District 

516, 545-7, 


575-7. 











75 . 


DISTRICT XV - NORTH-WEST FRING E. 

(1) Physical Features . 

District XV lies within two soil zones—black and 
transition or grey wooded. The topography is variable through¬ 
out; some parts are level to undulating, while others are rolling 
and hilly. Frequent sloughs, lakes, creeks and valleys are 
found in many parts. Occasionally sandy strips with varying tree 
growth appear. F or the most part tree growth is plentiful, 
except where it has been cleared. The west and north sides of the 
district are in the bush region and are fairly well wooded. 

(2) Type of Farming . 

Like most of the northern districts the North-Vfest Fringe 
area is typically a mixed farming area with the present emphasis on 
hogs. Only a small proportion of the cultivated land produces 
wheat; the chief crops are oats and barley. 

Although the district seldom suffers from drought, frost 
damage often occurs. According to the sample study the average 
livestock per farm is comparatively low. This may not be a general 
situation. 

(3) Population . 

Considerable variation in the population occurs—French, 
Germans and Ukranians are all well represented, with approximately 
36 percent beinf of British origin. According to the census a small 

increase in population is shown for 1936-41. 
















76 . 


(4) Size of Farm. 

Typical of the fringe areas the size of farm is 
relatively small. On the average there are about three 
farmsteads per square mile. This is a fair density. Considerable 
bush and other physical features of the land have been a barrier 
to extensive cultivation. The average improved acres per farm 
is small. The district and sample data agree very closely on 
acreages. 

(5) Percentage Tenant Farmers . 

It has been pointed out that the fringe areas have a 
low proportion of tenancy. This area substantiates the previous 
statement, as it shows only 9 percent tenant farmers. 

(6) Value of Property . 

The value of farm property per acre compares favourably 
with some of the older, better established areas. The average total 
value of farm property is $4,604, but this is for an average of 250 
acres, which is about $20.00 per acre. Some of the other districts 
have an average farm value of 7 or 8 thousand dollars, but the 
acreage value may be below $20.00. The average for buildings is not 
very high and in many cases they are of log construction with a 
nrud plaster on the outside. 

(7) Representativeness of the Sample. 

Definite agreement as to size of farm and acres improved is 
shown for the district and the sample. For the district as a whole 
the livestock average seems a little low; e.g. most of the areas 










77 


show a much higher average for horses. The other averages 
shown on the summary fit the general picture reasonably well. 
It may not be over pessimistic to take the proportions of 
"good”, "fair", and "poor" prospects as fairly typical of the 
district. 










78 . 


FARM ELECTRIFICAT ION SURVEY 

Tp. 58 Rge. _ 2 W . of 5 Meridian.. Tp. Nea r PICKARDVILLE 

Good Propsects_20_Per Cent Good_ 28% 

Fair Propsects_25_Per Cent Fai r 5 5%_ 

Poor Propsects_ 27 _Per Cent Poor_ Z7% _ 

Owner Farms_ 71 Per Cent Owned_97$_ 

Tenant Farms_ 2 P er Cent Tenan t 5% _ 

Total Farm Populatio n 264 Average Farm Populatio n 2> .6 

Average Number Acres per Far m 258 _Worked per Far m 94 

Proportion of Land Improved^._ 40% __ 

Total Cattl e 744 A verag e 10.1 Total Horse s 272 A verage_3.7 

Total Hog s 1802 Averag e 24.7 Total Chicken s6294 Averag e 86 .2 

Proportion of Farms with Wells 81% Average Dept h 64 ft. 

Power for Pumpin g 6 _Percentage_8$_ 

Grain Chopped per Far m 1579 B u. Chopped by own Tracto r 55% 

Other means on Farm: 15% _Off Far m 52% __ • 

Proportion Having: Car s 48% Tractor s 58% Telephones 4% 

Type ) Fram e 41 _Stucco 5_ jOther_29_ _ 

of ) 

House) Percentag e 56.2 P ercentag e 4,1 P ercentag e 59.7_ 

Rooms per House_4. 1 _____ 

Condition of House: Goo d 59.7 % Fair 55.6 % Poo r 24.7 % 

Condition of Barn: Good 57.9 % Fair 24.2 % Poo r 57.9 % 

Area per Bar n 684 , Sq. Ft. Other Bldgs, per Farm 5.2 

180^fj^_ 


Distance House to Barn 279 ft 


To Water 







































































79 . 


DISTRICT XV - NORTH-WEST FRTKT.y 


Data from 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1956) 

26,225 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

26,873 

Increase of Population 

(1956-1941) 

648 

Farm Population 

(1956) 

23,593 

Non-Farm Population 

(1956) 

2,632 

Proportion of Non-Farm Pop. (1936) 

11* 

Total Acres in District 

1 

,627,060 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1956) 

62 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

61 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1956) 

69 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1S36) 

618 

Number of Farms 

(1956) 

5,912 

Number of Farms 

(1941) 

6,064 

Increase in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

152 

Average Size of Farm - 

Total Acres (1936) 

230 

Average Size of Farm - Improved Acres (1936) 

99 

Total Acres in District 

per Farm (1941) 

268 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

9 % 

Value of Farm Property - 

- Total (1956) 

$4,604 

Value of Farm Property - 

- Buildings (1956) 

$ 881 


% Population of British Races 36^ 

M.D. r s & I.D.’s Included in the district 490,530,550, 


578-80,608-10. 















■ 

■ 



■ 

■ 












' 

• 




:;o .) 






i 

' 




. 

• 


. 

. 



. 


‘ 




? ■ 

• • ' ' 




' 



\ 

■ 

- 





' 

r. ' , . 

- 

. 

' 

■ 







80 . 


DISTRICT XVI - G RANDE PRATRTE 

(1) Physical Features. 

The district around Grande Prairie is the only one 
selected for study in the Peace River area. The greater portion 
of the soil is black; however, grey wooded soils are to be found, 
especially on the fringes. For the most part the topography is 
rolling, although level to gently rolling parts are frequent. Near 
Grande Prairie are several lakes, while throughout the district 
sloughs, muskegs and other lakes are common. Where farming is 
well established the bush cover is similar to other farming areas 
in the parklands—occasional bluffs. Near the edge of the district 
typical bush land with a grey wooded soil is common. The area 
shown on the map is not all well developed farm land. Just north 
and west of Wembley the only settlement is the occasional farm 
along the highway, then the situation will change again and 
broaden out to include quite a number of farms. With the Rocky 
Mountains visible in the west the scenery presents a very picture¬ 
sque farming area. 

(2) Type of Farming. 

The emphasis on certain types of farming shifts, depending on 
the locality. Just north and west of Grande Prairie wheat farming 
accounts for a good proportion of the cultivated acreage. Large 
farms with a full line of machinery are fairly common. Where the 
soil is not very suitable for wheat growing, coarse grains and grasses 

ire common. Alfalfa, timothy and brome are grown for hay and. seed. 













81 . 


Where production factors are not so favourable for wheat growing, 
mixed farming, with the emphasis on hogs is typical. 

(S) Population . 

A decrease in population has taken place from 1936 

to 1941, also a decrease in the number of farms. In the more 
the 

outlying parts ofj district a fair proportion of the farmers are 
bachelors. In some cases they have turned their farming operations 
over to someone else and joined the Forces or else sought 
employment in war projects. It is probable there will be a 
decided increase in population later when these men return and others 
come in to take up farming. 

(4) Size of Farm . 

It is not expected the average size of farm will be large 
as the small fringe or homestead farm will lower the average. From 
}rande Prairie to Wembley the farms are large, including the Trelle 
and R‘igby farms. However, a few miles south and west of the 
above places the soil changes, farms are small and poor. The 
typical situation is better revealed by the district data, as the 
sample study is indicative of an area with very favourable soil 
qualitie s. 

(5) Percentage of Tenant Farm s. 

The granting of homesteads has been a principal factor 
in the settlement of the Peace River country. Thus to start off 
the farmer has owned his own land. With reasonable success he 
was able to develop the homestead and acquire extra land. This 






























02.^ 11 

has been an influential factor in reducing the percentage of. 
tenant farmers. If farming practices and settlement of land 
in the future continue on much the same basis as during the 
past then the number of tenant farmers should remain about the 
same. 

(6) Value of Farm Property. 

In the vicinity of Sexsmith, Grande Prairie, Wembley 
and Beaverlodge large farms, a high proportion cultivated, good 
machinery, and good frame buildings are common. Many of the farm 
buildings near the towns mentioned compare well with those around 
Wetaskiwin, Red Deer and Olds. On the other hand it is often only 
a fev/ miles from a good area to one with all log buildings. In 
many cases the total value of all the log buildings would be only 
a few hundred dollars. Thus, the average for the district is 
greatly influenced by the less favourable farm picture. The same 
applies to land; there is rich farm land in one place and grey 
wooded soil only a short distance away. 

(7) Repre s entativen es s of the S a mple. 

Even to the casual traveller the rapid variations in 
farming areas are evident. This makes it difficult to get a 
representative sample. It would appear from an examination of the 
township studied that it reflects fairly well the general picture 
between Grande Prairie and Wembley and around Beaverlodge, but on 
the edges of this rectangular bLock there are many farmers definitely 
in a more difficult position. It is quite evident the sample data 











83 


does not reflect the general size of farm or acres improved. For 
the purposes of electrification there are many farmers in a 
favourable situation who could be expected to install power; however 
this would not be true for the district as a whole. 






84 . 


FARM ELECTRIFICATION SURVEY 

T P-_I_ R so. _8 W. of 6 M eridian. Tp. Near _ GRANDE PRAIR IE 

Good Prospects_ 59 Per Cent Good_53%_ 

Fair Prospects_1£_Per Cent Fair_19%_ 

Poor Prospects_ 21 _J?er Cent Poor_28%_ 

Owner Farms_71___Per Cent Owned_96%_ 

Tenant Farms_ 5 P er Cent Tenant_4$_ 

Total Farm Populatio n 241 _Average Farm Population_4.1_ 

Average Number Acres per Far m 461 _Worked per Far m 562 _ 

Proportion of Land Improved_78 % __ 

Total Cattle___Averag e 7.8 T otal Horses_Averag e 9.5 

Total Hogs_Averag e 55 T otal Chickens_Averag e 114 

Proportion of Farms with Well s 95 % Average Depth_ 165 ft. _ 

Power for Pumpin g 55 Percentage_ 56 % _ 

Grain Chopped per Far m 1650B u. Chopped by own Tracto r 41% _ 

Other means on Farm: 2% _Off Farm___57%__ 

Cars & Trucks per Farm: Car s .95 T ractor s .90 T elephone s 22% 

Type ) Fram e (x) _Stucco_Other__ 

of ) 

House) Percentage_.Percentage_Percentage_ 

Rooms per House_5J3__ 

Condition of House: Good_ % Fair_ % Poor_ % 

Condition of Barn: Good_ % Fair__ % Poor_% 

Area per Ba ra 1080 S q. Ft. Other Bldgs, per Farm_ 

Distance House to Bar n 224 ft. To Water_ 


(x) No data secured for some items. 
































































































































85 . 


DISTRICT XVI - GRANDE PRATRTE 
Data From 1936 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1936) 

9,845 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

9,740 

Decrease of Population 

(1936-1941) 

105 

Farm Population 

(1936) 

9,299 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

546 

Proportion of Mon-Farm Pop. (1936) 

6$ 

Total Acres in District 

1, 

063,125 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1936) 

108 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

109 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1936) 

114 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

1,947 

Number of Farms (1936) 


2,558 

Number of Farms (1941) 


2,438 

Decrease in Number of F 

arms (1936-1941) 

120 

Average Size of Farm - 

Total Acres (1936) 

301 

Average Size of Farm - 

Improved Acres (1936) 

101 

Total Acres in District 

per Farm (1941) 

436 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

12$ 

Value of Farm Property 

- Total (1936) 

$5,173 

Value of Farm Property 

- Buildings (1936) 

$ 884 


$ Population of British Races 49$ 

M.D. ! s & I.D.’s Included in the District 739-41,771-2. 












86 . 


STATISTICAL SUM MA RY OF ALL DISTRICTS . 


Data From 1956 & 1941 Census Reports. 


Total Rural Population 

(1936) 

323,504 

Total Rural Population 

(1941) 

318,557 

Decrease of Population 

(1936-1941) 

4,947 

Farm Population 

(1956) 

289,170 

Non-Farm Population 

(1936) 

34,334 

Prop, of Non-Farm Pop. 

(1936) 

10.6$ 

Total Acres in All Districts 

26,563,181 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1936) 

82 

Acres per Rural Person 

(1941) 

83 

Acres per Farm Person 

(1936) 

92 

Acres per Non-Farm Person (1936) 

774 

Number of Farms 

(1936) 

69,617 

Number of Farms 

(1936) 

68,816 

Decrease in Number of Farms (1936-1941) 

801 

Average Size of Farm - 

Total Acres (1936) 

347 

Average Size of Farm - 

Improved Acres (1936) 

— 

Total Acres in District per Farm (1941) 

386 

Percentage of Tenant Farmers 

10.5$ 

7alue of Farm Property 

- Total (1936) 

$7,784 

7alue of Farm Property 

- Buildings (1936) 

$1,363 


$ Population of British Races 44.7$ 





. 

- 









87 


SUMMARY OF DISTRICTS . 

Except for a few brief introductory comments the summary 
of all the districts will be similar to the outline for each 
individual one. Excluding two areas, one in the south-east 
corner of the Province and the other around Peace River and Grimsha?/ 
the study has included practically all of the farming area bf 
Alberta, Within the potential service area definite variations 
in type of farming are to be found, especially as between northern 
and southern Alberta. One type of fanning may give as great a net 
return as another, but other factors e.g. size of farm may vary 
greatly. This has already been discussed under the separate 
district summaries. 

Other information related to electrification may be 
briefly referred to here. The proportion of non-farm population 
is of some significance. Where this proportion is high it would 
mean there are sertice stations, stores, elevators, etc., through¬ 
out the district and these may become users of central station 
power. 

The sample data also include information on the number of 
wells, power for pumping, type of house and condition, rooms per 
house, distance from house to barn and distance from house to water. 
Some of these figures are necessary in order to determine the cost 
of installing power, e.g., the amount of wiring required. When 
all the data were received from each individual farmer a rating 
"good", n fair", Qi* "poor" was put on the record. The total of 
these ratings and the percentage of each is shown for each district. 









88 . 


Each district was described under seven headings; 
the following remarks relate to these same headings only all the 
districts are considered. 

(1) Physical Features . 

With the exception of Peace River practically all of the 
farming area of the province is on the prairie or parklands. 
Generally speaking, the situation for the prairie districts is the 
same—topography, soil, grass and bush cover and seasonal climatic 
conditions. None of these present important barriers to the 
erection of power lines or to servicing them the year round. In 
the parklands, more sloughs, lakes and coulees are encountered, 
besides, some of the road allowance are not as clear and open as 
those on the prairie. Nevertheless, as shown by existing power 
lines, the general physical features of the Province do not present 
problems sufficiently great as to become deciding factors in rural 
electrification. 

(2) Type of Farming . 

Studies of agriculture usually reveal wide variations in 
I systems of farming at different periods of time. Farmers are at 
| first uncertain as to the best crops to grow and in what proportions, 
gradually by trial and error a more permanent system of farming 
develops. This has been the situation in Alberta and as a result 
wheat farming and ranching have become the typical practice on the 
greater part of the prairie with mixed farming being predominent in 
the parklands. The information gathered on each district studied 
agrees with this general situation. Variations occur but on the 














*.! 







89 . 


whole fsjrrns are .larger in the south, a greater proportion 
of the land is cultivated and fewer livestock are kept. This 
of course does not apply to the irrigated districts. 

(5) Populations . 

The average population per farm was obtained for each of 
the township samples. For the first five districts in the south 
the average for the samples is 3.7 and for the other northern 

districts the average is 4.6, almost an average of one person more 

\ 

per farm. The fringe areas have a high number of persons per 
farm, and a relatively small proportions of the people are of British 
origin. The older settled areas, such as Calgary and Red Deer 
have a larger proportion of the population of British stock; whereas, 
the area east of Edmonton and the fringes have a high percentage 
of Ukranian, French and German nationalities. 

(4) Size of Farm 

Districts may be classified as follows with regard to 
size of farm: 

500 acres and over — Districts 1 and 111 

401 to 500 acres —Districts IV, V, VI, and IX 

301 to 400 acres —Districts 11, Vll, XI and XVI 

200 to 300 acres —Districts V111,X,X11,X1V and XV 

The average improved acres per farm for each district are as follows: 
400 acres and over —District 1 

301 to 400 acres —Districts 111 

201 to 300 acres —Districts 11,1V, V,V1 and IX 

101 to 200 acres —Districts Vll, V111,X,X1,X11,X1V &XV 












90 . 


0 to 100 acres —Districts Xlll and XV. 

From the above it is evident the large farms with 
large improved acreages occur in the south. Particularly 
noticeable is the fact—with the exception of District 11— that 
districts 1,111,IV,VI and IX may be grouped together as those 
with the greatest total and improved acreages. This is sign¬ 
ificant from an electrification point of view as it indicates 
the average number of farms per square mile. 

(5) Perc entag e T enant Farmery. 

The percentage of tenant farmers has a definite effect 
on the extension of electric power. In any given situation other 
things being equal the probability of owners installing power is 
greater than for renters. A brief summary of the percentage 
tenant farmers in each district will be sufficient to indicate 
the general picture. 

Percentage tenants 30 and over - Districts 111 

" " 20 to 29 - Districts 11,1V,V,V11, 

" " 10 to 19 - Districts 1,V111,1X,X, 

X1,X11,X111,XV1. 

" " 0 to 9 - Districts X1¥,XV. 


(6) Value of F arm Property. 

It has already been pointed out that District 1 has 
the highest property value per farm with District 111 as second 
and District IV third. However, this value is for a large acreage, 
and the per acre value may be below $20, whereas for other districts 
in the north,e.g., Edmonton, it is just under $40. For some 













91 . 


comparisons the acreage value would appear to give a more 
accurate picture. The value of farm buildings gives a more 
clear cut picture and from the data it is evident the Southern 
part of the Province has considerably higher average value than 
the North. 

(7) Representati vene ss of the Sample . 

At the end of each district summary the representativeness 
of the sample has been discussed. Difficulties arise in attempt¬ 
ing to interpret the representativeness of the sample in any district. 
It seems apparent that the degree of representativeness varies. 

En some cases the sample appears to reflect conditions more favorable 
bo farm electrification than would be true of the district in general ; 
:Ln other cases, the sample may reflect less favorable conditions. 

Over the whole service area some of these discrepancies would be 
compensating. 




































































































