University of Alberta Library 


0 1620 3448183 6 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


r - v m 





Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Seyer, W.F. 

Chemical investigation of the 
bituminous sands of Alberta. 1919. 






















0X UBfiK 
»TIW£8SKMIS 












A CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION 


OE THE 
BITUMEN 
IN THE BITUMINOUS SANDS OE 
NORTHERN ALBERTA 


By W. E. Seyer 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 



https://archive.org/details/seyer1919 


v 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION. 1 

The Sample 1 

Purpose of the Investigation 2 

Previous Work on the Constitu¬ 
tion of Bitumens 3 

PROCEDURE. 6 

Separation of Sand and Bitumen 6 

Preliminary Tests 6 

Sulphuric Acid Treatment of the 

Bitumen 9 

Further Sulphuric Acid Treat¬ 
ments 12 

The Action of Concentrated 

Nitric Acid 17 

Separation of the Bitumen from 

the Sand by Distillation 26 

Reaction of the Bitumen with 
Concentrated Nitric and 
Sulphuric Acid 28 

Action of Dilute Nitric Acid 

on the Distillates 36 

Fraction Solutions 38 

CONCLUSIONS. 43 

APPENDIX. 49 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 64 





A CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION OP THE BITUMEN IN THE 
BITUMINOUS SANDS OP NORTHERN ALBERTA. 


INTRODUCTION . 

.. ■ 

These so called "Tar Sands" are found to 
occur for many miles about Port McMurray, in the north¬ 
ern part of Alberta.^" The "Sands" are overlain by 
unconsolidated material of varying thickness. Sect¬ 
ions are however exposed on the banks of numerous 
streams. These exposed layers vary a great deal as to 
the nature of the sand and the quantity of the bitu¬ 
men with which they are impregnated. 

The Sample. __ 

The sample upon which the following work 
has been done was a portion of that used by Mr. S. 

C. Ells, Mines Branch, Ottawa, for paving experiments 
in the City of Edmonton. It was reported to have 
been taken from an exposure on the Hangingstone river 
about three miles from Port McMurray and brought to 
the city during the winter of 1914-15. The sample 
consisted of about 200 lbs. There was no oppor¬ 
tunity for taking a fresh sample at the time, and 

1. Ells, S.C., Preliminary Report on the Bitu¬ 
minous Sands of Northern Alberta. No 281. 
Mines Branch, Department of Mines, Canada. 
1914. 





2 


as there were no other samples available, and as 
this was only a preliminary investigation, it was 
thought the above sample would answer the purpose. 

ffurpose of the Investigation* 

The immediate object of this investigation 
was to find out whether the bitumen contained any aro¬ 
matic compounds which might be of use in the manu¬ 
facture of munitions. The ultimate object was to 
obtain some insight into the general constitution of 
the bitumen and finally, if possible, to find some 
method whereby commercially valuable organic sub¬ 
stances could be extracted or manufactured from the 
bitumen. An investigation conducted with these ob¬ 
jects in view differs of course from the ordinary 
technical analyses which are used to differentiate 
the natural bitumens. Such an analysis has already 
been made upon the bitumen by Mr. S. C. Ells, of the 
Department of Mines, Ottawa, but the results have 
not yet been made public. 



3 


Previous Work on the Constitution of Bitumens. 

Ho literature was available dealing with 
any extensive work on the constitution of the natural 
bitumens. 1 According to A. Danby, Boussingault was 
the first to have carried out any scientific investi¬ 
gations along this line. "He submitted the Pechel- 
bronn bitumen to distillation and obtained a distil¬ 
late to which he gave the name of ’petrolene 1 , whose 
chemical composition he determined as CqqH^* and 

which he pointed out was isomeric with that of oil 
2 

of turpentine^ Investigators since then appear 
to have devoted their attention chiefly to the study 
of certain properties of the bitumen which were of 
direct importance in its industrial application. 

The nature of the work is illustrated 
by the following table 9 the tests being those which 
are usually performed to distinguish the different 
bitumens and asphalts,« 

1. Mabery, C. F. „ Relations of Different Forms 
of natural Bitumens. Jour. Amer. Chem. Soc. 
Vol XXXIX, Ho 9, P 2015. 

2. Danby, A . 9 natural Rock Asphalts and Bitumens. 
1913., p 139 



c 

■ 

■ ; " v . - V> ' : 


. 

.. 

. 










4 


Asphalts from Be jural District, Cuba.'*’ 
Physical Properties 


Specific Gravity, 78°F/78°F, original 

substance, dry 1.505 

Color of powder or streak Red brown 

Lustre Dull 

Structure Compact 

Fracture Semi-con- 

ohoidal 

Hardness 2. 

Odor Asphaltic 

Softens 250°F 

Flows 240 ,f 

Penetration at 78°F. 0. 

Chemical Characteristics 

Dry substance 

Loss, 525°F, 7 hrs. .88 

Character of residue Cracked 

Loss 400°F, 7 hrs. (fresh sample) 1.50 

Character of residue Wrinkled 

Bitumen soluble in carbon bisulphide, 

air temperature 75*1 

Difference 5.5 

Inorganic or mineral matter 21.4 


100.0 


Malthenes 


Bitumen soluble in 88° naptha, air 

temperature 52.4 

This is percent of total bitumen 45.1 

Percent of soluble bitumen removed by 

sulphuric acid 60.5 

Percent of total bitumen as saturated 

hydrocarbons 17. 

Bitumen soluble in 62° naptha 59.6 

This is percent of total bitumen 52.7 


1. Richardson, Clifford; The Modern Asphalt 
Pavement, 1908, p 195 








5 


Carbenes 

Bitumen more soluble in oarbon tetra 

chloride,, air temperature 1.6 $ 

Bitumen yields on ignition 

Fixed carbon 25*0 % 

Sulphur 8*57% 


Such analyses are of technical importance 
only. They give but little insight into the con¬ 
stitution of the compounds forming bitumen. The 
latter as has been stated is the object of this 
investigation. 

The opinion of investigators such as 
Clifford Richardson is that the hydrocarbons in the 
asphaltic bitumens differ from those found in pet¬ 
roleum, although somewhat similar in nature, and 
that the lower boiling point hydrocarbons are pro¬ 
bably bicyclic or bridge polymethylenes, and the 
higher ones polycyclic.^ The literature offered 
no assistance in the way of directing the line of 
attack in regard to the isolation of any constitu¬ 
ents of the bitumen. Consequently it was first 
necessary to find some means by which this could be 

1. Richardson, Clifford: The Modern Asphalt 
Pavement, 1908, p 107 




6 


done. 

PROCEDURE. 

. '■■■ . '-m 

Removal of the Bitumen from the Sand. 

The bitumen was removed from the sand by 
the use of carbon bisulphide. Prom 800 to 900 gms. 
of the "Sands" were placed in enamelled pails and 
treated with several hundred c.c. of the solvent. 

After standing for a day, the solution was decanted 
into a filter and fresh solvent added to the residue. 
This was continued until the decanted carbon bisulphide 
was colorless. The average amount of the bitumen 
in the sample was found to be 17.82 The solvent 

was recovered by distilling the solution on a water 
bath until no more distilled. The residual bitumen 
which still contained some of the solvent was then 
poured into an evaporating dish and heated on a water 
bath with frequent stirring, for several days, until 
no odor of carbon bisulphide was preceptible. 

I 

Preliminary Tests. 

The resulting bitumen was too soft for any 
penetration measurements. However, upon one year's 

^ee Appendix. 









. : ■ . . . ■■ 


















. 
















, 






' 
























7 


exposure to the air it hardened somewhat although 
it was still too soft for any penetration measurements 
at the ordinary temperature of 78 0 F. 

The bitumen was completely soluble in carbon 
tetrachloride, partially so in alcohol, acetic acid, 
acetone and ether, the solubility increasing in the 
order of the solvents named* 1 It dissolved in con¬ 
centrated sulphuric and nitric acids* When warmed 
in contact with these acids and when standing in 
contact with them at room temperatures SOg and oxides 
of nitrogen were evolved, showing that oxidation 
had taken place. The bitumen when heated with strong 
alkali on a water bath for several days became plastic, 
and partially lost its sticky character so that it 
could be moulded by the hands* 

An analysis of the bitumen gave the fol¬ 
lowing results,- 


Carbon 

80.49 $ 

Hydrogen 

11.23 

Sulphur 

2.73 

Nitrogen 

.04 

Oxygen, etc. 

6.51 by dif¬ 
ference 

i Table, Page 39 

1 




8 


With the object of reducing the complexity 
of the mixture* i. e. # the bitumen* it was subjected 
to fractional distillation. Fractions were thus col¬ 
lected over irregular intervals* the receiver being 
changed* as is customary* whenever any sudden rise 
in temperature took place. In this way it was hoped 
to concentrate any benzene derivatives in one or other 
of the fractions. 

At 265 degrees cracking was so pronounced 
that this method of obtaining any of the substances 
originally present had to be abandoned* however* the 
distillation was continued up to 400 degrees G. to 
see if any benzene compounds were formed during the 
cracking. 


Results of the Distillation 

4 $ distilled between 83 - 105°* Pale yellow oil 

5 u it 105 - 155 " " " 

5 " " 155 - 160 " " 

with some colorless 
amorphous substance 

3 " " 160 - 265 A red oil 


40 




265 - 400 


A black oil 




9 


The residue hardened into a solid tar* 
Cracking began to take place at 150 degrees C. and 
increased with rise in temperature* being very pro¬ 
nounced at 265 - 400 degrees. The distillates ap¬ 
peared to be composed chiefly of olefines, no ben¬ 
zene or its derivatives being found when tested with 
nitric and sulphuric acid. They decolorized a 
potassium permanganate solution* absorbed bromine 
and iodine* reacted energetically with nitric acid 
causing brown fumes of nitric oxides to be evolved. 
Concentrated sulphuric acid produced polymerization* 
all the distillates forming black* viscous substances 
similar to the original bitumen when brought into 
contact with it at room temperature. 

Su lph uric Acid Treatment of the Bitumen. 

On determining the nitrogen by the Kjeld- 
ahl method a volatile substance was produced at one 
stage of the digestion of the bitumen. A colorless 
crystalline substance (1) began to appear at the 
mouth of the flask after the sulphur dioxide had 
ceased to come off in any considerable quantities 
and no more frothing occurred. In this case 10 gms. 





10 


of the bitumen with 10 gms. potassium sulphate and 
50 gms. of concentrated sulphuric acid had been heat¬ 
ed for 20 hrs. on a sand bath. 

In order to collect more of the crystal¬ 
line substance (1) a cork with a thin-walled glass 
tube was fitted in the mouth of the Kjeldahl flask. 
The flask was placed in a horizontal position and 
heated which resulted in the deposition of more cry¬ 
stalline material and also in the condensation of a 
brown liquid. The liquid upon removal solidified 
into a semi-crystalline mass (2 ) still retaining 
some sulphuric acid. This substance (2) was re¬ 
crystallized and an attempt mad© to determine the 
melting point, which was unsuccessful even after 
heating to 520 degrees C. It, however, showed 
signs of decomposition somewhat below that temper¬ 
ature • 

In all #3 gms. of substance (1) were col¬ 
lected and recrystallized from water, in the shape 
of fine yellow crystals which melted at 280 degrees 
C. but showed signs of decomposition and sublimation 
at 270 degrees C. The substance left no ash upon 















■ , 


. 






11 


ignition, contained no sulphur and was readily sol¬ 
uble in alcohol, water, sulphuric acid, and but 
slightly so in ether. These properties and con¬ 
ditions of formation were strongly suggestive of 
mellitic acid, 1 

The mother liquor from which substance 
(2) had been obtained yielded another small lot of 
crystals whose melting point was 220 degrees C, 

They appeared to be an impure form of substance (2), 
Numerous attempts were made to determine 
the most favorable conditions for the formation of 
substance (1), The relative amounts of bitumen 
and sulphuric acid were changed and heated at a 
constant temperature, and then at temperatures varying 
from 100 - 300 degrees C, The results of these 
treatments can be summarized as follows,® 

1, The presence of potassium sulphate 
appeared to be necessary for the formation of any¬ 
thing but a mere trace of the substance, 

1. Wohler, Ann, 37, Page 263, 1841, 

Schwarz, Ann, 66, Page 77, 1878 
Lippmann, V, Ber, 27, Page 3408, 1894, 



12 


2. No crystals appeared when an excess 
of sulphuric acid was used but an amorphous light 
yellow substance (3) distilled over, along with 
water and sulphuric acid* The substance (3) began 
to melt at 300 degrees C* possessing no definite 
melting point* was insoluble in alcohol and acetone 
and only slightly soluble in ether* 

3. Only at a definite stage in the digest¬ 
ion did the formation of substance (1) take place* 
i.e. after frothing and the evolution of sulphur 
dioxide had ceased* 

In view of the well known fact that mel- 
litic acid is formed by heating many organic sub¬ 
stances with sulphuric acid and that its formation 
in this case would be of little use in indicating the 
nature of the substances occurring in the bitumen* 
the work along this line was discontinued for the 
time being. 

Further Sulphuric Acid Treatments. 

As is known the difference between satur¬ 
ated and unsaturated hydrocarbons and aromatic com¬ 
pounds is that hydrogen in the latter is readily re- 
















13 


placeable by nitric and sulphuric acids. The tests 
carried out on the various fractional distillates in¬ 
dicated that no benzene was present,or, if present at 
all, only in extremely small amounts or as derivat¬ 
ives of benzene. In the search for these the fact 
that such compounds form sulphonic acids when treated 
with sulphuric acid or fuming sulphuric acid was 
utilized* 

Bitumen to the amount of 10 gms. was dis¬ 
solved in carbon bisulphide and shaken with 50 c.c* 
of concentrated sulphuric acid* It was shaken from 
three to four times a day for three days and then 
allowed to stand* By this time all had dissolved 
in the sulphuric acid and the whole solution was 
thrown into water. The heat generated drove off the 
carbon bisulphide and the greater part of the bitumen 
settled in the form of a dense charred mass (4) and 
a small part floated on the water as a black oil* 

The oil was skimmed off and the watery extract (la) 
removed from the charred mass (4) by decantation. 

In washing the charred mass with hot water, more of 
the black oil was formed. The total amount of oil 


. 

0 -.5 VUCC 

. • or. • ■ r ; 

.. 

' ' 

-n -;0; . : • v t 

. , • 



M .Vi? Jr.[' - n °.0.' t 

A®**## 







14 


obtained was too small for any investigation. 

The extract (la) had a yellow color. It 
was neutralized with barium carbonate and the precipi¬ 
tate which formed was removed by filtration. The 
barium sulphate precipitate contained no organic mat¬ 
ter and the filtrate from the above when evaporated 
left a non-crystalline colorless residue which show¬ 
ed merely a trace of organic matter. The substance 
(4) was found to be insoluble in all the ordinary 
organic solvents and only dissolved in concentrated 
sulphuric acid upon warming. After being thorough¬ 
ly washed with water it was tested for the presence 
of sulphuric acid with negative results. The sul¬ 
phuric acid had apparently brought about polymeri¬ 
zation. 

In a second treatment 100 gms, of the bit¬ 
umen were dissolved in 100 c.c. of carbon bisulphide 
and shaken with 50 c.c. of fuming sulphuric acid in 
a separating funnel. A vigorous reaction took place 
producing fumes of sulphur dioxide. In a short time 
the vigor of the reaction declined but it was con¬ 
tinued by heating on the water bath for 8 hrs. The 


- 

. 

: ; -;.oj : - 

'V ; ‘ • >' - / ■ i 

-■ • £.r . :• , 

--.r: ..■■■ 

, 

, . 

, 

.. :•> ' • 1 " - \ •.' 


15 


whole was then treated with water causing the sep¬ 
aration of a black oil and a charred mass similar 
to the substances obtained in the previous treat¬ 
ment. In this ease # however,, the yellow solution 
(2a) from which the sulphuric acid had been removed 
produced a few crystals of an organic substance (5) 
which contained sulphur. The amount was too small 
for any farther investigations. 

A small portion of the charred residue 
(4) was fused with sodium hydroxide, causing a few 
drops of an evil smelling oil to distil. 

A second portion of the residue (4), about 
20 gms. was digested on a sand bath with concentrated 
sulphuric acid until it dissolved and the solution 
formed became red in color. The solution was then 
neutralized with lead carbonate. The precipitate 
was found to contain no organic matter. The fil¬ 
trate (3a) upon evaporation yielded a colorless non¬ 
crystalline mass which was redissolved in water. 

The lead was then replaced by potassium by adding a 
concentrated solution of potassium carbonate but even 
the greater crystallizing tendency of the potassium 



16 


failed to form crystals* 

A third portion of the charred residue 
(4) was digested for 6 hrs. with concentrated sul¬ 
phuric acid and then treated with water. This pro- 
duced a charred mass (6) similar to (4) hut no oil, 
the solution (4a) was yellow, decanted from the char¬ 
red mass and neutralized with barium carbonate* The 
barium sulphate precipitate was removed by filtration 
and the filtrate was allowed to evaporate spontaneous¬ 
ly yielding a white amorphous substance?7 ) insoluble 
in alcohol, acetone, ether, and at first soluble in 
water but upon being exposed became insoluble. The 
substance (7) contained organic matter, but was not 
obtained in the crystalline state. The black resi¬ 
due (6) was again heated with acid for 6 hrs. and 
the solution treated as before with similar results. 
This heating and the periodical examination of the 
sulphuric acid solution was continued until no more 
of the original solution (4a) remained. The results 
were all negative. 

Approximately SO gms. of the bitumen were 
next heated in a flask with a reflux condenser at 









17 


temperatures about 200 degrees C. for two days. The 
black solution produced was diluted with water causing 
the separation of a black mass, which when removed and 
washed was found to be insoluble in everything but 
concentrated sulphuric acid. Bo crystalline material 
was obtained from the solution. 

The Ac tion of Concentrated Bitric Acid. 

It is a well known fact that concentrated 
nitric acid acts as a nitrating agent upon aromatic 
compounds and as an oxidizing agent when in contact 
with unsaturated carbon compounds, breaking the chain 
at the point of double linkage. It was therefore 
thought that treating the bitumen with concentrated 
nitric acid might result in the nitration of the 
aromatic compounds present car at least in the oxi¬ 
dation of certain unsaturated ones with the formation 
of simpler substances that could be easily removed. 

With this end in view 30 gms. of bitumen 
were treated with 25 c.c of nitric acid and allowed 
to stand at room temperature. The reaction was 
very slight at first but gradually increased until 
after 20 hrs. it suddenly reacted with almost ex- 



18 


plosive violence, "brown fumes of nitric oxides being 
evolved and much frothing taking place. The nitric 
acid solution (5a) had become red in color and when 
allowed to evaporate left an amorphous red resin-like 
mass (8), soluble in ether, alcohol, benzene, acetone, 
sulphuric acid and in alkaline solutions. It resist¬ 
ed all efforts made to obtain it in the crystalline 
state. The residual bitumen (8) was treated with 
fresh acid and heated on a water bath for 8 hrs, when 
10 c.c. concentrated sulphuric acid were added to as¬ 
sist the nitration of any aromatic compounds which 
might be present. The heating was then continued 
until all the residue (8) had dissolved forming sol¬ 
ution (6a). 

The solution (6a) was poured into 500 c.c. 
of water which resulted in the separation of a yellow 
flocculent mass (9). This was removed by filtration 
and found to be soluble in all the ordinary organic 
solvents and in alkaline solutions, but no crystal¬ 
line substances were obtained from it. In order to 
remove the sulphuric acid from the solution (6a) 
after the precipitate (9) had been removed calcium 



























19 


carbonate was added until no further precipitate form 
ed. This calcium precipitate (10) was dried and 
heated in a tube, which caused © few drops of a color 
ed liquid to distil over* The liquid was found to 
be water* The object of heating the substance (10) 
was to discover if any volatile substances, such as 
ketones, could be produced from these calcium salts, 
as is often the case* It underwent no change in 
appearance upon heating beyond a slight charring. 

The neutral filtrate (7a) from which substance (10) 
had been removed was then concentrated on a hot plate 
causing the formation of an orange colored precipi¬ 
tate (11) which redissolved when the solution was 
cooled. The solution (7a) was therefore filtered 
while hot until all the substance which became in¬ 
soluble upon heating had been removed. It was then 
washed and dried, but upon drying it underwent a 
change even upon mere exposure to the atmosphere. 
After a day’s exposure It became insoluble In every¬ 
thing but concentrated sulphuric acid and to a cer¬ 
tain degree In concentrated hydrochloric acid. 




20 


The filtrate from which substance (11) had 
been removed was then allowed to evaporate spontan¬ 
eously yielding a substance similar to (11) in color 
and in the fact that it also became insoluble within 
a few days. 

In a second nitric acid treatment sulphuric 
acid was avoided,, for it was plain that any addition 
of calcium or barium would result in the formation 
of substances which did not crystallize readily and 
rapidly became insoluble in all but one or two sol¬ 
vents. In this case the red nitric acid solution 
(9a) was removed by decantation after a period of 
10 hrs. digestion, leaving a dark red resin-like 
mass (12). Upon diluting the solution (9a) with 
water a yellow flocculent precipitate (13) appeared 
which formed a bright red resin-like mass when warm¬ 
ed. It was found to be soluble in all the ordinary 
organic solvents and in alkaline solutions but it 
would not crystallize from any of these nor volati¬ 
lize with steam. 

The solution (9a) after the removal of 




21 


(13) was then allowed to evaporate spontaneously yield¬ 
ing a residue (14) very similar to substance (13), 

The precipitate (13) formed by diluting the solution 
(9a) and the residue (12) were then digested with more 
nitric acid until all became soluble in hot water. 

About 7 gms. of this hot wafer soluble material (14) 
were obtained. When dissolved in water it still 
showed an acid reaction and in order to remove this 
nitric acid the watery solution was repeatedly evapor¬ 
ated to dryness on the water bath until no more fumes 
of nitric acid were perceptible or the vapors no long¬ 
er affected starch iodide paper. 

One half of the residue (14) was dissolved in 
ammonium hydroxide and the solution allowed to con¬ 
centrate, It yielded no crystalline substance but 
a dark red gummy mass (15) which when heated in a dis¬ 
tillation flask resulted in the deposition of ammon¬ 
ium nitrate crystals in the condensing tube. At 
200 degrees C* the contents of the flask took fire* 
preventing further heating. Upon cooling the flask 
the fire was extinguished* while at the same time the 
charred residue solidified into a non-crystalline 















. 






















. 


* 

■ 


22 


mass (16). This mass (16) was extracted with water 
which left as a residue colorless crystals that proved 
to be chiefly ammonium nitrate. This would indicate 
that the nitro group had again been split off or that 
some nitric acid had been held mechanically by the mass 
which only allowed it to escape upon heating to tempera¬ 
tures higher than that of boiling water. 

The bulk of the solid mass (16) was insol¬ 
uble in everything but hot concentrated sulphuric acid 
and upon digesting it in this acid in a flask fitted 
with a reflux condenser on a sand bath, small color¬ 
less crystals appeared in the neck of the flask. The 
amount obtained however was too small for any investi¬ 
gation. Further attempts to isolate crystalline sub¬ 
stances from the substance (16) failed. 

A small portion of residue (14) was then 
digested with copper oxide and water on a water bath 
until all the solution became green in color and all 
of substance (14) had gone into solution. This sol¬ 
ution upon spontaneous evaporation yielded, bright 
green needle-shaped crystals (17). These were wash¬ 
ed with alcohol in which they were slightly soluble. 












. 













. .. ... . 

■ 

' 





23 


and when dried and ignited on platinum foil, burnt 
readily hut left a residue of copper oxide and some 
other substance. When in solution no trace of the 
nitrate ion was found. In order to obtain more of 
these crystals the remainder of residue (14) was 
treated in a similar manner. The dark green solution 
(10a) formed was allowed to evaporate spontaneously 
yielding at the end of one month about .3 gms. of 
colorless crystals. These crystals appeared similar 
to those of (17) except that they did not ignite 
readily on a platinum foil. When exposed to the 
atmosphere for several months they acquired a faint 
greenish hue* After drying to constant weight a 
combustion analysis was made but only a trace of 
carbon and hydrogen was found. The residue was 
chiefly aluminium which had been present as an im¬ 
purity in the copper oxide used to form the copper 
compounds. The solution (10a) produced no more of 
th® crystalline substance (17), but a few dark green 
irregular crystals, after which it solidified into 
a green non-crystalline mass. 




24 


All attempts to obtain more of substance 
(17) were for some unknown reason unsuccessful, A 
few grams of serai-crystalline substances, containing 
copper were obtained but these when redissolved in 
water hydrolized and then remained as a non-crystal- 
line mass. 

In one of the attempts mentioned above the 
bituminous sands as such were digested with concen¬ 
trated nitric acid in a flask fitted with a reflux 
condenser. By digesting the sands directly the task 
of first separating the sand and the bitumen was avoid¬ 
ed, After a digestion of 5 hrs. the nitric acid sol¬ 
ution (11a) which had become red in color was removed 
by decantation and diluted with water. Diluting the 
solution caused the separation of a yellow flocculent 
mass which appeared to be similar to substances ob¬ 
tained before when nitrating the bitumen itself and 
was therefore added to the residue in the flask. The 
diluted solution (11a) was then allowed to concentrate 
resulting in the separation of a crystalline mass mix¬ 
ed with a red resinous amorphous substance. The red 
substance (18) was removed by digesting with alcohol 




































. 







' 

_ 















25 


in which it dissolved readily, leaving a mass of 
colorless crystals (19). A further digestion of the 
residual bituminous sands produced more of substances 
(18 8c 19), about 3 gms. of the latter being collected. 

The substance (19) upon ignition lost 33 $ 
by weight, leaving a colorless residue which was dif¬ 
ficultly soluble in concentrated hydrochloric acid. 

The residue was composed of aluminium, a small amount 
of iron and a trace of a third substance which acted 
very much like aluminium in some respects. 

Two combustion analyses were made on the 
substance (19) but the results failed to agree with¬ 
in 3 %. The average gave the percentage of carbon 
as 3.86 and hydrogen 8.35. In both cases combustion 
was incomplete as a considerable loss took place after 
heating the residue left in the combustion boat. 

The remainder of the substance (19) about 
2 gms. was then dissolved in water and the solution 
neutralized with ammonium hydroxide. A floeeulent 
precipitate of Al and Fe was obtained and removed by 
filtration. The filtrate was then allowed to evapor¬ 
ate spontaneously yielding a few colorless crystals 


■ 


, ; ■ • 


■ 






. 

- 




26 

which still contained a small amount of inorganic 
matter, no further tests were made owing to the small 
amount of material• 

The alcohol soluble material (18) was col¬ 
lected and redissolved in alcohol. Upon slow evapor¬ 
ation peculiar,,symmetrical # semi-solid particles 
appeared. These were separated from the red viscous 
mother liquor by filtrating with a suction pump and 
sparingly washed with ether. Attempts to obtain the 
substance in a more definite crystalline form failed. 

t Separation of the Bitumen from the Sand by Distillation. 

The object of subjecting the bituminous sands 
to distillation was two fold. In the first place it 
was hoped that distillation might serve as a method of 
separating the bitumen and the sand. Secondly, since 
the distillation would necessarily have to be carried 
on at red heat, and consequently much cracking taking 
place, it appeared possible that benzene or other com¬ 
mercially valuable products might be formed and separ¬ 
ated in this way. 








. 

'•a 

. 

» 








27 


The distillation was accomplished by placing 
the bituminous sands in an iron pipe 1-| inches in 
diameter and 2 feet in length. One end of this pipe 
was closed and to the other eni was fitted a % inch 
iron pipe 3i feet long which served as a condenser. 

By heating the loaded pipe in a combustion furnace for 
one-half hour at red heat, 12 to 13 % of bitumen dis¬ 
tilled over as a thick greenish black oil, and much gas 

» 

mixed with a persistent yellow fog was also formed. 

150 gms. of the bituminous sands yielded approximate¬ 
ly 4 litres of gas at room temperatures. An exact 
measurement could not readily be made on account of 
the gases containing hydrogen sulphide which would 
dissolve in the water displaced in the gas holder 
by the gases collected. In addition to hydrogen sul¬ 
phide the gas contained carbon dioxide. It burnt 
with a bluish flame. 

The distillate (lb) upon standing became 
less mobile and when a thin layer had been exposed to 
the air for several weeks it closely resembled the 
original bitumen extracted with carbon bisulphide. 




28 


It was then subjected to fractional dis* 
filiation, the object being the seme as the former 
distillation, viz. to concentrate as much as possible 
any benzene derivatives in the various fractions. 
Cracking accompanied the distillation and as the 
quantities which pass over at the different temper¬ 
atures depend in such instances, as is well known, 
upon the manner of heating and size of flask, it 
seemed unnecessary to measure the various fractions. 
Below are given the temperatures at which sudden 


rises 

took 

place and the 

appearance of the distillates 

1 

(a) 

60 to 

125 degrees. 

Pale yellow liquid 

2 

(a) 

125 " 

180 

TT 

TT TT TT 

3 

(a) 

180 " 

200 

W 

Light red liquid 

4 

(a) 

200 " 

245 

»J 

Lark " " 

5 

(a) 

245 " 

300 

tf 

Black liquid 


Reactio n of the Bitumen with Concentrated Sulphuric 
and Ritric Acids. 

The distillate (lb) when brought into con¬ 
tact with sulphuric acid apparently underwent poly¬ 
merization for the resulting product, after the removal 
of the acid with water, resembled the original bitu- 






. 





























































29 


men. In order to test for benzene the distillate 
(lb) was heated on a sand bath with concentrated sul¬ 
phuric acid and then treated with water. This pro¬ 
duced a charred mass similar to (6). The water ex¬ 
tract contained only a mere trace of organic matter. 
Concentrated nitric acid reacted very energetically 
with distillate (lb) changing it into a red gummy 
mass, which upon further treatment on the water bath 
became soluble in the acid. Even at room temper¬ 
atures the nitric acid became red in color and when 
allowed to evaporate spontaneously yielded colorless 
crystals (20). 

To obtain a larger quantity of these cry¬ 
stals 100 c.c. of the distillate (lb) were treated 
with 50 c.c. of concentrated nitric acid (s.g. f 1.42) 
at room temperatures. After standing for one hour 
a vigorous reaction took place, brown fumes were 
evolved, much heat generated and the acid became 
red in color. The nitric acid solution (12a) was 
removed from the insoluble mass by filtration through 
glass wool. The filtrate was diluted with 10 vol¬ 
umes of water. This caused a yellow flocculent 






. 

* 
















* 






30 


substance (21) to separate out, which was removed by 
filtration# The filtrate was allowed to evaporate 
spontaneously yielding colorless crystals similar to 
(20). They were readily soluble in alcohol and 
water but not so soluble in ether# They contained 
water of crystallization, melted first at 100 degrees 
C* resolidified and then remelted at 185, showing 
signs of decomposition and sublimation before the 
latter temperature was reached. T^ese properties 
suggested oxalic acid. 

The residue of the first treatment with 
nitric acid was di gested with more nitric acid on a 
water bath for 5 days. All the residue dissolved in 
the acid at the end of this time. A portion of 
the red nitric acid solution was removed daily, dil¬ 
uted, filtered and allowed to evaporate spontaneously, 
in every case a red amorphous mass insoluble in 
water and colorless crystals resembling substance 
(20) were produced. The total amount of the cry¬ 
stalline substance (melting point about 180) col¬ 
lected amounted to 25 grams. It was purified by 
reorystallizing six times from water. 5 grams of 





* 

- 




I 



the purified substance were dried to constant weight 
over concentrated sulphuric acid and lost 28,84 % 
in weight. The melting point of the anhydrous sub¬ 
stance was 188 degrees C. A combustion analysis 

i 

gave the following results,- 

1* *1985 grs substance, ,0424 grs H 2 O & *1930 CO 2 

11. .1970 " " .0444 " " " .1922 " 




Carbon 


Calculated for 

Oxalic acid Found 


I II 


26.67 26.54 26.60 


Hydrogen 2.22 2.37 2.50 

- 

Molecular weight 

(Boiling pt. method) 89. 91. 


A portion of the nitric acid solution (12a) 
was then digested with more concentrated acid until 
the red color disappeared. This solution uponh 
spontaneous evaporation yielded colorless crystals 
of oxalic aoid and a small amount of a yellow floo- 
oulent substance. This showed that the whole dis¬ 
tillate (lb) could be oxidized to oxalic acid. In 
the hope of separating products before this final 











32 


stage of oxidation had been reached, the remainder of 
solution (12a) was diluted with water to minimize 
the action of the nitric acid and evaporated on a 
water bath. By prolonged evaporation and repeated 
additions of water all the nitric acid was removed, 
leaving behind a soft red sticky mss (22 ) which 
dissolved in the ordinary organic solvents and in 
alkaline solutions, but refused to crystallize from 
any of these. It was slightly soluble in water 
and when digested on the water bath with water and 
copper oxide in suspension, formed a green solution 
from which green ©rystals separated upon standing. 

The whole of the material (22) was then 
treated in this way, copper oxide being added until 
the excess remained undissolved. The excess of 
copper oxide was removed by filtration. Upon 
agitating the copper oxide with water it was noticed 
that after the black copper oxide had settled, a 
light green, fine-grained material remained suspended. 
This fine-grained material was removed by decantation 
and purified by digestion with water in which It was 
very insoluble. An analysis proved it to be copper 



33 


oxalate. 

This filtrate (13a) from the copper oxide 
solution was allowed to stand for thirty days. At 
the end of that time a mass of green crystals (23) 
appeared which were separated hy decantation and 
washed with alcohol. The substance (23) contained 
water of crystallization* but upon attempting to re¬ 
move it by heating to 104 degrees 0. it blackened; 
and drying it to constant weight over concentrated 
sulphuric acid apparently fai led to remove all the 
water of crystallization* resulting in a loss of 
18 $ in weight. An analysis of the substance before 
drying gave 37.8 % copper sulphate. The remainder 

| 

was water and organic matter. Upon redissolving 
15 grs. in water a flocculent substance separated 
out which was removed by filtration* all attempts to 
crystallize it failed. Sulphuretted hydrogen was 
led into the solution until all the copper had been 
precipitated. The black precipitate was removed* 
washed with water* dried and extracted with acetone. 
The acetone extract became bright red in color and 
upon slow evaporation left between 3-4 grs. of a 



















. 


. 

' 



34 


red tarry substance. All efforts made to obtain 
this in the crystalline state were unsuccessful. 

The filtrate (14a) from which the copper 
sulphide had been removed was heated on a water bath 
until it began to darken in color, and barium car¬ 
bonate added to remove the sulphuric acid. The pre¬ 
cipitate of barium sulphate c ontained no trace of 
organic natter. The neutral filtrate upon further 
concentration yielded an amorphous substance which 
contained barium, but all attempts to c rystallize 
it failed. 

The mother liquor (15a) from which the 
copper crystals were obtained yielded no further 
crystals not even after standing five weeks. As 
had been stated the green crystals (S3) contained 
the sulphate radical, which went to show that the 
sulphur in the bitumen had been oxidized by the 
nitric acid. Its presence in the substance (23) 
would also indicate that either the snlphur radical 
formed part of a complete molecule or that certain 
organic substances would only crystallize from sol¬ 
ution (15a) in the presence of copper sulphate with 









: : ' . 






' 




■ 












35 


which mixed salts were formed. This was borne out 
by the fact that upon the addition of 2 c.c. concen¬ 
trated sulphuric acid crystals appeared. These were 
removed and upon analysis proved to be copper sulphate 
with but 10 $ organic matter containing 3 $ carbon. 

A second addition of sulphuric acid to the mother 
liquor (15a) produced a third crop of crystals which 
contained but .4 % carbon. Attempts to isolate cry¬ 
stalline organic substances from the successive cop¬ 
per compounds failed. The work along this line has 
been discontinued for the present. 

The original distillate (lb) obtained dir¬ 
ectly from the sands was distilled with steam. 20 c.c 
of a red oil which floated on the condensed water was 
collected from 500 c.c. of the distillate. This oil 
(2b) reacted violently with concentrated nitric acid* 
forming an insoluble red resinous substance and ox¬ 
alic acid. It was very impure and contained liquids 
with boiling points between 85 and 255 degrees C. 
hardened into an asphalt-like substance. The amounts 
collected were too small for further tests. 

The condensed water from the above steam 


, 



. 



- 





•• 



















56 

distillation contained a substance which formed a 
colorless precipitate with phenolphthalein. Only 
a trace of this was obtained by extracting the sol¬ 
ution with ether. 

Action of Dilute Uitric Acid on the Distillate s. 

As has already been stated concentrated 
nitric acid reacted violently with the distillates 
even at room temperature. To lessen the action, 

1 vol. of the acid (s.g., 1.42) was diluted with 
5 vols. of water, and 10 c.c. of this acid solution 
was added t© 20 c.c. of the fraction (Id). Ho 

reaction took place at the ordinary temperature but 

' 

the oil dissolved in the acid upon heating on the 
water bath for 8 hrs. The solution (16a) thus 
formed was extracted with ether. Both the aqueous 
solution and ethereal extract yielded only oxalic 
acid. 

Fraction Ho. (2d) behaved similarly. 
Fractions Bos. 3 d, 4 d, & 5 d, refused to 
dissolve completely in the dilute acids after 6 days 













' 
























-■ - * ■ 






37 


heating on a water hath. A red semi-solid sub¬ 
stance (24) remained which dissolved in concentrated 
nitric acid, in alkaline solutions, and all the 
ordinary organic solvents. ho crystalline sub¬ 
stances were obtained from this substance. 10-15 
grms. when subjected to steam distillation yielded 
1.5 c.c. of a yellow liquid, with an odor suggest¬ 
ive of turpentine. It decomposed when redistilled. 
The solution from which the semi-solid substance 
(24) had been removed gave more oxalic acid. 

Instead of allowing other acid solutions 
of fractions ho,Id and ho.2d, similar to solution 
(16a) to evaporate spontaneously, sulphuretted 
hydrogen was added to destroy the nitric acid. 

The removal of the acid caused the separation of 
an amorphous yellow compound intermixed with sulphur. 
This precipitate was removed by filtration, but no 
pure substance could be separated from it. The 
filtrate left oxalic acid upon evaporation. The 
results of the above experiments showed that no 
easily purified liquids could be obtained by the 



. 








. 


, 












. 












■ 




38 


distillation process and, since no crystalline sub¬ 
stance other than oxalic acid was isolated, the 
investigation along these lines was suspended. 

Fraction Solutions. 

The bituminous sand was extracted with 
90 % alcohol in a soxhlet extractor for three days. 
At the end of this time the alcohol soluble sub¬ 
stance was removed. The solvent was driven off 
from the sand in the extraction thimble by heating 
to a temperature of from 80 to 90 degrees G. in a 
drying oven. The material was then extracted with 
acetone 9 then with ether and finally with carbon 
bisulphide. 

The alcohol soluble portion was soluble 
in all the other solvents. The acetone portion 
was soluble in ether and carbon bisulphide, the 
latter as already stated dissolved the entire bit¬ 
umen. 




39 


Solubility 

of the Bitumen 

in Various Solvents. 

Solvent 

Percentage 

Soluble 

Percentage Soluble 
as indicated above 

A. Alcohol 

33 

33 

B. Acetone 

70 

37 

C. Ether 

86.9 

16.9 

D. Carbon 
bisulphide 

100* 

13.1 


Different portions when subjected to this 
treatment varied somewhat in the amounts soluble in 
the alcohol and acetone,and the results given are 
the average of a number of determinations. The 
variation was largely due to the fact that certain 
volatile hydro-carbons not soluble in the alcohol or 
acetone were drive^/off by heating in the drying oven* 
The alcohol and acetone solutions were red, 
the ethereal brown and the carbon bisulphide a jet 
black* The residues in the case of the alcohol and 
acetone solutions after the removal of the solvents 
were soft, almost resin-like substances in general 
appearance. The ether residue became quite hard 






































• 














' ■ 






40 


and "brittle, that of the carbon bisulphide was a 
jet black, hard, and broke with a conohoidal fract¬ 
ure. 

After the solvents had been removed by 
gentle heating the residues were analysed. The 
carbon and hydrogen results varied somewhat and the 
results given are the mean of a number of determin- 
ations,- 


A. Alcohol B. Acetone G. Ether D. Carbon 
_______ _____ ____ Bisulphide 


Carbon 

80.00 

78.05 

71.70 

72.55 

Hydrogen 

10.43 

,9.75 

8.66 

7.00 

Hitrogen 

.26 

.62 

.62 

1.07 

Sulphur 



2.75 



An attempt was made to determine the approx¬ 
imate molecular weight of these extracts. The re¬ 
sults were of no value owing to the fact that as soon 
as heat was applied the substances in solution were 
partly precipitated, apparently due to polymerization# 
The substance (A) reacted energetically 
with concentrated nitric acid after standing in con- 



















\ 

























r. ; ? 



41 


tact with it for 30 min* at room temperature, and 
heating the mixture caused the whole to dissolve in 
the acid. The solution formed yielded oxalic acid 
upon spontaneous evaporation. Heating with the 
dilute nitric acid, mentioned before, gave similar 
results. Concentrated sulphuric acid changed it to 
an asphalt-like substance which when subjected to 
steam distillation underwent no apparent change nor 
yielded any volatile compounds. 

Distillation of (A) with steam gave no 

results. 

A mixture of 10 gms. of (A) with 10 gms. 
of powdered sodium hydroxide when fused gave about 
1 c.c. of a disagreeable smelling liquid. This 
was very impure and attempts to isolate pure sub¬ 
stances from it failed. A solution of (A) in 
carbon tetrachloride was shaken with a 5 % bromine 
carbon tetrachloride solution. A black precipitate 
was formed which was partially soluble in alcohol. 
The alcoholic solution upon spontaneous evaporation 
yielded a small lot of yellow crystals which con¬ 
tained bromine. 
















































' 












42 


A number of attempts was made to secure 
more of these crystals by the bromine treatment. 
Although the same amount of substance and reagents 
were used and precautions were taken to have the re¬ 
action take place under conditions similar to those 
of the first case none were obtained. The failure 
to isolate any of the constituents of the alcohol 
soluble mixture pointed to its being still too com¬ 
plex and the most obvious steps in the furtherance 
of the work would be to subdivide it to greater ex¬ 
tent if possible* by fractional solution. 

The remaining fractions B* G and D have 
not been investigated beyond the analytical results 
mentioned. It is the intention to carry out a 
series of tests on these fractions similar to those 
done on the alcohol soluble fraction,in an effort 
to isolate some pure substances^in order to gain 
further insight as to the chemical composition of the 
natural bitumens. 










. 












. 

♦ 















































43 


COHCLUSIOfiS • 

1. The work so far done points to the fact that 
the bitumen is a mixture of complex substances. 

2. No benzene derivatives were found and the 

indications are that none are present or if present, 
only in small amounts and of a complex nature. There 
were two facts which suggested the presence of the 
benzene nucleus.^ The alcohol and acetone soluble 
portions upon being dissolved in their respective 
solvents gave solutions which showed a certain amount 
of flourescence that gradually disappeared when the 
solutions were allowed to stand in sunlight. The 
160 265 degree distillate from the original carbon 

bisulphide extract possessed a similar property. 

This apparent fluorescence was probably due to the 
fact that both the solutions were not true solutions 
but colloidal,and it is a well known fact that cer¬ 
tain colloidal solutions especially emulsoids show 
a kind of fluorescence. 

1. Brooks, Benjamin, T. & Bacon, Raymond, F. 

The Fluorescence of Petroleum Distillates, 
Jour. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 

¥ol 6. So 8, 1914, p 623. 
















■ 

, 


, 






44 


It was found by the analysis of a water 
insoluble nitration product produced by the action 
of concentrated nitric acid on the bitumen that both 
nitrogen and oxygen had been added. The former In¬ 
creased 3.3 the latter 17.45 %. Assuming that 
benzene were present and the nitrogen and oxygen to 
have been added as nitro groups, 11.6 $ oxygen would 
have to be considered as due to oxidation. However, 
the addition of the nitro groups does not prove con¬ 
clusively the presence of benzene compounds ? for it 
is well established that nitric oxides can be in¬ 
troduced into saturated or unsaturated aliphatic 
compounds. 

3. The constituents of the bitumen appear to be 
chiefly olefines for the following reasons,- 

(a) The ease with which nitric acid produces 
oxalic acid from the bitumen or its various fractions. 
Oxalic acid is the final oxidation product in the 
treatment of many organic substances with concen¬ 
trated nitric acid. Especially is this true of those 
compounds that have hydroxyl groups attached to 








. 


















' 




















45 


adjoining carbon atoms such as the sugars* The an¬ 
alytical results showed that the nitric acid acted 
chiefly as an oxidizing agent. In such cases one 
of the linkages of the doubly linked carbon atoms is, 
as is well known, broken and two hydroxyl groups are 
added. Further oxidation breaks the chain at this 
point, often with the elimination of carbon dioxide. 

The above mentioned ease in the production of oxalic 

' 

acid seems to indicate that there are a whole series 
of unsaturated linkages. 

(b) On the addition of bromine there was a 
vigorous reaction with a slight evolution of hydrogen 
bromide. Unfortunately the black color and other 
properties of the bitumen makes it extremely dif¬ 
ficult to accurately determine the amount of the 
bromine absorbed, but that a considerable addition 

of bromine had taken place, with little substitu¬ 
tion is another indication of a large amount of un¬ 
saturation. 

(c) As already stated the behaviour of the 
bitumen and its various fractions with concentrated 
sulphuric acid showed that very few if any saturated 



46 


hydrocarbons were present. This is being further 
tested by determining the solubility of the bitumen 
in liquid sulphur dioxide. 

4. Considering the analytical results given on 
page 40, and neglecting for the present oxygen, 
nitrogen, and sulphur the simplest formulae of the 
different solution fractions can be expressed as 
follows,- 

A. 

B • ^9^13 

C. 

D. Q9H10 

It is thus seen that with an increasing 
hydrogen content the solubility increases. 

6. In the effort to isolate pure compounds 
many difficulties were encountered. It has already 
been mentioned that the distillation process yielded 
no pure compounds, and if it had* such compounds 
would have given little indication as to the structure 
of the bitumen constituents, since cracking accompan¬ 
ied the distillation even before a temperature of 
100 degrees C. had been reached. The sulphuric acid 










■ 
























' 








■ 
















■ 




. 




47 


treatment was unsuccessful owing to the polymeri¬ 
zation it always produced, the resulting substances 
being such that only hot concentrated sulphuric acid 
would dissolve them* 

Digestion with nitric acid yielded either 
oxalic acid or a red resinous mass which possessed 
acid properties. The latter could be separated by 
first forming the barium f calcium, lead or copper 
salts and then subjecting these to the action of 
different solvents. However, the products of 

separation invariably changed upon exposure to light 

■ 

into difficultly soluble substances with which little 
could be done. This peculiar sensitiveness to light 
was apparent, even in products that had been treated 

with concentrated nitric acid at boiling temperature 

. 

for three and four days. This indicates that the 
acids formed by partially oxidizing the bitumen or 
its alcohol fraction are still unsaturated, and as 
even saturated polyhydroxy acids are often difficult 
to separate it is not surprising that the acids under 
investigation are not easily obtained in a pure state. 




48 


It is possible that a further subdivision 


of the original bitumen by fractional solution may 
yield mixtures from which pure oxidation products 
may be separated either by fractional crystallization, 
or by converting the acids formed into salts. Their 
instability towards light is however likely to im¬ 
pose a barrier in this direction* A more promising 
way appears to be to obtain some derivatives which 
will yield volatile compounds with acetyl-chloride 
whose boiling points differ sufficiently to allow 
of separation by distillation or derivatives that 
will react with phenylhydrozine or such substances 
which possess strong crystallizing tendencies. 


A beginning has been made in this direction 


but that work forms the subject of another investi¬ 
gation. 


In conclusion it behooves me to express my 


sincere gratitude for the help and suggestions given 
by Dr. Lehmann under whose supervision the work has 

* ; , ■ i 

been done. 



CHEMISTRY DEPARTMENT 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. 





49 









































50 


























l3. ^ jp - ' .-A CL. 































52 



























53 


























54 


BIB LIOGRAPHY 


Zalozieki, H. and Zolinski, C. 

Origin of Bitumens. Orig. Com. 8th. Intr. Congr. 
Appl. Chem. 10, p 335-41 

Fritsch, V# 

Some Bew Product from Montan Bitumen, Archiv. 
Chem. Mikros, 1913. 

Garrett, F. C % 

" Petrolene- Acetone Soluble- Asphaltene- Chloro¬ 
form Soluble. An Examination of Some Bitum¬ 
inous Material. Jour. Soc. Chem. Ind.1912. 

Richardson, Clifford. 

The Modern Asphalt Pavement, 1908. 

Brooks, Benjamin, T. & Bacon, Raymond, F. 

The Fluorescence of Petroleum Distillates, 

Jour. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 

Vol. 6, Bo 8, 1914, p 623. 

Engler, C. 

Chemische Zeitung, 36, 65 - 6, 82 - 4. 

Ipatav, V., Breyer, C. L. & Coste, Eugene. 

The Origin of Petroleum. Chem. Abst. Vol 6. 

Bo 5, 1912. 

Miolesco, C. 

Chemical Technical Investigation Matitza 
Asphalt. Chemische Zeitung, 1915. II, p 504. 

Rosinger, A. 

The Sentitiveness to Light of Asphalt. 

Chemische Zeitung, 1915, 36, p 243♦ 

Marek, J. 

Determination of Paraffin in Bative Asphalt 
and Petroleum Asphalt. Z. Anal. Chem. 

52 p 553 - 6. 









- 








• ■ 

. 







55 


Kantorowiez. H. 

Petroleum and Ozocerite, Chemische Zeitung. 

37, 1396 - 8. 

Rittmann, W. F. 

Utilization of Aromatic Hydrocarbons Derived 
from Cracked Petroleum. Jour, Ind. Eng, Chem, 
Ho 12 , Vol 7, 1915. 

Pailler, E. C, 

The Differentiation of Natural and Oil Asphalts, 
Chem. Abst•, Vol 6, Ho 4, 1914. 

Richardson, Clifford, 

Characteristics and Differentiation of Native 
Bitumens and their Residuals. Jour, Ind. Eng. 
Chem., Vol 5, Ho 6, 1913. 

Reeve, Chas, S. & Lewis, Richard, H. 

The Effects of Exposure on S@me Fluid Bitumens. 
Jour. Ind. Eng. Chem., Vol 9, Ho 8, 1913. 

Richards on, C1ifford. 

Gilsonite and Grahamite. The Result of the 
Metamorphism of Petroleum Under a Particular 
Environment. Jour. Ind. Eng. Chem. Vol 8, 

Ho 6, 1916. 

Mabery, Chas, P. 

The Relation in Composition of the Different 
Forms of Natural Bitumens. Jour. Amer. Chem. 
Soc., Vol XXXIX, HO 9, 1917. 

Moore, Robt, J & Egloff, Gustav. 

Pats and Patty Acids from Petroleum. Met. and 
Chem. Eng., Vol XVIII, Ho 6, 1918. 

Egloff, Gustav. 

Benzene, Toluene, and Xylene from Petroleum. 

Met. & Chem, Eng., fol XVI, Ho 9, 1917. 

King, Andrew, H. 

Synthetic Rubber. Met. & Chem. Eng., Vol XVI, 

Ho 9, 1917. 


















56 


Danby, A. 

Natural Rock Asphalts and Bitumen. 1913* 

Ells, S. C. 

Preliminary Report on the Bituminous Sands 
Of Northern Alberta. Department of Mines. 
1914. 

Wohler, 

Mellitic Acid, Ann 37, p 263 (1841). 

Schwarz. 

Mellitic Acid. Ann 66, p 47 (1848) . 
Lippmann, V. 

Mellitic Acid. Ber. 27 # p 3408 (1894). 

Brooks, Benjamin, T» & Bacon, Raymond, E., & 
Padgett, Ered, W, & Humphrey, Irvin, W, 

The Preparation of Gasoline and Kerosin© from 
Heavier Hydrocarbons. Jour. Ind. Eng. Chem., 
Vol VII. No 3, 1915. 

Abraham, Herbert 

The Classification of Bituminous and Resinous 
Substances. Jour. Ind. Eng. Ghem.,Yol V f 
No l f 1913. 

Reeve, Chas, S. 8b lewis, Richard, R. 

Application of the Dimethyl Sulphate Test 
for Determining Small Amounts of Petroleum 
or Asphalt Products in Tars. Jour. Ind. Eng. 
Chem., Vol 5, No 4, 1913. 




V 











B29737 





