
University of Alberta Librai 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


SHAKESPEARE»S USE OP MUSIC AS 


A DRAMATIC DEVICE 


LAMBERTSON, Chester Lee 
































0,X MBEB 







\ 







... 1 ' /: 
:-xa:u • 






i-i 












SHAKESPEARE*3 USE OP MUSIC 
AS A DRAMATIC DEVICE 

BY 

CHESTER LEE LAMBERTSOK, B.A. 
DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE DEGREE OP MASTER OF ARTS 


UNDER THE DIRECTION OP MR. P. M. SALTER 


APRIL, 1941 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/shakespearesuseoOOIamb 



UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 
have read, and recommend to the Committee on 
Graduate Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled 
"Shakespeare *s Use of Music As A Dramatic Device", 
submitted by Chester Lee Lambertson, B.A., in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the de¬ 
gree of Master of Arts, 


Professor 

Professor 

Professor 


Professor 









TABLE OP CONTENTS 


Page 

Introduction. i 

Chapter 1. 

The Songs .. 1 

Chapter 2. 

The Ballads .. 80 

Chapter 3, 

The Military Stage Directions• 106 

Chapter 4, 

Instrumental Music .. 140 

Chapter 5, 

The Dance .. 193 

Chapter 6. 

Shakespeare * s Knov/ledge of iviusic.... 210 

Chapter 7. 

Conclusion............................... 252 

Bihliography... 260 


























i. 

i 

INTRODUCTION 

During Elizabeth’s long reign not all men could read, j 
but unfortunate was he who could neither sing nor play a 
musical instrument. Music was held in universal esteem. 
Shakespeare excluded, the literary roster can be matched 
with names from musical history - such men as Morley, 
Weelkes, Byrd, Bull, Gibbons, Ravenscroft, Tye, Tallis, 
Dowland, Forde. It was the era of England’s greatest mad- > 

rigal activity"', a time of great church music*''"-'. Purcell, ‘i 

-- 

" E, H. Fello'wes, English Madrigal Composers , says in his j| 
preface, ”At the close of the sixteenth century a school 
of composers flourished in this country who held first ; 
place in European music,” ji 

E. Dickinson, The Study of the History of Music , Ch. X, |j 

the Shakespeare of English music, came only a few genera- 
tions later, ii 

But music consisted of more than chamber music for 
the upper levels of society. A humbler sort of music 
- catches, roundelays, ballads, dance tunes, - was an in¬ 
tegral part of the life pattern of the middle and lower 
classes. It was this music with which Shal^espeare was 
most familiar. 

Music did not suddenly make its appearance in England. 
Chappell'- traces the history of popular music to very ^ 

Popular Music of Olden Times , Vol. 1, 
























'1 




( I 


r 




wwm 


■? 



r f- 


.; j 






f V 


;•■ 






^ -.A.: ■■ ’ . :. ' ' ' ■• ■ ' '• ‘ .' '*- 





.•.' ••• Cix-.rc. 


. ■»«<.,Ill,(S 


4 






ii. 

early times. Both Chappell and Dr. E. J. Naylor'-*, as well 
Shakespeare and Husic . 

as most works dealing with Elizabethan music, present a 
great body of evidence from lV!orley*s Blaine and Easle 
Introduction ^o Musieke , 1598, and from the pamphleteers 
and dramatists of the time to demonstrate the prominence 
of music in sixteenth and seventeenth century life. In¬ 
teresting as such material is, it has no place in this 
study. It must be sufficient to observe that a beggar, 
as well as a King, could "sing his part". Taverns were 
the regular haunts of miusicians. Barber-shops provided 
instruments upon which waiting customers could amuse 
themselves. Each trade had its own songs and these were 
often three - part canons or catches of no mean difficulty. 
Music was a part of the education of both ladies and 
gentlemen, the recreation of monarchs, scholars, clergy¬ 
men, So widespread was the interest in music, and so 
general its practice, that "no subject, perhaps not even 
excepting religion, so much occupied men^s minds",'''* 

Chappell, Op. cit ,, Vol. 1, p. 59, 

Shakespeare was intensely interested in his fellow 
countrymen. No matter if nis scene is laid in Rome, 
Sicilia, or Denmark, his characters are English in temper- 






























‘ f' 



1,r 






■ ' , 








iii. 








ament, behavior and interests* Since all Renaissance 
Englishmen were predominately interested in music,it is 
only natural that Shakespeare’s plays should abundantly 
reflect that interest* 

The purpose of this study is to examine as dramatic 
devices the songs, ballads, military stage directions, 
instrumental music, and dances in Shakespeare’s plays. 

Much has been written on the general subject of Elizabeth¬ 
an music. Little has been done to show that Shakespeare 
developed music into an aid to drama, and became skilled 
in using it to stim-ulate the emotions and imagination of 
his audiences, I shall demonstrate that ballad tags and 
titles, the general and particular terms used in connec¬ 
tion with the dance, m^usical terms and the characteristics 
of musical instruments have been used for their connota¬ 
tions as im^ages. Some interesting examples of military 
signals will be examined and appraised from the stand¬ 
point of dramatic function. I hope to show that Shake¬ 
speare became more and more adept in his use of songs 
until songs became an inseparable part of his drama; that 
the later plays show a development of the musical ideas 
with which he experimented in the earlier plays. 






CHAPTER I 


The Songs 


/ 


/ 


In using songs in his plays, Shakespeare was only 
following his predecessors. England was a veritable 
”nest of singing birds" in Elizabethan times. Since 
drama is always a mirror of the times, the popular ap¬ 
petite for music was reflected on the stage, and vocal 
and instrumental music was part of the regular performance. 
Shakespeare differed from most of the other dramatists of 
his time in the use to which he put occasional songs , or 
songs to fit certain occasions. The songs introduced into 
the production of the men’s companies were often excessive 
in number, and irrelevant, or not in keeping with the 
scene. Marston’s Antonio and Me11Ida , for example, pro¬ 
vides, by stage directions, for five songs in each of the 
two parts.'X- Since not even the first lines of these ten 

•5C- A, C. Bradley, Oxford Lectixres on Poetry , p. 369. 

songs are given, we must suppose that it mattered little 
which songs filled the required gaps. The songs were mere 
entertainment, a break in the performance, having no con¬ 
nection with the situations. 

Shakespeare shov/ed restraint in his Inclusion of 














I 




( 


< 


c 





,r 


. %• 


o 


.iXtl 












2. 


music in plays. The most musical of his plays are still 
dramas with a musical backgroimd. His songs developed 
not only into integral parts of the background, but into 
points of dramatic significance, and finally into expres¬ 
sions which revealed character. 

LOVE»S LABOUR>S LOST 

III, i, of Love ^s Labour ^s Lost abruptly opens with 
a song: 


Enter Braggart and Boy 
Song 

Braggart: Warble childe, make passionate my sense of 

hearing. 

Boy: Goncolinal . 

Braggart: Sweet air I Go, tenderness of years, etc. 
There is a great deal of confusion as to the meaning 
of the word ”Concolinal"-x-, but there is general agreement 


The Variorum Shakespeare , ”Love*s Labour^s Lost” 
(Purne s s), pp7 82 »8o. 


among critics that here a song has been lost. From the 
tenor of the succeeding scenes one may conjecture that it 
was a love song. Introduced for the sole purpose of open¬ 
ing the scene. 

Edward J. Dent'^‘ supports the idea that ”Goncolinal” 


'^-^E. J. Dent, ”Shakespeare and Music”, A Gompanion to 
Shakespeare Studies , p, 154; also vide, Furness,-^ 
Ib id., p, 83, 


is the name of an Irish song. He points out that in 























'V'-- 






3 


1 Henry IV , written six years later, the boy v\rho played 
Glendower^s daughter had to sing a song in Welsh. The 
bwo songs, he suggests, may have been sung by the same boy 
actor. A more likely explanation is that ’’Concolinal" is 
inerely a clearing of the throat by singing nonsense syl« 
tables. We still poke fun at singers for their initial 
warbles of ”ml, ml, mi”, ”la, la, la” etc. No song having 
alther words or title of ”Concolinal” has ever been dis¬ 
covered. Dentes suggestion that the boy who sings the song 
hovQ ^ s Labour ^ s Lost also sings the Welsh Song (3^ Hen IV . 
[II, ii, 247) is absurd. Six years is a long time in the 
Life-time of a boy*s voice, A soprano at the age of ten 
will have the ’’mannish crack” at the age of sixteen. 

Earlier in Love ^s Labour ^s Lost , I, ii, 126, a song 
seems imminent, but the entrance of Dull, Costard, and 
Jaquenetta prevents it: 

Arm. Sing, boy, my spirit grows heavy in love. 

Moth, And that’s great marvel, loving a light wench. 

Arm. I say, sing. 

Moth. Forbear till this company be past. 

Enter Dull , Costard , and Jaquenetta . 

This scene prepares us for the song at the beginning 
of Act III, A similar case of a song being called for, but 
not sung, occurs in Antony and Cleopatra . II, v, 1-3. 

. The Song which ends the play (L L L., V, ii, 904 ff), 
may have been sung by the whole oast. It constitutes the 


























4. 

grand finale of the play. At least, it appears from the 
Polio edition that the whole cast is on the stage for the 
song. E. W. Naylor" makes no mention of the song. E. J. 

Shakespeare and Music . 

Dent''** says the ” songs at the end of Love ^ s Labour ^ s Lo£t, 
Op. cit., p. 154. 

not specifically given to any of the characters, are likely 
to have been sung by Moth and another boy'*. 

The purpose of this song was no doubt to give the play 
a bright cheerful ending. It is very close in spirit to a 
jig* 

THE COMEDY OP ERRORS 

There are no songs in the Comedy of Errors , and scant 
reference to music of any kind,'"' The absence of songs 

-X- rp^QpQ apQ only fo\ir references: £ E,, III, ii, 47. 

Ill, 11, 66. 

IV, iii, 23-24. 

V, i , 301-303. 

can be partially explained by the fact that The Comedy of 
Errors is a farce based on an extremely tenuous plot. A 
song would take too long to perform and would slow the 
action of the story. 






















w** 








5 . 


THE TWO GENTLEMEN OP VERONA 

In the Two Gentlemen of Verona we find many references 
to music, and a serenade to Silvia (1^ G ^^9 39 ff) . 

The song is essential to the story, for Julia must see 
that Proteus is \mtrue to her. Without the song, part of 
the play would have to be rev/ritten. There is .ample pre¬ 
paration for the song in III, ii; in IV, ii, the serenade 
is introduced very smoothly. The song itself could be 
addressed to any heroine in any play if the name “Silvia” 
were changed. It consists of extravagant praise, Mr, 
Noble"''' has suggested that since there have been many 

'''' “Shakespeare *s Songs and Stage”, Shakespeare and the 
Theatre, p, 120. 

literary styles in vogue since Shakespeare»s time, we may 
be giving this song an incorrect interpretation; it may 
be a parody for the amusement of the groundlings. 

The serenade would be sung most suitably by a man. 
However, Lucetta has not a great deal to do in the play, 
and may have performed the serenade, If a male voice 
was used for Silvia»s serenade, an adult singer must have 
been hired for the occasion, the first instance of this 
in Shakespeare *s plays. There is no evidence to show 
that such was the case. 


















6 




MIDSW.MER NIGHT DEEM 

The song and chorus of the fairies. Midsummer - Night^s 
Dream , II, ii, 9-25, is a contribution to the atmosphere 
of the play, but also, in a small way, it furthers the 
action. It is necessary that Titania 'fall asleep so that 
Oberon may anoint her eyes. It is the fairy song that 
lulls her to slumber. 

When Bottom is left alone with his newly-found ass's 
head, he sings to keep up his courage.(M HD., Ill, i. 


125 ff): 






/ 


/ 


-.-_»^and I will sing, that they shall hear 
I am not afraid. 

(sings) 

”The ousel-cock, so black of hue, etc. 

This song gives Bottom an opportunity for comment on un¬ 
faithful wives, a hackneyed theme, but one certain to 
produce laughter. It is Bottom's voice that causes 
Titania to waken and say, ”What angel wakes me from my 
flowery bed?” (M. III, i, 132). Since the whole 

joke of the Bottom-Titania episode is based on contrast, 

I suggest that Bottom's voice is not that of an angel, 
but one more befitting his new face. His taste in music 
we know to be rough. 

Bottom; I have a reasonable good ear in music; let's 
have the tongs and the bones. 

(M N D., IV, i, 32). 











I," 


¥ 


w 






r 




:■"' ■ 'W 




.;r c.f 


C’Q q 


• f 




a,-.' 


|■^t:: ?iWh .'■ '.: ' • .= ; ■ • ' :'" 

/ ••.■;■ .' ,Xc./.• 

, -.q ■"'' ' 

fy ■ ;, -:Vvr?C'^-' 

'i; -.i-ti ■!;; : ^.r 


mW: 


■:v . 


: ; n: ::Kj:i 


'lo :i^yir' 

- c ,. ■':l ' ■ 

o 




■ 't~s "i 

n rr; w.. ■-- 


^■ ,v iV . •: 













;■ '; . •• J.V ■!:'• o .:' ; 

I ! ..-O.: ,:.; *■ V 




^ . "} 







7 . 


Apparently one song at the end of Mldsixmmer Night * s 
Dream has been lost,*''* Johnson suggests that one song^ 

The Variorum Shakespeare , "Midsummer Night*s Dream", 
note by Johnson, p. 239, 


should be led by Oberon, and should follow the lines: 

Every elf and fairy sprite. 

Hop as light as bird from brier; 

And this ditty, after me. 

Sing, and dance it trippingly. 

Then Titania leads a song and dance, following the lines: 

Hand in hand, with fairy grace 
Will we sing and bless this place. 

S. 2.-# ^06) . 

I suggest that only one song is missing, » that the lines: 

First rehearse your song by rote. 

To each word a warbling note. 

(M. 1. 2*^ ^04). 

are additional instructions to the fairies who are about 
to dance. One song and dance is sufficient; two songs 
and dances coming so close together are superfluous; 
there is no reason for prolonging the drama to this ex- 
tent. A single song, accompanied with a dance brings 
the play to a colorful close, and supplies an ending 
quite in keeping with the atmosphere of the rest of the 
play. 





















8 . 


ROMEO AND JULIET . 1] 

li 

The rough songs in Romeo and Jullet which are sung j 
hy Mercutio are appropriate to his character* The song, , 

ij 

An old hare hoar (R 144-149)^has very little j 

I'i 

meaning outside of its bawdy quibble. It is suggested to ij 

li 

Mercutio by the words, ^supper’*, "bawd”, and ”lenten-pie” • ;,i 

f; 

Y^Tiether it is part of an old ballad or merely an extempore i 
rhyme has not yet been determined'"', but the reasons for 

i! 

' ,, ^ 

The Variorum Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet , see note | 

to 11, iv, 120, p. 133. 


its inclusion at this jimcture of the play, are clear. | 

The song shows a certain mad-cap, nimble-tongued quality j 

in Mercutio that has been evident before this; it is sly 
comment on the character of the Nurse by a man of the 
world; and it is a sop thrown to the crude humour of || 

the crowd. | 

Mercutio leaves Romeo and the Nurse singing "lady, 

i 

lady, lady" (R J-, II, iv, 151), a scrap from the Ballad | 

I 

. I 

of C onstant Susanna , quoted in Twelft h Night (II, iii, | 

[ 

85). Mockery lies in bringing the Nurse into relation f 

f- 

t 

with the "woman fair and virtuous. Lady, lady" of the j 

t 

ballad'" . This quip makes an excellent exit line for [| 

Percy»s Religues of Ancient English Poetry (Bickers | 

and Son, 1876), p, 210* | 








































9 . 


Meroutio. It has brightness, hijuiour, and is true to his 
character. 

THE MERCHANT OP VENICE 

In The Merchant of Venice , III, ii, 62 ff., the stage 
direction Music , whilst Bassanio comments on the caskets 
to himself refers to the song which follows it. There is 
no mention of any of the characters in this play who sing, 
but both Jessica and Launcelot Cobbo have very little to 
do. They may have been the singers for this song. If 
one singer only sang the song up to the "burthen”'^ sung 


Grove’s Dictionary of Music and Musicians ; Old songs 
and ballads frequently had a chorus or motto to each 
verse, which in the language of the time was called a 
Burthen or Bob . One of the most ancient and most popu« 
lar was "Hey troly loly lo", quoted in Piers Plowman , 
1362, and other early songs. In Izaak Walton’s Compleat 
Angler is the burden, "O the sweet contentment the coun¬ 
try man did find." In the ballad of "Sir Eglamour", 
very popular in the 17th century, the burden is "Pa la, 
lanky down dilly", 

It is probable the burdens were accompanied by 
motion or dancing. 


by the entire group of minor attendants, we must consider 
the words "reply, reply" as a hypothetical command only, 
which detracts, I think, from the song. The command may 
have been a real one. If so another voice might continue 
the song as far as the burden. I would suggest the fol¬ 
lowing arrangement as most artistic: 










































10 . 


First Voice. 


Second Voice. 


First Voice. 
Second Voice. 
All (Burden). 


Tell me where is fancy bred. 

Or in the heart or in the head? 

How begot, how nourished? 

Reply, reply. 

It is engendered in the eyes. 

With gazing fed; and fancy dies 
In the cradle where it lies. 

Let us all ring fancy’s knell: 

I’ll begin it, - Ding, dong, bell. 
Ding, dong bell. 


Richmond Noble* says that the final ”11’^ sound of 


Op . c it ., p. 125, 

*"Mr. Fox Strangeways says the song is a hint to Bassanio, 
given by emphasis laid on ’ed’ - and suggestion of ’L’ 
in bell and knell, Dover Wilson says ’The sound of the 
tolling bell and the reference to Fancy dying in the 
cradle where it lies, both hint at the lead which 
ribbed the ’cerecloth* in obscure graves.*” 


"Ding, dong. Bell" was prolonged, in order to give 
Bassanio a hint to choose the lead casket. This may be 
so, for undoubtedly Portia wished him to make the correct 
choice. This device would more likely bring to mind the 
sound of a bell. If we are determined to read a hint into 
the song we may remember that bred, head , nour ished , rhyme 
with lead. But if Bassanio does receive assistance from 
the song, his soliloquy gives us no intimation of it, 
and the purpose of the soliloquy is to reveal, not to 
disguise, the mind of the actor. Most of Shakespeare’s 
soliloquies are informative. Some, however, are decorative. 










3 






T 






.. ■ ■ ? 


■£t 

‘C 



! 


. 0-7 


X- 


y-C:- ’. 


V* 



■ "i 

. tri 









y. v' Jv.""' L" • ' 






W 








11 




Hamlet»s soliloquies, for example, give us information . 

but also suggest that he is a philosopher. It must also 
be remembered that Bassanio’s soliloquy is overheard* He 
must not betray his Lady if she has broken the rules of the ' 
game. But Shakespeare generally makes certain that the 
audience understands each point of his plays* I feel that 
Shakespeare would have certainly let it be known if I 

Bassanio had been slyly given a cue by the song. As it is, 
Bassanio seems to be completely In the dark until he has 
actually made the choice* He is then overcome by joy at 
his success* 

The song*s purpose is to allow for Bassanio*s medita¬ 
tion, and at the same time, to insert an appropriate and 
colorful love song at a dramatic spot in the story. The 
song creates a dramatic pause'“ in events, for the audience 

A somewhat similar dramatic pause, with a song as a brake I 
to action* is the ”Y/illow, ?ifillow” song of Othello, IV, | 
iii, 40-57* | 

feels that Bassanio, as last of the three suitors, must 
be the successful candidate. 

1 HENRY IV I 


The Welsh song in 1 Henry IV , is thoroughly linked with; 
the context. The conversation leading up to and following j 
the song throws much light on the relations of Hotspur and i 
















So 











.'u: ■ I* 


f (■ 


• ■■: ■ ' ■■. ,’ ' 
■■ i ■ '■ \- 



.\:r. . ro;: ■:. T .[ ■: ‘-: 

- H, 


■{.y- •'. -qz 


■ ii '■• ■ j';rr . ■,■ ■. , ' ;.!,: • 

. ■ ' / ■ ■ ■■ • ^ 

■ .'J •;■.-• A'■"••, ’'■'.-■■■■ g-xr iK;3 



j. --—. . . . - . 

i':* 'io '^r" • 


. ) 


■'■■ca: rm 










y 


12 . 


his wife, on the character of Mortimer, and on the temper¬ 
ament of Glendower. Mortimer, married to Glendower^s 
Welsh daughter, is unable to understand what she says to 
him (1 Hen IV., 111, i, 213). Glendower bids him lie 
down on the rushes, for she will sing "the song that 
pleaseth you" (1 Hen IV., 111, 1, 216). Glendower says: 

And those musicians that shall play to you 

Hang in the air a thousand leagues from 

hence. 

And straight they shall be here; sit, and 

attend. 

Hotspur. Gome, Kate, thou art perfect in lying 
down; come, qi ick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy 
lap. 

Lady P, Go, ye giddy goose. (Music plays'"*) 


See chapter on Incidental Music. 


Hotspur. Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh; 
And »tis no marvel he is so humouroiis. 

By^r lady, he is a good m_usician. 

Lady P. Then you should be nothing but m.usical, for 
you are altogether governed by humours. Lie still, ye 
thief, and heaj:* the lady sing in Welsh. 

Hotspur. I had rather hear Lady, m^y brach, howl in 

Irish. 

Lady P, Vsfouldst thou have thy head broken? 

Hotspur. No. 

Lady P, Then be still. 

Hotspur. Neither; ^tis a woman’s fault. 

Lady P. Now, God help thee I 
Hotspur. To the Welsh lady’s bed. 

Lady P. Wliat’s that? 

Hotspur, Peace I she sings, 

(here the Lady sings a Welsh song.) 

Hotspur. Come, Kate, I’ll have your song too. 

Lady P. Not mine, in good sooth. 

Hotspur. Not yours, in good sooth? Heart I you 
swear like a comfit - m.aker’s wife. ’Not you, in good 














13 


sooth*, and *as true as I live!*, and *as God shall mend 
me*.*, and *as sure as dayl*. And givest such sarconet 
for thy oaths 

As if thou never walk*st further than Fins¬ 
bury . 

Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art, 

A good mouth-filling oath; and leave *in 

sooth* 

And such protests of pepper gingerbread 
To velvet guards and Sunday citizens* 

Come, sing. 

Lady P. I will not sing. 

Hotspur. *Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be 
red-breast teacher. An the indentures be drawn, 1*11 
away within these two hours; and so, come in when ye will. 

Exit. 

(IH^^., iii, i, 223 ff) . 

This scene shows the two attitudes of women taking 
leave of their husbands - wild grief in Mortimer*s wife; 
an outv/ard indifference and playfulness covering an affec¬ 
tion no less sincere, and a sorrow no less deep, on the 
part of Lady Hotspur. Glendower, the mystic, calls up 
the music of the spirits; im.petuous Hotspur, whose teeth 
are set on edge by music and poetry. Jests with his wife, 
scolds her for her lady-like oaths, and abruptly takes 
leave. This episode is closely knit together with the 
Welsh song as the central thread. 

The proximity of the song in point of time to Moth*s 
song (L L L., III, i, 2), has already been noted and dis¬ 
cussed, The v/ords of the Welsh song do not exist, yet 
the song is fitted into the action, and is important 
mainly in showing the softer side of Hotspur*s nature. 










14 . 


Falstaff shows traces of the Puritan inheritance 

derived from Sir John Oldcastle. On Falstaff*s return 

from Gadshill, he blusters: 

I would I were a weaver; I could sing psalms or 
anything, (1 Hen IV., iv, 133). 

Descending himself to the Chief Justice he says: 

For my voice, I have lost it halloing and singing 
of anthems, (2 Hen IV., 1, ii, 213), 

which is perhaps a jibe at the vocal zeal of Puritans. 

The only time Falstaff sings, however, is in a thoroughly 

secular connection. 

Falstaff (singing) "When Arthur first in court"- 

Empty the Jordan (exit first ^ 
drawer,) (singing) 

"and was a worthy king-^:- 

(2 Hen IV., II, iv, 33). 


This is an imperfect citation of the first two lines of 
the ballad, "Sir Lancelot du Lake". Percy, 0£. cit ., 
p. 205 

VCien Arthur first in court began 
And was approved King, etc. 

A stanza of this ballad is repeated by the fool in 
King Lear , I, iv, 192, 195. 


The singing of the ballad tag gives an air of nonchalance 
to a crude remark. 

2 Henry IV 

In 2 Henry IV., V, iii, 18 ff, we have snatches of 
five songs sung by Silence. They are interpolated by 
conversation between Falstaff, Shallow, and Davy, and 























15 


show the progressive drunkenness of Silence. The scene 
is one of careless joy, full of rustic wit and humour. 

It is a preparation for the announcement hy Pistol that 
Prince Hal is now King Henry V. The songs of Silence 
echo the words of his fellow drinkers. For example: 

Shallow. Be merry. Master Bardolph, and, my little 

soldier there, be merry. 

Silence, (sings). Be merry, be merry, my wife has 

all etc. 

(2 Hen IV., V, ili, 33, ff). 

Davy. Your worship (to Bardolph) 1*11 be with 

you straight «- 
k cup of wine, sir? 

Silence. A cup of wine that brisk and fine. 

(2 I^nlV., V, iii, 46 ff). 

Palstaff. Why, now you have done me right. (To 

Silence, who has just drunk a 
bumper.) 

Silence, (sings). Do me right 

And dub me knight 
SamingoI 

(2 HenfV., V, iii, 76 ff) . 

These rough songs of the ballad type exactly fit 
the spirit of a bucolic revel. The ?/hole scene of 
drunken mirth is a lively preparation for their greater 
joy when Pistol arrives with his good news. 

THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR 

Wlien Mistress Quickly has shut Rugby into the closet 
of Doctor Gaius, she sings a ballad snatch in order to 
cover up her embarrassment. 

And Down, dowa, a-down-a etc. (M W W., I, iv, 44). 













16 


"Etc'''*”, here means that the aotor taking the part was to 


An "etc.” is also fomd in many of the songs. 

go on singing the ballad -until Gains was close enough to 
begin his lines. The doctor would scarcely comment on 
the few words that are indicated in the text. After ask¬ 
ing what :^ickly is singing, he says he does not like 
"dese toys” (ballads) (M WW,, I, iv, 45-46). Mistress 
Quickly, frightened at what he might do when he discovers 
Rugby, sings in order to appear unconcerned. 

The song which Evans sings (M W W., Ill, i, 11 ff), 
calls to mind that of Bottom (M N D., Ill, i, 128 ff), 
for he also' sings to keep up his courage. 

Pless my soul, how full of chollors I am, and 
trempling of mind. I shall be glad if he have 
deceived m.e. How melancholies I ami 

(M. 5 ![•> 11-13) • 

His song, which is interrupted by himself, and by the en¬ 
trance of Simple, is a clever picture of a terrified man. 
Humour rather than skill in singing was needed by the 
actor playing the part. The tender lyricism of the song, 
the display of fright in the voice, the mispronunciation 
of words - all give ample scope for comedy. 

To shallow rivers, to whose falls 
Melodious birds sing madrigals; 

And a thousand fragrant posies - 
(To Shallow) 

Mercy on me I I have a great disposition to cry. (sings) 










17 . 


Melodious birds sing madrigals - 
When as I sat in Pabylon - 
And a thousand vagram posies. 

(To Shallow - etc,^''*) 


This "etc.”, as the one in M W W., I, ii, 44, indicates 
a permission to continue until Simple breaks in with 
his lines. 


(Enter Simple) 

Simple. Yonder he is coming, this way. Sir Hugh. 

Evans. He*s welcome, 

(sings) 

To shallow rivers, to whose falls. 

Heaven prosper the right I What weapons is he? 

(M WW., Ill, i, 17«30), 

Singing will no longer sustain his courage. He is a-quake 
v/ith terror. 

The pinching song sung by the fairies (M W W., V, v, 
97-106) is part of the masque in which Falstaff is pimished 
for his temerity in p\irsuing two ladies at once, V/hile 
the fairies sing their "scornful rhyme" they dance about, 
and pinch the fat knight. The song and dance concludes 
the masque. It has also provided the necessary hurly- 
burly which permits Fenton and Anne to steal away and be 
married. The song (energetically sung by children), the 
dance, the torch-lit scene, draws the play to a colorful 
conclusion. 










18 


MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING 

Balthasar’s song in Much Ado About Nothing is skill- 
Itilly woven into the plot. Benedick has hidden himself 
when Don Pedro, Leonato, and Claudio enter. The stag© 
directions indicate Music ( within ), ^ A N,, II, iii, 

37). This music is evidently Balthasar singing to the 
accompanim_ent of instruments. 

Enter Balthasar with Music 

Pedro. Come, Balthasar, we’ll hear that song again. 

Balth. 0, Good my lord, tax not so bad a voice 
To slander music any more than once. 

(M A A N., II, iii, 44 ff). 

It is interesting to compare the art with which this song 
is introduced with the abruptness of the appearance of 
Moth’s song (L L L., Ill, i » 2). Much emphasis is placed 
on the fact that Balthasar’s voice is not good, Balthasar 
himself insists on this point, 

Balth. 0, Good my lord, tax not so bad a voice. 

(M A A N., II, iii, 40). 

Note this before my notes; 

Balth. There’s not a note of mine that’s worth the 

noting. 

(M A A N., II, iii, 56»57). 

Pedro. By my troth, a good song* 

Balth. And an ill singer, my lord. 

Pedro. Ha, no, no, faith. Thou sings’t well enough 

for a shift. 

Bene, (aside). An he had been a dog that should 
have howl’d thus, they would have hang’d him; and pray 
God his bad voice bode no mischief, I had as lieve have 
heard the night raven, come what plague could have come 
after it. iii, -77-85) . 

This is the first instance of a serious vocal attempt 



















19. 

of an adult actor in Shakespeare’s plays. Before this, 
the soloists have either been boys''^ or have been intro¬ 
duced solely as singers*''"''*. This, of course, excludes such 

Moth (L L L.) . ^ 

s:-*;:- The serena^^es of Two Gentlemen of Verona ; the solo or 
soloists of the song in the MercEant of Venice ; the 
Welsh song (1 Hen IV.) . 

efforts as Evan’s song in The Merry Wives of Windsor , and 
Balthasar’s song in Much Ado About Nothing , where the more 
raucous the voice the more comic the effect. The insist¬ 
ence that Balthasar’s voice is of bad quality suggests 
several possibilities. The song may have been a burlesque, 
or a mixture of the burlesque and the serious; the song 
has more meaning to the audience than to the actors, to 
whom it is merely ”a good song”. In it we find dramatic 
irony, a new element in Shakespeare’s songs. Moreover, 
if an actor had a poor voice, the logical thing to do is 
to burlesque the song. This treatment will yield results 
- will cause laughter. A serious song performed with a 
faulty voice will produce either indifference or irritation, 
Balthasar’s song. Sigh no more , ladies , may have been 
a serious experiment, an attempt to cast off the tradition 
of having only boys in singing roles. The use of boys 
meant that only boy or women characters could have songs. 

























20 . 

whereas in certain situations'''* it would he more fitting 

''' For example in the serenade to Silvia, Two G-entlemen of 
Verona, IV, ii, 38. 

to have a song by a man. In my opinion the two possibili¬ 
ties are not incompatible. ^ The song was probably sung in 
a mildly humorous fashion. If it had been sung in a comic 
manner, the point of the song - that "men were deceivers 
ever", might have been lost. It was also a way of intro¬ 
ducing a male singer to the audience. The criticism pre¬ 
ceding the song had the purpose of forestalling criticism. 

It was in itself humourous. Moreover, the song may not 
have been as bad as the actors represented it to be, for 
the song Pardon , Goddess of the Night (M A iii, 

12-21), could have been sung by Balthasar, and it is not 
accompanied by apologies. 

In the same play Benedick sings a snatch of an old 

song: 

The god of love 
That sits above. 

And knows me, and knows me. 

How pitiful I deserve 

( 

•Ji- The first lines of a song by Wm. Elderton, Vide Note 
M A A N., Arden Edition, p. 147. 

This is a representation of the melodic outburst of a 
lover who finds it hard to woo "in festival terms". In 

















I 




21 , 


such a musical age there was nothing extraordinary in 
bursting into song.*'‘’ 

Vide Falstaff*s ballad tag 1 V, iii, 18; 

Meroutio*s songs, R £•, II, Iv, 141-146; 151. 

The song. Pardon , goddess of the night (M A A N., V, 
iii, 12-21), is a solemn musical offering to the memory 
of Hero. It follows the epitaph Done to death by slander ¬ 
ous lies (M A A N., V, iii, 3 ff), and is meant to be an 
apology for his outrageous behavior. Solemnity, sincerity 
of grief, is the intended keynote of the song. It is 
dramatically necessary to show Claudio repentant so that 
he may be happily m^arried in the next and final scene. 

The song is performed not by Claudio, but by attendant 
musicians. 

Nov/, music (musicians) sound, and sing your solemn 
hymns. V, lii, 11). 

I have already suggested that the singer here may have 
been Balthasar, who, earlier in the play, sang Sigh no 
more , ladles (M A A N., II, iii, 64), No criticisms of 
the singer*s voice are made. The song has no direct con¬ 
nection with the story. It is merely mournful, suitable 
as the funereal offering found in a comedy. Such words 
and phrases as "slew”, "songs of woe", "tomb", "midnight". 


















0.f L : . • 





r 


22 


"moan'', ’’sigh and groan”, "groves,, yawn and yield your 
dead”, "death”, "Heavily, heavily” - give a sombre effect 
that mournful music would much intensify. This scene, r 
which centers on the song, is well contrasted with the 
gaiety of the final scene in which occurs the happy de- 
denouement, 

M YOU LIKE 

In ^ You Like It , we find adult singers handled 
more skillfully. There is an apology, before Amiens 
sings Under the Greenwood Tree ; 

My voice is ragged, I know I cannot please you, 

(A Y L I., II, V, 1-S). 

but less emphasis is placed upon it than upon the de¬ 
preciations that preface Balthasarsong (M A A N., II, 
iii, 46-85), Amiens offers no apology when he sings 
Blow , blo7/ , thou winter wind (A Y L II, vii, 174 ff) . 
Both of these songs are employed to describe the back¬ 
ground; both fit extremely well into the rustic mis-en- 
sc^ne. The melancolia and misanthropy of Jaqaes appear 
in the conversation following Under the Greenwood Tree : 

Jacques, I can suck melancholy out of a song as a 
weasel sucks eggs, (II, v, 12-13) 

I do not desire you to please me, I do 

desire you to sing, (II, v, 17-18) -- 

V\fell, then, if ever I thank any man, 1*11 
thank you. But that you call compliment 



























(■ 


? 


t 


if ' 








Vi 





23 . 


is like th* encounter of two dog-apes; 
and when a man thanks me heartily, methinks 
I have given him a penny, and he renders 
me the beggarly thanks, 

(II, V, 25-30). 

His sour reflections upon society are carried out in the 
verse which he sings: 

If it do come to pass 

That any man turn ass, etc. (II, v, 52 ff), 
Amien*s song. Blow , blow thou winter wind , perfectly 
fits the situation. It might almost be a reflection of 
the thoughts in the Duke *s mind - the “inhumanity of man 
to man” - and the asylum given by nature. In both Under 
the Greenwood Tree and Blow , blow , thou winter wind , we 
find a mixture of sad reflection and of jollity. Each 
has a poignant quality that has a certain emotional appeal. 
They are used not only for colour. Also, for the first 
time, Shakespeare has used songs to illustrate and reflect 
character. Both of these songs are of technical use. 

Under the Greenwood Tree gives a colorful opening to the 
scene, Yihlle Amiens sings Blow , blow , thou winter wind , 
the Duke is making himself acquainted with the status 
and troubles of Orlando. Perhaps they talk in dumb show. 
The song thus saves the audience from having to listen to 
the part of the story they already know. 

The song. What shall he have that killed the deer 










































(A Y L IV, ii, 11-19), has been included in the play 

for the purpose of indicating that two hours pass before 
Rosalind again sees Orlando. The theme is thoroughly in 
keeping v/lth the milieu . The rendition is indicated by 
Jacques, although this may be a slight apology for the 
singing , 

Jac. Sing it. »Tis no matter how it be in tune, so 
it makes noise enough.*"''* 

Elizabethans were very fond of loud music. Bacon, in 
his essay Of Masques and Triumphs , says "Let the songs 
be loud and cheerefull, and not chirpings and pulings. 
Let the musicke likewise, be Sharpe, and Loud and Well- 
placed". 

It may be that the Forester who takes the solo, doubles in 
the part of Amiens. The stage directions indicate that 
the bulk of the song is to be sung in chorus by the 
foresters. 

In V, iil, of ^ You Like It , Touchstone introduces 
two boys as the ”banish*d Duke’s pages”. The two pages 
are probably Rosalind and Celia. Rosalind has little 
time for changing cost-ume, but it would be sufficient to 
change into another jacket, and put on a different hat. 

To resume the garb of Rosalind, the actor has four lines 
of the next scene. The actor playing Celia has the whole 
of V, i to change, but must make a quick change at the 



















25 


end of V, ill. Actors are quite accustomed to making 
quick changes, and in this case only minor changes need 
to be made* 

It was a lover an his lass is introduced in the fol- 
loY/ing manner: 

Second page. We are for you, sit i» th^ middle. 

First page. Shall we clap into it roundly, without 
hawking or spitting or saying we are 
hoarse, which are the only prologues 
to a bad voice ^ 

Second page* I* faith, i^ faithI and both in a 
tune like two gypsies on a horse* 

(A I t 10-16) . 

The words of the First Page express in a rough 
fashion the idea that they have good voices. However, 
Touchstone, at the conclusion of the song, tells them 
plainly that they have done an ill job of it. 

Touch. Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no 
great matter in the ditty, yet the note was 
very untuneable. 

First page. You are deceiv’d sir. W'e kept time, we 
lost not our time. 

Touch. By my troth, yes I I count it but time lost 
to hear such a foolish song* God b’ wi’ 
you, and God mend your voices* 

(A Y L I,, V, iii, 35-42). 

I believe the song to have been well sung. The song 
is light-hearted and gay, rather than comic. Touchstone, 
in deriding the singing voices of the pages, may have been 
showing off his wisdom before Audrey, the simple country 
girl. 











26 . 


The phrase "both in a time, like two gypsies on a 
horse" - that is, one after the other in a tune, may be 
an indication that the song is a two-man catch or canon. 


Catch is, strictly speaking, a two voice canon. A 
»catch^ may be sung by two or more singers. It is 
so contrived that although each voice sings exactly 
the same notes, yet by coming in at stated periods 
of time, the result is harmony of as many parts as 
there are singers. Compositions of this sort are 
canons, becoming * catches* when the words in the dif¬ 
ferent voices *catch on®. A simple melody is begun 
by one voice and after a proper interval, the second 
voice begins or "catches", the two voices harmonising. 
A similar principle is involved with three and four 
voice catches. Well known catches still popular are 
"Three Blind Mice", "Ding Dong, Bell" etc. which are 
catches for three voices. 


There was a lover and his lass is in keeping with 
the love theme of the comedy. The function of the song 
is to supply a bri^t interlude between the scene where 
Rosalind promises to satisfy everyone on the next day, 
and the final scene. It was necessary here to imply the 
passage of time. Touchstone*s comments on the song re¬ 
veal the lordly male strutting before his lady. 

TWELFTH NIGHT 

Songs are very cleverly introduced in Twelfth Night . 
Act II, scene iii opens with a scene of revelry. A well- 
defined thread of thought sews the songs into the fabric 
of the scene. It is after midnight. Sir Toby says "To 

















e rr • 


. i \J -'.u . ■ .• 

' ■ ■ ,, , 

: . 1 , t (,'■' ■; 



, ^ ^ ■ V 4 i.. 


,*; V"-} 


•i . f 


: T. 


.■ ■ ■-.••; ^ ■ r ^ : -1 

mmm- 

r: r ^ .-• • .-•:>Tg’ .. ; '. Ko.- 


:i : >:i:.'\iv 

jiil 


1 '. '4il 

'v /<■ 

n- ■/.( fiii-.C.i.: 


• AT" 











go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes. Does 
not our life consist of four elements?” (T N., II, iii, 
8-10) "Faith, so they say”, replies Sir Andrew, ”But I 
think it rather consists of eating and drinking” (T N., 
IT, iii, 10-11). This suggests wine; wine suggests 
taverns; taverns suggest catches and songs; then the 
Clown sings 0 mistress mine , where are you roaming ? 
which is greatly praised by Sir Toby and Sir Andrew, 

Sir Toby then suggests they "rouse the night owl in a 
catch, that will draw three souls out of one weaver”♦ 
They sing a three-man catch. 

On the entrance of scolding Maria, Sir Toby sings 
several ballad tags » Three merry men be we”, - ” There 

In the chapter on ballads, I have tried to show that 
the chain of ideas is not broken here, 

dwelt a man in Babylon , lady , lady ”, - ”o* the twelfth 
day of December ”, Malvolio enters and demands quiet, 
saying that they are making a tavern of Olivia*s house. 
”ls there no respect of place, persons, nor time in you?” 

N,, II, iii, 98-9). Toby, by this time very drunk, 
says, ”we did keep time, sir, in our catches” N., II, 
iii, 100) , The steward says that Olivia has ordered 
them to be silent, ”lf not, and it would please you to 


























,o 


r i ‘ 







■ f rf-:'::,'C l:^/?"■ rrO 

" ■"'n ■'■ 

.. :--i-y. . 




_i 

f- .. . 


lUj 


'- —~ ■ 

j-.r-. .V. 


J. .V 







28 


take leave of her, she is very willing to hid you fare- 
vrell.” Toby, taking up the word farewell , then sings the 
first line of the song Farewell , dear heart , since I must 
needs be gone , This develops into a duet betv^reen Sir 
Toby and the Glov/n with interjections by Malvolio. 

There is in the piecing together of these ideas an 
excellent imitation of drunken logic. 

The two love songs are well chosen, for they repre¬ 
sent the sentimentality exhibited in one stage of drunken¬ 
ness, Sir Andrew and Sir Toby are greatly taken with the 
Clown*s song 0 Mistress mine where are you roaming ? 

Aud, 0 mellifluous voice, as I am a true knight. 

Tob. A contagious breath, 

Aud, Very sweet and contagious i^ faith. 

(T N., II, iii, 55-57,) 

The catch is not named (T , II, iii, 75). From 
the text we only know that it begins with "Hold thy peace” 
(T H., II, iii, 72-73), and that the word knave re-occurs 
in it. Such a catch was known, and the music is reproduced 
in the Variorum Shakespeare edition of Twelfth Hight , page 
118, From the catch we may see that the clown will be 
” constrained ” to call the knight a knave , which is unseemly. 
The clown expresses mock horror that he should do so. 

Hold thy peace, thou knave, knight? I shall be 
constrained in^t to call thee knave, knight. 

( T H., II, iii, 67,) 

























29. 

The duet Farewell , dear heart since 1 must needs be 
gone , was originally a song of indifference to lovers as 
long as more lovers can be had.'"'* The original poem is 

Percy, cit ,, “Corydon's Farewell to Phillis”, p. 210. 

compressed from the original for 0, n^, no 1 dare not , be¬ 
longs to the second verse. The meaning of separate lines 
is changed by action and comment. ”Nay, good sir Toby” 
is Maria's answer to some drunken demonstration of affec¬ 
tion as he sings “Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs 
be gone”. The clown's line “His eyes do show his days 
are almost done”, would appear to take on the meaning that 
Toby is either “almost gone” from drink or, satirically, 
for love. The clown speaks his answer to Toby's “But I 
will never die”, although ”Sir Toby, there you lie” fits 
into the rhyme-scheme of the song. The last four lines 
of the song 

Shall I bid him go? 

What an if you do? 

Shall I bid him go, and spare not? 

01 no, no, no, no, you dare not - 

refer to Malvolio, v/ho has been trying to silence the 
singers. Sir Toby evidently feels that Malvolio's in¬ 
junctions to silence cast a slur upon their voices. He 
answers the unspoken accusation with “out of tune, sir? 

Ye lie, etc.” (T N., II, iii, 122). He is approaching 
















I 








30 


the quarrelsome level of his cups. This song is a close 
approach to comic opera or opera Bouffe. 

Twelfth Night was revised seems almost sure 
when we consider the song. Come away death (T N., II, 
iv, 52-67). The Duke is a lover of music, as we may 
gather from the opening lines* Viola specifically states 
that she can sing. 

1*11 serve this Duke, 

Thou Shalt present me as an eunuch to him; 

---— --for I can sing. 

And speak to him in many sorts of music 
That will allow me very v/orth his service. 

(TN., I, ii, 55«59). 

As the play now stands, Viola does not sing. The song 

Come away , death , is sung by Feste, the clown, and it 

does not fit the context. The Duke says; 

0, fellow, come, the song we had last night 
Mark it, Cesario; it is old and plain. 

The spinsters and the knitters in the sun . 

And the free maids that weave their Sair with bones . 
Do use to chant it . It is silly sooth. 

And dallies with the innocence of love 
Like the old age. 

But the song is not sung by women. It is man*s song 
“ i ^ sl^fn by a fair cruel maid (T N., II, iv, 55), 
Neither does the song “daily with the innocence of love“. 
It is a sad song, the expression of one who dies for love, 
and as such is eminently more suitable to Viola than to 
Feste. She is in love, Feste is not. She has been hired 
to sing, Feste has not. 






























31 • 

Feste is the household clown of Olivia. Why is he 
present at the Duke»s palace? ^JVhy is he never before, and 
never afterwards, referred to as Feste? The name occurs 
only in this scene. The Duke refers to the song as "old 
and plain", yet it is an art-song. These facts point to 
a revision. It is plausible to infer that Shakespeare *s 
company, at the time of the play*s revival, no longer had 
the services of a boy-actor who could sing. That the boy^s 
voice had changed might be an explanation. Therefore, the 
play was revised so that the clown could sing a song in 
his place. That the song ill fits its context may be 
an indication that the original song was removed, and the 
present song put in its place. 

As Richmond Noble”''* remarks, "like take , oh take 
those lips away , its theme is directed to the situation 

^Vop. cit ., p. 130. 

of the person to whom it is sung, even although its pity 
is half mocking". It has an emotional quality which we 
feel even by reading the words, and of which Shakespeare 
is now thoroughly a master. 

The clown sings two songs in Act IV, scene ii, which 
are connected with the tormenting of Malvolio. The first 
indicates to Malvolio, who is bound, and confined in a 

















dark room, that the clown is near by. Feste, a moment 
before, had been impersonating Sir Topaz, the curate. 

Each line of the song is followed by a cry from Malvolio, 
who is becoming frantic* 

Clown (sings). Hey Robin, jolly Robin 

Tell me how thy lady does I 

Mai. FoolI 

Clown Alas, why is she so? 

Mai, Fool, I say! 

Clown She loves another, - who calls, ha? 

(T H., IV, ii, 78-85), 

The song is comic, not only because of Malvolio*s frenzy 
to attract attention, or because of the clown’s artless- 
ness in pretending he is unaware of the stev/ard. The 
song is a sh ort summary of the Malvolio - Olivia situa¬ 
tion. The audience would not be unaware of the irony in 
this. To Malvolio it is only a popular soig with no 
hidden meaning. 

The clown echoes the last words of Malvolio and 
sings a mocking song of adieu (T H., IV, ii, 130-141), 

The song is quite in character, for the clown has already 
been established as a Singer. The reference to "Old Vice", 
the "dagger of lath", and the devil is from the old 
morality plays""", and it is possible that the song indicates 

The Variorum Shakespeare, "Twelfth Night", note on 
p. 271,S, 3, 

Feste as the buffoon or "old Vice" v^ho torments the devil 


















33. 

with a wooden dagger. The main function of the song is 
to give a flippant ending to the scene, which ends with 
Malvolio still in torment. 

The final song in Twelfth Night may be classed as a 
jig. It was common to begin and end performances with 
songs of this type. Ram Alley , 1611, ends with the words: 
Strike up, music; let*s have an old song:'«* 

Ludowick Barrey, ”Ram Alley” (circa 1611), Dodsley^s 
Old English Plays , p. 380. 

Damon and Pythias ends with a "Last song”, the words 
of which are given.'” 

Richard Edwards, ”Damon and Pythias” (circa 1567), 
Dodsley>s Old English Plays , p, 104, 

New Custom , ends with ”The Second Song” 

Authorship unknown, ”New Custom” (1573), Dodsley^s Old 
English Plays , p. 52. 

”Wh£n I was and a little tiny boy ”, stands alone in the 
plays of Shakespeare as a jig to end the play. 

E. J. Dent remarks that jigs ressembled comic operas, 
for they were written in ballad metre and sung to popular 
tunes"”'. They were an elementary form of comic opera, but 

cit ., p. 160. 












































34 


attractive mainly to the lower classes who liked to hear 
a simple refrain many times repeated. They were able to 
understand the humour of jigs, and a good jig could save 
even a poor performance. Pesters song is a fitting finale 
to the play. It is appropriate that the clown should 
sing it, for it expresses in essence the spirit of the 
whole play. It covers the exit of the characters from 
the stage. 

This brings us to the end of the period of Shake¬ 
speare’s great comedies, according to Thorndike’s division 
of periods, 

TROILUS ARP GRESSIDA 

Troilus and Cressida ^ the first play of the second 
period contains but one song (T C,, III, i), The scene 
opens with off-stage music. The servant, when Pandarus 
questions him, says Paris has ordered it for Helen. 

Y^Tien these two lovers appear, Pandarus is full of flattery 
for them. His object is to cajole Paris into making ex¬ 
cuses for Troilus ”if the King call for him at supper”, 

(T C_., Ill, i, 84-5). To put Paris in the proper frame 
of mind he flatters Helen, repeatedly calling her his 
”sweet queen” (T III, i, 48; 67; 72; 77, etc). For 
the same purpose, he sings the song. Love , love , nothing 
but love , still more (T C^,, III, i, 125 ff) . The eroti- 


















• i. - 


c - • 





i v 






35 


cism of the song, together with the comments of Paris 
and Helen pave the way, to a certain extent, for the 
following scene between Troilus and Cressida, The song, 
along with the coyness of Pandarus in pretending to con¬ 
ceal where Troilus v/ill presently be (T C_., III, i, 
97-104), shows the vicarious enjoyment that Pandarus ex¬ 
tracts from any love affair. The whole scene mirrors 
Pandarus» mind, and the image is not nice. No melody 
has been found to fit the words. The song was accompanied 
by an instrument (T C., III, i, 104), probably a lute - 
which Pandarus himself played, 

JULIUS CA ESAR 

Act IV, scene iii of Julius Caesar is constructed so 
that it falls roughly into four parts. Lines 1-142 con¬ 
cern the quarrel and reconciliation of Brutus and Cassius; 
lines 143-162 shov/ the stoicism of Brutus when he hears 
of Portia’s death; in lines 163-274 we see the gentler 
side of Brutus* nature; from 275 to 308 w^e see Brutus 
bravely facing the ghost although he fears it; we see him 
take heart when it goes. The v/hole scene presents several 
contrasting facets of Brutus* character, 

Vvliat song Lucius actually sang to Bmitus is unknown, 
but it is the core of a beautiful scene which shows the 
more loveable qualities of Brutus. He insists that Varro 

















36 


and Claudius lie down in his tent, rather than stand. He 

is sympathetic to the tired boy, Lucius. He desires music 

before he retires, so Lucius plays and sings him a song. 

At its conclusion, the boy falls asleep. 

Brutus. This is a sleepy tune. 0 murderous slumber! 
Layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy. 

That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good 

night. 

I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee. 
If thou dost nod, thou breaks®t thy instru¬ 
ment; 

V 1*11 take it from thee; and, good night, 

good night. 

Let me see, let me see. Is not the leaf 

turn'd down 

Where I left reading? Here it is, I think. 

{J C., IV, iii, 267-274). 

In the midst of this tranquility the ghost enters. Brutus 

is terrified, yet speaks to it: 

Art thou some god, some angel or some devil. 

That maks't my blood cold and my hair 
to stare? 

(JC., IV, iii, 279,^80). 

The song of Lucius is an agent in creating the still¬ 
ness, the sleepiness of the atmosphere; in showing the 
gentleness of which Brutus is capable. This atm_osphere is 
a preparation for, and a contrast to the horror of the 
ghost's appearance. At the same time, it shows Brutus as 
a lover of music. 

HAl/iLET 


The songs in Hamlet fall into two groups; the songs 


of Ophelia, and those of the grave diggers. Both are very 








.5* 




i', 

' • c 





i ■.'' 




sn 


IX 

K. 








37 


important, 

Act IV, scene iii, comes quickly to the point. 
Ophelia is mad. 

She speaks much of her father; says she hears 
There»s tricks i* the world, and hems, and heats her 

heart; 

Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt. 
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing. 
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move 
The hearers to collection. 

(Ham., IV, V, 4-9). 

The"poison of deep grief" has affected her mind. Her 

songs express her madness. The first of these tells of 

the difficulty in knowing a true lover: 

How should I your true love know 
From, another one? 

By his cockle hat and staff 
And his sandal shoon, 

(Ham., IV, V, 24-26), 


The second two songs comment on death: 

He is dead and gone, lady. 

He is dead and gone; 

At his head a grass green turf. 

At his heels a stone, 

(Ham., IV, V, 29-32). 

White is his shroud as the mountain snow - 


Lorded all with svi^eet flower; 

Wliich bewept to the grave did not go. 

With true-love showers. 

(Ham., IV, V, 35-39). 


Two songs touch on sexual relationships and the falsity 
of man: 

Tomorrow is Saint Valentine^s day. 

All in the morning betim.e. 













38 


And I a maid at your window 
To be your valentine♦ 

Then up he rose and donn*d his clones 
And dupped the chamber door. 

Let in the maid, that out a maid 
Never departed more, 

(Ham,, IV, V, 48-55). 

By Gis and by Saint Charity, 

Alack, and fie for shame 1 

Your men virill do*t if they come to*t. 

By Cock, they are to blame, 

C^oth she, 'Before you tumbled me. 

You promised me to wed. 

He answers: 

'So would I a' done, by yonder sun 
An thou hadst not come to my bed, 

(Ham,, IV, V, 58-66), 

Her remaining songs perstiade Laertes to revenge more 

than could Ophelia if she were sane ( Ham ,, V, iii, 168-9) 

They concern death. 

They bore him barefac'd on the bier 
(Hey nony, nony, nony, hey nony,) 

And in his grave rained many a tear, 

( Ham ., IV, V, 164-168), 

And will he not come again? 

And will he not come again? 

No, no, he is dead; 

Go to thy deathbed; 

He will never come again. 

His beard was as white as snow. 

All flaxen was his poll 

He is gone, he is gone. 

And we cast away moan, 

God ha' mercy on his soul, 

(Ham,, IV, V, 190-199), 

We next hear of Ophelia's pitiful death: 











39 


--Her clothes spread wide 

And, mermaid-like, awhile they, bore her up. 

Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes. 

As one incapable of her ov/n distress. 

Or like a creature native and induced 
Unto that element; but long it could not be 
Till her garments, heavy with their drink 
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay 
To muddy death* 

(Ham.. IV, vii, 177 ff). 

Ophelia’s madness and, death cause Laertes to vow 
vengeance on Hamlet, Her songs and conversation show the 
straying of her wits. The sad incongruity of the lovely 
Ophelia singing lascivious ballads creates in the mind of 
the audience the feeling that Laertes is justified in his 
vow. 

That Ophelia sings bawdry in her madness does not 
mean that she was a wanton. That her father gives her 
advice in regard to conduct (I, iii, 90-136), means 
nothing. He gives advice freely, and has just given 
Laertes a fatherly talk. (I, iii, 54-90), Laertes has 
only just completed his brotherly warnings to Ophelia 
(I, iii, 52), Both Laertes and Polonius are aware of 
the dangers of a love affair between a prince and a com- 
m-oner. Hamlet berates Ophelia, but his worst accusation 
is that she follov/s the fashions of the day, 

God has given you one face and you make your¬ 
self another. You jig, you amble and you lisp; 
you niclaiame God’s creatures and you make your 
wantonness your ignorance. 

(Ham.^ Ill, i, 149-153). 





•'tr; ■"r^ '’ 


I i 


t 





:i> < 


i'. 





.'yys 

?>i 


■ i ' I. 


n ' 


') 




• t' I 



.4 

r 'iVdl'JB -'o 


: 


(■ 


1 



& .1 





40 , 


Slight as these criticisms are, Hamlet is either mad. or 
playing mad, at the time. There is no evidence, with the 
exception of two songs, that Ophelia is otherwise than 
pure. The age was less sensitive to crudities than our 
own. The ballads were popular - that is, every one sang 
them. Ophelia had been impaled on the horns of a dilemma. 
Within her raged a conflict betv/een love for Hamlet and 
obedience to her father. She lent herself to her father’s 
trickery and presently saw Hamlet mad, her father dead. 

Her own sanity crumples. The songs express the conflict 
between love and filial obedience. Their impurity derives 
from the suggestions of both her father and Laertes re¬ 
garding Hamlet, and from lewd suggestions of Hamlet him¬ 
self. Her songs, therefore, indicate her mental, rather 
than her moral state. 

The stanzas sung by the first grave-digger ( Ham ., V, 
i, 69-72; 79«82; 102; 105)^ are meant to reflect in spirit 
the macabre humour of the small talk which precedes them. 
Digging Ophelia’s grave, these men show themselves for 
what they are - rough clowns inured to their gruesome 
task by usage. The song shows their callous Indifference 
to death. Hamlet feels this when he says: 

Has this fellow no fellow-feeling in his 

business, that he sings at grave making? 


--and Horatio answers: 












41 , 


Custom hath made it in him a property of 

easiness. ( Ham ,, V, i, 73-6), 

When Shakespeare has established the business-like at¬ 
titude of the grave-diggers toward death, he shows us the 
feelings of Hamlet and Horatio as they talk over Yorick^s 
skull. The contrast in attitudes has been underlined by 
the grave-digger’s song. The words of the grave-digger’s 
song express thoughts most appropriate to the setting, the 
sweetness of love in youth, the coming of old age and 
death. Another verse lists the required tools of their 
own trade, Chappell gives the music which was originally 
used, , and a very doleful piece it is. The 

three stanzas are based on a poem attributed to Lord Vaux,**''" 

See note in Variorum Shakespeare, Hamlet, page 380, 381, 
382, ^ 

Shakespeare has selected certain lines, changing them 
slightly, in order to make the song a reflection of the 
clown’s character. The following reprint of the poem"''' 

Tottel’s Miscellany , ”The aged lover renounceth love” 
(Rollins* edition)^^ p. 165, 6. 

together with the clown’s song best shows the wholesale 
pruning which took place in order to make the three 
verses: 













42 


The aeced lover renounceth love 

The Grave-di.p:ger»s Son^r 

I lothe that I did loue. 

In youth, when I did love, did love 

In youth that I thought swete: 

stanza 1, line 1, 

Methought it was very swete 

As time requires for my behoue 

stanza 1, line 2, 

To contract, OhI the time, for, Ah 

Me thihkes they are not mete. 

my behove, stanza 1, line 5, 

OhI methought there was nothing meet, 

lHy lustes they do me leaue, 

stanza 1, line 4, 

My fancies all be fledde: 


And tract of time begin to -weaue. 


Gray heares vpon my hedde* 


For age with stelyng steppes. 

But age, with his aging steps. 

Hath clowed me with his cowche: 

Stanza 2, line 1, 
Hath clawed me in his clutch. 

And lusty life away she leapes. 

stanza 2, line 2, 

As there had bene none such. 

As if I had never been such. 

My muse dothe not delight 

stanza 2, line 4, 

as she did before; 


ly hand and pen are not in plight, 


ks they haue bene of yore. 


For reason me denies. 


Phis youthly idle rime; 


find day by day to me she eryes. 


‘jeaue of these toyes in time. 


The wrincles in my brow. 


The fourrowes in my face; 


oay lirapyng age will hedge him now. 


Inhere youth must geue him place® 













43 


The harbinger of death 
To me I see him ride: 

The cough, the colde, the graspyng breath. 

Dothe bid me to prouide* 

A pikeaxe and a spade, A pickeaxe, and a spade, a spade, 

stanza 3, line !• 

And eke a shrowdyng shete. For and a shrouding sheet; 

stanza 3, line 2* 

A house of claye for to be made. Oh, a pit of clay for to be made, 

stanza 3, line 5* 

For such a gest most mete* For such a guest is meet* 

stanza 3, line 4* 

Me thinks I heare the elarke. 

That knols the careful knell; 

And bids me leaue my wofull warke, 

Er nature me compell* 

My kepers knit the knot. 

That youth did laugh to scome: 

Of me that dene shalbe forgot. 

As I had not ben borne* 

Thus must I youthe geue vp, 

■Rhose badge I long did weare; 

To them I yield the wanton cup 
That better may it beare* 

Loe here the bared scull. 

By whose bold sign I know: 

That stouping age away shall pull, 

Wnich youthfull yeres did sowe* 



r 

- "■ 







¥ ^ 


a ♦r 


I 



'WM 1 ' 


: ' v : '•„ • ;■ 

■ .:• ■■ • . ' ' ? 

i 


» ’ • V: ; i. \ 

'''•'^^?:': U4 ■: 

- 5-V -' ’ 



r ., ■.' 'j ^?'- 









44 


For beauty and her band 
ThevSe croked cares both wrought: 

And shipped me into the lands. And both shipp’d me intil the land, 

stanza 2, line 3. 

From hence I first was brought. 

And ye that bide behind, 

Haue ye none other trust: 

As ye of cl aye were cost by kinde. 

So shall ye waste to dust. 

Tottel’s Miscellany was very well known to the 
educated men of Shakespeare’s day, mainly because it con¬ 
tained the works of Wyatt and Surrey. Since this Is so, 
the gentlemen of the audience would see the humour of this 
treatment of the poem, both in regard to the selection of 
lines, and the placing of the jumbled results in the mouth 
of an ignorant grave-digger. 

The ”oh”, and ”ah”, of the first stanza of the grave¬ 
digger’s song are really expletives or grunts of the digger 
as he wields his mattock. 

OTHELLO 

To discredit Gassio in the eyes of Othello is one of 
lago’s several designs. He therefore assails Gassio at 
his weakest point - his inability to hold his liquor well. 
The two songs which lago sings are very suitable to the 









45 . 


setting. The first song - 

And let me the canakin clink, clink 
And let me the canakin clink, 

A soldier*s a man, 

A life’s but a span, 

Viniy then let a soldier drink.''*' 

(0th., II, iii, 71 ff). 


Probably an old drinking song. Ftirness, "Othello", 
Variorum Shakespeare , note on page 130 says "The song 
itself does not appear to have been discovered". 


expresses the Garpe Diem theme which is common to soldiers. 
It is a melodic invitation to drink. Cassio considers 
that he has already had a "rouse", although his consump¬ 
tion is "not past a pint*' ( 0th ., II, iii, 67). He is 
nervously aware of his infirmity ( 0th ., II, iii, 34-35; 

40 ff), but lago’s song is calculated to justify him in 
drinking of more wine. 

From the time that the wins is called for, lago does 
most of the talking, and he sings two songs. We must 
suppose that Cassio drinks, for very shortly ( 0th ., II, 
iii, 89), Cassio is toasting his general. Evidently 
Montano answers his toast ( 0th ., II, iii, 59), while 
lago sings a ballad. 

King Stephen was a worthy peer. 

His breeches cost him but a crown. 

He held them sixpence all too dear. 

With that he called his tailor lown. 

He was a wight of high renown 
And thou but of low degree. 















.7 


S' '■ 




^ V' 

' 1 ■ ■,, ■ 

'' . 'i 



! : ■ .■ .. • ' '*.•' '' 

'■'■ ■; • ’ 


,1 LTv/v'’ 

I'i 

■ 

? 

■■>?'.'-:■ ■■ " a 




ol, 


Oit, i: 






' *r 




',-1 


^ Li 


• -vf 


Ic 





46 . 


*Tis pride that pulls the country dovm; 

Then take thine ould cloak about thee.*^* 

(0th.. II, iii, 91 ff). 

See chapter on Ballads. 

While lago sings, Gassio must have been drinking because 
his next words, “Why, this is a more exquisite tune than 
the other”, indicates an insobriety which increases line 
by line. The songs of lago, therefore, play a part in 
the downfall of Gassio. 

The song, ?/illow . Willow , which precedes the death 
scene of Desdemona, has ample preparation. Othello, 
several times, tells us that his wife is an accomplished 
musician: 

Sings, plays, and dances well. 

(0th.. Ill, iii, 186). 

An admirable musician: 0, she will sing the 
savageness out of a bear. 

(0th.. IV, i, 192, 193). 

Desdemona*s story of the maid Barbara has not only a 
certain parallelism with her oto case, but is an intro¬ 
duction for the song. Barbara too “had a song of willow” 
( 0th. . IV, iii, 28). 

The whole scene, charged with emotion though it be, 
is utterly free from rant. The song is full of pathos, 
though simple and restrained. It is broken by Desdemona’s 
orders to Emilia, who is preparing her for bed, and the 



















47 


sudden frightened query, "HarkI who is»t that knocks?", 

makes us feel the sombre expectancy that is in her breast. 

The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree. 

Sing all a green willow; 

Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee. 

Sing willow, willow, willow. 

The fresh streams ran by her, and 
murmur’d her moans; 
sing willow, willow, willow. 

Her salt tears ran from her, and 
soften’d the stones 

Lay by these 

Sing willow, willow, v/illow; 

Prithee, hie thee, he’ll come anon;- 

Sing all a green willow must 
be my garland 

Let nobody blame him; his scorn I approve, - 
Nay, that’s not next. HarkI Ydio is’t that knocks? 
Emil. It is the wind, 

Des. I call’d my love false love, but 
what said he then? 

Sing willow, willow, willow: 

If I court moe women, you’ll couch 
with moe men. 

So get thee gone: good night, 

(0th,, IV, iii, 41), 

The last line of the song leads the conversation to 
the topic of adultery, Desdemona is almost incredulous 
that such a thing exists. In view of the fact that Othello 
has already condemned her as faithless ( 0th ., IV, i, 204, 
215), we must feel pity for this pure woman. 












48 


Dramatically, this song is a development of a device 
used much earlier. Bottom and Evans sing to keep up their 
courage (M ND., Ill, i, 125 ff; M WW., Ill, i, 11 ff); 
Mistress '^ickly sings to maintain her composure (M W W., 

I, iv, 44). Desdemona sings "Willow, Willow" because she 
is afraid, "We must not now displease him" ( 0th ., IV, iii, 
17). The song is also used to give suspense, to act as 
a natural brake to the oncoming tragedy. Of this tragedy, 
the audience is expectant. Desdemona can only sense that 
something is wrong. This device was used in The Merchant 
of Venice (M V., Ill, ii, 62 ff), but its effect is 
greatly heightened in a tragedy. 

The song "All a green willow", was originally for a 
man. Shakespeare has changed the sex of the singer to 
suit his purpose. The v/illow was a symbol of mourning 
and was very commonly mentioned by Elizabethan writers, 
Chappell has reprinted the melody with lute accompaniment. 

There is an echo of this song in Act V, scene ii. 
Emilia, stabbed by lago, is dying;» 

Emil, T/hat did thy song bode, lady? 

Hark cansH thou hear me? I will play the swan. 
And die in music. (Singing) Willow, willow, 
wilTowT foth., V, ii, 246). 

It is natural that the memory of the devoted maid» 
servant should flash back to her mistress; and the snatch 
of song recalls to us the swan-song of Desdemona, The 














49 


words that follow, moreover, are a re-statement of Desde- 
mona^s innocence as brought out by the conversation fol¬ 
lowing the last line of Desdemona*s song. "Moor, she was 
chaste”, says Emilia. ’’She loved thee, cruel Moor.” 

(0th., V, ii, 247). 

MEASbRE FOR MEASURE 

Measure for Measure has but one song. It serves to 
introduce Act I, scene iv. The stage directions read: 
Mariana discovered sitting ; a Boy singing . Song . Expres¬ 
sing a nostalgia for a faithless lover, the song follows: 

Take, o take those lips away. 

That so sweetly were forsworn; 

And those eyes the break of day 

Lights that do mislead the morn. 

But my kisses bring again, 

bring again; 

Seals of love, but sealed in vain, 

sealed in vain. 

Mariana herself states the purpose of the song: 

My mirth it much displeas’d, but pleased my woe. 

(M M., IV, i, 13). 

She is indulging in the self-pity which the songs of this 
type bring to lovers. Melancholy love-songs were as popu¬ 
lar then as now. Her remark leads the Duke to say that 
music may be an instrument either for good or evil. 

Take , 0 take those lips away is reminiscent in the 
abruptness of its introduction of Moth’s song (L L L., Ill, 
i, 3). It has no preparation, and in this shows a direct 


























50. 

antithesis to Desdemona*s "Willow, Willow", It opens the 
act brightly and immediately establishes the emotion felt 
by Mariana. This is important because her subsequent 
actions hinge upon this point, and are therefore justi¬ 
fied. 

The song, which may have been accompanied by a lute, 
is emotional in quality. It has, moreover, a certain 
parallelism with the situation, showing that it was care¬ 
fully chosen. 

Mr. Richmond Noble commends Shakespeare for "breaking 
off" the song, pointing out that other dramatists dT the 
time were occasionally carried away by their songs."''* 

r Op . Cit • , 

Mariana does say, "Break off thy song, and haste thee 
quick away" (MM., IV, i, 7). This gives the song the 
appearance of being incomplete, but the whole stanza of 
the song was given. In Fletcher*s Bloody Brother , the 
song appears with the addition of smother stanza. The 
song in this case is addressed to a woman.'"* 

Tc ! Hide, 0 hide those hills of snow 

Which thy frozen bosom bears 
On whose tops the pinks that grow 
Are of those that April wears. 

But first set my poor heart free. 

Bound in those icy chains by thee. 

(Fletcher, Bloody Brother , V, ii). 



















51 


KING LEAR 

The Fool in King Lear sings two songs. They are a 
variation of the nonsense which the Fool delivers through¬ 
out the play. There is often a grain of sense concealed 
in the jester’s fooling, and this is the case in the song; 

He that has and a little tiny wit^ 

With hey, ho, the wind and the rain. 

Must make content with his fortune’s fit 
Though the rain it raineth every day. 

(K Lear. , Ill, ii, 74-77) . 

Lear understands the Fool, for he says, ”True, my 
good hoy. Gome, bring us to this hovel,” He gives no 
indication, however, of seeing the reference to himself 
in the first line - ”He that has and a little tiny wit”. 
The song is an adaptation of Peste’s jig which closes 
Twelfth Night . Prom the dramatic point of view, it is 
quite in keeping with the Fool’s character; it rings a 
natural and colorful change in the Pool’s pointed quips 
.at Lear, 

The Pool’s second song occurs in a scene which con¬ 
trasts Lear’s madness, Edgar’s pretended madness, and the 
Fool’s calculated eccentricity. Each thought has a slim 
connection with the preceding one which barely saves it 
from incongruity. Here, the king is holding an imaginary 
court; 

Lear (To the Fool). Thou, sapient sir, sit here. 

Now, you she foxes. 

Edgar. Look where he stands and glares! 


















52. 

Wantest thou eyes at trial, madam? 

Come over the bourne, Bessy, to me. 

This ballad tag prompts the Fool to sing nonsense in the 
same ballad metre: 

Fool (sings) Her boat hath a leak. 

And she must not speak 
Why she dares not come over to me. 

(K Lear, , III, vi, 24 ff) . 

The Fool’s lines were probably sung to the tune of 
’’Come over the bourne, Bessy, to me”. This ballad, if 
it were originally a compliment to '^ueen Elizabeth, as 
Chappell believes*''’, would be very well known to the Eliza- 

0£. cit ., p. 121. 

bethan audience, and in its present setting of wind and 
rain the Fool’s lines would be very humorous. 

In King Lear , I, iv, 183, the King says, ”?/hen were 
you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?” There is no 
evidence that the Fool has been singing. The term, songs 
is used loosely to denote reciting. His rh 3 miing is very 
much akin in spirit to the songs he does sing, and might 
well have been sung if Shakespeare had chosen to have them 
so performed. That they were not sung shows restraint, 
and a desire not to have the Fool’s lines overshadow 
those of the mad Lear, 


















53 


PERICLES 


The song with which Marina pierces the coma of her 

father is well prepared for. That she is an exceptional 

musician is repeated many times; 

Marina-^---hy Cleon trained 

In music, letters etc. 

(Per., IV, Prologue, 2). 

Marina to Boult: 

Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance. 
With other virtues that 1*11 keep in boast. 

(Per., IV, Vi, 190). 


Gower says Marina: 

Sings like one immortal, and she dances 
As goddess-like to her admired lays. 

\^h.en it is suggested that she might effect Pericles* cure, 

Lysimachus says: 


„»„fTis well bethought. 

She, questionless with her sweet harmony. 

And other choice attractions, would allure. 

And make a battery through his deafened parts. 

Which now are midway stopp*d. 

(Per., V, i, 44 ff). 

One purpose of this re-iteration is to give credibility 
to the recovery of Pericles. Her training in the fine 
arts is also used to give dramatic justification to her 
almost unbelievable virtue. The fame of her ’’sv^reet 
harmony, and other choice attractions” ( Per ., V, i, 45, 6), 
is the thing that leads to the suggestion that she be 
called in. No other songstress but Marina could have 
completed the cure, because, in the end, it is not the 
music*s magic which does the trick; it is the call of 













54 


blood - the affinity between daughter and father* 

There is something glows upon my cheek. 

And whispers in m.ine ear, »Go not till he speak’¬ 
ll., V, i, 96, 7). 

says Marina. She remains until Pericles discovers she is 
his lost child. The function of the song was to "make a 
battery through his deafen’d parts", to recall him to 
consciousness, 

The actual words of the song are not extant, nor do 
we know if it was sung alone or with an accompaniment. 

No hint is given as to its content, but the purpose of 
its inclusion is clear* 

ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA 


In Antony and Cleopatra , a drinking song is sung 
during a revel by the Triumvirs (A C., II, vii, 111-116)* 
Enobarbus introduces the song thus: 

= ^^-.=.all take hands* 

Make battery to our ears with the loud music: 

The while I’ll place you; then the boy shall sing. 

The holding every man shall bear as loud 
As his strong sides shall volley* 

Music plays . Enobarbus places them hand in hand* 

The Song 

Come, thou monarch of the vine, 

Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyneI 
In thy fats our cares be drown’d. 

With thy grapes our hairs be crown’d. 

Cup us, till the world go round. 

Cup us till the v/orld go round* - 

vii, 118-121)* 

Prom the words of Enobarbus, together with the stage direc- 




















9 








55 . 

tlons. It would appear that the roisterers joined hands, 
that the music played loudly while Enobarbus placed them 
in position. Probably the drinkers accompanied the boy*s 
song with movements such as accompany the traditional 
rendering of Old Lang Syne by group singers. A circular 
dance may have been performed but there is no evidence 
for this, except the suggestion '’till the v/orld go round”. 
If this were so, the movement would prove dizzying to 
even sober heads. The song, with its "dance” was the 
high-light of the drinking bout, being perhaps a Roman 
test of heads and stomachs. But this is pure conjecture. 

To drunken men, the mere effort of standing is a test. 

The Triumvirs came in on the holding'"', or burthen: 

Cup us till the ¥/orld go round. 

Cup us till the w^orld go round. 

as loudly as possible. 

(A C., II, vli, 122,3.) 


A note by R. H. Cose, Antony and Cleopatra (Arden Edition) 
page 84, quotes from a pamphlet. The SerTTng Man»s 
Comfort , 4 to 1598, (Sic. C) discovered by Malone. 

"xl song is to be sung, the holding or undersong whereof 
is. It is merrie in Haul, when Beardes wagges all,” 

The v/ord was rarely used. 

The Elizabethan audience expected songs to be sung 
in drinking scenes, for wine and song go hand in glove 
together, "Come, thou monarch of the vine”, is not a 




















“T’ < 




■■•t.'Mvk: ai:'i:>r£K . v 



Mn;0' ^ 










C'' ; -5>i-4 ; ■ • — - ' 


. u-uo r 


.. ’ ''t.r •• 
:>/T.; --c 

‘'0 T/ 


■.fr:n‘i,':oc; :: v; i 
/•■; - ^ ”r:-; -'I;; 


^:'::.::i' 


., ■ ■ * 

■':j.^^ '"'.C I'/i" ; •I 

. ;. . • ryu'-^x ■ 


:j .o 


■^i=xv--. ' ' 


?;'.' a--:.. :'..-"L o"-’ j 


■■:■-,::'ii, zT 


i j-JJ: •' ;■■; ■ i \rfv 


’flia 

'i 



■ , S6= ; ' ; 

yjf'd^.v: } 


. m:' V. :, r 







56 


toping song or a catch of the sort found in Twelfth Night 
(T N., II, iii, 75). It is a formal art song. This may 
have been considered more appropriate to drunken Triumvirs 
than the common drinking songs, but they, as Elizabethan 
Romans, would have been well versed in tavern catches. 

The song is the climax of the scene. It represents the 
height of the merry-making. At the song»s conclusion, the 
revelers prepare to leave. Accompanied by loud music and 
motions, having a loud burthen, this song must have given 
both sparkle and authenticity to the scene. 

The opening of Act II, scene v, of Antony and Cleo ¬ 
patra shows Cleopatra, moody and restless. 

Enter Cleopatra , Charmian , Iras , and Alexas .^ 

Gleo. Give me some music 5 music, moody food 
Of us that trade in love. 

Attend. Music, hoi 

Enter Mardian , the Eunuch . 

Cleo. Let it alone; let»s to billia.rds: Gome, 

Charmian. 

(A C., II, V, 1-3.) 

The attendant was calling for a musician. No mention 
is made of Mardlan*s instrument so we may conjecture that 
he was a singer. Furthermore, the fact that he was an 
eunuch would indicate that he had a soprano voice* His 
part was therefore played by a boy, for boys took the sing¬ 
ing parts. Cleopatra, has, in effect, called for a song 
and then changed her mind. The incident is used to show 




















57 . 


Cleopatra Is on edge, changeable, dissatisfied, and 
doesnH know her own mind. 

CYI^IBELINE 

^ hunts - up or morning song occurs in Gymbeline, II, 
iii, 1/ • As Richmond Noble'''*^"* points out that the progress 

•vJ-X' cit p. 130 


of the hours during the night are marked by comment, and 
that the song indicates the coming of dawn, Shakespeare 
had none of the lighting apparatus in use on the m.odern 
stage. He accomplishes the passage of time by comments. 
Imogen asks the time, "Almost midnight, madame" ( Cymb ., 
II, ii, 3). lachimo counts three strokes of the clock 
before going back into the trunk ( Cymb ., II, ii, 51), 

That it is morning, and also Cloten*s purpose in ordering 
the morning song, emerges from the conversation betvi^een 
Cloten and the First Lord; 

First Lord. Your lordship is the most patient man 
in loss, the most coldest that ever turned 
up ace. 

Cloten, It would make any man cold to lose. 

First Lord, But not every man patient after the 

noble temper of your lordship. You are 
most hot and furious when you win. 

Cloten. Winning will put any man into courage. 

If I could get this foolish Imogen, I 
should have gold enough. It^s almost 
morning, is*t not? 

First Lord, Lay, my lord. 

Cloten. I would this music would come. I am 

advised to give her music'''*o* morning; 















58 . 


they say it will penetrate. 

(Cymb,, II, iii, 1-14.) 


We have here in close proximity the word music used in 
two ways. "l would this music would come”, means ”l 
wish these musicians would come.” I am advised to give 
her music refers to music in the modern sense. 


Cloten v/ishes to win Imogen, and assails her with a 
musical love-potion. The song which is sung comes after 
an instrumental piece. 

First, a very good conceited thing; after, a 
wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich words to 
it; and then let her consider. 

( Cymb .. II, iii, 18-21.) 

The words of the song are suitable to a morning song. 

They express nothing more than the wish that ”my lady 

sweet” shallj. arise; 

Hark, harkl the lark at heaven*s gate sings. 

And Phoebus * gins arise. 

His steeds to Y/ater at those springs 
On chaliced flowers that lies; 

And v/inking Mary-buds begin 
To ope their golden eyes. 

With every thing that pretty is 
My lady sweet, arise. 

Arise, arise, 

( Cymb ., II, iii, 21-30.) 

The song, together with its context, expresses the 
fact that Cloten is desperate for the love of Imogen. 

The establishment of this fact is necessary to give 
plausibility to his later pursuit of her. Boorish 
Cloten cannot have been the author, of course, any more 
than Thurio was the author of the ”sonnet” serenade to 



















59 . 


Silvia''^ 

Thurio says, "l have a sonnet that will serve the turn” 
(T G V,, III, ii, 93). This means ”l have in my posses¬ 
sion a sonnet which will serve the purpose." 

That Imogen is an excellent singer is re-iterated 
many times. Pisanio, in advising Imogen»s course of 
action says, "»fore noble Lucius present yourself, desire 
his service, tell him wherein you^re happy - which will 
make him know. If that his head have ear in music, - 
doubtless with joy he will embrace you," ( Gymb ., III, iv, 
175-179 )• Of Imogen, who has retired to taste of the 
drug, Arviragus says, "How angel-like she sings I" ( Cymb ., 
IV, ii, 49Later he says, "The bird is dead that we 
have made so much on" (Gymb., IV, ii, 197). Yet nowhere 
in the play does Imogen sing, unless, Imogen, in the 
dress of a musician, sang her own serenade. This is an 
interesting idea, and highly probable. Shakespeare *s 
cast was capable of doubling parts, and instances of 
doubling are to be found throughout the plays. 

In Act III, scene iii, lines 42-44, Arviragus says 
"our cage we make a quire, as doth the prisoned bird, 
and sing our bondage freely." Yet the long threnody 
"Fear no more the heat o* the sun", although labeled 
song, appears to have been spoken. 













60 


Arv, i\nd let us, Polydore, though now our voices 
Have got the mannish croak, sing him to the 
ground, ( Cymb ., IV, ii, 235-6.) 

Gui. I cannot sing: I»ll weep, and word it with 

thee. 

For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse 
Than priests and fanes that lie, 

( Cymb ,. IV, ii, 240-2.) 

Arv. If you go fetch him. 

We*11 say our song whilst, 

( Cymb ,, IV, ii, 253-4.) 

The words "Pear no more the heat o* the sun”, follow, 

( Cymb ., IV, ii, 258-281). 

Several things suggest themselves from this evidence 
Imogen has been represented as a singer, because in the 
eyes of Arviragus and Guiderius she must be cultured and 
companionable. Anyone who sang v/as a sociable being, 
according to the Elizabethan stage myth. Having grown to 
love Imogen, the two boys performi for her a funeral song. 
Grief chokes their voices so that, instead of singing, 
they speak the lines of the song. The real reason behind 
this spoken performance was that the voice of Imogen 
could not be used. She was the boy who sang for the 
company at that time, Arviragus and Guiderius were 
slightly older boys, whose voices had already broken or 
”got the mannish croak”. 

The ’’ingenious instrument” ( Cymb ., IV, ii, 186), 
probably supplied the accompaniment for the songs. 














! 



or ■' 





<v V.' 







iv 


' ’ - ■ ' - ‘ v ■ ' '- ' 

a ■;" ■ :v, 

- ; ■ • ;■ 

oi:. -o'i .713$ ■', • w - , •■ " ,. ■ .tors . T' 

. T V : L .\ O' ' 

i: ^ c o ■ . 

•» ' ■ '.I.*, virAid-^ J* W^l 

■ ■ ■- p • ,.'*■; 

• • . •- • ‘i *' 


U’ , iiJj&if!; 














61 


THE WINTER»S TALE 


The songs of The V^inter * s Tal e are used with the skill 


and sureness of a master* From constant practice a certain- 
ty of the right way to use songs had been acquired. 

Autolicus is introduced only in Act IV, 8-nd he is 
introduced singing: 

When daffodils begin to peer. 

With heigh! the doxy over the dale - 

^Why, then comes in the sweet o* the year. 

For the red blood reigns in the winter^s pale. 

The white sheet bleaching on the hedge - 

With heigh! the sweet birds, 0 how they sing! 

Doth set my pugging tooth on edge. 

For a quart of ale is a dish for a king. 

The lark that tyra-lyra chants - 

With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the Jay - 

Are s-ummer songs for me and my aunts, 

YWaile we lie tumbling in the hay. 

I have served Prince Florizel and in my time wore 

three-pile, but now I am out of service. 

But shall I go mourn for that, my dear? 

The pale moon shines by ni^t; 

And v/hen I wander here and there, 

I then do most go right. 

If tinkers may have leave to live 
And bear the sow-skin budget. 

Then my account I well may give. 

And in the stocks avouch it. 

(WT., IV, iii, 1-22,) 

The song is autobiographical. It gives the season 
of the year, and thereby describes the scenery. It is a 
more delicate and humorous statement of what is contained 
in one sentence, ’’My traffic is sheets” (W T,, IV, iii, 22). 









is'e 





I 




rjj 



j»r-r5 ftiicJt i . 

'to t 



jr 

'i^'. 




ai c :: 

rf'- 

f -T ll 




vtw’ l\p^ ^ 



; r, 1 ^ 


r 



rm* 


fl-'IO 










62 , 

Richmond Noble^*' compares the song in this regard to Ariel’s 
Op. c^., p. 13a. 

Vv'here the bee sucks . He also remarks that the humour of 
the song ’’mitigates tne meanness of the theft”. It ear¬ 
marks Autolycus as a pleasant rogue, and makes his thiev¬ 
ery a mere peccadillo. Autolycus also sings a short exit 
song, ”Jog on, jog on the footpath way” (W.T., IV, ill, 

132). This not only adds interest to his exit, but fur¬ 
ther indicates him to be a happy fellow. 

His next song is merely the enumeration of a pedlar’s 
supplies. This is a parody on the songs of the crafts of 
the times, relics of which are still found in the calls 
of English street-pedlars. The song ends: yl 

Come buy of me, come S come buy, come buyl 
Buy, lads, or else your lasses cry. Come buy!‘ 

(W T., IV, iv, 220 ff,) 

This song is an entrance song. As he leaves he sings a 
song in sjjnilar vein:- I 

I 

Will you buy any tape, I 

Or lace for your cape. | 

(WT., IV, iv, 322-30.) | 

Both songs are in character. They show a merry rogue j 

turned pedlar. 1 

The three-part catch Get you hence for 1 must go, | 

follows an interesting discussion of ballads. (See ;i 

i 

chapter on Ballads.) The song occurs quite naturally, | 

















k,' 

c) 

t - 






'% 









lo ■ ■•'•Jw'T, ^J^^’rxx.:' e.^-: 




"•:iii^ n _ ._ ■ 








' r’%’y 






' /'iw, ’•' .' "'• 

, ;: :'V.'.iJ - ' '■ ■ ■■'' '' 







::,k 




7^ 


^V''":', . ... 












63 


for catches were immensely popular with the lower classes. 
It serves to illustrate happy, song-full country life, 
as well as to demonstrate the success of Autolyous» dis¬ 
guise as pedlar and ballad-monger. All the songs in The 
Winter ^ s Tale might be said to show a refinement of the 
technique which began in A Midsunniier Night ^s Dream , II, 
ii, 8-26, - that of using songs for atmosphere. 

THE TEI.'iPEST 

The Tempest represents the height of perfection in 
Shakespeare’s use of song. In no other play are there 
as many songs, and novirhere else do they occur with a 
greater semblance of naturalness. The songs are divided 
between Ariel, Stephano’s circle, which includes Caliban, 
and the songs of the masque. 

The masque songs are rather formal. They express con¬ 
ventional thoughts, wishing joy and plenty to a newly 
married couple. The fact that Prospero has called up a 
vision prepares for the masque. Songs were part of the 
substance of masques, and so the lays of Jimo and Ceres 
were not extraneous to the vision. The form that the 
vision took prevented more than a merely pretty, con¬ 
ventional song. 

The entrance of Stephano is very true to life. Song 
is a natural mode of expression for drunken men, and his 























64. 

lines testify that he is very drunk. Alonzo’s "drunken 
butler" sings a sea chanty, indirectly poking fun at 
tailors, who were then objects of fun. 

St. (sings) I shall no more to sea, to sea; 

Here shall I die ashore, etc. 

(Temp., II, ii, 44-56.) 

The song fits into the action of the play. Stephano, 
the bottle and the manner of song tell us, is drunk. It 
is liquor which leads Caliban to adore Stephano. It is 
liquor which so befuddles the ill-matched trio that their 
behavior is comic in its gravity. 

The bit of catch which Stephano attempts to sing - 

Flout ’em and scout ’em 
And scout ’em and flout ’em I 
Thought is free.'"* 

(Temp., Ill, ii, 130-132.) 


Perhaps the burden of a song, quoted by Marla, T W., I, 
iii, 72. 

--- Ariel plays correctly on 

pipe and tabor - that too is evidence that the butler is 
drunk. The incident also leads Caliban to tell of the 
magical music with which the island abounds. It is a pre¬ 
paration for the final prank which Ariel plays. 

Caliban’s song ( Temp ., II, ii, 182 ff.) is humourous 
because of its drunken quality. The stage direction "Sings 
drunkenly" denotes the manner of singing, or of howling, 
if we can believe Trlnculo - 























65 


A howling monster! a drunken monster. 

( Temp ., Ill, ii, 183.) 

Shakespeare even shows intoxication in the pronunciation 

of the word Calihan - 

*Ban, »Ban, Ga - Caliban - 

( Temp .^ III, ii, 188.) 

- as though the monster were stuttering and hiccoughing. 
The song might almost seem to be a spontaneous expression 
of Caliban’s hatred of bondage, for it mentions the 
specific tasks that Prospero has imposed upon him. 

Nothing seems more natural than that Ariel should 
speak in song. ”Gome unto these yellow sands" ( Temp ., I, 
ii, 375-386), greets the first entrance of Ferdinand, 
Ferdinand has scarcely time to be puzzled as to the where 
abouts of the singer when Ariel misleads him to believe 
that his father is dead. 

Certain things can be told about the performance of 
these songs, Ariel plays an instrument (see stage direc¬ 
tion), most probably a lute. He sings part of the song 
as a solo; 

Come unto these yellow sands. 

And then take hands, 

Curtsy when you have and kiss’d. 

The wild waves whist. 

Foot it featly here and there; 

And, sweet sprites, the burthen bear. 

(Temp., I, ii, 375-381.) 

A chorus of voices - "the sweet sprites" - then sing a 











I 









Burthen , disp 0 rsedly ,'*Bowgh, wawgh". Ariel continues. 

The watchdogs bark. 

Burthen , dispersedly . Bowgh, wawghl 

(Ariel) Hark, hark! I hear 

The strain of strutting chanticlear 
Cry, cock-a-diddle-dowe. 

( Temp ., I, ii, 382-386.) 

In the song “Full fadom five thy father lies”, the 
burthen of Ding , Dong occurs, which is sung by the chorus 
of “sprites”. 

In the first song the chorus gave scattered, musical 
representation of dogs barking. I can see no other inter¬ 
pretation of the word dispersedly . I think it likely that 
in the burthen of “Full fadom five thy father lies” the 
concluding ”ng“ sounds of Ding - dong were held out by the 
chorus to represent the tolling of a funeral bell.'"'^ 

Mr. Fox Strangeways has suggested this treatment for 
the words Ding dong bell . Qpoted by Richmond Hoble, 

Op . cit ., p. 125. 

The chorus were Invisible to the audience and may have 
been either backstage or in the m.usic room'"* or the tyring 
room. 

See S. K. Chambers, The Elizabethan Stage , iii, 96, 120. 

Ariel enters, accompanied by miusic, in Act II, scene 
i, to sing a warning in the ear of Antonio. Nothing 
could be more natural than that this sprite, who is in- 

































67 


visible, should transmit his message through such a 
medium. It is a magic island where such things are pos¬ 
sible. The song Yifhere the bea sucks there sucK is 
autobiographical, describing the habits of the spirit, 

Vjh.ile serving Prospero, Ariel is happy, both from nature, 
and because his period of servitude is drawing to a close. 
This song portrays emotion as well as character. The 
first three of Ariel»s four songs show Ariel, as Prosperous 
agent, pursuing the duty to which the magician has set 
him. I'lfhere the bee sucks ^ there suck bursts from the 
heart of Ariel because he is happy, and for no other 
reason. 

For naturalness of occurrence, portraying character 
and scenery, for linking of dialogue and song, Shakespeare^s 
use of song in The Tempest has yet to be equalled. 

A single song occurs in Henry VIII. 

Queen Katharine. Take thy lute, wench: my soul 

grows sad with troubles; 

Sing, and disperse *em, if 
thou cans*t: leave working. 


Song 

Orpheus with his lute made trees 
And the mountain tops that freeze 
Bow themselves when he did sing. 

To his music plants and flowers 
Ever sprung, as sim and showers 

There hath made a lasting spring. 

Everything that heard him play. 

Even the billows of the sea. 

Hung their heads, and then lay by. 

























68 . 

In sweet musio is such art. 

Killing care and grief of heart 
Fall asleep, or hearing die."''' 

(KH^., VIII, iii, 3-14.) 

The subject of this poem is found in Beaumont and 
Fletcher’s The Captain , III, i. The poem is attributed 
to Fletcher. 

Here the scene opens 3^ medias res" ^*, and the two lines 
See also the songs in M M., Ill, i; L L L., Ill, i. 

of the queen adequately state the situation as well as 
introduce the song with no sense of strain. Outside of 
the idea that music can kill care, there is little 
reason for the choice of this song. From the queen’s 
opening words, it is certain that a lute accompanied the 
song. The whole effect of the troubled queen listening 
to the song is to build up in us a sympathy for her. 
However, this song lacks some of the characteristics of 
the songs of his later plays. It neither reflects char¬ 
acter nor furthers the action of the play. It could be 
removed from the scene without perceptibly altering the 
dramatic value of the scene. Surely, after his master¬ 
ful handling of songs in The Tempest , Shakespeare did 
not write this portion of the play. 

The songs, in regard to usage, may be divided roughly 
into eight categories. It will be noticed that some of 
the songs serve several purposes at one and the same 
















til 


“ r 


t 











r , 


7 , 


J.. 


.S 



'.. ■^- 



nJ v- ■ < ' 

rp b©X.(fW'1 


t..4^iv vi ■ 




U: 










69 . 

time. The first group contain songs .which open or close 
scenes. Shahespeare had no curtain'*'' to indicate the be- 


For endings designed to give better curtain effects 
than Shakespeare had at his disposal, see Montague 
Summers, Shakespeare Adaptations , which gives Hahum 
Tate * s The History of King Lear , and Davenant and 
Dryden*s The Tempest , or Enchanted Isle . 


ginning or end of scenes.'*^ Hence, he has in some oases 
used a song to gain the attention of the audience at the 
beginning of a scene, or to keep their interest at the 
end of a scene. 


Hone of Shakespeare»s plays open with a song. Twelfth 
Night opens with musict TEe Two Noble Kinsmen is an 
example of a play which opens witE a song. 


Date'-- 

Entrance Songs 


Dates of plays are given for comparative purposes. 


1591 

Moth^s song (Cone 0 line 1), Lovers Labour’s Lost, 

III, i. 

1599- 

1600 

1611 

Under the Greenwood Tree, sung by Amiens, As 

You Like It, II, v, 1-8. 

Vifhen daffodils begin to peer, sung by Autolycus, 

The Winter's Tale, IV. Hi. 

1612 

Orpheus with his lute made trees, sung to Queen 
Katharine, The Life of King Henry VIII, III, 
i, 3-14. 

Exit Songs 

1591 

I'llien daisies pied and violets blue. Love’s 

Labour’s Lost, V, ii, 904-939. 





















































































70 


1601 

I am gone, sir 

And anon sir., sung by Feste, Twelfth Night, IV, 
ii, 130-141, 

1601 

V/hen I was and a little tiny boy, jig sung by 
Feste, Twelfth Night, V. 1, 398-417. 

1611 

Jog on, jog on, sung by Autolycus, The Winter*s 
Tale, IV, iii, 132-135. 

The 

next group of songs are those which contain 

dramatic 

irony: 

1599 

Sigh no more ladies, sigh no morel, sung by 
Balthasar, Much Ado About Nothing, II, iii, 
64-76. 

1599 

Pardon, Goddess of the Night, sung for Hero, 
whome Claudius supposes dead. Much Ado About 

1601 

Nothing, V, iii, 12-21. 

Hey Robin, jolly Robin, sung by Feste to Malvolio, 
Twelfth Night, IV, ii, 78-85. 

The 

following songs are either inseparable from the 


plot, OP retard or speed the action of the play: 


1591- 

1592 

1595- 

1596 

Who is Silvia, a serenade to Silvia overheard by 
Julia, Two Gentlemen of Verona, IV, ii, 39-52. 
Tell me where is fancy bred, sung while Bassanio 
makes his choice of caskets. Merchant of 

Venice, III, ii, 63-72. 

1598 

Fie on sinful fantasy, the "pinching song" during 
vfni'ch Anne and Fenton run off to be married. 

The Merry Wives of W^indsor, V, v, 97-106. 

1598 

Pardon, Goddess of the night, a song for Hero, 
whom Claudio believes to be dead. Much Ado 

1607- 

1608 

1611 

About Nothing, V, iii, 12-21. 

Song, sung to Pericles by his daughter Marina, 
Pericles, V, i, 80. 

Gone unto these yellow sands; Full fadom five 
thy father lies; While you here do snoring 
lie, sung by Ariel, The Tempest, I, ii, S75- 
386; I, 11, 396-404; II, 11, 300-305. 


A few songs are included in the plays to denote the 


passing of time: 















































































<7 ” 


:av 




r 












71 


1599- Blow , blow thou winter wind . During the singing 
1600 of this song, the Duke disoo.vers Orlando 

identity and present status, As You Like It, 

II, vii, 174-190. 

1599- What shall have that killed the deer? This 

1600 hunter’s song Indicates the passage of time be¬ 

tween meetings of Orlando and Rosalind, ^ You 
L ike It, IV, ii, 11-19. 

1610 Hark, hark , the lark at heaven’s gate sings . 

This song and its context together with Act II, 
scene ii, tell the passage of time from m.idnight 
to m^orning in 80 lines, Cymbeline, II, ili, 
22-30. 

Songs which give a pictorial effect, or are used to 

create atmosphere are; 

1594- You spotted snakes with double tongue , a song by 
1595 the fairies, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, II, ii, 
8 - 26 . 

1594- A falrie’s song, stage direction only (a song 
1595 and a dance), A Midsummer Night’s Dream, V, i, 
407, 

1598 Fie on sinful fantasy , the Pinching song sung by 
fairies. The Merry Wives of Windsor, V, v, 97- 
106. 

1599- Under the Greenwood tree, sung by Amiens, As You 
1600 Like It, II, v, 1-8. 

1599- Blow, blow, thou v/inter wind, sung by Am.iens, 
1600 ^ You Like It, II, vii,“l?7^-190. 

1599- It was a lover and his lass, sung by tvm pages, 
1600 ^ You Like It, V, iii, 17-34. 

1599 Stage direction only (Music and a song), sung 
by the boy Lucius, Julius Caesar , IV, iii, 266. 

1602- In youth when I did love, sung by the grave- 
1603 diggers, Hamlet , V, i, 69-82; 102-105. 

1604 Willow , willow , willow , Othello , IV, iii, 41-57. 















































































72 


1611 When daffodils begin to peer. The Winter*s Tale, 

irr'iii; 1^2:-—- 

1611 Where the bee sucks , there suck I, sung by Ariel, 
The Tempest , V, i, 88-94• 

Come unto these yellow sands. The Tempest, I, ii, 
375-386. 

Full fadorn five thy father lies . The Tempest , I, 
ii, 396-404. 

The master , the swabber , the boatsvmin , and 
sung by drunken Stephano, The Tempest, II, ii, 
44-56. 

No more dams 1*11 make for fish. The Tempest, 

II, ii, T8¥::192. 

Akin to these pictorial or atmospheric songs are the 

drinking songs, which together with their contexts are 

used to create an impression of drunken jollity; 

1598 Do nothing but eat and m.ake good cheer , etc. 

This and the following songs in Henry IV , show 
the progressive stages of Silence*s drunkenness, 

2 King Henry IV, V, iii, 18-23* 

Be merry, be merry, my wife has all, etc., 2 King 
Henry IV, V, iii, 35-39* 

A cup of wine that*s brisk and fine, 2 King 
Henry IV, V, iii, 48-50. 

Fil l the cup , and let it come I, etc,, 2 King 
Henry IV , V, iii, 66-57, 

Do me right , etc., 2 King Henry IV , V, iii, 78-80. 

1601 0 Mistress Mine , sung by the Clown, Twelfth 

Night , II, iii, 40-53, 

Farewell, dear heart, duet between Sir Toby and 
the Clown, Twelfth Night , II, iii, 109-121. 




























































































73 


1604 

And let me the canakin clink, clink, sung by 
lago, Othello, II, ill, 71-^6. 

King Stephen was a worthy peer, Othello, II, 
iii, 92-99. 

1607- 

1608 

Come, thou m.onarch of the vine, sung by a boy 
for the Triumvirs revels, Antony and Cleopatra, 
II, vii, 118-123, 

1611 

The master, the swabber, the boatswain and I, 
sung by Stephano, The Temptest, II, ii, 44-.F6, 

No more dams 1*11 make for fish. The Tempest, 

II, ii, 184-189. 

The 

following songs were intended to affect the 

emotions 

of the audience. The earlier songs evoke nothing 


more than good hurnour, but gradually the songs appeal more 


and more 

to deeper emotions: 

1594- 

1595 

The woosel cock so black of hue, sung by Bottom, 

A Midsummer Night *"s Dream, III, i, 128-131; 133- 
136. 

1598 

Dovm, dov/n, a-down-a, etc,, sving by Mistress 
Quickly, The Merry Wives of Windsor, I, iv, 43. 

To shallow rivers, to whose falls, sung by Evans, 
The Merry Wives of Windsor, III, i, 17-29, 

1599 

Pardon, goddess of the Night, sung by Claudio, 
Much Ado About Nothing, V, ii, 12-21. 

1599- 

1600 

Under the Greenwood tree, sung'by .Amiens and 
Jaques, As You Like It, III, v. 1-8. - 

Blow, blov/, thou winter wind, sung by Amiens, 

As YouTIle TE7"lll, vilTHTT^-igo. 

1599 

Stage directions only, (Music and a song). 

Julius Caesar, IV, iii, 266, sung by the boy 

Luc ius, 

























































































74 


1601 

Gome away, death, sung by Peste, Twelfth Night, 

II, iv7T2-W: 

1602- 

1603 

In youth when I did love, sung by the grave- 
digger, Hamlet, V, 1, .60-82; 103-105. 

1603 

Take, o take those lips away, sung by a boy to 
Mariana, Measure for Measure, IV, i, 1-6, 

1604 

Willow, willow, willow, sung by Desdemona, 

Othello, IV, iii, 41-57. 

1605- 

1606 

Ophelia’s Mad Songs 

How should I your true love know, etc,, Hamlet, 
-iV7 

He is dead and gone, lady, etc., Hamlet, IV, 

V, 29-32, 

White his shroud as the mountain snow, etc., 

Hamlet, IV, v, 35^39, 

Tomorrov/ is Saint Valentine’s day, etc.,, 

Hamlet, IV, v, 48-55, 

By Gis and by Saint Charity, etc,, Hamlet, 

IV, V, 58-66. 

They bore him barefaced on the bier, etc., 

Hamlet, iV, v, 164-166. 

And will he not come again?, etc., Hamlet, 

IV, V, 190-199. 

1610 

Fear no more the heat o’ the sun, spoken song to 
mourn Imogen,’~G^ibeline, IV, ii, 258-281. 

1612 

Orpheus with his lute made trees. King Henry the 
Eighth, III, i, 311T7 


The songs below, perfectly reflect the character of 
the singer, or throw light upon other characters: 


1594- 

1595 

An old hare hoar, sung by Mercutio, Romeo and 
Juliet, II, iv, 141-146, 

Lady, lady, lady, sung by Mercutio, Romeo and 
Juliet, ll, iv, -151. 

1597 

The Welsh Song, sung by Mortimer’s wife, 1 King 
Henry IV, III, i, 247. 


























































































75 


1599- Under the greenwood tree , sung by Amiens and 
1600 Jaques, ^ You Like It , III, v, 1-8. 

Blow, blow thou winter wind, sung by Amiens, 
AF ~YouTike III, vii7~r74-190. 

1599 Song , sung by Lucius, Julius Caesar , IV, iii, 266, 

1601- The Song of Pandarus, Troilus and Gressida, III, 
1602 i, 1^5^1:36. 

1605- The Pool * s Songs in King Lear . 

1606 Come o’er the bourne Bessy to me, etc.. King 

Lear , III, v, 27-30. 

He that has and a little tiny wit. King Lear, 
III, ii, 75^77, 


1611 


1611 


The Songs of Autolycus from The Vv'inter ’ s Tale . 

L'hen daffodils begin to peer. The Winter^ 

Tale' , III, i, IT^. 

Jog on, jog on the footpath way . The Vvinter’ s 
TaleV iV, Iii, I32»l35. 

Lawn as white as driven snow. The Winter’s 
Tale , IV, iv, 220^2311 ’ 

Get you hence for I must go, etc.. The W-inter’s 
Tale , IV, iv, 303-314. 

Will you buy any tape , The Winter’s Tale , IV, 
iv, 323-330. 


The Songs in The Tempest , sung by Ariel. 

Come unto these yellow sands. The Tempest, I, 

_—, --i;”Sf5-38Fr“ “—” 

Full fadom five thy father lies. The Tempest, 

I, i, 386-40^ 

W’hile you do snoring lie. The Tempest, II, i, 

- ^ 

The m-aster , the swabber , the boatswain , and I, 
The Tempest , IlT ii, 44-56. 

No more dams I’ll build for fish. The Tempest, 

II, ii, 184-189. 

Where the bee sucks, there suck I, The Tempest, 
V, i, 88-94. 


Although most of the ballad snatches in the plays 


are spoken, some of them are sung, as the following: 


















































































































76 


1598 Vifhen Arthur first in court, King Henry IV, II, 
iv,33. 

1599 The god of love , Much Ado About Nothing , V, ii, 

1601 Ballads , Twelfth Night , II, iii 

Hold th'y peace . Twelfth Night , II, iii, 75. 

1611 G-et you hence , for 1 must go . Winter>s Tale , IV, 

Certain facts are evident from an examination of 
such a table as the above, A rapid increase in facility 
of song usage is to be seen from year to year. The subtle 
effects of the songs of Shakespeare’s greatest plays were 
first turned in the workshop of the earlier plays, For 
example. Hark , hark the Lark , ( Cymb ., II, iii, 22-30.), 
shows more skill in indicating the passage of time than 
Blow , blow thou winter wind , (A Y L II, vii, 174-190); 
Ariel’s songs in The Tempest ( Temp ,, I, ii, 375-386; I, ii, 
396-404; II, ii, 300-305; V, i, 88-94), are far less pre¬ 
tentious as to performance, but superior in regard to 
establishing atmosphere, than the fairies’ songs in The 
Merry Wives of Windsor , (V, v, 97-106); the Pool’s song 
in King Lear, He that has and a little tiny wit , (K. Lear ., 
III, ii, 74-77), is a comment on character which is an 
intensification of the same method as used in Romeo and 
Juliet in And old hare hoar , (R J., II, iv, 141-146). 

The use of the Willow , Yvillow song in Othello as a 




























































, :"! r . 'a ;t :; 


1 




•r 


r;’- 



L 




> 


r. 


rv. 


? 


• *' • ■ •' '■ f#*v ■ '-O 

•' ' ' ■ ■ ■ "li?: 

v;;:;gvir^'.V- . ■ ':'!. 


1. ■ ;.. . A 

:h -^ . ' .c : 

;": ' a-rvA :^a:..• 

■ f • i-'. 

f ' . 

' .r ? ' ■ 

*>:?» eiiii; r • ' - >• • ' 


•■ i./'fio:. r 


:.'...a ... 











77 


means of showing Desdemona fearful of she knows not what 
and singing to keep up her spirits - what is this but an 
application of the device used when Bottom sings to show 
he is not afraid, or when Evans sings to disguise his 
fear from, himself? Willovir , Willov/ , creates suspense. So 
does an earlier song. Tell me where is fancy bred , in The 
Merchant of Venice # Y^Tillow , ' Willow , creates atmosphere. 

So do the fairies* songs in Midsummer Night * s Dream . 

(II, ii, 8-26; V, i, 407), and so do many other songs. 

In the second part of King Henry IV , V, iii, and in 
Twelfth Night , II, ii, Shakespeare has shown himself to 
be the master of portraying drunken men and their charac¬ 
teristic ways of thinking. He accomplishes this partly 
by the use of song. 

The mad scenes in King Lear , and particularly Act III, 
scene iv, are closely allied to the earlier scenes. Mad¬ 
ness and drunkenness are similar, for in both thought 
processes are not normal, Shakespeare shows the tenuous 
nexus of thoughts and ideas, which are common to madmen 
and drunken men. The scenes in the two earlier plays 
have many songs, for songs there demonstrate stages of 
drunkenness. In Act III, scene iv, of King Lear the Fool 
sings only two snatches of songs. These, like the grave¬ 
digger’s song in Hamlet , V, i, 69-82, accentuate the sense 

























)iff r. -r-aiElf mSr 

% - ■ ■ ■ , ' - ■> s 

-• 'sT.. .. ' ■■' ■/ .':>:,r.,- r. a:; , 

■ ■ 

. •' .■'/ ^ ^ 

'■■ ,■’ '; ' ' . 





.1 

! 











78. 

of tragedy by the use of humorous song. 

It is thought that Shakespeare wrote his songs to 

tunes already in existence. In some cases, these tunes ; 

are not now known to us, Richmond Noble mentions that with I 

the exception of Morley^s setting to It was a lover and p 

his lass, none of the great Elizabethan musicians were | 

connected with the music in the plays'"'. Mistress Mine j 

Richmond Noble, cit,, p. 132. 


was also set by Morley, However, Dr, Naylor points out 

that Farewell, Dear Heart, composed by Robert Jones, was 

published in 1600, a year before the production of 

Tv/elfth Night, It is doubtful if Dr, J, Wilson’s settings | 
of Lawn as white as driven snow, and Take 0 Take those 

lips away, were included in the first productions of The 

Winter’s Tale, and Measure for Measure, for ¥/ilson was 

only born in 1594'“*, Robert Johnson’s setting, to Wliere 

E. J. Dent, cit,, p. 159, 

the bee sucks, and Full fadom five, were considered to 

I 

have been used only in the revival of The Tempest in 1613,'''“ | 

. . -J 

Xbid., p. 159. 

Chappell says, "the practice of writing new words to old . 

songs was universal in the old plays." As an example of 

















































i 


5Jo»xf -1--" •■ ■> ’ •^- -’•• ■ •■' ■'‘' ^ ’•* I 

/ ' ' ■ * - TWEf^ififS?™ 

._j>i'. ‘nl ”- ■<- '■ ■ •' •-:• ■ ■■' - ^| 

fvMgi;!.ii'/tc . •' , '^ ' •’ m^-on . 

' ' ' ■ !- 
.., : •■ ' ■‘- ‘■^rii-f) ‘ '■ T ' "tO' -‘: " 

= ■ .'■ ,.' ■•; a. ’ ..'J - * ■O..-; , 


' , ,; ; ; ■ or ,L- .'voAV 









this he gives a song by Farquhar in The Beaux Stratagem , 
which was written to an old dance tune called Old Simon 
the King . The songs of Robert Burns were fashioned to 
fit old melodies. Shakespeare *s company was run very 
economically. There was a constant doubling of parts. 

In only a few plays do the songs require an elaborate 
accompaniment. It is not likely that the company would 
consider it necessary to stand the expense of having 
special melodies composed for them. Moreover, the use 
of an untried song would be in the nature of a gamble 
v/ith the likes and dislikes of audiences, whereas an old 
popular tune was assured of success. 

Some critics'"' have maintained that in general the 


ij| 

I 

i 


ill 


R. Warwick Bond, ”Lyly»s Songs”, R. E. S., 1930. 


songs were not written by Shakespeare himself. Lyly has 
been credited with many of the earlier songs. But songs 
which fit perfectly a given situation must have been 
written for the occasion. That the situations were 
written to fit the songs is, of course, absurd. I be¬ 
lieve that some of the songs of the period 1591-1595-6 ^ 

I 

may have been written by someone else but the majority I 

of the songs from 1595-6 ( The Merchant of Venice ) were | 

written by Shakespeare himself. I 

1 
































80 . 


CHAPTER II 

THE BALLADS 
- 

i 

III 

In her days every man shall eat in safety I 

Under his ov/n vine, what he plants, and sing 
The merry songs of peace to all his neighbors. 

i Hen VIII ., V, V, 34-37.) ! 

Cranmer^s words at the christening of Q:ueen Elizabeth 
are a reflection of the prevalence of ballads in England 
during her reign, and long afterward. Every man did sing 
the "merry songs of peace." 

Act IV, scene iv of The Yvinter ^ s Tale shows the ; 

importance of the ballad in Elizabethan life.'"' Autolycus, I 


For a full discussion of every aspect of the ballad, see 
Chappell*s Popular Music of the Olden Times , Volumes 1,2, 
and Introduction to Percy * s Reliques , Ed. '/Vheatley, 
(Bickers and Sons, 1876.) 


disguised as a singing pedlar, has come to a sheep shearing. 
He finds the ballads which he is selling far more in de- . I 
mand than his other goods; I 

Clown. What hast here? ballads? 

Mopsa Pray now, buy some, I love a ballad in j 

print, a-life, for then we are sure they are | 

true. I 

Autolycus Kerens one to a very doleful tune, how a j 
usurer’s wife was brought to bed of twenty | 

money-bags at a burthen, and how she longed I 

to eat adders’ heads and toads carbonadoed. | 

Mop. Is it true, think you? I 

Aut. Very true, and but a month old. I 

Dorcas Bless me from marrying a usurer I i 








































81. i! 


Aut. Kerens the midwife »s name to*t, one mistress j: 
Taleporter, and five or six honest wives that j 

were present. Why should I carry lies abroad? 

Mop. Pray you nov/, buy it. ' 

Clo. Come nov/, lay it by; and let»s first see 

more ballads; we’ll buy the other things soon. k 
Aut. Here’s another ballad of a fish, that ap- 

peared upon the coast, on Wednesday the four- ! 

score of April, forty thousand fathom above 
water, and sung this ballad against the hard 
hearts of maids: it was thought she was a woman, 
and was turned into a cold fish for she would 
not exchange flesh with one that loved her: the 
ballad is very pitiful and as true."^ | 

% 

--i^j 

The Winter’s Tale , Arden Edition, (Ed. P. W. Moorman). ^ 
Note, p. 85. Malone noted a ballad registered in 1604 . 

in the Stationer’s Register, anno 1604:- ^'The most true i 
and strange report of a monstruous fishe that appeared J 
in the forme of a woman from the wast upward Seene in I 
the Sea.** | 


Dor. Is it true too, think you? 

Aut. Five justices’ hands at it, and witnesses 

more than my pack will hold. 

Clo. Lay it by too: another, 

Aut. This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty 

one. 

Mop. Let’s have some merry ones. 

Aut, WTay, this is a passing merry one, and goes 
to the tune of ’’Two maids wooing a man”. There’s 
scarce a maid westward but she sings it; ’tis 
in request, I can tell you. 

Mop. We can both sing it: if thou’It bear a part, 
thou Shalt hear ’tis in three parts. 

Dor. We had the tune on’t a month ago. 

Aut.. I can hear my part, you must know ’tis my 

occupation: have at it with you, 

Autolycus and Mopsa then sing the three-part catch, 
’’Get you hence”, which Autolycus has informed us ’’goes to 
the tune of ’Two maids wooing a man.’” 

The above passage shows the great interest that the 


























82 . 


lower classes took in buying ballads '’hot off the press"; 
the belief that the printed word must be true; and the 
strange incidents which were the subject-matter of the |! 

ballads. If any should doubt that the events occurred, i 

N I' 

spurious affidavits gave them credence. The Mopsa^s and 
Dorcasci) of real life were quite capable of singing in parts.’ 
Shakespeare has painted this scene from life. 


Any event which might be of interest to people was 
promptly written up by authors, little if at all removed 
in social position from those who bought the ballads. In 
Martin Mar - Sixtus ^ 1592, we find the following passage: 

I lothe to spealc it, every red-nosed rhymester 
is an author: every drunken man*s dream is a book: 
and he, whose talent of little wit is hardly worth 
a farthing, yet layeth about him so outrageously as 
if all Helicon had run through his pen: in a m^ord, 
scarce a cat can run look out of a gutter, but out 
starts a half-penny chronicler, and presently a 
proper new ballet of a strange sight is indited,'''■ 


Quoted by Chappell, Popular Music of the Olden Times , 
Vol. 1, p. 56. 


Henry Chettie, in his pamphlet. Kind Hart ^ s Dream , 
1592, says: "How ballads are abusively chanted in every 
street, and from London this evil has overspread Essex 


and the adjoining countries. There is many a tradesman 
of a worshipful trade, yet no stationer, who after a 
little bringing up apprentices to singing brokery, takes 























1' I ' 

: •' , 11 -■ 




. 

0. ' •'t 


•■' -Ol 

. itm 

\;>G erf j 


r...-,fcr > 







'.>r- 






n'.ir 


O'rq 




, 9Li' 

r.i-"r I , G j. 


'H:' ■ -' 






;' }. -GG- I 

‘ c. ' ' 


V.t^C, •'■'• 1 ! 

T0 ' 

im G -, ; 


/i X i-i 

m ^ ‘^■' 

or- '^iCLL 




V c. 


i'L ,_.'. e ^ . ■■■ g; 

XXo Vi-:: 

' ■ '••••• 

: -- . . . 

c: .. ■■■ ■■ v^rt . 



nrr'U. 


ttlv tj'i 




C !■» f' ' 


* ■ 

-Si';••■; ,. , 

■t'lq'ia’ -: '10’^ . f.:- 

■ -:;. '■ oi.'si; 











83. 6 

e; 

into his shop some fresh men, and trusts his servants of 
two months* standing with a dozen groats worth of ballads, j 
In which, if they prove thrifty, he makes them petty J 

chapmen, able to spread more pamphlets by the state for- | 

'' i 

bidden'-' than all the booksellers in London. Ghettle 

Less than a month after Q^een Mary came to the throne ;i 
she published an edict against, "books, ballads, rhymes, j 

and treatises", ^een Elizabeth did not enforce this ' 

edict. Ibid ., Vol. 1, p. 55. I 

speaks particularly of the brothers Barnes, "the one with ! 
a squeaking treble, the other with an ale-blown base" * 

who brag that they have earned "twenty shillings a day, 
whilst others, horse and man, the man with many a hard 
meal, and the horse pinched for want of provender, have 
together hardly taken ten shillings in a week."'-' It was 

Henry Ghettle, Kind Hart * s Dream . 1592. Quoted Ibid ., 
p. 56. 

only natural that pedlars, of the type Autolycus is emu¬ 
lating, should sell ballads as a lucrative sideline. 

Lines 181-216 in Act IV, scene iv of The Winter*s 
Tale , gives us further information as to the style of 
singing, the types, the mixture of sentiment and bawdry 
of the ballads of the day. 

The following is not a collection of all of the i 




























84. 

ballads to be found in Shakespeare. It is an attempt to 
show how he treated the original sources, and the purposes 
to which he put ballads and ballad tags. 

GREENSLEEVES 

This ballad, dating from the time of Henry VIII , 
was very popular during the reign of Elizabeth, It be¬ 
came one of the party tunes of the Cavaliers during the 
civil war.'''* Prom the popularity of the tune as a wanton 

Ibid ., p. 239. 

dance, the term seems to have been transferred to loose 
women, who actually adopted green sleeves as a distinguish¬ 
ing mark, as in Jonson^s Bartholomew Fair , 1614, and in 
Beaumont*s and Fletcher*s ?>fomen*s Prize , Act III. 

The Merry Wives of Windsor, Arden edition (Edited by 
H. C. Harty: lote, p. 207. 

Falstaff, in The Merry Wives of W^indsor , V, v, 20-23, says 
to Mistress Ford: "My doe with the black scut I Let the 
sky rain potatoes, let it thunder to the tune of Green - 
sleeves , hail kissing-comfits, and snow eringoes," The 
tune had become a symbol for lascivious behavior. It had 
another connotation however, Chappell says that "Within 
twelve days of the first entry of Greensleeves it was 
converted to pious use", and was "moralized to the Scrip- 






































tures, declaring the manifold benefltes and blessings of 
God bestowed on sinful man."'''* Shakespeare in other places 

Op. cit ., p. 239. 

pokes fun at this tendency of the Puritans: 

--but one Puritan amonst them, 

and he sings psalms to hornpipes, (W T., IV, iii, 47- 

48.) 

Mistress Ford, referring to Falstaff^s love-letter in 
comparison with his character, says, ”they do no more 
adhere and keep place together than the hundred Psalms to 
the tune of Green Sleeves” (M H 62-64). 

Naylor has pointed out that when the hundredth psalm, is 
set to Greensleeves , the accents fall on the wrong syl¬ 
lables.'"* 'Phere is, however, a close enough fit to allow 

'"* E. J. Naylor, Shakespeare and Music , p. 73. 

the conjecture that it was sometimes sung in such a way, 
Greensleeves is still a favorite of Morris dancers, 
says J. M. Gibbon.'"* He gives five stanzas of the ballad, 

John Murray Gibbon, Melody and the Lyric , p. 53. 

the first of which is: 

Alas, my love, ye do me wrong. 

To cast me off discourteously, 

And I have loved you so long. 

Delighting in your company. 

Green Sleeves was all my joy. 

Green Sleeves was my delight; 

Green Sleeves was my heart of gold 
And who but Lady Greensleeves? 























86. 


FORTUNE MY FOE 


Fortime My Foe was a ballad sung to the "hanging 
t\ine" • It was sung by the crowds waiting for public 
executions. In The JVIerry Wives of Windsor , Falstaff says 
to Mistress Ford: 

I see what thou went, if Fortune thy foe were 
not, Nature thy friend, 

(M W W,, III, iii, 69.) 

The words of the first stanza are: 

Fortime my foe, why dost thou frown on me 
And will thy favours never greater be? 

Wilt thou, I say, for ever breed me pain. 

And wilt thou ne*er restore my joys again,*"* 


Ibid ., p. 49. 


KING- GOPHETUA AND THE BEGGAR MAID 

This ballad is mentioned four times in Shakespeare»s 
plays. In Love ^ s Labour^ s Lost ^ Moth says, "The world was 
very guilty of such a ballet three ages since, but I think 
'tls not now to be foTind" (L L L,, I, ii, 116-118). This, 
is undoubtedly meant as humour, for the ballad was every- 

I 

where to be found, Armado has mentioned the ballad to 
give the relation of his station in society to that of 
Jaquenetta: 

I do love that country girl that I took in 
the park with the rational hind. Costard. 

(L L L,, I, ii, 102-103.) 

He says he will have a new ballad written on the subject. 



























‘<DJ i 


r 


■ 




lit 7. . : 









r 5. ^ i -.,i'' ■' ‘.' ‘•'.t -/1 








87. , 

The allusion has thus shown Armado to be a pompous ass 

who has fallen in love with a country wench. 

In Romeo and Juliet , II, i, 12-14, Mercutio says: 

Her (Venus 0 purblind son and heir ;; 

Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so true, J 

When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid. ;| 

This is a paraphrase of line 13 of the ballad together 

with the ballad title. The word true is trim in the text I 

of the ballad." King Henry IV, referring to the mother ! 

olt., Vol. I, p. 191. ' 

- ! 

of Aumerle when she is begging for her son’s life, speaks •; 

of "The Beggar and the King" (R ich II, V, iv, 80). ■ 

I suggest that these references to the ballad suggest 

unseemliness . The connection between Armado and Jaquenetta,! 

would be a mesalliance. It was not proper for the old 

Duchess to be on her knees before Bolingbroke, even if 

he were King of England. Mercutio means to cast a slur 

upon Rosalind to shock love-sick Romeo into his senses. 

In 2 Henry IV , V, iii, 105-106, Falstaff says to 

Pistol: • 

0 base Assyrian knight, what is thy neirs? 

Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof. 

Falstaff is here mocking the affected speech of Pistol, 

and suggesting a difference in their social strata. It I 

I 

v^ill be remembered that Falstaff is full of Shallow’s ale. ‘j 



















88. j 

CANST THOU NOT HIT OT, i 

• j 

Repartee in paraphrase of this ballad is introduced | 

in Love ^s Labour ^s Lost , IV, i, 127-130. Chappell re¬ 
cords the time of the ballad"''*, but the words have not I 

0£. cit ., Vol. 1, p. 240. 

been foTJind, The ballad is here used for the purpose of i 

11 

lii 

humour, and to give rise to some rather scurrilous 
quibbling. 

TRIP AND GO 

This dance tune is to be found In Musickes Delight on 
the Githeme , 1666, and is given by Chappell.*''* The phrase 

Op . cit ., p, 309. 


became a proverbial expression, though meaning nothing in 
particular. In Love ^ s Labour * s Lost , IV, ii, 144, we 
find ”trip and go, my sw'eet” . The tune is a Morris dance, 
and is introduced as a dance song by Thomas Nashe in his 
Summer^s Last Will and Testament (c. 1592), where it is 
simg and danced by three maids and three clowns. 

J. M. Gibbon, Op. cit ., p. 55. 

Trip and go, heave and ho. 

Up and down, to and fro. 

From the town to the grove 
Two and two let us rove 
A-maying, a-playing. 












































fl 

ii 

89. - 

Love hath no gainsaying. 

So trip and go, trip and go,- 

Merrily trip and go. i 

HEARTSEASE 

In Romeo and Juliet, IV, v, 102-105, Peter demands n 
that the musicians play Heartsease , ’^because my heart 
itself plays, *My heart is full of woe^• 0 play me some 

merry dump to comfort me,*’ Ghappeir'‘'records that in the 

Op . cit ., pp, 97-98. 

•unpublished interlude to Misogonus (circa 1560), a song 
is directed to be sung to the tune of Heartsease « !; 

;^oted also in Romeo and Juliet , IV, v, 128-130; 145-146, j 

are three lines of a ballad or "sonnet”, A Song to the 
Lute , in Musi eke , given by Percy'"*. i 

52- Q3.t ., p. 188. I 

The tw'o ballads form the basis of the bickering be¬ 
tween Peter and the musicians, bringing comic relief 
after the preceding scene which shows the discovery of 
Juliet, supposedly dead. 

SIR LAHCELOT DU LAKE 

V 

In the Second Part of King Henry the FoTorth , II, iv, 

33 ff., Falstaff sings "\%Len Arthur first in court --- and 
v/as a worthy King." This is an imperfect citation of the 
first stanza of Sir Lancelot du Lake: 













































90, 

When Arthur first in court began 
And was approved king. 

By force of armes great victorys wanne. 

And conquest home did bring.'''' 

Ibid ., p. 205. 

Shakespeare uses this ballad snatch to give Falstaff an 
air of being perfectly at home in the Boarshead tavern, 
and to give an air of insouciance to Falstaff*s crudity. 
THE GAMAN^S WHISTLE 

Chappell gives the melody for The Carman^ s Whistle , 

Op . cit ., p. 253, It is contained in The Fitzwilliam 
Virginal Book ; Jane Pickering^s Lute Book ; B. M. Eq, Mas., 
2,046; etc. 

In speaking of Justice Shallow, Falstaff does not 

seem to be speaking of an actual ballad^Shallow, he says 

--—came ever in the rearward of fashion, and sung 

those tunes, to the overscutch'd huswives that he 
heard the carmen whistle, and swore they were his 
Fancies or his Cood-nights, 

(2 H^ IV, III, iii, 340 ff.) 

Chappell says Good-nights were "Last dying speeches" made 

into ballads. He gives as an example Essex's Last 

Op . cit ., p. 132, 

Good-Night'^': 


All you that.cry 0 Love, 0 Love, 

Come now and sing 0 Lord with me 
For why our jewell is from us gone. 

The valiant Knight of Chivalry, 

Shakespeare often UseS "GoOd night” in almost the moaern 












































91. 


slang sense, like, "That*s done it", "That sets the cap 
on it", or as an exclamation of dismay. Examples of the 
expression are: 

Be more abstemious, or else, good night your vow! 

( Temp ., IV, i, 54.) 

But, 0, poor souls. 

Come you to seek the lam-b here of the fox? 

Good ni^t to your redress. 

(M M., V, i, 299.) 

Is this your speeding? Nay, then, good night our 
part! (T S., II, i, 503.) 

If he fall in, good night! or sink or swim----- 

(1 ^., I, iii, 194.) 

Enobarbus (to Claudius, who has fled from battle). 

Ay, are you thereabouts? ¥/hy, 
then, good night indeed. 

(A C., Ill, X, 30.) 


Shallow tried to pass off such ballads as his own composi¬ 
tions « 


The whistling of the carmen was much commented upon. 
Chappell, Ibid ., p, 254, quotes Taylor, the Water-Poet 
who says in his tract. The World Runnes on Wlieeles : 

If the carman^s horse be melancholy or dull 
with hard and heavy labour, then will he, like a 
kind piper, whistle him to a fit of mirth to any 
tune, from above Eela to belov/ Gammoth; of which 
generosity and courtesy, your coachman is altogether 
Ignorant, for he never whistles, but all his music 
is to rap out an oath. 

Carters or carmen, were evidently responsible for 
propagating new songs: 

Carmen, boys, and prentices, when a new^ song 
is published with us, go singing that new, tune still 
in the street, 

(Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy , 
quoted Chappell, Ibid ., p. 255.) 





















•. -V->, , 




Tt 


* i ' ., > 
f *.1 -‘ • ■ 


\ 


■ 








m 


firo.T-'' ' 


f’l 



^.■.'^V■; , . --v , 

ji 

.. . '3, 

: . . .e^ ^•o'y 




■, sw ;,-.■■■ 


a^siiX'-Ar" 


*14 q 






92, 

Fancies are fantasies or formal embellishments of a 
theme, similar to what is now known as '’’Variations", 

Vide Naylor, 0£. eit ., p, 46. 

SILENCERS SONGS 

The ballads sung by Silence (2 Hen IV., V, iii), in¬ 
dicate the gradual progress of insobriety. By the time 
Silence sings:- 

Do me right 
And dub me knight 
Samingo, 

- he is so drunk that enunciation of 

words presents a difficulty. This is a scrap of an old 

drinking song, a version of which is to be found in Nashe, 

Summer^s Last Will (Haz. Dods. VIII, 55), It ends with: 

God Bacchus, do me right 
And dub me knight 
Domingo, 

His drunkenness is farther demonstrated when he sings 

’’And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John" for no better reason 

than that another ballad, that of King Gophetua and The 

Beggar , has just been m.entioned (2 Hen IV., V, iii, 106). 

"Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John" is a line from the ballad 

Robin Hood and the Pindar of Wakefield; 

All this beheard three wighty yeomen, 

Twas Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John: 

Vvith that they espy’d the Jolly Pindar 
As he sate under a thorne.'^' 

Percy, Op . cit ., p, 204. 



































93. I 

Falstaff also alludes to this ballad, in The Merry Wives 

of Windsor , I, i, 177 ff. 

'What say you. Scarlet and John? 

Scarlet here refers to the high colouring of Bardolph 

"whose zeal burns in his nose." 

BALLAD TAGS USED BY PISTOL 

Ballad tags form a part of Pistol’s characteristic 

argot. In 2 Henry IV , V, iii, 146, he says: 

^iVhere is the life that late I led? say they. 

Why, here it is I \7elcome these pleasant days. 

This is the title of a song in Clemence Robinson’s A , 

handefull of pleasant delites , 1584.'''' The song’s first “ 

^ Hen rv., Arden Edition, (Ed. R.P. Gowl), note p. 212, 

lines are "The life that erst thou ledst, my friend, was 
pleasant to thine eyes." Evidently it expresses a nostal¬ 
gia for good days now passed, for Petruchio in The Taming 
of the Shrew , IV, i, 143-4, teasingly sings 

WTiere is the life that late I led? 

Where are those - 

as an Elizabethan equivalent to the modern song 1 wish I 
were single again . 

Pistol, in the battle before Harfleur, King Henry V, 
III, ii, 22, says: "Be merciful great duke, to men of 
mould," He is borrowing a phrase from a ballad,''' 

S:etiry V, III, li, 22, Arden edition, (Ed. H.A. Evans), 



































94 . 


note p. 64, says ”Dyce in his glossary quotes True 
Thomas and the Queen of Elfland , »Man of Moulde, thou 
wilt me marre *”, Jamieson’s Popular Ballads , ii, 16, 


The PYench Soldier, in surrendering to Pistol, says, 

”Je pense que je vous estes le gentilhomme de bonne 

qualite”. Pistol, not knov/ing French, seizes on the last 

word and gabbles out the distorted title of a song:- 

'Quality* Callino custore me 2 

( Hen V., IV, iv, 4.) 

Chappell’''* gives the words to the first stanza: 
i'c Op. cit., p. 84. 


When as I view your comely grace, 

Caleno Casturame, 

Your golden haires, your angel’s face 
Caleno Casturame. 

Ballad tags in Pistol’s mouth mean nothing. They 
are a part of the bombast of which his ordinary speech 
consists 


J. M. Gibbon, cit ., p, 50, gives additional vwrds 

to this ballad. 


SICK , SICK ; LIGHT 0’ LOVE 

In Much Ado About Nothing , we find some quibbles on 
two ballads: 

Beat, Good morrow, sv/eet Hero. 

Hero. Why, how now? Do you speak in the sick tune . 

Beat, I am. out of all other tune, me thinks. 

Marg. Clap’s into Light o’ Love . That goes with¬ 
out a burden. Do you sing it. I’ll dance it, etc. 
Beat, Yes, ^Light o’ Love” with your heels’ then. 




































r 



ns H 


QZ r:(^' ^ 

1 




. ti ’’ a3.^;r .. 

a- 

‘r 


:-;^V ; 



.( 


f 


i 


T 


; 


I ■ 










95 . 


if your husband have stables enough, you’ll 
see he i^all lack no barnes. 

Mar. 0 illegitimate construotionl I scorn that 
with my heels. 

(M A A N., Ill, V, 40-49.) 
Chappell*''’ gives the refrain of the first song which was 


Op . cit . , pp. 73-4, 


called Sick , Sick ; 

Syck, sicke, and totowe sick 
And sicke and like to die; 

The sickest nyghte that ever I abode, 

God lord have mercy on me. 

A variation on this is found in Hashe, Summer’s Last Will , 

and Testament (Haz. Dods. vol. VIII, p, 50,). 

Sick, sick, and very sick. 

And sick and for the time; 

The viTords of Light o’ Love have not been discovered 

says Chappell who gives the melody (0£. cit ., p. 82), 

Gibbons (0£. cit ., p. 54) gives words by Leonard Gybson 

which fit the tune. 

Many ballad tags occur in Twelfth Night . In III, iii, 

80-84, Sir Toby manages to combine a cluster of four 

ballad tags in several sentences 

My lady’s a Catayan, we are politicians. 
Malvolio’s a Peg -a Ramsay , and (sings). Three merry 
men be we . Am I not consanguineous? Am I not of 
her blood? Tilly - vally , lady . (sings) There dwelt 
^ Babylon , lady , lady ’ 


































1 








0;irx-w' ''. ' 

gv:, - • ■ - "' ^ ^ ^ ■.^\'v'’^'^ 

••'.i 1 

I 

. , . ... 

■V « 


1 J^ ... j 





i.:.i' 






96 * 


PEG-A- RAJ/iSAY 

Peg -a~ Ramsay was a very popular ballad tune. The 
tune was found in a manuscript by Dr. John Bull, organist 
of the Chapel Royal in Shakespeare^s time* A set of words 
commonly sxmg to the tune is given by Gibbon. 

¥ Op. cit., p* 105. ' 


Bonny Peg o* Ramsay that any man can see. 

And bonny was her face with a fair freckled eye; 
Neat in her body made, and she hath good skill. 
And round are her bonny arms that work well at 
the mill. 

With a hey trolodel, hey trolodel, hey trolodel 
lill. 

Bonny Peg o’ Ramsay that works well at the mill, 
Chappell (^. cit *, p. 248) gives a number of other ver¬ 
sions. "Give me my yellow hose”, is the burthen to a 
ballad called 

A merry jest of John Towson, and Jackaroan his v/ife, 
VJiose jealousy was justly the cause of all their 

strife. 

Burton in The Anatomy of Melancholy (Gh. VI, p, 248) says: 

So long as we are wooers, we may kiss at our 
pleasure, nothing is so sweet, we are in heaven as 
we think, but when we are once tied, and have lost 
our liberty, marriage is an hell, "Give me my 
yellow hose again”; a mouse in a trap lives as 
merrily* 

This would suggest that yellow stockings imply 
bachelorhood or liberty. Sir Toby, in calling Malvolio a 
Peg-a-Ramsay, is calling him a bachelor or possibly a 
rake or libertine. It is probably not a coincidence, al- 




















97. 

though editors do not seem to have noticed it, that the 
letter in II, v, recommends yellow stockings and crossed 
garters to Malvolio. 

THREE MERRY MEN BE ^ 

Three Merry Men Be We , was a line from a song found 
in Peelers Old Wive ^ s Tale , 1595.'' The words go as follows:!] 

''' Chappell, 0£. cit ., p. 197. 

Three merry men, and three merry men. 

And three merry men be we, 

I in the woods, and thou on the ground. 

And Jack sleeps in the tree. 

It was set as a round for three voices by Henry Lawes, | 

says Chappell, and must have been exceedingly popular for 
it is found in all the contemporary catch books, j 

TILLY - V.ILLY , LADY 

Tilly ~ val ly , lady , probably is the nonsense refrain 
of a ballad. 

THE BALLAD OP CONSTMT SUSANNA 

There dwelt a man in Babylon , lady , is formed from 
the Ballad of Constant Susanna 

*''■ Percy, cit ., p. 209-210. 

Percy gives the words of the first stanza as follows: 

There dwelt a m.an in Babylon, 

Of reputation great by fame; 

He took to wife a faire woman, 

Susanna she was callde by name; 

A woman fair and vertuous; 






































r 

■ 

i.-' 

■ -‘JL'JOi ^ 



v*aw &s^: 


•> f - 




i 



>:A 


r 




r.-T ary 


J^-'3j-w,.,.:,-- ';: .!^-c 






I 


:0‘^' V':' 


rS:'lIf:'l rVKj v! , ; 




f .. 'eti al 


_ ^ r ten'r>ui / 




,;:j ,^: 


•-.^1 


:. (■■■••-' [-a:"- c?i 1 

- ■■ ■■: ' t. 




m 


' n,... j-cc. -S'\'; 


0)'i'v; j'::SJ 




; t : Q' -;1 


r'-W.; 


■ -r*', ,: ■" 








T'.?':r^,i 












Lady, lady: 

Why should we not of her learn thus 

To live godly? 

It is sung by Sir Toby because his own mention of Olivia 
brings to his mind this well-known ballad. The close 
proximity of these four ballad tags indicates his drunken 
state of mind* Mercutio, in Romeo and Juliet , sings Lady , 
lady , lady , as a none-too-subtle comment upon the morals 
of the Nurse (R £•, iv, 151) . He means to contrast 

the coarseness of the nurse with the "woman fair and 
vertuous; Lady, lady." 

GORYDQN»S FAREWELL TO PHILLIS 

The duet Fa rev/ell , dear heart , since 1 mnst needs be 
gone (T N., II, iii, 109-120), which is sung by the clown 
and Sir Toby, is a re-arrangement and compression of the 
ballad Gorydon* s Farewell to Phillis 

Percy, Ibid ., p. 210-211. For full discussion, see 
chapter on Songs. 

A ROBYN , JOLLY ROBYN 

Hey Robin, Jolly Robin (T N., IV, ii, 78 ff.), which 
Feste sings, and after every line of which Malvolio is 
heard to shout, is a close paraphrase of the first two 
stanzas of A Robyn Jolly Robyn .Belov/ is given both 

Percy, 0£. cit ., pp. 186-187* 









































99 . 


Shakespeare’s treatment and two stanzas of the original 
ballad: 


Clovm. 

Hey Robin, Jolly Robin (singing) 
Tell me how thy lady does. 

Mai. 

Fool - 

Clown. 

My lady is unkind, perde! 

Mai. 

Fool 

Clown. 

Alas, why is she so? 

Mai. 

Fool, I say - 

Clown. 

She loves another! Vlho calls, ha? 

(T N., IV, ii, 78-85 


A Robyn, 

Jolly Robyn, 

Tell me hov/ thy leman doeth. 

And thou shalt knowe of myn. 

My lady is unkynde perde. 

Alack! why is she so? 

She loveth another better than me; 
And yet she will say no/'' 


Percy, Op, cit ,, pp. 186-187. 


OPHELIA’S SONGS . 

On© of the ballad tags that Ophelia sings is For bonny 
sweet Robin is all my joy ( Ham ., IV, v, 186) , Chappell''”* 

Op. cit ., p. 153. 

gives music for the ballad which has two titles: ^ Robin 
To the Greenwood Gone , or Bonny Sweet Robin . The words 
of the ballad have been lost completely, but the tag by 
Ophelia fits the concluding phrase of the music.It is 

Vide Naylor, Op. cit., p. 191. ^ 





































100 . 


therefore considered likely that it is part of the ballad. 

The ballad is referred to in Fletcher»s Two Noble 
Kinsmen , IV, i, 107-S, the jailor’s mad daughter says: 

"l can sing twenty more----I can sing The Broom and Bonny 
Robin .” 

TAKE THY OLD CLOAK ABOUT THEE 

Of the two drinking songs sung by lago ( 0th ., II, iii, 
71-75; II, iii, 92-99), little is known of the first 
except that it is probably an old drinking song. The 
second song is very close to the seventh verse of the 
ballad Take Thy Old Cloak About Thee Shakespeare’s 

Percy, cit ., p. 198. 


version is smoother than the ballad in Percy, which runs: 

King Stephen was a worthy peere. 

His breeches cost him but a crowne. 

He held them sixpence all too deare. 

Therefore he call’d the tailor Lome, 

He was a wight of high renowne. 

And thouse but of a low degree, 

Itt’s pride that putts the countrye downe^j 
Man , take thine old cloake about thee.*'** 


*''' The words which differ in Shakespeare’s version are 
italicized. 


Probably Trinculo’s words 

^ Stephen , 0^ Peere : 0 worthy Stephano, 

Look what a wardrobe here is for thee, 

( Temp ., IV, i, 222-223,) 









































101 . 

are a reference to this ballad. Chappell"^'' says the ballad 
was sung to the tune of Oreensleeves . which would partly 
account for its great popularity, 

Othello , II, iii, 91, Arden Edition (Ed. H. G. Hart), 
note p. 99. 

NONSENSE BALLAD TAGS 

The line Whoop Jug I 1 love thee , in King Lear, I, i, 

245, is probably an imitation of a ballad tag, Chappell 

remarks that the tag Whoope , Barnaby , was very often 

found in ballads. Edgar, in the role of Poor Tom, uses 

the word **hey no nonny” (K Lear ., III, iv, 103) as a part 

of his calculated nonsense. This is also a frequent 

ballad tag. We find similar tags in Much Ado About 

Nothing , II, iii, 71, in Balthasar*s song, and in It was 

^ and his lass . As you Like It , V, iii, 17-34. Edgar 

uses other bits of ballads: 

Child Rowland to the dark tower came. 

His word was still, fie Poh, and fum 
I smell the blood of a British man, 

which is a fragment of a ballad Child Rowland and Burd 

Ellen , printed in Child*s English and Scottish Ballads 

(1864), 1, 245.'«'’ 

K Lear ., III, Iv, 193, Arden Edition (Ed. W. J. Craig), 
note p. 146. 









































102 . 


BROWN BESSB . 

In King Lear 5 III, vi, 25-30, Edgar says; 

Look, where he stands and glares I Wants»t 
thou eyes at trial, madam? 

Gome o*er the bourne, Bessy, to me. 

The Fool then joins in; 

Her boat hath a leak. 

And she must not speak 

\'\liy she dares not come over to thee. 

This ballad was called Over the Bourne , Bessy , or 

Brown Besse , sweet Besse , come over to me . Chappell 

(Op. cit ., p. 121 ), gives the tunes, but the words have 

been lost. Chappell thinks that the original ballad was 

one in praise of Q,ueen Elizabeth. If this is so the 

humour of the Fool and Mad Tom singing the ballad is 

understandable. 

I think Chappell is wrong here, Skelton has a song 

Ro-^^rof "', about 1520; 

My propire Besse, 

My praty Besse, 

Turne ones agayne to me; 

For slepyste thou, Besse 
Or wakeste thou, Besse, 

Myne herte hyt ys with the. 


Skelton, Speke Parrot , circa 1520, line 240 ff. 


By 1530, Skelton’s or an older version had become a hymn; 

The burne is the worlde blysede 
And besse is mankynde. 

So propyr I can non fynde as she, 



























5 


1 




y.i 




U 



L^ 


WJ3 


‘fC, 




,T 







103 . 


She daunces and lepys. 

And Christ stondes and clepys. 

Come oer the burne besse to me. 

(This is in addl. MS. 5665, 
British Museum.) 

'Mien an adaptation appeared, 1569, in The Longer Thou 

Livest the More Fool Thou Art , it may then have been 

political and may have referred to Queen Elizabeth. 

Com over the Boorne, Besse, 

My little pretie Besse, 

Com over the Boorne Besse to me. 

JOG ON 


The verse which Autolycus sings in The Winter ^ s Tale , 
IV, iii, 132-135, is to be found in The Antidote against 
Melancholy , 1661.'''* It is followed by two stanzas; 


Chappell, cit ., p. 159. 


Cast care away, let sorrow cease, 

A fig for melancholy, 

Let^s laugh and sing, or, if you please. 

We^11 frolic with sweet Dolly, 

Your paltry money-bags of gold, 

WTaat need have we to store for; 

When little or nothing soon is told. 

And we have the less to care for. 

The tune which goes with this ballad is variously called 

Hanskin . Jog On , or Eighty - Eight . 

Autolycus is described by a servant as singing Whoop 

do me no harm , good man . Chappell (^, cit ., p. 96) gives 

the tune, but the words do not exist. 



































104 


DILDOSS AND FADINGS 

Dildoes , and fadings are used in connection with the 

style of Autolycus in singing love songs ( The Winter * s 

Tale , IV, iv, 85). These words have an obscure origin, 

but were used as refrains in ballads. A fading was a 

dance or walk as a ballad refrain. A note by P. W. 

Moorman The Winter^s Tale , {Arden Edition), pp. 79-80, 

gives examples: from Roxburgh Ballads , ii, 55 (circa 1650), 

"She proves herself a Duke^s daughter, and he but Squire’s 

son. Sing, trang, dildo lee ;" from Beaumont and Fletcher, 

The Knight of the Burning Pestle , III, v, "l Vifill have 

him dance fading ; Fading is a fine jig.'* In Matthew 

White’s The Courtier scorns the Country CIoto, the last 

line is "with a fading , fading , fading ." 

Shakespeare has used the general term ballads in 

various ways. When Prince Hal will not give Falstaff 

his horse, before the Gadshill robbery, Falstaff says: 

-_An I have not ballads made on you all and 

sung to filthy tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison. 

(1 IV., II, ii, 44 ff.) 

Hotspur dislikes music and poetry, and slightingly says: 

I had rather be a kitten and cry mew 
Than one of these metre ballad-mongers. 

(1 H^ CT., Ill, i, 129-130.) 

After Falstaff has surrendered Coleville to John of Lan¬ 


caster he wishes his feat to be remembered: 




































-i?): 

'"'tad'c v'fsfi 




■.•:;•■- :.v :3f ."i 


" M-. 


■x-i- i 


V;;:X;3' 



i- •■ ■') 






. rratit r>b«' 


mi ■■'rn^no f,;.y 

-■ . j? 

•i ■ . _ [ ,-■ ■ 




L ' .^:-. ''I . X vI ■ 




, ■■ K-x 






^ 1 




iM 


■rf. 





W:iii 'txi t'i,:.:) 

. . -^T M 




•■ ' '\jfx -'V \'^.2:e.r,. 


/K> ,*Ju:.jb)«n 
1-2 !© 1 

; ■* ’ 



■m' 


f . 

I'- 


V' -k 


X; ■; 


> - , 
■•^ ■ 


(. 


1 .' -'‘l- ;i. ;• :;i„ i'x: . 

■■'.»'» ^p~v' •,.': 'if,' . 

x/ '-W 


.i 


' <iV t ^,'-1,1 


!::t^. 




rV-:; 


/t.. 











105 


I beseech your grace, let it be booked 
With the rest of this day's deeds: or, by the 

Lord, 

I will have it in a particular ballad else. 

With mine own picture on the top on't, 

Goleville kissing my foot. 

(2 K,, IV, iii, 49 ff.) 

This is a reference to personal ballads which re¬ 
counted the deeds of the men who had paid to have the 
ballads written. The subject matter of many ballads is 
referred to in the lines: 

A stumpet's boldness, a divulged shame 
Traduc'd by odious ballads. 

(AWE W., II, i, 172-3.) 

Shakespeare as a poet, probably had little love for 

ballad-writers. As a dramatist he was interested in the 

effect that ballads had on people. This scorn for ballad 

writers we find in Coriolanus , IV, v, 224 ff, a servant 

who rejoices at the prospect of war: 

Wliy then we shall have a stirring world again. 
This peace is nothing but to rust iron, increase 
tailors (who were the butt of many Elizabethan 
jokes) and breed ballad - makers . 

First Serv. Let's have war, say I. 

CONCLUSION 

Shakespeare's plays are inter-larded with ballad 
snatches and tags, to be spoken or sung. Some of the 
ballad tags had become a part of the language of the day. 

Of this type are ^i£ and go , three merry men be we , hey 
nonny no , whoop jog, and many others. These came to be 
















• rj ' ..u. 

^ • • b . 

•jasi 

^.,.J^I.- .... 

. IV'.I V 




■.n 



, V J- iV'J - '*1 0,'/ ,Yr;,')ij»-<./;■(#,■■ 


. . ' i\ 

n 


; .•: 

■'" . ( ■ 'iC*,: . i; 

. ''7 

; -4^ ' •■■ 

-vj ■ ' ^##■| 

. i^' Til^ik 

, ipij^v' A& 


‘ ,b'i 

(. ..' ' ’.iii ' 7 '' i'jl.lte 









106 


mere catch-phrases which had little or no meaning. Every 
age has its own meaningless cliches. Meaningless as 
these tags were, Shakespeare has used them to give verve 
and naturalness to his dialogue. The casual singing of a 
bit of ballad makes Falstaff appear quite at home in the 
Eoars-Head Tavern (2 Hen IV. , II, iv, 33 ff.) . Pistol’s 
vocabulary is remarkable for his constant use of bombast, 
which includes the use of ballad tags. 

Certain ballad tags recalled to the minds of the 
audience the whole story of the ballad from which they 
originally came. The names of certain tunes had certain 
connotations, Shakespeare has shov/n his knovsfledge of 
this inter-connection in many places. By the mention of 
Greensleeves he can call to mind either wanton behavior 
or the habit of the Puritans of “moralizing” dance tunes. 
King Gophetua and the Beggar Maid implies an association 
improper in regard to status or caste. 

Ballads, and lines from them, form a substantial 
part of scenes showing drunkenness and madness, (See 
chapter on Songs.) Ballads, or phrases from ballads, 
often form the core of comic scenes which consist of 
quibbling (R J., IV, v; M A A N., Ill, v, 40 ff.; L L L., 
IV, i, 115 ff.). Ballad tags are used to make certain 
implications (M WW., I, i, 77 ff.; T S., IV, i, 143, 144 












'yym 




. c 


.U 




.v;\:;' a,; .1 ' 


’hil- 





^..i... ^ ;'• j.,, o ; 


>■...-]• X 


mm 


f.i aj. r-Jv 


. , , ' ■ m - j 

. yy'y. yyp^yiyl •■ | 




, ^I CXJP'O*:: - 




.Xfi-r o .f : ■ Z^' 


o . .....: •■ ■■ -^r/' . •■ \'- ^cv 

, ■ ■'■ x ..-.vi.C'.’; 

:al . <.■ 'x.':; ~ ’ ' 




. ■...:. .t'::j'..;.;liiS?x ym \ 

■., f... , ” 




rx-:. .f'O, yy}S/if-:'p 


■' '^)’r:j y-iO'i. 


» 


Al}iy 


f. 


) :■ ^r;i-::.i j. 











107 . 


R J., II, iv, 151), and ballads are used with dramatic 
irony (T N., IV, ii, 78-85; also see chapter on Songs). 
They are frequently used with humourous results. 

A liberal use of ballad tags gives the speeches of 
his comic characters a bite, a forthrightness, an auto¬ 
chthonous quality. 

Ballads and ballad tags are a form of imagery. 

Used, as Shakespeare has used them, they have a telling 
effect. They make certain implications, or they suggest 
situations in concentrated or capsular form. 








I 0 8 


CHAPTER III 

MILITARY STAGE DIRECTIONS ' 

The theatre audience of Elizabethan times had a 
special fondness for certain sources of inartistic joy 
such as ’’noise; rant; mere bawdry; ^shews»; irrelevant 
songs; ballads, jokes, dances, and clowning in general”.* 

* A. C. Bradley, Oxford Lectiires on Poetry (Macmillan, 
1909), p. 365. 

They liked ’’trumpet and drum” history and Shakespeare 
gave it them. The Shakespearian method of depicting 
a battle was to have a pair of warriors rush on the 
stage, fight, and rush off again. Battle scenes were 
sometimes over-sauced with bugle-calls and drum beats, 
at least for the modem palate. There are considera¬ 
tions, hov/ever, in favour of this method. This series 
of single combats allowed characters to speak their 
lines during the battle. We are able to get some idea 
of the changes of fortune and impressions of the men 
engaged. Moreover, it is far more dramatic than the 
modern method of showing a great spectacle in panorama 
in which no one incident is predominant, and in which 
no words can be spoken. The Shakespearian method bears 
certain resemblances to the technique developed by the 

moving pictures - that of showing a series of incidents. 

Shakespeare had justification in using his military 




















/ Of. 

sound effects. It was necessary. Other playwrights 
were doing it. And plays such as Hamlet , King Lear , 
Macbeth , and Othello might have proved too heavy and 
over-subtle for the groundlings without the ”sound and 
fury”. The furore of trumpet calls, beating of drums, 
duels, shouts, firing of ordnance could be heard for 
some distance. It would serve as advertising for the 
play. A parallel might be drawn between the circus 
midway of today and the theatre of that time. 

But the "sound and fury” did signify something. 
There is a great difference between the theatrical 
exuberance which went into that welter of alarums and 
excursions of the King Henry VI plays and Shakespeare’s 
use of military stage directions in later plays. They 
came to have a certain dramatic significance. 

An examination of the Polios and Quartos of the 
plays shows many places where stage directions are 
obviously called for, but are not included. Since 
Shakespeare most certainly had a hand in the production 
of his own plays, he was not always meticulous in this 
regard. Trumpet calls could easily be added or deleted 
according to need; and furthermore, Shakespeare seems 
to have generally written in haste. Modern editors 
have more or less dealt with the stage directions 
according to their own taste. Additions to the stage 
















E-' 




, 






■jti;:. 




’.f'tv : 


Vs- 


..' r -:x; 


. u, '■■/; o lv:trr-,v;: 

: V.;..' '■ ' 


' :/ (?S 

i 


‘K>‘ 






jj- 


X, ■ : 


_ ,f,, ^ jjIj, 


■'<,■■ , J. J. 




M 


iSAAJ' Alo -in:/5 A 




■ ^ 


‘■•'j .'■ ■/ n’ 


i'i-'-'iS:.!. ' 'i-csi 




'■■; -ic.- 


j rle-l/Av r. , 

. ■ . .. '.:, - 'f-U'- 3 f: 




; ■ ; n n, . ' ‘ n u 


sr' 




o . 




4 i'll . 


j' ^; . ;■ •• ■ /■; r! O /.;' 'e rrB 0 !' „ 

•„ .;.C-.y ,' -V: ,• .) ,:; : A‘^y:A^-'/n:o nA' ss.^nf 

“: ■ ■ :ri £'■: ccoy.t;, yy" y./. J/'A: , nvBXB [ 

■ ■ ' ■ ;■ ■' .‘■, ;A AC'IlBn. Av A. J 

'■■ ■ '■' ' ,1 ■*.■ aAVOC fl 

''KP A: :■■ 


1, iS 


:ei<| > ci r'' Ao i,: 

y^- . 


• - 


-■'i: Uv ;,y. 


^■ 1 '" 


y' ,. 

'A V. ^ ■ ' ■ 


/ vn.' -oA ! 



4:>4/Ay'yy' 

t 



. y«>;. , 

‘V.) O'. 

: : V'.;r-1 



. 

i 











/ 10 . 


directions are often justified, for some of the Polio 
directions are spare to the point of emaciation. For 
example, in King Henry V, V, li, 43, “Enter the PRINCE, 
now KING HENRY V, attended*’. In 2 King Henry VI, IV, 
iii, Cade says, *’V/hat voice is this I hear? Dare 
anyone he so hold to sound retreat or parley, when I 
command them kill?” Editors lightly place the stage 
direction “Sound a parley*’ before Cade*s speech. 

For the purpose of this study, I have used the 
stage directions in the Polios and Quartos as repre¬ 
senting most nearly the intention of Shakespeare as it 
is available to us. Additions by modern editors I 
have enclosed in brackets, so that mod.ern opinions may 
be seen together with the stage directions of Shakespeare *s 
own time. The stage directions themselves I have enclosed 
in quotation marks. 

ALARUM 

The stage direction alarum is frequent. It is 
sometimes qualified, as in 2 Henry VI , V, il, 78: 

“Alarums afar off”; 3 Henry VI, I, Iv, 22; “A short 
alarum within”; Julius Caesar , V, iv, 95: “Low alarums”. 

Naylor, Shakespeare and Music , p. 160, quotes 
Skeaton on the derivation of the word alarum as being 
from “all* arrne” (Italian), a war cry of the Crusaders. 


























‘i;5' ^^r:>>.,L;t-'r?'■'■■'' 
.'ic^v-ipi' , 


m^: 






■ ■ •■ ' r : - 7 ' , :i "^ybi^i) ^ '.l^il 

. ■';" ; ■' 'ftii; 


I ik:r. 

':'. n 


■ ■: ■ .-v/, .' •'■■ 0 ' "' noI ;]-04t:‘::;Ib i 

■ ’ ■■ -'::::i»'' ■■ IM . ■ : 

; J n ..', ''’r-' :■•■£::; v‘:^irq i 

^ " '■^. ' :■■ I 


'1 ■) 


■• " "'rio 


:X ift 
, ai:i o:t ^^Id3iXi|/;S xf£ 'j 




J ■ ■■:':'V.v.; C'iy;jrf ! 

■ ■ mm I 

' ■ rof|B . C};i,, 

' >J - ■:': ,iii) %3':2cf ^ I o itoo | 

^ ' ■ 

. :;:^^;r,: rio .,:X-'-Xoxip ■ i:ix ,j 


.^IXI n6 f .;' r>x ‘- z,''V:'' '■ ■■ :' I' 

e X-: 

.... ' , ' n 


-j. a 


f 


izri- 'X-X 

MOT < 


■ ^:t 


* .;/v . 


• ,'.X'r xiy xt ■■■oy-i '.. 








/ t /. 


In general* it means a call to battle, executed on drums, 


Alarums were sometimes given by combined Instruments - 
A IV, vll: "Alarum. Drums and trumpets. Enter 
AGRIPPA, etc.". 

as in the text of Richard 111 , IV, iv, 149: "A flourish, 
trumpets. Strike alarums, drums". That alarums were 
signals to join battle can be seen from the following: 

^ Henry VI , IV, iii, "Alarums to the fight"; 1 Henry IV , 
V, Hi: "The KING enters with his POWER. Alarum to the 
battle. Then enter DOUGLAS and SIR WALTER BLUNT". 

Alarums are frequently coupled with excursions,* as 


* This is not always so. Vide 3 Hen VI, II, iv: 
"Excursions"; 1 Hen VI., I, iii, 69: "^ere they skirmish 
again, etc.”. 

a regular device for indicating thSit a battle is in 
progress. It has already been noted that this method 
satisfied the audience^s desire for noise and confusion 
on the stage; and that this method of treating battles 
has a certain dramatic advantage, in that the Interplay 
of characters need not be broken. 

Some idea of the varying length of alarums may be 
had from the follov/lng examples: 

"A short alarum". 

( Hen V., IV, v, 6.) 

Bru. Our enemies have beaten us to the pit. 

"Low alarums". 

It is more worthy to leap in ourselves 

Than tarry till they push us . Good Volumnlus, 




















I ! 'X, 


Thou know’st that we two went to school 

together; 

Even for that our love of old, I prithee, 

Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I tun on it. 

Vol. That*s not an office for a friend, my lord. 

Cll. Ply, fly, my lordl there’s no tarrying here. 

"Alarum still". 

(J C., V, V, 23.) 

The alarum evidently continues softly for the next twelve 
lines when it is broken hy a louder alarum, and the cry 
of "Flyl Plyl" (J C., V, v, 42.) 

A clearer example of a long alarum is found in 
Troilus and Cressida , IV, v, 112 ff: 

"Alarums. AJAX and HECTOR fight". 

Agam. They are in action. 

Nestor Now, Ajax, hold thine ownI 

Dio. Hector, thou sleep’st; 

Awake thee’. 

Agam. His blows are well dispos’d: there, /\Jax’. 

Dio. You must no more. 

"Trumpets cease". 

The effect of kettle-drums rolling while action is 
taking place is age-old, and is still in use in moving- 
picture music. The rolling of drums envelops events in 
an atmosphere of suspense and excitement. 

Differences in the volume of alarums were used to 
indicate distance. A loud off-stage alarum meant that 
the center of battle was close at hand (vide J £•, V, v, 
42, above); "a low alarum" (vide J £•, V, iii, 90; or 
2 Hen VI , V, li, 77: "An alarum afar off"), meant that 
the battle was some distance away. Variations of this 







J- 




<r“ 




■ ft 


\ * 


'10 . • 






■" ■■: ■. i ''■ ' .'* ■•/r^''"'' 












/ ‘ 3 . 


device are still In use on the stage and In sound 
pictures, and particularly are they useful as a radio- 
drama technique where the scene must be laid by 
audible suggestion. 

It was common for alarums to be combined with 
other sound effects such as the shooting of ordnance 
(2 Hen VL > IV, 1; “Alarum. Fight at sea. Ordnance 
goes off“); with thunder (1 Hen VI., I, Iv, 97: “Here 
an alarum and It thunders and lightens ”)5 or with 
shouts (J £•> V, V, 42: “Alarum. Cry within, ^Plyl 
Flyl”). 

The Globe Theatre was burned to the ground in 1613, 
the fire being caused by the "shooting off certain 
chambers in way of triumph". 

‘^Vlde E. K. Chambers, “The Public Theatres", The 

Elizabethan Stage , Vol. II, pp. 419-20. 

A rather puzzling stage-direction occurs in Antony 
and Cleopatra, IV, xii, 9: “Alarum afar off, as at a 

! 

sea-fight". Akin to it is, "after their going in, is 
heard the noise of a sea fight" (AC., Ill, x.). The 
words "as at a sea fight" only mean "at a distance". 

The stage represents the shore, and the naval engage¬ 
ment takes place at sea or “at a distance". The regular 
device of combined alarums, shouts, and the clatter of 
weapons was probably used here. 

















/ I V. 


I suggest that in 1 Henry IV > V, ill, 29, an 
alarum Is used with comic effect. Hitherto alarums 
have been accompanied with excursions. Here we find 
’’Alarum. Enter PALSTAPP, solus”. Alarums in general 
preface a rush of soldiers upon the stage and a skirmish. 
When Palstaff enters after an alarum, the effect is 
anti-climactic. This is good evidence that Palstaff 
believes discretion to be the better part of valour. 

He makes no effort to get into the battle, but is walk - 
ing away from it. It is significant that his first 
words are ’’Though I could scape shot-free at London, I 
fear the shot here. Here*s no scoring but upon the pate. 

* Kittredge Insists that Palstaff was brave (G. L# 
Kittredge, 1 Hen IV., note p. XIII). 

The stage directions of Shakespeare’s plays do not 
yield a great deal of information about sennets . Several 
critics have stated that they are of greater length than 
flourishes*, but I can find no basis for these statements 

* E. J. Dent, Shakespeare and Music, Companion to 
Shakespeare Studies , p. 153. 

Cowling, Music On the Elizabethan Stage, pp. 45, 47, 96. 

Grove’s Dictionary (Vol. P-Son, p. 713), says that the 
term is used to Indicate that a particular set of notes 
is to be played. It gives no Justification of this 
statement. The name, continues the article, is probably 
























lA- 


"-K 



. ' •■X 0 




§■ m 9 

-*tX3 


: „Cf''ei#' ' :■<^ ■ :k' : 'b '^;o7. 

■■ '.' '-I' ' ' :,'■ 







1 

- ^,. * 










/ / 6 *. 


derived from seven and may Indicate a flourish of seven 
notes, as suggested in Stainer and Barrett’s Dictionary 
of Musical Terms , A sennet is distinguished from a 
flourish , as is proved hy a stage direction in Dekker’s 
Satiromastix , ’'Trumpets sound a flourish, and then a 
sennate ". The New English Dictionary says it is 
"apparently a variant of signet , in the sense ’sign, 
token’•* 

* New English Dictionary , Vol. VIII., pt. II., S-Sh. 
p. 455« 

Since no music for sennets is extant, we only know 
that it was a set of notes instrumented in various 
ways, and used to announce royal or quasi-royal per¬ 
sonages. Sennets always signify pomp and circumstance, 
and are used to announce entrances, and to cover exits. 
In several plays a sennet signifies the conclusion of 
a bargain (3 Hen VI. , I, i, 205); and entrance into 
Parliament (2 Hen VI., III, i); and a sennet consisting 
of trumpets and cornets plays during a long procession 
to the Consistory Court ( Hen VM ., II, iv). 

Flourishes . 

Prom the text we have a clear idea as to what a 
flourish was. In Richard III, IV, iv, 149, we find "A 
flourish, trumpets’. Strike alarum, drums’." In The 
Merchant of Venice , there is a reference to the chief 






























s- 






> 








: ■'. r. ■ ' ■:,.. 





.£ 






■ i' ^ v: 







B ri 


{■' 


/:; '''m ■ •'■: 


') 


0 













/ / 6 


function of the flourish - to salute the presence of 
royalty - "Even as the flourish when true subjects 
bow to a new-orovmed’monarch" (MV., Ill, li, 49). 
Examples of flourishes are numerous and not particularly 
interesting. For this reason I have given only a few 
examples. 

The opening lines of Antony and Cleopatra are of 
Interest. Five lines which form a prologue are spoken 
by Philo and Demetrius. There we have the situation 
stated. At a flourish (AC., I, 1, 9), we have the 
entrance of "ANTOFT, CLEOPATRA, her LADIES, the TRAIN, 
with EUNUCHS fanning her", and the action starts. The 
flourish begins the play proper. There are numerous 
cases where flourishes imply action off stage. For 
example: "Flourish and shout" (££•> I> ii> 78); 

"Shout. Flourish" (J C., I, ii, 131). The first call 
brings the conversation of Brutus and Cassius to the 
crowning of Caesar. We understand that they are not in 
favor of it. The second flourish and shout causes the 
audience, as well as Cassius and Brutus, to wonder 
what taking place. 

Hamlet , II, ii, 585, the flourish announces 
the coming of players. Their call must have been 
recognized, for on hearing it, Guildenstern says, "There 
are the players". Similarly, a flourish is used to 
















announce Quince for the play Pyramus and Thishe In 
Midsummer Night * s Dream , V, i, 107. Two pieces of 


/ 17 . 


evidence are not sufficient to suggest that actors 

may have used a set of notes particular to the "quality”. 

Flourishes were also used frequently for exits as 
in the following examples: "Flourish. Exeunt all hut 
YORK" (1 Hen VL, IV, i, 175); "Flourish. They go up 
into the Senate House" (T A., I, i, 64); and "Flourish. 
Exeunt CAESAR, ANTONY, and LEPIDUS" (AC., II, ii, 

170). 

Flourishes were of different lengths to fit 
different occasions; "a long flourish" ( Rich II ., I, 
iii, 123); "A long flourish *till they come down" (T A., 
I, i, 233). They were sometimes accompanied by drums, 
or ordnance: "A flourish with drums and trumpets" 

(Cor., V, V, 7); "Sound a flourish. Enter TRUMPETS 
and KETTLE-DRUMS" (Ham., Ill, ii, 94); "A flourish of 
trumpets, and two pieces go off" ( Ham ., I, iv, 6). 
Flourishes were used to announce entrances.and cover 
I exits, but Snakespeare seems to have had no precise 
rule for the use of flourishes. They are absent in 
some places where we might expect them. For example: 
"Enter the KING, GLOUCESTER, WINCHESTER, RICHARD, 

DUKE of YORK, SUFFOLK, SOMMERSET, WARWICK, EXETER 
(VERNON, BASSET, and others) to them with his soldiers. 













V 










TALBOT" (1 Hen VI., Ill, iv); "Enter the DUKE of EPHESUS, 
with the ffiRCHANT of SYRACUSE (AEGON) , JAILOR, and other 
attendants” (C E., I, 1); "Enter KING HENRY, HUll'IPHREY 
(DUKE OP GLOUCESTER) BEDFORD, CLARENCE, WARWICK, WEST¬ 
MORELAND, and EXETER (with attendants)” (Hen V., I, ii); 
"Enter the PRINCE (now KING HENRY V, attended)" (2 H^ 

IV., V, il, 43). 

We find sin interesting use of a flourish in Richard 

III . The King orders a flourish to drov/n the railing 

of Queen Elizabeth and the Duchess of York: 

K. Rich. A flourish trumpets I Strike alarum, drums I 
Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale 

women 

Rail on the Lord’s annointedl strike, I sayl 
( Rich III ., IV, iv, 149-151.) 

Parley or Parle . 

The term parley or parle is not frequent in the 
stage-directions of the plays. Naylor defines the term 
as "either a trumpet call announcing an embassy from 
one party to another, or for a cessation of hostilities 
during the fight itself".* The following are the stage 

* 0£. clt., p. 175. 

directions in which parleys occur: 

"Trumpets sound a parley". 

(I H^VI., Ill, iii, 35.) 

"Parle without and answer within. 

Then a flourish. Enter on the walls etc.". 

( Rich II., Ill, iii, 62.) 




















. 7 11 

t' 






tl'v i 






£ 

... y,-?,. ,, 

^A■ 

ii u ■ ■ • . ^ 'I 


w ' .' 'j; 

H*tte tf . ' 



tx. 


ayx . . :,y:, ’Xa; iax-rl:;''! 


x; ■ '5v "'I 

."'^ • I'' 1 

''“;.V. " r | 

, X'., -V' ■ ^;fXV •■■'':.■ . '.a:.! ! 

. rilS'-'T,;; ,XT , sr -OLC' lo| ■;/;| 


.•-‘■;f ‘xO i'-'-v' '■-X "'■'‘■'X X 

. X -W' 

x,.' -'rx X:.)'"'."If ■o:4bX'J'-' 

■ ! 

:a,X: !. Xx;' ■: : ; ■,.i,',■■■' x;:X 

■ 11 

>■■ ■ 4 

'X'X’Xr '■- •■,>..fjii’io! ' ^ "i 

, X X.xrx ' "X ': ' ■' ' ' 


mm 


• .1’ ‘ • ‘‘X " 0 " 'v. • f ' ■ pI'O * :j-0 :.,' ‘iX. i ^ 

'■' ••/' c X' -;-■ ‘-: ■ X i 






/ ! 


’'The trumpet sounds a parley" . 

IV, Hi, 29,) 

"A parley (sounded)". 

( Hen V., Ill, ii, 148.) 

"Sound a parley. The Senators appear upon the walls". 

(T A., V, iv.) 

Of these, the only one of interest is in Richard II , III, 
iii, 162 (see above). Here, the faint and muffled call 
backstage contrasts with the louder parle without and 
flourish. This is effective stage business. The ansv/er 
within indicates the presence of troops at a distance. 

Hichard II occurs the only instance of a charge 
( Rich II., I, iii, 117). It is here the signal for 
Bolingbroke and Mowbray to begin combat. The actual 
trumpet blast is the climax of the scene in which the 
opponents prepare to Joust. Following it comes Richard’s 
unexpected action, "Stay*. The King hath thrown his 
warder down" ( Rich II. , I, iii, 118). 

Retreat . 

The stage direction retreat is self-explanatory. 

It occurs rarely. The actual notes of the retreat are 
not known. The term occurs in the stage-directions of 
only six plays. Sometimes the text gives the meaning 
of the retreat: 

Bedford Here sound retreat and cease our hot pursuit 

"Retreat (sounded)T" 

(1 Hen VI., II, ii, 3.) 




















•%:, ' " , ^ 
i'- ' i' 




>• ' 


fJ ' 







•“‘■'‘iXft-He.e r 
'id to 


- 

U 


f 

■ \ 



Sf,. 






S‘j:a o*^J i:bril, ^w 


fDc/o 1::!:-I'S‘Xi.Ll. 

’. J„ -L f •'. .1-4- '■f f, » *. . , .i 


.5 

- i 

li 




i. 

■ ‘ 7 -' , ■ t 

.:• si.. 




-■ • 4 

"Cfoqqcq 


, n -■ IX 0. r hh -:>; 

'’X 

;.i,A'KW; J. f- 

’■r-'i... ' .*^i'XVK.X^ 








/ 'X O 


^’Alarum and retreat. Enter again CADE and 
all his •RABBLEl'.'lEM’.(sound a parley). 

Cade What voice is this I hear? Dare anyone he 
so hold ^ sound retreat or parley ? when I 
command them kill? 

(2 VX, IV, viii, 4.) 

In other cases there is no textual explanation of the 
call. 

“Alarum. Retreat. Enter YORK, RICHARD, 

WARWICK, and SOLDIERS, with DRUM and COLOURS" 

(2 Hen VI., V, iii.) 

“Sound a retreat". 

(T C., I, ii, 191.) 

“Sound a retreat". 

(T C., Ill, i, 153.) 

Hichard III , V, v, the retreat which is sounded 

on Richard*s demise symbolizes the defeat of Richard*s 

cause. The stage direction runs as follows: 

“Alarum. Enter RICHARD and RICHMOND; they 
fight. RICHARD is slain. 

Retreat and Flourish. Re-enter RICHMOND, 
DERBY hearing the crown, with divers other 
lords". 

Out of the ten retreats which are actually heard 
on the stage, four are explained as retreats in the 
text; five are unexplained; in one, the meaning is 
implied. The use of the exact term retreat in the five 
times it is used and is not explained in the text and 
the one time its meaning is implied, lead me to believe 
that the audience understood the call and could recog¬ 
nize it. If this is so, they would he able to know. 






















merely from the trumpet call retreat , that the peak of 
the battle was over; one side had lost. ' Knowing this, 
the lines and actions of the vanquished and the con¬ 
querors would be more easy to follow. 

Horns . 

Horns occur in stage-directions seven times in five 
plays. 

’’Enter Titus Andronicus and his three SONS 
(MARTINS, LUCIUS, and QUINTUS), making a noise 
with horns; and MARCUS. 

(T A., II, ii.) 

’’Here a cry of hounds and wind horns in a peal.* 
Then enter SATURNINUS, etc. 

(T A., II, ii, 10.) 


Naylor, Shakespeare and Music , p. 177, says, a ’’peal” 
refers to a ‘”'se't of notes on a horn and is used in 
forestry”. In I And ., II, ii, 5, we find ’’ring a 
hunter*s peal”. 


’’Wind horns. Enter a LORD from hunting, with 
his TRAIN (of HUNSTBIEN and SERVANTS)”. 

(T S., Ind., 16.) 

’’Horns within. Enter LEAR, (KNIGHTS), and 
ATTENDANTS”. 

(K L., I, iv, 7.) 

’’Winds his horn. Drums strike up. A peal of 
ordnance. Enter SOLDIERS”. 

’’Post blowing a horn within”. 

(3 Hen VI., Ill, ill, 161 

The horn calls in Titus Andronicus serve several 

purposes. They transform the stage from ’’Rome. Before 

the Palace” into a forest. Moreover, they establish 

























I 'k'l. 


Titus as a cheerful, hardy man in the prime of life* 
This picture of him is given to contrast with the 
Titus we see at the end of the play, a man embittered 
and enfeebled with tragedy. 

I cannot entirely agree with Naylor* who says the 

* Ibid ., p. 126. 

hunting calls are "a part of Learns lessened state”. 

The call suggests that Lear is a vigorous man, still 
able to take part in the strenuous sport of hunting. 
Further evidence on this point is found in his entrance 
lines, ”Let me not stay a jot for dinners go, get it 
ready” (K L., I, iv, 9). The horn call also ends the 
soliloquy of loyal Kent, and serves as an effective 
entrance for the king and his attendants. 

The phrase "winds his horn”, 1 Hen VI., II, iii, 

60, can mean no more than "Talbot blows his trumpet”. 
The stage-directions "Post blov/ing a horn within”, 
represents the posts drawing near. The horn is here 
used to draw attention to the letters, and to make 
their delivery more striking. 

Fifes . 

Only in two places does "the ear-piercing fife”* 

* 0th ., III, iii, 351. Othello's reference to it 
iniplTes its association with war. 

















/ 


occur in the stage-directions. In 1 Hen IV.> III, ill, 
101, we find "Enter the PRINCE (and POINS), marching; 
and PALSTAPP meets them, playing on his truncheon like a 
fife”. Palstaff is here playing his usual role of 
buffoon in pretending to be the attendant music of an 
army. "Enter ALCIBIADES, with Drums and Pife, in war¬ 
like manner, and PHRYNIA and TIMAroRA" (T A., IV, lii, 

47). In a note on Othello , III, in Knight’s Shakespeare , 
p. 301, we discover that "Warton says the fife accompany¬ 
ing the drum is of considerable antiquity in European 
armies, especially the German. A picture in the 
Ashmolean Museum, painted in 1525, represents the siege 
of Pavla, and shows fifes and drums". 

Judging from the scarcity of its occurrence, the 
fife was not a popular Instrument in Shakespeare’s 
day. One can only conjecture as to the reason for the 
appearance of the fife in Timon of Athens . Hitherto 
the trumpet and drum have been used in stage directions. 

Sound . 

Shakespeare sometimes labels a fanfare merely as 
trumpet , instead of naming the specific trumpet call. 

Sound is the term most frequently used to indicate 
that the trumpets must play. Examples are: 

"The trumpet sounds. Enter WORCESTER (and VERNON)" 

(1 H^ IV., V, i, 8.) 

















/K/B'r:/' D'^ 







. b" ::Z ■ , (Tl^'j.’B 

- ' ' ■ ’/. ' 

Y .q I: 


r^... 




1 ^ 






,q;;qx ,r/J iy:-.':a-:B\ .,: Y/'Ye.ij''a.Y9.Co'':Y'B/l 


OYo YOV,X'!: B'vrO;iX; XvYY 'Xo 


'/’i; , '■ 
; -r *Y ' 




^ X;B-Y''>- Y' ::'o;f ,c;5’: j 




• ■;B ■’,;„.,.':V:> YlY' 

■’ -l ’i.'.';. '■■■ ■''y '•! o BBi: 


.*4 

1 . 


■'fi' 


'‘ 0S:|' 




, .... 

>r: B'*:.''."v :■■"■■'•; :,T 


mm 

■■ " Yt 


.... r;vi>' 


■r:i.ro- 








,."r'';; 










/ y. 


“Drum; trumpets sound; a piece goes off (v/ithln)’*, 

(Ham., V, ii, 293.) 

The order to blow trumpets Is most often found as 

"sound” In the text also. A typical example is: 

"Sound drums and trumpets and to London all;" 

(2 VI., V, iii, 32.) 

A trumpet precedes the company of players in The Taming 

of the Shrew , Ind., 1-73. 

"(Sly is borne out). Sound trumpet". 

Lord. Sirrah, go see what trumpet ’tis that sounds. 

We may Judge from the trumpet call which announces the 

players in Hamlet , II, ii, 390, that this call might 

be a flourish. The Maskers in Love's Labour Lost , are 

also heralded by a trumpet call. 

"Sound trumpet (within)". 

(L L L., V, ii, 156.) 

The entrance of royalty or of exalted personages 

is frequently marked by the sounding of trumpets, which 

probably refers to sennets or flourishes . Many entrances 

are marked in this way. 

"The trumpets sound. Enter young prince, etc." 

( Rich III ., iii, i.) 

"The trumpets sound. Enter the KING, PRIHCS of 
WALES, etc." 

(1 H^ IV, V, V.) 

"Trumpets sound”. 

Lafeu. The King’s coming; I know by his trumpets. 

(A W E W., V, ii, 53.) 

"(Trumpet within.)" 

(0th., II, i, 178.) 















! 




'I 




i 


■i t 


■■ H 














/ ‘X 6 ~ 


Trumpets mark the end of a scene, or occasionally 
signal for exits. The following are interesting cases: 

”Exeunt with trumpets”. (At the end of the masque.) 

( Hen VIII ., I, iv, 108.) 

"Exeunt TROILUS, CRSSSIDA, and DIOMEDE, Sound 
trumpet”. 

Paris Harkl Hector’s trumpet. 

AEni. How have we spent the morning. 

(TO., IV, iv, 141.) 

Here our attention is called from the unhappy 
lovers, who are leaving the stage, and fastened once 
more upon the Trojan war. The actual trumpet call is 
the transitional point. 

Here they embrace. The trumpets sound. (Exeunt.) 

(1 'V', ii, 98.) 

The sounding of the trumpets in this case foretells 
disaster. Hotspur feels it, and says: 

Sound all the lofty instruments of war. 

And by that music let us all embrace; 

For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall 

A second time do such a courtesy. 

Trumpets within . 

This is a device, mentioned before in this chapter, 
to imply action taking place off the stage. Editors 
have been lavish in adding the term within to trumpet 
calls obviously not performed on the stage. That they 
have been justified may be seen in several of the 
following examples. 

In King Lear , V, iii, 115, Edgar’s off-stage trumpet 
answers the triple challenge of Edmund. The stage 












Lf 








I’'' m ’ ‘ 

- - ' ,, i «'■■, ,v: 


■# 

. ' u iX(» V.V i:, „D^j,t;r:.UV, 





0 o,'. . i J >j'ji?r"'Xro 'eX-x: 


£;*: ,?vrr^l 




J-U'-fX' c.vX.' . -;""C'.'l:-v ';;e,Xd 

... •.:, ,x) ■ . 

u., ;> :‘. ;::v ; ;X? ■ lQ'^;.3rt^X5iir-;£:;;;ii OfiX 

L,i'..‘vX ‘.i,.vX.. So 


.-;X/‘i.’r ;;.■ ' >1 sii',J' 113 MiroE ' 

■ » ' ,xv- s:' ■' ." ’ .-it oi:,';J 

PXr ■;■' , v'’' ■ ■ . J ^-.xjX', 

■. •'■ .. s;?, e; “'X:* ' br'^or.f?e' A ■ 


: ' ;.Z .Av '.•■■-"I r:o>[(i 

»; '■ 


. 


‘‘. • .' ' ■' ,' i-V'to j 

■;\: AaXu.a J .''csor' " ■;.nrA 

. f.%i: ,a®/.'..':.e j.,, 

■ .■ m ; 

...... - . I- 

l.:dio ^ •I'..-,.':‘.cd 0.. ,■.■ S^iev," U-Ui 







/ a ^ 


direction is, “Trumpet answers within". In Othello , 

II, 1, 178, "Trumpet within". To this call, lago 
says, "The Moor I I know his trumpet". In the same 
play ( 0th ., IV, i, 218), to "A trumpet (within)", 

Othello says, "What trumpet is that same?" lago, who 
has just provoked Othello into a vow to strangle his 
wife, says "Something from Venice, sure. *Tis Lodovico. 
Come from the duke: and, see, your wife is with him". 

From the text we know too that the trumpet was 
used as an instrument of summons. 

"(Trumpet sounds)". 

(K J., V, li, 116). 

Lewis V/hat lusty trumpet thus doth summon us? 

Lartius Go sound the trumpet in the market-place; 

Call thither all the officers o* th* town, 
Where they shall know our mind. Away I 

(Cor., I, V, 27.) 

Trumpets are naturally connected with heralds. 

"Here after excursions, enter the HERALD of 
PRANCE with TRTOPETS, to the gates". 

(K J., II, 1, 299.) 

"Enter ENGLISH HERALD with TRUMPET". 

(K J., II, i, 311.) 

"The trumpets sound. Enter (BOLINGBROKE), DUKE 
of HEREFORD appellant, in armour, with a HERALD". 

( Rich 11., I, iii, 25.) 

"Enter a HERALD". 

Alh. Come hither, herald; - Let the trumpet sound - 
and read out this. 

Off. Sound, trumpet*. "A trumpet sounds, (he reads 

the challenge). 

Edgar Sound*. "First trumpet". 

Her. Again*. "Second trumpet". 

Her. Againl "Third trumpet". 

(K L., V, iii, 108.) 














A trumpet also is involved in Ajax*s challenge to 
Hector, Trollus and CressIda, IV, v, SL, and the 


/ -X y. 


challenge of AEneas to the Greeks, Trollus and Cressida , 
I, lii, 253. Again, a trumpet accompanies the King’s 
toast to Hamlet ( Ham ., V, li, 293: “Drums; trumpets 
sound; a piece goes off (within)".). 

Bugles ♦ 

Bugles were a colorful part of the stage decorations, 
for banners or pennants were attached to them. 

Constable. I will the banners from a trumpet take 
And use it for my haste. 

( Hen V., IV, ii, 61.) 

Marches . 

Eighteen marches occur in the plays. Five are dead 
marches; three are national marches; eleven are ordinary 
military marches . Marches are probably played upon 
drums without any accompanying Instruments. In Hamlet , 
III, ii, 94, we find reference to a Danish march. 

This is preceded by a flourish, and followed by the 
entrance of the King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, 
Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other Lords attendant, 
with the Guard carrying torches. Their entrance appeals 
to both the eyes and the ears. The music of the Danish 
march does not now exist. Its use, however, shows that 
Shakespeare was trying to create something of an 

Illusion of reality. The Danish drinking customs are 


















f 


used partially for the same reason. 

In Henry VI , III, ili, 30, we find, “Plere sound 

an English march (Enter and pass over to a distance, 

TALBOT and his TROOPS)”, Naylor gives evidence that 

the English march was characterized by "dignity and 

gravity”* in contrast with the "brisk and alert” French 

* Ibid., pp. 16708, quotes Hawkins, History of Music, 
p. 229. 

march. The French march is mentioned in 1 Henry VI , 
III, iii, 33, "French march. (Enter the DUEE of 
BURGUNDY and his TROOPS)”. Both stage directions 
indicate the martiailing of opposing forces on the 
plains of Rouen. The contrast in the national marches 
may have been used to show the differences in army 
movement, the French army moving quickly, the English 
army slower and with majesty. 

The opening scene of 1 Henry VI, is in Westminster 

Abbey. The stage direction is: "Dead March. Enter 

the funeral of KING HENRY V, etc.”. Dead marches are 

still in use for state or military interments. Further 

instances in Shakespeare are: 

"Exeunt marching; after which a peal of ordnance 
is shot off”. 

( Ham ., V, ii, 414.) 

"Exeunt with a dead march”. 

(K L., V, iii, 326.) 

























“Sxeuntj bearing tlie body of MARC I US. A dead 
march s ounded”. 

(Cor,, V, vl, 155.) 

In these last two cases (and the exit march of Hamlet 
is probably of the same type), gravity and realism Is 
lent to the final clearing of the stage. 

In 1 Henry VI , II, 1, 7, the stage direction reads, 
"Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY (and FORCES), with 
scaling ladders; their Drums beating a dead march". 
Since they are bent on attacking Orleans, the dead 
march appears to be out of place. They are English 
soldiers, however, and therefore the march referred to 
may be no more than the dignified and grave English 
march, as distinguished from the more lively French 
march. It has been suggested that the English are 
attacking the morale of the French, telling them that 
they will be massacred, but the function of military 
music played during an attack is to give courage to 
the attackers, and to Intimidate the enemy. A dead 
march would not do this. 

Such stage directions as "March within", or "March 
afar off", imply a body of men off stage. To achieve 
the effect was simple - a drum off-stage played softly. 
The device was usually coupled with explanatory words. 
For example: 














/ 3 o 


Hor. (at Hamlet*s death) 

Now cracks a noble heart. - Good night, 
sweet prince, 

And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest I 
'JThy does the drum come hither? 

"March within". 

(Ham., V, 11, 371 ff.) 

The march Is that of Portlnbras who approaches with his 

troops. Other examples abound. 

The distant drum beat In Antony and Cleopatra , IV, 

lx, 30, "Drums afar off", has a double function. It 

calls attention to the time of day: 

HarkI the drums 
Demurely wake the sleepers. 

(AC., IV, lx, 30-31.) 

It also serves as a liason de scene , a transition from 
the death scene of Snobarbus to the next scene. 

Of less interest are the marches accompanying 
entrances of hi^ personages. These all are from the 
play 3 Henry VI : 

"March. Enter WARWICK, MARQUESS, MONTAGUE, and 
their ARMY". 

(3 Hen VI., II, 1, 94.) 

"March. Enter MONTGOMERY with Drum and soldiers". 

"March. Enter EDWARD, WARWICK, RICHARD, CLARENCE, 
NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, and SOLDIERS". 

"March. Flourish. Enter (KING) EDWARD, RICHARD, 
and SOLDIERS". 

H^ VI., V, 1, 15.) 


Here the inarches are of the ordinary military variety - 












/ 3 /. 


Just what one might expect to accompany marching 
soldiers. Similarly we find the drum and trumpet to¬ 
gether in some stage-directions as in the following: 

"Enter TALBOT with Trumpet and Drum, before 
Bordeaux"• 

(1 

"Sound drums and trumpets; and then enter two 
of TITUS* SONS (MARTIUS and MUTIUS), and then 
two men bearing a coffin covered with black, 
etc.".* 

(T A., I, i, 69.) 


* There is here no reference to a dead march which 
might have been appropriately used. 


"Drums and trumpets sound, with great shouts 
of the people".* 

(Cor., V, Vi, 48.) 


* The inclusion of shouts with drums and trumpets 
indicates the presence of a welcoming party for Aufidius. 


In Henry VIII , I, iv, 49, the drum is coiiibined with 

trumpet, and gun shots to announce a masquing party. 

The stage direction is: 

"Drum and trumpets. Chambers discharged". 
A noble troop of strangers. 

For so they seem: they*ve left their barge and 
landed; 

And hither make, as great ambassadors 
Prom foreign princes. 


( Hen VIII ., I, iv, 53-56.) 
The stage directions "Dr-um beats", "Drum heard", 
have the same meaning as "march". Instances of this 
type have no particular interest, but some samples are: 
"Drum heats". (K £., II. i, 75.) 
























• 


'’Drum. Enter BRUTUS etc.". 

(J C., IV, ii.) 

The drum, as much as the trumpet, is a symbol of all 
the appurtenances of war. Goneril sneers at Albany 
"’iiVhere*s thy drum?", an implication that he should be 
in arms (K L., IV, li, 55). Palstaff says, "0, I 
could wish this tavern were my druml"* (1 Hen IV., Ill, 

* This remark might mean that Falstaff wishes that he 
could take the tavern with him, or that he would prefer 
to stay in the tavern rather than go to war. 


iii, 229). 

The word drum may refer to the drummer as well as 
to the instrument. In this sense, it is often connected 
colours , which may mean coloiir-bearers . The pre¬ 
sence of "drum and colours" labels the body on the 
stage as part of an army in the field. Some examples 
are: 

"Enter OXFORD, with DRUI^ and COLOURS," 

"Enter MONTAGUE, with DRUM and COLOURS." 

(5 VI., V, i, 66.) 

"Enter SOMERSET, with DRUM and COLOURS." 

(3 VI*» i’ "71.) 

"Enter CLARENCE, with DRUM and COLOURS." 

(3 Hen VI., V, i, 75.)* 


% 

Prom this cluster of stage directions we can be sure 
there were at least four drums on the stage at once. 


"Enter DRUM and COLOURS (BERTRAM) COUNT ROSSILLION, 





















.aiy, 




'.' ■ ‘ .: vC ■ J ’’ 






'■:l 


C' o 


Ic. & 




.5:5c 

r :^1 


e- 


m" 













/ 33 . 


PAROLtES, and the whole army.” 

(A W E W,, III, V, 77.) 

“Enter with DRUM and COLOURS, CORDELIA, DOCTOR, 
and SOLDIERS”. 

(K L,, IV, Iv.) 

“Enter MENTIETH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS, LENNOX, SOLDIERS. 

( Mach ., V, il.) 

Tuckets. 


There are few tuckets In the plays of Shakespeare. 

The stage-directions wherein tuckets are found are these: 

“Tucket. Enter Montjoy.” 

(HenV., Ill, Vi, 120.) 

“A tucket sotmds.” 


(M V., V, i, 121.) 


“Tucket.” 


(T C., I, iii, 212.) 


“A tucket far off. Enter old WIDOW of FLORENCE 
(DIANA), VIOLENTA, and MARIANA, with other 
CITIZENS.” 

(A W E W., Ill, V.) 


”Tucket.” 

”Tucket within.” 
“Tucket within.” 
“Sound tucket.” 


(AWE 

W., 

III, V, 7.) 

(K L., 

II, 

i, 80.) 

(K L., 

II, 

iv, 184.) 

(T A., 

I, 

il, 119.) 


Naylor* says 


the term was derived from the French 


* Op . clt ., p. 174. 


word toquet , or doquet , and shows it to have been applied 


















/3y. 


to the fourth trumpet in a cavalry fanfare,* Prom the 
text it would appear that tuckets are the musical 


The Oxford Dictionary derives tucket from the Italian 
tocco , **to strike**. Move’s Dictionary of Music and 
Musicians (3rd edition), Vol. Seng-Z, p. 400, sayF^The 
word is clearly derived from the Italian Toccata , which 
Florio (A Worlde of Wordes , 1598), translates »a touch, 
a touching.* No music for the call is extant." 


signatures of families, or branches of families. Lorenzo, 
in the Merchant of Venice , V, i, 122, hears a tucket, 
and says, "Your husband is at hand. I hear his trumpet." 

When Gloucester ( King Lear , II, i, 80), hears a 
tucket, he says, "Harkl the duke’s trumpets. I know 
not why he comes." He has not been looking for him, 
but recognizes the set of notes which comprise the 
duke’s personal trumpet call. In the same play (K II, 
iv, 184-6), we find the following: 

"Tucket within." 

Corn. What trumpet’s that? 

Reg. I know’t, my sister’s: this approves her 
letter. 

That she will soon be here. 

'^en a tucket is sounded in All’s Yifell that Ends ?/ell 
(III, V, 7 ff.), the widoviT says, "We have lost our 
labour; they are gone a contrary way: hark*, you may know 
them by their trumpets." 

In several places, Shakespeare has used this 
recognition of tuckets as a dramatic device. The time 
Detween the tucket (MV.., V, i,122), and the entrance 


























"4 


'r,e'; /.^ - 




C' 

'f, 

A 

'■ C:' ' 


;’ ^'ifi 

i' . ■*%'•:• 'V 

'■'-Artis 















/ "3 5 \ 


Of Bassanlo (MV., V, i, 126), gives Lorenzo time to 
assure Portia and Nerissa that he will not hetray them 
to their husbands. In the Interval between Cornwall’s 
tucket (K L., II, i, 78), and his entrance (K L., II, i, 
85), Gloucester has time to finish the reading of 
Edmund’s forged letter, to tell us that Edgar is in 
disfavour, and that Edmund is now his "loyal and natural 
boy" (K II> i> 84). Prom Goneril’s tucket (K L., 

II, iv, 184), to her entrance (KL., II, iv, 191), Kent 
has time to berate Oswald for his night in the stocks, 
Lear to express hope that Regan had no hand in it. 

These two things lead up to another blow for Lear. 

Regan greets Goneril in sisterly fashion, and Lear at 
last knows that she too is against him. In the thirty- 
nine lines between the first tucket in All’s Well that 
Ends Well , III, v, and the entrance of Bertram and 
Parolles, an important part of the plot is unravelled. 

We discover that Bertram is in pursuit of Diana, with 
Porolles as his Pandarus; Mariana inveighs against the 
false promises of men. The "tucket afar off" (A W E W., 

III, V, 7), brings the conversation of the widow and 
Diana to bear on the "French Count" and his bravery. 
Helena then enters as a pilgrim, and discovers that 
Bertram has solicited Diana for an "unlawful p\u?pose". 

By the time Bertram and Parolles have entered, the scene 












/ 3 


is well under way. In All*s Well that Ends Well, III, 

V, 41, two tuckets and a march have pointed to the pre¬ 
sence of the Florentine army, shown Its gradual approach, 
and In a natural way, directed the course of conversation. 

Tuckets are twice used to announce Montjoy In 
Henry V, III, vl, 120; IV, 111, 78. A tucket Is used 
to announce Cupid and the Amazons In Tlmon of Athens » 

I, 11, 119, and a tucket occurs In Trollus and Cresslda , 

I, 111, 212. These four tuckets have no special 
Importance. 

Concltislon . 

From the Indiscriminate noise of the first plays, 
Shakespeare *s military fanfares and signals came to have 
dramatic purpose and significance. Even the later plays 
however, such a.s King Lear and Hamlet , Incliide a 
leavening of rather pointless bugle calls and drum¬ 
beats along with other sound effects. 

Alarums, usually played by drums, are a signal to 
join battle, and are frequently coupled with Excursions . 
They varied in length; often the meaning of lines is 
made more intense by the employment of a background of 
drums. Little can be told from Shakespeare *s Sennets , 
except that they announce royal or quasi - royal personages, 
and frequently mark exits and entrances. Flourishes are 


salutes to royalty. Coupled with shouts, they imply 





























■; .'V"' ■ ■.■^ ' ti.. . 


''^Jh ■ ' i', ■ r': '''r'j.n t,'. .,-,[o£S:: 


R 


.i r: {• ■ ;t i j ' 'I'i o 


lo 


' ■ ' ■ .; ■ 

c :>' :' . ;:ir.r, 

. ,' . ‘/;: - ■• i < "v 

. . 4 , ■ . 

SK)nrTd.4-r(X; o;i : 


/a,', -a y f:-’ 




# . i 



o 






uax , , .j_. 

LJ^. .K:XlB.‘- o... 

‘,v 

-iTiVr ■•■ • ■' 
. - :r 




'■• ' .'.: i^O'K 

' ''"-Ir / ’ , .;'!' 

' ^ ■'-RR■ •'■'■’■. ■:.' •■■’ v« ■“ '.rZ RiL./ - '■■■ ■'^ -“'4.^. 'yhl’iir.'-..:. 

'::lzm ': ■ 

■ r:v.":;,:: ■■ ;';;u yy,;.nov.nyi;f 

■' ■:"' > R' y'.'.'':h :> r .*, ir ; ■' ■: >I.R; r: c r: dl 

■ ' '■ ■ ■ ■ " •" ' -'^v' ryyytl 

'■' .-. ■ 

■'■ ' ■ ::i .:;;n; ■, r,,j,c<,:i.i?,v.' '«.'o;; 

#'tt^:3 ;; :„":J-;nay; r,' > ..'■nv 

' ' .,'. )v:' ;■■ r' :’.i z 




rr _J 


.i;r 


: rgrtr-: ■ 'yy'd, cqt^OKQ 

' . ' ■ ' 

.'■ . r.y .T'- -ffiv, 

' ■ ■■ i' 












737 '. 


royalty greeted offstage dy crowds of people. Flourishes 
are of different lengths. Several times flourishes 
announce players. Shakespeare seems to have employed 
no set rule for flourishes, for he sometimes omits 
them In circumstances where they might logically he 
found. 

The most Interesting use of a flourish Is In King 
Richard III, IV, Iv, 151, where Richard orders the 
trumpets to drown out a scolding he does not wish to 
hear. A Parley Is a trumpet call announcing either a 
truce or an exchange of words between opposing leaders. 
The most Interesting case, from a dramatic point of 
view. Is In King Richard II , III, 111, 162, where 
Richard prevents the tournament by causing a parley 
to be sounded. 

The sounding of hunting horns Implied vigor on the 
part of the hunters and showed their social rank. The 
sound of horns, often coupled with the baying of hounds, 
also Indicated that the scene was In a forest. 

Drums, trumpets, and fifes are Instruments which 
symbolize war. Drums and trumpets were draped, and 
were colourful stage properties as well as being 
musically useful ones. Heralds always sounded challenges 
by trumpets (vide K L., II, 1, 178; K J., II, 1, 399; 

Rich ^., I, 111, 25) . 




















L 







I 

Sv 


















/ 3 7 . 


Trumpet calls were often not particularized, the 
term trumpet being used loosely. A number of marches 
occur in the stage directions. These were probably 
played on drums with no accompanying instruments. The 
marches of four nationalities are employed, as an aid 
in differentiating between the French and English armies 
in 1 Henry VI , and perhaps for nationalistic verisimili¬ 
tude in Hamlet . Dead marches are often used to clear 
the stage of bodies of soldiers, nobles, or royalty. 

This method is not always adhered to (vide T And ., I, 
i, 69), The beating of drums is once employed to 
indicate the time of day (A£., IV, ix, 30). 

Tuckets are sets of notes used to identify families 
or branches of families. They are a sort of musical 
family escutcheon. In three instances (MV., V, i, 122; 

K L., II, i, 80| awe W., Ill, V, 7), tuckets are re¬ 
cognized, a fact which Shakespeare uses as a dramatic 
device. 

* 

In three cases, trumpet calls (of type un-named) 
are recognized (A WE W., V, ii, 53; Qth ., II, i, 178; 

T £., IV, iv, 141). The extent of recognition of 
trumpet calls on the part of the audience is purely 
conjectural, but probably they were able to recognize 
some of the calls. There was much military activity in 
Shakespeare *s time, and trumpets and drums were universally 













/ ^ ?. 


used to coimnunlcate orders to troops. If not in all 
instances, at least in the above cases there is an 
indication that the audience knew some military signals; 
in particular, tuckets and retreats > 

All trumpet calls or drum beats labelled "Within", 
imply bodies of men offstage. Distance is implied by 
varying degrees of volume as in "a low march within". 

For descriptive purposes military signals are often 
combined with other sounds, such as shouts and the 
firing off of ordnance. The most frequent function of 
fanfares and drum-beats is to cover exits and entrances. 
















140 


CHAPTER ^ 

INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC 

All instrumental music in Shakespeare *s plays, 
including music accompanying dances, songs, and that 
which is purely background music, will be considered 
in this chapter. Nearly all the music of Shakespeare’s 
day was written in forms derived from the dance,* just 

* E. J. Dent, ”Shakespeare and Music^', Companion to 
Shakespeare Studies , p. 133. 

as is much of our music today. The Galliards and Pavans 
of the court were still fashionable, but composers were 
beginning to use these forms as models for serious music 

* Ibid , pp. 153-154. 

For this reason all instrumental music, with the excep¬ 
tion of trumpet calls, can be grouped and examined 
together. 

None of the actual Instrumental music used seems 
to have survived. Naylor* makes various suggestions as 

* Shakespeare and Music , Appx., pp. 200-203. 

to fanfares, drumbeats, and marches, but these are 
only approximations, based on music of a later date. 

Any conjecture as to instrumentation, type of music, 
the amount of music used (where the stage directions 
are not clear), I have tried to make with common sense 























L 


■■■ ) 


















141 . 


or practicability as my guide. 

LOVB^S LABOURLOST 

There is no evidence that Moth’s song (L L L., Ill, 
1, 2), was accompanied hy a musical Instrument but the 
masquers in V, ii, 157, have music. The stage direction 
reads: 

Enter Blackamoors with music ; the Boy (Moth), 
with a speech , and (the King and) the rest of the 
Lords disguised "(Tike Russians and maskedT- 

The approach of the masque is heralded by a trumpet 

call. The traditional opening speech is delivered, 

but the masque does not contain either songs or dances. 

The music, to which they enter, is entrance music only. 

No stage direction indicates music for the dance at 

V, il, 215 ff., but the text definitely indicates that 

music does play. 

The music plays; vouchsafe some music to it 
says the King, and in line 221: 

Curtsy, sweethearts - and so the music ends. 
COI^IEDY OP ERRORS 

The Comedy of Errors is innocent of music of any 
kind, including trumpet calls. 

"A sweet consort , in all likelihood of viols, 
plays for the serenade to Silvia in The Two Gentlemen 
of Verona . The music they played was a ’'deploring dump” 


(T G V., Ill, li, 85). At least this is Proteus’ 























'v- ; ' .• ' 












14S. 


advice and Thurio assures him that he will take it. 

TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA 

The instruments play a short introduction to the 
song (T G V., IV, ii, 35). It seems improhahle that 
the conversation between Julia and the Host would be 
superimposed on the song to Silvia. If this were done, 
the audience would be unlikely to understand either 
the conversation or the song. Therefore, the song is 
sung, after a short instrumental introduction, and 
Julia and the Host listen. On its completion, the 
"sweet consort" play instrumental music from line 54 
to line 80. This music gives rise to a series of 
quibbles on musical terms. In line 81, the Host says: 

Peace, stand aside I the company parts. 

( They hide .) 

This indicates that the music is over and the serenaders 
are breaking up their gathering. ^jVhen Julia and the 
Host have hidden themselves, Proteus passes by, arranging 
a further meeting with Thurio. Thurio and the musicians 
leave the stage at line 84. 

A IvIIDSUM?.!SR NIGHT »S DREAM 

In A Midsummer Night ^ s Dream (IV, i, 85;88), the 
stage directions, Music still , and music , have been the 
subject of a good deal of scholarly bickering*. Dyce 

* A Midsummer Night^ s Dream, Variorum Edition, p. 182. 




















’’V 





'f ' i 







otj- ' c,iv^ ■ ■ “ ‘ < ^'''/ |; 




; i'T ■’ 



.. ' ' ? 

< '■ ' ■ 


J""’ ;■ 









arv 


Qi .' 


I ■' 









143 


believes music still Is a cue to the musicians to be 
ready. Collier says that it means that the music must 
cease. 

Still music, according to Shakespeare’s general 
usage, means hushed music. I believe that the stage 
direction music still indicates soft music for Titanla 
in response to Oberon’s command (M N D., IV, i, 84), 
and calls for music “such as charmeth sleep” (M N D., 

IV, i, 86). This continues as soft background music 
until Oberon says ”Sound music”. The musicians then 
play an introduction to the dance (M N D., IV, i, 89). 
The music must have been gay, suitable for a fairy dance 

* The only information concerning the dance of the 
fairies in V, i, 407, is contained in the stage direc¬ 
tion - Song and dance . Since, ho?/ever, the first fairy 
dance (M N D.,*’lV, i, 89), was performed to music in 
similar circumstances, it is probable that music pro¬ 
vided the background for this dance also. 


Oberon says: 

Come, my queen, take hands with me. 

And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be. 

(M N D., IV, i, 88-89.) 

RICHARD II 


Richard II, alone in Pomfret castle, hears music. 
What type of music it was, we are not told. It may 
have been provided by some of his friends still true to 
him. It interrupts a very long monologue, giving him 
an opportunity to introduce a new figure of speech. Of 

















r<" • ’ ■ c;.; V V.-..'. ■' 0 




. '■C.''‘OC 

^ .' 'x'-i'K:rr’■' 

■V,' ,r-^ 

'■ - ■ 'X' ■ I:;oX' 

'XX-r 

):•;;- r: ■ ‘ : .-.I. 

•■■x ;: -v:: 

:. , I ■ xja; 

• :;.,)/j.:■•:/" -'•xx\ ,;:::X 





mi 


Mi 







.ir:; l; 

f, ■.', t 

■ .•i ’. . '. 


■:: ;'XX 



' bac^^X ■ ■ ' : '■■■ ••■..■■ ,'.V :-;OCk; 

. yjjcibiiom. ■.■. .x ■■x-xr- -.;-.;; '. ;'': . .'.d 

; ■ ■ • :■ ’ •■•;:■ ; ' j ;x-;:‘ioqqo .rx-x 

• ■. x . : .v::;ii 










144 . 


what the music consists is unknown, as the stage direc¬ 
tion gives only The music plays ( Rich II., V, v, 41 ff,) 
Richard*s attitude towards the music shows us his 
character. Even in prison he is an actor admiring 
his own pretty speeches. He prefers to take refuge in 
rhetoric, rather than to face the facts. At the first 
strain of the music he finds fault with it, saying that 
it is not in time ( Rich II., V, v, 42.) The music 
finally Irritates him into crying. 

This music mads me. Let it sound no more 
For tho it have holp madmen to their wits. 

In me it seems that it will make wlsemen mad.* 

( Rich II., V, V, 61-63.) 


* See Henry VIII , IV, li, 94-95. Queen Katharine says, 
"Bid the music leave. They are harsh and heavy to me." 

In this way, music portrays Richard*s character rather 
than the gloom of the prison. It shows him to be 
petulant, irritable, a dreamer forced for the first time 
to face reality. 

ROI^IEO A HD JULIET 

In Romeo and Juliet , I, iv, the masquers have 
masks and are accompanied by torch-bearers. Benvollo*s 
command, "Strike, drum*." (R J., I, iv, 114), is the 
only evidence that music of any kind accompanied them. 

It was usual for a band of musicians to accompany 





















-.f: . ■ 

. ■' .- ■ ' r • •, V * ., • 




» ';' ’:''i v O": 




;::. n-f e4:1''. lo'-.v'.:' 

,;1 :. , 



4 ; 

•>. 


■>) 


'■' ' ' ' ' .'l,. 

^, 'V_VVl . -v- , . ■ •■ j,-. . 

'," - • •> -. •■•.••,- ;.': -J ' : :;.,r.: ...' . -■ .Lrio 

;■ J .i; 










1 ^ 5 . 


masq-uers*. Musicians playing instruments other than 

* Percy Simpson, "The Masque", Shakespeare^s England , 
pp. 311-317. "The masques introduced into Shakespeare *s 

plays are usually in-the-primitive form of the 

masquerade dance at a nobleman’s house." Associated 
with this type were torches, costumes, masks, accompany¬ 
ing music. 

the drum appear in I, v. It seems that as the masquers 
march from the stage, a drum accompanies them. In I, v, 
shortly after the masquers, (with the drummer) have 
appeared, Capulet cries "A hall, a hallI give rooml 
and foot it, girls" (R J., I, v, 28). Music then plays, 
and a dance begins. Shakespeare has given the masque 
party only one drum because he needed the rest of the 
band for the next scene. 

It was during the entertainment at Capulet’s 
house that Romeo first saw Juliet. The dance is 
therefore an essential part of the action of the play. 

In IV, V, 23, Juliet is discovered dead. Before 
this scene, which is full of wild parental grief, we 
have music. It was to have been her wedding day, 
and Capulet says: 

The County will be here with music straight 

For so he said he v/ould. (Play music.) 

I hear him near. 

(R J., IV, iv, 23.) 
This music is played off stage to signify the approach 
of County Paris. The scene closes before his arrival. 







! 









146 . 


This music has three purposes. It indicates that Paris, 
whom Juliet is to marry, is at hand. It was probably 
bright music, as wedding music should be, and its 
lightness intensifies the following scene in which the 
wild grief of Juliet’s parents is shown. It also 
indicates the time of day. Shakespeare has rapidly 
passed over the night. In lines 3 and 4 of V, iv, 

Capulet says. 

Come stir, stir, stir I The second cock has crov/’d. 
The curfew bell hath rung, ’tis three o’clock. 

In line 21, he says. 

Good faith, *tis day. 

The music of the County then plays to show that morning 
has come. In regard to the handling of the passage 
of time, this scene might be compared to Cymbeline, II, 
scenes ii and iii. 

E. J. Dent* remarks that the musical entourage of 

* cit ., p. 140. 

Paris is not of the type one might expect in one of his 
class. The conclusion of IV, v, shows them to be of 
the rabble that frequented all the ale-houses of the 
time. Peter calls them minstrels, which was an insult 
at that time.* Their quibbling with Peter gives a 

* A similar insult was the ostensible cause of the fatal 
duel between Tybalt and Mercutio; vide H J.> HI? 1? 47-48. 
















147 . 


scene of comedy which follows the emotionally heavy 
scene where Juliet Is found, supposedly dead. 

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE 

In The Merchant of Venice , Jessica elopes with 
Lorenzo during the confusion of a masquer’s procession 
(MV., II, vi). There is no indication that musicians 
are present in scene vi, hut in scene v, Shylock him¬ 
self speaks of “the drum and the vile squeaking of the 
wry-neck’d fife” (MV., II, v, 29-30), as characterizing 
an approaching masque. There is no stage-direction 
indicating the use of music here, hut since music is 
used elsewhere in the play, the omission is not for 
economic reasons.* Shylock has adequately set the 

* Moreover, no mention is made of torches, or masks. 

scene hy stating that masquers are coming, and command¬ 
ing Jessica to stay indoors. Shakespeare evidently 
wishes to place the emphasis of the scene on Jessica’s 
elopement rather than on the procession of masquers. 

An excellent illustration of music and poetry 
working hand in hand to set a mood is to he found in 
V, i, of the same play. Lorenzo hids Stephano “bring 
your music forth into the air” (MV., V, 1, 53). The 
lines following portray a beautiful, calm, moonlit 
night: 
















i:\ro VA. 


'.V ■ ■:‘in.,’s'- 


.AT? 'eiL:. y)C 




^;i! 


:) i;T r.'.DO Oi■,>.,. ;; ; 

‘. :;: ::i: r-isio., ’ ,/; , : : 

. '■/ '„t:ooo ,Lt.L».^lr;or: 


i O0;:f ‘.. 0 . 


„;o ,j-,... 


AJ qi:,:, 
£ 


: 


r'V; 


r-s., 


;ti;Ci^O.•., 
T?A,r.,; .o,-', Of: 


)fsO;00: '■ 


■:' ■A'A;;vri#N 


d;: ::: 




) T 00 


oe;- ,: 

A CO..:';- 


;o,ic-:'JoD\)I 

'1'., 'V.Di: O; O.'L'L ,.^.A>:CO'' T: ■. ' ' 


Ai’ ,oocr( 'TO^. 






'"'A^ro.Toc";: 


''■. i-.'. ■* 











146. 


Hov/ sweet the moon-light sleeps upon this bankl 
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music 
Creep in our ears. Soft stillness and the night 
Become the touches of sweet harmony, etc. 

(M V., V, i, 54 ff.) 

Musicians enter and play soft music which produces in 

Jessica a melancholy feeling. Portia and Nerissa, on 

their arrival home from the trial, are greeted with the 

music. Their lines also carry out the Illusion of 

night. The music plays from line 68 to line 110. It 

forms only a quiet obligato to the voices of the actors. 

A consort of viols would be suitable instruments. The 

music here played has two purposes. It augments the 

effect produced by the poetry which states that it is 

a beautiful evening. It heightens the contrast between 

this scene, the short scene before it, and the next 

scene, where the two husbands are confronted by wives 

pretending to be angry. 

1 Kim HENRY 

Glendower, in the First Part of King Henry the 

Fourth , ‘'can call spirits from the vasty deep", and 

ca.ll music from the air. 

--- those musicians that shall play to you. 

Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence 
And straight shall they be here. 

223-226.) 

After his audience has arr8.nged themselves, music begins 
to play (1 Hen IV., Ill, ii, 230). 'JThile it plays 



















' 1 -:^ , 1 - ■ 







■;' I-t}C''i. ■ ;X-.:> 'X^ r - r. 


j '■ xlz: :*■ ■ ■; :.:).X .■. ••/' • ^ 

■ • . .' Ooa:.:- r: ■ :'::I '' I?v.XX , ' 
n ; G'Lam’'* Cu 
:l ^oiup f‘ 

' .'ecf r-.L7o\v ^So ’ : p.:^' 
otv--; i 3rt 

': ' :)r: 

■S:* - 

. .''O'/:, 1/4 . / ■> j ' P- i.o 










149. 


Hotspxir and his wife carry on amiable hostilities. The 
Welsh song begins on line 247. Hotspiir says the devil, 
who he believes is supplying the music, is a good 
musician. We are told nothing further about the music. 

We may guess that the music was played by stringed 
instruments, playing softly, above which the voices of 
Hotspur and his wife could be heard. Since the music 
plays from line 230 to line 247, we may guess that the 
instruments played until the V/elsh lady was about to 
sing. In all probability the instruments accompanied 
her singing. The instrumental music serves a double 
purpose. It establishes the fact that Glendower is a 
genuine mystic. In spite of Hotspur*s aspersions, he 
can and does produce music from the air. Secondly, 
the soft music nullifies any harshness or sting to be 
found in the exchange of words between Hotspur and his 
Lady. The emotion they feel at parting, they hide 
beneath domestic bickering. The English reticence of 
Lady Hotspur is contrasted with the Celtic fervour of 
the Welsh lady, and these national traits are shown 
either by music, or against a background of music. 

2 KING HENRY IV 

The music that plays for Palstaff and Doll Tearsheet 
in the Second Part of King Henry IV , II, iv, was pro¬ 
duced by an orchestra led by one Sneak. 












150 


1st Drawer. See if thou cans*t find out Sneak’s 
noise, (line 12.) 

2nd Drawer. I’ll see if I can find out Sneak, (line 23.] 
Noise was regularly used as a synonym for orchestra*. 


* The New Engl. Diet. , Vol. M-N, p. 179, gives noise , 
a company or hand of musicians. Examples: 1598, 
Chapman, Blinde Beggar : “Oh, that we had a noyse of 
musitions to play to this antick as we goe.“ 1609, B. 

Johnson, Silent Woman . “The smell of venison - will 

Invite one noyse of fidlers, or other.” 


It has been noted that in Heywood’s The Iron Age , a 
reference is also made to Sneak’s noise*. It is possible 


* E. J. Dent, Op. cit ., p. 150. 


that Sneak and his “noise” actually existed, an Elizabe¬ 
than version of a modern name band . Allusions to 
special bands occur elsewhere in the drama. In The 
Merry Devil of Edmonton (Haz. Dods., X.263), the host 
says “Why, Sir John, send for Spindle’s noise presently.” 
Since even musicians attached to patrons could take 
outside engagements*, Shakespeare’s company may have 

* » P• • 


employed Sneak’s “noise”, because of its fame. Another 
possibility is that Sneak may have become well known 
after Shakespeare recorded his name. At any rate, the 
name Sneak conforms with other Jonsonian names in the 


































151. 


Henry Fourth plays. Heywood’s Sneak may he the result 
of coincidence. Sneak and his noise evidently was 
hard to ’’find out”, for musicians do not enter until 
line 245. Ho stage direction tells us that they play, 
hut we assume that they do. Palstaff gives them their 
cue: 

Enter Music 

Page. The music is come, sir. 

Fal. Let them play. Play sirs. Sit on my 
knee, Doll, etc* 

(2 rv., II, Iv, 246-247.) 
Following this the Prince and Poins enter as Drawers, 
and overhear unpleasant remarks about themselves. 1/Vhen 
these are satisfactorily explained, Peto enters announc¬ 
ing the outbreak of civil war. Falstaff stays only 
long enough to hid farewell to Doll and the Hostess, 
and to hid the page pay the musicians (2 Hen IV*, II, 
iv, 403)* The only evidence that the musicians have 
been playing is Falstaff*s remark: 

^iVhat stuff wilt have a kirtle of? I shall 
receive money a Thursday. 

Shalt have a cap tomorrow. A merry song , come. 

It grows late; we’ll to bed. 

Thou*It forget me when I am gone. 

(2 Hen W., II, iv, 297-310.) 

YiJhere the music begins, or ends, we cannot tell. It 
supplied a background of tavern music for some or all 
of the Incidents which took place at the Boar’s Head. 

In the same play, music is played during at least 
part of the death scene of Henry IV. The King himself 














152 


calls for soft music: 

Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends, 
Unless some dull and favourable hand 
Will whisper music to my weary spirit, 

Warwick. Call for the music in the other room. 

(2 IV., IV, V, 1-4.) 

The King had music at his constant beck and call. 

Reference to the music attendant upon the nobles is 

made in the famous speech ending with ^'uneasy lies the 

head that wears the crown”. (2 Hen IV., III, i, 31.) 

Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs. 

Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee. 

And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber. 
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great 
Under the canopies of costly state. 

And lulled with sound of sweetest melody ? 

The emotional effectiveness of the whole scene - the 
Prince’s grief when he believes his father dead, the 
royal father’s anger and sorrow when he finds gone both 
Hal and the crown, the explanation and final under¬ 
standing - would be greatly intensified if accompanied 
by emotional music. It is unfortunate that from the 
text we cannot know to what extent music was used. 

THE TAJVIIHG OF THE SHREW 

In The Taming of the Shrew , III, il, 185, music 
plays during the entrance of the wedding party. Grumio, 
after telling of Petruchlo’s odd behavior in the church, 
introduces the music with. 

Hark, hark’. I hear the minstrels play. 

(T S., Ill, ii, 185.) 


















153 


The music was no doubt of a happy character and probably 
one of the traditional tunes played for wedding pro¬ 
cessions. Shakespeare wished to show the strangeness 
of Petruchio’s actions, and the music represents the 
accompaniment to normal weddings. Music is here used 
for the ptirpose of contrast, of accentuating Petruchio’s 
eccentricity. 

THE MERRY WIVES ^ WINDSOR 

There is no evidence that instrumental music was 
used in the Fairies^ dance which occurs in V, v, of 
The Merry Wives of Windsor . No instrumental music is 
played elsewhere in the play, and it appears that the 
accompaniment to the dance was the singing of the fairies. 
mCE ADO ABOUT NOTHING < 

Musicians were employed in the production of Much 
Ado About Nothing . In Act I, scene ii, a musician 
appears on the stage. Leonato speaks to him, saying, 

”0, I cry you mercy, friend. Go you with me, and I 
will use your skill.** The musician has been brought in 
by Antonio’s son, of whom Leonato inquired at the 
beginning of the scene: 

Where is my cousin your son? Hath he provided 
this music? 

(S A 4 1-2.) 

Music accompanies two dances which are performed on the 
stage. The first is danced by the masquers. This 






















154. 


introduces conversation by Balthasar and Margaret, Don 
Pedro and Hero, Benedick and Beatrice. The second 
dance clears the stage of all but Don John, Borachio, 
and Claudio (MAN N., II, i, 160). The music here 
is important only as an adjunct to the dancing which 
has been a means of introducing characters to, and 
clearing them from, the stage. In act 11, scene iii, 
of the same play, a large amount of instrumental m.usic 
is found. Music is first heard off stage. (Stage 
direction - music ( within ) , line 38.) Pedro and Cls.udio 
note v/here Benedick has hidden him-self and Balthasar 
enters with Music (musicians). Pedro says: 

Come Balthasar, we*11 hear that song again. 

(I A A I- » 45*) 

This can only mean that the music which was played off¬ 
stage was Sigji no more , ladies , sigh no more . The 
musicians play a short Introduction to the song (line 59), 
during which the hidden Benedick has time to make the 
following observations on music: 

Now divine air*. Now is his soul ravish*d. Is 
it not strange that sheep*s guts should hale souls 
out of men*s bodies? Vi[ell, a horn for my money, 
when al1 * s done. 

(M A 4 I- » 60-64.) 

Prom this we know the musicians played stringed instru¬ 
ments. There is also a pun on the word ’*horn“, the 
Instrument that Benedick prefers to strings. After 













0 -:, 





rto? ■ • i.jt V 


; c'o.O'-''';:'V 










"mm 


-}■ '■, 


■li' 


e' 




, ihi!' ih'' ,■ 


,': .; ■. ■ i' 



'-i ' ■;. 


■h -y rc- 'r 




''i 








mu ■ I '' ‘y ■■■■; 'y 'y'i.^ y;)'',.B'^!'i 

h,.:: '; ^ ' • 

.jy;;; 

;t' ‘.y,' y.r,;o • •' ., 

J ^ : ;y 





'v vyyx.! v: 


y.ry hix;'-'. . iJriyx 

•yyv : .^/y'.J-_ vih-ix; ‘ X"' 



X 00 • 

making plans to serenade Hero the follov/ing evening, 
Balthasar leaves the stage with the musicians (line 91). 

Mucli Ado About Nothing ends with a dance. Benedick 
gives two orders for m.usic - "Therefore, play music" 

(M A A N., V, iv, 123), and "Strike up, pipersl" 

(M A A N., V, iv, 30). Since the dance does not begin 
until the second command; the first is probably a cue. 
JULIUS CAESAR 

In Julius Caesar , music is introduced in Act 1, 
scene ii, to add to the effect of pageantry. "Set on, 
and leave no ceremony out," says Caesar (£.£•> I? ii? 

11). This music accompanies the procession of Caesar 
to the course, and is several times interrupted by 
Caesar himself, and by the soothsayer who bids him 
"Beware the ides of March" (J £•> I> ii» 18). 

The song which Lucius sings to Brutus in IV, iii, 
266, is accompanied by a stringed instrument, what type 
it was is not disclosed, but it was probably a lute. 

Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes a while 

And touch thy Instrument a strain or two? 

(J C., IV, ill, 256, 267.) 

If thou dost nod, thou break*st thy instrument; 

1*11 take it from thee; 

(J C., IV, ill, 271-272.) 

When the ghost has disappeared, Brtitus calls his 
retainers. His shout partially wakens the boy: 


















156 


Luc, The strings, my lord, are false. 

Bru. He thinks he is still at his Instrument. 

Lucius, awake I 

(J C., IV, iii, 291-292.) 

The effect of the song, accompanied by the lute, was 

to establish a note of peace before the entrance of 

the ghost. The scene also demonstrates the gentle side 

of Brutus^ nature by shov/ing his solicitude for the 

sleepy little boy. Because he was a music-lover, 

Brutus is a good man. Earlier in the play Caesar 

recognizes Cassius as a dangerous man for ”he hears 

no music'* (J £• » ii> 195). Lorenzo, in The Merchant 

of Venice , voices a similar thought: 

The man that hath no music in himself. 

Nor is not mov*d with concord of sweet sounds. 

Is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils. 

(M V., V, i, 85-85.) 

Other musicians were employed in this play to play the 
music for Caesar’s procession _(J £., I, li). It would 
have been possible for the boy’s song to have the 
accompaniment of an orchestra. Shakespeare preferred 
to use only a lute, a portable instrument, and one 
likely to be found in a camp. 

^ YOU LIKE ^ 

Still (or hushed) music accompanies the words of 
Hymen in Act V, scene iv, of As You Like It. There is 
no stage direction Indicating that the music has stopped. 
I suggest that the music accompanies the lines said by 













157 . 


Hymen (A Y L I., V, iv, 114-122; 131-146), and that 
during the lines of Rosaline, the Duke, Orlando and 
Phehe, the music stops. The music is intended to give 
Hymen’s role supernatural quality. The music sets the 
mood of the scene. It is likely that the music also 
accompanied Hymen’s song. Wedding is great Juno’s crown 
(4 S li I* ’ iv, 147-152) . In all probability music 
plays for the dance which is performed by the whole cast 
just before the Epilogue (A Y L V, iv, 204). 

There is no evidence that instrumental music 
accompanies the songs earlier in the play - Blow , blow 
thou winter wind . Under the G-reenwood tree , and ^ was a 
lover and his lass . These songs were perhaps s-ung 
unaccompanied to give them an air of realism. Orchestras 
are not found in forests. 

TTOLFTH NIGHT 

Twelfth Night opens with musicians playing on the 
stage. (See opening stage directions.) The music is 
soft, allowing the actor’s lines to be heard over it. 

Prom the Duke’s opening lines: 

If music be the food of love, play on, etc. 
we may judge that the music was sentimental. Part of 
the music is described: 

That strain again’. It had a dying fall. 

(T N., I, i, 4.) 































.w ■ ■ --■' 


..■Vl:'.:pf:)'’-:f:;-.;^ 


. . :s.' ' .'??',v"{'' ■ ',: , 'iu ;^ii:'«'sj:c|>l 




r: 


r 



. 'ic^oz' Id ^ 004 :!' 
-, • : .;P:x^' d' ', ‘ 

' , /' y . '^.' ■!£' ■ r } ;■" 

' - ..■-.. . d ■'^-:; 

' ' ■ . ■ , " " ' ' '; 'I 

.1.;; „ d'lu’teci ; ''.r ', j 

, ' ■ ":. ' , '^ ■ ■ . . i 

■ ■ , . X. ■ ' ,.■ ■■ ■'■ 5 

,... ■;.;, ■ ' '■'■ ‘ '■• ' '•■' ' , ■ i 

. ■■ ' I 

:■•; C-,': : 


'^1 '^dSS'; : '■ n-. 'gny^;1"n'^'Jr4 

■/■ ^'*'■.. ;dKr.A,!;jyl ' ■ i 

- 'it'. 

- d ' , ,| 

y.J ,'/olid , 

. - ' _ ■ 

- ■' :■ ,IS.. -.i. d;; ) ' ‘ ■■d., ;•:■'• t^TCv 



( 













158, 


The music continues until the Duke says: 

- Enough, no morel 

*Tls not so sweet now as it was before. 

(T N., I, i, 7-8.) 

This music sets the general tone and theme of the story. 
Like the Duke^s love for Olivia, it is begxm and broken 
off before completion. Prom the few opening lines we 
have a picture of the Duke as love-lorn, moody* and 

Cleopatra also, desired music, moody food of love. 

It is a sign she is pining for Antony. (A £., II, v.) 

petulant. He is sensitive to music,* stopping it when 

* The Duke. That piece of song - we heard last night --- 

did relieve my passion much. (T N., II, iv, 2-4.) 

he does not care for the fall of a cadence. The type of 
music heard in this scene is appropriate to the Duke’s 
social position. It is similar to the music attendant 
upon Henry IV (2 He_n IV., IV,. iv, 5)# 

Music is called for by the Duke in Act II, scene 
iv. The musicians are instructed to play ’’the tune” 

( Come , Away death ), while Curio seeks Peste to sing it.* 

* An Instrumental rendition precedes the song, Sigh no 
more, ladies, in M A A A., II, ii. 

The music is thus justified, but actually Shakespeare 
wishes deliberately to create an erotic atmosphere for 
the discussion between the Duke and the disguised Viola. 

























169 


Likely a consort of viols supplied the music. The 
music probably breaks off on the entrance of Curio and 
the clown. The stage direction MusIc (line 51), 
indicates that the musicians play an Introduction for 
the song, Come awa y, Come away , death . Instrumental 
music Is thus Introduced in a manner which seems quite 
natural. The drunken songs in Act II, scene ill, are 
rightly left unaccompanied. 

TRQILUS Am CRESSIDA 

Act III, of Trollus and Cresslda opens with off 
stage music, Pandarus discovers that, 

--- it is at the request of Paris my lord, who 
is there in person; with him, the mortal Venus, 
the heart’s-blood of beauty, love’s invisible soul, 

(T G,, III, i, 32-35,) 

Music here serves several purposes. It opens the scene. 
It introduces the subject of the love between Paris and 
Helen, a theme which is amplified in the latter part 
of the same theme, I feel that Paris and Helen are 
shown to be happy lovers so that Trollus’ behavior will 
appear to be not lustful, but quite in accord with the 
customs of the time. The song of Pandarus is not 
accompanied by more than a lute. ”Gome, give me an 
Instrument”, says Pandarus (T£,, III, i, 103). To 
summon musicians to the stage would take over-long and 

break the action of the play, Shakespeare uses his 
instrumental music in such a way as to convey an 

















160. 


impression of real life. 

MSASURS FOR M3ASURB 

A Lute was probably played by the boy who sang 
Take , 0 take thos e lips away , but no mention of an 
instrument is made (M M., IV, i). If this is so, 
this is the only instrumental music in the play. 

HAMLET 

In Hamlet , III, ii, 145 ffthe dumb-show is 
accompanied by hautboys. Dumb-shows, after 1560, were 
always accompanied by music. In Gorbuduc (1562), each 
act was preceded by a dumb-show, each of which was 
accompanied by specified instruments.* The Danish march 

* E. J. Dent, Op. cit ,, p. 146. 

(Ham., Ill, ill, 94), which accompanies the entrance of 
the King, Queen, and Polonius, may have been played 
on trumpets and hautboys . No other instruments are 
mentioned as being used in Hamlet. 

OTHELLO 

A short comic scene, in which musicians take part, 

opens Act III of Othello . Cassio, anxious to regain 

Othello’s favor, brings musicians before Othello’s 

castle and bids them play 

Something that’s brief: and bid ’Good Morrow, 
General.’ 


(0th., Ill, i, 2.) 

























^ , ........ 



¥i‘ 











ilSy 



if. 





■ r-f ; 






.T.3 










161-. 


This music was known as a hunts-up, or morning music. 
Morning music Is also found In Cymbellne , Act II, 
scene 1. 

From Casslo*s order, we Imow the music was of no great 
length. The Clown intimates that the instruments were 
badly played: 

\Vhy^ masters, have your instruments been to 
Naples , that they speak i’ the nose thus? 

(0th., Ill, i, 3-4.) 


The allusion to Naples has reference to syphilis, 
which was called the pox or the Neopolitan disease . 

It was so-called because syphilis first attacked large 
nuitbers of people at the siege of Naples, 1528. (Vide 
Othello (Arden Edition), note p. 120). A modern 
medical text (Boyd, Text Book of Pathology , 3rd edition, 
pp. 453-4) says that syphilis of the nose is common, 
and in either acquired or congenital syphilis, the 
septum, cartillage, and bone of the nose may be des¬ 
troyed, causing a saddle nose . When this happens, the 
voice has a nasal sound. 


Many Instruments, if played incorrectly, will give 
a nasal sound, or ’’sound i* the nose”. Stringed instru¬ 
ments, if no vibrato is used, have a flat, wliining 
sound; single-reed instruments, such as the clarinet, 
give a similar sound if the instrument is held loosely 
in the mouth, and no vibrato is used. Double-reed 
instruments, such as the oboe, have a clear sweet tone 
if played well; if played badly, the sound is similar 
to the noise one makes while singing with the nose held. 
The clown also says that Othello is no music lover ( 0th ., 

























162 


III, i, 17), but the Clown may only be trying to get 
rid of the musicians. He tells them to "put up your 
pipes in yoin* bag" (0th., Ill, i, 19). Since one of 
the musicians has already said they are playing wind- 
instruments (0th..) Ill, i, 6-7), they were probably 
playing oboes or a form of clarinet. The musicians 
appear only in this one place. They accompany neither 
lago^s drinking song ( 0th ., II, iii), nor Desdemona’s 
VJillow , Willow ( Qth ., IV, iii). These two songs are 
fittingly sung without accompaniment. 

KING LEAR 

Music is employed to restore "Th’ untun’d and 
jarring" senses of Lear (K Lear ., IV, vii, 23). There 
is no clue as to what kind of music it was. Belief 
in the curative powers of music is very old. David’s 
harp exorcises the demon lodged in King Solomon (I Samuel, 
xvi, 23). It may be found in lamblichus’ quotation of 
Pythagorus who recognized lute music and song as 
remedies for diseases of the mind such as anger, malice, 
unlawful desires.* Musical therapy is found elsewhere 

* Naylor, "?ifilliam Shakespeare", (Music and the Poets) 
p. 113. “ 

in Shakespeare’s plays. Richard II, in Pomfret prison 
says, "it hath hoIp madmen to their wits" ( Rich II., V, 
i, 75-100); In Pericles also is shown the great moral 























16S 


power that music exerts (Per,, IV, v, 6-7). Music is 
often shown to he soothing, as in King Henry VIII , 111, 
i, and as actually causing sleep in IV, 11, 80 ff., of 
the same play. Prospero in the fifth act of The Tempest 
says: 


A solemn air - the best comforter to an 

unsettled fancy.* 

( Temp ., V, i, 57.) 


* The Ancients were not altogether absurd. The modern 
form of music called the ”Tarantelle” is a reflection 
of the European belief in music and dancing as a cure 
for the bite of the tarantula spider. (Vide George 
Herbert's poem Do omsday .) Some experiments have been 
made in recent times on the effect of music on the 
mind. Music is used as an activity, not as a cure. 

It serves to occupy the mind of the patient, who 
benefits by receiving pleasure, or by gaining satis¬ 
faction from self-expression. (Vide M. Kalmus, ^’Musical 
Therapy", Occupa t ional Therapy , 19;1811186 , June 1940.) 

It has also been discovered that music exerts an 
influence on the human body in the following ways: 

(1) by increasing metabolism; 

(2) by increasing or decreasing muscular energy 
according to the type of music played; 

(3) by accelerating respiration and decreasing 
its regularity; 

(4) by producing a marked but variable effect on 
the volume, pulse, and blood pressure; and 

(5) by lowering the threshold for sensori stimuli 
of different modes. 

(Vide E. Podolsky, M.D., "Music and Health", The Canadian 
Medical Journal , (Peb. 1934), p. 195.) 


M-ACBETH 

We now turn from Lear*s cvre by music to the two 
songs in Macbeth , III, v, 33; IV, i, 43. The stage 
directions respectively read, "Music and a song within. 
Gome away , come away , etc .", and "Music and a song. 



































164 


Black spirits etc ♦** After the vision in Act lY, scene 
1, the stage direction reads: Music , the witches dance 
and vanish (Mach., IV, 1, 132). Both scenes are 
generally regarded as spurious.* The songs indicated 

* Macbeth , Arden Edition, (Ed. H. Cunningham), Intro., 
p. xxvl. 

are to be found in The Witch and in Davenant^s version 
of 1674. Both scenes can be eliminated, and both seem 
to have been inserted purely to add spectacular or 
showy elements to the play. 

Hautboys play King Duncan into Act 1, scene vl. 
Duncan is attended by his nobles and torch bearers. 
Hautboys and torches introduce the next scene. Here 
they are adjuncts to the meal. Hautboys appear in the 
vision Y/hlch the witches show Macbeth, ( Macb . ? lY, i, 
106). They are in these scenes connected with either 
torches, which represent night, or v;ith thunder. They 
play music which assists in creating an ominous, 
foreboding atmosphere. 

TIMOH OP ATHENS 

Music is employed in Timon of Athens , to imply 
luxury to the point of excess. In Elizabethan times, 
only the well-to-do could afford to retain a band of 
musicians. In The Taming of the Shrew , the Lord intends 


























I' 







.■■■; .1 ‘'J r; 




■'■d 



; 






' « 







r- f. 


; 






• ■;; S' 'r:,T' 











165. 


to make Sly believe he is a noble by having *’music 
ready when he wakes to make a dulcet and a heavenly 
sound” (T S.jind., 1,50). The Duke of Twelfth Night 
employs musicians constantly, but nov;here else in 
Shakespeare is music used in such a lavish fashion as 
in Timon of Athens . In this play music is associated 
either with extravagant masques, or with banquets. 

Act 1, scene ii, opens with: 

Hautboys playing loud music. A great banquet 
served in, 

(T A;^., I, li.) 

During the banquet, while Apemantus is trying to bring 
the spend-thrift to his senses, a tucket announces the 
approach of Masquers. After the traditional address,* 
* Percy Simpson, 0£. cit., pp. 311-317. 


the masque begins. The stage direction runs as follows: 

(Music) Enter Cupid , with the Masque of Ladies 
(as) Amazons with lutes in their hands, playing 
and dancing. 

(T I, ii, 136.) 

Apemantus describes the riotous dance: 

Hay-dayl vVhat a sweep of vanity comes this wayl 
They dance? They are mad women .... 

I should fear those that dance before me now 
Would one day stamp upon me I ^T has been done. 

(T, Ai^., I, ii, 137-149.) 

Another stage direction follows: 

The Lords arise from table v/ith much adoring 
of Timon, and to show their loves, each single 
out an Amazon, and all dance, men with women, a 
lofty strain or two of the hautboys, and cease. 


















' ‘i ■ 

el' r^tl :.r-\.-:../ 

'rr-vov.. ■: ■■■ Umi :'''i;/KC;^''^>' :v ^rr-f;. ■ :' 


4 .'. ♦. 




■ t .2 - 


.saMi- 


'o ■ 



'■'I 'i|^,; 

v'i-'i'fe' 












166 


The music for the banquet and dance music is supplied 

by hautboys. Act III, scene vl, shows Tlmon, a 

ruined man, but spending his last bit of money on a 

banquet. The feast proves to be all trappings and no 

meat, for Tlmon, now understanding the true extent of 

his friends' love for him, serves them covered dishes 

of hot water. The stage direction for the banquet Is: 

(Music, tables set out. Servants attending.) 

(T A;^., Ill, Vi.) 

Before the covered plates are brought in, Flavius the 

stev/ard weeps at Timon's prodigality. 

- So the gods bless me, 

^ilfhen all our offices have been oppress'd 
With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept 
Yiflth drunken spilth of wine, when every room 
Hath blaz'd with lights and bray'd with minstrelsy, 
I have retired me to a wakeful couch, 

And set mine eyes at flow. 

(T Ath., II, 11, 166-172.) 

Music is here one of the symbols of wastefulness. 

PERICLES 

Incidental music is played to introduce the daughter 
of Antiochus in Pericles , I, 1, 5. This probably con¬ 
tinued during her entrance, and during the eulogy to 
her beauty which Pericles delivers ( Per ., I, 1, 12-24). 

This usage of music is a forerunner of the Wagnerian 
method of writing a different theme for each character 
in his operas, or of the modern movie practice of 
intensifying audience reactions to characters by the 





TOC 


■vC, 






.<'»r ■ 


-W:M' 






• •;:vVi O.’.r.i?- 

-■;. r-:i _ 

iitm i>: i: ^. 

;■■ -: ;■■■. ■:.'■■; ; 

‘ V i'.o;t 

■ ." ' ^ 'y„ ; ■ ;i,J. 

■■ - /i : 70,;"^ ■ ; J'nBi' ''• ' ?■ ^ 

V ’ . . I’ ' ” •. •' ;. ■; -■ : I,,' •. J 





? 


i' 



f-,.. ^ • ; ’ 


t' 


7^- ) 



..-4: 


. •: i'... > ‘ - 




■ - i 
- V 


■ srr'vs 


'T'.^ '■? 


“'4aj/.'V00' c'7:x 

:;•■■;■; 4 ' 

.7 ■r'' 7 ■" -f. 5 



167 


use of theme music.* The type of music which introduces 


George Antheil, Hollywood Composer , (Atlantic Monthly 
Magazine), Peh. 1940, p. 160 ff. 

The composers who write the scores for sound 
pictures do almost unbelievable things, such as make 
a stout actress appear to be thinner than she is by 
giving her a theme played by a solo oboe; or making 
actors appear awkward by keeping the music slightly out 
of step with their movements; or reducing a strong man 
to effeminacy by giving him a background of muted 
violins. 


the daughter of Antiochus is clear from the descriptions 
of her, ”clothed like a bride For the embracem.ents 
even of Jove himself” ( Per ., I, i, 6-7)* Erotic music, 
together with the beauty of the lady herself, makes 
Pericles propose marriage ( Per ., I, i, 26)* Two dances 
occur in Act II, scene iii. The Knights dance, first 
alone, and then with ladles ( Per ., II, ill, 107). 

Music could appropriately have accompanied these dances, 
although music is not Indicated. The purpose of the 
dances was to awaken Pericles from his melancholy, for 
he has just been shipwrecked and cast ashore. The 
music of viols restores the senses of Thaisa after the 
shipwreck: 

The rough and woeful music that we have. 

Cause it to sound, beseech you; 

The viol once more. - 

(Per., Ill, ii, 88-90.) 

Three dumb shows are found in Pericles : II, 1; III, i; 
and IV, Iv, 22 ff. Gower’s speeches form the links 





















168 


between each act. Since the play Is extremely dis¬ 
jointed, dumb shows are used to Illustrate what Gower 
has said. It was customary for music to play during 
dumb-shows*, but no stage direction Indicates music in 

* E. J. Dent, 0£. cit ., p. 146. 

these three places. The song of Marina ( Per ., V, i, 80), 
seems to have been sung without an accompaniment. ^Mhen 
Pericles recognizes his long-lost daughter, he hears 
the music of the spheres. Editors war with one another* 

* fej^iclGS > Variorum Shakespeare, Edited by Furness, 
note, p. 192. 

as to whether actual music was heard by the audience. 

No stage direction calls for music, but Shakespeare 
wished the audience to gather from the incident the 
fact that the nev/ly-recovered Pericles has been over¬ 
come with joy. Shakespeare has projected the Imaginings 
of Pericles into a form that the audience can appreciate, 
audible music, to which Lysimachus, as an actor, is 
oblivious. 

ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA 

Music opens Act II, scene vli, of Antony and 
Cleopatra , as the accompaniment to a banquet. The 
stage direction is? 

Music plays . Enter two or three servants with 
a banquet . 
































m- ae; 





■ '7 {}n.60c r 


r 


nitu 

■'<< ' ' 


,3j 


?$ 












169 


The music probably plays softly beneath the conversa¬ 
tion of the two servants, continuing until the entrance 
of the Triumvirs (A£., II, vii, 19). Instrumental 
music also accompanies the song Come , thou monarch of 
the vine . Enobarbus describes it as "loud music" 

(A , II, vii, 114). Maecenas tells us the composition 
of the orchestra: 

These drums I these trumpets, flutes I 

(A £., II, vii, 136.) 

Such instrumentation is unlikely, but we must remember 
that flutes may refer to other wood-winds, and that the 
evidence occurs in the speech of a drunken man. From 
the stage direction, one gathers that an introduction 
to the song was played, during which "Enobarbus places 
them hand in hand" (A £., II, vii, 167). Other drinking 
scenes in Shakespeare *s music contain songs but no 
Instrumental music. The music shows them to be nobles, 
well able to dine and drink to music. The employment 
of music here is a statement of social rating. 

In Act IV, scene iii of the same play, music coming 
from the bowels of the earth is a prognostication of 
coming evil. Soldiers are on guard before Cleopatra*s 
palace when " Music of the hautboys is under the stage ." 

2nd Soldier Peace*, what noise? 

1st Soldier List, list*. 

2nd Soldier Hark*. 

1st Soldier Music 1* the air. 
















■ onJ,' lo ■ '*’'? 

■ : ■■ -im- "■ '. 

■ ^ r f'-; ' 'f ■ >.■' ■ " ’ ■' 




IXJD :.■ ^'. I::j ■ • 


'TCv, '■, 


. : :'.'r,.;: ' • .• ■'■vi: 


- f H 


;.. ‘.,.^;'eri' 


5:(i^ '.y 






y'l.yy' vy'y yy;‘ ^ '' t 


/ '‘■. ,yo ,fyy. .y-.ry' :.„■ ^y ■ v "i^" • 

• ■ ' ' .' , I 

,:vV- ■!,-.’-yy-y. ,y:-..y:yy -_ ^ | 




'■■ ' '/i 

‘ ■■' . ..' T'. .yy .:.y- 

,T ■ , . j.:w yy-yyi: :,r.y 

..„, .„, ^ ... 

r's,,.|,%-.'’‘-■ S'*.;.; 


.Kf I, 

r' 




.r/;:u ly.y'r• .’''."yl. 

r' . 

'■ y ,. T y.yi'f..! jy:'yvf 


'> y y'iyyyJ'y, .‘ 

■ . ■'j.'', 

'..■ '. i < ' ', .J.';.!, ■ 'i,.f.:, IxJ' ' c 


. . yLV'. r:., , 


~iy ■’■'') I .y; . ." 


yy •"■■■ • ■ 'T.\ 


'■:yy.-yv" 


t .ya', 

r, 


"■: ..^L y ■’#'<■? 


■• -'.’i 


..L J‘. 

. ’ ■ . r 




yy 











170 


3rd Soldier 
4th Soldier 
3rd Soldier 
1st Soldier 
2nd Soldier 


Under the earth. 

It signs well, does it not? 

No. 

Peace, I sayI What should this mean 
*Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony 
lov*d 

Now leaves him. 

(AC., IV, iii, 11-16.) 


This use of music to prophesy evil days to come is a 
case unique in Shakespeare*s plays. The Incident is to 


be found in his source. North’s Plutarch’s Lives. 


Since music was at hand, soft music may have played 
when Cleopatra mentions that supreme luxury - fishing to 
music. 


Give me mine angle’, we’ll to the river. There, 
My music playing far off, I will betray tawny 
finn’d fishes. 

(A C., II, V, 10-12.) 

No stage direction indicates music, so the idea probably 
was conveyed by words alone. 

COKIPLANUS 

Music is employed in Coriolanus , IV, v, to give the 
idea of the wealth and greatness of Aufidlus. The scene 
opens with the stage direction: 

Music plays . Enter a servingman - 
Here, servants, music, good food, point to the fact that 
Aufidius is a wealthy person. It was necessary to make 
this contrast, for Coriolanus, who enters as a beggar. 


soon outshines him. 

Extremely loud music announces the triumphant return 













■ : 




■s':' ■ ¥, 


Kf. 

'■■ ■''‘.LOtii/i ,i.■ -' i> i. 1' /ir' 



ii 




•r;V'i*;iw,^,' 






f. , r 








'^"illi 








:;■■; m'::i ; t r-'a:;.a ■;; 


. 




..’..! VC'"'- .' 




1 




'V*'" , 






' V ' . ■;^^^ '. ■ . ■ ■ ;■ ■: '■ ' 

' : ' 

■ ■.' ' A ' • ■ J e - iL 


a' 




'-.I. 


■; x: ■' ',;;n ■■ 

O'/t .>0' o.,XV/ i 




.A-.;.*:', ; 

■■hm .Ui ilk,n "Kj 

X7d , iiX. i, ; 

‘.■'A; 

!■ 


■ ^ 

.t,v> A-;^sJ'SX;ai.:v; no 

\y rAU-^o, 




I A yo' 


:ar:-.:aT 




■'X. 


..' ' 

; ‘ ;;5;,. ‘ O"^' *. X X ■ ^ fi a a ‘X '' . J < 

. - Aca;v::; 










171, 

of Coriolams to Rome. The stage direction is: 

Trumpets , hautboys , drums heat all together . 

r£or•, V, iv, 5i.) 

This does not seem to he more than a form of flourish ? 
although the instrumentation is interesting. (See 
chapter on Musical Instruments .) 

CYmSLIRE 

The "hunts-up” music of C ymheline has already heen 

partially treated in the chapter on Songs . Cloten 

explains his morning-music to Imogen hy saying: 

I am advised to give her music a-mornings; 
they say it will penetrate. 

( Cymh .? II, iii, 15-14.) 

Cloten describes the instrumental music as "a very 

excellent good-conceited thing" which means it was not 

a folk melody, hut a highly ornamented court melody. 

The morning-music was played before the song, " Hark , 

hark I the lark ", was sung. The music was played on 

stringed instruments, for Cloten says to the musicians: 

So, get you gone. If this penetrate, I will 
consider your music the better; if it do not, 
it is a vice in her ears which horsehairs and 
calves^ guts, nor the voice of an unpav*d* 
eunuch to hoot, will not remedy. 

( Cymh ., II, iii, 31-35.) 

Since English roads were paved with cobble-stones, the 
phrase "unpavM eunuch" is an accurate description. 


In spite of his crude language, Cloten is a courtier. 


























. ..V., .... 










The use of a consort of stringed Instruments to play a 
’’hunts-up” and to accompany the song Is quite In keeping 
with the general practice of men of his rank. S olemn 
music Is produced by an'Ingenious Instrument”'* ( Gymb ., 

* The New English * Dictionary , Vol. I-K, p. 284, says 
the word Ingenious and ingenuous were frequently inter¬ 
changed in the seventeenth century. 

IV, 11, 185-251). Cloten has been decapitated and his 
head sent down the stream, when the Instrument begins 
; to play its mysterious music. Gulderius is angry, for 
he thinks his brother has given it motion to play a 
requiem for Cloten. In reality it is playing of its 
own accord for Imogen, who is borne in dead. 

The existence of mechanical instruments in Shakespeare^a 
time is known,* but it is improbable that an actual 

* E. J. Dent, cit ., p. 157. 

j mechanical Instrument was used. Musicians v/ere employed 
I elsewhere in the play and could play suitable music off 
stage. The establishment of a divinely inspired mechanical 
instrument to supply the music was a dramatic necessity, 
since three of the four occupants of Belarius^ mountain 
cave are on the stage at the time the music begins. 
Furthermore, the purpose of the music is to bewail the 
death of Imogen, the fourth person of the group in the 

cave. 






























173. 


In the same play, a vision in the form of a dumh-shov/ 
appears to Posthumous. The stage directions are; 

Solemn music. Enter as in an apparition 
SICILIUS LEONATUS, father to POSTHUi'IOUS , an old 
man, attired like a warrior; leading in his hand 
an ancient matron, his wife, and mother to 
Posthumous, with music before them . Then, after 
other musIc , follow the two young LEONATI, brothers 
to POSTHTOOUS , with wounds, as they died in the 
wars. They circle POSTHUIv'IOUS round as he lies 
sleeping. 

( Cymb ., V, Iv, 29 ff.) 

In this dumb-show, musicians appeared on the stage. The 
phrase "after other music" indicates either that the two 
young Leonatl entered after other music had been played, 
or, that they entered after other musicians. The hunts- 
up music of Act II, scene ill, consisted of a consort 
of strings, which means four or five musicians. In all 
likelihood the same men played the music of the 

I 

j "Ingenious Instrument", Act IV, scene li. In the dumb- 
show or vision it is likely that a consort of instruments 
(that is four or five musicians), preceded Slcilius, to 
give music of the proper effect, for a split consort 
would play unbalanced music. Other musicians going be- 

I fore the Leonati would mean unnecessary expense with 

! 

I no dramatic gain. Other music , or more music playing 
for the entrance of the brothers seems to be both logical 
and more practical. 

THE 7/INTER*3 TALE 


In The Winter's Tale, the songs of Autolycus are 


































174. 


unaccompanied. This is appropriate since they are of 
the ballad type, and sung by an itinerant pedlar. 

Music is used for the dance of the Shepherds and 
Shepherdesses (W T., IV, Iv, 165), but none is used for 
the dance of the Twelve Satyrs (W T., IV, Iv, 351). 

The music which appears later (V, iii, 98), would be 
unsuitable to a country dance, but may have been used 
in this case because of the nobility of two of the 
dancers. The dance of the Twelve Satyrs, being of a 
rougher character, may well have been accompanied by 
pipe and tabor, although this conjecture has no basis 
except its suitability. Moreover, actors who played 
the clown parts usually played the pipe and tabor. As 

! 

i 

I a clown appears in this play, such Instruments would be 

I at hand. Music is used by Pauline to awake the ’’statue”, 

Hermione (W T., V, ill, 98). Leontes has had time to 

i 

j express his admiration for the statue, and his grief 

j for the loss of Hermione. The whole Incident is in 
reality a stage trick to prolong the reunion of Leontes 
and Hermione. Music is employed to make more dramatic 

I 

I the actual moment when the statue comes to life. 

i THE TEMPEST 

I The Tempest is full of songs. Instrumental music, 

I 

and sound effects. Ariel’s first two songs are 
accompanied by Ariel himself, probably on a lute (see 













v' 


'4 



O' 




^ • 







..V 





‘ -'..■ .i 



. i 






175. 


stage directlon{ Temp ., I, 11, 374). In II, 1, 184, 

Ariel enters ’’playing solemn music” which causes all 
of Alonzo’s company to fall asleep, with the exception 
of Sebastian and Antonio (T emp «, II, 11, 190). Ariel 
enters again ( Temp ., II, 11, 297), with music to sing 
his warning to Alonzo. The drunken ebullient songs of 
Stephano and Caliban are appropriately sung with no 
accompaniment. The singing of Ariel and the mysterious 
music Is not of this earth. They represent the super¬ 
natural. Stephano Is a drunken human and Is Imitated 
by Caliban. It Is natural that Prospero’s spirit music 
should not grace their drunken songs. When Stephano 
i sings a snatch of song, ”Plout ’em and scout ’em”, 

I Caliban says ”That’s not the tune”* ( Temp ., III, 11, 133). 

I One of the Incongruities of Caliban’s character Is that 
I he Is a lover of music. Contrast his delight In the “sounds, 
land sweet airs” that delight and hurt not”( Temp ., III, 11, 

I 145), with Stephano’s attitude - “This will prove a brave 
I kingdom to me, where I shall have my music for nothing” 

I ( Temp ., III, 11, 153). Caliban’s love of music Is 
I Inconsistent with his brutishness. 

i - -- -.- -.., .. . - ___ , __^ 

i 

I Ariel then plays the tune properly on tabor and drum. 

I 

I The sound of tabor and drum attracts them both Into 

i 

I 

'following It “calfllke through Tooth’d briers, sharp 
I furzes, pricking goss” and Into a “filthy mantled pool” 

I 

I ( Temp ., Ill, 111, 136 ff.). In Act III, scene 111, 

“Solemn and strange music” accompanies the several 






















176 


Strange Shapes who hear in a banquet to the King. They 
’’dance about it with gentle actions of salutations; 
and, inviting the King etc. to eat, they depart” ( Temp ., 
III, iii, 18 ff.). The banquet is removed by the S hapes 
to ’’soft music”. They ’’dance with mocks and mows” 

( Temp ., III, iii, 82). The music here, as well as the 
strange shapes, is evidence of magic. Soft music 
plays as Iris and Geres deliver their lines ( Temp ., IV, 
i, 58) in the masque. The song which they both sing 
(lines 106-117), and the dance of the Nymphs and the 
Reapers (line 138) is probably accompanied by the same 
music. Music not only assists Prospero in working his 
final spell, but assists in gradually dissipating it. 

--- v/hen I have required 
Some heavenly music (which even now I do) 

To work mine end upon their senses that 

This airy charm is for, 1*11 break my staff- 

( Temp ., V, i, 51-54) 

When Ariel has led Alonzo*s party into the magic circle, 
Prospero says; 

A Solemn air, and the best comforter 
To an unsettled fancy, cure thy brains. 

Now, useless, boil*d within thy skull*. 

( Temp ., V, 1, 58.) 

Since Ariel sings Where the bee sucks , there suck _! 
while he attires Prospero, he is unable to accompany 
himself on the lute. Probably his song was accompanied 
by back-stage music - the musicians who provided the 
"strange and solemn music” of 'Act IV, scene i. The 
























' ■ .. ;|if- 


^ srKi}:'- 






''i • ■.. 






:f 


■ - i 








177 


song, with orchestral accompaniment, would he a grace¬ 
ful tapering off from the musical climax of the play 
( Temp ., IV, i, 58-158), An unaccompanied song would 
have been hare and anticllmactic after the dancing and 
orchestral music of the masque. 

The Instrumental music in The Tempest is played 
either hy Ariel, or hy invisible spirits. The music 
of the second type is like the music which frightened 
the sentries in Antony and Cleopatra (A £., IV, ill, 
11-16), or that which Glendower summoned to play. Even 
as the special abilities of Ariel, the appearances of 
Strange Shapes , Banquets, Nymphs, Reapers, the goddesses 
Geres and Juno, the music is a symbol of Prosperous 
magical power over the spirit world. 

EENRY VIII 

Hautboys introduce Act I, scene v, of Henry VIII . 

It is a banquet scene, and mu'sic might be expected 
here. Hautboys are also used to introduce Cardinal 
Wolsey ( Hen VIII ., I, Iv, 33). In this same scene, 
masquers are announced by drum and trumpet and the 
discharge of chambers ( Hen VIII ., I, iv, 49), and a 
dance is performed ( Hen VIII ., I, iv, 76), A possible 
cue to the type of music performed may be: 

Let the music knock it. 

( Hen VIII ., I, iv, 108.) 

This suggests vigour, so the dance may have been the 



























178 


Coranto, or La Volta (see chapter on Dances). The 
instrumentation is not mentioned, but in the play a 
lute (III, i, 1), Trumpets (fanfares). Hautboys (I, iv, 

33 ff.), and probably strings (IV, ii, 81), are all 
mentioned. The ’’noise” in this case might consist 
either of hautboys or of strings, or both together. A 
lute accompanies the song which opens Act III, scene 1. 

The lute being one of the chief Instruments used by 
court ladies, this scene is very naturalistic. In Act 
,IV, scene li, the Queen wishes sad music. Her feeling 
is somev/hat akin to that of Mariana in Measur e for 
Measure , who said; 

My mirth it (the music) much displeas*d, but 
pleas’d my woe. 

(M M., IV, i, 13.) 

Queen Katharine feels she has not long to live. 

Cause the musicians play me that sad note 
I nam’d my knell, whilst I sit meditating 
On that sweet harmony I go to. 

(Hen VIII ., IV, 11, 78-80.) 

The musicians play "Sad and solemn music”, and the Queen 
sleeps. A vision (in reality a dumb-show), appears on 
bhe stage. 

The Vision 

Enter, solemnly tripping one after another, six 
personages clad in white robes, wearing on their 
heads garlands of bays, and golden vizards on 
their faces; branches of bays or palm in their 
hands. They first congee unto her, then dance ; 
and, at certain changes , the first two hold a 


















;) 













179 


spare garland over her head; at which the other 
four make reverent curtsies. Then the two 
that held the garland deliver the same to the 
other next two, who observe the same order In 
their changes and holding the garland over her 
head; which done, they deliver the same garland 
to the last two, who likewise observe the same 
order; at which (as It were by Inspiration), 
she makes (In her sleep), sings of rejoicing 
and. holdeth up her hands to heaven. And so In 
their dancing vanish, carrying the garland with 
them. The music continues . 

This vision, no doubt a reflection of the masque, con¬ 
sists of a dance In three parts. Katharine under the 
Influence of music has had a prophetic dream. 

The music, continuing after Katharine awakes, 
finally Irritates her. 

Bid the music leave. 

They are harsh and heavy to me. 

Music ceases. 

‘ Uli'irvill ., IV, 11, 93-94.) 


Instrumental music. In relation to the plays of 
Shakespeare, Is a hand-maiden of versatility. The 
variety of ways In which this type of music has been 
used can be seen best by a table of uses. The plays 
are dated In order that the gradual d.evelopment of 
Instrumental music as a dramatic device may be seen. 

Aceompanlment to Dances : 

Date 

1594-5 Midsummer Klght * s Dream , IV, 1, 89. Dance of 
Oberon and Tltanla. 

1594-5 Romeo and Juliet, I, v, 28. The dance at which 
Romeo meets Juliet. 
































160 . 


1599 

l6o6 


Much Ado About Nothing; , II, 1, 83. Part of the 
mask which takes place at Leonato^s house. 

II, 1, 160. 


Macbeth , III, v, 33. 

IV, 1, 43. Dances of the witches. 
IV, i, 132. 


160*^ Tlmon of Athens , I, ii, 136. The masque of the 
Amazons. 

1607-8 Pericles , II, ill, 98. The dance of the Knights. 

II, ill, 107. The dance of the Knights 
and the Ladle s. 


1611 


1612 


The Winter * s Tale , IV, iv, 165. The dance of 
the shepherds, and shepherdesses. 


King Henry VIII , I, iv, 76 
Henry*s court. 


The masque at 


The dances of Twelve Satyrs (W T., IV, Iv, 351), 

The Pinching Song (M W W., V, v, 97), and the Fairies* 
dance in V, i, 407 of Midsummer Night * s Dream , and others 
were accompanied by singing only. 

I Accompaniment to Songs ; 

■ Song accompaniments fall into two categories. In 

Isome cases songs are performed to the playing of a 
I single instrument while in other Instances, songs are 

I 

I sung to the music of a consort of instruments. 

i (‘^) Accompaniments by single instruments : 

1603 Meas-ure For Measure , IV, i, 1. Take, 0 take 
those lips away. 

1599 Julius Caesar , IV, iii, 266. Lucius* song. 

1601-2 'li’oil^s and Gressida , III, 1, 103. Pandarus * song 




































I 

J 




i 











10 . 














161 . 


1 6 11 The Tempest , I, 11, 375. Arlel»s songs. 

I, 11, 394. 

II, 1, 308. • 

1612 King Henry VIII , III, 1, 3. Song sung to 
Queen Katharine. 


(B) Accompanlments by a group of musicians ; 


1591-2 

The Two Gentlemen of Verona, II, il. 
Serenade to Sylvia. 

85. 

1599 

Much Ado About Nothing, II, ill, 45. 
song. 

Bathalsar 

1599- 

1600 

1601 

As You Like It, V, iv, 147. Hymen’s song. 

Twelfth Night, II, iv, 50. Gome away death. 

1606 

Macbeth, III, v, 33. The songs of witches. 

IV, 1, 43. 

IV, 1, 132. 


Antony and Cleopatra, II, vil, 114. 
monarch of the vine. 

Come, thou 

1610 

Cymbeline, II, ill, 22. Hark, harkl 
*IV, li, 258. Pear no more 
0 ’ the sun. 

the lark, 
i the heat 


* I have considered ”Pear no more etc.“, here as a 
spoken song. 


! The Tempest , IV, 1, 106. Song of Juno and Ceres. 

i 

I Some of the following songs were sung unaccompanied, 

i 

j since supporting music of any kind would be incompatible 

I 

I with the surroundings. Other songs are accompanied by 

I a single instrument, although other music was available. 

The following is an incomplete list of such songs. 

1595-6 The Merchant of Venice , III, ii, 63. 

Tell me where is fancy bred - performed by 
voices alone. 










































-n,’*■;».« r-"* 



■i 



f'A 













18 ^ 


1599- 

As You Like It, II, v, 1. Under the greenwood 
tree. 

II, vii, 174. Blow, blow, thou 

winter wind. 

IV, il, 11. V/hat shall he have 
that killed the deer? 

V, ill, 17. It was a lover and 

his lass. 

All these songs are unaccompanied by Instruments 

IS'qO 

Julius Caesar, IV, Hi, 266. Lucius* Song, 
accompanied by a single instrument. 

1601-2 

Trollus and Gresslda, III, i, 125. Pandarus' 
song, accompanied by Pandarus himself on one 
ins trument. 

1601 

Twelfth Night, II, ill. The drinking songs. 

1604- 

Othello, II, ill. Iago*s drinking songs. 

IV, Hi. Willow, Willow. 

Both these songs are unaccompanied. 

1603 

Measure for Measure, IV, i. Take, 0 take those 
lips away - probably accompanied by a lute. 


The following are Instances in which music plays 
for entrances or exits, or to open scenes. The numerous 
fanfares are not, of course, included. 

Entrance Music: 


1591 

Love*s Labour*s Lost, V, ii, 157. 

15^6-7 

The Taming of the Shrew, III, ii, 1S5. Music 
for the wedding party. 

1509 

Julius Caesar, I, ii, 1. Music accompanies 
Caesar*s entrance. 

1601 

Twelfth Night, I, 1, 1. Music opens the play. 

1601-2 

Troiliis and Cressida, III, 1. Offstage music 
opens Act III. 

1602-3 

Hamlet, III, H) 94. The Danish march. 













































163 


l6o6 Macbeth , I, vl. Hautboys open scenes vl, and vil. 

I, vll. 

1612 King Henry VIII , I, Iv, 33. Hautboys attend 
the entrance of Cardinal Wolsey. 

Exit Music : 

1594.5 Romeo and Juliet , I, Iv, 114. The masques exit 
to one” drum* 

MusIc for Pageantry : 

Music which Is evidently elaborate Is sometimes 
used to add to the sense of pomp and pageantry. Such 
music was a necessity, for comparatively few people 
had to represent large crowds. Typical Instances of 
music used In this way are found In Julius Caesar , I, 11 
1 ff.; and In Corlolanus , V, Iv, 51. 

Mus ic to Indicat e rank : 

A fine example of this Is In Corlolanus IV, v. 

Banque t Music : 

Banquet music Is somewhat allied to the above 
category, for any one who dined to music had, at least, 
wealth. The social status of the diners was established 
In wa^rs other than musical. Examples of banquet music 
are: 

1606 Macbeth , I, vll. 

1607-8 Antony and Cleopatra , II, vll. 

1607 Tlmon of Athen s, II, vll. Banquet music Is 

used In this "play to show the prodigality of 
Tlmon. Ill, vl. 





























164 . 


Music which helps to establish character ; 

Instrumental music Is sometimes responsible for 
throwing light on character, or supplies the background 
for conversation In which character or characteristics 
are brought out. Instances of this type of music are 
found In; 

1595 Kln^g Richard II, V, v, 41 f f. In Pomfret castle. 

1597 First Part of King Henry the Fourth , III, 1, 230. 

The natures of Hotspur and his Lady are brought 
out. 

1601 Twelft h Night , I, 1, 1. 

1601-2 Trollus and Cressida , III, 1. 

1607-8 Pericles , I, 1, 5. 

Musical Therapy : 

In tv/o plays music Is represented as a medium for 
healing; 

1605-6 King Lear , IV, vii, 23. 

1607-8 Pericles , III, 11, 88-90. 

Music of the Sphere s; 

I The music representing the music of the spheres 

I 

I may actually have been played ( Per ., V, 1, 80). It 
; seems reasonable that it should have been. 

Supernatural Music ; 

Instinirnental music is represented to be supernatural 
when dramatic credence normally does not allov/ music to 
appear In certain mis-en-scenes, that Is, in such cases as 































I 


I 


\ 




■; J 

D:: ^ 














165 


1610 Cymbellne , IV, il, 185-231. The music of the 
ingenious instrument. 

1611 The Tempest , all the music throughout The Tempest , 
with the exception of Ariel*s lute accompaniments, 
could only he supernatural, for the scene is a 
desert isle. 

1607-8 Antony and Cleopatra , IV, ill, 116 ff. Here 
music prophesies disaster. 

Music indicating passage of time or a point of time : 

1594^5 Romeo and Juliet , IV, iv, 23. With the context. 
Parish music shows the passage of time from 
three o^clock until morning. 

l604 Othello , III, i, 2. A "hunts-up'‘ here tells 
us it is morning. 

1610 Cymbellne , II, lii. A ’'hunts-up'* is played 
indicating morning. 

Music for Contrast: 


1594- 5 Romeo and Juliet , IV, Iv, 23. The music aids 

in contrasting the scene where Capulet prepares 
for the wedding and the next scene where Juliet 
is found dead. 

1595- 6 The Merchant of Venice , V, 1, 68-110. This quiet 

scene is a contrast to Act IV, scene li, in 
which Portia and Herissa plan to upbraid their 
husbands, and the following scene in which they 
carry out this plan. 

I60Q Coriolanus, IV, v. The music here subtly points 
out the difference between poverty-stricken 
Coriolanus and the affluent Aujidius, whom 
Coriolanus is soon to eclipse. 

Music for Pantomime Background : 

1602-3 Hamlet, III, ii, 145 ff. 

1607-8 Pericles, II, i. 

III, i. 

IV, iv, 22. 

1612 King Henry VIII, IV, il, 78-93. 
















































166 


Music essential in action : 

Instrumental music is more often an aid to 

Shakespeare *s drama, rather than essential in the action. 

In the following cases music is quite necessary: 

I59I-2 Two Gentlemen of Verona , III, ii, 85. The 
serenade to Silvia. 

1594-5 Romeo and Julie t, I, v, 28. Music for the dance 
at which'Romeo and Juliet fall in love. 

1611 The Tem pest , III, iii, 136 ff. The music of the 
tabor and drum which baited the trap for 
Stephano, Trinculo, and Caliban. 

Background music : 

This was instronnental music which was played during 
the lines of the actors, and which accentuated moods, 
or atmosphere. With the exception of some dances, 
Shakespeare always gives the mood or atmosphere in the 
actors’ lines. The music then carries on the desired 
effect, while the action of the play continues. Examples 
of music as a backdrop of sound are: 

1591-2 The Two Gentlemen of Verona , III, li, 85. 

1594- 5 Midsummer Right’s Dream , IV, i, 85. 

1595- 6 The Merchant of Venice , V, i, 68-110. 

1598 II Henry IV, II,iv, 246. 

1598 ^ Henry IV , IV, v, 4. 

1599 Much Ado About Nothing , II, iii, 38 ff. 

1599- As You Like It, V, iv, 114 ff. 

1600 

1601 Twelfth Night , II, iv. 
































K 


1 








I 

















167 


l6o6 Macbeth , IV, 1, 106. 

l6ll The Winter^3 Tale , V, Hi, 98. 

SOUro EFFECTS 

No attempt has here been made at a systematic 
collection of sound effects. Most of these are quite 
simple. The sounding of horns together with the bay¬ 
ing of hounds (easily imitated by actors backstage), 
represented a distant hunting scene. (T And ., II, il; 
II, ii, 10; K Lear., I, ill, 10; I, iv; ^er^., IV, i, 
255). Also a crowd is represented by shouts offstage. 
If a flourish of trumpets accompanied the shouts, a 
dignitary was being honored (J £., I, ii, 78). Peals 
of thunder occur in many plays, typical examples being 
Julius Caesar , I, ill; Macbeth , I, i; I, iii, King Lear 
II, ii, 290; III, i; III, ii. To get the effect of 
thunder cannon balls were rolled on the floor backstage 
for the heavier volleys, while softer thunder effects 
came from the rolling of the drum. Ben Jonson in the 
Prologue to Every Man in His Humour enumerates these 
two methods: 

rolled bullet heard 
To say it thunders: tempestuous drum 
Rumbles, to tell you when the storm hath come. 

CONCLUSION 

For off-stage music the musicians played in the 
” music-roqm ^^ or ” tyring-room ^*. This was a part of the 




































r • 







I 


I 




) 











188 . 


gallery which ran behind the stage. In some theatres, 
it was at one side of the stage itself.* This was the 

* Chambers, The Elizabethan Stage , Vol. II, p. 341. 

See also, E. J. Dent, 0£. cit ♦, p. 152. 

source of Glendower*s music, "hanging in the air a 
thousand leagues from hence" (I Hen IV>, III, i, 224); 

) 

of Pericles* music of the spheres ( Per ., V, li, 230); 
and of all the examples of still music, or background 
music as in The Merchant of Venice , V, 1, 68 ff. Music 
was also played upon the stage as in Twelfth Night , I, 1; 
The Two Gentlemen of Verona , IV, 11, 35 ff. - music is 
played beneath the stage. 

Musicians were sometimes given a few lines to say 
on the stage. Romeo and Juliet , IV, v, 102-149, and 
I Othello , III, i, 1 ff., are examples of this. Here the 
musicians have little to say, and the scenes are comic 
in character. In other cases, such as Much Ado About 
Nothing , I, ii, 25 ff,; II, ili, 39-91; The Two Gentlemen 
of Verona , II, lii, 14-35, the musicians say not a 
word, but as in many cases where trumpets and drums 
enter with armed forces, they are supernumeraries 
without lines. 

Shakespeare had an eye for realism in the matter 
of song accompaniment. \^en songs are sung in the 
households of nobles or the wealthy, musicians supply 



























<•■■■• -J > ^ 


}' 


'■■a 


■i 




• • 1 


; ^ 

i 

} 

! 















169 . 


the background. Music plays for the serenade to Sylvia 

•); for Balthasar*s song, Sigh 
no more , Ladles (M A A N., II, 111, 64 f f.); and for 
Festers song. Come away , death (T N., II, Iv, 52 ff.). 
Accompaniment to these songs Is appropriate, for an 
orchestra Is proper to the setting. In Twelfth Night , 

II, 111, however, the drinking songs have no supporting 
music. They produce the effect of naturalness and 
spontaneity.* Mercutlo^s snatches of song (F £•> II> Iv) 

The drinking song of the Triumvirs In Antony and 
Cleopatra , III, vll, 117-123, Is sung to an orchestra. 

In this case the presence of the orchestra Indicates 
the social position of the drinkers. The presence of 
Sneak*s noise Is justified for the Boards Head Is a 
tavern (2 Hen II., Iv, 245 ff.), where one might expect 
to find musicians. 

are sung unaccompanied. Although orchestral music 
appears In Julius Caesar , IV, 111, 266, Lucius accom¬ 
panies himself on an Instrument. An orchestra would 
be out of place In a soldier*s camp. The scene has a 
quiet, simple touch v/hlch Is entirely natural. Pandar*s 
song (T C., Ill, 1, 125-136), Is accompanied by a lute, 
although off-stage music opens the scene. Desdemona’s 
Willow , Willow ( Qth ., IV, 111, 41-57), has no background 
music although Instrumental music appears In the same 
play, Act III, scene 1. The song Is a simple ditty 
sung by a lady as she prepares herself for bed. There 























:r> 


! 















190 . 


is much Instrumental music in Henry VIII, but the song 
Orpheus with his lute made trees ( Hen VIII ., Ill, i, 

3 ff•)> is sung to a lute. Shakespeare uses simple 
accom.panlraents, or none at all for the songs that should 
so be sung. 

In several of the plays supernatural music is 
indicated. This allows music to be played in a forest, 
as in Midsummer Night^s Dream , IV, 1, 89 ff.; on an 
uninhabited island as in The Tempest , or away from 
civilization in a mountainous country as in G77mbeline , 

IV, il, 185-281. By first establishlrig the fact that 
the music is supernatural*, Shakespeare can employ music 

* Fairies being unearthly beings, s^^pernatural music is 
expected for their dances. ViTbere humans take the part 
of fairies, as in The Merry Wives of Windsor , V, v, the 
dance is accompanied by singing only. 

in places where normally it would not be found. 

The instruments of the day - recorders (beak-flutes), 
cornets (horns of wood), viols, hautboys or shawms were 
ordinarily used in families. That is to say the normal 
practise was to have only strings play together, or have 
three to six flutes or recorders play together. This 
was called playing in consort . Broken music consisted 
of a mixture of the families or groups, as in the modern 
orchestra. Shakespeare was not unav/are of the usage of 
























vo r ■ ■ ■' ■ ' ■' -■ ^ I' .i'" 

’"./'i-- ' ■■ i 

■ ■ ) 



'•r ■ 



' < • ■ • ! 

'vjva.:; ! 


j. j 


^ .u 







) 












191 


broken music*, but the Impression that one gets from 

* Come your answer In broken music; for thy 
Voice is music and thy English broken, etc. 

( Hen V., V, 11, 243.) 

Fair prince, here is good broken music. 

(T C., Ill, i, 52.) 

the stage directions is that he mainly employed instru¬ 
ments in consort. Each Consort, it is needless to say, 
has a different tone-colour. In The Tv/o Gentlemen of 
Verona , III, li, 84, a "sweet consort" serenades Sylvia. 
Soft music - which presumably meant strings - is 
required for the opening of Twelfth Night, and the 
death scene of The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth , 
IV, V, 4 ff. Hautboys are called for in Macbeth , I, vl; 

I, vii, and in Henry VIII , I, iv, 54. E. J. Dent records 
that in Gorbuduc (1562) five dumb-shows are found, each 
of which is prefaced by a consort of different instru¬ 
ments "to enhance the dramatic effect by appropriate 
instrumental colour."* This idea, derived from the 

* E. J* Dent, cit ., p. 186. 

Italian theatre, may have been used by Shakespeare who 
was alive to the l8.test in dramatic developm^ent. There 
is unfortunately not enough evidence to prove conclusively 
that Shakespeare’s Incidental music was designed to fit 
the mood or atm.osphere of the different scenes. There 



























i 



^ . ? » 



I 


) 


;u 

' '• 

dl) bi?g>0a; 


s 










192 


is only enough information to suggest that this might 
he the case. 

Throughout Shakespeare *s plays, Instrumental music 
was used as an aid to the imagination of the audience, 
or as a stimulus to their emotions. This was important 
in a theatre producing its plays by daylight and using 
little scenery. 










195. 

CHAPTER V 
THE DANCE 

Primitive dances of the earliest times were accom¬ 
panied by song alone. In time, instrimnents came to be 
used, but singing remained an important part of the dance. 
During the sixteenth century, dances were performed both 
to the playing of instruments and to singing. In Shake¬ 
speare’s work we find both types of accompaniment. 

Dance rhythm may be securely asserted to be the im- 
m^ediate origin of all Instrumental music.*''' When music 

Grove, Dictionary of Music and Musicians (3rd ed.. Vol¬ 
ume *D-jy7~PP • 7-10. 

came to be played for its own sake, the instrumental 
pieces were in the form of short dances. Definiteness of 
phrasing and form left their stamp on music from its early 
connection with dancing. The earliest resemblances to the 
miodern suite are found in Elizabethan times, when two or 
more dances were played one after another for contrast. 

The suite later developed into the sonata form. 

The dances of Elizabethan times were sometim-es arranged, 
for voices, sometimes for Instrimients. Morley ( Flaine and 
Easie Introduction , 1597), defines ballet as ‘'songs which 
being sung to a dittie may likewise be danced". Grove’s 
Dictionary gives the music for a pavane, written for four 






















194. 

voices. It was to be accompanied a driun which beat out 
the following rhythm.*''■ - J J J. Morley ( Plaine and 

Ibid ., Vol. P-son, p. 90. 

Easie Introduction ), also speaks of a "kind of songs - 

called Justinianas-^-all written in the Bergamasca 

language." Bottom, Midsummer Night ^ s Dream , V, ii, 30, 
has made no mistake in requesting the Duke to " hear a 
Bergomask dance'''* between two of our company." The 

A Bergamasca - a quick country dance. Ibid ., Vol. A-C. 

"pinching Song" in The Merr^ Wives of Windsor , V, iv, 98, 
was unaccompanied by instruments, but the fairies are in¬ 
structed to sing while they dance. Elizabethan dance 
music, therefore, shom^s the beginning of the schism of 
vocal and instrumental music, 

A super-abundance of material is to be found on all 
aspects of the dance in the sixteenth century. 1 propose 
to limit the subject''' to what the play-goer would see and 

For full treatments of the old dances see Naylor, 
Shakespeare and Music , pp. 110-146; Chappell, Popular 
Music of the Olden Times , Vol, 1; Groves, Dictionary 
of Music and Musicians . 

hear on the stage, and to show that the particular names 
of dances, as well as the more general terms of caper . 






































.t 


'i-- 


i 

i 




n 

■ji 









■j,.: -r mo X 

'»■' .,• r 








195 . 


measure , and dance , were used for their connotations. 

That is, they form a part of Shakespeare’s imagery. 

In Shakespeare’s first play. Love’s Labour’s Lost, 

9, the brawl and the canary are mentioned. 

Moth. Master, will you win your love with a French 

brawl? 

Arm. How meanest thou? brawling in French? 

Moth. No, m_y complete master, but to jig off a 

tune at the tongues end , canary to it wrth 
your feet ---sigh a note and sing a note. 

This is a reference to dancing to one’s own singing. 

Other allusions to the same thing are found in Midsummer 

Night’s Dream , and The Merry Wives of Windsor ; 

Tita. And this ditty after me 

Sing and dance it trippingly. 

(M N D., V, ii, 25.) 

Anne About him, fairies, sing a scornful rhyme; 

And, as you trip, still pinch him to your 
time. (M W W., V, v, 93.) 

BRAWX ; 

Groves’ Dictionary '”'' identifies the bra?/! with bransle, 
*”* Groves, 0£. cit ., (Vol. A-C), p. 458. 

brangill . It was a "round” dance in which dancers 
joined hands around a may-pole ” . Naylor'^ derives the 

Op . cit ., p. 115. 

dance from the French bransle , a totter, swing, shake, 
etc., or from. Old French, brandeler , to shake, sv/ing. 











































IS'6. 


The music was written a quick four-in-a-bar. There were 
a great many types, tv/o of which are given in Groves* 
Dictionary ; a Branle dje ^ torche , and a Dranle des sabots , 
Chappell gives a very full description of the brawl in 
his Popular Music of the Olden Times. 


Op . cit ., p, 135. 


CANARY ; 

The canary , Naylor describes as a lively dance in 
6/8 time. That the dance is lively is indicated in All * s 
Well that Ends V'lell , and The Merry Wives of Windsor ; 

Lafeu. I have seen a medicine 

That*s able to breath life into stone. 

Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary 
With sprightly fire and motion. 

[a W E W., II, i, 75 ff.) 

Host, Farewell, by hearts. I will to my honest 
knight, Falstaff, and drink canary to him. 

Ford (aside). I think I shall drink in pipe - wine 
first with him. 1*11 make him dance, 

(M WW., Ill, ii, Ql ff.). 

Mr. Ford is quibbling on the words dance and canary . 
Naylor’"* believes that wine is a pun on whine, and pipe. 


Op . cit., p. 116. 


a pun on the instrument to whose music it was common to 
dance. 

In Much Ado About Nothing , a cluster of dances appears 















































■ '1 






1 ^ 7 . 


in II, i, 77 ff. 

Beat, For hear me. Hero; wooing, wedding, and re¬ 
penting, is as a Scotch jig, a measure, and a 
cinque - pace : the first suit is hot and hasty 
like a Scotch jig , and full as fantastical; the 
wedding, mannerly, modest, as a measure , full 
of state and ancientry ; and then comes repent¬ 
ance, and with his bad legs falls into the 
cinque - pace faster and faster till he sink into 
the grave, 

(M A A N., II, i, 77 ff.) 

SCOTCH JIGS : 

Scotch jigs were "round" dances and performed by a 
large number of people at once.'''' From a passage in Hamlet 


Ibid., p. 121. 


it would seem that all jigs were lively dances: 

Pol. (of the play) This is too long. 

Ham. It shall to the barbers with your beard, 
Pr^ythee (to the First Player), say on: 
he ' s for a jig or a tale of bav/dry or ^ 
sleeps, 

(Ham., II, li, 528.) 

More than that it was a vigorous dance, little is knov^. 
CinqUEPACE ; 

This dance Naylor'"' says is the name fo r the original 


Ibid ., p. 118. 


galliard. He quotes Praetorius as saying the galliard 
had five sets of steps, and from this it derived its 
name. From. Beatrice*s description, the cinquepace re- 
semibled the tottering steps of an old m-an. The steps 










































evidently grew faster and faster as the dance proceeded. 
Sink , of course, is a pim on the word cinque . A less ob¬ 
vious pun is grave for greve '", which was one of the steps 
of the dance. 

Ibid ., p, 118. 

COR ANT 0 

Coranto was a ’^running” dance. It was the Italian 
form of the English country dance.''*' In Twelfth Night , 

rbici >, P. 119. 

Sir Toby says ”V\[hy dost thou not go to church in a galllard , 
and come home in a coranto ? My very walk should be a jig 
---- sink a pace ---- I did think by the excellent con¬ 
stitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star of a 
galliard ” (T N., I, iii, 138 ff.). Prom this evidence, 
a coranto would be quicker in tempo than a ggalliard , but 
not as fast as a jig . 

GALLIARD 

Groves’ Dictionary'^' describes the galliard as a dance 
0^. cj^., (Vol. D-J), p. 342. 

of merry character. It was contrasted in suites-'** to the 

These two, the pavan and the galliard , anticipate the 
saraband and the gigue of the modern” suite. 









































:] 







: 




(.;■ 


[. . rj ; , .Tf J 





i ■■ "; 


i'>- 
! ; 






'■\\ 
, ill 








ll 


■' L / 


I 






19S. 

stately pavan, Praetorius called the galliard ''an in¬ 
vention of the devil, full of shameless and obscene ges¬ 
tures and iimnodest motions."'-' Sir Toby, in the above 

Ibid ., (Vol. D-J) , p. 342, 


quotation, indicates that the galliard is a strenuous 

dance. Sir Andrew*s leg is of "vigorous constitution". 

To test his strength out, he says. 

Let me see thee caper. Hal higher; ha, ha I 
excellent, 

(T N., I, iii, 151.) 

Capering was feature of the lavolta (see note on La Volta). 
Since Sir Toby and Sir Andrew are a pair of topers, and 
since they are comic characters, these lines are deliber¬ 
ately misleading for comic effect. 

MEASURE 

Shakespeare sometimes uses this word generically to 
mean "a dance". Examples are numerous, for it was an 

easy word upon which to pun. 

£. of Havarre , Say to her, we nave measured manymiles. 
To tread a measure with her on this 

grass, 

Boyet (to the ladies). They say, that they have 
measur’d many a mile 
To tread a measure with you on this 

grass, 

Rosaline. It is not so. Ask them how many 

inches 

Is in one mile; if they measur’d 

many. 

The measure then is easily told. 













M 




I 




j; - i' 












zoo. 


Boyet, 

Biron. 

First Lady, 
Qtieen. 

Dul{:e Senior. 

LA VOLTA 


ir, to come hither, you have measur*! 
miles. 

And many miles the princess bids you telL, 
How many inches do fill up one mile. 

Tell her, we measure them by weary steps. 

(L L L., V, ii, 185-ff.) 

Madam, will dance, 

My legs can keep no measure in delight, 
Y/hen my poor heart no measure keeps in 
grief. 

Therefore, no dancing, girl. 

( Rich II., Ill, Iv, 6.) 

Play music! and you brides and bride¬ 
grooms 1 all. 

With measure leaped in joy, to the 
measures fall, 

k 1-^ iv, 185 ff.) 


La Volta is adequately described in Sir John Davies’ 

Orchestra , a poem upon dancing in Elizabeth’s reign. 

Yet is there one, the most delightful kind, 

A lofty jumping, or a leaping roimd. 

When arm in arm two dancers are entwin’d 

And whirl themselves with strict embracements bound. 

And still their feet an anapest do sound; 

An anapest is all their music’s song. 

Whose first two feet are short, and third is long,'" 


Sir John Davies, ’'Orchestra”, Chappell, cit ., p. 233.) 


Prom this description, the lavolta bore a certain resembHance 
to the modern Viennese V/altz, except that the long step 
which follows two short steps was a "lofty jumping". 

Troilus is so devastated by sorrov/ that he can neither 
sing nor "heel the high lavolt" (T C., IV, iv, 86). 






















The hay is mentioned only once. In Love ^s Labour ^s 
Lost , Dull says: 

1*11 make one in a dance, or so; or I v;ill play 
the tabor to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay, 

(L L L., V, i, 164.) 

The hay was a round country dance, the performers standing 
in a circle to begin the dance, then "wind round handin g 
in passing until you come to your places.The dance 

Stainer and Barrell, "Dictionary’* . Naylor, Shakespeare 
and Lusic , p. 127, 

must have been soDiewhat similar in character to the 
allemand l eft or all hands round of the country square 
dance of today. 

DIBiP 

The dump first occurs as a serenade in The Two Gentle ¬ 
men of Verona (IV, ii, 18). Proteus has advised "a de¬ 
ploring dump" (III, ii, 84). Peter, the servant to the 
Gapulets, speaks of a "merry dump” (R J., IV, v, 108). 

Prom existing dumps it may be said that they are mourn¬ 
ful. To speak of a "merry dump" is a humorous oxymoron 
arising from the ignorance of Peter, The dump is not 
mentioned anyv/here as a dance in Shakespeare *s plays, 

Naylor guesses at the movem.ents of the actual dance; "a 
tapping of the foot at certain places", and "an altema- 




























. 


tlon of a slow sliding step, interspersed with dead 
pauses, and a quicker movement, succeeded again by a 
slow step.'’'«' 

Naylor, 0£. cit ., p* 124. His conjecture is based on 
the music of Lady Carey^s Dump . 

MORRIS DANCE 

The morris dance was a very popular dance throughout 
Europe in the sixteenth century. It derives its name from 
Morisco and resembles the fandango, a modern Spanish dance. 
Dances employing fantastic costumes, blackened faces, 
ribbons, hairy garments, etc. were regarded as Moorish. 

On the eleventh of February, 1600, Will Kempe, the Clovm 
in Shakespeare^s company, began a nine-day*s morris dance 
from London to Norwich. For this the Mayor of Norwich 
gave him a present of five pounds and a pension of forty 
shillings The dance is still performed in England. 

C. B. Harrison, ’^Shakespeare»s Actors" ( Companion to 
Shakespeare Studies ), p. 72, 

The actual steps of the Morris dance have been given 
by Arbeau in his Or che so graphic (1588)'''. The dance was 
very lively and included much striking of heels on the 

Naylor, Op. cit ., p. 145-146. 
ground and together, Arbeau says it ?/as bad for the gout. 


























o ; r 










^03 


Two passages give the date of performance of the 
Morris dance, the first with Mayday, the second v/ith 
Whitsuntide, which is often in the month of May. 


Countess. Will your answer serve fit to all questions? 

Clov/n. As fit as-a pancake for Shrove Tuesday, 

a morris for Mayday. 

E W., II, ii, 21 ff.) 


Dauphin Let us do it with no show of fear; no, 
with no more, than if we heard that 
England were busied with a whitsun morris* 
dance. 

(^.V., II, iv, 23.) 


In The Winter^s Tale there is mention of ''/^/hitsmi 
Pastorals , which were dramatic performances and circus 
entertainments. These celebrations included such 
features as jugglers, hobby-horses, mountebanks 
stilf'-walkers, etc. The hobby-horse is mentioned in 
L L L., Ill, i, 30. 

But 0, but 0 

The hobby horse is forgot. 

Hamlet says this also ( Ham ., III, ii, 45), which sug¬ 
gests that it may have been a ballad tag. It was a 
frequent lament later on when the Puritans outlawed 
their use. Hobby-horses are also mentioned in Much Ado 
About Nothing, III, ii, 73: 

Bene. I have studied eight or nine wise words to 
speak to you,which these hobby-horses must 
not hear. 

The word seems here to be used as an expression for 
^capering fools”. The man playing the part of the hobby¬ 
horse had an imitation horse’s body attached about his 
waist. Suspended from this were the ”housings”, as of 
a medieval tilting horse. These curtains disguised the 
absence of four legs and covered the legs of the per¬ 
former. 

The hobbyhorse, with its attendant characters - a 
Robin Hood, a boy dressed as Maid Marion, a Saint G-eorge, 
and,a dragon - derived from much older sources than the 
Morris dance. However, hobbyhorses frequently performed 
at the same time as the Morris dance, and this has con- 
faseXmany editors, such as Chappell (0£. eit ., p. 245; 
243-7); H. C. Hart (L L L., Arden Edition, note p. 45); 
Furness (M A A N., Variorum Edition, note p. 156), 
























a^04. 


The general ter*m dance is nsed to denote various 
frames of mind or states of being. Most often it implies 
either joy or vigour. The Herald in Othello , II, ii, 4 ff. 
orders every man to "put himself into a triiunph: s ome to 
dance , some to make bonfires" etc. This is a public ex¬ 


pression of happiness at the conclusion of the wars. The 
lack of desire, or the inability to dance shows grief. 

The sad queen in Richard II, says. 


My legs can keep no measure in delight 

When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief; 

Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport. 

( Rich II^ III, iv, 6 ff.) 

Troilus, plunged into sorrow when Cressida leaves him. 


says 


-I cannot sing 

Nor heel the high lavolt, nor sweeten talk. 
Nor play at subtle games. 

(T C., IV, iv, 85-7.) 


Aumerle, to cheer the banished Bolingbroke, urges him to 


Suppose the birds musicians, thy steps no more 
Than a delightful measure of a dance . 

( Rich IL, I, iii, 288-9.) 


The old shepherd in The Winter ^ s Tale speaks of the vigour 

of his old wife. She was 

Both dame and servant; welcomed all, serv’d all; 

V\[ould sing her song and dance her turn; now here. 

At upper end o’ the table, now i’ the middle; 

On his shoulders, and his; her face o’ fire 
With labour, and the thing she took to quench it 
She would to each one sip. 

(W T., IV, iv, 57-62.) 



























» 




m 












^ 05 . 


Fenton’s youth is described thus: 

HQ capers , he dances , he has eyes of youth, he writes 
verses, he speaks holiday, he smells April and May. 

(M W W., Ill, ii, 68 ff.) 

Capering is one of the symptoms of the Instability of 

mood of Monsieur Le Bon, one of Portia’s suitors: 

If a throstle sing, he falls straight a capering; 
he will fence with,his own shadow. If I should 
marry him, I should marry twenty husbands. 

(M V., I, ii, 64 ff.) 

Q^een Margaret in 3 King Henry VI , says she will sing and 

dance to show her indifference to York: 

Stamp, rave, and fret that I may sing and dance, 

(3 Hen VL, I, ivTTl.) 

Dancing and similar amusements pave the way for love- 
making; 

For revels , dances , masks , and merry hours 
Forerun fair love, strewing her way with flowers, 

(L L L., IV, iii, 379-30,) 

Since dancing is a happy pastime, and one of peace 

rather than war, it may be no accident that the Proloerue 

Second Part of King Henry the Fourth , is spoken 

by a dancer. The dancer, representing happy times, speaks 

the last v/ords of the play in which Henry V has come to 

the throne. 

Whereas the term dance is generally used to connote 
youth, vigour or good spirits, sometimes particular 
dances are named with other implications. In Love’s 


























^ 06 . 


Labour^ s Lost ; 

And profo\ind Solomon timing a jig . 

(LLL., IV, ili,/U) 

present pictures of Incongruity. The ladies of France 
jibe at the French soldiers for their defeats, in King 
Henry V: 

Dauphin, Our madams mock at us and say 
Our mettle is bred out. 

Bourbon. They bid us to the English dancing-schools. 
And teach lavoltas high and swift corantos . 

( Hen V,, III, V, 28.) 

The Fj?ench men would be better dancing masters than sol¬ 
diers say the ladies, v/ith biting irony, Naylor suggests 
that this passage also shows that at the time King Henry V 
was written, the lavolta and the coranto were considered 
to be foreign dances,"^* The Dauphin deserves the quip, for 


Op . cit., p. 132. 


earlier in the play his ambassador to King Henry has cast 
a slur on the fighting ability of King Henry. 

The prince our master 

Says that you (king Henry) savour too much of your 

youth 

And bids you be advised there’s nought in France 
That can be v/ith a nimble galliard won. 

You cannot revel into dukedoms there. 

( Hen V., I, ii, 249 ff.) 

This is a deliberate insult which is increased by the 

gift of a ”tun of treasure” - tennis balls. 

Sir Toby mentions the passy - measures pavin . 

Sir Toby (drunk, and with a bloody coxcomb) Sot, 































^ 07 . 


didst see Dick surgeon, sot? 

Clown. 01 he^s drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone; he»s 
eyes were set at eight i» the morning. 

Sir Toby. Then he*s a rogue, and a passy-measures 
pavin. 

(T N., V, i, 201.) 

Naylor shows that Sir Toby has a drunken recollection of 
the rule that pavans were "set at eight",'''* The dance is 

Pit ., p. 131, 


one of the many things which pops into Sir Toby^s drunken 
head by suggestion. 

In Julius Caesar , Brutus says "what should the war do 
with these * jigging fools*" (J IV, iii, 136). This 
is a hit at inferior poets, for jigging here probably 
means silly capering or taking part in foolish antics,’’'^' 


There is a possibility it meant a balladeer, or one who 
wrote jigs. Shakespeare may have derived the idea of 
"jigging fools" from the opening lines of Marlowe’s 
Tamburlaine ;■ 

F’rom jigging veins of ruining mother wits. 

And such conceits as clownage keeps in pay.... 


Touchstone in ^ You Like It , alleges himself to be a 
courtier. 


I have trod a measure; I have flattered a lady; 
I have been politic with my friend, smooth with mine 
enemy; I have -ondone three tailors, I have had four 
quarrels and like to have fought one. 

(A Y L I., V, iv, 46.) 

All these are accomplishments of the courtiers of the 





















r 




J 


'ii- 


■1 



■ i 





^ 08 . 


day. The mention of the courtly dance is used in his 
protestation to establish his courtly origin. The vigour 
of the coranto is used figuratively in All * s V/el l that 
Ends Well . 

Lafeu. Lustig , as the Dutchman says: 1*11 like a 
maid the better, whilst I have a tooth in my 
head. Why he^s able to lead her a coranto. 

(AWE W., II, iii, 47.) 

Hamlet, in rebuking Ophelia, uses the jig as a symbol for 
foolishness, 

God has given you one face and you make yourselves 
another; you jig , you amble, and you lisp, etc. 

(Ham., Ill, i, 148 ff.) 

The coranto*s leaping and jumping may be the explanation 
of Edgar*s lines "Hopdance cries in Poor Tom^s belly for 
two white herring*’ (H Lear» , III, vi, 32). Edgar, coming 
of good family, would be familiar with the dance, and I 
believe it probable that he would use such a reference. 

Shakespeare never has rustics dancing galliards or 
Kings dancing jigs. The dances which represent the amuse¬ 
ment of different social strata, are alv/ays danced by 
appropriate characters. It is quite natural that this 
should be so, for a division by social rank as v/ell as by 
locality v/as well recognized: 

The court of Kings is for stately measure; the 
city for light heels and nimble footing; Western 
men for gambols; Middlesex men for tricks above 
ground; Essex men for the Hey; Worcestershire for 
the bagpipes; but Eerfordshire for a Morris dance, 
puts down not only all Kent, but very near (if one 


















^ 09 . 


had time enough to measure it), three quarters of 
Christendom..'"' 


Meg of Herfordshire for a Iv.ayd Marion , 1609. Quoted by 
Chappell, Popular I.iusic of the Olden Times , Vol. 1, 
p. 245. 


CONCLUSION 

Dances performed upon the stage seem alv;ays to indi¬ 
cate good spirits. References to dancing in general 
im.ply youth, vigo^ir, health, happiness. Dancing is once 
described as the atmosphere for love-making. Shakespeare 
uses the- names of particular dances almost as adjectives 
describing behavior or character. It is unfitting for 
Solomon to jig (L L L., IV, lii) . That Kenry V dances 
the galliard ( Hen V., I, ii, 249) implies that he is 
over-young. Dance terms and namxes of dances are there¬ 
fore used for their connotations as im.ages. 























no. 


CH APTER VI 

raAfESPE.AREiS KrTOV/L EDGE OF IvlUSIC 

It is a failing of the critics of Shakespeare to 
credit him with a far greater knowledge than he actually 
possessed. Only in recent times has it been pointed out 
that Shakespeare's knowledge was remarkable for its range 
rather than its depth. Those critics who have examined 
Shakespeare's plays for their musical material have often 
spoken approvingly of the bard's knowledge of music in all 
its ramifications. Naylor* speaks of "the familiarity 

* Naylor, "William Shakespeare", The Poets L msic , p. 90 

and..technical freedom quite unknown to the modern 

stage." with which Shakespeare alludes to musical 

instruments. Naylor also makes the sweeping statement 
that "Shakespeare is in every way a trustworthy guide in 
these (musical) matters" .* An examination of a few of the 

* Shakespeare and Music, p. 2 

mixsical passages in the plays will show that Shakespeare 
did not use some of the more important m.usical terms of 
Elizabethan times. His allusions to musical instruments 
are a part of his poetic language, and as such, reveal a 
general knowledge and an awareness of the instruments 
























^ 11 . 


rather than a technical understanding of them. 

Certain passages in Shakespeare are encrusted with 
musical terms. Such passages are nearly always heavy with 
puns and quibbles, and may be a result of the prevailing 
interest in language so prevalent in the Elizabethan court. 
In an examination of the musical terminology it is con¬ 
venient to use several of these passages as starting 
points. The first examples are from The Two Gentlemen 
of y^^qna. 

Jul. Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme. 

Luc. That I might sing it, madam, to a tun e: 

Give me a note: your ladyship can set . 

Jul. As little by such toys as may be possible: 

Best sing it to the tune of "Light o' love". 

Luc. It is too heavy for so l ight a tune . 

Jul. Heavy ? belike it hath some bu rden then. 

Luc. Ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it. 

Jul. And why not you? 

Luc. I cannot reach so high . 

Jul. Let's see your song. - How now, minionl 

Luc. Kqen tune there still, so you will sing it out; 

And yet, methinks, I do not like this tune. 

Jul. You do not? 

Luc. Wo, mndam, it is too sharp . 

Jul, You, minion, are too saucy. 

Luc. Way, now you are too flat . 

And mar the c on cord with too harsh a desc ant: 

There wanteth bVt a mean to fill yo ur s ong. 

Jul. The mean is drown'd with your unruly base. 

Luc, Indeed. I bid the base for Proteus. 

( T G V ., I, iii, 79-97.) 

Waylor* remarks that many of these musical terms are 


* Ibid., p. 27 . 


still in use by musicians, although other of the terms 


are now archaic. 







































T.o,,g iye the note - to ’’set" the pitch for sin^in^. 

B_^ach_,so hlp:h, siri.p^ it out , too shar p, t oo f lat - these 
terms are still in use, and are familiar even to non¬ 
musicians. 

Burden - a refrain STing in a lower pitch than the 
melody; or sometimes, a repeated refrain. 


M ar the concord - spoil the harmony. 

SeAQant - an ext^pore contranuntal part, played or 
sung to a written melody. 

Mean - an alto or tenor voice; the voice between treble 
and bass. 

The mea n is dro TO’d - the alto voice is covered up. 

Base - a pun on bass, and an unconscious prediction of 
Proteus’ behavior. 

In the same play we find other musical terms clustered 
in a f ev; lines : 

Jul.The musician likes me not. 

Host Why, my pretty youth? 

Jul. He p lays false , father. 

Host How? Out ^qf tun e on the s t rin gs? 

Jul. Not so; but yet so false that he grieves my very 
heart strings. 

Host You have a quick ear. 

Jul. Ay, I would I were deaf. It makes me have 
a slow heart. 

Host I perceive you delight not in music. 

Jul. Not a whit, when it jars so. 

Host Hark, what a fine cha nge is in the music I 
Jul. Ay, that change is the spite. 

Host You would always have them play but one thing? 

Jul. I would always have one play but one thing, etc. 

( T G. V. , IV, ii, 57-71.) 

Plays f alse - out of tune. 

Quick ear - a sensitive ear. 

Jars - is discordant. 


Change - a different tune. 






















■ i: ■■ 












Zl3 


Romeo and Juliet , the following passage is 


found: 

Jul. It is the lark that sings so out of tune . 

S training har sh discords , and unpleasing shai^gs. 
Some say, the iark makes sweet divisio n 
This doth not so, for she div i deth us.* 

( R J. , III, V, 27 - 30 .) 

Strai ning - singing a strain of. It may also be a 
pun on s*train ^ to struggle for. 

Harsh discords - unpleasant sounds. 

Sharps - the word here seems to be used as a synonym 
for notes . 

Di vision - "a brilliant passage of short notes which 
is founded essentially on a much simpler passage of 
longer notes**. * 


* Ibid . , p,. 28 . 


Many of the terms used so far occur elsewhere in 
the plays: 

Discord - There shall your master have. 

His jarri ng, concor d^ a.nd his dis cord , dulcet. 

(A W E W., I, i, 175 .) 

Here, musical terms are used to signify peace or 
disturbance. 


An should the empress know 
This discqrd'^s sound, the music would 
not please. 

( T And. , II, i, 69 .) 

Wilt thou love such a woman? What, to make thee an 
instrument, and play false, _s_tpains. upon thee! 

Hot to be endured, 

(A Y L I., IV, iii, 66.) 

At last, though long, our jarring notes agree. 

( T S .. V, ii, 1.) 










































^ 14 . 

Hov\r shall we find the concord of this discord? 

(M N D., V, i, 60.) 
t: 

The '‘gamut of Hortensio" necessitates some explana¬ 
tion, The gamut was the name of the ut or note of lowest 
pitch. This note corresponded in pitch to the G on the 
first line of the modern bass staff. It was marked v/ith 
the Greek Gamma, and so vms called Gam-ut. The gamut be¬ 
came synon^nnous with the word scale.* The Gamut of Hor- 

* Ibid ., p, 36 - for fuller treatment of the Gamut. 

tensio was love verses in the disguise of a regular Gamut 
(T S. , III, i, 73) during which Lucentio discloses his 
identity to Bianco. 

Other allusions to the gamut, which I consider to be 
only references to singing and not to the particular notes 
sung, are: 

I'll try how you can sol , fa, and sing it. 

(T S., I, ii,^l 6 .) 

I will carry no crochets (whims). I'll ^ you. 

I’ll fa you. Do you note me? 

( R J. , IV, V, 90 .) 

Ut , re, sol, la, m, fa. 

(This is part of Holoferne’s bombast.) 

(L L L. , IV, ii, lOa) 

Enter Edgar, 

Edm. He comes like the catastrophe of old 
comedy, lly cue is villanous melancholy, 















215 . 


with a sip^h like Tom o’ Bedlam.These 


* Ibid., p. 37. 


eclipses do portend'these divisions 1 fa, 
sol , la ^ mi . 

(K Lear, I, ii, 14-6.) 
These notes, whether spoken or sung, were probably sug¬ 
gested by the term divisio n. Since the mi, the last note 
of the run, was a discord and to be avoided,* * I believe 


* That the note mi was conscio us ly used as a discord 
seems far-fetched. The meaning of the passage is not 
affected if the notes are reduced to fa, sol, la, or any 
other group of notes. 


the notes were spoken rather than sung. 

Plain sonp, Pricksong. Descant ; 

A simple written melody was called nlain-s ong. An 
extem.pore contrapuntal melody added to the plain-song was 
called descant. The performance of the plain song with an 
under melody, sung or played as the tune progressed, was 
also called plain-song, whereas the performance of a plain- 
song with a written descant was called pr ick-song .* Ex- 


* Ibid. , p, 40. 


amples of Shakespeare’s usage of these term.s are: 

Nym. Pray thee, corporal, stay. The knocks are 

too hot; and for mine own part, I have not a 
case of lives: the humnur of it is too hot, 
that is the very p lain-song of it. 

( Hen Y .. Ill, ii, 2.) 









































^ 16 . 


I’ll make a holy d escant . 

(Ri ch II I.. Ill, vii, 49.) 

The phrase to read at fir s t si^ht is still in use. 

Troilus and C ressida we find an allusion to it: 

Ulyss. She will sinp: any ma n at first sight. 

Ther. And any man may sing her, if he can take 
her cliff; she’s noted. 

(TA.,, V, 1, 9.) 

Cliff - clef. A key to what is written. The lines 
and spaces refer to different notes, according to the 
clef prefixed at the beginning of the stave. The prin¬ 
ciple clefs to-day are bass, treble, and tenor. 

Merc. He fights as you sing prick-song . Keeps 

time, distance, and propo rti on, rest me his 
minim rest, one two, and the third in your 
bosom. 

(R J., II, iv, 21.) 

Proportion was used just as we use the term t ime .* It 
* Ibid. , p, 32, 34-. 

was an indication of the basic rhythm of the piece and 
was a very complicated study. To k eep time was to beat 
oiit the proportion with the hand or foot. The "one, two, 
and the third in your bosom" links the performance of 
Tybalt to the time of a waltz. He rests the first and 
second beats, and lunges on the third. 

A min im rest is the value of a quarter note. Here 
it means a very small rest, or a pause. The same term 




























i 

' i 




- t. r.; 









'.’if ’■ 

■ (f./ j’/.- -vf' ./ .'((i.r. 







.•f ;| j.. 



■| 





occurs in The Merry Wiv^ of Winds.or, I, iil, 25: 

Fal, (of Bardolph), .; his filching was like 

an unskilful singer, he kept n ot t ime. 

Nym. The good humour is to steal at a mi nim* s 

rest. 

Tim e - the phrase to kee p time is often used. Typical 
examples are: 

Ham. My pulse, as yours, doth temperately k.^ep time 
And makes as healthful music. 

(Ham., Ill, iv, 140.) 

We did k eep time, sir, in our catches. 

Sneck up! 

( T N. . II, iii, 101.) 

King Richard II’s soliloquy in Pomfret Castle is replete 
with musical terms: 


Music do I hear? 

Ha, haI keep time . How sour swee t music is. 

When time is broke . and m proportion kept ! 

So it is in the music of men's lives. 

And here have I the daintiness of ear . 

To check time bro ke in a disorde r'd string . 

But for the c onco rd of my state and time, 

Had not an ear to hear my true time broke . 

(Rich II., V, V, 41.) 

Time is broke and ^ propor tion kept, simply mean 
out of rhythm. Dain ti ness of ear , means sensitivity of 
ear to musical errors, and a diso rder'd s trin g is one out 
of tuns. C oncord is the equivalent of harmony among all 
the instrujnents performing the music. 

Broken Mus_ic - when a consort , or family of instru¬ 
ments, Y/as incomplete, other instruments were used as 

substitutes. The result was called broken music, A typical 




























^16 


example of Shakespeare's use of the term is: 

Come, your answer in broken m usic ; for thy voice 
is music, and thy English broken; therefore. Queen 
of all Katharines, b reak thy mind to me in broken 
English: wilt thou have me? 

(Hen V, ii, 263.) 
Ca dence - a clever conceit occurs in He nry V, that 
of a three voice canon, each voice representing a part 
of the government: 

Exeter. For government, though hig h, and low , and lower. 
Put i nto parts . doth keep in one consent, 
Congreeing in a full and natu ral clo se , 

Like music. 

( Hen V., I, ii, I80.) 

A natura l close is a reference to the cadence of the 

dominant fifth to the tonic (V to I). To Shakespeare this 

would simply mean the ending of a piece in perfect harmony. 

Another example of the use of the term close is: 

The setting sun, and music at the close 
As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last 
Writ in remembrance more than things lost past. 

(Rich IL, II, i, 12.) 

In Love 's Labour's Lost , cadence . which is synonym for 
cjiise, is used in connection with poetry (L L L,, IV, ii, 
124). 


Relish - a relish is what is nov/ known as a turn. 
It was an elaborate ornament, common in lute music.* A 

* Ibid ., p. 23. 


passing reference is made to it in The Two Gentle men of 






























Verona: 


219 . 


To relish a love-song like a robin red-breast. 

(T G V., II, i, 20.) 

Another mention of the relish is found in the Rare of 
L ucrece , Ln. 1127J 

Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears, 
fee cord - this viord, meaning to sing, is infrequently 
found. It is generally used in connection with the songs 
of birds: 

Here I can sit alone, unseen of any 

And to the nightingale’s complaining notes 

Tune my distresses and recor d my v/oes. 

S V., V, V, 4-6.) 

She sung, and made the night bird mute, 

That stil]. records with moan, .... 

( Per ., IV, Prologue, 2?.) 


Touc h - 

..... like a cunning instrument cas’d up, 
Or, being open, put into his hands 
That knows no touc h to tune the harmony. 

(Rich II., I, iii, 159.) 

The word touch is technical, and means "to play" on the 
instrum.ent .* 

* Ibid,, p. 6l, 

ITusic , harmon y, melody , and other general terms are 
frequently used as a part of Shakespeare’s poetic diction. 
The following are a few exam.ples: 






















S20. 


Both warb ling of one son.g^ , both in one key. 

(M N D., Ill, ii, 206.) 

I’ll stop my ears against the mermaid’s song. 

(C E., III, ii, 66.) 

0 you leaden messengers (bullets) 
That ride upon the violent speed of fire. 

Fly with false aim, move the (still-peering) air 
That si ngs with piercing . 

(A W E W., III, ii, 113.) 

The wind is several times referred to as singing: 

The wind did sing it. 

( Temp ., III, iii, 9?.) 

Another storm brewing, I heard it sing in the wind. 

(Temp., II, ii, 19-20.) 

A man m.ay hear this shower sing in the wind. 

(M W W., Ill, ii, 37-38.) 

The wind, piping to us in vain... 

(M N D., II, i, 88.) 

Reference to the term harmony is often general and synony¬ 
mous with concord, It is sometimes, however, applied to 
music: 


0, but they say the tongues of dying men 
Enforce attention like deep harmony . 

( Rich II., II, i, 5.) 


Tune 


Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of y our 
voices that I may be consul, I have here the 

custom.ary govm, . ... . 

(Cor., II, 111 , 84.) 


Especially he hath incurr’d the everlasting dis¬ 
pleasure of the King, who had ever tpji.’d his bounty 

















^21 


to sing happiness to him, 

(A W E W., IV, iii, 8 ff.) 

....with an accent t un *d i n the self-same key 
Retorts to chiding fortune. 

(T C., I, iii, 53.) 


Some joy too fine, 

Too subtle-potent, t un*d too sharn in swee t ness . 

(T C., III, ii, 26.) 

The fingers of the powers above do tune 
The harmon y of this peace. 

( Cymb . , V, V, 466.) 


Take but degree awa^'", untune that strin g. 

And harkl What discord follows. 

(T C., I, iii, 108-109.) 


To be in tune represents a state of being: 

Achil. Y\rhy, but he is not in this tune . is he? 

Ther. No, but he’s out of tune thus, etc. 

(T C., Ill, iii, 305.) 


Des. Alas, thrice-gentle Cassiol 

My advocation is not now in tune : 

(0th., Ill, iv, 120.) 

0th. Not Cassio kill’d I then m.urder ’ s out of tune. 
And sv/eet revenge grows harsh, 

(0th., V, ii, 112.) 


Mac. .thane of Cawdor too, went it not so? 

Ban. To the self-same tune , and word s. 

(Macb., IV, iii, 236.) 


Macb. 


(commenting on the words of Macduff). 
tune goes manly. 

-- (Ma^. , IV, 


This 

iii, 236 .) 


In King Richard II, III, ii, 92, Scroop speaks of his 
care-t]^’^ tongue. The phrase key of entun’d cares also 































occurs in The Comedy of Errors, V, i, 3111. 

The term hummln.p; ( Per . , HI 5 i, 64 - huiruninr water 
must o’erwhelm thy corpse), and buzzinp - 

Poor harmless fly 

That with his pretty buzzing melody etc. 

(T And., ITT, ii, 63 .) 

are technical terms of Elizabethan music. To hum was to 

drone a burden in a lower octave than the melody (See 

Rape of Lucrece ^ In. 1134). B uzzinp; had a similar meaning^ 

* I I>ih . , p. 4. 


Musi c - voices are often likened to music. A few examples 
are: • 


One ?7hom the musi c of his own vain tongue 
Doth ravish like enchanting melody. 

(L L L., I, i, 165 .) 

The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage 
Brought my too diligent ear. 

, III, i, 39 .) 

When rank Thirsites opes his mastic jaws, 

We shall hear music , wit and oracle. 

(T C., I, iii, 73-74.) 


Cress, 
Troil. 


And shall 
thence. 


Stop my mouth, 
albeit sweet music issues 

(T C., III, ii, 140.) 


List his discourse and you shal] hear 
A fearful battle ren der'd you in music. 

( Hen V., I, i, 43.) 


Polonius tells Reynolds to let Laertes "ply his music ". 

























cMxt 








223 


I 


( Ham . , II, i, 73). This may mean to let him. practise | 

his music, or to let him do what he wishes. 

The general term music is also used in a great many 

figurative and uninteresting ways. A few such cases are: 

Thy eye Jove’s lightning bears, thy voice his 
dreadful thunder. 

Which, not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire. 

(L £ L- ? IV, ii, 119-121) ‘ 

1 

cr^ • . 

. a mermaid, and a Dolphin’s back 

Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath 
That the rude sea grew civil at her song. 

(M N D., II, i, 150.) 

The current.makes sweet music with the ' 

enamell’d stones, etc. 

(T G V., II, viii, 29-) ; 

The s on g of bi rds; - there are a great many refer- 
ences to the sweet melodies of birds, of which here are | 

; J- 

a few; 

Except I be by Silvia in the night, ^ 

There is m music in the nightingale . ■' 

(I G V, , III, i, 178 .) 

Our cage 

We make a q uire , as doth a prison'd bird . 

And sing our bondage freely, j,. . 

(Cymb., III, iii, 42.) 1 

' ! i 

We tw'o alone v/ill sing like birds i’ the cage, ■ 

(K Lear . V, iii, 9.) i 

rr -f' 

The birds chant melody on ev’ry bush. j:. ■ 

( 1 ^ II? iii? 12.) ' 

Will thou have music? Hark, Apollo plays music ^ ! 

And twenty caged nightingale s do sing . | 


(T S,, Ind., ii, 37.) 































^ 24 . 


M usic of the sp heres - is always mentioned as a symbol of 
incredible beanty. 

Olivia (to Viola disguised as Sebastian) - 

But would you undertake another stiit, 

I had rather hear you to colicit that 
Than music from the spheres . 

(T N., IT, i, 114.) 

First Lord (of Jacques - 

Mj lord, he is but even now gone hence 
Here was he merry, hearing of a song. 

Duke S. If he, compact of jars, grow musical. 

We shall have shortly discor d in the spheres . 

(A Y L I., II, vii, 3 ff.) 

Cleo (of Antony) His voice v/as propertied 
As all the tuned spheres, 

(A C., V, ii, 83,) 


Lorenzo (of the stars) 

There's not the smallest orb which thou 
behold’St 

But in his motion like an angel sings, 

Still Quiring to the young-ey’d cherubins, 

(MV,, V, i, 59 ffJ 

Shakespeare has mentioned many of the instmum.ents in 

use du.ring his time. Very good descriptions of Eliza- 

bethan musical instruments have been.written by Dr, Naylor, 


* Ibid . Musical instruments are treated throughout the 
entire book. 


and need not be treated here. Only where an extraordinary 


knowledge or lack of knowledge of particular instruments 
is displayed will a description be given. 


Rumour is a p ipe 

BloYm by surmises, jealousies, conjectures 
And so easy and so plain a stop 
























225 


That the blunt monster with uncounted heads, 

The still-d iscordant wavering multitude, 

Can nlax upon it. 

(2 Hen, IV-? Ind,, I?,) 

•••*9 ^^ ipe for fortune’s finger 
To sound what ston she Pleases. 

^(Ham., III, ii, 7?.) 

This weak piping time of peace. 

(Rich III ., I, i, 24.) 

Playing on 9.L oorn, and versing love 

To amourous Philid a. 

(Min-? TI, i, 6 ?,) 

More mn.sical than the pip e of He rmes . 

(Hen V.7 III, vii, 15.) 

And Kinsmen, then may we go pipe for .justice . 

(T W-T IV, iii, 24.) 

Record er - a well known reference to recorders occurs in 
Hamlet, III, ii, 346: 

Ham.. 01 the recorders : let me see one,.,.. 

Will you play upon the nine ? 

Guild. My lord, I cannot. 

Ham, ’Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages 
with your finge r and tht^, give it br eath 
with yoTir mouth, and it will discourse most 
excellent music. Look you, these are the s tops . 

Guild, But these cannot I command to any utter¬ 
ance of harmony; I have not the skill. 

Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing 

you make of me. You would play upon me. You 
would sou nd me from my lp>we st note to the top 
of my compass : and there is much music, 
excellent y^ice, in this little organ, yet can¬ 
not you make it speak . ‘S bloodi do you think 
I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call 























m 



■■'.■' ■ ' - . , - U taaw iA^^S A- ^ ' : 

■■ ■■:• ■' : '■ ■ a- ■s:'.a'£#'' 


if';,' 








1 


-vv:j 


’ ' i ,••■ 






-■1‘';':> 




Iv " ./' "': y. :''" / 


v:^ig ^ 




; r .... 






!y;jz>o 


A.'jy'i' v j-. U >- ' ^^;iA,• iXVO.': . J. .i. -. 


,., it. 




:. ....1 n: 


iv^.;:;: 






x:- A. 




XliisC j'X,. Xa.:'.■ Al;r ::xv,::.XX: 
. ■...; ■■" • ;/! 1 XnJ':r f,v' v,': 


.A.v; . ':; vr--. :'. -^-v.^|V:a ' . .... 

.;■ aV:;;' a/in :a;4is . 


’;n' - 


;■.... ■ • '■ ; ■• ■„'■ a. . ''^T' 

.;''V ':’■ ; . „v, (' X. > liA::*!-.;:- 









. ■ : )€i 












^£6 . 


me what instrument you will, though you can fret 
me, you cannot nlay u pon me . 

( Ham ., III, ii, 3^6.) 

Hipp. Indeed he hath played on his prologue like a 

chil d on a recprde.r,* a sound, but not in govern- 

(A Y L I., V, i, 122.) 


* A form of the instrument still exists. It has the 
trade name of Tonette , and is used by schools in the in¬ 
troduction of music to children. The Quakers of the 
Eastern United States refer to them as recorde rs. See 
article by Barbara Rex, "l.kisie and the School Board" , 
Atlanti c MonthI.y , Oct., 1941, p. 491, 


The Viol ^^mily - 


Sir Toby (of Sir Andrew Aguecheek) 
the viol-de-gamboys„ 


....he plays o’ 

(T N., I, iii, 25.) 


He that went, 
leather. 


like a base-viol , in a case of 

(C E, , IV, iii, 23-24.) 


lago (on seeing Othello embrace Desdemona.) 

0 , you are well tun’d nowI 
But I’ll set dpxn t^_ pegs that m ake , t his music, 

As honest as I am, . 

(0th,, II, i, 200.) 


Unless the fiddler Apollo get his sinews to make 
catling.s (viol strings) on, 

(T C,, III, iii, 304-305.) 


Lovell ,.,, The sly whoresons 

Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies; 
A Frenc h song and a fidd le has no fellow, 

L. Sands, The devil fi d dle ’eml I am glad they 


are going, 

For sure there’s no converting of ’em. 
An honest country lord, as I am, beaten 


N0¥7 


A long time out of play, ma]^ bring his £li^lU.nSpn£ 
And have an hour of hearing; and, by’r lady, 

Held current music too, ... x 

---- (Hen Vill., I, iii, 39.) 






















Falstaff. 


’S blood, I am melanoholv as a eib cat or 


Prince 

Falstaff 


Shy. 


H aro - 

Mowbray (sad at banishment) 

And now my tongne’s use to me is no more 
Than an unstring * d vio l or a har^, 

Or like a cunning instrume nt cased up. 

Or being open, put into kis hands 
That knows no tou ch to tune the harmony. 

( Rich III.V I. iii, l6l,) 

For I was train’d up in the English court; 

Where,, being but 3 roung, I framed to the harp 
Mam^- an English ditty lovely well. 

(I Hen IV., III, i, 122.) 

His word is more than the miraculous harp . 

(T^mp,, II, i, 86.) 

Harp not on that string? madam; that is past. 

(Rich III.. IV, iv, 367 J 

Thou hast h arp ’d my fear aright. 

(Majlb.? IV, i, 74-.) 


a lugg’d bear. 

Or an old lion, or a l ove r's lute . 

Yea, or the drone of a L inc olnsh ire bagpipe . 

(I Heji IV- 5 1 5 ii? 74 ff.) 

Others, v/hen the bagpipe sin gs i’ the nose 
Cannot hold their urine. 

(M v., IV, i, 56 .) 

a woolen bagpipe 

“■ (I V., IV, 1, 56.) 

Some will' evermore peep through their eyes 
And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper . 

(M V., I, i, 52 - 53 .) 


The virginals - only one reference to the virginals is 


made in the pla^^s. 

























228 


Leontes 

Upon his palms 1 


Still virginallin.p; 

Ho\7 noY/, yon. wanton calf I 

(W T., I, ii, 125-126.) 


Flute * * 


* In a commercial dramatic company such as Shakespeare’s, 
the roles had to be written to fit the characters since 
the members of the cast remained the same. (See G. B, 
Harrison, Sha kes pea r e_’.5 Ac;^.rs ((Shakespeare and the Hieatre) 
p. 62 ff.) We knovT that the “raving” parts of Shake¬ 
speare’s plays were written to fit Richard Burbage, and 
that some of the clown parts to fit Will Kempe. A th in man 
appears in man^;' of the plays, and the characteristic 
peculiar to him was used for comic purposes. The thin man 
is Pinch in The Comed y of Errors, IV, iv, 42 ff; Robert 
Faulconbridge in Kin g John, I, i, 92, 140-143; Prince Hal 

I. Henry IV, II, iv, 243 ff; Shadow, Shallow, and the 
First Bead’le in II Henry IV, III, ii, 259 ff; HI, ii, 

298 ff; V, V, 19 ff; Cassius in >Julius Caes ar, I, ii, 

192 ff; and Sir AndreYY Aguecheek in Twelfth Night, V, i, 

212 ff.' 

Since Shakespeare capitalized on the personal character¬ 
istics of the members of the cast, I suggest that the 
thin man probably took the part of Flute, the bellows 
mender in A Mid.s umme_r Night ’ s ^.e^am. The comedy Y/ould be 
heightened if a tali thin man took this part, and the 
evidence is that a thin man v:as in the cast from 1591 (C S) 
to 1601 (T N,) 


Enobarbus (describing Cleopatra’s barge) 

... the oars were silver, 

Which to the tune of flute^ kept stroke, and made 
The water which they beat to follow faster,* 

(A C., II, ii, 199.) 

* North’s description runs thus: “...and the owers of 
silver, which kept stroke in roY^ing after the sound of the 
musicke of flutes, howboys, citherns, violls, and such 
other instruments as they played upon the barge”, 
Shakespeare has selected only one of these to represent 
music. 






























29 


Eunuch Flute 


My throat of war be turn’d, 
Which qulred with my drum, into a pip e 
S mall as an eun uch, or the virgin voice 
That babies lulls asleep. 


(Cor., Ill, 2, 113-) 

The “pipe Small as an eunuch” is usually taken to be a 
reference to the womanly voices of such men, or to the 
“eunuch flute”. This was not an instrument in the strict 
Naylor, ”V/illiam Shakespeare”, The Poets and Music , p. 97* 


f 


sense, but bore a close resemblance to the modern toy, 

■the kaz oo. A performer hummed through a membrane fixed in 
the side of a tube, and the result is a buzzing hum, Naylor 
says that Mersenne (I 636 ) has described the instrument, 
v/hich was used in consorts of four and five. 


Fife - is akin to the flute in some respects. There are 

few references to the instrument in the plays, and two of 

them occur in stage directions; 

Enter the Prince and Peto, marching, and Fal- 

staff meets them playing on his truncheon like a fife . 

(i Hen IV-? S?J 

Enter Alcibiades , vvith drum and fif e, in war¬ 
like manner.... 

(T A., IV, iii, 47 .) 

The spirit-stirring drum, the ear- pierc i ng fife . 

(0th., III, iii, 352.) 

When you hear the drum 

And the cile squeaking of the wryneck’d fife*,... 

(M V., II, V, 25 .) 

* Naylor thirties the expression “wryneck*d” refers to either 

























^ 30 . 


the instrument or to the position the performer is forced 
to assume to play the instrument. ( Shakespeare and Mu sic, 

p. 155.) . “ 


Lute - 

Boy Bardolph stole a lute-case , bore it twelve 

leagues and sold it for three half-pence. 

(Hen V., III, ii, 45.) 

Orpheus' lute was str ung with poet’s sinews, 

V/hose golden t ouc h* could soften steel and stones. 
Make tigers tame, and huge leviathans 
Forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands, 

( T G V ., III, ii, 75.) 


* To'nch is a technical word used in playing the lute. The 
same word is used to describe the m.anner of playing an 
instrument to-day. 


and like thee (Nero) 

Play on the lute , beholding the town burn. 

(I Hen n* I? iv? 95.) 

As bright as Apollo’s lute, strung with his hair; 

(L L L,, IV, iii, 339.) 

He capers nimbly in a lady’s chamber 
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute. 

( Rich III, I, i, 12-13.) 

Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is crawled 
into a lute-string, and now govern’d by stops,* 

(M A A N,, III, ii, 51.) 


* Stops are found on wind instruments. The correct term 
here would be f rets . 


God defend the lute should be like the c ase . 

(M A A N., II, i, 86.) 

The longest allusion to the lute is found in The Taming of 



































^2l. 


the Shrew, II, i, 145 ff. Only two very simple terms, 
frets and fingiering , here show a Imowledge of the lute. 

The two terms might also apply to any of the viol group. 
The incident of the lute-lesson is described by Shake¬ 
speare as part of the process of quelling Katharine’s 
rebellious nature. A humorous picture is described - 
that of Hortensio’s head pilloried by a broken lute. 

Horns - there are many references to horns, both in the 
text and in the stage directions. Most of them are 
mentioned in connection with hunting. A few examples are: 

Let us sit 

And while the babbling echo masks the hounds 
Replying shrilly to the well tun.Ld horns. 

(T And., II, iii, 16.) 

.... but that I will have a recheat* 
win ded in my forehead, or hang my bu gle in 
an invisible baldrick, 

(M 4 4 I-9 19 19 243.) 


* Rec hea t is a series of notes blown on a horn to call 
hunters together, and blown at intervals during the hunt. 


Typical stage directions in this connection are: 

Horns within. Enter Lear, Knights, and Attendants 

(E Lear ., I, iv, ?•) 

Post blowing a horn within 

( Hen VI ., III, ii, l6l,) 

And then to sigh, as ’twere 
The mort o’ the deer. ^ ^ 

(1 T., I, ii, 117-118.) 
















; :; j . i <.<k^’' ..' :|iL - 

Pj-r pin ■:.. , ,, O. ,;. ,-av«.%|B! Jlisif!: Tp|^ ov;i 

^ ', ' . ■ , fi/'V 

v'I u-b >: i ^ "; .;: 


: aai*‘ ■^^[' ^,^x, ;J 




r:'.;..;i 




<;:: ...':;0 


.MM 


cy‘:.V f 


‘■:rv , .:'o jbo 


;5, w -J^ri 


■ j/l ' ri yUU' J 


rnoc ill hiii. t.:.:.. .Ci'; :|' 


,4J^X:':. V-..,'... A 


•x.. ;■ -ii 




xfxro... --' v 
«.: lb)u.. 


, li'S ' ■ ., ■.';■■■-:'■ 


in 


•:■• J- 




‘‘'■'I:.:-:'::M.-i. y OV ,u J.j.'. f X. w ■ 


- X: 


;■:! njxxii ■;. ' ■ Xi.i^ XO . ' "X-• ■, . M. ^ 

’ . ,X':''■".. , .u:".' ' :^.Lu.r.X. i-Vi, ' 




:i 


ws' *■“ 4^:', ,rX.r;.Ld' LB'Xxt’' '.'.o 

alJ- •■■n.L'i'id.-.J/dxv. ji’f'X 'tT:. r:v, . Xd Lft 

4-.., 


djx-o'i 


’yll'C in linv ^ilbS. r-l iPO .1 l.p. ‘i nlir 


IdC'.d,: V 




n. i' 'p' ■■ .■>■■ . .. ■ J-.'.' '■ 

- .'•■■■ iJ--: '■ 




.n.:.i jXr yyi'y - 


-i 


' „■. y M'b plb ' 

-, ■ 

. ": ■ ■ ' 


■ ytM 

.... 














Ha utboy s - are indicated in the stage directions 




generally and mentioned only once in the text. 


iie case of a treble hautboy was a mansion for him, 


a court.. 


(2 Hen IV, III, ii, 321.) 


Typical stage directions are: 


Hautbo ys. Enter the King and others as masquers, etc. 

( Hen VIII., I, iv, 64.) 


Hautboys playing loud music, 
served in, etc. 


A great banquet 
(I A,, I, ii.) 


Hautbo ys play. The dumb-show enters. 

( Ham .. Ill, ii, 145.) 


Tabor - was a small drum, usually associated with the 

•pine . The music of the tabor and pipe symbolized peace. 

I have known when there was no music in him but 
■the drum and fife ; and he had rather beat the 
tabor and the pipe. 

(M A A N,, II, iii, 13,) 

this weak piping time of peace. 

(Blch III . , I, i, 24.) 

The shepherd Ioioy/s not thunder from a tabor 
More than I know the sound of Marcius* tongue 
From, every meaner man. 

( Cor ., I, vi, 25 .) 

A tabor appears on the stage in Twelfth Ni ght , III, i, 
where Feste is asked by Viola if he lives by the tabor, 
and in The Tempest . Ill, iii, 33? where the music of tabo r 
2 tnd pipe leads Trinculo, Caliban, and Stephano into the 
"mantled pool". 


























Drum - drums were used in nearly every scene shov/ing 
soldiers, and for thunder effects. They were used, 
along with the fife and the trumpet, as sjnnbol.s of war. 


Gon. (asking Albany why he is not dressed for war) 


Where's thy drum? 


(K Lear., IV, ii, ^2.) 


Many references are made to the drum in the text, and in 

stage directions. For example; 

1’11 beat the drum 
Till it cry sleep to death. 

(K Lear ., II, iv, ll6.) 

Hang up your ensigns, let your drums be still. 

For here we entertain a solemn peace. 

(1 Hen VI. , V, v, 174-.) 

Farewell, the neighing steed, and the shrill 
trump, 

The spirit -stir rin g drum , th’ e_ar -piercing f ife . 

(Oth., Ill, ill, 351^ 


Al aru m - usually a call to battle by drums, Shakespeare 

=ilso uses it figuratively/. 

lago. And when she speaks, is it not an alarum 

to love? (Oth., II, ill, 26.) 

'.'Ane 700, Venus and Adon is, refers to the noise of dogs 

liunting a hare as an alarum, . In Ma cbeth , II, iii, 78; and 

7, V, 51, a bell is spoken of as an alarum. 


Tabourine - was the full sized military drum, similar to 
the modern side-drum,. Only two references are miade to it; 






















£ 34 . 


Trumpeters 

With blazen din blast you the city's ear; 

Make mingle with our rattling Jtabourjjies, 

(A C., IV, viii, 35.) 

Beat loud the tabou rine^ let the trumpet bloY/. 

(1 C., IV, V, 275.) 


T rumpets - occi:ir frequently in the stage directions, but 
reference is also made to them in the text. A single 


exam.ple is sufficient; . 

I bring a trumpet (trum.pet-player) to make 
his ear. , ^ ^ 

(T C., I, iii, 250.) 

The term trumpet is used in a figurative sense: 


his virtues 

Will plead like angels, trump et-1 ongued 
The deep damnation of his taking of. 

( Macb ., I, vii 


The 

Doth play the tru mpet 


southern wind 
to his purposes, 

(1 II- 5 I? 


29.) 

i, 4.) 


Is it not damnable in us 
Out unlaY/ful intents? 


to be trum-peters of 
(A IE W,, IV, iii, 26 .) 


Parl e - the term parle, meaning either a cessation of 
hostilities or an announcement of embassy is used 
figuratively also; 


Ere my tongue 

Shall wound my honor with such feeble wrong. 

Or sound so base a parl e. 

( Rich III . .1,1, 190.) 












,';, . .v';:‘'v ;-;:''^‘ :‘jl7 




fl ,"* 




1,^11,; 


r.■".•^^' I', 


.’■.if 




Uj6L\ 


mmm 


r 


O'-,.* 


? 


T', 


‘t 




i t.O 1 • •' V ■ . ' . ■ X ' ■'''"'’(A ■■ 

; .' .‘ ■ .* ■' 

'.■’.■C ■■■■ j ’ - _ ■ - i’ 

• ■ ■ ./v' ' ^ 

' -T 

' . ' ' '■ >r"'.u,:. ■ 

f x p . J pn ': 


,' : J. ... ^ •iPC-P'iP-.'orirr'' p ■ ^......' •' ’ 

. :\Mortvr .;.::i': ;. . . r) :■. ■ ,r;i).. , ^ . p ^ 

. , • ■ ;■ f . ■./ ^J■^ ,P.);p. 

^ .•■ ; • . ■■ " ' :, :. 





/ ■..':"f:: .,cj.' -j 









S35 


Organ - there are only two allusions to the pipe 

organ. In 1605, Thomas Dallam had set up in King's 

College, Cambridge, the first complete two manual organ in 

England, which may account for a more specific reference 

in The Tem pest than in SlIS John . 

I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan, 

Who chants a doleful hym_n to his ovm death; 

And, from the organ-p ipe of frailty, sings 
His soul and body to their lasting rest. 

(K J., V, vii, 21.) 

The thunder. 

That deep and dreadful o rgan £rpe, pronounc'd 
The name of Prosper, it did bas s my trespa ss. 

(Temp., III, iii, 97-99.) 


Cithern - only one allusion to the cithern occurs in 
Shakespeare, and that to its most obvious feature - the 
carven head: 

Hal. I will not be put out of confidence. 

Bar. Because thou hast no face. 

Hal. What is this? 

Boyet A cithern- head . 

(L L L,, V, ii, 611 ff,) 

No reference is m.ade to the cithern's most common com¬ 
panion, the ghit t ern . 

Tongs an d Bones - this combination can hardly have 
been assonant, but a passing reference is m.ade to it in 
Mi dsumm er Nigh t's Drea m: 






























Bot. 


* M N D 


236. 

I have a reasonable good ear; let's have 
the tonr:s and bones.* 

(M W D., IV, i, 30.) 


, Arden edition (Ed. H. Ciinningham) , p. 114. 


Cori olanns a number of instruments are grouped 
together: 


The trum pet s, sac kbuts, ps alt eri es ^ and fi £.^5 

Ta bors and cymbals and the shouting Romans 

Make the sun dance. Tr 4 ^ 

( Cor ., V, iv, 52.) 

Three of the instruments, that is, sackbuts, psalteries, 
and cymbals are mentioned nowhere else in the plays, but 
only trumpets and fifes were used. A list, such as the 
one above, tells us nothing of the appearance of the 
instruments.* 


* The sackbu t, shakbussh e, or sagbut was the earliest 
form of slide trum.pet. It afterwards developed into the 
slide trom.bone. The band of musicians in the service of 
Henry VIJI included ten sackbtits, and under Elizabeth, in 
1587? there were six. (Vide Encyc . Brit., 11th ed., 

Vol. TON-VES, pp. 303“4.) 

The psaltery, mentioned many tim.es in the Bible, was a 
favorite instrument in medieval England, France, and Italy. 
Shakespeare uses the instrument as one suitable in Ancient 
Rome, The German zither is the sole European survivor of 
the medieval psaltery, (Vide En cyc. Brit .. 11th ed., 

Vol. BOL-REE, p. 540.) 


Shakespeare seems to have had little better than a 
nodding acquaintance with the theoretical side of music. 

A rough examination of the terms employed in Morley's 
Plajjie and Easie Intr oduction to Musiek e shows that 
Shakespeare uses the more simple term.s only and has omitted 
mention of many important ones. 

































^37. 


The G amut - this was the first step in learning music. 
In Morley, a diagram appears on page two, and a dis¬ 
cussion of the gamut is found on pages two and three. 
Shakespeare refers to the gamut in The Taming of the 
Shrew, II, i, 145. 

Clef - Morley’s sub-headings on page three are: 

What a clief is. 

How many cliefes there be. 

The formes of the usual cliefes. 

How to knoYr wherein every note standeth. 

The clef is referred to in TrqilUis and Cres sida, V, i, 11. 

Shakespeare makes no reference to strife®^ (beats) 

in regard to time, or to ligatu res (rests), the use of 

tails on ligatures, or to pri cks (dots), after rests. 

These are found in Morley (pp. 9“10), 

Shakespeare mentions proportion, but fails to go 

into the various types "in common use" - dujp3^, triple , 



27"33). There were forty-five varieties of proportions 
in all, of which Morley gives a table (p. 33). 

Shakespeare uses the terms desc^Mt, concord, disc ord, 
c^._ence, all of which are explained in Morley’s Se cond 
Lesson ^ pp, 70-73. He does not use the more important 
words counterpoint or fugue. Counterpoint, or binding 
des^cant (Morley, p. 75) ^ was the basis of Elizabethan 
music, which was polyphonic rather than homophonic as is 






















236 . 

modern music. Such terms as double descan t (Morley, pp. 
105-109), ^ricpp.a_tion (Morley, pp. 152-3), fugues (Morley 
p. 75), moi^t (Morley, p. 179), are not mentioned by 
Shakespeare. The term canon is not found in the plays, 
but Shakespeare uses its vulgar synonym, catc h. If Shake 
speare was thoroughly versed in musical terminology it is 
strange that he neglected so large and fertile a field 
for puns and imagery. He has used only the most easily 
acquired of musical terms. Of course, he had to use 
terms more or less familiar to his audience, but his 
language at times soars over the heads of every audience. 

It is also noteworthy that a number of phrases had 
practically the same meaning in regard to both music 
and poetry. George Puttenham'^ discusses “proportion" in 

* George Puttenham, “The Arte of English Poesie“, 1589, 
Gregory Smith, Eliz a bethan Critic a l Essay s, Vol. 11. 

poetry in regard to £taffe, measure, concord, situation, 

and figure. Three of these terms are miUsical as well as 

poetical. A few of his chapter headings are: 

Of Proportion in Concord, called Symphonic or Rime, 
Of Accent, Time, etc. 

Of your Cadences, by which your meeter is made 
symphonicall, when they be sweetest and most 
solemne in a verse. 

Scanty as this evidence is, it indicates that Shakespeare 
was not a thorough musician. However, we can find in¬ 
stances of a keen observation of musical instruments. It 




















239 


would have been almost impossible to remain unfamiliar 
with them, for the Elizabethan age was intensely musical. 
Furthermore, Shakespeare was on friendly terms with at 
least two well-known musicians,* and was in daily contact 
with the musicians of the theatre. He had, therefore, 

* i.e., Morley and Weelkes, Vide John Murray Gibbon, 
Mel ody and the Lyric, p, 101. 

opportunity to examine instruments at first hand. In only 
one case is he far off the mark. 

It was never the instrument itself that Shakespeare 
was interested in, but its relation to human beings. 
Instruments are always mentioned in order to bring out 
behavior. The very names of instruments, bringing to 
mind their peculiar characteristics, have become in Shake¬ 
speare's hands a form of descriptive imagery. 

Several references are made to children in connection 
with musical instruments. These show the observation and 
understanding which is to be seen in other of his treat¬ 
ments of children. In Cor iolanus, I, iii, 55? Volumnia 
says of her grandson, ”He had rather see the swords and 
hear a drum, than look upon his school-master". When the 
Prologue in Midsummer Night's Dream, V, i, 122, has 
muddled the punctuation, Hippolyta likens him to "a child 
on the recorder; a sound but not in government". Children, 
when learning instruments, often change the phrasing of 










f/j.^'d:t ^ap'i ‘.:i r'j 

;'-r. J-.:, :^r,:; f-'n-oy,:;-. / - tf oM'; | 

■ ^ I 


■ i<m 





[O i 

lit ! 






240. 

the pieces they are playing, anei this is what Quince 
has done. 

In many cases, the reference to musical instruments 
is such that we can be sure he is familiar with them. "The 
case of a treble haut-boy was a mansion to him, a court" 

(II Hen IV., Ill, ii, 321); and the reference to the "woole1^ 
* Modern bagpipes are now covered with plaid baize. 


bagpipe" (M V., IV, i, 56)5 shows that he had seen and 
observed the characteristics of these two instruments. 

That he had heard and disliked the bagpipes is indicated 
by the line "Others, when the bagpipe plays I’ the nose, 
cannot hold their urine", 

Sir F, Bridge* says that it is not possible for trumpet 

* Sir F, Bridge, Shakespearian Music, in the Plays and 
Eaj^ly O peras , p, 5. 


players to play with distended cheeks. He is referring 

■to Troiliis and Cr essida , IV, v, 6 ff; 

Now crack thy limgs, and split thy brazen pipe. 

Blow, villain, till thy sphered bias cheek 
Outswell the colic of puff'd Aquilon, 

Come, stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout blood. 


It is true that this is not considered a correct method of 


attack in blowing brass instruments. The best method, one 


requiring far less effort, and bringing best tonal results l| 

p: 

is called non -pres sure syste m,* a fairly recent development, 


* W. M. Eby, No- pressure Syste m. 
Costello, Non - pressure Syste m. 























^41 


It is still possible to see poor brass-men puff out their 
cheeks, and play from the chest rather than from the cor¬ 
rect place, the diaphragm. Shakespeare, who so frequently 
employed trumpet players for his fanfares, must have 
watched the facial strictures of such players. 

It is not often that Shakespeare can be caught in 
error when he refers to musical instruments. He does, how¬ 
ever, mention the ’’boist’rous untun’d drum” ( Rich II., I, 
iii, 134 ). All drums must be taut enough to play a note 
before they can be heard. For symphony orchestras, drums 
formerly were tuned, the bass drum to G, the snare to C. 

At the present time the tuning of drums is l.eft to the 
personal taste of the drummer or conductor.* 

* Tympani have a range of about an octave.and play 
definite notes of the scale, 

Shakespeare seems not to have had a perfect knoT/ledge 
of the virginals. He speaks of this instrument only once 
in his plays 5 and once in his sonnet sequence. In The 
Winterjs Tale we find the phrase ’’Still virginalling upon 
his palm!” The tickling of the palm has still a lascivious 
significance, and shows that Shakespeare had seen the 
virginals played. In sonnet Cxxviii, there is a more fully 
developed figure based on the virginals. The poet 
professes ”to envy those jacks that nimble leap to kiss the 
tender inward of thy hand,,,.. Since sauc 3 ^ jacks so happy 














^ 42 . 

are in this, Give them thy finders, me thy lips to kiss". 

The .jacks of the virginal are not the keys but the 
"dancing chips"* * which stand vertically inside the vir- 

* Burton, in the Anatomy of Me3.an choly says, "Be we young 
or old, though our teeth shake in our heads like Virginal 
jacks" etc, (Chapnell, Popul ar Musi c o f the Olden,_Times, 
p, 227). 

ginals, harpsichord, cemhalo, and other instruments of that 
type, and carry the quill, leather or bit of metal that 
brushes the strings when the key is pressed,* The action 

* Naylor, "William Shakespeare, The Poets and M us ic", p, ^2 

of the instrument was som.evirhat sim_ilar to that of the piano 

i 

except that the virginal string was plucked when the jack '.I 

II 

was raised. In the case of the piano, the sound is caused 
by the falling of the " jack’* , the bloY/ being regulated by 
the araount of pressure on the key. The jacks are inside 
the virginals. They do not touch the hand when the vir¬ 
ginals are played. Shakespeare did not have a clear under¬ 
standing of the mechanism of the virginals, although they 

were commonly found in barber shops, 

Shakespeare noted the interest which young people took | 

in "Report of Fashion in proud Italy", and in "Lascivious | 

metres, to whose venom sound The open ear of youth doth | 

always listen" ( Rich II., II, i, 17). S 

1^^ Romeo and Juliet , IV, v, two musicians appear. They ^ 

- 

I 





















^45 


are Hugh Rebeck* and James Soundpost. The very name^ 

* A rebeck was a three-stringed fiddle, 

S ound p oat , shows that Shakespeare had either inquired about 
the interior of stringed instruments, or had seen inside 
one. The soundpost is the least obvious part of a stringed 
instrument, for it is the pillar which holds the belly of 
the instrument from the back. This is a necessary function 
since the taut strings exert great pressure. The material 
of the protective cases is m.entioned, “He that went, like 
a base-viol, in a case of leather” (C E,, IV, iii, 23-24). I 
lago, on seeing Othello embrace Desdemona says “0, you are 
well turn’d nov^rl But I’ll set doYm the pegs that makes 
this music. As honest as I am” ( Qth . , II, i, 200). Since iit 

I 

Shakespeare had ample opportunity to observe the vagaries 
of theatre m-usicians, and since musicians have ever been || 
practical jokers, I suggest that he had seen many times j 
some viol-player slyly let down the strings of a fellow | 
musician’s instrument, | 

The allusions to singers and singing appear to be ! 

drawings from real life, Caliban’s drunken singing leads | 

Trinculo to call him a ’’howling monster” (Temp, , II, ii, 

92), Shakespeare Imev/ the ’’hawking and spitting, and 
saying we are hoarse” of poor singers (A Y L I., V, iii, | 
11 ff,)* Bardolph’s ’’thefts vfere too open; his filching 

* See also M A A N., II, ill, 46 ff. ) 























, -' fo ^ f: -jr, ^ :.;>•■ i.;; ;■,. '- •• ■;f"', t • 

. 

. *■’: ^■‘ 


■ , \..) ‘"Zr:.:.., .. 

z i 'omoizz L. 

r,- J'o;.v 


^ ^^iZ’zzUz- 

, riirt.ikxn^' " 

: '; . < 


I 

i 

? 

I 


hEi'^ q;i • .'. 

^:. ' ■ ■■ ■ .' , { 







3 


■<. <.j. 3 





r".'~ ::' , , : 

• i 


V 









^44. 

was like an unskillful singer: he kept not time" (M 'M W., ; 

I, iii, 27). The scenes connected with Autolycus in 

Act IV of The V/int er * s Tale, shov^ an observation of real 

life. In two places Shakespeare alludes to the singing of 

the workmen, a phenomenon everywhere to be observed: 

The singin g masons building roofs of gold. 

(H^ V. , I, ii, 198.) 

Our trade smen sin ging in their shops and going 
About their functions friendly, ! 

(Cor., IV, vi, 8.) j 

Hamlet says of the child-actor, "Y/ill they pursue the 
quality no longer than they can sing?" (Ham., II, ii, 26), 
a reference to the singing of child actors. Shakespeare 
had probably seen and heard public speakers and actors , - | 
whose voices turned "into a pipe, Small as an. eunuch, or J! 
the virgin voice that lulls babies asleep" (Cor., Ill, ii, 
112 _ff.) I 

Shakespeare had a musical ear. Many examples can be i 

i: 

given to show that he liked the baying of hounds, ; 

The musi cal confu sion 

Of hounds and echo in conjunction.* 

(M N D., IV, i, 113J 


* The baying of hounds also signify things other than 
m^usical: - falsity or fickleness (Ham. ^ IV, v, 109-110; 
foolishness (T C,, V, i, 100); etc. 


... I never heard 

So musical a discord, such sweet thunder. 

(M 1 D., IV, i, 120.) 















iui. . i .b:>j"'v:r - ' 

- ' . ■ ' , r* s 


:. - .; u..,:-'’ ■/ :-’r*:a ,r 
^ . - 


C: ':,. ! <■ 




- .-.:s-■ ,..'-jw/.:-; 






.f.„ -..-«|5 '■-•.;'■■■'■ ^ ' ; i: C"<'0.p,i?; { U\ 





• ri!!s7C7' 


’■r'' 




%ifx 


. > ' ■ r -i-V 

■' «: ^ rT ’ • ■^ *'■"■ ■' •■,:■ 

:: 7;.. jivn ‘7i.h:.v :r.!; ;:;i;3r-v, ^ oi.' 

.■.,7" 

■..:o / ;:::■ .- . .: .: 

'i 


■ -^i:- 

t 


ilMB'ji 




^■P 


, .Lj .. . -U 


... 


/';; • Vv-Qrv?: 'u 7 












245. 


.... match’d in month like bells 
Each under each. A cry more tuneable 
Was never halloa'd to nor cheer’d with horn.... 

(M N D., IV, 1, 126. ) 


The music in the baying of hounds has been so often men¬ 
tioned that it has become commonplace. 

Bells, ringing individually, are referred to by Shake¬ 
speare as in Othe llo , II, iii, l6l: "Who’s that that 


rings the bell? Diablo, hoi" Bells ringing together are 


mentioned also: 


Turning.... Our instruments into melancholy bells . 

(R J., IV, V, 86.) 


Now see that noble and most sovereign reason 
Like sweet bells jangled , out of tune and har sh. 

(Ham., Ill, i, 16 ?.) 


Then get thee gone and dig my grave thyself, 

And bid the m erry bell s ring to thine ear 
That thou art crovm’d. 

(2 Hen IV? Iv, v, 110.) 


.... a cough, sir, ?/hich I caught with 
ringing in the King’s affairs upon his corona¬ 
tion day, sir. 


(II H^ n-? Hi? ii? 176; j 

I 

However, bells used singly, or indiscriminately together, | 
cannot be called musical instruments. Nowhere does Shake- I 


speare use the word real in connection with bells,* and 


* Vide, Bartlett, Concordance to Shakes pea re . 


•peali ng ^lls, ch ange ringing , or round rin ging is not once 

.!k 

mentioned. This is strange, for it was a favorite pastime t 

























E46. 

of Elizabethans.* 

* Satis N, Coleman, Bells (Rand, McNally Co., 1928.) 

i 

Shakespeare seems to have known the habits of profes- ' 

!j 

sional musicians. Throughout the literature of the time I 
many allusions are made to their low estate. Musicians | 

were ill paid, and "fiddling" is described in R etur n from J 

Par nass us as "this trencher-waiting trade". Nabbes, I 

Mi croco smus, II, v, speaks of "a hungry fidler... who... 
expects the reversion of a gallant’s oyster". Probably ■ 

Shakespeare had a double purpose in portraying musicians; 

' I 

they were picturesque, and supplied a comic need; and they | 
could perform the necessary music in the plays. Many little: 
touches reveal an intimate knowledge of these musical 

H' 

vagabonds. In T roilus and Cre sslda , III, i, l6 ff., the 1 
servant knows all the musicians. Musicians had not the i 

financial security of regular servants, but in an age when 
nearly every one was an amateur musician, men-in-waiting no ^ 
doubt admired the musical skill of the professional. Musi¬ 
cians, always on the alert for food, liked to maintain 
friendly relationships with servants. To cite examples in 'll 
but one other play, the musicians in Romeo and JuJLiet, IV, 

V, 110 ff,, show professional discretion when they refuse | 
to play. "Not a dump, wei" says the first musician, " ’ Tis 
no time to play now". Musicians, like the members of other | 
crafts, have a strong sense of professional propriety. 



























^ 47 . 

The^'' are instinctively aware that they must not play in 
a house of death. In the same nlay, Peter casts a slur on 
the intelligence of the singer of the orchestra (R J., IV, 
V, 141), It is still the habit of people to under-rate 
the mental capacity of popular singers, sometimes with 
perfect justice. Since most people sing to some extent, 
singing is often regarded, not as an art, but as an easy 
way to earn a living. Moreover, popular singers perform 
for the masses. They are really a product of the desire 
of the mnsses to be entertained® The educated man tends 
to be supercilious toward popular songs and therefore 
toward the singer him.self. 

The terms " consort ‘d , ” minstrel '^ , **f iddler *^ , are used 
as term.s of contemnt, and this fact demonstrates very 
clearly the social position of the professional musician. 

.,.® she did call me rascal fidd ler, 
And twangling Jack, with twenty such vile terms. 

As she had, studied to misuse me so, 

(T S,, II, i, 158 ff.) 

Luc. Fiddler, forbear. You grow too forward,_sir. 

(T S., III, i, 1.) 

A modern performer on a stringed instrument resents being 
called a **fiddler'*. The term still carries the im-plica- 
tion that he is a poor player. 

In R omeo and Jul iet ^ IV, v, ll6, Peter says to the 
first musician, “I will give you the minstrel", i.e., as 
an insult. In this same play the term consort is the 














£48. 

match which lights the gunpowder of the enmity between 
Mercntio and Tybalt (R J., III, ii, 47). Mercutio chooses 
to auibl)le on the word co nso rt and considers himself 
call.ed a minstrel. * 

* The term cons ort has always had an unsavory connota¬ 
tion. Two examples from Shakespeare are: 

.... tv/o of the dangerous conso rted traitors , 

V, Vi, 13.) 

Glou. I know not, madam; ’tis too bad, too bad. 

Edm.. Yes, madam, he was of that c onsort . 

(K Lear., I, ii, 97-98.) 

Many of Shakespeare’s rascals are musicians - 
Sir Toby, Sir Andrew Aguecheek, lago, Pandarus, Autolycus. 
Likewise many of Shakespeare’s noble characters are music 
lovers. Brutus is a lover of music (J C,, IV, iii, 255 ff)f 
as is Duke Orsino in Twel ft h Night. The chief characters 
The Merchant of Venice, with the possible exception of 
Shylock, like music (MV., II, v, 28-39; V, i, 55-110). 
Othello does not like music ( 0th ., III, i, 17)? nor does 
Hotspur (I Hen IV,, III, i, 128-135),'nor Cassius (J C., I 
ii, 203-204), Some of the low characters do like music, 
Falstaff orders ’’Sneak’s Noise” (2 Hen IV., II, iv, 245 ff), 
for Doll Tearsheet; the shepherds in Tho Winter *s Tal e 
(W T,, IV, iv), are fond of ballads and. catches. Although 
Katharine (T S,, II, i, 146 ff; 150 ff) balks at learning 
music, m*any of Shakespeare’s women characters are musicians, 
which is indicated either by performance or report; - ; 







































^49. 


Viola (T N., I, ii, 54); Desdemona (0th., Ill, iii, 184; 

IV, i, 191 ); Marina (Per., IV, prologue, 7; IV, vi, 190; 

V, prologue, 3; V, i, 8 I); Ophelia (Ham., IV, v)• 

Cordelia (K Leaj* • ^ iii, 8); the Welsh Lady (I Hen IV., 
Ill, ii, 247 ); Volumnia's daughter (Cor., I, iii, 1). To 
be a gifted female amateur of music was to be pure and 
good. To be a professional musician was to be an extra¬ 
social creature. Although Shakespeare voices the thought 
that to love music is to be virtuous, he does not apply 
the principle in all cases. Lorenzo’s statement that 

The man that hath no music in himself 

Nor is not mov’d with concord of sweet sounds, 

Is fit for treason, stratagems, and spoils, 

(M V., V, i, 83.) 

is no more than a reflection of a mood of Lorenzo, mellowed 
as he is by the combination of a beautiful girl, a moonlit 
night, and soft music. 

C onclusion 

In Shakespeare’s pla^/’s, musical terms frequently/ occur 
in clusters, and form the material for puns and quibbles. 
They^ also are used in more dignified and more beautiful 
metaphors, Shakespeare’s knowledge of musical terms seems 
to be superficial rather than complete. This is indicated 
by a comparison of the terms in the plays and those found 
in Morley’s P lain e and Easy Introduct ion to Musicke , 1598• 









^50 


Shakespeare did not use many words of key importance in 
Elizabethan music. Some of these have metaphorical 
possibilities which Shakespeare woiild probably have 
utilized had he known the terms. Some of the musical 
terms which he uses were also used in works on the 
mechanics of poetry and have similar meanings. These 
words form an easy and natnral bridge from Shakespeare’s 
own fieId, poetry, to music. 

Shakesr>'="are' s treatment of musical instruments in 
general shows observation rather than an intimate know¬ 
ledge. In a few cases he mentions features of instru¬ 
ments which indicates either inquiry or investigation. 

In one instance, i.e., The Virginals, he was in error. He 
had ample opportunity to observe instruments for he was in 
regular contact with theatre musicians. He must have been 
cognizant of their general appearance and of the character¬ 
istic sounds of all the instruments. But Shakespeare 
wrote pla^^s 5 not musical text books. His references to 
m-usic are used to portray people, to show their appearance 
or character. 

Shakespeare knew the mannerisms and proprieties of 
professional musicians. He seems to have introduced them 
on the stage as comic characters representative of a low 
social caste. It is evident that he knew the peculiari¬ 
ties of poor musicians. In drawing his characters, and 











251 


sometimes by very casual touches, Shakespeare has shovm 
the prevailing interest in music. To the upper classes, 
music was a social grace, disliked by some, but en¬ 
thusiastically pursued by others. It was a part of the 
education of both ladies and gentlemen, a delight of the 
lower classes both rural and urban. 

It seems almost naive to mention that Shakespeare the 
poet had a musical ear, but this is apparent in the many 
common sounds which his ear has recorded as musical. 

Shakespeare used musical terms and the characteristics 
of musical instruments as descriptive imagery. He com¬ 
bined his knowledge of people and his knovfledge of music 
into poetical descriptions. That he did so is a reflec¬ 
tion of the importance of music in the daily life of the 
time. 











C1L.PTSH VII 
CQi'JGLUSIQH 


In this study I have examined the music in Shake¬ 
speare plays from the viewpoint of its dramatic func¬ 
tion, In the earlier plays, songs of a general type 
rather than those which perfectly fit the situation are 
found, Shakespeare became increasingly sxilful in the 
introduction and handling of songs, and those of the later 
period are intrinsic parts of the plays. The songs had 
become more than mere decoration for they finally 
acquired a dramatic significance. So perfectly do they 
fit the situations of the plays that the songs could not 
have been v^rritten by Lyly, or by anyone but Shakespeare. 

The songs were put to a variety of uses. Since 
curtains irere not used to marK the beginning and end of 
■scenes, songs vvere sometimes used for that purpose. In 
a few cases, the song is a resume of a situation which is 
found in the play. Hey Robin . Jolly Robin is a good 
example of the use of dramatic irony in song. The plot 
is sometimes accelerated, sometimes retarded by the 
employment of a song* In a few cases songs indicate the 
passage of time or a point in it. An important group 
of songs are used for their pictorial effect in creating 
atmosphere, and bulking large among these are the drinking 












; t-X.- ' X ■ 


J;. 

!. CM ; -. J V 


:^r 



"X.- 


i 

r.vrfi ^ 




, ■ ■ f. 

S 

• vi .: 



'■i 



i 






• v'aK : 






! ■' 

i:Ol::.'-. 

.... . ,;.. . 

i.r JI•^^ 


•i■! 


■'.f' 

, r"C'i','' 

J i ■ 

; y:'X 


l.i, J ' l 

1 

.!,r i 


^{.l kiX'- 









. i’ 

■ ■ 

': O:: J 

: 1. ■ ' , ' 

.'A. 

;C'- 'ic ;,r' 

iJ. ■^' 


j ■ 


‘ -i-«• 

; >. -w.*,, 

. >♦■' ■■ 

•,;■ 


i 

fm-: ■ 


^■v 

* 


■ 1 

i ■ J , ’ 

■.c! ■]■■,.' 



'' :■( 


f 


' ' - . 
J *■ 

;r "ru": 

t ■ 

■ ,.- . 

:.jK3 

.j ^ 'L '■' 


;; . 

f ■■■. 

Jim 


-■■;:■ X. ■ 

1 

,i . 

y 

Hti 


i- ^ 

' ^ 

• ' ■>•.. ■ 
..■' 1 • i ■ 




'Xt , 

J'. 



:• .. 

1 


■ : ^ kCj,] J J'' ' 

-■' 


' ' ■ ’• ! 


xml" 

■ ,. ■ 

■<; :■ • 


r X ; ' 



j ' ■'< ^ 

"xto-■';: 


..! t.«.' 


j'.' 

' ■.' 'S 

Xu 

'' iXX 

H"' 




.J 


#■' 





■;:-0 ' ^ . :;■; 

' ' '■;'-' '■’ ' . ' .■■:^--'.' 










X O J 

■# 

' X- '‘^XX- 

■ W^iSk ■ 

^ ■: -1 ‘■ ’ • 



xXCn X 

;'■ Xl : 

-..-X 

:.V. ■ 


-':5, . 

... 'V ) ' ' 

■ < V t 

.X':' X^- 


lo^ 


>:iX 

c. 

■xXxXx x^■-' 


'■ '■ .' J ' 

■XX fXX ■ 


1 ,‘"1' 

cx X'X..,: 

■ ■) : . •'' . ■ ' .i. • 

* .i 




' ■ ■ Cv' 

. J ;■«.!* cc 

. x. 

■■„c. •)" X.:: 


.J: X:.) '■ 


•:,,..J .X' 

.o‘ 

-i I 




•..-XX 

iXi'X'v '.'i. X ; 

\x . 



■t 


■ ' v/ j 



;, j ■ r (. 



s-wVT.’ 


'.tQ' •:.-C. . ' . 

: ,i ''lO 



i 


) . 


I 

i: 

1 

j 

■: 





£53. 


and tavern songs, their function being to portray 
crapulous conviviality. The emotional tone of Shake¬ 
speare ^s songs deepened from the light good humour 
of the songs of Bottom and Evans, or the momentary 
sentimentality of Claudio^s song, to the deep emotional 
content of those of Mariana, Desdemona and Ophelia. 

Certain songs reflect the character of the singer, or 
throw light on the other characters. By a comparison of 
the grave-diggers song in Hamlet and its source, I have 
shown Shakespeare^s careful selection of details to make 
a condensed version of more dramatic effect. 

Shakespeare has shown great interest in the ballads, 
and I have shovm this to be particularly so in Act IV 
of Ihe Winter ^s Tale . But ballads and ballad snatches 
occur in every play. Considered as music, the ballad 
tags are bits of song, and, as such, have been treated in 
the chapter on songs. Used as scurrilous comment, as 
reflections on characters and situations, as part of the 
habitual bombast of certain characters, as meaningless 
cliches, and as a means of minimizing crudity, »^hakespeare 
employs spoken ballad tags and titles as part of the 
language of his comic characters. 

Dr inlying and mad scenes are shot with ballad snatches, 
and in Hamlet . Ophelia^s ballads indicate the struggle 
vvhich has destroyed her sanity. 


Some ballads have definite 












m. 




li 


■A'y 


:::.p 


■j ‘im: 


; .. 'r ■. n"! *• 


iO. 

er’ 


T'CC .■ 

■■; ''ri-Lj ' 'i 

fish : .'■ ■ 


v.'r^ , v;1>v.: ■■■f,.' 0 lr V 






|k ■•";r. i'.;i i I';.' ^ ' I 

■„ V o> JTr’-:k 1 




- ■•. 

oJ i ..I. 


. t’,; *io : ■! '.■■ -■ .>.'J “w'j.i'.•■?■'"I 1 

^ ,; rTjK'iirto- -.io gf?.’ ' ■ 

’■ .i. ^ o''''’-' ’ ■■ 

........ 


.. ■•; 


•! V; - >■' 


aiJ;:/- 




ap 


.143 iv:U .: 3 '^. - %4 .h ^ ^ 

\'\ '1 . ; C:. v.'- "rS‘b.y> <. 1 'i,'- 

' , ■ ' ' ' ■• . ,- • ■ r 4 . .•■■j' =. 

- ■•■■■■'■■•:- .. ■■■""T:".'• 1 

0,.:.r:,4 r- 4\, ^ 4 - iC^o ! 

■ ;' , " . if A,,.-,. .,. ;. ■,(■ - v .. ‘ .'. 1. 

^ ^ ■ •<• ' ■ V . ' ^ ■•-' " ■■ ' ■ " ' \ 

- ... ■•-,>,.• . ■ ... •? ■ •.-% ■■ V^'':-T ’ ■•. . ..'.‘‘iV . '-’i 

3'- ' '■ 4- • ' 

; j. .: o-.;ih; . .‘r^; j , ''v.ft'"'' ‘ 

• ,' ■ '■ ■' . ^'4 ■^'4 ■ if;, .4' 

44..’i » 


,c' ■'i:4. ", 




4!,4;J,.:.44 

,V'‘i ' ',fi J J .4 ■ * .< ■;,>* ' ''■- • ' 




.' .y" ■ 


-■■4 


■ rt ..;oiv. .*■?. ;>I,,, • i.^- .' r- 




,' " '"4'":;i j ■/ i'.,. .1J ",;! ■ ' ; ’ ,: ■ i .’'"- ■ ' U {' ■ . 


; .■: i4---. 


». •' te &'i.i ■ %‘.v 


f’i' 'wa 








^54 


implications and where they are mentioned v/e find 
basicall}^ similar situations. Greensleaves implies 
w^anton behavior, or satire on the Puritans for their 
habit of using dance tunes as hymns, itjn^; Go.jhetua and 
the Bea.c.ar Maid always suggests unseemliness or a 
mesalliance . Since one of the versions of the ballad 
Pee o ^ Ramsay was called Give me my vellow hose . I 
suggest that the term ~v ellow hose implies bachelorhood, 
and that it is no coincidence that Sir Toby calls 
Malvolia a”Peg-a-Ramsay.” Ballad tags, so common in the 
lines of the comic chc..racters, give the speeches a forth¬ 
right, pungent quality. They become a form of imagery 
in Shahespeare^s hands, used to suggest situations and 
make implications in a popular and abbreviated form. 

I have demonstrated that Shakespeare^s technique of 
depicting battles had definite advantages. An army could 
be represented without using many actors. By this method 
it was possible to show” the dramatically important 
incidents of a battle and at the same time to make sure 
that the lines of the actors engaged could be heard, 
although none of the notes which constituted the military 
signals are extant, in many cases the text testifies as to 
their instrumentation and length. The combination of off¬ 
stage fanfares with shouts, reports of ordnance, clashing 
























<^55. 

of weapons etc._, is axi attempt at audible realism while the 
difference in volume of off-stage military signals was 
always used to indicate distance. Flourishes are generally 
used for exits and entrances of royalty. Shaxespeare 
had no set rule for flourishes . for they are not always 
present where we might expect them. In only one instance 
is a carle interesting,/both musically and as stage 
business (Rich II., Ill, iii, 62). Trumpets, drams and 
fifes are used in the text as symbols of Y/ar. Trumpets 
and drums are colourful additions to the stage decorations, 
and are alY/ays connected with heralds and challenges. 

In one instance (AC,, IV^ ix, oO-ol), the rolling of drums 
is used to tell the time of day. This incident also 
serves as a liason des scenes. Four national marches . 
as distinguished from the ordinary military march , are 
found in the plays. Dead marches are sometimes used to 
clear the stage of dead, but in at least one case a 
dead march is not found in an appropriate xclace: that 
is, in 1 Hen VI., II, i, 7, wliere the dead march has been 
confused with the Enslish march ¥/hich was slower in tempo 
than the French march . 

In three instances tuckets are recognized by 
characters in the plays. This recognition is used as a 
dramatic device, for the length of time which elapses 






















^56 


between a distant tucket and subsequent entrance was 
utilized for dramatic purposes. There are also cases 
where un-named trumpet calls and retreats are recognized, 
and identified in the text. The question arises whether 
or not the audience imew the military signals. Since it 
was a military age, and also since actual signals were 
used and specified in the stage directions, it is to be 
assumed they were understood, 

Horn calls v/ere used to represent hunters off- 
stage. The sounding of horns indicates health and 
vigour as well as social rank. This dramatic device has 
apparently not been observed by commentators. Previously 
unnoticed also is the fact that the alarum in 2 Hen lY,, 
offers evidence that Falstaff is a coward. 

Instrumental music was used by Shakespeare in many 
Y/ays. It accompanies dances, although, in certain cases, 
dances are performed to singing. Songs are accompanied 
both by single instnuments and by consorts; some are 
sung unaccompanied, for Shakespeare realized the dramatic 
value of simplicity. In all cases of song accompaniment, 
Shakespeare has chosen a background which Y/ould be most 
suitable to the milieu. In cases ?diere instrumental-music 
would be foreign to the setting, it is represented to be 
supernatural. Instruiiiental music frequently opens or 
closes scenes, and in Twelfth Ni>^At . opens the play. 








. o-.:,';! “i.; 

/ tx i‘ ^ , 

...',." yR',ra , , ■' 


"n., 

, JT 

. .. oql/.-'W 'i ■' ''.X-S-'l 



?,i'ri;-’ :v£Xiy» -O.'-V ■' •.•.l’^ .■■ -l' 


■ ;, • 1 ; 4 ■ 

} -a , -'YlCl illy.:' hxb ''.: 4'.'; .s. 

k'. X''X . ■ ' •■> ; j- .'■'. •■'■■ 



„."i.,.-’ ■ >" '■ '"^'- 

V : . ■ ■ X' Xy y ■ •. 'r-,. 


L{■,^ 

V'-Ci 

:vi^. ■'•^' 

’■ i i ' . - 


' >;^u v' ‘ j ^ i'4'- • ' 

' ' ’■■'. \,: ;■ _ ■; :;i:4 ■y’.'r,;:^ ^4*’.iX'r3. 

'A.. ^ 1 y ' * ■ ; Y '■ t.' *’ '^ ^ V * *' *” i ^ Ti ^ 

' * .. 4 “, . : y" i t 


Ugg... 

''' ■(. ' < ': ■ ■ ' ■’'• ‘•-*^w;W'f,'. ^'f .', . " ' ' 



■■;: ..;,v.'i' *'V '--vS . .j-i.y 



■ • XjtKiX ’X c; ■, i,IM ^ 'a;'.- H f"a,;- X■■ • 

' ••*' 



i ‘'v>i I'-J" 

{ <“■ ' %'.;':i-.i '- yf‘ i 

: ' j X y:cV 1 t.'rf.i -■ [X 



- 'I c i na c;> J J /O. ^ ' Y4 vy: ^ 1 ’V'a 

U'’: i.i 


'^Va^’"' ti.X r^k^y'S -U',ai'f'i '^,4 ,iyXa’- ' y 



. " ' XX'X-f; ' . ■' ’ ■. -G ,, ' ' '■■ ' ■ ' ■ 






jvrir;,. 


■j*,: ■'^' 


' £!■-. ::J- ^ ^ ^ ..._ ■ i V-' V 


Ea-JO i .1 ks-: Lj-. '-*t' ^ ■.'.■■'■ 

"V"'. '. V .:' JX. S ".■' j; ' . , , . \.. 

MV’■' .''>V -1',-. • .Ji'fii'J .;;'^'J M'O Oi;.-.1 Y 




i.: 






■03^ - 

. ,. , ',rv . fv .* ■ . ; ;> 


«.a-* "'■» ' 

• '. . ' ' 

, ^' "" ' '" 


■' , ■ ■; •■■ 'w.:' ■(': ' 

■■■': xW i Zl^. 

% -X" ■: 

' xX.r' ; 



/■■i.' ,'.. i*%''L4 4 H i 

' ,.•' ■■’ ,y' -vs/.f . '■ ■ 

,i... f'-’Lekit'* 


,i '''tiy,“H:,:;&c..;v;,. « 

; '• -,'; >tt> . n-J • ' *' ■' ■: ‘ ' ' ‘ ^ 

Xy. ; .v;.'; ..t. 


i i.'./ , '. xx:K}i‘' f* 







S57 


Elaborate music several times is played during processions 
to augment the impression of pomp and grandeur^ elsewhere 
it is used to indicate rank and wealth. In Timon of 
Athens . when coupled with banquets, music symbolizes 
ruinous extravagance. Character is established with the 
assistance of music in a number of instances* In two 
plays the healing power of music is represented. In 
several plays’ instrumental music indicates a point in 
time, or the passage of time. Dumb-shows almost al¥/ays 
have a musical background. In a few^ cases the action of 
the play depends upon music. It is often used to contrast 
the emotional level of scenes, and in one case is 
employed to contrast differences in fortune. Background 
music, or music played during the reading of the lines, 
is important in Shakespeare^s plays. Fnere music is 
employed in this ?my, the lines introduce the mood or 
emotion desired, which is then retained and re-echoed 
by the music while the action of the play proceeds. 

All the dances consist of movement and music. The 
music which accompanies the dances in the plays has been 
discussed.under the heading of instrumental music . The 
particular names of dances (such as Lavolta . Coranto . 
Galliard etc,,) imply different dance steps and different 
levels of society, and Shakespeare took care alx^ays to 


match the dance to appropriate social strata. In 
















^58 


Tv/elfth Ni^:ht a confusion of dance terms occurs for the 
sake of comedy. Certain passages consist of puns on 
terms connected v/ith the dance. The general term dance 
dhakespeare has used to denote states of emotion or 
being. Dancing generally implies vigour, health, or 
happiness, but it may also represent incongruous or 
foolish behavior, or effiminacy in men. The names of 
dances, the steps involved, and even the general term I 

dance -— all call to mind certain pictures. They have | 

been used for their connotations as images. 

Shakespeare ^ s knov/ledge of music is that of a listener | 
and an observer rather than that of a musician. The 
musical terms of which he makes use do not indicate a j 

great technical knowledge. He neither uses nor mentioxus | 
many of the expressions and terms which Ysrere not only ' 

of major importance in the study of music, but. which 

would have oroved valuable either as puns or as a more sober 

I 

form of imagery. It has been noted that some of the terms ! 

1 

currently applied to the mechanics of poetry m-ere close | 

I 

in meaning to similar musical terms. General musical i 

1 

terms (such as harmony, song, melody, etc.) had become 
a part of Shakespeare’s poetical diction, and, as such, 
are comparatively uninteresting. It has been demonstrated 
that Shakespeare was familiar Yixth most of the musical 
instruments of his time, but in only a few cases do we 















£59 


find a penetrating knowledge of them. In one instance 
an error was caused by lack of observation or inquiry. 
The qualities of the instruments have been used metaphor 
ically in the descriptions of characters. I have 
demonstrated that Shaiiespeare Knew the vagaries and 
proprieties of the professional musician, and that he 
did not believe that to be musical was to be virtuous. 

This study has shown that music, both vocal and 
instrumental, played an important role in the plays. 

It was no mere embellishment. Employed as it was in 
numerous v/ays, it came to have dramatic importance. In 
stimulating the emotions and in aiding the imaginations 
of the audience music supplied an important supporting 
buttress to Shakespeare^s drama® 








^ 60 . 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


George Puttenham, "The Arts of Englishe Poesie", Gregory 
Smith, Elizabethan Critical Essays , 

(Oxford; Clarendon Press, 19047) 

Satis H. Coleman, Bells , (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1928.) 

f 

A Companion to Shakespeare Studies . Ed, by H. Granville- 
Barker and G. B, Harrison, 

(Cambridge:University Press, 1934.) 

The Complete Y\forks of Shakespeare . Ed, by G. L, Kittredge 
(Boston; Ginn, n,d.)' 

John Bartlett, Concordance to Shakespeare , 

(London; Macmillan, 1906.1 

William Costello, Costello System for Brass Instruments ; 
No>> ~Pressure , (New York: Fischer, n.d.) 

Grove’s Dictionary of Musi c and Musicians , Ed, by H, C, 
Golles, (New York; Macmillan, 19277) 

Edmimd Horace Fellowes, The English Madrigal Composers , 
(Oxford: Clarendon Presi,1921,7“ 

Sir P, Bridge, Music in the Plays and Early Operas , 
(London; Dent, 1^371 

Francis Bacon, "Of Masques and Trumpets", A Harmony of 
the Essays , etc. Ed. by E, Arber. 

(Westminster; Constable, 1875.) 

George Antheil, "Hollywood Composer", Atlantic Monthly 
Magazine , March, 1940, 

The Holy Bible . (New York: The World Syndicate Pub, Co,, 
n.d.l ’ 

Jotin Murray Gibbon, Melody and the Lyric, (London; Dent, 
1930.) 

Barbara Rex, "Music and the School Board", Atlantic 
Monthly Magazine , Oct. 1940. 


E, W, Naylor, Music and the Poets, (New York: Dutton, 
1928.) 





























































^61 


A. 0, Bradley, Oxford Lectures on Poetry . 2nd ed. 

(London: Macmillan, 1934.) 

The Oxford Dictionary , Ed, by Sir .1. Murray, 

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1914,) 

Percy ^ s Reliques of Ancient English Poetry , Vol. 1. Ed, by 
Henry B, V/heatley 1 [l^ondon: Bickers, 1876.) 

Thomas Morley, A Plaine and Easie Introduction to Practicall 
Musicke (SEakespeare Association, Facsimiles No. 14}, 

(Oxford: University Press, 1937.) 

Plutarch, Lives , Englished by Sir Thomas North, 

(London: Dent, 1898-»99,) 

The Poetical Yv^orks of Skelton and Donne , Vol, 1. Ed. by 
A. Dyce.'^ ("Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, n.d.) 

W, Chappell, Popular Music of the Olden Times , Vol. 1, II, 
(London, 1859.) 

R, Warwick Bond, ”Lyly»s Songs”, Review of English Studies, 
Vol, VI, 1930.) 

E, W, Naylor, Shakespeare and Music , Rev. ed, 

(London: Dent, 1931.) 

Montague Summers, Shakespeare Adaptations « 

(London: Cape'll 1922.) 

Shakespeare Associatio n, 1925-26, (London: Oxford Univer¬ 
sity Press, 1927 .T 

Percy Simpson, ”The Masque”, Shakespeare ^ s England . Ed, 

G. T, Onion. (Oxford: ClarenEon Press, 1916.) 

Walter Eby, Scientific Method for Cornet an d Trumpet ; 

Non Pressure System . (Buffalo; Eby, n.dT] ’ 

Edward Dickinson, The Stud.y of the History of Music, 

(New York; Scribner^s, 1907.) 

William Boyd, A Text Book of Pathology , 2nd ed, 
(Philadelphia; Lea and Febiger, 1935.) 

Tottel»s Miscellany (1557-1587), Vol. 1. Ed. by H. E, 

Rollins. (Cambridge; Harvard University Press, 1928.) 




























































£ 62 . 


"Damon and Pythias". Dodsley* s Old English Plays , Ed, by 
W. 0. Hazlitt. (London: Reeves and Turner, 1876.) 

"New Custom". Dodsley * s Old English Plays , Ed. A.non. 
(London: Reeves and Turner, 187^6.) 

"Ram Alley". Dodsley ^ 3 Old English Plays , Ed. by Lodowlck 
•Barry. (London: Reeves and Turner, 1876.) 

"Sunmier^s Last Will and Testament". Dodsley^s Old English 
Plays , Ed. by Richard Edwards. 

(London: Reeves and Turner, 1876.) 

"Every Man In His Humour", Ben Jonson , Vol. Ill, Ed. by 
C. H. Herford and Percy Simson. (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1917.) 

"The First Part of King Henry the Fourth", Ed. by G. L. 
Kittredge. (New York: Ginn, and Company, n.d.) 

"Hamlet", 13th ed, by H« H. Furness. (Phil : Lippincott, 
1905.) (Variorum Edition.) 

"King Henry the Fourth", pt. 2. Ed, by R. P. Cov/l and A, 

E, Morgan. (London: Methuen, 1914.) (Arden Edition.) 

"King Lear". Ed. by J. Craig. (London: Methuen, 1915.) 
(Arden Edition.) 

"Life of King Henry the Fifth". Ed. by H. k, Evans. 
(London: Methuen, 1904.) (Arden Edition.) 

"Lovers Labour*s Lost". Ed, by H. C. Hart. (London: 
Methuen, 1913.) (Arden Edition.) 

"Macbeth", Ed. by Henry Cunningham, 2nd ed. (London: 
Methuen, 1917.) (Arden Edition.) 

"The Merry Wives of Windsor". Ed, by H. C, Hart, (London: 
' Methuen, 1904.) (Arden Edition.) 

"Midsumm.er Night »s Dream", Ed. by Henry Cuningham. 

(London: Methuen, 1905.) (Arden Edition.) 

"Midsummer Night»s Dream". 6th ed. by H, H. Furness, 

(Phil .: Lippencott, 1895.) (Variorum Edition.) 

"Much Ado About Nothing", Ed. by Grace R. Trenery. 

(London: Methuen, 1924.) (Arden Edition.) 






















^63 • 


"Romeo and Juliet". 14th ed. hy H. H, Furness. (Phil, 
Lippincott, 1899.) (Variorum Edition.) 

"Twelfe nighte; or. What you will", 4th ed. by H. H. 
Furness, (Phil. Lippincott, 1901.) (Variorum 
Edition.) 

"The \¥inter*s Tale". Ed, by F. W. Moorman. (London: 
Methuen, 1912.) (Arden Edition.) 

John Fletcher, "The Captain", The Work s of Beaumont and 

Fletcher, Vol. II, Ed. A. Dyce. 'T^ew York: AppleI'on, 
1890.) 

John Fletcher, "The Bloody Brother", The Works of Beaumont 
and Piet Cher , Vol. I, Ed. A, Dyce. (Lev/ York: 
Appleton, 1890.) 




















B29748 









