Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Shaver, A. 

Autobiography in Sraollet’s Roderick 
Random ... 1923. 















OX UBBHS 
3IItMBSW9SI$ 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/shaver1912 


PAKT I 


Autobiography- 

in 

SMOLLETT'S 

".Roderick random" 
"Peregrine Pickle 

LICEEN3' 

"Lavid Gopperfield" 
"Oliver Twist" 


A piece of work carried out by 
Miss Alice Shaver under the direction of 
Professor E. E. Eroadus, in English 62, and 
presented to the Committee on Graduate Studies 
of the university of Alberta, in part fulfil¬ 
ment of the work for the degree of M.A. 


May 1923. 







SMOLLETT'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY 
TABLE OE 0 011 TENTS 


Page 

Steps in his life 1 

Birth, parentage, and care 1 

Education 2 

His "tragedy" 2-4 

Enters the navy 4-6 

Visit to Jamaica 6 

Marriage 6 

Attempts to start medical practice 
in London 6 

Jacobite Rebellion 6-7 

"Roderick Random" 7 

Obtains his M/L. 7-8 

"Peregrine Pickle" 9 


Trip to trance 


9-10 







I 


S-K 0 t I E T T 


The important steps and phases of 
Smollett's life up to the appearance of "Roderick 
Randorn"and "Peregrine Pickle" were as follows: 

1. Birth and parentage and care.it. Education at Du#- 
mbarton and at Glasgow, 3. Departure for London an£ 
sojourn there; 4. The failure, of his tragedy 5. En¬ 
tering the navy as surgeon's mate in the attack on 
Carthagena; 6. His visit to Jamaica; 7. His marr¬ 
iage; 8. His return to London and his attempts to 
start a medical practice there; 9. His attitude to 
wards the Jacobite rebellion; 10. His writings("Ro 
derick Random"1748);11. Obtaining his M. D. 12. His 
trip to France; 13. Appearance of "Peregrine PickleJi; 
1751$ Practically all of these left some stamp on one 
or both of the two novels under discussion, as will 
be shown by tracing the course of his life, with the 
resembling features in the books, considering "Roder¬ 
ick Random^first. 

Born in 1721, Tobias Smollett was, like 
his hero in this novel, the offspring of a love match 
opposed by his paternal grand-father, Sir James Smol¬ 
lett. But while Roderick's grandfather, his uncles 
and aunts are all banded to persecute him, Smollett's 
grandfather gave the family a living on a small farm 
after their father, Archibald Smollett, died. But th©\ 
gather seems, nevertheless, prejudiced against his 
grandfather, for in chapter 18, after he has learned 
that a present is expected by the Secretary of the 
fiavy Office before appointing an applicant to a vac* 
ancy, Roderick r says, "I sneaked off towards my own 
lodgings, cursing my fate all the way, and inveigh¬ 
ing with much bitterness against the barbarity of my 
grandfather and the sordid averace of my relations, 
who left me a prey to contempt and indigence'.' So the© 
book may be taken as an authority at least in tfd.s 
sense, that, if it gives no true picture of what ac« 
tually happened to Smollett, it is a very fair state¬ 
ment of what he was inclined to think had befallen 
him. He took the outline of his own life, and paint* 
into it all the "selfishness, envy, and base indiff^©- 
erence of mankind he needed,,to produce the desired 
literary effect. In later times, the author made am¬ 
ends to his grandfather's house, for his ingratitude© 
but in 1748, when "Roderick Random" was written, he 
was in another frame of mind. The old judge's will 
amswers to the disposition of his property made in 
by o-t -d—S-T-w 


arnes 







■ 


























17$3?5by old Sir James, allowing £22. 4s. 5d. year¬ 
ly for Archibald’s children till they were twelve 
years old. Roderick was orphaned in infancy by his 
mother’s death, Smollett byfehis father’s. 

Tobias was given a fair education. Af- 
schooling at Dumbarton under Mr. John 
^uorddn, a medical practioner 7 which meant at that 
time both apothecary and doctor- in Glasgow. He pro¬ 
bably, while here attended the courses at.the Univer¬ 
sity of Glasgow, for he possessed a knowledge of TTatin 
and Greek. Many references and characters in "Roderick 
Random" and "Peregrine Pickle" pay tribute to, or 
satirise the Latin language, or those who taught 
it. Roderick’s education was similar to Smollett’s 
only his university education was provided for by# his 
uncle. After his early education, Roderick apprenticed 
himself,(ch. 7) like Smollett,to a surgeon, Mr. Crab, 
where he stayed for two years. 


In 1739, while still a youth under twenty, 
Smollett, with letters of recommendation from his fam¬ 
ily, went to London, to get a start in life. Likewise 
Roderick went there when he left Mr. Crab’s. The latt¬ 
er gave him a letter to Mr. Cringer, the member of 
parliament of his town, which he expected would bring 
successful opportunities. This Mr. Cringer, iMA /lAMloeif 
6t ^pVrflameriV Ai his town(ch. 140,Mr. Staytape, the 
tailor, (ch. 15 ), the examining medical board(ch. 15) 
and the admiralty yardfhh. 18), in "Roderick Random", 
were all parts of Smollett's experiences, told not as 
they happened to him, but as they would best fit into 
the story. The bribery of the government officials, and 
of the examining medical bo^ard, is well described 
in these chapters. Describing the latter, he says; "jTte 
expense of this qualification for second mate of a the. 
third rate, amounted to thirteen shillings, exclusive’ 
of the warrent, which cost him half a guinea and half 
a^rown, besides the present to the secretary, which 
consisted of a three -pound twelve piece."His experi¬ 
ence at the navy yard was similar.( Peregrine Pickle 
has an equally mortifying or even worse experience with 
the governm:nt(ch. 96) at the hand of Sir Steady Stead 
wel}, who forbids him his House, deprives hiip of his 
pension, and charges him with lunacy. Peregrine satir- 
iseshim thus; "He has succeeded more than once in con- 
t rivances of this kind, i. e. accusations of lunacy, 
having actually reduced people of weak heads to such 
extremity of despair as hath issued in downright dis- 
traction, whereby he was rid of their importunities. 







3 

and bis judgment confirmed at the same time.") Mr. 
Cringer’s snobbery is described in these words of Hod- 
rick Random, "There was a fire for the convenience 
of the better sortjfof those who waited on him. Thither 
I was never permitted to penetrate, on account of my 
appearance, which was not at all fashionable, but was 
obliged to stand blowing my fingers in a cold lobb y, 
and take the first opportunity of Mr. Cringer f s going 
to the door to speak to him." 

Smollett early made a name for himself as 
a writer, but not without preliminary discouragements* 
He took with him to London in 1732 a tragedy which he 
had written- "The Regicide"- which however only came 
tou, reveal to him "the dishonesty of patrons, the unw 
wisdom of friendly critics, the mendacity of managers.” 
Smollett had obtained an introduction to Lyttleton, 
a known patron of literature, from whom he expected 
great help. The patron seems to have spoken a good 
word for him with Garrick and other great mwn in the 
theatrical world, but the play was never staged. Smol¬ 
lett received only vague promises, equivalent to a 
rejection. Although the play really merited no rec¬ 
ognition, Smollett was for a while very hostile .towards 
Littleton and Garrick, but was later reconciled. 

$ome of his bitterness is reflected by 
incidents in "Roderick Random" and Peregrine Pickle" 

In the former, one of the characters, Molopoyn, relays 
a worse experience than Smollett’s. He was introduced 
to a priest, who promised to use all his influence 
with Su pple, the manager, and advised Molopoyn to 
call on Supple at any time, making use of the priest f s 
name. On his second call, Molopoyn saw thw manager, 
who promised to read the play. The next time he called 
thw manager was out; the next time, he was ill, the 
next time he had not yet read the play owing to stress 
of business; the next call found him laid up with 
the gout, and the manuscript missing, having been 
carelessly burned toy the cook in singeing fowls. In 
three weeks Mr. Molopoyn produced a^copy of the origi¬ 
nal. In a week’s t.me he called aga/n, but the sea¬ 
son was then too late. The next two seasons pasedd 
with a similar experience, and finally his playb was 
rejected. Like Smollett, he consoled himself temporar- 
ly by other writings. 

In "Peregrine Pickle" there is also a some¬ 
what similar reference to a manuscript, described by 

a member of the "College of Authors" (eh. 94), in this 

case a nobleman had requested to see the manuscript’ 








. 








, 






* 

• 

1 

5 


















' 



■ 

* 







. 








4 


but evaded every later interview. He is satirised here 
in the words of the chirman, tf l will lay an even 
bet with any man that his lordship, on the strength 
of that slendfer interview, together with the oppor¬ 
tunity of having seen your performance in manuscript, 
has already hinted to every company in which he is 
conversant, that you solicited his assistance in re¬ 
touching the piece which you have now offered to 
the public, and that he was pleased to favor youhwiti 
his advice, but found you obstinately bigoted toyour 
opinion, in some p oints relating to those very pas¬ 
sages which have not met with the approbation of 

the town-By that time you have lived to my 

age, you will not be surprised to see a coufctier's 
promise and performance of a diffwrent complexion.” 

Smollett, like Random, in the pursuit 
of his medical profession, shipped as surgeon*s mate 
on a man pf war, which took part in the mis-managed 
expedition of the English against Carthagena on the 
Spanish main, in the spring of 1794. But Roderick 
made his way into the navy if not in an irregular m 
manner, at least entirely on his own meri ts. Smoll¬ 
ett was not awithout friends and recommendations. Smo¬ 
llett, by his Carthagenian experience, gained his 
intimate knowledge of the English sailor, and the at¬ 
tack has a very conspicuous share in ipaking the int¬ 
erest of "Roderick Random”. 

Captain Knowleskad commanded the Weym¬ 
outh in Vernon's West Indian fleet. He is possibly 
represnted here by Capt. Oakum. He took part in the 
action with the French ships on the coast of Hispan¬ 
iola, described in ”Ro^d©$rick Random" , and his name 
is not praised in Smollett's account of the expedit— 
ionto Carthage. A— cap t a in Coo rg e -S-— 

A captain George Shelvocke, wo sail-^ 
ed to the South Seas some twenty years before Vernonfs 
expedition, was accustomed to solace himself with "hx- 
psy", a mixtute of wine, water, and brandy, which 
he thought good for his gout. It is thought Smollett 
must have referred to him in speaking of "banyan daysE 
and "lumbo", a liquor composed of rum, sugar, water, 
and nutmeg. 

The rivalry beUveen the French and the 
English after the battle of Dettingen is vividly por- 

trayed. "The genius of the French never appeared more 
conspicuous than now, in the rodomontadesjthey uttered 















I 











1 










5 


on the subject of their generosity, and courage.Eve¬ 
ry man, by his own account, performed feats that 
ecli psed all the heroes of antiquity. One compared 
himself to a lion, retiring at leisure from his cow¬ 
ardly pursuers,who keep at a wary distance and galled 
him with their darts. Another likened hiipself to a 
bear, who retreats with his face to the enemy, who 
dares not assail hiip, and the third assumed the cha¬ 
racter of a desperate stag, that turns upon the hounds 
and keeps them at bay. There was not a private sold¬ 
ier engaged, who had not, by the prowess of his right 
arm, demolished a whole platoon, and put a squadron 
to flight." Then Kode#xck praises the English. "I mag¬ 
nified the valor of the English, with all the hyper¬ 
boles I could imagine, and descried the pusillanimity 
of the French in the samre style comparing them to 
hares flying before greyhounds, or mice pursued by 
cats." etc. 


The speech made by Capt. Bowling on the 
way to Buenos Ayres, when a fight with a big stranger 
seemed imminent, is representative of the speech made 
by Capt. Best of the East India Company's service, 
when he was threatened by an apparently overwhelming 
Portugese forcdat Surat in 1612. This man was a Pur¬ 
itan. He read Psalm 16 to the crew of the Hoseander, 
beginning at the eighth verse. The rest of the address 
was more after the address of Lieutenant Bowling, who 

spoke as follows, ” My lads---■- I have gone 

to sea thirty years, man and boy, and never saw Eng« 
lish sailors afraid before.^ayhap you think I wan t 
to expose you for the lucre of gaih. Whosoever thinks 
so thinks a dammed lie, for my whole cargo is insur ed 
so that in case I should be taken, my loss would not 
be great. The enemy is stronger than we are, to be ' 
sure, what then? Have we not a chance of carrying a* 
way one of her masts, and so get clear of her? If we 
find her too hard for us, 'tis but striking at last* 

If any man is hurt 4n the engagement,! promise on the 
word o& an honest seaman, to make him a recompense 
according to his loss. So now, you that are lazy f ,lub¬ 
berly. cowardly dogs, get awayland skulk in the hold 
and breadroom, and you that are jolly boys, stand by 
me and let us give one broadside for the honors of 
Old England." The promise of recompense especially 
resembles that of Capt. Best, who, after showing hi* 
men the necessity there was for smashing the Portug¬ 
ese, further told them that if it should please God 
that any one of our men in fight were dismembered o r 

lamed, he faithfully promised upon his credit and re¬ 
putation, in the hearing of the company, that he would 






■ 

- 

- 

. 









; 




. 






r 





. 




6 

be a means unto the wors' ipful company whom we serve, 
in their behalf for reasonable maintenanceto keep them 
as long as it should please God they li ve. Smollett 
no doubt had ^his speech in mind when describing Capt. 
Bowling’s. 


Even apart from the hardships of sea- 
life, there was nothing in the prospect a£ surgeon’s 
mate to tempt Smollett to remain at sea. The West In¬ 
dies attracted him, so, very soon after the return of 
the defeated expedetion, he retired from service, and 
settled for a short time in Jamaica. Likewise Roder¬ 
ick, while on board the "Thunder", goes to Jamaica( 
(ch. 34). 


Smollett, like Roderick, married a fine 
lady, but the latter met his in England, Smollett met 
his in Jamaica. She was an heiress, a Miss Nancy 
Lascelles, commonly called Anne laseelles. She is con¬ 
sidered the original of Narcissa. The date of Smoll¬ 
ett’s marriage is given approximately as 1744, before 
he left Jamaica. 

Hi 1744 Smollett returned to London. 
Between this date and his writings, he was in straight- 
enrd circumstances, so far as his own exertions were 
concerned. He tried, in vain, to establish a medical 
practice in Downing St. Roderick is also rrepresented 
as destitute. On one occasion he pawned his sword. 

The following experience of Roderick is no doubt aujro- 
biographiealof this period of the author’s life, Ro¬ 
derick did not know what to do for a living while in 
winter quarters at Rheims. "When I thought of turning 
merchant, the smallness of our stock, and the risk of 
seas, enemies and markets, deterred me from that scheme. 
If I should settle as a surgeon in my own country, I 
should find Jrhe business already overstocked; or if I 
pretended to set up in England, must labor under want 
of friends and powerful opposition, obstacles insur¬ 
mountable by^ the most shining merit. Neither should I 
succeed by my endeavor to rise in the state, inasmuch 
as I could neither flatter nor pimp for courtiers, 
nor prostitute my pen in defence of a wicked and com- 
temptible administration." This last is a reference 
to Smollett’s political discouragements( Peregrine 
Pickle also knew perfcyty). But each of these, like 
Smollett, had to be pretty poor to forego his glass 
of wineor even his travels. 

We have many reminiscencesof Smollett 


[ 

. 

- 



7 


during the exciting times of 1745, the period of 
th&he Jacobit Rebellion. Together with Dr. Alexander 
Carlyle, John Blair, and Smith, he would meet at 
a coffee- house in Cockspur St. and they would pass 
pleasant evenings together. They would frequently 
reso^rtjto a small tavern in the corner of Cockspur 
Street at the Golden Ball, where they had a frug** 
al supper, and a little punch, with ridh conversa¬ 
tion on literary subjects, f This probably sugges¬ 
ted the supper in "Peregrine Pickle TT ch. 36jreferred 
to later)^Smollett, though a Tory, was not a Jaco¬ 
bite, but v he had the feelings of a Scotch gentleman 
on the reported cruelties said to be exercised af¬ 
ter the Battle of Culloden.We find numerous tributes 
in these books to the Scotch, and to Smollett’s pa- 
triosm. The stranger whom Roderick meets on the 
latter's return from Mr. Cringer's (ch. 14), speaks 
thus; "My grandfather by the father's side was Scotch 
and I am so prepossed in its favor that T never meet 
a Scotchman, but my heart warms. The Scotch are a 
very brave people. There is scarcely a great fami¬ 
ly in the kingdom that cannot boast of some exploits 
performed by its ancestors f many hundred years agp * 
There's your Douglases, Gordons, Campbells, Hamil- 
tons, We have no such ancient families ere in En¬ 
gland. Then you are well educated. I have known a 
beggar talk in Greek and Hebrew as well as if they had 
been his mother tongue. And for honesty, I once had 
a servant, his name was Gregory Maegregor; I would 
have trusted him with untold gold." Roderick says 
that thus euixbgium on his native country gained his 
affection so strongly that he believes he could have 
gone to death to serve the author, and Strap's eyes 
swam in teass. Another instance of Roderick's pat*, 
riotism is found (eh. 27) when Cramp ley began one 
day to sing a song, which Roderick considered unpat¬ 
riotic, and he told Crampley that"the Scots alway s 
laid their account with finding enemies among the 
ignorant, insignificant, and malicious." T his pro¬ 
voked a boxing contest, in which Roderick was vic¬ 
torious, and gained quite a reputation thereby) 

In 1748, Smollett wrote "Roderick Ran ** 
dom", which was the beginning of his successful li¬ 
terary career, and which helped to relieve his fin¬ 
ancial distress. 

In 1750, Smollett obtained a degree of 


M 




8 


MM. D. from the Marischall College of Aberdeen. He tried 
to establish a medical reputation by the publication 
of a scientific treatiseon the external use of water. 

He wrote about the water of Bath, and his object was 
to prove that any other waterwould do as we 11(although 
he was then trying to establish himself at Bath.)The 
medical life of the place, especially the quackery, had 
a great attraction for him. Hence the frequent reference 
to the place in TT Peregrine Pickle", He says, TT It was a 
common practice among the physicians at Bath to dissuade 
their patients from drinking the water, that the cure, 
and consequently their attendance, might be the longer 
protracted." 

It is probably owing to his frequent 
disappointments at getting a practice, that he satiris¬ 
es the medical profession so freely.( which will also 
be noted under"satire").His humorous satire is seen in 
describing tie arts of the apothecary, Mr. Lavement,(eh* 
19, "Roderick Random"); "Oyster shells he could invent 
into crab's eyes, cinnamon oil into oil of sweet almonds; 
syrup of sugar, into balsamic syrup; Thames water, into 
aqua cmmnaraon; turpentine into capivi, and a hundred 
more eostlybpreparationswere produced in an instant from 
the cheapest and coarsest drugsof the "materia medica ff , 
and when any common thing was ordered for a patient, he 
always took car q$5 disguise it in color, or taste, or 
both, in such a manner, as that it could not possibly 
be known, for which purpose cochineal and oil of cloves 
were of great service." 

The supposed rivalry in the professions 
he expresses in "Roderick Random" (ch. 7), in the quarr¬ 
el between Potion and Grab. The latter”had long enter- 
tainedan implacable resentment against Potion, who, though 
a^young practitioner,mwas better employed than he, an d 
once had the assurance to perform a cure, whereby he 
disappointed and disgraced the prognostic of the said 
Grab." 












. 









' 

, 



















* 













9 


"P^BSgKIMB PI0K1B" 

T? 

Between the writing of"Roderick Randoms 
and"PeregrinePickle" (1751), Smollett had taken a trip 
to France, so in this second book are depicted all the 
incidents of his tour which have been preserved. The 
travellers,(Peregrine and Jolter), fall in with a par¬ 
ty of Scotch Jacobites, and also with an English tra¬ 
veller, who figures quite prominently in the novel. In 
different ways both these meetings touched Smollett’s 
patriotism. He gave a supper to the Jacobites. The Eng¬ 
lish acquaintances were not so genial. Mark Aikensiffe 
and his unnamed frieddf, the painter, were the origin - 
als of the physician and Pallett. Smollett makes unmea¬ 
sured attack on the former. Some of the reasons advanc¬ 
ed fofc this antipathy are , that Aikenside quoted Gree£, 
was a great republican, laid down the law, and annoyed 
Smollett by continual talk about the ancients. 

The hero, Peregrine, is represented as 
continually tantalizing these men. He exasperated the 
painter in one instance, by eluding all his inquiries, 
so as to heighten his curiosity, which inflamed him to 
such a degree of impatience, that his wits began to be 
unsettled. Then, to recompose his brain. Peregrine told 
him in confidence that he had been arrested as a spy. 
"Then the painter ran from one apartment to the other, 
like a goose in the agonies of e^g-laying, with inten¬ 
tion of disburdening this important load. TT In anpthe r 
place, he saysjof the painter, "The ties of affection 
were too weak to engage the heart of this republican, 
whose zeal for the community had entirely swallowed up 
hos concern for individuals. He looked upon particular 
friendship as a passion unwortjry of his ample soul. " 

The painter andf the doctor are also re¬ 
presented as hostile to each other, "ihere was great 
animosity arose between these quondam friends. They 
never conversed together^rexcept with a view of expos® 
ing each otherto the ridicule or contempt of their fell¬ 
ow travellers. The doctor was at great pains to poin t 
out the folly and ignorance of Pallett, in private, to 
Peregrine, who was often conjured in the same manner 
by the painter,to take notice of the physiciaftfe want of 
manneraand taste. Pickle pretended to acquiesce in the 
truth of their mutual severity,which was extremely just, 

and by malicious insinuations blew up their contention, 

with a view of bringing it to open hostility, but he 
could not spirit them up to any pitch of resentment 



higher than scurrilous repartee.""Finally he did 
artfully foment a quarrelbetween them, and they 
fought a duel on the ramparts. Now the painter's 
cowardice is portrayed. Even after his challenge 
was accepted, he would have retracted it. He very 
willingly at last accepted the terms, and promis¬ 
ed submissive conduct. This burlesque shows Smol*/ 
lett's lack of respect for the men. 

Thus we see that Smollett put into "Per¬ 
egrine Pickle'all the fools and bores who came in¬ 
to his way, and made the most of their foibles for 
the amusement of his readers, never losing an opp¬ 
ortunity of attacking, principally the professions, 
among whom the physicians rank pre-eminent. Smoll¬ 
ett had had numerous "rubs of fortune", and delight 
ed to give expression to his resentment. 

The Lad-?# of Quality of this book rep¬ 
resents Lady Vane, who is supposed to have paid for 
her place in the book. The Memoirs were openly 
advertised as a scandalous attraction to the book. 
LadyifMary Montague supposed that Smollett, in his 
character of "Subaltern admirer of Lady Vane", must 
have added some"strokes of humor". The Memoirs 
illustrate Smollett's ideas, as the reflection of 
those tiipes, that all facts of life are fit to 
talk about. 





DICKENS' AUTOBIOGRAPHY 
TABLE Of CPU TENTS 


Page 


Birth / 1 

Childhood and parents / 1 

Sent to work /1-/2 

His father's arrest / 2-0 

Charles sent to school ) 3 

Office-boy to a sollicitor /3-/4 

Studies shorthand /4 

Newspaper and parliamentary reporter / 4 

Appointed to staff of "Morning 
Chronicle". /4-/5 

Takes rooms of his cwn /5 

The Ladies /5 

His marriage / 5 

Begginning as an author iBoy) /5 

Travels /6 

Originals of Characters / 6«/7 

Dickens as an actor /7-fe 

Personalities of Dickens ^8 


"David Copperfield" as a psychological 
novel 8-11 















DAVID COPPERFIELD 


In this book, the autobiographical touches 
were an afterthought, inspired by the suggestion of 
Forster, Dickens 1 biographer. The book gives, 
farily accurately, the story of Dickens 1 life, and 
also a portion of his father's life, with a brief 
gl&nce at his mother. His father, Mr. John Dickens, 
is represented in the character of Mr. Micawber, and 
his mother, in the person of Mrs. Copperfield. His 
parents, like these persons, had few guiding principles. 

Charles Dickens was born on a Friday, like 
David, February the 7, 1812. His father was then 
a Clerk under the Government at Portsmouth, but later 
moved to Chatham, where the family lived between 
1814 and 1822. Then, his father being recalled to 
Somerset House, the family moved to London,leaving 
Charles behind for a few weeks in the care of a 
School-Master, William Giles. Dickens, like David, 
had been given instruction in reading by his mother, 
in his childhood. 

It was during these few weeks of separation, 
that Dickens made his first intimate acquaintance 
with books, and the following passage from tT David 
Copperfield' 1 is his own experience. "My father had 
left a small collection of books in a little room 
upstairs, to which I had access — from that blessed 
little room, Roderick Randum, Peregine Pickle, Humphrey 
Clinker, Tom Jones, the Vicar of Wakefield, Don 
Quixote, Gil Bias and Robinson Crusoe came in a 
blessed host to keep me company. 

In the spring of 1823, Charles followed the 
rest of the family to London. He longed to get to 
School, but his father was too poor, so put him to 
work, at six or seven shillings a week, in a blacking 
factory, near Hungerford Market, to which Murdstone 
and Grimsbys is a pare 1 lei, even to the wages, only 
bottles of wine and spirits take the place of black¬ 
ing bottles. Here he experienced a "secret agony of 
soul", feeling conscious of higher capabilities. He 
kept this part of his life a secret from his wife for 
many years, which is related as follows*- "A curtain 
had forever fallen on my life at Murdstone and Grimsbys, 
no one has ever raised that curtain since. I have 







■ 






. 








' 









lifted it for a moment, even in this narrative, with 
a reluctant hand, and dropped it gladly. The remem¬ 
brance of that life is fraught with so much pain to 
me^with so much mental suffering and want of hope, 
that I have never had the courage even to examine how 
long I was doomed to lead it. Whether it lasted 
for a year, or more, or less, I do not know. I only 
know that it was, and it ceased to be, and that I 
have written, and there I leave it." DickenS was 
then eleven years old, ( about David's age at that 
period of his life). He had seasons of comparative 
gladness as he was naturally witty and mirthful. Like 
David,he dined off a Saveloy and a slice of pudding, 
but had a treat of Ale occasionally. He pictures 
himself as enjoying these extra treats as much as a 
rich man his banquet. These incidents reveal his 
prevailing optimism. 

At this time, his mother tried to assist in 
the finances, by opening a School on Goiter Street. 

A large brass plate announced " Mrs. Dicken r s*Estab¬ 
lishment/ 7 ' Little Charles left " at a great many doors 
a great many circulars." But is reported by 
Dickens that "nobody ever came to School, nor do I 
recollect that anybody ever proposed to come, or that 
the least preparation was made to receive anybody". 

We have a parallel in the novel in "Mrs. Micawber's 
Boarding Establishment for 3foutfg Ladies", of which the 
same result is reported, in the same words as above. 

But creditors came to Dicken’s home, as to Micawber's. 
"The only visitors ever saw or heard of were creditors. 
They used to come at all hours and some of them were 
quite ferocious.” 

Finally, John Dickens, like Micawber, was 
arrested for debt, amd sent to the Marshalsea. His 
last words before going were, like Micawber's, that 
the sun had set upon him forever. When Charles visit¬ 
ed him there, he received the same advice as David did 
from Micawber, to observe, that if a man had £20 a 
year, and spent £19.S19. 6d, he would be happy, but 
that a shilling spent the other way would make him 
wretched. Charles and his sister, Fanny, passed 
their Sundays in the prison. Charle’V notes of his 
surroundings are found faithfully recorded in "David 
Copperfield". One incident particularly, afterwards 



V 






f 















73 


transferred almost verbatim to this book, was the 
inauguration of a petition to the King for^a bounty, 
drawn up by a Committee, of which Dickens's father was 
the President, and also the Scribe, Capt. Porter, who 
occupied the room above Dicken’s is considered the 
original of Capt. Hopkins in "David Copperfield. 

Later, Dicken^s^fathe r, by means of a legacy 
and an official pension, met his financial responsib¬ 
ilities, and was released. Later, as a result of 
a quarrel with Jas. Lamert, for whom Charles was 
working, he declared that his son should leave and go 
to School. (Dickens always remembered that his mother 
opposed this step). 

He went to School at Wellington House Academy, 
in Granby Street, Hampstead Itoad. This Academy and ] 
the Proprietor, Mr. Wm. Jones, a Welshman, are satirised 
as "Salem House and Mr. Crea&le in "David Copperfield". 
Taylor, the English Master, figures as Mr. Mell. There 
Charles remained for about two years, without distinguish 
ing himself any more than David did. Dickens always 
felt , the lack of a "classical training, "then very im¬ 
portant socially". He blamed his lack to his early 
education. 

On leaving School, he was sent as Office boy to 
a Mr. Molloy, a Solicitor. His father, in May, 1827, 
transferred him to another firm, Messrs. Ellis and 
Blackmore, Attorneys, with whom he stayed until November 
1828. Corresponding to these experiences, we have 
David 1 s sojourn at Mr. Wickfield T s "while attending 
School at Dr. Strong*s, and his later course at Mr. 
Spenlow's. But Dickens did not like law, which is 
evident from his recent satire on the profession, e.g., 
(ch. 38, David Copperfield) " Kidnapers and inveiglers 
were planted in all the Avenues of entrance to the 
Commons with instructions to do their utmost to cut 
off all persons in mourning, and all gentlement with 
anything bashful in their appearance, and entice them 
to the offices in which their respective employers were 

interested - Any one of these scouts used to think 

nothing of politely assisting an old lady in black out 
of a vehicle, killing any proctor she inquired for, rep¬ 
resenting his employer as the lawful successor and 
representative of that proctor and bearing the old 
lady off to his employers office, many captives were 
brought to me in this wayl 


\ 








X ' 







These words of David's resemble what Dickens wrote 
to a friend, " I have that opinion of the law of 
England generally, which one is likely to derive from 
the impression that it puts all the honest men under 
the diabolical hoofs of all the scoundrels." This 
is exemplified in the case of Messrs. Wickfield and 
Heep. 

Dickens began to study Shorthand and his 
experience is graphically described in David's words. 

"The changes that were rung upon dots, which in one 
position meant one thing and in another position, 

something else,- the tremendous effect upon a curve 

in a wrong place, not only, troubled my waking hours, 
bjt^re-appeared before me in my sleep." His maxim 
was the same as David's. "Whatever I have tried to 
do in life, I have tried with all my heart to do well. 
What I have devoted myself to, I have devoted myself 
to completely." He soon became an expert Shorthand 
writer, as did David. 

November, 1828, he left Ellis and Blaekmore's 
office and abandoned the pursuit of the law for ever. 

His father had a place in the reporter's gallery of 
the House of Commons. Charles, now nineteen years 
old, aimed at becoming also a Newspaper Parliamentary 
Reporter, so practised Shorthand in the Law Courts 
for nearly two years, e$. David. "I did not allow 
my resolution with respect to the Parliamentary Debates 
to cool. It was one of the irons I began to heat im¬ 
mediately, and one of the irons I kept hot and hammered 
at with a perseverance I may honestly admire." 

After his two years’ probation in the Law Courts 
Dickens was appointed on the Staff of a London moling 
journal, called the "True Sun", then for the "Mirrors* 
of Parliament", and finally for the "Morning Chronicle". 
This is referred to in the novel, as follows:- " I have 

tamed that savage stenographic mystery- I am in high 

repute for my accomplishment in all pertaining to the 
art, and I am joined with eleven others in reporting 
the debates in Parliament for a morning newspaper. 

Night after night I record predictions that never come 
to pass, professions that are never fulfilled, explana¬ 
tions that are only meant to mystify, I wallow in words* 
Britannia, that unfortunate female, is always before mei 
like a trussed fowl, skewered through and through with 
office pens and bound hand and foot with red tape. I am 
sufficiently behind the scenes to know the worth of 


' 














. 

■ 


















. 

. 

. 


■ 


political life. I am quite an infidel about it, 
and shall never be converted. ,T (ch. 43). His last 
appearance at the House of Commons,in the capacity 
of Reporter, was at the close of the Session of 1836, 
when in David’s words, " he noted down the music of 
the Parliamentary bagpipes for the last time." 

In 1834, while still on the staff of the 
"Morning Chronicle", Dickens left his father’s house, 
with the intention of starting a home of his own. He 
decided to live in bachelor apartments, and rented 
Chambers in Purnival's Inn, Holborn. At first he 
became the tenant of a "Three pair back" at No. 13, 
and later he removed to more cheerful rooms at No.15, 
residing there from 1835 until 1837. This residence 
is the original of David’s apartments at Mrs. Crupp’s. j 

Mean?/hile, Dickens had been devoting some 
attention to the ladies. In 1829 he had met a Miss 
Maria Beadwell, who is considered the origig^^^of Dora, 
although he did not marry her. Her fathe£\objected 
to the attachment. Her disposition was something 
like Dora’s, rather coquettish. In 1834, he met 
Mary Hogarth, his ideal woman, represented in"David 
Copperfield by Agnes Wickfield, and in "Oliver Twist" 
by Rose Maylie. He married her sister, Catherine, on 
April the 21st, 1836. Mary lived with them until her 
death, at the age of seventeen. Her image had a great 
influence on his conception of womanhood. 

Before the close of his reporting career, Dickens 
had distinguished himself in authorship, as expressed 
by David, " I have come out in another way, (than 
reporting) I have taken with fear and trembling to 
authorship. I wrote a little something in secret and 
sent it to a magazine and it was published in the 
magazine. Since then I have taken heart to write a 
good many trifling pieces. Now I am regularly paid 
for them. Altogether I am well off". The "little 
something" that he wrote was a humourous paper entitled 
" A dinner at Poplar Walk" (afterwards called"Mr. Minns 
and his CousirO This appeared in the "Monthly Magazine" 
in December, 1833, and , with later sketches comprised 
his "Boz" of 1834, so it was this"little something" 
that started Dickens on his career as a writer of fiction 
He wrote many books during the next decade, among others 
"Oliver Twist" in 1838. 




















. 





. 




/ 6 


In 1842 Dickens visited America. In 1844, 

Italy and in 1846, Switzerland. A great restlessness 
seized him. This period of his travels marked the 
transition period in his art as closing his early novels 
"cLds^d together as quite a definite series, being large¬ 
ly marked by pure caricature - "" (c^. "Oliver Twist ) His 
trips to Italy and Switzerland are mentioned in "David 
Copperfield" (4h. 58 "Absence"). 

Finally, in 1849, in order to obtain local colour 
ing for the opening chapters of a new seriaj. story, Dick¬ 
ens journeyed into Norfolk, then, for the first time be¬ 
holding the quaint fishing town of Yarmouth, and its ©n- 
teresting environment# and decided to use this as the 
scene of his story. He actually saw the old boat which 
is made the home for little Emily. Peggotty's hut stood 
upon the keel. The book was started in 1849 and finish 1 
ed in 1850, and named"David Copperfield", the initials of 
which are those of Dickens' name reversed, although this 
did not occur to him until afterwards suggested by For¬ 
ster. This book was the beginning of the second series 
of his books -- his later novels and is considered his 
first real novel, in that he used, in the story as a 
whole, less pure caricature and more realism. It is con¬ 
sidered his masterpiece. 

A number of the characters in this book are based 
on actual persons of Dickens' experience, some being com¬ 
posites, resembling more than one person. Rosa Dartle 
represents one of Dickens' lady friends, very familiar to 
him. Hel* copied her peculiarity of never saying any¬ 
thing outright and of thus making more of it, but he graf 
ted this peculiarity on to a very replUsive character, so 
that his lady friend never recognized it as representing 
her in any way. 

i ; 

The real Miss Mowcher was Mrs. Seymour Hill, a 
neighbour of Dickens'. He offended her,as she recogniz 
ed her likeness, but the expression "'aint I volatile?" 
was the favourite utterance of another person of the same 
occupation. The peculiarities of figure and face, and 
the"chair for the table" were suggestive of Mrs. Seymour. 

In Tommy Traddles, Dickens indicated something of 
the find pathetic quality of his friend, Judge Talford, 
whom he greatly admired, and eulogised after~his death, 
as follows:- "The chief delight of his life was to give 
delight to others. He was modest, contented, interested 
in humble persons, surrounded by children ana young peo- 
P e, adored in remembrance of a domestic generosity and 


. 

: 

. 

. 

■ 

* 

.. . ' • 

' 

■ 


' 

. 


' 

. 

' 

' 


- 


. 

■ 

. 






/ 7. 

greatness of heart, too sacred to be unveiled.** This 
is also a perfect picture of Traddles, both at home and 
abroad. His warm generosity of nature was early mani 
fest when, in his boyhood, he accepted a severe punish¬ 
ment rather than inform on Steerforth for laughing in 
church. 

Steerforth represents a certain George Strotighill, 
whose family lived in Dickens 1 street in Chatham, and to 
whose sister, the novelist made childish love. George 
was a frank, open and somewhat daring boy, and was Dicker 
greatest friend at the time. 

Peggotty is thought to represent a Mary Weller, 
Dickens* nurse during his childhood, and a very aimiable 
person. Map s. D ic k w a s - a M r , A»-W, Ward* — 

Micawber, as stated, represents Dickens 1 father, 
but in his portrayal Dickens also used the idiosyncra- 
cies of Thomas Powell, a so-called "literary man” of 
America. Like Micawber, Powell had a trick of becoming 
very confidential on small or no provocation, and possess* 
ed a perfect mania for writing letters, even to persons 
in the same roonw^ Another alleged prototype of Micaw¬ 
ber lived in Yew York, about the time the story was writ¬ 
ten, a Mr. Richard Chicken, an eccentric person, describ¬ 
ed as a teacher of elocution, who resembled Micawber no¬ 
tably in regard to pecuniary difficulties, gloomy cl¬ 

ings , sanguine anticipations, of something "turning up", 
flourishes of speech, epistolary effusions, etc. He held 
a subordinate position in the office of an Engineer, whe* 
Alfred Dickens, a brother of the novelist, was employed 
for several years. Chicken had a shabby-genteel ap¬ 
pearance, was always attired in an old swallow-tailed coal 
and his appeals to the Clerks for pecuniary assistance ' 
were frequent. It is considered possible that Dickens* 1 
attention may have been called, by his brother, to his 
strange colleague, during one of his visits to York, and 
that he thus found further material for his portrait. An¬ 
other coincidence is the fact that the name Wilkins,dur¬ 
ing the early part of the last century, was a slang name, 
common in York, applied to ppor or shabby persons. It 
seems that in the Eighteenth century, a Major Wilkins suf¬ 
fered imprisonment in York Castle for fifty years, his 
name becoming a by-word in the City for such persons. 

The novelist would have made a good actor. At 
twenty, he entered into a theatrical engagement, which a 







/© 


cold cancelled. His keen delight for theatricals is 
seen in David’s experience, who went to Covent Garden 
Theatre, and saw Julius Geasar, etc. He says, "The min¬ 
gled reality and mystery of the whole show, the influence 
upon me of the poetry, the lights, the music, the company 
the smooth stupendous changes of glittering and brilliant 
scenery, were so dazzling,that - that when I came out 

into the rainy street, -- I felt as if I had come from 
the clouds, where I had been JLeading a romantic life for 
ages, to a bawling, splashingr-miserable world". This 
Theatre passion is partly responsible for his "stagey" 
writing in part of this novel. In the meantime, having 
started his writings, his main motive, financial, for en¬ 
tering on the stage was removed, and he gradually aband¬ 
oned the idea. 

Another tendency was his fondness for domestic petfi 
especially birds and dogs, chiefly the latter, of whom 
"Jip" is a representative. Sike r s dog follows him to 
death. Dickens had a dog named BukbinB He speaks here 
of the birds. "I love the London sparrows to this hour, 
and see the plumage of the tropics in their smoky 
feathers. ( He associates them herewith the scene of 
Dora’s engagement. 

Dickens was very systematic. This is expressed 
in "David Copperfield" thus: - "I never could have done 
what I have done, without the habits of punctuality, order 
and diligence" (ch. 42) This habit is seen ixUjis vain 
attempts to teach Dora system. He admires thisVxn Agnes. 

The novelist’s will shows how pronounced was his 
objection to the paraphernalia of undertakers. Here he 
emphatically directed that those who attended his funeral 
obsequies should" wear no scarf, cloak, black bow, long 
hat band, or other such revolting absurdity." He had also 
noted his views on this subject in "David Copperfield" 

(ch. 31), where David says that he did not attend Barkis’ 
funeral "in character", meaning that he was " not dressed 
up in a black coat and a streamer to frighten the birds". 

( The same custom is probably satirised in "Oliver Twist” 
where Oliver figures in the funeral parade). 

AS A PSYCHOLOGICAL HOVEL. 

"David Copperfield" has been called a psychological 
novel and autobiography, representing the inner conflict 
of Dickens’ soul. He was an implusive, impressionalie 
youth, incapable of resisting the leading of others ( 

















- 






1 










. 







(c^. Steerforth), and only disciplined into self-control 
by his later griefs, supplementing his earlier experien¬ 
ces. 

His experience at the blacking factory we±*$ part 
of his training, though a cruel part, but it was then 
that he gained the "key to the Street" and"Dickenised" 
all London so cleverly, as a result. His suffering at 
the time is portrayed in David's words re, f Murdstone and 
Grimbys. "I felt my hopes of growing up to be a learn¬ 
ed and distinguished man, crushed in my bosom. 1'he 
deep remembrance of the sense I had of being utterly 
without hope,now of the shame I felt'in my position, 
of the misery it was to my young heart to believe that 
day by day, what I had learned, and thought, and de¬ 
lighted in, and raised my fancy and my emulation up by, 
would pass away from me little by little, never to be 
brought back any more, cannot be written. As often as 
Mick Weller went away in the course of that forenoon, I 
mingled my tears with the water in which I was washing 
the bottles and sobbed, as if there were a flaw in my 
own brh^t and it were in danger of bursting." This 
shows that Dickens at an early age was conscious of a 
high destiny, ^and of the inner life to be developed in 
order to fulfil that destiny. Had it not been for his 
natural humour and optimism, he would probably have be¬ 
come crushed under the heavy weight of circumstances, 
but his spirit finally rebounded, with a natural bouy- 
ancy. 

He was naturally a timid child and was conscious 
of it, as reflected in David's experience with William 
(ch. 19). He tried to appear as old as possible to the 
Coachman and to speak extremely gruffly, but despite 
this, he was tricked. William suggested to him to give 
up his seat to a Gentlemen " with a very unpromising 
squint". He complied, although he had paid for the " 
Box seat". He despised himself afterwards for his 
"softness". He says, "I have always considered this 
as the first fall I had in life, a distrust of myself, 
which has often beset me in life i>n small occasions, 
when it would have been better away, was assuredly not 
stopped in its growth by this little incident outside 
the Canterbury Coach. I felt completely extinguished 
and dreadfully young.I was fully conscious of my 
youth, for nobody stood in any awe of me at all." 


Dickens' dealings with 


women seemed very eomplicat 




. 



IQ 


ed. He married Catherine Hogarth, but seemed to adore 
Mary, and made her the prototype of all his ""perfect 
women". After twenty years of married life, he was 
divorced from his wife on the grounds of her being "un¬ 
congenial". This wavering spirit is portrayed in David 

He loved Dora, but Agnes was always prominent in his 
thoughts, even before Dora's death. She, in the capac¬ 
ity of Mary Hogarth, is the "sister", but she seems 
more than this, which he finally admits in these words. 
"This narrative is my written memory. I have desired 
to keep the most secret current of my mind apart, and 
to the last)I enter on it now. I cannot so completely 
penetrate the mystery of my own heart as to know when 
I began to think that I might have set its earliest and 
brightest hopes on Agnes. The time was past, I had 
let it go by and had deservedly lost her. That I suffer¬ 
ed much in these contentions, that they filled me with 
unoappiness and remorse, I made no effort to conceal 
from myself, no^that I loved her, but I brought the 
assurance home to myself that it was now too late, and 
that our long subsisting relation must be undisturbed. 

I had considered how the things that never happen are 
often so much realities to us, in their effects, as those 
that are accomplished. I endeavoured to convert what 
might have been between myself and Agnes into a means 
of making me more self-denying, more resolved, more 
conscious of myself and offny defects and errors. Thus, 
through the reflection of what might have been, I ar¬ 
rived at the conviction that it could never be, ZJhese, 
with their perplexities and inconsistencies, were the 
shifting quicksands of my mind, from the time of my de¬ 
parture to my return homefspeaks of his travels). Home 
was very dea to me,and Agnes too, but she was not mine, 
she was never to be mine, she might have been, but 
that was past. 11 " Still, after this firm determina¬ 
tion, he eventually marries her, so we see that much 
of the secret struggle of bis life ( as with Dickens) 
is bound up in his effections and his marriage. 

His work was his consolation. He devoted him¬ 
self to it very earnestly. He felt a joy in writing, 
which is the secret of his success. Likewise David 
enjoyed his art. He says:- " In pursuance of my in¬ 
tention of referring to my own fictions only when their 
course should incidentally connect itself with the pro¬ 
gress of my story, I do not enter on the aspirations, 
the delights, anxieties, and triumph^ of my art. That 
I truly devoted myself to it with my strongest earnest- 


mmmM 












' 

' 

■ 






- 

* 





- 




























il 


ness, and bestowed upon it every energy of my soul, 

I have already said. If the books I have written 
be of any worth, they will supply the rest.” This 
they have done, and not the least, this autobiography, 
"David Copperfield". 




%z 


OLIVER HOST. 


Dickens began this book in 1838. He went for his 
facts behind the figures of a Royal Commission, appoint¬ 
ed in 1832 to inquire into the operation of the Poor 
Laws, and the evils that had grown out of the mal-ad- 
ministration of the old Act of 1796, inspite of the two 
Vestry Acts of J.817, which had been passed on the report 
of an earlier Commission in order to check them. This 
report was issued in 1834, as an expression of the at¬ 
titude of tnose in authority toward the poor, its cyn- 
nicism, its effrontery, its callousness, itsbrutality, 
are almost beyond belief. Only a stupid and a heartless 
rage for economy in the outlay of money, at any cost of 
suffering, seems to have guided the Commissioners. 

Dickens, during the days of his Parliamentary 
reporting, had had some pretty extensive experience of 
Royal Commissions. His wrath was now aroused, his sym¬ 
pathies kindled. He was aflame to right the fresh wrongs 
with which these vile enactments threatened the common 
people. He wrote TT 0liver Twist TT out of the fire and 
fury of his indignation, not out of his own experiences 
of the evils therein described. He knew no more than 
the average man about criminals and work-houses. 

It is thought that Fagin was founded on the 
personality of a famous rogue, Ikay Solomon. This man 
began his career as an itinerant street-vendor, at eight 
years old. At ten he had passed bad money, At four¬ 
teen he was a pick-pocket and a "duffer", or a seller of 
sham goods. He lived in Rosemary Lane and sometimes 
had as much as £2000 wortloof goods secreted on his prem¬ 
ises. He passed through Newgate prison in 1831, so his 
name was well known by 1838, when Dickens began his book, 
but the name, Fagin, was probably suggested by Bob Fagin, 
Charles' colleague in the blacking ware-house. 

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, there 
was also a plague of Jews engaged in receiving stolen 
goods. Many were rumoured to have trained children in 
crime, though not in Pagin's way. There was a general 
increase in juvenile depravity. There were in the vari¬ 
ous London prisons in 1816, three thousand inmates under 
twenty years of age. Nearly half of these were under 





seventeen, and one thousand convicted of felony. 

Some were only nine or ten years of age. Infants of 
barely six were charged in the Courts with crime. There 
were two hundred dens in St. Giles, Drury Lane, Chick 
Lane, Saffron Hill, the Borough, Ratscliffe Highway and 
Covent Garden. These dens were frequented by six thou¬ 
sand boys and girls, who lived solely by this means and 
gambling, or were the associates of thieves. 

These infamies were matters of general knowledge 
at the time when "Oliver Twist" was written. What 
Dickens knew about them, he knew in common with most ot¬ 
her people, only he thought more about them. He dream¬ 
ed of the mean squalor of the criminal haunts,''' so did he 
invest that squalor and its denizens with a quality of 
picturesque horror, that lent them something of the hec¬ 
tic effect of leering, grinning devils in red torment? 

It is thought that Henry Burnett, who had married 
Dickens* sister, Fanny, was the original of Henry Maylie, 
and Mary Hogarth persumably was the model for tbe n perfect 
woman f in the character of Rose Maylie. 

Such was his handling of the piece of solid, ex¬ 
isting, every-day life which he made here the groundwork 
of his wit and tenderness,"'that the book did much to help 
out of the world the social evils it portrayed. It is 
-the first English novel with a purposed 

Besides the purpose of social reform, the primary 
purpose of the book is"to show its little hero (Oliver) 
jostled as he is in the miserable crowd, preserved every¬ 
where from the vice of its pollution, by an exquisite 
delicacy of natural sentiment, which clings to him under 
every disadvantage." Besides preserving his own 

purity, he even pervades with it, to some extent, the at¬ 
mosphere around him, as seen from the impression he makes 
on Bumble, on one ©ccasion ( which is explained under 
Bumble*s character). The book is, therefore, like"David 
Copperfield", a psychological novel,Jnone of its phrases, 
while the evil characters are more life like than the 
others, they all disappear or come to grief in the end, 
and the good triunrmS over evil, as in Dickens 1 own life. 
Oliver is somewhat typical of Dickens in character, as 
rising above the squalor and meanness of his early life. 






Smollett's and Liekens Autobiography 


BIBLI0SHAPEY 


Life of Smollett - Lavid Harney 
Dickens* Originals - Ldwin Pugh 
Peregrine Pickle - Introduction. 

Hoderick Handom - introduction 

Other references found on list for Part II. 

























PART 11 


Smollett vs. Sickens 
Choice of material 
and 

Realistic Method. 


A piece of work for English 52, carried out 
by Miss Alice Shaver under the direction of 
Professor hi. K. hroadus, and presented to 
the Committee on Graduate Studies of the 
University of Alberta, in part fulfilment of 
the v/ork for the degree of M.A. 


May 1923. 






Sickens vs. Smollett 
Choice of Material and realism. 


TABLE OE CONTENTS 

Page 

Pl§ce each writer occupies in the develop¬ 
ment of the English novel 1 

Choice of Material 2 

Satire 3-8 

Humor and Humorous Characters 8-14a 

Psychology in Roderick random and Pere¬ 
grine Pickle 15-16 

Vices, collies, and Eoibles as represented 
by Characters 17-25 

Virtues and traces 25-29 

Lie kens 1 Humanity 29-31 

Tragic doom and Pathos 31-33 

Dickens an "ideal realist" 33-35 

Sentimentality 35-36 

Eaults 36-37 

Specially effective scenes 36 

Distinct Type of realism lVisionary) 37 

keen Observation 37 

Symbolism of Nature 38 

Style, as conducive to realism 


40-44 





SMOLLETT AND DICKENS 
CHOICE OF MATERIAL AND REALISTIC METHOD 


The first great period in the development 
of the English novel, the period of Gothic Romance, ( 
(1740- 1771), was concluded by Smollett. "Roderick Ran¬ 
dom" was written in 1748, at the end of the first quar¬ 
ter,and "Peregrine Pickle" in 1751, a little before the 
Mddle of this period. The Gothic romancer insisted that 
literature was not merely utilitarian, but included the 
impossible and the insane. It was a period of supersti¬ 
tious elements, the age of the eighteenth century Real¬ 
ists. Smollett is said to have given to the romance its 
method of dealing with the superstitious. He started, 
in its most popular form, a new romance, belonging to 
the so-called romantie movement, beginning the second 
quarter of the eighteenth century. In form, this liter¬ 
ary revolution meant a change from the epistolary and 
dramatic analogies to the epic narrative. In content, 
it meant the abandonment of analysis and ridicule, an d 
a return to magic, mystery, and chivalry. Smo^Jett’s 
idea of a novel was that of a union of intrigue,andven- 
ture, and personal history. (e .g.The LadyI: of Quality and 
M.M.in"Peregrine Pickle"). He imitated the "picaresque" 
novel or rogue stories of the Spanish, which gave rise 
to that conspicuous license of speech in the novel. 

Dickens bel nged to the Victorian age of 
literaturei1816-1901), the period of realistic reaction. 
Their subject is not primarily history and superstition, 
but contemporary manners of their youth. They were not, 
as a class, realists according to. present standards, 
for they commonly re-combined the matter of real life 
for instruction, farce, o t satire; yet their efforts 
made for realism. Dickens built his great romances on 
their tacitly assumed principles. He took Smollett’s 
novel of farcical situation, and transformed it, making 
it a distinct species. The romance of crime, as writt¬ 
en by Dickens, is a realistic treatment of Gothic melo¬ 
drama. "Oliber Twist"(1838)at the close of the first 
quarter of the Victorian age,of literature, is a "pic¬ 
aresque story humanized, with a realistic setting in the 
London slums. This huipan touch distinguishes it from 
Smollett’s gusto and"horse-play". 

Note- This page is based largely on Cross' Development 
of the English Novel". 















, 

■ 






. 


. 

- 

. 





- 

* 















2 


As to material, both these authors took char¬ 
acters and scenes from actual life and experience. Smo¬ 
llett uses more daring adventure, of which we have very- 
little in Dickens. Smollett's leading characters are 
well-known gentlemen, and high -class women. Dickens 1 
are from the lower middle class. Smollett's contribu¬ 
tion of subject matter to the novel was pre-eminently 
the English seamen, and scenes at sea. Dickens' cont¬ 
ributions were child life, and the English democracy# 

They both portray professional and national types, e,g. 
schoolmaster, clergymen, Welshman, Irishman, Scotchman. 

Dickens went back, in the main, to the car¬ 
icature of Smollett. Both in the treatment of fact, 
and in character building, the essence of Dickens'art 
is"grotesque exaggeration#Jake Smollett, he was on the 
look- out for some oddity, which for his purpose he 
r ^ade more odd than it was. He had a way of observing 
the very oddity that marks some quality cf mind, often 
a peculiarity of an occupationo or a profession, fre¬ 
quently this characteristic or profession would be em¬ 
phasized by a suitable and corresponding name, as "Art¬ 
ful Dodger"(cf. Smollett's Miss Snapper). He was cu stu¬ 
dent ahd inventor of characters, not chatacter; of types, 
not individuals. He was a great inventor, whereas Smo¬ 
llett was weak at invention. 

Dickens' characters which have the most 
vitality, are those which least resemble normal human¬ 
ity, i. e. Keep, the Hypocrite, Rosa Dartle, the spite¬ 
ful, Mrs. Qurpr^d^e^.the^p^^simist; Micawber, the opti¬ 
mist, etc .But, these icfiosyncracies lack variety at times# 
^ Heep's n umbleness7 Micawber's "waiting for something 
Ho turn up", become almost mechaiiical. The characters 
lack spontaneity and variation.Any variation of nature 
is not a change of mood, but of disposition under force 
of circumstances, e.g.Mrs. Gummidge. Smollett's char¬ 
acters, on the whole, are more spontaneous and natur¬ 
al in this respect. They show more of the changing 
shades usually found in characters of real life."They 
smile and scold, vex and comfort, are eccentric at 
times,"etc. They are very human. Dickens was not a pre¬ 
cise analyst of individual or general characters. The 
inner life of his characters was not sufficiently com¬ 
plex. They lack the play of intelligence. 

Both these writers have, more or less, for 
subject the heart, u with an ethical motive underlying, 
e.g. they cry for justice to the oppressed.'"But Dick¬ 
ens, more than Smollett, championed the heterogeneous 
mass, as capital and labor, popular religion, etc. 

His theme was always the downtrodden and the oppress** 























* 


, 

. 



















* . 

' 






. 

. 








■ 


. 











3 


SATIRE 

In Smollett’s preface to"Roderick Random", 
he states that one of his main devices for realistic 
effect is satire, which"brings every incident home to 
life? by representing familiar scenes in an uncommon 
and amusu&ng point of view*" The 6heme of this bock 
is especially adapted for satire. It is based on 
Le Sages*"Gil Bias", Translated by Smollett in 1749.. 
Le Sage, in turn, had practised the method of Cerv¬ 
antes, of making romance "point out the follies of 
ordinaryb life." This ms largely accomplished by sat¬ 
ire • 

Dickens has been called the "English sati¬ 
rist". As a Victorian novelist, he practised their 
satire, which was"searching and enthusiastie7"The 
great impulse of Victorian literature was the great 
sense of pity for things as they are, and of an im¬ 
perious duty to make them better. This was frequent¬ 
ly done by the shaft of ridicule."Dickens 1 satire 
covers a great part of English life, public and pri¬ 
vate. These two books deal eith education, charity, 
religion, social morality, sosiety, legal procedure, 
the machinery of politics, and the forms of govern¬ 
ment ( as shown under "Autobiography" and under the 
charactersin this essay). Dickens is considered a 
"violent satirist". He really damaged the things he 
attacked. "He made an extroardinary fuss abo&t ordi¬ 
nary things," which is considered one mark of his 
"feminine nature", another being, that he would allow 
of no mitigation fot those he condemned. Smollett 
also accomplished someth ing by his satire, especial¬ 
ly that aimed at the brutality of the English navy. 
Dickens attacked some abuse, or class of people, or 
certain ways of thought; Smollett, seemingly bitter 
at fate, attacked life in general, and the world at 
large. 

In "Oliver Twist", we have an example of 
Dickens 1 satire, directed to four classes of people 
in one short passage, i.e. "There are some promotions 
in life, which, independent of the more substantial 
rewards they offer, acquire peculiar value and dig¬ 
nity from the coats and waistcoats connected with 
them. A field - marsballhas his uniform; a bishop, 
his silk apron; a councillor, his silk goen; a bea¬ 
dle, his cocked hat* Strip the bishp of his apron, 
or the beadle of his hat and lace, what are they? 

Men and mere men. Dignity,and holiness too, sometimes 
are more questions of coat and waistcoat than some 



4 


people imagine" This is amined chiefly at Mr. Bumble > 
on his relinguishment of the Beadle's costume, together 
with that office, it is a "direct" satire and harsh, for 
he aims at Bumble T s downfall. 


Of the above classes, the Clergyman is satirized 
by Smollet in this incident. A Clergyman is fouAd 
chesting at cards. When accused, he replied." Darn me 
friend, d'ye question my honour?" Roderick says, 

"I did not all wonder to find a cheat in canonicals , 
this b eing a character frequest in my country . But' I was 
scandalized at the indecency of his behavious, which ap¬ 
peared in the oaths he swore, and the bawdy songs which 
he sang. When the Dr. arrives the Clergyman calls him 
"dog of a Doctor" and says, there the old lascal goes, 

and the devil go with him.- I should be glad to know 

how this sway-bellied Doctor deserves to be more at ease 
than me?". The satire consists largely in the seeming¬ 
ly gross exaggeration. 


Smollett reveals the status of women in those days, 
when the unmag^ied lady of doubtful age was a subject of 
mockery. c< She^failed in her chase^of men, and must be 
presumed full of rancour against both sexesR Peregine 
^set up his th?6ne among those who laboured under the di¬ 
sease of celibacy, from the pert Miss of fifteen, who, 
with a fluttering heart, tosses her head, bridles upland 
giggles involuntarily at sight of a handsome youg man, to 
the staid maid of twenty-eight, who, with a demure as¬ 
pect moralizes on the vanity of beauty, the folly of youfc 
and the simplicity of woman, and expatiates on friend¬ 
ship, benevolence aijd good sense, in the style of a Pla- 

onic philiso horn 5 oderick's experience with Miss 
rfithers is very amusing,- being humorous satire. 

. Miss Withers, a lady of seventy, "assumed the 
sprightly airs oi a girl of sixteen. One while she 
ogied me with ker dim eyes, quenched in rheum:’then 
as if she were ashamed of that freedom, she affected 0 
1 ° okd °wn, blush, and play with her fan; then toss 
her head, that I might not perceive a palsy that shook 
it; ask some childish questions with a 1 [spine- ao<-- 
ent, giggle and grin with her mouth shut, to conceal 
the ravages of time upon her teeth; leer: upon me again . 
sigh piteously,,fling herself about in her chai^to show 

vnnth^RRh’ a ? d aCt a S reat “any more absurdities that 
youth and beauty can alone excuse. Shocked as I was at 
my disappointment, my disposition was incapable of aff^- 
ronting any person who loved me ( this line is pure sat-, 
ire). I thereendeavored to put a good face on the mattfj 

er." 







































■ 















































- 5 - 


for the present". ihis was the lady noaerick met in¬ 
stead of Miss Sparkle, as he expected. he had received 
letters asking him to call, Roderick elsewhere makes 
the remark: "I thought l should have great reason to 
congratulate myself if it should be my fate to possess 
200 pounds encumbered with such a wife ' - (referring 
to Miss Anapper). ihis is probably a satire on the 
wealthy heiresses expecting husoands, and on men or 
women seeking a mercenary marriage. hieken^s 7 imagina¬ 
tion was greatly influenced by conventional ideas of men 
and women - especially women, nike Smollett he also 
satirizes the spinsters. Some of his liveliest satire 
is found in uis pictures of women - spinsters, widows 
and wives. It has been remarked that "for incontestable 
proof of his fidelity in reproducing the life he. knew, 
one should turn in the first place, to his gallery of 
foolish, ridiculous, or offensive women". in havid 
Copperfield, nose hartle is a satire on the spinster. 

^er appearance is described thus: "She was a little 
dilapidated - like a house - having been so long to let". 
Physical suggestion is used in describing her character: 
"She closed her thin hand on my arm like a apring ", etc. 
Also similes, as in the foregoing and metaphores as in 
the following: "She took everything, herself included, 
to a grindstone and sharpened it. She is a n edgetool 
and requires great care in dealing with". "She gave me 
the idea of some fierce thing, that was dragging th e 
length of its chain to and fro upon a beaten track, and 
and wearing its neart out". ner rancour is shown in her 
own words: "1 would trample on them all. i would have 
his 'f Steer forth* s ) house pulled down. i would have her 
(ifimily) branded on the lace, dressed in rags and cast 
out in the streets to starve. if 1 had the power to sit 
in judgment on her, l Y/ould see it donei See it done, i 
would do iti 1 detest her: if 1 ever coaid reproach 
her with her infamous condition. 1 would go anywhere to 
do so. if i could hunt her to hdr grave, i would, if 
there was any v/ord of comfort that would be a solace to 
her in Her dying hour, and only i possessed it, i would 
not part with it, for life itself. " She seems to have 
an incurable "love spite" against iteerforth, which is 
reflected on everyone associated with him. She is melo¬ 
dramatic. Her nature is fixed, devoid of evolution. 

Miss Murdstone is also a satire on spinsters. Again 
physical suggestion is used to characterize her. "She 
brought with her two uncompromising hard black boxes, 
with x^er initials on the lis in nard brass nails. when 
she paid, the coachman, she took her money out of a hard 

steel purse and she kept the purSe in a very jail of a 













s 
























6 - 


bag which hung upon her arm by a heavy chain and shut 
up like a bite. 1 had never, at that time, seen such 
a metallic lady altogether." etc. Then again, "just 
touching the back o± her liand with her cola, stiff, 
fingers,- she walked away, arranging the little fetters 
on her wrists and rand her neck: - these reminded me, in 
reference to Miss Mur ds t ond s nature, of the fetters over 
a jail door; suggesting on the outside to all beholders, 
what was to be expected within." Again, "Snapping her 
re ticule - -ana shutting her mouth . she looked as if she 
might be broken but could never be bent". !‘he devices of 
physical suggestion, (as underlined) and similes (double 
underlining) and metaphors (triple underlining) make the 
picture very real, according to nicken's conception of th 
character. Also in Pavia's opinion of her in the capa¬ 
city of uora 1 s "companion and protector", he says "a 
passing thought occurred to me, that Miss Murdstone, 
like the pocket instrument called a life-preserver, was 
not so much designed for purposes of protection as of 
assault." The satire here, as in kosa hartle, consists 
largely in thq contemptible role each has to play. There 
is "gross exageration" in both,from real people, but 
that was intended by Pickens. They are caricatures, 
differing from Smollett 1 s as they represent the meanness^, 
whereas Smollett's represent more the "follies and foible 
of this class . A nickens was considered very hard on 
this class, as^rule. There is a slight touch of humor 
in these remarks of Pavid's about Miss Murdstone: 

"Again l see ner dark eyes Toll round the church, when 
she says, ‘miserable sinners' as if she were calling 
all the congregation names." Then again, he speaks of 
her looking at him out of the pickle jar, "with as great 
an access of sourness as if her black eyes had abandoned 
the contents." 

Miss Clarissa and Miss Lavinia are satirized more 
after Smollett's style, with this class, i.e. in a 
humorous manner: I discovered afterward that Miss 

Lavinia was an authority in affairs .of the heart, by 
reason or there having anciently existed a certain Mr. 
Pidger, who played short whist, and was supposed to 
have been enamoured or her. My private opinion is, that 
this was entirely a gratuitous assumption, and that 
Pidger was altogether innocent of such sentiments - to 

which he had never given any sort of expression that i 
could ever near of." noth Miss Lavinia and Miss Clarissa 
had a superstition, however, that he Vvoula have declar ed 
his passion, if ne ixad not been cut short in his youth 
(at about sixty), by overdrinking his constitution , and 




















and cart running over me; a third time for geing bit 
by a baker's dog. in short, whether i was guilty or 
unfortunate, the correction and sympathy of this arbit¬ 
rary pedagogue were the same* " 'this is a very vivid 
picture of unjust accusation and its attendant miseries; 
also of the short-sightedness of this pedagogue in not 
discovering the real malefactor. ihe parallet struct- 

ture "I have been found---------saw", is an aid in 

the description to suggest the constant recurrence and 
frequency of the offences. 

uickens satirizes the school-master in the person 
of ureakle. David says "when a culpirt is called be¬ 
fore the tribunal, Mr. Greakle cuts a joke before he 
beats him, and we laugh at it - miserable little dogs, 
we laugh, with our visages as white as ashes and our 
hearts sinking into our boots.....miserable little 
propitiatiors of a remorseless idol, how abject we were 
to himi that a launch in life,- i think it now, on 
looking back, to be so mean and servile to a man of 
such parts and pretensions." (Dickens regrets his 
lack of higher education .) hr. Strong comes under 
humor as cogitating Greek roots. 

ihe medical profession is satirized by Smollett, 
(see autobiographyjij'in the following: "Doctors are 
like unskilled carpenters, that in mending one leak, 
make a couple". uickens does not satirize this class 
in these two books. 


It has been said that Dicken’s humour is the su¬ 
preme quality of his genius and that, without this, he 
would nave failed as a novelist. Gross says: "Yv f here- 
ever there is humour and satire, there is, if not reality 
itself, a sense of reality". "Humor is somewhere be¬ 
tween the real and the ideal." 

a 

Smollett a^so uses humour. The following is/slight- 
ly humorous satire on the widower Hatchway. "The wid¬ 
ower seemed to bear his loss with resignation, and be¬ 
haved very decently upon the occasion, though he did not 
undergo those dangerous transports of sorrow, which 
some tender-hearted husbands have felt at the departure 
of their wives. The lieutenant was naturally a philos¬ 
opher^ and so well-disposed to acquiesce in the dispen¬ 
sations of Providence, that in this case, as well as in 
every other emergency of nis life, he firmly believed 
that everything which happened was for the best.” 











9 


In both these authors humor is shown in describing 
the domestic relation. In 'Oliver Twist", Mrs. humble 
weeps in a crisis...hut like washable beaver nats , that 
improve with rain, his iMr. humb 1 e ‘ s i) nerves were ren¬ 
dered stouter and more vigorous by showers of tears, 
which, being tokens of weakness, and so far tacit ad¬ 
missions of his own power, pleased and exalted him 1 * The 
underlined simile gives point to the numor. Again Mr. 
humble is thus described: "tie had fallen from all the 
height and pomp or beadleship , to the lowest depth of 
the most snubbed henpeckery". The underlined mstaphor 
is slightly ironical. 

Mr. and Mrs. bowerberry lin Oliver Twist) are a 
contrast to the preceding. Mrs. bower berry "burst into 
a flood of tears. This left bowerberry no alternative. 

If ^e had hesitated for one instant to punish Oliver most; 
severely, it must be quite clear to every experienced 
reader that ne would have been, according to all pre¬ 
cedents in disputes of matrimony^ established, a brute, 
an unnatural husband, an insulting creature, a base im¬ 
itation of a man; and various other agreeable characte rs 

too numerous to for recital.To do him justice, he 

was, as far as his power went, it was not very exten¬ 
sive, kindly disposed towards the boy; perhaps because 
his wife disliked him. The flood of tears, however, 
left him no resource, so ne at once gave him a drubbing, 
which satisfied even Mrs. Sowerberry herself." There 
is ironical satire in the underlined words. Irony was 
a feature of Victorian literature. On the whole the 
scene is marked by humor, which makes it very realistic. 

The two couples described by Smollett are Commodore 
Trunnion and his wife, and My. and Mrs. Gemaliel Pickle. 
They are thus described: "The Commodore was in all 
respects as effectively subdued in the dominion of his 
wife as the person (hemalielj whose submission he ven- |j 
tured to condemn^with this difference of disposition^— 
Trunnions subjection was like that of a bear , checquerecb; 
with fits of surliness and rage, whereas Pickle bore 
the yoke like an ox , without repining. Ho wonder, then, 
that this indolence, this sluggishness, this stagnation 
of temper, rendered beinaliel incapable of withstanding 
the arguments and importunity of his friends". The 
underlined similes are what give the realistic effect 
to the humor. 

"Smollett paved the way for the broad comedy of i 
.Dickens”, The scene (in chapter 5 of .David Copperfield) 










overdoing an attempt to set it right again, by swilling 
Hath water. They had a lurking suspician even, that he 
died ol secret love; though 1 must say there was a 
picture of him in the house with a damask nose, which 
concealment did not appear to have ever preyed upon". 
Their appearance is thus described: "each of the sisters 
leaned a little forward to speak, shook her head after 
speaking. and b ecame upright again when silen t. Miss 
Clarissa never moved uer arms. nhe sometimes played 
tunes upon them with i±er fingers , minuets and marches, 

I should think, but never moved them". -"They were 

not unlike birds, altogether having a sharp, brisk, sud¬ 
den manner, and a little short, spruce way of adjusting 
themselves, like canaries ." This picture portrays eccen¬ 
tricities rather than medn&Css.in this class,-and as 
such, is a very real picture, showing nicken^s powers 
of close observation, especially the underlined parts, 
here there is a satire on hath, w r here Smollett also 
shows observation, Among the professions we find the 
shhool-master ridiculed, both in Smollett and in hiekens. 
Roderick and Strap come to a public-house (ch.10 h.K. ) 
whose landlord is a school-master. The two chief 
pleasures of his life are "his bottle and his Horace". 

He is the nappiest soul in his: Majesty's dominions, for 
his wife is in Heaven and nis daughter Is to be married 
next week.f' He charged his guests an exorbitant price 
for their night's lodging. Strap's friend is a school¬ 
master. (ch.10 H.K.j. This gentleman, who iu.ad come in i 
town, where He taught the Latin, Trench, and Italian 
languages, but what he chiefly professed, was the pro¬ 
nunciation of the English tongue after a method more 
speedy and uncommon than any practised heretofore, and 
indeed, if his scholars spoke like their master, the 
latter part of his undertaking was certainly performed 
to a tittle, "for although 1 could easily understand 
every word of what i had heretofore heard since i entered; 
England, three parts in four of his dialect were as un¬ 
intelligible to me as if he had spoken in Archaic or 
Irish." Then the description of Roderick's teacher is 
quite a satife on the profession in those days, ich.2.) 

"I was often inhumanly scourged for crimes I did not 
commit, because, naving the character of a vagabond in 
the village, every piece of mischief, whose author lay 
unknown, was charged upon me, I have been found guilty 
of robbing orchards I never entered, of killing cats i 
never hurted, of stealing gingerbread 1 never touched, 
and of abusing old women i never saw.----! was once^ 3 

flogged for narrowly escaping drowning, by the sinking ' 
of a ferryboat in which i was a passenger; another time 
for having recovered of a bruise occasioned by a horse 















10 


between David, and the waiter is marked by comic vigor. 

It is regular farce, of which we xiave numerous ex¬ 
amples in Smollett. it resembles the rogue element of 
Smollett, who gives an almost parallel example of rog¬ 
uery in the case where dackson wants Hoderick to pawn 
his linen so as to lend him money, hut this is not as 
humorous. We have an example of humor in Smollett where 
all the doctors come to wait on the Colonel. (fVJ*. ) 
and we nave an example of farce in Smollett where Hod- ^ 
erick describes what transpires in the cook's shop -"StraJ 
missing one of the steps, tumbled headlong into this in¬ 
fernal ordinary and overturned the cook, as she carried 
a porringer of soup to one of the guests. in her fall, 
she dashed the whole mess against the legs of a drummer 
belonging to the foot-guards, who happened to be in her 
way, and scalded him so miserably that he started up and 
danced up and down, uttering a volley of exerorations 
that made my hair stand on end. While he entertained 

the company in this manner, the cook got up and—-- 

emptied a salt-cellar in her hand and stripping down the 
patinnt's stocking, which brought the skin along with 
it, applied the contents to the sore, Phis poultice was 
scarce laid on, when the drummer, w/ho had begun to abate 
of his exclamation, broke forth into such a hideous yell 
as made the whole company tremble; then seizing a pewter 
pint-pot that stood by him, squeezed the sides ot it to¬ 
gether as if it had been made of pliant leather, grindingi 
his teeth at the same time with a most horrible grin”, 
there is far more of this farce style in Smollett than 
in Dickens, reflecting very vividly the coarser manners j 
of that time. Hut in comedy and humor, Dickens is pre¬ 
eminent. the scenes between Harkis and Peggotty and be¬ 
tween David and Peggotty are examples, e.g. where David 
advises Peggotty to marry Harkis, so she will have the 
horse and cart; also in his description of Peggotty, 
fr with eyes so dark that they seemed to darken their whole j 
neighborhood in her face, and cheeks and arms so hard 
and red that i wondered the birds didn't peck her in 
preference to apples.' the description of .Barkis' court¬ 
ship is very humorous and also where he bought David a 
present, but afterwards his covetuousness prevented him 
from presenting it. many of David's humorous expressions 
portray, in a very realistic manner, the vivid imagina¬ 
tion and. psychology of the child, wliich he understood as 
no other novelist. Bmollett does not touch this except in 
the two heroes. 

Dickens was numerous in the old Elizabethan meaning If 
of the word - "his emotions led the way, and his pen 








11 


followed", tie uses humor, at times, in otherwise path¬ 
etic scenes. After his mother's death, David says: "then 
I saw them glancing at me out of the windows, as they 
went up to their classes, i felt distinguished, and look-* 
ed more melancholy and walked slower. 7,'hen school was 
over and they came out and spoke to me, 1 felt it rather 
good in myself not to be proud to any of them, and to 
take exactly the same notice of them all as before." 

The same kind of humor is seen in "Oliver Twist", where 
Oliver has to join in the funeral parades decked out in 
sombre array. This soft note is seen also in navid and 
Dora's domestic life and in the character of the country 
undertaker who^makes up in fulness of heart for scanti¬ 
ness of breath*and is so sensitive that he dares not 
even inquire after friends who are ill, for fear of un¬ 
kindly misconstruction. 

This finer sense of feeling is not common in Smol¬ 
lett's humor. The grotesque element is found more, even 
in ordinarily sacred themes, e.g. Trunnion's grotesque 
ride to church on his wedding day. liven the Commodore's 
death-bed scene is invested with a sense of humor at 
times, which serves its purpose,, to sustain the seaman 
character to the end. Crotesqueness is seen in the per¬ 
son of captain Weasel, with grasshopper body and loud 
voice, (further described later], also in nicken"s 7 miss 
Mowcher, a "pussy dwarf ---with a very large head and 
face, a pair of roguish grey eyes, and such extremely 
little arms, that to enable herself to lay a finger 
archly against her snub nose, as She ogled Steerforth, 
she was obliged to meet the finger , halfway and lay her 
nose against it. tier chin, which is what is called a 
double chin was so fat that it entirely swallowed up the 
strings of her bonnet, bow and all. Throat she had none 
worth mentioning, for though she was more than full size 
dow r n to where her waist would have been, if she had any, 
and though she terminated, -—in a pair of feet, she 
was so short that she stood at a common-sized chair as 
at a table, resting a bag she parried, on the seat."etc 
(ch. 22, David copperifeld j ‘a'^good example of gro¬ 

tesque exaggeration^presenting a real picture. 

Many of the characters in "David Gopperfield" are 
made real by their humor and they are humorous chiefly 
by the exaggeration of their characteristics. Hetsy 
Trotwood’s humor makes her stand out prominently in the 
story from the first. Her humor consists chiefly in her 
eccentricity of character, which, in turn, consists 
























- 

■ 




' 












. 


- 















- 12 - 


mainly in her abrupt,extremely unaffected and unconven¬ 
tional manner, ana terse, pointed expressions, qualities 
which combine to produce a very distinct type, and there¬ 
fore very real as such, but AJ .ot as an average person. She 
had some peculiar habits, e.g. when she was particularity 
discomposed she would walk up ana down, "and the amount of 
of her discomposure might always be estimated by the 
duration of her walk. " She would walk "at an unchanging 
pace, with the regularity of a clock- pendulum" . l : his 
represents her systematic nature. her reticent nature 
is expressed thus: "tier face might have been a dead 

wall -for any light it threw upon her thoughts", ner 

her composure is shown in this remark "My aunt dismissed 
the matter with a'neavy sigh and smoothed her aress" . 

Also here: "Nobody would have thought so, to see her 
sitting upright with her arms folded: but she had wonder¬ 
ful self-command". The underlined words produce realism 
by physical suggestion representing certain character¬ 
istics. her abruptness is expressed thus: "It was an 
idiosyneraey with her "as it is with some horses, to 
stop very short when she appeared to be in a fair way of 
going on for a long while." tier abruptness is accen¬ 
tuated by her terse, curt remarks, e.g. in her farewell 
advice to David: "ilever be mean; never be false; never 
be cruel"; also in her philosophy regarding her lost 
property: "All I nave got to say about it is, if it's 

gone i can bear it; and if it 1 s not gone, 1 shall be glad 
to get it back". tier optimistic courage is seen in her 
advice to David: "we must meet reverses boldly, and not 
suffer them to frighten us, my dear. We must learn to 
act the play out. We must live misfortune down, Trot", 
tier kindness is not of the sentimental sort, but is 
usually implied in some humorous remark, e.g. her remark 
about Mr. Dick's Memorial: "I suppose it will go in one 
of these days, but it don't signify; it keeps him employed 
This remark embodies kindness, optimism, and tact, in 
dealing with Mr. Dick tan imbecileJ. 

Mr. uicx has a droll humor, as seen in his reply to 
Mrs. orupp's remark about the size of the room, not large 
enough to swing a cat in. "I don’t want to swing a cat, 
i never ao swing a cat", etc. ±>ut there was more under¬ 
standing in him than appeared at times^ana aeep devotion 
to his friends. This gave him the "mind of the heart", 
by which he perceived how to come to Dr. Strong's assist¬ 
ance in the latter's misunderstanding with nis wife, nis 
curt remark, "Oh indeed", when netsy announces her fin- jj 
ancial ruin is quite characteristic. 








Mr. and Mrs. Micawber are a direct contrast to this 
pair of characters, especially in their attitude toward 
misfortune, which is generally met by a flow of Mr. Mie- 
awber's highly figurative oratory, awakening mirth rather 
than sympathy, e.g. ,T i am a straw upon the surface of the! 
deep and tossed by the elephants----elements",etc. Then 
again he says; "fou will forgive the momentary lacer¬ 
ation of a wounded spirit, made sensitive by a recent 
collision with the minion of Power, with a ribald turn¬ 
cock attached to the waterworks, and will pity, not con¬ 
demn, its excesses". hut this speech arouses no pity, 
probably because Micawber 1 s actions belie his words. 

"At the mention of t a bowl of punch, his recent despon¬ 
dency was gone in a moment." Thus the sense of humor 
is constantly sustained in this character, through the 
very exaggeration of his despondency, as contrasted with 
his simple pleasures. After sending a heart-renaing 
letter to David saying that "the bolt is impending and 
the tree must fall", and suggesting suicide as the re¬ 
medy, soon afterwards David saw him sitting at the non- 
don coach, "the very picture of tranquil enjoyment, 
smiling at Mrs. Micawber's conversation, eating walnuts 
out of a paper bag, with a bottle sticking out of his 
breast pocket ’. (Dr. WaggMiil in "Roderick iiandom" re¬ 
sembles him a little, in his learned manner of speaking, 
and his loquaciousness, but unlike Micawber, he uses 
Latin in his speeches.) 

Mrs. Micawber's eccentricity consists in her over¬ 
weening ambition and confidence in Mioawber^and in her 
logic. The former is seen here: "Micawber, your mis¬ 
take in life is that you do not look forward f&r enough. 
You. are bound, in justice to your family, if not to your¬ 
self, to take in a comprehensive glance the extremest 
points in the horizon to which your abilities may lead 
you. As a direct contrast to .Betsy fro two od her re¬ 
marks in the face of misfortunes usually show more sent- ,, 
iment than action, but finally her logic leads to the 
retrieving of their fortunes. She reasons thus: "Am 
I wrong in saying it is clear that we must live?----and 
the fact is, --.-that we dan not live without something 
widely different from existing circumstances shortly 
turning up. Low I am convinced myself- -that things 
cannot be expected to turn up of themselves. .e must, 
in a measure, assist to turn them up. Very well, then, 
what do i recommend? Here is Mr. Micawber, -with a var¬ 
iety of qualifications.with great talent-1 should 

say with genius...- .and there is Mr. Micawber without 
any suitable position or employment. Where does that 









14 


c iocu that responsibility rest? Clearly on society. 

'ihen i would make a fact, so disgraceful known, and 
boldly challenge society to set it right. It appears to 

me - that what Mr. Micawber has to do, is to throw 

down the gauntlet to society, and say, in effect. "Show* 
me who will take that up, let the party immediately step 
forward''. tier method was to advertise,, and this led to 
inr. Micawber's appointment at deep and wickfields. As 
ordinary individuals, Mr. and Mrs. Micawber are not real, 
for they are not practical. They lack action. But as 
types, of eloquence and logic respectively, and of lofty 
disdain of hum-drum cares and exaggerated optimism and 
good nature in the face of want, and also as congenial 
spirits, they are very real, owing to their peculiarities 
being accentuated by the humor. 

Mrs. Trunnion is a rather humorous character as 
representing formality and ceremony. "She sat by the 
fire weeping with great decorum",- (during her husband's 
death). She was about as kind to Peregrine as Betsy was 
to David, but w r ith more ceremony. ner parting advice 
to him lasted two hours. She was more pessimistic than 
Betsy. tier formality is so accentuated as to make her 
humorous. it is said that Dickens "only failed as a 
realist wh^n his sense of humor failed". This was very 
seldom, as^gfeen from these and other examples. 

Smollett has some humorous characters. Miss 
Snapper in Roderick handom is humorous by virtue of her 
wit, e.g. when Roderick accompanied her and her mother 
to the £cng Boom, there were many contemptuous smiles 
and tittering observations about them. Mr. Bash asked 
miss Snapper if she could inform him the name of 'fobit's | 
dog, to ehich she replied, "His name was Pash and an 
impudent dog he was". The Commodore, in Peregrine 
Pickle is very humorous, seen even in his last words, e.rf 
advice to Hatchway, to marry his widow. Hatchway is || 
also humorous. A humorous incident is Peregrine's enter¬ 
prise or transformation on the mendicant girl, etc. per¬ 
egrine himself is a very humorous character, as seen by 
his many jokes and pranks while at school and later. 

The farce and rogue element comes in very strongly in 
this connection,* marking it as a picaresque novel. The 
single lady is very humorous, in appearance and also in 
her absent-mindedness. (ch. 53 &.JK. ) "Her forehead 
was high and wrinkled; her eyes were large, grey and 
prominent; her nose was long, sharp and aquiline and her 
:mouth of vast capacity; her visage meagre and freckled 
and her chin peaked like a shoemaker's paring knife",etc 




14a 


- a vivid picture, when she hears that Roderick 
was shipwrecked, she asks him whether he came on 
shore on the hack of a whale or a dolphin. she is 
represented as an intellectual lady, a poet, and 
rather demented thereby. when she heard notes of 
the hounds, "She believed herself beset by the hunters 
and begged for a few greens to munch". So we have 
satirized under this class, by Dickens and Smollett, 
the stcjp type, the husband hunters, and a certain in¬ 
tellectual type, all very real portraits of their types, 
ihis last picture is decidedly humorous, like Smollett s 
other pictures under this class. 








It) 



THE PSYCHOLOGY IH tt ROMRICK RANDOM" 


"Roderick Random" is more or less a psy¬ 
chological novel. Smollett says of it, "Ihave att¬ 
empted tp represent modest merit struggling with 
every difficulty to which a friendless orphan is 
exposed, from his own want of experience, as well 
as from the selfishness, envy, malice, and base in¬ 
difference of mankind; also where the humours and 
passions are undisguised by affectation, and the 
whimsical peculiarities of disposition appear as na¬ 
ture has implanted them." His reaction on circumstan¬ 
ces is shown, and his attitude towards adversity- 
sometimes fortifying himself against the world by 
means of his resentment,f cf. Peregrine Pickle), 
at other times by hisimagination,^ ana then 
again, by wine, and^y^gaml)ling. We shall consider 
examples of these various moods. 


After being dismissed by his landlord, 
Roderick says, "The indignationwhich this harangue 
inspired, gave me spirits to support my reverse of 
fortune, and to tell him ttat I would starve, rath¬ 
er than be beholden to him for a single meal. " 

While waiting at Rheims to hear from his 
uncle, he says, "My hopes from that quarter were not 
at all sanguine- —in the meantime, I had recourse 
to my old remedy, patience, consoling myself with 
the flattering suggestion of a lively imagination, 
that never abandoned me in distress." ( This trait 
is also prominent in "Peregrine PickleJ where Smoll¬ 
ett extols imagination thus, "The mind is naturally 
pliable, and provided it has the lea-st hope to lean 
upon, adapts itself wonderfully to the emergencies 
of fortune, especially when imagination is gay and 
luxuriant." This was the case with Peregrine, and 
instead of indulging the melancholyb ideas which 
hiss loss inspired, he had recourse to the flatter¬ 
ing delusions of hope, soothing himself with unsub¬ 
stantial plans of future greatness, endeavoring to 
cover what was past,with the veil of oblivion.") 

Finally Roderick grew melancholy at the 
prospect of approaching want, so had recourse to 
the bottle, and kept more company than ever. "I be¬ 
came particularly attached to the playhouse, convers¬ 
ed with the actors behind the scenes, grew acquain¬ 
ted with a body of Templars, and in a short time 
commenced a professed wit and critic._. . 







. 




« 









. 


- 






means of tf'ese avocations, I got the better of care, 
arul n learned to separate my ideas in such a manner, 
that, whenever I was attacked by a gloomy reflection, 

I could shove it aside, and call in some agreeable re- 
verie yo my assistance * TI 

After he pawned his sword, for seven pieces, 
he says, "This supply, inconsiderable as it was, mad© 
me as happy for the present as if I had kept £5oo in the 
bank, for by this time, I was so well skilled in procras¬ 
tinating every troublesome reflection, jrh at.the prospec t 
of want seldom affected m© veryb much, let it be ever so 
near. TT A.fter paying most of this for lodgings, he went to 
a tavern, but says, TT I was so much chagrined at their -go 
good humour, as a d~ -d soul in hell would fee at a g-14^ 

glimpse of Heaven. In vain did I swallow bumper af¬ 
ter bumper, the wine had lost its effect upon me, and, far 
from raising my dejected spirits, it could not even 
lay me asleep.” Soon he mends his fortunes at the 
gaming table. Thus his fortunes fluctuate, and thus h« 
meets reverses with varying sentiments.and devices.,_ ai 
indignation , imagination , expectatio n or as pirat fL,^ 
and dissi pation. 


Meanwhile, he is gaining experience. He says, 
fT I*or two years, I lived without hearing tidings of 
my uncle, and during which time I kept little or no 
company. I was no longer a pert, unthinking coxcomb, 
giddy with popular applause, and elevated with the 
extravagance of hope. My misfortunes had .taught me 
how little the caresses of the world during a man's 
prosperity are to be valued by him, and how serious¬ 
ly and expeditiously he ought to set about making him« 
self independent of them? 

The portrayal of the rT inner life n of these two 
heroes of Smollett, is very realistic, and pictures th«m 
as very natural, normal , characters. Theyhare more of 
the worldly than the religious orfintellectual type, 

David Copperfield, ( see Psychologyb under Autobiogra - 
phy) was more of the latter type. He lacks entirely 
the feeling of resentment and indignation, and the stern¬ 
er qualities, being more of an abnormal character. But 
the psychology in Smollett's books is not so especially 
autobiographical, so he had greater scope in the desc¬ 
ription of their characters than Dickens in the descrip¬ 
tion of his hero. 








a 










■ 










. 








* • 


' 




. 











17 


VICKS. POLrlnu. iiil'JJ .c01.bL.biS, 


Many of the characters, both Smollett's and 
Pickens', may be classed as representatives of certain 
vices or faults, follies or foibles, these qualities 
being portrayed by satire, humor, dramatics or mere in¬ 
cident, thus making the characters stand out prominently 
as in real life, 'i'he contrast "between virtue some¬ 
times abused, and vice, frequently insulting, appears 
with greater emphasis, than in ordinary narration, and 
every impression has a double force on the imagination." 

Cowardice is exemplified in the character of Capt. 
Weazel, (R.n.), of whom Isaac ironically said that he 
seemed to be a good Christian, "for he had armed himself 
with patience and resignation, instead of cruel weapons, 
and worxed out uls salvation with fear and trembling", 
this satirizes his manner during the fright from the 
supposed highwayman, likewise the soldier in the stage¬ 
coach going to hath became the object of Miss Snapper's 
wit when he said, "for my own part, I am always extremely 
cool on such occasions". She replied: "So it appeared 
by your trembling". Strap is pictured as a coward, so 
far as fighting is concerned. At the first alarm of 
murder, while travelling, he jumps from the waggon and 
hides behind a hedge. His objections to a soldier's 
life are very amusing. "Heaven keep cold lead out of 
my carcass, and let me die in bed like a Christian ---- 
what signifies all the riches and honors of the world, 

if we enjoy not content? --v/hat signifies riches? 

He seems to think that the soldier's life depends on 
choice rather than duty, and on the seeking of riches „ 1 
rather than sacrifice. The painter in "Peregrine Pickle 
is another example of a coward. 

In Pickens' "Oliver Twist", we hajfe the coward, ; i| 
Noah Claypole, a bully, but a coward at heart, much 
bolder with nis sneers and taunts than at fighting a 
battle. Oliver soon masters him. His lordly contempt 
of Oliver's birth is thus satirized by nickens. "This 
affords charming food for contemplation. it shows us 
what a beautiful thin g human nature sometimes is, and 
how impartially the same aimfe/hle Qualities are developed 
in the finest lord and the dirtiest charity boy." 
nickens portrays a meaner type of cowardice than Smol¬ 
lett's. While Smollett's are objects of humor, Pickens' 
are the object of contempt and ironical satire. Hut i> 
both Smollett and uickens had the school-boy's idea that 













18 


the hero must always knock the villain down, This 
probably reflects Smollett's own experience as violence 
was common in his day, and Dickens probably imitated 
him. loetic justice is always well observed in .Dickens 
with little compromise. Virtue insists on victory; as 
in the case of Mr. Mell, who was bullied by oteerforth 
on one occasion for a similar reason as Oliver by IToah. 
When he asked Steer forth how he could presume on his 
position and favoritism to insult a gentleman, Steer- 

forth said: "A what? where is he?-You are always 

a beggar you know; but now you are an impudent beggar.'’ 
After Steerforth's unhonoured death, the name of -r. Mell 
appeared in a newspaper. Poetic justice is illustrated 
in Smollett in the case of Roderick and Potion. The 
latter casts Roderick off in his poverty. The time 
comes when he fawns for the favor of Roderick’s society, 
which is denied him. He is now the poor man as compared 
with Roderick. 

Another form of cowardice, i.e. weak indulgence , is 
illustrated in Mr. Wickfield, who says: "weak indulgence 
has ruined me,- indulgence in remembrance and indulgence j 
in-forgetfulness. My natural grief for my child's mother 
turned to disease; my natural love for my child turned 
to disease. 1 have infected everything i touched. i 
have brought misery on what 1 dearly love - 1 thought it 
possible that I could truly love one creature in the 
world and not love the rest; i thought it possible that 
I could mourn for one creature gone out of the world and 
not have some part in the grief of all who mourned. Thus 
the lessons of my life have been perverted: 1 have 
preyed on my own morbid, coward heart, and it has preyed 
on me. sordid in my grief, sordid in my love, sordid in 
my miserable escape from the darker side of both - oh 
see the ruin I am, and nate me, shun mei" "He dropped 
into a chair and weakly sobbed. ' He was a victim of 
drink, which hastened his financial ruin. This type of 
faint-hearted cowardice is illustrated to a certain ex¬ 
tent in the characters of fora and David, as shown in 
their house-keeping. They becdme victimized on every 
hand, because they would not assert their prerogative, 
with their domestics. This may have been extreme good¬ 
nature along with weakness. Mr. Spenlow also ranks un¬ 
der this fault more or less, though with his "sagacious 
smile" the type of the politician,,me had not the cour¬ 
age of his convictions s but took refuge in a crisis 
under the name of Mr. Jorkins. This is a realistic touch,, 
as it is a common practice i2J~ many business firms, as 






19 


well as with individuals. Spenlow did not favor drastic 
reforms, but considered it the principle of a gentleman 
to take things as he found them. tie did not believe in 
the thin edge of the wedge", which shows again his un- 
aggressive, rather faint-hearted nature. in Smollett 
we have this practice, of shifting the responsibility 
on others, seen in the government officials, bo this is 
a feature of politics. 

Pride of oirth is portrayed in nickens - not in a 
•mean sense this time, as in loah claypole, but in a 
humorous sense, merely as a foible of society-life, by 
the characters of Mr. and Mrs. Paterbrook, and Hamlet's 
aunt, Mrs. Waterbrook repeatedly said, at her dinner¬ 
party, that if she had a weakness, it was nlood, Mr. 
waterbrook said: "I confess i am of Mrs. Waterbrook* s 
opinion. Other things are all very well in their way, 
but give me nlood." Hamlet's aunt echoed this senti¬ 
ment as follows: 11 Oh* there's nothing so satisfactory 
to one: There is nothing that is so much one's beau 
ideal of - all that sort of thing, speaking generally. 
There are some low minds that would prefer to do what 
i should call bow down before idols.--before services, 
intellect, and so on. but these are intangible points, 
blood is not so. We see nlood in a nose and we know it. 
We meet with it in a chin, and we say: 'there it is', 
that's blood. It is an actual matter of fact, we point 
it out. it admits of no doubt." nickens really means 
this as a satire, as he did not sympathize with aris¬ 
tocratic ideas. 

Smollett has a caricature on this "pride of birth 1 * 
in the character of Morgan, the Welshman in "Hoderick 
Random" , who says to captain Oagum, ,T I am a shentleman 
by birth and parentage, look ou, and peradventure I am 
moreover. He says to Captain whiffle on one occasion: 
'Sir, you will forgive and excuse, and pardon, the pre¬ 
sumption of one who has not the honor of being known 
unto you, but who is, nevertheless, a shentleman porn 
pred and moreover has had misfortunes, Cot help me in the 
world", ne laid great stress on his good birth, as a 
descendent from caractacus. He threatened to smoke the 
steward "like a padger", with sulphur, for the freedoms 
he took "among gantlemen of birth". A contrast to pride 
of birth is Peregrine's treatment of the mendicant girl. 
He did not pride Himself on nigh birth. 

bham respectability is personified in Hittimer, 
whose mean character is thus disguised. This respectable 
person with the "respectable eyelashes" and the unruffled 










20 


eye , his ”respectable bow”, was to favid as respect¬ 
able a mystery as any pyramid in Egypt". He might 
compare with him Captain whiffle. (K. H.) "He is dis¬ 
guised and transfigured and transmographied with 
affectation and whimsies and ne is more like a capoon 
than one of the human race". Physical suggestion makes 
Littimer’s character more real than Whiffle‘s. 

Avarice is pictured in a very humorous way in the 
character of .Barkis, first implied in his gluttony Wi ere 
he swallowed the cake, ”with one gulp exactly" like an 
’’elephant" , wi th no more change in his face than in that 
of an elephant. then, he kept a box under the bed. 

"When he was past creeping out of bed to open it, and 
past assuring himself of its safety, he uad required to 
have it placed on the chair, at the bedside, where he 
had ever since embraced it night and day. lime and the 
world were^ lipping from beneath him, but the box was 
there; and^last words he uttered were;(in explanatory 
tone) ”01d clothes", that it might better escape notice 
he nad invented a fiction, that it belonged to 'hdc-black- 
bery and was to be left with .Barkis until called for 1 ’ - 
1% a fable he had elaborately written on the lid, in char¬ 
acters now scarcely legible.” this is a very realistic 
description of a miser, only uickens has added humor, 
making him a less forbidding character than the average 
miser. ihe cunning tricks Sarkis invents to divert 
attention from the box, make his character more inter¬ 
esting, as well as real. 

uoquetry is seen in fora and in bmilia dauntlet, 
but the latter was more designing, not so si mple and 
naive as fora. She could be very haughty. 

loathful vanity is well portrayed both by Smollett 
and by sickens. when Hoderick^s fortunes were retrieved . 
by Sharp’s legacy, his brain was almost turned, equipped 
in fineries presented by Strap, he w^ent to the theatre 
and sat in a front box. he imagined himself the centre 
of attraction, which led him into ”a thousand riduclous 
coquetries". He says: n Irose and sat down, covered 
and uncovered my head twenty times between acts, pulled 
out my watch, clapped it to my ear; wound it up, set it, 
gave it the hearing again, displayed my snuff-box, af¬ 
fected to take snuff, that 1 might have an opportunity 
of showing my brilliant, and wiped my nose w T ith a per¬ 
fumed handkerchief; then dangled my cane, and adjusted 
my sword-knot; and acted many more fooleries of the same 
kind, in hope of obtaining the character of a pretty 















21 


fellow". This culminated in an ambition to hain a lady 
to her coach. David's vanity is shown, after he fell in 
love with Dora. He says: "within the first week of my 
passion, 1 bought four sumptuous waist-coats, not for 
myself, 1 had no pride in them, -for Dora - and took to 
wearing straw-colored kid gloves in the streets, and 
laid the foundations of all the corns I ever had. if 
the boots X wore at that period could only be produced 
and compared with the natural size of my feet, they 
would show what the state of my heart was, in a most 
effective manner." Although he disclaims this as a van¬ 
ity, still it is a species of such, as he did it to 
gain admiration, These are very real pictures and make 
the characters very real, by the touch of youthful folly. 
The details are well described in Smollett; Dickens, as 
usual, is more brief, and rather more original in idea. 

hypocrisy is portrayed in Heep, who, under the 
disguise of "umbleness" seeks to work out his ambitious 
schemes. Theh-in goal he becomes very self-righteous. 

He says: "There is a deal of sin outside", etc. His 
dangerous and insidious nature is expressed thus: "At 
the coach-window, as at the dinner party, he hovered 
about us without a moment's intermission, like a great 
vulture ." He is chiefly described by similes, and met¬ 
aphors and physical suggestion lappearancej, as so many 
of Dickens 3 leading characters are: e.g. "in nis slimy 
way", "sneaky undulations", his "writMngs" are described 
by Detsy, when she says: "I am not going to be serpen¬ 
tined and corkscrewed out of my senses!" Humor is added 
in David's description of him asleep "and his mouth 
open like a post-office". His mother is coupled with 
him in some of his detestable features. "A tender young 
cork would have had more chance against a pair of cork¬ 
screws, or a tender ^oung tooth against a pair of dent¬ 
ists, or a little shuttlecock against two battledores, 
than i had against Uriah and Mrs. Heep. They did just 
what they liked with me, and wormed things out of me 
that I had no desire to tell, with a certainty I blush 
to think of". This is said by David regarding his visit 
there. Their overbearing nature is^gain expressed here: 
"To have seen the mother and son like two great bats, 
hanging over the whole house and darkening it with their 
ugly forms, made me so uncomfortable that, etc." These 
metaphors and similes make the pictures very real. When 
talking of Mr. Wikkfield, he wears a "carved grin", but 
is stealthily plotting his downfall. He succeeds, for 
he has brains; but they prove his undoing, in leading 

him into crime. He is a fatally "logic character". He 



























" V- ~ * ' 

• . 






















V 

■ 

. * 

■ ■ 


























































- 22 - 


is the victim of nis early training and is really a sa¬ 
tire on society at that time, when the motto was "remem¬ 
ber your place". He was consumed with envy, hatred and 
malice. ‘’Poetic justice" is well illustrated in his fate 
also fatalism, for even in goal he is still a hypocrite: 
"There is a deal of sin outside", etc. 

Mrs. Sowerberry (in Oliver Twist), is a little of a 
hypocrite, for she allows humble to think she had over¬ 
fed Oliver. To his remark about meat vs. gruel, she 
replies: "Pear, dear, this comes of being liberal", of 

which she was wholly innocent in thought, word, or deed." 
Shefts also a tyrant. ^Mr. Bumble has a taint of hypo¬ 
crisy, in nis self-complacence, his pride in his paroch¬ 
ial dignity. But his office should presuppose an inter¬ 
est in the parishoners, but his supposed interest is more 
self-interest than otherwise. Bis sentiments towards 
others are very cool^and even verge on cruelty, or at 
least harshness, symbolized by his "metallic eyes". This 
is seen in the incident concerning Oliver's "madness”, 
in Basumble's comical remark to Mrs. Sowerberry: "It’s 

not madness, ma'am. it 8 s meat.- louve overfed him 

ma’am. You’ve raised an artificial soul and spirit in 
him, ma’am, unbecoming a person of his condition. --- 
What have paupers to do with soul or spirit? It's quite 
enough that we let 'em have bodies, if you had kept the 
boy on gruel, ma'am, this would never have happened." 
intrenched in wisdom he philosophically communicates 
profound truths about life and the impossibility of gra¬ 
tifying human desires, as seen in his ironical words: 
"That's the way with these people, ma'am; give 'em a 
apron-full of coals today, and they 11 come back for 
another the day after tomorrow, as brazen as alabaster". 
Yet once we find his calloused nature touched by Oliver’s 
softening influence. When the latter wept for lordliness 
and begged him not to be cross, Mr. Bumble regarded Oli¬ 
ver's piteous and helpless look with some astonishment 
for a few seconds, hemmed three or four times in a husky 
manner, and, after muttering something about "that 
troublesome cough”, bade Oliver dry his eyes and be a 
good boy. Then, once more taking nis hand, he walked 
on with him in silence". 

Mr. and Miss Murdstone are really types of cruelty 
as they never relent. Their cruelty, however, leads to 
mental rather than physical suffering, as seen in David’s 
suffering through sheer neglect and lack of sympathy. 

He describes Mr. and Miss Murdstone thus: "They disliked 





25 


me and they sullenly, sternly, steadily overlooked me. 

I was not actively ill-used, 1 was not beaten or starved; 
but the wrong that was done to me had no intervals of 

relenting.- Day after day, week after week, month after 

month, i was coldly neglected. 

Wealth worshippers are ridiculed in "Koderiek ran¬ 
dom". A certain set of persons no sooner understood 
that Roderick’s fortune was independent than they courted 
the acquaintance of him and imrcissa as much as they had 
despised them before, -but Darcissa had too much dignity 
and pride to encourage this change of conduct even in 
her relations. Mr. Potion made a similar vain attempt. 

Society is represented by the "gentleman in the 
white waist-coat", (Oliver Twist") f who seems quite in¬ 
different to the cause of justice, excepting to take 
sides with D&fei and Mr. humble, the popular side. Mr. 
Spenlow is something of thtfs-type. In Smollett society 
is characterized as hypocritical and preferential to 
buffoonery, etc. he says: "for which of his virtues 
was he (Mr. Marma^ot) so much caressed by the people of 
fashion? ‘It is not 8 said he, ‘for the qualities of his 
heart that this little parasite is invited to the tables 
of dukes and lords, who hire extraordinary cooks for 
his entertainment, his avarice they see not, his in¬ 
gratitude they feel not, his nypocrisy accomodates it¬ 
self to their humours, and is of consequence, pleasing; 
but he is nighly courted for his buffoonery and will be 
admitted into the choicest parties of quality for nis 
talent of mimicking Punch and his wife Jean, when a poet 
of the most exquisite genius is not able to attract the 
least regard 1 '.’ {/This may be a reference to his own ex¬ 
perience as a poet and might be placed under autobiog¬ 
raphy.) rambling is another flaw in the society of 
Smollett s day. .banter says, (in "E.K.") "cheating at 
cards far from being reckoned a blemish among people of 
fashion, was looked upon as an honorable indication of 
superior genius and address". in Dickens, Mr. Spenlow 
and Mr. hrownlow represent society, the latter being the 
preferable type. 

Slander is portrayed in Smollett. Roderick says: 

”i had the satisfaction to find myself in some degree of 
favor with the ladies, which 1 preserved by gratifying 
their propensity to scandal, in lampooning their rivals’.’ 
It is also shown in "Peregrine Pickle", on the subject 
of Peregrine's imprisonment: "Those who were present at 
his arrest), immediately propagated it among their 








. 







. 




■ 

' 



. 










■ 


. 


• - 

. 
















1 


















- 24 - 


acquaintances and it was the same evening discoursed 
upon at several tea and card tables, with this variation 
from the truth, that the debt amounted to twelve thous¬ 
and instead ot twelve hundred pounds. j?rom which cir¬ 
cumstance it was conjectured that Peregrine was a bite 
from the beginning, who had found credit on account of 
his effrontery and appearance and imposed himself upon 
the town as a young gentleman of fortune, xhey rejoiced 
therefore, at his calamity, which they considered as a 
just punishment for his fraud and presumption, and began 
to review certain particulars of his conduct, that plain¬ 
ly demonstrated him to he a rank adventurer, long before 
he had arrived at this end of his career.” in reality 
he did not deserve this condemnation for it is stated 
elsewhere that his ”foibles were overbalanced by a thous¬ 
and good qualities", hut, as stated by Smollett, slan¬ 
der is a sort of cowardly assassination that there is 
no guarding against". 

Crabtree, his informant, was implicated in more or 
less slander, as he was a misanthrope, and therefore, 
being a morose cynic and incensed against the follies 
and vices of mankind, he delighted in the distress of 
his fellow-creatures. "He was between whiles like a 
raven, croaking presages of more ill luck from the de¬ 
ceit of the minister, the dissimulation of his patron, 
the folly of the projector for whom he was bound, the-- 
---and the villainy of those with whom he had intrusted 
his cash. He saw and considered everything through a 
perspective of spleen, that always reflected the worst 
j^ide__oiLJauman_^ Smollett drags in the doctors 

again. "Peregrine perceived that among the secret 
agents of scandal, none were so busy as the physicians, 
a class of animals who live in this place, like so many 
ravens hovering about a carcass, and even ply for em¬ 
ployment like scullers, at nungerford stairs, dy their 
connection with apothecaries and nurses, they are in¬ 
formed of all the private occurrences in each family, 
and therefore enabled to gratify the rancour of malice , 
amuse the spleen of peevish indisposition, and enter¬ 
tain the eagerness of impertinent curiosity". ihe very 
essence of slander is also well portrayed in nis de¬ 
scription of an "imputation for madness”, which, when a 
person has once incurred, will be read into his every 
act. 

revenge and resentment are seen in Mrs. Steerforth 
who says of her son s relation with ^mily. "Let him not ■ 
put her away now, and he never shall come near me, living 











. 

. 

. 










. 


- • 








































25 


or dying, while i can raise my hand to make a sign 
against it, unless, being rid of her forever, he comes 
humbly to me and begs for my forgiveness, This is my 
right. i'his is the acknowledgment 1 will have”. 

Strange types of mothers are also seen in Mrs. 
Cxemalial Pickle, and Mrs. Markleham (old soldier), ihe 
former became estranged from her son while he was away 
at school and disowned him on his return. Mrs. Markle- 
ham required a great deal of amusement and, like a deep 
old soldier pretended, in consulting her own inclina¬ 
tions, to be devoting herself to her child (Mrs. Strong) 

Arroganc e in legal proceedings is shown in the 
trial scene on board the "Thunder” where Roderick is 
tried for conspiring against saptain Oakum's life. The 
same spirit is seen in the trial of Oliver for alleged 
theft. 

Drunkenness is portrayed in the character of Mr. 
Wiekfield. Several other chracters were fond of their 
"punch" and their wine, e.g. Mr. Micawber, Mr. Spenlow, 
Roderick and Peregrine, Mrs. Trunnion warns Peregrine 
when he leaves nome, to beware the beastly sin of 
drunkenness. 










26 


VIRTUES AND GRACES 


Desides the "vices, foil es and foibles" of ordin¬ 
ary life, these writers show some of the virtues and 
graces, hospitality and the homely virtues are por¬ 
trayed in the family life of Mr. Peggotty, the fisher¬ 
man. Mr. Peggotty's kindness is emphasized by Mrs. cum- 
midge's pessimism, he is very tolerant towards her, 
which seems to make her presume on his patience. When 
he says of his money: "Why, how should X ever spend it 

without you?-Doen’t i want ^ou more than ever X did?" 

She replies: "I know’d X was never wanted before, and 
now I am told so 1 . How could I expect to be wanted, be¬ 
ing so lone and lorn, and so contrairy." hut she later 
becomes his comforter in trouble, as he has been uer's, 
thus illustrating the ideal relation in home life. The 
kindness of all to little Emily is the crowning touch 
in this ideal home. 

Mr. Peggotty is a typical fisherman. A relic of 
superstition is seen in his words before harkis 1 death: 
"People can‘t die along the coast except when the tide's 
pretty nigh out. fhey can‘t be born unless it 4 s pretty 
nigh in - not properly born, till flood, he 8 s a-going 
out with the tide. it's ebb at half arter three, slack 
water, half an hour, if* he lives till it turns, he'll 
hold his own till past the flood, and go out with the 
next tide", his character is well described by the re¬ 
mark of uavid: "I could not help observing what power 
and force of character his sinewy hand expressed and what 
a good and trusty companion it was to his ^onest brow 
and "iron-grey hair". Physical suggestion is used here 
again. This expresses his staunch, true, character, as 
seen in his persistent search for Emily and his kindness 
towards her in misfortune, he says: "Por she’s more 
dear to me now, Martha, than ever she was dear afore". 

The "garrison" in "Peregrine Pickle" is another 
cheerful home in many respects, and similar, in that the 
Commodore, like Mr. Peggotty, kindly cherishes a child 
not his own, i.e. Peregrine, he resembles Mr. Peggotty 
in his staunch devotion and genuine, sterling qualities, 
but is more burly a type and uses more slang. Another 
resemblance, Mrs. Trunnion, like Mrs. Gummidge, is rather 
pessimistic, but the Commodore is tolerant. Mrs. Trun¬ 
nion is as kind to Peregrine , as Mr. Trunnion, but in a 
more formal manner. Cher parting advice to Peregrine, 
when he left nome, lasted for two hours^ hatchway 











- 27 - 


completes the family circle. He resembles Ham in his 
sturdy characteristics. He says: "He's no better than 
a fresh water sailor who knows not how to stem the curr¬ 
ent of mischance". He is more of a joker than Ham. The 
picture portrayed of this family is very realistic, if 
is marked by humor, especially the Commodore, whose lan¬ 
guage is so typical of his seaman's character, and never 
more so than on uis death-bed. 

i'raddles* and Sophy's home is another model of hos¬ 
pitality, but in rather an exaggerated form. "Traddles 
keeps his papers in his dressing room and his boots with 
his papers, and he and Sophy squeeze themselves into 
upper rooms, reserving the best bedrooms for the .beauty 
and the girls", i'hey were very happy together. 

True friendship is portrayed between Steerforth and 
David; Steerforth and Traddles; Dr. Strong and Mr. Dick; 
Ham and Lmily; Hoderick, Thompson and Strap; Peregrine 
and Pipes. 

David says:"I never had loved Steerforth better than 
when the ties that bound me to him were broken --- i be¬ 
lieve that, if i had been brought face to face with him, 
i could not have uttered one reproach". His was a rom¬ 
antic friendship, based on David's youthful adoration 
for a character that seemed to him perfect, but #10 had 
never said or done anything to justify this opinion; it 
was rather an unnatural delusion. 

Strap was a faithful servant and friend to Dcderick. 
He feared, one day, that noderick would fight a duel over 
Melinda, so ordered him arrested, as a means of antici¬ 
pating and preventing the duel. Whe^he received a leg¬ 
acy, Strap offered all to Roderick. Pipes was equally 
devoted to Peregrine. When the latter was in prison, 
Pipes offered him all his money, and would have burned it 
had not Peregrine consented to take it. 

Ham remains loyal to mily. He says: "No one can 
never fill the place that's empty. All that s past and 
over". He tried to drown his grief by devoting himself 
to duty. "When a man's wanted for rough service in 
rough weather, he 5 s there. When there's hard work to be 
done, with danger in it, he steps forward afore all his 
mates 11 . He was a man of action, but of few words. His 
last words were: "If my time is come, ‘tis come; if it 
aint, I’ll abide it; Lord above, bless you, and bless 
all. Mates, make me ready. I’m going offi" 




28 


bmily remains loyal to Ham. "She might uave married 
well a mort of times, but said: ‘That's gone forever . 

She illustrates repentant by benevolent well-doing. 
"Theer was some poor folks aboard as had illness among 
'em and she took care of them; and theer was the children 
in our company and she took care of them; and so she got 
to be busy and to be doing good and that helped ner". 

We see a similar case in Miss Williams after she reformed 

benevolence is also portrayed in the woman who 
sheltered Roderick after he was kicked out by all the 
other villagers, even the parson. The superstitious 
element comes in here. Slanderers pronounced this tad man 
a witch, owing to her "different 11 style of conversation, 
her recluse way of life, her skill in curing distempers, 
her entertaining of a tabby cat, and her age. Mr. brown- 
low and Mrs. Maylie also represent benevolence in their 
kindness to Oliver when he was alone and forlorn, mr. 
Omer is an advocate of kindness. 

Practical goodness is expressed by uaptain bowling, 
whose creed is: "1 meddle with nobody's affairs but my 
own; the gunner to his limstoek, and the steersman to 
the helm, as the saying is; *1 trust to no creed but 
the compass and do unto every man as i would be done by, 
so that i defy the Pope, the bevil and the Pretender and 
hope to be saved, as well as another". This kind of 
goodness is also seen in Captain Trunnion and betsy 
TrotwooJL,^ Worldly success is also seen in uaptain bow- 
^ ling a&jin bon hodrigo. 

forgiveness is seen in the kindness of Thomson and 
Roderick to Mackshane, in prison, despite his former 
cruelty to them on board the "Thunder"; when Roderick 
heard that Thomson was supporting him, he sent Mackshane 
ten pistoles. 

gratitude is shown in Marthas character, because 
bmily had been kind to her, she would go through any. 
hardship to serve her in distress. Also in bon bodrigo, 
who befriended all who had been kind to Peregrine. 

We find, then, a miniature world represented in 
these books (or either pair of booksj, representing,as 
shown, all the virtues and graces, all the vices and 
follies of human life, in the different varieties of 
characters, or in the varied incidents, bach pair of 
books pictures a little life in itself, and therefore 
the books are realistic in their sum total, as well as 










' 






























■ 



























29 


in many of their parts. xhe characters/ as illustrating 
sickens 1 humanity, include,all those afflicted in mind, 
body or estate, the human side of life, his art made 
visible to all mankind the characteristic virtues, the 
typical shortcomings of the English race. As an ideal¬ 
ist his task was to embody the better dreams of ordinary 
men, to fix them as bright realities. This he achieved 
by the strength of a faultless sympathy*' Smollett lacked 
this humanity and sympathy, but his characters have a 
healthy robustness and a lively spontaneity, mak\ing 
them very real. Smollett desired to arouse indignation 
against the cruelty and ruffianism of the most brutal 
period of the 18th Century - early tieorgian days, and he 
succeeded, by picturing these qualities highly exagger¬ 
ated, or, frequently, according to bare reality, as 
idealism never held less sway in the nation. 

Lickens shows more humanity in his characters than 
Smollett, not so much coarse brutality and callous in¬ 
difference to suffering. 

Sikes is the leading example of open brutality in 
Lickdns 4 two books. Some critic has stated that Sikes 
sLhowed lor felt) no remorse. if not, why is he so 
haunted by the spectacle of Haney's corpse? "Once he 
threw a rug over it, but it was worse to fancy the eyes 
and imagine them moving towards him, than to see them 
glaring upward as if watching the reflection of the pool 
and gore that quivered and danced in the sunlight on 
the ceiling. ---When he got there itiendon) all the people 
he met, the very children at the doors, seemed to view 

him with suspicion 15 ."Let no one talk of murderers 

escaping justice, and hint that Providence must sleep, 
there were twenty score of violent deaths in one long 
minute of that agony of fear". Again, we read, "Por 
now a vision came before him, as constant and more ter¬ 
rible than that from which he had escaped. Those widely " 
staring eyes, so lustreless and glassy, that he had 
better borne to s ee than think upon them, appeared in 
the midst of the darkness; light in themselves but giving 
light to nothing. There were but two, but they were 
everywhere, if he shut out the sight, there came -came- 
the room with every well-known object, - some indeed, 
that he would nave forgotten if ne had gone over its 
contents from memory - each in its accustomed place. 

The body was in its place and its eyes were as he saw 
them when he stole away, ne got up, and rushed into the 
field without. xhe figure was behind him. ne re-enterec 










. 

. 















1 

. 




































30 


the shed and shrank down once more. xhe eyes were there 
This seems like remorse. So far he was not conscious of 
pursuers, his flight was from the vision of the corpse, 
and from himself and uis guilty conscience, ne even wel¬ 
comed the voices and joined the crowd, and flying from 
memory and himself, plunged into the thickest of the 
throng". A practised and calloused murderer would have 
made away with the corpse and would not nave been so haun¬ 
ted by it. ne would, too, have shunned the throng, bikes 
moreover, is too burly and coarse, too gross and clumsy 
for a typical murderer. nis act was done in revenge on 
nancy for betraying the secret^and partly in self-protec¬ 
tion^, from fear of consequences. 

compare specimens of brutality in Smollett s uramp- 
ley and mackshane. "Grampley, an insidious slanderer on 
board the '"Thunder" caused a misunderstanding between the, 
surgeon and the captain. Then he confined the surgeon 
to JLs cabin, where he took a fever, and died. urampley 
felt no remorse for his barbarity, but insulted his mem¬ 
ory in the most abusive manner, and affirmed he had 
poisoned himself out of pure fear, dreading to be brought 
to a court-martial for mutiny, for which reason he would 
not suffer the service of the dead to be read over his 
body before it was thrown overboard". We have another 
instance of callous brutality, practised by nr. Mackshane 
- "The next patient to be considered labored under a 
quartan ague, and, being then in his interval of health, 
discovered no other symptoms than a pale, meagre, count¬ 
enance and emaciated body, upon which he was declared 
fit for duty and turned over to the boatswain; but, be¬ 
ing resolved to disgrace the doctor, died upon the fore¬ 
castle next day, during his cold fit. xhe third com¬ 
plained of a pleursitic stitch and spitting of blood, 
for which j/r. Mackshane prescribed exercises at the pump 
to promote expectoration", etc. while this is, no doubt,,, 
grossly exaggerated, the purpose is to arouse "that gen¬ 
erous indignation against the sordid and vicious dispos¬ 
ition of the world". 

A case of short rations on board the "ihunder" is 
thus described: "our provision consisted of putrid salt 
beef, to which the sailors gave the name of Irish horse, 
salt pork of Hew England, which, though neither fish, nor 
flesh, savored of both; bread from the same country, ever;* 
biscuit whereof, like a piece of clo uJ^-vgnrl: . mo - ve - d —by-Its 
own internal impulse . occasioned by the myriads of in¬ 
sects that dwelt within it, and butter served out by the 



















31 


gill, that tasted like train-oil thickened with salt." 
Although this presents a wretched picture, it does not 
awaken the pity aroused by Bumble's portrayal of short 
rations, (gruel vs. meat, etc). This is so ludicrous 
in effect by its grotesqueness that it arouses little 
emotion of tenderness. 

Dickens set the example of the novel of pity . This 
distinguishes his work from Smollett's. There is in his 
books a pervading spirit of compassion, and the spirit 
of respect for the individual. Bis purpose is to create 
a special setting and emotional quality in his novels. 

Bis success is not derived entirely from the characters, 
but depends on the situations which their existence 
makes possible. Thus, Oliver's sweet simplicity and 
helpless innocence prompts the kindly impulse in Mr. 
Bumble, as shown. It also gives lagan's violence and 
cruelty play to act, and receive the emphasis of contrast. 
Smollett's work is not sufficiently "complex" to show 
real tenderness and sympathy. Be shows heartless jest£? 
and "buffoonery", "burlesque" and "farce" in the main, 
varied by misfortunes and gloomy situations. 


in both authors we find, at times, a tragic gloom , 
due to seemingly useless striving against fate. An ex¬ 
ample is, where Koderiek, chained to the deck on a dark 
night, lies exposed to the furious broadswords of a 
French man-of-war, until, in full view of the gruesome 
scenes, he grows delirious through fear, (ch.29). An¬ 
other example is where, having been brutally attacked by 
a press-gang, and wounded on kis head and his cheek, he 
was taken prisoner and carried on board the "Thunder", 
where, after being pinioned like a malefactor, he was 
thrust down into the hold among a parcel of miserable 
wretches, the sight of whom well nigh distracted him. 

He handed his handkerchief to a fellow-captive and re¬ 
quested Assistance in stopping the bleeding of his wounds. : 
The fellow prisoner went and sold the handkerchief for 
a quart of gin (ch. 24). There is also tragic pathos in 
Molopoyn's experience. (see autobiography). These are 
very vivid pictures of sheer desperation in striving 
against fate and examples of Smollett' s"clever reporting'. 1 
They are made real by the straightforward, climactic 
order in which the misfortunes are narrated, each one, 
like a phantom, seeming to beckon to another, still more 
formidable, to follow fa its train, until the victim is 
enshrouded in tragic fatalism. The situation recalls 
Longfellow's description, how "Disasters come not singly’'. 










- 32 


But as if they watched and waited, 

Scanning one another's motions. 

When the first descends the others 
follow, follow, gathering flockwise, 

Aound their victim, sick and wotenUed". 

An example of "tragic gloom", but slightly dif¬ 
ferent is found in Martha s words t"i»avid copperfield" J 
which picture her life uistory: "1 know/that l/belong/ 

to it lthe rivers-it comes 1 / from coun/try places/ 

where/ there is/ no harm/ in it/ and it creeps through 
the dismal streets, aefiled and miserable, and it goes 
away, like my life, to a great sea, that is always 
troubled and i feel that i must go with it". Another 
example is uavid's experience at Murdstone and ^rimby s, 
related thus: "the misery it was .to my young heart to 
believe that day by day what i ha^e. learned and thought 
and delighted in would pass away, never to be brought 
back any more.* isee under Psychology. ) ihese examples 
from sickens portray rather the tragedy of the soul. 
Physical suffering is not so common as in bmollett. Mar¬ 
tha s words are an example of sickens writing under the 
influence of strong emotion. Another example of tragedy 
is seen in David's words about ^ora: ;, i sax / down al// 
my desk / alone^ / and cried / to thinhf, oh what' / a fax-/ 
al name//(.blossom] it was / / and how / the bios// som 
with// ered in // its bloom*/ upon the tree." Also in 
Peg.gotty’s account of Mrs. Copperfield on the eve of 
death. "The day / you went / away /, She said / to me / 

I never shall see my pretty darling again. Something 
tells me the truth, I know T . She triedV to hold/ / up 
adxer that' / and many a time, when they told her she was 
thoughtless and light-hearted, made believe to be so: 
but it*/ was all' / a by V- gone then/” 

sickens pathos . unlike Smollett's awakens rather a 
pleasing emotion at times, because of its poetic qualit¬ 
ies. In his moods of softness, writing under strong em¬ 
otion he sometimes wrote in a metrical style. Phis has 
been criticised as a fault of good prose, but it seems 
to suit such passages^ by making the sound represent the 
sense. In Martha’s words, the iambic movement seems to 
suggest the flow of the river. In David’s and Peggotty's 
words^soft sounding movement represents the softer e- 
motion. We have it also in the following, where it adds 
to the peaceful effect: "In her death she winged her 
flight back to her calm( untroubled youtl/, and cancelled 
all'the rest !1 < Also where accents are marked in the 
other examples given above. 







33 


D Dickens' pathos was made more real, at times, by 
his optimism, e.g. "Oliver asks for more." is consid¬ 
ered real pathos by virtue of Oliver's optimism find 
faith in humanity. This is a phase of Dickens' idealism. 

Dickens was an" ideal idealist ". It has been said 
that his characters are all ,r humours highly idealized". 

He observed the highest and most beautiful aspects of 
life, tiven to his villains he usually adds relief by a 
gleam of humor, or a tinge of picturesqueness. "Nor all 
the squalor, sin, and pain in uis novels, the impression 
left on reading any one of them is, that he believed 
that this is the best of all possible wo rlds. His faith 
in the better element of human nature, in its possible 
triumph, in its readiness to grasp the helping hand out¬ 
stretched to it, was boundless. "Oliver emerged uncon¬ 
taminated from Hagan's den. Nancy repented before she 
died. She desired to lead a better life and urged hill 
Sykes to do so. She held up Hose Maylie‘s handkerchief 
towards heaven and prayed for mercy, Martha showed her 
innate goodness of heart by rescuing timily from a fate 
similar to her own. 

It has been objected that such vile characters as 
Hill Sykes and Nancy, etc. cannot seem real without "ut¬ 
tering some profanity or vulgarity", but Dickens pre¬ 
ferred to leave that to the reader's imagination. This 
"reserve" is another phase of his idealism. Martha's 
character is portrayed mainly by her mysterious and 
stealthy entrances and exits, and her apparent desire to 
shun the civilized world. Neither is Nancy's life por¬ 
trayed in detail, and Hmily's seduction is merely 
suggested. 

in marked contrast to this reserve, we have Smollett 
with his frequent use of oaths and coarse vulgarity. 

(tiven Narcissa says "Oh Jesus': ‘X) Heavens i') and the de¬ 
tailed and lengthy description of the life of Miss Will¬ 
iams, a character similar to Martha. He delights in ex¬ 
hibiting the depths of human depravity and in appealing 
to the coarser side of the imagination. He was a roman¬ 
tic realist, but to quite an extent a coarse naturalist, 
tie lacked the optimism, humanity, spirituality and re¬ 
serve of Dickens' idealism. There is nowever, more ro¬ 
bustness about his work, which some admire. 

Dickens' idealism gave rise to one failing, i.e. his 
illusion as to the existence of "perfect women". This 
illusion was caused, it is thought, by the death of Mary 






34 


Hogarth, his ideal, in the dawn of her womanhood. Agnes 
Wickfield and Hose Maylie are embodiments of this illus¬ 
ion. ihey are considered by critics as more like god¬ 
desses than real women. "Severely correct, supremely 
perfect and supremely uninteresting as inhuman and re¬ 
pellent as they are beautiful." Agnes is willing to 
take a sister's place with the man she loves C rather un¬ 
natural.) He describes Hose Maylie thus: "She was "cast 
in so slight and exquisite a mould, so mild and gentle, 
so pure and beautiful, that earth seemed not her element 

nor its rough creatures her fit companions. She-threw 

into her beaming look such an expression of affection 
and artless loveliness, that blessed spirits might have 
smiled to look upon". This nas more of the sentimental 
and ideal than of reality, hut it is the purity and 
nobleness of her character that causes Haney to feel her 
own unworthiness. She is only another instance of Dick¬ 
ens 1 highly exaggerated types. His idea of perfect wo¬ 
men prompted Dickens to portray also the perfect man. 

We have this type in Harry Maylie. Smollett portrays 
no such ideally perfect characters, but he does not give 
all the varied and contrasting types of character in the 
world as Dickens does. In "David Gopperfield" alone, 
there are more types than in the two books of Smollett, 
as nardly any two are similar. Hut many of Smollett's 
are, especially the women characters, wealthy society 
ladies or coarse ill-bred, "wenches". Harcissa is more 
human than Agnes. nmilia resembles Dora in her coquetry 
but^more mature. 

Another so-called defect in Dickens arising out of 
his ideallism, is his emigration policy in "David Copp- 
erfield”. This is pictured as a‘'panacea" for every woe, 
from the"hopeless tragedy "of Peggotty, to the still more 
"hopeless comedy" of Mieawber. The scheme is a "sen¬ 
timental illusion". in fact, the book decreases in re-^ 
alism towards the end. It starts in a romantic realistic 
manner, to tell a living truth about a living boy and 
man. It begins with a new style, (being the first of 
his second series of novels), but closes in his old style 
(more pedantic and decorative). There is an air of fat¬ 
igue towards the close, because Dickens began it under 
the sudden emotional impulse to tell the whole truth 
about himself, and then allowed the whole truth to be 
more and more diluted. 

besides these were other so-called faults in his 
work. Some scenes have been pronounced too melodramatic 
and stagey, e.g. the idle mysteries surrounding Oliver 








35 


l ch. 17), itosa's tirade against Emily in .David's hear¬ 
ing, Nancy's murder, etc. hut this was due largely to 
force of circumstances with sickens. jj'rom the conditions 
of ais first undertaking as a novelist, he wrote in 
numbers which came more easily sometimes than at other 
times. "Each monthly number of "David Uopperfield", 
with one exception, contained thirty-two pages of about 
five hundred and seventy-five words to a page. Part 1 
ends when David returns home after his mother's second 
marriage and Mr. Murdstone's dog flies at him; Part ill 
with the description of his mother's death; Part &I , 
with the ruin of David's aunt; Part aIII with David's 
marriage to Dora; Part aVI with the finding of Emily; 
and Part XVII with the death of Dora; Part AVI11 ends 
with fhe departure of the colonists for Australia. Ever$ 
thirty-second page had to close, if possible, with some 
kind of situation, or some critical point, in the hero's 
life. Dhus there was a frequent check on the spontan¬ 
eity of the writer. In the scene of dose's tirade, Dav¬ 
id does not interfere, for it would have "spoiled the 
curtain". Li Peggotty must appear and Emily must fall in¬ 
to his arms, crying "Uncle" and he must come when she 
is at the last extremity of anguish. Dut the author, 
having put the story in the mouth of a supposed narrator, 
could not describe the meeting of Kosa and Emily him¬ 
self. David had to witness it. Still, when Peggotty 
does come, and holds the unconscious Emily in his arms, 
it is a very touching scene". Nancy's murder scene was 
intended for the stage. It was one of Dickens' most 
popular readings and the effect it had on the emotions 
of the audience shows how dramatic and thrilling it is. 
Had Dickens written for publication in book form, and 
not for serial issue, probably there w^ould have been 
less exaggeration and fewer "curtains", hut the method 
in which he worked was well suited to him. He was born 
to write theatrically, not philosophically; for humor 
and sentiment/to touch the heart, more than sent4men -~ 
ta lity -the intellect. 

It is said that the realist is "the legitimate 
child of the satirist and sentimentalist". Dickens' 
sentimentality is shown in the treatment of his rela¬ 
tions with Dora and is considered excellent y ^andr^is 
marriage with her far surpasses his second marriage so 
far as realism is concerned. ihere is a spontaneity in 
Dora's character and in her affection for him, as also 
in his for her, which makes these scenes of love very 
natural, although Dickens has been criticized for ex¬ 
travagance in these scenes. As a rule, however, it is 










36 


considered he was ever at his best when dealing with an 
"amiable weakness”. Sach would include .bora's love, as 
appealing to the affection, unbiased entirely by reason. 
His sentimentality is also seen ^nder "pathos”, mrs. 
Copperfield is an example oi sentimentality, both in her 
affection for David and in her appeal to the sense of 
pity and thus moving the reader to tears. This book is 
not excessively sentimental* though it is more so than 
Smollett's books, excepting ohe latter have c ertainl y a 
more sentimental ending, - more after the style of the 
older novels, which closed with a wedding, on the assump¬ 
tion that success in getting married was necessarily 
success in marriage and therefore the climax of life. 
Though Dickens' marriage with Agnes comes near the end, 
it is not considered a "real marriage" but only a make- 

Another criticism is that "coincidence" is too fre¬ 
quent with Dickens, e.g. when Oliver casually makes ac¬ 
quaintance with an old gentleman who turned out to be 
a relative, who desired of all things to discover the 
boy. When Steerforth returns to England from his travels 
with hmily, his ship'is, of course, wrecked on the sands 
of Yarmouth and His aead body washed up at the feet of 
David, who happened to have gone to visit his Yarmouth 
friends on that very day. His "situation” is also cri¬ 
ticised in the case of deep, in that "the knaveries 
have no claim on our belief, and that intrigue is intro¬ 
duced merely because intrigue seems necessary." 

dmollett had one of these faults of Dickens, i.e. 
weak ending for his books. The good fortunes of both 
Hoderick and Peregrine seem thrust upon them more for the 
purpose of concluding the stories than from any logical 
result of their conduct. The first part of these books 
is full of vivacity and reality, which gradually wanes 
toward the end. Dramatics is not such a problem with 
Smollett, his style being much more narrative. 

affective scenes fr om Dickens are David's journey 
on the Dover road, which is considered a masterpiece of 
narrative prose. This is largely owing to the humor. 
Domestic life (ch. 48) is also pronounced "perfect 
writing" containing"'just the right amount of sentiment 
and satire to make it real!' The exposure of uriah deep 
(ch. 52) is also considered very realistic. The picnic 3 
scene with the "ded Whisker" in attendance is typical 
of the spirits and moods of young people. dykes'death 
illustrates the delight of the crowd in sensation. 









. 

. fi 


















- 37 


The scene on London .bridge,, is also good. 

A distinct type of realism is illustrated in the 
"coffee-room" scene, the realism which makes things 
seem more actual than the reality. it is the reality 
of a dream, gained only by walking dreamily in a place. 
With such realism Lickens could always vitalize some dark 
or dull corner of London. There are details in Lickens' 
description a window or a railing, or the key-hole of a 
door, which he endows with "demoniac life". Of the coffee 
shop in St. martin's Lane, with an oval glass plate with 
"ooffee Loom" painted on it,he says: "if 1 ever find 
myself in a very different kind of coffee-room now, but 
where there is such an inscription on glass, and read it 
backwards, on the wrong side, ‘Moor eeffocc", a shock 
goes through my blood". This is based on the realistic 
principle, that the most fantastic thing is often the 
precise fact. Lickens adopted this realism everywhere, 
his world was alive with inanimate objects. A similar 
kind of realism is seen in this description: "what in¬ 
tolerable dullness to sit listening to the ticking of the 
clock and ---- and counting the divisions in the moulding 
on the chimney-piece and wandering away, with my eyes on 
the ceiling, among the Curls and cork-screws in the paper 
on the wall. what walks i took alone, down the Muddy 
lanes in the bad winter weather, carrying that parlor and 
Miss Murdstone in it, everywhere; a monstrous load, that 
1 was obliged to bear, a daymare that there was no poss¬ 
ibility of breaking in, a weight that brooded on my wits, 
and blunted them." This type of realism is not common 
in Smollett. his is more visual than visionary. 

- T- 

Lickens 8 keen observation and visual realism is seen 
in his description of the street where rraddles lived. 
(D.C.) "The inhabitants seemed to nave a propensity to 

throw any little trifles-into the road --i myself 

saw a shoe, a doubled-up sauce-pan, a black bonnet, and 
an umbrella in various stages of decomposition." It is 
also seen in the description of Martha’s neighborhood. 

"The ground was cumbered with rusty iron monsters of 
steam boilers, wheels, cranks, pipes, furnaces, paddles, 
anchors, diving-bells, windmill sails, and i know not 
what strange objects, grovelling in the dust underneath 
which they nad the appearance of vainly trying to hide 
themselves". "Slimy gaps and causeways, winding among 
old wooden piles, with a sickly substance clinging to 
the latter,like green mir, and the rags of last year's 
handbills, offering rewards for drowned men, fluttering 
above the highwater mark, led down through the ooze and 








38 - 


slush to the ebb tide." The wealth of detail makes this 
passage very realistic. Another example of keen obser¬ 
vation is seen in the following from Oliver Twist": 
"Midnight had come upon the crowded city. The palace, 
the flight-cellar, the jail, the madhouse, the chambers 
of birth and of death, of health and of sickness, the 
rigid face of the corpse, and the calm sleep of the child 
Midnight was upon them all". Dickens taught every au¬ 
thor after him this habit of observation. 

This kind of realism, (based on keen observation), 
is found in Smollett 4 s books. it is seen in Roderick's 
description of the sick b£rth on board the "Thunder": 
"Here 1 saw about fifty miserable distempered wretches, 
suspended in rows, so huddled one ^pon the other, that 
not more than fourteen inches of space was allotted for 
each with his bed and beddings; and deprived of the light 
of the day as well as of fresh air; breathing nothing 

but - atmosphere of the morbid steams exhaling from 

their own excrements and diseased bodies, devoured with 
vermin hatched in the filth that surrounded them, and 
destitute of every convenience necessary for people in ^ 
that helpless condition", hut we find more observati%§=- / 
descriptions of people's appearance in Smollett than of 
scenes, e.g. the description of Mr. Lavement: "He was a 
little, old, withered man, with a forehead about an inch 
high, a nose turned up at the end, large cheek bones, 
that helped to form a pit for his little grey eyes, a 
great bag of loose skin hanging down on each side in 
wrinkles, like the olforges of a ballon, and a mouth so 
accustomed to that contraction which produces grinding, 
that he could not pronounce a syllable without discover¬ 
ing the remains of his teeth, which consisted of four 
yellow fangs, not improperly called canine". Also s con -* 
in the description of the old man (ch. 11 "R.R."). "His 
eyes were hollow, bleared, and gummy; his face was shri¬ 
velled into a thousand wrinkles, his gums were destitute 
of teeth, his nose sharp and drooping, his chin pecked 
and prominent; sd that when he mumped or spoke, they 
approached one another like a pair of nut-crackers; he 
supported himsl£#f on an ivory-headed cane, and his whole 
figure was a just emblem of winter, famine, and avarice". 
These examples show a careful attention to detail; each 
describes all the features of a face; forehead, nose, 
eyes, mouth or chin, skin, teeth, Dickens rarely does 
this. He describes a face more as an indication of 
character. 

The symbolism of nature is frequently used by Dickers 











39 - 


for vivid and realistic effects and to create a certain 
emotional atmosphere. This is seen in his words express¬ 
ing his feelings after his mother's death. "The wind 
came moaning on across the flat as it had done before, 
hut 1 could ^ot help fancying, now, that it moaned of 
those who were gone; and instead of thinking that the 
sea m ight rise in the night and float the boat away, i 
thought of the sea that had risen since 1 had last heard 
those sounds, and drowned my happy nome". The metaphor 
here is very effective, he uses this nature symbolism 
more for s ubtle pathos , as in portentious passages fore¬ 
boding disasters, than he does for vital pathos, e.g. 

"hut from the greater part of the broad valley inter¬ 
posed^ mist was rising like a sea. which, mingled with 
the darkness, made it seem as if the glaring waters would 
encompass them. 1 have reason to remember this, and 
think of it with awe; for before l looked upon those two 
again, a stormy sea had risen to their feet", (refers to 
Steerforth and hosa hartle). This device is not used 
in Smollett, but picturesqueness is used. 









' 



■ 




- 















40 




STYLE 


cl • P~ Other examples of especially realistic scenes are 

the storm at sea , both in sickens and in Smollett. m 
"David Uopperfield" we have this description: "Sweeping 
gusts of rain came up before this storm like showers of 

steel :-The tremendous sea itself, --confounded 

me. As the high watery walls came rolling in, and, at 
their highest tumbled into surf, they looked as if the 
least^would engulf the town. As the receding wave swept 
back with a hoarse roar, it seemed to scoop out deep 
caves in the beach, as if its purpose were to undermine 
the earth. When some white-headed billows thundered on, 
and dashed themselves to pieces before they reached the 
land, every fragment of the late whole seemed possessed 
by the full might of its wrath, rushing to be gathered 
to the composition of another monster. Undulating hills 

were changed to valleys „ undulating valleys - were 

lifted up to hills; masses of water shivered and shook 
the beach with a booming sound, every shape tumultuously^ 
rolled on, as soon as made, to change' its shap£ and place 
and beat' another' shaped and placl away'; the ideal shore on 
the horizon, with its towers and buildings, rose and fell 
the clouds flew fast and thick; i seemed to see a rending 
and upheaving of all nature". This scene is made vivid 
by the underlined simile and metaphors. The grandeur of 
the storm is impressed by the three long periodic sen¬ 
tences; "As the high—--another monster", and 

by parallel and balanced structure and contrast: "Hills 

-- ---valleys". Then short, loose sentences follow, 

which suggest the rapid changes: "undulating hills- 

hills, etc." uickens 1 keen observation of detail in de¬ 
scription i£ noticed here: the waves of the beach, the 
towers, and buildings, the clouds are all described. 

There is here again the metrical style of sentences las 

marked)- in "every shape----place away", which 

rather heightens the effect here, in describing the water 
as the river in Martha's words. 


The storm in "Roderick nandom" is thus described: 
"The sea swelled into billows mountains high, on the top 
of which our ship so metimes ^ung as if it were about to 

be precipated to the abyss below. Sometimes we sunk 
between the waves that rose on each side higher than our 
topmost nead; and threatened by dashing together, to 
overwhelm us in a moment. Of all our fleet, consisting 
of one hundred and fifty sail, scarce twelve appeared, 
and these driving under their base poles, at the mercy 



















41 


Of the tempest. At length the mast of one of them gave 
way, and tumbled overboard with a hideous crash, Dor 
was the prospect in our own ship much more agreeable; a 
number of officers and sailors ran backward and forward 
with distraction in their looks, hallooing to one anothei 
and undetermined what they should attend to first. Some 
clung to the .yards, endeavoring to unbend the sails that 
were split into a thousand pieces flapping in the wind; 
others tried to - --which were yet whole, while the 
masts at every pitch, bent and quivered ji frp t.wi gs, as 
if they would have shivered into innumerable splinters. 
While 1 considered this scene with equal terror and as¬ 
tonishment, one of the main braces broke" etc. As these 
parties were in the ship rather as eye-witnesses from ’ 
shore, as in Dickens' description, the scene is different 
This portrays the terror and confusion caused. The 
grandeur of the scenery is not mentioned, it is a more 
practical style, nothing poetical as in Dickens, it 
cggsists almost entirely of loose sentences. There is 
figurative language; regular narrative style rather 
than descriptive - "clever reporting". it gives the im¬ 
pression of a real experience. So does Dickens, only 
it has the aesthetic and emotionsl element added, and 
takes^the whole face of nature. I Dickens was more fond 
of nature than Smollett.) 

The qualities of style are used by both authios, 
viz: for realistic effect: similes, are numerous. Those 
of Dickens convey more meaning than Smollett : s, e.g. 

"The arrears {of school-work) swells like a rolling snow 
ball". "There is a strange unwholesome smell upon the 
room (school-room), like mildewed corderoys, sweet app¬ 
les wanting air, and rotten books". "Jip made a com¬ 
fortable noise in answer, a little like a tea-kettle 
when it sings.' 1 "I felt as if 1 had been living in a 
palace of cards, which had tumbled down, leaving only 
Miss Mills and me among the ruins", etd. A gentleman in 
the commons wore "a stiff brown wig that looked as if 
it were made of gingerbread". 

Compare Smollett's similes: "A stage heroine (in 
?t P. P. N ) tossed her arms, and put him in mind of "a wind¬ 
mill under the agitation of a hard gale". A male per¬ 
former lifted up his hands above his head "like a tum¬ 
bler going to vault", he spoke as though his throat 
"had been obstructed by a hairbrush". Conductor colter 
lived "in constant alarm, like a man that walks under the 
wall of a nodding tower". Peregrine was "humorous as 

winter", "hungry as a kite", etc. These similes seem 









42 


to aim more at humor than explanation. 

Metaphors from Dickens are: "They l the words of 
his lesson) seemed to have put skates , on, and to skim 
away from me, with a smoothness there was no checking"; 
“ groves of deserted bedsteads" lat school in his holi¬ 
days). "The earthy smell, the sunless air, the sensa¬ 
tion of the world being shut out, the resounding of the 
organ through the black-and-white arched galleries, and 
aisles, are wings, that take me back, and hold me hov¬ 
ering above those days in a half-sleeping and half¬ 
waking dream". - " Carcases of houses in Martha's neigh¬ 
borhood?-, etc. 

Smollett uses a few metaphors, e.g. "A jail iSthe 
best bath-tub to which a cynic philosopher can retire". 
"The demon of Discord with her sooty wings", etc. 

climax is used effectively by both authors, Dick¬ 
ens uses it here, together with balanced and parallel 
structure: "To put that dress upon her Ihmily) and to 

east off what she wore, to take her bn my arm again, and 
to wander toward home, to stop sometimes upon the road, 
and heal her bruised feet and her worse bruised heart - 
was all that l thowt of now" (spoken by Mr. Peggotty). 
it is used in David's words, descriptive of his life at 
Murdstone and Crimby's: "Prom Monday morning until Sat¬ 
urday night, l had no advice, no counsel, no encourage¬ 
ment , no consolation, no assistance, no support of any 
kind from anyone, that i can call to mind". Again, " 
They (the Murdstones) sullenly, sternly, steadily, over¬ 
looked me" --Day after day, week after week, month af¬ 

ter month, i was coldly neglected." The monotony and 
regularity is emphasized in the last two sentences bv 
the climaxes .co^Z^f a- 3 &*** 

- ct *J 

Smollett uses it to portray very vividly Strap’s 
feelings and the gradual ascendancy of one over another. 
When Doderick related ^is experience to Strap, the lat¬ 
ter was strongly affected, according to the various sit¬ 
uations described: "he started with surprise ; glowered 
with indignation, gaped with curiosity ; smiled with plea^ 
sure : tremble d with fear; and wepf with sorrow , as the 
vicissitudes of my life inspired these different pass¬ 
ions. Part of this is anti-climax - indignation - pleas¬ 
ure. 

contrast is u.sed some also in the above examples, 
and elsewhere, e.g. “The more l pitied myself, or pitied 
others, the more i sought for consolation in the image 
of Dora. The greater the accumulation of deceit and 






























43 - 


u^A fu— 


tu 


I&. t&ji Lsv-inJJcJl 


trouble in the world‘>j also the following: "If Mr, 
Murdstone were in his best humor, i checked him. if Miss 
Murdstone were in her worst, i intensified it". Also in 
the dn§cr^.ption of the midnight scene, under observation- 
ip. e.g. birth, and death, health and sibkness; 

corpse and child. 


■balanced and Parallel Structures are noticed in most 
of the climaxes and contrasts. Parallel structures are 
also seen in uoctor Strong's farewell to <;ack Meldon: “A 
prosperous voyage out, a thriving career abroad, arfL a 
happy return home". A very marked example tunequalled in 
Smollett), is found in i>avid‘s "Ketrospect, ich. 43), con¬ 
taining forty phrases of similar form, ^escribing his 
wedding with uora he says: "The rest is all a more or 

less incoherent dream- of a pew-opener arranging us 

like a drill sergeant, before the altar rails - of the 

clergyman and clerk appearing, of a few boatmen-stroll¬ 

ing in, of an ancient mariner----of her waving ner little 

hand-of ner once more stopping and looking back-her 

last kisses and farewells". This is a very realistic 
picture, inhere his memory plays a part* Jhe structure of 
the passage brings out prominently the different detaiJs . 







44 


xjI OTlUiM 


Dickens uses repetition of words and expressions 
for impressive effects, e.g. Steerforth's words: "Daisy 
- it's the name I like best to call ^ou by, - and l 
wish. I wish . I wish, you could give it to me!" A lit¬ 
tle later David says "Never more, oh Uod forgive ^ou, 
Steerforth; to touch that passive hand in love and 
friendship, never , never, never . morei" 'i’here has been 

a time si nc.e when 1 nave wondered, etc.There has 

been a time since, when 1 have asked myself the question- 
would it have been better for little nmily to have had 
the waters close above her head that morning in my sight? 
This device is not so common in Smollett. 

A clever use of adjectii Laa. is very noticeable in 
nickens, which frequently creates a very realistic 
effect , e.g. David’s description of the company at Mr. 
Spenlow’s: "Altogether i have never on any occasion, 

made one at such a cosy, dosy, old-fashioned, time- 
forgotten, sleepy-headed little family party in all my 
life". Also his description of Uriah on the stage coach 
"It was some small satisfaction to me to observe his 
spare, short-waisted, high-shouldered, mulberry-colored 
great-coat”; also in his description of the play on his 

feelings, "When 1 came out into the rainy street-1 

felt as if I had come from the clouds--to a bawling, 

splashing, link-lighted, umbrella-struggling, hackney- 
coach jostling, patten-climbing, muddy, miserable, world” 
These adjectives give a very vivid and realistic picture 
in each of these passages. 

his easy, graphic power, is seen at times in the 
use of other words, e.g. his description of Mrs. Crupp: 
"she gradually smiled herself, one-sided herself, and 
rubbed herself out of the room”. This expresses briefly 
and vividly, her obsequious manner, £Ls indieative t ,of her 
character. (t .Betsy called her a^tiq^-servef', and a wealth 
worshipper/ her deceptive nature^expressed by "one¬ 
sided". Thus Dickens was a master of iS&glish prose, as 
an instrument of realism - Smollett used larger words 
than Dickens and used certain favorite ones very fre¬ 
quently, e.g. "punctilio", "ravished" (with delight) 
etc. 



















] V; ' 5: 












- 

' 


i 

( 
















Smollett vs. Dickens 
Choice of Material 
and 

Realistic Method 


■BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Development of the English Hovel - Cross 
Life of Charles Dickens - John Eorester. 

Charles Dickens - W. H. Helm 
Criticisms and appreciations of Charles 
Dickens Works - C. K. Chesterton. 

The Great English novelists Heade's Library. 

The Art of the novelist - Lathrop 

Advance of the English Hovel - Wm. Sijons-Phelps 

The Modern Hovel - Eollett 

Charles Dickens - A critical Study - C.E.Chesterton 
David Copperfield - Introduction. 

Oliver Twist - Introduction. 










