For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


























©X OBEM 

mwiBswaais 

ajiBaiMMis 












tnv<ju^ci. 
fYY 


t 







THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SOCIOLOGICAL BACKGROUND OF MODERN ELEMENTARY 
EDUCATION IN CANADA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 

, | 

IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

EVERETT F. HURT 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
MAY, 1943. 



I \\JLb\A) 

\W 

#3 


PART I 


SOCIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS RELATING 


TO ELUCATIOI 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/sociologicalbackOOhurt 


TABLE OF 0 Oil TESTS 


PAGE 

APPENDICES IV 

PART I 

SOCIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS RELATING TO EDUCATION 
CHAP TEP. 

I. INTRODUCTION 1 

II. CHARACTER JSD REST®3 OF SOCIAL CHANGE 7 

III. SOCIAL CONTROL THROUGH EDUCATION 52 

IY TEE RELATION OF THE SCHOOL TO THE SOCIAL ORDER 52 

V. EDUCATION AND TEE SAFETY OF DEMOCRACY 71 

VI. TEE SCHOOL IN RELATION TO TEE SOCIAL SERVICES 81 

PART II 

APPLICATION OF SOCIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS TO EDUCATIONAL 
THEORY AND PRACTICE 

VII. THE GENERAL NATURE OF THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 

CURRICULA 105 

VIII. SUBJECTS OF TEE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL CURRICULUM 126 

IZ. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 165 

t 


III 




.Ux INDICES 




Page 

Appendix 

I 

.171 

Appendix 

11 

173 

Appendix 

111 

175 








CHAPTEP I 


IDTEODUCTIOE 

The purpose of this thesis is to analyse the 
sociological factors influencing the formulation of modern 
educational theory. Particular application of the discussion 
involved is made to the programmes of study for elementary 
schools in Canada. This application is made in the hope that 
some facts concerning the backgrounds of our modern curriculum 
construction can be organized, and that some problems in this 
field of study be indicated. The method employed in the study 
is analysis of the elements concerned with philosophical inter¬ 
pretation. Do attempt is made to rate the programmes of study 

1 

individually with the view to comparison. In so far as their 
philosophies are analysed, it is done generally with an eye to 
the trend of educational philosophy in Canada as a whole . Com¬ 
parisons and contrasts in details are made for the purpose of 
illustration in the general field. 

The plan of the discussion has two parts, as follows; 

Part I; Sociological Concepts ^elating to Education. 
iart II; The Application of Sociological Concepts in 

Educational Theory and Practice. 

It is intended that Part I shall be an outline and analysis of 

background-problems rather than a mere 11 cross-section of some 

2 

prevailing popular or professional belief". Pegarding 


1 

Good, Carter V., barr, A. S., Scates, Douglas E.: methodology 
in Educational Research, Dew York, D. Appleton-Century Co., 
1936, 697. 

2 

■°usk, Pobert- P.; Pesearch in Education , University of .London, 
Press, Ltd., 1932. p. 


47 










































, 

































; 



























the treatment of the problem in Bart II , the remarks in the 
first paragraph are explanatory of its method and purpose. 

A reason for studying the sociological backgrounds 

of our elementary curricula is expressed in the following 

statement by Leo J. Bruekner: 

"....In recent years the approach to the study of cur¬ 
ricula has definitely shifted from an analysis of the 
contents of the areas of subject matter to the study of 
developmental processes (for instance increase in height 
and weight) or as a result of influences of the environ¬ 
ment, more especially educational environment....” 1 

It is stated in other quarters that the view of education 

is broadening. Eart expresses this development of 

educational theory as follows: "School plays some part in 

the education of each of us today, but so does every other 

2 

social institution, and the whole life of the community....” 

The above-quoted statements appear to be in 
harmony with the trend of educational sociology in so far as 
they indicate fields of interest and study. As a background 
for the discussion to follow, the meaning of educational 
sociology is here accepted as that branch of sociology "concerned 
with the study of the educational process from the point of 
view of its social purposes and the social conditions that 
determine its efficiency". The function of educational 
sociology as well, can be stated briefly. It is the function 


1 

Elementary School Journal , January, 1940, p. 385. 

2 

Eart, Joseph E.: A Social Interpretation of Education , E.Y. 
Eenry Holt, 1929, p. xiv 
3 

Bayne, •. George: Headings in Educational Sociology , I.Y., 


rrentice-Eall Inc., 1932, Vol. 1, p. 25. 




















.pertaining to the relation of the school to the social life 

of the community and the educational influences of the 

community. The following summary of this function by irayne 

is adequate for our present purpose: 

"One of the problems of educational sociology...is to 
develop means for determing social change through 
education, and to j^lace the emphasis upon the subject 
matter of the curriculum, the method of school instruc¬ 
tion and the school organization for the purpose of 
bringing about changes in social behavior.” 1 

This exposition of the function of educational sociology 

sug ests merely one task of the sociologist, but it is one 

of far-reaching implications and covers a background 

sufficiently inclusive for the topics discussed in the 

following chapters. 

Some preliminary assumptions and some amplification 

of the above introductory discussion can be made at this point. 

Educational progress as expressed in school 

curricula today results largely from changing concepts of 

individual and social needs. The most immediate influence 

upon educational theory and practice appears to be the 

tendency to formulate educational objectives in the 

accordance with intrinsic values to be sought in education, 

the greatest emphasis being placed upon the practical needs 
2 

of children. The evolution of educational theory is being 
influenced, therefore, by the belief that children themselves 

T ' " “ ~ ~ ~ 

Ibid., p. 32. 

2 

new Instructional xractices of Iromise , Twelfth Yearbook, 
Department of Supervisors of Instruction, E.E.A., Washington, 
D.G., 1940, p. 192. 























. 






































































. 






















-4- 


are more important than the skills they acquire. One result 
of this trend is the coming into favour of the ’’experience 
curriculum.” 

Modern theory appears to he affecting the 

1 

educational programmes in Canada There are recent changes 

in administrative and supervisory techniques, changes in the 

2 

equipping of school plants, as veil as increased attention 
paid to the improvement of relationships between the school 
and the home and the co-ordination of all educational agencies 
of the community. 

Parallel progress in these various branches of 
education is due to the fact that knowledge of childhood 
and knowledge of environmental influences are basically 
correlated. In the modern view of education neither the 
physical nor the psychological factors alone are sufficient 
for an understanding of educational growth. The sociology 
of childhood involves a study co-ordinated knowledge of the 
child and his environment. This means that the function of 
the school is a complicated one. In the community it is the 

task of the school to co-ordinate the influences of various 

4 

educational agencies, for the benefit of the child, and the 


1 

Sandiford, reter: ’’Curriculum Pevision in Canada”, The 
School, Toronto, lebruary, 1938, pp. 472-480. 

2 

School Progress , Toronto, July, 1939, pp. 8, 9. 

3 

Brown, Francis J, ; Sociology of Childhood, I.Y., Prentice 
Hall, Inc., 1939. pp. 275-291. 

4 

Uelby, Ernest 0. in Fewer Instructional rractices of promise, 
op. cit. P* 35. 













































. 































































school must, 
1 


influences. 


besides, 


neutralize and offset undesirable educatio 


The general assumption is that the study of the 

child in his environment is of increased importance in social 
2 


science. To a degree theory has prompted action; improve¬ 
ment and extension of institutions for the promotion of all¬ 
round educational growth of children form an important part 
of social service programmes today. It is the aim in the 
study of educational sociology to discover the basis of 
promoting security and happiness and moral growth for the 
individual child. In an address to the White House Conference 
on Child Welfare in April, 1939, President P.oosevelt of the 
United States referred to the sociological problem of child¬ 


hood in the following inclusive words; 

"....It is not enough to consider what a democratic 
society must provice. We must look at our civilization 
through the eyes of our children. If we can state in 
simple language some of the basic necessities of child¬ 
hood, we shall see more clearly the issues which challenge 
our intelligence... We make the assumption that a happy 


child should live in a home where he will find warmth* 
food ana affection; that his parents take care of him 
should he fall ill; that at school he will find the 
teachers and the tools needed for an education; that 
when he has grown up there will be a job for him and that 
he will some day establish his own home...." 3 


1 

Brown, op. cit., pp. 306, 332. 

2 

Ibid., p. 3 
3 

School and Society, Vol. 49, May, 1939, pp. 


590 


591 








-6- 


Tbis statement of President Poosevelt's 

represents the broader social and economic aspect of child 

well-being. There is a more specifically educational aspect 

presented by Witty and Skinner as follows; 

M ....if attempts to help the child prove truly beneficial 
they must be viewed as part of a larger and more signifi¬ 
cant problem of so modifying school practices that all 
children will be led through a sequence of successful, 
happy and meaningful experiences to adequate adulthood..”1 

It cannot be supposed that educationists can lose sight of 

either of these aspects of the situation. They are factors 

relating theory and practice in the educational field. 


1 

Witty, Paul A. and Skinner, Ghas. E. (Editors); ilental Hygiene 
in Education , u. Y., Earrar and "binehart, Inc., 1936, p. 6. 








- 7 - 


CHAPTEP II 

TEE CEABACTEF AED PESJLTS OF SOCIAL CHAHGB. 

In this chapter there is an outline-discussion 
of some general features and results of social change in the 
modern world. The purpose of the outline is to present 

(1) a "background for the sociological view of education and 

(2) to indicate the nature of the problems of social control 
through education. It is hoped that the familiarity of the 
material used will not lessen its significance for the present 
purpose. The writer "believes that sociological facts and 
theories that have become commonplace in current literature, 
are worthy of increased and renewed consideration 

Even a cursory view of modern social trends reveals 
a striking variety of fundamental relationships concerned in 
social change. One is reminded frequently that the complexity 
of modern life is its outstanding characteristic. Economic 
stress is a fact of fundamental importance, and modern social 
development is marked by apparent rapidity in social change 
unprecedented in history. Mere change, however, would not 

be peculiar to this, or any age. Social backgrounds have 

1 

"always been changing.” Pate of social change is amatter of 
greatest concern for educational and social leaders. 


1 

Schorling, P. and McClusky, Lew York:- ’Education and Social 
Trends, L. Y., Yonkers-onEudson, p.l. 






















































- 8 - 


Confusion and frustration in modern life are 

said to lie indicated by certain symptoms: loss of or change 

of standards in morality, for example. It is claimed also 

that the influence of science has had harmful effects upon 

morality and thinking in the modern world because the 

significance of the scientific method has been imperfectly 

comprehended by people generally. Older standards of belief 

have been broken down and have not been a&eqi vately replaced 

b; desirable intellectual and ethical qualities of mind 

1 

essential for the new age. It is suggested in many quarters 
that the granting of greater democratic freedom to the school 
would strengthen public concern for the welfare of society. 
The problems concerned in this suggestion are discussed in 
Chapters III, IV, and V. 

In the present chapter the following topics are 

discussed: 

1. Problems Created by Modern Social Change. 

2. The Problem of Integration. 

3. Educational Objectives and the Public Mind. 

4. Economic Stresses and Results. 

5. Science and Social Change. 


1 

Saucier, W. A. : Introducti o n to Modern Views of Education, 
Hew York, Ginn and Company, 1937, p. 64. 





























- 9 - 


1. PF0B1MS BY S0CI4L CHANGE. 


” While the fundamental problem of the teacher 
has been to guide the pupil into desirable adjustment to a 

•rapidly growing world, the task is certainly much more difficult 

1 

today...” Forty years ago John Dewey wrote the following 
words: 

” I make no apology for dwelling at length upon the social 
changes.... Those I shall mention are writ that he who runs 
may read. The change that... .overshadows and even controls 
all the others is the industrial one--the application of 
science resulting in great inventions that have utilized 
the forces of nature on a vast and impressive scale. Even 
as its feejler -beginnings, this change is not much more 
than a century old; in many of its most important aspects 
it falls within the span of those now living. One can 
hardly believe that the^e has been a revolution in all 
history, so rapid , so extensive, so complete;...That this 
revolution should not affect education in some other than 
a formal and superficial fashion is inconceivable....”2 

John Dewey has lived to see the revolution of which be wrote 

unfold. 


The background of sociological and educational 
problems can be thought of in rather well-defined but general 
terms. Eecause of the simplicity and clarity of the analysis 
of this background given by Schorling and MeClusky, their 
points are submitted at this point: 

1. The widening gap of our wants and our ability to 

supply them. 

2. The weakening of controls for the integration of 
personality exercised by religion and the home. 

2. Tne concentration of economic control without 
corresponding acceptance of responsibility. 

4. The shifting character of populations 


1 

Schorling and ilcGlusky, op.cit., p. 2. 

2 

Dewey, John; The School and Society , University of Chicago 
Eress, 1899 and 191b, pp. 5, 6. 

3 

Schorling and lieClusky, op. cit., p. 2 










































' 





































- 10 - 


5. The struggle for international co-operation, 

6. The increasing complexity and strain of modern life 
to which the individual must adjust himself. 

7. The clash of world political ideas ana ideals with 
its consequent threat to democracy. 

8. The influence of machines and techniques on the 
number and types of occupations. 

9. The widening gap between the expert and the masses. 

10. The growing conviction of people generally that 
education is essential. 

11. The use of the school by pressure groups. 

These social problems result from political and economic 
stresses behind which, in diverse ways, is the movement of 
science and technology. It is an aim in Part II of this 
thesis to indicate the effect of these problems upon the 
formulation of educational objectives. 

The subject of dissention between the leaders 

1 

of the Progressive education movement and the Realists is how 
education shoiild function to improve society. The leaders 
of the former school indicate that they have confidence in 
teachers’ powers to promote social adjustment in direct and 
practical ways through education, and that they believe social 
reform will come, and should come, as a direct result of 
education. That is, society should be a function of education. 
The educational Realists believe eontrarily that education is 
a function of society in the sense that the former is inevit¬ 
ably controlled by the demands of the social order. In 
Chapter IV, below, the philosophies of these two schools of 
educational thought are discussed in sufficient detail to 


1 -—- --- “--- 

Breed, F. 3.: Education and the lew Realism , lew York, 
MacHillan, 1959, Chapter IV. 

2 

References to this theory are made in Chapter IV. 













































. 





















- 11 - 


indicate their general ideas ana trends. Evidence would seem 
to show that the^e are Eases for future compromise on the part 
of the respective leaders of these schools. 

II lx. :E0" ,TIOh II U. EEUO.ITIOEIE r^OEEIl-i . 

It is emphasized by numerous educationists that 
the complex nature of modern social change makes the integration 
of personality a major problem of education. This belief was 
expressed frequently at the International Conference of the 
Lew Education Fellowship at Sice in 1933. One such expression 
reads in part as follows: 

T! ....the first task of the educator should be to help the 
chila. to forge this new intellectual tool.... It is of 

little help to give the child further information. 

Kow has the success of science been achieved? Sot by 

mere accumulation of facts and experiences, but by the 

mind that has been able to connect one fact with the other.VI 

The xxroblem of adjustment in human relationships might be 

compared unfavorably with that of applying the theory of 

physical science. 

The problem of social integration in relation to 

education is of especial interest to the Progressive educationist, 

for he looks upon social development as a proper function of 

education, professor Bode expresses this belief as follows: 

T, We can no longer depend upon external conditions. Our 
continued democracy of life will dex^end upon our own 
poYver of character and intelligence In using the resources 


I--—----- ------ - 

Pawson, Wyatt (Peporter): Tf A Hew World in the Making ", 
London, Lew Education Fellowship, 1935. 

































































. 



j 
















































- 12 - 


i t hand for a society which is not so much planned as 
alarm ing a society in which the constructive use of the 
experimental method is completely naturalized...” 1 

This statement indicates that the complex nature of the modern 
world calls for continuous adjustment of individual life, and 
since the individual is a unit of society, society as a whole 
must undergo constant phases of active adjustment based upon 
experimental experiences. Professor Bode’s statement, however, 
leaves fundamental questions unanswered, such as: In what 
fields can social experiment be carried out? What are the 
results of social and economic experiment on a large scale? 

How adaptable is democracy to the carrying out of social 
experiments? To what extent can experimental activities within 
educational institutions be utilized in the wider social sphere? 
The Progressive view- of the function of education implies the 
necessity for courageous policies in education. Suggestions for 
definite lines of action ana experiment, hovvever, are not at 
all a^arent in theoretical expressions, though the recognition 
of the educational problems arising from complex social develop¬ 
ment are given first place in the minds of these educational 
leaders. 

modern demands upon education have led to more 
thorough conceptions of integration . There is seen a need for 
bringing about integration in all phases of life. Lester I)ix 
Vvrites as follows: 

’’The existence of social life demands a minimal 

I---- - ~ ~ ~ . 

Kilpatrick, William B. (Editor): The Educational frontier , 
lew York, I). Apple to n-Century Go., 1933. p. 


65 . 































































































- 12 - 


uni ty of habits, ideas and beliefs shared within the group 
and built upon an understanding that the self and its 
social milieu are actually interdependent at all points 
and mutual in their evolution....it (the self) must 
also be able to look beyond the various social environ¬ 
ments as they currently exist. It must be a creative 
contribution to social life in the direction of con¬ 
stantly greater satisfaction of human needs and ideals... 

It is admitted that integration has been over¬ 
worked in educational writings. Perhaps that is why its full 
meaning should be examined in very broad terms. It would seem 
true, as Dix points out, that integration must be "examined in 
its broadest connotation—that is, against its complementary 

principle in life, growth and evolution-- the principle of 
2 

differention . It should be realized first, that integration 
is a pa:t of the basic processes of nature, in the inevitable 
connections of time and place. In this discussion the term 
integration is taken to mean coherence, the logical coherence 
of all phases of life, the most important application for 
education being the coherence of elements in individual and 
social life. 


The complex nature of social change has effected 
broader educational objectives and has increased the importance 
of the teacher's role in community education. Progress in 
the technical field has, in turn, tended to increase the 
gap between the expert and the common man in both social and 


IT " 

Dix, Lester; A Charter for Progressive Education , Bureau 
of publications, leaders College, Columbia University, 
1929, pp. 24, 25. 

2 

Ibid, p. 20. 












- 14 - 


material sciences, professor ^aup pits the latter point 
as follows: 

,f To be satisfactory, culture must fix its roots deep 
in our past, must find its ways and means realistically 
within the limits and possibilities of our technical 

age...”1 

The same point is made by Schorling and McClusky in these 
terms: 

"The major problem of the schools and perhaps the 
press is to bridge the gap between the expert and 
the masses. e need to humanize knowledge, to de- 
verbalize the curriculum, and to present the simple 
principles... that affect citizenship..."2 

Elaboration of the details of social change 
would be a monumental task, but certain basic factors may 
be briefly noted. The more obvious ones are: (1) intellectual 
advance and growth of human speculation, (2) the rapid 
accumulation of scientific inventions coupled with the 
development of technical skill through training and (3) 
practical utilization of the powers of nature. These factors 
of human progress have assumed a peculiar historical 
significance with the advance of science and technology. 

The chief educational result of this is a marked increased 
necessity for training of youth for bette^ adjustment in 
many spheres. Destructive human crises indicate the failure 
of educational forces in fundamental respects. It is 
apparent that education should be a factor in guidance which 
will include in its proper course guidance in social and 
economic facts. 

T-' “ ” — 

The Educational Frontier , op. cit., p. 73. 

2 

Schorling and McClusky, Op. cit., 


pp. 124, 125. 








The increasing number of human wants in the 

modern world concerns all aspects of life, intellectual, 

emotional and material. Competition inthe profitable endeavor 

to satisfy wants has, in turn, led to advertising to the point 
1 

of exploitation of all susceptible tnits and emotions. 

Emotions are studied and played upon; fads and modes are 

changed to create new wants. The results of such advertising 

are surely destructive in many instances and the need for 

counter-educational influences great. The development of 

intellectual self-control suggests itself as a chief objective 

for the school. Bias created through the use of selfish 

propaganda is likely to be a fundamental hindrance to the 

progress of individual and social adjustment in a complex 

social order. Slavson expresses this point as follows: 

”A liberal approach is not emotionally charged. It is 
a disposition to examine new ideas in new ways. These 
are accepted or rejected on the basis of merit rather 
than on emotional bias or selfish advantage. The 
intelligent person is one who strives to counteract this 
bias by reducing the emotional charge and thus allowing 
reflection and objective evaluation...’^ 

Education for life is no mechanical manoeuvre, however 

and the laying of foundations for sane, clear-sighted social 
control in the way sug ested by Slavson is an ultimate 


1 

Saucier, op. cit., pp. 34, 35. 

2 

Slavson, S. Character Education in A Democracy , lew York 

issoci^tion Press, 1939, p. 17 



























t 














































- 16 - 


e&ucational aim, the realization of which requires much 
foundational work. In such work the training of the emotions 
is a major task. It is hoped that education today can remove 
some of the emotional confusion wrought by the varied demands 
made upon the ingenuity and loyalties of the individual. 

It is difficult to interpret school curricula 

in the classroom in terms of ultimate objectives. It was 

stated recently by the Chief Inspector of Schools for British 
1 

Columbia that the publication of a school curriculum in 
keeping with modern educational aims does not bring immed¬ 
iate response from a large body of teachers. He stated, 
more specifically, that the inception of the new ’’Programme 
of Studies” had not resulted in the practice of an activity 
programme in the British Columbia schools generally. The 
scope for co-operative work among the members of a school 
staff and the full significance of integration in the working 
out of school activities has not been clearly seen or 
adequately practised. Industrial arts, for example, lose 
much effectiveness by the pursuit of work In that subject 
unrelated to vocabulary studies and social studies. The 
carrying out of an integrated programme at school appears to 
require skill and courage seldom found together. In this 
matter traditions in both the practice of teaching and in 

T------- - - - -—-- 

Dr. H. B. king. Chief inspector of Schools, spoke of this 
difficulty to an open meeting of the Elementary teachers of 
British Columbiaat the general convention of B. 0. Teachers 
in April, 1941. 








- 17 - 


administrative tendencies are hindering influences and are 
problems in themselves. 

Ill I. DU 3 IT I - Ax.D Ml. *JUGIQ 

As we noted in the last section, confusion of 
thought and action In modern life are said to arise from the 
clash of demands made upon the individual as a member of society. 
Propaganda and education are confused and intermingled. 

Then, the clash of political ideals adds to social and in¬ 
dividual confusion by forcing before the public mind half' 
truths, thereby discouraging clear thought and clear vision. 

But if educational objectives were clear, rapid 
social change would create difficult problems in the field of 
educational guidance. Education tends to be slow in over¬ 
taking the practical needs of the social order. This 
tendency is referred to as "lag", and it is claimed by. 
Progressivists as being the result of undue conservatism on 
the part of educationists and to the influence of tradition 
in general. Judd writes to this point as follows: 

"tradition is an unsafe guide in a changing society, 
because values which were once important disappear. 

The school curriculum should be flexible enough for 
new demands whenever the social order of which the 
school is a part, leaves traditional values behind. 

The curriculum is, in fact, very slow/ to change; like 
all social institutions, it resists innovation..." 2 

1 “ “ ’ ~ ~ 

The Educational Frontier, op. cit., p. 75. 

2 

Judd, Charles H. : Education and Social Progress , lew York, 
Earcourt, Brace 3; Go., 19 34, p. 52. 

































. 

. 








































- 16 - 


It might he stated, however, that the problem of adapting 

the school curriculum to modern and changing social needs 

has at least been recognised. Commenting upon the general 

character of curricular revision in Canada, ieter Sandiford 

..rote in 1938 concerning revised curricula in Canada: 

’’These revisions are based upon a new conception of 
education, explicitly stated as the development of 
character and citizenship and the provision for pupils 
of stimulating environment in which their mutual tend¬ 
encies will be directed into useful abilities and 
desirable attitudes...”! 

■Respecting the progressive tendency in Canadian educational 

reform, Sandiford adds a word of warning, and expresses 

admiration for the past efficiency of Canadian educators. 

’’One hopes,” he writes, ’’that the insistence upon the 

development of individual personalities will not become so 

pronounced that the traditional thoroughness of our eduea- 

£ 

tion will be sacrificed.” Sandiford’s exposition i-s an 
admission that Canadian education has broken with tradition 
in so far as curricula are concerned. We see in his statement, 
also, evidence of reaction to ^progressive” reforms which 
would lessen the thoroughness of school training. 


I---- " — . — ~ ~ 

Sandiford, leter; ’’Curricular Bevision in Canada,” The School , 
Toronto, February, 1938, p. 475. 

£ 

Sandiford, Ibid. 






, 

■ 




- 






P , 




. 









- 19 - 


If' confusion is found in the minds of 

educational theorists, it is perhaps more marked in the 

minds of youth and parents, though some practical and clear 

thinking is evidenced in the increasingly co-operative attitudes 

in both the latter cases. There is a lingering faith in a 

"magic” value of book learning as such. This faith, it 

would seem, is usually based upon the belief that academic 

education will raise youth to a higher standard of. life 

through more dignified channels than those through which 

their parents laboured. Types of work are associated, perhaps 

falsely, with educationaljprivilege. Even if this assumption 

were true, its literal interpretation would lead inevitably 

to disappointing results unless great stress were placed upon 

individual guidance based upon prefernces and capabilities. 

Both elementary and secondary education have functions in the 

solution of this very important problem. The tragedy of 

misconception is more apparent, however, in students of the 

secondary school level. The following passage from Josephene 

Lawrence’s novel, "If I Have four Apples,” is vividly illustrative 

of misconceptions regarding the purpose of education: 

"...Up stairs the two children still drudged confusedly 
over the vast assignments of homework, a mechanical 
process, the reason for which eluded them completely. 













' 












. 




















































- 20 - 


since neither they nor their teachers had ever succeeded 
in relating it to any present or future need in their 
lives, ^ose (the mother) ironing in the kitchen, liked 
to see her son and daughter at their hooks. The 
scholastic atmosphere at once comforted and reassured 
her. In the stacks of hooks, in the untidy piles of 
paper, she read a promise that the tragedy of her own 
inadeqate education would not he visited upas the 
second generation. Neither she nor .centner (the husband) 
had finished the eighth grade, hut that didn’t matter 
now. 'Isn’t it wonderfulI' she sometimes said to her 
husband very seriously, ’ill our children are so smart!’" 1 

The socilogical implications of this picture of confusion 

in the home is a challenge to the school and to educational 

agencies of the community. 


iv scasoiiia ste. 


Economic stresses are characteristic of a rapidly 

changing social order. These are not only major problems in 

themselves hut are related to the sociological background of 

education with influences upon both educational theory and 

2 


techniques of administration. 


3 


In the first place the conflicting theories 
concerning the need for economic reform with which the world is 
beset have repercussions locally, nationally, and internationally. 


1 

Lawrence, Josephene; If I Have Four apples , Lew York, 

F. Stokes Go., 1935, p. 25. 

2 

Cohen, J. I. and Travers, ?. Id. W. (Editors): Educating for 
Democracy 
3 

Saucier» 0 P» 


cit., pp 


36, 37. 




















Jchools must either fj.ce or avoid the problems thus raised in 

the social mind, according to Cohen and Travers, elementary 

schools cannot deal with economic theory, though fundamental 

habits and practices forming the basis of democratic living, 

1 

can be established at the elementary stage. Economic factors 
in social evolution stimulate controversial issues of major 
im^o^tance which secondary school students might study. The 
results of economic stresses i^e felt upon all branches of 
education. 

Secondly, economic stresses affect education in 
more direct ways; namely, those concerned, with the financing of 
education and with the facts of class distinction and economic 
privilege. Controversial issues related to the present methods 
01 tarnation, selection of school-equipment, and methods of 
administration are of current interest, feegarding the fate of 
the ^ublie support of education in trying times, Judd has 
..ritten that '...it is almost inevitable that education should 

■__ . o > Li i . i time . . jonomic 

. ducatio .£ from its’ very a 1 . le .. 1 the io 

progressive aspects of social life. Jaturally the lees pro¬ 
gressive aspects of social organization will fall behind educa¬ 
tion, from time to time the la^ will be come so great that 


1 

Cohen and Travers, op. cit., Chap. ZY. 









- 22 - 


1 

education will be gulled back." This view of the status of 

education, though optimistic in the sense that it posits 

education in the forefront of progress, is derogatory in that 

it is based upon the belief that the support of education 

is too generally neglected by the state. Financial obstacles 

have not prevented the expansion of educational facilities. 

In Canada, where educational change has not been markedly 

rapid under provincial authority, the more recent progressive 

attitudes in all branches of education are particularly 

noticeable to the public. There seems little doubt that 

democratic forces will tend to adjust the financial needs of 

2 

education to the progressive tendencies in the schools. 


V SOllkCh u . L SuOIAh GEAhOh; . 

"By this time it is a truism to say that we are 
living in a period of revolutionary change". The significance 
of science in relation to the progress of social change is 
fundamentally causal as well as secondary in character. It 
involves intricacies in the structure and life of the modern 
world. For the present purpose, however, the characteristics 


1 

Judd, op. cit., p. 108. 

2 

School progress ,Toronto, January, 1940, This number of 
School rrogress is devoted to the subject of "Making the 
School Fit the School Programme." Some articles on school 
finance are listed in the Bibliography. 

3 

Handeook to the Course of Study , (Province of lova Scotia}, 
Truro hews publishing Go., Ltd., 1935, "Forward", p. iii. 






























■ 



























■ 4 - 


























































- 23 - 


<f scientific progress and the influences of sc'.ence upon 
social life are generalized as follows: 

1. Transformation in the ways of living due to 
scientific technique. 

£. The effect of science upon the minds of people (ie. 

development of confidence in the ability of science to 
solve human problems.}. 

3. The progress of scientific living. 

4. Other effects of science upon the modern mind. 

The technical advances of science, though obvious 
and commonplace, are amazing in the rapidity of their develop¬ 
ment and in their significance. Transformations in methods of 
communication and ways of living are revolutionary and the 
nature of the scientific age affects more than the material 

processes of daily life. Trends of thought and habits of 

1 

mina are determined. Education is concerned with each of 
these aspects of science: it is concerned with the training 
of individuals to manipulate new scientific devices; and it 
is concerned as well with the effects of new demands upon 
the intellect which affect the major social problems of 
individual and social adjustment. Education should help us 
to understand the age in which we live. 

After the admission that science "...has been 
literally transforming the world.. .particularly since the G-reat 


1 

Examples of writers who emphasize these points are numerous 
Typical ones are: A.Century of Stupendous progress by 
Joseph McCabe, Charles A. Beard writer of thither “Mankind . 
































































- 24 - 


1 

War,” one might put the question: "What is the principle 
contribution that modern science and scientific technique 
have made to civilisation?" The question might he answered from 
one point of view by finding the most important laws and 
inventions, the survey of which situation would he a momentous 
task as well as an indecisive one. From such a survey one 
would he led to consider the contributions of science in the 
light of two major human issues; namely, the effects of the 
impact of science upon (i) the human mind and (2) upon the 
social ways of life. Since the purpose of this discussion is 
one of illustration, elaboration is not essential. One 
pervading example may he taken—that of speed in the activities 
of modern life. 

Lewis Mumford calls this the "new. structure of 

2 

tine ", and maintains that it is the fundamental aspect of the 
relationship between technology and human life. "Through the 
very mechanism of the clock we have learned to associate 
measured space with measured time, visual space with temporal 
Space, as in the swing of a pendulum, the movement of an 
escapement wheel, the passing of a clock hand over a certain 
inch on a dial...." In other words life has become highly 
organized; work, rest, and leisure have come to be answered 
in a high degree of punctuality. The habits of life have 
become standardized as is the production of material goods. 

1 " ~ " 

Saucier, op. cit., p. 41. 

2 

Mumford, Lewis, in Social Education , (Stanford Education 
Conference), lew York, MacMillan, 1929, pp. 80, 81. 

2 

Ibid. 




















, 
























































































- 25 - 


In point of historical time, however, man’s 

horizon has been expanded by the discoveries of scientific 

workers. As Mumford puts it: 

”...Qur historians are far more aware of actual events 
in Mesopotamia, in Egypt, in Greece than the people who 
lived almost on top of these places. Similarly we reach 
forward into the future with the aid of statistical 
charts and their indicated trends.. 

Then, too, there is the ’’contraction” of time through the use 

of time-saving devices and infinitely speedier means of 

communication and production. The social significance of 

these devices is related to the advantages or disadvantages of 

human welfare derived from the use of the devices. On the 

one hand, the lessons of the |a st may be ignored or helpfully 

taught; on the other, devices of scientific technique are used 

to produce with or without thought for the welfare of the user. 

The routine phases of life are, without doubt, 
benefitted by punctuality and temporal discipline. Time is 
saved and human wants are satisfied with greater expedition 
as regularity and mechanical efficiency increase. But there is 
another side of life adversely affected by mechanical regularity. 
’’The spasmodic, the irregular and the capricious are as necessary 


1 

Ibid., p. 82. 





































- 









- 26 - 


to human balance....as the orderly time routines we too 

1 

easily take for granted.” The problem thus suggested 
by the contrary effects of temporal discipline is one of 
adjustment and balance between the demands of the modern 
world for discipline and the demand of the human spirit for 
relaxation and flexibility. Thought and creative activity, 
for example, cannot always be punctuated by too rigid a 
periodicity in respect to time-tables without loss to the 
activity concerned. Because of this fact the tendency to 
cling to the traditional time-spacing in the elementary 
school programme may prove a barrier to the best success in 
the carrying out of the modern educational activities. Yet, 
if school life is to be realistic, it must train children to 
realize the passage of time and to form habits of regularity 
and punctuality. 

The study of scientific progress brings to 
the fore the seriousness of social disorganization and unscientific 
living, and raises the problem of how education might improve 
the situation. We might agree at the outset that the habit 
of scientific thinking has gained a start in the modern world. 

As Saucier writes: ”The method of scientific thinking may 
not have permeated the minds of the masses but it has, none- 


1 

Ibid., P. 84. 











. 




















■ 




































; 





- 27 - 


1 

tbeless, gained tbe respect of large numbers of minds.” Sot 
only in tbe physical sciences and commercial techniques has 
this gain been made, but in attempts to clarify social problems 
as well. Education is looked upon by many today as containing 
the ultimate solution of social ills. Studies in the fields 
of criminology, juvenile delinquency, the advance of adult 
education, and the weakening of dogma and superstition might 
be given as examples of the scientific gains which we have 
claimed. Finally, the attempt to co-ordinate fields of 
knowledge affecting social welfare is, perhaps, the crowning 
effort in the effort of science to promote and utilize the 
scientific attitude. 

Nevertheless examples of unscientific behavior 
are countless. Saucier points to the gullibility of the 
masses of the people in America as proof of a widespread 
unscientific attitude: 

”...Party leaders write a plank full of generalities 
and inconsistencies, for people like platitudes and 
slogans and do not readily detect contradictions. The 
plain truth is often offensive to the people... Similarly 
advertisements relflect unfavorably on the intelligence 
of the .. .people. But the advertisers possess a fair 
estimate of the people’s intelligence."2 

It might be shown further that the acceptance of science as 

a fact in the modern world is one too largely of blind faith. 


1 

Saucier, op. cit., p. 

2 

Ibid. 


44. 













- 28 - 


as was the acceptance of Christianity during the Middle Ages. 

It is often pointed out that there is a confidence placed in 
science which could he mistaken ior a genuine scientific 
attitude. Saucier writes that, '‘the confidence of the common 
people in science has led them no further in their intellectual 
outlook than the rejection of their former standards. They are 

discarding tradition as an agency for distinguishing between 

1 

right anu wrong, or arriving at truth." This belief is up- 
2 

held by Lippmann and others who claim in effect that science 
has shattered beliefs and standards but has not been instru¬ 
mental in establishing new bases of guidance and planning in 
personal and social life. Freedom of youth, therefore, is 
itself a problem affecting the stability of the home and other 
institutions of society. 

Finally there is the problem of family and 
community economy as to the use and misuse of the material 
benefits of science. For education the problem involves 
training in better domestic management especially in communities 
in which low incomes predominate. The problem in general, 
however, is not one which pertains to the economic field alone: 
it is one involving the conservation of all values of life, the 
moral and spiritual as well as the material and economic. 


1 

Ibid., p.45. 

2 

lippmann, Walter; "A Ire face to Morals", MacMillan, 1929, p. 516 








. 





. 
















■ 















■ 
















1 


- 29 - 


Oonditions giving rise to the problem have created more?which 
are the heart of difficulties challenging both sociology and 
education. The following picture given by Mumford will serve to 
illustrate this point: 

11 ...Consider the place occupied by the machine in the 
life of the typical workingman of middle town....as 
known by the cursory observation to all of us. Eehold 
the well-built, sixty horse-power car....which is in¬ 
stalled in the family garage. The car is often bought 
at a sacrifice of essential items in the family budget, 
like food dnd medical care. Beside it, in a secondary 
position, is the dwelling house of the same worker, 
narrow, cramped, insufficiently surrounded by open 
space, without garden or pleasant outlook. It is ram¬ 
shackle and inferior even as a mere technical instru¬ 
ment and positively horrifying if one remembers that 
here is where young children are reared, where sick are 
nursed.... The motor car, built for speed and motion, 
receives hommage, care, almost worship. The home, built 
presumably for living, is a sour caricature of human 
environment...” 1 

This picture indicates a need for training in the field of 
domestic management. The machine in the social environment may 
be a barrier to wholesome progress rather than a beneficial 
instrument. The picture indicates, too, that perversion in 
the sphere of leisure time ambitions and pursuits may be the 
cause of some sociological difficulties. 


1 

Mumford, op. eit., p. 78. 








- 30 - 


On the brighter side of social trenddwe ma# 
refer to the fact which Saucier calls the ’’increasing sensitive¬ 
ness to injustice.” The record of humanitarian movements 
when viewed b# themselves and in terms of the historical 
background are encouraging evidence of progress. With man# 
evils, such as slaver# swept awa# b# legislation, the problem 
of facing the future seems to man# to be one of education, 
the encouragement of honest thought, the clarification of 
democratic ideals and the abolition of social evils through 
an attack upon ignorance. In this view the idea of reform is 
based upon knowledge and a desire for right on the part of 
man#. It would appear that democrac# cannot progress in 
realit# unae~ the protectorship of the few in chosen classes. 

Certain alternatives present themselves when the 

solution of social problems is attempted through the medium of 

education. In the first place, the complex character of modern 

social change leads some to press for more rigidit# in the 

standards of life. The presumable advantage of such a polio# 

would be a degree of simplification. There is evidence in the 

form of authoritative opinion, however, that such a polic# is 

inapplicable because of its incongruit# with the present status 

of democratic progress. Secondl#, there is the suggestion of 

to 

a return to former standards which are presumed be lost. This 
view would appear to have obvious and fundamental objections in 
its wa# since the progress of science has alread# made these 




































; 


■ 






. 

* . 













' 

































- 31 - 


irreleyent. Furthermore, a policy of retrogression would imply 
a basic ignoring of the facts of social evolution. The course 
open to education is certainly one of forward-looking nature, 
based upon foundations of social experience and intelligent 
experiment. 








- 32 - 


CHAPTE^ III. 

SOCIAL COUTBQL THROUGH EDUC ITIOH. 

The present chapter is a brief analysis of the 
problems of social control through education. The presentation 
involves theoretical concepts and is, therefore, chiefly a 
reference to various opinions expressed in writings on the 
subject of educational sociology. One of the chief objects 
of the chapter is to consider the relationship of the school 
to other educational influences of the community. The object, 
secondly, is to indicate the trend of opinion of leading 
educationists and educational sociologists concerning the 
possibility of increasing the influence of the school as a 
factor in the integration of the various educational agencies in 
modern society. 

Fundamental questions upon which a critical view 
of the problem at hand may be based a^e suggested as follows: 

(1) What does effective social education imply? (2) What are 
the educational agencies which determine the nature and 
direction of social control? First: social control implies 

changes in individual character and changes in group attitudes 

1 

and reactions. Second; the educational agencies betermining 
social control include all agencies which help to determine 


1 

Payne, op, cit., Vol. II., p. 9 








- 33 - 


tbe type of behavior which a given social order produces. 

The direction of social change must be thought of in terms of 
all-round growth involving society as well as the individual. 

The plan of the following discussion is in 
outline as follows: 

I. Education and Growth. 

II. Four Bases of Social Control. 

(a) Knowledge of folk traditions. 

(b) Knowledge of moaern patterns of life. 

(c) Education as a creative force. 

(d) The application of psychology. 

III. Methods and principles of Social Education. 

Despite the secondary nature of sources employed, the Yiriter 
hOj.es that something of a general view of the problem will 
be seen in the chapter rather than a mere cross-section of 
opinion. 

I EDUG .TICE' -.UID G^OV/TII . 

Grovvth and education can be identified logically 
as the same process. If they are so identified, education 

can be appropiately defined as ”the process going on in the 

1 

individual whereby changes in behavior” take place. These 
changes, being brought about by a coincidental and unorganized 
influences in the environment of an individual, as well as 
by controlled influences, are continuous, and in modified 
degrees, unbroken from the beginning to the end of life. 
Education cannot be associated entirely with schooling or 
any one set of influences. Education of the individual is 

I —— ■ — - — " 

Payne, op. cit., Vol. II., p. 5. 














































- 54 - 


affected by the community of influences which make up his 
social environment. Finally, individual growth is part and 
parcel of social growth. 

There are two obvious factors which will determine 
the nature of educational influences upon the individual. The 
first has to do with the individual's health, physical and mental. 

Slavson refers to this factor as the "organic bases of social- 

1 

ization", which bases incluue peculiar glandular functions, 

general health and bodily functions. Medical science has done 

much in co-operation with the school to overcome and compensate 

for physical weaknesses in children; especially has this been the 

case in the fields of mental hygiene and the study of glandular 
2 

disorders. The purpose of the school is to promote the 
co-ordination of the applied knowledge of children. It is the 
centre through which administrative agencies of child welfare 
can best function. It is said that the school exists for the 
benefit of the "permanently imbalanced" child as well as for 
the good of the normal, healthy child. 

The second factor in determining a child's educa¬ 
tional growth is the influence of associates outside the home 
and the school. It is believed by educational sociologists that 
the control or direction of the individual is effected largely 
by direct or indirect control of the group of which the individual 

1 --*. .. .... . ■". . .. . 

Slavson, op. cit., pp. 162, 165. 

2 

Dauphinee, Miss A. J.: "Glands and Our Pupils", The B. Q. 
-Teacher , March, 1959, and April, 1959, pp. 419, 420. See 
also Chapter VI of this thesis. 

5 

Slavson, op. cit., p. 165. 



















































































- 35 - 


1 

forms a part. Behavior is seldom that of individuals in 

the strict sens$; social compulsions operate. At a point 

in the life of a boy, for example, the power of the so-called 

gang might be of greiter influence in determining his behavior 

and attitudes than either his family or his school. Angelo 

aatri writes of a boy: "He went with a group his own age, 

talked their language, followed their ways, as they followed 
2 

his’ 1 . Behavior, good or bad, is not the behavior of a few 
or of individuals: it is a social function. 

3 

II 1 0J* Ji' SOCIAL IM.J'J iTIwii . 

It may be assumed that the promotion of social 
control can be effected through the assimilation of useful 
knowledge. Four forms of knowledge which appear to be 
essential for this are: (1) knowledge of folk traditions, 

(2) Knowledge of moaern life and its requirements, (3) 
Knowledge of the creative forces which may be applied to 
and derived from education, (4) Knowledge of useful 
psychological principles. "Hnowledge" as the term is 
intended here implies knowledge derived by the learner, and 
the educator's knowledge of backgrounds of social life which 
he can interpret. 

(1) One form of education is the assimilation 
of social culture, sometimes referred to as folk ways or 
folk traditions. Canadian cultures are varied to the extent 


1 -- “ 

Saucier, op. cit., p. 109. 

2 

Patri, Angelo,; "Our Children", Ihe Vancouver Sun , August 8, 
1941, p. 9. See also Beckless, W.C. ana Smith Maupheus, 
McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1932, p. 148. 

3 

Payne, Op. cit., Yol. II. pp. 


5 - — 10 . 
















Jr 
































, 























. 















that numerous national and ethnic groups are settled in the 


country. The cultures of Canada are not blended. An 
important function of education is to assist in the preservation 
of the rich anc varied cultures now represented in Canada and 

to make this variety of cultural background an asset. The 

1 

mosiac of Canadian culture presents at once a difficult 
problem and an opportunity; through imitation there is the 
opportunity to preserve the cultures brought to Canada by 
the first generation of alien settlers, then there is the 
more important task of inculcating the standards of citizen¬ 
ship which must be preserved and fostered in a democratic 
society . 

Attitudes formed as a resutl of variant cultural 

backgrounds probably have much to do with the shaping of 

personality, "which is difficult to change very much later 
2 

in life." But, as Professor Watson Xirkconnell writes, 

"...Differences of opinion give free countries their 
most difficult but most important problems of civil¬ 
ization ....it takes the highest cultural gifts to 
harmonize the variant traditions in a single democracy. 

The persistence of French tradition in Canada thus 
not only adds the values of another culture to the 
country but also provides an opportunity for develop¬ 
ing the highest qualities of citizenship through 
facing the problems of national harmony.... 

The cultures of the "variant traditions" in 

Canada are too complex and not sufficiently harmonized to 

form a background of folk culture such as arises in Denmark. 


1 - -“ 

Books by such a writer as J. Murray Gibbon illustrate the 
variety and emphasize the significance of the racial groups 
in Canada. 

2 

Qgburn, W.E.; Social Change , lew York, Eeubsch, Inc., 1923, 

p. 26. 

3 

r^oonne 11, Jatson; Canadians All, issued by Director of 
Public Information, Ottawa, June, 1941. 




















, 


' 

















- 37 - 


This characteristic of Canadian aevelppment, though it holds 
rich promise for future folk culture which might he known 
as "Canadian culture”, tends for the present to divide the 
cultures of the country. It should not he claimed that the 
schools alone can make the best of such a national trait 
hut it might be suggested that the schools, together with 
other educational agencies of Canadian communities, mighr 
promote more friendly mingling of the cultural groups of the 
country. Should this he done it would further the assimilation 
of diversified cultures. 

The discussion of the problem of assimilation of 
culture by the nation may cause some confusion between the 
concepts of "national unity" and "national uniformity." The 
writer suggests that the function of education as far as 
national culture is concerned is to preserve, not destroy the 
variety in Canadian cultural traditons; national unity 
should be founded on the principle of democratic freedom. The 
growth of the individual is an integral part of community 
anu national assimilation of the cultural inheritance. Part 
of his growth consists of imitation and unconscious adoption 
of prevailing social habits, beliefs and ideals; but knowledge 
of cultural growth, including his adaptation to democratic 
life, must be inculcated consciously as academic knowledge is 


Ibid. p. 11. 


1 
















. 





























, 













■ 


. 





' 



















' 

















, 








- 38 - 


inculcated. 

The comparative importance of the biological 

ancl the social inheritance as factors influencin the 

development of character is a controversial issue of no 

great importance to educational sociology, for the reason that 

the former factor is not subject to the educator's control. 

In his recent book, Educational Psychology , Judd maintains 

that heredity is over-emphasized in considerations of educa- 

1 

tional background. It is more important, he claims, to 
concentrate upon factors less remote, though inherited ability 
should not be neglected in the handling of individuals and in 
the appraisal of individual growth. 

Social environment is the social inheritance of 
the individual; both the biological and the social inheritance 
are factors in individual growth. ""That a person does and 
the kind of intellectual abilities which he exhibits in mature 
life are now known to be related to the structure of his 
nervous system and to the developments which have taken place 
during the maturing of his ^owers....both heredity and environ¬ 
ment are indispensable in the development of personality... 

The school must provide for individuals and many types of 
2 

ability." 

Provision for individual differences is, however, 
part of the control of the environment and does not indicate 

r~ 

Judd, G. E• : Educational jrsy cholog., , . r 7, g. H 

/Vew^ovk, M;f<? Itv . 9 3 9 ; P* C • 

2 

I D1 d., pp* b, Q O . 











































-$y- 


•cnat inherent abilities themselves ire believed to oe suoject 
to control* Furthermore, it may be assumed that modern theory 
or education is inlluencea by knowledge of social influences 
Uj.on individual growth. Over-emphasis of these influences in 
the development of educational theory is not to be feared, for 
the control of social change is dependent Upon action within 
the scope of administrative power ana human endeavour. A 
summary of the stand which the writer has taken respecting the 
possibility of controlling social environment and the signi¬ 
ficance of that control is found in the following words of 
Saucier: 

"One is justified in concluding that the teacher should 
look, not to various lists of instincts, but to social 
backgrounds for an explanation of the present status of 
the child, kence case studies afford our most adequate 
scientific approach to discovering the child's real 
nature. Further, the school must depend upon other 
agencies of the community for aid in the promotion of 
pts programme, kot only must it use and co-ox-erate 
with all other institutions and social groups in a 
common effort to socialize the child, but it must 
endeavor to improve these social agencies."1 

It is taken for granted by the writer, that to co-operate 

effectively with other social agencies, the school must 

adapt its own programme and methods of instruction in such 

a way that school life will be a vital part of the child’s 

experience. It is especially important that school life 

should not be isolated from out-of-sehool experiences. 


1 

Saucier, Op. cit, p. 125. (Of. xost, xurt II, Chap. III). 













































- 40 - 


Through the school many experiences should he interpreted to 
the child and deficiencies in individual social backgrounds 
should, be compensated for, in part it least, by the school 
experience . 

(2) The patterns of life based upon folk ways 
are older than those created by the influences of the modern 
industrial age. Social change means in one respect the 
supplanting of old habits and attitudes by new ones. Desir¬ 
able social change, howev , means evolution of society in 
which new patterns of life grow out of old ones. It is not 
always desirable that older traditions should be lost or 
destroyed. Education should be designed to assist individual 
adjustment by having the school, as closely as possible, 
related to present-day life. In no other way could the school 
fulfil this function better than by establishing harmony between 
valuable traditions of society and the new ways of life which 
are being brought about continuously. 

Knowledge of new patterns of life is essential 
to the modern educator. It has been easier to teach 
tradition than to adapt the school to changing social needs 
and schools have retained established methods of instruction 
and subject matter of traditional value longer than has been 
best for present-day needs. Educational theorists have made 

a point in recent years of criticizing education because of 

1 

lag behind the advance of science and technical skill. 

A particular criticism of modern education is that it remains 

i 

cf. supra, Chapter II. 






- 41 - 


too academic. Hart writes of this educational tendency in 
these words: 

,T A sc..oolish intellectualism cannot meet the problems of 
our world to-day. The sort of mind developed in the 
school cannot he defended upon to deal intelligently 
with local mo world tasks. education must he free, and 
It must free the individual into the presence of the 
problems and tasks of the world. It must leave him at 
the end not graduated’ hut ready to begin."l 

It is a controversial issue as to whether educational inst¬ 
itutions can and should serve as direct controlling forces in 

p 

social change. it cannot he doubted, however, that education 

should develop critical ability, and ability of leadership 

through which social agencies will he improved. 

Scientific development requires necessary 

adjustment in agriculture and industry. It would seem as 

necessary to bring about an adjustment in personal and social 

unowledge and skill; in health, in the use of leisure, and in 

the adoption of moral standards "inculcation or education plays 

3 

an exclusive role”. It is .probable that the inculation of 

knowledge useful for adjustment to modern society is dependent 

more Upon organized education more than uy^on the assimilation 

4 

of traditional folk ways and culture. 


1 

Eart, op. cit., 

2 

rayne, op. .cit. 

3. 

Ibid, p. 8 

4 

Ibid., 


p. 140 

Yol. II, p. 7. 

































































-42- 


Social control through education can he 
superficial. It is said that individuals may be outwardly 

or superficially motivated, causing adjustment to be partial 

1 

and ineffectual. Slavson distinguishes two types of ^ersons 

by the terms "societal person” and ’’socialized person”: the 

term ’’societal”, in contrast to ’’socialized”, is the term 

which signifies superficiality in a person's adjustment to the 

modern environment. The youth, for example, who had become 

adapted to the technical requirements of his surroundings but 

who had, on the other hand, little stability of character and 

Wi.s unable to enjoy his leisure with profit, might be in 

2 

Slavson’s terms, a "societal” youth. It is imp"ied further 
by Slavson that the task of actual socialization is one re¬ 
quiring thoroughness, and on the part of the educator, deep 
and extensive knowledge of modern social problems enabling 
him to discover a .ital programme of guidance for the learners 
unuer his direction. A knowledge and gras x , of the social 
order enables the educator to use all subjects of study as 
essential guidance in the experiences of the student. 

It may be that teachers in certain branches of 
education cannot be expected to be fully qualified students 
of sociology. It might be suggested with justice, however, 
that teachers in all branches of education should have 
developed a sympathetic attitude towards the children whom 
they teach and that they should know the environmental back- 


1 

Slavson, Op. cit., p. 162. 

2 

Of. supra, Chapter II (Other examples of social maladjustment 
are discussed). 




- 



















































































' 














-43- 


grounds of these children in so far as such knowledge is 
reasonably obtainable, rresent-uay social conditions seem 
to make it es:ential th.t teachers understnd, if they do not 
practice the rules of the social worker. 

(3) In seeking the knowledge of creative forces which 

can be applied in education one discovers a fundamental rift 
in the philosophy of education. It is generally agreed that 
education should be creative in the sense that the individual 
should develop a capacity "not merely.... for adjustment but 

ability to contribute to social progress by making changes in 

1 

behavior, by creating the tools of social justice.” The 
progressive Educationist speaks of education as "readjustment 
to experience" and thinks of all ideas as creative if the ideas 
are useful. Opponents of progressivism do not dispute the 
stand that education should be continuous ana that it should 
be stimulated by creative ideas. The chief dissention arises 
in the philosophy of educational discipline. John Dewey, on 
behalf of the Progressive movement , has taught that useful 
ideas become creative in the experience of the individual and 
that the individual discovers truth indepe n dently . 

The opponent of this view, who calls himself a 
modern Pealist, objects to the theory on the ground that it 
neglects the importance of objective knowledge and be power 
of outward discipline. Professor breed, a Pealist, brings 


1 

Payne, o^. cit., Vol. II., p. 8 




























































































-44- 


tbis issue to a bead in tbe following words: 

"...Thus more clearly than ever tbe meaning of tbe 
’activity movement' begins to dawn upon us. Tbe battle 
line is definitely drawn between tbe defenders of 
material content externally suppliea and of mental 
content internally produced; between truth that depends 
on tbe satisfaction of man, and the truth that depends 
on the satisfaction of facts; between those who think 
of education and life as adjustment to environment and 
those who think of them as a creation of environment; 
between tbe advocates of a morality that is sanctioned 
by tbe natural propensities of tbe individual and tbe 
advocates of a morality that in addition is sanctioned 
by tbe demands of a self-existent social and physical 
world; between those whose theory of freedom denies tbe 
necessity of external restraint and those who foresee 
disaster in tbe denial of such restraint; between those 
who believe in an education determined only by the inner 
extension of personality ancl the advocates of outer as 
well as inner integration ... T, 1 

The extreme contention of' the progressive educationist is 

that tbe creative capacity of the child, without tbe dictation 

of adult control, will enable him to develop greater powers 

than be has hitherto been able to develop. It is the extreme 

implications of the progressive theory at which the "Realist 

directs his attack. 

To the educational sociologist, the progressive 
School has something of value, but he prefers the more 
moderate implications of the movement. A co-ordination of 
educational philosophies is desired which ?«ill "enable us to 
steer a middle course between the harshness of a purely external 


1 

Breed, F. S.; Education and the hew ^ealism , lew York, 
MacMillan, 1939, pp. 117, 118. 

2 

Brown, o x ; . eit., ^. 12. 

3 

Loe. eit., 13. 




































































: 













- 45 - 


discipline and the softness of much that is called 

1 

progressivism and democratic freedom to-day...’ 1 

In conclusion the writer wishes to propose four 
bases of creative education. These are; First; That the 
growth of individuals should he promoted throughthe process 
of active adaptation ana that the curriculum should provide 
for such as the following; planning, construction, purposing, 
creating, criticizing, judging, appreciating, enjoying, 
feeling. Second; That the school must extend and improve 
democratic iaeas ana ideals. Third; That the school should 
place emphasis Upon the development of social personality as 
the highest form of creative potentiality. Fourth; That 
education should not he rigid; that it he democratic and 
designed to develop creative and adaptable individuals. 

(4) A knowledge of psychological principles is 

essential to education; therefore it is essential as a means 

oi promoting social control. In the broadest sense education 

2 

is ’’...the process of developing social control...” All 
behavior, individual or social, grows out of the habits, skills 
ana attitudes of the individual. The individual, though he is 
an entegral part of the social whole, develops and independent 
life'as a result of social stimuli. Education is retroactive, 
individually and socially. Psychologically, edtication relies 


1 

Wilson, Frank W.; "Education for Civilization—Art and 
Humanism”, Tne I. 3. Teacher, January, 1941. 









































. 




. . 















































. 




























- 46 - 


upon the means for control of the environmental stimuli. 
Control of social change involves the complex problem of 
developing the individual in terms of the environment, but 
it also involves the prodem of direct control of the 
environment as well. 

Social education should be planned in order to 
utiiizepsychological traits of the individual. The develop¬ 
ment of the social sense in an individual must probably 

1 

’’emerge from deep-rooted self-love.” Also, certain 
psycholgical characteristics must be accounted for in the 
preparation of education for the control of social change. 
These are made the basis of determining educational method 
in the modern school and the exercise of all educational 
agencies. In this way education is intended to be as 
immediate and effective as individual circumstances permit. 

Slavson emphasizes three principles especially 
important in the process of individual socialization: 

1. It is essential in the educational programme that 
the child* s dynamic ana activity drives be satisfied 
in beneficial activity. 

2 . Each individual has inherent love-needs which must 
not be starved. 

2. The child’s feelings of depenuence should be guided 
with care and understanding. 

Socialization should be effected in an atmosphere of happiness 
without the creation of harmful repressions. That is to say, 

I “ ~ 

Slavson, op. cit., p. 160. 






























U ; ' Ty 





























































-47- 


socialization car) best be effected by a dependence upon the 

use of the natural human drives. 

Individual psychological and physical differences 

appear complex when the individual is faced with the problem 

of adapting himself to the environment in which he must live. 

The success of his life will depend upon the degree to which 

he can overcome handicaps or adjust his own peculiarities to 

the world. Therefore, it is of little value to the educator, 

who is also a social worker, to be preoccupied with the 

theoretical significance of inherited capacities. These are 

less subject to change than are many of the environmental 
1 

stimuli. In the case of handicaps such as blindness, nervous 

disorder and incapacitated arms and legs, much is done by 

individual effort to compensate for the specific handicap. 

In most eases, however, it is desirable to raise life 

distinctly above the level of physical inheritance where this 

is possible. Judd believes that, despite individual differences, 

this can best be done by a -psychological use of what one might 

2 

call the romantic features of our rich n social inheritance.” 

An a^eal to this background is said to be an invaluable motive 
for the promotion of individual effort to accomplish higher 
things and for the stimulation of social pride. 


1 

cf. supra, p. 38 

2 

Psychology of Education, op. cit., p. 


8b 



































, 




. • 


. 


























■ 




















































-48- 


Sociologically, it is important to learn the 

fullest possible background of the individual's behavior. It 

is believed by some authorities that too much reliance can be 

1 

placed upon the objective measurement of behavior. It is 
believed also, that teachers should develop certain skills 
as social workers ana that they should extend their sphere 
of knowledge of the child beyond the classroom. Knowledge 
of group influence, the nature of home environment and other 
influences are of value in assisting the teacher to promote 
the educational welfare of a given individual. These sources 
of knowledge are believed by sociologists to be of greater 
assistance to the teacher than knowledge of children's scores 
and progress records in school studies. 


Ill. VT^CIffS, II, r TITJTIObS 111 ...WTEulS 01 300111, EkUOlTICK . 

The first general agency of social education 
includes all institutions formally organized for educational 
purposes. These are; the school, the church, boys and girls’ 
clubs, organised playgrounds, community centres and others. 

It is with such agencies that metho d is a matter of 
professional concern. Well defined policies as to me thou are 
likely to be found in the work of each particular institution. 
In social education, character training is likely to be 
considered by most educators as the fundamental part of the 


1 

Saucier, op. cit., p. 


121. 









. 


































. 















■ 

. 





. la - 




. 










-49- 


1 

work undertaken. For character training Slavson suggests 

three alternatives: (1) Abstract drill of precepts, 

including story-telling, and questioning, (2) The laissez-faire 

method by which the teacher or adult absents himself from the 

children and their problems. (5) A method, positive, but devoid 

of authoritarian domination. The discussion under II (3) of 

this chapter is a summary of the suggestions regarding principles 

2 

of method. General principles suggested by Slavson are as 
follows; 

1. Reasonable freedom of action on the part of children. 

2. Provision for co-operative group activity. 

3. Go-activity among various groups. 

4. Motivation by noncompetitive values. 

5. Practice in self-government. 

6. Communal participation. 

Payne states that all institutions are social 
institutions and the ’’moment the school becomes conscious of the 
gang, or any other element in the social background and uses it 
for educational ends which it desires, that is, the development 
of personality or formaking behavior changes, at that moment 

the gang becomes as much a part of the curriculum as geometry 

2 

or history.” The school, therefore, is the co-ordinating 
institution among educational agencies. 

The second agency is made up of institutions such 
as the family, the play group, etc., which are organized for 
other purposes than education. Community education which 
brings about changes _n the behavior and attitudes of such 
groups is, however, making one of the primary contributions to 


1 --- 

Ibid. 

2 

Payne, op. cit., Yol. II., p. 


434 






























. 


























































-50- 


social education. 

The third agency in social education is work and 
industry. In this agency there is a source of opportunity 
for the mature practices of social co-operation. Work and 
industry of a community should reflect the result of educa¬ 
tion. Yet, because of changing conditions in modern industry, 
there is a continuous need ior further education. If those 
engaged in occupations are stimulated to seek further training 
in their own required techniques and in social co-operation 
as well, a valuable supplementary educational force is found 
in work itself. 

The forth agency of social education includes 

commercial entertainment and modes of transmitting public 

information. It cannot be doubted that media such as the radio 

and the picture show, though most frequently designated as 

recreational, are significant forces in the formation of 

opinion, attitudes and character; while the newspaper, far 

from being outmoded, has a peculiar responsibility in the 

determination of social attitude and the degree of intelligence 

1 

of the public mind. These agencies determine the statug of 
public intellectual and recreational tastes in their own way. 

It rests with tne school to prepare young minds to choose 
independently the best forms of recreation and sources of 
intellectual guidance after formal schooling is over. 


1 

Brown, op. cit., P• 
















■ 













' 















. 
















. 


















-52- 

CEAPTE^ IV 

THE PELATIOH OF THE SCHOOL TO THE 
SOCIAL OP.HER 


When the function of the school is considered 

in terms of its direct effect upon public- opinion and its 

responsibility for the nature of the prevailing social order, 

1 

the problem contains controversial issues. The writer's 
concern in the present chapter is to outline the chief points 

of view concerning the function of the teacher in relation to 

2 

the social life of today. There are two major theories which 

3 

may be applied to our problem*. the educational "realists” 

contend that the school is inevitably a function of the state, 

4 

while the so-called "frontier" writers maintain (subject to 

5 

some recent modifications) that the state should be a function 
of the school. It is hoped that the following discussion may- 
help to clarify the significance of these two theories. 

Hivision of opinion comes over the problem of 
directness or indirectness which should characterize the teacherfe 


The radio broadcast, i Disagre e,February 9, 1941, (CBS) was an 
argumentative discussion dealing with some of the controversial 
issues involved in "The "^elation of The School to The Social 
Order." The debate was carried on by a superintendent of 
schools and other prominent citizens of the U.S.A. 

Kilpatrick, V. . A.: Group Education for A Democracy , Lew York, 
Association aress, 1940, pp. 29--40. 

✓ 

This theory is upheld by arolessors Henry . Simon and If. S. 
Breed. 

L 

The Progressives, or "frontier" writers include Professors John 
Dewey, Jesse E. Lewlon, G. S. Counts, J. L. Childs, ... E. 
Kilpatrick. 

Modification in thought from radical Prcgressivism towards a 
more cautious liberalism can be detected in the recent writings 
of some of these men; notably, in Experience and Education by~ 
Dewey, Group ducation for a Lemocracy by Kilpatrick and 
Education for Democracy in our Time, by J. H. lewlon. 
































' 

















. 

■ 




■ 



















. 


















. 

. 

t 











influence in social control and over tie meaning of educational 
freedom. But a point of common ground is a mutual Belief 
that the formulation of educational aims should he based 
upon the best knowledge of the social environment and upon 
the highest obtainable ideals of manhood and citizenship. 

The role of the teacher must be worked out to the satisfaction 
and mutual good of all in accordance with principles generally 
recognized. 

The broad view of education covers relationships 
of family life, vocational preparation, training for the use 
of leisure time, and the duties of citizenship. The constituents 
of life might be ge neralized in terms of health, morals, 
esthetic appreciation, scientific outlook and breadth of personal 
outlook. Them there is a general recognition of the need for 
specific outcomes of education, such as knowledge and information, 
habits and skills, tastes and appreciations, ideals, attitudes, 
and permanent interests. These are the educational conceptions 
over which no apparent fundamental controversial issues arise. 
Whenever these are interpreted so as to form backgrounds of 
social policies, however, limitations of the school’s function 
are sought and problems relating to the proper freedom of 
teaching are raised. 

The opposing theories of education concerning the 
function of the school and the social order are presented here¬ 
with the following points in mind; 











- - 


















... .. .- 

■ 








. 

* 














-54- 

1. Progressivists arid. Modern "Realists. 

2. Views Common to Both Schools of Theorists. 

5. Controversial Issues in the Schools. 

I x^0Gr^ 1 3 3IV i S T S u;i) ,iOlS£°.x ^ i iI ;: /TS . 

It is "believed, By sociologists that the individual 

personality develops in a single pattern By interaction with 

1 

outer influences. Frustration in the realization of ideals 
fixed in youth results in thwarting effects upon the develop¬ 
ment of personality. Educators for whom this difficulty appears 
extraordinarily great are prone to advocate improvement of the 
social order as one of the "basic functions of educational 
influences. Opponents of this school of thought claim the 
former educators to "be leaders of indoctrination rather than 
of education. Whether this contention Be well founded or not, 
the advocacy of social control through the direct influence 
of the school is the centre of an issue not well defined By 
the exponents of either of these schools of educational thought. 
Since Both groups of opponents reject utterly a Belief in the 
desirability of indoctrination on their own part, it is evident 
an interpretation of the theories of the Progressive and the 
modern Realist is a task of some difficulty. 

T — — " “ “ ~ — “' 

Bell, Reginald: Personality Factors in Education , 

Stanford Education Conference, op. cit., p. 205. 
































. 

















' 











. 




















-55- 


The Progressivist, George 3. Counts, contends 
that our educational philosophies ire based too largely 
upon the culture of past ages. According to Counts there can 

he no "all-embracing educational philosophy, policy, or 

1 

programme suited to all centuries and all ages." Then with 

special reierence to the social sciences. Counts states that 

the task of formulating educational policies and programmes 

2 

is not "merely a task of gathering social data." On the 

contrary, positive influence must be exerted by the educator: 

"...Facts must be selected, interpreted and woven into 
patterns of utility and purpose...Always and everywhere 
genuine education is a form of practical endeavour—a 
form of social action. This means that the educator fails 
in his line of duty if he fails to step out of academic 
cloisters, even leave the research laboratory, reject the 
role of disinterested spectator, take an active part 
in shaping events, make selections among social values, 
and adopt, however tentatively and broadly, some con¬ 
ception of social welfare and policy, bo enquiry can 
remove from his shoulders the responsibility of embody¬ 
ing in his theories and programmes some interpretation of 
history....some general outlook upon the world, some frame 
of reference with respect to society, some conception of 
things deemed necessary, of things deemed possible, of 
things desirable in the proximate future... .He may rightly 
inquire Vvhat choices of purpose and direction as practic¬ 
able and feasible; but being compelled to act he inevit¬ 
ably makes such choices, even though he may conceal his 
decisions from himself as well as from others..."3 

Counts’ expression is clearly on the side of those who contend 

that the school's function in society is properly one of 

direct influences. His stand is unconditional and uncompromising. 


1 

Counts, George 3.: The Social Foundations of Education , 

P.eport on the Commission on Social Studies, American Historical 
Society, Hew York, Chas f Scribner and Sons, 1934, p. 1 ff. 

2 

Ibid. 

3 

Ibid., p. 3. 




















, 





. 

' 






























-56- 


If education, as he believes it should he, is called 
indoctrination by some, then it would appear that Counts is 
prepared to accept the accusation without apology. His 

introductory conclusion is that, "the educator should conceive 

1 

his task, in terms of broadest statesmanship." 

His statement, though pertaining to the disposition 
of social sciences, opens the question of the social function 
of the school. The statement has caused objections from 
various points of view. Perhaps the most pronounced objection 
is, that the members of the Progressivist "group" are prejudiced 
on the side of socialism in politics. The opponents of the 
group point out, that while the Progressives claim to encourage 
experimental!sm in education, their theory of teaching citizen¬ 
ship is really a means of propagating particular social 
policies and thus lacks the true character of experimentalism. 

The view of the Progressives appears to go 
furtherin the field of academic freedom. Bertrand Bussell 
whose writing in this field might be taken as a neutral source, 
upholds the right of the teacher to throw off all hyproerisy and 
teach according to the dictates of intelligent and broad-minded 
reasoning. Bussell claims that the support of the status quo 
is too often taken as the only desirable form of teaching. 


1 

Ibid, 5. 

2 

Breed, op. cit., p. 176. 

3 

Bussell, Bertrand: The Functions of the Teacher , 
Harpers Magazine, June, 1940, p. 11. 





































. 

















. 






















' 
















. 












-57- 


He states, tor example, that in higher education, 

"...The practice of considering a man*s nationality 
rather than his competence in appointing him to a post 
is damaging to education and an offence against the 
ideal international culture...” 1 

This particular type of reasoning might not be so applicable 

to elementary education, though its counterpart might be 

found. Russell continues in his criticism of educational 

dogmatism. He states that, 

Tt .. .dogmatists the world over believe that although the 
truth is known to them, others will be led into false 
beliefs provided they are allowed to hear the arguments 
of both sides. This is a belief which leads to one or 
other of two misfortunes: either one set of dogmatists 
conquers the world and prohibits all ideas, or, what is 
worse, rival dogmatists conquer differnt regions and 
preach the gospel of hate against each other...The first 
makes civilization static; the second tends to destroy 
it completely. Against both the teacher should be the 
main safeguard...” 2 

In common with Counts, Russell claims that the function of the 
teacher is, through genuine regard for the welfare of the 

3 

learners, to teach what he himself" believes to be of value. 

The opponents of Progressivism, while they do 
not pretend to deplore educational freedom, wish to approach 
the problem of freedom from a different angle. The teacher 
should be neutral, they claim, in the sense that he strives 
only to develop intelligence and selective powers in his 
learner. Educational freedom as understood by the Progress- 
ivist, they say, is the doctrine of the propagandist. 


1 

Ibid, p. 13. 

2 lud, 

2 

Ibid. p. 


14. 




















. 


. 

* 

■ 

... 

■ 

■ 






- 







1 

. 












. 








- 58 - 


Kilpatrick answers this criticism "by stating that the opponents 

here confuse education with indoctrination. He w'rites: 

"...When current controversial issues considered at 
school are taken home for further discussion, excited 
stant-patters, thinking that education is always the 
same as indoctrination, call to high heaven that the 
schools are perverting the youth and subverting the 
government..T^l 

Kilpatrick contends too, that the words pervert and subvert 

are catchwords and subtly presuppose "the absolute correctness 

of what already is and the wrongness of even any questioning 
2 

of the matter." It would seem, therefore, that Kilpatrick 
has in mind the evil of official opinion acting as a pressure 
roup upon the school, forcing it to support standards without 
recourse to critical examination either on the pa^t of the 
teacher or the student. 

As we have noted, the opponents of the Progress- 
ivists contend that when an educator takes sides in political 
matters, he becomes a propagandist. Professor lewlon opens 
himself to attack on this ground as he blames conservative 
elements in society through "vested in"erests" for undesirable 
pressure put upon the school and teachers. He explains why 
teachers do not take part freely in political affairs: 


1 --- “ ——— - “ 

Kilpatrick, W. H. (Editor): The Teacher and Society, Eewy 
York, D. Appleton-Century Go., 1957, p. 28. 

2 

Ibid. 




































, 






' Eul *:U:3 


, 









. 

- 

























... . 

























- 59 - 


”...The controlling reason why teachers do in fact 
avoid participation in political affairs begins thus 
to he more apparent. Recognizing that the public school 
is an effective agency for moulding the minds of yout£, 
powerful interests seek to limit the scope of its 
operations, to control its curriculum, to render the 
school socially innocuous. The status quo groups—and 
it is always defenders of the status quo who fear the 
effect of an inquiring education, seel: to prevent the 
school from venturing into the areas of life that are of 
deepest concern to them whether religious, moral, social, 
political, or economic...” 1 

The opponents of the view expressed by Bewlon accuse its 

exponents of wishing to propagandize the schools in favour of 

2 

Leftist politics and a socialistic society. But the 

arogressives claim in literal language only the right of the 

school to teach pupils to think critically and to help to 

direct society tow/ards co-operativeness and abolition of 

3 

selfish individualism. They say that democratic society 


must be dependent upon the right of free play of intelligence 
in schools—that we owe allegiance ”not to what we have 

hitherto thought, but rather to what better study can find 

4 

out.” Finally, in this view, educators must choose, not 
follow,the lead of society, and logic must shift to a dynamic 
basis. 


fjritics of the Progressive theory of the school's 
social function do not recognize any validity in the claim 


that a school led according to this theory can develop 
impartiality on the part of students. Breed “writes caustically 


1 

The Teacher and Society, op. eit., p. 301. 

2 

Breed, op. eit., p. 175. 

3 

Kilpatrick, Stanford Education Conference , op. cit., pp. 231, 
232. 

4 

Ibid. 


» a • 


234. 













. 


























. 



























. , • 














- 60 - 


" ...The proposal to confiae the school to the discovery 
and dissemination ol truth, to give it both conservative 
function, and to make the teacher a specialist in the 
values of our social inheritance rather than a leader of 
questionable reforms, will be regarded by many educational 
Progressives as renouncing a magnificent opportunity. The 
opportunity, nevertheless, had best be renounced..."1 

Counts, at least, among the Progressives, does not even 

suggest that the teacher should show himself to be neutral 

where social policies are concerned. It would appear, however, 

that it is too much to assume that even the extreme of the 

progressives advocate partiality on the part of the teacher 

in politics in his school. Little can be gained by considering 

portions of arguments characterized by mere animosities. 

Some account should be taken, however, of the reasons offered 

by the Realists on behalf of the alleged practicability and 

common-sensed nature of their attitude towards the problem 

of the school's function in society. 

un behalf of the Baalists., Simon contends that the 

school is an "agent of the state entrusted with the training of 

2 

the young." This being the case, if is not at all logical to 
expect the state which supports education, to al'lo?; the 
fostering of emotions which do not strengthen the national 
unity ana patriotic sentiments. "I am not even saying," he 
writes, "that it ought to be so; but it is, and you cannot 


1 

Breed, op. cit., p. 185. 

2 

Simon, Henry W.; Preface to Teaching , Oxford University 
Press, 1958, p. 11. 



























































■ 





























- 61 - 


1 

alter a fact by wishing it different.' 1 2 3 4 Simon believes that 
the reason for this realistic attitude on the part of educators 

2 

is democracy's respect for minorities and difference of opinion. 
Teachers, therefore, cannot always teach what they b-elieve to 
be right. A democracy, Simon contends, tolerates, even "encourage 
differences of opinion in most matters.' 1 But it does not 
tolerate extreme views on controversial subjects which might 
be propagated in educational institutions. To do otherwise, 
he claims, would thwart attempts at patriotic training and 
lead to social anarchy. 

Such a "logical" theory is apparently looked upon 

by the rrogressives as being motivated by educational cowardice. 

Ohilds writes that a "living educational philosophy is never 

4 

the sheer invention of philosophers and theorists." Though 

these men express the ideas contained in the traditions and 

practices of their society, the materials are not created by 

them. "These materials are supplied by the manifold life of 
o 

society itself." To this statement the opponents counter 

with the questions: "What philosophy? Communism? Fascism? 

6 

Socialism? We are not told." 


1 

Ibid, p. 12. 

2 

Ibid, p. 15. 

3 

Ibid. 

4 

Childs, John L. ; " A x re face to a hew philosophy of Education , 

Thirteenth Year Book, Department of Superintendence, 

Washington, D. C., 1935, p. 113 
o 

Ibid, p. 114. 

6 


Simon, op. cit, 


16 

















. 

































■ 
















1 ■' 































- 62 - 


Tben to support his interrogative challenge to the 
Prog: ves, Sir o ,c t col, at 

lest, can reflect only in a tardy manner the changes which 
have already taken place in society, therefore, the most 
M a school can hope to do is to train in that respect of social 

philosophy which it considers test and which will he tolerated 

1 

by the existing society.” Then he aads that, "Even this may 

2 

take great courage.” 

Finally, we find that the Progressives are held 

by certain opponents as favoring Socialism. Freed goes so far 

as to label both moderate and extreme Progressive leaders as 

socialists. Ee then claims that socialism cannot be supported 

in a democracy, for as many intelligent people oppose it as 

uphold it. In any case, he believes that the school is not 

adapted lor the purpose of bringing about fundamental changes 

in the social set-up. Simon is convinced that to be a teacher 

successfully, one must adopt,this philosophy. But, he writes, 

”...If you still insist on becoming a teacher and. still 
insist upon living up to your own unorthodox social 
opinions, I think I can tell you how far you will go in 
the classroom with them. You can go with them just up 
to the ^oint where you are taken seriously, but no 
further...But just as soon as you achieve that epithet 
’dangerous 1 2 3 , that is, just as soon as you are starting 
to be effective, out you go. You will then be in the 
excellent company of Socrates...” 3 


1 -- 

ibid, p. 17. 

2 

Ibid, p. 180 

3 

Ibid., p. 


18. 
















. 

; 




























. 

- 

. 

. 




. . . 




« 




























- 63 - 


And then, as if to assure the reader that he may 
hold Socrates in some esteem, Simon adas; "..Please do not 

1 

think tLat I approve of all this. It is just deplorably so.” 

A point which makes a contrast in the two educational 
philosophies under discussion difficult to understand is the 
fact that the Fealists, no less than the Progressives, criticize 
traditional schools for their narrow-minded teaching of a 
national history. Breed cites passa es in American and British 
histories which he would class as nationalistic propaganda. 

Then it is pointed out that the Facist and Communistic states 
adopt the same method of preparing their youth for the acceptance 
of the respective political philosophies. Criticism of 
traditional schools by those who, at the same time, condemn the 
Progressives for attacking conservatism in society, leaves the 
problem of finding clearcut distinctions in the philosophies of 
social education somewhat confusing. But the circumstance 
leads one to believe that greater compromises could be made 
by exponents on both sides. 

II FlUTJ^KS II. 1KB IV.0 PHIBOSuPEIKS . 

The,exponents of Progressive education support, in 
a theory that society should be improved as a direct result of 
educational leadership. 'These exponents state that economic 
and social structures have changed faster than has been the 


1 

Ibid. 

2 

Breea, op. eit*, pp. 167, 171, 172. 









- 64 - 


adjustment of individuals to the new conditions and faster 
than the evolution of social and economic organization. They 
claim that our present social life is organized on the assumption 
that all who want work can find it if training is provided for the 
individuals concerned. Since this condition no longer exists, as 
it might have done in periods of economic expansion in new 
countries, the rrogressive educationists content that youth 
must oe trained to think anu experiment in social reform. 
Teachers, they claim, should he leaders in the constructive 
control of social change. Education should he a sum of processes 
which enable a ’’free play of intelligence w which is "our final 

resource to tell us what to think and do in all individual and 

1 

social affairs.' 1 The exponents of social control through 
education will admit no ^lace in education for lessons taught 
with authoritative rigidity. 

On the other hand educational leaders who claim a 
liberal hut realistic view of the school’s function, claim that 
the teacher cannot reform society; nor is it, they say, the duty 
of the teacher to tr; to reform society through the school. 

■Rather it is the teacher’s job to develop qualities and abilities 
in children which will fit them to live in the world In which 
they find themselves. Social scientists cannot agree upon the 
desirability of various social and economic policies which are 
advocated: Kow, the$, can teachers who are not experts in 


1 

Zilpatriek, 1. E., The Stanford ducat i on Conference , op. cit., 

j.. 228 . 












, .. 
































, 















































- 65 - 


social science, decide and teach where such issues are 
concerned? The Pealists advocate that the school should he 
an impartial medium through which useful knowledge and desirable 
habits may be acquired. 

Superficially, it would appear that the Progressive 

educationists would discount too completely the traditional 

heritage of society in education. It is a characteristic 

point in progressive educational philosophy that traditional 

points of view should be sacrificed for the good of present 

adjustment; but there is evidence to show that, more recently 

at any rate, that eminent Progressive leaders do not suggest 

a complete destruction of the social heritage in so far as the 

subject matter of education is concerned. Dewey has written 

in a recent essay as follows: 

” ...The institutions and customs that exist in the 
^resent ang give rise to the present social ills and 
dislocations did not arise overnight. They have a long 
history behind them. Attempt to deal with them simply 
on a basis of what is obvious in the present is bound 
to result in adoption of superficial measures which in 
the end will only render existing problems more acute 
and more difficult to solve. Policies framed simply upon 
the ground of knowledge of the present cut off from the 
past is the counter part of heedless carelessness in 
individual conduct. . . T ’l 

It is through such statements, indicating both 
moderation and reforming insight, that a basis for compromise 
and conciliation in the field of educational theory may be 
ultimately reached. Some common ground for compromise, if 


1 

Dewey, John: Experience and Education , Dew York, MacMillan, 


> .r 


















































' 



































. 






























- 66 - 


no t for conciliation, between the two schools of thought under 
discussion can he found in the following disclosures: 

1. There is a common belief in the desirability for the 
development of critical intellects. 

2. There must be social and individual adjustment through 
educational experiences. 

3. There are certain generally ‘recognized cardinal 
objectives for education. 

4. Both schools of thought show respect for the social 
heritage and for the courageous pioneer. 

5. barrow-minded nationalism is condemned. 

It is over the problem of limiting the function of the school 
in the sphere of social change, and over the problem of educa¬ 
tional freedom that the controversy is most acute. It is 
admitted by the Progressives and Realists alike that social 
change is a fact and that it is the function of education to 
direct ^outh in as intelligent a manner as possible. The 
Realists accent the dictates of society in the matters of 
educational objectives, while the Progressives look upon 
society as dynamic, governing the needs in education but 
reject the claim that educatiom must of necessity uphold the 
status quo of social objectives. If this final difference 
ino pinion represents a fundamental discord in the theory of 
educational function, it may require that social intelligence 
rise to a higher plain before educational freedom is placed 
upon a sound foundation where it can be democratically 
appreciated and fostered. 

















_ 










- 







* 


















i 














c 











- 67 - 


III COkT^ OVl^SIiL I33u .3 I,. TbE SCHOOLS . 

Tbe problem of controversial issues in relation 

to tbe function of tbe school is one phase of the general 

problem thus far outlined in this chapter. Those who oppose 

the handling of controversial issues in the schools fear that 

discussion of them cannot remain objective on the part of 

teachers and students. It is feared that education would 

1 

become a form of indoctrination. Indoctrination, educationally 

speaking, may be taken to mean teaching which influences people 

with prejudice towards one side of a controversy. This could 

mean that, education might be made to influence social unity 

directly through intellectual force; this being the case 

because of the necessary significance which must be attached 

2 

to a controversial issue worthy of the name. The great 
concern, however, is not that Indoctrination has a uniting 
effect, but that it is likely to have a subversive effect. 
Education which upholds the traditions of society is never 
saio. to be indoctrinating by the society concerned. It is 
this fact which causes the concern of the Progressive 
educationists.. They contend that teaching based upon the 
preconceived superiority of the status quo in society should 
be considered indoctrination. 

But an issue of such importance to society 
today cannot be left upon a definition of terms. If any 
solution to the difficult problem is to be offered, tbe 

T ~ — 

iashburn. Carle ton; A Living xbilo sophy of' education , 
hew York, The John Day’Co., 1S40, p. 425. 

2 

Ibid. 






































t 





. 

. 














' 















: - t - 







- 68 - 


main alternatives of the case should be submitted. These 
alternatives are, as V.ashburn convincingly states them, "in¬ 
doctrination, a balanced presentation of both sides (of 

1 

controversial issuesj, and avoidance of controversial 

, VN ^ 

issues altogether (in public schools). It might be said for 
indoctrination in the form of nationalistic propaganda that 
some form of unification of the nationalistic mind has been 
achieved in the Totalitarian states of the world. Unity 
without unification, however, appears to be the aim of 
democratic societies. On the other hand it might be shown 
that, because of natural prejudice where traditions are 
concerned, it is literally impossible for teachers to always 
present a perfectly balanced account of controversial issues. 
Academically, therefore, the question; what shall be don e 
concerning controversial issues by the schools? leads to 
much antagonism and confusion of thought. In practice it 
would seem that good teachers solve the problem through 
sincerity and tact. 

The principal result of educational growth 
is probably the ability to think clearly and constructively 
and it is desirable that minds should be free from narrowness 
and hyprocrisy. In this educational aim Progressive educationist* 
and Pealists express similar views. Among educational leaders 
of opposing schools there is also agreement on the value 
of pupils’ discussion, even the discussion of controversial 


1 

The worms in parenthesis are inserted. 

£ 

Washburne, op,, eit., p 


437. 



































, 



















• - • - — . - -- - 























































- 69 - 


issues. Disagreement arises in the matter of limitation of 

discussion and degree of control exercised* 

The elaboration of the difficulties of the problem 

under discussion would lead to by-paths. The point is that 

practice on the part of pupils in impartial reasoning, according 

to their maturity, is commended by all leading educationists. 

The status of public opinion cannot be easily observed and 

estimated but it is the aim of education to dispel groundless 

fears, prejudice and hyprocrisy. To summarize the point, the 

following expressive words of bashburne are quoted: 

"..A person with a^owerful motive but without 
balanced judgement and scientific reasoning, without 
eyes wide open for all pertinent facts, is like an 
automobile with a powerful engine, but no steering 
gear. It moves with great force, but is doomed to 
destruction. Doth engine and stearin*; gear are indisp¬ 
ensable . It is the job of education to give children 
both powerful motive for solving our problems and 
scientific thinking to steer their course...”! 


1 


Wasbburne, op, cit., p 


. 446. 












-70- 


CHAPTER V 

EDUCATION AND THE SAFETY OF DEMOCRACY 

Trends of political ideologies during the past decade, 
and especially the upheavals of the present war, have in¬ 
troduced grave concern for the welfare of democracy. Public 
expression on the part of national leaders during the present 
crisis indicates clearly that the welfare of democracy and 
that of public education are thought of in close relationship. 

In the present chapter our aim is to consider the school*s 
relation to the social order in terms of democracy. In the 
discussion following two assumptions are accepted: (l) 
"Democratic processes are conditioned by the extent and dis¬ 
tribution of educational opportunity "J (2) The democratic 
way of life is essentially desirable 

The plan of the discussion is as follows: 

1. Concern for the Welfare of Education in Time of Crisis. 

2. The Importance of Defining Democracy. 

3. The Place of Education in the Support of Democratic 
Principles. 


1. Good, Carter, V.: "Editorial" in Journal of Educational 
Research, September, 1940, p. 43. 































. 


■ 










: • ; 






. 

. 

. 

. 







- 71 - 


1. EDUCATION AND DEMOCRACY IN TI.IE OF CRISIS , 

Democratic education touches all people through the 

family. Professor Newlon writes: 

"..•There is no opinion-forming agency more important 
than popular education, touching all people as it does 
most literally from the cradle to the grave..." 

Democratic peoples feel called' upon, therefore, to de¬ 
cide the specific social functions for which their schools 
are to he employed. This feeling is known to he especially 
strong at the present time when the world as a whole appears 

p 

to he unsafe for democracy. Avenues of propoganda are 
numerous, and agencies of propaganda are active in them all. 
Freedom of speech in democratic countries appears to some to 
be of assistance to the promoters of totalitarian ideologies. 
Because of the aforementioned belief it is felt in many quar¬ 
ters that the risks of resort to indoctrination of democratic 
ideals must he taken. It is believed, at any rate, that the 
teaching of democratic principles should he undertaken as a 
positive programme with greater stress upon the vital need for 
preservation of these principles in action than for stimulation 
of an abstract study of them. It should he understood, there¬ 
fore, that deomcracy Is taken to mean more than a system of 
government. It must he understood and taught as a way of life 
embracing the whole field of human relationships which, through 

T7 " " ' — 

Newlon, Jesse H.: Education for Democracy in Our Time , 
McGraw-Hill Book Go.,Inc. New York and London, 1939, p. 16. 

2 . 

Ibid., p. 31,ff. 














• : ' 

' ■ ■ . m 

, 




















* 






. 








- 72 - 


the progress of democracy have not been made perfect, but 
have been brought into the realm of humanitarian ethics. 

Its ideals must be practised while they are being learned. 

Those who defend democracy should understand the 
characteristics of modern society and world development 
which make democracy susceptible to inward attack. The 
emergence of a new division of classes due to industrializat¬ 
ion has, for example, rendered democracies which were form- 
erly peacefully united, susceptible to the influences of 
social strife and agitation. The disturbing influences may, 
in themselves, be signs of progress in social evolution. Mo¬ 
mentarily, however, they may weaken the democracy in its stand 
against counter forces. Even the habit of self-criticism, 
constructive though it may be in the long view of democratic 
development, leads to dissention in time of crisis and makes 
the internal unity of a country less firm. In the main it 
would seem that the fight by democratic peoples to preserve 
essential freedom is a struggle for the maintenance of demo¬ 
cratic education. Or, the struggle might be said to be one to 
maintain the practice of experimental social science in a world 

in which some nations have submitted to the suppression of ex- 

2 

perimental adjustment in social life. 

Democracy is fostered by freedom of thought and discussion 
As Champlin puts it: 

_ 

Champlin, Carrol D.: Democracy through Education . Educational 
Administration and Supervision, Vol.XXVT, May, 1940,p.380. 

2 

Ibid., p. 382. 







I 























. « « 




t ' ' ■ ■" 






% 

t *' ? : : ' if 




. 










. 


. 




. 


< « 


- c 

, t , 








- 73 - 


"...There is nothing like practical, authentic inform¬ 
ation about the world's economic and political move¬ 
ments to preserve our social sanity and to keep us 
individually clearheaded. Current literature, private 
and public discussion and the free use of the press and 
the radio are saving us from being capitulated into the 
maelstrom of' revolutionary panaceas..." 1 

The fact that the acute crisis of war may make necessary a 

curtailment of the ideal thus set forth a necessity does not 

diminish it. To clarify the confusion of thought created by 

uncertainty concerning the proper function of education in the 

social order, it might be suggested that it matters little 

whether democracy is a result of education or whether the 

reverse is the case. The important fact is the necessity of 

making education a positive factor in the strengthening of 

democracy. 


We shall now consider 
of democracy. It cannot be denied 
of its proper significance must be 


the importance of the conception 
that an intellectual grasp 
the basis of its promotion. 


11 — - nrk, ,;f rj jI i i . 

The prevailing conception of democracy is one 
both of fact and ideal. The Editor of the 3. 0. Teacher 
writes as follows: 


"...We sorrowfully admit that democracy still is an ideal, 
an unrealized dream; but it is a dream and ideal that tends 
to embody itself in social and political institutions and 
practices that deal with mankind as individuals rather than 
in wholesale lots..." 2 


1 -----~~ ’ ‘ 

Ibid. 

2 

The B. 0. Teacher, (Dr. 1M. F. Black, Editor) February, 1941, 















. 











































































- 74 - 


Statements such as follow indicate further the spirit of 

idealism held by educational leaders: 

"Democracy has its own system of moral and social 
values. It emphasizes the brotherhood of man, co¬ 
operation and not selfishness.. . T, 1 

"The very presence of democratic institutions suggests 
study and experimentalism...Democracy in action is 
based on the brotherhood of man idea, and it carries 
with it the thought of sincere fellowship and loyal 
mutual service...Democracy is a challenge to devotion 
and consecration to the high calling of social use¬ 
fulness ."2 

But the practice of democracy as we know it may 

leave room for doubt as to the extent of its realization. The 

idea of world brotherhood, for example, appears within democracies 

to be all but impossible to attain as a means of solving race 

problems within the nation. The problem of obtaining fair and 

unprejudiced treatment of Orientals in British Columbia might 

3 

be cited as a most serious obstacle. 

Educational leaders believe that the ideal must 
be maintained. The duties of citizenship are many-fold and they 
should include the maintenance of faith in the ideal of 
democracy and in the essential value of Christian ethics upon 
which the democratic ideal is claimed to be founded. 

The implications of democracy are too broad to 
permit definition here. It is noteworthy that a danger of 


1 

Bewlon, op, cit., p. 68. 

2 

Ohamplin, op. cit., p. 379. 

3 

The P. 0. T e acner , March, 1940, p. 328. 





















... 


■ 



























. 












. 































superficial comprehension of its meaning exists, and that 

resulting from this superficiality is the tendency of passive 

1 

acceptance of democracy. As Washburne indicates, there is 

often a cleavage between the "essence” and the "form” of 

democracy. It is obvious that there must be many forms of 

democratic activity: "...democracy is a way of life that 

gives every individual the utmost opportunity for self-fulfillment 

2 

as a member of independent society." The form of democratic 

government is not as significant, it is rightly claimed, as 

the basic ideas which are developed. The ideas in name are 

3 

freedom, social responsibility, understanding. 

Freedom allows intelligent study and reflection, 
frank expression therefrom, and reasonable action, the object 
of which is constructive design. Social responsibility involves 
the realization of individual capability and usefulness lead¬ 
ing to unselfish co-operation. Finally, understanding of 
democracy means the ability to find and see facts in their 
proper perspective and to reach conclusions in the light of 
the facts presented. The assumption of these significant 
meanings can be made, however, only in the faith of idealism, 
as indeed the assumption of the whole democratic conception 
must be. Through education it may be possible to teach with 
greater success in the future the necessity of developing 
virile character upon which the carrying out of democratic 


1 

Washburne, op. cit., p. 447, ff. 

2 

Ibid., p. 448. 

3 


bid. 
















: 





. 






. 




r 





























































- 76 - 


processes depends. An important point in the conception of 
democracy is that constant and courageous effort must he 
maintained. 


If this latter fact were understood more generally 


democracy would likely he stronger to withstand its foes, 

and violence ana hate would not so commonly replace experiment- 

alism ana reason. On this subject Champlin writes: "Education 



and this suitable 

1 


form of education is now being worked out step by step..." 

It is evident that a democratic nation must educate for 
strength of character and democratic intelligence. The process 
of education should allow for the development of these 
qualities. 

Ill DEMOCRACY THPOUGrH EDUC1TIOS. 


Education for democracy cannot mean indoctrination 


for belief in any specific type of political organization. 

We assume that training for democratic life presupposes free¬ 
dom of the individual mind. It is not the democratic 
tradition to believe that co-ordiantion of community and 
national effort is to be autocratically imposed but that it 
is to be developed within society through co-operative 
reasoning. It can be stated without fear of mininterpretation, 
therefore, that "the task of the schools in a democracy is 


1 

Ohamplin, op. cit., p. 382. 






























. 





















■ 









. 























- 77 - 


1 

above all else the adjustment of youth to the social order.” 

Social policies within a democracy can he 
derived through co-ordination of findings of the various social 
groups; active among these groups in Canada toaay are youth 
congresses, industrial and labour groups, young political 
groups and religious organizations. In the process of 
democratic expression and determination there is inevitable 
conflict of opinion and interests. Because of this, there 
is a challenge to education-to overcome prejudices of race, 
creed and individual selfishness. 

Row education can effect this end is a moot 

question. Educational philosophy and school organization 

must certainly be determined by the needs of democracy. But 

it can be seen that organization alone cannot accomplish the 

2 

task of nurturing democratic life. Organization might, by 
becoming lifeless and rigid, be an obstacle to democratic 
practice. The spirit of democracy should be alive in the 
school; democratic leadership which is given with the view of 
drawing from children their talents for self-activity and 
responsibility is essential. 


1 

GrOod, op. cit. , p. 44 • 

2 

Wasbburne, op. cit., p. 455. 

3 

Ibid. (Chapters XXXIV, SZXV.) 















































' 



























- 















- 78 - 


In the previous chapter two fundamental points 
of view concerning the function of education in relation to the 
social order were discussed. Uo definite evaluation of the 
respective merits of these points of view were established; 
perhaps none can he established at this period of educational 
development. Yet, directly or indirectly, education is 
either the means or the outcome of the status quo of social 
policy. The conception of democracy in or through education 
is highly relative to specific time and place, general and 
universal though truth may be. Education involves the 
accomplishment of specific and practical habits and skill 
with which to meet the demands of the modern world. Though 
a core of culture be somewhat stable, the character of the 

social ana economic world is dynamic. Tr_e trend of educational 

1 

research in recent years towards the study of problems in 
education points to a realization of the latter fact. This 
gives education and the democratic ideal a vital relationship. 

Popular education does not, however, assure 

foundational training for democracy unless unceasing pains 

are taken to make it do so. Eewlon writes: 

"popular education is not always a creative and liberating 
influence, for it can be controlled by whatever forces 
control the state. It may be employed either as an 


T-- 

Good, Op. cit., p. 44. 























. .. 























. 


* . 
























- 79 - 


agency of enlightenment or merely for purposes of 
social control... T, 1 

Finally, it would, appear that there are two essential safe¬ 
guards if democracy is to remain whol 0 ; first a basis of 
education which provides training and culture for all, and 
second, a democratic spirit emanating from the leaders and 
administrators of the schools. .Social improvement depends 
upon social motives working through the best media which 
civilizatioh has developed. The school should rank high 
among these media. 

In Canada it seems clear that inequality of 

opportunity, as between rural and urban areas creates a 

situation which is really undemocratic. Democratic organization 

within the school cannot overcome undemocratic features of 

organization, financial support and administration. These 

latter phases are points which must be considered in a 

theoretical as well as a practical view of education and 

school life. The following statement by J. W. noseworthy 

is pertinent to our present conclusion: 

"Before the school can become the bulwark of democracy 
there must be education in democracy and democracy in 
education. Education does not of necessity develop a 
democratic citizenship. Education can be made with 
equal effect to produce a good latzi or a good Facist. 

To develop democratic citizenship the school must 
provide the knowledge necessary for free men, a knowledge 
that will enable our citizens to preserve and extend their 

T ' “ ' 

Eewlon, op. cit., p. 81. 

















. 





















: 





- 80 - 


freedom. Hor does the school of necessity develop the 
loyalties essential to the preservation of democracy. 

To do this it must provide an understanding of the meaning 
of democracy and the implications of its loss. IS or does 
the school of necessity develop the disciplines of 
democracy. These can he developed only hy democratic 
living within the school...’ 1 1 


T-- -- 

loseworthy, J. W. : ’’The School--The Bulwark of Democracy,” 
The B. Q. Teacher , November, 1941, p. ISO ("Reproduced from 
the Canadian jorum, September, 1941). 














- 81 - 


CHAPTER VI 

THE SCHOOL IN RELATION TO THE SOCIAL SERVICES 

Study of the administration of the social services 
reveals as no other study can the diverse nature of the comm¬ 
unities that make up a state. From the family which is the 
original and basic group, the communities expand in widening 
circles to form the complete state. The individual has re¬ 
lationships with all the units of the social structure; to 
understand him he must be studied as a social being. The 
democratic conception of the state implies the necessity 
for the best possible development of the component individ¬ 
uals which together make up the various units and communities 
of the whole state.^ 

The chief purpose of the administration of social 
services is, therefore, to promote individual development. 
Since the commencement of the present century much progress 
in this direction has been made. In matters pertaining to 
public health alone, it can be shorn that great strides have 
been made.^ Work of local authorities has developed in the 
line of the social services in conjunction with the increas¬ 
ing part played by central authorities. The work of volun¬ 
tary agents has always been a deciding factor in the accomp¬ 
lishment of social service work, and the fruit of voluntary 

1 ' — ~ " 

Cohen, I.I. and Travers, R.M.W.(Editors): Education for 

Democracy , p.109 

2 

Ibid. 







’ 














* ■ 

* 

• : 0 


: , ■ < ' 

< • 

i 


5 / . 

. * .. 


. 












- 82 - 


enterprise has, doubtless, been a powerful factor in stim¬ 
ulating the activity of municipal, provincial and federal 
development of forms of service designed to .promote fuller 
individual and social life in Canada as well as in older 
nations. 

Education, which is itself the most inclusive of 
all social services, is destined to play a vital part in the 
carrying out of all other forms of social service. It is 
through the school and the home that the individual learns 
to feel the need for further aids to his life. The art of 
reading, for example, acquired partly in the home and part¬ 
ly in the school, but principally in the school, is a pre¬ 
requisite to the use of public libraries. 

The present chapter is a brief discussion of the 
social services which have practical and direct bearing up¬ 
on the development of public education and which in varying 
degrees affect the carrying out of the whole public charge 
concerning the welfare of children and youth. The plan of 
the discussion is as follows: 

1. The Growth of Social Services. 

2. Examples of Modern Social Service Development for 
Children 

a. The Vancouver Schools Library Service. 

b. School Health Department of Vancouver. 

3. The nature of Social Services. 

4. Administrative Factors. 














< 








■ 

• . t : 

i 





. 














. 

* 

* 

, 

. • * 















- 83 - 


I THE CrRO /Tii OE r'UBLlU o ATVTCES 

The conditions governing the development of 
Canadian life have limited the growth of public services. 
Education itself has grown in the face of the difficulties 
of pioneering, some geographic and climatic disadvanta es 
and economic difficulties enhanced by the advance of frontiers. 
Canadian history makes it clear, however, that neither ed¬ 
ucational nor health welfare were ever forgotten issues even 
in colonial times. Neverthe-less, public concern for social 
services under government sponsorship is a characteristic 
of recent decades in so far as it has become an important 
f ctor in national planning and economy. But it should be 
noted too, that the older methods of rendering social service 
still function as supplementary agencies. As has been pointed 
out, this is desirable in so far as it has an educational and 
stimulation effect upon the public. A possible danger indicated 
by some social service workers is that sections of the public 
can be lulled into a feeling of satisfaction by feeble contri¬ 
butions to voluntary social services. The epoch of public 
sponsorship of social services marks the stage of scientif¬ 
ic approach to the problem which should result in adequacy 
and thoroughness. 

Our discussion in Chapter II indicates that tech¬ 
nical and material change creates new needs in the fields of 

















. 











* ■ 




' 




» . 








C 








c • 

. 

" 


. 

























- 84 - 


social service and social guidance. In cities especially 
there is increasing need for the adjustment of home life to 
industrial needs. Recent housing movements appear to he fill¬ 
ing this need in many quarters. The settlement of rural areas, 
especially in frontier communities, results in uneven distri¬ 
bution of suitable land and other resources, ^uch factors 
affect social, economic and moral development. 

New types of social service have developed as a 
result of the varying needs of both town and country. Some 
of these services have been created to meet critical social or 
economic crises, and are temporary in organization. Direct 
relief and work relief, for example, are of this type. Var¬ 
ious permanent institutions ef social service, however, are 
sponsored by local, provincial or federal governments. u anada 1 
in common with the United States," Britain and many other 
countries has established departments for the direction of 
social services, some volunteer, others government-sponsored. 

Among the essential institutions created are provincial and 

- 3 

municipal child-guidance clinics, mental hospitals, schools 
and special classes for handicapped children, preventive 
clinics, nursery schools, vocational schools, night schools, 
and extension departments. 


The Canadian Almanac . 1941, Copp, Clark ^o., pp.531,317—379; 
494, 300, 526. 

2 . 

Social Services and the Schools , op.cit.,Chapter I 

3. 

Appendix I 















- 85 - 


Becognition of the need for social services has “been 
followed by various lines of social services being 
developed through official and voluntary effort. The 
general emphasis for the need of further extension of 
social and personal responsibility through education is 
the clearest sign of the growth of public consciousness of 
social service, its value and its need for the future. 

The nature of the growth of the social 
services has created problems for the future to solve, 
while the urgent need for more adequate social services 

has itself become a problem of major importance. Spheres 

1 

of responsibility are not clearly defined and proper 
integration of the established services is not worked out 
to the best advantages in many quarters. Standards of the 
social services vary. Communities suffer from a varying 
distribution of wealth 


1 

Social Services and the Scho ols , op. cit., Chapter I. 






. 


















' 

, 





















. 





























- 86 - 


adding to the burden of voluntary and official workers in 
unfortunate areas. The integration and general administration 
of social services has clearly become a problem worthy to be 
coped with by the best spirit and intelligente of any nation. 

II EXAMP S . CHILD?El 1 S SOCIAL SERVICES II . !RH SETTIIGS. 


The creation of social services, to be permanently 
effective, requires thorough planning on the basis of broad 


social 

aims. The following outline contains points which the 

writer 

believes to be essential*. 

1. 

Division of the services. This will require admin¬ 
istration of schools, libraries, recreation facilities, 
health and general public welfare. Others are added 
or included in the scope of certain of those above 
named. 

2 . 

Aims of the services. Individual services have 
specific aims. The following, however, appear to 
have general applicability; education, prevention 
of defects, diagnostic, corrective. 

3. 

Definition of the quality to be maintained. Modern 
authorities in the fields of social service require 
that clear notions of qualities which the particular 
service is to maintain be clearly defined. For 
example, health, in the modern sense, is not merely 
an absence of disease# Health and many other concepts 
must now be thought in more basic and inclusive terms 
than they have been heretofore. 

4. 

Training of personnel. This must include a large body 
of individuals outside the professional sphere. 
Teachers, parents, numerous assistants and children 
themselves come under this heading. 

5. 

The whole environment. Effective social services 
succeeded by being based upon the broadest possible 
foundation of service. Individual lives cannot be 




■ 












. 




* 


- 




>.' • - • • . * , • .. ... 1 

- . . 

•• , V. 

X-. 




■ 

* 

■ 




■ 
























- 87 - 


brought to tbeir fullest possibilities unless all 
the conditions under which they grow are advantageous 
to that development. 

It is hoped that the relation of the social services to 
education will be made more clear by a brief exposition of 
the organization and achievements of two typical branches of 
the social services in Canada which are vitally linked with 
the schools. These are: (a) The Schools department of 
the Vancouver public Library and (b) The Vancouver School 
Health division. 

1 

The Schools department of the Vancouver Public Library. 

In the Spring of 1959 the Vancouver,School Board 
and the Representatives of the municipal library of Vancouver 
City made an agreement whereby a central collection of books 
would be established for circulation by lots throughout the 
city's elementary school system. The Librarians required 
to handle this collection or "pool 11 were to work under the 
supervision of the Public Library officials and be paid by 
the School Board. The new books required for the pool were 
to be purchased, accessioned, catalogued and rebound in the 
existing departments of the Library. 

By this plan the elementary schools of Vancouver 
City receive, every month or two, allotments of books of 


1 

lielavish, Isabel: The Vancouver Public Library and Schools 
department , The B. C. Teacher, January, 1941, pp. 229, 250. 















- 








































































< 



























- 88 - 


recreational reading to supplement the permanent library of 
each school. The size of the allotment received, by a given 
school is proportional to the pupil population of that 
school. The librarians of the Schools Department of the 
city library, with the assistance of a committee of school 
librarians, select the books for the pool with special 
attention to subject and grade needs. Suggestions for new 
titles are regularly received by the Schools Department from 
any teachers of the city staff who wish to make therp, such 
suggestions being consolidated by the central committee of 
school librarians. 

The Yancouver school library plan does not 
diminish t^e importance of the individual, permanent libraries 
of the schools. These are made more effective for several 
reasons, two of which are outstanding: library grants to 
school libraries can now be concentrated upon the purchasing 
of useful, permanent reference material; and secondly, school 
librarians are freed from many of the routine tasks now being 
performed by skilled assistants in the Dublin Library. further 
more many useful books which lay formerly in many school 
libraries unused because they were familiar to the children 
of a given school can now be contributed to the pool in 





















* 








■ 




















































' 

. ■ "k . . 








■ 

















-yy- 


exehange for new "books for the school. The new library plan 
promotes co-operation among the elementary schools of the city. 

The former system of individual school libraries, 
without the benefit of a central library institution bore some 
fruit, for it did establish school libraries of a worthwhile 
standard in some schools. Its chief weaknesses were its lack 
of uniformity and viastefulness. Under it schools became 
library conscious, in many eases at least, and a staff of 
school librarians was trained. Through the old library system 
the city schools v.ere prepared to take advantage of a more 
co-operative and economical plan. 

The Library Committee is representative in that it' 
includes the following members; Inspector of elementary 
schools, four elementary school librarians, supervisors of 
primary ana special classes and the head of the Children's 
Library Department. The teacher-librarians on the committee 
are changed every year, making it possible thereby for all 
elementary school librarians to serve on the committee at 
some time. Suggestions from all librarians are invited by 
the committee. 

The extent and variety of the book pool is seen 
in the fact that, by January, 1941, the pool contained 4200 
booms of fiction, fairy tales, plays, biographies, handicraft 
books, poetry and humour. 


the total collection comprising over 



























, 











. 
















. 







. 

























- 90 - 


1000 titles. The plan is dratted to include eventually the 
junior and senior high school libraries of the city oi Vancouver. 

As can he seen by its organization, the new plan 
for the promotion of school library facilities in Vancouver is 
a contrast to the former system by virtue of its facilities 
for co-operation, equalization of opportunity for the children 
of the various schools, and because of its economy. Co-operative 
buying results in more books for the money. Circulation of the 
books from school to school multiplies the value of each book, 
while, at the same time, more money and energy can be spent in 
the expansion and maintenance of the individual school libraries. 

In summarizing the benefits of the Schools Depart¬ 
ment for Vancouver Schools, the head of the same department 

1 

points to three outstanding advantages of the plan; 

1. The best books are procured for the schools at the 
least possible cost. 

2. There is active participation of the school librarians 
on a co-operative basis resulting in maximum benefit 
from their training and skill. 

2. The individual child learns to associate the school 
library with the lublic library, thus laying the 
foundation of the appreciation of the community 
library in adulthood. 

Organization and administration of libraries, 
as with all social services, should be so designed to facilitate 
their proper functions. The activities of a school library are 


1 

McTavish, op. cit., p. 230. 


















• c 

. . •••... i 

■ 

: , •• 

. 

. 
























:.S 









- 91 - 


oo-operative and ’’largely' insensible of subject matter 

1 

boundaries. 1 ’ The educational activities have to do with 

general reading and research, both of which activities 

occupy children of a very early age when school life is 

considered in the modern light. 'The type of the new library 

organization in Vancouver City was created by librarians 

and administrators who had the co-operative aims of the 

library in mind. In this organization the school libraries 

are not independent units. Their function touches many 

interdependent educational activities of the community and 

the province. The school librarian is now a co-worker where 

many educational activities and problems are concerned. Some 

2 

of these Specifically are; 

(a) General classroom activities. 

(b) ^©medial reading. 

(c) Curricular building and revision. 

(d) Activities and projects. ‘ 

(e) Miscellaneous and incidental co-operation of various 
kinds. 

The keynote of the democratic aim for library and all social 
services is to furnish economical service on a basis of equal 
distribution of the benefits. 


1 

Fargo, Lueile F.: The Library in the Schoo l, Chicago, 
American Library Association, 1939, f. 35. 

2 

jjargo , op. cit., pp. 36——A3. 







— - . ' 








.. 


. 


■ . 


































■ 






















. 

. 






' 











■ 

































.. . I'X? alp 









. 

» . . •• ■ 











- 92 - 


1 

The School Health Department of Vancouver . 

The following is a brief summary of the work 
done by the various departments of the school Health Division 
under the direction of Dr. Harold White during the year, 1939, 
which is the latest year on which a general report has been 
issued to date. 

One feature of the organization of the Vancouver 
School Health Division is that the work of the supervisors 
of the various sections of the system is consolidated in such 
a way as to give services of equal standard to all the 
communities of the metropolitan and sub-metropolitan areas. 

This is important, since the system includes relatively 
sparsely populated communities such as "Richmond, West Vancouver 
and Burnaby. The services cover a surprizingly wide range. 

The essential work done includes the following samples: 

1. Turbereuline testing in the high schools plus X-ray 
treatment when positive reactions occur. 

2. Surveys of classroom temperatures and humidities, 
with the aim of increasing efficiency of heating and 
ventilating systems and to stimulate the interest of 
teachers and children in the physical surroundings. 

3. Surveys of lighting conditions by the school doctors 
and nurses for purposes similar to those in heating 
and ventilation surveys. 2 

4. Glassification of pre-school children as to physical 
fitness. 


1 

Medical Health Officer’s "Report for the City of Vancouver 
and Greater Vancouver Metropolitan Health District, 1939, 
pp. 15—26. 

2 

Medical Health Offleer *s Report, p. 16. 












. 




’ 

















; 









' 




■ 






• • 






. 










- 93 - 


5. Immunization of school children and pre-school 
children against diphtheria and smallpox. 

6. The carrying on of three sight-saving classes. 

7. The organization of speech remedial classes. During 
1939, 272 pupils were instructed in these classes 
twice weekly. 

8. Audiometer tests followed by recommendation for 
treatment of children hard of hearing. 

9. X-ray testing of teachers in the chest clinic. 

10. Surveys of the amount of milk used hy families with 
children. 

11. Mental Hygiene Service. A regular system of clinics 
has keen established under the supervision of Dr. 

G. E. Sundry, psychiatrist. 

12. School dental services. There are two clinics,one 
on half time and one on full time. Dental services 



in these 
the needy 

clinics are given only to the children 

• 

13. 

The operation of a tonsil clinic. During 1939 
seventeen children were treated free of charge. 

14. 

Special activities such as: 


(a) 

Goiter prevention. 


(D) 

Toxoid clinics. 


(c) 

Home nursing. 


(a) 

First aid examinations. 


(e) 

Vocational guidance lectures. 


In conclusion let us note certain salient 


principles or objectives and underlying the organization and 
work of the Vancouver School Health Division. Firstly the 
services are meant to he part of the educational programme 
of the school system. Teachers, parents and children must 









- 






' 




























. 











. 





























' 








- 94 - 


learn the purposes of the services performed, while upon 
each is placed responsibility according to the individual's 
status for the effectiveness and permanence of particular 
services. The policy of the directors of this system is 
to lay the foundation of healthful surroundings in the entire 
community and to set up machinery for the promotion of co¬ 
operation of all individuals concerned. As Dr. Gundry has 
written in his report on the Mental Hygiene service of the 
system, "...it is not the effects of individual treatment on 
particular cases that we have to look to, hut the opportunity 

to use individual eases to make our ideas familiar to parents 

1 

and teachers concerned with them." 

Whether or not public funds should he used for 

the treatment of'defects found in medical and dental examinations 

2 

of children is admittedly a controversial issue. In Vancouver, 
it is assumed that the major treatment is the financial 
responsibility of.parents, except in the eases of needy parents. 
Medicines and minor treatments are furnished at cost, however. 

It is maintained that this policy enables the system to expand 
and add services which would otherwise be made impossible by 
the expense of treatments. It is believed also that eo- 


1 

Medical Health Officer’s Report, op. eit., p. 23. 

2 

School Life, Vol. 2b, Humber 4, Washington, D. C., January 
1940, pp. 112, 113. 


























, 















. 

























■ 
















-9 5- 


ordination of responsibility is facilitated by the execution 
of this policy, and that the educational motive supplied by 
health services is strengthened. The Vancouver health 
services being in line with modern views of social services, 
are essentially euucational and co-operative. 

Ill iEE a ITU”:'] Jl SjC.U L S :.r VICE S . 

It is intended that the two foregoing outlines 
should indicate in some degree the nature of social services. 
Social services embrace all human needs but certain illustrative 
examples of organized services can be taken to summarize the 
general nature of all social services. Those services most 
closely related to the educational service and with which 
educationists are most concerned are; (1) schools, (2) 

libraries, (3} public recreation facilities, (4) public 

1 

welfare organizations, (5) public health services. 

Social services, where they are efficient, are 
not static but continue to grow and develop according to the 
needs of the society in which they function. In education 
the school age is tending to increase to allow a greater 
time for the education required in a more complex economic 
and social environment. The administration of the social 
services should be designed to allow growth in accordance with 
the best vision. Planning for the future is essential for 


1 

Social Services and the Schools, op. eit., pp. 9--12. 






■ 


























. 

. 

. 






































. 







































- 96 - 


tbe development of all social services. 

It has been noted that education includes all 
experience of the individual, and that the purpose of the 
school in the community is to co-ordinate educational 
influences so that the best use of the specialized features 
of education, such as libraries and health, can be utilized 
to the greatest extent. The school is the central, though 
not the specialized educational service. Library service is 
an example, on the other hand, of specialized service. The 
library furnishes free service in books, pictures, reviews, 
lectures, etc. The library service as with the health service 
and that of public recreation can go beyond the scope of 
school in their specific spheres; but by so doing the function 
of these services makes clear that the duty of the school is 
to train future citizens in the proper use of the social 
services. 

The foregoing outlines of health and library 

services in particular settings makes it unnecessary at 

the present stage to deal in detail with the specialized 

services. It is essential to keep their purposes in mind, 

however, and to associate them constantly with the whole plan 

of education. The following plan may be used as a guide in 

the consideration of the five services to which reference 

£ 

was made at the beginning of this section; 


1 

Ibid., p. 10. 

2 

Ibid., p. 8 









■ 







. 



' 




- 




























; 








































- 97 - 


Public Schools 

Purpose; guidance of the intellectual, moral, physical 
and social development of the individual. 
Clientelle; minors and some adults. 

Public Libraries 

Purpose; Preservation and use of recorded knowledge to 
supply practical and cultural needs. 

Clientelle; interested persons of all ages. 

public Recreation Facilities 

Purpose; provision of apparatus for guided leisure¬ 
time activity, leadership also is essential. 
Clientelle; interested persons of all ages. 

Public Health Organization 

This bare outline suggests definite spheres of 
social service and suggest^ at the same time, the necessity 
for the co-ordination of the services through their ad¬ 
ministration and function. The school exists to promote 
individual development in many directions, the acquisition of 
the ability to read the printed page comprehending!^, being 
an example of a basic skill to be learned at school. School 
libraries and public libraries serve an educational purpose 
which is supplementary to the education of the school. 

Health services protect the physical welfare of individual 
children, removing handicaps and making possible the best 
use of educational facilities. They do this by protecting 
children from disease and, by teaching, promote healthful 
ways and preventive action. Peereation should be planned 








. 

























- 










; 




■ 





. 














■ 




















- 98 - 


to develop leadership and encourage wise use of leisure 

time. Authorities have characterized desirable recreation 

1 

as that which is voluntary yet purposeful. A very sig¬ 
nificant movement in the field of recreational service in 
Canada is the recreation and physical education programme 
initiated by the government of the Province of British 
Columbia in 1935. The whole activity was called by its 

provincial director in 1939, Canada*s Democratic Youth 
2 

Movement . "public recreation authorities seek to reach all 
age groups in the population with a diversified and compre¬ 
hensive programme adjusted to the needs and interests of the 
3 

persons served." Finally, welfare, which means well-being, 

9 

is designed to assist those who are handicapped, physically, 

mentally, morally or financially. The present status seems 

to be that welfare services are available on the basis of 
4 

need. By maintaining this status the aim_of welfare 
services appears to be to place upon the individual, the 
family and the community balanced and desirable responsibility. 

From this brief statement of the nature of the 
social services it seems apparent that education is related 
to all the social services thus far discussed. These 
services overlap the sphere of education and the school relies 
upon them in the fulfilment of its purpose. To make the 
co-ordination of social services possible, administration 


1 

Social lervices ana the Sci.ools , op. cit., p. 11. 

E 

Eisenhardt, Ian; Canaan's Democratic Youth movement . 
The B. G. Teacher, January, 1939, pp. 223’—EE6. 

3 

Social Services and the Schools , op. cit., pp. 13, 14. 

4 

Ibid., p. 15. 












































' 


. 


■ 

. 








. 


.... 


























. 

. . - ; . V f ... . . \i 















- 99 - 


of the services must he adapted for efficient and co-operative 
action on a basis of sound economy. 

IV AIi:i. IbT ^iTIuL uF SOCIAL ADVICES . 

The co-operative library plan for school service 
now in operation in Vancouver and the School Health Department 
of Vancouver with their desirable results, are examples of 
relatively efficient social services made possible by co¬ 
ordinated administration under a single authority. The 
commission of the national Education Association of the 
United States, studying the problem of administration of 
educational and social service policies, concludes that 

this principle of co-ordination of services under a single 

1 

authority is essential for efficiency* It can be seen by 

a study of both urban rural organizations in Canada that 

the modern trend in varying degrees throughout the country is 

toward the development of this type of administration of 

social services under the general head of education. Some of 

the fundamental difficulties met in the progress of this 

2 

general movement are noted below. 

The administrative organization of a city school 
system such as that of Vancouver makes the adoption of co¬ 
ordinated and unified control possible through the revision 
of internal details, such as was accomplished in the organiza- 


1 

Social Services anu the Schools, op. cit. p. 26. 















- . - 


















' 




































































-100- 


tion of the Schools department of the Vancouver Public 
Library. In rural areas it has been necessary to implement 
a consolidated form of educational administration in order 
to obtain uniform educational and social service standards 
for children over a sizable region which would be comparable 
to those standards obtained in uroan areas. 4 single 
authority would co-ordinate educational and social service 
functions and avoid the undesirable overlapping of the 
functions of separate boards of administration with powers 
not clearly defined. 

From the inception of the movement towards 
consolidation of rural educational districts in Canada, 

the policy was recommended by outstanding educational 

1 

leaders and the early reports of the first experiments 
2 

were encouraging. Despite these facts the progress of 

administrative consolidation of rural educational districts 

has been, with the exception of the progress made in the 

province of Alberta, somewhat retarded. In view of the 

complicated relations that often prevail between the 

3 

professional and lay administrators of educational and 
related services in some of the rural areas of Canada, it 
would appear that the lag in the progress of rural consolidation 
prevents the establishment of equitable financial burdens 


1 

Aing, E. B. : School Finance i n 2 . C ., Victoria, King 1 s 
printer, 1935, p. 104ff.; San&if&rd, Peter: Problems of 
Canadian Education, The School, Toronto, 1935, pi 658. Other 
similar reports are obtainable. 


The School, Toronto, Day, 1937, p. 744 (Beports on early Alberta 
Experiments); Plenderleith, W. A., in the Sixty-Fifth Annual 
Peport of the public Schools of B.C. 


3 

Judd, Ctoas. E.; 


» op. cit., p.34. 


Education and Social Progress 











- 

































■ ' 






■ 








i 




■ 







. o • 





































. 


' 





























-101- 


made necessary by the administration of services in rural 
districts. 

Because of the importance of aaministrative 

features of the social services the following brief analysis 

in 

of the causes of retardation ^the movement for rural consolida¬ 
tion of educational administration is suggested: 

1. There was inevitable political opposition to the 

movement at the outset, especially on the part of 
those who felt that the maintenance of local control 
of education was essential to democracy. It appears 
that too little effort has been made on the part of 
the governments and the teaching profession to educate 
the public regarding the aims of consolidation. 

2. Lack of interest on the part of urban citizens whose 
educational systems already possessed the qualities 
and standards towards which the rural districts were 
to be guided. 

3. Direct opposition of those in larger rural districts 
whose tax rates were lower than the newer districts to 
which they vtere to be united for equalization of the 
tax burden. 

4. Lack of federal support. 

5. Failure of those in charge of the consolidated units 
to restore democratic principles, such as elected 
boards of school trustees. This is especially true 
of the two Units in British Columbia. 

6. Lack of money to establish quickly the facilities 
desired to obtain more ideal educational standards. 

Whatever be the other contributing causes for 
the failure of the movement of consolidation to grow steadily 
from the outset, the aoove-mentioned ones appear to be fund¬ 
amental. Therefore, since unwieldy, undefined and complicated 































- 


















» 

- 








- . .. , il 










-102- 


forms of administration of social services hinder efficiency 
in the function of the services, it would seem that causes of 
administrative inefficiency should he among those problems 
worthy of immediate study. Assuming that the present curricula 
of Canadian schools have an important sociological background, 
the efficient function of all social services related to 
education is important to the whole educational set up. 










PART II 


APPLICATION OF SOCIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS TO EDUCATIONAL 


THEOPY AND PRACTICE 






-103- 


CHAPTER VII 

THE GENERAL NATURE OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL CURRICULA 

The purpose of the present chapter is to 
indicate the general nature of the elementary school curricula 
of Canada, giving special attention to the analysis of the 
sociological influences which they reflect. It is hoped 
that samples presented will make a comparison of the status 
of the educational theory with the theoretical data of modern 
educational sociology understandable. 

The topics discussed are as follows: 

1. Attempts to set forth the meaning of education. 

2. The individual and social nature of elementary 
education. 

3. The guiding principles of learning and growth. 

4. Organization for instruction. 

5. Conclusions and suggestions for research. 

The following chapter deals with the philosophy 
represented in the curricula under the headings of the subjects 
of study. 

I TEE MEANING- OF EluGATIOh 

One does not find in the prefaces to the 
elementary school curricula of Canada elaborate attempts to 
define education or to set down its aims in the formal sense. 
This fact is due, doubtless, to the realization on the part 
of the Canadian Curriculum-makers that formal statements of 
idealism in the educational field are subject to greatly- 
varied interpretations. Let us suppose, for example, that 










- • 
































. 


















































-104- 


a formal definition of education to be: ’’the process of 
bringing about desirable changes in human behavior. Tf The 
definition in itself may be perfect from the formal, 
theoretical point of view, but the difficulty of relying upon 
it is obvious, in that it contains no specific suggestion 

and no basis for determining what the desirable forms of 

1 


human behavior are. 


S 


The Public School Curri c ulum for Saskatchewan 
submits five formal definitions taken from the writings of 
well-known authors prominent in the pioneering and present- 
day educational and curricular research of America. They 
are submitted in the preface to the Saskatchewan Curriculum 
to indicate the spirit of the curriculum and to form a 
general philosophical background to the more specific elements 
mentioned subsequently. With the exception of the preface 
to the programme for British Columbia, the philosophical 
statements of the Canadian Curricula tend to be informal 
with some reference to local educational needs. This fact 
indicates a desire on the part of the departments of 
education to leave the teacher a wide scope for interpretation 
of the modern educational philosophy. 

The following portion of this section is a brief 
presentation of the meaning of education as set forth in 


1 

MacDonald, John; Education , Its philosophy and Foundational 
Principles , University of Alberta (Mimeographed* Lectures)' ~ 
pp• 4, 0, 6 . 

£ 

public School Curriculum and Teachers' Guide , F.egina, 
Saskatchewan, 1931, p. 7. 
























- - 

- 








. 


' 






, 








- 









. 

r 
























-105- 


philosophical statements of the Canadian elementary school 
curricula. A core of common philosophy runs through all the 
programmes , making it necessary to follow more than one 
presentation only upon occasion, to emphasize the parallel 
nature of the provincial curricula and to reveal minor 
variations. 

The philosophies reflected in Canadian elementary 

education are uniformly based upon the belief that education 

at this level is ’’activity and experience rather than 

1 

knowledge to be acquired and facts to be stored.” The 

activity described is to be one motivated by natural interest 

and the impetus of active participation ”in an atmosphere of 
2 

freedom.” The essential elements in the educational process 
are the pupil, experience, and the teacher. Ey providing 
experience for the pupil, the curriculum is a guide to the 
healthful educational processes leading to moral and physical 
development and development in the social abilities required 
in the home, the community and the outside world. The aim of 
education in Canada, therefore, is to promote the process of 
growth of the child by an enrichment of the present life, this 
being claimed the only desirable means of preparation for 
adulthood ’’consistent with individual abilities.” Eo 


1 

Interim programme of Studies for the Elementary School , 

(G-rades I—VI;, Winnipeg 1959, p. 16. It will be noted 

that this expression is taken from the Peport of the 
Gonsulative Committee on the Irimary ScFool (Kaddow Report), 
London, Eis Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1901, p. 92. 

2 

Ibid. (Manitoba}. 























< 

















. ■ 



















. 


*• e 
















. 





























■ 
















-106- 


essential conflict appears to exist between the activities 

necessary for preparation for adult life and the natural 

interests of children. It is stated that education is 

meant M to develop in the child the fundamental human powers 

and to awaken in him the fundamental interests of civilized 

life in so far as these powers and interest lie within the 

1 

compass of childhood.” The aims of education are both social 
and individual, ana education is growth based upon these 
essential concepts. 

One finds the definition implied in more specific 
terms in four phases of the philosophy set forth in the 
f-rogramme of Studies for British Columbia. The first phase 
is that which gives certain fundamental functions of education 
in both individual and social adaptation. Those specifically 
stated are; (1) the necessity to impart knowledge, form correct 
habits and skills, create interests and appreciations, and 
inculcate desirable attitudes and ideals; (£) the formal 
recognition of the peculiar needs of childhood as compared 
with those of adulthood; (4) subject-matter is a medium 
through which a system of ideals can be created; (5) education 
is not a function of childhood only, but a "germ” to function 
throughout life improving the standard of life; (6) the 
necessity for training children in the fundamental skills of 

T ' ‘ — 

Ibid. 




, 







' 






. 















r . . 

























- 107 - 


learning so that individual education can progress independently 
(7) the belief that the activities of school take their 
meaning from their relation to life out of school. 

The second phase of the implied meaning of 
education to which we refer is summarized in the statement 

that, "the way and manner of lessons.... transcend in social 

1 

value the...subject-matterThat is, education is a function, 

a growth through activity of the mind and body in co-operative 

exercise. The third of these phases in the philosophies which 

express the meaning of education, is that education must 

2 

provide for individual needs. The school lesson should be 
designed, it is stated, to promote the many-sided development 
of the individual. This, however, is not enough without 
provision for individual opportunity based upon the variant 
abilities of children, individual needs are manifest in both 
individual activities and social, or group activities. 

Fourthly, education Is the medium through which 
the experiences of the home are supplemented and enriched. 
Because of this essential function of education the teacher 
cannot divorce himself from the duties of simple social 
service through which conditions of the home are made known 


1 

x-rogramme of Studies for the Elementary Schools of British 

Columbia, Victoria, King’s Printer, 1941, p. 

2 

Ibid. 

2 . • 

Ibid. 








' 










- 











■ 










, 




- . 


















. 


















, 





















-108- 


to the school, and liason "between the home and the school is 
clearly defined. 

The philosophical statement of the rrogramme for 

Alberta, while in fundamental harmony with those of the other 

provinces, is distinct in its emphasis upon the desirability 

of the "activity principle" in school life. This emphasis 

is centered on the conception of education being what the 

1 

child "does" rather than what he "gets." If followed, this 
trend in educational philosophy in the Alberta curriculum, 
should indicate a distinct trend in methodology in the Alberta 
schools. 

The elementary school curricula of Canada are in 
accord where the question of environmental influence is 
concerned. It is maintained in all the curricula that educa¬ 
tional growth should be promoted by a stimulating environment- 
-a child’s environment. Again, however, the statements in the 
Forward to the Programme for Alberta, though extremely brief, 
appear to be most explicit in tuis respect. These statements 
are closely akin to the philosophy of the child-centered 
school. The point of the remarks in the Forward is that 
education is activity, based principally upon the dhild’s own 
desire. Furthermore, no modification of this statement is 
made by Alberta except that the teacher "will not find it 

desirable to follow exclusively either the enterprise 

2 

procedure or that of formal teaching". The significance 


1 

Programme of Studies for the Elementary S chools , Edmonton, 
king’s printer, 1956, p. 5. 

2 

Alberta, op. eit., p. 


5. 

















c 









« 


























. I t . /. ■' 












































. 

































-109- 


of this latter statement cannot he evaluated without data 
concerning the tend ol teaching practices in Alberta since 
1935. The chief point to he noted in this phase 01 the 
meaning of modern education, and one which is stressed in 
several of the curricula, is that, education hein_ a pre¬ 
paration for adult activity, should, nevertheless, be 

maintained for children on their own level of attainment and 
1 

interest. 


In concluding this section of the chapter the 
following well-defined points in the philosophies of the 
Canadian curricula are submitted: 


1. The tendency to submit text-book definitions of 
education and extended lists of standardized 
objectives is not great, although the Aims an d 
Philosophy of Education in British Columbia is 
somewhat of an exception. The tendency is rather, 
to stress the significance of activities and enter¬ 
prises and to suggest ways of promoting activities. 

2. The meaning of education is discussed in terms largely 
of adjustment and social values. For example, the 
statement for Ontario- summarized the threefold task 
of education as;2 

a. helping ’’the child to understand the nature of 
bis environment.” 

b. helping ’’the child to accept as his own the 
ideals of conduct and endeavour which Christian 
and democratic society approves.” 

c. helping the child ”to master those abilities 
essential to living in a modern society.” 

3. Education is complete growth, stimulated by appeals 
to interests within the compass of childhood. ’’The 


Manitoba, op. cit. ppl 17, 18. Also: Brown, op. cit., The 
Sociology of Childhood , pp. 14--22. 

2 

Programme of Studies for Grades I to YI of the Public and 
Separate Schools, Toronto!, 1941, pp. 6, 7. 
























































. 

* 

































































-110- 


processes "by which people strive to realize the 
potential blessings inherent in their eurroundings- 
-physical, mental, social, and spiritual--!s education.”1 

4. Education aims to "release and direct the creative 
powers of the learner through proper activities." 2 
Furthermore, education is likened to a "germ" which 
grows throughout life. The education of childhood is 
the foundation for adult citizenship ana adult education 
—"physical, mental, moral." 3 

5. The "background of modern education is sociological 
in that it lays stress upon "life and work" upon the 
adjustment of the individual to home and community 
requirements and to the "group effort" in general. 

6. Education must produce individual skills and abilities, 
but these must be supplemented by aesthetic sensitivity 
and trained emotions. 

7. Modern education as explained in the Canadian curricula, 
is designed to produce the essential elements of citizen¬ 
ship, the foundations of which can be made during the 
first six years of school life. 


11 THE Ill TV TLU IL A LL 3 00 111 011 Sk Q ClT. OF .SUCuTIGL . 

The social nature of education is explained in 
the Canadian curricula by first, a reference to the individual 
growth and secondly, by application of the requirements for 
educational growth of the individual to the social field of 
education. Social development ana individual development are 

4 

said to be complementary. 

It is stated in several provincial curricula that, 
progress and success in school should be dissociated as much 


1 

Programme of Studies for dew Brunswick Schools (Grade VII), 
St. John, J. A. MacMillan, Ltd., Printers, 1941, p. 5. 

2 

Hew Brunswick, op. cit., p. 6 

3 

Kaddow Feport (1931), op. cit., p. 92. 

4 

Memor anda for the Guidance of Teacher s in the Protestant 
Schools of ^uebec, Que.”, Department of Education, 1940, p. 


7. 














. 

. 


-- 






-- 




























, 






























; 

" 










. 













-111- 


as possible from the yearly period of time such as "the 
grade-a-year plan requires* 11 1 The statement for Alberta in 
this connection runs as follows: "The great aim of the 
■Programme is to encourage flexibility in organization and 
the adapting of instruction to individual needs"For the 
individual, the curriculum is the means of supplying him with 
materials and activities which will guide him towards the life 
for which he is best fitted* In conjunction with other 
provisions for the individual and his social adjustment, the 
training and status of the teacher is said to be a first 
consideration* 

The complicated nature of man's growth is emphasized, 
and the necessity for the provision for individual differences 
is one of the most clearly marked points in the provincial 
curricula* These things being emphasized, the problem of 
adjustment is said to be of major importance in school life. 
Education is claimed to involve adjustment to the 
social order, with some emphasis upon the necessity for 
adjustment to social change* 

Another element in the provision for the individual 
is that of bringing educational aims within the realm of the 
child's understanding in so far as this is practicable. Al¬ 
though it is claimed that the child must study and learn 

1 Manitoba, op.cit., p.SO 

2 Alberta, op.cit., p.30 

5 handbook to the Course of Study , Truro, Nova Scotia, News 
Publishing Go., 1935, p.A* 
















- 






■ l V- 

: 




* 

' 






* 


■ 



' 

' 

C ' * 

. 








t • 

. 


t 


c 

c ' 

, 


t • 

c 4 










-112- 


much that is beyond his present understanding,' 1 2 3 4 5 ' it is claimed 
to be of importance too, to have the child 11 conceive before¬ 
hand, in a general way, the result of his wo.rk." s The Forward 
to the Programme for Alberta states this point more specific¬ 
ally than do the other provincial curricula. 

The applications of modern educational principles to 
social education can be summarized as follows: 

(1) "Education is a social function,"*^ and because 
society is not static, education must provide for the present 
and temporary adjustment and capacity for readjustment. Subject 
matter, therefore, is not educative "in and around itself," 

but is the means of creating in the mind a system of social 
ideals and ideas. 

(2) The child’s needs are not those of the adult, yet 

there is no conflict between the demands of the child’s social 

living and those of adulthood. Education proceeds as growth 

throughout life sontinues. Furthermore, growth is not in 

4 

defined stages, but continuous. 

(3) The teacher is responsible for asking the question 

repeatedly: "What contribution can this subject make to the 

„ 5 

present and future of the child?” 

(4) Interpretation of the environment has two major 
aspects: (a) interpretaion of scientific findings in the 

1 British Columbia, op.cit.,p.8 

2 Alberta, op.cit.,p.4 

3 British Columbia, p.8 

4 Quebec, op.cit.,p.6 

5 Eova Scotia, op.cit., p A. 









. 


€ 

Q ' < 

i 1 / 









C c" 

* 


. 

' . / 




„ 

♦ c 


c " - ; 









-113- 


world of nature; lb) interpretation of human relationships, 

(5) Good citizenship and good work are products of 
desirable attitudes. Group actions are basic to the under¬ 
standing of adult life. The teacher’s duty is to use the 
social situation to explain the lessons of life. 

(6) Good discipline is essential to education. It is 
not the result, however, of repression:; "all the teacher can 

do is to stimulate." Some variations in the provincial 
philosophies can be found concerning this latter function of 
the teacher, but in general, the spirit expressed here is 
typical of all the provincial curricula. "Fair Treatment" 
does not mean "treating all children alike." 2 Mental hygiene 
and the principles of child psychology are the bases of treat¬ 
ment of the individual. 

(7) The curriculum should "take its touchstone from 

r z 

the community" 0 and the approaches to life should be on a 
functional basis. The curricula for A lberta, Saskatchewan 
and Ontario lay most particular stress upon this subject. 

(8) The school cannot isolate itself from the outside 
world. The school must co-ordinate its influence with the 
educational agencies of the community and strengthen the 
supplementary educational forces of all kinds. 

{9) The ideal picture of individual education sets 


1 Saskatchewan, op.cit., p.ll 

2 Ibid. 

3 Brown, op.cit., p.245. 



■S; ,1 

' 

. 










- 




/ 

> ) 


. 




- 

' 

. 

) S' ' ■■ 

■ 








# 

; ' { V ) 

, 

■- (8 > v 

* 

. ' ■ ' ■' ; v • ) 


. 








- 









-114- 


the standards of all-round citizenship: "The objectives of 
education will be attained if children are so trained that 
they become healthy, moral, cultural, efficient, self-support¬ 
ing, and co-operative citizens."' 1 ' 

The above statements gleaned from the philosophies 
of the Canadian School curricula, represent the ideal aims 
of modern education uniting the aims for individual develop¬ 
ment with those for social adjustment and co-operative life. 

It remains to relate these aims to educational methods. 

Ill METHODS 1IM MODERN EDUCATION 

Reference to educational method is implied in many or 
all of the statements concerning the general meaning of ed¬ 
ucation , and in those pertaining to the social nature of ed¬ 
ucation in particular. From the point of view of child-sociol¬ 
ogy the problem of method is of major importance. Payne states 
that there is no need in education-"greater than that of devel¬ 
oping a scientific technique which takes into account the so¬ 
cial factors...in the educational process." 2 3 Brown maintains 
that the passing of the recitation by pupils in school of 
material unrelated to life and its problems was the most sig- 
nificant phase of modern educational development.^ 

1 "" " ——— ~~ — ~ —— ‘ 

Quebec, op.cit., p.9. 

2 

Payne, op.cit., Vol.II.p. 488 

3 

.brown, op.cit. ,p.210. 






_ . — 

■ ' 

' -- 

c . , 

? 

- t 

c i:j. 









■ 



1 



' QCU'3‘r* ‘ten |f|j \ 






■ t . 

- 


* 


, 


■ v : 

'■ •: :•'■ •• * vO / • 

' 





: , # * 


' 


* ' a * « < 





-115- 


The principal point of emphasis common to all 
the curricula is upon ’’active adaptation” on the part of 
children. Methods which will result in activities giving 
practice in adjustment to social situations a^e recommended. 

A classification of the activities recommended is as follows: 
health activities, carried out in accordance with the 
principles of mental hygiene; activities in social situations 
activities for the development of a vocationa aptitude. 

Hatural aids to learning are recommended. These 

are interest, activity, and satisfaction. The ^resent, and, 

sometimes passing interests of childhood, should he utilized, 

enriched and developed into permanent interests of life. The 

1 

’’play wap” and freedom of movement are said to he necessary 
in order to utilize the child’s natural tendencies. The 
chief purpose of the promotion of basic activities in school 
is to lead to socialization and the creation of ’’readiness to 
use one’s resources.” Satisfaction derived from educational 
activity is said to he rightly produced hy honest and success 
ful effort on the part of the child. Virile character is the 
aim, in terms of outcome, of the promotion of the elements 
of self-motivation. 


1 

Quebec, op. cit., p. 6. 

2 

Ibid. 












f 


i 

* 





« 













































’ 














































-116- 


Tbe concept of "activity" appears to be the most 

important feature of modern educational philosophy as expressed 

in the Canadian school curricula. The comprehension of its 

significance by the teacher is, consequently, of major concern 

to the curriculum-makers. Through activity in an atmosphere # 

of freedom, the unity of education is said to be achieved, 

with the activities of the playground, the classroom, and the 

extra-curricular period, forming a continuous phase of life, 

not disconnected segments. 

It is perhaps significant that warnings are made 

regarding the promotion of educational activities. It is felt, 

doubtless, that unskilled application of freer activity 

2 

princip-les in Canadian schools might lead to "sloppy" education 

with too little discipline. One of the warnings is that mental 

activity is likely to be submerged in the confusion of so-called 

3 

’physical activity." Physical activity, according to the 

Programme for Manitoba, is significant in so far as it is 

meaningful in relation to a system of ideas, furthermore, it 

is emphasized that "liberty is not license." The demands of 

the democratic plan of society should in this matter be the 
4 

teacher*s guide. In all school activities, self-discipline 
should be developed, and with this, the attributes of character 
essential to social life. 


1 

Manitoba, op. eit.,pp. 16, 17. 

2 

Sandiford, peter; "Curriculum Revision in Canada," The Schoo l, 
Toronto, February, 1938, p. 475. 

3 

Manitoba, Ibid. 

4 

Ibid, p. 16. 












- 






v 

- 




















■ 

. 






- 






. 






















c 




, • ' -• ,.v ■ 








• ■ 





, 

, 


t . 






-117- 


The central medium through which educational 

activity can be motivated is the enterx;rise. The reasons 

for the recommendation of t is medium are specifically: 

(1) that it makes possible the objectivity, immediacy and 

accessibility of goals for children; (2) it furnishes the 

material means of learning for the child; (3) its progress cuts 

across the fields of subject-matter and furnishes the best 

means of integration in both learning materials and individual 

growth; (4) it furnishes a means of growth in self-direction. 

Though in none of the Canadian school curricula for the 

elementary schools is there any statement of compulsion 

concerning the promotion of the enterprise, it is, however, 

recommended as a basis for unifying the various subjects l! on 

1 

a basis of normal life situations. Tf 

If, in the moaern school, purposeful activity in 
an atmosphere of friendship and freedom can be promoted, 
teacher-pupil relationships are likely to be chief basis 
upon which such progress will be made. The vitalizing of 
teacher-pupil relationship appears to be one of the chief 
aims implied in the philosophical statements of the Canadian 
curricula. 

IV :I -1 * 

The elementary schools of Canada are organized. 


1 

hr own, Francis, op. eit., pp. 


141, 242. 












i 

:T 






































. 






















































-118- 


theoretically at least, upon the basis of six grades, or six 
levels of attainment. It is presumed that, in schools forced 
by circumstances to house the pupils of the school according 
to the traditional8-4 plan, that opportunities are given for 
the pupils of grades seven and eight to follow as nearly as 
possible the plan of study outlined for the intermediate 
school and to pursue the aims of that school level. 

The aims of education forming the basis of the 
organization of the modern elementary school appear to be 
very fundamental to child growth. The first case of this is 
that the growth of the child through this period is meant to 
be fundamental to all further education. The achievement of 
these levels of attainment in the elementary school is meant 

1 

to provide fundamental backgrounds in the following spheres; 

(1) mastery of the fundamental subjects in so far as the 
child as an individual is able. 

(2} attainment of a background for aesthetic appreciation. 

(3) the attainment of a background for further growth of 
knowledge in natural and social sciences. 

(4) the establishment of effective and permanent health 
habits. 

Another feature of modern organization of the 
elementary school in Canada is the possibilities in it for 
promoting the welfare of the individual. The important 


1 

ITova Scotia, op. cit., p. xi. 



' 

. 

' 




i. . r . : 


i:;:: £'■''.c-t ■ ..■££ Icoiivi: ] 




. 




■ 

' 

\ i 1 .. Co; . 




. . ^ 














- 








* ... , • ‘j • c’ c . i.. 








characteristic of the organization in this respect is that 
it is designed to he flexible, and it is intended that 
programmes within the organization should be modifiable. 

This is said to be essential in the case of less able children 

1 

in order thaty they be kept with their social group. Certain 

recommended features and practices are important in this 

respect. One of these appears to be the abolition of rigid 

and arbitrary standards of achievement in the tool subjects, 

2 

where the less able children are concerned. A second is 
that the teacher must take greater concern than in the past in 
the appraisal of results of school activities and studies. 

The appraisal is based upon individual needs and capacities, 
and should be concerned with such fundamentals as, mental and 
physical well-being and wholesomeness of the environment, the 
acquisition of necessary skills, and the development of 
interests and attitudes of pupils in work and play. 

The 'recommendation that the courses of more than 
one grade be combined, and that the activities for various 
grades be followed in successive years, would appear to have 
a purpose more fundamental than that of convenience. There 
There seems some basis for the belief that the social adapt¬ 
ations required for the working to-gether of children of 
various ages ana degrees of maturity has a distinct value in 
the promotion of integration of knowledge and of growth. One 


1 

Ontario, op. cit., p. 9 

2 

Ibid. 































' 




' 













■ 








, 













' 





















- 120 - 


might suggest at least that simplifying of the programme 
oi studies by this method in tne more or less ungraded 
classes would result in benefits to compensate largely for 
the lack of specialized teaching in such classes. 

If ,f the elementary school has no business with 
uniform standards of attainment' 1 it is possible for the 
teacher to select topics based upon the individual and local 
needs of the children. The community can, therefore, be 
made a source of elementary education. Book-study in turn 
can be made the function supplementing and organizing know¬ 
ledge and viewpoints gained through the processes of adapt¬ 
ation in the community, the home and the school. 

Y ColiluSIJIS i ll iuQG -B STI ..3 i,~ STUDY . 

An analysis of educational philosophies does 
not result in clearly objective data. The samplings of 
statements which have been considered in this chapter indicate, 
however, some important tendencies. The following are taken 
to be the most significant: 

1. The curricula for the elementary schools of Canada 
have a core of common objectives in harmony with the 
modern educational philosophy of the United States 
and Britain. 

2. Much stress is laid upon individual adaptation and 
social development. 

3. The influence of the "progressive Movement" is present 
but in a strictly modified degree. 


1 

Ontario, ox,, cit., p. 11. 





- - 




' 





























■ 






. 

































' 


















- 121 - 


4. Modern educational philosophy in Canada has a 
sociological background in theory. 

5. Consideration of modern educational theories suggest 
the neeu lor objective studies designed to determine 
the influence of new theories upon educational 
practices. 

The similarity of the philosophicsreflected by 

the provincial curricula suggests that they are all built 

1 

principally from secondary sources as to educational aims 

2 

and general outlook. The allegedly conservative nature of 

educational evolution in Canada i/vould tend to increase the 

common elements in the provincial philosophies, air. G. F. 

Mcllally wrote in 1935: ”It has never been the practice in any 

of the provinces to assume that in order to get a new course 

every former practice must be abandoned...This is fortunate, 

3 

because all that is criticised is not bad...” On the whole 
the interdependence oi the provinces of Canada regarding 
educational aims is marked, and the dependence of all the 
provinces upon American and British sources is equally marked. 

Some outstanding features of the revised curricula 
common to all the provincial philosophies are: (1) recom¬ 
mendation of activity programmes and the promotion of educa¬ 
tion through enterprises, (2) classification of' attainments 
necessary for adjustment to the social order and its changes, 
(3) broadening of the concept of health, (4) conception of 
education as fulfilling both present ana future needs, (5} 


1 

Draper, Edgar M.: Principles ana Techniques of Curriculum 
making | hew York, Appleton-Oentury, 1936, p. 159 ff. 

^Sandiford, ”Curriculum Pevision in Canada,” The School , 
Toronto, February, 1938, p. 473. 

3 

Mclally, G. F•: "Curricula for Canauxan High Schools”, 

The School , Toronto, January, 1935, p. 377. 











, 



















, 























. 










































5 








- 122 - 

improvement of the environment, (6) individual treatment 
of children, (7) flexible time-tables, (8) increase of 
emphasis upon the social factors of childhood, (9) relating 
the function of the school to the educational agencies of 
the community, (10) conception of education of the school as 
a function of society and the state. (11) conception of 
elementary education as a background for educational growth 
throughout life. 

In the curricula there are attempts to co-ordinate 
individual adjustment and social growth. Social activities, 
as well as the individual drills, are presented in terms of 
varying abilities of children, for, it is said, "Variation 
will occur also in the way pupils participate in group activities 

the leadership they assume, and, in general, the wealth of 

1 

experience they derive.” Further, these activities are 
suggested to make effective the present environment of the 
children and developing in them the desirable attitudes. 

It should be apparent that none of the issues 
of Part I has been disregarded in the formulation of the 
educational philosophies of the provinces of Canada. It is 
emphasized in the curricula that education must promote ad¬ 
justment of the individual, not only to the present conditions, 

but to the conditions of "a democratic society which is 

1 

constantly changing.” Whatever question exists concerning the 


1 

British Columbia, op. cit., p. 12. 









■ 

















' 







- 


. . 




« .. , 





. 
















































- 123 - 


educational function in relation to society and the state is 
answered definitely in the philosophies considered in this 
chapter, in so far as the democratic ideal is concerned. In 
no case is it intimated that school fcust not ’’lead the child to 
choose and accept for his own those ideals of conduct and 

2 

endeavour which a Christian and democratic society approves.” 
Where this statement is not made directly as in the case just 
quoted, it is implied in the nature of the principles laid 
down for the teaching and promotion of individual and collective 
responsibilities in and out of school. Also, in this same 
spirit it is indicated that our concern for the welfare of 
democracy should be centered on the education of children with 
the social nature of education uppermost in the minds of 
teachers; and, in this it is indicated too, that the total 
welfare of the individual child is in complete harmony with the 
larger social growth. The writer believes, therefore, that 
the eurriculum-makers of the Canadian provinces a'^e convinced 
that ’’education furnishes the ultimate and most subtle form 

of social control because it controls.... the formation of 

1 

habit and character of individuals.” Finally, it is indicated 
in the Canadian educational philosophies, that the school 
should function in co-operation with the educational agencies 
outside itself, helping the child to get the best from all of 
the se . 

— —— 

Ontario, op, cit., p. 3. 

2 

Ibid., p. 


7. 







- - - 








. 




- 















- 

, 






. 












' 








. 







- . , i ; I 















- 124 - 


In conclusion, the following joints are 
submitted as the chief elements of the sociological back¬ 
ground which can be gleaned from the educational philosophies 
of Canada; 

1. Objectives of education "are not merely the insti¬ 
tutions as they are, but,as they are becoming." 2 
In Canadian educational philosophy, however, it is 
not indicated that education is the medium through 
which the institutions of society §re to be modified, 
but through which the individual is adapted to fit 
into the changing world, ana the better world which 
it is hoped will come. Education is pictured only 
as the indirect means of social control-control 
through individual character. 

2. Knowledge should be presented in relation to the 
environment (physical and social) in such a way that 
its significance is understood. 

.3. A child* s growth consists of both passive and active 
adaptation. Educational methods in the elementary 
school should be based upon the child’s natural 
tendencies to as high a degree as possible, thus 
reducing passive submission to social ways to a 
minimum. 

4. The conflicts of childhood should be utilized with 
the aim of ultimate co-operation and good will. 

5. Activity and an atmosphere of freedom are essentials 
to wholesome educational growth. 

6. Social interactions are extremely important. Teacher- 
pupil relationships should become "primary" interactions, 
and second only to the interactions of the home. 

7. The school can co-ordinate work of individual and 
social welfare of a community. 


1 

Ellwood, Charles A. (quoted by Bayne, op. cit., Vol, 11., pp.ll) 

2 

Finney, B. L.: A Sociological Ihilosophy of Education , lew 
York, MacMillan Co., 1928, p. 95. 

















_ 











— 

- 


: 




, 


' 

« 














1 














: • ■ , 

. . .. ;t' 




























- 125 - 


The following questions suggest problems unanswered, 
or inadequately recognized in the philosophies of education 
which this chapter has attempted to analyse: 

1. How can religious instruction be correlated with 
guidance and character-building, the objective of 
which are set forth in the Canadian programmes of study? 

2. In view of our centralized control of education in the 
provinces of Canada, how might primary sources be more 
effectively utilized in the formulation of educational 
aims? How might an educational programme meet local 
needs in education and training background?. 

3. Could there oe devised practical measures for social 
readiness in the elementary school child? 

4. To what extent does a revision of educational philo¬ 
sophy in a Canadian-province influence the rate of 
transition of aims and methods of teaching in that 
province? 1 


1 

Krause, L. W.: "What Principles of Modern and Progressive 
Education are practised in Intermediate-Crade Classrooms?”, 
Journal of Educational Beseareh, Vol. ZXXV, Ho. 4. December, 

1941, pp. 251-262. 

Eraus6 reports in conclusion: "From this survey and data the 
writer would conclude that the practice of modern and progressive 
principles are well established in from 5 to 7$ of the public 
classrooms; moderately established in 15 to 20$ of the class¬ 
rooms; and in 70 to 80$ of the classrooms they are rarely 
practised. 








- 






' 

. ... 

' *-• , 




. 

' 

- > .. . : 























• 



• 






















‘ . ' . . ; 


. 

. 















-126- 


GHAPTER VIII 

SUBJECTS OF THE ELELCENTARY SCHOOL CURRIGULUM 


In attempting to evaluate the subject-matter of a 
curriculum or a set of curricula, it seems essential that 
some criteria for such an evaluation be stated. Payne’s 
three criteria are submitted as being in accord with modern 
trends of modern educational theory and with the viewpoint 
of the educational sociologist. These are:" 1 " 

1. The ’’conventional division of subject-matter must 
be retained, at least within large limits,” be¬ 
cause of the necessity for recognizing the history 
of the development of the curriculum. 

2. Within "subject limits, vital material must be 
added and drawn upon if the social objectives of 
education are realized." The sources of material 
should be varied, according to the vital needs of 
children’s activities, and "does not need to be 
included in the basic texts at all." 

3. The subject-matter should possess validity "in the 
realization of the objects sought...For instance, 
the problem is not how much knowledge of arithme¬ 
tic, history and geography the pupils acquire, 

but rather how the subject-matter...affects the 
behavior of the child’s health, civic abilities, 
leisure, and the like..." 

Study of the elementary curricula reveals that 
content and method are not thought of separately. If any em¬ 
phasis is stronger than another, it appears to be that placed 
upon the important role of the teacher in the selection of 
subject-matter and interpreting it in terms of useful ideas. 


1 

Payne, op.cit., pp. 440, 


441, 442. 






1 - - . ; jig? 






' 

. 





K ' • ‘ / ■ - r : • 




■ 

t 


, 


. 




. 



. 


■ c 


■ 

... ' 


c 


. 

. 


*> . c. ' c * - « * * « 




-127- 


It is stated in one important source that, subject-matter 

"is^losing its hold upon education, not because it is 
subject-matter but because there is so much in the 
curriculum that is not vital to our present state of 
culture. We are not moving away from something to 
teach but towards something to teach that will be 
more vital."1 

The nature of the Canadian School curricula are discussed 
below with these fundamental criteria in mind. It is not 
the aim in this chapter to make a comparison of the provincial 
curricula; instead, the common and general trends are noted. 

The following are subject-headings of the curriculum of the 
elementary school: 

(1) Health 

(2) The Subjects of the I'undemental Skills 

(3) Social Studies 

(4) Elementary Science 

(5) Practical Arts 

(6) 'The Fine Arts 


I HEALTH 

The problems of health are spoken of in the Canadian 

Curricula, not as a subject, but as a programme intended to 

"pervade the whole of life ." 2 It is dealt with as a major 

problem of education, and, on the whole, is placed upon an 

3 

activity basis rather than upon an academic one. Further, 
it is recognized in the curricula that the school is in a 
unique position in which to promote co-operation among social 


1 

The Teacher's Guide to Child Development in the Intermediate 

Grades . Sacramento, 1936, California State Department of Ed¬ 

ucation, p. 39. 

2 

Ontario,op.cit., p. 25 
3 

Quebec, op.cit., pp. 53, 54. 






- 






c 














- 







( ) 

. 

/ 







c , ' 






' 

c c ■ c 



















-128- 


agencies in respect to health of children and health of 
communities.I 

A sampling of statements is selected from some of the 
curricula and quoted below. The nature of the statements in¬ 
dicates that the teaching of health is generally meant to be 
an itegrative process. The samples submitted are as follows: 

Manitoba: ,f Under this heading will be included all 
those activities and responses of child life which 
have to do with the maintenance of vigorous, intell¬ 
igent and moral minds in clean, healthy and active 
bodies...Sound mental, moral and physical health g 
is essential to the full development of the child... 

Ontario : "Habits are the result of doing. They are 
formed as the result of reading and talking. Instruct¬ 
ion in health, therefore, should be active rather than 
formal in nature, and should be linked as closely 
as possible with the-child’s daily experience. The 
food he eats, the clothes he wears, the games he 
plays, the home where he lives, and the school that Tf 5 
he attends, are all related to his health and growth. 

British Columbia : "Health is the first objective of 
education. It includes mental health as well as 
physical well-being...It is not sufficient that the 
pupil have a knowledge relating to health...One may 
have knowledge which does not function in behavior... 
it is living, ideals of body-perfection.” With these 
ideals, it is stated that: "the formation of approp¬ 
riate habits will be much easier and they will be more 
lasting. At the same time essential knowledge con¬ 
cerning health willbe more readily mastered and re¬ 
tained.” * 2 3 4 

Alberta : "Life situations furnish a setting for health 
teaching that is timely and welcome. The alert teach¬ 
er is ever watchful for such opportunities. The funda- 


Manitoba, ou.cit., p.28 

2 

p. 28 

3 

p.16 

4 

p.148. 










* 


' 

e ; ■ . . , 

. 

' . ‘. ■ : < 

■ 

* 

. 

* •• < 

, 


? 4 * t 


• r 

. 













-129- 


prinoiples of healthful living are persistent and 
continuous throughout the grades. The approach at 
each age level must be made on the basis of natural 
interests of the children and their capacity to 
understand and react.” 1 

The general plan of health instruction in the modern 
elementary school indicates the necessity of following the 
children’s interests and capacities at age levels: In Grades 
I to III, the teaching must be informal, it is stated, and 
should center around home, family, pets, plants, and animals. 
In Grades IV, V, VI, instruction concerning the nature of the 
inner and outer body, nutrition added. 

Two distinct features found in the health programmes 
should be noted. These are: (1) the special attempt indic¬ 
ated in the Alberta Programme to promote the integration of 
health with the studies of elementary science and (2) the 
outline of health in the British Columbia Programme in a 
series of units which are expanded throughout the six grades 
of the elementary school. 

The plan for integration indicated in the Alberta 
Programme is based upon the following three stipulations: 2 

1. ”The rules of health are based on science, which 
provides the necessary background for the teaching 
of health."3 

2. "When scientific principles have been learned, 
they can be applied to useful healthful living.” 


1 

p. 148. 

2 

Po 144 
3 

p. 144 










* 

- 




1 


« . , . o cr 1 

' 

f • c ? . c ■ 






e c ' c 






► 

‘ 












, 






. 








* 
















-130- 


3. n Kealtb education is an activity rather than 

theoretic verbalising..." It should he integrated 
with elementary science by means of enterprise 
procedure. 

In keeping with these stated principles, the health programme 
in the Alberta curriculum is an integral part of the course 
in elementary science. It should be noted, however, that, 
although the content for health instruction is so placed in 
the curriculum, it is in no other respect different from those 
placed under separate headings in the other curricula. Because 
of this fact, there is some reason to doubt whether this 
placement of the health outline would facilate integration of 
the two subjects concerned. The effect of this arrangement of 
the curriculum upon teaching practice should be studied before 
an estimate of its effectiveness is made. 

The outline of health for British Columbia contains 

1 


"expanding” units as indicated 
(xR ADE I 

The Outer Body and Cleanliness 

The Inner Body 

Clothing 

Surroundings 

Sleep, rest, relaxation 

Exercise and Posture 

Fresh Air and Sunshine 

Healthful Living 

Safety 

Mental Hygiene 


below: 

-SHADE II, 

The Outer Body and Cleanlines 

The Inner Body 

Clothing 

Surroundings 

Sleep, Best, P.elaxation 

Exercise and Posture 

Fresh Air and Sunshine 

Healthful Living 

Safety 

Mental Hygiene 


1 

pp. 31-~64. 
















■ 

« 


■ lL 




. 






. 























. 


























-131- 


GBADE III 

The Outer Body and Cleanliness 

The Inner Body 

Clothing 

Surroundings 

Sleep, Pest, Relaxation 

Fresh Air, Sunshine, Ventilation 

Exercise and posture 

Healthful Living 

Mental Hygiene 

SPADE V 

Outer Body and Cleanliness 

Inner Body 
Clothing 
Surroundings 
Sleep, Pest, Pelaxation 
Fresh Air, Sunshine, Exercise 
Prevention of Communicable Dis¬ 
ease 
Safety 

Mental Health 


SPADE LV 

The Outer Body and Cleanliness 

The Inner Body 

Clothing 

Surroundings 

Sleep,. Pest, Pelaxation 

Fresh Air, Sunshine, Pelaxation 

Safety 

Mental Health 
Healthful Living 


The Outer Body and Clean¬ 
liness 

The Inner Body 
Clothing 
Surroundings 
Sleep, Pest, Pelaxation 
Fresh Air, Sunshine, Exercise 
Prevention of Communicable Dis¬ 
ease 
Safety 

Mental Health 


The subheadings to be added from grade to grade are starred 

for convenient observation by the teacher, and throughout the 

health programme, the details are selected to suit the a^e- 
1 

level concerned. In such a plan, an attempt is made to 
secure unity in the six-year course. 

The following outline is common to all the health 
programmes of the provincial curricula: 


2 

HEALTH AMD PHYSIC AL BDUC iTIOff 


I General: 

A. Philosophy behind the Health Programme. 


1 


Diagram I. 


Adapted from the Health and Physical Education , programme 
for elementary schools in Manitoba: Manitoba, op. cit. 
pp• 26—48• 






















; 

f 




, 

1 , 





























' 






1 . 

f : 


. 





























” 

. 

. • 

■ 
























. 













- 










B. The Health Programme—to pervade the whole life of 
. the child. 

G. Healthful Surroundings. 

I). Health Examinations--by teacher, school nurse, school 
doctor, dentist. 

E. Mental Health. 

F. Health Halits. 

G. Heference Books. 

II. Specially Adapted Programme for Grades I, II, III. 

III. Specially Adapted Programme for Grades IV, V, VI. 

IV. Physical Training. 

The programmes are stated to he adaptable to the 
individual child. The topics listed are said to he suggestive 
and are to he used incidentally, in an integrative fashion 
throughout the school programme. Time it school would not 
permit all these topics to he dealt with formally. The 
activities of the physical education programme are part and 
parcel of the health programme as a whole. The games, dis¬ 
cussions regarding safety, the problem of cleanliness and 
beauty of the environment are features of the programme, 
challenging the qualities of leadership and example on the 
part of the teacher. 

In many respects the responsibility of the teacher 
is extended to wide fields. Physical activity must be for the 
oenefit of each individual. Activity which would be harmful 
must be avoided. The teacher becomes a social worker in the 
sense that he is a connecting link between the child and 
social services. Also he must know the environment of the 
home in order that he may assist the child in respect to 


















. 

. 

















. 

. 

' 















. 














. . 
















* 

. 








... . : 






















mental health as well as physical health. Aesthetic appreciation, 
likewise, is a problem linked with physical education and 
health; This comes directly through participation in singing 
games, folk dances, and controlled games, and more indirectly, 
through developing in the child a respect for the perfection 
of bodily strength, posture and grace of movement. Then, of 
all the responsibilities of the teacher, perhaps the most 
fundamental is that of examining the child in the sociological 
sense to determine his specific needs. In this work of 
examination the teacher is assisted by experts--the nurse, 
the doctor, the dentist (and in fortunate cases, the psychiatrist) 
but this in no sense lessens the responsibility of the teacher. 

In the modern school the teacher has sociological duties which 
imply for more than those of an academic instructor. 

These and other features of the modern health 
programme illustrate the sociological background of elementary 
education in Canada. They sug est one problem above all 
others to the writer; namely, that of attracting to the 
teaching profession men and women of character and ability 
and of providing for these, adequate leadership and facilities 
for initial and continued training. 


1 

Appendix I contains an illustrative sample of the 
psychiatrist’s leadership. 























































- 134 - 


II -HE SUBJECTS OF T' ^ iunP.U x.TIL SHILLS . 

"In ordinary life certain experiences which are 
necessary for intelligent living in later life are either lacking 

or so casual that they do not bring about the desired learning 

1 

...It is the function of the school to supply this lack." 

It is not stated in the curricula that the skills to be 

obtained are confined to reading, writing and arithmetic, 

although these are examples of them. The spirit of the 

elementary curricula can be summarized, in so far as reference 

to the fundamental skills is concerned, by the following 

2 

statement of purpose of the elementary school: To acquire 

command of the common knowledges and skills essential to 


effective living means the acquisition of skills from the 
following groups; 

1. The tools of learning , including reading, writing, 
Spelling and arithmetic. 

2. The motor skills involving the use of the hand-- 

crayon, pencil, tools of cutting and measuring, and 
the manipulation of materials. 

3. Oral expression emphasizing particularly ability to 
talk correctly and naturally, with clear, pleasing 

tone quality ana careful enunciation. 

4. Knowledge of the facts essential to the understanding 
of man 1 s relation to his natural and social environ¬ 
ment . 

As was indicated in Chapter YII (fart II), it 
is not intended that skills in the branches above-mentioned 


1 

British Columbia, op. cit., p. 9. 

2 

Teachers’ Guide to Child Development, California, op. cit., 
"pi 5. 
























. 

. 

' 

. 


. 




; 


- 

. 


. 






. 






























be absorbed with equal readiness by all children. It is both 
stated and implied in the Canadian curricula that the teacher 

must set standards for the individual rather than for the 

1 

group. Competition is reduced to the effort of the individual 
to improve his own standard of performance, letter pupils 
set him an example: they do not ’’beat him.” 

A detailed analysis of the philosophy and content 
of the tools of learning is, for obvious reasons, impossible 
at this point. It is possible, however, to outline briefly 
certain salient features which are consistently seen in the 
programmes of the Canadian curricula. Those features selected 
are intended to indicate the degree of sociological influence 
discernible in modern educational theory. The writer believes 
that the philosophy and suggested techniques for the tools of 
learning are relative to this influence in theory. 

lerhaps the most decided purpose for the teaching 
of the fundamental skills is that they are necessary for 
complete living. They are basic as a preparation for both 
childhood and adult life in that they are the means of growth. 
The concept of growth, therefore, is the outstanding principle 
upon.which the philosophy of the tool subjects is based. This 
Is a concept repeatedly emphasized throughout the philosophical 
sections of all the curricula. In theory the skills which are 
said to be essential to complete living are related to the 
essential activities of life, and it is intended that this 


1 

Ontario, op, cit., PP* —1, — 



















« 




r 


■ 

; 




, 









. 







. 

■ 

. 

■ 










, 



■ 




. 

‘ 

... 





















- 136 - 


principle should, he applied in the activities ol the school, 
especially through the enterprise. That this concept of 
growth through education can he realized, the following 
educational essentials are recommended -in relation to the 
teaching of the fundamental skills: 

1. There should he thoroughness in the learning of the 

skills: "explanation, exercise, review, and fixing 

drill" must he employed to obtain this thoroughness.1 

2. Pride in workmanship should he promoted, neatness 
in printing ana writing and facility in spelling 
and usuage are examples through which pride of work¬ 
manship can he developed. 

3. Transitions from easier to harder skills should he 
carefully planned. Development of Skill is a growth 
which should he as continuous as possible. It is the 
teacher's duty to have knowledge of both lower and 
higher requirements for any skill being taught. 2 

4. Skills, should he taught with the aim of increasing 
creativeness on the part of the individual. Some 
skills are noble and worth while in themselves-- 
music, for example. 

5. There should he a wide use made of reading ability, 
-eading abilities, being varied, serve to integrate 
fields of appreciation and factual knowledge. p ead- 
ing is perhaps the greatest factor in the promotion 
of integration of study and personality. 3 

6. Emphasis is placed upon readiness for skills. r eading 
readiness and number readiness are especially em¬ 
phasized. Pealistic activities within the compass 

of the age-level concerned are said to he the great¬ 
est stimulus to readiness. The enterprise is re¬ 
commended. 

7. It is essential that training in various types of 
reading he given. 


1 

Manitoha, op. ext., p* 21. 

2 

Ontario,, op. cit., p. 37. 

3 

Teachers' Guide to Child Development, op. cit., p. 13. 











- 137 - 


8. Interest is fundamental to the development of read¬ 
iness in relation to the learning of skills. 1 

9. Emphasis is placed upon speech training and voice 
culture, hew emphasis is placed, consequently, upon 
singing, oral reading, and verse speaking. 

10. The modern Canadian teacher is supplied with adequate 
suggestive "bibliographies in modern theory and 
practice in education. 

On the basis of these elements in Canadian element¬ 
ary education to-day, certain assumptions can be made. It is 
seen in the above innumeration of elements relating to the 
fundamental skills that the theory of education supports the 
development of skills on a functional basis. The skills 
achieved by the children are meant to assist in the integrative 
process of study and in the entegration of adult-life processes. 
They are to be taught with aims and objectives clearly in the 
mind of the teacher. Secondly, the theory sux-ports the thesis 
that nothing in the present interest of the child is in conflict 
with the task of his preparation for life. In the third place, 
drill for efficiency is not to be carried on mechanically for 
its own sake; practice should be reflective and meaningful. 
Transfer of training is not implied in a formal sense anywhere 
in theory. In the fourth place, standards of achievement, 
though necessary, are not to be applied to prevent a child, 
even of the lowest ability, from experiencing a genuine feeling 
of success and from realizing progress. Finally, the child is 


1 

Alberta, op. cit., p. 82. 














- 

v e 






$ 























' 




. 


. 






; 






















, . : 








. , . . t 






- 138 - 


to be encouraged to enjoy school life, to visualize his own 
objectives, to work hard in an atmosphere of freedom and to 
grow into a period of "active adaptation" as fully as possible 
during the first six years of school. .There is no theoretical 
support for the lowering of educational standards or for 
softening the process of education for any child. Teaching 
practices contrary to these assumptions are, the writer 
believed, based upon misguided interpretations of the theory 
of the modern curriculum. 

On the basis of the principles of educational 
sociology indicated in the last chapter, the conclusion at 
this point is that, the elements of m dern education 
enumerated in this chapter are in fundamental harmony with 
those principles. This is not because sociological elements 
are discernible in the theory of the Canadian Curricula, but 
because they are discernible in a predominant sense. 

Ill 1111 SOCIAL STUDIES . 

The programmes outlined under the heading of 

Social Studies , vary in content and suggested procedure 

from province to province, more noticeably than do those 

for other subjects. Nevertheless, some fundamental elements 

of the social studies are common to all the provincial courses. 

One sees references to the problem of breaking down the 

1 

barriers between subject of study, between geography and 
history, M r example. Again there is a general tendency to 
vary the content and procedure when the grade IV level is 

1 ‘ 

Manitoba, op. eit., p. 86; This statement is typical of 
several others on the same point in other curricula. 











■ 

.. . .' • . 

; ■_ ... •.. . ... ,... c... ^ 

, . j id . . . 

... .V . s . . :> 






" 




' 




. 

■ . .. : . - - . ' .. . ■ . : '■ .. • . . ./ t • -„ 












e 

« . ... 

* 












^ - ...... .•... T :l -- 


.. . 










- 139 - 


reached, from quite informal activities to a more formal 
approach to geography, history and civics. Further it can 
be stated that the fundamental aim of the social studies 
programmes is a common one, in that this aim is to teach 
so that the child will develop an understanding of the world 
in which he lives and that he should gain this understanding 
through experiences which develop good character and sound 
citizenship, noticeable variation is found among the 
provincial social studies courses in the degree of formality 
introduced into the .::iddle-grade programmes. 

The themes forming the background of the 
suggested activities in social studies for the first three 
graaes of school (Division I in Alberta) are the family, the 
neighbourhood, the homes and the needs of homes. In all 
except the programme for nova Scotia, it is suggested that 
the best way to develop the themes is through co-operative 
activities, and the use of the enterprise is recommended. 

In the programme for lova Scotia, both history and geography 
are introduced as separate subjects in Grade III. For this 
grade the nova Scotia course involves -geography and history 
of the home locality. The emphasis in the social studies 
for this province is upon thoroughness of knowledge of Canada, 
and upon the desirability of arousing the children's interest 
through suitable reading and through the spoken word of an 
enthusiastic teacher. 
































, • - 
























> . . 

■ 

. 


■ 

- 



























■ 






























In the present case some contrasts and. 
comparisons among the outlines for social studies may help 
to indicate more general trends in the elementary schools 
in this field of activity# The following are examples of 
variations which are in contrast with former practices as 
well as being in contrast with some forms now in use: 

1. The programmes of geography and history for British 
Columbia, though under separate subject headings (auove 
Grade III), are organized into monthly units each of which 
includes suggestions as to content and activities. In 
addition to these, the general purpose of each unit, it is 
stated, is to assist the teacher in his planning. 

2. For British Columbia, the course in history for 
Grade Y, involves a study of the evolution of society from 
primitive man to the end of the kiddle Ages. In the older 
courses of study this field was reserved largely for the 

high school grades. In all the present programmes of study ti_e 
emphasis in history for Grades Y and YI is upon the discovery 
of the lew World, and Ganadian development. 

2. For lova Scotia, the emphasis in the programmes of 

history for Grades Y and YI, is upon continuity in Canadian 

1 

history. This continuity, furthermore, is built upon a 
foundation of stories of Canadian men and women told to the 
children in Grade IY. The aim of history through this 
programme is to give the pupil an interest in the background 
of Canadian life and to give him a clear knowledge of the move- 


lova Scotia, op. cit., p^. 192 SCO 



- 
















' 




. 

* 


■■■ • 




























, • 




f " * • 

, . 


1 


e ' O L • , 
















< 






- 141 - 


ments of Canadian development* i few dates are recommended 

to ue memorized in each grade• The following passa e from 

1 

Content ana Procedure relative to the Grade V programme 
illustrates to some degree the spirit of the history cur¬ 
riculum in II ova Scotia: 

"The hearing, reading and silent reading of history 
stories by the pupils of rade V could with profit be 
supplemented by the writing of brief essays on topics 
suggested by the lessons...Even a written examination 
now and then on the matter gone over would not be at 
all amiss provided that it is kept subservient to 
the study of history for its own sake...The pupils 
should be encouraged and carefully coached in the 
practice of repeating history stories to a group of 
listening classmates." 

4. The programme for Alberta does not include an outline 
in social studies for Grades I, II and III. The reason is 


"that the Social Studies of this programme represent a fusion 

of History, Geography, and Civics or 

Citizenship; and as such 

they represent two types of content: 

(1) information facts 

and generalizations, to be studied. 

comprehended and ’learned 1 

and (E) activities of social living. 

that induce appreciations 

attitudes, abilities and behaviors. 


" In Division I (Grades I, II, III) only the secondtype 


of content is important and the teacher will provide it by- 
means of the enterprises for the division—the Social Activities. 

5. The programmes for Alberta and Ontario alone provide 
suggestions for the outright fusing of the various branches of 
the social studies. 


1 

Ibid., p. 193. 

S 

Alberta, op. cit., p. 109. 


















- 




























































. 








t _ ; 

































- 142 - 


6. "The Community Idea” as a continuous theme running 
through the whole of the social studies is unique in the 
Alberta programme. 

In conclusion, the writer, believes that the 

theoretical presentation of the elementary social studies in 

the Canadian curricula is fundamentally in keeping with the 

modern views concerning the development of the child. The 

chief of these are (1) that education aims to develop the 
1 

whole child; (2) that knowledge is that which makes the 

child’s mind effective in purposeful activity. Dr. Wees puts 

the latter point as follows: "If we think of knowledge as 

an ability, we are thinking of a much more powerful instrument 

2 

than if we think of knowledge as a dead weight of fact." 
Activity, interest and purpose are highlights in the elementary 
social studies, especially in those of the lower grades. 

It would appear that social activities are less 
carefully worked out for the middle grades than for the three 
lower grades. The writer believes that the suggested pro¬ 
gramme for Grades I, II, and III in the British Columbia 
curriculum might serve as a model in respect to organization 
of units. There appears no comparable counterpart in the 
other provincial curricula. 

The social studies imply the teaching of a-cross- 
section of human life with attempts to show a background of 
all the "aspects of living." These are carried through from 

teachers’ Guide to Child Development , op. cit., p. 2. 

2 

Dickie, op. cit., p. 20. 

3 

British Columoia, op. cit., pp. 


230—245. 











■ 






' 




















. 




















: 

, 

■ 


s ■ : : : : ' X:X , ; X,. 

. . . ; X X . o ; j. 




' 




, ■ : . 

». 

■ 










' 




I 





















■ 













primitive peoples to modern tiroes. It is intended, that, 
whether the continuity of the course is confined to Canada 
alone (as for liova Scotia), or whether it takes a "broader 
point of view (as for British Columbia), the object of the 
social studies is to help children to understand social 
relationships by seeing vividly the development of people 
through the ages. There appear to be rather consistent 
attempts to present social development with a core of con¬ 
tinuity. The most impressive device is (to the writer) the 
"community Idea" employed in the programme for Alberta. 

It is stated in all the programmes that it is 
desirable to break down artificial barriers between the 
branches of the social studies. As has been indicated, 
practical suggestions for the carrying out of this ideal 
are made in the programme for Ontario and Alberta only. 
Because of this fact, it might be suggested that the out¬ 
comes of these two plans might well be studied in school 
practice. 

A final modern aspect of the elementary social 
studies programmes is the broad use recommended for books 
and reading. Through reading,'integration is meant to be 
facilitated. For this purpose adequate references to 
historical and geographical readers are included in the 
programme-outlines. 

IV ""AtlAA.T .T SCI KIT IB. 


Science is provided in the modern curriculum as 




t 




































- 

. 


. 














- 









. 



























. 




. . 































1 

providing "part of literal training in universal education.” 
'The programme in elementari-school science, it is stated, 
’’should lead the pupil to goals of information, skills and 
habits.” The aims of the course are : (1) ”to initiate 

the children into the romance and wonder of science,” (2) 
to arouse the child's natural desire to know the world about 
him and to find explanations of various phenomena, (3) to 
learn to make generalizations, and to form "the habit” of 
thoughtful generalization, (4) by the fatter kind of growth, 
to eliminate superstition by learning to look for causes of 
effects in the world of nature and to apply this principle 
to social relationships as well. 

The content of the science programmes of all the 

Canadian curricula can be generally summarized as follows: 

”...a study strictly elementary in scope yet conducted 
in a genuinely scientific spirit; some firsthand observ¬ 
ation of natural phenomena—the changing weather, the 
apparent movement of the sun, moon, and stars, the 
day and night, and the seasons; and such explanations 
of physiology and hygiene as be necessarym to give mean¬ 
ing and support to the health habits which the school 
attempts to establish in the lives of its ^upils..” 4 

The general s tatements concerning the meaning and content of 

elementary science in the schools vary somewhat from province 

to province, yet it can be said that a fundamental core of 

purpose and content is found in all the outlines. It can be 

said too, that the common and similar purpose expressed in 


1 

Manitoba, op. cit., p. 196. 
2 

Ibid. 

3 

Ontario, Op. cit., p. 87 

4 

Ibid, See also, Diagram II 




■ 



















. 



. 

' 








1 






* 




















* • 












































t . 


' 















these courses of science has a distinctly social meaning 
for the study of science. 

The aims which the writer believes to have 
this social meaning are seen in the following and other 
developments desired for the programmes in science: 

(1) enrichment of the child’s present life by his 
study of ’’outdoor” science. 

(2) discovering the scientific approach to personal 
and group problems. 1 

(3) bringing scientific concepts into meaningful 
relationships. 

The first development is dependent largely upon the fact, 

often expressed in the elementary curricula, that the child 

is inspired by the enthusiasm of the teacher and that an 

2 

abiding interest in the ’’beauty ana mystery of nature.” 

comes from actual contact with nature; that ’’reading about 

3 

nature is not enough.” 

The second and third developments, cited above, 

are of primary importance in the illustration of sociological 

background in the theory of the modern curriculum of the 

elementary school. To some extent these desired developments 

represent only a prophecy for the future in that the elementary 

4 

school cannot achieve in practice the idealism of its theory. 
Nevertheless, the projections of these desired developments 
are intended to be a basic stimulus for the enrichment of 
present living for the child and are not intended to be 
intrepreted upon a basis of adult standards. Learning the 


1 

ilewer Instructional practices of r^omise , Twelfth Year Book, 
Department of Supervisors of Instruction, L.E.A., 1939, pp. 151, 
152. 

2Twelfth Year Book, op. cit., p. 165. 

3Ibid. 

4McGaughy, J. B.: An Evaluation of the Elementary School , x.ew Yo 
The Bobbs-Merril Go ._, 19 37, pp. 393-394. 





















. 














- 

■ 

. 


* - 

v 




. 


. 

. 

. - ■ M ■ It ^ : 

, 

■ 

. 

. 









applying this approach to problems of construction, the science 
laboratory, the farm, the home, for example, is aoubtless the 
principle of greatest importance in the making of elementary 
science as a basic school subject. In the programmes them¬ 
selves there is, perhaps, no better example of an attempt 
to make science basic , than the attempt to fuse the science 
and the health, in the programme for Alberta. This attempt 
may not achieve the results desired, at once, but it points 
the way for an important “Integrational development vital to 
the understanding of healthful living. 

Another attempt to promote thediscovery and use of 
the scientific method of solving problems of every-day life is 
the introduction of the ’’unit" employed in the irogramme for . 
British Columbia. The activities suggested in connection with 
these units in science indicate clearly that "the problems 
to be considered should be those arising in the experiences 
of the children rather than those posed by some writer of 
textbook or course of study." The truth of this, it appears 
to the writer, is in the suggestive and variable nature of the 
activities proposed. It is not claimed here, however, that 
the general topics proposed as a background for these units 
are the type or particular quality which would be suggested 
by children in a purely "child-centered" school. As we have 
seen (Chapter VII), the present-day curriculum-builders in 


1 

Teachers’ Guide to Child development, op. cit., p. 94. 










- 


. . 




, 











. 

, 

- 










4 . . . 

■ 














' 

- 










- 147 - 


Canada, have assumed that there is much that the child must 
he called upon to study for which he does not feel a particular 
need, or even comprehend fully at the time. Yet in the science 
courses of the Canadian curricula, the- child's natural interests 
are a chief concern. Furthermore, it can he stated that the 
integrational value of science was observed hy those who framed 
the programmes. 

v atactica:/ a^ts . 

The justification of crafts, or practical arts, 

on the curriculum is made from many points of view. Modern 

theory of education recognizes that former curricula were too 

bookish to promote natural and happy growth of children. The 

crafts play a-part in overcoming this defect. One important 

justification claimed, therefore, is the joy children find in 

handiwork. Sir Percy lunn writes that children like handicraft 

1 

"better than any other subject in the curriculum." Another 
justification set forth in the Canadian curricula is that the 
media through which children can express themselves in the 
handicrafts supply a very useful form of self-expression and 
creativity. Furthermore, practical skills learned form a 
background for more advanced craftsmanship and appreciation 
of good craftsmanship, achieved by skilled craftsmen. 

The practical arts are considered below from 
the following aspects: 

I-— — 

Manitoba, op. cit., p. 2t>3. 






- 


' 




■ 

. 














* 












r 





. 


' 










« 









■ 




























- 148 - 


(1) Varying points o± view concerning the desired emphasis 
which should be placed upon the subject; (2) the social sig¬ 
nificance of tne subject; (3) integrational value; (4) a 

general view of objectives and main purposes. 

1 

The introduction to the junior division of the 
programme for Manitoba contains statements of possible points 
of view taken by teachers of the crafts. In this presentation 
it is implied, as it is in the other curricula, that a consider¬ 
able amount of freedom of interpretation must be allowed in 
teaching of the course and to the children in their develop¬ 
ment of it. Five points of view are included in the Manitoba 
programme, indicating various extreme preferences; 

1. Emphasis upon a knowledge of the whole craft and 
ability to carry it through. Teaching should be 
thorough and in easy stages. The slogan for this 
point of view is ; ’’The craft’s the thing.” 

2. Thorough training in the skills required for 
individual parts of a craft. 

3. Grafts in school as a background for the under¬ 
standing of the industrial processes of the modern 
world. The emphasis should be Upon social value 
rather than upon development, of particular skills. 

4. Constant drill upon a few essential processes. This 
view emphasizes the importance of specialization in 
industrial work. 

5. Freedom of expression on the part of the child; now 
stress upon standards of achievement as conceived 
by the adult. 


1 

Manitoba, op. cit., p. 267. 








' 








“ 
















, . icu 

■ 


■ 

: 




, 






- 






■ 















































The contusion one might expect from this variety 

ot joints is somewhat dispelled by a consideration ot some 

fundamental concepts of practical arts in the light of modern 

theory. One of these concepts is that the practical arts 

furnish the children of the elementary school with an active 

pursuit, with goals clearly understood by them. Secondly, 

the constructive nature of the craits furnishes meaning and 

to 

practical apx^lication^the teaching of design, art appreciation 

and the use of colour. Again, there is opportunity for traini 

in design in construction work and in the beautification of 

models. Th6 integrational value of practical arts extends 

further as an aid to the teaching of history, geography and 

other subjects, as well as providing opportunity for the 

application to arithmetic and elementary geometry. A final 

concept of importance in the treatment of the practical arts 

is that the subject, more readily than many other subjects, 

is an activity requiring organization, initiative and social 

control. In the modern school curriculum the subject easily 

Z 

results in social training. 

It is recognized in the philosophy of the 
elementary school curricula that the development of a respect, 
for, and knowledge of craftsmanship, is complementary to the 
nuturing of an appreciative love of beauty. 


1 

Beport of the Consultative Committee on the Primary School, 
London, Eis Majesty's Stationary Office, 1931, Tlidow ^e^ort) 
p. 195. 

2 

Teachers* Guide to Child levelopment (California) o^. 
p. 445. 


cit., 









- 160 - 


The California State Curriculum Commission deals v.itb this 
point as follows: 

"Although the decisions involved in school situations 
ma^ 1 2 * 4 seem to be oi relatively small importance, ’.hey 
really. signify much oi what may happen on a much larger 
scale in the city and state government...People who know 
nothing about art are often the ones who, when some spot 
is to he beautified, manage to have their ideas to he 
carried out...There should he art commissions in each 
C-*- ty to control the architecture ana other factors which 
make up its appearance...” 1 

The role off the elementary schools should he kept in mind in 
consideration of this topic. -Briefly., the elementary school 
is the means of providing background activities for later 
development. But, as Dickie points out, some may not apprec¬ 
iate the aegree to which very young children are able to 

2 

”wrench relavant facts' 1 from their studies and activities. 
Significance of the social development along the lines of 
art and appreciation of beauty as in any field is a point of 
emphasis in the philosophy behind the modern course in practical 
arts. 


The key to the integration of the practical arts 
appears in the statement that the ”needs ana resources” of 
the pupils are the teacher’s guide to toe selection of work in 
the crafts. These ”needs”, it is pointed out, find their 
source in the child’s requirements for his activities and 

4 

enterprises ”in any school subject or field of experience.” 

1 -- — ~ --- 

Ibid, p. 445. 

2 

Dickie, op. cit., p. 97 

2 

Manitoba, op. c-it., p. 268. 

4 

British Columuia, Op. cit., p. 505. 











- 







. 


.... .... r.: . .. 

. 

. 

c 




, 

. 

: 


- 

. 




,. 

- 

* .. .. 






- 151 - 


The community aaa home are included in the "field of experience” 
where hobbies, and varied constructive activities are concerned. 
The various media involved in construction work in the elementary 
school (paper ana paste-board, clay, wood, cloth and incidental 
hy—proaucts) suggests varied application of integrative uses of 
the crafts. Teachers vary in their regard for the value of 
illustration and construction in a given subject, hut they 
must be the children's guide in the discovery of supplementary 
aids in his studies. 

The broad objectives 01 the practical arts in the 
elementary school are indicated in the following brief state¬ 
ments from some of the provincial curricula: 

"Creation in the realm of art is emotional, intellectual 
and physical; since the forms of beauty which the child 
attempts to create with pencil, brush, or knife have been 
fore fashioned in the mind in response to an emotional 
experience. For all these phases of such creative effort 
the curriculum should provide opportunity and training." 1 

(Ontario). 

"Modern educational practice places increasing emphasis 
-.upon outcomes which are social--which meet the needs of 
average pupils. The child learns through his own activity 
and courses must beplanned to meet this requirement. The 
materials of the art curriculum may be grouped under three 
heads; (1) The Knowledge Factor ...(2) The Appreciation 
Factor ...(3) The Creative . actor ..." (AlbertaJ & 

"Aft and handwork are the principal means of motor train¬ 
ing in the elementary school...Children have to repeat 
swiftly the experience of' the race and must be helped in 
school through their own efforts to become skillful with 
their hands and to express their artistic ability...They 
(arts and crafts) are rich in Opportunities to develop the 
qualities of ingenuity, initiative, and resourcefulness, 
and self-reliance. The pioneer life that has prevailed in 
Canada in past generations has naturally produced these 
qualities in its people and the schools should guarantee 
their active persistence...Education must also awake and 


1 

p. 127. 

2 

IF. 195, 196. 











. -r; 






' 














. - , ' 

■ 

* 




< ' 

- 


’ 










' 


' 












; 






















— 

- 






develop the latent abilities for appreciating and creat¬ 
ing the beautiful things which the material development of 
our country has satisfied in some definite measure." (Hova 
Scotia) 1 

"The ultimate aim of education is saiu. to be social effi¬ 
ciency and individual growth. The process of education is 
one of gaining experiences either directly or indirectly. 

The aim of hand-work in the schools is to enlarge the 
scope of those experiences by providing opportunities for 
creative expression. Skill is an outcome but is not the 2 

primary aim of the creative experiences." (British Columbia) 

The development of refined skills is not the main object¬ 
ive of this course. That is the field of the specialist. 
Beverthless, some amateur ability to draw, design, and 
model, and construct is required, chiefly as a means to 
an end. A working knowledge of the principles and techn¬ 
iques underlying the creation of beauty in form and colour 
is essential to the development of art appreciation and 
discrimination.” (Saskatchewan) 3 


From these expressions it can be seen that hand¬ 
work is not i.ntended to be a separate subject in the first six 
grades of the school, "but an integral part of the teaching..." 4 
It will likely be taught in great measure by the ordinary 
teacher who may not be a specialist in handwork. The practical 
arts of the elementary school, therefore, should be distinguished 
clearly from the subject of industrial arts taught in the 
junior high school. Observation of work in practical arts in 
city schools,especially in platoon schools, -eveals to the 
writer a tendency to regard this work as a subject in itself. 

This tendency, if it exist, is not in accord with the spirit 
of the present curriculum of any province. 


1 

pp. 430, 431. 

2 

p. 505 
3 

p. 270 

Lewkirk, jo uis V .: 
Schools, hew York, 


Integrated Handwork for the Elementary 
Silver Buraett Go., 1940, p. 


v 













. 


- 

( f , : 

* 

- . . 

- 

e 




* 












• ' s ■: 


















f ' . ! 








. 

. 











-153- 


In the statements above there are certain broad, 
but well-defined educational objectives implied. The chief of 
these are that practical arts should, (1) give the child object 
ive media for expressing his ideas, (2) provide, the child with 
creative and manipulative interests for leisure-time expression 
(3) to acquaint the child with a variety of construction 
materials and develop handiness with common tools. The habit 
of making useful things such as book-bindings, posters, toys, 
charts, maps, etc., should have significance far beyond the 
walls of the school. This is the plan behind the modern 
curriculum of practical arts. In eases where the unit in 
practical arts is carried out, opportunity is given for 
iniative on the part of the child in organization of materials, 
planning ana. execution in construction, and artistic choice in 
the enrichment by way of decorative design. 
aKSlhllU T^Idl^fi 1.: ~ ... r -:. . mu3Ij . 

What has been said of practical art, or handwork, 
is applicable in great measure to the field of graphic arts. 

In this field too, there is need for manipulative skills, judg¬ 
ment of proportion, and ideas concerning usefulness. Further¬ 
more, the integration of general art with other subjects of 
the curriculum is an important function of it. "It is the 
function of the. teacher to arrange this integration."1 
Finally, as has been recorded, all art in the modern element¬ 
ary curriculum is designed to have a wide social significance. 

2 

It is "part of life." 

1 ' 

British Columbia, op. cit., p. 489 

2 

Ibid. 





















































« • , , • 








, 






. 












. 


' : 








, 






. 


. 















. 






















-1154- 


In so far at general art in the elementary school 

contributes towards aesthetic development in the child, it can 

be taken as one with music, dancing, rhythmic activities in 

physical education and other forms of•ex^ression based upon 

"a fusion of cognitive and affective responses." 1 2 3 The 

aesthetic subjects are to be taught in accordance with the 

philosophy common to all forms of art, and must be based upon 

an understanding of child development. It is probably very 

significant that in the philosophy of art, recognition is 

made of the tendency in artistic abilities in children to 

level the differences of their general abilities to some 
2 

degree. Because of this, artistic activities are m.re likely 
than any other activities to j.lace children upon a relatively 
equal ability-basis. The spirit of the elementary curricula 
points teachers to the possibilities of this tendency. 

In art and music the curricula provide a very 

3 

broad field of activities. The periods of artistic development 

in the child are accounted for in this broad outline of the 

courses. The knowledge , appreciation , and creative factors 

figure vitally; yet there is repeated emphasis u x .on the 

necessity for promoting "free expression with individual 

. 4 

variation ana orginality." In the graphic arts, the "specific 
aims 11 , "subject-matter," and "activities", are designed to 


1 

British Columbia, op. cit., p. 489. 

2 

Uova Scotia, op. cit., p. 427. 

3 

Hadow Beport, op. cit., p. 47. 

41 ' 


British Columbia, op. cit., pp. 


493-504. 








. 






- 


































■c 

' 

* 


« 

" 


■ 






. 


, 






; 


, .. ... : 


f • ' 


















■ 












- J * • r • - ... V ‘ 7 J 




' 




< * -■ • ±0 c 



















allow much freedom to the child under the guidance of the 
teacher. Knowledge and skills are the tools to be used in 
the development of artistic sense and appreciation. Activity 
with creative impulse in the graphic arts are the counter¬ 
part to the singing background found in the modern course in 
music. The thesis in the modern curriculum of art is that 
creative activity leads to appreciation. 

In music, the plan is to learn a d reat many songs 
(forty to sixty a year) rather than a few son s with a view 
to finished performance. Certain elements of music, however, 
must be learned thoroughly. The sense of melody, purity of 
tone and sense of rhythm are the essential background for an 
understanding and appreciation of music. This is derived through 
experience in singing and hearing the pure melodies of a wide 
ana varied collection of national and folk songs pre-eminently. 
G-ood teaching is said to be particularly essential in music as 
in art. The delicacy of the task must be appreciated by the 
teacher, this being of' greater importance than personal skills 

on the teacher's part. In attempting to lead children to cultivat 

2 

a love of beauty, 11 the teacher must walk warily." 

Music, as perhaps no other activity on the modern 

curriculum of the elementary school is intended to create 

delicacy, clearness and simplicity of form in the mina ana 

performance of the learner. "Good clear melody and good 

5 

poetry are essential." For the first few years nearly all 

I “ * ~ ~~ 

Eadow Peport, pp. 186-188 
E 

Ontario, op. cit., j^. 1E9. 

S 

Ibid., p. 119. 









' • 

■ 

. V-. • i 










—1 56— 


the singing is by rote, and this form is continued through all 
the grades. Singing is, therefore, the basis of appreciation 
ol music. Creative work has its place in musical activities. 

It is recommended that opportunity be -given for the composition 

S' r : 2 

of simple tunes and rhythms. It is pointed out that appreciation 
comes through the kind of growth of the musical sense that 
results from increasing knowledge of and delight in singing 
and listening to good music. 

The music courses of the Canadian curricula are in 
harmony with the recommendations for school music in such 
authoritative sources as the Consultative Committee on the 
primary School in Britain, and the California State Curricular 
Commission. The aims of the study of music emphasize the 
desirability of teaching with such materials and methods that 
the child shall be led to the love of the beautiful. Hot only 
should this be attained by a few, but as many children as 
possible should be helped to this state of mind and habit, 
that the democratic meaning of education might be increased. 

Beauty of material and beauty of performance are made com¬ 
plementary, but strain, and over-emphasis upon technical per¬ 
fection are discouraged. Enrichment of the training of out¬ 
standing children through such Special activity as festival work 
3 

is recommended. There is not total agreement as to the time 
to introduce notation and sight-singing, nor is to the amount 
of formal theory to be used throughout the school courses. 

It is agreed, however, that experience in sound and feeling 

1 — - 

Hova Scotia, op. cit., p. .56 

2 

Ibid., p. 560. 

3 

Hova Scotia, op. cit., Pp. 


565. 










- 












. 






































* 


















, / ... . .. . . ; . 

. 


































. 
























• . t * - 















- 157 - 


o± music should precede the formal learning of theory. In 
&ny case the teacher is left with a rich field of professional 
advice in the form of reading material and a wealth of 

"tion in the programme of studies itself. Much freedom 
to the teacher to act upon his own resources and upon a 
knowledge of the experiences and capabilities of his children. 
4n important essential is that the teacher must "have a 
genuine interest in music as an educational force. Although 
it is not necessary that she be specially trained in this 
subject, it is expected- she will avail herself of every 
opportunity for self-improvement..." It might be said that 
teachers are asked to teach aesthetic subjects so that they 
will have a genuine sociological significance. 

vil Coio 

It is not easy to determine the exact status of 
methodology represented by the theory of education. A few 
conclusions concerning fundamental changes of attitude toward 
instructional practices can be made, but one cannot state 
with certainty that this or that plan of teaching has been 
adopted by a Canadian province. Tx.is difficulty is due in 
part to vagueness of terms current in educational literature. 
The Irogramme or Studies for Alberta states that its outline 
is in substance an "activity programme." The comparative 

I ” ' “ ” 

Alberta, op. eit., p. 223. 







- 






■ 












- : / 


' 

. 


























' . . . 




■ 


' . 






, • 
























meaning Oi this statement is, however, difficult to determine. 

A category in this respect cannot he established. As xicGaughy 

puts it: "The activity programme is not a method or a set of 

techniques or a different plan for arranging the content of the 

traditional school curriculum. It is a plan of education itself 

It is based upon the fundamental concept that children learn 

by doing, that they must have purposes in their school activity. 

that education is not mainly learn_ng about things, but is 

concerned...with developing in children the capacity to act 

and react..." Finally, it seems necessary to point out that 

it is "probably true that no school...may truthfully be called 

2 

an activity school in all the implications of that term." 
Education to-day reflects the influence of the "activity" 
principle, types of activity being modified for particular 
needs. The adoption of the "activity" principle means a 
modification of the tone and spirit of the traditional school, 
not a supplanting of former practices. 

The modern developments in the methodology of 
Canadian elementary curricula are fundamentally represented 
by the following statements; 

1. The classroom is intended to have an atmosphere of 
freedom and purposeful activity. Furthermore, the 
classroom is intended to be "a form of democratic 
social life" not completely limited by academic 
lessons. 3 

2. The enterprise is recommended as a means of stimulating 

purposeful activity and as a means of cutting across 
the lines of traditional subject-matter. 


1 MeGaughy, op. eit., p. 187 

2 Ibid., 191. 

3 Wrightstone, J. Wayne: a^raisal of x.ewer practices in 
public Schools , Few York, Teachers' 

University, 1935, p. 9. 


College, Columbia 






' c • 




; 






t 




. 

' 

- 






. 

• - 










: • . ... .. * .. , j . - 














- 

• ■ , 




• . f ' 












- 159 - 


3. Classrooms should be equipped anu fitted in such 
ways as to be homelike, pleasant and promote interest 
in the studies carried on within them. 1 

4. School activities are intended to be linked in mean¬ 

ingful ways with the world outside of school. Child¬ 
ren should often study out of- the classroom. 

5. It is intended that creative activities be encouraged 
through forms of art and that the creative Spirit be 
extended to other studies, to social relationships, 
which require initiative, for example. 

6. The unit is to be made a realistic study of a problem. 
Co-operative methods of study are suggested. 

7. Readiness and maturation in the child should be the 
basis of selecting activities. 

8. It is intended that activity should have an educational 
purpose. Mental and physical activity, educationally 
speaking, are not distinct. 

9. Education, through the enterprise, does not excluae 
formal teaching where the latter is required to give 
training in the fundamental skills. The use of the 
enterprise-activities is not a sole form of education. 
It is a means of producing desired ends in school life. 

In order to appraise newer methods in education, 
it is essential to characterize more traditional ones. Wright- 
stone lists the following five assumptions concerning former 
practices; 

1. The classroom represents a restricted form of social 
life, limiting children's experiences therein to 
academic lessons. 

2. The quickest and most thorough method of learning 
lessons is to allot a certain portion of tbeschool 
day to instruction in separate subjects. 

3. Children's interests which do not conform to a set 
curriculum should be disregarded. 


Child Education, Vol. 16, Ho. 8, April, 1940, pp. 350-354. 










- 

. 
















' 

5 

- 






- 




- 

. 















- 160 - 


4. The real objective of classroom instruction consists 
mainly in the acquisition of the content-matter of 
each subject. 

5. Social progress is achieved best through the teaching 
of conventional subjects. 1 

It cannot be stated with accuracy that these 

characteristics, claimed by ..rigbtstone for the so-called 

traditional school, are totally lacking in the modern school. 

The class-room,for example, ijs a representation of a "restricted 

2 

form of social life", regardless of the progressive methods 
used in it. Bor can it be assumed that children’s interests 
are always, or should always be the basis of the curriculum- 
content or method. The stand taken in our revised curricula 
is that the child must of necessity study and learn much that 
he does not at the moment feel a need for, or even fully under¬ 
stand. The progressive element in our moaern theory consists 
of a stress upon the education of the "whole child". In the 
words of Kilpatrick; "Progressive education...means to 
build its school exactly on these total effects. It seeks 
to care for the whole child. Hot that it does not care for 
the reading and writing anci literature and all like things. 

It will get these even more than does the old school, but it 
seeks first the whole child.. r J3 

The raoderization of Canadian educational theory 

4 

has come at such a time, as Sandiford indicates, when a reaction 

T ' ' ' 

Wrightstone, op. cit., p. 9. 

2 

Ibid 

3 Kilpatrick, K. E.; Progressive Education, Yol. 7, Bo. 8, 
December, 1930, pp. 383-386 (Quoted by Payne, op. cit., Yo. II, 
P• 40 5. 

4 

Sandiford, peter, The School , op. cit., p. 475. 









- - 












' 




. 



t ■ 




. 








• • 


. 














■ 




■ 




‘ 




' 




» 










. 


* -t 












- 161 - 


to extreme Irogressivism in education is evident. It is 
evident, in View of this, that Canadian revisionists have 
attempted to guard against loose practices. Our general 
philosophy accepts the modern view that the ’’whole child" 
must he the concern of the educator. Yet this conception is 
not left in the "general”. Suggestive outlines of method, 
purpose, and content a^e included in the curricula, serving 
as a substantial guide to the teacher. 

Creative education in school is, perhaps, the most 
difficult activity to promote. This is true because it is 
difficult to determine the most desirable degree of teacher- 
control. In other words, creative education is a question of 
the delicate art of guidance. There is an attempt made in our 
elementary school curricula to stimulate improvement in the 
art of leadership on the part of the teacher; that is, leader¬ 
ship which results in harmonious participation of teacher and 
child in the educational activities of school. Dewey refers 
to this problem in the following words: 

"When the emphasis falls ux:on having experiences that 
are educationally worthwhile, the center of gravity shifts 
from the personal factor, and is found withing the 
developing exx-erience in which pupils and teachers alike 
participate. The teacher, because of greater maturity 
and Vvider knowledge, is the natural leader in the shared 
activity, and is.naturally accepted as such..." 1 


1 ----- 

Dev?ey, John; The Dew Pepublic , Yol. LXIII, Do. 814, July 9, 
1930, pp. 204-206, (Quoted by xayne, op. cit., p. 415). 












. 






f 
































e ■ ' 

. 

: 

f’ 

. >. 










. 




■■ 














- 162 - 


In so far as the teacher-pupil factor is concerned, it seems 
safe to state that skilful use of the enterprise-activity is 
the greatest single medium for joint participation. 

Behind the activity-principle is the belief that 
adjustment of the child is best made through learning to 
participate co-operatively on Lis own account. In 1928, 

Finney wrote: 

tT We ought...to make every child feci that nothing is 
more natural and proper than for him to undertake 
creative work on his own-account, without any self- 
consciousness as to his horn genius, and with almost 
never any thought of publicity or a career...".1 

What Finney has expressed here on behalf of the arts, our 

elementary curricula uphold in all spheres of school activities. 


Finney, ^oss _j.: A Sociological Ihiloso^hy of Education , 
Lew York, MacMillan Go., 1928, p. 324. 











- 163 - 


CHAPTER IX 

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 

PART I 

A study of educational theory permits few definite con¬ 
clusions because of certain factors limiting the inter¬ 
pretation of the theory analysed, A prevalent confusion 
in the field of educational thought is the chief limit¬ 
ing factor in the estimation of the analyses presented 
in £art_I. The following comments will call to mind the 

problems which the writer has presented: 

. 

(1) Modern educational authorities recognize the 
fact of rapid social change in recent years as the chief 
source of confusion concerning education in the minds of 
people generally. It is also the chief source of divis¬ 
ion in the field of educational theory. Education is now 
called upon to train for new technique of work, to inter¬ 
pret social and economic theories, and to serve as. a 
background of understanding the present in terms of the past 
and the possible future. Integration has a broad meaning 
for the individual in society. 

(2) Sociologically, education and growth are synono- 
mous. This implies a broad view of education. Social con¬ 
trol through education can be understood to advantage when 
education is conceived in this broad sense. It is essent¬ 
ial, therefore, to recognize the educational influences of 
many agencies in a community, other than the school. This 
condition, however, does not diminish the importance of the 








^;oi- 


. 

';: s /t j:1 6 

- 

. 

- 21 ■ 31 .trf : - 1: y W/■, j ■ 16 M 0 I! 

. 






.6 






“ 


* 




* 




. • 







7 



. "• o.y 






. 


* 




« : . .-oo:. ; ; 

- 

r f. 








. 


• '. r ;j; r. ©' • 










- 164 - 


role of the school. The school, in the theory of the ed¬ 
ucational sociologist, is the chief and co-ordinating 
agency in the total education or growth. 

(3) It is over the problems of education related to 
social progress that educationists--the Trogressivists 

and Modern Realists—take chief issue. The two main points 
of issue are: (l) the role of the teacher in social change, 
and (2) the problem of controversial issues in relation to 
education, .by studying the points of view represented by 
these schools of educational thought, it can be seen that 
compromise is not impossible. Experience has modified ex¬ 
treme views in both schools. The following words by John 
Dewey point educational controversialists to significant 
lines of thought: 

"...those who are looking ahead to a new movement in 
education,, adapted to' the existing need of a new so¬ 
cial order, should think in terms of Education itself 
rather than in terms of some T ism about education, 
even such an f ism as 'progressivism. T For in spite of 
itself any movement that thinks of itself in terms of 
an 'ism becomes so involved in reaction against other 
*isms that it is unwittingly controlled by them. For' 
it then forms its principles by reaction against them 
instead of by a comprehensive constructive survey of 1 
actual needs, problems, and possibilities... " 

(4) Fears for the safety of democracy are increased 
by the crises of to-day. In regard for this concern, two 
essentials were outlined; namely, the necessity to define 
democracy in its fullest sense, and to teach democracy by 
practice as well as by precept. It is recognized by author 
ities that school is a forceful opinion-forming agency. 


1 . 

Experience and Education, op.cit., p.vn. 






iiy i : 





♦ 

. 

c 



. 


\ c* / 



■ 


. 

. ', : i 
















t 




« ; 

c 

, 












- 165 - 


The more democratic education becomes the more it is a 
force in social intelligence. 

(5) In relation to the social services the school 
is essential in the co-ordination of facilities and a 
source of knowledge of these facilities. The school 
gives to the agencies of social service their most gen¬ 
eral picture of the individuals served. The social ser¬ 
vices in turn have for their main objective the maintenance 
of the physical and mental health of individuals rather 
than the restoration of health that has been lost. Branch¬ 
es of the social services have been organized which work 
in close co-operation with the school. A weakness of the 
social service's is that they are inadequately organized 
in poorer districts and communities. Administration of 
social services has become more effective through central¬ 
ized organization. 

BART II 

The chief factor limiting conclusions which can be drawn 
from a study of educational theory represented in the pro¬ 
vincial curricula, is the manner in which the structures of 
these curricula are based upon formerly existing sources. 
Prominent among these sources are United States Yearbooks 
and the British Hadow Reports . Sandiford has indicated 

that the greatest outside sources for Canadian educational 
theory is the American Educators. "This statement is made 

despite the fact that Ontario declares that its programme 
of studies is based on the findings of the Hadow Reports." 1 

1 " 

The School . February, 1958, op.cit., p.475. 














. 






■ ■ 


{£ 3 

- 




- . 

. 




- 

„ - 




, 




. 


, 

. 








; ? ’ •' ' 












* 



























- 166 - 


Eecause the theory expressed in the elementary school 
curricula of Canada is derived from secondary sources, the 
writer finds it difficult to conclude that certain express- 
ions of progressi . in their philosophies contain lull and 
practical significance when interpreted in the schools. 

(1) The pattern followed through Part I can he traced 
in thephilosophy of the school curricula. Cognizance is 
taken of the problems of modern social change, and the im¬ 
portance of adjustment of the individual to his environment 
is stressed. In the curricula reference is made to the pro¬ 
blem of assimilation of modern culture ana folk culture; the 
latter as much of importance in the development of personality 
as the regular subjects of study. Further, it is recommended 
that education in the elementary school should lay the found¬ 
ations of democratic living. Regarding the latter point the 
spirit of the curricula is that the school ’’must seek to lead 
the child to choose and accept as his own those ideals of con¬ 
duct and endeavour which a Christian and democratic society 
1 

approves.” Regarding the position of the school and the 
social order, the Canadian curricula, on the whole, present 
a more conservative philosophy than is expressed by the ex¬ 
ponents of the Progressive movement. 

Finally, the curricula stress means by which the 
facilities of education can promote and co-ordinate the social 
services. Modern education is thought of as the experiences 
which develop the whole organism and whole personality. Health 
is both physical and mental and child welfare is thought of as 
a prerequisite to education. The Canadian curricula appear to 

be advanced in this field. 


~\ -n +■ a v* n r\ 


nr, . 




v . 7 






. 

' 

I 

■ 

■ 








t . 












- 167 - 


(2.) It can be concluded that elementary education in 
Canada has a fundamental sociological background in theory. 
It would seem that certain phases of this background lack 
boldness. On the whole, however, its methods, aims, and 
general philosophy are in harmony with the definition and 
function of educational sociology presented in the Intro ¬ 
duction. Practices recommended in the theory of the ele¬ 
mentary school curricula which illustrate the sociological 
background are represented in -the following list of state¬ 
ments: 

(1) The class should be organized for co-operation in 
living and learning. 

(2) Work in school should be organized in meaningful 
units. 

(5) The daily programme should be planned and systemat¬ 
ic, yet flexible. 

(4) The total environment should be utilized by the 
teacher and pupils in educational activities. 

(5) Educational activities should be planned to utilize 
latent creative abilities of the children. 

(6) The aim of discipline should be to develop intell¬ 
igent self-control on the part of the children. 

(7) The needs of O-typtical children must be met. 

18) The role of the teacher as a leader in the modern 

2 

elementary school is increasingly great. 

1 " ' “ " ‘ ™ 

Jiocket, John A, and Jacobson.E.W. .MQdern Practices in the 
Elementary Schools . New York, Ginn and Co., 1938, p. 199 

2 

Ibid., p. 335. 













- 168 - 


It is tbe emphasis placed upon these 
recommendations rather than their mere statement which makes 
them significant in modern educational theory. Likewise it 
is the emphasis placed upon many of them which marks th6 
modern spirit in the elementary school curricula of Canaaa. 

A single illustration will indicate this point. It has been 
found that, in practice, units and enterprises have been 
interpreted superficially by teachers. The following state¬ 
ment from the British Columbia Programme exposes this mis¬ 
conception: 

"Another misconception is that an activity is an addendum 
to a unit, a sort of sweet coming at the end of a full- 
course dinner. When this erroneous view is held, a unit 
is taught in the traditional fashion, as a body of content 
to be learned, retained and preproduced in tests and ex¬ 
aminations. This task accomplished, an effort is made to 
perform the activities suggested in the Programme of Studies. 
The complaint is then made that after the unit has been 
taught there isn ! t enough time remaining to ao all tbe 
activities. 

"It should be understood that learning is achieved through 

the activities. The class and the teacher may think of 
much better activities than those suggested in the programme 
of studies." 1 

(3) The concept of integration is recognized in the Canadian 
curricula, there being a variety of suggestions meant to 
stimulate the integrative process in tbe children’s activities. 
Integration of school activities with those of the home and 
community are also recommended. This is particularly true of 
suggested activities for primary grades. 


1 

British Columbia, op. cit., p. 18. 















- 169 - 


It is possible that misconceptions concerning 

integration might also occur in the minds of teachers. The 

following statement by a teacher and supervisor of art 

pertains to such a possible misconception. It is quoted 

below for its critical value: 

"The concept of integration, excellent in itself, could 
lead to disintegrating practices. These might very 
possibly arise through the integrated programme—the 
device which is often used to maintain the child’s unity 
of personality at the normal level. The integrated 
programme does not guarantee integrative teaching. Art 
teaching could cause considerable harm even as a part of 
such a programme. Should the art work in which the child] 
occupy themselves not challenge the capacities of each ch: 
to the fullest, should the gre^t range of activities whici 
may be included in the word art taken in its fullest sens< 
not be fully exploited (as in the case of the class which 
gives to much attention to, say illustration), should the 
class employ itself in construction only replicas of fort; 
riv6r systems and the like activities which demand little 
account-of expression through significant form, the child¬ 
ren might be suffering from a disintegrative procedure... 

(4) The elementary school programmes are designed to leai 
to the socialization of children as well as to the developmen 
of individuality. It cannot be concluded that the processes i 
this double function are anything but complementary. The 
following conclusion of Sir Percy Lunn is appropriate in this 
ease; 

"...tfe conclude, then, that the idea that the main functii 
of the school is to socialize its pupils in no way con¬ 
tradicts the view that its true aim is to cultivate 
individuality..." Z 

(5) The elementary school curricula of Canada are design' 
to stimulate interests and attitudes on the part of children 
which will affect in a positive manner the use they make of' 


^aitskell, Dudley-C.: "Art and Integrative Teaching". Vne_: 
Teacher, April, 1942, P-* S81. 

Z 

2Education: It s Data ana hirst rrinciple s, London, Edward Ari 

and Co., 1920, 1927, p.229 













- 170 - 


educational agencies outside the school. Through the teaching 
of music, literature and art, and through eneral guidance it 
is intended that the foundations he laid for the improvement c 
children 1 s preferences in the out-of-.school fields, such as, 
radio listening, attendance at picture shows, and recreational 
activities. 

In their present form t.e curricula make$ no dire 
attack upon this problem of cultural development. The attack 
is indirect onl^ in that no. specific programmes in this fielc 
are proposed in the programmes. It can he assumed that this 
problem is taken by our curriculum-makers to be one for the 
home and the community rather than for the school. 

(6) For more adequate programmes of study having firmer 
sociological background the following recommendations are sub¬ 
mitted: 

1. That greater clarity be attained in the field of 
integration. 

2. That the formulation of programmes of study be made 
more dependent upon local and community experiment 
and research. 

*5. That more clarity and boldness be expressed regarding 
the, modern status of the activity principle. 

That organizations set up for the purpose of curriculi 
revision be made to function more continuously. 


4 . 






- 171 - 


APrEEBIX I 

SIMM A? Y OF A PSYCHIATPIST* S VERBA A REPORT 
AT A GLASS CUimFMRE.uCE 


1. The boy is in fairly good physical condition, generally 
speaking; Eis vision is slightly defective (6:10).~ Eyes should 
be examined. Ee has vererial disease but all that can be done 
is being done through the clinic. 

2. Ee has a mental age of 7:5. Ee reads rather slowly but 

not below the Grade I standard, in view of the fact that he falls 
in the low-average group. 

3. The boy steals and in this regard is growing steadily worse. 
Both he and his mother attribute this habit (of stealing) to the 
influence of other boys. The mother speaks of this in the 
presence of the boy.* Both mother ana son have developed this 
attitude so consistently that the boy has become a master at 
rationalization. 

4. Psychologists list more than a hundred causes for juvenile 
stealing. The one most likely to be operative in this case is 
that of a desire (conscious or unconscious) on the part of the 
boy to find a recompense for his unpopularity among other child¬ 
ren. A second cause is hero-worship. Eis mother says that the 
influence is that of other boys. "The chief older boy in this 
case would seem to be the father.” 

5. The boy’s life is built on a background of fear. The 
stimulation of fear has been the mother’s chief means of dis¬ 
cipline. Beating has been resorted to. Tales of fearful things 
that would happen in case of disobedience have also been usea. 

6. Under the present circumstances, no constructive help which 
the school might give would be of any avail. It is strongly 
recommended that a more complete picture of the family be 
obtained. Various tests of the father and mother would likely 
be of assistance in discovering a means of reconstructing the 
boy’s character. 


7. It would appear that a complete change of environment 
would be essential to reconstructive work. 

8. Present at the conference were: Ur. Grease, Ur. /atson, 
psychologist, the school nurse, assistant nurse, two or three 
social service workers, Mr. McKay of the Juvenile Court, the 
teacher. 

(The psychiatrist in charge of the examination expressed the 
belief that, in his experience, there had never been a more 
serious ease study to be recorded.) 



' 

*, 

. 

• • 




•■'< • . 

. 

, 








Name 


Nate of Birth 


r eterred to: 


Nay Mo . Yr. 

Address.Nate of first entering any school. 

Schools attended. 

present grade.Grades repeated.No. of grades 

accelerated..Absences: Extent of... 

Reasons for. 

Standing this term with comments about achievement in earlier 

grades. 

Special abilities... 

Special disabilities. 

Interests or hobbies.. 


Nate.. Teacher* s Signature. 

School. Principal* s Initials 


Nate and results. 

Intelligence tests. 

Standardized achievement tests. 

Attitude toward authority. 

Participation in activities of own age group 

Reaction to success and failure... 

Difficulties in behaviour.. 

Problem from teacher’s point of view. 


















































-173 


XI—DIAGIiA.. .J 


DlAGitAu I 

EaPAGGIGG- T01 iuo lit liiiiALiH 

















































5ilT.S AHr> 


-174- 


LlAGiHAiii 11 


ii 




Shore, J< 
November 


•'iiUementar* 
ip. 134-135. 


Scienci 


Tne 


her. 

























-175- 


IPPEH : II - BIBLI Ut Y 


B00II3 

1. Breed, Frederick S. : Education and the Hew ^ealism, 

Hew York, MacMillan Co., 1939. 

2. Brown, Francis J. : The Sociology of Childhood, Hew York, 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1939. 

3. Brubacher, John S. : uodern Philosophies of Education , 
McGraw-Hill, Book Co. Inc., i,ew York, 19 39. 

4. Counts, George S. : The Social Founaations of Education , 
Beport on the Commission on Social Studies, American 
Historical Society, Hew York, Chas. Scribner & Sons, 1934. 

5. Cohen, J. I., and Jravers, ?.. II. W. (Editors): Education 
for Democracy. 

... <r 

6. Dewey, John: Experience and Education, Hew York, MacMillan 
Co., 1938. 

7. Dewey, John: The School ana Society , University of Chicago 
Press, 1889 and 1915.' 

8. Dickie, Donalda: The Enterprise in Theory and practice , 
Toronto, W. J. Gage & Co., Eta., 1940. 

9. Dix, Lester; A Charter for .Lrogressive Education, Bureau of 
publications, Teachers’ College, Columbia University, 1939. 

10. Draper, Edgar M.: Principles and Techniques of Curriculum- 
Making , Hew York, *D. Appleton-Century Co., 1936. 

11. Fargo, Lucile : The Library in the School , Chicago, American 
Library Association, 1939. 

12. Finney,, B. L. ; A Sociological Philosophy of Education , 

Hew York, MacMillan Co., 1928. 

13. Good, Carter V., Bar, A. 3., Scates, Douglas E. : The method¬ 
ology of Educational Besearch , Hew York and London, 

D. Appleton-Century Co., 1988. 

14. Hart, Joseph II.: A Social Interpretation of Education , 

Hew York, Henry Holt, 1929. 

15. Eodkett, John A., and Jacobsen, . .; modern practices in 

the Elementary School , Hew York, Ginn Sc Co., 1938. 

16. Jones, Arthur J., Grizell, E. D. and I'rinstead, IV. J.: 
Principles of Unit Construction, Hew York, and London, 
^cGrow-hill boon: Company Inc., 1939. 































* 
















< 



I 





/ 















-176- 


17. Juad, Chas. E. : Education and Social ret:.. _.--w 7crk. 

Earcourt, Brace & Go., 1934. 

18. Judd, Chas, . ; . t .York, Houghton 

Mifflin Co., 1939. 

19. Kilpatrick, 7,’. H. ; Group Education for a Lemoc^acy , 

Lew York, issociation xress, 1940. 

20. Kilpatrick, W. K. (Editior): The Teacher and Society , x*ew 
York, K. appleton-Century Co., 1937. 

21. Kilpatrick, ... E. (Editor): The oducational frontier , i.ew 
York, P. Appleton-Century Co., 1939. 

22. King, E. B. : School finance in I. C. , Victoria, King 1 8 
printer, 1935. 

23. Lawrence, Josephene; if i have four apples , Lew York, 

F. Stokes Co., 1935. 

24. Lippmann, Walter: a.Preface to Eorals, Lew York, MacMillan, 
ml929. 

25. McGaughy, J. ?.. : an Evaluation of the ^lementa^y Scho 1, 

Lew York, The Bobbs-Merrill Co., 19 37. 

26. Lewlon, J. G. : Education for Democracy in Qur Time , 
ivIcGraw-Eill Book Co., Inc., Lew York ana London, 1939. 

27. Ogburn, W. F. : Social Change , Lew York, Heuhsch, Inc., 1923. 

28. Payne, E. George, : headings in Educational Sociolog :., 

Lew York, prentice-Hall, Inc., 1932, Volumes I and II. 

29. Pawson, Wyatt (Eeporter): A Lew world in the making , London, 
Lew Education Fellowship, 1933. 

30. ^.usk, Pobert P. : Pesearch i n Education , University of London 
Press, Ltd., 1932. 

31. Schorling, ?. and ^cClusky, E. Y. : Educatio n an d S ocial Trend 
Lew York, Yonkers-on-Eudson. 

y 

32. Slavson, S. P. : Character Ed uc ation in A Democracy , Lew York, 
Association press, 1939. 

33. Saucier, W. A. : Intro duc tio n to Ko de rn Views on Education , 

Lew York, Ginn & Co., 1937. 

34. Simon, Eenry W. ; Preface to leachin g, Oxford University Press 
1938. 


























« 



! * 















-177- 


35. Washburne, Carleton: A Living Philo soph, oi ducation , 

Hew York, The John Day Co., 1940. 

36. Witty, Paul l., md S] inner, Chae. E. f (Editors) : cental 
Hygiene in Education , i.ew York, Parrar & Phinehart, Inc., 1936. 

37. Wrightstone, J. Wayne: .^pra i sa! oi x. ev. er rr actices Selected 
public Schools, Hew York, Teachers Colie e, Columbia University. 
1935. 

PEpO^TS 

1. The Teachers Guide to Child Development, California State 
Department oi Education, Sacramento, 1936. 

2. Canadians All, Director of Public Information, Ottawa, June, 
1941. 

5. The Canadian Almanac , Copp Clark Co. 

4. Medical Health Officer’s Peport for the City of Vancouver and 
Greater Vancouver, Metropolitan Health District, 1939. 

5. Hew Instructional practic e s of x-romise , Twelfth Yearboo, , 
Department of Supervisors of Instruction, U.E.A., Washington, 

D. C., 1939. 

6. The Peport of the Consultative Comm itte e on the Primary School 
( Ha clow PeportTT London, His majesty’s Stationery office, 1931. 

7. Social Services anc th e Schools , Educational Policies Commis¬ 
sion, IT E7 a., and the American Association of School 
Administrators, Washington, D. C., 1939. 

8. Stanford Education Conference (-eport), Mumford, Lewis, Hew 
York, MacMillan, 1959. 

9. MacDonald, John: Education, Its Philosophy and Foundational 
Principles, (University of Alberta). 

10. Childs, John L. ; A Preface to a Hew Philosophy of Education , 
Thirteenth Yearbook, Department of Superintendents, 

Washington, D.C., 1935. 

J GUPHALS 

1. Britis h Columbia Parent-Teacher news , October, 1941. 

B. C. Teacher, January, 1959, November, 1941, iaarch, 1939, 
January, lv41. 


2. 






























/' 






















-178- 


<7 


5 . 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 
9. 

10 . 

11 . 


Lduc.tional idminibtration ana Supervision . Vol. XXVI, May, 

1940 

Elementary School Journal , January, 1940. 

Harpers Magazine, June, 1940. 

Journal ol Educational Research ,.September. 1940. 
parents’ Magazine , June, 1941. 

The School , Toronto, January, 1955, January, 1937, February, 
1938. 

School Life , Vol. 25, Ho. 4, Washington, D. C., January, 1940 
School iregress , Toronto, July, 1939, January, 1939. 

School and Society , Vol. 49, May, 1939. 


PBOGBAMMES OF STUDY 

1. Handbook to the Course of Study , Truro, b. S. pevss Publishing 
Company, 1935. 

2. Interim programme of Studies for the Elementary School , 

(Grades . I--^I), Winnipeg, 1939 . 

3. Memoranda for the (guidance of Teachers in the xrotestant 
Schools of Quebec , Quebec, Department o± Education, 1940. 

4. programme of Studies for the Elementary Schools , dmonton, 
195&, Xing*s Printer. 

5. Programme of Studies for the Element a ry Schools of British , 

Columbia, Victoria, Xing’s printer1941. 

6. Public School Curriculum and Teachers’ Guide, Pegina , 

Saskatchewan, 1951. 

7. Programme of Studies for Hew Brunswick Schools , (Grade VII). 
St.,John, J . X. MacMillan, Ltd., 1941. 

• Programme of Studies for Grades I to VI of the Public and 
Separate Schools , Toronto, 1941. 


8 






























. 


' 







-r 






















