Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Soderman, H.M. 

Racine 1 s women and Lady Macbeth, 


1935. 





S.X M8B1S 
awvijsiiaajs 






UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a dissertation on ’'Racine’s 
Woman and Lady Macbeth”, submitted by H. M. Soderman, 
B. A,, in partial fulfilment of the requirements for 
the degree of Master of Arts, 















RACINE*S WOMEN AND LADY MACBETH 


by 

H. M. Soderman 
University of Alberta 


A THESIS 

Submitted to the University of Alberta 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements 
for the degree of Master of Arts. 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April, 1935 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/soderman1935 


RACINE'S WOMEN AND LADY MACBETH 


I 

It is our Business to make a study of all of 
Racine's women, and one of Shakespeare's. This seems 
unbalanced, but then Shakespeare is almost universally 
recognized as the greatest of pen-creators of men and 
women the world has known, while Racine is considered 
chief of Erench poets by his countrymen. The subject 
is rather difficult, as the types of genius of the two 
dramatists are fundamentally different and their portfaJ - 
of character is arrived at in very dissimilar ways. 
Racine is essentially a poet and artist, but he was 
particularly interested in women, and the ways in which 
they revealed their passions. Whereas Shakespeare is 
a poet, artist, dramatist, --Victor Hugo says, "On 
paurrait presque rgpondre, C'est la terre." 

Before we begin our study of the women, it will 
perhaps be helpful to make a brief comparison of those 
factors which determined the nature of the works pro¬ 
duced by both writers. The study of the women will be 
presented in two parts; the first will deal with the 
characters of some of Racine's women and that of 
Lady Macbeth; the second will be an effort to compare 
























. 








2 


all of the women with the average woman of today, with 
some attention placed upon the psychological skill of 
the two writers. 

The first thing, or group of things which affect 
any writer, are his education, environment and dispos¬ 
ition. Very little is known about Shakespeare’s school¬ 
ing. It is likely he had what was common to boys of 
his social class of his day--that of a grammar school. 

That he obtained more knowledge than that is obvious 
from his plays. In them he reveals a knowledge of 
insects, flowers, science, music, law, the Bible, the 
philosophical theories of his day, besides giving evidence 
that he may have travelled to Scotland, Prance and Italy. 

A great deal of the skill he shows in his plays must have 
been due to his keen observation of what he saw in the 
people about him and his remarkable accuracy in recording 
it. Life was Shakespeare’s great teacher. Moreover, he 
had that happy disposition which was receptive of what 
life had to offer--stability of mind, good nature, 
sympathy, and a wisdom and penetration beyond that of any 
other writer. 

Racine’s education was very systematic and thorough. 
The most important features of his early training were 
his keen delight in the classics, especially the Greek 
writers, and the austere religious training he received 









































3 


at the hands of Jansenists of Port Royal. The former 
affected his choice of subject when seeking material 
for plays; it also taught him that psychology and 
insight into the workings of the mind which he reveals 
in his characters. To the latter may be ascribed his 
deep sense of spiritual values and those contrasts 
which constantly occur, throughout his plays, as 
diversity of mood--contrasts formed through the contrasts 
in his own nature. Por port Royal developed the 
religious sense in him; but when he went to Paris to 
further his studies, he revealed a heretofore unknown 
side to his character—he showed himself a lover of the 
bright and gay, the light things of life--he enjoyed the 
society of the (in the eyes of Port Royal) most, doubtful 
people, and went so far as to fall in love, at different 
times, with various actresses. But it was this life 
which taught him the emotions of mankind. Here, he 
learned the joy of laughter, and the sweet sadness of 
tears. Hereto©, in the capital, he met two men who were 
very influential in his life, and can be considered as 
having some part in his education--MoHere, who showed 
him what was real in life, and encouraged.to despise 
and shun the "invraisemblable H --and Boileau, who taught 
him to distrust his own work, but ever remained faithful 
to him, reproving and encouraging him as he required. 

And he needed the latter as much as the former, for he 














































. 


































4 


was of a very sensitive nature. This gave rise to 
two things--it was one means of his being so able to un¬ 
derstand the nature of women and their passions, and it 
was also the cause of his being bitterly pained at any 
adverse criticism, which was not infrequent during his 
career as writer of tragedy. It was due to Boileau 
and to this sensitivity which could not stand the awk¬ 
ward, the ugly, the repulsive, that he became the artist 
he did. 

A second agent of effect upon the production of a 
writer are the demands of his time. Both Shakespeare 
and Racine lived in a period of great literary splendor 
and each was eventually considered chief of his age. 
Shakespeare’s age made very few demands on him--and 
therein lay a difficulty for most writers. The sole 
heritage was the five-act drama. Otherwise it permitted 
ef- great outbursts of poetry of every kind from mediocre 
to sublime; it allowed great scope in imagination and 
variety, but it also permitted a great looseness of 
structure, and vagueness of purpose, so that inferior 
writers could produce works of insipidity or dullness. 
Though there was much genius among the Elizabethans, 
Shakespeare alone overcame the tremendous difficulties 
with which they had to contend. The chief requisite 
was that the public should be pleased. What did the 

people want? Chiefly, a good interesting story with 




















































5 


plenty of detail and action, and characters whom they 
could understand. Fortunately, although the people of 
Shakespeare ’s day were healthily natural and far from 
squeamish, they could also appreciate nobility and 
tenderness of character. And herein lay Shakespeare’s 
opportunity, and from it he developed his genius. We 
find that, though^ superficially he seemed interested 
in getting a good story, he did not spend so much time 
on developing or polishing it, provided it contained 
sufficient action and detail, as he considered it more 
worth while to make the characters in it real men and 
women. And how marvellously he could do that. It is 
in the portayal of these that he reveals that great 
skill and innate knowledge which he could not have 
derived from education, 

Racine’s age was likewise the Golden Age of 
literature in France, But here, things were much easier, 
for there was a complete set of rules for the would-be 
dramatist to follow. If he had any talent at all, he 
could produce a passable play, acceptable to his day, 
at least. The greater geniuses, with the exception of 
Racine, felt that these rules were a hindrance, and 
though they followed them in genera,!, they chafed, and 
broke them when they dared. These rules required the 
strict observance of the three unities, and the avoidance 
of all that tended towards bad taste or "invraisemblance," 




c 




* 












. 







6 


the whole to be written in the noble, majestic verse of 
the alexandrine. Racine’s aim, too, was to please the 
public, so he followed the rules, which, it is probable, 
he never dreamed of breaking. But these rules rather 
helped than hindered him. Hiar own personal aim was to 
depict pure passion. What could be more inducive to 
this than a plot containing very little action, absence 
of all detail and violence? Indeed, the absence of 
violence was particularly pleasing to Racine, to whom 
all coarseness or crudeness was distasteful. The 
alexandrine lent itself admirably to his style of 
writing. He has handled it the most skilfully of all 
the writers of the seventeenth century. It also seemed 
most suitable to show forth the varying moods and shades 
of emotion in his "personnages.’* 

How are these various influences reflected inthe 
works of Shakespeare and Racine? They have given rise to 
two sets of works entirely different. Shakespeare’s 
are an enormous collection of plays of every genre, 
though ordinarily classified as comedy, history and 
tragedy. Racine confines himself, with one exception, 
to tragedy, correct in form, and polished in style. We 
may form some estimate of their respective works by 
considering them in relation to two statements which have 
been made about both writers: 


1 


"Racine certainement ne connaissait pas 





. 

































































7 


Shakespeare..mais tous deux connaissaient si bien les 
mouvements des passions, qu’ils se rencontrent a ce trait 
de verite profonde." (E. Deschanel--Racine) 

2. '‘Comprehension might be taken as the watchword of 

the Elizabethans; Racine’s was concentration." (L, Stra- 
chey--Portraits in Miniature) 

1. It is amongst his characters that Shakespeare 
showed his marvellous powers of genius, and his great love 
of humanity. His insight is marvellous. He is a master 
of the mechanics of passion as well as Racine, but 
depicts it in a different way. Not being hampered by the 
unities or other restrictions he could show the causes 
and effects of a passion as well as the passion itself, 
in all the height of its intensity. "Macbeth" is an 
admirable example of this. It was customary for the 
writers of Shakespeare’s day to show all the details 
which led up to a catastrophe, the catastrophe itself, 
and the "aftermath". This appealed to Shakespeare, so 
he did it too. It gave him scope to get in the movement 
and color which he desired to make his characters warm, 
vivid and alive. Just as his situations, for the most 
part, are taken from real life, so are his characters, 
for the most part, taken from his knowledge of human 
beings--and he knew them far better than we do, in spite 
of all our accumulated knowledge and experience. I say 
"for the most part" for someone may say that the characters 





















































8 


in "A Midsummer Night’s Dream", or the "Tempest" or 
even the witches and ghosts which occur in various plays, 
are not taken from real life. Agreed. But he has drawn 
such characters, even such creatures of the imagination 
as Puck and Caliban so vividly, with such a truth and 
consistency, that we are forced to hold the conviction, 
that if such beings really existed, they would be just 
as Shakespeare has depicted them. Even with his real 
men and women, should we try to anticipate a certain 
form of behaviour, as reaction to a particular situation, 
and Shakespeare surprises us by giving us something 
quite different, we must come to the conclusion that 
his idea was the best and truest, and we acknowledge hifli 
master of the human mind and heart. He reflects every 
mental state, sorrow, mirth, imagination, thought, 
wisdom, love, experience. His relations with the world 
were extraordinarily close. But when he writes his 
great tragedies, he meets something more than man, 
something greater and more allied with Nature thalB with 
humanity--the mystery and cruelty of life, as shown by 
the agonies and movements of a soul in travail. We 
have but to refer to "Macbeth" to see the truth of this. 
Shakespeare is not merely portaying the characters of 
Macbeth and his wife; he is showing them to us in the 
possession of the power of evil, and the reactions of 
their souls to this influence. The ghosts, witches 




















































































9 

and spirits do not come uncalled. They are the re¬ 
flection of the human mind. 

For Racine, "L'etude de la passion est la seule 
chose qui importe. C’est le premier plan.# This was 
largely because of his temperament# the sensitivity 
of which we have already noticed. We shall observe 
that Racine limited himself for the most part to the 
portrayal of three types of passion, i. e., ambition, 
as in "Britannicus" and "Athalie", love, as in all his 
plays except "Athalie and "Esther", and maternal love, 
as in "Andromaque" and "Iphigenie". Of these, he dwelt 
most on love, Corneille had used love as an ornament 
to his plays, not considering it worthy enough to hold 
all the attention. But Racine makes it the "ressort". 
Again, it is to be noticed that Racine f s strongest 
characters are women. They appealed to his delicate 
mental structure, Voltaire says that this is not real 
tragedy, but that it has enough beauty for the subject--* 
this poetry of women. 

Opposed to Shakespeare’s use of detail and love of 
externals, Racine has a subjective point of view--the 
point of view of the spectators. In the first place, 
he borrows his subject matter for his plots, simplifies 
it, then retains only that action which is necessary to 


# P. Monceaux - Racine 





































































10 


permit of development of passion. To obtain interest, 
he shifts the mental point of view, which leads to 
change in action. This is interesting in "Andromaque", 
but monotonous in "Berenice." 

Racine’s passion is different from Shakespeare’s. 
It is fatal, irresistible. It draws along its victims 
in its train, to their doom. And it is useless to com¬ 
bat it, though all of his characters try to. If they 
yield, and they mostly do, they are tortured with 
remorse, From his Jansenist teaching, he knew that man 
is weak and feeble, that his passion is stronger than 
his will. And he makes the most of this foible. He 
pushes the passion within the character to the very 
end, and the iriittim is seized with torments, until we 
are afraid. And this passion always brings its own 
"chatiment" and expiation. Even the innocent of crime, 
if they have yielded to passion, must suffer--for 
example, Hippolyte, Bajazet; and the guilty never 
escape--Eriphile, Hermione. In their misfortunes they 
prove the danger and fatal consequences of weakness. 

If reason or duty intervene, which they do but rarely 
in Racine, they also must be overcome, Andromaque is 
the best illustration of this. 

2, Strachey says that comprehension is the 
watchword of Shakespeare and concentration that of 
Racine. Let us consider this. As far as Shakespeare 






, 


- 


. 






























- 




























11 


is concerned, this is rather difficult to ascertain from 
the consideration of but one play, and especially one in 
which the main characters are unusually few. Even so, 
he has managed to include a fairly great variety. His 
characters include a king and his son, his generals, a 
common soldier, two titled ladies, a child, two doctors, 
an old man, a porter, murderers, besides the witches and 
ghosts. His scenes are a blasted heath, battle fields, 
the interior and exterior of a castle, all in Scotland, 
and the king f s palace in England. The variety of mood 
is not so great in this play as in some, for Shakespeare 
is confining himself to portraying one effect, and the 
tone must not be spoiled. Even the humor of the porter is 
ghastly, in keeping with the general atmosphere. We may 
well say that Shakespeare has powers of concentration 
equal to those of Racine. A brief mention of other plays 
will give a glimpse of Shakespeare 1 s comprehension in 
choice of subject: "Merchant of Venice", "Romeo and 
Juliet", "The Tempest" and the historical plays. The 
scenes are from all countries and of all times, the 
characters from the supernatural and fairyland to the 
most human of humans. But the greatest comprehension is 
to be found in his portrayal of character, and reference 
has already been made to that. 

We have already noticed the aim of Racine—to seize 
















8 - 






















12 


upon a crisis which was simple,* with swift action, in 
order to portray one or more minds in the throes of an 
intense passion--and to express this as a flawless work 
of art. So at the outset, we see one way in which Racine 
is preventing himself from being comprehensive. His aim 
is limited so that his scope is narrowed. His situations 
are common-place, though all different--also, we find 
similar relationships in various plays, for example, a 
woman and two men--"Britannicus% "Mithridate”, ’’Berenice”, 
or a man and two women-- "Andromaque ”, ’’Phedre”, "Bajazet”, 
"Iphigenie”. His,characters are not particularly varied, 
that is to say, they are all royal personages or have 
some connection with royalty. Of course, he cannot be 
critized too much for this, for his times forbade the 
introduction of any ignoble character on the stage. At 
the same time it prevented Racine from choosing characters 
from all walks of life, and revealing all types of passions. 
But Racine does, by this enforced limitation, have the 
advantage of being able to put his entire attention and 
talent on to the portrayal of various passions as he 
conceived them, and we have Phedre, Hermione, Roxane and 
Clytemnestre. 































— 

. 









13 


I 

SOME CHARACTERS 

The story of "Macbeth” is well enough known to 
require but brief mention. After having been success¬ 
ful in battle, Macbeth, Thane of Glamis, and chief 
general to King Duncan of Scotland, is met by three 
weird sisters who hail him as Glamis, Cawdor, and king 
to be. Almost immediately, he receives news that the 
king has made him Thane of Cawdor as a reward for 
services. The startled battle chief writes of this to 
his wife, who is first seen reading his letter. 
Immediately, her resolve is made--that it will not be 
through lack of effort on her part or her husband*s, 
if the rest of the prophecy is not fulfilled. This 
resolve is at once strengthened by the news that Duncan 
is to be their guest that night, He comes, and a 
ghastly deed is committed. His sons flee, and Macbeth 
is crowned king, From then on, he and his wife live a 
life of fear, instead of glory as they had anticipated, 
Macbeth conjits one murder after another in order to 
strengthen his hold on the kingdom which comes to fear 
and hate him. The queen f s efforts are all bent towards 
protecting her husband. At a banquet given to pacify 
some of their subjects, both have an exhausting time. 
Eventually, the dead king’s son returns from England 
with an army, and with the help of certain Scottish 

















































14 


lords, overcome*and kills Macbeth, thus proving the 
fallacy of further prophecies he had received from the 
weird sisters. Just previous to this defeat, Lady 
Macbeth takes her own life. 

Two opinions have been expressed by critics as 
regards the part of Lady Macbeth in the first ideas of 
the crime. The one is, that Macbeth was a strictly 
honest, straight-forward man, a brave and trusted 
general of his king, and that his wife completely 
corrupted him and sent him to perdition. The other is 
that Lady Macbeth, knowing the somewhat doubtful 
ambitions of her husband in respect to the furtherance 
of his glory, simply decided for him when the opportunity 
came, and inspired him by her own courage and fascina¬ 
tion to do the deed which both thought would fulfil 
such an ambition. Whichever view is favored, it is 
certainly true that Lady Macbeth*s was the dominating 
hand in the murder of Duncan. How did it happen that 
she, a mere woman, had so much power over him, a 
battle chief? In the first place we have every reason 
to believe that the marriage between Macbeth and his 
wife had been a happy one. There was entire confidence 
between them, a trust and companionship which does not 
exist in ill-assorted marriages. Lady Macbeth was 
attached to her husband with a sort of Victorian 




» i 

. 



15 


devotion, a fact which caused her to lose all sense of 
spiritual values or risks. She permitted her man to so 
fill her whole world that he blocked her view of all else. 
The whole play is the story of desperate efforts to ful¬ 
fil a desire--Macbeth's desire to be king--but also Lady 
Macbeth*s desire that he should be king--not that she shou¬ 
ld thereby be given greater prestige or social glory, 
but that her husband might reach the acme of his destiny, 
for in her day, ’a crown was a minature symbol of 
divinity.’# So that, according to her lights, she is a 
perfect wife; but although she bends all her efforts, 
and uses to the utmost her enormous courage and control 
to fulfil her plans, once they are formed, her lights are 
very limited. She greatly admires and respects her 
husband, though, at the crisis, she rather despises his 
weakness and pities him for it; she thinks a throne is 
his proper position in the world, but does not sufficient¬ 
ly understand his temperament to realize how to help him 
attain it in the best way. Thought for her husband fills 
her mind, but she has no consideration for the world. 

Though like Macbeth, high and commanding and born to rule, 
it did not occur to her that they might serve the world 
once they got the opportunity. She had no notion of the 

rights of the people about her; they become merly ob- 

A 

# Campbell in the Variorum edition of "Macbeth.” 










— 









* 
















16 


stacles in the path of achievement and as such, must 
be swept out of the way. 

And it is here that Lady Macbeth shows her most 
outstanding characteristic--overwhelming strength of 
will, which is the second reason for her power over her 
husband. We see it the moment she appears on the stage, 
reading her husband*s letter. As soon as she comes to 
the part describing the prophecies of the witches, she 
makes up her mind as to the only possible mode of 
action, Duncan is an obstacle and must be removed. So 
that when she actually meets her husband, after the 
wars, her decision is formed, and all that is necessary 
is for Macbeth to be of the same mind. It has been said 
that Lady Macbeth understood her husband. In her 
sololiquy after the reading of the letter, she appears 
to--but only up to a point. She knows his ambition, 
but senses that he would prefer to attain it, '‘without 
the illness should attend it,' 9 She feels he is "too 
full of the milk of human kindness to catch the nearest 
way". Therefore, she wishes to do what she can herself 
do-~"chastise with the valor of my tongue all that 
impedes thee from the golden round," She knows him 
then, quite well in this respect, Macbeth*s notions 
towards moral values and means to end were not of the 
purest, and Lady Macbeth knows this. But he possessed 
qualities which she not understand, Macbeth, 






. 































. 





































17 


when confronted with the task of murdering the king 
who was to he his guest, immediately shrank from the 
picture of the consequences his mind formed. This 
shrinking Lady Macbeth ascribes to fear, because she 
possesses no imaginative faculties herself. In order 
to bring Macbeth to her way of thinking—that the deed 
is to be done, and when the opportunity presents--she 
uses every talent in her power. She rises to heights 
of eloquence; it is possible her physical charms have 
some effect, but it is by using the resources of her 
intellect with her will power behind as reinforcement, 
that she is finally able to overcome all his scruples 
and backwardness. She uses successively taunts of 
cowardice ^promises of assurance and finally persuades 
him that there will be no fear of detection. And in 
her efforts to convince him, works herself up to such 
a passion that she borders on hysteria. Her dominating 
will is further reason for her power over him. 

However, her work is not yet finished. The deed 
must be done, and when the time comes, Macbeth is un¬ 
equal to it. His wife has prepared the way—nothing can 
really go wrong. Then why does he hesitate? She is 
practical and unimaginative and cannot understand the 
struggle he has had to overcome his scruples to kill 
Duncan, to whom he is bound, beyond the usual: 















. 















18 


"He’s here in double trust; 

First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, 

Strong both against the deed; then as his host 
Who should against his murtherer shut the door, 

Not bear the knife myself. Besides this, Duncan 
Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been 
So clear in his great office, that his virtues 
Will plead like angels..................." 

("Macbeth" --Act I, Sc. 7) 

She cannot understand the images which constantly assail 
his senses. She merely knows a deed is to be done, and 
from her practical viewpoint, the sooner, the better. 

She cannot think that some such idea as came into her 
own mind, as she prepared the room, might have entered 
Macbeth's with yet greater force—"Had he not resembled 
my father as he slept, I had done't" This slight 
wavering from her purpose, as she gazed on Duncan's 
form, is an indication that she is not without certain 
feminine weakness. An earlier one is shown in her 
terrible soliloquy which she makes when she learns the 
king is to be her guest that night. She knows at once 
that the deed will have to be done then, but she also 
realizes her limitations as a woman. Therefore, she 
invokes the spirits to unsex her, in order to check any 
untoward weakening. Moreover, lest she repent too soon, 
she asks them to "stop up the access and passage to 
remorse; that no compunctious visitings of nature 
Shake my fell purpose." To make the deed less out¬ 
standing and vivid, she says, "Gome, thick night, And 
pall thee in the dunnest smoke of Hell, That my keen 


















. 




. 




























19 


knife see not the wound it makes." Is not this strong 
enough evidence that she knew she was prone to the 
ordinary weakness of women? It might also be remarked 
that she found it necessary to give herself physical 
•support, in the form of wine--so important did she con¬ 
sider this "great business". Another indication that 
she did not possess a man’s strength comes shortly after¬ 
wards, when the murder is discovered. Amidst the con¬ 
fusion amongst MacDuff, the king’s sons and others, when 
Macbeth relates how he killed the stewards, so guilty 
they were, Lady Macbeth faints. Some think this is 
feigned, to detract attention from Macbeth who might 
betray himself. It is more likely a genuine breaking 
down of her physical resistance, with the shock of these 
added murders, or simply the reaction after the high 
tension of the past hour or so. The horror reflected in 
the faces of the new-comers brings to her consciousness 
a realization of what she has done, and she cannot stand 
it. A still further indication that she has merely 
a woman’s constitution is shown later when we learn 
that she is now afraid of the dark. "She has light with 
her continually." This is likely to dispel the black¬ 
ness of the thoughts of the dreadful deeds which keep 
recurring to herf and to pierce the thick gloom of the 
nether regions which she begins to see - "Hell is murky! , 
*she remarks in her sleep-walking scene* 









» 








. 














20 


So that at first, Lady Macbeth seems to be an 
extremely powerful character, in spite of the fact that 
she must be carried off the stage. Her sense of what her 
duty is, is in no way lessened. We next see her just 
previous to and during the banquet scene. She is queen 
now, but a totally different queen from what she expected 
to be. She has no freedom or joy, and what glory may 
attach to her regal position is unperceived, or at least 
unappreciated by her. She is thoroughly disillusioned: 

"Naught’s had, all’s spent, 
Where our desire is got without content; 

’Tis safer to be that which we destroy, 

Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy." 

("Macbeth" Act II, Sc. 2.) 

Her one great aim in life is now just as consistent with 
her former desire-~it is to protect her husband from 
betraying himself. In this she shows herself entirely 
noble. Macbeth himself realizes this too, and emphasizes 
it for us, for never once does his respect for her waver. 
Although she has given of her all, and obtained nothing in 
return, she utters no word of complaint, nor asks for any 
help. She wants nothing for herself. It is her husband 
who was to have received the glory. But since that has 
proved so futile, at least she can still exert all that 
is in her to prevent detection. 

Macbeth does not intend to tell her of his plans 
regarding Banquo, but when he hints at it, she guesses, so 










- 














. 









21 


he tells her all except the time. She is sickened at the 
news, hut realizes it is useless to try to persuade him 
against it--this Macbeth who shrank from killing Duncan. 
During the banquet she does not know whether the plans hare 
been accomplished or not, but at Macbeth 1 s strange 
behaviour in regard to the ’stool, 1 she intuitively knows 
something must have happened to cause him to lose control 
over himself, and she is terrified lest he give himself 
up entirely. As soon as she realizes that Macbeth’s 
imagination has seized hold of him, she knows it behooves 
her to counteract it. And what an ordeal] Not only is 
she to cover up his strange behaviour and reassure the 
guests, but also to dispel the illusion* However, he 
goes too far. At the second appearance of the ghost, 
he is beside himself and everyone must of necessity 
suspect him of some crime. But Lady Macbeth rallies 
nobly and although in exquisite fear, is able to put on 
a sufficiently calm face to dismiss the guests with 
appropriate courtesy. 

When they have gone she gives no reproaches, but 
womanlike and practical, as is her nature, tells her 
husband that he must get to bed--it is sleep he wants. 

And so does she. But he is unable to sleep, and her 
sleep is cursed. Shakespeare gives us but a glimpse of 
her slumbers, but it is enough, in fact almost too much. 
Here, for the first time, we see her without power over 







. 












* 






























22 


herself. What she has been endeavoring with her whole 
being to prevent, i. e., betrayal in her husband, she 
now yields to herself, and reveals the ghastly secret 
much more plainly than ever Macbeth did. But even 
though we see that the whole series of terrible incidents 
has become very real to her, and that she is constantly 
trying to push it from her, we see no hint of repentance- 
no feeling for the slaughtered ones, unless it be in the 
terse statement, “the Thane of Fife had a wife. Where 
is she now?”. She has apparently heard of this final 
crime and it possibly moves her more than the others, 
for it includes what she herself thinks as the greatest 
crime, the slaughter of a child. But even the con¬ 
templation of this is not what has made her sleep so 
unholy. Ever since the first crime the events have been 
intruding themselves on her mind. Through sheer force 
of will, she forces them back, and appears normal to the 
observer (though such a strain must inevitably have made 
its mark upon her physical appearance), However, in her 
sleep, she loses the grip on her control, and the sub- 
conscious mind has free play. All the incidents are 
brought to the surface, but none more so that the fact 
that the "old man had so much blood in him," She cannot 
forget his death. How could she? She saw him before 
his death and would have killed him herself; and she 
saw him afterwards covered with blood which got on to her 

















































23 


own hands when she returned the swords to his chamber. 
This blood torments her. It is warm and sticky. Its 
smell is sickly and repulsive. She constantly tries to 
remove it but it is a hopeless task, "All the perfumes 
of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand." So it all 
floods her ungoverned mind. She sits down to write in 
order to give expression to her feelings. She has 
great need of this, for she has no one to talk to now. 
Ever since the first murder, she and her husband have 
been drifting apart, partly through circumstances, 
partly because Macbeth no longer has need of her. And 
she is unutterably lonely. Racine would have given her 
a confidant, but such a device would be degrading to 
Lady Macbeth. So it is no wonder that she gradually 
loses all control over her mind and it is very fitting 
that she should put an end to her life. 

To what conclusion must we arrive regarding Lady 
Macbeth? Was she "an accomplished adept in crime from 
the beginning?" # Hardly that, for she had some moral 
qualities. We know that she wished to turn her 
husband from his evil design concerning Banquo, She 
says, "You must leave this", and a little later tries to 
console him that inthem "nature’s copy’s not eterne". 

But she does eventually know of the murder. In her 

# E. Kreipsig - Variorum edition - "Macbeth" 










































































24 


sleep-walking, she reveals that she must have tried to 
comfort Macbeth regarding Banquo. It may he nearer the 
truth to conceive of Lady Macbeth as having given birth 
to this plot of the murder of Duncan as if it had been 
a child. It seems to be regarded by her as such. When 
it is born, it receives her maternal care. It is her 
only offspring that reaches maturity, and when that has 
taken place, she falls back once more into her normal 
state. She has no further wish to commit crime or 
participate in it. From now on, she is in the clutches 
of remorse, which, although unaccompanied by repentance, 
is sufficient to convey to her the enormity of what she 
has done. A study of some other 1 tragic 1 women may 
assist in forming a fairer judgment of this unfortunate 
queen. 

Of the twelve or thirteen women In Racine’s plays 
worthy to be studied, only two approach Lady Macbeth in 
respect to crime, though possibly not in much else. They 
are Agrippine and Athalie, both historical characters, 
notorious for their evil reputation. Agrippine, 
daughter of German!cus, and mother of Heron, through 
a series of crime including incest, murder both direct 
and indirect, confiscation of public funds, and 
deposition, had finally placed her son, a minor, in the 
imperial seat of Rome. The possession of such power 

















25 


becomes a consuming passion with her and she does her 
utmost to retain it. She unites Britannicus, her 
step-son, whom she has deposed in favour of Heron,with 
Junie, (of the family of Augustus) in order to form a 
place of refuge if she ever needs its "Je m’assure un 
port dans la tempete”. Heron, however, being able to 

read his mother’s character, and having become anourous 

l 

of Junie, kidnaps the girl, and brings her to his palace. 
Agrippine is furious, since, not only does this show 
defiance and contempt on the part of Heron, but it sets 
up a rival to her power. Octavie, Heron’s wife, chosen 
also by Agrippine, is weak and insignificant, though 
virtuous, little desirous of power, Junie, however, 
has a claim to the throne in her own rights, and, 
therefore could prove formidable. However, Agrippine is 
powerless, for Heron refuses to see her, and she herself 
has caused the army to promise its support to him. 
Agrippine’s perseverance eventually wins an audience with 
her son who promises to do as she wants, but as soon 
as she has gone, makes plans to murder his step-brother 
and rival. Agrippine, who had been satisfied with the 
result of the conference to the point of self-glory, is 
caused to fall to the lowest depths at the news of 
Britannicus’ death. She meets her son again, accuses 
him of the murder, prophesies her own death and a most 















■ 







































26 

ghastly future for him. Junie meanwhile, joins the 
Vestal virgins where no one can touch her, and Keren at 
the news, almost goes mad. We finally see Agrippine 
preparing to go to see him, hut hoping that once more she 
will he able to assert her power over him. 

Athalie’s story contains a little less intrigue on 
her part. The daughter of Jezebel, she inherits from her 
mother unholy tendencies and ambitions. After having 
slaughtered with her own hand her grand-children, heirs 
to the throne, following the death of her son, (as a 
revenge for the destruction of her mother and brother 
by the prophet Jehu,) she has seized the rule of Juda, 
and held it for eight years. Then she receives a ter¬ 
rifying dream of her mother warning her and of a child 
about to kill her, and she is seised with fear. To 
dispel this, she seeks to appease her own §od Baal, and 
also the God of the Jews. In the temple of the latter 
from which she is driven, she sees to her horror, the 
identical child of her dream. On questioning this child, 
she finds him guileless and intelligent. Ke is, however, 
unknown to himself, one of the grandchildren, escaped from! 
the slaughter with the help of his aunt Josabet, wife 
of the High Priest, who has reared him in the temple 
ever since, v/aiting for the propitious moment to pro¬ 
claim him king, this moment is brought close when 
Athalie demands either the child as hostage, or war and 






, 














. 




















27 


and destruction of the temple. Expecting the choice 
to he war, she prepares her army. However, before 
actually engaging, she once more comes with terms--a 
desire to see the reputedly hidden treasure of David* 

Joad shows her the child crowned king, entraps her 
in the temple and has her killed. The play ends with 
the child Joas being accepted as king by Jerusalem* 

The outstanding characteristic of both Agrippine 
and Athalie is the same as that of Lady Macbeth-- 
ambition in them is a passion* But whereas with Lady 
Macbeth it is for power for her husband, with our 
queens of pagan times it is power for themselves. 
Agrippine has always had the desire to rule* Even though 
she had no direct claim to the imperial power, she was 
not prevented from marrying the Emperor Claudius, her 
uncle* This once accomplished with the consent of the 
Senate, it was comparatively easy for her to persuade 
him to adopt her own son Heron and eventually consider 
him as legal heir, instead of his own son Britannicus* 
After this, the people, prejudiced in favor of Heron 
by means of lavish expenditure of public moneys, by 
Agrippine, but in the name of Heron, it remained but to 
wait until the day should come when Heron, with his 
mother behind him should gain the power. But Claudius, 
although he became ill, did not show any signs of dying 

at once. However, too late, he saw through Agrippine f s 












. 









« 





























28 


schemes, and regretted what he had done. But 
Agrippine, relentless and persistent in her march to 
her goal, coldly ignored his wishes, kept him separated 
from his son and finally hastened his end with a plate 
of mushrooms. At length, Neron was the accepted 
emperor. Throughout every step, there is evidence 
only of Agrippine f s desire for power for herself, Not 
once does she give any indication that it is for her 
son, although she tells him it is so, (hut of what 
value are the words of such a woman?)/ But when she 
tells him he is ungrateful, 

M Vous ne me trompez point, je vois tous vos 

detours 

Vous etes un ingrat, vous le futes toujours, 

Des vos plus jeunes ans, mes soins et mes 

tendresses 

N'ont arrache de vous que de feintes caresses, 

Rien ne yousa pu vaincre; et votre durete 

Aurait du dans son cours arreter ma bonte. 

Q,ue je suis malheureuse l w 

("Britannicus" Act IV, Sc. 2) 
we feel that she has had some affection for him in his 
youth, and are sorry that it is not returned. In any 
case, she must have over-indulged and spoiled him, 
thus cultivating and strengthening his natural in¬ 
herited tendencies for selfishness and vice. But as 
he grew older, and showed no particle of fondness for 
her, she permitted her natural hardness to remain un¬ 
concealed., and strove for the one thing which she 





















29 


thought could satisfy her--power. And she obtained it, 
at least, during the early part of his rule. She in¬ 
herited from her father some talent for political 
affairs. This, combined with her naturally haughty 
and domineering manner would lead Heron to think her 
superior to himself. Indeed, for a while, she had him 
completely under her control. She consulted with him 
on all affairs of state, and even went so far as to 
attend the sittings of the Senate, (though concealed)-- 
a thing usually permitted to no woman. But the time 
came when Heron began to chafe at the restraint. He 
too, was desirous of power--he too, had ability to 
remove obstacles from his path. Moreover, he had the 
power, though hitherto had not used it. At the 
instigation of his tutor Harcisse, he begins to assert 
himself. He absents himself from his mother’s presence, 
or sees her only in the presence of others. He shows a 
dislike for her followers and advisors. But the final 
blow comes when he kidnaps Junie. Agrippine takes this 
as a personal affront. In reality, Heron has fallen in 
love with the young girl, so, apart from his possible 
delight in paining Britannicus and defying his mother, 
he is really only satisfying his lust. But Agrippine 
is persevering and thorough. She gets the interview 
she wants. But she does not make the most of her 
opportunity. Most of her long speech is an enumeration 





. 


















30 


of what she has done for him, and a reminder that he 
owes all to her. This may be true, but it is galling 
to him. When she finally appeals to his emotions, he 
promises to do as she wishes, though in a half-hearted 
way. She sails away in triumph. But she cannot keep 
this triumph to herself. News of her boasting comes 
back to Neron, who immediately resolves to do what he 
had intended doing all along--he makes preparations for 
the death of Britannicus. When Agrippine hears the 
fatal news, she is stunned for the moment. Then she 
knows it is the pronouncement of her own doom. Her 
power is at an end. Although she does not die in the 
play, the preparation for it is very plain. Indeed, 
Racine says in his preface to the play that "ma 
tragedie newest pas moins la disgrace d f Agrippine que 
la mort de Britannicus”. 

Athalie is possibly more successful than Agrippine. 
Having once made her position strong, she rules for 
eight years. It is possible that she may have ruled 
longer, if she had not had her dream, which hastened 
events. Like Agrippine, Athalie possessed some ability 
for ruling, an ability resembling that 0 £'tyrant, however 
We know that she had quelled neighboring provinces, 
checked the marauding attacks of Arabs, and was re¬ 
cognized as ruler by other sovereigns. Lady Macbeth did 
not possess this faculty. She was anxious that her 










. 

„ * ' ■ I 










































31 


husband should become king, but she was willing that he 
should have full sway in his rule--if indeed, she thought 
of this at all. The dream filled Athalie with terror. 
This was due to various causes. Firstly, it threatened 
her life--a disturbing thought; next, the appearance of 
her mother made the warning deeper; and finally, Athalie 
was growing old and her resistance to externals was 
breaking down. We may even believe that she was 
beginning to feel some twinges of remorse for earlier 
misdeeds. Whatever the reason, it was the vision which 
brought her into contact with the High Priest, Joad. 

After this, it was simply a series of mental adjustments 
until At halie found herself dethroned and doomed. Like 
Agrippine, she was under no delusions as to her fate. 

She had never given mercy, and expected none. 

How do Agrippine and Athalie and their crimes com¬ 
pare with Lady Macbeth and hers? In the first place, 
their motives are not nearly as noble. With Lady Macbeth 
it was "Glamis t hou art and Cawdor, and shalt be all 
thou art promised.” All her actions are entirely self¬ 
less. And, until Macbeth is actually made king, it is 
really the lady who does all the work. She makes the 
decision that the opportune moment has arrived; she spurs 
her husband to agreeing with her; she does all the out¬ 
ward acts preparatory to the murder to spare him as much 









, ■ 










32 


as possible. Then it was necessary to rally Macbeth 
who was almost out of his senses. He must be strong 
to conceal this deed. Once he is crowned, her goal is 
achieved. She has but to watch him. However, her goal 
is only achieved theoretically. Actually, she becomes 
disillusioned. Where are the glory and success which she 
and her husband had visualized? She has not realized 
that they could never be the reward of such sin. In 
like manner, the goals of Agrippine and Athalie are only 
partially achieved. They get what they want for the time 
being, but it brings them no satisfaction* The reward 
for their way of life is murder or fear of it. Lady 
Macbeth 1 s recompense is a frenzied mind and death by 
her own hand. So that in all three cases, the deed 
brings its own retribution. 

(Dn the next place Lady Macbeth 1 s most outstanding 
characteristic is her indomitable will. She sees a deed 
to be done--an heroic deed she thinks it-- ,f this night’s 
grea t business H --and her decision is made. Moreover, for 
her, decision is synonymous with action. She goes through 
to the bitter end without wavering, Agrippine*s will is 
almost as strong. She has decided on her goal, and passes 
through a most complicated series of events and crime to 
achieve it. Like Lady Macbeth, she has long been 
accustomed to the attitude that her word is law. It is 





















■ 



33 


when she comes into conflict with another whose mind is 
as strong as hers that she feels thwarted, and she gives 
vent to her passion. In this she is unlike Lady Macbeth, 
who never, on any occasion, betrays her feelings. She is 
interested more in externals, and keeps her vision fixed 
on them. Because, in her estimation, what she desires is 
grand, and noble, she uses only great, sweeping actions 
to accomplish it. She could never, like Agrippine and 
Athalie, stoop to petty tricks or deception. She A Xies 
to her husband, and between them is absolute faith. It 
is this customary habit of frankness which makes the rest 
of her life so difficult--she has such an enormous thing 
to hide. But she is capable of keeping it to herself-- 
her will is equal to her desire. Indeed, the greatness 
of her resolution almost lessens the greatness of her 
crime, Athalie 1 s will is not so strong. She allows 
herself to be swayed or persuaded by others. We can 
never conceive of Lady Macbeth receiving a terrifying 
dream, because she was unusually lacking in imagination. 
But to Athalie, the dream is very real--it affects her 
whole being to the extent that she must confide in some 
one or get advice~-and she tells it to Abner and Mathan. 
However, she is mistress of herself sufficiently to insist 
on getting what she wants--and now she desires to see the 
child. Moreover, as soon as she has seen him, her mind 
is made up that he indeed will be the cause of her down- 





























34 


fall in spite of his apparent innocence. "C’est lui. 
D’horreur encore tous mes sens sont saisis." In fact, 
it is his extraordinary simplicity combined with 
wisdom which makes her uneasy concerning him. But she 
is determined to obtain him for herself, or bring 
about his destruction--and it is the contact with a 
determination stronger than her own.(Joad 1 s), which 
prevents her. 

Of the three, Athalie has probably the strongest 
sense of religion. Lady Macbeth is utterly pagan; 
if anything, she is fatalistic. She seems entirely 
oblivious to any idea of principle or morals. She 
avoids the petty sins, because it is her nature to be 
large and open, instead of cramped. She has no idea 
of a Supreme Being or guiding Destiny whom one might 
offend. It is true that she gives expression to the 
phrase, "Hell is murky”, but this is no indication 
that she possesses any religious beliefs. Heaven and 
hell have been familiar terms almost throughout the 
ages, Agrippine was equally pagan, but then she lived 
in a pagan country. Ho?/ever, we find no reference to 
her holding any respect for the gods, nor did she fear 
their wrath. On the other hand, Athalie, though a 
wicked woman, had sufficient qualms after her dream 
to feel it might be helpful to appease both her own 
god, and the God of the Jews. It is very obvious 



















. 












' 















35 


that she feared this latter God. True, she had waged 
a constant war against His authority on earth, and had 
set up a temple to the pagan gods of her ancestors. 

But that was very largely because she realized that 
the Jewish priesthood was very close to a political 
power, and therefore a rival. In the end, Athalie 
admits to God that he has won, as Jezebel warned her 
He would--but this does not prevent her from blas¬ 
pheming the temple, which somewhat neutralizes any 
remorse she may have felt. 

Athalie sinned very much, for she had available 
means of living an upright godly life. But she was too 
filled with a desire for power. She laid too much 
stress on material things. She may be excused on the 
ground that she inherited strong tendencies towards 
evil, which she regarded as a matter of course. 

Agrippine was typical of her time, and as such should 
not be condemned too severely. However, she sinned in 
excess, for she was even criticized in her own day. 

There is really nothing likeable about Agrippine, and 
we are not sorry for her when her desires are thwarted. 
But towards Lady Macbeth we do feel some sense of pity. 
She desired so much for her husband, and although her 
methods of getting it were altogether wrong, we perceive 
of) much that is splendid in her and a good deal that is 










. 









. 



















36 


piteous. Her sin lies in possessing a perverted sense 
of what was great and in setting too high a value on 
external and material things. Religion was the only 
thing that could have changed her. What a mighty force 
for good she might have been under its guidance. 

The other women in Racine f s plays do not commit 
crime for crime f s sake, or even to gain something for 
themselves. If they are instrumental in bringing a 
crime to pass, it is because they are powerless, at 
least for the time being, of preventing it. Phedre 
illustrates this very well. Here we see a good, honest- 
living woman, fascinating enough to have been able to 
make the fickle Thesee constant to her, filled with a 
violent love for her step-son. She realizes it is 
an illegitimate passion and that it must be checked, 
but she is powerless against it. Do what she will, 

(and she tries many things), it remains as strong as 
ever. She receives news of the death of her husband. 

On the advice of her nurse, she makes known her feelings 
to Hippolyte, who repulses her. Next, Thesee returns 
unexpectedly. To ensure safety to her mistress, Oenone 
accuses Hippolyte of incest and thus enrages Theseus,. 

In spite of Hippolyte’s denial, and declaration of his 
love for Aricie, Thesee calls upon Neptune for vengeance. 
Hippolyte is slain as a result of a duel with a sea- 













- 













) 

v 

V 

u 

' ? 

T 



37 

monster, Phedre in great remorse, poisons herself, 
and dying, confesses her sin. 

In spite of the fact that Phedre is practically a 
dying woman, and actually does very little throughout 
the play, the stage is dominated by her, even when she 
is absent. Like Lady Macbeth, she is seized with an 
illegitimate passion. But she knows it is illegitimate, 
whereas Lady Macbeth feels that her desire is noble. 

But her reaction to it is unlike Lady Macbeth’s. To 
win her lover becomes her whole desire in life, and she 
sacrifices to it, all that she holds valuable, chastity, 
honor and pride. We have noticed Lady Macbeth’s motives; 
we have seen also, that she is very practical, a woman of 
action. Phedre is more a woman of words. She bemoans 
her fate continually, and at times gets very sorry for 
herself. She may be excused on the ground that she has 
had this ma&t^r for a number of years, and that she has 
tried all she can think of to cure it-»prayers, 
sacrifice, harshness to Hippolyte, even banishment-*-but' 
she finally realizes it is stronger than she, and so 
gives up her resistance. Could we imagine Lady Macbeth 
with her strength of will in a similar predicament? 
Hardly. She would have made attempts years before to get 
what she wanted, or to put an end to the situation. What 
is it then, that makes Phedre such a strong figure* in 
the play? We must look for it in the strength of her 



t - Li 

n 

















38 

passion, which overcomes all her reason and saneness 

of thinking. We are amazed to see how far she has let 

herself go. She is physically weak and ills 

"Je ne me soutiens plus; ma force m’abandonne. 

Mes yeu* sont eblouis du jour que je revois, 

Et mes genoux tremblants se derobent sous moi. 

Kelas] 

("Phedre" --Act I, Sc. 3.) 

Even disinterested members of the court do not expect 

her to live long. However, when she thinks Thesee is 

dead, she rallies, and betrays herself to Hippolyte. 

Her feelings run away with her to such an extent that 

she seizes his sword and tries to kill herself. Then 

later, on learning that she has a rival for the 

affections of Hippolyte, her jealousy so overpowers her 

that she contemplates the murder of Aricie: 

’Trends pi tie de ma jalouse rage, 

II faut perdre Aricie.’ 

She is even swept to the point where she thinks of 
asking Theseus her husband to avenge her] 

M I1 faut de mon epoux 

Gontre un sang odieux reveiller le courroux 
Dans mes jaloux transports je le veux implorer." 

("Phedre” --Act IV, Sc. 6) 

But this is transient. In a moment she realizes what she 
is saying: 

"Moi jalouse] et Thesee est celui que j’implore] 

Mon epoux est vivant, et moi je brule encore] 

(Act XV, Sc. 6) 













* 














# 




















39 


Here she differs from Lady Macbeth. Her innate good¬ 
ness and virtue reassert themselves at once, and she 
is palled at the black nature of her thoughts. As a 
penance, a ghastly vision of the under-world rises 
before her, with her father Minos, in amazement and 
horror, meting out to her some totally new form of 
punishment that will last through eternity. Only at 
the end of the play when, tormented by remorse, she 
has decided to confess, and to clear Hippolyte if 
possible, does she become normal. Her dying speech is 
sane and calm. Why is she such a victim to passion? 

It is partly because Racine has put her in such a 
position that she cannot help herself. The passion 
has been inflicted upon her by Venus in a fit of pique, 
and humans cannot thwart the decree of the gods. This 
gives her a fatalistic strain which Oenone reflects when 
she says to her, "Vous aimez. On ne peut vaincre sa 
destinee.” This attitude possibly prevents Phedre from 
making any effort to change her mode of thinking, which 
would be one method of combatting her misfortune. She 
simply thinks she is helpless against the obsession, 
and becomes helpless as a consequence. But setting this 
fatalistic reason aside, it is quite possible to im¬ 
agine why Phedre is under the sway of passion as she is, 
in the light of other characters of Racine not under 
the malice of the gods, Hermione, Roxane, Clytemnestre 





























































40 


ho .< 
V 4 

i 

* 

'S 


and others all permit their passions to completely 
dominate them. Then, too, the family duties ofPhedre 
apparently left her enough time to spare to fall in 
love, and then brood upon it, upon her grievances and 
upon the happiness of others, and draw therefrom a 
contrast. We cannot imagine a woman of the working or 
peasant class becoming thus afflicted. She would not 
have the time. Even if she were seized with a strong 
emotion, strong enough to cause her to suffer, her duties 
to others in her life, and the work she would have to do 
would force her mind from it, and,given sufficient time, 
she would recover. But queens of olden times^ had no 
work to do, no interests outside of themselves. That 
was their misfortune. Then, with Phedre, circumstances 
were such as to aggravate her unfortunate condition. 

At the beginning of the play, she is weak enough and 
tired enough of life to die, and, if nothing in her 
life had changed, she likely would have done so shortly; 
but, as she says, at least she would not have died 
f deshoneree f , her secret would have been unbetrayed. 

We have a great deal of sympathy for Phe'dre, and 
are rather terrified by her excess of emotion. We 
rather wish that something could have been done to help 
her. Of course, our sympathies lie with Eippolyte 
and Aricie, too. We blame the thoughtless haste and 
lack of faith of Thesee, Yet, if he had believed his 








- 

. 


















41 


son, he would have had to turn against his wife, who, 
as A have seen, has won our compassion. Racine has 
skilfully brought this about largely by making Oenone 
the chief source of blame. Oenone is perhaps the most 
active of all Racine f s confidants. She has the most 
individuality. She it was who suggested all the evil-- 
the confession to Hippolyte, the betraying of Hippolyte 
and so on. Phedre, in her weakened physical and mental 
state is powerless to oppose her ideas, and so is some¬ 
what exonerated. 

A matron likewise, and almost as^assionate, is 
Clytemnestre. But she committed no crime, and after she 
has passed through a terrible ordeal, the play ends 
happily for her. She is the wife of Agamemnon, and 
mother of Iphigenie, Unknown to her, Agamemnon has 
promised to sacrifice his daughter to the gods in order 
to obtain favorable winds to take an expedition to Troy. 
To carry out the sacrifice, he has sent for Clytemnestre 
and his daughter to come to his camp where he says 
Achille, to whom Iphigenie is bethrothed, is anxious to 
fulfil the marriage. On arriving there, she finds out 
the truth. Clytemnestre approaches her husband and in 
a long outburst ofpassion accuses him of selfishness, 
cowardice and barbarity. He finally gives them 

































* 

■ 


- 

* 














■ 










42 


permission to flee, but Eriphile, a young captive, 
jealous of Iphigenie, betrays them to the army and others 
who desire the sacrifice, and they are brought back. 
Iphigenie goes to the altar, but so does Eriphile, who 
has hitherto lived in ignorance of. her parentage. She 
has been told that the day of revelation will be the day 
of her death. The High Priest tells her who she is— 
she is a cousin of Iphigenie, of the same name, and it 
is she who is desired by the gods for sacrifice. She 
kills herself, and the terrible suspense ends for the 
others. 

Clytemnestre is the strongest and best drawn woman 
character in the play. She is passionately fond of her 
daughter, but she is also haughty, and imperious, and we 
shall find that her will is strong enough, that she will 
stop at nothing. Although she committed no crime, at 
the height of her passion, she would not have hesitated 
to do so, if she could have saved her daughter thereby. 
She is really not mentally reposed all through the play. 
First she is insulted by the thought that Achille 
wishes to defer the wedding—a wedding which she herself 
had arranged. The insult to her daughter is no less 
painful to her. She appears for the first time in all 
the hauteur of outraged majesty: 



















* 







» 

. 









43 


"Ma fille, il faut partir sans que rien nous retienne, 
Et sauver, en fuyant, votre gloire et la mienne. 

Je ne m'etonne plus qu'interdit et distrait, 

Votre pere ait paru nous revoir a regret. 

Au& affronts d f un refus craignant de vous commettre 
II m f avait par Areas envoye cette lettre." 

" Je vous vois rougir de cet outrage. 

II faut d f un noble orgueil armer votre courage." 

("Iphigenie" --Act II. Sc. 4) 

Next, she is outraged and mystified by the command of 

Agamemnon to stay away from the altar during the wedding. 

His wish being a command makes her helpless, but she is 

none the less puzzled; 

"D f ou vient que d*un soin s® cruel, 

I^injuste- Agamemnon m f ecarte de l f autel? 

Eier de son nouveau rang, m f ose-t-il meconnaitre? 

Me croit-il a sa suite indigne de paraitre?" 

But she is consoled at the thought that the wedding will 
bring joy to Iphigenie: 

"Mais n’importe; il le veut, et mon coeur s'y resout, 
Ma fille, ton bonjieur me console de tout. 

Le ciel te donne Achille; et ma joie est extreme" 

("Iphigenie" --Act III, Sc. 2) 

Then, the worst of all--the discovery that Agamemnon 

means to sacrifice his daughter: 

"Je ne m’etonne plus de cet ordre cruel 
Q,ui m’avait interdit l f approche de I’autel." 

Clytemntstre is thrown into a terrible state of mind: 

"A mon perfide epoux je cours me presenter; 

Il ne soutiendra point la fureur qui m f anime. 

Il faudra que Calchas cherche une autre victime, 

Ou, si je ne vous puis derober a; leurs coups, 

Ma fille, ils pourront Bien m f immoler avant vous." 

(Act III, Sc. 5.) 








44 

and until the news of Eriphile’s sacrifice remains in 
an agony. 

Lady Macbeth is likewise mentally burdened-- 
actually for a much longer period that Glytemnestre, whom 
we see for only twenty-four hours. It is true that 
Lady Macbeth is not unhappy when she first appears, but 
we see in her the beginning of that tense excitement 
which was to increase in degree, and carry her all 
through the actual murder of Duncan and the few hours 
that followed. We do not see her immediately after she 
becomes queen, but it is easy to believe that uneasiness 
creeps upon her very soon, and then changes to a 
gripping fear, or at least a strong consciousness of 
what she has done—a consciousness, or sense of reality 
which grows until it breaks down her feminine resistance 
and physique. Clytemnestre, however, does at length 
get relief and happiness. Having broken no laws, she 
morally requires no punishment. Her great passion is 
her love for her daughter. It is true that she does not 
stop to use reason, or to look at things from another*s 
point of view, when the various crises arrive. But is 
not this entirely natural, an evidence of the maternal 
instinct which is the strongest of all feminine 
instincts? It may be that at such a time, there is more 
need of reason than at any other. But at all times, and 
in all places, mothers have been willing to cast common 
sense to the winds and to defend their children with 









45 



„} 


t 



4 / ? 

1 j • 

J J 

* <J 

/ 

_ : r 

4 / 
1/ 


i 

4 

> 


their own lives. And so Clytemnestre rouses herself 
to a frenzy. Like a tigress defending her young, she 
challenges Agamemnon to tear her child from her arms. 
Her will is strong, but owing to the restrictions of 
her day and country, is not of much power. 

Such unbridled passion is altogether strange to 
Lady Macbeth, but we have seen that it is natural. 

Lady Macbeth, on the other hand, has said that she 
would sacrifice her own child to gain what she wanted. 
This is contrary to nature, and could only be con¬ 
cerned under the stress of a great emotion, when one’s 
sense ofmoral values has become distorted. It would 
be interesting to observe the results if the situations 
were exchanged. How would Clytemnestre react if in 
Lady Macbeth’s place and if her affection was for her 
husband as Lady Macbeth’s was? I would say that her 
strength of will and determination would be just as 
great, and she would possibly resort to crime, as 
Lady Macbeth did, although she was innately honest 
and good. But she would only go to such an extreme if 
her passion carried her to it--and it likely would. 

It is certain that she would not be able to control 
herself nor her husband, and so the play would have 
a different ending. She would probably kill herself 
much sooner than Lady Macbeth did. What would Lady 
Macbeth do at Aulis, her strong affection being for 















. 










46 


her child? She would not have been very unlike 
Clyteranestre, for Clytemnestre had no freedom. 

However^ strong-willed she might have been, and a 
woman of action, she would have found herself quite 
hampered and bound. Her passion at its awful heights 
might have terrified Agamemnon and caused him to yield 
to her. She would not have permitted Iphigenie to go 
to the altar; she might have gone herself. There would 
not be time for her passion to affect her character. 

In her own play, we have seen that Lady Macbeth 
sacrificed all for her husband. Her strongpassion is 
that of a wife rather than that of a mother. Agnes 
Mackenzie says that there are five types of women— 
wife, mother, mistress, adventure-seeker, and neutral.# 
Lady Macbeth and Clytemnestre reveal easily to which 
type they belong. To which of these types does 
Andromaque belong? 

To one who is familiar with the story it will 
obviously be either that of wife or mother, if not both. 
Andromaque, widow ofHector of Troy, has been carried 

i 

away captive with her infant son by Pyrrhus. After 
some time, he falls in love with her, (although he is 
officially engaged to Hermione of Greece) and wishes to 
marry her. But she, through strong affection for Hector, 

# The Women in Shakespeare f s play* 








- 







» 

. 






■ 

» ' 













_ 























47 


refuses, Pyrrhus, annoyed, threatens to kill her child 
unless she submits to him. In fact, he goes as far as 
to bid Hermione prepare for the wedding. In the mean¬ 
while, Andromaque, torn between two duties, loyalty to 
her husband, and love for her son, has been inspired at 
her husband's tomb. She resolves to marry Pyrrhus to 
ensure safety to her son, and then immediately kill# 
herself to remain faithful to Hector. She makes known 
the first part of her decision to Pyrrhus, who is over¬ 
joyed. Hermione, however, justly disappointed and angry, 
works her passion to a frenzy and urges Orestes, a 
lover of hers from Greece, (but now on a mission to 
persuade Pyrrhus to destroy his Trojan captives) to 
kill the traitorous Pyrrhus. After some hesitation, he 
does this, and brings the news to Hermione. But she, 
in a still worse frenzy through real love for Pyrrhus, 
orders him from her sight, and kills herselfon the 
dead body ofPyrrhus, Andromaque is now received as 
queen and is able to■emerge from her difficult position 
in happiness. 

Andromaque has more in common with Lady Macbeth than 
appears at first sight. Very few casual readers would 
think there could be many points of similarity between 
the stately, pure and noble, though captive queen of Troy 
and the terrible, av/e-inspiring and criminal queen of 

Scotland. But let us examine them. Both are filled with 
























































48 


7 


i) 


jr 


a passion for something which does not materially 
affect themselves. Andromaque must remain loyal to 
Hector, and save her son’s life. In neither of these 
does she think of profit or danger to herself. It is 
true thatLady Macbeth would shine in the reflected 
glory of her husband, once he became king, but this 
apparently does not enter her thoughts. With both 
women, this passion is the fixed and dominating interest 
in their lives. They can think of nothing else or do 
anything unconnected with it. naturally such an emotion 
must have some vent. Andromaque pleads with Pyrrhus 
and humbles herself before Hermione, her position as 
slave not permitting her much other freedom: 

"Vous saurez quelque jour 

Madame, pour un fils jusqu’ou va notre amour. 

Vous pouvez sur Pyrrhus ce que j f ai pu sur lui: 

Q,ue craint-on d’un enfant qui survit a sa perte? 

Laissez-moi le cacher en quelque ile deserts." 

("Andromaque” --Act III, Sc. 4) 

But she revolves all her trouble and indecision to a 
large extent in her own mind. She does not break forth 
into quite such frenzied speeches, as does Hermione, 
although her desire is as strong as Hermione* s. Even 
if she had been absolutely socially free, she would not 
have given free rein to her impulses. She is too 
reserved and dignified, and inclined to be calm. She is 
possibly the only one of Racine ! s characters who has a 
tendency to use her reasoning power. Of course, it would 


9 












49 


not require much reason to show her that she would 
have to give up her affection for either her son or 
her husband; but it would take a certain amount of 
mental effort to decide how to retain both, although 
she likely considered it inspiration to arrive at the 
decision she did. "Voila de ce qu f un epoux m T a 
commande lui-meme”. All the same, such an inspiration 
would come only after ceaseless thinking and effort 
at solution. Lady Macbeth f s control has already been 
mentioned. In fact, after the murder, it becomes the 
only thing in her life to watch--control for both her¬ 
self and her husband. It becomes so deeply fixed in 
her subconscious mind that even in her sleep-walking, 
she does not make any comments. She merely, as far as 
she speaks, relives the various incidents which have 
impressed her so much. 

Then, Andromaque and Lady Macbeth are alike in 
being alone. Both are set apart from the other 
characters in their respective plays. ITobody under¬ 
stands or appreciates Andromaque f s position, which 
she reveals in her conversation with her confidant 
who, being a merely mechanical device of 17th century 
tragedy, could give no assistance. Lady Macbeth does 
have her husband at first, until the murder of Duncan 
is perpetrated, but even then, she can only talk to 
him of the actual things to be accomplished. He does 

















„ 






n 













* ■ 














50 


not understand how she is affected, and gives her no 

sympathetic support. And after the banquet with the 

terrible apparition of the dean Banquo, she is thrown 

entirely upon her own resources, and can only let the 

audience know what has taken place within her by what she 

reveals in her sleep, and by her own death. Her life 

has stopped for her--it has snapped as a taut string 

snaps when the tension is too great. 

Then, finally, Andromaque is never considered as a 

criminal, but is she really so sinless as she appears? 

We are told that before the story of the play, she had 

caused another child to be killed in place of her own, 

during the general slaughter at Troys 

.pour ravir son enfant au supplice 
Andromaque trompa I’ingenieux Ulysse, 

Tandis qu'un autre enfant, arrache de ses bras 

Sous le nom de son fils fut conduit au trepas." 

("Andromaque” --Act I, Sc. 1.) 

It is true her motive was justifiable, and that she was 

acting from strong maternal instinct. But the other 

child also had a mother, a fact which apparently did 

not occur to Andromaque, or if it did, was considered of 

no importance. And then, in her great decision--to 

marry Pyrrhus to ensure the safety of her child, and 

afterwards kill herself--it evidently never occurred to 

her that by doing this she would be cheating Pyrrhus 

very badly, Pyrrhus,whose whole thought was of her, 

Pyrrhus, a man of whom she held a very high opinion— 















51 


"Je sais quel est Pyrrhus, Violent mais sincere." 

But her sense of fairness was naturally distorted at 
this crisis in her life. Furthermore, she pays an un¬ 
duly high compliment to him in entrusting him alone with 
her child. Her faith was indeed strong. But here was 
an instance where her passion was blind. What proof 
had she, except her acquaintance with his sincerity*that 
Pyrrhus, who would likely have become as passionate as 
Hermione when he discovered the trick, would keep his 
word, or at least, not commit some rash crime, in his 
temporarily unbalanced state? She had none, and this 
goes to prove that of her two passions, her affection 
for her husband was the stronger--and that she there¬ 
fore, belongs to the same class as Lady Macbeth. 

However, Andromaque is distinctly more feminine 
than Lady Macbeth. She is conscious of her attractive 
powers and certainly uses them with Pyrrhus, either 
consciously or not: 

"Captive, toujours triste, importune a moi-meme, 
Pouvez-vous souhaiter qu f Andromaque vous aime? 

Q,uels charmes ont pour vous des yeux infortunes 
Q,u f a des pleurs eternels vous avez condamnes?" 

("Andromaque" --Act I, Sc. 4) 

Moreover, we could not imagine her planning a cold¬ 
blooded murder as Lady Macbeth did, nor participating 

in its ghastly details. Because Andromaque has some 

control over her passion, and commits no crime, in the 

ordinary sense of the word, throughout the play, she 




















■ 













52 


is the only one who emerges safely. She is happy, and 
she is even rewarded as a compensation for her suffer¬ 
ing and nobility of purpose. This is merely another 
instance of dramatic justice. 

The remaining women characters of Racine are the 
young women or "jeunes filles" and have nothing in 
common with Lady Macbeth. For th® s reason I have 
reserved them for the next division. These we have 
studied so far are the "premier plan" of his plays. 

With Lady Macbeth, we have noticed that all are of noble 
birth, though not all free socially. Most of them are 
products of their environment. Those who were most 
criminal'—Lady Macbeth, Agrippine, Athalie, do not come 
under this grouping, for they were of a purpose and will 
power that they formed to a large extent their own 
circumstances. Every one came under the grip of a 
passion, varying in intensity, but sufficiently strong 
to stifle all inclination or capability to reason. With 
the passion, was a fatalistic strain, which formed the 
r attitude of the helplessness of struggling against it. 

As a result, not one leads an entirely happy life-- 
some indeed are very unhappy. All have a great trouble 
which springs chiefly from within. All die but 
Andromaque and Clytemnestre--but they would not wish to 
live, under the existing circumstances. 
















































53 


II 

COMPARISON WITH THE AVERAGE WOMAN 
PSYCHOLOGY OP CHARACTER 

Shakespeare is considered famous for his great 
insight into human nature, and for his accurate port¬ 
rayal of character* Racine, likewise, owes one of 
his chief claims to fame to his keen psychological 
powers--he also can read the human mind and follow 
its complicated path through its tricky mazes. Do 
these two writers possess this faculty to an equal 
degree? We may arrive at some conclusion by com¬ 
paring the various characters with the average woman 
of today, the woman we see about us in our every-day 
life--for if the poets are really great, and they 
possess a knowledge of the human mind, their portraits 
should be true to-day and for all time. We shall be 
able then to judge of their faithfulness to nature. 

At the same time, let us notice the respective skills 
of Shakespeare and Racine as psychologists, 

Porming a conclusion at once, after a fairly casual 
reading of ’Macbeth 1 , one would likely consider Lady 
Macbeth quite abnormal, and to have nothing in common 
with the ordinary woman. However, her situation is 
commonplace enough. It is that of a woman anxious and 
willing to face all odds to do anything within her 







- 

' 

















54 


•ho’ 


n 


^ f 


' 

■V- 


f 


8 


* V_ 
1 * 


* a* 


i / 

i a - 
^ i 


V 

(Sf>* 
*1 * 
* I 


i ^ 
v '£ 

* 


power to promote the prestige of her husband. If we 
look about us, we shall find many examples of wives 
with similar desires, though possibly less intense. 

It is not likely that a modern woman would think she 
was promoting the welfare of her husband by committing 
a crime, her standards being different. On the other 


hand, how would this ordinary v/oman have behaved in ^ . 


the conditions. She lived in an unsympathetic, iron 
age, in which were very few softening elements. However, 
women, especially of the nobility, were in many ways, 
equal with men. Lady Macbeth had equal education with 
her husband, her social position was equal, and she was 
regarded with as much respect by those to whom they 
were known. But it was an age of violence, and of 
paganism. Wars and slaughter were everyday events, 


and superstition was strongly prevalent. Forgetting 

? vJ^O+aJL*. «. -&-a£u 


the changes which A h#tv=e in such an environment? Likely 
in a very similar way, if she possessed the same strong 
desire as Lady Macbeth did. Was Lady Macbeth’s ruling 
passion abnormal? I think not--desire to see her 
husband’s position bettered. It is as common now as 
it was then, perhaps more so, only the means of bring¬ 
ing it to pass are usually carried out in a less 
spectacular manner. As soon as Lady Macbeth received 
the letter with the news of the prophecy, her decision 
was formed. In her practical mind, she decided that 




















0 

/ 



















55 


i 



pjL^'- I 


7 


Duncan must be removed by fair means or foul. And we 
have no reason to believe that she would not have used 
fair means if it had been in her power--if it involved 
some mode of action, instead of waiting. But on the 
other hand, foul means was not at all repugnant to 
her--remember, it was a violent age. Is not the modern 
woman who contemplates the downfall of her husband 1 s 
partner or rival in business exactly on an equal? -- 
perhaps lower, for she has Christianity as a guide and 
help. She does not conceive murder, it is true, un¬ 
less it be murder to his hopes and desires, and the 
chances and aspiration?of his family. Lady Macbeth was 
extremely startled when she found that her opportunity 
to do as she unconsciously wanted was to arrive much 
sooner than she had expected. "Thou’rt mad to say it", 
she says to the servant who brings her the news. 
Shakespeare shows his adherence to truth in revealing 
this little bit of human reaction. Every woman with 
guilty intentions would have done the same. The crisis 
comes next, when Lady Macbeth and her husband meet, 
and the final decision is arrived at. Murder has 
been in Macbeth’s mind, possibly for some time. At 
least it is he who first warns us as to whatmay be 
a development of the play: 

"This supernatural soliciting 
Cannot be ill: cannot be good: if ill 
Why hath it given fee earnest of success? 


















. 

■ 

















56 

If good, why do I yield to that suggestion 
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair 
And make my seated heart knock at ray ribs 
Against the use of nature?" 

("Macbeth" --Act I, Sc. 3) 

And apparently, Lady Macbeth is familiar with her 
husband 1 s secret ideas. Only, when the time actually 
arrives, he shrinks from the deed. Now, would the 
average woman have had the same oratorical power, would 
she have possessed such a strong over-powering will 
that she would fairly sweep her husband off his feet? 
Could she have gibed and ridiculed him in order to 
rouse him to consent to the crime, could she have shown 
herself utterly devoid of maternal feeling to rouse the 
admiration* she did in her spouse? If she had 
possessed a strong enough desire to help her husband-- 
yes. Many women are not conscious of their enormous 
capabilities until placed in some severe crisis. But 
her strength of will, her over-powering mastery of mind 
are what were exceptional. Very few women possess 
these traits to an even similar extent, though they are 
not unknown. Even though the average woman might have 
been able to deliver a similar tirade and give evidence 
of a strong resolution and will, for the time being, it 
is not likely that it would remain after the critical 
moment had passed. And Lady Macbeth’s did remain. It 
is true that even with her, her natural, normal strength 

in these faculties increased with the stress of the 























57 


occasion, but she certainly gives evidence of her 
immense control all through the rest of the play. She 
illustrates this throughout the banquet scene, and 
later when there is no one about but her husband--she 
shows herself almost ready to drop from exhaustion-- 
but she does not drop--unless it is later in the 
privacy of her own apartments. We feel that she has a 
conviction that she can protect her husband by 
guarding her very thoughts. And even in the sleep¬ 
walking scene it is the restraint, the absolute lack 
of self-confidence, as it were--she betrays only facts, 
no opinions or ideas--that makes it so terrible. 

Lady Macbeth’s behaviour during the banquet is 
entirely normal and natural. Any woman, even nowadays, 
would so act, in like circumstances, if she were as 
"noble" as Lady Macbeth. She enters somewhat haggard, 
by the disillusionment she has received--their terrible 
efforts have not brought the expected joy and happiness 
But she puts on a bold face, and is gracious to her 
guests. It is when Macbeth begins to worry her with 
his eccentric behaviour that all her woman’s resources 
are cailled upon to defend him. She alternately berate 
him to rally him, (which she must conceal), and speaks 
assuringly to the guests, to cover up his odd manner. 
And this is as much as any woman would do, and no more. 
Once more the circumstances required tremendous self- 









. 




















58 


control, for it is all so unexpected. She does not 
know of the conclusion of Banquo’s fate, and can only 
imagine that he sees a vision of Duncan--and possibly 
for no reason. B.it she does not try to reason why he 
is in the condition he is--it is only necessary to 
protect him, which she does, though it cannot be very 
successfully, for he gives away so much before she real¬ 
izes what is the matter with him. Then when the need 
for dissiwulation is over, what? She does not reproach 
him for lack of the control which she possesses, nor 
curiously ask him reasons for his behaviour. Her mind 
is too large and noble for that. She no longer needs 
to hold the reins tightly, but she gives him what she 
thinks he needs now--advice to go to bed and get the 
rest that has been denied to him so much of late. I 
think the average woman of today would possess less 
nobility of mind--she could not refrain from some 
reproach or at least some remark on her own effort 
required in the trying situation. But Lady Macbeth 
was consistently selfless and regardless of her own 
needs or desires to an unusual degree. Is Shakespeare 
erring in his observation here? Ho, for there are 
women today as void of pettiness, but they are not 
the average woman, 

As regards the sleep-walking, Lady Macbeth is 
again consistent. This method of breaking down is 
















































59 


what we would expect from a woman with such a strong 
hold on herself. The average woman would likely have 
gone mad, or killed herself before this. But Lady 
Macbeth, having the strength, had kept up, in case 
her husband should need her, although it must have 
been agony to live. Her thoughts, the realization of 
all they had done, the realization that she was the 
cause of the damnation of her husband f s soul--(for 
her instigation of the first murder had led to all 
the others) must have been crushing beyond words. It 
is when she sees that Macbeth no longer needs her, 
that his tro!hles--troubles of a private, mental nature, 

/\ 

prevent him from even paying any attention to her, 
(which she cannot help), that she finally gives in and 
ends her life. Again, is this difference an evidence 
that Shakespeare is departing from the truth? Again 
no. Shakespeare has in mind, a particular woman, wh'om 
he causes to participate in a ghastly crime, for his 
own dramatic reasons. In order to do this, she must, 
though ordinarily a normal woman, possess those 
characteristics which will make her equal to the 
demands placed upon her. Moreover, he must make her 
other qualities consistent with these primary and 
necessary ones. Her utter selflessness was the one 
main characteristic which she must have. Possessing 
this, the rapid development of the great passion which 



. 














60 


seized her would account for all that seems abnormal 
in those scenes where she first appears to us, i. e,, 
immediately after the receipt of the letter, and 
immediately preceding and during the murder. Her 
mighty self-control is woven into her self-lessness-- 
she must be mistress of herself for her husband’s sake. 
The two other outstanding qualities which she possesses- 
she is intensely practical, and very void of imagina- 
tion--are not abnormal, and are given to her to make 
her character consistant. 

Gan Racine’s women be compared with the women 
we see about us? To a great extent, yes. Taking his 
women altogether, let us strip them of their surround¬ 
ings and possessions, and examine their situations. 

We find a woman anxious for worldly power and prestige-- 
Agrippine and Athalie; a vroman in the throes of agony 
at the threat of danger to her child--Andromaque and 
Clytemnestre; a woman loyal to her dead husband’s 
memory^— Andromaque; a child to be sacrificed to her 
father’s ambitioas--Iphigenie; a woman in love with 
her step-son^ Phedre; girls whose love is unrequited-- 
Hermione, Roxane, Eriphilk; a girl between two men— 
Berenice, Monime. Are not these situations very natural 
and common-place? Every one. In any case, Racine 
thinks their situations strong enough to create 
tragedies of them. With Racine, it was not so much 



. 

. 





61 


the situation as the scope for passion which inspired 
him to write his great works. If the situation was 
such that it would give rise to the development of a 
great passion it was acceptable to him. 

Agrippine can be compared to any society woman who 
is desirous of an exalted position in the eyes of the 
world, or in the eyes of her associates, and has no 
scruples about getting it. Looking through the pages 
of history, we can find many examples of queens, or 
would-be queens who did not hesitate to sacrifice 
human life to attain their desires. We can look at the 
so-called upper classes in our own or other land (where 
’’upper-class” does not mean superiority of learning) and 
find illustrations. We are also likely familiar with 
the woman in the small town whose passion is to 
belong to the exclusive bridge club, or be president of 
the Arts’ Society, Of course, these do not strive 
for power to the extent that Agrippine did, but it is 
as important in their sight, and it often gives rise to 
a strong passion within them. They are perhaps as 
willing in their own small way to make things as un¬ 
comfortable as possible at home or elsewhere, or of 
being as merciless and spiteful to possible rivals, 
as lies within their power. 

Agrippina and Athalie pass through many mental 
phases in'their efforts to gain v/hat they want. Both 




















■ 








62 


are audacious and uneasy, then imprudent, capable of 
compromising everything by pettiness, tricks or deceit 
Agrip.ine is at first amazed at the contrary behaviour 
of Heron who owes everything to her. After amazement, 
doubt and uneasiness as to how long her power will 
continue, seize her. Various incidents strengthen her 
feelings here--Neron l s refusal to see her, Burrhus 1 
explanation that Heron is old enough to rule alone, 
banishment of Pallas, kidnapping of Junie. This 
accumlation works her into such a fury that she 
threatens to betray all she has ever done, in order 
to cause Heron to lose his power, and that the people* 
support may be transferred to Britannicus. Racine 
shows his keen powers of observation of the working of 
the human mind here. Is not this the reaction of any 
unscrupulous woman? --one defeat after another urges 
her to recklessness: 

“Ah, l f on s ! efforce en vain de me fermer la bouche, 

De nos crimes communs je veux qu*on soit instfluit; 
On saura lea chemins par ou je l*ai conduit, 

Pour rendre sa puissance et la votre odieuse. 
J’avouerai les rumeurs les plus injurieuses; 

Je confesserai tout, exils assassinats, 

Poison meme..... M 

("Britannicus" --Act III, Sc. 3) 

But it carries no conviction with it. Burrhus tells 
her that she will not be believed. She reveals again 
how Racine understood her mind in her long speech to 

























•**..*.. 






63 


Neror* with her pride, arrogance, knowledge of and 
confidence in her own powers, andger, and she displays 
an utter lack of tact. Although she eventually 
becomes womanly and shows some slight flickering of 
earlier love for her son, she loses all the advantage 
she may have gained by her inability to control the 
satisfaction and triumph which she displays. She falls 
to greater depths, but there is nothing admirable or 
deserving of pity in the way she receives her downfall. 

She retains her pride and courage, it is true, but she 
cannot refrain from giving evidence of her thwarted 
passion; she curses this son of hers andpredicts for 
him a most terrible end: 

"He crois pas qu’en mourant je te laisse tranquille. 

Tes remords te suivront comme autant de furies; 

Tu croiras les calmer par d^autres barbaries; 

Ta fureur, s T irritant soi-meme dans son cours, 

D ! un sang toujours nouveau marquera tous tes jours; 
Mais j’espere qu f enfin le ciel, las de tescrimes, 
Ajoutera ta perte a tant d’autres victimes; 

Qu’apre's t’etre couvert de leur sang et du mien, 

Tu te verras force de repandre le tien; 

Et ton nom paroitra, dans la racefuture, 

Aux plus cruels tyrans une cruelle injure.” 

("Britannicus" --Act V, Sc. VI) 

But again, Racine makes her consistent with herself. 

When she hears of Heron’s temporary insanity at the loss 
of Junie, her unconquerable love of power arises from 
its ashes and once more she cherishes a hope of con¬ 
trolling the emperor: 














' 




















64 


"Mais Burrhus, allons voir jusqu’ou vont ses transports 
Voyons quel changement produiront ses remords, 

S*il voudra desormais suivre d'autres maximes." 

( "Britannicus'• --Act V, Sc, 8) 
Athalie*s situation is not quite so probable in 
the life of the average woman as that of Agrippine. 

She has actually had supreme power for a number of 
years, and dreads any thought of losing it. But it is 
inevitable. She gained power through boldness and 
violence, and it takes boldness and violence to retain 
it. At heart, she is quite alone, for though she is 
supported by the followers of her false gods,, and the 
army, they are really little true aid. The priests of 
Baal, like Mathan, are ambitious and support Athalie 
only as long as it satisfies their lust for wealth and 
power. The army, as so often in early times, was 
mercenary. Moreover, it stood to defend the govern¬ 
ment, whatever the ruler, and was but indifferent to 
a hated queen. Athalie realizes this and knows that to 
keep her position she must add audacity to audacity. 

Her rule is founded on fear. She has material force on 
her side, whereas, a fact which she is to learn, Joad 
has spiritual force on his. And now, some of this 
fear reacts upon herself. Her age increases, her 
energy lessens, and in her heart she hears voices of 
remorse and pity along with the uneasiness of the 
secret fears attached to superstition. In this 











. 











65 


receptive state of mind to which Racine has so skil¬ 
fully led her, she has the dream, and it completely 
seizes hold of her mind and imagination. Womanlike, 
she puts a meaning on it--at least assumes that it has 
a meaning. But what meaning? It cannot he propitious 
from its horrible nature--it threatens her life--and 
it appears to her three times--a mystic number. Such 
a dream requires action of some sort. What shall she 
do? It is of such a serious nature that purely the gods 
have sent it. They must be appeased then. So she goes 
to the temple of Baal, and makes all the necessary off¬ 
erings in prayer and sacrifice. But perhaps this God 
of the Jews, who, it is said, was instrumental in the 
death of her brother and her mother, has something to do 
with it. A visit to the temple of this unknown, and 
therefore rather awesome god might be of some help. How 
true is her terror, when having arrived in the inner 
courts, s&e, amidst all the hostile glances and 
horrified whispers, she sees at the altar, the very 
child of her dream. Being hurried out, she feels her¬ 
self overcome with weakness. 

"tu vois mon trouble et ma faiblesse; 

Va, fais dire at Mathan qu’il vienne, qu’il se presse; 

Heureuse sije puis trouver par son secours 

Cettepaix que je cherche et qui me fait toujours." 

(Elle s’assied) 

("Athalie" --Act II, Sc. 4) 

She must tell someone about it. Isn’t this exactly a 




' 


. 





66 


womans reaction in a like position? Athalie*s next 
act is quite typical of a brave woman, though in this 
case, courage is not so obviously necessary. She will 
see this child and question him. The fact that he 
resembles the child of the dream would cause some women 
to shrine from seeing him—they v/ould feel there was 
something supernatural about him. On the other hand, 
the fact that he was an apparently innocent child of 
tender years would tend to dispel such fears. In the 
interview, Athalie shows herselfmore human than ever 
Agrippine seems possible of being. She is first 
surprised by the precocity of the child and his guile¬ 
less wisdom, and then touched--she is drawn to him in 
someway unknown to herself. She wonders if she is not 
becoming weak: 

r, Q,uel prodige nouveau me trouble et li^embarasse? 

La douceur de sa voix, son enfance, sa grace, 

Font insensiblement a mon inimitie 
Succeder.»,.Je serais sensible a la pitie?" 

( "Athalie” —Act II, Sc. 7) 
but it is only a faint glimmering of her maternal 
instinct, long since dormant or dead. Her subsequent 
offer to adopt him might have been partly suggested by 
the sweet nature of the child, without Athalie herself 
realizing it. Undoubtedly, her possession of the child 
would of necessity put him in her power and assure fur¬ 
ther safety to her. It is quite possible too, that 
such maternal instinct which had come to life for a 

























67 


moment would have been extinguished for good, if she 
had obtained the child, and was able to rest from these 
terrors which had just filled her mind. It is difficult 
to conceive of anything else from a woman whose life 
was so blackened by deeds almost too awful to mention. 

On the other hand, she had been brought up in all the 
pagan beliefs which existed, and knew no other. What Joas 
might have been able to accomplish in her life, now 
growing less strong in resistance with increasing 
years, it is difficult to say. The powers of an 
innocent child are great. How true to human nature is 
Racine in the next phase of Athalie f s mental life. 

When she finds she cannot have what she wants, she 
immediately thinks (and to think is to act) of revenge. 
Athalie lived in a country where even the worshippers 
of the Lord Jehovah, including the High Priest, guided 
their life by the ancient law of an eye for an eye, 
and a tooth for a tooth. Athalie therefore, had some 
excuse, not having learned of tj (Mristian doctrine of love. 
Her final attitude is possibly worthy of some 
admiration. At least, she has courage, or was it bra¬ 
vado? 

"On vient a mon secours, Tremblez, troupe rebelle 
And her parting words: 

Dieu des Juifs, tu l T emportes. 























- 

























68 



Q.u’il regne done ce fils, ton soin et ton ou vrage: 

Et que pour signaler son empire nouveau 
On lui fasse en mon sein enforcer le couteau." 

("Athalie" --Act V, Sc. 6) 

If the latter, it was at least to save her self-respect. 
And so, like a trapped animal, she goes to her death. 

Andromaque and Clytemnestre illustrate a passion 
which has always been strong in the human race, and 
always will he --that is, strong maternal love. Both 
find the life of their offspring threatened, and both 
are ready to go to any lengths within their power to 
save them. Again, of course, the situations are 
different. Nowadays, at least in the civilized would,n 0 
woman would be called upon to marry a man when she felt 
strongly opposed to it, or lose her child by death as 
a result--although such things as forced marriages 
were not so rare even in the 19th century. And we need 
only to read Dickens to find out in what light esteem 
Children were held. At the same time, however, we have 
no reason to believe that the mother of the children 
then, did not do all that was in their power to pro¬ 
tect them. But in the 20th century, so much value 
is attached to child life that it is' difficult to con¬ 
ceive of any such situation as Andromaque f s arising, 
even though the objectionable husband may not be a 
prince. Clytemnestre 1 s situation is probable, though 
less likely, since the beginning of the twentieth 







, 

♦ 
















69 


century--the sacrificing of a child to its father 1 s 
ambition. We have all heard of men willing to gamble 
their last cent in the great chance of getting fabulous 
wealth, at the same time depriving their families of 
even necessities of life, not to mention means of 
satisfying children 1 s hopes for their own future. This 
is somewhat parallel. 

How has Racine treated these two mothers? Is his 

knowledge of maternal love as true as for social 

ambition? In ’Andromaque’, he strikes his note at once. 

The queen first appears on her way to visit her child, 

when she is intercepted by Pyrrhus; 

"Je passais jusqu’aux lieuxou 1’ on garde mon fils, 
Puisqu’une fois le jour vous souffrez que je voie 
Le seul bien que me reste d f Hector et de Troie 
J’allais, Seigneur, pleurer un moment avec lui:" 

('Andromaque "--Act I, Sc. 4) 

After having remarked that the Greeks, if they still 
fear her baby, have found a worthy object for their 
fear, she is made apprehensive at once by the news that 
Orestes has come to urge the infant’s death. She 
pleads with Pyrrhus--she draws attention to her own 
sorrow, at the same time guile lessly asking for flattdy 
and then she flatters him--to do as she wants, "were 
conduct that befits Achilles’ son”. Once more referring 
to her tears and troubles, she finally decides that her 
child had better die, and she with him. Here she wins 
her point. Pyrrhus had not yet made his final decision. 


































































70 


To her sorrow however, she later learns that he, after 
all, will sacrifice her child and marry Hermione. 

Again she seeks Pyrrhus. She reminds him of all his 
earlier promises-- 

Ah, Seigneur, arretezj Q,ue pretendez-vous faire? 

Vos serments m f ont tantot jure tant d’amitiej 

Vous qui braviez pour moi tant de perils divers* 

( "Andromaque" --Act III, Sc. 6) 

--is his word worthless? All her troubles are due to 
him. Again she tells him she must die if the child does 
Pyrrhus, very unsteady in his mind, is easily moved to 
tell her he will give her one more chance. Left with 
Cephise, Andromaque reviews all the troubles she has 
been through since the war on Troy. The memory pains 
her beyond relief but this is nothing as compared with 
the thought of the death for her son. She almost loses 
control. Then the thought of her husband’s tomb 
steadies her. She goes there and arrives at her great 
decision. Thus Racine has led us truly and accurately 
through the paths of a woman’s mind. Moreover, he has 
made them so important that all the action of the 
play depends on them. 

Clytemnestre’s problem is less complicated. She 
has only her daughter to think of. She has no other 
loyalty which is pulling her in an opposite direction, 
for she thinks at first that her husband is one with her 
She arrives at the camp in all joy andpride at the 












- 










































. 





















71 


thought that her child loves and is to be married to a 

distinguished man, one whom she has chosen herself-- 

when like a thunderbolt comes the news that the marriage 

is to be deferred. Her pride is insulted no less for 

her daughter than for herself. And she makes it evident 

in her bitter words to Sriphile, who she thinks has 

/ 

caused the breaks 

Je ne vous presse, Madame, de nous suivre; 

En de plus cheres mains ma retraite vous livre: 

De vos desseins secrets on est trop eclairci; 

Et ce n’est pas Galchas que vous cherchez ici. 

( "Iphijenie" —Act II, Sc. 4) 

Her happiness is restored once more by the bridegroom 
himself, only to be disturbed again by the command from 
the king that she must stay away from the ceremony. What 
can be the meaning of this? Yet, as long as her daughter 
is to have her joy fulfilled, she will submit. Iphygenie 
is all that matters. Then, horror of horrors, she learns 
the truth. Her child is to be the sacrifice to the 
gods, in order that the fighting heroes may have fair 
winds. Preposterous thought’ But she will do anything 
to prevent this ghastly deed. She, a queen, casts 
herself on the ground before Achillesr, and begs him, 
their only hope, to save them. She endures an agony as 
she hears Iphygenie, though unhappy, defend her father. 
Will the child be foolish enough to prevent opposition 
to him? Yet she admires her filial tenderness, and 












■ 








































* 

















72 


listens to her speak to Agamemnon, and agreed to obey 

him. But when her husband accepts this sacrifice, and 

in bland terms, bids her go--the Greeks will appreciate 

what he is sacrificing--her passion breaks forth, and 

finds expression in her great reproach. Then her 

imagination carries her away. She sees boorish hands 

laid on her daughter, and the curious reading the 

future in her quivering heart: 

..AhJ toute ma raison 

Cede a la cruaute de cette trahison. 

Un prdtre, environne d'une foule cruelle, 

Portera sur ma fille une main criminelle, 

Dechirera son sein et d T un oeil curieux, 

Bans son coeur palpitant consultera les Dieux. T 

( "Iphigenie" --Act IV, Sc. 4) 

In a burst of anguish and fury, she throv/s herself upon 
Iphigenie and challenges Agamemnon to tear her away. 

Then, again this poor woman is doomed to disappointment. 
Having received permission to escape with Iphigenie, 

(we can imagine her relief) she is betrayed and brought 
back. She prepares to fight or to kill if necessary, 
but finally Iphigenie goes. Clytemnestre undergoes all 
untold throes of agony while she waits for the outcome. 
She knows Achille will defend his fiancee to the death. 
But what is one among so many enemies? Areas comes 
to lead her to the scene, if she is not afraid: 







































































73 


Arcas-Venez, puisqu’il tait, venez par vos discours 
De votre defenseur appuyer le secours. 

Lui-meme de sa main, de sang toute fumante, 

II veut entre vos bras remettre son amante; 
Lai-meme il m f a cha.rge de conduire vos pas. 

He craignez rien. 

Clyt.- ..Moi, craindre? Ahi courons, cher Areas, 

Le plus affreux peril n f a rien dont je palisse, 
J f irai partout. 


( "Iptogenie" --Act V, Sc. 5) 

She will dare anything. But who is this? It is Ulysse. 
They are too late, and Ipbgenie is dead. But no, 

Ulysse comes with marvellous news of a miracle. Eriphile 
is the required victim, and Iptiggnie is safe. Her relief 
is so great that she can say nothing but express her 
thanks for what Achille has done: 

’’Par quel prix, quel encens, o ci el] puis je jamais 
Recompenser Achilles, et payer tes bienfaits?" 

("Ipbfeenie" --Act V, Sc. 6) 

Love is the great passion of all the remaining 
characters of Racine. They can be divided into two 
classes—those whose love is passionate and furious, 
and which leads its victims to crime--and those whose 
love is gentle, meek, subdued, patient, but none the 
less strong. In the first group we find Phedre, Hermione, 
Roxane, and perhaps Eriphile. These have nothing in 
common with Lady Macbeth, but they may have some 
resemblance to. women we know, or have heard of. Society 
has changed and all people have more control, so that no 






































74 


attack of love would be so spectacular as in the days 
when it was allowed to run loose. But, nevertheless, 
there are many young girls who will do anything, will 
use flattery, guile, deceit, in order to win to them¬ 
selves the man upon whom they have set their heart. 

In these examples ofpassionate love, Racine has 
more scope, so to speak, to develop his characters 
psychologically. Phedre is drawn particularly well. 

She is regarded by many critics as Racine f s master¬ 
piece. She is never truly happy all through the play, 
which shows how love is ruthless. But she knows from 
the beginning that her love cannot be sanctioned. How 
can she help it, though? Even though it has made her ill, 
she loves, and can do nothing. At first she did try to 
be true to herself, as an honest, natural woman. But 
who can prevail against the gods, ^hen they are seeking 
vengeance? And so Racine shows us the inner workings 
of her mind or rather all the fluctuations of it, as 
circumstances change. Prom. her desolate state of utter 
hopelessness, she moves to a certain amount of relief, 
with the news of the death of Thesee. It gives her the 
opportunity of unloading her burden, as she confesses 
to Hippolyte. But this does not help her a great deal 
for he, amazed, receives her coldly, and she is wounded 
afresh. Her passion becomes a frenzy, and she would 
kill herself if not prevented: 



















































































75 


Tenge-toi,. punis-moi d*un odieux amoulr. 

Digne fils du heros qui t f a donne le jour, 

Delivre l'univers d f un monstre qui t'irrite. 

La veuve de Thesee ose aimer Hippolyte.' 

Crois-moi, ce monstre affreux ne doit point t'echapper. 
Voila mon coeur, C'est la que ta main doit frapper. 
Impatient de v ja d'expier son offense, 

Au-devant de ton bras je le sens qui s'avance. 

Frappe. Ou si tu le crois indigne de tes coujjs, 

Si ta haine m f envie un supplice si doux, 

Ou si d f un sang trop Vil ta main serait trempee, 

Au defaut de ton bras prete-moi ton ep6e. 

Donne. 


("Phedre" -- Act II, Sc. 5) 

But such is the strength of love, she will not let 
Oenone blame him in any way afterwards. She is re¬ 
assured in the thought that Hippolyte hating all women, 
she will at least have no rival. Then, to her dismay, 
Thesee returns. What has she done? --confessed her guilt 
unnecessarily. If she had not spoken, at least she 
would have died knowing that her sin was secret. But 
now--she imagines Hippolyte gloating over her downfall, 
for he must hate her. And so through all the terrible 
thoughts that come to her--until, when Oenone suggests 
that Hippolyte be forestalled by being accused, she 
is too exhausted to resist, although it is contrary 
to her standards of right. But when she has had time to 
think this over, its full significance dawns upon her, 
and she is overwhelmed with remorse. How can she let 
the innocent suffer--especially one whom she loves. 

Better would- it be to die, at least free of still another 
sin. But the goddess who seeks vengeance will not let 










































. 
















76 


her have this solace. Phedre learns that she has a 
rival, and consumed with jealousy, she forgets her good 
intention of vindicating him. Racine here shows his 
great skill in depicting passion in its most unbridled 
form. She feels that she hates Aricie with all her 
being; she plans her death. But almost immediately, 
her innategoodness asserts itself, and she realizes 
the enormity of her desires. The pendulum swings the 
other way. Torrents of abuse are heaped upon Oenone’s 
head: 

"Je ne t’ecoute plus. Va-t f en, monstre execrable," 
she takes poison in her fit of repentance and confesses 
to Thesee too late. 

Just as passionate are Hermione and Roxane, and 
more legitimately so. Hermione is even officially 
engaged and has every right to expect happiness from 
the man she loves. But alas for her, Andromaque 
appears and the affections ofPyrrhus are transferred. 

So that, even if her behaviour is extreme, it is justif¬ 
iable. Howefcer#,Pyrrhus behaves like a cad to her 
and does not deserve the unswerving devotion she gives 
to him: "Je t f aimais inconstant; qu'aurais-je fait 
fidele?" It may be argued that her treatment of 
Oreste is not above criticism, but nowhere do we find 
that she has ever encouraged him in his affections: 


























' 



























77 


"(Vest cet amour paye de trop d ! ingratitude 

Q,ui me rend en ces lieux sa presence si rude, 

Est-ce la^ dira-t-il, cette fiere Hermione? 

Elle me dedaignait." 

("Andromaque" --Act II, Sc. 1) 

His passion for her is something like that of Phedre. 

It has seized him in its grip, and has affected his health, 
It is almost deadly in its fatality. Hermione is glad 
to see him when he comes to Pyrrhus’ court, because 
she knows his fidelity, and it is comforting to feel 
there is someone who will die for you even though you 
may not recipricate the emotion. Moreover, she has 
begun to be very worried over Pyrrhus’ behaviour. Up 
to now she has only suspected, but now, she is almost 
convinced. She has attracted the attention of the 
Greeks to the existence of Andromaque’s child and now she 
tries to persuade Oreste to stir them up further. 

Racine shows himself an admirable psychologist in his 
portrayal of her vacillations between despair and hope, 
as she speaks to Cleone of Pyrrhus. She is convinced 
of his love for Andromaque, and therefore is in des¬ 
pair, yet because he knows his duty he may come back to 
hers. Therefore, she will not leave Epirus, even though 
she has sufficient encouragement to do so: 

»..Mais si l’ingrat rentrait dans son devoir.’ 

Si la foi dans son coeur retrouvait quelque place.’ 

S’il venait a mes pieds me demander sa grace’ " 

("Andromaque" --Act II Sc, l) 









. 

- 












. 










































78 


Then Pyrrhus behaves in the most despicable manner 
possible. We have seen how his actions change with 

Andromaque’s changes of mind. Is it any wonder that 

Hermione is at first stunned and then wrought to such a 

pitch that murder seems a little thing? She is entirely 

incapable of seeing the other side of the question, the 

Greek side, as Oreste does. How would a modern girl 

act in similar circumstances? I think she would have 

behaved precisely as Hermione did up to a point. She 

would have passed through all the uncertainties and 

agonies and hopes of mind; she would refuse to leave 

as long as Pyrrhus was unmarried. But it is hardly 

likely that she would have had the man she loved killed, 

however* much she felt like murder. Having been taught 

by society that it is expedient and the proper thing 

to control oneself to a certain extent she would have 

given way to a tremendous outbreak of tears, laments 

and reproaches, and then submitted with a broken heart. 

She may have married the other man who wanted her. 

In the rare case, she may have committed suicide. 

But Hermione’s mental processes, while she is waiting, 

and after she knows of the success of Oreste T s attempt, 

are quite natural. At first, she is still in the heat 

of her passion. She thinks she hates Pyrrhus. "Je 

l’ai trop aime pour ne le point hair.' 1 Ho words are 

bad enough for Oreste if he should be cowardly enough 






























' 
































79 


to withdraw. But when she knows that her lover is 
really dead, the reality of what has occurred breaks 
upon her, and like Phedre, she turns upon the one who was 
willing to sacrifice his life for her, and bids him 
never to appear before her again. The unfairness of it 
cannot occur to her, for she is not in her normal mind, 
and is absolutely incapable of reasoning. Still in the 
heat of her passion and with repentance burning within 
her, she rushes out and kills herself on the dead body 
of her beloved. Such is Racine f s reward for too strong 
an indulgence in passion. 

Roxane's passion, like Hermione's is entirely 
unbridled, once it roused, and it will stop at nothing. 
Unlike Hermione, her nature is not truly girlish and 
pure. How could it be, living in the environment of a 
Turkish seraglio? The first stages of her love are 
natural and ordinary enough—except that the situation 
would be an impossible one in western countries. She 
loves Bajfizet with a certain amount of trust, expecting 
the affection to be returned. Her love differs from 
Hermioneis, Hermione, in the height of her passion 
remains a young noble princess, conscious of her dignity. 
Roxane f s love is sensual, voluptuous, and when roused 
she shows all the objectional qualities of the Turkish 
harem. She puts at the service of her love, all her 
generosity, then her tricks, then her power. She makes 











’ 



















































80 


love with a poignard in her hand. She passes from 
fierce love to suspicion, then to certainty that she is 
not loved. The play depends on the actions of her mind 
and their results. Prom her discovery of the letter 
and the sure knowledge that Atalide and Bajazet love each 
other, she is consumed with jealousy, her own love turns 
to hate, (although occasionally a glimmer of her love 
returns to her) and she makes another effort to retain 
Bajazet, But at what a price* : 

Ma rivale est ici; suis-moi sans dif£erer; 

Bans les mains des muets viens la voir expirer: 

Et lihre d*un amour a: ta gloire funeste, 

Viens m’engager ta foi; le temps fera le reste. 

Ta grdce est a ce prix, si tu veux l f obtenir. 

("Bajazet" --Act V, Sc. 4) 

All the harshness and cruelty of the east come to the 
surface. This, combined with her anger at white heat 
intensity, result in only the most barbarous deeds. 

Racine in this instance, shows himself acquainted with 
local color. Consider: At her final offer to Bajazet 
to live, and his refusal, she utters the terrible, 
"SortezJ" knowing that it is irrevocable, and that the 
mutes wait without. And next, at the trembling* but 
courageous visit of Atalide to offer herself as 
sacrifice, what is her reply? --sweet words with a 
cruel meaning: 

















. 




- 























81 


"Je ne merite pas un si grand sacrifice; 

Je me connais, Madame, et je me fais justice; 

Loin de vous separer, je pretends aujourd'hui, 

Par des noeuds eternels vous unir avec !>ui . 

Vous jouirez bientot de son aimable vue. 

("Bajazet" --Act V, Sc. 6) 

The trembling Atalide doubts, and would know only too 
well the meaning, if fate itself did not cut short 
Roxane f s life, and check the evil intention. Passion 
thus urged to its extremity cannot fail to inspire 
apprehension in the spectator of the play. 

Atalide and Eriphile also meet tragic ends, though 
by their own hands. Atalide, poor thing, is the sport 
of fate. She has loved Bajazet tenderly from childhood, 
but now she finds herself in an embarrassing situation-- 
though tragic for her, it contains an element of comic. 
She is forced to make love to him on behalf of her 
mistress. At first it is a delightful situation. She 
can indulge as much as she likes--the more ardent she 
is, the better pleased will Roxane be. Moreover, the 
unusualness of the situation adds a thrill--it is a sort 
of forbidden fruit which she is tasting. But, when 
Roxane declares herself uncertain of Bajazet*s 
affections, and her intentions to marry him, Atalide*s 
fears are aroused. Supposing Roxane should win the love 
of Bajazet: 

Tout ce qu’il a pu dire, il a pu le penser, 
Peut-etre en la voyant, plus sensiblepour elle, 

II a vu dans ses yeufc, quelque grace nouvelle. 

("Bajazet" --Act III, Sc. 3.) 





* 


— 









■ 

- 

. 





































82 


A 


r 


-V 


o 






Even while she thinks this, she realizes its folly, 
for Bajazet has always been faithful to her. His love 
is the one solid thing in her uncertain life, and his 
life must be protected. Therefore she persuades him 
to submit to Roxane’s imperious demands--and to please 
her he agrees. Once he is out of her sight, her fears 
come to life again. He may be too fervent in his 
avowals—Roxane’s beauty may fill his mind. Racine might 
almost have been a woman himself, he knows her emotions 
and her mind so well. So that, Atalide, by her 
unnecessary alarms and suspicions and reproaches to 
Bajazet, who, by the way, remains very constant, is 
the cause of her own and her lover’s betrayal. If only 
she could have kept calm, and used her head as much as 
her heart, she would at least have been able to pre¬ 
serve his life for some little while—she would not 
have had to reproach herself for being the means of 
his death; her own mou^iful end would thereby have been 
avoided. 

We have less sympathy with Eriphile, whose 
character is not so straightforward. It is true that 
Atalide is forced to deception all through the play, 
but it is against her inclination. She is naturally 
open and frank, as far as was customary in Turkey. 
Eriphile is a young captive princess who does not know 
her own parentage, and who is in love with her captor 









, 










* 








. 

■ 





„ 

. 

. 








# 










83 


Achille, and at the same time jealous of her benefactress 
Iphigenie. This jealousy has meanness and spite attached 
to it, and causes her to betray the attempted flight 
of Iphigenie from the altar of sacrifice. Since this, 
however, does not prove satisfying enough, she herself 
goes to the high priest, demands revelation of her 
origin, and finds that she is the sacrifice destined 
by the gods. Since henceforth, her life will be empty 
for her except for the shame which she discovers is 
hers, she kills herself. Eriphile’s acts are consis¬ 
tently objectionable. If she were a mature woman, she 
would have little of our sympathy. But her youth, her 
unjust misfortunes, and her courage make us lenient, 
and lessen for us the horror which she inspires. 

Racine shows himself the true poet of gentle love 
in his portrayal of the characters ofJunie, Aricie, 
Iphigenie, Monime, and Berenice. Although with all of 
them, love was their consolation in life, none of them 
were as passionate as any of the women discussed up to 
this point. This may be because all were confident 
that their love was returned. We have no opportunity 
of seeing how they would behave under the pain of 
unrequited love. Nor are any of these criminal in 
their minds. Consequently, everyone ispermitted to 
remain alive at the end of the play, although all do 
not get the fulfilment of their desire. The varying 




* 


- 




. 

■ 

, 
















































84 


endings of the plays are such that we cannot rejoice, 
for the atmosphere is either too sad or tragic or 
awful; hut at least, we are consoled in the thought 
that they suffer no violence. And Racine shows his 
versatility in making them all individual. Junie has 
heen officially betrothed to Brwtannicus, and fortun¬ 
ately their mutual love is genuine. The misfortunes 
of the young man only strengthen Junie ! s love. Yet 
there is a gloom about their fate, as if danger 
threatened. Courageously, she faces Heron and obeys 
him merely to save Britannicus, She is never at ease, 
and when the doom comes, which she expects, her gentle 
nature causes her to become a Vestal virgin rather than 
to kill herself. Aricie, a young girl also, is con¬ 
fident that her love is returned. There is no gloom 
about her love, but rather pride, for she has been 
able to move to affection the "sauvage Hippolyte" 
until now adamant against women’s charms. This is the 
greater joy to her, for she is of a scorned family, and 
is held captive by Thesee, Her life has not been too 
severe, however, and she receives with the right amount 
of archness the declarations of Hippolyte. 

’’Partez, Prince, et suivez vos genereux desseins. 



Rendez de mon pouvoir Athenes tr^butaire. 

J’accepte tous les dons que vous 'me voulez faire. 
Mais cet empire enfin si grand, si glorieux, 

H’est pas de Slos presents le plus cher a mes yeux. 


("Phedre" --Act II, Sc. 3) 




















* 





85 


She also is courageous enough to consent to an elopfoent 
with him, provided it is attended with all the necessary 
conventions. Her love is strong enough to maintain her 
trust in her lover, in spite of the bl«ck slander which 
even his father too easily believes. Her reproaches 
to Thesee are truly of a girl who has been matured by 
love. Her grief is genuine at the death of Hippolyte. 
Iphig€nie, the simple native girl, also strong in her 
nobility of race and the love of her fiance, has 
sorrows brought upon her by the instrumentality of 
external agencies. Happy in the hope of her immediate 
wedding, her joy is destroyed by the news that she must 
die at the wish of her father. And so strong is her 
affection for this father, that she will not permit any¬ 
one to reproach him, not even her beloved. He is in 
his right to command her, and it is her duty to obey. 

She is tragically sad, for the cruelties of the world 
are strange and harsh news to her; but she is strong in 
her sense of right. She is generous and forgiving, and 
blames herself severely at the thought that she has 
wronged Eriphile, Her devotion to her mother is no 
less strong. Her joy at the end of the play is her just 
reward, but Racine has indicated her sensitive nature 
so well, that we feel her happiness will be modified 
by sad brooding over the fa,te of Eriphile. Monime is 
perhaps the most perfect a.nd exquisite of Racine T s 


























. 



























































86 


1 jetines filles'. The daughter of a king, she has been 
given as a gift to the old Mithridate, but she makes no 
resistance. Like Iphig£nie she feels it is her duty to 
obey, whether she becomes slave or queen. But beneath 
this submissive exterior, circumstances have roused a 
silent revolt within her heart. Whatever may be the 
noise and injustice of the world, it cannot reach this-- 
it is her own. Her love for Xiphares is pure, noble 
and sincere, but she-will not yield to it as long as 
Mithridate lives and commands her. When Mithridate, 
however, feels this wordless resistance and is angered 
thereby, and by a trick forces her to betray herself, 
she considers herself freed from her obligations, and 
frankly and courageously tells him so. Her speech to 
him is full of good sense a,nd logic. She can never 
be his wife, she says, for he, knowing her secret, 
would always suspect her of disloyalty; at the same 
time she would never be able to forget the shame of this 
forced avowal, and even her obedience to him would not 
be genuine. So that she is now free to let^heart feel 
as it will, even though death be the result. How thank¬ 
fully she receives the poison that the angered king, in 
a fit of passion sends her--she is thankful because she 
thinks her lover is doomed, too. What her joy really is 
when she learns that Mithridate is making true the promise 
he uttered in cruelty, we can only imagine--for it is 
































































































87 


tempered by sincere sympathy and pain for the dying 
warrior. But never once does she lose the modesty, 
self-respect and dignity which malce her one with the 
chaste, though older Andromapue. 

I have left Berenice till last, for she illustrates 
perhaps the best with Phedre, Racine’s power as a 
psychologist. The play of ’Berenice’ has the least 
action of any of Racine’s plays, and it follows most 
closely the theory, which Racine defines in his preface 
to the play--"Toute 1’invention consiste a faire quelque 
chose de rien". In this respect '’Berenice’' is the most 
charcicteristic of all Racine’s plays. The subject 
matter is simply a lover about to take leave of his 
sweetheart for good. Ho other author would have attenpt- 
ed to build a five-act tragedy on such a meagre found¬ 
ation. Yet Racine does it, and does it successfully. 

But action is necessary to a full-length tragedy. Racine 
supplies it in the mental processes of Berenice, Titus 
and Antiochus, the two other main characters in the play, 
can be called stations^. They are of certain opinion, 
or hold a definite set of ideas at the beginning of the 
play and they do not change throughout. Titus has just 
been made emperor, and realizes that this, according to 
Roman law, will forbid him from marrying Berenice. He 
knows this at the beginning of the play and it is only 
nis hesitation, or lack of decision to tell Berenice, that 







■ 
















































88 


is the cause of the mental activity, or changes in her 
mood, which gives rise to the play. He knows all the 
time what he is going to do, and not even she can change 
him. Antiochus likewise at the beginning of the play, 
knows that he loves the queen, but that she does not 
return his love. He knows her love for Titus is so 
strong that it would never be transferred to him. So 
he remains the unwanted lover, bemoaning his fate all 
through. Titus and Antiochus are consequently rather 
uninteresting. But Berenice constantly changes. Once 
the action begins, she is engaged in a "lutte morale 1 ' 
throughout. Her love is opposed to her rival, in this 
case, Rome, since it dares to offer itself as an 
obstacle to the fulfilment of her joy. The Romans' 
hatred of foreign royalty, the strong sense of duty of 
Titus, both challenge her in this combat. To quote G. 
Michaud, in his work on "Berenice", "il lui faut a travers 
tant d'emotion, passer de l'esperance serein a 1*in¬ 
quietude, de 1*inquietude a la douleur, de la douleur 
au desespoir, du desespoir a la colere, de la colere a 
1'admiration, de 1*admiration a 1 1 acceptation volontaire 
d'une separation si longtemps repousaee". Let us examine 
these various stages. Her "espersfance serein is very 
obvious at the beginning of the play. She is full of joy¬ 
ous hope in the marriage which has been promised to her 
for five years. We even hear how hopeful she is before 




























































89 

we see her. Antiochus tells us about it and she con¬ 
firms it herself when she appears. Moreover, in her 
interview with Antiochus, she is kindly because of 
strong assurance in the happiness that is hers--so much 
so that she repels his timorous advancesft--in spite of 
the advice of Phenice, who reminds her that Titus has not 
yet declared himself, and is evidently of the opinion that 
it is better to have several strings to one's bow. 

Finally she sees Titus, but to her amazement, he is 
rather distant with her. In reality, he wants to broach 
the unpleasant news to her but in the fear of hurting 
her, hedges and hesitates till she does not know what 
to think of him. This is the beginning of her 
"inquietude". What can she have done to displeas€&% 
him? Perhaps she has not been effusive enough in the 
acceptance of his gifts. She even glimpses for a 
moment the real reason: 

"H'est-ce point que de Rome il redoute la haine? 

II craint peut-£tre, il craint d'6pouser une reine; 

H^lasJ s'il etait vrai; mais, non, il a cent fois 

Rassure mon amour contre leurs dures lois." 

but dismisses it in favour of jealousy. Titus must have 
heard of Antiochus' advances. This is Some consolation 
to her: 

"Si Titus est jaloux, Titus est amoureux." 

("Berenice" --Act II, Sc. 5) 

But alas, Antiochus comes with the sad news, which 
Titus has delegated to him. She is very pained. How 




























■ 














90 


can Titus, or Rome, or anyone be so eruel to her, who 
has never harmed any one? But alas, Titus himself comes 
and confirms what Antiochus has said. What is her 
reaction? Her first impulse is to struggle; he is un¬ 
fair; he should not have permitted her to reach this 
point without warning her. Of course, she is perfectly, 
right here. The more she thinks about this, the more 
hopeless she gets. The future holds nothing for her 
now; the break will be for ever. He is cruel, "un 
ingrat", "un barbare." Eventually, she works herself 
into the “colere". The only thing left to her is to 
die. But she will avenge herself at the same time-- 
because she knows her death will make him unhappy. This 
psychological development is sufficient for a tragedy, 
and the play could end here--the separation is complete. 
But Racine wants more. He has decided that the moral 
evolution of Berenice’s soul is necessary to complete 
the action of his drama. And so Titus, on discovering 
the letter and her intentions, shov/s himself very hurt. 
She has no right to treat him thus, but if she insists 
on dying, he can die too, and prove his love: 

“Si vos pleurs plus longtemps viennent frapper ma vue, 
Si toujours a mourir je vous vois resolue, 

S’il faut qu f g£ tous moments je tremble pour vos jours, 
Si vous ne me jurez d’en respecter le cours, 

Madame, a d’autres pleurs vous devez vous attendre; 

En l’etat ou je suis, je puis tout entreprendre, 

Et je ne reponds pas que ma main a vos yeux 
IT* ensanglante a la fin nos funestes adieux.“ 

(“Berenice“ 


--Act V, Sc. 6) 






■ 

. 


. 











' 




, 



















' 




















91 

Berenice had not expected this and she is moved. At 
this moment, Antiochus comes and explains himself. 

Not knowing the state of affairs between Titus and Beren¬ 
ice U_0 _aa>_£_B Loo. kJ JdtX- JiA-fje. , AXxjt 

KibiXa AX**** Hut « (X. cf cka-^v^ " 

ice^is profoundly touched by so much heroism about her. 
Can she not rise to such heights of sacrifice too? 

Yes indeed; 

”Je veux en ce moment 

Par un dernier effort couronner tout le reste, 

Je vivrai, je suivrai vos ordres absolus." 

( "Berenice" —Act V, Sc. 7) 

She will resign herself to live, away from her Titus, 
provided that both he and Antiochus will live also, 

'•Tout est fini par ce consentement, et la tragedie, 
que seule a prolonge la resistance de Berenice, 
se termine quand Berenice s’est resignee", Thus it is 
still Berenice who guides all the action. HerS is the 
will, or rather the love which removes the obstacles 
which retard the denouement. She dominates the whole 
of this melancholy, elegiac play. 

We have come to the end of our study. Lady Macbeth 
is really too profound for ordinary people to understand 
in her entirety. But everything she does, every move¬ 
ment of her mind is logical and natural and true, and 
if we look, we can find it duplicated in the world about 
us. The situations in which Racine *s women are found 
are probable and natural enough, but their passions carry 
them too far. Though realistic to a certain extent, 
his world is not really a copy of ours—it is an ex¬ 
tension. The harshness and the common-place are refined 









U^tC" ^m-U~ c,c^T • W-^u^ Lr*^ 4^ N ^ 

'^^r' 4 ^ 1 -) VM>^ ^|(^ /'i'vL.J ^ cl~ “b 9 J,~ - \i *vi ^ ^ 

'^ v ^» lrv ^*-<^«-o». (/a^ . 

,r Lt> 10 tr{f^<^ a_-_^ - c&s^l^ 

Its Ur-^^ ^ LH^sU to jw^ -eA^u*%J2* 


U 


0 






92 


and even sin is transmuted into something beyond our 
reach. However, in spite of Racine f s many excellences, 
he cannot be ranked close to Shakespeare. The dramatic 
limitations of his day not only affected his choice of 
subject, but forbade him to make his heroes really heroic 
or his passionate characters utterly passionate. When 
placed beside the warm, living creations of Shakespeare, 
and some even of Corneille, his characters are cold, 
artificial, unreal. They may move the audience to tears, 
but the emotion is transient; one has not the effect 
of having passed through a new, though perhaps terrible 
experience, and having been purified by it. There are 
no deep-seated reactions, no agony of soul--nothing 
beneath the heart, unless it be in I J hedre. Athalie 
approaches it. Racine*s enforced narrov/ness, to which 
he did not apparently object, as did Corneille, caused 
him' to choose only an artificial and conventional 
fraction of the whole world at his disposal. One might 
reasonably feel that Shakespeare could have written the 
'•Plaideurs", but Racine could never have written anyt¬ 
hing so airily light as "As You Like It”. At the 
same time, the work that Racine produced, within his 
limited confines is admirable, and to have become 
familiar with the extreme beauty of his verse is to have 
obtained a new happiness. 


rS 


I 






A k 




























' 

































93 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

MACKENZIEA-The Women in Shakespeare’s Plays; New York^ 

Page, 1924. 

BRADLEY--Shakespearian Tragedy; London, Macmillan—1910. 
HAZLITT--Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays (in his 
Lectures on the literature of the age of 
Elizabeth--1907.) 

JAMESON MRS.—Shakespeare’s Heroines; New York, 

A. L. Burt, n. d. 

CAMPBELL L.--Shakespeare’s Tragic Heroes; Cambridge 
University Press--1930. 

RALEIGH W.--Shakespeare; London, Macmillan--1907. 

DOTOEU and His Art; 3rd Edit.--N.Y.Harper 

1880. 

KNIGHT-G. --The Wheel of Pire--essays in interpretation 
of Shakespeare’s sombre tragedies; 

Oxford Univ. Press--1930. 

MASEPIELD J.--Willian Shakespeare; London, Williams, n.d 
LARROUMST G.--Racine; 3rd edr-Paris, Hachette, 1908. 
DESCHANEL E.—Racine; Paris, Colmann-Levy, 1891. 

MONCEAUX P.'—Racine; New ed.-Paris, Lecene n.d. 

LEMAITRE J --Impressions de Theatre; Paris, Societe 
frangaise d’imprimerie et de librairie- 
1392-1900 

MICHAUD G.--Le Berenice de Racine--1907. 

PAGUET--Etudes Litteraires--Litterature du 17th siecle; 
Paris; Boivin n.d. 

LANSON G.--Histoire de la Litterature Prangaise; 

3rd ed rev. Paris. Hachette, 1916. 

SAINT-BEUVE C.A. --Causeries de lundi, Paris, Garnier- 

n.d. 

STRACHEY G.L. --Books and Characters; London, Chatto, 
1929. 

Portraits in Miniature; London Chatto 
and Windus-1931. 



















