For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


SOME PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF PROTEINS 
by 

W. B. McConnell, B.Sc* 

Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta 



mm 



WamlWtu^-jr, 






























Qx UBIffiS 

arawiwais 











UNIVERSITY 


ALBERTA 


0 F 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


This is to certify that the undersigned have read 
and recommended to the Committee on Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis submitted by W. B. McConnell, B.Sc, 
entitled 


SOME PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF PROTEINS 


Professor 

Professor^/ 


Professor 









I 






Thesis 


SOME PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF PROTEINS 

Submitted in Partial Fulfilment 
of the 

Requirements for the degree of 

Master of Science 

by 

W. B. McConnell 

Under the direction of 

Dr* S. G. Davis 

Time spent on this work was ten months 


University of Alberta, 
Edmonton. 


April 1947. 





















university LIBRARY 
university of alberta 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


The author wishes to take this opportunity to extend 
sincere thanks to all those who have assisted in this 
investigation. 

To Dr* S. G. Davis, who directed this research and 
whose valuable suggestions, kindly criticism and generous 
assistance has been of great value* 

To Mr. G. Hodgson for timely suggestions and for 
co-operation on common problems. 

To Mr. R. Colvin for conductivity and electrophoresis 
measurements* 

To the Robert Tegler Trust Fund for the Research 
Scholarship which enabled the writer to carry on this 
investigation. 

To the Committee on Agricultural Research Grants for 
financial support* 

To the Department of Field Crops for the use of their 
facilities• 


To the Department of Chemistry for services and supplies 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/somephysicalpropOOmcco 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


1 General Introduction 1 

2 Fundamental Theories 3 

3 Semi-Permeable Membranes 10 

4 Methods for Measuring Osmotic Pressures 20 

5 Osmotic Pressure of Proteins 24 

6 PLANT PROTEINS 28 

7 PREPARATION OF MATERIALS 30 

8 APPARATUS AND PROCEDURE 37 

9 Factors to be Considered in Measuring 

Osmotic Pressure 48 

10 Results 59 

11 Appendix I Viscosity Measurements 78 

12 Appendix II 84 











































































SOME PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF PROTEINS 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 

Proteins belong to a group of the most complex 
of chemical substances. They are characterized by the fact 
that upon hydrolysis they yield a mixture of as many as 
twenty-six « amino acids, and are known to have molecular 
weights ranging from 16,000 and upwards. 

The structural pattern of protein molecules is 
not known in detail. Certain general features of their 
structure can be regarded as established and much is known 
about the relative amounts of the different amino acids 
contained in the molecule. The greatest problems in the 
structural chemistry of proteins are, however, still unsolved. 

Proteins are highly specialized molecules that 
can be formed only by living cells. The general elements in 
the fundamental pattern of structure are capable of wide 
variation in order to adapt them to their biological function. 
They vary greatly in size, shape and chemical composition. 

The proteins elaborated by plants are up to 
the present not so well known as those from animals. This is 







; 'irf ?(i' 


/ n: 




'i r v; i i 


•hk ■. 


■% 












■ 



■{ 













- 2 - 


probably due to the fact that many animal proteins are 
readily obtained in a relatively pure state and are more 
distinctive in properties and function. The medical profession 
has naturally been instrumental in much of the fundamental 
investigation related to animal proteins. 

The study of the physical chemistry of hemoglobin is 
an excellent example of the relation between the chemistry of 
a protein and its specialized function in the living organism. 
In the chemistry of plant proteins there is a very large field 
which as yet is largely untouched. As plant proteins become 
better known we may confidently expect to increase our under¬ 
standing of their functions and special adaptations. 
Investigations along this line will lead ultimately to the 
discovery of underlying relations fundamental both to the 
science of chemistry and to botany. 

The measurement of osmotic pressure has been used as 
a means of estimating the molecular weights of polymers and has 
been successfully adapted to use with protein solutions. 

It is with this approach to the measurement of the 
molecular weight of proteins that the work presented herein is 
largely concerned. 






- 3 - 

FUNDAMENTAL THEORY 

When a solution is separated from the pure solvent 
by a membrane which is perfectly permeable to the solvent but 
will allow no passage of the solute, the solvent will tend to 
pass into the solution. A membrane as described above is 
termed a perfect semi-permeable membrane. The theoretical 
development following is dependent upon the use of such a 
membrane. 


Consider two bags composed of semi-permeable 
material: (Fig. l). The bags, one containing a solution and 
the other containing the solvent, are suspended in a closed 
chamber. 


Solvent 


6 6 -* 


Solvent 
Vapor (Po) 


Figure 1. 


Solution 


The pure solvent will tend to vaporize until the 
pressure of solvent vapor in the chamber is identical with 
the vapor pressure of pure solvent at the temperature of th& 
apparatus. The vapor pressure of the solution, however, is 











- 4 - 


lower than that of the solvent, so that a point will be 
reached at which the solvent vapor will tend to condense into 
the solution. There will effectively be a distillation of 
solvent from pure solvent to solution. As this process 
continues there will be a hydrostatic pressure built up 
inside the bag containing the solution due to the additional 
liquid which has entered. A time will be reached when the 
increased pressure on the solution has raised its vapor 
pressure to the same magnitude as that of the solvent. There 
will no longer be any net transfer of material and the system 
will be in equilibrium. 

By considering the thermodynamics of this equilibrium 
system, it is possible to derive a relation between osmotic 
pressure and molecular weight. 

The work required to transfer one gram molecular weight 
of the solvent to the solution is 

Ph% 

where: 

= hydrostatic pressure inside the sac. 

= partial molar volume of solvent. 

If we consider the transfer to be carried out reversibly at 
constant temperature and pressure, the work done is equal to 
the free energy change. During this change we have changed 








O; 




















one mole of solvent from a vapor pressure of Po to a vapor 

pressure of Fl* The free energy of this process is 

BT In — 

P 


where 


P 0 = Vapor pressure of solvent 
P = Vapor pressure of solution 
Equating the two expressions for free energy we have 


&F = PhVi = KT In E° 


( 1 ) 


In order to eliminate the term -2. from equations (1) we may use 

P 

Raoult’s law* This law states that for dilute solutions 


p P - p = ^2 

Po n]_ + ri2 


where 

n]_ =s moles of solvent present 
n^ = moles of solute present 


Raoult’s equation may be rearranged to give 


P ° n l +n 2 


Substitution in equation (1) gives 
P. V, = -RT In El 

h 1 V n 2 


and 


P.V, = - RT In (1 - 2l ) 

h 1 n^+no 


( 2 ) 








- 6 - 


For dilute solutions n 2 is very small compared to and so the 

n 2 

natural logarithm is very nearly equal to - — 

n l +n 2 

Therefore 


p h v i = m 


(3) 


n l +n 2 


Osmotic pressure is defined as the additional pressure 

which must be applied to the solution in order to prevent a 

16 

transfer of material across the membrane . P^ is identical 
with osmotic pressure (P 0 p) and equation (3) can be written in 
the form 

p ££• _ n\ 

op \ n l +n 2 ^ 

V, is very nearly equal to ^_i 

Pi 

where = Molecular weight of solvent 
^ = Density of solvent 

For dilute solutions rig is very small compared to n^ and 

( n l+ n 2 ) is very nearly equal, to n^. 

Equation (4) may now be rearranged to give 

P op "Pi ^* p 2 (5) 

% n i 

% n 3 = w sig^t of solvent present (w^) 

ri 2 - number of moles of solute dissolved in wp grams of solvent 













t 

















■ ■ 




1 




\ 











- 7 - 


If we let be equal to 100 grains solvent, and C be the mass 

solute dissolved in 100 grams solvent then: 

C 

n 2 = M 2 

where 

M 2 = the molecular weight of solute 

By substituting for n-^ and for N 2 equation (5) becomes 

p 0 p = fi m 

100M 2 


If osmotic pressure is expressed in centimeters of 
water R has the value 

R = 22,414 x 76 x 13.597 

= 8.48 x 10^ c.c. cm. KLpO per degree 

where 

22,414 is molecular volume at 76.0 cm. of mercury pressure and 

13.597 is density of mercury at 0°G. Using the value 0.9970 as 

density of water at 25°, equation (6) may be written as a working 

equation for the special case where temperature is 25°G. 

0.9970 x 8./,8 x 10 4 x 278 . C 


* op 

100 

m 2 


II 

04 

o 

2.525 x 10 5 . | 2 


(7) 

«2 = 

2.525 x 10 5 x C 

P on 


(8) 


Equation (8) is a simple expression linking osmotic 







I '#1 


'■B; 











■ ■ ', T - L 










.s 

f 






- 8 - 

pressure and molecular weight. Concentration may be readily 
determined and since the osmotic pressure of materials such as 
proteins is of a convenient magnitude for laboratory measurement, 
this method has been frequently employed for estimating molecular 
weight. 

Dorman Equilibrium 

A factor which must be considered in an attempt to 
use osmotic pressure measurements to estimate molecular weight 
is that of a possible uneven distribution of buffer salts due to 
Donneu equilibrium. 

Bull^ gives a theoretical discussion of this effect 
in relation to the study of osmotic pressure of proteins and 
gives the following equation. 

Mo= i + £1 (9) 

(NaClJ i 1 C 2 i9; 

where 

(NaC^J 0 = equilibria salt concentration outside 
(NaCl) i = equilibrium salt concentration in protein solution 
= equivalent concentration protein ions 
C 2 = initial concentration of salt outside 


Examination of equation (9) reveals that if the 








V • . . 


I ■ ' i • ”■ 


' 






:o.; , ’ : 'b '■ i 






' • ; ;y 




> 




.y 

. 

. 




: v. 










> > ! ■' 






■ 














- 9 - 


concentration of charged protein particles is finite, there will 
be a greater concentration of salt outside than there is inside. 
It is also evident that as the equivalent concentration of salt 
becomes large compared to that of the protein, the right hand 
side of the equation approaches unity and the relative salt 
concentration gradient tends to disappear. 


If the protein is at its isoelectric point, it 
carries no net charge and does not give rise to an uneven salt 
distribution across the membrane with its consequent disturbing 
influence on osmotic pressure. It is therefore, common practice 
to make osmotic pressure measurements on proteins at their 
isoelectric points, and even in such cases'^ electrolyte is 
usually added to depress any possible Donnan equilibrium effects. 


39 

Wagner' has pointed out that osmotic pressure data 
obtained at the isoelectric point is often poor even in the 
presence of excess salts. He suggests that this is due to the 
fact that at this point the conditions of minimum solubility 
and maximum aggregation occur. He recommends that the hydrogen 
ion activity of the solution be buffered at a point about one 
pH unit from the isoelectric point of the protein and that a 
sufficient concentration of buffer be provided to reduce the 
osmotic oressure contribution due to diffusible ion to a small 











- 10 - 


value which, if significant, can be applied as a calculated 
correction. 

SEMI PERMEABLE MEMBRANE 

The successful measurement of osmotic pressure 
depends largely upon the performance of the membrane used in the 
determination. The ideal membrane, aside from the obviously 
necessary condition of semi-permeability, should have as high a 
rate of solvent transference as possible. The material should 
be such that it can be obtained or produced with a uniform and 
reproducible fine structure. 

The actual cause of semi-permeability is even at 
present somewhat obscure and a number of theories have been 
advanced regarding it. The earliest suggestion regarding the 
origin of serai-permeability was made by M. Traube in 1867, who 
thought such membranes acted as sieves, retaining the larger 
molecules but allowing the passage of the smaller ones. It is 
doubtful whether the sieve theory accounts completely for the 
behavior of these membranes. It has been stated for example, 
that membranes with pores many times larger in diameter than 
solute molecules are able to prevent the passage of the latter. 

A number of experiments have lead to the suggestion 






























- 11 


that semipermeability occurs when the solvent is soluble in the 

17 

membrane material but the solute is not . A simple experiment, 
which illustrates this point of view is to layer chloroform, 
water, and ether in a cylinder in the order given. The ether 
beihg soluble in water to an appreciable extent is able to pass 
through the water and down into the layer of chloroform. The 
chloroform owing to its insolubility in water is unable to reach 
the ether layer. The water is thus acting as a semipermeable 
membrane. A similar effect (Imitation of osmosis) occurs when 
an animal membrane well soaked in water is used to separate 
ether and benzene. 

It is not easy to understand how the above theory 

could be used to explain the passage of water through collodion 

as is the case with the osmotic pressure determinations being 

presented herein. Collodion and water appear to be highly 

insoluble in each other. In recent years the tendency has been 

to regard semipermeability as an absorption phenomenon. According 

to this view a membrane is supposed to be permeable to the 

molecules it absorbs positively but impermeable to those which 

37 

are negatively absorbed. 

This view, nevertheless, regards the pore size to 
be of considerable importance as the channels must be small 







- 12 - 


enough so that the materials therein will be under complete control 
of surface forces. 

There is probably no single theory which is capable 
of explaining the behavior of all types of membranes. 

Bull^ elects to divide artificial semipermeable 
membranes into two classes 

(1) Sieve membranes, such as cellophane and 
collodion. 

(2) Homogeneous membranes such as would occur 
when an oil phase separates two water phases. 

Pore Diameter . 

The term pore diameter is frequently employed when 
describing membranes. This term can be very misleading because 
it is quite likely that one is dealing with holes and cracks that 
have a great variation as to size, shape, and pathway through 
the material. In spite of this the "Average Pore Diameter" is 
determined. These measurements serve to characterize membranes 
and are useful in making qualitative estimates of their 
performance. It would be dangerous to interpret such results as 
absolute physical measurements. 


A calculation of average pore diameter involves 









- 13 - 


Poiseuille’s law of flow through circular capillaries. The 

6 

method requires the use of some rather questionable assumptions. 
Erbe^ has developed a method for measuring the pore size 
distribution in a membrane, although the method also involves 
many uncertainties, all studies on this distribution show the 
membranes to have a fairly wide range of pore diameters. The 
distribution follows that of a probability curve. 

Electrical Properties of Sieve Membranes 

29 

Michaelis observed that collodion membranes, which 
had been well dried so as to reduce them to very low porosity 
showed a differential permeability for cations and anions. The 
cations were able to penetrate at a greater rate than the anions. 
When potassium chloride solutions of different concentrations were 
placed on two sides of the membrane, a potential difference was 
observed across the membrane. With the more dense membranes at 
25°C this potential approached the theoretical limit of 
59 millivolts for a concentration gradient of 1 to 10 across the 
membrane. These membrane potentials were maintained for 
several months, Sollner and Abrams' reinvestigated this 
problem and concluded that this differential permeability to 
ions shown by dense membranes is due to acid groups in the 











- 14 - 


collodion. They found it impossible to develop such potentials 
with the purer grades of collodion on the market. If, however, 
the collodion was oxidized with sodium hypobromite (NaBrO), it 
acquired the electrical properties described, Sollner argued 
that the electrical behavior of such membranes must be due to 
the presence of carboxyl groups in the collodion which would 
attract the cations and allow them to pass through. The 
negatively charged anions would of course be repelled and could 
not pass the membrane. 

Differential ion permeability leads to what is 
known as anomalous osmosis. It has been found that under proper 
conditions water will flow through the membrane from a 
concentrated to a dilute solution. After a time, however, the 
forces causing this flow decrease and eventually concentration 
becomes identical on both sides. Anomalous osmosis is a kinetic 
rather than an equilibrium condition. The conditions giving rise 
to these effects are briefly outlined. 

Negative Anomalous Osmosis , 

The term negative anomalous osmosis is used to 
describe the motion of water from the concentrated to the dilute 
solution. It will occur when the ion which has a charge of the 
same sign as the membrane has the greater mobility through the 




■ 





f, 






. 










‘u. 

■<r 









- 15 - 


membrane. In order for this condition to arise, the pores of 
the membrane must be quite large and an electrolyte must be 
used which gives ions with considerable difference in mobility. 

A good example of this phenomenon is presented by 
the flow of lithium chloride through a magnesium silicate 
membrane. The chloride ion has a much greater mobility than 
the lithium ion and in spite of its negative charge passes 
through the negative membrane at the greater rate. The dilute 
side of the membrane thus becomes negative with respect to the 
concentrated side. Water molecules being positively charged 
in the negative pores are drawn from the more concentrated to 
the dilute solution by electrosmosis. 

Positive Anomalous Osmosis , 

This term describes an accelerated flow of water from 
the dilute solution to the concentrated solution. It occurs 
when the membrane pores are very small. In such a situation only 
ions with opposite charges to the membrane would be expected to 
penetrate it freely. The other ions would tend to be repelled 
and the more concentrated solution would acquire a charge of the 
same sign as the membrane. The water in the membrane would 
consequently have a charge opposite to the more concentrated 
solution and would pass into it with increased velocity. 








- 16 - 


The osmotic pressure measurements on egg albumin to 
be presented herein were carried out in a solution of sodium 
acetate-acetic acid buffer. Collodion membranes were used. 

It would be of interest to consider the probable osmotic effects 
which would arise out of this situation. 

Consider the collodion membrane to be negatively charged 

due to the presence of an undetermined number of acid groups 
0 

(R-0-0"). 

If the membrane pores are very large the ion with 
the greatest mobility may be expected to penetrate the membrane 
at the greatest rate. 

The mobilities for the ions involved at a temperature 
of 25 e c are? 0 

Na * - 50.9 oh* i» 

H + - 350 

C,H 3 0 2 - 40.8 

The positive ions have the greater mobility. They 
would penetrate the membrane faster and the conditions for 
positive anomalous osmosis, as described above, wolild be met. 

If the pore size is small only positive anomalous 


osmosis can occur 














- 17 - 


In both cases then, one may expect the system to 
show an initial rapid transfer of water from the dilute to the 
more concentrated buffer solution. The magnitude of this effect 
would depend upon the relative concentration of buffer salts 
in the inside and the outside solutions. 

Summarizing, one can say that anomalous osmosis 
arises out of the electrical properties of the membrane and is 
a kinetic phenomenon. It is undoubtedly of more importance in 
considering the time in which equilibrium is reached and probably 
has no effect upon the actual condition of equilibrium. 

Membrane Materials . 

The most common materials used for osmotic pressure 

measurements are collodion and cellophane. Although other 

28, IS 

substances have been suggested the above are preferred 

due to the fact that they are easily obtained and can be 
prepared with a wide range of porosity. 

27 

McBain and Stuewer ‘ discuss the properties of 

cellophane. They point out that commercial sheet cellulose as 

now manufactured is much less porous than formerly. They 

describe a method of swelling the membrane in 63$ zinc chloride 

solution in order to make it freely permeable to all electrolytes. 

13 

Flory " describes cellophane membranes which were found 







- 18 - 


satisfactory for osmotic pressure measurements on solutions of 
the polyisobutanes. 

The membrane material used in practically all 
osmotic pressure measurements to be reported here was collodion. 
Collodion is a solution of nitro-cellulose in an ether-alcohol 
mixture. It is very convenient for osmotic pressure work 
because it can be readily formed into a membrane of the desired 
shape and size. 

The permeability of collodion membranes may be 
varied in a number of ways. A few suggestions for controlling 
porosity are listed belowj 

(1) The higher the concentration of alcohol in the 
solvent the greater the permeability. The usual ratio is 

25 volumes of alcohol and 75 volumes of ether. 

(2) Elford"^ finds that in general the addition of 
good solvents for nitrocellulose decreases membrane porosity' 
and addition of non-solvents increases the porosity. Amyl 
alcohol for example decreases porosity while acetone increases it. 

(3) Collodion membrane porosity can be varied by 
soaking it in different concentrations of alcohol for twenty- 
four hours and then washing with water. 

(4) The extent to which the collodion is dried before 





- 19 - 


washing in water is also significant in relation to the porosity 
of the membrane. The longer the period of drying the smaller 
the permeability. 

These indications of the possible means of varying 
collodion together with the fact that commercially prepared 
solutions seem to vary considerably in their inherent properties 
explains why there are so many different variations in the 
recommended procedure for membrane manufacture. Bull'* used 
Merck U.S.P. collodions and cast the membranes on the inside of 
a small test tube. These were gently rotated until the material 
had set in a uniform film and were then dried under vacuum for 
fifteen minutes. Each bag had two coats of collodion so 
applied, Adair‘S says a good membrane should be rigid and be 
capable of standing two atmospheres pressure unsupported. He 
prepared his membranes by putting from five to seven coats of 
collodion on the outside of a glass mould. Each coat was 
dried by rotating the mould before a gas fire and the finished 
membrane was removed by forcing water under pressure through a 
small hole in the bottom of the tube, Adair emphasizes the 
importance of the operator’s technique and comments that after 
several years of practice the proportion of failures was below 
10?. Marrack and Hewitt when making osmotic pressure 
determinations on haemoglobin prepared collodion sacs using 8 % 







:i 






i 














■ . 




A 








•) .'V. 

• ^ a- 


, ‘ ! 


■ ■ • r ; . . . , 

> vp‘ ' ' 

f- ;>>i r . 




y .. ■■■%■ .r: r ; r. 


- . 


■■■'' ' / 

i 


J 




- 20 - 


solution of collodion (British Drug House) in a mixture of 
alcohol, ether, and glacial acetic acid in the ratio of 5:5si. 

Some workers have described methods of preparing 

membranes of any desired porosity. Such methods involve a 

systematic changing of one or more of the controlling factors 

11 34 

mentioned above. The work of Elford and Pierce can be 
referred to in this connection. Other authors giving 

information on the preparation of membranes are Montanna and 

30 12 13 

Jilk , Ferry and Flory 

METHODS FOR MEASURING OSMOTIC PRESSURES 

Osmometers may be divided into two classes: 

(1) The Static Elevation Cell 

(2) The Dynamic Equilibrium Cell 

In the static elevation osmometer the osmotic pressure 
of the solution is balanced by the flow of solvent into the - 
solution. This type of cell has the advantage of being 
relatively compact, inexpensive to construct, and simple to 
assemble and operate. The chief disadvantage is the length of 
time required for the attainment of equilibrium. 

The operation of a static elevation osmometer is 
illustrated by the modified Schultz osmometer .'shown in 






- 21 


Figure 2. The membrane is fastened across the mouth of the 
glass chamber C by covering it with the perforated plate F which 
is then clamped in position by means of the metal ring R and 
the bolts T. The chamber C is filled with solution S? and the 
tube A fastened into the ground glass joint G in such a manner 
as to exclude all air. This assembly is suspended in a 
cylinder so that the lower portion is immersed in the solvent S^. 
As the solvent passes into the solution, the liquid level in the 
tube A rises. When the pressure due to the column of liquid 
in the tube balances the osmotic pressure the level remains 
constant and can be read from scale B. The height of this 
column corrected for any capillary forces acting in the tube A 
is a direct measure of osmotic pressure, 

Bourdillon^ has described an osmometer better suited 
to the measurement of low osmotic pressures, especially aqueous 
solutions for which it was intended. Its design and operation 
are such as to avoid the necessity for any correction for density 
and capillarity of the solution, A very significant feature of 
this instrument is the small sample of solution required to 
carry out a determination (0.2 ml.) 

Other workers who have used the static elevation cell 
are Adair'., Marrack and Hewitt'" 5 ^ and Gee 







’ ■ I < >■' / ... 1 l ) V lv 







w 



i ■ ; 










; i 









- 22 



MODIFIED SCHULTZ OSMOMETER 


Figure 2 



































- 23 - 


The dynamic equilibrium cell is designed so that the 
osmotic pressure can be counterbalanced by an external applied 
pressure of known magnitude. The external pressure required to 
prevent flow of solvent into or out of the solution is 
equivalent to the osmotic pressure of the solution. This method 
is advantageous where a rapid determination of the pressure is 
essential. Unfortunately this cell is more elaborate in design 
and requires considerable experience to fill and operate 
successfully. The time saving features would not be so 
pronounced in the measurement of buffered protein solutions 
which require buffer distribution to reach equilibrium before 
the osmotic pressure registered can be attributed to protein 
alone. 

The dynamic equilibrium cell has been used by 
Flory^ and Montanna and Jilk^. One of the best cells of 
this type was designed by Fouss and Mead‘S* 

A rather unique method for measurement of osmotic 

pressure is the porous disc method, first used by Townsend in 
38 

1928 . This apparatus employs the air-solution interface as 

the semi-permeable membrane. 



;ti±> O' oi- 








'to 


. ■ . 


n . r-.j . " 




o?‘ r r. 








:■ ■ ,U>.' ooo : ■ 1 . -r 








•: ; ' 


J >,: ; >• 




?y li/XvJ;.,- 


■i: ‘ ),: . f 


O.J r [■. ‘ 0 Li. •; o oj :v;{t 









- 24 - 


OSMOTIC PRESSURE OF PROTEINS 

Osmotic pressure measurements have been used 
primarily for estimating the weight of large molecules * The 
application of the technique to protein solutions introduces 
some special factors which will be discussed here together 
with a brief consideration of the results of some of the 
workers in this field. 

(l) The concentration of a protein solution is often 
determined by a residue weight method. The protein in solution 
usually has associated with it considerable water of 
hydration (egg albumin estimated at 36$). The implications 
of this fact are: 

1* The molecular weight obtained is that of the dry 
protein molecule rather than its effective molecular 
weight in solution. 

2. During the determination of concentration the' 
water of hydration is lost along with the water 
effective as solvent. Unless the extent of 
hydration is known a small error is introduced 
in concentration, expressed as weight of protein 
in unit weight of solvent. 


(2) Proteins are amphoteric. In solutions acid to their 





- 25 - 


isoelectric point they behave as positive ions and in solutions 
basic to their isoelectric point they act as negative ions. 
Protein molecules can exist as neutral, particles only if 
the solution has a particular pH. The significance of the 
charge on the protein molecule has been referred to in the 
section on Donnan Equilibrium. 

(3) The experimenter working with proteins is quite restricted 
in his choice of solvents. With the exception of the 
prolamins and gliadins they are almost universally insoluble 
in organic solvents. A fev; dissolve in pure water but many 
require a special concentration of salt, acids or alkali. 

Discussion of Literature . 

Bull in 1940 undertook to use osmotic pressure 
measurements to eliminate some of the uncertainty regarding 
the molecular weight of egg albumin. He presents a table show¬ 
ing the various values for the molecular weight that has been 
reported, and describes a new and simple apparatus for 
making the measurements. A modification of Bull*s apparatus 
and procedure was used in carrying out the work presented 
herein and it will be described in some detail in a 
subsequent section. 


Bull obtained a value of 45*160 for the molecular 





- 26 - 


weight of egg albumin. His results showed a standard deviation 
from the mean of 180. 


7 

In 1946, Bull and Currie used a similar method for 
the estimation of the molecular weight of ^ - lactoglobulin. 
They report a value of 35,050. 


12 3 

Adair 9 9 presented a critical study of the direct 
measurement of osmotic pressure of haemoglobin. He points out 
that haemoglobin may be regarded as a colloidal system and is 
consequently somewhat unstable. The experimenter is in the 
difficult position of having to choose between two evils. If 
an extended period of time is allowed for the system to reach 
equilibrium there is a possible chemical charge In the material 
under consideration and a consequent erroneous conclusion. On 
the other hand if approximate equilibrium is accepted at a 
shorter period of time, the results can never have the finality 
which alone would justify so difficult a method. 


Adair gives a survey of the possible sources of error 
in osmotic pressure measurements and suggests the following 
criteria for true equilibrium. 

(1) Steadiness. Adair made his measurements at 0°C and required 
that levels remain constant for long periods of time 
(several weeks). Rejection of runs that did not measure 






> 


s'. •!.. 


- r V. .V- ; 






i,. -t r;{.. ■ > 




■ ' • 


.?{*: > : V V 




' i ' f 

. 


'V.iVC.:. a ! 0 




. 






:o 





- 27 - 


up to this standard eliminated errors due to change of the 
chemical constitution of the solution or to passage of 
protein through the membrane. 

(2) Capacity for Repeating Measurements . The levels of the 
osmometer liquids were reset at different places and it 
was required that they return to the same point of 
equilibrium. This practice will eliminate errors due to 
simple inertia. 

(3) Agreement of Results when Technique was Varied . 

It was considered that the results should be independent of 
reasonable changes in procedure and technique. 


Marrack and Hewitt carried out osmotic pressure 

25 26 

studies on the serum proteins and on egg albumin'In the 
case of the work on egg albumin, they were interested in 
determining the effect of various salts on the linearity of the 
osmotic pressure concentration curve. They showed that 
concentrations varying from 0.1 to 1+1% of sodium chloride, 
sodium acetate or ammonium sulphate produce no deviation from 
the ordinary straight line but that deviations did occur with 
salt concentrations either greater or less than this. They 
observed that this effect was more pronounced with ammonium 
sulphate and conclude that it has a special effect upon the 
activity of egg albumin. Marrock and Hewitt report a value of 








- 28 - 


43,000 for the molecular weight of egg albumin. 

8 

Burk and Greenberg carried out osmotic pressure 
measurements, using 6.66 molar urea as solvent. They present 
the following reasons for the choice of medium. 

(1) Few proteins are soluble in water or dilute salts thereby 
cutting down on comparative studies. Urea solutions, 
however, have a powerful solvent action on many proteins 
regardless of class. 

(2) The use of acid or alkali may cause chemical reaction and 
mask effects (e.g. aggregation) which might have been useful. 

(3) The use of a new solvent might bring out results which 
would ordinarily be obscured. 

These workers allowed periods up to two to three 
months for attainment of equilibrium and also give criteria 
for judging when true equilibrium is reached. 

PLANT PROTEINS 

A good deal of the initial work on plant proteins 

31 32 33 

was done by Osborne and his co-workers 9 3 . They isolated 

proteins from a large number of plant materials obtaining many 
of them in a crystalline form. Octahedral crystals, for example, 
were obtained from the seeds of hemp, flax, oats and squash. 






29 - 


They were unable to get crystals from the legumes* 

33 

Osborne and Harris found that peas contained three 
protein fractions which they named and described as follows. 

1. Legumin . A globulin which is soluble in saline solution. 

The solutions remain clear when heated to 100°C. 

2. Vicilin . A globulin, soluble in more dilute saline. It 
could be coagulated by heating the solution to 95°C. 

3* Legumelin . This is an albumin-like protein, soluble in pure 
water. It can be completely coagulated by heating to 80°C. 
It is quite distinct from the other two proteins. 

22 

Csonka, Murphy and Jones found the isoelectric 
points of vicilin and legumin to be 5*2 and 5.35 respectively. 

Osborne ! s method for fractionating pea proteins 
involves much lengthy dialysis. This is a distinct disadvantage 
because there are proteolytic enzymes associated with the 
proteins which may bring about chemical changes in the proteins. 
G. W. Hodgson modified Osborne*s method in such a way that the 
time required for the separation of legumin, vicilin and 
legumelin was substantially reduced. 








a: 




> > 










- 30 - 


PREPARATION OF MATERIALS 

Preparation of Egg Albumin . 

Two methods were used for preparing egg albumin 

21 

solutions. The method of Kekwick and Carman using Na2S0y was 

used for six of the nine preparations and the method of 
19 

Sorenson employing (NH^SO^ was used for the remainder. Three 
of the preparations were carried out in cooperation with 
G. W. Hodgson who was using samples of the protein solutions for 
film balance work. Hodgson was using a microkjeldahl nitrogen 
determination to obtain the egg albumin concentration, and 
consequently, the use of Na 2 S 0 ^ as crystaliizing agent rather 
than (NH^^SO^ which contains nitrogen was preferred. The two 
methods gave products which could not be distinguished as far as 
their osmotic behavior was concerned. In the preparation 
according to Keckwick and Caiman, the whites of one dozen fresh 
eggs were collected and the membranes were broken up. To this 
was added an equal volume of Na 2 S 0 ^ solution prepared by 
dissolving 400 gms. of the anhydrous salt in one litre of warm 
water. The mixture was stirred gently for about two hours and 
the precipitate removed by filtration. The pH was then 
adjusted to 4.7 by the addition of 0.2 N and solid 

was added to the clear solution until a permanent opalescence 
appeared. The liquid was then decanted from any undissolved salt 












rio'V' (V 


x. 


"'j ' 






# ■ 














- 31 - 

and the solution put in a warm place (above 21°C) for one or two 

days. The crystallized egg albumin was then collected on a filter 

paper and dissolved in distilled water. The preparation was 

recrystallized three times by addition of solid Na 2 S 0 ^ to 

opalescence and proceeding as above. The final solution was 

dialysed until outside solution gave a negative test for sulphate. 

During these preparations it was customary to use a 

microscope to make sure that the precipitate was crystalline in 

nature. Under the microscope the egg albumin crystals appeared 

19 

as a beautiful mass of very fine needles 

In order to have satisfactory crystallization it was 
essential that only strictly fresh eggs be used. 

Preparation of Vicilin „ 

Vicilin is characterized by being soluble in 3? sodium 
chloride solution but insoluble in water. Its preparation was in 
general as follows: Pea meal, was extracted with a solution of 10$ 
NaCl, This removed a large percentage of the protein from 
insoluble material. The salt concentration was then reduced to 
about 3$ by electrodialysis. This brought about the 
precipitation of legumin which is the fraction soluble in 10$ NaCl. 
The material was then centrifuged and the solid material discarded. 
The supernatent solution containing the vicilin was subjected to 
further electrodialysis until the salt concentration was 







- 32 - 


reduced to about 0.5$. This precipitated the vicilin which was 
collected by centrifuging. The water soluble solution of 
legumelin was discarded. In order to rid the solution as 
completely as possible from legumin and legumelin this 
fractionation process was repeated several times. 

Detail of the actual steps carried out in the 
preparation are shown in a flow sheet (Figure 3). 

Preparation of Legumelin 

The steps involved in the preparation of legumelin were 
as follows: 

1. A sample of BO gms. of pea meal was stirred with distilled 
water for three hours, 

2. The suspension was centrifuged and the supernatant liquid 
filtered. The filtrate was dialysed against water for about 
18 hours. 

3. This material was centrifuged again. The supernatant 
saturated with ammonium sulphate and the precipitate of 
legumelin collected on a filter paper, 

4. The precipitate was dissolved in water and the resulting 
solution dialysed against water for two 'days. A considerable 
precipitate was filtered off and discarded, 

, This solution of water soluble legumelin was prepared as 


5 







33 


i ml.I ■ r •’! A. 1.: 


E.D. 2 DAYS 


JM 


Ex .10/j NaCl (500 


_3NaCl .5“' 


Fipure 3. 
































- 34 - 


an inside solution for osmotic pressure measurements by 
dialysing against 0,05 M sodium chloride for twenty four 
hours, 

Preparation of Membranes . 

The results of the first ninety osmotic pressure 
measurements on egg albumin were highly irregular and it was felt 
that the membranes being used must be faulty. During these runs 
the procedure for making membranes was varied a good deal in what 
was essentially a trial and error attempt to obtain a satisfactory 
membrane. The elements which were varied eve listed below. 

(1) Membrane material. Materials tried were: 

a. Collodion U.S.O. supplied by Baker Chemical Company. 

b. Collodion C.P. supplied by Merck and Company Inc, 

c. Cellophane sausage casing - supplied by Visking 
Corporation Union Stock Yards, Chicago. 

d. Collodion U.S.P. supplied by British Drug Houses (Can.) 

(2) Manner of Drying Collodion. The time of drying was varied 
from ten minutes to thirty minutes with the pressure 
ranging from a low value of about 1.5 cm. Hg to 6 cm. Hg. A 
few attempts were made to dry collodion on the exterior of 

a glass tube but difficulty was experienced in removing the 







- 35 - 


membrane. A number of membranes were cast on the interior 
of a short wide tube in the hope of getting more uniform 
drying. These, however, were difficult to fix to a glass 
tube and appeared in no way superior. 

(3) Thickness. Membranes of one, two and three coats of 
collodion were used. 

In all of the earlier attempts the variations of osmotic 
pressures measured were so large that no definite conclusions 
could be drawn regarding the relative merit of different methods. 

A few points of interest are, however, listed below. 

1. The Merck C.P. Collodion and the cellophane gave 
membranes which were very slow in attaining equilibrium and were 
regarded as having too small a pore size. 

2. Very few membranes were observed to be permeable to 
protein molecules. Passage of protein through the membrane could 
be detected by boiling a sample of the outside solution, or by 
addition of tannin. 

3. The stock bottle of collodion must be kept tightly 
stoppered at all times to prevent loss of ether by evaporation 
and a consequent alteration in the porosity of resulting 
membranes. 

4* Considerable trouble was experienced due to a tendency 
for the drying membrane to peel from the interior of the glass 








- 36 - 


tube. This was overcome by allowing the collodion to drain from 
the tube for fifteen seconds so that the coat would not be too 
thick. It was also found necessary , in this connection, to 
keep the pressure at a value not lower than four cms. Hg. 

5. Two membranes prepared by impregnating an alundum thimble 
with collodion were unsatisfactory. 

The procedure which was finally adopted and which gave 
satisfactory results is as follows: A thoroughly clean glass 
sample tube of inside diameter about 0.8 cms. was filled with 
U.S.P. collodion (British Drug House) and emptied again with a 
rotating motion. The tube was slowly rotated and allowed to 
drain at an angle of about 45° for fifteen seconds. The tube 
was then shaken sharply once, to remove any drops of collodion 
adhering to the lip of the tube. It was then rotated in a 
horizontal position until the liquid formed a gel. The tube 
was then placed in a small flask and the pressure maintained 
at four cms. Hg. for a period of fifteen minutes, A second coat 
was applied in the same manner and the bag finally removed from 
the sample tube with distilled water. The bag was washed for two 
hours in water before using. 

Preparation of Buffer , 

Materials: Sodium hydroxide pellets - Merck (reagent) 

Glacial acetic acid - Baker ! s (C.P.) 








- 37 - 


Osmotic pressure measurements on egg albumin were all 
done in a sodium acetate-acetic acid buffer. The preparation was 
carried out by neutralizing sodium hydroxide with acetic acid. 

A stock solution of any desired pH was made up to be 0.10 N with 
respect to sodium acetate; the excess acetic acid required was 
calculated using the Hasselbach-Henderson equation 

pH = P Ka ♦ log 

A Coleman electrometer was used to check the final pH. 

To obtain the outside solution for the osmometer, stock 
solution was diluted with an equal volume of distilled water. 

The inside solution was obtained by diluting stock solution 
with an equal volume of dialysed egg albumin solution. 

APPARATUS AND PROCEDURE 

The osmometer used for all measurements reported herein 
was a modification of one described by Bull^. The first eighty 
two determinations, many of which were unsatisfactory were 
carried out with a pyrex glass osmometer having a capillary of 
bore 0.53 cm. diameter. Subsequent runs were made with a soft 
glass osmometer which utilized the stem of a broken thermometer 
as a capillary. A measurement of the mean capillary diameter 
of one of these thermometer stems gave a value of 0.02 cms. 

The object of changing the design was to increase the 






- 38 - 


sensitivity of the instrument as much less transfer of material 
was required for the attainment of equilibrium. 

The only essential difference in the two types was the 
size of capillary bore. Both osmometers were as represented in 
Figure 4* 

Assembly of Apparatus . 

The assembly and operation of the osmometer is 
described by referring to Figure 4. 

Attachment of Collodion Sac . 

After the rubber stopper R had been put over the tube B 
a 3/4 u length of rubber tubing was moistened with glycerol and 
slipped over the tube. The rubber tube was then rolled back on 
itself from the outer end to form a double thickness of rubber 
and a small rubber band stretched over this. The collodion bag 
was then placed in position close to the rubber tube and creased 
to fit tightly around the glass tube. The rubber band was then 
rolled from its position onto the sac to hold it firmly in 
place. A very thin film of stopcock grease was rubbed about 
the exposed interior of the rubber tube and the top of the sac. 
The rubber tube was then rolled out over the collodion sac but 
not over the rubber band. Any excess stopcock grease was 
removed. The interior of the bag was rinsed with the protein 











OSMOMETER 


Figure 4 




































Figure 4b, 
























- 40 - 

solution P and the tube filled to the level A before it was 
inserted in the osmometer. 

This manner of fixing the membrane was simply 
performed, and after a little experience invariably gave a joint 
which did not leak. 

Order of Assembly . 

To assemble the pyrex osmometers, the small cup E was 
stoppered and stopcock S opened. The osmometer was then filled 
with buffer solution M and the protein solution put into the 
apparatus by firmly forcing the rubber stopper R into place. The 
stopcock S was opened, the stopper removed from E and the buffer 
solution allowed to flow around to the position L before closing 
the stopper again. Toluene was added to the cup E, the stopcock 
opened again, and by means of gentle air pressure the toluene was 
forced through the capillary to the position T. The air pressure 
was now removed, and the toluene forced the last traces of air. 
out through the capillary and rose to its natural level in the 
capillary H. The open ends of the tubes were then stoppered 
with one holed stoppers to reduce evaporation to a minimum and 
the apparatus clamped in a thermostated water bath at 25°C. 

One side of the bath (Figure 5) was made of plate 
glass to provide a clear vision of the osmometers through a 








V 




' r.H"t y 


.ouao : a ; 




: < ■ ' 




. 

1 i'Xf-y v ■ - ; 


1 ■■ ■>. , 

: ' 


~ - s n ' . I ' j' > 

- 

•• ~ ; • ■ ■' v - ‘ y >• 

C/J.O . ■ f >...- v . V . :• .i »•'. . ... . 

< 

J . '' ■: i. . p ’• >i ... , '.. ] x>; , y • 

' iy, U, ru j 

I V- ■- 

. 


o .i'y .i.ji:lc .) 


., ' : .... '' . - ■ i : . . ■ : r < ' .. • 

• : ■ ■ . . •! '. ^ . . ,J. . . 




V'"' 1 


.v-y , ;,; r .v ,L ‘ .aS.'Jj 




. .L • jnO 

. r pX J .tikivtiw ©3 X; 




- 41 


cathetometer. 

After a period of about fifteen minutes had been 
allowed for the osmometer to reach the bath temperature* the 
initial level of the protein at A, the buffer at B and the toluene 
in the capillary were recorded* The stopcock was then closed 
and any net transfer of material through the membrane was reflected 
in a change of the toluene level. Readings of the level of the 
toluene were taken at intervals until it had reached the point 
of equilibrium. The stopcock was then opened and the initial 
readings checked. From these readings the osmotic pressure can 
be calculated. 

The initial pressure across the membrane is equal to 
the difference of the levels of protein and buffer (A - B)V The 
change of the toluene in the capillary represents a change of 
this pressure. The osmotic pressure is thus equal to the protein 
level minus the buffer level plus any adjustment arising out of 
the change of the toluene level. This may be expressed by the 
formula: 

P op = (A - B) + D t AT 

where 

P 0 p = osmotic pressure in cm. of water at 25°C 

A = level of protein solution 

B = level of buffer solution 




* 



; f 





- 42 - 



Figure 5 













- 43 - 


D t = density of toluene compared to water 25°C 

AT = initial level of toluene minus equilibrium level 

of toluene. 

7 

Bull in his work with lactoglobulin continued to 
adjust the level of protein in the osmometer so that the change 
in toluene was as small as possible. This small change was then 
applied as a correction to the osmotic pressure as given by A - B 
The practice in the work done here was to adjust the initial 
levels to approximately the osmotic pressure expected and made 
no alterations during the run. 

It is to be noted that all capillary forces cancel out 
in this method and can be neglected providing the bore of the 
capillary is uniform. 

DETERMINATION OF PROTEIN CONCENTRATION 

All protein concentrations were obtained by residue 
weight. The problem is somewhat complicated by the fact that 
the protein solution contains an appreciable amount of 
dissolved sodium acetate. Ignition of the sample to burn off 
the proteins proved unsatisfactory due to the fact that sodium 
acetate is unstable at high temperatures. Tests showed that 
sodium acetate when ignited suffered a somewhat variable loss In 






, 





i 




uO 0 . ' 













- 44 - 


weight. This loss also was not sufficient to represent a 
quantitative conversion to sodium oxide. 

The method adopted as the most satisfactory is as 
follows: A sample of about 2 ml. of the protein solution was 
removed from the osmometer immediately after completion of the 
run and weighed in a previously dried and weighed crucible. 

This was dried in an oven at 110®C for a period of four hours 
or more and again weighed. These weights gave the total weight 
of sample and the total weight of residue. Previous blank 
determinations carried out on the stock solution of buffer gave 
the residue of salt to be expected. This salt residue was then 
deducted from the total residue to give the total weight of 
protein present. Protein concentration was expressed as the 
grams of protein in 100 grams solvent. 

This method was regarded as adequate because duplicate 
determinations were always made and these usually checked to 
within the accuracy to be expected from the balance used. 

A modification of the above procedure which proved 
satisfactory was to take simultaneous samples of the inside and 
outside solutions. The difference in the residue per gram from 
these was regarded as due to the protein. 


Samples of egg albumin dried at 110°C in an 











\ : rSy)'-, ’ . 



' r 




45 


ordinary oven showed no change in weight when dried for an 
additional two hours in a vacuum oven at 105°C. 

FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN MEASURING OSMOTIC PRESSURE 

Effect of Temperature Variations . 

The theoretical osmotic pressure is directly 
proportional to the absolute temperature and any error in 
reading the temperature of the bath would be expected to produce 
an error in the calculated molecular weight* The temperature 
during any run would be within 0.1®C of the desired 25°C and 
would ordinarily not fluctuate over a range of more than 
O.QX°C. This amount of variation could not produce more than 
a very small error due to the effect mentioned above* 

Temperature also has an effect upon the density of the 
solutions and the isoelectric point of the protein. Here 
again their magnitude is extremely small for the temperature 
ranges listed above* 

Temperature variation of a very small amount does have 
a marked effect upon the toluene level in the capillary; 
especially in the case where thermometer capillaries were used* 

A rise and fall in the temperature of osmometer solutions will 
produce a simultaneous rise and fall of the toluene meniscus. 


This effect is well illustrated 


in Figure 6 








if) i)l£ 


oonixy-i .: rjcr- r - - ;.d.;.-s ; ,d .. ... ..-I.) ,d,; 

‘ Hi 

% ■ ■ * ' ' ■ !>tJ ! ... : .. .' t ' lo i ro ... . 


o 


I; 


t 



-W 





‘ 









46 



Figure 6, 









































- 47 


Toluene elevations were recorded at regular intervals on runs 
number 101, 102 and 103. The readings were taken when the runs 
were near the equilibrium condition* The slow cooling of the 
bath due to evaporation followed by a more rapid rise in 
temperature is reflected in the toluene elevations* 

In order to calculate the osmotic pressure, it is 
necessary to have a single value for the elevation of toluene 
at equilibrium. In order to arrive at what was felt to be the 
best value for the final toluene level the elevations were read 
at regular intervals over one or more complete cycles of 
temperature fluctuations and then averaged. Essentially the 
same result was obtained by taking the point midway between the 
maximum and minimum of the wave forms. 

This temperature variation is also evident in 
Figures 7 and 9. 

The temperature effects described above were not 
noticed with the pyrex glass osmometers (see Figure 8). The fact 
that they had a cross-sectional area of more than six times that 
of the thermometer bore would account for this. 

Time Required to Reach Equilibrium > 

Two factors are involved in the time required to reach 
equilibrium. 






: ' ' • • t i'C-- ■/' 



I '-: 


poi 








v.o o .. a .. . 

- 




H:j-s ■ j 




•O ' ' !(• - OO-O’j ' 




' ■ ■ I j i . sirto: 




















p;>, 










48 - 


(1) The time necessary for the membrane to transfer sufficient 
material to move the toluene meniscus to its equilibrium 
position* 

(2) The time required for any uneven distribution of buffer salts 
across the membrane to disappear. 

The time required for the first of these factors can 
be reduced by using a smaller capillary bore* and it was with 
this object in view that the use of the soft glass osmometer was 
adopted. 


The time needed for salt distribution to be erased 

depends upon the initial concentration difference* the permeability 

of the membrane to buffer salts and upon the diffusion rate of the 

ions in question. In order to reduce this time as much as 

possible the inside and outside solutions were made as nearly 

equal in salt concentration as ordinary volumetric measurements 

would permit. In a number of cases* the protein solution was 

dialysed against the buffer, before the osmotic pressure 

measurements were made. Some workers have considered some 

24*25 

type of stirring to be essential 

Equilibrium was judged to exist when the calculated 
toluene level (see discussion temperature effects) remained 
constant to within a range of about 0.1 cm. for a period of three 
hours 






. .. ■ : ' " ■ ■ ■ 




. 




•• :oj: 













' 


- 

. 

s, . * ‘ ' i»' - ' >u * ' i* v Oi * «'* l+i w* j 


’ :i .v \ ■: 




■i 

, 

. *•■■■■ ■ . 

. 

- 

a\ 




- 49 


or more, A period of 24 hours was usually ample for attaining 
this state but in a number of cases a longer period was 
required• 


Figure 7 shows the way in which equilibrium is 
approached when a thermometer bore capillary is used. In 
runs number 101, 102 and 103, the osmotic pressure which would 
be calculated at any time from the beginning of the run is 
plotted against time. The solutions were of approximately the 
same concentration, so they immediately begin to move 
together. After a period of from 20 to 30 minutes, the curves 
flatten out and continue to approach equilibrium at a much 
slower rate. 

Figure 8 is the same type of plot for the behavior of 
a pyrex osmometer which has the larger capillary. A period of 
about four hours is required for the curve to level out. 

Figure 9 illustrates the behavior of a fine capillary 
osmometer over a longer period of time. Attention is drawn 
to the fact that after the first rapid motion there was a 
reversal of the direction of the motion of the toluene. The 
approach to equilibrium in this second phase is very much 
slower. The first rapid motion of the toluene is regarded as 

a result of the transfer of material through the membrane 













:c" i 





f .a wovt 



*- r - ■.?>'■: a; 



aa: , 




- 50 - 



Figure 7 


























51 



Figure 8 













OSMOTIC PRESSURE (cm*. «*cO 


APPAREN 

r OSMOTIC F 

VS. 

T1 ME 

5 RESSUflE 

RL/n A/o- 106 

Ej 5 Albu yrti n 
Con c. = 2.04 % 


jr* 

__/ 


N -v- 



* 

i 

m * 

./ 



Final 

Equilibrium 
(22 hours ) 


./ 






O SO loo iso 2.00 

TIME (Tnln i- - ) 


Figure 9 



































53 - 


in response to the osmotic pressure as it actually exists at 
this early stage. As time goes on the buffer salts slowly 
become evenly distributed and the protein alone contributes to 
the osmotic pressure. This slow evening up of salt concentration 
probably explains the gradual downward motion in the later 
half of the curve of Figure 

Sources of Error. 

The errors which might occur in making an osmotic 
pressure measurement are listed and discussed briefly. 

Mechanical errors . 

(1) Variation in cross section of a Capillary Bore. 

For the capillary of a pyrex osmometer the bore 
uniformity was estimated by measuring the length of a thread 
of mercury as it moved through the bore. The mercury thread 
was then removed and weighed, and the results used to calculate 
the bore diameter at intervals along the capillary. 

In order to illustrate the manner in which possible 
errors were estimated, the data obtained in the study of bore 
variations is presented in Table I. 









' •' : i ; • ' 

t.o qi; 


■ 


ttubte n n2 '.Utaoc 24 
: :• . ' - \\, 


::oo . o 

' 

- . 

■ < ■ \ 

, x 



: :;y -.VJ.&W Fl'tOI't# 

L . 






■ 






54 


Table I. 


Bore Variations In Pvrex Capillary 



Elevation of 
Top of Thread 
(cms) 

Elevation 
Bottom of 
Thread 
(cms) 

of Length of 
Thread 
(cms) 

Diameter of 

Bore 

(cms) 

1 

42.886 

41.510 

1.356 

0.0529 

2 

a.no 

39.760 

1.350 

0.0534 

3 

39.651 

38.300 

1.351 

0.0533 

4 

38.068 

36.724 

1.344 

0.0533 

5 

36.720 

35.370 

1.350 

0.0534 

6 

34.354 

33.396 

1.358 

0.0531 

7 

33.256 

31.884 

1.372 

0.0528 

8 

31.350 

29.958 

1.392 

0.0524 minimum 

9 

30.074 

28.774 

1.300 

0.0543 maximum 

10 

39.302 

37.950 

1.352 

0,0532 




Average diameter 

0.05324 


The manner in which the error was estimated is shown 

below s 

Calculation of diameter 

Weight of mercury recovered = 0.0278 gms. 

Density of mercury at 22.5°C * 13.521 gms./ml. 

Volume « = 0.0278 = 0.205 ml. 

13.521 











55 - 


but 


D » 


2 /U * 0.0618 


cm* 


V77 i 


where D * diameter of bore 


V = volume of mercury = 0*205 ml* 


L = length of mercury 


for measurement no. 1 



In order to estimate the probable effect of these 


variations upon the osmotic pressure, the capillary rise of 
toluene at 25°C was calculated using the equation 


h * 4£L 
grD 


where h = capillary rise of toluene 

s = surface tension for toluene at 25°C s 34 dynes/cm. 
r - density of toluene at 25°C * 0*862 
D = diameter of capillary 
g - acceleration due to gravity 
Capillary rise for minimum diameter * 3*07 cm* 

Capillary rise for maximum diameter * 2*96 cm. 


Difference 


0.11 cm. toluene 


* 0.09 cm. H 2 0. 


If such variations in capillary rise were to occur 
during a run it would produce an error of the same magnitude 







'■ < . 

I . . :0 ’>} l ,i .* 


, 

, . 

. 

. 1 

- 

ytos, t’iHyv :i 

' 






mast 
m. t- 


,.& 0 Of. -■ 



ft 



56 


For a solution of material with a molecular weight of 
40,000 and concentration of 2#, the theoretic osmotic pressure 
would be 12.6 cms. and an error of 0*09 cm* would be equivalent 
to error of 0.7#. 

(2) Stickiness of Toluene Meniscus. 

Any error caused by sticking of the toluene was 
negligible if the capillary was clean and dry. If dirt or 
moisture were present errors of serious mature would arise. 

(3) Errors Due to Light Refraction Through the Water. 

No appreciable error occurred due to this when the 

following conditions were met: 

1. The osmometer was submerged far enough that 
all readings could be taken below the water surface. 

2. The osmometers and the glass wall of the 
bath were perfectly vertical. 

(4) Errors in Making Cathetometer Readings. 

The error of any single cathetometer reading is 
probably considerably less than 0.01 cm. provided that the 
instrument is properly focused to eliminate all parallax. 

It is considered that if the proper precautions are 
taken the total error in an osmotic pressure measurement due to 
imperfections of the measuring apparatus will not be greater 










- 57 


than 0.10 cm. H 2 0. 

Errors Inherent in the Membrane . 

This type of error is very hard to evaluate or 

explain. 

Imperfections that may occur are: 

1. Large pores or small leads which would allow the passage of 
protein. If protein passed through the membrane it could 
be detected in the outside solution by precipitating it 
with tannin. 

2. Slow passage of buffer ions or elasticity of the membrane 
allowing volume changes. These imperfections would give 
rise to a very slow approach to equilibrium. 

3. Absorption of the protein by the membrane. This was not 
tested for in the work reported herein, it was assumed that 
it did not cause appreciable error. 

Blank Runs . 

When an osmometer is set up containing only buffer 
salts at the seme pH, it should come to equilibrium at such a 
point that the calculated osmotic pressure is zero. The 
equilibrium should be independent of the relative initial 
concentration of the inside and outside solutions. If a 
method for measuring osmotic pressure does not give this zero 










> ' - ys ;; -v • •' ' p * ■ ^ 

4 

* 

, 

. 

, 

■ 

- 

, 




- 58 - 

osmotic pressure for a "blank run", it cannot be regarded as 
satisfactory* 

Two such runs were carried out using the apparatus 
and technique finally adopted as most successful. Osmotic 
pressure of 0*07 cm. HgO and 0*02 cm. HgO were obtained. As 
this is within the possible experimental error the method was 
regarded as having met this requirement. 





;• V'r 




. 


. 


... >*i ‘ % • : ' - ; all I&0B 







59 


RESULTS 

All osmotic pressure measurements were carried out in 
the manner previously described and the calculations are as 
indicated in the sample calculation given below: 

Sample Calculation* 

Run # 119 Egg Albumin Concentration 2 % Approx* Feb* 25, 1947. 

Osmotic Pressure Measurement. 



Initial 

Final 

Toluene level (stopcock open) 

19*54 

19*54 

Protein Level 

20*12 

20*12 

Buffer Level 

9*69 


(Protein-Buffer) 

10*43 

10*44 

Equilibrium Toluene Level (14 

readings, 1 cycle) 

20.14 


Drop in Toluene Meniscus (19.54 - 20.14) s -0.60 
H 2 O equivalent of drop in toluene (0.60 x *862) = -0.52 
Osmotic pressure = Initial Pressure ♦ Drop toluene 
* (10*44 - 0*52) - 9*92 cm* E,0. 











- 60 - 

Determination of Concentration. 



a) 

(2) 

Wt. empty crucible 

10.9914 

9.4434 

Wt. crucible + solution 

12.97? 

11.437 

Sample 

1.984 

1.994 

Wt. after Drying 

11.0328 

9.4846 

Total Residue 

0.0414 

0*0412 

Residue per gram of Sample 

0.0208 

0.0207 

Theoretical Residue Salt 

0.0030 

0.0030 

Wt. Protein/gm. Sample 

0.0178 

0.0177 

Wt. Protein/gm. Solvent 

0.0181 

0.0180 

Average 

0.0181 


Composition 

1.81* 



Calculation of Molecular Weight 

Molecular weight ■ 2*525 xC x to* 

P op 

s 2*525 x 1*81,^ 46.100 

9.92 













. 


/IQ, 






;'n 










- 61 - 

Osmotic Pressure Measurements on Egg Albumin . 

The object of making osmotic pressure measurements on 
egg albumin was to test the method and procedure using a fairly 
well known material. The first results were very erratic as is 
shown by the distribution given in Table 2. 

Table 2. 

Distribution of Calculated Molecular Weights of Egg Albumin. 
First 90 determinations* 

Range of Molecular Weight No. of Determinations 


Under 40,000 

3 

40,000 - 50,000 

25 

50,000 - 60,000 

12 

60,000 - 70,000 

13 

70,000 - 80,000 

5 

80,000 = 90,000 

3 

90,000 - 100,000 

1 

Over 100,000 

9 

Discarded runs 

12 

Total 

90 


The very high results were nearly all among the first 
fifteen runs (see appendix H). 


Common reasons for discarding a determination were 






H' 






V 


t 


■:;d 


t ■ 


■- 


. 
















. 


"> ■) ■'■,{1:;.ri 




: . ' 








- 62 - 

a leaking membrane, traces of water in the capillary, rise of 
toluene out of capillary bore and failure to reach a steady 
equilibrium. 

These runs are obviously so variable that in themselves 
they have little value and no definite conclusion can be drawn 
from them. 

The experience gained in this phase of the work led 
to the development of a satisfactory method and technique. 

After the first ninety runs, this acceptable method was used 
consistently. Table 3 gives the results obtained in using 
this technique with egg albumin. 







. 


r ilj, ■ 

< 

V"' 










. 


. '< ■■ •' ■' ■ Y 

; a:- bo :i> ■ ' ■.* 4 *p: Is-v ■■ l- < 

• ■ 




, 















- 63 - 


Table 3. 


Osmotic Pressure on Egg Albumin. 


Sun No. 

Concentration 

Osmotic 

Molecular 

Deviation from 


gms/100 gms. 

Pressure 

weight 

Mean 


Solvent 

(cm HgO) 



91 

2.00 

11.01 

45,900 

100 

92 

2.25 

12.81 

44,300 

1,500 

94 

2.24 

12.77 

44,300 

1,500 

96 

2.04 

n.33 

45,400 

400 

97 

2.04 

11.15 

46,100 

300 

101 

2.10 

11.05 

48,000 

2,200 

102 

2.22 

12.22 

45,800 

000 

103 

2.21 

11.90 

46,800 

1,000 

104 

2.23 

11.95 

47,100 

1,300 

105 

2.22 

12.61 

44,100 

1,400 

106 

2.21 

11.99 

46,500 

700 

108 

2.99 

16.84 

44,800 

1,000 

no 

2.96 

16.35 

45,700 

100 

in 

2.93 

16.28 

45,400 

400 

112 

2.95 

15,99 

46,600 

800 

115 

1.82 

10.34 

44,300 

1,500 

n6 

1.25 

6.73 

46,900 

1,100 

117 

3.45 

IS .49 

47,100 

1,300 

118 

2.61 

14.70 

44,800 

1,000 

119 

1.81 

9.92 

46,100 

300 

123 

2.68 

14.82 

45.600 

200 

Average Molecular Weight 

45,800 


Mean Deviation 



860 

Average Deviation of the mean 


188 


Runs # 115* 116, 117, 118, 119 presented in Table 3 
were done at a pH of 4*45$ the remainder were at the isoelectric 
point of 4*7. Runs at this slightly lower pH were satisfactory 
and gave the same results. 










- 64 - 

Measurements at other pH values are not included in 

the table. Such runs were few in number and were not consistent 

A measurement at a pH of 3.3 for example gave a molecular 

wieght of 49,300. This was to be expected as the protein 

solution in the collodion bag and in the stock bottle became 

26 

cloudy on standing. Marrack and Hewitt also observed this 
effect below a pH of 4#0. 

Discussion . 

Although the measurements do not cover a very wide 

range of concentrations, a plot of osmotic pressure against 

concentration (Figure 10) gives the straight line characteristic 

5,26 

of egg albumin » 

The value of 45,SOO although somewhat high is in 
quite good agreement with the results of Bull"* who, with the 
same type of apparatus and procedure, reported the molecular 
weight of egg albumin as 45,160. 

For purposes of comparison, a selection of molecular 
weights reported for egg albumin are given in Table 4* 







Mini 







m y 

PUP 




•:-i i ami; 


m: x *'p 






.:■■> i.'.O'- 


' ( "' ■" 
■ . a ■ 










64b* 


OSMOTIC PRESSUfle 



I 

COMPOSITION 


Figure 10 























i 

O' 

VI 



Table 4* 


Values for Molecular Weight of Egg Albumin Reported by 


Various Workers. 


Method 

Molecular Weight 

Workers 

Osmotic Pressure 

43,000 

Marrack and Hewitt (1929) 

Osmotic Pressure 

46,000 

Taylor Adair and Adair (1932) 

Osmotic Pressure 

34,000 

Sorensen (1917) 

Ultracentrifuge 

34,500 

Svedberg and Nichols (1926) 

(Equilibrium) 



U1 trac en trifug e 

44,000 

Svedberg and Pederson(1940) 

(Sedimentation) 



Chemical Analysis 

36,800 

Bernhart (1940) 

Film Balance 

43,200 

20 

Hodgson (1947) 

Osmotic Pressure 

45,160 

Bull (1941) 

Osmotic Pressure 

45,800 

Present investigation. 


Study of Electrodialysed Egg Albumin . 

x 36 

In 1926, Svedberg and Nichols concluded from work 
with the ultracentrifuge that egg albumin, even after several 
recrystallizations, contained two components. They report the 
molecular weight of the main component as 34*500 and suggested 
that the second component, present in small amounts, was a 
















- 66 


globulin of molecular weight about 170,000. This globulin, they 
said, was probably held in solution by small amounts of 
absorbed salts. They reported that electrodialysis to a very 

low conductivity removed this large molecular weight material. 

2 / 

Longworth, Cannan and MacInnes studied egg albumin by means 

of electrophoresis. They also report the presence of two 
components even after repeated recrystallization. 

These suggestions together with the fact that the 
literature reports molecular weights for egg albumin ranging 
from about 35,000 to 46,000 prompted this work on electrodialysed 
egg albumin. 

A solution of egg albumin (about 6,8$) which had 
previously been dialysed against distilled water until it was 
apparently sulphate free was electrodialysed with a standard 
type apparatus using parchment as a membrane. A continuous flow 
of distilled water, redistilled from barium carbonate through 
a block tin condenser was passed through the cathode and anode 
compartments. The protein in the middle compartment was stirred 
gently. 


Colvin measured the specific conductance of the 
material upon completion of the dialysis and found it to be 
1.78 x 10 ^ ohms \ 






'. I ■ ■ ' ; 












67 


Osmotic pressure measurements were made upon this 
material in the same manner as with egg albumin which had not 
been electrodialysed. Results are given in Table 5. 

Table 5. 

Osmotic Pressure Measurement on Electrodialysed Egg Albumin 

Run No. Concentration Osmotic Molecular 

gms/100 gms. Pressure Weight 

solvent 


1 

3.26 

19.62 

41,900 

2 

3.25 

19.92 

41,200 

3 

2.35 

14.94 

39,700 

4 

2.30 

15.00 

38,700 


Average Molecular Weight 

40,400 


Average Deviation of the Mean 

600 


R. Colvin carried out an electrophoresis analysis on 
the electrodialysed egg albumin. This type of analysis makes 
use of the fact that proteins, not at their isoelectric point 
will move under the influence of an electric field and thus 
produce a slow motion of a protein buffer boundary. Different 
proteins differ in molecular mass and charge and consequently 
will migrate at different rates. The electrophoresis apparatus 
is so arranged that the photographic record shows a single 


























■ r : • !.. v: ;j 

, in 



- 68 - 

"peak 1 * for a single component and additional peaks for other 
components that move at a different rate. 

Figure 11 is a print obtained from the photographic 

plate of the electrophoresis run on electrodialysed egg albumin. 

Unfortunately, no electrophoresis run was made on the material 

before electrodialysis and it is impossible to be sure what 

changes the electrodialysis produced in the electrophoretic 

behavior of this particular preparation. A drawing on the 

lower unexposed portion of the plate illustrates what would be 

expected from the material before electrodialysis. It was 

24 

sketched from work reported by Longsworth . The pH of the 
electrodialysed egg albumin was 6.7. The sketch illustrates a 
run done at a pH of 5.3. 

The electrophoresis pattern indicates that although 
a second component is indicated by a hump on the side of the 
peak (see arrow), it has been much reduced by the electro¬ 
dialysis. 

Discussion . 

Although only four measurements for the molecular 
weight of electrodialysed egg albumin are reported these are all 
well below any of those reported in Table 3.for the same material 
before electrodialysis. 






Hr f c-jfimy ;iv) 

■?.$. ;:i 

thu-^i'i4:;<cxrtwX~ u-U’ :t'3 ; r { 

'.’ - ‘ I ■ •'■■ ■• . ; ■ . 

■ :.,iX io -r/.-- :.v ... \ v' 

k ' ■ '' / ■ 

I.' ■ ;. ‘ ' • :U 

* * 

. , 

. .> 

■■ " ' £ ; ' ; ,v:r: ■ r-v:, ,3 

iv'-liir." ■ *i >■ iU'.yS :) ,i 




;■ i. T\ 
>' 

: • • 




- 69 - 



Figure 11. 








70 - 


There is a strong indication that this treatment has 
in some manner reduced the average molecular weight* Although 
the information is not complete enough to permit the formation 
of definite conclusions about what has taken place, the 
following suggestions are offered. 

1. The electrodialysis may have partially precipitated some 
high molecular weight material (e.g. a globulin as suggested 
by Svedberg), which is not separated by the ordinary 
recrystallization procedure. The electrophoresis results 
indicate that at least some of the second material is still 
present. It is impossible to estimate the molecular weight of 
the two components without knowledge of the amounts of each 
present. 

A precipitate did form during the dialysis but 
this could have come from denaturation of the egg albumin with 
stirring. 

2. The high molecular weight material may be a complex built 
up of the basic egg albumin molecules. It has been suggested 
that such complex molecules might be formed in a definite 
proportion to the egg albumin molecules . There is a 
possibility that such a complex was partially broken down by 
the electrodialysis and would slowly reform until it was present 
in what might be termed equilibrium amounts. 






. 

- 

* 

* 

, - 

* 

- 

_ 

. 

, 

, 

* 

, 

, 

. 



71 


3. Electrodialysis is quite a drastic treatment for protein 
molecules and it is conceivable that it caused some fragmentation 
of particles of molecular weight 45,800 with a consequent re¬ 
duction of the average molecular weight* 


Qsmqttc on Vljs^ia. 


Osmotic pressure measurements on vicilin at its 
isoelectric point of 5.2 with a 3$ NaCl solution outside gave 
results as presented in Table 6* 


Table 6. 

Osmotic Pressure Measurements on Vicilin. 


Run No. 

Concentration 

Osmotic 

Molecular 

Deviations 


gms/100 gms 

Pressure 

Weight 

Mean 


solvent 

(cms. ft^O) 



1 

0.74 

1.07 

174,000* 

.... 

2 Discard — 

W>3» 


—— 

3 

0.63 

0.68 

234,000 


4 

0.66 

0.86 

196,000 

2,000 

5 

0.58 

0.74 

198,000 

0,000 

6 

0.61 

0.74 

208,000 

10,000 

7 

0.68 

0.89 

192,000 

6,000 

8 

0.74 

1.42 

133,000* 


9 

0.43 

0.93 

201,000 

3,000 

10 

0.76 

1.10 

190.000 

8,000 


Average Molecular Weight 

198,000 



Average Deviation of the 

mean 

2.000 


* 


Molecular weights discarded statistically 







72 - 


Discussion , 

The vicilin was obtained in a relatively dilute 
solution. This coupled with the fact that the material has a 
high molecular weight made the osmotic pressures to be 
measured less than one cm, of water. The reliability of a 
single run is consequently greatly reduced and is reflected 
in relatively greater deviations from the mean. The results 
are, however, consistent enough to show that vicilin as 
prepared for these measurements has a molecular weight in the 
vicinity of 200,000, 

The term molecular weight as applied to a protein 

fraction such as vicilin is perhaps misleading. The term 

average particle weight would probably be more explicit. It 

is probable that many plant proteins exist with quite a wide 

range of particle weight and that the average weight of these 

particles varies with varying conditions of preparation, pH, 

etc. This point of view is supported by the film balance 
20 

work of Hodgson , 

He found that when samples of the same preparation 
of vicilin as used in the above osmotic pressure measurements 
were spread as a monolayer the molecular weight was 23,400. 
Hodgson*s work indicates that a breakdown of vicilin into 







>0J . ;."4, 


y'-J. i J' 


;4 • . ' 7 x 37 ,;:; 

. ■ • I ' 

■SiL ' -■ •. ..'.V . 'V,' t :>‘M 


,t{ , j nj: 41; . o. ; .U, : >* : 






. 


' 

4 - 


•^ rv 4 , 4:7 47;::;: W ..4 777;- 4 

' 


■ ; ;;.} • '• ; c " • .. 


0 . . ' ■ ■ 


- . : ; •• 

oV, 7'4' , 7,0 




v4 ■ J- : w . .77 ■ 4,' 4"4 


4 4 




4oy4x :m 


I 




‘l, 4 ■ ); r. 


.4- . .<4, , - cb'A.-y: 


O', >■ 7 - . ... 7 ^ 77 . / • 

1 




- 73 - 

smaller fractions occurs when it is thus spread. 

Osmotic Pressure Measurements on Legumelin . 

The results of four osmotic pressure determinations 
on legumelin are presented in Table 7* 

Table 7. 

Osmotic Pressure Measurements on Legumelin 


Run No. 

Concentration 
gms/100 gins. 
Solvent 

Osmotic Pressure 
After 16 hours 

Molecular 

Weight 

1 

0.38 

6.33 

15,200 

2 

0.38 

6.03 

15,900 

3 

0.38 

6.06 

15,800 

4 

0.38 

6.18 

15.500 

* 

Average molecular weight 

15*600 


Average Deviation of the mean 

125 


* To be regarded as approximate only (see discussion) 


Discussion . 

The results presented in table 7, although agreeing 
quite well with each other are not conclusive for the 
following reasons: 












' v ‘ 'i;' 10 


! ; 






74 - 


1. Steady Equilibrium was never reached. 

2. The concentration at the end of sixteen hours was not 
available. During the first few hours these runs, all of the 
same initial concentration, behaved normally and next morning, 
after a period of sixteen hours, calculations gave osmotic 
pressures as shown in Table 7. They continued, however, to 
show a slow but distinct change. Runs numbers one and four 
moved tow girds higher osmotic pressures) the other two moved 
toward lower osmotic pressures. At the end of four days they 
gave values ranging from 3*85 to 9.00 cms. 1^0, had not yet 
reached equilibrium, and had partially precipitated. 

In order to estimate the molecular weight, the osmotic 

pressure at the end of sixteen hours was chosen because: 

(1) The material had been previously dialysed against buffer and 
after sixteen hours would ordinarily be very close to 
equilibrium (see Figure 9). 

(2) The chemical change in sixteen hours would be less than at 
any later time. 

(3) The osmometers had by this time approached much the same 
values from opposite sides of equilibrium. 

(4) Subsequent changes were very slow. 

The concentration of the protein at the end of the 

sixteen hour period was, of course, not available. For purpose 





- 75 


of calculation, the concentration of the material at the start 
of the runs was used. It may be regarded as a reasonable 
approximation because each collodion sac was rinsed twice with 
the legumelin solution before it was filled, and no evidences 
of a precipitate was observed after the sixteen hours. 

The irregular behavior of the osmotic pressure over 

periods of two or more days is difficult to understand. It 

could be partially explained by assuming that the membranes 

differed considerably in pore size. It is quite possible that 

fragmentation of the protein was occurring due to proteolytic 

20 

enzymes which are known to be present . If these fragments 
were passing through the different membranes at different rates 
results similar to those observed would be obtained. 

Microkj eldahl nitrogen measurements were obtained 
on the outside solutions at the end of the four day runs. An 
increase in nitrogen content was observed in all cases. It. 
represented about 5% of total protein nitrogen in a case where 
osmotic pressure was rising, and was somewhat more (about 6£) 
in the case where osmotic pressure was falling. This is the 
order to be expected in the light of the discussion in the 
previous paragraph. 


The situation is complicated by the fact 






}0 


1.1;;]" 


to 





■ 






i'nz\ ax Jjics 

-rin 



. . • -v yy-y.i. \ K .u-y- 

* ? ..... • ■ 

t y. y >X ^ ) ; * x tt; 




IntoJ' 


0 d'Lro ••.. ) • ■ "’■■ ■ ■ ■■ ' v< .•••- : c •" ’ '"s'-; < y xi,«. 


■ -xif ■ 1 ;• ’ v > 

■ . •' t : , S - 


iiMi ?yu,. !■ 


lu 






- 76 


that precipitation is occurring at the same time as any break¬ 
down into fragments. Much work is required to obtain a complete 
picture of the changes occurring in legumelin at room 
temperature. 

20 

Hodgson obtained a molecular weight of 13,500 for 
the same preparation of legumelin. His measurements were made 
with a surface balance. 

Summary . 

A satisfactory technique was developed for measuring 
the osmotic pressure of protein solutions. 

The molecular weight of several proteins were 
investigated by means of osmotic pressure measurements. The 
results reported are given as: 

1. Crystallized egg albumin 45,S00 

2. Electrodialysed egg albumin 40,400 

3. Vicilin from peas 192,000 

Legumelin from peas was found to have a low molecular weight 
(probably close to 15,600). 

The results on egg albumin are in f air agreement with 
the results of other workers who used a similar method. 


Electrodialysis changes the osmotic behavior of egg 











- 77 - 


albumin solutions. 

Legumelin from peas undergoes marked changes in its 
physical state if retained in dilute salt solution at 25°C. 

Suggestions for further work . 

The possibilities for further work in this field 
appear almost limitless. A few suggestions are given below. 

1. An investigation into possible ways of speeding up the 
approach of equilibrium in osmotic pressure measurements 
should prove useful, especially when unstable materials 
such as proteins are to be studied. One way of doing this 
might be to introduce some stirring mechanism to prevent the 
development of a concentration gradient from the membrane 
surface to the bulk of the solutions. 

2. The work on electrodialysed egg albumin should be extended. 
The molecular weight of the material could, for example, be 
measured at regular intervals after the dialysis in an effort 
to determine whether the large molecular weight component 
was being re-formed again. 

3# . Molecular weight determinations on vicilin could be extended 
in several ways to answer such questions as 

(1) Can the preparation be repeated to give material of the 
same molecular weight as already observed? 

(2) What effect does the pH have upon the molecular weight 










■ 





1 











S'jX''; 'Xi) a ,, ,• - ' ■■ ■■■ 


‘ fli [£&<$ 


■ 




*.4 '$ 


C. .u. 




. 4: 

“ "*• m - fjyii 


- 

-vi '• v ■•v,.. v ■••• ; - • 





- 78 - 


of vicilin? 

(3) Is the osmotic pressure concentration curve a straight 
line? 

4* The osmotic pressure measurements on legumelin should be 
repeated. If the anomalous behavior described is again 
observed, an investigation into its cause might produce 
valuable information. Osmotic pressure measurements near 
0°C might prove more satisfactory with legumelin as enzyme 
activity would be much reduced. 


Appendix I. 

VISCOSITY MEASUREMENTS 


Introductory Remarks . 

It is recognized that a general relation exists 
between the viscosity of a solution and the molecular weight of 
the solute. The amount by which the viscosity of a solvent is 
increased with addition of a particular solute depends upon the 
shape as well as the size of the solute molecule. The 
interpretation of viscosity measurements is often very difficult 
and no attempt will be made to discuss the problem in any detail. 














79 


The relation between viscosity and molecular weight of material 

39 

over 10,000 is given by the following equation 

n = KM a (1) 

where 

n » the intrinsic viscosity 
M * Molecular weight of solute 
K and a are constants characteristic of a given 
solute solvent system. 

The intrinsic viscosity is identical with the ratio 

N sp at infinite dilution. 

C 

where N sp = specific viscosity 

C = concentration expressed as grams solute in 
100 ml. of solution. 

N S p can be obtained from the time of flow in an Ostwald type 
viscometer. It is given by the equation 



where t c = time of flow with solute concentration C 

t 0 = time of flow of pure solvent 

The valves of the constants K and a are however 
more difficult to determine accurately. 

Measurements were made with two Ostwald Viscometers 






.( „u-.i 








axi:/ x..o 






. 







80 


on Egg Albumin and Vicilin. The chief object was to test the 
usefulness of this type of viscometer with protein solutions. 
Results are given in Figure 12. 

Discussion. 

The results obtained with the two viscometers were 
in good agreement and the points fall on a fairly smooth line. 

The legumelin which was very dilute (0.38£) could 
not be measured satisfactorily. The increase in viscosity 
caused by its presence was very small and errors in the method 
were so large in proportion that no smooth line could be 
obtained. It was obvious, however, that the slope of the time 
of flow - concentration curve was very small. The dotted lines 
in Figure 12 are included to indicate the probable position of 
the curve. 

The method is not regarded as wholly satisfactory 
for viscosity work on protein solutions. The points show some 
scattering, and make the exact shape of the curve somewhat 
doubtful. 


Proteins are surface active so they foam very 
easily. Stable bubbles tend to form in this type of viscometer 

and unless extreme care is taken, accurate measurements are hard 




















... < . J. ;u: l iii . 




O ’ i : 

, -■ - 




. • 










: ; ' /. , , ; 

p i • • 




. . . . ... . 



- 


, 




■ 


.. 














• 


■ 

,, ., v‘ 


' 


. x CU ! - 


TIME (sees) 


81 



Figure 12 
























- 82 - 


to obtain. 


There is a qualitative agreement of the slopes of 
the lines in Figure 12 with the molecular weights of the 
proteins as obtained by osmotic pressure measurements. The 
order of increasing slope is also the order of increasing 
molecular weight. 

The values of K and a for these systems are not 
known with certainty so it was impossible to calculate the 
molecular weights accurately. An estimation with the 
information available was made for vicilin. 

The equation 

n “KM 4 was used. 

n for egg albumin and vicilin was obtained from Figure 12. 

The calculation required the following assumptions. 

(1) a was taken as 0.67. (The only value for a found in the 

39 

references with water as solvent). 

(2) K for egg albumin was assumed to be the same as K for vicilin. 
Using the molecular weight of egg albumin as 45*000 and 

a = 0.67 the K could be calculated. 


The value obtained for the molecular weight of 








■ 

* 






. 




i v : ' i) ' Jr„. . 




* 




. 










. 

, 

‘ 

' 

4 


if 








•'l ■ 








■ 


vicilin was 192,000 


- 83 - 


It must be made clear that the assumptions used 
are subject to a great deal of criticism♦ 

In summary, viscosity measurements on plant proteins 
were encouraging but the Ostwald viscometer was found to have 
limitations for this type of work. 






. • .... 


r 

C "I >v ' ■ •' -0 . j ‘ w, : ^ 1 


■ * 








84 


APfflPJBL-U 


The results of the first ninety runs on egg 
albumin at the isoelectric point are listed below. 


Run No. 

Molecular Wt. 

Run No. 

Molecular Wt. 

Run No. 

Molecular 

1 

* 

31 

48,880 

61 

45,600 

2 

73,500 

32 

* 

62 

80,400 

3 

70,000 

33 

42,500 

62A 

60,000 

4 

65,500 

34 

48,500 

63 

79,000 

5 

79,700 

35 

49,500 

64 

66,500 

6 

126,500 

36 

48,500 

65 

61,800 

7 

59,600 

37 

48,300 

67 

60,600 

8 

99,500 

38 

52,000 

68 

* 

9 

132,000 

39 

51,500 

69 

* 

10 

206,000 

40 

48,500 

70 

50,300 

11 

120,000 

u 

45,600 

71 

29,900 

12 

154,000 

42 

46,400 

72 

21,100 

13 

214,000 

43 

* 

73 

48,000 

14 

150,000 

44 

* 

74 

68,100 

15 

High 

45 

55,700 

75 

155,000 

16 

71,000 

46 

* 

76 

* 

17 

106,500 

47 

* 

77 

* 

18 

* 

48 

* 

78 

45,900 

19 

52,000 

49 

47,500 

79 

* 

20 

* 

50 

56,000 

80 

60,000 

21 

82,500 

51 

62,000 

81 

47,000 

22 

75,500 

52 

60,000 

82 

48,700 

23 

43,200 

53 

46,100 

83 

* 

24 

60,000 

54 

87,500 

84 

51,000 

25 

68,200 

55 

49,900 

85 

31,000 

26 

48,100 

56 

52,800 

86 

42,600 

27 

* 

57 

44,400 

87 

40,000 

28 

* 

58 

53,300 

88 

44,000 

29 

67,700 

59 

55,000 

89 

51,300 

30 

42,200 

60 

60,000 

90 

46,200 
























<5 


t 


*. 



















BIBLIOGRAPHY 














1 

Adair, G. 


Proc. Roy. Soc. 

108A 

627 

(1925) 

2 

Adair, G. 


N N N 

109 A 

292 

(1925) 

3 

Adair, G. 


J . A.C .S . 

42 

2524 

(1927) 

4 

Bourdillon 


J. Biol. Chem. 

m 

617 

(1939) 

5 

Bull, H.B. 


J. Biol. Chem. 

m 

143 

(19U) 

6 

Bull, H. B. - 

Physical Biochemistry 

- John 

Wiley and Sons 


Inc. New York, 

P. 

309. 




7 

Bull, H.B. & 


J.A.C «S. 

68 

742 

(1946) 


Currie, B.I. 






8 

Burd & Greenburg 

J. Biol. Chem. 

22 

197 

(1930) 

9 

Burnett, Roberts 

Ind.Eng.Chem. 

2 £ 

276 

(1945) 


and Parker 






10 

Cohn & Edsall 






11 

Elford, W.J. 


Trans.Faraday Soc. 

22 

1094 

(1937) 

12 

Ferry 


Chem. Rev. 

42 

373 

(1936) 

13 

Flory, P.S. 


J .A.C.S. 

22 

372 

(1943) 

14 

Fuoss, R.M. & 


J. Phys. Chem. 

42 

59 

(1943) 


Mead, D.J. 






15 

Gee, G. 


Trans. Faraday 

36 

1162 

(1940) 


Soc. 

16 Glasstone, S. - Textbook of Physical Chem. - D.Van Nostrand 
Co* Inc., New York, p. 64.3 

17 Glasstone, S. - Textbook of Physical Chem. - D. Van Nostrand 
Co. Inc., New York, p. 646 

18 Hartman, R.J.-Colloid Chemistry - Houghton Mifflin Co., 








! ! 
















. . 








New York, p. 273 

19 Hawk, P.B. & Bergeim, 0. - Practical Physiological 
Chemistry, The Blakiston Co., Philadelphia, p. 165. 

20 Hodgson, G.W. M.Sc. Thesis, University of Alberta, 1947. 


21 

Kekwick, R.A. & 

Biochem. J. 

22 

227 

(1936) 


Cannan, R.K. 





22 

Ksonka, Murphy 

J.A.C.S. 

42 

763 

(1926) 


& Jones 





23 

Lepeschin, W.W. 

J. Phys. Chem. 

22 

2625 

(1932) 

24 

Longman, Cannan 

J .A.C .S. 

62 

2580 

(1940) 


& Mclnnes 





25 

Marrack & Hewitt 

Biochem. J. 

21 

1129 

(1927) 

26 

tt n 

It !t 

22 

1079 

(1929) 

27 

McBain & Stuewer 

J. Phys. Chem. 

42 

1157 

(1936) 

28 

Mellville 

Nature 

i2Z 

74 

(1946) 

29 

Michaelis 

J. Gen. Physiol. 

8 

33 

(1928) 

30 

Montanna, R.B. 

J. Phys. Chem. 

42 

1376 

(1941) 


& Jilk, L.H. 


31 Osborne, T.B. - The Vegetable Proteins - Longmans Green 


32 

& Co., London, New York 

Osborne, T.B. & J.C.S. 

LXXIV 2 624 

(1898) 

33 

Campbell 

Osborne, T.B. & J. Biol. Chem. 

17 

213 

(1907) 

34 

Harris 

Pierce " 

22 

994 

(1927) 




. .15 


CM 










w 






, ; 
















35 

Sollner, K. & 

J. Gen. Physiol. 

24 

1 

(1940) 


Abrams, I. 





36 

Svedberg & Nichols J.A.C.S. 

48 

3081 

(1926) 

37 

Tinker 

Proc. Roy. Soc. 

92A 

375 

(1916) 

38 

Townsend, R.V. 

J.A.C.S. 

52 

2958 

(1928) 


39 Wagner, R.H. - Physical Methods of Organic Chemistry - 
Interscience Publishers Inc,, New York, p. 360 

40 Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (29th Edition - Chemical 
Rubber Publishing Company, Cleveland, Ohio.) 


















































