

1SBBIS 

I11MW 

ajBOTMMB 














■ 





. 










Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/somehistoricalasOOritc 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SOME HISTORICAL ASPECTS IN THE GROWTH OF 
HOME ECONOMICS EDUCATION IN THE PROVINCE OF ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO THE CGMITTEE ON 
GRADUATE STUDIES IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT 
OF THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

EDITH MURIEL RITCHIE 
HIGH RIVER, ALBERTA 


OCTOBER, 1954 










UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and do recommend to the Committee on Graduate Studies for 
acceptance a thesis entitled "Some Historical Aspects in 
the Growth of Home Economics in the Province of Alberta," 
submitted by Edith Muriel Ritchie, B«Ed«, in partial ful¬ 
filment of the requirements for the degree of Master of 
Education* 

Professor _ 

Professor _ 

Professor 


ii 
















. : ... - ■ i iv.. ; - 

.... : . v ., .. , • ' ' "■ ■ :• •" 

; • .. ' ' ’ . . .. ... - : . .. • .. • ■ '• . - ~ ■ 

. 0,' i. c. -Xv .. 

... . t ■: o... - ■ ' 

_ -. . ; i v.- ■ ' - 1 £0 u-; ... J x i 

. 




. 




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


In presenting this thesis the writer wishes to 
acknowledge a cherished debt of long standing for the 
original suggestion from which this work grew, namely 
to Thomas Harold Ritchie under whose encouragement the 
author began her work in the teaching of Home Economics. 

Also, it is with appreciation that gratitude is 
given to Professor Mabel Patrick for inspiration and di¬ 
rection received during the preparation of this disser¬ 
tation, and to Professor Grace Lesley Duggan for valuable 
criticisms, suggestions and assistance in the work of 
construction and revision* The helpful advice and per¬ 
tinent observations on the development of the discourse 
by Professor H. T. Coutts are likewise recognized. To 
Miss Georgina Thompson, reference librarian of the Cal¬ 
gary Public Library particular mention is accorded for 
her aid in securing early sources of information, and 
in allowing the use of valuable clippings and records. 

The writer is furthermore indebted to a number 
of educationists in the Province of Alberta for furnish¬ 
ing reports and statistics, especially to Mr. W. E. Frame, 
Chief Superintendent of Schools, and Miss A. B. Maefarlane, 


iii 











' 

' ..V W • ' 






... .H j - • - .. ' >- : '- 

* . i L, 0 ,• , ’ - ,i. ' ' i ' 1 - 








■ 






C ■- 

. 

■ 

« 


* 


■J • 






• ,{ . .. . ■■■ 5 ; S'. . 0J-, 

' < 


Supervisor of Home Economics. 

Finally, to all home economics’ teachers and 
home economists this study is dedicated. 


iv 

















ABSTRACT OE THESIS 


The purpose of this study was to trace the de¬ 
velopment and consider the significance of the changes 
in the home economics curriculum since its introduction 
into Alberta schools. The main problem was to secure 
data that would provide a picture of practices and con¬ 
ditions in the field of home economics in the province 
of Alberta. The survey investigated the various aspects 
of the progress of home economies: subject matter, content 
of courses and the general attitudes toward home economics 
and the effectiveness of the programme in order to deter¬ 
mine the place of home economics in the educational pro¬ 
gramme of Alberta. The study was centred mainly in the de¬ 
velopment of the curriculum in home economics and in the 
procedures employed to achieve it. In addition references 
were made to the manner in which the Department of Educa¬ 
tion has and is solving some of the problems connected 
with the teaching of this special subject. 

The procedure followed in gathering the data was 
first, to examine the periodical literature on home econ¬ 
omics for general information. Secondly, specific informa¬ 
tion was obtained by consulting the following sources. 

School Board Records 

Newspaper files 

v 

















o 








» 


- . - 


: . - : 








, . ■l.'x-. . ‘J ' ■ 



* 






: 

v 


, • . . 














4 


■ 








e 








. 




Alberta School Act 

Nomal School and University Calendars 

Personal Interviews 

Correspondence 

Annual Reports of the Department of Education 
Courses of Study for the Schools of Alberta 

The historical background of education in the home 
and the early beginnings of the teaching of home economics 
was given in order to place the developments in their 
proper relationship to each other and to the educational 
system of Alberta as a whole* 

Information for the chapter entitled **The Home and 
Home Economics Education” was gathered from a number of 
secondary sources including Encyclopedia articles and Dr* 
Willystine Goodsell f s W A History of the Family as a Social 
and Educational Institution,” while the development of the 
home economics movement in the United States and Canada 
was gleaned from such authors as Winchell, Atwater, Cooley, 
Bane, Hunt, Spafford, Hanna, Craig, and the Canadian and 
American Home Economics Journals* The development of home 
economics In Alberta was outlined from a study of such pri¬ 
mary sources as the annual reports and programmes of study 
issued by educational authorities before and after the 
creation of the province in 190.5* Letters, newspaper files 
and magazine articles as well as personal interviews sup¬ 
plemented this information, and produced material for the 
last chapters. 


vi 




t. 








' c • o . 

. i ■ 


.... J •, 






■ . . ‘a. ' ..." J. i 


' : ■ L< • J 


■ 1 ' ' ; i 




. . V \. , L: ' . .3 - I- i •, 




J i l 

i 


. [ ■ ... : v> . o ■> 




, ■ 


T .•• ... ' ■ . .... 


5 

c . ,. . J ... . -•••• ' ■< • •• • • 

5 5 5 { t 

* 

U I . i . 

, •■'. . . . ..,v i"; 1 < ■. i. J ... ■ • - 'I i "'.'.l' 

. . :• - • ' V ' -■ ■- ■ 












. 

, 







In tracing the origin of home economics instruction 
in Alberta the author found that the first curriculum was 
strongly influenced by .American examples* The first cur¬ 
riculum remained in effect until 1912. 

Subsequent curriculum developments resulted in two 
great revisions in elementary and secondary courses in home 
economics, the one in 1936 and the other from 1930 to 1933* 
The sweeping curriculum revision of 1936 covered education 
from Grades I to XII and introduced the integrated method 
which was used in the entire home economics programme, until 
1933 when it was eliminated from the Senior High School pro¬ 
gramme in favor of one of specialization* However, the in¬ 
tegrated hememaking technique is still the method employed 
in the Junior High School, and so the principles of activity 
education sti11 remain. 

Analysis of the home economics curricula in Alberta 
reveals that the main objective has come to be the develop¬ 
ment of high standards of personal and family living. The 
need for flexibility in the programme to meet community and 
individual differences has been stressed. Home economics 
has the greatest influence and attendance in the Junior 
High School. The present work has indicated how the attempt 
has been made to bring about a closer connection between the 
schools and the life activities of the students* Furthermore, 


vii 












































■ 


< 












j . ; 






, 


* 


. 



























the study has shown that as home economics has been adapted 
to the changing needs of the province so have people with 
foresight guided its growth in accordance with developments 
in the provincial field of education. Changes in the socio¬ 
economic situation which have affected the home have been 
reflected in the content of subject matter in home economics 
education. New inventions have changed the nature of work 
in the home. And, as it no longer produces most of its 
requirements, there has been a need for education in the 
intelligent purchase and consumption of commodities. 

In addition, it has been shown that difficulties 
have stood in the way of the establishment of home economies 
in the schools. These obstacles have centered around such 
causes as lack of qualified personnel; the need of funds, 
equipment and accommodation; two world wars and depression 
periods, and in recent years the rapidly expanding school 
population. These factors retarded education generally, 
but the structure of home economies advancement was especi¬ 
ally affected. 

The general picture from this collection of facts 
reveals that much has been done toward providing adequate 
home economics instruction and accommodation especially 
in the city and town school districts and divisions. How¬ 
ever, more remains to be done in Alberta in consideration 


viii 


, , ' -L- 

ox• a ‘ 




* 


t 



■ 



, . 1, . . lOV , • 



1 ■ 

. V ■ ... > 3 £ voo . 

; 

\ 

< 

* 


u 

' 

' 

- 





of the facts that all girls do not receive such training 
and that there is a shortage of qualified personnel and a 
lack of facilities in some areas for carrying out an effec¬ 
tive province-wide home economics programme# 

The investigation has revealed that in recent 
years, from 1935 to 1953 » there has been a readiness to 
adopt newer and better methods of instruction in home econ¬ 
omics as these have shown promise of being more efficient 
and sounder than those previously used. 

The author concludes with a number of recommenda¬ 
tions pertaining to certification of home economics 
teachers, the need for teachers’ and students 1 manuals 
and some emphasis on further work to be done in home econ¬ 
omies research in Alberta, the need for evaluation of 
teaching methods and a public relations enterprise for 
home economics education in Alberta. 


ix 

























. 










< 


'■j : j. ■ • ■ 

t 


. 
















TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I INTRODUCTION. 1 

The Purpose of This Study . 1 

Importance of the Study . 2 

Defining Home Economies . 3 

Brief Review of Source Material. 8 

II THE PROCEDURES OF THE STUDY AND THE 

SOURCES OF DATA. 11 

III THE HOME AND HOME ECONOMICS EDUCATION. 13 

IV THE BEGINNINGS OF HOME ECONOMICS AND 

ITS DEVELOPMENT IN ALBERTA. 22 

Early History of Home Economics. 22 

The Introduction of Home Economics 

into Alberta Schools. 2? 

Early Teaching of Home Economics 

in Calgary .. 30 

The Report of the Royal Commission 
on Industrial Training and 
Technical Education . 34 

Home Economics in the Normal Schools .... 37 

V FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN HOME ECONOMICS 

IN ALBERTA. 43 

The General Picture from 1913 to 1917 ••• 43 

A Pre-vocational School . 49 

Household Science and Manual Training 
Differentiated from Technical 
Education. 34 


x 











































































CHAPTER PAGE 

Agricultural High Schools . 55 

The New Policy. 57 

Summer School for Teachers at 

the University of Alberta. 58 

VI HOME ECONOMICS IN ALBERTA FROM 1917 TO 1956. 61 

Household Arts in the Public School 

from 1917 to 1922 ... 61 

The 1922 Course In Household Economics 

for Grades TII and VIII. 67 

Home Economics in the High School. 70 

The Technical High School Course ........ 72 

Certification of Household Economics 
Teachers .. 77 

Economic and Social Crises .. 77 

VII HOME ECONOMICS IN ALBERTA PROM 1936 

TO THE PRESENT . 8l 

A New Programme .. 8l 

The 1936 Course in Home Economics 

for the Intermediate School .. 82 

Home Economics for the High School •••••• 86 

Centralisation and Circuits . 92 

Summer School for Teachers .. 93 

Accommodation and Equipment .. 95 

The 1941 Revision of Home Economics 

for the Intermediate School. 96 

The War Years . 99 

Appointment of a Supervisor of 

Home Economics ..••*••••. 106 

xi 









































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Programme of Studies for the 

High School . 109 

Teacher Training ..... . 110 

General Observations from 1943 to 1933 *• 112 

Special One Year Course in Home 
Economics at the University of 
Alberta 1934-33 Session . 119 

Till THE CONTINUATION AND APPLICATION OF 

HOME ECONOMICS EDUCATION. 120 

School of Household Economics... 120 

The Alberta Schools of Agriculture 

and Home Economies . 121 

Provincial Institute of Technology 

and Art ...... 122 

Adult Education .,.. . 123 

IX SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ... 123 

Summary .. 123 

Conclusions . 138 

Recommendations. 144 

BIBLIOGRAPHY . .......... 131 

APPENDICES .. 134 

A Course of Studies for the Public Schools,1912. 133 

B Summer Session Courses, 1941 . 169 

C Course of Studies for the Public Schools,1920. 1?4 

D Part III of the Course of Studies for 

the Elementary Schools, 1922 . 182 

E High School Subjects of Study, 1924 . 202 


xii 
































H-k. 





















• c 


« 


























APPENDICES 


PAGE 


F 

G 

H 

I 

J 

K 

L 

M 

N 

0 

P 

Q, 

R 

S 

T 

U 

V 

w 

X 


Curricula - Alberta High Schools, 1328. 203 

Household Economics 1 and 2, 1327 . 210 

Technical High School Course Outlines, 1323 ... 216 

Programme of Studies for the Intermediate 

School, 1336... 213 

Revised Programme for Grade XI, 1338 .......... 243 

Programme of Studies for the High School,1340 • 246 

Needlework ... ..... 261 

Programme of Studies for the Intermediate 

School, 1341 . 263 

Certification of Teachers . 288 

Enrolment of pupils in the Elective Courses ... 231 

Statistics Relating to Home Economies 

Centres and Staff .. 233 

Enrolment of Pupils in Classes in 

Home Economics . 234 

Careers for which Home Economics 

Training is a Preparation. 233 

Questionnaire .. 237 

Guide for evaluating .. 301 

Bulletin No. 147, Department of Education •»••• 303 

Programme of Studies for the High School, 

Home Economics 1 and 2, 1347 .... 303 

Technical Subjects . 334 

Arts and Grafts . 400 


xiii 


















- 




w 




c 

































CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

1* The Purpose of This study 

Home economics has a place in the education programme 
of Alberta, for this reason the writer believes that it is 
important to trace the development and consider the signifi¬ 
cance of the changes in the home economies curriculum since 
its inception. 

Primarily, the problem is to describe and examine, in 
some detail, the progress of home economics in the schools 
and in teacher training courses, with a view to determining 
and evaluating its status in the educational growth of the 
Province of Alberta, 

As the advancement of home economics instruction is 
outlined, the writer hopes to find facts pertaining to the 
following questions: 

(1) Has the home economies curriculum been changed 
by school authorities to keep in step with the progress and 
needs of the province and in accordance with modern educa¬ 
tional research? 

(2) What modifications in class room methods have 
taken place through the years? 

finally, there is a documentary aim In this thesis. 
The research on home economics in Alberta reveals a scarcity 




2 


of source material# Consequently, the author wishes to col¬ 
lect information from early records which are difficult to 
obtain, so that future investigators, curriculum makers and 
teachers may have it more readily available# It is felt 
also, that this should be done while it is still possible to 
consult some of the pioneer workers in the field# In the 
attempt to provide such an account it is hoped that the 
origin of the first Alberta curriculum in home economics is 
found, as well as circumstanees which have led to the 
present programme, aid the changes in class room methods 
which have accompanied the curricular adjustments# 


2# Importance of the study 


Joseph R# StrobeI has written: 

Preparation for home and family living is more and 
more being considered one of the important goals of 
education in the modern school# Homemaking programs 
in the secondary schools have a unique contribution 
to make to this preparation, for home economics is the 
only subject area which is centered on the home acti¬ 
vities and the relationships which enable the pupil 
to assume the responsibilities of homemaking#^- 

This points up an important value of home economics 
that applies in Alberta too# It seems appropriate that a 
survey of home economics education in Alberta be made to 
show teachers and others concerned something of a programme 


Home. School and Community Experienced in the Homemaking: 

Program* (U. S. Department of Health, Education and 
Welfare, Office of Education# Vocational Bulletin No. 
2J?2* Education Series No* 29# 1 955 ), P* iii, forward# 


1 



















3 


2 

which is focused on 11 overall homemailing education goals'*. 

Significant, too, is a quotation from Educating Our 
Daughters by Doctor Lynn White Jr*, President of Mills col¬ 
lege for girls: 

These, then, are the fields of greater interest 
to women than to men ~~ the studies dealing with the 
institution of the family and all that contributes 
to its well-being through food, beauty and warmth, 
shelter and security — which will be developed to 
supplement the traditional curriculum in proportion 
as women lose their sense of inferiority in the 
realm of higher education* They are important, 
however, not merely for the majority of women col¬ 
lege students who will b© marrying but also for the 
unmarried, both because they too must maintain 
homes for themselves and because the greater part 
of the vocations in which women have prospered are 
professional extensions of these subjects*5 


3® Defining Home Economics 


Before proceeding further an examination of the 
content of home economics is essential for a clear under¬ 
standing of its place in t.h@ curriculum. 

Pew courses have appeared under so many names* 
Beginning in the l870 f s as cooking and sewing, it later 
became known as domestic science, domestic art, domestic 

economy, housewifery, household arts, household science 

4 

or household economics* 

2 hoc»_ cit . 

^ Lynn White Jr*, Educating Our Daughters (Harper and 
Brothers, New York, 1930), P* 8S* 

4 The Philosophical Library of New York uity, Encyclopedia 
of Modern Education (F* Hubner and Uompany Inc., New York 
City, 1943), p* 371. 





















t 









c 




C 


< 





c 















4 


In September l 8 99, a number of scientists, teachers 
and others interested in home economics gathered at Lake 
Placid in New York StateThe aim of the meeting was to 
organize a movement for the advancement of home economics 
and to unify the different persons interested in the prob¬ 
lems in this field* 

ihnong the most important topics under discussion at 
this first Lake Placid Conference were classification and 
terminology* Until that time home economics had been clas¬ 
sified under “Production 1 * in the library catalogue. It was 
decided to consider it as a distinct section in the general 
field of economics so that it would have a logical place in 
the college and university offerings and not be confused 
with the "household arts". Thereafter, it was entered as 
"Economics of Consumption".^ 

Following a full discussion, the name of home 
economics was agreed upon as the title preferable for the 
whole general subject. Other phrases were used for the sub¬ 
divisions: domestic economy for younger pupils; domestic 

science for students at the high school level; and home 

7 

economics for college courses. 

^ For the history of the Lake Placid Home Economics Con¬ 
ference see Hazel T. Craig, The History of Home Economics . 
(New York, 194,5, Practical Home Economics). 

^ Graig, op* cit .» pp* 8-9* 

7 Lit a Bane, Mildred H. Chapin, Introduction to Home Econom ¬ 
ics , (Houghton Mifflin Company, Cambridge, 194^), P* 132. 








5 


Agnes K. Hanna reports the difficulty of designating 
the content of home economics as follows: 

In most subjects of instruction there is a rela¬ 
tively clearly defined field of related facts, princi¬ 
ples, laws and applications which are accepted as be¬ 
longing in a coherent system* Chemistry, mathematics 
and history mean practically the same thing to every¬ 
one with the differences and deeper interpretations 
which come with greater knowledge in any of these 
fields. There is no such definiteness to the defini¬ 
tion of home economics, fhile in general terms the 
subject matter centers around the study of foods, 
clothing and shelter, the different aspects under 
which these main topics may be considered are so 
varied that there are limitless possibilities of 
defining the content of courses.8 

Home Economics has drawn from the natural and social 
sciences as well as from the arts for its objectives. As 
early as 1902 leaders in the field recognized its functional 
character as illustrated in the following paragraph: 

Home Economics in its most comprehensive sense 
is the study of laws, conditions, principles and 
ideals which are concerned on the one hand with man*s 
physical environment and on the other with his nature 
as a social being, and Is the study especially of the 
relation between these two factors. In forming a com¬ 
plete definition, however, it may be possible to con¬ 
sider home economics as a philosophical subject, a 
study of relations while the subjects on which it 
depends, economics, sociology, chemistry, hygiene 
and others are empirical in their nature and con¬ 
cerned with events and phenomena.^ 

The American Home Economics Association in 1913 out¬ 
lined and defined home economics as a distinctive subject of 

0 Agnes K. Hanna, Home Economics in the Elementary and Secon ¬ 
dary Schools . (Boston: Whitcomb and Barrows, 1922), p. 208. 

^ The Philosophical Library of New York City, op. cit ., p.271. 






VJ ■ 

, 0 ' : ■ C. 'JO c li O 

'. : • !■'- 

, • ^ vie vi: J 

t 1 - 

,’,.... - : -■ 

; % v.0*1'» - 

' . ' '■ . , • - w ... 1 \ rl v ..a.. • 0 

.. -.U ■ . J i: C.,.,^0 Oi 

» ■ ■ 

. O • 

* . , - .... V 

t ,,U . .. o 0'^ ^ C .iJo 

. - • ' - • o 

1 •„ ' i, rj ■ ■■■■» 

, ; ; ^ ■, . J -Li .-'V 


.. J X i 0 4 '*.:,s 

• ■ hib- ... •' • • 

.i: ni a o t>«- ©&04 

c ' ' *- c 

. , ; 0 ' :• 0 -■ ■'•••■ ' - 1 

. . I ' 

. 

, 

** 

L \ 1J ... ■ ••1 •' - -v "■ ■■■'- 






.. ~ 



. 

. 

: . v •.. ,j J .i ■ * ' '.! *•-< o ' 





6 


instruction. It is: “the study of the economic, sanitary 
and aesthetic aspects of food, clothing and shelter as con¬ 
nected with their selection, preparation and use by the 
family in the home or by other groups of people. 1,10 

Home economics like many other subjects of instruc¬ 
tion — for example, sociology, engineering, agri¬ 
culture — is a complex. In it the contributing 
groups are art, history, anthropology, sociology 
and aesthetics, economics, physiology, hygiene, 
mathematics, chemistry, physics and biology. 3 -^ 

In the 1933 revision of the American Home Econom¬ 
ics Association syllabus, the subject matter was divided 
into five major areas: The family and its relationships! 

family economics; the house; foods and nutrition; and 

12 

textiles and clothing. 

Traditionally then, home economics has been concerned 
with the feeding and housing of the Individual and the family. 
In recent years, however, stress has been laid on many other 
activities: the car© and guidance of children, the mainten¬ 
ance of family health, home nursing, the management and use 
of individual and family resources, the growth and develop¬ 
ment of members of the family and the social relationships 
of individuals. Basic knowledge has been ‘‘unified, reinter- 

American Home Economics Association, Syllabus of Home 
Economics . (Baltimore: American Home Economics Associa¬ 
tion, 1913), pp. 7-8. 

11 UQQ. Pit . 

12 Craig, op. cit .. p. 40. 










c 


. 




< 





c « 


< 








« ' 






7 


preted, and related* 1 to form a body of information "which 
has as its focal point the betterment of home and family 
living*"^ Today, all phases of homemaking, with the em¬ 
phasis on personal and social development, provide a variety 
of experiences and activities based on real life situations 

14 

with a view to discovering the basic underlying principles* 

To conclude the above observations, it is noted by 
Duggan 1 ^ that, "Trends in home economics education have 
shifted from the homemaking skills as an end in themselves 
to the social development of the individual as a person and 
as a member of a family, and of a community*" 

How that a number of opinions have been considered 
in order to clarify the meaning of home economies an attempt 
may be made to trace the development of the instruction in 
the schools of Alberta* Because homemaking is as old as the 
family, some thought must be given to the relationship of 
home economics and the education of girls within the family. 
Important, also, are the early beginnings of home economics 
in the United States and Eastern Canada for they have a 

^ Anna M* Lee, "Home Economies", The American People y s 

incxciopgdia, 1915, X, 559. 

^ Ontario Department of Education, Intermediate Division * 
Grades VII* VIII* I X and X* Curriculum 1:1. Revised 

1950* p. 266. 

^ Grace Lesley Duggan, "A Study of Some Aspects of Home 
Economics Education in Canadian Universities," (Edmonton, 
Alberta, sponsored by the Canadian Home Economics Associ¬ 
ation, 1950), p* 6. 









. 








i : . vi :J ' . ' t 

. J . f' . i'- ; 

« . 

i a . ■ : w' - ' L ■ - ‘ i0 

,,. , ..... ... •..; . : .. .. *v-::okJl'j Cj _.s iftisv. 

• • , : i,\'C 1 1 . •• ; : v •'./ C 

■ - t u 

■ , :,i ,. ■xxox yn- i - - c-v.l. £> 

. ; ■ . , ;■ , : ■ ■ - : • - ■ - 

< 

; j ... . c ! -vx o :i'.: w ri'O 

; i; ..... i,: .xO Ox ‘It l)'S V 

c . ...■ . ■. .0 t »0 •'•XC ! $' X-.-V-/J x t 

* 




* 




• < •• ' 

ilCi , £) Li ' o£>J ■‘MVC' • t; ! °f* 

■ ? t ' 

. . • ; ,j •, j j.vX : ill 


t * 

’ A,! 1 • • .1 ' ;* 1 J ■■ 


* 


■ r t 


* c • • t 










) 

X 




8 


bearing on its introduction into Alberta schools* 

4 * Brief Heview of Source Material 

Observations on the progress that Alberta has made 
in home economics, since it was first introduced into the 
schools, are not readily available. As is to be expected 
information can be secured easily on the nature and extent 
of courses now administered by the Department of Education, 
the University of Alberta and the Department of Agriculture, 
However, material is scanty regarding subject matter and 
instruction in the earlier years, 

A search for relevant literature was mad© to deter¬ 
mine the need for a history of the growth of home economics 
in the Province of Alberta, particularly with reference to 
the schools and teacher training courses. Accounts dealing 
specifically with home economies in Alberta seem to be few. 
However, the search for Canadian background material perti¬ 
nent to this treatise revealed one survey of particular 
interest ,^ This is summarized as follows: 

A brief history from 1822 of the teaching of home 
economies is followed by a portrayal of the present 
practises in Canada, The focal problem of the study 
is the extent to which home economics education is 
directed towards strengthening the Canadian home. 


^ Alethea Mae Stewart, "Current Practises in Home Economics 
Particularly with Reference to Alberta", (Unpublished 
Master of Education Thesis, The University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1^49). 





















9 


After examining the periodical literature and courses 
of study and after consulting Departmental files* the 
author concludes, "Home Economics is a way of life 
rather than a subject matter course. Its fundamental 
objective is the improvement of personal and family 

living."17 

Another recent work 1 * 0 was of value because it re¬ 
vealed the most recent published thinking of Canadian 
authorities on the teaching of home economics# The general 
conclusion of this investigation most applicable to the 
present study Is that, ‘‘Finally, it must never be forgotten 
that the original goal of home economics education is as 
true now as it was in 1900; namely to promote better family 
living." 19 

The review of existing writings failed to disclose 
any manuscripts on the growth of home economics education 
in Alberta# Flirthermore, as the studies mentioned indicated 
only a general reference to such development, it seemed im¬ 
portant that some research should be made Into the progress 
of heme economics in this province. 

So, because of the inadequacy in the present informa- 


^ Dr. H. A. Smith, (ed») Abstracts of Theses In education . 
1929-1949 . (Faculty of Education, University of Alberta, 
December 1949), No. 107* p# 13 * 

18 Duggan, op. clt . 

19 

Grace Lesley Duggan, “A Study of Some Aspects of Home 
Economics Education in Canadian Universities 11 — II. 

The Canadian Home Economies Journal , folume 2, Number 4, 
December 195 2# p# 8. 








e 






ii Cj 


' 



. 




« 


c 






« 


< 


t 


« . 






10 


tion on the topic, it Is hoped that the observations which 
follow will fill the gap and answer some of the questions 
asked about home economics in ^Alberta. 







CHAPTER II 


THE PROCEDURE OF THE STUDY AND THE SOURCES OF DATA 

As revealed in the preceding section, a search for 
available literature dealing with the subject of home 
economics education in Alberta, and a review of existing 
manuscripts was first made as a basis for the approach to 
the problem* Material of a general nature in the teaching 
of home economics can be found* But, for specific details 
for this province, it has been necessary to make use of 
the Annual Reports of the Department of Education and 
other current publications such as the Annual Reports of 
the Technical Education Branch of the Department of Labour 
of Canada, The Royal Commission on Industrial Training, and 
Technical Education Sessional Paper No* 191 D. A. 1912. 

In addition, a search was made for available data 
from the following sources: 

School Board Records 
Newspaper Files 
Alberta School Act 

Government of Alberta Grant Regulations 
Normal School Calendars 
University Calendars 

Calendars of the Alberta Schools of Agriculture and 


Home Economics 






















< 








• 











< 















. 




' 






< 





5 

. 






. J.. 












.. v 










r 







12 


Personal interviews 
Correspondence 

Courses of Study for the Schools of Alberta 
A# T# A* Magazines 

The approach to this thesis is from the standpoint 
of history, not philosophy of education# It is the writer's 
intention to assemble information concerning the home econ¬ 
omics courses which have been taught in Alberta from the 
beginning and to relate them to the progress of education 
and the social advancement of the province# 

Before proceeding it should be stated that the author 
does not intend to enter into any of the involved arguments 
concerning the relative values of home economies as compared 
to other courses in the education programme# 








CHAPEEB III 


THE HOME AND HOME ECONOMICS EDUCATION 


In this chapter the interplay of home economics 
education with that of the home will be discussed in order 
to determine the place of such training and to discover 
what conditions in living caused it to become part of the 
school curriculum® 

Historically, homemaking appeared early* 1 In the 

2 

fourth century B.G# Socrates wrote of home and farm manage¬ 
ment# In these writings a husband outlined the duties of a 
wife: 


I am paying into the common stock all that I 
have, and you have put in all that you brought with 
you and w© are not to reckon up which of us has 
actually contributed the greater amount but we 
should know of a surety that the one who proves 
the better partner makes the more valuable contri¬ 
bution# 

Your duty will be to remain indoors and send 
out those servants whose work is outside and super¬ 
intend those who are to work indoors, and to receive 
the incomings, and distribute so much of them as 
must be spent, and watch over so much as Is kept in 
store, and take care that sum laid by for a year be 
not spent in a month# And when wool is brought to 
you, you must see that cloaks are made for those 
that want them# You must see, too, that the dry 
com is in good condition for making food# 


1 Consult, Willystine Goodsell, Ph* D#, A History of the 
Eamilv as a Social and Educational Institution . (The 
Macmillan Company, New York, 1917). 

^ Bertha E# Nettleton, “The Early Days**, Journal of the 
American Dietetic Association Volume 24, p# 973. 










* . » 

* 


o ; got* jgi,I;v.gc ; .c 1 

e 

L - - . 









14 


Let us choose the place that each portion should 
occupy# How good it is to keep one f s stock of uten¬ 
sils in order, and how easy to find a suitable place 
in a house to put each set in* How beautiful it is 
to see cloaks of all sorts and conditions kept sepa- * 
rate or blankets, or brazen vessels or table furniture!^ 

These comments are applicable to a well run home 
today and form the basis for sound family relationships, 
budgeting, conservation, preservation and home management* 
.Also, in ancient Greece, the education of girls was confined 
to the home, where the mother trained her daughters in home 
management and in womanly graces# This pattern of home edu¬ 
cation continued to a greater or less degree through the ages 
to the time of the colonial settlements in America in the 
early years of the seventeenth century* 

With the passing of time woman became recognized as 

an individual# Thus, in the educational world there have 

4 

been many adjustments to meet her changing needs* In order 
that the reasons for these adaptations may be seen, a look 
at the development of woman*s work in the home, the commu¬ 
nity and the world has bean taken* 

Much has been written about homes and home life and 
the economies and social relationships arising out of family 
living# Through the centuries homemaking has been a major 

5 ibid... p. 980. 

4 Cooley, Wlnchell, Spohr, and Marshall, leaching Home 
koonomics . (The Macmillan Gompany, New York, 1922), p. 3* 








t 




t 

' 








( 





15 


3 

activity of all peoples in all lands* Given notes that: 

The home itself is the centre of all those 
activities which are particularly concerned with 
the material aspects of daily life, such as the 
getting of food and clothing as well as a reflee-^ 
tion of the various cultural forms of the period. 

The importance of the home as the centre of family 
life arises from the fact that the human infant is completely 
helpless at birth and must receive care and shelter to sur¬ 
vive* The rearing of children has traditionally been as¬ 
signed to woman and in most cases it is her duty not only to 
see to the material well-being of her offspring but also to 
teach him those forms of behavior which will meet with 
societal approval. Thus the family served as the educative 
institution in the society, relating the child to his cul¬ 
ture in terms of survival, religion, ideology and social 
organization.^ 

Originally, the home achieved all these objectives, 
but the trend in modern times has increasingly delegated 
these functions to agencies outside the family group. More 
and more the school has been taking over some of the func¬ 
tions formerly performed by the home, "not because the home 
is not willing to do what it once did but because the 
changed conditions make it impossible for the home to assume 

^ G. Given, "Home and Home Life," The American Peopled 
Encyclopedia. Tolume X, 1?15, p* 554. 

^ Loc* cit . 

7 Ibid ., p. 554. 









t 

* 





... ' i j' • 




4 

. w ... ■ V v • 
■ 

■ 

l . L ■ . • - •' 






* 

- 

- 






- 


" 1 v .. X 1 v 




. 





. 






16 


the full responsibilities." 

In 1929, Atwalter^ expressed the view that there was 

nothing new in the idea that girls should be taught to cook, 

sew and clean. In the past it was often all they were 

taught. These things were merely matters of skill and 

practice, learned at home and of no direct concern to any 

one but the housekeeper. The management of the household 

was considered as knowledge which was passed on from mother 

to daughter. The rearing of children was left to the 

"maternal instinct" guided by advice from others. 3 * 0 

The home did not become the subject of systematic 

study until the "machine age" with its changes of work and 

wealth. The old standards and activities of the home were 

out of alignment with actual habits and conditions. In 

time, scientific investigation had spread to the very 

11 

threshold of household and family problems. 

There was a time when the interests of the adults, 
especially the male adults, were considered paramount in the 
family. In this "century of the child" society has now 
placed a premium upon individualism and self-realization. 

U -- —--■---—--—--—- 

0 Cooley, OP. cit .. p. 26. 

^ Helen W. Atwater, Home Economics — The Art and Science 
of Homemaking . (Chicago, American Library Association, 

1929). P. 9. 

10 Loc. cit . 

11 Ibid .. p. 10. 













< 

» 

. 

-1 C ~ ' ' ' 

. 

,• . ■ ■ ' 

' • •• -• ^ : " 








» ■ 








. 

c 

* . ' J 




t . . t . 


c ' • 

■ / • t... ■ i i 

* * t - 

• ' • 

. • «• 




17 


The cohesive, highly integrated family has given way to a 
smaller unit more directly concerned with consumption than 
productivity. While modern home life is losing its economic 
function the importance of the home in the personality 
development of the child has become increasingly its duty. 
But even this responsibility has been somewhat thwarted by 
the growing use of the schools for education, and the wide 
range of contacts beyond the limits of the family circle. 

Home life in the large city today indicates a dis¬ 
integrating family structure* While women have achieved in 
some measure an equality of status with men, they have also 
been harassed with the difficulties arising out of maintain¬ 
ing a home and career at the same time* for many women, 
however, no such problems arise since neither fimncial need 
nor desire for outside employment has drawn them away from 

their homes. Notwithstanding this fact, the number of 

12 

employed women has increased. Home life for this group 
has centered, usually, about an apartment which is rented 
and not owned. 

Community agencies which service the needs of an 
K employed woman who may also be managing a home have 
increased* ior many adult members of a family, the home 

12 Dominion Bureau of Statistics 1952, Ottawa, 1954m See 
Appendix. 









18 


has become little more than a place in which to eat and 
13 

sleep. So, the growing dependence of the home upon or¬ 
ganized industry has been paralleled by the increased 
introduction of skilled services into the home* 

Druzilla Kent writes: 

The successful homemaker today must be able to 
assume a wide variety of responsibilities in connec¬ 
tion with a complex pattern of living. The pioneer 
homemaker’s tasks were quite different from those of 
the modern era. They were also easier to define and 
to develop skill in performance* Skill at performing 
these tasks to meet an acceptable standard was 
acquired through practising the methods mother or 
grandmother used until a satisfactory result, measured 
by an acceptable product, was attained* The basic 
needs of the family for clothes, food and soap remain, 
but how different is the learning required of the pros¬ 
pective homemaker today* A bewildering array of fabrics 
made from fibres unheard of a generation — or even a 
year —► ago confront the woman shopping for rugs, house¬ 
hold linens or clothing .H 

Changing patterns of living are apparent in more 
than these aspects of homemaking, too. Perhaps, grand¬ 
father worked sixteen or more hours per day alone or 
with a hired man on the farm. The young husband of mid¬ 
twentieth century may work only eight hours a day but he 
may travel as much as two hours daily to and from his 
job, and see as many different people in a day on the 
bus and in the cafeteria where he eats lunch as his 
grandfather did in a lifetime. The new bride in grand¬ 
father’s day probably moved into a house on the same 
farm, or at least in the same community, where she had 
grown up. Her mother, grandmother and adult friends 
whom she had known for a lifetime were handy sources 
of advice in any emergency. In 1?33 in addition to 
marrying younger .... a bride may move hundred of 

^ Given, op* cit .> p* 338 . 

14 

U. S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, 

Office of Education, Home. School and Community Experi ¬ 
ences in the Homemaking: Program f Vocational Division 
Bulletin No. 232. Home Education Series No. 2?, p. 1. 









c ■■■; :u 

r 8 ^Lf:. 


. 

’ 


0 ^ 0^).0> 


, 


... . 




;■ ' ' " , , 1', ■ ■; "■ i7. : : -.' : 

7,0 £ : J I V llOi 0 

. r'i - ■ 

- 


.. t , i ■ 1 ‘ .7 

, -.v , - 

■; I. J . r J. c ; 

* 






. 








... >. ' ( i, Joeq 

— 

• ^ 

. 

' V, I. .. 1 . . ':'. U 

< . 

■ u . o . i.M .. -ta 1 . 

- T • . .■ i 

- « 

. . 


V, - 












C 






19 


miles away from her family and friends perhaps 
spending much of the first few years of her mar¬ 
riage in temporary housing near defense centers 
or army camps. ^ 

"Preparation for homemaking in such a situation can 
not be considered adequate, if it includes only the acquisi¬ 
tion of housekeeping skills or if it encompasses only the 
situation within which the parental family lives and 
operates*"^ Recognizing these facts, families and commu¬ 
nities have welcomed the school into the field of homemaking 
education, for the woman of today needs specific training 
which will contribute both to womanhood and homemaking. 

Today the necessities and pleasures of life are pro¬ 
vided in different forms and by different means than w as the 
ease a generation ago* The modern home no longer houses all 
the essential industries which support life. In the average 
home of today certain industries do remain. The kitchen and 
dining room with the elements of their attendant industries 
still survive. However, our food materials are more varied 
and more convenient and the home preparation has been greatly 
curtailed by the commercial food industries. Today, many 
foods are either ready or partly ready to serve. In the past 
these had to be developed from their raw state to edible 
forms by the housewife. New fabrics and new processes go 

^ -hoc . c it . 

^ Loc. cit . 























* 




c 








* 




. ■ ■' 

L 

. . ■ 

. 

• . ' • V. 








20 


into the making of our clothing and much more of it is pur¬ 
chased ready made, furnishings, which make a convenient, 
comfortable house, are now more elaborate. 

Cooley 1 *^ has affirmed that the needs of tomorrow are 
reflected in the life of today. The knowledge which is re¬ 
quired in the present differs from that of the past and in 
view of this fact home economics has become an essential 
phase of education because it is a social study and the 
demands of everyday living make it one of prime importance. 

"Home economics in the schools of today should 
endeavor to work towards the maintenance of the best types 
of homes and family life because they are vital forces in 

the establishment of a sound democracy. 11 iU 

19 

furthermore, Lita Bane in discussing the education 
of the modern woman writes: 

One of the vital functions of home economics 
training is to enable the homemaker to see beyond 
the walls of her home, to realize the relation of 
her home to society. She must be aware of the in¬ 
fluences which bear upon her home and learn to use 
these external forces constructively. 20 

It seems that with education in home economics the 
"Aim of the Homemaker 1 * could be more fully realized. The 


17 

18 

19 

20 


Cooley, on. cit ., p. 57. 
ibid ., p. 38. 

Bane, op. cit .. p. 115. 
hoc, cit . 










21 


objectives are to have the home: 

Economically sound, 

Mechanically convenient, 

Physically healthful, 

Morally healthful, 

Mentally stimulating, 

Artistically satisfying, 

Socially responsible, 

Spiritually inspiring, 

Pounded upon mutual affection and respect 


21 


21 


Ibid*, p. v 








CHAPTER IV 


THE BEGINNINGS OF HOME ECONOMICS AND ITS 
DEVELOPMENT IN ALBERTA 


!• Early History of Home Economics 


As outlined in the previous chapter, the school has 
become more and more the centre of home and family-life edu¬ 
cation. 

1 

Bane stated that the first home economics movement 

grew out of the lag between the findings of science and their 

application where they would be of untold value to mankind, 

2 3 

namely in the home. Ivol Spafford extends this viewpoint 
in the statement that: 

Home economics grew out of a great social need, 
the recognition by social-minded women that many 
girls were not learning within the home the skills 
they needed to feed, clothe and house their families. 
Home economics has changed through the years with new 
knowledge in art and science, social science and psy¬ 
chology ; with changes in the larger society and with 
a new concept of the purpose of education.4 

The beginnings that were to result in home economics, 
as it is today, did not commence in the United States until 
near the end of the nineteenth century. In l8?0 only four 

1 Bane, op. cit .. p. 121. 

2 Loc. cit . 

2 Ivol Spafford, Fundamentals in Teaching Home Economics . 

(John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1^42), p. 7* 

4 Loo, cit . 










U ■ <i 

. _ . 1 

. < ( - 



















23 


"land grant" colleges in Iowa, Kansas, Oregon and South 
Dakota had departments of domestic science# By l8?6 the 
movement had progressed far enough so that the University 
of the State of New York had admitted household science to 
the examination list# Emphasis, in these early courses, 
was placed on learning the skills, in preparing food, making 
clothing and caring for the house# At that time it was of¬ 
fered only to girls. 

There were earlier origins in Canada but these did 
not grow because the time was not ripe# Such a start was 
made as early as 1668 when, 

Francois de naval, first bishop of Canada at¬ 
tempted to establish agricultural education on the 
North American continent with a farm school in 
southeastern Canada for French and Indian boys# 

Before the end of the seventeenth century, certain 
household tasks were taught and assigned girls in 
the Ursulin© Convents in Quebec, as part of their 
education# Sometime later the spinning and weaving 
of flax were introduced.* 

At Chatham, Ontario, the Ursuline Sisters have had 
a school of home economics for over ninety years#^ 

Still later in 1882 in the Province of Quebec a 
school was established by the Ursuline Sisters of Boberval, 
Lake St# John County, which provided the daughters of the 
farmers with an education in "agricultural household science". 


5 

Craig, on# __clt #. p. 3 * 

^ Letter, Mather Dominica, Brescia Hall, London, Ontario, 
Canada. 














t ( .. c " 

■ 

c ' 




. - si 


■ 


• ; :: •: •- r. ... r'Jo. c 


: 








<• 




t • • • ~ 

. o' is. ' w 


* 








■* 

...... ' , - 

< ^^ ^ 

: . . i . : 

■ 

{ * 




24 


This was the first school of its kind in Europe or America.^ 
There, Mother St* Raphael of the "Dames Ursulines de Roberval" 
directed education toward teaching young girls how to manage 

g 

a home successfully according to their social positions. A 
similar school was started in 1905 at St* Paschal and still 
another at the Macdonald Agricultural College at Ste. Ann de 
Be llevue, Qjae bee * 

The first great step in the United States toward 

organizing the home economics movement was taken in 1899 

when a group of leaders In household economics met at Lake 

Placid, New York, to discuss the problems involved in the 

9 

education of women and the training of teachers. 

These Lake Placid conferences in home economics were 
organized because in the last decade of the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury there had been a growing movement of courses of study 
in schools and colleges on subjects relating to home econ¬ 
omics. This was helped by such things as the literature 
which Mrs. Ellen Richards prepared, her "New England Kitchen" 
and her exhibit of a similar character called "Rumford Kit¬ 
chen" at the Chicago exposition in 1895* There were also 
Professor Atwater's investigations on human nutrition which 

7 Miss Irene Hill, B.A., "Household Science", Encyclopedia 
of Canada ^ 1948, III, p. 205. 

® Mother Dominica, op. cit . 

9 Bane, op. cit ., p. 121. 












29 


had been in full operation at the Wesleyan University from 

1894 and were associated with the Office of Experiment 

10 

Stations at Washington, 

In Canada development was influenced by practices in 

the United States. The origin of home economics in Ontario 

was due to the vision of far-seeing philanthropists and edu- 

11 

eationistso Miss M. A. Clarke writes: 

We, who are beneficiaries of their pioneering, 
shall always respect the high ideals and the vision 
of two community-minded women — Mrs. Adelaide 
Hunter Hoodless of Hamilton and Mrs. Lillian Massey 
Treble of Toronto, and of two early leaders in home 
economics education — Miss Annie L« Laird and Miss 
Mary Urie Watson. 

It was Mrs. Hoodless who in 1891 was responsi¬ 
ble for the first classes in "the science and art 
of homemaking" held in the Hamilton Y.W.C.A. These 
paved the way for the first "Normal Courses for 
Domestic Science Teachers" and the official intro¬ 
duction of donestic science in the elementary school 
system in 1899• Shortly after, Mrs. Hoodless inter¬ 
ested Sir William Macdonald in providing funds to 
build a home economies centre at the Ontario Agri¬ 
cultural College, Guelph. As a result Macdonald In¬ 
stitute opened its doors in 1903, offering, a "Nor¬ 
mal Course In Domestic Science", a "Normal Course 
in Plain Sewing", a "Housekeeper’s Course" and a 
variety of short courses. 12 

About the same time Mrs. Lillian Massey Treble 
devoted herself to the establishment of courses in 
homemaking for girls and young women at the Victor 
.Mission in Toronto# In 1901-02 a two-year Normal 
k course for the training of teachers was added to 

10 Ibid ., p. 122. 

11 Miss M. A. Clarks, “Home Economies in Ontario", 

Practical Home Economics , December, 1947* 

12 Loc. cit . 





{ 












; 


■ 






0 










c 




'J 


< 












c 









26 


the curriculum of the school. This was the fore¬ 
runner of the Household Science Department of the 
University of Toronto which came into being in 
1902 as a result of Mrs. Treble's enthusiasm and 
generosity. She, with the support of chancellor 
Nathaniel Burwash of Victoria College, interested 
the University authorities in establishing the 
first degree course in Household Science in Canada 
and the third on the continent. In 19 08 the first 
sod was turned for a new building to house the 
Department of Household Science. This building 
was the gift of Mrs. Treble.^3 

The early educators in home economics at both 
the University of Toronto and the Macdonald Insti¬ 
tute at Guelph received their professional training 
in the United States. 14 

Thus, impetus was given to the movement in 
Canada. In the provinces in which the government 
provided financial assistance the growth was most 
rapid. 15 

Radical changes were also being felt in the educa¬ 
tional world at the beginning of the century. Weston‘S com¬ 
ments on the introduction of the innovations as follows: 

New ideas In education expressed by such men 
as Friedrich Froebel in Germany and Herbert Spencer 
in England were beginning to find practical expres¬ 
sion* The need to provide for individual differences 
in children, the value of utilizing children’s inter¬ 
ests to motivate learning and the desirability of de¬ 
veloping motor as well as intellectual expression were 
all helping to bring about changes in the school cur¬ 
ricula. 17 

^ Doc, cit . 

14 Loc. cit . 

15 Stewart, on. cit . r Synopsis. 

3-6 Phyllis Ellen Weston, ’’The History of Education in 
Calgary”, (Unpublished M. A. Thesis, The University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta. April 1951), PP* 21-22. 

Loc. cit . 




















. ' i.v ' - ^ 

- 

c 

c 

? 

, 

« 






a 








' 0 (£ ’ : 

* 








' i ' *• . ■' 




, . l 




■ 


* 

« 


. . 


■ 

. 






27 


2* The Introduction of Home Economics 

Into Alberta schools 


In Doctor D* J. Goggin was given entire charge 

l8 

of the educational affairs of the North West Territories* 

In 1898 , he said that the purpose of the high school was* 
”To teach those subjects, a knowledge of which is helpful 
in the transaction of business, the duties of citizenship, 
the care of the body, and the forelation of moral charac- 
ter." 1? 


Again in 1?01, he explained that education served 
the need of the state when It recognized that, 

The educated man is capable of higher service 
than the uneducated one, that the broader a man T s 
views and the more liberal his culture, the more 
intelligent will be his grasp of state needs and 
the more effective his labours in its behalf* The 
local community and the family recognize that the 
enrichment of the individual through liberal in¬ 
struction and training along cultural lines means 
an improved horn© and community life* 20 

With these ideas in mind Doctor Gcggin in 1902 re¬ 
vised the programme of studies for the Ncrth West Territories 
following closely the one which was in use in Ontario at that 

time* His comment on the course was to the effect that it 

21 

had been framed to meet actual rather than ideal needs* 


^ Nellie Margaret Aylesworth, ”History of High School 
Courses of Study for Alberta”, (Unpublished Master of 
Arts Thesis, University of Alberta, April 1936), p* 17* 

^ Loc» cit * 

20 ibia .. pp. 17-18. 

21 Ibid ., p. 22. 







A W 





t 


c 




c 


a ; £2 : ■.. vj 










r 




$ 


‘ 












l.y 


< 


e 


c 


( 



t 


t * 









28 


22 

Doctor Goggin did not consider manual training as 

another subject but rather as an added mode of study* It 

was only an attempt to help students convert thought into 

action since “action tests and clarifies thinking”* It 

would not take the place of reading, writing or arithmetic. 

"Its greatest value lay in the correlation of the physical, 

23 

the manual and the intellectual". 

When the Province of Alberta was organized in 1303 f 
the Department of Education adopted the programme of studies 
in use by the North West ‘territories. However, in 1308 
steps were taken to instigate a new course of studies in 
Alberta. 1'his was ready in 1312 and there was a general 
feeling that it compared favorably with the courses in the 
other provinces of the Dominion. In this first major re¬ 
vision of the Alberta Course of Studies a system of twelve 
grades was introduced and provision made for the teaching 

of such "special subjects" as art, manual training, house- 

24 

hold economics and health, 

the Course of Studies for the Public Schools in 
1312 listed Manual training and Household Science and Arts 

22 Annual Report of the Department of Education North- 

West Territories, 1902 » Regina, John A. Reid, Government 
Printer. 

25 Loo, cit . 

24 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report 1939 . Report of Deputy Minister, G. Fred McNally, 
The Curriculum, p* ?• 









; . , ■ , v. Si .... ' - c ■*; 


'■ 




. 




. . . V 

, 


' 








. 




C; . . , ; : .. .. , - ' c 




. 













. t 




i 









• 

















c . c 















29 


25 

for grades one to eight. The course included sewing for 
Grade VT girls; sewing and cooking for Grade VII girls; and 
sewing, cooking and housework for Grade VIII girls. A 
definite course was set out but it was understood that 
it was “subject to suitable modifications to reflect local 
needs and conditions"* The objectives were “to give a new 
channel for the expression of ideas; to give hand and eye 
training; to develop constructive impulses, judgment, ac¬ 
curacy, resource, patience, industry and a sense of sym¬ 
metry, proportion and beauty by the artistic production of 
common things, to give respect for manual pursuits and en¬ 
courage industrial effieieney. This course was listed 
as a non-examination subject. Although home nursing is 
listed in the introduction to the course, no subject mat¬ 
ter is mentioned in the course content. 

Home economies was thus introduced into the schools 
of Alberta at a time when the emphasis on manual training 
was strong* According to winch©11 2 ° its first purpose was 
the teaching of sewing, cooking and cleaning and attention 

Course of Studies for the Public Schools . Province of 
Alberta, 1912. Jas» E. Richards, Government Printer, p.69 

See Appendix A. 

^ Course of Studies for the Public Schools . Province of 

Alberta, 1912* Jas. E. Richards, Government Printer, p*69 

Cora M. winehell, Home Economics for Public school Admin ¬ 
istrators . (Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, 
Columbia University, New York City, 1931), p* 3. 












20 


was almost wholly on skills* 

After the formation of the province there had been a 
rush of home seekers to the Peace River District. The edu¬ 
cation of the settlers 1 children had been looked after by 
the Anglican and Homan Catholic Mission schools which had 
received aid from the Dominion government previous to the 
formation of the province. Afterward they had been assisted 
by the provincial government* These schools were generally 
taught by the Sisters of some Homan Catholic Order or by lay 
teachers, male or female, of the Anglican church. In many 
of these schools the students lived in dormitories and were 
taught to care for their own beds and clothing. In addition 
the girls were taught mending, darning, plain sewing and 
knitting. 29 

2* Early Teachings of Home Economics 
In Galgary^O ~ 


Prior to 1902 the first suggestion of the establish¬ 
ment of household science classes in Calgary seems to have 
come from Dr. J. f. Robertson when he met the Calgary School 
Board in November 19 QQ and made arrangements for one of the 


^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1912, also 

J. M. Hutchinson, "The Education System of Alberta" 
(Thesis for Degree of Doctor of Pedagogy, Queens 
University, Kingston, Ontario, 1912}, p. 49. 

^ School Board Piles in the Calgary Public Library and 
Newspaper Clipping Piles in Reference Library, Calgary. 











31 


Macdonald endowed manual training schools. When this school 
had been established for approximately six months the teacher, 
N. M. Snell, arranged a special course for the public school 
girls in the wood-working shop, ‘fhis was carried on for some 
time. 

In November 1901, the senior lady teachers of the 
public school proposed to the board that a course in elemen¬ 
tary sewing be arranged for the girls to correspond with the 
course in woodwork for the boys. The Instructors offered to 
plan and prepare the course and to teach the classes if the 
board would furnish the equipment and supplies. This offer 
was accepted and the course was outlined after information 
was received from other school systems concerning the nature 
of the work most suitable. A complete set of models was 
prepared illustrating the details and development of the 
various stitches and the simpler sewing processes. Instruc¬ 
tion began early in 1902. 

In 1903 the Calgary School Board tendered formal 
thanks to the teachers for their success in the instruction 
of these first classes in sewing. The lady teachers of the 
senior grades all Joined in the work and the systematic 
teaching of sewing was continued by them until the work in 
household science was extended in 1910. 

At the regular meeting of the Calgary school Board 
in May 1910, on the motion of Lieutenant Colonel James 







32 


walker, a committee was appointed to prepare a report on the 
teaching of household science in the schools and to bring in 
recommendations for a suitable place for holding classes, 
the appointment of teachers and the equipment required, with 
an estimate as to the probable expense of operation and main¬ 
tenance. During this same month Miss Anne Morrison from 
Ontario was appointed Supervisor of Domestic Science with 
Miss Margaret A. Stewart from New Brunswick as her assistant. 

About the beginning of October 1^10, khe first domes¬ 
tic science centre in Alberta was completed and cooking 
classes were started. Equipment had been placed in rooms in 
a rented business block on the corner of Eleventh Avenue and 
fourth Street lest. All senior public school girls of the 
city were given courses in cooking and household management, 
xhe courses in sewing which had been previously established 
for the junior public school girls were continued in the 
regular class rooms. The accommodation at the cooking centre 
was by no means ideal, yet the set up was quite complete with 
fairly good ventilation, lighting and plumbing. The cooking 
tables were in hollow square formation, having individual and 
group equipment of utensils and gas stoves. Adjoining the 
kitchen was office space and a good sized dining room simply 
furnished. 

From reports it is ascertained that there was much 
enthusiasm. Night school classes were opened in November 


: ? ' 

.. . . . •• •- 

.. • ,, 0 iO u QO 9 iv 

, 'i:: n•• 

■. * 

c . . 'L ... 

; ,• j L . * . : i. i 

* ■. t.' 

... . •... o ,..... , • ■ .i c; Ziifi a 

* 

.. . ■ '••• -■ ^ -■ c 

. 

• j- < QS..r.i: • ‘I -- 








► 

f 






c 




c 









' ■ 




■ 

, 





23 


1910 . These were not free, a small fee being charged to 

cover the cost of lighting, materials and the rent of the 

room* The editor of the Calgary ALbertan , Mr. William 

Davidson, printed the lessons in his newspaper each week in 

advance. These evening cookery classes were the first in 

Canada to be sponsored by a school board. They grew from 

one weekly lesson to four or five evening classes each week. 

For these and the increasing day classes an additional 

teacher was required. Miss Gladys Borden, B.Sc. , from New 

Brunswick was appointed. In 1919 she went to Edmonton to 

assist Miss Mabel Patrick who had organized a household 

31 

economics department at the University of Alberta. 

In 1911* T. B. Kidner was named supervisor of House¬ 
hold Science in Calgary with duties to commence in September. 
Mr. Kidner had been brought from England through the Sir 
William Macdonald Fund, to help establish manual training 
and household science in the schools of Canada. At the time 
of his appointment he had been doing that work in New Bruns¬ 
wick. His first step was to plan for the equipment of a 
permanent teaching centre at Connaught School. In 1912 the 
school board Instituted an elaborate system of night school 
work under the directa* ship of Mr. Kidner. 

^ Margaret A. Stewart, "Memories of the First Home Econ¬ 
omics fork in the Schools of Alberta under the Calgary 
School Board 11 , Toronto, September 1939* 









34 


4* The Report of the Ro.val Commission 
On Industrial Training 
and Technical Education? 2 


In 1913 The Report of the Royal Commission on Indus¬ 
trial Training and Technical Education was completed* Its 
testimony was substantially unanimous in indicating a number 
of pressing needs of the people in respect to Industrial 
training and technical education. Number eight read as 
follows: 


Glasses and courses for the training of girls 
'and women to give them clear concepts of the sani¬ 
tary conditions which make for the safety, comfort 
and economy of the home, correct ideas of economical 
ways of providing food and garments and of using 
fuels; and some practice in domestic art that will 
further enable them to reveal and enjoy their love 
of the beautiful by making beautiful things for the 
home. 53 

A review of the work done in Alberta contained 

statements from Mr. James McGaig, Superintendent of Edmonton 

Schools, who reported that preparations were being made in 

the Gollegiate Institute of that city for domestic science 

34 

but not for manual training. 

Information obtained from Doctor Arthur M. Scott, 
Superintendent of Schools for Calgary, revealed that while 


Royal Commission on Industrial Training and Technical 
Education, Report of the Commissioners . Sessional Paper, 
No. 191 DA, 1913, Ottawa. 

33 Ibid., Part IV, p. 1648. 

34 Ibid ., p. 2296 . 
















* 










%: '. . . j ■ ' - ... - 


j ,. - ■ . 


t- ' c L/ t i J :, o 0 

t . .. - '•# •, '• ' 

l ... •, t . 






. 


• . u ,, . ■ .. •- .. o' : • 








c » 

: t 

i l : v- : 1 .. - ^ - -- r ■ 

. . 

t .. ' - ' • .v....'. .. 




. 


i 




. 


< 
















35 


the courses of study were in the main prescribed by the 

Department of Education, the City Board had organized a 

department of household science in the public schools* under 

the direction of a supervisor as no provision had been made 

35 

in the school ordinance for either, previous to 1?13. 

The content of the subject matter in household 
science was briefly summarized as follows: 

The girls of standard 3 have sewing lessons 
once each week while the boys take elementary 
bench work one hour a week.36 

In Standard 4, both senior and junior, the girls 
have a lesson each in cooking and household economics 
while the boys have more advanced woodwork with elem¬ 
entary mechanical drawing for two hours each week.37 

Special attention is given in Standard 5 to 
drawing and art and an elementary course of leather 
and brass work forms a continuation of the handi¬ 
craft work for both boys and girls. Manual training 
and elementary handicraft work are taken from the 
primary class through the public school grades. The 
tooled leather work and advanced basketry are carried 
on in regular classrooms. The domestic science course 
had two special teachers and included cooking and 
sewing. A class for girls from the private schools 
met on Saturday. Married women* working girls and 
teachers had an evening class.35 

In addition, Doctor Scott made the suggestion that 
provision should be mad© for manual training and household 
science in the high school to continue and supplement the 


^ Ibid .. Section 4. p. ZZ99* 

36 Ibid ., p. 2500. 

37 

koc. oit . 

Loo* cit . 







: V.\ • ; •: 













v <: • ..., • J 

d 





■ - ■ 



« 

. . .0 ' •*. ■ .. ..: 

' 


‘J : v 

J j ! ■ > u; 0 







\itV2 XV : 


f .! V ■'■■■• U ■ ■ A J < • '■> ’ -- 

r,., v v; , .. T':'* :• tnU) 


£ . 

i,j;;o M.; iu>*S«ik\.!. 0 • (■•%£>. 

L‘ • C '.i V • . ' ~ 








36 


work being done in the public school. This would be a fur¬ 
ther provision in the training of boys and girls for social 

39 

service and citizenship. 

When interviewed, Miss Stewart thought that she 
could give a series of ten lessons to the Calgary teachers 
that would enable them to understand the relationship of 
domestic science to other work in the school. She felt that 
there could be a great deal of correlation between domestic 
science, literature, science and chemistry. Concerning course 
content, Miss Stewart pointed out that no instruction was 
given to the public school girls in cutting out garments. 

This would come later in the class for women and would be a 
suitable subject for high school girls, although they would 
probably lack the necessary preliminary lessons in sewing. 

Miss Stewart anticipated that by the time the girls, who 
were then taking sewing, reached high school there would be 
technical classes. As time went on classes were to be ex¬ 
panded to meet the needs of the people. 40 

According to the report of the loyal Commission, 

no domestic science had been offered in the schools of 

41 

Lethbridge or Medicine Eat up to the year 1913* 

The observation was made, also, that a number of 

^ hoe, cit. 

40 Ibid .. P. 203. 

41 Ibid .. Section 7, PP. 2303, 2304, 2303. 







* 








. 






C 


u 


, 5 V : •• ' • ■ ^ 

0 

t 

. 














i 









37 


young people in the high school were preparing for normal 
entrance* i'hese students intending to be teachers were 
getting no training that would qualify them to give instruc¬ 
tion in manual training or domestic science* 

3* Home Economics in the Normal Schools 

In the development of the policy of the Department 
of Education for the encouragement and improvement of in¬ 
struction in the manual and household arts, an initial step 
was taken in 1907 when provision was made for the teaching 

of such courses in the normal school* In so doing Alberta 

42 

followed the lead of the older provinces in u ana da* 

Consequently, early in the year of 1913 courses in 
domestic science were introduced into both the Gamrose and 
Calgary Noimal Schools by highly qualified and experienced 
specialists* Miss Margaret Stewart was appointed to Gamrose 
and Mss Catherine McCaig, a Macdonald Institute graduate 
and former teacher of Foods and Cookery at Macdonald College, 
Quebec, was appointed to the Calgary position. 

At that time the limited training period of four 
months made it impossible to give an extensive course* Ihe 
students were more or less introduced to the subjects and 
given a "point of view" regarding the place of household 


42 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1914, pp. 32-33. 








38 


arts in the education of children* This was especially true 
for those who had no training in the subject before entering 
Normal* These two factors made it particularly trying and 
difficult to secure real and permanent results. It was not 
until September 1, 1919 > that the Normal course for the 
training of teachers was extended from four to eight months.^ 
The lesson period was then forty minutes in length and three 
periods a week; were devoted to Household Science and Art* 

The courses were practically the same in both normal 
schools* The lessons in cookery centered chiefly around 
rural lunch problems. The theory of foods and food values 
was discussed and lists made of dishes suitable for prepara¬ 
tion and serving under conditions which obtain in the rural 
school. Methods and time of preparation and minimum equip¬ 
ment were also considered. Groups of students prepared these 
dishes and served them to children in classrooms, so as to 
get actual experience. A slight charge defrayed the cost 
of the undertaking. In addition to the preparation and 
serving of the food, records were kept of the quantities 

required for a certain number of persons and of the cost 

44 — 

of individual portions. iror the rural school lunch work, 
a manual of instruction was prepared by Miss Margaret 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Animal 
Report . Edmonton, 1920, p. 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1917 9 p* 29. 





















3 ? 


Stewart in l?l8. The Department of Education printed these 

pamphlets which were used by the students of the two noimal 

43 

schools as a text book on the subject* 

In addition to the school lunch work, the men stu¬ 
dents of the Gam rose Normal School made a request that they 
be allowed to have a course in "homestead n cooking. The 
request was granted. When class schedules permitted the 
men were also taught in Calgary. 

Sewing problems were related as closely as possible 
to art problems, and to the preparation of material for 

school fairs which were being sponsored jointly by the De- 

46 

pertinent of Agriculture and the Department of Education. 

Two aims were uppermost in the course in sewing — 
first, to familiarize the students with the common stitches, 
knitting, crocheting and mending. The articles for demon¬ 
stration were such as would be found in any home and so 
would be obtainable in any school. Second, to enrich the 
students’ own experience problems were set in the making of 
simple articles from common materials at minimum cost. 

Costs and methods of construction were discussed in class. 
The degree of difficulty and the technique employed were 

43 w. E. Einbow, Editor Librarian of the Department of 

Education Library has a copy of this school lunch manual. 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report., Edmonton, 1^13, p* 44. 













c 






















* 

■ ? 



. 

c 





« 








{ 













f 













c 


c 









40 


47 

carefully graded to suit the various classes. 

Facilities for providing instruction were considered 
of great importance. At Camrose the household science clas¬ 
ses were first held in temporary quarters provided by the 
Camrose School Board. In 1913 the new Normal School Build¬ 
ing was completed and a generous department for household 
science was provided with all the latest equipment available. 
A large cooking laboratory had ample plumbing, lighting, and 
ventilation, cooking tables and utensils. A good variety of 
fuels for cooking was installed -- coal, gas, oil and elec¬ 
tricity. There were two electric ranges, a “lestinghouse” 
and a "Hughes”. Another room was available for domestic 
art and one for laundry. There were also a dining room, a 
supply room and an office for the instructor. 

In Calgary, classes were first started in the 
spacious janitors 1 quarters at the top of the building 
which is now known as McDougall School. When the Calgary 
Normal School was moved to the north hill in 192 2 and es¬ 
tablished in the same building as the Institute of Tech¬ 
nology and Art, comfortable and spacious work rooms were 
equipped for the use of the domestic science classes. 

In 1922 Miss Margaret Stewart resigned as head of 
the Department of Household Science at the Camrose Normal 

4 7 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1917, P* 20. 














p 

; tO : v-3 

* 

. 

• t 

' 






t « 




* 

. 




* . 




'o 1 Cx ^ i , '• 




c . 

i 



' 




• 






4 














t 5 








41 


School. She was succeeded by Miss Hi# K. Bowman, who had 
been in charge of the Household Arts Department in the 
Edmonton Technical School. In 1923 Miss E. A. Hastie who 
had been in charge of the Department of Domestic Science 
and Household Art at the Provincial Normal School in 
Edmonton was appointed to succeed Miss Bowman when she 
returned to her home in the United States. 

Under the direction of Miss Catherine McOaig, the 
Calgary Normal school students and Normal Practice school 
children received training in the "scientific preparation 
of food" and in needlework. In 1916 Miss Marjorie Goldie 
became head of the department and the emphasis in the 
training was directed chiefly toward the organization of 
school lunches in rural schools® This was a practical out¬ 
let for Miss Goldie’s interest in health as a part of house¬ 
hold science* This enterprise proved to be one of the 
valuable undertakings of the department. 4 ® After Mss 
Goldie’s resignation in 1926, Miss Rae Chit tick, the health 
instructor, carried on this important work during the cold 
winter months. 4 ^ 

As time went on there had been a growing feeling 

that the long periods required by the laboratory classes 
— ~ ~ 

Olive C. Pisher, Newspaper Article in Calgary Herald . 

April 7, 1952. 

4 ^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 

Report, Edmonton, 1927, p* 21. 










t 




. 

•- f f. ’ c 

. 

L ' . V .» ( 

. 

. 

. i . v‘ ■ ■ .! 1 >• •< ■ , ■■ 1 .. •' ' t 

v . ... '.•* . ■■■ i, > » • - '-V. - 1 ■' • ^ 

* 

i, .. . v ' i. ; ■ = 

% 

t 

. 

* ' 

< 

t - 



' 










t 








■ 




42 


in household science were an encroachment on time which 
could be spent on more academic work. Consequently, when 
Miss Goldie resigned in 1^26 the Department of Household 
Science in the Calgary Normal School was closed except fcr 
a brief interval when Mrs. M. Gossip (the former Catherine 
McCaig) gave demonstrations in the procedure of "hot lunch" 
preparation and serving. 





CHAPTER V 


FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN HOME ECONOMICS IN ALBERTA 

1* The General Picture from 1913 to 1917 

Coming after the introduction of the 1912 course 
of studies in household science and arts* the Provincial 
School Grants Act of 1915 made provision for the payment 
of a grant for the teaching of special subjects* This aid 
varied with the location of municipalities* The large cen¬ 
tres of population and wealth were to a large extent thrown 
on their own resources* Nevertheless* these centres were 
encouraged to provide for the teaching of manual training, 
domestic science, art, music and physical culture by these 
grants which were approved under departmental regulations.” 

The allowance in the larger cities was twenty per cent of 
the teacher 1 s salary and ten per cent of the value of equip¬ 
ment* In 1?20, an increase to forty per cent of the teacher r s 

2 

salary was authorized. More liberal grants were offered in 
the smaller centres with the idea of encouraging school 
boards to secure specialists to teach these subjects and to 
assist in providing equipment.^ 

1 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report , Edmonton, 1913* 

o 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1919, P* 10. 

■5 

Ibid .» p. 11, also No* 1, Section iii, Technical Educa ¬ 
tion Bulletin . 
















i- v ;v, ' 

? ' ' 




. 

■ 









? 




( 


c 







C 








c • 






44 


4 

J. A. Smith, Inspector of High Schools, observed in 
1919 that the introduction of manual training and household 
science in town high schools would be a most difficult task 
as more high school accommodation was needed. Generally, 
however, the different school boards realized fully the 
importance and value of this training and appreciated the 

s 

liberal encouragement offered by the Department of Education. 

With reference to the introduction of instruction in 
household arts into the elementary and secondary schools in 
new centres, Dr* J. G. Miller, the Director of Technical Edu¬ 
cation for Alberta, visited many school boards during the year 
of 1915* At each place he explained the value of the training, 
the regulations and the arrangements made by the government 
for financial assistance. In practically every case the 
boards indicated their willingness to do their part to pro¬ 
vide for this type of work as soon as it became possible to 
make the necessary financial provisions at a reasonable rate. 
In some places the necessary accommodation was available and 
only the equipment and a qualified teacher were required.^ 

In Glaresholm, Olds and Vermilion the presence of 
the Provincial Schools of Agriculture, with their manual 
and household arts equipment and staff, indicated that pos- 

4 Ibid ., p. 17. 

5 

■boc. cit . 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1915, p# 39• 











. 










. 

. . J 


■ 










i 

' 

8 ■ • ^ * 

4 

\ 




... ‘ •.. . ' ..,c. ■ , ■ . 




. 

I 

<* i • t-' 

<J 












45 


sibly an arrangement might be made whereby the children at¬ 
tending the schools of these towns could be given the re¬ 
quired courses* The chief difficulty arose from the fact 
that an additional teacher would be required for the boys 
and one for the girls for the five months during which the 
.Agricultural Schools were in session. It was thought un¬ 
wise to provide separate equipment for students of these 
towns while that provided in the Agricultural Schools re- 

7 

mained almost wholly unused for seven months in the year.' 

As it was expensive and difficult to make provision 
for suitable accommodation for such instruction where it 
had not been provided for in the school buildings, Doctor 

Miller urged all districts that were erecting new buildings 

8 

to make specifications for such teaching in their plans. 

9 

According to J. A. Pife of the Edmonton Inspecto¬ 
rate, the greatest advancement in the educational field was 
taking place in the areas of manual training, domestic 
science and in ”the purely technical education.” In five 
of the large Edmonton schools there were domestic science 
laboratories with complete modern equipment. The teaching 
was done by three supervisors and the course included sew- 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
R e po r t, 1915, p. 59. 

8 Ibid . f p. 41. 

9 

7 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, 1915, pp. 21-22. 


























::S ! 

. 

* 

* 


e 









46 


ing for the girls of grades five and six and cooking for 

the girls of grades seven, eight and nine. 10 

In 1913 provision for the teaching of technical 

education had been made in Edmonton. A temporary building 

had been fitted up at a cost of eight thousand dollars and 

equipped at a cost of twenty thousand dollars to serve the 

needs at that time. Provision was made for both day and 

night classes. The courses for the day classes included: 

English, mathematics, industrial and commercial history 

and geography, civics, hygiene, free hand drawing and 

design, mechanical drawing, home economics, woodworking 

and printing. The courses for the evening classes were 

similar but more advanced. 

Edmonton reduced all special supervisors to the 

rank of instructors in 1913* In the majority of cases 

their services were retained as special teachers or they 

were placed in charge of one of the regular classrooms. 

The various centres for instruction in the manual and 

household arts in the elementary grades were kept open 

11 12 

and the usual instruction provided. In 1917, Mr. life 
wrote that much interest was being shown by the senior 

10 Loc. cit . 

11 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1913, p. 38. 

l? 

Province of Albert a, Department of Education, Annual 
Report , Edmonton, 1917, P* 31* 










47 


girls of the Edmonton schools in domestic science and it 

appeared that the instruction given was much appreciated by 
13 

their parents. x 

When mechanical drawing was provided in 1914 for 
first year high school boys in Calgary, a correspondence 
course in dress and garment making was introduced for the 
girls. Unfortunately in 1915, with the exception of the 
supervisor of physical training, all supervisors were re¬ 
duced to the rank of teachers and the duties of super¬ 
vision of home economies were centered in the office of 
the Director of Technical Education. The regular class 

room instruction in household arts was continued in all 

14 

centres as in former years. 

15 

The opinion was expressed by J. A. smith in 1915 
that the education of children in town and country schools 
would be more n vital 11 if they had the opportunity to do 
sane work in manual training and household science. He 
felt, too, that more effective means should be taken to 
stimulate a greater interest in these subjects in the pub¬ 
lic schools. From his visits to the household science and 
manual training centres in Ualgary, he concluded that the 
value of the work could not be overestimated. Principals 
Loc. cit . 

14 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1915, p. 38. 

Ibid .. p. 95. 










• ' • • $ 


x 



, - ) 


i.j . Oi: J 








i . 




i n) 








, , ’ . 

? t 

.. / i,. 0 :* j. > ' ■ v ' ‘ 






■ 












c 


- * 










48 


of the schools informed him that through such work boys and 
girls were developing in personality, self-control, initi¬ 
ative and appreciation. Habits of industry and a love for 

16 

productive and constructive work were also being formed. 

During the summer of 1919 courses in household arts 
for Grades nine and ten were outlined and authorized. In 
districts where the school board provided equipment and in¬ 
struction in accordance with the requirements of the Depart¬ 
ment, these courses were required by all girls in the grades 
specified. 1 ^ By 1916, Edmonton, Calgary and Camrose had or¬ 
ganized these classes. Practical and theoretical tests were 
provided by the board of examinations, in the different cen¬ 
tres where the trustees had provided the necessary equipment 
and placed specialists in charge of the work. A large num¬ 
ber of students wrote on these examinations and it was felt 
that probably these departments of the secondary school sys- 
tern would develop rapidly. Under the direction of Mr. C. 
W. Fairn, Supervisor of Household Science in Calgary, the 
laboratory in the Crescent Heights High School was equipped. 
There household management and food study were taught to all 
grade ten girls in the city. 

The full programme tn household arts was being pro- 

16 Log, elt . 

11 Ibid., P. 39- 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report > Edmonton, 1916, p. 21. 


















t « 

* 

■ i . ' * 









( 















« 

. 


, 






49 


vided in Camrose in 1919 through co-operation of the local 

19 

school authorities and the Provincial Normal School. 

During the same year in Medicine Hat the departments of 

20 

household arts were discontinued. .Early in 1919 the 
Lethbridge School Board decided to close the Manual Train¬ 
ing School, store the equipment and transfer the high 

school to the building. The prevocational class that had 

21 

been organized was also disbanded. However, good pro¬ 
gress was being made in needlework in the Separate schools 
of that city in 191?. 22 


2. A Prevocational School 


In 1919 the Calgary School Board turned its atten¬ 
tion to a problem which according to Weston was not yet 
solved satisfactorily even in 1991; namely, n that of the 

adolescent neither ready for a job nor suited to pursue an 

23 

entirely academic program in the higher grades.” 

Robert Massey, principal of Balmoral School, was 
interested in trying to find a solution. After an extensive 


^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1919, p♦ 59• 

20 Ibid ., p. 98. 

21 Ibid ., p. 98. 

22 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1917, p. 49. 

Phyllis Ellen Weston, ”The History of Education in Cal¬ 
gary”, Unpublished Master of Arts Thesis, Faculty of 
Arts and Science, University of Alberta, April 1991, p.28. 
















30 


survey and classification of students who had left school, 
and their past school records, the conclusion was that: 

Some system of intermediate education must be 
found in order to prolong school life, to assist 
those intending to engage in a trade, to modify the 
curriculum for those not intending to complete high 
school and yet make it possible for them to change 
their minds later on, and to find a satis fact ory 
place for the average student* The Prevocational 
School, already finding ardent adherents in the 
United States seemed a promising avenue for re¬ 
search and experiment * -• 

Mr* Massey; T. B* Kidner, Director of Technical 
Education in Calgary, Assistant Superintendent J . A. Smith; 
and Mr* S. Y* Taylor, Public School trustees were selected 
by the Calgary School Board to attend the Prevocational 
School Convention which was held in Michigan in 1913* The 
group also visited Eastern Canadian and American centres 
for intermediate technical education. 2 ^ 

Keturning, the committee presented a report which 
was satisfactory to the board. 

Among other things the report read: 

Many children who drop out of school are 
classed as dull or backward because their brains 
react more to actual doing than to abstract studies. 
Such children, in the atmosphere of a prevocational 
school expand and develop tremendously and soon make 
equal progress 
studious type. 2 


g* Ibid .. p. 2 9 . 

25 Report of a Special Committee on Industrial and Teciinl- 

cal education . 1914. Calgary Public School Board. 
Newspaper article, Calgary Albertan , September 19, 1913* 
Calgary Public Library. 


.n academic work with those of the 









51 


Mr* Massey was appointed director of the Calgary 

27 

Prevocational school which was to open in January 1914* 

It was the first school of its kind in Canada and was sup¬ 
ported partly by the Calgary School Board and by a special 
federal grant* 

Victoria School on Twelfth Avenue between Third 

and Fourth Streets east was chosen as the location of the 

school* In addition to the prescribed academic courses 

for grades seven, eight and nine, instruction was given 

in household and manual arts, shorthand, typewriting and 

printing* The course was so arranged that the students 

spent half the time in vocational training and half in 

regular work* The pupils wrote the regular examinations 

and could at any time be transferred to the regular school* 

This type of intermediate education continued to be offered 

at Victoria school until 1950 when it was transferred to 

28 

the western Canada High School. 

In an address to the Collegiate Club in Calgary, 

29 

in December 1915 9 Mr. Kidner y stated that the system of 
education was changing from "top to bottom”« He went on to 
say that from time immemorial the public and high schools 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1914, p. 79 • 

28 

Weston, op* cit *, p, 30* 

^ Newspaper article, Calgary Albertan , December 8, 1915* 
Calgary Public Library. 







•J 













0 


0 . 


t 


t- 


t 





c 


t 


52 


had endeavored to prepare but one class of students namely 
those who intended to enter the old professions. lie felt 
that future schools would give special training so that a 
student would have a fair start in the particular work he 
desired. 

51 

According to Mr. Kidner the school board had 
taken one of the greatest steps in the line of progress 
when it adopted the report of the prevocational committee. 
The members had made it possible for active measures to be 
taken to help ,! the great mass of boys and girls to choose a 
vocation with more accuracy than heretofore and incidentally 
receive special work that will help them. n 

In 1^16 a report was presented to the school board 
by Principal Massey. This was printed in the Calgary Alber ¬ 
tan under the caption ^Successful Year in Pre-vocational 
School. 

This report said, 

Prevocational education is that education 
which precedes direct vocational training and which 
uses the elements of different vocations as a means 
to arouse interest in education in those to whom 
purely abstract studies do not appeal.54 

Loc. cit . 

31 - 

-toe, cit . 

Hoc, cit . 

^ Newspaper article, Calgary Albertan. May 10, 1?16, 

Calgary Public Library. 

Loc. cit. 












It is sometimes argued that the term ^re- 
vocational 1 is misleading and likely to deeeive 
the public, since it carries the suggestion of 
specific preparation, when in reality it does 
not necessarily give such preparation* To this 
objection it should be said that the training 
given is preparatory for vocational education, 
rather than for vocation itself* f Prevocational’ 
simply means the type of general education which 
will lay a better foundation for vocational 7 ,- 

courses than is commonly laid in school courses. ^ 

Principal Massey believed that in accordance with 
his notion of the function of a prevocational school the 
elements of as many vocations as possible should be taken 
up in the school and with this in view he recommended that 
elementary work in leather be introduced. This was not to 
be art decoration but directly useful leather work appli¬ 
cable to home and farm use. 

When the work of the prevocational school was trans¬ 
ferred to Western Canada High School in 1930, little time 
was lost in expanding the facilities of the new school. It 
was of the latest type and included opportunities for every 
student to study along the lines of the vocation that he was 
most anxious to take up as a life work. Students were at¬ 
tracted from all parts of the city and the province. The 
spirit and purpose of the institution, can be captured from 
Dr. Scott’s words 


^ hoc, cit . 

^ Newspaper article, Calgary Herald T Dr. A. M. Scott, 
Superintendent of Schools, ualgary, September 16, 1931, 
Calgary Public Library* 







M 


"The technical high school is not a refuge for poor 
students nor is it a trade school* 1 * 

In combining practical with academic work the stu¬ 
dent learned the important relation between them, for with 
a broader understanding of the meaning of industry, young 
people would have an opportunity to develop into citizens 
having a knowledge of their walk in life and some under¬ 
standing of its theoretical side as well. 

The public school board, in 1917, experimented with 
an elementary prevocational school in the Riverside commu¬ 
nity where the majority of the pupils were of foreign paren¬ 
tage. All pupils twelve years of age and over were given 
instruction in manual training and household arts. Inspec¬ 
tor J. A. Smith reported that the purpose was to try to 

make the home atmosphere in this community more favourable 

37 

to the continuation of the pupils in school. Mr. C. I. 
Fairn, supervisor of household science in Calgary, devised 
and put into operation the kitchenette plan of the River¬ 
side public school cooking centre. 

3. Household Science and Manual Training 

Differentiated from Technical Education 

D. A. Campbell, Director of Technical Education in 

^ Provinceof Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1917, p. 49. 







c 






. 





v 












C i 





33 


1919 gave a resume of manual and household science in rela¬ 
tion to the term technical education. 

The introduction of manual training into the 
schools is usually the first step in the direc¬ 
tion of a more practical type of education for 
the older boys* At the same time the girls usu¬ 
ally make a start of homemaking studies such as 
cooking and sewing. Instruction in both these as 
conducted in the public and high schools is not 
classed as technical education. Technical educa¬ 
tion aims at preparation for gainful employment 
in some special vocation# In the former the in¬ 
struction is given for but half a day per week 
usually# In the latter the time given to the *0 
practical work is usually half a week per week. 

39 

Mr. Campbell felt that greater encouragement 
should be given to the technical and vocational type of 
education# With the installation of equipment for manual 
training and household economics it would be possible to 
provide such training for those students who wished it and 
who would stay at school a year or two longer to get such 
a training# 


4# Agricultural High schools 

An institution peculiar to Alberta, as far as 
Canada is concerned, was the system of agricultural high 
schools established in 1913® Other schools of a similar 
character were to be found in Denmark and in the united 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1919> P* 106. 

39 

Doc, cit. 











. ; w';; : : ■ J '■ U fl •> "l>‘- '3 '.i. f'V:‘ . J 

, . ' . ; j. ; ; .?■ : f - S r \ A t » 

■ • • • , . • ■ 

1 *'? r •• 

, 

► 


“ ;■■ v’ l J an < ■ n>i ill ■ »i o > 


- 


* 

m 'i a. \ /. -a ' ; &• •'.,..0'3 

* 


■' - V : - 




t 






. i , ■' 

♦ 

, i c '. •• •■£ , : ,L ■'J ‘ J 

.'A ... • ' ■ ■ 

■_ c. •, , j v. oil c... J > 

. 






' 

e 





States in Wisconsin and Minnesota. The organization and 
the programme of studies for the Alberta schools was for 
the most part original and adapted to the needs of the 
province, 40 

An act provided for the immediate erection of 
three agricultural high schools with others to follow if 
the experiment proved successful. 

The aim of the schools as announced by the Minis¬ 
ter of Agriculture was to give the farmer i s son and the 
farmer*s daughter a type of education that would fit them 
for their business in life, that of agriculture. The main 
object of the instruction was to give such knowledge and 
practice as would make faming a more pleasant and profi¬ 
table employment. In the preparation of the course of 
study the Board of Agricultural Education had kept a prac¬ 
tical end in view namely the training of men for the actual 
practice of farming and the training of women for the ac¬ 
tual practice of housekeeping and homemaking on the farm. 

While the courses offered extended over a period 
of two years the subjects did not vary much, except that 
the second year was more advanced. The work of the first 
year in household science was definite and complete al¬ 
though elementary. This was in order that a student who 


40 


J. M. Hutchinson, ft The Education system of Alberta** 
(Unpublished Thesis for the Degree of Doctor of Peda¬ 
gogy , Queens* University, Kingston, Ontario, 1?15). 









57 


had only one year to spend in the school would have some 
instruction in all the subjects. In addition to the regu¬ 
lar two year course, short courses were offered in the 
winter. 

The schools of agriculture were financed entirely 
by the government, no fee being charged. Where dormitories 
were provided the students paid for board and room. 

In 1515 these agricultural schools were closely 
linked with the educational system of the province. They 
depended on the elementary schools to supply them with 
qualified beginners and looked to the university to finish 
the instruction of any students who wished to take advanced 
training. 

5* The New Policy 

At the beginning of 1514 the Government of Alberta 

decided to tqke steps leading to the development of a 

general provincial policy regarding practical education. 

In January, Dr. James C. Miller was appointed Provincial 

41 

Director of Technical Education. 

The essential features of the new plan included the 
modification of the upper grades of the public school in 
such a way as to give opportunity to the girls in rural, 


41 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1514. 








■ - • ■ • • •• ' 

.. . . .. 

. 














' . ' 

‘ • • ; v . . -j c • -j . ' ■ 1 ’ ' ■ ■ 

. : ! 






Jj ^ ..; 




. . r .. j i 








... ‘ J ti 




J . i v- 







. 

t 

■ 








t 




( 


< 







58 


village and urban schools to receive instruction in sewing, 

cooking and the elements of housekeeping, sanitation and 

nursing. Until this time such instruction had only been 

given in the cities of Medicine Hat, Lethbridge, Edmonton 

and Calgary and by special arrangement in the town of 
42 

Raymond • 

Consideration was also being given to the question 

of providing a place for instruction in the high school 

course of study for household arts so as to give a better 

balanced course for ail students. It was thought that such 

courses should receive credit in connection with the re* 

quirements for admission to the normal schools and the 
43 

university. 

6* Summer school for Teachers at the 
University of Alberta 

Having adopted the policy of encouraging the de¬ 
velopment of instruction in special and technical subjects, 
so that the schools could meet more adequately the educa¬ 
tional needs of ail the children of the province, the sup¬ 
plementary training of the teachers already in the service 
became a matter of concern. Consequently the organization 
of a summer school for teachers was authorized by the De- 

42 - 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1914. 

43 

Loc. cit . 












partment of Education in the spring of 1913. 'ihe work in 

household science was started in 1914 at the University of 
44 

Alberta* The instruction consisted of classes in Methods 
of Teaching, Nutrition, Household Management, sewing, Tex¬ 
tiles, Elementary and Advanced Cooking, Rural School Lunch 

and "Homestead Cooking." For several summers men students 

45 

at the University Summer School enrolled in the latter# 

In order to give all teachers in the province an 

equal chance to attend summer school, the department 

arranged to pay the railway fare of those who attended 

provided they completed a minimum number of courses satis- 
46 

factorily. 

Discussing the summer school for teachers in 1913, 
Dr. Miller said, 

At present and for many years to come home- 
making and agriculture and its related industries 
are and will be of primary importance in the life 
not only of the rural districts but also of our 
towns and cities. To give the children and the 
youth of the Province a good practical command 
over, and insight into the problems involved in 
these occupations as well as an appreciation of 
their significance in the life of the individual 
and community is a real necessity. 4 ? 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1914, p. 60. 

Margaret A* Stewart, "Memories of the First Home Econ¬ 
omics Work in the Schools of Alberta under the Calgary 
School Board," Toronto, September 1933* 

4o Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report , Edmonton, 1914, p. 34. 

4 ? Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1913, p# 48. 










60 


At the 1916 session he wrote, 

Capable teachers particularly those possess¬ 
ing executive as well as teaching ability who 
qualify in the special subjects will be at a 
premium for a number of years.4o 


48 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1916, p. 4 2. 










CHAPTER VI 


HOME ECONOMICS IN ALBERTA FROM 1917 TO 1936 

1o Household Arts in the Public School 

from 1917 to 1922 


The household science and arts curriculum for 
grades six, seven and eight probably did not receive a fair 
trial during the years from 1912 to 1917* Many of the in¬ 
spectors complained of the serious shortage of teachers 
arising from the "social dislocation caused by the Eirst 
World war."^ The "permit” teachers generally lacked 
training in household science* In 1917, however, the 
course was revised to include grade five and called house¬ 
hold arts. 

The aim and scope were expressed as follows: 

The great majority of people find their time 
and thought are largely taken up with the problems 
involving a knowledge of the materials of nature 
and ability to deal with shape and manipulate these 
materials in such a way as to cause them to serve 
man T s purposes. Boys and girls find also their 
natural tendencies are such as to cause them to be 
interested in doing things, in making things about 
them serve their purposes and In understanding 
their material environment. 2 

Manual and household arts were planned to care for 
this tendency in youth on the one ha id aid for the needs of 


ismbree, op, cit .. p. l86. 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1917, p. 84. 



















* 

- 

- 


i I 


• • ; ■ < 

- 

' 






■ 


, 


. 

* T 

. 





62 


society on the other. The materials and procedures were to 
be within the mental, physical and social powers of the 
child, Development was gradual in knowledge, technique, 
control of materials and tools and in the "intelligent 
appreciation of the social relationship of the industries 
in which the materials and processes"*^ were used in the 
industrial world. 

In grades five and six habits of work, neatness 
and accuracy of detail were encouraged, as well as a res- 
pect for sewing as part of woman 1 s work, and responsibility 
for selecting and caring for clothes. "Strength and truth 
in workmanship” 4 were to be striven for "rather than mere 
perfection in stitches. 

The selection of models which were to serve as a 
basis of instruction added interest in the programme and 
provided criteria for evaluating student products. Stit¬ 
ches were "not to be taught as completed work on abstract 

6 

or practice pieces." 

The eour se for gr ade five covere d 'the ele ments of 
hand sewing and familiarized the pupils with the common 
stitch forms and gave a measure of mechanical skill. In 



Loc. 

cit. 

4 

Loc. 

eit. 


Loc • 

cit. 

6 

Loc. 

cit. 













6 ? 


grade six the course proceeded to actual construction work, 
including cutting, measuring and the application of stit¬ 
ches. It introduced more advanced stitches and machine sew¬ 
ing adapted to the making of garments for personal use and 
other articles connected with the interests of the school, 
the home and the daily experiences of the pupils. Some 
study of the source and manufacture of textiles was inclu¬ 
ded with reference to cost and adaptability of materials 
used for specific purposes. 

In general practice it was usual for the school 
authorities to supply the materials needed for the work 

in grade five and for pupils to supply or pay for their 

7 

own materials for the work in grade six. 

The purpose of the course in grades seven and 
eight was to teach the art of cooking, and iS to connect the 
interests of the school and the home and to elevate the 
tasks of the home to their proper position of dignity and 

honour by bringing to them a trained intelligence and a 

8 

systematized knowledge. 1 * 

Grade seven students were expected to form habits 
of neatness and cleanliness; to acquire system and accuracy 
in interpreting instructions given in recipes, to manage 

7 ' — - — — — ~ 

See Appendix G for details of course. 

8 loc. cit. 























. 


< ■■ ' - ■ ■■ 

1 


■ 






















. 

■ 















64 


simple serving with speed, daintiness and ease and to per¬ 
form routine work quickly and without unnecessary noise; 
to care for cooking utensils and general kitchen equipment; 
and to acquire an understanding of and skill in the usual 
procedures of household laundry work. 

The students in grade eight were to acquire in¬ 
dependence and self reliance with reference to the work 
undertaken and to get some understanding of the nutritive 
and economic value of foods, live lessons dealt with the 
planning of simple menus, and the preparation, serving and 
cost of family meals, lour were devoted to the home and 
care of the sick and four more considered the problems of 
household management. The work incidental to the cooking 
gave practice in household methods. 

Apparently the educational authorities of Alberta 

were not satisfied that the best programme had been planned 

9 

to meet the needs of the students in the province, so in 
1918 the aims for the household arts course for grades five 
and six were rewritten with less emphasis on sxills and 
manipulation of materials. There was, also, an attempt to 
correlate household art, the fine arts and manual training 
so that problems could be “worked conjointly resulting in a 
useful article made beautiful, thus illustrating all the 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Admonton, 1939, P* 7- 













65 


principles of art and good workmanship." 10 This "dove¬ 
tailing" enabled boys and girls to work on the same problem, 
assuring the continuity of the application of design through 
different media. By paralleling "fine art" and household 
art the rules concerning colour and design were carried 
over to the hand or machine work designs in garments. 

The work in textiles in grades five and six was 
extended to include "selection of material for the hygienic 
comfort, style, design and purpose for which the material 
was intended. 1,11 A study of labor conditions and wages for 
workmanship in ready-made articles was introduced as well 
as some ethics in shopping. 

This same course was the authorized one in use in 
12 

1^20. Mr. G. Gorman, Chief Inspector of Schools, dis¬ 
cussed this course in grade eight as it was carried out In 
Calgary. He stated that the topics given in the outline 
gave the teacher a wide choice of applications. The girls 
spent one afternoon a week doing advanced work in cooking 
which included: bread, rolls, cake, pies and roasts. The 
instruction also included the preparation of meals; the 
study of foods with their cost, food value and composition; 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1518, p. 51 

^ noc. cit . 

12 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report » Edmonton, 152 0, p. 110. 




















■ I I 










0 


' 






- 

, •• o. 

/.. ',v' .. .. 5‘. " = 0 ' Ills. " 




O' 
















66 


canning and jelly making. In laundry work, the washing of 
woollens, silk, towels and the removal of stains were prac¬ 
tised. Four lessons were devoted to first aid and home 
nursing and two to food for the sick. 

With the close of the First Great war new problems 

had arisen which demanded new emphases and new procedures 

in education.* 1 *^ 

14 

Embree describes the situation as follows: 

The conditions exposed by the war and its 
aftermath also led certain educators to express 
skepticism toward traditional practices* They 
began to work toward making the schools a more 
vital force in the social economic, and political 
life of the country by stressing the development 
of critical mindedness and an understanding of 
contemporary society. At the same time techno¬ 
logical advance speeded up by the war made em¬ 
ployment difficult for young people and resul¬ 
ted in an influx of youth into the public high 
schools* These youth were not the academically 
selected youth of the pre-war high school group 
but represented all levels of personal compet¬ 
ence and intellectual and socio-economic back¬ 
ground. 15 

Consequently, between 1920 and 1924 a complete 
rewriting of the curriculum from Grade I to Grade XII was 
attempted under the organization and direction of the 


^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . 1959, p. 7. 

14 

David Grant Embree, f, The Beginning and Growth of the In¬ 
struction in the Social Studies Provided by the Schools 
of Alberta", (Unpublished Master of Education thesis, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, April 1952), p. Il8. 

noc. cit . 











67 


Deputy Minister of Education, G. Fred McNally.^ This re¬ 
vision introduced a modernization of subject matter into 
the basic courses of the elementary school and a wider 
choice of subjects for students, in the high school, not 
intending to take up professional work. Provision was 
also made for promotion by subject or unit. This programme 
with some occasional "refurbishing 11 and "revamping" served 
until the year 1936.^ 

2. The 192 2 Course in Household Economics 

for Grades ¥11 and VIII 

18 

Following trends in the United States, the 1922 

outline for Household Economics in the elementary school 

emphasized first the "appreciation of and sympathy with 

the problems involved in the conduct of a well regulated 
19 

home." The second aim was to give the girl "working 

principles in food, clothing, sanitation and hygiene 

whieh will enable her to take an active share in home 
20 

activities. The development of skill and technique 
came third and was no longer the main objective. 

To accomplish these results a well rounded body 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1937» p* 13• 

^ Loc. cit. 

—r- . 

10 See Cooley, op. cit ., 1921, p. 37-33. 

^ See Appendix D. 

20 

See Appendix D. 















68 


of material was presented in lesson outline form and in¬ 
cluded discussion and practice suggestions. Subject matter 
was no longer confined to sewing and cooking but included 
other phases of household activities concerning food, 
clothing, shelter and the family. 

Grades five and six were no longer included in the 
plan. From two and one-half to three hours a week were 
required for both grades seven and eight, but this time 
could be given in two periods. Wherever a period was more 
than an hour in length, it was to include both class dis¬ 
cussion and practical work. 

The subject matter formed a complete course for 
those girls who would leave school at the end of Grade VIII, 
and yet it led up to the high school home economies which 
would present similar problems of greater difficulty. 

The sewing course was organized around a series of 
problems that were of interest to the girl and not around 
a core of stitches and seams. The preparation of a meal 
in Grade VTII gave the opportunity to learn the cooking 
processes as well as the planning of time allowance, co¬ 
operation, selection of menu, serving and table manners. 
Thus, these activities indicated a trend toward an "experi¬ 
ence" centered rather than a "subject matter" curriculum. 

In Grade VII in order that every girl should re¬ 
ceive the same fundamental training and form good habits 




' 0 












c 




. 

. 









. 

■ - ' t ; 

. 























. 




, 




c 









■ 












69 


of work, all sewing problems were individual and not group 
projects* iiivery girl made the same garment or garments 
involving the same processes. In cooking, every girl 
cooked the same things in individual amounts. Empbasis 
was placed on the personal needs of the girl in appearance, 
clothing and food. 

The goal in Grade VIII was to develop cooperation, 
initiative, leadership and judgment of values as well as 
skill and technique in workmanship. Groups of four worked 
in the preparation and serving of meals and in the care of 
the room. Cooking was done in quantities sufficient for an 
average family. Throughout the course there was emphasis 
on the responsibility of the girl in the family. This ap¬ 
peared under the headings: feeding the family, clothing the 
family and the study of home problems. 

As a result of this 1^22 revision of the elementary 
school course in household economics, the laboratories in 
the public schools were changed from the hollow square 
pattern with individual stoves to a less formal arrangement 
of tables with a range for the use of each four students. 

This reorganization of the elementary school cur¬ 
riculum provided that certain subjects called "const ants” 
were to occupy eighty per cent of the classroom time while 
"directive 11 or "optional" courses were to receive the re¬ 
maining twenty per cent. The "constants" were defined as 












..... € 

4 






j * 

, ' .. v . • . - • : • - . 

. . . 


. . ' . . ... ; 


, 


' 


. 




' 


: j 


* 


' 




* 

. 




. 




J- V ■ V? .1. ' • - .1- ■ j V ‘ ‘j. 







70 


English, arithmetic, geography, citizenship, music and 
physical education* The "directive" courses included 
agriculture, art, manual arts or household economics, 

French and commercial subjects. 

3. Home Economics in the High School 

During 1^21 there was a growing demand that high 
school facilities should be brought closer to the people, 
so as to enable rural boys and girls to da tain a better 
education without the necessity of going to towns and 
cities. Another manifestation of the desire for a wider 
school programme was shown by the introduction of manual 

21 

training and household economics into towns and villages. 

The curriculum changes in the secondary course of studies 

did not go into effect until 1924. 

The reconstruction provided a greater diversity of 

studies in the high school. Six alternative courses were 

provided: Normal entrance, matriculation, agricultural, 

22 

commercial, technical and general. The latter was de¬ 
signed to give the student the widest choice in making up 
his programme. Physical education and two years of English 

were the only required subjects. This multiple curriculum 
— ~~ “ — ~ 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Heport . 1921, p. 114. 


22 


See Appendix E for requirements 














< C • : • 






* 

D, 










71 


had an obligatory core, thus allowing students to transfer 
from one course to another without serious handicap* How¬ 
ever, the number of subjects that could be taken concur¬ 
rently was reduced. Each subject was to be known as a unit 
and promotion was to be made by subject or unit and no 
longer by grade. Every unit was to have the same value and 
to require the same amount of time which was to be from one 
hundred and eighty to two hundred minutes per week. Pro¬ 
vincial examinations were to be held for all subjects in 
every grade. 

By this change in the high school regulations stu¬ 
dents could select three of the following subjects: music, 

algebra, geometry, agriculture, household economics or 
23 

manual arts. As a consequence great impetus was given 

to the study of the household economics. In Edmonton 

ninety per cent of the girls in Grade XI selected household 

24 

economics as an option in 1920. 

Bespit© the multiple curricula, forces operated so 
that schools prepared their students for either the normal 
school or university entrance examinations. 2 ^ Consequently 
school boards in all but the larger centres, being unwilling 
to incur the additional expense of adding other courses, 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . 1920, p. 40» 

24 ibid ,, p. 134. 

25 

Aylesworth, on. cit . . p. 64. 













72 


made provision for these two only. In the 1? 22 course of 
studies the sixteen required units in the normal entrance 
course included household economics in the list of optional 
subjects of which five could be chosen and of which two 
could be household economies. 

In both Household Economics 1 and Household Econ¬ 
omics 2 the time allotment was three hours per week with 
one hour for discussion and two hours for laboratorywork. 
The term was divided into two five month periods. In House¬ 
hold Economics 1 the first half was to be devoted to nutri¬ 
tion and the second half to clothing. In Household Econ¬ 
omics 2 the order was reversed. In the first home course 
there was a list of projects. The course outline was very 
brief and carried no explanations as to method or other 
details. u This same course appeared in the 1929 ? 1927 and 
1930 handbooks for secondary education. 

4. The Technical High School Course 

The curriculum of 1924 made provision for a techni¬ 
cal high school course. Previous to 1924 there was consi¬ 
derable social prejudice against technical training* hut 
from 1929 to 1929 there was a much more tolerant attitude. 
Graduates from academic high schools were unable to obtain 


26 


See Appendix G for course in Household Economies 1 and 
Household Economics 2, 1927 . 






73 


positions and many people looked to the technical curriculum 
to solve their problems. As a result of this optimism a 
technical high school was opened in Calgary in 192?• It 
was not only the question of unemployment which needed 
answering* Many looked to the technical school to solve 
the problem of the large percentage of students who found 

27 

academic work too abstract. In this connection Aylesworth ' 
said, 

fe have become disillusioned in regard to bot h 
expectations. Students trained in the technical 
high school have not been able to step Into posi¬ 
tions more readily than the academically trained 
students since industrial plants find it necessary 
to give the same training to all beginners and the 
student with the technical training has no real 
advantage.2° 

In 1919 the Dominion Government, convinced of the 

value of technical education, voted to the Province of 

Alberta the sum of #10,000,000 to be expended over a period 

of ten years. In 1931 an additional annual sum of #730,000 

29 

was voted for the same purpose. The payment of this second 
grant, however, was to become effective w hen proclaimed. 
Unfortunately for technical education it was not proclaimed 
and, in Alberta where the original grant had all been used, 
the progress of technical education received a serious 


^ Aylesworth, op. cit . . p. 69. 
28 

^oe. cit . 

29 


Canada, Annual Survey of Education in Canada, Ottawa, 

193!. 









74 


setback, 

Sven with the original grant, technical education 
was very expensive to the community and had to justify its 
existence. It was disappointing to find that a large per¬ 
centage of the students who were not adapted to academic 
work were equally misfits in technical achievements. 

31 

In 1927 Doctor Carpenter discussed the expansion 

of technical education in these words, 

It does appear that the time is at hand when 
the public will avail itself of a more varied pro¬ 
gramme than the revised curriculum offers. The 
time is passing when all children irrespective of 
their natural aptitudes, must be molded into the 
same form, or, according to school standards be 
called failures.32 

During 19 28 Calgary was building a technical high 

school and committees were working on the details of a 
33 

curriculum. A special programme of studies to meet the 

34 

needs of the first two years was presented in 1929 and the 

33 

third was presented in 1930. The assumption underlying 
the details of the plan was that the pupils who registered 

Aylesworth, op. cit ., p. 69 . 

3 ^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 19 27 , p. 73* 

32 

Loc. cit . 

33 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 19 28, p, 18 . 

34 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1929 , P* 10. 

33 province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1930, p. 17 . 















73 


in these courses had made a definite choice as between 

university matriculation and normal entrance courses on 

the one hand and those that led directly into industrial 
36 

occupation. The approved curriculum of the technical 

High Schools was based upon an English, history, geography 

core similar to that of the academic schools. Replacing 

algebra, geometry, physics and chemistry were general 

mathematics and general science built upon a plan which 

selected these subjects because of their value to problems 

of life and vocations. Half-time was devoted to classroom 

37 

studies and the remainder to shop experiences. 

Through the years, the attitude towards technical 
education changed. The growth of its development in Calgary 
was typical. In 1933 the technical high school and the 
Western Canada High School were combined under one principal 
to form a composite high school. This amalgamation was 
possible since both schools were located on the same grounds 
and connected by a tunnel. The technical work was not dis¬ 
continued and a very wide programme of subjects was provided. 

The 193 0 Departmental examinations for the Technical 
High School had been conducted with special care to show 
that a high standard of attainment was being achieved in the 

^ bee Appendix H for Technical High School Course Outlines, 

n 1929 *" 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report » Edmonton, 1931, P» 93* 










i 








' 













. 


■ 






i .. (. 


£ 

i 

' 



< 

' 


• 



1 ( 





~ 


, 


. 

4 - 

■ 

- 

• 





: , < . • ' ! 



• 







v i . ’ ; 











• 









* 

• 











v '' 




















c 





76 


practical shop subjects. The aim was to place such train¬ 
ing on a parity with that received in the more academic 
subjects. 

During this year the Edmonton School Board decided 
to introduce the new curriculum into its Technical High 
School. It was hoped that this would bring new vigor to 
this school and would enable it to do work that was "dis¬ 
tinctive and definite" and which would correct a discourag¬ 
ing feature of this school — the failure of many students 
to return. It was regretted that the citizens of Edmonton 
did not endorse a bylaw that would have resulted in the 
extension of the services of the Technical High School. This 
school had been operating since 1914. Later in 1931 addi¬ 
tional accommodation with new equipment was provided. 40 

Lethbridge in 1934 had organized a technical depart¬ 
ment in the high school offering courses for both boys and 
girls. 

The technical course had not functioned to any ex¬ 
tent outside Calgary and Edmonton. In 1930 there had been 
a growing demand for technical and prevocational training 
throughout the province, but owing to financial conditions 

■ T 7T ————-——— - —•—■— -- - ——■—-——-——— 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1930, p. 86. 

59 Ibid . f p. 87 . 

40 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Rep ort r Edmonton, 1931, 93 * 




















. 

' 








~ ' ti ■■ 

( • » i 

... i - € 












- 

- : .to 




c c 


c c 


c, 

c * 






77 


only a few centres could provide the equipment and teaching 

41 

staff required to operate such a school, 

3 • Certification of Household Economics Teachers 

Prior to June 1921 there had been no certificates 
issued to teachers of special subjects in .Alberta. Some 
were instructing in household economics in elementary and 
secondaiy schools; others were teaching vocational sub¬ 
jects in the technical schools. In awarding certificates 
consideration was given to practical and technical training, 

.All were required to present evidence of their 
academic,professional and vocational training and were 
granted certificates as teachers of special subjects in 
accordance with the statements of qualifications submitted. 
Forty-four special certificates were Issued in 1921. 

6. Economic and Social Grises 

During June of 192.3* owing to financial conditions, 
the household science classes in the high schools of Cal¬ 
gary were•discontinued. Lessons were given to the public 
school pupils once in two weeks, instead of the weekly. A 
skeleton organization was continued for two years after 
which a new period of expansion began, arising from the 

4X — " “™~ 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1950, p. 10. 












renewal of interest in practical and technical education. 
This resulted in the building of the new technical high 
school which placed household science on a more permanent 


78 


basis. 


42 

Carpenter in 1323 made this comment, 


It is regrettable to report that the Edmonton 
Public School Board has deemed it wise to further 
curtail the scope of the manual training and house¬ 
hold science departments# Our system is weak in 
expressional subjects and the loss of any of this 
type of education in urban life is serious# There 
has been no further curtailment in Calgary. ^ 

J, A . Smith 44 remarked also, 


It is a matter of regret that the financial 
conditions of the cities forced the school boards 
to economize along the lines of manual training 
and household economics# Besides rejuvenating 
the work of the high school and thus increasing 
its holding power, the students through this train¬ 
ing developed in personality, in application and 
in breadth of industry. Habits of industry and a 
love for productive and constructive work were 
formed, 4 ^ 


The economic stress of the year 1331, particularly 
among the farmers, had a depressing effect on technical 
education# As this type of instruction required more 
expensive equipment and operated with snail groups per 
teacher, it had to wait for times of greater easement in 


42 

43 

44 

43 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annua l 
Report . Edmonton, 1?23, p. 103• 

Loc# cit . 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1323, P« 23. 


Loc. cit. 












79 


the distribution of money.' 0 Furthermore, the depression 

years of the 1930 T s showed that the number of pupils seeking 

instruction at the high school level more than doubled. A 

large percentage of these had neither interest in nor the 

capacity for advanced study in the subjects of an academic 

programme* Had there been opportunity for employment, 

many of than would never have entered the high schools. 

It became evident that a more flexible curriculum with a 

recognition of the "practical** subjects and some attempts 

to study the aptitudes of the pupils was the next step in 

47 

prog ramine bu il di ng.. 

Accordingly, in 1934, a new study of the curriculum 
needs of the province was undertaken with the guidance of 
Doctor H. 0. Newland, Supervisor of Schools. It was 
claimed that this was the most painstaking and most scien¬ 
tific of any revision that had been made in Alberta. Much 
time was spent in an examination of the best work which had 
been done elsewhere in Ganada, in the United States and in 
Great Britain. The members of the committee were released 
from other duties so that they might give their entire time 
to the work. 40 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report r Edmonton, 1931, p. 93« 

47 

1 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, .Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1937, p* 13♦ 

48 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1939, P* 7* 
















8o 


This study given to the reorganization of the pro¬ 
gramme of studies for the secondary schools pointed to a 
more intimate relation of school and active life. The 
general course was to be made more interesting and accep¬ 
table by tying it closely with the academic, the commercial 

and the technical courses. Gonsideration was given to the 

49 

inclusion of practical shop subjects in all the courses. x 

So, with this new revision, the trend seemed to 

point to a widely diversified curriculum from which the 

student would select the subjects he liked. The success 

of such a curriculum would depend upon a reorganization of 

50 

school territory into units of a larger area. 

51 

Aylesworth expressed the attitude toward secondary 
education in these words, 

We have drawn closer to the ideals of old Quebec, 
an education not primarily for the advancement of in- 
dustry and commerce, but an education which may make 
living more enjoyable for the individual; an education 
not merely for the acquiring of individual wealth but 
an education which may train us to live like social 
beings with our fellow creatures. 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1 955, p. 85. 

Aylesworth, on. cit .. p. 80. 

^ doc. cit . 







.. . •. -i: . . 4 ■ > i • '■ i o .. 










e • , U . , o < U ■ - O' - .t . J u ( . . J 

. . . . . .. * . - . . > - ■ 

' . .. ■ ■ ■ 

. 

1 t t 

' ,).! 3 i.’i 0 1 \L £ ■ "V 3 7 ' X\C •( .» .■ £'*< ■ 

J- 

. 

■ :.n:r , X. 

■« ■. ■ i ..I > . >-• >.‘.’ ‘I ■■ '■ • 

,, .:* v . -. .... .... . ' '.i'C " \ . u '.l, > .. . J X I . ... 

e \.r., , .. ...xw ... i : J . -3 

.... X J •'> V ■ A v.t 3 A’ - v : ...i O 



- 


. . (. 












CHAPTER VII 


HOME ECONOMICS IN ALBERTA 
PROM 1956 TO THE PRESENT 

1. A New Programme 

Embree 1 2 in discussing education in Alberta previous 

to 1?34 stated that former objectives had possibly been 

determined upon the need for making a living. The result 

was that many who had failed to make a living endured as 

well ”a mentally starved existence while the richest fields 

2 

of their spiritual life** were lying uncultivated. Conse¬ 
quently it seemed that greater stress must be laid on the 
development of personal and social character. Mental at¬ 
tainments, the subjects taught and the methods employed in 
education were means rather than ends. The principal 
motives appeared to be character building and the enjoyment 
of a full life. An indication of the need for a new ap¬ 
proach in subject matter and method were evident in 1^23 in 
the introductory remarks to the programme for secondary 
schools which read, 

Education must no longer be a blind process of 
faith, it Is now becoming the sphere of the master 

1 Embree, op. cit ., p. 204. 

2 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1334, p. 13* 











82 


craftsman engaged in the building of the greatest 
structures the world knows — a human life.3 

After two years of careful consideration and experi¬ 
mentation, the new curriculum was put into Alberta class¬ 
rooms during the 1936-1937 term. Under the new scheme of 
organization the twelve grades were grouped in the following 
manner: The Elementary School, Grades I to 71; The Inter¬ 
mediate School, Grades VII to IX; The High School, Grades 
X to XII. This revision, wrote Embree, “revolutionized 
education in Alberta and placed the province in the fore¬ 
front of Canadian educational progress. * * 4 * 6 

Doctor Newland^ described it thus: 

The new programme is built on the principle 
that education is a social experience in the course 
of which the pupils plan* initiate and carry out co¬ 
operative projects. The motivation of the pupils is 
strengthened and the classroom is vitalized through 
a variety of activities which replace the verbalism 
and repetitive book-learning procedures from the old 
course. The new programme, however, makes greater 
demands on the ability, initiative, and resource of 
the teacher. The greater freedom both for,teachers 
and pupils entails greater responsibility.& 


2. The 1936 Course in Home Economics 
for the Intermediate School 

The new courses for Grades VII, VIII and IX were 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Handbook 

for Secondary Schools > 1923, p. 11. 

4 Embree, on. cit ., p. 203. 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1933, P# 19• 

6 LoCjCit. 













■ • . 






















. , J; i 







c 










82 


constructed along the same lines. Optional as well as com- 

7 

pulsory subjects were included. The whole plan was so 
integrated and consolidated that in the smaller schools 
pupils in Grades VII, VIII and IX might be combined for 
instruction. The exploratory courses, which included home 
economics, were used to investigate the personal resources 
of the pupils “through suitable and adequate activation, 
intelligent selection and experimental direction.8 

Home economics as a subject of study in the inter¬ 
mediate school was justified because educators had agreed 
that the function of education was to fit the child to take 
his place and play his part in society.^ It aimed to edu¬ 
cate by directing the mind of the child to ideas connected 
with the home and by giving knowledge and experiences rela¬ 
ted to the home. Although it might be classed as a manual 
subject of a practical nature it also had high value in 
mental training. 1 ^' 

Ho subject on the curriculum had greater possibili¬ 
ties for correlation than home economics. Special care was 
taken to integrate it with the regular school programme. 

7 See Appendix I. 

8 province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1927, P* 12* 

^ Province of ALberta, Department of Education, ^oelal 
Studies in the Interned! ate Grades . Edmonton, 194 6, p. 2* 
fO Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Edmonton, 
Programme of Studies for the Intermediate School . 1926, 
p. 224. 










84 


This had been a weakness in the teaching of this subject as 
these departments had not been made a vital part of the 
general school programme. 11 

The schedule was built upon a thirty-six week plan. 
It was recommended that the afternoon period be used where 
possible for Grade VII and the morning half day to Grade 
VIII# The Grade VII programme was planned for two and one- 
half hours per week and the Grade VIII programme for three 
hours per week. Allowance was not made for recess, as the 
variety of class activity made release for free play un¬ 


necessary. 

The following is an analysis of the courses with a 


suggested allotment of time. 

Grade VII 

Sewing - 16 weeks 

Foods - 16 weeks 

Laundry - 4 weeks 

Grade VIII 


Sewing - 16 weeks 

Foods - 16 weeks 

Social and Family Eelationships 


Grade IX 


4 weeks 


Clothing and Textiles - 14 weeks 

Foods - 14 weeks 

Social and Family Relationships - 4 weeks 

Home Management - 4 weeks 


11 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1^7, P* 77* 







c 









83 


The teacher could arrange to discuss the problems 

of social and family relationships incidentally, as con- 

12 

venience or other factors would determine. It was 
planned to teach foods for one half the year and clothing 
for the other. 

There were no minimum requirements for projects, 
but each student was to be employed to the maximum of his 
ability. The teacher was to be the judge respecting the 
type of assignment. The assignments were to be graded 
with reference to the achievement and the capacity of the 
student. The teacher had a considerable amount of respon¬ 
sibility but there was also freedom in developing the indi¬ 
viduality of the pupil. The use of a library was stressed 
and lessons contained both theory and practice. 

Outside of the cities and towns there were very few 
schools attempting to teach home economics. There were 
many obstacles to be overcome before it could be offered, 
especially in the one room schools. The cost of equipment, 
lack of special accommodation and the need of qualified 

teachers were all factors in restricting to a minimum the 

13 

choice of home economies as an option in small schools. 

1^ province of Alberta, Department of Education, Edmonton, 
Programme of Studies for the Intermediate School , 1336, 
p. 223. 

13 province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Repo rt. Edmonton, 1336, p. 60; 










86 


In the smaller centers, where a wide range of courses could 

not be offered, the students had to take what was on the 
14 

time table. Thus, the term '’optional subjects" in the 

intermediate schools in rural communities was often a mis- 

13 

nomer, as circumstances permitted little choice. In many 

schools only three options were offered; therefore, all 

students had to conform to the choice of the majority, or 

in some cases to the requirements of the school through 

its teacher or school board. Even in the larger centers 

it was sometimes not practical to offer certain options 

because of the very few wishing to enroll. 1 ^ The preferred 

electives were usually those which required little or no 

outlay for equipment. However, indications in 1333 pointed 

17 

to a "steady but unspectacular" growth in home economics. 

3* Home Economics for the High School 

The general committee on the high school programme 

recommended that a revised programme be introduced in Grade 
i R 

X in 1337- The lines formerly separating the academic, 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1337, p* 13* 

^3 province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1337, P* 661. 

^ Ibid ., p. 48. 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1333, P* 38. 

18 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1337, P» 13- 






































J 




' 

' 


■ .., 






' : ■ 

' ' • 

o 


c 
















.. ' S j - .. . 


. 




. 




( 

t ” 






87 


technical and commercial courses were to be erased. Only 
three subjects were compulsory for all students. These 
were: English, including literature and language; social 
studies; and health and physical education. Students were 
free to elect other subjects according to their interests 
or aptitudes. 1 ^ Home Economics 1 was to carry four 
credits. (For the purpose of computing instruction time 
and high school credits, it was assumed that the regular 
school day of five hours would comprise eight periods of 
teaching time, each of at least thirty-five minutes dura¬ 
tion and that the school week wouM comprise forty such 
periods of teaching time. For high school credit the 
standard requirement in instruction time was thirty-five 
minutes per week for each unit of credit.) u Under stan¬ 
dard conditions a subject carrying four credits would 
require one hundred and forty minutes of instruction. 

The needlework course which was authorized in 

21 

1927 was assigned three credits. 

The courses for the technical or composite high 

22 

schools were valued at nine credits. The general policy 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1937, P* 20. 

20 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Programme 
of Studies for the High School. Bulletin 1. Regulations 

of the Department ending June 30. 1940 . 1939, p« 2>. 

21 See Appendix L. 

22 See Appendix K. 









. 

■ ' . - . < *' * ' 

. 





' I 




. 










• . 

*■ 

. 

- 

* 

. . . I • . 

. . ■ - ' 

: ■ ' 

• , ' , 




88 


followed in the cities was to incorporate the technical 
school advantages with the other phases of the high school 
programme in such a way as to widen the range of choice of 
subjects* This arrangement materially broadened the influ¬ 
ence of home economics* Except in Edmonton, this inter¬ 
relationship of departments in the large high schools was 

23 

actually in practice. ^ 

24 

In 1938 Miss Ada Lent said that the school had 
generally accepted the challenge of training young people 
for homemaking as this subject had been officially accep¬ 
ted by the National Education Association as one of the 
major objectives of education* 

Continuing, the discourse pointed out that in the 
past the emphasis on home economics had been on cooking and 
sewing* Both teachers and pupils focussed their attention 
on the finished product and had "little interest in its 
contribution to the good life. 11 Evidence in this regard 
showed that too much emphasis was placed on the perfection 
of training and not enough on the individual taking the 
course* 

The author stated that in 1938 the development of 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report , 1938, p. ?!• 

Ada A. Lent, B.Sc* (H.Ec.), Edmonton Technical School, 
"Home Economics, A Fundamental in the Secondary School 
Programme 11 , A*I*A* Magazine , Yol* XVIII No* 8, April 
1938, Edmonton, p* 33• 





■ .« c. ' • - . w ■ 




o. ' $ i . 

... i> 


J 


' , 


c 






8 ? 


skill was still considered an objective of home economics 
but that it was far from being the only objective. Instruc¬ 
tion had become more individualized and as such required 
less formal laboratories. There was more pupil doing and 

less teacher dominance. 

25 

Miss Lent concluded with the suggestion that as 

home economics was a fundamental in the curriculum “the 

introduction of new methods and new materials from this 

department would tend to restore the balance of a school 

program” which overemphasized the intellectual and tended 

26 

to neglect the social. 

The high school programme was planned primarily for 
those who had previous experience with the subject in the 
intermediate grades. The girl in the home was the central 
idea about which the details of the programme were gathered. 
The school was an artificial environment but the aim was to 
carry instruction over into practical situations. The main 
value was utilitarian but there were also cultural and dis¬ 
ciplinary values. 

In Home Economics 1 there were five units. The 

following analysis indicates the approximate time allotted 

27 

to each phase of the subject: 

25 Ibid ., p. 54. 

p L 

Loc . Git. 

27 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Programme 
of Stud ie s for the High School . 1?40, pp. 40 - 48. 












































. 


















* 






















■ 






















90 


Unit 1 
Unit 2 
Unit 3 
Unit 4 
Unit 5 


Foods 
Clothing 
Home Management 
Budgeting 

Personal Responsibility 


14 weeks 
14 weeks 
4 weeks 
2 weeks 
2 weeks 


These units could be taken in any order but it was 
suggested that units four and five, the work and discussions 
would be better handled if they were extended over the year. 
Home Economics 2 contained four sections: 


Section A 


Section B 


Section C 


Section D 


- T he ma kin g of a home 

fa) The home site. 

I b ) Home fu rni sh i ng. 

(c) Laundry and cleaning, dyeing, 
decorating fabrics, 
fd) Home craft. 

(e) Food menus and service. 

if) Home relationships. 

ig) Home nursing and care of invalids, 
(h) How to make a bed; care of 

bathroom and basins. 

* Sewing 

fa) Patterns 
lb; Textiles 

(c) Colour and Design 

(d) Construction 

- Foods and Cookery 

The object in this course was to 
develop skill in the preparation of 
foods in relation to the home and 
special hospitality occasions both 
within and without the home. 

- Cra ft and Hand Needle Work 

fa) Girl T s Room, 
lb) Sewing Room. 

(c) Bed sitting Room. 

The girls in selecting this option 
were required to have a simple kit 
of woodworking tools and a painting 
outfit. 



























- 



- 



- 



- 





j. 

- 

. . 

/ 

















91 


Home Economics 2 planned to culminate the experi¬ 
ences of the girls with the definite application of the 
skills and knowledge acquired to the making of a home from 
small beginnings as though it were a personal problem. 

There were no definite requirements. A girl could choose 
to work in A, B, C or D section of the course, each of 
which carried equal credit. The measure of the work done 
was the ability of the girl working at a reasonable rate 
throughout the year. 

In discussing the complete reorganization of the 
home economics programme for the intermediate and the high 
school, Doctor Carpenter 2 ® observed that 

The new programme makes no specific require¬ 
ments other than that of providing facilities for 
offering manipulation or shop experience with any 
medium or media in which the student is required 
to work to the maximum of his ability.29 

In appraising the new high school programme there 

were indications that the programme was producing some of 

the results desired. In the first place, more students of 

average capabilities were advancing to the second and third 

years of the programme. There were better prospects of 

graduation, since fewer n academic electives” were required 

for the high school diploma. Apparently the new programme 

- - ~ --———- 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 19^8, p. 71« 

Ibid .. p. 71« 







92 


was serving the educational needs of a larger percentage of 
the high school population than did the former one. Second¬ 
ly, the system was more acceptable and more inspiring to 
the students. Finally, many more schools were offering in¬ 
struction in commercial subjects, shop subjects and home 
economics. On the whole the Department of Education in 
1939 admitted that the boys and girls of high schools 
throughout the province were obtaining a more effective 
type of education than ever before.^ 0 

4• Centralization and Circuits 

During this time the most promising opportunity 
for the improvement of educational facilities outside the 
larger centres seemed to lie in the provisions whereby the 
consolidated village and rural high schools could form 
parts of the larger units or divisions. Included in these 
plans was the centralization into high schools of three or 
more rooms with highly trained and specialized teachers.^ 
With such a ’‘set-up 1 * it would be possible to provide equip¬ 
ment for the new general courses in music, general shop and 
home economics with one set of equipment serving a large 
group, and with a programme of courses designed to meet the 

Province of Gilbert a, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1939 , p* 17* 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, .an nual 
Report . Edmonton, 1936, p. 39 * 

































e ... ■. * 

c ■ ' ' ' ■ ■ ' ■ ' ' •. 






♦ 




■ * • • ... . -■ 




■ 






















- 


' 




t 

















needs and capabilities of all groups. 

A number of schools made co-operative agreements 

for the teaching of shop and home economics with travelling 

32 

teachers devoting their full time to this special work. 

33 

These circuits were apparently working quite well.' 

3* Summer School for Teachers 

The revised curriculum, the new teaching techniques, 

activity procedures and objectives required a new type of 

teacher. In other words teachers had to be prepared for 

more specialized tasks and normal school education was 

34 

being adapted to that end. 

The Department of Education summer school pro¬ 
grammes in Calgary made provision for courses to qualify 
teachers in home economics. In the past, th©se programmes 
had given opportunity mainly for manipulative experiences. 

It seemed that in the future more attention would have to 

be given to philosophy, psychology, objectives and metho- 

33 

dology. Doctor Carpenter believed that skills would 
develop in due course and that all should be "patient and 

Tp ” — — ' “ ~ “ 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 

Report .Edmonton. 1?39, P* 38. 

55 ibid ., p. 80 . 

54 province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1939 , p. 9. 

55 ibid ., p. 80 . 
















94 


forbearlug" during the introduction of the courses but 

"special care should be taken" to see that the teachers 

had the correct ideas and vision to get the programme off 

to a good start. In 1936, inspectors 1 reports indicated 

that the percentage of teachers who had actually received 

special training through summer courses probably ranged 

37 

between a quarter and a third of the total group. 

As it had not been expected that all of the teachers 
offering the former Grade IX programme would be qualified to 
teach the optional subjects of the new programme, provision 
was made for special five week courses at summer school. 
School boards were notified that special qualifications 
would be required of teachers offering instruction in these 
subjects in 1936-37 

For the groups in home economics, programmes were 
offered in Dress and Fabrics and in Foods and Nutrition. 

One session at summer school gave the teacher authority to 
start these subjects in a school. Two sessions gave a per¬ 
manent license for continuing the instruction. The institu¬ 
tions offering home economics courses had been able to supply 
the demand for trained teachers in these subjects. Those who 

^ I*oc. cit . 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report , Edmonton, 1936, p. 39* 

38 


Ibid . t p. 13. 









93 


had been qualified in Alberta were considered to be “thor¬ 
oughly well prepared in foods and dietetics but the train- 

39 

ing in textiles and clothing* 1 needed to be strengthened. 

6. Accommodation and Equipment 

Different types of accommodation were being used 

for the teaching of home economics. In the majority of 

schools, basements provided the only available rooms. Many 

of these were not very well suited to their purpose, being 

40 

dull, dark and unattractive. In the building of new 
schools, basements were generally provided and part of 
these fitted up for general shop and home economics cl as¬ 
ses. By 1941 this was an accepted practice. 42 The office 
of the Director of Technical Education provided drawings of 

proposed lay-out plans for centers. Blue prints were sup- 

43 

plied as a basis for making of equipment. Other classes 
were found in classrooms which were available, and in build¬ 
ings apart from the schools: churches, halls and private 
houses rented for the purpose. 44 

39 

^'Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . 1937, p# 76. 

40 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1939, p. 79* 

41 Ibid . r p. 36. 

42 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1941, p. 61. 

43 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1939, P* 80. 

44 Ibid ., p. 79. 


















« 

- 

■ 
















Equipment was not lavish, as schools had been ad¬ 
vised to be conservative in their initial expenditure but 
to provide an annual sum in their estimates for adequate 
additions suitable to the needs as the years progressed* 

In some places where scanty equipment had been supplied at 
first, good progress had been made and an abundance of 
apparatus and supplies had been provided in due course 
because of the satisfaction expressed by the boards and 
school supporters. Thus, the policy had been that of advi¬ 
sing against elaborate equipment for an ideal programme but 
rather to encourage provision of accommodation and equip¬ 
ment suited to the needs of the district. 

7 * The 1941 Be vision of Home Economics 

for the Intermediate School 

A meeting of the home economics teachers, in 
October 1940, proposed a revision of the course in home 
economics for the intermediates grades (Grades 7 * 8 and 9 )« 
The course was to be integrated around the principle that 
homemaking was a co-operative enterprise. The "set-up" of 
distinct, individual units arranged in a series was to be 
abandoned and in its place there was to be a programme of 
activities integrated around the home as a centre. The 
course was open to boys as well as girls. 














, 

' «-' . 



91 


4 5 

This programme ^ provided for a considerable amount 
of integration with health and physical education, general 
science, general shop, social studies and community econ¬ 
omics. The "care of children" and "consumer purchasing" 
were topics which were included in the activities of the 
programme. 

The activities of the three grades 'were integrated 

and not divided as formerly. There was some progression in 

difficulty with the main emphasis in the first and second 

year being on "Sharing in Family Life" and in the third 

"Personal and Social Adjustments." In this home-centre 

plan the students worked as a family group. The home- 

centre plan offered an opportunity not merely for unrelated 

experience in cooking, sewing, child care, housekeeping and 

dietetics but also for the blending and integration of 

these experiences in a home programme, that aimed at the 

46 

common welfare of the family and of the community. 

The programme contained a list of basic skills in 
housekeeping, cooking, sewing, laundering and care of the 
body. These were to be motivated in three ways: by home 
projects, by home-centre problems and by culminating acti¬ 
vities. These skills were included because the majority of 

^ See Appendix M for Home Economics Programme of Studies 
for Grades VII, VIII and IX (1941). 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Edmonton, 
Programme of Studies for the Intermediate School , Grades 
VII, VIII and IX, 1941, p. 230. 












intermediate school girls would eventually undertake the 
duties of home making. 

In order that the plan should operate successfully, 
every student was held responsible for the planning and 
completion of a task to the satisfaction not only of the 
individual but also of the group. Performance was evalu¬ 
ated by group approval. 

The general objective of this programme was that 
of all education; namely, to help the pupils develop to 
their full capacity in all phases of life. More specifi¬ 
cally the aim was to raise the general standard of home 
life. 47 

A model classroom for instruction in home economics 
would resemble a home, low screens or partitions serving in 
place of walls. Generally included in the room would be 
sections designated as dining, living, bedroom and laundry 
areas; and a combined sewing and teaching space. The plan 
of each room was dependent on the community and the teacher 
in charge. In the larger centers there were varying com¬ 
binations of general homemaking rooms with special activity 

rooms for food preparation, clothing construction and arts 
48 

and crafts. 

47 Ibid .. pp. 235-234. 

A ft 

Alberta Government Publication, Legislative Building, 
Edmonton, Within Qur Borders Vol. 2. No. 7» Lee. 1.5, 
1?49. "Popular Course Encourages Family and Personal 
Development .** 































■ 









One of the pupil experiences listed in the 1?41 
course was the checking of children for nutritional status. 
In carrying out this project many classes in Grades VII, 
VIII and IX had nutrition groups chosen from the primary 
classes. The children came to the household economics 
classroom daily and were served a nutritious lunch. Aach 
individual was weighed and measured at the beginning and 
any improvements were recorded by the home economics stu¬ 
dents. 

8. The War Years 

Readjustment in plans and materials were involved 
in technical education in 1?4 0. Sincere attempts were 
being made to adapt the programmes of the schools so that 
the rising generation would be more adequately prepared to 
solve problems that might have no "precedents'*. It was not 
considered sufficient to hold students in school until they 
were eighteen to twenty-two years of age unless abstract 
and academic studies were supplemented. Nor was it con¬ 
sidered wise to isolate youth from the practical issues in 
which they might have to take part. In the ordinary scheme 
of school life there was not sufficient individual respon¬ 
sibility . As a rule the challenges presented in school 
were not of a type to bring about reactions called for in 
actual life situations. There needed to be a carry-over. 



















■ 


* 












































. 








100 


To be thrust into a world of practical problems where one 
had to manage a home and rear a family, conduct a business 
or earn a living, to vote, to handle material or men effi¬ 
ciently indicated the need for a more practical education 

49 

than had heretofore characterized the schools. 

Out of school the child was often so busy doing 
home work that there was no time for chores. As a result, 
many young people were growing up ignorant of how to do 
the simplest tasks around the house. One commentator had 
remarked that, 

School life is like a trip on a luxury liner, 
seeing the world after which the passenger is made 
to walk the plank without having learned to swim.-5° 

Doctor Carp ant er^ maintained that the practical 
requirements of the war could have been more quickly met 
if boys and girls had been given certain basal experiences 
during their school days such as those which could be of¬ 
fered in a homexnaking course or a general shop programme. 

The times showed that a matriculation course for the advan¬ 
tage of the few entering the university was not reasonable 
considering the numbers who would never enter such an insti¬ 
tution. It was time that the emphasis was shifted to "at 
— ■ — - ~ ' “ ‘ ~ " “ 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 

Report . Admonton, 1941, p. 8l. 

50 , 

liOC. Clt . , 

^ Doc, cit . 





















e 






, . 

( 







. 














. ■ ■ 









, 











































101 


least give an equal opportunity to those who may not be so 

highly endowed with academic ability or with the power to 
52 

achieve. 

The recommendations in Doctor Carpenter 1 s report 
indicated that provisions should be made in high schools 
for tool-using projects for the boys and for the girls 
consideration and participation in practical problems 
likely to arise in the course of their lives. These ex¬ 
periences were considered invaluable whether or not the 
students were university matriculants. In shop rooms and 
home economics departments the use of library books would 
provide the experience of others and so save time and 
repetition in experimentation. 

During 1?40 and 1?41 interest in home economics had 
been well maintained in Alberta. The smaller centres had 
been more responsive to changes in the programme than the 
cities. In several centres accommodation had been remod- 
delled in order to improve instruction. Teachers were 
acquiring experience in the new curriculum, and in some 
places a superior type of work was being done. Attendance 
at the summer school to improve qualifications was good. 

One of the phases in the development of home economics 
programmes during these years had been the large increase 

JFZ ~ — " ~ 

Loc. cit . 






’ 


















c 

* 





102 


53 

in the installation of electrical equipment. It seemed 
that this might have far-reaching results in the home-life 
of Alberta, because of the stimulus it gave to the extended 
use of this type of energy in rural homes. In 1942 elec¬ 
tric ranges, washing machines, refrigerators, electric 
irons, hot water heaters, toasters and mixmasters were 
finding their place in home economics classrooms. 

54 

In discussing this equipment Doctor Carpenter^ 

wrote: 


It may be argued that some of these pieces 
are not justified by the amount of service there 
is in school for them to perform. This may be 
quite true. The main argument for their instal¬ 
lation is not service, but in creating an effect 
upon the children who gain experience in their 
use. They are educational tools comparable to 
power machines in the boys 1 shops. It is a 
leading contribution towards the development 
of a mental attitude towards the use of elec¬ 
tricity as a servant of man and woman.3.5 

Here was an opportunity for the school to exercise 
leadership in social service. The account ended thus; 

Anything that hastens the day of general 
electrification of Alberta is a step in advance 
in the socialization of Alberta.36 

In spite of the war, inquiries from school boards 


33 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1941, p. 82. 

34 province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1942, p. 71* 

33 hoc , cit . 

36 


q c . ci b . 


















- 

C • / • 


















* 

. . 5 . . 

♦ 







c 


« 




( 


c < 


? 












103 


57 

about home economics indicated growth. Wherever these 

courses were offered they were popular with teachers, 

58 

students and parents alike. Doctor McNally made this 
comment, 


It is astonishing that educationists have 
overlooked this medium of educational develop¬ 
ment for so long. 

Unfortunately, 1942 proved to be a year of diffi¬ 
culty. War activities had drawn heavily on the men and 
women engaged in technical education. The situation would 
have been more serious if a large number of experienced 
teachers had not applied for specialized instruction in 
the summer school to qualify themselves for the vacancies 
which had occurred. Fortunately, nearly all schools were 
able to carry on without any serious compromise being made 
in the requirements of the Department of Education in 
regard to the certification of teachers. A few of the 
smaller schools withheld instruction in home economics be¬ 
cause of the inability to secure qualified instructors. 
Difficulty in securing equipment was also a deterrent in 
establishing new centres. 

- * ' ~ ” 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1940, p. 10. 

^ Loc. cit . 

5? Doc, cit . 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1942, p. 70- 





























... ' 

« 

















- 






. 






























» 








. 



























< « 

, 

f C r 












104 

Because of the conditions which existed in 1?42, 

Doctor Carpenter "ceased to aggressively propagate this 

type of educational service while the urge face support 

6l 

of specific war necessities” was so pressing. He thought 
it was advisable to postpone further organization until 
there was available a sufficient number of qualified in¬ 
structors and easily obtainable equipment and supplies. 
Therefore, he devoted his time to the consolidation and 
improvement of those centres which had already been es¬ 
tablished. 

It was noted that home economics instruction had 
become "generally acceptable”. Where the instructor was 
competent in attaining the objectives of the programme, 
it was apparent that all concerned were enthusiastic over 
the results attained. In some cases, where it was just 
another subject, the results were disappointing. There 
was no doubt that an enthusiastic teacher with a vision 
of the possibilities, and with some technical skill, could 
do wonderful things in inspiring better work in all phases 
of school life. Some of the centres which were developing 
the basic ideas in the home economics programme provided 
real inspiration. The working through of the problems in 
the home economics courses to their successful conclusion 


61 


Ibid ., p. 71* 






























• 




















; ■ f 


. 
















• 













* 




■ ' ■ ' c 








4 








• • 



















105 


ensured a better general standard of home life in the com¬ 
munity. Even though diverse activities were carried on 
the standards of attainment in the fabric and food aspects 
of the subject were good. 

In Alberta, it was remarkable that such results 

had been attained, in the main, by instructors who had 

depended on summer school programmes as their only oppor- 

65 

tunity for training. 

The year 194 3 had been a difficult one in the field 
of technical and practical education in Alberta. There 
was however, 

A healthy disposition on the part of the 
Alberta school patrons to do something really 
worth while to improve facilities to make them 
more closely related to the lives children would 
have when they grew up.° 4 

Alberta was ready to do something about providing 
a variety of constructive experiences in its schools. A 
splendid programme of home economics had been organized 
and widely introduced as an option in the discussion and 
participation in home problems. The economic depression 
had not materially lessened the desire of parents for more 
practical results. It seemed as though it had increased, 

Ibid*, P* 71* 

^ L oc. cit . 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 

Report . Edmonton, 1945, p. 73- 









* 




! 




$ 








c 



< 






• 

: . 

■ 
























. 




t .? 



.* 'iQ-' 










... .M *' 




. 





























. 











■ ' ■ . .0 ' .i ’ ■ ' V ' ' ' ' ■■ ••> : 
























i . 







106 


but the war added difficulties to the establishment of new 
centres. 

During the year the Edmonton School Board closed 
the Technical High School. The teaching staff was dis¬ 
tributed through the city schools and the pupils were 
placed in academic classes* The school, with its tools 
and equipment, was loaned to the war emergency organiza¬ 
tion. ^ 

Appointment of a Supervisor of 

Home Economics 

At the close of 1^43 Dr. Carpenter retired as 
Director of Technical Education. In September 1?44 Miss 
M. Jeannette Hinman of Cardston was appointed Supervisor 
of Home Economics for the province. During the year Miss 
Hinman pointed out the need for a new course of studies for 
the high school. The course as outlined for the schools 
offering the Group C or technical options in home economics 
seemed to be functioning well, but the outlines in Home 
Economics 1 and 2 as taught in other high schools were in¬ 
adequate. In many schools the courses had to be taught in 
the same period. Miss Hinman considered that a course 
which could be taught under such conditions should be 

outlined. 

__ 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1^43, P* 74. 




























* * 























* 






0 




C 


« 









• 




• 










• 














. 










. 



« 





107 


There was still a tendency to regard home economics 
as cooking and sewing. Not enough emphasis was being put 
on the other phases of home making. Topics on household 
mechanics, child care, consumer buying, family entertain¬ 
ment, interior decoration and other related topics were 
needed in the course. 

As there were very few schools in which a full af¬ 
ternoon could be devoted to a single class in home econom¬ 
ics, the methods of teaching cooking had to be such that 
the classes could be conducted in a quarter of a day. 

Classroom instruction should be associated with 
actual home practice. To be successful, the home project 
should follow the units of work being studied in school. 

An intimate knowledge of the home of the girl was a neces¬ 
sity for the teacher if the project was to be successfully 
carried out. 

In some centres the high school girl could get 

invaluable training in management through the medium of 

6 6 

the school lunch. 

There was a noticeable lack of teachers in the 
province trained for home economics. This was linked 
with the general scarcity of teachers. Regarding the 

Ln 

situation, Miss Hinman ' made the following statement: 

_ 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1943, P* 74. 

^ Ibid ., p. 62. 
























, • 




c 

















■ 























. 












iq8 


This scarcity of home economics teachers 
is increased because there has been insuffici¬ 
ent machinery in operation in the province for 
the training of such teachers. It is hoped 
that changes in teacher training will result 
in greater facilities being available.°° 

Miss Hinman’s report indicated that on the whole 
the school boards and superintendents of the province 
were very sympathetic toward the teaching of home econ¬ 
omics and co-operated in all ways possible with the in¬ 
structors and with the supervisor of home economics. 
Considering the amount of money available in the province 
for education, the home economics centres were well equipped. 
This was especially true of some of the circuits where the 
centre was used for only one day a week. In mose places 
the equipment was such that all the phases of the course 
could be taught. 

In l?4j? it was noted that as a whole students in 
the city high schools had little opportunity to study 
home economics. In Edmonton, the Victoria High School 
and the University High School offered Home Economics 1 
only and that to a limited number of students. Western 
Canada High School was the one Calgary school offering 
home economics on the secondary level. In this school, 
the Group C Technical^? 0 ptions in home economics were 

68 ~ ~. . ~ ~ ~~ ~~ “ “ 

liOC. OIL . 

6? 


See Appendix W. 























. 














, 




- 




, T 






. 






- L) 

v - 

r ' 























10? 


the only ones offered. As these subjects carried eight 
or ten credits, no student interested in an academic pro¬ 
gramme was able to include home economics in her schedule. 
The same situation applied in Medicine Hat. In Lethbridge 

home economics was offered only at the Grade VIII and 
70 

Grade IX levels. 

71 

Miss Hinman stated in her 1?4.5 report that some 

training should be available to all students and not just 

to those who were interested in home economics from the 

standpoint of earning a livelihood in the business world, 

or to the pupils who were considered too poorly equipped 

72 

mentally to study other subjects. 

10• Programme of Studies for the High School 

During l?4j? a tentative programme was prepared 
for Home Economies 1 and 2. In 1?47 this was printed 
and It was felt that it would meet the needs of Alberta 
students in the post-war years. Its major objective was 
the improvement of personal living, and of home and 
family life. The programme was flexible and readily 
adapted to the many circumstances which occur in high 
schools throughout the province. In some cases girls 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, l?4j>, P* i>7« 

71 

hoc» cit . 

Loc. cit. 











110 


entered high school with three years* intensive training 
in integrated home-making, while in the same class were 
pupils with no home economics training. 

As many of the smaller schools found it necessary 
to combine Home Economics 1 and 2 in the same class period, 
the course was outlined in units. The units selected were 
to be the ones for which there seemed a need in the commu¬ 
nity. Each year*s work was to include at least one unit 
on foods and one on clothing construction. Suggestions 
were given for carrying out the work in the unit.7^ Each 
year T s course was to consist of four or five units of 
work. In this programme the many aspects of personal and 
home living were presented as an integrated whole rather 
than as separate and segregated phases of life. Educa¬ 
tion for personal and family living was planned so as to 

involve the whole individual — mentally, physically, 

74 

emotionally and socially. 

11. Teacher Training: 

During 1^44 the first step was taken toward the 
unification of teacher-training in the Faculty of Educa¬ 
tion. The Department of Education had conducted an annual 

7^ See Appendix Y for 1^4 7, Programme of Studies for the 
High School . Home Economics 1 and 2 . 

74 Programme of Studies for the High School . Home Econ ¬ 
omics 1 and 2, p. 1. See appendix Y. 





























Ill 


summer school for teachers since the summer of 1?17* This 
was transferred to the Faculty of Education of the Univer¬ 
sity. ^ 

The great advantage to this arrangement was that 
teachers were then able to secure university credits for 
all summer school courses offered by the Faculty of Edu¬ 
cation. Mo such credit had been offered by the Depart¬ 
ment of Education. It was felt that the new system would 

definitely encourage teachers to seek advanced professional 
7 A 

training. Special courses in home economics were being 

77 

prepared for teachers. The courses which had been of¬ 
fered at the university previous to 1945 had been meant 
primarily for those graduates who were interested in the 
commercial or dietetic phases of nutrition. However, it 
should be pointed out that Bachelor of Science graduates 
in home economics who had teachers 1 certificates were 
teaching home economics. 

At last, the training of home economics teachers 

had become an integral part of the teacher training plan. 

78 

Miss Hinman' believed that the future of home economics 

7J? province of Alberta, Department of education, Annual 
Heport . Edmonton, 1944, pp. 22-25. 

7^ Loc. cit . 

77 3ee Appendix N for courses and certification of home 
economics teachers. 

7^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, imnual 
Report . Edmonton, 1945, p. 56* 










• . 

... • JL ■ 










* 














, 










. 











112 


teaching in Alberta depended on the personal and academic 

qualifications of its teachers. 79 She referred to nine 

teachers who were engaged in the work with one summer of 

training in home economics* Of this she said, 

There is a grave danger of home economics 
in our schools losing prestige because the 
teachers are not qualified to carry on a prac¬ 
tical programme adapted to meet the needs of 
the pupils.oO 

Since 1944, more graduates who have taken their 
B.Sc. in Home Economics have taken professional training 
and gone into the teaching field* And, too, there has 
been an increase in the number of education students 
majoring in home economics at the winter and summer ses- 

Qi 

sions of the University of Alberta. x 

12* General Observations from 1945-1953 

An examination of inspectoral criticism and 
developments from 194.5 to 1952 will give specific evidence 
as to the type of home economics instruction to be found 
in Alberta schools. 

In August of 194 5 Miss Hinman transferred to the 
Institute of Technology and Art. As no immediate appoint- 

79 Loc. cit . 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1945, p. 56. 

^ Information obtained frcm records in the School of 
Household Economics and from Miss Mabel Patrick, 
Director of Household Economics. 

























* 

„ 








• 






< 

. 

i 




























113 


ment was made, Mr. Tingley took over the duties of that 
department for 1^4 6 and 1^47 ♦ It was disheartening to 
him to find so many centres closed because qualified in¬ 
structors were not available. A survey of the sources 
of supply from which future teachers in the field could 
be drawn was not encouraging. It seemed advisable that 
some steps be taken whereby candidates in the high schools 

might be given seme guidance and assistance that would 

83 

result in specialization in this phase of education. 

Realizing that the programmes in home economies 
were in need of revision, the department of education ap¬ 
pointed a sub-committee of home economics instructors to 
work on the revising. Efforts were concentrated first on 
the programmes for the intermediate grades. It was 
planned to have the new courses ready for trial by Sep¬ 
tember 1948. Go-operation of instructors throughout the 
province had been solicited through circulars requesting 

o, 

observations, suggestions and recommendations. 04 

The final revision of this programme of studies in 
Home Economics for the Junior High Schools was completed 

Mr. A. P. Tingley, Supervisor of Industrial Arts, 
Province of Alberta. 

83 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1^46, p. ?4. 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report , Edmonton, 1^47, p. 84. 










114 


in 1950 and was in use in all schools after September the 
first. In addition to the course outlines, suggestions 
for establishing centres and installing equipment; refer¬ 
ence and free material lists; and pictures of students 

carrying out work in different phases of the course were 
85 

included in the new Programme of Studies for the Junior 
High School. 

o/* 

Mr. Oviatt 0 in his summary of inspection and 
supervision for 1947, revealed that in the intermediate 
schools (Grades 7, 8, 9) the offering of optional subjects 
was too often conditioned by the preparation of the teach¬ 
ers so that the students were given no choice in the matter 
and such subjects were merely non-examination subjects* 

This resume also stated that because the options in home 
economics required special qualifications on the part of 
the teacher before they could be taught, this instruction 
was much more effective and popular with the students* 
Furthermore, It was regrettable that more well qualified 
teachers of ”these interesting, cultural and exploratory 
courses”, were not available in the schools. 

w Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 

Report, Edmonton, 195 0, p. 67* 

Mr. D. T. Oviatt, Supervisor of Teachers' Service 
Bureau, Department of Education, Edmonton. 

87 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1947, p* 52. 

Loc. cit . 





















« 




115 


The organization oi the Bed Deer Composite High 
School was a development of great interest and signifi¬ 
cance in 1J47. -additional subjects made possible by the 
new organization included Fabrics and Dressmaking and 
Homemaking 1. The second units of these vocational pre¬ 
paratory courses were to be available in the second year 

89 

of operation of this school. 

Miss A. Berneice MacFarlane, formerly of the 
Medicine Hat High School staff, took over the duties of 

90 

Provincial Supervisor of Home Economics on May 4, 1947* 

In her first report Miss MacFarlane wrote that regardless 

of conditions teachers showed "initiative and ingenuity" 

in arranging and organizing home economics centres. Their 

co-operation in the matter of programme revision and their 

interest in the activities and administration were encou- 

91 

raging and commendable. 

Revision of the high school course in home econ¬ 
omics was started in 1950 and consideration was given to 
the desire of many senior students to specialize in defi¬ 
nite phases of home economics. During that year the 

general courses Home Economics 1 and 2 continued to be 

. 

7 Ibid ., p. 41. 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1948, p. 9* 

91 Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1948, p. 75* 











116 


taught in the majority of schools offering home economics. 

92 

The technical electives were taught in the cities. 

General observations in 1930 indicated that the 
future outlook for home economics in .Alberta was bright. 
More people were becoming aware of the important part that 
the school could play in improving home and community life 
through better understanding of the value of good nutri¬ 
tion, budgeting, family relations, child care and leisure 
93 

time activities. 

In the years just previous to 1932 the importance 
of education for home living had been emphasized and 
social as well as technical values had been recognized. 

In keeping with these changes, the revision of the high 
school courses was planned to give more girls an opportu¬ 
nity to take the courses.^ Hew credit values and group- 
93 

ing of periods were planned to assist in the arranging 

96 

of time tables and schedules. 

This new high sehool programme which became effee- 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report, Edmonton, 1930, P* 6?. 

93 Loc. cit . 

9^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual 
Report . Edmonton, 1932, p. 36. 

93 See Senior High School Curriculum Guide for Home Econ ¬ 
omics, Province of Alberta, Department of Education, 
1933. 

96 Letter, July 13, 1934 from A. Berneice MacEarlane, 
Supervisor of Home Economics. 











o 




117 


tive in the 1933-34 school term, includes two general 
courses which cover the main phase of home economics; 
two courses which allow three years of specialization in 
Foods and Nutrition or in sewing and textile work* There 
are additional courses of practical and cultural interest, 
including: Clothing Selection and Design 20; Clothing 
Selection and Design 30; Child Care and Home Nursing 10; 
Homes and Home Furnishing 20; and Home Economics Crafts 
10. Home Economics 11 is a general course for boys and 
Home Economics 12 is a Foods Course for boys. 27 These 
additional courses are to be offered only upon approval 
of the Department of Education, because so few teachers 
are trained for these courses. 

The revised programme, 1933-34, was developed by 
co-operative planning of curriculum committees, the Super¬ 
visor of Home Economics, teachers, parents and the students 
themselves* Careful attention was paid to the trends in 
modern home economics education by the study of the cur¬ 
ricula of various schools in the United states and in the 

other provinces of Canada* Questionnaires were used to 

98 

secure opinions of parents and students. 

27 The numbering of courses was changed, beginning 1932- 
33, so that Grade X courses were numbered 10, 11, 12, 
etc*. Grade XI courses 20, 21, 22, etc., Grade XII 
courses 30, 31, 32, etc. 

°° see Appendix s* 




t 


t 










c 


c 


c i 


u 


t c < 











118 


Today, Fabrics and Dress courses, Foods and Nutri¬ 
tion courses and the general courses Home Economics 10 and 
20 are offered in the majority of schools having centres. 
In the opinion of Miss MacFarlane these courses are appa¬ 
rently proving quite satisfactory. 

In reviewing home economics in the schools of Al¬ 
berta today Miss MacFarlane 101 has made this statement: 

Since home economics is offered in Junior 
High Schools on almost a compulsory basis, it 
is natural that high school students, at the 
Grade X level, often choose other electives. 
Commercial courses are favorite courses, since 
students secure positions quite readily without 
further training. There are limited opportuni¬ 
ties for students of home economics in Alberta 
unless they continue home economies training at 
the University. 

This statement gives an indication of a reason 
for the "drop-off” in registration in home economies in 
the high schools. 


13* Special One Year Course in Home Economics 
at the University of Alberta 1954-55 Session 

In an attempt to ease the shortage of teachers 
qualified to teach home economies, the Department of 
Education consulted the Department of Household Econ¬ 
omics at the University of Alberta* Their suggestion 

99 Letter, Miss A. B. MacFarlane. 

100 See Appendix Q. 






























* 




































11 ? 


was a special one year course'*'^ for certified teachers for 

the year 1954-55* This was accepted and in December 1953, 

a special bulletin was published in the A,i»A« Magazine 

102 

describing the plan. By taking this course certified 
teachers will be able to secure a senior certificate in 
home economics in one winter session instead of in four 
or five summer sessions. 


101 

102 


See Appendix V. 
A.T.A. Magazine . 


December 1953, 


p • 42. 






- - 

.... .. 





' 





















CHAPTER VIII 


THE C 0 NT INUATI ON AND APPLICATION 
OP HOME ECONOMICS EDUCATION 

In the previous chapters the history of home econ¬ 
omics in Alberta has been reviewed in relation to students 
and teachers of the public schools. In closing the survey 
this section will make brief mention of other fields of 
home ec on omi c s e due a ti on. 

The opportunities for careers 1 2 in home economics 
have increased rapidly in the past few years. Well trained 
qualified home economists are in demand in the fields of 
business, education, social work and governmental services. 
In 19j>2, Craig^ wrote 

The need for trained home economists 
throughout the country is evident not only 
in the teaching field, but also in dietetics, 
extension and business. 


1. School of Household Economics 


The University of Alberta offers specialized 

training in the field of home economics through the School 

3 

of Household Economics. Degree courses in Household Econ- 


1 See Appendix R. 

2 Hazel Thompson Craig, "Recruitment for Home Economics," 
The Adviser . Vol. V, Pall 1952, Number 1, D. C. Heath 
and Company, Boston. Heath’s Service Bulletin for Home 
Economics Teachers. 

^ The University of Alberta Calendar , 1930-51, Edmonton, 
Alberta, p. 51* 
















• 







. 











. 


e t 








« 


























121 


omics have been offered since 1 ^ 18 , when the department was 
established with Miss Mabel Patrick as its head. Courses 
are offered for students from the high schools and from the 
Provincial Schools of .Agriculture. 

The course of study is a general one, designed 
to provide a student with a foundation in Arts, 
Science, and Household Economics which will ena¬ 
ble her to enter any of the numerous branches of 
Home Economics, or to proceed to graduate study. 

Por some of these lines of work special training 
is required. Por example, if a graduate plans to 
teach, she must obtain a Teacher f s Certificate, 
and if she plans to be a dietitian she must qua¬ 
lify by taking student training in a hospital or 
commercial institution. Other positions open to 
graduates in Household Economics are as directors 
of the home service departments of utility compa¬ 
nies; home economists in food industries and 
extension work; nutritionists in social service, 
industrial plants; government departments and in 
nursery schools; laboratory technicians; and edi¬ 
torial positions in the field of journalism, lor 
some of these positions special training and ex¬ 
perience are desirable, but the present great de¬ 
mand has necessitated the employment of graduates 
without this advanced training.4 


2• The A l berta Schools of Agriculture 
and Home Economics 


The home economics courses offered at the Alberta 
Schools of Agriculture and Home Economics at Olds, Pairview 
and Vermilion are "designed primarily to give training in 
homemaking. u ^ 


4 

Loc. cit . 

^ Calendar, The Alberta Schools of ^giiculture and Home 
Economics at Olds. Vermilion and Pairview , Alberta, 
Department of Agriculture, Edmonton, Alberta, p. 2o. 

























122 


Such, a purpose appears to be entirely justi¬ 
fied in view of the obvious value it will have 
for most young women. Much of the training is 
applicable to numerous forms of employment that 
might be obtained after graduation, but there is 
no attempt to provide specific training for any 
particular job. The strictly home economics 
subjects include sewing, clothing selection, 
textiles, cooking, nutrition, handicrafts, 
laundering and home management.6 

Up until the fall of 1953 agricultural subjects 
such as horticulture, dairying and poultry were included 
and were also compulsory. Since then these have become 

7 

optional and typing has been added as an alternative.' 

Considerable time is also devoted to English, 
Mathematics, General Science and Community Orga¬ 
nization. The course also endeavors to stimulate 
higher standards in home practices and rural liv¬ 
ing and provides n some training in rural leadership 
and citizenship. 0 

Some graduates have continued for further 
training in Bursing. Teaching or Home Economics 
at the University .... Other graduates have 
found employment in hospitals, school dormi¬ 
tories, hotels, stores, dressmakers 1 shops and 
with other commercial organizations.' 


3* Provincial institute of 
Technology and Art 


The purpose of the Provincial Institute of Tech- 


£ 

Loc. cit . 

^ Letter, E. M. Putnam, Superintendent, Schools of Agricul 
ture, Edmonton. 

8 Calendar , T he Albert a School s of Agriculture and Home 
Economic s, Department of Agriculture, Edmonton, Alberta, 
p. 28 . 

^ Loc. cit. 

















, 





? « 




► 






c 





c 


c 





123 


nology and Art is to train men and women for occupations 
between the skilled crafts and the highly scientific pro¬ 
fessions, Half of the training time is devoted to shop 
work in the practical application of skills and techniques. 
Theoretical sections offer instruction intended to qualify 
students for supervisory positions in their trade. Home 
economics courses in clothing and design and food service 
training are offered at the Institute which is operated by 
the Department of Education, It is also affiliated with 
the University of Alberta. 10 

4. Adult Education 

Home economics education at the adult level serves 
primarily to help adults assume homemaking responsibilities. 
Such opportunities have been made available in Alberta 
through the following channels: night classes, in schools, 
university branches; and the Institute of Technology and 
Art; extension work sponsored by the University of Alberta 
and the Department of Agriculture; homemaking or family 
service centres in stores, gas and electrical companies; 
sewing machine company courses; and cooking schools spon¬ 
sored by stores and wholesale companies* Informal methods 
of assisting adults in homemaking are being increasingly 
used also. These include personal consultations and clinic 

10 Senior High School Handbook. 1954-35 . Province of 
Alberta, Department of Education, 1934, p. 28. 












I 

. 




. 

: i ; 




. 


















i - 


< v 

c <• ‘ - 

* . • . 

; . 












„ 













t 













124 


type help on the repair of household equipment and furni¬ 
ture; the selection, care and renovation of clothing; the 
production and preservation of food; and the guidance of 
chi 1 dr en. 





CHAPTER IX 


SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


1. Sumaiar.v 

Primarily, the present study has attempted to des¬ 
cribe in some detail the progress of home economics in the 
schools and in the teacher training courses in Alberta. 
Secondly, it has attempted to determine the place of home 
economics in the educational program of Alberta by so 
tracing its development and considering the significance 
of the changes in the curricula. 

In addition, references have been made to the 
manner in which the Department of Education has and is 
solving some of the problems connected with the teaching 
of home economics. 

The historical background has placed these develop¬ 
ments in home economics in their proper relationship to 
each other and to the educational system of Alberta as a 
whole. The work has indicated how the attempt has been 
made to bring about a closer connection between the schools 
and the lives of the students. 

Furthermore, the study has shown that as home econ¬ 
omics has been adapted to the changing needs of the province 
so have educators with foresight guided its growth in keep- 























































. 




















, 



i 










126 


ing with developments in the provincial field of education. 

The survey was considered to be of importance be¬ 
cause home economics is a subject which centres in the home 
and its relationships. These indicate a type of education 
which is especially adapted to the needs of girls and which 
gives a basis for the intelligent solution of problems con¬ 
nected with home and community responsibilities of adult¬ 
hood. 

The many definitions of home economics designate it 
as a field of study, for it Involves not only the teaching 
of the activities essential to the home, but also a body of 
contact which enriches the activities of homemaking. It 
includes a study of food, shelter, and clothing viewed from 
the standpoint of science, economics and art, as well as a 
study of the relations of the members of the family to each 
other and to society. 

The function of the home, originally, was the care 
and protection of the child during infancy. Most of the 
needs of the individuals in the family were met within the 
group. As time went on social and economic structures 
changed in a wide variety of ways and the home lost its 
vital function as the seat of economic productivity. Con¬ 
sumption replaced much of the production. As a result 
homes and home life have changed. Men now work shorter 



127 


hours and farther from home and their work is less clearly 
connected with the home. Many women are also gainfully 
employed outside the home. The day of the well integrated 
community characterized by family group contacts has 
passed. 

Because of these changes, agencies outside the 
hone have assumed many of its functions. Schools have 
taken more and more responsibility in the education of the 
children. Since the family is the most important, most 
continuous, and most significant of all the agencies that 
contribute to democratic living, home economics education 
has become an integral part of the school system. 

Early in the history of Canada the first beginnings 
of home economics were started by the Ursuline Sisters in 
the province of Quebec in 1668. 

In the United States, though, its subject matter 
had received the attention and the thought of writers and, 
though a large body of knowledge had accumulated as a re¬ 
sult of the experiences of housekeepers, home economics did 
not find an established place as a recognized subject for 
formal instruction, until about 1870 when it was introduced 
into four state agricultural colleges. 

The history of home economics education also reveals 
the fact that emphasis on education for home and family life 




■ 






- 




i ■ : 

... UJ . , ; i 


, s . _• i . j .,..1. ..v, -i,:. \ 


■ 


i. • - f 






. 

, 

. 


« 

' 

< c 


















128 


received impetus from the works of Mrs, £11 en Richards and 
the efforts of other delegates to the Lake Placid Confer¬ 
ence . 

In Canada development was influenced by practices 
in the United States. In the provinces where the govern¬ 
ment provided financial assistance, the growth was most 
rapid. The enthusiasm of three philanthropists and edu¬ 
cators, Sir William Macdonald, Mrs. Adelaide Hoodless and 
Mrs. Lillian Treble, gave force to the movement. 

A brief review of the outstanding events in the 
march of home economics in the province of ALberta shows 
how far we have travelled. Prom 1895 to 1905 this sub¬ 
ject was confined to sewing. After that it was extended 
to include cooking. Manual training and household science 
have been cited as subjects on the curriculum from the 
earliest period in the history of the province. In 1912 
the course included sewing for Grade VI girls; sewing and 
cooking for Grade TII girls; and sewing, cooking and house¬ 
work for Grade VTII girls. The emphasis was entirely on 
skills. 

Household science was introduced for girls as a 
counterpart of manual training. The rapid development of 
manual training in the lower grades and the demand for in¬ 
structors led to the establishment of teacher-training 


















. 




, . . ; i » 






t 






• . . . k . : . . ' « 




c • 














. 




' < w* . ’ • 








' 

■ 







* 

. 







129 


courses and promoted investigations into the value of the 
subject and into the question of the forms 1 in which it 
should be presented in order to meet the changing needs 
of the public schools, which represented the only formal 
education received by the vast majority of people. The 
importance of this problem came at a time of rapid changes 
in social and industrial life, all of which affected the 
home and tended to add still further to the subject matter 
of household science. 

Although education in Canada comes under the juris¬ 
diction of the provinces, the teaching of household science 
was fostered to some extent by Dominion Government legisla¬ 
tion. Recognizing the importance of instruction in house¬ 
hold science following the Report of the Royal Commission 
on Industrial Training, the Agricultural Instruction Act 
was passed in 1913* This Act appropriated a sum of money 
for use over a ten year period, to be granted to the prov¬ 
inces in proportion to their population. This grant inclu¬ 
ded the teaching of household science in public, high, sep¬ 
arate and continuation schools and the university. The 
teaching of household science was also encouraged by the 
School Grants Act of 1912, which gave special grants to 
rural and village schools for the teaching of home economics 

1 System of class divisions called forms until 1913* 









< 


' 










, 


, . ,, ... ' ' - ' ' ■ " ' ■ - - 

< 






■ 






. 


1 


. t 




. 

. 

4 






130 


The regulations became operative on January 1, 1?13* The 
appropriation of the Agricultural Instruction Act expired 
in 1923-24, The Schools of -Agriculture also functioned 
under this act, 

A further grant in 191? under the Technical Educa¬ 
tion Act, provided an additional sum for vocational train¬ 
ing in the provinces, with a stipulation that a provincial 
grant equal to the allotment of the Dominion government be 
made. 

This aid made it possible to introduce and maintain 
work in home economies in smaller communities and helped to 
raise the standard of teaching. 

Up to 1914, when the Department of Education in 
Alberta decided to follow a definite policy of technical 
education, instruction in ”vocational 11 subjects had been 
given as a part of the school work only in the larger 
centres, namely Calgary, Edmonton, Lethbridge and Medicine 
Hat. Household science was offered to the girls in the 
seventh and eighth grades. The work was taught by well 
paid, well qualified supervisors and the board received a 
grant from the department based on the amount expended. 
However, this system had been unsatisfactory because school 
boards had to decide how much and what kind of instruction 
should be given. Accordingly, when he was appointed in 




131 


1914, the Director of Technical Education was instructed 
to draw up a scheme of technical education which could be 
applied in the rural as well as in the large city schools. 

It was hoped that the scheme would meet the serious prob¬ 
lems presented by the low average attendance in the elem¬ 
entary schools and the fact that many immature, retarded 
pupils were taught in the same classes with children five 
to seven years younger than themselves. 

In the cities, well trained specialists from eastern 
Canada and the United States were employed. In the rural 
districts the offering of such courses was dependent on 
local initiative to provide equipment and on the regular 
teacher for the instruction. To train teachers, summer 
schools were established at the University of Alberta in 
1913. Three certificates in specialized courses were 
available -- the el one nt ary, the intermediate and the 
specialists 1 . 

The purpose of the household economics courses 
offered in the normal schools from 1913 to 1926 was not 
for training the teachers to instruct in the subject, but 
rather to instill a basic knowledge of nutrition and food 
selection in relation to health, and methods of prepara¬ 
tion for the organization and serving of rural school 
lunches. Clothing was included as part of the course as 











































. 

. 












« ■ • 














c 



















- . 


— 



. 























* ■ 



132 


an aid to school fair work. 

Unfortunately the depression in the years of the 
1914-18 war hindered development. Calgary retained its 
Pre-vocational school and Edmonton its Technical school, 
but Lethbridge abandoned its attempts at expansion in the 
field of vocational education. Public school classes in 
Calgary were reduced to a half-time basis with a skeletal 
staff. 

Older youth returning to school after the first 
world war and in the years that followed, created a need 
for technical and vocational education. Attempts were 
made to meet the demand. Help was needed with personality 

and vocational problems, family adjustment and preparation 

n FJIifPl 

for marriage. 

Before the war of 1914-18, studies in home econ¬ 
omics had been recognized by some as an essential part of 
the general education of every girl. At the close of the 
war these studies assumed a new significance and appeared 
as an indispensable part of education. Every girl needed 
instruction regarding better and more healthful living 
and training in those practices which would enable her 
to live her daily life more intelligently, to rear her 
children more thoughtfully and to serve her community and 
country more efficiently. These studies were needed by 























« 










, 

, 



- 



* 


, 

, 

. 


■ . 





e — 




























, 

- 

- 



133 


others for definite wage earning vocations* 

In their first classes in home economics, pupils 
worked individually, for educators then thought that pu¬ 
pils worked best and assumed more independence working 
alone* In cooking, each girl made an individual recipe. 
Meal preparation in a unit kitchen was yet to come. 
Teaching was organized around the subject not the pupils’ 
needs. For a long time the day’s lesson was the unit of 
work. Glasses were teacher-dominated and the emphasis 
was on skills. The shift has been from a subject- 
organized curriculum to the family centered one. The 
aim is no longer to make the student amenable to disci¬ 
pline and then fill her mind with facts, but to develop 
to the full her talents so that she will be a credit to 
herself, her home and her country. 

The home economics curriculum revisions of 1?36 
were 11 sweeping. 11 The trend toward ’’activity 11 programmes 
led to the setting up of problems which would stimulate 
learning. The trend toward curriculum integration in the 
high school led to the organizing of different areas of 
study concerning the home. Homemaking education no longer 
consisted of cooking and sewing only, but had been broad¬ 
ened to include all areas of everyday living. The "inte¬ 
grated homemaking technique" was the method of instruction 


■ ■ ; <: L": I; n :.. 0 cw':. l\ i\l. 

< - • 


t 








-, ' . ' •!■' - 0 




- 

* 










. .. < 

l 








L - • • ' 

/ ? 'i 1 




» 







134 


employed. 

Meal preparation and service formed the foundation 
for all foods courses from grades seven to twelve. Greater 
stress was also placed on the preparation of food in family 
quantities and on the study of food principles in relation 
to health. 

The realization of the importance of the individual 
and of families and their relationships resulted in the 
study of child development and guidance and of personal and 
family relations. In the junior high schools students were 
introduced to homemaking activities and learned to accept 
responsibility for any project undertaken. 

Home projects were an essential part of this new 
home economies programme* buch projects included the plan¬ 
ning of an attractive wardrobe, the planning and making of 
low cost meals, the securing of better nutrition, the plan¬ 
ning of family good times, the beautification of a room, 
house or yard, the improvement of the efficiency of the 
house, the planning of a party or the extending of other 
forms of hospitality* To be effective and valuable these 
projects needed to be supervised by the teacher. When 
carried through properly, they had many values* They en¬ 
couraged a closer parent-child-teacher relationship* They 
fostered pupil development by broadening the area of 












experiences* They provided, opportunity for the knowledge 
and skills acquired in the classroom to be applied to out¬ 
side situations* 

The major purpose of this programme was the educa¬ 
tion of youth so that they would be enabled to meet and 
solve the problem of everyday living. The emphasis in the 
programme was the development in the individual student of 
attitudes, appreciations and abilities to meet his responsi¬ 
bilities and the gaining of some knowledge of the profession 
of homemaking. 

In the larger centres and in the composite high 
schools technical courses requiring from eight to ten 
periods a week were offered. If a girl wished to speci¬ 
alize in sewing and related art and design, she could take 
three years of fabrics and Dress. If she preferred cooking 
and food work with some laundry, home management end related 
arts, she would take three years of Homemaking. In some 
schools a course in arts and crafts was offered to both boys 
and girls. 

During the period of the Second Great War, there was 
a great shortage of teachers and a lack of facilities. It 
seemed that the first subjects to suffer were the optional 
subjects in the high school. In L?4j? there was a great drop 
in the number of students taking home economics and the number 














t • x ^ ■ 


« 














. ... C • - •- - 

* 

L 

.. . ...... i . " ‘1 .... ... ■ ■- J : - ■■■ 




. 












. 


. 




;. ‘J. 

* 





136 


2 

of high schools outside of the cities offering the courses. 
The explanations in the annual reports gave a general picture 
of home economics being hampered by inadequate salaries, 
serious deficiencies in classroom equipment, time limits, 
circuit teaching and lack of professional training, Even 
under these difficulties, the inspectoral remarks indicated 
that the programme was achieving some success. It seems 
that teacher shortage was the major deterrent to progress. 

The situation may also be explained by the fact that 
teachers required summer session training in home economics 
and that this involved an expenditure of time, money and 
energy that did not seem warranted during the war years. 

In 1943 teacher training was completely taken over 
by the faculty of Education, University of Alberta. Courses 
in Household Economics could then be taken in the summer and 
winter sessions, and carried credit toward a degree. Thus, 
progress was made towards better training of home economics 
teachers in Alberta in these years. The appointment of a 
Supervisor of Home Economics in 1344 also gave a new impetus 
to the development, and steps were taken to bring methods 
and courses up to date. 

In the 1330 revision of the home economics course 
for the junior high school and in the 1333 revision for the 


2 


See Appendix Q,. 




senior high school there was a change in emphasis on subject 
matter. The change was from generalized to specialized 
courses. The objectives as expressed in these courses are 
in line with Alberta’s general aims in education. The over¬ 
all programme in home economics includes courses in foods 
and nutrition, clothing, home furnishings and equipment, 
child development, family economics, family relationships 
and crafts. Home economics is no longer wholly concerned 
with setting standards of perfection. Rather, it is impor¬ 
tant that problems involving time, energy, money and satis¬ 
factions must always be solved on an individual family 
basis. Today the courses show a retention of useful 
skills; an application of scientific knowledge to home 
living; and the importance of the development of the indi¬ 
vidual and the family in a family-centered programme. The 
course is uniform but elastic. The minimum requirement 
for each grade is stated, but scope is given for the selec¬ 
tion of optional units and materials. This permits the 
teacher to consider both the needs of the students and the 
community. 

It would of course be premature to attempt to pass 
judgment on the ±955 high school courses in home economics 
before sufficient time has elapsed to prove their soundness. 
Indications are that the programme is proving satisfactory, 



r* 

v 
















t 






. 

i 

< ' ’ L i 

» 


. . 




ft « 

' - 

. • ■ 













in 

















138 

but objective reports were not available at the time of 
writing. 

By completing university programmes in household 
economics and related fields, high school graduates may 
prepare themselves to become teachers of home economics, 
dietitians, district home economists, household economics 
consultants* 

Those wishing to specialize in dressmaking or in 
restaurant management may take courses at the Provincial 
Institute of Technology and Art in Galgary. General courses 
in homemaking, designed for farm girls, can be taken at the 
Agricultural Schools at Olds, Vermilion and Fairview. 

Efforts have been made and are being made to im¬ 
prove the standing of teachers in home economics. Those 
already in the field have the opportunity of attending sum¬ 
mer session classes. Those teachers wishing to specialize 
in home economics will have the opportunity of attending 
the special course in the 1933-.54 University of Alberta 
winter session. The completion of this course will entitle 
the teacher to a Senior Certificate in Home Economics. 

2. Gone fusions 

The emphasis on the importance of raising the stan¬ 
dards of training for home economics teachers is perhaps 















* 


■ 






. 

. 













! 


& J ; 













13 ? 


the most far reaching move of all, for it is essential if 
home economics is to flourish and expand, that teachers 
should be adequately equipped for the responsibilities 
which face them. 

Home economics teachers at the Annual Workshop in 
Calgary on April 23rd and 24th this year, expressed the 
need and desire for additional home economics courses. 

The changes in home economics education have placed new 
demands upon the teachers and to prepare them to meet 
these requirements teacher training courses in home econ¬ 
omics must be extended. Teachers need to be familiar with 
the newest methods in teaching and with the newest trends 
in home equipment, foods and textiles. 

The status of the home economics teacher stands 
forth in Alberta as elsewhere as the chief determinant of 

3 

future educational progress in home economics. Sandiford 
says, “After all, the teacher not the programme is the key- 

4 

stone of the educational arch.” 

This is particularly true in the case of home econ¬ 
omics. The teacher is in a large measure responsible for 
moulding public opinion and her success in the attainment 
of this end is in proportion to her conception of the place 

^ Peter Sandiford, Ontario College of Education, Article 
entitled “Curriculum Revision in Canada.” 

Loc. cit. 


4 










14,0 


of home economics in the education programme and the con¬ 
tribution this subject makes to the individual, the family 
and the community. If we are to reach the goals of home 
economics, there must be teachers who are quick to take 
advantage of every opportunity to stimulate public interest 
and support. 

Fortunately, through extension work, reading, radio 
and someday television, the home economics teacher may keep 
in touch with her fields of interest and continue to build 
upon the foundation of her training. Most women eventually 
manage homes of their own. Home economics training has the 
advantage of being a professional field which furnishes 
many outlets for remunerative work, and also one which is 
not abandoned when the responsibilities of a home are under¬ 
taken. 

Schools in -Alberta are now quite generally equipped 
to give courses in home economics. However, a good home¬ 
making programme may be achieved without an ideal situation 
by moving forward step by step. This means hard Y^ork and 
determination, but the satisfaction it brings more than 
repays the teacher who believes enough in it to make it a 
success. Home economics courses are intended to give the 
students a general acquaintance with the various activities 
of the home. Nevertheless, the foundation of homemaking 




— 







■ ' • . i ' •. V 
































141 


can be laid even though ideal set ups are not available. 
Attractive home economics rooms do not appear voluntarily 
but there is more to teaching than just good equipment and 
pleasing accommodation. The good home economics teacher^ 
pays attention to circumstances surrounding the community, 
schools and homes, and plans constructively. Through 
every day she must retain her sense of direction and her 
confidence. 

Analysis reveals that home economics in Alberta 
contributes to the objectives of all education through the 
solution of problems primarily concerned with home and 
family living. It serves to develop abilities, attitudes 
and appreciations which are essential for personal and 
family living through experiences in preparation for home 
living and homemaking. It provides training for such 
specialized tasks as selection, buying, and preparation 
of food; selection, purchase, care and construction of 
clothing; care of furnishing, equipment and the home; 
management and use of personal and family resources such 
as money, time and energy; protection of health and care 
of the sick; development and care of children; and social 
relationships within the home and the community. Home 
economics is dependent upon supporting courses in other 

5 See Appendix T: Evaluation chart on back of inspection 
form of the Supervisor of home economics. 





142 


fields such as art, English, science and social studies; 
therefore, mutual understanding between the teachers of 
the various departments should be aimed for, so that stu¬ 
dents may be offered an effective programme, 

Invention and research necessitate constant 
changes in content and method of home economics, while 
social political and economic conditions bring shifts 
in emphases. A significant example of this has been the 
increasing attention given to the problems of consumption 
as goods and service produced outside the home have re¬ 
placed those formerly secured by the direct efforts of 
members of the family. Another example is the adjustment 
called for during a major depression or a war in order that 
the best possible contributions to family and community 
welfare may be effected. 

Those who have looked back over the years feel that 
a great deal has been accomplished but always ahead is the 
vision of still further expansion. Household economics can 
do much for students and help them, through worthwhile acti¬ 
vities, to build full and satisfying lives. It is rich in 
possibilities for serving the home and the community. Eor 
these reasons those who are interested in the future of this 
phase of education will respond to the challenge to seek 
broader and richer fields of development. In Alberta, many 













. c 






t ■ 




- ■ 

-10 I 





















. 








* 




































143 


worthwhile accomplishments have attended the progress of 
home economics instruction through the years. What the 
future holds in problems or achievements lies beyond the 
present view. However, the record for the past forty-nine 
years has made a firm foundation to build upon in the years 
ahead. 

When one views the programme in perspective, he 
concludes that the socio-economic conditions in the home as 
they are evolving under new pressures applied by woman’s 
economic status and expanding employability, will demand 
new types of home economics curricula. It seems likely 
that a number of occupational skills related to homemak¬ 
ing will need to be developed in harmony with the life of 
a married woman as a worker outside of the home. It is 
probable, also, that modern inventions effecting new time 
saving conveniences in the home will necessitate revisions 
in homemaking programmes as they are presently Offered. 
Trends indicate that some skills and techniques will have 
to be dropped and new ones developed. 

From the foregoing discussion it will appear that 
the place of home economics in the education programme of 
Alberta can hardly be overestimated. Ho other course in 
the school curriculum is as fundamentally related to the 
present and future needs of all youth, boys as well as 
girls. 


- 


c 


T 






























- 

I jn 

v - • ^ 














i 


r 














•- ■ .L- ■ : : 5 




144 


If the home is considered the basic unit of our 

society then education for home and family living is vital. 

Home economics is concerned with life; therefore, 

it cannot be reduced to a science* However it has pro- 

6 

gressed with culture. Home economics is not traditional 
book education but it is education that makes for effici¬ 
ency in living. Home economics has gained in "academic 
respectability 11 but it is still "on the spot" because of 
its comparative newness, and it is still being challenged 
by some school administrators. 

3. Re commend at ions 

I The need and justification for homemaking educa¬ 

tion is found in basic needs — physical, mental, emotional 
and spiritual. In view of these statements some means should 
be devised whereby adults are made aware of its importance, 
its scope and its goals. Radio programmes and exhibits 
sponsored by the Department of Education, newspaper arti¬ 
cles and publications of leaflets or bulletins for various 
clubs would give publicity to these courses and make the 
public aware of the place of home economics in the schools. 
Such devices have been used by the Department of Agricul¬ 
ture in their extension work in home economies for girls 

6 Willystine Goodsell, Ph.D., A History of the Family as a 
Social and Educational Institution (The Macmillan Company, 
New York, 1?17). 







- 



. 








c 




- 


* 



























l w ' 


. 




. 













' 




t * 







. 




c 





































c 

. . 

c 

t 







.:.o 




145 


and women with gratifying results. Home economics teachers 
need to do a better job of telling others of what they are 
doing in the classroom, also, but to do so with the backing 
of the Department of Education would improve the status of 
home economics* We need adult education regarding home 
economics instruction in the schools. 

II Home economics is an enterprise in living and 

teachers should have ways of evaluating what is being done 
in the classroom so that the students have clear and worth¬ 
while goals constantly before them; there should be a vari¬ 
ety of types of evaluation in terms of these goals; students 
should be helped to evaluate as they learn; and this evalua¬ 
tion should be a pleasing experience; students and parents 
should recognize that the important thing in home economics 
is for a student to achieve as much as he is capable of 
doing and that achievement is not measured in terms of what 
others are doing. This appraisal of a student f s progress 
should take as little of the teacher’s time as possible and 
yet be effective. Many home economics teachers have ex¬ 
pressed a need for such assistance, especially the young 
inexperienced teachers. Since standards throughout the 
province vary greatly, it is recommended that a uniform 
evaluation system be devised by the Department of Education. 
A uniform grading system would tend to improve poor teach¬ 
ing methods. 















. - 






« 


' 


■ 

« 










- 








- 


f 








, 




■ 


« 















146 


III It is in the Junior High School in Alberta that 

7 

home economics is reaching its greatest numbers. In the 
high school home economics reaches only a small percentage 
of the students, most of these being girls. It is not 
alone what a school offers, that is important; it is also 
what a student takes. Little consideration has been given 
to the problems of interesting students in these courses. 

We should seek to find out why more high school girls and 
boys do not take the courses, preferably from the students 
themselves. Some of the criticisms they will make should 
help in improving the offerings; others will lead to an 
educational campaign for home economics. Home economists 
should take the lead in promoting and providing home and 
family life education. Therefore, it is recommended that 
the Department of Education commence a programme of enquiry 
to determine why home economics courses in high schools are 
not chosen more frequently. We hear explanations and 
reasons but we have no proof of the validity of these 
statement s. 

17 As the field of knowledge in home economics 

changes rapidly, there must be continuous teacher train¬ 
ing. Home economics teachers at the annual convention of 
the Alberta Home Economics Association in Calgary this year 

^ See chart, Appendix 0. 














. 






. 


« 








* 




5 




. 





























' 





















147 


expressed the need for additional courses at the University 
of Alberta. Those which were discussed in particular in¬ 
cluded: tailoring, an advanced course in textiles, millinery, 
advanced applied art, child care, home nursing and interior 
decorating. Therefore, it is recommended that the Depart¬ 
ment of Education, the Faculty of Education and the School 
of Household Economics consider the possibility of making 
such courses available. 

7 Furthermore, there is a need for teachers’ instruc¬ 

tion guides to accompany the new high school courses. Work 
sheets for students’ us8 in foods and nutrition would elim¬ 
inate the much disapproved practice of copying recipes. It 
is recommended that the Department of Education consider 
the publication of such materials. 

71 In view of the fact that Industrial Arts teachers 

are granted advanced and specialist’s certificates, and 
that teachers who have graduated with a 3.Sc. in Home Econ¬ 
omics are granted advanced certificates it is recommended 
that recognition be given, also, to home economics teachers 
with B.Ed. degress who have specialized beyond the require¬ 
ments for a senior certificate. 

711 From a survey of the history of home economics 

in Alberta and as a result of discussions, there appear 
to be many unsolved problems. It is thereupon, recommen- 






148 


ded that further studies related to the following sugges¬ 
tions be made: 

1. The formulation of devices for checking know¬ 
ledge of necessary techniques and achievements in both the 
high school "Foods and Nutrition" and "Fabrics and Dress" 
courses. 

2. A comparison of the integrated homemaking sys¬ 
tem of teaching home economics, in Alberta, in the junior 
high school with traditional methods so as to determine 
their relative effectiveness. 

3. An investigation of the value of high school 
courses in chemistry on the training of home economics 
teachers. 

4. A study of the length of periods for instruc¬ 
tion in home economics in junior and senior high schools, 
with a consideration of the administrative as well as the 
educational problems involved. 

In this topic information is required to answer 
these questions: 

What is the situation? 

What is desirable? 

How could it be attained? 

3. An analysis of the school lunch programme with 
special regard to these questions: 




* 












- 

' 





e 

3 















L . ' ' 

* 






. 















* 







14 ? 


Are home economics students being exploited for use 
in this project? 

Does this project provide the varied homemaking 
experiences needed by students? 

Furthermore, beyond a certain point in the partici¬ 
pation in its various activities, does it lose the educa¬ 
tional value which it has afforded the pupils during the 
process of learning the specific activities? 

6. The growing tendency to furnish the clothing 
and foods laboratory as an attractive living room points 
to an increasing belief in the educational valie of home 
economics activities* 

Because of its attractiveness and convenience, the 
home economics department lends itself to the social acti¬ 
vities of the entire school and there is an economic advan¬ 
tage in using it for such purposes* The growing tendency 
to consider this homelike room as the most confortable and 
attractive place for teas, receptions, meals and teachers 
meetings is to be encouraged* However, it entails these 
points for consideration: 

(a) How can the use of the equipment and furnishings 
be made with the least inconvenience and handicap to the work 
in home economics? 

(b) To what extent is a principal or superintendent 


























t ' 




. 


. 









. ■■ . • - 

. 








,• 








. 





































150 


justified in enlisting the services of the home economics 
teacher and her students for the above activities? 

(c) At what point do such activities lose their edu¬ 
cational value? 

7. Another school activity which usually is con¬ 
sidered the work of the home economics department is the 
making of costumes for school pageants and dramatics. A 
study of this and other related activities would be helpful 
in clarifying: 

(a) the educational value of such projects in rela¬ 
tion to the service rendered and the time spent. 

(b) the effect on the attitude of students toward 
a course in home economies. 

The progress made in home economics since it was 
first started in the schools of Alberta encourages a belief 
that the years ahead will see further development. In con¬ 
cluding this account, it is hoped that the narrative will 
challenge others to add information that will assist those 
who are attempting to administer and teach home economics. 
































































. 

















. 






5 









• 


























BIBLIOGRAPHY 

(Selected) 


A. Books 


Atwater, Helen W., Home Economics — The Art and Science of 
Homemaking , Reading with a Purpose, No, 5CU (Chicago, 
American Library Association, 520 No. Michigan Avenue), 

39 pp. 

Bane, Lita, Chapin, Mildred R., Introduction to Home 

Economics . (Houghton Mifflin Uo., The Riverside Press, 
Cambridge, 1945), 260 pp. 

Cooley, Winchell, Spohr, and Marshall, T eaching Home 

Economics . (The Macmillan Company, New York, 1922), 

555 pp. 

Craig, Helen T., The History of Home Economics , (published 
by Practical Home Economies, 468 Fourth Avenue, New 
York City, 1945), 45 pp. 

Goodsell, Ph.D., Willystine. A History of the Family as a 
Social and Educational Institution. (The Macmillan 
Company, New York, 1917), 588 pp. 

Hanna, Agnes K., Home Economics in the Elementary and 

Secondary Schools . (Whitcomb" and Burrows, Boston, 1922), 

327 pp. 

Hunt, Caroline L., The Life of Ellen H. Richards . (Whitcomb 
and Burrows, Boston, 191ST, 32 <5 pp. 

Spafford, Ival, Fundamentals in Teaching Home Economics . 

(John Wiley and Son's, Incorporated, New York, 1942, 

490 pp. 

Winchell, Cora M., Home Economics for Public School Administration . 
(Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia 
University, New York City, 1931), 151 pp. 

White, Lynn Jr., Educating Our Daughters , (Harper and Brothers, 

New York, 1950), 166 pp. 


151 





























152 


Unpublished Materials 

Aylesworth, B.A., Nellie Margaret, "A History of the High 
School Courses of Study for Alberta 11 , Unpublished 
Master of Arts Thesis, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
April, 1936, 144 pp. 

Embree, David Grant, "The Beginning and Growth of the In¬ 
struction in the Social Studies Provided by the Schools 
of Alberta," Unpublished Master of Education Thesis, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, April, 1952. 

Goresky, Isidore, "The Beginning and Growth of the Alberta 

School System," Unpublished Master of Education Thesis, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, April, 1945, 157 pp* 

Hutchinson, J.M., "The Education System of Alberta," 

Unpublished Thesis for Degree of Doctor of Pegagogy, 
Queen 1 s University, Kingston, Ontario, 1915, 64 pp* 

Stewart, Alethea Mae, "Current Practices in Home Economics 
particularly with Reference to Alberta," Unpublished 
Master of Education Thesis, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, October, 1949, 102 pp* 

Weston, Phyllis Ellen, "The History of Education in Calgary," 
Unpublished Master of Arts Thesis, Faculty of Arts and 
Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, April, 1951, 

136 pp. 


Bulletins and Reports 

Duggan, Grace Lesley, A Study of Some Aspects of Home Economics 
Education in Canadian Universities , Canadian Home 
Economic’s Association, 1§50, 130 pp* 

Ontario Department of Education, Intermediate Division, 

Grades VII, VIII, IX, X. Curriculum I; 1 Revised 
1950, Home Economics Section 266-266. 

Province of Alberta, Annual Reports , Department of Education, 
Edmonton, 1905-1§52, inclusive. 

Royal Commission on Industrial Training and Technical Education % 

Report of the Commissioners, Sessional Paper, No. 19ID 

A 1913. 

Smith, Dr. H.E., Abstracts of Theses in Education, 1929-1949 . 
Faculty of Education, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
December, 1949, 19 pp. 











5 





- ' ' ; < • : • 

< * * • c 

% % botisl 

■■■■/- '■ ; , v::,:; n 1 n r ' 


AOj:r.ionooii amoh 



? 


* e 


t * 

;•: l f 

i • j:. "y-.omj ■. '. o i.so’s1 

5 e oj • 





C - • - 


) 




, : .i •) 
















Province of Alberta, Second Interim Report of the Committee 
on High School Education, 1923, Edmonton. 

United States, Department of Health, Education and Welfare, 
Office of Education, Home. School and Community 
Experiences in the Homemaking Program . Vocational 
division, Bulletin No. 252. Home Economics Education, 
Series No. 29, 1953. 

United States, Department of the Interior, Office of Education, 
Division for Vocational Education, Vocational Education 
Bulletin. No. 181. Home Economics Series 18 . 1935> 

United States Government Printing Office, Washington, 

1936, 153 pp. 

American Home Economics Association, Syllabus of Home 

Economics . American Home Economics Association, Cathedral 
Street, Baltimore, Maryland, 1913* 


Periodicals 


American Home Economics Association, Washington, D.C., Vol. 
46, No. 4, April, 1954* 

A. T. A. Magazine . Alberta Teachers 1 Association, Edmonton, 
September, 1935* 

Canadian Horae Economics Association, Canadian Home Economics 
Journal . Montreal, Quebec, January, 1953, 22 pp. 


Newspaper Articles 

Fisher, Olive C., Calgary Herold , Newspaper article, April,?, 
1932. 

Encyclopedia Articles 
The American Peopled Encyclopedia . X. 

Encyclopedia Britannica . 

Encyclopedia Americana , XIV. 

Encyclopedia of Modern Education. 




















c 


: o: r b '' o 




t 



) ; o r :.:y ?. yjnv. 


/ . ) ' ' , J 




O V 





c 


! 






c 




t 


r • (■ 



J ' OY. 




f: 










')'■ 'O 


> f ‘v. ‘ v""' 


































































@£ aiBMS 

MWIBSttWIS 

HEmililSlS 














. 





, 



. 



















APPENDICES TO 


SOME HISTORICAL ASPECTS IN THE GROWTH OF 
HOME ECONOMICS EDUCATION IN THE PROVINCE OF ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO THE COMMITTEE ON 
GRADUATE STUDIES IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT 
OF THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

EDITH MURIEL RITCHIE 
HIGH RIVER, ALBERTA 


OCTOBER 1?54 














155 


APPENDIX A 

Course of Studies for 
the Public Schools, 1912. 
Grades 1 to Till 


Manual Training and Household Science and Arts 

Page 69. Pages 76 - 84 


Grade VT 
Girls 


Sewing 

Preliminary Lesson 

Correct posture of body 
Necessary equipment 
Proper handling 
Practical Work 

Threading needle, making knots, using a thimble, 
illustrations of warp and woof-threads in cloth. 

Simple Stitches 

Basting, stitching, running, oyercasting, gathering, 
hemming, stitches applied to sewing bag and tea towels. 
Ornamental Stitches 

Outline stitch, catch stitch, feather stitching, 
hem stitching, blanket stitch. Stitching applied to 
dish towels, needle book, pillow cases, sheets, and 
blankets for a doll’s bed. 











156 


S earns 

Plain, fell and French. 

Bands 

Review gathering, stroking, applied to bands put 
on in different ways. 

Buttonholes 

Buttonhole stitch form, making different button¬ 
holes, sewing on buttons applied to sewing apron. 

Grade VII 
Girls 

Patching 

Overhand patch, hemmed patch. 

Stockinet, cashmere, table Linen. 

Hens 

Turning different hems on paper, mitering and cutting 
out a square corner. Applied to doily and table napkin. 
Patterns (bought) 

Method of cutting, measurements, method of putting 
together. Applied to underwaist and kimona. 

Finishing Garments 

Gusset, placket, sewing on lace, sewing on hooks 
and eyes. 

Cooking 

Preliminary Lesson 

(a) Personal appearance when at work. 












V. 



(b) Dishwashing, care of cooking utensils. 

(c) Building a fire. 

(d) Getting acquainted with kitchen. Practical 
work — measuring. 

Study of Starch 

(1) Potatoes - Composition and use in body; methods 
of cooking. Practical work: Baked, mashed and 
creamed; white sauce. 

(2) Cereals - Source and composition, manufacture, 
methods of cooking. Practical work: Oatmeal, 
cornmeal, cream of wheat. 

(3) Prepared Starchy Foods - Starch as a powder, 
starches as a source of energy. Practical work: 
corn starch mould, tapioca pudding. 

Study of Sugar 

(1) Sugar - Source and manufacture; value to body. 
Practical work: candy. 

(2) Sugary Yegetables - Structure and composition; 
value to body of cooked and raw vegetables. 
Methods of cooking. 

Practical Work: creamed cabbage, stewed onions, 
mashed turnips, cauliflower. 

(3) Salad Plants - Yalue to body. Methods of cooking 
kinds, and uses of salads. 

Practical Work: salads of lettuce, celery, 
tomatoes, salad dressing. 















t 









158 


Study of Proteid 

Study of animal foods, tissue building foods, effect 
of heat on proteid. 

(1) Bggs ” Composition and value to body; effect of heat. 
Practical work: poached, boiled, scrambled, omelet. 

(2) Milk - Composition, care, effect of heat, value to 
body. 

Practical work: junket, coffee, cocoa, milk soups, 
cottage cheese. 

(3) Cheese - Manufacture, food value. How to combine 
a starchy food and a proteid. 

Practical work: Macaroni and cheese, cheese fondue, 
Welsh rarebit. 

Serving a Meal 

Breakfast 

Preparation of dining room 
Setting table 
Planning menu 
Marketing 

Cooking and serving meal 
Cleaning up after meal 

Practical work: prepare room, buy supplies, cook 
and serve meal, wash dishes, clean rooms. 

Menu : Fruit Toast 

Cereal Coffee 


Omelet 









o.r J 

i ;-y — - -' v I - 


Lir: 1 1 . : ;:' : o0v) 
f.:: Jij 'j: .. vV. , lA-irr^I** 

• < ' . < •• * • '. . : •. . 
. ) . . ' : <» ; v'v: . 


9 


oi 




It ) 






159 


Grade VIII 

Review different stitches, buttonholes, seams, bands. 

Use of the sewing machine and attachments. 

Make one set under garments. 

Foot stockings. 

Mending gloves. 

Cooking - Study of Proteids (continued) 

(1) Meats - Structure and composition, use to body, 
kinds of meat and principal cuts with relative 
costs, care of meat, effect of heat. 

Practical work: Visit market for cutting demon¬ 
stration. Cook meat by following methods: broiling, 
stewing, roasting, making meat soups. 

(2) Beans and Peas - Composition and use to the body, 
effect of heat. 

Practical work: baked beans, creamed peas. 

(3) Fats and Oils - Classification: Manufacture of 
butter, value to the body, use as shortening. 
Practical work: Comparison in use of suet and lard, 
frying potatoes. 

(4) Use of Left-overs - Review foods and methods of 
cooking. 

Practical work: saldds, soup, souffles, escalloped 
dishes, croquettes. 







I 


~;v 9b. 




■ c ' 

' 

. b . .. • ) o.b; . 

4 ‘: ’ \ 


■ ' 

X c; bx n£ bsom d sb ixoi 

■ ., t ' b ' 

- ■ 

* b 

b :■ . ' ■■ ~ .b bb. > • 

' ' 


t 


• ’ ' ; y 

:)‘.i :».b ■ 

. 


b : 



c 


. b'Xb ■ '■ 




■ e •bb'' 

••Irrow .b'.;'DL‘■/I b 

v)bbbc ; ; ; \rrcfs. 


. 

.' r,: ■/ ) ■ ' 

• t ■ 






160 


Study of Lightening Agents 

(1) Flour mixture classified, making pour batter, oven 
tests, expansion of air and water in baking* 
Practical work: popovers* 

(2) Making Drop Batters - Baking powder as leavening 
agent* 

Practical work: muffins* 

(3) Soft Doughs - 

Practical work: baking powder biscuits* 

(4) Soda and Sour Milk or Molasses - Effect of acid 
and alkali, right proportion of each* 

Practical work: corn bread, brown bread, ginger¬ 
bread, griddle cakes* 

(5) Yeast Bread » Study of the yeast plant, experiments; 
kind of flour, methods of mixing and baking* 
Practical work: white bread, rolls* 

Serving a meal 

Luncheon 

Practical work: 

Prepare room 
Buy supplies 
Cook and serve meal 
Wash dishes and clean room 
Menu: Consomme Tomato Salad 


Meat 

Croquettes 
Creamed potatoes 


Rolls 

Gingerbread 

Tea 











' j: 

■ ■ ' lo ■ i ■ ' ' " : ] 

. ■ - ■ - *o : ■ 


* 










S. 


c 


r y, : 0.9~Z 1 

~ .'V... ' , i ‘ ■ 

; 

• •. Jo . /oiJjKJ :3lfl . : U1 1 J: .°j1 

o • oocpo:^ ■■■ ’■■■ '• 

t \ : V-X-..; ■ . ' VX - 

' y~ -oP *“? . px _ p \ . \ c 

; ■- ■ : ... ; ? ■ p >.'■ .o j . 


; ; - j ■ ; ; 


, - -jr-. •••• “ 


; 

: > y : ry op; .' 


' V v, 'AOO^ 

v > ; :o P •: r: o "P 

: 

TK-- ' 

j ,' _ ' ’ '• m ) • 7 ■ 







161 


Housework 

General care of the house 
Sweeping carpets 
Bare floors, matting 
Dusting floors, walls and furniture. 

Washing of floors — hardwood, painted, oilcloths, 

( 

matting. 

Washing of windows 

Cleaning of faucets and other metallic substances 
Care of woodwork and furniture. Removal of spots and 
stains, oiling and polishing hardwood, care of paint 

Bedroom - Care of room and of closets, airing of room, 
care of bed and bedding. 

Dining Room and Kitchen - Care of glass, silver, china, 
linen. Care of stove, sink and garbage pail 
References. 

Furnishing 

The kitchen should be fitted with a table or a series 
of tables laid out in a hollow square with an entrance to 
each end. It should accommodate twenty pupils. The table 
is laid out in sections 32 inches wide by 52 inches long, 
each section providing working space for two pupils. This 
section provides three drawers, two individual drawers for 
small utensils and one common to both pupils, for keeping 
supplies such as sugar, flour and salt. Each section is 
also fitted with a cupboard to hold the necessary pots and 












162 


pans® An individual mixing board which slides in between the 
top of the table and the drawers, is also provided* The top 
of each section of the table is fitted with two gas burners 
and a garbage crock* In the centre of the hollow square is a 
supply table, which may also be used as a demonstration table 
for the teacher. The kitchen is also provided with two sinks 
and an ordinary kitchen range. Where only a kitchen is 
provided, as in most public schools, the demonstration table 
is ordinarily used to demonstrate the method of serving. 

Equipment - individual 
Utensil Drawer 

1 baker 
3 bowls 
1 popover cup 
1 measuring cup 
1 plate 
1 tin plate 
1 sieve 

1 Dover beater 
1 paring knife 
1 spatula 

1 tablespoon 

2 teaspoons 

1 wooden spoon 
1 fork 





■ ■ • * 

' ■ - ■ th irlJ- has I o' ’ ' 

■ ‘16 i •) ■ • 


■ ' < 

> 

■ - . . . r" ■ I - . : ’ ' ' ‘ ■ ' 

< • - ■' •• :> r. : r: • ' >••: o:- « oo ' - ■ ■ 

■ 










X .V: ' /. ■ 

X 

a.C v;od X 
rr :o 'XSVO'.r q-.;j I 
-.’■to j 




J -.“q nlj .1 

O'V 

'X vj<’ *'c 1 

,VU: :d • a oq I 

*■' 'X 

; ) •' ■ .I'.!. "■$ X 

■iiCOO ■ r llMyi'Ki ■' 

; ;• i r • .go' : J- 









Supply Drawer 


1 flour box 
1 sugar box 
1 salt box 
1 salt shaker 
1 pepper shaker 
Table Cupboard 

1 scrub basin 

1 scrub brush 

2 vegetable brushes 
1 meat board 

1 dish pan 

1 draining pan 

2 stewpans with cover 
2 saucepans 

2 frying pans 
1 stove plate 
1 tea kettle 

Equipment - general 
Teacher 1 s Table 

1 basting spoon 
1 can opener 
1 cork screw 
1 large French knife 
4 small French knives 








nsnrro OXX L 


::nno. 


;cv 


:i3 


r 





X •: 


• I- ; 


no 0* 


r 




0 1 


r 





1 knife sharpener 
1 pair scissors 
1 package tissue paper 

1 spool thread 

2 wooden spoons 
10 graters 

10 purie sieves 
Glass Door Oupboard 

1 cornstarch jar 

5 lemon squeezers 

1 glass measuring cup 

6 tumblers 
Scales (4 pounds) 

10 teapots 

6 white crockery cups 
6 plates (10 inch) 

10 jugs 

6 bowls (enamel - 3 1/2 inches) 
3 bowls (brown - 7 1/2 inches) 

3 bowls (yellow - 11 inches) 

1 portable oven 
1 crock (for washing soda) 

1 dish pan 
1 scrub pan 
1 washboard 


2 blackboard erasers 





■: Oi: o . 

v.c' 0 

to ; o' : ob 0 ooo 0 o,oq I 
0 O' O: 0 
ano x?a no.boo:/ :: 

anou z%:\ Of. 
a nvob ; o ':- Or >f 
' ■; : ■ ; ; . 
■o '’, i annoo I 

. 

a• •:) :oo.rj oa r.:oo . o 

q O • ;A .'0 • - : T 0:.0" I. 

rov;j; OI.O| U 

\ ai .T/oq ; a-,0 ::0v. 

o..;-) "O,o’- 01 

0 ■ T "i: ; oO)0';co> : o 

OO'O: Of } o/o. .' . c. 

- - 

- 

■ \ \ - or/ , . .. O 3 V . 

' :o ‘o 0: .'O' - • o.oOCeq a I .\>J- 0 

A OO) 0.0 ' •■•Ox ) ; T. 

; o' i ' - .00 hm 'I-:/. , : 0) no J. 

rtncV qai:b I 

■ OO/'/A O’ X 







I ’’i vt On 




1 tea kettle (large) 

1 oven thermometer (700° F) 

1 thermometer (reg. 600° F) 

5 thermometers (reg* C and F) 

Pantry 

2 blankets 

1 ice cream freezer (2 quarts) 

20 rolling pins 
10 potato mashers 
20 toasters 
1 pint measure 

1 quart measure 

2 steamer kettles 

1 storage tin for flour 

1 bean pot 

2 round white enamel pudding dishes 
10 pie plates (small) 

1 storage tin (for sugar) 

1 tray (black Japan) 

1 pail for milk (2 quarts) 
skewers 

6 cake tins (6 in. by 6> in. by 2 in.) 

6 bread tins (7 in. by 4 1/2 in. by 3 in.) 
4 muffin sets 

1 bread raiser tin (10 quarts, 17 l/4 in.) 
4 dozen biscuit cutters 


1 butter crock 



; ; : X ©I W ^ 09J- 1 

X ’ " }• *X9Ct > ■:•■! • • > •' r^v ; X 

, • • • : 


:;.J 9;lri£ jji ..: 

: • : .■ £) •: ;• :.o: ••=:': j.TS^b oox I 
■ 'U',X;X1O': JX 
:;r'i9otfstfocf 01 
Oi: 

0£:;;n9,wi XX: ; X 

T 9 £ 9 : : - X. 

• 3 \IXXoX : :oX 8 X. 

■' i ' X. - ' nXd ) -io ja I 

$o<: 15.390 X 

i t ■ ’ ■ i r 0 / 0*1 & 

. ■ ■ ' ' ' 

*-9X; ! X; f£'iXV10X3 X 

' ■ X , • ’ x 

‘ ■ f l till 'to' X 

: . ‘ ■ ; 

■ * ' ■' x.' - 

53 iXXX:;j:., X 
X Xi 3 -j :ilr/x fr:-y:.‘cJ 1 
? 'f. :• X X ; rj . 0 X r o ■; X X no •' ’ o r> X 

4 ‘ . • 





For Cleaning 


1 string mop 
1 broom 
1 oil can 
1 dust pan 
1 stove apron 
1 stove mitt 

1 stove brush 

Linen 

15 dish towels (3/4 yard) 

15 scrub cloths 
15 sink towels 

2 jelly bags 
20 meat cloths 

6 oven cloths 
6 dusters 
6 glass towels 
15 dish cloths 
Furniture « Kitchen 

1 hollow square table 
20 chairs 

2 chairs 

1 coal range 

1 gas range 

2 sink cupboard and drain boards 
1 refrigerator 











qo. :.\ns. r i $I 

■ 1 

ir-'.q j.-rr.’.* i. 

- • - ■" 

: '/ 'v' 3 


l ::o 


?,j.& 70 0* i'lB J/.) c;J_ 

ril^v;Oo :inl3 cJ. 






S » " o ..v?; •; . 

a/XMlo fiJr/o < 
a-j; ? jaifb' o 
wl v , r )J- ■<>?.&!;% o 

■ ' E ' : A ■ 51 

::.r • J- "‘I,a '/olXorl I 

: o )s 
-o r o 
. •: Ir.oo X. 

■'( 'V' /. 

.CO 'r: .! •; o , r ; ro Xn.’.a ... 


' l' 1 :. 






1 teacher's table 
1 supply table 

1 glass door cupboard 
On Wall and Floor 

2 asbestos mats 
1 hand basin 

1 clock 

1 coal hod 

1 cup (white enamel) 

1 pail 

1 pot scraper 
1 refrigerator pan 
1 scrub brush (for sink) 

1 soap dish 

2 towel bars 

1 wastepaper basket 
1 knife board 
Dining Room 

1 table 
£ chairs 

1 side table 

l/2 dozen teaspoons 

1/2 dozen forks 

1/2 dozen dessert spoons 

3 tablespoons 

l/2 dozen steel knifes 






: , r A 1 ! ‘ : • 

' ' ‘ I 

' jrfq ■ ■ 3 5 »I 

;; .v.: ; v. aa: : 

. At •• • aoc v '3 90 r a/; t; 

/ : 

■Aoo.Zo I 

. o • . L ) 0 X 

..' . : T: rj [w] • I 

t: a - • toq .[ 

; ■ ■ 

■ -I:/ ; l f' Qtf'tOW 1 

‘C .... •• \ - 

• • [ q 0 If B 


too 


. A. . •. . 

■ ■ h 


r ' ' 


o.r. 

Ah 8..i 


nod - 



■ 

nos oh 



ff.-v: a 


an - 


:• i. 


1 carving knife and fork 
1 water jug 
1 vinegar cruet 
1 set dishes (97 pieces) 
1 table cloth 
1 silence cloth 
1 dozen table napkins 












orilvxoo I 


*1; C) 



o;rio :;..'.r'disJ:v X 
! ■ - J: ’ ' L 

. 'ijoJiD 1 

/jd'O-Ci - ) 00 r:$X.h', X 
3n.blq.cn old set nooo'o J. 













16 ? 


APPENDIX B 

Summer Session Courses 1914 ^- 

Household Science I 

A* Cooking 

Previous to each practical lesson on the cooking 
and serving of the foods talks will be given on the theory 
of foods -- their composition, food value and digestion. 
Special attention to methods of correlating with grade 
work in the school* 

The course includes sueh subjects as: Fruit; cereals; 
eggs; beverages; batter and dough mixtures; school and 
picnic lunches; salads; sandwiches; fish; meat (tough 
and tender); vegetables and cream soups; puddings (hot 
and cold); custards; jellies and creams; supper dishes; 
yeast breads and rolls; table setting and serving; 
balanced menus; formal luncheon* 

Discussion of Rural School conditions and possibilities 
for work in Household Science subjects. 

B 0 Home Sanitation 

Bacteriology of the household ; daily routine of 
housework; care of kitchen; sink; refrigerator; dining 
room; hygiene of the bedroom* 


^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 
Edmonton, 1914, p. 59. 








• j • ■ : 


(r 


r 7 ' •,; 


.m:. - '':0.ob- o$ r )u > bf'v:: *• 

'• ■ • : ,. r . a g 


-o 


, 

. • ' . . . ■ ) .[■)!. 

bo ro 






; 






. 


•i * ~ ( 1 . i. ■; .v 

•: . ' ■ v. 11 ; 

’ 


, ■ 





170 


Home Nursing - Sick room and patient; disinfectants; 
emergency aids; demonstration and practice in bandaging; 
care of wounds and cuts. 

Household Art 

The principles of sewing. Common stitches as applied 
to simple garment making and ordinary mending. Practice will 
be given in making problems suitable for grades in the urban 
and rural schools. Study and discussion of textiles. 

Special attention given to methods of teaching and planning 


courses 




• ' ; ' - ' 3 • - :..v.V :..... 

■ . ■ : - c ' ■ ■ - ’ 

. ' ' 


* ‘ ' ' ■••'•••■ 

■ ’ ' - - : 

• ‘ 

r - • • £}•_*; ; o : jv' o..t i iuv.b m.rJ: vc^;$s lr.‘ 


•:1 o ct 



171 


In 1917 for the Special Certificate in Elementary 
Household Arts the following was required: 



No* of 
Periods 

Length of 
Periods 

Total Moo 
of hours 

Household Science I 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Dietetics I 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Household Arts I 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Household Management I 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Household Science II 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Dietetics II 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Household Arts II 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Household Management II 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Total 

264 hours 


Up to the close of the session of the Summer School in 1917-25 
teachers had qualified for the special certificate in Elementary 
Household Arts* In 191$ the requirements were altered slightly 
as follows: 


Household Science I 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Theory of Foods 1 

22 periods 

45 minutes 

16 1/2 hours 

Household Arts I 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Textiles 

22 periods 

45 minutes 

16 l/2 hours 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report 

1 - 1917 Page 44 

2 - 191$ Page 35 














•• ’ *) V ; Jx. /X O ’0 Ofi ^ '10 \ V ! 1 111 

uv/oll o‘i edd’ b cm l X > 


. 


r N '! 


•> ■; . r 'OO 




. r 




o 


; g feoI*T M 

’ ' - 

aboxi ■ 

' 




' VV' f :> ■, bS.0\x vro 1 

. . p ‘) : 

I a"'!A Modoa'roH 

Y ■[.! 1-.V • •• ; r ; I >Y.V'. fO ... 

II so.toio:., r J/vb.rv/o I. 

A", a' bloiioaJ/oH 


- r . VV ctno-to".'’ .P.riPui blorlBB/ZOtf 


r yI>I 


' ■ [ l D£ ’ 

■: ) • 


h$j: ... 


• loi 

: 


P rr<..., 


p.pp. 

P • : (f 


Mo 

I p;vx-.. bio. bauul 

■ ' 






< ' 


7o r : . 

X j; _ , 







172 


Household Management I 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Household Science II 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Theory of Foods II 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Household Art II 

22 periods 

90 minutes 

33 hours 

Household Art Methods 

22 periods 

45 minutes 

16 1/2 hours 

Household Science 

Methods 

22 periods 

45 minutes 

16 1/2 hours 

Total 


264 hours 


Number of Teachers Receiving Uredit in Household 

Arts bourses at Summer Sessions 


Subject of Instruction 

1913 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

Household Science 

17 

39 

55 

51 

47 

Dietetics 

17 

35 

55 

51 

47 

Household Management 



32 

41 

24 

Household Arts 


11 

j 25 

26 

27 

Home Nursing 




6 

3.4 


Subject of Instruction 

1916 

1919 

1920 



Household Management 

5 


4 



Home Nursing 

17 





Household Arts I 

6 


10 



Theory of Foods I 

13 


9 



Household Science I 

12 


9 



Theory of Foods II 

7 





Household Science II 

7 
































c 





'if;- TO' 



' 


•Xo; t.)M 


' 






. 


10 


‘o 


0 /; 


a .00 


i.XO'JO. 



oo ri¬ 




ff [X _ _ 






r 

. ■ ■ 


■ • ■ 


' 


ff) 



■ ■ I 


■ • r 




;.. b J. O fi 0 

' o-X *i r • o ' :o - 

' -«f ' X 

! eboo lo vio 

. . . ■ ' •' . : • . . 

'! aboo'X ‘ o i. 














173 


Subject of Instruction 

1918 

1919 

1920 

| 

Household Art II 

5 





Household Art Methods 

5 


(19 

( 

( 



Household Science Methods 

6 




Textiles 

11 





Home Planning and 

Decoration 



2 















j>;j; i ' /. ■: , : £ L' . 

c- II jin .MoIsbxxqH 

. ; ' lo is u 

■ ' 0 , l I : 1 ) - 

ael.Mxo'I 

iriB in&I am 
nos.;: szQDsC. 

























174 


APPENDIX C 
1920 

Course of Studies for the Public Schools 

Grades I to VIII 
Province of Alberta 
Department of Education 

Household Arts 

Grades V and VI 

The aim in this course is to give the pupils a broader 
conception of the problems underlying the work in clothing 
and textiles, and to encourage an appreciation and respect 
for the labor involved in making good articles of clothing. 

A certain measure of skill is also one of the aims, that the 
pupils may be able to make worth while articles for personal 
use and others connected with the school, home and community. 
The work in textiles helps the pupils to choose the proper 
materials for the purpose intended, and gives them some 
ability in selecting and caring for their own clothes. 

In the Grade V course it is the intention to so link 
the art and manual training with the household art that prob¬ 
lems and projects may be worked conjointly, resulting in a 
useful article made beautiful, thus illustrating all the 
principles of art and good workmanship* 





: . ;i( 


VI 

' ■ ’ ' ; ■ ' . 

iiiy ext i ao/oto 
r.o'Todl/- lo DonlVox^ 
no Ict t : 'xo vj'nei-.lo'X&cf ©Ct 

IV ' V-”. .'i ; l;i,_ 

:' • jvx. l ' 

s 

• ■ ' 1; a .. I Otq OfCcJ" -lo ' ‘ 0 

• ‘ ' ■ ■ v " • ' - . : ' c -Va ' a r: 

■ ■ • • o ) r ' ' i x hi )V.£ ' / a > to' 

• one -'I' -I " ’ ■ ■ • 

■ ■ r •. - o: Ins ©cf '; a bI t u 

[oil t Xo ' ' ' I' r o ) moo " c ’ ■ bns >su 

5 . [ ' ' ‘ 

a ' ■ . • a ; a"al aoqa ' ; a- I : ;-a.La.I:oI ■ ; 

, $ ' ■ ) ' i 1 ' ■ J ’ fi 

ox • ■ • ;j- I -la a.': II > aa~- a V ofoaail o;(j nl 

: ■ ’is* a l .CBtd bflE o': 

• . e ' . I: ; / > q V ■ : ’ .''' ■ ''.OX X. ‘ 

I' a x ' a r j* c J/f 'laVrao 1 ala-. ; ololo'-i: I/I'inm 




175 

The selection of models in this course is such as to 
cover the elements of sewing. These serve as a medium of 
instruction and should be such as to interest the pupils 
and in each case they should have a definite purpose and use¬ 
fulness. 

Service should be the underlying idea in all this work. 
Correlating or dovetailing the work of the fine and indus¬ 
trial arts enables the boys and girls to work on the same 
problem. This is desirable, that the continuity of the 
application of different mediums be not broken. 

The course for Grade VI is designed for girls. The 
making of garments for personal use or making for others is 
entailed. This involves machine and hand sewing, simple 
drafting, use of commercial patterns, the design, construction 
economics and care of simple articles of clothing. 

The courses in fine arts and in household art are in¬ 
tended to parallel each other as far as the principles of 
color and design are concerned. The Household Art classes 
carry these principles over to the hand or machine work design 
on the garments. 

The textile work in Grades V and VI covers the sources 
and manufacture of the common fibres, cotton, linen, silk 
and wool; their characteristics, weave, design, identification, 
cost, widths, durability and suitability are studied. This 
knowledge helps us in the right selection of material for 
the hygienic comfort, style, design and purpose for which the 











v. V o 


on 'V '0.1. > 


V 




- 




i.nrr: oJ 


' 


' 




;o 


■ o 




oibno o;0t od tJ .■ rooo oo.i"/ - ioo 



. 



; • • Jo i t ' 

' . .. * . ' )' 50^000 

• CO ■ ■ ‘ 1 






c 


0 0 . 




oV'O ? 




'f ■ 


; ■ 0 0 ) ) ":: 












■ox no 


JO Qi 




v. ' 









. 














o 


0 i: o no 




0 0 ' >. 






< 


•Q 0 




>■ -jr ■'< ro r> 


0 


< 


B 
















*00 










r o d'u rooo^J'ooo:: 




c 


0 






1 % 


material was intended. The pupils are thus able to under¬ 
stand some of the problems of labor conditions and appreciate 
right wages for workmanship in well-done ready-made articles. 
This in turn suggests a sympathetic study of some of the 
ethics of shopping. 

In general practice it is usual for the school authorities 
to supply the material needed for the work in Grade V and for 
the pupils to supply or pay for their own materials for the 
work in Grade VI. 

Grade V. 

1* An introductory lesson on position when serving, equip¬ 
ment for work - box, threading of needles and making 
knots. 

2. Plain stitches and simple decorative stitches -- taught 
and applied in the making of such articles as a table-mat, 
jewel-case, hair receiver, bag, napkin-ring, needle-book, 
book cover, handkerchief-case, blotter corners, letter- 
case, book marker. 

3. Hems — taught and applied in the making of a duster, 
dol^s sheet, towel, wash-cloth, etc. 

4. Plain seams and joining tapes -- taught and applied in 
making a marble-bag, button-bag, work-bag, book-cover, 
brush and comb set. 

5. Patching and darning including hemmed patch, flannel 
patch and stocking darning — taught and applied in 







177 


repairing garments, darning of sweaters and stockings, 
gloves or mittens. 

6 0 Gathering and stroking gathers, putting on bands —* 

taught and applied in making a small apron or petticoat. 

7* Sewing on buttons and making blind or tape loops — 
taught and applied in finishing or repairing simple 
garments. 

£. Knitting and crocheting taught and applied in making an 
article such as a wash cloth with crocheted edge. 

Grade VI 

Theory - Napery hem, button holes, tape loops, decorative 
stitches, hemstitching, use and care of sewing machine. 
Garment making — use of commercial patterns, cutting out 
and construction work. 

Problems - Cooking outfit — apron, towel and pot holder with 
covers. Fancy apron (by hand)* Mending — stocking darn. 
Nightdress or middy. 

Textiles - Elementary study of wool and silk fibres and 
fabrics. 

Reference Books for Grades V and VI 
Sewing Course - Mary S. Woolman. F.A. Fernald, New York. 
Sewing Manual - Prepared and published by the Department of 
Education, Toronto, Ontario 

The Sewing Book - Prepared and published by the Butterick 
Publishing Co. of New York. 









. . v - ' • .? • V ' < w-r q - r x 

. •; -- 

• •• " • :• : J; j" - : t; .v bi i:‘ C' cl -V ro 

V j ■; •. nl ■ i • rl <; ' ha* .' 








> • ; \r j y r o 



\ . u ■ . - 





I¥ ob&nO ' 

t ■ ) .' . • a j i ■ ' ■ t ; ■ \ • - v;; \pj ...» 

t ' ? • 

' . ¥ < : ''.V. ~ \ . . . . . 

* ' 

* . . 


. i . ' ) 'A. ^ - 




■ j ■ • . •: ‘ 

- 

■■ . 



■ 


. . • v . ? ■ " h . 


■ ■ ■■■ ■- - ' \ •• 








178 


Hints on Choosing of Textiles - Titsworth, New York State 
Agricultural College, Ithaca, New York. 
Household Textile Sewing - Bulletin No 0 1, The Cornell 
Reading Course* 

Household Science 

Grades VII and VIII 

The aim of the course is to teach the art of cooking, 
to connect the interests of the school and the home, and to 
elevate the tasks of the home to their proper position of 
dignity and honour by bringing to them a trained intelligence 
and a systematized knowledge* 

In Grade VII the pupils are expected to form habits of 
neatness and cleanliness; to acquire system and accuracy in 
carrying out recipes; to manage simple serving with speed, 
daintiness and ease; and to perform routine work quickly and 
without unnecessary noise* They should learn to care for 
cooking utensils and general kitchen equipment and should 
acquire an understanding of, and skill in, the usual processes 
of household laundry work* 

In Grade VIII the pupils are expected to acquire in¬ 
dependence and self-reliance with reference to the work under¬ 
taken and to get some understanding of the nutritive and the 
economic value of foods* Five of the lessons deal with the 
planning of simple menus and the preparation, serving and 
cost of family meals* Four lessons treat of the home care 






■ 

■ ! . ? ixyj • ; X " • y ■ A 

■ • >?-• bXo 

:) : : -0 'A '' '> -■ ■ x 

A x- 'x . xxd A.o xAxxx A. A: o^osrcroo ,o;t 

• • rv: • • X tOi-L X-XA ’ O 'i j'p. ii*T.0“ Bill Xj VX>.f.U 

■ • . . 1 i xi ■ ■ : mod u 

. . 


• ; 

C 


oxxxx oxx 

• <;vx 

x>AA xx I xxxxO xl 




XX. 

■ B-ii 

l ■ . xv -x 'X • • 





1 

XX XX ox 

< x ; ; ' •: •; x xx 

XX 0 




■. ■ ■ 


j : XX 

,'J 0> 



-" 'O; 

, 

x; ■ ;x -.xx xxx •. x; d:;x 

■ 




; r )''■)■ 

■-.X.-/XX • 

hi al.x 3 

xoo 0 



« 

. 

<’ ' X 

x :,t x C: : xA 

•; ■ d ! •. 





. X 

IXfJ Bl A : ' X . 





xjxx-xo 


"IV 





. . ■. 



,) XX; 






) ■ • : vX x od ' X-[ a 

x A 






:I'Xx .. 


t 




x >r.i x.x; X. J xo '-xiXXi' 

HBl(; 




> • ‘ x. x .0 


. 

Ax OD 


) * ) ■ ■ 


K ■ 





119 


of the sick, and four lessons are devoted to a consideration 
of the problems of household management. The work incidental 
to the cooking should give practice in actual housekeeping. 

Outline of Work 

Grade VII 

lo Principles and practice of each method of cooking - 
boiling, simmering, steaming, steeping, toasting, 
broiling, and pan-broiling, sauteing, deep fat frying 
and baking. 

2. Serving simple breakfast. 

3. Study of food principles. 

4* Fuel foods - 

Starch - cornstarch, vegetables, cereals. 

Sugar - syrup, candy. 

Fats and Oils - animal and vegetable fats. 

5. Proteins - meats, fish, milk, cheese, eggs. 

6. Flour mixtures and their leavens — steam, air, soda and 
acid, baking powder. 

7. Luncheon -- organization, preparation, serving. 

8 . Laundry - 

Study of laundry equipment and supplies. 

Arrangement and preparation of family washing. 
Removal of stains. 

Washing and ironing table linen, white and colored 
cotton, woollens. 

Making of soap - demonstrated. 








C JTi ;V;'. 


' be :k>Y..- : .n 

.. 

■ Izirtor, n.:. o 


■a-;.'. ’ < * '• 

■; 'aa r Jj ! i /.o a 


? o 


v.!'. f v). t a • ■ i :1 :lo o o o * i’ J' o o 


1 f;. 



. : . 





o ‘ o . 

> ■' i 


r. 

j. 


:'i.j 




' . - >o ' ' 



l8o 


Laundering white and colored silks, art linen and 

lace* 

Renovating velvet, cleaning gloves. 


Grade VIII 


A. Cooking 

1. Canning and preserving. 

2. Salads and salad dressing. 

3. Vegetables 
4* Pastry 

5. Gelatine desserts 

6. Bread and rolls 

7. Cookies 

£. Cake and cake icings 

9. Meats and soups 

10. Made over dishes 

11. Frozen desserts 

12. Lunches 

13o Serving meals - luncheon, supper, dinner; table 
setting; balanced menus, computation of costs. 

Bo Home Nursing 

1. The Nurse - personality, appearance, dress. 

The Patient - personal care, attention. 

2. The sick room - location, furnishing, ventilation, 
cleaning. 








, r *a 


< 


o >1 jo ji • ejlikr oo 


jr/j :•L 




o '.70. 


T 2 ±\ ■ ' -: 





o. 


rioo ns 7 0 
noxfomjt-j. 


? 


c 


c 


)r‘oiT 


iOj'.t 








I ;<00 




98 





t 


t 


Ol i 




i '■ 








l8l 


3. Invalid Cooking - liquid diet, semi-liquid diet, 
convalescent diet. 

4# First Aid 

(a) Burns, scalds, bruises, frost-bites, etc. 

(b) Fainting, bleeding, sprains, and other 
emergencies —■ bandaging. 

C. House Management 

1. Location of house, water supply, sewage, cellar. 

2. Daily and weekly care of the house. 

3. Personal accounts, simple bookkeeping. 

4. Purchasing — the ethics of shopping. 

During 1920 the following amounts of material were pur¬ 
chased by the board and used by the Grade V classes in the 
city of Calgary. 

126 yards gingham 
75 yards flannelette 
37 yards canvas 

« 119 yards unbleached cotton 

151 yards galaten 
273 spools silkene 
173 spools thread 

29 spools marking cotton 

152 spools knitting cotton 
40 rolls tape 

162 packages needles.-^ 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 
Edmonton, 1920. p.110. 




90 


'v" . . > • ; ■. 

):? ! >V.\ ■■■■> 

• • • •; o ' t no ? r.r'v . ; 

• . ■ 

„ ■ ■- '1 - ' ' - ’ ■■■ 

... ■ 

. 0 ' . O ' ^ f ') . . ■ * i '>. . ‘ • 

"> ' 0 : • . O.V'; . ' ' 


■"> f - v T) '".S.oi Olv;..;* "r : ; r r.r. 

O', jVj.ot V'0: jVloO.o 9.. :w‘ \T; , r ;00. 

o • ' 


> * .. 1 






d o r 




)0 


o.L v,;)f T 0, 


t 



APPEMDIX D 


Part III of the Course of Studies for the 
Elementary Schools of Alberta 
1922 

Grades I to VIII inclusive 

Directive Courses 

Household Economics 

Grades VII and VIII 

General Statement 

Time spent at school should give the pupils experience 
which they need to fit them for life outside of school® What 
are the needs of every girl of to-day? She needs to know the 
principles governing healthful-living for herself, her family, 
and the community. In order to live healthfully, a girl 
should know how to select, prepare and use proper food and 
clothing® She needs to know about the sanitation of her 
house, the care of food and clothing, and the care of children 
and other members of her family® She needs to learn to make 
plans for daily living to give opportunity for work, recrea¬ 
tion, education, wise spending, and saving. All household 
economics studies, because of the nature of their content, 
afford the right opportunity for this training of the girl 
as a member of society® 







u xxxixlo.xu 

\ ' •) -'k, oXj I o XXX Xl:.' c I 

■ 0 X ; ) io ’’ Jj ■ 1 I • 

iigx 

JVl’Stfl £ - ■ ■ • < o 1 ' obB'l 


"" 'XII.i ; "X. XlliX .XlXA.X ■ ■ 

.XX 

- • . 

X ; ' v if .• I :Y 0 rXoiX 

■ 

; ; . ’ , 

nid .c J. m ie £o o >. ;; 1 Xxt • ' ■ ml 

, , ; •. • • I X .. .. X '.X X •• :> • ■ oX’ Xv. 

. . X ; . : ;. .. ~oX ■ Xx £ /.: vo ‘ :■ 'X oyo 

■ • t - X • . £ v £x XX ; • X: i - -v o Xo/Iiq 

X ■ ' •: •• * 

X. ■; v ■ ■: : ■ . ! ' t X),:>. .v-; ' •!’ ) < > 1 • ?o ; o: 

- X X 



X ) • 

t 

' 

t£io ho o' 

‘Io 91 i 




■ ' 


. XI r -o,X 

' 

18 i • o’ ' 1 'Hi •• 



': - : id q jxiruXxo 

f x o yv 

■ 


ioI "uielq 



• 

t 

. 

;:X. ■ t r;o::X,: 

■ ■ ■. . < > X- 

< 




' i "70 ;> 

• c ' ■ • ••• 

. a ox: :o. 10 o o 




' 

qX In :X io 

. 

j x •. • 


. ■ 


•: 


. . 


o 


Aims of Household Economics in Grades VII and VIII 


1. To give the girl an appreciation of and sympathy with the 
problems involved in the conduct of a well regulated home. 

2. To give her working principles in food, clothing, sani¬ 
tation and hygiene, which wi^l enable her to take an 
active share in home activities. 

3 • To develop some skill and technique in handling materials 
and obtaining results. 

Scope of Course 

To accomplish these results the course in household 
economics should offer a well rounded body of material. It 
should not be confined merely to sewing and cooking but should 
include all the phases of household activities which girls of 
13 or 14 years are able to appreciate and perform. 

The work should include: 

1. Food - Production, selection and marketing, cost, care, 
preparation and cooking, service. 

2. Clothing - Elementary textile study, cost, selection, 
care, repair and renovation, construction of simple 
garments. 

3* Shelter - Arrangement of furnishings, care of rooms, 
cleanliness, order, neatness, sanitation. 

4* The Family - Simple accounts, home pleasures, hospita¬ 
lity, care of children, invalids. 














; 

' 

•- o -vfct • > vtvLovfJ: Jcriq 

• r • - '‘ • ’• ■ 5 '• • 

; '' 1 ' ■ ' ‘ 

. . 

, ' ' • ■ ■) 

- O r : ' ''■ OCiOO^ 




l ' ■ ‘ 


' • ' • ■ • ' ■ • ■’ - 0. ■ 

' 

X . ' ■ ■ • ■ obtf. 

: rlon f. * ' ’• :r> ! 






■o ■'.')■ 






c 








■ • > ,i : 0 f ) 


■ 




> ,i ■ ' u <r.r r t r i: 


U)T>0 


: 


•; f ■ . ‘ [ \ 


» 


I' 0 




184 


Time Required 

From 2 l/2 to 3 hours a week are required for both VII 
and VIII, but this time may be given in two periods* When¬ 
ever a period is over an hour in length it should include 
both class discussion and practical work. 

Organization of Work 

The work of each year is planned as a unit in itself, 
with a definite subject, aim and purpose. The two years 
together give a general education, not vocational * in the 
elementary basic principles of home-making. It is planned 
to form a complete course in itself for those girls who leave 
school at the end of Grade VIII and yet to lead up to the work 
in Household Economics in High School, which will present 
similar problems of greater difficulty. 

The course is organized around a series of problems 
that are of interest to the girl instead of around a core of 
stitches and seams in sewing and a group of processes in 
cooking. The making of a garment of use to the girl is a 
real problem to her and the stitches and seams are introduced 
in their natural setting instead of being introduced as 
abstract problems. The construction of such a garment gives 
opportunity for textile study in the choice of material, the 
study of patterns and economical cutting, the hygiene of 
clothing, including simple laundering and the discussion of 
comparative cost of home-made and ready-made clothing. 







• ; . .• 1 •: • • : • :: > r •; r) ' Q.;; ;7 1 ... T/iO*/:. 

7 ' . . . 

. • ■ - ' ■ ■ . r 

„ . ■■■'/• •. - . : ' 1 :■ V ' 7 o'i 

:i‘-ro ... ' : o ' j; •• j 

? V• . '• ' • • 3;' . ' ; • /’ • •; o-r ) ' .:> ' ‘iovv 

. ■ •. - . • . 

- - < . o • o' \:j 7o,• 

*• •• • • ... V. ; o' ■ ' ; 77...- 

• ‘ ' ‘ . 7. i t ) ■. r 1 7 £ f■ ■. o ■ ‘ ' 

. r J . no III. .. [ooiios 

■ •c t 7‘ o ' . 'v 7 

. ■... . '■ 

; » '■*. . s'x^o! 

l . 7 


; ■ i • .. . 7.7' ; 

, 

o ; :,i \ r.‘ oil;'; no.d oS ;iel. : or :.r Lz-3'i 

• ' •• j- ;:T. r : •' ■ ' ?, .7 \r: *\::7: ■>' n7: 

. ! 

: ' : : • 1 1 '77 1 7 rOo o.r no'. \^^n.X'. r o'X >ncfO 

t '■ 1 .' ■ * f p,; -: ‘ o '; " i£r. 


•: , r : \0:' y : r.7 o 7: . •••• :. r 7 7 o7I> 

) v - • V.o o 1 " ■■ :.n ov; o; oo 




l8*> 


The preparation of a simple meal gives an opportunity 
to teach not only cooking processes but also equally impor¬ 
tant phases such as planning of time allowance, cooperation, 
selection of menu, serving and table manners* Every effort 
should be made by the teacher to throw as much responsibility 
as possible on the pupils, especially in class discussion* 

Grade VII 

In order that every girl may receive the same funda¬ 
mental training and form good habits of work, it is intended 
that all problems for this year shall be individual, not 
group problems* Every girl will make the same garments, or 
garments involving the same processes* In cooking every 
girl will cook the same things in individual amounts. Emphasis 
is placed on the personal needs of the girl in appearance, 
clothing and food* 

Requirements in Subject Matter 

I. Personal appearance of a Grade VII girl 

1* Care of clothing: Hanging, brushing, folding, 

removal of spots, darning, mending, laundry work, 
pressing, simple renovation. 

2. Suitable dress for school, gymnasium, housework. 

II* Hygiene 

1. Health habits: Breathing, sleeping, bathing, 
eating. 

2. Care of hair, nails and teeth* 












9 -■ ) :r 


• > • . ' • •. ■ • ■ 

:i:kooD y'/.no kon noook ok 


, " i ■*.-! .krookr or k:> ■ rvoorv.k; k.v.'k 

*■ - ■ - ;. ' v ' t 

• fj ; •.•/. by ok yo'knook okk yk 0^0.1 :> ' kfiraka 

.• r ■ , 1: f r ' ' es 




< "■ ■ 

0 

■ k fyo 09 nr:ok bo 

■ 

■ 


• 

-.y. k : oo:.'■ kio kokk 




. ■ c 

k 9 : 

* 

J'K'O'; .OOffia okj 0 

' ■/ 1 k ‘i 


• • • ■ ' • b± 

, 

' 

■. ■* • 

, < - : 
t ; t b c 

. > k; < ■ 

t t 

. 

, : 

. 

, c 



l86 


III* Garment construction 

1* Cooking uniform and bag for carrying: Basting, 
running, backstitching, combination stitch, over¬ 
casting, hemming, gathering, stroking, putting on 
band, cutting bias, binding, machine stitching, 
cutting from pattern, chain stitch, outline stitch. 

2. Bloomers or drawers: French seams, overhanding, 
buttonholes, sewing on buttons* 

IV. Food for a Grade VII girl 

1* Food values* 

2. Food preparation: cereals; fruit; vegetables; 
milk; beverages; quick breads; meat - bacon, 
chops or steak, baked or boiled fish; eggs. 

V. Note book work 

Basic recipes 

Few notes in brief outline form 
Samples of stitches* 

Suggestions for Lessons 

Lesson 1 

Discussion - 15 to 30 minutes 

(a) Care of Clothing. What can a Grade VII girl do to 
care for her clothes so that she will look well 
dressed? 

(b) Suitable dress 

(c) Uniform for cooking. 











187 


Practice 

(a) Make coat hanger out of newspaper• 

(b) Start bag for carrying note-book and uniform* 
Discussion of size, shape, material color* 

Lesson 2 

Discussion - 15 to 30 minutes • Care of clothing re¬ 
viewed and continued* 

Practice 

(a) Brushing clothes. 

(b) Removing spots* 

(c) Sew on bag* 

(d) Start note-book. Di scuss i on 0 f use and importance 
of note-book* 

Lesson 3 

Discussion and demonstration - 20 minutes 
Care of clothing - pressing* 

Practice 

(a) Pressing (part of class) 

(b) Finish bag* 

(c) Start cap. 

Lesson 4 

Practice 

(a) Pressing (part of class) 

(b) Work on cap. 

(c) Start apron (By having two garments to work on, 
enough handwork is provided to prevent waste of 
time in waiting for cutting table or sewing machine.) 











Vc j- 



■ 



, 

+ \ noEP, 




t 


. 

vc'- , fio.'-f.rrr. J- . 
:' r t T-riKi’3^' rrujoa » 


. 







188 


Lesson 5 

Discussion - 15 to 30 minutes 
Hygiene - Care of hair. 

Practice 

(a) Pressing (Remainder of class) 

(b) Freshening hair ribbons* 

(c) Working on cap and apron. 

Lesson 6 

Discussion 

Hygiene - Habits of sleeping — time, fresh air, bed 
clothes* 

Practice - Work on cap and apron. 

Lesson 7 

Discussion 

Habits of breathing, sitting* 

Practice - Work on cap and apron* 

Lesson 3 

Discussion 

Bathing, care of nails* 

Practice - Work on cap and apron. 

Lesson 9 

Discussion with illustrations 

Review and continue - tare of Clothing* 

Mending* 

Practice 


(a) Mending 

(b) Work on apron 






















1 : ’ ’ 


- *• 


1.0 














v? ■ l . ■... ' “ : . ■: 


. 


0 


(’TOO 






fto? : ' r 0 








. 


. 1 


" • 



- lifoo l :i ■ ' r 












18? 


Lesson 10 

Discussion - Mending 
Practice 

(a) Mending 

(b) Work on apron. 

Lesson 11 

Practice 

(a) Mending 

(b) Finish apron. 

Lesson 12 

Discussion - Can a Grade VII girl wash and iron her 
middy or apron to wear to school? 

Practice ~ Wash white clothes - cap and apron. 

Written test 

Examination of note books. 

Lesson 13 

Final preparation for cooking 

Iron cap and apron. 

Examination and marking of uniform. 

Discussion - Food values. What foods will help give 
bright eyes ? clear skin 5 rosy cheeks 5 and strong teeth? 
Lesson 1L 

Cooking 

(a) One cereal 

(b) Stewed fruit 




















i: 



« 


. ’ • ); ■ ) K [0''XC|.S 

:■ - - ■ ’ ' ; ■ “ . .: : . 




d quo ■; y‘'i ■ 

. : 


o > :> ‘X V n ' •• v (■ ‘Irj'.T ;‘‘irr j . s ; _ 

. 

, ■ ; ' ' ; ' ' i ' • 

. • - 


' 

l £ '3 r X9 0 31.1 ) \r f 

dI :)‘;0( :f) 









Discussion 


(a) Foods that help build strong teeth 

(b) Care of teeth. 

Housewifery 

(a) Method of washing dishes. 

(b) Order of equipment. 

Lesson 15 

Cooking 

(a) Another kind of cereal. 

(b) Baked apple or apple sauce. 
Discussion - Habits of eating. 
Housewifery - Care of towels. 

Lesson 16 

Discussion - Construction of coal range 
Housewifery - Building fire. 

Cooking 

(a) Potatoes - one or two methods. 

(b) One other vegetable. 

Lesson 17 

Discussion 

(a) Combustion in range. 

(b) Oxidation in body. 

Housewifery - Build and control fire. 
Cooking 

(a) Potatoes, one method 

(b) One other vegetable. 

(c) One beverage. 

























• ■■ " I •.. ' ■ ■ • . ■ 






r ■ 

, \ 

* ■ 


r ^ _ r . r? 





* .v" ;■ v.> *. '• • ; r f • - ; • ■ /; _ . 


, ■ 






■ ) r 10 


jo 




. ■_> > ' v ' 


DfO id) 


ro; 






♦ 


jDiOjV ■ 

( ■ ) 


. r I9V 











m 


Lesson 1& 

Housewifery 

(a) Control of oven temperature* 

(b) Cleaning knives. 

Cooking 

(a) Muffins• 

(b) One beverage* 

Lesson 19 

Short test on range, dishwashing and care 
(Both written and practical)* 

Cooking 

(a) Biscuits 

(b) One beverage 
Housewifery - Cleaning range. 

Lesson 20 

Cooking 

(a) Toast 

(b) Bacon 

Housewifery - Table setting 
Discussion 

(a) Table manners 

(b) Plan breakfasts 

(1) Suitable dishes in season 

(2) Cost 

(3) Time for preparation* 


f towels. 













L _ ; 

■ 

, ■ • Vv ■ ' O • '■ ■' . . 

. 8 /'' . ' . 

' 

. : rr '> " ■ . 

VI 

V i V : • 

... .{ooO 

8 on J::;;. [z) 

988 VI 01/ad 9flO ( 8 ) 

, • ‘ - ;: ' . . 


■' 


i;oobc (c} 
• > i 8:i' 8 8 r-1/ I aV -* y e ,8. V -V.y'onj V 

ivto r.f.arv: f t old/di 1 [z] 
■ ' Vawr' 88 :! ■ \ ; 

: ’ 91 . • . 

8 ’-:)v (;;) 

f ■ ■ : • • 



192 


Lesson 21 

Prepare breakfast for a Grade VII girl* 

Examination of note-books* 

Lesson 22 

Looking; 

Milk dishes (cream soups, milk toast, cornstarch 
pudding, custard) 

Discussion - importance of milk in the diet. 

Lesson 23 

Cooking; 

Eggs and Egg Dishes (This lesson should come the last 
in March when eggs are cheap. If eggs are high give 
lesson later). 

Discussion 

(a) Cost of food* Foods in season. 

(b) Plan luncheons - suitable dishes, cost, time* 
Lesson 24 

Cooking; and Serving; 

Luncheon for a Grade VII girl* 

Discussion - What should a grade VII girl have in her 
lunch box if she carries her lunch? 

Lesson 25 

Prepare lunch boxes 

Discussion 

Plan dinners. 














■v ■ ec • ■ • • ■ 1 ' ■ - - '■ - 

: : < ■■ r i’ ' 

m • ’ ' ■ - - - j' : i\ ' 

; 

• ’ ■■ ■ fr . ax' . ' " ■ ' " - ^ "■ ' ; - 

. 

. 

. c " ' ‘ '. - ;; ) ‘ . ’ i ' . 

■ 




■: ■ • \,‘_r .'I:;. 

; :> r r r • £•:>.{ r :. 0 O'la V XOC I'iDPSfl. 

< . ‘.'oo 'VVA 


3o:::o- : do .t r . r e-'T'-'r-o:' - 


■ ■ • 

‘ f r 




193 


Lesson 26 

Cooking 

(a) Chops or steak 

(b) Simple desserts. 

Test. 

Lesson 27 

Prepare dinner (Baked or boiled fish). 

Lesson 2S 

Garment Construction . Bloomers or drawers. 

Examine models shown by teacher. 

Examine samples of materials. 

Discussion - Materials, cost, patterns, amount, proce¬ 
sses. 

Demonstration in cutting. 

Lesson 29 

Cut and start bloomers® 

Laundry work. Removing stains from table linen. 

Lesson 30 

Work on bloomers 
Washing table linen. 

Lesson 31 

Work on bloomers 

Ironing table linen. Folding. Airing. 

Lesson 32 

Work on bloomers 

Discussion - Is it better to make bloomers or to buy 


them ready made? 























no (£} 

' 

.. 

’;.. /ton.^9-I 

. ; ■ ' ' ) ' V • ; o; • ' :r: ■ ; : - 

. 

: ■ ' : 

, 0 ' ; r ' / ' - ■' 

. •: : 

i. ♦ ' 

•••:/ t r'S.ci ;to 
. r 1: :• 1 • 

> rv o'- no : i,: : 

. ' ' . * 

fo • ] '■> 

•vit nol N an 

Y ) ' / ‘ - ; ' _ '. 

:oh ‘/bn on y • •" 




Lesson 33 


Work on bloomers 
Examination of note books* 

Lesson 34 

Test 

Preparation and serving of refreshments to boys of 
class and teachers. 


Grade VIII 

The problem for this year is intended to develop the 
spirit of cooperation, initiative, leadership and judgment 
of values, as well as skill and technique in wormkamship* 

There will be group work in preparation and serving of meals 
and care of rooms. All cooking will be done in quantities 
sufficient for an average family. Special attention will be 
given to suitable cordination and economy. The work this 
year emphasizes the place and responsibility of the girl in 
the family. 

Requirements in Subject fetter 

I. Feeding the Family 

1. Meals for average families with average and low 
incomes. Plan meals f Market, cook and serve. 

2 0 Special food for babies, young children and invalids. 

3. Canning and preserving. 












331O0cl eel 0 




. 




' 




3 




..r'x.' Of !a 


o ' 1 c‘1.ii b 




. 


r|' rf err ’ o d 


• n 






3 ri o 




i:o 


•+ 


1 





/ I / 


o ■: v .c v 




« . 

r - ’ < 







195 


II* Clothing the Family 

1. Proportion of income for clothing, 

2. Home-made versus ready-made clothes, 

3. Clothing construction. 

(a) One or two articles of use in the house. 

Towel (unless made in Grade VII), pillow slips, 
table napkins. 

Problem to involve overhanding, napery hem, and 
some decoration. 

(b) Kimona, nightgown for self or some member of 
the family. 

Practice in cutting and machine work. 

Flat felled seams. 

Handwork in trimming, 

(c) Articles for some other member of family. 

Tea apron - fine hemming, sewing on lace, 
putting on band, button and buttonhole. 

Gift - preferably linen or silk. 

4. Care of clothing 

(a) Storing winter clothing 

(b) Laundry work - colored clothes, woollens, 

III. Study of Home Problems 

1. Making home attractive: cleanliness, order, neat¬ 
ness, care of rooms, choice and arrangement of 
furniture, cooperation and helpfulness. 






£ 



" V:..) : 

- : . 

. 

• 

lo Ic *xf3 owtf ( 'to 

■ • : aim; j It > ' > 

.... < • * ~ ' * 

, . : /": •;• 


< . V X 0 i )I ■ ■ 

* r . Y. 0 : ' 1 ' 

o ‘X 6 d 

■: •. i ' 1 -- : “.c ‘ 1/ v.* ■ < r; ' 

. V> 

. • . . 

•- - «.* . r:-"‘ 

.' . .. ■ . 

9 

Y Y. •: V.'O o :o ' “.Y.: a'Y-YY'i:'. 

< '• 

i. . ■ .. e ■ . ' ‘ Y- . ; ' ' • 

,s\ • ‘ ■ Y : ’ < ' ' ' ' 

• ~ y ■' 

‘Y'YYYJY Y/) 

1 E v . » ; 

t ■ >•:.*; u " ' ■ 

. ' . ' " Oi JO 

t 

? t 

, :‘ r w-) t :r.: Y' 






196 


2. Home pleasures: Reading, music, sewing or knitting. 

3. Hospitality. 

4* Special holidays, picnics, birthdays, etc. 

3* Planning and division of time, money, care, labor 
and responsibility. 

Suggestions for Wessons 

Foods for the Family 

Lesson 1 

Discussion 

If a family of four has $40.00 a month to spend for 
food, plan the best meals possible for this amount. Best, 
means best tasting and also best in other ways. Review 
Grade VII work on food requirements. Cost of food may 
be reduced by canning vegetables from gardens and fruits 
in season. 

Note-Book - Importance of good note-book. Few notes 
but neat, orderly, valuable. This note-book should be 
continued in Grade IX. 

Lessons 2,3.4 

Canning and Preserving. 

Lesson 5 

From plans made in Lesson I, prepare and serve a 
breakfast for family. (Groups of four.) Review table 
setting and table manners. 










3 r i dj 


c 




t 




or 


>. noi: ivl 


, 


■ 



p, }■) PQsL 

• ' 



v;;. ,V{ *, --rJ'.'lJ. 





; a 











197 


Lesson 6 

Prepare and serve dinner* 

Lesson 7 

Prepare and serve supper* 

Lesson 8 

Discussion - Needs of another family with different in- 
come. This family has two very small children, one and 
three years. 

Food for babies and young children. 

Practice - Prepare special dishes for babies and children. 
Lesson 9 

Plan one day* s meals for family. Make market list for 
buying provisions. Prepare breakfast. 

Lesson 10 

Market for dinner* 

Prepare and serve dinner. 

Lesson 11 

Market for supper. 

Prepare and serve supper. 

Discussion or debate : - ft Horae-made bread versus bakers 1 
bread* n 
Lesson 12 

Bread making. Examination of note-books. 

Lesson 13 

Bread Making. 

Test. 














vioc. 


■ 






l: o. 


; f :j V - '_> <;•? •, ;• * - 0 ... j yjT: '"I J . .0 ( ) O' 

' a -•,: '-TVA 


no e 3 a 4 


; ' ■ ' . . - 1 ; . 

lYQ'X 

01 ■/ u*;v 


x a. 


y. ) 


* ::: 1 s : - 

IS _no^a,3.I 

„ • ■ • ■ 

,• hr.vo o : ' ; : • 


. 


■ ; 


, • 





193 


Lesson 14 

Discussion - Needs of another imaginary family where 
there is a sick person. 

Practice - Liquid diet® Home nursing® Bed making. 

Lesson 15 

Soft diet and convalescent diet® Home nursing® Common 
emergencies. 

Lesson 16 

Preparation of trays. 

Lesson 17 

Discussion - Needs of another family of very small in¬ 
come. 

Practice - Prepare breakfast (one-half class)® Prepare 
lunch (other half of class). 

Lesson 18 

Prepare dinner or plan and prepare a basket for "Sunshine.” 
clothing for the Family 

Lesson 19 

Discussion - Proportion of income for clothing® Home-made 
versus ready-made clothes. 

Sewing or knitting as a duty; as a pleasure. 

Examination of models shown by teacher® 

Examination of samples of materials for nightgown. 
Comparison of price, width, durability® 

Measure and find amount of material required. 















-.. ro £ £ ‘ • 0 r ;> : > 0 0 " I - J: ? :V VV£ ^ 



^ i * '' .’: - ; '; :': ' V . Vi' : ; ■•••• ■ •• 

. ' •■- ■ • ') 

; 

.non'0;0.I 

. 1 r 




• f 


3 9, 


. 


t rr ' 


. 



. •;') ) ;r >> •; )*: • - /; ;'VV '..TV • . 

• > : ■>-• . 

' i : 

■ ) oXqrr!B3 *io T . T . ■ ■ . 

, i/iq lo nos i'li’.qno! 

> ) ■ font ■ ■ ■ *I£J8£0 





1 ?? 

Discussion of shopping etiquette* 

Note-book requirements. 

Start small sewing or tea apron* 

Lesson 20 

Review Grade VII work in sewing* 

Gut nightgown* 

Work on apron. 

(Having two garments to sew will prevent waste of time in 
waiting for cutting table and for sewing machine.) 

Lesson 21 

Baste and start flat felled seams in nightgown. 

Work on apron. 

Lesson 22 

Finish seams. 

Work on apron. 

Lesson 23 

Continue work on nightgown and finish apron. 

Lesson 24 

Discussion - Helping mother with care of clothing. 
Practice - Darning, mending, lengthening skirt or similar 
problems. Work on nightgown. 

Lesson 25 

Continue problem in repairing clothes. Finish nightgown. 
Wash colored clothes. 










3 ?) 0 3 . 7 . 7 


'Of 13 ‘.lO n 

.Co “ ' > 

.. . M • • - isi- x- 

■ ). ; J b : 

* ' ' 

J ■' • 

* , • , ; » 

ILt,: vf'33 Of: a:t o r c? nnxv^li) 

93 ■ ' ' ■ • ' ' $ ' ! >‘ nxc'.C£*7 




_ . J. E iP..)• 

; £ .' 3 ' 

. ) li'XO ‘ > 

fio-aaoJ 


o. ■) 


)■- ; . ' ; 


0 !: 


UX* J..I 0;i.: 


. 


, ll 

jii : cv.j r-xinoU 

no:‘. r VU- 

•: •: ■■ •• . : ■ 


■ < ■' < 

. . 


.3 1 ’ ; : o 


) . : : 


■ Ido r i [ ' ' - ' 

a.);!jolo .no'xo.i.oo i a a,, 






200 


Lesson 26 

finish problem in repairing* 

Iron colored clothing. 

Discussion and Demonstration - Storing winter clothes. 
Lesson 27 

Wash woollens such as stockings, mitts, scarves, caps, 
babies 1 clothes. 

Start article for home use, preferably pillow slip. 
Lesson 26 

W T ork on household article. 

Examination of note-books. 

Lesson 29 

Work on household article. 

Start second article, preferably table napkin. 

Test. 

Shelter for the Family 

Lesson 30 

Discussion - The house we live in. 

Debate: "Renting versus owning a home." 

Work on household article. 

Lesson 31 

Discussion -- Choice and arrangement of furniture® 
Examination of pictures and advertisements. Visit a 
furniture store if possible. Work on household article. 














:1... A : :ji;I 

: 1 . . :> ‘ 

■ 

' - ' ' ' : . ' - 

‘.rtos :^9vl 

... C J .J j; • <•: a ; aa/ja a/z: I loo: -: aa£vV 

, : : ; ' . ' • . ' ■ 

' v — ? a.; ):A. V • J.' • w '1.0 C> ' 

V\'U;. : 

. '■ / ’ ' L 

„ ■; ; • 'a..-, r:...; ao : a -■ 

:V. ‘ v V:‘i ■ s n -- a; 




' . 7 roil 1 . 

........... a •; : ' ) 

, 


f £ rr, 


?9d 






' ( hits Z 


• V..': o-jc )j:: u‘:u$x) c v 



201 

Lesson 32 

Discussion - Care of various rooms. Cooperation and 
division of labor between members of family* Practice 
in care of bedroom 0 Bedmaking* 

Lesson 33 

Discussion and practice in care of kitchen and bathroom. 
Sanitation, ventilation, effect of direct sunlight, 
water supply, sewage removal. 

Hospitality and courtesy* 

Lesson 34 

Prepare and serve luncheon to mothers, teachers or other 
guests. 

Lesson 35 


Prepare picnic lunch 









; 









' 




, •: . j ■' ’fX* c •' 


. : 

1 ' ' 

. ■ 

> ,• o ‘ \ 

e ’ 

l rj : 

or no a?, a 4 



„ ■ ■ r : ■ ' 














202 


APPENDIX 

E 

High School Subjects 

of Study, 1924 

Group A 

Group B 

English 1 

English 2 

General Science 1 

History 2 

Algebra 1 

Algebra 2 

Art 1 

French 1 or 2 

History 1 

German 1 or 2 

French 1 

Latin 1 or 2 

German 1 

Greek 1 or 2 

Latin 1 

Agriculture 1 

Greek 1 

Geometry 1 or 2 

Geometry 1 

Bookkeeping 1 or 2 

Bookkeeping 1 

Manual Training 2 

Manual Training 1 

Physics 1 

Household Economics 1 

Household Economics 

Physical Education 1(a) 

Physical Education 1 

Music 1(a) 

Music 1(b) 

Group C 

Group D 

English 3 

English 4 

History and Economics 3 

History 4 

Chemistry 1 

Algebra 3 

Arithmetic 1 

Geometry 3 

Geography 1 

Trigonometry 1 







r>:■ vX i X. >oXa 


HsxXn.nU 

X X Xo :o":X 
• X -">0 
.. -xo I rd j;:.I 
r xr) 1 : r 3 0‘iD 
I' rjl.ao.,';-::nA 
S T'> 1 

‘Xq .x.’: vX {. • •. 

i • E ' rn/5 . 

r p *■) '-p-r {f'-j, 

xmon ’ 

' 

( : ;X o ‘;::;r 


. ;; ; XX > ( 

I .-..a - 

X 9 D ! . Xo ■ I IS fSO 

' i rsiQs&lk 


I :iono r i f l 

X nBrrioO 

X 1 l v ' 

X ■ / td > I ) 

• o o:\Xo o3 

•ixv'iT X-unaM 


box!iohooS M [esi/oH 


;X x£•>X:o" X oXbv X. 


Wl ■ 


. . . fill 

.. ' ’■ *"l::-/- X.A 

' X )' OJ' 

' ; ! . )' 


v '• t 

- - - * ~ '“wr-wr 

X rloXJ'x.riw 
no.brtg ■ o bn n >3 :.' 
I 

X oi:X^ii.X:;. 
r - - 'O ■' 




Group C (conto) 
Agriculture 2 
Art 2 
French 2 
German 2 
Latin 2 
Greek 2 

Physical Education 1(c) 
Music 1(c) 


( Group D (conto) 
Physics 2 
Biology 1 
Chemistry 2 
French 3 
German 3 
Latin 3 

Physical Education 2 
Music 2 


The Requirements were as follows: 

I Normal Entrance (Second Class) non-professional® 
(a) Required Subjects 
Group A: English 1 

General Science 1 
Algebra 1 
Art 1 
Geometry 1 

Physical Education 1(a) 

Group B: English 2 
History 2 

Agriculture 1 or Physics 1 
Physical Education 1(b) 










' 

. 

; . .l'd ;: : r 

' 

.. • : oxa*: I ■ 


« ■ ; ■■■•■.):• . ; ; . ' ; 

. . ;*V ■' ■: £’ 

"• -4.-,/. V . 

. U 1*U 

rorr 1 
n£:-i'iaD 
S il: i ' 

.. : !.o ■: 

. o ' 

. D ;.: o j r 1 


; v )• ‘ i: : sX : • Oiil 

r. , ' > v ' y ■ „ v : •' ' ; : ,f O ' f ’ .•!’ i'l f ■ 1 - 

3#oeqdu< ' hehll ol is) 

j; 

I oaao/n . I'-.-.torfo- s 
r : v'V! yi'.Jj . 
i o-c;.. 

;■/ ' o:.> 

; : ". i [ , 'qrrv:;.'V • 1 ::tv: : ‘; r - 

. ; ; /. l •; : . q. r ^*x' } 

';W V ■ 

;; -to I rVirr^vroJ-.T’ 

, . -rc-D • ■. v ■ ' ■ 




204 


Group C: English 3 

History and Economics 3 
Agriculture 2 or Chemistry 1 
Ar it lime tic 1 
Geography 1 

Physical Education 1(c) 

Elective Subjects 

One unit of work to be chosen from Group A and the other 
four from Groups B and C* 

II Normal Entrance (First Class) non-professional* 

(a) Second class non-professional standing as detailed 
above* 

(b) Required subjects: 

English 4 

Physical Education 2 

(c) Elective subjects: Six units to be chosen from 
Group D. 











' 




0 . 




tj/vjX ■ ri ■ 




':.o -"inu on ) r 

, • . ' ■ ■ 

• . ■ ' n - > . :V; 'Xo 'm do . \r ;■ 

* 





•••• ) r 




r-rnXi nssono od Oo 


' 


; Vj 0 






203 


APPENDIX F 

Curricula - Alberta High School s 
For the year ending June 30, 1928* 

Edmonton 

Regulations of the Department of Education 
Relating to Programme of Studies 
Printed by W 0 D. McLean, Acting King*s Printer, 1927. 

Normal Entrance 


First Year 

Second Year 

Third Year 

English (2 units) 

English (2 units) 

English (2 units) 

General Science 

Art or Geometry 1 

History and 

Algebra 

History 

Economics 

Geometry or Art 

Agriculture or 

Agriculture 2 

History 

Physics 

or Chemistry 

^Geography (if not 

taken in second 

year.) 

6 units 

6 units 

6 units 

Physical Education 

Physical Education 

Physical Education 



















f T ■ 


- JJ ' 

' OOv 'vV‘ 




tlOo n 






•) O.Vi?*'* (Y.C - 03 T? I X£ 3 Vi ,L ' 


• ' ■ [ D 


•i J « ' A 




) ) > 






/: n 


oJn.i 


?. o.o n 
) 


) ' ) - ■ ‘TO $'Z 


.: • - 

. : : , ' ’ O O/T. .ft : 

\ .r r f V'' 


■ \) 


r o.' 


ctoo. -oo ■ :oo0 
■ioJ 


■ r 


. o. 









206 


In schools where. 

Any two of the 

Any two of the 

the languages are 

following: 

following: 

taught one of 

Physics or 

Algebra 

the following 

Agriculture 

Art 

should be taken: 

Algebra 

Geometry 

Latin 

Geometry 

Chemistry or 

French 

Latin 

Agriculture 

German 

Greek 

Latin 

Greek 

French 

Greek 


German 

German 


Manual Training 

French 


Household 

Music 


Economics 

Manual Training 


German 

Household 



Economics 

Agricultural 



First Year 

Second Year 

Third Year 

English (2 units) 

English (2 units) 

English (2 units) 

General Science 

History 

History and 

Algebra 

Physics 

Economics 

Geometry 

Agriculture 

Chemistry 



Agriculture 



Arithmetic 

5 units 

5 units 

6 units 















' ono- 


)': 0 




' l:o I ' a 


c r i?A '.' - ■ 





207 


Physical Education 

Physical Education 

Physical Education 

Any one of the 

Any two of the 

Any two of the 

following: 

following: 

following: 

Latin 

Art 

Art 

French 

Algebra 

Geography 

German 

Geometry 

Algebra 

Greek 

Latin 

Geometry 

History 

Greek 

Latin 

Manual Training 

French 

French 

Household 

German 

German 

Economics 

Bookkeeping 

Greek 

Music 

Household 

Economics 

Music 

Music 

Technical 



First Year 

Second Year 

Third Year 

English (2 units) 

English (2 units) 

English (2 units) 

General Science 

History 

History 

Algebra 

Geometry 

Arithmetic 

Geometry 

Physics 

Algebra 


French or German 

French or German 

5 units 

6 units 

6 units 














oj.r 


' D O'. 

• i x y 


.0 


1 r : 


O: !o 


-) o pro v nh 


JO.:...;.*>... i 


qO 




lo : • : 


' 


: r cv.. 


i ? ) )" :. 


) : 


oh:-> 


■ :. ' > 


.: ■ 


; oxni 


o; 








[O' 





- ; - f J ) OO.) 


3* ‘ [ 








Physical Education 

Physical Education 

Physical Education 

Any two units of 

Any one unit of 

And one of the 

shopwork chosen 

shopwork to be 

following: 

from the follow- 

chosen from: 

Chemistry 

ing; 

Carpentry or 

Geography 

Forge work® 

Cabinet Work 

German or French 

Pattern Work and 

Machine Shop 

Eat in 

Foundry 

Printing 

Shopwork - 

Printing 

Drawing and 

Choice of, 

Drawing and 

Design 

Carpentry 

Design 

Foods and 

Cabinet Work 

Household 

Nutrition 

Forge Shop 

Economics 

Millinery and 

Motor Mechanics 


Dressmaking 

Machine Shop 

Electrical Shop 

Printing 

Design and 

Craft Work 

Home Management 

Millinery or 

Dressmaking 











: 

o 

•:o it" 

' 

,' 3: x 








' r > ci o* » r £ . 

' 

r to £ 


' 

O'i Oo ^‘iO'XqO-h 

: 

■ 

d 

‘ 

•: •. ■ n .£wst( 

' 

hii.0 r::i ).) •- 

jr 


• B J Of 3 C 
. r, -v:oio : r, iOv’qo;Ia 
- "J". v o ’ .. rr,: r 

; 

l ) . ■ ■ d-d ■ 

^-lorrjoa 
t: 

hi:: r.n.':::r/r 

n: :J:boC 

■ 




20? 


1927 

General Uourse 

This is designed to give the student the widest choice 
in making up his programme♦ 

Physical Education and two years of English are the only 
required subjects. At least six of the twenty-one required 
units must be chosen from the subjects of the Third and Fourth 
years. The remaining eleven units may be chosen as desired® 

1927 

p.4 All candidates who have qualified for Grade IX standing 
under the old curriculum will be considered as having credit in 
English 1, History 1, Algebra 1, Geometry 1 and General 
Science 1© 






■ ■ / ' 

si 

' ' 


- - ' r r 




J'lK- ■■'IF. ■ C 

• r &i . 

; > : - * - .7;; ; '• n ocf 

' 

• 




■ 

t i ' 

: . • . 


no ' II xw • Xo rd3 t 

Z '■•• ' - ' - < ' ■ t 

* '■ s' : 





210 


APPENDIX G 

Handbook for Secondary Schools, Alberta 
Authorized by the Department of Education, Edmonton 
W. D. McLean, Acting King 1 s Printer 
1927 

Same course for 1925 - pages 106 to 107 and for 1930 - pages 
£6 to £9. 


Household Economics I 

Time: Approximately three hours per week — one hour for 
discussion, and two hours for laboratory work. 

Length of term: 10 months. Half term, 5 months. 

A. First half of term - Foods and Nutrition. 

B. Second half of term - Clothing. 

p. 100 A. Foods and Nutrition 

I. Discussion Periods 

1. Preservation of foods. Keeping qualities. Study 
of storage systems. 

2. Sanitation of food. Milk supply. Foods exposed on 
market, etc. 

3. F 00( i principles. Caloric value of common foods, 
visualized in ordinary serving amounts, in order to 
approximate meal values quickly. 

o Selection of foods for children and adults. 


4 








211 


5. Food requirements* 

6. Budgets for food* 

7* Organization of work* 

£* Care of kitchen equipment* 

II* Laboratory Work 

1* Canning Fruit — cold pack and open kettle methods* 

2* Canning Vegetables — cold pack method. 

3. Pickling. 

4. Jelly making. 

5. Breakfast dishes — cereals, quickbreads, eggs, 
dried fruits, beverages* 

6 0 Planning and preparing breakfasts for a family of 
adults and children, doing at least part of the 
marketing. 

7. Luncheon or supper dishes — cream soups, salads, 
scallops, cheese and fish dishes, fresh fruits and 
cake. 

Planning and preparing suppers or luncheons for 
families of adults and children, doing at least some 
of the marketing. 

Po 101 B* Clothing 

Io Bjscussion Periods 

1. Study of cotton and linen fibres* 





;o‘j. 

■ j a ■- 


"1 : 


1 


. 




V : 


~ :; . > 


t ■b 

• r-anra:! 

1 >o 

9 " 1 i 


o a- 


il n 


•O.^Tp-i. ! 'O )::93;7C>; 


8 ' 


■ JJOO 





212 


(a) Source 

(b) Physical characteristics 

(c) Manufacturing processes — Common weaves, 
wearing qualities, etc. 

Methods of dyeing and printing. 

Finishing processes — weighting, dressing, etc. 
Adulterations and household tests for detecting 
presence of substitute fibres. 

2. Study of cotton and linen fabrics -- names, widths, 
prices, color tests, quality , etc. 

3. Costume design — line, color, style. 

4. Care of clothing. 

5. Planning of clothing budgets* 

6. Removal of stains. 

Home Projects Suggested 

Renovating and remodeling of clothes for one 1 s self or 
another member of the family. 

Care of linen closet. Care of family linen. 

Planning one s s wardrobe for the year. 

Selection and making of drapes or curtains for one's room 
or making more attractive any other room in the house. 

II. Laboratory r eriods 

1. Use and care of sewing machine. 

2. Use of commercial patterns -- selection and alteration. 









215 


3. Cutting, fitting and finishing garments to include the 
following: 

(a) Common seams — French and fell* 

(b) Common hems — straight, faced, French* 

(c) Plackets — bound, bound and faced, hemmed. 

(d) Sewing on lace and embroidery. 

(e) Putting in sleeves. 

(f) Making button holes and sewing on buttons* 

(g) Mending cottons and linens. 

(h) Applied design* 

Suggested Problems Using Cottons and Linens 

1. Handling of cotton materials — one undergarment* 

2. Handling of linen material -- one household article in¬ 
volving applied design* 

3. Mending of cotton and linen* 

4. Child 1 s garment, made over from an adults garment. 

5. Cotton dress or middy. 

Household Economics II ' 

Time: Approximately three hours per week — one hour for 
discussion, and two hours for laboratory work* 

A. First half of term -- Clothing 

B. Second half of term — Nutrition. 

p. 102 A* Clothing 

I. discussion Periods 

1. Choice of Materials. 










: i■ '• 




' 


.o 




a :.ro. 


o 





)0 



j a 















214 


2 . 

3. 


4® 

5o 

6 . 

7. 

6 . 


Costume design in relation to garments made* 

Study of silk and wool fibres* 

(a) Origin* Physical Characteristics* 

(b) Manufacturing processes — Common weaves -- 
wearing qualities. 

Methods of dyeing and printing. 

Finishing processes, weighing, dressing, etc* 
Adulterations, and household tests for detecting 
presence of substitute fibres* 

Study of silk and wool fabrics — names, widths, 
prices, color tests and quality tests* 

Laundry methods for silk and wool -- effects of 
soaps and washing powders. 

Study of laces and embroideries. 

Care of clothing. 

Clothing budgets* 


II* Laboratory Wor k 

1* Handling of wool material — making of a wool skirt 
or simple dress* 

2. Handling of silk material — silk smock or blouse* 

3® Problem involving applied design, using some decora¬ 
tive stitch etc* 

4® Mending of wool and silk. 

5® Thrift problem: Cutting, fitting and finishing 

garments to include the following problems: Seams, 
hems, plackets, and button holes for woolen and silk 


fabrics 





, 


- o '.o*i t o 1:1 h &r\nj30'o 


oow oxx :. r.e -JO o 


* ;o :o :■ • ' 

• j - -- rxooxo oo- 't: ':o oO; '■■■''■ ••••'••• - 

9 i . X X - 


: 0 ' ; ; ' , " ■ *;J' Oi -O..L r ' ■ .. 


a i 7:0 oxox.': jo: 


o.7:x ? x: 


3 - ' 


o 90.093 ooox 
: : Ot f •/ ' j YT / " " 7. I7o O 'vO.'J'O O 

t io' cl '■' : ' ■ 

* •: o • o / o •' ; '‘o - 

hfLZ aSOB.L XO ""OX- 

* 

„ , 




loo.: r, 


__ r 


o • :o : 'j > 


‘.o - j'.v : looi; 7o 'oxcxxlxaxi'- 

•. j i }T£j!c5 'io ill IbE 
££ ■ iJtvI . 1 ) . ” 

# 1 • 

r .x ; loovr 'Io nxooo i 

;,'.0. :o 77 ot' , 


»• 


flo X Q 

. 


iOI! 











215 


B._ Nutrition 

I 0 Discussion r eriods 

lo Review of food principles. 

2. Review of food digestion, and digestion of various 
foods absorption and assimilation. 

3. Relation of diet to health and disease -- brief 
survey of recent discoveries in vitamins, prevention 
of rickets, etc. 

4o Invalid cookery — fuel values, etc. 

5o Dietaries for different types of people. 

6. Study of commercial food products — butter, milk, 
eggsubstitutes, flour, etc. 

7. Time and labor saving devices. 

II. taboratorv Work 

p.103 

1. Review of work of first year in meal planning, values, 
etc. 

2 0 Dinner dishes — stock soups, meats, vegetables and 
salads, puddings, pastry, ices, gelatine dishes, 
bread. 

3. Planning, marketing, preparing, and serving dinners 
for families of adults and children. 

4* Meals for infants. 

5. Invalid cookery, dietaries, etc. 

6. Cooking for special occasions — menus for larger 
quartitifcSo 












: 



-i r 


O' 










' 


- 


0 


o oo.LZ/: ::V'i 


50 - 


‘000 


■ .... ■ . 
• ■ ; irA > > 


:; 9 :, 






216 


APPENDIX H 

Two-Year Course Outline for 

Technical High Schools, 1929 

First Year 

Required units : English, composition, literature as in 
Academic bourse. 

General Mathematics 1 
General Science 1 
Optional Units s Woodwork 1 

Metal Work 1 
Drawing and Design 1 
Electricity 1 
Motor Mechanics 1 
Household Economics 1. 

Note : Household Economics 1 included 

(1) Elementary nutrition and foods 

(2) Laundry 

(3) Home mar sing; Sewing and Elementary Dressmaking* 
Of the optional units all students were to select drawing and 
design, while the boys would choose two from woodwork, metal 
work, electricity and motor mechanics* The girls on the other 
hand would select household economics, sewing and elementary 
dressmaking* 










21 ? 


Second Year 

Required Units : English Composition 2, Literature 2, as in 
Academic course,. 

Industrial history 1 
General Mathematics 2 
General Science 2 
Optional Units: Carpentry 1 

Cabinet Work 1 
Metal work 2 
Electricity 2 
Motor Mechanics 2 
Drawing and Design 2 
Household Economics 2 

(1) Nutrition and Foods 

(2) Home Management 
Dressmaking* 

In the second year boys will take drawing and design and 
any other two of the optional units, while the girls will 
take Drawing and Design 2, Household Economics 2 and 
Dressmaking® 

Credits were to be granted students in technical schools 
on attainment similar to that in the regular academics® 








'' ' 


c 


no iv iaoqmoO 


; 









0 * 1 




•: Do 


} . 







3 0 /; •; f ■: 


■ ■ > 


ar> oo- 


;' 


3 





37/ orf bii-ooo odO n.C 

[ { : o sriJ ) '■ r t i ..icto '. ( s 

'9 : in 

0 - 

■- 

3 :/0/ n:'c \r '' A..’; J'jiamj/X no 



218 


Third Year Outlines for Technical High Schools, 1930 ^ 

(a) English, Literature 3 and Composition 3 as in Academic 
Courses 

(b) History 3 - Canadian History, Civics and Elementary 
Economics as in Academic Courses<> 

(c) Geography 1 as in Academic courses* 

Required for Girls 

Chemistry for Technical Schools 1 
Physiology and Hygiene 
Optional Units 

One to be chosen by both boys and girls from the following: 
Electricity 3 
Metal 3 

Motor Mechanics 3 
Building Construction 1 
Clothing 1 

Eoods and Dietetics 1 
Industrial Art 1* 


1 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 
Edmonton, 1930, p* 17* 








' 


xH vv .'; ; o - 

'■ » ' ^ 

3 0-rx;f< 

' , ■' ~ 

. .)■' 0 1 • •' ■ 3<T -9... 

„ •; - r •- . ; . ' ' • ) ; 0 . 

' 

f ' 1 ■: 

: V- ‘ 

1 [(J r, 

.o/c..: -v oc V .> ; v.. : noao 'o so o$ enO 

X oo L . 

XstfoM 

£ aoJ:no ; o'oodoK 

1 soldo denov ' 

.. ■' i.dctoX’ 

J; 

.X 0-: ■ 'X- 

r 

' ) ,• •;> ■( ' > 9 9 VO"' i 







21? 


APPENDIX I 

Programme of Studies for the 

Intermediate School 
Grades VII, VIII, and IX 
1936 

Province of Alberta 

(Same course reprinted in 1940 - pages 216 - 226) 

Home Economics as a subject of study in the Intermediate 
School is justified in the light of modern research in 
education* It aims to educate by directing the mind of the 
child to ideas connected with the home, and by giving know¬ 
ledge and experiences of a useful nature related to home 
duties* Although it may be classed as a manual subject of a 
practical nature, it has high value in mental training. 

No subject on the curriculum has greater possibilities 
for correlation than has home economics* Interests in a 
class study can be directed to a library where additional 
stories on interesting topics raised in the lessons may be 
secured. Calculations of qualities and values afford oppor¬ 
tunities for tying the work in with arithmetic. The 
artistic sense finds an outlet In the exercises of the 
kitchen or of the sewing room. Home Economics can be made 
a gathering ground for working over and vitalizing much use¬ 
ful information, gleaned in the other classes of the school 
particularly in social studies and in science. 






' 




i. 


"\l •• 




e V 


ooVb Vo oo :Vvcr.;;V 




: ~ o ' •: r o 0, ■ 


v • '.,0 O, <;,/* ': 0 V: OO 1, 0 . . 9MCKJ 

. ■ x l ' ‘ ' 'V si loo ■ 

■’ 

^ ? smo . f ' o ocobi . ’ ’■ ■ 

: .\i :V;.,o V :':o; • o V..o oooo:..'.‘.:oo-:::o hziF, oobob 

* "• 

. ■ . ■ : ■ / ' ' V < .0 ' .' o boo vro 

. ' • ;• }-r\ ■:'/)(* -ot •. •: • iinJj.fo'l'T'Z-JO 0 Vi no MooVVoo o 

, . .. .. .. •. * . ■ . • 0 cf '■ r : 

■ ; V ■ ■ \ a • ■ V ’■ o ’- ' ..’V ■ 

. 

mow at let ’ ■ i ■ 

; ■ it 

. 

- il": *xoV V:r; o-'/oo s 

t '' 

« .0. 










Elaborate equipment is not essential. If a sewing 
machine, a table, a cooking stove with an oven and some 


220 


utensils are available good work may be done under a compe¬ 
tent teacher. Care should be taken to give a maximum amount 
of manipulative experience and not to spend too much time 
in discussion without work. Special care should be taken 
not to make the subject a lecture course or a book study 
procedure. While a certain amount of book knowledge may 
be necessary, the most important aspect in this work is found 
in the doing of things. 

This programme is built upon a 36-week-year plan. In 
Grade VII it is recommended that the afternoon period be used 
where possible, the morning half-day being given to Grade 
VIII. The Grade VII programme Is planned for 2 l/2 hours per 
week and the Grade VIII programme for 3 hours per week. It is 
not necessary in these classes to make allowance for recess 
time. The work of the class allows such a variety of class 
activity that the release of the class for free play is really 
not necessary. 

The following is an analysis of the courses with a sugges¬ 
ted allotment of time. 

Grade VII 
Sewing - 16 weeks 
Foods - 16 weeks 
Laundry - 4 weeks 




■ )■ J:, j 1 ■ 

I • I ) ) ■ l ■ : ■■ ■ ■ 'IB a l i an f 

■ ■' ■ : ' ; 

. ' !'■■ ' ■ " ' - ’ : ‘ '■ 1 ’• 


r io *xr? 






■ • . - 


i oo jon 


.... . 5 , ■ - 


0- 




•fr, '. r Of f 


" ... .... • o 

. ' ' ) ' 

- ■ ‘ ‘ ' ’ " ’ - ■ " ; - - • 

" l y * : 

-1^ t • 

* 

J :;•/ Zx.i'1 V' 7 " ? ^f.n ?'03W 

; 1 ■ t c .'o o';:.-. : : - Son 

‘ * ' 

■ . ' ■ 

„ . 

... ;• ■ - :: ,/ o . 

, : 

: I ui - 

- 








221 


Grade VIII 
Sewing - 16 weeks 
Food - 16 weeks 
Social and Family- 
Relationships - 4 weeks 

Grade IX 

Clothing and Textiles - 14 weeks 
Foods - 14 weeks 

Social and Family Relationships - 4 weeks 
Home Management - 4 weeks 

This schedule does not mean that the topics are to be 
treated in the order given; it refers only to the approximate 
time allotment for each. The teacher may arrange to discuss 
the problems of social and family relationships incidentally as 
convenience or other factors may determine. 

In some schools it may be necessary to combine grades in 
order to get a class large enough to use the teacher 1 s time 
economically. The course lends itself to this arrangement. 

When grades are combined, the teacher should select carefully 
the projects of greatest interest and value to the students. 

There are no minimum requirements for shop projects. 

The weaker students may not achieve so much as the more capable, 
but they may, however, make greater relative progress. All 
students should be employed to the maximum of their capabilities. 


V.I ,.Y e.bB'^) 

' 

■ ‘ )■' - 

-9 " r :sl hU\ lm:oo'Z 

. 

v; ... - • 

’ . ' . 

- ;: v. . : :. 

-■ , 0 - • V 

; • • / - : •'" 1 - ) ■ 


v{ J- ; ■ •• a ' :•> ;*• > 

• 

,,, r, ... ;; - 

r 0909 oioT 

C,i • i 9; > 9 o -/..uio 

. V ' 


r, 9- 

■' •.'•09 0" :r\rf'i9 ’ 

oOd - . 9 f 

. 

..YoiJ: • o:ti± ;J' 

■ _ . i .<" •' ' 

•• 


> OOOl oiict 

, 

sb ' 9 


•: ) o • ■ .'. . • / :o 0 

0 

.■ ’ H >•' 

■ ■ ' u s. •' i i 

oo o,.toc nl 

■ i. , 

■ "<■ '• ; r ' 0; 

£ T 'I r: 

"■ od ) 

. 

V 9 f9 

r. ; o o i" -• 





. 

. 



: \ CK - .)'• ' 

, 


■ 





bjjd* nco:-'o :• t . o d? 

• 

•. .i 

• c . V ; : 

: c " 


’!i'. ! ji.iv) Qvj 

bo v<' .0 f ’ : •;> 0'j 

. 






222 


The abler students may act as tutors. Such tuition will help 
the student who gives it as well as the one who receives it. 

The teacher will be the judge respecting the type of 
assignment that each student should take. Assignments are to be 
graded, not only with reference to the achievement of the 
student, but also to her capacity. The teacher must therefore 
accept a considerable burden of responsibility but by so doing 
he will have greater freedom in developing the individuality 
of the pupil. 

A carefully kept note book is essential for each pupil but 
care must be taken to avoid too much stress on mere taking 
notes. This book should contain the recipes and dictated or 
printed material given to the pupils from time to time. 

Samples of work in textiles, color schemes, pictures, clippings* 
are properly included. This book should be available for the 
inspector, who will give it major attention in evaluating the 
work of the pupil and of the class during the year. A daily 
record, or log, should be kept in a separate section of the 
note book. 

The school should provide a reference library that is 
readily accessible to a ^l the students. Frequent assignments 
should be made calling for the use of this library. A biblio¬ 
graphy of suitable books is given below. 

Textbook for pupils - British Uolumbia Manual of Foods. Nutrition 
and Home Management . 








i j noij£ 


■: fo is ;tos - 

?,jri l A 

■ 

• 


■ A; o 0O o 


: ■ I.At r ■ ; : $t 

' qA-; Arts hi; o' 

: oAA 



' ;tO0< 

' 

; o' -'A: A; e 3 A 

JAA: -r toAdbbA oilv.' 



■ v 



luo ii cl i) ;d 

i ;{ o £9 ci '.;; ; A' 

"■ i • ■ : 


.A Vi o V ' .v: At : AA’. ' '; .; • A • . < At A :: . 

*■ ■ ;> ■ A ■ ■ t A ■' •- 

- - - ‘ AAA t-A-.t At tAtt t .V At: A n :t A' A-dob 

• ■ i A . ' u I a.. ■ ' ■ ■ vsd 1.1 tf &d 

♦ 

j '•;/. Ib j: etnas 30 si }food scfoii aAtA'.'t-o A 

, •• y-> ttt tvv <> A . A v • tA ttA A‘ tA Jr otto 

■ V) ' ' *. . j i. 

, ocA . ■ ; :oAA ^ ... '■■■ A' tt,At V At::A o. ■; i o At At 

A A t AoAt - t o . « t> to A o < o A 'A A- :A: A to: A.o aclo, '■ A, 

■ ■ ■ : TA: - / A. A: . > " c • ‘ ttt t,A: - 

v; t : ■ ; • ■V '.> ' .: .■ ,' : . ■: - K ttdot 

■A. .» .V ttAA jn. t.,t: A t: o e : A;T‘OTq AAttA: A >oAoo oAA 

„ : - A - .. ‘ : 'r '' A A’: 1 

„ • . •; A: A '. , Ai ■A ■ AAAA o ;;Att oA' AAAjj A: 

♦ ’ ' ’’ :' ■ ’A 'A ' ■ A ■ • .: 

< ' . ..■; : •; A q _ - " / ■ V Ao > V *-.A 

«A ~ 



223 


N,B , A Manual of Family Sewing Machines , together with a set 
of illustrative charts will be furnished free to schools by 
the Singer Sewing Machine Company, 

Reference Books for Teachers 

Homemaking: - An Integrated Teaching Programme - Herrington: 
(Appleton-Century) 

Textile Fabrics - Dyer (Houghton-Mifflin) 

Feeding the Family - Rose (Macmillan) 

Your Home and Family - Groves and Ott (Little, Brown and Co.) 
Healthful Living - Williams (Macmillan) 

Books for the Classroom Library 

Fundamentals of Home Economics - Jensen, Ziller and Jensen 
(Macmillan) 

A Girl* s Problem in home Economics - Trelling and Williams 
Elementary Rome Economics - Matthews, (Little, Brown and Co.) 
Junior Home Economics Units - Friend and Saultz (Appleton) 
Junior Home Economics - Dean and Middleton (Ryerson) 

The Girl Today, The Woman Tomorrow - Hunter (Allyn and Bacon) 
Everyday Manners (Macmillan) 

Good Neighbors - Hoviland (Lippincott) 

Home and Family - Jordon, Pitler, and Brown (Macmillan) 

Junior Home Problems - Kenyon and Hopkins (Benj. H. Sanborn) 
Foods and Home Making - Greer (Allyn and Bacon) 

Nutrition for Boys and Girls - Rose (Macmillan) 

The Canadian Cook Book - Pattinson (Ryerson) 























;) 








rj".' ) 





i 




-- 


t 


' 


■ 


ff 


0 0.' o [ : 










f' 




■ to 










224 


Meal Planning and Service - Bailey (Manual Arts Press) 

Breakfasts, Luncheons and Dinners - Chambers (Boston Cooking 
School Magazine Company ) 

Clothing for the High School Girl - (Boldt and Harkness) 

Practical Sewing - Everson (Ryerson) 

From Thimble to Gown - Van Gelder (Allyn and Bacon) 

Thh Mode in Home and Dress Sewing Book - Hyde (Century) 

Design - Buss and Helbourne (Little, Brown and Company) 

Free Pamphlets 

Foods Tested, Tested and Approved - Good Housekeeping Institute 

Nutrition and Health - The Borden Company 

Principles of Clothing Selection - Butterick 

Foot Health - Metropolitan Life Insurance 

Health Heroes Series - Metropolitan Life Insurance 

Questions and Answers in Canning - Kerr Canning Company 

On the Art of Being Charming, - Proctor and Gamble 

Sewing Book for Girls 8 Clubs - Dominion Department of Agriculture 

Soap in Everyday Life - Colgate, Palmolive Peet 

The Story of Crisco - Proctor and Gamble 

Better Buvmanship - Household Finance uorporation, Chicago 

p. 227 Grade VII 

The course has been planned for work in clothing and 
laundry during the first half-year, and in foods and household 
management during the second half. 






















■ : ; i ; .. , ~ 

:• ' DV D.D ■ '..'d: dLd ' ;v. did '. 

\ V i J, 0 i iJ.uD'.J i i,0 •) ,. : O '--' 

' ■ ‘ > ' ' ‘ . 

vv: ■■■;.■..■ ; > -M: v, ~ ;, d ; . J" ;.d\ ... 

• :• - \r-.r ) ' - i •' ;o_ ; o : :; j _ ' 7 . d .1 .. 

«, • ’ - '■ dfefV 

' ' ~ . ! .ii 


. 


Do* ■ n.:,t : -.>• 


> .;:[• l)i: > jM > 


/ d ‘ . 

d ' ■ ■ - ' ; •; . , . ; ; /. . . < Vd..'.' . :/V\„ 

•' . ■■ : : f'. ■ d " ) D d. « , .d'D/DD :. yd ... .' 1' V-D-' DD'di 

, - 

d .od v ;:!’d - < j. "y . j oo 

• , d.. ■ • *- ' ■ d...... 

• -. d d".'dd ddd 

• ■ . - ...... ■ ■ . j< - ; )j nO 



■ V do: > r to aid ot - .ddddldD. ■ 

, 

. - .V. . -. . 

•• : ; , • •>• d ~ . o;a ' ;;/.:' o; :d 

? •• o • d'O.'d dd , :-d r ■. - V.dL../'... r r ... C &J/A 9 £L'-. 


• - '■ ' aood aivi o^ddiod oiil’ 

t 

„■ • ;; ;> r v .d i ■ d■ ' •;dvi \ ■ - 


225 


Objectives 

To develop skill in the use of tools and the use of 
materials. 

To give acquaintance with the use of the sewing machine. 

To give instruction in choosing textiles wisely. 

To stimulate the interest of girls in making their own 
clothes, and caring for them properly. 

To develop sound food habits, and to provoke thought 
about the important relation of food to health. 

To teach fundamental cooking principles. 

To help girls understand what constitutes a sanitary, 
convenient kitchen, and how work should be organized to save 
time and strength. 

Sewing 

The sewing in Grade VII is based on the need of the girl 
for a cooking uniform in the latter part of her year*s work. 
The Sewing Machine 

Proper way to sit; threading; managing treadle to avoid 
breaking thread; starting position of needle and presser foot; 
removal of material; turning corners. Exercise of proper 
care in opening and closing the machine. Reason for leaving 
piece of material under presser foot. 

Textiles 

Study of cotton and linen to include — source, countries 
producing and characteristics, fhis work should consist of 














' 


3 roleve.b o‘i 


if 


' • ' ' ; ■ 1 


' f: • 0 0 9V i 

[o Hi ; V ; t 




o bn 


• V-• 










‘• : IL • :-).: o'... 


3 


•I » 




t r '■ 


uTI 


0 



. oo:. 


. 


) • 


: . ‘ . 




<r 

















D 


icr r i9 b nis X jb x i ' 1 


> 


bns . f ‘ :> rbcrcq 




226 


talks by the teacher, discussion by pupils, use of illustra¬ 
tions and brief simple notes* 

Names and prices of standard materials as unbleached 
cotton, print, broadcloth, gingham, Holland linen and damask. 
Suggested Projects 

Envelope bag for carrying apron and notebook. 

Material used - Holland linen, width about 35 inches. 

One width 3/4 yard long makes 2 bags. Finished bag is appro¬ 
ximately 10* f X 14 tf . 

Pot holder - knitted, crocheted or cloth. 

Apron - style to conform to present vogue. Simple 
butchers apron recommended when time is limited. 

Problems involved 

Computing amounts of material required; use of pattern 
in cutting (attention to grain of material in folding and 
straightening the ends; seams (French or felled); hem; bias 
facing or binding; as required by style of apron* pocket; 
button and buttonhole, or ties, as required by style of apron. 
Cap - a single bandeau. 

Simple hand towel - (If the teacher desires it as part of the 
equipment.) Articles made should necessitate the use of the 
following: Basting, hemming by hand and machine, overhanding; 
French and flat felled seams; cutting and joining bias; bias 
facing and binding; embroidery stitches suitable for bag; 
sewing on fasteners. 






/..i. 

• J. VC: 


0 ■ 






' ■ 




KVOiovn,!. 


fit); 


rr-\ :■ ■ > 


. X 


d j i 


u 




■) 


r 


c 


0 ' i 


i ■' 


■ 


- i:\ 


j >;.[ / I : loo 


; ,:.k 




c 


! 



> : .0 


c 





• 113 


.rr.‘: o r. r 


c 


o.lo : tn 


TO. 


f: 


0 £ 0 j 


c 



c 



c 


:) 





22 ? 


Laundry 

The work in laundering should be carried out in conjunc¬ 
tion with the sewing and foods. Short periods at frequent 
intervals should be arranged. Washing of white clothes, airing, 
folding; laundering of apron and cap. Washing of colored 
clothes; ironing of embroidery; practical application - 
laundering of uniform, bags. Removal of stains that might be 
found in a breakfast cloth and serviettes, apron. Laundering 
breakfast cloth and serviettes. 

Foods 

The work in this grade should involve the fundamentals 
of food preparation and nutrition leading up to planning, 
preparing and serving a breakfast. Stress daily essentials 
of an adequate balanced diet. Nutrition in relation to health 
may be correlated with health education. 

Beverages 

Theory - Sources of common beverages, e.g. tea, coffee, 
cocoa; stimulating effects; food value. 

Practice - Demonstration of the making of tea and coffee; 
class practice in leaking cocoa. 

Cereals 

Theory - Importance in daily diet; kinds; relative costs 
of bulk and package cereals. Importance of using home grown 
cereals. 

Practice - Preparation of at least one fine and one coarse 
cereal. Stress the use of who^e grain cereals. 










t 

c 




- 

;• ; r•) • ' f v . -) oo L'Jj.ro. "a nJ: :i*zaw ©fiT ; 

’ ■ . :> » a.. ■■■: . o f r 

. : . 

■' •; ' ; •' ■ • * • - ^ 

< : 

j .■' ' 

":.r •:j/^ -v. . to./,7:\:/\- ■: 7 .00 rx.f ooo7 Zo 

' /■ . : . ‘' 

' . > 

. ;i'.i ; '3 r > ’ ; /■ . ’ ' . . >:') 0 : ■ 

.. . . 

c • . t -- 

. < ■ ... 

■ ' ' ■ ..< - ; ;o ' ! 

• 

... .... 

' * ' • .7,7 " - • 3*-iOr ^ 

r r ■ , 

. . 0 

o . 

; u ' ; 

- 



228 


Fruits 

Theory - Common kinds; selection and cost; food value and 
place in diet. 

P ractice - Preparation of fresh fruits, fruit sauces, 
stewed fruits and dried fruits. 

Eggs - Soft and hard cooked, poached eggs, omelet. 

Breakfast breads 

Theory - Brief study of flours - bread, pastry, graham, 
whole wheat and cornmeal; leavening agents; oven temperatures 
and regulation* 

Practice - toast; French toast; muffins - plain, cornmeal, 
graham or whole wheat and bran. Various types of fruits may 
be introducedo Tea biscuits — plain, emergency, pin-wheel. 
Breakfast meats : bacon, sausage, 

Planning, preparing and serving types of family breakfast 
suited to different incomes, ages and occupations. 

Social and Family Relationships 

Everyday courtesies in the home and at school, in stores 
and public places, as hostess and as guest; greetings. 

Tests 

It is desirable to give short, practical tests on all 
phases of the year‘s work. For practical tests in foods, 
pupils should know methods, but should be given ingredients 


and amounts 
















229 


Three or more short written tests should be given during 
the term. 

Gleaning methods for the following should be incorporated 
in class lessons in a natural setting: Sinks, stove, refrige- 
rator, garbage container, cupboards, bread box, drawers and 
woodwork, floors and dusting; cleaning of metals - silver, 
aluminum, nickel, steel and brass; polishing of glass; care 
of dish towels. 


Grade VIII 

Objectives : 

To provide further knowledge of sewing and to encourage a 
liking for sewing. 

To develop further skill in the use of sewing machines. 

^o enable students to improve their personal appearance 
at a moderate cost. 

To import a practical knowledge of fabrics as an aid to 
the intelligent buying of clothing and clothing material. 

To give instruction in the care and repair of clothing 
with regard to health and economy. 

To foster an appreciation of the principles of line, 
design and color. 

To develop further skill in preparing food and in 
planning and serving meals. 





v ; •.jo-Wi •' ’ ; 3 9';o:; ‘io 9u‘'p r T 

. 

;•• ' - ■ : ■ c . C j ■■ n 0 ' r. 1 

• ■: - . :• t ': ' ‘ : ■ '• ' ! < ' ' 

: !o l .!: : ' - ! 

- ; .. . - . .> ? i r f - r/ ■ ' . . .. 

, 

. : V * 

. . • 

: 

■ . J; . , ■ . > .; • *j» V \ ' . if • : < T 

; ' - v / : . r : ■ v / n : ., 

>rict ov o *:■■ rxt •. ; i...r.11= ! o 

, 

5 son ' ' .. i *1 ' : ■■ • 

•' i.r.o ' :> " ■ ’ "7•< ‘ ;■ c ' ‘ ‘7. 

' 

? ‘ ■. 1.i ■ .j j r, : - , x.;v •" vc '£:•■'?-"io‘i o7 

. ■. ' • /: ■ 1 » 

'• [ V, 7. 7 77 n JiiJV'r7 <. ;. : 7v/..:. o7 

. 




To provide such further knowledge of the facts of nutriti 
as is necessary for health* 

To cultivate habits of cleanliness and sanitation in 
daily living. 

To inculcate sound principles of family budgeting* 

Social and Family Relationships 

Health and Appearance - Nutrition, sleep, exercise, air, 
posture, cleanliness of person and clothing, suitability of 
clothing; care of clothing; grooming ■— hair, skin, nails 
(practical work in shampooing, manicuring, preparation of hand 
lotions, etc*) 

Personality - Development of desirable traits; making 
and keeping friends; poise and ease; habitual good manners 
as opposed to "company" manners* 

Foods:- 

Preservation of Food 

Theory - Brief, concise study of bacteria, yeasts and 
moulds; causes of food spoilage; reasons for food preserva¬ 
tion; methods of food preservation* 

Practice - Canning of fruits by cold-pack and open- 
kettle method. 

Vegetables 

Theory - Place of vegetables in diet; formation of daily 
habit of eating at least one fresh green vegetable. 
















231 


Practice - booking of at least one vegetable of each 
class; potatoes cooked in several ways; making of a quick 
mild vegetable pickle; e.g. beet and cabbage, cucumber salad, 
pepper relish. 

Milk 

Theory - Composition; value in diet; importance of 
cleanliness in handling; sterilization; pasteurization; 
adulteration; particular importance in diet of children; 
milk products. 

Bread 

theory - Study of yeast as a leavening agent; experiments 
with yeast; effects of heat, cold and warmth upon it; study of 
glutex. 

Practice - Graham or white bread. Rolls may be made if 
time permits. 

Sugar 

Theory - Sources: use in body; abuse of body by use of 
excess sugar; stages in cooking sugar syrups. 

Practice - Four kinds of candy, illustrating four stages 
in cooking of sugar syrups; e.g. maple cream, divinity fudge, 
molasses taffy and peanut brittle. 

Desserts 

Custards, milk puddings, fruit desserts, cake and cookies. 
Luncheon and Supper dishes 


Soup, salads, cheese dishes, egg dishes 



















so .r: 


*v ,; o tW « pj:v ol£3’.‘l,3 

■ - 1 : v - ' ■' • { 

„ « ^ - 

■:• ' ■- 








; ' ' ' f 1 ' ' " ' ’ . 

• • ■ ■ : ; ' ' r/:;;; \ ' ' .f.: 

O ■ : J o' ■ '• ; l : ‘T 'O0 . 0 







3 3 


' 


:or 




'j 


■ : . >* 


• : ■' 



; 

■ , i : ■ ; '/ • ;;. ' ", . - 0 ‘ V '/T ■ 

. * . 

' ' • ' •' TV! ’ o 


p v - • - , ;-v; :>v, s 


c 





ll 






. 




' 





Meal Planning 

Theory - Balancing, cost, marketing, methods to save both 
time and money. 

Home exercises in menu making should be given. 

Stress should be put on menus for children of various 

ages. 

Proper form in writing menus. 

Practice - Practice should be given in serving low cost 
family meals as follows: 

Breakfast - consisting of fruit, cereal, bread stuff, 
protein dish and beverage (Review). 

Luncheons or Suppers - for families of various ages, in¬ 
comes and activities. 

A Tea for mothers and other guests might be given by 
students of this grade in cooperation with students of Grades 
VII and IX with a display of work or a fashion show. 

Sewing 

Use and Care of Sewing Machine 

Review of use as laid down in Grade VII course; winding 
bobbin, placing bobbin, placing plate, placing needle. 

Care after using; cleaning and oiling. 

Textiles 

Review and continue study of cotton and linen in connec¬ 
tion with material used in practical work. 











. ' ... 

* ' 

„ : ' : ' -’ ■ ’ ■> • 

• . '• •o n i tV : : no J ? 9d . r >:c ssonJo. - 

. 

s. i./ ji *y.cj Ov: '’L;oii;o ; jD. , jD/' f r' - 9:.‘.',o_ o 1 

: . ■ .. . . ' 

/ ' 1 • . • c t ■ «' yi:j " , .... /V. 

■■ , ' / • i 

t ' - . ' - . ; . ; note\ :• ; 

* ' . r : " o •. ;„>o 

/ o" :■ ; M 0-0 .!)• O'. 0 O ■ ; ‘I o'.. 00.0?. L . 

;.j o. ■ r.o .V oo/rio rind lo. oonoM/cta 

JO 

o;v.' ' o . xj:• - ' '> j r ■ I' ; : .-init 

i if. ■) • oC o ■: s- -.0 j o •7 

< < 1 ’ ’ :. t 

. • ■' ’ V :■ ; • i ; . •' • J‘ 






253 


Suggested Projects and Practical Work 

The practical work in sewing in Grade VIII is planned to 
arouse the student*s interest through her own personal clothing 
needs. A hand project is included to increase manipulative 
skill. 

Towel or runner, bag or cushion, made from linen, brick- 
a-back or colored linen to show hemstitches or scalloped hems, 
and decorative stitches such as darning, cross stitch and 
satin stitch. 

Slip, step-ins or equivalent. 

Collar and cuff set, or vestee if in vogue (To be 
selected with dress in view and cut from drafted or commercial 
pattern.) 

Summer or sports dress, or blouse. 

Selection of materials: kinds suitable; pattern of 
cloth •— plain or figured; computing of amount, consideration 
of trimming; becomingness of color; ease in laundering. 

Pattern: becoming lines for various types of figure; 
markings; testing; altering; economical placing and cutting. 

Construction: pinning; basting; fitting; appropriate 

seams; finishes; judging; comparing with ready-made as to 
design, material, construction, style, cost. 



< 

91 , 

• l [u 




■ ' , 

i II -. 1 t< • t ' •'‘to i : i ‘X 

r jG ZZZ.^nb Z 1 -j fob 

. • ' ■ - - ' : . . 

■ 

t v ■ < ‘7.-- 

/. . ■ : : • • ; ,•'D ; ' • o -o- '■ 

■ ■ : ; ;; c ■ .-f ' ,-j. I, : r r ' ‘.VI -3 ■ 1 b IC 

. : 

. : . . 5 

/ \ ( ' ■ ' ' ' • V'‘ 

. : i .r:./ 'Czz >.;l: ;r V;v • 'i: zz -z bzbozize 

, * : r :, 

• ' t *i 

• . * V : : ‘ - - ‘ :» 

■ . > r. ; ■ " ■ V . : $ ■■ o 

- b 

! 

? ? i ■ 

• . : ,':•■ ■ ■ 

-• ■ • < ■ '■ ■ < • 1 - 

t ■ t . • ,.< 






234 


Grade IX 

Clothing of the Intermediate School Girl 

Discussion Periods 

Factors making for good appearance; grooming; health habits 
in relation to appearance — bathing, care of the skin, care 
of the hair and scalp, care of the hands, posture, sleep and 
rest, food habits. 

Sewing Equipment 

Individual; class. 

Sewing Machines 

Types : parts with their uses; threading; regulation, 
tension and stitch; care — oiling, cleaning, setting needle. 
Conservation of Clothing 

Reasons for conservation; ways to conserve; renovation -- 
washing or cleaning; remodelling ripping, washing or dry 
cleaning, dyeing, pressing, repairing; laundering -- cotton 
and linen, silk, wook, rayon, removal of stains. 

Intelligent Shopping 

Definite plan; sales — advantages and disadvantages; 
shopping ethics. 

Costume Design 

Application of the principles of line proportion, color, 
etc., to all articles of clothing. This section should be 
taught by the use of a great deal of illustrative material; 
accessories in relation to dress. 














I 

-') > ' 1 •:) . i 11 . , ■ 0 11 : 8 ‘ .1" ? v 0 

• t : ' ~~ so o' ) oj a- u ■" i X 

5 

C 

0 r 0 ; 

: 

, ■ • ~ • * . ': ' ■ ' 

■ ' . . . V 7 : l: 

■ : .... ■: i r :r:ov; 

' ' ' « ' < ' < ' ' 

, ' < - < ■ " t ' ’ ' '' 


' 


o j: a 


.! 0 >. . ,:o 


.) .! ; 


■ ’ s 0 ■) ;• 



233 


Garment Construction 

Kinds of commercial patterns; study of symbols of at 
least three commercial patterns; suitability of pattern to 
material, occasion and season; choice of material — considera¬ 
tion of quality and cost, suitability, amount needed* 

Constructio n - study of pattern; testing and altering 
where necessary (alterations for length and width of all parts 
of garment to be thoroughly understood); placing pattern — 
economically with grain of material, pinning, marking, cutting. 
Construction — pinning, basting, fitting, stitching, finishing, 
seams, bias — cutting and joining, facings, binding, pockets, 
belts, hems, decorations. 

Textiles 

Silk, wook and rayon fibres; source; physical charac¬ 
teristics ~ compare fibres; review spinning and weaving — 
common weaves, plain or tabby basket, twill, satin, pile, 
leno or gauze; methods of dying and printing; finishing 
processes, e.g. bleaching, sizing, mercerizing, wearing 
qualities of cloth — influenced by: kind and quality of 
fibre, various types of spinning, weave, weight of material. 

Use of fabrics to illustrate these points. Study of number of 
staple cotton, linen and rayon materials suitable for the 
garments under construction. 





lyily ; :-y / ;yy 1 y.yyy 

* • ■ • J ■ • : •“!: . 1 

- o ^ . . 

» ,» ? 

■ i • ' ■■ - ... . . ; y. 

. 1 y I ; } « { ; . ■ ■'; 9 ' Xi 

■;' 0 ,;.y- ■ ■ '. 0 ■■ : ?r' y /1 ■-o .. •: : 1 l— 0.7 1 j ;• . a’) 

t ? t ." 1 ' ■ ‘ o ‘ i 'ii ' . ' ' o oo 

' y y ' , ' t ' . ' : ’ n 

t c 1 y•: i /. ' -. o ' ■ , • • - ; o 

' \ ' : 

c *. j . •. t - 

< t c c «: : ■' •' •• - • y-y 

* 1 ■ ' i . : j : ‘ - ■> • li r 

< « t - * . c' 

: 

, t , 1 : ’ ‘ 

. : 

. ? ■ ol oi" ; 

» 






236 


Suggested Practical Work 

Child 1 s dress or baby 1 s rompers - cotton or linen; preferably- 
remade from old garment or from a remnant, The object of this 
project is to test the skill of the incoming students, and to 
encourage thrift. 

Underwear - a choice from the following: step-ins, 
pyjamas or night gown, slip* 

Cotton is suggested for this project but the teacher may 
allow the use of a firm silk, e,g. spun silk or a heavy 
quality rayon crepeo 

Sports or afternoon dress of cotton, silk, linen or rayon 
(No girl who had not attained a standard set by the teacher 
shall be allowed to use rayon or silk for this project*) 

On the completion of each garment, comparisons should be 
made with ready-made garments as to cost, workmanship, styles. 

The work of the year shall include common seams —* plain, 
French, flat fell; common hems — plain, curved, faced, French 
sewing on lace by the French hem method; placket -- bound and 
faced or bound slit; setting in sleeves; button holes and 
sewing on fasteners; darning and patching. 

Social and Family Relationships 

Social customs and courtesies. 

Aims 

To show that good manners indicate a respect for oneself 
and for others, and that courtesy makes living more pleasant 
for oneself and for others. 




















ISfX O’ ■ ' 

. . £ ;T0 ’ ' : ■ 

' : ,■ ■ ' o ' 

_ 


. 


:;v v in 


ro;l;hW 




:L. 


i I- '‘V' ' I ’ sJ ! 




, • i\ b O'lO ■- ' 01 -' U ° 


■ 




on) 

o o:Ll nO 

9 )£ 




' 


■ 


I 90 SI £10 $axw9« 

[ ■ ) ' • boos 

'• 


!’ )0 


:: i o o i 




■ 


r.f; 



237 


To become familiar with the common social customso 
To meet unusual situations with ease. 

To appreciate the duties and privileges of a visitor 
and hostess. 

Content 

1. Origin of Social Customs :- 

Respect for others necessary for happy family and com¬ 
munity life; respect for elders; origin of hand shaking as 
a sign of friendship; origin of dancing as an expression of 
happiness. 

2. Everyday Social Customs 

Introductions and greetings. 

3 • Everyday Courtesy :- 

To Family - Respect for parents; interest in and tolerance 
of young brothers and sisters; courtesy to older people; 
sharing pleasure and duties. 

4• Table Etiquette :- 

Posture; handling of silver; eating habits; rising from 
the table. 

5* Conduct in Public Places :- 

On the street, in stores — politeness to sales people; 
in public gatherings; in restaurants; when travelling. 

6. Conduct and Manners at School :- 

In corridors and assembly hall (orderliness, quietness); 
toward fellow students; at games; at school parties. 
















238 


7o Conduct of Boys and Girls: - 

Frank discussion of good manners between boys and girls; 
proper conduct ~ in the classroom, on the street, at parties, 
keeping appointments. 

Home Management 

Food Budgeting and Marketing (to be incorporated with 
practical work.) 

Relationship between food value and cost - use of foods in 
season, advantages of knowing brand of canned goods; bargain 
buying; use of cheaper cuts of meat; necessity of knowing food 
value with regard to substitution; value of contribution from 
garden, (home canning and preserving) poultry, cow. 

Care of Food in the Home - Foods that need special attention — 
milk, meat, fresh vegetables, dried vegetables, canned fruits, 
and vegetables, fresh fruits; bread and cake; temporary care 
by means of refrigeration, cellar, window box; storing staples 
protection from dirt, protection from pests, protection from 
moisture. 

Organization of work and budgeting of time in relation 
to daily work; weekly work; labor saving devices; well planned 
kitchen. 

Care of kitchen and kitchen equipment to include the use 
of soaps, scourers, solvents on different metals and woods. 
Foods and Cookery 

Discussion Periods 


Preservation of Foods - Review bacteria, yeasts and moulds 











• • ; * 

i!.. • •. vd -V.;: ■177'.': 

t 

: J.O i visa 7 ; 

< t ' ■■ ■ v : t ■ ■ 

■ ; ' ' d> ) ; 7*. -•* 7 :• • ,• ... ' 

■ 

• - 

;• 7: d sc a 

. 

' ' ‘ 

d 7 '7.: 

■ ■ ' n 7 -j . 

<3 r x ’ d ' : . ‘ 

• ■ : ' ■ b ' ; 

■■ ' ; d ' 7777 : < : i 

• 7 7 : -J < '■ 

‘ . . ‘ 7 3 * 7 < ■ \ r ' 

■■ 7. : 7 ; 7 

..dviiddd’ .' J.TB od •: • 7 : .dr/'.; c r dev 

. . . ■ 

•. • t : ' " 


~ .. 

■ ( ■ / d : : d ■ • -■ v " ‘ ' < d -o : *dJd : : t 

■ • ' ■ ' ? " ■ ! \' 

• <■.: -I:: , : ' ... . • ' ■ '. ' > •: ‘ ■ Y ; 

■ - ‘ ? ‘ : j ■■■' 77 

;d d > ' 

' ' ‘ ' 


' r • ■' ' - ’ ■ 

? ; 

. 

■' r 9 

i ;, d.*; d ; ' no ■ 7 'd d > '.O 

. ■: 7 ' ' 1 7 i- ■ • ‘ 0 

. • ■ ' - >3 - 

‘ - ' • 


■ - .d'.vd'.... ; .. v. .-d:... 




22 ? 


discussing conditions favoring the preventing of growth 
(Some experimental work should be included). Preservation by 
various methods -- pickling, jellies, jams, and marmalade; 
consideration of value and economy of various methods of 
preserving; comparing the products preserved at school with 
commercial products as to cost, appearance, flavor, etc.; 
brands, grades, sizes and prices of canned goods. 

Health and Nutrition 

A general study of the characteristics of a healthy 
school girl. If time does not permit of weighing and measur¬ 
ing all students, types may be selected. Effect of health on 
general appearance; factors determining health and personal 
appearance — foods, rest, exercise, cleanliness, habits, 
disposition and clothing; daily habits which make for health; 
review of food principles and planning of meals in connection 
with the needs of a healthy body; food prejudices, essentials 
of the balanced meal. (The work of Grade IX should be a 
recapitulation and broadening of that done in Grades VII and 
VIII.) Great care should be taken to vary and enlarge upon 
the practical work done in the junior grades. 

Review - Meal planning, meal service, ^iscuss main types and 
try to illustrate usage in the serving of meals. 

Satisfactory M ea ls - Attractively served; variety of texture 


and flavor; sufficient fat to prolong digestion; sufficient 
bulk. 





■ ■ a no let I: i o 








, ' ; '- 

c - ^ 

' , ■' O LUOV J.' ■' ;.'0 ■ 4 .i' •’ •’ 

. '' : ' < 

: ... " ■ t O : O / "< . ■ ; ■' : ' 

c ■ « 

,L. J> 

* 


• : : • :o 


• ■ . • 




: 


c 


t ' : c * - 


IX ; ■ l ■ ; . I f I'Onl^q- ' ’ ■ 

• • ; ' • ' . ) . ■ • :• ' • 

. ‘ ■ 

v ' j cob i y)iw nollc-lne 


Ow i.■/ ;. L 3 <J otf>d 


) > • 




r 

r 


c 



0 !X 
9 /iI 0 & ) 

rol* 

103 " 

3 r?ii ■ ic( 

. 

100303 

I ' ’ . i L* 

‘i (to 

t 

TO Oil' 

•‘>1 ' 'll 

111 bnc 



240 


Calorific Value of Diet (brief treatment) - Comparative value 
of common foods, the effect of age, occupation, etc., upon 
the caloric requirements. Approximately the caloric value of 
some of the meals served in class and at home. 

Protein Requirement s - ^'unction of proteins, type of proteins, 
amount needed, economical sources. 

Minerals - Minerals required; best sources; functions; 
conservation; by proper methods of cooking. 

Vitamins - Kinds, sources, functions, importance of raw foods, 
results of lack of vitamins. 

Constipation - Common causes, corrective measures, importance 
of diet. 

Laboratory Work 

Preserving 

Pickling with different methods of procedure in prepara¬ 
tion. Note that where amount of vinegar and spices is not 
sufficient to insure preservation, the method of open-kettle 
canning is used. 

Jelly-making including pectin tests. Demonstrate use of 
commercial pectin. Jam or marmalade. 

Review luncheon work of Grade V-^II. Type of luncheon s: 
factors affecting types of luncheons; planning, preparation 
and serving of two and three-course luncheons. Include a 
special occasion luncheon. 















241 


Simple dinner - use luncheon work as a foundation; review 
and extend meat cookery, including methods of making gravy 0 

Practical work should include preparation of vegetables; 
casserole and oven dishes; use of left-overs; salads; cream 
soups; meat and fish; desserts - milk, egg, cereal, fruit and 
gelatin; luncheon breads -- muffins, nut and date loaf, tea 
biscuits, etc.; cakes, cookies, plain pastry. 





. ■ n r - ■:, 




\> ■: . n.'. ' .1 :>.? t ' "C ;oo J • • ' lu? : ,■ 

. ■ '• • y -■ • 0: j: r.:) ' / ' I >;: 1 b D 0 0 b‘ ■' - 


„• - ' ' ) '• vr '* ; v-■ v , hr. ■ >,o 


Li: ■ ;’~ 





, c t ■ - : ; 

c :r — • f r : < 0 ■rj; • !’ y. 

, < • , : « < : ‘ 







242 


The scheme of subjects and time allotment 

for the Intermediate School 
p.9 1936 


Grades VII and VIII 


Compulsory Subjects 


Time allotment 

in periods 
per week 


English 5 
Social Studies 5 
health and Physical Education 3-4 
Mathematics 5 
General Science 3 
Music 2 
Art (either in Grade VII or Grade VIII) 2 
Additional Requiremefats 

Library or Remedial English 3 
Supervised Study 5 


Periods per week required 31(32) or 33(34) 
Optional Subjects (One or two to be chosen) 


Dramatics 2-4 
Farm and Home Accounting 2-3 
Typewriting 2-3 
General Shop 2-4 
Home Economics 2-4 


Periods per week available for optional 
subjects 7(6) or 9(8)* 
























„ 


1T * y,' pnB 11V ■ 

S . . • ] ; 't 

' 








: V ■ : : J • d-ISJ'/; 







oons.r rC Ir^ieneO 

D J:?* r.r'4 


; ; o: -io , -iir.-.-t ■rcr'.tt-O jia 









; ; . . J. ,L ; ■ r >. ; : r_;- w: hartal 

. ’ u;l 

‘ ' ;v -^O: ..V tO:.: bflS KVl& r, i 

'Tor(d I/v'iane, 1 












' 


■,-■'11 '. . r " " : : ‘ ■ : - 


. 



243 


The school day comprises eight class periods, of which one must 
be a study period. 

One of the optional subjects listed for Grades VII and 
VIII may be offered in Grade VII, and two in Grade IX; but 
in either case, only with the approval of the inspector of 
schools, which will depend on the amount of time available 
for instruction, the equipment and the qualifications of the 
teacher or teachers. 


Grade IX 

Oompulsory Subjects 

English 

Social Studies 

health and Physical Education 
Mathematics 
General Science 
Additional Requirements 

Supervised Study 

Periods per week required 

Optional Subjects (three to be chosen.) 

Art 

Dramatics 

Music 

Elementary Bookkeeping and Junior Business 


Time allotment 

in periods 
per week 

5 

5 

3 

5 

5 

L 

2g 


2-4 

2-4 

2-4 


2-4 








• : ' ■ v. >0 i ) \ 

• ' Iv 1 

" ;l.n ' e > ' ■: 

■ : ' ' c 

5 " o‘j 

XI ObSTl) 

L; 3 ?.r • , \ 

' 

3 •i'D'-io.' J'cxdoS 

> h ■ < . 1 ':.' .. '.:r,z . 

:yX • : f - ’,n; : i 

'O.'.n . ■ 't■? it o0 

:ov ‘ ; ' . _ / ; 

-y 

: ;...r Y. \ 










r. o.i:o!Z mt: 

: t ' 

; tf f j:-): ' loo - - io„UL 








244 


Typewriting 2-4 
Oral French 2-4 
General Shop 2-4 
Home Economics 2-4 
Periods per week available for optional 

subjects 12 


The Grade IX programme consists of five compulsory subjects 
and three optional subjects* 

Twelve periods a week will be available to each Grade IX 
pupil for instruction in optional subjects* Not more than 
four periods a week or fewer than two are to be given to any 
one optional subject* General Shop or Home Economics will 
each require half a day per week* 

The Department of Education will, where conditions 
warrant, authorize urban school boards to offer shop courses 
in place of one or more Grade IX options. 

Because of the fact that many Grade IX pupils will elect 
optional subjects in which they have had no previous training 
in the intermediate school, teachers are asked when assigning 
grades to the work accomplished by these pupils in the op¬ 
tional subjects to attach as much importance to the amount of 
progress made by the pupil during the year as to the standard 
of accomplishment which he reaches at the end of the year* 




■ 

riono^X SsriO- 
r :o" 1 Ii 

, . ■ 0 

■■ ' 0 j f - 

. 1 . • : .. • ;■ o m O'.f/ ' X ' OiiT 

, • ■ : ' : ■■■■': X * • 

\ e t% ■ ' ' 

■ ‘ ' ■ ■ ■ • ■ r 







lOXstCp 




. 






: ■: < ' ' 

or ... Xo 






o ■ ■ ■■ :• •• 

- ■ X ; t X.r;Ti:v/ 




4 

' 

• t. ! .-JiTu ‘ O i'-OO. Xt ft c 






oXj • o' 9c.ur.co or 






■■ ' X 




• - 


•>J o. : oof “ic^rX: o X ! nl 




■ • ' ■ ' ' .' J : • . ' ‘ ■ 4 ' 1 ■ ■ 

JXX -i • ■ . . ;O r iq 

, ' 10006 *io 





245 


APPENDIX J 

Revised Programme for Grade XI ^ 

1933 

I'he following schedule of home economics subjects with 
the number of credits assigned to each was approved for the 
second year, Grade XI. 

Group C - Technical 

Not more than two subjects were to be elected. One first 
unit could be elected but not two. 

Arts and Grafts 1 or 2 - 8 credits 
Fabrics and Dress 1 or 2 - 8 credits 
Homemaking 1 or 2 - 8 credits 

For a shop course the eight periods a week were distributed 
in the following manner: 

Drawing a n d Design - 2 periods 

Theory - 2 periods 

Shop Practice - 4 periods 

For two shop courses fifteen periods a week were required, 
not sixteen. 

Group Q - General 

x Home Economics 2-4 credits 

& Special qualifications were required of the teacher. 

^ Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 
Edmonton, 1938. pp. 14-15♦ 










. ' ■ • r' t ■ ' V - 0 .):. 
- 


« 


v' io r i ’-yjo v- rr ' o f- 










r -V" ' ■ 


by-'"' ■' : •' :nv - 

: itz au'i-' 




• r ’o: '■ - 




)XIO CL 


• i 




t 


■ • , ■ f ' 


. ■ 






. jfc ) I 1 > ' 

_Lg :. 






c ' " ’ 






246 


APPENDIX K 

Programme of Studies 
For the High School 
Bulletin 1 

Edmonton: Printed by A, Shnitka, King J s Printer, 1940 

Home Economics 
pp. 40 - 48 

p.40 Introduction 

The programme in Home Economics is planned for those who 
will have had previous experience with this subject in the 
intermediate school* it is quite expected, however, that 
there will be cases where students will desire to select this 
option without having had this previous training. This should 
be possible, in as much as the individual student has been 
kept uppermost in mind in the drafting of this programme; and 
a student without a previous course may be given essential 
experiences, where necessary to enable her, without too 
serious loss of time, or other handicap, to take her place in 
the regular class. 

The girl in the home is the centralMea about which the 
details of the programme are gathered. This should be kept 
in mind at all times, and the actual conditions of life among 
girls in their homes should be always uppermost. The school 
is necessarily an artificial environment, and, “unless the 








1 ''' • ) : v i ; I 

L'.)o :i ’ •'i 10 * 

' ’ ['it 






: 


DC -f.')!-;. o- 


• • ,.r • 8 j; ao.i: 0:100 .. j : oiT-t 

■ ■'v .. br,d 9 j£xl II Jew 

« . ' ' ' 


/V rti C''00"',d’:J? r.'-t/’o TutilcT 9DJT9.VX 

. 




is o; • • ■ 

. ' : r < ' v" ■; ' : V' - . r s ' -o 

■ ■ • i. ■ ■ ' ‘ ' ' ■ ■ r ;: "r; 9 i' 

( ' ■■ . ; • ■ : <r;j ; , - : > oc>(u r 

. : ':••••'. • ‘ j '- r --•■0 uo.1'7 ■ ■ 9 r 1 r &'rz>hu$n s 

r - •' ' ■ . •: ‘ .!. ‘ ‘ :> o;- 




1 ' 


) • 


0 ‘X' 

o ^rLr\:n oiU 




b: 


■ : 1 • ' 1 / jo )CiJ n. 1 9n A 

. • • • ■ 1 ; ■ v ' v ‘ * j’ ' 








0 ! • • • 






fw - 


1 r.: 


. 1 . ' ' • : r ■ * r ' 






24? 


instruction can be made to carry over into practical situations 
it will be of little value. While its main value may be 
utilitarian, still it has its cultural and disciplinary values. 
Because of its inclusion on a programme of studies, many girls 
may be made more teachable in academic subjects. School is a 
more interesting place, and much of the subject matter of the 
class-room may be made more applicable to actual life situa¬ 
tions. i he subject has high correlating possibilities. 

Home Economics 1 

It will be noted that no minimum requirements are 
specified. This omission implies a responsibility upon the 
instructor to see that an adequate quantity of work is done 
during the year by each individual, that will justify the 
awarding of a credit. While this judgment will necessarily 
be made by the instructor, it is still subject to the checking 
of the inspector. To facilitate this checking process each 
student will keep a note-book in which will be recorded a 
dated account of each day's achievement. Projects need not 
necessarily be retained if their retention interferes with the 
maintenance of interest and effort; but, where practical, 
projects should be available for inspection. A detailed 
record of the work of each student will be reported on the 
proper forms for credit purposes at the end of the year. 



'• ■--r- oh ‘ ■; v ' ■ o' '■: lkJ nr.o aui:^Ofr.i03.01 

« 

< ' ' ' 


. 


l 

:.j l oiii: h.‘: ' v Li', ■ • oo<. 


, 


■ ; 


‘ 

c 

•: 11i' • lO 






• •• • ■ ■ ■■ ' " * 


1 • ;>p_ _ : 



C ' 91 

' 


' 

‘ o ' :v ;• nr • r. •. ' : oh 

‘ J 0 .• v 

'lohojrx SniS 


■ : ’ ' ? •" ' r r ' 


1 r U ' . 

* 

IS J;v r •"/;? - !• ’ ■ 

. 

. ■ . ■ . : ■ ( - ■ 


J • • '. * • L r j:,;jo ■ ■■ • 

t ■ J ‘ ■ 

: •OilJ- v'' Oh:X i oil 


' : : : o o> •’ 1 *■ / 

' 

. ■ 

■ 


-• ' 

Iliw i } 0*8 


. 

> ; 

' ' ' : ' £ ' 


, • - ,1 ' •: ■ r:i. •.: 




. ' • ■ h" :ri ‘ 

• ' ,:o n ; 'looo'X 




■ :• ‘ • )' l 


■ 


243 


The following analysis will indicate the approximate time 
that should be allotted to each phase of the subject: 


Unit 1 

14 weeks 

Foods 

Unit 2 

14 weeks 

Clothing 

Unit 3 

4 weeks 

Home Management 

Unit 4 

2 weeks 

Budgeting 

Unit 5 

2 weeks 

Personal Responsibility 


These units may be taken in any order, according to the 
discretion of the instructor* For units 4 and 5, the work and 
discussions will be better handled by extending them over the 
year* 

Unit 1 - Foods 

Objectives 

To teach selection, cost, marketing, and preparation of 
foods on the meal basis, from the standpoint of health, 
economics, and art* 

To develop an understanding of the scientific and economic 
principles underlying cooking and nutrition* 

To develop an appreciation for proper organization and 
planning of housework to save time and energy. 

To develop a true spirit of hospitality* 

Subject Matter 

Review simple dinners. Plan, prepare, and serve more 
formal dinners, to include: appetizers (fruit juices, fruit 
cup's, canapes); soups; meats, fowl, fish, carving; salads; 

















v ) i Li iJ: : . . .. • / ■ . . ixiw'ranois 


.: • . o : o . 

? •• : io ■ - )' 

* , . : ■ c ; 

o ■ x.‘: j. : r '■ ■: * •• ; qo.Cov >. > o* 

, ’ : ' ' 

; ■■.o.r ,v JO O- • , 

' '• ! .fo.; ' 0 • ■ ■' ; TO.’/ 



, ; 


: Vi ;JO 


0 


i?. 

1 ■ 


. • ‘ . 

. 




t 


. 


' . 

< - ■ 


: t B 








249 


bread; biscuits; cheese straws; vegetables, less commonly 
used types, and variety in cooking common types; desserts - 
pastry, frozen, gelatin, steamed; deep fat frying. 

Nutrition; digestion. 

booking for children, aged persons, invalids and convalescents. 

Unit 2 - Clothing; 

Appreciation of the value of careful grooming. 

Understanding of the principles of good design as applied 
to clothing. 

Ability to plan a suitable wardrobe. 

Ability to make simple clothing. 

Ability to choose suitable ready-to-wear clothing. 

Discussion and Demonstrations : 

Clothing survey; clothing budget -- relate to family 
income; care of clothing -- daily care, storing, cleaning, 
and pressing; principles of design and colour combinations. 
Projects : 

Select at least one from Group I and at least one from 
Group II. 

Group I - Silk undergarment; nightgown; kimona; lounging robe; 
tailored pyjamas; shorts and blouse; slacks and blouse. 

Group II - Wool skirt and silk blouse; silk afternoon dress; 
evening dress. 






> c ' < 

■ 1 ■ ? y,' -v -' ■ , " ' ' ■’ ' 


* t 

■ . y: : L ... ~ .... : . . . 

' 

' 

• -- ' ; ■' • 
’ . ' 

? t 

i 







230 


Problems involved: Selection of patterns, styles and materials; 
design; cdour; quality; and amount of material; some study 
of textile chosen for garment; trimming. 

Construction: - Seams, stitches, plackets, finishes, etc., 
as necessary. 

Cost: Compare with ready-to-wear. 

Accessories. 

Unit 3 - Household Management 

Problem : 

Some girls have their own bedrooms, and others share 
their rooms. What special care do bedrooms require? 

Objectives : 

To give a clearer understanding of the girl ! s obligation 
as a member of the family; to share in the work of the home. 

To develop appreciation of the comfort and pleasure to 
be derived from a clean, orderly house. 

Topics for Discussion : 

Purpose of personal room:- 

Bedroom, study; advantages in having own room privacy; re¬ 
sponsibility in sharing room; furnishings for bedroom, and 
their selection; arrangement of bedroom furniture; qualities 
and kinds of bedding; use of colour in the bedroom; possibi¬ 
lities of improving furnishings; care of bedroom and clothes 
closet -- daily,weekly, occasional. 














.0 0 - 




,V o 




' 



v 






o * 


D..: 




- 


0‘ 


• < , 

c 




. x; > 


.• i 


v \r • o'...' 








>J> 0V:' 






c 


c 


c 


y 




? 


" .V 

K } 


t$0 9. 



m 







251 


Project : 

Plan a girl's room, simple in design, inexpensive in 
outlay* ^ork from prices of furniture already on hand. 
Introduce one or more of the following improvements: Curtains, 
bedspread, rug, dressing table from boxes, wall book-shelf, 
painting or refinishing old furniture, a stud}?- unit. 

Unit 4 - Budgeting of Money and Time 

Problem : 

How to get more satisfaction from money spent, and how to 
ensure an efficient and satisfactory day* 

Objectives : 

To get the most for one's money; the most for one's 
time; and the most for one's strength* To help the girl gain, 
by means of the clothing budget, a better understanding of the 
advantages of definite planning. 
discussions and Activities : 

List activities which use time, money, or strength. 

^iscuss relative Importance to health, progress, improvement, 
etc. Recall previous experience, observation, or reading 
in relation to budgets. List items commonly included in 
family expenditures* Estimate individual share of the family 
budget. Make inventory of clothes on hand* Avocational 
expenditures. 

Projects : 

Keep personal accounts for year. iVi ake a time budget 


for a high school girl 













; . ; w ; 

» 

o -i ' r io -r ) 0‘j fc!' 

il " ' ' ' 


... 

’ y! 

■ ? . -I' /• . '' ' ■ ‘ '■ ■ ' 

, ■' : 

: 

. I . 1 '■ ' 

1 - c 

# 

' ' 


; 

■ :o • i. 


« ■ • ■ ! 

* 

. 

.. 

: ; 

, 




f c- r 



2^2 


Unit 5 - Personal Responsibility 

Problem : 

How can high school girls help to make their homes 
happier, and contribute to the betterment of society? 
Objectives : 

Appreciation of individual responsibility to the home, 
and to the community. 

Topics for Discussion : 

The 100 per cent girl -- Personal characteristics that 
help in life work; that help make happiness; that help make 
a happy home. Ways that these characteristics are developed 
and strengthened. 

Textbook 

Jensen, Jensen and Ziller - Fundamentals of Home Economics . 
(Macmillan) 

Reference Books 

Jensen, Jensen and Ziller, Fundamentals of Home Economics 
(Macmillan) 

Lannan, McKay and Zuill, The Family 1 s Food (Lippincott) 

Bailey, Foods - Preparation and Serving (Webb Publishing Uo.) 

Trilling, Williams and Reeves, A Girlte Problems in Home 
Economics . (Lippincott) 

Bailey, Pie a 1 PI ann in g (Manua 1 Arts Press) 

Chambers, Breakfasts, Luncheons. Pinners , (Boston C 00 kj_ n g 
School' Magazine Company! 

Hunter, The Girl Today - The 'Woman Tomorrow (Allyn and Bacon) 


























Groves and Ott, Your Home and 'Family, (Little, Brown and Co,) 
Jordon, Zeller and Brown, Home and Family , (Macmillan) 

Justin and Rust, Home Living , (Lippincott) 

Shultz , Making Homes , (Appleton) 

Turling and Nicholas, The Girl and Her Home (Houghton-Mifflin) 

Starrett: The Charm of Fine Manners (Lippincott) 

Kaufman, Teaching Problems in Home Economics (Lippincott) 

Van Gelder, From Thimble to Gown , (Allyn and Bacon) 

Pickens, The Secrets of Distinctive Dress , (International 
Educational Publishing CompanyTT 

Rathbone and Tarpley, Fabrics and Dress, (Houghton-Mifflin) 

Deany, Fabrics and How to Know Them , (Lippincott) 

Everson, Practical Sewing , (Ryerson) 

Dyer, Textile Fabrics , (Houghton-Mifflin) 

Bush and Welbourne, Design, (Little, Brown and Company) 

Gillum, Color and Design 

Butterick, Principles of Clothing Selection , (Macmillan) 
Friend, Earning and Spending the Family Income , (Appleton) 
Friend and Schultz, Junior Home Economics Units , (Appleton) 

Home Economics 2 

During the previous four-year period various interests 
involved in home making have been developed. Experiences in 
food preparation have been had, and certain fundamentals in 
the economics of food have been learned. 























. 






.... ? 

bn*-: " 


cr j.i 


: 

.; ? .{n. ' ■ 

< - 


' 


on: 


■ 


j 






[ i . ■ 


. t 






; i . . / ■ n-'tOX'X 


: : ) ) 




ov :> - ■ 


. 

o r r . ' n: j >:jvS. ov.*; 


) « O-) n ’Ji).: on JOD D'lv 




2M 


By the time Grade XI is reached the student should have 
gained a fair proficiency with her needle in the making of 
her own clothing and keeping it attractive* She will have 
made several articles which make her room or her home more 
attractive. Her taste in the selection of a home, and in 
building it into an attractive place will have been developed. 
The use of certain household equipment, as labour saving 
devices, has been studied. The place of such equipment in a 
home with financial limitations will have been discussed. 

Social and family relations will have been discussed with the 
view to making her life happier and her relationships more 
acceptable. 

For the fifth year this outline of studies, plans to bring 
to an issue the experience of the girl secured either in the 
school, or in the home with the definite application of the 
skills and knowledge acquired to the making of home from small 
beginnings as though it were the personal problem of each 
girl. Whether she will be privileged to make a home for 
herself or not, she will have to assume responsibility to a 
degree for the furnishing and housekeeping of her own living 
quarters. 

There is no definite requirement set out in this programme. 
The teacher, who will act as a director rather than a 
lecturer or a group instructor, will be the judge as to what 
a girl shall do and the part she will take in the little 
society of the class or the larger life of the school. 



- cl'i eoo£. 


. 

r ■: "ji; n ;' a-..;; j no \ ji-tf o/ rar;± nc od- 

. • ’ ‘ < ' • 

• : r. ■ i : : 0 O ; . -full ' ’ ■ f nli II'U’ 

. : •« •, : ■ • - u .. .axnni^9d 

* ■' 

■: 

■ 

. ' 

, . : ; ■ "lo'i-;o o f :l 

- 1 L. 1'i.x.p 




Ideally there will be a few engaged in the kitchen part of 
the school home, another group in the living room section 
engaged in craft work, home decoration projects, clothing, 
the whole spirit being that of a home whose standards are 
just a little higher than the general average of the homes in 
the community. Projects, that may be motivated with a direct 
use possibility, should be encouraged. Projects that may be 
fitted into the life of the girl in her home should be sought, 
even if these involve team work; such as the making of bed¬ 
spreads, bolsters, pillow slips, runners, curtains, ornaments, 
boudoir chests, overhauled furniture, rugs and dressing 
table gadgets. M any of these things may be made very in¬ 
expensively but very prettily. i here is no reason why the 
girls should not have a single set of tools in the shop with 
which to reconstruct furniture or make essential frames, 
shelves or equipment. 

A girl may choose to work on the A,B,C, or D section 
of the course, each of which will have equal credit. The 
measure of the amount of work done will be the ability of the 
girl working at a reasonable rate throughout the term. 

A daily log of the achievement of each girl shall be 
kept. Each girl will be expected to work to her capacity and 
a high standard of attainment should be sought and maintained. 
Art principles should be carefully observed and applied in 
the projects worked out. This is necessary if the results 
of the class are to bring the greatest satisfaction. 







Originality in design should be encouraged and local motifs 
sought about which to work artistic schemes* Colour harmonies 
are particularly important. 

Projects should not necessarily be retained in the 
school although the maintenance of the school room as an 
attractive place should have the constructive interest of each 
girl. She should be required to take some major part in a 
community project and not be permitted to use her time exclu¬ 
sively in producing something for herself. It will be a 
desirable objective to dispose of the made projects at the 
close of the year that the next incoming class may have a 
clear course in working out their individuality. 

The following suggestions are intended to give a lead as 
to what might be worked out during the year. 

p.45 Section A 

The making of a home will be the main motive during the 

year. 

The home site -- location; building or renting a house; 
instalment buying for building or furnishing; insurance, 
services, grounds, garden economics. 

Home furnishings - Furniture for various rooms; economy; 
equipment, such as range and heating system, cooking equipment; 
food storage and preparation and serving; furnishings - floors, 
walls, windows, colour schemes, decorations, arrangement; 
library, books, periodicals, their use and care: housekeeping 




6 .. • 

. ; ; .) : . f ' • •' 

■ • - 

. 

r • ;•r - j y r :.jr o .-.m : jo: r. f/Jl'T -•>; 3 • ■ o o 3 r t p'i 1 


■ o ; -. i i o Y' .' .;: . Y : ... ‘ J.oorios 

' . £ •; r o ■ : 3 9 oI n v h j o z tc j j a 

* • 

jcf jj l . ■ “I fitffltOD 

1 

V 1.: s j 9T~ OOOzri aio O 000 ; 90 


r • : ! l,yi j.Oo i33 «iO" 

: ns. Y -‘ ■• t esioo 9>Y j o" o: 


' jo . 01 "j:v::.Lt,O.D 

• y V • ; .i • Y fry. 100 J: ■" - -j j ' Y • 9 ©iivl lo oso'Xo 

• • ... r : ' 

i) ■ j fs ^ n xwol 1 - - • 

• r f ■ > ■ • : ... '• ' ..... i : / Y 


■ 




•0 '. O " • 


t 


... > 


, .( c >• ■ • 

•' : » / ' Y. -V •: '. ■ ■ ' v. - k; . Y. . -1 .. ,.Y [\Vi 

t ' . ■ i ‘ : ;.i 9• . : t . •' 19 i ' >p 

• ■ ■ • VV 

; t , '. ' c ' t 

: -■ t .. c 1 « • ' 




2^7 


routine; housekeeping aids, help. 

To as great an extent as possible the classroom should 
be made a home in which to work.out through the project meth¬ 
od class discussion. This offers great leeway for ingenuity. 

Laundry and cleaning, dyeing, decorating fabrics. 

Home craft -- cross-stitch, petit point, weaving, cane 

and raffia, embroidery, rug making, quilting, batik, tie and 
dye, stick printing, stenciling; electricity -- installing 
fuses; inserting washers in taps. The use of common tools, 
screw driver, plane, hammer, chisel, wrench. Actually make 
some project. Home ornaments, copper, leather, plastic, resins. 

Food menus and service - Breakfasts, lunches, dinner, 
tea parties, special occasions, work or school lunches, 
picnics, and outing menus. 

Home Relationships - Conventions, understanding, com¬ 
promises, entertainment, social responsibilities, insurance - 
fire, life, accident and health, burglary. Home nursing and 
the care of invalids and children, diets and menus. 

Clothing - garments, according to ability of girl; 
care of clothing, mending, remodelling, economics. 

How to make a bed; care of bathroom and basins. 

It will be desirable to have the class visited by men 
and women representing certain interests of value to girls. 

It would be well to inspect some well-set-up homes in the 
community as an object lesson. The whole spirit of the 
course should be that helpful to a young woman faced with 
the problem of setting up a home. 











2^8 


Section B - Sewing 

The desired outcome of this course is to aid a girl in 
making her own clothing economically, to buy suitable clothing 
economically, and to alter garments to get a good fit, and an 
attractive costume. 

Patterns - Commercial, altering, variety, skirt drafts, 
collar drafts, changing plain sleeve draft to fancy sleeve. 

Textiles - Wool and silk, the source, manufacture (not 
in detail), finish, care of silk and wool, laundering, dry 
cleaning, purchasing and testing emphasized, comparative costs. 

Colour and Design - Line and design as applied to girl’s 
own type, complete unit, shoes and hat; colour harmony in 
wardrobe and dress, related to girl personally, becoming hats, 
etc. 

Construction - Novelty seams added to first year's 
knowledge, faced heme, stitches — cross, faggot, hemming, 
smocking, bound buttonhole in wool, skirt placket, faced 
placket in silk, commercial finishes, pinking and shirring, 
simple ideas in tailoring. 

Suggested Projects - To meet girl's own need in silk or 
wool. Blouse, skirt, dress, tailored jacket, remodelled hat. 

References - Selected readings from books listed in 
Fabric and Dress Design Courses (Technical Subjects.) 

Lace - Buying, judging, common laces. 














t 




. * 1 . ; 0 


( 


0 


-f 


'I.')". fj 


i’LS.oo 


: o : 




c 


c 






i ') 


r . f 


c 


0 








t 




lO o 


t 





t 


3X1 j 


f/. o*. 




c 


I 




V" 


i) 


0 — 









n f : 








c 


bslw >i 


* 




,;rv> T o 


r . 


>9 I 0 








Section C - Foods and Cookery 


The object in this course is to develop skill in the 
preparation of foods in relation to the home and special 
hospitality occasions both within and without the home. An 
appreciation for proper organization and planning to save 
time and energy should result from this study. A student 
working with this option should develop skill and knowledge as 
to etiquette and proper serving methods. 

The student may not cover all the details suggested here 
but will select or be assigned to those that require enough 
time to secure four credits, Tt is strongly urged that this 
programme be worked out by having the girls working in groups, 
different projects being covered by different groups working 
at the same time. Selection will be made among the following 
laboratory suggestions. 

iAenus for breakfast, lunch, dinner -— prepared and served 
afternoon tea, evening party supper, Sunday evening supper, 
serve —• yourself meal, after sport party supper, breakfast 
party, supper, picnic, school or work lunch. 

Practical work in table service and setting, use of left¬ 
overs, buying, keeping account of time and money used in 
securing, caring for and the preparing and serving food. 

Preservation of food , salting, drying, refrigeration, 
canning, jellies, pickling. 

Special diets - anti-constipation; reducing and fattening 


invalid and children 














) ■ 


■ t > t . 






■ 






. ujooo--.jo o ... ‘-’vj 


. 






: " 

: d n:: d o ", • o 


’■ B.l X 

'■•V) 

OOOIOTODO 


■ ■ ‘)-i : ' no.'. 


r loo.;! 3 'is ri; •• 

., , ,■ • j 

JL$ •(> si o' dti 

'M 

OCfO'XC.f. OilC Odd: 

" J v ) 



d ’0 ! doOB 


•10 o r .c r .roo• 


fo BO;' :;d 


-.do: 


. • 

* 

3 1 10 J.O B 0 ■« ■ :,.vj 3 V 

c ' 

.•Id.; or' *; / . 


' ,, 


. ‘TO 


■ . ‘ i'' 






VT'.'.3 

. r : • « 


; . to : .<.iyo.ro OBU 


;> * >o*. 






t 


' 1 c ’' ?.■ r X : 

< t . V-. . ' . . 

- c c 

- j. ■ ■ • ; ' 

* 






260 


Section D - C raft and hand Needle Work 

The following are suggestions as to craft problems that 
may be attempted* It is not intended that every student 
will work at all these problems. It is expected that different 
students will be working at different problems at the same time. 

1. Girls 1 Room 

Remodelled furniture, redecorated furniture; curtains, 
bedspreads and quilting, cushions, dressing tables and 
decorations, novelty lamps, framed pictures, chests, pillow 
cases, dresser covers, weaving, rugs. 

2 • Sewing Room 

Lampshades, book ends, copper ornaments, soapstone or 
alabaster ornaments polished; curtains, rugs, chesterfield 
covers, runners, upholstery. 

3• Bed Sitting Room 

Slip covers, book cases, chests, spinning, batik, petit 
point, embroidery, cross-stitch, applique, weaving, felt 
applique, leather tooling, raffia and reed basketry, knitting. 

The girls in selecting this option should have at their 
disposal a simple kit of wood working tools and a painting 
outfit. 










261 


APPENDIX L 

p. 47 Needlework 

Under certain conditions it may not be possible to offer 
the full Home Economics course, particularly the foods section; 
but it may be feasible to do some work in sewing with the 
girls. These conditions are more likely to occur in rural 
or smaller urban schools, where the class may be small and 
the facilities limited. The organization of a hand needlework 
class is simple; and the necessary equipment is not elaborate, 
being little more than a thimble, a needle, and some thread. 

The student’s desk may be the work table and the materials 
with which to work may be brought from home. Boys may be 
interested in certain types of needlework. 

While no minimum requirements are set out in the course, 
the teacher will be held responsible for seeing that a reason¬ 
able amount of sewing is accomplished. Each student will be 
required to work to her capacity, and her fina3. grading will 
be determined in terms of what is actually achieved in relation 
to her ability. 

The teacher will be the judge as to the assignments any 
student may be given. 

A carefully kept note-book is essential for each pupil, 
but this should not be stressed at the expense of actual 
achievement. Samples of work in textiles, colour schemes, 







' 



: . 

. 

y v • y •; ■ ' 

Q '• •••* )\ ' ;;) jr '■ ' ,)J O J.V V ■' -jA 

■ -1 --AA'AAS. : j • ■■/. ■. u'L:. • ; ■ >0 CW)‘.1T 

. • y - • - y " ' ' ' "f" y : . : Xy: : ) 

. 

' « ■ 

? r r c . : 01 .... • ’ M ■ 

: : ' f : ' ■ . ■ 

, 

e - ' : 

' .;';f ) !' i . i:<'CfJfp&*X '-'LUnf. ... T OH oXXXlv'# 

• y t&i- 9 

: ' > ; '• . ..': ■' • ' • 

* 

, , L ; .r.y. • . • 

. 

' . y »- - y> • y y r \.r.:;r :■>•!)? o A 

> 


.' ■' ,v.: 

f c 

■ 




- 


. 




262 


pictures and clippings are properly included in the note-book, 
but even this may be overdone. This book should be available 
to the inspector, who will give it careful consideration in 
evaluating the status of the pupil and the type of work being 
done in the class. 

A daily diary, record or log shall be kept in a separate 
section of the note-book. 

Provision should be made for a reference library which 
should be readily accessible to the pupils. Assignments should 
be made frequently which call for the use of the reference 
library. 

The nature of the fabrics used will be studied with re¬ 
spect to type of fibre — cotton, linen, silk or rayon; 
weave, qualities, and servicability for the purposes designed. 
This work should be done incidentally when these fabrics are 
being used. 

A. Construct, and decorate some household article, such as 
towel, pillow slip, sewing bag, shopping bag, laundry 
bag, knitting bag, chesterfield set, using various sewing 
stitches; such as basting, hemming, overhanding, over¬ 
casting, running, badkstitching, where strength is 
required; and decorative stitches, such as outline stitch, 
chain stitch, blanket stitch, hemstitch, cross-stitch, 
button-hole stitch, or for scallops, satin stitch. 









... r.iIrio vo 9 ci ' • ii): n\t ve» cf/jcl 

. ■ 

• 9 o: • ■ t ■~• 

j'- .-y-- a--; ' i;(ili:s.vo*t c i 




* ' 

; . • 5 , a. - o : ■/ : . V • r ' . 99 i 

. 


' >r . ... ! 9 9 9' 9/' ; r. 99 9" 99 Of;T 

- ' • '• ' -- ' ' (.>■' :)9 .'9 

? < " 

t ■ ■ ‘ <99 

• ■ ■; ; r ; ■ 99 .''. 9'i'9jf0.r. r-.n • b_Lr:,iV, sJLif’i ... 

* 

; < , 

c c t ’ ? ■ ' 

< , • < 

, , ' 9 ' ■■'"..9 

. 0 , : 5 

' 

C ' « ' t 9 ■ 

. ' “io t -9 - i 



263 


B„ Construct and decorate with the use of a pattern some 

simple garment, such as apron, slip, pyjama set. Embroider 
or applique a monogram or a simple pattern, using colour. 
With the use of a pattern construct a simple blouse or 
house dress. 

These garment problems will involve simple construction 
processes such as the making of collars, cuffs, plackets, 
button-holes; and attaching fasteners, such as buttons, 
hooks and eyes and dome fasteners. 

C. Needlecraft -- knitting, quiMng, cutwork, drawn work, 
crocheting, needlepoint, cross-stitch, weaving (weave-it 
"loom"), as applied to some useful article. 

Requirement 

At least two articles must be completed, one from n B Tt and 
one from n A rt or * ! C Tf . This requirement is the minimum. The 
capable student may achieve more -- one article from each group 
or even more. 

Care and repair of textile articles. Mending, patching 
and darning; laundering; removal of spots and stains. 

Reference Books 

lo Practical Sewing . Everson. Ryerson Press. 

2. From Thimble to Gown . Von Gilder, Allyn and Bacon. 

3. Clothing for the High School ^irl , Boldt and Harkness, 

Lippincott. 











!) . .''O' 

. ■' 






■ ' ;< '• r \\J.C! Oo;-" r :l r):;,h j 0 77o ?.j 

' < •' r:: ■ : r ' - ■ • < :• : - '■ 

7 ;• ■;•>'.‘r:.7 r y i V O-Joj.L -;/> 

; ■; O v /•- \t 0 . ’ r 7 _7' 7 ■ ') 7 y.O'J ■ J /' 0 

4 

..f.. v : ovl :-Vs ;;y o ylyyoyrr ..Sor ■ ‘. 1 " : 3700. 7 ^ 



t < < ' ’ '• 

c . ' ‘ • l . 

. 

t t • , ' c f.i ■" ■■ : ' • ' > ' 

- • •, t ■ -- ' ‘ < > ' < •-> 
. ’ . . ' , - • . , 


"f3‘* 

■ 'IS ; , h- I- ■ : VI * ,7.7-0 '> ■ r ) .7 jy76..C O'- 

. ' . 

O '. - . ■ .7 70 -- y ) V ' . 3 - ; : '' ' 70 5 , : Id .}<■( • 

. ;■ ) , - r • ■ r • 

< o: 

• c i 

. ' : ):'7 T o‘ , ;o r ,o..i 

. , ? 0 

• t ' < 

c * • 

. 









264 


4. Textiles , Nystrom, D. Appleton and Co. 

5. The Mode in Dress and Home , Donovan, Allyn and Bacon. 

6. Fabrics and Dress . Rathbone and Tarpley, Houghton Mifflin. 

7. Art in Everyday Life . Gddstein, Macmillan. 

Bo Textile Fabrics , Elisabeth Dyer, Houghton Mifflin. 

9. Samplers and Stitches , Handbook of Embroidery, Christie, 
Botsford. 

10. Making Smart Clothes , Modern Methods in Cutting, Fitting 
and Finishing, Butterick. 

11* Simplicity Sewing Book and Charts , 419 - 4th Avenue, W e 
New York. 

12. McCalls 1 Patterns , Manual of Instruction, Toronto. 

13. Butterick Patterns , Manual of Instruction, Toronto. 

14. White Sewing Machine Course in Dressmaking, White Sewing 
Machine Co., Cleveland, Ohio. 

Singer Sewing Machine Manual, Singer Sewing Machine Company. 


15. 














k 


* < ' ^ . 

. ' • • ■ 

c < . . . . ' • 

. . 

. • - ' . 

, ■ 

c ' : * • 

. 

. , , * 1 . 

. t : . 

- t 

; ' 


c * 












265 


APPENDIX M 

Programme of Studies for the Intermediate School 
Grades VII, VIII and IX. 
p.230 1941 

Home Economics 

Home-life education in the school should have its centre 
in the course in Home Economics, which, properly speaking, is 
a cooperative enterprise, open both to boys and to girls. In 
this Home Centre , pupils work as members of a family group; 
and their learning is functional because it is accomplished in 
a realistic environment. The Home-Centre plan provides not 
only a setting similar to the home, but also such situations as 
commonly arise in the home. It offers an opportunity not 
merely for unrelated experiences in cooking, sewing, child care, 
housekeeping and dietetics, but also for the blending and 
integration of these experiences in a home programme, that aims 
at the common welfare of the family and of the community. 

If this plan is to function successfully throughout the 
intermediate-school years,, every pupil, on entering the home 
centre must be sensible of his responsibility for the planning 
of a task and the completion thereof to the satisfaction, not 
only to herself, but of the whole group . The performance, in 
other workds, is evaluated by group approval. The teacher 












’ 




O 


• ‘ (CD •' 





ft ■ ■ 

? t 







0 







. •' * • 








266 


is guide and consultant, and will therefore plan with the 
pupils in such a way as to realize the fundamental objectives 
of the programme. 

Situations will be presented that call for skill in manipu¬ 
lation and management, and for willingness to accept respon¬ 
sibility* Teacher and pupils mil work together in the detailed 
planning and organization of classroom activities and hoj$e 
projects, and in the solving of practical problems. The pro ¬ 
gramme does not consist of serial n lessons n or "talks" on 
prescribed "topics "* 

Integration 

This programme provides for a considerable amount of in¬ 
tegration with Health and Physical Education, General Science, 
General Shop, Social Studies and Community Economics* Vv hen a 
given activity or project is under way, there should be little 
concern whether it is described, for example, as Home Economics, 
Health, Social Studies or General Shop* The important things 
about it are the extent to which it is meaningful to the pupils 
and accepted as worth while by them, and the opportunity that 
it offers for the cooperative solution of problems* 

Three Years 1 Work Combined 

This programme suggests material and activities for three 
years' work. There is no intention to divide this work vertically 
for Grade VII, Grade VIII and Grade IX* Under proper organiza¬ 
tion it is both possible and desirable to combine in one class 







. - . • ' ' r/O'I ■ 1 u 

c ' • 1 •: .. : t > '. I : ; '-- 

■ - <' . ' ' ' 1 


lO 




CTO. 




:)fi o 








. 




£rr: J\’: j'tjouV. 

: : . 7 ■ ;• . i 1 . V Jc r o c \ him 

■ 

I) . ' . ■ . i ' or: 7 


) >. : £ ) v.' ... O ' ' . ’ 


. 

:iv * 


t.. 




.7:0 a : Icfoorov-- 77 • ' 








267 


pupils who are beginning and thosewho have already had one year's 
or two years' experience. 

There is naturally some progression in difficulty, as is 
shown in the following schedule: 

First and Second Years : 

Sharing in Family Life: 

1. Cooperation simple home duties. 

2. Planning simple room arrangements. 

3o Participating in recreational activities of the home. 

4. Making and caring for personal belongings. 

Third Year : 

Personal and Social Adjustment: 

1. Spending money wisely. 

2. Assisting and caring for younger children. 

3. Solving personal problems. 

4. Cooperating in the solving of family problems. 

5. Cooperating in all home activities. 

6. Participating in community improvements; e.g., 
equipment and furnishings for school, plavgrounds, 
library. 

7. Keeping health records, such as those showing growth; 
correction of health defects by appropriate diet. 

The Programme 

General Objectives 


The general objective of this programme for Home Economics 







~ I 





. 


..f; l v ' J '.CO 



XI.:: 


) 


. ';-j. n., 






■ ; ■ ’ ■ ! ; 


■ . in 

i;' .V 

[ ••' ‘ ' i ' ( 






■ £ 


V 


- L 



















268 


is that of all education; namely, to help the pupils develop 
to their full capacity in all phases of life* 

Special Objective * 

More specifically, the programme aims to raise the general 
standard of home life: in other words, to help the pupils to 
do better those things which they will later be called on to 
do anyway* The programme may be described in terms of the 
following outstanding features, four in number; 

I« Basic Skills in Demonstration and. Practice 

Because the majority of intermediate-school girls will 
eventually undertake the duties of home-making, it is obviously 
of advantage for them to learn to perform efficiently and 
expeditiously those simple household tasks which they will 
later be called on to perform anyway. These simple tasks in¬ 
volve certain basic skills , which must be mastered for efficiency 
in order that time may be saved from them for other, and more 
important, activities af the home. 

These basic skills are set out in the following list. The 
programme must provide ample opportunity for demonstration and 
practice in these skills, but not by means of a series of 
unmotivated n lessons TT * This programme requires that the learning 
of these skills be motivated in three ways: (i} by home projects, 
(ii) by home-centre problems, and (iii) by culminating activi¬ 
ties. ^he basic skills are not, in themselves, the objective 
of the programme, but they are necessary to the realization 
of that objective; and under proper motivation, they make the 
realization possible. 














o r. o ?. 


j '.rrJ. 


•... 0 ^ 






J" O' 






s r .:o. ^ 




■ 




,1! J 


). ■ ' - o - * . - ■ ; ' ’ 




■ X l) 111 O ‘O ' : ■■ 1 

- - Cf £ [ ■; ;< ;-) r r 3“-;r; f ’ Ct : .1. O' '1.5 J J O fi 




HOI 


• 1 o 9 .l-v 

li- :,' o'.: ms r o'rooov j 

r v; • ! j io’. 1 £ la 

s ..... 3.’0:.;J Y-l.8/..fO .\o .CjbSCJXD 

• ; ;.; Y : ' ! 9 *j ' YC J ’.•". 

or sad j‘ioo evlov. 


ro -:o 


o; i . 




' 


(• ' • < 

' • ■ ox ■ 

- -J-'; - , 'i O..C ,.!<* 9;1 lYCV'lYf J'OXf X 0. I'. Y r . I*'"'9 Y" 

.' r ' ^ ' • " ' : r JO ’' C ■ 

. 

1 :t ■ : 4 ■ ■ ’’ : - V.o 


\ 


■ 






. 








> • ( 




. . 




List of Basic Skills: 


Housekeeping 

dishwashing 
Care of garbage 
Dusting 

Care of simple equipment 
Bedmaking 

Ironing (flat pieces) 
Table-setting -- simple service 
Cooking 

Stirring 
Beating 
Folding 
Measuring 
Paring, etc. 

Sewing 

Use of scissors -- cutting 
Use of needle 
Use of Thimble 
Pinning 

Measuring with tape and ruler 
Machine sewing 
Plain-sewing stitches 
Laundering 
Washing 
& insing 








''' f 


, ‘ • ;.!>■ uya ‘..'a 9''if - 

■ be 

:.)o . ' J' ; • ■■’ 

i: f 

'■•n iTi'.tJ - 

. 

• ■ .ra; ; . 

. : < 

' 

■ j '■ V re — ‘ o 9Co 

; •• > ■ ’ O U?, 1 

oLC.rJar.: 10 ©sU 

t . 

■i .-J! •: r^jr, .v .\ed .■ J r ■ n,*: r ' 'e.^o I 
• e : y-) y ‘ T 

r :>: . - 1 ■ i 

. , ■ ‘ , . . ' j r r . t 

' 






270 

Hanging 
Sprinkling 
Folding 
Care of Body 

Hair; teeth; bathing; hands and nails 
Possible Demonstrations 

Sewing by machine 
Manicuring 

Cleaning and caring for hai'r 
Cleaning shoes 
Polishing furniture 
Arranging flowers 
Cleaning silver 
Home Crafts 

Field Trios -- with definite purpose in view; e.g*, studying 
arrangement of supplies and equipment, studying sanitation, 
choice of color* 

Dairy Grocery 

Model Kitchen Flour Mill 

II* Home Projects 

The Home Centre in the school should keep in close contact 
with the pupils 1 ho$es in the community* The teacher will find 
it necessary — 

1* To become acquainted with homes of the community * 









'' i EX 


>0 V'.O C‘ r ' vj 



,r:o ; c;'/: :':V .• Jv:vr *•- rr-I-.V-C. 

■•••• r • i .... . ' r ' ."» f :i ; 

i v.r ) v'I.CBC 

rol '. /;) vw _ Lb^o M 




.v.o: 


' r J ' 

— — ) 






271 


The.following are means by which this purpose may be 
served: 

i. Visiting the homes, 

ii. Taking part in community activities, 

iii. Informal visits at the school from small 
groups of parents, throughout the year, 

iv. Teas and demonstrations for parents, 

v. A parents 1 advisory committee. 

N.B. -- Consult the books listed for reference under Problem 
SI below. 

2. To become informed regarding the needs and interests of 

the pupils . 

In planning for a year‘s work, and before entering any 
new phase of the programme, the teacher should have a check-list 
prepared for the pupils* activities in the home. 

The following is an example of a check-list for laundering. 


What vou do 

What you like 
to do 

List 



Do you launder your own?-- 

silk underwear, sweaters 

and scarfs. 

Do you?-- 

help with the family washing 

hang out the clothes, 

iron the clothes. 













. ' 'tu •- 




, - . 


" 




' 










.'if: - 

1 -,,.r ■ 






osj 




■ [ 







Lm 




■ 


o 


c 


I 






C 


ion 


?, • ri vf " ‘ 


:z o 




•: v ic 



r f ■■ ; ■' ■ ) 


i O J j Oj _ j. 







t 







272 


What you do 

What you like 
to do 

List 



starch the clothes, 

make starch for the 

clothes, 

mend the clothes for 

other members of the 

' family, 

sew on buttons and snaps, 

press your own clothes, 

clean spots on clothes, 

put away the clean 

clothes. 


It is a simple matter to transform these home duties and 
experiences into home projects , hy relating them definitely to 
the activities of the school. 

Reference : 

The Home Project Method — Bulletin of the United States 
Department of Agriculture,.Washington, D.C. 

3• To conduct group discussions 

The democratic way of life requires group discussion of 
common problems, group planning for the solution of these 
problems, and group evaluation of the results. 

Group discussion is a very effective procedure for the 
planning of classroom projects and the evaluation of results. 


















’ 



o..') „‘tf\;it ■ 


t 

m 

■. 

•;o ^ :> r .j j.>r.fo 





v. / . fo '■ • ; 


/.Jo '■ • 


t - r 








; : • \ ■; _ ^ o ; > n.v •: 

* 

: • 


5 . V • n 






) or: 











. 






• •' . • ' ;• -f-jr') 

r ■ ["> t \ .v' •) .. 


• ■ . ' , ' rifiX 









27? 


Reference for the Teacher : Suggestions for Group Discussio n 
Leaders -- United States Department of Agriculture, Washington, 

D.C. 

III. Classroom Problems 

Below will be found a suggested list of classroom problems, 
outlined in some detail. These problems may serve as a basis 
for class discussions , and also as a means for interpreting and 
integrating the home projects and the culminating activities of 

the home-centre classroom . 

IV. Culminating Activities 

The following are suggested as suitable activities for the 
home-centre classroom. They are the motivating activities for 
demonstrations and practice in the basic skills : 

Group 

Picnic. 

Open house. 

Simple entertaining. 

Health play. 

Christmas activity. 

Tea for the parents. 

Individual 

Some of the group activities may be carried into the homes 


as home projects 



















. ' 


• . ' • '• . ' ;/ . .• . . . 

' ' ■ : 

a V ■ - 

* . 

. ' u . 

. • • . ■ ■ *' ■ 

; • ■ ■* ' • :• . _ • 

. : ■ - 

„ 

. 

' 

. 

' 


















2?4 


classroom Problems 

Problem 1 : What are the best means of getting and maintaining 
health? 

Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

What does it mean to have good health? 

What factors affect our health? 

Vi/hat about ourselves can be discovered by means of a 
physical examination? 

How does our health affect our general appearance and 
our disposition? 

Brief outline 

Characteristics of a healthy girl are glossy hair* clear 
skin, bright eyes, erect posture, firm muscles, elastic step, 
even disposition, sufficient energy for work and play, correct 
weight for height, build and age. 

Pupil experiences 

Make and keep a weight chart. 

Plan daily food patterns for family menu, with consideration 
for time and limit of cost. 

Plan and prepare own or family meals. 

Plan and pack school, picnic or camp lunches. 

Check children for nutritional status. 

Plan and give a health examination. 

References 

Fundamentals for Home Economics : Jensen, Jensen and Ziller, 
(Macmillan Co.7 Toronto). 








:p 











rrfa 


FO 3 'JOD v;o..i 
-)(T3.‘-P WO 
) J’UO 













•'.0 


V ’ 




...S' 


a to 


30 Oil 


; / 


0 






a:- 










n 
















■ 


. 






275 


New Course in Homemaking , Calvert (Turner E. Smith Co., 

Atlanta, Georgia). “ork book for the foregoing. 

Foods and Homemaking . Carlotta Greer (Allyn and Bacon, New York). 

A Girl*s P ro blems Home Economics , Trilling, Williams and 
Reeves (Lippin'cott, Chicago ) . 

Film: ^'ood Makes a Difference - Consumer Bureau, Department 
of Agriculture, Ottawa. 

Problem 2 : How can a pleasing personality be developed ? 

N.B. This problem belongs also to health and Physical Education, 
and may be sut&ied there. 

Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

*%at qualities make a charming girl? 

Kow can personal traits be altered? 

What can be dorse to develop pleasing personal traits? 

Brief Outline. 

Characteristics of a pleasing personality may be friend¬ 
liness, sincerity, unselfishness, thoughtfulness for opinions 
and feelings of others, courtesy, poise, etc. 

x hese are the surface indications; but underneath there must 
be freedom from fears, a feeling of adequacy and confidence, 
and a purpose in life accepted as worth while, in which the 
welfare of the individual is bound up with the welfare of others. 
(Consult in this connection any good textbooks on the 
"Psychology of Personality" of "Mental Hygiene," such as those 
listed on page 44 of Bulletin III of the Programme of Studies 
for the High School.) 









'■ ')■■■" V : ■ ' •• r ' 

•V o:'-v : a ' ‘L r> - 


QvtXC’ICl ' • IBO >--0 

■; ■ .■ -tt; :■ 

. 








> •, 




■ v - ■ t ; " : ■ 

■ • ' ' ' 

■ ' 


f) ■ " ‘ 

- 

V 




■f. >' 


r > !Y> 


CV 




;; : 









276 


Pupil experiences. 

List the qualities of the most pleasing person you know. 

List qualities in yourself which you think are pleasing. 

List the qualities which you think could be changed for 
the better. 

Make a score card to jidge personal traits. 

Hate yourself by this score card. 

Dramatize situations where pleasing personal traits are 
brought out. 

n ave a question box for unsigned questions. 

References 

Living Your Life : Crawford, Cooley and Trillingham, (D.C. 

Heath and Co.). 

The Girl Today, the Woman Tommorrow , Hunter (Allyn and Bacon, 

•' New YorkTT”* 

The Girl and Her Home, Trilling and Nicholas (Houghton Mifflin 

— — 

Cues for You , Mildred Graves Ryan (Appleton Centur}?-, New York) . 
Problem 3 : How can friends be made and kept? 

N.B. This problem belongs also to Health and Physical Education, 
and may be studied there. 

Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

What are the desirable qualities which you look for in 

your friends? 

What qualities are necessary in yourself in order to attract 
friends? 

What can you do to develop these qualities? 











277 


Brief Outline* 

Characteristics of a good friend may be sincerity, coopera¬ 
tion, unselfishness, respect for opinions and feelings of others, 
fair-mindedness, health, attractive appearance, courtesy, poise, 
etc. 

Pupil experiences. 

List the desirable qualities of a person -whom you admire. 
Make a plan to develop in yourself those qualities which 
you lack. 

References 

As for Problem 2. 

Problem 4: What good grooming means and what it accomplishes. 

N.B. This problem belongs also to Health and Physical Education, 
and may be studied there. 

Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

On what does appearance depend? 

What are the facts concerning the care of skin, hair, nails 
and teeth? 

What plans can be made for the care of personal clothing 
that one may be well-groomed daily? 

Brief Outline. 

Characteristics of an attractive person may be good health, 
correct posture, well-cared for body (i 9 e 9 skin, hair, nails, 
teeth), clean and becoming clothes. 








273 


Pupil experiences. 

Demonstration of proper brushing of the hair, shampooing, 
cleaning and care of the nails, laundering personal garments, 
arranging dresser drawers, etc* 

Reference 

Junior Home Economics (Unit I, Good Grooming), Friend and Schulz 
(D. Appleton Century). 

Problem 5 : How to look well on a small clothing budget. 
Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

How much do my clothes cost? 

What clothes can I make for myself? 

How can I choose becoming clothes? 

How can I care for my clothes so that I shall be well- 
groomed and attractive? 

Brief outline. 

The well-dressed girl wears appropriate clothing, well- 
brushed, pressed, clean, mended, and of becoming style and color 
Pupil experiences. 

iv eep a record of your clothing expenditures for a year* 

Make a list of the clothing in your wardrobe* 

Decide what you need most. 

Plan and make a garment for yourself within a limited cost, 
and compare the cost with a ready-made garment. 

Remodel a garment for yourself. 

Learn how to care for your clothing by mending, brushing, 


pressing, etc 













279 


References 

The Mode in Home and Dress , Dulcie Donovan (Allyn and Bacon) 

Your Clothes and Personality , Mildred Graves Ryan (Appleton 
Century Co. / New York)T 

Problem 6 : How to save and spend wisely* 

N.3. This problem beIons also to Community Economics, and to 
Home Mechanics. It affords a good example to show the possi¬ 
bilities of integration* 

Questions to indicate scope of Problem. 

What is the amount of the family budget, and how is it 

apportioned? 

What is the amount of my personal budget, and how do I 
spend it? 

What necessaries must be provided? 

What savings can be made in these budgets? 

How can consumers learn the value of the things they buy, and 
know when they are getting the worth of their money? 

What can I do at home to help save money? 

Brief outline. 

“Wise spending is spending for necessaries, and getting 
the full value of the money spent. 

Wise saving is the putting by of a surplus after necessa¬ 
ries have been provided. 

Pupil experiences. 

Prepare a family budget and a personal budget. 

Save for the family budget by helping with home duties, 
such as mowing the lawn, doing the ironing, making simple re¬ 
pairs. 










. 

. 


\ ■ ' . . r; •••.- 


3 0.C 




. 

' 


x.r: yy. ana avaa o;t web 


' 


. ’ 




. 

, • r -■ ‘ . .. ' ■ - • 

? j > n i ■ ' 




t •>; p' fi JI • i." ■; ' ' *. ' '■> ' • 

bnoqa 

'i l >.£ ■ ' V.i'Cf 3(3 vT • ■ a t?. c5 0 j o hix** 

; - •. jjvjJ •- . - ,' : " .■/) , m. W\:a a >•■ 

• v v 'o aw : ,wv aba aaaa[ aa a :aa aor>. raao 'rob 

; : , - . • • bo V ■ ’ •: v: : : -'i 

■ / ■ a a a a fXO J ' : 

. . 

■ • c •. • ‘ • .. :u : a - ' aa 

„ 

o' ' 

# a . 'x a. aa y * 1 ^ 

- ’ ': ' 

f . • ■ ; . ; j .T 7PJ. ‘ i b 'Oi' fiM?. 




280 


References 

Consumer Economics , Kennedy and Vaughn (Manual Arts Press, 
Peoria, Ill.). 

Earning and Spending the Family income , Mata Roman Friend. 

Home Mechanics for Girls , J.C. Wooden (McCormack-Mathers, 

Wichita, Kansas). 

Problem 7 : How to develop interest for leisure time. 
Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

What obligations does leisure time bring? 

How can I plan and carry out my work so that I can 
have some leisure time? 

How can I spend my leisure time on things that are of 
most worth? 

Brief outline. 

Leisure time is time saved by the careful planning and 
organizing of our work. 

Pupil experiences. 

Make a plan for spending your own leisure time. 

Have class discussions on better planning for use of 
leisure time. 

Plan some form of recreation in which the whole family 
can take part. 

Do some knitting, rug-making, etc. 

Arrange flowers. 

Arrange and carry out plan for indoor planting. 







/ • 

t‘ : ‘ V:,. '• 4's- . 


. 

■ 

1 

. , 

: ' ’ 


'• . . 


, ’ . . 

>o ; Ixo.tbnx jnoLd 3 r . 

r c "£ r r 

•'! oir> \j v-dido dnif.: 

■: ;.•? . ■ ■'/ ..'•[> , 3'J< 

• : r .s . - OB ; - r.. ( • o : :o : 

V ■ ■ ’ t&,d 

•jij ' ;no : . ■ 

.... 


. 


t:. : :J' iBCrrieo oiid u o- v ;' . . • a :o o y inBX9uL 


. 

. • 

■ *' : ; i 



Lt : ' '.I ■' 

‘ y 0 iO r, IV jyi 


' ■ ' 

• « '■ 

V . • -■ t i.rr 3 :.v’ ■) . 


. ■ • • . • ■ ■ ■ : : ■ , 






281 


Make,a simple article for home or self, such as pot 
holder, silver case, table mats, ironing board cover. 

Make scrap books or toys. 

Make or play games. 

References and Illustrative Material 

Home Decoration with Fabric and Thread , Ruth W. Spears. 

The Girl and Her Home , Trilling and Nicholas (Houghton Mifflin 
Co. , New TorkT.~ 

Roods and Hememaking . Carlotta C. Greer. 

Problem S : How to share in the work in the home. 

Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

What are the everyday activities w hich take place in my 

home? 

What attitude should an intelligent girl have toward 
sharing home responsibilities? 

Which of those activities listed are the responsibility 
of father, mother, and other members of the family? 

In which activity do I share? 

What else could I do about the house to relieve other 
members, and assume my fair share of family responsibility? 

Brief outline. 

Desirable attitude toward home responsibility: considera¬ 
tion for others, kindliness, willingness to share responsibility, 
cheerfulness, punctuality, reliability. 











r :• : . I 'xavl ra % ri : L > I 

. ■ x ■■ n > • : - 


. 


-x 


• ■ _ ' ' ; ^ ; 

. , Li' . . . ■ . ,.■.■; .. . .. . 

. . .. 

$ y' 

. 

# ■ > . i ' ' ; .. ' : ‘ ' . ' : ' > , '■ > ; j _ J.. <Qy. 

* 1 v >/,;■' : ’ ' ' ' ■ ' 

yc fix ooxlq ■xi r 'd- no::;; w BeiX.rvI:J'o:;■^GiTX'x-v ; odd dsd^ X 

? Oi [Oi • 

jv : ' J\ i. ' .Xl.L vi,:J 'hg Mjo;'X-: cjIixj jJzci v?s 

V.v.-v>:x..:xf 

' r-iXL-;: '-;o'-' v . : X o* : r X. :.r • j;.. X v. : ; j 6c ‘■■) , y)dd 'xo 

1 * ' \: ■ ■' . j *: . .V > < '■' ' ‘ ' ol 

\ ■.; ■: j- ; ; o ftf '■ v dr o j? d'j i* d v/ ri I 

■ \r r I • 1 J o ; r . : 'J ;/ roH ' o X .. .XJjJoo oaJ.X' >'■' n 

. ■; ■ • ' ' • . : ; < i : r* . ' t r' ig:.i 


: du 


' . ; 


' 




•t i ■; no < 
ml. jli'ioedc 







282 


Suggested responsibilities: care of one's bedroom, bath¬ 
room, dishes, table setting, serving, entertaining; care of 
younger children, elderly members of household, etc. 

Pupil experiences. 

Keep a record of the way in which you spend your time for 
24 hours. 

From this record, tabulate amount of time you spend on 
sharing home activities. 

^iscuss the record with your mother and work out a 
schedule that will help you perform your fair share of the 
home tasks. 

As a home project, put such a schedule into practice for a 
specified time. 

Keep a list of the things 3^ou are doing at home which will 
train you to take your mother's place, if she were ill or away 
on a visit. 

References 

Home and Family, J ordan, Ziller and Brown (Macmillan, 1 oronto) 

Fundamentals of Home Economics . Jensen, Jensen and Ziller 
" (iiacmillainY ^oront o 

Problem 9 : How can I contribute to social living in the home? 
Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

How can we contribute to entertainment in the home of 
(1) our family, (2) our friends? 

How can we share our friends withother members of our 
family; e.g., our parents, grandparents, etc.? 








r >: 


> 


• :v.ox< x.o t o*.:M.‘ o. fo- of ' / ; 

. ■; : ■ ' r ■ 

• r r ; ; X o b’XOfK-Vj: O fOXi. v' 

. ' 

■ • ’ o' . • •' ■'' ■ JO v.;' ■ .. 

. 

• t..- ' tjo i .rl:'- rrr;i" 

v 0 ■'boron 


00 ; ! ' ' p - • ' '■ ’ f:T ' 

* ■ " ' )■:■) ' 

00)0 •; • r r;;r/' ■<!* :.) "0 .00 0'o.f.i. r‘09*'i 

t ■ >■; ; o ’ o . or ' ' O' O' ::J’ ooo; 




f • . i ! /■< - 

! ' • . .■ . ' . 

„ c ‘ 1 


I '•>)■' . . ,t - v r -it ■ o 1 o >;■ : ; rfeob v 

8 : J. O';- 0 < ■ 0" " ' ' O' ’ > oS 

;• ( : • o': ;; ,! o 0 oj* i' Ob ’ o G.. r iD'O \TOil 

/ ,■ . r ) o' •of) 



o i 












283 


On a limited budget, what forms of entertainment can be 
carried on in the home? 

Brief outline. 

Qualities that make for successful home living are 
cheerfulness, consideration for others, reliability, honesty, 
sinceritykindliness, sympathy, friendliness, loyalty, reco¬ 
gnition of private rights of individual members and of rights 
of the family as a whole. 

Pupi}. experiences. 

List various means of low-cost entertainment possible in 
the home. 

Make and carry out plans for a family evening at home. 

Share in the entertainment of friends in the home. 

References 

Living with Others , Goodrich (American Book Co.), 

The Girl and her Home : Trilling and Nicholas (Houghton Mifflin, 
New fork)." 

The Girl Today, the .Woman tomorrow . Hunter (Allyn and Bacon, N.Y.) 

Problem 10 : How to understand and use desirable social customs. 
Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

What social customs should I recognize? 

How can I become familiar with these social customs? 

Hoxv can I make these customs a part of my daily living? 

How can I make myself a welcome guest? 

Brief outline, 

Conduct at home, on the street, travelling, at the theatre, 
movies, concerts, in stores, etc. 







' 












. 

i 0 


{ rid- as 



id' 

iii : ;r :.:vilo 1 





G f> f t9'i 

. . ) 



t : .. . 

\’' v X, [ 



I 


\ ■ - • 


‘O , vj 

e >L :. : . .. . .. 


■'i'ir xiS: - j?ii| 



•> i ' . 

■ v:o 




. ‘ r ■ ’ • > 


c 


’ jr 

■ > ■ I?; 

■ .r 

fcooS'd 



. 

>:' o •> ■' 

' ; 0 \V> : 



■ 6 >■ .:< -■ ' • 


J r '70: i 



' 

.' ’ : i 

' 




* 




, J . ■ 1 


e 



. 70 l 




284 


Pupil experiences. 

Learn how to receive guests. 

Learn how to carry on a telephone conversation. 

Plan and carry out some simple entertainment. 

Have a party. 

Plan and carry out a school reception, or other entertain¬ 
ment for the community by the whole school. 

References 

Living with Others , Goodrich (American Book Co.). 

Community Schools in Action . Clapp (Viking Press). 

The Girl Today, the 'Roman Tomorrow , Hunter (Allyn and Bacon). 

Fundamentals of Home Economics , Jensen, Jensen and Ziller, 

’ (Macmillan Co.) 

°ues for You . Mildred Graves Ryan, (Appleton-Cehtury Co.). 

Problem 11 : How to assume responsibilities in school and 
community life. 

Questions to indicate scope of problem. 

What responsibilities can I share in my school? 

How can I share in community activities? 

Brief outline. 

Cooperation in class and school activities. 

Cooperation with community services; e.g., women's in¬ 
stitute, local hospital, school fair, field day, baby clinic, 
community recreation. 

Pupil experiences. 

Do some work for the Red Cross or other social-service 


agency 











. : • • ’ 


“i : .'/V') ';) _ ; rv: \o} { 






j ’ 


1 c 




t 


• ■ ,u.’ 






a 










) /..i: 


. ' 


« 




i 






. 


. 

• ■[r. . . a o n . ).t ■> i 11 J’. : .,•; r ) : , r?, > * :i J' ■; 1 1 - • 

. • - ;• r i ; , .)*x;*..■[ , .. - 

• ;r • \ 

V:>.; J'. ) . .'/j i •:/; fl >.\? r >. xro o'J 

. ; 

• : : r i ; : 




283 


Make a survey of the health standards of the community* 
Make a survey of the standards of home-making, of child 
care, of diet, in the community. 

Plan a programme of recreation and social education for 
the community. 

Arrange to attend a baby clinic. 

Plan the improvements required in the school buildings in 
order that they may be used as the centre for community 
education and recreation. 

References 

Planning the Community School , Engelhardt and Engelhardt, 

^ (American Book Co.j. 

Community Schools in Action . Clapp (Viking Press)<> 

The Community School , Everett et al (Appleton-Century) 

Youth Serves the Community . Hanna (Appleton-Century) 0 

Your Home and Family , Graves and Ott (Little Brown and Co.,). 

A Hew First Course in Homemaking , Calvert (Turner E 0 Smith, 

At1anta, Georgia)* 

References for the Teacher 

Integrated Homemaking . Herrington (Appleton-Century, N*Y.)« 

Guide Book for above, ^errington (Appleton-Century, N.Y.). 

Fundamentals of Teaching Home Economics , Spafford (John Wiley 
and Sons, "Hew Yorkj V" 

A Funcational Program of Home Economics . Spafford (John Wiley 
and" Sons, Mew YorkT” 














■\ :'i : 


s o: 


a 


if 3 £ 0 >i£ 


; t J' 




rxa i rt I 


o ! • 




[ 


-'i. \'jjn,/ 'i/i:.. 

r 




■■ ■ • ■ ' >' - 




. 1 • 










, 

•;>• vi L . JV'. I 

;• 1 1 >_ _ -o.r \, [ i ;-V S. ■ ■ 


a 3.LJ 


. :■ ; -:a'I /3m-- 


( , .■ 




* , ■ ■ 


' 


Z: o 


'T ■ •' 


t 


. 


? • -I ( j - >'• Ic;cr.. } a t 




ono 






236 


Additional References for Pupils 
General Books on ^omemaking : 

Advanced Gourse in Homemaking , Calvert and Smith (Turner E. 
Smith Co,, Atlanta, Georgia) 

Foods, Nutrition and Home ^anaf’ement Manual , Department of 
Education, Victoria, B.C. 

Housewifery , Balderston, (Lippincott, Chicago)* 

Housekeeping Work Book , Balderston (Lippincott, Chicago)* 

The Home Economics Omnibus , Harris and Huston (Little Brown 
and Co. , Boston). ’ 

Elementary home Economics , Mathews (Little Brown and Co*). 
Personal Etiquette : 

Behave Yourself . Allan and Briggs (Lippincott, Chicago)* 
Everyday Manners , Wilson. 

Consumer Buying : 

Better Buvmanship Booklets , Household finance Corporation (99 
Michigan Ave *, Chicago) 0 

Consumer Goods , Reich and Zeigler (American Book Co., Chicago)• 
When You Buy , Trilling, Eberhart and Nicholas (Lippincott). 

Food and Nutrition : 

Teaching, Nutrition to Boys and Girls , Rose (Macmillan, Toronto) 
Canadian Cook Book , Pattinson (Ryan Press, Toronto). 

Home Nursing, Health, Child Care : 

Home Nursing and Child Care , T urner? Morgan and Collins, 

Growing Up , Karl de Schweinitz (Macmillan, Toronto). 



































0 




, 



V 




... S'; 0 




0 






r J-r 


c 


: ) 


< .t 


t 


) 






287 


Clothing and Textiles: 

From Thimble to Ocun , Van Gilder (Allyn and Bacon, N.Y.). 

Modern Clothing , Baxter and Latzke (Lippincott, Chicago)« 

Practical Sewing , Iverson (Ryerson Press, Toronto), 

Fashion Book Manuals: 

Vogue ■— Book of Smart Dressmaking . 

McCall — Sewing Manual . 

Simplicity -- Sewing Manua l. 

Butterick -- Sewing Manual , 

Textiles : 

Textile Fabrics , Dyer (Houghton Mifflin Co., Chicago). 

A Guide to Textiles , Evans and McGowan (John Wiley and Sons, N.Y.). 

For Boys : 

The Boy and His Daily Living, Burnham Jones and Redford 
(Lippincott, Chicago). 

Magazines : 

Practical Home Economics . Lakeside Publishing c Co , 46 B Fourth 
Avenue, Hew York. 

Forecast, Forecast Publishing Co., 140 North 6 Street, 

Philadelphia, Pa.). 



















■ _ J;J,':r 



* c * ‘ ’ 1 . ‘ " (. ’ . .... . 

: . 

: : ; ; ; ' ; ’ :r: • . ' : __ ' ■; ; ; 'o _ :>rV 

. ’ t 


: . . 

. < . ’ ‘ ' : ■ t /' ■ ;' _.*j V; 

. 














288 


APPENDIX N 
1952 

University of Alberta 


Special Certification 


Certi- 

Credits 

Teaching 


Subiect . ficate 

Required 

Privileges 


Home Junior ▼ . 

...H.Ec, 11 or (H.Ec, 

Grades VII. VIII, 


51 and H.Ec.2) and 

and IX. 


Economics 

H.Ec, 12. 

Home Economics 

1 

Senior ,. 

H.Ec, 45 and H.Ec. 




46 in addition to 
the requirements 
for the Junior 
Certificate. 

Home Economics 

2 

Advanced, 

...Teacher 1 s certifi¬ 




cate carrying grade 
12 teaching privi¬ 

Home Economics 

1 


leges together with 
B.Sc. in H.Ec, 

Home Economics 

2 


degree. 



Household Economics 

11 — Foods 10 hrs. 

lect., 15 hrs. 

lab 


An elementary study of the fundamental principles of 
nutrition; the composition, manufacture, food value, economic 
selection of various food materials; the general principles 
of cookery with laboratory practice in food preparation, meal 
planning and service. 


Household Economics 12 — Textiles and Clothing: 

10 hrso lect,, 15 hrs» lab, 

(a) Textiles -- A study of the composition, physical properties 






















emo n 

. •, 


: : 

'‘toy.w > T i o ; : ^ 




o 


i 


















i f * 

■ 


c 






„ 


' 


') ■ :j. 




< • 


c 


) 








28? 


and manufacture of fabrics, and the influence of these 
on selection and on methods of cleaning. 

(b) Clothing --- Selection -- A study of the principles of 

design in relation to the individual and the environment. 
Construction — The construction of various types of gar- 
ments from commercial patterns. 

Household Economics 44 — Economics of the Household and 

Nutrition 10 hrs. lect., 15 hrs. lab. 

Economics of the Household : Household production; the home as 
a business; the income and its expenditure; budgets; standards 
of living; consumer education. 

Nutrition : Meal planning and serving; low cost diets; school 
lunches. 

Text-books: Nickell and Dorsey, Management in Family Living ; 
Sherman and Lanford, Essentials of Nutrition . 

Prerequisites: H.Ec. 11 and 12, and Chem. 42 0 

Household 'Economics 45 -- Color and Design 

10 hrs lect., 15 hrs. lab. 

A study of the principles of color and design, and the 
application of these principles to home planning and furnishing 
and handicrafts. 

Prerequisites: H.Ec. 11 and 12. 













8 


% ' ' * 


c 



C‘r£a r x c I 


> f : [ ) I > ■ 


c 


c 


















2?0 


Household Economics 46 -- Advanced Clothing, and Special 

Problems in Household Economics 10 hrs.lect. 15 hrs.lab 
Prerequisites: H.Ec<> 11, 12, 

It is strongly recommended that students have also House¬ 
hold Economics 45 as a prerequisite for Household Economics 46 

Summer Session, 1952 


T 














, , : '■ 


! i; " D‘ 


: 


... - . -- ..; I ")...>b toOsvx vSx 


r'Q 'X , i' 






a ■. . ox oit >o 









































Enrolment of Pupils in the Homemaking; Elective Courses 


291 


APPENDIX 0 
































CA 



o 

A 

14 

-4 

NO 

O- 

X 

i—I 

X 

O 

CM 


O 



'X 

i—! 

A 

-x 

NO 

A 


A 

-4 

A 

A 


A 





NO 

1—1 


rH 



CM 




x 

rH 

o 

1—1 

rHj 

A 

A 

A 

X 


X 

X 


-4 



CM 

CM 

o 

H 

CM 

CM 

-4 

rH 


X 

A 


-4 


<A 



1—1 


NO 

rH 


i—1 



X 




CM 



CM 

. A 

A 



A 


CM 

A 


CM 


!>- 



On 

A 






CM 

CM 


A 


r—1 





-4 





1 

X 




O 



CM 

A 

ON 

to 

CA 


1 

1 

X 


CM 


-4 



to 

CM 

O 

On 





CM 


A 


CM 





A 






i—1 



c 

rH 



X 

O 

O- 



O- 


o 

X 


X 


to 



1A 

CM 

-4 



vO 


CM 

X 


A 


rH 





CM 










CA 



ON 

ON 

-4 



o 


-4 

-4 


-4 


vO 



!>- 

rH 

-4 



o 


CM 

CM 




i—1 





rH 



X 







o 



J> 

A 

iH 



i—! 


A 

r-- 


X 


to 



ON 

E>- 

CM 



CN 


A 

X 


ON 


-4 





CM 



X 



CM 




A 



to 

A 

nO 



C"- 


O 

-4 


CM 


H, 



NO 

rH 

A 



fX 


CM 



-4 


i—! 





rH 










iH 



On! 

x 

o 



X 


X 





CM 



-4 


NO 



-4 







rH 





rH 





















CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 












X 

X 

X 

X 



XI 









X 

X Cd 

X 

x cd 

1—1 

cd 

i—i 

CM 

A 







cd 

cd x 

cd cm 

cd CM 


rH 









X 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

hi 


bj[ 

hi 

hi 

X 

•x 

X 

X 

X 

£ 

o 

O 

o 

o 

£ 

bi 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ ■ ■ 

£ Cd 

£ X 

£ 

£ cd 

cd 





•H 

£ 

•H 

•H 

•H 

Cd rH 

Cd rH 

Cd rH 

cd CM 

£ CM 

A 

X 

X 

X 

X 

44 

•H 

44 

44 

44 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

cd 


cd 

cd 

cd 

O CD 

O CD 

O CD 

O 

O CD 

O CD 

cd 

cd 

cd 

cd 

£ 

cd 

£ 

£ 

£ 

•H CD 

•H CD 

•H CD 

•H CD 

•H CD 

•H CD 





CD 

£ 

Q) 

CD 

CD 

£ CD 

£ CD 

£ CD 

£ CD 

£ CD 

£ CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

£ 

\ Q) 

£ 

£ 

£ 

X £ 

X £ 

X £ 

X CD 

X £ 

X £ 

X 

X 

X 

X 

o 

£ 

O 

o 

o 

cd n 

Cd Q 

cd pi 

cd £ 

cd P 

cd pi 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

PC 

° 

PC 

PC 

PC 

fa 

fa 


fa P 

fa 

fa 

<4 

<4 

< 

< 


1 PC 















CM 


i —i i 


X 

r\ cm 


H I 


<1-0 


H 1 


Xi 

4 qn 

>•4 

1 


4X 

>-4 

1 


O 
-4JH- 


H 9 


9 

A 

-4nO 
On -4 

i—! 1 


J 

u '■ —4 

rH I 


A 

-4 

On 































































Enrolment of Pupils in the Homemaking: Elective Courses 


A 
A-3- 

G\ A 


CM 

ON A 

rH I 


A CM 
O' A 


ON 


3 

A (—I 
3N A 

I 


-to 

On A 

I 


X) 
-tCSN 

On-4- 


NO 


Uj-to 

3N-<hi 

I 


O 

<hc- 

JN ~t 

—I 1 


A 

-tvO 

On-4- 


<h 

-t A 
On-4" 

i —I ! 


NO 


A 
-t -t 
ON -t 

I 


co 
P 
<h 
Cd A 
3 
O 

T3 
3 
<d 


CO 

p 

u 

<*: 


o 

A 


1 


o 

o 

CD 3 
fH O 

1 — 1 

CD -H 
CO P 

6 

rs 

•H 

faO 

CO 

3 

CD 

•H 

« 

Pi 


P 

"d 

O 

3 

rH 

3 

O 



cm 

(V 

rH 


O -t- 

A CM 


CD 


3 

T3 O 
3 *H 
cd p 

W 3 
T3 P 
o 3 
OS 


o 

rH 

fcuCl 

3 

•H 

,3 

CO 

•H 

O 

K 


3 

cd 

fafio 

•S* 

CO 

3 Pi 

s O 

CD T3 

B 3 

O cd 

m 




























Statistics Relating to Home Economics Centres and Staffs 


APPENDIX P 


293 


<A 
la-4 
la 

r—I 5 


CM 

LACA 

O 

i—I J 


ACM 

IJNLA 

I 


D 

ArH 
3\ A 

H J 


LA 

vO 

i—I 


O- 

vO 


ON 


4 

cm 


c- 

vO 


ON 


ca 


CM 


DN 

-4*0 

J\ '-A 

H 1 


No 


avalLable r€ 


ports; 


O 
4 On 
On-4- 

i 


No 


available reports 


>- 

■4-to 
3n4 

H I 


to 


<A 


I CO 5 

U -P £ 

•d £ 8 l 

(M OH P 


ca 


O 
-4*C S - 
Jn-4- 

I 


A 

-4-vO 
On -4 

i—! i 


CA 

i—I 
i—I 


O 

la! 


-4 
-4" la 
0\-4- 

I 


CM 

LAI 


to 


v0 


CM 

<A 


CA 

-4*4 
0N -4 

rH I 


VO 

CA 


t>4 


CM 


vO 

cA 


to 

!>• 


'df £ 

<Di«H 

d 


T-$=r 


W £ 
-P o 

ft *H 

0 -p 
« cd 

U 


CO 

u 

0 CO 


CO 
0 CO 
£ -P 
-p 


0 o 

-P u 


o 

s 


£ 
o 
u 

•H 

ft O 


O 

S 


CO 
0 
£ 

-P T3 
£ 

0 

O 0 

£ 

0 

S3 


CO ,£ 

0 o 
£ -H 
-PX 
£ £ 
0 
o 


0 

r D 

0 

cd'd 


CO TJ 


ch 
O £ 
0 
03 ,£ 
co o 
£ cd 
cd 0 
o -p 


co 
£ 
0 
,£ 
i—I O 

rH Cd 
£ 0 
«h -P 

Ch 0 

o a 

•H 

* -P 

O 

S3 


0 

£ 

0 

■p ft 
£ O 

cd cd 
ft 0 
•P 
ft 
O 0 

E 

® *H 
O -P 

13 


ft 
o 

co 

• £ 

O 0 
£ ft 

O 

i—! cd 
cd 0 
-P -P 

o 

Eh 



0 

+3 

cd 

> 

•H 
£ CO 
ftft 
o 

ft O 
oft 
o 
o co 
o 
S3 






































Enrolment of Pupils in Classes in Home Economics 


2?4 


APPENDIX Q, 


on 
in 
On mj 

H I 


CM 

mon 

ON m 

I 


in CM 
ON m 


o 
m 
On m 

I 


ON 

-40 

On m 

i—I I 


(X) I 
-4-ON 
On -4* 

3 


PQ O 
on m 
in -4 

rH CO 

CM 


PQ O 
onvo 
'CO o 
-4 
on 


PQ O 

O rH 

•co m 
in 
on 


PQ O 
NO rH 

I—I ON 

onm- 

ON 


on m 
cm - 4 * 

ON 


CO 

NO 

ON 


rH O- 

-4-on 
i—I o 
on 


on 

OnnO 

-4 

on 


on no 

-4 to 

H rH 

on 


m- -4 
on no 
CM NO 
CM 


o on 

£>-tO 

rH nO 

CM 


on in¬ 
to CM 
-4 
on 


CM nO 
nO 'CO 

H -4 

CM 


on 

NO 


o m- 
ino 

i—I nQ 

CM 


m--4j 

m-to 

onvO 

ON 


On i—I, 
CM on 

i—ij 
rH 


NO -4 

Gn n- 
-4 in¬ 
to 


in -4 
m-o 

onto 


'CO 


NO o 
H -4 
to 


NO 

mu 

'CO 


onto 

i—! 


CM m-4 
n0 £N 

cn rH 


NO 

CM 


nO 

CM 


ON Oj 
OnS 
CMf 


m-m- 

on 

CM 


rH On 

CM' CO 

cm; 


n- 

■4 to 
On - 4 *| 

i—! 


O 
-4 m- 
0N-4j 

i—! i 


i—I nO 
rH rH 
•—! O 

CM 


to On 
On in 
on 
CM 


on o 
on m 

CM CM 
CM 


cm m 
-4 CM 
-4 NO 

nO 


m- 

NO 

O 

im 


to o 

rH 

'CO 


nO tO I 

ononj 

i— 1 } 


CM rH 

m- 

CM 


no m 
cm m- 
-4 


CM ON 
on m 
no 

rH 


m-'co 
no cm 
nO 

i—! 


m cm 

CM nO 

rH m- 

-4 


CM NO 
on 
CM 


to 

on 

CM 


CM O 
CM 

c 


to on 
ONin- 
o in 

rH rH 


m 

-4*nO 

On-4 

I 


-4 m 

on CM 

rH On 


CM CM 

mm 

ON 

rH 


m-m-i 

rH tO 

rH O 

CM 


on -4 

to to 

on ON 
m 


m- 

no 

on 

NO 


no m- 

CM rH 
G* 


onto 
rH O''! 


CM 


On j O 
CM CM 1 in 
-4 


4 
-4 m 
OC-4 

i—! 3 


i—I 
rH CM 
-4 to 

rH 


mm- 

m-4 

on 

CM 


-4 CM 
nO'CO 

rH 

CM 


O O 

N0 IfN 

i—I on 

NO 


in 

NO 


m-ON 

ON 

m 


to 

- 4 « 

Hi 


■to 

m 

on 


CM 

NO 

on 


on 
-4 -4 
ON-4| 

I 


to 


in 

on 

CM 


O 

pq 

« 

PQ 


PQ O 


H 


• £-i 

O O 

PQ 


• h 

o o 

PQ 


X 


* 5Q 
O O 
PQ 


o 

PQ 


PQ 


PQ O 


CM 


O 

PQ 


PQ O 


O 


CO 


CQ 

o 

•H 

b 


o 

<Q 

o 

o 


PQ 


<D 

B 


o 

PC 


o 

PQ 


PQ 


•SoO.C. - Special Opportunity Class 










































































I 














b» 

'3 


■ I 





O 


o 




I 


















APPENDIX R 


The Canadian Home Economics Association 
Box LV, 290 Vaughan St., Winnipeg, Manitoba 

Careers for Which Home Economics Training 

is A Preparation 

Papers on the sectional theme, "Careers for Which 

Home Economics Training is a Preparation," were received from 

\ 

Canada, France, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, 
the United Kingdom, and the United States of America. 

Four very broad general ideas were apparent in the paper 
presented. 

1. The ideal of service to individuals and to families is 
an important characteristic of all careers for which 
home economics training is a preparation. 

2 a Home economics careers have remained closely related to 
the traditional concept of the functions of the home. 

3* Teaching of homemaking subjects is the most important 
gainful occupation for persons with home economics 
training. 

4. The positions which persons with home economics training 
might fill are more numerous than the persons with home 
economics training who are available for these positions 


Ca nadian Home Economics Journal . Volume 3, Number 3. 






« 

dvr : 


;: , :• - ■ y -vO oi 09 q :oA jl>£nF-0 OliT 

t ’ < . ' ! < • 

■ -XBp 

n.r ■ • ' t ‘ ' ■: ■ •'■ ; " • 

9 ^ ■ •. • •' c ■■ >• qd /., / ■. r: o. 9 ; ;.-j 

, . , v • ■ • . : ‘. < , r :; j ' ' : - 

. 

• - 





j r d"i: ; i 






oq ^‘10 r 


o.':oc>no0 9 oood 

• 

■ i . ■ 

■ ox. ■) D ' 

ri ■ r.j9 


cl 




■ 

0 


' 

. C r 90 ;■ '■.) I 

'■ ■ 




* . ■ 



' ' 

• '• r’ v V’’ 9 dO. 



T.ro‘ i,>' ;• : >‘I- > 

. 



• ■, ) ’ - ’ 

■ dcxci o.;c.o^ 


.,'v70 






2?6 


The tendencies affecting careers in home economics seem 
to be: 

1* Increased recognition of the carryover of homemaking 
interests and family life principles into professional 
careers outside the home. 

2. Increased number of different careers in home economics. 

3. Increased employment of home economists to interpret 
scientific data for the benefit of individual and family 
wellbeing. 

4* Increased recognition of the amount of scientific knowledge 
required for many of the careers in home economics and 
addition to the educational requirements accordingly. 

5. Development of home economics careers in response to 
changes in homemaking practices. 

6. Development of home economics careers in response to the 
social development of the individual nation or its worlk 
outlook. 

7* Awareness of need to safeguard standards and create 

professional attitude through professional associations. 

The general fields of work which offer careers to women 
(and some men, too) with home economics training are: teaching 
in schools:, teaching in adult education and in extension 
programs, dietetics and nutrition; journalism, radio and 
television; institution administration; research; and community 
service. 

Suggested questions for discussion at the Congress are 
presented in the general report. 











- ' ' l ' 

■i._v • .. ).;■■■;) : ' • ’ J - 'V9v, 

. 


O' 








' oo'.nr. n 






' , • 








ct : • - • •, 

j 






2?7 


APPENDIX S 

Questionnaire 

At the present time the Home Economics courses for Alberta 
High Schools are being revised. We are anxious to plan courses 
that will be of real interest and use to you, the students. 

Would you please give us your opinion by answering the following 
questions. We should be glad to have you consult your parents 
in replying to the questions asked. 

1. In Grade X you make a tentative outline of the high 

school subjects you are going to take to complete your 

vocational pattern needs. If you are able to include 

some Home Economics subjects, how many credits would you 

be able to take during your whole high school career? 

5? 10? 15? 20? 25? 30? 35? 50? 45? 50? 

4? 6? 16? 24? 32? 40? 46? 42? 52? 

2. Are you interested in home economics because: 

(1) You wish to be a good homemaker or housekeeper when 
you marr}^? 

(2) You wish to become a home economics teacher? 

(3) You want to become a dietitian in a hoppital? 

(4) You plan on going to university and want to enter 
some field of home economics — foods, textiles, 
interior decoration, designing? 

(5) You intend going in training and think a study of 
foods would be of benefit? 







t 









" : •?: ct; 

. . . ■ • 




. 






ro-; 

; ; j j'■" ;':n " r '\\ loo ion 






' v ■ ■ v 

, ; f ; ; ■, ." 1 i, - ■ • ;) >8 




. 






: 








■ 







; 0 : V); ; (.') 

t ;■ ... : : ; ‘ '" 1 > ; 








■ ■ c ■■ ',■ ■: ; ; J 

r 1 : '/ >■: ' . 








298 


(6) You believe a knowledge of sewing would help you to be a 
better dressed secretary? 

(7) You wish to study home nursing and child care? 

(6) You are interested in buying or selling household 

furnishings and equipment and believe these courses 
would be helpful? 

(9) You desire to work in a dress store and believe these 
courses would help you to be a better informed saleslady? 

(10) You are interested in becoming a dressmaker? 

(11) You would like to own and run a tea-room? 

(12) You intend being a nurse's aide? 

(13) You think these courses are easy, snap courses ■with 
little danger of failure? 

(14) You believe these courses won't entail any homework? 

(15) You like to do things with your hands? 

(16) You don't like reading and learning facts? 

Other reasons - 


Would you like to study a little bit about a lot of different 
topics as in Grades 7, 6, and 9 or would you prefer to study 
one subject in great detail? 

List the subjects you are interested in, in order of your 
preference. 




t :? ■ . V. *'... > 


. o 1 

? ■ ; ■.!' ‘ 1 > J> . .1.; .-g 
rra 1 r 1 l ' ; r 1 •'' 

■ ■ f 


LJ' JU -• v 




■:q 








;s: 


• • 


/ ; ) V ■ - o '* 






: ' :o ' - ' • - • 

Off ') ' fTO^ ql : Slf <?■':* BSP.'tf-TOO 

.. . .,. .. , ■ ■ i ffi r 

. ' ■■ . ’ , V V.. , 

r : • •- ; r .L 

- if Loci i'r-G ‘stoX ( C,l) 

o y ) ' J- L -oV { IL) 

l ' ' ' 

. i r.£ jo ■ : ■ . ' v ' o t >:" UD 

' ■ 

•, . ' - 1 rfO ’ • no'.: () 








;ro i 


... ' 








■ 


' v : 0.110 






299 


I. Foods, 

(1) Studying value of food to health, 

(2) Making food and eating it, 

(3) Learning various ways of serving food, 

(4) Learning to buy food, 

(5) Making various types of party foods, 

(6) Learning to plan menus for various types 
of meals, 

II* Clothing, 

(1) Making clothes that you can wear, 

(2) ^earning to remake clothes, 

(3) Learning what kinds of clothing you should wear. 

(4) Studying various kinds of material, names, weaves, 
prices. 

(5) Finding out what kinds of materials are most 
suitable for coats, dresses, slacks, etc. 

(6) Finding out how to clean clothes, remove spots, 
press, etc. 

(7) Finding out how to repair or mend clothing. 

($) Studying the clothing worn by the Homans, Greeks, 
Egyptians, etc, 

(9) Finding out when the first sleeves were put in 
dresses, when sewing machines were first made, 
when women first wore make-up. 

(10) binding out what kind of hat suits you best. 








, 


. 


, 


. 










, ";o 


•. j 8 ; r ;j ) -v •• • 1 ■;.) 

. . 

, 

■ 

r .;.- >■: ‘ o 

. . o I :> • ‘ ■ 

, • o 

rl Jo \o ' : t ;• 

5 • • < ‘ ‘ ; ■■ - ' ' '' ' ' ' 

' 

, . . 


a • ’ • ’ . 














V •' 


r i ; • v-'.< J • •; ' r .» ■ '• 1 •• \ 

t . J ;> .. " n . <v-' 







30Q 


III. Home Nursing. 

(1) Learning to bath a patient. 

(2) Finding out what to feed a 2 year old child. 

(3) How to nurse a person who has mumps. 

Questionnaire for Boys 

If you had the opportunity would you be interested in a 5 
credit General Course in Home Economics? 

Would you be interested in knowing how prbper selection of 
food affects your health and appearance? 

Would you like to cook? What type of food? 

Would you be interested in clothing selection, and care -- 
getting the most for 3^our money? Good grooming? Social 
etiquette? How to get along with others? 

Would you be interested in a 5 credit Foods and Nutrition 
Course? 

Would you be interested in taking the following course with 
girls? 

Home Nursing and Child Care 
Homes and Home Furnishing 
at the Grade XI or XII level? 


What other topics would you be interested in? 











. . '; r . : r.> ; [ .* 





; 

/: / 1 • n . rl: oc. Mjjo t "!.■ "",/'O oi't: hr,<[ t'ox 'll 

, ■ 


■ 

V ' ■ . • ■: ~ do'' . 


- 

; J‘ ;y- r \-' : ' V " \or> oj 

. ! j; : >'■ . J ' ;r •> ' ’ "0 ■' 

j)'V: ‘ v>\ 

‘.c • ••• ! %:■ r ■ - . * ■ X' : > .. 







- 

. :t • ‘ fj • ; r o. 

\j ■ ‘ « hr, ■ > iO v I 

• •:• rr . .> 1 '.'-■■■■ n "> o < 

3 . C :.o. ' ■:! o 


. ; . •' v. •' ’ v.’. 





301 


APPENDIX T 

Department of Education — Alberta 
Report of Supervisor of Home Economics 

Guide for Evaluating 

The Instructor 

-is alert, enthusiastic, poised, cheerful, patient, 

courteious; 

- is competent in her field, resourceful, tactful and 
professionally progressive; 

- has an understanding of adolescent psychology; 

- appreciates the aims and objectives of general education 
and of Home Economics; 

~ is neat and well groomed; 

- is guidance conscious; 

- keeps records of daily lessons, student projects and 
test scores, of money transactions, equipment and library books 

- is school and community minded. 

The Pupils 

- are developing a spirit of inquiry, desirable habits of 
neatness, self-reliance, cooperation and industry; 

- are learning to evaluate their own work for efficient 
performance of every task; 

- are acquiring an interest in and knowledge of all the 
phases of Home Economics. 








\t ') ' ) /' ; ; /■; : ; . 




■ 


fo ’ 


. : " , • ‘", .f '. r ■ .r. • - 

• :v r :>:> 

■ - ", • -• r nn • - 

* •; v ' ■ -V 




■ 


j "• •: ■ - 

: - ' •• 

: ■ . ' • ' 1 . ’ " 

- . ■ • : ■ ■ r t : ; .. ■ > ;9 HO t : V. 0' >1; 

. 

U • 

. • , . • '' > ' v •' • . ■ ' 

: - . ‘l • • • • < r < 1 m :> 

‘ ) , ■ j ) i; - act / 

• .. ' » ■ •, ■' ■'■r U'- 




) j 1 i C 1 >'■ 


■ - 

>noo smoli 16 bobbxI 







302 


- are learning to appreciate good design* 

The Home Economics Center 

- is well planned, properly equipped, and suitably 
organized for isplimentation of the courses of study; 

- is attractive, neat and clean; 

- provides an hospitality corner which aids in gracious 
living; 

- has a library of reference material; 

- is in process of improvement; 

- is an exemplification of good safety practices* 



. ' • • • ! '' ' ~ 

-; . t I; i) ' 

'■ , : /; ■ << >' . [ . ■ . " ' .’ r : - 

r. ' . " '• ' . ' : "• '■ 1 ■ ; " : ■“ 

; 

; 

■ ‘ O : ' r ' ■ ' : ' - 







APPENDIX U 


The A,T,A, Magazi ne - December, 1953 
Volume 34, Number 3 

Special one-year course in home economics at the University 
of Alberta 1954-55 Session 

A special one-year programme in Home Economics is being 
planned by the University of Alberta for certificated teachers 
wishing to teach Home Economics and wishing to qualify fully 
therefor in one year instead of in four or five summer sessions. 
This projected programme is planned for the 1954-55 University 
session. Interested teachers are assured that there are many 
favorable teaching positions open in the Home Economics field 
and that improvement in status on salary schedules will over¬ 
take in three or four years the cost of atteniihg University 
for one winter. 

The programme will include Chemistry 42; Household 
Economics 11; Household Economics 12; Household Economics 44; 
Household Economics 45; and the education methods course. 
Education 26OS (Household Economics Section). 

Household Economics 11 and 12 normally qualify a certifi¬ 
cated teacher for the Junior Certificate in Home Economics 
(teaching privileges valid up to and including Grade X Home 
Economics)U This together with two of Household Economics 
44,45,46 qualify for the Senior Certificate in Home Economics 
(teaching privileges valid in all grades). 





.. .... «■ 

:r/"' t - i > • 

• f . \. : : : 0 ' 3- 33.' \ ' : ' ■' ‘ ■ ' ' ~ •"•' > 

, : ' - 1 ■ ■' 


• ■ ,-vi , ' r : 3;:::-:• '>• : ' 




- 

- 

. ■ ; 






■ 

. . • S ' 

, 

; T ' > ■’ ■ 

. . ' ' ' ' ? ' ■ ' ■ ' 0 

■ ' ? ' 

. : • - ’■ > i 

!. t n*x )> 'lojij i <o v 

■ ■ XV j 


. 

' ' ■ . , t ■ ■ t ‘ 

. ' ■ ' 




204 


Anyone who already holds credit in one of the courses men¬ 
tioned, may enrol in the programme, substituting another 
approved course for those in which such credit is held. All 
courses in this special programme, including substitute 
courses when approved, carry credit on most regular B, Ed, 
programmes, but interested candidates are requested to check with 
the Faculty of Education general office on this point. Since 
the special programme requires considerable early planning, 
and since its feasibility depends on an adequate registration 
(possibly twenty students), it is requested that anyone 
interested get in touch with Miss A. Berneice M a cFarlane, 
Supervisor of Home Economics, Department of Education, 

Edmonton, 






















' : . ■ .v> : ' ori;; Eno-;.;; '. 

>• ' V> u'i ■ a " t : 




t , ■ . . . :oj : : ■ : f r;oo 

• . 

... ;.r; ; : .. . 7 , :7 ' : • : 7 • ' , ,' ' . ■ ' >■ 7^7; vL' '::7^ : ) 







































APPENDIX V 


1947 

Program of Studies for the High School 
Home Economics 1 and 2 

Home economics education has as its major objective 
the imporvement of personal living, and of home and family- 
life. 

In order to accomplish this result, the student must be 
taught to formulate desirable ideals and standards in regard 
to individual and family living. She should learn to appreciate 
the worthwhile functions of a home, to learn the pleasure which 
can be derived from homely tasks well done for the welfare of 
a member of the family, or the family as a whole. She should 
gain an understanding of the contributions of science, social 
studies and art to the improvement of home and family life. 

Facts should be acquired, not for their own sake, but to 
enable pupils to solve present and future problems of living. 
Learning experiences should be selected to fit the environment 
of the learner and her previous experience. The instructor 
must begin where pupils' interests now are, and hdp each 
student to choose her best interests and develop them into 
something better. The home economics program endeavours to 
grasp the many aspects of personal and home living as an inte¬ 
grated whole rather than as separate and segregated phases of 










■ ■: ro' ' ;'' r.b 3 R 0-f. H 0 n O 0 9 ; -)HoH 

• : • - t ■ '• i c; 










. 

■; 'o ■ v "■ r > ■' ' ■']?:, j" < "h’SKd 

t ' ■ r . ■: ' • ■ -c . ' : 

"'; r nro 

* : <. 

‘ ' ■ .i • • ;" .". ' r 

fl : n; v ; •, ..:v. , ' t) . ' " • -> r :.;'0d 






; ■’ / ; ■ v.i f>' '■ Vo 

t ... ■ i . ■ • ■ . ; f - .• 

.... 



306 


life. Education for personal and family living involves the 
whole individual — mentally, physically, emotionally and 
socially. 

The program in home economics is very flexible, one 
readily adopted to the many circumstances which occur in high 
schools throughout the province 0 In some cases girls enter 
high school with three years' 1 intensive training in integrated 
home-making, while in the same class are pupils with no home 
economics training whatsoever. 

Many of the smaller schools find it necessary to combine 
Home Economics 1 and 2 in the same class period. For this 
reason the course is being outlined in a number of units. 

It is expected that each year's course will consist of four 
or five units of work. When Home Economics 1 and 2 are com¬ 
bined, the same unit should not be chosen for two consecutive 
years, but probably will be chosen for two alternate years. 

The units selected should be the ones for which there are 
evidences of need in the community. 

It is expected that each year's work will include at 
least one unit on foods and one on clothing construction. The 
actual class organization will vary with the number of girls 
in the class, the amount and t3^pe of equipment and the particuse 
lar unit of work being covered. 






" , t ' 




* 


. 


' ' ’I 1 1 


: ; O'i o ,.\.kv ' -o-x :■ lc oooo 


i '• 

c 

, • 








1 

. •-.■■ ■ .. 1 • ■ ■ ■ ■ ' . 1 - 

* 

■■ • ■ •■ ) ■ 'o ' ' V ' ' ' ' ■ ■ • ■ ‘ 

' p: 1 « 

■ . ’ • 

J'T. ■ ; I . 0 ' ' • • - 




: > • ' .0 ' J ‘ < 





i07 


Where Heme Economics 1 and Home Economics 2 are not com¬ 
bined in the same class period, the following units are sugges¬ 
ted: 


Home Economics 1 

Becoming clothing 

A problem in clothing construction 

Construction of children 1 s clothing 

A remake problem in clothing 

Poods and meal planning 

The school lunch 

Home nursing 

Child care 

Home mechanics 

Time and money management 

Intelligent buying 

Party refreshments 

Home projects 

Home Economics 2 
A remake in clothing 
Advanced problem in clothing 
Advanced problem in tailoring 
A home for happy living 

Preparation for the responsibilities of marriage 
Production of food through gardening and preservation 


The school lunch 




' 



















' 1 







• ■ . r. j :;:i ; ;, i . .. 

", .1 : - : / ' . : >>}:r ' o 'V- 

jf.oivrl £.00dor, 9 f{T 

■ val: a/Ti'-rn' entoH 

aol 

! 











. r„: so 








'• i!:. i:: 0 ' ■ • .. 










:o 1 


' 







208 

Batters and doughs 

Party refreshments and entertaining 

Home projects 

Home Projects or Home Experiences 

Regardless of what is accomplished in the school, home 
economics teaching cannot have reached its goal until living 
conditions and housekeeping techniques in the home have im¬ 
proved* Working in a carefully planned and supervised home¬ 
making centre is different altogether from working in a home 
where circumstances cannot be so well controlled. The home 
project should be the most important part of the program of 
home economics education, 

The home project is a guided home experience in which the 
girl learns to apply, in a true family setting, what she has 
learned at school. 

The initial step in home project work should be home 
practice which consists of repeating at home what the pupil 
has done at school, or what the teacher has demonstrated. It 
has for its aim the development of skill, and is chiefly a 
T? doing TT job, A home project is a more important piece of 
work than home practice, and differs from it in that it involves 
not only skill bub managerial ability as well. A project is 
not merely a doing job, but in addition is a studying, planning 
and managing job 4 





■v: f :-uoh hrm s'todxJtvl 

• vl ' 

b:’ ' x 

: ,- lf -.•'■.?■ 'h;>■■•’o• r.v£r( ^orr^y.) r>nxxo & xoJx'onooo 

- * • ■ 

; •■•• •' ; ; „ it - • ' ' X ■ ' -• X ■ ■ ': ' • 

• •: ■ ' ■ • - ■ in ■ - ;>/;. :! . x r i;' : 

■ • : .. '• 

' 

■ ■ r ■ r .>* ]\cyiq one-.: 








■ • e \;j : •/. ... - '. « ■ ■ ' n..;:<r I-i-X’ 

■■ 

. 


..V » ■ • . ' ■■■ ■ : "t: :.,x/ t O^X- 

,• ■. •. ■. ':•) ' ' ■' ' ■: 

; ... ' ■ " v x 

■ ■ * ' ' v ■ 

•• ■ 1 r ‘ err 1 X: '' I" '. r :? ''I'XOV 

. 

< ' r : , ' 


Neautrement for I .'one Projects 


The teacher should definitely state the requirements. 
Number cf projects : 

During the year the pupil should complete three or four 
projects in two or three different phases of home-making. 

(When the home projects is introduced for the first time, and 
is new to teacher, pupil and parent, perhaps one home project 
is all that should be attempted the first year.) 

Time requiremen t: 

No time requirement should be set, as it ma}*- lead to 
intentional exaggeration of time required for a particular task 
or the pupil may be inclined to dawdle at the work in order to 
occupy more time. A time record should be kept, however, in 
order to gain an understanding of time required for different 
tasks, and also to encourage the pupil to complete routine 
tasks in less time. 

Choosing the project : 

1. The project must parallel or follow class room instruction 

2. The project must be of interest to the pupil, 

3. It must meet the needs of the student and her family, 

4# The project must be difficult enough to challenge the 

ability of the pupil, yet simple enough that goals set 

for the pfoject can be attained. 

Home contacts: 


Good project work cannot be carried on with only a general 
















310 


understanding of community conditions. To give proper guidance 
of home- projects the teacher must understand the viewpoint of 
the girl and her family„ There cannot be proper pupil growth 
in project work unless the girl has the support of her family. 

A series of home visits is necessary. 

Purpose of home visits : 

lo To get acquainted with home conditions. 

2. To gain the cooperation of the family. 

3. To ask the advice of the mother about what she would like 
her daughter to gain from her home experiences. 

4# The purpose of later visits will be to check on the 
progress or to evaluate the completed project. 

Method of Teaching : 

1. Pupil chooses project after consultation with family and 
teacher. 

2 0 Work plans are made for accomplishing desired goals. 

3. Records are kept of work donf, material used, etc, 

4. Conferences are held between teacher and pupil to ascertain 
progress that is being made by the student, and to a ssist 
pupil with problems which arise, 

5o Teacher and pupil evaluate project: 

i. b a ve the desired aims been accomplished? 
ii. What pupil growth has resulted? 

(More detailed information concerning the procedure to be used 
when introducing a home experience programme can be obtained 
upon request from the Supervisor of Home Economics, Department 
of Education.) 








. 

. - >iio vt: l on >ri .• > 

. 


: . . ■. ' . L . .' :> ' " . 


■ ' ■ '' .' ■ r> • o • 

. 

a '; ' \> ' 

o • ■ ■ ■ ; 


* r 


- 


. *• 

. 

. * 


. c : <, . - 

•’ ;U: • ' : : ■! *t :: dt '0'.:: ; 

, 

; 

' 

. 

< ‘ 

. 




311 


Foods and lieal Planning 

I* An Adequate Diet -- See Kitchen wall charts 

Nutrition Division 
Department of Pensions and National 
Health. 

Vitamins and results of their deficiencies 
Foods rich in the different vitamins 
Minerals essential to health 
The best food sources 

"Minerals and vitamins from the grocery store not 
at the drug store" 

Purchasing of fruits, vegetables, meat, staples 
Storing of fruits and vegetables, milk, meat in the home 
Milk — nutritive value 

Ways of incorporating milk in the diet 
Principles of cooking milk dishes 
Cereals -«= especially whole grain 
Nutritive value 

Ways of incorporating cereals in the diet 
Fruits and vegetables -- nutritive value 

Cooking of fruits and vegetables, fresh, canned, 
quick frozen, dehydrated 

Meat — Different cuts; relative nutritive values and 
methods of cooking the different cuts; boiling, 
broiling, roasting, frying, braizing, etc; 
cookery, fish cookery. 



. .. - • ■ ,> 7': . n 


: - . v "- 

n .t - ' 








. ■ i » . ' clB 




r .. • r/: > c -■ ;i - v . - 7 ‘' ' : . ' ' 






c c 

to to 




' 












■ ‘. r 


c ; t 




) -\y\ 


¥ 

< • i "" : 




r ’ 

■ 

■ - 

■ c • 





«• « : ' 


t 


t 7 7: 


. < 




Eggs — Nutritive value 


Principles of egg cookery 

(cookery of eggs and milk may be studied together.) 

Cheese dishes -- oven poaching of cheese and eggs 

left-over dishes 

fruit and vegetable salads and their contribution to the 

diet. 

Meal planning : 

1. To include the essentials of an adequate diet. 

2. Pleasing combinations, 

3. Varieties in color, temperatures, textures and flavor. 

II. Batters and Doughs 

Leavening agents — air, steam, carbon dioxide -- and 
method of producing those in batters and doughs: phosphate, 
tartrate and alum phosphate baking powders, and the proportions 
of each which should be used. Substituting soda and sour milk 
in a recipe that calls for baking powder and sweet milk and vice 
versa. The qualities of bread and pastry flours. Making of 
batters and doughs in which the different leavening agents are 
used: 


Muffins 
Tea Biscuits 
Griddle Cakes 
Waffles 
Yeast Breads 


Cakes — with and without shortening 

Pastry 
Cookies 
Popovers 
Cream Puffs 












v ‘ ,l • ‘ - - 

, • j-. • . 1 i Id -v' 

r ’ j; - v ' . r . 

j ■ ■ rL* I'M ~ ’’ ■" ■■ ' 

: 7: : : 7 - 7.7 

4 ■ ' 







'•' • V. : 




> ' ■ • • . r • < .. '' - ; 1 


’ : $ " ‘ ' ■' • . . ' r ‘ • ■ ) - 1 
t : ' . ; ■ ' • ■ ■ ' r ‘ ' >'■ ' : J 


• • : ■ ' - ' ' 

' 

- 

• > r ; •: •: ‘ 7 v i,’7 :v . / .7* r • ■ • f ‘ 






: 




.X 




' 

•• ' 7 " ) ■’ . 


7 " ' - 


1 • 








III. Party Refreshments and Entertaining: 

Sandwiches, canapes, hors d 1 oeuvre, fancy cakes and 
cookies, salads, candies, frozen desserts* 

The School Lunch 

More and more children are travelling to school in vans. 
For this reason some means of providing a hot school lunch for 
these pupils is becoming important. Where a school is equipped 
to teach home economics, it is expected that every effort will 
be made to use this equipment to provide a hot lunch. Part of 
the cooking course should be devoted to the planning, prepara¬ 
tion and serving of at least one hot dish each noon. Each 
girl in turn should have the responsibility of purchasing and 
supervising preparation of the food. 

Where this scheme has been put into operation, it has been 
found that one hot dish per day costs from 34 to 54 per pupil. 
The objectives of the scheme are: 

1. To provide good food for hungry pupils 

2, To develop a sense of responsibility 

3o To develop an appreciation of the time and effort 
spent in planning, selecting, preparing and serving 
food. 

Reference — School Lunch Bulletin, Extension Division, 
Department of Agriculture, Edmonton. 

Home Production of Food Through Gardening and Preservation 


This unit affords excellent opportunities for correlation 















■ ■ 1 ' < ’ •; •'.!. ,0 . ' ■ os.- ' 


• ’ . . • : . o « " ’ 


' : o . v . . 










... ■ % • , • , ; -IT • ■ r> ■ n.r ■ ."'V; 

• s ' > r cV"' 0 • • ■ ' ' V \ r; - 

j; S 

. 

. 










*i •n |k o 

: 










* 







• ' ' ■ - . • ' ' 


t-ion-j'a o'ia 




( ■_ /; • .. >0. . . ’! '& . ■ 

' 










314 


with home practice, e.g. planting tomatoes in the spring, 
transplanting into garden, summer care, preservation of toma¬ 
toes in the fall for family use in the winter* 

Reference -- Seed catalogue from a reputable firm is one of 
the best authorities. 

Plan the amount of space in the garden which should be 
devoted to each vegetable in order to supply the family needs 
for the whole year. 

Encourage introduction of vegetables not generally grown - 
e.g. broccoli, new varieties of squash, etc. 

Storing of vegetables in the root cellar. 

Drying of vegetables (Bulletins, Department of Agriculture) 

Causes of food spoilage: 

1. Bacteria growth 

2. Yeasts 

3. Moulds 

4. Botulism 

Methods of conteracting the above. 

Treatment of vegetables between time of picking and cooking 
to conserve minerals and vitamins. 

Canning vegetables — hot water bath 

pressure cooker 
fractional sterilization 

The place of home canned vegetables in menu planning. 


. , 












■ •; • .-rn. n ' Qj. •: ■ r"' ,;v o: b^Sovrih 

. 

, . - * 

„ 

, : ■ 

; ’■ '■ 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

*'• - - ■ ' ■; • - - 















Clothing Unit 


I. Becoming Clothing : 

a. Study of Fabrics -- Type of fibre 

Manufacture of fabric - briefly 
Weaves 
finishes 
Designs 
Dyes 
Labels 
Durability 
Tests - lye test 

acetone (fingernail polish, 
remover for acetate rayon) 
burning test 

Laundering and cleaning^of different 
fabrics 
Stain removal 

b* Purchasing of clothes -- 


coats 

undi es 

dresses 

foundation garments 

shoes 

hats 

hose 

accessories — gloves, et 


When should we buy ready-made clothes and when should we 
make our own? ^hat lines and colors are becoming to 
different figures and complexion? 










316 


IIo A Problem in Clothing Construction: 

If the student has not had home economics in the 
intermediate grades she should be required to make her 
first garment of cotton. A print dress or pinafore, 
flannelette pyjamas, or a cotton blouse are possibilities. 

Selection of pattern and material — correct size, 
becoming in line and color, suitable for the girl and for 
the occasion; material suitable to the style; trimmings. 
Alteration of pattern and cutting of garment. 
Construction and fitting of garment. 

Record of clothing constructed -- (Records as in 
Practical Home Economics magazine — April, 1946. 

Samples of these records mil be supphed by the Super- 
visor of Home Economics upon request.) 

III. Construction of Childrens Clothing : 

Styles which make it easy for the child to dress 
himself. 

IV. A re-make problem in clothing construction : 

(a) remodelling a dress 

(b) making a child 1 s garment from an adult 1 s 

(c) making a skirt from a pair of men’s trousers 

(d) making a girl’s jacket from a man’s 

(e) making a skirt or jumber from a coat. 

V a Advanced problem in clothing (The wool or rayon garment) 

VI. Advanced problem in tailoring (The suit or coat) 

























; . * 

- 


'' 

< ■ • - ■ " ‘ :ooo,:.' 

• -- c 




« 








. ; 





; , 1 ; * 

. 



* 



' 





























1 . 





1 








1 r; 











i 




1 





. 

ct 













































VIIo Handicrafts -- Knitting 


Crocheting 

Weaving - card, weave-it, or loom 

Embroidery- 

Textile painting 

Quilting 

Rug-making 

Arrangements may be made with the industrial arts 
instructor for the girls to do a woodwork project under his 
instruction* 


A Home for Happy Living 

This may be taken as one large unit, or the smaller 
sections may be studied as individual units* 

The Girl and Her Room 

Suitable floor and wall finishes for bedrooms 
c . - 

Bedroom wall papers for large or small rooms, bright or 

dull rooms 

Pictures suitable for bedrooms 
Color scheme for bedrooms 
Furniture - desirable finishes 

Points to consider when buying springs, mattress, sheets, 
blankets, pillows, etc* 

f 

Furniture arrangment 
Adequate lighting in bedroom 








< - 




• • . o : 

< ~ ■ - ; T ■> 

. 











' ' 


< 






, 


' 1 


m /. •: 






. 

: or" 

- • f : • : /" 

>■' - r '■ 1 ■ 







jl8 


Care of bedrooms - bed-making 

care of mattress and bedding 
arranging dresser drawers, etc. 

A study corner in the bedroom 
Personal daintiness - bathing 

use of deodorants 
care of hair 
cosmetics 

upkeep of clothing and shoes 
Sharing room with a sister 

Provision for towels, basin, etc., when there is no 
bathroom in the house 
Suggested home projects: 

Arrangement of clothes closet - shoe racks, etc. 

Improvising of clothes closet 

Construction of dressing table, shelves, laundry bags, etc. 
Construction of spread and drapes 
Construction of rugs for floor 
Prevention of damage of clothes moths 

The Living Room 
Purpose of the living room 

Art principles applied to the living room - balance, 
proportion, rhythm, emphasis, harmony 
Effects of color 
furniture arrangement 











-'ic: i ' > • '• 0 

' 


:-S •'>0 








/ ? 4 ? ; 















. 


-coo 'i-o?. 

; V; . !) ■ ..>• 1 ' ■ 


•, . • ■ r ; - ' ' V o -o<rrr'- 


V. ■ ; ’ O • '• ' , . 

' 


. 



n 9 


Adequate lighting 

Points to consider when buying chesterfield, chairs, 
rugs, lamps, etc. 

Choosing and hanging pictures 
Care of houseplants in living room 
Cut flower arrangements 

Accessories - mirrors, tapestires, plaques, candles, 
magazine racks, etc. 

Care of furniture and rugs 

Courtesies observed in the living room - introductions, etc. 

Sharing the living room with members of the family 

Sharing the radio - a time schedule for the radio 

Entertainment for the whole family 

What children do when parents entertain 

What parents do when children entertain 

Storage of games, etc. 

Suggested Home Projects : 

Entertainment within the family 
Refinishing pieces of furniture 
Slip cover chesterfield or chair 9 

The Kitchen 

Suitable floor, wall and cupboard finishes 
Kitchen cupboards; toe cove, space for utensils and lids, 
shallow shelves for storing linen, spice shelves, etc. 
Storage space for housekeeping supplies 






220 


Convenient arrangement of work centres 
Correct heights for working surfaces 
Equipment - purchasing and care of stoves 
refrigerators 
sinks and fixtures 
utensils 

mix masters etc. (Do you use it enough to 
justify the cost?) 

Kitchen linens 
Garbage disposal 

Care of plumbing - prevention of clogged pipes 

cleaning the trap 

Arrangement in kitchens without water and sewage disposal 
Prevention of accidents in the kitchen 

Provision for use of kitchen other than food preparation 
Laundry 

Place for baby 
Rocking chair for grandma 
Serving meals in kitchen 
Suggested Home Projects : 

Brightening the kitchen with fresh paint, colorful 
curtains, etc. 

Check kitchens at home to discover if unnecessary steps 
are required when performing tasks. Are more cupboards 
needed? 















v : ...v » M cawi 





. 
























' . ' r" ■> 






:•/ J /no. O' ■ Ur . 


, O. s. ' o > ■ • /■' -o; : :.V\. 




/;>. brj ' 

,>V . ‘O'. no I. . 












• t 

. 










: 







J521 


The Dining D-oom 
Decoration of the dining room 
Suitable colors 
Wall and floor finishes 

Purchasing of dining room furniture, table lineij, china, 
silver, glassware 
Storage of linen, silver, etc. 

Table setting and service 
Dining room etiquette 
Cleaning silver 
Laundering linen 

Other uses of dining room — for sewing, study, play room, 
etc. 

Suggested home projects: 

Making every family meal a happy social occasion 
Construction of place-mat sets, hot-dish pads, etc. 

Bathroom 

Suitable wall and floor finishes for bathroom 
Color scheme 
Bathroom fixtures 

Devices to prevent accidents -- hand grips, electric 
switch in the hall, etc. 

Storage for towels, soap, etc. 

Curtains for privacy 







< 




■ io . .i'' - o; I-j V o 

' 

t 1 ■' • • ■ i - ■ ' • r' 

-u" t : V ; 

. \ / »•- . 

•' 

: 

\*:o 

< ■ . - ■ • ■ ' ' 








‘ 

, ? 








• ' •; . 





322 


Keeping the bathroom clean: cleansing agents to be used 
individual responsibility of family members 
Sharing bathroom with family members and guests 
Plumbing and sewage system 
Putting new rubber washer in a faucet 
Preventing plugged pipes 

Installation of water systems in rural homed 
Bathroom facilities in homes without water systems 
Suggested home projects : 

Cooperation among family members in use and care of 
bathroom 

Planning, the House 

Choice of location 
Build or rent 

Installment buying of house or furnishings 

Fire insurance 

Floor p}.ans 

Plans for basement: 

Heating system 
Laundry equipment 
Arrangement of laundry 
Vegetable and fruit storage 
Avoiding accident and fire hasards 
Landscaping and yard 
Suggested Home Projects : 

Planting and growing of flowers 
Care of lawns and flowers 







: ■ x ‘ stooTtflctecf 

' 

'i"'d • n;iv. 


j W; f -y- 7! nv T , r;'dV.V'7 ' r)7J\. 

. .■ ' ■• ' I ; moo‘ ■: < ■■ 





: 



••r 










!T. 1 

' •/,>. r o ’• : ,.'v\ ■ r :j'. 

i 

7; - I ■ •j: 

: " • ' : ■ v . 

f'1 •/: j;.- ' 

■ • '■ ' ■ 

' 

: 














Preparation for the Responsibilities 

of Marriage 

Qualities Necessary for Success in Marriage 

Sincerity 

Honesty 

Tolerance 

Unselfishness 

Consideration of others 

Cheerfulness 

Responsiveness to modds and interests of others 
Ability to adjust to changing situations 
¥holesome attitude toward sex 
Choosing a Life Partner 

Social, educational, economic background 
Effects of heredity 

Problems to be Discussed during the Engagement 

What type of wedding is desired? 

Where will the honeymoon be spent? 

How much money will be spent on the honeymoon? 

Where will permanent residence be established? 

What personality traits may cause conflicts and how may 
these traits be modified? 

Will they retain membership in different churches? 

Are there other members of the family which may be the 
cause of conflicts? 

Will the wife continue to work after marriage? 









' 













90vO f ~ 

' 




' 




’ ' ; ' 

- 

1 ' ■ , " '9 ' io,' ' 

: ;0'n:O.‘0- 

■ 








;o : 
















. 










324 


How will the income be spent? 

How many children are desired? 
etc. 

The Hygiene of Pregnancy 

References : 

Alberta I.other's Took - Department of Public Health, 
Edmonton * 

The Canadian • other and Child - Department of Pensions and 
National Health, Ottawa. 

(Also obtainable from Provincial Department of. Health, 
Edmonton.) 


Child Care 

Taking care of children while mother has an. eveing out -- 

!t baby-sitting n 

General Care of the Infant 

Food, clothing, bathing, etc., (See Canadian Mother and 
Child, Department of tensions and National Health, 
Ottawa.) 

The Pre-School Child 

Food for the toddler 
Clothing for children 

Teaching a child to speak good English 
Teaching a child to be cautious but not fearful. 
Teaching honest}^ to a child 


Training in obedience 













How and when to punish children 

Training in toilet habits (McCalls' Magazine, January 

1945) 

(Child Welfare Problems in Habit Formation and Training, 
Canadian Welfare Council, Ottawa). 

Teaching a child to like the foods he should have 
Entertaining Children 

Toys for children 

Choosing stories for children 

Children's parties 

Every home economics department should sponsor the serving 
of food to under-nourished children in the school. Tomato 
juice, orange juice, cod liver oil, milk, a nutritious 
pudding, etc. could be served. A graph showing gains in 
weight should accompany this project. 

Home Nursing 

1. Qualities of a good home nurse 

2. Gaining the cooperation of the family in caring for 
the patiento 

3. Converting an ordinary room into a sick room 

4. Care of the patient 

Equipment necessary 
Bathing patient 

Routine nursing procedures (See Red Cross Manual.) 
















' 

I : \ '■ ' ’ - r :!■ ; r ’ -• 

' 

^ . 2 . 2-jl : -sl% ■ . ' 

.. t 

, 

• t ■ '■ • - ■ « r ; ‘ ' ' 










. • '■ 









* 

, ■' ' 

' 

:y’,3C) ■ M< f ' . - 

- . • • ■■ ■ j . , :• ■ • • ■ O- • • ' ' ' 








326 


5o Invalid cookery - including diets to gain or lose weight 
Serving meals to a bedridden patient 
Arranging an attractive tray 
6 0 Entertainment for the invalid 
Toys for children 

Games, handicrafts, etc, for the convalescent 
7. Housecleaning after communicable diseases, 

I# Intelligent Buying 

Learning to evaluate advertising and salesmanship 
Installment buying 
Consideration for sales people 
Studying labels 

Buying of clothes - yard goods, shoes, coats, hoisery, etc. 
Buying food 

Labels on canned goods 

Grades of meat, butter, eggs, etc. 

Buying of furniture and household furnishings 
Construction and finish of furniture 
Construction of carpets, etc. 

Buying of household appliances 

Vacuum cleaners, washing machines, refrigerators, etc. 

II. Home Mechanics 


Problems as outlined in TT Home Mechanics for Girls 11 - ¥ 00 din 








•' • ■; • ' * :fJ: ■ •- ' ; ';y ',ooo. - -r 

yy yy y.yy, " "y.yy ' - 

i 

h.l. ■ v : - Yi y / ' (. yy . 1 • : 

; • YY Y 1 -’ ’ 

; . ■ y ' •" : ‘ " t ' 

. . ' , ’ Y . ' > ' . 


* 


' H 






■ 




: c' t ■ ■ y ? "’ ■ ■ ; - ■ ’- ' ' "’■ 

■■ 2 i) O 0 '■' h ;); t i1B 0 .1 1 o B 1YC ' £J 

. ? t 

l ■. ' lodsBi ■ • lm.ud do 

j • 

■ 

0 : '' < ' ' 1 ' 

YQOfY Yl . , ;> l. Y r V '..O ‘ : YYY/ 

■ ? yyyY.) ' ' \ Y : : ' , < Y Y j 'y v rjaP-V 


...'Y 

: 'J I YY : 1 ■ '■ ■' ■ : •' ■ ■ 








Ill* Time and iionev Managemen t 
Need of planned family spending 


327 


A budget pattern 
*ood and clothing budgets 

Time schedules - daily, weekly, and seasonal care of home 
Alloting tasks to family members 

IV. Conservation of Food and Clothing 
Making clothes do 
Remaking and remodelling clothing 
Conservation cookery 

Sugar and fat saving recipes 

Needlework 

Under certain conditions it may not be possible to offer 
the full home economics course, particularly the foods section; 
but it may be feasible to do some work in sewing with the girls* 
These conditions are more likely to occur In rural or smaller 
urban schools where the class may be small and the facilities 
limited* The organization of a hand needlework class is 
simple; and the necessar}?- equipment is not elaborate, being 
little more than a thimble, a needle and some thread* The 
student 1 s desk may be the work table and the materials with 
which to work may be brought from home. Boys may be interested 
in certain types of needlework* 






« ' 

■ . ■' ' ■ - ' 

■ 

„ 

' 

*: / ■■ o n ■ • r ::i - ' 

. . 

■ • ■ 

/ : rni 

: ' . 

r 1 - r-r-o- nrf ".p i ctl 

o 


. 





c • 

, 


< 




' 


r • ©J ' ; '*i / : 



1 11 



. yi. ■' l 

:r 




. ■ 












323 


While no minimum requirements are set out in the course, 
the teacher will be held responsible for seeing that a reason¬ 
able amount of sewing is accomplished. Each student will be 
required to work to her capacity, and her final grading will 
be determined in terms of what is actually achieved in relation 
to her ability. 

I'he teacher will be the judge as to the assignments any 
student may be given. 

A carefully kept notebook is essential for each pupil, 
but this should not be stressed at the expense of actual 
achievement. Samples of work in textiles, colour schemes, 
pictures and clippings are properly included in the note¬ 
book, but even this may be overdone. This book should be 
available to the supervisor, who will give it careful considera¬ 
tion in evaluating the status of the pupil and the type of work 
being done in the class. 

A daily diary, record or log shall be kept in a separate 
section of the notebook. 

Provision should be made for a reference library, which 
should be readily accessible to the pupils. Assignments 
should be made frequently which call for the use of the 
reference library. 

The nature of the fabrics used will be sutdied with respect 
to type of fibre, cotton, linen, silk or rayon; weave, qualities, 
and for the purposes of design. This work should be done in¬ 
cidentally when these fabrics are being used. 


St . 1 

O’:: J.. 7 i n.yyj: ^ t 0 'A.*.~hi: 
r : ) :; • ".v" ; : : -0 j. r y ■ 'o ' ■ ,;:L- 

r ' ) ' ' : " 

. 

t \ 1 ■ '• *' • . k; r > *■ . ■' n 

■ ' ■ ■ ', v ! '■{:•:•' '' Q ’.•> •' rr.: 

* 

. ■ :• ,o*' ! ' ! .v : L\ x ' ■ '> -Kt ■ ■'. ? ~ 

.L.T;J ftorv. c. ? ■■ ;: r oi: . , ; y/: Xyrey 'T. JO /• 

■ 

. . .. .* v * • 

> . - . ■ . - .■ ; ' :np .■' - * ’• . ':ov- .:' p : : 

-/■ ': X : X: ' 

, ' < 

■ ’■ ■' j" '• e ; 1 y o.X ■ ' : V •. 

: XX O ■; ,J , X' •; : X >’/ X : X7:-rr..[ -y t) Ill flO.XCt 

* ■ ■ 

. • • v: , ' X’ . 

’ ■ " 1 ' ■'o' 

t ‘ ' • , ‘ ’ ! ' ' 1 " 

, ' ' ■ 

.r.L',o rloi: Iv; ■■'IJ’no:: ■ *r' ; o' ;•: .»■ M'jonn 








A. Construct and decorate some household article, such as 
a towel, pillow slip, sewing bag, shopping bag, laundry bag, 
knitting bag, chesterfield set, using various sewing stitches; 
such as basting, hemming, overhanding, overcasting, running, 
backstitching, where strength is required; and decorative 
stitches, such as outline stitch, chain stitch, blanket stitch, 
hemstitch, cross-stitch, button-hole stitch as for scallops, 
satin stitch. 

B 0 Construct and decorate with the use of a pattern some 
simple garment, such as apron, slip, pyjama set. Embroider 
or applique a monogram or a simple pattern, using colour. 

With the use of a pattern construct a simple blouse, or 
house dress. 

These garment problems will involve simple construction 
processes such as the making of collars, cuffs, plackets, button¬ 
holes; and attaching fasteners, such as buttons, hooks and 
e^^es, and dome fasteners. 

G. Needlecraft - knitting, quilting, cutwork, drawn work, 
crocheting, needlepoint, cross-stitch, weaving (weave-it tT loom n ) 
as applied to some useful article. 

Requirement 

At least two articles must be completed, one from n B tT and 
one from TT A TT or tr G TT . This requirement is a minimum. The capa¬ 
ble student may achieve more - one article from each group,, or 
even more. 

Care and repair of textile articles. Mending, patching, 
and darning; laundering; removal of spots and stains. 







Reference Books 


Art 

Art in Horne and Dress - Trilling 

Elements of interior Decoration - 1hiton 

Home Decoration - with Fabric and Thread - Spear 

Child Care and Home Nursing 

Care and Guidance of Children - Goodspeed 

Home Nursing and Child Care - Turner et al 

Simp 1 ified K ursing- - Dakin 

Clothing and Textiles 

Fabrics and Dress - Rathbone and Tarpley 
Fabrics - Denny 

Guide to Textiles - Evans and McGowan 

Our Clothing - Baxter 

Practical Dress Design - Erwin 

Practical Sewing - Everson 

You and Your Clothes - Baxter and Latzke 

Your Clothes and Personality - R^ran 

Consumer Education 

Consumer Economics - Kennedy and Vaughan 
consumer Goods - Reich and Siegler 
Consumer Train in/ ' - Heil 

Earning and Bpending the Family Income - Friend 


You and Your . .oney - Trilling 









































- • , ' • . .. L .... * 

.. ■ ■ v ■■ - . 

' 

. . . - .: _ . ■ /' .V: ; 






■ 













































331 


Family Relationship 

The Family and Its Relationship - Groves, Skinner and 

Home and Family - Jordan et al 

Home and Family living - Justin and Rust 

Living with Others - Goodrich 

Living Your life - Drawford et al 

Cur Homo and Family - Baxter 

Cur CLr.:v in the Ilonm - Baxter 

Sharing Home Life - Baxter and Justin and Rust 

Foods and Nutrition 

Canadian Cook Book - Pattinson 

Everyday Foods - Harris and Lacey 

Food and Family Living - Cornell 

Foods and Homemaking - Greer 

Foods and Nutrition and Home Management Manual 
Home Guide to Modern Nutrition Phillips 
Meal Planning and Table Service - Bailey 
Our Food - Baxter 

Vitamins, what they are and How They Can Benefit You ■ 

Table Service and Decoration - Gunn 
Vitality through Planned Nutrition - Davis 
Home Management 

Housekeeping Handbook - Balderston 
Housewifery - Balderston 
Your Home and You - Greer 


Svenson 


Borsook 

































. s 



























322 


Pome Planning; 

Making Homes - Schultz 
Personality and Etiquette 
Behave Yourself - Allen and Briggs 
Cues for You - Ryan 

Everyday living - karris, Tate and Andrews 
Everyday Manners - Wilson 
If You Please - Allen 
lanners for Moderns - Black 
his Way, Please - Boykin 
General Referenc es 

The Girl Today, The Woman Tomorrow - Hunter 
Advanced Course in Homemaking - Calvert 

fundamentals of Home Economics - Jensen, Jensen and Ziller 

The Girl and 11 er Home - Trilling and Nicholas 

The Gir^s Daily Life - Van Duzer et al 

New Home Economics Omnibus - Harris and Huston 

New Elementary Home Economics - Matthews 

first g purse in Homemaking - Calvert 

Problems in Home Economics - Trilling et al 

Teachers 1 References 

Feeding the Family - Rose 

A Functioning Program of Teaching Home Economics - Spafford 
Fundaments of Teaching Home Economics - Spafford 
A Guidebook for Ho m emaking - Herrin.aton 
Healthful Living - Williams 












































































333 


Homemaking (An Integrated Teaching Program) - Herrington 

Housekeeping Handbook - Balderston 

Needlework in Education - Graham 

Teaching Nutrition to Bpy S and Girls 1 Rose 


The Teaching of Homemaking - Hatcher and Andrews 








- 

* r '\f 


• • "L ' ■ ~ : ' ,w ' 















APPENDIX W 


Department of education 

Alberta 

Special Retaliations of the Department 

Relating; to the Technical Subjects 
■ 01 the Programme of Studies for High Schools 

Credits will be secured in Shop Subjects for the first 
and second year on the following basis: 

Drawing and Design 2 

Theory 2 

Practical Work 4 

a 

Credits for the third 3 rear Shop Subjects will be secured 
on the following basis: 

Theory including Drawing and Design 2 
Practical Work 8 

10 

Drawing; and Design (Girls) 

(This subject is essential as a part of Fabrics and Dress 1 
and Homemaking 1) 

Figure Drawing 

Several times during the year figure drawing should be 
introduced as a preparation for second year wok* Study 
proportions and relations of different parts of human figure, 



































'• . •. /v..':- . ‘ ._<» _■., v V . . ,l- : A 


: ■. ’ ■ ,v r • : 




: 




■ r, ' ' • 






' 




■ ' 



















•. vd ■; i>: t -j r; r, ?.u 







and give timed pose drawings of figures in standing position. 

At least eight such studies should be made, one every month. 
Principles of Design 

A study of the principles of proportion, dominance, balanc 
rhythm and unity. This section of the course differs from that 
of the boys 1 course, only in the selection of ULuutrative 
material and drawings done by students. These should be 
related to dress, home craft, etc. Pupils should be allowed 
to work on large 12 n x l$ Tt sheets of material if available. 
(This section should be completed by the end of the first 
term.) 

Colour 

The study of the colour circle, intensity, values, and 
six different pleasing colour combinations. 

These should be definitely connected with everyday 
associations such as dress, walls of rooms, dishes. 

Units 

Conventionalize a motif either from nature or simple ab¬ 
stract. Show variations of this as follows: a change of 
outline; a change of proportion; a change of texture; a change 
of colour; a change of internal parts. 

A definite design for practical use should follow this. 

The unit may be varied for quilt pattern, cutwork, solid 
embroidery, cross stitch, lace, china, pillowcase, vases. 




■ 


; r 


' 


■ 

a 


a 

" ■ 

.. ■ • « ; < ■ : ■ ■ ■ " ■ 

. 

* < t 

i ' ' 1 ' t 

c 

' 

t ' 

■ t I ■' ' t : • 








Application of Design Principles 

(a) Italian Quilting 

Teach single line and Italian quilting. Work out a 
pattern for an oval, elliptical or circular cushion top. 

(b) Stencilling 

Teach materials suitable for stencilling, and articles 
of use, which are best stencilled. Work out a pattern 
and cut stencil from shellacked cardboard. Cut negative, 
and carry out actual stencilling project on article of 
use. 

Portfolio 

Some suitable portfolio or container should be made, to 
keep year's work of each student. Each container should pro- 
vide a problem in design, and an application of colour theory 
learned. 

■ Drawing and Design (Girls ) 

(This subject is an essential part of the Fabrics and Dress 
2 and Homemaking 2.) 

Suggested Problems 

Make a human proportion chart of the Greek type figures. 
Using a head leangth as the unit of measurement, practice 
measuring heights, shoulder widths and length, of limbs of 
several members of the class. Make 20-minute pose drawings 
of figures in standing positions. 













rj . . . L . ' . 

. 

' - : ' ■ ■■ .*- r r 

• • ' r :> ■ - * ; r . ■ : y:; " ' v: ‘- 




. . . ? • Vi : • .■ • ' ■> ^ 


* ' : ’ ‘ ' < ' " 0 


„ 






' 


. 

‘ • ‘ ' ' - . « ' ’■ ' ; 




















3 "; •. o 


. 


“ 


.r : • . , ■ ■ ■ 

. 






1# 

<■-* hinm In mmmWnmtim 

:■* him* V- paifcornod mttrtnl 

km lAtm if? various tri^sings# 



1 * t&H Amber 
2* Short flftMt 
3# fail . ; «^d 
4# Sfcsrt slsrttdtF 
5# full angtiLsr 

ti&mrmm ifti&t meh tfpe 4temt3& mm% 

Vmw±m drmmn for mmh mi %hmm tfpm®* 

itmlf tli# clothing of th* : Oracle sod Byzmtlm 

p- rtoda*, 

Ttak# a ara^inr firm « fdotttp* of mn Lgyp&im 9 Croak or 
Bfmmtinm 4 mm* 

M&&$m m modem &mm imm mm mi those historic motifs* 



iim%m oolotir theory and colour mi 

and Host iso 1* 

Mount in note hook stKfe##n»iuoh*s^iro t patches of 
different coloured clothes, iw those with th« *tms*li 


sfBtm of colour, naming * Ho# fain# 1*9 

Intensity 9*0 




































Break up spaces with simple and compound curves. Apply 
colour harmonies to thewe spaces in flat washes. Watch 
that as the intensity decreases the areas increase. 

Craft Problems 
First Craft Problem 

Make an abstract or conventional design for crewel 
embroidery of vari-coloured wool or rgffia for some 
article of use such as folded purse, sewing bag, shopping 
bag or cushion top. The design to be worked on plain or 
colored canvas. 

OR 

Make a design for a small hooked rug - conventional, 
abstract or geometric. Trace on canvas sewn to a stretcher 
and work with strips of coloured knitted goods. 

Linoleum Block Printing 

Work out a triangular or rectangular design in masses 
with charcoal or brush and ink, having no spaces less than 
one-eighth inch wide. Trace the design on the block or 
on transparent paper glued to the block. Cut away the 
background. Print with dye or paint on material. 

Small practice blocks may be tried out on hankerchiefs 
or personal greeting cards. 

One large'block print should be made for tie-ends, 
scarves, collar and cuff sets, or any other accessory in 
vogue. The same block may be used for a repeat surface 
pattern on lining for a portfolio. 










0 j 





















•' v 

■■ 1 1 r • 1 ■) 

. : 

■ L ■ i 

•.. • > I i ) ■ -r :•) j:'.. v '. > *.r L-l '^6 mo 

. ' : ' t - : . rv ■: ' ■ ; ■ • ' 






. 







. 


. 

- 


, 






. 









• 







. 



. 





Gesso Problem 


Make a decoration on low-relief gesso on a pair of book 
ends or an octagonal or hexagonal wall plaque. Gild and 
colour and give antique finish. 

OR 

Make a design in coloured enamels on a pair of wood 
book ends or an octagonal or hexagonal wall plaque. Out¬ 
line the masses in a neutral or contrasting colour. 

Interior Decoration Problems 

(1) Make sketches on squared paper of a bedroom, living- 
room or dining-room at home, a floor plan and the four 
wall elevations. Accurate measurements taken and 
recorded. 

(2) From these make a carefully drawn series of the 
same plan and elevations on separate sheets, (Scale 
one-half ince to one foot.) Everything in the room should 
be dram in plan or elevations to same scale. The 
prevailing colour scheme should be washed over these 
drawings. 

(3) Teach the application of the Pringiples of Arrangement 
to Interior Decoration. Deal with - 

a. Colouring of rooms with regard to exposure 

b. Value in ceiling, walls, trim, and floor 

c. Mall coverings, hangings. The amount and 
scale of patterned material used. Upholstery. 

d. Placing of furniture 

e. Hanging of pictures, lighting fixtures, acces¬ 


sories. 











340 


f. Floor coverings. 

5. Portfolio 

Make a portfolio with pockets and tapes. Size - 13 TT 
by 19 Tt to hold the year's drawings. A tracing of one of 
the designs from the year's work with the student's name 
may be put on the cover. 

This problem may be taken early in the year if the 
students need a means of carrying, their drawings. 

Homemaking 

Home Economics has for its ultimate aim the improvement of 
home and family life through the training in youth for the 
vocation of home making. The school, as a rule, is very 
limited in its ability to duplicate home conditions and the 
great danger to avoid is the making of the work of the 
department artificial and stinted. Because it is good theory 
or good information it is not necessarily good practice. 

Much of the instruction of a theoretical nature must be given 
incidentally and informally, duplicating the natural process 
of learning to do by doing. This does not meat that theory 
is not important. It is, but care must be taken to relate it 
to actual situations that are arranged to exist in the school. 
One of the great precautions to observe is the danger of making 
the work too academic and such that the instruction does not 
actually carry over into practical situations out of school* 







341 


As a method, participation and manipulative experiences 
are more important than much lecturing* Note taking can be 
carried on to an extreme. Daily logs should be kept by each 
student and a careful record of the work done by each should 

be kept and progress should be noted . Individual initiative 
should be encouraged. There is no reason why all students 
should be working at the same project at the same time. If 
this variety of project is presented it opens opportunities for 
much greater individuality, according to the ability of the 
student. 

No minimum requirement is set out in the program. The 
student with low ability is not overly driven or humiliated in 
not being able to attain to a minimum, while the able student 
is not retarded because of the slow pace of the slower moving 
partxipants. The bright and capable student should be permitted 
to progress as rapidly as her ability will permit. She should 
be given heavier responsibilities and kept constructively busy 
at all times. 

The following analysis of the course, with approximate 
time allotment is suggested: 


Unit 

I 

Foods 

18 

weeks 

Unit 

II 

Family Meals 

4 

we eks 

Unit 

III 

Lunch Box 

2 

weeks 

Unit 

IV 

Home Care of the Sick 

/** 

? 

weeks 

Unit 

V 

Laundry 

5 

weeks 

Unit 

VI 

Social and Family 





Relationships 

4 

weeks 







'' ' : 1 ' 








;;;; / . 












. •' ' • L tfos ' : : ‘ '' 

■ 

^ ■''• ■; ' ■ - 






cj. . ■ ,. ' ■- ■ >i d$j ■ d 



t 












0 J ' -r ' 




? 









342 


This must not be interpreted to mean that this is the 
order of the work to be taken or that any specific set of 
lessons should be devoted to any unit. This is left to the 
discretion of the instructor and the limitations under which 
the work must be carried on. In unit VI, for example, the 
best method may be that in which the instruction is incidental. 
If a 'four week period is allowed for lectures and discussions 
the work may become very formal and of doubtful value. 

Every department should have a reference library of the 
books listed in the bibliography. Students should be taught 
to use this library to its fullest functioning. Reports on 
special problems assigned according to the abilities of the 
respective students is a good method. 

Foods 

Objectives 

r 

To develop appreciation of the skill required to make 
standard products. 

To develop some understanding of scientific and economic 
principles underlying cookery. 

To furnish practice and develop some skill in cooking and 
care of kitchen, utensils, and equipment. 

Laboratory "fork 

Batters and doughs. Meat cookery. Fish cookery. Fowl 
cookery. Vegetable cookery. Deep fat cookery. Appetizers and 
salads. Desserts. Care and cleaning of kitchen and equipment 
in connection with laboratory work. 
















^ ■ . 








. •• ■\ 1 ■' 1 ''■■■ ‘ ; 

■■ ■ ? 

• - r: .’ s ■ \t V.0 f'O • *; 

• ' « ^ ‘ " 






. 

■ 

■ 

‘ 

- •; • ' . .■ :> ' ' in 


* v' ■' ' 














• ' : l 

m 



0 , 









Evidences of Desirable Progress 


Greater skill in preparing foods that are palatable and 
attractive , 

Greater knowledge of food principles and their use in 
the body. 

Growth in vocabulary of foods and in knowing of varieties 
of foods-- cheap cuts of meat, organs, different vegetables 
and ways of cooking them. 

Appreciation of the importance of thrift. 

Family Meals - Planning, preparation and serving. 

Objectives 

To give practice in planning meals to include all the 
essentials of an adequate diet at moderate low cost. 

To develop ability to budget time and money in meal pre¬ 
paration. 

To develop appreciation of the niceties of table setting, 
serving, and manners. 

Laboratory Work 

Preparation simple breakfasts, luncheons, and dinner for 
family. 

Dramatization of situations. 

Svidences of Desirable Progress 

Greater skill and speed in cooking. 

Greater ability to judge adequacy and cost of meals. 

More ease in serving and in table manners. 









344 


Lunch Boxes - for school. 

Objectives 

To develop appreciation of adequacy, variety, and daintiness 
in lunches. 

To demonstrate that planning and forethought are necessary 
in order to prepare lunches quickly and easily. 

Laboratory Work 

Preparation of food suitable for lunch boxes - sandwishes, 
raisin bread, custards and puddings, cookies, etc. 

Packing lunches for children of various ages. 

Packing of lunches for High School girls. 

Evidences of Desirable progress 

Improvement of lunch room conditions. 

Home Care eg the Sick 

Objectives 

To give knowledge which will help the girl to recognize 
common diseases and to know how contagious diseases are trans¬ 
mitted. 

To give training and some practice to enable her to meet 
home responsibilities, in case of illness, end to make sick 
persons more comfortable. 

Laboratory Work 

Care of the sickroom (methods of dusting, etc.) 

Practice in making, and changing bed. 

Taking temperature, pulse, respiration. 

Making mustard plaster, poultices, compresses. 











. 

&■' ■ . 

? ■ n ' -j : V‘.) FO 7 £00'I CTft CO, .. )7‘ J 0 - 

. 

4 

: ' [ . . ' ’ 

' 

' ■- t ' 1 ' 4 

■ 

• ; 


, ■ • - •• • •:) ‘ ' ' 1 • ‘ ' ’ 
z v 












'•: ■ h-: . ; v 

. 











Preparing hot water bottle. 

The blanket bath. 

Measuring medicine. 

Preparation of trays. 

Bandaging. 

Simple treatments for nose bleed, fainting, cuts, burns, 
etc. (Red Cross Manual, First 7 chaps.& 

Discussion 

The sickroom - location, lighting, ventilation. 

The bed - kind, height, clothes. 

Desirable qualities in a nurse. 

Symptoms of common diseases. 

Communicable diseases. 

Visitors. 

Care of flowers. 

Ways in which a girl may help. 

The home medicine chest. 

Evidences of Desirable Progress 

Ability to render simple services connected with the sick. 
Ability to practice sanitary precautions. 

Growth in vocabulary. 

Laundry 

Objectives 

To develop appreciation of the dignity of cleanliness. 

To teach helth through habits of cleanliness. 

To make practical application of textile properties. 








. 

. 

. 

: 

. ' -I. ~ ■ 0 ' 

, ' , 

„ 


, 




- 




• ; :.V. ‘ 


'* ;• " ‘ /' 

, 

» ■ 

... ; ' ; : . .. 

. ■ ■ 

' 

' 1 • : • tflv 






‘ 1 • r. /;• > •> • 



346 


Laboratory Work 

Laundering personal clothing. 

(Jot ton, silk, rayon, wo ok underwear. 

Hosiery 
HandkerchiefSo 
Dresses and blouses. 

Family Laundry 0 

Mending, sorting, removing stains, soaking, washing, 
rinsing, blueing, starching, hanging, drying, sprin- 
ling, stretching, folding, ironing, airing, storing. 

Discussion 

Hard and soft water, softeners. 

Soaps. 

Starch, 

Blueing. 

Social and Family Relationships 
A. The girl and her charm, or Personal Improvement 

Objective 

To develop some knowledge and appreciation of the 
factors which make a charming girl. 

Discussion 

Dramatization of situations, and pupil activities. 
Discuss desirable qualities in ffiends and individuals 
admired. 

Make a list of things a school girl can do to be 
healthy, attractive and happy. 



















. 




















0 • 

< • ' ' t ' ■' ’ ^ t ' 

' ? : , 

: ; t ' . • 5 

. : ■ • 



















. : .... 

- ■ 

< ' ' ' : •: 




■v : 0 


.■ V • ■ t ! ' • 





347 


Decide on real factors which constitute charm such as 
personal appearance, good manners, health, hharacter. 

Personal appearance - analyze chief factors, discuss 
effect on others, list things to be done to appear well 
groomed. 

Good manners - knowledge and practice of rules, sincere 
desire to give pleasure, frindliness. Utilize in class¬ 
room opportunities f to make requests politely, acknow¬ 
ledge favors, speak in turn, share supplies, await turn 
for individual help, introduce, extend hospitality to 
visitors. 

Health - foods as they affect health, and appearance. 
Clothing - style, suitability, weight, care in relation 
to hedth and appearance. 

Character - listing and discussing desirable qualities 
observed, quotations, criteria for self-judging, standards 
for self-help. 

B. The girl and her family 
Objective 

To develop in the girl a sympathetic understanding 
of her relationships to her family. 

Discussions, dramatizations, and pupil activities 

Relationships that exist in the home circles. 

Listing benefits and privileges. 

Ways in which family members are helping to each other 













348 


Listing contributions that the girl may make through 
live, obedience, respect, loyalty, service. 

Discuss characters in books. 

Bibliography 

Elementary Home Economics - Mattews (Little, Brown and Co.) 

The Family 1 s Food - Lanman, McKay and Zhill (Lippincott) 

Foods and Home Making - Greer J Allyn and Bacon) 

Everyday Foods - Harris and Lacey (Houghton Mifflin) 

Foods: 1 ^reparation and Serving - Bailor (Webb Publishing Co.) 

The Country Kitchen - Lutes (Little, Brown and Co.) 

Junior food and Clothing - Kenyon and Hopkins (Benjamin H. 
Sanborn) 

A GirPs Problems in Home Economics - Trilling, Williams, 
Reeves (Lippincott] 

Meal Planning - Bailey (Manual Arts Press 

Breakfasts, Luncheons and Dinners - Chambers (Boston Cooking 
School Magazine) 

Table Setting and Serving - Lutes (Barrows and Co.) 

Everyday Manners - Macmillan Publishing Co. 

Fundamentals of Home Economics - Jensen, Jensen and Ziller 
(Macmillan Publishing Co.) 

B.C. Manual of Foods, Nutrition, and Home Management . 

Home Nursing and Child Care - Turner, Morgan, Collins, (D.C« 
Heath and Co.) 

First Aid in the Home - Metropolitan Life* 

Red Cross Manual of Home Nursing and First Aid. 

Methods and Equipment for Home Laundering; Un ited Stated 
Department of Agriculture, Farmers Bulletin No. 1497 















































m 


.11 about Laundering - Hamilton and Jeffreys (McCalls Magazine) 
Why Soap Cleans Clean - Armour and Co, 

Foods and Household Management - Ainne and Colley (Macmillan) 

The Girl Today, the Woman Tomorrow -Hunter (Allyn and Bacon) 

Your Home, and. Family - Graves and Ott (Little, Brown and Co,) 
Home Livin'? - Justin and Rust (Lippincott) 

-.akin:-’ Heims - Schultz (Appleton) 

The 01rl and Home - Trilling and Nicholas (Houghton Mifflin) 
... House of Tour Hm - Lutes (Bobbs Merrill) 

The Charm of Fine Manners - Starrett (Lippincott) 

Feeding the Family - Rose (Macmillan) 

Teaching Nutrition to Boys and Girls - Rose (MacmilJLan) 

High School Dietetics - Wellard and Gillett (Macmillan) 

Joiler Home .'.'ccncmlcs Units - Friend and Schultz (Appleton \ 

Fabrics and Dress 1 

Clothing is a, major universal interest to girls and women. 
Closely associated with this interest is the matter of personal 
appearance and social relationships• The life of a girl is 
tremendously influenced by the way in which she is dressed and 
appears, The.se ideas are the basal ideas around which this 
course in Fabrics and Dress is constructed. 

There is a necessity upon most girls and homes to be 
economical in all things and no phase of this necessity is more 
pressing than is the problem of comfortable attractive and 
appropriate clothing. There is no adequate reason why a girl 












































330 


should not master the principles involved in solving this 
problem satisfactorily, and at the same time experience the 
thrill that comes from achievement. Home sewing is an art that 
has been lost to a large degree, the service having been assumed 
by large Commercial houses. While in many respects this may be 
desirable, so far as the slavish routine is concerned, at least, 
still there are other aspects to the problem because of which 
the home has been the loser. There are few pleasures more 
wholesome or satisfying than those which come with the conscious¬ 
ness of having done something well. The subject is closely 
associated with art, involving design, pattern, colour harmony, 
balance, rhythm. Decoration is a major subject in dress, involving 
the hat, pattern and design on the blouse, the neck piece or tie, 
the underarm bag or purse or shopping bag. 

Much of the instruction in this course will be oral but 
care should be taken to avoid too much time given to lectures 
or to discussion. Actual manipulative experience should be major 
in the interpretation of the program. Projects made for the 
individual or a close friend are infinitely more appealing than 
artificially set exercises. These projects should not be stored 
or kept too long from actual use by the girl. This tends to 
discourage and slow up her rate of progress. Of course, the 
instructor will not permit a girl to select a project, which is 
obviously beyond her ability, but care should be taken not to 
make the work too academic in forcing too much exercise work as 









» 


p 


' 





. ■ 


. 

' t 



< - ■ ■ ' ' ■■ ■ ■ '■ c ■■■ ■ ' ■ 

. 


' 





• 





. . 

. 

■ . •• • • r 

, 

' ■ ? o. • ■; 




c 




351 


a preparation* The best preparation ma}? - be had in the working of 
some simple project in which the material is inexpensive, but in 
which the girl may be interested. 

Too much note taMng is an evil. However, a daily record 
should be carefully kept by each student of the work done. A 
textile book with samples and weaves is a valuable study. 

Ho minimum requirement is set out in any of the units nor is 
the order of procedure in following the units prescribed. The 
student should be kept employed to the maximum of her ability all 
the time, and not made conscious that, when a job is done, that 
is all that is required. Some girls will do a much larger quantity 
of work or better work than others. It is most Important that 
they make progress or grow in power. One who is not able to 
achieve so much may attain a higher standing than her more 
rapidly moving associate by reason of her having made greater 
progress. To set a more able student to he^p a weaker is often 
good practice for both. 

The following analysis of the course, with approximate 
time allotment Is suggested: 


Unit 

I 

laboratory and its Equipment 

1 

week 

Unit 

II 

The Girl and Her Charm 

2 

weeks 

Unit 

III 

Glothing 

26 

weeks 

Unit 

IV 

Care and Repair of Clothing 

3 

weeks 

Unit 

V 

Choice of Clothing 

2 

weeks 

Unit 

VI 

Economics of Clothing 

2 

weeks 


* 

:• ao*:/::; : ' ; r ~r l : : ■ 

. 

» 

, 



l 

’ ;..Ci i: ” 

.. 


. 

O’ . 


. 


.'O’ 

, 

. 




: 








hris ‘ ;x■'.••J": y-:o<l 
















■ 









!V >1 




This should not be interpreted to mean that the above is the 
order in which the work will be taken, or that any specific 
number of lessons shall be devoted to any one unit. Consequently 
this is left to the discretion of the instructor and the limit¬ 
ations under which the work must be carried on. In some of the 
units the last method may be the incidental method. If a regular 
series of periods is devoted to some of the discussional units, 
the work may become very formal and reduced in value. 

Detailed Course 

The Laboratory and Its Equipment 

Objective 

To give a working acquaintance with all the necessary 
equipment, and to help pupils realize the desirability of an 
attractive school environment. 

Content 

Discussion of responsibilities; examination and demon¬ 
stration of laboratory equipment. 

Types, arrangment, care, use of: sewing machine, scissors, 
ironing board, storage space. 

Personal equipment; indispensable, desirable, prices and 
qualities. 

The Girl and Her Charm 

Objective 

To develop some knowledge and appreciation of the factors 
that make a girl charming. 














• . . IU: ■ 

. 

i 

' ' 






' 

- ; ■; ' *• " ir < ' •' - r ‘ •' ■ 

* 

■- •••■= ; - 

l 

■ ' ' t' 




: ' • . • ■ t 

- < : 

■ ' •. c . •, ' < ’ a j ' 


. 





353 


Discussions and Activities 

List and discuss desirable qualities in friends, charac¬ 
ters in history, in books, actresses. 

Discuss qualities which make for charm, and how to develop 
them; effect of one's personal appearance on others. 

Importance of good posture in walking, sitting, standing. 

List things to do daily to appear well groomed. 

The constituents of good manners: knowledge of rules of 
etiquette, feeling of friendliness, desire to please. 

List of opportunities for developing charming manners. 

Health as a part of charm. Effect of foods on health, 
disposition, and appearance. Effect of clothing on health. 

Criteria for self-judging. 

Evidences of desirable progress 

Knowledge of the factors which contribute to personal 
charm; improvement in courteous practices, growth in vocabulary. 

Clothing 

Objectives 

To develop good judgment in the selection of styles and 
materials suitable to the individual girl. 

To help girls realize that the selection and construction of 
garments expresses to a large degree traits of personality. 

To give instruction and help in the processes leading up 
to the construction of projects ranging in difficulty, suitable 
to the varied abilities of the pupils. 
























■ • : • c ' 1 ' : : 

c 

• ■ : ’ : ! ■* 

: 

- ■ i . ; ' ■ '■ ’■ ' '' " 

■ 


. ■ ■ ■■ . 


, ■ ’ ' ' ' f 











‘ ■) ’■ 














Suggested r ro.iects 

L aundry bag, apron, smock, or Hoover, nightgown, slip, 
panties or step-ins, pyjamas, kimona, blouse, sports dress, 
child 1 s dress, garment made from remnant, made over garment, 
slacks, shorts, hand work problem in linen, class project. 

To develop a realization that the care of one‘s own 
clothing.is a definite responsibility. 

To give the girl a working and practical knowledge of the 
weave, finishes, laundry-ability, durability, textures, widths, 
prices, patterns, etc. found in cotton and rayon, to help her 
determine the material best suited to her skill and individual 
needs. 

Contents 

Use and care of the sewing machine; selection of patterns 
suited to material, age, and occasion; identification, inter- 

preation, and fitting of pattenrs; personal measurements; 

, 

preparation of material, placing of pattern, marking, and 
cutting, assembly, fitting, and construction garments. 

Methods of finishing; plan and apply collars, cuffs, 
belts, pockets, and other trims; involving standard to apply 
to the chdice and selection material, style, and workmanship. 

Identification of standard cottons and rayons. Laundering 
of cottons and. rayons. 

Correct posture at work table and machine. 






Care and Repair of Clothing 


Objective 

To develop some ability to make a neat and comfortable 
darn, and an inconspicuous patch. 

Content 

Discuss effect on appearance and poise of holes in 
stockings; decide on ways to conserve weariig qualities 
in stockings; decide what size of stockings to wear; equipment 
and materials needed for stocking darning; darning stockings; 
criteria for evaluating darns; follow somewhat same outline for 
a hemmed patch. 

Choice of Clothin g- 

Objectives~ 

To develop judgment and to learn to appreciate the rela¬ 
tion good taste in clothing bears ot personality and charm. 

1 :c - : 

Realization of the relation color, line, design, suitabili 
ty, weight and care of clothing, has to health and personal 
appearahce. 

Content 

Consideration of present wardrobe, colour scheme, social 
requirements; discussion of good design in relation to types 
of individuals; colour and its relation to individual types; 
colour, style, size, weight, care, etc. of shoes, hose, gloves, 
hats, and other accessories. 








■ e * 

- 


i ■ ' ^ " 














. 




t C 

C ' " 










... . i ' 

- t « c * t 








Economics of Clothing 


Objective 

To develop in the girl the realization that to become an 
intelligent buyer, one requires a well organized plan and 
criteria; to help the girl to realize the need and value of a 
definite plan for spending. 

Content 

Consideration of factors which make the purchase of ready- 
to-wear clothing advisable or .otherwise; advantages and disadvan¬ 
tages of various types of stores — quality of merchandise 
found in each. 

Sales. What is a bargain? Factory conditions; ethics of 
shopping. 

Clothing budget and the girl f s share of the family clothing; 
ways in which a girl may help to keep the budget down; com¬ 
piling a simple individual clothing budget. 

Bibliography 

Clothing for Women - Baldt (Lippincott) 

Principles of Clothing Selection - Butterick (Macmillan) 

Earning and Spending the family Income - Friend (Appleton) 
Clothing - Choice, Care and Cost - Woolman (Lippincott) 
fertile Fabrics - Dyer (Houghton Mifflin) 

Design - Bush and Welbourne [Little - Brown and Co.) 

C olour and Design - C-ellum 

Textiles and Clothing - MeGorman and Waite (Macmillan) 














• y o.-'- ■ > ' y 

rv/.yy).' *, i 


«• : 


; • v 


, 






* . : • • o ^ : y r ' ' - ■ ' •' 1 : • ' •• 








* ' :> . ' y 


< » y ■ 

. 

1 

■ 










;• v. - \ j. ' - ‘. 'J .1- 



- 








- . jr , 




! 0? - ... ‘yy 




















351 


Fabrics and Dress - Rathbone and Tackley (Moughton Mifflin) 

From Tumble to Gown - Van Gilder (Allyn and Bacon) 

A Girl * 1 2 3 4 s Problems in Home Economics - Trilling and Williams 
(Lippincott) 

Fabrics and Eow to Know them - Benny (Lippincott) 

Sewing Book - Hyde (Century) 

Practical Sewing -Everson (Ryerson) 

Cloliiing for the High School Girl - Ealat and Harkness 
(Lipincott) 

Fibre and Finish - Dodd (Ginn) 

Junior Home Economics Units - Clothing - Friend and Schultz 
(Appleton) 


HOMEMAKING 2 

A daily diary or log shall be required of each student, 
FOODS AND NUTRITION 

Aims ; 

Development of standard, judgment and skill in planning 
and serving well-balanced meals. 

Development of wise discrimination in marketing, 

1, Outline for DSs cuss ion Periods : 

A. Simple bacteriology to include: 

1. Food Spoilage 

2. Kinds of Spoilage 

3. Principles underlying the growth and control 

of Bacteria, Yeasts and Moulds* 

4. Comparison of Home and commercially canned foods. 

















1 . - /; 

’ . 

•" v 

' ' / ' o~ j 

•• ' : ") o ' v':: Y . ;o.J. \ " % ■ 

: ■ - ' ; ; ■. . ' :;C2 

: 

' ' 

. 

4 " ■: ".o v \ >73 ' 

, ' ■ ' - " ' 

* ’ • 

. 

:: - ' - ' 

: 

O'l 

- ' t ’ 

'•: - ;; • * "■ ■.» ; : 

















553 


B. 

C. 
D* 

E. 

F. 


G. 

H. 


5. Precautions to be taken in the use of canned 
foods* 

Review and more thorough discussion of the dietetic 
value of all canned foods* 

Food selection and menu-building in greater detail* 
Study of caloric value of foods. 

Simple Chemistry of Foods to include tests for food 
stuffs, composition of foods, etc* 

Digestion and Absorption of food of all classes; 

1* In the mouth 
2* In the stomach 

3. In the intestine 

4. Elimination 

Food Sanitation and the Value of Pure Food Laws to 
the consumer* 

Marketing 

1. Planning before buying 

(a) What to buy according to body needs* 

(b) Consideration of materials on hand. 

(c) Foods in season. 

(d) Consideration of cost. 

(e) Brands and grades of staples, canned 
or package goods. 

2* Saving measured by purchase of; 

(a) Staples from !, Cash and Carry’ 1 stores. 

(b) Foods in season. 


; ' - ' * 

: L . V . £ “ T , it .”€> *: V\ 

. 

•: . ; ■ : i- ■ ■ ■' ■ ".po :• ■ " V 

* ■ ■ ' ' . I ■ 

-yo.'jZ-:.>cv: "sboc^I to v'i$zl.:xedO oilqril::.; 

* , « 

■■■ rq ■ ■ V •: r ;io?.r- ■ M' pql; .. 

. • 

* 

■ - ■ 

f 

• 0 -,;o oi/.UV oxt: ; op: .3 rCL’J; p,: : tpuP' 

*■ 

•:. 1 .1 


r 


i*"XOCO'C T^ICf Dj :j JS-TfiV 




* 

(o) 

.00 vs-nbl \nc 0 

O.) 

;;,o • oc: : • 

• 

. , 


. ■ 

0 

■■■ 'V ' '• 

v J3; 




(c) Suitable substitute for an article when 
prices change suddenly, 

(d) Foods by the pound or unit rather than 
for small coin, 

I, Study dietary needs and A plan daily rations for - 

1, The average family 

2, The aged 

3, Infants and children - modification of the 
family meal to suit the needs of the small 
child, 

4, Plan luncheon boxes for people of various 
occupations 

5, Plan meals for special occasions. 

Outline for Laboratory Periods : 

A, Preservation of foods: 

1, Cold-pack canning of fruit, vegetables, meat, 

2, Open~kettle canning of fruit, 

3, Jelly making, 

4 « Jam mak ing , 

5, Pickling, 

6, Other methods of drying, salting, smoking, etc, 

B, Review, continuation and further application of the 
subjects listed under outline for Laboratory periods 
in First Year, 

Extended work should be given, particularly in 
the preparation and cooking of - 



- ; ■; . .v .V: K y 

" . " : - ' 

v ; -;- , ; c . •: -r C : r f; oo'-:. ! 

. 


~ » 

• • •’ ‘ ; : ; ■ ’ \ w . ■ 

* 

rfjoenrm'I n & i : \ 

3x:pi:-'J ' : *a jso$ o 

; ■ r, " ■ % £ ■■ C 

: : . ; /v 

c ol V no. r : 

t : . - 

" - 

* 






r . , - , rr/j r o ; ’ ■ o 1 '; ■ 








36o 


1. Batters and doughs 

2. Meats 
3* Pish 

4, Game and poultry 

5. Salads, garnishes and accompaniments. 

There should be included an elaboration of desserts 
covering - 

1, Fruit 

2, Cornstarch 

3, Frozen desserts 

4, Gelatine desserts 

5, Steamed puddings and sauces. 

Pastries, Entrees, Souffles, deep-fat frying should 
also be included. 

Experimental cookery of a simple type, 

C, Marketing, preparing and serving of daily rations 
for the types mentioned in Section H, outline for 
Discussion Periods, 

The practical work should include - 

1, The informal and formal meal, 

2, Table decorations - simple and more elaborate, 

3, One-dish meals® 

4, The plate luncheon or meal, 

5, Buffet service of meals® 

• Types of service - English, Russian and 

Compromise, 


6 


' : ■■ 

* 

* ■ 

. 

. t 

; .-r’ \ Vir'iDivi?! r beh:: r Xj.^::.l sd did'"Mil:. 

• ■ 

. " 

* 

■ 

v . : . - ' ■ ' ■ ■ 

/ 

' 

. . x 

. 

. ■ 

■ 

* ■ 

- 

* 

. 

, ' * I 




561 


N.B* Some of the students will undoubtedly come from a 
distance and will, therefore, find it necessary to bring a 
noonday meal from home. It should, therefore, be possible 
to sell products prepared in the laboratory period to these 
students at a price low enough to cover merely the cost of 
materialSo 

D # Field trips to include visits to mill, bakery, 
dairy, etc. 

CHILD CARE 

1* Outline for Discussion Periods ; 

A* Importance of: 

1# Bathing 

2. Dressing 

So Sleep 

4o Sunshine - protection of eyes from strong 
light, 

5, Water 

6. Handling of baby* 

Bo GroY/th and development: 

1* Weight 

2* Exercise and airing 

3. Plays and toys 

4. Habits and training ~ effects of systematic 
care. 

C. Clothing for the baby. 

D. Food for the baby: 

1. Comparison of feeding methodso 




-.- f . 




J:r n- 




■ ' . . . 

r ■ . r 

■ ■ 




•mo ®*rrf a^ofj'f'sovr.r I 




•:!> vo;j a-;* :> vtoI ex ;x ri ; : f T.-:v.; >:rr ; 

. 

. 

* 




■ ■ 

. ’ 

• • *: : •... 

* • 

- 

d-ri- / ; 


IX ;x ; 




: r t - . . . ;!\f - 






2. Prepared foods. 

3. Modified milk - necessity for doctor 1 s 
advice• 

4. Care of feeding bottles and nipples. 

5. Pood for children of various ages up to 
and including the school age child. 

E. Baby’s foes. The effects of: 

1• Unwhole some milk• 

2. Impure air and water. 

3. Unclean playthings, floors,nipples of 


bottles. 

4. Plies and mosquitoes. 

5. Exposure to over-heated air. 

6. Patent medicines. 

7. Candy. 

8. Pacifiers. 

9. Dust, etc. 

HOME MAM CEMENT 


Aims : 

To create an interest in the study of the business of the 
home and a desire to produce more efficient homes. 

1. Outline for Discussion Periods; 

A. Study of the Budget - a plan for spending the income. 
1. Pamily needs: 


(a) Pood 

(b) Clothing 





« 


;; ■ i ' ' .*;ooo'l 0 o SO ■ ; 


: • 0 300 . 


■',.0 r '-0 

- 




c 


*.. •• 


• 



« 

• r C ;:--- ; lo'?o 



m 

' - \ • 

0-0.?. 

i • 

' 


* ‘ ■ 

* 

* 

. ' ' 

v 

» t 








•■O! "■ 




: 


o o o' 



363 


(c) Shelter 

(d) Household operating expenses - light, heat, 
equipment, service, telephone. 

(e) General expenditures - personal expenses, 
advancement 

(f) Saving, charity, investments# 

2# Household Accounts: 

(a) Records of expenditures# 

(b) Convenience of printed forms# 

(c) Paying bills - advantages and disadvantages 
of cash, credit, cheques* 

3. Value of the Budget: 

(a) To spend wisely# 

(b) To save# 

(c) To give* 

(d) To make adjustments to income* 

B* Study of the home of fifty and of one hundred years 
ago. Make a comparison with the home life of tod^r 
and the factors which have been instrumental in its 
evolution* 

C* Selection of a Home# 

1. Sanitary surroundings, air, sunshine, dryness, 
distance from odors, sounds, unpleasant sight, 
etc# 

. Sanitary conditions of basement, floors, walls, 
plumbing, heating system. 


2 


" 


^ : • ...... : U- . ■■ ' ' -. 

. . . . , 

t - 

- * 

* 

* 

. : J - * r ' ' ' . ■ . • 

» • t • 




c.:\ 

. c. 

* 



„ ' 





„ 


U : 



♦ 


0 


a 

' 


(, ; 

>. ~ f 

ei' rirsfH O'i'o 1 








„ 





hr:.?. 





r r: o 



«► 


: : '- o . : ■ 

* 

. . ■ . n • 

, ' ■ t 


* 

* 

, 














264 


D. 


F. 


3* Convenience, type of heat, water, sinks, lights* 

4* Kinds of neighborhood, accessibility to cars, 
stores, schools, churches, etc* 

5* Owning versus renting the home* 

1* The use of colour schemes in relation to light 
and heat; size and use of room; personal taste 
of individuals* 

2. Colour harmoney should be apparent in rooms and 
furnishings: e*g., complementary and analogous 

colours. 

3* Colour values should be carried out, e*g* darker 
tones should be nearer the floor. 

Walls and Woodwork 

1* Different treatments - advantages and dis¬ 
advantages. 

2. Aim to keep unobstrusive and harmonious with 
other features of the room* 

3. Factors influencing choice of wall coverings: 
economy, exposure of room, size, use, colour 
of woodwork, etc* 

Selection of furnishings for each room in the home: 

(hall, living room, bedroom, dining room, kitchen, 

closets, laundry). 

1. Purpose. 

2. Qualities necessary* 

3 * Co st * 




G. Study of Labour Saving Devices 


1. The advantage and use of the small labour 
saving devices: 

(a) Dish drainers. 

(b) Bread and cake mixers. 

(c) Egg beaters and cream whips. 

(d) Potato parer. 

(e) Fruit corer. 

(f) Slicing devices. 

(g) Water-proof apron. 

(h) Varieties of brushes. 

(i) Small mechanical devices for cleaning. 

(j) Fireless cookers, steam cookers, etc. 

2. Comparative value ai d cost of larger devices, 
e.g., vacuum cleaners, carpet sweepers, washing 
machines, mangles, etc. 

3. Care of devices - cleaning, oiling, replacing 
parts, etc, 

4. Methods of selecting and buying devices. 

Outline for Laboratory Periods : 

A. Mak ing of budgets for families with differing incomes 
and standards of living. 

B. Planning of system of expenditures and records for 
budgets made in A. 

C. Working out of given practical problems in the 
furnishing of various rooms of the home. (This should 










366 


be carried out in correlation with the work of the 
girls in their Art and Sewing classes.) 
APPROXIMATELY TWO-THIRDS TIME DEVOTED TO POODS AND NUTRITION. 
APPROXIMATELY ONE-THIRD TIME IE VO TED TO HOME MANAGEMENT. 
Textbook 

Feeding the Fan ilv - Rose (MacMillan) 

Meal Planning and Table Service - Bailey (Manual Arts Press) 
Housewifery - Balderston (Lippincott and Co.) 

Laundering 

Spending the Fanily Income -.Donham (Little, Brown and Go.) 
Food, What it is and What it does - Greer (Ginn and Co.) 

Food Nutrition and Health - McCollum and Simmons - (John 
(Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md.) 

Newer Knowledge of Nutrition - McCollum and Simmons - (John 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md.) 

Business of the Household - Taber (Lippincott and Co.) 

Food Study - Wellman (Little, Brown and Co.) 


FABRICS AND DRESS 2 

A daily diary or log shall be required for each student. 
Detailed Course 


EQUIPMENT 


Specific objectives 

To develop skill, accuracy and speed in machine and 
hand sewing. 
























De sire d out come s 


1. Manipulative skills developed through further 
use of the equipment in the clothing laboratory. 

2. Ability to care for equipment intelligently. 

A. Sewing Machine 

1. As in Fabrics and Dress 1, with 
practice in the use of the ruffler 
and tucker. 

2. Each pupil to clean and oil a machine 
sometime during the term. 

B. In the use of hand equipment, position,, 
speed and accuracy to be stressed. 

U.Bo A practical test in sewing given at the beginning of In e 
term would aid the teacher in guiding the girls* choice of 
material and garments. 

TEXTILES 

Specific objectives 

To familiarize students with the fabrics made from silk 
and wool fibres. 

Desired Outcomes 

1. To gain an elementary understanding of the signi¬ 
ficant facts which concern the production and manu¬ 
facture of silk and wool fibres. 

2. Ability to care for garments made of silk or wool. 

3. Recognition of the advantages and disadvantages of 
different materials. 















* 

' 

. 

r 

' ' 

* 

* 

, 

• * 

l ■ v , , r" • ; ' •’ : ' r '' : 0 ; 

* 







0 ' 



..... ■ 

■ 






* 










o ■: 












368 


A. Silk 

1* Brief outline of the evolution of sericulture - 
China, Japan, greece. Southern Europe, United 
States. 

2. Main countries producing silk. 

3* Sources and cultivation of silk - cultivated 
and wilk silk. Life History of the silk 
worm. 

4. Spun silk - basis, character, advantages, 
and disadvantages. 

5. Heeled silk - process of reeling. 

6. Processes involved in the manufacture of 
silk - 

(a) Conditioning - reasons for allowing 
moisture. 

(b) Throwing - purpose and importance. 

(c) Weighting - process, advantage and 
disadvantage s. 

(d) Weaving - Pine yarn lends itself to 
many weaves - plain, rib, twill, satin, 
gauze or leno, double-cloth, pile, 
pattern. 

(e) Dyeing - In the yarn or piece; printing - 
direct, discharge, resist. 

(f) Finishing - Mechanical or by means of 
dressings (See ”Woolman and McGowan”) 





■ 







•; r : , •; - a " V* o •' 






’.LvO U V. ii 








& 18 b df 


- 


'■ c ••• ; : : 0 




: 


; c- :’ a oo< 




toD 




» 





) o 









■ 




3 f; 






9i.: ' - 




l 








369 


7. Cleaning and caring for silk fabrics to include 

(a) Laundering precautions - use of dry heat, 
use of strong alkali soaps, exposure to 
sun. 

(b) Removing wrinkles - hanging in room where 
there is steam in preference to pressing. 

(c) Dry cleaning - using benzine, carbon, 
tetrachloride, gasoline. 

(d) Pressing: 

1. Effect of using hot iron on weighted 
material* 

2. Effect of pressing upon white silk 
that is stored. (Loss of moisture 
causes silk to turn yellow.) 

B. Wool 

1. Source of wool fibres and countries producing 
wool. 

2. Qualities of wool - 

(a) Variations visible under the microscope. 

(b) Structure of the fibre. 

(c) Length of fibre or staple* 

(d) Effect upon the fibre of densastication 
and cultivation. 

(e) Quality of wool found on different parts 
of the sheep. 






510 


3. Sources and uses made of reclaimed wool and 
wastes - mungy, shoddy, wool, extract, waste 
or flocks, pulled wool, (Distinguish between 
virgin wool and shoddy.) 

4. Hair-bearing animals producing wool-like fibres 
Uses made of the fibres. 

5. Characteristics and physical properties of wool 
chemical nature, absorbency, felting qualities, 
elasticity, strength, conductivity, affinity 
for dye, lustre* 

6. Main processes of manufacture: 

(a) Woollens - scouring, carding, spinning, 
doubling yarns, dyeing in the slub, yarn 
or piece, weaving, finishing. 

(b) TiTorsteds - same as woollens with the 
additional processes of combing, gilling 
and drawing - many times repeated* 

7* Uses made of woollen and worsted yarns to 

include, suitings, underwear, bedding, dress 
materials, floor covering, hosiery, hats, etc. 

8. Advantages and disadvantages of woollen and 
worsted materials for certain purposes. 

9. Effect of changes of fash ion on the finishing 
of materials, 

10. 1C leaning arid caring for woollen and worsted 
materials to include: 




* ' „ ... 

* * ■ 


- 




. 

; ■■' : . 

t - 

X 

- 

tcfrarc 

o- . - . 

. ' 

. , 


o 

' •; . • a*;'ico 1 n : r: eXO 






371 


(a) Brushing and airing* 

(b) Steaming - to remove wrinkles* 

(c) Pressing - under a damp cloth; over a wool 
pad* 

(d) Removal of shine. 

(e) Use of hangers, tissue papers, etc. 

(f) Dry cleaning - practical household methods. 


precautions* 

(g) Laundering. 


4. Each student 
indicated - 
Wool 

Poplin or Rep 

Grep 

Tv/eed 

Gabardine 

Broadcloth 

Jersey 


shall mount in note 

he weave, width and 

Silk 

Satin 
Taffeta 
Habutai 
Plat Crepe 
Crepe de chen© 
Faille or Poplin 
Pongee, Tussah 
or Shantung 


book sanples as 

cost to be stated: 

Mixture s 

Silk an d wool 
Silk and rayon 
Wool and rayon 
Wool and cotton 
Cotton and rayon 
Cotton and Linen 


COLOUR AND DESIGH 
Specific objectives 

To realize that both the color and the line of the 
dress are important considerations if one wishes to 
appear becomingly dressed. 

Desired Outcomes 


1. Ability to choose and design clothes more intelli¬ 
gently by increased knowledge of art principles. 









■ ■:: a ' a 

< ■) 

* 

■ 



• 



* 




{ .} 

* 

“ 

. * ’ ' * 

• 'i ? aal; 





* 

* 

' 

' , . “ : ' 

...... 

•• e:i2::x'\- s. o 

, a/; ao-:' J ' a :> ■ a ■ j I--a 

■ : ' . ' 

■ v ' l nx;^::^a !« , r io 

■ o \ ' l-m'.'J • • • a-:\j a:; 1 :.I -''aa,’ ' •: X a 

: ■ a :.a ■ X,a J X ■ .1 - av;:.* 

# 


q 0 a U 

rttioIOOF OT ' 

■ ' ■ 






372 


2. To realize that "Colour’,' like music, may be studied 
either for the possibilities of enjoyment which it 
affords or for the sake of self-expression. But 
unlike music the opportunities and the occasions for 
self-expression in colour are intimately associated 
with the needs of daily life. There is almost 
constant demand upon the individual to make choices 
of colour in dress, in the home, in business detail, 
selections which are self-expressive since they 
reveal cultivation and taste, or on the contrary a 
lack of judgment" - Weinburg. 

A• Study of colour to Include : 

1. Suggested courses of colour schemes, viz., nature, 
mineral, bird reptile and flower; china and glass; 
materials, ribbons and tapestries; rugs and old 
embroideries and laces; picture galleries. 

2. The effect of background colours upon the dress. 

3. The effect of texture upon the colour of the material* 

4. The importance of considering type, age, size, hair, 
eyes and skin when selecting designs, colours and 
materials, e.g. 

(a) The light complexion ?tfith an agreesive forceful 
disposition may wear stronger colors, but as a 
general rule the pa stel shades are better. 

(b) As a rule the dark complexion with a strong 
personality may wear bright colors. 



„. ‘. , •:: , Co : ; ' f -:'0‘i o 

\ : ' ' v ~ " ' o"'-o o"r-O': O'C ' 

- . 

. ■ ov : : r.; ; :C .:0 ooo o L. oo; a:;:":'.oo 

■ ;; : ■ ' ■ . • ' .. . •. - ■ 

♦ 

r 

- . . ; 

• . ; 

: " ',o o r oc _ •> 

. 

- : ; . : » , : ■ 'c:. •• ■ . . • ■ - 

- • ; . ■ - * ' . 9 , j O'- " o . . C; • O' ; jo,. ■ 

’ 


■ • ■ r . [:■ ■ ' ) ;t . O' 0 9 O'. 

O : ,>r io -O o: O'.: ' 






373 


(c) Colors should be avoided which call so much 
attention to themselves that the wearer is 
unnoticed, 

(d) A person th high coloring should avoid 
colors that either by repetition or contrast 
emphasize her own coloring, 

(e) Sallow skin is made more sallow by wearing 
blue, purple, mustard, green, orange, 
yellow and certain shades of tan, and brown, 

(f) A girl with auburn hair can make her hair 
seem more brown by wearing blue or bown. 

The golden glints will be brought out by 
wearing purple and lavender. Blue-green 
and green will make her a.ppear more red, 

(g) The repetition of a personal coloring as 
cheeks, eyes or hair intensifies that 
coloring and is a wise choice for many 
types to make, 

(h) As one grows older and the hair changes it 
is sometimes necessary to change the whole 
color scheme, 

(i) If a dress is for day wear choose color 
by day-light; if for evening wear, by gas 
or electric light, 

(j) Bright intense colors make one appear 














' -i ' i - 1 ■ ' ' ' 

: 

. 










. 




' . 5 . 

V •• 






0,-iJ ^ ^ r ' r “ e:i 


■ 

- 

u • i in - V ■ ■ :i ' 






, 




" ■ 

: * 

. 

. ■ 





374 


larger than one actually is. Soft, dull and 
dark colors disguise one * 1 2 s size. (Students 
should experiment with colors and form their 
own conclusions as the study progresses.) 

B. Design 

1. Study of line as applied to dress to include - 

(a) Becoming lines for the tall thin girl. 

(b) Becoming lines for the short stout girl. 

(c) Lines suitable for sloping or square shoulders 
yoke, raglan, kimona, slant of shoulder seam. 

(d) Becoming hat lines for differently shaped faces 
and different types of figures. 

2. Draw attention to arrangement of parts as outlined 
in Sewing and Dressmaking 1, under "Areas within 

Areas". 

ECONOMICS 

Specific objectives 

To plan the season’s wardrobe by making a clothing chart. 

Desired outcome _ 

Appreciation of the vaLue of careful planning in having 

a wardrobe that is harmonious and becoming, at least 

cost. 

Steps of procedure in making a clothing chart to include ; 

1. Rule in notebook square 1" x 1" (larger if necessary) 

2. Write at top of sections: Occasion, Coat, Dress, 

Hat, Gloves, Hose, Shoes, Accessories. 












' 

* 

; • - :• =VT % v 'V L\1 

; j:- ff r-'J.J 'i:7'-V::UU.LO::COO ....O 


o l : ; .1. a jj ? 


- . 

. 

* 

: \L : ' ,/• • • ■ ; 

. 

, 

■ • i t a 




■: ‘ M-,V :::■ , : . ■‘ 


:l 




r r : ■ 


• • yJ • ' 


, f o "> ,f r.iX oO 


, ; ' ■ ■ ■■■■■;" r - '■ • • ‘ : 

; . > - • • t ■ :: - . ■ ■ ' ■" •-'' 

* 

; 

. . . • 

■ * 

♦ « r t - 




3# What to do before filling in chart - 

(a) Take an inventory of clothing on hand and note - 
garments to be mended; garments to be remodelled 
garments to be purchased. 

(b) Decide upon colour scheme for the season and 
aim to have garments and accessories harmonize. 
Pill in chart neatly. 

CONSTRUCTION 
Specific Objective 

To acquire knowledge that will lead to the successful 
making of silk and woollen garments. 

De sire d out c omes 

1. Ability to select, cut, fit and sew simple dresses 
made of silk or wool. 

2. Appreciation of the value of properly caring for 
garments made of animal fibres. 

A• Study of drafted and commercial patterns 

1. Review problems outlined for work in Dressmaking 1 - 
selection, interpreting and altering patterns. 

2. Further work on altering patterns to fit variations 
from the standard figure, viz. 

(a) One shoulder higher than the other. 

(b) Narrow shoulder and large hip. 

(c) Changing length of boy*s trousers. 

(d) Round shoulders. 









j aa v a -.: ■ :> a aa; a ; - r - ’ r ■ aa r 
a a a-- .o fB ac; o iyy'Bs.' 1 

* 

„ 

. 

* 

* - ■ ■ . : *. 

■ v :.: ■■':'■.■ >' a ‘ ■ v .a a a : a ' z __ _ ^ 

, ■ ' , . ’j .>■ : a , r :t:r > a - -:o rj ■":\ i a: ^ a r'a a 

■ •.'■■■ V J ■ ■ ' • •' ’ « ’ ■’ “• ' 

.r.;-,. - *. .a-.'.C- /<. -.-a -.a-.'/.aa: ' 

■■■ • . \C-arI; : : a ‘I0.a :aa a; : a s<:t ■ \ : 

: aa • -a: \r v»j: r , ■ -aa-a. ■ 



576 


3. Drafting patterns 

N.B* A careful check on the accuracy with which 
measurements are taken should be made a.t the be¬ 
ginning of the term’s work* 

(a) Draft foundation block for a dress - waist or 
blouse (not kimona)• 

(b) Draft pattern for a flare skirt* 

(c) Draft pattern for a shirt sleeve* 

(d) Make pattern for a slip from foundation block, 
with modern lines and curves* 

(e) Model on dress form or make from a flat pattern 
collars to fit various neck lines, 

B* Computing anount of material required 

1* Discuss the advantages of using wide material for 
flares, etc* 

2. By demonstration show that narrow material is some¬ 
times more economical in the end; e.g*, when the 
pattern is cut into a number of gores or pieces, 

3* Consideration in computing amount of material 
required to make ruffles and plaitings. 

C • Fitting Garments 

Further experience in dealing with the processes involved 
in the preparation and fitting of garments as outlined 
in the work of the first year* 


D. Fin1shing Processes 

1* Stitches - Review of stitches outlined in work of 





S n"9a ot© C 


* • 

\D.radc; rv? act 38 Uwy 

. ■ : 

* 

e ' • • ■ 

y ; h[i;J'St pra'li, CTJ.X8* B '"SO"! :X‘l 8.,: C.!'C \ 

‘ • y~. . 

* • 

’.r:'" : r;> o'i -'.c'8 :8)C8 •> ' / 

* - , ■ r 

■ 

.■ , - - ’■ 

< ri , ■ . 

‘.vi rye. o \C::-k 88'ff"' "’ 8 /0 •• - - r iii; 

, , : r£ ?; f jr, • ■ ) £ H l f ' V ^ ^ © & - ' ' • - ; 

;-• -* :• ■:..., b'xz 8 3.m.'.T£ oiJ- : ’3 

; , ;v-f p'-v)' ■ 

:• • \y - I G r ) 0 ' 

. 






- 



377 


first year, with the inclusion of herring-bone, 
feather, chain, satin stitch, tailor’s tacks, 
smocking* 

2. Seams. 

(a) Silk - French seam, plain seam with edges 
turned together and run or overcasted; plain 
seam, pressed open, cut edge turned under and 
stitched or run by hand; double overcasted 
edge forming a cross stitch effect. 

(b) Wool - Plain seam pressed open and pinked or 
overcasted; overlaid seam; bound seam. 

3. Hems 

(a) Silk - edge turned, run by hand or stitched by 
machine, and siip-stitched to garment. 

(b) Wool - same method as for silk if material is 
very thin; edge pinked and slip-stitched; bias 
binding on edge and siip-stitched to garment. 

4. Plackets - Tailored placket for side of skirt; 
facing blouse front. 

5. Buttonholes - bound, made in cotton, silk and wool. 

6. Pockets - silt and welt. 

7. Sleeves - position of worker and sleeve, side on 

which to pin pin, basting and stitching. 

8. Plaits - kinds of plaits, e.g., box plaits, side 

plaits, inverted plait, kilt plait. 

9. Pressing - curved seam (should be notched), how 

and when to press various parts of garments. 


neck, selvedge 




378 


N.B. Students should be warned that some finishings 
are better not pressed* 

E. Required projects 

(Lounging outfit - Kimona and pyjamas) 

1* Any one: (Re-made dress 

(Slip - dainty handmade finish at top, 
curved seams* 

2, Skirt, for self - wool - drafted pattern* 

3* Blouse, for self - any material - drafted pattern* 

4* Simple adult*s dress - wool - set-in-sleeves, 
collar - commercial pattern* 

5* .Dress, for self - silk or crepe « commerical 
pattern* (Jacket and skirt may be made if in 
vogue.) 

6. Mending - silk hosiery; mend tear in silk or wool 
with thread of self; use of mending tissue. 

Textbook 

Clothing for the School Girl - Baldt (Lippincott) 

Reference Books 

. See List for Fabrics and Dress 1, above* 






* . 

■ ' 

- 

» • 

* ' - . . * ■' 

* 

- - - ? 

* •;! ■" . - r . 

- - , 

, 

* 

;' ■ ' . - 

, ' : ". * 

' 

~~. 

, V r 









m 


FABRICS ANI) DRESS 3 

A. daily diary or log shall be kept by each student, 
EQUIPMENT 

Specific Objective 

To understand and properly care for the working equip¬ 
ment in the sewing room. 

Desired Outcomes 

1. Application of the value of keeping the equipment 
in good working order. 

2. Manipulative skills developed through the use of 
tools and equipment used in the construction pro¬ 
cesses in dressmaking and millinery. 

A. Review lessons listed in Sewing and Dressmaking 1 and 
Dressmaking 2, checking carefully the girls* knowledge 
of proper use and care of equipment. 

B. Introduce equipment used in making hats, viz, 

1. Crown blocks - electric; wood, 

2, Hat stands - wood; cardboard. 

3# Pliers, needles, etc. 

TEXTILES 

Specific Objectives 

1. To gain a knowledge of the principles underlying 
the successful cleaning, renewing and refreshing of 
wearing apparel. 

2. Ability to distinguish between hand-made and machine- 









. • : 



: : r10.1 ‘[.0 yzr ' b \:X ’>3 0 k 





■■ •* "v J -'.V"; '?r . Y,I‘t 0CO‘It; iK-:B ■ H O 

fc ■ ■ ’ : ■ : 


^ cin i r\ ■+ r t 0 r i A • r f‘ '•» ATT 



•• : • : ■ r . '>• < : ’ : ' ' ' ' " ' * : 

' 

. ’ 'V: ' • • : 

, . r ■ ■; n ■ *;;;•? . n' r . ■ ■ tx '■ ■ '■"■■■■ : .V" . 

• : 1 [• ' - V ' r ' ■ : ’ " ' ■ i:. ' f ' 


. ' ■ ' ' 1 . ■ '■ :’■ ' ' 


• / . • di t f ’ . 901 : 

, ■) • r * - v ' I r • 


t - - ■;! "j. . / ■' . 





. ' ■ ' 


ox to. 


f f : i ‘ V. ■ .1 C i' , ''' 




V's ’ a 


- 1 ■ '*! : n 


r' 1 '- 


■ ■;.) .) j ' 






38o 


made lace. 

Desired Outcomes 

1. Recognition of the many ways by which clothing may 
be renovated. 

2. Appreciation of work involved in the making of 
hand-made lace. 

A. Review and continuation of the study of fabrics made of 

animal and vegetable fibres. A brief study should be 

made of the characteristics and uses of the minor fibres- 

jute, hemp, pina, ramie, asbestos, kapok. 

Extended work should stress particularly: 

1. The construction of weaves and finishes in relation 
to the life and appearance of the fabric. 

2. Texture - Compare materials, e.g., serge, velvet, 
chiffon, organdie. Let the girls use lengths of 
materials of different colours and textures to 
study the effect of feel, appearance, pleasing play 
of light, harmony of colour, becorningness, etc. 

3. Simple tests for separation of identification of 
fibres. 

4. Various methods of applying designs. 

5. Properties of textile fabrics that affect health, 
e.g,, absorption, conductivity of heat, cleaning, 
etc. 

6. Felting qualities of wool and hair fibres. Study 





0 Li 

. ■ ; ■ - ; O: ‘ ■ 

. ’ *■: ■ ' 

r • n -lov • • 

. ■ ■ " 


. • - - - - ■' • • ) •; '• ■■ : f..’ ' ' 5 • •' ' r - f 

- . ■ , •' . • • ... :i"! 1 v ; - r • - ■ 

•-> : a ;-t - > a’ ba • *>d$ bo enorii 

. . ; •. • ? '• ; '■ ♦ < ’ ;r • 

..r j;. • r: o t : '• .oc- *:» 9 3 9; $o 51 :e • •» • 2 • [1 o :r b 9 on er > 0 ? 


' '; 1 ■ 00 ) ■ '• •' •: 


, . . 

: • • ; • • •= ’ ■;■■■■■' . ^. ' ■ ' • i- ‘ - 

. • .~;*rn \£oD 9 f ' ‘ T5' 0 SI %M "I 0J 3M 

•; : : . n • ' cn * ■ ‘ 5" - ■ : vonl'J 

. 

n . n: m i:';'3'i bc-oo ‘in’": olo-oi el. ' 

. • ■' 

' ; ■ i.‘: -I ■ ‘ o . ■ • '.n - ■ '• ' V: - 

: ■ ' ' ' : ' '■ ' • ■ • 

• • * 

. 








r i: r *,c.m -; i 1 o •! 


Lo ;»W 'o 




381 


felt hats - fur felt; wool felt; cheap felt. 

B. Study cleaning mediums and methods. The pupils 

should make a classified summary of the various agents 
used, e.g. 

1. Solvents - liquids th$t dissolve grease or gummy 

substances. 

(a) Water - cold and hot, distilled. 

(b) Volatilo liquids - alcohol (wood, denatured), 
ether, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, 
acetone. 

(c) Cleaning oils - gasoline, naptha, benzine, 
benzene or benzol, kerosene, turpentine. 

(d) Acid materials - oxalic acid, hydrochloric 
acid, potassium permanganate, hydrosulphite 
of soda, hydrogen peroxide, chloride of lime, 
javelle water, vinegar, lemon juice, salts*of 
lemon, sour milk, buttermilk. 

(e) Alkaline materials - soap, ammonia, borax, 
sal soda, sweet milk. 

j ' 

2o A bsorben ts - as the name indicates, take up rather 

than dissolve the particles of dirt. 

(a) White powder - French chalk, magnesia. 

(b) Kitchen supplies - meals, salt, starch. 

(c) Non-plastic clay - white blotting paper, 
ungiazed cloth. 

C. Dyes and dyeing to includes 

1. Origin of dyes - vegetable, animal, mineral, 






^82 

2„ Choice of dyes - kind of fibre. 

3. Purpose - tinting or fast colours. Method and 
procedure. 

4. Dyes used for tinting or light colours - dolly 
dyes, tintex, ink, tea, coffee, saffron, crepe 
paper, rit, twink, Sunset. 

N.B. Application of the principles involved in cleaning 
and dyeing should be made in preparing material for the 
sewing classes, e.g., cleaning hats - summer and winter; 
hat lining; lace and trimmings; fur collars; garments, A 
piece of tied and dyed work may be included. 

D. Study of Lace to include: 

1. Brief study of the history of lace. 

2. Difference in needlepoint and bobbin. 

3. Names of some needlepoint and bobbin laces. 

4. Kind of fibre used. 

5. Have each girl study two old laces ( one 
Needlepoint and one bobbin) observing: 

(a) Mesh - round, square, hexagonal, diamond 
shaped. 

(b) Pattern - hand-made. 

(<|) Edge finish. 

(d) Beauty of design. 

(e) Kind of fibre. 

(f) Origin. 





383 


6. Distinguishing characteristics of hand-made and 

Machine made lace, e.g., 

(a) Buttonhole - stitches found in infinite 
variety in needlepoint lace; never in machine- 
made lace. 

(b) Unalaiting in hand-made lace very difficult. 

(c) Any padding required in hand-made lace is 
worked with a slanting stitch. In machine- 
made lace the padding is worked over and over 
straight. 

(d) Threads in machine-made lace have a twisted 
and compressed look. 

COSTUME DESIGN 

Specific Objectives 

To gain a brief knowledge of the historical 
development of dress. 

Desired Outcome 

Some knowledge of how fashions have been created 
and a recognition of the relation of the costumes 
of today to those of the past. 

I nd 1 re c t 0 u t c o me 

Realization that the Art of Dress, although it 
admits of innumerable variations, like all other 
arts it is subject to the three rules of beauty, viz., 
order, proportion and harmony. 







■ r ■.:' noocT OV : . ' ' 

j \ov 'i'.7 'll r v'\!:'s -1 0 'i lo oo/zi. ..} 

. ' . ■; • : : . ■■i ' 

r ; i- r-n i; 

' nrs *: '> ■ bn 

In* c c-.rm'-:- 9 : ( v Oj- J'OOf. J.U3 3 j. 

: ■ 1 l ' » 


384 


Study of the historical development of dress. Com¬ 
parison of costumes of past periods emphasizing only 
the pronounced distinguishing marks and the influence 
which brought them about. (This should be carried 
out in correlation with the work of the girls in 
their art a nd sewing classes.) 

1. Conditions which influence dress - climate, nature of 
material, due to civilization, environment, rank, social 
and political reforms and religious beliefs. 

2. Sources of information: Carvings, sculptures and writing 

3. Study of Period Costume: 

Cl) Egyptia n - very little and thin clothing, straight 
lines, elaborate embroidery - lotus, papyrus and palm 
design. Rich colours in material and jewellery, jewelled 
headdress for protection from the sun; bare feet or 
sandals. Linen and cotton materials. 

(2) Grecian - refined simplicity, beautiful line and 
proportion. Draped effects, girdles, delicate colours, 
rich embroideries. Crown, wreath or ornamental headdress 
sandals, stockings without toes, wool, linen and silk 
materials. 

(3) Roman - Elaborate gowns, striking colours, rich 
embroideries. Several tunics, one over the other. 

Greek simplicity notiin evidence. Girdle indispensable. 
Hair curled, adorned with ribbons. Golden caul worn on 
head; or flowers. Shoes with slits in sides and straps. 










bo L'ron 


‘ 

' 


. , • ■ -,7_ 

M r . ' 3 

. 

' 

t J: V - r : b iO 


n x 1: ■ 

- 


t f B 1 1 

s ■' 

*: . 3 . 

1 r = 


' \ >■'. . .a ■ ? ■ r >- r; .:: O: t ■ ’ ’'' ‘ "v o; ’ , " ' • :■ it 

: ■ ■ ' : ' ■ 

• ' \r ; )J . ■ r ‘-'O'l ■‘ ! • 

i , i. .. ' :v , 

• • ' . ' : ' - r ‘ : '; \ 

■; ' •( - - , • • ; ^ I , f 

. . ;; ' " ■ ’ ' ' > 

■ 

- ■ ; • ’ • -*£j ' t ' ■ • ' • ' ' I ■ ' >ri 

, ' ' . ■' '' I 

♦ ' ‘ ■ ■ ~ J _ 

. 

. 

’ * 

. . • ' 

• ■ >' . ■ ' *. ■ i i >orr ( ,* ~ ■ c x • • 

. ' . ■ . • : ’> ' a 




38^ 


Coloured shoes worn. 

(4) Byzantine - Fabrics noted for richness and variety 
of pattern. Styles Greek and Roman in form. Gaudy 
colours due to combination of pagan and Christian influ¬ 
ences. Introduction of buttons and two coloured garments. 
Long right sleeves. Head covering - see picture of the 
Madonna. Coloured shoes or sandals. 

(5) Middle Age or Gothic Costume - Introduction of 
close fitting garments (set-in-sleeves and black for 
mourning). Chemise and cloak worn. Flavour of the 
Oriental in design. Richly embroidered materials and 
expensive fabrics. "Parti-coloured” materials made. 

Velvet made its appearance, worsted material introduced. 
Elaborate hose of bright colours; long pointed shoes - 
laced and buttoned. Hennin headpiece, garget and wimple. 
Fashion dolls sent from France to other European countries. 
Three types of dress due to three classes of people. 

(6) Renaissance - Costly materials; excessive use of 
lace and ribbons; high collars and ruffs, bell-shaped, 
slashed and huge sleeves. Tight waists, peplums and 
hair "curled and frezzed". Gloves, muffs and silk 
scarfs worn. Lace edged handkerchiefs. Muffs and fans 
used. Long trains, full skirts and hoops. 

(7) 17th Century Dress - Exaggeration of fitted waists 
and pointed bodices. Bustles. Elaborately puffed and 
plaited open over-skirts. Bold and dashing elegance due 








* ' • • . ■ ‘ 

;• y;' ‘ • P PC CK "-f! .^.Kr -0;f V;- P. r < iO 0 

. • - y..;. y V ' '■ " “cc .V' ,w ’ n . ■ on ; 

• . ' ■ 3 : 

. , ' - 7 ;s . 

■■■ \ _ /;;.y . C'v.l„ ( ;) 

■ : .' * •’ r . .. • : '■ ••• ■■ •• -• v ■ 

•• ■ ‘ -• • •'•■■■ v •• ' ■ - ;: ' . . • ' ; > ■■ , : c ' 

■; ••• : > • -•• . • ’ i ,r . • v ■ '• 

. 1 ’ yy , •' C ‘ ' : : . > ' C V . 

- ■ > ' , i f Y' 1 * . r z :'0 ~ :■ : ' •' ■' ' : n\ j c ' ; I 

. • ’ ■ ' * ' 

■' • ■ ■ % d'o id D • ■ fO*I 

. ; i 1 i ' . ■ : y Jo y ' " ' - ■’ ’ : • ■ '• 0 ' ■ ’ ' C ’ 1 

■ > ' - v o. ' - ) 

• ■ ' • 

■ ■ . ■ ■' ■■ , /' ' ' ' ! ' 

. ■ j; •' f ■?. y 


. !':.ii' , ■ ' • ■ ' ' »■ 'n' ■ 

. '■ • : '' - ■ « r > • V 




386 


to the influence of Spanish women and favorites of the 
king. Short sleeves; underskirt full, elaborately trim¬ 
med with lace, ribbons, furbelows and festoons. Much 
false hair mounted high; shoes of satin brocade or em¬ 
broidered material fastened with buckles and ribbon. 
Parasols, fans and muffs. Materials - printed linens, 
India muslins, transparent materials elaborate brocades, 
satins and velvets. 

(8) 18th. Century Dress - Pannier hoops. Scepter of 
fashion wielded by Madam Pompadour and Madame du Barry. 
Watteau or Princess dress; stockings with clocks. Short 
puffed sleeves with frills of lace. Hair powdered and 
dressed high. Materials - tulles, nets, fine cambrics 
and many dainty fabrics; gold and silver laces. 

(9) 19th Century Dress - Empire waist lines and the 
tight basques. Oriental materials and styles due to 
the Napoleonic campaigns. Skirts full and decorated at 
the bottom. Sleeves short, puffed and decorated at the 
top. Military characteristics of hats and bonnets due 
to the war. Tailored suits. 

(10) 20th Century Dress - Rapid change of custom. 
Specialized costume - sport, social, work. Simpler 
and fewer garments worn. Effect of War upon dress. 
Effect of motor car upon dress. Adaptation of the best 
of the past to the needs of today. 

N.B. The above outline Is given only as suggestions from 
which to select, add to or change. 





uwn-: 


: ■ • ■ ^ - 'vo ; f : i t ! X 

t .. . c • : ' v - -0.i . « 

t • • t 

r , * ■ * ■ 


1 

- 



,.“X :s-:- : ' 




* 

. 


• 


•r,„ ' ■ ■; /Tjr ■ ■ ‘/^X ■ *) 






i f f 


* ' • ' ■ 




* 

X. 



t 


t •, - ■ ■ 


* 


V. ' 

: 




— 

X 

' r:y o;.,rh a o£ 



■ ' 





. 





, ' : ' ^ ; ■ '• ' . 

X 


' ■:• ... . O ’ ' * ; 

* 

- . . : 

, 

•rocrr.r ‘T’'■ > *:.<■:'< ‘f ‘- r 










287 


4o The basic principles of colour and linear design should 

be reviewed and applied in connection with the practical 
phases of the clothing work* Topics to be included: 

(1) Essential factors affecting choice of colour and 
design for the individual* 

(2) Types grouped according to figure type# 

(3) Types grouped according to personal colouring* 

(4) Effect of colour value on the individual* 

(5) Effect of intensity of colour on the individual* 

(6) Analysis of complexion difficulties* 

(7) Effect of Pattern and texture of material on 
individual* 

(8) Appropriateness of design on individual# 

(9) Use of colour and design to improve the individual# 

(10) Effect of carriage upon appearance: 

(a) Slumping versus dignified carriage* 

(b) Lightness of feet* 

(c) Proper sitting posture# 

(d) Arms and hands held gracefully# 

(11) Studies applicable to hat making: 

(a) Balance 

(b) Shape, size, line (should be studied before 
full length mirror) 

(c) The hat in the silhouette# 




.V-;.- dot lo 3oIa:; lea 

c w.; ; .v , T; -‘C XX ti 77 '0 d ibo.tlqq--- bn--, henelv&i ecF 

*:X . ■ ' ■ 



■ 



to 



* X 





OB 

• 



; .: . 7 7 Ole C X 7C OX 

• 


{4 


* X 

. 7 7 ■;.!, .: V • T t .i v> 

c 

i 7 

* 


[ ‘ ■ 

C ' ' . 



* 

' : :i f:: X t o 

X 



i.O j.. • .'I It' -17 7- ICOu 

to < ' ' 

. 



* X 



*x 

1: 5 © ■ b > ci • • 


*x 


X. ... • ' i. X; c 



; 7 X ‘7 

<tc XX. 



* ■ ■ 

; ■ , v 

. 




* 1 . 




* 




■,t" ; 17 

t «. 

. 

# 






338 


ECONOMICS 

Specific Objective 

To gain a knowledge of the factors involved in true 
economy and thrift* 

Desired Outcomes 

(1) Realization that the matter of thrift and economy 
refer to more than the original cost of the garment* 

(2) Knowledge of the factors which should be brought 
into consideration in selecting clothing* 

A* Problems which face the consumer and manufacturer: 

(1) Less demand for enduring materials. 

(2) Prices no longer indicative of quality* 

(3) Difficulty in distinguishing best values* 

Reasons for the bargain counter: 

(1) Articles returned in poor condition 

(2) Short ends 

(3) Out-of-date styles 

(4) Novelty goods. 

(5) Merchandise bought in bulk 

(6) Styles that did not take. 

(7) Seconds * 

B. Factors that influence the original cost of clothing: 

(1) Value of fibre used 

(2) Amount of goods produced 

(3) Cost of preparation - fibre, weave, colour 

(4) Pattern weave - added expense of designer 





; 


. 

» ' • ‘ 

c 

- 

w \< .r:r-a ..:r- : : r vco e s.i£ r..vi cv' 

r ’ . • t 

* ' ' O . j' . ’ . ' A "' "■ ■ •• 


. ; - ■ ' ' 

* 

.: ■ ■ 

: i i if on u 

: ■ tt : • '' ' • 




{£ 




" - 

* 

I ' i ■ . 

« 




(V) 


v ' .. :r 


■ 


OJ r 


■ ' 


x x 






* 

, 

r ;('• l 

' : ' 




38 ? 


(5) Margins of profit to dealers varies with goods. 
Number of dealers getting a profit affects the 
final price. 

(6) Wages of workers in the industry. 

(7) Shipping costs preparatory to final sale, beginning 
with raw fibre. 

(8) Import Tax® 

G. Styles and economy 

(1) Disadvantages in buying extreme styles 

(2) Introducing the fashion versus following the fashion 

(3) Styles that require a great amount of material. 

Do Remodeling possibilities of fabrics 

(1) Quality of goods - durability 

(2) Disadvantages of materials that wear well but lose 
their attractiveness by losing colour or becoming 
shiny. 

(3) Reversing fabrics may not only ^change 11 it but may 
eliminate the appearance of shine, ink stains or 
wear® 

(4) Cutting and slashing a garment In the first making 
renders it less suited to remodeling® 

E. Far reaching influence of dress in our daily rounds: 

(1) Effect upon self when well dressed. 

(2) Effect upon others when well dressed. 

(3) Why simplicity is to be preferred to gaudiness® 

(4) Dress an indication of character® 








- r 

G • • ( . 

* • 

* 

' f> < . . ' ■ ' .• •: -0 •. •' 












>rid ixioSJ, o' • %Bt exl 

* - ; •; \o fX;."c •f w; -\i ' <3 r i;., CA' _.rv ' '■■■■■} 

. : :;-rc ■■ ' C 3 

V .■:' ~ c '; ' V- 

J.l • j ' ■' . , 


0 . • Xo • ' 

*' 












* 

1‘. .• -7A , 

* •• 

: ;j.; ; >i’c f ’o 00 ;oi; X'x : 

* 

* 

•; • : .. ‘ ^ ■ • 

* 








(5) Standards of dress set by the consumer* 

CONSTRUCTION AND RBLATED MATTER 

Specific Objectives 

lo To increase ability to cut, fit, and finish garments 
made of wool, silk, or other materials* 

2* To acquire some ability to make a hat* 

3* To gain a knowledge of the factors that influence the 
cost of a hat* 

Desired Outcomes 

1. Knowledge of the construction processes of 
millinery* 

2* Recognition of the economic value of making one * 1 2 3 
clothing* 

A* Dressmaking 

Suggested Projects 

(1) Remade garment - dress, child’s coat, blouse, skirt 
(wool) boy’s pants* 

(2) Afternoon or evening dress* Pupil’s activities to 
include: 

(a) Selection of suitable style 

(b) Selection of appropriate material 

(c) Calculation of amount of material required 

(d) Selection and calculation of ajnount of 
trimmings, and findings required* 

(e) Making pattern - (To be developed from a 
drafted foundation block or an adapted 
commercial pattern*) 










3?1 


(3) Elected project of an advanced type suggested 

garments - wool coat (simple style), wool dress 
(set-in-sleeves), silk or wool ensemble. Pattern 
to be blocked to measurements* 

Construction Processes to Include 

(1) Seams - slot, welt, tuck, plain - overcasted or 
pinked* 

(2) Hems - bias faced hem, shaped facing, gathered to 
fi t • 

(3) Bias - true and long (emphasize importance of a true 
bias for folds, pipings, bindings, etc*) 

(4) Shirring - machine and by hand (drill if necessary, 
in running a gathering thread properly)© 

(5) Darts - method of making and finishing ends* 

(6) Welt pocketo 

(7) Stitches - French knots, fagot ting, button-holed 
loops, arrowhead, tailor ? s tacks* 

(8) Fastenings - worked button-hole; bound button-hole; 
material stitched and turned to form cord* 

(9) Pressing - shrink fullness at top of sleeve, end 
of darts, hem of skirt, etc* 

B. Milliner:/ 

Suggested Projects 

(1) Remodelled hat* 

(2) New hat - seasonable materials* 





ec ~-r': bc :0 'fv'<c lo tfo6>*;o«xq be-cfOv-XS 

t ; - .o - ' ** ■ •' 

* - ■- 1 

’ l ■ 

" <'• ' t - ■ 1 “ 

; ; , , t ;, . ■;:> - 

■ ; , j • , -V ;.•'■) ■: j'-.i’ ; ~ ■ 

. <. t 

. ;o * - ■ - - 

» ; . . • - - ' ■ ' ■: ' • 

btem 

' '. ■' .’I •: * t .' ; ■ '' ' ' ~ 

* " 1 • . b' 

- ’■ 

rr C , r, •>;, r// 0:." 0 A ' 4 f I ’ •!.' ; v D f.'i 1 0 1 13 ?< J. ; ^ j] i' 

: . , • ' .0 • ~ ' ’ 

o t «. 


'• ■- i . ole 





Construction Processes to include 

(1) Method of taking head measurements 

(2) Method of taking a pattern of a hat 

(3) Method of making a molded or wire foundation (not 
to be made if not in vogue) 0 

(4) Hat linings - explain two kinds - French style and 
one-piece style® Make and put in lining® 

(5) Stitches - slip, back, catch, running, basting, stab® 

(6) Making bows and other ribbon finishes used in 
tri mining ha ts 

(7) Method of making a sectional crown 

(8) Method of making a French fold 

Trade terms used in Millinery 

(1) Terms used to indicate the purpose of the hat - 
riding, dress, sport or outing® 

(2) Terms used to indicate shape of hat - sailor, 
toque or turban, cloche brim, beret, tam, tricorn, 
poke bonnet, mushroom, Napoleon, etc® 

(3) Other terms used - ensemble effect, ribbon hat, 
tub hat, picture hat® 

(4) Names to indicate the material used in making 
hat foundations - Leghorn, Milan, Panama, Baku, 
Bangkok, Mohair, visca, etc® 

Costs in a Millinery Shop 

(1) Overhead expenses - rent, light, he at, telephone. 


equipment, wages of employees, trips to fashion 
centres, tax® 








,::c ■/ (1 

•;. \ c n'xsrfd'jsq B to .boriosM , (S) 

.;•(• • •; boblo^f n vjihlnu: bo bo.dtob ( b) 

* ! 

: - ^ • ' 

* , <: • - t : <o ~ ; 

fi.c b&&; ooibd. accldbo o odo bru-i 8!?;ocf (b; 

• • 

: .T*TC-'■ IbOOG ; /T.bb.0 . l • ' • '..I - ... {V) 

- 

iuoi n Oil*?.*"i:o \;n .c ,.oiv ., » lo; 

iill .M . _ \ 

- ,/ -■; / ■■' • : ; - •; f ■.<' b ' : ' 0 .* ■ . / 

„ ■. ’ t «. 

<. ■ ,, t •. b < /• • 

* ; t t i ' .. > 

t ■ ( / '. ~ . 




* 


- 


t -. *. 




0j <» ' 

' 


■ ■ 


i 










(2) Advertising - newspaper adds, bills, magazines© 

(3) Stock - raw materials including shapes, material 
trimmings© 

(4) Profit - (Explain the effect of short seasons and 
changing styles on the margin of profit©) 

(5) Reasons for charging 50$ to 100$ more than was 
paid at wholesale for hats and materials© 

HOMEMAKING- 5 

A daily diary or log shall be kept by each student© 

FOODS AND DIETETICS 1 
Study of Dietetics: 

Aims : 

1© To give a thorough working foundation tothe student 
who is planning to take up nursing or institutional 
work as a vocation© 

2© This section of the year f s work should be a recapi¬ 
tulation and a very appreciable expansion of the 
work of the first two years 0 
1© Outline for Discussion Periods : 

A© Thorough review of food principles© 

B* Complete understanding of the digestive mechanism and 
knowledge of the digestion of all food stuffs© 

C© Review of caloric values 

D. Proportionate requirements of the various food 
principles© 








Study of the food for the adult man: 




Eo 


P. 


Go 


Ho 

Io 

Jo 

K® 

L. 

M® 

N. 

0 * 

P. 


(1) The sedentary man. 

(2) The muscularly active man - various degrees 
of activity. 

(3) The obses man. 

(4) The thin man. 

Study of the food for the adult women (under the 
same headings as for the adult man). 

Study of infant nutrition: 

(1) Prenatal care. 

(2) Natural food supply. 

(3) Artificial feeding - modifications necessary. 

(4) Proprietary infant foods. 

(5) Weaning. 

(6) Importance of additional mineral supply* 

Food for the two years old child© 

Pood for the three to four years old child. 

Food for the five to seven years old child. 

Pood for the eight to twelve years old child© 

Pood in adolescence and youth. 

Pood for the family group - modifications© 

Pood after fifty® 

Pood in old age. 

Study of food plans and dietaries with proper 
energy requirements, correct proportions of food 
principles, vitamins. 



Qo Food for the sick and convalescent 2 

(1) Necessity for a knowledge of energy requirements 
and the type of diet needed* 

(2) Study of typical menus of different types of 
invalid diets* 

(3) The convalescent diet* 

(4) The diet in minor illnesses: e.g* colds* 

(5) Diets for more serious illnesses: acute 
indigestion, intestinal putrefaction, fevers, 
tubercolosis, food poisoning, diabetes* 

R, Deficiency diseases (cause, prevention and cure)* 

(1) Eruptions of the skin* 

(2) Scurvy. 

(3) Rickets. 

(4) Xerophthalmia* 

(5) Beriberi* 

(6) Pellagra* 

S* Relation of faulty nutrition to early loss of youth 
and vigor* 

2* O utline for Laboratory Periods : 

Foods and meals for the various types studied, should be 
actually prepared* The practical work should be carried 
along with the theory, thus stimulating and holding the 
interest of the class in the discussion periods* 
Institutional Management 





:r.r. o a al &vn go bn 

'.oM:i -loM 

bo (5 


r ;<o *■: r • Me a Ms I on:M ;s 

*ioM vMMeaooeM 



* 

- MM OfT ' 



i , .;r=: oMM ' : Me i>o 

r a.; Mo : M- 



„ . M . 

* •• ; n. : ' I / ( ' ( . 

B M • * . : 

c ■; r.i-o : .v t neesenJMC" oj,.. ‘i''."': ceroiMl (c) 

t, ' • < ‘ ' : • ' ■ < 

* * ' ' 

„ v 

. ... - 

* 

• . • 

* ' • ' 

* ' 

* * . ' 

* ■ 

j ■ ' M , 


^ ' v - i.,-.' ■ O . 

* 

.* :: ' K - r 
, ' ■ ■*.- ’ ' ' 










3 96 


Aims : 

lo To convey a clear idea of the difference between the 
home kitchen and the institutional kitchen® 

2* To impress the importance of cooperation among 
members of the working group® 

3o To stress the necessity for wise discrimination in 
marketing® 

1* Outline for Discussion Periods ; 

A* The Institutional Kitchens 

(1) The most desirable size and shape® 

(2) Proper relationships of position of various 
working units® 

(3) The equipment (a) Necessary® 

(b) Desirable® 

(4) The mechaaical devices - consideration of the 
elimination of human labor® (Students should 
make their own lists of mechanical devices, 
being prepared to discuss them and discard 
those which they consider unnecessary or un¬ 
profitable ) • 

B® Marketing: 

(1) Review work of second year on marketing® 

(2) Stress great necessity for wise uses of left¬ 
overs® 

(3) Necessity for quick, accurate judgment in 
quantity buying® 




: 



= • ' ‘ ' ■ r ' ' ■ ' 

: 

* 

. . : 

■ : ■■ 

* 

;'i : ’ ■ ; . •' •: 

;■ ■ • ‘ ; • / ' i ' . 1 - O'- a . .' " 1 r 

* • - . ■ ; ; . ■ 

. : . ' . ' , • , 

; ' - ' ' - v • ■ " •■■■ ~ } ; ‘' : • ' - 

■' _ •• ' ' - r : 

t • . • • X • .' r ■■■ u ■ > ' o ■ ' ■ " • ; ; • -i 


... ... : • . , ■ : 0 r-i r 

r j- fro.'isq ; ?. n; X acf 


|| • 

> ecorli 



A ' :■ r ; . . ■ 




' j'. .. 

. 

0 ' ■<: , .V." >*; \ ■ . '/ ' 

U) 

*1. .!. ..o ■ ■ ■ ■ . ' x ’ 


( ; 


* 

: t 1 *:. i ■ 1 . ■ ■ '■ 1 ■ • ■ • ' 

* 






n 

s J • 


(4) Cash transactions usually most economic a 1 0 
Cleanliness of Insti tuti onal Kitchen: 

(1) Personal habits of employees© 

(2) Each person responsible for her own equipment© 

(3) Refrigeration of foods© 

(4) Disposal of waste© 

D*. Field Trips: 

Arrange visits to two or more kitchens of the 
following types: 

(1) Hospital, (2) Hotel; (3) Restaurant, (4) Cafeteria© 
(The girls will get the greatest benefit from these 
trips if made after the class discussion has taken 
place) © 

Food Study - Institutional Cookery 

Aims : 

1© Further development of judgment in planning and 

marketing and skill in the preparation and serving 
of meals© 

2© Ability to plan and prepare meals on a large scale© 

1© Outline for Discussion Periods : 

A© Types of institutional kitchen work and the nvgys which 
they differ© 

B. Recipes: 

(1) Comparison of home and institutional recipes© 

(2) Importance of retaining flavor in large 
quantity cookery - ways of doing this© 







' ' 

* 

, ' • ■: • J ; ' ' 

* ‘ 

* 

' 

■ 

o'iOi. "to GWor? ' ; .kMs’v C> 

; *■ 1 ■ " . ; r±lol 

«. f .- .•»" ' ’ : X ■ t • - >-' 

• • | 

* 

- 

;j r, eoi' ! Oo ;i/iV^m^oXeveb 'TtO r -f-‘ , .crr' 

* 

■ • ■ O' ,r: .ftj : t '■ } *0 ' o ■ ' - : O'' O' . ' " 0 

. b . o ' • . f r. . o J .1 

: 

- •• ' ■ ■ ’ ' 11 














Co Efficient Service: 

(1) Different standards, e.g. daintiness in tea¬ 
room service, speed in cafeteria service^ 

(2) Time tables - importance of following a definite 
routine o 

2o Outline for Laboratory Periods : 

A. Preparation of Poods on a larger scale should be 
continued*. For example orders might be taken and 
individual pupils made responsible for canning a 
whole case of fruit, making a dozen glasses of jellyo 
An effort should be made to make the student more 
self reliant, giving her an opportunity to apply, 
under observation, the principles learned in her 
second year f s work# 

B* More extensive preparation of batters and doughs, 
meats, fish, poultry, vegetables, desserts, pastry 

and entrees® 

C. Experiments in fireless cookery® 

D. Practical work on one or more forms of institutional 
food preparation, giving the students practice in the 
planning and serving of meals to groups larger than 
the average family* The success of this work will 
largely depend upon the initiative and resourceful¬ 
ness of the teacher in charge® The work might take 


the form of: 



- ■ 

r.. . ■ - ’ 

* 

: ■ - i., ■' . -\:c .. -l ey/dj x '■ 

* 

• ; • '■■ ■ : r c r y . yy y . y f j u. • ' v : • -iid' 

:: ; - ' ■ ; ' , ' ’ • ' ' C " xd.i v. 

‘•r;> , r ,jr-;d.l .v'.uV, c.;/ C : n5«Ti Gd bl;.i'0ri.£ h'OTiS XI , 

'V r ' t ;.i • ■ c y .. . : K " t > .".id--; X; 

. • '' t ' ■■■ 3C - 

. : T • . * 

* 

. ; * * d t ’ * 

* ■ ■ ' 

’ • ' ■ ■ - 

•: ’ : • ; ; ' v " c V • 

•; r,- J - d ' ■ r» , r* Xv -i:'. !v . ; n ! - "tJSlt 

' 0 ,r: ■: i : ■ • / ' • ' d > '; : « ' ’ ; 1 d \ 1 ' - 

„ ' ’ 










(1) Cafeteria lunches served to students 0 

(2) Noonday luncheons served to teachers 0 

(3) Afternoon refreshments served to teachers 
or pupiIs o 

(4) Pood orders filled, to be taken home. 

(Prices to practically cover the cost of foods 
served should be chargedo) 












4 00 


APPENDIX X 

Arts and Grafts 

Our great heritage of the arts of the past is an 
invaluable storehouse of inspiration and knowledge which 
should be studied. The modern philosophies of art, as seen 
in painting, industrial arts design, sculpture, architec¬ 
ture and other phases of life should also be presented. 

Abstract and non-objective art should be emphasized, 
not at all to the exclusion of more conventional art forms, 
but because they are stimulating means of expression them¬ 
selves. Non-objective art also has significance because it 
has such close relationship to modern industrial design and 
architecture. 

The entire art endeavour should be creative in 
nature; an attempt to stimulate the fullest expression on 
the part of the student. In the case of a project there is, 
of course, always the practical application of the design 
to be considered, but here, too, originality should be 
stressed. 

The first year program is exploratory, and students 
may be permitted to try out several phases of the work. 

Arts and Grafts I 


Gene ral: Pollo G on st rue tion 












* 

' 

c « t 

- 

• i ' ■ -; • ■ : ■ • 


0 


■ ' . V. ' ■ ■ ■ l" 1 . ' - *• 


* 


' 




* 

f 




« « ■ < 

L 








401 


Design: 

Structural and ornamental design 

Relation of art to industry 

Sources of design 

Principles and their application 
Drawing and Painting : 

Geometric solids and nature of forms 

Oo l Q U£ : 

Note: While the orthodox "colour schemes* 1 such as 
monochromatic, analogous, etc# may be taught, it is more 
important that students learn to use colour without neces¬ 
sarily referring to these. 

Any hues can be combined in a design successfully if 
used with skill as to value, intensity, amount and distribu¬ 
tion. When **colour schemes 1 * are stressed, students are likely 
to acquire two false ideas: 

(a) That if these **eolour schemes** are used, the 
results are likely to be successful. 

(b) That no other colour relationships are likely to 
succeed. 

Colour is an exciting phenomenon which should be ex¬ 
perimented with and not prescribed by too many rules. 
L et tering: 


Poster alphabets 








402 


Drafting for Girls : 

Definitions, use of instruments, geometric forms, 

etc. 

Commercial Art : 

More intensive study of lettering; brush exercises; 
layout; layout as applied to commercial art problems; price 
tickets, sales cards, bulletins, letter heads, poster; 
labels; packaging; lino cuts. 

Leathercraft : 

Design bill-fold or change purse, including decora¬ 
tion; thonging; use of punch; press studs; sewing leather; 
cobbler’s stitch; cut leather; stencil patterns; book ends 
of tea cosy; designs for embossing; use of embossing and 
modelling tools; comb case or scissor case; monograms for 
bag-tag or bookmark; extra articles; shopping list, card 
case, camera case, glove case, playing card case, gloves. 
Pottery : 

Preparation of clays: three-dimensional designs; 
flower-pot coil method; decorating with colored clay; mak¬ 
ing slabs; making slab box with lid; making a lamp base; 
glazing. 

Modelling and Plaster Casting : 

Slabs: low-relief, bird and animal forms; clay three- 
dimensional groups; soap carving of bird and animal forms; 
model foot, hand features; simple easting; wood carving. 










403 


Interior Decoration : 

Study of material used; woods and wood finishes; 
walls and wall coverings; floors and floor coverings; windows 
and window coverings; simple floor plans and elevations; re¬ 
decorate second-hand furniture. 

Stage Art: 

Construction of model stage for class use; construc¬ 
tion of cardboard model stage by each student; colour for 
stage effects; various types of settings, as, naturalistic, 
conventional, abstract; papier mache masks (simple); marion¬ 
ettes (simple) 

Textile Printing and Dyeing : 

Tie-and dye; single colours; variegated; top dyeing; 
batik (simple designs); block printing; stencilling. 

The silk screen process of printing, while not feasi¬ 
ble for large groups of students, could be used successfully 
by individuals or small groups. It is a quick and interesting 
method of producing program covers, posters, fine art designs 
and textile patterns in fast dye. 

Art Metal : 

Bent-iron designs for sign brackets; flower vase 
stands; flower pot raek; hanging flower basket; window box 
brackets; candle holder; desk lamp; cut, bend, drill and 
revel metal; etching in copper and brass, work out designs 


























. . 

■.. ' 






- - ■ : ' 








■ 


< 

e 






, 

« .. ■ . 




■ 

. 

* > 




« 









: 






404 

for desk set; blotter corners, rocking blotter, calendar. 
Make these articles and decorate. 

Dress Design and Fashion Drawing : 

Study of line in dress; dressing abnormal types to 
camouflage abnormalities; neck cuts for different facial 
types; hat design; costume studies. 

Bookbinding : 

Pamphlets, one signature; wire bound; paper case; 
tape binding; making cases; rebinding magazines. 

Plastics : 

Modern developments in the plastic industries; 
composition of plastics; definitions -- binder, filler, 
colouring matter, lubricant, etc*; classification — 
la; Thermo-setting (b) Thermoplastic; hand and power 
tools used in working plastics. 

Suggested Projects : 

Toilet articles; jewelry, buttons, buckles, handles, 
picture frames, beads, signs, shade pulls, desk sets, lamps, 
name plates, paper knives and inlays. 

Weaving : 

Looms and their construction; design for weaving 
various useful articles for wear and decoration; wool and 
its preparation, fleece cleaning, carding, spinning, dyeing, 
setting up loom, warps; weaving table mats, scarves, cushion 
tops, runner, curtains, rugs, cloth. 








405 


Art Woodwork : 

Many original and useful articles can be made of 
wood •- photo albums (hinged with leather thongs or hinges); 
brooches or othor costume jewelry; fancy boxes; ornaments, 
etc. 

Arts and Crafts II 


Design Required : 

Appreciation; good and bad in structural and orna¬ 
mental design (pattern lectures); scrap book collection of 
examples; critical analyses; layout. 

Drawing : 

Cast and pose drawing in pencil, ink or wash; still 
life groups; imaginative drawings for stories. 

Figure Drawing : 

Besides drawing from posed figures in the class room, 
students should be urged to sketch from people in action or 
at rest, at home or on the street. 

Colour : 

Harmonies; colour application for dress, interiors, 
stage, etc. 

Lettering : 

Practice 


N.B* Select any two of the following second year craft phases. 






















• i ;• ;.. X ..... ■ 

- 









■ 

























406 


Commercial Art ; 

Wrappers; bookjackets; photo-retouching; silver 
print drawings; line-block cutting and printing in one and 
two colours. 

Draw articles such as furniture, leatherwork, for 
reproduction in catalogues or in advertisements. 

Leath ere raft : 

Design a bookjacket or magazine cover ; use a panel 
decoration; embossing and thonging of edges; staining; use 
of water colour, oil colour, caustic soda, gold leaf. Choice 
of articles for second year — music cover, table or radio 
cover, desk set, tea cosy, lady’s purse. 

gattara: 

Use of wheel; turning of plaster core; cast vase; 
tile design — line pattern; glazing; pottery history -- 
Egyptian. 

Int er i or De cor at ion : 

Interior groupings; drawings of groups or corner 
arrangements in ink and wash; colour and texture studies; 
perspective drawings of rooms; period furniture -- Queen 
Anne, Early Georgian, Louis XIV, XV, Chippendale. 
Soje L Ua&-a ad la s t ex: 

Modelling in papier mache; use of crack filler, hard 


putty and gesso; keen cement; low-relief plaque in gesso; 









407 


modelling from casts; making of armature; original composi¬ 
tion in the round; casting; cement tiles in colour. 

Stage Art : 

Drop-curtain, making of properties; stage settings 
in colour by painting or cut paper, for special plays; mini¬ 
ature cardboard models showing stage sets of various types; 
simple stage costumes. 

Textile Printing and Dyeing : 

Designing in charcoal; wall hangings, scarf or 
cushion top. Work out in colour by batik method. Continue 
work in block printing and stencilling. 

Art Metal : 

Using copper, brass, pewter, etc.; pierced metal; 
design pierced metal patterns for such articles as napkin 
ring, paper knife, bracelet, monogrammed backle; make arti¬ 
cle and saw out decoration; repousse in light weight sheet 
metal; designs for masks, note book covers, greeting cards, 
telephone book cover. Minimum -- 3 articles. 

Bookbinding : 

Half-leather case; rope binding; suede covers; snap¬ 
shot album with posts; gilding. 

Dress . Design : 

Colour for types; complexion charts; study of suita¬ 
ble clothing for athletic type, dramatic type, ingenue type, 














. 






I i 


- 


•... 






■ 




v . 






. 


* 

' 




: « t 

! .... ■ . ' : 




, ' " ’ « ■ ' « 
' 






« 


. 




• ' 




, ! l. 




408 


matronly type; develop original designs of costumes for these 
types; historic costume; modern dresses from historic motifs. 
Industrial Design : 

Work out original, practical designs for ornamental 
iron, refrigerators, stoves, radios, furniture, lamp fixtures, 
leather goods, wallpaper, linoleum, dishes, pottery, automo¬ 
biles, etc, study factory methods of production of each 
article designed. 

Arts and Crafts III 


Design : 

Freedom and originality in design to be encouraged; 
wide latitude should be given students showing originality. 

A student may desire to follow some special line which should 
be permitted according to the judgment of the instructor, A 
composite selection of media or subject may be chosen. 
Commercial Art : 

Show cards; poster designs and layouts; poster tech¬ 
nique; greeting card designs; signs on cloth, wood, metal or 
glass; cut-out signs and window display; projects; stencils 
and brush work; drawings for reproduction; methods of repro¬ 
duction with visit to engraving plant. 

Drawing and Painting : 

Various media — pencil, pen and ink, crayon, water 











colours, oil, techniques; sketching of natural objects and 
landscapes; still life and figure sketching; colour mixing 
and monochrome painting. 

Industrial Processes and Finishing : 

Materials — wood, metal, canvas, glass, plastics. 
Processes -- enamelling, lacquering, powdering, 
graining, gilding, spraying, polishing, leafing. (Practice). 
Modelling and Casting : 

Media — wood, plaster, cement, papier mache, soap, 

butter. 

Projects — hollow are, book ends, mantle ornaments; 
busts and parts of human figures such as hand, foot, head, 
ear, animals; plaques; figurines; composition; glazes; use 
of kiln. 

Interior Decoration : 

Compositions in flat and in perspective; colour; 
models worked out with various media and arranged as sets; 
arrangement of flowers; history of period furniture — Adam 
Hepplewhite, Louis XVI, Sheraton, Empire, Modern. 

Stage Art ; 

Model sets for specific play; full size scenery and 
properties for a dramatic presentation; period scenes and 
settings worked out; stage technique; lighting effects and 
colour effects; puppets and marionettes. 










■- ' | • • ; 1 • 










c 










c 




t 


t \ ' ' : 




< « 


l • 


. 

. 


v\>. i : }:',■> 



, • i u.' 









410 


Art Metal : 

Jewelry, designs for filigree; drawing out of wire, 
copper or silver and bending into forms; annealing, solder¬ 
ing; colouring; combinations of small sheet metal units and 
filigree as in leaf or flower forms; brooches and pendants; 
shaping of stones for settings; repousee work, napkin rings, 
bracelets; chains; rings; buckles; hinges, pins, catches# 
Weaving * 

A further study of materials used in weaving; de¬ 
signing patterns for projects; projects of a more advanced 
nature involving more intricate and difficult designs. 

Heferences : 

‘‘Design in Modern Life” -- ^ohn Gloag — Geo* Allen & Unvin 
Ltd., London 

"Art Today 11 Faulkner, Ziegfield and Hill — Henry Holt & 

Go., Hew York 

"General Plastics" — Cherry — Me Knight and Mcknight — 
Bloomington 

"General Bookbinding" — Groneman — McKnight and Me Knight — 


Bloomington 











, 

.. ' : " . ■ ' • v ‘ I-; ■: V- 

i 

. 

. . ; 




















. 

, 

e - 

■ — 






-- 

■ 












B29769 



