
For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


ANALYSES OF PLEISTOCENE DEPOSITS 

IN THE 

EDMONTON AREA 


\ 


A 




(5.X JUBlil 

wimbsiwis 












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/someanalysesofplOOdenn 



UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


Faculty of Arts and Selene© 


Department of Geology 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 


and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for acceptance, 
a thesis entitled !, Some Analyses of Pleistocene Deposits in 
the Edmonton Area” submitted by Denny Emerson Duff, B.Se®, in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Science® 












’ 


. 

i,- <.: ■ ■ 





THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SOME ANALYSES OF PLEISTOCENE DEPOSITS 
in the 

EDMONTON AREA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


by 

DENNY EMERSON DUFF, B.SC. 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
APRIL 1951. 





, 

■ 




Thesis 

1^5 \ 

*\3 


ABSTRACT 


This thesis embodies the results of a detailed 
investigation of the sands and sand fractions of till sheets of 
Pleistocene age in the Edmonton map-area.to ascertain if a 
correlation of these sands and till sheets is possible. 

Observed field data, mechanical analyses, histograms, 
graphs, heavy minerals and sphericity-roundness data are the 
methods of approach utilized in attempting this correlation and 
the various techniques employed in this investigation are described. 

The investigation reveals the presence of three distinct 
till sheets and two sets of interglacial beds. Histograms and 
sphericity data present a possible means of correlating the till 
sheets but no method of correlating the interglacial sands was 
effected by the methods of investigation utilized in this study. 



n 














, 













TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

Purpose of the investigation . « . . .. 1 

Methods of investigation . . ... 1 

Acknowledgements . ....... . 2 

Location* boundaries and access. .......... 2 

Previous work in £he area ............. 2 

CHAPTER II 

STRATIGRAPHY 

General statement ................. h 

Mesozoic formations ... . ........ h 

Upper Cretaceous ................ h 

Grizzly Bear formation . ... h 

Table of formations ................ 5 

Birch Lake formation ............. 6 

Pale and Variegated beds ........... 6 

Bearpaw formation ............... 6 

Edmonton formation. 6 

Cenozoic formations ................ 6 

General statement ..... . ...... 6 

Tertiary .................... 7 

Saskatchewan gravels and sands ........ 7 

Pleistocene ................... 7 

Gray till .... ............... 7 

Lower Intefglaeial stage ........... 8 

Brown till .. 8 

Upper Interglacial stage .. 9 

Silt till ................... 10 

Recent ..................... 10 

CHAPTER III 


METHODS OF INVESTIGATION 

Stratigraphic correlation ............. u 

General statement ................ 11 

Procedure .................... 11 









































u 



Mechanical Analyses . « 13 

General statement.... 13 

Procedure . ,•••••«•*• 13 

Histograms .. 15 

General statement. 15 

Procedure . • •••••••••• 15 

Graphs. 15 

General statement. 15 

Procedure. 16 

Heavy Mineral Analyses ..17 

General statement . .. 17 

Procedure. 17 

Sphericity and Roundness . 18 

General statement • . 18 

Procedure • 19 


CHAPTER IV 

INTERPRETATIONS 

Stratigraphic Correlation • ..« e « 21 

Saskatchewan sands and gravels 21 

Gray till .. . 21 

Lower Interglacial beds «•••••••••••• 22 

Brown till ..23 

Upper Interglacial beds • *. 2k 

Silt till ........ .* , . . 25 

Mechanical Analyses . 26 

Interpretation of mechanical analyses ...... 26 

Histograms . • •*•••••••••••••••• 28 

General characteristics of histograms ...... 28 

Interpretation of histograms ..•••••••o 29 

Graphs . 31 

General characteristics of graphs 31 

Interpretation of frequency and cumulative 

frequency curves . . . . 32 

Heavy Minerals .... * « • 33 

Source of heavy minerals ....... .33 

Interpretation of heavy minerals ........ 3k 

Sphericity and Roundness ............. 38 

Factors controlling sphericity and roundness ... 38 

Interpretation of sphericity roundness data • * « 39 

CHAPTER ¥ 


k3 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 









































BIBLIOGRAPHY 


kS 


Figures 

Numbers 1 to 6 inclusive 


Appendices 


Glacial map in pocket at back 


(co P .*J Research 

1 O. « t ^ 1 VT\ Q p ^ 


0> v n c» 








CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

Purpose of the investigation 

In the summer of 1950, the Research Council of Alberta 
started a survey of Pleistocene deposits in the Edmonton area# The 
author assisted in this survey and was greatly impressed with the 
large amounts of sand associated with the glacial dejjosits in the 
map area. The summer field work and the materials and information 
used in this thesis have been assembled under the auspices of the 
Research Council of Alberta. The kindness of the Council in allowing 
the use of their equipment, laboratory, working space and materials 
has aided immeasurably in preparing this thesis. 

A survey of literature on the Pleistocene revealed no detailed 

wdK 

approach or survey to correlate the sands and tills^in the area® The 
author will set forth in this thesis the field observations and the 
results of several analytical methods in an attempt to use the sand, 
and the sand fraction of the till, to correlate the till sheets and 
interglacial sands. 

Methods of Investigation 

The methods used In this thesis for correlation are sixfold; 

1. Stratigraphic correlation. 

2. Mechanical analyses. 

3. Histograms. 
lw Graphs. 

5 * * Heavy minerals „ 

• Sphericity and roundness* 


6 





- 

J.‘ iv !: . ‘ ' • 

, • . ■ . : , . ' • ' , n:) I - f , 

. . . 

tx,r>A . ■. 

* 

./ .. ... j : ■ .. . - ■■ 

, 

:'L.; ■ji..;' • ..’.J. v'/»i 

■V ; ' :-U.i : n: : ' ■- • 

/d ^ ■. : . ■ ,. .;. v ' * » • •• 












„ 



Acknowledgements 


The preparation of this thesis has been under the direction 
of Dr. R. L. Rutherford* Department of Geology* University of Alberta. 

His criticisms and suggestions have been most helpful* 

Thanks are also extended to the other members of the Department 
of Geology for their aid and criticisms* 

W.H.A. Clow, Assistant Geologist, Research Council of Alberta, 
has given freely in both time and assistance* 

Location* boundaries and access 

The Edmonton map-area designated herein is that embraced by 
Sectional Sheet No. 315• It includes townships I 4.9 to 56 and ranges 
15 to 2? W* of the fourth meridian, yielding approximately 3920 square 
miles. The city of Edmonton lies roughly in the west center of the 
Sectional Sheet. 

A network of highways and municipal roads radiating out of 
Edmonton make most of the area readily accessible by motor vehicle. 

The only areas which do not permit a detailed examination by normal 
means of transportation because of few or no roads, are the Indian 
Reserves* Elk Island National Park* Cooking Lake Forest Reserve and 
the immediate environs of Ministik* Joseph* Oliver and Miquelon lakes. 

Previous work in the area 

The earliest mention of the Tertiary and Pleistocene deposits 
in the area were made by Tyrrell (1886). Dawson ( 1898 ) and later 
Coleman (1909) make further mention of these beds. 

Erdtman and Lewis (1931) published a report on their observations 
of the glacial mantle in the vicinity of Lake Wabamun and three years 














- 3 - 


years later Taylor (193^) made a survey of the stratigraphy in the 
vicinity of Edmonton* 

Rutherford (1936, 1937) published papers dealing with the 
Saskatchewan gravels and sands, and later Warren (1937, 195>0 a*), 
Rutherford (19lil) and Bretz (19U3) published papers dealing with 
glacial features, deposits and possible correlations. 








CHAPTER II 


STRATIGRAPHY 

General statement 

The rocks of the Edmonton area range in age from Upper 
Cretaceous to Recent. As this report is concerned almost entirely 
•with a correlation of Pleistocene deposits only a brief description 
of the consolidated strata will be given. These are shown in tabular 
form on Page 5. 

The Upper Cretaceous rocks are dominantly sandstones, somewhat 
bentonitic, with minor amounts of shale and some coal seams. The 
Edmonton formation directly underlies the glacial mantle over the 
greater part of the map-area. 

The Tertiary rocks in the area overlie the erosional plain of 
the Upper Cretaceous and are composed of the Saskatchewan sands and 
gravels. 

Pleistocene and Recent deposits form the covering mantle over 
almost all the area and are composed of sands, till, silts, laking 
clays and gravels. The soil mantle in the area grades from a few 
inches to about five feet. 

MESOZOIC FORMATIONS 
UPPER CRETACEOUS 

Grizzly Bear formation 

The Grizzly Bear is found only in the extreme north-east 
comer of the map-area* The formation consists of dark blue to gray 
bentonitic shales, which in some places are sandy. 









■ 


o . 


■ ii 






- 

' 

■ •' ■ 






TABLE OF -FORMATIONS 


Group 

System 

Series 

Formation 

Character 

Cenozoic 

Quaternary 

Recent 


soils and laking 

Pleistocene 

Silt 

till 

light buff to 
brown, locally 
stony, till 

Upper Inter- 
glacial stage 

sands, silts, 
varved clays 

Brown till 

buff brown, 
stony, columnar 
till 

Lower Inter¬ 
glacial stage 

green brown to 
buff brown 
sands, peat, 
gravels 

Gray till 

gray, coaly, 
somewhat stony 

Tertiary 


By 

Saskatchewan 
Gravels and 
Sands 

• gravel and sand 

Mesozoic 

Cretaceous 

Upper 

Cretaceous 

Edmonton 

formation 

sandstone, 
bentonitic shale, 
coal seams 

Bearpaw 

formation 

clay, sandstone, 
ironstone nodules, 
some black quartzite 
and chert pebble 
conglomerate 

Pale and 

Variegated 

beds 

light and dark 
shale, sandstones 
and coal seams 

Birch Lake 
formation 

buff sandstone 
and some shale 

Grizzly Bear 
formation 

dark shale and 
sandy shale 




































% 










- 6 - 


Birch Lake foma.t5.on 

The Birch Lake, like the Grizzly Bear, is found only in the 
extreme north-east comer of the area* The formation consists of 
massive gray to buff sandstone with minor amounts of shale® 

Pale and Variegated beds (Belly River) 

The Pale and Variegated beds cover roughly the area east of 
a line through Holden and Gibbons® The area occupied by these beds 
is generally speaking quite flat* They consist of light and dark 
coloured shales, bentonitic arenaceous shales, pale incoherent sand¬ 
stones and thin coal seams* 

Bearpaw formation 

The Bearpaw in the map-area is quite thin and in surface 
map expression is about two to three miles wide* It consists of 
light and dark coloured clays with thin beds of sandstone® Ironstone 
nodules are common and in places a black chert and quartzitic 
conglomerate is found* 

Edmonton formation 

The Edmonton is the consolidated strata immediately underlying 
the till over the remainder of the map-area, and consists of buff, 
gray and green sandstones, dark bentonitic shales and coal seams* 

CEN020IC FORMATIONS 

reneral statement 

The deposits of the Cenosoic are of chief interest in this 
thesis and a more detailed description will of necessity follow. 














- 7 - 


The section shwon as Figure 1 is the type section in the area and 
has been used for correlation purposes. Location of this type 
section, known as the M Big Bend” section, is Lsd.l Sec.11 Tpj$2^> 

R.2f> j/k. The outcrop of this section is very complete in detail. 

TERTIARY 

Saskatchewan gravels and sands 

These sands and gravels are quite widespread over the province 
and good sections of them are exposed in the Edmonton area® They may 
be observed in the Saskatchewan River valley or in some of the local 
gravel pits. According to Rutherford (1936), n In the district 
immediately adjacent to Edmonton along the Saskatchewan valley to the 
west of the city the sands are the more prevalent material, whereas 
to the east of the city and in several places somewhat removed from 
the city gravels are more prevalent.” 

The Saskatchewan sands and gravels are thought to represent 
Tertiary deposits as they overlie bedrock and underlie glacial material. 

The coarse materials of the gravels are composed of undecomposed 
bedrock (of local derivation) and pebbles and boulders from the 
Cordilleran area® These western pebbles are largely chert, quartzitic 
sandstones and arkosic sandstones. The beds also carry find gold which 
is most abundant near the base of the gravels. 


PLEISTOCENE 


Gray till 

This is the oldest till observed in the area and is generally 
found overlying the Saskatchewan sands and gravels. This till is 
observed only in low places and it appears a long erosional period 
followed the retreat of the glacier that laid down this deposit. 







\ 












- 8 - 


This till is gray coloured, quite thin and not very stony. 

The pebbles average about two inches in diameter. "When dry, the 
till has a gray-white colour, and on fresh exposure is black, tough, 
and of a somewhat fissile nature. 

Lower Interglacial stage 

Overlying the Gray till in some places is a sand or peat 
layer that separates the lower Gray till from the overlying Brown 
till. This is not always present and if missing makes the separation 
of the Gray and Brown tills quite difficult. 

The sands are clear, clean, buff, yellowish to greenish black. 
They have a prevailingly yellowish brown to buff colour and once 
seen are easily recognized elsewhere. Gravels have been observed in 
the sand though they are not common. 

Peat (Clow, 195>1) and lemming teeth have been found in these 
beds and are further proof of an interglacial stage. The term stage 
is here used to indicate a time break between the Gray and Brown tills. 

Brown till 

This till overlies the Lower Interglacial beds and the Gray 
till and is quite thick, sections up to 33 feet having been observed. 

It is brown, massive, very stony, and boulders up to twenty five inches 
in diameter were observed, l/yhen dry it has a light brown colour and 
weathers into a columnar wall (Figure 2), fhen wet or on f resh 
surface the till is sticky and pliable. 








- 9 - 


Upper Interglacial stage 

Beds assigned to this stage include deposits from loess“like 
material to gravels* There are lake silts, clays, varved clays, 
sands and sand and gravel pockets and stringers* These deposits lie 
above the Brown till and where applicable below the Silt till. 

Some of the sands are not covered and appear to be represented by 
recent sand dunes* 

The sands are wind deposited, waterlain, glacio-fluvial and 
predominantly gray-gresn to light brown in colour* The silts are a 
buff colour showing some bedding features and appear to be both 
aeolian and waterlain. The laking material is composed of brown clays 
and varved clays. Locally the brown clays show salt crystals. 

There appears to be a threefold division, two sands with an 
intervening bed of silt or laking material, comprising these deposits* 
Outcrops showed all variations ranging from no interglacial beds through 
to the complete sequence* In the majority of outcrops the upper sand 
was missing and only the two lower phases were present. 

Lemming teeth were found in the sands and give weight to inter¬ 
pretation as an interglacial stage* Further evidence toward the 
possibility of an interglacial period is the persistence of a zone of 
rhizoconcretions found in the silt phase of these Upper Interglacial 
beds. These rhizoconcretions are well exposed, in the map-area, at 
the Acme Brick Company clay pit (Lsd»3 Sec.27 Tp.53 R.2? Wlu). 

Rhizo concretions are discussed in detail by Kindle (1923) and 
Rousseau (1931;) • 

The term stage is applied here with the same reservations as 
for the Lower Interglacial beds, only in this case as a time break 
between Brown till and Silt till. 












- 10 - 


Silt till 

This till represents the latest glaciation in the map-area. 

The term ”Silt till” is used here for the till overlying the Brown 
till and Upper Interglacial beds. 

The Silt till is quite variable in texture with very few 
cobbles or pebbles present. It is generally brown to light brown 
in colour, soft crumbly texture and can easily be mistaken for the 
Brown till* The lack of stones, softer texture, and siltier nature 
tend to aid in differentiating this Silt till from the Brown. The 
presence of Upper Interglacial beds is the best criterion for 
establishing its identity as can be seen in Figures 3 and h, where 
the Silt till overlies sand and varved clays. 

RECENT 

Deposits of Recent age form the covering mantle of the area. 
They are represented by soils, swamp muck, peat swamps and some river 
gravels and sands. The soils, which are the most significant of these 
Recent deposits, have all formed on the young unconsolidated deposits 
of drift and have a profile of a few inches to about five feet* 







CHAPTER III 


METHODS OF INVESTIGATION 

STRATIGRAPHIC CORRELATION 
General statement 

The deposits described In this thesis are assembled in 
tabular form showing specimen number, location and stratigraphic 
relationship of the deposit to overlying or underlying beds® They 
appear in Appendix ”A", Tables 1 to 6 inclusive® 

Procedure 

The placing of the deposits into the proper position in the 
geologic column was done at the outcrop® All specimens were thus 
placed on the basis of their correlated position with the "Big Bend" 
type section® 

The assignment of the Saskatchewan gravels and sands was very 
readily done since in almost every case bedrock was observed below 
these deposits® When bedrock was not seen the position of these 
gravels and sands under the Gray till established their stratigraphical 
position® 

The Gray till was readily assigned to its proper position on 
the basis of its distinguishing colour, the overlying buff coloured 
interglacial sands and the underlying Saskatchewan gravels and sands. 

The Lower Interglacial beds were accurately placed on the 
basis of their position between the lower Gray till and the upper 
Brown till* The colour was also an aid in their identification* 
















' 




. \ 

























- 12 - 


The stratigraphic placement of the Brown till was more 
difficult. Confusion as to whether Brown till. Silt till, or both 
were exposed was the major enigma in determining this till since on 
casual appearance the Silt till is easily mistaken for the Brown till. 

The harder texture, somewhat columnar habit and greater number of 
cobbles and pebbles of the Brown till were the chief means of separating 
these two tills. 

The assignment of an accurate stratigraphic position to the 
beds of the Upper Interglacial stage was not readily executed. Sands 
lie on the Gray till and also under the Silt till. Interbedded 
between the two sands are a group of silts, clays, varved clays and 
loess-like material. As previously mentioned, one, any or all of 
this series may be missing and thus cause confusion. Above the lower 
sand and in the silt there is a zone of rhizoneoncretions which not 
only aided in fixing the position of the lower sand but also established 
the presence of the laking silts. If no underlying beds were observed 
then any sand in the Upper Interglacial stage group was considered to 
be only of Upper Interglacial stage age and stratigraphically immediately 
below the Silt till. 

The Silt till was, in almost every case, easily assigned to 
its proper place. This till lies above all other deposits in the 
area and hence with the soil forms the surface mantle. Some difficulty 
was encountered when the till was observed but lacked the pebbles or 
cobbles. A detailed search would always reveal the presence of such 
pebbles or cobbles and hence establish the outcrop as being that of 
the Silt till. The softer texture and the lesser number of cobbles 
and pebbles of the Silt till were the deciding factors in establishing 
its presence. 






5 . 



















' ' ' 



. 






' 











- 13 - 


MECHANICAL ANALYSES 
General statement 

Screen analyses were carried out on the sand fractions of 
seventy samples of sands and tills. Of these seventy analyses two 
were on bedrock, one on a sand within the Gray till, fourteen on 
tills and the remaining 53 on other sands. The results of these 
analyses were compiled on a weight percent basis and a cumulative 
weight percent basis. These two sets of figures in table form appear 
in Appendix H B n , Tables 1 to 6 inclusive. 

Procedure 

The samples were screened in Tyler Standard 8 inch screens. 
The mesh size in millimeters and inches of the screens used are as 


follows s 

Mesh #28 ..... 0.0232 inches . 0.589 millimeters 

35 ..... 0.0161* " o.ia? " 

1*8 ..... 0.0116 » . 0.295 " 

65 . 0.0082 « . 0.208 « 

100 . 0.0058 « . 0 . 11*7 M 

i5o ..... o.ooia » o.ioi* « 

200 . 0.0029 " 0.07U *» 


The material smaller than the 200 mesh screen was retained 
as one cut, and is referred to as the ,, bottoms ,, . The material caught 
in the 28 mesh screen ranges from 2 mm. to 0.589 mm. and this was 
also used as one cut. Screens larger than 0.589 mm. (#28 mesh) were 
not used as the amount of material above this size was in practically 
all cases negligible. 




























Dry sand samples were placed in the top of a nest of screens 
and the entire column was rocked and tapped with the flat of the hand 
until sieving in the topmost sieve was completed. This sieve was 
then removed from the column and the process repeated until sieving 
was completed. This allowed the finer sieves to be worked for a 
longer period than the coarser and the critical sieve to be open to 
view at all times. 

Consolidated samples of bedrock and till were placed in a 
beaker and allowed to soak in water until they were entirely disaggregated. 
The entire sample was then placed in the top of the nest of sieves and 
washed through by water. Each sieve was then washed separately to 
remove any further traces of clay and silt that might have adhered to 
the sands. The screens, with their sand cuts, were then dried and the 
sand run through the sieves again as described in the above paragraph 
for dry sand samples. 

Mien available 500 gram samples of sand and 300 gram samples 
of till or bedrock were treated. Any specimen not computed from 500 
or from 300 grams is specified at the bottom of the column of figures 
and the weight of the sample used is shown in brackets. 

The usage of such large samples somewhat aided in reducing 
any error caused by loss of sand in the sieves. In a $00 gram sample 
these losses ran to an average of about 1.8? grams, with a maximum of 
luO grams and a minimum of 0.2 grams. The use of the large sample 
made the loss of sand such a small fraction of the total that the 
loss did not visibly affect any one screen size cut. 

The conversion from actual weight to a weight percentage is 


of slide rule accuracy, 









. ; ; VI ' ‘/; V . ; !. " • • i 

„ 

■ 

- 



• . .. 












1 


' ■ 


f 


j 








, 




. ■ 


. 

' . . ' . . 

* : 

... 

. 




, : 

. .. - ; i: r ... . ■ ■ • ' . • 


• . 





- 15 - 


HISTOGRAMS 
General statement 

Histograms were constructed using the data obtained from 
mechanical analyses. These histograms appear in Appendix "C" , 

Tables 1 to 6 inclusive. 

Procedure 

The results of each screen analysis were compiled into a 
frequency table using the Tyler mesh number as the class intervals, 
and the frequency of each class grade as a percentage of the total 
weight. The Tyler mesh number was chosen as the independent variable 
and the frequency as the dependent variable. 

Each grade size (Tyler mesh number) was indicated as of equal 
width along the horizontal. H x n axis. This in effect gives each 
rectangle an equal width and hence indirectly transforms this scale 
to a logarithmic scale (Krumbein & Pettijohn 1938, p. 186). The 
vertical M y M axis represents the weight percentage of the total 
weight of the sample. 

The data from the mechanical analyses was then plotted on 
histogram tables and assembled into six groups on the basis of 
stratigraphic position. An exception to this was the grouping of 
the two types of Upper Interglacial sands on the basis of histogram 
shape directly. This accounts for the irregularity of stratigraphic 
position noted in Tables k and 5 of Appendix "A". 

GRAPHS 

General statement 

Two types of curves, cumulative frequency and the frequency, 


were prepared from data obtained from mechanical analyses. Each 







— 











' 

d i .. ■ \ 




i | 













- 16 - 


curve is placed under the corresponding histogram in Appendix n C w * 

Tables 1 to 6 inclusive. As two distinct types of curves were 
prepared each will be discussed as a separate entity although both 
types are placed in the same table. 

Procedure 

The cumulative frequency curve is one based on histogram 
data. It is made by plotting ordinates which represent the total 
amount of material larger than a given diameter* They are equivalent 
to setting one histogram block above and to the right of the preceding 
block so that the base of each block is the total height of all 
preceding blocks. A size scale of Tyler mesh number was chosen as 
the scale along the horizontal n x M axis and a frequency scale from 
0 to 100 percent along the vertical ”y n axis. The horizontal scale* 
as in histograms* is logarithmic. The data from the cumulative weight 
percent tables in Appendix lt B n * Tables 1 to 6 inclusive was then 
plotted as a series of points. These points were then connected to 
form a smoothed curve yielding a line representing the continuous 
distribution of sizes. 

The frequency curve is a smooth curve showing the variation 
of the dependent variable as a continuous function of the independent 
variable. There is a relationship between cumulative curves* frequency 
curves* and histograms* but in the construction of such curves from 
histogram data the cumulative curve is most convenient. The relationship 
between the histogram and the frequency curve is that the latter denotes 
the limit of a histogram as each class limit becomes smaller and finally 
reaches zero, while the frequency increases without bound. In the 
construction of these frequency curves a smooth continuous curve was 
simply superimposed over the histogram bars. 







0 








■ : 




. 




.. 








/ 










, ' 





r. 





- 17 - 


HEAVY MINERAL ANALYSES 
General statement 

The heavy minerals were separated, examined microscopically 
and the results placed into table form, showing the frequency of 
occurrence of individual species and the persistence of each species. 
The compilation of these results are in Appendix ,, D% Tables 1 to 
6 inclusive. 

Procedure 

The separation of the heavy minerals from the sand was 
carried out by the bromofom method as described in the Manual 
of Sedimentary Petrography, pp. 3h3-3kk (Krumbein and Pettijohn, 
1938). 

In each analyses 25 grams of the sand were placed in the 
bromoform and each sample allowed to stand for a period of one 
hour. Each sample was thoroughly stirred upon being placed in 
the bromofom and subsequently every ten minutes thereafter. 

The heavy mineral residue deposited on the filter paper 
was washed with acetone and dried. 

An immersion mount of the heavy mineral suite was prepared 
in ortho-nitro-toluene (index of refraction 1»5U1$) and this mount 
placed under the petrographic microscope for examination of the 
individual mineral species. 

The individual grains were examined and determined using 
the Manual of Sedimentary Petrography (Krumbein and Pettijohn, 

1938), An Introduction to Sedimentary Petrography (Milner, 1922) 
and Optical Mineralogy (Rogers and Kerr, 191$) which proved to 
be very good and concise aids. The frequency of occurrence of 







) ' ■ . . ■ > ' 










■ 






■ : 




















; ’ 













- 18 - 


each mineral was also noted on the basis of the scale set up by- 
Milner (1922). This table, partially reproduced below, gives 
only a simple estimation by eye. No attempt was made to make an 
individual count of the grains. 

Table after Milner 


TERM SYMBOL 

Flood. F 

Very abundant • A 

Abundant • a 

Very common .. C 

Common ..c 

Scarce ..s 

Very scarce ..... . S 

Rare .. r 

Very rare .. R 


Some animal teeth, probably those of lemmings, were observed 
and noted in the heavy mineral suite. These were identified and 
confirmed by Stelck (1951). The presence of teeth and the appropriate 
specimen number is noted below the table, where applicable. 

SPHERICITY AND RQUNDNESS 
General statement 

Selected samples of sands were photographed and from these 
photographs sphericity and roundness values were obtained. The 
results of these computations appear in Appendix ,f E M , Tables 1 to 
7 inclusive. 

















; i- i( ■. 

















- 19 - 


Procedure 

Representative specimens of the sand were chosen and immersion 
mounts made of the sand grains. The medium used for making these 
wet mounts was alpha-monochlomapthalene (index of refraction 1.626) 
allowing the quartz grains* in particular* to stand out with good 
relief. 

These slides were then placed under a petrographic microscope 
with medium power magnification ( x 80). The microscope was placed 
under a n Leitz M.A.U B. Camera Photographic Apparatus” with a 120 
film adaptor. 120 verichrome film was used with an exposure time 
of 3 seconds. A magnification of 125 times was obtained from this 
method and one photomicrograph of each representative sand type 
was taken. 

Tvso specimens from each of the six groups in Appendix ”A” 
were photographed in the above manner and from these photographs 
sphericity and roundness data were obtained. 

Two-dimensional sphericities were rapidly made from a table 
devised by Rittenhouse (191*6). This visual comparison chart 
prepared by Rittenhouse is reproduced here (Figure 6). In order 
to check results the author had four unbiased comparisons of the 
sphericities made by classmates* The results of their work and 
that of the author were remarkably similar in all cases. 

The compilation of the roundness data required considerable 
time. Circles with radii from 1 mm. to 16 mm. were described on 
a piece of tracing cloth. This was then placed on the picture of 
the sand grain in question and the required radius determined. 

The roundness factors were obtained from using the formula: 








. 








. 








r, 






' 

* 


. 




20 


P (rho) - 


where 


(r ± /R) 

N 


individual radii of comers 


number of comers 


» radius of the maximum 
inscribed circle 







CHAPTER IV 


INTERPRETATION 

STRATIGRAPHIC CORRELATION 

Stratigraphic correlation was found to be an effective 
method of identifying the deposit and delineating the areal 
distribution of the deposit* 

Saskatchewan sands and gravels 

These sands and gravels were traced by the author as far 
west as Seba Beach, but were not observed east of the eastern 
boundary range 22 within the map-area. The sands and gravels are 
not limited to the valleys but appear throughout the map-area at 
elevations ranging from 2000 feet to 2310 feet above sea level. 
However the thickest deposits were observed in the Saskatchewan 
River valley® 

The top of these deposits was used as the lowermost boundary 
of the Pleistocene in the map-area. The gravels showed every 
indication of being river transported and the lack of Precambrian 
boulders, cobbles and pebbles suggests a western source probably 
in the Cordilleran. 

Gray till 

This Gray till lying above the Saskatchewan gravels and sands 
and below the Brown till was very readily distinguished in the map- 
area, Gray till was observed at such places as Tofield, Cardiff, 
Devon, west of the map-area at Lake Wabamun and also south at 
Labuma on the Red Deer river. The till appears to have, at one 











- 22 - 


time, covered the entire Edmonton area and it represents the first 
glaciation over this area* The abundance of granites, gneisses 
and schists from the Precambrian establishes the till as having 
an eastern source and undoubtedly being a phase of the Laurentide 
ice-sheet* 

Gray till was observed in only the topographically low- 
places* In no place was the till exceedingly thick reaching an 
observed maximum of only 12 feet* Erosional features are common 
on the till surface and it is assumed a strong period of erosion 
took place after the deposition of this Gray till* Channels and 
gouges were scoured out and filled by later deposits, and at the 
west end of the Edmonton Golf and Country Club on the north bank 
of the river it may be seen where the finer fractions of the till 
have been completely eroded out leaving only the gravel* This 
erosional period left the Gray till scattered throughout the 
country in the form of isolated patches® 

Lower Interglacial beds 

These beds are present over most of the map-area and were 
observed at many places including Tofield, Mearns, Elk Island Park, 
Devon and Fort Saskatchewan* They are generally represented by a 
buff light coloured, clean, bedded and cross-bedded sand. Locally 
the sands were dirty and had some coarser pebble and cobble phases 
present and at one locality (Lsd. Ik Sec* 36 Tp. 56 R. 26 W* h) a 
peat bed was observed* Peat, which represents the first stage in 
coal formation, is formed from the accumulation of grasses, sphagnum, 
and other plants in moist places* This peat layer is the first 
recorded occurence at this stratigraphic position in the province* 












23 


The peat was dark brown to black in colour with some fibrous material 
and locally quite compact* 

The sands, probably in part derived from Gray till erosion, 
which fill the old erosional pockets and gulleys appear to be stream 
and in part wind deposited* The peat which developed in the low 
areas of the region indicates a time of plant growth and a possible 
rise of mean average temperature* These two deposits indicate a 
long period of erosion following the deposition of the Gray till and 
an interglacial period of a considerable time* 

Brown till 

The Brown till, lying unconformably on Lower Interglacial 
beds or Gray till, was present over the entire map-area* This till 
has considerably greater numbers of the Precambrian elastics and 
like the Gray till had its source on the Canadian Shield, probably- 
associated with the Laurentide ice movement* 

Brown till outcrop, observed in the map-area is considerably 
thicker than the Gray till but it has been subjected to erosion, 
either partially or completely, and is covered by later deposits. 

It has an observed maximum thickness of 33 feet and is more prevalent 
than the Gray till* 

This till displays a typical columnar habit and in many places 
the lower part of the till sheet appears to be bedded. In some of 
the observed sections the middle of the till has gravel and sand 
stringers and in nearly all cases the upper part of the till sheet 
is eroded and undulatoiy* 

The increased number of boulders, cobbles and pebbles in this 
till can probably be attributed to the ice passing over the old 







* 




I 






' 


■ 



















% ' ■ j). . - '> A ‘ ;'. 



erosional plain of the Gray till -where these materials would be in 
abundance, being left from the erosion and washing away of the finer 
sand phases. The thickness of this Brown till as compared to the 
Gray can possibly be explained by either a thicker ice advance or 
a shorter period of erosion. A shorter period of erosion is favoured 
as the Silt till above, like the Gray till below, has very few cobbles 
and pebbles present. This Brown till appears to be the product of 
a separate ice advance on the basis of the lower, separating, inter¬ 
glacial beds and the very distinct colour difference from the Gray 
till. It is difficult to reconcile only one ice advance with such 
diverse properties in these two till sheets. 

Upper Interglacial beds 

These beds presented many difficulties and hence a greater 
number of suppositions must be made. Under this heading the sands 
at Winterbura, Woodbend, Glory Hills, Redwater and Elk Island Park 
are tentatively placed and in many places these sands are now at the 
surface. It is assumed these upper beds are associated with a large 
lake in the Edmonton area and this can be noted by reference to the 
glacial map (in folder) accompanying this thesis. 

This glacial topography map shows a large flat area in the 
environs of the city of Edmonton. It is suggested a large proglacial 
lake occupied this area as is evidenced by the large amounts of clays, 
varved clays and bedded silts noted in the cutbanks of the Sturgeon 
and Saskatchewan rivers. 

The author postulates that as the glacier responsible for 
the deposition of the Brown till retreated eastward it halted in 
the morainal area in the center of the sheet (Cooking Lake Moraine). 

As the glacier halted here amounts of sand would wash down the front 



. 

























and out onto the proglacial area. The dammed glacial waters would 
soon form a large lake and the marginal sands would be shaped into 
dunes by the winds prevalent in front of the glacier. In the quiet 
deep water the finer clays, varved clays and bedded silts would be 
deposited. That the lake level was fluctuating is evidenced by the 
tiers of rhizonconcretions observed within the silt. Here plant 
life probably flourished and was then covered and killed by rising 
or falling waters or local ice advances. As the ice retreated 
farther eastward this dammed body of water broke through the moraine 
area in the vicinity of Bruderheim and flowed in back and east of 
the Cooking Lake moraine, probably removing large amounts of materials. 
Various erosive forces would then take the old beach and dune sands 
and distribute them over the lake silts. 

Silt till 

This till has almost complete coverage over the map-area. 

It represents the last observed glaciation and is extremely variable 
in composition, texture and thickness. The only place this till 
was not recognized or observed was in the areas marked "sand” on the 
glacial map and in the extreme west of the map-area on top of the 
Gloiy Hills, 

The evidence supporting this third glaciation is readily 
observed in the various exposures throughout the area. Figures 3, 

U, and 5 all show interglacial beds or features separating the Silt 
till from the Brown. There was undoubtedly a period of erosion 
prior to the advance of this third ice sheet but it was of a shorter 
duration than that of the Lower Interglacial stage. The cross-bedded 
and bedded sands, underlying varved clays (Figure i|) and the erosional 










- 




- - 

■ 

„ 

, 

. 

* 

. 




. • l-y.i •' :■ a ' 3 ' 

. 




■ ■ 









. 








■ 

. • • . • 



- 26 - 


pebble lines (Figure 5) all give evidence to confirm an interglacial 
period. Arkosic pebbles typical of the Saskatchewan gravels were 
also found in this till which suggests erosion had bared these deposits. 
This is the only till in which such cobbles and pebbles were found* 

The author is not prepared to say from which direction this 
ice-advance came but does recognize the presence of a third glaciation 
which forms the uppermost glacial deposits over the Edmonton area. 

The shorter erosional period of the Upper Interglacial period would 
not permit a large accumulation of pebbles and cobbles to be weathered 
out on the surface of the Brown till and hence lesser amounts of this 
coarser material in the Silt till. The large amount of laking clays 
and silts over which the ice advanced would account for the finer 
silty nature of the Silt till in the same manner in Deane (1950) accounts 
for the silty nature of some of the tills in the Lake Simcoe district 
in Ontario. 

MECHANICAL ANALYSES 

Interpretation of mechanical analyses 

Interpretation from mechanical analyses are usually made 
from histograms, graphs, etc. However a unique method of direct 
interpretation from mechanical analyses is that described by Gardescu 
and Billings (1937) in which serial numbers are used to identify the 
various screen cuts. These serial numbers are constructed from the 
screen cuts. The 28 mesh is represented by 1, the 35 mesh by 2, 
the 1*8 mesh by 3* etc. To build up a serial number the largest screen 
cut of an analysis is used as the first digit, the second largest 
screen cut as the second digit, etc. For example the serial number 
for specimen a^ is 3-U-2-5-1-6-7-8. The coarseness index is 






- 27 - 


arbitrarily chosen as the 65 mesh screen cut and the index for 
specimen a^ would be 29*10* 

A series of such serial numbers and their corresponding 
coarseness indexes was prepared for the seventy specimens of this 
thesis in an attempt to evolve pertinent information for correlation* 

The serial numbers for the Saskatchewan sands, Lower Interglacial, 
Upper Interglacial and Miscellaneous sands were for all practical 
purpose similar* The only deviation appeared in specimen of the 
Saskatchewan sands which was markedly different from the other serial 
numbers of the sands but remarkably similar to specimens c^, and 
of the Miscellaneous sands* 

All specimens of the till and bedrock revealed similar serial 
numbers* The sand within the Gray till (specimen c^) yielded a 
serial number about one half way between that obtained for the till 
and that obtained for the Lower Interglacial sands. 

Such results indicate that there were at least three sets 
of environmental conditions. That of the tills is the same, all 
the Interglacial sands and the Saskatchewan sands are similar and 
specimens h^, c^, and represent another set of conditions* 

The serial numbers did not reveal any data diagnostic for 
correlation and the coarseness index number was so variable throughout 
that no attempt was made to utilize it. There is an indication that 
the sands of the till were in part derived from the underlying bedrock 
of the Edmonton formation and the interglacial sands were derived 


from the till 


t •.(. ‘ 











- 28 - 


HISTOGRAMS 

General characteristics of histograms 

Udden (19lU) found continental tills to be notably uniform 
in composition with maximum ingredients from l/l6 to 1/32 mm* in 
diameter. Some of Udden®s glacial sands were as well sorted as 
beach sands while others were very poorly sorted. His beach deposits 
were all very well sorted with 66% of the sample in the maximum and 
the entire sample spread over an average of three grades in the 
histogram. Coarse drifting sands had a predominance (about %0%) 
in the l/h to 1/8 mm. in diameter class while the dune sands has 
fine sand (l/h to 1/8 mm. in diameter) as the maximum ingredient 
(average 6 $% of the total). These dune sands were remarkably 
uniform in mechanical composition and had approximately 90% of 
their distribution among three grades. In all drifted and blown 
material Udden found the coarse admixtures to be in excess of the 
fine. 

Krumbein (1933) in his work on glacial tills found they had 
extremely irregular distributions and several secondary maxima 
rendered them polymodal. He further noted the influence of the 
immediately underlying bedrock on the mechanical composition was as 
inconsequential in one till as another. Krumbein did find that a 
given ice sheet does tend to produce a till that has a fairly well 
defined frequency distribution. 

Doeglas (19U6) in his work on Dutch sediments found beach 
sands have no characteristic size frequency distribution, the shape 
and size being mainly dependent on the detritus available inland 























‘ ■ i 











- 29 - 


from the coast. In analyses of aeolian sands he found the size 
range small, the particles well sorted, symmetrical frequency 
distribution and that clay particles were wanting. 

Interpretation of histograms 

Histograms of the size distribution of sands permit a 
comparison of sands to be easily and readily made. As yet the 
shape of histograms do not allow a wind deposited sand to be distinguished 
from a sand of aqueous deposition* All that can be ventured is the 
suggestion that the shape of the histogram suggests a type of environment. 

The histograms, in Table 1, Appendix C, of the Saskatchewan 
sands are extremely variable. None could be classified as either 
beach or aeolian sands as defined by Udden (191U). Specimens d^, 
e^, f^ and show some similarity and specimen h^ appears similar 

to the washed beach sands of Table 6 (specimens c^, d^ and e^). 

Specimens a^, b^ and c^ show no similarity to each other or to any 
of the other histograms of the Saskatchewan sands. All of the 
Saskatchewan sands are well sorted but no correlation by histograms 
was possible. 

Table 2 of Appendix C reveals better results than any of the 
other five tables. The two histograms of the Edmonton sandstone 
(specimens a 2 and bg ) show a distinct similarity. The sand is 
bimodal with about 3$% of the sample in the silt-clay fraction. 

The histograms of the till sheets are veiy similar. All are 
polymodal in agreement with Krumbein (1933) and these tills further 
show a uniformity of composition and maximum ingredients from 1/16 
to 1/32 mm. in diameter which agrees with Udden*s (19lU) results. 

A noticeable difference in the percentage of the silt-clay fraction 




- 30 - 


of each till type is present. The average percentage of these fine 
cuts is 68.3$ for the Gray, 58.2$ for the Brown and 65.5$ for the 
Silt till. This feature does present a possible means of correlation 
but much more work will have to be done before any concrete conclusions 
may be drawn. 

The Lower Interglacial sands of Table 3 show no similar 
histogram pattern. These sands are, with the exception of specimen 
h^ well sorted but their histograms reveal no diagnostic criteria 
for correlation. There is every indication, on the basis of histogram 
shape, that the environment of deposition for these sands was the 
same as for the Upper Interglacial sands. 

Tables k and 5 of Appendix C show histograms of sands under 
the Silt till. The majority of the Upper Interglacial sands fitted 
into one of these two groups. The histogram shape of these sands 
was the basis for this large two-fold division. 

The histograms of Table ii are all remarkably constant 
indicating a particular type of deposition for all of these sands. 

Some of the individual specimens are bimodal but the maximum 
ingredient is common in every case. Specimen of Table 3 is very- 
similar to the histograms of this group. 

The histogram shapes of the specimens in Table 5 are also 
very similar* Some of the sands are bimodal but all showed a very 
marked degree of sorting. Several specimens of Lower Interglacial 
sands in Table 3 are similar in shape to these histograms and indicate 
a similar environment of deposition. 

The histograms of the Upper Interglacial sands show a 
predominance of two distinct types of depositional environment but 








_ 

' 

- 

' 

■ 














• - 






■ 

■ : 


' 

- 

■ 




- 31 - 


the histogram shape does not reveal a means of correlating these 
sands throughout the area or of distinguishing them from the Lower 
Interglacial sands. 

In the Miscellaneous sands of Table 6 specimens and 
from the Upper Interglacial sands appear to be coarser phases of 
the sands in Tables b and 5 respectively. Specimen c^ is a histogram 
of a modem beach sand and specimens d^, and h^ are very similar 
to it. Specimens f^ and g^ both of Upper Interglacial age bear no 
similarity to any other histogram. 

A study of the histograms of the sands in this thesis did 
not allow any of the sands to be established as aeolian or aqueous. 

The histograms do reveal several environments of deposition were 
present and that these same environments were probably present during 
the deposition of the Saskatchewan, Lower and Upper Interglacial 
sands. The histograms of the till types are very similar and the 
histograms of tills do present a possible means of correlation* 

GRAPHS 

General characteristics of graphs 

Twenhofel and lyier (19^*1) state that the cumulative frequency 
curve is practically independent of the grade scale used and is a 
more reliable index of the nature of the distribution of particles 
in sediments than a histogram or frequency curve. These authors 
further agree that the mathematical values derived from the cumulative 
frequency curves better express the character of the sediment than 
do visual comparative methods. 

Trask (1932) prepared the coefficient of sorting from the 
first and third quartile measurements. This geometrical quartile 












' 
















•- ‘ "*T 








' 









' ' 













- 32 - 


measure eliminates the size factor, that is, the difference in 
coarseness between samples or the units of measurement have no 
influence on the coefficient of sorting* Trask states that if the 
coefficient of sorting is less than 2,5 the sample is well sorted, 
if greater than Uo5 poorly sorted and if about 3,0 normal sorting. 

Interpretation of frequency and cumulative frequency curves 

The frequency curves were prepared with the view they might 
reveal certain characteristics the histograms did not, but such was 
not the case and these frequency curves were less diagnostic than 
histograms and no correlative data was obtained from them. 

The results obtained from the cumulative frequency curves 
were no more fruitful than those of the simple frequency curves. An 
attempt to use the coefficient of sorting, derived from the cumulative 
frequency curves, was also ineffectual for correlation. 

The cumulative curves of the Saskatchewan gravels show some 
similarity and indicate that water washing has removed a greater 
part of the finer phases. The coefficient of sorting averages about 
0,36 with variations from 1*U to 0,35* 

The cumulative curves of the Edmonton formation are very 
similar and yield a sorting coefficient of 1,86 indicating a lesser 
degree of sorting than that of the Saskatchewan sands. 

The cumulative curves of the till sheets yielded a high 
sorting value. The average coefficient of sorting was 2.18 but 
the Brown till gave a slightly lower value probably indicating 
removal of some of the finer silt-clay phases by water washing prior 
to deposition. All cumulative curves of the three till sheets are 
markedly similar but are of no apparent visual value for correlation. 








: . 






. 




. 









- 33 - 


The cumulative curves of the Lower Interglacial sands were 
of little use for correlation and showed good sorting with an 
average coefficient of sorting value of 0.36* Specimen h^ was 
high with a value of 1.63 for the sorting and merely has a greater 
amount of silt-clay material present. 

The curves of the Upper Interglacial sands (Tables k and 5) 
gave an average sorting value of 0.37k with a very small deviation 
from this figure* This value is very similar to that obtained for 
the Saskatchewan sands and the Lower Interglacial sands and merely 
shows that these three sets of sands are well sorted. 

The cumulative curves of the Miscellaneous sands have 
varying coefficient of sorting values which though close to the values 
obtained for the Upper Interglacial sands do not allow a correlation 
of these Miscellaneous sands to any of the Upper Interglacial sands. 

No results of any diagnostic value were obtained from frequency 
curves or cumulative frequency curves. The coefficient of sorting 
value did show a variation in the degree of sorting but it was not 
marked enough for correlation purposes. 

HEAVY MINERALS 

Source of heavy minerals 

Pleistocene geologists have long claimed that glacial till 
is largely of local origin (Flint, 191*7: Salisbury, 1900). Wallace 
and McCartney (1928) working with Pleistocene sands in Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan attributed their Pleistocene sands to direct derivation 
from the Precambrian. Later Krumbein (1933) working with tills showed 
that the heavy minerals found in the tills were largely derived from 
crystalline sources and he inferred this from the abundance of 








* 

» • 












« 


■ 






. . ' 




. 

« ■ ; : , . . ■ 

7 X;. ^ \ 

' 

. 


























- 3U - 


hornblende present* Studies of the till sheets in Minnesota by 
Kruger (1937) showed that the heavy minerals were from granitic 
type rocks and Rittenhouse ( 1914 - 6 ) asserts the type of mineral present 
is indicative of the source* Work on fluvio-glacial sands in New 
Zealand by Hutton (1950) showed the type of heavy mineral present 
was of a granitic source. Gravenor (1951) working with tills in 
southwestern Ontario found his results coincided with those of 
Kruger, the heavy mineral suite showed no appreciable variation, 
and hence a granitic rock type source from the Precambrian* All of 
these studies were made where the tills are relatively close to the 
Precambrian shield. 

Interpretation of heavy mineral analyses 

Correlation of deposits by means of their petrology must 
necessarily presuppose that they all contain a common but distinctive 
mineral assemblage, Solomon (1932) and Rittenhouse (I 9 I 46 ) both used 
this method of correlation successfully but found it time consuming, 
exacting and exhaustive. The heavy minerals from certain strata are 
distinct and are also a very useful guide to the source rock of the 
deposit. Boswell (1933) and PettiJohn (19U1) both agree that there 
is an apparent increase in the complexity of heavy mineral assemblage 
with decreasing geologic age, which can be attributed to the greater 
complexity of new terrane and the disappearance by solution of the 
less stable minerals in the older. However, the actual mineral 
assemblage is a function of both the source rock and the mineral 
stability. 







, 











. 




V 
















- 















. 













- 35 - 


Various workers have arrived at some general conclusions 
regarding actual minerals present in deposits* Wallace and McCartney 
(1928) suggested the presence of abundant hornblende in their Pleistocene 
sands indicated very limited weathering. The presence of apatite 
suggests a low percentage of CO^ in the atmosphere and cool conditions 
(Boswell, 1933)* Rubey (1933) found that the coarsest grained and 
finest grained samples of Pleistocene sands, both from the same till 
body, differed in heavy mineral assemblages. In the coarse he found 
epidote, kyanite, andalusite, rutile and hypersthene while in the fine 
sands magnetite, ilmenite, zircon, muscovite and biotite were the 
major constituents. Russell (1937) put forth the suggestion that 
feldspars, pyroxenes and amphiboles are very susceptible to abrasive 
action whereas rutile, zircon, and tourmaline are very resistant. 

Russell further stated that limonite cannot be transported any great 
distance from its source area. A list prepared by Dryden and Dryden 
(19l|6) showing the order of stability is as follows: 

1. zircon 6. kyanite 

2. tourmaline 7. hornblende 

3o sillimanite 8. staurolite 

ho monazite 9. garnet 

5. chloritoid 10. hypersthene 

Rittenhouse (LeRoy and Crain, 19h9 ) lists andalusite, 
kyanite, staurolite and sillimanite as being originally derived from 
metamorphic rocks while rutile, zircon, ilmenite, apatite, olivine, 
titanite and tourmaline (?) indicative of an igneous source. Hutton 
(1950) states that the presence of zircon, garnet and hornblende in 
glacial sands point to a granitic source. 














. 


t 











c 















*r , 










. 








- 36 - 


A study of the tables in Appendix D reveal that certain 
generalizations and conclusions discussed in the above paragraphs 
are applicable to heavy mineral suites of the Pleistocene deposits 
in the Edmonton area* 

The heavy mineral suite under specimen a^, Table 2, is that 
of the Edmonton formation which shows a complete lack of the amphibole 
group and only minor amounts of garnet. This indicates long weathering 
and perhaps a certain amount of recycling, allowing the beds to be 
differentiated from all sands above the Edmonton formation. There 
is no reflection of its heavy mineral suite in the sands above. 

Table 1 of the Saskatchewan gravels reveals an abundance 
of amphibole and garnet groups, a scarcity of apatite and in general 
a lesser variety of heavy mineral assemblage than the overlying glacial 
tills and sands but a greater variety than the underlying Edmonton 
sandstone. The complex heavy mineral content indicates a younger 
and more complex source for the gravels than for the Edmonton sandstone 
and a younger age for the Saskatchewan gravels because of the presence 
of the less stable minerals. 

Tabic 2 which constitutes the heavy mineral analyses of the 
three till sheets in the map-area shows abundant amounts of amphibole, 
garnet and limonite. There is a persistence of apatite, chlorite, 
ilmenite, leucoxene, magnetite, staurolite and zircon. The absence 
of haematite in the Gray till, muscovite in the Gray and Silt tills 
and tourmaline in the Brown till are indicative of a means of 
correlation. However the rarity or absence of haematite, muscovite 
and tourmaline in all samples rather precludes these minerals as a 
diagnostic criterion for correlation. Heavy minerals present in these 






. 

• - 

+ 


• • ' • - 

. • ■ , . . • 




■ - ■ ' , 
: ’ 

* , . . 

. 

* 




- 37 - 


till sheets indicate an igneous and metamorphic source from the 
PreCambrian shield, a young age, fine to coarse sands, cool climate, 
limited weathering and the formation of limonite locally* The 
presence of the amphiboles and their relation to limited abrasive 
action as suggested by Russell (1937) is doubted. 

Table 3 of the Lower Interglacial sands evinces an abundance 
of amphiboles, garnets and limonite, a persistence of apatite, 
haematite, ilmenite, leucoxene, magnetite and staurolite and a 
noticeable absence of tourmaline. There is no detrital in this 
groups not represented in the underlying till and all indications 
point to a derivation of these sands from this Gray till. The 
lemming teeth found in the heavy mineral residue of these sands 
point to the presence of an interglacial stage. 

Tables k and 5, of the Upper Interglacial sands, both reveal 
an abundance of the amphibole, garnet and limonite groups while 
apatite, ilmenite, leucoxene, magnetite and staurolite show a 
persistence throughout. There is, again, a complete lack of tourmaline 
which is to be expected here as none was observed in the Brown till. 

All minerals present in this Upper Interglacial detrital group appear 
to be a reflection of the Brown till from which these sands are 
derived. Lemming teeth, also observed in heavy mineral suites from 
these beds, indicate an interglacial period. 

The miscellaneous sands of Table 6 reveal the same detrital 
groups that prevail throughout the other heavy mineral assemblages. 
Hence these sands are assumed to have the glacial tills in the area 
as their source. 

The heavy mineral suites from Pleistocene sands and tills of 
the map-area are indicative of a granitic and metamorphic source 





s. 


. 










- 


. . J’ 4 

. 











. 


■ 









- 38 - 


which is undoubtedly the Precambrian shield* These detrita.1 
assemblages show no reflection to the underlying Edmonton sandstone 
and the presence of abundant hornblende and garnet indicates a 
younger age for these deposits than the underlying bedrock. The 
heavy mineral analyses revealed no diagnostic criterion for correlation 
of the Pleistocene till sheets or sands. 

SPHERICITY AND SOUNDNESS 

Factors controlling sphericity and roundness 

Wadell (1932) pointed out that sphericity (shape) and roundness 
are independent properties of sedimentary particles. It was later 
shown by Fraser (1935) that certain minerals break up more readily 
than others and are unable to stand the vigorous wear necessary to 
round them, and they become smaller without becoming rounded. Work 
on Mississippi river sands by Russell and Taylor (1937) revealed 
particles as small as 0.05 mm. in diameter can be rounded by water 
and that there is a decrease in sphericity and roundness with a 
decrease in grain size* Krumbein (19l±l) found roundness to be 
strongly modified by abrasion and wear to which particles are 
subjected, whereas shape may play its most important role in the 
selective transportation of the particle. Abrasion rapidly modifies 
the roundness but after the initial stages of rounding the process 
is much slower. Work by Ailing (1950) led to the conclusion that 
with the exception of slight modification produced by abrasion the 
end shape of a sand grain appears to be determined by its original 
shape, 

Wadell (1933) attributed the following four factors as 
responsible for shape; different cohesive forces in different 











- 39 - 


directions, the mode of crushing, grinding and direct blows and, 
crystal structure* A later list put forth by Krumbein and PettiJohn 
(1938) is as follows: original shape, structure (cleavage, bedding, 
etc*), durability, nature of the geologic agent, nature of action 
and violence of action, and, the time or distance over which the 
action is extended. 

The above paragraphs reveal there is such a great number of 
geologic features involved in the development of sphericity and 
roundness that any one criterion based on a single principle is 
likely to be unreliable. 

Interpretation of sphericity-roundness data 

Correlation by spheric ity-roundness data using an arbitrary 
set of standards is possible (Wadell, 1932). Appalachian oil producing 
sands were correlated with sphericity-roundness measurements by 
Ritteahouse (I 9 I 16 ), where roundness was established as an independent 
criterion (used with caution) for outlining types of sediments. 

LeRoy (LeRoy and Crain, 19ii9) also asserts these sphericity-roundness 
measurements have served in correlating certain strata. 

PettiJohn (1 9k9) infers that the evaluations listed below 
can be interpreted from sphericity-roundness data: 

1. roundness is a good index to the maturity of a sediment. 

2. prolonged abrasion will modify the sphericity. 

3* where the sediment is not derived from pre-existing 
sediments, and where it has been little transported, 
all particles have the same or nearly the same roundness. 

From the results shown in Appendix M E H the average sphericity 
value obtained for the Edmonton sandstone was considerably higher 




. 





















■ 















■ 





- Uo - 


than that of the Saskatchewan sands and precludes any relationship 
between these two beds. There is, however, a striking increase 
from the value of 0.75>3 for the Saskatchewan sands to that of 0.877 
for the Silt till. The average sphericity value increases for each 
overlying bed and suggests the Saskatchewan sands as a major source 
of local material for the first ice advance. The sands picked up by 
the Gray till would be modified and yield a higher average sphericity 
value. The sands eroded out of the Gray till would be further modified 
by geologic agents acting on them and thus yield the higher value 
obtained for the Lower Interglacial sands. This repeated usage of 
the original sand would explain the increasing sphericity with 
decreasing geologic age. 

An average sphericity value of 0.799 obtained for the Upper 
Interglacial sands disrupts the continuity of the increasing sphericity. 
The reasons for this aberration are many and detailed inquiry into 
this problem would undoubtedly solve it. Regardless of this anomalous 
average sphericity figure for the Upper Interglacial beds it is 
assumed they supplied abundant local material for the Silt till. 

The average sphericity results with the above exception, show 
an increasing sphericity with decreasing geologic age and support 
the assumption that source materials for the glacial tills in the 
Edmonton area are largely of local origin. These sphericity 
measurements exhibit a possible means of correlating till bodies 
but more detailed work on a larger scale attempt is necessary to 
establish definite conclusions. 
















- 




























- hi - 


For comparative purposes the roundness data is classified 
on Pettijohn*s scale (19l|.9) partially reproduced below: 

Geometric 

Grade term Class limits mid-point 


angular 

0 

to 

o.i5 

0.125 

subangular 

o.i5 

to 

0.25 

0.200 

subrounded 

0.25 

to 

o.Uo 

0.315 

rounded 

o.Uo 

to 

0.60 

o.5oo 

well rounded 

0.60 

to 

1.00 

0.800 


The average roundness factor for the seven sands in Appendix 
»E ,f yielded a figure of 0.U51. The maximum deviation from this was 
found in the Brown till which gave a roundness factor of 0*386* 

This average roundness factor places these sands in the lower class 
limits of Pettijohns rounded grade but the roundness factor of the 
individual grains range from subangular to well rounded* 

There is a large difference in values obtained for the Edmonton 
sandstone and the Saskatchewan sands. Also^ the Gray and Brown tills 
have roundness factors close to that of the Edmonton formation which 
may indicate an association. The varying roundness factors do show 
abrasion modifies the roundness but do not reveal any broad diagnostic 
differences that can be noted. 

Sphericity-roundness data of the sands under discussion in 
this thesis revealed no absolute means of correlation. The sphericity 
factor presented a possibility for correlation but no diagnostic 
features can as yet be assumed. Roundness data offered no interpretative 
evaluations that were of use in correlation. The rounded classification 
of the sands revealed a certain amount of maturity and it may be 










B 




■ 














interpreted that prolonged abrasion modifies the sphericity. 

These sphericity-roundness values do show that sphericity (shape) 
and roundness are independent properties of sedimentary particles. 



CHAPTER V 


SUMMARY AMD CONCLUSIONS 

The study of the Pleistocene deposits in the Edmonton area 
has revealed the presence of three separate glacial tills and two 
separate interglacial beds. The presence of the three till sheets 
is confirmed by a stratigraphic study, histograms and sphericity- 
roundness data. An abundance of boulders, cobbles and pebbles of 
the Precambrian type indicate association of these ice advances 
to the Laurentide ice-sheet and the heavy mineral analyses show- 
abundant minerals derived from igneous and metamorphic rocks further 
confirming the Canadian Shield as the source of the icesheets* There 
is eveiy indication from the results of stratigraphic studies, 
sphericity-roundness data and mechanical analyses that the advancing 
ice used both Edmonton sandstone and Saskatchewan sands as local 
source material in the formation of the till. 

The occurrence of peat in the Lower Interglacial beds, 
rhizoconcretions in the Upper Interglacial beds and the presence 
of lemming teeth in both beds indicates the ice retreated to the 
extent of allowing life to exist in this area during these inter¬ 
glacial stages. 

The mechanical analysis of each till type yielded a 
characteristic curve and histogram. The interglacial sands while 
not yielding characteristic histograms, curves and mechanical 
analyses do show certain depositional environments were present 
in each stage and that these same environments were present in 
both stages. 


















. 






J $ 








* 






























. 





■ : 



- IOi - 


The sand fraction of the underlying till appears to be the 
main source of the corresponding overlying interglacial sand and 
this interglacial sand supplied a local source of material for the 
next ice advance. The stratigraphic study, heavy minerals, sphericity- 
roundness data and mechanical analyses all support this supposition. 

Very meager results were obtained from the six methods of 
investigation used in this thesis in an attempt to correlate the 
sands and tills of Pleistocene age in the Edmonton area. Some of 
the interpretations and results agree with the findings of other 
workers and certain inferences may be made from some of this data® 

No absolute method of correlating the sands and tills of Pleistocene 
age in the Edmonton map-area was evolved from the methods of study 
used in this thesis* 


-x * % -x- -x- 










' 







BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Ailing, H.L. (1950): Initial shape and roundness of sedimentary 
rock mineral particles of sand size| Jour. Sedim. Pet., 

Vol. 20, No. 3. 

Boswell, P.G.H. (1933): On the mineralogy of sedimentary rocks 5 
T. Murby and Go., London. 

Bretz, J.K. (19li3): Keewatin end moraines in Alberta, Canada! 

Bull., Geol. Soc. Am., Vol. 51u 

Clow, W.H.A. (1951): Unpublished report on the Pleistocene geology 
of the Edmonton Area! Res. Counc. of Alberta. 

Coleman, A.P. (1909) : The drift of Alberta and the relations of the 
Cordilleran and Keewatin ice sheets! Roy. Soc. Can., Trans. 
Vol. 3. 

Dawson, G.M. ( 1898 ): Geol. Surv., Canada, Sum. Rept. Pt» A, Vol. 11. 

Deane, R.E. (1950): Pleistocene geology of the Lake Simcoe district, 
Ontario! Geol. Surv., Canada, Memoir 256. 

Doeglas, D.J. (19^6): Interpretation of the results of mechanical 
analyses! Jour. Sedim, Pet., Vol. 16, No. 3* 

Dryden, L. and Dryden, C. (19^6): Gomparitive rates of weathering 

of some common heavy minerals! Jour. Sedim. Pet., Vol. 16, 

No. 3. 

Erdtman, G. and Lewis, F.J. (1931): A section through the glacial drift 
near Wabamun Lake, Alberta, Canada! Zeitschrift fur 
Gletscherkunde, BD. XIX, Heft 1/3. 

Flint, R.F. (19ii7)s Glacial geology and the Pleistocene epoch! J. Wiley 
and Son, New York. 

Fraser, H.J. (1935): Experimental study of the porosity and permeability 
of clastic sediments! Jour. Geol., Vol. U3, No. 8. 

Gardescu, 1.1. and Billings, M.H. (1937): Use of mechanical sand 
analyses for correlation purposes! Bull., Am. Assn. Pet. 

Geol., Vol. 21, No. 10. 

Gravenor, C.P. (1951): Bedrock source of tills in southwestern Ontario! 
Am. Jour. Sci., Vol. 2l|.9, No. 1. 

Hutton, C.O. (1950): Studies of heavy detrital minerals! Bull., Geol. 
Soc. Am., Vol. 61, No. 7« 

Kindle, E.M. (1923): Range and distribution of certain types of 

Canadian Pleistocene concretions! Bull., Geol. Soc. Am., 

Vol. 3k. 











~ 1*6 - 


Kruger, F.C. (1937)* A sedimentary and petrographic study of certain 
glacial drifts of Minnesota; Am. Jour* Sci., Vol. 31*, 5th 
Series. 

Krumbein, W.C. (1933)5 Textural and lithological variations in glacial 
till; Jour. Geol., Vol* 1*1, No* 1*. 

-and Pettijohn, F.J* (1938): Manual of sedimentary petrography; 

Appleton, Century, Crofts Inc., New York. 

— - (19lil): Measurement and geological significance of shape 

and roundness of sedimentary particles; Jour. Sedim* Pet., 

Vol. 11, No. 2. 

LeRoy, L.W. and Crain, H.M. (19l*9)* Subsurface geologic methods; 

Colo. School Mines, Golden, Colo. 

Milner, H.B. (1922): An introduction to sedimentary petrography; 

T. Murby and Co., London. 

Pettijohn, F.J. (19l*l): Persistence of heavy minerals and geologic 
age; Jour. Geol., Vol. 1*9, No. 6. 

-—— (191*9)* Sedimentary rocks; Harper and Bros., New York. 

Rittenhouse, G. (19l*3 a): A visual method of estimating two dimensional 
sphericity; Jour. Sedim. Pet., Vol. 13, No. 2. 

— (19l*3 b): Transportation and deposition of heavy minerals; 
Bull., Geol. Soc. Am., Vol. 51*® 

—— (191*6): Grain roundness - a valuable geologic tool; Bull. 

Am. Assn. Pet. Geol., Vol. 30, No. 7. 

Rogers, A.F. and Kerr, P.F. (19i*2): Optical mineralogy; McGraw Hill 
Co., New York. 

Rousseau, J. (1931*): The part played by some tidal plants in the 
formation of clay rhizoconcretions; Jour. Sedim, Pet., 

Vol. I*, No, 2. 

Rubey, W.W. (1933)* The size distribution of heavy minerals within 
a water-laid sandstone; Jour. Sedim. Pet., Vol. 3, No. 1. 

Russell, R.D. (1937)* Mineral composition of Mississippi river sands; 
Bull., Geol. Soc. Am., Vol. 1*8. 

——— and Taylor, R.S. (1937)* Roundness and shape of Mississippi 

river sands; Jour. Geol., Vol. 1*5, No. 3. 

Rutherford, R.L. (1936): Some gravels and sands in the Edmonton district, 
Alberta; Geol. Surv., Canada, Prelim* Rept., 36 - 22. 




Rutherford, R.L. (1937): Saskatchewan gravels and sands in central 
Alberta; Roy* Soc* Can., Trans., Vol. 31, Sec. b. 

-— (19bl): Some aspects of glaciation in central and southern 

Alberta; Roy. Soc. Can., Trans., Vol. 35, Sec. lu 

Salisbury, R.D. (1900) i The local origin of glacial drift; Jour. 

Geol., Vol. 8. 

Solomon, J.D. (1932): The glacial succession on the Norfolk coast; 

Proc. Geol. Assoc., XLIII, 1932. 

Stelck, C.R. (1951) i Oral communication. 

Taylor, D.A. (193U): Thesis, M.Sc. 193k (Unpublished), Library, 
University of Alberta; Edmonton, Alberta 

Trask, P.D. (1932): Origin and environment of source sediments of 
petroleum; Gulf Publishing Co., Huston, Texas. 

Twenhofel, W.H. and Tyler, S.A. (19bl): Methods of study of sediments; 
McGraw Hill Co., New York. 

Tyrrell, J.B. (1886): Report on a part of northern Alberta and portions 
of adjacent districts Assiniboia and Saskatchewan; Geol. 

Surv., Canada, Ann. Rept. Vol. 2, Pt. E. 

Udden, J.A. (191b): Mechanical composition of clastic sediments; 

Bull., Geol, Soc. Am., Vol. 25. 

Wadell, H. (1932): Volume, shape and roundness of rock particles; 

Jour. Geol., Vol. bO, No. 5* 

—— (1933)* Sphericity and roundness of rock particles; Jour. 

Geol., Vol. bl, No. 3. 

Wallace, R.C. and McCartney, G.C. (1928): Heavy minerals in sand 
horizons in Manitoba and Eastern Saskatchewan; Roy. Soc. 

Can., Trans., Vol. 22, Sec. b. 

Warren, P.S. (1937): The significance of the Viking moraine; Roy. Can. 
Inst., Trans., Vol, 21, Part 2. 

— (1950a): Unpublished manuscript on glaciation in the 

Edmonton area. 







_ 


















































FIGURE 2l 


Looking down the North Saskatchewan river from the 
tf Big Bend 11 * Brown till forms the steep columnar 
cliffs* Low angle slope is formed by the Saskatchewan 
sands* 


FIGURE 3 


Uppermost “Silt till” overlying sand and silt, 

















FIGURE U 


Silt till overlying varved clays* Note the cobble 
in the clay* 


FIGURE 5 


Silt till overlying Brown till* Note old erosional 
pebble line on the Brown till* 





























.97 00000 .73 
.95 OOOOO 






v 


.9300000 

.9, <30000 

.89 oDODO 
.8700000 

.85 O^G^Q 

• 83 OOC)0 D 





TABLE for ESTIMATING 


TWO- DIMENSIONAL 


SPHERICITY . 


reproduced from 
G.Rittenhouse 
in Jour, of S e d. Pet 
V 0 1. 13 No.2 1943 


FIGURE 6 











































APPENDIX "A" 


TABIES 1 to 6 







Table 1 


SASKATCHEWAN GRAVELS 

Specimen 

Location 

Stratigraphic Position 

a i 

3-6-51-25 Hi 

below brown till 

b i 

lit— 3-5U-23 Till. 

below gray till 

c i 

1-23-52-25 Ifl* 

below gray till 


miles east of 
Burbank, Alberta 
in road cut 

below gray till 

e i 

in Red Deer River cut 
bank at Labuma, Alta. 

below gray till 

f i 

13-31-50-26 lSii 

below gray till 

Si 

Lothian Collieries, 
north shore of 

Lake Wabamun 

below gray till 

*1 

7-16-52-25 Wii 

below gray tin 















J- 


ti 


\ 





v(: 




f 5 







" 











Table 2 


BEDROCK, GRAY TILL, BROWN TILL, SILT TILL 

Specimen 

Location 

Stratigraphic Position 

a 2 

overall sample 

Edmonton ss 

*2 

overall sample 

Edmonton ss 

c 2 

7-16-52-25 w4 

in gray till 

CVJ 

T3 

11-31-51-2^ w4 

gray till 

e 2 

16-23-52-25 W4 

t r 

gray till 

f 2 

7- 1-52-25 w4 

gray till 

gp 

7-16-52-25 w4 

gray till 

h 2 

7-16-52-25 w4 

gray till 

i 2 

11-31-51-24 ¥4 

brown till 

*2 

7-1- 52-25 w4 

brown till 

k 2 

16-23-52-25 ¥4 

brown till 

X 2 

7-16-52-25 w4 

brown till 

m 2 

3- 3^,53-22 w4 

silt till 

n 2 

1 mi. E. of Elk 
Island Park 

silt till 

°2 

North Cooking 

Lake 

silt till 


Tofield strip 
pit 

silt till 

^2 

Strip mine Seel- 
53-20 w4 

silt till 



Y 





























t t. 







Table 3 


INTERGLACIAL SANDS 

Specimen 

location 

Stratigraphic Position 

"3 

In Red Deer River 
cut bank at Labuma 

on gray till 
interglacial 

h 

Sand pit 6 miles 

N of Carvel Comer 

on gray till 
interglacial 

C 3 

1U-3-&-23 wit 

on gray till 
interglacial 

S 

7-16-52-25 wit 

on gray till 
interglacial 

e 3 

12-2U-55-25 Wit 

on gray till 
interglacial 

f 3 

i iUe west of 
Campsie P.O© 

under brown till 

% 

Meams Strip Mine 

on gray till 
interglacial 

1 % 

Brockett, Alberta 
(Dr* Yfarren) 

on gray till 
interglacial 

H 

Hearns Strip Mine 

on gray till 
interglacial 

% 

1-S-&-21 wit 

on gray till 
interglacial 

K 

5 

10-26-50-19 Wit 

on gray till 
interglacial 

i 3 

n-3G-5i-2lt wit 

on gray till 
interglacial 

“3 

Hi- 36-56-26 Wit 

on gray till 
interglacial 
































■> 





' O 














Table ij. 


SANDS UNDER SILT TILL 

Specimen 

Location 

Stratigraphic Position 


3-27-53-25 W5 

under Taking 

\ 

1-36-56-28 15 

under silt till 

% 

1-12-53-25 1/5 

under Taking 

d 5 

12-25-53-28 15 

under Taking 

% 

1-12-53-25 @5 

under Taking 

f 5 

8-36-59-2 W5 

under silt till 

g 5 

16-31-55-22 W5 

under Taking 

\ 

5-11-52-25 w5 

under silt till 

\ 

1-22-56-23 15 

under silt till 

J u 

12-22-52-26 15 

under silt till 

\ 

50 St. - 112 Ave. 
Edmonton, Alberta 

under silt till 




















.1 









m w' 







Table 5 


SANDS UKDER SILT TILL 


Specimen 

Location j 

Stratigraphic Position 

a s 

112 Ave* - 56 St 9 
Edmonton 

'under laking 

b 5 

112 Ave. - SO St. 

under silt till 

c r 

2-2-50-26 lit 

under silt till 

cLp' 

2-3-S1-2S ilt 

under laking 

e 5’ 

Peace Hills at 
Wetaskiwiri 

uncovered sand 

% 

10-13-50-28 lit 

under silt till 

s 5 

8-6-57-21 lit 

uncovered sand 

h 5 

Valley west of 
Burbank 

uncovered sand 

H 

Sand Hills N.E. 

of A hi t.pnnu Wv 

uncovered sand 


1-25-55-21* lit 

under silt till 

H 

12-17-521-27 lit 

under silt till 

H 

VA 

Hoad cut at Nevis 9 
Alberta 

under silt till 

n 5 

1-22-55-2? Wit 

under silt till 

n 5 

Above city gravel 
pit west of Univer¬ 
sity of Alberta 

under silt till 



































i. 














C ; 









Table 6 


MISCELLANEOUS 

Specimen 

Location 

Stratigraphic Position 

a 6 

6-12-52-25 Hit 

under Taking 

b 6 

1-25-55-21; WU 

under silt till 

C 6 

Pigeon Lake 
(Ma-Me-G Beach) 

beach sand 

d 6 

5-2U-51-27 lU 

under silt 

e 6 

13-21-55-22 WU 

under silt 

f 6 

1-18-51-27 WU 

under silt 

g 6 

56 St. - 113 Ave. 
Edmonton 

sand from silt 

tin 
















i 









. 












APPENDIX M B n 


Tables 1 to 6, 





SASKATCHEWAN SANDS 

(all samples 5°0 grains unless otherwise 


Weight percent 

Mesh # 28 

35 
U8 
65 
100 
150 
200 
bottoms 

Cumulative percent 

Mesh # 28 

35 
U8 
65 
100 
150 
200 


a l 

b l 

C 1 

5.72 

.21 

2.5U 

10,96 

2.90 

18.70 

35.08 

18.86 

26. k 2 

29.10 

39.9 k 

28.06 

10.52 

19.6 k 

13.6U 

U.92 

8.88 

5.56 

1.90 

U.82 

2.82 

1.0 

3.92 

1.58 


5.72 

0.21* 

2.5U 

16.68 

3.1U 

21*21; 

51.76 

22.00 

U7.66 

80.86 

6l.9l< 

75.72 

91.38 

81.58 

89.36 

96.30 

90. k 6 

9U.92 

98.20 

95.28 

97. 7 k 

99.20 

99.20 

99.32 


bottoms 


TABLE 1 


d l 

e l 

f l 

Si 

h l 

1.3U 

1.76 

0.88 

1.36 

U3.32 

5.104 

10.7U 

2.16 

1U.38 

17.88 

69.86 

6I4.O8 

60.26 

53.3U 

12.61) 

12.58 

13.3U 

20.62 

22.U6 

114.32 

1;.98 

3.96 

8.22 

3.82 

8.36 

2.U8 

2.80 

3.01; 

1.16 

2.76 

2.114 

1.92 

3.36 

1.1*0 

O.6I4 

0.82 

1.10 

1.12 

1.U0 

0.21; 

1.314 

1.76 

0.88 

1.36 

143.32 

6.78 

12.50 

3*01; 

15.714 

61.20 

76.61; 

76.58 

63.30 

69.08 

73.8U 

89.22 

89.92 

83.92 

91*5U 

88.16 

9U.20 

93.88 

92.1U 

95.36 

96.52 

96.68 

96.68 

95.18 

96.52 

99.28 

98.82 

98.60 

98.104 

97.92 

99.92 

99.61; 

99.70 

99.56 

99.32 

100.16 






TABLE 2 


BEDROCK, GRAY, BROWN AND SILT TILL 

(all samples 300 grams unless otherwise stated) 



a 2 

b 2 

c 2 

d 2 

Weight percent 





Mesh # 28 

.16 

.18 

2.06 

3.U3 

35 

.72 

.92 

1.86 

2.13 

U8 

3.18 

U.U6 

2.90 

3.73 

65 

25.0 

27.2 

19.9U 

7.1 

100 

20.9 

21.66 

55.32 

7.07 

150 

8.6 

7.70 

7.76 

5.07 

200 

U.69 

3.8U 

U.5U 

U.37 

bottoms 

36.6 

3U.0U 

5.0U 

67.1 

Cumulative percent 





Mesh # 28 

.16 

.18 

2.06 

3.U3 

35 

.88 

1.10 

3.92 

5.U6 

U8 

U.06 

5.56 

6.82 

9.19 

65 

29.06 

32.76 

26.76 

16.29 

100 

h 9.96 

5U.32 

82.08 

23.36 

150 

58.56 

62.02 

89. 8U 

28.U3 

200 

63.25 

65.86 

9U.38 

32.80 

bottoms 

99.85 

99.90 

99. U2 

99.9 


(320 

(500 

(500 



gm.) gm.) gm.) 


e 2 

*2 

§2 


h 2 

i-2 

02 

U.o 

2.1 

3.] 

L 

0.77 

U.53 

U.9 

2.83 

2.1 

0.' 

r 

0.5U 

3.17 

2.8 

U.37 

U.13 

1.U3 

1.17 

5.13 

U.7 

6.U3 

6.83 

U.J 

> 

3.76 

8.U3 

8.73 

6.77 

6.7 

7.U7 

8.3 

9.13 

9.23 

5.0 

U.l 

6.87 

8.9 

U.9 

6.67 

U.O 

2.63 

8.U3 

8.1 

U.23 

U.87 

66.6 

71. U 

67.2 

3 

68.6 

60. U7 

58.1 

U.o 

2.1 

3.: 

L 

0.77 

U.53 

U.7 

6.83 

U.2 

3.< 

3 

1.31 

7.70 

7.7 

11.20 

8.33 

5.23 

2.U8 

12.83 

12.U0 

17.63 

15.16 

9.U3 

6.2U 

21.26 

21.13 

2U.U0 

21.86 

16.90 

1U.5U 

30.39 

30.36 

29.90 

25.96 

23.77 

23.UU 

35.29 

37.03 

33. UO 

28.59 

32.20 

31.5U 

39.52 

Ul.90 

100.00 

99.99 

100.00 

100.1U 

99.99 

100.00 


(520 

gm*) 


k 2 

12 

m 2 

n 2 

°2 

P2 

^2 

6.2 

6.03 

2.77 

U.U3 

5.10 

5.5U 

5.30 

U.6 

3.33 

2.37 

3.77 

3.16 

1.06 

3.20 

5.37 

U.87 

3.7U 

6.26 

U.13 

U.37 

U.83 

7.83 

7.53 

U.67 

5.17 

5.90 

5.67 

5.76 

9.7 

8.37 

5.9U 

5.10 

6.65 

6.U6 

7.33 

5.73 

6.31 

5.13 

5.50 

6.30 

5.70 

5.77 

U.77 

5.25 

u.uu 

5.96 

6.35 

5.20 

5.50 

55.8 

58.3 

71.2 

63.80 

63.UO 

66.10 

63.10 


6.2 

6.03 

2.77 

U.U3 

5.10 

5.5 

h 

5.30 

10.8 

9.36 

5.1U 

8.20 

8.26 

6.6 

0 

8.50 

16.17 

1U.23 

8.88 

1U.U6 

12.39 

10.9 

7 

13.33 

2U.00 

21.75 

13.55 

19.63 

18.29 

16.6 

U 

19.09 

33.7 

30.12 

19. U9 

2U.73 

2U.9U 

23.1 

0 

26.U2 

39.U3 

36.U3 

2U.62 

30.23 

31.2U 

28.8 

0 

32.19 

U5.20 

U1.68 

29.06 

36.19 

37.59 

3U.0 

0 

37.69 

LOO.00 

99.98 

100.26 

99.99 

100.99 

100.1 

0 

100.79 









INTERGLACIAL SANDS 

(all samples 500 grams unless otherwise stated) 


Weight percent 

a 3 

Mesh # 28 

1.26 

35 

1.18 

1*8 

23.78 

65 

51.32 

100 

11.62 

150 

U.16 

200 

2.98 

bottoms 

3.01* 


Cumulative percent 


Mesh # 28 1.26 

35 2.10*. 

1*8 26.22 

65 77.51* 

100 89.16 

150 93.32 

200 96.30 

bottoms 99.31* 


b 3 

c 3 

d 3 

e 3 

0.18 

0.62 

2.72 

10.61* 

3.58 

i*.30 

1*.56 

16.58 

82 .21* 

63.1*2 

78.36 

1*9.36 

11.06 

19.96 

6.16 

11.96 

2.12 

6.61* 

3.96 

5.32 

0 .21* 

2 .1*2 

1.28 

2 .1*2 

0 .11* 

0.96 

1.96 

1.51* 

0 .11* 

0.91* 

0.81* 

1 .1*6 


0.18 

0.62 

2.72 

10.61* 

3.76 

U.92 

7.28 

27.22 

86.00 

68.31* 

85 .61* 

76.58 

97.06 

88.30 

91.80 

88.51* 

99.18 

91*. 91* 

95.76 

93.86 

99.1*2 

97.36 

97.01* 

96.26 

99.56 

98.32 

99.00 

97.80 

99.70 

99.26 

99.81* 

99.26 



(250 

gm.) 



TABLE 3 


f 3 S3 

10.ll* 

11*.12 2.21* 

55.56 69.56 

11.28 12.81* 

l *.0 6.96 

1.82 3.81* 

1.61* 3.1*8 

0.98 0.92 


10 .11* 

- 

2 l*.l6 

2 .21* 

79.82 

71.80 

91.10 

81*. 61* 

95.10 

91.60 

96.92 

95.1*1* 

98.56 

98.92 

99.51* 

99.81* 


(250 

gm.) 


h 3 i 3 

0.11* 5.71* 

0.61* 20.98 

7.66 1*3.1*6 

11*. 62 16.32 

13.18 6.36 

10.21* 3.26 

32.28 2.06 

21.62 1.1*1* 

0.11* 5.71* 

0.78 26.72 

8 . 1 ( 1 * 70.18 

23.06 86.50 

36 . 21 * 92.86 

1 * 6 . 1*8 96.12 

78.76 98.18 

100.38 99.62 


j 3 * 3 

2.98 0.15 

6.92 1.05 

25.22 12.85 

1*6.30 63.95 

8.38 12.1*5 

1.78 1 *. 6 

2.1*2 2.2 

5.1*8 2.05 

2.98 0.15 

9.90 1.2 

35.12 11*. 05 

81.1*2 78.00 

89.80 90.1*5 

91.58 95.05 

91*. 00 97.25 

99.1*8 99.50 

(200 

gm. ) 


3-3 m 3 

11.51* o.a* 

18.91* 2.82 

62.08 1*2.06 

2.58 1*0.81* 

1.18 5.66 

0.78 3.31* 

0.81* 2.16 

1.56 2.28 


11.51* 0.1*1* 
30.1*8 3.26 

92.56 1*5.32 

95.U* 86.16 

96.32 91.82 

97.10 95.16 

97.91* 97.32 

99.50 99.60 









% 


SANDS UNDER SILT TILL 

(all samples 500 grams unless otherwise stated) 



a u 

b U 

C U 

d U 

Weight percent 

Mesh # 28 

0.82 

0.66 

0.1 

0.88 

35 

0.7 

2.28 

1.70 

1.72 

U8 

U0.25 

U3.36 

UU.98 

UU.98 

65 

1*3.16 

1*1*. 25 

37.2U 

35.06 

100 

6.66 

6.12 

8.38 

6.U2 

150 

U.28 

1.98 

U.1U 

U.oo 

200 

2.3U 

0.58 

1.96 

3.58 

bottoms 

1.56 

0.U8 

1.16 

3.1U 

Cumulative percent 

Mesh # 28 

0.82 

0.66 

0.1 

0.88 

35 

1.52 

2.9U 

1.80 

2.60 

U8 

1*1.77 

U6.30 

U6.78 

U7.58 

65 

8U.93 

90.55 

8U.02 

82.6U 

100 

91.59 

96.67 

92. UO 

89.06 

150 

95.87 

98.65 

96.5U 

93.06 

200 

98.21 

99.23 

98.50 

96.6U 

bottoms 

99.77 

99.71 

99.66 

99.78 


TABLE It 


e U 

10.08 

11.88 

U2.18 

26.1|6 

2.58 

1.50 

2.1»6 

2.38 

10.08 
21.96 
61*. H* 
90.60 
93.18 
91*.68 
97.11* 
99.52 


f U 

2.06 
6.58 
1 * 2 . 10 * 
32.91* 
6 . 11 * 
3.1*1* 
3.31* 
2.88 


2.06 
8.61* 
51.08 
81*. 02 
90.16 
93.60 
96.91* 
99.82 


SI* 

0.72 

2 . 1 * 1 * 

1*3.98 

36.00 

5.81* 

2.92 

1*.58 

3.32 

0.72 

3.16 

U7.ll* 

83.11* 

88.98 

91.90 

96.1*8 

99.80 


h U 

0.32 

3.22 

U9.60 

29.2U 

9.9U 

U.08 

1.88 

1.26 


0.32 
3.5U 
53.11* 
82.38 

92.32 
96.UO 
9 8.28 
99.5U 


% 

0.96 

0.66 

U6.50 

32.32 

10.16 

3.2U 

2.8U 

3.10 

0.96 
1.62 
1 * 8.12 
80.UU 
90.60 
93.8U 
96.68 
99.78 


OU 

0.16 

0.3 

U0.82 

25.5U 

ll.UU 

8.12 

8.92 

U.6U 


0.16 
0.U6 
1*1.28 
66.82 
78.26 
86.38 
95.30 
99. 9U 


k U 

1.97 

3.7 

U0.07 

25.58 

6.U5 

2.52 

7.27 

11.57 


1.97 

5.67 

U5.7U 

71.32 

77.77 

80.29 

87.56 

99.13 

(U00 

gms) 























SANDS UNDER SILT TILL 

(all samples 500 grains unless otherwise stated) 

a 5 b 5 c 5 d 5 e 5 f 5 


Weight percent 

Mesh # 28 

35 
1*8 
65 
100 
150 
200 
bottoms 

Cumulative percent 

Mesh # 28 

35 
1*8 
65 
100 
150 
200 
bottoms 


1.13 

1.28 

0.32 

3.6 

3.32 

U. 98 

57.2 

63.56 

73.92 

15.57 

11*. 78 

10.58 

7.1*7 

2.86 

3.06 

li.97 

2.38 

1.1*2 

5.6 

1*. 88 

. 2.02 

U.13 

7.78 

3.62 


1.13 

1.28 

0.32 

i*.73 

l*.60 

5.30 

61.93 

68.16 

79.22 

77.50 

82.91* 

89.80 

81*. 97 

85.80 

92.86 

89.91* 

88.18 

91*. 28 

95.51* 

93.06 

96.30 

99.69 

100.81* 

99.92 


2.1*6 

3.31* 

7.02 

11.98 

12.96 

10.22 

68.72 

73.52 

65.52 

9.11* 

l*.5l* 

8.02 

2.96 

2.50 

3.02 

1.78 

1.62 

2.01* 

1.1*6 

1.11* 

11.91* 

1,26 

0.26 

1.92 


2.1*6 

3.31* 

7.02 

ll*.l*l* 

16.30 

7.21* 

83.16 

89.82 

82.76 

92.30 

91*. 36 

90.78 

95.26 

96.86 

93.80 

97.01* 

98.1*8 

95.85 

98.50 

99.62 

97.78 

99.76 

99.88 

99.70 


TABLE 5 


g 5 h 5 

0.22 3.72 
9.01* 18.06 
75.91* 53.98 
7.98 13.82 
U.58 6.02 
1.18 2 . 1*8 
0.38 1.32 
O.ll* O.U 

0.22 3.72 
o.26 21.78 
85.20 75.76 
93.18 89.58 
97.76 95.60 
98.91* 98.08 
99.52 99.1*0 
99.66 99.80 


H % 

o.ll* 3.3U 

1.90 18.32 

65.08 61.91* 

16.00 11.96 

8.68 2.28 

3.88 1.12 

3.26 0.51* 

1.02 0.3 U 

0.11* 3.3U 

2.01* 21.66 

67.12 83.60 

83.12 95.56 

91.70 97.81* 

95.58 98.96 

98.81* 99.50 

99.86 99.81* 



0.82 1.82 

11.08 11.70 

61**88 52.68 

11*. 1*2 20.71* 

1*.3U lull* 

2.01* 2.9U 

1.0 3.82 

0.96 1.58 

0.82 1.82 

11.90 13.52 

76.78 66.20 

91.20 86.91* 

95.51* 91.08 

97.58 91*. 02 

98.58 97.82 

99.51* 99.1*0 


m 5 n 5 

3.1*2 3.82 

1*.70 18.1*8 

68.72 50.00 

12.60 17.18 

3.88 1*. 98 

1.61* 2.1*0 

1.91* 1.21* 

2.80 1.36 

3.1*2 3.82 

8.12 22.30 

76.81* 72.30 

89.1*1* 89.1*8 

93.32 91*. 1*6 

91*. 96 96.86 

96.90 98.10 

99.70 99.1*6 


















TABLE 6 


MISCELLANEOUS SANDS 

(all samples 500 grams unless otherwise stated) 



a 6 


c 6 

<*6 

e 6 

*6 

S6 

Weight percent 

Mesh # 28 

7.30 

5.52 

21.18 

19.7k 

60,k6 

2.28 

l.<f 

35 

36,62 

2k. 76 

6k. 8k 

63.82 

28.56 

3.80 

2.3 

U8 

U6.72 

59.20 

9.92 

13.82 

8.28 

13.76 

k.73 

65 

6.78 

7.58 

2.88 

1.70 

1.66 

kl.k6 

6.26 

100 

1.58 

1.U8 

0.56 

0.2k 

0.38 

9.62 

17.1 

150 

0.U2 

0.58 

0.12 

0.08 

0.08 

7.68 

16.26 

200 

0.2k 

0.32 

- 

0.0k 

0.18 

8.7k 

33.8 

bottoms 

0.18 

0.16 

- 

0.02 

0.06 

12.28 

16.86 

Cumulative percent 

Mesh # 28 

7.30 

5.52 

21.18 

19.7k 

60.k6 

2.28 

1.6 

35 

U3.92 

30.28 

86.02 

83.56 

89.02 

6.08 

3.9 

U8 

90.6k 

89. U8 

95.95 

97.38 

97.30 

19.8k 

8.63 

65 

97J42 

97.06 

98.82 

99.08 

98.96 

61.30 

lk.89 

100 

99.00 

98.5k 

99.38 

99.32 

99.3k 

70.92 

31.99 

150 

99.U2 

99.12 

99.50 

99. kO 

99. k2 

78.60 

k8.25 

200 

99.66 

99* kk 

- 

99. kk 

99.60 

87.3k 

82.05 

bottoms 

99.8k 

99.60 

- 

99. k6 

99.66 

99.62 

98.91 


















APPENDIX C 

— » 

T q b I es I to 6 



Cumulative wt. °» f»eq. weight percent 


Table I. 


Saskatchewan Sands. 





































Table I. 



r 


i 


r 


i 


l 






























weignt percent cumulative *t. s «, f»eq. 


































































c u m u I o 11V e v:' t. % freq. weight 



Table 3 



































































eight percent cumulative v?t. % 


















































































mesh size 












































































Bedrock, Gray Till , Brown 




Till 









































































r 



oj ° 






















































eight percent cumulotive wt. % f r e a. 
























































0 



od m d m O O O 
<M ^ O in O 
































































































ight percent 


Sands under Silt Till. 




oo m o o o " 

ic o m o fc 

— CO O 


mesh size 

































Table 4. 



f 

4 


9 


4 




















































mesn 


..2 e 



















































bottoms F bottoms 





i—r 






































cumulotive wt. % freq. weight percent 











































Table 




f 


5 


9 5 











































weight percent cumulative 
































































































— 
























































































eight 


Table 6. 


Miscellaneous Sands. 













































































































Table 1 


SASKATCHEWAN SANDS 

Heavy Mineral 


Specimen No. 

a l 

b i 

c i 

% 

e i 


Sl 

h i 

Amphibole group 
(tremolite, 
actinolite, 
hornblende) 

c 

c 

C 

C 

C 

C 

C 

C 

Apatite 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

Biotite 

r 

r 




R 

R 


Chalcopyrite 









Chlorite 

R 

R 

R 

R 



r 


Garnet 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

C 

a 

C 

Haematite 









Ilmenite 

R 

r 

S 

S 


r 

r 

s 

Kyanite i 









Leucoxene i 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

Limonite 

a 

a 

a 

C 

s 

a 

R 

c 

Magnetite 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

C 

Muscovite 









Pyrite 









Pyroxene 









Rutile 









Stavrolite 

s 

s 

s 

s 

g 

s 

s 

'S 

Tourmaline j 






R 



Zircon 

R 

r 

3 

R 

R 


R 

R 

































































t. 




t 
















Table 2 


BEDROCK, GRAY TILL, BROWN TILL, SILT TILL 

Heavy Mineral 

Specimen No. 

a 2 

c 2 

*2 

e 2 

*2 

§2 

h 2 

a 2 


k 2 

12 

m 2 

n 2 

°2 

. P2 

is 

Amphibole group 
(tremolite, 
actinolite, 
hornblende) 


c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

C 

c 

a 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

C 

Apatite 

r 

c 

r 

r 

R 

r 

c 

c 

C 

c 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 


Biotite 

s 



r 


R 

R 

r 

R 



R 

T* 

r 

r 

R 

Chalcopyrite 

















Chlorite 

S 

s 

S 

r 

s 

S 

R 

r 

R 


R 

r 

r 

S 

s 

s 

Garnet 

s 

c 

C 

c 

c 

c 

c 

C 

C 

C 

C 

C 

c 

c 

c 

c 

Haematite 








R 




R 





Ilmenite 

r 

s 

s 

c 

s 

c 

r 

S 

S 

S 

S 

s 

c 

s 

c 

c 

Kvanite 






R 




R 

R 


R 

r 


R 

Leucoxene 


r 

s 

R 


r 

R 


R 


r 

r 

r 


R 

r 

r 

Limonite 

c 

r 

s 

c 

c 

C 

C 

C 

C 

c 

c 

c 

C 

v 

a 

a 

a 

Magnetite 

c 

c 

s 

c 

c 

c 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

Muscovite 

S 

R 






R 



R 






Pyrite 






r 











Pyroxene 

















Rutile 

R 

r 





R 

R 

R- 

R 




R 


R 

Stawrolite 


s 

R 

r 

r 

r 

r 

S 

S 

r 

r 

r 

r 


R 

R 

Tourmaline 


s 

R 


R 








R 



R 

Zircon 

r 

C 

s 

3 

S 

r 

r 

R 

r 


R 

R 


r 

S 





















































4 


l 


■■ a 


r 




* 



■V’t.r.,;/ c. 






D 


0 


■ a' *■ '(■ -v .r 


;/ 















Table 3 


INTERGLACIAL SANDS 

Heavy Mineral 


Specimen No. 

a 7 
- 

b7 

c 3 

d 3 

e 3 

"3 

g 3 

1 3 

J 3 

k 3 

K\ 

i — I 

m 3 

Amphibole group 
(tremolite, 
actinolite, 
hornblende) 

a 

a 

a 

A 

a 

a, 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

Apatite 

c 

c 

C 


S 

S 

S 

r 

S 

r 

r 

S 

Biotite 

r 



r 

r 




r 


R 


Chalcopyrite 





s 








Chlorite 



R 



R 






r 

Garnet 

C 

C 

C 

c 

C 

C 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a. 

a 

Haematite 


R 

R 

R 

R 



R 

R 

R 



Ilmenite 


r 

r 

r 

r 

r 


r 

r 




Kyanite 

R 












Leucoxene 

R 

R 

R 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

R 

R 

R 

R 

Limonite 

a 

c 

c 

a 

c 

c 


s 

c 

S 

8 

8 

Magnetite 

r 

r 

r 

S 

s 

s 


s 

s 

r 

r 

r 

Muscovite 













Pyrite 





R 








Pyroxene 








R 

R 




Rutile 










R 



Stairrolite 

s 

s 

s 

s 

e 

s 

s 

8 

s 

s 

s 

8 

Tourmaline 













Zircon 

r 




X L 


R 





—-—-r 


Tooth observed In a 3 * 














































. 










SANDS UNDER SILT TILL 

Heavy Mineral 

Specimen No. 

a k 


c 4 


e k 

f 4 

S 4 

h 4 

H 

Jit 


Amphibole group 
(tremolite, 
actinolite, 
hornblende) 

a 

a. 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

A 

A 

a 

Apatite 

c* 

f-/ 

S 

S 


S 

S 

S 


S 

r 

S 

Biotite 

R 

R 


R 




R 




Chalcopyrite 












Chlorite 


r 


r 


r 

r 

r 



R 

Game t 

C 

o 

w 

c 

C 

C 

O 

u 

C 

c 

c 

S 

c 

Haematite 

r 



s 


S 

S 

r 

r 



Ilmenite 


S 


s 

r 


r 

r 

r 

r 

s 

Kyanite 

r 

r 



r 


r 


r 



Leucoxene 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

R 

r 

Limonite 

a 

a 

8 , 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

A 

s 


Magnetite 

£ 

s 

S 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

r 

s 

Muscovite 












Pyrite 












Pyroxene 












Rutile 







R 


R 



Stavrolite 

S 

s 

8 

s 

s 

8 

8 

s 

8 

8 

8 

Tourmaline 












Zircon 


S 




r 

r 


s 

r 

r 


Small tooth observed in & 4 <> 














































: ; 1 ■' v 







s 








Table 5 


SANDS UNDER SILT TILL 

Heavy Mineral 

Specimen No. 

ap 

bp 

°5 

a 5 

e 5 

f 5 

s 5 

hpj 

i 5 

J 5 

k 5 

x 5 

me 

np 

Amphibole group 
(tremolite, 
actinolite, 
hornblende) 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a. 

a 

Apatite 


s 

s 

S 


S 

S 


S 


S 

S 

S 


Biotite 

R 

R 


R 

R 

R 


R 

R 

R 





Chalcopyrite 















Chlorite 

m 







r 


r 





Q-arnet 

a. 

a. 

a 

a 

a. 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a. 

a 

s. 

a 

a 

Haematite 

R 

R 

R 

R 

R 

R 

R 

R 

R 

R 

R 




Ilmenite 

r 



r 

r 

r 


r 

r 

r 



r 


Kyanite 



r 




r 




r 



r 

T --- - --— 

Leucoxene 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r* 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

r 

Limonite 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a. 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

Magnetite 

s 

c' 

© 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

Muscovite 















Pyrite 















Pyroxene 

R 

R 













Rutile 















! 

Stawrolite 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

Tourmaline 















i 

Zircon 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 


S 



S 

































































. 1 


■ ' ■ ■ ■ 

o./i -\u: 

















Table 6 


MISCELLANEOUS SANDS 

Heavy Mineral 

Specimen No. 

a 6 

b 6 

c 6 

a 6 

e 6 

f 6 

e 6 

Amphibole group 
(tremolite, 
actinolite. 
hornblende) 

a 

a 

c 

c 

c 

A 

A 

Apatite 

r 

S 

r 


r 

c 

r 

Biotite 






R . 

R 

Chalcopyrite 








Chlorite 

S 

r 




R 

R 

G-arnet 

C 

C 

c 

r 

c 

c 

c 

Haematite 

R 







Ilmenite 

S 

s 

R 


r 

s 

s 

Kyanite 






R 


Leueoxene 

r 

r 

R 

R 

R 

r 

R 

Limonite 

A 

a 

S 

a 

c 

c 

c 

Magnetite 

s 

s 

S 

a 

c 

s 

s 

Muscovite 








Pyrite 

R 







Pyroxene 








Rutile 






R 

R 

Staurolite 

s 

r 

R 



r 

r 

Tourmaline 

r 





R 

r 

Zircon 

r 





r 

r 




















































v.i «i* :'i. • ■ 'H 

*,,!■ cl yp. II 


r a 


u: L:ocrj 





I 




r 











APPENDIX " E " 


Tables 1 to 7 




Table 1 


EDMONTON SANDSTONE 


G-rain No, 

Sphericity 

Roundness 

a 

0,70 

0.313 

b 

0.84 

0.20 

c 

0.85 

0.56 

a 

0.85 

0.36 

e 

0.73 

0.57 

f 

0.83 

0.41 

Average 

0.80 

0.41 



Sp. No. a 2 (x 1S5) Sp. No. b 2 (x 125) 















Table 2 


SASKATCHEWAN SANDS 


Grain No. 

Sphericity 

Roundness 

a 

0.71 

0.354 

b 

0.81 

0.327 

c 

0.71 

0.590 

a 

0.77 

0.452 

e 

0.67 

0.470 

f 

0.73 

0.712 

g 

0.87 

0.550 

Average 

0.753 

0.494 



Sp. No. h^ (x 125$ 


Sp. No. (x 125) 












Table 3 


GRAY TILL 


Grain No. 

Sphericity 

Roundness 

a 

0.88 

0.58 

b 

0.85 

0.39 

c 

0.74 

0.39 

a 

0.76 

0.68 

e 

0.71 

0.52 

f 

0.70 

0.283 

g 

0.74 

0.31 

h 

0.84 

0.27 

Average 

0.779 

0.427 





Sp. No. d s (x 125) 


Sp. No. gg (x 125) 


















i 












Table 4 


INTERGLACIAL 


Crain No. 

Sphericity 

Roundness 

a 

0.83 

0.482 

b 

0.83 

0.463 

c 

0.65 

0.459 

a 

0.89 

0.310 

e 

0.85 

0.534 

f 

0.77 

0.283 

Average 

0.803 

0.422 


Sp. No. b 5 (x 125) Sp. No. d 3 (x 125) 











Table 5 


BROWN TILL 


G-rain No. 

Sphericity 

Rounaness 

a 

0.83 

0.35 

b 

0.83 

0.43 

0 

0.83 

0.26 

a 

0.85 

0.49 

e 

0.83 

0.40 

Average 

0.834 

0.386 



Sp. Ho. l z (x 125) 


Sp. Ho. (x 125) 











Table 6 


UNDER SILT TILL 


Grain No, 

Sphericity 

Roundness 

a 

0.S7 

0.214 

b 

0.75 

0.555 

c 

0.85 

0.447 

a 

0.85 

0.715 

e 

0.77 

0.520 

f 

0.77 

0.428 

g 

0.73 

0.520 

Average 

0.799 

0.486 



Sp. No. d 5 (x 1S5) Sp. No. a 4 (x 125) 
















* 













Table 7 


SILT TILL 


drain No, 

Sphericity 

Roimdness 

a 

0.91 

0.57 

b 

0.87 

0.53 

c 

0.90 

0.36 

d 

0.93 

0.65 

e 

0.94 

0.45 

f 

0.73 

0.31 

g 

0.85 

0.54 

Average 

0.877 

0.48 



Sp, No, Pg (x 125) 


Sp. No, n^ (x 125) 




























































































































6LACIAL MAP 

Of- 


EDMONTON AREA. 


SCALE I INCH TO 3 MILES. 

R.22 R.2I I l3°oo' R.20 


R.l 9 


R.l 8 so' R.l'7 


R.I6 M 2 °i 5 ' R .|5 r -^4 



1 Cucumber L. 


Whi tford 


Wostok 


Beaver Hi 11 


Scotford; 


Krako' 


: ort Saskatchewan 


Norma 


r Josephburg 


Olsiaim, 


■ABriesbach 


Hil licrd 


Ta-wayi 


Dryyrass 


HO T 


V 

- r „. — C.PR. 

< 1 

Michael 

.—*— *— 



^ r 

c 

^ J 


Trappers 


) 

o 

\ -C3 

d 

——, 

^ - 

c -;- 


! 
















































































bedrock. 























































































d'\* 



H ‘ 9/{Uy , L ^ Op Hay Lakby 


R - 22 ll3°oo'R.2l 

- LEGEND — 


R. I 6 112 ° 1 5' 


Gently Undulating topography 
influenced by underlying 
bedrock. 


Flat topography- area 
of old loking. 



Sand areas - dunes present, 
no observable overlying till. 































































































