For Reference 




v. 




TK«4|'» 

IdSI 




NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


SOME CUTINIZED MICROFOSSILS 




•■'•:, WIvIlW i'OjftW .Jjvm l 

■/ jK |*Vf ’.‘ ft' Y>. j * I £* £'•? ,’V A ■' a V'\ 

iK'i W 

FROM 

ft <viv 

; vC '*>' Wtrf, 1$?>vip|{•• *if 

TO jfci* ffciW C 

Mfflj 

mmm 


WESTERN CANADA 


mBBSmt- 




s»M» 


A. W. NORRIS 




Pi 


Ml 



■B 

lip: 





( 3 .\ UBBIC 

WBSIWIS 

MMERMMS 

















UNIVERSITY OP ALEYRTA 
LIBRARY 

Regulations Ko[: a~d ing Th e s e s ay.. d. "iss or t at ions 

Typescript copies oi thoses and disserta11 ons f or Ivlas ter » s 
and doctor’s degrees deposited in the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the faculty of Graduate Studies, 
>nsi lted in the sference . ea Ln; I oom only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supervision the worl was done. Some art 3nts are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of Alberta.Library. 

These theses and dissertations• are to be used only with due 
regarc to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 

he i permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub1ished work. 

This diesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons, listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user. 


Please sign below* 


Date 


Signature 


Ins titution 

































































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


r 


https://archive.org/details/somecutinizedmicOOarno 



University of Alberta 


Faculty of Arts and Science 
Department of Geology 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled ’’Some Cutinized Micro- 
fossils from Western Canada”, submitted by Arnold 
Willy Norris, B. Sc*, in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of Science. 











? ' 



■ 


i:o : 


















THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SOME CUTINIZED MICROFOSSILS 
FROM WESTERN CANADA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE. 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY 


by 


ARNOLD WILLY NORRIS 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 
APRIL 1951. 


ERRATA 


Throughout thesis change: 

n Sporangitoides ellipsoprolata " to " Sporangitoides ellipsoprolatum ”. 
" Sporitoides spinus }> to " Sporitoides spinum "„ 

" Sporitoides discus** to " Sporitoides discum IT * 














i~ 


ABSTRACT 

These preliminary descriptive studies of unclass¬ 
ified cutinized microfossils, occurring in sedimentary 
rocks of Cretaceous age of Western Canada, deal part¬ 
icularly with forms occurring in samples from the 
middle (?) portion of the Loon River shale, on the 
Peace River, Alberta. 

Two new form-genera are proposed; Sporang!toides 
for those forms which look like a spore-sac or spore- 
container, and Sporitoides , for those forms which look 
like a megaspore. On the basis of distinctive mor- 

st ze 

phology and^two new species of Sp oritoides are proposed. 

Affinities of these cutinized micrcfossils are in 
doubt but they are probably organs of plants representing 
a part of their reproductive cycles. They are 
relatively constant in size and morphology within 
restricted stratigraphic horizons and geographic 
localities. 

Cutinized microfossils have been observed, also in 
samples of the Grand Rapids sandstone, Joli Fou shale 
and Pelican sandstone, from surface outcrops along the 
Athabaska river, Alberta; in the basal Lioydminster shale 
and Viking sand, Edmonton area; from the St. John 
formation in type area, British Columbia; more rarely 
in samples from the Second White Specks zone, Spirit 
River area, Alberta. 





- F 7 F .C--K-,r 

j 1 U^Tt; ‘uZrfnV i 1 

<; 

. ' . , • : !/::! 


’ 

;:■!< , ;; ,v FF - t>rr: f;; J: ::;i• 1> .v 0C 

;r;':'3.i i v v Fv,: - ,C..u o.f 

* 



< 


• O 



, 

<._. - 

... X - ~ ■ ■ 





. ... n-i... ' -:i ■; ;/ : '■ / J ( 


.- : . 0 i l .. ‘ 


j : .. , F:... 4 :-0 

. ,-i L . u g 

* 

• • *F, ' .■ ; .. . c ■.. >J '.. 

. .. . '■ Ki:- ■ ni: 

, -f .. ; ■- 

ul.!.U ^‘-X'aO iitS &■ ii OF. -FOOJ.F OlP.q. 

i V'ti l . ... I ni i 

* 

x 

■, . .. F ;:..F. . : w 


...:d“ ‘F.c ..:-.F 



: 



. t 

■ F ‘ ' F- • * 


t '' - : 

f;- S.G OFFO: .;. I 

* ' - x "" ' 




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer gratefully acknowledges both the financial 
assistance and permission to use the samples received 
from Pacific Petroleums Ltd., throughout the preparation 
of this thesis* Dr. Pierre Cote collected the samples 

a nd furnished the writer with much pertinent information 

' **■ 

in discussions of mutual interest. 

The Botany Department, University of Alberta, on 
various occasions assisted the writer in many ways. 

Dr. E. H. Moss furnished the writer with Recent small 
seeds, fruits and other microplant parts for comparison 
purposes. Dr. J. H. Whyte directed the writer*s atten¬ 
tion to several references and loaned a personal copy 
of a reference not obtainable from the library. Dr. 

R. G. H. Cormack, Miss L. L. Kennedy, and Miss I. V. 
Burwash were consulted and assisted the writer on 
numerous occasions. 

The writer acknowledges the encouragement and 
generous assistance accorded to him by all members 
of the Geology Department, University of Alberta. Dr. 

C. R. Stelck directly supervised this study and was 
always keen to assist in every way possible. 

The writer is grateful to Dr, R. T. D. Wickenden of 
the G. S. C., Calgary, Albertfor examining type 
specimens and offering helpful suggestions. 


' ~ : ( 


( ’4V , 


* * 


j: 




t 










r 








TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

Title page 

ABSTRACT i 

Acknowledgements ii 

Chapter I 

1. Introduction. 1 

2. Cutinized Microfossils. 4 

3. Occurrences of Cutinized Microfossils 

Within the Loon River shale. 7 

4. Observed Occurrences of Cutinized Micro¬ 

fossils from other Formations and Geo¬ 
graphic Localities. 11 

5. How Obtained and Methods of Study. 16 

Chapter II 

1. Allied Forms and Brief History of these 

Studies... 20 

2. Methods of Designating Plant Microfossils 

(Terminology). 32 

3. Terminology Used in this Thesis. 37 

Chapter III 

1. Descriptions of Morphologic Types. 41 

2* Plates I - V and Explanations, Cretaceous 

Cutinized Microfossils,...., 101 

Chapter IV 

1 * Biological Conclusions,.. 109 

2, Strati graphical Conclusions. 111 

3* Paleo-ecologieal Discussion of Cutinized 

Microfossils. 117 

Appendix 

1. Detailed Description of Lithology at each 

Collecting Station.. 123 

2, Map showing, Key to Geographic Locations 

of Stations and Faunal Suites, Loon 
River shale. Peace River area, Alberta,153a 
3* Statistical Record of Micro-organisms and 

other Elements in each Sample. ..... 153b 

Statistical Record.., as above, (continued). 153c 

4. Map of Peace River Area showing Outcrop 

Area of the Loon River Formation.. 153d 

5* Chart showing Terminology of the Fort St. 

John Group in Peace River and Athabaska 

River Areas. 153e 

6. Glossary of Terms...... 154 

7. Annotated Bibliography. 162 





















&c ©1 j'i: 


a jxxuv a rxi /Xi'jfo,- 


I 


■ 






1 



i nix 


. 


90.'-: ?xxxr :.jx 




v ;: jj.r. X:Xi.X "1C-- ’ jX 
^19' / X; b.US 

# # 



L . 1 XXX j"X 


J'qjgf 



)0£h 
















-1- 


CHAPTER I 
1. INTRODUCTION 

This study deals particularly with a group of 
unclassified microfossils oocurring in the Cretaceous 
Loon River shale of Northern Alberta, Because of the 
primary nature of this study the treatment is of nec¬ 
essity, mainly descriptive* Descriptive and taxonomic 
studies of these fossils alone will occupy the energies 
of this field prior to an evaluation of stratigraphic 
facies relationships. Cutinized microfossils should be 
a new tool which could be used by micropaleontologists 
of Western Canada in the correlation of rock units which 
lack other types of suitable fossils, Cuticular re¬ 
mains along with other fragmentary bits of carbonized 
and distorted organic material are frequently prominent 
as microfossils* Spores and pollen have received the 
most study, A major obstacle in these investigations 
has been the difficulty in classifying this material 
on a practical commercial level for oil companies* The 
writer has of necessity leaned heavily on the available 
micropaleobotanical literature, most of which is not 
directly pertinent but rather applies to spores and 
pollen* The study of these latter groups of micro¬ 
fossils is now a firmly established science with a long 
backlog of contributors* Most of this literature on 
spores pertains to Paleozoic, especially the Carboniferous* 


7. 0 c • • " 

- 


•r V ? M 


I! 0 J t 


7 'o c.7'77 

-v. • .7 : .7’ 


a •' 1 


u vj ., ;.j •, o ' I:Q w n0 i<: 


J.-J- C ‘7' •VC. VO 

.' : fj o7 ': V ■ - . 


.. 


' 


cl ,vvv.t^ v O- ; \;a v: v 




; : .7 1.0 :lOQ% 7o 0 c .7 : i *: ■■' OV.V. •' t,i C •. • vIV-W 

7 , 

caovvv. 7 o 7 i'isZk? :::\ o 7 0 ' 7 : . ■ 77 .,. WClv . 

ro'i . xS.J.-ysj,- -li ; X .i.-„ .f 

* 

7 . , v.; 1 7'. ... \ * ■■ ; ■ 

: 1 ■ X\< : .... - 7 

s 7: c ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ r .’ v : ' 1 - ■' ‘ ■ 

/ - ;..c; cc r .r ■; - 7 : f " I 77 • • c' c 7 :. ?: : 

* .- , ' : . o I j 

*x 

* 

■ 7. 7 ■ ;.i ■ v r V.7. ;X p j; P J 

4 

. 



Spores and pollen occurring in Recent and Pleistocene 
sediments, especially peats, are also intensively stu¬ 
died. Only a small amount of literature pertaining to 
Mesozoic forms was available to the writer. Informa¬ 
tion gathered from readily available references has 
undoubtedly prejudiced the treatment of morphological 
features of cutinized microfossils considered in this 
thesis. 

Micropaleontoicgists in Western Canada have 
been aware of. the presence of these cutinized micro¬ 
fossils which are known to occur in certain sediments 
of Lower Cretaceous and lower Upper Cretaceous ages, 
but for various reasons, been neglected. No previous 
study has been published pertaining directly to these 
cutinized microfoesils of Western Canada. This seems 

a little surprising as they are comparatively abundant, 

% 

especially in some zones. Observations to date indlcat 
that they are most abundant in some zones where Foram- 
inifera are very scarce or entirely absent, so- 
called, ’’barren zones”. 

These cutinized elements appear to have been 
ideally suited to preservation. In their present 
fossilised state, they seem to consist of an organic 
substance that is relatively inert to the action of 
acids and bases, and little affected by a wide range 
of heat treatment* This substance is presumably one 



:vco 1 

• ■ ■- ■■r •' 

■ 

■ )i 


i'i' . r lov ' 

. -*ic\ : 

- 


r/i'.r: ::v j; oir c 

t 



t - 



/; -Y ■.;/ ;; t 




r ■ 


- 

- 


. 





■ 

i;o;: o ; / - 








■ ■ ‘-'"j'j 

fioXJ ' 

L 


f< ; j y / •'. ■ 

■ i..;; .r'jol 

o J:. 



:fa u or. hjj 



. j: l - B ' * 





■ 


a- 

v \i, :: ■ y >■- i! v in.; ■ ■ 









' ! .vS ,i 2 . 1 / :-o ■ - = o 


DO-'i:. ; 



■C.O ,'iC 131 i 

. . % 11 u 

l: o’ - i 


it 2 U’.o/Oiil ‘ uW c 





■;■ ...*■■. JiiL.o 

. . , 

0 


0 

» 




• u .[.i'Or *.• 




. * 





. ' I 

■ i v. •... 4 0d 

'Oj.'.i; 'o' 

Go v±,:y >yjx . ,Xr 2 





i'i; 0i 

. 



« 


r i; ■' 




i’i . 

i.r ■ 

: ( v 




. 

t 

;:' -j -j;;; ii.:, •: 




: :.\y.. :> -io2 J 


* 



•- V 


— ■ • ■ 


?v. ■, SSf-OiS SI 0 '■ 


:.jnu 


< 

' V;.. 

. ; u i'u' 








V 1 ■. . ' V ’ ' 'X in 









<-f r. • -v " 




-V T\ QC .-m;. • 




: 




* 


V‘"i ■ f: 


Oy t ;. o' li ‘ 7- 


0. 

















i 



. 


. 






, ^ • y i- i 

v .; i .. < 2il 


* 


; ‘t 







-3- 


of the most stable in the organic world, in fact, 
so much so, that its chemical composition is still 
not completely known. (Ref„ 16, p.lb). 

After a careful search of available literature, 
and from comparative morphology, the writer believes 
that these elements are the reproductive parts of 
plants. Throughout this thesis, for convenient re¬ 
ference and general discussion of the group as a whole, 
they are descriptively designated as ,, cutinized micro-” 
fossils”. These same elements have commonly been 
referred to as "spores”. Spores and pollen proper, 
belong to a lesser degree of smallness. These cut- 
inized microfossils appear more like spore-sacs or 
spore-containers, A discussion of their morphology. 


The production of spores by a special cell or 
organ - (sporangium). (Coulter, R e f, 9 , PP* 12, 17, 
54 -) • 


size and comparison with spores and pollen proper is 
given later in the main body of this thesis. 

Where possible the cutinized microfossil occurr¬ 
ences have been tied in with megafossil zone indices, 
other microfauna, including Foraminifera and Radio- 
iaria, and previously established lithologic marker 
horizons. 





* 


t'S, lie ,f: - r 

4 

* ' < v * 

. *4 . •' 

. 

. < 0-: .> f'-u ' f.; i 


V . ■■■j... r; ;i ^ 

v.':.: / I: •/ -o ■ 

t : ' 


u .. i . ■ . , . . U . ' 




j', .O : ,i,;0 V 'it 



* 



■ 



* 



; 

r * , 

* 





■ ' ' - - O ,, . ; ■' ; 1 / . • , '• i 





. t 


< 

* 





- 4 - 


The foraminiferal content of the samples from 
surface outcrops of the Loon River shale on the 
Peace River, between a sample collecting station 
located 8 miles upstream from Ft. Vermilion and as far 
upstream and south to a point located 10 miles north 
of the 25th base line, was the original objective of 
examining these shale samples. The samples were 
divided with Mr. F. H. Trollope handling those from 
the south, that is, those samples of numerical sequence 
below 518, and those to the north were done by the 
writer, that is those samples of numerical sequence of 
518 up. The paucity of Foraminifera in most of the 
samples studied by the writer and the relative abund¬ 
ance of cutinized microfossils, prompted a change of 
the scope and treatment of the investigation, to a 
study of this previously neglected group of micro¬ 
fossils. 

2. CUTINIZED MICROFOSSILS 
Eight main types of cutinized microfossils, 
based on easily discernible morphology have been re¬ 
cognized and are known to occur in varying abundance 
in the Loon River shale. They have been noted in 
some abundance from other sources but the writer 
confined the greater portion of this preliminary 
study to those forms occurring in the Loon River shale. 


. . . ' 

. ■ •. *. ' is c'Sf^tr.rs job:bsb,:. 

■ : : ■' . •. . « : \> y:: ;; . -}•. 

• ' . ... .1 

. . . . . 0 . . • .. < 

« 

- 

* 

■ ' ' u. . ' - f ■' ./ • ' ' « 

. ■ • ' 1 : - ■ ' /■. / ;; ■ ■ ■ ... < . ' j. 

* 

:■ I>•; j hpj: 't-tatxy; vo fc stbss&u a&Lqows 

t . ... . 

< ' t .< ■ .n„: n ,. l ..v. .t . v:n,- 

' 

* 

, .. '. ■ ■ , 

ov.i-d , vie,..: ’ sLSsjrx : ao3l‘n vi j: ^ bo : . .-im.-cj 

ia v m ur.ooc c/t .nv.’oml (bib L&b. bv#±a$j eo 

* 

■ 

* • / ■ V f 


- 5 - 


The principal types are as follows: 

1. Thin-lenticular form, ( Sporangltoldes len ¬ 
ticular e n.genus, n. sp.) 

2. Large thin-lenticular form, approximately 
twice as large as the above, does not occur in the 
Loon River shale, ( Sporangltoldes giganteum n. sp.) 

3. Broad-lenticular form, ( Sporangltolde s 
elllpsoprolatu ff?n, sp.). 

4. Large flat circular form, ( Sporangltoldes 
clrcul are n. sp.). 

5. Smaller flat circular form, quite rare, 

( Sporangltoides mesocirculare n. sp.). 

6. Small flattened disc-shaped form with 
from one to four minute spine-like appendages pro¬ 
truding from the peripheral margin, ( Sporitoides 
splnus n. genus n. sp.). 

7* Small flattened disc-shaped form, lacking 
spines, relatively rare, ( Spor itoldes discus n. sp.) 

S. Very small fragile, thin, disc-shaped form 
with 5 to 11 delicate appendages projecting radially 
outward from peripheral margin, ( Hystrichosphaera 
loonriverensls n* sp.), referred to the Hystrichos- 
phaerid group. 

Several other beautifully preserved eutinised 
microfossils have been described and illustrated 
but not considered in this general discussion be¬ 
cause of their scarcity. 


















cc. 





A. characteristic common to all of the cutinized 
micro-elements is their apparent consistent composi¬ 
tion, which seems highly resistant to decay, rendering 
them favorable to preservation, although some 
horizons show more corrosion of specimens than others. 
The organic substance is presumably cutin-like in 
composition, having a waxy or somewhat resinous 
appearance. Its color varies from a light straw- 
yellow to a dark amber; thinner and more translucent 
portions always appear lighter in color than the 
thicker forms and portions of the same speciman. 

All of the larger forms, that is all those forms 
which have been designated Sporangitoldes , can easily 
be seen by the naked eye, and range in size from 0.2 
to 1.5 mm. The smaller forms are down near the lower 
limits of unaided vision. This applies particularly 
to the Sporltoldes and Hystrichosphaerid groups, 
which range in size from 0.09 to 0.19 mm. The sis© 
measurements within a group are relatively constant 
for forms occurring within a restricted geographic 
location and stratigraphic horizon. Magnification 
of moderate power is indeed helpful in studying 
detailed morphology of the larger forms and is a 
necessity for the smaller forms. 

These cutinized microfossils under a microscope 
of moderate power and reflected lighting, reveal 





' l 


or 




fr 



/; £ 


r 






t; 




I 


; 


nui$ 





~7~ 

little of their structure. The walls can in some 
cases be distinguished from the internal portion which 
may be seen to enclose patches of floculent or 
granular matter. The specimen, against a light 
background with transmitted light, reveals certain 
structural features not seen otherwise. Spheroidal 
globules, of irregular distribution and sizes are 
in most forms contained Inside the wall. Some 
forms also appear to have a cell-like wall structure. 
All forms have been flattened which in some forms 
has produced fortuitous folding of the outer coat. 

As all these are translucent to light, these 
features stand out as light and dark areas with two 
or more features superimposed on one another. As 
well as being folded, the outer surface of the coat 
is generally faintly and irregularly papillated, 
which is in some cases, a surface expression of the 
contained spheroidal masses within. The coat itself 
appears to be composed of a very fine granular 
cutinized substance. 

3, OCCURRENCES OF CUTINIZED MICROFOSSILS WITHIN THE 
LOON RIVER SHALE. 

A key to Geographic Locations of Stations and 
Faunal Suites 9 and a statistical Record of Micro¬ 
organisms and other Elements from each Sample 9 are 





< 


L 


% 












r- 













O. 












included in the appendix for convenient reference. 

This discussion applies only to that limited portion 
of the Loon River shale from which samples were studied* 
These samples are from 24 collecting localities from 
the banks of the Peace River, Alberta. The most 
northerly position is located & miles upstream, west 
south-west of Ft. Vermilion and the most south e A Collec- 
ting locality is located 10 miles north of where the 
25 th. base line crosses the Peace River. The winding 
river distance separating the north from the south sample 
collecting localities is 130 miles. The straight line 
distance between these two points is approximately 
65 miles. 

Sporangitoides lenticulare n. sp. is the most 
abundant and was noted in most samples from lb of the 
24 sections considered. In all samples containing an 
abundance of Foraminifera and Radiolaria, cutinized 
microfossils, including J3* lenticulare are sparse or 
not represented. Within the area considered by this 
study, cutinized microfossils are spread over a winding 
river distance of approximately 100 miles and a straight 
line distance of approximately 50 miles. They seem to 
be conspicuously absent from several consecutive sam¬ 
pled localities in the south and are sparsely distri¬ 
buted in samples from the most north located sampled 
locality. 





^ f- >. 




f i v 






- 9 - 

The broad-lenticular type, designated 
Sporangitoides ellipsoprolatw^ n. sp. is never as 
abundant as S. lenticulare and its distribution with¬ 
in a section is quite sporadic. A high frequency count 
of S. ellipso prolate ,usually coincides with a high 
count for the S. lenticulare. Zones containing a 
high frequency count of this type can in some places 
be traced through several consecutive section local¬ 
ities and for this reason proved of more value than 
S. lenticulare in tentative correlation from section 
to section. 

The circular type of cutinized microfossil, 
designated Sporangitoides circulare n. sp. is less 
abundantly represented in the samples and for this 
reason zones containing a high frequency count are 
usually more conspicuous than either of the two 
previously mentioned form species. 

The disc-like types, including the two form 
species Sporitoldes spinus n. sp. and S. discus n, 
sp. appear to have a more restricted and local distri¬ 
bution. The greatest numbers occur in samples from 
section localities that is 7 miles north 

of Tompkins Landing, and 19^:53$“559, that is 11 
miles north north-east of Tompkins Landing. Frequency 
counts indicate that they are relatively abundant 
throughout these two sections. In the remaining 


















ao~ 


sections in which these types occur, their distribu¬ 
tion is sporadic and zones showing a high frequency 
count profile can in some cases be traced through sev¬ 
eral sections over a lateral distance of approximately 
6 miles. Because of its apparent local geographic 
distribution its value as a correlative indicator was 
found to be not as useful as the three previously 
mentioned form species. 

Sporitoldes splnus and S. discus have been seen 
only in samples from the Loon River shale. It is a 
very small cutinized microfossil, ranging in size from 
160 to 190 mu and therefore could quite easily be 
missed on picking when using the lower powers of 
magnification. 

Another unusual form seen only in samples from 
the Loon River shale and designated as Hystrichos - 
phaera loonriverensis is very small, fragile, and 
looks somewhat like a spoked-wheel lacking an outer 
rim* This form species has been seen in relatively 
few samples and appears to have erratic and local 
distribution. It occurs in most of the samples from 
section locality 202;565-576 * situated *1-0 miles north 
north-east of Tompkins Landing. This form species 
was noted in a few samples from only two other 
section localities situated some distance upstream 
and to the south. 











■ rj ■ -X; •!,? . s o til ■> 

j‘.-...i;. s o ; r.1. '3?-I ■' 


' J ' ) ■; 






f 



' ;X C X v" 


o in 



- j; • t r r ‘ ' •• ■ 

o ' w ,' n •' . o/uf ■ 






• - 


• ' ■ - ■ :x ■ ■' - ’ V - ; -- : 

< . . f - ■■••• ; .. . .. ...... . 

' an \;nJ:iLo-l ' r . :\o ^ n . :v>r..u .03 BviOQl 

: >. ■;/; ■; , . - ' -' 1 -' - * 

. ■ - • 

. , ■ - *•■ ------ 

; L ■ t - u<-.; i - . - ' - . s} ^ 

* 


'ISiiljQ O./w ^Ino in 


■ - - 


: i 


on- ^ - - - ;uo ■: : 


nc x: 


* 




- 11 - 


4. OBSERVED OCCURRENCES OF CUTINIZED MICROFOSSILS 
FROM OTHER FORMATIONS AND GEOGRAPHIC LOCALITIES. 
Additional information regarding the occurrences 
of cutinized microfossils from other sources was 
obtained from a cursory study of suites in collections 
of the Geology Department, University of Alberta. 

These included suites picked in I 949 -50 by A, R. 
Nielson, D. B. Bullock and W. Bahan, and those of 
R. Wetter, F. H. Trollope of 1950-53-* also suites from 
the basal Moosebar formation picked by Imperial Oil 
Ltd. 

Basal portion of Moosebar Formation . 

Numerous bits of fragmentary matter of probable 
organic origin had been picked and mounted indicating 
that if the cutini z ed microfossils had been present 
they would have received the same consideration as 
other micro-organic elements present in some samples. 

Grand Rapids sandstone, Joli Fou shale, and the 

Pelican Sandstone . 

Cutinized microfossils occur in samples from the 
Grand Rapids sandstone, Joli Fou shale and Pelican 
sandstone from surface outcrops along the Athabasca 
River, Alberta, between Sec. 19* 3?p # go, Rge. 17, 

W. 4-th. meridian to S e c. 19, Tp. S6, Rge. 17, W. 4th 
meridian, (Supp. Ref. 1). Three main types were 
recognized which are as follows: Sporangltoides 
glganteum n. sp. S. ellipsoprolaW ^n. sp. var. B. 











V 







- 12 « 


and 8 . clrculare n. sp. The three main types appear 
in maximum abundance in samples B-71-C and B-71-10, 
from the top and 10 feet from the top, respectively 
of the Joli Fou shale, Cutinized microfossils 
including the three form species w^e noted in fewer 
numbers in one sample* (B-Z-I-7), in the Joli Fou 
shale, 7 feet from the base* Beautifully preserved 
specimens of Sporangitoides circulars n, sp* occur 
in samples from here along with specimens of S. 
glganteum n. sp* and S« ellipsoprolat^ n. sp* var. B* 
A sparse distribution of S* giganteum n. sp* and S. 
ellipsoprolatur > A n» sp. var. B. was noted in two 
samples, B- 70-6 and B**~IQ**1$ 9 from the Pelican 
sand, 15 and 7 feet respectively from the base. 

Very few cutinized microfossils occur in samples 
B-76-7, B-76-15, B-76-2 and B 76 - 23 , spaced within 
7 and 23 feet from the top of the Grand Rapids 
sandstone. 

The cutinized picrofossils noted from these 
formations are larger than similar form species 
occurring in the Loon River shale and closely 
compare with those from the Basal Lloydminster 
shale, (Viking sands) from the Eldorena Imperial 
#1 well, Edmonton area, Alberta. 

Lower Lloydminster shale (Viking sand). 


Cutinized microfossils, (referred to as H spores H 










- 


; 3 


t 

•'•V't *J!l 

i ■ 


... 

■ 




J V 


■ 


r •3.33.7733-3 : .i ulx :: n.r 

■ I* oJ . ■ 1 

f,!C fr -: 3 13*0 "’Hiri ,: -c 

- 

3.3:. ' '3.1:; . .’3 3\7 7 3>.;..37 

7..^ 7.'_ •:.7 7 . 3i; .7 7 

■ . li 


.... ' * ' * : , ■;. 

„ „ * * 

r,'i ^ t 

* ■ s -' 

3 3: ■ • . 


73;.;.:.: 3 


7 3 


. •' • - ; ... ... ■ 

. , ■ • :V ' ': ' 7 --3 \ 7 77; 1 ;3*t .. 7; 

' V 3 HC'OJ ■•'•i'j (■ 3 73 1 ’ 7 U:) 0 0 

• ' ■ ; 3 X ' 30 

■ ; « ■ " 


.*3, ■.. 

7 < 7 3 3:3 .: • •: ’. . <3 .*3 :./.,37 ... 



by Mr* D. B. Bullock), also occur in samples from 
the Lower Cretaceous, Viking sands within the Lower 
Lloydminster shale from the Imperial Eldorena #1 
well, of the Edmonton area, Alberta, LSD 4-, Sec* 27, 

Tp. 57, Rge* 20, W. 4-th meridian* (Bullock, Supp. Ref* 

2). The main types occurring here are: Sporangitoides 
glgantuem n. sp., S. ellipsoprolat^ n, sp. jS* circulate 
n* sp., and several other cutihized microfossils not 
seen elsewhere* 

A study of a graph presented by Bullock (Supp* 

Ref. 2* fig* V), showing the percentage breakdown of 
fossil population reveals some interesting data* 

In this graph, Bullock uses the total of cutinized 
microfossils or n spore” content of the samples which 
he analyzed statistically from 193^ feet to 212S feet 
in the Eldorena #1 well* H Spores n first appear 
at 2060 feet, just a little below the base of the 
second Viking sand and extend up to 197^ feet or to 
a few feet above the top of the Viking sand* The 
maximum occurrence of ,! spores 51 is at 2020 feet, 
which is just above the top of a thin shale zone 
separating the first and second Viking sands* A 
minor maximum occurs at the top of the second 
Viking sand and extends a short distance upward 
into the shale zone* Cutinized microfossils, 

H spores”, outnumber all other forms of organic 









r ^r.o 


5 


- 14 - 


life in the upper Viking sand* 

A distinctive difference between comparable 
morphologic types occurring in the Loon River shade and 
the Viking sands 3s size* In general, cutinized micro¬ 
fossils from the Viking sands are about twice the size 
as those from the Loon River shale* Many of the 
specimens are beautifully preserved and being compara¬ 
tively large renders them excellent material to study. 
For this reason several specimens from this source 
have been described and Illustrated* 

Shaftesbury formation * 

A sparse number of cutinized microfossils of two 
types Sporangltoldes circulare n* sp. and S* lentleu] R r A 
n* sp. var* D occur above the middle gypsiferous sand¬ 
stone horizon'(fish-scale horizon), in the Shaftesbury 
formation* (Nielsen, Supp* Ref. 3). At a locality 
(16-47-30) on the east bank of the Smoky river, about 
1/2 mile west of Judah railway station, Alberta, 
samples containing cutinized microfossils (M3904, 

M390b, and M 3911 ) occur respectively 45, 3&> and 10 
feet above the fishscale sand* (Location map, Nielson* 

A 

Supp. Ref* 3)* One speciman only of a cutinized 
microfossil, B* circulare n. sp. was seen in a sample 
(M395B) from locality 16-47-3 1 * on the east bank 
of the Smoky River ifr miles north north-east of Judah 
railway station, Alberta. This occurs at 148 feet 
above the fish-scale sand in the Shaftesbury forma¬ 
tion. 







f 





/ 











■ 15 - 


These specimens occur in silty shales and are 
on the average very well preserved and of slightly 
larger dimensions than comparative forms occurring 
in the Loon River shale. The writer suspects that 
they occur in relatively larger numbers than is 
indicated by the mounted microsuites, because Mr. 
Nielsen’s study was primarily concerned with the 
Foraminiferal content. 

St. John formation. 

A cursory study of R. letter’s microsuites 
(Supp. Ref. 6), Indicates that three main types of 
cutinized mierofossils occur in the St. John forma¬ 
tion (Cenomanian age). They are S-pora n gltoldea 
clrcglare n. sp., S. lenticulare n. sp* var. D. and S. 
elllpsoprolati&n n. sp. A major maximum is indicated 
by a sample (4-912) from 65 feet above the base of the 
fish scale sand z one at locality A, on Septimus 
Creek, British Columbia, in Sec. 20, Tp. 28, Rge. IS* 

W. Sth meridian. A minor maximum occurs at 4-9 feet 
above the second tuff horizon, (sample 4-610). This 
latter sample is from a locality at the mouth of St, 
John Creek, on Beatton River, British Columbia, S. 
ellipsoprola t^.n. sp. in the major maximum occurrence 
zone makes up 87 of the cutinized microfossil count. 
Within the minor maximum cutinized microfossil 
occurrence zone, S. circulars n. sp. is the pre¬ 
dominant form species with S. lenticulare n. sp. and S. 
ellipsoprolata n. sp, sparsely represented. 









t 


9.-. 


1 


% 


D 


l> i 






x 


t - < 


x 


m 


IS 


c 




:c < • 







- 16 - 


Upper Cretac eo us^ Second White Specks (1 u ronlan Age) , 

Varieties of cutinized microfossils of two form 
species, S 0 clrculare n. sp. and S. ellipsoprolat^ A n. sp. 
are known to occur in samples from the second white 
specks zone (Turonian age) from a well in the Spirit 
River area. (Mr. J. Wall, personal communication, 

1951). S. cireglare n. sp. is the predominant type. 
Considered as a group, they are considerably larger 
than similar forms occurring in the Loon River shale. 

To the writer*s knowledge to date, this sediment 
(Second white specks) is the youngest to reveal 
evidence of cutinized microfossils. 

5. HOW OBTAINED AND METHODS OF STUDY. 

The procedure of treatment of samples was 
essentially the same as described in the thesis of 
Mr. A. R. Nielsen (Supp. Ref. 3 PP* 3”*>)» except a 
120 mesh screen size was used in place of the 150 
screen for part of the work. A record was kept of 
those samples which were washed using the latter 
screen in case of a noticeable difference of results 
which could be attributaM^to that cause. 

Details of the morphology of the cutinized 
microfossils stand out much clearer when placed 
against a light background. In contrast, external 
features of Foramlnifera are seen to best advantage 









.f 




0 






I-.. ^ 


Vi 


' ’ ■ ‘v.;.'' i. J [ ,i.' i.' c' - > 







C 











- 17 - 


when studied against a black background* For higher 
magnification, the cutinized microfossils were placed 
on thin glass slides and a Bausch and Lomb petrographic 
microscope used. The combination of XIO ocular with 
a 0.25 mm objective was found to be the most suitable. 

Camera lucida drawings were made of selected well 
preserved representative specimens as a means of por¬ 
traying morphologic features. The writer believes 
that in the early formative stages of a study such as 
this, making numerous drawings is indeed an aid in 
the interpretation of structure and morphology. It 
is also a valuable record for later comparisons. With 
regard to this same idea, the writer quotes the 
following from Wodehouse (Ref. 4?, p. 56 ). 

°In making microscopical drawings the eye is com¬ 
pelled to dwell upon the contours and minute detail 
of the object. At first these appear to be without 
arrangement, but after the eye has studied them and 
put them accurately together on paper an underlying 
plan is revealed, and from the apparent chaos 
gradually emerges the plan of the whole which may 
be resolved into its structural elements. These 
may be captured and retained only as dictated to the 
mind by the trained eye and skillful hand. As more 
forms are examined the same structural elements are 
found to occur again and again in different combina¬ 
tions, and different but related plans are revealed. 

In this way the morphological science is built up 
as a visual structure. 15 





:..'i v 1' 



r ' - a 


k 



%' ■ * 


..i- w> 


wc$ c 






IPS 






— 18 — 


A comparison of earlier and later drawings 
by the writer reveals that there is considerable 
truth in the above statements of Wodehouse. The 
eye does require training to be able to discern 
some of the finer details of structure. Structural 
features are frequently seen to advantage by using 
a combination of reflected and transmitted lighting 
and by altering the intensity of the light source. 

This is somewhat analogous to the frequent practice 
of micropaleontologists, of moistening the test of 
a Foraminifera with a fine brush and then watching 
the changing light as it dries from cell to cell. 
Indistinct cell and obscure suture lines are fre¬ 
quently detected in this manner. 

Most of the camera lucida drawings were done 
at a scale of X110. Where necessary for very small 
forms the magnification was increased to approximately 
XI 55 and likewise for very large forms the magnification 
was reduced. Where possible a constant scale was used 
so as to portray relative size differences within a 
type and between markedly different types. 

Best results are obtained using microscopes 
having vertically orientated oculars, that is, per¬ 
pendicular to the page of the drawing book placed on 
an horizontal surface, as constant checking of posi¬ 
tion of the drawing book is required when a camera 
lucida is attached to an ocular or body tube which is 
not orientated vertically. In this case, in order 





Jj/e.U ; .• 




- 19 - 


to maintain the page of the drawing book perpendicular 
to the ocular, it has to be placed on an inclined sur¬ 
face where there is greater tendency for it to slip 
out of position. 

The writer suggests to anyone continuing the 
study of cutinized microfossils that the black mat 
background of the mounting c^ells be surfaced with 
a white material as specimens of the cutinized type 
show up to best advantage against a light colored* 
preferably white background. 

There are several excellent references which 
explain in detail methods of maceration, microscopic 
mounts, staining procedures* etc. Among these is an 
excellent treatise by Gr. Erdtman* 1943 (Ref. 15* PP* 
26 - 42 ). 

The methods of maceration* mounting, etc.* 
applied to the samples investigated by the writer 
are those which are best suited to the study of 
Foraminifera as no special techniques had as yet 
been developed for cutinized remains alone. 


.1: non 


Jivfflsx, 







r:. 











. 



t * 




C J 


'iv .t | i'". ■ 


.nr 




:i... ; >J 0 \n 






20 - 


CHAPTER II 

1. ALLIED FORMS AND BRIEF HISTORY OF SOME 
OF THE STUDIES. 

The early history of the observed occurrences 
of plant microfossils is quite probably associated 
with the development of the microscope. Waltham, 

1333, (Wilson, Ref. 47. p. 112) was apparently one 
of the first to describe the occurrence of fossil 
spores in the bituminous coals of England. Almost 
all of the plant microfossil literature pertains to 
spores and pollen occurring in peat and coal where 
they are found most abundantly in the fossil state. 

In this country, Dawson in 1363* (Ref. 11)* described 
the occurrence of disc-like spore bodies, ( Sporangites , 
now ^asmanites ,) from the shales of eastern Canada. 
White and Stadnichenko in 1923* (Ref. 47) record the 
presence of small roundish spore sacs, now flattened 
and appearing as somewhat wrinkled or creased, 
irregularly rounded bodies, J to 5 mm. in diameter, 
in black shales, regarded as of Genesee age, in 
northeastern Kentucky. Another plant part described 
is the forking divisions or th&ili of presumably a 
small seaweed, named Foerstia . I mention these types 
because of the similarity in description of their 
composition to the cutinous microfossils studied 









Of 


I'., : 






i 


1 




«. *' ' * ' t 


C 



t 




* 

[ 5 >3 ;>" 





i 







- 21 - 


from the Loon River shale, although size and mor¬ 
phology indicate that they are obviously different. 
Parts of the above plants are referred to as waxy 
resinous in composition which seem especially de¬ 
signed to resist decay. A paper by Bradley (1931» 

Ref.7), illustrates and describes numerous micro- 
fossils found in the Green River formation of Colorado 
and Utah, The G-reen River formation is of fresh 
water origin and has yielded an abundance of foss¬ 
ilized plant material including spores and pollen. 

The writer has examined and for comparison 
illustrates with camera lucida drawings a piece of 
Exshaw shale. (Upper Devonian), containing a 
specimen of “Sporangites”. This name was first 
proposed by Dawson in 1663;; and the name and form is 
discussed quite thoroughly by Schopf, Wilsoh and Ben- 
tall. (Ref. 31. p. 11). They give reasons why the 
term should not have generic significance. Dawson 
applied the name to spore or M spore cases 11 which he 
thought were referable to Lepidodendron , Calamites 
and other similar plants. The present common use 
of the term ^ Sporangites * 1 by geologists, refers to 
the presence of more or less disc-shaped, resinous- 
appearing bodies that are commonly found in Devonian- 
Mis sissippian black shale. 








22 - 


Schopf, Wilson and B e ntall, X9^i-( Ref* 31) of 
the Illinois State Geological Survey published a 
report in the form of an annotated synopsis of the 
literature which describes most of the Paleozoic 
fossil spores known to that date. A fairly complete 
review of recent t! spore w literature since that date 
has been done by Schopf 19^9 ( Ref. 33)* One of the 
outstanding omissions from the earlier report was 
material from Russian literature. Much of this 
Russian literature is still not available but what 
has been obtained so far is of extreme interest. The 
writer quotes the following from Schopf* ( Ref. 33# 

P* *99). 

‘’Naumova, lists species characteristic of Dev¬ 
onian* Lower Carboniferous* (European province, 
Karaganda province). Middle and Upper Carboniferous(of 
Donetz and the Ruhr), Permian (Donetz province and 
Siberian province). Upper Triassic (Uralian province), 
Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous (East Asiatic province), 
and the Upper Cretaceous and Tertiary. The differ¬ 
entiation of the floristic- provinces is of considerable 
interest and when fully reported will probably hold 
much significance. Angiosperm pollen is said to 
appear first in Jurassic coals of the Caucasus; in the 
far east it does not appear earlier than the Upper 
Cretaceous. No illustrations of this interesting 



' \ 

t '■ * • * 





t 




' ''llJi'J, f 


i 





i 


■0 It;' 








t 




\ 




material are given, nor is the fossil specifically 
identified. 11 

The study of modern spore and pollen morphology 
and analysis now is a well established science. 

Three comprehensive treatises have been written on 
this subject within the past sixteen years. "POLLEN 
GRAINS, Their structure, identification and signifi¬ 
cance in science and medicine" by R. P. Wodehouse 
appeared in 1935* This treatment is the most complete 
and summarizes most of the American knowledge and 
much of the European contributions to this new 
science. This text discusses fossilized remains and 
is for this reason a valuable reference £ 0 ^anyone 
engaged in a study such as this. 

The European slant and background is comprehen¬ 
sively represented by the two following texts. In 
19^3 appeared "An Introduction to POLLEN ANALYSIS 11 
by G, Erdtman, This book was first written in 
Swedish and later translated to English. In the 
editor*s preface, it is stated that the book is 
meant primarily as a short Introduction to the 

anaSj/si5 un of tAe 

principles of pollen A types of pollen grains met by the 
beginning pollen analyst. 

The most recent text off the press (1950) is by 
two Danish workers, Knut Faegri and Johs, Iversen, 
entitled, "Text-Book of Modern Pollen Analysis". 











: j,, i . 













T ■ 








r 


• C 




















n 


j,; 






»,:v2 






- 24 - 


This book summarizes those methods and principles 
which have guided Danish workers on pollen-analytical 
work. 

These texts are of obvious value to any inves¬ 
tigator dealing with Recent spores and pollen types 
but are of little direct help in clarifying the 
problem of affinity of the cutinized microfossils. 

The forms investigated by the writer appear to 
be some part or parts of the reproductive organs of 
plants. Micropaleontologists of Western Canada have 
tentatively designated them as 15 spores 1 ’ and it is 
for this reason that the writer devotes a great deal 
of space to the discussion of spores. 

If the cutinized microfossils investigated by 
the writer do happen to be spores or pollen, they are 
of giant proportions. Most pollen grains are small, 
in fact so small that they cannot be seen by the 
naked eye. One of the largest modern pollen grains 
is that of the pumpkin, which has a diameter of 
about 200 mu and from this size pollen grains range 
downward to about 4 \ mu in diameter (Ref. 49* p;S0.) 

In the hope of clarifying the relationship and 
meaning of spores and pollen the writer is including 
the following summary. 

^ Pollen Grains are Spores" (Wodehouse, Ref. 

49. page 1). 

f, They correspond to the small or male spores of 














i 







f % 









WS 








- 25 - 


the ferns* It is even a little difficult to draw a 
hard-and-fast line between pollen grains and other 
kinds of spores* Perhaps the best distinction is 
this: "When a spore, like the fern spore, germinates, 

it ruptures its wall, and the developing prothallus 
emerges; when a pollen grain germinates, the young 
prothallus, which is only rudimentary does not rupture 
the spore wall but is entirely contained within it*" 

Other micro-organisms which compare in size 
and have superficial resemblance to cutinized 
microfossils are the Radiolaria and Heliozoa* The 
shells of these aquatic animals generally consists 
of some siliceous or calcareous material, which is 
chemically entirely unrelated to the substance of the 
cutinized microfossils. Nevertheless the simple 
families of the order Foraminifera was searched in the 
hope of finding comparable forms. The family 
Allogromiidae is described as: "Test either wanting 
or of chitin, not porous; aperture either single or 
at each end of the test, the surface of test some¬ 
times with attached foreign materials; fresh and 
brakish water, sometimes marine, not known as fossils." 
(Cushman, Ref. 10, p. 65). 

For the same reason the Calcareous Algae may 
be dismissed as a possibility of affinity. With 
regard to the Charophyta, the writer quotes the foll¬ 
owing brief description, (LeRoy, Ref. 23, p* 99)® 


v ■ ; r. i L. * 

- n - - i 

. ■ : c " ■ • . . ■ * v / i 1 \ 

t . t . . , 

1 11 ; .. £ . ‘ ' • 1 

• .. " ...... t ■ ■: •' : v. 1 r. ' . c ~ . • ■■■.:•. . :. 

« l 

c 

9‘ . ... . . 

Co &0£i&LSi Sj.-S.OX.'Z'S.&C'Sl^ vVfci'i hltk 

.£>050X19 

■‘o'p:h :.fiuo 1 leiJSg el. .. Di;:r.- : ifo, eej Xo allsils 

■ t .. ... ... 
iOJXi l . $ • fsls .V J . . : ■ ■ u ■ li ; . . 

V I" r ■ ■ . i £>.(. !.M . ' C'X C ,, jX ' ; ’ .X ! ;i i'.! 

enj" y<£ , *?iI0Tj 39& 8l.;W '/±XiK 18..3T0''! T^CTC v'C ...u.il.c<:' 

•: V :, 1 X. -■•. ■ ■:. f ' Vf 

% CTO 

• ■ : . o' fo.tr * 

, 

| 1 ' • , 0 : Oi C >i '. • 

* ■; t J.; *' 1 ... * ;■ } 

~' ■ 'v. •..: j... 8J/C9X. .oLx:l- :: :r uocc-s-w. eill to 1 '. 

* . X 

c ■ ■ • -' , 

* * ? . - • ' 


2b- 


11 The Charophyta are a distinctive, isolated group 
of algae, usually classed with the green algae 
(Charophyta). Calcium carbonate is usually precipi¬ 
tated around the tips of the branches and spore 
cases. These structures are the only portions of many 
of the plants that are calcified. The spore cases 
(oogonia) form a distinctive fossil". 

The diatoms compare in size and shape with 
the microfossil elements studied by the writer, but 
they possess mineral skeletal parts which eleminates 
this group from serious consideration. A brief 
description of this group is given by LeRoy, (Ref. 

23 , p. 101). 

"Diatoms are microscopic unicellular plants be¬ 
longing to the phylum Thallophyta. The skeleton or 
frustule, composed of opaline silica , commonly 
consists of two shallow, disc-shaped halves (example: 
Crapedodiscus ), one of which fits into the other 
similar to a flat pillbox. Other forms are elongate 
and bilaterally symmetrical with respect to an 
axial strip. Individual specimens may range in 
diameter from 0.1 to 0.15 mm." 

The unicellular plants Desmlds , although similar 
in outline to Sporangitoides lentlculare n. sp. and 
S. glganteum n. sp., are characterized by distinctly 










o 




s 


\ 


I 




<5 


.U C: ■ 




i 




c 


r. 







- 27 - 


dlfferent and definite structure. Desraids for the 
most part grow solitary, hut frequently remain attached 
and form filamentous colonies. Some are common as 
freshwater plankton. Most desmids consist of two 
similar halves, semi-cells, and frequently a constric¬ 
tion called an isthmus separates the two semi-cells. 
(Holman and Robbins, Ref. 19, p. 36l). 

The fossil form of Perldlnium , a Dinoflagellate , 
(Protozoa), has been found in the firestone of 
Delitzet, of Cretaceous age. The modern Perldlnium 
is common both in fresh and salt water. (Harmer 
and Shipley, Ref. IS, fig. M6 f pp. 131-133)« In 
general outline only does this form resemble the 
cutinized microfossil S. lentlculare n. sp. Another 
form noted in the same reference and under the same 
group which compares favorably in size and shape to 
S. lenticulare n. sp, is Pyrocysitis fusiformus . A 
constriction (isthmus) at the center separates two 
semi-cells. 

A careful check was made of a study by Elias 
of prairie-grass seeds of the Late Tertiary deposits 
of the Prairie States, (Elias, 1942, R e f. 14). 

The illustrated fossil grass vegetative and reproductive 
parts are much too large as well as being obviously 
morphologically different from any of the cutinized 
microfossils studied by the writer. Grass pollen is 










v i rr 


v >. : 





not considered in the above statement. 

Modern grass pollen is remarkably uniform 
throughout the family. (Wodehouse, Ref* 49. PP- 

303- 304). Their shape when fully expanded are genera¬ 
lly spheroidal or, some species, tend to be ovoidal or 
ellipsoidal. Their size ranges from about 22 mu to 

a little over 100 mu in diameter. The writer mentions 
the pollen of grasses because of two morphologic 
features which have striking resemblance to a form 
designated by the writer as Sporltoides splnus n. sp. 

A small spine-like projection is frequently seen on 
some of these forms which can be compared to the 
single g^rm pore, the base of which is surrounded by 
a thickened rira of exine. (Wodehouse, Ref. 49* PP* 

304- 305)« Its general shape outline is also 
somewhat similar. A noticeable difference however is 
size; as mentioned previously, the maximum diameter 
of grass pollen is a little over 100 mu. The mean 
diameter of S. discus varies between 160 to 190 mu. 
Wodehouse states (Ref. 49, p. 306 ) that the single 
minute germ pore is unique having been recorded in 
the grains of no other plants. 

A brief discussion of the pollen of FOSSIL 
GYMNOSPERMS, Cycadof ilieales, (Pteridosi^erms), is 
taken from a section of the text of Wodehouse (Ref. 49 




X 



- 29 - 


pp. 211 - 232 ) where quite a number of forms are 
fully described. 

As mentioned earlier in this thesis, modern 
pollen grains are quite small, in fact so small that 
they were not at first considered very seriously as 
a possible source of close comparison to the cutinized 
microfossils occurring in the Loon River shale and other 
sedimentary rocks. Wodehouse cites evidence (R.ef. 

49, p. 211) of fossil pollen of comparatively 
large dimensions. He states: 15 The most outstanding 
characters of the pollen grains of the Cycadofilicales 
are their large size and pluricellular structure 11 . 
Different described species range in size from "JO 
to 500 mu in diameter. In some, the cell cavity 
contains only two cells while in others there is as 
many as 3$. The cell cavity is almost Invariably filled 
with cellular tissue having well-developed walls. 

Saporta and Marion (162>5), from Wodehouse, (Ref. 

49, p. 211), describes piuri-cellular pollen grains 
which are 5 00 mu long which were taken from the pollen 
chamber of Pachytesta . Similar grains about 400 mu 
long and without exines were described by Rennault 
presumably about the same time. An important point 
discussed by Wodehouse,(Ref. 49, p. 213 ), is the 
lack of the broad germinal furrow which were so 




rr. 


«L 




' vlC- -J 


’ 0 . 


\ 











t • * t 



30 - 


prevalent in the later gymnosperms. This is signifi¬ 
cant because none of the cutinized microfossils 
studied by the writer show a germinal furrov; of 
this description, and if they are spores or pollen 
they are presumably acolpate. 

The Cycadofilicales are the most primitive 
gymnosperms, with the habit and certain of the ana¬ 
tomical features of ferns* It is now thought 
(Wodehouse, Ref. 49) that the Cycadofilicales were 
not derived from ferns but existed with them in 
Devonian times. In their early history they probably 
gave rise to the Cordaitales, and this group extended 
a little way into the Mesozoic. From them developed 
the group Bennettitales or Hemicycadales which became 
the dominant vegetation of the Mesozoic* 

Some of the larger forms of this latter group 
also seem to possess marked similarities to the 
cutinized microfossils described in this thesis. One 
of these is Stephanospermum akenoides Brongn. 

Most of the description is from Oliver (1904), after 
Wodehouse (Ref. 49, p. 21£). It is ellipsoidal, 

160 by 100 mu or occasionally 200 mu long. “Texture 
of the outer coat finely granulated or sculptured, 
the interior of the grain divided into about 20 wedge- 
shaped cells disposed in five rows around the major 






4 


’i' 


r 


V 




r rj 


.* r *• r r, i ‘ 


T 


;i X. 


or 






0 0 ; 




J 






. 






■ 




\ 


y oi 





. ■ t . 






‘x o 




- 31 - 


axis of the grain." The whole interior of the grain 
is marked out by internal tissue, consisting of num¬ 
erous cells which line the exospore everywhere. The 
above grains were taken from pollen chambers. The 
writer has frequently observed a pluricellular struc¬ 
ture in some of the cutinized microfossils considered 
in this thesis and is apparently a common feature. 

The writer has not seen however, the wedge-shaped 
cells as depicted in the drawings by Wodehouse, (Ref* 
49, p. 219, Tig- 62 ). 

Another large species is Pachytesta glgantes 
Grand 1 Eury, (Wodehouse, Ref. 49, p* 221, fig. 65 , 

B. and C.) 

"Grains ellipsoidal, about 500 mu long, pluri¬ 
cellular. Found in the pollen chamber of Pachytesta. 
(Saporta and Marion, ISS 5 , p* 64), a Permoearboniferous 
genus of seeds from the coal measures of France and 
elsewhere, distinguished by their large size, which 
is about equal to that of a hen* s egg. The plants 
which bore these seeds are certainly not known but 
probably belonged to the Medullosae (Seward, 191?) • 11 

Atheotesta elliptica , (Wodehouse, Ref. 49, 
p. 221, fig. 65 , A). Described as, ellipsoidal form, 
with dimensions of 320 to 400 mu long and 270 to J10 
mu broad. The interior cavity is divided into a 
number of walls forming numerous cells. The name 










¥ 


I 


' / 




or r\\, 









- 32 - 


was given by Renault to seeds found in rocks of 
Permian age but unknown affinities. He thought 
they might belong to Dolerophyllum . 

The fossil pollen of Gordaitales can be 
dismissed from consideration because of their 
small size, (maximum diameter 100 mu) and these 
grains posses a single longitudinal furrow. 

2. METHODS OF DESIGNATING PLANT MICROFOSSILS, 
(TERMINOLOGY) 

Several methods have been devised by micro- 
paleontologists to designate the specific identity 
of spores and pollen. Different uses for which the 
studies were undertaken and personal preferences are 
main reasons for these various methods. Designations 
also vary with the geologic age of the material and 
the state of morphologic knowledge of the plants to 
which they are related. Some Cenozoic plant material 
can be assigned with some degree of certainty to 
existing groups of plants. A great many are tentat¬ 
ively placed in artificial morphologic groups because 
botanical relationships are in many cases merely 
conjectural. These “species* 1 nevertheless are fre¬ 
quently valuable from a geologic point of view. This 
tendency is of necessity more prevalent as one goes 
back in geologic time. However desirable it is to 
know the affinities of spores, and other raicrocutinized 





- 33 - 


elements, it is not necessary to wait until such 
knowledge is attained. This is supported by the 
fact that several systems for designating spores and 
pollen have been used with some success in geologic, 
especially, stratigraphic work. 

British workers, including (Raistrick, Ref. 2g) 
and (Paget, R e f. 27) and others, have designated the 
identity of a number of Carboniferous spores with a 
letter to represent general groups and a subnumber 
to represent specific forms. Six spore groups, referred 
to by letters from A to F, were established, (Wilson, 
Ref. ij-S p. 116) and specific forms within a group were 
designated as A^, A^, A^, etc. 

German workers started other systems. Potonie 
(193^), after (Erdtman, 1943 , Ref. 15, pp, 215- 
216), used a number of symbols to convey some ideas 
of shape, numbers of furrows or pores and type of 
ornamentation, etc. Erdtman suggests that a standard 
system of this type would be useful in routine work 
of a specialized institution, but would not be of 
much use in common practice. 

General terms were also introduced, for example 
the generic name Sporonltes , (R. Pontonie, 193-0 
after (Erdtman, Ref. 15 p. 217), when dealing with 
fossil fungus spores. Fossil bryophyte and pteri- 
dophyte spores, whose determinations are not certain. 




OT 


x 


x 


t 


' 


< 


' ; ’ . 


< '< 





-Li 


X 






are called Sporites . This name is also used when 
there is doubt as to whether the material is pollen 
or spores. Sporites has been divided into three 
major groups: (1) those spores without a germinating 
aperture ( Aletes ), (2) spores with one germinating 
aperture ( Monole t ea ), (3) spores with a trilete 
aperture ( Triletes ). G-enera were established under 
these three groups, according to the character of 
the spore coat ornamentation, such as degree of 
smoothness, reticulation, punctation, etc. Mega¬ 
spores and microspores were not separated in the 
above classification. An example of subdivisions 
of the Alete group of Sporites is as follows. 
(Ibrahim, 1933 after Erdtman, Ref. 15 , p. 217 ). 

1. Punctata - sporites 

2. Apiculata - sporites 

3. Zonala - sporites 

4-. Reticulara - sporites. 

G-erman workers also found it expedient to desig¬ 
nate fossil pollen as pollenites . Modified generic 
names, as prefixes, were hyphenated with the term 
pollenites , for example Tllla - pollenltes. Ertdman, 
(Ref. 15 1 p. 212>), objects to the word pollenltes 
because it merely indicates the fact that the 
object so designated is a fossil pollen grain; 
also, it becomes so universal in application that 
it means almost nothing. Wodehouse surmounted this 



















35 - 


shortcoming by proposing (1933)* (Wilson, Ref. 48. pp. 
llb-117 and Erdtman, Ref. 15 , pp. 218-219) a modified 
system of nomenclature. Fossil pollen whose identifi¬ 
cation was relatively certain with respect to the fam¬ 
ily but remain unknown as to genus would carry the 
root name of the family plus the suffix 11 - pites . M 
In cases where the fossil material is identified with 
some assurance to an existing genus, then, the root 
of the genus is used with the suffix 11 -pites . 11 
If a positive generic relationship is determined, the 
valid generic name is used. In cases where fossil 
pollen resembles an established species of a modern 
plant but some doubt exists as to its certainty, 
the suffix n -pites 11 is added to the root of that 
species. The chief advantages of this system are f 
the freedom of the use of descriptive adjectives as 
specific names without the introduction of trinomials; 
also, some idea of the exactness or reliability is 
conveyed. The fact that the determination was based 
on fossil pollen grains is indicated by the suffix. 

In America, Schopf, Wilson and Bentall, (1944, 
Ref. 31), reviewed most of the literature pertaining 
to the classification of Paleozoic spores. They 
attempted to place the descriptions of these fossils 
on the basis of the International Rules of Nomen¬ 
clature and to assemble them into more natural 





r t 






c 


p 





X 


a 












* 






x < 


r,'* '■ 

t < 




,r I 



36 - 


groupings* This taxonomic revision was presented in 
the form of an annotated synopsis of several hundred 
Paleozoic fossil spores in which generic groups were 
defined* For a complete discussion of the guiding 
principles which relates to their treatment, the 
writer refers the reader to their work* 

A very brief summary of the guiding principles 
established and applied by Schopf, Wilson and B e ntall, 
is as follows: 

11 1. Only adherence to the systematic principles em¬ 
bodied in the International Rules will give satis¬ 
factory results in the study of microfossile 0 » 

H 2. Species classified within the same genus or 
under the same generic name must possess significant 
characteristics in common* 0 

There is considerable divergence amongst paleo~ 
botanists in their treatment and interpretation of 
unusually complete specimens. In most cases parts 
are. found separated and generally classified separa¬ 
tely. In subtype, they state the following: H No 
plant, and certainly no single specimen can have more 
than one valid name. However, instances arise in 
which it is difficult to determine which of two or 
more names should actually be applied. In spite of 
this, systematic procedure demands that an author 
follow some consistent usage 0 . 


1 


; j . 


•ill; n* 







. 

' .r-.yc! : r ' y<£ , 


. 




■ 1 -if f;I f 


;C0 


, 


- ' ' 


•f >T 




r 




, 




. 


rj 



- 37 - 


4. The practice adopted by the authors with regard 
to the determination of synonymy is conservative 

to the extent that unless conspecific relationship 
is proved for two nomenclatural types, both names 
are valid. The word synonym is used as an absolute 
term, i. e. partial synonyms are not synonyms, 

5. In making specific identifications, emphasis is 
placed on positive evidence of similarity rather 
than on negative evidence of lack, real or fancied, 
of features which cannot be examined critically, 

o. This synopsis considers a species of plant, as a 
group of organisms. It is fairly certain that spores 
are Just as definitive of a species as any other 
organ belonging in a coordinated manner to the life 
cycle of a particular plant individual. 

7 . The primary purpose of giving a name is simply 
a convenience in reference. All previously given 
names that are taxonomically valid should be 
continued. 

3. TERMINOLOGY USED IN THIS THESIS, (CLASSIFICATION) 
With regard to terminology and nomenclature, 
the writer is faced with the problem of not knowing 
with certainty the plant or animal affinities of the 
micro-elements studied. Certain morphologic structures, 
composition, and other features, strongly suggest 
that most of these micro-elements are the parts of the 











;.f. 








reproductive organs of plants* In view of the 
foregoing discussion on methods of classification 
and terminology, which apply directly to spores and 
pollen proper, the writer feels that a somewhat 
tentative, artificial system, based on morphologic 
characteristics of the microfossils, would at the 
present time, be of the most use® As mentioned before 
the main purpose of giving a name to a taxonomic 
group is not to indicate the characters or history 
of the g^roup, but is merely a convenience in refer¬ 
ence, A name focus°es attention on, and it is hoped, 
will stimulate further study of this previously- 
neglected group of microfossils* Until more is learned 
about the finer details of their structure, terminolo¬ 
gy should be restricted to the more salient features 
of morphology* Descriptive terms have been suggested 
by the writer which it is hoped would not cause later 
confusion when this gap in the knowledge of the&e 
microfossils has been studied and more fully understood* 
The writer introduces two t! form-genus f{ group 
names. These are 18 Sporangltoides* 8 and ^ Sporltoides * n 
Sporangltoides refers to all forms whose size and 
morphology resemble spore-sacs or spore?-containers. 
Sporitoides is used to designate those form types 







< 







J t 










39 - 


which look like megaspores. The term megaspore is 
here used in reference to size only. According to 
botanical usage, the distinction between microspores and 
megaspores is based on functional differences. R. B. 
Thompson ( Ref. 45) has shown anomalous cases where 
the microspore is sometimes larger than the megaspore. 
The form-genus group Sporangitoides is subdivided into 
five finer divisions, that is, form-species, on the 
basis of distinctive morphologic and size differences. 
These have been designated as follows, by giving 
descriptive trivial names. 

1 . Sporangitaides lentlcula re 

2 . Sporangitoides glganteum 

3. Sporangitoides ellipsoprolatum 

4. Sporangitoides circulars 

5* Sporangitoides mesoclrculare 

The form-genus group Sporitoides is subdivided on 
the same basis as above, into two sub-groups, or form- 
species. They are as follows i 

1. Sporitoides splnus 

2 . Sporitoides discus 

Generally, common and well preserved specimen 
types were isolated and studied structurally. These 
are permanently located in the University of Alberta 



















- 40 - 


Type Micropaleontologlcal Collections. Complete 
descriptions have been prepared which are contained 
in Chapter III of this thesis along with camera lucida 
drawings of each of the selected proposed holotype and 
paratype specimens* All of the commoner forme have 
been illustrated by drawings of several selected 
paratypes. This has been done to indicate the 
variance of morphology within the arbitrary form- 
genera and form-species. In addition. Chapter I, 
includes statements concerning the abundance and 
stratigraphic distribution of these types as revealed 
to date, by this preliminary study. 

Another form type is tentatively assigned to 
the Hystrichosphaerid group* 

A glossary of morphologic terms is included in 


the appendix of this thesis 



/ 

" v . '■ ■ ; : ii.ti ri x v; ■' :om : ■: ■) t f.■ > y 

i < . . * 


. 

". .. . . • . 

* . 

•XX . ..‘■roS. 1 . :x:- .' oi:,.I■, ., ’ .u ..... ,X. 





. 41 - 


CHAPTER III 

DESCRIPTIONS OF MORPHOLOGIC TYPES 
Kingdom: Incertae sedis 
Genus: Hystricosphaera Wetzel 1933* 

Hystrichosphaera loonrlverensis , n- sp- 

Plate 1, figures 25, 29, 30, 31 , 32, and 33* 

Symmetry - Central body is circular, flattened and disc¬ 
like with radial symmetry in one plane- Spoke-like pro¬ 
jections vary in number and position of attachment to the 
disc-like body- 

Shape , Body proper is a flattened circular, or nearly 
circular disc with 6 to 11 spoke-like projections 
extending radially outward from the periphery of the 
disc* Some are bent into various shapes- In some 
specimens these projections extend inward a short 
distance into the disc and appear slightly thickened 
at the proximal end. The thickness of the arm-like 
projections is not constant, some appearing filamen¬ 
tous and some considerably thicker, even within the 
same specimen. On some specimens, (476-150), a 
loose irregular, thin menbranous folded exine extends 
outward from near the center of the flattened disc- 







iip l 


I 



0 



42 - 


The outer extremities of the spoke-like appendages are 
enlarged, in some they appear like small barbs, in 
others the enlargement is irregular. There is a 
faint indication that the appendages consist of 
elongated cylinder shaped segments. Joined end to 
end. The body of a paratype (specimen 49&-150-3 
pi. 1, fig. 32 ), is very compressed and has little 
content and appears like a thin menbranous sac* 
Paratype 49S-150-4 (pi. 1, fig. 29) is impregnated 
with, or contains within the sac a black granular 
substance. 

Size 


Specimen number 

1 

2 

3 

Digm. flattened 
disc. 

fa6 

72-75 

78-94 

Overall max. diam. 

134 

15s 

130 

Mean length of 




arm-like proj. 

39 

20-140 

26-32 

Thickness of 



| 

center disc. 

13 


1 1 


4 ! 5 

71-gO 62-75 

j 

136 136 

32 26-45 


24 





•;V 







t 







t 




il 0 


< 







ft, 




- 43 - 


(All measurements in microns) 


Specimen number 


Specimen 

476-150-1 


1 


2 


476-150-2 


3 


498-150-3 


4 


498-150-4 


565-100-5 


Ornamentation All forms are minutely granulose and 
slightly rugose. Specimen 476-150-1, pi. 1, fig. 33, 
has a comparatively large depression in the center of 
the disc which seems to have been caused by collapse 
of the outer wall. Specimen 476-150-2, pi. 1, fig. 

25 f has very faint markings on the flat side of the 
disc as indicated by accentuated shading in camera 
lucida drawing. None of the other specimens show 
distinct ornamentation 

Color . Varies from a light straw to a light resinous 
yellow. Arm-like projections appear lighter in color 
as they are more translucent to light than the thicker 
flattened disc-like center. Specimen 498-150-4 » 
pi. 1, fig. 29, is the only one which contains a fine 
granular substance, black, and opaque to light. 

Coat . Cutinous, generally quite thin and seems uniform 
in thickness. Under high magnification appears finely 








■. ■. . 

I-Cr-1-;:, ‘ 

X 

V-: 




n-oc i-e \ ' 




smr. 

*. *• ' :v;. ' 


t * ' r - « - - ' ' <* - 

„ t [ . 

■ •. ' < . 

. Z .• Jli b- J'/ i,,. ' . -j- ibiil . j • 

* 

* ■ . . . ■ . ■■ - 

\..r ' ~ •' -V V - . 

* 

■ t nsd ©lit 

„ ■ L . * .U >. 

<• . . c . . . 

. k f. ■ , ' • = : * • 1 c ' ■ • " 1 ' • . : 

C 

. ■ ; ■ I: • . ' 






granular and less translucent to light than substance 
of spoke-like projections. 

Diagnostic features . Size and shape are relatively 
constant. Disc is always compressed and flat, with 
spokes always joined to the disc at or near peripheral 
margin of disc. Number of spoke-like projections 
cannot be considered diagnostic as they vary from 
6, most common, to as high as 11. 

Affinity . This form compares most closely to Hystrichos- 
pha.era tublfera , Ehrenburg, Upper Cretaceous, France, 
(G-laessner, Kef. 17, pi. 3, fig.* p. ^9) and is 
assigned to the Hystrlchosphaerid group. 

The typical representative of this group is the 
genus Hystrichosphaera 0. Wetzel, 1933* described 
as a hollow sphere of microscopic size, consisting of 
a chemically highly resistant membrane bearing numer¬ 
ous acicul&r, tubular or branching spines. The 
diameter of the sphere varies from CL01 to 0.07 mm. 

They were originally referred to Zanthidlum , a genus 
of a living freshwater algae, by Ehrenburg in IS 36 . 
Subsequent investigators have noted similar elements 
from the Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, Jurassic, 
Cretaceous, Eocene and Miocene rocks. Merrill (l$95)> 
after Glaessner, considered similar forms found in 
Cretaceous flints from Texas as sponge spicules ( G-eo - 
dia). 










* 







< ' ■ t 


< + 


< c . . ’ .... ... 

t ■ * - t * ■ t 





t 


< •• ' C ! - 


t, 


<> 




- 45 - 


Other authors have suggested that they may be 
the spiny eggs of a marine Crustacea ( ova hispida )• 

0* Wetzel thinks they might be the unknown remains of 
organisms related to the dinoflagellates. Sisenack 
(193&)> after G-laessener, referred to the Hystrichos - 
phaerids as 11 cysts 11 . 

Remarks , The form illustrated in G-laessner, (Ref. 

17# pi. 3, fig. b, p. 49). Shows twenty spine-like 
projections on the species H. tubifera . It is also 
noted that their point of attachment to the main body 
is not confined to the outer peripheral margin. 
Measurement made of the drawing indicate that it 
has an overall diameter of 93 mu and the diameter 
of the irregular sphere-like center is 40 mu, and has 
projections 25-2S mu long. This indicates that this 
genus is somewhat smaller than the form from the Loon 
River formation. 

In general outline, Hystrichosphaera loonriveren - 
sls compares with the Forsminifera genus Vafahoeffenella 
Rhumbler 1905, family Astrorhizidae. (Cushman, Ref. 10, 
key plate 1, fig. 14). Its description is as follows: 
(Cushman, Ref. 10 p. 72) H Test free, consisting of 
a compressed central chamber with thin chitinous wall, 
the exterior a polygonal, peripheral, tubular cham¬ 
ber of sand grains with apertural tubes at the angles; 
apertures at ends of tubes. ■— Recent, particularly 

















X 











-46- 

the Antarctic. This genus is somewhat similar to 
an Astrorhiza with the outer material removed from 
the central disc, leaving the chitinous lining * 11 
Of the numerous specimens of H« loonriverensis examin¬ 
ed, no sand grains were evident, all were naked of 
foreign material* The size of Vanhoeffenella is 
also much larger than H. loonriverensis * 

Comments on Zygospore of a Desmid . 

A form illustrated by Bradley (Ref* J, pi* 23, 
fig. 4) from the Green River formation, has close 
similarity in size and shape to Hystrichosphaera 
loonriverensis n. sp. Bradley has tentatively designa¬ 
ted it as a Zygospore of a Desmid (?)* It consists of 
a central prolate spheroidal body from which six 
appendages project outward, the arrangement of 
which is not symmetrical* Measurements made of the 
illustration indicate that the diameter of the central 
body varies between 55 and 70 Overall diameter 

of the speciman is 90 mu., mean length of arm - like 
projections vary between 12 - 55 
Occurrences and Stratigraphic Range* 

This genus has been seen in microsuites of 
seven samples from the Loon River formation only* 
Holotype localities* 

Specimen 476-150-1, Peace River, Alberta, Sec* 

2 , Tp. 101, Range 20 , W* 5 th meridian, section 
station 175 # 55 feet above the water level of the 















-47- 


Peace River, Loon River shale, just below the 
Ammodiscus 411A subzone. 

Specimen 476-150-2, sample 476, section station 
175, 55 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec. 2, Tp. 101, Rge. 20, W. 5th meridian. 
Loon River shale, just below the Ammodiscus 411A 
subzone. 

Specimen 498-150-3, sample 496, section station 
180, 7 3/4 feet above the water level of the Peace 
River, Alberta, Sec. 29, Tp. 102, Rge. 21, W. 5th 
meridian. Loon River shale. 

Specimen 498-150-4, sample 498, section station 
180, 7 3/4 feet above the water level of the Peace 
River, Alberta, Sec. 29, Tp. 102, Rge. 21, W. 5th 
meridian, Loon River shale. Lower Cretaceous, just 
below the Ammodiscus 411A subzone. 

Holotypes . University of Alberta, Paleontological 
Type Collection. 


Phylum PTERILOPHYTA 
Family Polypodiaceae - Ferns 
Genus Woodsia 

Woodsia cf. scopulina D. C. Eaton, Canad. Nat. II. 
2: 91, 1865* (Abrams, Ref. 1, fig. 10, p. 6). 















9 lit.!" ; ;’Ci 


c ' 




Jpf 




t 




X S V 01 




■' od. 






£ J Si 








t '9.i 


I 


' 

% ■ 


IK . 


U'iK 




■" t 




c 


t 



* 

, I '' ’■ . . 









Fossil Indusium of a Fern cf, Woodsla. 

Hypotype specimen 6 2&- i 4-2>, Plate 2, figures 2 
and 3» 

Symmetry . Only portions of stellate pattern of indusium 
remain and therefore elements of symmetry are uncertain. 
Shape . Roughly elliptical in outline. Edge of margin 
is quite jagged, with suggestion that indusium was 
originally deeply cleft. Form is now shaped somewhat 
like a saucer. On concave side, near the center is a 
small circular ridge with a circular depression in its 
center. On the opposite, convex side, a thiekening 
occurs at the center which appears to have been the 
point of attachment of the indusium to the leaf*. 

Before flattening by compression form may have been 
more bowl shaped. 

Size, Diameter 320 to 560 mu. 

Color. Streaked bronze resinous color in reflected 
light. 

Ornamentation, Very finely venated, radiating out^^ 
from the point of attachment of the indusium, veins 
get finer towards the margin. The vein-like tracings 
are of two distinct sizes, 3^5 fine veins are 
interspaced between the coarser veins. Transmitted 
light reveals a faint and very fine reticulated 
surface with the lines radiating outward standing out 
in sharp contrast to the circular lines crossing them. 







i.'f: 1 . 1 


tzar's £ T C t) 1 ■ 


ic ,n locr 


-Tv. 






49< 


These circular lines are more like shadows and appear 
like faint growth rings, assumed to be the cell wall 
limits. 

Diagnostic features . 

Closely spaced radiating venate markings which 
extend to the outer margin and inward to the thick¬ 
ened center portion of the indusium. Distinct saucer 
shape, convex as seen from the proximal side, and 
concave on distal side. 

Coat . Very thin and composed of very fine granular, 
cutin-like substance. 

Affinity . This form is strikingly similar 
to the indusium, i* e., the thin membranous 
protective covering over the sori of some of the 
recent ferns, illustrated in Abrams, (Ref. 1, fig.10, 
p. 6). In this species ( Woodsla cf. scopullna ), the 
indusium is wholly inferior and has divisions which 
are stellate or spreading. The sori are dorsal, 
upon the veins, separate, not marginal. 

Remarks . Paratype specimens include fragments, one of 
which looks like portion of the baseuof indusium, 
another, consists of outer flange-like portion of an 
indusium. 

Occurrence . Holotype occurs in sample 628, from 


section station 220, from the Loon River shale. 








./ ) I x 


. 

'±c- W . i. • 





-50- 


Lower Cretaceous, approximately the same horizon as 
the Radiolarian ( Conostrobus . Artocapsa . Cyrtocapsa ) 
zone. Occurs 61 feet above the water level of the 
Peace River, Alberta, Sec. 17, Tp. 106, Rge. 16, W. 

5th meridian. 

Paratypes from sample 609, from section station 
211, from the Loon River shale. Lower Cretaceous, 

61 1/2 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec. 4, Tp* 105, Rge. 16, W. 5 th meridian . 

Genus: undetermined. 

Fern Sporangium (?) 

Specimen 2026-Bullock, Plate 5, Figure 5* 6, 7. 
Symmetry . A plane of symmetry parallel to length and 
coinciding with line of dehiscence. 

Shape . Side view outline is roughly an ellipse and 
equatorial plan view appears to have been circular or 
nearly so before compression on fossilization. In 
present fossilized state, it is considerably flattened 
in a plane containing the long axis. A circular 
indentation at one end appears to have been a 
point of attachment (proximal end), other end (distal), 
is more pointed, lacks the indentation, and is quite 
distinct from proximal end. Specimen is split long¬ 
itudinally down one side, from end to end, which is 
probably the line of dehiscence forming the opening 
through which spore content was dispersed. 







« ' ' ■ ■ • - v 

, _ . 

- - : 

* t * t v 

* 

•; - - • r.c-: « f - 

t * " 

r, : _. v r.‘ 'iv-' ';.o 'v ivi, xui-SVOcTx $ Xc 




: •; :j;-: V 




t ; X c 




*; . ' •••' - ; ■>- ' 



•i ill • 






.. 

* 


■ \ ■. ' fix 

i ri-. 

, 



xi.fec 



• sY: v\ r;, 


/' . 


• 



:\ci (Rcr -3 ! 



: 

tx 

(J . 

- 


. 











\ % ■ ■ ri 

t . . . / , ... t 


, 

. x ■ 

• . r-t;, ■ ■ )C< ;■ V V. '■ ■ p V.‘ < 

. 



51- 


Size, 

Maximum or longitudinal diameter a 757 niu. 
Equatorial diameter - 5^3 mu * 

Thickness of wall - 100 mu. 

Color, In thicker regions color is a medium amber 
yellow, areas where wall is thinner color is a 
light amber yellow. 

Ornamentation, Somewhat coarsely granular, rugose, in 
reflected and transmitted light, surface of sporangium 
has a coarse reticular structure which is the surface 
expression of large, closely spaced cells, making up 
sporangium wall. 

Sporangium wall . Wall is made up of large cells, 
spheroidal in shape, with their long axis perpendicular 
to the outer surface. Nine or ten of these cells 
can be seen arranged side by side along the line of 
dehiscence for almost the whole length of the specimen, 
O u ter surface of sporangium wall appears to be covered 
by a very thin granular exine. Composition of entire 
specimen appears cutinoua,* The surface expression of 
the large closely spaced cells of the wall is a 
reticulate pattern. 

Diagnostic features . Large size makes it easily visible 
to the unaided eye* Thick wall of the sporangium 
made up of large thick closely spaced cells. 

Remarks and Affinity , This specimen has a remarkable 












\ 



r 






-52- 


similarity to sporangia of modern ferns. A point of 
difference is the lack of a row of enlarged cells 
along one side which opens the sporangium when ripe, 
then snaps it shut and the ripened spores are cast 
out. Illustrations of Recent fern sporangia show 
the remainder of the wall as being comparatively 
thin. This fossil specimen has a wall that is uni¬ 
formly thick throughout. 

Occurrences and Stratigraphic Range • 

Seen only from one sample (202to-Bullock), from 
the base of the top Viking sand, basal Lloydminster 
shale, from the Imperial Sldorena #1 well, LSD 4, 

Sec. 27, Tp. 57 , Rge. 20, W. 4th meridian. 

H oletype . University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 

Class; Incertae sedis 

Sporang!toides n. genus 

In this thesis the form-genus Sporangitoldes 
is erected to include a group of cutinized micro¬ 
fossils which look like a sporangium, that is, a spore 
sac or spore cohtainer. Five distinct form species 
have been tentatively assigned to this form-genus 
and they are as follows; 

1. Sporangitoldes lentlculare n. sp. 

2 * S. glgantp iim n. sp. 

3 ® S. circulars n. sp. 

4. £>. ellipsoprolatum A n. sp. 

5 . S* mesoclrculare n, sp. 













r 


•> x 








r 





Lx.. XD 


i, 




■ 2 ‘* 




■j 






r r 


t. 







-53- 


Sporangitoides giganteum is hereby designated 
as the genotype* Specimens of this genus all appear 
to be composed of the same substance which has a 
somewhat waxy or resinous lustre and is translucent 
to light* The color varies from a light straw yellow 
to an amber yellow as seen in reflected and trans¬ 
mitted light. Thinner specimens and thinner portions 
of the same specimen appear lighter in color than the 
thicker portions. 

Size . Size range for this form generic group varies 
from 1.5 mm. for the genotype down to 0.2 mm. Form 
species within this group from restricted geographic 
localities and stratigraphic horizons appear to 
be relatively constant in size. 

Symmetry . Disregarding irregularities, the form species 
tentatively assigned to this for^genus can be re¬ 
ferred to two types of symmetry. Those forms of 
disc-like, flattened circular outline show approx- 
mate radial symmetry in one plane and those of thin 
and broad lenticular shape-outlines show a bilateral 
symmetry as seen in plan view of broad side and 
edge view. 

Shape Outline . The shape outline of some form species 
varies considerably from the genotype but is relat¬ 
ively constant for form species. Basically, two shape pattern 

















— 

.■ ._.. ... 

t-v ■ * : ' :. : 

.. .. • :j. t ; . . a'ra C -1c' .’<• ;;^r'Ci^OO c’X C$ 

. i ' 

?;3o:.. oIl'VT IS. 17 >0?“ -'..V 0 

■ t 7 ,M. i •. ' - *x . .. . Id - Jj.: iX ■ . ,• . Xi 

^:v X. 7..1* icloo .t:.i: !■'-■.!: r *xe©qg£*- i*e/- Xoccu.: e.dt r ic 

, . •: •" "X 

, .. . ■ . ... 
oxx os ■ < •• l 

ca r .. . . : 7' i'T.or ohj vX m- w^xtXXx-C'Oi 

* ^ - 

t ' ' ■ ’ 1 : . -XX^XXX-X . 

- - e.i ‘xoi axrUt nri ban:; i Y ^-'’ v ' J Xn ;Xa. b 

• , £ 

< 

' 

-X. Jj7 Jf,i f •:,/ nO'IjC .'isX.l&nOD Sei/trV 

♦ ■: . f -, ■ .. ,. - 







-54- 


ouf/zne outhn e 

are represented, a lenticular^and a circular* S. giganteum 
(genotype), S. lenticulare * and S. ellipsoprolatum are form 
species representative of the lenticular shape outline and S. 
circulare and S. mesocirculare are form species representative 
of the circular plan outline. A very narrow, elongate, thin- 
lenticular form, resembling somewhat a flattened spindle is 
represented by S. lenticulare and S. giganteum . They are 
morphologically similar but differ markedly in size, 
as S. giganteum is approximately twice that of S. lenticulare . 
These thin-lenticular form species have a length to width ratio 
which varies between 3.2 and 5.6 to 1. 

A form of much broader lenticular outline has 
been tentatively designated as S. ellipsoprolatum. 

The length to width ratio of this form species varies 
between 2.1 and 2.24 to 1. 

All forms assigned to this generic group are 
quite thin compared to length and width measurements 

which could be attributed to compression since burial. 

Coat and ornamentation . Two form species within this 
form genus, S. ellipsoprolatum and S. circulare . are 
forms which are essentially thin membranous coats 
that appear like flattened sacs. Very few of these 
two forms have been split which may be interpretated 
as caused by compression or it may be a dehiscent 
feature. Original form was probably spheroidal for 
S. circulare and of prolate spheroidal design for S. 















_ .. . ' » 

, * < , , , 

. ' f • . ■' /X ■: ■ ; 

0 . 

.r-.: , ■• x . ;.r: r:.; l '.: 

«• ' <J r • j 

. . 

c . ■- i: :> x, " , : •;.C . ;:,.r «„• 1.. V xci 

..... ... 

■- 'c c - \*x ijr jjy .'; 

■ U- .U/f, i I i;d , in 'lc ro< '1 ■■ ' 

- A 

. . 

. 

. 

» - • • ‘ ' . : > : . ■: , h ■ .. . . 

■ 

«. . ^ * c • 

• m 

,. ■. 

■ ' , 1 ' ■ J J. :• L;Vv , : , /•’ '< ■' X " .. J' 

• : _ _ ^ , _ 










- 55 * 

elllpsoprolata . Evidence for such an assumption is 
based on the frequent observation of folds and 
wrinkles and as they are not constant in design 
they are not a part of the ornamentation of the sac- 
like membrane. 

Another rare form consisting of a coat only and 
assigned to this generic group has been tentatively- 
named S. mesocirculare . It is somewhat disc-shaped, 
subcircular in plan view, with one side concave 
and the opposite convex* Faint circular spherical 
impressions are frequently seen on the concave side, 
which appear to have been formed by spheroidal masses 
or spores before dehiscence and dispersal. The line 
of dihiscence coincides with the outer peripheral 
margin or circumference of form. 

In contrast to the ajbove forms which appear 
thin, membranous and sac-like, are two form species 
which have a more solid, filled-out appearance. These 
have been tentatively designated J3. lenticulare 
and £[. glganteum (genotype). M 0 st specimens of these Matter 
two above form species have a contained thickened rib 
of sporogenous tissue extending longitudinally down 
the medial portion from end to end of specimens. The 
exterior coat appears thin and of very fine granular 
texture. 






. ' . . . . 

:T 1 7 ' . ■ ;,t . • /; 7 7C ff 'V.C7; V- .;-J 

«■ 

. Vl-.io 7-/77 .;■> 7.3 ■ 1 '773 0 7 7\<77 ^Iv*l 'ied-ZOtt. 


"■ 7 0 u- ■ ■■.-.77 7 7 j eno !: 'rv.i 

. 

- *. .. 7 0 , . .7 . 

- . 7 .’ ■ ..' ... ■. .. 7 7.7.7.' . 7 ■ 0 .... j 'iO 




• 3 - t • • • . •, .. . ■ t ... 

7 ■■ i’ K : 7 . . . . .. 

1 - j •£ ,r 7 

„ 

' 

' ‘ ' . 

‘ ■ . 

7 ■ n.r ' "7 ■ < •: - ' 7-,:; 7 77'. 


-5b- 


Globular, spheroidal masses, slightly flattened, 
are seen contained inside the coat of all form species 
of this form generic group except S. mesoclrculare . 
They vary in size within the same specimen and from 
specimen to specimen, and have a slight preferential 
arrangement parallel to length and/or very roughly 
parallel to circumference of circular forms* In some 
cases they are doubtfully interpretated as cells, 
but in the main the writer thinks that they are 
fossilized globules of some oily or fatty substance^ 
The surface expression of the contained globules, 
is a warty or pimple-like appearance. 

As all the forms are translucent, internal and 
external features are seen superimposed on one another 
which show up as light and dark areas as seen with 
transmitted light* 

Small, dark colored, opaque spheres were seen in 
one specimen only of 3* giganteum . The specimen when 
teased apart with a sharpened needle revealed spheres 
seen embedded in the medial mass ofsporegenous tissue. 

Many specimens of 3. giganteum and B. lenticulare 
show a partial splitting apart along the outer edge, 
into two halves, which frequently is seen to be 
sheared laterally like the open blades of a pair 
of scissors so that the specimen roughly resembles 
a letter w Y f! * 






< 




. 


ono no 


h •; l :. 


:I;p I: 


Bfij; o':;.: 
,1 i 6 ,0 ill 



51 * 


Size Statistics for Sporang!toides l entlculare n. sp. 

Graphs in histogram form reveals that IS out 
of the 26 specimens considered from this Loon River 
shale range in length between 5^0 and 720 mu. 

Within tills n greatest frequency” concentration, 3 
out of the IS range in size between 700 and 720 mu. 

Considering width, 16 out of the 26 specimens 
are between 125 and 1?0 mu. Three out of 16 are 
between 150 and 155 mu. 

Taking 6S0 as the weighted mean length and 152 
mu as the weighted mean width results in a length 
to width proportion of 4.5 to 1 . 





■ 

, 

; ... , ( •. 0 . 

\ \. ... .. • a'V i 'a.a: ^ ?*:. r:JLt>e- % , &' cl; : ai. t 

s .. 7 a -a . ; ... .. l . 

i*’ <aa:a: •, a; 'aaa a -"a . • : - a.; 1 L . S a.a',,J 

.. 0 7 / . 0- A i .. -o .a. • a. , a ,.i Sa7 *0 ZiJ 




. t ... • 


. 

cl 


, : 


3 . 









C. . 


a a . v . ,i, .. 




a' 



~ 5 &- 

Size Measurements of Sporangitoides lentloulare n. sp , 


Specimen 

Length 

Width 

Thick] 


(mu) 

(mu) 

(mu 

623-100 

640 

145 

36 

666 -SO 

215 

247 

18.5 

422-100 

622 

206 

16.6 

531-150 

6p9 

157 


0I5-I2O 

b47 

152 

10 . 5 , 

0 14-150 

622 

108 


017-lOOA 

715 

150 

10 

0 I 7 -IOOB 

700 

191 


627-100 

819 

181 

10 

639-20 

667 

162 


654-100 

078 

134 


476-150 

860 

121 


665-100 

215 

149 


665-20 

720 

261 


610-100A 

472 

I 85 


610-100B 

590 

232 


542-150A 

548 

137 


542 - 150 B 

458 

158 


542-1500 

484 

126 


611-120-2 

573 

167 


611-120-9 

660 

153 


611-120-10 

6 75 

150 


607 - 150-1 

568 

116 


607 - 150-2 

550 

100 


607 - 150-3 

457 

135 


607 - 150-4 

610 

126 



Length of stem 24b 











- 59 - 


Sporangitoldes circulare n. sp. 

Plate 2, Figure 9* 10. 

Plate 5, Figure 1, 2, 3, 3, 9, 10,12, 13, 15 . 

Symmetry . Approximate radial symmetry in one plane. 
Shape. Comparatively large, roughly circular very 
flattened disc which was probably nearly spherical 
in shape before compression. In present state shows 
no proximo-distal orientation preference. Some spec¬ 
imens show a slight thickening around the periphery. 
Size. 


Speciman 

Max, Diam. 

Min. Diam. 

Thickness 2 

480-30 

430 

416 

19.5 Holotype, pi. 5, 

fig. 9, 10. 

481-80 

Mean diam. 

- 470 

7 Hypotype, pi. 2, 

fig. 9, 10, pi. 5 

fig. 8. 

475-20 

500 

384 

Hypotype, pi. 5, 

fig. 1, 2, 3. 

628-48-1 

53 s 

523 

Hypotype 

2036 

(Bullock) 

237 . 

623 

Hypotype pi. 5, 

fig. 12. 

Spirit R. 

710 

655 

Not illus. 

specimens 

615 

575 

Not illus. 


(All measurements in microns). 











- 60 - 


Specimens of Sporangitoides circulare from the 
Loon River shale vary in size between a maximum 
diameter measurement of 507 mu an ^- a m inimum of J&k- mu * 
Thickness not diagnostic as dependent upon extent of 
compression. 

Color. Thin areas a light amber yellow and in 
thickened folded areas color darkens to an amber 
yellow. 

Ornamentation. Distinct surface ornamentation is lack¬ 
ing. Thickened ridges are not a part of the outer 
surface ornamentation but appears to have been 
formed by fortuitous folding of coat. 

Coat, Thin, eutinatiS,^ pluricellular (?), membranous, 
in the form of a flattened disc. Cellular structure 
of the coat is sometimes revealed by transmitted light. 
Thickened portions seem to cone the light forming a 
rough reticulated surface pattern of light and dark. 

Few specimens show a longitudinal line of dehiscence, 
coat then appear as two halves, joined at one end 
which presumably is the proximal end or point of 
attachment. 

Diagnostic features . Size seems relatively constant 
for those forms occurring in the Loon Rive£ formation. 
Peace River area, Alberta. They always appear sac- 
like, cutinous, , membranous, with the coat made up 
of numerous closely spaced circular cells. There is 
no distinctive geometric pattern to the arrangement 
of cells. 










' V . : , : - . o I 


i’-ij 


■ 











. 



0 .1 r i .. 


0 




% 


K f 




* 




, a 







< 




% •• 


r 


i r j. 






- 61 - 


Affinity . These forms have not been found attached 
and although they appear sac-like, that is, like a 
sporangium, no spore content was ever definitely seen, 
Holotype locality # Specimen 480-80, sample 480, section 
station 175, 25 feet above the water level of the 
Peace River, Alberta, Sec* 2, Tp. 102, Rge. 19, 

W. 5th meridian. Loon River shale, approximately 
equivalent to the Ammodiscus 411A subzone. 

Hyp§type localities # Specimen 481-80, section 

175, sample 481, 22 feet above the water level of 
the Peace Eiver, Alberta, Sec. 2, Tp. lOg, Bg@. 1|, 

W. 5th meridian. Loon River shale. 

Specimen 475-80, sample 475, section station 
175, 48 feet above the water level of the Peace 
River, Alberta, Sec. 2, Tp. 102, Rge. 19, W. 5th 
meridian. Loon River shale. 

Specimen 628-48, section station 220, sample 
628, 61 feet above the water level of the Peace 
River, Alberta, Sec. 17, Tp. 106, Rge. 16, W. 5th 
meridian. Loon River shale, approximately equivalent 
to the Radiolarian ( Cyrtocapsa . Artocapsa . Conostrobus ) 
zone. 

Specimen 2036-48 (Bullock), from Imperial 
Eldorena #1 well, Edmonton area, Alberta, LSD 4, 

Sec. 27, Tp. 57, Rge. 20, W. 4th meridian, from the 
bottom part of the shale zone separating the upper 
and lower Viking sands in the lower Lloydminster shale. 













,)J'./ -S 



cm 




t 












* 




c 


+r,- , 


? 


a. 


: < 






■r. j;- ;■ 


or 


H9K 


:’.. . _ 


J* S V C *J... o d >' 


t 


c 




t 


i 








LU 


l 



0x9 






o 




. 


J C 




* - 

, ■' ■ ■ )< .n • •• 

t t IJ 1 

- <! * \ t - C • * 


. - \ i: . ■.... a ■. r? J ' -j :. : 0“ M'"' ■ • 

iO't' .‘•tcIJ mm cl. .: * j if n i: ■; a •?. Ci.t:LtV r i9v.»cX hrit 



-62- 


Specimens from 3pirit River area, Second White 
Specks, Turonian age. 

Holotype and H ypotypes . University of Alberta, Micro- 
paleontological Type Collection. 

Sporangitoides lenticulare n. sp. 

Plate 3 , fig. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10,11. 

Plate£, fig. 1, 4, 5. 

Plate 4, fig. 3, b. 

Proposed Holotype, specimen 6 S 3 -IOQ. 

Plate 3# Figure 5* 7® 

Symmetry . Disregarding irregularities, specimen may be 
referred to a longitudinal axis of four-fold symmetry, 
and two longitudinal planes of symmetry. 

Shape . In transverse plan view, thin elongate, or 
thin lenticular. Length i width : thickness - 19 i 
4.2 : 1, length : width - 4.4 : 1. In shape outline 
it may be compared to a narrow leaf, pointed at both 
ends. One end is terminated by two sides, convex outward, 
meeting at a point, the other end is terminated by 
sides concave outward meeting at a point. The latter 
end is arbitrarily considered by the writer to be the 
point of attachment or proximal end, assuming of 
course, that the form was attached. 









-63 1 


Size , 

Length - 640 mu 

Width = 145 mu 

Thickness - Jk- mu (33*6 mu) 

Col or, Straw yellow in thinner portions, darkening 
to an amber yellow in thicker portions. 

Ornamentation , Distinct external surface ornamen¬ 
tation of outer coat is absent. In plan view a 
thickened irregular rib extends down the center from 
end to end. Transmitted and reflected light reveals 
closely spaced, flattened, sphere-like cells or fossil¬ 
ized globules of fats or oils. The latter suggestion 
is probably the more correct because they seem to 
portray no consistent geometric arrangement which 
they probably would have if they were cells. There 
is however a slightly preferred orientation of 
these globular masses parallel to length. The sur¬ 
face expression of these contained globules is a warty 
appearance. These thickened areas cones transmitted 
light and stand out quite clearly as seen against 
a white background. The thickened longitudinal 
center is interpretated as a concentration of sporoo¬ 
genous tissue. The globules in this speciman vary in 
diameter from IS to 45 mu. 

Coat. Is comparatively thin, fine granular, cutinous- 
like substance. 






t.: 


. 




1 :*": u 







Oil 




<) :) 



- 64 - 


Diagnostic features « Shape : length : width ratio 
is relatively uniform from specimen to specimen. 
Thickness is the most variable of the measurements. 
Thickened longitudinal rib is present in most spec¬ 
imens although it is not always confined to the 
center. Central rib is located off to one side in 
a few specimens. 

Holotype locality . Specimen 683-100, sample 683, 
section station 251, 39 feet above the water level of 
the Peace River, Alberta, Sec. 23, Tp. 107, Rge. 15, 

W. 5th meridian. Loon River shale, about 12 feet above 
the Radiolarian ( Cyrtocapsa . Artocapsa . Conostrobus ) 
zone. 

Holotype . University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 

Sporangitoides lenticular© n. sp. var. A. 

Hypotype Specimen 666-80, 

Plate 4, Figure 3, 4, 6. 

This specimen shows a line of dehiscence along 
the outer edge. It is partially open and spread apart 
slightly like the blades of a pair of scissors. This 
is a common feature seen in specimens of Sporangitoide s 
lenticulare and S. giganteum . 

Size . 

Length = 815 mu 
Width = 247 mu 
Thickness = 18.5 mu 
















,ri. p 






-65- 


Shape 

Length : width : thickness - 22.7 • 7*5 • 1* 
length : width - 3*3 * 1. A thickened longitudinal 
rib of sporogenous tissue on the inside extends from 
end to end. Two distinct sizes of cells or spherical 
globules are seen. Mean diameter of larger globules 
60 mu and mean diameter of the smaller globules or 
cells - 29 mu. 

Color . Light yellow, darker in the thicker areas. 

Remarks .Softens slightly in water and acids. 

Coat . Appears to be thinner near the outer flange™ 
like edge. 

Hypotype locality . From sample 666, section station 
241, 76 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec. 20, Tp. 107, Rge. 15, W. 5th meridian, 
Loon River shale. 

Hypotype . .University of Alberta, Micropaleontologieal 
Type Collection. 

Sporangltoides lenticulare n, sp. Var. B. 

Hypotype Specimen 6l4 - 150 . 

Plate 5* Figure 14. 

This specimen is unique in having an extra appen¬ 
dage attached to one end, which is tapered and made 
up of S or 9 segments or divisions. The camera 











I 


t 


t 







!i ti 


t 


—66*-' 


luci&a drawing illustrating this speciman is an inter¬ 
pretive, diagrammatic in part, reconstruction* 

Size * 

Overall length = 866 mu 
Length of appendage = 2^8 mu 
Length of body proper = 628 mu 
Width of sporangium - 108 mu 
Length : width = 5.3 : 1 

Hypotype locality * From sample 614, from section station 
211, 39 1/2 feet above the water level of the Peace 
River, Alberta, Sec. l ? Tp. 105, Rge* 16, W. 5 th 
meridian. Loon River shale. 

Hypotype . University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 

Sporangitoldes lenticulare n. sp, var. G. 

Hypotype Speciman 627-100 
Plate 3 , Figure 9, 10, 11. 

The camera lucida drawings illustrating this 
form were done during the early stages of this work 
when the writer first began to examine them critically. 
Two of the drawings, pi. 3, fig. 9, 10, illustrate 
the surface features as seen in reflected light. In 
transmitted light and against a white background, 
internal structure is seen, interpretated and a 










tentative reconstruction given. Solid lines indicate 
structure that is distinct and easily seen. In the 
thicker center portions where structure is less dis¬ 
tinct internal structural interpretation is given by 
dotted lines, pi. fig. 11 . 

The central thickened sporogenous tissue stands 
out as a dark shadow extending from end to end of the 
speciman. This central mass consists of flattened 
spherical masses arranged in line and joined and for 
end. Each side of the central mass is bordered by the 
outer coat which forms a thin flange-like projection 
tapering to a point alt each end. In transmitted 
light very small sphere-like masses can be seen 
superimposed on the much larger spheroidal structures. 

Size . 

Length = 819 mu 

Width - 180 mu 

Thickness - 10 mu 

Length : width : thickness « 81.9 ; lg : 1 . 

Length : width - 4.5 : 1 

Hypotype locality . From sample 627, section station 
220, 67 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec. 17, Tp. 106, Rge. 16^ 

Loon River shale. 


W. 5 th meridian. 











% 




Hypotype. University of Alberta, Mieropaleontological 
Type Collections. 

Sporangltoldes lenticulare n. sp, var. D. 

Hypotype Specimen 4912- 100 A (Wetter). 

Plate 3, Figure 1, 2, 3. 

Symmetry . Form can be referred to an approximate 
longitudinal axis of four-fold symmetry and two 
planes of symmetry passing through the longitudinal 
axis. 

Size, 

Length s 613 mu 
Maximum width = 191 mu 
Maximum thickness ” 61 mu. 

Color, Medium to dark amber or resinous yellow. 

Shape, Thin elongate or thin-lenticular in plan view. 
Length ; width : thickness - 10 : : 1, 

Length : width - 3»2 : 1, 

One end is distinctly more pointed than the other. 

Form is quite robust, filled-out, A distinct 

thickened ridge extends from end to end parallel to 

the length, maximum width of this thickened ridge is 

121 mu. In transmitted light it is seen to consist of 

closely spaced comparatively large fossilized spore- 

genous tissue and what looks like globules of oil or 

fat. Some of these could be spores (?), Assuming more blunt- 









f-: 





- 69 - 


end to be proximal and opposite end as distal. 
Ornamentation of outer coat . Slightly wrinkled (rug¬ 
ose). Surface expression of contained spherical 
globules is slightly raised bumps which have a general 
linear arrangement parallel to length. 

Remarks o This is the thickest specimen of Sporangitoides 
lenticulare studied. 

Hypotype locality . About 65 feet above the base of the 
fish scale sand zone (Cenomanian), St. John formation, 
at locality A, on Septimus Creek, British Columbia, 
in Sec. 20, Tp. 28, Rge. 18, W. 8th meridian. (Ref. 6, 
Wetter). 

Hypotype . University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 

Sporangitoides lenticulare n. sp., var. D. 

Hypotype specimen 4912-100-B (Wetter) 

Plate 2, Figure 1, 4, 5. 

Size . 

Length = 667 mu 

Maximum width = 152 mu 

Maximum thickness = 45 mu 

Cell or globular mass measurements: 

Maximum diameter = 52 mu 
Minimum diameter = 19 mu 














* > 5 f'l'. ' v ■ i. .U Y.I.: . Cd X, 10 

■ *£.- .-..lL 

• ; * 

... 0'-, m..,'- aen-jLitf Luc-.J.vI.tr r ;T;j:Ia ai aeludolp, 

*. ; . . ' 0 ... . .:.... Y l. 

*. . . _ 

* .£. 

. 

„; ,. ^ . : ■;' . ,, , : " Yy .: 

,, ■ ? J i. ■ . - 

t ■ * . ; * t * < 

* ■ .;...2_ 

«. .. __... „ _...;... ^_ 

(y:d; n->;:) .0* ■ Y>. 0, £ iYYmi;:.YK y oav/O', yH 

*• t ■ <■ t 

' */ £. ;... . 

m V 00 = if^grn-ul 

!,•:> . 3 1 as . ; 5 YV .,L,jjY,X;. 

’ m: f v’-v- eaern;oxfld wmuy yy 

5 

SS .0: S : . -= ‘ j. •; t D C Jjb X b W- • t Ai £X£\t 
•■••• 'I.:. ... ■:id- 


,.r o x 





-70- 


Length : width : thickness =15*5 : 3*5 : !• 

Length : width = 4.4 s 1* 

Shape o Narrow, elongate, both ends gently tapered, 
terminated by rounded ends, one end more blunt than 
the other. For proximo-distal orientation assuming 
blunt end to be proximal, or point of attachment and 
opposite end as proximal. Side peripheral edges 
quite sharp which coincides with line of dehiscence. 
In many of the Loon River specimens, edge is fre¬ 
quently flange-like, in contrast to those from the St. 
John formation which are in most specimens comp¬ 
aratively much thicker. 

This specimen also exhibits a central thickened 
rib extending from end to end longitudinally. 

Coat . Slightly rugose, made up of very fine granular 
cutinous-like material as seen in reflected light. 

Hypotype locality . About 65 feet above the base of 
the fish scale sand zone, Cenomanian, St. John form¬ 
ation, at locality A, on Septimus Creek, British 
Columbia, in Sec. 20, Tp. 28, Rge. 18, W. 8th merid¬ 
ian. 


Hypotype . University of Alberta, Paleontological 
Type Collection. 







1 


„ . ■ ; , . 

* , * 

t f ■. v * ‘ c 


. . .. ••• 

' ' < ; 

• . 

:: • • .•" . .[. . v i. ■•<: c. / v.ua '■ is* 


< .•' 

0 & l i - ■ 

*■ ■■ 

:::j . < i i.r,;' -.r-. .■ ;9Aij;. >:• 

* 

, s • 8 */ _ ■ 

„ & 

* c , • ; 

r « 

* ? * , 7i , C 

, •• ■ ' ■ * ■_ __ 

* : 


t 



-71- -*?- 


Sporangi toides giganteum n # sp. 

Plate 3, Figure 4, 8, 12. 

Sporangitoides giganteum n. sp. 

Proposed Holotype Specimen B-70-6 (Bahan) 

Plate 3, Figure 8, 12. 

Symmetry . Before dehiscence form can be referred to 
two approximate planes of symmetry and a longitudinal 
axis of four-fold symmetry. 

Shape . Unusually large when compared to S. lenticulare . 
In plan view it is thin elongate or thin lenticu¬ 
lar, may be compared to a flattened spindle. Tapers 
to a rounded termination at both ends. This specimen 
has dehisced, that is, split apart along the outer 
edges for about 4/5 of its total length, the two 
halves are still attached together at one end. At 
the opposite end the two halves have been sheared 
laterally, like the blades of a pair of scissors. 

Its present shape outline may be compared to a rough 
letter Y. 

Size . 

Length = 1580 mu 

Width of specimen before dehiscence = 324 mu 
Diameter of globules = 85.6 mu 
Diameter of smaller globules or cells of 
outer wall - 21 mu 
Thickness = 113 mu 

Length : width : thickness = 14 : 2.9 : 1<* 

Length : width = 4.9 : 1* 










T* 


f . 5; ■ v . 

* - c ■ , 

• ' - . ' - : 

* : .■ ", ; - ;v> : . o \ 

. ' 4 _ 

* 

. 

«C ' t . : ' ' ■ M A ■ 

- . ■ • . i u: A • •- : A : A : : : \t.-i I $ AAA ■ A, oSVi j,-,i 

... .' ' 

* : .' ' . A • "• ■: : • c A 'I 'A*. I 

00*1 * A 

* 

. . 

* 

. 

A-A If « II v A T-J^XTC 

" 

*•' - i A A ~ o vA\. ■ j ; aIA,-.- 2 

.. • : 



73" 


Ornamentation and structure . 

Where corrosion has not obliterated structure, 
on both the inner and outer sides of the sporangium 
can be seen spherical globular masses of two general 
sizes. The smaller flattened spheres appear to be 
a part of the sporangium wall which are very closely 
spaced and have a general arrangement parallel to 
length. The larger flattened sphere-like masses have 
less regular distribution and are confined more to the 
medial area. The larger spherical indentations and 
raised flattened spheres appear like fossilized oil 
globules or part of the contained sporogenous mass* 

Color . Straw to amber yellow* 

Coat , Is distinctly seen when specimen is placed on 
edge. At a magnification of X105, it; appears to be 
quite thin and membranous® 

Diagnostic features . It compares closely in general 
morphology to S, lenticulare , occurring in the Loon 
River shale, but is considerably larger, S. glganteum 
is twice the average length of S* lentieulare ® 

Holotype locality . From the Pelican sand, 15 feet from 
the base, Athabaska River, Alberta, 1 mile below 
Wheel Rapids, on the east bank at the apez of sharp 
"V H band in the riyer, Sec. lb, Tp. gl, Rge. I7 
W, Lth. meridian. 















c 


t 


4 





Holotype. University of Alberta, Micropaleobotanical 
Type Collection* 


Sporangltoldes gigantem n. sp. var. A. 

Hypotype Specimen 2026 (Bullock) 

Plate 3> Figure 4* 

This specimen has been teased apart, split in 
half along the two lines of dehiscence. Inside, 
embedded in the medial mass of sporogenous tissue 
are small black colored spheres, which appear pyritized. 
Semispherical cavities can be semi where spheres have been 
dislodged from position by teasing with a sharpened 
needle. A thickened sporogenous tissue is confined to 
the medial inside half of the sporangium. In complete 
specimens it is this same mass which forms the thickened 
rib extending from end to end and parallel to length. 

The spheres when examined under higher magnification 
(X3S0) appear to have a very faint spiral line extend¬ 
ing around the sphere from pole to pole. 'The writer 
makes this latter statement with reservation because 
it was seen so indistinctly. These spheres are pre¬ 
sumably spores. 


Size 


Width of sporangium - 30? mu 
Diameter of sphere - 3^ mu 







rt- of.»' X 












-75- 


Compariaon. 

These spheres (spores ?) are larger than the 
smaller flattened spheres and slightly less than one half 
as large as the larger spheres in the holotype specimen. 

Col or. Thin areas of sporangium is a dirty yellow, in 
thicker areas it is a dirty amber yellow. 

Hypotype locality . From the top of the shale zone 
separating the upper and lower Viking sands, Lloydmin- 
ster shale. Imperial Elaorena #1 well, Alberta, L8D 4, 
Sec. 27, Tp. Rge. 20, W. 4th meridian. 

Sporangitoldes ell ip so pro la W gi. so. 

Plate 2, Figure 6, 7, 5. 

Plate 4, Figure 1, 2, 4 , 7* 

Plate 5i Figure 4, 11. 

Proposed Holotype Specimen 
Plate 4, Figure 1, 5» 

Symmetry . Bilateral symmetry. 

Size . 

Longitudinal diameter - 607 mu 
Equatorial diameter - 304 mu 
Thickness - 44 mu. 

Shape. Is similar to a flattened lemon. Plan view of 
broad side is broad lenticular or ellipse-like. The 
elliptical outline has a length to width ratio of 
approximately 2 to 1* Before flattenning by compression 









t > 1, t l 




-76- 


shape was probably very similar to that of a filled 
out lemon* Edge view shows that specimen has been 
compressed to a thickness of about one cell. 

Coat and ornamentation . Using transmitted light, 
internal structure is seen to consist of numerous 
closely spaced fossilized oil or fat globules or cells. 
This structural feature is seen with difficulty using 
a binocular microscope with reflected lighting. There 
is no regular geometric distribution or arrangement 
to the cell-like or globular masses. Irregular 
ridges and troughs of the outer coat is interpreted 
as compression folds, it appears to consist of a 
fine granular cutinous substance which is thin and 
membranous. When teased with a needle, coat is tough 
and somewhat springy. It is softened very slightly 
by the application of water, acids, and bases. 

Color . A light amber or straw yellow. 

Remarks . This form resembles an elongated, flattened 
spindle, sac-like container and for this reason the 
writer assumes it to be a sporangium. Only one sped- 
man was seen to have a line of dehiscence along one 
side which could also be interpreted as a split caused 
by compression. The writer has never been able to 
obtain distinct tangible evidence of a spore content 
as was obtained for S. giganteum . 








f r 


r 

■ 






. 


r 


t 





f r 















■iiV ■; a/ron-'- 

1 i J J SI' ' 


C\ n i Q r 




*£ . Ci 1 


c 









; ; ,Cc( 


u 0 ■■ 




77- 


Hypotype locality . From sample 475# section station 
175# 47 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec. 11, Tp. 102, Rge. 19*W. 5 th meridian. 

Loon River shale, approximately equivalent to the 
bottom part of the Haplophragmoldes 424 zone. 

Sporangitoides ell ip so pr plata n» sp. Var. A. 
Hypotype Specimen £> 05-80 
Plate 2, Figure 6, 7# 8* 

Symmetry. Bilateral, if specimen was not damaged at 
one end. 

Size, 

Longitudinal diameter - 7^3 mu 
Equatorial diameter - 3^8 rou 
Maximum thickness of sporangium - 76 mu 
Diameter of top, largest sori impression - 76 mu 
Diameter of the smallest and center sori - 109 mu 
Diameter of the bottom sori " 117 mu 

Color . Light to dirty yellow. 

Shape . Plan view outline of flat side is broad lenti¬ 
cular somewhat like a v w ery flattened ellipse with a 
length to width proportion of 2.24 to 1, Edge view 
of sporangium is very thin elongate. Original shape 
was probably spindle-like and similar to a sac-like 
container, gently tapered at both 











< . X * 



{ 







o 


Ornamentation and other markings on jcoat* 

Camera lucida drawing pi. 2, fig. 6, shows 
carbonaceous fragment of a parallel venated leaf 
impressed on the outer surface of the sporangium wall. 
Near the upper right hand side of the leaf fragment 
is a distinct circular depression, the one beneath is 
a slightly raised impression and the one above is seen 
as a very faint shadow Outline. These comparatively 
large circular markings are interpretated as being the 
sori of a fern leaf. The fern leaf and sporangium were 
superimposed on one another and pressed together during 
fossilization. 

The small cellscf the sporangia if they are 
cells, stand out like small warts or pimples. They 
have a general distribution parallel to the length of 
the sporangia The outer surface coat is minutely 
granulose showing little folding and appears cutinous 
in substance. At some places along the outer periphery 
sporangium wall is more translucent than medial areas. 

Hypotype locality. 

From sample 665 , section station 241, S3 i feet 
above the water level of the Peace River, Alberta, Sec. 
20, Tp. 107, Range 15, W.5th meridian. Loon River shale. 
Hypotype . University of Alberta, Mieropaleontological 
Type Collection. 









Sporangltoldes elllpsoprolatu ^n* sp 
Hypotype Specimen 480-100 
Plate 5# Figure 4, 11. 


Size, 

Longitudinal diameter = 666 mu 
Equatorial diameter - 326 mu 
Thickness - £4 mu 
Length : width - 2.04 : 1. 

Remarks , This specimen is illustrated by two camera 
lucida drawings of the same side, PI, 5* fig. shows 
the externa,! surface coat features indicating the promi¬ 
nent folds formed by compression. By lowering the plane 
of focus and using transmitted light, internal structural 
features are noted and an attempt made to illustrate 
them, pi* fig. 11. Internally it is seen to be 
made up of numerous closely spaced flattened globules* 

Hypotype locality . From sample 480, section station 
175* 23 i feet above the water level of the Peace 
River, Alberta, Sec. 11, Tp. 102, range, 19, W. 5 th. 
meridian. Loon River shaJLe. 

Hypotype . University of Alberta. Micropaleontoicgical 
Type Collection. 









i: 




- 80 - 

Sporangltoides elllpsoprolatift n A n. sp. Var* 13. 

Hypotype Specimen B-71-1C ( Bahan) 

Plate 4, Figure 2, 7, 8. 

Symmetry - Approximately bilateral. 

Size . 

Longitudinal diameter = 9&0 mu 
Equatorial diameter - 457 mu 
Maximum thickness - 88 mu 

Mean diameter of the larger spherical globules = 47 mu 
Mean diameter of the smaller spherical globules, 
cells (?) - 24 mu. 

Length : width “ 2.14:1. 

Shape . Plan view of flattened side is broad lenticular. 
Rounded tapered ends with one and sharper than the 
other. Blunter end is considered as proximal or 
point of attachment and sharper end is considered distal. 
Edge view shows that specimen has been considerably com¬ 
pressed. 

Structure , ornamentation and other markings . 

Both flattened sides exhibit pronounced folding 
of the thin, fine granular, cutLnous coat. Outer 
surface is covered with closely spaced Irregularly 
distributed raised spherical protuberances, like 
numerous pimples. This seems to be the surface 
expression of the outer coat containing the spherical 
masses within. Their substance does not seem to differ 













t I 


l. 







f; : r, ,'!• 




C 


c o 




from the outer coat. The larger spherical masses 
contain smaller spheres within them. As the light 
source is moved it is noted that the sphere outlines 
change position slightly, indicating that thickened 
areas has a coning effect upon the light rays. 

Line of dihescence probably coincides with 
sharp line of folding along circumference of specimen. 

Color . Thinner portions more translucent and a light 
straw yellow, tending to a darker almost amber color 
in the thicker less translucent portions. 

Comparison . Shape is similar to, but is considerably 
larger than similar forms occurring in the Loon River 
shale. 

Remarks . Horn seen at one end of edge view of this 
specimen, pi. fig. 1 9 is not a diagnostic feature, 
but is merely a fortuitous twist of the distal end of 
specimen. 

Hypotype locality . Ten feet from the top of the Joli 
Fou shade. Sec. lb, Tp. SI, Rge. 17# W. 4th meridian, 
on the east bank of the Athabaska River, about one mile 
north-east of Wheel rapids, Alberta. 

Hypotype . University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 








r 


0 


rtQO 


, r .,. 

t : 








n 


* "■ 


t 


t * & * ■ < 



. 


V 





< ■ > - < 




i I o 







Sporang!toIdes mesoclrculare n, sp. 

Plate 1, Figure 22, 23, 24, 2b, 27, 25. 

Proposed Holotype Specimen 665-30 
Plate 1, 26, 27, 26. 

Symmetry - Approximately bilateral. 

Size . 

Longitudinal diameter r 196 mu 
Equatorial diameter - 241 mu 

Color . Light amber yellow. 

Composition . Fine granular cutinous substance. 

Shape and ornamentation . One half of this sporangium 
is missing. Line of dehiscence coincides with the 
circumference of specimen. In plan view outline shape 
is subcircular, with the outer side convex as shown 
by camera lucida drawing pi. 1, fig. 26. Drawing, 
pi. 1, fig. 26, is the concave or inner side of 
sporangium wall. Drawing, pi. 1, fig. 27, shows in 
oblique view the indented or concave side of sporangium. 

On the inner concave side distinct spherical 
indentations can be seen, which on the opposite side 
show up as shadows. The writer is interpreting these 
indentations as formed by spherical masses or spores 
before dehiscence and dispersal. It is difficult to 










ft , V'- * 


XSjflX- 


.•UwV ..... :-v 


- ■ 1 «i 


• ' 


OiicQ \X■: 



determine whether the wall structure of this sporangium 
is pluricellular, as some of the spherical indentations 
can be seen and it may be the shadows of this feature 
which look like cells. The diameter of the cells (?) 
or spherical indentations vary between IS and 30 mu. 

Remarks. S. mesoclrculare is a very rare form. 

Holotype locality . Sample 66 5? section station 241, 

S 3 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec. 20, Tp„ 107# Rge. 3-5# W. 5 ^ meridian, 
Loon River shale, about 20 feet above the Radiolariap 
( Cyrtocapsa , Artocapsa . Conostrobus ) zone. 

Holotype . University of Alberta, Micropaleontologieal 
Type Collection. 

Sporangltoides mesoclrculare n. sp. Var. A. 
Paratype Specimen 4610-10Q-2 (Wetter). 

Plate 1, Figure 22, 23 , 24. 

Symmetry . Approximately bilateral. 

Color , Light amber yellow. 

Size. 

Longitudinal diameter - 236 mu 
Equatorial diameter - 224 mu 
Thickness - 33 nm 

Comparative si z e measurements of other specimens. 














t 


t 








>&k~ 


flpecimen Long, diam 
(mu) 


Equat. diam. 
(mu) 


4610 - 100-1 246 

4610-100-3 276 

46io-ioo-4 234 


236 Not Ulus. 

247 Not Illus. 


219 Not illus 


Shape . In disc-like, subcircular in plan view outline, 
comparatively thin as seen in edge view. One side is 
slightly convex outward and the other is concave. A 
suggestion that specimen has split in two halves 
by dehiscence along the outer circumference. An 
examination of comparative specimens indicates that 
although they all tend to be circular and are approx¬ 
imately the same size, the irregularities in shape 
outline are not constant from specimen to specimen. 

Ornamentation . Surface is slightly rugose. Cbat 
appears to be finely granular, cutd no,us in composition, 
thin. Seen in reflected and transmitted light the thin 
membranous wall appears to be made up of cells. Seen 
on the concave side these structures appear more like 
faint impressed indentations forced by spore-like 
masses, s spores (?), which were dispersed on 
dihiscence. 

Remarks . 

_S. mesocirculare is considerably more abundant 
here, see below, than in theLoon River Shale. 








t 


N- ? i i J CIS C . 1';;; r ' i" r : . 

t * 

' 

. 

• ■ .. ' •• ■' /, nxi; 

■ ■ ■ ... 0 ..-. ,D9il ; ■' r ■ I ■ 'V '; - 'X-. r J , '<• 







- 85 - 


Hypo type locality # Occurs 49 feet above the Second 
Tuff zone, St# John formation, from an exposure, 
at the mouth of St# John Creek, on Beatton River, 

Sec# 14, Tp# 84, Rge# 18, W# 6th meridian, locality 
B, British Columbia# (Personal communication, R# 
Wetter, 1951). 

Class: Incertae sedis 

Sporitoides n# genus 

In this thesis the form genus Sporitoides is 
erected to include all those forms of cutinized micro¬ 
fossils which look like a megaspore# The term mega¬ 
spore is used in reference to size only. Two dist¬ 
inct form species have been tentatively assigned to 
this form genus and they are as follows: 

1# Sporitoides spinus n. sp# 

2# S# discus n# sp# 

Sporitoides spinus is hereby designated 
as the genotype# All specimens appear to be comp¬ 
osed of the same composition which has a somewhat 
waxy resinous lustre and is translucent to light® 

Color is usually various shades of amber yellow with 
thin specimens tending to have a light straw yellow 
color# 

Size range of specimens of the genotype S# 
spinus vary between 134 and 180 mu for longitudinal 
diameter, and 133 to 174 mu for equatorial diameter 
measurements# 













&-xj. 




t 


i ' t ' ■ /DU , 

. , * 

.,uuu. oo Xuvdu : u 


« ' « ■ 

o ‘ tXiu 

- «• 


U": 


\ lu 


- .. X u.vu *’■ r-r 

, .Ll.i ? ; . . ^ i c: o du 

. 

: • -. ;y;"o: Xu: 


•- ■ ■ 

• -U Jr 

77 { U 

, D •UUV 




■ 


1 8 f u J: - 

DU 


: OX :/ v DUID : 

. 

' ' 

•X e.Do.i xD3d; v;x.d'x 

juddd ci: 'tele;' 

• ' u : / ■ -■ ■ j 




.:u:.- ,\t9 

V 

* , 



-S6- 


For _S_. discus , longitudinal diameter varies be¬ 
tween 134 and 171 and equatorial diameter measurements 
are between 9& and lbb mu. 

Symmetry . Most specimens of* this generic group are 
roughly bilaterally symmetrical as seen in plan view 
of broad side and edge view. 

Shape outline . Most specimens assigned by the writer 
to this form genus group are characterized by a 
circular or nearly circular outline, very flattened 
in one direction so that the form resembles a small 
disc. 

Some specimens have one to three, and in rare 
specimens, four spine-like protuberances projecting 
outward from the peripheral margin. Where there are 
more than one protuberance, one is usually larger 
and more spine-like than the rest. Some specimens 
show a small notch or depression on each side of the 
spine. Those specimens with spines have been assigned 
by the writer to the genotype form species J3. splnus . 

For orientation purposes the writer assumes the 
most prominent spine or protuberance as the proximal 
end or point of attachment (proximal pole). Relative 
to this orientation the other protuberances are sit¬ 
uated on the equator and at ppposite sides, the fourth 
protuberance when present is located at the distal pole. 










Those forms of approximately the same size and 
shape as the genotype J3. spinus , but lack the spine or 
protuberances have been tentatively assigned to the 
form species J3. discus . 

Coat . Appears cutinous, membranous, fine granular, 
rugose in some specimens, with no definite pattern 
to folding. Some specimens, of the J3. discus form 
species group reveal in transmitted light a mosaic of 
what looks like closely spaced cells, resembling in 
plan view a cobble stone pattern. This cell-like 
pattern is not seen in some specimens, example S. discus , 
n s sp. var. A, pi. 1, fig. 34, 35 and 36. 

Remarks . Because of the very small size of this 
form genus, high magnification is necessary to study 
them and the forms differing from the genotype are 
observed with difficulty using moderate power of 
magnification. 







9 & 






f'5 


jt -.'Sip 



« . 








Co 


■- 



c 


t 


■ 





1 









Record of size measurements for the genotype Sporitoldes 

spinus n* sp, 

(All measurements in mu) 

Thick- 


No* 

specimen Long. diam. 

Squat. 

diam. ness 

Hypotype 

(x) 

1, 

669-150 

156 

139 

51 

X 

2. 

534-150-3 

134 

146 

52 

X 

3. 

533-150 

1 S 1 

173 


X 

4. 

530-150 

177 

174 

23.3 

Holotype 

5. 

529-150 

190 

171 

52 

X 

6 . 

527-150 

152 

155 


Not illus» 

7 . 

614-150 

177 

174 

9.7 

X 

s. 

665-150-1 

160 

133 


Not. illus. 

9. 

665-150-2 

13 s 

133 


Not illus. 

10. 

459-150-6 

ISO 

lbO 


Not illus. 

11. 

459-150-7 

ISO 

153 


Not illus* 


Arithmetric 

1q6*3 


mean 


159.1 








MOTE 


Throughout thesis change: 

" Sporitoides spinus ” to H Sporitoides spinum * 1 
" Sporitoides discus n to " Sporitoides discum ” 











Spor-j Isoldes spinus n. sp. 

Plate 1, Figure 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9>10, 

11, 12, 15, 20, 21. 

Spord t oides spinus n. sp. 

Proposed Holotype Specimen 530-15° 

Plate 1, Figure 1, 2, 3. 

Symmetry. Specimen can in a general way be referred to 
two longitudinal planes of symmetry and a longitudinal 
axis of four-fold symmetry. 

Shape . Plan view outlined* broad side is nearly circular, 
very flattened in one direction so that form is much 
like a small disc. At one pole is a spine-like 
projection. A small notch can be seen beside the 
base of the spine which in this particular specimen 
occurs only on one side. On some specimens this feature 
occurs on both sides and is more like a rounded de¬ 
pression rather than a sharp notch. Using the same 
orientation in space, two rounded protuberances are 
on thei equator on each side opposite one another. 

Size. 

Equatorial diameter - 177 mu 
Longitudinal diameter - 17^- mu 
Maximum thickness - 3^ mu 










t * t 


t C t . < K t ^ 






$ 


r •• 


< < : t 










0 ' ■ / it 



90— 


Ornamentation 

Spine and two protuberances referred to above* 
Diagnostic features* 

The disc- 3 hape and relatively constant size are 
the two most diagnostic features* The spine is broken 
on many forms and the two side protuberances are lack¬ 
ing in many specimens, and are seen only under high 
magnification* 

Coat * 

Appears thin, cutincus, membranous, fine granular, 
quite rugose, no definite pattern to folding. 

Color . 

Dirty resinous to orange yellow. 

Affinity . In general shape it is closest to the 
pollen of the grass family, but it does not compare 
in size, as the maximum diameter of grass pollen is a 
little over 100 mu. This is discussed in more detail, in 
Section 1 of Chapter II of this thesis. 

Holot ype locality . From sample 530, section station 
1S7, 27 i feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec. 7, Tp. 104, Rge. 19, W. 5 th. meridian, from 
the Loon River shale, approximately equivalent to the 
upper part of the Ammodlscus 4-11A subzone, of the 
Haplophragmoides A24 zone. 










t. 


r-l - Jj 






-91- 


Sporotoides spinus n. sp* 

Hypotype Specimen 529-150 
Plate 1, Figure 4, 5, 6. 

Comparison. At each s»de A of the spine are smaller 
protuberances separated from the central spine by small 
depressions* Dark shaded areas are thickened ridges 
caused by folding of outer coat on compression and 
fossilization. This specimen is somewhat thicker 
than the proposed holotype specimen. 

Size. 

Equatorial diameter - 171 mu 
Longitudinal diameter - 190 mu 
Thickness = 52. 

Hypotype locality . From sample 529# section station 
187, 33 -set above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec* 7# Tp, 104, Rge. 19 f W* 5^& meridian, from 
the Loon River shale* 

Hypotyp e* University of Alberta, Microbotanical Type 
Colle ction. 












£5 


K 


i. 


0 
















-92- 


Sporotoides solnus n. ep, V a r. A. 

Hypotype Specimen 614-150* 

Plate 1, Figure 10, 11, 12, 

Symmetry * Specimen can be referred to two longitudinal 
planes and a longitudinal axis of four-fold symmetry. 
Shape, Circular to rounded square outline with small 
pointed projections at each of the rounded corners. These 
projections are quite distinct at three corners and less 
so at the fourth. 

Coat ornamentation . Surface has a medium granular text¬ 
ure, A slightly raised circular rim can be seen on 
both sides extending around, a short distance in, and 
roughly parallel to the peripheral margin or circum¬ 
ference, On one side, pi, 1, fig, 10, are three faint 
radial markings extending from near the center to the 
circumference. On both aides of the disc a slightly 
raised arcuate thickening joins a small spine-like 
protuberance projection at one pole to a similar 
small spine at the opposite pole. These markings do not 
appear to be consistent from specim ,n to specimen, and 
are probably the result of fortuitous folding, an 
compression, of the outer wall. 

Size, Longitudinal diameter - 177 mu 
Equatorial diameter - 174 
Maximum thickness - 10 mu 

Hypotype locality . From sample 614, section station 
211, feet above the water level of the Peace 











<' '■ t 


:i ;o rnl 0 




X - 


X 


x ■■ ■■ * X * • 


or 



. 


* 


J 0: 




OO Hi 


< 


iUi 




t 




-93- 


River, Alberta, Sec. 4, Tp. 105* Rge. lo, W. 5 th meridian, 
Loon River shale. 

Hypotype. University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 

Sporitoides splnus n. sp. Var. B. 

Hypotype specimen 669-150 
Plate 1, Figure 7* 9. 

Symmetry . Disregarding irregularities, specimen can 
be referred to two longitudinal planes of symmetry and 
an axis of four-fold symmetry. 

Slz e» Longitudinal diameter r 156 mu 
Equatorial diameter - 139 mu 
Maximum thickness - $1 mu 

Shape . Somewhat like a disc, plan view of flat side is 
subcircular, edge view is a medium lenticular outline 
with a sharper taper at one end than the other. A 
pronounced spine-like projection is at one end. For 
orientation purposes, this is referred to as the 
proximal pole. 

Ornamentation of coat . Coat has fine granular surface 
and appears to consist of a tough membranous cutincus 
substance. This specimen is unique in showing raised 
impressions of small prola.te spheroidal bodies contained 
within the coat. These may be stored fossil fats, oils 
or starch. They lack regular distribution and are 
seen on both sides* 









t 


t 





J 



M :y 




< 





Comparison , This specimen is smaller in diameter but is 
thicker than the specimen selected as holotype, 

Hypotype locality. Sample 669, section station 241, 

51 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, S e c. 20, Tp. 107, Hge. 15, W. 5th meridian. 

Loon River shale. 

Hypotype , University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection, 

Sporltoldes splnus n. sp. Var, C, 

Hypotype Specimen 53^-150-3 
Plate 1, Figure 20, 21, 

Symmetry. Disregarding irregularities speciman can be 
referred to two planes of longitudinal symmetry and an 
axis of four-fold symmetry. 

Size, Longitudinal diameter - 1J4 mu 

Equatorial diameter « 146 mu 

Maximum thickness = 52 mu 

Shape In plan view, shape outline is somewhat like a 

toy top, with distal portion subcircular and proximal 
portion rectangular and terminated by a spine-like 
protuberance. At each side on the equator is a comp¬ 
aratively large outward bulge. They are irregular in 
shape and approximately opposite one another. In this 
respect this specimen is somewhat similar to the 
proposed holotype specimen 530-150• Edge view is 
lenticular, with one end rounded and the other quite 
sharply tapered. 










i 





5 


I 








- 95 - 


Ornamentatlon Irregular ridges of local thickening which 
appear to have been produced by compression and for¬ 
tuitous folding of outer wall* Coat is thin, membranous, 
fine granular and cutiEEous. 

Color * Amber yellow as seen with a petrogrs.phic micro¬ 
scope, using transmitted light. 

Hypotype locality . Sample 53^* section station 192, 

40 feet above the water level of the Peace River, Alberta, 
Sec. 32, Ip. 104, Rge, 19* W. 5 th meridian. Loon River 
shale. 

Hypotype . University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 

Sporltoides splnus n. sp* Var, C* 

Hypotype Specimen 533-150 
Plate 1, Figure 15, 

This specimen has been illustrated because it 
shows a part of the coat broken away exposing the hol¬ 
low interior, left side, a part of the coat remaining 
in place. As seen here coat appears like a thin 
cutIncus,, fine granular membrane. 

Size. Longitudinal diameter - 1 S 1 mu 

Equatorial diameter - 173 mu 

Hypotype locality . 

Sample 533, section station 192, 32 J feet above 
the water level of the Peace River, Alberta, Sec. 

32 , Tp. 1C4, Rge. 19, W. 5 th meridian. Loon River shade. 













t 


5 


5 


l 


K 









K 


t " « 


< 




<r * 


t 


t 


t t 




t • 


- 96 - 


Sporitoides discus n. sp. 

Plate 1, Figure 13, 14, 16, 17, 34, 35, 36. 

Sporitoides discus n. sp. 

Proposed Holotype Specimen 534-150-4 
Plate, 1, Figure 13, 14. 

Symmetry . One longitudinal plane and an axis of two¬ 
fold symmetry. 

Shape . Irregular disc shaped. Plan view of broad side 
is rounded and subcircular, as if a circle had been 
compressed from two opposite sides, approaching shape 
of an ellipse. Edge view is roughly lenticular with 
one side smoothly convex and the opposite, quite irregular 
and less convex in outline. 

Size . Longitudinal diameter = 140 mu 
Equatorial diameter = 98 mu 

Maximum thickness = 42.5 mu 

Goat ornamentation . Transmitted light reveals a mosaic 
of closely spaced cells which in plan view resemble 
cobble stones. Approximately 14 cells can be seen 
around the outer circumference of the specimen. Coat 
comparatively smooth, fine granular, cutinous, no 
distinct folded areas. 

Color . Using petrographic microscope color appears amber 
yellow. 

Comparison . Although size and general shape of S. spinus 
and S. discus are very similar, in fact so much so 





















* ■ . , 

■ , ■ t t ,, t <> - «• 


„ . ^ _ . . 

■... i 



1 • ' ■ ' •' : - - ■" .......... 

* - 

■ . ' 1 -... 

, ,• \ ... . ■ ; -'-V- ■ : 

■; ... C t . -vt to :0: ’ > K’Y . I •. ' i;- . " ' 

.. . . ">■- ' 

;r « i: ■. .t.0‘V0-* J t'i.'l S\ ' 0 ■ , 7,1 ■ • $ < ■ 6 ■ ■ -• ' >1 X, VJC 

» •• : :: • >.■ 


. 

’ % : 1 E 

■ ■v ' , : •■■■.. ■" ' ; t - 

... ..... 

• 1.cm Lv • 1 . : ; ;• £>Or??, \’±Str:0.1^ XC 

. ■ •. . - ■: ■ ■ . •’ ■■ . ’ ■■ ■ ■ 
* ..'... ■ .. • '. n - ' L >•' y ,• : J ■' ' " ’' f - • 

t ... • • < ...~ , 

Ic . .to ; 





" ■ .. 

* 

. «, 






- 37 - 


that they cannot be told apart using a microscope 
of moderate to low magnification. S. spinus lacks a 
cellular structure and S. discus lacks spine-like 
protuberanc es. 

Hypoty pe locality . From sample 534, section station 
3-92, 37 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec. 32, Tp. 104, Rge. 19 9 W. 5 th. meridian. 
Loon River shale, approximately equivalent to the 
Ammodiscus 411A subzone of the zone Haolophragmoides 
424. 

Holotype . University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 

Sporitoldes discus n. sp. 

Hypotype Specimen 553-150 
Plate 1, Figure 16 , 17 . 

Size. Longitudinal diameter - 134 mu 
Equatorial diameter " 11 5 mu 
Shape. General shape is somewhat like a small disc. 
Plan view outline of broad side is rounded and sub- 
circular similar to the outline of an egg, with one end 
more round and broader than the other end. Edge view i 
not illustrated but is very similar to that of the hole 
type. 

Coat ornamentation . Placing specimen on a glass slide 
and using transmitted light, a closely spaced mosaic 

















* 


t 








% - * c 




0 6.U : CliJ 






<. 





X X.tX. r i • 




vj 0 






- 98 - 


of cells can be seen* Cell-like structure is not 
evident using reflected lighting. The writer is not 
certain if this cell-like structure is a part of the 
coat or inner contents of the specimen. Coat appears 
fine granular, cutinous, and using petrographic 
microscope color appears amber yellow. 

Hypotype locality . From sample 553, section station 
194, 21 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, Sec. 25, Tp. 104, Rge. 18, W. 5th meridian. 

Loon River shale. 

Hypotype . University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 

Sporitoides discus n. sp. var. A. 

Hypotype Specimen 618-100 
Plate 1, Figure 34, 35, 36. 

Symmetry . Approximate radial symmetry in one plane. 

Size . Longitudinal diameter = 171 mu 

Equatorial diameter = 166 mu 

Maximum thickness = 21 mu 

Color . Light resinous yellow. 

Shape . Shaped much like a disc. Plan view of broad 
side is almost circular. Edge view is narrow lenticular 
with one side slightly more convex outward than the 
opposite side. Original shape may have been nearly 
spherical. 











♦ 

oJ • ' r,; : : ■ L . j: • ■ r$ • 

*. 




.0, U • : .-fe o'li.. 
< - r ■ "■ ' 
r' V .1 rrr ';f.: vV ■ 


■it 10D ••■,.00 

. . _ ' _ _ _ _ 

■- v -i- I;. ? 0;j. 


loovyo-o 




'? - o i a 


■ 


m:rx.:-p' 

* • 

* 


:JYv. 


* ' i_ 







- 99 - 


Ornamentation* On both sides of the specimen there 
are several ridges and troughs which seem to have been 
formed by folding on compression of the outer coat* 

No indication of trilete scars indicative of hapto- 
typic tetrad arrangement* 

Coat * Very thin and translucent* 

Comparison * This specimen differs from the other ill¬ 
ustrated specimens of S. discus in that it lacks 
a pluricellular mosaic structure* It is also obviously 
different from S* spinus because of the absence of 
spine-like protuberances, but its size measurements 
compare most closely to the average of this form species 
Hypotype locality * Sample 618-100, section station 
211, 20 feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Sec* 4, Tp* 105, Rge* 16, W. 5th meridian. Loon River 
shale• 

Hypotype * University of Alberta, Micropaleontological 
Type Collection. 

This is offered because many geologists are fam¬ 
iliar with this form* 

Genus TASMANITBS Newton, 1875 
Sporan&ltes Dawson* 1863 (pars.), Canadian 
Naturalist, new ser*, vol* 8, no* 6, pp* 
431-457. 

(Illustrated and fully described by Schopf, Wilson and 
Bentall. Ref* 31)* 

Plate1, Figure 18, 19• 

Symmetry * Radial symmetry in one plane. 
















8 


B < 






00 














« 


« 




■,r: 


? «• ' s 


t - t 











■ 100 - 


Size. Diameter - 271 mu 

Maximum thickness = 6l mu 

Color . Dark resinous amber, tending to have a reddish 
hue in reflected light* V e ry slightly translucent. 

Shape . A flattened disc, view of broad side almost 
circular, edge view, narrow lenticular. Original 
shape was spherical. 

Ornamentation . There is a narrow ridge a short distance 
in from and parallel to the circumference. Rather than 
being a distinct feature of ornamentation, it is probably 
result of folding on compression. Surface of the disc 
is covered by numerous very small pits and protuberances. 
Remarks . Two specimens of Tasmanltes embedded in black 
shale were examined by the writer. No evidence of 
trilete or monolete markings were seen. 

Specimen from Exshaw shale, Mississippian-Devonian 
boundary. Imperial Sterling #1 well. 










y. 1 



















.r ; i 


. - 


x o 


: , ;Ii I;i 


Oil;.' i 









t 




o 




■ 











0 





y , ■ yx of. 

- x •. :o ?Ii.x v 


x ■ ' ,yy, . . ■ L 


% 


. 
















- 101 - 


EXPLANATION OF PLATS 1 

Figure 1, 2, 3 : Sporitoides spinus n. sp., X106, 

proposed holotype specimen~53 0 ~150# from the 
Loon River shale, at locality 137-530* 27.5 
feet above the water level of the Peace 
River, Alberta, approximately equivalent to 
upper part of Amraodiscus 411A subzone, of the 
Hauloohragmoides 424 zone. 1, plan view of 
one side, 2, edge view, 3, plan vieitf of opposite 
side. 

p. 89 

Figure 4, 5, 6: Sporitoides spinus n* sp., X105, 
hypotype, specimen $25-150# from the Loon 
River shale at locality IS7-529, 33 feet above 
the water level of the Peace River, Alberta* 4* 
plan view of one side, 5# e&ge view, 6, plan view 
of the opposite side, 

p. 91 

Figure 7* 8* 9* Sporitoides spinus n* sp., Var, B. XioS, 
hypotype, specimen 6b^-1^0, from the Loon River 
shale at locality 241-669, 5^ feet aboVe the 
water level of the Peace River, Alberta, 7, 
plan view of one side* S, plan view of opposite 
side, 9, edge view, 

P* 93 

Figure 10, 11, 12: Sporitoides spinus n. sp., Var. A, 
X104, hypotype, specimen 6l4—I50, from the Loon 
River shale, at locality 211-614, 3$»5 feet 
above the water level of the Peace River, 

Alberta, 10, plan view of one side, 11, edge 
view, 12, plan view of opposite side. 

p. 92 

Figure 13, 14: Sporitoides discus n. so., X164, 

propos eS ho 1 otypespecimen 534-150* from the 
Loon River shale at locality 192-53^* 37 
feet above the water level of the Peace 
River, Alberta, approximately equivalent to 
upper part of the Haolophragmoides 424 zone, 

13, plan view of one side, 14 edge view, 

P. 96 

F igure 15: Sporitoides spinus n. sp., Var. C. X105# 

hypotype, specimen 633-150, from the Loon River 
shale at locality 192-533* 43.5 feet above 
the water level of the Peace River, Alberta, 
figure shows a part of coat torn away exposing 
hollow interior on right side, left side, a part 
of coat remaining in place. 


p. 95 






















- 102 - 


EXPLANATION OP PLATE 1, (continued) 

Figure 16, 17: Sporitoides discus n. sp., X164, 
hypotype, specimen 553-1^0, from the Loon 
River shale at locality 194-153, 21 feet 
above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, 16, plan view of one side, 17, 
plan view of the opposite side* 

p. 97 

Figure 18, 19: Genus TASMANITES Newton, 1875, 

Sporangites Dawson* 1863, (pars*), Canadian 
Naturalist, New Ser. vol. 8, no* 6, pp* 431- 
457. (After Schopf, Wilson, and Bentall, 

1944, Ref. 31, p. 11) 

A camera lucida drawing, X107, of a 
specimen of TASMANITES embedded in black 
Exshaw shale, from Imperial Sterling #1 well, 
Alberta, Mississippian-Devonian boundary, 18, 
plan view, 19, edge view. 

p. 99 

Figure 20, 21: Sporitoides spinus n. sp. var. C, X164, 
hypotype, specimen 534-150-3, from the Loon 
River shale, at locality 192-534, 40 feet 
above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, 20, plan view of one side, 21, edge 
view. 

p. 94 

Figure 22, 23, 24: Sporangitoides mesocirculare n. sp. 
var. A, X105, hypotype, specimen 461Q-100-2 
(Wetter), from 49 feet above the second tuff 
zone, St. John formation, (Cenomanian), at the 
mouth of St. John Creek, on Beatton River, 
British Columbia, 22, plan view of one side, 

23, edge view, 24, plan view of opposite side* 

p. 83 

Figure 25: Hystrichosphaera loonriverensis n. sp., 
cf. tubifera Enrenberg after heflandre, 

(illus. Glaessner, Ref. 16, pi. 3, fig. 6, p. 
49), X152, hypotype, specimen 476-150-2, 
locality 175-476, 55 feet above the water level 
of the Peace River, Alberta, Loon River shale, 
25 , plan view of one side. 

pp. 41-46 

Figure 26, 27, 28: Sporangitoides mesocirculare n. sp., 
X112, proposed holotype, specimen £65-80, from 
the Loon River shale, at locality 241-665, 83 
feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, about 15 feet above the Radiolarian 
( Cyrtocapsa , Artocapsa , Conostrobus ) zone, 26, 
plan view of one side, 27, obliqueview, 28, 
plan view of opposite side. 


p. 82 




















r t * *»• _ ..j y._y .. , _ v.. ■ V. , 

? ' 1-v J . Y ■ iuX r.: s .• 'Y. *•"< v •• ■ 

i ■ J < j •- 

t ' t m 

. ? o.r ? ■ i 


x ~ « 

\ . * 


* ■ 


* . • . \ ' r 

• ' ' Y- ' YYiliSY 




• r- 


Y : , ,. : 


- x ’-U .'■ - .Y ' , 


s 


t 




:> - x 


G *'J GiY 


., ; ' i. ; • i • ■ X, U 




t 

, . ' ii 


o - y - C - 


,.?yy 


* ■ 
t 


,•0 'to '-.tv' 1',! 






xrnso 


srtjj •. v 


. y .;_. ic . : < 

*J ‘ . ’• ' ./ ' ' .1.<. 


Ixtro 


-Y SYOU. 


■rJ . 




Luanc.a3U 


* « 


« , ? ■' . 

■ . « ' ' . '• 

„ 

t « * .... . _ . . . .... 

tj ■' • ■' ■ 

c -;y yy .,> 4 


n w-i - : '•> r r<y Y r -X, 

» X • * t * • t * 

t .‘ Y ■ > ■ ' : « , < 

: "• . . e . . Y . ■ ^ 

c .. ( K * 


- 

* 


lr 

YV f v ' 




<r - - . ■ • . , i • G< Y 

. t 1c IsvqI ’xetaw giyy y. .. 


? • T \ : • ’v. 

t K 


Y . _ Y,'-... . « ..... . ... .'. Y.'- ; .'' 

c * ■ 

* Y - : r ■■ Y - ■ ... 




9‘ijlg ,r 


' YY.;Y j: , : 








- 103 - 


EXPLANATION OF PLATE 1, (continued) 

Figure 29: Hystrichosphaera loonriverensis n. sp., 
cf. tubifera Ehrenberg after Deflandre, 

(Illus. G-laessner, Ref. 17, pi* 3, fig* 6, 
p. 49), hypotype, specimen 498-150-4, from 
the Loon River shale, locality 180-498, 73/4 
feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, 29, plan view, XI54. 

pp. 41-46 

Figure 30s Diagrammatic edge view of Hystricho sphaera 
loonriverensis n. sp., cf* tubifera Ehrenberg 
after Deflandre, spoke-like projections not 
shown, X154. 

pp. 41-46 

Figure 31: Hystrichosphaera loonriverensis n. sp., 

cf. tubifera Ehrenberg after Deflandre, XI54, 
hypotype, specimen 565-100-5, from the Loon River 
shale, locality 202-565, 62 feet above the water 
level of the Peace River, Alberta, 31, plan view. 

pp. 41-46 

Figure 32: Hystrichosphaera loonriverensis n. sp., 

cf. tubifera Ehrenberg after Deflandre, X154, 
hypotype, specimen 498-150-3, from the Loon 
River shale, locality 180-498, 73/4 feet above 
the water level of the Peace River, Alberta, 

32, plan view. 

pp. 41-46 

Figure 33: Hystricho sphaera loonriverensis n. sp., 
cf. tubifera, Ehrenberg after Deflandre, 

(Illus. Glaessner, Ref. 17, pi. 3, fig. 6, 
p. 49), XI54, proposed holotype, specimen, 
476-150-1, from the Loon River shale, equi¬ 
valent to the Ammodiscus 411A subzone 
which is the upper part of the Haplophragmoides 
424 zone, locality 175-476, 55 feet aVove the 
water level of the Peace River, Alberta, 33, 
plan view. 

pp. 41-46 

Figure 34, 35, 36: Sporitaides discus n. sp. var. A, 
X105, hypotype, specimenTTB^TOO, from the 
Loon River shale, locality 211-618, 20 feet 
above the water level of the Peace River, 

Alberta, 34, plan view of one side, 35, edge 
view, 36, plan view of the opposite side. 

p. 98 




















< ' . ■ . *1 . 

v; :: ” ■ ■' -1: ■. f l 1.. t v. t :7\--S.Y 




PLATE 1 



CRETACEOUS CUTIHIZSB MICROFOSSILS 






-104- 


EXPLANATION OF PLATE 2 


Figure 1, 4, 5: Sporangitoides lenticulare n. sp. var. D, 
X105, hypotype, specimen 4912-lOOB (Wetter), 
from 65 feet above the base of the fish scale 
zone, (Cenomanian), St* John formation, at 
locality A, on Septimus Creek, British Columbia, 

1, plan view of one side, 4, edge view, 5, 
plan view of the opposite side. 

p. 69 

Figure 2, 3s Fossil indusium of fern cf. WQo.dsia 

scopulina. X105, proposed holotype, specimen 
628-48, from the Loon River shale, about 
20 feet above the Radiolarian ( Cyrtocapsa . Arto- 
capsa . Conostrobus ) zone, locality 211-628, 61.5 
feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, 2, plan view of convex side, 3, view of 
opposide, concave side. 

p. 47 

Figure 6, 7, 8 j Sporangitoides ellipsoprolata^ n. sp. 

var. A, X105, hypotype, specimen, 665-30, from 
the Loon River shale, locality 241-665, 83.5 
feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, 6, plan view of one side, 7, edge 
view, 8, plan view of opposite side. 

p. 77 

Figure 9, 10: Sporangitoides circulate n. sp. 

X149, hypotype, specimen 481-S6, from the 
Loon River shale, locality 175-481, 22 feet 
above the water level of the Peace River, 

Alberta, 9, plan view, 10, plan view of the opp¬ 
osite side. 

pp. 59-62 















CRETACEOUS CUTINIZED MICROEOSSILS 








EXPLANATION OF PLATE 3 


Figure 1, 2, 3: Sporangitoides lerrticulare n. sp.. 

X107, hypotype, specimen 4912-100A (Wetter), 
about 65 feet above the base of the fish scale 
zone, (Cenomanian), 3t. John formation, at 
locality A, on Septimus Creek, British Columbia* 

p* 68 

Figure 4s Sporangitoides gjganteum n* sp. var. A, XI04, 
hypotype, specimen 2026 (Bullock), from the 
top of the shale zone separating the first and 
second Viking sands, in the basal Lloydminster 
shale. Imperial Eldorena #1 well, Alberta, 
specimen has been split apart by teasing with 
sharpened needle, exposing small black, opaque 
spheres, embedded in sporogenous tissue, 
circular depressions can be seen where spheres 
have been dislodged. 

p. 74 

Figure 5> 6, 7: Sporangitoides lenticulare n. sp.,x//o, 
proposed holotype, specimen 683-100, from the 
Loon River shale, occurs 34 feet above the 
Radiolarian ( Cyrtocapsa . Artocapsa . Conostrobus ) 
zone, locality 251-683, 39 feet above the 
water level of the Peace River, Alberta, 5, 
plan view, 6, edge view, 7, plan view of the 
opposite side. 

p. 62 

Figure 8, 12: Sporangitoides giganteum n. sp*, 

X105, proposed holotype, specimen B-70-6 
(Bahan), from the Pelican sand, 15 feet 
above the base, Athabaska River, one mile 
below Wheel Rapids, Alberta, 8, plan view, 

12, edge view. 

p. 71 

Figure 9, 10, 11: Sporangitoides lenticulare n. sp. 

var. C, X105, hypotype, specimen 627-100, from 
the Loon River shale, locality 220-627, 67 feet 
above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, 9> plan view showing outer surface 
configuration, 10, edge view, 11, plan view 
reconstruction of the interior of specimen. 

p. 65 
















£ a.lV*ISL V ’C 401 TAi/li'.vL'-'Uvii 

; ' ' • ■ . ■; c - < i 

. . V :v-, 1 // * oriu* V: •••' , ;V - . .f": v Succ* 

? • * 

■ ' t 


8W.fi C 


r * * ■ 

0: j' ■ •■ 

fy.fr r t,:v LX 


x~\ 


or x o f 


L • L. . « : ; •• • : i" 

< 

c 

, ■ ■ • f 

O' •-") ■.i' 0‘S , riDSfs 9d ff&O an 


x ■ - 

':0 3C;c 

cscriarta 
soIsriqa 
Jj;0‘I±0 


y/,- h o Le i: £■ jte J ev ml 




.ton r 


vtfole 


?qc*Jcr 

oc cd 




t t •• .i. t ’V/v >' 

- i t 




-■ 


mos 

«: level. Xeiv 

s ■ ? 

©I'ia eti:aoao:o 


** ....... . . . - 

~0Y~ ■ t i* ■ 

: . ■<•.... t ; y .. • xi _ ax a , U ■ •• ; 

■ ; - ? : ■■' ; . s 

t . JiBlq *8 , , 

, • a 


ixr x? 


.. . o. ../. iaal. * "• < :j a 

~ » c ^ ? 

. ■ r < . • v 

t 

i * 

, i B t « ' 


G IU £ i'. 1 






PLATE. 3 



CRETACEOUS CUTINIZED MICROFOSSILS 








- 106 - 


EXPLANATION OF PLATE 4- 

Figure 1, 5 : S-oorangitoides ellipsoprolat^ ru sp., 

X14S, proposed holetype, specimen 4-75“10°» 
from the Loon River shale, occurs in the 
bottom part of the Haplophragmoides 4-24- zone, 
locality 175-4-75* 4-7 feet above the water 
level of the Peace River, Alberta, 1, edge 
view, 5 , plan view of one side. 

p. 75 

Figure 2, 7> S: Sporangltoldes ellipsoprolatftm A n. sp. 

Var. B. XIOS, hypotype, specimen B-71-10, ten 
feet from the top of the Joli Fou shale, on the 
east bank of the Ath&baska River, Alberta, about 
one mile north-east of Wheel Rapids, 2, plan 
view, 7, edge view, 6, plan view of the 
opposite side. 

P* 80 

Figure 3# 4-, b$ Sporang!toides lenticulare n. sp. Var. A. 
hypotype, specimen bbb-SO, from the Loon River 
shale, locality 241-666, JG feet above the 
water of the Peace River, Alberta, 3> XI 53 , 
plan view, 4-, X110, plan view, 6, XIOS, plan 
view of the opposite side. 


P* 64 









S* ' 


t 






i 




K ' 


< 






PLATE 4 



CRETACEOUS CUTIUIZED MICROFOSSILS 








-107- 


EXPLANATION OF PLATE 5 

(These camera lucida drawings have been 

reduced 5/& original size.) 

Figure 1, 2, J : Sporangitoides circulare n. sp. 

X94, hypotype, specimen 47j?-2>0, from the Loon 
River shale, locality 175~475* feet above 
the water level of the Peace River, Alberta, 

1, plan view, 2, plan view of opposite side, 

3, plan view using another microscope. 

pP* 59-62 

Figure 4, 11: Sporangitoides elllpsoprolata/ nji. sp., 

X 94 , hypotype, specimen 4&0-100. from the 
Loon River shale, locality 175“4SO,'23»5 
feet above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, 4, plan view of outer coat, 11, plan 
view showing external features superimposed on 
internal structure. 

p. 79 

Figure 5> 6, ~f: Fossil form which superficially re¬ 
sembles modern fern sporangia, X44, specimen 
2026-C (Bullock), from the top of the shale 
zone separating the first and second Viking 
sands, in the basal Lloydminster shale. 

Imperial Eldorena #1 well, Alberta, 5 9 view 
of outer coat, 6, view of opposite side showing 
gap exposing inner cavity and cell structure of 
the sporangium wall, 7# view similar to 6 but 
at a slightly different angle* 

p. 50 

Figure S: Sporangitoides cir cul are n. sp. X93 

hypotype, specimen 4§T-S0, from the Loon River 
shale, locality 175 - 4 SI, 22 feet above the 
water level of the Peace River, Alberta, edge 
oblique view. 

pp. 59-62 

Figure 9, 10, IS: Sporangitoid es circular e n* sp., 
X 92 . 5 , proposed' ho'lotype, specimen 480-S0, 
from the Loon River shale, occurs in the 
bottom part_of the Haplophragmoldes 424 zone, 
locality 175~4SO, 25 feet above the water 
level of the Peace River, Alberta, 9# plan view, 
10 , edge view at a slight oblique angle, 15 , 
plan view of the opposite side. 


pp. 59-62 











1 


1 


{. X 




* 









t 




< t 












-10S- 


SXPLANATION OF PLATS 5 
(continued) 


Figure 12 : Sp orangitoides circulate n. sp. 

X 73 ,“~Eyp6type/ specimen ’ 3636-48 (Bullock) 

4 feet from the bottom of the shale zone 
separating the first and second Viking sands, 
basal Lloydminster shale. Imperial Eldorena 
#1 well, Alberta, plan view, specimen appears 
to be slightly pyritized, 

pp, 59-62 


Figure 


13i Sporangltoides clrculare n. sp,, X 65 . 6 , 
hypo type, specimen 628^48, from the Loon River 
shale, locality 220-628, 61 feet above the 
water level of the Peace River, Alberta, 
plan view. 


pP. 59-62 


Figure 14: Sporangltoides lentic ular© n, sp, Var. B, 
X 65 .b, hypotype, specimen 614-150, from the 
Loon River shale, locality 211-614, 39,5 feet 
above the water level of the Peace River, 
Alberta, plan view, diagrammatic in part, 
reconstruction, showing a segmented appendage 
at proximal end. 


p. 65 












e 














PLATE. 5 



CRETACEOUS CUTINIZED MICROFOSSILS 




-109- 
CHAPTER 4 

1. BIOLOGICAL CONCLUSIONS 

Eight common and distinct types of cutinized 
microfossils based upon distinct morphologic and size 
differences have been recognized by the writer. The 
writer assumes, but is not certain, that they are 
the parts or organs of plants representing a part of 
their reproductive cycle. Evidence based on obser¬ 
vation, and reference to available literature, pertaining 
to the composition of fossil and plant material seems 
to indicate that these parts or organs are in most 
cases composed of a very durable substance especially 
adapted to preservation. 

The writer does not know the affinity of these 
microfossils as they were not found organically attached 
to the parent body. The larger types look like spore 
sacs or spore containers, (sporangia). One specimen 
only, of Sporangitoides giganteum n. sp. was seen to 
contain small sphere-like masses, presumably spores. 

All of these cutinized microfossils are considerably 
larger than most Recent spores and pollen proper. None 
of the material studied by the writer had monolete or 
trilete scars or germinal furrows indicating an haptotypic 
tetrad arrangement which is a common characteristic of 
most spores and pollen proper. 




5T-jfMAnC 

. 

•,r-ix. 1 ;... 4 xo • xx bn* -uxtuxco 

' . u . ■ ■ : i ' 

: - ; .1 . >\:'C * r ' V . ' •- 

* * 

. .. ' ' 

, • ©1 « 

..V:,--/,; l&.rsftf£m dmlg cr!,- Ltxz ox.lo ncijxaoqHioo ©fit ox 

i?x sat c,.f;xx-xc ie sihxxcf x-o-Ij o*BO f 3* ©tBOxfeni: ot 
xo 9 -:f< 3 ©• ©oxxs-iadxrs \p - ov x it fcaeoc/rnoo aesxo 

* ■: '. £ • . - . 

t io vo’.rnxr.a. su;r>/ofol job web leti'x* fed'J: 
£>£;Io£jtB .^IJLBalxiBr-.-'xo JbiiiK v toi.f ai9w sb sllasolo'ioxin 

- 

•' ’ '• • 

L , - * ■ ,, ' -.:•■'■• ' " .. ' • ^ " «' •' ' *' 

* t 

.*■ X:- r £--joo :vx£ aliaaolo-xoi:^. bosxnxtxrb e&eiit 'io LLM 

i 

c ■ * . .. ; - : ■ - ' 

t 

. . t : iffl €\ oM ' ■ 

*• ■ .".*\.y c i■ ■ - 




. 



-110- 


Sporitoides spinus n. sp. and S. discus n. sp. 
are amongst the smaller forms of cutinized microfossils 
studied by the writer and are assumed to be megaspores 
of unknown affinity* 

A very small and fragile form, designated by the 
writer as Hystrichosphaera loonriverensis n. sp. has 
been tentatively assigned to the Hystrichosphaerid 
group whose affinity has been referred to quite a 
number of things by various authors* Ehrenberg, 1836, 
(Ref* 16, p* 20), determined them as Zanthidium * 
a genus of freshwater algae, Merrill, 1895, (Ref* 16), 
considered them as sponge spicules (G-eodia). Lohmann, 
1904, (Ref. 16) compared them to the spiny eggs of 
marine planktonic Crustacea (ova hispida)* 0. Wetzel, 
1933 (Ref. 16) stated that they were not f, ova n but 
the remains of unknown organisms related to the dino- 
flagellates. He later revised his opinion and referred 
to the Hystrichosphaerids as "cysts." 

Bradley, (Ref. 7, p* 45, pi* 23, fig* 4) illus¬ 
trates a microfossil which has a remarkable similarity 
in size and shape to Hystrichosphaera loonriverensis 
n. sp* He refers to it as a Zygospore of a desmid (?)* 










' 





1 


? 






clw 


t « 


c 


t >. 



c 


IlX r XB£. 




« 


r 




xa 






* 





111- 


2. STRATIGRAPHICAL CONCLUSIONS* 

Stratigraphically, the samples from which the 
raicrofossils for the major part of this study were obtained 
are from the middle portion of the Loon River shale, that 
la about 200 feet from the top and about 4-00 feet from 
the base, representing a probably thicliness of about 
300 (?) feet. Geographically, they were obtained from 
24- collecting stations spread out over a distance of 
approximately 64- miles. The most northerly collecting 
station is located 10 miles upstream from Ft. Vermilion 
and the most southerly station from which samples 
were collected and studied is situated 32 miles 
upstream from where Wolverine River empties into the 
Peace River. 

Within the Loon River shale, the occurrences of 
cutinized. microfossils is tied in with previously 
established megafossil, ammonoid and pelecypod zones, 
and new microfaunal zones as recognized and set up by 
Mr. F. H. Trollope (Supp. Ref* 5 ). 

The age relationship existing between these 
various zones is shown by the following generalized 
table. Age sequence Is from oldest at the bottom to 
youngest at the top. 


* 

5 


' . 










' ■ , ■ t 




l&tri 


;> X IX 


r x 


■i 


j: a 


:,:oV'x :.x ix” x; \,jxx^ x s■■ xx 'xxx' x<xu 


; 


*■; ,i : ;v r r: ;; , ' % , , f* 0 3 




x; /iv' ;v.i ■ X,Xx Ii JxL w Jx* 

^ ' . J ' i t ■ • : 

;- q ,v. r' fix; ■■ -:t >x x olsi X6.:.: ixix-'i 


r; ; * • * 

x . 

X. I . . X 

- 



-112- 



i 

pr4 cQ 

E£5 eh JD 























i 







113’ 


It is to be noted that the table on the previous 
page merely attempts to portray the fossil zone sequences 
and does not indicate thickness of strata represented by 
each zone. 

The zones contained within the two horizontal lines 
indicated on the left side of this generalized table 
are those which have been recognized by Mr, Trollope. 

The shale samples containing the micro-organisms 
studied in this thesis are from strata of the Loon 
River shale below that in which Beudanticeras is 
known to occur, and younger than the strata containing 
the calcareous microfauna (Foraminifera) known to 
occur in samples from a section below Ft. V e rmilion. 

The lower microfauna was not studied by the writer or by 
Mr. Trollope. This latter occurrence is estimated to 
be about 150 feet above the Devonian limestone at 
this locality. 

The bottom-most Radiolarian zone consisting of 
the three main genera, Cyrtocapsa , Aptocapsa and Conostrobufr 
was noted at the bottom of the most northerly section, 
(locality 257 * 700-704) studied by the writer. It 
represents the lower limit of the Loon River shale strata 
in which cutinized microfossils have been observed in 
this study. The maximum occurrence of cutinized micro¬ 
fossils occurs above the aforementioned Radiolarian zone 
and below the Ammodlsc us 411A subzone. 








■ " X *■; . v " • •■■■r - . • ■ 

■>; . ,' - ■: ■ ■; ''i.. - ol:' rJ: ■: . l \ . 

* 

' 

4.“ n --rS-t 'to cv: io . 'ml ozUr no Jlrt: : o, lor: l 

* + O'i 0 ' rC / . 'J 1 i • .. .J ' 

v ' : X .'tU 0 J. k .o, 

>> - 

■ no‘t.j .■»’/: ..X. /x - .■ r. OUOO- ...OX..'.) 'iXO 

* 

. 

• ■ V r-J ■ ' • .r. r.'/n ■ : .. 

i X'kl: ". 0 0 ■■ c.; . ruiw . 

< t 

< : : * • 

.• : 

0 ■ l iU i:o X X • . 

; , ■ *• ■■■.'; >: . Xr.XC - /"X.X .X 0 . 

♦ . 

' 

* ■/.. \.S. no t ■ - ■ ■ 





- 114 - 


The Radiolarian, ( Conostrobus) zone is immediately 
above the Ammodiscus 411A subzone and appears to be 
about 35 (?) feet thick. As the ammonite Cleoniceras 
is known to occur at the base of this zone it permits a 
reasonably accurate and long range correlation with the 
Folkstone Sands of England. (Spath, Ref. 37, vol. II, 
p. 699). Cleoniceras is said to be characteristic of the 
Leymereilla regularis subzone of the Leymereilla 
tardefurcata zone, which is uppermost Lower Albian in age. 

Immediately above the Radiolarian ( Conostrobus ) 
zone cutinized microfossils come in again and occur in 
considerable abundance in 50 feet of strata. The cutin¬ 
ized microfossils extend into the bottom half of the 
Haplophragmoide s 360 zone. 

Regional section to section correlation based upon 
the spectra of cutinized microfossil occurrences was 
done with some success. It must be stated that cor¬ 
relation from section to section does not show exact counts 
or percentages of identical species, but successional 
and repetitional trends are indicated. Several obvious 
reasons why the successional trend is not exact in 
section to section are as follows: A strong factor 
would be the areal distribution of flora in this 
part of Loon River time in the area considered. Another, 
would be the corrosion of the cutinized microfossils, 
prior to and during fossilization. A non-uniform 
method of sampling and the later non-uniform treatment 












■ ' ‘ ■ ' xj__X_ XX C : " !••..’■ x X :: v 

. 

£ f: - £ X, "Jr. -rj&f/J Xilj v ;... J '£jJO0€ C it .1 <V70fl$ x.t 

xrx • .'••■' 'tc • x. , x ; y.Xj rxc- xc 

t < i ? 

. x 

a .? T • X .X ' : .XX. ■ ■ X X f ' ■ " XX. X XX XQ'XX'^TV xl 

X .. X':- x . o • ? . •/,, x. ■ 

.. . ; x" f x >,.;; ■ xvx -y ixx ! xi; xx ■ 

, 

^ ' '.. ^.. ■ . ..... 

••xx;;. x.xxx: x,. x; /■..■ - x.:xxdxxx ox ocixxxx xx'xx 

, 

-x ■'■■ex.' toi x-x." o'OXt xx cx xxf' : ‘'-x n<Vfl roitfi-lyfl: 
• ! ■ ■ : ■' x < j l. x ■ c xxx x: 

* 

; ” £ &'■■■' x» -' ex- ..•• o*::-t • oeixes-xOix yxix xacxxe*! 

• ’ ■ X , :? \;c j. r‘.„ ; XIJX XX XX'XXX; OX me .r X.;-/X 

" !!,£ ■•'xl; ;xo ;x xxxxtxxytxxxi!; l.xex:x- erlxt xs D.Xnciv 

< : j n r a. j:. \rr vi: x x < J 'U r 

c ■" • ■ '. ■ .x ■ v x ::o ( ynoo dad i .. c 

* C £ :i" : i X IX , . : X x; i; f f , ;; X , , ■■ 

' '■ X I x.X yvXX'XXX' 'tO hC;XX"9£ 




- 115 ' 


of samples would produce erratic results. 

A cursory examination of microsuites from other 
sources, from rocks stratlgraphically younger than the 
Loon River shale conclusively indicates that cutinized 
microfossils are not localized stratigraphically or 
geographically. Further studies will no doubt reveal 
an even greater distribution. 

Cutinized microfossils have been observed in 
samples from the Grand Rapids sandstone, Joli Fou 
shale and Pelican sandstone from sections on the 
Athabaska River, Alberta* (Bahan, Supp* Ref. 1). These 
microfossils are considerably larger than equivalent 
elements studied in the Loon River shale. Varieties of 
three form species are represented* Sporangitaides 
giganteum n, sp,, 3 9 ellipsoprolatam j!. sp. and S m 
circulars which occur in maximum abundance at and near 
the top portion of the Joli Fou shale. The same assem¬ 
blage of cutinized microfossils also occurs in the 
Viking sands of the Basal Lloydminster shale (Bullock, 
Supp. Ref. 2), from the Imperial Eldorena #1 well of the 
Edmonton area, Alberta, The maximum is at the base 
of the first or top Viking sand* Assuming the above 
correlation to be correct, this suggests that this 
zone may occur slightly higher stratigraphically than 
the similar maximum occurrence zone at the top of the 
Joli Fou shale. 







' 


r 


u 

' 






A sparse number of cutinized microfossils, of 
two types, Sporangitoides ellipsoprolatam ji. sp. and 
S. circulare n, sp. were seen in samples from the 
Shaftesbury Formation from a section on the Smoky 
River, near Judah railway station, Alberta. (Nielsen, 
Supp. Ref. 3). Stratigraphically, they were observed 
to range between 10 and 45 feet above the middle 
gypsiferous sandstone horizon in the Shaftesbury 
formation. 

Three main types of cutinized microfossils occur 
in considerable abundance in the St. John formation 
(Cenomanian) as revealed by a cursory study of sample 
contents from sections on Septimus Creek, and from the 
mouth of St. John Creek, on Beatton River, B r itish 
Columbia, (Wetter, Supp. Ref. 6), varieties of three 
form species are: Sporangitoides ellipsoprolat^ n. sp., 
most abundant, S, lenticulare n, sp. var. D, S. cir ¬ 
culate n. sp. These occur in maximum abundance at 
65 feet above the base of the fish scale sa,nd zone 
in the St. John formation. 


The youngest strata in which cutinized micro- 
fossils have been observed to date occurs in the Second 













- 117 - 


White Specks (Turonian) from shale samples from a well 
in the Spirit River area, Alberta* (J* Wall, personal 
communication, 1951)* A few specimens of varieties 
of two form species are noted; Sporangitoides cir¬ 
culars n. sp*, most abundant, and S. ellipsoprolata^ n. 
sp. 


3* PA1E0-EC0L0GICAL DISCUSSION OF CUTINIZED MICRO¬ 
FOSSILS. 

Spores and pollen proper have been found in nearly 
all types of sedimentary rock although they are not 
known to have been extracted from conglomerates or Recent 
and Pleistocene gravel deposits. (Wilson, Ref. 48, p. 

112) A few plant fossils have been found in sandstones 
but this type of sediment does not seem to be favorable 
to the preservation of spores and pollen; however, 
conifer pollen has been noted frequently in the sandy 
sediments underlying the peat of northern bogs. (Ref. 46) 
They occur rarely in marine limestones but occur abund¬ 
antly in at least some of the fresh water limestones, esp¬ 
ecially marl, deposited by fresh water lakes. Calcareous 
concretions in coal seams has yielded some of the best 
morphologic material. Spore cases, spores and pollen are 
frequently so abundant in shales (Dawson, 1871, Ref. 11), 
(Bradley, Ref. 7) that they overlap one another as seen 
in thin sections. 





su.- da 


- . t so 4 x l : 

(iuiixtCAu<*1') r © c*& © ttdff! 

t - ** * . • $ .A. 

' 


_ ■. .. • • .. . i**oo 


.Ay . ; A ■■: c •' :: Ai-. :AAi. 

> c > ■ 

* ■ _ * 

t * .. 1 


%• ' ■ t .1 < s ■ 

©TOC 

rf'C;.: 'A/ A yAKf A'joA 1 a ?iDGT y 

\U :: aao A If - a . ;] 0 v;r' If,A 


' ' :X Kt^flCO rrt; -v..; ;>V.' d et awcivA 

* <' - «' ' t- ' • * 

1 '• n; " z**ssr'i ns-von aliAsor t t0B.[q v/el a (SIX 


AAA. AC vAlt 9 • A'A 270^8 AC A A 90.5 ATT' 


t ' ' r : * 

■ ■■■"' AC iJ i'.’.V'I v ■ 0 9 ACeil 0 3 


i .■ ■:' kliQQ 


* ■ ■ ’ * ■ 

. J 

*"}ji yo v jjj&oo &sjti f. onod's 9!ifxX 0 ni y 

AO.. ;u xL$*ls r i Tj/CD0,Y9d , l' 

1 0 

aa, vtc'A.sI #s isi yJ^Ituk 


■■ ■ A. ' A'. , c . ....A, , 

so e-moa oag bbii 

■■a ;• ao cu .q± enoxteToiyoo 

-A ■ . ■■ c 

* 0 ■ .-A''. ■ A A A ! ■' 

•"■'■■■ c •* ■ ■ A t 5. - \ A ) : 1 

^■it-hrwOB oa YlATieAA:.: *;c*i 

" '.■c :aa TonAonc, oro q&Lzsvc 

• • . V t ; A ■ 

* ' 0 t •. : ■ .o. ;:r ,J. 



-11 s- 


The wide range of host rocks mentioned above 
illustrates the diversity of environmental conditions 
in which micro-plant material can be preserved* 

Considering the Loon River shale, the environ¬ 
ments of deposition can best be determined from a 
study of the sequence of micro-assemblages occurring 
in suites from the respective collecting stations. 

These interpretations are based upon the statistical 
analysis of the cutinized microfossils and their re¬ 
lation to other microfauna and megafossils. The 
lithology of the Loon River shale is also considered. 

McConnell, (Ref. 25, p. 570) described the Loon 
River shale outcropping in this area as i 11 About 4-00 
feet of dark greyish or nearly black, soft shales, 
holding calcareous and ironstone nodules, interstratified 
with occasional beds of sandstone, impure limestone and 
iro.nstone* Fossil wood was found in considerable 
quantities, scattered through this formation". 

In the portion of the Loon River shale con¬ 
sidered by this thesis, neither the lower contact with 
Devonian limestone nor the upper contact with the Peace 
River sandstone is seen. 


- ' 

< . .. r Z . i. . ■ • v 

. . 

j:c ■■■ . -u rle‘:r 't f " w ti 1 1 41.2 

. 

t * < 

: 

■ x . . i I i ' : iOp ; 6 xv: 1 f 

K ' • 

... ' < ' . . - ••- ■ 



-119- 

The accuracy of the interpretation of the environ¬ 
mental significance of biotopes is limited because of 
the uncertainty in some cases of definite structural 
control between sampled localities* An initial study 
of this type should be done on a single section or 
samples from a single drilled hole drhere no doubt would 
exist about the sequences of micro-assemblages 
encountered. 

With this in mind the writer offers the 
following generalized interpretation. 

It is believed that the Loon River shales are 
of marine origin laid down by the fluctuating Clear¬ 
water sea which McLearn (Supp. Ref. 7) depicts as coming 
in from the north north-west and flooding to the south 
south-east. The known occurrence of marine calcareous 
Foraminifera in a section located below Ft. Vermilion 
on the Peace River indicates that at this time and 
place a marine neritic environment existed. This 
was followed by a considerable deepening of the sea and 
consequent flooding southwards. This is represented by 
shale which contains well developed genera of Radiolaria 
including Cyrtocaosa . Artocapsa and Conostrobus . 

Within a short vertical interval and lateral 
distance to the south the micro-assemblages rapidly 
alters to that of cutinized microfossils consisting 





-CMJ'- . ' 

■■iJ- j.c :n nn;,n;jnon: o^ax od& Xo vo^’iuoo.- odT 
Xc on,;-no- ■. i.a XXna.! a.:: ..an ooxd 'no lioniv^x'xx.'ij^xe L,;r*i9m 
' • 

* . ' • :' ono.nn; ; ■;■; ■ -.: no .. ,.on : I-c on 1 o\o 

' * ! - oaxonon x, no 00:00 ecf bLsjoiie eqyt oida n o 

Xiooi , Jin on .nano i/i.c - he):.I XtX o.i ; ;,r,i:o ,0 Dm';!.: 00X00.>0 

•no ■■,.: ,-o\i. do 0 i ,n ■ ; on■■'■.:.•• 0oX". j ■ ■ c J,,:-. o0X0 o 

» : -o . oo 

< • • ■ v . • 0 f | 

■ * - : i ■ on 

®*ib o.:lo.ao o: y\jx. nx.cj. ona X.no 0 bsverlod 01: XI 

* ■ - < ; < 

, ' * ,■•: • 0 

fl -■■ono .. . jo 5 : o.X.: jo;. :ooco : , |. v r00 o : . a 0r:i ranli ioi 

O 0 . • 

;v • ••• - ’ ■ 0 * '■ • 9:-. . f . •"■ 9.,. r - n ; 

j on -am on;on ,0 donno ■ 0don tOooi ‘ODvon ooio; on! no 

■ • *■' 1 ' : ' 0 ■; ■ . • . . 

* : ■ ' ' ■ 0 00..‘ ■.i »Ii: ■ 9 ■-• DXoOon; . ,, A . . , { j. 10 t • ■ ' 

. 

*. I.Ill :x Y.„n.0:X0' : 

X'0‘'oo:r:inn Invoar/nr jX/ioXn tov nxcnn 
\o.u.. nm: non.. nooo;: 00:000.. on.; n:Xo non ob odf oX s-omnlo in 
• - " — non ; oo 0 -n:n l .. .: no X n 0,., n; do; X o c 0 nr-' nl. 






-120 


mainly of Sporangitold.es lenticulare n. sp. and lesser 
numbers of j3. circulare n. sp. and J3, ellipsoprolato/ n 
n. sp. The paucity and complete absence of Foraminifera 
and Radiolaria and the relative abundance of cutinlzed 
microfossils suggests a partial recession of the Clear- 
water sea resulting in a very shallow brackish 
environment. Although there is a marked lateral change 
in the biotopic characters, there is no noticeable 
change in lithology as indicated by descriptions of 
these sections. Thus it seems reasonable to assume 
that the Clearwater sea did not completely recede. A 
coastal swamp would account for the large amount of 
carbonaceous matter and fossilized wood as noted by 
McConnell (Ref. 25 ). 

As the cutinized microfossils are somewhat too 
large to be carried any great distance by air currents 
as is done with pollen, it is to be expected that their 
distribution would be somewhat restricted regionally 
if deposited on land. If dropped in water, in their 
original state they would presumably float and their 
distribution would be the result of wave and current 
action. Regarded in this sense they would behave as 
plankton and the possibility of their being distributed 
over larger areas considerably increased. If these 
elements are truly planktonic organisms they may 
reflect the environment of the pelagic realm; and 
therefore be of small value in the interpretation of 
depositional environments. 






~ _[•— 

. *. . .. 

- 

a - •; ..'-a;.; V. •vt/; I \i a4- .aa;A' .axa: ■ 

■ 

i 

t ■ * ■. .' 

' 

■ * « 

* 

A ■ •;. / A ;■ • • • ' A ' ' ! ■ -• -■ ■ •- - 

. 

; - - ' ■ • a : ■■ ' a.: -..'. ■ ' . A 

. . ■) : \ 1 • • * ■ .1 a . . - ; 

, A < :■ 

. 

. 'AAA''- A a;. 

• ■ V ■ i ■ 

* 

. 

. 

<■ 1 

4 : A .. , A i:A:.. 





- 121 - 


Cutinized microfossils were noted in samples 
from approximately 15 localities along the Peace 
River representing a winding river distance of 
approximately 100 miles and a straight line distance 
of ajcout ^O miles between the two end stations in 
which they were observed. Cutinized microfossils 
completely dominate the organic content observed in 
these samples. 

A deepening of the Clearwater sea or a deeper 
local embayment is indicated to the south by the 
appearance of the Ammodlscus 411A subzone micro¬ 
assemblages which coincides with the upper portion 
of the Haplophragraoides 424 zone and it marks the 
interruption of cutinized microfossils at this 
stratigraphic horizon and geographic locality. This 
tenet is supported by the known occurrence of Cleon - 
ice ras at the bottom of the Radiolarian Conostrobus 
3SS zone which occurs in the Loon River shale at this 
locality in strata above the Haplophragmoides 424 zone. 

A short distance south the appearance of cutinized micro- 
fossils in samples from strata above the Radiolarian 
Conostrobus 3&& zone suggests a shallow marine environ¬ 
ment, G-lauconite seen in some sample residue^along 
with the cutinized microfossils tends to support this 
assumption. 












I 






/ 





' 










- 122 - 


Microassemblages from strata above this zone 
indicates a deeper marine environment and cutinized 
microfossils are not found with it. 




APPENDIX 


1. Detailed Descriptions of Lithology at each 
Collecting Station. 

The samples of the Loon River shale from which 
the microorganisms for this study were obtained were 
collected by a Pacific Petroleums Ltd., surface party 
during the field season of 1950« This party consisted 
of Dr. Pierre Cote, chief; William Elder, G-eorge Donn 
and John Binnie, assistants. The samples treated in 
this thesis were collected from outcrops along the 
Peace River between-Fort Vermilion and as far south to 
point 10 miles north where.the 25 th. base line crosses 
the Peace River. Fort Vermilion is situated 3^5 miles 
straight line distance, north north-west of Edmonton. 

The samples are from the middle portion of the 
Loon River shale representing a probable thickness 
of 300 (?) feet. 

A condensation of the field descriptions of 
lithology at each collecting locality is included 
in this appendix for convenient reference. A map 
showing a H Key to (Geographic Locations of Stations 
and Faunal Suites 11 is included with the descriptions. 






f 


o. 






124 *- 


SUITES 511-319 

Locality C 129C, Loon River formation, Peace River, Tp. 
R.19, W. 5 meridian, Alberta. 

4* Shale - grey, carbonaceous, micromicaceous, fairly 

fissile. 

Suite 311 

0.2* Highly rusty layer - could not be found fresh. 

11,0* Shale - dark grey, fairly coarse, slightly silty, 

blocky, fissile in lower portion. Shale contains 
carbonaceous particles, is micro-micaceous and 
microsilty. 

Suite 312 1* down from base of above* 

Suite 313 6 1 down from base of above* 

Suite 31 ^ 10 1 &own from base of above. 

This last is a sandstone, dark grey, micromicac¬ 
eous with much coarse glauconite, a mixed sample. 
(*>. 

2.0* Modular shale - shale as above, with little 

glauconite andnumerous small nodules up to C M 
in diameter* 

Suite 315 

3*0 1 Shale - as above, but without nodules. 

4.4 1 Shale - dark grey, silty, hard and somewhat 

blocky, small discontinuous nodular layer, 1*5* 
down. 

Suite 316 l 1 down from base of above. 

0.6 - 1.2* Ironstone layering - concretionary, discontin¬ 
uous. 

3*5 1 Shale - dark grey to black, silty, contains car¬ 
bonaceous particles, also innumerable elongate 
nodules. 

Suite 317 . 

6*7 1 Shale - as above but without nodules, contains 
carbonaceous particles, and is micromicaceous* 

Suite 31$ 2 l down from base of above. 

Suite 319 6.7* down from base of above, (i.e* water 

level). 


Covered to water level 
















1 


c 








1 












) 




- 125 - 


SUITSS 349-35^ 

Locality 0 137A, Loon River formation, Peace River, Tp. 
99, R. 19* W. S meridian, Alberta. 

ij-.O* Silty shale - to shaly slltstone, friable. This 
might well"represent the interbanded sandstone 
and shale at the base of the Notikewin. 

Suite 349 

3.4 1 Siltstone - light grey, argillaceous, contains 
carbonaceous particles. 

Suite 350. 

0.4* Ironstone layer - fairly discontinuous. 

7.0* Siltstone - as above, but contains many rounded 
nodu1 e s, _ Suite 351 

3*0' Siltstone - as above but without nodules. 
Covered to water bed. 


SUITES 352-35S 

Locality 0 13SA Loon River formation. Peace River, 
Tp. 99* R.19* W. 5 meridian,Alberta. 

Recent Silts. 


2,0 5 Shale - as below, 

15. 0 f Shale - grey with brownish hue, slightly silty, 

micromicaceous and carbonaceous to coaly 
particles, a few nodules for 5 1 below base of 
above, medium blocky. 

Suite 352 3* down from base of above. 

Suite 353 down from base of above. 

Suite 35^- 13* down from base of above. 

1*0 1 Ironstone layer - concretionary, not continuous, 

2.0 ! Shale - similar to that above, almost khaki 

locally, 

16.0 1 Shale - drab to khaki, medium splintery, slightly 
silty, carbonaceous particles, some irridescent 
micromicaceous particles 6 !l down. 

Suite 355 V down from base of above. 

Suite 35b 6 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 357 11 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 35 S 16 1 down from base of above. 


Covered to w T ater level 

















■«. 



■J 



x ■ * % 










T r 



I 


- 126 - 


suitss 359-370 

Locality C I 38 B, Loon River formation, Peace River, 

Tp. 99# R. 19# W # 5 meridian, Alberta. 

5 . 0 * Shale - grey, fissile to hackly, badly weathered, 
a few nodules. 

5.0® Shale - blacky, medium grey to brown, Irridescent 
particles. 

Suite 359 2 1 down from base of above. 

3.5' Shale - grey, fine grained, rusty locally. 

■Suite 360. 

5.0* Shale - drab, medium to fine, rusty weathering 
band, yellow decomposition product at base. 

Suite 3b1* 

1.0* Ironstone band . 

12.7 1 Shale - dark grey, blocky, medium to coarse, 

micromicaceous, carbonaceous particles, weathered 
into fissile shale, dark grey. 

Suite 3d2 4* down from the base of above. 

Suite 3o 3 9* down from the base of above* 

2.5 1 Shale -dark grey, tendency to khaki, coarsely 

blocky. 

20.°‘ Shale - grey, medium blocky, becoming greenish 
grey, irridescent micro-particles, carbonaceous 
micro-particles, micromicaceous, very slightly 
calcarepus if any. 

Suite 36 ^ 5 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 366 10 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 367 15 1 down from base of above. 

5*0 1 Shale - darker grey, fissile to flaky, mierosilty, 
micromicaceous and microcarbonaceous. 

Suite 368 . 

$•0* Shale - greenish grey, much yellow decomposition 
product, micromicaceous, carbonaceous, rusty 
weathering. 

Suite 3d9 at base of above. 

Suite 370 5* down from base of above. 

37.3 * Covered to water level 












« 


< 


<s 


I 



< 






t 



SUITES 372-3S3 


Locality 0 154A Loon River formation, Peace River, Tp. 

100, R. 20, W. 5 meridian,Alberta. 

11.5* Shale - dark grey, very slightly silty in lenses, 
weathers light grey locally, and looks like 
interbanded shale and silt, micromicaceous, non- 
calcareous. 

Suite 372 b.5' up from base of below. 

Suite 373 1.5* U P from base of below. 

5.0* Shale - dark brownish grey, medium blocky,, 
silty (?), micromicaceous. 

Suite 374. 

2.5' Shade - hard clayey to flaky, micromicaceous but 
no silt, much yellow decomposition product in 
thin layers, contains carbonaceous particles, 
a gradational phase into shale below. 

Suite 374-. 

5.Q 1 Sha.le - dark grey to black, coarsely blocky, 

fissile, rather platy, much yellow material stands 
out like sandstone on weathering. 

Suite 376 . 

14.0* Shale - dark grey, medium blocky, becoming fissile, 

micromicaceous, contains a few carbonaceous 
particles. 

Suite 377 5 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 37 SA 10* down from base of above 

18.5* Shale - dark grey, becoming finely fissile to 

flaky, clayey, when wet, micromicaceous, carbonac¬ 
eous particles, some decomposition product. 

Note: drab metabentonite layer at 3 1 * 14* and 
17 * down. 

Suite 37SB 2 9 down from base of above. 

Suite 379 7* down from base of above. 

Suite 3 SO 12* down from base of above. 

Suite 38 I 17* down from base of above. 

0.4* Indurated layer - anhydrite (?) crystals, highly 
rusty, sandy '("?) 

Suite 382. 

6.0* Shale - dark grey to black to dirty brown, coarsely 
T51"ocky, and platy. Much yellow decomposition 
product, some biotite, carbonaceous matter. 

Suite 383 . 


Covered to water level 














I , . 





~ 128 - 


SUITES 4o4-40b 


Locality C 164X4, Loon River formation, on Wolverine River 
above mouth, Alberta, 

15.0 1 Shale - blocky, medium coarse, rusty weathering* 
Suite Lo4. 

0.2* Rusty weathering metabentonite - yellow to 
dark greenish grey. 

27*0 1 Shale - black coarsely platy and blocky, becoming 
splintery in bottom 5 1 an & showing close inter- 
baftding of silts and shales, not sampled. 

O.S 1 Metabentonite - grey to yellow, rusty weathering 
becomes indurated due to sulphate content (?). 

Shale - very coarsely blocky, black to brownish, 
greasy. 

Suite ^05 
Suite 40 6 , 

SUITES 416-444 


Locality 0 170A, Loon Riveijformation, Peace River, Tp. 
101, R* 19, W. 5 meridian,Alberta. 

5* Shale - dark grey, hard, fine to medium blocky 

with some coarse laminations, carbonaceous, 
sulphur or metabentonite in partings. 

Suite 416. 

5 1 Shale - as above, becoming more medium to 

coarsely blocky, rusty eartings» 

Suite 417. 

5* Shale - as above, becoming platy as 417, 

weathers well. 

Suite 4lS. 

5* Shale - as above, slight increase of rust in 

partings. 

Suite 419. 

Shale - as above, 

Suite - 420. 

Shale - as above, 

Suite 421 . 


5 3 

















I 





• 129 - 


R* Shale - as above becoming finely bloeky. 

Suite 422. 

5* Shale - as above, softer in weathering properties, 

not as many rusty partings, small amount of sul¬ 
phur or bentonite present. 

Suite 423. 

5 f Shale - as above. 

Suite 424. 

R 1 Shale - as above, medium to coarsely bloeky, 

more rusty, weathers hard. 

Suite 425. 

5* Shale - as above. 

Suite 426 

5* Shale - as above, dark brown tinge, very platy, 

hard. Suite 427. 

5* Shale - as above. 

Suite 42S. 

5* Shade - as above. 

Suite 429. 

R* Shale » as above, rusty platy. 

Suite 430. 

5* Shale - as above, lighter shade of grey, 

"medium, to finely bloeky, softer. 

Suite 431 , 

5 5 Shale - as above, medium bloeky. 

"Suite 432. 

5* Shale - as above. 

3uite 433• 

5 1 Shale - as above, softer, 

Suite '434. 

5* Shale - as above, dark grey, coarsely laminated, 

metabentonite, finely dispersed in part, becoming 
silty in part. 

Suite 435; 














I 




• v i 


:> 




dC 


t 







! 


t 






-130- 


5 ' 

Shale - not quite as platy as above, but 
becoming harder. Suite 436. 

5 * 

Shale - dark to medium grey, coarsely platy 
with sulphur in partings. 

Suite 4-37. 

5 ' 

Shale - medium to coarsely platy, hard weather- 
lng. 

Suite 43S. 

5 ' 

Shale - as above* 

Suite 439* 

5 ' 

Shale - as above. 

Suite 440. 

5 ' 

Shale - as above but finely blocky. 

Suite 441. 

r* 

Shale - as above but finely blocky. 

Suite 442. 

5 * 

Shale - as above, medium to coarsely platy, 
weathers hard. 

Suite 443. 

5 * 

Shale - as above, immediate below thin meta¬ 
bentonite band, very coarsely platy. 

Suite 444. 

- 

Covered to water level. 

SUITES 

449-456 

Locality 0 173^# Loon River formation. Peace River, 

Tp. 102 :, R» 19 # W. 5 meridian, Alberta. 

3 ' 

Pebble clay. 

7' 

Shale - medium blocky, grey, brittle, weathered, 

0 . 1 * 

Ironstone layer - continuous. 

1 . 0 ' 

Shale - brownish, blocky micromicaceous or 
silty, brittle, not fissile, medium to fine 
blocky. 

Suite 449-5 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 450 10 1 down from base of above^ 



















1 



I 


1 




J 





















-131- 


R.O’ Shale - as above, but becoming somewhat coarser, 
but considerably more resietant*°weathering, cliff 
forming. This considered to be the top of so 
called Indurated shale, this shale is locally 
coarsely to very coarsely plated. 

Suite 4-51. 

I. 0* Concretionary layer - with metabentonite shale 

covering. 

II. 0 1 Shale - coarsely platy as above, also very 

coarsely blocky, strongly micromicaceous. 

Suite 4-52 5’ down from base of above. 

Suite 4-53 101 down from base of above* 

7* Shale - similar to above, but less coarsely’platy 

with definitely coarse splintery, otherwise quite 
similar but less resistant to weathering. 

Suite 4-54- 5* down from base of above, 

13* Shale - as above but more finely splintery to 

blccky. and more crumbly. 

Suite 455 V down from base of above. 

Suite 4-56 8* down from base of above. 

20 1 Covered , 

3 1 Shale - poorly exposed, very coarse. The “Burn 11 

Covered to water level. 

SUITES 4b 5-4-85. 

Locality 0 175 s j Loon River formation. Peace River* 
at mouth of Big Buffalo River, 

4,0* Clay - with recovered shale* 

4.0’ Shale - dark grey, a certain platiness, waxy, 
narrow yellow thin laminae, closely spaced, 
badly weathered. 

17. 0 ? Shale - dark grey to black# coarsely blocky, 

"tendency to coarse splintery, not fissile, 
micromicaceous. 

Suite 465 l 3 down from base of above. 

Suite 46b 6 f down from base of above. 

Suite 467 11 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 4bS lb f down from base of above. 













«! 


f. 





t 






I 


132- 


12.0* Shale - dark grey to black, less coarse in 
texture, medium. 

Suite 4o9 4* down from base of above. 

Suite 470 9 1 down from base of above. 

9 , 0 * Shale - dark grey, becoming black, coarse to 
very coarse tendency to fissile, thin, could 
be top of 11 Burn". 

Suite 471 y down from base of above. 

Suite 472 6* down from base of above, 

3,0* Shale - much finer, splintery, silty. 

Suite 473* 

13.0* Shale - as previous. 

Suite 474 1* down from base of above. 

Suite 475 6® <3-0wn from base of above. 

Suite 47b 11* down from base of above. 

6.0* Sha le - dark grey, not blae, tendency to fissile, 
not"coarse. 

Suite 477 2* down from base of above. 

Suite 47^ down 7® from base of above, 

6,0* Shale - dark grey to black, medium blocky. 

Suite 479 4* down from base of above, 

5.5* Shale - dark grey to bladj medium blocky, only 

very slightly laminated with silt. 

Suite 460, 

2*5* Shale - as above but with fairly marked tendency 
to rusted, joint planes, slightly laminated with 
silt. 

Suite 461. 

9*0 1 Shale - dark grey, blocky has rounded fractures, 
locally silty, only slightly laminated, but 
appears fairly silty, slightly calcareous. 

Suite 462 4* down from base of above. 

Suite 463 6 f down from base of above. 

2,0* Indurated layer - shale apparently with much 
rusty shale., 

Suite 464. 














<! < 


1 


T 



! 











1 


<v 


% 





T 


1 




133- 


3.0' 

Shale - dark grey, splintery as below. 

6.5' 

Shale - dark grey, splintery, tendency to rust, 
Suite 485 l 1 down from base of above. 

0.1' 

Ironstone layer - apparently continuous. 


1.0' Covered to water level. 

SUITES 485-492 

Locality 0 "17&5A, Loon River formation, on Little 
Buffalo River above the mouth, Alberta. 


5.0' 

Glacial silt - honey combed. 

50 . 0 ' 

Covered. 

4* 

Shale - as below. 

0.2* 

Ironstone layer - not continuous. 

21.0' 

Shale - black, very coarsely blocky, this is the 
top of the Burn. 

Suite 4-92 l 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 491 11® down from base of above. 

0.2' 

Ironstone - fairly continuous. 

10.0* 

Shale - dark grey to black, fissile, coarsely 
blocky. 

Suite 490 5* &own from base of above. 

7.0' 

Shale - grey to dark grey, resistant to weathering, 
coarle, not platy nor fissile, nor very coarse, 
conchoidal to rounded fracture. 

Suite 489 5 s down from base of above. 

13 . 0 ' 

Shale - black, fissile, almost flaky coarse, 
very slightly laminated. 

Suite 488 8* down from base of above. 

1.4' 

Ironstone - discontinuous , concretion. 

20.0' 

Shale - black, fissile, much yellow decomposition 
product, very coarse, very slightly laminated. 

Suite 48J 4® down from base of above. 

Suite 486 14* down from base of above. 

5.0' 

Shale - coarse to very coarse, grey, rusty wea- 
thering, is cliff forming, clayey, micromicaceous, 
brittle. 

Suite 485 4* down from base of above. 



















t 


t 

I 

I 


1 



1 


I 


f 




! 



-134- 


SUIT5 493-497 

Locality 0 121X2B, Loon River formation. Keg River, 
Alberta. 

Boulder clay. 

7* Shale - as below, but highly weathered, 

0.2' Indurated layer - rusty weathering, high in 
anhydrite (?)* 

11,0 1 Shale - dark grey to black, weathers light grey 
platy to fissile, becomes more coarse, fissile 
and a little clayer towards the lower part, 

0,1* Ironston e layer - could be continuous, contains 
tTiin 'co'alyTayer „ 

9.0* Shale p dark grey to black, fairly blocky. 

Suite 495 5«5 J down from base of above, 

0.1’ Ironstone layer - thin and continuous, 

7.5 8 Shale - as above, but more coarsely blocky, 

less fissile. 

Suite 496. 

0.1* Ironstone layer , 

7.5 1 Shale - as above. 

Suite 497. 

0,1* Ironstone l ayer - discontinuous, below this to 

water levsI~6ofcrop is mainly covered or 
reworked* 

Water level. 


SUITES 501-506 . 

Locality 0 ISRB, Loon River formation. Peace River, Tp, 
105, R. 19* W* 5 meridian Alberta. 

10 1 Boulder Clay. 

10.0 s Burn-type shale - black coarsely to very coarsely 
"Blocky, platy, weathers fissile. 

Suite 501 10 1 down from base of above. 





















t 




td -j. i 


* 












t 


i 








c 

i 




1 






-135* 


1L.0* Shale - brovanish black, medium to fine blocky, 
very finely silty. This becomes laminated 
downwards due to silt content* 

Suite 502 5* down from base of above. 

Suite 503 12* down from base of above. 


0 . 1 ' 
b .0 1 

10.0 1 


0 . 1 * 

3.5' 


o.i* 

2 . 5 * 


Ironstone layer . 

Shale - as above, but mostly covered. 

Shale - dark grey to black, brownish hue on 
fresh fracture, coarsely to medium rubbly, 
rounded fractures, not silty but microraicaceous, 
weatherslight grey. 

Suite 504 5* down from base of above. 

Ironstone lay er - discontinuous, layered with 
very fine sandstone. 

Shal e - as a,bove but appears more micromicaceous 
and not silty. 

Suite 505 . 

Ironstone layer - discontinuous. 

Shale - as above. 


O.I 1 - 3.0* Ironstone layer - discontinuous 


10 1 Shale - dark grey with brownish hue, finely 
blocky, finely silty. 

Suite 5 0° down from base of above. 

Covered water level. 


SUITES 507-517, 

Locality 0 IS 5 A Loon River formation. Peace River, 

Tp, I 03 , R. 19# W, 5 meridian,Alberta* 

4* Boulder Clay - erosional unconformity. 

9* Shale - black brownish hue, strongly weathered, 

much yellow decomposition, could be ,f Burn 15 . 

11.0 1 Shale - dark grey, micromicaceous, silty blocky 

to splintery, rusty joints, becomes definitely 
platy, medium to coarse at base* 

Suite 507 from base of above. 

Suite 59^ 5.5 1 d&wn froinv base of above. 

Suite 509 11 5 down from base of above. 



















t 






T 


{ 

I' 

I 






1 


• \ _ 1 
5 ... 

t t 

% 

.'. ,'k Jz iVf ■ 



136- 


0.05* Metabentonite - white weathering. 

7,5* Shale - dark grey to black, coarsely platy 
'•to "rubbly 11 , silt laminate, micromicaceous, 
carbonaceous, particles. 

Suite 510 2 r down from base of above. 

Suite 511 7* down from base of above. 

0.2* Indurated l ayer - rusty, weathering, shale. 
Locally greenish hue. 

g.O 1 Shale - dark grey to black, silty, slight 
lamination, medium to coarse, "rubbly 11 
platiness, i. e., platy but also much rounded 
fracturing even along plate faces. 

Suite 512 5 1 down from base of above. 

26.0 1 Shale - dark grey to black, as above, but 
increasingly silty and brittle, also 
increasingly coarse in blockiness, discon¬ 
tinuous concretionary layer 7*0* down. 

Suite 513 2® down from base of above. 

Suite 51^- 7 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 515 13 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 5 lb IS 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 517 22* down from base of above. 

IS* Covered to Water Level. 

SUITES 5 1S - 532 

Locality 0 IH7,Loon River formation. Peace River, Tp. 
10L, R. 19*W. 5 meridian, Alberta. 

5* - 15* Boulder Clay - erosional surface. 

11.0 1 Shade - grey to black, with brownish hue, 

cliff forming on weathering, medium blocky. 

Suite 51 ^ 3? down from base of above. 

Suite 519 6* down from base of above. 

0.2* Concretionary laye r - discontinuous, flat, dark 
limestone, 

6.0* Shale - dark grey, only finely splintery, clayey 
soft~almost fissile. 

Suite 521 JJ-* down from base of above. 

0.2* Concretionary laye r - discontinuous, similar to 
that above. 















‘13 7* 


12,0* Shale - dark grey to black, cliff forming on 
Weathering, medium to fine blocky, clayey to 
splintery. 

Suite 522 4* down from base of above. 

Suite 523 9* down from base of above. 

17. 0 1 Shale - dark grey, as above, but coarser, more 
Brittle, rounded fracture, coarse rubbly. 

Suite 524 2* down from base of above. 

Suite 525 7’ down from base of above* 

Suite 52b 12 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 527 16.5* down from base of above. 

0.1 1 Rusty layer - prominent, may be due to highly 
weathered metabentonite. This forms base of 
cliff forming shale* 

9.2* Shale - grey, medium to fine, platy to blocky, 
silty, not so prominently cliff forming. 

Suite 52$ 5* down from base of above* 

Suite 529 9*2* down from the base of above. 

0.1 1 Concretionary layer - flat highly discontinuous. 

8 . 2 * Shale - dark grey to black as above. 

Suite 530 5 s down from base of above. 

0 . 2 ’ Shale - rusty weathering, layering, 

4,0 1 Shale - dark grey as above, but a little more 
coarse. 

Suite 531 V down from base of above, 

5*5* Shale - dark gre 3 ^ as above, but appears more 
cliff forming and coarser. 

Suite 532. 

Covered to water level. 

SUITES 533 - 537 * 

Locality 0 192A,Loon River formation. Peace River, Tp, 
104, R.19, W. 5 meridian* Alberta, 

75* Recent sediments with sand at base. 

IS* Shale - black with brownish hue, hard with almost 

'or it tie, coarsely laminated, blocky, some 
coarse plates, micromicaceous, possibly finely 

silty. 














% 


t 


k 


< 


1 



c. 





* 






I 




t 
















-132- 


Suite 531 5* down from base of above. 

Suite 534 10* down from base of above. 

Suite 535 15* down from base of above, 

S l Covered - but apparently all shale. 

0 , -1.5 l Concretions - elongate, built around petrified 
layer. 

17 1 Shale - as above, but mainly covered down to 

water level. The shale at water 1 s edge appears 
different. Brownish, rusty, softer and crumbly. 
Suite 53° 3 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 537 lb 1 down from base of above. 

1.2* Covered to water level. 


SUITES 532-559 

Locality 0 194-A, Loon River formation, Peace River, 

"Tp. 104, R. lb, W. 5 meridian,Alberta. 

2.0 1 Shale - as below. 

0.1* Ironstone layer - fairly continuous. 

0 . 0 1 Shale - black, eorasely platy, slight tendency 

to be fissile, silty, micromicaceous, tendency to 
brownish hue , tough. 

Suite 53 S 

0.2* Rusty shale layer - partly indurated. 

7 . 0 f Shale - as above. 

Suite 539 5* down from base of above. 

0 . 2 1 Shale layer - rusty weathering, containing a 
few small concretions. 

30 . 0 f Shale - dark grey to black, coarsely blocky, 

tendency to platiness, brownish hue, silty and 
Several discontinuous layers of small concretions 
and very small isolated concretions. Shale 
contains a few narrow white silt laminae. 

Suite 54-0 5 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 54-1 10 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 5^-2 15 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 54-3 20* down from base of above. 

Suite 544 25 * down from base of above. 

Suite 54-5 3C 1 down from base of above. 


















1 





i ■ 







\ 





13*0 1 Shale - dark grey to black, with brownish hue, 

fairly silty, micromicaceous, medium rubbly, 
tendency to platiness, weathers fissile light 
grey. Very large isolated concretions, also a 
rusty layer seen from water. 

Suite 54o 5* down from base of above* 

Suite 547 down from base of above* 

Suite $4S 15* down from base of above. 

0.2* Indurated layer - rusty weathering. 

13 . 0 * Shale - dark grey to black, brownish hue, generally 
less tough than above and more apt to be crumbly 
and flaky when weathered. 

Suite 5^9 5* down from base of above. 

Suite 55° 10 1 down from base of above. 

31 . 2 * Shale - as above but more coarsely blocky and 
platy. This could be due to the fact that it 
is recently eroded. Discontinuous ironstone 
ihyer 4.0’ down. 

Suite 551 from base of above. 

Suite 552 5 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 553 10 8 down from base of above. 

Suite 554 15 1 down from be.se of above. 

Suite 555 20 * down from base of above. 

Suite 55b 20 ! down from base of above. 

Suite 557 24 8 down from base of above. 

Suite 558 29 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 559 31*2* down from base of above. 

(Water level) 9 

l.S f Covered to water level. 

SUITES 5oO-5b2 » 

Locality 0 197A, Loon River formation. Peace River, 

Tp. 105 > R* IS, W. 5 meridian,Alta. 

There is here a large outcrop of shale, but 
it*s upper part is covered with entirely too much 
detritus for it to be easy to get any markers. 

This shale contains numerous isolated large to 
very large concretions. 

Suite 5b2 10* above water level. 

Suite 5b1 5 l above water level. 

Suite 5b0 at water level. 









■ 140 - 


SUITES 5o5-576 

Locality 0 202A, Loon River formation. Peace River, 

Tp. 105, R. I?> W. 5 meridian, Alta* 

11.0* Shale - black with brownish hue, coarse to very 
coarsely blocky, platy to fissile and almost 
flaky on weathering, slightly silty. 

Suite 565 10* up from top of below. 

Suite 56 b 5' up from base of below. 

Suite 5^7 a -t top of below. 

1.7 1 Calcareous concretion - quite hard, laminated. 
Suite 

11,0 1 Shale - black as above, much yellow decomposition 
product. 

Suite 569 at base of above. 

Suite 570 5 s down from base of above. 

Suite 571 10* down from base of above. 

0.7* Concretionary layer - flat, discontinuous, highly 
rusty but otherwise similar to that above. 

23.6* Shale - black as above, locally strongly fissile 
Suite 572 3* &own from base of above. 

Suite 573 down from base of above. 

Suite 574 13' down from base of above. 

Suite 575 !&* down from base of above. 

Suite 57b 23* down from base of above* 

0.3 1 Ironstone layer - flat discontinuous, highly 

rusted. 

3*0 1 Shale - cliff-forming as above. 

15 . 5 ’ Covered to water level* 


SUITES 577-584 . 

Locality 0 206, Loon River formation. Peace River, Tp. 

105, R® 17* 5 meridian, Alberta. 

3.0* Boulder clay . 

S.§* Shale - black to dark grey, weathered, coarsely 

blocky, almost a eonehoidal fracture, not sampled. 

9.0 1 Shale - black, coarse to very coarse, cliff-forming 

brownish hue, micromicaceous, few silt laminae, 
tough. 





















i 










< 













$ 








* 


j 

t 







- 141 - 


Suite 577 l 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 576 6* down from base of above. 

Metabentonite layer - very thin, continuous. 

24.-2* Shale - as above, but coarser, more platy on 

fresh fractures, more fissile where weathered. 
Suite 579 3' down from base of above. 

Suite 560 8* down from base of above. 

Suite 5&1 13' down from base of above. 

Suite 582 IS* down from base of above. 

Suite 583 23 1 down from base of above. 

1.0* Concretionary layer - discontinuous. 

5.0 1 Shale - as above. 

Suite 5^4 3 1 down from base of above. 

Covered to Water Level. 

SUITES 5S5-6Q2 . 

Locality 0 20b G, Loon River formation, Peace River, Ip. 
105 , R. 17# W. 5 meridian, Alta. 

3 1 Silt and cobble clay 

2' Gravel to conglomerate - some large boulders, 

rusted. 

5* Upper Burn-type shale - weathered. 

- —— 

0.2* Ironstone layer - apparently continuous. 

4.0* Shale - Burn type, weathered. 

"Suite 585. 

3.0* Shale - black, medium to fine. 

Suite 5^6 1.5* down from base of above. 

20.2* Shale - black medium to fine, not blocky 
brownish hue, crumbly to clayey. 

Suite 587 4* down from base of above. 

Suite 5^^ 9* down from base of above. 

Suite 589 14* down from base of above. 

Suite 590 19 1 down from base of above. 

21.6* Shale - as above. 

Suite 591 5.4* down from base of above. 

Suite 592 1018* dow-n from base of above. 

Suite 593 lo.2* down from base of above. 

Suite 594 21.6* down from base of above. 






















- 142 - 


0.2* Bentonite - rus w ty weathering, also flat concre- 
cretlonary layer, laminated; this rock is app¬ 
roximately top of "Lower Burn". 

23,6* Shale - black, coarsely platy and blocky, fissile 
micromicaceous, brown black. 

Suite 595* 2* down from base of above. 

Suite 59b 7*4* down from base of above. 

Suite 597 12.S* down from base of above. 

Suite 59&'l8.2 f down from base of above. 

Suite 599 23.6 f down from base of above. 

Suite bOO 29.0* down from base of above. 

Suite bOl 34*4* down from base of above. 

2.0* Shale - very silty, fine. 

Suite 602. 

- Covered to ‘water level. 


SUITES 603-621 


Localit y 0 211A, Loon River formation. Peace River, 

Tp. 15 , R. 16, W. 5 meridian, Alberta. 

0.2* Shale - indurated, rusty with much raetabentonite. 

22.6* Shale - dark grey, brownish hue, silty laminae, 
tough, medium blocky fair weathering resistance. 
Ironstone layer 15 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 603 10* down from base of above. 

Suite 604 20 1 down from base of above. 

0 . 2 1 Ironstone layer -flat, quite resistant. 

14*5 1 Shale - as above, but more platy, parallel layering 
more prominent, also softer and more clayey. Shale 
becoming blacker and more coa.rse towards the base. 
Suite 0O5 7*5* down from base of above. 

Suite 6 O 0 14 5 down from base of above. 

0.25' Ironstone layer - quite prominent and resistant* 

2.5* Shale - identical to above* 

9.2* Shale - black brownish hue, medium to coarse 
blocky, fair platiness, hard, brittle, minute 
conchoidal breaks, fairly resistant to weathering. 
Suite 607 5* down from base of above. 























c 


t: 

1 

I 


I 

f ■ 



I 












S 









! 


I 



r 



i 






* 






I 


i 

I 










- 1 * 3 - 


35.0 1 Shale - black as above but coarser, and notably 
more resistant to weathering, almost vertical 
cliff, contains several narrow ironstone layers 
at 10* 13 * and 15 * down; also two narrow rusty 
layers at 23 * 5 1 and 26.0* down. 

Suite bOS 6 l down from base of above. 

Suite b09 lo 1 down from base of above* 

Suite blO 2b * down from base cf above. 

2.5 1 Shale as below but slightly more resistant to 
weathering. 

11.5* Shale - black, brownish hue, fissile, blocky 
soft clayey, quite crumbly. 

Suite bll 3*5* down from base of above. 

0.2* Ironstone layer fairly micromicaceous and 
carbonaceous. 

7•3 1 Shale ~ as above, but highly crumbly due to 
earthy platiness. 

Suite 612 2 1 down from base of above. 

7.0 1 Shale - brownish black, crumbly, clayey, contains 
a 6 11 layer of shale as below. 

Suite 613 . 

5*0 1 Shale - black to brownish, coarse but platy to 
fissile. 

0.3 1 Ironstone layer - discontinuous. 

7.0* Shale - brownish black, hard to soft varying 
locally medium to fine blocky. 

Suite 615 3 1 down from base of above. 

6*0 1 Shale - with very thick silt layers, in fact 

Interbanded. 

Suite olo l f down from base of above. 

0.1* Ironstone layer - narrow. 

1.4-* Shale - with thin silt interlayers as above. 

0 * 0 5 1 Metabentonite layer . 

0.1* Ironstone l ayer. 

0*3* Shale - as above. 

0.2* Ironstone - layer . 

2.S 1 Shale - quite silty, dark to black, coarse to 
very coarse. 


























t 











t 








1 





X 





^ v 





t 





- 144 - 


0.1* 

Ironstone layer - quite continuous. 

10.6 1 

Shale - grey, coarse, flaky, black with brownish 
Tiue, silty. 

Suite 619 5* &own from base of above. 

Suite 620 10 1 down from base of above. 

0.4' 

Ironstone layer - unusual, made up of 0.1* of 
normal ironstone and 0.3* of highly weathered 
tectonic shale. This has a gentle dip to the 
east. 

5.0' 

Shale - black, coarsely platy, highly fissile, 
crumbly in large plates. 

Suite 621 sampled at water level. 

Covered to water level. 


SUITBS Q 23 -0,3,9 

Locality 0 21JF, Loon River formation, Peace River, Tp. 


3* 

100, R. 19• W 5 meridian, Alberta. 

Clay shale. 

12' 

Boulder clay 

0.5' 

Pebble clay 

1' 

Gravel 

1 ' 

Medium sand 

4.5' 

Shale - black with brownish tinge, appears 
silty, weathered and probably reworked. 

22.0' 

Shale - black with brownish hue, silty, a few 
thin silty laminae, coarsely blocky, cliff 
forming, platy. 

Suite 623 3 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 624 9*5 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 625 21.5* down from base of above. 

7.5' 

Shale - black brownish hue, apparently blocky, 
but more fissile and more crumbly. 

Suite 626 2 ! down from base of above. 


a 



















- 145 - 


S.O 1 Shale - black with brownish hue, probably 

coarsely blocky, cliff forming, also crumbly 
into coarsely splintery shale. 

Suite 627 2* down from base of above. 

Suite 62S S' down from base of above. 

10.0* Shale - black as above in all but apparently not 
coarsely blocky, and highly crumbly. 

Suite 629 5* &own from base of above. 

Suite 630 10* down from base of above. 

0.1 1 Ironstone layer - narrow, fairly continuous. 

15.0 1 Shale - as above. 

Suite 631 5* clown from base of above. 

Suite 632 10* down from base of above. 

Suite 633 15' &own from base of above. 

15.01 Shale “ as above. 

"Suite 634 5* &own from base of above. 

Suite 635 10* cLown from base of above. 

Suite 630 15* down from base of above. 

3.0* Shale - as above, with narrow silt laminae. 

12.0 1 Shale - black brownish hue, coarsely blocky, 

coarsely platy, silt laminae. 

Suite 637 2 f down from base of above. 

Suite 63 S 7 f down from base of above. 

Suite 639 12 1 down from base of above. 

3.2' Covered to water level. 


SUITES 649-660 

Locality 0 233B, Loon River formation. Peace River, 

Tp. 107 , R. 16, W. 5 meridian,Alberta. 

15 . 1 Boulder clay . 

b* Shale - dark in part, reworked. 

0 . 2 * Ironstone layer , thin, fairly continuous. 

1 . 0 ! Shale - as above. 

0 . 2 * Ironstone lay a ? - quite continuous. 

5 . 0 * Shale - black series, blocky, not cliff forming. 

Suite 649. 























5 . 



I 


I 

1 


I 









! 




- 146 - 


0.4* Concretionary layer - limestone, discontinuous. 

TTir:- 4 


2.1* Shale - as above. 

0.2 f Ironstone band - continuous 

7.5* Shale - black brownish hue, hard, fairly blacky 
few silt laminae. 

Suite 650 5* down from base of above. 

2.1® Shale - as above. 

O.Q5 1 Irons tone l ayer - continuous 

3*0 1 Shale - gradational between that above and below* 

0.2* Ironstone layer - discontinuous. 

lb.0 1 Shale - dark grey, flaky, clayey, hard, fissile, 

cliff forming. 

Suite 651 2® down from base of above* 

Suite 652 9 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 653 15* down from base of above. 

2,0 f Limestone - concretion, discontinuous. 

2.5* Shale - as above. 

0.05* Ironstone layer , 

15* 0 1 Shale - as above, highly cliff forming, fissile 
to splintery, clayey, much yellow decomposition 
product. 

Suite 654 3 1 down from base of above* 

Suite 655 down from ba.se of above. 

Suite 656 14* down from base of above. 

4.0 1 Shale - black brownish hue, blocky,fissile 

very similar to that above, but not so coarse, 
more crumbly and not so markedly cliff forming. 

1.7 1 Limestone layer - discontinuous. 

1.3 5 Shale - as above. 

0.4' Ironstone layer . 





















1 
















- 1 * 7 - 


1.5* 

Shale - as above. 

0 . 2 ' 

Ironstone layer - quite continuous. 

Suite 657* 

2.4* 

Shale - as above* 

0 . 2 ' 

Ironstone layer - fairly continuous. 

4.4* 

Shale - black to brownish, bloeky but crumbly 
and^fissile* 

Suixe 65 S 2 1 down from base of above. 

3-0' 

Shale - as above but appears more bloeky and cliff 
forming. 

Suite 659 

0 . 1 ' 

Ironstone layer. 

17 . 0 * 

Covered - but -some shale here and there* 

Suite boO 13' down from base of above. 

SUITES 

661 


Locality 0 235A, Loon River formation. Peace River, 

Tp* 107, Ref. lb* W. 5 meridian,Alberta* 

20 * Shale - with much detritus. 

5 1 Shale - black coarsely bloeky platy, cliff forming. 

2 .0 1 Limestone concretions . 

7.0* Shale - as above but less coarse and platy. 

Suite 661. 

7.0 1 Shale - as previous but now definitely crumbly. 

0,k* Ironstone layer - fairly continuous. 

13.0* Shale - as above, but slightly less crumbly. 

0 .2 s Ironstone Layer . 


Covered to water level. 


SUITES 663-073 


Locality 0 241A Loon River formation. Peace River, 
"TO71 R. 15* W # 5 meridian,Alberta. 























I 



f 


K 


1 





'C 


i 










3.5* silt 

2,0* Shale - black, weathers grey, badly weathered and 
m part reworked. 

15*0* Shale - black, brownish hue, coarsely blocky, 
tendency to fissility, also platy, contains 
fairly coarse silt laminae and in the upper 
Suite 663 6 * down from base of above. 

Suite ot>4 15 1 down from base of above. 

2o.O* Shale - as above, numerous silt laminae, highly 
cliff forming, less fissile than normal, little 
yellow metabentonite. 

Suite 065 6 * down from base of above. 

Suite 666 lb 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 667 25 1 down from base of above. 

1.0* Ferrugino u s limestone - concretion, discontinuous. 

3 . 0 * Shale - as above. 

3. 0 * Shale - black with brownish hue, gradational 
between above and below: tendency to coarse, 
but also crumbly and clayey. 

0.3* Ironstone layer - fairly continuous. 

29.0 1 Shale - black with brownish hue, clayey, and 

crumbly, only partly blocky. 

Suite 60 9 7* down from base of above. 

Suite 670 13 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 671 21* down from ba.se of above. 

0.3* Ironstone layer - fairly continuous. 

10.0* Shale - as above. 

"Suite 5 72 5 s down from base of above. 

O.S® Coarse limestone band - bulbous appearance. 

2.0* Shale - black, semi-platy, irregular fractures. 
Suite 673. 

Covered to water level. 


SUITES o75 - 6gl 

Locality 0 24-&A, Loon Pdver formation, Peace River, 
Tp. 107, R. 15, ¥. 5 meridian, Alberta. 

2 * Humus arid silt. 
























- 149 - 


2* Pebble silt 

9*0' Shale - black, weathers grey, fairly blocky, 

brownish hue. 

Suite 675 4* down from base of above. 

0.5* Ironstone concretion - discontinuous - 
highly weathered^ 

29*5* Shale - black coarsely to very coarsely blocky, 
pTaty to fissile, much selenite. 

Suite 676 3* down from base of above. 

Suite 677 7*5' down from base of above. 

Suite 67 S 13' down from base of above. 

Suite 679 IS. 5® down from base of above. 

Suite 6 SO 24* down from base of above. 

Suite 6 SI 29*3® down from base of above. 

1 . 0 ' Shale - as above. 

Covered to water level 


SUITES 6S2-692 


Localit y 0 25 IA, Loon River formation. Peace River, 

Tp. 107 , R* 14, W. 5 meridian,Alberta. 

3 1 Pebble silty clay 

3® Shale - grey, finely blocky, platy, layered, 
badly weathered but not reworked. 

S.9* Shale - black, coarsely blocky, tough, platy to 

rubbly, contains numerous thin silt laminae, plant 
remains. 

Suite 6S2 5*5® down from base of above. 

5® Shale - as above but not quite so coarse and tough. 

Suite 6 S 3 2.5* down from base of above. 

0.1 1 Silt laye r - as below. 

0 . 8 * Shale - as above. 

0.7* Silt and shale - interbended in bands 0.08* thick. 
Shale as above; silt is buff to khaki, .often 
rusty, fair induration and minute cross-bedding 
in the silt. 

6 . 0 * Suite o04. 

6 . 0 * Shale - khaki brown to black, good primary 

layering, may be a clajr-shale more than true 
shale. 






















-150- 


becomes rusted on weathering, medium splintery, 
good parting, and micromicaceous. 

Suite 6$5 clown from base of above. 

0.1 1 Ironstone layer - fairly continuous, highly 
weathered. ' 

l.o 1 Shale - as above. 

0.1* Metabentonite layer - fairly continuous 

3*3* Shale - black, medium to coarsely blocky, 
fissile, generally weathered. 

Suite 6So 2 1 down from base of above. 

Q.05 1 Ironstone layer - narrow, quite continuous. 

d.O* Shale - black fairly coarsely blocky, fissile, 
clayey and crumbly. 

Suite o$7. 

0.3* - 0.4' Ironstone layer - ojaite continuous, flat 
and lensy, apparently platy, 

7.0 1 Shale - black, very coarsely blocky, highly 
fissile. 

Suite 6SS 5* down from base of above. 

0.02 1 Silt - thin layer, quite continuous. 

9.S 1 Shale - black, very coarsely blocky, highly 
fissile. 

Suite 6S9 2* down from base of above. 

Suite 690 9 1 down from base of above. 

0.1 1 Metabentonite layer . 

O.b- 1 Shale - as above. 

0 . 05 1 Metabentonite layer 

0*3* Shale - as above. 

0.05 1 Metabentonite layer . 

3.2* Shale - black, quite coarsely platy to fissile. 

0 .2* Metabentonite layer . 

1.5* Shale - as above. 

Suite 691. 

0.1 Metabentonite layer . 





















% 


'ft 




K 

J 





t 



I 


1 



<5 




* 




/ 







I 


1 


i 














- 151 - 


1*5* Shale - as above. 

Suite o92 1.5* ^own from base of above. 

Water level. 


SUITES 695“b99 

Locality- 0 2S4D, Leon River formation, Peace River, 

Tp. 108>, R. 14, W. 5 meridian, Alta. 

3* Recent clay . 

2' Shale - grey, fine, small plates weathered. 

1* Shale -a.s below 

0.1 1 Metabentonite layer - highly rusted and indurated. 

2.0* Shal e - black, very coarsely blocky and platy, 

fissile as below, 

0.05* Ironstone layer - very thin but quite continuous. 

3*0* Shale - black, as above, contains few narrow 
layers of metabentonite. 

Suite o93 2 5 down from base of above. 

21.3 r Shale - black, very coarse, highly fissile, 
micromicaceous, 

Suite 694 3* &own from base of above. 

Suite 595 S 1 down from base of above. 

Suite 69b 13* dovxn from base of above. 

Suite b97 1& 1 hown from base of above 

0.2* Metabentonite layer - coarse. 

0.4 1 Shale - as above. 

0 . 05 * Metabentonite layer . 

1.3 f Shale - as above. 

Suite 69^ 

0 . 15 * Metabentonite layer - coarse. 

Suite o99 ” 

0 . 2 * Shale - as above. 

0.4 r Shale - indurated, highly rusted on weathering. 

0 .2 1 Shade - as above. 

0.1* Metabentonite layer. 

0.1 1 Shale - as above. 
























m 



■;; V'' 








* * < 



f. r 
















I 

t <■ 


t 








'1 


l 
i 
1 
t 



I 



7 


r 





t 






-152" 


0.05' Metabentonite layer 
0.2* Shale - as above 

O.L* Shale - rusty weathering as above. 

1.0* Shale - very coarse. 

Covered to water level. 

SUITES 700-704 

Locality 0 257 A # Loon River formation. Peace River, 
Tp. 10&, R. 1^, W, 5 meridian, Alberta* 

V Pebble clay 

0* 1 1 Ironstone layer 

3#5 f Shale - black, very coarse, friable, almost 
coaly black, badly weathered* 

0*1* Metabentonite layer . 

0*5* Shale - as above* 

0.1 1 Shale - highly rusted layer. 

1*5* Shale - black, highly rusty, fine friable, 

crumbly, clayey, badly weathered. 

Suite 700 

0 .1 1 Shale - as above. 

0.1* Shale - as above, 

0*05 1 Ironstone laye r. 

1.2 3 Shale - as above. 

0 .1 1 Ironstone layer * 

0.3* Shale - as above. 

0.05 1 Shale layer ~ highly rusted. 

1.2 1 Shal e - as above, but with thin rusty shale 
or tEin ironstone layer. 

0.1* Ironstone layer - as above. 

























V 


t 

I 

I 


t 


0 


i 


K. 



i 








i 


I 


- 


i 

I 


t 






Shale - with thin rusty laminae 


0,3* 

0.05* Ironstone la yer 
O.o 1 Shal e - as above. 

0.1 1 Ironstone layer 
O.S* Shale - as above 

0.1-0.2 1 Ironstone la yer - thin, quite prominent and 
carbonaceous^ ~ 

0.3* Shale - dark grey, finely splintery, silty not 
rusty. 

0.1 1 Ironstone layer. 

0,7* Shale - dark grey as above. 

"BuTFe 701 

0.2-0.7* Ironst one la yer - coarse, very prominent. 

2.0* Shal e - dark grey to blacf* contains three 

rusty ironstone layers. 

0.1-0.2 Ironstone layer . 

1.0 Shale - as above. 

'Suite 702 , 

0.1 1 Ironston e layer . 

15* Covered. 

0.3 1 Siltstone - grey, indurated. 

1.0* Shale - grey friable, clayey. 

0.1* Me t ab e nt o n11 e 1aye r 

1.6* Shale - grey,clayey, friable. 

Suite 70 ?. 


Water level 



























Map showing 


KEY TO GEOGRAPHIC LOCATIONS OE STATIONS AND FAUNAL SUITES, 
Loon River shale. Peace River area, Alberia. 


I 


) 




t 





I 


t 


1 




































































































STATISTICAL RECORD OF MICROf 
Loon River sj 

-ORGANISMS AND OTHER ELEMENTS FROM EACH SaMPLE 
iale. Peace River area, Alberta. 

ynvji vjiai\jiuiv-nvn'vjivjiuivjiuivjivjivj"jivjiuiv-nuivji \jiuivnuiui vrvoi^n^n ■^■■^. -o-to. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ j^ja. s.a ja 

-JO% VJlVOOD^.04|N3 0vOC3-3<nUl-^0»INJOVOOOrOHOVOa>-avn^^HOVOa)03-0 0\VJH>.OIw HO$ gi^poio.® £3 gCo : ) ' ^WHoSffi Pul 

WMOVOCO-^Ol^OJMOVO.CoCjSjCSIiJw HO 8 3sao 

-3^ io K ^ r 'X X X X xx 

\\ ^ ^ roro o ro o.ioroto cr.ro 

rooi •' 

(£ $3 ^ : * x x x ■ . ;*. x x x x x x x x xx H 

ro ro r\D ; v>i ^(\jpo kj >v ro ro r>o ro rorovjiroro f^oro ro 

w > 

s s g g g g Kgs 'r-issss gsgKg g°£ 

° ° ° - ° i _ o OJ O'OO oooooo ooooo ooc 

1 tt M MM :|_ \Z~ hH pj Vj 

!oo § S S3 -6 aggp 53 

. ro ro ro o. ^ ^ *>&§>5S ® ££ t 

, Olio M M -fa- 

ooo. pMo.-ocorO'J-o-^o^M'O M 

i_i i f , m ■ 

€0 ■ w^WOl^MoxOV^^UIV^^OOaJ^S MM VJ1HMO M ro %'/ • 2$ OJ^io^CT^ -4 £ O^ Vfl 

1 o. M Mj, 

O. -Pa* -MOOMMOIMai-ta.faWMU 

10 ^ 0 ) V0CE <IM M ^M ro M M MMOvJi-P-CD <d o. £ CD M M^&^ro M-0 -*-J CD 

O - — 1= -*---1 

MMM M l_i 

-Pa. M 0.0.0. MO. , ^ 

OD M oi-P—jo. ui rol^M MM M poi 00 M M ro U!ro 4 PO ui-impoov* *V a>K vji 

---,- 

MO. ^ 

4^-001 OIOIM M IO M ®u 

ro m ro m 

V£ . _ , . JMMN MMMMff''J)(JWOON Ol to M O. »., ., 

■^■-4 O-o-p- Ooi-o M ON CD VO M or or omoivo p ro ovo pvom-p* or o M ro mm m ool -e. ro m-^ 

-T-M 

M +» 

PM 

MOM Mro Mioroo.ro vji o. ro ro p io ro ro m.-.-.mh p^p^o. HM mH io 

M pm o. ro ro m 

- —-— -:- - --- f — --- 

rofv5 ' Jl p M ro M M M roo.ro mo. m h* CD-P^usoJro 01 pp p ro -n -r^ oJoro oo.roua— j 0 ^ cn^o p 

M 

ro ^3 ro -0 CD p M oi -H o. -o m ro ro v. 

M ro -P* -p*. H 

ro 

M io oio. ro -O p 




OJO) O.P 




O 

•’3 *4 








































TS FROM EACH SAMFJJi 


erta. i 

V MMM 

fa r\o 

NO IV> 

-f* 4> .p. 4. 3jl 3^13-tf 3jl 

HHO OOOO'-O U03O CO 

3-4 3-4 3^1 

cq com 

4*1 41 M 

41 41 41 VJl 41 04 41 

03 -4^3 -3-4-4-3-3 
OVO 00-4 03 414*41 

372 

4*4141 
-403 03 
OVQ CD 

41 41 3-4 41 3J® 

03 d 03 03 031 
-4 03 3J1 4* 41 1 

3-4 304 41 

03 03 03 

ro m o 

04 04 

VJ1U1 

HO 

3jJ \jOVjd 3j3 \jJ 

H MM M M 

30 CO-4 0341 

41 41 41 41 

M M M M 
4-4114 M 

X ^ XX 

o4rororo <3\ ro 

X X X 
eo ivon) 

x x x x x x x x>< x 

04 ro ro ro ( iv>ro 04 ro ro h 

VJ1 

40 ro ro 

XXX Xi^ 
ro ro ro ro |K 

_ £ 

33J1 M -4 ro 

rox-ro 

41. 

X X 

4>H 

4* 

• >n _ 

XXXXX XXXX XX M X X X X 
4>-.rorororo 4»4MOvro4>-4^rororororo 

ro ro 

H H 

HH H M 

U1O003J1 3J1 00 

100 

120 

120 

HHHHHHHHH M 

VJIO'J'OOIOMMO 41 

ooooooooo o_ _ 

M M 

ro o 
a o 

-X 

-00 - - 

1—• t—* 1—J M M M M MM 
POOI30 0410 0 41 O 

ooo qooooo 

100 

150 

MM MM MM MMM 

30104*410 41 O OO "f* 4141 O 

O PCD OO_O O PCD OO O 

MMM 

CD 3J1 130 41 

Q O O 0_ 

H 


-£=*■ 


04 

o ro 

M4l 

M OlVjlUO 4* 
3P3-0-40303 004* 

ro 

41 

ro 




O 




oo 

VJ104 


ro 

00 H 

HUIOO 41 
■4*4*4* O03 404* 

CT\ 


i 



P 

3 

M — 


H 


M 



m ro ' 

14410303 4* 

M 





a> 


— 




H 

M4*ro 
^ OJvffH 

I- 1 

ro 








-e- 






' ‘ . j 




-— 

_ 













II M 




i ro4i 

ro m 

4* O O 03 

VO 







M 

ro ro 


M 

H 

vjJ ro H OM-* 03 M 


•M 

00 

---j- 

M 



M 

J - 

1 _ 

ro 






-X 03 

M H M 130 130. 

ro 


- " •_-MrM 

M M ro 
ro-441 0 
30400 

'MM m 

3J14»- M 03 -J M 

3 Ct 033041 03 OO 

M4i 

03 14 

1—* 

ro4i 

M 

03 

M M 

CD'jJ CD M 

<XI 

4* M 
r\0O3 CD 

4=- 41 4* H 

-X o 4* 41 41, 
-4 M 4*4-4V 

roro 4i 
3PU5 ro 
-4-4 O 

7 

297 j 

189 

369 

211 

276 

; Mro 

ro. 

M H 

41 

00 03 

TST ~ 

-4 ro 

ro 4* ro 


rooi oo 

M 




M 

M 

10 

2 


M 


H 





H 







X 








__ 

41 







ro 3ji 1 

ro 


03 



Q 

O 



Q 


cpcp 

1 

■ ■ j 



O 

O 





C/3 

CO 



—;--— \ 





—- 1 —:- 1 — 


Sample 

Correction Factor 
Mesh Size 

Total Cutinized Microfoseils 
Sporangitoides lenticulare n« sp«, 
Spornngitoides ellipsoprolata n. sp, 
Sporangitoides ciz‘culare n. sp. 

Sporitoides discus n. sp« and 
Sporitoides spinus n» sp. 

Undifferentiated Cuticular Remains 

Seeds 

Bones 

Foraminifera 

Radiolaria 

Carbonaceous Matter 
Fish Scales 
Spheres (?) 

Glauconite 

Selenite 

Cylindrical Tubes (?) 

































702 

704 XlcJ/11 120 


loon |iver shale. Peace River area, Alberta, 


—3 M] (JiOi ONON O' ON ON 
OO VO VO VO (B CO 00 CO 
MO (\0 M OvOCO-4 O' 


C 3 _i —j on on on on on QNvnvnvnvnvnvrtvnvn -r* 

vnvnncMOuooo-JONvn ono 03-4 ON-f^varo mvo 


vjj POMHH 00-4 o 
-£• VOV4 vnvO-P=>C3 03-4-4 




vxvnovn vn 


ro -f»--f=.rovn V- 1 

>jivn -~3 VO ON (V) —4 VH M M MVDVnpOPO ONONi 


n\ n\ ON ON ON ON ON ON ON ON ON ON O' ON ON ON ON ON ON ONI O'O'ON ON ON ON ON ON ON ON ON ON O'ON O' ON ON ON ON ON ON O'O'ON ON O'ON ON ON ONVJ1 VJ1 NJ1 VJ1 VJ1VJ1 VN \J1 VJ1 \J1 VD NJ1 VJ1 VJ1VJ1 VJIVD VJ1 

O' ON ON on ON ON UN U' U'U - --- vnv4vnv>JV>JvnvMrN3r\3r\3r\3[\3 PC m m m m m m m m H o o O O O O O OVD VOVOVO VO 03 03® QC CD CO 03-4 -4-4 -4-) -4 

vo on-p* uiroHO CD-4 ONvn OvO Q3-—3vn-F*v>Jr'oMOvocD —jO'-f'v^HOO)-40'-f“V)J03-]aN-^roHOtt)'40Nvn-f»[\} 

X M 


M 

vn 

o 

po ro ro fv) IN3 vji 


roOrooNONCNV^-^-M'j- ; w^OvnaiwoiwoNHO-P 


-f^V>J—4rO-4POPJMMV>4v>l -P»P0 . HVI M V>; f\3 ro M M M ©NPO vnM Vd 

OOODPOPOONON-4VOVJJMM-Fs.vn-40003 vn Ovn -4 vn vJ1 NjO ~J ro Q MOOOn-P»M 


vjn -4 vnv»i i 


ION M M VO 03 VO 


M ro IN3 M M MM 

rv> MOJV4PO ON.-N30NP4PO V>)VMVn-P» 04 vjl NJ1 M --J O (NO CD V*1 VJI -f* -P* IN3 V>1 -M4QON ON V-X ^POMOI 


vn ro njj o on -4 on po jiwmjijn 


A 


P0—J —3 ONONV/l-P* PC 

m ro vn 


O' P0 ONIN3 


•VO 00 M OP4 


< M rov>i ro 


». ro on ro oi on vn M vw M vnvji 4 

MM OJ (O 

MONNjIPO -4 CD -4 

MM MM 

vjj vn-4-p» O' co vn O CD O (\o vn o-P* 

i_>-£• on-r*- M ro m oo vn ro oorof 


vn rovn-4 -Jm M-P»-4 
•*j rzi yj yrj yq 


PC VMNjJ 03 -F» vn • 

►V Hj 


pc M 


hr) HsJ Vr) >33 Hj 

ro 


Sample 

Correction Factor 
Mesh Size 

Total Cutiniced ?.ficrof 03 sils 

Snorangitoides lentisulare n. sp. 

So ellipsoprolata n. sp. 

So circulare n. sp, 

Sporitoides discus n. sp. and 
S. spimis n. sp. 

Undifferentiated Cuticular Reaiins 
Seeds 

Bones 

Foraminifera 
Radiolaria 
Carbonaceous ’.Tatter 


Fish Scales 
Spheres (?) 

Glauconite 


Selenite 


Cylindrical Tubes 






























1J 7* ti*>* i/S" 



























































Figure 2. Terminology of the Fort St. John Group in Feace River and Athataska River Areas 







































































































-154- 


6 . GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
Acolpate * without furrows or pores* 

Angiosperms * flowering plants* 

Anther * the region of the microsporophyll bearing 
sporangia* 

Antheridium , an oogonium and an antheridium of an algae, 

each invested by a protecting jacket of cells, 

would represent the essential idea of the sex 

organs of liverworts* The male sex organ 

continues to be called the antheridium, but the 

female organ is now called an archegonium * 

Apogamy * ferns are apogamous, the gametophyte 

prothallium produces sporophytes without 

the sex act* 

Apospory * in ferns, apospory is a common phenomenon 

which means that the sporophyte produces game¬ 
tophyte s without using spores; that is, a gamet¬ 
ophyte buds out directly from a sporophyte* 
Capsule * a dry dehiscent fruit (pod)* 

Carpel * (Carpidium), The ovuliferous organ of the 

flower; a closed macrosporophyll (megasporophyll), 
a simple pistil. Each megasporophyll (often 
called scale) of a cone bears one or more megas¬ 
porangia. These megasporangia were called 
ovules long before their real nature was known, 
and the megasporophyll was called a carpel or 
pistil * 














-K J I- 

-tJ. 

c 

r : n ,*; r 00 v 

! - v ( J.;.. T:- 

4 <:-.iIeo Xo os:4o&l cv.c * XoJjovnj uolz 

x&h ari j 'jo jbo&J: Ij.i nieces? edu jirociSTgoa frjj.rrw 

t . . . 

*. . .... . . • 

i 

. . 

t * 

oiocy ;.a,r terur . oin xioiii'w 

« 

* ■ -'•' . ■ ■ • ■ ■■'.■ '■ ■ ■ .\ - ; ;>:i /. ,■ 

* 

t , . ) x X 

-■■■■.. XXv ■ • | 

• ■ • ' ' ‘ - , ■. 

-o :• jx $Li o nr.;co *io i ai&oe 

■ : ‘ ■ • J < 

t ■ ■■ ■ •' oxxvx' j... • . :r io r j.::-d y..;.-,c-L celj;;v'o 

*x< X| ■_ . i ... . 

» ; .. 
















Carpogonium , (Gr. karpos, fruit + gonos, producing), 

female gametangium (in red algae), p. 621, 
(Ref. 19). 

Oaryopsis , the grain, (fruit) of grasses. 

Cell . In taxonomy usually referring to the seed-cavity 
or locule of a.n ovary, or to the pollen chambers 
of an anther, or to the air-spaces in the stem of 
some aquatics. 

Colpate , possessing germinal furrows or harmoraegathi, 
generally used with numerical prefixes as mono-, 
di-, and tri-, signifying the number of furrows. 
(G-r., a fold). 

Consoeclfic , belonging to the same species. 

Coriaceous , of leathery texture. 

Cotyledo n , a seed-leaf, the temporary, usually distinct - 
ive, first leaf of leaves of an embryo. 

Culm , the stem of grasses and sedges. 

Dehiscent, splitting open by valves or slits, said of 
anthers and capsules. 

Diag nostic - defining, determining, or distinguishing, 
referring to the taxonomic characters. 

Differentiate, to distinguish or separate on diagnostic 
characters. 

Dis coid, having the shape of a disc. 

Dorsal, belonging to or appertaining to the back of an 


organ 


















■ 

) 






K 


t 


K, 


% 



*8 * 


l 


<C 





-15b- 


Embryo, the undeveloped dormant plant within the seed. 

Embryo-sac, the gametophytic part of the ovule in which 
the embryo develops. 

Endosperm , the reserve food-storage tissue or ’'albumen” 
of a seed. 

Splcarp , the outer layer of the pericarp of fruits. 

Epicotyl , that portion of an embryo above the cotyledonary 

node: plumule. 

Epidermis , the outermost layer of cells of an organ. 

Equator , the great circle midway between the two poles 

and dividing the grain into two polar hemispheres. 

Exfoliated, peeling off in thin layers. 

Exocarp, the outer layer of a fruit. 

Place Id , 1 the a loose, papery sack; lax. 

Fruit , the seed-bearing organ of a plant. 

Fusiform , spingle-shaped. 

Gametes , sexual cells. 

Gemma , a leaf-bud; a bud by which a plant propagates 
itself vegetatively. 

Gemmules , a diminutive of gemma. 

Germinal apertur e, a hole in the furrow membrane through 
which the germ pore protrudes* The term is also 
used to designate the rounded apertures which 
frequently occur in the general surface of the 
exine in the absence of germinal furrow. 




















t» , , :• .. I: 









1 











iti: 


r 


* 




- *f 0 ( 

















-157- 


Germ ina l furrow , a longitudinal groove or opening 

in the exlne, either enclosing a germ pore or 
serving directly as the place of emission of the 
pollen tube, also generally serving as a harmom- 
egathus. 

Germination , the extraseminal development of an embryo. 
Glume, a rigid, chaff-like or scale-like bract, 

referring especially to the two empty bracts 
at the base of the spikelet in grasses. 

Grain , the fruit or caryopsis of grasses, 

Haptotyp i c characters , those which are due to internal 
or prenatal environment, such as the stimuli 
received by a developing pollen grain from 
contacts with its neighbors, make an impression. 
Haulm , a dead and dried herbaceous stem like that of 
grasses and sedges. 

Herb , a plant which is not a tree or a shrub, and is 
usually of relatively soft texture, producing 
relatively little woody tissue, 

Hypocotyl , the part of an embryo below the cotyledon® 
and including the cotyledonary nodep the stem 
of the embryo, 

Indehiscent , not splitting open; remaining closed, as 
an achene. 

Indusiate , furnished with a cover* 

Indus!urn , membranous outgrowth of the epidermis of a fern 


leaf which covers the sori 

















r 


•': i. 


« - 




... r 









X 




t 


X 






X 




* 




- 15 &- 


Macrosporangium , an ovule, megasporangium. 

Macrosporophyl l, a carpel. 

Mesocarp , the middle coat or layer of a fruit. 

Monocolpate , having a single germinal furrow or 

harmomegathus on one side of the grain. If 
the grain is encircled by a single furrow, it is 
regarded as dicolpate or zonate. 

Monocotyledonous, having the characters of a moncotyledon. 

Muriform , arranged like bricks in a wall, referring to 
the markings on the surface of small seeds and 
achenes. 

Nervation , the system of venation of a leaf. 

Nerve, the vein of a leaf or bract. 

Nltidous , having a smooth or glossy surface, as some seeds. 

Nodulose , having snjall knots or knobs. 

Nut, a hard-shelled indehiscent fruit; dimunitive, 

nutlet . 

Ovary , part of a carpel or genoeeium containing the 
ovules and seeds. 

Ovule , the macro sporangium (megasporangium) 

Papilla , a nipple-like prominence on the surface of a leaf 
or petal. 

Papillate , bearing or furnished with papillae. 

Pedicel , the flower-stalk. 

Pedicellate , furnished with a pedicel. 


Peduncle , the sts.lk of an inflorescence 





















‘ ) ; i > 








0.uD’ " V: .z r. c -d ^ 


'I " 0 .\ : - 




. 










ri'.tjr-.; 'k; .r ■-..‘i. 

» 




_ 







- 159 - 


Pericarp , the wall of the ovary, referring to a fruit. 

Petiole , a leaf sta.lk, 

Phaenogam , a flowering plant, Phanerogam . 

Phylogeny , race history of a plant or group: genealogy 
(Phylogenetic). 

Pistil , the ovuliferous or seed-bearing organ or organs 
of a flower; carpel; gynoecium. 

Pistillate , bearing the gynoecium only; carpellate. 

Placenta , the part of the locule of an ovary on which 
the ovules are borne. 

Plumule, the epicotyl of an embryo. 

Pod, a dehiscent fruit. 

Pole, one of the extremities of the axis of symmetry of 
radiosymmetrical pollen grains. If there is 
more than one such axis of symmetry, the word 
applies only to the extremities of the axis which 
is directed toward the center of the tetrad or was 
so directed during the grain’s formation. Prom 
these tetrad relations the two poles and two 
hemispheres may be designated as inner and outer 
or proximal and distal, though in mature pollen 
grains that are not shed in tetrads the hemisphere 
are rarely distinguishable. 

Pollination, transferring of pollen from the anthers 
to the stigma. 

Punctate , marked with very small dots or glands or 


translucent spots 

















t ■ v . ' ' '-i ■ 


; 


* 




* . 

Oi:"M i J xO 


t 


■/ . :*■/;■: ‘: : ;o .i. - '■ . : ■” 

' t ■■ 

■ 

• ;| L / 


. ‘1 






t 1 ■ 

. . ‘V " ' ■ ■ 




. .V 










,Xu 


* 




•~ 160 ~ 


Rhizome , a subterranean stem or branch. 

Rugose, wrinkled. 

Ruminate, mottled. 

Sac , a cavity or vesicle. 

Saccate , sac-shaped; bag-shaped. 

Scarlous , dry, thin, ecale-llke membranaceous. 

Scrobiculate, having small pits or depressions. 

Seed , an embryo and investing parts of the ovule. 

Sheath , the tubular basal portion of a leaf or a gras 
or sedge, which invests the culm. 

Spermatophyt e, a seed plant. 

Sporophyll , a spore bearing leaf. 

Stamen , the anther-bearing organ of a flower. 

Stigma , that part of the style which is modified for 
the reception and germination of the pollen. 

Stipel , a small stipule, like the small appendages 
at the base of the leaflets of some compound 
leaves. 

Stipule , a leaf-like appendage of the base of the 
petiole of leaves. 

Strobilus , a cone-like inflorescence; a flower. 

Style .the contracted upper part of a carpel or 
gynoecenum which supports the stigma. 

Suberous , of corky texture. 

Suture, the line of dehiscence of dry fruits, the 

line of junction or of cleavage of two united 
organs. 



























- 161 - 


Tegman, the s^econd coat of a seed. 

Terclne , the third coat of the ovule or seed. 

Testa , the outer, usually hard, coat of a seed. 

Theca , a pollen sac of an anther. Thecal, belonging 
to a theca. 

Tricolpate, possessing three meridionally arranged 
germinal furrows. 

Tumid , swollen. 

Type , that specimen or individual plant in a collection 
of specimens of a supposed species which in the 
judgement of the taxonomist is the most ideal 
representative of the species as a whole; or the 
specimen or individual plant of a collection, 
which formed the basis of the description of 
the species. A type may be only a single specimen 
of the plant, not previously described. In 
constructing a new genus the type is selected 
from' the most representative species, 

Valve, a section of a dry, dehiscent fruit, (capsule) 

Utricle , an inflated achene-like fruitlet. 

Verrucose, covered with wart-like protuberances or 


excrescences. 





















t 




< t 




•tjj ;; : : l .0.0 0 : , ' ■ *1 v' 




j : I 











0 .J ■ ■ ■ 


0,10 T 


..; .!. : '■) n 

vi 















- 162 - 


7. ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
(* in U. of A. library, 1951) 

*1. Abrams, L.A., 1940, "Illustrated Flora of the 

Pacific States, Washington, Oregon and Cal¬ 
ifornia”, In four vol., Vol. I, Ophioglossaceae 
to Aristolochiaceae, Ferns to Birthworts, 

Stanford University Press, Stanford University, 
California, 536 pp. 

*2. Arnold. Chester. A., 1947* "An Introduction to 
Paleobotany”, 1st edition, McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, 433 pp. 

This is one of the most recent, concise, 
yet fairly comprehensive textbooks covering 
Paleobotany* 

*3* Beijerinck, W., 1947, ”Zadenatlas Der Nederland- 

sche de Botanie, Palaeontologie, Bod emcultuur 
en Warenkennis”, Met* 140 Platen, 316 pp. 

An atlas of 140 plates illustrating num¬ 
erous Recent seeds of plants of the Netherlands. 
Cutinized microfossils are smaller than the 
material illustrated here* 

*4* Bower, F.O., 1923, "The Ferns (Filicales)”, Treated 
comparatively with a view to their natural 
classification, vol. I, Analytical Examination 
of the Criteria of Comparison, Cambridge at 
the University Press. 359 pp* 

*5* Bower, F.O., 1926, “The Ferns (Filicales)”, 

Treated with a view to their natural Classifi¬ 
cation, vol. II, The Eusporangiate and Other 
Relatively Primitive Ferns, Cambridge, at the 
University Press, 344 pp* 

*6. Bower, F.O., 1928, ”The Ferns (Filicales)", Treated 

comparatively with a view to their natural class¬ 
ification, vol. Ill, The Leptosporangiate Ferns, 
Cambridge, at the University Press, 306 pp* 

*7. Bradley, W.H., 1931, "Origin and Microfossils of the 
Oil Shale of the Green River formation of 
Colorado and Utah”, U. S. Department of the 
Interior, G. S. Prof. Paper 168. 

"Two kinds of organic matter are discernible 
in thin sections of the oil shale; one is massive 
and structureless and is the matrix of the other, 
which has definite form and consists of organisms 
or fragments of them. The microflora of the 
Green River formation contains two forms that 
are doubtfully referred to bacteria and many 




: « - x 


, 


X ) 


?' | 4 * 5 

x.i-■ X ' e ; ■ V.". 

, , ' ~ t 


«.oxixi x ‘.d r.t 
■ 


o j ,x.x:; 'XX'xxxx. ! <x 

■ C :'V.I . ... : . =0 8 £■■ " : 




? 




1 r 




t -&& <« 

XXX u^xX 91 ^ OXXO 9''XlXXXXC 0 X 


ex O OX 

f*y ’■• 




-/■< ixl . xi, ■ 

■ t 

. . . ... ; t •' - C 

-• 

Daxltxotxx exit ‘.to sjnui 




... c * c .' :■ : I"'i . . . 

•■■■■ t r ..';. . :ro-' •. : x - 1 

< .. 

ix - el Vx lax nx 

■ ' .? 9 ? . • f 1 XX:,.- 


. II ■ eXxsex . .. . ' ■ 

*. ,. • c. ' -t 


- x... « , •' x . 


J.XsjJWJb ■ 


$ war 


z • * ■•* * % 

IK’ v/' i.ovi:cr.i'iL(ixc 


: I9V/C :. 


. t . ■ ; 


. X ; v j ■ , ? 

■ :• .... x . ,. ;-x. tx l c; .. o ■ ■ V ■ xrx u:< . f . 

* *• x . ■:• 

t : t * • *’ X 

"■•i.iXoc'JiX.'J XXO J\:. ; . I Ot.! Vi 9.'... '/ . U.0 £W X ;X X.! 

t #J 4 

8 X. , j . \ . . 

r 

? , : ,»x f 

■ '* J • -X. ■ : . ‘ ■ ; .. ; • cx 0 

8 * * 8 IX X 

, 8 ■ r . 

■ \ . ^ ' ’■ ■ f * ' X c 

' 

, • 


* 




'.XT 


" 19 0 .x XX 9 0 10 fix ix:: i CX— :: 

: x. ; . ni 

•xX; r . XJ; ;r - X.i ( : x.x X ■ > 1 XXX'XXXX £XX ; 

:■.. ..> .'X. *-■• .: ■ ■ ■. 9x ■"c 

■ ■ ,r :xcV ex' r.; x :’xoo \ cix ’x."" xsxlH nee'iO 

Y.ixx . ix- ; x..; ox xxLxexx--' ytlx^tcixoi xx:x 







-163- 


« 


fungi spores of which 13 are illustrated and 
compared with living genera® In addition to 
the spores there are also many fragments of the 
vegetative parts of fungi® Of the algae, all 
of which are microscopic, one flagellate, a 
naked protoplast, five blue-green algae, and 
five green algae are described and referred 
tentatively to living genera of fresh-water 
algae and compared with living species. Five 
forms, probably all algae, which are too in¬ 
definite to be assigned to any position in the 
natural system are also illustrated and des¬ 
cribed. According to the numbers of individu¬ 
als found the blue-green algae appear to have 
dominated the microflora. No diatoms were 
found. Of the higher plants spores and 
pollen are plentiful. Eight spores and three 
parts of reproductive organs, all probably 
belonging either to mosses or to ferns, are 
described, and some of them are compared with 
the pollen of living plants. A fragment of bark, 
a part of a spiral tracheid, and a few stellate 
hairs are the only parts of the tissues of plants 
higher than the mosses and ferns that have 
been found.” 


*8. Brooks, C®E*P., 1949 > ’’Climate Through the Ages”, 
A study of the climatic factors and their 
variations, McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 
395 pp. 

Not very useful to this study® 


*9® Coulter, John M., 1916, 2nd impression, ’’The 

Evolution of Sex in Plants”, The University 
of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, 137 pp. 

A very readable, clear explanation of this 
aspect of the study of plants. 


*10. Cushman, J.A., 1950, ’’Foraminifera, Their Class¬ 
ification and Economic Use”, 4th edition, 
revised and enlarged, with an illustrated key 
to the genera, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
Harvard University Press. 


11. Dawson, J.W., 1863, ’’Synopsis of the Flora of the 
Carboniferous Period in Nova Scotia”, Cana¬ 
dian Naturalist, new ser., vol. 8, no. 6, 
pp. 431-457. 


- 


. 

, a • . 

$r : a 7 c q&ss „vxi %n .■■: o»Ia sarr ©ri-rlr ssioqs an't 
« 

c 1 . . ? : 

< ■ ■ -• . «f 0 .. ■ - .. ■ L r ' C .br . 

b&' ' .Q’T bv. I-:-,’* XSiv-.'j. 0.. f>*y ' HOO 3VX.I 
•ia- . • a'i r :a nr il aLaviyiaaob 

'•■v '' J irai. c <■ O'; *•■!■ •. br-.-,, • ... o.l an! aiba.a,.; 

- • ' b.aa- bet. 1 .:-:7as.yl.ll;. oabr -a,:? ,k.yr:a•: 

■ . . , . - . * a a ■ 

or c ;1' yay, nrylr nso'.v.y--oo b ■ *- f j- .bi\u<>7. • I 

* f. .. . r a... c\ 

..a . •• . * 

* 

r , v r ' v ■ : :r a • to. - a • vbr • a 

r.;;. t , ; on re '. rr:r cci“ a.--art '■y.;.rar.:a),i 
a are .... o ra - t 'ba ■.■. ■ t • ... baa a . 

«: - : ' * ■ 

, 

•p.cuikiq ic orarr in? odcr an array yiau- erlcr err arxird 
oVEil bobd e.cn'eVi biiB aaro;,: and rsxiyxd 

* 

« y c * . * t 

y-i:ria .bar: triobarbr oiti-i ..r. -alt bo yard., a 

y .. « > 

*' 

* a.. 

t ' ? ■' - t * < 

■a.. < • ' . r ; , r 

* r" y r t .. •: « • . 

' r .-cr r a; . a a \ , be x •'. . ■ . ea, ., ... 

* ■ or. ... -.at • . .-'a 

, e ,». * ? 

, ' : '-ft y ' ; ' .r.; 

■' "■ a ' r ( o,'b.a- /a ' r ;• a; 

«■' ■ . '• ' r ■' ? ■ K a .c ■■ 

r V. b a , <■ '-a; ■. 

^ t . . * • , , 

-■ ■' y ■ i*. be r ; y a a. ; . ■: ■ r-a- \ rate : \ .y. 

? t * t * ? ' -..« 



-164- 


*12. Dawson, J.W., 1871, "On Spore-cases in Coals", 

Amer. Jour. Sci., April, 1871: Canadian Naturalist, 
new ser., vol. 5, pp. 369-377, Dec. 1870. 

One of the earliest American papers dealing 
with micro-plant material somewhat similar to the 
cutinized microfossils dealt with in this thesis. 
Dawson describes Sporangites Huronensis . 

pp* 374-375. 

"It is to be observed, in conclusion that the 
spore cases of plants, in their indestructibility 
and richly carbonaceous character, only partake 
of qualities common to most suberous and epidermal 
matters. Such epidermal and cortical substances 
are extremely rich in carbon and hydrogen. They 
are also very little liable to decay, and they 
resist more than, other vegetable matters aqueous 
infiltration; properties which have caused them 
to remain unchanged and resist the penetration of 
mineral substances more than other vegetable tissues." 

P. 375. 

Dr. T. Hunt says: "The outer bark of the Cork 
tree and the cuticle of many if not all other plants 
consist of a highly carbonaceous matter, to which 
the name suberin has been given. The spores of 
Lycopodium also approach to this substance in 
composition." 

"They in fact approach closer in composition 
to resins and facts than to wood, moreover like 
those substances repel water, with which they are 
not easily moistened, and thus are able to resist 
those atmospheric influences which effect the 
decay of woody tissue." 

*13. Don, A.W.R., and Geo. Hickling, 1915, "On Parka 
decipiens ". Geol. Soc. London Quart. Jour., 
vol. 71, pp. 648-666. 

Fossil fragments indicate that Parka decipiens 
is a very low spore bearing plant. It occurs 
abundantly in shale bands of the Lower Old Red 
Sandstone of Scotland. 

*14. Elias, M.K., 1942, "Tertiary Prairie Grasses and 
Other Herbs from the High Plains", Geol. Soc. 

America Special Paper 41, pp. 1-176. 

This material is obviously different than the 
cutinized microfossils dealt with in this thesis. 







t 


t - • • • t * * '• « 






« * 



* 





vo o 





-165- 


*15. Erdtman, Gunnar, 1943, "An Introduction to Pollen 
Analysis", Waltham, Mass,, U.S.A., published 
by the Chronica Botanica Company* 

This is a short introduction to the principles 
of pollen analysis and an atlas of the principal 
types of pollen grains met by the beginning "pollen 
analyst". Although it does not directly apply 
to the study of the microfossils treated in this thesis 
there are several chapters in this text dealing with 
the chemistry of peat, pollen preparations, preparation 
of fossil pollen-bearing material, pollen analysis 
and graphic presentation of their results, geologic 
correlations, etc., which would have indirect but 
valuable bearing on the future study of cutinized 
microfossils. 

*16. Faegri, Knut and Johs. Iversen, 1950, "Text-book of 
Modern Pollen Analysis", Ejnar Munksgaard, 

Copenhagen. 

This is the most recent text pertaining to 
pollen analysis off the press. Its object is to 
present a summary of those methods and principles 
which have guided pollen-analytical workers in 
Denmark. The remarks pertaining to Erdtman's text 
apply equally as well here. 

*17. Glaessner, Martin, F., first published 1945, re¬ 
printed with corrections 1948, "Principles 
of Micropalaeontology", Melbourne University 
Press. 

Chapters II and III should be consulted by 
anyone pursuing the study of cutinized microfossils 
as (II) gives a review of microfossils (exclusive of 
Foraminifera) and III covers the methods of collect¬ 
ing and studying microfossils. 

*18. Harmer, S.F., and A.E. Shiply (editors), 1909, 

"The Cambridge Natural History", Protozoa, 

(Sponges), Coelenterata and Ctenophora, Echino- 
dermata, vol. I, MacMillan and Co., Ltd., 671 pp. 

*19. Holman, Richard M, and Wilfred W. Robbins, 1949, 

"A Textbook of General Botany", for colleges 
and universities, 4th edition, 18th printing, 

Feb. 1949, 664 pp. 


-rVj-I- 


•. : ■ ’ ' " , ; ' : X.A. . •• : S t .c. A a : s i 

'''■ •: a i .1 : t ., » . x .. v i V v ..- a. xa.u ; f 

4 - ' • .V '»■!.’ 

vi ro.ai’X'.i c j x vir, • e p.jfc si:Vx 

. 

-iiS j. I Os.• : ><SS ' S-I s-M V;. XXsiV.TV 1X9.1J.CU ±0 89qVV 

. 

: '■ •-•is 1 . X A - 1 i -Si 0109;*j TP 9.0,; ?CC vbiSio ?£?t 0& 

-sl - si; : i jq C) IS’ICv! . O'Li SSSiil 

• . .. /• .A 

■ J:c. I j ■.. a i e .i l.c s t 1 ■ i - ' i . -t ; ■ -1 i ■;■ s, - r f 9 ,1 j c c 1 Xa a c 1 0 

or (.si. a- ,. i ' ' • s vc rciX, ; vasv; sir: iss 

, * 

bos.to .. Xr ... V< - ' if-;]' : ;AV"a; ••ii • \r y [\ XT' AS; vil iiitrlrY 

. ; (.' • 0 XA 

• r : 1 , ax . a: . . 

t .: .u ‘A,* ij; i .' -a j:s v n. us I i " so.sbc 

■ a >U-SfC v 

oi $0 {{)££ v* ... s si irxoA'AS vscv edt si; a td i 

* 

89XQ‘X0X:iJtiq iA'x- ulOOjUjO 9c.0i.vi 10 V*X£&iinX58 i, T09u9*Xq 
! .. • : ■ c : ,ii. . . a. • : ■ 

a ; i s- : : ■ < ' 1.' re i xso ..i'i .a - sax ia 

j . t > 

* A . 

A .■ is • i i A A . -J A i bj : • A.: • •• ■ A '. ■' ! A: j i 

A X ■ - A»' ‘AC A 'A: A ;SfC . ■ VS.C'A-r; AS. ' V;.;-A SnOVS^ 

' 

Lie :A \0 SAS : ..*■£!: t.S.ut 0‘ISVSO ill J/iU- ( .J-'XSl.Xl, VAJ StC A 

. . A' . ■ . A l - AA 

t . , . t V , • , . 

• -S' S . . V AA As. • is. A - A ' ■ S-AA'-SA- ■ ' '• y ; ' ' n 

-•"■■s', f .; A A: .... . : ■• ■ t ■ 

■ . . ... , 

? . A. . , '. .. A ;,A. V ’A A - r AS. : is-V 

A 'A. . V I.,- A ' AA S' I ’ ;!"x V ... : ' 

, . . : 'a .: sv i ,sa;:j c.‘ - r "a ? ..a issis s. v r .a- • 

* . V i l ... , ; 




-166- 


20. Johnson, Arthur Monrad, 1931, ’’Taxonomy of the 

Flowering Plants”, The Century Co., New York 
and London, 864 pp. 

Contains an excellent glossary of terms* 

21* Knox, M., 1950, "The Spores of Lycopodium, 

Phylloglossum, Selaginella and Isoetes and 
their value in the study of microfossils of 
Palaeozoic Age”, Bot. Soc. Edinburgh Trans*, 
and Proc., vol* 55, no. 5, pp. 209-357* 

These spores have no obvious affinity to the 
cutinized microfossils but this reference may 
nevertheless be profitably consulted for methods 
of study, references etc. 

*22. Kosanke, R.M., 1943, ’’The Characteristic plant 
microfossils of the Pittsburgh and Pomeroy 
coals of Ohio”, Am. Midland Naturalist, vol. 

29, no. 1, pp* 119-132. 

No obvious affinity to cutinized microfossils. 

*23 LeRoy, L.W., 1950, ’’Subsurface Geologic Methods”, 

(A symposium). Edited and compiled by the above 
author, Colorado School of Mines, Department 
of Publications, Golden, Colorado, 1156 pp. 

Part of chapter IV gives a brief review 
of the main types of microfossils encountered 
in micropaleontologic analysis. 

*24. Lyon, Florence May, 1901, ”A Study of the Sporangia 
and Gametophytes of Selaginella apus and 
Selaginella rupestris ”. Contributions from the 
Hull Botanical Laboratory 31, Gaz. 32, pp. 
124-141 and pp. 170-194, pis. V-IX. 

This author fails to give a clear statement 
of the scale of her illustrations. 

*25. McConnell, R.G., 1893, ’’Report of a portion of 
the District of Athabaska comprising the 
country between Peace River and Athabaska 
River, North of Lesser Slave Lake”, Geol. 

Surv. Can. Annual Report, vol. 5, part I, 
1890-91, pp. 1D-67D. 





'& r jl*» 


< < t ' • ■ 

t * ' ■: - . ; t 

* ? 

* 

<x : ' t • J e * ■ « •••• 

■ , . j.x -d.:, . x. < ■x ; - v ' . 

A a '... ;i<sstn eiif xsJc ojxfjbV' axed O' '/ 

*. : ■ .. . * ■ ■ * - < ' /A • J\x ;v " " ■ 



* 

<• 

« ■■ <» v 

t '' • 

* 

< * 

- 

XJfi.v' 0 f 

\f£U£ 

r fJ \ huqJl 

t ' . 


x;c ;o eaeux 



c xxxx'x 

X . ■■ X XX 

fioi .. 

I JtO.BOl 


ixn fjBRMxifuo" 


cxxAoX! 


, j.. .,:r., ff r; x 


x":.o"X4, 


a xolDxn^XD'xxx;' 





. . 



:• -i t-xoo--. 




\x±*x$J“ < x 


X- 1 ' < 


«* * 



- 



f T 


: j.x: X.:.0‘xc "X, X ■ 


* 

t X 


„ 

? ' 

.XX-' :’c xli'xo , 





*.. 

Xi-vx1 


, * ■ , 


I t^eol 


xx xx.:': j: ,rx 

I'D Of 

xxxrx., i. x 


o; ; c.xivXO Ox 


,"■* J 0 

dr bU o 

XX'C LC9v 

ouixXXtjfyj 11 

,X 

■. < * * ? 

: V xd ;. x 

djr yd 

hsUmc^ 


■ ■ 

? \ 

;:X.XI8C C; A) 



j'fX. r 

t 

0 . 

( 'X" r, 


■. lx . ^'xxxj; 


- 

6§u 

< X l x 


, 


X&L. 0X10 o 'i xo 




;x.:xtxc'j 


V;, '-.o 

■i'xXXXX 'fO :f r U: < L 




81X080i 


lo X ;v 





* 


■ . *.. ■ . e < r - 

: : x,;„. . ■ ox ' ■ x ■ X . .... 

.' - xJxttj .. 

« x , iZ »•..• ■ t I v." c; > . I:,i 

*...-•• * , . . "* ■ 

■, ; -t :x,xx. xx. .. .Id £ ox.fx c r hlxi; r :uxxl'X;: , xxx' 
x.x. ■ ' . x ■ 

v ' « - t *. * *. ■ 

. . ' . lire X ■ : : 

. < ' ‘'mo X ^ / n^XX.' X„ i X ) 

* j ' V , ' . X ■ ‘ X> ;. ■• XC XXDX X X . .,x X: 

1 1 < T ■ J 

, . - . - t -X - ’■ 





-167- 


*26. Millot, J.O*N., 1939, "The microspores in the coal 
seams of North Staffordshire", Part I - the 
grit - ten foot coals; Inst. Min. Eng. Trans. 
(London), vol. 96, pp. 317-353. (Reprinted in 
Colliery Guardian, vol. 158 (4074): pp. 151-153 
ibid. (4075), pp. 200-204, Jan. and Feb. 1939. 

This reference of little direct value. 

*27. Paget, R.F., 1936, "The correlation of coal seams 

by microspore analysis; The seams of Warwickshire", 
Inst. Min. Eng. Trans. London, vol. 92, no, 2, pp. 
59-88, (In part reprinted in Colliery Guardian, 
vol. 153 (3954), pp. 654-663, 1936. Discussion 
in Colliery Guardian (3955-3956), pp. 748-750, 
1936). 

This reference demonstrates that coal seams 
of a restricted area can be correlated by micro¬ 
spore assemblages. 

*28. Raistrick, A., 1939, n The correlation of coal 
seams by microspore content, Part II - The 
Trencherbone seam, Lancashire, and the Busty 
Seams, Durham", Inst. Min. Eng. Trans., 

(London), vol. 97, pp. 425-431. (In part 
reprinted in Colliery Guardian, vol. 158 
(4094), pp, 1059-1061, June 1959). 

See ref. 26. 

*29. Ried, E.M. and M.E.J. Chandler, 1933, "The London 
Clay Flora", British Museum (Natural History), 

33 plates, 17 figs., 561 pp. 

The flora illustrated here has no obvious 
affinity to cutinized microfossils. 

*30. Schemel, Mart P., 1950, "Carboniferous plant spores 
from Daggett County, Utah", Jour. Palaeontology, 
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 232-244, pis. 39, 40, 3 
figs., March 1950. 

"ABSTRACT - Post-Madison, pre-Belden plant 
spores from Daggett County Utah, are described 
and illustrated. The assemblage is compared 
to British, Polish, and Russian assemblages 
of similar age. Two new genera are proposed, 
Rotaspora and Tripartities ." 

These plant spores are obviously different 
from cutinized microfossils, but this reference 
is of value because it may be used as an ex¬ 
ample of a good method of presentation of new 
microplant material. 




, " c ■ 1 t » T ' - * « 

, PP : ...' . . ■ .. .0 ■' ' ■ OP ■ ^ ■' 

r 

* * <. -iOP" ' ; 


CO 00 J ni. 

* 


•■-J. 

» « ■ i 4 . 


.. 

,:' ' ~ ■ - \ , v ■ - ■ ■ 


v- coe/ixJ 


«> r, 


-J:w r X£v.' 


t * * ' ■* * 

'loo 1.0 f £ O':a:C'I0 cp- yd 


00 0 V 


■ : < 

£ . c 


t * • * " . < 

itoi;fox,- on y;:f 9X118': oi 

« v .i t ' 

V c ' . . ' -o / ' p ' ,.*X 




■ . 

xoi:m vo 08 jcisprio 


PCt/rr.: o"',. 

.bojoxxc,:: 


a 

* 

'• •: , ' ■ ■ 0 


K:u 


5J0S.E9B 
in £0X0 


< ♦ pp * ' 

■n ■:•■■ ;:l*. , 

y;y ; - 


C • * 5 

' [ lo! . X 


O .. < 


00bitod. on'!.' ** 


r l.:C f.\ r dt' OP-. O'ii S'x.bii. oi.lX PXXl 80. 

O -i O- 0 ; ■■ ■O'PO" 0. 0 . •' -> 0;/' ' i 

• ■ ■■ >■ '■ ‘‘j ■■ ■ ;t* 

. .: > - t’ 

• •; * t * ? 41 ' 


v.:.i.. I /iv . .'0-0 . ,i 0 - 0 i. ■ ■ x *-■ p. 

P-.P. ;0; C' . ■' POOXPv- XPOpopOP '0':. O;.0C8 

X... ; . t p ■ c : ■■ - r - pp 

■ cp i: o' ; - .,o.j-.. . 

■ ; i 5 ( P ' f v ' 

. . ... . . P , . ' 

—359 04 . • & " ■■ T • • i - 'i ' $ - 1 : 

op y .byor . . xc ioooOp boc;o a bo eiqxtix 

, : .co. --- .P pp* 



D£i fc 


CTO iO 


l- £ Iq 


61.0 

CC 






-168- 


31. Schopf, J*M., L.R. Wilson, and Ray Bentall, 1944, 

"An Annotated Synopsis of Paleozoic Fossil 
Spores and the Definition of Generic Groups", 

Ill. Geol. Surv., Rept., Inv., No. 91. 

The above authors reviewed the existing 
systems of classifying the Paleozoic spores 
and attempted to place the descriptions of 
these fossils on the basis of the Internat¬ 
ional Rules of Nomenclature and to.assemble 
them into more or less natural groups. This 
taxonomic revision is in the form of an 
annotated synopsis of several hundred Paleo¬ 
zoic fossil spores and the definition of 
generic groups. 

The method of presentation of this thesis, 
follows to a certain extent that of this 
reference. 

It contains the most complete list of 
references pertaining directly to Paleozoic 
spores and related material, up to 1943. 

*32. Schopf, J.M., 1948, "Pteridosperm Male Fruct¬ 
ifications: American Species of Dolero- 
theca, with notes regarding certain Allied 
Forms", Jour. Paleontology, vol. 22, no. 6, 
pp. 681-724, pis. 104-115, 18 text figs. 

Dolerotheca includes a group of pteridosperms, 
(Medullosaceae) characterized by very large and 
unusual pollen-bearing organs. 

They have no apparent affinity to the cut- 
inized microfossils described in this thesis. 

This reference contains a wealth of information 
pertaining to microplant material as well as 
a good list of references. 

*33. Schopf, J.M., 1949, "Research in Coal Paleobotany 
since 1943", Econ. Geol. vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 
492-512. 

Chief emphasis in this paper is devoted to 
a review of plant microfossil investigations 
and it covers literature not previously reviewed 
by reference 31, or since 1943. 

"One of the greatest difficulties in using 
this material (plant microfossils) for correl¬ 
ations for extending our knowledge of the plant 
composition of coal has been in systematic 
(taxonomic) treatment of the materials. The 
review of recent literature are presented chiefly 
with reference to the diverse systematic approaches 
of various authors. The contrast between ess- 





« ■ t * * ■ t 





-169- 


entially nonbotanical or morphologic classif¬ 
ication schemes, which are simpler to apply and 
which may serve adequately for local correlational 
studies, and those studies conceived on a more 
fundamental basis of plant taxonomy, for paleo- 
geographic and ecologic interpretation of 
botanically related groups is presented." 

*34. Scott, Dukinfield, H., 1924, "Extinct Plants 
and problems of Evolution", Founded on a 
course of public lectures delivered at the 
University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, in 
1922, 63 fig*, and frontispiece, 240 pp. 

*35* Seward, A.C., 1931, "Plant Life Through The Ages", 

A Geological and Eotanical Retrospect, 

Cambridge University Press, 140 illust¬ 
rations, 601 pp. 

*36. Sbimer, Hervey W. and Robert R. Shrock, 1944, 

"Index Fossils of North America", a publication 
of the Technology Press, Mass., Institute of 
Technology, John Wiley and Sons., Inc., New 
York, and Chapman and Hall, London, 837 pp* 

*37. Smith, Gilbert, M., 1933, “The Fresh-water Algae 
of the United States", McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, Inc., 716 pp. 

*38. Spath, L.F., (1923-1930), "A monograph of the 
Ammonoidea of the Gault", vol. I, printed 
for the Paleontographical Society, London. 

*39* Spath, L.F., (1931-1943), “A monograph of the 

Ammonoidea of the Gault", vol. II, printed for 
the Paleontographical Society. 

*40. Stadnichenko, T., and David White, 1929, Micro- 
thermal Studies of some 1 Mother Rocks* 
of Petroleum from Alaska", pp. 823-840, 
"Description of Fossil Plants found in some 
'Mother Rocks' of Petroleum from northern 
Alaska", pp. 841-848, Am. Assoc. Petroleum 
Geologists, Bull. vol. 13, no. 7. 

This reference is of interest because it gives 
the results of preliminary microthermal and 
microchemical tests done on microplant material 
including spores and spore cases. Some of this 
microplant material is thought to be of Lower 
Cretaceous age. Very little can be determined 
from the photomicrographs used as illustrations. 


— 


Du, 
OXu 


1CU 


■ ■ e •' . :■! -jo : i../ , v.Q',;: -;h > 

■ c ■ •.i.: v-V' -o ./ < . . j ., c ,tre t ;j •,. 

■ ...... 

: • ■ * 

. « ; ' ! --v .. ;j; .. ■■ ' : ■■ ? i ' Z. 

.c nc j:,: e reiq ! i-■>?': e.. c-ie oleue hi ix: ee-; ; : /r c * 

* 

'"OX:; £ j/ 


■,. > x. 

£ X3C 


* t ■ ■ t 

t : ■ •".. ! ' ■. : V r : .. . ■' l .:. 1 

.. \ . 1C c 

£ - " 

• • 


r .' ... r * *. t 

t • .£: •..• •’ i\f , o. . •... I. ... '■ . O ...... ■' ; . 



j'xacic; blU 

* j" 

J..J .UnV; < ' V. 0 ± r 5. *•:; 

. dtroll a 


'* , 


OiiuV'S. arit jo 

- 

t * * ♦ 


, 

. : . ■ ■ 

■ 


OB’Z 1 '0 .: .... - . • •• •' ' i 

* t * 

- v.. ,..; r ~ 

? . t 


t" • 



* . •, , 

• ' 

$dt '■ <: d. e f r. o.; ,ctr 

.1 f , • j -c 

<• • . • 


<•'■■■■■ ■■ 

jo .• obxCiM 

. ■■ < 


j,: .re. 

. ; c c < 

A : . —: 

*+'-* < ■' 

< , 10 V' 

x U cx!'\ - Oil- 

j 0 ;.:.-.L>.iOi .o: x.e. 


■ 0 js'Ot>l£ r 



? * ? . 

r .. . . • • 

{ 

. . 

c <■ ■ , 

e-. •; J.... 


a:- '' ah he r . o'..: p j.a 3 

XJ - *Li 

e/cxee .e..;-'e.: eu 

men j‘£.,u mcnx isjj 

Jj'- y.J'-'-'... :ro f 

..s': eej C',.. 1 

, * 

* «• . . 

. j 

w 5 * '■ t 

. 



: .... 

Li fin c 0 ' l *1 tih U i 

leer-j^n; ee.l roe. eo ei.;c. : , n , „■ c re. .be 

* • \ v.'i X : ' 

■j ' r „, jo oi e7 jrj xc.- •' lo± j‘.o j&m joe lq c±.X 

■ ■ ... ■ ■ . ; 




- 170 - 


*4l. Stauffer, Clinton R., 1933, ’’Middle Ordovician 
Polvchaeta from Minnesota", Bull. Geol. Soc. 
Amer. Vol. 44, pp. 1173-1210, pis. 59-01, 

Dec. J>1, 1933. Proceedings of the Paleontolo¬ 
gical Society pp. 1175-1210. 

No affinity to cutinized microfossils. 

*42. Stones, Marie C., 1910, "Ancient Plants", Being 
a simple account of the past vegetation of 
the earth and of the recent important dis¬ 
coveries made in this realm of nature study, 
Blackie and Son, Ltd., 50 Old Bailey, E. C., 
London, 190 pp. 

*43. Taylor, William, R., 1937 "Marine Algae of the 
Northeastern Coast of North America", Illus. 
by Chin-Chih Jao, Ann Arbor, University of 
Michigan Press, 1937* 427 pp. bO pis. 

*44. Thiessen, R., 1921, "Origin and Composition of 

certain Oil Shales", Econ. G-eol., vol, lb, pp. 
289-300. 

This reference*pertains to an experimental 
study done on oil-bearing shales from the 
Devonian of Illinois, Indiana, and Kentucky 
containing a high content of microplant 
material. 

"From the small amount of work that has been 
done on the chemical composition of spore-walls 
and cuticles of living plants it is shown that 
these are composed largely of the esters of the 
higher fatty acids, that is oils and waxes". 

(p. 29S). 

*45. Thomson, R, B., 1927* "Evolution of the Seed 

Habit in Plants", Trans. R. S. C., vol. 21, sec¬ 
tion 5. pp. 229-272. 

Could be profitably consulted by anyone 
doing further study of cutiniaed microfossils. 

*46. Walton, John, 1940, "An Introduction to the Study 
of Fossil Plants", (text), Adam and Charles 
Black, 4 , 5, and fa Soho Square, London W.I., 

187 pp. 139 illus. 

*47, White, david and T. Stadnichenko, 1923, "Some 
Mother Plants of Petroleum in the Devonian 
Black Shales", Econ, G-eol. vol. 10, pp, 238- 
252, (reprinted by Kentucky G-eol. Survey., 

1925, ser. 6, vol. 21, pp. 99-117* 


1 









- 171 - 


*48. Wilson, L.R., 1946, "The Correlation of Sediment¬ 
ary Rocks by Fossil Spores and Pollen", 

Jour* Sedimentary Petrology, vol. 16, no* 

3, pp. 110-130. 

* This is an important reference because it 

summarizes much of the information pertain¬ 
ing directly to the use of fossil spores and 
pollen in correlation of sedimentary rocks. 
The use of cutinized microfossils as corre¬ 
lative indices could be investigated in 
somewhat the same way. 

*49# Wodehouse, R.P., 1935, "Pollen Grains" Their 

structure, identification and significance 
in science and medicine, 1st edition. New 
York and London, 574 pp* 

This is the most complete American text on 
the subject of pollen grains. A section of 
Part II of Chapter VII is of extreme interest 
because it presents a summary of Fossil 
Gymnosperms, Cycadofilicales (Pteridosperms), 
pp. 211-232. 

Supplementary Bibliography 

*1. Bahan, W.G., 1951, "Microfauna and Correlation 
of the Joli Fou Formation", unpublished 
M. Sc. thesis. University of Alberta. 

*2* Bullock, D.B., 1950, "Microfaunal Study of the 
Basal Lloydminster Shale", unpublished M. 

Sc. thesis, University of Alberta. 

*3* Nielsen, A.R., 1950, "Microfaunal Study of the 
Shaftesbury Formation", unpublished M. Sc. 
thesis, University of Alberta. 

*4. Stelck, C.R., 1950, "Cenomanian-Albian Foramin- 
ifera of Western Canada", unpublished Ph. 

D. thesis, Stanford University. 

*5* Trollope, F.H., 1951, "A Lower Microfauna of the 
Loon River Formation, Northern Alberta" 
unpublished M. Sc. thesis. University of 
Alberta. 

*6. Wetter, R.E., 1951* M A Cenomanian Microfauna 

- from Upper Fort St. John Strata", unpub¬ 

lished M. Sc. thesis. University of Alberta. 




XVI- 


' « v c * « 

* < t " ’ ' '■ 

* ■ - . * «■'■ 

. v- ;;«•:£ m. ax oXill! 

— . ; .;;; ..••■■' ■ u* : n . x;' : 

.. XC : ‘' i'<v- . £■' C ;- C .i:J . J. • ; X. XX '• C " . 

. v o X X . r •• fV0TX£ . fXX.X £.00 7.C -j'-.J'J Xi J i 

* 

< « V ■ * t 

; ...., .. . - ' ' u o ' . ■ • ■ v ' ■' ' £ ' 

Vi-; . I.::- tXlb* - X;- J, XU .£i.UI ’ i UU U : ; U t 

» r . ' 

u £ /. luuuu.,. : j j -uxu vu >,.or: xu: xuu.' . 

ox; 

.,r:? j: .;uuu.;ru ; < ... i : X7 ■ c: x-.... \.c : i. J xu'. 

■■■'.' ■■ : ■ 

. . ■ . • : ? 

* t - * - 

, r ;,•.: . j:Xv. j; .'. •. ? •''■'c :$ x*xc' u c' - s.io b mi £ 7: c 

* - * . . 

. , . , ■ < ■ < - » ? 

, X . : 

* 

■' t ? 
t 

' . . ' , ' ' ■ ■ 

~ . : ~ ■' < <* * 

. ■ < : \ 

;; ; : x? x r i: ■. t .ac . r^-.i ■ ' . -. ■" xx: c ■, 

.. 

. 

■ '. .. ' Li ( " ? - X' t * > - • ^ 

X . 




-172- 


*7* McLearn, F.H., 1944, "Revision of the Paleo- 
geography of the Lower Cretaceous of the 
Western Interior of Canada", Geol 0 Surv. 
Paper 44-32* 

_ , 1945, "Revision of the Lower 

Cretaceous of the Western Interior of 
Canada", G-eol. Surv. Paper 44-17, 2nd 
edition. 


*8 



-STX- 






■ .■ , f 1 ;XX * !~ ,. ; a : T,: ■ u . 

8.0 t lx X :• C ■0 £ .ttrxO “iO'vYOj..' o io 'XC ~£X. XXS‘X>- n B'-\ 
m V ' *XC:.H. c ' ' v.’ ’ X" X >. . j'-. . ■ X.-: 

* 

. ' dx t ... e .,... . 

do xox-,-Xj*i, x'x.xrxxx xxx t;a ouoeooJSXG 

d- ■ x \ i — . # " ■ „ JX' 

* 















, 






















