Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Overbaugh, S.C. 

Some mercurated alkyl-resorcinol 
carboxylic acids and the mercuration of 
dinitrofluorescein. 1933* 




















































f933 
II 




UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and recommend to the Committee on Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a dissertation on, "Some Mercurated Alkyl- 
Resorcinol Carboxylic Acids" and "The Mercuration of 
Xinitrofluorescein", submitted by Sidney Charles 
Overbaugh, B.Sc. # in partial fulfilment of the re¬ 
quirements for the degree of Master of Science, 









SOME MERCURATED ALKYL-RES ORCIHELL 
CARBOXYLIC ACIDS 
AHD 

THE MERCURATION OF DIUIT ROFLUO RES C ElN 

fry 

Sidney Charles OverLaugh* B.Sc. 

Department of Chemistry 
University of Alberta 


• A THESIS 

Submitted to the Committee on 
Graduate Studies, University of 
Alberta, in partial fulfilment 
of the requirements for the 
degree of Master of Science, 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April, 1933 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/somemercuratedalOOover 


PART I 


SOME MERCURATED ALKYL-RESORCINOL 
CARBOXYLIC ACIDS 

Introduction 

In recent years there has been a growing interest 

in organic mercury compounds, as many of them have been 

found to possess marked bactericidal properties. They 

have the advantage of not precipitating protein, as do 

inorganic mercury compounds, and they do not attack 

metal instruments to any extent, 

Special interest has centered around substances 

containing the hydroxyl group because many of these 

already possess considerable bactericidal activity, 

and they lend themselves readily to mercuration. Henry 
1 

and Sharp were able to prepare mercury derivatives of 
salieylaldehyde and para-hydroxy-benzaldehyde, although 
benzaldehyde itself merely reduced the mercury to the 
mercurous condition. 

The influence of alkyl side chains in the benzene 

2 

ring is well known, since the work of Leonard . It was 
found that the introduction of longer hydrocarbon chains 
caused a marked increase in germicidal power until the 




hexyl compound was reached* At the same time the toxi¬ 
city for laboratory animals was considerably diminished. 

Henry and Sharp in another investigation mercurat- 
ed several alkylphenols and phenolic aldehydes. The 
intensifying effect of the -alkyl side-chain is still 
apparent in the mercury derivatives. 

In a later paper 4 , the same authors reported on the 
mercuration of several polyhydroxy-benzaldehydes. Those 
having two hydroxyl groups in ortho or para position 
to each other did not yield pure mercury compounds* In 
the case of 2, 5 - dihydroxybenzaldehyde mercuration 
was followed by the separation of mercurous acetate 
owing to intramolecular oxidation and reduction. With 
2 , 3 - dihydroxybenz aldehyde and 3, 4 - dihydrobenzalde¬ 
hyde dark-colored mercury compounds were obtained mixed 
with mercurous acetate or oxide. On dissolving the com¬ 
pounds in sodium hydroxide solution, rapid decomposition 
took place, with the deposition of metallic mercury. 

On the other hand resorcyl-aldehyde or 2, 4 - dihy¬ 
droxybenzaldehyde having hydroxyl groups in meta posi¬ 
tion to each other, yielded a stable mercury compound? 

Its constitution was found to be 3, 5 — diacetoxymer- 
curi - 2, 4 - dihydroxybenzaldehyde by converting it into 

the known 3, 5 - dihromo-2-hydrox,y-4 methoxy-benzalde¬ 

hyde and 3, 5 - dibromo-4-hydroxy-me -hoxy-henzaidehyde . 






























. 



























































The replacement of the mercuri-group by bromine or 

5 

iodine according to the method given by Paolini is a 
method often used to determine its position in the ben¬ 
zene nucleus. This useful, reaction can be represented as 
follows, R - standing for the non-reacting portion of the 
molecule 

R-Hg—OAc-f-Na Br-^R-Hg—Br-flla 0 Ac 
R Hg Br + Br^R Br-f-Hg Br . 

£J £-> 

Of the compounds prepared several showed pronounced 

bactericidal action, the most active being the mercury 

derivative of 2 - hydroxy -5- methoxybenzaldehyde, 

A considerable number of mereurated aromatic acids are 

known, Benzoic acid can be mereurated, though mercur- 

6 

ation does not take place readily • The anhydride of 
o - hydroxymercuri benzoic acid is obtained, as is shown 
by the preparation of the same compound by the mercuration 
of phthalic acid » In the latter case carbon dioxide 
is evolved and the mercury is joined to the carbon atom 
left unoccupied. 

Introduction of the amino or hydroxyl group into a 
benzene ring containing a carboxyl group facilitates mer- 
curation. If salicylic acid is boiled with mercuric 
acetate, 3 - hydroxymercuri -2-hydroxybenzoic acid is 














* 




■ 




. 


' 

■ 


. , 






. 

* 
















. 


















formed 8 . It is believed that in this case mercuric 
salicylate is first formed which then changes to the 
above compound. This mechanism of the reaction is 
supported by the fact that solid mercuric salicylate 
heated to 100° 9 , gives the anhydro - 5 - hydroxymer- 
curi - 2 - hydroxybenzoic acid. The corresponding 
reaction with mercuric benzoate requires a tempera¬ 
ture of 170° C. 

A great variety of other hydroxybenzoic acid mercury 
compounds have been made, as for example, 2 - mercuri - 
5 - hydroxybenzoic acid i0 and 2 - mercuri - 4 - hydroxy¬ 
benzoic acid 1 ^, 

Mercurated alkyl resorcinols are also known'**". Of 
this series the ethyl and hexylresorcinols were chosen, 
the latter because of its high phenol coefficient. Like 
the other compounds mentioned above having hydroxyl 
groups in meta position to each other they are readily 
mercurated. Both mono - and di-mercury derivatives were 
found, which ,though insoluble in ordinary solvents 
dissolve in sodium hydroxide solution. The effect of 
the alkyl side chains on germicidal activity in these 
compounds could not be determined, as unfortunately the 
alkaline solution decomposed with deposition of metallic 


mercury, 













































. 























More recently beta - resorcylic acid has been 
mercurated 12 , giving mono - and di - mercury deri¬ 
vatives. The mercury compounds are more stable toward light 
than the mercurated alkyl-resorcinols. They dissolve 
more readily in alkali and the solutions show a greater 
stability. 

In view of these facts it was thought that the mer¬ 
curated alkyl - resorcinol carboxylic acids would per¬ 
haps yield mercury compounds which would be stable and 
owing to the alkyl, side chain and the mercury in the 
molecule might be effective germicides. 

OUTLINE AND DISCUSSION OP INVESTIGATION. 

The alkyl resorcinols used in this work were pre- 

15 

pared according to the method of Johnson and Hodge 

When a fatty acid is heated with resorcinol in the 
presence of zinc chloride, condensation takes place be¬ 
tween the carboxyl group and the hydrogen of the aro¬ 
matic nucleus. In the case of acetic acid and resorcinol, 
the reaction is as follows: 



OH 



CH , 


i 


+ c-o 


-f H 2 o 


I 


0 H 



OH 



H 


c-o 
















The ketone so formed now generally called acetyl re- 

14 

sorcinol, was first prepared by ITencki and Sieber , 
and called by them and the older literature reeaeeto- 
phenone , or ethanoylphendiol . The color of the pure 
ketone ( M. P. 142 ), is not recorded in the literature* 
As generally prepared it is a dark red solid which may 
be vacuum distilled to give a yellow oil* The color is 
probably due to the presence of the compounds resace- 
tein and acetfluorescein formed by further condensation 
with resorcinol* 

Acetyl-resorcinol is reducible by means of zinc 
amalgam and hydrochloric acid. 

On reduction oxygen is removed from the carboxyl 
group and the side-chain is reduced to a hydrocarbon one 
as follows*- g ^ 


+ 4 H 



+ H, 0 . 


CH t 

Cd, 


The ethyl resorcinol produced was purified by vacuum 
distillation* A portion was recrystallized from benz¬ 
ene * Water could not be used as it is too good a sol¬ 


vent * 










. 













. 




- 




: 

































■ 

* 










To introduce the carboxyl group Kolbe f s synthe¬ 


sis was used, as in the preparation of beta-resorcylic 
16 

acid . By this method the compound v/as dissolved in 
an aqueous solution of potassium bicarbonate. The sol¬ 
ution v/as heated for some time alone and later with 

a rapid stream of carbon dioxide passing through. 

OH OH 



HOOC 



+ C 0, --> 



On acidifying the solution while hot f with concentrated 
hydrochloric acid and allowing it to cool, 2, 4 - di- 
hydroxy - 5 - ethyl benzoic acid crystallized in a 
thick fibrous mass resembling macerated filter paper 
in appearance. 

This acid is not described in the literature, 

nor is its preparation given. It is however, mentioned 

17 

in some biological work by 1. Bleyer * It is most 
readily crystallized from water, being very soluble in 
hot water and practically insoluble in cold. If the 
solution is allowed to cool slowly the acid crystallizes 
in beautiful white needles, which so completely fill 


the beaker that it may be turned on its side for a few 
seconds without spilling the mother liquor. 













■ 



































. 










. 













































The acid was obtained pure by three recrystall¬ 


izations. It melts at 166 - 170 C 


The formula proposed is a tentative one, though 

there is good reason to believe that the carboxyl 

group is in the position shown. 

The monoacetate has been prepared by adding 

acetic anhydride to the alkaline solution of the acid, 

18 

according to the method of Lesser and Gad 
It has been shown that in this way only the hydroxyl 
group in para position to the carboxyl group is acetyl- 
ated. As the hydroxyl group is a much stronger ortho 
and para directing group than is the ethyl group, the 
formula of the monoacetate in all probability is:~ 


OH 



The 2,4- dihydroxy - 5 - ethyl - benzoic acid was 
readily mercurated in dilute alcoholic solution by the 
theoretical amount of mercuric acetate . 


0 H 


OH 


HOOC 

























The acetoxy group was immediately hydrolyzed away 
to give the hydroxymercuri compound which precipi¬ 
tated . 


The precipitation took place instantly on the 
addition of the mercuric acetate, the precipitate 
which was yellow for a few seconds quickly turned 
quite white. Analysis showed it to be the 3 - hy¬ 
droxymercuri- 2, 4 -dihydroxy-5_ethyl benzoic acid, 
having the following formula:- nhj 



OH 



The pure white color of the substance agrees with the 

hydroxymercuri - formula shown, the anhydro forms 

19 

often being colored 

In the same way, by mercurating 5 - ethyl- 2 - 
hydroxy - 4 acetoxy benzoic acid, the compound 5 - ethyl- 
2 - hydroxy- 3 - hydroxymercuri- 4 - acetoxybenzoid 
acid was obtained having the formula:- 


0 H 


H00 C 


h* oH 



-o- co- 








: 

- 

: 

- 












Propionyl resorcinol was prepared similarly to tne 

ethyl compound, using propionic acid instead of acetic. 

After reduction, the Kolbe syntnesis was carried out in 

a precisely similar manner, to give 2, 4 - dihydroxy - 

5 - propyl benzoic acid having the following formula 

OH 


H00 




No mention of this acid has been found in the liter¬ 


ature, though the closely related divaric acid has 
20 

been prepared . This substance naturally occuring in 
lichero is 2 - propyl - 4, 6 - dihydroxy benzoic acid 
with the following structure 


HOOC 



OH 


By the mercuration of 2, 4 - dihydroxy - 5 - propyl 
benzoic acid in dilute alcohol, anhyd.ro - 3 - hydroxymer- 
curi - 2, 4 - dihydroxy - 5 - propyl benzoic acid was 
obtained as a light yellow solid. 












































, 
















































0 


/ 


* 


HOOC 



/ 



OH 


The anhydro structure shown is indicated by the yellow 
color, as well as by the analysis. 

By the above method butyl-resorcinol was prepared 
by the condensation of n-butyric acid with resorcinol 
and subsequent reduction. 

In this case the carboxylation could not be carr¬ 
ied out as in the previous cases, as butyl - resorcinol 
is insoluble in water. It was earboxylated by the method 
previously used in the carboxylation of hexyl - resorc¬ 
inol hereinafter described, to give 2, 4 - dihydroxy - 
5 - butyl - benzoic acid, with the following structure 




HOOC 


II 


I 




This was mercurated to give anhydro - 3 - hydroxymercuri 

2, 4 - dihydroxy - 5 butyl - benzoic acid, (Formula II) 

Hexyl - resorcinol was prepared as above, using 
n-eaproic acid and resorcinol. 










Its carboxylation presented some difficulty owing to 
its insolubility. Attempts were made to carry out 
the reaction in aqueous solution, but after eight 
hours no evidence of reaction was apparent. In an 
alcohol - water solution sufficient to dissolve a con¬ 
siderable part of the hexyl-resorcinol , negative re¬ 
sults were also obtained after several hours reflux¬ 
ing with the passage of carbon dioxide. The method 

21 

described in Eouben - Weyl in the laboratory prepara 

tion of salicylic acid was tried. In this, the dry 

sodium salt of hexyl - resorcinol was heated in an 

atmosphere of carbon dioxide at atmospheric pressure 

for several hours without result. The sodium salt in 

benzene solution also failed to react. The reaction 

was finally carried out by the method used by Robinson 

22 

and Robertson in the preparation of p-orsellinic acid 
using glycerol as the solvent. The acid is tentatively 
given the formula shown, (Formulr TV 



OH 



OH 


OH 




It was readily mercurated giving the anhydro- 3 - 
hydroxymercuri - 2, 4 - dihydroxy - 5 - hexyl benzoic 












acid. (Formula II) 

It was desired to compare the germicidal power 
of theseeompounds with their surface tensions in solu¬ 
tion. For that purpose solutions of the pure acids 
were made up by weight, dissolved \n the theoretical 
volume of standard sodium hydroxide or sodium bicarbonate 
and made up to fifty or one hundred cubic centimeters. 

Surface tensions were measured by two different 
methods, the capillary rise method, and the direct 
method by means of the Du Nouy tensiometer. While both 
methods indicate a steady decrease in surface tension 
as we ascend the homologous series, the two do not agree. 
In each case the concentration of the acid used , cal¬ 
culated as the free acid was one part in five hundred 
parts of solution.. The temperature was kept as nearly 
as possible at 23.0°C. 

Phenol coefficients were determined by a modified 
Rideal-Walker method , using Bacillus typhosus as the 
test organism. 

The results of the surface tension and phenol 
coefficient measurements are given in the following 
table. For convenience the acids are referred to under 
the names of the alkyl radicals present. 






TABLE I 


Acid used as 
the Na salt 

Cone. 1: 500 

Surface tension 
by Capillary Rise 
dynes/ cm. 

Surface Tension 
by Du Nouy meth¬ 
od. dynes/cm. 

Phenol 

eoeff 

Water 

72.6 

73,0 

- 

Ethyl Acid 

72.6 

69.0 

<0.7 

Propyl Acid 

72.5 

60.8 

• 

O 

V 

Butyl Acid 

70.7 

53.6 

0.9 

Hexyl Acid 

65 .2 

45.5 

1.6 


As will be observed, the surface tensions measured 
by the Du Nouy tensiometer are in each case less than 
those measured by the capillary rise method. As we 
ascend in the,homologous series the surface tensions 
decrease and the phenol coefficients increase. 

It is interesting to compare to phenol ceefficients 
of the alkyl-resorcinol carboxylic acids with those 
of the uncarboxylated compounds quoted by Lohme, Cox 
and Miller 0 * This is shown in Table II. 


















TABLE II 


Alkyl-Resorcinols 

Phenol 

Coefficients 

Alkyl-Resorcinol 
Carboxylic Acids 

Phenol 
coeff. 

Ethyl-Resorcinol 

i. 

Ethyl Acid 

<0 .7 

Propyl-Resorcinol 

5.0 

Propyl Acid 

<0.7 

Butyl-Resorcinol 

22.0 

Butyl Acid 

0.9 

Hexyl-Resorcinol 

46.-56 

• Hexyl Acid 

1.6 


The phenol coefficient for ethyl resorcinol is 
not quoted in literature but was obtained by extrapo¬ 
lation on the graph given by the above authors. 

It is evident from this that the effect of the 
alkyl side-chain is still noticeable. The germicidal 
power however, is greatly reduced by the presence of 
the carboxyl group* 

It is interesting to note that the phenol coeffi¬ 
cients reported by various workers , on the same com¬ 
pound, often vary greatly* This variation is due 
largely to difference in resistance to germicides 
exhibited by various strains of Bacillus typhosus. 

It becomes considerable only in the case of a germicide 
of high potency * For example, hexyl-resorcinol is re¬ 
ported as having coefficients from 52 to 147 , by 
the same worker using five different strains of test 
organism 

















Nevertheless, it is believed that the comparison 
made between the alkyl resorcinols and their carboxylic 
acids is correct, as very little variation occurs with 
different strains of Bacillus typhosus in phenol co¬ 
efficients below 5. 

It was originally intended to compare the bacterio¬ 
cidal potency of the carboxylic acids with that of their 
mercury derivatives, as in practically every case, the 
introduction of mercury into a compound intensifies 
the action. This proved to be impossible however, owing 
to the instability of the mercury derivatives in solu¬ 
tion, Shortly after dissolving in alkali, decomposi¬ 
tion took place with the deposition of metallic mercury. 
As the mercury derivatives are very insoluble in non- 
reaction solvents, the attempt had to be abandoned. 

In this respect the compounds described resemble the 
mercurated alkyl resorcinols . 

EXPERIMENTAL PART 
Preparation of Acetyl-Resorcinol 

A solution containing 90 g. of anhydrous zinc 
chloride in 120 g. (2.0 moles) of glacial acetic acid 
was prepared. To this was added 110 g, (1 mole) of 
resorcinol. The mixture was stirred and kept at the 






boiling point for two and one-quarter hours. The mass 
assumed a deep ruby red color. On pouring this into 
ten volumes of water , beautiful dark red crystals 
separated which were allowed to stand a few hours be¬ 
fore filtering off. Yield 94 g. 

A small portion recrystallized from water yielded 
red crystals melting at 140 - 141° ( uncorr.) On dis¬ 
tilling a small portion in vacuo , a light yellow solid 
was obtained, which was recrystallized from water yield¬ 
ing a product of M.P. 142° (uncorr.) 

P^re acetyl-resorcinol is quoted by Nencki and 

25 o 

Sieber as having a melting point of 142 . 

The remainder of the red crystals was distilled 
in vacuo at 195 - 200° under 12 mm. pressure. The 
distillate was a light brown color • It quickly set 
to a mass of crystals. Yield 71 g» 

This was not further purified but was used in the 
preparation of ethyl resorcinol. 

Preparation of Ethyl-Resorcinol 

Two hundred and sixteen grams of acetyl-resorcinol 
was refluxed with 500 g. amalgamated zinc in two litres 
of hydrochloric acid (Cone, acid and water 1:1). After 
heating for 12 hours a small portion of the solution 
no longer gave a red color with ferric chloride, in- 







dicating that reduction was complete. 

On cooling, a crop of white crystals separated 
M.P. 95° (uncorr) . These were filtered off, and 
three more crops obtained by concentrating the solution. 

As these v/ere contaminated by tarry material, they 

o 

were distilled in vacuo, boiling at 160 under 12 - 15 mm. 
pressure. The distillate was nearly white. Total 
yield 97 g. 

Recovery of this compound was difficult owing to 
its great solubility in water from which it cannot be 
readily crystallized. It is not volatile with steam. 
Ether extraction removes zinc chloride as well as 
ethyl-resorcinol. It can be recrystallized from benzene 
or toluene * 

Carboxylation of Ethyl-Resorcinol 

A solution containg 10 g. ethyl-resorcinol and 
50 g» potassium bicarbonate in 100 cc. water was heated 
on the water bath for four hours. It was then refluxed 
with the rapid passing of carbon dioxide gas for one- 
half hour. The dark red liquid was acidified while still 
hot by means of concentrated hydro chloric acid from a 
dropping-funnel reaching to the bottom of the flask. 

On cooling, a very bulky fibrous precipitate separated, 

cc- isting of fine needles. This was filtered, washed, 
and recrystallized from water. Yield 4 g. 




f 
















, 








* 

- 

.. 

■ 'v 



























On repeating this experiment with longer heating 
( 5 j hours) , and longer passage of carbon dioxide (2 
hours), the yield was still 4 g. 

On working with larger quantities it was found 
possible after removal of the first precipitate of the 
carboxylic acid , to add more potassium bicarbonate, 
repeat the reaction, and get a second crop of crystals. 
This was repeated until in all, four crops of crystals 
had been removed from the same solution. 

The acid was recrystallized from water three times, 
using decolorizing -carbon once or twice as required* 
The pure- acid crystallizes in lustrous needles melting 
at 166 - 170°. It is very soluble in hot water , though 
practically insoluble in cold. It is soluble in alcohol 
and ether. • 

Analysis, Calcd. : C, 5 9.3?£ ; H, 5.54^ 

Found: C, 59.27^ ; H, 5 .43f* 

^ercuration .of 2, 4 - Dihydroxy - 5 - Ethyl - Benzoic 
Acid 

A solution containing 7.096 g. (0*039 moles) of 
the carboxylic acid in 400 cc. water and 65 cc. alcohol 
was heated on the water-bath. To this was added a hot 
solution containing 12.44 g. (0.039 ipoles) of mercuric 
acetate in 280 cc, water and 20 cc . acetic acid. A 











. 















. 




' 












white finely divided precipitate formed immediately. The 
mixture was heated until the precipitate had become 
flocculent and begun to settle. It was then filtered, 
washed with water, and dried at 100°. Yield quantitative. 

Analysis,Calcd. ; Hg. , 50.30^ 

Found: Hg ., 50 .35?& ; 50. 90fi 

This compound is a white amorphous solid , insol¬ 
uble in water and in most ordinary solvents. It is 
slightly soluble in hot acetic acid , due probably to 
the formation of the acetoxymercuri compound. It diss¬ 
olves in sodium hydroxide solution , but the solution 
is unstable. In a short time a deposit of metallic 
mercury begins to form, and the solution assumes a 
brown color. Strong acids quichly remove mercury from 
the compound as an inorganic salt. 

Preparation of the Monoacetate of 2, 4 - Dihydroxy - 
5 ° Ethyl - Benzoic Acid. 

Two grams of the carboxylic acid was dissolved in 
a few cubic centimeters of approximately normal sodium 
hydroxide. Acetic anhydride was added dropwise with 
stirring to the cold solution until excess had been added. 
After standing a few minutes the cold solution was acidified 
with hydro chloric acid. The fine crystalline precipitate 
formed . The mono-acetate was recrystallized.twice from 
20 alcohol. Yield , quantitative. 








' 

, 

. 




t 

. 

« 








Analysis,Calcd. : 

C, 58.919& 

; h, 

5 .40 ft 

Found: 

C, 59.177& 

; H, 

5 .44^ 


The mono-acetate crystallizes in very fine clusters 

of needles, easily distinguishable in appearance from 

o 

its parent compound* M*P. 125 - 145 » 

Mercuration of the Mono-Acetate 

A hot solution containing 1.20 g. (0.0057 moles) 
of mercuric acetate was added to a hot solution of 
0.85 g. (0.0057 moles) , of the mono-acetate on a 
water-bath. The solution remained quite clear for 
several seconds. Then a white finely divided precipitate 
began to form slowly. The heating was continued as 
long as the precipitate continued to form (about 50 
minutes). The precipitate was filtered off , washed, 
and dried in the oven. Yield 0.96 g. 

Analysis, Calcd.: Hg, 45.41^> 

Found : Hg, 45 ,86^ ; 46.44^ 

Like the mercury derivative of the unaeetylated 
acid , this is a white amorphous solid. It is soluble in 
the same solvents and its alkaline solution is equally 
unstable. 

Preparation of Pr opionyl-Resorcinoi 


Two hundred and fifty grams of anhydrous zinc ehlor- 
















ide was dissolved in one hundred and fifty grams 
( 2 moles) propionic acid. (B.P. 135 - 8 uncorr.) 

To the warm solution was added 100 grams (0.91 moles) 
resorcinol and the solution was heated to 130° with 
frequent stirring for 2 hours. On pouring the mass into 
water , an insoluble red oil was obtained which was 
washed with water . After standing a few hours it sol¬ 
idified. The propionyl - resorcinol was purified by 
recrystallization from a large volume of hot water. 

It crystallized in large orange needles. Yield 63 g. 

Preparation of Propyl-Resorcinol 

Sixty three grams of recrystallized propionyl - 
resorcinol was refluxed with 275 g. amalgamated zinc 
in 700 cc. of dilute hydro chloric acid, (Cone . acid and 
water 1:1). After four hours heating a few drops of 
the oily layer in 5 cc. alcohol no longer gave a red 
color with ferric chloride solution. The red oily 
layer was separated from the aqueous solution . On 
attempting to wash with an equal volume of water, a 
clear homogeneous solution resulted. Ho further attempt 
was made to isolate the propyl-resorcinol, but the solu¬ 
tion obtained was used in the next reaction. 




, 










« 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■■ 





Carboxyla/fcion of Propyl-Resorcinol 

The solution of propyl-resorcinol obtained as in 
the last paragraph was mixed with four parts by weight 
of water and two parts by weight of potassium bicarbon¬ 
ate. This was heated for two hours on a boiling water- 
bath , and refluxed for two hours with the passage of 
a rapid stream of carbon dioxide. The solution was 
diluted and acidified yielding a precipitate of 
2, 4 - dihydroxy - 5 - propyl - benzoic acid which was 
recrystallized three times from hot water. Yield 
small. 

Analysis, Calcd. : C, 61#2?& ; H, 6.17f* 

Found: C, 60 &f> ; H, 6,02ft 

The acid crystallizes in pure v/hite lustrous 
needles , melting at 177 - 182° (uncorr.) » It is 
fairly soluble in hot water , practically insoluble 
in cold. It dissolves readily in alcohol. 

Mercuration of 2, 4 - Dihydroxy - 5 - Propyl - Benzoic 
Acid . 

A hot solution containing 2.648 g. (0.0083 moles) 
of mercuric acetate in 60 cc. water and 1 cc. acetic 
acid, was added to a hot solution containing 1.630 g. 
(0.0083 moles) of the carboxylic acid dissolved in 50 cc 
water and 12 cc. alcohol. The light yellow precipitate 












formed at once . After heating on the water-bath for 

a few minutes, it was filtered,and the precipitate 

o 

washed with water and dried at 100 . Yield quantitat¬ 
ive (3,2 g.) 

Analysis, Calcd. : Hg, 50.81^ 

Found : Kg, 50 .65^ ; 49.7?& 

The yellow color indicates the anhydro structure . 
In its properties it resembles the corresponding 
ethyl compound. 

Preparation of Butyryl-Hesorclnol 

One hundred and fifty grams of anhydrous zinc 

chloride was dissolved in 150 g. (1.7 moles) of 

n-butyric acid. To the warm solution was added 75 g. 

( 0 .68 moles) resorcinol , and the whole was heated 

for two hours to 130°. The oil produced was washed in 

water three times , dried, and vacuum distilled. The 

o 

product boile.d at 190 - 200 under a pressure of 15 to 
18 mm. Yield of distilled ketone 77 g. 

Preparation of Butyl-Resorcinol 

Seventy seven grams of butyryl-resorcinol was 
refluxed with 800 cc . dilute hydro chloric acid and 
300 g. amalgamated zinc. At the end of 23 hours the 
oil no longer gave a red color with ferric chloride, 







indicating complete reduction. The dark red oil was 
washed three times with water. Yield 67 g. Without 
further purification the butyl-resorcinol was used in 
the next preparation, 

Carboxylation of Butyl-Kesorcinol 

Twenty grams butyl-resorcinol in 40 g. glycerol 
was heated with 40 g. potassium bicarbonate in an at- 
mostphere of carbon dioxide. The temperature was kept 
near 130°, After heating for three and one half hours, 
a small test portion dissolved completely in water. 

The mixture was poured into a litre of cold water and 
acidified, causing the precipitation of a dark oil, 
which later solidified. Yield of the crude acid 16 g. 

This was recrystallized with 5'^ alcohol. It 
crystallizes in v/hite needles and resembles the other 
acids of the series in appearance. The solid shows a 
tendency to turn pink, if allowed to stand for some time 
before filtering. This is probably due to oxidation. 

Analysis , Calcd. : C, 62.8^ ; 11, 6.71 
Found : C, 62.4^ ; H, 6.7 Zf> 

This acid resembles the corresponding propyl compound 
but is less soluble. It melts 115 -116°. (uncorr.) 








Mercuration of 2, 4 - Dihydroxy - 5 - Butyl - 
Benzoic Acid 

A hot solution containing 2.063 g. (0.01 moles) 
of the carboxylic acid in 80 cc. water and 40. cc. alcohol 
was prepared. To this was added a solution containing 
3.130 g. (0.01 moles) mercuric acetate in 60 cc. water 
and 1 cc. acetic acid. The precipitate which formed 
was yellow at first, but on standing turned white. 

Yield 3.8 g. 

Analysis, Calcd. for anhydro compound : Hg, 49.04^ 
Pound: Hg, 48.46?® ; 48 .36?& 

In properties this compound resembles the others in 
the series . 

Preparation of Hexylyl-Resorcinol 

One hundred and twenty five grams anhydrous zinc 

chloride v/as dissolved in 300 g. caproic acid, by warming 

and stirring. To the solution 95 g. resorcinol was 

o 

added. The mixture was heated to 125 - 135 for two 
hours with constant stirring. It was poured into cold 
water and the oil obtained washed with water, dried 
over calcium chloride, and distilled in vacuo. The 
first fraction consisted of caproic acid,boiling at 
104 - 5° under 15 to 20 mm. pressure. Hexylyl resorcinol 











was collected as a light yellow oil, distilling at 200 - 
227 ° under 12 - 15 mm. pressure. This was again dis¬ 
tilled in vacuo, yielding 110 g. of nearly pure ketone. 

165 g. of caproic acid was recovered. 

Preparation of Hexyl-Kesorcinol 

One hundred and ten grams hexylyl resorcinol 

was refluxed with 500 g. amalgamated zinc and 1000 cc. 

dilute hydrochloric acid. After 15 hours , reduction 

was complete. The substance was washed with water, 

dried over calcium chloride and distilled in vacuo. 

o 

It boiled at 195 - 210 under 12 to 15 mm. pressure. 
Yield 85.5 g. 

Carboxylation of Hexyl-Resorcinol 

Fifty grams hexyl-resorcinol was mixed with 100 g. 
potassium bicarbonate and 100 g. glycerol . The mixture 

Q 

was heated to 150 for three and one-half hours. It 
was then poured into water and acidified with hydrochloric 
acid. The oily precipitate solidified. Yield 25 g. 

The impure 2, 4 - dihydroxy - 5 - hexyl - benzoic 
acid was recrystallized from dilute alcohol (20fi is 
suitable) three times . There was considerable loss 
on recrystallization, and this acid showed a greater 
tendency to oxidation than the corresponding butyl 






, 

* 




. 

. 








. 

' 

* 







compound* This was shown by the rapid assumption of 
a pink color during crystallization. It crystallized 
very slowly, two or three days being required. If 
the filtrate from one crystallization is strongly 
acidified with hydrochloric acid , the liquid becomes 
milky in appearance, and a second crop of crystals 
is formed. 

Analysis, Calcd. : C, 65.51 ? ; H, 7.60? 

Found: C, 65.80?* ; H, 7.65? 

This acid is less lustrous in appearance than 
the previous one. It crystallizes in short, flexible 
needles. Like the others, it is soluble in sodium 
bicarbonate solution . In most solvents it is less 
soluble than the others of the series. It melts 
160 - 164°. 

Mercuration of 2, 4 - Dihydroxy - 5 - Hexyl - Benzoic 
Acid. 

The procedure followed was the same as in the case 
of the butyl compound. Equimolar quantities (1.65 g. 
of the acid , and 2.209 g. mercuric acetate) were used. 
The precipitate was light yellow and had the anhydro 
structure . 

Analysis, Calcd. : Hg, 45.93? 

Found: Hg, 45.47? ; 45.71? 



























* 

* f : 












« 

* 

• . . 










Surface Tension Measurements 


In each case the solutions used in this work were 
made up accurately “by weight. One gram , or in some 
cases o.5 g. was dissolved in the theoretical amount 
of standard sodium hydroxide and made up to a 1 
solution in a measuring-flask. This was diluted to 
a concentration of 1 : 500 for use. All concentrations 
were calculated on the basis of the free acid. 

Using the Du Nouy tensiometer , great difficulty 
was experienced in getting constant readings. When 
2 or 3 cubic centimeters on a watch -glass were use^L, 
the surface tension as measured decreased steadily, 
apparently not approaching a constant value . 

Much better values were obtained using about 25 cc. 
of solution in a 50 cc. beaker, the sides of the beaker 
above the surface helping to shield the liquid from 
air currents. Using this method, the surface tension 
as measured was practically constant for solutions 
whose surface tension did not vary by more than a few 
dynes per centimeter from that of water. 

Out of 27 readings taken on the 2, 4 - dihydroxy - 
5 - propyl - benzoic acid in a 1 : 500 dilution, the 
maximum variation was one dyne each way from the 
average of 60.8 dynes per cm. The great majority 


are 


















. 




« 


; 

. 







• 



' 

. 










. 










‘ 




: 


: 














. 


* 

















much nearer the average . 

With solutions of lower surface tension , more 
variation was observed. When first measured, the 
surface tension increased rapidly until near the 
average value, when the variations became smaller, 
but without any constant tendency in one direction or 
the other. The surface tension reported for the hexyl 
compound is the average of 32 readings. 

Much more accurate observations were made by the 
capillary rise method. In this case accurate temper¬ 
ature control was possible, using a litre beaker as 
a thermostat. The temperature was kept at 23.0° ± .05° 

measured by means of a thermometer graduated in tenths 
of a degree. In every case several measurements were 
taken of the height of the column of liquid. The 
meniscus was alternately raised and lowered and allowed 
to return to equilibrium before each measurement. In 
most cases the variation in successive readings did not 
amount to more than 0.01 cm. either way. The maximum 
variation was in the ease of the hexyl compound, the 
height of the column varying from 7.01 cm. to 7.17 cm. 

For purposes of calculation, the capillary rise 
of pure water was measured. The surface tension at 
23.0° obtained from tables is 72.6 dynes per cm. 

If it is assumed that the density of the solution is 
the same as that of water which must be very nearly 












true for such dilute solutions, the following equation 

holds : ^ __ Y* ■ h 5 Where Y refers to surface 

Tk , 

tension," h” to capillary rise , and the subscripts " 6" 
and /: 'w" to salt solution and water respectively. 

Using this relation the surface tensions of the salt 
solutions were calculated. 

Measurement of Phenol Coefficients 

Preparation of Broth 

7.5 g. sodium chloride 
7.5 g. Lemco Meat Extract 
15 g. Peptone Siccum 
1500 cc. Distilled water 

These ingredients were mixed and autoclaved to insure 
complete solution. The broth was adjusted to a 
pH of 7.2 using 1.0 normal sodium hydroxide with the 
indicator brom thymol blue , and again autoclaved. 

The precipitated phosphates were filtered off and the 
broth was put up in 10 cc . portions in 6 x f inch 

broth tubes* After being autoclaved these were ready 
fcr use, 

Preparation of Phenol Stock-solution 

About 60 g. of the purest obtainable of phenol 
was placed in a dry distilling-flask fitted with a 
thermometer and a condenser. The first fraction 







> 

. 

, 

. 

* 

' 

















was discarded. After the constant-hoiling portion 
was reached (B .P. 175 uncorr.) The receiver was 
replaced by a previously weighed Erlenmeyer flask 
and approximately 5 g. was collected. The flask was 
immediately cooled and weighed, the weight of pure 
phenol being obtained by difference. 

The volume of solution required to contain exactly 
5,000 g. phenol per 100 cc . was calculated. The phenol 
was made up to 100 cc. in a measuring-flask. The amount 
of water required to make up to the desired volume 
was added from a burette and the whole was thoroughly 
mixed. This stock solution was used in making up 
the dilutions required later. 

Disinfectant Solution 

One gram of the unknown disinfectant was accurately 
weighed out into a small beaker . The theoretical 
amount of standard sodium hydroxide solution was 
added from burette . The solution was rinsed into 
a measuring-flask and made up to 100 cc. In each case 
a l$o solution was prepared. 

Preparation of Dilutions 

I Phenol - For greater accuracy, 30 cc. of 

each dilution v/as made up, of which 5 was used. The 
calculated amount of phenol stock solution was added 







. . 

- 












' 

. 

. 






. * 




. 









* 




■ 










• 











• 




- 






























' 



. 































to sterile glass-stoppered measuring -cylinders from 

a "burette. Sterile water was added to each to make 

a total of 30 cc. The dilutions used were as follows: 

1 g. phenol in 100 cc. solution 

1 g. phenol in 105 cc. solution 

1 g. phenol in 110 cc . solution 

1 g. phenol in 120 cc. solution 

1 g. phenol in 125 cc. solution 

1 g. phenol in 130 cc. solution 

It was found , after preliminary experiments, which 
dilution of phenol came within the proper range . Sub¬ 
sequently, only those dilutions in this region were 
used. 

In the experiment, 5 cc. of each phenol solution 
was transferred to a sterile medication tube by means 
of a sterile pipette. 

II Unknown Disinfectant - A calculated volume 
of.stock solution was transferred to a sterile medication 
tube by means of a graduated pipette. Using another 
pipette , the volume of water required to make up 5 cc. 
of solution . v/as added. 

In the first test of an unknown disinfectant , 
widely separated dilutions were employed, as 1: 100 , 

1 : 200, 1 : 500, and 1 : 1000. When the proper range 
was discovered, dilutions were made up over much 
narrower limits, as 1 ; 150, 1 : 160, 1 : 200, etc. 

Dilutions of phenol and disinfectants were made up 
freshly for use. 











Technique 


In each run 5 sterile medication tubes each 
containing 5 cc. of phenol or unknown disinfectant 
solution were inoculated. The tube containing the 
most concentrated solution was placed on the left 
and the concentration steadily decreased toward the 
right, 

In this work, two operators are required, one 
of v/hom flames and replugs the tubes after inoculation 
and the other who inoculates the tubes by means of a 
pipette or platinum loop , 

Starting at zero time the first medication tube 
on the left was flamed,and inoculated with 0.2 cc. 
of a twenty-four-hour broth culture of Bacillus typho¬ 
sus . The tube was gently shaken to insure mixing. 
Thirty seconds later the operation was repeated on 
the second medication tube , This was continued until 
each of the'five tubes had been inoculated. Thirty 
seconds after the addition of the culture to the last 
tube, a loopful of liquid was withdrawn from the 
first one, and implanted in a tube of plain broth 
previously marked -"Ho. 1 ". Thirty seconds later a 
loopful was Withdrawn from the second medication tube 

and implanted in another broth tube marked "Ho. 2 





Tftis was repeated at precisely the same interval 
throughout the series of five tubes. After finishing 
the last one , a second loopful was withdrawn from 
the first of the series and implanted in broth tube 
,r iTo. 6 ,f . This was continued until in all, twenty 
five broth tubes had been inoculated. 

It will be readily seen that from each of the 
medication tubes loopfuls were withdrawn at intervals 
of 2.5 minutes, or, counting from time of inoculation 
with the culture , after 2.5 , 5, 7 .5 , 10 , and 12.5 
minutes• 

Before each operation the platinum loop and the 
tube to be inoculated xvere thoroughly sterilized 
by flaming. After a loopful was withdrawn from the 
medication tubes, the cotton plug was immediately re¬ 
placed to minimize the danger of contamination. 

The broth tubes were incubated at 37° for 48 
hours and examined. Those showing growth were readily 
detected by the marked cloudiness of the broth. All 
others remained perfectly clear. 

It will be noted that 10 cc. of broth was contained 
in each tube instead of the 5 cc , recommended by Rideal 
and Walker. This was to prevent the bacteriostatic 
action shown by many disinfectants in small concen¬ 
trations. This results in little or no growth although 










the organisms are still living. However, the small 
amount of disinfectant carried by the loop when 
mixed with 10 cc. of broth should be so diluted as 
to have little or no bacteriostatic effect. 

As a rule, the phenol in these experiments killed 
the bacilli in 2.5 minutes in dilutions as high as 
1 : 115 , so it was frequently found that the 1 : 120 
dilution was the first to show growth. This differs 
from results previously reported by other workers, 
using the same strain of Bacillus typhosus, who 
obtained growth in dilutions as low as 1 : 100 . 

In calculating the phenol coefficients the 
dilution of the unknown disinfectant which killed 
the organisms in a certain time, was divided by the 
dilution of phenol acting in the same time. 




SUMMARY 


1. Carboxylic acid derivatives of some of the 
alkyl-resorcinols have been prepared* 

2. The surface tensions of their sodium salts 

in aqueous solution have been measured, by the capillary- 
rise method and by the Du Nouy tensiometer* 

3. The phenol coefficients of the sodium salts 

have been measured by a modified Rideal - Walker 
method • 

4. The introduction of the carboxyl group into 
the alkyl-resorcinol molecule produces a profound 
lowering of the germicidal activity, 

5. Monomercury derivatives of the carboxylic acids 
have been prepared* 

6. Owing to the instability of the mercury deriva¬ 
tives in alkaline solution , no measurement of their 
germicidal power could be made* 








. 


, 












, 












. 












* 

- 








PART II 


THE MEKCURATIOR OF DIRITROFLUORESCEIN 

Introduction 

Since the discovery of fluorescein "by Baeyer 

in 1871 , a great number of its derivatives have been 

prepared. Many substituted fluoresceins are readily 

made, and these, as well as their parent compound 

possess many interesting properties. 

Owing to the anomalous behaviour of certain of 

these, a certain amount of confusion has arisen. 

Von Liebig described five different forms of yellow 

fluorescein^ . Orndorff , using specially purified 

fluorescein, has shown that their are only two forms, 

27 

a yellow and a red, He was able to prepare only one 
yellow form, and believes that some of the other 
varieties reported by Von Liebig , are really impure 
methoxy derivatives. 

The property of existing in two forms is not 

peculiar to fluorescein alone. Eosin for example, 

occurs in a colorless form , and in the better Known 
27 

red hydrate. These varieties are explained by Orndorff 




on the “basis of structure; the colorless eosin, 

like yellow fluorescein , possessing a lactoid 

structure, while the more deeply colored forms 

possess a para- quin 0 id grouping. 

Fluorescein and some of its derivatives form 

interesting addition compounds with many substances , 

such as the hydrogen halides » pyridine and alcohol. 

So far, these have been little studied. 

28 

In 1920 White reported the mercuration of a 

number of phthaleins , including phenol phthalein, 

fluorescein , phenolsulfonphthalein, o-eresolphthalein 

and dibromofluorescein. One derivative of the latter 

hydroxymereuridibromofluorescein, better known as 

rT mercurochrome 220", has come into general use as a 

disinfectant and urinary antiseptic. This compound 

has also been shown to be very effective against 
2 9 

Bacillus pestis 

A mercurated salicylsulfonphthalein has been 
30 

prepared by Horden , and has been shown to kill 
Bacillus typhosus in dilution of I : 2000 in fifteen 
minutes . 

The mercuration of ethyl- and hexyl - fluoresceins 
31 

has also been reported 

The influence of halogen in mercurated sulfon- 




phthaleins is shown by the work of Drake and Dunning , 
who tested the bactericidal activity of mono- and 
di-mercury derivative of dichloro - , dibromo - , 
and diiodo - resorcinsulfonphthaleins. Resorcin- 

sulfonphthalein itself showed little action. It was not 
bactericidal in a solution. The introduction of 
mercury into the molecule caused a marked increase 
in germicidal effect. 

The introduction of halogen gave a product but 
little more active than the parent substance. However, 
when both halogen and mercury were introduced the 
greatest increase in activity was observed. The 
activating effect of halogen in the mercurated com¬ 
pounds was least in the case of chlorine, and 
greatest in the case of iodine. The germicidal 
activity was not proportional to the amount of mercury 
introduced into the molecule. The introduction of 
the second mercury atom produced a compound only 
slightly more efficient than the monomercury derivative . 
The dimercury compound was also considerably more toxic 
than the other, to laboratory animals. 

Recently, similar monohydroxymercuri - derivatives 

have been made from di-chloro , di-bromo, and diiodo - 
33 


fluorescein 









■ 

- 

. 

. 

* 

. • 
















T • 








* 

* 

‘ 














. 







The nitro group is known to have an influence on 
bactericidal activity in such compounds as p-hydroxy- 
mercuri-o-nitrophenol. It was thought that possibly 
the introduction of the nitro group into fluorescein 
would have an activating effect on the mercury atom 
subsequently introduced. It was with this possibility 
in view that the preparation of mercury derivatives 
of dinitrofluorescein was undertaken 


OUTLINE OF INVESTIGATION 

34 

Fluorescein was prepared as recommended by Orndorff , 
using a temperature of 180°. In the presence of zinc 
chloride phthalic anhydride condenses with resorcinol 
as shown: 



Fluorescein so prepared was readily nitrated in 

concentrated sulfuric acid solution , by means of fuming 

nitric acid , to give dinitrofluorescein , possessing the 

/v 

OH 


following formula 



O H 


' N 0, 
































Considerable excess of fuming nitric aci^ must be 
used. The temperature of the reaction mixture 
must be kept near zero, or the tetranitro compound 
results . 

The canary yellow flocculent precipitate of 
impure dinitrofluorescein which was obtained by 
pouring the reaction mixture into a large volume of 
cold water, was difficult to purify. This was done 
by preparing the diacetate by refluxing with acetic 



This compound was recrystallized from acetic 
anhydride in which it is fairly soluble in the hot. 
After two recrystallizations no further change in 


0 0 h. 


























































































rr ' 











f 






color was noticed, though all was recrystallized 
three or four times. 

Von Baeyer , who first prepared this compound 
reported it to have a light yellow color, and to be 
soluble in alcohol. In this investigation no 
yellow form was obtained , and it appeared to be 
quite insoluble even in hot alcohol. 

By recrystallizing from acetic anhydride two 
forms were obtained. The first was a light pink 
crystalline powder. This form always appeared when 
the solution was fairly concentrated and crystalli¬ 
zation started at a moderately high temperature. If 
a more dilute solution was made , no crystallization 
commenced until the liquid was cold. The crystals 
formed were fine white needles which completely 
filled the liquid. As usually prepared,the second 
form was slightly pink, though much lighter than the 
other. On one occasion a small sample was obtained 
which was paper-white. By controlling concentrations 
of solutions and the temperature, one form can be 
readily converted to the other. Both give the same 
analysis and have the same melting point. Bor most 
purposes the pink form is preferable, as it is more 
easily dissolved. 








The purified diacetate was hydrolyzed to 


yield pure dinitrofluorescein. This was brought 
about in two ways . By warming with 80sulfuric 


acid* 56 , a clear amber solution was obtained, 


which, on pouring into cold, water yielded, a canary 
yellow precipitate of dinitrofluorescein having 
the' formula shown above. This pure compound was 
readily obtainable in crystalline form by re- 
crystallization from alconol or acetic acid, or 
simply by allowing it to stand under water for 
several hours during washing. On hydrolyzing with 
alkali , a deep reddish violet solution was obtained, 
which, when acidified yielded a orange yellow pre¬ 
cipitate of dinitrofluorescein hydrate . The 
constitution of this compound has been the basis of 
some controversy, as two structures are possible. 



The first was accepted soon after the compound 
was discovered, and is found in the older literature. 










36 

Hewitt and Perkins believe that Formula II is 
correct, as a tetrasodium salt is known. If 
Formula I were correct, no more than three sodium 
atoms could be readily introduced. 

The mercuration of dinitrofluorescein presented 
some difficulty . When an alcoholic solution of 
the unhydrated compound was mixed with an equi¬ 
molar quantity of mercuric acetate solution , a 
brick red precipitate formed slowly. This invar¬ 
iably contained too much mercury.On analysis it was 
found to contain about thirty seven per cent 
mercury, while the theoretical value for the hydroxy 
mercuri compound is 31.41^ . This preparation was 
carried out five times in all, always with similar 
results . 

An attempt to mercurate dinitrofluorescein in 
acetic acid was unsuccessful. After heating for 
several hours, the unchanged dinitrofluorescein was 
recovered. 

It was thought that possibly the dihydroxymercuri 
derivative formed with such readiness that the pre¬ 
cipitate was contaminated thereby. An attempt was 
made to prepare the dimercury derivative . On adding 
double the molecular proportion of mercuric acetate 
















. 




• ' i. ‘ 1 . u 

* 










- 


' 


. vc ■ ■ , .... 










* 


, 


















- 


. 




a precipitate was obtained containing only 40$6 
mercury instead of the theoretical 46.8. 

The pure monomercury compound was finally 
prepared from the impure-red precipitate mentioned. 
On adding a large volume of . glacial acetic acid 
and warming, the precipitate dissolved. The 
solution was filtered, and refluxed for about an 
hour. On diluting the solution an orange pre¬ 
cipitate formed . This was heated for some time 
before filtering. It was filtered, washed, and 
dried at 100°. Analysis showed this to be anhydro- 
hydroxymercuridinitrofluorescein. It dries as 
an orange red powder having the formula : 



BACTERIOLOGICAL WORK- 

Eor the purpose of comparison, tests were made 
on dinitrofluorescein and its monomercury deriva¬ 
tive . The former showed no evidence of disinfectant 

power within the range of the experiment. That is, 
in a concentration of 1 : 50 ,it failed to kill 











Bacillus typhosus in 12.5 minutes. The monomercury 
derivative in a concentration of 1 : 100 killed the 
organisms in 5 minutes. In a concentration of 1 : 500 
it killed them in 12.5 minutes. 

The Behaviour of this mercury compound differs 
considerably from that of the carboxylic acids men¬ 
tioned in Part I, in that it shows activity over a 
much greater range of concentration. For example, 
the carboxylic acid killing the bacilli in 2.5 
minutes in a concentration of 1 : 150 , fails to 
kill them in 12.5 minutes in a concentration of 
1 : 200 . In expressing the disinfectant power of 
compounds which, like the mercurated dinitrofluor- 
escein, act over a wide range , it is usual to give 
the concentrations and the time required to act, 
rather than to calculate phenol coefficients. 


EXPERIMENTAL PART 

34 

Preparation of Eluorescein 

One hundred and fifty grams (1 mole) phthalic 
anhydride was mixed with 220 g. (2 moles) resorcinol, 
and the mixture was fused on an oil-bath. Seventy grams 

powdered anhydrous zinc chloride was stirred into the 
molten mass . The mixture was heated to 180° for two 


























, 






























♦ 

, 






. 











and one-half hours • At the end of that time the 
substance was solid. It was cooled, pulverized 
and extracted with sodium hydroxide solution. After 
filtering, the solution was acidified with dilute 
hydrochloric acid , which precipitated the fluorescein. 
The best results were obtained by precipitating from 
a warm solution and heating to boiling before filter¬ 
ing . The yellow fluorescein was thereby changed 
to the less bulky red form which was readily filtered 
off. Yield 285 g. 

35 

reparation of linitrofluorescein 

Fifty grams fluorescein was dissolved in 1000 g. 
concentrated sulfuric acid by gently warming. The 
solution was cooled to 0 0 and 100 g. (excess) 
fuming nitric acid was added slowly with vigorous 
stirring. The addition of the acid was so gradual 
that the temperature of the mixture never rose above 
8°. A gradual lightening of the color was observed 
as nitration took place . The cold mixture was poured 
into a large volume of ice water, causing the pre¬ 
cipitation of the crude dinitrofluorescein. In this 
form it was very difficult to wash free of acid. 

The precipitate was dissolved in a slight excess of 

alkali and repreeipitated with dilute hydrochloric 
































. 













. 














, 


. 

















■ 















acid. The mixture was heated to boiling to coagulate 
the precipitate before filtering and washing. Yield 
50 g. 

Preparation of Dinitrofluorescein Diacetate 

Ninety eight grams dinitrofluorescein were re¬ 
fluxed with 450 g. acetic anhydride on an oil-bath 
for four hours. The cooled mixture deposited dark 
pink crystals of dinitrofluorescein diacetate. 

After standing for some time in the ice-box the pre¬ 
cipitate was filtered off. By evaporating part of 
the acetic anhydride from the filtrate , and adding 
alcohol, a second crop of crystals was obtained. 

Total yield 81 g. On attempting to extract more of 
the substance from the filtrate, an uncrystallizable 
syrup was obtained. 

The impure dinitrofluorescein diaeetate was re¬ 
crystallized three or four times in small portions, 
from acetic anhydride. As noted above, a pink and a 
white form were obtained. 

Analysis, Calcd. : C, 56.90^ ; H, 2.78f* 

Found : (pink form) - C, 56 .75?& ; H, 2.85T& 
(white form) - C, 56.52^ ; H,2.74^ 
Both melt at 176 - 8°(uncorr). 















Alkaline Hydrolysis of Pirn trofluorescein J .cetate 
Five grams of the pure dinitrofluorescein di¬ 
acetate was heated with 195 cc. of potassium 
hydroxide solution on a water-bath for one hour. The 
reddish violet solution was refiltered and acidified 
with dilute sulfuric acid. The flocculent precipitate 
was washed by decantation and dried at 100°. 

Analysis, Calcd. for hydrate : C, 54.5^ ; H, 2.75 
Found : C, 54 .8fi ; H, 2.81 . 

.cid Hydrolysis of Dinitrofluorescein 

Ten grams dinitrofluorescein diacetate was added 
to 50 g. of warm 80^ sulfuric acid. The mixture 
was heated or the water-bath for about fifteen minutes 
before complete solution took place. The canary 
yellow dye was precipitated by pouring into cold 
water. This was washed by decantation during which 
process it gradually became finely divided and crystall¬ 
ine . 

Analysis, Calcd. : C, 56.85^ ; H, 2.39^ 

Found : C, 56.99^ ; H, 2.46* 

Tier curat ion of Dinit - oflu-. e scein 

A solution containing 7.638 g. (0.018 moles) of 

dinitrofluorescein in 100 cc . alcohol and 50 cc. water 
was prepared and heated on the water-bath. A hot 













solution containing 5.661 g. (0.018 moles) of 
mercuric acetate in IOC cc. water and 2 cc. acetic 
acid was added slowly with vigorous stirring. In 
a few seconds a finely divided brick red precipitate 
began to form. Heating was continued for one hour 
and the mixture was allowed to cool. A small 
quantity of fine white needles was noticed in the 
upper part of the precipitate. The precipitate was 
filtered off and dried in the air. Yield 11.3 g. 

This preparation was repeated several times. 

?/hen a larger concentration of acetic acid was 
present , the precipitate formed much more slowly. 

As prepared it always contained about mercury. 

The crude mercury compound was dissolved in 
glacial acetic acid and refluxed forgone hour. 

On adding a large volume of water an orange pre- 
cipitate came down. This was heated for several 
minutes before filtering. It was filtered and 
washed with hot alcohol to remove any dinitrofluor- 
escein. 

Analysis, Calcd.for Anhydro Compound : Hg, 32.31?& 
Found : Hg, 31.90?* ; 31.86?* 





Bacteriological WorJ 


The efficiency of the anhydrohydroxymercuri- 
dinitrofluorescein against Bacillus typhosus was 
measured, using the method previously described. 

The stock solution used was made hy dissolving 0.5 g. 
of the substance in the theoretical amount of standard 
sodium hydroxide, and diluting to 50 cc . in a volumetric 
flask . 

SUMMARY 

1. Pure dinitrofluorescein has been prepared. 

2. Its monomercury derivative has been made. 

3. The bactericidal action of the mercury compound 

has been measured. 


In conclusion, the author wishes to express his 
sincere thanks to Dr. R.B. Sandin for his assistance 
and advice, and to Dr. R.M. SHaw , of the Department 
of Bacteriology, for putting at his disposal the 
necessary equipment for the bacteriological tests. 






REFERENCES 


1. Henry and Sharp : J. Chem. Soc. 121 , 1055, (192^) 


2. 

Le onard : 

J . Am 

. Med. Assoc. 83 

, 2005,(1924) 


Dohme, Cox 

and Miller : J. Am. Chem. Soc.. 48 , 
1688, (1926) 

3. 

Henry and 

Sharp 

: J. Chem. Soc. 

1926 , 2432, 

4 . 

Henry and 

Sharp 

: J. Chem. Soc. 

1930 , 2271 

5 . 

Paolini : 

Gazz . 

chim. ital. 51. 

, (II) , 188,(1921) 

6 . 

Dimroth : 

Ber . 

32 , 758, (1899) 

7 . 

Pesci : Atti accad. Lincei 10 

, (I) , 362,(1901) 

8 . 

Buroni : 

G-azz , 

chim. ital. 32 , 

(II) , 305,(1902) 


9. Whitmore: Organic Compels. of Mercury, p. 316 

10. Chem. Zentr. 1911 , I , 276 

11. Blumenthal and Oppenheim: Bio chem. Zeit. 39 , 51, 

(1912) 

12. Sandin: J. Am. Chem. Assoc. 479,(1929) 

13. Sandin & Zeavi n: J . Am. Chem. Soc. 52 , 436 9,(1930) 

14. Nencki and Sieher: J. Prak. Chem. 23 , 147,(1881) 

15. Johnson and Hodge: J. Am. Chem. Soc, 35, 1014,(1913) 

16. Nierenstein and Clihhens: "Organic Synthesis", John 

Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York, 1930 , Vol. 10, p.94 

17. Bleyer: Biochem. Zeit. 181, 333,(1927) 


CO 

rH 

lesser and Gad: Eer. 

12. 

233, (1926) 

19. 

Sandin: J. Am. Chem. 

Soc . 

51, 479, (1929) 


20. Sonn and Burkard: Ber. 61B , 2471, (1928) 







21. Houben-Weyl, rr Die Methoden der Organ ischen Chemie" 

Vol. 3, p. 681 

22. Robertson and Robinson: J. Chem. Soc. 1927 1 2196 

23. Bohme, Cox and Miller: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 48 ,1688, 

Tl 926) 

24. Shaffer and Tilley: J. Bact. 14, 259,(1927) 

25. Nencki & Sieber: J. Prakt. Chem. 23, 147,(1881) 


26 . 

Von Liebig 

: 

J . Prakt, Chem, 

85, 97 

CO 

to 

w 

27. 

Orndorff: 

J. 

Chem. Soc. 4_9 , 

1272, 

(1927) 

28. 

White: J. 

Am 

. Chem. Soc. 42 , 

2355, 

(1920) 


29. Haidu and Jang: Indian J. Med. Research, L5, 117, 

(1927) 

30. Harden: J.'Am. Chem. Soc. 49, 3139, (1927) 


31. 

Sandin and Sutherland : 

J . Am. 

Chem. Soc. 51, 

1773, 

(1929) 

32 . 

Brake and Punning: J. 

Infect. 

Pis . 48, 366, 

(1931) 


33. S.C. Lynn: Master’s Thesis, 1932 

34. Orndorff and Hemmer: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 49, 1272, 

(1927) 

35. Baeyer: Ann. der Chem. 183 , 30, (1876) 

36. Hewitt and Perkins: J. Chem. Soc. 77, 1324, (1900) 


########### 

































