












(3x mm 
mvmmm 













UNIVERSITY OP ALEPRTA 
LIBRARY 


Regulations Regarding Tae ses and R iss ert at lons 

Typescript copies of theses and dissertations for Master'd 
and Doctor's degrees deposited in the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the faculty of Graduate Studies, 
may be consulted in the Reference Reading Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
Supervision the work was done. Some Departments are willing to 
loan cheir copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of Alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. trio ten permission of 
the author and of the Department; must be obtained through the 
University of Alberts, Library then extended passages are used. 
When permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub 1 ished work;. 

This, thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 
user. 


Please sign belows 


Ins tltutlon 


Date 


Signature 























































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/spowen1952 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


Department of Biochemistry 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 


have read and recommend to the School of Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled "Perio¬ 
date Studies on Carbohydrates", submitted by 
Stanley Paul Owen, B*Sc*, in partial fulfilment of 
the requirements for the degree of Master of Science* 


PROFESSOR 



PROFESSOR 



PROFESSOR 



Date * 













■ 







THE UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 


PERIODATE STUDIES ON CARBOHYDRATES 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OP GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OP THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOCHEMISTRY 

by 

Stanley Paul Owen 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
APRIL, 1952 

















ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to express sincere thanks to 
Dr* B* Jelinek for his interest and criticism throughout 
the course of the investigation* 

My thanks are due also to other members of the 
Biochemistry staff who have helped me with their sugges¬ 
tions and general assistance* 

Many thanks are due to the Department of Veterans 
Affairs, without whose financial assistance, further 
academic training would not have been possible* 

Part of this work was done during the tenure of 
a University of Alberta Research Scholarship, and part 
was supported by grants to Dr. B* Jelinek from the 
National Research Council, M. P. #280. 


















- 

* 

' t . ' 

.* 


* 

* 




ABSTRACT 


Periodate oxidation studies were undertaken in 
an effort to evaluate this procedure as a method for the 
study of the action of beta-amylase on amylose. Reports 
of periodate studies in the literature were confusing 
and it was deemed advisable to undertake a thorough in¬ 
vestigation of the factors affecting periodate oxidation 
It was found necessary to standardize the con¬ 
centrations of the oxidant and the reductant and to con¬ 
trol carefully the temperature of reaction. Photochem¬ 
ical degradation of the products of the reaction was 
demonstrated * 

Monosaccharides, disaccharides, short chain amy 
lose, and the starch components were studied by a method 
devised in this laboratory. 













TABLE OP CONTENTS 


Pap;© 

INTRODUCTION .. 1 

Periodate Oxidation .. 5 

Fractionation of Starch 12 

Acid Hydrolysis .....* IS 

Starch-Iodine Complex ... 21 

Reducing Sugar Determinations ...... 25 

METHODS AND PROCEDURE. 29 

Starch Fractionation.29 

Iodine Colouration of Amylose... o .... o 55 

Blom Reducing Sugar Determination •••.••«.o....o.. 57 

Somogyi Reducing Sugar Determination 9 ..• 45 

Results and Discussion .. 45 

PERIODATE OXIDATION . 51 

Experimental .. 54 

The Use of the Acid or its Salts ......••••<>•* 56 

Concentration of Oxidant •••••,.• . 57 

Results and Discussion .. 53 


Concentration of Reductant 


61 



























TABLE OP CONTENTS (Continued) 


Page 

Results and Discussion ... 62 

Temperature of Oxidation ... 65 

Results and Discussion .• «•»« 65 

Photochemical Destruction of Formic Acid 71 

' Short Chain Oxidation by Periodate •o*«o«*** 75 

Periodate Studies on Amylose ... 78 

DISCUSSION ON PERIODATE OXIDATION.... 84 

SUMMARY * o..... ..o .... 88 

BIBLIOGRAPHY ........ • •. •.... . . * • 90 
















INTRODUCTION 


The constituent of starch which is a long un¬ 
branched polyglucopyranoside, here called amylose, is 
hydrolysed by beta-amylase with the successive removal of 
two glucopyranose residues at a time, starting at the non¬ 
reducing ends* As the beta-amylolysis of amylose pro¬ 
gresses a chain end is left just like its predecessor, the 
molecule being unchanged except for a small diminution in 
length, and no appreciable change in reaction velocity is 
to be expected as long as the molar concentration of the sub 
strate remains unchanged* As the chain length is very great 
considerable hydrolysis should occur before the reaction 
velocity falls as a result of fall in molar concentration* 
There is growing evidence that the chains in a sample of 
amylose are of widely varying lengths; although the range 
of length is quite unknown, the mean length has been var¬ 
iously estimated from 200 to 1000 glucose units* 

Swanson (1), (2), concluded that beta-amylase 
having attacked one chain of amylose, completes its hydro¬ 
lysis before commencing on another* This was based chiefly 
on the apparent absence of short chain material throughout 







- 2 - 


the hydrolysis of maize amylose as indicated by tests on 
dialysates and quantitative observations of iodine colours. 

Simultaneously, Cleveland and Kerr (3) came to 
much the same conclusion. When a limited addition of enzyme 
was made to corn amylose and the reaction interrupted at 
certain stages, the unconverted residues appear to have mean 
molecular weights comparable with that of the original amy¬ 
lose. Using viscosity, reducing power and the spectral curve 
of the iodine colour to arrive at this conclusion of pre¬ 
ferential short chain hydrolysis, Swanson *3 hypothesis of 
“single chain 11 action received support. 

Meyer (4) also concluded that the smaller molecules 
in maize amylose served to protect the larger ones from re¬ 
tro gradation,* the smaller molecules were attacked first and 
their removal in earlier stages of hydrolysis by the beta- 
enzyme facilitates retrogradation or, at least aging of the 
remainder. 

In another paper, Hopkins, Jelinek and Harrison (5) 
have studied the hydrolysis of potato amylose to maltose with 
the enzyme beta-amylase. They also used the device of inter¬ 
rupting the hydrolysis but interpreted the increasing resistance 


When a starch solution is allowed to stand, the amylose 
slowly retrogrades and precipitates from solution. 






to the beta-enzyme exhibited by successive arnylose residues 
as indicating that the longer chains were more easily hydro¬ 
lysed than the shorter ones* They also found that Iodine 
colouration throughout hydrolysis changed in such a way as 
to suggest a considerable accumulation of short chain amy- 
lose in the latter stages of the reaction* 

A careful review of all the experimental e vidence 
led Hopkins and Jelinek (6) to state that no conclusion was 
yet justified, and that the matter needed investigation by 
new methods* It was considered desirable to prepare samples 
of arnylose with long and short chains respectively, to deter¬ 
mine these chain lengths, and to calculate the MIchaelis 
constants of the samples with beta-amylase* 

At this point a confusing problem arose; that of 
the determination of the chain length of arnylose using the 
periodate oxidation technique* With amylopectin in which 
there are relatively many non-reducing chain ends each 
giving one mole of formic acid, the matter is simple* It is 
not known whether the glucose group at the reducing end of 
the arnylose chain yields two molecules, one molecule, or no 
formic acid* 

As previously mentioned, the enzyme beta-amylase 


attacks arnylose, splitting off maltose residues, thereby 







■ 






. 




. 

. • r . l 

- ; r..: : : o ..:.) \ r 










c* 


,o 




* 


■ 




* 












• V ; 





- 4 - 


reducing the chain length of amylose by two glucose units* 

By use of periodate oxidation procedures it should be possible 
to estimate the original chain lengths of amylose and of pro¬ 
ducts arising during degradation* As amylose may be regarded 
as an extension of the disaccharide maltose, it was thought 
that if conditions were standardized for the oxidation of 
maltose to formic acid, amylose could be oxidized and com¬ 
pared with such a standard f However, a critical review on 
periodate oxidation procedures for analysis of carbohydrates 
made it clear that, because of lack of agreement, the per¬ 
iodate oxidation procedure had to be extensively s tudied 
and somehow standardized® 

This investigation presents an examination of some 
of the variables affecting periodate oxidation procedure® 

A method has been developed for oxidation of mono¬ 
saccharides, disaccharides and polysaccharides in order to 
establish a basis for comparing and correlating the find¬ 
ings of various investigators* 











PERIODATE OXIDATION 


Nature of the Reaction 

Periodic acid (HIO^) oxidation is applicable to 
compounds having two hydroxyl groups, or an hydroxyl and 
carbonyl, or an hydroxyl and amino group attached to ad¬ 
jacent carbon atoms, and is characterized by the cleavage 
of the carbon-carbon bond* 

If the above mentioned groups are not attached 
to contiguous carbon atoms, no reaction takes place* This 
selectivity, which is an outstanding characteristic of per¬ 
iodic acid oxidation, adapts the reaction to the testing 
for the presence of contiguous hydroxyl, hydroxyl and amino 
and hydroxyl and carbonyl groups* 


Reaction Mechanism 

Concerning the mechanism of periodic acid oxida¬ 
tion of alpha-glycols, the suggestion has been made (7), 
(8), that the splitting of the carbon chain results from 
a series of three reactions, the first being the ester¬ 
ification of a hydroxyl group by paraperiod.ic acid (H^lOg 
or HI0 4 *2Hg0)* The most up to date interpretation of 






‘ o 


U .0 


: ( v . '. ) r < i . f 


' t : \ ■ / ■>. , 

*' ■■■'>«: • ' : 
•' : :■ . •. V' 

, ’ t ■; • 




o 




* 


.o 


*.'■ c 




•> y 


0 














6 - 


periodate oxidation, advanced by Waters (9), involves 
temporary formation of a free radical* It seems likely 
the following reaction occurs: 

HI0 4 -> HIO 5 + (0) 

h 2 c - 0H H P 0 + HpC-— 0- 

*1 + ( 0 )_. 2 2 | 

HgC- OH * HgO-0- 

This type of structure (a biradical) is unstable 
and cleavage of the carbon-carbon bond results giving two 
molecules of formaldehyde* The reaction is important be¬ 
cause it affords one of the few ways in which the carbon- 
carbon single bond can be cleaved readily* 

Secondary alcohol structures, as present in the 
sugars, are oxidized and formic acid is one of the end pro¬ 
ducts* Since such oxidation reactions are quantitative, 
certain analytical procedures have been based on the deter¬ 
mination of the aldehyde or acid produced and upon analyzing 
for residual periodate* Such analytical data have afforded 
useful evidence on the structure of many compounds* 


Scope of the Reaction 

The periodate reagents are widely used in carbo¬ 
hydrate chemistry and in the preparation of many organic 

















t . ' ' 

■ ; 






i . t i. ;.r 




> "■ '■ ' o v • ; 


'iv 

’ '<> ) r 




O 0 W.' 

'• ? L O ■ 


* ■ , r . - .*.) 

' : >t a ; • ;• : > *) ;■> 

* * 

• . ' ' ■ ’> : ; -■;} 
• T • ' r) ; r, " ,:•/ > - : 

* 

' (.« ‘ :o ) , ) ■ /. .• 1 / i‘.; j 









- 7 - 


compounds (10), (11 )• The literature contains many refer¬ 
ences pertaining to periodate action concerning such varied 
topics as virology, immunology, the chemistry of nucleic 
acids, proteins, fatty acids and steroids* Too frequently 
no basis is given for such studies* 

An advantage of most periodate oxidations is the 
absence of side reactions and consequent high yields* A 
disadvantage for large scale operations is the relatively 
high cost of the reagent* Undoubtedly one of the great 
advantages of periodate oxidation is its selectivity which 
is not possessed by similar agents as permanganate and nitric 
acid* 


Oxidation by Periodate 

In contrast to the more or less random oxidation 
by the halogens in general, oxidation by periodic acid is 
characterized by a high degree of specificity* The use of 
periodic acid for the oxidation of simple sugars was first 
used by Malaprade (12)* in a study of the ring structure of 
various methyl aldohexosides* In the glycol series, Fleury 
and associates (13), showed that it was specific for 1,2- 


diols 










• j : c*?, c: • ;N ■ j; 3 


O j. : . 8 

> • ,0 





- 8 - 


Soon thereafter Jackson and Hudson published their 
investigations on the determination of the ring structure 
on alpha and beta configuration of glycosides (14), (15)* 

The first report of experimental oxidations of corn starch 
by periodic acid is that of Jackson and Hudson (16)* The 
oxidation is carried out by suspending ungelatinized com 
starch in an excess of 0*58 M aqueous periodic acid sol¬ 
ution and allowing the reaction to proceed at room temper¬ 
ature # 

Working concurrently but independently, Caldwell 
and Hixon (17), and Jackson and Hudson (18), carried on 
further investigations relative to the oxidation of starch 
by periodic acid# The investigations have materially assisted 
in the elucidation of the mechanism of oxidation by periodic 
acido 

Neuberger (19), made use of periodic acid as a 
tool in the investigation of carbohydrate structure during 
the preparation of reference compounds from glucosamine 0 
The periodic acid method has more recently been adapted by 
Hirst and his co-workers (20), to the determination of 
chain length of unmethylated polysaccharides as starch, 
cellulose, glycogen and inulin# The results agree with 
those obtained by the methylation technique* 

They also showed that the data obtained from per¬ 
iodate oxidation of starch can be utili z ed for determining 





* 





o 














■ • ' ' 0 ;< 






,K “ 












e 








7 *. f 




9 


the number of glucose residues per non-aldehydic end group® 
The values they have obtained for the chain length of a 
number of starches from different sources and for one sa¬ 
mple of crude potato amylopeetin were in fair agreement 
with those obtained by Haworths methylation end group me¬ 
thod (21)« 

Periodate oxidation data (22) showed that amylo- 
pecti.n from a number of starches from different plant sources 
ranged from 22 to 27 glu.cose units per end group* while the 
chain length of the c orre sponding amylose ranged from 420 
to 980 glucose residues* 

Halsall, Hirst and Jones (23)* investigated sugar 
derivatives containing hydroxyl groups on each of three ad¬ 
jacent carbon atoms and also established conditions for the 
quantitative estimation of formic acid* 

Oxidation of certain carbohydrates by periodate 
in the presence of phosphate and other buffers has been in¬ 
vestigated by Bell* Palmer and Jones (24)* These workers 
found that at a pH of 7*5 the use of phosphate buffer tends 
to promote ”over-utilization” of the periodate and reaction 
proceeds more rapidly than in carbon dioxide-bicarbonate 
or maleate buffers* They postulate a phosphate-periodate 
complex* 







50 ; 


©t) 



) ' ' 















' .0 01 VI o r .o : : 










/■-" : ' o;'* 







10 - 


New applications of periodate reactions to chain 
length determination of polysaccharides have opened up a 
new field of microanalytical technique of great value in 
biology. Barry (25) used periodate in an attempt to de¬ 
termine the chain length of laminarin which is considered 
to be based on the 1, 3-glucosyl radical. In such a case 
only the free n end groups” possess adjacent hydroxyl groups 
and are subject to periodate attack, being expected to 
yield one mole of formic acid per terminal radical with the 
simultaneous reduction of two moles of periodate. Barry 
determined the consumption of periodate and deduced a chain 
length. Barry and Dillon (26) also examined the insoluble 
resistant cell wall of yeast "glucan” and found the mean 
chain length to be about 28 glucosyl radicals. Hassid, 

Joslyn and McCready (27), using methylation technique, 
found no evidence of appreciable amount of end groups in 
the form of tetramethyl glucose. In addition to this fact, 
Halsall, Hirst and Jones (25) have shown that ”over-oxida¬ 
tion” of the substrate can take place under certain cir¬ 
cumstances, in which case Barry*s chain length estimate may 
prove to be too small. Hirst and his collaborators, using 
a carefully controlled oxidative procedure, obtained end 
group assays on glycogen (28), amylose and amyfopectin (29), 
which agreed well with the results of methylation experiments. 





. 




r 


'O 







i <; 




• * :\ r j 




■ 


• r ) 




). 






* 





O 


t 



■ 7 




t. 


•) 


0 














- 11 


Experimental conditions for periodate oxidation 
have been investigated by a number of workers* Hill (30) 
found sodium metaperiodate to be a very suitable salt for 
periodate oxidation due to its solubility * Oxidation by 
sodium metaperiodate is preferable when the formic acid 
generated in the oxidation reaction is to be determined as 
the increase in the acidity of the reaction solution (31)o 

Various methods have been formulated for the 
oxidation of starch (16), (18), (32), however, none of them 
have been universally accepted and as a consequence much 
confusion is noted in the interpretation of the final re¬ 
sults* 

Bell (33) concluded that periodate oxidation can 
be applied to chain length determinations only when an 
appropriate structure obtains in the polysaccharide* For 
fundamental structural investigations, methylation is in 
no way superseded* 



r 




. / 
t ^ ' 




;f.n J ;o 


< >■ 


o 






; ;;) 



r 


. .) . 


* 




6*1 ■' ' 


'C‘i rt 




r 


* 











FRACTIONATION OF STARCH 


According to prevailing theories starch contains 
two carbohydrate substances, both polymers of glucose but 
differing markedly in properties and structure® The chief 
chemical difference that distinguishes the two components, 
amylose and amylopectin, lies in the fact that the former 
Is constituted of unbranched chains of glucose residues 
joined only through alpha-glucosidic-1,4 linkages, while 
the latter also contains alpha-glucosidic-1,6-linkages 
which are present at the branching points® 

Many general methods of fractionation have been 
developed, all of which accomplished at least partial se¬ 
paration® However there are at least three principal 
criticisms of most of these methods: (1) the low degree 
of separation achieved and consequent impurity of the re¬ 
sulting products, (2) the use of rigorous chemical treat¬ 
ment resulting in degradation of the starch substance, 
and (3) attendant physical changes (viz®, retrogradation) 
altering the character of the products® 

In addition, much confusion has arisen in the 
nomenclature of the starch fractions, with a multiplicity 
of Ill-defined terms and frequent transposition of their 

























- ' J ■. 




t 


O 











- 13 


usage. Starch carbohydrates have been known by the 
following terms: amyiose, amylopectin, alpha amyiose, 
beta amyiose, fraction A, fraction B, amylocellulose, 
hemicellulose, amylohemicellulose, erythroamyiose, gra- 
nulose, farinose, fractose, amidin, amidulin, cold water 
soluble fraction, hot water soluble fraction, hot v/ater 
insoluble fraction, etc. The starch degradation pro¬ 
ducts formed by the action of heat, enzymes, bacteria 
and chemical reagents have necessarily multiplied the 
number of terms introduced into the field© G-ortner (34) 
has tabulated a partial summary of the conflicts of the 
nomenclature of the starch fractions. 

Sclioch (35) has enumerated a number of reasons 
for the confusion regarding the molecular size of the 
constituents of carbohydrates® 

When starch is swollen in water at a temper¬ 
ature of approximately 70°C. the grains are not ruptured 
and crude amyiose can be extracted from the swollen grains 
and separated by settling and centrifuging. Since the 
amyiose can be leached from the starch granules with hot 
water, it appears that its solubility in the starch gra¬ 
nule is greater than that of amylopectin* However, the 
amyiose becomes more insoluble than the latter after it 










■ 




;;o • % . 


: 


1 


: v • • ) 


'in. q 















14 - 


has been precipitated and dried® The small amount that 
dissolves! rapidly retrogrades from solution® The more 
completely the amylose is separated from the amylopectin 
the more insoluble the amylose becomes® The retrogradation 
of the amylose is attributed to its greater orderliness 
of molecular orientation and tendency to exist in the cry¬ 
stalline state® 

Fractionation methods for the starch components 
can be roughly generalized as follows: 

Selective Retrogradation 

Maquenne (56) found that when a dilute starch 
solution is allowed to stand for a period of time the 
linear component gradually separates as an insoluble flee, 
the branched component remaining in solution® 


Selective Adsorption 

Tanret (37) and Pacsu (38) found that when a 
cold dilute starch solution is passed through adsorbents 
(usually cotton), the linear component is preferentially 
removed and the branched component remains in solution® 
Subsequently the linear component may be removed from 
the cotton with hot water* 




' 





















■ 






. 














O ’ o 




jrr 



















■:r.r. 








) ■ . O 












- 15 


Selective Enzymolysis 

If a starch paste or autoclaved solution is 
treated with malt amylase or other liquefying enzyme, 
the amylose tends to flocculate, the amylopeetin under¬ 
going considerable degradation (39)« 


Aqueous Leaching 

This method involves extraction of the swollen 
but intact granules math successive portions of water 
until no further solubles are removed* Separation which 
appears to represent the shorter and more mobile linear 
chains is effected by sedimentation, filtration or 
centrifugation,(40)* 


Ele ctrophore sis 

Samec (41) found that when dilute solutions of 
root and tuber starch are placed in an electric field, 
the branched component migrates toward the anode, where¬ 
as the linear component remains stationary. With the 
cereal starches hov/ever, it appears to be the linear 
component that does the migrating (42). 


























O ' ■ 1 o 


0 3 ‘.C : ' Y - Oj i 


) 









) 


















16 - 


Selective Precipitation with Polar Agents 

Schoch (43) introduced a unique method for 
separating amylose from starch using butanol as a se¬ 
lective precipitant® When a dilute starch solution sa¬ 
turated with butyl alcohol is autoclaved and cooled, the 
amylose precipitates in the form of six leaved rosettes 
or microscopic needles which can be separated by centri¬ 
fuging® Schoch co nsiders these crystals to be formed as 
a result of the formation of an addition compound with 
butanol* Applying the butanol method to a hot water ex¬ 
tract of starch, Kerr and Severson (44) obtained what 
appeared to be single crystals of amylose® 

According to Bear (45) the butanol-precipitated 
crystalline starch fraction gives a V-type X-ray pattern 
similar to the synthetic polysaccharides® As in potato 
amylose and the synthetic polysaccharides, this crystalline 
fraction has a high percentage conversion to maltose with 
beta-amylase (44) and a great tendency to absorb iodine and 
is therefore considered the same as amylose (46)® 

Wilson, Schoch and Hudson's (47) observations 
that the butanol-precipitated fractions from corn and potato 
starches give high yields (approximately 70fo) of Schardinger 
dextrins whereas the non-precipitated fractions give low 






; 


>-\ 










■‘X 


.. 1 : 


* 













• c 





.■ . r. r.:\ ( : 


. :: >;' o 


















- 17 - 


yields (approximately 49$) of these dextrins, lend support 
to this vie?/o 

Preferred fractionating agents include n-butyl 
alcohol (43), commercial amyl alcohol (35), nitropropane 
(48), aluminum hydroxide (49), and a mixture of thymol 
and cyclohexanol (50) 0 

Schoch (35) states that almost any mono-hydroxyl 
alcohol will accomplish a separation under suitable condi¬ 
tions and in this regard he drew up an arbitrary classifica¬ 
tion rating the alcohols as fr^fionating agentso 









* 








tv ■ ) - r 


■ t , ■ ’ ' t ! 

* 


■ cv ' ; .; ! r •. ' - c’. ( c ',) r') ■ '•'' 

v,: j-.-.-v-:, •• - : 111'/ .(o r oo.r*i 

• ■ - • • • • ' ' ' '• ", : -• 

* 





- 18 - 


ACID HYDROLYSIS 


Kirchoff in 1811 was the first chemist to pro¬ 
duce sugar by chemical methods® He prepared a gummy and 
sugary subst&nce^reacting sulphuric acid with wheat and 
potato starch# Since that time literally hundreds of 
papers have appeared on methods of hydrolysis of carbo¬ 
hydrates by various acids and other means# 

When dilute mineral acids act on very dilute 
solutions of starch, the only end product of the hydro¬ 
lysis is D-glucose, if phosphoric acid and other minor 
constituents are disregarded# If the concentrations of 
acid and starch are very high, higher saccharides are 
formed in addition# These may to some degree be rem¬ 
nants of starch molecules, but are mainly secondary pro¬ 
ducts formed by Reversion* from D-glucose in presumably 
the same manner as those isolated after the action of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid on D-glucose alone (51)# 

Methylated starch can be hydrolyzed with oxalic- 
acid in aqueous alcohol solution to give products with 
molecular weights as lov/ as 20,000 (D.P® 120). All these 
degraded products contain the proportion of end groups 

* D.P. — DEGREE OF POLYMERIZATION EXPRESSED AS GLUCOSE UNITS 





























} 






o 






o 


o ;j‘o 




n 











0 -.. ' • ( 


* o . * r - :':q 




% 




\..o 


■> 


o 


v.:/) ■ ■■ bn 


) ! 0 




c. 




T 




::.‘0 r 





o 




' ■« 













present in the original material. Hydrolysis to a greater 
extent, however, leads to products with a greater pro¬ 
portion of end groups. The bonds that are broken in the 
disaggregation process are primary valence bonds, for the 
rate of hydrolysis and the activation energy are comparable 
with those for the hydrolysis of simple glucosides (52), 

(53). 

As measured by ferricyanide reducing values, the 
rates of acid hydrolysis of amylose from either com or 
potato starch are slightly but consistently higher than 
those of the corresponding amylopectin fraction. Reducing 
values of the fractions isolated by the butanol separation 
of acid-modified thin boiling starches also indicate that 
the amylose fraction is hydrolysed somewhat more rapidly 
(35). 

Lampitt jet al (54) studied the effects of time 
and concentration on acid hydrolysis (hydrochloric) of 
starch to D-glucose. They found that appreciable destru¬ 
ction of D-glucose takes place before hydrolysis of the 
starch is complete. They also concluded that the pro¬ 
portion of D-glucose destroyed by 0 o 62 to 1.5N hydrochloric 
acid at 100°C. is linearly proportional to the time of 
heating; the rate of destruction increases with increasing 
acid concentration and is approximately directly proportional 


















* V 







-> 






■) ? rr:o-";i' 


V.o . ;.rl. :v 


c 


•. o 


'V 








- r 




) . i 



r>. ’ 








» 


' 












- 20 - 


thereto* He also stated that the length of time ne¬ 
cessary to achieve complete hydrolysis of starch decreases 
with increasing acid concentration* 

Pirt and Whelan (55) found that D-glucose was 
slowly destroyed when heated in neutral solution and that 
the rate of destruction was accelerated by sulphuric acid, 
but to a much greater extent by hydrochloric acida Sul¬ 
phuric acid was therefore chosen as a suitable starch 
hydrolyzing agent and conditions were developed whereby 
starches were estimated with a high degree of accuracy® 

A small correction factor was applied to correct for 
the loss of glucose by acid degradation* T he method was 
successfully applied to amylose and amylopectin* 



■ 




■ 


• . ;;; 


r.: no 


o. 


d : 3 


OA :i,o 


•> o. 










STARCH-IODINE COMPLEX 


It has been noted that starch possesses the 
ability of forming coloured complexes with iodine* Arny- 
lose yields an intensely coloured blue violet complex* 

Two factors which influence the iodine colour given by a 
particular starch are the length of the glucose chain 
involved and the degree of branching of the chain* 

Hanes has shown that dextrins obtained as 
intermediate products in starch hydrolysis by acid or 
by beta-amylase do not give the iodine colour reaction 
if they contain six or fewer glucose units as judged by 
the end-group assay method 0 Furthermore starch dextrins 
containing eight to 12 glucose units form red rather than 
blue complexes* Only the longer amylose chains give the 
typical blue colouro 

The two starch fractions exhibit different behaviours 
in iodine solutions and an important method of analysis of 
starch constituents has been developed by the use of iodine 
titrations (46)* If successive portions of iodine are 
added to amylose solutions, the iodine activity (as 
measured from the E*M*F* of the cell: Pt/lg,Kl/calomel), 
remains fairly constant until characteristic amounts of 














n 


) 








■" 






‘,:c 














c 




"jo*.: : • r-M'Ci . /' c 






•' > O 


r 






0 0 


. 






) 







- 22 - 


iodine have been added; thereafter the activity increases 
as more iodine is added* This behaviour is best interpre¬ 
ted as a removal of iodine from the solution through the 
formation of a starch-iodine complex* In contrast to the 
behaviour of the amylose fraction, the addition of Iodine 
to amylopectin solution results in a continuous increase 
In the activity of the iodine proportional to the amount 
of iodine added* 

Another quantitative method suggested for the 
estimation of the amylose and amylopectin contents of starches 
depends on measurement of the absorption spectra of the 
complexes formed by the two components with iodine (56)* 

The suggestion has been made that the glucose 
units in amylose are not arranged in the straight form chara¬ 
cteristic of cellulose, but are coiled in a helical fashion 
with six pyranose rings forming each turn of the helix (57)* 

Freudenberg (58) explains the blue starch-iodine 
colour on the basis of a helical structure of starch* When 
starch is treated with iodine, the iodine molecules are 
deposited within the spirals, the spaces of which are of 
the exact size to allow the Iodine to enter* The association 
formed between the Iodine and the starch spirals affects the 
absorption bands, thus producing the blue colour. 




- 23 


Meyer and Bernfeld (59) object to this expla¬ 
nation on the grounds that some substances known not to 
have a spiral arrangement* such as methylated cellulose* 
or cellulose which has been swollen with zinc chloride* 
also give a blue colour with iodine.. According to these 
authors the explanation of the blue iodine colour resides 
in the colloidal structure of these compounds* They note 
that certain colloidal suspensions and finely divided pre¬ 
cipitates also give colours with iodine similar to starch* 
None of these substances, either in the state of molecul- 
arly dispersed solutions or in the crystalline state, 
gives the colour reaction with iodine* The colour occurs 
only in the case of colloidal precipitates having greatly 
dispersed lattices* 

Rundle and his collaborators (60), (61) point 
out that since no model is capable of explaining the 
many known coloured iodine compounds other than starch* 
Meyer 5 s criticism of the helical starch molecule is not 
serious* Rundle et al present further evidence to 
strengthen FreudenbergS view by showing that starch- 
iodine solutions exhibit dichroism of flow; the light with 
its electric vector parallel to the flow lines is more 
strongly absorbed than light with its vector normal to 














- 24 


flow lines® The dichroism of flow requires that the long 
axes of iodine molecules in the complex he parallel to the 
long axis of the starch-iodine complex® They believe that 
the optical properties of starch-iodine complexes may be 
best interpreted in terms of helical starch chains* 

Lampitt, et al (62) found the absorption spectra 
given by the starch-iodine complexes of potato starch 
fractions to be quantitatively very similar to those pre¬ 
viously observed for wheat starch fractions® They also 
found that depolymerization of both starches by grinding 
lowers the absorption of the starch-iodine complex only 
at the longer visible wave-length® 

Sehlamowitz (63), while studying the iodine ab¬ 
sorption spectrum of rabbit liver glycogen, concluded 
that the spectrum is essentially that of iodine and the 
alteration of the iodine spectrum by polysaccharides is 
due to a change in the state of the iodine molecule, 
brought about by the new environment, and that the helix 
concept for polysaccharide structure appears to satisfy 
the conditions necessary for the change in the state of 
the iodine molecule* 






* 


- 






t 










.> ■ 




■ Q 

' - ■ ■ ' ■- ■ l ' - 

i ' \ 

) Y : ■■ ■ 

: ■ : -o . •: : 


;V.Ol 


: ■ 


■ 

■ i.'iO. ■}: •) : 














- 25 


REDUCING SUGAR DETERMINATIONS 


The structural formulae of both amylose and 
amylopectln fractions of the common starches indicate that 
each molecule is terminated at one end by an aldehydic 
reducing group (64), (65), (66)* That the reducing power 
is inversely proportional to the molecular weight (or to 
properties that depend thereon), has been demonstrated for 
starches (67), (68), (69), (52), (70), and dextrine (71), 
(72), (75), (74), (75)* It is therefore possible to cal¬ 
culate the /4 number average* molecular weight of a particular 
starch or starch fraction from a knowledge of its reducing 
power* 

Heinze and Murneek (76) have compared the effi¬ 
ciency, accuracy, and reliability of five popular methods 
of sugar determination in plant extracts* The methods 
studied were: 

(a) Bertrand’s with the Munson-Walker heating procedure* 

(b) Shaf f er-Hartmann 1 s • 

(c) Shaffer-Somogyi* s * 

(d) Hagedorn’s and Jensen’s. 

(e) Williamann’s and Davidson’s* 












- 26 - 


These authors found that the Shaffer-Somogyi 
method (77), (78), slightly modified, was the most effi¬ 
cient and convenient, and also as accurate as Bertrand’s 
method (79)* 

The principal chemical methodsfbr quantitatively 
determining the sugars make use of the reducing action 
of sugars on alkaline solutions of the salts of certain 
metals, copper and silver probably being most extensively 
used* 

Pigman (80) reviews the early history of oxidation 
by metallic salts in alkaline solution, oxidation with 
ferricyanide and colourimetric procedures for reducing 
sugar determinations* 

The study of action of amylases on starches has 
been beset with many difficulties in addition to those 
common to most investigations in the starch field* In 
general, degree of hydrolysis has been determined by the 
reducing sugar methods and calculated as maltose* How¬ 
ever, reducing values may be meaningless as a quantitative 
measure since the products of hydrolysis may include de¬ 
xtrose and reducing dextrins (oligosaccharides), in addi¬ 
tion to maltose* In some instances, degree of hydrolysis 
greater than 100$ has been observed because of the pre¬ 
sence of D-glucose in the hydrolysis products (81)« 





27 - 


Soraogyi (82) has developed a new reagent for 

the determination of sugars in which the carbonate-bi- 

n 

carbcjate buffer mixture of the old reagent is replaced 
by a phosphate buffer solution of 0.1 M dibasic and 0.1 
M tribasic sodium phosphate# The new reagent is suffi¬ 
ciently alkaline to allow the determination of maltose and 
other slowly reacting sugars® It contains no potassium 
iodide and yet is stable and shows no self-reduction even 
when exposed to direct sunlight# Its high sulphate con¬ 
tent and absence of iodate obviate the re-oxidation of 
cuprous oxide# The range is extended so that a single 
reagent can be used for the determination of 0#1 mg# to 
3#0 mg. of glucose or other equivalent reducing power# 
Meyer (83) estimates reducing power by colour- 
i me trie estimation of the reduction of silver oxide* 
Amylose by this method gives a value corresponding to 
about 1/200 th the value for glucose, a result in reason¬ 
able agreement with that obtained by other methods# 

Lampitt, Puller and Goldenberg (84), (85), use 
a ferricyanide-carbonate reagent in their present work* 
They express their reducing power as a percentage of the 
reducing power of anhydrous maltose* 

Blom (86), after working on the enzymatic de¬ 
composition of starch for years, concluded that the 





+ 








c 


■Q 1 


0 ) >f) '.V.7 


- 


-/Jo " o 


oa ' o 


* 


■ 






• ; 0 







:■ ’ , ' 






r 






., r -• 


. • . •• •• - v ■ : ; 



















■ 





. 






- 28 - 


methods usually employed for the determination of re¬ 
ducing sugars were inadequate# He tested the methods 
most generally used in quantitative determinations of 
reducing sugars and developed a new method using po¬ 
tassium copper carbonate# The following were some of 
his observations: 

(a) The determination of aldoses with iodine gives re¬ 
liable results only when buffered at a pH of about 
10.2* The method should be used only in the case 
of pure or almost pure sugar solutions# 

(b) The determination of reducing sugars by means of 
ferricyanid© is rapid, the titration is accurate 
but the oxidation of the sugar varies somewhat# 

(c) The determination of reducing sugard by means of 
copper tartrate gives serially well reproducible 
results# With new reagents, discrepancies occur 
in the results, the cause of which is not under¬ 
stood# 

Blom concludes that due to the low oxidation- 
reduction potential of the system Gu\-^_ Gu ++ relative 
to Pe(CN) 6 ——Pe(CN)g-“ > copper methods are, in 
principle, the better ones# 






• . < ' . , ' 4 




t 


< 










o ...• 








r j"_ [fj f) •/> fj 0 


O 






‘ o 


O r.'.J 








< 

X 


/ 


o 




i: 













■ . ; ■ ( :■ 






■r. r .} 




* 















- 29 


METHODS AND PROCEDURE 


Starch Fractionation 


A fundamentally new method of starch fractionation 
was discovered by Schoch during an investigation of the 
effects of alcohols on starch pastes (38)# It was found 
that butanol and pentand cause a selective precipitation 
of the amylose constituent of starch, leaving the amylo- 
pectin in solution (43). This recently developed method 
most closely approaches ideal fractionation since the 
fractions are isolated in a high state of purity with 
minimum or negligible chemical degradation and without 
interference from retrogradation. For these reasons 
selective precipitation with polar agents was used to pre¬ 
pare the starch fractions for investigational use# 

Many modifications and improvements of Schoch *s 
original method have appeared since 1942# In Schoch’s 
original fractionation procedure he autoclaved starch 






- 30 


paste with butanol or isoamyl alcohol* Later (35) he auto¬ 
claved the starch first and then added pentasol, a commercial 
mixture of primary amyl alcohols, and cooled the resulting 
starch paste slowly, thereby causing the amylose to settle as 
crystalline needles or rosettes* Purification was carried 
out by re crystallization from the same solvent mixture* 

Schoch considered autoclaving to be essential for successful 
fractionation* 

Haworth, Peat and Sagrott (50) precipitated the 
amylose from non-autoclaved starch paste using thymol* 

These workers avoided autoclaving, fearing that mild hy¬ 
drolytic decomposition of the amylose and amylopectin might 
result* Hopkins and Jelinek (87) prepared amylose and 
amylopectin from non-autoclaved starch by successive add¬ 
itions, on alternate days, of thymol and cyclohexanol* To 
prevent any possibility of mild hydrolysis of the components 
during preparation, they washed the starch three times with 
0*001 N K 2 CO 3 followed by distilled water* This changed 
the pH of the paste from 4*5 to approximately 6 , the pH 
recommended by Schoch (43)* 

During preparation of amylose in the laboratory 
it was decided to control the pH of the paste by the use of 
a buffer system* The preparation is described below. 





) 




' 


( 




). 


t. 


\ 




< 








■ t 




e. - 


1 






- - * 






) 

















31 


Forty-two gm. of air dried potato starch (B.D.H#) 
was transferred carefully with washing (500 ml*) into 4,100 
ml# of boiling distilled water containing 100 ml# of Sorenson 
buffer of the following proportions: 

M/15 NaH o P0. -70 ml# ) 

) pH 6#5. 

M/15 Na 2 HP0 4 - 30 ml# ) 

The contents of the flask were boiled for 20 minutes with 
constant moderate stirring, after which time the mixture 
was allowed to cool for one-half hour# The solution was 
then centrifuged for one hour at 1,800 r.p.m# After centri¬ 
fugation two distinct layers were noticeable in the centri¬ 
fuge cups# The uppermost layer was collected and the volume 
measured# The lower layer, which contained the starch hulls 
and most of the amylopectin, was saved if amyl ope ctin was to 
be prepared# About three liters of crude amylose solution 
was collected from the 4,600 ml# of original starch paste# 
This solution was placed in a large bottle and to it was 
added five gm# of finely powdered thymol and the resulting 
mixture was shaken at regular intervals during a three to 

four day incubation period# The temperature was held at 

o o 
30 - 35 C. v 


Thymol added to the crude starch hull - amylopectin 
solution produced little if any precipitate after four 
weeks, indicating the completeness of separation of the 
amylose• 







- 




‘.:o 











- 32 - 


After completion of the incubation, the thymol 

precipitated amylose was centrifuged down in four 225 ml* 

centrifuge cups and washed three times with thymol-saturated 

water* The separated thymol-amylose complex was purified in 

the following manner* To each centrifuge cup was now added 

o 

75 ml* of water at 90 C* plus 50 ml* of hot butanol-saturated 

water* The resulting solution was heated to 90°C*, stoppered, 

and allowed to cool at room temperature over a three to five 

hour period* The precipitate was collected and washed with 

water-saturated butanol until the washings no longer gave any 

color reaction with iodine* The precipitate was then re- 

o 

dissolved in water at 80 G*, reprecipitated with butanol and 
rewashed* Three precipitations involving nine washings yielded 
a product from which no starch component could be extracted, 
as indicated by the absence of iodine coloration or dissolved 
carbohydrate in the mother liquor* 

Amylose precipitated by thymol, or by cyclohexanol 
followed by thymol, was separated as soon as possible by 
centrifuging, redissolving in hot butanol-saturated water, 
reprecipitating and washing several times as described 
above• 

Amylose was also prepared using cyclohexanol alone, 
thymol alone, and butanol alone* Each preparation was washed 
and recrystallized from its respective water-saturated pre¬ 
cipitant • 






35 


Determination of Yields of Fractions 


A weighed sample of amylose solution was evaporated 

o o 

to dryness on a steam bath and finally dried at 108 - 110 C# 

for two hours# 

The potato starch used for amylose preparation 
yielded between 17 - 19 % amylose no matter what precipitant 
was used# 


The Use of Amylose for Periodate Studies, Acid Hydrolysis# etc# 

When amylose was to be used for further experiments, 
the supernatant liquid was poured from the crystalline amy¬ 
lose complex and the complex was then dissolved in boiling 
water and the volume diluted to give an amylose concentra¬ 
tion of one to on© and one-half per cent# An aliquot was 
then taken for a dry matter determination* Other aliquots 
for special study were then removed and weighed# The amount 
of amylose used in a particular experiment was calculated 
££> ® the dry matter determination carried out simultaneously# 












• , ■ ' ■ ■ ■ 


i 


;-'v. ' 


! 


■ 




.. 0 






0*ro cc o</o 






■ • ■ ■ • ■ 

• • ; • ; , IV 


Preparation of Amylopectin 


Amylopectin was prepared according to the method 
of Hopkins and Jelinek (87), the only variation being the 
use of a buffer, (as described in the amylose preparation), 
to keep the pH of the starch paste constant* 


Preparation of Short Chain Amylose 


The method used in this laboratory for the pre¬ 
paration of short chain amylose has not been reported else¬ 
where, so will be described in detail# 

Amylose (2*7 gm.) was dissolved in 250 ml# of water 
and the resulting solution was made up to 257 ml* To this 
was added 13 0 5 ml* of one N HC1 and the whole was heated in 
a glycerol bath regulated at 97t2°C. The final concentration 
of acid was 0#05N and of the amylose was !%• After seventy 
minutes of heating, color tests with iodine were carried out 
on the reaction mixture to determine the approximate chain 
length# At the first appearance of a red color (70 to 80 
minutes) the flask was removed and the entire contents were 








•; . ;c : ;• -: 








(• ■ • 


c " ; • 




•"> ” oci 








o : 










t 














r O 


’ 






■ . J 


t 
















- 35 


neutralized with KOH# The solution was saturated with 

cyclohexanol, was thoroughly mixed and then heated to 
o 

90 C#, corked and allowed to cool slowly over a period of 

three to five hours# The precipitate was centrifuged and 

the supernatant was evaporated in vacuo to 150 ml# The 

solution was then dialyzed in cellophane against two liters 

of cold water# The water was changed every 12 hours for a 

total of three days# The resulting short chain amylose 

solution was evaporated to 75 ml# and then precipitated with 

absolute ethanol# The precipitate was centrifuged, washed 

with absolute ethanol, washed with dry ether, and finally 

o 

dried in vacuo at a temperature of 55 C# 

Aliquots were removed at varying time intervals 
(i.e# 84, 104, 130 minutes) during the acid hydrolysis, 
thereby giving short chain amylose of different average 
chain lengths# 


Iodine Colouration of Amylose 

The iodine complex of amylose gives a character¬ 
istic absorption spectrum# Iodine colouration measurements 
were made on prepared amylose samples and the spectral ab¬ 
sorption measurements were used to check the purity of the 
final producto 




.■iO , r - 


:o 




. ■ 


■ o • , ; 


' 




i'Q 


0 i ) 




f ■: v v.*. i ■; r o. •• 








- 36 - 


The starch-iodine complex was developed with an 
iodine-potassium iodide reagent containing 2.0000 gnu re¬ 
sublimed A.R. iodine and 20.000 gm* AoR* potassium iodide 
per liter of standard solution. The solution was prepared 
in the standard manner using carbon-dioxide free water and 
was stored in a dark bottle kept in a refrigerator# 

Spectral absorption measurements were made using a 
solution containing one mg. of amylose and to it was added 
five ml. of stock iodine-potassium iodide reagent and the 
whole made up to 100 ml. with water. With amylopectin 
five mg. of the component was required for 100 ml. of the 
mixture. It was found desirable to dilute the amylose and 
amylopectin as far as possible before adding the iodine 
reagent, otherwise the component-iodine complex tended to 
flocculate. 

The component-iodine complex was allowed to stand 
one-half hour before spectral absorption measurements were 
made. The standard procedure was followed, using one cm. 
cuvettes in a Beckman spectrophotometer. Model DU. The 
machine was adjusted to give lOOfo transmission through a 
blank prepared with five ml. of the stock reagent made up 


to 100 ml 












Blom Reducing Sugar Determinations 


The determination of sugar in pure solution pre¬ 
sents many difficulties* Where solutions contain other 
oxidizable organic compounds, the difficulties increase* 

Blom (86) after making a thorough investigation 
of reducing sugar methods, developed a new reagent contain¬ 
ing potassium copper carbonate* It was found to be quite 
successful with high concentrations of monosaccharides and 
was recommended for complex mixtures of other sugars* 

The reagent consists only of inorganic salts 
which can be procured in a highly purified state* It has 
a well defined pH and a very high buffer capacity* The 
procedure involves heating in a glycerol constant temper¬ 
ature bath volumetric flasks filled to the mark to eliminate 
oxidation by air* The actual determination is based on 
iodometric titration* The accuracy of a single determination 
is O.&fo. 

The potassium copper carbonate reagent presents 
several obvious advantages as compared with Pehling*s sol- 
ution* Cu remains as,, complex in a solution of well defined 
inorganic compounds which at the same time constitute com¬ 
ponents of a weakly alkaline buffer* Because of its lower 











0 






r ■ ' \ 













* 




o 













• It 




































- 38 - 


pH the Blom reagent does not decompose dLigo- and polysa¬ 
ccharides to the same extent as does Fehling* s* 

The reference for the Blom method is not present 
in the library so the procedure will be outlined in detail 
for future reference in this department# 


Method 

The sugar solution is heated on a glycerol constant 
temperature bath with an excess of potassium copper carbonate# 
Cu ++ is reduced by the sugar to Cu + , which is precipitated 
as CUgO # The excess is determined iodometrieally# A blank 
experiment is carried out under the same conditions# From 
the difference between the blank and the unknown, the amount 
of sugar may be calculated from a standard graph, (Fig* 1)* 


Table 1 
Reagents 




Gm./liter 

Ml./analysi; 

X 

CuS0 4 . 5H 2 0 

41.6 

15.00 


k 2 co 3 I 

23.0 



KHCOg 

166.9 



K 2 CO 3 11 

230.3 


II 

KI 

32.2 



Na 2 C0 3 

1.0 

5.0 

III 

HClconc# 

333 ml# 



Pb* acetate 

1.0 

25.0 


Glacial acetic acid 

4-5 drops 


IV 

KCNS 

194 

2.0 

V 

Na 2 S 20 $ 

0.1000 N 


VI 

Na-starch-glycollate 

indicator 









- 


t 





•• f 












■: , 







. 








■ o-.i 


■ 


r , r ' • • 

















39 - 


Preparation of Reagents 

I. The copper sulfate is dissolved in a one liter 
beaker in 200 ml# of boiling water# After cooling, KgCOg I 
is added cautiously while stirringo When COg has escaped, 
which is accelerated by stirring, there are added 400 ml# 
of water, pulverized KHCOg and K 2 CO 3 II* When the main part 
of the salt is dissolved, the total contents are washed over 
into a one liter volumetric flask and diluted with water to 
the mark# K g C 0 g is ©&sily dissolved, KHCOg with difficulty# 
Large crystals of KHCOg must therefore be pulverized very 
carefully. Gradually everything dissolves when the flask is 
shaken, but at the same time KgSO^ appears in very fine 
crystals# After dilution to the mark with water, the flask 
is shaken and left overnight for continued precipitation of 
K 2 SO 4 , then the contents are filtered# The solution does not 
keep indefinitely as bluish salts,probably consisting of 
copper carbonate.,separate slowly* 

II# NagCOg stabilizes the solution# 

III# The lead acetate was dissolved in about 20 ml# of 
water to which a few drops of glacial acetic acid vere added, 
before addition of the hydrochloric a cid* 







I • .• ' r ' 










t 














*■ 









. *■ 


r 


•• •• .. ■ 





( ■■ 





- 40 - 


VI. Preparation of sodium-starch-glycollate. 

The sodium-starch-glycoHate indicator was first 
reported by Peat et al (89). The indicator was added at the 
start of an iodometric titration. The end point was very 
sharp and duplication of results with the indicator were 
excellent and were similar to the results obtained with the 
standard soluble starch indicator. The glycollate indicator 
seemed more resistant to attack by moulds and so it was 
unnecessary to prepare the indicator daily. 

The sodium-starch-glyco11ate indicator prepared in 
this laboratory was compared with an equal strength of a 
commercial preparation of sodium-starch-glycollate from the 
B.D.H. Co. The former was found to be far superior both 
in sharpness of end point and stability. Only three to 
five drops of the indicator were required in the Blom and 
Somogyi reducing sugar determinations. 

The indicator used in this laboratory was prepared 
according to the original method, with numerous modifications. 

Forty gm. of potato starch in 640 ml. of water was 
stirred with 120 ml. of 50$ NaOH. To the resulting starch 
paste, cooled to 50°C., the following solution was added: 

80 ml. of, water, plus 12 gm. monochloroacetic acid, plus 
eight gm. NaOH pellets. The mixture was cooled and neutralized 






















"> ' 1 





. 




0 • 


O'.:, . i ; 





' 


. 


o: ioZ 















- 41 - 


with glacial acetic acid* The neutralized solution was dialy¬ 
zed in a cellophane hag for three days against running tap 
water* 

The sodium-starch-glycollate was precipitated from 
solution by addition of an excess of 95$ ethanol* The pre¬ 
cipitate was centrifuged and washed well with 95$ ethanol 

and finally with absolute ethanol* The powder was then dried 
o 

in vacuo at 50 C., triturated, and dried in vacuo once again* 
The yield was about 50$ based on the original air-dried 
starch* 

The glycollate indicator was prepared for analy¬ 
tical use by dissolving one-half gm* of the powder in 75 
ml* of boiling water, cooling and diluting to 100 ml* 


Apparatus 

(a) Numbered volumetric flasks, 25 ml* capacity, width 

2 

of neck eight to nine ram*, surface area about 0*6 cm. . 

(b) A wire basket with compartments for the flasks. 

(c) A glycerol constant temperature bath regulated at 


97-2°C 






■ 




/ 








42 


Procedure 


The sugar solution was weighed or pipetted into 
the numbered flasks* This solution must not occupy more 
than 10*0 ml* To each flask was added 15*00 ml* of re¬ 
agent I* Fifteen ml* of reagent I was pipetted into three 
other volumetries for blank determinations* The flasks were 
filled to the mark with water, shaken and placed in the 
glycerol bath and the time noted. After 45 minutes heat¬ 
ing, the flasks were cooled in running water. Five ml. of 
reagent II was placed in a 300 ml, Erlenmeyer and the 
reaction mixture was transferred with washing into the 
Erlenmeyer* No attention was paid to any Cu^O that may 
have remained in the volumetric flask* In the blanks a 
ring of CugO was often noticed in the neck of the flasks* 
This was removed by Blom III, 

The cuprous oxide was dissolved in a few ml* 
of reagent III and washed into the titration flask. 

Twenty five mi* of reagent III was cautiously added* 
Effervescence may cause some difficulty* The flask was 
shaken while CO 2 escaped, then five ml* of reagent IV was 
added* Titration with 0*100N NagS 203 followed Immediately* 
The use of sodium-starch-glycollate as the indicator 




V 




.0 












43 


allowed the indicator to be added at the start of the 
titration. The colour shift was from blue to white-yellow 
for small amounts of Cu++ and from blue to pink for larger 
amounts# The end point was quite sharpf nevertheless, it 
should be observed under standard lighting conditions# 

The Blom method was found to be very satis¬ 
factory where analyses were made on aliquots of the pro¬ 
ducts of serial degradation of amylose by beta-amylase# 
Heating time for maltose and glucose of 45 
minutes was found to be satisfactory* Calculations were 
based on standard curve graphs of the respective sugars. 
(Pig. 1)* 


Somogyi -Reducing Sugar Determinations 


As a check on the Blom reducing sugar method, 
and for use with smaller concentrations of Sugar, the 
Somogyi reducing sugar method was used (82). This method 
was devised to include the advantages found in four other 
alkaline copper tartarate methods. It was sufficiently 
alkaline for the determination of maltose and other 




















• : *' •' 1 ' ■ 

* 

• * 












* 

. 




ft . ■ 










44 


slowly reacting sugars» The results were very consistent 
and were reproducible even at the very lowest sugar con¬ 
centrations® ^he concentrations of the reactants in¬ 
fluence the reactions of the sugars* but the final 
concentrations used represent the most favorable con¬ 
ditions as regards buffer action* stability* and 
sensitivity of reagents• The method used in this lab¬ 
oratory was that described by Somogyi (82) with the ex¬ 
ception that sodium-starch-glycollate was used as the 
indicator® Glucose oxidation was complete after 10 min¬ 
utes heating* maltose however* required 20 minutes# 

The net titration of a determination of glucose 
or maltose is calculated* in grams* by referring to a 
standard graph (Pig* 2)« 























45 


Results and Discussion 


The standard curves for the Blom and Somogyi re¬ 
ducing sugar methods for glucose and maltose are graphically 
represented in Fig. 1 and 2, respectively. The glucose 
curves were used to determine the mean chain length from 
the acid hydrolysis studies on short chain and normal long 
chain amylose. The method used for the acid hydrolysis of 
the starch fractions was the one described by Pirt and 
Whelan (55). 

The yields of glucose from the starch fractions 
(after hydrolysis) were used to calculate the original 
chain lengths. Further studies are to be continued in which 
an effort will be made to correlate results from acid hy¬ 
drolysis, reducing sugar determinations, and the periodate 
oxidation of short and normal long chain amylose. 

The maltose standard graphs were used in connection 
with the action of beta-amylase on amylose. Three different 
preparations of beta-amylase (soya) were undertaken using 
the method described by Hopkins, Jelinek, and Harrison (5). 

The samples of the enzyme were compared on the same amylose 
substrate using the maltose curves to compare their efficiency. 





























. 

7 e • : 








. 


, 








. 























- 46 - 


Fig. 5 represents the spectral absorption curves for 
the iodine complexes of amylose and amylopectin. These curves 
served as a check on the purity of the two starch components 
before they were used for further study. 

Fig. 4 represents the spectral absorption curves 
for the iodine complexes of two short chain amylose fractions. 
It may be observed that the short chain amylose (S.C.A.) of 
the shorter hydrolysis time (90 minutes) has a higher optical 
density reading than that of the S.C.A. resulting from an 
110 minute hydrolysis period. The curves presented are typi¬ 
cal spectral absorption curves for the iodine complex of 
S.C.A. as found in this laboratory. 







. 


* * 


, . . 

* 


. 















47 



Pig. 1 

Standard curves for the Blom reducing sugar 
determinations of glucose and maltose. 















- 48 



Pig. 2 


Standard curves for the Somogyi reducing sugar 
determinations of glucose and maltose. 















OPTICAL DENSITY 


49 - 



Pig* 3 


Spectral absorption curves for the iodine 
complexes of amylose and amylopectin. 















OPTICAL DENSITY 


- 50 - 



WAVE LENGTH (nyi) 


Fig* 4 


Spectral absorption curves for the iodine complexes 
of two short chain amylose samples* 








Periodate Oxidation 


During the last ten years certain new techniques 
and methods have been devised for measuring the chain lengths 
and mean molecular weights of starch components. Haworths 
methylation method of end-group analysis has been modified to 
enable the mixture of methylated glucoses to be separated 
chromatographically by various means. However, a new method 
of end-group assay involving periodate oxidation, which 
obviates the customary lengthy methylation procedure, has 
been developed (SO), (SS), (90). The results obtained with 
this new method show good agreement with those of the classi¬ 
cal assay when applied to starches and starch fractions of 
known composition; but in the absence of supplementary evi¬ 
dence they should be interpreted with caution, for the amount 
of formi c acid produced per chain depends on whether the 
potential reducing group is free, as in amylose, or blocked, 
as in amylopectin. 

At the outset of this project the purpose of the 
periodate studies was to assist in the elucidation of the 
action of beta-amylase on amylose. It was thought that if 
it were possible to standardize the conditions for periodate 
oxidation of maltose, such findings might be applied to 
amylose. It is necessary to know the mean chain length of 





’ 

. 

■ ;■ 

■ ' • 

. 

r • -- ; v. " J-- 'f' ■ ..vt •; / f o 

* * 

' 






r. ■ 


■ 




• ’ 0 0 fi 



< 



. ) r -■ 










e • 








. ■ > 








' 








. 


. 











, ' 







. 









52 


amylose prior to, and during the action of beta-amylase on 
amylose to explain action of the enzyme. Periodate studies 
on amylose might possibly assist in elucidating the nature 
of beta-amylolysis. 

A careful survey of the literature indicated that 
periodate oxidation methods were not uniform. Many different 
methods were used and interpretations of the final results 
were ambiguous and quite often of doubtful value. 

Meyer and Rathgeb (90) found that maltose, when 
oxidized by NaI 04 , gave one molecule of formic acid from the 
non-reducing end and one molecule from the reducing end. 

Hirst, Jones and co-workers (20), using their own 
oxidation method, found one molecule of formic acid released 
from the non-reducing end of maltose and some from the reduc¬ 
ing end. 

Potter and Hassid (22), using another entirely differ- 
end method, found one molecule of formic acid released from 
the non-reducing end of maltose and two molecules from the 
reducing end. 

Because of disagreement among these workers, it was 
impossible to relate the maltose-periodate results to a study 
of the action of beta-amylase on amylose. 


. 

. . 

. 

1 .rlu • • j . r 'r‘- "rr <;•: . •;« i ■ 

• '• 

’ 

. 

. c o.;X o :{ ■ ;) d 0 - ' bn • 9sj 

■ . 

„ 

' 




, * ; 

■ 




- 







t . ; 

i 




, 




- 




* 




o ■ l 



- ■ C v 



. 

- 




- 53 


Reagents and Apparatus 

The periodic acid (HIO^), trisodium paraperiodate 
(Na^HglOg), and sodium metaperiodate (NalO^) used were Reagent 
grade chemicals .^ The sodium metaperiodate used contained no 
free acid since on addition of excess of ethylene glycol to 
an aqueous solution, sodium iodate neutral to methyl red was 
formed. 

The glucose, maltose hydrate and ethylene glycol 
used in this project were C.P. grade chemicals.^ 

The 0.005 N Na^S^O^ was prepared by diluting the 
0.1000 N stock reagent (stabilized by addition of 0.1 gm. 
anhydrous Na^CO^ per liter of standard) with COg-free water 
just prior to use. The diluted solution was stable for only 
about two days. 

Freshly prepared COg- free water was used for pre¬ 
paration of all reagents and was used exclusively in the 
periodate oxidation procedure. 

The pipettes and burettes used with standard re¬ 
agents were of the Kimble N0RMAX precision type; for general 
analysis Kimble EXAX glassware was used. The 0.011 N and 
0.058 N NaOH were contained and dispensed from "All Automatic 
Inter-Joint Pyrex Glass Burettes For Alkali Solutions" of two 
and 10 ml. capacity respectively.^ 

1/ Supplied by G. Fredrick Smith Chemical Co., Columbus, Ohio. 
2/ Supplied by Pfanstiehl Chemical Co., Waukegan, Illinois. 

2/ fljew^Jerse 1 ^ Scientiflc Glass Apparatus Co., Bloomfield, 




. 

; , >1 J : •: , . ‘ . : f, 1 t , , * 

. ' . f •/ ! *v* ' 3 '' 1 q': ' " ■ • " 

■ .\ec 

- 

K ' . . 

. . 

•: "•' ■; K ■ -v : •: \;o ■ '; : 0' 

* 

. 

- ■ • ■■ 'O : •; •: - • • • . 

)■[$ 

. 

- ■ '• 4 ; V. ' U :.•••' 

•. -■ : ■,' •. ■ ’ ■ '3‘ 

i 

. 


















. 




54 


Experimental 

When periodate studies were first undertaken in 
this laboratory, the periodate salts were not available and 
it was necessary to continue for some time using modification 
of Meyer’s original method (90)* The procedure that was 
used is outlined below. 

Seven gm. HIO4 was dissolved in 50 ml. CQg-free 
water and the solution was carefully brought to a pH of 
3.8 with 1 N NaOH. If a precipitate appeared it was centri¬ 
fuged and the supernatant liquid removed and diluted to 100 
ml. with water. This was the stock solution of NaI04. 

lust prior to use for oxidation, IE ml. of the 
stock solution was brought to a pH of 4.E with N/10 NaOH. 

Ten ml. of this reagent was added to solutions of maltose, 
amylose, and amylopectin for oxidation and the whole was 
diluted to 100 ml. with water. At regular time intervals 
10 ml. aliquots were removed from the reaction flask and 
transferred to 50 ml. Erlenmeyer flasks containing 0.5 ml. 
of ethylene glycol. The contents of the flask were mixed 
gently and allowed to stand 10 minutes, after which time 
1.0 ml. of 0.1 N KIO3 and 1.0 ml. of 2f 0 KI )pas added. 

The flask was again mixed genpqy an & allowed to stand three 

minutes. The solution was then titrated with 0.005 N Na^S^O^ 
using sodium-starch glycollate indicator. 





. 

ii 

■ 


- 

\ 

, 

■ j.t . ■ ' . >:•: ■. o :0‘1 • f .7 " . :i') -:ul5 on 3 l . : 

. 

„ . 


* 





55 


Although considerable care was used with the above 
procedure, determinations carried out at different times were 
not always in agreement. This same trouble was experienced 
in Birmingham (91). Since we have studied the periodate 
question more thoroughly it seems that difficulties could 
be expected with the method. The difficulties that were 
found in the above method were in no small way responsible 
for a more thorough investigation of the periodate problem. 

The following problems were encountered during 
the use of the modified Meyer method: 

(a) Varying amounts of precipitate were observed from day 
to day when preparing the stock reagent. 

(b) The reagent was not very stable and so the oxidant 
concentration was not constant. 

(c) The method was relatively complex and initially very 
time consuming. 

(d) Blank values were quite large and not constant. 

(e) Atmospheric conditions caused appreciable error and 
were difficult to correct. 

It was concluded that the method was unsatisfactory for 
quantitative work. 








■ 














. 


. 

♦ 

. 

. 



, 

’ 







. 




■ 






' 




. 




„ 



56 


The Use of the Acid or its Salts 

The fi rst consideration in carrying out periodate 
oxidations was a choice between periodic acid and a suitable 
salt of the acid as the oxidant. As it was proposed to study 
the carbohydrates in aqueous solution and to determine the 
formic acid that was generated in the oxidation mixture by 
measuring the increase in the titratable acidity of the re¬ 
action solution, then periodic acid could not be used under 
these conditions. Three of the periodate salts were available 
for study, but most of the salts of periodic acid are only 
slightly soluble in water. For this reason sodium metaperio¬ 
date, (NaI0 4 ), is the most suitable salt, i.e., its solubility 
9.3% at 20°C., 12.6% at 25°C. (30). Use of some of the other 
salts would unnecessarily extend the time for complete oxidation. 

Maltose hydrate (20 mg.) was oxidized with satu¬ 
rated aqueous solutions (at 25°C.) of the following salts; 

KIO^, Na^HglOg, and NalC^. Only the latter salt gave any 
appreciable oxidation to formic acid after 24 hours oxidation 
time. The low solubility of the first two salts undoubtedly 
contributed to their slow reaction. NaI 04 proved to be the 
superior oxidizing reagent. 

Although the above oxidations were carried out in an 
aqueous medium, it has been shown that oxidation of starch by 
periodic acid gives the same results whether the reaction is 




- 











* 




t' 

* 

- 


.... 

- - 


„ 

. 




■ 


• ■ ■ - ■ 




■ o 


* 

. 


- 







57 


carried out on raw starch granules or on gelatinized starch. 
Jackson and Hudson applied the oxidizing agent to whole 
starch grains while Caldwell and Hixon applied periodic acid 
to gelatinized starch pastes. The results agreed in all 
respects. When periodic acid was applied to soluble starch 
and to insoluble powdered starch by the same investigators, 
the rate curves for periodate ion consumption were found to 
be practically superimposable (92). 


Concentration of Oxidant to be Used. 

The concentration of the oxidant used, directly 
affects the length of time required for complete oxidation. 

A high concentration of oxidant in the reaction mixture lowers 
the time for completion of the reaction; but if too high a 
concentration is used, the products of the reaction may be 
further oxidized. Determination of the optimum oxidant con¬ 
centration must take such facts into account. 

Potter and Hassid (22), used 10 ml. of 0.37 M NaI 04 
for every 20 ml. of reaction mixture. Halsall, Hirst, and 
Jones (20) used 10 ml. of 0.20 - .35 M N 8 .IO 4 per 120 ml. of 
reacting solution. Meyer and Rathgeb (90) used a concentra¬ 
tion of periodate similar to that of Halsall, Hirst, and Jones. 







' 


* 


- 




, 



















* 




. 




. 


■ 






. 

. - 


. 


. 
















58 


Results and Discussion 

One hundred ml. volumetric flasks were used to 
contain the reaction mixture. We found it was convenient to 
remove 10 ml. aliquots of the reaction mixture for titration 
with 0.01 N NaOH. As indicated above many of the workers 
doing periodate studies use concentrations of 0.2 to 0.4 
M NaI0 4 , therefore 0.30 M NaI0 4 was used as the stock re¬ 
agent. It was always prepared just prior to use. 

The following experiment was carried out to 
determine the effect on the constant amount of maltose, of 
different concentrations of NaI0 4 . Twenty mg. amounts of 
maltose hydrate were dissolved in 75 ml. of 00 2 -free water 
and cooled to 0°C. To the cooled maltose solutions were 
added 1, 3, 3, 5, 10, and 20, ml. respectively, of 0.30 M 
NaI0 4 , each flask was filled to the mark with cold water, 
and the time noted. The flasks were kept in ice-water and 
in the dark. At various time intervals, 10 ml. aliquots 
were removed to a 50 ml. Erlenmeyer flask containing excess 
ethylene glycol to destroy the periodate noted used in the 
oxidation of maltose. After thorough mixing the solution was 
allowed to stand for 15 minutes and the formic acid was ti¬ 
trated with 0.01 N NaOH, using methyl red as the indicator. 













. 


* 

oi 

\ . . 7 — .777 7-' 7 7 - . c^ r r-.-r billot 






. ,. ' - 


* 

.. ■ . ' i -I t 


. ' 






. 

, 

• V : Co? ; j"f' • 

> 

J ■: * ■ 

..7 if ; '\ :■ 


■ i ..77":7 y • 7 ' •'" Jiy.' •.■7 tk- 

?iioI . V7> . 

. 

* 

..... , . ' .> : 

';'y '7 : , : 0 

. . ' ' ‘ . • • o 71: ‘■•V, 7 7 7 7 7 7 

;':i' • 

* y 

0$. • uvof T ~7V 




. 

r • 7v 7 7 V 7 - >1 777-.-.7C ’ 

' 

■' • , - ';7 777: 

7 , ; • ■ - r ' ■< - ' 


* 


WO life 

: 7 • 




















59 


Blanks were determined and corrections, if any, were applied,' 
At least duplicate determinations were made. The results of 
the titrations are summarized in Table 2 and presented graph¬ 
ically in Fig. 5. 


Table 2 

The Effect of Varying the Concentration of Periodate 


Net titrations of 10 ml. aliquots of the reaction mixture dur¬ 
ing oxidation of 20 mg. of maltose hydrate, expressed as ml. 
of 0.011 N NaOH using methyl red as the indicator. 


Ml. 0.30 M 
NaI0 4 /100 
ml. 


Hours of 

oxidation at 

o°c. 


1 

3 

6 

i 

11 

25 

96 

144 

1 

0.03 

0.10 

0.19 

0.25 

0.38 

0.71 

0.86 

2 

0.07 

0.16 

0.29 

0.38 

0.53 

0.84 

0.90 

3 

0.10 

0.20 

0.35 

0.45 

0.58 

0.93 

0.96 

5 

0.17 

0.32 

0.48 

0.57 

0.72 

1.01 

1.08 

10 

-- 

0.48 

0.56 

0.64 

0.80 

— 

1.20 

20 

0.46 

0.68 

0.81 

0.92 

1.07 

1.38 

1.41 


1/ Blanks were determined by carrying out a normal oxidation 
procedure, but omitting the oxidant in one flask, and 
omitting the reductant in another. 



































. 


, 











ML. 0.011 N NaOH 


- 60 - 



Pig. 5 


The effect of periodate concentration on periodate 
oxidation of maltose. 

Maltose concentration; 20 mg. per 100 ml* 
of reaction solution. 

NaI 04 concentration expressed as ml. of 
0.30 M NaI 04 per 100 ml. of reaction sol¬ 
ution; (1) 20, (2) 10, (3) 5, (4) 3, 

(5) 2, (6) 1. 


























61 - 


Potter and Hassid (22) state that, with their 
method, "over-oxidation 11 of maltose by periodate was appa¬ 
rent at about 25 hours* Because of this fact they plotted 
their titration results and when a sudden increase was 
noted in the titration curve at about 25 hours, they attri¬ 
buted the change to "over-oxidation" or "secondary oxidation"* 
Meyer (90), also observed the effect from "over-oxidation" 
and to minimize it he extrapolated to zero time* We found 
it justifiable to extrapolate to zero time and noticed that 
the extrapolated values closely approximated the titration 
values actually found after 25 to 50 hours of oxidation* 

As expected, when less periodate was used for any 
specific amount of sugar, formic acid was released more 
slowly* Although it was difficult to choose any particular 
volume of NaI 04 for the standard oxidation procedure from 
a study of Pig. 5, we decided to use 10 ml* This volume 
of periodate was chosen for convenience and was comparable 
to the concentration of periodate used by most other workers. 


Concentration of Reductant 

Once the concentration of oxidant was established, 
the concentration of the reductant was varied in order to 
determine a suitable range in which to work* 











- ; 

Oo • . 




. 















V '■ ■■ 'i 

■ 


















^ ' 


t * 













' 



1 






• 













- 62 - 


Results and Discussion 

Maltose hydrate, in 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, and 160 mg* 

amounts was placed in 100 ml* volumetric flasks and 85 ml* 

of COg-free water were added and the flasks and contents 
o 

cooled at 0 C* After cooling, 10 ml* of 0*30 M NaI0 4 was 
add.ed and the oxidation procedure was continued in the usual 
manner* The work was repeated three times and the results 
were similar* Blanks were determined simultaneously with 
each series analyzed* The results are summarized in Table 3 
and plotted in Pig* 6® 


Table 3 

The Effect of Variations in the Concentration of Maltose Hydrate 


Results expressed as ml 
reaction solution® Ten 

. of 0.058 N NaOH 
ml. 0.30 M NaI0 4 

per 10 ml* aliquots of 
were used in all flasks* 

Mg* maltose hydrate 

Hours of oxidation at 0 C 

*C. 

per 100 ml* reaction 
flask 

5 10 

24 

48 

144 

5 

0*03 

0.04 

0*05 

0*07 

10 

0*07 

0*09 

0.10 

0*12 

20 

0*10 0*18 

0*20 

0*20 

0*19 

40 

0.20 0.30 

0*40 

0*40 

0*44 

80 

0*40 0*60 

0*78 

0.78 

0*91 

160 

0.80 1.17 

1*26 

1.53 

1.89 

500 

— 

1.40 

1.50 

2.05 
















| 





63 - 



Fig* 6 


Th© effect of maltose concentration on periodate 
oxidation of maltose* 

NaIC >4 concentration; 10 ml* of 0*30 N NaI 04 
per 100 ml* reaction solution* 

Maltose concentration expressed as mg. mal¬ 
tose hydrate per 100 ml* of reaction solu¬ 
tion; (1) 160, (2) 80, (3) 40, (4) 20, 

(5) 10, (6) 5. 






























64 - 


The above results indicate that for concentrations 
of maltose hydrate between 5 and 40 mg* % the titration values 
are proportional to maltose concentration, especially at the 
24 to 48 hour periods* The effect of "over oxidation” was 
noticeable after the 48 hour titration* These facts justify 
extrapolating to zero time or taking the final readings at 
about 25 to 48 hours, depending on the concentration of 
reductant used* 

At concentrations of 500 mg*$ maltose hydrate, the 
reaction mixture turned yellow before 24 hours had elapsed* 

The titrations were not proportional from that time on* The 
appearance of molecular iodine after about 25 hours indicated 
that little or no NalO^ was left in the reaction mixture (93)* 
When the concentration of maltose was higher than 40 mg•$, 
the time for completion of the reaction was somewhat longer* 
This may have affected the final titration value because 
"secondary oxidation” probably occurred during the extended 
time* 

The use of 10 to 20 mg*$ of maltose or its equiva¬ 
lent, (in formic acid released), was satisfactory for the 
method described* If lower concentrations of reductant were 
used, quantitative estimations were not exact* At concen¬ 
trations above 50 mg*j£, unnecessary amounts of valuable 
fractions had to be used, and at higher concentrations (500 
mg*$), the reaction was affected by the release of molecular 


iodine 



* 

* 

, 










, ' - 

A 






... r . J •■■ ■: 

■ 

i - ■: 






* 






» 

t 

4 




t 




. * 

, 





65 - 


When calculating the molecules of formic acid re¬ 
leased from one molecule of maltose, using the 5, 10, 20, 
and 40 mg# results from Table 3, two molecules were found# 
The fact that we were consistently able to get two molecules 
of formic acid from one molecule of maltose, justified con¬ 
tinuation of our periodate method (94)# 


Temperature of Oxidation 

Temperatures reported for oxidation with periodate 
vary from 0°C. (22), to 100°C* (95)# Many of the workers 
use room temperature, which may vary from 15°G® in Great 
Britain, to 30°C* in America# These variations in temper¬ 
ature may influence the effect of ff over-oxidation n , or the 
destruction of formic acid, if there is any# 


Results and Discussion 

Temperature studies of periodate oxidation were 
o o o 

undertaken at 0 C., 30 G # , and 37 C. The former temper¬ 
ature was attained by use of iced-water baths, the latter 
two by use of constant temperature baths regulated at the 
specific temperatures# All reactions were carried out in 





- • 


' 


» 

„ . t; 



- 


* 

« 












. 

C-* . "■ > '■ j - - ■: •" 

. . 





- 

* 










s 













* 











«* 66 


100 ml. volumetric flasks and in as diffuse light as 
possible® There were four concentrations of maltose, 20, 
40, 80, and 160 mg® % 9 for each reaction temperature. Ten 
ml, of 0.50 M NaI0 4 was used and the determination of 
formic acid was made in the usual manner. Blanks were run 
with the main experiments. The results are summarized in 
Table 4« 


Table 4 

The Effects of Temperature on the Oxidation of Maltose by 

Periodate 


The results are expressed as ml. 0.058 N NaOH required to 
titrate 10 ml. aliquots of the reaction mixture at the times 
indicated. 


Mg. 

maltose 
hydrate 
/100 ml. 




Hours of oxidation 






30°C. 





37°C. 



5 

10 

24 

48 

144 

5 

10 

24 

48 

144 

20 



.26 

.34 

.60 

.18 


.45 

.47 

.73 

40 

.50 

.41 

.54 

.73 

1.29 

.37 

.54 

— 

1.02 

1.54 

80 

.61 

.80 

1.14 

1.62 

2.89 

.75 

1.01 

1.56 

2.35 

3.22 

160 

1.25 

1.57 

2.57 

3.35 


1.48 

2.00 

3.47 

*2 

off 










. 



67 


o 

The results of the reactions carried out at 0 C, 

were identical with those presented in Table 5, and so were 

not placed in Table 4. The results presented in Table 4 

o 

indicate that at 37 C. the titration values for similar 

concentrations and oxidation times were consistently higher 
o 

than those at 30 G. ’’Secondary oxidation 11 was probably 
accelerated at the higher temperatures® This was indi¬ 
cated when the number of molecules of formic acid released 
per molecule of maltose was calculated at the three temper¬ 
atures* The calculations were made for the 24 and the 48 
hour titration values* The results of the calculations 
are tabulated in Table 5* 


Table 5 

Molecules of Formic Acid Released per Molecule of Maltose 

(Anhydrous) 


Hours 




Mg. 

maltose hydrate 





of 

oxi¬ 


o°c. 



30 

9 

o 

o 



37 

°C. 


dation 

20 

o 

i 

o 

160 

20 

40 

80 

160 

20 

40 

80 

160 

24 

2*0 

1*9 1*8 

1*6 

2.5 

2*7 

2*9 

3*1 

3*8 


4*0 

4.5 

48 

2.1 

2*1 2*0 

2.0 

3.6 

3*8 

4.2 

4.4 

5*0 

5.3 

6.1 

— 










* 

* 


* 


• : 0/> • \ _ ,‘.c ;■ 






. 






68 - 


It is evident that a considerable difference exists 

between the results of oxidation at 30°C. and those at 37°C. 

Possibly a similar difference exists between results obtained 

o o 

by oxidation at 15 C* and 25 Go Such a study should be under¬ 
taken when suitable apparatus becomes available* 

Standardization of the temperature is an important 
factor in quantitative analysis by periodate* 

Experiments similar to those for maltose were carried 
out on glucose* Glucose anhydrous concentrations were 5, 10, 
and 25 mg* % 9 while the concentration of periodate was the 

usual 10 ml* of 0*30 M per 100 ml* of reaction mixture* 

o o 

Temperature studies were done at 0 C, and 30 C. The re¬ 
sults of some of the work is summarized in Table 6* 


Table 6 

Molecules of Formic Acid Released per Molecule of Glucose 

(Anhydrous) 




Mg. of glucose anhydrous 


Hours of 


o°c. 

30°C. 


oxidation 

5 

10 25 

5 10 

25 

45 

3*8 

3*7 3.6 

4*4 4*4 

4*4 

164 

4*0 

3*9 3.8 

Va?uues all lower 
at 45 hours. 

than 








































- 










69 


o 

In other studies with glucose at 30 C. we have 
found that the number of molecules of formic acid released 
per molecule of the sugar approximated 5, the value quoted 
in the literature (90), (95). At 0°C. only four molecules 
of formic acid are released* Possibly a different mechanism 
of oxidation of glucose to formic is involved at the lower 
temperature* 

The method of periodate oxidation so far developed 
proceeds as follows: 

Place the carbohydrate (enough to release five to 
ten mg. of formic acid) in a 100 ml. volumetric flask and 
add COg-free distilled water to give a volume of 85 ml* 

Cool the solution to 0°C. then add 10 ml. of 0.30 M NalO^, 
fill the mark with cold COg-free water, mix well and place 
the flask and contents in an ice-water bath. At regular 
intervals 10 ml* aliquots of the reaction solution are re¬ 
moved to an Erlenmeyer flask containing excess ethylene 
glycol (20 drops). Mix well and let stand 15 minutes, 
after which time the contents are titrated with standard 
NaOH, using methyl red as the indicator. Blanks are de¬ 
termined along with the unknowns. The excess of ethylene 
glycol has no effect on the final titration values* 







* ' 













o;r 


























- . 








- 70 ~ 


The release of formic acid from a compound oxidized 
with NalO^ was calculated in the following manners 

G-lticose anhydrous, M.W* 180.1. Used 10 mg* glucose/ 
100 ml* of reaction solution or 0*0000555M* The titration 
of a 10 ml. aliquot of the reaction mixture with 0.058 N 
NaOH was 0*35 ml; for 10 mg* of the completely oxidized 
glucose the total titration was then 5*50 ml* NaOH* One 
ml* of 0.058 N NaOH was equivalent to 2.67 mg* formic acid. 
Total formic acid titrated from 10 mg* glucose was 9.34 mg* 
which equals 0.000203 moles* Therefore, the molecules of 
formic acid released per molecule of glucose was *203/.055 
or 3.66* 

It was realized that a slight error was introduced 

by cooling to 0°C. and removing 10 ml* aliquots. This 10 

ml. was a 1/10 aliquot of the reaction mixture, although 

when warmed to room temperature the volume was greater than 

10 ml. (a 10.00 ml* volume of water at 0°G. occupies 10.5 

o » 

ml. when warmed to 25 C.)* This difference m volume 
measurements was within the experimental error of the 
procedure. Five similar samples of maltose hydrate were 
oxidized in the usual manner and 10 ml, aliquots were 
titrated with 0.011 N NaOH and at the 48 hour titration 
the five results averaged 0.498 £ 0.005 ml* 
























- 71 


Photochemical Destruction of Formic Acid in the Presence 

o f Hal0 ^ 

It has been reported (95) that formic acid was 
destroyed by NalO^. if the formic acid concentration was 
greater than 0.005 N in the reaction solution. Photo¬ 
chemical destruction of formic acid in an aqueous medium has 
also been observed (96). We investigated this problem 
further by reacting various concentrations of aqueous 
formic acid in a manner similar to that used with the 
carbohydrates. Simultaneously with these studies of oxi¬ 
dation of formic acid, we Investigated the possibility of 
photochemical degradation of the formic acid. A summary 
of some of the findings appears in fable 7• 

It may be noted that in an environment resembling 
normal laboratory conditions of temperature and lighting, 
formic acid was completely destroyed before 100 hours 
elapsed time. The formic acid concentration in all flasks 
was well below the critical value reported by Sakar (95). 






: v. -"ov "Oo o': \0 ' ooi oh-vo- - o • : 

~ * ■' * 

' / 6 . 1 !--' . 

1 * , X , 


■ 


f.fj ''I' ' ' 


.:!ooo: vo o:o 6- ' 

..- ... . 

:• ox ■ '■X: 

.* - hll 

' 




' 


jfL . 

tv-ClMlBC •/ XV 0 Jjq$ 4 : Z 


, 


■ 0.6: ‘Xo no Xu: 51 ) 

+ . 


HO X J ...t : 

io Hr 

I 

* 

. 



6 

' 

X 60/ 


.) 


M 

' 

:d ■ 

■: ,01 J.O • ' 

o,‘ OCX 






0,0 



, ’ ' 


on.Cxo r 

■ 


• o' oJ:ov co i 




72 


Table 7 

The Effect of NalQ/ on Varying Concentrations of Formic Acid 

Varying amounts of 0*0046 N formic acid were added to 100 
ml* flasks and periodate oxidation was carried out in the 
usual manner at room temperature* The results are expressed 
as ml* 0*058 N HaOH required to titrate 10 ml* aliquots of 
the reaction mixture at the times indicated 


Laboratory temperature and 15 watt floure- 
scent lighting* Hours oxidation at 25-23°C. 
Ml* 0*0046 N ~ ~~ ~~ “ 


formic acid* 

iA 

18 

41 

68 

114 

166 

50 

0.42 

0*25 

0.13 

0.06 

0.03 

0.00 

35 

0*29 

0.18 

0.10 

0.05 

0.00 

0*00 

25 

0.21 

0.13 

0.04 

0*04 

0*00 

0.00 

15 

0*12 

0.06 

0.01 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

10 

0*08 

0*03 

0.01 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

Varying amounts of 0*0046 N formic acid were added to 

100 ml 


flasks and periodate oxidation was carried out in the usual 
manner at 0°G» for 114 hours after which time the flasks were 
placed under a 15 watt flourescent illuminator* at 25-28°C. 
The reactions marked (**) were contained in amber glass volu¬ 
metric flasks* 


Ml. 0.0046 N 
formic acid. 

Temp• 0°C * 

Hours oxidation 

Temp. 25-28 C. under 15 
watt light* Hr*, oxidation 
at the new temperature. 

1/4 

67 

114 

26 

50 

95 

215 

50*“* 

0.41 

0.41 

0*41 

0.42 

0.41 

0*42 

0,42 

50 

0*41 

0.41 

0.41 

0*22 

0*16 

0.02 

0.00 

25 

0.20 

0.20 

0*20 

0.08 

0.06 

0.00 

0,00 

15 

0.13 

0*12 

0.12 

0.04 

0.03 

0.01 

0.00 

10** 

0*08 

0*07 

0.07 

0.07 

0*07 

0.07 

0.07 


Supplied by Fisher Scientific Go* Ltd*, Montreal, Canada* 
** The amber glass flasks are supplied by Kimble Glass Co*, 
Toledo* Ohio*L 





























- 73 - 


At 0°C. little if any formic acid was destroyed, 
even after 100 hours* When the same flasks were removed 

O & 

from 0 C. to room temperature and placed under*15 watt 
Fisher Fluorescent Titration Illuminator, the formic acid 
contained in normal pyrex flasks was destroyed in about 
100 hours* Reaction mixtures contained in amber flasks were 
not changed, i*e*, no formic acid was destroyed* The de¬ 
struction of formic acid in the presence of NalO^ must 
therefore be due to photochemical means and not to oxida¬ 
tion by periodate* 

An experiment was then carried out in which 10 mg. 

of maltose hydrate was reacted with NalO^ in the normal 

o 

manner, except that the temperature was 13-15 C* and the 
flasks were placed one foot from a 40 watt bulb. Duplicate 
determinations yielded similar results* Nitrations of 10 
ml. aliquots were performed in the usual manner. The 
results are summarized in Table 8* 



































- 74 - 


Table 8 

Photochemical Effects During Oxidation or Maltose by Periodate 


Oxidation of maltose by periodate with results expressed as 
ml# of 0 o 011 N NaOH per 10 ml® aliquots* The reaction flasks 
were placed below a 40 watt light bulb* Temperature 12-14°C. 

A. 




Hours 

of oxidation at 12 

- 14°C. 


Mg. maltose 
hydrate 

18 

90 

262 

310 

480 

768 

20 

0*95 

1*28 

1*56 

1*60 

1*30 

0.53 

10 

0,47 

0,64 

0.64 

0*60 

0*33 

0.07 


The following reactions were carried out at 0 C. for 142 hours 
ang then placed under a light source at a temperature of 26 - 
28 G* Results expressed as ml* of 0*011 N NaOH per 10 ml* ali¬ 
quots* 

B* 



Hours 

of oxidation 
7 C * 

at 

Hours 

of oxidation at 
26 - 28°C. 

Mg. maltose 
hydrate 

41 

90 140 

22 

46 

118 

240 

340 

20 

1.22 

1*26 1.43 

1.64 

1*89 

2.25 

1*40 

0.58 

10 

0.60 

0.63 0.65 

0.75 

0*33 

0.65 

0.13 

0*07 
























75 


Prom the data of Tables8A and 8B, it may be ob¬ 
served that the titrations are higher than those from 
similar studies carried out earlier, but not ex-posed to 
light# Possibly secondary oxidation is accelerated by 
light# At between 250 and 300 hours the titrations, as 
shown in Table 8B, decreased, indicating considerable des¬ 
truction of the formic acid* Part B of Table 8 shows that 
although oxidation is apparently completed at 7 G* in about 
140 hours, nevertheless, it continues when the flasks are 
exposed to light at room temperature, and after about 125 
hours, destruction of the formic acid occurs* 

The periodate reaction should be carried out, if 

I 

at all possible, in very diffuse light or in complete dark¬ 
ness* Under these conditions reduction of titer due to 
photochemical degradation is minimized* 


Short Chain Oxidation by Periodate 

A short chain amylose sample was oxidized in the 
standard manner and titrations with 0.011 N NaOH were made* 
Duplicate determinations checked. The results are summarized 
in Table 9* 

The results of Table 9 indicate the possibility 
of studying amylose fractions of various chain lengths# 







. 











r ;'' 





* 

, 






















r r 

•• 


or r'”'' ‘ 













. '■ o" .1' • ' • 




* 


V 


















- 76 - 


Table 9 

Periodate Oxidation of a Sample of Short Chain Amylose 


The results are expressed as ml« 0.011 N NaOH required to ti¬ 
trate 10 ml. aliquots of the reaction mixture at the times 
indicated. 




Hours 

of oxidation at 

o 

o 

o 

• 

1 


Mg. of 

S . 0* A • 

4 

29 

46 

117 

143 

190 

10 

0*03 

0.07 

0.08 

0.10 

0.11 

0.12 

20 

0.06 

0.14 

0.16 

0.18 

0.20 

0.21 


Short chain amylose fractions, obtained by hydro¬ 
lysing amylose for 84 and 104 minutes, were oxidized with 
periodate and the formic acid liberated was titrated with 
0 o 011 N NaOH. In other studies with short chain amylose, 
we found, as with glucose and maltose, that the oxidation 
results were affected by exposure to light® The results 
of periodate oxidation of short chain amylose are tabulated 


be low o 



















1 


;rr 



* 





‘ 




o J: 





* 








' 


f IO 












- 77 - 


Table 10 

Periodate Oxidation of Hydrolysis Products or Amvlose 


The results are expressed as nil* 0*011 N NaOH required to ti¬ 
trate 10 ml* aliquots of the reaction mixture at the times in¬ 
dicated* 


30 mg* of each S.C.A* sample was used per 100 ml* of 
reaction solution. 

o' 

Hours of oxidation at 0 C* ___ 

Chain 


Sample 

24 

43 

67 

114 

140 

152 

186 

length 

84* 

0*06 

0*07 

0*07 

0.09 

0*11 

0.11 

(In. 

27 

104 9 

0*12 

0.15 

0.15 

0*19 

0*22 

0*21 

0*21 

14 


The mean chain length of the S*C*A* samples was 
calculated using the work with maltose as a basis* The cal¬ 
culations were based on the fact that from 10 mg* of maltose, 
5*00 ml* of 0*011 N NaOE was required to titrate the oxida¬ 
tion products* Other work is being continued with short 
chain amvlose preparations* 
















1 

I 








- 

. . 

* 

' 




78 « 


Periodate Studies on Amylose 

Once the conditions for oxidation of maltose were 
established, studies were continued with other sugars, then 
SoC*Ao, and finally amylose* 

The amylose was prepared fresh whenever it was to 
be used for experimental study. We realized at the outset 
of the work that it was difficult to prepare identical amy¬ 
lose samples. Variations in stirring, heating, centrifuging, 
precipitating, and recrystallizing during the preparation 
probably cause variations in the samples. Another problem 
that confronts workers using amylose is the fact that the 
amount of actual dry matter used in each e xperiment cannot 
be known for sure until the work is well on its way. 

Care must be taken during the preparation and handling of 
amylose because if the sample is redissolved more than once 
by heating, degradation may occur. Hence the necessity of 
freshly prepared amylose at the start of each study. 

Potter and Hassid (22), found, by their periodate 
oxidation procedure, (Pig. 7), that the mean chain lengths 
of various amylose preparations was from 500 to 1000 glucose 
units, or an average of 250 to 500naltose units. For the re¬ 
lease of an amount of formic acid equivalent to that obtained 
with maltose, we would then need 400 times 10 mg. per 100 
ml. or about 4$ amylose. As it was impossible to keep such 



! 

<. ■ ■ . ' ■ ' t • 

* ' , , . , 

'• / ■’ - .■■■.•' ■; ■ ■ • * 

* 


■ . 






•' ' ; 






- « ■ ' v ‘ 


$ 

* 

: *■ ■■ ■'■'- ' . . ■: - : ■. 

' rU> £ ;■‘kJ\o £o d'ru.j’oi-.cv. 

■ 

■ ‘ ■ - ' 

T fe 

* 

) 

A ' 

* 






- 79 - 





Fig* 7 

Periodate oxidation of amyiose as interpreted 
diagramatically by Potter and Hassid (22)* 



























-80 


a concentration of amylose in solution/ we had to use a 
concentration of 0,5 to 1 %, 

The amylose was prepared for reaction with perio¬ 
date as described earlier (p, 33)* Prior to the addition 
of the NalO^ the amylose solution was cooled to 30°C., the 

periodate was added, and the contents of the flask were then 

o 

cooled as quickly as possible to 0 C. 

Periodate studies with amylose were commenced by 
studying the effect of various amounts of periodate on a 
constant amount of amylose, (butanol - complex). Amylose (0.792 
gm* dry matter) was oxidized with 5, 10, 20, and 30 ml, of 0*30 
M NaI04 per 100 ml® of reaction solution at 0°C, The formic 
acid released was measured by titrating 10 ml, aliquots at 
various time intervale with 0,011 N NaOH, using methyl red 
as the indicator. Blanks were determined in the standard 
manner. The results are summarized in Table 11, 

These results of Table 11 indicate that with 
higher concentrations of periodate, titration values are 
higher. These results are similar to the findings with 
maltose. Duplicate determinations made on the same sample 
of amylose were similar. 






■ 

- ■ * ; - .« 



■ 

* 




- 

■ 

■ 

■ 

0 



' ; • 

■ :■ 

* * , 

* :■ ■ * r 

* . - v 

t 

* 

» ' ’ a ' 

. : ' ■ .. . - 1 - \: , 

' x ' ■ : ' " 

4 

*-• 







- 81 


Table 11 

The Effect of Varying the Concentration of Periodate on 
a Constant Amount of Amylase (0.791 gm,) 

Results expressed as ml, of 0,011 N NaOH required to titrate 
10 ml, aliquots of the reaction mixture. 


Ml* 0,30 M 
HaI0 4 


Hours of 

oxidation 

o 

at 0 C« 


16 

40 

64 

112 

160 

5 

0,00 

0,00 

0,00 

0.00 

0.00 

10 

0,03 

0.06 

0,06 

0.08 

0.07 

20 

0,28 

0,51 

0.57 

0.72 

0.76 

20 

— 

0,51 

0,56 

0.71 

0.76 

30 

0.46 

0,60 

0.62 

0.87 

0.88 


Another experiment was carried out in which the 
amount of periodate was kept constant but the amylose con¬ 
centration was varied. The oxidation was performed in the 
standard manner and titrations were expressed as ml, 0,011 
N NaOH per 10 ml, aliquots on samples removed at various 
time intervals. At least duplicate determinations were 


made. 












82 - 


Table 12 

Oxidation of Varying Concentrations of Amylose with 
Constant Periodate Concentration 


Results expressed as ml* 0*011 N NaOH required to titrate 10 
ml. aliquots of the reaction mixture at the times indicated. 


Ave. chain 
Q length 

Hours of oxidation at 0 C . in 


Gm. 

amylose 

Ml. 0.50 M 
NaI0 4 

19 

49 

66 

114 

138 

glucose 

units 

0.175 

20 

0.04 

0.06 

0.07 

0.09 

0.09 

200 

0.551 

20 

0.15 

0.19 

0.19 

0.26 

0.26 

140 

0.526 

20 

0.23 

0.54 

0.53 

0.41 

0.41 

130 

0.701 

20 

0.51 

0.45 

0.49 

0.58 

0.57 

120 


We used 20 ml. of periodate in preference to 10 ml. 
in the above experiment because from Table 11, it was noted 
that a higher titration value resulted and so titration 
errors would be less* The results presented in Table 12 
were in close agreement with similar concentration data 
in Table 11. The oxidation data in Table 12 indicate 
that oxidation was completed at just over 100 hours. 

When the results of Table 12 were plotted graphically 






















* 






z ■ 















extrapolation to zero time did not appear to represent the 
completion of the oxidation as the initial release of fo¬ 
rmic acid v;as not as great as was found with maltose and 
glucose« As it was difficult to know whether oxidation 
was completed after 25 or 48 hours we used the titration 
values that were constant after 100 to 150 hours. 

Although considerable experimentation has been 
carried out on the periodate oxidation of amylose, we have 
as yet been unable to reach a definite conclusion* With 
low concentrations of amylose (0*17 $), chain lengths of 
about 200 glucose units are found© At higher concentra¬ 
tions of amylose (0.50 $), and with the same periodate 
concentration, average chain lengths are considerably 
lower (130 - 140 glucose units)© 

We found no visible evidence of retrogradation 
in the amylose-periodate reaction flasks even at amylose 
concentrations of 0.70$. With this amount, retr©grada¬ 
tion might be expected, as it is known that amylose re¬ 
trogrades at the higher concentrations. Ho?;ever, in 
reaction flasks containing 0.70$ amylose, the titration 
values for a 10 ml. aliquot were proportionately higher 
than in flasks containing 0.175 $ amylose. Had retroga- 
dation occurred, the above findings should have been re¬ 


versed© 





\ 








■ 



O r --,v •*. 



































84 


The effect of butanol on the periodate oxidation 
of various carbohydrates was investigated*, No interference 
from the butanol was observed® 

The periodate oxidation method for amylose re¬ 
quires further study before it can be used as an aid 
in the study of the action of beta-amylase on amylose® 


Discussion on Periodate Oxidation 


At the outset of this project we endeavoured to 
standardize conditions of periodate oxidation of maltose 
to yield as little formic acid as possible. With Potter 
and Hassid®s method (22), three molecules of formic acid 
are formed; two from the reducing end and one from the 
other end of the carbohydrate molecule. If it is finally 
found that natural long chain amylose has no reducing 
group a great error is introduced in estimating the chain 
length of amylose. In this laboratory no evidence of a 
reducing group was found. Perhaps the reducing sugar 

methods used were not sensitive enough to detect them* 

' -\ 

Most workers with amylose make no mention of reducing 
groups, but Meyer has reported that they are present. (83). 


\ 




* 

* 

. 

' 










' \ •> 

' " ■ •. ■ ■ •; ■ 

* 

, ; , • ' ' 


" 

’ 

- 

■ 

* 

* 

. * • 






85 


Possibly the reducing group detected was due to some short 
chain amylose present or to the presence of reducing sugars 
released during the preparation of the amylose# 

If it was definitely known that amylose actually 
contained a reducing group, then by use of our standard 
periodate procedure developed for maltose, we could estimate 
the chain length of amylose with some accuracy# 

If it is supposed that the deducing* end of 
amylose produces no formic acid (i.e*, it is not reducing), 
Hassid®s method would give chain lengths of amylose three 
times the actual length# Meyer* s method would give twice 
the true chain length, as would our method# 

It would seem that the mildest conditions of 
reaction giving the least possible oxidation of the reduc¬ 
ing group of maltose are desirable# W e believe that the 
conditions we have described satisfy those requirements# 

The fact that we get only four molecules of formic acid 
per molecule of glucose, not five as reported by other 
workers (95), (90), would indicate that our conditions 
are quite mild# The fact that we get four molecules of 

formic acid and not five from the glucose supports the 
o 

choice of 0 Co 

Presumably it is the ireducing carbon* atom of 
glucose which is not yielding formic acid# Oxidation of 









■ . -'V . ■ '■ ;t r; ; - - r 












T 


! 






07 


* 











e 





?> * ■ 





7 


t 










- 36 - 


this carbon atom to formic acid would involve a different 
mechanism of oxidation from the others* This is assuming 
that glucose forms the open chain during periodate oxi¬ 
dation. 

Short chain amylose gives reasonably constant 
titrations of formic acid during periodate oxidation but 
we are not certain that the results calculated as chain 
lengths are accurate. The chain length calculations of 
short chain amylose would have to be verified by Somogyi 
and Blom reducing sugar determinations on the same samples# 
We have encountered difficulty in trying to estimate the 
chain length of the short chain fractions by the reducing 
sugar methods# Ho work on these short chain fractions has 
been reported in the literature to date and we have found 
it difficult to integrate the reducing sugar studies and 
periodate work® 

Studies with periodate and amylose require further 
investigation# Potter and Hassid ( 22 )., while studying 
amylose found it necessary to keep the reaction flasks 
in constant motion to prevent precipitation of the amylose® 
We had no difficulty in keeping our amylose in solution, 
once the periodate was added# There is a possibility 
that Potter and Hassid were working with retrograded 
amylose since their amylose chain lengths were very large# 







87 


In retrograded amylose if a number of amylose chains are 
held together along their long axes by hydrogen bonding 
or other means (i*e. retrogradation) then periodate could 
not attack amylose molecules held or enclosed inside the 
bundle* Oxidation to formic acid would then be low and 
the calculated chain lengths larger* 



- 38 - 


SUMMARY 


1* A method of preparing amylose has been described in 
which the pH of the starch pastewas controlled by 
the use of a buffer, 

2, A preparation of short chain amylose has been de¬ 
scribed from which short chain fractions of different 
mean lengths may be isolated. It involves the pre¬ 
cipitation of the long chains by cyclohexanol and 
removal of the very short chains by dialysis, 

5* The spectral absorption curves for the iodine com¬ 
plexes of amylose and short chain amylose have been 
used to determine the purity of these starch pro¬ 
ducts# 

4, Periodate oxidation methods have been studied in an 
effort to clarify much of the information presented 
in the literature# 

5, The concentrations of the oxidant and the reductant 
have been shown to affect the determination. The 
optimal concentrations of each was governed by the 
time of the reaction and effects from, over-oxidation. 


O ' - ’ ‘ ’ ' l 1 

.. •. " d■ • o ' ; : . *io a 

■ 

■ 

* 

. ■ ■ C 

■ ' . • . c a ' ■ • .0 ... : s.0 V eX* ‘ 

r . ■ ■ 


s . . • 

. . ■ ' . . 

* 


.. 

* 

■ 









39 - 


6* Temperature of the periodate reaction was shown 

to influence the results of the oxidation considerably* 
o 

We have found 0 C# to be satisfactory* 

7 o Using the method developed in this laboratory, two 
molecules of formic acid were found to be released 
from one molecule of maltose and four molecules of 
formic acid to be released from one molecule of glu¬ 
cose a 

8. Photochemical degradation of formic acid must be 
kept to a minimum* We have found that formic acid 
produced in our oxidation procedure may be completely 
destroyed in less than 100 hours if the reaction 
vessels are exposed to light* 

9. A method of periodate oxidation has been described 
which is believed to minimize errors inherent in 
other periodate methods* 


* 

t' . 4 , 

c . • r i :Tr.-.‘ . • • •• .1 " 

. 

■ ■ ^ ■' .:o\; .. , - . .... . ■ , r , 

* 

' 

. i ■ . 1 . - 

A 

' 

- 

* 













90 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


lo SWANSON, M. A, J. Biol, Chem. 172:805. 1948. 

2. _________ J• Biol. Chem. 172:825. 1948. 

3. CLEVELAND, F. C. and KERR, R. W. Cereal Chem. 

25:133. 1948. 

4. MEYER, K. H., Helv® Chim® Acta. 23:1467. 1940. 

5. HOPKINS, R. H., JELINEK, B., and HARRISON, L. E. 

Biochem. J. 43:32. 1948. 

6• • UnpubIIshed• 

7. CRIEGEE, R., KRAFT, L., and RANK, B. Arm. 507:159. 

1933. 

8. PRICE, C. C, and KROLL, H. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 60: 

2726. 1938. 


9. WATERS, W. A, Trans. Faraday Soc. 42:184® 1946. 


10. 

JACKSON, E. L. Organic Reactions. 2:341. 1944. 

11. 

OWEN, L. N., Ann. Repts. 

Soc. London). 

on Progesss Chem, (Chem. 
40:115, 1943. 

12. 

MALAPRADE, L, Bull. Soc. 

Chim. 43:683. 1928. 

13® 

FLEURY, P. and LANGE, J. 
1932. 

Compt. rend. 195:1395. 

14. 

JACKSON, E. L. and HUDSON, 
58:378. 1936. 

C. S. J. Amer. Chem. Soc, 

15. 


J. Amer. Chem. Soc, 


59:994. 1937. 


16, 


J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 


59:2049. 1937. 











I 


91 


17. CALDWELL, C. G. and HIXQN, R. J. J. Biol. Chem. 

123:595. 1938. 

18. JACKSON, E. Lo and HUDSON, C. S* J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

60:989. 1938. 

19. NEUBERGER, A. J. Chem. Soc. 1941:50. 

20. BROWN, F., DUNSTAN, S., HALSALL, T. G., HIRST, E. L., 

and JONES, J. K. N. Nature. 156:785. 

1945. 

21. HAWORTH, W. H. J. Chem. Soc. 107:8. 1915. 

22. POTTER, A.L. and HASSID, W. Z* J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

70:3488. 1948. 

23. HALSALL, T. G., HIRST, E. L. and JONES, J. K. N. J. 

Chem. Soc. 1947:1427. 

24. BELL, D. J., PALMER, Anne, and JONES, A. T. J. Chem. 

Soc. 1949:1536. 

25. BARRY, V. C. Nature. 152:538. 1943. 

26. and DILLON. T. Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. 

{!) 49:177. 1943. 

27. HASSID, W. Z., JOSLYN, M.A. and McCREABY, R. M. J. 

Am. Chem. Soc. 63:295. 1941. 

28. HALSALL, T. G., HIRST, E. L. and JOIIES, J. K. N. J. 

Chem. Soc. 1947:1399. 

29. BROW, F., HALSALL, T. G., HIRST, E. L., and JONES, J. 

K. N. J. Chem. Soc. 1948:27. 

30. HILL, A. E. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 50:2678. 1928. 

31. JACKSON, E. L. and HUDSON, C. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

61:1530. 1939. 

32. GOTTLIEB, D., CALDWELL, C. G., and HIXON, R. M. J. 

Am. Chem.. Soc. 62:3342. 1940. 









1 


92 


33* 

BELL, D. 

Jo, 

Ann. Rev. Biochem® 

18:87. 1949. 

34. 

GORTNER, 

R. A. 

and GORTNER, W. A. 

Outline of Bio- 


chemistry* John Wiley and Sons, Inc., N. 
Y., 1949* p. 636o 3 rd Edition* 


35* SCHOGH, T* J* Advances in Carbohydrate Chemistry. 
1:247. 1945* 

36* MAQUEhNE, L* Compt. rend. 137:88, 797* 1903* 

37* TANRET, C. Compt* rend. 158:1353* 1914* 

38* PAOSU, E* J* Am. Chem* Soc. 63:1168. 1941* 

39. LING-, A. R. and NANJI, D. R* J* Chem. Soc* 123: 

2666. 1923* 

40. BALDWIN, M. E. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 52:2907* 1930. 

41. SAMEC, M. and HAERDTL, H. Kolloidchem. Beihefte* 

12:281. 1920. Cited: Chem. Abstracts, 

14:2728. 1920. 

42* TAYLOR, T. C. and IDDLES, H. A* Ind. Eng. Chem* 
18:713. 1926. 

43. SCHOCH, T. J* J. Am. Chem. Soc* 64:2957. 1942* 

44. KERR, R® W. and SEVERSON, C. M. J* Am. Chem. Soc. 

65:193. 1943* 

45. BEAR, R. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc* 64:1388* 1942. 

46. BATES, F. L., FRENCH, D. and RUNDLE, R* E. J. Am. 

Chem* Soc. 65:142* 1943* 

47. WILSON, E. J., SCHOCH, T, J., and HUDSON, C. S. Jo 

Am. Chem. Soc* 65:1380. 1943. 

48. WHISTLER, R. L. and HILBERT, G. E. J. Am. Chem. 

Soc. 67:1161. 1945. 

49* BOURNE, E. J., DONNISON, 0. H., PEAT, S., and WHELAN, 
W. J. J. Chem. Soc* 1949:1® 















93 


50* 

HAWORTH, 

W. N., PEAT, S., and SAGRQTT, P. E. Nature. 

157:19. 1946. 

51o 

MYRBACK, 

W* Advances in Carbohydrate Chemistry. 

3:251. 1945* 

52o 

HIRST, E 

• L» and YOUNG-, G* T* J. Chem® Soc* 1939: 

951, 1471. 

53, 

BAWN, C* 

E. H., HIRST, E. L. and YOUNG, G. T. Trans. 

Faraday Soc. 36:880. 1940. 

54* 

LAMPITT, 

L. H., FULLER, C. H. F., G-OLDENBERG-, N., and 
UINE, M* J. Sci* Food Agric* 1950:371* 

55* 

PIRT, S. 

J. and WHELAN, W. J* J. Sci. Food Agric* 

2:224* 1951* 

56* 

Me C READY, 

, R. M* and HASSID, W. Z. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

65:1154. 1943* 

57. 

HARES, G 

. So New Phytologist* 36:101, 189. 1937. 

58, 

FREUDENBERG-, K*, SCHAAF, E., DUMPERT, G., and PLOETZ, T. 
Naturwissenschaften, 27:850. 1939* Cited: 

Chem® Abstracts. 34:2632. 1940. 

59. 

MEYER, K 

• H«, and BERNFELD, P. Helv. Chim. Acta* 

24:389. 1941* 

60* 

RUNDLE, R. E. and BALDWIN, R. R. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

65:554. 1943. 

61. 


and FRENCH, D. 



J. Am. Chem* Soc* 65:558* 1943* 

62® 

LAMPITT, 

L. H., FULLER, C® H. F. and GOLDENBERG, N* 

J. Soc. Chem. Ind* 67:97. 1948. 


63* SCHLAMOWITZ, M# 


J. Biol* Chem* 190:519* 1951* 






















94 


64• MEYER, K. H. Advances in Colloid Science, ed* Kraemer, 
Interscience Publishers, N• Y. 1942* pp. 
387-417. 

65* ________ Natural and Synthetic High Polymers, 

Interscience Publishers, N. Y* 1942. pp. 
387-417. 

66. KERR, R* W. Chemistry and Industry of Starch, 

Academic Press, N. Y. 1944* pp c 113-176. 

67. RICHARDSON, W. A*, HIGOINBOTHAM, R* S., and FARROW, 

F. D* J. Textile I n st. 27:131. 1936. 

68. BECKMAN, C. 0. and LANDIS, Q, J. Am* Che*. Soc. 

61:1495. 1939. 

69. HIGGINBOTHAM, R. S. and RICHARDSON, W. A. J. Soc. 

Chem. Ind. 57:234. 1938. 

70. MEYER, K. H., WERTHEIM, M., and BERNFELD, P« Helv. 

Chim. Acta. 23:865* 1940* 


71. LEVINE, M., FOSTER, J. F., and HIXON, R* M. J* Am. 

Chem. Soc. 64:2331. 1942. 

72. AHLBORG, K., and MYRBACK, I. K. Biochem, Z. 297: 

172. 1938. 

73. ORTENBLAB, B, and MYRBACK, I. ,K. Biochem. Z. 303: 

335. 1940. 

74. NHRBvlCK, I. K., ORTENBLAD, B., and AHLBORG, K. 

Biochem. Z. 307:49. 1940. 

75. MYRBACK, I. K*, ORTENBLAD, B., and AHLBORG, K. 

Biochem. Z. 315:240. 1943. 


76. HEINZE, P. H. and MURNEEK, A. E. Missouri Agr. Expt. 

Sta», Research Bull., 314:23 pp. 1940. 
Cited: Chem* Abstracts. 34:5377. 1940. 


77 


S0M0GYI, M 


J. Biol. Chem. 117:771. 1937 

























95 


78* 

79. 

80* 


81. 
82 o 

83. 


84. 


SHAFFER, P. A. and S0M0GYI, M. J. Biol. Chem. 
100:695. 1933. 

BERTRAND, G., Bull. Soc. Chim. 35:1285. 1906. 

PIG-MAN, W. W. and GOEPP, R. M# Chemistry of Carbo¬ 
hydrates. Academic Press Inc., N. Y. 


1948. pp. 139-148. 

STARK, I. E. J. Biol. Chem. 142:569. 1942. 

SOMOGYT, M. J. Biol. Chem. 160:61. 1945. 

MEYER, K. H. BERNFELB, P., BOISSONNAS, R. A., 

GURTLER, P., and MQELTINS, G. J. Phys. 
and Colloid Chem. 53:319. 1949. 

LAMPITT, L. H., FULLER, C. E. F., BOLDENBERG, N., and 
GREEN, G. H. J. Soc. Chem. Ind. 66: 

68. 1947. 


85. 



J. 


Soc. Chem. Ind. 

60:1. 1944. 


. 

to 

CO 

BLOM, J. and ROSTED, C. 0. 

1:32. 1947. 

Acta® Chem. Scand. 


87. 

HOPKINS, R. H. and JELINEK, 
28. 1948. 

Bo Biochern. J. 43: 


CD 

CO 

SCHOCE, T. J. Cereal £hera 

. 18:121. 1941. 


89. 

PEAT, S., BOURNE, E® J. and 
159:810. 1947. 

THROWER, R. D. Nature* 

90. 

MEYER, K. H. and RATHGEB, P 
1540. 1948. 

* Helv. Chim. Acta. 

31 

91. 

JELINEK, B. Personal communication. 


92. 

GRANGAARD, D. H., GLADDING, 
Paper Trade J. 

E. K., and PURVES, C. 
115:41, 1942. 

B. 















96 


93. SARKAR, P. B. Nature* 168:122. 1951. 

94. HOPKINS, R* H. Personal communicaticn. 

95. HIRST, E* L. and JONES, J. K. N. J. Chera. Soc* 

1949:1659. 

96. ALLMAND, J. A. and REEVE, L« J. Chem. Soc. 

129:2852. 1926. 






s 




♦' t 

* 


V 


r 


t 














0 





















