STRATIGRAPHY 

OF THE AREA INCLUDING 

MAJEAU LAKE No.l WELL 
EDMONTON AREA 

1949 


J.M.ANDRICHUK 




















Cbc OBBIli 

auBmiiBsis 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/stratigraphyofarOOandr 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


School of Graduate Studies 


The undersigned hereby certify that thej^ have 
read^ and recoMnend to the Committee on Graduate Studies 
for acceptance a dissertation on ^Stratigraphy of the Area 
including Majeau Lake No, 1 We 11^ Edmonton Area'% subniitted 
hj John Iviichael Andrichuk^ B,Sc._j in partial fulfilment of 
the requirements for the degree of Iikister of Science in 
Geology, 


April 1949. 














STRATIGRAPHY 


Of the Area Including 
MAJEAU LAKE NO. 1 WELL 
EDMONTON AREA 


by 


Jolin Mchael Andrichuk^ B.Sc.^ 
Department of Geology^ 
IJniversitTr of Alberta, 


A Thesis 

Submitted to the University of Alberta 
in partial fulfiLment of the 
requirements :^or the degree 
of 

MASTER of SCIENCE 


Edmonton^ Alberta 


Aprils 1949. 












Table of contents 


CHAPTER I - II^TRQDUCTIQN 

General Statement. 

Scope of Thesis . 

AcImo¥\rledgenients... 

Location of Wells . . . 

Physiographical Features ........ 

Glacial Deposits . .... 

Topographical Features . 

Summary and Conclusions . 

CHAPTER II - PaUSOZQIC STRATIGRAPHY 

Table of Palaeozoic Formations ..... 

Description of Formations. 

Pre-Devonian . 

Devonian .... , . . 

General Statement ........ 

Upper Devonian . 

General Statem.ent. 

Vfeterv/ays Formation. 

General Statement . 

Lithology. 

Formational Boundaries . . . 

Thickness.^ . . . 

Palaeontology and Correlation 

Jefferson Dolomite . 

Ge ne r al St at erne nt. 

, Lithology. 

Formational Boundaries . . . 

Thickness . 

Correlation . 

Exshaw Formation ....... 

General Statement . 

Lithology and Distribution . 

Thickness .... . 

Formational Boundaries . . . 
Age and Correlation .... 

Mississippian . 

General Statement ....... 

Banff Formation . 

General Statement ...... 

Lithology . 

Formational Boundaries . . . 

Thickness.. . 

Palaeontology and Correlation 


Page 

1 

2 

2 

3 

k 

k 

7 

s 


14 

15 
15 
17 
17 
19 
19 
22 
22 

23 

24 

24 

25 
27 

27 

28 

29 

30 

30 

AO 

31 
31 

31 

32 

33 
33 
36 
36 

36 

37 

38 
38 























































































”Runcile” Formation .. 40 

General Statement ........ . 40 

Lithology .. 40 

Forimational Boundaries. 41 

Thickness. 42 

Palaeontology and Correlation , .. 42 

CHAPTER III - IUSQZQIC STRATIGRAPHY 

Table of Mesozoic B’orniations .. 45 

Description of Formations. 40 

Cretaceous .......... . 40 

General Statement.. . 40 

Mannville Formation . 4S 

General Statement . 40 

Lithology ................. 50 

Formational Zones and Boundaries . 52 

Thickness ..... . ...... 53 

Palaeontolog 3 ^ and Correlation. 53 

Colorado Formation 57 

General Statement. 57 

Lithology ,. 53 

Formational Zones and Boundaries.'59 

Thickness. OO 

Age and Correlation. 61 

Lea Park Formation .. 03 

Belly River-Edmonton Group. 65 


chapter ip - THE MESOZOIC-PALAEOZOIC UNCONFORMITY 

General Statement.. 07 

Age and Stratigraphic Relationship of Unconformity . . O 7 
Character of Unconformity . . 68 


APPENDIX 

Detailed Core Log of Majeau Lake No. 1 well. 73 

Log of Lower Cretaceous Samples - Majeau Lake No. 1 well 94 
Log of Drilled Intervals - Majeau Lake No. 1 vrell ... 97 


Detailed Core Log of Lisburn No. 1 well.101 

BIBLIOGRAPHY ...... . 123 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

Location Map ............. . Figure 1 


Columnar section of Majeau Lake No, 1 well ... in pocket. 
Slectrolog pa^ttern of Majeau Lake No. 1 nell. , , in pocket. 






























































- 1 - 


CHAPTER I 

introduction 

GENERAL STATEMENT 

Very little has been published on the stratigraphy under 
the Plains in the Edmonton area of central Alberta. Oil dis¬ 
coveries of the last tx^ro j’^ears have added immensely to the 
knowledge of stratigraphy of the area^ but un.fortunately diffusion 
of this information has lagged as a result of the secrecj^ imposed 
by private oil development concerns. 

In October, 194S, Dr. J. A. Allan, University of Alberta, 
through arrangements with Dr. H. H. Beach and Mr, G, Killick 
of the Texaco Exploration Company, made it possible for the 
vj-riter to have access to the cores and sam<.ples of Texaco-McColl 
Majeau Lake No, 1 well, the latter located about 42 males north¬ 
west of Edmonton. Later, in February, 1949> the xYriter was also 
permitted to examine the core of the Texaco-McColl Lisburn xvell, 
about 20 miles farther to the west. Both these wells were coror- 
pleted and abandoned less than one year ago. 

The vjriter made use of all existing information on the 
stratigraphy of the adjacent areas of central Alberta as could 
conveniently be obtained, mainly from published literature. 











L 



i 








- 2 - 


SCOPE OF THESIS 

The purpose of this study I'las ;td attempt to arrive at 
a reasonable understanding of the stratigraphical succession of 
Palaeozoic and Ivoesozoic rocks in the district including Majeau 
Lake No. 1 well. The interpretation of the stratigraphy is a 
result of a lithological and palaeontological study of cores 
and samples from tv^o wells. The writer concentrated mainly on 
the cores from Majeau Lake No. 1 well. To study rock types, both 
the binocular and petrographic microscopes v/ere employed. For 
purposes of correlation and exact age determination of the 
Cretaceous strata, the writer resorted, in part, to a study of 
micro-fauna, Devonian, tiississippian and Cretaceous mega-faunas 
were also studied from both wells. 

Since only a lioiited section of the drilled intervals 
had been examined, well-record logs were supplemented in order 
to obtain a more complete succession. No attempt was made to 
study samples above the Viking zone. 


ACKNOV>/LEDGEM\iTS 

The material for this thesis v\ras made possible through 
the kind permission of Dr. H, H. Beach and Mr. G, Killick of the 
Texaco Exploration Company, Calgary and Edm.onton. The I'/riter 
appreciates greatly the help offered by the organization in 









- 3 - 


providing much pertinent information and laboratorv facilities. 

The scientific part of the study vvas done under the 
immediate direction of Charles R. Stelck, Universit^r of Alberta. 

The writer is deeply indebted to the latter for his continued 
interest and time given freely in palaeontological determinations 
and techniques. The study of the Cretaceous micro-fauna, in 
particular, would not have been possible without his supervision. 
The 'writer appreciates the guidance and constructive 
criticisms offered by Dr. J. A. Allan, Dr. P. S. Warren and Dr, 

R. L, Rutherford, all of the Department of Geology, University 
of Alberta, 

Thanks are also due to the staff of the Geology Division, 
Research Council of Alberta, for the use of their facilities and 
for other assistance. 


LOCATION OF AELLS 

ilajeau Lake No, 1 ¥/ell is located about 42 miles 
northwest of Edmonton, in l.s.d. 12 of sec. 1, tp. 57^ rge. 3^ 

W. 5th mer. The Lisburn well is present about 20 miles farther 
to the west, in l.s.d. 1 of sec, 22, tp. 56, VL 5th mer. (see 
Figure l), 

The Majeau Lake-Lisburn district is served by a branch 
line of the Canadian National Railways, passing through the 








■ L 


} 




■u 





t 






r 

I 

i 



LOCATION MAP 



^Abandoned well 
© Producing well 


FIGURE I 


SCALE I INCH TO 12 MILES 





























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































- 4 - 


hanilets of Gunn, Glenevis, Cherhill, Lisburn and Sangudo. A 
secondary gravelled highway (No. k3), along with the ”feeder” 
dirt roads, connects the district with the Sdnionton-Jasper 
highway (No. l6), • ■ 

PHYSIOGRAPHICAL FEATURES 

Glacial Deposits 

A prominent fea^ture of the area is the ”Larly” Wisconsin 
end moraine as mapped by Bretz (l) and ¥/hich Warren termed the 
”Duffield moraine”, finds it distinctly younger than the 

Iowan-Illinoian drift of Montana, According to his map, the 
eastern boundarj^ extends in a southeasterly direction from the 
environs of Majeau Lake to a point almost touching longitude 
114 degrees, due east of the town of Duffield; then it curves 
to the southvfest and crosses the North Saskatchewan Paver just 
to the east of a sharp bend in tp. 51^ rge. 2, Y/. 3rd, The western 
boundary is more indefinte, but probably roughly parallels 
longitude 115, Rutherford (2) also maps this moraine as ”bouJ.der 
clays lying on bed-rock or Saskatchewan gravels”, but he does 
not bring the eastern boundary as far east in the vicinity of 
Duffield, He puts the western boundary of the Keev/atin drift 
in Central Alberta at 50 to 75 miles to the vrest. Warren (3) 
recognizes two distinct moraine3,¥vest of the Viking moraine. 

























• • ■{' 



-o : 





■)-' ' 0 :\ 



( 

! 






mm J 

formed by ice advances from two different directions. The *'Duf~ 
field riioraines'% presumably the older_, was produced by ice that 
advanced from the north or slightly east of norths while the 
otherthe Buffalo Lake m-oraine^ parallel to the Viking moraine, 
shows an advance of ice from the east or slightly north of east. 
Warren considers the evidence insufficient to date these two 
v-restern moraines outside of the fact that they are probably oMer 
than the Viking moraine v^hich may be of Illinoian age. Antevs (4) 
correlates the glacial deposits in the large triangular area 
extending from Northern Montana to far north of Edmonton, and 
from the Rocky Mountains to the Altamont moraine, which runs in 
a southeast-northvvest direction through the southwest corner of 
North Dakota and through IVo Hills, Alberta, with the lov^ran 
drift of early Wisconsin age. 

Parts of this Duffield moraine are compounded by 
irregular piling, the most pronounced of these apparently being 
"kame piles" with associated ice-block depressions. Bretz (l) 
studied this moraine in its eastern part where it was crossed 
by the Jasper Highway and it showed several distinct features. 

For a width of eight miles this moraine seemed to be com.posed 
almost wholly of silt, a considerable part of which was stratified. 
The bedding is lensy and irregular, and localljr good, cross¬ 
bedding is present in which the foreset dip is to the v\rest. 







- 6 - 


Some parts were sandj^ and a few lenses of pebbles were present^ 
but boulders were very rare. There V\ras no deformation by ice 
thrust and the hollows and small depressions seemed to be molds 
of ice blocks. This all stands as an accumulation of thousands 
of variously shaped and sized hills^ rising nearly 100 feet above 
a ground moraine plain to the east_, and some large lake- and 
swamp-filled lowlands to the west. The Keewatin ice sheet doubt¬ 
less lay immediately to the east when this moraine was deposited 
but the cause of its western front is obscure. It is imown that 
Keev>ratin moraine extends 20 miles farther west and Kse¥\ratin 
drift materials are kno¥m for 50 miles still farther. 

West of this silt moraine along the Jasper Highway^ 
the “Duffield moraine” is less marked topographically, but it 
has very marked ice-thrust structures, with masses of incorporated 
shale and Saskatchewan gravel, and with the parent underl 3 ’'ing 
formations also deformed. (5). Bretz noted in road cuts, 
’’anticlinal overturnings of quartzite gravel in the basal till 
in which the pebbles were fractured”. Rutherford (6) noted 
similar fracturing in Saskatchewan gravels farther east a few 
miles. Both agree that the crushing may have been caused by 
glacial load or movement, Bretz (l) concludes that the 
”Duffield moraine”, as mapped, is compounded of tv/o moraines, 
the silt moraine recording a retreat of the ice edge, and a 











\ 


i 

? 


i. 





- 7 - 


readvance under sufficiently different conditions to produce 
the different composition^ structure and topography. 

It is interesting to note that Rutherford (7) reports 
a glacial bituminous sand boulder present in the drift at 
Nakamun Lake a.bout 10 miles northwest of Edmonton (l.s.d. Ik, 

Sec, 31^ Tp. 56 ^ Rge, 2, Vi/, 5) and presumably derived from the 
McMurray district. This would indicate that the general direction 
of movement of glacial material in this area viras probably about 
S,20.Wo to SolO.V^. 

Topographical Features 

The North Saskatchev^ran River and the Pembina River 
lie respectively to the south and north of this area. The 
former flows approximately east in this vicinity, but changes its 
course to the northeast towards Edmonton, The latter follows an 
approximate northeasterly course and eventuall 3 ^ joins the 
Athabaska River to the north. Warren (S) considers the North 
Saskatchewan River valley largely pre-glacial in the vicinity 
of Edmonton, but farther to the west the river assumes a definite 
northwestern trend in its course between Rocky Mountain House 
and the 33rd. latitude. He explains that the latter course 
indicates a post-glacial channel paralleling the western limit 
of the Keewatin glaciation produced by the escape of the melt 











- 8 - 


water in front of the Keev/atin ice sheet. On re-establishment of 
the drainage as the Keewatin ice retreated^ the North Sa skate he Y^ran 
River made use of this pre-existing channel in establishing its 
course. 

Several post-glacial lakes^ four mi.les or less in length, 
provide temporary drainage basins for small creeks originating 
in a mildly high area to the south, and, in turn, drain to the 
north into the Pembina River. Majeau Lake, Lac la Nonne, 

Nakamun Lake and 01±man Lake belong to this group. A larger 
lake. Lac Ste. Anne, is present to the south of the area but it 
drains into, and provides the reservoir for, the Sturgeon River 
Y^rhich drains to the east into the North Saskatchewan River. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

The area including Majeau Lake No. 1 Yvell, about 4^ 
miles northwest of Edmonton, is veneered by a mantle of glacial 
morainal material which forms part of the Keevratin ”Duffield'’ 
terminal moraine. These unconsolidated deposits lie directly 
on beds of the Ed.monton formation, except where there may be local 
lenses of ''SaskatcheY\ran gravels". 

Upper and Lower Cretaceous, Mississippian and Upper 
Devonian strata were penetrated by drilling in Majeau Lake No. 1 
and Lisburn Y/ells. 












I- 



i 



I 





- 9 - 


Tv/o distinct Upper Devonian facies were recognized 
below the Exshav^ shale in Majeau Lake No. 1 well. The lovrer facies^ 
termed the Watenmys formation^ consists of 12S2 feet (base not 
reached) of calcareous shales and limestones. This section, 
however, is in the main stratigraphically higher than that found 
in the type area near Watervj-a 3 rs, Alberta, and includes certain 
equivalents of the Hair River shale of the Great Slave Lake area. 

The upper facies, termed the Jefferson dolomite, consists of 722 
feet of brownish-grey dolomite, V\rith some limestone in the upper 
part. 

The brachiopods, Theodossia hungerfordi and Atr^^pa sp., 
collected from the upper part of the Waterwa^rs shaly beds makes 
possible a correlation with the lower part of the Cprtospirifer 
whitneyi zone of the Upper Minnewanka, Palliser and Boule 
formations in the Rocky ^fountains. The Cyrtospirifer zone extends 
up into the overlying Jefferson dolomite. 

The D-3 biohermal reef is absent, being represented 
by a brovm-black shale facies in the Waterwa^^s formation. The 
quartz siltstone, or Darling silt, and the underlying dolomitic 
D-2 zone are present in the lower part of the Jefferson formation. 

A brecciated liimestone containing fragments of chert and 
green claystone makes up the upper 25 feet of the Jefferson 
showing a disconformable relationship with the overl^ring Sxshaw 















^ . i 


m 








- 10 - 


shale, 

The Exshaw shale is a dark grey, non-calcareous shale 
which is 10 feet and 30 feet thick in Majeau Lake No. 1 and Lis¬ 
burn wellsrespectively. The greater thickness in the Lisburn 
vrell is due to the intercalation of a calcareous shale within 
the non-calcareous shale, 

Mississippian beds are 250 feet and 504 ( and possibly 
up to 556 ) feet thick in Majeau Lake No. 1 and Lisburn wells^ 
respectively. In the Lisburn well^ these beds are split up into 
two formations on electrolog pattern^ the Banff and “Bundle”. 

They consist of grey to bro?mish, usually fossiliferous, limestones 
and dolomites. The “Rujidle” is overlain by 52 feet of brownish^ 
granular dolomite^ with a zone of whitish-grey chert at the top; 
on lithologic evidence this section is considered to represent 
mainly the residual^ or upper^ zone of the “Bundle”, In Majeau 
Lake No, 1 vjell^ the strata consist of grey lim.estone, shaly* at 
the bottom and containing a 25 foot residual zone in the upper 
part. The latter consists of a brecciated mass of limestone^ 
green claystone and some chert. 

The whole suite of fossils collected from, both the 
Banff and “Bundle'' formations showed a lower Mississippian 
Kinderhook aspect. Therefore^ the “Bundle” formation in the area 
represents a lower, stratigraphic horizon tha.n that found in the 
mountains and probably should be correlated v^ith the upper part 












- 11 - 


of the Banff formation of the type section. 

The Mannville, ColoradoLea Park^ Belly River and 
Edmonton formations comprise the Cretaceous rocks in the two 
wells. 

The Mannville formation consists of 665 feet and 534 
feet of alternating sandstones and shales in kajeau Lake No. 1 
and Lisburn wells, respectively. A definite m.arine member is 
present in the lower part. Ostracodes and Forarninifera are present 
in the upper part of this member. Haplophragmoides gigas var. 
minor . liilianrnina sproulei and We rneuilina" cuirirnlngensis from 
Majeau Lake No. 1 'well correlate this marine member directly 
with the Cummings member of the Mannville formation at Vermilion, 
Alberta. The mega-fauna, including Sphaerium cf, onestae , 

Corbula palliseri , Unio cf. Lacombi , Melania cf. multorbis . 

Melampus athabaskensis and Murrain cf. naiadiformis correlates 
the lower part of the Mannville with the basal Blairmore in the 
southern Plains and Foothills area of Alberta, and with the 
McMurray form-ation of northern Alberta. 

The Colorado formation in Majeau Lake No. 1 well 
consists of 1295 feet of de.rk grey, marine shale which contains 
a 145-foot Viking sandstone member, 30 feet above the base; a 
lower, white, calcareous, "speckled” zone, with the top 675 feet 
above the base; and, an upper "speckled” zone, at the top of the 





























- 12 - 


formation. The formation thickens to 1390 feet in the Lisburn 
wellj 20 miles to the west. 

Foraminifera collected 10 to 20 feet above the Viking 
member were similar to those found in the Lov\rer Cretaceous 
Shaftesbury formation in the northern Foothills area of Alberta. 
Fish scales resembling Holcoleois sp. found in the Neogastroplites 
zone in the Fort St. John shale^ were also present. The top of 
the Lower Cretaceous is present somewhere betvfeen the Viking 
member and the lower "speckled" zone in the Colorado shale. 

The Lea Park formation consists of dark grey^ marine 
shale, A90 feet and 470 feet thick in Majeau Lake No. 1 and 
Lisburn wells, respectively. 

The Belly River - Edmonton group (undifferentiated) 
consists of alternating sandstones and shales, with some coal. 

It is 1500 feet and 2150 feet thick at the tvvo wells, respectively. 
The Afesozoic - Palaeozoic unconformity in the area is 
the result mainly of non-deposition and erosion during 
Pennsylvanian, Permian, Triassic and part or all of Jurassic times. 
The unconformity truncates Mississippian strata in the area. 
Progressively older Mississippian and Upper Devonian beds are 
truncated from west to east across the Plains area of central 


Alberta., 








;} 


> ' 







% 




7 


I 




i 

i 


, 11 




- 13 - 


In Majeau Lake No. 1 well^ the unconiorinable surface o 
the IvUssissippian is characterized hj a residual zone consisting 
of a brecciated mass of limestone^ green claystone and chert 
fragments. This is commonl^^ referred to as the '’chert detrital" 
zone in the Plajjas area. 















chapter 11 


palaeozoic stratigraphy 























TABLE OF PALAEOZOIC FORMATIONS 


- 14 - 


MX 

cd 

CO 

CO 


s, 

a 

- ! 




C^- 

nO 

o 

(Oi 


-4- 


1 

•a 

rH 

0 

!>s -P 
Q) -H 

x ^ 

W O 
I H 
M O 
cn Xj 

"I 

M ‘ 
Q) 

!>, a 
0 o 
X -p 


o 


o 





UA 


CO 


o- 


c- 

OA 






-P 







o 

P 







92 







0 p! 
0 o 

o 


o 


02 

02 

cd P 

UA 


M 


02 

to 

13 0 

02 





02 

___ 





1—1 





p 







p 






0 

P 

• •\ 




1 

P 

X 

0 Ph 



0 

P 

o 

0 

-P O 



p! 

Cti 

0 

•p 

•P -P 



o 

o 

p 

PI 

P 

!>s 


0 

1—i 

cd 


O -11 

0 

• ^ 


o3 

O M 

M P 

P 

CD 

• «N 

o 

(-1 

cd 

O 

bOH 

0 

1 

ctf 


0 

! 

rj ■ 

P 

p 

O 

c! 

P 

-P 

Id 

o 

o 


q 

o 

0 

0 

-p 

p 

• r\ 

•r“l 

0 -p 

•P 

0 

to 


0) -P 

p 0 

P 

0 

1—1 

o3 

'QO 0 

0 

p 0 

£E! 

0 

cd 

1—i 

p 

O -p 

0 

O P 

•H 

p 


cd 

P 

0 o 

t—1 

tiiQ 

1 0 

o 

-P M 

bO 

p -p 

0 



P 



p 0 

tA) !—1 


0 

0 

cp 0 

rP 

O 0 

0 ct5 

P 

P 

-p 

M El 

P 

M g 
p -P 

in X 

cd 

O 


P o 

ro 

cP w 

n 

Q) 

•P 

cq 0 

Q 

O H 





P 0 


0 





O -P 


i>^ 





0 -p 


P 





P g 



M 




0 o 


P 



To 


MM 
M O 


0 

-lO 

03 


kj 


0 Xj 


P 

, pq 


P-3 


’X) 



a 







cd 







•H 







Cl 







Ph 







•P 




P 



0 




P 



0 




•P 



•H 




P P 



0 




92 P 



0 

•H 




P, > 






Ph 0 







P) Q 



P 







o3 














.o, 







Q.i 







'H 




p 



0 




p 



0 




•p 



•H 




p 



0 




o 



0 




> 



XJ 

Ph 




0 

Q 




^re-Upper Devonian 
























r . . '.r: 

r '. ■ , ::v:; 

' - . 


■•■I 


r. 
















- l - 


DES C RI PTION OF FORMATI OyrS 

PRE - DEVONIAN 

In the two v/ells examined by. the writer in the area^ 
namely, Majeau La.ke No, 1 v/ell and the Lisburn well, the oldest 
beds drilled were found to be of Upper Devonian aye,. However, 
any dissert«=tion on the stratigraohv of an area w’ould h.^rddv be 
complete without Bome discuspion on the oossi'-'le, if not ob¬ 
servable, formations oresent, remarks must of necessity be 

of a_ general, or rather, sueci.ilstl^-e nz-ture. 

In Unoer Cambrian time, the sea flooded over from the 
Cordilleran trough on to the eastern foreland, especially in 
the areas of southern Albert^^, Montana and adioinine states on 
the east. This event w^as recorded by the deoosition of Deadw'ood 
formation in the sout^,8nd maroon and green shales to the north. 
The areal extent of t^e I'^tter s1t=»1ss under tA''e Plains is con¬ 
siderable; however, deeo-w^ell data are too erratic to delimit 
them. The Petroleum and Natural Cas ConservSvtion Bo^rd reports 
Ca^mbrian strata consisting of glauconitic sandstone and mp'roon 
and vreen shales in the Lloydminster-Wainwric’ht area in Vermilion 
Consolidated Oils No. 1^, l.s.d. sec. 12, to. 49, rge, 6, 

W. 4th. mer. The top is taken at the contact of a dolomite 
series and an underlying glauconitic sandstone at 4l40 feet. 

It is seen, therefore, that Cambrian strata could presumably/ 















7 - 





1 


I 



■ 

f 






- l6 - 


extend into the area under discussion. 

IJp'oer Ordovician rcchs of Richmond age outcrop on the 
west side of Lake Winjiioes- in Msnitoba (9). Tney consist of 
670 feet of limestone and dolomite, with a b'^-sal sands+one. 

On the north arm of Great Sl?ve La^:e is found about 55 feet of 
red arenaceous limestone and shale v/ith g^rosum of Richmond s^e (lO). 
MacDonald (IL^ presents some evidence of Upper Ordovician beds in 
the McMurray area, on Athabaska river. It is likely that there 
was a connection or seav/ay between the Manitoba and Crreat Sla.ve 
Lake areas passing through Alberta and Saskatchewan in Ordovician 
time. Therefore, Ordovician strata ra^.j be found in certain 
areas vmere they v/ere deposited, orovidinv subseouent erosion 
did not remove these beds. 

In Silurian time, the Northern sea came dovm over the 
Shield and beyond Manitoba in the south and laid down deposits 
of v/hich only the 250-foot Stonev/all formf=tion in Manitoba 
and the thin Fitzgerald dolomite (Middle Silurian) at Oreat 
Slave Lake remain. Hum.e (12) reoorts that no strata of Sili’ri-^n 
age have been identified from wells in southern A.lberta and 
beli'^ves that none are ore sent. Most information on Siluria.n 
beds under the Pla.ins has proven to be rather unreliable. It 
is like]::y that some beds of this age were deco sited in the 
Plains area, but their oresence under the Plains area would 











( 


• ; 


T 





V ' 



't 







- 17 - 


der)erd on ^/be factors of original areal extent and pre-Mddle and 
■ore-Unoer Devonian erosion. 


DDVONIAII 


-STISHAL STi^ TSIlElTT 

No Lower Devonian rocks have been recognized in the 
Great Plains area and^ furtherr-iore, there is no evidence of 
their nresence in the foothills or mountains (ip)* 

Middle Devonian rocks are as yet not knovm to outc roo 
in Alberta. How^ever, they do outcroD in Manitoba (l4), at 
Great Slave Lake (15) and in the Lov/er Mackenzie '/alley (l6^. 

In each of these areas the Middle Devonian strata are divided 
into three formations on the bases of fauna and litholozy. 

They are all intercorrel^table (I7) follows: 


MAFIT'^OBA 


GREAT SLAVE LAKE 


Manitoba limestone 


Slave Point limestone 


Winnipegosan dolomite Presau’ile dolomite 


Elm Point limestone 


Pine Point limestone 


LOWER MACKENZIE VALLEY 


Beavertail limestone 


Ramnarts limestone 


Hare Indian River shale 


















r 


^ . 


L 




% • r 






- 18 - 


The peawe.y oo'^^nection throup-h these areas during 
Middle Devonian +irne wa.s 'orobably suite na.rrow and is yet to 
be delimited in the Plains region. At Verbata ITo, 2 well, 

Unity, Saskatchevra.n, l.s.d. 7 j sec. 24, tp. 4l, rve. 24, W. 
mer,, about 915 feet of Middle Devonian limestones, dolomites 
and eva-oorites have been correlated with the Ramparts on faunal 
evidence (l7a), Kidd (18) assigns a tentative Middle Devonian 
age to 505 feet of beds including salt (':ase not reached) at 
Beaverhills No. 2 well, l.s.d. 11, sec, 11, tp. 80, rge, 17, 

■V. 4th. mer. He takes the top arbitrarily at red and green 
shale beds and reports the presence of Martinia su bli n eata Meek, 
Ch aronhvta oop-onea. and Ostracodes belov/ the salt series. The 
writer has no knowledge of yields th."t have penetrated through 
the UpDer Devonian in the Ma-iean Lake area. 

In Upper Devonian time the Cordilleran trough was 
filled by a sea which also flooded over on to the east foreland. 
This wide seav/ay extended from, the present day Selkirks on the 
west to the eastern Great Plains region. About ^000 feet of 
predominantl-^r limy denosits were lai-^ dovm in the trough area (ij)* 
Definite Upper Devonian beds have been revealed in all deen wells 


in the Plains rep-ion of Alberta and Saskatchewan, 
















1 




- 19 - 


UPPER DEVONIAN 

During Upper Devonian time there vras simultaneous 
deposition of sediments in the trough and depressed area to the 
east vfhich hes left a record in the mountains, foothills and 
Great Pla.ins area. In the mountains, the Minnewanka formation 
consisting of limestones and dolomites extends from Southern 
Alberta north to Jasper; at the latter place it ma.y subdivided 
into three formations on the basis of an intermediate shale, as 
follows; 

Eoule formation 

Perdrix shale (former’’y Blackface Mountain shale) 

Flume formation 

In the southern Plains of Al'-erta, the Upoer Devonian section is 

very similar to that in Monta.na and, as a. result, formational 

nam.es have been introduced from Montana, as follows; 

Exshaw shale (included in Three Forks formation in 
Montana). 

Three Forks formation 

Green Shale member 
Potlatch anhydrite member 
Jefferson formation 

In Central Alberta, the Jefferson form.ation eouivalent may be 

split up into tv7o formations, namely; 

Jefferson dolomite - 
Waterv/ays formation 

In the Leduc oil fielil, three porous horizons are 














i 

! 




1 ■ 


i 

I 

I 




- 20 - 


recoq-nized in the UpDer Devonian, namely, the D-1, D-2, and D-^ 
zones* 

The uppermost D-l zone is up to 400 feet thick, ex¬ 
tending down from the uoper unconformable surface of the Upper 
Devonian limestone. The porosity in this zone has been induced 
by ancient weathering and erosion. This zone has not given any 
significant oil flow. 

The D-2 zone, about IpO feet thick, is locally a 
biohermal or biostromal reef and generally underlies red and 
green shales, anhydrite and a silt zone. Strictly, the D-2 
zone includes the lower pairt of, and underlies, the silt zone. 

It is an important producing horizon in the Leduc area. 

The silt zone generally consists of a reddish or 
greenish quartz siltstone which has been named the "Darling 
silt" after Dor don Darlin/^. It has a wide distribution and is 
a useful marker in drilling. 

"^he D-5 zone, ranging from zero to ^60 feet in thickness, 
is a biohermal reef, characteristically irregu^lar both in 
lateral and vertical extent. It also consists of dense thoufrh 
vuggy dolomite with abundant corals, bryozoans and other fossils, 
Ihe D-5 zone is the most important producing horizon in the 
p ro du cing are a s ne ar E dmonton. 


















- 21 


The D-fi zone rests uoon'a thin shale, which overlies 
1100 feet of limestone; the letter rests upon dark.grey shales. 

Link (59) postulates the develooment of the D-3 and 
D-2 zones, respectively, during the transgression and subseauent 
regression of the sea in Upper Devonian time. He states that by 
continued submergence, caused by a transgressive sea, the D—5 
bioherm eventually becamie covered ''-'y shale and/or limestone, 
and thus became sealed, so that any accumulation of oil, gas and 
water v/ould be in an isolated reservoir. Further, he cites the 
D-2 zone as a regressive type of reef on the basis of its 
association with brecci-'ted materi.al, anhvdri-^e, red shale and 
other material closel^r related to the "back-reef” or shorevmrd 
facies. 

To the north at Great Sl^ve Lake there is present 
the following Upper Devonian section (lU'^-* 

Hav Ri'.-er limestone (pOO') 

Hay River sh''-le (400 ') 

Simpson shale (2^0’) 

As the Hay River shale and Simpson shale are found in separate 
areas, their exact rel--tionships are unknovm, but t-ey may 
possibly be synchronous (17)« The Hay River shale becomes suite 
limy on Athabaska river to the sou'*'.h v/ith the upner part 
developing into a heavy limestone and the lower p'^rt remaining 
a calcareous shale; here it is called the V/aterv/ays formstion ( 19 )* 













t 

I 


:> . M 

■■ V/J 

■ ■' M 

■ "'h 



'I 













- 22 


The v.'riter vvill use the neines Water ways formation and 
Jef ferson d olo mite in this thesis, which v;ill conform v;ith the 
nomenclature most used by oil company geologists. 

Water v/ ays formetion 

Gene r al Statement 

Warren (I 9 ) named the Waterv;ays formation for strata 
exoosed on the Clearv/s.ter river east of 'Waterv/ays. He assigned 
an Upper Devonian Portage a.ge to it on the basis of fossils 
collected by J, A. Allan and K. A. Cl^rk. The formation here 
consists predominantly of massive, buff-colored, fine-grained to 
dense limestone v;hich is commonly argillaceous, Beds of grey- 
vreen, calcareous shale are also present. From the log of the 
Industrial Minerals No, 1 salt well (20), the thickness h^'s been 
determined ouitb accura^telv at hO’y feet wi+h the upper boundary 
being an erosion surface. The McMurray sandstone of Lower 
Cretaceous' age rests unconf o rmab ly on the eroded surface oi’ the 
V/axterways formation in this district, 

Warren correlates thase beds v/i+h the Devonian beds at 
Peace ^oi.nt and the Simpson shale on the cY.e'^'T'j.e riven to the 
north '^IQ) and with. Pi-rt of the Jeffersen formation of Montana, 
and v/ith be'^s both above and belo’-: the Blc'ckface Mountain" shale 
in the mountains to the sout^-'VJest (21). 






















- .55 - 


It should be emphasized th8.t in the type section at 
Watervvays, Alberta, the upper surface of the Wptervrayr formation 
is an erosional unconformit'r ari therefore onlj^ the lov:er pe-rt 
of this shale and limestone facies is present. To the south and 
north of this type area, this upper portion of the V/aterways is 
present,and the sections are more complete, includi^'^p- beds of 
a much higher stratigraphic position. The V/atervrays beds th-'^t 
were drilled in Majeau La^.’ie :'''o. 1 well are in the main strati- 
^graphically higher than those in t^^e t'^’-pe section. The Waterv/a.ys 
facies as used bm the writer includes certain of the YlS-Y River 
shale enuh^ad.ents of the Great Slave Lake area. 

Li tholo^^f 

In Maieau Ipke Fo, 1 v;ell the Waterwavp formation 
equivalent.consists mainly of dark greenish-grey, calcareous 
shale with interbeds of brownish, finely crystalli^'^ to dense 
limestone and some dark gr.ey s'’^'''ly fossiliferous limestone at 
the top. Within this formation is present the ecui-^alent of the 
well~knov7n D-^ zone v;hich in this vrell consists of a brovjn-bl^ck 
sh^le and whose top according to an electrolog pick is ate 5925 
feet. Th,is shale is a.nother facies of the biohermal reef zone 
found in the Leduc producin'^ area to the southeast. As the D-5 
zone in the IcSitter area was formed near an old shoreline or at 














- 24 - 


the margin of a basin v/here v^aters were shallow enough and 
therefore amenable to the growth of reefs, the brown-bleck shale 
facies was orobably an off-shore deco sit that formed from the 
deoosition and consolidation of lim 3 ^ muds. 

Formntional Boundar i_e_^ 

The writer h'^s talcen the top of the Waterways formrtio 
at the first appearance of a, dark crev sha.ly and fossilif erous' 
limestone at ^022. feet in Ks-jeau Lake No. 1 v/ell. This is a 
marked lithologic contrast to the overlying monotonous brov/nish- 
-grecr dolomite. The base of the formation vras nrobabl^^ not 
reeched at this well in which drilling ceased at 6^04 feet. The 
vniter did not examine any sarnnles belov: 6052 feet. 


Th ickne ss 

The Waterv/a 3 /s formation comprises the interval 5^22 
to 6504 feet v.hich gives it a thickness of 1282 feet with the 
base probably not reached. 

Xidd ( 18 ) assigns a thickness of 10^6 feet (IOO 9 
feet according to insoluble residues nick) to the Vva.terv/ays at 
Seaverhills No. 2 v/ell to the southeast. Willson (?2) gives 
a thickness of approximately 1000 feet at V. C. 0. No. IT well 
in the Lloydminster area and mentions that it becomes thinner 




















- 25 - 


and prhydritic to the south of thrt area. Farther to the south 
in the Princess district the Waterwaj^-s facies thins do’.n to about 
600 feet, 

Pa lae ontol opo;- and Correlatio n 

Corals, Brachiopods and some Ostracodes were collected 

and identified in the top ^0 feet of this section (i.e,, 5^*22 

to 5*^72 feet) in the calcareous shales and shaly limestones. 

5022 ’ - 50 , 52 ' « Cladooora sp. 

Pisnhyl?Lum (S ynaotoohyHum ) stramineum 

Bil’’ings 

Atryoa sp. 

5057 * - 5^‘^7' " Syrin.^opora sp. 

Cladopor a: so. 

Coral fragments 

5052 ’ - 5068 ’ - Theodossis hungerfordi H all (especially 
at '5065 to 5067 'feet) 

‘‘Dip loony Hu m sp, ” or 
” C?)^athophyllum caesoitosum ’^ G'o 1 dfues 
(cf, Disoh^rllum goldfussi) 

5068 ’ - 5072 ’ - Cladop ora sp. 

A t ry pa so. 

Paracycles so. 

Qstracod's (undetermined) 

Fote: Coring ceased at 5^72 feet in this part of section. The 

fossiliferous zone probably extended lower down, as 
indicated in drilling samples. 

In general, the v/hole suite of corals collected have a 
Devonian aspect. Some of the forms are rather lonv-ranging, a^s 



















ij ' 



! 



i-.-' ■ 


• ■ 





\ 












- 26 - 

for exaTnole, Cyathoohy 1 lum cae spito sum^ Pi sphyllum (Synaot-ophyllum ) 
stratri neum and its ally, Disphyllum simcoense , have a wide range 
in Forth America; they are both found in the Corniferous limestone 
of Ontario (type enea) and are well represented by specimens from 
the MacKenzie River region (25). 

The most important form found is the s pi r if erid 
Theodossia 

bra chip p o o., A Tiunge r f o r d i, present in the interval 5065 to 5^67 
feet. This form from Majeau Lake Ko. 1 well was found to have 
close affinities with Spirifer hunyerfordi ver s iformis (Form ”B") 
and Spirifer platysomus luxus ”A'’ in the evolutionary chain of 
Spirifer as worked out by C. L. Fenton (24). The latter forms 
are present in Zonules 1^ to 25 and Zonules I 6 to 20, respectively, 
of the lovver port of the Cyrtospirifer Zone in the Oerro Gordo 
member of the Kackberry formation in Floyd and Cerro Gordo 
counties of Iowa. Th.e Hackberry forms/oion correl^-tes with the 
Upper Devonian Fort Creek shale in the MacKenzie Valiev (2f''. 

The Cyrtospirifer zone is represented in part by the Upper part 
of the Minnewanka formation (2.6), upper part of the Palliser 
form'-'tion (27) and the Boule formation (23) in the mountains. 

The presence of The odoss ia in the top of the Fatervra'i^s formation 
in Majeau Lake Ko. 1 well corroborates V/arren's correl'-tion of 
the Vfaterways formation w'ith beds abo-^e and below the Blackface 

















I 










- -27 - 


Mountain sh-^le of the eastern Rang'es of the Pocky Mountains (21). 
Very likel 3 r, some of the louer part of the W 8 terv 7 a.ys section 
probably correlates with beds below the Bleckface Mountain shale. 

Atrypa (species unidentifiable) is present along v;ith 
the other brachiopods at this Cyrtosnirifer horizon. In the 
mountains, Atrypa disaaoears in the Minnewanka or Eoule formations 
at the horizon that the Cyrtospirifer whitneyi becomes abundant. 

As mentioned above, this horizon ha^ a fauna similar to that of 
the lower Cyrtospirifer zone and therefore would probabl’^'- repre¬ 
sent a transition zone in which the.Atrypa are dying out and the 
Cyrtospirifers begin to come in strongly. Consecuentl^A, the 
Cyrtospirifer zone probably extends stratigraphically into the 
overlying Jefferson dolomite in which no specimens vrere found, 

A poorly preserved Hypothyridina v/as found in the 
interval 5995 "to 6 OO 5 feet and probably indicates the close 
proximi-^y of the base of the Upper Deyonian. 

Tentaculites has been noted in limestone in the drilled 
interval 6280 to 6504 •'^eet, but the writer did not examine the 
drilling samples himself. 


Oeneral Statement 


Jefferson Dolomite 


A. C. Peale ( 29 ) gave the name "Jefferson formation" to 



















- 28 - 


64o feet of missive bl'^ck limestone v/ith bands of 1‘^minated 
mognesium limestone lying belov/ the Three Forks shale at Three 
Forks, Montana. Moore (^O) describes the formation as con¬ 
sisting of smolcy or chocolate-brown, granul^n dolomite having a 
Deculi-^r brecciated apoearance, with thin beds of lighter colored, 
denser limestone or shaly limestone. 

In Southern Alberta, the Jefferson dolomite includes 
the strata lying above the Waterv/ays formation and belov/ the 
Potlatch anhydrite member of the Three Forks formation. It 
includes beds ecuivalent to only the uo'aer oart of the Jefferson 
formation of Montana. 

Litholo nf 

The Jefferson dolomi-^'e at Majeau Lake No. 1 well consists 
predominantly of buff to grey to v/hitish-gre’^ dolomite, locally 
limestone with streaks of green shale. The uoper 60 feet is 
made* up of limestone, with fragments of pea-green shale and some 
oebbles and fragments of chert. This upoer part which is discon- 
formable v.-ith the Exshaw shale above probably represents an old 
leached surface showing weathering in the time in'^'erval before 
its subsequent burial by the Exshaw shale. Immediately belov,' 
this zone is present some brecciated dolomi'^e v/hich may have 
formed by the collaose of the rock after solution of some solid, 




, ’'ly. 







- 29 - 


crystalline salt, such as anhydrite (Potlatch ?) wiiich ms.y h-^ve 
been present in pockets or lenses in this pr>rt of the section. 
There seems to be no present evidence of anhydrite st this 
horizon, and no lithological evi'^ence for the presence of either 
one of the members of the Three Forks formation as are present 
in the south, that is. Potlatch. anhydri'f'e or the typical Green 
Shale (29, 50 , 51 , 52 ). 

The top of the Quartz siltstone is nresent at 48^5 fee 
(electroloo' ■oiok), cut this interval was drilled and the writer 
did not examine any samoles. 

t The D-2 zone, immediately belovj the *’sil+", is 12p 

feet thick end is -oresen"'* in the interop] to 4990 feet 

(electrolog picks';. 

In the I'isburn. well, 20 miles to the west, t>e 
dolomite in the D-2 zone vjss snhydritic, containing strin^-ers 
end inclusions of v/hite anhydrite. 

Fo rr na t i o n s 1 Bound a r i e s 

Tlie lov’er boundary of the Jefferson dolomite is 
transitional from the dark grev calcareous sriele and shaly 
limestone to the grey to brovjn dolomite shove. The upaer 
boundary is a.brunt at the ,disconformitv of the un'oer limestone 
beds with the overlying non-calcareous Fxshav/ sliple. 






( 


. 












t 


:v 






~ 50 - 


Thick ness 

The thickness of t'-^e Jefferson dolomite eouivalent in 
Ms-ies.u Lake Fo, 1 well is 722 feet (interval 4500 - 5022 feet') 
with the w.DDer surface 8. disconforrnity. To the south in the 
Princess ares it is about TOO feet thick. 

Correl at ion 

The Jefferson dolorai+e in Manepu Lake No. 1 well 
correlates with the UDoer nart of the'Hay Ri-'^er formation to the 
north a.nd v/ith n^rt of the Upner Minnewanka formation in the 
mountains, fossil ° ware collected fro’"'^. any sections of core 

in this interval end, as a result, the bases of correlation are 
lithology and stratirra'obic posi+ion, inference, the low’-er 

part 8-t least, and nrobabl’/’ the upper, may well correlf^te v/ith 
the upper OvrtosDirifer zone of the Upner Minnev/anka and 
Pal User formations. 


Exshew Shale 

General Statement 

■Warren ( 55 ) named this form'''tion in 1957 for a p^-foot 
section of black, fissile shale exposed near Exshaw and on the 
basis of the ammonite, '■'o rnoc eras cf. unianpulnre (as identified 

The 


by A. K, Millar' assigned to it an Upper Devonian age 












I 


i 

3 





i 

t 








51 - 

associated fossils also h^d a definite Devonif^n aspect. 

This sh-‘^le is remarkably ubicuitous and uniform in 
character and^ as a result, has proved to be a very useful 
horizon marker in drilling. 

Litholoay and Di stribut ion 

The Exshaw shale is uniformly a bl-^ck, fissile, non- 
calcareous, lean bituminous shale which is invari^^bly present 
under the Plains area of southern and cen’^r®! M.berta. v/here 
aost-Mississi’ODian erosion has not removed it, 

Thickne ss 

Under the Plains area the thickness of this shale is 
a;o'':'roximately 10 feet and rarely exceeds 20 feet. At Maieau 
Lake , 1 vrell the electroloe "pick" .pl-^ces it in the inten/al 
4290 to 4500 feet, gi^'in.p- a thickness of 10 feet. To the west at 
Lisburn No. 1 well, the electrolog picks are PlOO to ^ 1^0 feet, 
giving a thickness of possibly 50 feet. The greater thickness 
in the latter is due to the intercalation of an intermediate 
calcareous shale ‘’member” in the Exshev.r, 

Fo rmational Bounda ries 

At Maieau Lake No, 1 well, the Exshav; sh-’le rests on 


a disconformable surface of limestone included in the Jefferson 











t 

I'.; 

r’ 





i. ■' ; ' ) 




-* 52 - 

dolomite. As the Exshaw shsle Vv'as not cored in this well^ or 
in Lisburn well, the writer cernnot make any definite statement 
on the character of the uooer boundary. However, the upper 
surface is generally found to be less abrupt a.s the non-cal- 
ca.reous bl"’ck shale passes into the overlying argillaceous 
limestone of the Banff form'^tion of Kinderhook age. 

Age and Correl- ti on 

In A*.lberta, the Exshav^ shale under the Plains has been 
venerably correlated with the Exshaw form’^tion as found near 
Exshaw, Alberta, where it contains a Devonian fs.una (55)* 

B'owever, a recent stud^/" of Cono d o nts found in the 
shale in southern Alberta and Monta.na by Coocer and Sloss (5*^) 
shows these to be of Mississipoian Kinderhook age. This suo-gests 
a correlation vdth the basa.l Lodgepole shale of Montagna rather 
than with the Exshaw of the Rocky Mountains. It is ouite possible, 
however, that more than one black shale zone may occur in this 

region (55). 

In addition, Hage (^6^' finds evidence of an ’’uncon¬ 
formity” at the bass of the Exshaw shale in the D'/'son Creek area 
w^est of hurner "hlley, Alberta, He notes the presence of a 
coarse-grained sandstone bed, 1 to 2 inches thick, which reoresents 
the base of the formation, when observed. He also finds that the 



















- 55 - 


form'^tion consists of two members of black, fissile, non-cal- 
ca.reous sh^le, eacb about 20 feet thick end secerated by a dark 
g-rey, brovm weathered, argillaceous limestone. This inter¬ 
calation in the upoer beds is indicati-’.^e of little or no break 
in its ucper part. 

At Majeau Lake To, 1 v/ell, although the Sxshaw shale 
itself v/as not cored, the writer finds tliet tlie immediately 
underlying limestones shov/ evidence of a lithological discon- 
formity, 

M ISSISSIP P IAN 

GEITERAL STATEMETT 

Our best knowledge of Mississippian stratigranhy in 
the Plains area comes from Montana and Southern Alberta, In 
these areas, nississippian rocks have ^^ielded substantial amounts 
of oil and have been studied quite thoroughly. The Mississipcian 
strata in Montana have been divided into two grou'os, separated 
by an unconformity, as; 

Big Snovy group (^ 7 , 5^) 

Madison groun (59, 29) 

The Madison group includes beds of Kinderhook to Osage age,* the 
Big Snov.y takes in the remaining Middle to Upoer Mississicpian 
beds. The Madison grouc has been subdivided into two formations. 










i 



f 




- 5^ - 


as: 

Mission Canyon forni'^tion (400 to JOO feet) ; uniformly 

bedded, massi-e, liffht colored 
to brown limestone, locally 
cherty. 

Lodgepole formation (^00 to 600 feet): dark colored, 

dense, fine-grained limestone, 
interbedded calcareous shale 
and argillaceous lim.estone. 

The correlation of thes beds vjith those in the Caanadian Rockies 
is as follows; 

Big Snow;/ group - Upoer Bundle form^-tion 
Mission Canyon formation - Lo’/’er Bundle formation 
Lodgepole formation - Banff formation 
^nether the Big Snowy group continues on into Southern Aloerta 
and -Ss.skatchewan is a matter for conjecture (40), 

The Mission Canyon formc/tion thins from south to north 
and west to east due to pre-Mesozoic erosion. Furnival (4-0) 
believes that the Lodgepole is comparatively uniform in thickness 
across Southern Alberta and Montana, and undoubtedly underlies 
the Cypress Lake area, Saskstchev/an, with slight change in thick¬ 
ness and litloloey. He estimahes the vhole Madison equivalent to 
be ^00 to 1100 feet thick in the latter area. It should be noted 
that there is a porous sandy zone up to 80 feet thick at the 
base of the Mississio'oian in southern Alberta and in soij.th 
central Alberta (4l). 











i ' ^ 

f ■ ) 





!’ 





- 55 - 


In Albert,?, the eastern limit of Mississipoian strata 
is ma.rked by the ’’Madison escarpment” whose oosition has been 
determined by pre-hesozoic erosion. The aporoximate edge of 
this buried ’’escarpment” traced from south to north is as follows 
from two. 52 j rae. 4 it trends northv^esterly through Castor 
(twp. 57 , rge. 15 )? '^uffalo Lake, crosses the Horth Saskatchewan 
River at aparoximately ll4 degrees longitude, continues to the 
west of the "Edmonton hic'-'h”, \I.e., area of structurally^ higher 
Palaeozoic strata) east of Lac Ste. Anne; the trend now changes 
to a little east of north, passing roughly;^ through the area west 
of Barrhead. 

Mississippia.n beds comprise a good extent of the 
strata in the mountains to the west and southv/est. They consist 
of the Banff shale (a.rgillaceous limestone) and the • overlying 
Rundle formation, both of which thin to the east. The former 
is Xinderhook to Burlington in age; the letter, Keolmk to the 
base of Chester (55)* Monta-na, Idaho and ’/Wyoming, an uncon¬ 
formity v/as found above the hea-vy basal beds of the Rundle 
formation. As a result, the name "Madison" was used to include 
the Banff shale and the basal Rundle beds up to the unconformity 
(Xinderhook, Osage and e.pproximate Middle Mersmec age) (55) • 

Hie overlying beds were named the "Brazer” formation. 














- 56 - 

^-ummarily, the Me.dison formetion includes the Banff 
formation and the lower part of the overlying Rundle formation. 
The writer will use the terminology as employed in the mountains, 
namely, the Banff end Rundle form^itions. 

Banff forme_tion 

General Statement 

Shimer (4?.) introduced the term "Banff formation" to 
include about 1200 feet of calcareous shnles and argillaceous 
limeston.ea contn^nl.n'^ 

ih'newan^^a section. 'Ahrren (26) m^de a later detail'^d study of 
this formation at Banff, Alberta, and solit it up into three 
lithologic members, ''e noted two fossiliferous zones, the lower 
one in the middle member and the uoper in the upoermost beds of 
the form^-tion. This formation can be followed northv/ards to t'-^e 
Entrance foothills area east of Jasoer wrnre Lang reports 

660 feet of thin-bedded limestone, calcareous sh^le and 
arrnllaceous limestone constituting th.-' Banff forraation. 

Lithology 

In Majeau Lake No. 1 w^ell the Banff formation consist'^ 
mainly o'P grey to greenish-grey, dense limestone v/ith interbeds 
of grey to greenish-grey shale in the basal ■oart. The upper 25 
feet (4059 to 4084 feet) is a definite residual zone. ^his zone 








s 








* ' j ^ ' ‘ ^ 


ik 


r 


5 


~ 57 - 


is generp.lly a breccirted yreen cl^’^^stone with fracTnerts of chert 
and limestone. Only the upper 44 feet of the Banff was cored in 
the Lisburn v;ell, 20 railes to the v;est; the lithology consisted 
of a brovmish-grey, microcrj/'stalline, fossiliferous limestone^ 
locally partlj^ crinoidal, v/ith paper-thin argillaceous breaks 
and nodules of whitish-gre 3 /' to bluish-grey chert. 

The ariff formation is domina.ntl^^ a limestone facies 
(cf. Rundle formation) in the thesis area and definitelji^ 
represents a change in facies from the Foothills and Mountains 
a.rea vjhere it has a shal^/'aspect. 

Formational Boundaries 

In Majeau Lake Ho, 1 v/ell the lower boundar^r of the 

'• .3 ■ . 

Ba.nff formation v/as taken at the contact of the sIipI^;- limestone 
and calcareous shsle \rith the underlj^-ing dark grey non-calcareous 
Exshaw shale. The lower of the Banff v/as not cored at t>e 

Lisburn well but the greater thickness of the Exsh.aw sh'-'le here 
probably imnlies s.n intercalation of a calcareous bed v/ithin the 
Exsh^^w which would make the boundary transitional. 

The top of the Banff beds in Majeau La’-’-.e Ho. 1 well is 
a major erosional unconformi-^y lyinp: immediately below^ Low-er 
Cretaceous brownish-grey sandstones and siltstones which are 
oebbly (chert and ousrtz') at the verv base. 


In the Lisburn vjell 











- - 


20 miles to the west, the Banff beds are co''''^orrnably overlain by 
the ''Bundle" beds of similar litholor^/'. The electroloy "■nick" 
places the too of the Banff at the aoDsarance of v/hitish-gre^^ to 
bluish-grey chert nodules. 

Thickne s s 

The Banff form^’tion is 2^0 feet thick (electrolocr 
"pick", 4o40 to 4290 feet) in Maieau Lake No, 1 well, with the 
top an erosional unconformity. In the Lisburn v'ell, 20 miles to 
the west, it is ^^0 feet thick (electrolog "pick": 47^0 to ^100 
feet) v/ith both bounda.ries ao'oarently conformable. 

Pala eontolog'/ and. Correiation 

Brachiopoda, Bryozoa and Echinodermata v/ere the main 
Phyla represented in the fossil collection from the Banff 
formation in the two v/ells. The follov;ing genera and soecies 
v;ere identified : 

Maiea.u Lake No. 1 Well 

4l06 - 4ll6 feet - F ene str ellina sp. 

Lingula so. 

4ll6 - 4121 feet - L ingu la cf. soatulata ^'anuxem 
Ac tinooterir so. ? 












f ■ 


'1 


i 






^9 - 


Lisb urn ’^'-o « 1 well 

hlhd - ■475s feet - Spirifer cer.tronatus Winchell 

Spirifer cf. striatiformis Meek 
C arnar o toe chi^ cf. m e talli ca Wbi'^.e 
C a me r o t Q. e ch ia sp, 

Fenestrellina sp. 

Rod-like bryozoe 
Grinoid stems 

4756 - ^7^8 feet - S pirifer rundlensi s Warren 

Spirifer cf. cascadensis Warren 
of, liurchisonia 

4768 - 4778 feet - Sp irifer cf. str iatiformis Meek 
Spirifer cf.■ cas cadensis Wsrren 
Crinoids 

4788 - 4794 feet - Spirifer cf. cascadensis V/'^rren 

The Lisburn well fanna shows a definite Einderhook 
aspect. Spirifer centrona tus, Spirifer striatiformis , 

Spirifer cascadensis and Camarot oech ia metallica have been 
found by Warren (26) in the middle member of the Panff formation 
at Banff; the first two have also been found in the uppermost 
beds of the Bar^f. All these forms, except Spirifer c ascadensis , 
have been described from the Einderhook of the Mississippi valle-^.'-, 
from the Madison limestone of Wyoming and similar horizons in 
^'^evada end Colorado, S pirifer c ascadensi s, however, has been 
described by Warren (26) from the mi'^dle member of the Banff 
shale on the north end of Rundle mountain. Spirifer centronatus 


has also been found in the Banff forma.tion in the L.oose Mountain 














































- 40 - 


area, Mir.newanl'ia area and Jas'oer area. (27). 

" Run d 1 e '' formation 

General Stgtement 

Kindle (44) proDosed the name ”Rundle limestone” for 
strata in the Bov; River sections previously called the ’’Upaer 
Banff limestone” by McConnell (4^). Kindle considered the entire 
formation to be Pennsylvanian in age, but subseouent detailed 
palaeontological v/ork by Shimer (42) in 1920, Warren (26) in 192? 
and Beach (27) in 19^2 indicated that the lover part is Miss- 
issippian and that the upper part may be Pennsylvanian. Warren 
(26) made a detailed s+xidy of the Bundle formation at Bariff vdnere 
it consists of over 2,400 feet of massive, grey limestone with 
a considerable development of chert nodules in some beds. This 
formation continues to t'^^e north, and east of Jasner, Lang (4^) (I 
reports 75^ to 9^0 feet of massive, fairly thick-bedded, grey to 
buff, locally porous, limestone and dolomite with a little shale, 
anhvdrite and irregular chert fra.gments (esnedaily in upner 
part). 

Litholofor 

The ”Rundle” formation is present in the Lishurn well 
where it may be split into two lithological units: 














- 4i - 


dolomi'^e meni''''er 

Lower limestone member 

The lower limestone member consists 'generally of buff-grey to 
brownish-greyj dense, stylolitic limestone, usuallv fossil- 
iferous and locally crinoidal, with thin greenish-grey shsle 
breaks (especially near the top). The upper dolomite member is 
a grey to buff-grey to brownish-grey, finelj?- crystalline dolomite, 
vugpy and oil sta.ined in the uoper pert and calcareous at the 
base where it grades transitionally into the underlying limestone 
member. Some chert was ore sent in the formation. 

Format iona l Boundaries 

The writer has talcen the boundaries as indicated bv 
the electrolog oattern. The lov/er boundary comes at a defini-^e 
zone of chert nodules at' the transition from the underlving 
brownish-grey, microcrvstalline, cherty Banff limestone into 
a lighter colored, buff-grey, dense, stylolitic limestone. The 
uncer boundary may come at the transition from a grey to buff- 
grey, vuggj,?-, finely crystalline dolomi“^e to t^e overl37ing darker 
colored, brovrxiish-grey, microgranular, clastic dolomite. 

Overlying the cn/stalline dolomite is a 52~foot interval 
consisting of a bro’-mish-grey, oil stained, grsnular dolomite, 
which in the upner part contains fragments of whitish-grey 










- 42 


chert, brownish<-^rey limestone and calcareous sandstone, '^n 
lithologic evidence, the interval may be considered to represent 
mainly the old residual zone of the ‘'Rundle" dolomi-^e.. The 
v/hitish-grey chert could well have been concentrated as a. residua,! 
deposit, on solution of the dolomi-’-e. The lo-^er p:-rt of this 
interval is tra.nsitional into the underlying roch, and this o'^rt, 
at least, is undoubtedly part of the .Mississi'onipn, 

Thic k ne s s 

The thickness of the''Rundle^'^formation in the Lisburn 
well is 1^4 feet according to electrolog ’’nicks(45^6 to 47tO 
feet), with the following member thicknesses: 

Unoer dolomite member - ‘64 feet (4^96 to 4660 feet) 
Lower limestone member - 90 feet ( 4660 to 4750 feet) 
However, if the overlying interval, 4^44 to 4^96 feet consistinp- 
mainly of granul'-r dolomi-^e, whth ch'^rt at the too, is included, 
the ’’Rundle” form'^tion v/^uld have a total thickness un to 206 
feet. . ' 

Palaeontology/-, and Correlation 

The follovdng fauna was 'collected and identified in the 
’’Rundle ” formation from the Lisburn well. Kost of the forms 
v/ere ore sent in the lower limestone member. 








I 







( 




- ^3 - 


4658 -• 4648 feet 

4648 - 46'=)8 feet 
4668 - 4678 feet 


4688 - 4698 feet 
4698 - 4708 feet 

■ 4745 - 4748 feet 

A number of the 
older Banff beds into the 
appro'oriate in vievj of the remarkablv simila:^’ litholocri-s and 
defi nitely conformable relations of the two form‘dtions. 

However, fou-'" new^ forrs make their aonearance, namelv, 
Spirifer rundlensis , Eumetria verneuilian gi, C1 eiothyridin a cf. 
lata and Buxtoni-^ cf. semicircul^ris . Snirifer rundlensis 
was described by Warren (26) from the lower beds of t‘’^e Bundle 
limestone on. the north end of Bundle mountain at Banff, 
Cleiothyridina late, is a form described by Shirner (4-2) from the 
Lake Minnewa.nka section and compares v.'ith Cleiothyridina obmaxima 
from the Upper Kinderhook, Burlington, 


•“ Bene strel l ina sp. 

Spirifer cf. striatiformis Meek 

- Crinoid columns 

- B uxt onia cf, semicircularis Sutton 

• ■ and hagner 

Clei oth ’^i^r'^ dine cf. Xf.ta Shimar 
Eumetria ye rn e ui liana Ha11 
Spiri -^'er cf. stri^'tif orrnis Meek 
Chonet es ? 

Crinoid .stem fracm.ents 

- Spirif er cf. cascadensis V/arren 

“ Spirifer cf. cen.tronatus Rail and 
. .. . Ifnitfield 

” Camarotoe chi cf. metal lica Wliite 
Spirif6 r rund1ensis Warren 

forms have continued on -^rora f'^e 

■^^ounver ‘'fund 1 ebeds. This is ouite 


and Keolcuk of the 

































j 






- hh ~ 


Missipsi’Toi x’-alley ( 26 ). Eumetria verneuiliana- has been reported 
from the lov.'est beds of the Madison limestone where it is 
associ^^ted with the typical Kinderhook fauna.^ and also fram t'^e 
i-innermost beds of the Rundle limestone; it is apoarently a time 
ranp-ing form. Buxtonia semicircularis is a Chester form found in 
Kentucky and Okladnoma (46). 


Summarily, the "Rundle" formation as -oresent in the 


Lisburn well seems to have mainly a Kinderhook fauna. The total - 

thickness of the underlying Banff section is very much smaller 

than that of the section found in the mountains to the west. i 

I 

I 

Fi-irthermore, there appears to be no break in t'-^e v.hole Miss- ! 

issippian section. On this evidence, the writer believes th^t 

the-"Rundle" forma.tion oresent in the area reoresents a lovrer 1 

i 

strati'graphic horizon than that of the type section in the Mountains * 
and should be included in the upcer part of the Banff form.'^tion. 















( , ■ ■ ' 








.« 




r:'it 


vp ■.' 






t 



t'i 


i 








•Q^^PTiiiR III 


S 0 Z 0 I c 


STRATIGRAPHY 









m.' 








TABLii; OF MBSQZQIC FORBATIOBS 


45 - 



















H 




1—1 








cd 




cd 








-P 




p 




r] 




0 




0 




U 

o 

o 


0 




ut P 





ca 

£> 


ON-w^ 




CO 





1 — 1 

-4- 






uo 




CO 

Cv2 



1 — 1 







•H 











s 

H 












(D 











ro 












ro 

ci 








\ 



m 

h-J 




H 




1—I 








cd 




cd 








p* 




P 



o 

03 




0 




0 




0 

O 

o 


UN, P 




UA -p 



vXl 

•r-O 

O 

■ON 


ON N_^ 




vO N_^ 



r-i 

ct3 

UA 



C\2 




nO 





I-1 



1 — ! 










0 

0 

0 











H 

1 — 1 


t3 

i>a 







c3 

cd 

cd 


Cl 

0 






0 


4:1 



cd ‘N 

U 


a 




i — 1 

0 

0 

0 


CO 

5x0 

U 0 

0 



nj 





p 0 


^ cd 510 

“H 




0 

— 

= 0 


H a 

P 

H 0 d 

r—j 


o 

0 

Cl 

TiS 

0 -Td 0 C 

0 

cd 0 

M 

0 ■§ g 



:! 


•H 

0 

1 — 1 Cd 1 — 10 

H 

0 p 

cd 

cd 

c 

) 


Cl 

rH 

cd H cd P 
P P4 Pi 0 

cd 

r 0 

xS 

0 d p 
0 p 

d 

P 

[X! 

a 



r~] 



0 

0 


H 

o3 


0 

0 0 0 TO 

CO 

5 x 0 d 
cl cd 
•H 0 



> 

0 


H 

1 

0 


a 

!>i a i>i § 

yo 

0 

0 

0 0 • 

P 

cd 

d 




0 

0 

0 0 0 0 

0 

p 

d 

CO Ei p 

cd 

P 



o 

c 

~ 

c = c 

c 

cd = 

0 

0 


0 




t:0 


tiO tiO bjD 

5X0 

d d 

p 

••N Cd 

d 

0 



0 


c 

c c 


P 0 

0 

0 d 





t3 H 


0 

P 0 -H 

C ^ C P 

P 

0 a p 

1 — 1 'H 0 

(Q 



d o3 

c 

a 

c 

p a r—1 

cd d 0 

S P 



Cu O 

o3 

a 

cd 0 cd H 

cd 

r-H 0 

*H 

P cd cd 


P 



CO o 

Q 

a 

Q a Q > 

Q 

--xi a 

CO 

0 ^ P 

g 













c 

) 











M 












H 

h=> 











1—1 










Qi 

0 a 










O 

m c3 










rv 


1 o 







0 





C! 



0 




H 





o o 

C 


T3 




1 —I 





-p 

cd 


cd 




•H 





a u 

Pm 


c 




> 





Q 0 



0 









d > 

cd 


1—1 




9 





t 3 -H 
r£| p:^ 



0 

0 




•SS 




2no9O"5q.0j[O 


Erosional UnconforiTiity 































— /i.6 — 


DESCRIPTION OF FOTJ^IXTIONS 
CRETACEOUS 
General Statement 

Lower and Upper Cretaceous strata underlie the Foothills 
and Plains areas of Alberta, These sediments were deposited in a 
widespread and depressed area to the east of the present-day 
Rockies* Cretaceous sedimentation commenced in Neocomian time v/ith 
the deposition of the continental Kootenay formation and its equiv¬ 
alents in the Foothills area, Aptian time began with the deposi¬ 
tion of the Blairmore (Cadomin) conglomerate^ the material for 
which probably came from the Selkirk Mountains to the west that 
were suddenly raised above their former level. A series of cont¬ 
inental sandstones and shales comprising the Blairmore group were 
laid down in the Foothills area during trie remainder of Aptian 
and Albian ages. At the same time, the Plains area of central 
and northern Alberta received mixed continental and marine dep¬ 
osition, the latter more dominant to the north from which direc¬ 
tion the sea \ms encroaching. 

With the advent of the Colorado sea which extended 
continuously from south to north across the continent, marine 
deposits consisting essentially of dark grey shale were laid down 
across the Plains area. However, in the Peace River area, deltaic 
conditions prevailed in Cenomanian time and resulted in the 














- 47 - 


deposition of the essentially continental sandstones and shales 
of the Dunvegan formation. 

The Pierre sea following the Colorado flooding was 
responsible for extensive marine deposition in the Plains area. 

The monotonous marine shale beds are broken by two sandstone 
tongues that wedge out to the east and thicken to the west. 

These are called the i/Iilk River sandstone and Belly River sand¬ 
stone in Alberta^ and the Eagle sandstone and Judith River sand¬ 
stone in Montana, The Belly River group thiclaiess becomes much 
greater to the west towards the Foothills. 

With the retreat of the Pierre sea, the Plains area 
remained high to the present day. Deposition in post-Pierre 
time took place in a terrestrial environment. The St, Mary 
River formation in southern Alberta and the Edmonton formation 
in the area to the north are,both the products of this sediment¬ 
ation at the end of Cretaceous time. These formations are char¬ 
acterized by sandstones and shales, containing a land flora and 
fresh-water fauna. There is but little apparent break in sed¬ 
imentation between the Edmonton formation and the overlying Pas- 
kapoo formation of Tertiary age. The boundary is at present in 
dispute, 

The exact boundary betvreen the Lower a,nd Upper Cretaceous 
in the Plains area has been a matter of dispute in the past. 





— 4 ^ "* 


More recently, detailed ndcro-faunal studies have revealed many 
important facts on this subject. A study of the foraminiferal 
succession is necessary in order to properly delimit this boundary. 
The most recently published work on the Cretaceous in the Plains 
region by A. YL Nauss (47) in 1943 constituted a detailed micro- 
faunal study of the Cretaceous beds in the Vermilion area. Nauss 
gave the name, Mannville formation, to include all the strata of 
"Lower Cretaceous" age in that area. The overlying beds which he 
termed the Lloydminster shale correspond to the Colorado shale 
elsewhere in the Plains area. 

Only the lower 173 feet of the Colorado formation and 
the underlying iiyiannville formation equivalent were studied by the 
writer. 


l^nnville Formation 

General Statement 

Nauss (47) named the Mannville formation in 1943 for 

Lower Cretaceous beds as revealed in Northwest Mannville No. 1 

vrell (l.s.do 1, sec. IS, tp. 30, rge. 8, W. 4ih,). On the basis 

of lithology he subdivided the formation into six members, to 

which he applied names of local geographic significance. In 

stratigraphical sequence, t|ie members are: 

Q»Sullivan member - " Salt and pepper" sandstone ; grey 

shale; several coal seams; thickness 
is 130 to 133 feet. 










< 




t 



€ 


.i. 


r ■ } 


/ "11 



. c 


I 







- 49 - 


Wainv/right (Borradaile) member - Quartz sandstone , un¬ 
consolidated, well sorted, rounded 
grains; some grey shale; producing 
horizon in the Vermilion-Lloydmins- 
ter-Wainvnright area; thickness is 
29 to 60 feet, 

Tovell member - ”Salt and pepper’* sandstone ; grey shale; 

thin coal seams; thickness is 75 to 
ll6 feeto 

Islay member - Quartz sandstone , unconsolidated, well 
sorted, rounded grains; thickness 
is 0 to 60 feet, 

Gurmiiinys member - Shale , dark grey to black, with abun¬ 
dant Foraminifera and pyrite: '‘salt 
and pepper” sandstone; thicloiess is 
0 to 90 feet. 

Dina member - Quartz sandstone , v/ell sorted, frosted, 
and rounded grains; interbedded 
siltstone and shale; thickness is 
0 to 150 feet. 

The total thickness of the Mannville formation in the area is 
207 to 645 feet. 

V'i[illson (22) in 1947 j^de a study of the Mannville 
formation in the Lloydminster and adjacent areas. He was not 
able to recognize the Islay member in its type section and found 
the Cummings, Islay and Tovell to be of similar lithologies. He 
proposed the name "Buffalo Coulee" member for these three members 
of Nauss. 


ladd (16) in 1948 did not distinguish any of these 
members in feaverhills No. 2 tvell about 100 miles to the west, 
but reports the basal quartz sand member (Dina) to be absent. 















c. 


^ f 








fi.'' v' o 





r ■ 


I 














- 50 - 


Wickenden (4^) in 194^ emphasized more the change in 
conditions of local sedimentation by proposing a three-fold div¬ 
ision of the Mannville formation in the Lloydminster area. The 
lowest division occupies approximately the same part of the section 
as the. Diiia member of Nauss, The middle division is represented 
by a group of sediments, mostly of marine and brackish-water 
origin, and includes the equivalents of the Cummings, Islay, Tov- 
ell, and Borradaile members, plus a few feet of the 0‘Sullivan 
member. The uppermost division includes the rest and ra.ost of 
the O’Sullivan member. 

Lithology 

The i^nnville formation in Majeau Lake No, 1 well con¬ 
sists of alternating sa^ndstones and shales. The section m.ay be 
divisible into two units: 

Upper continental beds 

Lower predominantly marine and brackish beds. 

The lower beds are 120 feet thick and consist of greenish-grey 
to brownish-grey sandstone and siltstone and dark grey, locally 
calcareous, shale. In the upper part glauconite is a notable 
feature; arenaceous Foraminifera and OstraQodes are also present. 
The lower part of this unit becomes brackish and continental to¬ 
wards the base, with the reappearance of carbonaceous material 
and plant fragments. The basal sandstone resting on the uncon- 










- 51 - 


f orrnity is cherty. 

The upper beds consist dominantly of grey, '*salt and 
pepper”, usually fine-grained, sandstone, grey to dark grey, - 
usually fissile, shale, and light grey to grey silt stone. CarlD- 
onaceous material is characteristic and coal seams are present 
locally, the latter varying up to about 10 feet thick near the 
top of the lfe,nnville* The ”salt and pepper” appearance of the 
sandstone is due to dark colored constituents made up of carbon¬ 
aceous particles and argillite and chert grains. Locally the 
sandstone is feldspathic and often takeas on a white, earthy, 
kaolinitic appearance. 

In the Lisburn well, 20 miles to the west, only the 
lower 75 feet of the Lower Cretaceous v\ras cored. The top of the 
marine beds taken 3.t the Ostracod zone is present 46 feet above 
the base. This marine zone consisted of alternating grey sand¬ 
stones and dark grey shales, usually calcareous or dolomitic, and 
locally glauconitic. Above the Ostracod zone, the 29 feet of core 
examined by the writer consisted of sandstone, siltstone and shale, 
usually dolomitic or very slightly calcareous and contained abund¬ 
ant carboiB-ceous plant fra-gments. 

The writer did not recognize any basal quartz sandstone 
in the ISannville formation in the two wells examined. It is pos¬ 
sible that SO.TIB of the granular, silty dolomite and calcareous 
sandstone, along with chert, that is present immediately below the 











- 52 - 


Maiinville in the Lisburn well maj belong in part to the basal 
Lovj-er Cretaceous* 

Formational Zones and Boundaries 

The base of the Mannville formation in Majeau Lake No. 1 
well is taken at the top of the unconformable surface of the under¬ 
lying Mississippian limestone. The top of the Mannville formation 
is present at the transition from the underlying sandstones and 
carbonaceous shales to th^ overlying dark grey marine shale of 
Colorado age. 

The top of the marine zone or the Cummings member equiv¬ 
alent is characterized by the appearance of a highly glauconitic 
sandstone at 3930 feet, about 10 feet above the Ostracode zone. 
Foraminifera were recovered from just above the Ostracode zone. 

The basal part of the I'lannville formation becomes brackish and 
non-marine, v\rith the reappearance of carbonaceous material. 

In the Lisburn well, 20 miles to the west, only the 
lower 75 feet of Lower Cretaceous core was examined by the writer. 
The base vras taken at the top of the chert zone. An electrolog 
*’pick*’ gives the top of the marine member at an Ostracode zone 
at 449^ feet, 46 feet above the chert zone. Above this marine 
zone, the siltstones, sandstones and shales were generally carb-’ 
onaceous. 











.1 



.) 






). 



I 




- 53 - 


Thiclcness 

The thickness of the Mannville formation as given by 
electrolog pattern is 665 feet (3375 to 4010 feet) in Majeau Lake 
No. 1 well and 534 feet (4010 to 4544 feet) in the Lisburn well. 

For comiDarison, the total thickness of the Mannville 
in the Vermilion area, Alberta, varied from 20? to 645 feet. The 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Conservation Board ascribes approximately 
670 feet to the Blairmore group in the Leduc area, but this section 
probably represents only the lower part of the Blairmore as found 
in the Foothills area to the west. The Afennville formation as 
used by the v/riter corresponds roughly to this same interval. 

In summary, the Mannville formation appears to maintain 
a fairly uniform thicimess regionally in the area between Majeau 
Lake and Veraiilion in central Alberta, 

Palaeontologrv^ and Correlation 

Forarninifera ¥/ere recovered from a dark grey silty shale 
at 3939 feet near the top of the marine member just above the 
Ostracode zone in the Mannville formation as found in Majeau Lake 
No. 1 v\rell. The species were identified by C. R. Stelck. 


Ammobacu-lites humei Nauss 
»Verneuilina’* cuflimingensis Nauss 
Haplophragmoides gigas minor Nauss 
jiiiliammina sproulei Nauss 
'’Bigenerina» angulata Cushman 
Proteonina sp. 

Bathysiphon sp. 

■^mmoaiscu p. 


(References: # 49, 











































- 54 - 


The arenaceous Foraminifera, Haplophraemoides ^isas var. 
minor , Miliammina sproulei , and *’Verneuilina^' cummingjensis are 
found exclusively in the Cummings member of the Mannville formation 
at Vermilion^ Alberta ( 49 ). Ammobaculites humei and Bigenerina" 
anpulata both appear in the Cummings member at Verrrdlion^ but 
they are long-ranging forms and continue up into the Lloydrainster 
shale. 

On the basis of the above nd-cro-fauna^ the ¥/riter cor¬ 
relates the marine member at Majeau Lake No. 1 well with the 
Cummings mamber of the Mannville formation at Vermilion, Alberta. 

Pelecypods, Gastropods and Ostracodes constituted the 
main fossils collected from the lower part of the Mannville 
formation in both Majeau Lake No. 1 and Lisburn wells. The 
species vrere identified by C, R, Stelck. 

Majeau Lake No. 1 well 

3 G 69 “ 3 S 79 feet - Plant fragments; Conifer , Mono ¬ 
cotyledon . 

3909 - 3919 feet - Pelecy::;!od , poorly preserved. 

3932 - 3942 feet - Sphaerium. cf. onestae McLearn 

liurraia cf. naiadiformis Russell 
Unio sp, 

3940 - 3947 feet - Ostracods (undetermined) 

■ derma sp. 

Gast rolled 

























■"> 




i 


t! 







! 


i 


I 


I 












- 55 ” 


3959 - 3979 feet - >Sphaerium cf, onestae McLearn 
Brachydontes sp. 

Lioplacodes cf« biturninis Russell 
Lioplacodes ? 

Melania sp, 

3979 ” 3939 feet “ Metacypris sp. 

Other undeterrfdned Ostracodes , 
especially abundant at 3932 to 
3935.feet. 

Melania cf. multorbis Russell 
Sphaerium cf. Qne,stae M eLearn 

3939 - 3999 feet - Melania cf. multorbis Russell 
Gastropod (undetermined) 

Corbula palliseri McLearn 
Corbula sp. 

Murraia cf. naiaddforinls Russell 
Sphaerium cf. onestae MuLearn 
Astarte ? 

4025 feet - Sphaerium cf. onestae McLearn 

4030 “ 4049 feet -• Corbula palliseri McLearn 

Sphaerium cf. onestae McLearn 
Melania cf. multorbis Russell 


Lisburn well 

4435 ” 4495 feet " Plant spores (elongate) 

4495 “ 4505,feet - Murraia sp. 

Nucula sp. 

4505 - 4515 feet - Ostracods (undetermined) 

Iifelarapus cf. athabaskensis Russell 
Unio cf. lacombi McLearn 
Sphaerium cf. onestae McLearn 
Nucula sp. 

4515 "• 4525 feet - tairraia naiadiformis Russell 
Sphaerium cf. onestae McLearn 
Unio sp. 

Unio cf. lacombi McLearn 
Nucula sp, 

T.ioplacodes sp. 










































































- 56 - 


4525 “ 4529 feet - Ostracods (undetermined) 

Unio cf, lacombi MeLearn 
Sphaeriuni cf« onestae McLearn 
Lioplacodes sp. 

4529 - 4539 feet - Unio cf, lacombi McLearn 
Unio sp. 

Melania sp. 

4539 - 4549 feet - Astarte cf. trapezoidalis Stanton 
Corbula palliseri McLearn 
Sphaerium cf. onestae McLearn 
Cycloid fish scales 

Fish bone 

4579 - 4534 feet - Cycloid fish scale ■ 

Sphaerium onestae and Corbula palliseri are both in¬ 
cluded in the Unio (Quadrula) natosini fauna as found in the 

lov^er part of the Blairmore group (50). Unio lacombi is also 
included in this fauna and is reported from the Luscar formation 
which correlates with the lower Blairmore. Melania multorbis 
a-nd Lioplacodes bituminis are both included in the Unio (Blliptio) 
biornatus fauna and are found in the Mclvfurray formation (50). 
Melampus athabaskensis and Murraia naiadiformis are both des¬ 
cribed from the McMurray formation by Russell (51). 

Astarte trapezoidalis Stanton is reported from the 
Lower Cretaceous Paskenta formation in California ( 4 O). 

The' Ostracode^ Metacypris sp.^ ranges in age from the 
Jurassic to the Cretaceous ( 46 ). 

It is evident that the above fauna is remarkably sinr- 
ilar to that present in the lo?/er part of the Blairmore group 
as found in the southern Plains and Foothills areas of Alberta^ 









































;( 



r 


( 


i 


4 






■3 




















- 57 - 


and to that of the McMurray formation in northern Alberta. 

Summarily 5 on the basis of micro- and mega-fauna^ the 
writer finds the marine member in the lower part of the Lov\rer 
Cretaceous (i.e.^ Mannville formation) to be directly correlat- 
able with the Cummings member of the Mannville formation in the 
Vermilion area of Alberta^ with the basal Blairmore in the south¬ 
ern Plains and Foothills areas of Alberta^ and with the McMurray 
formation of northern Alberta. The v^-riter uses the name ’’Mann¬ 
ville formation” for that part of the Lower Cretaceous below the 
Colorado formation. This correlation was based on similar lith¬ 
ologies and general stratigraphic position. It is probable, 
however, that there is some difference in the stratigraphic int¬ 
ervals involved of these two sections, 

Colorado gormation 

General Statement 

The Colorado formation of the Plains area is correlative 
with the Benton and Niobrara formations which comprise the Colorado 
in the Missouri River section as restricted by C. A. White in 1S7S 
( 52 ). In the past, the term ’’Benton” formation has been used for 
these strata, Huime (53) in 1930 showed the ’’Benton” of the Foot¬ 
hills of Alberta to include strata of younger age than the Fort 
Benton of the Mssouri River section. He proposed the naire 
’’Alberta formation” to include some strata of lower Montana age 












■■j: :.ir 






-.-o: -I.U 





• C 


1- J: ,'J-. /■: 


j..,'." 


.... , .! . 'i.. : V' . : I-I i i C' 

.'.u -; -x.o /,.i. .V., ^ n ; • n;. v,. vov.fi: 









along v;ith the underl 3 dng Colorado shales. Therefore, in the 
Foothills area, the ”Alberta shale’’ comprises a lower shale formation 
of Colorado age; an intermediate sandstone, or sandstone and shale, 
member referred to as the "Cardium sandstone”, and an upper sha.le 
formation that together with the ”cardium” is mainly of Colorado 
age, but includes, at the top, strata of Montana age. Later, these 
three components h&ve been identified, respectivel.jr^ with the 
Blackstone, Bighorn, and Wapiabi formations of the Foothills west 
of Edmonton, 

In the Plains area, the Cardium or Bighorn sandstone is 
not recognized and the three-fold division is lacking, the whole 
series being referred to the Alberta shale, darren (54) describes 
Baculites ovatus from, the upper part of the Lea Park shale of 
Pierre age and correlates this section with the upper part of the 
Alberta shale in the Foothills. For this reason, the "writer uses 
the name Colorado formation (cf. Lloj^dminster shale) to include 
the beds underlying the Lea Park and overlying the Mannville 
formation. 


Litholo-ry 


The Colorado forimtion in the a,rea consists mainly of 
dark grey, fissile, marine shales ivhich contain a definite sand¬ 
stone member near the base. The shales are characterized by two 















- 59 - 


very distinct zones vdiich contain white^ calcareous specks. The 
firstor upper, ’’Speckled” zone is present at the top of the 
formationj the second, or lower, occupies approximately the central 
part of the formation. These ’’Speckled” zones are v-ddespread and 
are useful markers in drilling in the Plains area. 

Various opinions have been expressed on the origin of 
these white specks. Sanderson (55) believes the specks to have 
originated in association with volcanic ash or bentonite, Nauss 
(47) finds the ’’specks” to consist of Inoceramus prisms. Sproule 
(fide Nauss, 47) say that the ’’soecks” may be the remains of a 
calcareous micro-fauna. 

The sandstone member which.is present 30 feet above the 
base of the Colorado formation in Afajeau Lake No. 1 v/ell is called 
the Viking sandstone. It consists generally of grey, usuall 3 r 
■’’salt and pepper” sandstones and siltstones, with som.e interbeds of 
shale. A pebbly sandstone about 30 feet below/ the top of the 
Viking member.splits the section into an upper Viking zone and a 
lower Viking sandstone proper. 

Formational Zones and Boundaries 

The base of the Colorado formation is present at the 
contact of the underlying continental sandstones and shales of the 
i.iannville formation w/ith the overlying dark grey, marine shale. 

The first, or upper, calcareous ’’w/hite specks” mark the top of the 



I 












v"-'* . •■ :':'’/:S: 



■< 







;n S ', ^ 






- 60 - 


Colora.do formation and are in contact with the overlying non- 
calcareous^ dark grey_, mariine shales of the Lea Park formation. 

The Viking sandstone member occupies a zone in the shales 
which begins at 30 feet above the base of the formation in Majeau 
Lake No. 1 well. In the viking area, this member occurs generally 
about 140 feet above the base of the Colorado formation. Vlfillson 
( 22 ) reports that in Northwest Mannville No. 1 v;ell (l.s.d. 1, 
sec. 18, tvrp. 50, rge. 8, W. 4th.) chert pebbles occur at a depth 
of 1695 feet, but no sandstone is present. In Beaverhills No, 2 
well (l.s.d. 11, sec. 11, twp. 50, rge. 17, W. 4th.), 

Kidd ( 18 ) reports the presence of 80 feet of siltstones, sandstones 
and shales with some black chert grains and thin bentonite at the 
top, about 63 feet above the base of the Colorado formation. 

The top of the second '’Speckled” shale zone is present 
675 feet and 69 O feet above the base of the Colorado, or 500 feet 
(in both cases) above the Viking member in Majeau Lake No. 1 and 
Lisburn ?/ells respectively. The top of the first ’’Speckled” 
shale zone occurs 620 and 700 feet higher, respectively, in the same 
wells. 

Thickness 

The thicl-Qiess of the Colorado formation in Majeau Lake 
















■s.., - yvV: . 




J! 


.< : : •■ ■• li./‘ v ' 














- 6l - 


No. 1 well is 1295 feet (electrolog /'picks*': 20B0 to 3375 feet). 

The formation thickens slightly to the ¥fest^ being 1390 feet thick 
in the Lisburn well^ 20 miles distant. This agrees v/ith the general 
regional thickening of the formation from east to ¥;est across 
central Alberta. In the Vermilion-Lloydrninster area^ the thiclmess 
of the Colorado formation is 662 feet in Community Services No. 29 
well; about 100 miles to the ¥vest it is IOI 6 feet thick in Beaver- 
hills No. 2 v«rell (18); about 50 miles farther to the Yiest the 
thickness is about 1300 feet in the Leduc area. 

The Viking member is 145 feet thick (electrolog "picks”: 
3200 to 3375 feet) in Majeau Lake No. 1 ¥/ell. 

Age and Correlation 

Foraminifera_, fish scales and plant spores were collected 
from the shale 10 to 20 feet above the Viking member in Majeau 
Lake Mo. 1 ivell. The species were identified by D. R. Stelck. 

3217 - 3227 feet ( Corrected depths: 3180 - 3190 feet ) 
Foraminifera 

Ammobaculites cf. coprolithiformis (Schv/ager) Cushman 
Aavriobaculites sp, 

kiliammina cf. manitobensis Wickenden 
Gaudryina hector! Nauss 
• G-audryina sp, 

Reophax sp, nov, 

Verneuilina cf, canadensis Cushman 
Haplophragmoides cf. excavata Cusliman and Naters 

Haploohragmoides sp. (rare) 

References: #49j 64 . 

Fish scales 

cfo Holeolepis sp. 





















T • r 


I 












- 62 - 


The Foraminifera are mainlj a post-V'iking fauna as re¬ 
ported by Nauss (49) from the Vermilion area. The fauna has sim¬ 
ilarities with that found in the Shaftesbury formation of Lo¥/er 
Cretaceous age in the northern Foothills area of Alberta and 
British Columbia (C. R. Stelck - Personal coiinmunication), 

The fish scales found at this horizon are somewhat simr- 
ilar to, but much narrower than. Holeolepis sp, as is found in the 
heogastroplites zone in the Fort St, John shale of Lower Cretaceous 
age in the Peace River area. 

This Foraminiferal zone was the highest part of the Cret¬ 
aceous section studied by the writer. Micro-faunal evidence would 
correlate this zone with a part of the Fort St. John group and 
Shaftesbury formation in the northern Foothills of Alberta. This 
v/ould give a Lower Cretaceous age to the horizon. Therefore, the 
top of the Lov»rer Cretaceous would be present in the Colorado shale 
somevfhere between the Viking sandstone and the lower ’’SpeclcLed” 
shale, 

A'lckenden (56) in 1932 reported the lo¥fer part of the 
Colorado formation below the Viking zone to contain the Haplo - 
phragmoides gigas fauna which was found to be also present in the 
Pelican shale of Lower Cretaceous age (Albian) in the Athabaska 
area. Ke assigned a Lower Cretaceous age to this species of 
Foraminifera and included that part of the Colorado belov/ the 










” ' i'lO ' 


cl 


.J.. 







Vikir.g sand in the Lower Cretaceous. Cuslunan (57) originally- 
described this species from its occurrence in British Petroleirms 
No. 3 well (sec. 29tp. 45^ rge. 6^ W. 4th.) and assigned an Upper 
Cretaceous age to it on the basis of stratigraphic position. 

The lower^ or second, white ’’Speckled” horizon of the 
Plains area occurs v^ithin the Inoceramus labiatus zone (58), the 
latter being found in theBlackstone formation of Upper Cretaceous 
age in the Foothills area. Wickenden (59) correlates the second 
"Specid-ed" zone with the Favel formation in Manitoba; the latter, 
in turn, may be correlated with the Greenhorn limestone member of 
the Benton formation in North Dakota, 

On the basis of micro-fauna, Vfickenden (5$) has also 
correlated the first, or up;per, ’’Speckled” zone with the Boyne 
mnmber of the Vermilion River formation in Manitoba; the latter 
■formation, in turn, may be correlated with the Niobrara limy shale 
of North Dakota, Furthermore, the central dark grey shale zone 
below the first ’’Speckled" zone is correlated with the Morden 
member of the Vermiilion River formation by FJickenden (59). 


Lea Park formation 

J, A. Allan (6l) described and named the Lea Park shale 
as found between Lea Park and Battleford on the North Saskatche'wan 
River, where onl^^ the upper 375 feet of this formation is exposed. 












' V . I 


;... ... Ji ■' ' ■. -Jv .... ': . ‘j'y ’ 

■ :.. I.; ’ 




" ■ i 
...o.i 0d5 

i 


• ■■' '*• Vi:; ' ,.• ■ 









- 64 - 

He assigned a lower Pierre age to this section and Warren (54) 
corroborated this age determination on the basis of the ammonite, 
Baculites ovatus , 

Wickenden (60) reports a thickness of 800 to 870 feet for 
the Lea Park formation in the Lloydminster area of Saskatchewan. 
Here, the formation can be divided into two units on the bases of 
lithology and micro-fauna. The lov/er part consists of medium to 
dark grey shale with numerous concretions and usually chert pebbles 
at the top. The Epistomina caracolla fauna is present throughout 
and indicates a correlation of this lovrer part with the Milk Puiver 
formation of southern Alberta. The uicper part of the Lea Park is 
ma.de up of medium grey shale overlain by sandy shale 'with irregular 
concretions and contains Verneuilina bearpawensis Wickenden (60). 

The contact of the Lea Park with the underlying Colorado 
is taken at the first occurrence of the calcareous, ''speckled” 
shale which is recorded in the electrolog pattern. The upper 
contact eomes at the transition from the underlying dark grey, 
m.arine shale to the alternating sandstones and shales of the over- 
l 3 mng Belly River series. 

The writer did not examine samples of the Lea park shale, 
but electrolog "picks” give a thickness of 490 feet (1590 to 2080 
feet) in ife-jeau L3.ke No, 1 well, and 470 feet (2150 to 2620 feet) 














- 65 “ 


in the Lisburn well_, 20 miles to the v^rest. It ds interesting to 
note that the Lea Park possesses approximately the same thickness 
in the Leduc area^ about 60 miles to the southeast. This formation 
thickens regionally to the east^ being 580 feet thick in Beaverhills 
No. 2 vfell (IB) and 7B0 to 850 feet in the Verriiilion-Kitscot^/' area. 


Belly River - Edmonton Cdoup 

J. A. Allan (6l) and S. S. Slipper ( 62 ) both recognized 
and subdivided the fresh-water sandstones and marine shales of the 
Belly River series in separate areas of east central Alberta, In 
the Leduc area^ the Belly River series includes brackish beds, 
about 240 feet thick, and consisting mainly of grey to green to 
brown carbonaceous shale and ”salt e.nd pepper^’ sandstone, with ^ 
some coal seams in the upper part. 

In the Edmonton area, the Edmonton formation consists 
of continental beds of sandstone and carbonaceous shale with coal 
seams. This formation includes the remainder of the Upper Cret¬ 
aceous above the Bearpaw shale, or if the latter is not present, 
as is the case to the west of the Edmonton area, it overlies the 
Belly River series. The Edmonton formation forms the surface or 
near-surface bedrock of a broad area extending through the central 
part of Alberta and' including the area of the thesis. In the 
Leduc area, the Edmonton formation is about 750 feet thick. 















, , , 

■" .-'I.'-'rvv.' : 

■ : • • .■ .,v . —■ ■ ' 

^ ^ r.': ■' -V ' CrX'‘■ i*:-’ 


dSo;.;'';,- , ,«■ ^ »• • 

VV. ..-M, i ' 

" . ' ; j 

, '■■■■' •■■■■.<■;,■ ' 

.,i. - •,;■/ ■t: ■'. .-'.i- - -CCZ; 

,I.,,/ ■., j.. ■: ■ f/c ‘.■.'..■.n i-.v^o^tO' ^ 

iC'-rlvl lil ■ v./fe 

j'.:-;;. O-.-. v.'.;. '■) -i '. ■■ i'y Z'.;Z v" 'O 

•Tj v's: -■ ,r}i■ y..^c 7. 

■ ■ '. i 

»:: „.j; -i'jZ- z; 1.. ’ Z '-■;•■ (r}.. ::.V(CiJe.?;-)-' 

. ... ..'J.:'- •vI.h"': ’ ,f^‘ - -r.^ • r-H-.' ;:J.. . 

:„'1 , .Z..'Z;u:v:c‘Z j'ii-.ZrZvi .‘.'Z-vV; 'i' . ‘Z-ZZ-vZY 

i'.', '. Z' ■ „-Z.; i'J.. ..i ^C'*’r.'' .' ':'d 

.'•‘SZ'.i 
■' ,' , : 

. Z ...* • - ■•• ', f' .ii'i''''■■ -'■Zt /i Z. ZZ-. Z“ .'n'“’' .''Z'’,.;:,^,jZZZ ' q . 

Jo^y- ,.i ■; . ,f:.. . : Z_ ..<■ z.,... '• c ■ i.Mu^fZoirZZr:. y!;Z' .-..O'.C-. lur-rZ 

‘ ' ' " « , : 








- 66 - 


The v^rriter did not examine samples of the Belly River 
and Edmonton beds and therefore did not differentiate the tivo 
formations. The electrolog pattern gives about 1500 feet of' 
sandstones and shales for the Belly River - Edmonton group^ with 
the top of the Edmionton beds being a residual surface covered 
with glacial drift material, in Majeau Lake No. 1 well. In the 
Lisburn well, 20 miles to the west, this group extends down to 
2150 feet below the surface. 

























- 67 - 


CHAPTER IV 

MESOZOIC - ?AL:I;SOZOIC UNCONFORMITY 

GENERAL STiiTSMSNT 

The Mesozoic - Palaeozoic unconforjriity is a very marked 
feature in the stratigraphic col'uirin of the Plains of central 
Alberta. It represents an iiTHnense ’’time-break" or hiatus which 
was characterized by non-deposition and erosion. It is cjuite 
probable^ however, that some deposition may have taken place 
during this long time interval, but conditions subsequent to this 
deposition were such, that in the establishment of a new profile 
these sediments were denuded during the process of erosion to 
base-level. Briefly, this unconformity is an ancient topography 
which was buried by sediments of Lower Cretaceous age. This 
burial preserved some of the characteristics of this old weathered 

and denuded land surface. 

% 

AGE Ai^ID STRATlGPuiPKlC RSUT10M3H1P OF UNCOi^JFQRIlETY 

VJith the exiSeption of the Jurassic Ellis formation 
which does not extend beyond the Oldman River, rocks of Pennsyl¬ 
vanian, Permian, Triassic, and probably Jurassic age are in the 
main absent under the Plains of Alberta. From west to east 
across central Alberta, this unconformity overlies rocks of 
progressively older age ranging from the Mississippian to the lower 

















- 68 - 


Upper Devonian. The unconformable surface is present in the 
i^/lssissippian in the Lisburn and Majeau Lake areas^ in the upper¬ 
most Upper Devonian at Leduc and in the Waterv^ays limestone at 
Lloydminster, In the area under discussion all the beds below 
the unconformity have a gentle regional dip to the west and south. 
This would indicate that during the time of the unconformity the 
beds were structurally higher to the east and lov^rer to the west. 

It is probable, therefore, that the central Alberta area xvas in 
the greater part covered by Mississippian strata which are now 
onl 3 ^ present in the structurally lovrer area to the west of the 
•’Madison escarpment'’. Therefore, the three important factors which 
are responsible for the present stratigraphical relationships of 
the unconformity are the original areal extent of the Upper Devonian 
and Aiississippian strata, structure and erosion. 

In summary, the Mesozoic - Palaeozoic unconformity ca,n 
be dated as post-I/Iississippian and pre-Lower Cretaceous in 
central Alberta. 

..y.. CHARACTER OF UNCQNFOmaTY 

The important factors that account for the character 
and Quantit 5 ^ of material at an unconformable surface are the 
type of parent material and environmental conditions at the time 
of formation, the latter including physiographer and climatic 


















>v 'c 


•' ! i 






0 



- 69 - 


conditions. However^ the actual amount and character of this 
weathered material preserved at an old unconformity will be 
related to the physiography^ v/hich makes for complete, partial 
or no removal of the wea.thered mantle. A typical soil profile 
or weathered mantle is made up generall37- of tvro zones, an upper 
oxidized (usually of reddish color) zone and a lower "little- 
oxidized” (duller greyish to greenish color) zone. It is seen 
that either both or only the lower zones may be preserved, 
depending on erosional effects. This may vrell explain the pre¬ 
sence of red and grey to green shales, or onl^.r grey to green 
shales at an unconformity. 

At Majeau Lake No. 1 well, the unconformity is present 
in the Mississippian Banff limestone and is characterized by a 
definite lO-foot residual zone. In the upper 10 feet this zone 
consisted of brecciated light gre 3 ^ to light greenish-grej^ clay- 
stone with pebbles and irregular fragments of grey chert, fragments 
of vdiite to light grey limestone and kaolinitic, calcareous 
material and somp minor dark grey claystone. Below this, the 
brecciated claystone material alternated with light greenish- 
grey, hard, dense limestone-. The lithology/ compares qualitatively 
v^rith the common "chert detrital" zone reported by geologists from 
other wells Ihat have encountered Mississippian strata. 




Xi; ■; - • •• • 

eXr,:/, •: . 

..■y Iv ■ , .. 

y . ...” .... . >"... . y • ■ X. . .' .y- 

v,y,; .X; X 'yy>-' '••= , 

;'.w..f.^.v . .;; v \> •..-^ .v. .' ,,■■.'■■■. 

. i A •■' i'.. . '. . . ' ,Lj IV.; :. ■■.■'■>' L. 

. :: .;..:. ..X ' ■ - -X • .. .... -...y.-.. ..... ; .LX.X 





- 70 - 


The Mississippian formations are characterized by the 
^presence of chert nodules (see Appendix^ Lisburn well core log). 
Accordingly^ in the process of vfeathering of the carbona^te rock^ 
the soluble and less stable limestones and dolomites are 
leached a¥fay i^hile the stable chert (a.nd quartz) are not affected, 
being concentrated in this zone of weathering. To a certain 
extent, also, the Mississippian beds are somewhat argillaceous, 

e 

As the carbonates are removed by solution, this insoluble ar¬ 
gillaceous material consisting in the main of clay minerals, 
clajr micas, chlorite and hydroxides of iron is concentrated a,nd 
consolidates into irregmilar, patchy claystone. This process is 
analagaus to stylolitization in carbone^te rocks wherein solution- 
takes place along a lateral plane, leaving an insoluble residue 
consisting of clay, iron oxide, quartz sand and silt pa^rticles. 

Due to the fineness of grain of this clay mass, it is 
particularly susceptible to alteration or authigenesis. In 
particular, the iron hydroxide ivould react according to the 
environmental conditions. In a moist, oxidizing environment the 
iron would change to the ferric state (hematite) and vvould give 
to the residual material a distinctive red to brown color, (The 
red coloration in sediments is a function of the ratio . of the 
ferric to the ferrous oxide'content.) On the other hand, in a 
reducing environment as may be present beneath the oxidized zone 











t ''V 




- 71 - 


or in a marine environment^ the nisiterials would retain a duller 
grey to greenish color. The presence of a grey to green claystone 
at Majeau Lake No. 1 well could be attribiited to the above process 
in which the upper oxidized zone may have been removed prior to 
the burial by Lower Cretaceous sandstones and shales. 

In the Lisburn well^ the unconformity is tentatively 
assumed to be present at the top of chert zone which overlies a 
granular dolomite the latter grading transitionally into the 
loTirer crystalline dolomite. The distinctive green cle^ystone was 
not present. 

Farther to the east where the Lovver Cretaceous rests 
directly on the Devonian this residual zone is characterized by 
the paucity of chert (18'). The unconformity, if present in the 
Jefferson dolomite, consists mainly of decomposed powrdery dolomite, 
with interfingering greenish or reddish claystones and quartz 
grains associated v/ith white kaolinitic material. Ifith depth, 
the dolomite becomes less decomposed and grades transitionally 
into the unaltered material. The vuggy,' saccharoidal dolomites 
are susceptible to deep leaching xvhich produces a ’’karst" surface 
in ¥/hich the insoluble argillaceous material accumulates as 
patchy deposits. V'Jhere the dolomite is interfingered and pocketed 
vfith anhydrite, the deep leaching produces large voids by-first 
removal of anhydrite; this v/eakens the rock mass to such an extent 





- 72 - 


that it collapses to form a brecciated dolomite, commonly termed 
a "collapse breccia". The presence of brecciated dolomite in 
certain zones, as is common in the Jefferson, may indicate some 
break in sedimentation, i.e., disconformity, 

Willson (22) reports a sharp contact at the uncon¬ 
formity between the Watervmys limestone and the Lovrer Cretaceous 
in the Lloydminster area. The Waterways limestone is found to be 
hard, massive and quite dense, making for less permeation by 
solutions than in the vuggy Jefferson dolomite. It is also 
likely that the residual mass that v^as present on this old 
Waterways surface may have been largely removed hy erosion before 
the burial by the Lower Cretaceous sediments. 

It is interesting to note the possible character of un- 
conformable s'urface of the "Darling silt". This clastic rock type 
m.ay have a different characteristic residual zone as compared 
with that of the carbonate rocks. There is also a possibility that 
this exposed siltstone may have been a source for some of the 
sediments laid down during the time of the unconform.ity and which 
may have been reworked later in Lower Cretaceous time (?), 







APPENDIX 








- 73 - 


Log of Ma.jeau Lake No. 1 Vfell 

Location : L.S.D. 12, Sec. 1, Tp. 57, Rge. 3 

Co-ordinates : S. of .i\i. 1980 E. of W. 660 

Spudded : June 22, 1948. 

Abandoned : August 17, 1948. 

Total Depth : 6304 feet. 

Elevation ; 2241.1’ (Ground) 

2248.0> (Kelly Bushing) 

Casing ; 398' of 13 3/8" 

Cored Intervals : 321?' - 3277' 

3869' - 4131' 

4300' - 4391' 

4539' - 4563' 

4897' - 5072' 

5983' - 6032' 

Electrolog Spicks" ; Lea Park 

First l/'fhite Specks 
Second lihite Specks 
Viking zone 
Viking sand 
Lower Cretaceous 
Mississippian 
Exshaw shale 
Devonian limestone 
Devonian dolomite 
Quartz silt 
Top D-2 zone 
Base D-2 zone 
Top Brown-Black shale 


, W. 5th. 


1590 feet 
2080 ” 
2700 " 
3200 ” 
3237 ” 

3375 ” 

4040 " 

4290 ” 

4300 ” 

4348 
4845 ” 

4865 " 

4990 " 

5925 ” 


Note : Due to driller's error, the depths on the core boxes 
and samples in the interval 3200-4290 feet require a 
correction. The correction is subtractive, 37 to 19 



























- 74 - 


feet. 

e.g. Top Viking zone^ nncorrected 3237 feet 
" ” " } corrected 3200 ” 

Top 1/Iississippian, ixncorrected 4059 feet 



M 

" , corrected 4040 ” 

Detailed Gore Log 


Core No. 1 

8.4' 

3217' ~ 3227' 10' recovered 

Shale, dark grey, very fissile vvith fish 
scales, some rare carbonaceous 
fragments, finely disseminated 
pyrite specks, small mica flakes 
lying parallel to parting; few 
minor inch laminated silty zones. 


0.3' 

Clay ironstone, grey, heavy compact, con- 

choidal fracture with mJ-ca flakes. 


1—1 

shale, as above. 

Core No. 2 

7.5» 

3227' - 3237' 7.5' recovered 

shale, as above (1), with 1.5' of soft, 
fragile shale; some thin silty 
to sandy grey shale lenses. 

Core No. 3 

0.5' 

3237' “ 3247' 10' recovered 

sandstone, grey, fine to medium-grained, 
"pepper-and-salt", hard, thinly 
laminated, mica flakes, pjnrite 
grains; some thin jet-like lenses 
of black carbonaceous shale. 


9.5' 

shale, dark grey to black, hard, compact, 
with light grey -vmvir lensing 
alternations of lamiinated sandy 
shales, siltstones and fine 
sandstones; plant fragments, mica 
flakes, pyrite 0 

Core No, 4 

3.8' 

3247' - 3257' 9.5' recovered 

sandstone and shale. Sandstone is light 






































- 75 - 


grey to grej, hard, compact, fine 
to medium-grained, ’’pepper-and 
salt”, laminated; shale is dark 
grey to black, compact, silty; 
carbonaceous fragments, mica 
flakes, pyrite specks. 

1.0* sandstone . as above (4)^ and shale , very 
fissile, silty. 

3.2* sandstone and shale , as above (4), with 

sandstone showing cross-lamination 
specks of mica, pyrite and car¬ 
bonaceous abundantly distributed. 

1.5' sandstone , grey, medium-grained, ’’pepper- 
and-salt" containing rare small 
black cherty pebbles; thin black 
silty shale lenses; black jets 
of plant remains. 

Core No. 5 3257' - 3267' 10* recovered 

10.0* sandstone and shale , as above (4), with 

sandstone lenses locally of buff- 
yellow color; signs of oil 
staining ; carbonaceous fragments. 

Core No. 6 3267' - 3277' 9«5' recovered 

5.6* sandstone and shale , as above (4j7 

2.7' sandstone , coarse, pebbl37-, dark grey, 
argillaceous with arenaceous 
shale . Pebbles are well-rounded, 
colorless to grey to black, 
cherty , concentrated in two zones: 
(1) a 4" zone at top with pebbles 
up to 3 / 16 " diameter and (2) a 
3" zone at bottom up to l/2" 
pebbles. Mica flakes, black 
carbonaceous fragments. 




























- 76 - 


1.2’ sandstone , light grey^ medium-grained, 

thin-bedded; mica flakes, small 
black carbonaceous fragments, 
abundant pyrite zones, some 
rare p;;/rrhotite; some thin, 
limited lenses of argillaceous 
material. Sandstone is composed 
of subroLinded to angular quartz 
grains (sometimes with inclusions), 
soime altered feldspar (almost 
opaque due to kaolin and sericite), 
small rhombs and fragments of 
calcite. 

Core No. 7 3669’ - 3B79* 10’ recovered 

10.0' sandstone and shale . Sandstone is light 
grey to buff-yellow, fine¬ 
grained varying to siltstone , 
minute cross-laminations, in beds 
1” to 1’ thick; mica flakes, 
pyrite patches. Shale is medium 
grey to dark grey, compact, varies 
to silty; abundant carbonaceous 
plant fragments along parting 
plane s. 

Core No. 6 3679’ - 3669’ 9*5’ recovered 

9 .5’ sandstone and shale , as above (7)^ pyrite 
patches more numerous. 

Core No, 9 3669’ - 3699’ 10.3’ recovered 

3 , 0 ’ sandstone and shale , as above ( 7 )^ sandstone 
gradually becoming medium¬ 
grained and predominating over 
shale; pjTitized plant fragments 
in shale lenses. 

sandstone , fine to modium-grained, greenish- 
grey to brownish-grey, thick- 
bedded, finely laminated. 


1 , 1 ’ 


sandstone and shale , as above (9). 




































-11 - 


2.8' sandstone , medium-grained becoming coarser 
downward^ greenish-grey to brovim- 
ish-grey^ "pepper-and-salt”^ 
massive^ slightly glauconitic. 
Composed of subangular to angular 
quartz grains, some large chert 
grains (exhibiting aggregate 
polarization), altered feldspar, 
green glauconite grains (sometimes 
globular) in minor amounts, 
calcite and brovmish argillaceous 
cement. 

1,7’ sandstone, medium to coarse-grained, 

brownish-green to gre37'ish-green, 
not as compact or as well-con¬ 
solidated as sandstone above it, 
kaolinized, glauconitic ; heavily 
oil stained at top. 

Core No, 10 3899* ” 3909* 5.0* recovered 

5.0' sandstone , as immediately above (9)^ highly 
kaolinitic . loosely consolidated, 
thin-bedded, oil stained through¬ 
out. Made up of quartz, chert, 
altered feldspar, some glauconite 
and calcite grains. 

Core No. 11 3909* ” 3919* 10' recovered 

6.5’ sandstone , as above (10), oil stained, 

3,5* sandstone . as above (11), well consolidated, 
with ver 3 ' thin (l/h" and less) 
lenses of dark grey to black shale , 
local pyrite concentrations in 
masses up to 1" across; oil 
stained; abundant small carbona¬ 
ceous fragments, mica flakes;- 
pelecjTpod at 3916’, 




























78 - 


Core No. 12 3919* - 3922> 3>7* recovered 

3.7* sandstone , light greenish-grey to greenish- 
greiTy fine to medinm-grained, 
otherv/ise like above (11), with 
thin streaks of dark grey shale 
and buff siltstone . 

Core No. 13 3922* - 3932* 9.5* recovered 

2,3’ sandstone , fine-grained, hard, grey to 

greenish-grey, in beds up to 6” 
thick, finely laminated; mica, 
small carbonaceous fragments. 
Composed of quartz, altered feld¬ 
spar, some chert, calcite, few 
grains of glauconite and brovimish 
argillaceous material. 

7,2’ sandstone , greenish, brownish to dark grey, 
fine-grained, glauconitic, with 
numerous irregular lenses of dark 
grey to almost black shale , vary¬ 
ing to arenaceous ; numerous 
brownish plant fragments; rock 
gets progressively darker downv\rard 
as shale becomes equally dominant 
with the sandstone (also darker 
greenish due to high glauconite 
content), 

Core No. 14 3932’ - 3942’ 10’ recovered 

1,0* sandstone , highly glauconitic , and shale , 
arenaceous, as above (13). 

0.9’ shale , light to medium, grey, very fissile, 
friable, dense, some minute rare 
carbonaceous specks. 

5.4’ shale , with irregular sandstone lenses 

glauconitic; in upper foot the 
sandstone is equally dominant 
with the arenaceous, dark grey 
shale but belovj- it appears in 
minor lenses or blebs; shale 
exliibits specks and streaks of 
bluish, greenish and reddish 



































- 79 - 


vivianite (hydrous ferrous 
phosphate), mica flakes, some car¬ 
bonaceous fragm.ents; Pelecjoods 
at 3936' and 3939’. 

1.2’ sandstone , silty, fine, brownish-grej', cal¬ 
careous, and shale , dark grey, 
calcareous; Pelecypods present; 
exudes a black oil, 

1.5’ shale , dark grey to black, with fine silty 
grey shale lamdnations; abundant 
Pelecypods . 

Core No. 15 3942’ - 3947’ 1’ recovered 

1,0’ shale , calcareous, dark grey, silty, with 
some fine silty sandstone , 
brownish-grey, calcareous, some 
oil stains; Pelecypods , Ostracods 
and Gastropod , 

Core No. l6 3947’ - 3957’ 0.3’ recovered 

0.3’ limestone , impure, shaly, dark grey to 
alm-ost black; coquina ?/ith 
Pelecypod and Gastropod shells 
replaced with calcite. 

Core No. 17 3957’ - 3959’ 0’ recovered 

Core No. 18 3959’ 39^9’ 8’ recovered 

8,0’ shale , black, with thin lenses of siltstone 
to fine sandstone , grey, cal¬ 
careous, finely lamdnated; quite 
fossiliferous; Pelec^poods , 
Gastropods . 

Core No. 19 3969’ - 3979’ 10,5’ recovered 

■'''2,0’ shale , black, as above (18); rare, thin 

grey silty zones; quite fossili¬ 
ferous as above. 

~^^ ~Note : Next core-box that contained rest of core in interval 
3969 ’ - 3979 ' was massing, apparently being misplaced 


in transit. 
























































- 80 - 


Core Mo, 20 

5.9’ 

3979’ - 39S9’ S’ recovered 

shale, dark grey to black, and grey cal- 
careous siltstone lenses, local 
pyrite globules; fossiD-iferous 
with Pelecypods, Gastropods, 
Ostracods (latter extremely 
abundant in bottoip 3’); oil 
stained at top. 

0.8» 

sandstone, grey, medium-grained, calcareous, 
with pyrite, iron oxide, exudes 
black oil (discolors sandstone 
to dark brownish-grey); DJich dark 
grey shale interbed. 

1.3’ 

shale, dark grey to black, calcareous, 
fossiliferous as above (20); 
calcareous silty zone at bottom. 

Core No, 21 

7.7’ 

3989’ ~ 3999’ 9’ recovered 

siltstone, light to brownish to dark grey, 
claystone, dark grey to black, 
varying to arenaceous, shoves 
crude parting; some fine brownish- 
grey calcareous sandstone; 
fossiliferous, variably oil 
stained. 

0.3’ 

sandstone, greenish to brownish-grey, 
fine-grained, fossiliferous, 
heavily oil stained, sho’ws 
porosity. 

1.0’ 

siltstone and claystone, as above (21), 

with Yevj thin laminated, fine¬ 
grained, brownish-grey sandstone 
lenses in upper part. 

Core No. 22 

9.5’ 

39991 _ 4009 ’ 9.5' recovered 

siltstone, brownish-grey to buff, locally 
varies to fine sandstone, oil 
stained throughout, laminated, 
with thin grey to dark grey 
claystone lenses; mica flakes 








































» 81 - 


along parting planes^ apparently 
non-fossiliferous; few lenses 
of light brownish-grej^, calcareous, 
kaolinitic sandstone at bottom. 

Core No. 23 1009 ' - 4019* 5»5* recovered 

5.5’ siltstone , with fine sandstone lenses^ 
light brownish->grey to light 
grey; claystone . dark grey to 
almost blacky varying from, paper- 
thin to 3” beds, rare carbonaceous 
material; thin slightly calcareous, 
kaolinitic zone at top; oil 
stained throughout. Siltstone 
is composed of rounded to sub- 
angular quartz, some feldspar 
(with albite twinning), small 
zircon prisms terminated by 
rounded pyramids, fev\r grains of 
tourmaline, with generally no 
calcite. 

Core No. 24 4020> - 4030’ 10.5 recovered 

2.5' siltstone and claystone in thin alternations, 
as above (23)^ locally varying 
to fine sandstone and silty 
shale; coarser siltstone present 
in elliptical blebs within silt¬ 
stone and claystone; thin ij" 
grey (w'eathering brovmish) 
heavy cla,y ironstone band at 
4022'; lightlj^ oil stained. 

0.4' sandstone , brownish-grey, fine-grained, 

heavily oil stained, crystalline 
pyrite, poorlj^ preserved 
Pelecypods and Gastropods . 

7.6' siltstone and shale , as above (24)^ clay 
ironstone band’s (up to 2") 
throughout; local pyrite, thin 
finely crystalline m-arcasite zone 
near bottom; little oil staining; 

Pelecypods ; shale more dominant 
towards bottom. 
























1 


f 


I 


i 

i 


( 



1 


i 



4 





i 

! 

! 

i 












- 82 - 


Core No, 25 4030’ - 4040* 10’ recovered 

4»1’ shale , as above (24) ^ brovmish--grey silt- 
stone lenses, grading to a fine¬ 
grained quartzitic , chertitic 
sandstone ; occasional clay iron¬ 
stone bands; local p3T:*itization, 
small carbonaceous specks (?), 
some oil staining in silty zones, 
poorly preserved Pelecypod noted. 

0,3’ sandstone, medium-grained, grey to brownish- 
grey, ’’pepper-and-salt", cal¬ 
careous, contains large brown 
plant fragments partly replaced 
by ferric oxide, some minute 
glistening coaly fragments ; oil 
stained; poorly preserved Pelecypods 
and Gastropods . Composed of 
angular to rounded quartz, chert, 
with feldspar, calcite, some 
tourmaline grains, carbonaceous 
material, 

5.6’ siltstone , grey to buff, shale , grey, dark 
grey to almost black, varying to 
silty, some thin clay ironstone 
bands; fossiliferous with shells 
• sometimes filled and replaced by 
pyrite, fossils especially 
abundant in clay ironstone; some 
coal7/ fragments ; oil stains in 
silty zones at base. 

Core No. 26 4040* - 4049’ 9’ recovered 

2.3’ shale , grey to dark grey, varying to silty, 
mdca flakes, abundant carbona¬ 
ceous plant fragEjents (coaly); 
some Pelecypods . 

3,9' siltstone , brownish-grey, varying to fine 
silty sandstone , calcareous in 
lower part, thin lenses of grey 
to dark grey shale (paper-thin 
in lower part), abundant carbona¬ 
ceous fragments, pyrite zones. 

















































-> S 3 - 


oil stained; quite fossiliferous 
. . in lower l/2’, Pelecypods and 

Gastropods (coquina) often 
pyritized. 

0,7’ limestone ,.buff-grey^ dense, hard, quite 
fossiliferous (coquina). 

1,1* shale , dark grey to black, calcareous; 

siltstone , brownish-grey; highly 
fossiliferous; 3” from, base is 
heavily- oil stained silty zone. 

Core No, 27 4049’ - 4059’ 7.3’ recovered 

4.2’ sandstone , fine-grained, silty, brovmish- 

grey, slightly calcareous locally 
with minor thin jet-like lenses 
of dark grey shale; oil stained 
especially in top ij*. 

2,3’ siltstone , brownish-grey, and shale , dark 
grey varying to silty; thinly 
laminated, minor oil staining, 

1.0’ sandstone , cherty, drab grey; rounded 

pebbles up to l/l6" in diameter, 
black chert ; colorless, white , 
frosted quartz . 

Core No, 28 4039’ - 4069’ 6,3’ recovered 

6.3’ claystone , light grey to light greenish- 
grey, compact, contains chert 
pebbles up to 1” or more in 
diameter, some oil staining at 
top, shows slickensiding especially 
at top, grey chert nodules are 
surrounded by white calcareous 
material 1’ below top and below 
this are present nodules of light 
grey to white limestone ; 4.7’ 
from top is a 6” band of heavily 
slickensided dark grey shale ; 
towards base claystone becomes 
calcareous. 












































Core No. 29 


1.3’ 


4069 * - 4079 * 3.3’ recovered 

limestone , light greenish-grey, dense, 
hard, compact, small rounded 
pyrite globules, small calcite 
streaks. 


4.0' claystone breccia , light greenish-grey, 
whitish mottling, nodules of 
calcareous material and chert, 
some slickensiding. 


Core 

0 

0 

0.9’ 

4079 ’ “ 4089’ 3.3’ recovered 

ILmestone, greenish-grey, as above (29). 
fossiliferous. 



1.2’ 

claystone breccia, as above (29), small 
inclusions of fine dark brown 
sandstone. 



1.4’ 

limestone, as above (29). 

Core 

No. 31 

1.0’ 

4089’ ~ 4097’ 1’ recovered 

limestone, greenish-grey, as above (29). 

Core 

No. 32 

0.3’ 

4097 ’ “* 4106 ' 0.3’ recovered 

limestone, greenish-grey to buff-grey, as 


above (29). 


Core No. 33 4100' - 4 II 6 ’ 4.3’ recovered 

4.3’ limestone , light to mediiim grey to greenish- 
grey, dense, compact, hard, p^/rite 
streaks, some fossils. 


Core No. 34 


4116 ' - 4121’ 4’ recovered 

4.0' limestone , as above (33), more darker 
grey bands, fossils. 


Core No. 33 4121’ - 4131’ 3’ recovered 

3.0’ limestone , as above (34), concentrated zones 
of crystalline pyrite (striated 
cubes, pyritohedrons), some 
brovjnish limonite streaks. 



























} 

I 

« 
















- 85 - 


Core No. 36 4300* - 4309* 5’ recovered 

5.0’ limestone , buff to brovmish-grey to greenish- 
grey dense to granular, with 
paper-thin interbeds of greenish- 
grey claystone , patches of 
crystalline calcite, p^yTcite, 
iron oxide, some oil staining, 
slightly porous. 

Core No. 37 4309' - 4319’ 2’ recovered 

2.0’ limestone , buff to brov/nish-grey, dense, 
as above (36), white to grey 
cherty fragments in bottom inch, 
some oil staining. 

Core No. 36 4319' - 4329’ 1.5' recovered 

0.6’ limestone , buff to brownish-grey, minor thin 
green cla;/stone breaks. 

0.7' limestone , grey, earth;; . white to grey 
chert fragments. 

Core No. 39 4329' ~ 4334' 2.5' recovered 

0.5' limestone , conglomeratic with pebbles of 
chert in a matrix of limestone 
and green claystone, 

2.0’ limestone , grey, crystalline to dense, with 

irregularly bedded green claystone , 
oil stained. 

Core No, 40 4334’ - 4339' 2’ recovered 

2.0’ limestone , grey, granular, with irregular 
green cla,ystone lenses, 
abundant coarsely crystalline 
calcite, some oil staining. 

Core No, 41 4339' - 4344' 2« recovered 

1.0’ limestone and green claystone , as above (40), 
pyrite specks, some oil staining. 

1,0’ dolomite , whitish-grey, dense, and shale , 
light greenish-grey; specks and 
streaks of calcite in dolomite. 


















































- 86 - 


Core No. 42 4344* - 4349' 2.3* recovered 

0.5* shale , light greenish-grey, as above (41), 
some slickensiding, numerous 
small pjn^ite specks, some oil 
staining. 


Core No. 43 


2.5* limestone , grey, granular, and dolomite , 

bro'wnish-grey, dense, with minor 
greenish claystone lenses, 
streaks of calcite, some oil 
staining. 

4349* - 4353* 1.5* recovered 

0.6’ dolomite and limestone , as above (42), 

with a 2" chert r^^bble zone in 
bottom limestone (white to grey 
pebbles), some oil staining. 


0,3* claystone , light greenish-grey, streaks of 
calcite. 

0.2’ limestone , as above (42), some oi_l 
staining. 

0.4* dolomite , as above (42), some oil staining 
in parallel laminations. 


core No. 4'- 


4353* - 4358’ 


1.5* recovered 


1.5* limestone , grey, as above (42), thin inter¬ 
bands of oil stained broi/mish- 
grey dolomite , some thin greenish 
claj/stone streaks. 

Core No. 45 4358’ - 4363* 4* recovered 

1.5* dolomite , • vfhitish-grey to light grey, 

silty, laminated with oil stains, 
thin limestone and greenish 
claystone bands, some pyrite. 

2.5’ dolomite , silty, porous, vuggy, contains 
oil, interspersed with grey 
limestone and calcite crystals, 
some pyrite. 































1 


j 

















Core 

No. 46 

0 . 8 ' 

4363 ' - 4368 ' 2' recovered 

dolomite, whitish-grey, oil stained, thin 
limestone, as above (top 45). 



1.2» 

dolomite and limestone, as above (lower 45) 

Core 

No. 47 

2.0' 

4368 * - 4373' 2' recovered 

dolomite, as above (top 45). 

Core 

No. 4S 

0.1' 

4373' “ 4378' 2' recovered 

Ijjuestone, dark grey to black, dense, 
brown oolites, white calcite 
streaks. 



1.9' 

dolomite breccia, oil laminated silty 




dolomite fragments in a matrix 
of dolomite, grey limestone and 
and slickensided green shale. 

Core 

No. 49 

1.5' 

4378' -4381' 1.5’ recovered 

dolomite breccia, porous, as above (48), 




matrix of grey dense, hard 
dolomite. 

Core 

No. 50 

2.5' 

’4381' - 4386' 2.5' recovered 

dolomite breccia, porous, as above (49), 




heavily oil stained, 1” band 
of greenish shale at base. 

Core 

No. 51 

1.5' 

4386' - 4390 ' 1.5' recovered 

dolomite breccia, as above (49). 


Core No. 52 4539’ - 4547' 6.5' recovered 

6.5' dolomite , buff to light brownish-grey, 

finely crystalline, saccharoidal, 
porous, vugs lined vri.th calcite 
crystals (geodes), locally 
slightly calcareous, 6” band of 
buff-white, microcrystalline 
doloraite at 4544'. 

Core No. 53 4547' - 4557' 5' recovered 

dolomite , greyish-white to cream-white, 

microcrystalline to dense, massive. 


5.0' 








































■I' 


>' \ 







I 











f 


i 

i 


I 

j 


I. 



j 

I 

I 





I 




! 



i 

j 

i 


I 

I 

1 

! 


i 


















hard, finely laminated, abundant 
"oolitic" p:^n?ite specks . 


Core No, 54 


Core No. 55 


5.0' 


4 . 0 - 


4557’ 


4563 


5' recovered 


dolomite , as above (53), but locally 

finely crystalline laminations 
alternating with macrocrystalline, 
some limy specks and blebs. 


4897* - 4904’ 


4' recovered 


dolomite , grey to greenish-grey, dense, 

hard, microscopic porosity, with 
thin green shale breaks especially 
in upper part, calcite streaks, 
pyrite specks and streaks. 


Core No. 56 


4904’ - 4910’ 


2’ recovered 


2,0’ dolomite , as above ( 55)5 and limestone , 
grey, finely crystalline. 


Core No, 57 


Core No, 58 


Core No. 59 


4910' - 4915’ 


2' recovered 


2.0’ dolomite , brownish-grey, silty, saccharoidal 
to very finely granular, porous. 

4915 ’ - 4920 ’ 1 . 7 ’ recovered 

1.7’ dolomite , as above (55 & 57 alternating), 
saccharoidal bands varying to 
reddish-brov/n, shows porosity, 

4920 ’ - 4922 ’ 1.5’ recovered 

1.5’ dolomite , as above (55), varies locally 
to finely crystalline reddish 
dolomite, 


Core No, 60 


4922’ - 4927’ 


2’ recovered 


2.0’ dolomite , as above (59), vugs lined with 
calcareous material in places. 


Core No. '61 4927’ ~ 4932' 2’ recovered 

2.0’ dolomite , as above (55), thin calcareous 
streaks. 


Core No. 62 


4932 


4937 


2’ recovered 


2.0’ dolomite , as above (55), calcareous streaks, 
vugs lined with calcite, st 7 /lolitic 




























































~ 89 - 


Core No. 63 4937* -- 4942* 2* recovered 

2.0’ dolomite , as above {55), var^diig to a 
light grey to whitish-grey^ 
silty dolomite, some thin green 
shale breaks in upper part^ 
pyrite distributed throughout 
with brovm to dark green tarnish 


Core No. 64 4942’ - 4947* , 2’ recovered 

2.0’ dolomite , as above (55), locally varying 
to brov/nish-grey, calcite 
patches throughout. 


Core No. 65 

2 . 0 ’ 


4947» - 4952’ 
dolomj.te , as above ( 64 ). 


2’ recovered 


Core No. 66 4952’ - 4957^ 2’ recovered 

2.0' dolomite , as above ( 64 ), few irregular 

thin lenses of green silt 7 / shale 
in upper 6 ”, 


Core No. 67 4957* - 4962’ 2’ recovered 

2.0’ dolomite , brownish-grey^ as above ( 64 ), 

some small irregular green silty 
blebs. 


Core No, 68 4962’ - 4967* 3* recovered 

3.0’ dolomite , brov/nish-grey to greyish-white 
(local greenish tint), dense, 
hard, silty in upper foot, som.e 
pyrite, calcite, outside of core 
stained yellowish to orange- 
brown (sulphur). 


Core No. 69 4967* - 4972* 5* recovered 

dolomite , brownish-grey, dense, hard, 
locally/ quite calcareous , 
irregular interbeds of greenish- 
grey shale , pyrite patches. 


Core No. 70 4972’ - 4977* 5* recovered 

5.0’ limestone , dolomitic , brownish-gre^/-, 

massive, dense, hard, locally 
only slightly calcareous, 
irregular green silty shale 
lenses, abundant calcite patches 









































j; 

















- 90 - 


Core No. 71 4977* - 4902* 5* recovered 

4.3’ limestone , dolomitic , as above (70)^ 

varying locally to dolomite , 
abundant calcite patches. 

0.7’ dolomite , grey, slightly calcareous . 

Core No. 72 4902* - 4992* 3»5’ recovered 

3 <>5’ dolomite , grey, dense to micro crystalline, 
hard, vugs due to leached 
calcite, some very thin green 
shale and calcite streaks, pyrite. 

4992* - 4997’ 3*4’ recovered 

dolomite , as above (72), varying to 

brov/nish-grey, few irregular 
thin dark grey to brownish-grey 
silty shale breaks. 

4997’ ~ 5002* 5’ recovered 

dolomite . as above (73):, massive with 

abundant dark brovm silty sho^le 
lenses, vugs of calcite crj^stals 
up to 1'* diameter. 

$002* - 5007’ 5* recovered 

dolomite , finely crystalline, as above 
(74), brovrnish-green shale , 
vugs of calcite, pj^-rite. 

Gore No. 70 $007’ - $017’ 10* recovered 

10.0* dolomite , greenish-grey, as above (75), 

and dark greenish shale , rapidly 
alternating, laminated, vugs of 
calcite. 

Core No. 77 $017’ - 5022* $* recovered 

5.0* dolomite , shaly, as above ( 70 ). 

(Base of Jefferson dolomite at $022 feet 
Lithologic **pick'*). 


Core No. 73 

3.4’ 


Core No. 74 

5.0* 


Core No, 75 

5.0* 





































I 











! 

















91 - 


Core No. 


5022* - 3032 


10,5’ recovered 


1 , 0 ’ limestone , shelly^ dense to microcrystalline^ 
greenish-grey to brownish-grey. 


8 . 8 * calcareous shale and shaly limestone , 

alternating; shale is dark grey 
to black (locally greenish-grey), 
fissile, becomes non-calcareous 
towards base, organic stains on 
parting planes; shaly limestone 
is dark grey to almost black, 
dense, fossiliferous ( Corals ). 

^ greenish-grejT-, finely crystalline 
to dense, silty, hard, blebs of 
calcite, fossils: Braehiopods . 


Core No. 79 5032» - 5037’ 

3 . 8 ’ dolomite , as above ( 78 ). 


5 ’ recovered 


1 , 2 ' limestone, brovmish-grey to grey, finel 37 - 
crystalline, hard, shaly ,• blebs 
of calcite, pjrlte, 

Core No, 80 5037’ - 5047’ 10' recovered 

2 . 7 ’ limestone , greenish-grey, dense, hard. 


1 , 3 ’ shal,y limestone and calcareous shale , 

dark greenish-grey to da.rk grey, 
silty . 

5 . 6 ' shaly limestone and calcareous shale , as 
above (80), but with abundant 

limy Corals, 


0 , 4 ' limestone , broi/mish-grey, dense, very hard, 
conchoidal fracture, minute 
laminations due to fine streaks 
of dark grey shale. 


Core No, 81 5047' - 5052' 5’ recovered 

5 . 0 ' liirestone , as above (lower 80); lower 3' 
become shaly , abundant corals; 
heavy zones of pyrite, mnreasite, 
some calcite. 










































- 92 - 


Core No. 82 5052* - 50^2* 10* recovered 

10,0* shaly limestone , as above (8l)^ varying to 
liin;v shale . dark brownish-grey, 
dense to finely crystalline, 
pyrite throughout, abundant Corals 
except in bottom few feet, small 
Braehiopod near base. 

5062 * - 5068 * 6* recovered 

shaly 1imestone , as above (82), corals in 
I'* to 10'* zones, Brachiopods 

at 5065* - 5067*. 


Core No. 83 

6 . 0 * 


Core No. 81 


5068* - 5072 * 4* recovered 

4.0* limestone , as above (83), Corals , 
Brachiopods , Ostracods . 


Core No. 85 5983* - 5993* 9* recovered 

4 . 2 * limestone , shaly, grey to dark grey, finely 
crystalline, and dark grey to 
black calcareous shs^le , 2 " at 
top and 6 " thick 2 * below top. 


1 . 5 ’ shale , brownish-black to black, calcareous , 
thinly lam±nated, sm.ooth parting. 

3 . 3 ’ limestone , bro'wnish-grey to greenish-grey, 
dense, hard, conchoidal fracture, 
in places sha.ly, some calcite 
streaks. 


Core No. 86 5993 * , 6003* 7.5* recovered 

7.5* shaly limestone , as above ( 85 ). and cal- 

ca.reous shale ; brovmish limestone 
becomes finely crystalline locally; 
BrachioDod. 


Core 

No. 87 


6003' - 6113' 

1 * recovered 


1 . 0 * 

limestone, brownish-grey, dense, hard. 

Core 

No. 88 

1 . 0 * 

6013 ' - 6018 ' 
shale, calcareous, 

1 * recovered 
brownish-black, thin 


1 / 2 " band of finely crystalline 
brovmish-grey limestone at top . 








































j" 






■X'. 





.L 






' Is 






1 


I 

I'.;: 

I' 















- 93 - 


Core No, 89 


6018 ' - 6020' 2* recovered 

2 .0' liinestone , light brovinish-grey, dense, 

hard, and shale , brownish-black 
calcite blebs. 


Core No. 90 


6020 ' - 6030' 1,5* recovered 

1 ,5' limestone , as above (89)^ varv~ing to 
shaly. 


Core No. 91 


6030' ~ 6032' 2 ' recovered 

2 , 0 ' lime stone , as above ( 89 ), calcite blebs, 
stylolitic in upper 6 ". 




















- 94 - 

Lo.q; of Lower Cretaceous Samples - kajeau Lake No. 1 Well 


3278 - 3280 ' - 

- siltstone, greenish-gre;," to brownish-grey, micaceous, 
locally with white to black grains of, quartz 
and chert^ soft, kaolinitic (?); 
sandstone, grey, "salt and pepper”, fine-grained, 

little induration, made up of colorless quartz 
and dark chert grains, few glauconite grains; 
some shale, dark grey, fissile, micaceous, 
varying to silty (mostly cavings) 

3280 - 3290 

- siltstone, light grey, micaceous, locally pyritized; 
and shale, grey, black carbonaceous flakes, 
brownish fish scales (cavings?), some "salt 
and pepper" sandstone. 

3290 - 3300’- 

- grey siltstone; greenish-grey to grey, "salt and 

pep;oer" sandstone, locally cherty; grey shale 

3300 - 3310’- 

- grey siltstone, locally cherty, carbonaceous; shale 
cavings 

3310 - 3340 ’- 

» grey siltstone; "salt and pepper" sandstone; shale 
(mostl3^ cavings) 

3340 - 3360 ’- 

- hard grey quartzitic sandstone; kaolinitic "salt 
and pepper" sandstone; gre:^ siltstone and 
silty shale 

3360 - 3380’- 

- grey to dark grey shale; grey siltstone 

33 SO - 3420 ’- 

- dark grey shale, little grey siltstone 

3420 - 3440 ’- 

” grey to broi'mish to dark grey shale; grey siltstone; 
carbonaceous fragments; some coal fragments 

3440 - 3450 ’- 

- grey to dark grey shale, silty 

3450 - 3460’- 

- as above, with whitish, kaolinitic, fine sandstone 

3460 - 3470 '- 

- light grey siltstone and shale, cos-1 fragments 


3470 - 3480’- coal ; some grey siltstone , shale 








































j 


















- 95 - 


34 S 0 

3490 

3500 

3510 

3520 

3530 ' 

3550 

3560 

3570 

3590 

3600 


3620 

3630 

3640 

3670 

3630 


3490’- grey to dark grey shale , silty; some coal^ bentonite? 

3500 ’- shale and siltstone , brovna ironstone concretion 

3510 ’- shale , siltstone and sandstone ; marcasite spherulite 

3520 *- shale , ’’salt and pepper" sandstone , some coal 

3530 ’- shale , "salt and pepper" sandstone 

« 

3550 ’- shale , grey kaolinitic "salt and pepper" sandstone , 
siltstone , some coal 

356O’- shale , siltstone , silty sandstone 

357O’- siltstone and grey "salt and pepper" sandstone , 
carbonaceous fragments, coal 

3590 ’- grey siltstone and dark grey shale , varying to silty 

3600’- siltstone and shale (varying to light grey), some 
coal 

3620’- siltstone , gre3^ to yellowish-grey, laminated, 

carbonaceous; sandstone , grej, "salt and pepper" 
(dark components mainlj^^ carbonaceous), white to 
colorless quartz grains, kaolinitic; shale 
dark varying to light grey, silty, some coal 
fragments 

3630’“ mainl^r light grey siltstone , light grey silty shale , 
little coal 

3640’- as above, v^ith little greir, "salt and pepper" 
sandstone , little coal , p^prite 

3670’- sandstone , light grey to grey, "salt and pepper", 
carbonaceous; siltstone , light grey; shale , 
dark grey, little ironstone? 

3680’- siltstone ; shale , grey to dark grey, calcite 

3690’- shale and siltstone , pyxite 















































f 
























- 96 - 


3700 - 3150^- siltstone , grey; sandstone , grey^ "salt and pepper" 
shale , grey to dark grey^ carbonaceous^ coal 
fragments 

3750 - 3760 *- siltstone and sandstone , some coal 

3760 ~ 3770’- siltstone ; shale , grey, silty; some coal , pyrite 

3770 - 3700 shale , dark grey to blacky carbonaceous^ varying 
to light grey, silty 

3730 - 3790’- as above, with little grey siltstone 


3790 - 3o00’- sandstone , grey to ?fhitish-grey, "salt and pepper", 
feldspathic, kaolinitic, slightly calcareous, 
ce^rbonaceous; little grey siltstone , coal 

3800 - 3810’- siltstone , shale , sandstone , as above, ?/ith black 
rounded chert pebble, coal 

3810 - 3820’- sandstone , siltstone , shale , as above, little coal 

3830 - 3860 ’- shale , dark grey, va.rying to silt 3 /-^ little coal in 
bottom 10' 


































“1 

i 
















Lop‘ of Drilled Intervals - Ma.jeau Lake No, 1 Well 

Courtesy Texaco Exploration Company 


DEPTHS IM FEET 

LITHOLOGY ' 

4134 ~ 4222 

Limestone 

4222 - 4237 

Limestone^ soft^ with shale, bentonitic and 
grey, silty; calcareous 

4237 « 4270 

Limestoiie, soft, green and grey shale 

4270 ~ 4300 

Shale, greenish grey and dark grey 

4390 - 4446 

Dolomite, buff, microcrystalline, with green 
calcareous shale 

4446 - 4539 

Dolomite - light buff, sugar. 37 , vvith porosity 
and micro-crystalline 

4562 - 4572 

4572 - 4595 

Dolomite - light buff, micro-crystalline 

Dolomite - light buff fine crystalline, good 
porosity, minor green shale (?) and calcite 

4595 - 4630 

Dolomite - light buff, fine to micro-crystalline, 
less porosity, increasing amount 
of calcite 

4630 - 4705 

Dolomite - buff, sugary and micro-crystalline 
in zones 

4705 - 4730 

Dolomite - buff with considerable brick-red 
to pink dolomite 

4730 - 4733^ 

Dolomite - buff, sugary ‘with much soft w’-hite 
limestone 

4733 - 4740 

Soft zone of buff dolomite and white, cal¬ 
careous dolomite 













5 






4740 - 4B20 


4820 - 4850 


Dolomite^ buff^ sugary with zones of white 
calcareous material^ as above. 


Dolomite ^ buff-grey 


4850 - 4897 


Dolomite - grey with bits of white quartz 


5072 - 5096 


5096 - 5118 
5118 - 5140 


5140 - 5196 


5196 - 5207 
5207 - 5224 


Limestone - grey^ finely crystalline, fossil 
fragments; little grey and green 
sh8.1e 

Shale - dark greenish-greir, calcareous; or, 

limestone - dark greenish-grey, shaly 

Shale - dark greenish-gre^r, calcareous; or 
limestone, dark greenish-grey, 
shaly 

Limestone - whitish-brovjn and greenish-brov/n; 

fine to medium-grained; fossil 
fragments 

Siltstone - light greenish-greyr; calcareous 

Siltstone - light greenish-grey, calcareous, 
as above 


5224 - 5270 

5270 - 5312 

5312 - 5321 

5321 - 5325 
5325 ~ 5405' 

5404 ” 5412 

5412 - 5455 


Limestone - whitish-brown, nd-cro-crystalline 
to dense; fossil fragments and 
pieces of calcite 

Shale - dark greenish-grey^, slightly calcareous 

Siltstone - dark grey, calcareous; hard 

Siltstone, as above 

Shale - dark greenish-grey, slightly calcareous 

Limestone - 'whitish-bro'wn, micro-crystalline 
to dense 

Shale and limestone in zones. Shale and 
limestone as above 









I 











• 1 








i 


an 


- 99 - 


5455 - 5480 

Shale 

5480 - 5540 

Shale 

5540 - 5665 

Shale 

5665 - 5675 

Trace 

5675 - 5694 

Shale 

5694 - 5715 

Shale 

5715 - 5765 

Shale 

5765 - 5780 

Shale 

5780 - 5815 

Shale 

5815 - 5831 

Shale 

5830 - 5895 

Shale 

5895 - 5920 

Shale 

5920 - 5935 

Shale 

5935 - 5950 

Shale 

5950 - 5965 

Shale 

5965 - 5974 

Shale 


- dark greenish-grey^ slightly calcareous 

- dark greenish-grey as above with zones 

of light greenish-grey shale, very 
calcareous 

- dark greenish-grey: calcareous 

of limestone, light bromish-white, 
microcrystalline to dense 

- dark greenish-grey, calcareous 

and limestone - shale is dark greenish- 
grey; lim.estone is whitish-grey 
and whitish-brovm, finely crystalline 
dense 

- dark greenish-grej^ 

- dark greenish-grey; some limestone 

as above 

and limestone - shale is dark greenish- 
grey, calcareous; limestone is 
light brown, dense 

as above; little lijnestone as above 

- dark greenish-grey, calcareous 

as above, plus a little limestone 

as above with some dark grey, very 
calcareous shale 

- dark brofjn to black, calcareous, soft 

(Top brn-bk, sh: 5935) 

and limestone - shale is dark greenish- 
grey, calcareous; limestone is 
brown, dense. 

- dark brovm to black, calcareous, soft 








■d .4 


I-. '.'C. 









I- 

■: 'I-- 





i 








rki'V M 


- J .-1 






■-.t 




■1 y. ■■■. ■. 


" i 
!' 
\ 

. j 

5 

( 

i 


t- 


I 

j- 


!. 

} 

( 




- 100 - 


5974 - 5933 


•Shale “ dark brovvn to black 


6032 - 6070 Shale and liraestone - shale i,s dark greenish- 

grey to brown; limestone is brovni 
and dense^ grading to grey limestone 
at base 

6070 - 6115 Shale and limestone - shale is dark greenish- 

grey^ calcareous; little brown 
shale; limestone is light to dark 
brown^ dense 

6115 - 6134 Shale - dark greenish-grey; little brown shale 


6184 - 6275 


Shale - dark greenish-grey^ calcareous 


6275 - 6280 


Shale - brownish-black bituminous^ very 
calcareous 


6280 - 6304 ’ Limestone - brovrn to whitish-brovm, dense, 

containing fossil fragments and 
tentaculites 








- 101 - 


Log of Lisburn Mo. 1 Vfell 

Location : L.s.d. 1, Sec. 22^ Tp. ^6, W. 6th. 

Co-ordinates ; 660 N. and 660 W„ 

Spudded : June Yf, 1916 

Abandoned : August 10, 1948 

Total Depth ; 6500 feet 

Elevation ; 2396.6’ (Ground) 

2406 ,9’ (Kelly Bushing) 

Casing ; 358» of 13 3/8” 

Cored Intervals; 4469' - 4794' 

5149' - 5320’ 

5823' - 5900’ 


Detailed Core Log 

Core No. 1 4469' - 4475' 6’ recovered 

0.8’ shale and siltstone ; shale is dark grey, 

varies to si1ty , contains abundant 
carbonaceous plant fragments* 
siltstone is grey, hard, compact, 
thinly laminated, has both sharp 
and transitional boundaries with 
darker shale. 

0.8’ sandstone , grey, fine-grained, slightly 
dolomitic, laminated, hard 
compact, apparently kaolinitic, 
with m±nor dark grey micaceous 
shale breaks, abundant car¬ 
bonaceous fragments, local heavy 
P3n:*itized zones. 

































- 102 - 


4.4* siltstone'and shale . as above upper part 

(l)^ rapidly alternating in beds 
l/lO” to 3" thick; siltstone 
shovfs cross-laiiiina.tion near top; 
heavj^ clay ironstone band at 1’ 
from base, local pj^Tite, carbon¬ 
aceous fragments abundant; 
pitted surface. 

Core No. 2 4475* - 4405* 10> recovered 

2.0’ siltstone and shale , as immediately above 
(1), pyrite more abundant, less 
pitted surface. 

0.3’ sandstone , medium grey, fine-grained, 

dolom-itic, ”salt-and-pepper*', 
hard, compact. 

1.9* siltstone and shale , as above (2), 

' slightly dolomitic siltstone 

grading into fine sandstone , 
shows definite local cross¬ 
lamination. 

1.1’ sandstone , dolomitic, as above (2), minor 
silty shale breaks. 

3.6’ sandstone , dolomitic, greenish-grey to 

mediuiri-grey, fine-grained, hard, 
finely laminated, mottled, 
locally varying to silty dolomite 
irregular wav^^ dark grey 
arenaceous claystone, indefinite 
borders; black carbonaceous 
fragments. 

Core No. 3 4465* - 4495* 10’ recovered 

0.8’ dolomite , silty, medium-grey, compact, 
conchoidal fracture, pitted 
surface. 


7,1’ sandstone , dolomitic and claystone , 

arenaceous, as above lower part 
(2), mnttled, breccia-like in 
upper 3' , piTcite zones, heavy 

































- 103 - 



light grey band with abundant 
carbonaceous plant fragments 
at 4493’. 

1.1» 

shale, silty, dark grey, some carbonaceous 
specks^ pyrite. 

Gore No. 4 

8.3’ 

4495’ - 4505’ 10’ recovered 

shale, as above (3), pitted surface, cleaves 
into 1 / 2 ” to 1” bandsj evidence 
of slickensiding (?), two 4” 
ironstone bands^ at 4497’ and 

4501 ' ; Pelec,ypods. 

1.7' 

dolomite, silty, medium to dark grey, 
finely granular. 

(Electrolog *’pick”: Ostracods - 4498’) 

Core No. 5 

0.2’ 

4505' - 4515’ 10’ recovered 

dolomite, silty, as above (4). 

1.2’ 

sandstone, dolomitic, shaly, medium to 

dark grey, and shale, carbona- 
ceous fragments. 

0.7* 

sandstone, slightly calcareous, dark 

greenish-grey, fine to medium¬ 
grained, glauconitic, and shale. 

0,8’ 

shale, silty, dark grey to black, 
slickensided. 

0.3’ 

limestone, buff-grey, dense. 

3.3’ 

shale, calcareous, dark grey to black, 

varying to silty, fev/ thin light 
grey siltstone and fine sandstone 
breaks, Pelecypods, Gastropods. 

1.3’ 

sandstone, highly calcareous, grey, fine- 
grained, hard, compact, varying 
locally to dense, medium-grey 
shaly limestone; miarcasite; 
Pelec 3 PDods. 



























r . 

















- 104 - 


2.2’ shale , as above (5), thin light grey 
calcareous siltstone breaks- 
fossiliferous^ Pelecyoods . 

Core No. 6 4313' - 4325* 10’ recovered 

4.0’ sandstone and shale , calcareous, thin- 
bedded, rapidly alternating; 
sandstone is grey to brovmish- 
grey, fine-grained, varies to 
calcareous siltstone; shale is 
dark grey to almost black, varies 
to silty and arenaceous, v\rith 
mica; pyrite zones, paper-thin 
coaly streaks at top, evidence 
of slight oil stain in upper 
foot; sandstone is commonly 
nodular, irregular with shale 
flexed around it; Fossiliferous: 
Pelec,'rpods , CTastropods , sometimes 
filled and replaced with pyrite, 
oxidized locally to brown spots, 

2.0’ shale , dark grey to black, vari^ing to silty, 
paper-thin grey to brownish- 
grej siltstone breaks, cleaves 
into 1 / 2 ” bands, 

shale and siltstone ; shale as above (6), 

siltstone, grey to brownish-grey, 
slightly calcareous to calcareous, 
hard, in thin beds or nodules, 
varies to fine sandstone , heavy 
pyritization. 

Core No, 7 4323' - 4329* 3.7' recovered 

3,7’ shale and siltstone . as above (6); Pele^nods , 
Gastropods in lower 2’, cocjuina- 
like in places. 

4329 ’ - 4339’ 3 .3' recovered 

3.3’ shale , as above (7)^ few lenses siltstone ; 

shale is soft in zones; highly 
fossiliferous as above. 


Core No. 8 
















































- 105 - 


Core No. 9 4539* - 4549^ 6» recovered 

3.7’ shale^ as above (0)^ few grey siltstone 
lenses in upper part^ pitted 
surface especially at top; 
highly fossiliferous as above. 

0.5’ shale , as above (9), lenses of sandstone, 
grey, mediijm-grained, cherty, 
'Vpepper-and-salt”, kaolinitic (?), 
pyrite. 

1,2’ sandstone , slightly calcareous, buff-grey 
to brownish-grey, fine-grained, 
hard; Pelecypods as above, 

0.6’ fragments of limestone , greenish-grey, 

fine-grained; cherty limestone , 
chert pebbles, cherty browmish- 
grey calcareous sandstone , 
whitish-grey chert . 

(Slectrolog ’’pick”: Top of chert:- 4544’) 

Core No, 10 4549’ - 4554’ 1,0’ recovered 

1.0’ fragments of : whitish-grey chert , cherty 
calcareous material, brownish to 
buff-grey calcareous sandstone 
(sometimes with small chert 
pebbles) and limestone , dark 
grey shale ; some slight oil 
staining. 

Core No. 11 4554’ - 4559’ 2,0’ recovered 

2,0’ fraginents of : buff-grey to brov/nish-grey 
limestone and calcareous 
sandstone , whitish-grey to 
bluish-grey che^, some shale (?); 
distinct oil staijiing. 

Core No. 12 4559’ - 4564’ 

fragments of limestone , calcareous sand¬ 
stone , chert , as above, some 
calcite. 

























































- 106 - 


Core No. 13 4564' - 4569' 2.5' recovered 

2.0' fragments of limestone , brovm calcareous 
sandstone , chert . as above; 
limestone and chert are intim.ate~ 
ly intermixed; some oil staining. 

0,5’ dolomite , clastic, whitish-grey to greenish- 
white, microgranular, hard; 
some paper-thin green shale 
breaks; oil stained in parallel 
laminae. 


Core No. 14 4569’ - 4574’ 5’ recovered 

4.5’ dolomite , clastic, dirty brownish-grey, 
very fine-grained, porous, 

^^§.7, crystals of calcite, 
heavily oil stained in 1' zone 
near top and variably in remain¬ 
der, locally friable; several 
1" zones of greenish-white 
dolomite, as above (13). 

0.5’ dolomite , clastic, light greenish-grey, 
fine-grained, very slight oil 
staining. 


4574’ - 4579’ 3’ recovered 

doloiriite , clastic, brownish-grey, as 

above (14), with breaks of light 
greenish-grey dolom.ite, less 
heavily oil stained, more friable. 

Core No, l6 4579’ ~ 4564’ 5* recovered 

dolo.mite , clastic, light greenish-grey to 
buff-grey, granular, hard, some 
porosity in zones, some variable 
oil stains, few paper-thin green 
shale breaks. 

2.2' dolomite , broTOish-grey, as above (15), 
oil stained. 


Core No, 15 

3.0' 






















I 


L- 













- 107 


dolomite , greyish-white to light greenish- 
grey, as in lower part of (13), 
vertical fracture coated with 
crystals of calcite, pyrite and 
oil stains; some black oil in 
small pits at base; Pelecyood 
cast. 

0,7’ dolomite , brownish-grey, as above (l6), 
oil stained. 

Core Wo, 17 4584* - 4$B9’ recovered 

3.0' doloiiaite , as immediately above (l6), 

oil stained especially in upper 
foot, streaks of calcite. 

0*3’ shale , greenish to bro^vTiish-black, squeezed, 
fractured. 

0.5’ dolomite fragments , as above (17)^ oil 
stained. 

Core No, 18 45B'9' - 4594’ 3’ recovered 

3.0’ dolomte , as above (17), oil stained. 

Core No. 19 4594’ - 4599’ 5* recovered 

3.2' dolomite , as above (17)^ oil stained; 

paper-thin streaks of green 
shale at bottom.. 

1.7’ dolomite , grey to buff-grey, very finely 
crystalline to microcrystalline, 
hard, porous, vuggy, oil stained, 
fossil casts left as result of 
leaching out of gastropods, etc, 

(Electrolog "pick”: Top of "Rundle” 

Dolomite - 4596’) 

Core No. 20 4599' - 4604’ 5’ recovered 

5.0’ dolomite , as above (lower part 19), larger 
vugs, oil stained; varies 
locally to brovmish-grey and 
greenish-grey color. 










































- 108 - 

Core No. 21 

3.0* 

4604 ’ - 460 c' 3’ recovered 

dolomite, as above (20), vurmy, oil 
stained. 

Core No. 22 

1.4’ 

4608 ' “ 4618 ' 2* recovered 

dolomite, as above (20), vus^^y. oil 
stained. 

0.6» 

dolomite, brownish-/ 2 :re 7 /-, granular, 
laminated^ oil stained. 

Core No. 23 

1.3’ 

4618 ' ~ 4628 * 2' recovered 

dolomite, as immediately above (22), oil 
stained. 

0.7’ 

dolomite, li^ht p:rey, as above (21), 
oil stained. 

Core No. 24 

2.0* 

4628 ’ “ 463 B’ 2’ recovered 

dolomite, brownish-^rey, finely crystalline, 
hard^ microporosity^ oil stained, 
some interbeds of light-grey 
dense, hard dolomite: whitish- 
grey chert band at 9” belo'w top. 

Core No. 25 

4.0* 

4638 ' - 4648 ’ 5.8* recovered 

dolomite, greenish-grey to greenish-white, 
finely crystalline, hard, 
spherulites of pj^rite or mar- 
casite along parting planes; 

1'* band grey dense, hard dolomite 
at 7” below top; light grey 
chert fragments at 10” below 
top; minor oil stains; the upper 
foot is distinctly greenish, 
and belov/ a chalky greenish- 
white color a.ppears; imprints of 
Bryozoa (Fenestellid), 

1.3’ 

dolomite, brownish-grey, crystalline, 

chertitic, sometimes calcareous 




































- 109 - 


bands intimately interbedded with 
grey^ dense bands; Bryozoa 
( Fenestellid ). 

0,5' dolomite , as above^ upper part (23), 
minor oil stains. 

Core No, 26 4648 * - 4638 ’ 10* recovered 

9.0’ dolomite , greenish-grey to brovmish-grey, 
finely crystalline, spotted oil 
staining throughout, globules 
of massive pyrite, spherulites 
of crystalline pyrite; dolomite 
has a general chalk 3 ^ appearance 
and distinctly greenish in 
bottom 1^’, grading into a 
green shale. 


0.8’ ILmestone , dolomitic , brovm, fragmental in 
part made up of Crinoids , medium 
crystalline in remainder, oil 
stained, 

^*2’ shale , greenish-grey, fragile, cavings (?). 

Core No. 2? ' 4638’ - 4668 ’ 9' recovered 

9 .O’ limestone , fragmental (Crinoidal), brown 
to broimish-gre^,?-, oil stained, 
large calcite crj'stals; several 
thin dark argillaceous breaks ; 
local buff-grey dense limestone 
lenses. 

(Blectrolog ’’pick"; Top Bundle Limestone 

- 4660 ’) 

Core No. 28 4668 ’ - 4678 ’ 10’ recovered 

10,0’ limestone , alternating brovm to brownish- 

grey, fine to medium crystalline, 
locally slightly fragmental 
(Crinoidal) and buff-grey, dense, 
hard, compac t 1 ime stone s, 
stylolitic throughout, variablj^ 




































- 110 - 


oil stained throughout; black to 
green argillaceous material along 
stylolites; local oolites of 
pyrite and marcasite; Braehiopods 
at 1672 '. 

Core No. 29 467 B> - I 6 B 8 * 7* recovered 

0.1' limestone , buff-grey^ dense, hard, compact. 

shale , greenish-grey, slickensided, 

fragmentary, some buff-grey 
limestone. 



5.4’ 

limestone, alternating as above (28). 


0.1' 

shale, greenish-grey, as above (29). 


1.4’ 

limestone, as above (28). 

Core No. 30 

5.0' 

4688 ' - 4698 ’ 5’ recovered 

limestone, alternating buff-grey and 
brown; the buff-grey dense 
limestone predominates; paper- 
thjji green shale along stylolitic 
contacts; Brachiopod at 469 O’. 

Core No. 31 

10.0’ 

4698 ’ - 4708 ’ 10’ recovered 

limestone, buff-grey to light grey, dense. 


hard, compact, massive, con- 
choidal fracture; fevif irregular 
interbands of broimish-grey 
fossiliferous granular limestone; 
stylolites vmth green or black 
shale along contact; l/2" 
whitish-grey chert nodule at 
4706 ’; sniall chert and calcareous 
sandstone nodule at bottom; 
slight local oil staining. 

4708' - 47 IB' 10' recovered 

10.0' limestone , as above (31), stylolitic, local 
slight oil staining; small 
fossil. 


Core No. 32 










































- Ill - 


Core No. 33 

0.3’ 


47ie» - 4728’ 
limestone , as above (31). 


0,3* recovered 


Core No. 34 & 35 472B’ - 473B* Probably no recovery ? 

Core No. 36 4733’ ~ 4743’ 2.5’ recovered 

2.5' limestone . buff-grey varying to light 

brownish-grey and light greenish- 
grey, dense, hard, compact, fev/ 
paper-thin green shale breaks. 

Core No. 37 . 4743’ - 4743’ 4.7’ recovered 

4.7’ limestone , buff-grey to light greenish- 

grey, dense to microcrystalline, 
hard; some brovmish-grey granular 
limestone bands in*bottom 2’; 
indistinct paper-thin greenish 
argillaceous breaks in bottom 
2 1 / 2 '; Brachiopods at 4745’ - 
4743’, 


Core No. 33 4743’ - 4753’ 10’ recovered 

10.0’ limestone , microgranular, as in lower part 
of (37)^ slightly oil stained in 
parallel laminae, som-e p^crite, 
whitish-grey chert nodules up 
to 1” diameter at 4754’. Well- 
preserved Braehiopods ( Spirifer ) 
and Bryozoa ( Feriestellid ), crinoids, 

(Electrolog ’’pick": Top Banff formation 
- 4750’). 


Core No, 39 4753’ - 4763’ 10’ recovered 

10.0’ limestone , as above (33), locally var^.'ing 
to finely crystalline; paper- 
thin argillaceous breaks; 
Brachiopods , Gastropods . 

Core No. 40 4763’ - 4773’ 10’ recovered 

10 . 0 ’ ' limestone , as above ( 39)5 locally partly 
fragmental; thin greenish-grey 
argillaceous breaks; calcite, 
p^Tite, oil staining along vertical 

















































- 112 - 


fracture at 4771’ - 4774’ and 
in bottom 1*; local oolites and 
globules of pyrite; Brachiopods , 
Crinoid stems. 


Core No. 41 477^’ ~ 47BB< 1.5’ recovered 

1.5’ limestone , as above (40) with bluish-grey 
chert nodules up to 2" or more 
diameter near bottom. 

Core No. 42 47 qB* - 4794’ 2.5’ recovered 

2.5’ limestone , as above (40) ^ ■ P3T:’ite ; Brachiopods , 
Crinoid stems . 

(Electrolog "pick"; Top Exshaw shale - 
5100 ') 

(Electrolog "pick": Top Devonian limestone 
- 5130') 

Core No. 43 5149’ - 5154’ 2.5’ recovered 

2.5’ limestone , dirty brownish-grey^ varying 

locally to light bromish-grey, 
finely crystalline to micro- 
crystalline to dense^ hard, comr- 
pact; some small gre 3 r to black 
chert fragments in upper part; 
Brachiopod cast. 


Core No. 44 5154’ - 5159’ 4>5’ recovered 

3.6' limestone , as above (43)^ vari’ing locally 
to almost mediuia cri^stalline; 
calcite streaks, brown to dark 
grey paper-thin argillaceous 
breaks; Brachiopods at 5154' ~ 
5157'. 

0.9’ limestone , buff-grey to light bro'wnish- 

grey, dense to crj^Dtocrj^stalline 
(locally lithographic), hard, 
compact; one fragm.ent shows 
thin banded chert ; thin dark 
grey argillaceous breaks, calcite 
streaks. 




































- 113 - 


Core No. 45 5159* - 5164* 2.5* recovered 

2.5* limestone . lithographic, as above (44) in 
fragments, varying locally to 
cryptocrystalline, fragments 
show calcite, stylolites, paper- 
thin oil stains; fragments of 
whitish-grey chert, especially 
at bottom with diameter up to 
and greater than v^ridth of core. 

Core No, 46 5164* -- 51q 8* 1,5* recovered 

1.5* limestone , buff-grey to light brownish- 

gre^T-^ cryptocr 3 /stalline to finely 
crystalline, hard, compact, small 
1 " chert fragment of light grey 
color in upper part; calcite 
streaks; bottom core crumbled up 
into powder, small chips, some 
chert. 

Core No. 47 5169* - 5173* 3* recovered 

3 .O’ lii^iestone , as above ( 46 ), in fragments 

varying to dense, poorly pre¬ 
served Brachiopod . 

Core No, 46 5173* - 5176* 3* recovered 

1 * 5 * limestone , as above ( 45 )^ stylolitic, dark 
grey to black argillaceous 
material. 

1 . 5 * limestone , as above ( 46 ), numerous finely 
crenulated black stylolites, 
calcite. 

Core No. 49 5176* - 5163* 2* recovered 

0 , 5 * lim.estone , as lower part (46), thin band 
dirty brownish-grey, crypto¬ 
crystalline limestone at bottom., 
stylolitic. 

1 . 5 * lime stone , light grey to light greenish- 

grey, dense to cr^/ptocrystalline, 
hard, compact, varying locally 
to finely crystalline light 






















'mrW:' 


■ BW 





' , 











- 114 - 


brov/nish“grey limestone, as above 
(49), calcite crystals leached 
out near bottom forming small 
vugs, stylolitic, 

(Electrolog "pick”: Top Devonian Dolomite 

- 5180 ') 

Core No. 50 5183* - 5188' 3«5* recovered 

1.1' limestone , locally dolomitic . light 

brovmish-grey to light grey, 
finely crystalline, stylolitic, 
slightly laminated, slight local 
oil staining. 

lol’ dolomite , light brov/nish~grey to light 

greenish-grey, finely granular, 
he.rd, compact, laminated, very 
slightly calcareous, calcite 
streaks. 

limestone , light greenish-grej^ to light 
grey, granular, hard, local 
slight oil stains. 

limestone , dirty brownish-grey, dense, 

hard, compact, m-ottled, stylolitic 
paper-thin black argillaceous 
breaks especially in bottom l/2". 

5188' - 5191 * 2 . 9 * recovered 

lime stone , light grey, granular, hard, 

fairier compact, slight parallel 
laminated oil stains at top. 

2.1' dolomite , light grey to light brownish- 

grey, finely granular, parallel 
laminated oil stains especially 
in upper 1', slightly calcareous. 

Core No. 52 5191* - 5194* 2,9* recovered 

lo5* dolomite, as above (51), oil stained. 

1.4’ limestone , resembles above dolomite (52), 
minor oil stains. 


0 . 6 ' 

0.3* 

Core Mo. 51 

0 . 6 ' 


















































- 115 - 


Core No. 53 . 5194* - 5199^ 5* recovered (?) 

4.3’ limestone , light greenish- to brovmish- 

grey_, cryptocrystallLne to finely 
crystalline^ hard, compact, 
thin dark grey argillaceous 
breaks , stylolitic. 

1.3’ limestone , buff-grey to light brownish- 
grey, dense, hard, compact, 
conchoidal fracture, few paper- 
thin dark grey to black ar ¬ 
gillaceous breaks. 


Core No, 54 5199’ - 5204’ 1.5’ recovered 

1,5’ limestone , as immediately above (53)^ 
in fragments, stylolite. 

Core No. 55 5204’ - 5209’ 2.5’ recovered 

2.0’ limestone , as above (54), generally lighter 
in color. 

0,5’ limestone breccia , irregular v/hitish-grey, 
dense to cryptocrystalline lime¬ 
stone fragments in a matrix of 
m.edium-grey finely crystalline 
lim.e stone. 

Core No. 56 5209’ - 5214’ 2,5’ recovered 

2.5’ limestone , m.ediuni-grey to light greenish- 

grey, d.ense, hard, compact, 
conchoidal fracture, stylolitic; 
locall^r varies' to light grey 
finely crystalline; fragmentary 
in bottom 2’, parallel oil - 
stains in crystalline fragments, 
calcite. 

Core No. 57 5214’ - 5219’ 1,0’ recovered 

0.4' limestone , light greenish-grey to light 

broTmish-grey, dense to crypto¬ 
crystalline, hard, compact, w'ith 
equal amounts shale <, dark 
greenish-grey, calcareous. 



























I' 
















- 116 - 


0.6’ lime stone f rague nt s , buff-grey to light 
brownish-grey, dense, hard, 
conchoidal fracture. 

Core No. 56 5219* - 5224’ 5* recovered 

5.0’ limestone fragments , as above (57);few 
small fragments whitish-grey, 
finely crystalline. 


Core No. 59 


5224’ - 5229’ 1’ recovered 

1.0’ limestone , light grey, finely cr^rstalllne, 
compact, hard, in fragments. 


Core No. 60 5229* - 5235* 5* recovered 

3.0’ dolomite breccia , fragments of light 

bro^Amish-grey, granular dolomite 
in matrix of gre3i" granular 
limestone, slight oil staining. 


2.0’ dolomite , grey to light brovmish-grey, 

finely crystalline, hard, laminated, 
calcareous streaks, slightly oil 
stained in parallel laminae in 
bottom 1’, 


Core No. 6l 5235* - 5240* 2.5* recovered 

2»5* dolomite , as above (60), slight oil 

stains, few paper-thin dark grey 
argillaceous breaks. 


Core No. 62 5240* - 5244* 4.5* recovered 

4.5’ dolomite , slightly calcareous, grey to 
light greenish-grey, finely 
crystalline, hard, lamiimted; 
5242-43* is oil stained brownish- 
grey dolomitic ILmestone . 


Core No. 63 5244* - 5250* 6’ recovered 

dolomite , grey, as above (62), locally 

quite calcareous, calcite crystals, 
some thin dark grey argillaceous 
breaks ; good oil staining at 
5245-46*. 


2 . 0 ’ 































I 











- 117 - 


1.0’ dolomite , light greenish-grev^ finely 

granular, compact, hs-rd, some 
thin dark grey shale interbeds. 

3.0’ dolomite , slightly calcareous to calcareous, 
light grey to light broimish- 
grey, finely crystalline, lamin¬ 
ated, hard, compact, slight oil 
staining; thin dark grey 
argillaceous breaks . 

Core No. 64 5230* - 5255^ 3.3* recovered 

3 . 3 * dolomite , as immediately above ( 63 ), 
locally- quite calcareous , 
calcite crystals, lower 2’ 
fragmentary, oil stained. 

5255 * - 5260 ’ 4* recovered 

dolomite , as above ( 64 ), paper-thin to 
thin dark grey argillaceous 
breaks , upper l/2’ oil stained, 
remainder very slight locally. 

Core No. 66 5260’ - 5265* 2’ recovered 

2.0* dolomite , as above ( 65 )^ in fragments, 
local slight oil stains. 

5265 * -- 5270 ’ 1.5* recovered 

1 . 5 * dolomite , whitish-grey, cr 3 /ptocrystalline, 
locally breccia-like with dolo¬ 
mite fragments surrounded by 
granular limestone, 
stylolitic. 

527O’ - 5274* 4 ’ recovered ^ 

4.0' dolomite , Yfhitish-grey, cryptocrystalline 
to finely crj'stalline, brownish- 
grey 1’ from top, oil stained 
upper 2 ’. 

Core No. 69 5274* " 5279* 3.3* recovered 

3.3* dolomite , as above (63(, vuggy especialljr 
in bottom 1 l/2*, slight oil 
staining. 


Core No. 67 


Core No. 68 


Core No. 65 

4.0’ 











































- 118 - 


Core No. 70 5279* - 5281* 1.9* recovered 

4,9’ dolomite , as above ( 69 );, vuggy (leached 
out calcite crystals), locally 
oil stained especially in upper 
1’, locally laminated, l/l" 
greenish and brovmish-black 
shale break at 2^ from bottom, 
some chert fragments in upper 
part? 

Core No. 71 5284* ~ 5289* 4.9* recovered 

4 . 9 * dolomite , as above (70), varying to light 
brov/nish-grey, locally a breccia 
with fragments of light greenish 
shale or finer textured dolomite 
in dolomite matrix, vuggy, oil 
stained; locally quite calcareous 
grading into dolomitic limestone, 

5289* - 5295 * 5* recovered 

dolomite , as above (71) ^ generallj/^ light 
brovmish-gre^/ in lower 3*, 
locally calcareous, some inter¬ 
mixed grey limestone , generally 
porous, locally- vuggj^, locally 
oil stained; some small green 
shale fragments . 

Core No. 73 5295* - 5300* 4* recovered 

2.1’ dolomite , vdiitish-grey to buff-grey, as 

above (71) > locall:/- calcareous , 
stylolitic, oil stained in upper 
1’; greenish-grey shale breaks . 

0 . 5 * limestone , grey, fine to medium cr^^^stalline. 

1,0’ dolomite , light brovmish-grey, fine to 
medium crystalline, micro¬ 
porosity, oil staining at top. 

0,1’ limestone , as above (73)'. 


Core No. 72 

5.0’ 





















































- 119 - 


0 . 2 ' limestone , grey to light brownish-grey, 
cryptocrystalline to dense, 
hard, some oil staining in 
leached out calcite vugs. 

Core No. 74 3300^ - 5305* 2.1* recovered 

2 . 1 ' fragments of limestone , as immediately 
above ( 73 ), dolomite, light 
brownish-grey, cryptoc rystalline 
to dense, some greenish cal¬ 
careous, gritty argillaceous 
material; hard dolomite in lower 
1 * . 


Core No. 75 

0.7' 


5305’ - 5310* 0.7’ recovered 

dolomite fragments . as above ( 74 )^ specks 
of green shale . 


Core No. 76 5310* - 5315’ 1.8' recovered 

1 . 8 ' d.oloinite , brownish-grey, finely 

crystalline, sugary, inter¬ 
granular porosity, slight local 
oil staining. 


Core No. 77 5315’ - 5320' 5’ recovered 

5*0’ dolomite , as above (76), lighter 
brownish-grey, 

(Electrolog "pick": Base of D-1: 5765’) 

(Electrolog "pick": Quartz Silt: 5795’) 
(Electrolog "pick": Top D-2: 5823’) 


Core No. 78 5823’ - 5826' 2.5’ recovered 

0 . 9 ’ dolomite , grey to bro?mish-gre 3 ^, dense, 
hard, small pores, calcite; 
fragment of fine-grained, 
greenish-grey calcareous dolomite 
at top. 




















j. 














- 120 - 


0.8' dolomite , light brovmish-grey to buff-grey^ 
cryptocrystalline to dense^ 
slightly porous^ calcite crystals. 


1,8’ dolomite , grey, as above upper part (78), 
light grey fragments. 

Core No, 79 5826' -- 5831' 3* recovered 

2,0’ dolomite fragments , as immediately above 
(78), calcareous material, 
calcite, p^nrite, brovaiish-grey 
dolomite in bottom 1', 


Core No, 80 

3.3» 


5831' - 5836' 3»3' recovered 

dolomite fragments , light brovmish-grey to 
buff-grey, crushed decomposed. 


Core No. 81 5836' - 5839' 2,6' recovered 

2.6’ dolomite , whitish-grey to buff-grey, 
cryptocrystalline to aLmost 
dense, compact, small calcite 
streaks; interbedded paper-thin 
green shale . 


Core No. 82 5839' - 5842' 3' recovered 

1.3' dolomite , s 1 ightly anhydritic , buff-grej^, 

as above (8l), laminated, brovmish- 
grey towards bottom, small 
calcite streaks. 


1*7' dolomite , grey to brownish-grej^, fin-el^r 
crj/stalline, hard, compact, 
conchoidal fracture, laminated, 

5842’ - 5847' 5' recovered 

limestone , dolonu.tic , brownish-grey, finely 
crystalline, hard, massive, 
paper-thin black shale. 

1.3' anhydrite , dolomitic , buff-grey to grey, 
translucent, hard, compact, 
conchoidal fracture. 


Core No, 83 

0.7' 



















































- 121 - 


1.3* 

dolomite, li^ht ^i:reenish“^::rey to srey. 

cryptocrj^stalline, hard, compact, 
laminated; 1/2” black shale 
band 1’ below top, 1” friable 
grey siltstone fragment. 

1.7’ 

dolomite, brownish-grey, finely crystalline. 

hard, varj^ing to calcareous, and 
doloniit ic lime stone. 

Core No. 84 

3.5’ 

5847' - 5852’ 3.5’ recovered 

dolomite, buff-grey to light gre?^, 

crj/ptocrystalline to dense, hard, 
compact, varying locally to 
grey and vj-hitish-brown translucent 
anhydrite, 

Core No. 85 

1.9’ 

5852’ - 5862’ 3.3’ recovered 

anhydrite, as above (84). 

1.4’ 

dolomite, anhydritic, brownish-grey, 

cryptocrysta^lline, very hard, 
compact. 

Core No, 86 

2.5’ 

5863’ - 5867’ 2.5’ recovered 

dolomitic, anhydritic, as immediately 
above (85), few vugs. 

Core No. 8? 

2,0’ 

5867’ - 5875’ 2’ recovered 

dolomite, anhydritic, as above (86), vugs 
filled with vdiite anhydrite. 

Core No, 88 

8.3’ 

5875’ “ 5884’ 8.3' recovered 

dolomite, silt;/-, brownish-grey, granular, 

vugs filled with vdiite anhydrite; 
black l/2” silty shale bands in 
bottom ij'. 

Core No. 89 

2.3’ 

5884’ - 5890’ 2.3’ recovered 

dolomite, as above (88), microporous, 
quite vuggy. 



































I 




















- 122 - 


Core No. 90 3B90* - 5B95* 4»5^ recovered 

0.4’ dolomite , brownish-grey^ cryi^tocrystalline 
to dense, hard, microporous, 

4.1’ dolomite , as above (B9)^ lighter brovmish- 
grey, varying to grey in bottom 
part; some dark grey argillaceous 
breaks in bottom 1’. 


Core No. 91 5895* - 3900* 4.8* recovered 

dolomite , grey, cryptocrystalline to finely 
crystalline, paper-thin partings 
of shale, vugs filled v^ith vfhite 
aniiydrite. 


(Electrolog ’’pick”: Base D-2 zone: 5975’) 























- 123 “ 


BIBLIOGHIPHY 


1. Bretz^ J. Harlen 1943 

2. Rutherford, R. L. 1941 

3. Warren, P. S. 1937 

4. Antevs, Ernst 1945 

5. Erdtrnan, G. 1931 

6. Rutherford, R. L. 1937 

7. Rutherford, R. L. 1928 

8. Warren, P. S. 1944 

9. Wickenden, R. T. D. 1945 

10. Hume, G. S. 1925 


’’Keewatin End Moraines in Alberta, 
Canada", Bull. Geol. Soc, Am., 

Vol. 54, PP. 31-52. 

"Some Aspects of Glaciation in 
Central and Southwestern Alberta"^ 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Sec. 4, 
pp. 115-124. 

"The Significance of the Viking 
Moraine", Trans. Roy. Can. Inst., 
No. 46, Vol, 21, Pt. 2. 

"Correlation of Wisconsin Glacial 
i^xima". Am. Journ. Science, Vol. 
243-A, Daly Vol., pp. 1-39. 

"A Section Through the Glacial 
Drift near Wabamun Lake, Alberta, 
Canada", Zeitschrift fUr 
Gletscherkunde, Bd. 19, Heft l/3. 

"Saskatchewan Gravels and Sands 
in Central Alberta", Roy. Soc. 

Can. Trans., Vol. 31, Sec. 4, 
p. 81-95. 

"Tivo Interesting Boulders in the 
Glacial Deioosits of Alberta", 
Journ. Geol., Vol. 30, pp. 558-563 

"The Drainage Pattern in Alberta", 
Trans, Roy. Can. Inst., Vol, 25, 
Pt. 1, No. 53, pp. 1-14. 

"Mesozoic Stratigraphy of the 
Eastern Plains, Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan", Geol, Surv. Can,, 
Memoir 239. 

"Ordovician and Silurian Fossils 
from. Great Slave Lake", Geol, Surv 
Can. Museum Bull. 44, Geol, Series 

46 * 









- 124 - 


11. MacDonald, VM D. 1947 

12. Huine, G. 3. 1944 

13. V/arren, P. S. 1939 


14. Kindle, E. M. 1912 

15. Cameron, A, E. 1921 

16. Kindle, E, 1920 

Bosworth, T. 0, 

17. Marren, P. S. 1944 


17a 


18, 

Kidd, S. J. 

1943 

19. 

Warren, P. S. 

1933 


M.Sc. Thesis, University of 
Alberta, April, 1947. 

Petroleum Geology of Canada, 

Geol. Surv. Can., Econ. Geol, 
Series No. 14, 1944. 

'‘SedLmentation in the Cordilleran 
Geosj/TLcline in Alberta and 
British Columbia". Reprinted 
from Proceedings of the Sixth 
Pacific Congress. 

"The Silurian and Devonian 
Section of Western Manitoba”, 
Geol. Surv. Can., Summ. Kept., 
pp. 247 - 261 . 

"Hay and Buffalo Ptivers, Great 
Slave Lake and adjacent country", 
G-eol. Surv, Can., Summ. Kept., 

Pt. B, pp. 1-44. 

"Oil-bearing Rocks of Lower 
Mackenzie River Valley, Geol. 
Surv. Can., Summ, Kept., Pt. B, 
pp. 37-58. 

"Index Brachiopods of the 
Mackenzie River^Devonian”, Trans. 
Roy. Soc. Can., 3rd series, Vol. 
38, sec. 4. 

Department of Natural Resources 
and Industrial Development, Mines 
Branch, Regina, Saskatcinewan. 

M.Sc. Thesis, University of 
Alberta. 

"Age of the Devonian limestone 
at McMurray, Alberta", Can. 

Field Nat., Vol. 47, Ro. 8, 
pp. 148 - 49 . 





1 






■ti 







- 125 - 


20. Allan, J. A. 1920 

21o Warren, P. S. 1933 

22. Willson, N, 1947 

23. Smith, Stanley 1945 

24o Fenton, C. L. 1931 

25. 1943 

26. Vfarren, P. S. 192? 

27. Beach, H. H. 1943 

26. Allan, J. A. 1932 

Ifarren, P. 3, 

Rut he r f ord, . L. 

29. Peale, A. C. 1893 


"Salt”, Second Annual Report of 
the Pineral Resources of Alberta, 
pp. 102-117. 

"The Spirifer Argentarius Fauna 
in the Canadian Rockies", Trans. 
Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 36, sec. k, 
pp. 129-136. 

M. Sc. Thesis, University of 
Alberta. 

"Upper Devonian Corals of the 
MacKenzie River Region, Canada", 
Geol. Soc. Amer., Special Paper 
No. 59. 

"Studies of Evolution in the 
Grenus Spirifer", Vol. 2, Publ. 
of the Wagner Free Inst, of 
Science. 

"Correlation of the Devonian 
Sedimentary Formations of North 
America", Bull. Geol. Soc. 

Amer., Vol. 53, pp. 1729-1794. 

"Banff Area, Alberta", Geol. 

Surv. Can., Memoir 153. 

"Moose Mt. and Morley Map-Areas, 
Alberta", Geol. Surv. Can., 

J;iemoir 236. 

"Preliminary Study of Eastern 
Ranges of Rocky Mountains in 
Jasper Park, Alberta", Ro37', Soc. 
Can., Vol. 26. 

"The Palaeozoic Section in the 
Vicinity of Three Forks, Montana,n 
Bull, U.S.G.S. 110. 






- 126 - 


30. Moore, P. D, 1931 

31. Ferry, E. S. 1928 

32. Berry, G.S. 1943 

33. Warren, P. S. 1937 

34. Cooper, C. L. 1943 

Sloss, L. L, 

35. 1948 

36. Hage, C. 0. 1943 

37. Scott, H. VM 1935 

38. Perry, E. S. 1943 

Sloss, L. L. 


’’Palaeozoics of the Southern 
Plains of Alberta", Bull, /ii'ner. 
Assn. Pet. Geol., Vol. 15, No. 10, 

pp. 1141 - 1155 . 

"The Kevin-Sunburst and other oil 
and gas fields of Sv/eetgrass Arch", 
Montana State Bureau liines and 
Aaetallurgy, Memoir do. 1. 

"Stratigraphy and Structure at 
Three Forks, Montana", Bull, 

Oeol. Soc, Amer., Vol. 54, 
pp. 1-39. 

"Age of the Exshaw Shale in the 
Canadia.n Rockies", Amer. Journ. 
science, 5th series, Vol. 33, 
pp. 454-457. 

"Conodont fauna and Distribution 
of a Lower Mssissippian Black 
Shale in Montana and Alberta", 

Journ. Pal., Vol. 17, Mo. 2, 

pp. 168 - 176 . 

"Correlation of the iitLssissippian 
formations of North America", 

Bull, Geol. Soc. Amer., Vol. 59, 
pp. 91 - 196 , Feb. 1948. 

"Dyson Creek Map-Area., Alberta", 
Geol. Surv. Can., Paper 43-5, 
Report and Map, 

"Some Carboniferous Stratigraphy 
in Montana and Northwestern 
Wyoming", Journ. Geol., Vol. 43, 
pp. 1011 - 32 . 

"Big Sno^/fy Group, Lithology and 
Correlation in Northern Great 
Plains," Amer. Assoc. Pet. Geol. 
Vol. 27 , No. 10, pp. 1287 - 1304 . 


3 













‘■.f '-5' 

1/^ 

. 'I ■ 

■ A . 

- « . 




4 :, 

’i 

t. 






- 127 - 


39. Sloss, L. L. 1912 

Hamblinj R. H. 


10. Furnival, G. M. 1916 

11. Hume, G. S. 1933 

12. Shiiuer, H. W. 1926 

13. Lang, A. H. 1917 

11. Kindle, E. M. 1921 

15. McConnell, R. G. 1887 


16. ShiiTier, H. W. 1911 

Shrock, R. R, 

17. Nauss, Arthur 1915 


"Stratigraphy and Insoluble, 
Residues of the Madison Group 
(Llississippian) of Montana", 

Amer. Assoc. Pet. Geol., Bull. 
Vol. 26 , pp. 305-335. 

"Cypress Lake Map-Area, Saskatch¬ 
ewan," Geol, Surv. Can., Mem-oir 
212 . 

"Oil and Gas in Gestern Canada", 
Geol. Survey. Can., Econ. Geol., 
Series No. 5. 

"Upper Palaeozoic Faunas of the 
Lake Minnewanka Section, near 
Banff, Alberta", Geol. Surv., 
Can., Bull. 12. 

"Brule and Extrance Map-Areas, 
Alberta", Geol. Surv. Can., 

Ivfemoir 211. 

"Standard Palaeozoic Section of 
the Rocky Mountains near Banff, 
Alberta", Pan. Amer. Geologist, 
Vol. 12, pp. 113-121. 

"Report on the Geological 
Structure of a Portion of the 
Rocky Mountains", acco-mpanied 
by a section measured near the 
51st Parallel", Geol, and Nat. 
Hist. Surv., Canada, Ann, Report, 
1886 Pt. D. 

"Index Fossils of North America, 
Publication of the Technology 
Press, Mass. Inst, of Lech. 

"Cretaceous Stratigraphy of the 
Vermilion Area, Alberta", Aimer. 
Assoc, Pet, Geol., Vol. 29^ 

No. 11, p. l605o 











1 




- 12S - 


l+B, Wickenden^ R, T. D. 194S 


49. Nauss, Arthur Vif. 3-947 

50. McLearn^ F. H. 1944 

51. Russell, L. S. 1932 

52 . Wnmrth, M. G. 193S 

53. Hume, G. S. 1930 


54* Warren, P, S. 1935 

55. Sanderson, J. 0. G. 1946 


56. Wickenden, R. T. D. 1932 


"The Lower Cretaceous of the 
Llovdminster Oil and Gas Area, 
Alberta and Saskatchewan", Geol. 
Surv. Can., Paper 43-21, Pre¬ 
liminary Account. 

"Cretaceous Microfossils of the 
Verriiilion Area, Alberta", Journ, 
Pal., Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 329- 
342, July, 1947. 

"Geol. Surv. Can. Paper 44-17. 

"Mol].usca from the Mctiiurray 
formation of Northern Alberta", 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Can,, 3rd series 
Vol. 26, sec. 4^. 

"Lexicon of geologic names", 
U.S.C-.S. Bull, Pt, 1, A-L, 

pp. 1-1244. 

"The Highwood-Juinping-Pound 
Anticline, with Notes on Turner 
Valley, New Black Diamond and 
Priddis Valley Structures, 
Alberta", Geol. Surv. Can., 

SuimT., Rept., 1929, Pt. B. 

pp. 1-24. 

"The Fauna of the Lea Park Shale" 
Trans. Roy. Can, Inst. Vol. 20 
pp. 223-229, Pt. 2. 

"Progress of Petroleum Geology 
in Western Canada to 1945”, 

Trans. Can. Inst, of Min. & Met., 
Vbl. 49, 1946, pp. 256-266. 

"Notes on some Deep Wells in 
Saskatchewan", Trans. Royl. Soc. 
Can. Vol. 26, sec, 4, PP. 177-96. 










.c 




I-; 




- 129 


57. Webb, J. B. 

Hertlein, L, G. 

1934 "Zones in the Alberta Shale 

"Benton Group" in Foothills of 
Southwestern Alberta", A.A.P.G., 
Bull'., Vol. IS, pp. 1387-1416. 

5B. Cushman 

1927 "Some Foraminifera from the 
Cretaceous of Canada", Trans. 
R.S.C. Vol. 21, sec. 4, pp. 127-32 

59. Link, T. A. 

1949 "Leduc Oil Field, Alberta, 

Canada", (An Example of Trans¬ 
gressive and Regressive Bioherm 
Grovrt,h), Bull. Geol. Soc, Amer., 
Vo. 60 . pp., 3B1-402, March, 1949. 


60. Vi^ickenden, R. T. D, 1941 "Cretaceous marine formations 



Penetrated in Wells near Lloyd- 
minster, Saskatchewan; Trans. 

Roy, Can. Inst., Vol. 23, pp. 

147 - 155 . 

61 . Allan, J, A. 

191 s "Sections along North 

Saskatchewan River, and Red 

Deer and South Saskatchewan River" 
Canada Geol. Surv. Summ. Rept., 
1917 , Pt. C, p. 9 - 13 , Fig. 2, map. 

62 . Slipper, S. E. 

1918 "Viking Gas Field, Structures 
of Area," Canada Geol. Survey 

Summ. Rept., 1917^ Pt. C. pp. 6-9. 

63 . 

1948 Preliminary Type Log section. 

General Leduc Area, Compiled hy 
Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Conservation Board, Calgary, 

April 24 , 1948. 

64 . Cushman, J. A, 

1946 "Upper Cretaceous ForamjLnifera 
of the Gulf Coast Region of the 
United States and Adjacent areals", 
U.S. Geol. Surv. Professional 

Paper 206. 














































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































si. 











































































































































































































































































