For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 



For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 

CAT. NO. 1935 LOWE-MARTIN CO. LIMITED 


©x amis 
WBswasjs 

aiBMMiHSlS 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/studyofselfconceOOmcgr 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


(V^f) 


A STUDY OF THE SELF-CONCEPTS AND IDEAL-CONCEPTS 
OF A GROUP OF ADOLESCENT STUDENTS 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFIIMSNT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

JOHN ROSS MCGREGOR 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


May, 1955 




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer is deeply indebted to Dr. 3.C.T, Clarke of the Uni¬ 
versity of Alberta for his advice, encouragement and assistance during 
the preparation of this work, to Professor E.S. Keeping of the Univer¬ 
sity of Alberta for his valuable comments on the statistical methods 
employed, and to Dr. D. Spearman of the University of Alberta for his 
suggestions and criticisms. The writer also wishes to express his 
gratitude to Mr. G. Zytaruk and to Mr. J.M. Cram of the Edmonton School 
System for their assistance in administering the forced-sorts, to Mr. 
R.S. Sheppard, Superintendent of Schools for the City of Edmonton, for 
his cooperation, and to Mrs. A.I. McGregor and Mrs. B.A. Cram for their 
invaluable clerical assistance. 


ii 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. ORIGIN AND PURPOSE OF THE INVESTIGATION... 1 

II. THE SELF IN PHILOSOPHY AND PSYCHOLOGY. 6 

I. SOME PHILOSOPHICAL CONCEPTIONS OF THE SELF.... 6 

II. THE SELF IN PSYCHOLOGY. 8 

III. THE 1 SELF IN THE PRESENT INVESTIGATION..14 

III. RELATED STUDIES.23 

I. THE SELF AND ADJUSTMENT.23 

II. THE SELF AND INTEGRATION...... 2 6 

III. THE SELF AND OTHERS... 2? 

IV. OTHER STUDIES OF THE SELF...30 

IV. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN. 34 

I. THE CONSTRUCTION OF STATEMENTS DESCRIPTIVE OF 

THE SELF-CONCEPT AND SELF-IDEAL.... 35 

II. THE DISTRIBUTION OF STATEMENTS IN THE SORT.......... 39 

III. PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING THE SORT.. 41 

V. ADMINISTRATION OF THE SORT AND CONSOLIDATION OF THE 

RAW DATA. 43 

I. THE EXPERIMENTAL GROUP....... 43 

II. THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE FORCED-SORT.. 45 

III. CONSOLIDATION OF THE RAW DATA...46 

VI. ANALYSIS OF THE DATA.... 4? 

I. SELF-IDEAL CORRELATIONS......4? 

iii 


























■ 








■ 

































TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

VI. ANALYSIS OF THE DATA (Continued) 

II. ANALYSIS OF THE GROUP IDEAL...51 

HI. RELATIONS BETWEEN THE SELF-CONCEPTS AND THE 

GROUP IDEAL-CONCEPTS.57 

IV. RELATIONS BETWEEN THE IDEAL-CONCEPTS AND THE 

GROUP IDEAL-CONCEPTS. 62 

V. THE INFLUENCE OF THE GROUP IDEAL ON THE SELF¬ 
IDEAL RELATIONSHIP. 6? 

VI. ANALYSIS OF DISSATISFACTION WITH SELF.69 

VII. ANALYSIS OF SEX DIFFERENCES.?2 

VII, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY.78 

I. GROUP ADMINISTRATION OF THE FORCED-SORT...78 

II. RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE SELF-CONCEPT, THE 

IDEAL-CONCEPT AND THE GROUP IDEAL-CONCEPTS.....79 

HI. GROUP DISSATISFACTION AND CONCERN. 81 

TV. SEX DIFFERENCES. .... .82 

BIBLIOGRAPHY... 84 

APPENDIX 

I. SUMMARY AND CLASSIFICATION OF THE SELF-DESCRIPTIVE 

STATEMENTS.88 

II. NORMALIZATION OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF SELF-DESCRIPTIVE 

STATEMENTS..... 92 

HI. SAMPLE DISTRIBUTION CHART.96 

iv 



























































TABLE OF CONTENTS 


APPENDIX (Continued) PAGE 

IV. INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE FORCED- 

SORT. 97 

V. SUMMARY OF THE RAW DATA.103 

VI. SUMMARY OF THE THEORY AND APPLE CATION OF VAN DER 

WAERDKN'S TEST FOR THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DIFFERENCE 
BETWEEN TWO MEANS.. 109 


v 










LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. William James' 'Empirical Life of the Self* Showing 

the Composition of the Constituents of the Self*.. 9 

II. Factorial Design for a Sample of Statements Descrip¬ 
tive of the Self-Concept..... 36 

III. Frequency Distribution of Statements in Eleven "Truth 

Categories"......... 40 

IV. Classification of Students by Grade in School, Sex and 

Age... 44 

V. Self-Ideal Correlations for the Experimental Group.. 48 

VT. Location and Concern of Statements in the Group Ideal- 

Sort......... 52 

VTI. Mean Concerns for the Various A-reas of Self-Perception..... 53 

VIII. Statements of Greatest Concern in the Group Ideal-Sort. 53 

IX. Location and Concern of Statements in the Group Ideal- 

Sorts for Boys and Girls....... 54 

X. Mean Concerns for the Various Areas of Self-Perception 

for Boys' and Girls* Ideal-Sorts..... 56 

XI. Statements of Greatest Concern in the Boys' and Girls' 

Group Ideal-Sorts....... 56 

XII. Correlations between the Self-Sorts and Group Ideal-Sorts.. 59 

XIII. Contingency Table for Examining the Relationship between 

Self-Acceptance and Group Acceptance.... 60 

XIV. Correlations between the Ideal-Sorts and the Group Ideal- 

Sorts ........... 63 

XV. Contingency Table for Examining the Relationship between 

Self-Acceptance and Social Integration.... 64 

vi 





























LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

XVI* Contingency Table for Examining the Relationship between 

Group-Acceptance and Social Integration* *..*•»«»«.. ....... 65 

XVII. Partial Correlations between the Self and Ideal-Sorts 

with the Group Ideal Held Constant* ••.*...»•»••».•.••.*»•* 68 

XVIII* Group Dissatisfactions by Sex for the Various Areas of 

Self-Perception* .. ?0 

XIX. Intra-sex Differences in Group Dissatisfactions for the 

Various Areas of Self-Percept ion. . .............. ?1 

XX* Self-Ideal, Self - Group Ideal and Ideal - Group Ideal 

Correlations by Sex.73 

XXI. Classification of Subjects by Sex and by the Relative 
Magnitude of their Self-Ideal and Self - Group Ideal 
Correlations* •••.•..,..*•».•«. . 7^ 

XXII. Percentages by Sex of Subjects in the High and Low 

Self-Acceptance, Group-Acceptance and Social Integration 
Groups* .. 75 

XXIII. Group Dissatisfactions and Mean Concerns by Sex for the 

Various Areas of Self-Perception*.......... 77 

XXXV. Summary and Classification of the Self-Descriptive 

Statements .. ............... .... 88 

XXV* Results of the Computations Involved in Normalizing 

the Distribution of Self-Descriptive Statements.. 93 

XXVI. Identification Data of Subjects, and Truth Category 
Numbers corresponding to the Positions of the Self- 
Descriptive Statements on the Distribution Charts for 
the Self and Ideal-Sorts..... • 103 

XXVII. Computation Table for Computing the Significance of 
the Difference in Girls 1 Group Dissatisfactions in 
the Areas of •'Mind" and 'Mental Processes" by van der 
Waerden’s Method... 111 

vii 


























LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Lecky*s Organization and Evolution of the Personality.. . ». 10 

2. Histogram Showing the Distribution of Self-Ideal Corre¬ 
lations for 104 Adolescent Subjects..50 

3. Histogram Showing the Distribution of Self - Group 

Ideal Correlations for 104 Adolescent Subjects,.......,.*. 61 

4. Histogram Showing the Distribution of Ideal - Group 

Ideal Correlations for 104 Adolescent Subjects......,.,.,, 66 

54 Histogram Showing the Distribution of Self-Ideal 

Partial Correlations Holding Group Ideal Constant, for 

104 Adolescent Subjects... 69 

6. Histogram Showing the Relative Frequency Distribution 
of Self-Descriptive Statements into Eleven.Truth 
Categories, and Best Fitting Normal Curve................. 95 


viii 














SINOPSIS 


The primary aim of this investigation was to develop a forced- 
sort device for sampling the self-concept and the ideal-concept, and 
using this instrument, to study the relation between these variables 
for a group of adolescent students. Secondary aims included the in¬ 
vestigation of sex differences in the self-ideal relationship during 
adolescence, and the study of the "concern" and "dissatisfaction" 
associated with various areas of the perceived self in adolescence. 

A set of fifty-one self-descriptive statements was constructed 
to form a stratified sample which was representative of a strictly 
delimited theory of the self. A distribution chart was designed to 
make possible the continuous comparison of statements as they were 
sorted into eleven discrete "truth categories". The frequencies of 
statements in these categories were fitted to the best approximate 
normal distribution. A detailed procedure was devised for the administra¬ 
tion of the forced-sort. 

The forced-sort was administered twice to the same groups of 
adolescent students selected from Grades IX and X in two Edmonton 
schools. In the first sorting of the statements, the criterion was 
the truth of the statements relative to the individual’s actual con¬ 
ception of himself: the criterion of the second sorting was the truth 
of the statements relative to the person he "would most like to be." 

Although few mechanical difficulties were experienced in the group 
administration of the forced-sorts, absenteeism resulted in the loss of 


ix 





some data, and lack of rapport was apparent in a few instances. 

Whether or not there is a more pronounced tendency in group administra¬ 
tion, than in individual administration, for subjects to conceal their 
true attitudes toward themselves, is an open question. 

Analysis of the data showed moderate, but highly significant, 
linear relationships to exist between the self-concepts and the ideal- 
concepts for the group as a whole, and for its constituent groups of 
boys and girls. Strong evidence was obtained for the existence of 
significant individual differences, or subpopulations, in the self¬ 
ideal, the self - group ideal, and the ideal - group ideal relation¬ 
ships, both for the group as a whole and for its constituent groups. 

These groups also exhibited a slight tendency for the self-concepts 
to conform to the appropriate group ideal, and a strong tendency for 
the ideal-concepts to correspond to the group ideal-concepts. Partial 
correlative analysis showed a general lowering of the self-ideal relation¬ 
ship when the influence of the group ideal was held constant. Further 
analysis showed significant positive direct variation betitfeen the self¬ 
ideal and self - group ideal relationships, and between the self-ideal 
and ideal - group ideal relationships, but not between the self - group 
ideal and ideal - group ideal relationships. 

The concern exhibited by the group as a whole, and by the con¬ 
stituent groups, for the various areas of self-perception described 
in the theory, was fairly uniform. However, the limited coverage of 
these areas and the obscuring influence of the averaging process make 


x 



























■ 






this apparent uniformity of doubtful significance. 

Analysis of the intra-sex differences in "dissatisfaction with 
the areas of the perceived self" showed that the girls were significantly 
more dissatisfied with the area of "Mind" than with 'Mental Processes" 
or "Bodily Processes," 

Although no significant sex differences were found in the boys* 
and girls' mean self-ideal, self - group ideal and ideal - group ideal 
correlations, further analysis showed a significant tendency for a 
larger proportion of girls, than of boys, to have self concepts which 
conform more with their own ideal-concepts than with the group ideal 
for their sex, A significantly higher percentage of girls, than of 
boys, was found to have a high degree of conformity between their 
ideal-concepts end the corresponding group ideal for their sex. 

Although no significant sex differences in "concern" for the 
various areas of self-perception were found, there did appear to be a 
slight tendency for girls, more than boys, to be concerned with the 
general "Mental" area of self-perception, and for boys, more than girls, 
to be concerned with the "Physical" aspects of the self. 

There seemed to be a consistent,although not statistically signifi¬ 
cant, tendency for the girls, more than the boys, to be dissatisfied 
with all of the areas of self-perception. 

Evidence was obtained which suggested a high degree of relatedness 
between the boys' and girls' group ideals. 










■ 


•< t • 


I 







CHAPTER I 


ORIGIN AND PURPOSE OF THE INVESTIGATION 


The current psychological literature shows a renewed concern with 
the self as a legitimate subject for psychological study. As is seldom, 
possible, the stimulus for this reawakened interest can be located 
with seme precision® In 1943, G.W. Allport, writing on The Ego in Con ¬ 
temporary Psychology , provided what may rightly be considered as a 
turning point in modem psychology® 

One of the oddest events in the history of modem psycho¬ 
logy is the manner in which the ego (or self) became side¬ 
tracked and lost to view® I say it is odd, because the exist¬ 
ence of one f s self is the one fact of which every mortal 
person - every psychologist included - is perfectly convinced,^- 

Professor Allport provides an explanation for the loss of interest in 

the self as a subject for serious psychological investigation® 

The total eclipse of the soul and the partial eclipse of 
self were due in part, as I have just said, to the rise of 
positivism in psychology® Positivism, we all know, is a 
scientific program for moral re-armament, whose imperatives 
include absolute monism, absolute objectivity, and absolute 
redactionisrn. - in short, absolute chastity* From this ascetic 
point of view, subjective certainties are suspect, selves seem 
a bit indecent, and any hint of metaphysics (that is, of non- 
positivistic metaphysics) savours of laxness.^ 

Professor Allport collected from the different conceptions of the 

ego to be found in the literature the following concepts, which he 

felt to be of primary importance. 


1. Gordon ¥® Allport. "The Ego in Contemporary Psychology". The 
Psychological Review , L, 1943, p. 451. 

2. Ibid ., p. 452. 













■ 











.) 







2 


The ego as knower. 

The ego as object of knowledge* 

The ego as primitive selfishness* 

The ego as dominance-drive. 

Ego as a passive organization of mental processes. 

Ego as a *fighter for ends*. 

The ego as a behavioral system* 

Ego as the subjective organization of culture. 

He suggests that these eight concepts may ultimately be subordinated 
under one inclusive theory of the ego* From a survey of experimental 
evidence. Professor Allport concluded that - 

- the ego is acting in several, if not all, of the eight 
capacities I have listed. In other words, ego-involvement is, 
as the phrase implies, a condition of total participation of 
the self- as knower, as.organizer, as observer, as status seeker, 
and as socialized being.3 

One of the first important works to follow Allport *s paper was 
the book, Self-Consistency , written by Prescott Lecky and published in 
1945* After commenting that ** - all of the individual’s ideas are organ¬ 
ized into a single system whose preservation is essential M ,^ Lecky pre¬ 
sents his fundamental thesis. 

The nucleus of the system, around which the rest of the sys¬ 
tem revolves, is the individual’s idea or conception of himself. 

Any idea entering the system which is inconsistent with the in¬ 
dividual’s conception of himself cannot be assimilated, but 
instead gives rise to an inconsistency which must be removed as 
promptly as possible.3 


3. Ibid ., p. 459. 

4. Prescott Lecky. Self-Consistency , Island Press, New York, 1945, 

P.135. 

5» Ibid a 5 p. 136 . 









o. 










- '■ 









. 



« t f 







3 


The importance of the self in the field of educational psychology 
is clear when one considers the influence of the school upon the form¬ 
ation, and to sane extent the fixation, of attitudes, interests, aspi¬ 
rations, values and ideals, all of which are implicit in the individ¬ 
uals self-concept or self-ideal* A.T* Jersild presents a strong argu¬ 
ment for the study of the self by educators* 

There is a need of staggering magnitude for doing something 
in our educational program to help children and youth acquire 
realistic attitudes of self-acceptance* A large proportion of 
the young people now entering adulthood are hardened with anxiety, 
hostility, defensive attitudes toward themselves and others, 
feelings of guilt, inferiority, or other forms of self-disparage¬ 
ment and self-distrust*^ 

We need to undertake a program of study to find to what extent 
and in what ways we might in the normal process of education 
achieve for all growing persons such benefits as those which the 
psychotherapist tries to bring about for his patients in the 
process of re-education 

The school is second only to the heme as a place where the social 
forces which influence a child*s attitudes toward himself and 
others are concentrated* 

Even in the allied field of guidance, there is a growing realiza¬ 
tion of the importance of the self* Commenting on vocational adjustment. 
Super feels that an individual * s 11 - exploration of his own feelings 
and attitudes may bring about not only self-understanding, but a 
self-acceptance which releases the individual emotionally so that he 
is free to face facts and to deal with them more rationally* ”9 The 


6* Arthur T* Jersild. In Search of Self * Bureau of Publications, 
Teachers College, Columbia University, Hew York, 1952, p* 5® 

7. Ibid ., pp* 5-6* 

8. Ibid., p. 7. 

9* Donald E* Super* “Vocational Adjustment: Implementing a Self- 
Concept Occupations . XXX, 1951s p. 90* 











4 


same author says, ,r In choosing an occupation one is, in effect, choos- 
ing a means of implementing a self-concept. n In the field of person¬ 
al guidance, Hobbs expresses a similar point of view* 

The self becomes an organizing influence: it provides direc¬ 
tion for the life of the individual by selectively responding to 
the environment, admitting those stimuli that are tolerable to the 
self, and excluding or distorting those stimuli which are un¬ 
acceptable to the self *H 

1 ? 

This is highly reminiscent of Lecky 5 s assertion* 

It is scarcely necessary to emphasize the importance of adolescent 
psychology in the general field of educational psychology* The effects 
of adolescent changes on the self are perhaps less widely appreciated* 

The adolescent period is one of great turbulence in the development of 
the self-concept and self-ideal. Percival W. Symonds, commenting on 
this point,says, "During later adolescence, the individual is struggl¬ 
ing to work out a new concept of the self which leaves behind the 
dependence of childhood and attains the independence and self-direction 
of maturity* f, 13 likewise, "New self-ideals which may persist throughout 
life are taken on during adolescence, for this is the period when 
ideals are adopted.""^ The significance of the discrepancy between the 
self-concept and self-ideal in adolescence has been discussed by Henry 
C* Idndgren* 


10. ibid ** p* 92* 

11* Nicholas Hobbs* ‘‘Guidance and Some Recent Developments in Psycho¬ 
logy", Canadian Journal of Psychology . Ill, 1949, 9* 71* 

12* Supra , p* 2* 

13# Percival W* Symcnds* The Ego and the Self , Applet on- C entury- 
Crofts, Inc., New York, 1951, P. 77. 

14. Mm P. 77. 


























. 

















5 


As the child grows into adole scenthood and adulthood, he be¬ 
comes more able to behave according to adult standards* As this 
occurs, the difference between his self-concept and his self-ideal 
usually diminishes and he becomes less anxious and at the same 
time attains a feeling of greater adequacy* 

The existence of a large gap between the self-concept and 
the self-ideal means that the individual does not like himself. 

He is likely to be self-critical and discouraged about his abili¬ 
ty to do the right thing in the right way. We say that he does 
not accept himself. Immature persons are characterized by a low 
degree of self-acceptance.^5 

Although there is a considerable body of recent research on the 
self and subjects related to it, little study has been directed toward 
the self in adolescence. In particular, little is known about ado¬ 
lescent self-acceptance. The present investigation was undertaken to 
contribute to the closing of this gap by developing an instrument for 
sampling the self-concept and self-ideal, and, using this* to examine 
the relation between the self-concepts and self-ideals of a group of 
adolescents. Secondary alms of the investigation were to study sex 
differences in adolescent self-acceptance, to study the relation of 
the self-acceptances of individual adolescents to the ideal-concept of 
the group of which they are members, and to study the concern and dis¬ 
satisfaction* shown by adolescents, for the various areas of self- 
perception. 


15# Henry Clay lindgren. Mental Health in Education , Hairy Holt and 
Company, New York, 1954, p. 98. 













■ 











CHAPTER II 


THE SELF IN PHILOSOPHY AND PSYCHOLOGY 

The literatures of philosophy and psychology contain a wide 
variety of approaches to a definition of the self* It is beyond the 
scope of the present discussion to attempt to review them all* An 
attempt will be made, however, to include some of the more important 
philosophical conceptions of the self, to discuss the more relevant 
psychological conceptions, and to present a theoretical foundation for 
the study of the self-concept and self-ideal in the present investiga¬ 
tion* 

I* SOME PHILOSOPHICAL CONCEPTIONS OF THE SELF 

Kant and Schopenhauer discussed the philosophical distinction 
between the subjective f I 9 and objective f Me 8 . The ®I* was con¬ 
sidered as *the knower 1 , the , Me l as 8 the object of knowledge 8 * This 
dual concept of the self has been the subject of voluminous philosophical 
discussion* 

J • S. Moore, describing the transcendentalist conception of the 
self, says, "It is true that f I 8 (the subject) can only know *Me l 
(the object), but it is only one self that knows (as subject) and is 
known (as object) * Thus he rejects a dual theory of the self in the 
form of a knowable object-self and unknowable subject-self* Further- 


1. Jared S. Moore. "The Problem of the Self”* The Philosophical 
Review , XLII, 1933, P. 490. 











. 






■ 








i 


i i 


i r 




i r r 





















7 


more, he ascribes to the self a spiritual core which he feels has been 
ignored by contemporary psychologists. He says, "The self as the psycho¬ 
logist studies it (my •mind 1 ) is but an integration of feelings, de¬ 
sires, and ideas; but surely this is not all that ’I 8 am - rather am 
I a system of values, a centre of purposes, a pursuer of ideals."2 In 
the same vein, he says, ”My soul is not another self from my mind; it is 
’myself* in the most intimate sense of that word. "3 However Moore 
does see fit to distinguish between mind and spirit: "Mind is the 
integration of phenomenal consciousness, and spirit is the integration 
of spiritual consciousness ^ He feels that " - the phenomena of 
the body in their interrelations are amenable to causal explanation, 
and so with mental phenomena in their interrelations but that, as 
for the spirit, " - there is always a residue not so amenable."^ 

Dampier points to the difference between the philosophical and 
psychological concepts of the self, but he stresses that the reality 
of the self is essentially independent of these concepts. He says. 

Is the self an entity existing before and independently of 
experience, as in the older philosophies, or is it a composite, 
secondary structure, put together by the very action of sensa¬ 
tions, perceptions and other mental activities, as seme modem 
psychologists hold? The question cannot be answered by general 
agreement, but perhaps it need not be answered. However formed® 
the self is conscious, and in Eddington’s sense is self-knowing 
and therefore real.® 


2. Ibid ., p. 490. 

3. p. 491. 

4. Ibid ., p# 493. 

5. Ibid ., p. 494. 

6. Sir William Cecil Dampier. A History of Science . The University 
Press, Cambridge, 1949, p. 486. 





I r 






r r 






8 


Whitehead predicates self-knowledge on a knowledge of a plural¬ 
ity of things other than the self* 


Thus the self-knowledge inherent in the bodily event is the know¬ 
ledge of itself as a complex unity, whose ingredients involve all 
reality beyond itself, restricted under the limitation of its 
pattern of aspects. Thus we know ourselves as a function of uni¬ 
fication of a plurality of things which are other than ourselves.^ 


The conclusion follows that our consciousness of the self-identi¬ 
ty pervading our life-thread of occasions is nothing other than 
knowledge of a special strand of unity within the general unity 
of nature. It is a locus within thetfiole, marked out by its 
own peculiarities, but otherwise exhibiting the general principle 
which guides the constitution of the whole. 


II. THE SEIF IN PSYCHOLOGY 


In contradistinction to Moore, William James propounded a distinct¬ 
ly dualistic theory of the self. ,? 1 shall therefore treat successively 
of A) the self as known, or the me, the 9 empirical ego* as it is seme- 
times called; and of B) the self as knower, or the *1*, the *pure ego 8 
of certain authors.”^ In respect to the foimer, James provides a 
definition which is perhaps too inclusive. 

In its widest possible sense , however, a man 8 s Me is the sum total 
of all that he CAN call his , not only his body and his psychic 
powers, but his clothes and his house, his wife and children, his 
ancestors and friends, his reputation and works, his lands and 
horses, and yacht and bank-account. 10 

James felt that the 1 empirical ego* consists of three classes - 


?• Alfred North Whitehead. Science and the Modem World . Mentor 
Books, The New American library. New York, 1948, p. 151. 

8. Alfred North Whitehead. Adventures of Ideas » Penguin Books, 
Haimcndsworth, Middlesex, 1948, p. 219. 

9. William James. Psychology . The World Publishing Company, Cleveland 
and New York, 1948, p. 176 . 

10. Ibid ., p. 177 















! 











9 


“The material me; 

The social me; and 
The spiritual me. 

In addition to these constituents of the *Me*, James felt that the 
history of the ’Me* includes the feelings and emotions which the con¬ 
stituents arouse, and the acts which they prompt. He summarized the 
•empirical life of the Self* in the following table: 


TABLE I. WILLIAM JAKES 9 • EMPIRICAL LIFE OF THE SELF* SHOWING THE 
COMPOSITION OF THE CONSTITUENTS OF THE SELF ^ 2 


Material 


Social 


Spiritual 



Bodily Appetites and 

Desire to Please, be 

Intellectual, Moral 


Instincts. 

Noticed, Admired, 

and Religious 


Love of Adornment, 

etc. 

Aspirations, Con¬ 

Self- 

Foppery, Acquisi¬ 

Sociability, Emula¬ 

scientiousness . 

Seeking 

tiveness, Construc¬ 
tiveness. 

Love of home, eta. 

tion, Envy, Love, 
Pursuit of Honor, 
Ambition, etc. 



Personal Vanity, 

Social and Family 

Seise of Moral or 

Self- 

Modesty, etc. 

Pride, Vainglory, 

Mental Superior¬ 

Estima¬ 

Pride of Wealth, 

Snobbery, Humili¬ 

ity, Purity, etc. 

tion 

Fear of Poverty. 

7 

ty, Shame, etc. 

Sense of Inferior¬ 
ity or of Guilt. 


Lecky has located the ego (or self) diagrammatic ally as the core 
of the personality. He sees tils core as remaining unaltered during the 


11. Ibid ., p . 177 

12. Ibid ., p. 195 
















10 


evolution of the personality from birth to adulthood insofar as its 
position in the personality is concerned. 



Infant Personality Childhood Personality Adult Personality 



Lecky has offered sane valuable comments on the necessity for change 
in the self-concept* and on the difficulties involved in making such 
a change. 

Finally, it is sometimes necessary to alter the opinion one 
holds of oneself. This is difficult, for the individual 1 s concep¬ 
tion of himself is the central axiom of his whole life theoiy. 
Nevertheless, a gradual change in the concept of the self is 
imperative to normal development and happiness.-^4 

Of particular importance to education is the resistance of the 

self-concept to change. Lecky gives a striking illustration of the 

effects of such resistance in the case of an intelligent student who 

is deficient in spelling* 


13. Lecky, op . cit .. p. 90 

14. Ibid ., p. 137♦ 












. ' ' •• ■ •. ' • :-'fr 

















11 


The resistance arises from the fact that at seme time in the past 
the suggestion that he was a poor speller was accepted and in¬ 
corporated into his definition of himself, and is now an integral 
part of his total personality# His difficulty is thus explained 
as a special instance of the general principle that a person can 
only be true to himself# If he defined himself as a poor speller, 
the misspelling of a certain proportion of the words which he 
uses becomes a moral issue. He misspells words for the same 
reason that he refuses to become a thief# That is, he must be¬ 
have in a manner consistent with his idea of himself#^ 

What a person is able or unable to learn, in other words, depends, 
to a large extent at least, upon what he has already learned, 
and especially on how he has learned to define himself 

Allport has reviewed the sensationalistic and Gestalt conceptions 

of the self# 

The fusion of sensory impressions, particularly around the kines¬ 
thetic sense of postural strain and position, originates the sense 
of self# This theory is wholly congenial to empiricism, to the 
belief that at birth the infant is a tabula rasa upon which the 
sense of self along with everything else has yet to be engraved. 
William James found evidence for this sensationalistic theory in 
his observation that for the adult the reportable experience of 
selfhood is usually reduced to a matter of postural strains and 
stresses, centering especially in the head.^7 

Following a less sensationalistic view, a more abstract location 
is suggested by Koffka# The self (or Ego) is that which lies 
between Right and left , between before and behind # The self is 
the point of reference in all temporal experience too, for it 
lies as well at the exact junction of oast and future. #^° 

James Benjamins has discussed the external influences on the forma¬ 
tion of the individual* s conception of himself# 


15. Ibid ., p# 140# 

16 # Ibid ., p. 144# 

17# Gordon W# Allport# Personality # A Psychological Interpretation . 
Henry Holt and Company, New York, 1937s P* 163» 

18. Ibid#, p# 163. 


fs 


















't ; 




























12 


Normally once never perceives himself apart from a contrasting 
background or without boundaries, nor does he usually view the 
world as if he wdre wholly unrelated to it. 

Among the many influences determining the nature of the picture 
the individual gains of himself, his perceptions of the reactions 
of others toward, him are probably most potent.^® 

An empirical conception of the self has been presented by 

Theodore R. Sarbin. 

The human animal can regard itself as an object in the same 
way as it regards objects in the external world* Put in other 
terms, the inter-behavioral field of the human can include 
perceptions and cognitions referable to objects in the external 
world, and to perceptions and cognitions referable to his own 
body, to his beliefs, his own statuses, and so on. 2 ^ 

The self is empirically-derived, not transcendental; it is the 
resultant of experience, that is, interaction with bodily parts, 
things, persons, images, and so on. 2 

Camilla M. Anderson has written on the composition of the self- 

concept, using an anatomical and physiological analogy* 

Every one has an image or a concept of himself as a unique person 
or self, different frcm every other self* This concept pertains 
to one®s self both as a physical person and as a psychological 
person - i.e* each one has a physical and a psychological self- 
image, ^ 

The self-concept or image is composed of many parts, and each part 
is conceived of as having both structure and function or as 
having both anatomy and physiology. Every organ or member that 


19. James Benjamins, ’'Changes in Performance in Relation to Influ¬ 
ences upon Self-Conceptualisation", The Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology , XLV, 1950, p, 474. 

20 . Ibid,, p, 474, 

21. Theodore R. Sarbin. "A Preface to a Psychological Analysis of the 
Self”, The Psychological Review , IIX, 1952, p« 12, 

22 . Ibid., p. 12. 

23. Camilla M. Andersen. ”The Self-Images A Theory of the Dynamics 
of Behavior”, Mental Hygiene . XXXVI, 1952, pp.227-228. 
























13 


is conceived of as doing a specific job is included in the 
individual’s physical self-image. Organs are also given differ¬ 
ent values, depending on the conceived functional value of each 
one. The heart, for example, is ordinarily more highly valued 
than is the hand. 2 * 1 ' 

It is likewise true that every character trait that carries with 
it the implication of a result to be obtained through its use is 
a part of the psychological self-image. Every portion of the 
psychological self-image thus also has both anatomy and physio¬ 
logy, structure and function. As in the physical area, so in the 
psychological, there is a hierarchy of traits, some having great 
value in the individual ®s conceptual thinking and others having 
less. 2 ^ 

Jersild has given a comprehensive summary of psychological con¬ 
ceptions of the self. 

The self is a composite of thoughts and feelings which con¬ 
stitute a person’s awareness of his individual existence, his 
conception of who and what he is. A person’s self is the 11 sum 
total of all that he can call his”. The self includes, among 
other things, a system of ideas, attitudes, values and commit¬ 
ments. The self is a person’s total subjective environment. 

It is a distinctive "center of experience and significance 15 « 

The self constitutes a person’s inner world as distinguished 
from the "outer world" consisting of all other people and things. 

The self is "the individual as known to the individual”. 

It is "that to which we refer when we say *I 9 ." It is the "cus¬ 
todian of awareness"; it is the thing about a person which has 
awareness and alertness, "which notices what goes on, and... 
notices what goes on in its own field". 

The self is reflexive — it is an object to itself and it 
can be both subject and object. It is both a knower and a thing 
that is known, a perceiver and a thing perceived. As a knower, 
the self is able to take a "panoramic view of the total person¬ 
ality". 

The self has also been described as the nucleus of person¬ 
ality. 

The self is both constant and changeable. It includes the 
"...constant nature of an individual plus all that is conditioned 
by time and space and that is changeable." It provides a 
"nucleus on which, and in which, and around which experiences are 


24. Ibid ., p. 228 

25. Ibid., p. 228 








, 






















14 


integrated into the uniqueness of the individual. " In the 
process of experience, the healthy self adds, assimilates, and 
integrates within its own system that which is essential and 
authentic, while renouncing what is "unessential, strange and 
harmful."26 

Discussing the "Self and Society", Jersild stresses the implications 

in education of the social origin of the self. 

Each person*s self is something individual, yet it has a social 
origin. This fact has important meanings for education because 
many of the strongest social influences are brought JLo bear 
upon the child by way of his experiences at school. 


IH. THE SELF IN THE PRESENT INVESTIGATION 


It will be clear from the preceding section that there Is no 
universally accepted definition of the self or its constituents. Un¬ 
fortunately, this lack of unanimity does not relieve the investigator 
of the responsibility of defining the self as It enters into his par¬ 
ticular investigation. Certain questions pertaining to the self must 
be answered as a necessary preliminary to research. Some of these 
questions have been clearly posed by Robert B. MacLeod. 

We still lack the answers to some of the most elementary ques¬ 
tions. What sets the boundaries of selfhood? What segregates 
it from the rest of the field? To what extent is it identical 
with the body-percept? Is it a single system? 2& 

In the subsequent parts of this section, an attempt will be made to 
answer these and other questions as they apply to the present investi¬ 
gation. 


26 . Jersild, op. cit., pp. 9-10. 

27. __lbid*» P* 11. 

28. Robert B. MacLeod. "Perceptual Constancy and the Problem of 
Motivation", Canadian Journal of Psychology . Ill, 1949, p. 64. 













. 












15 


Since Freud, psychologists at various times have identified or 
intimately related the ego and the self* That they need not be con¬ 
sidered as identical psychological concepts, is stated by Isidor 
Chein* 

- the self is not identical with the ego. If it were, then the 
knowledge of the ego would be as immediate as the knowledge of 
the self. 

For, while each individual recognizes himself, he has no im¬ 
mediate knowledge of ego processes such as repression or self- 
actualization . 29 

Without denying the possibility, indeed the inevitability, of in¬ 
teraction between the ego and the self, the present discussion will 
treat them as essentially different psychological concepts. By the 
ego is meant the objective self as it would be described by a com¬ 
pletely informed and unbiased observer. The self will refer to the 
"subjective self as it is perceived, conceived, valued and responded 
to by the individual himself. "3° This is essentially the phenomenal 
self defined by Snygg and Combs as including " - all those parts of 
the phenomenal field which the individual experiences as part or char¬ 
acteristic of himself. "31 In the sense used here, the phenomenal 
field is taken simply as " - the universe of naive experience in which 
the individual lives, the everyday situation of self and surroundings 
which each person takes to be reality."32 


29. Isidor Chein. "The Awareness of Self and the Structure of the 
Ego”, The Psychological Review . XU, 1944, p. 305 c 

30. Percival W. Symonds. The Ego and the Self, Appleton-Gentury- 
Crofts, Inc., New York, 1951* p. vi« 

31. Donald Snygg and A. W. Combs. Individual Behavior , Harper and 
Brothers, Hew York, 1949, p. 58, 

32. Ibid ., p. 15 . 









































« 


t • . ’ ' -• ' 








16 


Specifically, the subsequent discussion will concern itself with 
but two aspects of the self: the self-concept and the self-ideal. 

It is necessaiy to distinguish between the self as conceived and 
the self as perceived. The individual perceives certain aspects of 
himself when he looks in a mirror or listens to a recording of his own 
voice. Such a statement as, “My hair is black", is descriptive of the 
self as perceived, A concept of the self, on the other hand, results 
from a mental reaction to a percept or set of percepts of the self. 

If the above statement is altered to, ,f My hair is becomingly black", 
it becomes descriptive of the self as conceived. It follows that a 
percept or set of percepts must exist before a concept can be formed* 

The exact nature of the reactive process involved in concept 
formation is not clear, but it would seem to involve integration, in¬ 
terpretation and evaluation. Further, it is possible to qualitatively 
describe the *direction 9 of a reaction as positive, negative or neutral. 

A positively directed reaction is one which results in a concept which 
reflects satisfaction, optimistic acceptance or feelings of adequacy. 

A negatively directed reaction is one which reflects dissatisfaction, 
worry or conflict. A neutrally directed (or undirected) reaction is 
one which operates on an isolated percept in such fashion as to leave it 
unchanged in concept formation. Such neutrally directed reactions 
give rise to simple descriptive concepts devoid of emotional charge. 

In addition to direction of reaction, it is possible to classify 
reactions by type. Symonds says, "It is possible to have awareness of 
the self without accompanying feelings. On the other hand, It is 














' 



3 




> 

















17 


not possible to have feelings about the self without awareness*"33 
For the purposes of subsequent discussion, a reaction will be described 
as an awareness when, in statements descriptive of the self-concept, 
an individual fails to mention explicitly his feelings or valuations* 

A reaction will be described as a feeling when feeling, but not valua¬ 
tion, is mentioned explicitly* Finally, a react!an will be described 
as a valuation when a value judgment about the self is made with re¬ 
spect to an explicitly stated datura* Such rigid delimitation may seem 
artificial, but it is essential if classification of self-descriptive 
statements is to be made possible* 

A rational explanation for the existence of negative self-values 
is suggested by Syraonds. 

One can well understand why one clings to a positive concept of 
self, but it becomes more difficult to understand why an individ¬ 
ual should persist in thinking of himself as being inadequate, 
ineffective, inept or stupid. To hold such attitudes toward the 
self indicates a masochistic tendency* A person does not dare to 
think well of himself for fear that such a concept would be 
toppled and then he would be disgraced in his own sight.34 

Leon litwinski, on the other hand, cautions us about the tendency of 

some psychologists to overemphasize negative self-values* 

The point is whether in insisting on the self that feels guilty 
and is anxious, whether in studying the ways in which we deceive 
ourselves by denial of Impulses, of traits, or of memories by 
disguise in assigning our own undesirable traits to other people, 
in order to maintain or to restore self-esteem, we do not lose 


33* Symonds, op. cit., p. 79. 
34. Ibid ,, pp. 104-105. 













18 


sight, far more than we should, of the self that is flattered, 
that glorifies itself openly and frankly, that is proud of its 
acquisitions or achievements and that consequently likes itself.35 

Symonds suggests the subjects of perception which, when observed 
and reacted upon, become concepts of the self, "The self , on the other 
hand, refers to the body and mind and to bodily and mental processes 
as they are observed and reacted to by the individual,In the 
present investigation, the subjects of perception suggested by 
Symonds have been used to delimit the concept of the self, 

9 Mind* will refer to intelligence or mental ability, memory, 
mental efficiency, * common-sense*, reason, sense of humour and artis¬ 
tic ability. This is essentially what Jersild has categorized as - 

XI. Intellectual status; intelligence; ability or lack of ability 
to think, reason, remember; good or poor imagination; etc; 
ability or lack of ability to think quickly or make a good 
comeback; curiosity, desire to find things out, learn and 
discover; search for truth, ability to see both sides37 

*Mental processes 1 will include feelings, emotions, intuitions, 

sensations, attitudes, interests, desires, morality and temperament. 

In this area of the self, Jersild has included - 

XXXX x . Personality traits; temperament; disposition; character 
traits; ©motional tendencies; inner resources^® 

The word ’body 9 will refer to the organism itself and to such 

9 bodily extensions 8 as clothes, artificial limbs, glasses and so forth, 

when such are identified by the individual as part of his material self. 


35• Leon Litwinski. "Toward the Reinstatement of the Concept of the 
Self", British Journal of Psychology . XHI, 1951» P® 247. 

36. Symonds, op. cit ., p.4. 

37. Jersild, op. cit., p. 139. 

38. Ibid., p. 139. 











o 




t • •' 


! 


; 




< t 



i 








T 


' 


I 







19 


It will include all that Jersild has categorized under - 

I• Physical characteristics 

A. General appearance**. . H. Posture:..* 

B* Size; weight I* Gait:... 

* « • 

C. Build; shape; figure 

D. Features of face and head 

♦ • • 

E. Upper extremities:... 

F. Lower extremities:... 

G. Other parts of body 

I x . Voice and vocal mannerisms;... 

A. Vocal qualities 

B. Tempo, rate of talking;... 

II. Clothing; grooming; and make-up 


’Bodily processes* will include all of the physiological pro¬ 
cesses, such as digestion and respiration, as well as motor skills and 
abilities and the functioning of the senses. Jersild*s categorization 
includes - 

III. Health and physical condition 

A. General health; robustnessj vigor; soundness 

B. Specific physical defects or assets 

III X . Attitude toward or enjoyment of, or habits connected with, 
sensory and bodily pleasures and comforts: eating; ... 

VIII. Participation in, enjoyment or lack of enjoyment of, recre¬ 
ation, sports, games, and hobbies... 

IX. Ability in play and sports:... 

In discussing the development of the self-concept in adolescence, Sy- 
monds says, "The body is particularly valued and becomes the core of 
later self-value because it is the source of pleasure and pain and be- 


39. Ibid., pp. 135-136. 

40. Ibid., pp. 136-138. 

















0 




20 


cause it is the tool or vehicle for achieving satisfaction. "^ Jersild 
has made valuable comments on the psychological implications of the 
bodily self-image. 

Physical features noted by a person in describing himself 
probably often represent more than meets the eye. They may be 
symbolic of deeper meanings. The child who is pudgy may not 
merely see his pudginess as something which detracts from his 
physical appearance. To him his pudginess may be a symbol of 
guilt and feelings of unworthiness. 

It follows from the preceding discussion that any statement which 
is descriptive of the self-concept may, in theory, be classified as 
resulting from a positively, negatively, or neutrally directed awareness, 
feeling or valuation of the body, bodily processes, mind or mental 
processes of the individual* 

The development of the self-concept necessarily follows that of 
the perceived self. On this point, Symonds says, "We perhaps should 
make a distinction, between the self as perceived and the self as con¬ 
ceived. Certainly the self as perceived comes earlier. "43 Further, 
he says, "The *1* concept develops only as maturity and the advent of 
language make conceptualization possible. Allport says, "Still 
another drawback is the child*s deficiency in language. His concepts, 
expressing the relationship between himself and his surroundings, are 
but dimly formed, for as yet he lacks the capacity for sharply sculp¬ 
turing thought with words. "^3 The dependence of self-concept forma- 


41. Symonds, op. cit., p. 6?. 

42. Jersild, op . cit .. p. 66. 

43. Symonds, op . cit .. p. ?2. 

44. Ibid ., p. ?2. 

45. Allport, op . cit .. p. l6l. 












21 


tion on perception is suggested by Snygg and Combs. n Xt is probable 
that throughout the lifetime of the individual change is constantly 
occurring in the phenomenal self as he perceives the reactions of 
others to himself.” ^ 

The adolescent period is of major importance in the development 
of the self-concept. Elaborating on the direction of change in the 
self-concept during adolescence, Symonds says, **At the beginning of 
adolescence, as threats to the older established self values begin to 
appear, in consequence of doubts concerning his ability to meet ex¬ 
pectations of himself* and others, there is an increased selfishness 
and he becomes more self-centered. **^7 Lecky has commented on change 
of outlook during adolescence. 

With adolescence, however, a change of such crucial difficulty 
and importance occurs in the structure and organization that 
emotional crises similar to those of early childhood frequently 
reappear. 

During this period of instability and reorganization, when the 
adolescent is revising his earlier values and changing his whole 
outlook on life, the need for unity is most acute. This may be 
seen in the growth of religious interes^g, idealism, and the 
desire for membership in social groups. 

Any discussion of changing concepts of self during adolescence 
leads naturally to a consideration of the self-ideal, for, as suggested 
earlier^, this is the period during which persistent ideals are 
usually adopted. The self-ideal or ’self to be realized 9 refers to 


46. Snygg and Combs, op., cit «. p. 92. 

47. Symonds, op. cit., p. 78. 

48. Lecky, op. cit .. p. 89. 

49* Supra , p.4. 





. 




t 


' 







) 


m 







t ■ 





22 


the self which an individual wishes to become. It grows out of the 
realization of the possibilities of development toward a goal, Symonds 
suggests that the self-ideal 11 - is patterned after strong adults whom 
the child admires and takes as his models, but basically the self¬ 
ideal is determined by the basic drives - to love and to be powerful,"5® 
The self-ideal gives direction to the development of the self- 
concept, At the same time however, the existing self-concept is 
influential in the selection of the goals which are embodied in the 
self-ideal. This is suggested by Snygg and Combs when, in discussing 
individual differences in the significance of goals, they say, "Each 
perceives the same object as a different kind of goal in terms of its 
peculiar reference to himself and his needs at the moment, "51 Symonds 
maintains that, "Goals are selected because they satisfy the fundamental 
need to maintain or enhance the self, "52 Symonds also discusses the 
influence of the self on the level of aspiration. 

The level of aspiration is highly self-involved. This means that 
the level of aspiration is set high when there is some challenge 
to the self, and the more the self is involved, the higher the 
goal discrepancy with past performance. In addition, the level 
of aspiration tends to be more constant when the self is involved 
and is less subject to fluctuations from one task to another 


50. Symonds, op. cit., p, 148, 

51. Snygg and Combs, op. cit., p. 65, 

52. Symonds, op. cit., p. 97. 

53. Ibid,, p. 97. 










. 

t 








CHAPTER III 


RELATED STUDIES 

The stimulus provided by Allport’s paper has resulted in a 
variety of research studies related to the self. Unfortunately, these 
studies do not follow a distinct pattern, nor are they consistent in 
their use of terms. This defect has resulted, in part at least, from 
the lack of a generally accepted theory of the self. This means that 
each author must define his terms more or less as he sees than in 
relation to his particular study. Perhaps the word ’defect* is un¬ 
justified, since, at the present stage of knowledge of the self, a 
variety of approaches has definite merits. It is hoped that, in the 
not too distant future, studies of the self will clarify its nature 
to such an extent that a uniform theory will result. 

I. THE SELF AND ADJUSTMENT 

The magnitude of the difference between the self-concept and the 
self-ideal may well be indicative of the Individual* s personal adjust¬ 
ment. ^ Commenting on this point, Mowrer says, ,! There would probably 
be universal agreement among psychotherapists, regardless of training 
or theoretical persuasion, that prior to treatment a disturbed, 
puzzled, suffering person would show a discrepancy between himself as 


1 . cf. lindgren, supra » pp # 4-5 a 













r 










































24 


he 1 is* and as he * would like to be®."^ Referring to the opinion of 
de Groot, Symonds says, " - for mental health the self-ideal must not 
be too high and demanding, not too vague and shadowy, and yet high 
enough to give continuous support to self-respect."^ 

From a study which he conducted on the relationship between ad¬ 
justment and the discrepancy between the perceived^ and ideal self for 
a group of thirty male undergraduates in psychology at the University 
of Wisconsin, Chodorkoff reported that - 

- a significant curvilinear relationship existed between adjust¬ 
ment and degree of correspondence between the individual 2 3 4 5 s per¬ 
ceived and ideal self. The curvilinear regression of adjustment 
scores on correspondence scores showed that as adequacy of ad¬ 
justment decreased, correspondence between perceived and ideal 
self decreased too, until a point was reached where from then on 
adequacy of adjustment increased as correspondence scores descreased. 
However, the level of adequacy of adjustment did not rise to the 
level found for the subjects with high correspondence scores.5 

In a second study of thirty male undergraduates in psychology at 
the University of Wisconsin, Chodorkoff found a highly significant 
biserial correlation of +.73 between adjustment scores derived from 
the analysis of a biographical inventory, Rorschach protocols, a word- 
association test, and T.A.T. protocols, and 1 accuracy of self-descrip¬ 
tion scores* based on the analysis of a self-descriptive forced-sort 


2. 0. Hobart Mowrer. Psvchotheraov Theory and Research . The Ronald 
Press Company, New York, 1953* p. 319. 

3. Symonds, op. cit., p. 149. 

4. "perceived self", as used by Chodorkoff, corresponds to "self- 
concept", as it is used in the present study, 

5. Bernard Chodorkoff. "Adjustment and the Discrepancy between the 
Perceived and Ideal Self", Journal of Clinical Psychology , X, 1954, 

pp. 266-268. 













; 




/) 


V c o 


I . • - • 

» 

• , 

; 

■ • 





I 











25 


by a group of clinicians who acted as judges. Fran this study he 
concluded that, “The greater the agreement between the individual®s 
self-description and an objective description of him, the more 
adequate will be his personal adjustment« 

Brownfain conducted a study of stability of the self-concept 
for a group of sixty-two members of two men*s cooperative houses at 
the University of Michigan, He defined stability of the self-concept 
in the folloidng words; “In this study, stability of the self-concept 
is measured in terms of the discrepancy between two definitions of 
the self; the self as it is * positively conceived 6 * 8 9 and the self as 
it is *negatively conceived*.“7 He concluded from this study that - 
“All findings support the theoretical prediction that subjects with 
stable self-concepts are better adjusted than those with unstable 
self-concepts, 

Taylor and Combs, in a study of self-acceptance and adjustment, 
sought to test the hypothesis that - “the well-adjusted individual 
ought to be better able to accept more unflattering (and hence threat¬ 
ening) facts about himself than would be expected of the less well- 
adjusted individual, “9 The results of their study were based on data 


6, Bernard Chodorkoff. “Self-Perception, Perceptual Defence, and 
Adjustment”, Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , XLXX, 195^* 

pp. 508-512. 

7* John J, Brownfain. “Stability of the Self-Concept as a Dimension 
of Personality”, Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , XLVII, 
1952, p. 597. 

8. Ibid ., p, 606, 

9. Charles Taylor and Arthur W. Combs. “Self-Acceptance and Adjust¬ 
ment ”, Journal of Consulting Psychology , XVI, 1952, p. 89. 














I 
























I 


t 














. 







26 


obtained for 105 boys and 75 girls in the sixth grade in a group of 
consolidated rural schools in northeastern Pennsylvania* These 
children were classified as adjusted or maladjusted on the basis of 
scores obtained on the California Test of Personality* Self-accept¬ 
ance of damaging statements was estimated by means of a check list 
of self-descriptive statements. The authors found that - "The better- 
adjusted group checked significantly more items than did the poorer- 
adjusted group." 1 ® They felt that the hypothesis quoted above had 
been amply supported, and they concluded that - "Apparently the 
relationship between ability to accept damaging statements about self 
and adjustment is a real one and can be experimentally demonstrated. 1,11 

H. THE SELF AND INTEGRATION 

In a theoretical discussion of the self and personality inte¬ 
gration, McQuitty relates adjustment or 1 adequacy of personality 9 to 
the self-concept. 

- we suggest that the adequate personality is one in whom the 
self is well integrated, in the sense that his successive sub¬ 
jective descriptions of self are characteristic of similar cate¬ 
gories of people, and as a result of this he can readily accept 
into his organized conscious concept of self all his interpreta¬ 
tions of reality, including, of course, perceptions of himself. 12 

Segal used a forced-sort device to sample the self-concepts and 

self-ideals of a group of clinicians. The self-concepts and self- 


10. Ibid., p. 91. 

11. Ibid., p. 90. 

12. Louis L. McQuitty. "A Measure of Personality Integration in Re¬ 
lation to the Concept of the Self", Journal of Personality . XVIII, 
1950, p. 472. 



























I 




0 ' 




; ' ■ 


• • . ' • 






























,, ■ i 


« ( 






27 


ideals for the best integrated group (correlation + .81 to + *98 
between self-sort and ideal-sort) and the most poorly integrated group 
(correlation - *25 to + *59) were compared* The author* concluded that - 
"The ideal self concepts of both the best and most poorly integrated 
clinicians are virtually similar; the crucial differences lie in their 
evaluations of themselves* 


III. THE SELF AND OTHERS 


In his exhaustive study and analysis of essays submitted by 
1800 school and college students, Jersild found that - 

Persons in high school and college appraised themselves in 
terms of social relationships somewhat more often than did the 
younger people, but at all grade levels many young people saw 
themselves as they thought they were seen by others or in temS 
of their own attitudes to others* 4 

The significance of relationships with others provides a simple 
but profoundly important aid to self-examination. In its simplest 
terms it may be read as follows* If one would know what he thinks 
about himself and how he feels about himself, let his glance turn 
to others, for the kinds of thoughts and feelings he has with 
regard to others in one way or another to reflect his 



attitudes toward 


McIntyre conducted a study to test Rogers* hypothesis that 
" - an individual’s acceptance of himself is positively and significantly 



13 • Julius Segal. "The Differentiation of Well and Poorly Integrated 
Clinicians by the Q-Sort Method", Journal of Clinical Psychology * X, 
1954, p. 325* 

14. Jersild, op* cit*, p. 45* 

15. Ibid*, p* 46. 

16* Carl R. Rogers* Client-Centered Therapy * Houghton Mifflin, 
Boston, 1951 > P*S20* 







































I 















< 











28 


the form of a questionnaire developed by Phillips was administered to 
315 male dormitory students. The results of the study were based on 
data obtained frcm 244 of these students, all of whom were white, 
second semester students living on the same floor of the dormitory* 

The author found a significant correlation of + .46 between the 
acceptance-of-self and acceptance-of-others scales of Phillips® question¬ 
naire. He concluded that his results supported Rogers* hypothesis.*7 
Using the same questionnaire on four different groups of high school 

and college students, Phillips found significant positive correlations 

18 

( + *51 to + *?4) between attitudes toward self and toward others. 

Berger devised a group instrument for the measurement of self¬ 
acceptance and the acceptance of others based on Sheerer® s definition 
of the * self-accepting person 1 and the ®person who is accepting of 
others*. Using this instrument on a wide variety of groups. Including 
college students, prisoners, stutterers, counselees, and so forth, the 
author concluded that ** - evidence for a positive correlation between 
acceptance of self and acceptance of others was definitely supported 
and strengthened by the results of this study. Correlations frcm 
+ .356 to +.695* all but one of which were significant, were found 
between the variables* In an analysis of ten counselling cases, 


17* Charles J. McIntyre. "Acceptance by Others and Its Relation to 
Acceptance of Self and Others", Journal of Abnormal and Social Psycho¬ 
logy . XLVH, 1952, pp . 624 - 625 . 

18. E. Lakin Phillips. "Attitudes toward Self and Others: A Brief 
Questionnaire Report", Journal of Consulting Psychology. XF, 1951* 
pp. 79”81. 

19* Snanuel M. Berger. "The Relation between Expressed Acceptance of 
Self and Expressed Acceptance of Others", Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology . XLVH, 1952, p.782. 
































Sheererconcluded that - "There is a definite and substantial corre- . 
lation between attitudes of acceptance of and respect for self and 
attitudes of acceptance of and respect for others."^0 

Stock, on the basis of a study of ten randomly selected clinical 
cases, concluded from statements made during nondirective psychotherapy 
that - 

- a definite relationship exists between the way an individual 
feels about himself and the my he feels about other persons. An 
individual who holds negative feelings toward himself tends to 
hold negative feelings toward other people in general. As his 
feelings about himself change to objective or positive, feelings 
about others change in the same direction. ^ 

In a comparative study of self and group evaluations, Webb sought 
an answer to the question, "How does an individual * s rating of himself 
compare with the ratings of him by a group of his close associates?"^ 
The results of this study were based on data obtained for 31 members 
of a Jewish fraternity at Washington University. Ratings were obtained 
on the traits ’Personal Charm 1 , ’Intelligence’, ’Security 1 , ’Jewish 
Appearance’, and ’Jewish Acceptance®. The correlations obtained between 
the average rating giver an Individual by the group and the rating of 
the individual on the five variables were: (a) Personal Charm, .434; 


20. Elizabeth T. Sheerer. "An Analysis of the Relationship between 
Acceptance of and Respect for Self and Acceptance of and Respect for 
Others in Ten Counselling Cases", Journal of Consulting Psychology , 
nn, 1949, P. 175o 

21. Dorothy Stock. "An Investigation into the Interrelations between 
the Self Concept and Feelings, Directed toward Other Persons and Groups", 
Journal of Consulting Psychology . XIII, 1949, p. ISO. 

22. Wilse B. Webb. "Self-Evaluation Compared with Group Evaluations", 
Journal of Consulting Psychology . XVI, 1952, p. 305. 






























30 


(b) Security, ,220; (c) Intelligence, .602; (d) Jewish Appearance, 

.321; (e) Jewish Acceptance, .419. The author did not comment on the 

statistical significance of these correlations. The data were further 
subjected to a test for bias to determine whether or not there was a 
consistent tendency to overrate or underrate the self in comparison 
with the group rating. The author concluded that - 

Low correlations were obtained between the mean group rat¬ 
ings with the individual ratings, indicating a considerable dis¬ 
parity between the individual* s concept of himself and the group*s 
concept of the individual on the variables mentioned. Personal 
over- and under-evaluation was, as a group, related to the accept¬ 
ability of a particular trait - a consistent tendency for over¬ 
evaluation was obtained.""^ 

IV. OTHER STUDIES OF THE SEIF 

The purpose of a study by Cohen was 18 - to investigate goal- 
level setting within a level-of-aspiration framework by studying two 
variables, which were presmed to relate to the implicit factors de¬ 
termining goal-level setting. I?2 4 The variables mentioned were; feel¬ 
ings of adequacy, and self-acceptance. The findings of this study were 
derived from data on 50 patients selected from medical and surgical 
wards of Duke Hospital. Level-of-aspiration was estimated from a series 
of trials on the Rotter Aspiration Board. Feelings of adequacy and 
self-acceptance were measured by the Rorschach. From an analysis of 
these data. 


23. IbM.» P. 307. 

24. Louis D. Cohen. ^Level-of-Aspiration Behavior and Feelings of 
adequacy and Self-Acceptance 88 , The Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology . XUX, 1954, p.85# ’ 

















31 


It was found that goal-level setting was not related to feelings 
of adequacy as defined in this study. However, a curvilinear 
relationship was discovered to exist between goal-level setting 
and self-acceptance. The results indicated that both very high 
goal setting and very low goal setting were related to self-re¬ 
jection, and that only those who could accept themselves were 
able to use low positive goal setting. ^ 

In a study of the development of the ideal-self in childhood and 
adolescence, Havinghurst, Robinson and Dorr based their conclusions 
on the analysis of essays submitted by boys and girls on the topic 
“The Person I Would Like to Be Like”. The authors reached a number ©f 
valuable conclusions and framed some stimulating hypotheses* 


One conclusion is that the responses fall mainly into four cate¬ 
gories, those of parents, glamorous adults, attractive and visible 
young adults, and composite, imaginary characters. Parent- 
surrogates such as teachers and older adults are seldom named, 
and heroes are very seldom named* 

A second conclusion is that an age sequence exists, moving out¬ 
ward from the family circle, becoming more abstract, and culminat¬ 
ing in the composite, imaginary character*^ 


The following hypothesis appears to account for the observed age 
trends. The child from the age of about 6 to 8 generally chooses 
a parent or some other family member. Most children then move on 
to a choice either of a glamorous person or an attractive, visible 
young adult. The age for choosing a glamorous person is about 8 
to 16. The choice of an attractive, visible young adult may start 
at 8 or 10 and continue all through adolescence, or it may give 
way to a more abstract ego-ideal in the form of a composite, 
imaginary person* The final and mature stage of the ego-ideal is 
the composite of desirable characteristics, drawn from all the 
persons with whom the individual has identified himself during 
childhood and adolescence*^® 


Ibid ** pp*85-86. 

26 , Robert J* Havinghurst, Myra 2. Robinson, Mildred Dorr* ”The De¬ 
velopment of the Ideal Self in Childhood and adolescence”. Journal of 
Educational Research . XL, 1946, p.248* 

2?. Ibid ., p. 248, cf. Lecky, supra , p.10. 

28. Ibid*, p* 248* 


































■s 












32 


The third conclusion is that social environment affects the 
choice of the ideal self.^9 

Nevertheless, we may be sure that an individual will not 
report an ideal which is repugnant to him, not will he report 
a set of ideals which he has not thought about at all*3° 

From preliminary research, Benjamins framed the hypothesis that 
” - reactions in terms of self-conceptualization can be related to 
measurable behavior High school students first ranked themselves 
in intelligence and four other characteristics and then took a group 
intelligence test* The next day they were given false reports of their 
ranks on that test* After re-ranking themselves, they took an alter¬ 
nate form of the intelligence test* The direction of change in test 
scores was predicted for each subject on the basis of the change in 
self-ranking and the pattern of questionnaire responses, with the use 
of ‘reaction categories’ developed from preliminary research. The author 
concluded that - 

The observed frequencies of the two kinds of test score changes 
made by the subjects predicted to make each kind of change would 
be expected to occur by chance fewer than one time in a hundred. 

From a study of insight into one’s own values, Stanley concluded 

that - ”In this investigation there is a slight tendency ( r= * 38 ) 

for students whose values are pronounced to have better ’ self-insight 8 

than those x?hose profiles are relatively flat. 


29* Ibid ** p* 248* 

30* Ibid*, p. 257* 

31* James Benjamins* "Changes in Performance in Relation to Influences 
upon Self-Conceptualization", The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psycho¬ 
logy * XLV, 1950, p. 479. 

32. Julian C. Stanley. "Insight into One’s Own Values", Journal of 
Educational Psychology . XLH, 1951* p* 407. 














. 


; ■ _ ; 



. 




i 


T y . ' •' f C*' 








’ 












| 









if 








33 


In two studies of 151 delinquent adolescents, Rogers, Kell and 
McNeil concluded that - "The ratings of the individuals understanding 
of himself and the reality situation was, in both studies, the best 
predictor of what his future adjustment would be *" 


33• Carl R 0 Rogers, Bill L* Kell, and Helen McNeil. "The Role of Self- 
Understanding in the Prediction of Behavior", Journal of Consulting 
Psychology . XU, 1948, p. 184. 








CHAPTER IV 


EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 

Q-technique, as evidenced by the current psychological literature, 
has become a well established method for the experimental study of the 
self. It is beyond the scope of the present discussion to attempt to 
justify the use of Q-technique, or to dwell upon its theoretical founda¬ 
tions in psychology or statistics. The interested reader is referred 
to Stephenson 1 s definitive work.'-- However, an attempt will be made 
to illustrate its application to the present study. 

Q-technique was used to estimate the degree of relatedness between 
the self-concept and the self-Ideal for a group of adolescents. This 
was accomplished by having the subjects sort a set of 51 self-descrip¬ 
tive statements into eleven categories ranging from "Most True 11 to 
"Least True". The procedure was carried out twice. On the first 
occasion, the subject judged the truth of each statement relative to his 
actual concept of himself. In the second sort, the truth of each state¬ 
ment was judged relative to the subject*s self ideal* "the person he 
would most like to be". The number of statements permissible in any 
given "truth category" was rigidly set to make the frequencies of state¬ 
ments approximate, as closely as possible, the normal frequency distribu¬ 
tion: Thus the term "forced-sorb". By numbering the "truth categories". 


1. William Stephenson. The Study of Behavior : Q-technique and Its 

Methodology . University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1953« 











* 











' .', J 












' 

‘ "1 : . 








■ 













' . ■ i 

























35 


it was possible to associate with each self-descriptive statement a pair 
of numbers corresponding to the positions of the statement in the self¬ 
sort and the ideal-sort. The resulting $1 pairs of numbers could 
therefore be considered as a sample from an approximately normal bivar¬ 
iate population. The application of correlative analysis to this sample 
permitted the calculation of a correlation coefficient expressing the 
degreee of linear relatedness between the subjects self-concept and 
self-ideal. 

I. THE CONSTRUCTION OF STATEMENTS DESCRIPTIVE OF THE SELF-CONCEPT 

AND SELF-IDEAL 

In Chapter IX, it was seen that statements which are descriptive 
of the self-concept may be classified by direction of reactions, by 
type of reaction, and by subject of perception. It has become custom¬ 
ary in the language of Q-technique to describe the classifications as 
"independencies” and their categories as "levels". Thus the independ¬ 
ency "direction of reaction” has levels - positive, neutral and nega¬ 
tive; the independency "type of reaction" has levels - awareness, 
feeling and valuation; and the independency "subject of perception" has 
levels - body, bodily processes, mind and mental processes. 

From a practical point of view, it is virtually impossible to con¬ 
struct a set of neutrally directed statements, which are even potentially 
applicable to a group of individuals, if they are to be of more than 
trivial significance. For this reason, it was decided to omit the 
"neutral" level of the "direction" independency* 




36 


With this restriction, a factorial design for a sample of self- 
descriptive statements is given in Table II* The scheme followed is 
that suggested by Stephenson. 2 

TABLE II. FACTORIAL DESIGN FOR A SAMPLE OF STATEMENTS DESCRIPTIVE OF 

THE SELF-CONCEPT 


Independenci es 

Levels 

Number 

Degrees of 
Freedom 

Direction of 
Reaction 

(a) positive 

(b) negative 

2 

1 

Type of Reaction 

(c) feeling 

(d) valuation 

(e) awareness 

3 

2 

Subject of 
Perception 

(f) mental process 

(g) mind 

(h) bodily process 

(i) body 

4 

3 


This results in 2 x 3 x 4 = 24 possible combinations of the inde¬ 
pendencies taken one level at a time. The theoretically possible combi¬ 
nations are: 


acf 

ach 

bcf 

bch 

adf 

adh 

bdf 

bdh 

aef 

aeh 

bef 

beh 

acg 

aci 

beg 

bci 

adg 

adi 

bdg 

bdi 

a eg 

aei 

beg 

bei 


2. William Stephenson, "Sane Observations on Q-iechnique n » Psycho¬ 
logical Bulletin , XUX, 1952, pp.433-498. 




























37 


This scheme permits each self-descriptive statement to be identi¬ 
fied with a letter combination which locates the statement in the theory* 
For example* the statement, "I feel unhappy about my stupidity", is of 
the type bcf , The statement, "I am a better swimmer than most of my 
friends”, is of the type adh. 

A sample of statements of any desired size may be constructed by 
using replications of statements corresponding to the different letter 
combinations. For example, by taking five statements for each "cell” 
defined by a letter combination, a sample of size 5 x 24 = 120 state¬ 
ments may be composed. As Stephenson has said, "Theoretically any 
number of such samples can be composed for the given design, and any 
one is in principle as representative of the theory as any other, ”3 

Preliminary investigation showed the optimum length of the sort 
to be approximately 50 statements for group administration to be 
accomplished in one thirty-five minute classroom period. Statistical 
considerations indicated that if 51 statements were used the calcula¬ 
tions of the correlation coefficients would be simplified. For these 
reasons, two statements were composed for each letter combination. 

One additional statement of the type aef, and two of the type bef were 
included to give a total of 51 statements. In the absence of any 
definite criterion for selection, these types were chosen for the 
additional three statements because of the seemingly greater psycho¬ 
logical importance of "mental processes". 


3# Ibid ,, p, 489 





o 


•; 








« 


' 




£ ' ) 




0 








•) 

















33 


The statements themselves were adapted freely from a variety of 
sources including the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, the 
S.R.A. Youth Inventory, and the criterion statements for the Rotter 
Incomplete Sentences Blank. In adapting these statements and in compos¬ 
ing additional statements, clarity, brevity and language level of the 
subjects were important considerations. 

After the list of statements had been completed, it was necessary 
to decide upon a fixed order of presentation,, The following rules were 
used as approximate guides in ordering the statements so as to avoid 
the establishing of a ‘•mental set" along one independency or level. 

1. Successive statements should have different first identification 
letters. 

2. Successive statements should have different third identifica¬ 
tion letters. 

3. Successive statements should have different second identification 
letters unless this gives rise to a repetition of a letter 
combination before the entire set of letter combinations has 
been completed once. 

4. Replications of statements corresponding to a given letter 
combination should not appear until the entire set of letter 
combinations has been completed once. 

When the statements had been ordered in approximate conformity with 
these rules, they were numbered from 1 to 51- Appendix I of the present 
study contains a complete list of the statements, together with their 
identifying letter combinations and their numbers denoting the order in 
which they were presented in the administration of the sort. As pre¬ 
sented to the subjects, the statements were in capitals on .8“ x 1.9“ 
white cards. 







39 


II ♦ THE DISTRIBUTION OF STATEMENTS IN THE SORT 

From a statistical viewpoint, one of the chief advantages of the 
forced-sort is that it obviates the necessity for an assumption about 
the form of the distribution of statements* This is accomplished by 
predetermining the number of statements permissible in each of a 
discrete set of categories, so that the resulting frequency distribu¬ 
tion of statements coincides with the best normal approximation for 
the sample size. 

In the present study, a set of 51 self-descriptive statements 
were sorted into eleven categories or intervals. The criterion of 
sorting was, in the first sort, the truth of the statement as it 
applied to the subject*s actual concept of himself, and in the second 
sort, the truth of the statement as it applied to his ideal concept 
of himself® Eleven "truth categories 15 , ranging Irani 'Most True" to 
"least True", were used in order that the discrimination between the 
relative truth of the statements might be reasonably fine, and because 
the use of nine or eleven categories has become common practice in the 
design of forced-sorbs. Thus the eleven categories constitute an eleven 
point scale of truth. The number of statements permitted to correspond 
to any given point on the scale were prescribed so as to ensure the 
best approximation to the normal frequency distribution. 

Table III gives the number of statements in each of the "truth 
categories", together with the identifying numbers which were assigned 
to each of these categories. 








40 


TABLE IH. FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION OF STATEMENTS IN ELEVEN “TRUTH 

CATEGORIES 11 


“Least True” truest True" 


"Truth Category" 
Number 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

Number of 

Statements 

1 

2 

4 

6 

8 

9 

8 

6 

4 

2 

1 


Appendix II of the present study contains details of the procedure and 
computations involved in normalising the distribution of statements. 

It has become common practice in the administration of forced- 
sorts, to have the subject sort the statements into piles % one pile 
for each category. This has the defect of preventing a continuous 
comparison of statements, since only the top statements in the piles 
are visible to the subject. It seemed advantageous, therefore, to seek 
a method of sorting whereby all of the statements would be visible at 
once, 

A second difficulty arose from the necessity for administering the 
sort to a group of subjects, rather than to an individual. It is a 
simple matter for the person administering a forced-sort to an individual 
subject, to record the distribution of the statements. This advantage 
is lost in group administration. In the latter case, it is virtually 
essential that the subjects themselves record their own distributions. 


















. V ; . 




. 


•> . :: , 


















41 


Both of these difficulties were overcome by using a "distribution 
chart". This distribution chart consisted of eleven laterally dis¬ 
tributed columns numbered from 0, on the left, to 10, on the right* 
the numbers corresponding to the "truth categories". Each column was 
divided into vertically distributed rectangles so that the number of 
rectangles in a given column corresponded to the number of statements 
in the corresponding "truth category". The rectangles were of slightly 
larger dimensions than the cards upon which the statements were printed. 
By sorting the statements onto the rectangles of the distribution 
chart, the subject was able to see all of the statements at once, and 
to rearrange them according to their relative truth. When the sort 
was completed, the statement numbers could then be recorded by the 
subject on the appropriate chart space® Provision was made on the 
chart for recording the subject*s name, age and sex® The completed 
chart constituted a pemarrient record of the sort, together with the 
necessary identifying data® Appendix III consists of a sample 
distribution chart of the type used in the present investigation. 

Ill. PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING THE SORT 

Following the construction of the self-descriptive statements and 
the distribution chart, a tentative procedure for administering the 
sort was composed,. The instructions for the administration of the 
forced-sort included an introductory paragraph designed to assist in 
establishing the proper rapport with the subjects. It was appreciated 











































• • 










I 






















42 


from the outset of the investigation that the establishing and main¬ 
taining of rapport would be a difficult problem in the group adminis¬ 
tration of a forced-sort. In composing the instructions for administra¬ 
tion, the need for clarity and the language level of the subjects were 
important considerations. 

In the light of experience gained by administering the sort to a 
small group of individuals, the procedure was revised. In its final 
form, the administration procedure was printed in two columns. The 
column on the left of the page contained the procedure to be followed 
by the administrator, and the column on the right consisted of the 
instructions to the subjects. These were coordinated to facilitate the 
administration of the sort. Appendix IV of the present study contains 
the complete instructions for the administration of the forced-sort. 





CHAPTER V 


ADMINISTRATION OF THE SORT AND CONSOLIDATION OF THE RAW DATA 

I. THE EXPERIMENTAL GROUP 

In the latter part of January, 1955* the forced-sort described in 

the preceding chapter was administered to five classes of adolescent 

students. One of these was a Grade IX class in an Edmonton Junior 

High School, The other four were Grade X classes in a large Edmonton 

Composite High School. The raw data were obtained for 104 of these 

students, 62 of whan were boys, and 42 of whan were girls. The ages 

of these students ranged from 12 years 9 months to 18 years 7 months, 

1 

with a mean age of 15 years 8 months. Gates et al. quote the findings 
of Crampton and others which show that roughly ninety percent of all 
girls, and eighty-five percent of all boys, have reached puberty by 
15 years 8 months. 

Although no specific efforts were made to randomize the sample of 
students, it is felt that they represent a fairly typical cross section 
of adolescent students in the City of Edmonton, Inasmuch as scholastic 
ability may affect the variables of the present study, the Grade IX 
group may be considered as biased toward higher ability, since it was 
the highest of five ability-grouped classes in the school from which 
it was taken. The aggregate group of Grade X students adequately 


1, Arthur 1. Gates, Arthur T. Jersild, T.R. McConnell and Robert C. 
C ha liman. Educational Psychology . The MacMillan Company, New York 
1950, pp. 54-55. 












spanned the range of scholastic ability and socio-economic status for 
the school from which it was chosen. 

Table IV classifies the sample of students by grade in school, 
by sex, and by age, 

TABLE IV. CLASSIFICATION OF STUDENTS BY GRADE IN SCHOOL, SEX 

AND AGE 


Grade 

Age: 

Years 

and 

Months 

12-6 

to 

13-11 

14-0 

to 

14-11 

15-0 

to 

15-11 

16-0 

to 

16-11 

17-0 

to 

17-11 

18-0 

to 

18-11 

Total 

Mean 

Age* 

IX 

Boys 

2 

5 

4 

3 

0 

0 

14 

14-11 

Girls 

1 

8 

6 

1 

0 

0 

16 

14-11 

X 

Boys 

0 

0 

25 

15 

7 

1 

48 

16-2 1 

Girls 

0 

2 

16 

8 

0 

0 

26 

15-9 

Total for 

Boys 

2 

5 

29 

18 

7 

1 

62 

15-11 

Total for 

Girls 

1 

10 

22 

9 

0 

0 

42 

15-5 

Total Students 

3 

15 

51 

2 ? 

7 

1 

104 l 

15-8 


* The mean ages are given to the nearest whole month. 












































45 


II. THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE FORCED-SORT 

Prior to the administration of the forced-sort, interviews were 
held with the teachers who were to act as administrators* During 
these interviews, the purpose of the investigation and the procedure 
for administering the forced-sort were discussed* 

The sorts were conducted during the regular class periods of a 
course in Health and Personal Development, by the teachers of this 
course* One period was taken for the administration of the self-sort, 
and a second period, about a week later, for the ideal-sort. The 
self-sort was given first because it was felt that the concept of 
"the person one really is" would be easier to keep firaly in mind, than 
the concept of ,f the person one would most like to be", especially when 
the nature of the sort was unfamiliar* 

After the administration of the self-sort, the statement cards 
were rearranged in their original order for use in the ideal-sort. 

From the point of view of convenience in consolidating the raw data, 
it would have been desirable to have both sorts recorded on the same 
distribution chart* However, it was felt that the possible influence 
of immediate knowledge of the self-sort on the ideal-sort would be an 
invalidating factor. For this reason, a new distribution chart was 
used for the ideal-sort* 

Reports from the teachers who administered the sorts suggested 
ample time limits of forty minutes for the complete administration of 
the self-sort, and thirty minutes for the ideal-sort* They also 


















46 


indicated that the instructions for administering the forced-sort 
were clear, and that very little individual explanation was necessary* 

A rather heavy absence rate, during the period when the sorts 
were being given, resulted in a number of subjects taking only one of 
the sorts. The incompleteness of the data for these subjects necessi¬ 
tated their removal from the sample of students. Two subjects were 
eliminated because of their obviously frivolous attitude toward the 
sort, as evidenced by their signing absurd pseudonyms on their 
distribution charts. A few others were eliminated because of duplica¬ 
tion and emission of statement numbers on the distribution charts. 

These eliminations may have been a biasing influence on the data, and 
point to one defect of the group administration of forced-sorts. 

HI. CONSOLIDATION OF THE RAM DATA 

In consolidating the raw data, the initial step was to pair the 
distribution charts corresponding to the self and ideal-sorts for each 
of the subjects. Next, an identification number was assigned to each 
subject and placed on his distribution charts. Large data sheets were 
constructed for recording the identification number, grade, sex and age 
of each subject, and the truth category numbers corresponding to the 
positions of the statements on the distribution charts. These data 
were transferred from the distribution charts to the data sheets and 
the necessary eliminations made. The residual 104 subjects were then 
renumbered from 1 to 104. Appendix ¥ includes all of the raw data 
upon which the present investigation was based. 








CHAPTER VI 


ANALYSIS OF THE DATA 

In the present chapter, it will be convenient to introduce some 
new terns in order to reduce the repetition of awkward descriptive 
phrases# For example, the tern ’’location” will refer to the truth 
category number corresponding to the position of a statement in one 
of the sorts. Thus to say that the ideal location of statement 46 was 
3, means that on the ideal-sort, the position of statement 48 corres¬ 
ponded to truth category 3* Other new terms will be defined as they are 
introduced# 


I. SELF-IDEAL CORRELATIONS 

The first step in the analysis of the raw data was the calculation, 
for each subject, of the simple correlation between the locations of 
the 51 statements in the self-sort and in the ideal-sort# This 
resulted in 104 correlation coefficients for the entire group of subjects 
Table V contains a complete list of these correlations in the column 
headed the subscript ”1” denotes self-sort, and ”2” denotes ideal- 

sort. It will be seen that these correlations range free - ®208 to 
#824. The mean "z” for the group, using Fisher’s method, was found to 
be o46 with a corresponding ”r” of #43# The standard, error of the 
mean ”z” is @02? giving a ”t ratio” of 16#8 which greatly exceeds the 
critical value of 2.63 for 103 degrees of freedom at the V$> level of 





















' 







48 


significance. Thus the mean correlation between the self and ideal- 
concepts for the group as a whole is highly significant* 


TABLE V, SELF-IDEAL CORRELATIONS FOR THE EXPERIMENTAL GROUP 


Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

s 

E 

X 

r l2 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

s 

E 

X 

r 12 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

S 

E 

X 

r 12 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No, 

s 

E 

X 

r 12 

1 

F 

.336* 

27 

F 

,484** 

53 

M 

.164# 

79 

M 

.484** 

2 

F 

.244 

28 

F 

.244 

54 

M 

.640**x 

80 

M 

.248 

3 

F 

.376** 

29 

F 

.384** 

55 

M 

.628** 

81 

M 

.312* 

4 

F 

-.020# 

30 

F 

.216 

56 

M 

.424** 

82 

M 

.532** 

5 

F 

.492** 

31 

F 

.448** 

57 

M 

.308* 

83 

M 

.124# 

6 

F 

.612** 

32 

F 

. 560 ** 

58 

M 

.576** 

84 

M 

.388** 

7 

F 

.612** 

33 

F 

.436** 

59 

M 

.256 

85 

M 

. 600 ** 

8 

F 

.564** 

34 

F 

.404** 

60 

M 

.132# 

86 

M 

.476** 

9 

F 

.440** 

35 

F 

.328* 

61 

M 

,264 

8 ? 

M 

. 052 # 

10 

F 

,728**x 

36 

F 

-.208# 

62 

M 

.172# 

88 

M 

.156# 

11 

F 

.536** 

37 

F 

,420** 

63 

M 

,672**x 

89 

M 

.364** 

12 

F 

,76 o**x 

36 

F 

.824**x 

64 

M 

. 568 ** 

90 

M 

.584** 

13 

F 

-. 060 # 

39 

F 

.268 

65 

M 

.172# 

91 

M 

.428** 

14 

F 

.292* 

40 

F 

.720**x 

66 

M 

.572** 

92 

M 

.776**x 

15 

F 

.0110# 

41 

F 

.592** 

67 

M 

.440** 

93 

M 

.472** 

16 

F 

. 700 **x 

42 

F 

.284* 

68 

M 

.416** 

94 

M 

436# 

17 

F 

.268 

43 

H 

.332* 

69 

M 

.396** 

95 

M 

.536** 

18 

F 

.444** 

44 

M 

.612** 

70 

M 

, 656 **x 

96 

M 

. 620 ** 

19 

F 

,688**x 

4 5 

M 

.080# 

71 

M 

.208 

97 

M 

.292* 

20 

F 

.204 

46 

M 

.008# 

72 

M 

.228 

98 

M 

.364** 

21 

F 

.372** 

47 

M 

.680**x 

73 

M 

.584** 

99 

M 

.308* 

22 

F 

-.124# 

48 

M 

,780**x 

74 

M 

. 368 ** 

100 

M 

.688**x 

23 

F 

.092# 

49 

M 

.532** 

75 

M 

.552** 

101 

M 

. 632 **x 

24 

F 

.480** 

50 

M 

.272 

76 

M 

.592** 

102 

M 

. 576 ** 

25 

F 

. 032 # 

51 

M 

.784**x 

77 

M 

.488** 

103 

M 

.392** 

26 

F 

.484** 

52 

M 

.596** 

78 

M 

.232 

104 

M 

.436** 


* Significant departure from ,! 0 11 at 5$ level of significance., 
** Significant departure from ”0” at ifo level of significance, 

# In low self“acceptance group.. 
x In high self-acceptance group. 






















49 


The standard deviation for the sample of "z" values was found 
to be .28. Thus a "z” value of .18 corresponds to one standard de¬ 
viation below the mean, and .74 corresponds to one standard deviation 
above the mean. The corresponding "r" values are respectively, .18 
and . 63 . It was decided to designate the group of subjects having 
self-ideal correlations below .18 as the low-self acceptance group, 
and those above .63 as the high self-acceptance group. The first of 
these groups was found to contain 1? subjects or l6.3$ of the total 
group, and the second to contain 15 subjects or 14.4 jo of the total 
group. 

In a statistically similar study involving the changes in the 

self and ideal-concepts as a result of client-centered counseling, 

Butler and Haigh^ have illustrated the use of a test suggested by 
2 

Tippett for testing the significance of individual differences in a 
group of correlations when the mean correlation is significantly 
different from zero* The criterion for this test is 

X = ( H - 3 ) H ( > - Z ) 1 2 , 

where "n" is the number of subjects, and "U" is the number of state¬ 
ments in the forced-sort. The number of degrees of freedom is (n-l). 


1. John M« Butler and Gerard V. Haigh. "Changes in the Relation between 
Self-Concepts and Ideal Concepts Consequent upon Client-centered Counsel¬ 
ing", from Carl R. Rogers and Rosalind F. Bymond. Psychotherapy and 
Personality Change , The University of Chicago, Chicago, 1954, pp.55-75* 

2. L.H.C. Tippett. The Methods of Statistics . Williams and Korgate, 
London, 1937# p. 180. 



























■ 















50 


For the set of correlations given in Table V, the value of chi square 
obtained from this formula was 385#! which greatly exceeds the critical 
value^ of 138.5 for 103 degrees of freedom at the 1# level of signifi¬ 
cance. Butler and Haigh have interpreted this significance as indicat¬ 
ing the existence of distinct subpopulations in the subject population. 
The nature of the subpopulations cannot be inferred from the data of 
the present study. It would seem that "adjustment n » "socio-economic 
status" and "cultural environment ,5 9 among other factors, might be 
important determinants of the subpopulations. Sex differences will be 
discussed later in this chapter. 

As a whole, the experimental group exhibits a significant re¬ 
lationship between the self-concept and self-ideal. In addition* 



Figure 2. Histogram Showing the Distribution of Self-Ideal Correlations 
for 104 Adolescent Students. 


3. This critical value was calculated from the approximate formula, 
a, __ 

X - (-/IfCI 4- Up where "f" stands for degrees of free¬ 

dom, and Up is the fractale of the normal distribution corresponding to 
a cumulative value of "p". For the 1$ level, p = .99. 














































' 




* 

* 




, 


' 

« '. V. ' . ■ 











* 

. 


< 


<s 

. 








































♦ 

, 

• • t 











51 


there are significant individual differences in the self-ideal relation¬ 
ship. Figure 2 illustrates the distribution of self-ideal correlations 
for the experimental group. 

H. ANALYSIS OF THE GROUP IDEAL 

A group ideal-sort was obtained by averaging the locations of 
each statement over the entire group of subjects, sorting the state¬ 
ments on a distribution chart according to their mean locations, and 
taking as the group location of a statement its resulting location on 
the chart. 

The degree of concern which an individual feels for a given state¬ 
ment is related to the departure of its position from the centre of the 
distribution chart. A subject who places a statement in the centre 
column of the chart feels essentially indifferent to it. It will be 
convenient to define mathematically the concern associated with a given 
statement as the numerical difference between its location and 5» the 
location of a statement placed in the centre column of the distribution 
chart. Table VI summarizes the locations of statements in the group 
ideal-sort and the concern, associated with then. 

It was felt that one might find some areas of self-perception 
which exhibited greater concern than others for the adolescent. The 
statements were grouped by subject of perception^ (body, bodily 
processes, mind and mental processes), and the mean concern found for 


4. Suora , pp. 17-20 


















. 









. > ; 










52 


each grouping. Analysis of the differences between these means showed 
none of them to be significant. This will be intuitively evident to 
the reader by examining Table VH, where the mean concerns for the 
various areas of self-perception are seen to be remarkably close. 

TABLE VI LOCATION AND CONCERN OF STATEMENTS IN THE GROUP IDEAL-SORT 


State¬ 

ment 

Number 

Loca¬ 

tion 

Concern 

State¬ 

ment 

Number 

Loca¬ 

tion 

Concern 

State¬ 

ment 

Number 

Loca¬ 

tion 

Concern 

1 

10 

5 

18 

5 

0 

35 

5 

0 

2 

2 

3 

19 

1 

4 

36 

6 

1 

3 

8 

3 

20 

6 

1 

37 

4 

1 

4 

1 

4 

21 

4 

1 

38 

6 

1 

5 

3 

2 

22 

5 

0 

39 

3 

2 

6 

9 

4 

23 

3 

2 

40 

6 

1 

7 

2 

3 

24 

7 

2 

41 

5 

0 

8 

8 

3 

25 

0 

5 

42 

7 

2 

9 

3 

2 

26 

7 

2 

43 

4 

1 

10 

7 

2 

27 

3 

2 

44 

7 

2 

11 

2 

3 

28 

8 

3 

45 

5 

0 

12 

9 

4 

29 

4 

1 

46 

6 

1 

13 

2 

3 

30 

5 

0 

47 

5 

0 

14 

8 

3 

31 

4 

1 

48 

6 

1 

15 

5 

0 

32 

6 

1 

49 

4 

1 

16 

5 

0 

33 

4 

1 

50 

7 

2 

17 

3 

2 

34 

6 

1 

51 

4 

1 


This may imply a fairly uniform concern for the different areas of 
perception of the self for the group as a whole. On the other hand, the 
apparent uniformity may simply reflect the rather limited coverage of 
these areas inherent in the sort itself, or the obscuring of significant 
individual differences in concern by the averaging process. 
























* 

' 



























53 


TABLE VII. KEAN CONCERNS FOR THE VARIOUS AREAS OF SELF-PERCEPTION 


Body 

Bodily Processes 

Mind 

Mental Processes 

1.92 

1.75 

1.67 

1.73 


Table VIII summarizes the 14 statements of greatest concern to the 
group as a whole. 


TABLE VIII STATEMENTS OF GREATEST CONCERN IN THE GROUP IDEAL-SORT 


Statement 

Number 

Letter 

Combina¬ 

tion 

Concern 

Statement 

1 

aei 

5 

I am good-looking. 

25 

beh 

5 

I am hard of hearing. 

4 

bef 

4 

My feelings are easily hurt. 

12 

aeg 

4 

I have a good sense of humour. 

6 

adh 

4 

I am as good at sports as most people. 

19 

bei 

4 

I have poor skin. 

8 

acf 

3 

I feel good about my honesty .. 

14 

adf 

3 

I am as ambitious as most people. 

13 

bef 

3 

I am usually nervous. 

3 

adg 

3 

I am as smart as most people. 

7 

beg 

3 

I am slow at arithmetic. 

2 

bch 

3 

I worry about my health. 

11 

bdh 

3 

I am clumsier than most people. 

28 

aei 

3 

I have good teeth. ! 


By averaging the ideal-concept over the entire group of subjects. 















. 




I ' 












3 




■ 



















54 


the important area of sex differences is obscured. For this reason, 
separate group ideal-sorts were derived for the girls and boys. The 
method used was the same as that described above for the total group. 
Although the analysis of sex differences in these group ideal-sorts 
will be left to a later section, their individual analyses will be dis¬ 
cussed at this point. The locations (L) and concerns (C) of the state¬ 
ments in these groups are included in Table IX below. 

TABLE IX LOCATION AND CONCERN OF STATEMENTS IN THE GROUP IDEAL-SORTS 

BOYS AND GIRLS 


State- 

ment 

Number 

Boys 

Girls 

State- 

meit 

Number 

Boys 

Girls 

State- 

melt 

Number 

Boys 

Girls 

L 

c 

L 

C 

L 

C 

L 

C 

L 

C 

L 

c 

1* 

10 

5 

10 

5 

18 

6 

1 

5 

0 

35 

4 

1 

5 

0 

2* 

2 

3 

2 

3 

19* 

1 

4 

1 

4 

36 

5 

0 

6 

1 

3* 

9 

4 

9 

4 

20 

8 

3 

5 

0 

37 

3 

2 

4 

1 

4 

1 

4 

0 

5 

21* 

4 

1 

4 

1 

38 

5 

0 

7 

2 

5* 

3 

2 

3 

2 

22 

5 

0 

6 

1 

39 

3 

2 

4 

1 

6 

9 

4 

8 

3 

23* 

3 

2 

3 

2 

40* 

6 

1 

6 

1 

7 

2 

3 

1 

4 

24* 

7 

2 

7 

2 

41* 

5 

0 

5 

0 

8 

7 

2 

8 

3 

25 

0 

5 

2 

3 

42 

6 

1 

8 

3 

9 

4 

1 

2 

3 

26 

6 

1 

7 

2 

43 

5 

0 

4 

1 

10 

7 

2 

6 

1 

27 

2 

3 

3 

2 

44 

8 

3 

6 

1 

11 

3 

2 

2 

3 

28* 

7 

2 

7 

2 

45* 

5 

0 

5 

0 

12 

8 

3 

9 

4 

29* 

4 

1 

4 

1 

46* 

6 

1 

6 

1 

13 

2 

3 

3 

2 

30 

7 

2 

5 

0 

47 

4 

1 

5 

0 

14* 

8 

3 

8 

3 

31 

4 

1 

3 

2 

48* 

6 

1 

6 

1 

15 

5 

0 

4 

1 

32 

5 

0 

7 

2 

49* 

4 

1 

4 

1 

16 

6 

1 

5 

0 

33 

5 

0 

4 

1 

50* 

7 

2 

7 

2 

17* 

3 

2 

3 

2 

34* 

6 

1 

6 

1 

51 

4 

1 

5 

0 


* Same location in both group sorbs. 
































■ 












55 


The mean concerns for each of the areas of self-perception were 
calculated for both the group ideal-sorts. Intra-sex differences in 
these means were found to be not significant at the 5$ level, although 
the mean concern for "mental processes" exceeded that for "bodily pro¬ 
cesses" significantly at the 6$ level for girls. The test used for 
examining the significance of the differences between these means was 
a distribution-free test developed by van der Waerden.'" This test 
is used extensively in the analysis of the data in the subsequent 
sections of this chapter. The usual Student*s Test for the difference 
in means requires homogeneity of variances and an assumption of normal¬ 
ity about the form of the distributions. Neither of these requirements 
could be satisfied with any degree of certainty for the distribution 
of concerns. Indeed, preliminary examination of this distribution 
showed it to be markedly skewed. For these reasons, van der¥aerden*s 
test proved to be an invaluable tool. A discussion of its theory and 
application will be found in Appendix 1/1 of the present study. 

Table X summarizes the mean concerns for the various areas of per¬ 
ception of the self for both the boys* and the girls* group ideal-sorts. 
In the column headed ’Mental Factors", the concerns for the areas of 
’Mind" and ’Mental Processes" have been combined. Similarly, "Body" 
and "Bodily Processes" have been combined under "Physical Factors". 


5* B.L. van der Waerden. "Ein neuer Test fur das Problem der zwei 
Stichproben", Mathematlsche Annalen , CXXVI, pp. 93-10?. 
































































, 

, 

. 








- 

* 


















56 


TABLE X MEAN CONCERNS FOR THE VARIOUS AREAS OF SELF-PERCEPTION FOR 

BOYS' AND GIRLS' IDEAL-SORTS 


Group 

Ideal- 

Sort 

Body 

Bodily 

Processes 

Mind 

Mental 

Processes 

Mental 

Factors 

Physical 

Factors 

Boys 

1.83 

2.08 

1.67 

1.47 

1.55 

1.96 

Girls 

1.83 

1.33 

2*00 

2.13 

2 *0? 

1.58 ! 


Table XI summarizes the six statements of greatest concern to 
the group of girls, and the six statements of greatest concern to the 
group of boys* 


TABLE XI STATEMENTS OF GREATEST CONCERN IN THE BOYS' AND GIRLS' 

GROUP IDEAL-SORTS 


Statement 

Number 

Letter 

Combina¬ 

tion 

Concern 

Statement 

Boys 




1 

aei 

5 

I am good-looking. 

25 

beh 

5 

I am hard of hearing. 

19 

bei 

4 

I have poor skin. 

6 

adh 

4 

I am as good at sports as most people. 

3 

adg 

4 

I am as smart as most people. 

4 

bef 

4 

My feelings are easily hurt. 




























57 


TABLE U (continued) 


Statement 

Number 

Letter 

Combina¬ 

tion 

Concern 

Statement 

Girls 




1 

aei 

5 

I am good-looking. 

4 

bef 

5 

My feelings are easily hurt. 

19 

bei 

4 

I have poor skin. 

7 

beg 

4 

1 am slow at arithmetic. 

12 

aeg 

4 

I have a good sense of humour. 

3 

adg 

4 

I am as smart as most people. 


IH. RELATIONS BETWEEN THE SELF-CONCEPTS AND THE GROUP IDEAL-CONCEPTS 


Having derived group ideal-sorts for the boys and girls, it 
seemed natural to consider their relationship to the self-sorts of 
individual subjects. In a sense, the degree of relatedness of a 
subject’s self-concept to the ideal-concept of the group of which he 
is a member, is a measure of his social acceptance. It may also be 
interpreted in terns of the influence of the group ideal on his 
stated self-concept. In other words, a subject may be influenced to 
some extent in his expressed description of himself, by his conscious 

or unconscious appreciation of what the group considers to be ideal. 

The first step in analyzing the relationship between the self- 
concepts and the group self-ideals was the calculation, for each 
subject, of the correlation between the locations of the 51 statements 
in the self-sort and their locations in the appropriate group ideal-sort. 


















































. • 

























58 


Thus the girls* self-sorts were correlated with the girls* group ideal- 
sort, and similarly for the bqys. The resulting correlation coefficients 
are listed in Table XU under the heading r^: the subscript n l** 
denotes self-sort, and ”3 11 denotes ideal-sort. It will be seen that 
these correlations range from -.264 to .720. The mean M z w for the 
group was found to be .46 with corresponding mean "r” of .43. It is of 
interest to note that these are the same as those found in the self¬ 
ideal analysis in Section I of the present chapter.^ The standard error 
of the mean n z n was found to be .022 resulting in a M t 11 ratio of 20,7 
which greatly exceeds the 1$ critical value of 2.63 for 103 degrees of 
freedom. It may be concluded that there is a highly significant degree 
of relatedness between self and group ideal-concepts for the group as a 
whole. 

The standard deviation for the ,, z M values was found to be .23 
This gives a range of "z" values of .23 to .69 fram one standard 
deviation below the mean to one standard deviation above the mean. The 
corresponding range for r ^ is from .23 to .60. The set of subjects 
having self - group ideal correlations below .23 were termed the low 
group acceptance set; those above .60 constitute the high group acceptance 
set. The first of these groups contains 17 subjects, or 16.3$ of the 
total group; the second contains 15 subjects, or 14.4$ of the total group. 

These are the same percentages found for the low and high self-acceptance 

7 

groups in Section I of the present chapter.* 


6 » Supra , p. 47 
7. Supra , p.49. 









I 


■ 




O ■_ 


















TABLE XU CORRELATIONS BETWEEN THE SELF-SORTS AND GROUP IDEAL-SORTS 


Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

s 

E 

X 

r 13 

Sub¬ 

ject 

NO. 

s 

E 

X 

r l3 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

s 

E 

X 

r l3 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

S 

E 

X 

r 13 

1 

F 

.104# 

2 ? 

F 

.544** 

53 

M 

.124# 

79 

M 

,672**x 

2 

F 

* 360 ** 

28 

F 

.236 

54 

M 

.464** 

80 

M 

. 328 * 

3 

F 

440** 

29 

F 

. 476 ** 

55 

M 

.596** 

81 

M 

.492** 

4 

F 

-.024# 

30 

F 

.392** 

56 

M 

.488** 

82 

M 

.492** 

5 

F 

. 436 ** 

31 

F 

.400** 

57 

M 

.428** 

83 

M 

.140# 

6 

F 

.492** 

32 

: F 

.464** 

58 

M 

, 628 **x 

84 

M 

.460** 

7 

F 

. 512 ** 

33 

F 

.388** 

59 

M 

.460** 

85 

M 

.6o4**x 

8 

F 

.436** 

34 

F 

. 512 ** 

60 

M 

.100# 

86 

M 

.516** 

9 

F 

.436** 

35 

F 

.556** 

61 

M 

.392** 

87 

M • 

-.020# 

10 

F 

,6o8**x 

36 

F 

-.004# 

62 

H 

. 312 * 

88 

M 

.340* 

11 

F 

.392** 

37 

F 

.472** 

63 

M 

.596** 

89 

M 

.308* 

12 

F 

.692**x 

33 

F 

.6l2**x 

64 

M 

, 560 ** 

90 

M 

. 328 * 

13 

F 

.072# 

39 

F 

. 228 # 

65 

M 

.268 

91 

M 

.440** 

14 

F 

.144# 

40 

F 

,588** 

66 

M 

,652**x 

92 

H 

.468** 

1 5 

F 

.168# 

41 

F 

. 600 ** 

67 

M 

. 560 ** 

93 

M 

,644**x 

16 

F 

,680**x 

42 

F 

.268 

68 

M 

.536** 

94 

M 

.136# 

17 

F 

.376** 

43 

M 

.504** 

69 

M 

. 372 ** 

95 

M 

.692**x 

18 

F 

.440** 

44 

M 

.364** 

70 

M 

.588** 

96 

M 

.540** 

19 

F 

. 616 **x 

45 

M 

,268 

71 

M 

.268 

97 

M 

.064# 

20 

F 

.184# 

46 

M 

.124# 

72 

M 

.480** 

98 

M 

.428** 

21 

F 

.308* 

47 

M 

.612**x 

73 

M 

.408** 

99 

M 

.372** 

22 

F 

-.264# 

48 

M 

. 592 ** 

74 

M 

.396** 

100 

M 

. 476 ** 

23 

F 

.244 

49 

M 

.448** 

75 

H 

.584** 

101 

M 

.532** 

24 

F 

.460** 

50 

M 

. 300 * 

76 

H 

.572** 

102 

M 

.720**x 

25 

F 

.148# 

51 

M 

.640**x 

77 

M 

,660**x 

103 

M 

.400** 

26 

F 

.472** 

52 

M 

.57 2 ** 

78 

M 

.324* 

104 

M 

.388** 


* Significant departure from *’0 n at 5$ level of significance. 
** Significant departure from “O’* at Vf> level of significance* 

# In low group acceptance set* 
x In high group acceptance set* 


However# the subjects constituting the high and low self-acceptance 
groups are not necessarily those who are included in the high and low 















) 










60 


group-acceptance sets. The amount of duplication of subjects in the low 

and high groups is sufficiently marked to invite the hypothesis that 

subjects who are low (or high) in one of the classifications, tend to 

be low (or high) in the other classification. In order to test this 

hypothesis, a two way contingency table was constructed and the subjects 

classified according to the degree of their self-acceptance and group 

acceptance. In order to complete the classification for all of the 

subjects, it was necessary to introduce intermediate categories of 

medium self-acceptance and medium group acceptance. Table HU is the 

resulting contingency table. The coefficient of contingency calculated 

8 

from this table was found to be .595* Using the formula - 

TABLE XIII CONTINGENCY TABLE FOR EXAMINING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN 

SELF-ACCEPTANCE AND GROUP ACCEPTANCE 


Group 

Accept¬ 

ance 


S elf-Ac c eotance 


Classifica¬ 

tion 

Low 

Medium 

High 

Totals 

Low 

12 

5 

0 

17 

Medium 

5 

59 

8 

72 

High 

0 

8 

7 

15 

Totals 

17 

72 

15 

104 


8. For the method of calculating this coefficient, the reader is 
referred to, Henry E. Garrett. Statistics in Psychology and Education . 
Longmans, Green and Co., New York, 1953» pp.368-371* 

















* 

■ 

* 

. 
















61 


o = ly£_ 

y N +*X x 

the value of chi square^ was found to be 56.6 which greatly exceeds 
the critical value of 13.28 for four degrees of freedom at the Vf> level 
of significance. Thus the hypothesis is strongly supported. 

Using the method described in Section I of this chapter, the 
group of self - group ideal correlations was tested for the existence 
of significant differences. A chi square value of 253.^ was obtained. 
This exceeds the critical value of 138.5 Tor 103 degrees of freedom at 
the ifo level of significance. Thus significant individual differences 
or subpopulations are seen to exist. 



Figure 3* Histogram Showing the Distribution of Self - Group Ideal Corre¬ 
lations for 104 Adolescent Subjects. 


9. In this formula, M C n stands for coefficient of contingency and M N n 
for the sample size. 































, 

















62 


Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of self - group ideal correla¬ 
tions for the entire experimental group* 

IV* RELATIONS BETWEEN THE IDEAL-CONCEPTS AND THE GROUP IDEAL-CONCEPTS 

Whether or not an adolescent wishes to resemble the ideal of the 
group of which he is a member has important social implications* Per¬ 
sons who direct their self-development decidedly away from the general 
direction of the group goal are commonly referred to as “misfits"* 

They necessarily experience frustration and tend to become social iso¬ 
lates* 

It was felt that an indication of the incidence of adolescent 
"misfits"* and their counterparts* the socially well integrated adoles¬ 
cents* could be obtained by studying the relationship between the ideal- 
concepts and group ideal-concepts of the adolescents who constituted 
the experimental group of the present investigation* 

The correlation between the ideal-sort and the appropriate group 
ideal-sort was calculated for each subject* These correlations are 
listed In Table XXV under the column heading They range from .300 

to *912. The mean "z" for the group was found to be .89* and the 
corresponding "r" was .71 • A standard error of the mean"z" of *023 
resulted in a "t ratio" of 38.6 which greatly exceeds the critical value 
of 2.63 for 103 degrees of freedom at the Vf> level of significance* For 
the group as a whole* it follows that there is a highly significant degree 
of correspondence between ideal and group ideal concepts. 

















■' 


, 




> • ; : 'X 

v . 








63 


TABLE XIV CORRELATIONS BETWEEN THE IDEAL-SORTS AND THE GROUP IDEAL-SORTS 


Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

S 

E 

X 

r 23 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

S 

E 

X 

r 23 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

S 

E 

X 

r 23 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No. 

s 

E 

X 

r 23 

1 

F 

.820**x 

27 

F 

.720** 

53 

M 

.796** 

79 

M 

.432**# 

2 

F 

.776** 

28 

F 

.624** 

54 

M 

.656** 

80 

M 

.728** 

3 

F 

.832**x 

29 

F 

# 860**x 

55 

M 

.812**x 

81 

M 

.572** 

4 

F 

.780** 

30 

F 

.780** 

56 

M 

.572** 

82 

M 

.708** 

5 

F 

.812**x 

31 

F 

.652** 

57 

M 

.548**# 

83 

M 

.312*# 

6 

F 

,696** 

32 

F 

.312*# 

58 

M 

.728** 

84 

M 

.748** 

7 

F 

,880**x 

33 

F 

.744** 

59 

M 

.588** 

85 

M 

.760** 

8 

F 

.728** 

34 

F 

.740** 

60 

M 

.624** 

86 

M 

.708** 

9 

F 

.876**x 

35 

F 

.688** 

61 

M 

.744** 

87 

M 

.788** 

10 

F 

.828**x 

36 

F 

.672** 

62 

M 

.340*# 

88 

M 

.680** 

11 

F 

.912**x 

37 

F 

.796** 

63 

M 

.732** 

89 

M 

.732** 

12 

F 

,8l2**x 

38 

F 

.776** 

64 

M 

.724** 

90 

M 

.563**# 

13 

F 

,836**x 

39 

F 

.668** 

65 

M 

.300*# 

91 

M 

.688** 

14 

F 

.668** 

40 

F 

.844**x 

66 

M 

.780** 

92 

M 

.620** 

15 

F 

.804** 

41 

F 

.732** 

67 

M 

.560**# 

93 

M 

.656** 

16 

F 

.808** 

42 

F 

,772** 

68 

M 

.756** 

94 

M 

.556**# 

17 

F 

.728** 

43 

M 

.608** 

69 

M 

.580** 

95 

M 

.756** 

18 

F 

.668** 

44 

M 

.676** 

70 

M 

.724** 

96 

M 

.600** 

19 

F 

.704** 

45 

M 

.556**# 

71 

M 

.776** 

97 

M 

.696** 

20 

F 

,828**x 

46 

M 

.828**x 

72 

M 

.612** 

98 

M 

.788** 

21 

F 

.500**# 

47 

M 

,8l6**x 

73 

M 

.464**# 

99 

H 

.736** 

22 

F 

.784** 

48 

M 

.708** 

74 

M 

.516**# 

100 

M 

.632** 

23 

F 

.448**# 

49 

M 

.716** 

75 

M 

.596** 

101 

M 

.580** 

24 

F 

.800** 

50 

M 

,824**x 

76 

M 

.492**# 

102 

M 

.776** 

25 

F 

.676** 

51 

M 

.724** 

77 

M 

.664** 

103 

M 

.800** 

26 

F 

.844**x 

52 

M 

.648** 

78 

H 

.656** 

104 

M 

.644** ; 


* Significant departure from M Q M at 5$ level of significance® 

** Significant departure from n Q M at ifo level of significance* 

# In low socially integrated group® 
x In high socially integrated group® 

The standard deviation for the observed u z n values was found to 

be .24. This results in a range of n z M values of *65 to 1.13 from one 

standard deviation below the mean M z n to one standard deviation above it. 












64 


The standard deviation for the observed "z u values was found to 
be *24* This results in a range of "z" values of .65 to 1.13 from 
one standard deviation below the mean n z" to one standard deviation 
above it* The corresponding range for H r n is from ,5? to *81. The 
set of subjects having ideal - group ideal correlations below .57 were 
temed the low socially integrated group, and those above .81 were 
called the high socially integrated group. The first of these groups 
was found to contain 15 subjects or 14*4$ of the total group, and the 
second to contain 1? subjects or 16.3$ of the total group. These 
percentages are just the reverse of those found for the low and high 
group-acceptance and self-acceptance groups. As in the preceding section, 
contingency tables were constructed to examine the coincidence of 
subjects in the various groupings. Table X? is the contingency table 
which classifies the subjects by self-acceptance and social integration 
and Table XVT classifies then by group-acceptance and soeial integration. 


TABLE X? CONTINGENCY TABLE FOR EXAMINING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN 
SELF-ACCEPTANCE AND SOCIAL INTEGRATION 


Social 

Integra 

tion 


Classifi¬ 

cation 

Low 

Medium 

High 

Totals 

Low 

6 

9 

0 

15 

Medium 

9 

52 

11 

72 

High 

2 

11 

4 

17 

Totals 

17 

72 

15 

104 



































. 








65 

A contingency coefficient of *295 was obtained for the distribu¬ 
tion of subjects in Table XV. This resulted in a chi square value of 
9.5 which slightly exceeds the critical value of 9.488 for four degrees 
of freedom at the 5$ level of significance. Thus there is evidence 
to support the hypothesis that persons, in this case adolescents, who 
exhibit high self-acceptance tend to be well integrated socially, 

Fran Table XVI, a contingency coefficient of .139 was obtained. 

The corresponding chi square of 2.04 is not significant. There was 
no observed tendency for adolescents with high (or low) group-accept¬ 
ance to be well (or poorly) integrated socially. In other words, 
subjects whose self-concepts fail to resemble the group ideal were 
not observed to exhibit significantly different ideal-concepts from that 
of the group of which they were members. 

TABLE XVI CONTINGENCY TABLE FOR EXAMINING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN 
GROUP-ACCEPTANCE AND SOCIAL INTEGRATION 


Inte¬ 

grat¬ 

ion 


Classifica¬ 

tion 

Low 

Medium 

High 

Totals 

Low 

2 

12 

1 

15 

Medium 

11 

50 

11 

72 

High 

4 

10 

3 

17 

Totals 

17 

72 

15 

104 






















66 


Figure 4 illustrates the distribution of ideal - group ideal corre¬ 
lations for the entire group* 



Figure 4* Histogram Showing the Distribution of Ideal - Group Ideal Corre¬ 
lations for 104 Adolescent Subjects. 


The test for the existence of significant individual differences 
in the ideal - group ideal correlations gave a calculated chi square 
value of 274*0 which greatly exceeds the critical value of 138.5 for 103 
degrees of freedom at the ifo level of significance. This supplies 
further evidence for the existence of significant subpopulations. The 


























67 


recurring evidence of significant subpopulations invites investigation 
of their determinants. This would seem to offer a rich field of 
investigation by the methods of factor analysis* Butler and Haigh 
have speculated on the possible existence of self-ideal patterns and 
their relation to personality integration * They say, "In brief, cer¬ 
tain patterns of the self-ideal Gestalt may be discovered to indicate 
certain patterns or types of personality integration. It is possible 
that factor analysis of the self-ideal sortings may isolate such 
fundamental patterns.” 10 

V. THE INFLUENCE OF THE GROUP IDEAL ON THE SELF-IDEAL RELATIONSHIP 

As was seen in the preceding section, self-acceptance seems to 
be significantly related to both group-acceptance and social integra¬ 
tion. This suggests that the group ideal is an influential factor in 
the relationship between the self-concept and the ideal-concept. 

In order to examine the nature of this influence, it was decided 
to use partial correlative analysis to render constant the influence 
of the group ideal, and to examine the residual self-ideal relation¬ 
ship. Ejy contrasting the residual relationship with the original, it 
was possible to obtain an indication of the group ideal*s influence. 

The partial correlations are listed in Table XVII. They win be 
seen to range from -.2?? to .751 • The original simple correlations 


10. Butler and Haigh, op. cit ., p. 62. 








* 

* ' 

. 


. 

■ 

- 

. 

T 

* 














l, l > 





68 


TABLE XVII PARTIAL CORRELATIONS BETWEEN THE SELF AND IDEAL-SORTS 
VJITH THE GROUP IDEAL HELD CONSTANT 


Sub¬ 

ject 

No* 

s 

** r l2 3 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No* 

x ri2 *3 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No* 

s 

E 

X 

r l2.3 

Sub¬ 

ject 

No* 

S 

E 

X 

r 12.3 

1 

F .441** 

27 

F *159 

53 

H 

.109 

79 

M 

.290* 

2 

F -.060 

28 

F .127 

54 

M 

. 502 ** 

80 

M 

.014 

3 

F *020 

29 

F -.057 

55 

H 

. 307 * 

81 

M 

.043 

4 

F -.002 

30 

F -.156 

56 

M 

.202 

82 

M 

.299* 

5 

F .263 

31 

F .269 

57 

M 

.097 

83 

M 

.085 

6 

F .431** 

32 

F .493** 

58 

M 

.223 

84 

M 

.075 

7 

F .396** 

33 

F .239 

59 

M < 

-.018 

85 

M 

.272 

8 

F .356* 

34 

F .044 

60 

H 

.090 

86 

M 

.183 

9 

F .134 

35 

F -.090 

61 

M ■ 

-.045 

87 

M 

-.127 

10 

F .505** 

36 

F -.277 

62 

M 

.074 

88 

M 

-.109 

11 

F .473** 

37 

F .083 

63 

M 

.431** 

89 

M 

.214 

12 

F .470** 

38 

F .751** 

64 

M 

.285* 

90 

M 

.512** 

13 

F -.220 

39 

F .160 

65 

M 

.100 

91 

M 

.192 

14 

F .266 

40 

F .516** 

66 

M 

.134 

92 

M 

. 701 ** 

15 

F -.162 

41 

F .280* 

67 

M 

.146 

93 

M 

.086 

16 

F .386** 

42 

F .126 

68 

M 

.017 

94 

M 

.073 

17 

F -.009 

43 

M .037 

69 

M 

.238 

95 

M 

.027 

18 

F .223 

44 

M .533** 

70 

M 

.413** 

96 

M 

.440** 

19 

F .455** 

45 

M -.086 

71 

M 

.000 

97 

M 

.345* 

20 

F .094 

46 

M -.170 

72 

M • 

-.095 

98 

M 

.048 

21 

F .265 

47 

M .373** 

73 

M 

.488** 

99 

M 

.054 

22 

F .139 

48 

M .634** 

74 

M 

.208 

100 

M 

. 568 ** 

23 

F -.020 

49 

M . 338 * 

75 

M 

.313* 

101 

M 

.469** 

24 

F .187 

50 

M .046 

76 

M 

.435** 

102 

M 

.Olio 

25 

F -.093 

51 

M . 605 ** 

77 

M 

.089 

103 

M 

.131 

26 

F .181 

52 

M . 361 * 

78 

M 

.027 

104 

M 

.264 


* Significant departure from n O" at 5$ level of significance. 

** Significant departure from n ) ,t at Vf> level of significance* 

A i 

were found to range from -.208 to *824. 1 This suggests a general 
lowering of the self-ideal relationship when the influence of the 


11* Suora . p* 4? 







































69 


group ideal is held constant. For only three subjects (Numbers 1, 22 
and 97) did the partial correlation exceed the simple correlation. The 
mean partial correlation was found to be .22 compared with the origins!, 
mean simple correlation of .43. Some of the possible causes for this 
lowering will be discussed in Chapter VII. Figure 5 shows the distribu¬ 
tion of self-ideal partial correlations with the group ideal held 
constant. 



Figure 5* Histogram Showing the Distribution of Self-Ideal Partial 
Correlations Holding Group Ideal Constant, for 104 Ado- 
lescent Subjects. 


Vi: . ANALYSIS OF DISSATISFACTION "WITH SELF 

An individual indicates dissatisfaction with himself when his 
ideal-concept differs from his self-concept. It will be convenient 
to define the mathematical dissatisfaction associated with a given state- 












































70 


ment on the forced-sort as the numerical difference between its self 
and ideal locations* For a group of individuals, the group dissatis¬ 
faction of a given statement will be the numerical difference between 
the average self and the average ideal locations taken over the entire 
group. The group dissatisfaction associated with a set of statements 
will be the average of the individual group dissatisfactions for the 
set. 

Rather than considering the group of subjects as a whole, in study¬ 
ing the dissatisfaction with self, it was decided to treat the boys and 
girls separately. This had the advantage of permitting the examina¬ 
tion of sex differences at a later stage of the investigation. 

The group dissatisfactions for each of the sets of statements 
associated with the various areas of self-perception were calculated 
for both the boys and girls. Since each of these group dissatisfactions 
were means, they could be tested for the significance of intra-sex 
differences by means of van der Waerden*s test. 

Table XVIII shows the resulting group dissatisfactions for each 
of the areas of perception of the self. 

TABLE XVIII GROUP DISSATISFACTIONS BY SEX FOR THE VARIOUS AREAS OF 

SELF-PERCEPTION 


Sex 

Mental Processes 

Mind 

Bodily Processes 

Body 

Girls 

.68 

1.00 

.62 

.98 

Boys 

.53 

.66 

.59 

.66 
















71 


Intra-sex differences in these group dissatisfactions are shown 
in Table XIX. 


TABLE XIX INTRA-SEX DIFFERENCES IN GROUP DISSATISFACTIONS FOR THE 

VARIOUS AREAS OF SELF-PERCEPTION 



Boys 

Girls 

Area 

Ment. 

Mind 

Bod. 

Area 

Ment. 

Mind 

Bod. 


Proc. 


Proc, 


Proc. 


Proc. 

Mind 

.13 



Mind 

.32* 



Bod. 

Proc. 

.06 

. 0 ? 


Bod. 

Proc. 

.06 

.38* 


Body 

.13 

.00 

.07 

Body 

.31 

.04 

.34 


* Difference in dissatisfactions significantly greater than "O'* at 5$ 
level of significance. 


No significant differences were observed between the group dis¬ 
satisfactions associated with the various areas of self-perception 
for the boys. For the girls, it was found that the group dissatis¬ 
faction 4n the area of ‘Mind” was significantly greater than in the 
areas of "Mental Processes” or "Bodily Processes”. 

It may seem curious that the difference in group dissatisfaction 
between the areas of "Body" and "Bodily Processes”, for the girls, was 
not found to be significant, although the smaller difference between 
the areas of "Mind" and 'Mental Processes" was found to be significant. 















. 




















72 


This can be explained by the nature of van der Waerden’s test which 
depends solely on the numerical order of the observations, and not 
on their size, except as the order is determined by size. This may, 
at first consideration, seen a defect in the test, however, it has 
the advantage of minimizing the influence of isolated extreme observa¬ 
tions. In the present instance, the group dissatisfaction for a 
single statement (Number 1) was responsible for raising the group 
dissatisfaction in the area of "Body" to a relatively high level. 

This had the effect of making the group dissatisfaction in the area of 
"Body" unrepresentative of the dissatisfaction associated with the 
area as a whole. This defect was automatically corrected by van der 
¥aerden*s test. 


VIII. ANALYSIS OF SEX DIFFERENCES 

The data of the present study offered a variety of opportunities 
for the study of sex differences in the various aspects of the self. 
Rather than treating these in the preceding sections, it was decided 
to group them in a single section in order to give a more uniform 
picture of sex differences. 

The mean self-ideal, self - group ideal and ideal - group ideal 
correlations were calculated for both the boys and girls. Each of these 
was tested for significance of departure from zero by Fisher*s method. 
All were found to be highly significant. In addition, each set of 
correlations, which determined the mean correlations, were tested for 
the existence of significant individual differences by the method 


t 

t 

< 

' 


















I 















.■: ■ 






73 


TABLE XX SELF-IDEAL, SELF - GROUP IDEAL AND IDEAL - GROUP IDEAL CORRELA¬ 
TIONS B1 SEX 


Para- 

r 12 

r l3 

r 23 

meter* 

Boys 

Girls 

Boys 

Girls 

Boys 

Girls 

z 

.48 

.43 

.49 

.41 

.82 

1.00 

S.E.z 

.033 

.048 

.027 

.037 

.026 

.037 

»t 

ratio" 

14.7 

9.0 

18.4 

10.9 

31.5 

27.1 

d.f. 

61 

41 

61 

41 

61 

41 

C.V. t 

(150 

2.66 

2.71 

2.66 

2.71 

2.66 

2.71 

r 

.45** 

.40** 

.45** 

.39** 

.67** 

.76** 

X 2 

193.3 

188.8 

129.3 

116.4 

122.7 

112.3 

c.v.x 2 

U50 

89.6 

65.0 

89.6 

65.0 

89.6 

65.0 

r (Boy)- 
r (Girl) 

.05 

.06 

-.09 ; 


* Some of the abbreviations of the parameters require explanation. 

They are as follows: 

S - the mean "z", using Fisher* s method. 

S.E. z - the standard error of z. 
d.f. - degrees of freedom. 

C.V. t(l$) - the tabulated critical value of "Student 5 s -t 11 at the 
lf 0 level of significance for the number of degrees of 
freedom indicated. 

ru- the mean correlation corresponding to z. 

"Xt - the value of chi square found by Tippett*s formula for testing 
for the existence of significant individual differences. 

C.V. X (1- the tabulated critical value of chi square at the 1$ 
level of significance for the number of degrees of 
freedom indicated. 

** Significant departure from "0" at the 1$ level of significance. 





























74 


described in Section I of the present chapter* All of these sets were 
found to contain highly significant individual differences* 

The sex differences in the mean correlations were calculated, and 
tested for significance of departure from zero. None of these differ¬ 
ences proved to be significant* 

Table XX summarizes the analysis of the correlations described above* 
The subjects were classified by sex and by the relative magnitude 
of their self-ideal and self - group ideal correlations, to determine 
whether or not there was a significant tendency for the self-ideal 
correlations of one sex to exceed the self - group ideal correlations 
more frequently than for the other sex. A contingency table was 
constructed which classified the subjects in this manner* Table XXI 
shows the manner in which the subjects were classified. 

TABLE XXL GLASSIFICATION OF SUBJECTS BT SEX AND BX THE RELATIVE MAGNIT¬ 
UDE OF THEIR SELF-IDEAL AND SELF - GROUP IDEAL CORRELATIONS 


Sex 

r 12 S rea-ter 
than 

r ^3 greater 
than r ^2 

Totals 

Boys 

(A) 2? 

(B) 35 

62 

Girls 

(C) 2? 

(D) 15 

42 

Totals 


50 

(N)104 















75 


Using the criterion, 12 

X 2 = _ H(AD - BC) 2 _ , 

(A + B)(C + D)(A + C)(B + D) 

where the letters have the numerical values shown in the table, a 
chi square value of 4.31 was obtained. This exceeds the critical value 
of 3*84 for 1 degree of freedom at the 5$ level of significance. It 
follows that significantly more girls than boys have a self-ideal 
correlation that exceeds their self - group ideal correlation. 

The percentages of boys and girls in the low and high self-sccept- 
ance, group-acceptance, and social integration groups were calculated. 
Table XXII summarizes these percentages and the sex differences between 
them. The percentages for the girls are of the total number of girls, 
and similarly for the boys, 

TABLE XXEI PERCENTAGES BY SEX OF SUBJECTS IN THE HIGH AND LOW SELF¬ 
ACCEPTANCE, GROUP-ACCEPTANCE AND SOCIAL INTEGRATION GROUPS 



Self-Acceptance 

Group-Acceptance 

Social Integration 

Sex 








Low 

High 

Low 

High 

Low 

High 

Boys 

16.1$ 

14.5$ 

11.3$ 

16.1$ 

19.4$ 

6.5$ 

Girls 

16.736 

14.3$ 

23.8$ 

11.8$ 

7.1$ 

30.9$ 

$Boys- 

$ Girls 

-0.6$ 

0.2$ 

-12.5$ 

4.3$ 

12.3 $ 

-24.4$* 


* Significant departure from "O' 1 at the 5$ level of significance. 


12. Garrett, op, cit., p. 265. 

















> ■ 


! 


















76 


In the classification "high social integration", the percentage 
of girls was found to be significantly greater than that of boys. 
Otherwise, no significant sex differences in percentages were found. 

The sex differences in the mean concerns and group dissatisfactions 
for each of the areas of self-perception were computed, and their sig¬ 
nificances tested by van der Waerden*s test. Although none of these 
differences was found to be significant, the girls seemed to exhibit 
consistently greater dissatisfaction with self than did the boys. 

This is suggested in Table XXIII where the group dissatisfaction for 
the girls is seen to be greater than that for the boys in all areas of 
self-perception. There also appeared to be a tendency for the girls 
to show greater concern for the ’Mental" area of self-perception, and 
for the boys to be more concerned with the "Physical" area. 

In order to obtain a measure of the similarity of the boys* and 
girls* group ideal-concepts, it was decided to compute the simple 
correlation between the boys’ and girls’ group ideal-sorts. This 
resulted in a correlation of .880 whose departure from zero is sig¬ 
nificant at the level. There appears, therefore, to be a highly 
significant relationship between the group ideal-concepts of the boys 
and girls who constituted the subjects of the present investigation. 

Table XXIII summarizes the group dissatisfactions and mean con¬ 
cerns by sex, for each area of perception of the self. It also in¬ 
dicates sex differences in these quantities. 










. 

■ 

* 1 

t • • • : .) 

. 








) 

, 








77 


TABLE XXIII GROUP DISSATISFACTIONS AND MEAN CONCERNS BX SEX FOR THE 
VARIOUS AREAS OF SELF-PERCEPTION 



Ment, 

Proc.* 

Mind 

Bod. Proc* 

Body 

Sex 










Cent 

Diss,* 

Con. 

Diss, 

Con. 

Diss. 

Con. 

Diss. 

Boys 

1.4? 

.53 

1.67 

.66 

2.08 

.59 

1.83 

.66 

Girls 

2.13 

.68 

2.00 

1.00 

1.33 

.62 

1.83 

.96 

Boys- 

Girls 

-.66 

”.15 

-•33 

-.34 

.65 

-•03 

.00 

£ 

. 

I 


* The abbreviations have the following meanings; 
Kent* Proc. - Mental Processes 
Bod, Proc. - Bodily Processes 
Con, - Mean concern 
Diss. - Group Dissatisfaction, 




























CHAPTER VII 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY 

It is not intended that the conclusions drawn in this chapter 
should apply beyond the experimental group of the present investigation. 

At best, they can serve as hypotheses to be tested on a wider scale. 

It would be tedious to repeat this qualification with the statement 
of each conclusion to which it is intended to apply. Instances in 
which extrapolation beyond the experimental group seems justified will 
be discussed explicitly. 

I. GROUP ADMINISTRATION OF THE FORCED-SORT 

It has been customary for forced-sorts to be administered individ¬ 
ually. In the present study, an attempt was made to administer a self¬ 
ideal forced-sort to several classes of adolescent students. This was 
facilitated by the use of a distribution chart which permitted the 
continuous comparison of the self-descriptive statements, and made it 
possible for each subject to record his own sort and identifying data. 

The chart also served as a permanent record of the sort. 

Certain defects were observed in the group approach. Difficulty 
was experienced in establishing the proper rapport with a few of the 
subjects. Perhaps this could be corrected by a more intensive orienta¬ 
tion of the subjects in the puiposes of the sort. A few errors in 
recording the sort were observed. This defect could probably be elimin¬ 
ated by having the students check their distribution charts more carefully 





79 

Another difficulty was the loss of data due to absenteeism. This could 
be corrected by having both the self and ideal-sorts carried out during 
one session. However, this raises problems of "mental set" in changing 
immediately from the vieitfpoint of "self" to that of "ideal". 

It is also possible that there is a more pronounced tendency in 
group administration, than in individual administration, for subjects 
to conceal their true attitudes toward themselves. This hypothesis 
might be verified or rejected experimentally. 

H. RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE SELF-CONCEPT, THE IDEAL-CONCEPT AND THE 

GROUP IDEAL-CONCEPTS 

Moderate, but highly significant, linear relationships were found 
to exist between the self and ideal-concepts for the group as a whole, 
and for its constituent groups of boys and girls. The total group 
and the constituent groups were found to contain significant individual 
differences in the self-ideal relationship. This suggests the presence 
of significant subpopulations whose determinants might serve as a 
rewarding subject for further investigation. The methods of factor 
analysis would seem to be appropriate to such a study. 

Group ideal-sorts were derived for the total group and for the 
groups of boys and girls. Significant moderate linear relationships 
were found between each of these group ideal-sorts and the self-sorts 
of the corresponding groups of subjects. In all instances, strong 
evidence was obtained for the existence of significant individual 
differences or subpopulations. 





80 


Very significant high linear relationships were found between 
the ideal-concepts of the subjects constituting the total group, the 
boys* group, and the girls* group, and the corresponding group ideals. 
This suggests a uniformly strong tendency for the ideal-concept of an 
adolescent to conform with the ideal-concept of the group of which he 
is a member. Again, evidence of the existence of significant individual 
differences in the ideal - group ideal relationship was obtained. 

The influence of the group ideal-concepts of the boys* and girls* 
groups on their self-ideal relationships was examined by partial 
correlative analysis. It was observed that by holding the group ideal 
constant, a lowering of the self-ideal relationship resulted. It is 
difficult to isolate the precise area where this influence is greatest. 
It may reflect the group*s influence on the expressed concept of self; 
that is, it may reflect a conscious tendency of the individual to 
describe himself with a bias in the direction of what the group con¬ 
siders desirable. On the other hand, it may reflect the influence of 
the group ideal on his own ideal-concept. It is probably caused, to 
a greater or less extent, by both of these effects. 

The subjects of the study were classified as possessing high, 
medium or low self-acceptance, group-acceptance or social integration 
according as their self ideal, self - group ideal or ideal - group ideal 
correlations fell respectively above, within or below one standard 
deviation of the corresponding mean correlation. These cross classifi¬ 
cations were analyzed by means of contingency tables. In this manner. 



'•'■J . ■ 


1 


; ■ - . 


' 




'j 




















81 


it was found that there is a strong tendency for subjects who exhibit 
a high self-ideal relationship also to exhibit a high self - group 
ideal relationship, and conversely# Similarly, a significant positive 
direct variation was found between the self-ideal relationship and the 
ideal - group ideal relationship. On the other hand, no such tendency 
was observed for the self - group ideal and ideal - group ideal relation¬ 
ships. This negative result may be interpreted as indicating that 
adolescents whose self-concepts resemble the group ideal for their sex, 
do not necessarily have ideal-concepts which resemble this group ideal. 

III. GROUP DISSATISFACTION AND CONCERN 

The terns "dissatisfaction tt and "concern" were defined mathemati¬ 
cally in relation to the present investigation. "Dissatisfaction" refers 
to the discrepancy between the self and ideal conceptions of some aspect 
of the physical or mental being. "Concern" is related to the degree 
of indifference an individual displays toward some such aspect. 

For the group as a whole, no significant differences were found 
in the concern felt for the various areas of the perceived self. 
Similarly, no significant intra-sex differences in concern for these 
areas were observed, although there appeared to be a slight tendency 
for the girls to be more concerned with the area of "Mental Processes" 
than with that of "Bodily Processes". The limited coverage of these 
areas, and the obscuring influ ©ice of the averaging process, make this 
apparent uniformity of "concern" of doubtful significance. The subject 






















82 


of "concern with the various areas of self-perception" would seem to 
offer possibilities for more intensive research. 

Analysis of the intra-sex differences in "dissatisfaction with 
the areas of the perceived self" showed that the girls were significantly 
more dissatisfied with the area of "Mind" than with "Mental Processes" 
or "Bodily Processes". No significant differences in the dissatis¬ 
factions associated with the various areas of self-perception were found 
for the boys. Again, more intensive investigation may yield significant 
differences in these areas. 

IV. SEX DIFFERENCES 

The boys* and girls* mean self-ideal, self - group ideal and ideal - 
group ideal correlations were examined for significant sex differences. 
Although no significant differences were found, further analysis showed 
a significant tendency for a larger proportion of girls, than of boys, 
to have self-ideal correlations which exceeded their self - group ideal 
correlations, and a larger proportion of boys, than of girls, to have 
self - group ideal correlations which exceeded their self-ideal 
correlations. This may be interpreted to mean that, in adolescence, 
there is a tendency for a larger proportion of girls, than of boys, to 
have self-concepts which conform more with their own ideal-concepts 
than with the group ideal for their sex, and for a higher proportion 
of boys, than of girls, to have self-concepts which conform more with 
the group ideal for their sex than with their own ideal-concepts. 






83 


Analysis of the percentages of boys and girls in the high and 
low self-acceptance, group-acceptance and social integration groups, 
as they were defined in this study, showed no significant sex differ¬ 
ences, except in the "high social integration group", where a sig¬ 
nificantly higher percentage of girls, than of boys, were found to have 
a high degree of conformity between their ideal-concepts and the 
corresponding group ideal* 

No significant sex differences in "concern" for the various areas 
of self-perception were found* There did appear to be a slight tendency 
for girls, more than boys, to be concerned with the general "Mental" 
area of self-perception, and for boys, more than girls, to be con¬ 
cerned with the "Physical" aspects of the self* This apparent tendency 
could probably be confirmed or rejected by further investigation. 

The group dissatisfactions associated with the various areas of 
the perceived self were investigated for significant sex differences* 
Although none were found, there seemed to be a consistent tendency for 
girls, more than boys, to be dissatisfied with all of the areas of 
self-perception. Again, this tendency could be the subject of further 
research. 

little intensive analysis was applied to determine the signifi¬ 
cance of sex differences in the group ideals of the boys and girls* 

The very significant high correlation found between the boys* and girls* 
group ideal-sorts suggests that any such differences would be small* 



I 




' 


' 







* 

■ 

, ■ t '■ 

i '• ; 

' 

• • . ' ■ 

« 

■ ? « 

. 






> 









BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Allport, Gordon W. Personality . A Psychological Interpretation . Henry 
Holt and Company, New York, 1937* 

Allport, Gordon W. "The Ego in Contemporary Psychology." The Psycho¬ 
logical Review . L, 1943, pp. 451-478. 

Anderson, Camilla M. "The Self-Image: A Theory of the Dynamics of Be¬ 
havior." Mental Hygiene . XXXVI, 1952, pp. 227-244. 

Benjamins, James. "Changes in Performance in Relation to Influences 
Upon Self-Conceptualisation. " The Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology . XLV, 1950, pp. 473-480. “ 

Berger, Emanuel M. "The Relation between Expressed Acceptance of Self 
and Expressed Acceptance of Others." Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology . XLVII, 1952, pp. 778-782. " 

Brownfain, John J. "Stability of the Self-Concept as a Dimension of 

Personality." Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology . XLVII, 
1952, pp. 597-606. 

Butler, John M. and Haigh, Gerard V. "Changes in the Relation between 
Self-Concepts and Ideal Concepts Consequent upon Client-centered 
Counseling." from Carl R. Rogers and Rosalind F. Dymond. Psycho¬ 
therapy and Personality Change . The University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, 1954, pp. 55-75. 

Chein, Isidor. "The Awareness of Self and the Structure of the Ego." 

The Psychological Review . XU, 1944, pp. 304-314. 

Chodorkoff, Bernard. "Adjustment and the Discrepancy between the Per¬ 
ceived and Ideal Self." Journal of Clinical Psychology . X, 

1954, pp. 266 - 268 . 

Chodorkoff, Bernard. "Self-Perception, Perceptual Defence, and Adjust¬ 
ment," Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology . XUX, 1954, 
pp. 508 t512. 

Cohen, Louis D. "Level-of-Aspiration Behavior and Feelings of Adequacy 
and Self-Acceptance." Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology . 
XUX, 1954, pp. 84-86. 

Dampier, Sir William C. A History of Science . The University Press, 
Cambridge , 1949. 
















































t 






1 


. 















85 


Gates, Arthur I*, Jersild, Arthur T., McConnell, T.R. and Challman, 

Robert C. Educational Psychology , The MacMillan Company, 

New York, 1950# 

Garrett, Henry E. Statistics in Psychology and Education , Inngmans, 

Green and Company, New York, 1953# 

Havimghurst, Robert J., Robinson, Myra Z., Dorr, Mildred. "The De¬ 
velopment of the Ideal Self in Childhood and Adolescence." 

Journal of Educational Research . XL, 1946, pp. 241-257# 

Hobbs, Nicholas. "Guidance and Some.Recent Developments in Psychology." 
Canadian Journal of Psychology . Ill, 1949, PP# 67-72. 

James, William. Psychology, The World Publishing Company, Cleveland 
and New York, 1948. 

Jersild, Arthur T. In Search of Self , Bureau of Publications, Teachers 
College, Columbia University, New York, 1952. 

Keeping, E.S. The Power of Statistical Tests . WADC Technical Report 54-0, 
Wright Air Development Center, Air Research and Development Command, 
United States Air Force, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, 1953 

Lecky, Prescott. Self-Conststency . Island Press, New York, 1945. 

Lindgren, Henry Clay. Mental Health in Education , Henry Holt and 
Company, New York, 1954. 

litwinski, Leon. "Toward the Reinstatement of the Concept of the Self." 
British Journal of Psychology . XIII, 1951* PP# 246-249. 

McIntyre, Charles J« "Acceptance by Others and Its Relation to Acceptance 
of Self and Others." Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 

XLVII, 1952, pp. 624-625. 

MacLeod, Robert B. "Perceptual Constancy and the Problem of Motivation." 
Canadian Journal of Psychology , III, 1949, pp#57-66. 

McQuitty, Louis L. "A Measure of Personality Integration in Relation 
to the Concept of the Self." Journal of Personality , XVIII, 

1950, pp. 461-482. 

Mood, A.M. Introduction to the Theory of Statistics , McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, Inc., New York, 1950. 




































.) 


$ 




* 


? 






$ • t 








86 


Moore, Jared S. "The Problem of the Self." The Philosophical Review . 

XIII, 1933» pp. 487-499. 

Mowrer, Hobart 0. Psychotherapy Theory and Research. The Ronald Press 
Company, New York, 1933. 

Phillips, E # Lalcin. "Attitudes toward Self and Others: A Brief Question- 
aire Report." Journal of Consulting: Psychology . XV , 1931» 
pp. 79-81. 

Rogers, Carl R., Kell, Bill L. and McNeil Helen. "The Role of Self- 
Understanding in the Prediction of Behavior." Journal of Con¬ 
sulting Psychology . XU, 1948, pp. 174-186. 

Rogers, Carl R. Client-Centered Therapy . Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 

1931. 

Rogers, Carl R. and Dymond, Rosalind F. Psychotherapy and Personality 
Change . The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1934. 

Sarbin, Theodore R. "A Preface to a Psychological Analysis of the Self." 
The Psychological Review . LIX, 1932, pp.11-22. 

Segal, Julius. "The differentiation of Well and Poorly Integrated 

Clinicians by.the Q-sbrt Method." Journal of Clinical Psychology . 

X, 1934, pp. 321-323. 

Sheerer, Elizabeth T. "An analysis of the Relationship between Acceptance 
of and Respect for Self and Acceptance of and Respect for Others in 
Ten Counselling Cases." Journal of Consulting Psychology , XIII, 

1949, pp. 169-173. 

Snygg, Donald and Comb s, A.W. Individual Behavior , Harper and Brothers, 
New York, 1949. 

Stanley, Julian C. "Insight into One’s Own Values." Journal of Educa¬ 
tional Psychology . XIII, 1931, PP* 399-408. 

Stephenson, William. "Some Observations on Q-technique." Psychological 
Bulletin . XXIX, 1932, pp. 483-498. 

Stephenson, William. The Study of Behavior : Q-techniaue_a nd^Its Method¬ 
ology, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1933* 

Stock, Dorothy. "An Investigation into the Interrelations between the 

Self Concept and Feelings, Directed toward Other Persons and Groups." 
Journal of Consulting Psychology , XIIX, 1949# PP. 176-180. 



















































1 













87 


Super, Donald E. •'Vocational Adjustment: .Implementing a Self-Concept." 
Occupations . XXX, 1951» PP. 88-92. 

Symonds, Percival W. The Ego and the Self . Appleton-Century-Crofts, 
Inc., New York, 1951* 

Taylor, Charles and Combs, Arthur W. "Self-Acceptance and Adjustment." 
Journal of Consulting Psychology . XVI, 1952, pp. 89-91. 

Tippett, L.H.C. The Methods of Statistics . Williams and Norgate, 
London, 1937. 

van der Waerden, B.L. "Ein Neuer Test fur das Problem der zwei Stich- 
proben." Hathematische Annalen. CXXVI, 1953* PP* 93-107* 

Webb, Wilse B. "Self-Evaluation Compared with Group Evaluations." 
Journal of Consulting Psychology . XVI, 1952, pp. 305-307* 

Whitehead, Alfred North. Adventures of Ideas . Penguin Books, 
Hamondsworth, Middlesex, 1948. 

Whitehead, Alfred North. Science and the Modem World . Mentor Books, 
The New American library. New York, 1948. 

























88 


APPENDIX I 

SUMMARY AND CLASSIFICATION OF THE SELF-DESCRIPTIVE STATEMENTS 

The following table classifies each of the self-descriptive state¬ 
ments by its letter combination which locates the statement in the 
theory in the manner described in Chapter TV* It also gives the state¬ 
ment numbers which denote the order in which the statements were 
presented to the subjects* 

TABLE XXIV SUMMARY AND CLASSIFICATION OF THE SELF-DESCRIPTIVE 

STATEMENTS 


Letter 

Combination 

Statement 

Number 

Statement 

acf 

8 

I feel good about my honesty. 


32 

I feel happy about knowing right from wrong. 

adf 

14 

I am as ambitious as most people. 


36 

I have as much self-control as most people. 

aef 

18 

I have a good temper. 


22 

I don't get discouraged easily. 


42 

I am usually happy. 

acg 

26 

I feel satisfied with my mind. 


40 

I feel satisfied with my vocabulary. 

adg 

3 

I am as smart as most people. 


46 

I have more than average common sense. 
















89 


TABLE XXIV (CONTINUED) 


Letter 

Statement 


Combination 

Number 

Statement 

aeg 

12 

I have a good sense of humour. 


50 

I think clearly. 

ach 

20 

I feel happy about my strength. 


48 

I feel satisfied with my eyesight. 

adh 

6 

I am as good at sports as most people. 


30 

X am better than average at mechanical work. 

a eh 

16 

I have a good appetite. 


34 

X have a strong heart. 

aci 

10 

I feel happy about ray weight. 


44 

X feel satisfied with my build. 

adi 

24 

I have as good posture as most people. 


38 

I am as clean and neat as most people. 

aei 

1 

X am good-looking. 


28 

I have good teeth. 

bcf 

23 

X am often unhappy because I am lonely. 


37 

I often feel unhappy because X think bad 
thoughts. 

bdf 

9 

X have fewer interests than most people. 


49 

I daydream more than most people. 









' 




4 


















* 

. 





- 













k ' ' • 









TABLE XXXV (CONTINUED) 


Letter 

Combination 

Statement 

Number 

Statement 

bef 

4 

My feelings are easily hurt* 


13 

I am usually nervous. 


27 

I get embarrassed easily. 


43 

I feel like smashing things sometimes. 

beg 

17 

I am often unhappy because I can*t under¬ 
stand my teachers. 


35 

I worry about my memory. 

bdg 

21 

I can*t concentrate as well as most pupils. 


41 

I don f t understand books as well as most 
pupils. 

keg 

7 

I am slow at arithmetic. 


31 

I have a hard time solving problems. 

bch 

2 

I worry about my health. 


45 

I worry about my voice. 

bdh 

11 

I am clumsier than most people. 


51 

I have to be more careful than most people 
about what I eat. 

beh 

25 

I am hard of hearing. 


39 

I sometimes have trouble breathing. 

bci 

5 

I worry about my weight. 


29 

I worry about my hands. 









I 










91 


TABLE XXEV (CONTINUED) 


Letter 

Combination 

Statement 

Number 

Statement 

bdi 

15 

I am not as well-developed as most people. 


33 

My hair is not as nice as most peoples*. 

bei 

19 

I have poor skin. 


47 

My eyes are small. 









92 


APPENDIX II 


NORMALIZATION OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF SELF-DESCRIPTIVE STATEMENTS 

In determining the frequency distribution of the 51 self-descriptive 
statements into eleven ’’truth categories”, it was necessary to fulfill 
the following conditions % 

1. The resulting frequency distribution should be the best normal 
approximation for a sample of size 51 ; 

2* Truth categories ”0” and "10” must contain one statement; 

3* The widths of the class intervals corresponding to the truth 
categories must be equal. 

The first two conditions require that, 



b 


where "a" and ”b” are points on a theoretically infinite truth continuum; 
”a” being the limiting point of the interval corresponding to truth 
category ”0” nearest to the origin of the continuum, and "b" being the 
corresponding point of the interval corresponding to truth category ”10”. 
Equations (1) are easily solved by tables for the Cumulative Normal 
Distribution." These give, a = -2.061, and b = +2.061. The interval 
between "a” and «b” is, therefore, of width 4.122. By the third condition 
this interval must be divided into nine subintervals of equal width 
corresponding to truth categories ”1” to "9"• It follows that the 
widths of each of these intervals xd.ll be 0.458. The origin of the 


1. A.M. Mood. Introduction to the Theory of Statistics , McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, Inc., New York, 1950, P«423. 























93 


continuum will be located at the centre of the subinterval corresponding 
to truth category ”5 M , When the end-points of all of the subintervals 
have been determined, the areas under the normal curve, between ordinates 
to the curve at these end-points, can be found from tables for the 
Cumulative Normal Distribution, These areas will determine the theoreti¬ 
cal frequencies of statements in the corresponding truth categories. 

The actual number of statements in each of the truth categories is then 
found by multiplying each of the theoretical frequencies by 51» and 
rounding off the products to the nearest whole number. 

The results of the computations involved in the procedure described 
above are given in the following table, 

TABLE XXV RESULTS OF THE COMPUTATIONS INVOLVED IN NORMALIZING THE 
DISTRIBUTION OF SELF-DESCRIPTIVE STATEMENTS 


Truth 

Category 

Number 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Class 

Interval 

- oo 

to 

-2.061 

-2.061 

to 

-1.603 

-1.603 

to 

-1.145 

-1.145 

to 

-0.687 

-0.687 

to 

-0.229 

-0.229 

to 

0.229 

Relative 

Frequency 

0.0196 

0.0351 

0.0703 

0.1200 

0.1639 

0.1820 

Number of 
Statements 

1 

2 

4 

6 

8 

9 


























* 


* 
















4 






















94 


TABLE XXV (continued) 


Truth 

Category 

Number 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

Class 

Interval. 

0.229 

to 

0.687 

0.687 

to 

1.145 

1.145 

to 

1.603 

1.603 

to 

2.061 

2.061 

to 

00 

Relative 

Frequency 

0.1639 

0.1200 

0.0703 

0.0351 

0.0196 

Number of 
Statements 

8 

6 

4 

2 

1 


Figure 6 shows the discrete distribution of the statements and 
the normal curve to which it was fitted* The extreme bars of the histogram 
have been adjusted to make their widths equal to those of the other bars, 
in conformity with Condition 3* The figures on the bars of the histogram 
correspond to the number of statements in the truth categories* The 
direction of increasing truth is frcm left to right. 






















* 

, 


- 

. 




































95 



-2.061 -1.145 -.229 .687 1.605 2.519 


Glass Intervals 


Figure 6 . Histogram Showing the Relative Frequency Distribution of 
Self-Descriptive Statements into Eleven Truth Categories, 
and Best Fitting Normal Curve, 


The vertical scale numbers are adjusted to make the areas 
of the histogram bars equal to the relative frequencies. 













































* 







. 


. 












► 


















' 







































APPENDIX III 


SAMPLE DISTRIHJTION CHART 


L 

E 

A 

S 

T 


T 

R 

U 


NAME . 

BIRTH DATE . 

day month year 

















































APPENDIX IV 


INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE FORCED-SORT 

In the following instructions, the column on the left contains the 
procedure to be followed by the test administrator, and the column on 
the right contains the verbal instructions to be given to the subjects. 
The sample cards referred, to in Paragraph 1 of the Procedure were used 
to illustrate the way in which the cards were to be sorted. The letter 
designations of these cards, and the statements printed on them, are 


given below, 

A. I am tall. 

B. I don't like football. 


PROCEDURE 

1. Before the students have 
entered the roan, the dist¬ 
ribution charts should be placed 
face-up on the desks. The four 
trial cards should be piled in order 
(A,B,C,D) directly under the "Most 
True" label. 

2. When the students have taken 
their places, they should be in¬ 
structed to await verbal instruc¬ 
tions before proceeding. 

3# The adjacent introductory 
c amnents should be read to the 
students before the sort is 
commenced. 


C« I am a good swimmer. 
D. I speak French well. 


INSTRUCTIONS 


"One thing that makes people so 
interesting is that they are all 
different in sane ways. We are 
all better at some things than 
at others. We all have our faults 
and we all have virtues. All of 
us have problems. The problems 
and feelings we have when we are 











« 

' 

■ 1 ’ 

, 

' 































98 


PROCEDURE 


INSTRUCTIONS 


becoming men and wcmen are very 
important to us, partly because 
we are not yet used to them, and 
partly because we don*t know what 
to do about them. Your parents 
and teachers have all passed through 
the growing-up period, but it is 
hard for them to remember exactly 
how young people feel about things, 
and exactly what their problems 
are. If parents and teachers are 
to help and understand young people 
during this growing-up period, it 
is vital that they know what you 
think and feel about yourselves 
as you are now, and as you would 
like to be. YOU are the ones who 
really know! The aim of this sur¬ 
vey is to obtain information to 
help YOU! Do not be afraid to be 
truthful; the information you give 
will be considered as completely 
confidential. n 


SELF-SORT 


4. During the reading of the adjacent 
instructions, it is suggested that 
the instructor hold a distribution 
chart in frort of him and use it to 
illustrate the instructions. 


'‘Look at the chart in front of you. 
You will see that there are eleven 
columns." (instructor points to 
them.) 

"The first columns on the right and 
left have only one space each." 
(Points) 

"The second column in from the left 
and from the right each has two 
spaces." (Points.) 

"The centre column has nine spaces." 
(Points)• 

"Altogether there are fifty-one 
spaces on the chart. In a moment 
you mil be given fifty-one cards 
to place in these spaces. This is 
how to place the cards: 





} 




















99 


PROCEDURE 

INSTRUCTIONS 

If the statement on the card is 
quite true for you, place the 
card in one of the columns toward 
the right. 

If you feel that the statement on 
the card is not very true for you, 
place it in one of the columns 
toward the left. 

Instructor points to the word 
‘‘Most" in the "Most True” 
label. 

The statement you feel is most true 
of you goes in the space directly 
under the word ‘Most 1 , 

Instructor points to the word 
"Least” in the "Least True" 
label. 

The statement you feel is least 
true of you goes in the space di¬ 
rectly under the word ‘Least *. 

Statements which don‘t seem to be 
particularly ’true* or ‘not true* 
should go in the centre column or 
in one of the columns near the 
centre. 

Instructor should point to a 
central column and to the 
spaces in it. 

Once you have decided on a column, 
it doesn’t matter what space in 
the column you put the statement 
in. 

Instructor points to the right 
and left as he gives the 
instructions, 

You may rearrange the statements 
on the chart as you go along. 
Remember, you keep the ‘true® 
statements toward the right and 
the ‘not true* statements toward 
the left." 

5. It is recommended that during 
the reading of the adjacent in¬ 
structions, the instructor walk 
down the centre aisle and check on 
a few of the students to see that 
they are following the procedure. 

"Now pick up the sample cards under 
the label ‘Host True*. Card A says, 
‘I am tall 5 . Ask yourself if this 
is true for you. If it is very true, 
place the card in one of the columns 
well over to the right. If it is 
not true, place the card in one of 
the columns on the left. If you are 
of medium height, place the card at 
or near the centre of the chart. 

















, 






v . f? r;, V 




) i ; 

' 




T 
















: ' ‘ • ' 5 

















' 


. 

1 t 






* 


•.) i 











.1 












100 


PROCEDURE * 

INSTRUCTIONS 

Do the same for each of the 
other cards, asking yourself 
each time if the statement is 
true for YOU. 

In giving individual assistance, 
the instructor is free to use 
whatever comments he feels are 
necessary to clarify the pro¬ 
cedure* 

If you have any questions, put 
up your hand." 

6. Sufficient time should be 
allowed for the students to 
place all of the sample cards* 

When the instructor is satis¬ 
fied that the procedure is 
understood, he should say - 

“Now pick up the sample cards, 
place them at the top of your 
desk, and wait for further 
instructions. M 

7. The instructor distributes 
one set of statements to each 
student, and then says - 

"Before you place these cards, be 
sure to ask yourself if the state¬ 
ment is true for YOU. Take the 
cards in the order in which you 
find them. You may rearrange the 
cards on the chart as you go along. 
Every space on the chart must be 
covered with just one card. You have 
twenty minutes* 

GO AHEAD*" 

8. At the end of about two 
minutes, the instructor should say - 

"Remember, the truer a statement is, 
the further it goes to the right; 
the more untrue it is, the further 
it goes to the left." 

9. At the end of fifteen minutes, 
the instructor should say - 

"You have five more minutes." 

10 * At the end of twenty minutes, 
the instructor should say - 

"Leave the cards as they are now. 

Be careful not to spill them. Start 
at the left, picking up the cards 
one at a time and writing the card 
number in pencil on the chart space 
beneath." 

























I 



f 

-V ‘' . ' ■ 

I ' • . 





■ -si 

, 

■ 

- 

;; . I:'■ .) 
















k 









> . - ■ > 










101 


PROCEDURE 

INSTRUCTIONS 

11. When all of the card 
numbers are recorded, the 
instructor should say - 

"Place the rubber band around the 
cards. Write your name and birth 
date in the proper spaces in the 
bottom left-hand comer of the 
chart. After your name, print *B' 
if you are a boy, and 'G* if you 
are a girl. Place the bundle of 
cards and the sample cards on the 
chart, and leave them on your desk." 

IDEAL-SORT 

12. Procedures 1 and 2 should 
be repeated with the exception 
that the trial cards need not 
be set out. 


13. The adjacent introductory 
comments should be read to the 
students before the sort is 
commenced. 

"Today you are going to sort cards 
again. You itfill remember that last 
time you sorted the cards so that 
the statements which were really 
true of you were placed toward the 
right of the chart. The statements 
which were not really very true of 
you were placed toward the left of 
the chart. Today you are to 
imagine that you are the person you 
would MOST like to be. Keep firmly 
in mind that you are to sort the 
cards as the person you would most 
like to be, and not as you rbally 
are. Otherwise the procedure is 
just the same as before." 

14, During the reading of the 
adjacent instructions, it is 
suggested that the instructor 
hold a distribution chart in 
front of him and use it to 
illustrate the instructions. 

"If the statement on the card is 
true of the person you would most 
like to be, place the card in one 
of the columns toward the right. 

If the statement on the card is 
not true of the person you would 
most like to be, place the card in 
one of the columns toward the left." 









« 

- 



: i '• . 






. 



■ 

' 



















102 


PROCEDURE 

INSTRUCTIONS 

15. The instructor distributes 
one set of statements to each 
student. He should then say - 

"Before you place each of these 
cards, be sure to ask yourself if 
the statement is true of the person 
you would most like to be. Take 
the cards in the order you find 
them. You may rearrange the cards 

ON THE CHART as you go along. 

Every space on the chart must be 
covered by just one car'd. 

You have twenty minutes. 

GO AHEAD 1 H 

16. At the end of two minutes, 
the instructor should say - 

"Remember, the truer a statement 
is for the person you would most 
like to be, the further it goes 
to the right; the more untrue it 
is for the person you would most 
like to be, the further it goes to 
the left." 

17. At the end of fifteen minutes, 
the instructor should say - 

"You have five more minutes." 

18. At the end of twenty minutes, 
the instructor should say - 

"Leave the cards as they are now. 

Be careful not to spill them. Start 
at the left, picking up the cards one 
at a time, and writing the card 
number in pencil on the chart space 
underneath." 

19. When all of the numbers 
are recorded, the instructor 
should say - 

"Place the rubber band around the 
cards. Write your name and birth 
date in the proper spaces in the 
bottom left-hand comer of the 
chart. After your name, print *B* 
if you are a boy, and *0* if you 
are a girl. Place the bundle of 
cards on the chart and leave them 
on your desk." 


































t 


- 




, 


-• 






APPENDIX V 


SUMMARY OF THE RAW DATA 


XXVI IDENTIFICATION DATA OF SUBJECTS, AND TRUTH CATEGORY NUMBERS 

CORRESPONDING TO THE POSITIONS OF THE SELF-DESCRIPTIVE STATE¬ 
MENTS ON THE DISTRIBUTION CHARTS FOR THE SELF AND IDEAL-SORTS 


Statement Numbers 



Subject 

Number 

Sex 

Age 

S 

0 

R 

T* 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 10 

11 

12 

13 14 15 

16 17 18 

19 

20 

21 

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 3^ 35 36 37 1 

38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 

1 

F 

15-1 

I 

6 

3 

8 

2 

4 

9 

3 10 

1 

8 

2 

8 

3 

7 

2 

6 

5 

6 

2 

7 

3 

7 

1 

8 

0 

7 

3 

9 

3 

4 

4 

7 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 6 

6 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

4 

5 

5 




S 

3 

8 

6 

4 

6 

6 10 

7 

5 

9 

4 

7 

5 

5 

3 

5 

0 

5 

5 

6 

6 

7 

1 

7 

4 

3 

4 

8 

4 

2 

8 

7 

2 

6 

5 

4 

3 

6 

4 

2 

4 5 

6 

7 

5 

3 

3 

9 

2 

1 

8 

2 

F 

14-6 

I 

9 

3 

7 

3 

3 

6 

2 

8 

4 

7 

4 

8 

2 

8 

3 

5 

1 

5 

0 

7 

4 

9 

1 

8 

4 

7 

4 

7 

4 

7 

4 

5 

3 

6 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 

5 

5 6 

2 

6 

5 

6 

5 10 

5 

6 

2 




s 

2 

3 

7 

4 

6 

6 

5 

10 

3 

5 

2 

9 

4 

6 

3 

8 

2 

5 

8 

7 

4 

8 

8 

7 

6 

7 

4 

5 

1 

2 

3 

7 

5 

6 

0 

3 

4 

6 

1 

6 

4 9 

5 

4 

4 

6 

5 

3 

5 

7 

5 

3 

F 

15-5 

I 

10 

5 

9 

1 

2 

9 

2 

8 

2 

3 

4 

8 

1 

8 

5 

5 

2 

6 

3 

7 

3 

5 

3 

7 

3 

7 

4 

7 

5 

5 

4 

7 

4 

5 

5 

7 

4 

8 

5 

6 

4 6 

6 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

0 

6 

3 




s 

6 

3 

6 

3 

6 10 

7 

6 

8 

4 

4 

8 

6 

6 

7 

8 

7 

4 

2 

5 

3 

7 

1 

9 

2 

4 

1 

3 

2 

2 

4 

7 

5 

4 

5 

8 

0 

9 

3 

4 

5 7 

5 

4 

6 

5 

5 

5 

3 

6 

5 

4 

F 

15-5 

I 

9 

5 

9 

3 

5 

8 

3 

7 

5 

5 

1 

10 

1 

8 

0 

6 

2 

2 

2 

7 

2 

4 

3 

7 

3 

6 

3 

6 

3 

8 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

7 

5 

7 

4 

7 

6 8 

4 

6 

5 

5 

5 

4 

4 

6 

5 




s 

5 

4 

2 

6 

5 

9 

10 

7 

7 

8 

1 

7 

9 

5 

4 

2 

3 

6 

7 

8 

6 

3 

5 

6 

7 

8 

7 

6 

5 

4 

2 

5 

6 

4 

3 

3 

4 

6 

4 

0 

4 6 

2 

3 

5 

4 

5 

8 

1 

3 

5 

5 

F 

16-0 

I 

10 

1 

9 

1 

2 

7 

2 

8 

2 

7 

2 

9 

3 

8 

6 

3 

0 

8 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

6 

4 

7 

4 

7 

5 

8 

5 

6 

5 

5 

5 

5 

4 

4 

4 

6 

4 6 

6 

6 

4 

6 

3 

5 

4 

5 

5 




s 

2 

4 

6 

1 

6 

9 

8 

8 

4 

6 

1 

5 

3 

8 

2 

5 

0 

10 

2 

7 

6 

6 

2 

5 

3 

6 

4 

7 

8 

4 

5 

7 

4 

5 

3 

7 

3 

6 

3 

5 

4 7 

9 

7 

3 

6 

4 

5 

4 

5 

5 

6 

F 

13-10 

I 

9 

2 

5 

5 

3 

7 

4 

6 

3 

3 

2 

8 

2 

8 

9 

6 

2 

6 

1 

3 

4 

7 

0 

8 

3 

5 

4 

5 

5 

3 

5 

7 

1 

5 

5 

7 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 10 

4 

8 

6 

6 

6 

6 

4 

7 

5 




s 

7 

3 

2 

5 

4 

7 

5 

5 

1 

4 

5 

6 

4 

8 

1 

6 

5 

7 

3 

3 

5 

6 

0 

7 

3 

6 

6 

9 

4 

2 

6 

8 

3 

7 

4 

8 

2 

8 

6 

5 

5 10 

4 

9 

4 

4 

3 

6 

5 

7 

2 

7 

F 

14-11 

I 

9 

5 

9 

1 

4 

8 

2 

8 

2 

6 

4 

8 

3 

7 

3 

5 

3 

5 

3 

5 

4 

5 

3 

7 

0 

7 

2 

8 

5 

7 

4 

7 

3 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 10 

1 

6 

5 

6 

5 

7 

2 

6 

5 




s 

5 

5 

6 

5 

6 

5 

4 

8 

4 

4 

4 

6 

6 

6 

4 

5 

3 

5 

3 

5 

3 

7 

3 

7 

0 

8 

6 

9 

4 

5 

6 

7 

3 

7 

4 

8 

2 

9 

1 

7 

2 10 

2 

5 

4 

8 

6 

1 

2 

i. 

7 

3 

r \ 

8 

p 

14-8 

I 

9 

1 

7 

3 

2 

10 

2 

7 

2 

7 

3 

9 

3 

7 

8 

6 

3 

5 

2 

6 

3 

3 

4 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

4 

4 

6 

8 

5 

4 

8 

1 

8 

5 

5 

5 7 

4 

6 

5 

6 

5 

1. 

7 

i, 

4 

5 

U 

A 




s 

5 

1 

5 

3 

2 

9 

10 

8 

2 

7 

2 

6 

1 

7 

5 

8 

7 

7 

2 

5 

4 

4 

3 

7 

5 

4 

7 

6 

6 

3 

3 

6 

5 

8 

3 

6 

5 

9 

3 

4 

6 8 

4 

6 

4 

5 

4 

4 

5 

o 

U 

9 

F 

15-1 

I 

10 

0 

9 

1 

2 

8 

2 

9 

1 

8 

2 

8 

2 

7 

4 

8 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

4 

6 

5 

5 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

5 

4 

5 

4 

6 

4 6 

5 

6 

5 

6 

5 

o 

b 

3 

j. 

5 

5 




s 

6 

4 

6 

3 

3 

6 

5 

7 

7 

7 

1 

6 

7 

8 

2 

9 

4 

6 

4 

7 

5 

5 

5 

8 

2 

8 

4 

10 

3 

4 

5 

9 

3 

4 

0 

6 

5 

6 

7 

2 

5 6 

4 

8 

s 

1 

5 

£ 

3 

*7 

e 10 


10 

F 

14-5 

I 

9 

1 

9 

2 

2 

8 

2 

8 

2 

5 

6 

8 

3 

7 

3 

5 

3 

6 

3 

5 

3 

3 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

7 

4 

5 

1 

7 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

7 

4 8 

0 

o 

5 

o 

>7 

£ 

£ 

Q 

3 Aw 

£ 7 

J 

4 




s 

5 

2 

10 

4 

1 

5 

2 

6 

3 

5 

5 

8 

1 

8 

4 

7 

2 

7 

6 

3 

3 

3 

3 

7 

4 

8 

4 

3 

2 

4 

4 

5 

6 

6 

6 

7 

4 

8 

5 

6 

6 9 

i. /f 

0 

5 

D 

( 

c 

£ 

y 

c . 

- 


*5 

11 

F 

14-7 

I 

10 

2 

9 

2 

0 

9 

1 

8 

2 

6 

1 

8 

2 

8 

3 

6 

3 

6 

3 

5 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

4 

8 

4 

5 

4 

7 

4 

7 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 6 

5 

Ji 

o 

£ 

5 

h. 

J 

h . 

c; 

J 

5 

3 

4 

j 




s 

4 

0 

2 

4 

1 

10 

5 

6 

2 

5 

3 

5 

1 

8 

4 

8 

6 

7 

5 

7 

3 

7 

4 

7 

3 

6 

6 

8 

5 

5 

9 

6 

7 

8 

2 

6 

5 

7 

3 

6 

2 9 

*+ 

A 

o 

£ 

*+ 

c 

C 

K 

6 

2 

o 

4 

12 

F 

14-11 

I 

9 

4 

8 

3 

4 

7 

3 

9 

2 

7 

2 

8 

4 

8 

3 

7 

1 

5 

5 

6 

3 

8 

2 

6 

1 

7 

4 

6 

5 

5 

4 

7 

3 

6 

5 

6 

3 

7 

4 

5 

4 10 

U 

o 

D 

c 


5 


10 

4 


4 




s 

5 

1 

6 

2 

3 

6 

3 

8 

5 

5 

2 

8 

4 

8 

3 

8 

1 

7 

5 

4 

3 

7 

2 

6 

0 

9 

6 

6 

3 

4 

5 

9 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

7 

3 

7 

5 7 

r Q 

C* 

t ; 

D 

n 

D 

c 

6 


7 

6 

7 

5 

13 

F 

14-7 

I 

9 

1 

8 

2 

1 

8 

0 

10 

3 

9 

2 

8 

2 

7 

3 

6 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

6 

4 

6 

4 

4 

4 

6 

5 

4 

4 

7 

4 

7 

5 

6 

5 

6 

5 

4 

o 

5 o 

n A 

2 

( 

2 

ft 

4 

J 

7 

2 

c 

4 

7 




s 

7 

3 

7 

8 

8 

3 

10 

6 

4 

1 

5 

9 

4 

6 

4 

7 

2 

4 

6 

3 

6 

7 

4 

6 

3 

5 

9 

6 

4 

1 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

6 

3 

8 

5 

i, 

o 

u D 
o ft 

3 

s 

ft 

4 

i 

6 

7 



14 

F 

15-6 

I 

10 

9 

6 

1 

5 

9 

5 

6 

3 

6 

1 

9 

4 

4 

5 

6 

5 

7 

2 

2 

4 

5 

5 

4 

4 

7 

4 

6 

2 

5 

0 

6 

2 

6 

5 

7 

5 

1, 

8 

i, 

4 

7 

rj 

3 o 
£ 

Q 

2 

J 

2 

5 

3 

4 

7 

c 

9 




s 

5 

6 

5 

3 

8 10 

8 

7 

5 

6 

3 

8 

6 

7 

1 

6 

5 

7 

7 

4 

6 

6 

4 

6 

5 

3 

1 

4 

2 

4 

5 

4 

3 

8 

0 

3 

4 

4 

.2 

( 










_ 





























































































































































































- 












































- 














































































































































































Subject Sex 
dumber 


Age 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 


16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 3 9 40 41 42 4 3 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 


T* 


15 

F 

15-4 

I 

10 

3 

7 

0 

5 

9 

3 

8 

5 

8 

2 

9 

2 

8 

2 

5 

5 

8, 

4 

5 

3 

7 

3 

6 

4 

7 

1 

7 

4 

5 

4 

6 

1 

4 

4 

7 

4 

7 

! 6 
6 
6 

4 

6 

5 

6 

2 

6 

5 

6 

3 

5 

3 6 

6 



s 

6 

3 

5 

7 

9 

4 

8 

7 

2 

0 

5 

10 

2 

4 

5 

8 

6 

1 

4 

6 

5 

4 

3 

4 

5 

5 

6 

9 

2 

5 

6 

6 

8 

7 

7 

7 

4 

2 

8 

4 

7 

4 

3 

1 

5 

3 

5 

3 6 

3 

16 

F 

14-6 

I 

10 

3 

8 

0 

4 

8 

3 

8 

5 

6 

2 

8 

5 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

6 

2 

7 

4 

6 

4 

9 

2 

6 

5 

5 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

7 

1 

4 

6 

1 

8 

2 

6 

5 

5 

5 

3 

4 5 





s 

5 

1 

9 

3 

7 

6 

2 

7 

3 

9 

3 

6 

4 

8 

5 

6 

4 

7 

3 

5 

5 

6 

4 

5 

0 

10 

4 

7 

4 

5 

3 

6 

4 

8 

5 

8 

3 

2 

7 

2 

7 

1 

4 

5 

6 

6 

5 

4 8 

2 

17 

F 

15-11 

I 

8 

4 10 

1 

7 

6 

5 

7 

2 

5 

2 

9 

4 

8 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

5 

4 

4 

4 

6 

2 

6 

4 

6 

2 

7 

1 

6 

0 

4 

5 

8 

5 

8 

5 

9 

6 

7 

5 

7 

6 

7 

3 

4 

5 6 

3 




s 

5 

2 

5 

8 

5 

5 

5 10 

3 

5 

2 

6 

7 

6 

3 

6 

6 

4 

2 

4 

6 

7 

1 

8 

3 

5 

4 

6 

9 

7 

4 

7 

4 

8 

3 

9 

5 

7 

3 

4 

6 

1 

8 

4 

7 

5 

4 

3 

2 

0 6 

6 

18 

F 

16-10 

I 

8 

5 

7 

2 

3 

7 

2 

8 

3 

5 

6 

6 

2 

7 

7 

3 

4 

9 

3 

6 

7 

3 

2 

6 

1 

8 

4 

5 

4 

5 

4 

5 

5 

5 

4 

5 

4 

6 

0 

6 

10 

1 

6 

4 

7 

4 

8 

3 9 

3 




s 

3 

3 

7 

6 

4 

4 

4 

6 

2 

6 

3 

7 

1 

6 

5 

8 

2 

6 

2 

9 

3 

4 

6 

8 

1 

5 

8 

6 

2 

4 

5 

6 

5 

7 

4 

5 

0 

7 

3 

3 

5 

8 

4 

5 

4 

5 

7 

10 

3 9 

7 

19 

F 

16-5 

I 

6 

0 

6 

2 

2 

6 

3 

7 

3 

8 

3 

6 

3 

8 

3 

5 

3 

5 

4 

6 

7 

4 

5 

7 

2 

8 

4 

7 

1 

6 

1 

6 

4 

10 

2 

5 

4 

8 

8 

4 

7 

6 

5 

7 

4 

5 

4 

9 

3 

6 

3 9 

3 



s 

5 

2 

5 

3 

2 

4 

2 

7 

4 

6 

3 

5 

0 

8 

7 

5 

3 

6 

4 

5 

3 

6 

6 

8 

1 

10 

6 

9 

1 

5 

5 

8 

4 

7 

4 

7 

6 

3 

1, 

4 

9 

4 

6 

4 

7 

5 

3 

2 7 

5 

20 

F 

15-11 

I 

7 

0 

7 

1 

5 

8 

2 

8 

3 

6 

1 

9 

2 

7 

6 

5 

3 

7 

2 

5 

3 

3 

2 

6 

3 

8 

3 

9 

4 

4 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 

6 

4 

8 

6 

6 

4 

7 

4 

7 

4 

5 

b 10 

3 

3 

5 5 

6 



s 

3 

4 

4 

6 

5 

5 

6 

6 

6 

4 

3 

7 

8 

6 

3 

5 

5 

10 

4 

5 

7 

8 

l 

8 

2 

7 

7 

7 

8 

1 

7 

9 

2 

6 

2 

6 

2 

3 

5 

5 

9 

3 

5 

3 

4 

4 

0 

4 5 

4 

21 

F 

15-7 

I 

8 

8 

7 

6 

6 

5 

0 

8 

4 

8 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

7 

2 

5 

2 

3 

3 

6 

4 

7 

4 

9 

5 

7 

1 

5 

5 

6 

2 

10 

5 

7 

2 

4 

9 

6 

3 

4 

3 

6 

7 

5 

3 

5 

3 5 

1 



s 

5 

7 

6 

5 

8 

9 

5 

8 

2 

1 

3 

8 

7 

7 

2 

7 

6 

8 

2 

7 

l 

9 

4 

6 

2 

5 

7 

3 

3 

5 

4 

lQ 

3 

6 

5 

6 

3 

5 

4 

4 

0 

4 

5 

4 

5 

4 

6 

3 6 

4 

22 

F 

16-2 

I 

6 

0 

10 

1 

2 

7 

1 

6 

2 

5 

2 

7 

2 

6 

6 

4 

4 

5 

4 

5 

6 

4 

3 

6 

3 

5 

3 

6 

3 

5 

4 

7 

3 

7 

4 

7 

3 

7 

4 

8 

8 

8 

4 

8 

5 

9 

5 

3 

3 9 

6 




s 

0 

1 

10 

9 

9 

8 

8 

1 

2 

8 

8 

2 

7 

2 

2 

7 

7 

3 

3 

3 

7 

3 

7 

5 

3 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 

6 

4 

4 

6 

6 

6 

4 

4 

5 

5 

6 

3 

5 

5 

5 

5 

4 5 

6 

23 

F 

15-7 

I 

5 

3 

5 

3 

7 

7 

2 

4 

3 

5 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

2 

5 

7 

4 

3 

5 

8 

4 

5 

5 

6 

4 

8 

6 

7 

2 

8 

2 

6 

3 

7 

3 I 

6 

1 

6 

0 

6 

4 

7 

8 

9 

4 

3 

1 10 

9 




s 

1 

5 

6 

5 

5 

3 

3 

10 

7 

4 

5 

6 

3 

8 

3 

7 

3 

8 

2 

2 

2 

8 

5 

6 

5 

6 

6 

1 

5 

0 

4 

7 

7 

7 

2 

6 

4 1 

9 

7 

8 

6 

4 

9 

3 

5 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 4 

5 

24 

F 

16-9 

I 

10 

1 

9 

3 

2 

8 

5 

8 

3 

8 

4 

8 

2 

9 

2 

5 

3 

7 

1 

7 

5 

7 

0 

7 

3 

7 

5 

6 

3 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

4 

6 

6 

5 

7 

4 

5 

3 

5 

4 5 

2 




s 

5 

5 

5 

5 

9 

7 

6 

8 

1 

8 

1 

8 

4 

8 

2 

10 

2 

7 

5 

7 

2 

4 

0 

7 

2 

6 

5 

7 

4 

3 

5 

7 

4 

6 

5 

6 

3 

6 

3 

3 

4 

4 

4 

4 

6 

3 

9 

3 5 

6 

25 

F 

15-1 

I 

10 

4 

4 

1 

3 

6 

4 

6 

3 

6 

5 

7 

2 

8 

3 

0 

2 

6 

1 

2 

5 

6 

4 

7 

2 

5 

6 

7 

4 

6 

5 

5 

3 

7 

5 

7 

5 1 

5 

3 

8 

4 

6 

9 

6 

9 

6 

3 

7 

5 

8 

4 8 

4 



s 

0 

4 

8 

9 

6 

9 

7 

6 

4 

1 

5 

7 

3 

6 

2 

10 

2 

3 

4 

4 

3 

5 

3 

8 

1 

4 

7 

6 

4 

3 

6 

5 

2 

7 

4 

6 

4 

8 

3 

5 

7 

8 

5 

5 

7 

2 

3 5 

3 

26 

F 

16-0 

I 

10 

2 

6 

0 

3 

8 

3 

8 

3 

5 

2 

7 

3 

8 

3 

7 

4 

7 

2 

7 

4 

7 

4 

5 

2 

7 

1 

9 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

1 

6 

4 

6 

5 

9 

5 

8 

5 

5 

5 

6 

5 5 

3 




s 

8 

1 

6 

6 

3 

10 

5 

6 

5 

7 

5 

6 

4 

6 

5 

8 

5 

6 

3 

7 

5 

7 

6 

7 

1 

3 

4 

5 

3 

5 

4 

6 

4 

8 

2 

3 

3 

7 

2 

4 

6 

4 

8 

6 

2 

7 

2 

9 

4 

0 

3 9 

4 

27 

F 

15-0 

I 

10 

2 

6 

4 

1 

7 

0 

8 

4 

9 

3 

7 

3 

6 

3 

6 

4 

7 

5 

5 

4 

9 

3 

8 

1 

6 

4 

6 

3 

7 

3 

6 

2 

8 

4 

7 

5 

7 

8 

4 

5 

4 

5 

2 

8 

3 

5 

5 3 

2 


s 

5 

3 

5 

3 

4 

10 

4 

5 

4 

6 

2 

5 

3 

7 

7 

7 

4 

8 

2 

5 

6 

6 

3 

9 

1 

5 

4 

7 

2 

3 

6 

6 

5 

5 

4 

6 

1 

4 

5 

6 

8 

6 

7 

2 

4 

8 

9 

3 7 

0 

28 

F 

16-7 

I 

9 

5 

6 

5 

3 

7 

5 

9 

5 

5 

4 

7 

7 

8 

6 

6 

3 

4 

1 

5 

1 

6 

4 

6 

0 

10 

4 

7 

4 

5 

2 

5 

5 

6 

3 

6 

4 

8 

2 

8 

7 

7 

3 

2 

3 

6 

4 

4 

3 3 

2 




s 

5 

8 

7 

8 

0 

6 

6 

8 

3 

5 

2 

7 

7 

6 

5 

7 

8 

5 

4 

4 

3 

4 

3 

5 10 

6 

2 

6 

2 

1 

3 

6 

3 

5 

2 

5 

1 

5 

4 

4 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

5 

6 

9 

3 8 


29 

F 

15-9 

I 

10 

3 

9 

2 

2 

9 

2 

8 

2 

7 

3 

8 

3 

8 

3 

5 

4 

1 

1 

5 

3 

6 

3 

7 

4 

7 

0 

7 

4 

5 

7 

7 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

8 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 

5 

1. 

5 

6 

/ 

3 

6 

5 8 

4 



s 

5 

4 

7 

6 

4 

9 

5 

7 

3 

8 

3 

7 

3 

8 

3 

6 

3 

8 

5 

7 

5 

7 

2 

5 

2 

6 

8 

6 

4 

3 

6 

6 

2 

6 

1 

4 

4 

9 

4 

/- 

5 

r- Z' 

5 

I* 

4 

5 

1 , 

0 

2 

5 

4 

c 

7 

0 5 

r (L 

1 

c 

30 

F 

16-0 

I 

s 

10 

5 

3 

4 

9 

5 

2 

4 

2 

6 

9 

7 

2 

5 

8 

6 

2 

3 

8 

5 

3 

1 

8 

6 

3 

4 

8 

6 

3 

2 

5 

5 

4 

7 

1 

9 

4 

5 

6 

6 

6 

7 

7 

3 

3 

3 

7 

6 

3 

0 

6 

7 

1 

5 

7 

4 

4 

2 

5 

2 

4 

4 

5 

5 

4 

7 

6 

8 

4 

3 

7 

6 

5 ( 

1 10 

5 10 

2 6 

0 10 

J Q 

0 

4 

•< 

5 

2 

5 

e 

6 

0 

7 

8 
c 

4 

0 

7 

5 

1 

O 

0 

8 

e 

b 

8 

■7 

5 o 

3 8 

0 A 

T 

9 

31 

F 

15-1 

I 

8 

4 

4 

4 

2 

6 

3 

7 

0 

6 

1 

7 

5 

6 

4 

7 

5 

5 

3 

8 

5 

7 

5 

6 

4 

4 

3 

9 

3 

7 

2 

9 

3 

6 

4 

8 

1 

i> 

D 

3 

5 

L 


0 

8 

2 

h 

3 

4 

*3 

3 

h 


£ O 

Jl c 

_ 

32 

F 

15-8 

s 

I 

5 

9 

1 

5 

5 

8 

5 

10 

2 

8 

6 

5 

4 

8 

7 

7 

6 

5 

8 

6 

4 

2 

6 

8 

2 

3 

8 

7 

2 

3 

7 

7 

3 

0 

7 

6 

7 

3 

5 

6 

4 

2 

5 

5 

4 

4 

4 

7 

3 

4 

6 

6 

7 

5 

9 

7 

3 

4 

0 

3 

3 

4 

6 

4 

6 

1 

9 

7 

5 

1 

7 

3 

4 

5 

it 

3 

6 

£ 

D 

6 

8 

4 

3 

4 

b 

5 

c 

*+ 

5 

7 

6 

Q 

*+ ^ 

4 4 

4 6 

9 




s 

5 

2 

7 

7 

6 

3 

6 

7 

1 

5 

2 

8 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

0 

5 

1 

7 

2 

5 

3 

5 

9 

7 

2 

4 

6 

8 

3 

5 

4 

5 

H' 

n 

D 

fi 

*r 

4 

£ 

c1 

6 


y 

4 6 

3 

ri 

F 

15-U 

I 

9 

4 

10 

2 

3 

7 

2 

5 

4 

8 

3 

9 

5 

8 

5 

7 

4 

5 

1 

5 

7 

6 

1 

5 

3 

6 

4 

6 

2 

5 

4 

7 

6 

7 

3 

5 

2 

£ 

u 

0 

O 

5 

O 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

6 

r 

6 


2 




c 

5 

2 

7 

7 

3 

6 

7 

6 

6 

1 

2 

9 

9 

5 

4 

8 

3 

5 

0 

5 

4 

5 

2 

7 

1 

5 

4 

8 

5 

4 

10 

8 

3 

8 

3 

5 

3 

O 













































































































' 









‘ 












































. 


























































■ 


















































































































































































_ 







- 































__ 








-- 




_ 












- 






















* ^ : 






■ . ... 





















Subject 

Number 

Sex 

Age 

0 

R 

T* 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 13 14 15 

16 17 

18 19 

20 

21 

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 

' 

138 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 

34 

F 

15-3 

I 

7 

0 

7 

1 

1 

6 

2 

7 

2 

6 

2 

7 

2 

6 10 

6 

3 

6 

3 

5 

3 

5 

3 

8 

3 

5 

4 

9 

4 

4 

4 

8 

4 

6 

4 

8 

5 

7 5 

8 

5 

5 

4 

5 

5 

6 

4 7 




S 

5 

6 

9 

3 

6 

9 

4 

7 

5 

4 

2 

8 

5 

5 

4 

7 

4 

5 

5 

4 

1 

7 

2 

7 

0 

6 

3 

8 

5 

3 

5 

6 

10 

5 

3 

6 

4 

1 6 2 

6 

1 

8 

2 

6 

4 

7 

3 3 

35 

F 

15-9 

I 

10 

5 

9 

4 

1 

8 

4 

7 

4 

5 

3 

7 

4 

6 

4 

7 

4 

8 

3 

8 

2 

6 

5 

5 

3 

7 

0 

6 

3 

6 

1 

6 

4 

6 

5 

7 

4 

8 2 

5 

3 

7 

6 

5 

2 

9 

5 5 




S 

5 

1 

6 

4 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

0 

3 

8 

6 

8 

3 

7 

4 

1 

2 

5 

3 

6 

2 

7 

2 

7 

7 

6 

4 

3 

3 

9 

4 

5 

4 

5 

3 

7 5 

4 

2 

10 

8 

6 

6 

7 

5 8 

36 

F 

16-10 

I 

10 

1 

9 

6 

2 

8 

2 

4 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 

7 

2 

6 

5 

3 

5 

5 

3 

7 

3 

7 

4 

5 

3 

9 

3 

4 

1 

8 

4 

8 

5 

7 

4 

6 0 

6 

5 

7 

4 

8 

5 

6 

2 5 




s 

1 

9 

8 

8 

2 

2 

8 

8 

4 

7 

2 

7 

7 

4 

4 

4 

3 

3 

0 

3 

1 

4 

7 

7 

4 

3 

3 

2 

6 

3 

9 

7 

5 

5 

4 

6 

4 

6 10 

6 

6 

6 

5 

5 

6 

5 

5 5 

37 

F 

15-6 

I 

8 

4 

8 

2 

3 

8 

1 

8 

2 

7 

3 

9 

5 

7 

2 

5 

3 

3 

3 

6 

3 

4 

4 

7 

4 

7 

4 

6 

5 

6 

4 

5 

4 

7 

5 

6 

5 

7 4 

6 

5 10 

0 

6 

5 

9 

5 6 




s 

4 

2 

6 

4 

7 

9 

8 

9 

1 

5 

3 

10 

3 

6 

1 

7 

4 

8 

6 

4 

7 

6 

2 

7 

0 

5 

5 

4 

3 

3 

6 

5 

2 

8 

3 

7 

4 

8 4 

6 

5 

7 

5 

4 

3 

6 

5 5 

38 

F 

15-U 

I 

5 

2 

9 

2 

3 

7 

3 10 

1 

6 

5 

8 

4 

8 

3 

5 

4 

6 

3 

5 

4 

6 

2 

7 

4 

8 

1 

6 

3 

7 

4 

9 

5 

6 

4 

6 

0 

6 5 

7 

4 

8 

2 

5 

4 

7 

5 6 




s 

1 

2 

7 

3 

3 

6 

4 10 

3 

6 

2 

8 

2 

9 

4 

6 

2 

7 

4 

5 

4 

7 

5 

6 

3 

8 

4 

5 

5 

7 

4 

9 

5 

6 

3 

7 

0 

6 4 

6 

3 

8 

1 

5 

5 

8 

5 6 

39 

F 

15-1 

I 

7 

5 

5 

5 

2 

7 

2 

5 

5 

7 

2 

7 

2 

7 

3 

5 

5 

7 

3 

6 

3 

8 

3 

8 

0 

6 

1 

8 

3 

5 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 4 

6 

4 

9 

4 

8 

4 

6 

4 10 




s 

6 

4 

5 

7 

7 

3 

6 

7 

6 

8 

3 

7 

2 

7 

3 

5 

2 

7 

6 

6 

4 

5 

3 

8 

2 

5 

9 

4 

1 

2 

8 

6 

4 

6 

3 

8 

5 

9 3 

C 

s 

4 

10 

4 

5 

4 

5 

6 0 

40 

F 

14-11 

I 

6 

2 

8 

2 

2 

5 

2 10 

1 

7 

1 

9 

3 

9 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

0 

8 

4 

8 

4 

5 

4 

8 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 4 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

5 

5 

5 5 




s 

6 

2 

7 

4 

3 

1 

5 

8 

5 

7 

1 

8 

2 

7 

5 

8 

3 

6 

4 

4 

3 

6 

2 

9 

0 

9 

6 

5 

2 

3 

5 

7 

3 

8 

7 

6 

4 

10 4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

3 

5 

4 5 

41 

F 

14-4 

I 

10 

4 

6 

3 

3 

5 

3 

9 

6 

4 

2 

8 

4 

6 

0 

5 

4 

7 

2 

5 

3 

6 

1 

7 

1 

6 

5 

6 

4 

5 

3 

7 

4 

8 

2 

8 

5 

9 5 

7 

5 

8 

4 

6 

3 

7 

5 6 




s 

5 

7 

7 

1 

3 

4 

l 

10 

2 

3 

2 

6 

4 

8 

2 

9 

3 

8 

2 

7 

3 

7 

8 

8 

0 

6 

5 

6 

3 

5 

6 

7 

3 

6 

4 

6 

4 

7 4 

5 

5 

6 

5 

6 

5 

9 

4 5 

42 

F 

15-8 

I 

6 

3 

7 

1 

4 

9 

2 

5 

5 

8 

1 

10 

3 

7 

4 

6 

5 

5 

2 

8 

5 

5 

3 

8 

2 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

0 

6 

4 

7 

5 

6 

3 

7 4 

8 

3 

7 

2 

6 

4 

9 

4 5 




s 

3 

2 

6 

4 

4 

0 

2 

4 

5 

9 

2 

7 

6 

5 

5 

3 

4 

5 

5 

1 

6 

5 

4 

7 

3 

6 

6 

3 

2 

3 

5 

8 

4 

5 

7 

7 

3 

6 10 

7 

4 

8 

6 

9 

4 

7 

5 8 

43 

M 

15-5 

I 

10 

4 

3 

5 

3 

9 

1 

7 

5 

6 

3 

8 

3 

5 

3 

6 

2 

8 

3 

8 

4 

7 

4 

5 

4 

7 

5 

7 

5 

9 

5 

7 

0 

7 

1 

4 

2 

6 4 

6 

4 

6 

2 

6 

2 

8 

4 6 




s 

7 

2 

6 

4 

2 

10 

0 

6 

3 

8 

5 

7 

5 

7 

4 

8 

8 

6 

5 

4 

4 

5 

2 

8 

1 

7 

1 

4 

5 

4 

6 

7 

3 

3 

5 

5 

6 

6 4 

6 

5 

9 

7 

3 

3 

3 

2 9 

44 

H 

15-1 

I 

8 

5 

6 

5 

5 

10 

5 

6 

4 

5 

0 

8 

4 

7 

1 

8 

4 

8 

1 

9 

4 

7 

7 

5 

2 

7 

2 

6 

2 

7 

4 

6 

2 

7 

3 

6 

3 

6 3 

6 

3 

5 

3 

9 

3 

5 

4 5 




s 

5 

10 

6 

6 

9 

9 

8 

8 

0 

8 

i 

8 

1 

7 

2 

7 

5 

5 

2 

7 

4 

7 

5 

6 

2 

6 

5 

5 

4 

5 

6 

5 

4 

7 

5 

7 

2 S 

4 3 

4 

3 

6 

3 

4 

3 

4 

4 6 

45 

M 

14-8 

I 

10 

4 

7 

5 

4 

5 

4 

4 

4 

5 

2 

6 

5 

6 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 

9 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

7 

3 

7 

3 

5 

1 

8 

1 

8 

5 

6 2 

9 

2 

8 

2 

8 

3 

7 

5 7 




s 

7 

4 

8 

9 

6 

9 

8 

8 

1 

8 

1 

7 

2 

5 

6 

7 

2 

2 

5 

2 

3 

0 

7 

6 

3 

3 

7 

5 

5 

10 

5 

5 

6 

3 

5 

5 

3 

3 4 

4 

4 

7 

6 

4 

4 

5 

4 6 

46 

H 

14-10 

I 

10 

4 

9 

2 

2 

9 

5 

6 

3 

8 

4 

8 

3 

8 

3 

8 

3 

5 

4 

7 

4 

7 

0 

7 

1 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

2 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 f 

6 1 

6 

4 

6 

5 

6 

5 

5 

2 5 




s 

7 

7 

8 

9 

5 

2 

0 

3 

6 

6 

6 

7 

3 

8 

8 

7 

2 

6 

3 

1 

2 

3 

10 

5 

1 

6 

9 

5 

4 

3 

4 

5 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

5 5 

7 

6 

4 

5 

3 

4 

4 

5 5 

47 

M 

16-1 

I 

10 

3 

8 

1 

2 

9 

2 

7 

2 

8 

1 

8 

4 

9 

2 

8 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

0 

6 

4 

6 

6 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

6 

5 4 

5 

5 

5 

5 

6 

5 

5 

4 5 




s 

7 

8 

9 

2 

2 

7 

3 

7 

1 

7 

2 

9 

4 

7 

0 

8 

2 

8 

4 

7 

4 

1 

6 

8 

3 

6 

4 

6 

3 

10 

4 

6 

3 

3 

5 

5 

5 1 

5 4 

5 

5 

5 

5 

6 

6 

6 

3 6 

48 

M 

12-9 

I 

8 

2 

9 

5 

5 

7 

0 

6 

2 

8 

5 

7 

5 

8 

1 

7 

2 

8 

5 

7 

2 

7 

-a 

7 

1 

10 

3 

5 

3 

6 

3 

6 

4 

5 

3 

6 

3 1 

6 4 

6 

4 

5 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 4 




s 

5 

4 

7 

4 

3 

6 

0 

6 

2 

7 

2 

6 

3 

8 

2 

8 

3 

4 

5 

6 

3 

8 

4 

7 

2 

10 

4 

7 

5 

8 

1 

7 

3 

6 

3 

7 

5 ! 

6 4 

6 

5 

4 

5 

6 

5 

9 

5 4 

49 

M 

14-9 

I 

10 

0 

6 

1 

2 

6 

2 

1 

2 

7 

2 

9 

3 

8 

3 

8 

3 

8 

3 

8 

3 

9 

3 

7 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

7 

5 

4 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 1 

6 4 

6 

5 

6 

5 

6 

5 

7 

5 5 




s 

5 

0 

7 

2 

1 

7 

5 

1 

2 

6 

2 

9 

2 

6 

9 

5 

4 

4 

6 

5 

6 

6 

6 

7 

3 

7 

3 

3 

3 

3 

5 

4 

4 

8 

4 

6 

4 1 

8 4 

8 

3 

8 : 

10 

6 

5 

5 

5 7 

50 

H 

16-0 

I 

9 

1 

6 

1 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 

7 

5 

7 

2 

7 

3 

4 

3 

5 

2 

9 

3 

5 

3 

7 

2 

7 

0 

8 

4 

10 

4 

6 

4 

8 

4 

6 

3 

6 4 

6 

4 

5 

5 

8 

5 

6 

5 S 




s 

5 

2 

4 

5 

7 

6 

4 

5 

6 

7 

2 

5 

2 

6 

3 

6 

5 

8 

3 

9 

5 

7 

2 

4 

1 

4 

10 

0 

1 

9 

6 

5 

3 

6 

5 

7 

4 

6 3 

3 

7 

5 

8 

8 

7 

4 

4 8 

Cl 

H 

14-3 

I 

8 

4 

9 

1 

1 

9 

5 

8 

5 

8 

2 

8 

2 

7 

4 

10 

2 

7 

3 

5 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

6 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 

6 4 

5 

5 

6 

0 

4 

4 

5 

4 7 




s 

8 

1 

9 

2 

3 

7 

5 

6 

2 

8 

1 

8 

2 

6 

6 

10 

4 

6 

3 

7 

6 

5 

5 

7 

3 

6 

5 

5 

3 

5 

4 

7 

7 

7 

3 

8 

5 

6 4 

6 

4 

4 

0 

5 

4 

5 

2 9 

52 

K 

13-5 

I 

9 

5 

9 

5 

4 

8 

4 10 

1 

7 

5 

8 

3 

7 

3 

7 

2 

5 

4 

7 

4 

4 

4 

8 

4 

5 

5 

8 

4 

5 

3 

6 

5 

6 

3 

6 

2 

6 5 

6 

1 

6 

0 

6 

3 

6 

2 7 




3 

7 

3 

7 

4 

1 

6 

2 

6 

4 

6 

3 

6 

5 

6 

5 

10 

3 

8 

5 

4 

4 

5 

5 

7 

2 

8 

4 

9 

8 

4 

2 

5 

6 

5 

3 

6 

0 

6 1 

7 

2 

7 

4 

5 

3 

8 

4 9 


6 
8 
2 
5 

4 

5 
1 
2 
5 
4 
1 

4 

5 

5 
4 

4 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 
3 

3 
6 

5 

6 

4 

4 5 4 

4 9 4 

5 9 1 
5 5 5 
5 7 4 

5 7 2 

6 3 4 
5 6 2 
4 4 3 


•p- OOVji 
























■ 














































































































































- 















' 







































































































































. 



































































TABLE XXVI (continued) 


s 

Subject Sex Age 0 
Kianber R 


123^ 5 678 


9 


106 


10 11 12 13 14 15 


16 



17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 




T* 


53 

M 

16-5 

I 

10 

1 

9 

3 

3 9 

5 

8 

3 

8 

3 

7 

3 

7 

2 

7 

2 

7 

2 

8 

2 

6 

4 

4 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

7 

6 

6 

4 

6 

4 

4 

1 




s 

5 

6 

2 

4 

7 4 10 

6 

4 

6 

3 

6 

6 

7 

7 

7 

3 

8 

3 

4 

6 

6 

5 

5 

1 

2 

9 

8 

3 

4 

5 

7 

2 

8 

2 

5 

3 

54 

M 

14-4 

I 

6 

5 

7 

4 

4 8 

0 

7 

3 

8 

2 

10 

2 

7 

3 

6 

2 

7 

6 

7 

4 

5 

6 

8 

2 

5 

3 

6 

3 

7 

4 

4 

3 

6 

4 

5 

6 




s 

5 

3 

7 

3 

2 6 

6 

8 

2 

7 

1 

8 

1 

8 

3 

9 

5 

6 

5 

5 

4 

6 

4 

2 

0 

6 

4 

3 

5 

10 

6 

6 

2 

7 

5 

7 

5 

55 

M 

15-6 

I 

10 

3 

8 

4 

4 8 

3 

8 

2 

8 

2 

7 

3 

7 

2 

6 

2 

6 

1 

9 

5 

3 

3 

7 

1 

9 

3 

7 

5 

7 

5 

6 

0 

5 

4 

6 

4 




s 

7 

3 

9 

5 

5 6 

3 

8 

1 

4 

2 

7 

5 

8 

2 

10 

5 

6 

4 

5 

3 

6 

5 

7 

1 

6 

5 

6 

4 

8 

2 

8 

2 

7 

3 

9 

0 

56 

K 

15-10 

I 

6 

0 

6 

l 

5 6 

3 

6 

2 

6 

4 

6 

3 

6 

3 

2 

4 

5 

2 

6 

2 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

4 

7 

4 

7 

5 

10 

3 

8 

4 

8 

4 




s 

6 

4 

6 

3 

3 6 

1 

4 

3 

9 

2 

6 

4 

6 

3 

6 

l 

7 

5 

7 

5 

8 

2 

7 

3 

4 

2 

3 

5 

4 

0 

6 

8 

9 

8 

10 

4 

57 

H 

16-11 

I 

6 

5 

5 

5 

4 7 

2 

4 

2 

3 

1 

7 

2 

7 

5 

8 

3 

7 

6 

9 

4 

6 

5 

7 

1 

4 

4 

8 

6 

10 

3 

3 

3 

4 

6 

6 

3 




s 

5 

2 

4 

1 

1 8 

5 

7 

2 

9 

3 

5 

2 

6 

6 

10 

6 

8 

2 

5 

4 

9 

3 

4 

7 

5 

3 

5 

8 

8 

7 

7 

6 

7 

3 

7 

4 

58 

M 

15-5 

I 

9 

0 

9 

2 

1 8 

1 

10 

2 

8 

2 

8 

8 

7 

2 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

7 

7 

3 

6 

3 

6 

3 

6 

3 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 




s 

6 

2 

5 

3 

2 8 

5 10 

5 

8 

2 

8 

2 

7 

7 

8 

4 

4 

1 

5 

7 

4 

1 

7 

0 

9 

3 

3 

3 

5 

7 

7 

3 

9 

3 

6 

5 

59 

M 

16-10 

I 

10 

2 

9 

4 

9 8 

4 

8 

2 

7 

4 

7 

4 

7 

7 

5 

4 

1 

2 

6 

6 

0 

3 

7 

3 

6 

4 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

1 

6 

4 

7 

3 




s 

8 

7 

6 

3 

3 7 

9 

6 

2 

5 

3 

5 

4 

7 

4 

5 

2 

8 

3 

7 

7 

8 

3 

7 

2 

5 

5 

10 

4 

4 

6 

8 

4 

9 

2 

6 

4 

60 

M 

15-7 

I 

10 

0 

9 

4 

9 8 

4 

8 

3 

7 

4 

8 

4 

7 

7 

5 

3 

1 

2 

6 

6 

1 

2 

7 

3 

6 

4 

6 

5 

6 

4 

5 

3 

5 

4 

7 

2 




s 

5 

5 

5 

7 

1 5 

4 

3 

4 

8 

2 

8 

9 

8 

6 

9 

2 

8 

2 

2 

7 

3 

5 

6 

3 

6 

7 

6 

4 

7 

7 

5 

3 

4 

4 

7 

6 

61 

M 

17-7 

I 

9 

5 

7 

1 

2 9 

2 

6 

3 

5 

1 

6 

2 

8 

6 

7 

3 

8 

2 

4 

5 

3 

3 

7 

3 

7 

0 

7 

3 

10 

8 

7 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 




s 

6 

3 

2 

6 

3 10 

7 

8 

4 

9 

4 

5 

2 

4 

4 

6 

5 

3 

4 

5 

7 

5 

4 

8 

1 

5 

5 

7 

2 

8 

6 

6 

7 

9 

3 

7 

3 

62 

H 

17-1 

I 

5 

8 

5 

3 

6 9 

9 

6 

4 

8 

6 

5 

4 

4 

8 

6 

7 

5 

5 

7 

6 

3 

0 

4 

1 

6 

2 

7 

2 

3 

7 

4 

7 

5 

3 

5 

2 




s 

5 

4 

4 

6 

4 6 

7 

7 

3 

5 

4 

9 

1 

8 

5 

5 

1 

8 

5 

5 

2 

4 

3 

2 

2 

5 

10 

6 

2 

5 

4 

6 

5 

7 

3 

8 

3 

63 

M 

16-7 

I 

10 

6 

7 

4 

4 9 

4 

5 

1 

7 

0 

9 

2 

5 

5 

5 

3 

5 

3 

7 

5 

4 

5 

7 

2 

8 

1 

6 

3 

2 

5 

6 

4 

7 

3 

6 

4 




s 

6 

6 

5 

3 

4 10 

2 

7 

3 

7 

0 

7 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 

4 

3 

6 

5 

6 

5 

8 

2 

7 

5 

8 

2 

5 

5 

6 

4 

7 

4 

6 

3 

64 

M 

16-10 

I 

10 

0 

6 

4 

4 5 

4 

8 

5 

5 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

7 

5 

6 

2 

8 

4 

5 

3 

6 

1 

7 

4 

9 

3 

6 

5 

6. 

3 

7 

3 

5 

3 




s 

6 

2 

4 

4 

3 2 

4 

8 

3 

6 

2 

7 

2 

10 

6 

9 

3 

6 

1 

7 

5 

4 

1 

6 

0 

7 

5 

8 

3 

5 

4 

5* 

7 

5 

5 

8 

7 

65 

M 

17-7 

I 

6 

2 

7 

3 

6 3 

8 

4 

3 

8 

7 

7 

4 

4 

4 

10 

4 

6 

1 

4 

5 

5 

2 

5 

4 

6 

5 

5 

0 

5 

7 

5 

6. 

3 

6 

7 

3 




s 

3 

8 

5 

3 

3 8 

9 

6 

7 

7 

4 

7 

3 

4 

6 

9 

6 

5 

4 

6 

8 

5 

7 

4 

1 

5 

3 

7 

6 

5 

6 

8 

7 

6 

2 

4 

1 

66 

H 

16-9 

I 

9 

0 

10 

3 

1 9 

8 

8 

2 

8 

4 

8 

2 

7 

3 

7 

2 

7 

3 

7 

3 

2 

3 

7 

1 

7 

3 

6 

4 

6 

6 

6 

5 

5 

4 

5 

4 




s 

6 

4 

7 

3 

4 9 

4 

5 

3 

6 

1 

8 

1 

10 

5 

6 

6 

7 

6 

7 

4 

7 

3 

5 

0 

8 

2 

4 

4 

8 

7 

4 

2 

8 

2 

6 

2 

67 

M 

15-2 

I 

5 

3 

5 

4 

3 7 

4 

4 

8 

6 

5 

6 

3 

7 

5 

6 

4 

9 

4 

8 

3 

7 

4 

6 

1 

7 

5 

7 

4 

10 

3 

5 

6 

6 

6 

5 

2 




s 

5 

1 

8 

4 

2 8 

8 

7 

3 

5 

4 

5 

2 

6 

4 

9 

3 

7 

3 

7 

5 

4 

2 

5 

1 

6 

3 

4 

3 

6 

4 

6 

6 

7 

7 

6 

2 

68 

}£ 

15-1 

I 

8 

1 

6 

2 

2 7 

1 

9 

4 

6 

2 

7 

3 

7 

7 

6 

2 

8 

3 

8 

7 

3 

3 

7 

3 

8 

3 

9 

4 

6 

4 

5 

5 

5 

5 

6 

5 




s 

4 

5 

6 

3 

1 7 

4 

7 

3 

7 

5 

8 

4 

7 

5 

8 

3 

8 

2 

6 

3 

5 

2 

6 

0 

9 

5 

1 

3 

6 

5 

6 

6 

5 

6 

10 

4 

69 

M 

16-4 

I 

8 

3 10 

2 

4 5 

2 

5 

3 

5 

3 

8 

5 

4 

4 

6 

1 

6 

3 

7 

0 

7 

4 

7 

6 

6 

4 

5 

3 

6 

4 

7 

4 

5 

5 

9 

6 




s 

6 

8 

9 

4 

2 5 

7 

7 

7 

6 

2 

4 

1 

8 

3 

6 

2 

6 

6 

1 

2 

6 

4 

5 

3 

7 

4 

5 

4 

7 

5 

9 

5 

5 

4 

5 

0 

70 

K 

15-8 

I 

7 

4 

9 

1 

2 9 

3 10 

5 

5 

3 

8 

3 

5 

5 

5 

1 

6 

0 

5 

4 

7 

5 

6 

3 

7 

4 

7 

2 

7 

4 

8 

5 

6 

3 

7 

2 




s 

6 

4 

6 

2 

3 7 

4 

9 

7 

5 

3 

5 

3 

5 

6 

4 

3 

7 

2 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

2 

4 

4 

6 

0 

7 

4 

6 

6 

6 

1 

8 

4 

71 

K 

16-1 

I 

8 

2 

9 

2 

5 8 

2 

9 

3 

6 

3 

7 

1 

8 

2 

7 

3 

7 

1 

7 

3 

8 

4 

6 

3 

3 

4 

6 

4 

10 

6 

7 

6 

6 

5 

4 

4 




s 

9 

6 

2 

4 

5 6 

6 

4 

7 

3 

3 

7 

1 

7 

8 

6 

3 

7 

5 

7 

4 

3 

3 

8 

3 

1 

5 

8 

7 

4 

2 

9 

6 

6 

8 

5 

5 


6 5 

7 3 
9 5 
7 2 
5 4 
5 3 

8 4 

7 5 

4 5 

5 4 

6 4 

6 4 

8 2 
6 0 

7 3 

6 4 

4 4 

8 1 

5 1 

6 6 
6 2 
8 2 

7 1 

8 5 
8 1 
6 2 

6 4 

7 3 
7 2 
7 5 

6 4 

7 2 

6 4 

5 5 

6 2 

7 1 
5 0 
6 2 


6 

4 

5 

4 

6 

5 
8 

4 

6 
6 

5 
5 
5 

4 

5 
3 
5 
3 

7 
0 

8 
5 
9 
5 
8 
2 
5 
3 

5 

6 

5 
8 
8 

6 
6 
6 
5 
5 


5 

5 

5 

8 

5 

5 

0 

6 

5 

5 

-/ 

1 

8 

6 

5 

4 

5 

0 

9 

5 

c 

4 

4 

5 

4 

6 

5 

5 

1 

8 

1 

9 

0 

4 

8 

4 

6 

5 

4 

3 

5 

4 

9 


4 

6 

5 

6 

5 

7 

4 

6 

4 

5 

5 

4 

6 

6 

6 

4 

7 

4 

3 

4 

7 

4 

4 

9 

1 

5 

5 

9 

5 

5 

5 

7 

5 

4 

7 

5 

6 

5 

7 

2 

8 

5 

5 

5 

2 

4 

8 

9 

7 

5 

5 

6 

5 

8 

0 

3 

6 

4 

5 

4 

5 

3 

4 

6 

6 

0 

4 

5 

4 

5 

4 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

c 

5 

6 

6 

4 

4 

6 

4 

5 

6 

6 

4 

5 

3 

5 

5 

3 

5 

3 

8 

5 

6 

5 

1 

6 

5 

6 

5 

5 

5 

6 

1 

3 

4 

6 

2 

5 

5 

4 

5 

3 

8 

5 

6 

6 

3 

5 

6 

0 

1 

5 

4 

6 

10 

5 

4 

5 

5 

6 

6 

5 

5 

5 

6 

6 

8 

6 

6 

5 

7 

4 

2 

6 

5 

6 

4 

5 

0 

6 

10 

4 

8 

6 

5 

3 

4 

3 

4 

2 

3 

9 

6 

7 

6 

7 

4 

8 

3 

7 

4 

5 

6 

6 

8 

4 

6 

4 

7 

3 

8 

3 

5 

9 

4 

3 

1 

9 

1 

8 

4 

7 

4 

3 

6 

5 

7 

4 

8 

1 

8 

2 

7 

2 

4 

9 

6 

5 

6 

4 

3 

7 

4 

6 

*5 

9 

9 

5 

6 

4 

6 

2 

2 

7 

5 

3 

4 

3 

4 

10 

5 

5 

0 

2 

4 

5 

5 

4 

6 

4 

5 

5 

5 

4 

6 

5 

6 

5 

3 

5 

5 

5 

5 

6 

4 

9 

5 

6 

3 

4 

6 

2 

8 

8 

5 

3 

2 

1 

9 

6 

4 

8 

3 

5 

9 

5 

0 

10 

5 

6 

4 

4 

6 

0 

10 

4 

6 

4 

5 

5 

5 

4 

4 

9 

5 

4 

3 

5 

4 

7 

4 

6 

2 

3 

8 

5 

7 

2 

7 

5 

6 

1 

9 

2 

6 

7 

3 

4 

3 

8 

4 

8 

3 

10 


4 

6 

6 

4 

3 

8 

5 

3 

4 

0 

4 

7 

8 

8 

10 

2 

8 

4 

9 

3 

5 


4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 

5 

5 

3 

5 

5 

5 10 

4 

4 

6 

4 

0 

4 

5 

2 
























TABLE XXVI (continued) 


Subject 

Number 

Sex 

Age 

s 

0 

R 

T* 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 13 

14 15 

16 17 18 19 

20 

21 

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 

38 39 40 41 42 43 4+ 45 46 47 48 49 

50 51 

72 

M 

16-4 

I 

6 

7 

7 

1 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 

10 

5 

6 

4 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

3 

3 

3 

7 

3 

6 

2 

9 

5 

6 

3 

6 

4 

8 

4 

8 

3 

7 

0 

5 

4 

6 

2 

9 

4 

7 

2 8 

2 

8 

1 




S 

4 

3 

3 

5 

0 

8 

1 

8 

4 

6 

2 

3 

5 

9 

2 

7 

3 

6 

1 

9 

6 

5 

4 

7 

3 

7 

4 

8 

4 

3 

6 

8 

4 

5 

6 

6 

2 

6 

6 

5 

5 

7 

7 

7 

5 

2 

4 10 

4 

5 

5 

73 

M 

16-5 

I 

5 

5 

5 

1 

5 

5 

3 

5 

1 

7 

7 

8 

0 

6 

2 

9 

2 

8 

2 

2 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

9 

3 

3 

4 

8 

4 

4 

4 10 

4 

8 

7 

7 

4 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

5 

6 

5 6 

4 

5 

4 




s 

5 

3 

5 

3 

3 

5 

6 

6 

2 

7 

7 

9 

6 

7 

3 

10 

5 

9 

4 

5 

8 

6 

1 

7 

4 

8 

1 

4 

4 

6 

4 

5 

4 

7 

3 

6 

5 

7 

4 

3 

4 

8 

6 

5 

2 

5 

2 8 

2 

6 

0 

74 

M 

16-4 

I 

7 

8 

10 

4 

8 

9 

4 

8 

4 

7 

4 

8 

4 

4 

7 

7 

3 

6 

3 

5 

5 

4 

2 

6 

2 

7 

5 

6 

2 

5 

5 

3 

3 

6 

2 

6 

5 

6 

5 

5 

3 

6 

3 

5 

1 

6 

1 9 

4 

7 

0 




s 

5 

7 

4 

3 

5 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

3 

6 

1 

3 

0 

9 

5 

9 

2 

6 

7 

4 

6 

5 

2 

4 

2 

5 

2 

5 

4 

7 

3 

6 

4 

6 

4 

7 

4 

7 

7 10 

8 

8 

3 

3 

5 8 

5 

8 

1 

75 

M 

16-6 

I 

10 

5 

7 

1 

1 

5 

5 

5 

8 

7 

5 

9 

2 

7 

9 

8 

2 

8 

0 

8 

5 

7 

5 

5 

2 

2 

5 

7 

7 

6 

3 

3 

6 

6 

6 

6 

3 

3 

3 

3 

4 

6 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 4 

4 

6 

6 




s 

5 

5 

7 

5 

1 

5 

5 

8 

3 

7 

5 

8 

3 

9 

5 

8 

5 

9 

0 

8 

1 

7 

2 

7 

2 

7 

3 

5 

10 

7 

2 

6 

6 

6 

3 

6 

2 

6 

3 

3 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 4 

4 

4 

4 

76 

M 

17-2 

I 

6 

5 

6 

4 

3 

7 

4 

5 

4 

6 

4 

5 

5 

9 

4 

5 

4 

5 

2 

6 

7 

3 

4 

7 

3 

6 

5 

6 

4 

6 

3 

9 

5 

6 

7 

7 

3 

7 

3 

8 

2 

2 

2 

8 

1 

8 

1 10 

0 

8 

5 




s 

5 

5 

7 

5 

5 

6 

4 

5 

2 

6 

4 

7 

6 

6 

4 

7 

4 

4 

2 

8 

3 

7 

4 

5 

3 

6 

3 

8 

3 

7 

2 

6 

5 

7 

3 

6 

3 

5 

0 

6 

4 10 

4 

8 

1 

8 

1 9 

2 

9 

5 

77 

M 

15—6 

I 

10 

6 

6 

4 

3 

7 

6 

8 

3 

6 

4 

7 

4 

9 

3 

5 

3 

5 

2 

4 

5 

8 

1 

6 

1 

7 

4 

8 

0 

7 

5 

5 

4 

5 

6 

5 

4 

8 

4 

6 

5 

6 

3 

9 

2 

7 

2 5 

3 

7 

2 




s 

6 

1 

8 

4 

5 

9 

2 

5 

4 

9 

6 

8 

5 

5 

3 

10 

2 

6 

5 

7 

4 

6 

3 

6 

1 

7 

4 

6 

5 

5 

2 

5 

4 

7 

3 

6 

4 

6 

3 

4 

3 

8 

4 

7 

3 

7 

2 7 

5 

8 

0 

78 

M 

15-8 

I 

7 

8 

8 

4 

3 

9 

2 

5 

7 

9 

1 

5 

4 

5 

7 

7 

4 

3 

2 

8 

6 

4 

4 

6 

0 

6 

3 

8 

6 

4 

3 

5 

6 

5 

2 

6 

5 

5 

3 

7 

6 

5 

4 

10 

4 

6 

2 5 

3 

7 

1 




s 

4 

6 

5 

4 

8 

9 

2 

8 

3 

2 

2 

5 

7 

7 

6 

9 

3 

3 

3 

3 

8 

8 

4 

7 

0 

6 

4 

6 

4 

5 

4 

6 

3 

7 

7 

5 

2 

6 

1 

4 

5 

6 

6 

4 

1 

5 

5 10 

7 

5 

5 

79 

M 

15-9 

I 

5 

9 

8 

7 

6 

6 

4 

6 

5 

5 

5 

7 

0 

9 

5 

6 

2 

10 

2 

6 

2 

5 

3 

3 

3 

5 

5 

6 

3 

7 

3 

8 

4 

4 

3 

6 

1 

2 

4 

8 

7 

8 

7 

5 

4 

7 

4 4 

4 

6 

1 




s 

5 

2 

5 

2 

4 10 

1 

7 

3 

4 

3 

7 

0 

8 

2 

7 

3 

6 

3 

5 

3 

5 

3 

6 

1 

7 

5 

6 

4 

6 

5 

9 

4 

9 

4 

8 

4 

6 

4 

6 

6 

8 

7 

5 

5 

8 

2 6 

5 

7 

4 

80 

M 

15-8 

I 

10 

1 

9 

3 

4 

8 

0 

6 

5 

7 

4 

6 

5 

5 

1 

5 

4 

6 

3 

6 

2 

8 

4 

4 

2 

7 

2 

9 

3 

6 

5 

7 

2 

6 

3 

5 

6 

5 

3 

8 

5 

6 

4 

7 

3 

7 

5 8 

4 

7 

4 




s 

4 

5 

5 

4 

7 

7 

2 

5 

5 

9 

4 

8 

6 

6 

5 

8 

2 

8 

2 

1 

3 

5 

4 

7 

0 

6 

8 

4 

2 

4 

6 

10 

7 

9 

3 

6 

3 

5 

3 

1 

6 

7 

4 

5 

4 

6 

3 6 

7 

5 

3 

81 

M 

16-9 

I 

10 

9 

5 

3 

2 

6 

2 

5 

5 

6 

4 

7 

4 

7 

5 

7 

1 

4 

3 

8 

8 

2 

2 

9 

4 

5 

4 

5 

4 

5 

1 

6 

3 

6 

3 

6 

0 

6 

6 

6 

4 

8 

5 

7 

3 

7 

4 7 

3 

8 

5 




s 

9 

0 

6 

1 

6 10 

5 

6 

5 

3 

2 

8 

3 

5 

2 

2 

2 

5 

6 

5 

8 

3 

3 

7 

3 

6 

3 

5 

4 

4 

8 

4 

4 

7 

4 

7 

4 

7 

5 

4 

6 

9 

7 

5 

4 

6 

1 7 

8 

6 

5 

82 

M 

17-9 

I 

6 

0 

10 

1 

1 

6 

3 

8 

3 

2 

2 

9 

2 

6 

2 

8 

4 

9 

3 

6 

3 

8 

3 

5 

3 

8 

4 

7 

4 

7 

4 

5 

4 

5 

4 

6 

4 

7 

4 

7 

5 

7 

5 

7 

5 

6 

5 6 

5 

6 

5 




s 

6 

1 

6 

5 

7 

6 

7 

9 

6 

2 

5 

8 

3 

6 

2 

10 

2 

5 

2 

5 

3 

7 

6 

6 

0 

5 

4 

4 

1 

5 

3 

5 

5 

7 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

4 

8 

6 

4 

8 

4 

4 

4 9 

5 

8 

4 

83 

K 

17-6 

I 

10 

4 

6 

3 

8 

6 

9 

4 

5 

4 

3 

4 

3 

6 

2 

5 

3 

2 

2 

7 

6 

7 

9 

6 

5 

4 

5 

5 

2 

6 

4 

5 

8 

7 

6 

1 

0 

7 

3 

6 

4 

4 

3 

8 

7 

5 

1 8 

5 

5 

■7 




s 

5 

5 

3 

2 

7 

8 

9 

5 

6 

9 

5 

4 

3 

8 

5 

10 

0 

3 

3 

5 

6 

8 

4 

5 

6 

5 

6 

4 

4 

7 

6 

8 

1 

6 

6 

7 

4 

6 

3 

4 

7 

7 

2 

3 

2 

2 

5 1 

4 

7 

4 

84 

H 

15-7 

I 

7 

0 

8 

1 

5 

8 

1 

8 

2 

5 

2 

8 

2 

7 

7 

7 

4 

2 

3 

7 

3 

7 

3 

9 

3 

6 

4 

9 

4 

6 

3 

6 

6 

10 

4 

5 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

5 

5 

5 

5 6 

3 

5 

5 




s 

5 

3 

6 

2 

1 

7 

0 

6 

5 

6 

5 

7 

3 

6 

6 

7 

10 

4 

4 

6 

4 

4 

3 

5 

3 

6 

1 

2 

4 

5 

4 

7 

7 

8 

2 

7 

4 

2 

3 

3 

5 

6 

4 

5 

8 

8 

5 8 

9 

9 

5 

gc 

u -/ 

K 

15-7 

I 

10 

1 

7 

5 

3 

9 

4 

6 

5 

5 

4 

5 

3 

6 

4 

5 

3 

6 

5 

8 

4 

6 

3 

7 

0 

5 

3 

8 

3 

7 

2 

7 

2 

6 

4 

6 

2 

6 

1 

8 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

8 

5 7 

c 

9 

2 




s 

6 

5 

6 

4 

4 

10 

5 

9 

4 

3 

2 

6 

2 

8 

3 

7 

4 

4 

1 

3 

4 

7 

4 

7 

0 

6 

6 

5 

5 

7 

3 

7 

5 

8 

3 

7 

5 

6 

2 

5 

5 

6 

5 

6 

2 

9 

1 8 

4 

8 

3 

86 

M 

15-10 

I 

10 

2 

7 

2 

4 

8 

3 

6 

6 

5 

1 

5 

3 

5 

9 

7 

5 

5 

2 

7 

4 

6 

3 

8 

0 

6 

2 

8 

6 

5 

3 

4 

7 

9 

1 

5 

4 

7 

4 

8 

6 

4 

3 

4 

5 

7 

3 4 

5 

O 

6 




s 

6 

1 

4 

3 

5 

6 

4 

5 

5 

6 

2 

5 

4 

6 

6 

7 

3 

2 

1 

8 

6 

8 

8 

7 

0 

4 

5 

10 

3 

5 

6 

5 

3 

5 

3 

7 

2 

9 

2 

5 

6 

8 

7 

4 

3 

7 

4 9 

4 

7 


87 

M 

17-11 

I 

10 

0 

9 

1 

1 

9 

2 

8 

2 

8 

2 

8 

2 

8 

7 

7 

3 

7 

7 

7 

3 

6 

6 

7 

3 

6 

3 

6 

3 

6 

3 

6 

6 

6 

4 

5 

4 

5 

4 

5 

5 

5 

4 

5 

4 

5 

4 5 

4 

c; 

4 




s 

0 

1 

5 

7 

9 

2 

9 

8 

2 

8 

8 

8 

2 

7 

7 

7 

7 

2 

3 

1 

7 

3 

3 10 

3 

3 

6 

6 

4 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

5 

4 

5 

4 

4 

4 

5 

5 

4 

4 

5 

4 5 

5 

5 

3 

<38 

M 

16-9 

I 

9 

4 

5 

2 

2 

6 

1 

7 

3 

7 

4 

5 

3 

5 

8 

6 

5 10 

3 

7 

4 

9 

4 

5 

0 

6 

2 

7 

2 

8 

4 

7 

1 

6 

5 

5 

5 

6 

3 

6 

4 

8 

3 

6 

4 

8 

3 6 

5 

7 

4 




s 

9 

3 

6 

1 

2 

7 

7 

4 

4 

8 

4 

3 

2 

7 

2 

7 

3 

1 

2 

8 

3 

4 

4 

3 

4 

7 

9 

4 

4 

6 

6 

6 

0 

7 

3 

6 

6 

8 

8 

6 

6 

5 10 

5 

5 

5 

5 5 

5 

5 

5 

89 

M 

15-8 

I 

8 

5 

9 

3 

1 

9 

3 

8 

2 

10 

2 

8 

2 

8 

3 

7 

3 

5 

5 

7 

3 

7 

0 

7 

5 

5 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 

7 

5 

7 

3 5 

2 

5 





s 

5 

2 

5 

5 

3 

5 

1 

8 

6 10 

5 

8 

0 

6 

5 

7 

6 

4 

6 

7 

6 

7 

4 

3 

3 

4 

7 

9 

5 

7 

2 

8 

8 

6 

5 

4 

9 

6 

2 

2 

3 

4 

1 

4 

3 

5 

3 7 

6 

4 

4 

90 

H 

15-4 

I 

0 

1 

10 

1 

5 

9 

2 

8 

2 

8 

3 

9 

2 

8 

2 

8 

3 

7 

3 

3 

7 

3 

4 

7 

3 

7 

4 

7 

4 

4 

4 

7 

5 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

4 

6 

6 

6 

5 

6 

6 

5 

5 5 

5 

5 

5 




s 

0 

1 

5 

1 

6 

7 

8 

6 

2 

6 

2 

6 

3 

7 

6 

9 

2 

2 

3 

3 

6 

4 

3 

8 

3 

5 

4 

7 

4 

4 

6 

7 

3 

7 

5 

6 

5 

7 

4 

8 

4 

8 

4 

4 

5 

5 

5 9 

5 l 























108 


TAKL£ XXVI (Continued) 


S 


Subject 

Number 

Sex 

Age 

0 

R 

T* 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

91 

M 

18-? 

I 

6 

2 

8 

3 

3 

9 

5 




S 

3 

5 

6 

1 

1 

6 

7 

92 

M 

15-3 

I 

7 

6 

6 

2 

6 

7 

4 




s 

5 

8 

5 

1 

8 

7 

5 

93 

M 

15-U 

I 

10 

0 

4 

3 

1 

7 

5 




s 

6 

3 

5 

5 

4 

7 

5 

94 

M 

15-5 

I 

7 

4 

5 

5 

5 

9 

2 




s 

3 

7 

8 

6 

5 

6 

3 

95 

M 

15-5 

I 

9 

2 

7 

3 

4 

8 

2 




s 

9 

1 

9 

7 

4 

8 

2 

96 

M 

15-4 

I 

7 

2 

6 

6 

2 

6 

3 




s 

5 

5 

7 

2 

7 

5 

5 

97 

M 

16-1 

I 

7 

1 

8 

2 

1 

8 

3 




s 

6 

9 

7 

7 

10 

6 

8 

98 

M 

15-9 

I 

8 

2 

9 

4 

1 

6 

0 




s 

4 

5 

10 

3 

8 

5 

1 

99 

K 

15-5 

I 

10 

2 

7 

3 

4 

8 

1 




s 

6 

2 

6 

5 

5 

6 

1 

100 

M 

15-1 

I 

10 

5 

6 

4 

4 

5 

0 




s 

5 

5 

7 

6 

2 

4 

0 

101 

H 

15-7 

I 

4 

0 

6 

1 

4 

6 

4 




s 

6 

5 

7 

4 

4 

4 

3 

102 

M 

15-4 

I 

9 

3 

8 

3 

1 

8 

4 




s 

7 

1 

8 

4 

2 

10 

3 

103 

M 

16-5 

I 

8 

5 

9 

3 

1 

9 

1 




s 

5 

5 

9 

3 

1 

4 

0 

104 

M 

15-6 

I 

7 

4 

6 

3 

5 10 

4 




s 

5 

5 

3 

6 

6 

6 

3 


8 

9 

10 

11 

12 13 14 15 

16 17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 23 

5 

5 

6 

3 

10 

2 

6 

4 

5 

3 

5 

4 

8 

0 

8 

1 

2 

2 

8 

3 lo 

5 

5 

4 

6 

5 

8 

2 

5 

7 

6 

2 

9 

4 

5 

3 

8 

4 

7 

4 

5 

4 

8 

3 

5 

3 

5 

2 

7 

4 

4 

2 

6 

3 

5 

6 

6 

4 

6 

1 

6 

4 

6 

3 

9 

7 

4 

1 

6 

2 

7 

2 

6 

5 

6 

2 

9 

7 

4 

5 

7 

4 

8 

1 

7 

3 

6 

2 

10 

4 

6 

2 

6 

5 

7 

2 

6 

5 

8 

4 

6 

4 

5 

5 

5 

4 

6 

3 

7 

4 

7 

4 

6 

4 

9 

4 

6 

4 

6 

5 

10 

4 

4 

7 

5 

5 

5 

4 

6 

4 10 

3 

5 

1 

8 

4 

5 

3 

6 

4 

8 

2 

6 

4 

10 

4 

3 

0 

6 

2 

8 

1 

8 

2 

7 

2 

7 

3 

5 

3 

7 

4 

7 

4 

9 

2 

7 

5 

10 

4 

7 

4 

9 

0 

5 

3 

7 

3 

6 

4 

10 

3 

7 

4 

9 

4 

8 

5 

5 

4 

8 

2 

7 

3 

9 

4 

6 

0 

8 

3 

6 

4 

7 

5 

6 

2 

10 

5 

7 

1 

2 

5 

4 

9 

8 

5 

7 

5 

4 

0 

7 

3 

5 

3 

7 

3 

5 

2 

6 

2 

6 

4 

6 

5 

7 

3 

6 

4 

6 

3 

7 

4 

7 

5 

6 

3 

8 

6 

7 

4 

9 

3 

5 

4 

6 

3 

6 

4 

5 

1 

7 

5 

6 

2 

8 

5 

5 

3 

9 

2 

4 

3 

8 

5 

6 

3 

9 

4 

8 

5 

9 

3 

2 

3 

4 

6 

7 

7 

9 

2 

6 

4 

7 

4 

8 

4 

8 

4 

7 

3 

5 

3 

5 

2 

10 

2 

5 

1 

8 

2 

8 

5 

9 

4 

6 

3 

6 

4 

5 

3 

8 

5 

6 

3 

7 

5 

6 

5 

6 

5 

7 

4 

6 

5 

6 

4 

9 

0 

7 

3 

6 

2 

8 

5 

9 

3 

5 

3 

5 

3 

6 

6 

5 

5 

6 

0 

6 

4 

7 

4 

5 

4 

4 

3 

8 

7 

6 

2 

5 

3 

8 

2 

8 

1 

6 

2 

9 

2 

7 

3 

7 

5 

5 

3 

4 

4 

6 

2 

7 

3 

7 

2 

6 

4 

8 

3 

7 

2 

7 

2 

6 

3 

5 

5 

6 

6 

7 

6 

8 

4 

6 

4 

4 

2 

7 

2 

7 

5 

7 

5 

6 

4 

6 

l 

3 

4 

7 

4 

8 

5 

5 

4 

7 

2 

5 

5 

5 

4 

7 

5 

6 

3 

3 

5 

7 

3 

3 

4 


stands for "Ideal-Sort”, and *5" for "Self-Sort" 















































• 


























































































































































I 









. 














109 


APPENDIX VI 

SUMMARY OF THE THEORY AND APPLICATION OF VAN DER WAERDEN*S TEST FOR THE 
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TWO MEANS 


The following summary of van der Waerden's test for the difference 

of the means of two samples is essentially that given by E. S* Keeping 

Let there be two sets of observations; x^, x••• » with mean 

x; and, y^, y£» . •• • y n , with mean y. It is desired to test the null 

hypothesis that 2 - y = 0, against the alternative hypothesis that 
x - y>0. Let the observations be combined and arranged in order of 
increasing size. Let the combined set be labelled z^, Z£* ... » z^, 
where N = m + n. It is possible to associate with each of the z^. 

( k = 1, 2, N) a standardized normal variate defined by, 

<£($k) = k , .(1) 

N + 1 

whose inverse function is defined by, 


"rtf (= ? k » — / 

*JzKJ 


^(k + 3 -t 1 2 /2 


dt 


N + 1 


( 2 ). 


The values of ^ ^ k ^ are easily obtained from tables for the 

Cumulative Normal Distribution. 

Let the values of corresponding to the x*s be denoted by, 
m k 

^1^2’ •••» • If 2 ^ i is greater than zero, the x’s, as a 

will be larger than the y*s. If this sum exceeds a certain critical 
value, depending on m and n, x - y will be significant. 


1. E. S. Keeping. The Power of Statistical Tests, , WADC Technical 
Report 54-9, Wright Air Development Center, Air Research and Development 
Command, United States Air Force, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, 

Ohio, 1953. 






















110 


The critical values are obtained from the formula. 

Critical Value = ^( 1 - c* ) / _mnQ_) ^ 

IN - l] 


(3). 


where. 


I 5 fa (iTTT^ 


....(4), 


and where o<. is the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it 
is true, that is, of making an error of the first kind. 

The approximation, 

Q = 1 - 2ln N + In In N , 

N N 

may be used when N is large, (in this fomula In means the natural 
logarithm.) 


> t z q+p» are ties, 


If a set of p observations, say, 

we associate with each observation of the set of the mean value, 

P 

^ q+i 

1-1 __ 

P 

instead of the values given by equations (2). These values are used, 
for the tied set, both in computing and in evaluating Q by 

equation (4). 

The following example illustrates the use of van der Waerden*s 
method in testing the significance of the girls* group dissatisfactions 
in the areas of "Mind" and “Mental Processes". The observations will 
consist of the girls* group dissatisfactions associated with "Mind" 

(the x*s), and ’(Mental Processes" (the y*s). Thus, n = 15* m = 12, 

N = 2?, x = 1.00 and y = .68 










* ' 


, 






I 





Ill 


TABLE XXVH COMPUTATION TABLE FOR COMPUTING THE SIGNIFICANCE OF 
THE DIFFERENCE IN GIRLS* GROUP DISSATISFACTIONS IN 
THE AREAS OF "MIND" AND "MENTAL PROCESSES" BY VAN 
DER WAERDEN * S METHOD 


State¬ 

ment 

No. 

k 

Group 

Diss. 

(z k } 

k 

^k 

Mean 
?* s 
for 
Tie 

Groups 

i 

•a 

•H 

u/ k 'll 2 ** 

N + 1 
= k/28 

v* (n + lA) 

49 

1 

*024 

.036 

- 1.799 




3.236 

22 

2 

.119 

.071 

-1.468 




2.155 

42 

3 

. 16 ? 

.107 

-1.243 




1.545 

32 

4 

.286 

.143 

-1.067 




1.138 

37 

5 

.333 

.179 

-.919 




.845 

23 

6 

.404 

.214 

-.793 




.458 

36 

7 

.404 

.250 

-.674 

-.677 



.458 

43 

8 

.404 

.286 

-.565 




.458 

8 

9 

.452 

.321 

-.465 




.103 

41* 

10 

.452 

.357 

-.366 

-.321 

1 

-•321 

.103 

21* 

11 

.452 

.393 

-.272 


2 

-.321 

.103 

50* 

12 

.452 

.429 

-.179 


3 

-.321 

.103 

18 

13 

.476 

.464 

-.090 




.008 

35* 

14 

.500 

.500 

.000 


4 

.000 

.000 

17* 

15 

.524 

.536 

.090 


5 

.090 

.008 

46* 

16 

.571 

.571 

.179 


6 

.179 

.032 

14 

17 

.666 

.607 

.272 

219 



.102 

26 * 

18 

.666 

.643 

.366 


7 

•319 

.102 

12* 

19 

.881 

.679 

.465 


8 

.465 

.216 

9 

20 

.905 

.714 

.565 




.319 

13 

21 

1.167 

.750 

.674 




.454 

40* 

22 

1.262 

.786 

.793 


9 

.793 

.629 

3* 

23 

1.500 

.821 

.919 


10 

.919 

.845 

31* 

24 

1.738 

.857 

1.067 


11 

I .067 

1.138 

27 

25 

2.024 

.893 

1.243 




1.545 

4 

26 

2 . 38 I 

.929 

1.468 




2.155 

7* 

27 

2.929 

.964 

1.799 


12 

1.799 

3.236 

Total 

s 



4.668 

21.494 


* x*s 

** Adjusted for ties. 
































112 


Table XXVII summarizes the somputations involved in testing the 

significance of the difference of these means by van der Waerden*s 

method. At the 5$ level of significance, o( = .05, 1 -o< = .95» and 

if (1 -oc) = 1.645. Thus Q = _i_ x 21.494 = .796, and 

27 

to Critical Value = 1.645 f 12 x 15 x .796 1 5 = 3.860. 

Y l 26 J 

Since = 4.668, the critical value is exceeded and the difference 

i= i 

in means is significant at the Sl° level. 







B29771 







