
Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Lehmann, Frederick William 

A study of the poetry preferences 
of unior high school pupils in 
selected rural, village, and town 
schools of Alberta. 






@X MBBIS 

««KW1$ 

mmMmm 








UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
LIBRARY 


Regulations .a ding Theses i cl Essertaj;ions 

; ci b oopie: )1 ; sses and dif s .... tatic ns Bor Has ter 1 s 

and doctor f s degrees deposited in the Univer sity of Alberta 

iry, as the fficial Copy of the acuity of G-raduate Studies, 
ia^ be ■ >n i it >d In the rfei < nee Reac ing Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under ohose 
su >e 2 vis m the work was done. Some rpai b 3nts are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
er^ tl Unjv : si ty of Alberta Library. 

These theses ana dissertations are to be used only with due 
regar to priority rights of tne author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended, passages are used. 

hen permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub1ished work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below . The 
borrowing library is obligated to sscuregfthe .signature of each 

user. 


Please sign below: 


Date 


Signature 


ins titution 



























































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/studyofpoetrypreOOfred 


#* ^ 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A STUDY OF THE POETRY PREFERENCES 
OF JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL PUPILS 
IN SELECTED RURAL, VILLAGE, AND TOWN 
SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO ‘HIE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

FREDERICK WILLIAM LEHMANN 
ARMSNA, ALBERTA 


SEPTEMBER, 1932 





ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to express to Dr. H. S. Smith, 

Dean of the faculty of Education, Dr. H. S. Baker, Dr. H. 

T. Coutts, of the Faculty of Education, and to Mr. A. T. 
Elder, of the Faculty of Arts, University of Alberta, his 
appreciation for the helpful advice and assistance received 
in the preparation of this work. 

Grateful acknowledgement for assistance rendered is 
also due to Miss D. I. Hamilton, Miss M. Morrison, and Miss 
N. E. Freifeld, of the Rutherford Library, and to Miss E. D. 
Clever, of the Education Library. 

Thanks are also due to Mr. H. Kostash, Superinten¬ 
dent, Smoky Lake School Division, and to Mr. Neil Purvis, 
Superintendent, Lamont School Division, for their assis¬ 
tance in contacting teachers whose classes took part in 
the poetry preference survey. 

For the administration of the poetry preference 
booklets in their respective schools, the writer also ex¬ 
presses his thanks to the following teachers: Miss M. 
Sanderson, Alix; Mr. H. F. McCall, Mmisk; Mrs. F. Pelech, 
Beilis; Mr. A. J. Petruk, Chipman; Mr. R. H. Evernden, 
Coronation; Mr. C. Saby, Daresbury (.Camrose); Mr. J*. 

iii 



























■ 

. 

* 

. 


















Ballantyne, Donalda; Mrs, M. Lund and Mrs. A. Meriam, 
Dorenlee; Miss V. Peterson and Mr. G. Dennis, Edberg; 

Mr. I. Birdsell, Forestburg; Miss A. Calvert and Mr. H. 
Anderson, Hay Lakes; Mr. F. Danelesko, Huwen (Andrew); 
Mr. C. Bawden, Kingman; Mr. A. Rogalsky, Lainont; Mr. S. 
Olstad, Meeting Creek; Mr. D. Green, Norbo (Meeting 
Creek); Mr. R. Cruiekshank, Olds; Mr. P. Poloway, Paulus 
(Chipman); Mr. M. Meiklejohn, Ponoka; Mr. H. Rolseth, 
Rosalind. 


iv 



SYNOPSIS 


The author T s primary purpose in this investigation 
was to discover preferences of junior high school pupils 
for definite types and patterns of poetry. Coincident with 
this aim was the purpose to discover the subject matter of 
poetry that appeals most strongly to these pupils. A secon¬ 
dary aim of this study was to determine to what extent there 
exist sex differences, and age or grade differences, in 
these poetry preferences. 

The pupils who participated in this study were given 
a booklet of poems to read. In the booklet, the poems on 
each page were grouped according to a predetermined common 
factor such as rhythm or subject matter. Below each group 
of poems, the pupils indicated in spaces provided their 
preference for a poem of that group, their dislike for 
another poem, and the reason for each preference and dis¬ 
like. 

It was found that of all poetic devices, rhythm 
most strongly appeals to junior high school pupils. Next, 
the topic or subject matter of poetry is an important fac¬ 
tor in determining choice. Rhymed poetry is greatly pre¬ 
ferred, and regular form is given preference over irregu¬ 
lar. The information contained in the poem must be pre¬ 
sented in an easily understood manner. Abstractions, 


v 



involved figures of speech, and melancholy moods are not 
liked. Dialect, repetition, and satiric form of humor 
meet with disapproval. Sex is a more pronounced determi¬ 
nant of poetry preferences than grade or age. Girls like 
poetry to a greater degree than do boys. Intelligence 
strongly influences the reasoning ability of pupils in 
making preferences. 

Because of these findings, it is recommended that 
poetry for junior high school pupils should deal with sub¬ 
ject matter that interests them. There should be the 
greatest possible variety in topic, mood, setting, and in 
reading difficulty consistent with the findings of this 
investigat ion. 


vi 






, ■ 

. 

. 



■ 









TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 

LIST OF TABLES .... .. ix 

CHAPTER 

I INTRODUCTION. 1 

II SUMMARY OF RELATED STUDIES . 14 

III PLAN AND DESIGN. 25 

Purpose of the Study . 23 

Limitations of the Study. 23 

Plan of Procedure .. 27 

IV PRESENTATION OF THE DATA. 35 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group I... 36 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group II ... 39 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group III . 43 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group IV .. 46 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group V .. 43 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group VI . 35 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group VII . 56 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group VIII .. 6l 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group IX ..... 64 

vii 



































*«'•>* >■■»»«.«• > 0 v * 1 e 


* • ■ ' .. 




' ' 

















TABLE OF COM!MTS (continued) 

CHAPTER PAGE 

IV PRESENTATION OF THE DATA (continued) 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group X. 68 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group XI ... 72 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group XII . 75 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group XIII . 78 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group XIV . 82 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group XV. 85 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group XVI . 91 

Analysis of Findings Related to the 

Poems of Group XVII ... 95 

Sex Differences in Poetry Preferences .... 96 

Frequency of Reasons for Preferring 

and Disliking Poems . 105 

Relation Between Intelligence and 

Poetry Preferences .. 107 

V SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS. 115 

VI RECOMMENDATIONS. 119 

BIBLIOGRA PHY 

A. References . 130 

B. Sources of Poems. 134 

APPENDIX The Poetry Booklet . 137 


viii 




























LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I A Glassification on the Basis of 
Grade and £>ex, of th© Pupils 

Participating in this Study. 29 

il Findings related to preference, dislike, 

and reasons therefor, of the poems of Group I • 35 

III Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems 
of Group II .. 3 9 

IV Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems 
of Group III . 43 

V Findings related to preference, dislike, 

and reasons therefor, of the poems 
of Group IV. 46 

VI Findings related to preference, dislike, 

and reasons therefor, of the poems 
of Group V .. 49 

VII Findings related to preference, dislike, 

and reasons therefor, of the poems 
of Group VI . 52 

VIII Findings related to preference, dislike, 

and reasons therefor, of the poems 
of Group VII .. 56 

IX Findings related to preference, dislike, 

and reasons therefor, of the poems 
of Group VIII .. 60 

X Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems 
of Group IX .... 64 

XI Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems 
of Group X... 68 

XII Findings related to preference, dislike, 

and reasons therefor, of the poems of Group XI. 72 

ix 
















? 




















• • . 


.* • ' 






















LIST OF TABLES (continued) 


TABLE PAGE 

XIII Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems of 
Group XII . 7j? 

XIV Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems of 
Group XIII . 78 

XV Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems of 
Group XIV . 8l 

XVI Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems of 
Group XV. 83 

XVII Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems of 
Group XVI . 91 

XVIII Findings related to preference, dislike, 
and reasons therefor, of the poems of 
Group XVII . 94 

XIX Sex differences in the poetry preferences 

of junior high school pupils. 97 

XX Sex differences in the poetry dislikes 

of junior high school pupils . 98 

XXI Sex differences in stating preference, 

dislike, and reasons therefor, of all poems ... 99 

XXII All the poems arranged in order of 

increasing and decreasing preference ... 103 

XXIII Relative reasons for preference and 

dislike of the poems from all groups. 106 

XXIV Certain relationships between intelligence 

and poetry preference . 107 

XXV Certain relationships between intelligence 

and reasons stated for preference of poems ... 108 

XXVI Certain relationships between intelligence 

and reasons stated for dislike of poems ...... 110 


x 






































■. 

















CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 


Since earliest times, when our primitive forefathers 
chanted their rhythmic incantations at their camp fires, 
poetic expression of one kind or another has been the art 
that has met most satisfactorily the aesthetic requirements 
of the human race. In Elizabethan times no gentleman worthy 
of the name lacked the skill to compose a sonnet. Every 
peasant was a poet when he joined in the singing of a ballad, 
changing the words to suit his own imagination. At a later 
period, rhymed couplets were the barbed shafts of political 
satire. The Victorians expressed their morals and morale in 
the poetry of Tennyson, Browning and Matthew Arnold, the 
Georgians their mild frustrations in the verses of Auden, 
Housman, Eliot and others. 

One might think that in our time, when men's minds 
are filled with the prospects of atomic war, when their 
chief interests seem centred in a material world, the pleas¬ 
ure derived from writing and reading of poetry would be all 
but unknown. But evidently not. 11 An examination of the 
amount of verse printed in America alone in the twenty years 
between 1?12 and 19 $ 2 reveals that approximately 40,000 
poets have achieved publication and probably ten times that 




2 


number have written without attaining the distinction of 

print...,” 1 At the present time, books of popular poems 

are selling by the million. 

And why should this not be? There is as urgent need 

for poetry today as there ever was. ”The chief object of 

poetry is to separate the reader from his ordinary getting 

and spending self, and to lift him into a world of larger 

dimensions and wider horizons. Entering the poet’s mind, 

the reader’s mind becomes increasingly enriched and enlarged 

The landscape vibrates with richer colors; human beings are 

2 

touched with greater understanding....” 

The foregoing information would lead us to assume 
that we are a nation of poetry readers. It is rather dis¬ 
concerting to learn that such an inference seems to be false 
In the first place, only a small minority of the common 
people read poetry. Blumenthal says: ”What percentage of 
the average intelligent reader’s reading consists of poetry? 

I should hesitate to put my money on so high a figure as two 
3 

per cent.” Lamborn is even more emphatic: ”Not one in a 
thousand learns, not one in a hundred even reads, a line 
when his school days are over. There is something wrong 

^ Louis Untermeyer, Poetry - Its Appreciation and Enjoyment . 
Harcourt, Brace & Co., New York, 1934, p.4. 

^ James Dow McCallum, The Revised College Omnibus . Harcourt 
Brace & Co., Hew York, 1939, p.l07&. 

2Joseph C. Blumenthal, "Literature For Plain People,” The 
English Journal . May 1943, p.248. 

















; 

, 



' 






' 
























X,:iJ , 




. 

* 

■ 










- • , 

t 

. 








5 


4 

somewhere." In the second place, the type of poetry read 
by the ordinary person is often not above the level of dog¬ 
gerel. On analysis, popular verse scarcely stands the test 
of good poetry. Ogden Nash, Richard Armour, Norman Jaffray, 
Helen Welshimer, Edna Jacques, and a host of others write 
chiefly for the ephemeral entertainment of the readers of 
periodicals and newspapers. "While the interest in serious 
poetry is becoming more and more restricted to the so-called 
intellectual class, nonsense is practically the only type of 
poetry which is remaining in touch with the great mass of 
the people."^ 

It is probable that only those adults who acquired 
a taste for poetry during childhood will ever voluntarily 
read it. Since there are few homes in which the reading of 
good poetry is encouraged, the schools must be aware of 
their responsibility and privilege in this aesthetic field 
if acceptable educational goals are to be reached: 

The end of educ at ion, in the intellectual sense, 
may be defined as an eager and efficient mind, a mind 
whose native sensibilities have been so refined that 
it is able to receive beauty of all kinds, a mind which 
has a love of knowledge, a mind ready to absorb ideas, 
a mind able to arrange its ideas and to distinguish the 
true from the false. Since such a mind is a unified 
and balanced mind, as well as an energetic mind, and 
since none of these qualities can exist in the highest 


* E. A. Greening Lamborn, The Rudiments of Criticism . 
Oxford Clarendon Press, 19 2 8 , p.l^. 

^ Emile Cammerts, The Poetry of Nonsense T New York, E. P. 
Dutton & Co., 1?26, p. 56 . 














- 

. 

. 

- 




' 



















■ 










* 








. 






















4 


degree in the absence of the others, a cultivated 
taste in art is indispensable in education. 


As poetry is an emotional experience, and as it 
is the expression of the imagination in language, 
the appreciation of poetry should stimulate emotion 
and imagination, and the power of expression in words, 
since all human powers fall below their limit unless 
exercised. In so far as the emotion, imagination, 
and language of poetry transcend the ordinary in 
quality, poetry should elevate and purify these same 
human powers. Therefore, to the extent that it is 
desirable that these qualities should be cultivated, 
poetic experience should possess educational value. 
All these qualities enter into other human qualities, 

. so that the effects of poetic experience may 

penetrate into every ramification of human life.® 


As for the educative values of poetry; its 
function in purifying taste, and in helping to con¬ 
trol emotion; its moral value; its effects upon prac¬ 
tical life, in stimulating action or as a sedative; 
its place in linguistic training; its power to rouse 
imaginative activity in the reader — all these will 
demand his attention.7 


These views are endorsed by other educators. Groves 
affirms that "Poetry develops the intermediate-grade child's 
mental and spiritual nature. It awakens him to what life 
really is, brings into greater clearness his relationship to 
the world, extends his intellectual horizon, and refines his 
sensibilities. Skilfully handled, no subject offers more 

Q 

inviting opportunities to the child.’* 0 Diltz makes the as¬ 
sertion that "English poetry, properly taught as an art for 

^ J. H. Jagger, Poetry in School . University of London Press, 

London, 1928, pp.164-16.5. 

^ Ibid•» (Introduction;. 

8 Ruth Groves^Poetry: Its Place in the School Curriculum”, 
The Elementary School Journal , vol. 44, Jan. 1944, p.292. 















■ 



. 













t 











the sake of experience, is one of the finest of all educa¬ 
tional instruments, and may in its effect reach deeply into 

the life of a people and help them to discover their tradi- 

9 

tions, their character, and their destiny. 

It is sometimes said that the schools of today are 
teaching less and less about more and more, it seems to be 
true that education is increasingly a matter of horizontal 
expansion rather than of restricted vertical penetration. 

It is not within the scope of this investigation to discuss 
the relative merits and demerits of this changing emphasis. 
In the field of English, the stress that has been placed on 
silent reading to the almost total exclusion of oral read¬ 
ing in schools has necessarily resulted in the authoriza¬ 
tion of textbooks that contain a preponderance of prose 
selections, The reading, the study, and the memorizing of 
poetry have consequently been pushed into the background in 
many schools. 

This trend has gone neither unheeded nor unchallenged. 
Ghaneles speaks for many when he says: "The number of 
voices being raised today protesting the lack of pupil in¬ 
terest in poetry is increasing. It is becoming increasingly 
necessary to revise the traditional attitude towards poetry, 
namely, that it is a literary device whose Universality of 

9 


B. C. Diltz, Poetic Pilgrimage , Toronto; Clarke Irwin & 
Co., 1942, p.42. 






. 

» 





















■ 

< - 

* 

- 


















6 


thought 1 , verbal loveliness, and imaginative imagery are suf¬ 
ficient reasons for its continuation in the curriculum. 1,10 
Jacobs warns that "There are those who believe that America 

is in danger of losing poetry in the daily living of the 

11 

people of this country." But he reassures us: "There are 

those who believe that the school can give poetry back to 

12 

American children." 

If, then, the schools are to "give poetry back to.... 
... children", we must ask ourselves if the schools are 
doing all that should be done in order to stimulate the 
children's interests in good poetry. Research into this 
question makes it rather obvious that, until recently at 
least, too much was left undone. During a study on verse 
writing by Alberta school children, the author asked forty 
pupils of a typical junior high school classroom if they 
liked to read or to hear poetry. One pupil answered in the 
affirmative. At the end of several weeks 1 reading and study 
of selected poetry, only one pupil stated that he had not 
derived enjoyment nor gained in appreciation from the pro¬ 
ject. Similar results were obtained in other classrooms 
sampled by this investigator, and a number of other teachers 

Sol Chaneles, "A New Attitude Towards Poetry", Elementary 
Eaglldil-, Nov. 1930 , p.4^4. 

11 Leland B. Jacobs, "Poetry Por Children", Element ary 
English Magazine , March 1930 , p . 133 • 

12 Ibid. 








* 


• 

• 










. 





• 






* 






? 





. 

‘ . * . 







- 



■ 






. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

■ 

. 

. 

■ 











7 


reported that the appreciation of poetry, which is lying 
dormant in a majority of pupils, can be rather easily 
arou&sed by a poetry-conscious teacher. Educationists else¬ 
where have come to similar conclusions. Here are some cor¬ 
roborating statements: 

The teacher of . junior high school pupils 

frequently finds in her classes many boys and girls 
who profess no interest in and show no appreciation 
of poetry. There may be some who say frankly that 
they do not like that form of literature. 1 ^ 

in the four schools where investigation was made, 
the majority of pupils reported that they did not 
like poetry. 14 

Attitudes of high school students towards three 
poems were measured after they had read them silently. 
After class reading and discussion there was a sig¬ 
nificantly greater favorable attitude toward each 
poem. 1 ^ 


In a typical suburban high school the pupils were 
asked the question, "Do you enjoy poetry? 1 * some of 
the varied responses were: "Some poems that rhyme and 
are funny." "If it is humorous." "No, I do not like 
poetry. I consider it very dry." In one high school 
half of the twenty pupils definitely expressed a dis¬ 
like for poetry. One senior boy made the following 
statement: "I think the reason more pupils do not en¬ 
joy poetry is because teachers do not teach us poetry, 
they just give it to us." ..The extent of the child’s 
response to poetry will depend on the teacher’s appre¬ 
ciation of the art. 1 ® 

Blumenthal gives this honest appraisal of poets by a 


^ Mardie Weatherby Endres, "Poetry in the Junior High School", 
English Journal . Nov. 1930, p.303. 

14 J. Y. McGookin, "The Children’s Story", unpublished Thesis , 
Bachelor of Education , University of Alberta, 1924. 

^ J. E. Hadley, "Teaching Poetry Appreciation", Bulletin 
Purdue University , 1936, 37, pp.32-54. 

^ Groves, op.ci t. p.293. 




















. 














8 


school boy: 11 * The only writer I liked was Byron, and I 
didn’t like him very much. 1 " He goes on to say: 

In votes taken at two large high schools, 

English headed the list as the most-disliked 
subject in the curriculum, and I refuse to be¬ 
lieve that this sorry verdict is the result of 
poor teaching. Rather it is due to the fact that 
we teach masterpieces without due respect to the 
cultural and emotional maturity of the student, 
disregarding the principle that education should 
begin where his present cultural status leaves 
off - regardless of how low this point may be. 

Culture is a continuum, a step-by-step process in 
which huge gaps have no place. If we ignore this 
principle we shall find ourselves in the position 
of the railroad engineer who, after reaching the 
peak of a very steep mountain under forced draft, 
looked back to admire his difficult feat only to 
discover that he had left all the cars at the 

bottom. 11 ? 

Norvell asks: "What accounts for this low estate of 
poetry among children? 1 ’ He proceeds to answer as follows: 

"An examination of well-liked as well as disliked poems 
reveals, I believe, that basically not form but content is 
the touchstone of popularity. The vast majority of poems 
deal with themes and ideas which children would reject as 

decisively if offered to them in prose. ..youth demands 

life in action; age is often content with sentiment in rose 
leaves, and philosophy. Poems that present life dramatic¬ 
ally or with humor rival in popularity with children prose 

18 

selections that do the same." u 

17 " ~ " ~ — " ~~ ’ 

Blumenthal, op. cit ., p.250. 

George W. Norvell, "Some Results of a Twelve-Year Study of 

Children’s Reading Interests", The English Journal . Dec. 

1936, p.531. 










. 

- 























. 










9 


Glieksberg confirms the preceding comment: 

Students condemn poetry for a number of reasons: 
it is uninteresting (lacks action); it is far-fetched 
(deals with experiences beyond their ken); it uses 
language that is ranote, artificial, unintelligible 
(it touches no part of their living vocabulary); it 
has no practical value. ' 

If the student feels free to utter his opinions 
without censorship or condemnation on the part of 
the teacher, he soon betrays the fundamental reason 
why poetry fails to appeal to him. His unreflective 
reaction, his ignorance of philosophical values, his 
blind acceptance of tribal standards, his limited 
vocabulary, his unwillingness to think, his inability 
to suspend belief temporarily and to surrender him¬ 
self to the spell of the poem, these are facts that 
cannot be evaded. .... These conditions, as every 
experienced teacher of English knows, exist in many 
schools, and they must be faced realistically. 20 

The conclusions to be drawn .... are chiefly 
negative. The teaching of poetry in the secondary 
schools, as far as the majority of the students are 
concerned, is largely a failure. .. Under these cir¬ 
cumstances, the best the teacher can do is to awaken 
emotion, to suggest, inspire, evoke. .... The rest 
depends on the future experiences of the individual 
student, his sensibility, his imaginative insight, 
his capacity for appreciation, his moral and aesthetic 
faculty. 21 

In the face of the foregoing evidence, teachers are 
forced to accept the double premise, first, that poetry is 
heartily disliked by too many school children, and second, 
that the teachers themselves are largely to blame for it. 
The conclusion to be reached should not be one of passive 


^ Charles I. Glieksberg, "Poetry and Philosophy in the 
English Classroom n , The English Journal ,, vol. 28, Oct. 
1939, p.637. 

20 Ibid , p.641. 

21 Ibid , p.642. 







10 


resignation, but one of active interest in the possibili¬ 
ties of so much creative enjoyment waiting to be realized. 
Nor should it be feared that the task is beyond the capa¬ 
bility of the average teacher. Jagger speaks a reassuring 
word: "The difficulty of poetic appreciation in school can, 
however, be exaggerated. Childrens capacity to appreciate 
poetry is not as small as those whose liking for it has 
been allowed to rust in disuse frequently suppose. This 
can be seen in the right instinct which they display in 
being much more interested in the inspiration than in the 
formal technique." 22 And Moore writes: 

Children possess at least five strong bents which 
if recognized and encouraged will incline them toward 
poetry, for each of these finds a very genuine cor¬ 
respondence in the inherent nature of poetry itself. 

1. They are responsive to rhythm ... metrical 
verse stimulates this response almost as 
much as music does. 

2. They delight in the sounds of words and in all 
kinds of striking language effects. Such 
effects are the very essence of all kinds of 
poetry. 

3. Poetry ... is full of childlike sensory images. 

4. Poetry offers idealized, imaginatively recon¬ 
structed experience much of which is harmoni¬ 
ous with the native responses of the immature. 

3# Ghildren are eager participants in nature ex¬ 
perience. Nature in its various forms is the 
subject of much simple, beautiful poetry. 

The study of literature from the standpoint of 
children 1 s needs has long been considered an important 

22 

Jagger, op# cit . t p.34. 

23 Annie S. Moore, Literature Old and New for Ghildren , The 
Riverside Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1934, p.26?. 


































11 


part of the preparation of teachers, ... but in recent 
years the scope and dignity of the subject have been 
more fully recognized. ... The great social need for 
types of school experience which shall enrich life and 
open up many lines of innocent enjoyment are serving 
to emphasize the need for an enlargement of the study. 
Parents and teachers have always counted on literature 
to contribute to a more sympathetic understanding of 
human motives and actions and thus to encourage just 
and generous social attitudes. Nothing in our human 
inheritance of knowledge and art speaks a clearer 
language to successive generations than literature, 
and for the young at least, no other form of art ex¬ 
pression makes such a direct appeal to thought and 
feeling. ... For these reasons it is highly important 
that all adults having a personal relation to children 
should have a broad knowledge of books both old and 
new and learn to judge the probable response of chil¬ 
dren to them. Teachers in particular need to develop 
the art of invitation and incitement to worthwhile 
reading. 24 

Kangley says that “the acceptance on the part of 
educators of what might be termed the individualized ap¬ 
proach to literature and their abandonment of classical 
standards has forced an entire reorientation of the prob¬ 
lem of teaching literature.” * 2 ^ The great difficulty to be 
overcome is to decide what type of literature gives enjoy¬ 
ment to children. “Obviously it is simpler to prescribe 
what is ^ood* for an individual than it is to discover 
what is at once suited to his needs and culturally desi - 
rable." 26 


Moore, op. cit ., pp.l - 2. 

2 ^ Lucy Kangley, Poetry Preferences in the Junior High School , 
Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia Univer¬ 
sity, N. Y., 1938, p.2. 

26 Ibid. 









12 


The problem of finding reading material that was 
both valuable from a literary standpoint and acceptable to 
the popular tastes of high school students was recognized 
by Dr. Allan Abbott in 1?02, in the report of his study of 
the reading preferences of these students.since then, 
a considerable number of educators have made investigations 
in this field, and many of them have used the method of 
letting the students themselves state their preferences. 
Lamborn declares that “children are naturally good critics 
of poetry, for they are akin to the poet, who is the child 
of the race.....Wheeler has found that “if the poems 
he examines are arranged in groups according to similarity 
of theme, passing from simplicity and obviousness to more 
subtle emotion and a more involved style, and if the stu¬ 
dent is induced to consider the poems in each group and 
measure their success in treating the same subject, a mira¬ 
cle often takes place: a critic begins to create himself 
before our eyes IGradation is as necessary in poetry 
as in any other school subject, and needs equal considera¬ 
tion from the teacher. He should find out what the chil¬ 
dren naturally appreciate, and instead of unduly forcing 

Reported by Kangley, op. cit., p.3» 

? A 

Lamborn, op. cit., p.? (Introduction). 

Paul Mowbray Wheeler, “Comparing Poems on Like Topics, 11 

English Journal , March 1951, p.lj?3. 



























- 






■ 










* 







13 


the pace, ... should develop their taste by building upon 
their spontaneous preferences. ... *ihe study of ^children's; 
preferences yields the most valuable results. 1 ’^ 

dagger, op. cit ., pp.222-223, 223. 





CHAPTER II 


SUMMARY OF RELATED STUDIES 

During the past fifty years, many investigators have 

made revealing studies of childrens preferences of poetry 

31 

and other forms of literature. In 19 02, Dr. Allan Abbott 

found that subtlety, delicacy, and technical perfection were 

sources of irritation rather than of pleasure to young read- 

31 

ers. Both he and I. A. Richards^ found that poetry consti¬ 
tuted only an insignificant portion of their subjects’ 

31 

reading. Charles McConn, in 1912, in an attempt to rank 
those pieces of literature which were preferred by high school 
students and to draw from such rankings the qualities that 
were the bases of appeal, found that "all books ranking high 
contain vivid and dramatic presentations of life. All have 
fairly strong ethical import. High school students react 
negatively to literature in which the primary appeal is 
aesthetic or stylistic. They are una?/are of subtle beauty 
or indirect ethical implications." Blanche Weekss,^ 1 in 
1929, conducted a study to discover how figurative language 
and involved sentence structure as factors of meaning affect 
children’s choices of poetry, and to what extent actual ex¬ 
perience as a factor of meaning affects children’s choices 
of poems. Her conclusions were that "though both involved 

^ Reported by Kangley, op. cit ., pp.6-12. 






15 


sentence structure and figurative language obscure meaning, 

figurative language is the more serious difficulty for 

31 

children." In 1932 Helen Mackintosh found that "poems 
ranked high had a combination of interest elements. Lite¬ 
rary merit is not recognized by children. They are little 
interested in the thoughtful, meditative type of poetry. 
Helation to real experience, for them child experience, 
and opportunities for vicarious experience are determinants 
of choice." Theodore Irion^\ in 1923, after testing 170 
ninth-grade students, concluded that "poetry is of all 
types of reading the most difficult. Only children with I. 
Q f s of 100 or more can profit by the study of literature 
now used in the ninth grade." 

In 1?47, Kyte arrived at the following conclusions: 
Pupils of all grades preferred the poem, "Da Greata Basa- 
ball," because of its humorous dialect, and its subject 
matter. The poem, "The House With Nobody in it" was liked 
by some pupils because of its feelings of sadness, kindness, 
and goodness; but it was disliked for these same character¬ 
istics, especially the feeling of sadness. "Animal Crackers 
was considered too silly or childish by a number of pupils. 
Others stated that it was not interesting. The repetition 
of a phrase was disliked by some upper-grade children. Chil 
dren identified themselves with the familiar experiences 
31 


Ibid. 









16 


portrayed in each poem. A considerable percentage of the 
children disliked three of the poems because they seemed 
meaningless. "Bob-white" appealed to the children because 
of its subject, birds. Many children liked the poem for 
two other reasons also: its liveliness and joyousness. 

Those who did not like it said there was too much repeti¬ 
tion. "The Daisies" was liked by a number of the children 
because it was about Nature, if our poems were disapproved 
because they were too short. The element of phantasy in 
"Moon Folly" was considered silly and too impossible by 
older boys.^ 2 

dagger’s conclusions are summed up in the following 
statement: "Individual differences being allowed for, 
children love rapid metre and strong alliteration, and 
rhymed poetry rather than blank verse. They dislike all 
poems which they consider too easy or too childish for them, 
especially namby-pamby verse. Both boys and girls will say 
that they like a poem because it is sad."22 

From her study of the poetry preferences of junior 
high school students, Kangley concluded: "It is interesting 
to note the many points of agreement among the findings of 
these investigators. Covering a range in time of thirty- 

32 - — — ~ “ ” ~ 

George C. Kyte, "Children f s Reactions to Fifty Selected 

Poems," The Elementary School Journal , Feb. 1947, pp*334-337• 
22 Jagger, or. cit ., p. 228 . 







. 

















. 







■ 



t 
















17 


four years and in subjects from the primary to college, they 

34 

have a surprising unanimity.she summarizes the previous 
findings as follows: 

Poetry is the least read and the least appreciated 
of any of the types of literature used in the schools. 

It is due to the following causes: a. verse form, even 
for many intelligent and cultivated adults, is a power¬ 
ful distractor. b. poetry implies an approach to life 
which is contrary to that used in daily experience, 
c. poetry is out of harmony with the main intellectual 
movements of the last century. These imply an analy¬ 
tical, critical, essentially prose approach to experi¬ 
ence. d. figurative language creates double difficulty. 
The slow pupil cannot grasp the figure. The bright 
pupil, if his aesthetic development has been neglected, 
may find the figure absurd.” ... Young people generally 
have no aesthetic appreciation. They approach litera¬ 
ture with the same critical standards that they would 
apply to a situation in life. This is indicated by ... 
the prevalence of either predetermined or erratic 
responses to poetry, responses based on a false reading 
of the poem often influenced by the effect of personal 
experience. There is a tendency toward passing arbi¬ 
trary judgments and making choices for preference on 
the supposed moral worth of the character portrayed. 

Certain other writers of children’s books deserve 
mention here. Barnes writes as follows concerning poetry 
for children. w It is not difficult to generalize concerning 
the themes suitable for children’s poetry. J?'rom the very 
fact that it is for children, certain aspects of life inter¬ 
esting to older people must be eliminated. The mysteries of 
mortal existence, the baffling tragedies of humanity, the 
subjective, the philosophical, the psychological — much of 


Kangley, op. cit ., p.12. 
^ ibid , p.13* 





























• ■ « 








18 


that which makes up the power and the glory of poetry for 
men and women is unsuitable for children. On the other 
hand, children T s poetry will include many aspects of life 
to which grown-ups pay scant attention: sports and toys, 
animals and the simpler phases of nature, nonsense, home 
life, — lullabies, scenes and stories of youthful experi¬ 
ence, — . "^ He concludes: "Poetry for children is a spe¬ 
cial kind of poetry, as distinctive as pastorals, as son¬ 
nets, as humorous verse. It is neither higher nor lower 

37 

than other forms of poetry. It is merely different." 

In another study Barnes says: "Poetry for children should 
be, first and foremost, and throughout, excellent poetry, 
essentially and indubitably poetry; and it should be, secon¬ 
darily, but quite secondarily, poetry that is within the 
apprehension and the scope, the rather wide-flung scope, of 
children ! s interests. These are the two elements which 
enter into good poetry for children: poetry merit and chil- 
dren’s interests."' To clarify the latter he concludes: 

"I should discuss as a final criterion the appeal to chil¬ 
dren. Perhaps the shortest approach to the problem ... is 
the statement that poetry for children should present . 

■ . .. .— ■ ---—— ■— . ■ a— 

^ Walter Barnes, The children’s Poets, World Book Co,, 
Yonkers-on-Hudson, New lork, 1?24, p.6. 

37 ibid. (Introduction), p.l. 

3^ Walter Barnes, "Contemporary Poetry for Children," The 
English Review . Jan. 193&, p.3* 









* 









. 

. 














. 

' 

. 

■ 

. 

■ 

. . 

. ■ 

< 









19 


and should interpret the experiences of children* This 
principle enables us to eliminate at once all that poetry 
about children and childhood written from the retrospec¬ 
tive view-point of adults: Longfellow's "The Children's 

hour," Hood's "I Kemember,” and many other thoroughly 

39 

delightful poems.”^ 

The following conclusions were arrived at by Nor- 

vell: "What factors affect children's reading preferences? 

. (1) sex; (2) age, or maturity; ij>) intelligence; ^4) 

40 

special interest factors, as adventure, humor, etc., ... 

The data presented in this chapter suggest that for pupils 

in secondary schools, content and not reading difficulty 

41 

is a major determinant of reading interests.’ 1 He then 
states these findings: 

1. That girls like poetry decidedly better than do boys. 

2. That girls' tastes in poetry are more literary than 

42 

boys' tastes.” 

It is said that the committing to memory of poetry 
is the highest expression of appreciation. Tor this 
reason, Simpson's conclusions to her study are relevant. 

She has found that ”a piece of memory work is difficult 

59 Ibid ., p.7. 

George W. Norvell, The Reading Interests of Young Peo ple, 
JJ. u. Heath and go., Boston, Sew York, etc., iy^o, p.T4- 

41 xbid «> P* 2 7- 

42 Ibid., p.72. 















20 


for the average student in Grade IX if 

1. there are unfamiliar or unusual words. 

2. the lines are too long. 

3. it is trochaic rather than iambic. 

4. it is written in blank verse. 

3. there are more than eight lines in a stanza. 

6. it is in prose form instead of in verse form. 

7. the lines are of unequal length. 4 ^ 

A study of the agreement between poetry preferen¬ 
ces of school children and their teachers was conducted by 
Mackintosh in 1932. She summarized her study as follows: 

Four hundred poems were selected by the writer. 
Several groups of children in each of grades 3, 4, 3 
and 6 heard and rated all of the poems, or samplings 
containing fifty of the poems. Groups of children 
were found to be consistent in average rating of 
fifty poems when reread. ... The comparatively low 
agreement between teachers 1 and experimenter T s 
ratings and the childrens ratings indicate the pos¬ 
sibility of some bias on the part of the teachers 
and on the part of the experimenter. This condition 
seems to indicate the need for investigations in the 
field of childrens choices in reading, since the 
same element of bias may be expected to operate in 
the case of any individual who attempts to select 
material for children. 44 

The following statements are from Arbuthnot: 

Children may develop an antipathy for poetry, but 
if they have no unfortunate experience with it, they 
will continue to find it a special source of aesthetic 
satisfaction. In the first place, the swift movement 
of poetry - produced by rhythm and the metrical beat 


43 

^ Maimie b. simpson, “An Experiment in Memory Wor& the Ob¬ 
ject of which Has Been to Find Out What Constitutes a 
Difficult Passage of Memorization For the Average Grade 
IX Pupil 1 *, un published Bachelor of Education Thesis , 
University of Alberta, 1930, p.T/. - ~ 

44 H. K. Mackintosh, "A Critical btudy of Childrens Choices 
in Poe try, ” University of Iowa studies btud. Jdu c., 193 2, 

p. 128 . 










. * 

. 

« 

. 

- 











21 


of the lines - makes a universal appeal ... Lyrics 
with their singing quality may be as pleasing to 
children as the more easily enjoyed humorous verses 
with which they begin - if the content is within the 
range of their comprehension. Obscurity baffles 
them (as it does most adults), and they do not like 
grown-up moods of melancholy or resignation or any 
other form of defeatism. They need and enjoy poetry 
that i s up and doing, that swings along in a lively 
similitude of action, poetry that reassures and com¬ 
forts them, that arrests their attention with fresh 
ideas, such poetry can provide them with gaiety and 
beauty and. above all, a new kind of aesthetic sat¬ 
isfaction. 

Here, then, are some clues to the rather general 
prejudice against poetry: it is hard to read; it is 
often too long; it has not always been well represen¬ 
ted. We might as well face the issue frankly in order 
to see what we can do to avoid these unfortunate re¬ 
sults, and keep alive the child’s hearty and unself¬ 
conscious delight in hearing and saying poetry. 

Many children have learned to distrust the subject 
matter of poetry largely because of our blundering 
choice of selections for them. We have given them 
pedantic verse designed to teach manners or morals 
or, more recently, health....Then we have given the 
children poems that voice the philosophy of old age 
rather than that of exuberant childhood. ... If we 
are going to foster children’s natural liking for 
poetry we had better avoid these elderly daydreams 
and find selections that speak of the child’s world. 

We have also given children poetry whose meaning is 
obscure. ... A selection may be great literature, but 
if it leaves the children baffled and suspicious it 
is not good literature for them at that point. 

Abbott and Trabue have found that "children prefer 
verses without subtlety, objective in mood, easy to under¬ 
stand, and in simple, strongly-marked rhythms. Vigorously 
expressed feeling is the demand of the ... upper grades. 

43 " " — — ' “ *" 

Arbuthnot, op. cit .. p.2?. 

46 Ibid ,. p.l6l. 



























22 


Restraint, understatement, are not for them, nor the 
delicate adjustment of intensity of egression to the 
validity of its occasion. Their emotions are all sun¬ 
light and shadow .... Poetry of a vigorous, unrestrained, 
and emotional type ought to meet their moods, provided 
always that the emotion is valid; that it has its source 
in genuine feeling, not affectation.” * * * 4 * * ^ 

The progressive development of appreciation seems 
to be, according to Jagger’s conclusions, as follows: 

"Liking for rhythm is followed by the appeal to the sensu¬ 
ous imagination, in normal development, and the intellec- 

48 

tual and reflective qualities in poetry appeal last.” 

Regarding the possible influence of mental ability 
on the ability to state valid reasons for poetry preference, 
Shachtman has found that mental ability correlates more 
highly with ability to judge poetry than do any of the 
elements of English tested. Given pupils of a certain 
mental ability, there is a positive correlation between 
comprehension of literary passages and ability to judge 
poetry. 

In a comprehensive study of children’s interests 

4 7 Allan Abbott and M. R. Trabue, "A Measure of Ability to 

Judge Poetry 11 , Teachers College Record . March 1?21, p.123. 

Jagger, op. cit .« p.2?9. 

4 ? Joseph Shachtman, ’’Elements of English Related to the 

Judgment of Poetry in Grade XI,n Teachers College Record, 

vol. 31, p.262. 
































. 

' 






. 






















.. 

. 

* . . 


















25 


in poetry, Huber, Bruner, and Curry"* 0 broke away from the 
traditional method employed in determining what poems 
children should be taught. Instead of considering the 
subjective opinions of teachers of poetry, they asked 
pupils from Grades II to IX to tell, on the basis of the 
study, which of a large number of poems they liked or dis¬ 
liked. .Among the findings from this survey are: 

1. Didactic, moralizing poetry is ranked very low. 
("The Quality of Mercy is Not Strained..." was 
placed 52nd of 52 poems, by Grade IX pupils.) 

2. Sentimentalizing poetry about likeable people 
is ranked high. ("Somebody's Mother" was placed 
first of 49 poems, by Grade VI pupils.) 

5« There is no discrimination against modern poetry 
as such, provided it meets other, preferred stan¬ 
dards. 

4. The most common reason for the rejecting of a poem 
is the immaturity of the child to understand it. 

5# The majority favor the simple and the obvious. 

6. There are marked differences found between pupil 
and pupil. 

7. Highest rank is given to: 

i. obvious sound effect; 

ii. commonplace subject matter; 

iii. obvious humor. 

8. Lowest rank is given to: 

i. straight didactic, 
ii. complex imagery. 

9 . Most poems are liked much better in certain grades 
than in others. 

It is perhaps fitting to conclude with the findings 
in Kangley’s study, since her work most nearly parallels 
that of this investigator in purpose and results. Below 
are her conclusions: 


Miriam B. Huber, Herbert B. Bruner & Charles M. Gurry, 
Children f s Interests in Poetry . Hand, McNally & Go., 
Chicago, -1927, Part II, Results of the Experiment, p.65. 




■ 

* 







fl 









? 


? 






- 

♦ 



















24 


1. Simplicity was an extremely important factor in 
influencing preferences. In the reasons stated 
for selecting a poem as least liked ... a failure 
to understand was operative in almost a fourth of 
the choices. ... It appears that children prefer 
material that is below what is ordinarily thought 
to be their comprehension level. 

2. Specific subject matter was definitely important 
as a factor in influencing choices. Over 147* of 
all reasons given for preference were classifiable 
under some type of subject matter appeal. ... Ap¬ 
parently what a poem was about was of primary sig¬ 
nificance to these children. 

3. Story interest was fairly significant as an in¬ 
fluence on choices. This is closely related to 
subject matter. 

4. Pronounced rhythm. 

3. Rhyme. 

6. Ethical import. 

7. The tastes of a small minority ran counter to the 
tastes of the majority. ... That a poem was sad, 
or quiet, or imaginative was a defect in it in the 
opinion of the majority but a virtue in the opin¬ 
ion of the minority. 

8. There appeared to be little observable difference 
in direction of tastes between children of low, 
average, and high ability, but there was a marked 
difference in the power to formulate reasons for 
preference. 

9. Most outstanding characteristics of best-liked 
poems: clear rhyme scheme; relatively simple; 
dialogue, obvious sound effect; descriptive de¬ 
tail; story element; funny; relates to common 
experience. 

10. Most outstanding characteristics of least-liked 
poans: ethical import; mood of melancholy; rela¬ 
tively difficult; feeling of movement or action; 
imagery. 

11. Comparisons between the sexes suggest that the girls 
more nearly approximate developed adult taste than 
do the boys.^i 


^ Kangley, on. cit ., pp.117-121. 








CHAPTER III 


PLAN AND DEblUi\! 


PURPOSE OF THE STUDY 

This study has the following aims: 

1* To construct an adequate test of preferences in poetry, 
designed to ^.low the poetry preferences of junior high 
school pupils and the reasons for these preferences. 

2. To use this test : 

i. to assess the poetry preferences of junior high 
school pupils and the reasons for their prefer- 
enc es; 

ii. to compare, on the basis of sex, grade, and age 
group, the poetry preferences of junior high 
school pupils; 

iii. to determine the elements of poetry that appeal 
most strongly to junior high school pupils; 

iv. to determine what constitutes suitable poetry for 
junior high school pupils. 

LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 

This study is neither definitive in its findings 
nor exhaustive in its scope. The results should be consi¬ 
dered as indications only, for the following reasons: 

1. Participating schools were relatively few in number; 














> 














* 















. 
















. 










, 


















26 


were not randomly chosen, and included no city schools. 

2. Participating pupils read the poetry selections silently, 
during a regular classroom period of thirty-five minutes, 
and indicated their preferences and dislikes in accor¬ 
dance with instructions given on the cover of the poetry 
booklet. Had the poems been read to them, preferences 
might have been somewhat different. (One teacher repor¬ 
ted his class as saying afterwards: "Why didn T t you read 
them to us? We would have chosen differently.") It was 
not required that the suggested time limit be strictly 
adhered to; one teacher reported that certain pupils 
seemed to be concerned more with finishing quickly than 
with careful reading, while conscientious pupils used 
more than the suggested time, further, one teacher ex¬ 
pressed the opinion that some pupils might have been in¬ 
fluenced to give "rhyme" or "rhythm", or "I don f t under¬ 
stand it" as reasons, since these were stated for illus¬ 
trative purposes in the instructions, rather than search 
their minds for more fitting reasons. The investigator 
should have kept in mind that pupils are often easily 
suggestible. 

3. The r easoning of some pupils was of such an ambiguous 

or irrelevant nature as to preclude classification under 
the several headings used for this purpose. Answers such 
as "It f s stupid. f " may reflect the tendency of adolescents 


. 























































■ 










* 







* 








■ 











' 




























































* 

' 










































• 






























27 


to be positive in their statements, but they usurp the 
place of better reasons. 

4. Poems were chosen by the investigator, with the approval 
of the thesis committee, on the basis of technique and 
subject matter. As exact a grouping as possible was at¬ 
tempted, even though the complex nature of poetry makes 
discrete classification impossible. Not all poems were 
found to be typical of the group in which they were 
placed. The groups involved yielded indecisive results 
when examined for pupil preferences. Narrative poems, 
known to be liked by junior high school pupils, were not 
included in the booklet because they are too long and 
because short extracts from them would give only a frag¬ 
mentary meaning and thus prejudice true preferences. 
Ballads and sonnets were two other types omitted from 
the preference study. 

3 * The booklet of poems was somewhat long. Pupil interest 

may have waned. To the extent that reading of poems might 
have become tedious, the sincerity of some pupils® answers 
may be questionable. 

PLAN OP PROCEDURE 

For the purpose of conducting this investigation into 
poetry preferences of certain junior high school pupils, the 
following procedures were used: 






. 


. 








28 


1. A number of poems, or excerpts from poems, were gathered 
into a test booklet of seventeen pages.A 

2. Pupil preference on each page was made from a group of 
two, three, or four poems or excerpts having a common 
feature, such as rhythm or topic, rather than from seve¬ 
ral artificially reconstructed poems and the original. 

3. The poems and excerpts used were chosen by the investi¬ 
gator and approved of by the thesis committee, and were, 
as far as possible, of recognized literary merit. 

4. Poems and excerpts used represented a variety of form 
and subject matter. 

5. Poems and excerpts were, as far as possible, unknown to 
participating pupils. 

6. Poems and excerpts used were neither too simple nor too 
difficult for average junior high school pupils. 

7# The statement of preference was the sole responsibility 
of the pupils who were asked to indicate by number, in 
spaces provided belay each group, which poem or excerpt 
was liked most, which least, arid to state their reasons 
for preference or dislike. 

8. Choice of schools whose pupils were to participate in 

the poetry preference survey was made by the investigator. 
In order that some geographical representation of 

& 


A copy of the poetry preference booklet is included as the 
Appendix of this stud. 



. 

* 

. 

* 










■ 










1 


•- 

0 








* 










29 


Alberta junior high schools would be effected, the 
following schools were chosen: 



Location 

Type of school 

Grades 

1 . 

Alix 

Village Consolidated 

VII, 

VIII 

2 . 

Amisk 

Village 

VII, 

VIII 

3. 

Beilis 

Village 

VII, 

VIII 

4. 

Chipman 

Village 

VII, 

VIII 

3. 

Coronation 

Town School 

VII, 

VIII 

6 . 

Daresbury 

Ungraded (rural) 

VII, 

VIII 

7. 

Donalda 

Village Consolidated 

VII, 

VIII 

8 . 

Edberg 

Camrose S.D. Centralized 

VII, 

VIII 

9. 

Hay Lakes 

Camrose S.D. Centralized 

VII, 

VIII 

10 . 

Huwen 

Ungraded (rural) 

VII, 

VIII 

11 . 

Kingman 

Camrose s.D. Centralized 

VII, 

VIII 

12 . 

Lamont 

Village 

VII, 

VIII 

13. 

Meeting creek 

Camrose S.D. Centralized 

VII, 

VIII 

14. 

Norbo 

Ungraded (rural) 

Town School 

VII, 

VIII 

13. 

Olds 



16 . 

Paulus 

Ungraded (rural) 

VII, 

VIII 

1 ?. 

Ponoka 1 

Town School 



18 . 

Rosalind 

Camrose s.D. Centralized 

VII, 

VIII 


TABLE I 


A GLASSIFICATION, ON THE BASIS. Oif GRADE AND SEX, 
OF THE PUPILS PARTICIPATING IN THIS STUDY 


GRADE 

BOYS 

GIRLS 

TOTAL 

VII 

51 

68 

125 

VIII 

66 


125 

IX 

60 

84 

144 

TOTAL 

185 

211 

594 


Table I shows a breakdown, on the basis of grade 
and sex of the pupils participating in this study. 


mmH a hhhhhhhhhh 



















: . 










« 


: 






' 

■ 

. 

. . 








. 














































50 


As to the most effective means of presenting the 
poems to the pupils, three possibilities suggested them¬ 
selves. The first was to have each classroom teacher whose 
pupils were talcing part in the study read the poems to them 
in accordance with a uniform, predetermined procedure. ‘This 
method was decided to be unsuitable for the reason that too 
many differences in presentation, due to differences in the 
teachers' reading abilities and preconceived attitudes to¬ 
wards the poems, would interfere with the desired unifor¬ 
mity of procedure. Jagger says: 

The poet T s intention, in writing or reading his 
poem, is that the same poetic experience shall be 
revived in the reader’s mind. To read a poem is to 
recreate it with the same degree of intensity. Such 
an act of revival, if performed perfectly, could only 
be performed by an ideal reader, by one whose mood is 
attuned, whose imagination is alive, whose cnriousity 
is alert, who understands what poetry is, and who com¬ 
prehends the words of the poem. More than this, his 
experience would have to coincide with that of the 
poet, as would his emotional sensitivity, and his 
rhythmic quality, and his power to feel the associa¬ 
tion of words. — But such a reader does not exist; 
no two persons have had exactly the same experience, 
and none feel the associations of words in exactly the 
same way. The appreciation of a poem can, in the nature 
of things, be only an approximation, even when the rea¬ 
der is best fitted to appreciate it.52 

A second method, the one used by Kangley in her 
study of poetry preferences of junior high school pupils, 
would be to use a "trained reader" to read, as uniformly as 
possible, all of the poems to all of the pupils in the vari¬ 
ous schools participating in this study. For practical 


52 


Jagger, op. cit ., pp.32-33- 






- 


e 

. 


. 

. . 






31 


reasons this plan also was not used. No "trained reader" 
could be found who would have been able to travel rather 
widely in order to read uniformly to the pupils. Theoreti¬ 
cally, too, it is questionable if even an expert in reading 
would read a large number of poems in precisely the same 
fashion again and again. Only a gramophone record could do 
that. Jagger also says: 

As poetry existed before the art of writing began, 
it was originally meant to be heard. It does not fol¬ 
low that poetry is meant to be read aloud only, . 

The fact that sound is more important in poetry than 
in prose does not even warrant the conclusion that 
poetry is meant to be read aloud, for it is possible 
that imagined sound is superior as a poetic vehicle 
to sound which is heard."53 

Is not this what Keats meant when he wrote "Heard 
melodies are sweet, but those unheard are sweeter..."? 
Further, Arbuthnot claims that 

A child does not know consciously that he likes 
the sound or pattern of a poem until he has heard it 
often enough for it to be tucked away in his mind, 
as a whole, or even in bits. Then, as he says those 
singing words over to himself, he begins to under¬ 
stand them. "54 

It was therefore decided to use a third method, 
namely, to let the pupils read the poems silently. A number 
of points seem to bear out the justification for using this 
method. Diltz says that 1,1 poetic experience 1 is initiated 
by the reading of a poem, and is shaped by its contemplation, 

53 Jagger, on. cit ., p.204. 

54 May Hill Arbuthnot, Ghildren and Books , Scott, Foresman & 
Go., New York, 1947, p.133. 

















* 


■ 










, 

* 




























. 


• • • 

• • 




















32 


but it belongs in its essence to the reader."55 Jagger ob¬ 
serves that "the study of children f s preferences yields the 
most valuable results, but it is difficult, because children 
are very suggestible, and are not often able to explain what 
it is that pleases them in a poem."5^ It would seem reason¬ 
able to suppose that an aural presentation of a poem to a 
child is more likely to influence his attitude towards it 
than a visual presentation. 

In reality, the deciding factors in the appreciation 
of a poem are probably the intelligence and the previous ex¬ 
perience of the pupil. Poetic experience is subjective and 
personal; onljr a pupil*s reading of a poem to himself would 
give him the particular meaning or feeling that would con¬ 
stitute the basis for his preference or dislike. Baker 
says that "nobody has learned to read poetry until he can 
hear the words as they would be spoken, even though he is 
reading silently. 6o the trained musician hears the music 
as he reads the score. "57 It would seem to require a cer¬ 
tain degree of intelligence to be able to do that. 1 While 
the primary appeal of poetry is to the emotions, it is to 
the intellect in scarcely lesser degree, since poetry must 
be built around subjects or ideas which require intelligent 

55 Diltz, o p. cit ., p.43* 

5° dagger, op. cit., p.22Jj>. 

57 Franklin !. Baker, "Studies in Appreciation," Teachers 
College Record . Oct. 1?26, pp. 122-123. 








* 

♦ 


* 

* . ' , . 

- 

















‘ 

■ 


< ■ • ■ 

. 







33 


interpretation before there is any stirring of the emotions. 
It is interesting to note here that Kangley is of the opin¬ 
ion that "the child in junior high school is intellectually 
close to the average man, although without his background of 
experience, either social or emotional."^® 

When the completed preference booklets were returned 
to the investigator, the pupils' choices were recorded as 
follows: to differentiate among grades, Grade VII data were 
recorded in green, Grade VIII data in orange, and Grade IX 
in red; to differentiate between the sexes, a "plus" sign 
was used to record the data for the boys, a small "zero" 
sign to record the data for the girls. 

In accordance with the system just described all 
preferences, dislikes, and reasons given by the pupils of 
the participating schools were compiled for each group of 
poems. Lists were then completed showing, for each grade, 
both the actual number and the per cent of boys and girls 
who had stated preferences and dislikes for various poems. 
Totals by grades and sex and grand totals were also recor¬ 
ded. Because of the multiplicity of reasons given, these 
were copied separately and then classified according to 
specified common factors. 

As an aid in presenting the data and understanding 
the findings, a number of tables were prepared. Certain 

is 


Kangley, op. cit ., p.17-18. 






. 

. 

. ■ . . . : ■ . . . 7 . ■ 7 ■ . ■ ■ ■ .. Xo 

v 

■ ... 

• ' - ' . . .. ... . ,.... v ... ■ .. : ,, 4. ... £>-, , , 7 . jr 


* . 

■ 


- 














• e 

- 

. 

• ■ 
















34 


obvious trends in poetry preferences of junior high school 
pupils were thus made more easily discernible. In conclu¬ 
sion, a summarizing table was prepared to give an overview 
of the most significant reasons for preferences and dis¬ 
likes as stated by the pupils. Some recommendations were 
also suggested. 



CHAPTER IV 


PRESENTATION OF THE DATA 


For the sake of clarity and simplicity, the data de¬ 
rived from this study are presented in tabular form. The 
preferences and dislikes of the pupils for the poems of the 
various groups, together with the reasons stated, are given 
in a separate table for each group of poems. Pertinent com¬ 
ments and references are given after each table. In each 
table, too, the first three reasons for poems preferred and 
disliked are given. 

TABLE II 


FINDING-S RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUT I (TOPIC: SNOW) 


POEMfc 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

abcb 

trochaic 

trimeter 

32“/° 

rhythm - 3?% 
rhyme - 28 % 
easy to 
understand 

- 8% 

87 . 


2. 

aabb 

dactylic 

(irreg.) 

1270 


28 % 



blank 

iambic 

pen¬ 

tameter 

67 . 


647 . 

hard to 
understand 

- 57% 
rhyme - 17 % 
rhythm - 17 % 


^ 1. "Falling Snow" - Anon. 

2. "Snow Towards Evening" - M. Cane 
3# "The Snowstorm" - R. W. Emerson 


































. 










< 










. 
































. 
































« 


* 


. 




















% 

ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POT4T8 (VF 

group i (table ii): 

A study of Table II reveals that the first poem was 
easily the favorite, whereas the third was preponderantly 
disliked by the pupils. The reasons given confirm the find¬ 
ings of previous investigators; namely, that pupils prefer 
the simple and the obvious in rhythm and rhyme, and that 
commonplace subject matter is preferred rather than complex 
imagery. Although to adults the imagery suggested in the 
second poem seems apt and beautiful, it would be a mistake 
to assume that it is so to junior high school pupils. Only 
one pupil out of 48 who gave reasons for preferring this 
poem said she did so because ,! it gives you a mental picture. n 
The most common reasons given for rejecting both poems 2 and 
3 were that "it T s hard to understand; it doesn't explain; it 
doesn't tell anything.” This seems to indicate a rather 
common lack of ability to visualize and interpret a metaphor, 
or simply to understand poetic language and construction. On 
the other hand, 1? pupils found it easier to "see" the snow 
fall in the simple, direct description of poem 1. Some typi¬ 
cal comments were: "You can see the snow; it f s vivid; reminds 
me of the first snowfall; I like watching the snowflakes." 
Arbuthnot says: "The fact that children enjoy marked rhythms 
and crisp rhymes accounts for their ready acceptance of sec¬ 
ond rate verse if it has these characteristics. Good taste 







. 

. 





















. 


















: 



































37 


in any field — music, interior decorating, clothes, poetry 
— is a matter of experience. So we should be patient with 
children's enjoyment of poor poetry. Their taste will im¬ 
prove if they are given experience with good poetry."-^ 
Barnes concurs: ’’Children care most for that verse which 
is marked by the uninterrupted, never-varying recurrence 
of strongly stressed syllables. Later, if the sense of 
rhythm is developed, the ear takes pleasure in ritards and 
accelerandos,... ”^0 That this sense of rhythm remains 
largely undeveloped in many adults was shown by Richards^ 1 
in an experiment with ’’superior” college students. He found 
that these students had an exaggerated respect for rhyming 
ability; they too had the notion that great regularity was 
a merit in poetry.” MeGookin concludes his study by saying 
that ’’pupils reveal their lack of maturity to some extent 
at least by their too great dependence upon rhyme and rhythm 

c p 

in the preferring of poems. 

Knowing then that rhythm and rhyme are indispensable 
factors in poetry for children, we can understand why poem 
3 was rejected by so many because of its lack of rhyme. 
Seventeen per cent of all reasons given for liking this poem 

^ Arbuthnot, on. cit .. pp*13?-l60. 

Barnes, The Children’s Poets , op. cit., p.24. 

Reported by Kangley, op. cit ., p.!23« 

62 MeGookin, on. cit .. p. 27 . 




















- 




• .■■ . v . • 


. 

c 

* 















e 









* 














58 


least were that there was no rhyme; another seventeen per 
cent, that the rhythm was poor. Only one pupil preferred 
the rhythm and one the rhyme. One found it "easy to under¬ 
stand.” Barnes says that "blank verse is never employed, 
and free verse, though frequently used by child poets, 
seems not to be suitable for child-readers."*^ 

It is rather surprising, however, that 8j> pupils, 
or 577° of all those stating a reason, did not like the 
poem on the ground that they found it "hard to understand", 
since it deals with an experience that must certainly be 
familiar to Alberta school children. Perhaps some of these 
pupils were distracted from the topic in that they vainly 
looked for the expected rhythm and rhyme. Fourteen pupils 
did not like the description of the coming of snow. "To me", 
wrote one, "snow comes quietly, not announced by a trumpet 
or a clap of thunder." Fight pupils, on the other hand, 
liked the poem most because of the description. "It is like 
the winters we have here; it seems so real to be shut in a 
warm house in a storm", were several of their comments. The 
fact that a poetic description may elicit a favorable res¬ 
ponse from one person and its opposite from another seems to 
be a matter of the relative capacities to use the imagination. 
Abbott states, 

The basis of imagination is, of course, the power 
^ Barnes, Contemporary Poetry for Children , op. cit .« p.7 













39 


to recall, and to suggest to others, vivid sensory 
images; and this power, in turn, rests on sharp and 
vivid perceptions* ... Poetry is real to us only 
when our imagination becomes quickened, when we be¬ 
gin to form for ourselves images that the poet does 
not specifically give us.^ 


TABLE III 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP II (TOPIC: ANTMALS. ) 


POEMfc 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

abaab 

ababab 

abaab 

iambic 

tetram. 


rhythm - 2<?% 
rhyme - 207<> 
"idea", 
subject- 17% 

137° 


2. 

abab 

cdcd 

dactyl. 

hexam. 

277° 


307. 


3. 

blank 

verse 

irreg. 

177° 


377° 

hard to 
understand 

- 28% 

distasteful 
subject- 21% 
rhythm - 12% 


1* "Green Moth” - if. Welles. 
2. "The Hawk" - A. Benson* 
"Bats" - D. Lawrence. 


, Q F, 

MQ^II I III: 

The "animal" poems in Group II were chosen because 
of the fact that they are not about familiar domestic animals, 
and because it was thought they would reveal sex differences 

64 Abbott, "The Imaginative Element In Poetry,” Teachers 

College Record . Oct. 1?26, pp. 105 and 110. 






































. 

. 










,, . 

■ « 





40 


with respect to either liking or disliking poems about un¬ 
usual or even repugnant creatures. Such differences were 
fairly strongly indicated. Of 220 pupils who chose "Green 
Moth" as the most liked poem, 76 were boys and 144 were 
girls. Conversely, 73 boys but only 33 girls expressed their 
preference for "The Hawk". The poem "Bats", because of its 
free verse style, was decisively rejected by both boys and 
girls: 177® liked it most, 377® liked it least. 

It will be seen that rhythm, rhyme, and "idea" or 
subject, were given as the three most frequent reasons for 
preferring "Green Moth". Slightly less than 10°A of all 
reasons given mentioned what would seem to adult readers 
the significant feature about this poem, namely, the mood 
or emotion that It evokes. Of 22 pupils who gave this 
reason, 17 were girls. They used such expressive comments 
as "It T s soothing; mysterious; very soft and still; dreamy; 
shows how pretty a moth can be." But several pupils did not 
like the poem because It was "too still; not real;" or be¬ 
cause "I don f t ever think of a moth like that." Two boys 
liked "Green Moth" most because they "could imagine it;" 
but a girl liked the poem least because "my imagination 
cannot extend that far". It Is interesting to note that the 
reason for preference by one pupil may also be the very rea¬ 
son for dislike of the same poem by another. 

This poem about the child and the moth is considered 


. ■ ; .. 

. t 

t . • . 

c 


5 

: 

. 

. 

; 

' 

■ 


41 


one of the finest examples of that perfect blend of realism 
and fantasy which to younger children is a delightful imagi¬ 
native adventure. Children in the junior high school grades 
are probably too advanced in years to appreciate it fully. 
McGookin, commenting upon the Wisconsin Survey by Professor 
Uhl in his iSlementary School Course in Reading , says: 11 As 
the developing child comes to better understand reality, i.e., 
as his experiences become clarified and organized, his imagi¬ 
nary world recedes.”^ 

The poem, ’’The Hawk”, containing as it does a des¬ 
cription of the food-getting habits of this predatory bird, 
appealed to 63 boys who gave reasons for liking it most, but 
to only 29 girls. Conversely, only 37 boys but 6 7 girls 
gave reasons for liking it least. The boys liked ’’The Hawk* 1 
because it was ”exciting; adventurous”; ”it gives you thrills; 
I like to see large birds fly and swoop; concerns Nature and 
its balance being kept by hawks*’♦ The girls, on the other 
hand, said ”1 don T t like hawks; too cruel”; and, somewhat 
ambiguously "it’s not a nice poem”. 

The free verse of the poem, "Bats”, caused the greater 
number of pupils to like it least of the poems in this group. 
Of 200 reasons given for not liking it, 36 said that it was 
’’hard to understand”, 22 said it had no rhyme, and 23 objec¬ 
ted to the lack of rhythm. Forty-two pupils did not like the 

^ J. Y. McGookin, op. cit.. p.62. 











: • . 


* 






« 

' • e 


* . 




■ 





■ 










: 















• • • . . 














42 


subject: "I don't like bats; I'm scared of bats 11 . Of 59 
reasons given for preferring the poem, 31 were for the idea 
or subject, expressed as follows by some pupils: “it's 
about nature and birds; my hatred for bats; I don't like 
bats and that's the way I feel about them". It will be 
noted again that some pupils preferred this poem for the 
same reason that others rejected it* 

The following are pupil expressions relating to a 
form of poetry with which they are evidently scarcely fami¬ 
liar: "too complicated; lines uneven; sentences uneven; all 
mixed up; clumsy verse; sentences have no relation to one 
another.” The question naturally arises in one's mind as 
to the advisability of teaching free verse to children. 
Abbott replies: "Shall we teach free verse? By all means, 
if sufficient sense of rhythm has been developed to enable 
students to catch its more concealed movement. 


66 


Allan Abbott, "Rhythm in Poetry", Teachers College Record, 
March 1927 , p. 689 . 












45 


TABLE IV 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POIMS OF GROUP III (PRAISE OF GOD.) 


PO Mt 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

aabb 

trochaic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

5 n 

rhythm - 277* 
rhyme - 24% 
thought- 18 % 

n 


2 . 

aabba 

dactylic 

penta¬ 

meter 

257 . 


32 % 


5. 

abcabc 

dbcdc 

trochaic 

iambic 

187 . 


59% 

hard to 
understand 

- 42% 
rhyme - 12% 
rhythm - 11% 


a 1. "Let Us With a Gladsome Mind" - I. Watts. 

2. "Praise to the Lord" - J. Neander (Translation). 
5. "Pied Beauty" - G. M. Hopkins. 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POaiS OF 

GROUP III (TABLE IV) : 

Since these poems have as their common topic praise 
and thanks to God, pupils’ choices were expected to be made 
on the basis of structure and expression. The first poem is 
simple and regular, the second, dactylic and irregular in 
length of line, while the third is certainly too mature for 
the understanding of the average snhool child, not only in 
thought but in form as well. 

Arbuthnot speaks of Watt’s hymns as ’’authentic poetry 
by any standard”, and adds: ’’Somewhere, in school or Sunday 



















44 


school or the home, children should sing this beautiful old 

■fjr 

hymn until they have it by heart. — Such hymns make a 

67 

centre of peace and encouragement for children 11 . 

Of 221 reasons given for preferring the hymn by 
Watts, 8l named the rhythm and 34 the rhyme. These were 
the right criteria, since the theme of each poem in this 
group is the same. Nevertheless, 32 pupils gave the idea 
or thought as basis for their preference. Their reasons, 
"tells what God does; makes you feel adoration and praise 
of God; 11 etc., are applicable to the other two poems as 
well. As in Group I, the simple and obvious structure of 
the first poem was the deciding factor for preference by a 
large majority of pupils. A small but significant number 
(3 out of 21 pupils) rejected the poem because of its repe¬ 
tition. This reason recurs from time to time. 

Interestingly, the more involved structure of the 
second poem, "Praise to the Lord", caused more pupils to 
state that the thought, or idea, was their reason for pre¬ 
ference. Only 16 of 84 reasons were given for rhythm, and 
13 for rhyme; but 36 reasons, or 43%, indicated a subject 
preference: "like a prayer; very reverent; descriptive of 
God's work; praise the Lord for everything." On the other 

^ Arbuthnot, op. cit .. £. 102 

* not the same as Poem 1 above, but "0 God Our Help in Ages 
Past". However, the idea expressed is applicable to poem 
1 as well. 

&& The word is not used here in a statistical sense. 




- - . 

' 

<■ 
















. 


. 


. 


■ 












■ 

- 


■ 







• « *. 


« 

. 























43 


hand, 44)® of the pupils liking this poem least found it dif¬ 
ficult, and another 117 ® criticized the line arrangement: 
"lines too long; each line is shorter or longer; sentences 
too long; not veiy long; sentence structure”. A girl in 
Grade VIII suggested that "there is some less showy way of 
saying thank you”. 

It was anticipated that a large number of pupils 
would reject "Pied Beauty”. 170 did so, of whom 88 found 
it ”hard to understand", 21 did not like the rhyme, and 19 
did not like the rhythm. Fight pupils objected to the com¬ 
plex imagery; "tells so many things in one breath; too many 
descriptions; speaking of too many things". Fifty-nine 
approved of this poem, several because of the multiplicity 
of things mentioned. They wrote: "it shows that God made 
all these beautiful things; full of colorful words; those 
are the things I am thankful for, I live on a farm and have 
freckles". It can be unhesitatingly said that the girl who 
so frankly wrote this last quotation truly appreciated the 
poem. Worth writes that "the perception of meaning in its 
accepted sense is not at all necessary to great enjoyment 

/ Q 

of a poem". Fitting, too, is Lamborn’s remark that "there 
are no poetical subjects — there are indeed no artistic 
subjects, for art can find and reveal an aspect of beauty in 

68 — —— — — 

Kathryn Worth, "Poetry and the Child", Atlantic Monthly, 

Sept. 1937, P.327. ““ 


























■ - | ■ ■ pU i 7 . 

* 

■ 










■ • .. 
















. 







■ 



■ ' 






L 





, 

* 












46 


everything that God has permitted to exist. It i s not the 
thing but the saying that moves us, not the matter but the 
manner of its presentation". ^ 


TABLE Y 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP IY (IRREGULAR FORMS) 


POEM& 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1. 

{ blank) 

irreg. 


descrip¬ 
tion - 1 ?% 
subject- 23 /o 
rhythm - 14% 

6% 


2, 

aabb 

abab 

abba 

iambic 

tetram.; 

iambic 

trimeter; 

dactyl. 

hexara. 


rhythm - 2?% 
rhyme - 28 % 
subject- 20% 

n 


3. 



Z% 



Can T t under¬ 
stand - 6o% 
misc, criti¬ 
cisms of 
form - 217 ® 
rhythm- ?% 
rhyme - 8% 


1. "Moonrise" (The Squatter) - Sir C. Roberts, 

2. "The Pike" - E. Blunden. 

3« "Sunset" 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TQ THE POEMS OF 

GROUP "IY (TABLE V) : 

The irregular poems of Group IY relate to topics found 
^ Lamborn, op, cit ., p.12 























47 


elsewhere in the poetry booklet. The purpose of this group 
is to check on the consistency of choices made previously 
by the pupils. 

From the table, it is seen that the third poem was 
almost completely rejected. Oddly, preferences were almost 
equally divided between the first and second: 187 of 383 
pupils preferred the poem "Moonrise", and 186 preferred the 
poem "Pike”. 

One hundred and seventy-nine pupils gave reasons 
for liking most the poem •’Moonrise". Ten of these said that 
they liked the rhyme. They did not see that there isn T t any 
rhyme. Here, as elsewhere, a number of pupils were prone to 
pick a common attribute of poetry, perhaps for lack of find¬ 
ing better reasons, without discriminating whether such an 
attribute is contained in the particular selection. The 
majority, 67 , or 37% of all who gave reasons, liked the poem 
because of the description. Some comments were: "tells how 
the moon rises; beauty in the moon; gives the clearest pic¬ 
ture". On the other hand, five of seventeen pupils liking 
the poem least criticized the description: "I can f t get a 
picture; it isn’t humped, red, and remote". 

The poem, "Pike", was given 163 reasons for prefer¬ 
ence. Of these, 48 choices were for rhythm, and 46 for 


rhyme. Thirty-two reasons were given for the story: "tells 
of my interest In sport; I like poems with streams; the use 


. 

' 

. 

t ' 

. 

. 

. 

i ■ ' 

, 

• • • ' • 

. 

* ; - ■ ' 1 ■ I 

« 


- 




; 







48 


of colors to describe things seems to take away from the 
slaughter”• Of 26 reasons for liking the poem least, 14 
related to difficulty in understanding it: "I don T t know 
what kind of animal, bird, or insect he is talking about". 
Several others criticized the unusual verse construction. 

There were seven reasons offered for preference of 
the poem "Sunset". Most of these were trivial and irrele¬ 
vant: "it T s short, not too long; rhythm; rhyme; easy to 
understand". One reason gave this description: "The winds 
how they drag the sea". It may be that the connotation of 
this expression caught the imagination of this particular 
pupil. There were 277 reasons for liking this selection 
least. 162 pupils could not understand it. It Is probably 
safe to say, neither could the other 240 who read the poem. 

The latter were too puzzled or frustrated to set down their 
thoughts. 41 pupils called the poem "odd; silly; a misprint; 
scattered; no good; not complete; out of order; not finished; 
too modern; all chopped up; not all there; not wrote good 
enough; just a list of words;" etc. They said, "it T s nowhere 
near a poem; it don’t sound right; don’t know what he is 
talking about; it doesn’t make sense". For the purpose of 
obtaining the reaction of junior high school pupils to this 
type of writing it was in order to,have presented the poem 
to them. Care should be taken, however, not to give them 
poetry that is so obviously beyond their level of understanding, 










* 






« 

. 

. 

' 




; 



* 

. 


- 

• : - ; \ . . V 

















* 











4 ? 


since that can only result in creating a distaste for poetry 
in general. 


TABLE VI 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP V (MISCELLANEOUS). 


POEM* 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

blank 

verse 

irreg. 

6% 


31 % 

hard to 
understand 

- m 

rhythm - 147* 
rhyme - 14 7« 
thought- 147* 

2. 

aabb 

iambic 

tet¬ 

rameter 

34% 


n 


3. 

abaacb 

dactyl. 

irreg. 

147* 


30 % 


4. 

aaa 

bbb 

iambic 

tetra- 

dimeter 

46% 

thought- 367 * 
rhythm - 237° 
rhyme - 167 * 




^ 1* "Gone - A Day" - Elizabeth Stix ("Three Moments") 

2. "On Nature" - Davies. 

3. "Rilloby Rill" - Newbolt. 

4. "Truant" - Lieberman. 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POEMS OF 

GROUP V (’TABLE VI)-. 

The reason for having grouped the four poems above 
is not so apparent as it should be. Pupils were faced with 
the problem of making choices with no clues as to similarity 
of form or subject matter. 





















































- 









* 








- 




* 

















* 





30 


The poem, "Gone - A Day", abstrusely and pessimis¬ 
tically looks upon the inexorable passage of time. As ex¬ 
pected, the majority of pupils rejected it. Of 139 reasons 
given, the rhythm, the rhyme, and the thought each were 
mentioned nineteeen times. Forty-six pupils found the poem 
"complicated; hard to understand”; or said that it ”doesn T t 
explain; doesn f t say much; doesn’t tell enough”. Sixteen 
more pupils called it "dull; uninteresting; silly; not 
clear". This is definitely not the kind of poem that junior 
high school children can understand or appreciate. Of this 
type Kangley says: "In poems that tend to be somewhat static 
in effect, the life of thought and feeling rather than the 
life of action is portrayed. Their appeal is to the medita¬ 
tive reader, - consequently it is not surprising that such 

70 

poems should appeal only faintly to children." 1 

Davies* poem, "On Mature", with its simple and 
regular metre and rhyme, was favored by 34% of all pupils. 
This was anticipated, in view of two similar occasions where 
the pupils preferred the easy and obvious forms of poetry. 

Of new interest is the fact that a majority of choices were 
in this case made on the basis of thought or subject dealt 
with. Rhythm and rhyme were the reasons for preference in 
267 ® and 13> of choices respectively; but topic, or subject, 
was the reason stated for preference in 437® of all instances. 


70 


Kangley, on. cit .. p.6l 








51 


Typical pupil comments were: "it makes you believe Nature is 

so beautiful; gives a warn feeling for spring; I like the 

farm; tells a lot about the life I’d like to lead”. There 

were 80 girls as compared with 54 boys who preferred this 

poem. Norvell has found that "Nature, as represented by 

flowers, birds, bees, and trees, has a greater appeal for 

71 

girls than for boys". 

It was rather surprising to find that the gay and 
sprightly poem, "Rilloby Rill", expressing the idea of ir¬ 
responsibly dancing and fiddling one’s time away, was pre¬ 
ferred by only 14% but rejected by 30% of the pupils. The 
rhythm and rhyme were given as reasons for preference in 
28 % and 20% of all cases, and the "jolly, humorous thought", 
in 13% of all cases. The large majority of those who did 
not like the poem criticized the subject matter: "I don’t 
like grasshoppers; it seems for Grade I; it’s stupid; no 
meaning; no humor;” and, as if dismissing this poem from his 
mind once and for all, one boy wrote: "It does not interest 
me in the least what a grasshopper does". These pupils seem 
to have missed the effect of rhythm upon subject matter to 
produce a mood of vivacious jollity. 

The fourth poem of this group, "Truant", received 
the largest number of preferences: 467«. 35% of the choices 

^ Norvell, op. cit ., p.68. 
















* 








. 

■ 

* 















- 








































* 


























52 


were made because of its subject: "love of nature; it f s 
abait nature"; but only 6 pupils (4%) experienced a feeling 
of empathy: "What I like to do; you feel like you’re with 
him; it puts you in". Seven pupils criticized the form of 
this poem: "too choppy; I don’t like the third line". The 
total preferences of this and Davies’ "On Nature" poem were 
80%, largely on the basis of subject matter. Obviously, a 
simple type of Nature poem is popular with junior high 
school pupils. 


TABLE VII 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP VI (AUTUMN) 


POEMA 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

abcb 

iambic 

tetra- 

trimeter 

417 . 

subject- 33% 
rhythm - 22% 
rhyme - 14% 

7% 


2. 

aabbcc 

iambic 

hepta¬ 

meter 

227 . 


21% 


3. 

aabbcc 

trochaic 
oeto- 
met er 

32 > 


297 . 


4. 

blank 

verse 

dactylic 

hexa¬ 

meter 

57 ° 


437 * 

hard to 
understand 

• 58% 
rhythm - 20% 
rhyme - 13% 


* 1. "October’s Bright Blue Weather" - H. H. Jackson. 
2. "The Death of the Flowers" - W. Bryant. 

5* "When the Frost is on the Punkin" - Riley. 

4. (from Evangeline) - Longfellow. 


















53 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE PCTOfi OF 

GROUP VI ('TABLE VII) : 

Since these poems deal with a common theme, the 
coming of autumn, preferences would presumably have been 
made on the basis of form, and of the mood evoked because 
of form and treatment of subject matter. 

It is noteworthy that the pupils indicated their 
preferences and dislikes decisively in the case of the first 
and fourth poems only; with regard to the second and third 
poems, the number who liked these least was almost the same 
as the number who liked them most. 

The topic, or subject, of the poem, "October T s Bright 
Blue Weather", was given in 337® of the reasons for preference. 
"I like autumn; I like October weather", were typical expres¬ 
sions. Curiously, six pupils were under the mistaken impres¬ 
sion that the poem was about June; they said: "I like June 
when it is nice and sunny; June is a nice month to make 
rhymes about; spring is coming”; etc. It seems that prefer¬ 
ence for a poem may sometimes result from a false interpreta¬ 
tion of it. 

The chief reasons for preferring the second poem 
were the rhyme ( 26 c /o), the description (237®), the rhythm 
(207®) • In spite of its melancholy nature, one pupil preferred 
it because it gave her "such a nice warm feeling", and another 
liked the' ! gay mood" of this poem. However, of those who ex¬ 
pressed reasons for liking it least, 317® correctly interpreted 





. 












■ 









t 














M 


the mood as one of "melancholy; gloom"; they said the poem 
was "sad; bleak; cheerless; cold; hopeless". One girl com¬ 
plained that "it didn’t say where the robin and the wren had 
flown"; and a boy had this horrible thought: "fall is the 
beginning of a new school term". iUight pupils (14> of those 
giving reasons) criticized the length of the lines: "too 
long for poetry". 

"When the Prost is on the Punkin", by James Whitcomb 
Riley, has for generations been an outstanding favorite of 
American school children. A similar poem by Riley ("Little 
Orphant Annie") was voted universally liked throughout the 

72 

grades by thousands of American school children. Huber, 

Bruner, and Gurry also say that "it is interesting to note 

that while Riley is the outstanding poet in children T s 

interests, with Longfellow second, nevertheless there are 

individual poems by both poets that children will not 
7 3 

tolerate". Arbuthnot remarks that "the tremendous popu¬ 
larity of James Whitcomb Riley’s humorous verse seems to be 

waning, although a few of his children’s poems persist in 

74 

most of our anthologies." In view of this somewhat contra¬ 
dictory evidence, it is not surprising to find that almost 
— “ —— - “ “ ~ 

Reported by Huber, Bruner, and Gurry, Children’s Interests 
in Poetry , Chicago, 1?27, p.66. 

75 Ibid*, P.6? 

74 Arbuthnot . op. cit. , p*?8. 










equally large numbers of reasons were given by Alberta 
school children both for liking the poem most and for liking 
it least. The dialect was the reason for preference eleven 
times; it was the reason for dislike ten times. However, 
“style and language 11 were criticized a further twelve times; 
“more like a story; too many T s for -ing"; while 29 pupils 
found this poem “hard to understand*'. The reason may be 
that Alberta pupils are not nearly so familiar with Riley f s 
dialect as American children are. Arbuthnot says: “Children 
generally like dialect. They like the dialect v/hen they hear 
it if they know what it means". A correct identification 
of dialect need not be a prerequisite for its enjoyment. 

One girl gave as the reason for preference: “very comical 
with the Negro accent". Right church, wrong pew! 

The excerpt from Evangeline was preferred only ten 
times. There were 128 reasons given for liking it least, 
of which again were that it was “hard to understand". 
Eight pupils called it “dull; uninteresting; stupidest thing 
I ever read". The findings of the third poem in Group I, 
and of the second poem in this Group, are here confirmed: 
pupils do not like a combination of blank verse and long 
lines, nor indeed either of these when they occur singly in 
a poem. 


^ Arbuthnot, op. cit ., p.6l 










TABLE VIII 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP VII (MISCELLANEOUS). 


POEMA 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

blank 

verse 

irreg. 

337. 

subject- 34% 
descrip¬ 
tion - 9% 

rhythm - 9% 

48?. 

subject- 237. 

feeling- 21% 
rhythm - 17% 

2. 

blank 

verse 

iambic 

dactylic 

irreg. 

347. 

subject, 
idea - 40% 

descrip¬ 
tion - 227. 
rhythm - 18% 

207. 


3. 

blank 

verse 

dactyl- 
anapae st 

337. 

subject- 447. 
rhythm - 12% 
descrip¬ 
tion 9% 

327. 



1. "Man and Bat" - D. H. Lawrence. 

2. "Winter Night" - M. Helm. 

3. "Spain" - J. Miles. 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POEMS OF 

GROUP VII (TABLE VIII) . 

Since the poems of Group VII are all in blank verse, 
pupils 1 choices would have to be made on the basis of subject 
matter, effective description, and power to evoke mental 
images, rather than on rhythm and rhyme* 

Preferences within this group were almost equally 
divided among the three poems. Furthermore, the subject 
matter dealt with was the most common reason for preference 
in all three poems. The first poem was the most decisively 

































- 






57 


disliked, also on the basis of subject or feeling. The 
second poem had not only a slight margin of preference, but 
also a decided margin in being the least disliked. In poem 
three, there was a sex difference of approximately two to 
one in favor of the Grade IX girls. Because of its greater 
free verse irregularity, the poem "Man and Bat" received the 
most outspoken criticism as far as form was concerned: "not 
like a poem; choppy, no order of lines; verses are scat¬ 
tered". This is in keeping with previous findings in Group 
II, Poem 3 and Group IV, Poem 3* 

"Winter Night" was preferred by those who could 
understand the personification implied: "the house snuggling 
down cosily in the snow; compares it with people; makes you 
feel comfortable". Others liked this poem least because 
they felt only the "cold winds and frozen snow", as one 
pupil expressed it. Kathryn Worth says: "The one indispen¬ 
sable element in the imaginative poetry is symbol, or meta¬ 
phor: direct or implied substitution of one object or idea 
for another. The symbol is the poem. ... Poetry can exist 

nC 

where neither rhyme, regular meter, nor message occur".' 

The poem "Spain" was given 102 reasons for prefer¬ 
ence. The story, or subject, was the reason for choice in 
44> of all cases. An anticipated sex preference in favor of 

n C 

' Worth, op, cit ., p.32b. 




. 

. ■ . . 












« 




. 


t '• 

... 

, ■ . 

. 

.. 




^8 


boys could not be found. Girls as well as boys were inter¬ 
ested in the bullfighters, bullfighting, and "the frightened 
eyes of bulls' 1 . Only one pupil mentioned the church as being 
part of the composite picture; one pupil called the poem !, a 
perfect picture of Mexico” - a justifiable error. 

Of 78 pupils who gave reasons for not preferring 
this poem, 417* said that it was “hard to understand”. This 
seems unusually high, since the words used are not intrin¬ 
sically difficult. A likely explanation is that many pupils 
could not grasp the imagery suggested by the descriptions 
and interpret it into meaningful pictures of Spain, because 
they lacked the reading background necessary for such inter¬ 
pretation. The connection between the padres, the bull¬ 
fighters, and the peasants was seemingly unapparent to them. 

A number of reasons stated were quite specific on this 
point: ”churches and bullfighting don't go together; it 
tells each time of different things; doesn f t seem to fit 
together”. These reasons compare with their opposites 
stated for preferring the poem: “keeps on the same line; 
sounds more complete than the others; the only poem that 
makes sense; good comparisons”. A preference or dislike of 
this poem seems to be a question of the power of imagery, 
correlated with intelligent background reading. It is no 
doubt also a matter of appealing to the pupils’ previous 
experiences. Perhaps that is why one boy justified his 


wm 









. ' • 

- 

. 

- 




■ 

. 


. 
































* 














i : 


















5 ? 


dislike of the poem by saying: "I don’t like about the bull ,, . 
Sussams^ reached the conclusion that "boys were troubled or 
antagonized by extravagant imagery, introspective mood, or 
absence of movement. They liked simple poems based on fami¬ 
liar experiences and were influenced by their own personal 
backgrounds. There was no indication that the boys applied 
any literary criteria in making choices". Kangley also has 
found that "it seems equally clear that they are interested 
in poetry that presents material which is commonplace in 
the sense that it deals with persons and events well withing 
the realm of their experience. ... If the image or images 
are not vividly realized, the poem is quite without meaning 

78 

to the reader". ... "The exotic type of material is 

liked, apparently, only when it is of a certain type and 

79 

when visually portrayed". ' 


Reported by Kangley, op. cit ., pp.6-12. 
Kangley, op. cit ., pp.^6, 6l. 

19 ibid., p.68. 











60 


TABLE IX 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POMS OF GROUP VIII (TROCHAIC METRE). 


POEM* 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

aabbcc 

trochaic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

467« 

rhythm - 3.5% 
rhyme - 26% 
subject- 217o 

21% 


2. 

abab 

trochaic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

44% 

subject- 30% 
rhythm - 217* 
rhyme - 177® 

23> 


3. 

abab 

trochaic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

10% 


367. 

hard to 
understand 

- 38% 
mood - 347® 
rhythm - 8% 


^ 1* "Travel" - Stevenson. 

2. "The Snare" - Stephens. 

3® "A Psalm of Life” - Longfellow. 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POMS OF 

GROUP ~^I I ~rTABLE^IXT 

Since the three poems of this group all have the same 
metrical form, pupils should have inferred that the rhythm 
would not be a criterion in making choices. 

The table shows that preference was almost equally 
divided between the first two poems, "Travel", and "Snare". 
Longfellow’s "A Psalm of Life”, was preferred by only ten 
per cent of the pupils, which compares with slightly over 
six per cent for "Gone - A Day", of a similar nature, of 
Group V. 
















. ■ ' “ '' '• ’ ' . • V J. >*„.<. 

■ 

■ 


’ 

- 








, ' 



* 






t 



, 



... 






6l 


In stating reasons for preferring "Travel", 25% of 
the pupils named the rhythm. Possibly many made this choice 
before having read the remaining poems of this group and dis¬ 
covering that the other two had a similar rhythm, ifimpathy 
('I’d like to go to some of the so places") was given as a 
reason only eight times out of 174. Perhaps, now that infor¬ 
mation about foreign places is a common, daily event in 
nearly every home, or because rocket-ship travel to the moon 
is a more exciting possibility to the teen-agers of today, 
imaginary travel to far-away lands no longer offers the 
thrills that it once did. Or, perhaps, the youngsters who 
live in a world of their own, separated by thousands of 
miles from their immediate environment, are to be found in 
a lower age-group. One pupil’s reason contained this hint: 

"It tells of a small child’s dream so well". Others said, 
in rejecting it: "too much imagination; I can’t imagine it; 
just a dream; the desert doesn’t interest me; I don’t like 
travelling"• 

In stating preferences for the poem "Snare", the pupils 
gave rhythm as the reason in 21% of all instances. There were 
twenty sympathetic responses; girls outnumbered boys in giving 
such reasons in the ratio of 19:8. They said: "I like rabbits; 
I heard a rabbit cry once and 1 feel sorry for it; my brother 
likes to set snares, but I feel sorry for the rabbits; makes 
you feel ashamed and sorry; makes me feel as if I should go 


















V 




























. 



























■ 


■ 






: ■ 




















62 


and help the rabbit". One discerning boy based his prefer¬ 
ence on the unusual form: "the way the last line of a verse 
is repeated at the start of the next one". In rejecting 
this poem, one boy asserted that "rabbits never cry of pain", 
but he could not have had the startling experience of having 
heard a rabbit*s cry. It is not soon forgotten. The repe¬ 
tition, already mentioned as a mark of preference, was ad¬ 
versely criticized no fewer than eleven times. Weekes has 
a pertinent observation: "There is, also, sufficient ground 
for the assumption that the emotional attitude associated 
with an experience influences choice of poetry descriptive 
of similar or related experiences."^ 0 Wheeler says: "One 
aspect of the personal evaluation by which every reader 
measures a poem is the way it arouses in him a memory of a 
similar experience. Unless the reader has had a similar 
experience and can thrill in just this way because of it, 

Q-i 

poetry will not have much appeal. 

Longfellow*s "A Psalm of Life" was given 32 reasons 
for preference; of these 22"% were for the "thought; a deep 
meaning". More specific were six pupils who said "it tells 
you that you can do anything you want to, as long as you make 
up your mind to; it gives you courage." There were 120 rea¬ 
sons given for liking it least; of these 38% were, as before, 

Blanche E. Weekes, "The Influence of Meaning on Children*s 

Choices of Poetry", Teachers College Record, vol. 31, p.l63« 

Wheeler, op. cit .« p.133. 





6? 


because the poem was "hard to understand". To 347<> the mood 
was distasteful: "dull, no life; mournful; sad; not sensible". 
To quote again from Barnes: "It enables us to eliminate, too, 
(from children T s poetry). ... the philosophical and the psycho¬ 
logical, ... It is not that they cannot understand the words 
and be brought to comprehend the thought; it is that they 
have not enough personal, sensory, experiential maturity to 

82 

be quickened and energized by poetry of this kind". But 
Barnes also says: "While child life should be happy and frolic¬ 
some, it should also upon occasion be sober and reflective; 
that, while the child should enjoy the pleasure and play of 

the moment, he should not be utterly regardless of duty and 
8-5 

service". ^ 


Op 

0c: Barnes, on. cit ., p.7* 

Barnes, The Childrens Poets , op. cit ., p.225. 









. 






64 


TABLE X 


FINDINGS BELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROJP IX (IAVJBIC METRE). 


POEM& 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1. 

abcbdd 

iambic 
tetra¬ 
meter i 

1 

107 o 


387 . 

can’t under¬ 
stand - 307® 
mood - 367 ® 
rhythm - 9% 

rhyme - ?7° 

2. 

abba 

iambic 
pent a- 
meter 

ll$ 


357 . 


3. 

abab 

iambic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

267 . 


167 . 


4. 

aabb 

ccdd 

iambic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

337* 

subject- 357® 
rhythm - 24°/® 
rhyme - 177 - 

11$ 



1» tt Moon and Child 11 - Davies. 

2• "Work 1 * - Tan Dyke. 

3. from "The Merchant’s Tale" - Kirkconnell. 

4. 11 On Nature" - Davies. 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POEMS OF 

GROUP IX (TABLE : 

The purpose of this group of poems is to check pupils’ 
previous choices for consistency. Since the rhyme in each is 
simple and obvious, and the rhythm is identical, choices are 
presumably on the basis of topic or subject matter. 

The first poem, "Moon and Child", was given the least 
number of preferences, and the most reasons for liking it least. 






















65 


Reasons for preference were trivial: "not very long; easy to 
learn; sounds pretty". One girl liked the poem b ecause of 
"the way the moon arouses the child ! s interest", another saw 
in the poem "the child I would like to be". A large number 
of pupils were outspoken in their reasons for not liking the 
poem. It was "not interesting; silly; peculiar; ko-ko (coo- 
coo); simple; childish; too dull". One girl said disdain¬ 
fully: "The moon doesn't haunt me.™ In the face of so much 
evidence from pupils themselves, it- seems unnecessary to 
prove the validity of their responses by comparing them with 
previous findings. 

The second poem, "Work", was preferred by the same 
small number (though not necessarily by the same pupils) who 
chose "A Psalm of Life", in Group Till. Of 27 reasons given, 
nine were for the thought. This was expressed in a somewhat 
laborious fashion by one girl: "It reminds everyone to help 
anybody that does something in the wrong way". Thirty-seven 
per cent of the pupils liking it least found it "hard to 
understand", but several pupils did not like it because they 
felt that the author was "bragging; overestimating himself". 

A previous finding is confirmed by the results obtaiuasd from 
this poem; namely, that children definitely do not like moral¬ 
izing poetry. There was, incidentally, a sex preference of 
two to one in favor of girls for this poem. 

The third selection, an excerpt from a longer poem by 


















. 












■ : j./ ■ ■ ' 





. 

t . ... ' 

l 

' 

. . 

: ' 

. . 

: ‘ . . . • 

• ' - - ; • • ..... .. . ".L . 1 . . . 




66 


Watson Kirkconnell, repeats the common theme of the poems 
of Group I: the coming of snow. It struck a responsive chord 
in only a limited way; 26% of the pupils preferred it, and of 
these, 237 ® liked the theme; "tells of wintertime; I like snow 
sounds like a cold winter day". A small number did not like 
the poem for precisely the same reason: "I don’t like poems 
about the winter; the heavy snowfall; a dull, cloudy feeling" 
one boy claimed that the poem "makes fun of God". When it 
is remembered that preferences of the poems in Group I, 
dealing with snowfall, were made preponderantly because of 
their rhythm and rhyme, it seems reasonable to conclude that 
this aspect of nature, namely, the coming of winter, is not 
favorite subject matter for poetry in the junior high school 
grades. 

Concerning "On Nature", by Davies, it will be seen 
that this is the same poem that was presented in Group Y. In 
that group it was preferred by 34%, in group IX by 33%; pre¬ 
viously, it had been rejected by 9%, aow by 11% • When it is 
remembered that preferences were not made on the same basis 
in each group, it can be said that there is a fairly close 
consistency in pupils 1 choices. In Group Y, 43% of choices 
were made because of the subject or topic; now, 33% chose it 
for the same reason. Rhythm and rhyme received 26% and 13% 
of choices respectively in group Y; they received 24% aud 
17% of choices in Group IX. In contrast to a winter scene, 






















* 










■ 



















, 






. 


. 











67 


it seems that spring is a favored topic for childrens 
poetry, bcane stated comments by the pupils were: "the month 
I like best; I T d like to sit there; reminds me of spring; 
the first nice month of summer; I get the feeling I was there". 

It may be remarked here that the poem by Davies is 
not of a high literary standard, using as it does such ex¬ 
pressions as "do sing with all their might". That, however, 
makes it none the less liked by children. Arbuthnot has a 
pertinent remark concerning this fact: "If the lesser of 
our poets are at first more popular with the children than 
our major poets, it is because they are direct and clear; 
they choose subjects the children can understand easily, 
and they treat them briefly and cheerfully. These are 
standards we must respect in our choice of verse for chil¬ 
dren. We must remember that they turn away from obscurity 
in a poem; that they will eodure length only in narrative 
verse that is swift-moving and exciting; and that in general 
they shun the somber mood, bo lyric poets who catch their 

favor generally do so with poetry that is brief and gay or 

84 

markedly melodious." 


84 


Arbuthnot, op. cit ., p.15 7• 





: 





e 




' ' 






„ 


. 


' 




















... 















68 


TABLE XI 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF UROUP X 
(TOPIC: MOON AND STARS; PERSONIFICATION ) 


POEMS: 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

blank 

verse 

iambic 

irreg. 

167 . 


327 . 


2. 

abcb 

abab 

iambic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

67 % 

rhythm - 407® 
subject- 247® 
rhyme - 18 % 

n 


3 . 

blank 

verse 

trochaic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

177 . 


617 . 

hard to 
understand 

- W® 
topic - 137® 
mood - 137® 


1. "Moon in October" - H. Conkling. 

2. "Starlight at Sea"_- 

3® from "Hiawatha" - Longfellow. 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO TEE POEMS OF 

group YTTwmr~ 

The poems of this group give the pupils an opportunity 
to state preferences for certain forms of personification; in¬ 
directly, they serve as a check on rhythm preferences. 

The poem "Moon in October" was here preferred by 16% 
of the pupils. This compares with 10“/® preference for the 
same topical poem of the previous group. It was least liked 
by 327o in this group, as compared with 387 ® in the previous 
group. This seems fairly consistent, as were the reasons 



















6 ? 


given. 1 o use the moon as the topic for a. poem appealed, to 
407» of those giving their preference; in the previous group 
it was 5.5/•• In the same way, similar remarks were made by 
those pupils who disliked the poem about the moon in both 
groups. Again, to a great many this poem was "childish; 
stupid; silly; far-fetched; too fictitious". Other pupils 
explained that the poem shewed "too much exaggeration"; that 
"the moon could not be weaving; seems like it T s speaking of 
a spider instead of the moon". This group of pupils does 
not seem to realize that a vivid, fantastic imagination is 
one of the attributes required for the understanding and 
appreciation of certain kinds of poetry. Admittedly the 
"kinship" between the moon and a spinning maiden is diffi¬ 
cult to see in non-poetic minds. To those who have the 
gift to see it, Worth has the following conclusion to make: 
"After personification, the most appealing form of imagery 
to children is the substitution of one concrete object for 
another concrete object somehow akin."®^ To those rather 
practicak*minded youngsters who care little for imaginative 
flights of fancy in the realm of poetry, Arbuthnot has a 
word of sympathy: "Of course, too much ambiguity in chil¬ 
dren's literature may be a dangerous quality, children being 
rather literal creatures and liking things straight and plain. 
A little, however, stimulates their imagination and provokes 

^ Worth, on. cit.. p.328. 









: 





70 


not only a healthy speculation but the ability to transcend 
the factual and go over into the world of dreams. Some 
people console themselves in this way with music; why not 
with poetry as weH?"^ 

The poem "Starlight at Sea” was given a preponder¬ 
ance of preferences. Forty per cent of 220 pupils gave 
rhythm as the reason for their choice. This may be ex¬ 
plained by the fact that the first poem of this group is 
irregular, free verse, while the Hiawatha excerpt has tro¬ 
chaic tetrameter, rather harder to follow after reading 
the effortless iambic verses of "Starlight at Sea". At 
the same time, it does point again to the fact that the 
pupils here stating their poetry preferences are too ready 
to seize upon the most common characteristic of poetry, 
namely, rhythm, as a reason for excellence, without reflec¬ 
ting that rhythm is not the only deciding factor in juding 
the merits of poetry. The topic of stars was a reason for 
preference for 24> of the pupils; only one pupil said that 
it was "too much to imagine". 

The findings relative to the excerpt from Hiawatha 
were the opposite to what had been anticipated; it was 
thought that this poem or any part of it would be a favor¬ 
ite with a majority of children. It was, instead, decisively 
rejected by 6l 0 /» of all pupils. Of these, 51 % complained as 

^ Arbuthnot, op. cit ., p.!53>« 


















' 

« 

. 

- 

' ■ ' . tv ‘ ' " 





















71 


usual that it was "hard to understand"• There is some jus¬ 
tification in this complaint in view of the fact that pupils 
may have been puzzled by the Indian names. A number said 
that "the names are too hard". Others, probably as a con¬ 
sequence of the preceding difficulty, said that they "don T t 
know what the subject is about"* Those who preferred the 
poem liked it because of "the story; an Indian legend;" and 
because "I like to study the comets and constellations". 

To the latter, the poem thus gave a highly special satis¬ 
faction. A word of criticism should be said about the 
reason given by another pupil: "I like all Longfellow poems." 
This boy probably did not make his choice on the basis of 
comparison at all; to him apply the words of Foley: "A pu¬ 
pil’s appraisal of a poem should not be in terms of formal 
and preconceived standards of excellence established prior 
to his experience."^ Weekes also says: "Many students 
failed to get a true response from a poem because a prede- 

o o 

teimined response stood in their way." 


^ Louis Foley, "Appreciation Cannot be Taught", School and^ 
Society , vol. May 8, 1?43. (quoting Leon Monesj p.>l8. 

o0 Weekes, on. cit .. p.l6j. 












- 






; 










• 






















- 















72 


TABLE XII 


FINDINGS BELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP XI (SENSORY APPEALS). 


POEM* 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1. 

aaabbb 

iambic 

trochaic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

72% 

rhythm - 34% 
rhyme - 28 % 
subject- 13% 

87 . 


2. 

blank 

irreg. 

177* 





aabbcc 

iambic 

penta¬ 

meter 

11% 


55 % 

hard to 
und erstand 

- 40% 
mood - 18 % 
rhythm - 11% 


1. “Smells 11 - C. Morley 

2. “Woodyards in Rain” - A. Marriott. 

3. from “The Great Lover 11 - R. Brooks. 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POEMS OF 

GROUP XI TT-4BLB XII7- 

It was the purpose of this group to discover which 
of the senses can be appealed to most strongly in obtaining 
poetry preferences from junior high school pupils. Poem 1 
is on smells, poem 2 is on sights in “Woodyards in Rain”, and 
poem 3 appeals to touch, tastes and smells, being an excerpt 
from “The Great Lover“. 

As the table shows, the poem “Smells 11 was the prepon¬ 
derant favorite. It was anticipated that the third poem, be¬ 
cause of the use of caesura as well as the multitude of .appeals 



































. 


















72 


to a number of senses, would be more difficult and therefore 
less appreciated by the pupils than the other two. This 
proved to be the case. It is, however, disappointing to 
record that of 2J?6 reasons given for preference of the poem 
"Smells", 34% were because of rhythm and 28% because of 
rhyme. Only 67 ® spoke of the description: "tells of many 
sweet-smelling smells." An even smaller number were ima¬ 
ginatively stimulated after reading the poem. Only 47® said: 

"I can smell the good smells; I feel hungry; makes me think 
of camp; makes me thing of Christmas". 

In the second poem, "Woodyards in Rain", fully half 
of the forty pupils giving reasons based their preference 
on the thought or subject matter: "how the tugs have to 
work; how lumberjacks have to work; tells of strong men and 
exciting work". That more than twice as many boys gave this 
preference as girls, was not unexpected for this type of 
poem. Two girls who gave as their reasons for disliking the 
poem: "I don't know these things", probably spoke for others 
of their sex as well who chose this poem as least liked, but 
were unable to state a reason. 

The poem, "The Great Lover", is no doubt too mature 
for the average junior high school pupil. The series of 
sensory impressions in this poem make little appeal to any 
but those who are rounding out a full life and are reminiscing 
about days of their youth. Quite obviously adolescents are 


. 

. * ■ 

. . ... 

‘ 

... .' ...... 


* 


. 


. 








. . • . .. .-. ; • . ' 

. 

■ 




. «:• v i ; ; ;o 




. 






.. 





74 


not to be found in this group. The objections of these 
pupils are therefore understandable. They said: "Too many 
things; mixed up; confusing; words too bunched together; 
lines too long", etc. They came to these conclusions be¬ 
cause they read the poem too fast, without lingering over 
the various sensory impressions since these recalled no 
similar experiences to their minds. If they did, they were 
of an unpleasant nature, as they must have been to the girl 
who said: "I don T t like doing dishes". Barnes says, "Chil¬ 
dren 1 s poetry must, to be sure, deal with children T s experi¬ 
ences, those which they have had or can image themselves as 
89 

having.” * 7 He says, furthermore, "The substance of a good 
poem is the realistic, sensory material of life: facts, ex¬ 
periences, actions, sights, smells, sounds, scenes, people 

and other animals, and such-like. A good poem Is rooted in 

90 

the concrete, . .." 7 Moore also asserts that "the child’s 
love of sound, color, and movement, his eagerness to handle 
objects of pleasing form and texture, his gusto for food 
which suits his palate, and his delight in sweet odors, all 
help to build up a receptivity to ideal representations in 
literature, music, and art. Poetry is full of beautiful, 
clear, and simple imagery ... occasionally, tactual sensa¬ 
tions and flavor are revived and odor is faintly wafted 

■ ~ 

7 Barnes,' Contemporary Poetry for Children , op. cit ., p. 7 . 

Barnes, op. cit ., p.5. 





















; : 




. 

















' 


, . • 






4 

. 




















• ■ ! ' 




: 




- o , 













73 


Q1 

back." Coleman concurs in this assertion in that she 
states: "All poems must be made to relate to pupil experi¬ 
ences if gratifying results are to be obtained.. .Link the 
essential elements of the poem with the past experience of 
the children by visualization of the pictures and discus¬ 
sion of incidents contained in the poem. 2 


table xiii 

FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP XII (PEOPLE) 


POEM* 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

'REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS. 

1 . 

blank 

verse 

irreg. 

37% 

subject- 307* 
mood - 18% 
rhythm - 10> 

267. 


2. 

abccb 

iambic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

217a 


357- 


5. 

abab 

iambic 

22% 


39% 

mood - 437o 
thought- 237* 
the 

ending - 197° 


1. "Jack" - E. Lukas. 

2. "Peter 3ell" - W. 'Wordsworth. 

3. "Richard Cory" - E. A. Robinson. 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POEMS OF 

GROUP XII (TABLE XIII): 


91 

Moore, op • c it .. p.271 

Mary M. Coleman, "Teaching Poetry in Elementary Grades", 
Wilson Bulletin . May 1938, p.379. 













































. 















% 


It is understandable that pupils would give prefer¬ 
ences of the poems in this group on the basis of subject, or 
description, or mood provoked by the former two factors. 

"Jack" was evidently the most likeable fellow of the 
three. In giving reasons, pupils placed the emphasis on his 
character. They said: “sounds like a boy's dream man; he 
was a hero; he was poor but everyone liked him; money isn't 
everything; everybody is happy”. The next most frequent 
reason given was the "comical mood; humor”, etc. Of 6? 
reasons for not liking this poem, lack of rhythm and rhyme 
received the major share of all criticism: "like a story; 
it’s prose”. 

Of the 73 reasons given for choosing "Peter Bell” 
as the most liked poem, 40% chose it because of its rhythm. 
The subject was found to be appealing in 29% of the reasons 
given, but not for the character of "Peter Bell”. Many 
students said, "it is of Nature; a clear imagination of 
the forest; I would like this Life”. Those who liked this 
poem least were more specific In their reasoning: "He was 
queer, why did he stay in the woods if they meant nothing 
to him? it doesn't tell much of Peter Bell”; but the majori¬ 
ty simply brushed this poem aside as "uninteresting; silly; 
not funny; distasteful; dull”. 

The poem "Richard Gory" proved to be of the contro¬ 
versial type that caused almost as many to like it as to 


♦ 

- 

' 

. 

. 



. 

















77 


dislike it, often for identical reasons. Those who preferred 
the poem said, in part: "it often happens that way in life; 
envy is reality; shows that the rich are not always happy; 
a good ending". Of those who expressed their dislike for 
it, some said: "doesn’t sound like the life of a boy; although 
he was rich he didn’t have much judgment; I feel an instant 
dislike for Richard Gory; money isn’t everything"; and 19% 
of all who gave reasons didn’t like the ending. The unplea¬ 
sant thought was given as a reason for dislike 23% of all 
cases, and the mood, variously expressed, in 437• of cases. 

It seems to be true that, as Barnes says, "the baffling 
frustrations, ironies, and tragedies of existence"^ have 
no place in children’s poetry. 

It has been found, in previous poem groups, that 
pupils consistently reject free verse. They associate 
certain definite forms and a proper technic with poetry 
and refuse to accept as poetry anything which deviates too 
markedly from standard forms. In this group, however, 
pupils have for the first time indicated that if t he sub¬ 
ject matter is sufficiently interesting it takes precedence, 
as far as their preferences are concerned, over the mechan¬ 
ics of verse. 


93 


Baines, op. cit ., p.7 






78 


TABLE XIV 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POMS OF GROUP XIII (DIDACTIC) 


POfflfr 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

abab 

iambic 
penta¬ 
meter 

15% 


2 ?% 


2 . 

abcb 

anapaest 

irreg. 

61 % 

thought- 4?7® 
rhythm - 19 % 
rhyme - 8°/o 

10 % 


3. 

abab 

cc 

iambic 

penta¬ 

meter 

15% 


21 % 


4. 

aaba 

iambic 

penta¬ 

meter 

n 


40% 

hard to 
understand 

- 44% 
doesn T t make 
sense - 11% 
rhyme - 107 ® 


a 1. "In Night’s Brave Darkness" - E. Morrow. 

2. "Do You Fear the Wind?" - H. Garland. 

3. "The Fairest Action" - 

4. Verse LXXI of The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam . 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POB/IS OF 

GROUP XIII (TABLE XIV.).: 

This group of poems attempts to discover pupils 1 
preferences of reflective or thought-provoking poems. When 
poems of this type are placed in a group with poems of 
other types, as in groups V, VIII and IX, these didactic 
poems are decisively rejected by the pupils. Actually this 

























« 


• t 













D ■ 











* 


’’ . ; : : 





■ 






e . 



7 9 


group seeks to find out not only poem preference but a 
philosophy of thought as well. 

As expected, the poem, "In Night’s Brave Darkness", 
was not preferred by many. Of those who did prefer it, 38 % 
stated that they liked the thought, but only a few were able 
to say specifically what the thought was that appealed to 
them. Several, in fact, totally misinterpreted the meaning: 
"it has a joke at the end; it tells that Peter’s rooster had 
died". As in the poem "October" of Group VI, pupil prefer¬ 
ence may sometimes be the result of a false interpretation 
of the poem. There were 75 reasons given for liking this 
poem least; of these 22 stated that it was "hard to under¬ 
stand", and 20 said that it was "too short". With respect 
to the latter remark, Kangley has found it to be a cause 
for complaint about the poems presented to junior high school 

pupils: "Why do they make poems so short? You can’t get on 

54 

to them because they end before you get into them". 

Hamlin Garland’s "Do You Pear The Wind?" proved to 
be decisively the most popular poem of this group. The 
thought or subject was correctly taken as the criterion for 
choice in 65 cases, or 427<> of all reasons stated. Pupils 
said of this poem: "tells you what some people have to face; 
what a person can be like; this should happen to everyone 
sometime; you aren’t a man till you’re fearless; tells you 


Kangley, op. cit ., p.12^. 

























. 




8o 


to be a man and not a mouse". Perhaps the most aptly stated 
reason of twenty-one given for least liking this poem was 
this: "You don’t have to revert yourself to being primitive 
to hold your head high and your shoulders firm". 

Although 28 of the 42 reasons given for preferring 
the poem "The Fairest Action" stated "thought, or idea", 
none of the pupils was able to express clearly what, to him 
or her, this thought was. The only expression of a thought 
revealed a misunderstanding: "the poem means to take an 
injury easily". A similar misunderstanding caused another 
pupil to express his dislike of the poem: "tells of the 
personality of a revengeful boy". 

The fourth poem of this group, a quatrain from Omar 
Khayyam’s "Rubaiyat", understandably caused frustration and 
therefore misinterpretation. Although fifteen of pi reasons 
were for the "thought", this thought was e^qplained by the 
pupils as follows: "I like writing; it tells how to get 
fingerprints off". As might be expected, a majority of 
reasons for liking the poem least said that it was 

"hard to understand", or that "it doesn’t make sense". 

Huber, Bruner, and Curry say about this type of 
poetry: "Many reasons besides immaturity suggest themselves 
in explanation of children’s dislike of some of these poems. 

It is possible in some cases that the poems carry connotations 
to children entirely unintended by the writers - connotations 





8 l 


that are even humorous in their implicati ons". ^ Kangley 
explains: "With didactic poems, the difficulty is clearly 
related to the inability of children to deal with even sim¬ 
ple abstractions. To perceive courage as it is displayed 
dramatically in a brave act is one thing; to understand 
courage as an abstract quality is quite another."^ This 
lack of abstract perception undoubtedly caused the pupils 
to reject the poem "In Night’s Brave Darkness" of this 
group. 


TABLE XV 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP XIV (ANAPAEST METRE) 


POEMfc 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1 . 

abab 

anapaest 

tetra¬ 

meter 

m 

humor - 42% 
st ory - 18 % 
rhythm - 17 % 

137® 


2 . 

aabb 

anapaest 

tetra¬ 

meter 

m 


507 . 

hard to 
understand 
- 517® 
mood - 2£% 
rhythm - j?% 

5. 

aabb 

anapaest 

tetra¬ 

meter 

267 . 


377 . 



* L "Father William" - Lewis Carroll. 

2. "Destruction of Sennacherib" - Byron. 

3. "The Virtuous Fox and the self-righteous Cat"- Cunningham. 


^ Huber, Bruner, Curry, op. cit », p.72. 
Kangley, op. cit .. p.6l. 
























. 






* 





























. 



. 

■ 

- 


f * 




t 















82 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POEMS OF 

GROUP XIV (TABLE Tr) : 

Since rhythm is not a proper basis for preference 
of poems in this group, preference should have been stated 
in terms of subject matter, style, or mood. 

Lewis Carroll’s parody of 11 Father William 11 is well 

known to any child who has read Alice in Wonderland. This 

book is considered childish by a considerable portion of 

teen-agers, whereas to others it is a literary classic. 

The same controversial opinion presumably applies to the 

$ 

excerpt from “Father William”. That is why 38 % of the 
reasons for not liking the poem used such expressions as 
“silly; childish; stupid;” while 42% of the reasons for 
preferring it mentioned the "humor; it’s comical; funny; 
foolish”. A number of pupils liked the "direct quotation; 
unexpected ending;” and especially the "good conversation 
between the two humorons”. 

The poem, "The Destruction of Sennacherib”, from 
which the excerpt comprising poem 2 of this group Is taken, 
has the most regular and the strongest rhythm. Pupils made 
327 o of their choices because of this rhythm, and 367 ® because 
of the regular couplet rhyme. Of the miscellaneous reasons 
given, only one pupil mentioned the similes. There are 
three striking ones in the two stanzas given. The majority 
of pupils who did not like the poem could not, as usual, 



















- 

- i . • , ' . . 

* 

* • - : . { 

* 








■ 











; 

. 

t 

- 

- 

c 

* 




83 


understand it. They used such expressions as "not clear; 
don f t get it; too heavy; the way it is worded;’ 1 other 
reasons were "makes you think of wolves; it’s about war; 

I don T t like anything to do with spears". In the Huber, 
Bruner, and Curry survey on Children’s interests in 
poetry, "The Destruction of Sennacherib" was one of the 
poems that the children rejected overwhelmingly. 

With respect to the fable in verse, "The i*ox and 
the Cat", the findings show no clear-cut majority for or 
against it. There were 84 reasons offered in favor, and 
87 reasons in dislike of it. 377® of the reasons in favor 
supported the "subject; the story; the thought". A number 
of pupils explained the subject precisely as it interested 
them: "I like cats; tells of an adventure; the way each 
animal feels towards the other". Several others pointed 
out the moral of the fable : "shows you may be just as bad 
as someone else; one says the other is a murderer and then 
he Is a murderer himself; shows that people shouldn’t criti¬ 
cize others before looking at themselves". Of the reasons 
for not liking this poem, it is surprising that so many 
(407o) should have called the story "boring; uninteresting; 
childish; farfetched; distasteful"; and that another fifteen 
per cent should find it "hard to understand". It has been 
said that it is one of the missions of poetry to set up be¬ 
fore us the ideals of life. It is well known, however, that 


: 






t 




.. 






. 

< ' . . i 

► 


. 

. 

























■ 


84 


children of junior high school age do not like to have 
their noses rubbed into the moral of a story or poem. That 
can be done with effect, and without causing resentment, in 
the elementary grades. Adolescent children like to be led 
to make their own conclusions, and to discover for them¬ 
selves whatever philosophical wisdom the poet is trying to 
impart. This attitude accounts partly for the fact that 
these pupils are apt to say bluntly of a certain poem: "it T s 
stupid M , or the like, without searching their minds to dis¬ 
cover a more valid underlying reason. Kangley’s finding 
was that "the preference for the story didactic is due, in 
all probability, as much to the story foim as to the 
ethical import, though there is evidence enough in the 
reasons given for liking by the children themselves that 
a moral is far from being resented if it is interestingly 
presented. 


^ Kangley, op. cit ., p.J?6. 






5,5 


TABLE XVI 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP XV (HUMOROUS POETRY) 


POM* 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

1. 

aabb 

iambic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

46% 

humor - 337® 
rhythm - 217® 
rhyme - 167® 

13% 


2. 

aabba 

limerick 

237- 


67. 


5 . 

aabbcc 

ddd 

ababcc 

dactylic 

irreg. 

147® 


49% 

hard to 
understand 

- 257® 
rhythm - 137® 
rhyme - 87® 

4. 

aabbcc 

iambic 

dimeter, 

mono¬ 

meter 

177- 


30% 



1. "The Perfect Reactionary" - H. Mearns. 

2. Limerick. 

3. "Nature Stuff Through a Monocle" - (London Opinion). 

4. "The Duck" - 0. Nash. 


ANALYSTS OF FI NDINGS RELATED TO THE POE:,IS OF 

GROUP XT' (TABLE XVlTT 

The four humorous poems here grouped are of four 
types: the first, Hughes Mearns “The Perfect Reactionary“, 
is classed as an absurdity; the second is a Limerick; the 
third, “Nature Stuff Through A Monocle”, satirizes a certain 
English type of character; and the fourth, “The Duck”, by 
Ogden Nash, is a whimsical bit of nature observation made 





















86 


humorous by means of clever word-play* 

While there was no preponderant majority in favor 
of any one type of humor, the first poem was given twice 
as many preferences as the next poem that was considered 
most liked. Disregarding the number of reasons given for 
rhythm and rhyme (377®), 337• of the reasons mentioned the 
humor as the reason for preference. No pupil succeeded in 
analysing the type of humor; that is, in stating explicitly 
what aspect of the humor pleased him. The several remarks 
made by some pupils were not quite to the point: “tells 
what a person would find out what happens; it seems to give 
a sense of one who doesn T t care“; while one pupil said 
frankly: “I just like it“. 

Strangely, the pupils who reasoned their dislike for 
this poem were so emphatic about it as to give the impres¬ 
sion they were outraged at the suggestion that someone had 
tried to “pull their leg* 1 . These pupils, besides calling 
the verse “crazy; corny; silly; ridiculous; childish“, also 
said: “it isn’t true; it don’t say much; think of a chair 
with no back, no legs. 1 “ 

The Limerick, while not strongly preferred, was on 
the other hand voted least liked by the smallest number of 
pupils. It seems that this type of humor is no longer so 
appealing to adolescents as it is to younger children; the 
fozmer tend simply to ignore it. Of 7& reasons given in 






. 
















. 

, 
















































• 

. 







< 













' 

• 











' 







: i . 




l . ■ 






















. 







■ 










87 


preference of the limerick, 27 > stated “humor", 28 > "rhythm", 
247» "thought", 207o "rhyme", and only 57• "it’s a limerick". 

It seems that several pupils tended to take the "thought" 
of the limerick seriously (horrible thought:), being so to¬ 
tally unacquainted with limericks as such. At any rate, 
several pupils said: "because how they made their nest in 
his hair; tells of an adventure of a man and eight birds;" 
while in expressing their dislike of the poem, others said: 
"the beard was too long; the poem got beyond the funny 
spot". of the other reasons for dislike were that the 

poem was "silly; crazy;" or simply "not interesting". 

The third poem is a good example of the English 
humorous magazine type of humor, it having been first 
printed in the well-known London Opinion . It seems to have 
almost completely baffled the pupils. There were only 44 
reasons given by 54 pupils out of the 38l who read it. Of 
these, only four mentioned the humor. Only three were con¬ 
scious of the fact that the humorous effect was obtained 
because of satirizing an English characteristic: "an amu¬ 
sing way of speaking; the English accent; the dialect". 

Twelve pupils gave their preference because of the subject, 
which in their opinion was the essence of the poem: "memo¬ 
ries of spring; I like spring; describes spring well; in¬ 
spires the spirit of spring". Of the 106 reasons given for 
liking least this poem, 257- classed it as "hard to under- 





88 


stand 11 . Again the subject of spring was unduly emphasized 
by some pupils: "reminds me of spring which I don f t like; 
doesn T t tell the truth, because spring isn’t priceless". 

In rejecting this poem, it remained for one Grade IX boy 
(I.Q. 144) to write the perfectly priceless squelch: "Er - 
rawther silly!” 

The reasons given for preference of ”The Duck” were 
in great part as whimsical as the poem. Eleven of rea¬ 
sons stated "humorous” or "amusing”, while thirteen said 
"rhythm”, sixteen said "rhyme”, and eight said ”1 like 
ducks; I love Nature”, and the like. Other irrelevant 
reasons were: ”very simple; very true; so short and easy 
to memorize”. Pupils who did not like this poem called it 
"silly; senseless; too simple; immature; kiddish”. One fellow 
said: "it leaves it hanging in the air". He did not make it 
clear if he meant the poem or the duck. 

To summarize: pupil preferences in the field of humor 
are emphatic and controversial. This is the group of poems 
of which it can most rightly be said, ”de gustibus non est 
disputandum”. At the same time, it is gratifying to see 
that the findings in this study concur with those of previous 
studies. Ruth Wells in 1?34 undertook a survey among 2J?0 
high school students to discover preferences of four types 
of humor: slapstick, absurdity, satire, whimsy. Here are 
her findings: "Absurdity ranks first and slapstick second 












« 






. 














* 






* , 












.* 























• 















' 












. 

, 

' 















8 ? 


through all four years of high school. (Taste for satire 
and whimsy grows, with maturity), bat ire is a poor fourth. 
Girls like satire and whimsy better than boys do and absur¬ 
dity and slapstick less, children with superior social 
backgrounds like whimsy and satire better than do children 
who are average in the group.” In the poems of Group XV, 
it was seen that the absurdity of ”The Perfect Reactionary” 
ranked first and the satire of "Nature Stuff Through A 
Monocle” ranked fourth. In a table of results on page 87 
of her book, Wells shows the following figures: In Grade IX, 
of 70 pupils tested, 677 ° favored absurdity, 47® satire, 17 ® 
whimsy. In Grade VII, of 87 pupils tested, 6?7° favored 
absurdity, 5% satire, 1% whimsy. She rightly concludes that 

"individuals of all grades of the junior high school are 

98 

fairly consistent in response to types of poetry .” 7 The 
corresponding figures resulting from this study are: 467® 
favored absurdity, 147® satire, 177° whimsy. The difference 
in actual percentage is due in part at least to the fact that 
pupils were asked to choose the most liked of four instead of 
three selections. 

Nonsense verses are not usually considered great 
poetry. They do, however, serve a useful purpose in the 
child’s personal and literary development. Besides their 

^ Ruth E. Wells, ”A Study of Tastes in Humorous Literature 
Among Pupils of Junior and Senior High Schools”, Journal 
of Educational Research , Oct. 1934, p. 8 l. 





. 

' 






. 














« ' : 

. 

. 


t ' ■ 

. 4 


. ' . 

* 










* 

: t * • 




' 


* * , 









90 


salutary effect as a release from tension and worry, they 
serve to introduce the child to rhyme, rhythm and to various 
types of verse patterns. Arbuthnot claims that "humorous 
verse is good introductory material to rouse interest in 
poetry and to allay the suspicion that poetry is highbrow 
and peculiar, - Begin with humorous verse or downright non¬ 
sense, and you*11 have the children with you". She gives 
the example of a group of boys whose opinion of poetry was 
that it was "kinda queer", and "crazy". "With these boys 
the wise adult tried some humorous poems and promptly won 
their surprised attention and approval. — By the time 
their funny poems had progressed from the broadly nonsen¬ 
sical to the somewhat more clever type of humor, their 

suspicions were broken down, and after some stirring nar- 

99 

rative poems, they were ready to go further". 


99 


Arbuthnot, op. cit ., p.79* 






























• 








































* 







t ’ 

















• 





















• • 







■ 












91 


TABLE XVII 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP XVI (DACTYLIC METRE) 


o 

a 

I 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

REASONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

i. 

abaccb 

dactylic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

167 . 


417 . 

hard to 
understand 

- 32% 
subject- 15 % 
mood - 1J?% 

2. 

abab 

dactylic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

14% 


20% 


3. 

aabb 

dactylic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

47 % 

humor - 28 % 
sub ject- 22 u /o 
rhythm - 19% 

227 . 


4. 

abcb 

dactylic 

tetra¬ 

meter 

irreg. 

237* 


177- 



K 1. "Rockaby - Lullaby” - J. Holland, 

2. "Morning Star” - R. Heber. 

3. "Isabel” - 0. Nash. 

4. t! The Throstle 11 - Tennyson. 


ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS RELATED TO THE PO JMS OF 

group xvi (table xviiT; 

The purpose of this group Is to determine preference 
of subject matter. For this reason the poems are of the 
same rhythm pattern. 

The "Rockaby” poem was third in preference of the 
four poems. It was least liked by the largest number of 






















' 




. - 






























. 




- 

























. 

* 


















92 


pupils. Only one pupil, a boy, went to the trouble of 
writing out a relevant statement with his reason: "like a 
lullaby song”. A larger number wrote statements to explain 
their dislike, but not all of these were to the point: 

"Makes you think of bees; I don't like fairy tales; more 
for children; I don't 3mow who Rover was; when you have a 
lullaby there should not be so many 'r T sounds". A majority 
simply said that the cradle song, to them, was distasteful 
or not interesting. Evidently, lullaby poems are not a 
popular type with 'teen-age children. Oddly, there was no 
sex difference noted; the girls disliked this poem as much 
as the boys. 

The poem, "Morning Star" has a religious motif. It 
was preferred by the smallest number, but it was disliked 
by the second smallest number of pupils reading it. In all 
probability this poem, because of its theme, was simply ig¬ 
nored by most of the pupils. There were no valid explana¬ 
tions among the 41 reasons to tell why the pupils did not 
like the poem. Of the 48 reasons for preference, one gave 
specific mention to the religious aspect: "lovely descrip¬ 
tion of the Magi coming to adore Jesus". The most signifi¬ 
cant outcome of this poem's evaluation is a sex difference 
of almost three to one in favor of girls, in giving reasons 
for liking the poem. This is not surprising in view of the 
fact that in many communities a major part of the active 











* 






















* 






. 






* 
























: 






* 



























c 


- 








. 















. 






















. 

















. 






93 


church work is done by women’s organizations. 

The humorous poem "Isabel" was almost as decisively 
rejected in the same emphatic fashion as the poem, "Nature 
Stuff Through A Monocle", in the preceding group. As before, 
pupils said of this poem that it was "foolish; extravagant; 
frightening"; that there was "no sense to it"; it was even 
considered "too humorous". Nearly 607 * thus expressed their 
dislike. There were several querulous inquiries about the 
poem: "who and what was Isabel? I like ones that could 
possibly be true". One outraged girl did not like this 
poem because, she said, "I f m Isabel and I don’t care for 
what they wrote about this Isabel". In spite of the objec¬ 
tions of this vociferous minority, the poem "Isabel" was 
preferred over the others of the group, as shown in the table. 
Twenty-eight per cent of 159 reasons gave the humor of the 
poem as its outstanding attribute; 77® restated the surprise 
ending ("she ate the bear up"). A classmate of the unfortu¬ 
nate "real" Isabel gave as her reason for preference, "be¬ 
cause there is a Isabelle in our school room". Neither of 
these two girls, of course, had searched her mind for a valid 
reason either for preferring or not preferring the poem. To 
both of them applies Weekes* remark when she says: "Actual 
experience is a factor in choice, but it may be either favo¬ 
rable or unfavorable. Sometimes a single word in a poem 
arouses a negative response and so determines choice" 


100 Blanche Weekes, op. cit ., p.l63. 








* 






























* 








« 






. 



. 










94 


The summer theme of the fourth poem, "The Throstle", 
was the reason for its preference in 21 of the 6? reasons 
stated. "The happiness; the joy" was given ten times. "I 
like summer; summer is coming” were other common expressions 
to confirm a previous finding (Group X) that nature poems 
are liked by a majority of junior high school pupils. An 
insistent criticism of this poem - ten times of 37 reasons - 
by those who liked it least was the "repetition"• This 
reason had also been given earlier for least liking the 
poems "Snare," "Praise the Lord", and in a few cases where 
actually there was no repetition at all. The use of repeti¬ 
tion as a poetic device seems not to be understood or at 
least not liked by these pupils who object to it. 

TABLE XVIII 


FINDINGS RELATED TO PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, AND REASONS 
THEREFOR, OF THE POEMS OF GROUP XVIII (MOOD) 


poa&f a 

RHYME 

FORM 

LIKED 

KEiiSONS 

DIS¬ 

LIKED 

REASONS 

l. 

abab 

cccb 

spondee, 
irreg. 

527 . 


627 . 

mood - 64 u /o 
hard to 
understand 

- 307o 

2. 

abed 

abed 

dactylic 

dimeter, 

irreg. 

687 . 

thought- 34"/o 
rhythm - 177 ® 
easy to 
understand 

- 13* 

description 
(about sum¬ 
mer ) - 14* 

337 . 






















95 


1. "A Dirge" - P. Shelley. 

2. "Pippa’s Song" - R. Browning. 

ANALYSIS OP FINDINGS RELATED TO THE POEMS OF 

GROUP XVII (TABLE XVIII’): 

The two poems of this group give opposing moods con¬ 
cerning an outlook on life. Poem 1, "A Dirge", is essenti¬ 
ally pessimistic, but poem 2 is Browning 1 s well-known joyous, 
optimistic "Pippa’s Song”. 

The poem of pessimism was given 100 reasons for 
preference. 247* favored the thought, 247. the rhyme, and 
22£ the rhythm. More discriminating pupils, of course, 
would have omitted the latter two factors as criteria in 
making their choices from this last group. Nevertheless 
it is rather surprising that 157® of the pupils would have 
found this poem "more interesting;. better sounding; more 
sense; seems real; sounds nicer; more meaning* 1 etc. than 
Pippa’s Song 11 ♦ Of only thirteen reasons for liking it 
less, "A Dirge" was most often said to be "too sad; so 
cold; so lonely". One pupil said, "I like neither", and 
one, who no doubt by this time was heartily tired of giving 
poetry preferences, said with frank finality: "I run out of 
reasons". 

"Pippa’s Song" was the dominant favorite poem of 
this group. The pupils gave 218 reasons to justify their 
choice. The most frequent reason was the thought, or subject. 







. 












As several pupils said so aptly: "It is what we hope the 
world to be; why paint a bad picture of the world when so 
many good ones can be painted". The note of preferred op¬ 
timism evidenced here was previously met with in "October T s 
Bright Blue Weather", "Jack", and "The Throstle". Wheeler 
raises the question: "Which is the more convincing to them, 
the more concordant with their own experiences - the insis¬ 
tent optimism of Browning or the resigned stoicism of 
Arnold? Have any of them lived long enough to know which 
is truer to life?"^^ And Jagger answers: "On the whole, 
poems springing from moods of optimism, of acceptance of 
the scheme of things, are the most suitable for children, 

— The poems which, in the last analysis, rest on a basis 
of pessimism are to be avoided. Gloom, resignation, des¬ 
pair, cynicism, - whatever their technical excellence may 

10? 

be, they are unsuitable for children." 

SEX PIFFIDRENCES IN FOffPRY PREFERENCES 

Although this study did not set out to determine 
sex differences in poetry preferences, nevertheless a 
number of such differences manifested thanselves. It is 
thought to be sufficiently pertinent to this study to set 
than forth in the following tables. 


1 Wheeler, op. cit ., p.l60 
■^2 Jagger, op. cit ., p.221. 













» 



. 


— 











» 

. 


; 





. g ' 






* 









97 


TABLE XIX 


SEX DIFFERENCES IN THE POETRY PREFERENCES OF 
JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL PUPILS 


POEM 

NATURE OF POEM 

BOYS* 

GIRLS* 

REASONS FOR 
PREFERENCE 

Group II 

Imaginative 

76 

144 

Rhythm, rhyme, 

Poem 1 

Fantasy 

42% 

707. 

thought 

Group II 

Descriptive 

75 

33 

Topic, des¬ 

Poem 2 

Act i on 

40% 

107 , 

cription, mood 

Group V 

Descriptive 

34 

80 

Topic, rhythm, 

Poem 2 

of Nature 

297° 

387. 

rhyme 

Group V 

Imaginative 

36 

20 

Rhythm, rhyme, 

Poem 3 

Fantasy 

207 * 

97° 

humor 

Group VII 

Descriptive 

1 n 

31# 

Thought(Story), 

Poem 3 

of Spain 

257 . 

377° 

rhythm, 



32 

73 

description, 



237 . 

357° 


Group VIII 

Imaginative 

26 1 

38* 

Rhythm, 

Poem 1 

Travel 

437° 

457° 

rhyme, 



8 ? 

89 

thought 



487 . 

427 , 


Group IX 

Descriptive 

91 

112 

Topic, rhythm, 

Poem 4 

of Nature 

507. 

537° 

rhyme 

Group X 

Descriptive 

104 

148 

Rhythm, rhyme 


of Nature 

577° 

707. 

thought 

Group X 

Excerpt, 

41 

22 

Thought, 

Poem 3 

Hiawatha 

227 . 

107 . 

rhythm 

Group XI 

Descriptive 

Ill 

167 

Rhythm, 

Poem 1 

Sensory 

607 . 

807 . 

rhyme, topic 

Group XI 

Descriptive 

50 

15 

Topic, rhythm 

Poem 2 

Sensory 

277° 

77° 


Group XVI 

Religious 

17 

37 

Thought, 

Poem 2 


n 

187 ; 

rhythm 


TOTALS x 

96 . 67 . 

97.4% 



# Grade IX figures only & 183 211 2 : See Table XXI. 


















- 


• ' ! 









< ■ •' 
' 














































■ 





. 
















• 























































• 




















■ 

■ 


























. 












98 


TABLE XX 

SEX DIFFERENCES IN THE POETRY DISLIKES OP 
JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL PUPILS 


POEM 

NATURE OF POM 

BOYS A 

GIRLS& 

REASONS FOR 
DISLIKE 

Group II 

Imaginative 

37 

13 

"hard to 

Poem 1 

Fantasy 

207 . 

67. 

understand" 

Group II 

Descriptive 

44 

73 

"hard to 

Poem 2 

Action 

247 . 

367. 

understand 

Group III 

Heligious 

24 

7 

"repetition" 

Poem 1 


137= 

37. 


Group III 

Religious 

88 

127 

"hard to 


Didactic 

487 . 

607 . 

understand" 

Group V 

Imaginative 

44 

63 

mood; subject 

Poem 3 

Fantasy 

247. 

317* 


Group IX 

Imaginative 

79 

61 

mood; 

Poem 1 

Fantasy 

437* 

297 , 

description 

Group IX 

Moralizing 

49 

80 

"hard to 

Poem 2 


zn 

387. 

understand" 


TOTALS x 

91 % 

90.77= 



x See Table XXI. 














99 


TABLE XXI 

SEX DIFFERENCES IN STATING PREFERENCE, DISLIKE, 
AND REASONS THEREFOR, OF ALL POMS 



BOYS 

GIRLS 


actual 

number 

possible 

number 

7® 

actual 

number 

possible 

number 

7® 

Preference 

3003 

3111 

9 6.6 

34 93 

3387 

97.4 

Reasons 

2508 

3111 

86.1 

324 5 

35 S 7 

90.3 

Dislikes 

284 5 

3111 

91.4 

3233 

3387 

90.7 

Reasons 

1917 

3111 

61.6 

2334 

3387 

71.2 


actual 

Ratio of boys to girls in giving 

reasons for preference - 44 : % 

Ratio of boys to girls in giving 

reasons for dislike - 43 : 37 

Tables XIX, XX and XXI present the more apparent 
sex differences. In Table XIX for instance, the poem, 
"Green Moth", caught the imagination of considerably more 
girls than boys, even though rhythm and rhyme rather than 
the thought or idea were given as reasons in meet cases. 

As Table XIX shows, boys greatly outnumbered girls in 
least liking the poem. In the same way, the poem "Hawk", 
because of its topic, was preferred by more boys than 
girls but voted least liked by more girls than boys. The 
poem^Rilloby-rill" showed a slight sex preference in favor 
& 



See Table I 

















100 


of the boys. Strangely, both the poem "Spain” and Steven¬ 
son’s "Travel" were preferred by more girls than boys; the 
opposite was thought to be the case. The verse from "On 
Nature", by Henry Davies, was preferred in both its pres¬ 
entations by more girls than boys, but the boys preferred 
the poem "Work 11 , by Van Dyke, Boys 1 preferences outnum¬ 
bered those of the girls for the excerpt from Hiawatha , 
and "Woodyards in Rain" while girls’ preferences were 
greater than boys’ for all Nature poems, the poem "Smells" 
and the religious poem, "Morning Star". A larger number 
of boys expressed dislike for Watts’ "Let IJs With a Glad¬ 
some Mind", and for the poem, "Moon in October", but more 
girls than boys disliked "Pied Beauty", "Rilloby-rill" and 
"Work". In total, slightly more girls than boys of the 
number taking part in this preference survey indicated 
their preferences, but slightly more boys than girls in¬ 
dicated dislikes of poems throughout the survey booklet. 

The conclusions that may be drawn from the above 
and from similar examples in Tables XIX, XX and XXI are 
confirmed by previous investigators. Thus, Norvell quotes 
Thorndike’s findings that "magic and phantasy are an un¬ 
favorable special interest factor for boys, but a favor¬ 
able special interest factor for girls".This compares 

Norvell, The Reading Interests of Young People, 

op, cit ., p, 80 . 














101 


with a similar finding about the poem "Green Moth". Kangley 

found that "boys tended to favor poems that dealt with war 

and violent action of any sort, while the girls very consis- 

104 

tently seemed to rate low all such poems". This survey 
showed similar results from the poem "Hawk". Kangley says 
that "girls consistently ranked nature poems higher than 
did the boys". 3 ' 0 ^ In this study, the girls also were con¬ 
sistent in ranking the poems about nature, the moon, star¬ 
light, and travel (exotic nature topic) higher than the 
boys did. Norvell found that "the poems relating to religion 
and to philosophy bear out the findings in previous studies 
that girls in general are more strongly influenced by these 
factors than are boys".^ 0 ^ In this study, the same result 
was in evidence with respect to the poems "Morning Star" 
and "Let Us With a Gladsome Mind". As for preference find¬ 
ings regarding "Hiawatha" and "Woodyards in Rain", these 
poems deal with subject matter that is more appealing to 
boys than to girls. Norvell says: "The data presented ... 
suggest that for pupils in secondary schools, content and 
not reading difficulty is a major determinant of reading 
interest". 10 ^ He also found that "girls like poetry 

104 Kangley, on. cit .. p.79* 

105 ibid . 

106 Norvell, on. cit .. p.68. 

1°7 Ibid ., p.72. 






. 

. . 

? e • 

■ 


. 


• : ' 


■ ' ■ ' 


.. 

. 

. 


. 

... 









. 








. . ... 

: • 

. . 













102 


decidedly better than boys", and "girls" tastes in poetry 

are more literary than boys T tastes".In this study, a 

majority of girls have indicated not only preferences, but 

their reasons for these preferences (see Table XXI). "It 

appears that from the fifth grade, at least to adulthood, 

sex is a dominating influence which attains its maximum 

109 

during the junior high school period. ... In governing 
the choice of reading materials for children in our second¬ 
ary schools, sex is a universal and highly significant fac¬ 
tor". Kangley found that "the poems which showed marked 
sex differences when ranked for preference did so largely 
because the positive tastes for the boys and girls were dis¬ 
similar. Actual distaste was not an important factor". 11 ' 1 ’ 

In Norvell’s study, "of 466 poems, 18.9> were better liked 
by boys than by girls; 81 . 17 . were better liked by girls 
than by boys” 

It may be of interest to see how the poems used in 
the preference booklet ranked in popularity with the pupils. 
A preference ranking of all the poems is given in Table XXII. 

108 Ibid ., p.72. 

109 Ibid., p.48. 

110 Ibid ., p.6. 

Kangley, op. cit ., p.8o. 

112 For veil, "Some Results of a Twelve-Year Study", 
on. cit ., p.531. 











ALL THE POEMS ARRANGED IN ORDER OF 
INCREASING AND DEGREASING PREFERENCE 


103 


(p 


£M 


"3- CM O CT\0O K\rlO 0\CO OO C"-vO LT\ Lf\ CM OJ CM 

OO VO vO vO LT\ Lf\ lf\ Lf\ Lf\ Lf\ ^ ^ tJ- K\ N"\ K\ K\ K\ K\ K\ K\ K\ 


© © 

S a 

P -P 

CO 00 

Cl Cl 
© © 
© © 
ci a 
3 * 

-p p 

S 3 

o o 


© © 
a d 

erf © 
-P P 
© © 
© C| C| 
O © © 
o © © 

*33 

S-p-p 

Is 3 

bQ o o 


"2 'd 

© © 
p -p 
© © 

Cl Ph 

© © 

'S'H 

a 3 


© © 

S 3 

-p p 

© © 
Cl Cl 
© © 
© © 
d d 
d © 


p p p P p p 

d d~ 

© © 

o o 


d © d d 03 d d 

© © © © P © © 

O o o o 


© © 
d d 
© © 
p p 

ra w 

r-l Cl Cl 
© © © 
*H © © 

© d d 

p © © 
© 

© p p 
p - - 
© d 
© 

© o o 


© 

d 

© 

p 

© 

C| i—i 
© © 
© Pi 

d © 
d p 
w 

p © 

- p 

d © 
© P 
o © 


bOp 
d 03 
•H C| rl 
P © © 
© © <p 

© d © 

Cl © p 
© © 
P P © 
d - p 
•h d © 
d © p 
do© 


d 12 
d d 

© © 
p p 
© © 
Cl Ci 
© © 
© © 
d d 
d d 

p p 

3 3 

o o 


^)P 

d ra 

© Ci 

p © 
© © 
© d 
Ci d 
© 

p p 
d - 
•h d 
d © 
d o 


© © 
d d 
© © 
p p 
© © 
S4 Ci 
© © 
© © 
d d 
d d 

p p 

d d 
© © 
o o 


8 

o 

p p 
© © 
ra £ 
d o 


>> 

d 

© © 

^ $ 
p PQ 

© © 

bQ £ © ra 
Ci © © p 


d Pi 
Ci © © 


© 

p Ci ©~ © Pi p 

hd © Q P d d 

t> Ci p pq 

O <t* >>C0 

d ra © 

I ra © d 

p H © 

© © d 


d d p © d 
co co Q « pm pq 


pm o 


P © Cl 

© aJ Dd © 

d P O © 

P >>r) bo d o 

© tj d © p p 

© Cl OO Oil po 

d po copra p o 

H © © © © 

-I >> d© d ra © o pq « 

0 P G* <h © - d© P © 

bo d © © © >s ci dra 

ddP^jdPi © ^ © d p -h 

’ OOft^Of.PO©© 
TiOdOo9oop.fi 
« ^ PM^ CO PM 


Ip 


fM 


OJ C\J CO CTH C“-C"-C~~vO K\0\CNO*©ra© ^P^t^trOvKNOJOJCP 

OO C—vO vD vO ir\ LT\ LT\ tf\ LT\ ^ ^ ^ -sfr f«\ K\ K\ r<\ K\KMM 


+-^ p p p +-» Ml p ppppppppp 

|a©a^oo|gx|THgfifidgd^! 1 £j©oooi1o 
,3 ,d bQ.d bO ® ©fl© bO Ci dd &).d bQ bQ bQ bQ ® © © bf)© 
p p d p d •«-j* r ^p Pdopoodpddd d ♦<->•«-> •*-> d •<- 

© ,d d d © © ,d © ,d 3 d d d-d d 

Cj Cj rrf ti rf H x 3 ti i *» o i*i m rft m »-> rC\ 


P Oi 


h>)0 . 

© © .d ,d ,d d d^^,^-, ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

ci Ci p Ci p © ra ci Ci p © Ci © © p cipppp 


© 

c» 

o 

id 


B 

£ 

bO 

d © 
p p 

H p 
p © 
erf a 
ip co 


2 
O 
CO 

ra 

- d 

© ra o 

Pi © 

P P O 

(M CO Q 


CM 


P 

bO • 

P PM 


Ci 

P £< 

P P 1 

>» 

Ci 

pq 

p 

i © 

© 

P © 

Ci 

bD 

© 

POP© 

© 

ra 

© p 

ip 

3 : P O U © 

d 


Cl 123 


^ d 03 

o 

Ci 

d . 


® 
<d 
o P 
© © 
H P 


© 

© d 
p © 
© © 
Ci u 
fM CU 


P p P P 

© p 


© P Ci 


©rap© 


o 

P Ci 
d fq 
PQ 

© 

© rd 


tun w+jdO®,QC!lOd^ © 

^ S opo t> Ciofepp cj bO^i 

o^l©©d©©p ddd©P^ 

dop© ®Cicidodppi©©p© 
O^l|HKHEH3)OO^C0^^Pt4 

















TABLE XXII (continued) 


104 


Pd 


O O O CTn CKOO vOW (MHrHHOO C—vO IX\K\K\ 
K\ N"\ C\J C\J CM OJ C\J C\J C\J C\J C\J CVI C\l rH i—I i—I i—I r—I 


HrIO CKONOnOOCO C“- C~-v£) vO 



§§ 
P -P 
© W 
rH d d 
d <D © 
TJ >a <5-4 TJ ©* 
d rH © 3 2 

•H CO 

P W © P p 

- P - - 

S3 O co 
© o -h 

O P T3 o o 


§ s 


'H 

© 

-p 

co 

d rH 

© d 

©* >><d 

Cj © rH © 

3 Shp 

P 43 © © 
- *H - ^ 

d o co 

© O O -H 
o S3 P *d 


d 

© 

p 

© 


, d 


S 3 


d'd d 
© o © 
'd o t© 

g a g 

d d 

b 

’p S+> 

- o - 

d o d 

© rH © 
O tiDO 


p 

© 

rH d 
d © 
<d d 
© d 
+3 d 
© 

© p 

p - 

© d 

•rH © 
nd O 


P 

© 

rH d rH 

d d © d 

O <+-| >j >jrd <p 
•H (D H rl d ® 
PPHH ^ 

*H W *H *H 
P © © © P 
© P 

P* © O O d 
© -H O O © 
d d -P P O 


© 

*> 

-p ,aq 

co © 

o > © 
d © d 

P»4 d d 

pq © 

£ 
© o 


© 

d 

© d 
g o 

O -H 
rH +5 
1*4 O 

<5-4 

O +» 

rH W 

© 43 © 

> -P d 

© © -H 

d © © 


3 


P 

5^ 


© 
rH 
© 
© Eh 


fd 


JL| 

^ t ® ' ' & <5-4 ’ Sd 

£ o >>43 © O O -p W) d 

©d^P-P- EH rH rH M d d 43 

3P o p ©©©^©©•H'd 

rH 3 4 > ^ d d > P f_,p d 
©®rH©?j0OO©©©©Pdd© 

rCj *H rdj f-i Cl ClJ W m M © Cd *r-f O rd vyvi/wriHnvjq -r-i h 

EHEHqd^^COHHaaEHP^^^EH^PCl^cUOEHnajaj^O 


>>rH 

Snd 

© *H p 

d3 o 
o a 

•H d 
■P © d 
© 4d © 
© p © 

© © d 


3 

© 

£4 


vO 

d • 

d Hi 

O 

I 


d © 

O rH 
>H ,H 


© p 
© © 
h g *d 525 
o fir) fn d 


+3 cd 
43 © 
p) ^0 
•H 

^ d p 
o PQ © 
d 

co © P 

*- 43 

PD d 

d © *rH 
•H X) iH 
rH ° d 
rip 3 
©OP 
£4 O CQ 


© o 

*H *H 
d d 
d © 
2 3 

O -H 


\£> vO IT\ K\ K\ OJ OJ rH CO 
CVJOJCMCVJCVJCMOJCVjrH 


cr— C— C— C—VO v£> Lf\LT\^t OJ H rl O O OS©© LT\ CM 

HrHrHrHHHrHrlrHrHrHrHiHHHrH 


p -P P 
43 43 • 

CjD 50 



© P 

33 

B <» 
© 43 
- -P 

"S d 

© d 
43 © 
O 

d M 

© o 


d 

d 

o 

h3 

o 

^44 

o 

© -H 
© d 
•H © 

© S 

d -h 

H4 rl 


© 
d 
© 
£ 
© o 


1o 


O <5-4 
d o 
43 

EH 4d 

P 

© © 
43 © 
Eh Q 


!>> 

d 

O rH 
O rH 
© 

d pq 


S 


© d 

X © 

40 

d d o 

•r4 © p 
•H O 

© d o 
© 44 d 
43 o d © d 
p d © © *h 
©Q >><{ 

'd © ^ d d 

© p © © o © o 

© *H 43 O 43 


O P 

03 P-I P-I pq dd EH 3 EH^ 


d 
© o 

fe* H 

© p 
d o 

pq <£j 

© 

>s © -P 
,o - © 

© p © 

44 43 d 

O Mr! 
O -H © 
Cd P4 


© 
> 
1 aq 

1 

d rH C H © 

© H Vc © 

PH i d 
CO d -P © 
I CO ^ 
PD O 
d 43 © H 
•H O d 

S3B 8 

o th © d 

S X S5 CO 


r d 

© rH d 
4 ^ *H fH 

d -H 43 © 

© (-q O d 

> *P £ 

O d© cd h 
^ O d d o 
© o?p 
p S © 

CdrH dH ^ 

© 

d©oj*Sdo>d 

O 04 ^ a co O aq 72 


>> 

© 

Q © 
d 
**H 


© 

P) © 


© cj © 

© O K 0 d © d 

© o W d o > 




















» 

, 
















• 






















• • 







• 







, f; ' 













« 























105 


From this table it is apparent that: 

1. There was relatively high agreement on some poems; that 
is, they placed near the top of the list of most pre¬ 
ferred poems, and near the bottom of the list of least 
preferred poems: "Falling bnow", "Smells", "Stars". 

Other poems showed contradictory tastes; that is, 
strong preference by some pupils and strong dislike by 
others: "Man and Bat", "A Dirge", "The Fox and the Cat". 
Still others, containing too much static description, 
left pupils indifferent; that is, they were neither 
preferred nor disliked strongly: "Spain", "The Death 

of the Flowers", "When the Frost is on the Punkin". 

2. The outstanding reasons for preference of poems are 
rhythm, and thought or subject matter. Pupils often 
gave rhythm as a reason when there were other more 
obvious or stronger and more valid reasons for prefer¬ 
ence of that particular poem. 

5. The outstanding reasons for dislike of poems are inabi¬ 
lity of the pupils to understand or get the meaning, 
pessimistic mood, and disagreeable topics. 

FREQUENCY OF REASONS FOR PREFERRING AND DISLIKING POEMS 

Table XXIII gives a tabulation of reasons for pre¬ 
ferring and for disliking all of the poems in this study. 








106 


TABLE XXIII 

RELATIVE REASONS FOR PREFERENCE AND DISLIKE 
OF THE POEMS FROM ALL GROUPS 



PREFERENC5ES 

DISLIKjSS 


Reason 

Fra- 



Reason 

Fre¬ 


Rank 

Given 

quency 

% 

Rank 

Given 

quency 

7> 

1 

Rhythm 

1392 

21 

1 

Hard to 

1410 

21 






understand 



2 a. 

Thought 

1034 

16 





b. 

Subject 

363 

8 

2 

Mood 

782 

12 

5 

Rhyme 

936 

14 


Rhythm 

346 

8 

4 

Description 

421 

6 

4 a. 

Subject 

408 

6 





b. 

Thought 

131 

2 

5 a. 

Mood 

332 

5 





b. 

Humor 

233 

4 

5 

Rhyme 

390 

6 

c. 

Hmpathy 

67 

1 









6 a. 

Form 

257 

4 

6 a. 

i£asy to 



b. 

Repetition 

30 

1 


understand 

233 

4 

c. 

Dialect 

11 

- 

b. 

Simple lang. 

139 

2 





c. 

Repet it ion 

14 

- 

7 

Description 

109 

2 

d. 

Form 

12 

- 





7 

Miscell. and 

311 


8 

Miscell* and 

337 

5 


Meaningless 




Meaningless 



8 

No reason 

943 

14 

9 

No reason 

2227 



TOTALS & 

6698 

100 


TOTALS & 

6698 

100 


& 

The total possible number of reasons that could have been 
given was found by multiplying the number of pupils who 
too:k: part in the poetry preference study by the number of 
poem groups in the poetry booklet, that is, $94 x 17. 

































■ 


107 


RELATION BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE AND POETRY PREFERENCE 


TABLE XXIV 

CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE 
AND POETRY PREFERENCE 


Choices Made 

I.Q,. Range 120-142, 
I.Q. Average 127• 

I.Q. Range 69-91, 
I.Q. Average 82 . 

1. Number of "most"- 
liked choices 

334/340 

98.37. 

555/540 

98 . 87 . 

2. Number of "least ,f - 
liked choices 

309/320 

96. 67 . 

294/520 

91.97. 

3. Number of reasons 
given for ( 1 ) 

281/340 

82 . 77 . 

265/540 

77 . 97 . 

4. Number of reasons 
given for ( 2 ) 

235/520 

75.47. 

195/520 

60 .3> 


From Tables XXIV and XXV we may conclude: 

1 * The higher intelligence group has made a greater number 
of "least"-liked choices; it has given a greater number 
of reasons for preferences, and a substantially greater 
number of reasons for “least”-liked poems. 

2 . The lower intelligence group based its preferences to a 
much greater degree on rhythm, and on ease of understan¬ 
ding the poem; this group also gave a greater number of 
miscellaneous and meaningless reasons, or no reason at 
all, than did the higher intelligence group. 

. The higher intelligence group based its preferences to 


3 











* 



















= 










‘ 

: . 








* • 

. 








TABLE XXV 


CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE 
AND REASONS STATED Jr OR PREFERENCE OF POEMS 


Reason 

High 

fr. 

I.Q. 

> 

Low 

fr. 

I.Q. 

Average A. 
Fr. 7. 

Subject, topic 

88 

2 3.9 

86 

23.3 

24 

Rhythm 

51 

13.0 

73 

21.3 

21 

Description 

48 

14.1 

13 

3.8 

6 

Rhyme 

37 

10 .? 

38 

11.2 

14 

Easy to understand 

9 

2.6 

14 

4.1 

4 

Humor 

31 

9.1 

8 

2.4 

4 

Mood (other than humor) 

8 

2.4 

0 

0 

3 

Miscell. and 
Meaningless 

9 

2.6 

33 

9.7 

3 

No Reason 

99 

17.4 

75 

22.0 

14 

fpthers) 3 

TOTALS 

340 

100 

340 

100 

100 


a markedly higher degree on description, and on humor 
and other moods evoked by the poems, than did the lower 
intelligence group. 

In support of findings included in Tables XXIV, XXV 

and XXVI Kangley has noted that 

both boys and girls of the upper group tended to go 
beyond mere statement of preferences for individual 
poems and to seek to find the elements that had 

I 


See Table XXIII 
















10? 


pealed to them, while the children of the lower 
group seemed content to list subjects that inter¬ 
ested them and to name poems that they had enjoyed. 
There appeared to be little observable difference 
in direction of tastes between children of low, 
average, and high ability, but there was a marked 
difference in the power to formulate reasons for 
preference. ... The upper group tended to scatter 
their choices more than did the lower group and to 
give higher rank to poems in the imagery (descrip¬ 
tion) and nature categories' 1 . 11 *? 

Williams, Winter and Woods have found that 

It is easy to see why intelligence, which by 
many psychologists is defined as the power to per¬ 
ceive or at least to realize relations, is essen¬ 
tial to the aesthetic sense. ... And, so far as 
this is true, it will be the child with the high¬ 
est apperceptive powers who is able to recognize 
the characteristic form of a complex aesthetic 
whole. ... The capacity for literary appreciation 
correlates highly with intelligence and, to a 
smaller extent, with pictorial and musical appre¬ 
ciation". 11 ^ 


Since the reasons for disliking poems are somewhat 
different from the reasons for preference, relationships 
between intelligence and reasons stated for dislike of 
poems are given in Table 2XVI, from which we may conclude: 
1 . The higher intelligence group, surprisingly, gave as 
a reason for least liking poems that they were "hard 
to understand” with greater frequency than the lower 
intelligence group. Since the lower group gave no 
reason at all in a great many more instances, it may 


Kangley, on. cit . t p.99, 121 . 

114 3£. D. Williams, L. Winter, J. M. Woods, w Tests of 

Literary Appreciation", British Journal of Educational 
Psychology . Nov. 1958, p. 280, 283- 
























* 

■ 

' 

. 



■ 

. . . . 









no 


TABLE XXVI 


CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE 
AND REASONS STATED FOR DISLIKE OF POEMS 


Reason 

High I.Q. 
fr. > 

Low 

fr. 

i.q. 

> 

Average A 
fr. % 

Hard to understand 

76 

23.8 


16 .7 

21 

Subject, Topic 

36 

11.2 

26 

8.1 

8 

Rhythm 

27 

8.4 

44 

13.8 

8 

Rhyme 

27 

8.4 

22 

6.9 

6 

Mood 

28 

8.8 

10 

3.1 

12 

Form 

17 

5.3 

15 

4.8 

4 

Description 

18 

5.6 

1 

— 

2 

Miscell. and 
Meaningless 

6 

1.9 

22 

6.9 

5 

No Reason 

83 

26.6 

127 

39.7 

33 


A See Table XXIII 

be assumed that this group simply ignored altogether 
many of the “hard-to-understand" poems. 


2. The higher group based a greater number of reasons for 
not preferring certain poems on disliked subject matter, 
gloomy or unhappy mood, and on poor descriptions; where¬ 
as the lower group based a greater number of reasons for 
least liking certain poems on lack of obvious rhythm. 

3. A larger number of reasons given by the lower group were 












. 

. 




, 






' 


























Ill 


meaningless, as: "the way it is written; not much in it; 
not interesting'*. 

In her preference survey Kangley found, conversely, 
that the least liked poetry attributes were complex imagery, 
and the straight didactic type. These ranked eleventh and 
twelfth, respectively, of twelve preference subdivisions on 
Kangley f s list. In the same way, Table XXII shows that the 
complex imagery of "Pied Beauty", "The Great Lover", "Gone - 
A Day", "Quatrain", and similar poems were disliked by 
large numbers, as were poems of the didactic type such as 
"Work", "A Psalm of Life", and the fable "The Fox and the 
Cat". 

It should be noted that pupils* reasons as they 
stated them do not always fall easily and naturally into 
the eight main classifications as listed in Table XXIII. 

It was sometimes difficult to decide whether a reason given 
as "a hawk is a beautiful bird" is a thought that the poem 
suggested itself to the pupil, or whether it merely refers 
to the subject or topic of that poem. The same difficulty 
as to precise classification arose with reasons such as 
"tells how the hawk catches", which was put under the head¬ 
ing description, although Kangley lists it as mere repeti¬ 
tion of subject matter. In this study the headings for 
classification (among others; were used because a great 
many pupils merely wrote the words "thought; subject; des- 







. 







• 


.. 







t 








- 


. ♦ 
































112 


cription; mood; repetition;” in place of more elaborately 
expounded reasons. 

Under the heading, Miscellaneous and Meaningless” 
were placed all reasons that could not be grouped under a 
more definitive heading, aome examples are: ”1 like poems 
like that; it appeals to me; a good poem; written as it 
should be; the only good one on this page; it's stupid; not 
like a poem”. Kangley found that ”such statements make up 
one-fifth of the reasons given for preference and over one- 
third of the reasons given for selections of poems least 
liked.Kangley states also that, in her study, children 
frequently gave two reasons for a choice. —”In all proba¬ 
bility both reasons were equally valid to the child.In 
this study, too, wherever two reasons were stated, such as 
n the rhythm and rhyme 11 , they were both recorded, 

Kangley defines the word empathy as communication of 
experience. Under this heading were placed pupil responses 
such as: ”It T s what I like to do; this is the kind of life 
I f d like to lead; those are the things I am thankful for;” 
and others in which the child projects himself, as it were, 
into the situation described in the poem. Empathy is pos¬ 
sibly the strongest interest factor in the subject matter 
of a poem (or story, for that matter); it is surprising that 

■^-5 Kangley, op. cit ., p. 109* 

Kangley, op. cit ., p. 108. 













113 


it was not found more commonly* In its negative form, such 
as: n The desert doesn't interest me; I don't care what a 
grasshopper does;" it occurs much less frequently. 

There are a variety of rather interesting observa¬ 
tions with respect to the fact that many pupils give no 
reason whatever for their preference or dislike of poetry. 
Kangley's results confirm those shown in Table XXIII. She 
says: "That large numbers could not tell why they liked a 
poem is indicated by the fact that of the possible op¬ 

portunities for expression of reasons for preference, 136? 
were not used. In the case of poems that were not liked, 
even a smaller proportion of reasons were stated. In these, 
2807 of the 64^6 were not filled out. When the large num¬ 
ber of reasons that had to be classified as meaningless are 
added, it becomes clear that in only about 60 per cent of 
the cases in choices for either best liked or next best 
liked, and in about 38 per cent of the choices for least 
liked or next least liked, was there clear evidence as to 
how the children interpreted their own choices."^7 Some 
pupils doubtless cannot express in words why they like a 
poem because of a too deficient vocabulary. That the same 
state of mind may occur in erudite adults any reader of 
poetry who has been distracted by this seeming paradox may 
attest. "The very essence of poetry is exactly what cannot 


117 


Kangley, op. cit .» p. 117 





. 

* 


. 














. 

* 


114 


be intellectually conceived or expressed."H® We may be 
sure that at least some junior high school pupils are so 
intelligently appreciative of good poetry that they, per¬ 
haps, can only say to themselves: 

and l would that my tongue could utter 

The thoughts that arise in me. 

Surely not all of the pupils who withheld stated reasons 
did so because, as one pupil candidly said: H I run out of 
reasons.” Nor should the wise teacher of poetry expect 
that all pupils’ reasons must conform to the same accepta¬ 
ble standard. "Reader and poet together produce the poem, 
like the strings and body of the violin; the poet plays 
on the strings, but the real music comes from the reson¬ 
ance of the body of the instrument, which is the mind of 
the reader. The response will be just as varied as the 
experiences, actual or imaginative, of the reader; no two 
persons will give back the same echo. For this reason, no 
one reason is necessarily better or truer to the poet’s 
meaning than some other; indeed, the most imaginative lines 

are so because they call up so many and varied associations 

119 

in the readers’ minds. 11 / 


Lamborn, op. cit ., p. 119* 

119 Allan Abbott, "The Imaginative Element in Poetry”, 
Teachers College Record . Oct. 19^6, p# 110. 





. • 

. 


. 






CHAPTER VII 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

There has long been a general awareness among 
teachers that the expected objectives of the teaching of 
literature were not being realized. Classroom instruction 
in the traditionally great literature, especially poetry, 
has not resulted in a raising of the popular level of read¬ 
ing tastes. That both the subject matter presented and the 
methods used in presenting it have been at fault in the past 
must be frankly acknowledged. 

Today the emphasis is placed not so much upon tradi- 

i 

tional^subject matter but upon the interests of the pupil. 
Poetry, to fulfil its double function as a means of exten¬ 
ding knowledge and as a source of pleasure, must be chosen 
for children and presented to them in accordance with the 
findings of this and related studies. Whether children are 
going to grow up liking poetry or not depends largely upon 
how wisely adults have chosen poems, and how all-round- 
happy an experience they have had with poetry. Generally 
accepted psychological principles point out the power of 
interest in seeking and obtaining profitable, wholehearted 
pupil responses. The answers to the question of what 
interests children in poetry are given in this summary of 
the poetry preference survey. 






' 












, 
















* 
















4 










. 


< ' '• ,v ' ■ . ' H -y St • a$\:.. M ' ' 

. 



116 


1. Children prefer first and foremost poems that possess 
strong, obvious rhythms. It is the singing quality of 
good rhythm that differentiates poetry from prose; 
children are quick to recognize it and to use rhythm 
(too often, and at times wrongly) as the criterion for 
preference. 

2. Children prefer poetry that they can understand; that 
is, poetry that is meaningful to them. They invari¬ 
ably reject poems whose meaning is obscure or impossible 
for them to apprehend. 

3. Children prefer poems that deal with the type of subject 
matter which interests them, just as they prefer storieB 
and books that deal with subject matter which they find 
interesting. 

4. Children prefer poetry that rhymes. They have little 
liking for blank verse, unless the subject matter is 
strongly interesting. 

5. Children prefer moods of optimism, gaiety, and happiness. 
They reject poetry that deals with moods of pessimism, 
gloom, and despair. 

6. Children prefer poetry whose topic or thought directs 
their interests to their own experiences, or to vicari¬ 
ous experiences that they would like to have. They do 
not like poetry whose thought is obviously didactic, 
deeply philosophical, or subtly psychological in its 


1 











■J 









• ■ J , ■ 

J 

. 

* 

:■ ... ' : . w 

. 





117 


appeal. 

7. Children prefer poetry that, to them, looks like poetry. 
They do not like free verse, irregular lines, lines that 
are too long or too short, or poetry that looks like 
prose. 

8. Children prefer humorous poetry. The humor, however, 
must be of a type that appeals to them. They resent 
humorous poetry that, to them, is merely silly, ridi¬ 
culous, or childish. Many do not understand and there¬ 
fore do not like satiric or subtly ironic humor. There 
are strong individualistic preferences for certain 
specific types of humor, such as obvious absurdity and 
whimsical nature description. 

9. Children prefer poetry that is written in simple, 
straightforward language. Involved figures of speech 
frustrate them; inverted sentence structure baffles 
them; peculiar, poetic forms or structures antagonize 
them. Children therefore tend to reject all poetry 
containing these "poetic 11 devices on the plea that they 
can’t understand it. 

10. Children do not prefer poetry that makes use of repeti¬ 
tion as a poetic device. They do not seem to understand 
its purpose. 

. Children prefer or dislike poetry without always being 
able to say what it is that they like or dislike about it. 


11 













. 




. 





















118 


12. There are marked differences in poetry preference be¬ 
tween pupil and pupil. 

13. There are marked sex differences in poetry preferences. 

14. There are slight differences on the basis of intelli¬ 
gence in poetry preferences, but marked differences in 
ability to state valid reasons for such preferences. 

13• There are no noticeable differences in poetry prefer¬ 
ences of junior high school pupils as far as chrono- 
logical age is concerned. 

16. With one or two exceptions, there is no noticeable 
difference in poetry preferences of junior high school 
pupils as far as grade placement is concerned. 

17. There is some indication in this study that girls show 
a greater interest in poetry than do boys. 


* "It was found that there is a definite negative correla¬ 
tion between chronological age and the elements of English 
tested (including the ability to judge poetry) as well as 
between chronological age and intelligence." - Joseph 
Shaehtman, "Elements of English Related to the Judgment of 
Poetry in Grade XI", Teachers College Record , vol. 31, 

Dec. 192?, p. 262. 




■ 

' 

. ■ 

-■ 

« 







, 
































. 








CHAPTER VIII 


RECOMMENDATIONS 

(1) Poetry that is intended for reading enjoyment in 
the junior high school grades should possess the following 
characteristics: 

(a) It should have the attractions of sounds that 
appeal easily and universally to the pupils - marked rhythms, 
rhymes of various kinds, alliteration, and assonance. Not 
only the poem itself, but the reading of it, whether silent 
or oral, should be considered as an art experience. Many 
children seem to sense this almost instinctively; they feel 
that rhythip. is the basis of all art appreciation, whether it 
is music, the undulations of a field of wheat as the wind 
passes by, or poetry. There should, however, be opportuni¬ 
ties for the children to become acquainted with the effects 
of irregular rhythms. The degree of consciousness required 
to follow rhythm which is unchanging is not enough to sus¬ 
tain interest. In the poems for older children, as in the 
music and poetry for adults, rhythmic and arhythmic elements 
should be combined in order to stimulate an intelligent ap¬ 
preciation of the effects of such combinations. The rhymes 
in good poetry should be true and unforced, in that the 
rhyming words themselves are the most apt ones in their 
place and not merely put there for the sake of obtaining 

















t 




. 




. ■ 




■ 

- 






. 


. 







. ■ 






• 


■ 

- 





■ 








• 



V... • 

■ 










' 


120 


the rhyme. When the meaning of alliteration and assonance 
have once been pointed out to children in poems containing 
striking examples of them, most children will take pleasure 
in looking for these poetic factors in other poems. Like 
Wordsworth, they will want to say 

- Twice five years 

Or less I might have seen, when first my mind 
With conscious pleasure opened to the charm 
Of words in tuneful order, found them sweet 
For their own sakes, a passion and a power; 

And phrases pleased me chosen for delight, 

For pomp, or love. 

(2) Poetry for the junior high school should, as 
far as possible, be poetry of our own time. Its contents 
should, in other words, deal with meaningful experiences to 
the children, not with fantastic happenings of far away and 
long ago. McGookin says: "In connecting the known and the 
unknown there is a satisfaction. The totally unfamiliar has 
no appeal. It seems to leave a sense of failure to make an 
adjustment. But when familiar elements are found in conjunc¬ 
tion with unfamiliar ones there is a feeling that an adjust¬ 
ment has been made in the acquiring of new knowledge through 
knowledge already possessed. 1,120 Further, poems for junior 
high school pupils should deal with life - dramatically, 
realistically, and with sensory appeals; not contemplative 
or introspectively. Arbuthnot says: "The sensory content of 
poetry constitutes one of its strongest appeals, or, in some 


120 


McGookin, on. cit .. p.^0 





■ 









■» 

. 














121 


cases, accounts for its failure with certain children. If 
the sensory content is familiar or understandable, then they 
respond with zest to the words of seeing, smelling, feeling, 
hearing, and tasting with which poetry abounds. 1,121 Poems 
for these pupils should deal with emotions which they have 
felt or are capable of feeling; moods that spring naturally 
from the joyous optimism with which they are accustomed to 
regard life. Adult moods of sorrow, despair, and self-pity 
are not suitable for children. Nor should there be too many 
or too long descriptions in children 7 s poetry; it will send 
them away bored and discouraged to seek reading enjoyment 
from other sources than poetry. Too many poems of static n 
nature description are not for the generally practical- 
minded youngster of junior high school age. “Lyrical ejacu¬ 
lations about a violet are poetry experiences that will send 
the average child scurrying to the solace of the comic 
strip.” 122 To quote Wordsworth again, 

A primrose by the river’s brim 
A yellow primrose was to him, 

And it was nothing more. 

(3) Poetry for the junior high school should not 
contain too many unusual words or involved figures of speech, 
since these are a source of obscurity and therefore dis¬ 
couragement to the pupils. They will like poetry better if 

121 Arbuthnot, op. cit ., p. 164. 

122 Arbuthnot, Children and Books . Scott Poresman & Co., 

1947, p. 79. 










122 


they know what it means. Sometimes children will interpret 
figures of speech too literally, deriving a meaning that is 
wholly different from that intended by the author, a meaning 
that may be even ludicrous when taken out of its intended 
setting. Classical poetry which tends to be heavily weighted 
with involved figures of speech should therefore not figure 
prominently in any collection of poems for junior high school 
pupils. It is well to keep in mind: "There is today, as 
there has always been, an immeasurable gulf between the ave¬ 
rage person and the classics. We must never forget that we 
are educating the plain sons of plain men, not a generation 
of future English teachers." 12 ^ 

(4) Poetry for junior high school pupils should 
contain a variety of humor. Selections of this type are 
usually easy to read, and their content is enjoyed by 
teacher and pupils. Por this reason humorous poems not only 
arouse an interest that was previously all but dead, but also 
can be used as convenient points of departure and stepping 
stones to other types of poetry. "We shall encounter certain 
children," says Arbuthnot, "who have no ear for word sounds 
or the subtleties of metrical cadence, and who lack the ima¬ 
ginative reach demanded by poetry. For them, we shall find 
humorous poems which they like and which will carry them a 


123 


Blumenthal, op. cit. , p. 2^2 






123 


little further in their enjoyment of verse." 124 

(3) Provision should be made, in the selecting 
of poetry for the junior high school, for the various and 
definite sex differences in poetry preference that are 
known to occur. There should be plenty of variety of sub¬ 
ject matter to appeal to both groups; the type of poem 
known to appeal to one sex particularly should not be 
forced upon the other. The appreciation of poetry is a 
subjective matter and should not result from the undue 
influence or bias of the teacher. Women teachers should 
not expect the boys in their literature classes to become 
enraptured by Fitz-James f romantic meeting of the Lady of 
the Lake , when they definitely prefer the hunting scene; 
the converse no doubt applies to the girls. The import¬ 
ance of sex preferences should not be underestimated. f, In 
governing the choice of reading materials for children in 
our secondary schools, sex is a universal and highly sig¬ 
nificant factor." 12 '* 

(6) Poetry material for junior high school pupils 
should be less difficult than corresponding prose. By the 
very nature of poetry, the comprehension difficulties that 
it presents differ greatly from the comprehension difficul¬ 
ties found in other types of reading material. Common 

^ 24 Arbuthnot, op. cit ., p. 137 

12 ^ Norvell, The Heading Interests of Young People, op. cit ., 

p. 6. 








. 







124 


reasons for children’s difficulties are that their experi¬ 
ence of life is small; their knowledge of language and ex¬ 
tent of vocabulary are incomplete; and their feeling for 
subtle effects of poetic technique is insufficient. "That 
the aesthetic perception of children is blunt, and needs to 

be refined, most teachers would regard as axiomatic", corn- 
126 

ments Jagger. And Kangley advises: "Teachers should 
frankly recognize the fact that much of the world’s great¬ 
est poetry cannot be appreciated even by children of supe¬ 
rior ability as they lack the emotional maturity that makes 
such poetry significant to older readers."I* 2 ? ... "The emo¬ 
tional demands made by a large number of poems ... are such 

that the experiences of everyday life, especially the life 

128 

of the child, do not prepare for...." Poems that con¬ 
tain complex imagery raise similar problems of comprehension 
in the minds of junior high school pupils. Nor is a poem 
that depends for its effect upon subtleties of technique 
successful in rousing responsive chords in the minds of 
pupil readers. 

(7) Certain aspects of poetry should be consciously 
taught. It is very well to say that poems should be read for 
enjoyment only, but it is even better to know why we appreci¬ 
ate them. As with all works of art, true appreciation de- 

Jagger, op. cit .. Preface, p. viii. 

12 7 Kangley, on. cit .. p. 142. 

128 Ibid., p. 61. 







- 










« 

























■ 

' 



















123 


pends upon full understanding. "I feel that we should not 
shrink too much from this dissecting of the poetic master¬ 
pieces; for analysis helps furnish the students* sense of 
discrimination with positive attitudes to supplement and 
even to largely displace the negative ones. It helps him 
to have reasons and standards not only for disliking bad 
poetry but also for liking good poetry." 12 ? Too anxious 
teachers must of course heed the warning that analysis is 
never the end itself, but only a means to the end of poetry 
appreciation. This is Moore’s recommendation: "A better 
and sounder practice (of setting up a body of principles 
and standards to govern liter ary art) would seem to be for 
the student to learn to distinguish some of the most dis¬ 
tinctive features of beauty and delight in each general 
type studied and thus in an accumulative way build up a 
fuller consciousness of the effect of such features where¬ 
ver they appear." * 1 ^ 0 To realize this goal the teacher 
must more often guide than dictate. Lamborn has rightly 
said: "It is as ridiculous as it is fatal to try to make 
a poem suggest for a child the ideas it suggests to the 
adult. Their common ground is in emjoyment of its music 
and pictures; the setting and background must vary with 

12 ? Martin R. Katz, "A Poetry Unit in Action", The English 
Journal . Dec. 1936, p. 338. 

1 ^° Annie E. Moore, op. cit ., p. 3* 






* . 



















. 

* 

* 








< 





126 


knowledge and age." 1 ^ 1 

(8) Enjoyment should be the outcome of all poetry 
experience. That is precisely what makes the teaching of 
the poetry selections in literature so difficult. What is 
enjoyed by one child may leave another completely indiffer¬ 
ent, or even antagonistic. The conclusions to this study 
list only some of the tangible factors on which enjoyment 
of poetry depends. There are probably at least as many in¬ 
tangible ones that appear from time to time; most of these 
are found in the subconscious minds of the pupils and there¬ 
fore beyond the ken of the teacher. Still, there may be 
some guidance in the opinions of those who have successfully 
taught enjoyment to their pupils. Strong gives this advice: 
"Pick poems on subjects that will interest the pupils; 
stress sound and rhythm; keep explanation and annotation to 
a minimum; — put enjoyment first and second and third and 
fourth." 1 ^ 2 Arbuthnot says: “When we choose a new poem for 
children we may well test it by asking ourselves these 
questions: First - does it sing - with good rhythm, true, 
unforced rhymes, and a happy compatability of sound and 
subject....; second, is the diction distinguished - with 
words that are rich in sensory and associative meanings...; 

Lambom, on. cit .. p. 124. 

132 Leonard A. Strong, The Teaching of English in Schools . 

Macmillan & Go., Ltd., London, 1947. Quoted in Time 

Magazine, Sept. 1.5, 1947, P« 36. 













* 

- 














. 








. 






. 




' 











. • • « 










- 








« 9 

• - - 









127 


third, does the subject matter of the poem invest the 
strange or the everyday experiences of life with new impor¬ 
tance and richer meaning? 1 ' 1 -^ 

Above all, it must not be thought that appreciation 
will quite automatically be the end result af a poetry ex¬ 
perience even when all conditions concerned seem to be 
favorable. Appreciation is too elusive for that. It may 
come quite unexpectedly, or it may never come. Apprecia¬ 
tion is often too passive or too active; too critical and 
analytic, or too uncomprehending; it is wrongly directed; 
or it omits essential elements; or it is too emotional.”-^ 4 
(9) To assist the pupils In arriving at a fuller 
appreciation of poetry, the teacher should read a great 
deal of well-chosen poetry to them. Let him be humble 
about his abilities to do this rightly; it will demand the 
best that there is in him. But the rewards will be well 
worth his efforts. Children will invariably respond to 
obvious sound effects and marked rhythms: 

f Tis not enough no harshness gives offense, 

The sound must seem an echo of the sense.” 

Lamborn says ”1 have found that nothing in poetry 
attracts children more, and nothing excites them to spon¬ 
taneous appreciation and criticism than that ’echo of the 

133 

Arbuthnot, op. cit ., p. 160. 

134 


Jagger, op. cit., p. 33 






. 

• ''i . •- . V 

. 

• . 

. . 

, , ' ' 


' ' 


' 


. , ’ • ■ ■ 




« .. 





c 














128 


sense' ^5 He also says: "The musical charm of poetry de- 
pends almost as much upon tone and enunciation in the reader 
as that of music itself depends upon perfect tune in the in¬ 
strument.” Abercrombie asserts that ”poetry can never have 
its proper value unless it is heard as well as understood. 
Either, then, it must be read aloud, or, if you read it to 
yourself, you must mentally hear every word you read.”^^ 

It goes without saying that it is this last requirement 
which the pupils find nearly impossible to meet. That is 
why the teacher should read to them. In the case of nar¬ 
rative poetry, children are discouraged by the very length 
of it when they see it on the printed page, but nearly all 
of them thoroughly enjoy its auditory appeal. 

In ”01d Man Long Ago” a child sees at dusk a quaint 

old figure, so clearly described by the author that any 

child-artist could draw his picture. The child telling of 

the mysterious vision feels she may be doubted, and she adds, 

Some see this and some see that, 

As soon as shadows fall; 

Some see little, and some see much, 

And some see nothing at all.** 

It seems not unreasonable to conclude that wherever 
children are sympathetically and skilfully taught that type 

Lamborn, on. c it .. p.46., ibid., p.31. 

I3& Laseelles Abercrombie, Poetry - Its Music and Meaning , 

London, Oxford University Press, Humphrey Milford, 

1932, p.17. 

A From ”Magpie Lane”, by Nancy Byrd Turner. 












„ 





















. 










. 























































5 












' 



















4 


















• • 

. 

•« « 5 









129 


of poetry which they themselves prefer, there will be smal¬ 
ler numbers of those who "see nothing at all." There will 
be fewer pupils whose definition of poetry is "something 
that rhymes", or who say that "poetry is where every line 
begins with a capital." There will be fewer boys like the 
one who, in Kangley’s study, "relentlessly wrote on the bot¬ 
tom of all his preference sheets, *1 don’t like no poems. 1 " 
There will be more pupils who will share experiences with 
the girl who wrote, in this study, that the poem gave her 
"a nice warm feeling." One may criticize her definition, 
but she made it clear that the appeal of the poem was to 
her emotions rather than to her intellect, and so, for 
her, the poem had accomplished its mission. 




130 


BIBLIOGRAPHY A 


Abbott, Allan, "The Imaginative Element in Poetry," 

Teachers College Record . October 1926. 

"Rhythm in Poetry," Teachers College Record , 

March 1927. 

Abbott, Allan and Trabue, M. R., "A Measure of Ability to 
Judge Poetry", Teachers College Record , March 1921. 

Abercrombie, Lascelles, Poetry - Its Music and Meaning , 

Oxford University Press, London, Humphrey Milford, 
1932. 

Arbuthnot, May Hill, Children and Books . Scott, Eoresman 
& Co., New York, 1947- 

Baker, Eranklin T., "Studies in Appreciation," Teachers 
College Record . October 1926. 

Barnes, Walter, The Children T s Poets . World Book Co., 
Yonkers-on-Hudson, New York, 1924. 

- "Contemporary Poetry for Children," The Elemen ¬ 
tary English Review , January 1936. 

Bayliss, A. E. M., Poems for Practical People , Harrap & 

Co., London, 1949* 

Blumenthal, Joseph 0., "Literature for Plain People," The 
English Journal . May 1943* 

Butt, G. Baseden, Invitation to Poetry . Gerald Howe Ltd., 
London. 

Cammerts, Emile, The Poetry of Nonsense . E. P. Dutton & 

Co., New York, 19267* 

Chaneles, Sol., "A New Attitude Towards Poetry," Element ary 
English Magazine , November 1930. 

Coleman, Mary M., "Teaching Poetry in Elementary Grades," 
Wilson Bulletin . May 1938. 

Daiches, David, Poetry and the Modern Y/orld . University of 
Chicago Press, 1940. 





























131 


Diltz, B. C., Poetic Pilgrimage, Toronto, Clarke, Irwin & 

Co., iJZT. 

Drew, Elizabeth, Discovering Poetry , Norton & Co. Inc., 

New York, 1933 . 

Drury, Honor, Verse Composition for Children , George Har- 
rap & Co. Ltd., London, 1937- 

Eastman, Max, Enjoyment of Poetry (Revised Edition), 

Charles Scribner's sons, New York, 1932. 

Eliot, T. S., The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism . 
Faber, London. 

Endres, Mardie Weatherby, "Poetry in the Junior High School," 
English Journal , November 1930. 

Foley, Louis, "Appreciation Cannot be Taught," School and 
Society . vol. 57, May 8, 1945. 

Glassey, Stanley, The Groundwork of Criticism - Judging 

Poetry . Oxford University Press, London: Geoffrey 
cumberlege, 1949- 

Glicksberg, Charles I., "Poetry and Philosophy in the 

English Classroom," The English Journal , vol. 28, 
October 1933* 

Groves, Ruth, "Poetry: Its Place in the School Curriculum," 

The Elementary School Journal , vol. 44 , January 1944 . 

Gullan & Gurrey, Poetry Speaking for Children . Expression 
Co., Boston, 1937» 

Gurrey, P., The Appreciation of Poetry . Oxford University 
Press, London: Geoffrey Cumberlege, 1946. 

Hadley, J. E., "Teaching Poetry Appreciation," Bulletin 
Purdue University , 1936. 

Housman, A. E., The Name and Nature of Poetry . 

Huber, Miriam B., Bruner, Herbert B. and Curry, Charles M., 
C hildren's Interests in Poetry . Rand, McNally & Co., 
Chicago, 1927* 
























132 


Jacobs, Leland B., "Poetry for Children,” -Elementary 
English Magazine . March 1950. 

Jagger, J. H., Poetry in school . London, University of 
London Press, 1928. 

Kangley, Lucy, Poetry Preferences in the Junior high Schoo l, 
Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia 
University, New York, 1938. 

Katz, Martin R., ”A Poetry Unit in Action,” The English 
Journal , December 1936. 

Kyte, George 0., "Childrens Reactions to Fifty Selected 
Poems,” The..jq.Qmant.arg. School Journal f February 
194 7. 

Lamborn, E. A. Greening, The Rudiments of Criticism , Oxford 
OLarendon Press, 1928. 

Lewis, c. Day, Poetry for You , Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1945 

McCallum, James Dow, The Revised..college Omnibus, New York, 
Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1939• 

McGookin, J. Y., "The Children’s Story,” unpublished 

Bachelor of Education Thesis, University of Alberta, 
1924. 

Mackintosh, Helen K., ”A Critical Study of Children’s 
Choices in Poetry," University of Iowa Studies, 
Student Education .. 1932. 

Malone, Ted, Ted Malone’s Scrapbook , Bookmark Press, Camden, 
N. J., 1943. 

Moore, Annie E., Literature Old and New for C hildren . 

Cambridge, Mass., The Riverside Press, 1934. 

Norvell, George W., The Reading Interests of Young People , 
Boston, D. C. Heath & Co., 1950. 

Percival, Modern Poems for Modern Youth , Ginn & Co., Toronto 

Perry & Bliss, A Study ..of Poetry . Houghton Mifflin Co., 
Boston, 1920. 

Ridley, M. R., Poetry and the Ordinary Reader , Bell, London, 
1930. 






















. . 




* 




c 




4 

. 

■ 




* 














■ 








i ■. : o . 

, 




■: 

* 


- 

. 9 • • 

















133 


Shachtman, Joseph, "Elements of English Related to the 

Judgment of Poetry in Grade XI,” Teachers College 
Record, vol. 31, December 1929. 

Simpson, Mamie S., "An Experiment in Memory Work the 

Object of Which Has Been to Find Out What Con¬ 
stitutes a Difficult Passage of Memorization for 
the Average Grade IX Pupil," Unpublished Bachelor 
of Education Thesis , University of Alberta, 1930. 

Strong, Leonard A., The Teaching of English in Schools , 
London, MacMillan & Co., 1947* 

Untermeyer, Louis, Poetry - Its Appreciation and Enjoyment , 
New York, Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1934. 

Weekes, Blanche E., "The Influence of Meaning on Children’s 
Choices of Poetry." Teachers College Record , vol. 
31, November 1929. 

Wells, Ruth E., "A Study of Tastes in Humorous Literature 
Among Pupils of Junior and Senior High Schools," 
Journal of Educational Research , October 1934. 

Wheeler, Paul Mowbray, "Comparing Poems on Like Topics," 
English Journal , March 1931. 

Williams, E. D., Winter, L. and Woods, J. M., "Tests of 

Literary Appreciation," British Journal of Educa¬ 
tional Psychology . November 1933• 

Worth, Kathryn, "Poetry and the Child," Atlantic Monthly , 
September 1937. 















134 


BIBLIOGRAPHY B 


SOURCES OF POEMS 


Alexander, W. J., Shorter Poons, T. Eaton Co. Ltd., Toronto, 
1932. — 

(Man and Bat: D. H. Lawrence) 

Barnes, Walter, Contemporary Poetry for Children , article in 
Elementary English Review, January to December 1936. 
(Green Moth: Winnifred Welles) 

(Moon in October: Hilda Conklingj 

Bayliss, A. E. M., Poems for Practical People . Harrap & Co. 
(Jack: E. V. Lucas) 

Canada Book of Prose and Verse : Book One , Lome Pierce and 
Dora Whitefield, The Ryerson Press, Toronto, 1938. 
(Smells: Christopher Morley) 

Canby, Opdycke, Gillum, Carter, High School English . Book 
III, Macmillan Co., New York, 1936. 

(Quatrain: Elizabeth Morrow) 

Dickie, Donalda, Junior Language, Book C ., W. J. Gage & Co., 
Toronto, 1941. 

(The Throstle: Tennyson) 

Dilworth, Ira, Twentieth Century Verse , Clarke, Irwin & Co., 
1943. 

(Woody ards in Rain: Anne Marriott) 

(Rilloby Rill: Sir Henry Newbolt) 

Dew, Harold, Poems Past and Present , J. M. Dent & Sons, 
Vancouver, 1946. 

(When the Frost is on the Punkin 1 : James Whitcomb Riley) 

Junior Hymnal , Evangelical Lutheran Augustana Synod, Rock 
Island, Ill. 

(Let Us With Gladsome Mind) 

(Praise to the Lord) 

Life and Literature 

(Slowly the Moon-) 




















133 


Longfellow, H. W., The Poetical Works of H. W t Longfellow , 

Ward, Long & Co. Ltd., London, l?l8. 

(Evangeline) 

(Hiawatha) 

(A Psalm of Life) 

McCord, David, Pocket Book of Humorous Verse , 1?46. 

(The Perfect Reactionary: Hughes Mearns) 

(The Duck: Ogden Nash) 

MacDonald, Adrian, A Pedlar’s Pack , Macmillan Co., Toronto, 

1937. 

(Snare: James Stephens) 

Malone, Ted, Pocket Book of Popular Verse , Pocket Books 
Inc., New York, 1943. 

(The Snowstorm: Ralph Waldo Emerson) 

(October’s Bright Blue Weather: Helen Hunt Jackson) 

( The Death of the Flowers: William Cullen Bryant,) 
(Work: Henry Van Dyke) 

(Do You Fear the Wind? Hamilton Garland) 

(Rubaiyat, v. LXXI: Omar Khayyam) 

Parker, E. W., Modern Poetry , Longmans, Green & Co., London, 
1940. 

(The Hawk: Arthur Christopher Benson) 

(Bats: D. H. Lawrence) 

0?ied Beauty: Gerard Manley Hopkins) 

(The Pike: Edmund Blunden) 

Penguin Poets: The Centuries’ Poetry , vol. 3 . Pope to Keats , 

Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, Whitefriars’ Press, 1?30. 
(Peter Bell: William Wordsworth) 

Proctor, Mary, Stories of Starland . Silver, Burdett & Co., 

New York, l8?8. ~~ 

(Starlight at Sea) 

Reprint from Guidebook, Friends and Neighbors . 

(Falling Snow: Anonymous) 

(Snow Toward Evening: Melville Cane) 

Robins, John D., A Pocketful of Canada, Wm. Collins & Sons, 
Ltd., 70 Bond St., Toronto. 

(The Merchant’s Tale: V/atson Kirkconnell) 

Seely, Howard F., On Teaching English , American Book Co., 

New York, 1933* 

(Gone - A Day) 














- 



t 








136 


Speare, M. E., Pocket Book of Verse . Great English and 

American Poems, Pocket Books, Inc., New York, 1944. 
(Richard Gory: Mwin Arlington Robinson) 

(Father william: Lewis Carroll) 

Stevenson, Robert L., A Child's Garden of Verses . Copp, 

Clark Co., Toronto, 1918. 

(Travel ) 

Tressler, J. c., English in Action, course Two, Revised 
Edition, D. C. heath & Co., New York, 1933. 

(Winter Night: Marjorie helm) 

(Spain: Josephine Miles) 

Untermeyer, Louis, Rocket Book of storv Poems T Pocket Books 
of Canada, Montreal, 1946. 

(Destruction of Sennacherib: Byron) 

(The Yirtuous Fox and the Self-righteous Cat: 
(Isabel: Ogden Nash) (John Cunningham) 

Wiggin, Late Douglas, The Posy Ring . Doubleday, Doran & Co., 
Garden City, New York, 1933* 

(Rockaby, Lullaby: J. Gilbert no 11and) 

Concordia Publishing Rouse, Evangelical Lutheran Hymn-book . 
St. Louis, Mo*, 1931. 

(Morning Star : Reginald Reber) 

College survey of English Literature, shorter Edition . 

Earcourt, Brace & Co., New York, 1942. 

(A Dirge: shelley) 

(Pippa: Browning) 

Daiches, David, Poetry ana tne Modem World . University of 
Chicago Press, 1940. 

(On Nature: W. H. Davies) 

(Moon and Child: W. H. Davies) 

London Opinion 

(Nature Stuff Through a Monocle) 

Saturday Evening Post , 1943. 

(Truant: Elias Lieberman) 

Limerick: Edward Lear 

The Fairest Action- 


Sunset. 














APPENDIX 






138 


A SURVEY OF POETRY PREFERENCES IN 
THE JUNIOR HIG U SCHOOL 


To the teachers and pupils who are helping in this survey by 
reading the following poems: 


This booklet consists of a 

number of pages of poems. Each page contains 2 , 3, or 4 
poems that are grouped on the same page for special reasons. 
You are asked to read each page in turn, and to state at the 
bottom of the page which poem you like best, and which you 
like the least. Try to give a reason for each choice, but do 
not spend too much time in trying to think of special reasons*. 
You may like a certain poem because of its rhythm f its 
rhyme scheme, or for the thought that it contains. Similarly, 
you may dislike a poem because it treats of a distasteful 
subject , or because you cannot understand it. please be sure, 
in any case, that you indicate your H best-liked M poem on 
each page. 

There is no time limits You 

should be able to finish within the regular 35-minute period. 
If you don't* please come back to it later in the day, or 
your teacher may be able to extend time somewhat beyond the 
period. It is important that you try to finish the booklet. 
When done, hav; the teacher collect all booklets so that they 
may b.; sent back to me. 


asked for below. 


Please complete the information 


NAME: 

AGE: GRADE: SEX: 

SCHOOL: 

Are you interested in: 

MUSIC: 

DRAMATICS: 

POETRY: 

NATURE: 

PEOPLE: 

What are your special hobbies, or leisure time activities? 












U H3 


139 


See the pretty snowflakes 
Falling from the sky; 

On the walk and housetop 
Soft and thick they lie*. 

On the window-ledges 
On the branches bare 
Now,how -fast they gather, 
Pilling all the air! 

Look into the garden, 

’There the grass was green; 
Covered by the snowflakes, 
Not a blade is seen. 

Now the bare black bushes 
All look soft and white, 
Every twig is laden- 
What a pretty sight* 


Suddenly the sky turned gray. 

The day, 

Which had been bitter and chill. 
Grew soft and still. 

Quietly 

From some invisible blossoming tree 
Pillions of petals cool and white 
Drifted and blow, 

Lifted and flew,- 

Fell with the falling night. 


Announced by all’the trumpets of the sky. 

Arrives the snow, and, driving o’er the fields. 
Seems nowhere to alight: the whited air 
Hides hills and woods, the river, and the hoav'n 
And veils the farmhouse at the garden’s end. 
he sled and traveller stopped, the courier’s fe 
clayed, all friends shut out, the housemates si 
Around the radiant fireplace, enclosed 
In a tumultuous privacy of storm. 

I like Numb e r ■ _b o s t. My REA SON is : - 


I like Number least. 


REASON:- 


ct* O 











/ 



■ r il X 


• • • . . a .• 

. t : : a a v-'o . i/i 





1 


14(5. 

The n:. ■•'it the green moth came for me, 

A creamy moon poured down the hill, 

The meadow seemed a silver sea. 

Small pearls were hung in every tree, 

■And all so still, so still - 

He floated in on my white bed, 

A strange and soundless fellow, 

I saw the horns wave on his head, 

He stepped across my pillow 
In tiny ermine boots, and spread 
His cape of green and yellow. 

He came so close that I could see 
His golden eyes, and sweet and chill 
His faint breath wavered over me, 

’’Come, child, my Beautiful 1 ’, said he 
And all so still,, so still- 

o * e • e a 


, The hawk slipt out of the pine, and rose in the sunlit air: 

Steady and still he poised; his shadow slept on the grass: 

And the bird’s song sickened and sank: she cowered with furtive stare 9 
Dumb, till the .quivering dimness should flicker and shift and pass. 
Suddenly down he dropped: she heard the hiss of his wing, 

Pled with a scream of terror: oh, would she had dared to restl 
For the hawk at eve was full, and there was no bird to sing, 

And over the heather drifted the down from a bleeding breast*. 

• O' • €<■ « 

, Look up, and you see things flying 

Between the day and the night;, 

Swallows with spools of dark thread sewing the shadows together*. 

A circle swoop, and a quick parabola under the bridge arches 
Where light pushes through; 

A sudden turning upon itself of a thing in the air. 

A dip to the water,, 

And you think: 

’’The swallows are flying so larte I” 

Swallows? 

Dark air-life looping 

Yet missing the pure loop —- 

A twitch, a twitter, an elastic shudder in flight 
And serrated wings against the sky. 

Like a glove, a black glove thrown up at the light, 

And falling back. 

Hover swallows l 

Bats l - - - - 

Bats, and an uneasy creeping in one’s scalp 
As the bats swoop overhead l - - - - 

Wings like bits of umbrella. 

Bats [ 

Creatures that hang themselves up like an old rag, to sleep; 

And disgustingly upside down, - - - - 
Bats l 


I like Number_best* My REASON is:- 

I like Number__ least REASON 












l 




« 












141 


j- • Let us with a gladsome mind 

Praise the Lord, for He is Kind: 

For His mercies e’er endure, 

Ever faithful, ever sure. 

He, with all-, commanding might, 

Filled the new-made world with light; 
For His mercies e’er endure, 

Ever faithful, ever sure. 

All things living He doth feed; 

His full hand supplies their need: 

For His mercies e'er endure, 

Ever faithful, ever sure. 


. Praise to the Lord, the almighty, the King of creation’. 

G my soul, praise Him, for He is thy health and salvation’. 

All ye who hear, 

Now to his temple draw near, 

Join me in glad adoration. 

Praise to the Lord, who doth prosper thy work and defend thee i 
Surely His goodness and mercy here daily attend thee; 

Ponder anew 

What the almighty can do, 

If with His love He befriend thee ’ 


Praise thou the Lord, who with marvelous wisdom hath made thee, 
Decked thee with health, and with loving hand guided and stayed thee. 
How oft in grief 

Hath not He brought thee relief, 

Spreading His wings to o’ershade thee ’. 


3. Glory be to God for dappled things- 

For skies of couple-colour as a brinded cow; 

For rose-moles all in stipple upon trout that swim; 
Fresh-firecoal chestnut-falls; finches’ wings; 

Landscape plotted and pieced - fold, fallow, and plough; 
and all trades, their gear and tackle and trim. 

all things counter, original, spare, strange; 
whatever is fickle, freckled (who knows how?) 

With swift, slow; sweet, sour; adazzle, dim; 

He fathers-forth whose beauty is past change: 

Praise him. 


best. REASON is:- 

least. REESON:- 


I like Number 
I like Number 



























5. 142 


1. Slowly the moon, 

Humped, crooked, red, remote, 

Rises,, tangled and scrawled behind the spruce-tops. 

Higher she rises, - 

Grows round, and smaller, and white, 

And sails up the empty sky, high over the spruce-tops. 

She washes in silver, 

Illusively clear, the log barn, 

The lop-sided stack by the barn, and the slumbering cabin. 


2 . The rose-finned roach and bluish bream 
And staring ruffe steal up the stream 
Hard by their glutted tyrant, now 
Still as a sunken bough. 

He on the sandbank lies, 

Sunning himself long hours 
kith stonv gorgon eyes: 

Westward the hot sun lowers. 

Sudden the gray pike changes, and quivering poises for slaughter; 
Intense terror wakens around him, the shoals scud away, but there chanc 
A chub unsuspecting; the prowling fins ouicken, in fury he lances; 

And the miller that opens the hatch stands amazed at the whirl in the 

. water. 


3 . stinging 

gold swarms 
upon the spires 
silver 

chants the litanies the 
great bells are ringing with rose 
the lewd fat bells 

and a tall 


wind 

is dragging 

the 

sea 

with 

dream 

-S 

I like Number . ■ __ best. My REASON is:- 

I like Number _ best. REASON:- 











6 


14J 


Gone - a day - 

Into the great vast depths 

Of time, hich strays behind 

Like the little boy who wishes 

To throw stones at the passers-by: 

And what have 1 done 

To chain you to the future 0 

Day, I have made pf you no link 

Between the past and present, 

But only a void 
Upon which I look back 
And - shudder. 


Yes, I will spend the livelong day 
With Nature in this month of May; 

And sit beneath tne trees, and share 
T'y bread with birds whose homes are there; 
'While cows lie down to eat, and sheep 
Stand to their necks in grass so deep; 
While birds do sing with all their might, 
As tnough they felt the e rth in flight. 


Grasshoppers four a-fiddling went, 
Heigh-ho T . never be still! 

They earned but little towards their rent 
But all day long with their elbows bt-nt 
They fiddl.d a tune called Rilloby-rilloby, 
Fiddled a tune called Rilloby-rill. 


The hidden haunts within my mind 
No teacher born can ever find 
Who is not kind. 


I love the woods, dark, unexplored, 
The golden sun in meadows stored, 
Swift streams to ford. 


lust sitting on a fence is fun, 
mnd noticing without a gun 
A phipmunk run. 

The smell of open fields is sweet; 

I hear the earth m gladness bs^t 
Beneath my feet. 

My pup mid I jaro hoboes ; we 
Bnjoy the thrills of vagrancy 
And being free. 

If you believe tnat I am wrong, 

Some morning, teacher, hum a song 
And come along! 

I like Number . best. My REASON IS:.... . 


. My Rc as on is 


1 liko Number 


le as t 













7 


144 


1- 3 suns and skies and cloads of June, 

And flowers of -June together. 

Ye cannot riv-1 for cne hour 
October's bright blue weather, 

• then loud the bumble-bee makes haste, 

Belated, thriftless vagrant, 

And golden-rod is dying fast, 

And lanes with graces are fragrant; 
when all the lovely wayside things 
Their white-winged seeds are s owing^ 

And in the fields ? still green and fair, 

Late aftermaths are growing; 

C sarcs and skies and flowers of June, 

Count all your beasts together. 

Love loveth best of all the year 
October's bright blue 'leather. 

o c © © o o 

The melancholy days are come, the saddest of the year f 
Of wailing winds, and naked woods, and meadows brown and sere. 

Heap'd in the hollows of the grove, the autumn leavdit lie dead; 

They rustle to the eddying gust, and to the rabbit's tread. 

The robin and the wren are fCown, and from the shrubs the jay, 

And from the wood-top calls the crow through all the gloomy day, 

when the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the shock, 

And you hear the kyouck and gobble of the struttm 1 turkey-cock. 

And the clackin' of the guineys, and the cluckin' of the hens, 

And the rooster's hallylooyer as he tiptoes on the fence; 

0 it's then's the times a feller is a-feelin' ait his best. 

With the rasin' sun to greet him from a night of peaceful rest, 

As he leaves the house, bare-headed, and goes out to feed the stock, 
When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the shock. 

They's something kindo' hearty-like about the atmusfere, 

When the heat of summer's over and the coolin' fall is here¬ 
of course we miss the flownrs, and the blossoms on the trees, 

And the mor.Jo 1 c of the hunmin'-birds and buzzin' of thc bees 5 
Tut the air's so appetisih'; and the landscape through the haze 
Of a crisp and sunny morning of the airly autumn days 
Is a pictur' that no painter has the colorin' to mock- 
When the frost is on the punkin and the fodder's in the shock. 

o o o 0 0 • 

How had the season returned, when the nights grow colder and longer, 
And the retreating sun the sign of the Scorpion enters. 

Birds of passage sailed through the leaden air, from the ice-bound, 
Desolate northern bays to the shores of tropical islands. 

Harvests were gathered in; and wild with the winds of September 
Wrestled the trees of the forest, as Jacob of old with the angel. 

All the signs foretold a winter long and inclement. 

Bees, with prophetic instinct of want, had hoarded their honey 
Till the hives"overflowed; and the Indian hunters asserted 
Cold would the winter be, for thick was the fur of the foxes. 

Such was the advent of autumn. 


I like Humber best. My REA30H is 

I like Humber least. REASOHs- 



















u 145 

.hen I went into my room at mid-morning- 

A bird 

Flying round the room in insane circles. 

In insane circles l 

Round and round and round 

,/ith a twitchy, nervous, intolerable flight, 

And a neurasthenic lunge. 

And an impure frenzy 5 
A bat, big as a swallow. 

Out, out of my room! 

I flicked him on, 

Trying to drive him through the window. 

He could not go out, 

I also realized --- 

It was the light of day which he could not enter, 

Any more than I could enter the white-hot door of a blast-furnace. 


Hunch your back a bit more, my mouse, 

And dig your chin deeper in the deep, soft sno\ 

The wind is so cold tonight 

And the world A.g. ; so white l 

See how that tn£h tree beats 

The air with outspread fingers 

And shakes himself flake-free. 

The wolf-wind bites the. toes of passers-by 
And snaps the twigs of sturdy bush and tree;, 

Up hill and down dale, up hill and down, wind, 
Sing us a lullaby, up hill and down. 

Sing us a song while the moon looks on, 

Then - rock us to Breaming. 


Padres in the carved churches. 

In the high, mountain monasteries. 

Sing Ave Maria in the fading light. 

Sing Plail Mary in the light of the setting sun. 

Bullfighters in the rainbow squares. 

Pricked by a thousand dancing dark eyes, 

Wave red cloaks for the frightened eyes of bulls, 
Have red cloaks for dark eyes and bright red roses 


Peasants in the high fields 

See the sun is setting and straighten their backs, 

And the sun haloes their heads,.and the bullfighters 1 , 

and the padres 1 5 

Haloes this land singing Ave Maria, singing Hail Mary. 


I like Humber_ 
I like Humber 


best. My reason iss- 
least. Reason;- 






































. 


" 















1 


(9) 


14b 


I should like to rise and go 
Where the golden apples grow; 

Where, below another shy 
Parrot islands anchored lie, 

Where, in sunshine reaching out, 
Pastern cities, niles about, 

Are with mosque and minaret 
Among sand’ 7, gardens set., 

And the rich goods fro:' near and far 
Hang for sale in the bazaar, -- 
Where, in jungles near and far, 
Man-devouring tigers are, 

Lying close and giving ear 
Lest the hunt be drawing near, 

Where, among the desert sands, 

Some deserted city stands, 

There I T 11 cone when I’m a nan 
Vith a camel caravan. 


2 . I hear a sudden cry of pain! 

There is a rabbit in a snare; 
Now I hear the erv again, 

But I cannot tell from where. 

But I cannot tell from where 
Ho is calling out for aid! 
Crying on the frightened air. 
leaking everything afraid.’ 

Making everything afraid.’ 
Wrinkling up his little face* 
As he cries again for aid; 

- And I cannot find the place .’ 

And I cannot find the place 
Whore his raw is in the snare.’ 
Little One/’ Ch, Little On l 
I am searching everywhere.’ 


3. Tell re not, in no ur n f u 1 n unb r s , 

Life is but an empty dream’ - 
For th soul is dead that slumbers, 
And things are not what they seem. 

Lives of great men all remind us 
We can make our lives sublime, 

And, departing, leave behind us 
Footprints on the sands of time. 

Let us, then be up and doing, 

With a heart for any fat:; 

Still achieving, still pursuing, 

Learn to labour and to wait. 

I like Number ___ best. My REASON is:-- 

I like Number _ least. 


REASON:- 















Thy beauty haunts me heart and soul, 

Oh thou fair Loon, so close and bright; 
Thy beauty makes me like the child 
That cries aloud to own thy light; 

The little child that lifts each arm 
To press thee to her bosom warm. 


Let me but do my work from day to day, 

In field or forest, at the desk or loom, 

In roaring market-place or tranquil room; 
Let me but find it in my heart to say, 

"Tien vagrant wishes beckon me astray, 

’’This is my work; my blessing, not my doom; 
Of all who live, I am the one by whom 
This wort can best be done in the right way 


The day began with flakes of snow 
That fell in droves by half p c st seven, 
Flooding a silent world below 
Out of a dark and windless heaven. 

They fluttered down, a flood of fleece, 
Filling the morning sky completer 
Than if ten billion big white geese 
Mere beirS plucked by old Saint Peter 


Yes, I will spend the livelong day 
Nith Nature in this month of May; 

And sit bene -th the trees, and share 
I.ly bread with birds whose homes r rc there; 
T 7hile cows lie down to eat and sheep 
Stand to their necks in grass so deep; 
rr hile birds do sing with all their might, 
As though they felt the earth in flight. 


I like Number_best. My LEAS ON is: 

I like Numb er_1 e ast. 


REASON: 








I , .a 


. 

y 








■ 














* 











. 
















1 . 


14-8 


The moon is at her crystal window 
Spinning and weaving- 

The moon looks out of ...her window of crystal 
She has no lights exciting stars 
That hang on threads unknown 
From her sky-ceiling, her walls. 

Their twinkling is like the twittering of many birds 
In the early morning. 

The moon sits by her crystal window; 

She sings to herself and spins- 

Spins the pale blue silken thread 
That holds earth dangling 
Over deep night-- 


2. Overhead the countless stars 

Like eyes of love wore beaming, 
Underneath the weary Earth 
All breathless lay a-dreaming. 

The twilight hours like birds flow by, 
As lightly and as free; 

Ten thousand stars were in the sky, 
Tan thousand in the sea. 

For every wave with dimpled face 
That leaped upon the air 
Had caught a star in its embrace 
And heL&i it trembling there. 


3. Many things Nokomis taught him 

Of the stars that shine in heaven; 

Showed him Ishkoodah, the comet, 
Ishkoodah, with fiery tresses; 

Showed the death-dance of the spirits, 
Warriors with their plumes and vanr-clubs, 
Flaring far away to northward 
In the frosty nights of winter; 

Showed the bro n d, white road in heaven, 
Pathway of the ghosts, the shadows, 
Running straight across the heavens, 
Crowded with the ghosts, the shadows. 


I like Number_ best. My REASON is : - 

I like Number_ least. -REASON:- 












1 . \-3ay is it that the poets tell 14 ^ 

oo little of the sense of smell? 
fhese are the odours I love well: 

fhe smell of coffee freshly ground; 

Or rich plum pudding, holly cro^ ned; 

Or onions fried and deeply browned. 

•«oods by moonlight in Jeptember 
mreathe most sweet; and I remember 
many a smoky camp-fire ember. 

Camphor, turpentine, and tea, 
fhe balsam of a Christmas tree 1 ,' • 

fix e s e ore w h i f 1 s 0 f gr a ma rye.- 

ship smells best of all to me I 


fhe smell of woodyar&s in the rain is strong 

like six-foot* lumberjacks with hairy cheats 

and thick axe-leathered hands. 

fhe scent is ram and slices through 

pale drizzle and dull mist 

biting the sense. 

I like to match piled wetness dripping off 
the yellow-brown stacked shingles, 
while behind 

the smoke churns up in black revolving towers 
f r ora lean mi 1*1 ch inne y s . 
now the broad-hipped tugs 

sniff through the squall and swing the oblong booms 
by tar-stained wharves, 
as with a last fierce gesture rain 
small-pocks the oil-green water with a hurled 
ten million wire nails. 


3. fhese have I loved: 

white plates and cups, clean-gleaming, 
Hinged with blue lines; and feathery, faery duet; 
.<et roof's, beneath the lamplight; the strong crust 
Of friendly bread; and many-tasting food; 

<md radiant raindrops couching in cool flowers; 
xand flowers themselves, that sway through sunny 
hours, 

Jrearning of moths that drink them under the moon; 
fhen, the coc1 kindliness of shouts, that scon 
emocth away trouble; and the rough male kiss 
Of blankets; grainy weed; live hair that is 
bhining and free; blue-massing clcuds; rhe keen 
Unpassicned be. uty cf a great machine; 
fhe bonisen of hot water; furs to touch; 
fhe good smell of old clcthos; and cthar such -- 
fhe comfortable smell of friendly fingers, 

Hair’s fragrance, and the musty reek that lingers 
.ibout dead le£ VeS end last year’s ferns . . . 


1 like Humber 


beS t. my K JOs JO L is: - 


j. like Humber 


le. St. 



















1 . 


13 150 


Jack 


Jack had a big black beard and a red sMrt, which was made 
for another. 

His boots were sonebody else’s; 

He wore the doctor’s, coat, 

A a the Vicar’s trousers. 

Personally, I gave hin a hat, but it was too small. 

Everybody liked Jack. 

The Vicar liked him, although he never went to church. 

The doctor liked hin, although he was never ill. 

The girls liked him, because he brought them the first wild 
roses and the sweetest honeysuckle; 

Iso, because he could flatter so outrageously. 

.Hut the boys loved him. 

Vney followed hin in little bands: 

Jack was their hero. 

And no wonder, for he could hit a running rabbit with a stone. 
And he cut then long, straight fishing-poles; 

And he always knew of a fresh nest. 

Besides, he could make a thousand things with his old pocket- 
knife . 


S 


Feter Bell 


He roved among the vales and streams, 

In the green wood and hollow dell; 

They were his dwellings night and dnv,- 
But nature ne’er co^ld find the way 
Into the heart of Peter Bell. 

In vain, through every changeful year, 
Did Nature lead him as before; 

primrose by a river’s brim 
A yellow primrose was to him, 

And it was nothing more. 


3 


Richard Corv 


'Vienever Richard Cory went to town, 
me people on the pavement looked at him: 

He was a gentleman from sole to crown, 

Clean favored, and imperially slim. 

And he was rich - T 7 es, richer than a king - 
and admirably schooled in every grace: 

In fine, we thought that he was everything 
To make ’is wish that we were in his place. 

So on we worked, and waited for the light, 

Aid went with on - 4 the. meat, and cursed the bread; 
,nd Richard Cory, one calm summer night, 

Vent home and put a bullet through his head. 

I like Number _____ best. My RE. JSON is 


I like Number 












151 


1. In night's brave darkness lovely < \ctior r -^lov’er, 
Red with oar courage, nurnle with our nride, 

Only to shrivel in one shining hour, 

As "Peter's boasting with the cock-crow died. 


2. Do you fear the force of the wind? 

The slash of the rain? 

Go face them and fight them, 

Be savage again. 

Go hungry and cold like the wolf. 

Go wade like the crane: 

The nalms of your hands will thicken, 

The skin of your cheeks will tan, 

You T 11 grow ragged and weary and swarthy, 
But you r ll walk like a manl 

*»•••* 

3. The fairest action of our human life 
Is scorning to revenge an'injury; 

For who forgives without a. further strife 
His adversary T s heart to him doth tie: 

A nd T tis a firmer conquest truly said 
To win the heart, than overthrow the head. 


4. The Moving Finger writes, and having writ, 

Moves on, nor all your ‘ r> iety nor Wit 
Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line 
Nor all your tears wash out a Word of it. 


I like Humber__best. My REASON is :- 

I like Number___least. My REASON is :- 







*. 























15 2 


1. "You arc ol*, Father William," the '/oung nan said, 

"AdY 3 ^ 0 ur hair has become vefy white; 

An p yet you incessantly stand on "-our head- 
Do you think, at your age, it is right?" 

"In ny youth," Father William replied to his son, 

" l feared it night injure the brain; 

But now - that I T m perfectly sure I have none, 

Why, I do it again and again." 

"You are old," said the youth, "and your jaws are too we ak 
For anytjiing tougher than suet; 

Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak: 
Pra 3 r , how,did you manage to do it?" 

"In"my youth,” said his father, "I took to the lav;, 

And argued each case with ray wife; 

And the. muscular strength which it ga'-e to ny jaw 
Has lasted the rest of ny life." 

2 . The Assyriim cane down like a wolf on the" fold" 

And his cohorts were gleaning in purple and gold; 

And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea, 
When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galileo, 

Like the loaves of the forest when the Summer is green, 
That host with their banners at sunset wore soon: 

Like, the loaves of the forest when Autumn hath blown, 

That host on the morrow lay withered and strown. 

3. The fox and “the cat, as they travelled on day, 

With moral discourses cut shorter the -way: 

™Tis groat," says the fox, "to make justice our guide!" 
"How god-lik.; is morcyl""Grimalkin replied. 

While thus th,.y proccW:^, a wolf from the wood, 

Impati nt of hunger, and thirsting for bio o' 3 , 

Rushed forth - as he saw the dull shepherd aslecp- 
And seized for his supp .r an innocent sheep. 

"In vain, wretched victim, for mercy you bl at, 

"When mutton’s ""at hand," says the wolf, "I must .at." 
"What a wretch," sa}-s the cat, " T tis the vilcst"of brutes; 
Does he feed upon flesh when th. rW s herbage"and roots?" 
Well, onward they marched, and they' moralized still, 

Till they came where some poultry 7- picked chaff " 03 / a mill. 
Sly Reynard surveyed them with gluttonous y s, 

And made, spit of morals7 a pullet his prize. 

A mo use, - ' too, that chanced from h .r cov.rt to stray, 

The greed}?- Grimalkin secured as her prey. 

A spider*"that sat in h r web on"the wall, 

Perceived the poor victims, an ^ 1 pitied their fall; 

She cried, "Of such murders, how guiltless an II" 

Then ran to regale on a new-taken fly. 

I like IT umber _ best- . My PWA30F IS:- 

I like Number least, REASON: 












16 


153 


1. As I was sitting in ny chair 

I knew the hotter: wasn’t there, 

Nor legs, nor bac!', but I just sat, 
Ignoring little things like that. 


2. There was once an old nan with a beard 
Who said, ”It is just as I feared: 

Two larks and a wren, 

Four owls and a hen 

Have all made their nests in nv beard.’” 


3. Fr - spring.’ 

You perfectly priceless old thing.’ 

I’m frightfully bucked at the signs that one sees; 
The jolly old sap in the topping old trees; 

The priceless old lilac, and that sort of rot; 

It jolly well cheers up a chap, does it not? 

It’s so fearfully bright, 

So anazingl y right 

And one feels as one feels if one gets rather tight. 

There’s a tang in the air, 

If you know what I mean, 

And the grass, as it were, 

Is so frightfully green. 

We shall soon have the jolly old bee on the wing. 

Fr - spring! 


4. Behold the duck. 

It does not cluck. 

A cluck it lacks. 

It quacks. 

It is ~sp'ciall T " fond 
Of a puddle or pond. 
When it dines or sups 
It bottoms ups. 


I like number _ best. Vy JpASON is : - 


I like number _ least. Ky RFASON is:- 








17 


1M 


Rea Moby , lullaby, lees in the clover ; - 
Or coring so drowsily , crying so low - 
Roc kub\ , in 1 In by . dear little rover 1 - 
Down into wonderland ••• 

Down to- the cinder land. - 
Gc». oh go i 

Dcg'n ante .wpndpry.3nd.. go \ 

Roc ka by ] ilia by', ■! w >n the clover I 
I ■ on : ( s lat will sparkle at dawn 7 

Roeknby > lullaby, door little rover 7 . 

Into the si-illy wer Id l 
Into the 111} world, 

Gone, oh none l 
Into the ; 


v worm. 


Br igh t e st ax d 1 : 


gone l 

sons of the morning, 


Dawn on our darknoss, and lend us thine aid 
Star of the Bast, the horizon adorning, 
Guide where our infant Redeemer is laid. 


Cold on Jfis cradle 
Low lies His head w 
Angels adore Him in 
Maker, and Monarch, 


■he dew-drops are shining; 
th the beasts of the stall: 
slumber reclining, 
and Savior of all 1 


3, Isabel met an 

enor: 

nous 

bear; 

Isabel, Isabel 

d i 


care « 

The bear was n 

ungr, 

v * t 

he bear was ravenous, 

The hoar■s v ig 

IiOU 

th ;W 

as cruc1 and cavernous. 

The'bear said. 

1 o a 

oe 1 

glad to meet you, 

How do, Isabel 

no 

w 1* 

11 eat you! 

Isabo 1 T s- -ja 1 

t hi 

Q. 1 "k 

worry, 

Isabel didn't 


M 'hi hi 

r scurry* 

She washed hr.n 

ha n 

O, o M. 

no she straightened her hair 

Then Isabel yu 

X 611 

y at 

e the bear up a 

4, "Summer is co 

mi t- r; 

su 

mner ia c oming, 

I knew it 1 

know 

it . 

I kr.ov.; in» 

Light again, 

-ianf 

ag a 

in, life again, love again 

Yes, ny wild 

1 - r + 
J. ...- J KS 

1 e p 

wet - 

"Love again.. 

Q r- p 

aga 

:.n, nest again, young again, 

Never a proph 

0 t S 

v , c r 

a. z y a 

And Lara ly a 

d 0 1 0 

7 a 3 

ya t . 1 i 111e f riend , 

See there os 

har d 

ly a 

Ui Ct J. O j r .0 

I like Number^_ _ 


C S £ 

t. My’ REASON is li¬ 

I like Number 


lea 

st - My REASON r s : ~ 







* 















1 


155 


Rough wind, that meanest loud 
Grief too sad for song; 

Wild wind, when sullen cloud 
Knells all the night long;; 

Sad storm, who fee tears are vain, 
Bare woods whoso branobbs^sttaih* , 
Deep caves and dreary main, - 
Wail, for the world’s wrong I 


2 . 

The year’s at the spring 
And day’s at the morn; 
Morning’s at seven; 

The hill-side’s dew-pearled; 
The lark’s on the wing; 

The snail’s on the thorn: 
God’s in his heaven - 
All’s right with the world! 


Of these two poems, I like Number _ better than 

Number , 

My REASON is: - 


This concludes your reading of these groups #f poems. 

Are you sure that you have stated, on the bottom of each 
page , which p#em on that page you like better than the 
others on the same page? Have you briefly given a reason 
for yourccboice? 


I hope y#u have liked reading the poems and stating your 
preferences* THANK YOU. 

















