
















For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


0JC WBRHS 

rawiBSKaais 



















UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


"SUFFERING AND THE ID^A OF GOD" 


A DISSERTATION 

Submitted to the B. D. Committee 
in candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity 


By 

GEORGE WILLIAM SPADY 


April, 1941 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/sufferingideaofgOOspad 


CONTENTS 


I Introduction---Historical Survey 1 


The 

Wisdom 

Literature 

29 

The 

Book of 

Job 

36 


(i) 

The Story 

33 


(2) 

The Prologue 

42 


(3) 

Job 1 s God 

49 


(4) 

Dialogue between Job 
and his Friends 

54 


(5) 

Yahweh’s Repl 3 f and 

Job’s Confession 

62 


(6) 

The Epilogue 

65 

Conclusion 


67 


IV 









BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bailey and 

Kent 

•History of the Hebrew Commonwealth 

Hew York: Charles Scribner's Sons 

P. XXIV - 1 494 

Breasted, < 

J. H. 

Dawn of Conscience 

1934 P. XVII -J 431 

Hew York: London 

Charles Scribner's Sons 

Clarke, W. 

H. 

Outline of Christian Theology 

1913 P. IX J 488 

Hew York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 

Devine, M. 


Story of Job 

1931 

London: MacMi11an and. Co., Ltd. 

Driver and 

Gray 

International Critical Commentary 

1931 —Job, Vol. 1 

Hew York: Charles Scribner's Sons 

P. 1 XXVIII ^ 376 

Fowler, H. 

T. 

History of the Literature of Ancient 
1937 Israel 

Hew York: MacMillan Co. 

P. XIV J 393 

Goethe, W. 


Faust P. 576 

Leipzig: Breitkopf and Hart el 

Rankin, 0. 

S. 

Israel’s ffisdom Literature 

1936 P. XVI J 370 


Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark 

Kilpatrick, T. B. Suffering-Encyclopaedia of Religion 

and Ethics, Vol. XII 
lew York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 
Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark 

Davidson, A. B. Jeremiah ) Hastings Dictionary of the 

Davison, W. T. Job ) Bible. Vol.II 1901 

Hew York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 

Davidson, A. B. Job—Encyclopaedia Britannica 

1911 Vol. XV 

Cambridge. 

Hew Translation of the Bible 
London: Hodder and Stoughton 


Moffatb, J. 













BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Jastrow, M. (Jr) 

Book of Job 

1920 P. 368 

Philadelphia and London 

J. B. Lipoincott Go. 

Jordan, W. G. 

Book of Job 

1929 P. 193 

New York: MacMillan Co 

Kraeling, E. G. 

Book of the Ways of God 

1938 P. XIII J 270 

London: Society for Promoting Christian 

Knowledge. 

New York: Charles Scribnerls Sons 

Oesterley and 

Robinson 

Hebrew Religion 

1937 P. XIII J 448 

Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge 
London: 

New York: MacMillan Co. 

Peake, A. S. 

Problem of Suffering in the Old 

Testament 

London: Robert Culley 

P. XV 197 

Peake, A .S. 

The Century Bible-*-*Job 

1905 P. 355 

Edinburgh: T. C. and E. C. Jack 










I 


INTRODUCTION 


The work set forth in the following pages has 
directly grown out of a keen interest in the hook 
of Job. Appreciation for the beauty of the book’s 
high literary Qualities and its fascinating theme 
was first stimulated by a course in Old Testament 
Literature given by Dr. A. D. Miller, professor of 
Hebrew and Old Testament at St. Stephen’s College. 

It was here that the universality of the problem 
of suffering was first recognized. The Old Testament, 
consciously or otherwise, is filled with this concern, 
particularly in its prophecies. And whether it is 
moral or physical, on an individual or national scale, 
it has remained one of the most real even to this day. 
One dares to venture forth with the hope of adding a 
little to the clarification of this problem, though 
perhaps making in the end the discovery that the author 
of the book of Job made, namely that there is no com¬ 
plete intellectual solution to some of life’s deepest 
issues. Yet the impulse to go and search could not 
be kept down. The spiritual and moral evolution of 
the Jewish people, traced in its historical events, 
forever reveals the intimate relationship existing 


1 









2 


between their interpretation of life’s tragedies and. 
blessings, and the type of God they worshipped. This 
essay is an investigation of the nature of this re¬ 
lationship and how it found expression in such a work 
as the book of Job. 

Like an individual, a book is the product of the 
many factors which have gone into the making of it. 

One cannot understand either unless he knows something 
of the background out of which it has arisen. For 
this reason it is necessary to touch on passages 
relative to suffering appearing in the Old Testament 
literature orevious to Job. A thesis on this subject 
would not be complete unless it gave at least some 
indication of the contributions of earlier writings. 
Thus the introductory part of this work traces chron¬ 
ologically the evolutionary factor in the develooment 
of the conception of God as related to the orthodox 
idea of reward and punishment—traces this factor 
in the early writings of the Davidic period, of 
f, J H and 11 E”, the prophets, the exilic and post exilic 
literature, and shows how that whole period of pess¬ 
imism and gloom, following the return and previous to 
400 B.C., was largely responsible for that masterpiece 
in the Old Testament appearing at this time. This 
affords the main part of the thesis an intelligent 









3 


setting not otherwise obtained. 

The literature of the Old Testament extends over 
a period of about nine centuries. It was with king 
David, his imperial expansions and his court life 
that the first incentive to writing came. It is with 
the literature of this period that a start has to be 
made. To it we must resort for the conceptions of 
God that prevailed, the beliefs that governed the 
practices of king and commoner alike. 

Israel’s God is still that of the desert, prim¬ 
itive and anthropomorphic. Yahweh is still conceived 
of as being related to the tribe, or, in this case, 
to Israel, and conseouently demands blood revenge. 

In II Sam. 21 :1—Yahweh gives David to understand that 
the reason for the three years' famine is—"The guilt 
of blood lies on Saul and his house, for having slain 
the Gibeonites," and David had failed to do anything 
about it. God is propitiated only after revenge has 
been taken on Saul and his house. 

In II Sam. 24 appears a very confused story. 

The reason for Yahweh's anger is unknown. He tempts 
David to number the people of Israel and Judah. And 
yet in 24:10 "After he had numbered the oeople, David 
felt remorse." Thus with a sense of sin, David is 





4 


r-iven a chance to choose one of three evils which is 
to befall Israel. He chooses the pestilence. Seventy 
thousand of the people are slain. At the entreaty 
of David, in verse :16 "Then the Eternal changed his 
mind about the punishment, and said to the Angel who 
was destroying the people, 'Enough.' hold your hand'." 

Then the whole episode closes with verse :25 "David 
built an altar for the Eternal there, and offered burnt- 
offerings and recompense-offerings; the Eternal was 
propitiated over the land, and the plague- was averted 
from Israel." 

Here is a deity that is capricious, becomes angry 
for no reason, tempts David, and then punishes the people 
for David's wrong doing. Finally Yahweh's anger is 
removed by big sacrifices that are acceptable to him. 
Perhaps this whole story has been suggested to the 
author by a plague that had ravished the land at one 
time. In it, however, we see a people who are guided 
in their actions, not by a moral sense of what is right 
or wrong, but by a vague feeling of what is acceptable 
to their deity. It is the deity that is directly res¬ 
ponsible for famine and pestilence, brought about by 
the exercise of his own capricious nature, just as much 
as by disobedience of any one or all of the people. 






5 


There is nothing that justifies one in believing God 
to be motivated by the welfare of men ’ 

On a higher basis are the elements of suffering 
appearing in the story of David and Bathsheba in chap¬ 
ters 11 and 12 of II Samuel. Briefly, David secretly 
wished to have Bathsheba for his wife, who was already 
the wife of Uriah, one of his soldiers. David knew 
that he could not have her as long as she was the wife 
of another. Thus he arranged with Joab, his general, 
to have Uriah placed in a most dangerous position in 
the next battle, where his death was certain. The 
little drama worked out as planned. Uriah was killed. 
David married Bathsheba. 

Yahweh was disoleased (II Sam. 12 :l). Nathan 
is sent to David with the story told allegorically. 
David’s reactions are significant. In 12:5, "David’s 
anger blazed furiously against the man. ’By the life 
of the Eternal,’ he said to Nathan, ’the man who did 

that deserves to die,-Nathan reveals that it 

is David. And he continues by saying that Yahweh 
denounces in very vigorous terms, the two sins of which 
David is guilty, (l) murder, and (2) adultery. Yahweh 
predicts tragic consequences, which find their ful¬ 
filment in the bloody rebellion of Absalom. Both 
crimes are thus punishable by death. Here we have suf- 








6 


fering follow as the consequence of actions which have 
come to be regarded as decidedly objectionable to the 
deity. But they are objectionable for a reason that 
is closely connected with the relationships of men. 

Xt brings God and man a step nearer to each other by 
making suffering result from moral short comings. 

This is a very lofty insight for this period. 
Unhappily it is followed by an incident which discour¬ 
ages any hope of a prophetic religion for this time. 
David is oenitent. God therefore transfers his ill 
will from David to his child. The latter falls ill, 
and David mourns and fasts until the child dies, when 
he gets up, washes, eats and worships. When asked ab¬ 
out this seeming contradiction in his behaviour, David 
replies that he hoped he could induce Yahweh to be 
merciful and let the boy live. Here the deity is one 
that apparently has no knowledge of, or interest in, 
a man’s inner beliefs, but one that can be influenced 
and cheated by mere exteriors. If a man was a con¬ 
vincing actor he could side-step some of the ills that 
were his dues. 

Next we come to the document of M J 11 dated about 
850 B.C. . ’’J" is a capital story teller, with excel¬ 

lent literary ability. He gathers folklore and laws 







7 


of the opst end re-tells them with the greatest free¬ 
dom in his own words. His primitive conceptions end 
his nomedic prejudices ere revealed in every part of 
his work. For 11 J M God is just a big man who plants 
a garden, moulds man out of the dust of the earth and 
walks with Adam and Eve in the cool of the day. Cities 
are evil. God desires sacrifice, but acceptable to 
him are only offerings of the flock. In the Cain and 
Abel -story "J" shows his nomadic prejudice in his dis¬ 
like of the farmer and the settled life. To the nomad 
truthfulness, and honesty are no virtues. Thus 11 J ? s 11 
God still favors Jacob, even though the latter is guilty 
of deeds which we regard as immoral. The only nojble 
characters are the patriarchs. This is M J n , and his 
God is like him. This is important for an understandiig 
of the references to suffering throughout his document. 

In the third chapter of Genesis, Adam and Eve 
bring God’s curse upon their heads, they are expelled 
from the Garden of Eden, and doomed to suffer the rest 
of their lives because they disobeyed the commands 
that were given them. Disobedience, as the cause of 
suffering, appears again and again, although it h?s 
different moral implications in different situations. 
Particularly in "J”, one must not be too concerned 






8 


about the absence of consistency in the accounts he 
gives, since logical thinking was not his concern. 

In Gen. 6:5, Yahweh declares that because of wicked¬ 
ness he will blot man off the earth. Wickedness for 
”J” largely centres about wine and adultery. Thus 
the flood in Gen. 7:22, which sweeps all life off the 
earth, with the exception of what is in the barge, 
follows the wickedness of men, a wickedness that has 
both a ritualistic and a moral basis. 

With the story of Abram, Sarai, and Pharoah 
(Gen. 12:10) comes a new type of suffering. God’s 
provocation finds its expression in the punishment 
of the innocent. Pharoah is punished for having taken 
Sarai, Abram’s wife, into his palace. Yet Abram had 
falsely represented her to the Egyptian as his sister. 
Pharoah is innocent. For ”J” God does not trouble to 
look into the hearts of men. 

Similarly in Gen. 16:8,Hagar, maid of Sarai, 
contemptuous of her mistress, is forced to leave home. 
Her own attitude brought about her departure from home. 
Yet does Yahweh fail to realize where the plight or¬ 
iginates, since his angel declares in verse :11, 

’’for the Eternal has heard of your ill treatment”.? 
Again Yahweh does not distinguish between the motives 




















. 


■ 


















9 


of people. 

The Sodom and Gomorrah incident reveals one of 
the finest insights of "J". Gen. 18:23 "Abraham went 
nearer and said, 'Wilt thou really sweep away good and 
bad together Suppose there are fifty good folk in 
the town; wilt thou really sweep away the place, and 
nov forgive it for the sake of the fifty goo& folk in 

it . ( :25) Far be it from thee to act like that- 

-Shall not the Judge of all the earth be just'." 

Here is the first indication of "J. 11 glimpsing the 
idea of right and justice in God's dealing with men. 
Mixed right in with that, however, is still the prim¬ 
itive idea that God can be pleaded with. He could be 
induced to change his judgement for the sake of a few 
righteous by a gradual reducing of the number that 
were in the towns, and who would be doomed to die with 
the unrighteous. But Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed. 
(Gen. 19:24). For 11 J. " the destruction came from God 
because its inhabitants had become an inhospitable 
and adulterous mob. 

One of the best examples of "J's" nomadic prej¬ 
udices can be seen in how he has Jacob betray Isaac, 
his father, and Esau, his brother, and in Jacob's 
flight and working for his uncle Laban. 








10 


In this whole picture of deceit and cheating, 
there isn't the slightest question about the right 
or wrong of it. There is no moral element, in our 
sense. Jacob is still acceptable to God. This whole 
conception has been part of "J. " throughout. Nomadic 
prejudices and primitive conceptions keep him from 
rising to the moral plain. 

About 775 B.C. a writer appears who ushers in 
a new age in the Jewish religious history. For him 
morality is the chief characteristic of the Deity, 
and he sees true religion as a moral religion. He 
reaches the height of ethical insights in Exodus 
2 :4 and.5: 

"If you come across your enemy's ox or ass wand¬ 
ering, you must be sure to take it back to him; if 
you see the ass of a man who hates you lying helpless 
under its load, you must not leave it all to him, 
you must help him to release the animal." 

His God is merciful and gentle and kind. With 
him c.omes a very human element into religion. This 
writer is known as "E"— ; the forerunner of the great 
prophets. In Exodus 22:21-27 and 23:1-12, are rev¬ 
ealed the fine utterances that could only come from 
a man who began to realize that God was a God who 








11 


was very much concerned about people for their sake. 
The alien must be driven fair consideration, the widow 
and orphan treated kindly, and the poor man loaned 
money without exacting interest. Bribes and false 
charges are condemned. The innocent is upheld in his 
rights. 

In "E" (Numbers 14:32-35) “Because of unfaith¬ 
fulness they shall wander forty years in the desert 
-to the last man they shall fall and die." 

In "J" (Numbers 14:11) "-Kow long is this 

people to despise me? How long are they to distrust 

me? -1 will smite them with pestilence and destroy 

them." 

In both these cases, it is faithlessness that 
brings about the people’s destruction. Faithlessness 
in "E", however, has a moral significance which is 
lacking in "J". 

About the time of "E" two kings, sagacious and 
tactful, directed the affairs of Israel and Judah. 
Jereboa.sm II (785-745) for Israel, and Uzziah (790- 
738) for Judah, in their' foreign policy and internal 
development, brought the nation to a relative degree 
of prosperity. In harmony with the prevalent belief 
of the day, this was taken as a direct expression 








12 


of Yahweh's favor and good-will towards his people. 
With the conception of a moral deity accepted only by 
a. few, and with the belief that Yahweh demanded sac¬ 
rifices and gifts still predominating, the nation 
moved toward a moral depravity of the lowest degree, 
when even oppression of the poor and the lower class 
by the higher, was interpreted as God’s will, or at 
least a matter of indifference to Him. Israel was 
prospering. God evidently didn't care about the poor. 
All he wanted was sacrifice. 

Into this situation came the Revolutionists ! 

The prophets were the men who ushered in a new era 
in Jewish religious history, an era that proclaimed 
a just God, with a new, vital, spiritual conception 
of man's relation with Him, in which offerings and 
sacrifices had no value. "E n as the first of these, 
has already been mentioned. Briefly, the others will 
now be examined, particularly in their ideas on suf¬ 
fering. 

Amos, the shepherd-prophet of about 750 B-C., 
starts right out with a threat of punishment by Yahweh 
upon all who disobey His will—His will, however, 
aimed at justice and fair dealings in human relation¬ 
ships. Amos never loses sight of the humanitarian 










13 


element. Indeed none of the prophets ever do. In 
6:12, the reason for punishment is because "You make 
poison of justice.” Again in 3:10-11 "They know not 
how to deal justly; they olenish their palaces by 

violence and robbery; therefore- 11 punishment is 

predicted. It is to be noted that in chapter 4 suf¬ 
fering is retributive and also corrective. The people 
are punished for falling away from Yahweh, snd then 
also punished to bring them back. After mentioning 
some of the glaring evils of corrupted living, Yahweh 
in verse 7: says, "Never will I forget what you have 
done". And then again in 9:1-4, appears a reiteration 
of that impossibility of people getting away from the 
working out of God’s moral law—though for Amos it 
is God's justice and not law. 

With Hosea of 740 B.C., comes a milder attribute. 
Suffering is the result of evil. It comes from God. 
But He is a God of mercy and kindness, nevertheless. 
Passages like 7:14 "They have never put their heart 
into their orayers", and 10:12 "Sow justice for your¬ 
selves and reap a harvest of God's love", and. again 
10:13 "You had to eat the harvest of your lies", and 
also when he calls Jacob a swindler (12:7)—all these 
point to Hosea's desire for a religion of the heart. 












14 


Hoses's God holds man morally resoonsible for what¬ 
ever he does, but in the end he is still a God of love 
and a God of forgiveness. 

In Isaiah, whose writing is spread over a oeriod 
of about forty years (739-701), appears for the first 
time a statement of the generally held belief through¬ 
out the Jewish literature, and. only contradicted by 
Job, namely that the righteous prosper and the un¬ 
righteous suffer as a direct result of their way of 
living. Isaiah, as other prophets, now and. again 
suggests a knowledge of the laws of cause and effect, 
similar to our ideas of natural law. But unlike our 
own, they are inseparably a part of the deity. And, 
for Isaiah, as long as religion will be a mockery, 
and not of the heart, Ya.hweh will deal with the wor¬ 
shippers . 

"Since this people draw near me with their mouth, 
says the Eternal, -honouring me with their lips, while 
their hearts are far remote; since their religion is 
a, mockery, a mere tradition learned by rote; I will 
now deal with them to their amazement, bewildering, 
surprising them, till their wise men lose their wits, 
and their clever men are fooled." (Isaiah 29:13-14) 

Micah, of about 720 B-C., makes injustice, brib- 




- 









15 


ery, crime and blood-shed, (3:8-12) the reason for 
Sion being ploughed up like a field, and Jerusalem 
a heap of ruins. (3:8-12) One of the finest examples 
that we have of the prophetic religion appears in 
6:8, "0 man, he has told you what is good; what does 
the Eternal ask from you but to be just and kind 
and to live in auiet fellowship with your Grod. u . 

The prediction of Micah about Jerusalem had. its 
fulfilment in the lifetime of one of the most dram¬ 
atic figures of the Old Testament—Jeremiah (626-586). 
The strong, vigorous and indelible impact of his 
manly qualities has left its undying imprint upon 
generations of the past, and will leave it upon gen¬ 
erations yet to come. For him the nation's long 
history of unfaithfulness to Yahweh, could lead only 
to one thing—its complete destruction. In his pre¬ 
diction about the Scythian threat from the north, 
Jeremiah was wrong in that Jerusalem did not fall 
at this time. But his message was still right. It 
was the moral depravity of the nation that brought 
about its ruin. In so far as he accepts the ortho¬ 
dox belief—as he does in 5:25 when he says, "It is 
your crimes that keep such blessings back"—and has 
Yahweh repay righteousness with prosperity, as all 
































' 



























■ 






■ 















16 


the other crochets had mistakenly believed, Jeremiah 
is wrong. There is no such direct mechanical inter¬ 
relation between God and man. One needs only to read 
the touching story of this great man’s life, to become 
aware that perhaps orosperity and well-being, are not 
the only tests which prove God's good graces. Indeed, 
in 12:1-3 Jeremiah himself questions this principle: 

"Thou art always in the right, Eternal One, 
when I complain to thee, yet I would argue this with 
thee—Why do bad men prosper? why are scoundrels 
secure and serene 9 Thou plantest them and they take 
root, they flourish, yes and they bear fruit ! Thou 
art always on their lips, but far, far from their 
hearts. Eternal 0 n e, thou knowest me, hast proved 
how true is my heart to thee; drag them away like 
sheep to the slaughter, reserve them for their day 
of doom 1" 

But he Questions it apologetically, indicating 
first how deep rooted this idea had become; and also 
his own indomitable conviction that God's .justice would 
ultimately realize itself in the relationships among 
n Bn. 

This becomes the focal point about which revolves 
a whole century of the most intense and desperate searching 














17 


after some intelligent reconciliation of the promises 
of the prophecies, with the grim situation after the 
return from Babylon. This is the post exilic period, 
one of the most touching epochs in human history. 

Jerusalem fell in 586 B. C. Nebuchadnezzar had 
the best of its people taken to his grand and glorious 
city of Babylon, leaving behind only the weak and the 
poor. The Babylonian monarch treated the Jewish cap¬ 
tives with a good deal of consideration and tolerance, 
even allowing them to retain their own religious 
practises. Undoubtedly, many were ca,ught by the 
splendor of Babylon, and soon were settled to stay. 

But a few longed to return. And had not Jeremiah and 
Exekiel expressed Yahweh’s promise that He would. 
let them return 0 Why should they continue to suffer 
the curse of enslavement? As Yahweh’s people, had 
they not the right to hope for freedom? 

Out of this period of confused questioning emer¬ 
ges a man who, with keen and comprehensive insight, 
catches the vision that brings hope and spiritual 
redemption to a disheartened people. Second Isaiah, 
author of Isaiah 40-55, had shared with his fellow- 
countrymen the exilic experiences. Babylon, a for¬ 
eign nation, and idolatrous, had been tolerant in 















































t> fej 















































18 


her attitude towards the caotives. But the long 
years of their captivity and separation from their 
beloved Jerusalem began to tell on them. Hope for the 
fulfilment of predictions of a return that had been 
made by the proohets waned. Yet in spite of it the 
author of 40-55 steps out boldly and declares his teach¬ 
ing. Eabylonian pretentions challenge him to conceive 
of God as almighty, all-wise, all-loving, who was not 
God of Israel only, but God of the other nations as well. 
With him Jewish religious inspiration reaches its high 
water mark, with the loftiest and noblest conception 
of God in the whole of the Old Testament. And well 
may this be said—"It is not too much to say that all 
the sufferings the Hebrew nation endured from outward 
oppression ana inward sin were not too great a price 
to pay for those sublime ideals that have permanently 
enriched mankind."# 

While human life and exoeriences are interpreted 
in the light of the God that a people worships, it is 
also true that it is the sharpness of a new experience 
which brings home the realization of a new truth. It 
is through the form of a. dialectic process whereby the 
"experienced new" comes into conflict with the "accepted 


#Bailey and Kent, p. 191 
























19 


old 11 , with a resultant in which both the old and the 
immediate new lose their identity in something that is 
often loftier and more comprehensive than anything that 
had preceded it. Thus Second Isaiah conceives of Yah- 
weh's people as having been tested in their exilic triab 
and prepared for a great mission which was their 1 s to 
fulfil. He couldn’t accept the contention of previous 
writers who declared that because Israel was Yahweh's 
chosen nation, she conseouently enjoyed a superiority 
over the other nations. No Yahweh chose Israel as 
a servant to make known His purpose to all nations— 
toLbring to them a knowledge of His justice and His 
love. ”1, the Eternal have called you of set purpose, 

I have taken you by the hand, I have formed you for 
the rescuing of the peoples, for a. light to nations." 

42:6. ”-1 now a.pooint you to bring a light 

to the nations, that my salvation may reach the world's 
end." 49:6 

It wa.s Israel who had best understood Yahweh. 

And was it not Israel who had also suffered most? 

Perhaps it was through suffering that she gained her 
understanding. Second Isaiah here has one of the 
finest ethical insights when he conceives of a whole 
nation having to suffer before it can come to a. ful- 












































20 


ler and better understanding of God, and a more com¬ 
prehensive grasp of his dealings and ways with men. 

The truth of these statements can be partly brought 
out by a brief examination of a few related passages 
in the book. An adequate treatment of the whole work 
is beyond the scope of this e.ssa,y, since it is impos¬ 
sible to deal with detailed and technical questions 
which have caused disagreement even among scholars. 

Thus, some statements may appear unwarranted, with 
incomplete backing and lacking in perspective. That 
is inevitable. However, the relevancy of Isaiah 40-55 
to the topic of this thesis will be indicated with 
particular references. 

Second Isaiah accepts the premise.that Israel 
was Yahweh’s chosen people. That idea permeates Jew¬ 
ish thought and writing from very early times. And 
particularly is this apparent in the book of Deuter¬ 
onomy, where the writer has no consideration for the 
other nations, but regards Israel as the sole object 
of Yahweh's grace and favor. “For you are a people 
sacred to the Eternal, your God; the Eternal your God 
has chosen you to be his prized possession, out of all 

nations on the face of the earth-. 11 Deut. 7:6-7. 

This same thought recurs again in 14:2. Also, n - 











21 


the Eternal set his heart in love upon your fathers, 
and chose their descendants after them, chose you out 

of all nations-. 11 10:15 

This idea the Second Isaiah accepts and uses it 
as a basis upon which he can build his lofty teaching 
concerning Israel as the Servant of Yahweh. The con¬ 
tribution that this writer makes is the recognition 
that Israel has been chosen for a definite purpose . 

"I the Eternal have called you of set purpose-1 

have formed you for the rescuing of the peoples, for 
a light to nations, to open eyes that are blind, to 
free captives from their bondage, darkened lives from 
prison. 11 42:6 The idea of Israel serving Yahweh did 
not originate with the author of Is. 40-55. Eut this 
writer certainly gave the phra.se "the Servant of Yah- 
weh n a content and connotation that had not been known 
before. Now Servant of Yahweh also means servant to 
other nations. God becomes God of all nations. His 
goodness and His love are for all men. And if Israel 
is to fulfil the mission for which she has been appoin¬ 
ted she must make known to other peoples the univer¬ 
sality of God, whose universal purpose it is to have 
just and fair dealings among all men. "I have endowed 
him with my spirit to carry true religion to the nat- 



































' 















22 


ions-. M 42:1 Such a moral and monotheistic con¬ 

ception transcended any previous teaching. It is 
significant to note that Moffatt indicates the growth 
and expansion of the meaning of the word Mishoat 
by translating it “religion"—which at this point has 
come to include all those prophetic Qualities of love, 
justice and mercy. 

Professor A. S. Peake says that the most original 

and deepest element in Second Isaiah’s prophecy- 

"is to be found in his treatment of the hard problem 
of Israel's suffering and his great conception of the 
Servant of Yahweh." # 

Thus far I have quoted from Second Isaiah as 
though there was no question of its integrity. This, 
however, is not so. The four main so-called Servant 
passages (42:1-4; 49:1-6; 50:4-9; 52:13-53:12) are 
singled out by Oesterly and Robinson as not belong¬ 
ing to the book proper. Peake feels that they are 
Second Isaiah's own compositions but likely added 
later. But both positions are very difficult to re¬ 
concile with the presence of 42:5 & 6,/fhich is as 
typical a servant passage as the others. Why didn't 
Oesterly and Robinson exclude it? And what about 
# Peake, p. 36 








































23 


passages like 41:8-10, 44:1-2 and 48:20 where the 
servant is mentioned and identified with Israel? 

It is difficult to see how some of these sections 
can be left out for reasons which would not at the 
same time exclude all the others. The letter is im¬ 
possible if the wo i to be retained as a, unit.-- 
Certainly, the leading idea throughout the book seems 
to be Israel’s mission to the nations. One cannot 
help but feel that no matter who the author was he 
was highly conscious of a divine purpose working 
throughout Israel’s history, and particularly did he 
see a significance in her hard exilic experiences which 
put upon her the responsible task of bringing true 
religion to all the world. Second Isaiah was aware 
of the growing power of Persia under Cyrus, with whom 
redemption for Israel would come. But at the same 
time he was quite ready to point out that Israel would 
not be redeemed for her own sake, but for a universal 
puroose. ’’The Sternal now says, 'Tis too slight a 
service to set the clans of Jacob up again and t* e - 
stooe Israel’s survivors; I now appoint you to bring 
light to the nations that my salvation may reach the 
world’s end’.” 49:6 

Thus, for Second Isaiah, Israel has been chosen 












































































24 

to be Yahweh’s servant, has had the suffering exilic 
experience to fit her as a. worthy representative of 
Yahweh's followers and as such to be the means, when 
set free by Cyrus, 45:1-13, whereby all the world 
would get to know one God, who was the wise, just and 
merciful ruler of all nations. It is in this partic¬ 
ular that Second Isaiah can be said to have reached the 
high water mark in Old Testament religious inspiration. 

Finally, in what is perhaps the best known of the 
Servant passages (52:13-53:12) and. one so often wrongly 
applied to Jesus, the writer recognized Israel’s 
suffering as of a vicarious nature. He sees his people 
as having borne the sorrows and pain of the other 
nations, for the Servant now will bring to them di¬ 
rectly £ universal God and a spiritual religion which 
had come to Israel through her history of wars and 
trials, and the humiliating captivity—Thus by a short¬ 
cut were the nations enabled to arrive at those spirit¬ 
ual concepts which for Israel were gained through- 
defeat and exile. 

"-he (Israel) was wounded because we (the 

nations) had sinned, ’twa.s our misdeeds that crushed 
him; ’twa.s for our welfare that he was chastised, the 










25 


blow8 that fell to him have brought us healing.” 53:5 
And no more applicable concluding sentence, so 
true to the spirit and thought of II Isaiah, could 
be given to this section than that from Encyclopaedia 
of Religion and Ethics. 

"No man sins by himself or suffers by himself, 
and no man is redeemed for himself alone." # 

The post-exilic period was one that disillusioned 
the most optimistic spirit. The few caotives that 
returned m r ere a disappointed, disconsolate and dis¬ 
couraged lot. Their city was still in ruins. The 
people they knew were gone. There was no joyous wel¬ 
come awaiting them. Foreign peoples began to imoinge 
upon Judah. It was no longer home. And yet, had not 
Ezekiel, Jeremiah and even Second Isaiah prophesied 
the coming of a glorious age after they returned' 5 
Certainly it was now that fulfilment of those predic¬ 
tions was fully expected. But instead, a ruined city, 
demolished walls, and strangers in the streets, met 
the weary wanderers after their long trek back to their 
once loved home. Why was their return accompanied 
by so little rejoicing? Why weren’t the great pro¬ 
phecies fulfilled? There must be reasons for cond- 
# Kilpatrick, p. 8 




' 

■ 

. 

■ 

. 

' 














26 


itions so deolorable ! There must be an answer to 
the confused Questioning of a distracted people ! 

True to the orthodox conviction a group of men 
came forward, all with the same hypothesis, yet each 
with a different application. It was Yahweh’s anger 
and disoleasure which kept the golden age from being 
ushered in. Haggai declared that the peoole had built 
themselves houses but had forgotten to build a house 
for Yahweh. 

"You expected a rich harvest, and it came to 
little; even what you brought home I spoiled. And why? 
Because (the Lord of hosts declares) my House still 
lies in ruins, while each of you takes pleasure in 
his own house. 11 (Haggai 1:9) 

Restoration of the temple was needed he urged, 
and prosperity would come back to them. With Haggai, 
Zechariah ^reached for the return of justice and right¬ 
eousness. 

By 516 B.C., the temple was complete. Yet for 
seventy years conditions were as bad as they had ever 
been. Nehemiah came and looked for another reason. 

He saw that the walls were still down, thus allowing 
inter-marriage and contact with evil neighbors. But 
even an honest and conscientious figure like Nehemiah 










27 


was wrong. 

Malachi of about 400 B.O. followed. For him the 
people had lost faith in Ye.hweh and thus brought their 
wretchedness upon themselves. The people cheated God 
by keeping the better part of the sacrifices for them¬ 
selves, and Riving the poorer to Him. 

"You bring blind brutes and lame and sickly— 
you actually bring that for an offering] Am I to 
accept that from you? says the Lord of Hosts." 

(Maiachi 1:13) 

Ho doubt there were many who were ready to say, 
as in 3:15, "It is the worldly, we find, who are well 
off; evil-doers prosper, they dare God—and they es¬ 
cape I". Very likely many fell away from Yahweh for 
this reason. And it is the writer of Job, emerging 
out of this situation, who takes up these unbelievers 
and their false hypothesis, and attempts to express 
his convictions about a moral and just God, who re¬ 
mains true to His being in all the manifold expres¬ 
sions of His nature. 

The book of Job has been classed with the great¬ 
est and the best literature of the world. Character¬ 
istic of all masterpieces in artistic creations, it 
is the product of the hard heart-searching experiences 













28 


of its age. "The indicated time occurred when four 
factors, like so many stars, came into conjunction: 
an advanced belief in the justice of God, a sense of 
the religious importance of the individual, an earnest 
quest for righteousness, and the so-called ’Wisdom 
Movement 1 * To see these stars travel until they 
assume their proper position relative to one another 
is to discover the sufficient reason for the exist¬ 
ence of such a book a.s the book of Job." # 

But characteristic also of a great ?/ork of art, 
this book belongs to all ages as much as it does to 
its own; in that it proclaims an eternal truth which 
will register response in the hearts of men as long as 
there will be hearts to resoond. What a privilege 
to have a glimpse into its pages 

# Kraeling, p. 15 










II 

THE WISDOM LITERATURE 


In the Old Testament is represented a type of writ¬ 
ing recognized for its high literary Qualities and its 
general human appeal. This is the Wisdom literature, 
or writings of Hebrew humanism, as it is also known. 
Because the book of Job has by some been classed with 
the Wisdom writings, it is necessary to examine briefly 
the characteristics of this literature and see to what 
extent they are exhibited by the author of the book with 
which we are concerned. 

The Hebrew Wisdom literature largely took the place 
of philosophy, and was the result of a certain spec¬ 
ulative and contemplative attitude towards life. As the 
name implies, it exalted and personified Wisdom in a 
way which is seen most clearly in the Book of Proverbs, 
particularly in the first nine chapters where practic¬ 
ally every verse, either directly or indirectly, refers 
to wisdom. 

Proverbs 8:1, ”Is it not Wisdom calling, Knowledge 
raising her voice?” 

And, 8:11-12: ”For Wisdom is better than rubies, 

No treasure is eoual to her. 

I Wisdom have intelligence in hand 
knowledge and insight I command.” 


29 














30 


Similarly the writer of Ecclesiastes, in spite of 
his pessimism, can also say, 7:11-1?, "Wisdom is as 
pood as an inheritance, A real profit for mankind; 

For wisdom like wealth is a defence, but knowledge does 
more pood than money, it safeguards a man's life". 

(See also Ecc. 9:17-18) In Proverbs, 8:22-31, Wisdom 
is personified—so also in Job 28. Throughout this 
literature appear reputed wise sayings of life and how 
to get the most out of life. 

A spirit of humanism and universalism marks the 
wisdom writings. 

"Yet it is beyond doubt that the element of human¬ 
ism was nurtured by the acquaintance of the "wise" with 
the wisdom of the neighbouring peoples. It introduced 
the topic of the worth of life and emphasized the need 
of man's interest in his own self, of man's regard for 
man and the belief in God's interest in the individual 
and in mankind." # 

In Proverbs, 8 :31—personified Wisdom declares that 
she was "finding delight in humankind ". Also in Prov. 
8:4, "0 men, I am calling you, my anneal is to all men. 1 ! 

"The Wisdom literature may be called the documents 

of Israel's humanism-because its general character- 

# Rankin, n. 9 
















31 


istic is the recognition of man's moral responsibility, 
his religious individuality and of God's interest in 
the individual life. " # 

A man's moral responsibility is brought out again 
and again. In Proverbs, 6:16-19 "Six things the Eternal 

hates-haughty eyes, a. lying tongue, hands that shed 

innocent blood-crafty plans-false witness". 

Ecclesiastes 5:4 "When you vow a vow to God pay it with¬ 
out delay-Religious individuality is traceable 

ouite early. ^reeling points out that "in Jeremiah we 
actually see the individual coming into his own in rel¬ 
igion— communing with his God and asserting his own 
personality". # 

As to God's interest in the individual life, it is 
to be noted how the writers of Proverbs and Ecclesiastes 
speak in terms of the individual man—'the good man', 
'the wise man', 'the just man', etc. This may be, as 
Breasted suggests, a trace of Egyptian influence, for 
the Egyptian always thought in concrete terms—he 
thought not of the theft but of a thief, not of love 
but of the lover, not of poverty but of a Poor man. # 

# Rankin, p. 3 

# Kraeling, o. 18 

# Breasted, p. 817 
















One other asoect of the Wisdom literature is its 
academic interest in God and the life of man. Somehow 
a reader of Proverbs or of Ecclesiastes never has the 
feeling that the authors are intimately a part of what 
they are saying. They seem to be removed to a place of 
speculation, rather than in a state of active oprticio- 
ation in the type of life and relationship with a God 
of wisdom that they talk about. And it is at this point 
at which the characteristic of the Wisdom literature 
and that of the book of Job fail to coincide. 

Whoever the author of Job was, and. however limited 
his exoerience may have been, no reader can escaoe the 
feeling that he was a fflan who with keen sensitive¬ 
ness and intensity of human emotion, had actually been 
at the heart of life’s bitterest and most jarring con¬ 
flicts. There is a ring of genuineness and reality 
about Job’s words. 29:4-5, H 0h to be as I once was 
in my orime, when God was kindly sheltering my home 
when the Almighty still was with me, when my children 
were about me."' But one cannot do justice to the 
book by quoting individual verses. The whole section 
of the dialogue between Job and his friends, has a pas¬ 
sion, and a certain personal glow and fervour, which 
causes the entire drama to move not in the academic 












r t t r «K r r \o • - t wrrO 

• ? f -. ,1- 

' 












































■ 












- 

. 















































33 


realm but in a real world of human exnerience. 30:1, 

“And now my juniors mock me, men whose sires I would 
have scorned to trust with a sheep-dog: 1 s task. 11 These 
words and many others like them can only come from' a 
storm-beaten soul and not from a contemplating: philoso¬ 
pher. Here then is one difference between the book of 
Job and the Wisdom literature. 

As to the extent to which the subject of wisdom 
is dealt with there seems to be only one reference. 

This is chanter 28, universally regarded as not belong¬ 
ing to the book proper, but rather being of the Wisdom 
literature. It has nothing to do with Job nor with 
the three friends—nor has it any of the human feeling 
and emotion that appears in the speeches immediately 
before and after it. Suffering is absent. 

Actually chapter 28 is one of finest bits of Wisdom 
writings that we have. It is highly idealistic and with¬ 
out the utilitarian motif that leaves a blot on so many 
fine passages in Proverbs. The stanzas of the chapter 
are divided into groups. In verses 1-11 the writer, 
in beautiful figures, declares that valuable metals 
may be dug from a hill, but not so with wisdom. Prec¬ 
ious things are sold at a market (12-19) but not so 
with wisdom. Then in the last group of verses 29-28, 











.74 


we read that "God only is aware of her abode; And he 
declares to man, 'For you to revere me is your wisdom— 
to shun evil—that is knowledge' !" It is an excellent 
literary construction about the theme *No human creature 
can attain unto the wisdom of God". And it is the 
only part of Job which can rightly be called Wisdom 
literature. 

In Rankin appears this paragraph—"Though interest 
in morality and religion is common to prophetic, apoc¬ 
alyptic and other forms of composition, there is in the 
Wisdom writings a quite distinctive ouality of mind, 
method and outlook in resoect of ethics and religious 
belief. Here we see growing stronger and more apparent 
as time advances a searching for first principles, the 
application of these principles, a wrestling with the 
problems of faith, a criticism applied to the subjects 
of character and conduct, an observation of human nature, 
even an analysis of human nature, the atmosphere of 
discussion, the reliance upon reason along with the 
recognition of reason's limits-." # 

This might very well have been written of Job, 
it s 

with/ discussion, search of, and failing to find, an 
intellectual solution to the problem of suffering, wredo¬ 
ling with the problem of faith, etc., — all these are 
# Rankin, p. IX 
































35 


familiar. 

The scene of the book is given a universal setting, 
with an absence of the national name of Yahweh from the 
main part of the book (3-31) except in 12:9 which is 
taken as an interpolation. This with its intensely hum¬ 
an and universal problem of suffering would plead for 
classing it with the Wisdom writings, in spite of its 
dialogue, and its mingling of prose with poetry. Its 
kinship with this literature is most clear in its in¬ 
terest in all humanity. However, the matter of giving 
it a name is not of such great significance, as long as 
it is recognized as a work of the highest literary 
quality, of the deepest insight and understanding of a 
universal and human problem. As such it is of inest¬ 
imable value to succeeding generations. 











Ill 

"HE BOOK OF JOB 


A brief survey has been made of the moral and ethic¬ 
al development that took place from the time of the 
earliest Old Testament literature down to the post - 
exilic period. The task of this thesis is to examine 
with considerable detail the culmination of that whole 
process in the book of Job, and to show how any attempt¬ 
ed explanation of human suffering is directly related 
to the conception of God that prevailed at the time. 

For the authors of the earliest writings, people fpred 
ill for no other reason than that they happened to be 
the object of Yahweh's vindictiveness, who in his Prim¬ 
itive wav would give expression to a wilful and auto¬ 
cratic nature. With the prophets comes a moral God, 
and a religion with fine humanitarian ideals. Here 
the people suffer as a consecuence of their own action^ 
for disobedience* and failure to live up to God's com¬ 
mands. God and religion become vitally concerned with 
the affairs of men. More and more do they express 
themselves in terras of human relationships. 

Accompanying this growth, there is a formulation 
of a doctrine which becomes a retarding influence even 
in the best v^ritings of the prophets. This is the be¬ 
lief that reward and punishment nre directly propor¬ 
tional to righteousness and sin as these find expres- 


36 














37 


sion in the life of ?n individual or a group. As has 
been pointed out previously it wps with Jeremiah that 
the worth of the individual began to be recognized— 

Also it is Jeremiah who first of all, rather hesitating¬ 
ly it is true, questions this principle. (Jer. 12:1-3) 

But apart from that, there is no sign of opposition 
to this bit of orthodoxy until the time of Job. 

With him, in bold and masterly lines, comes the rev¬ 
elation of a truth which may have been glimpsed before 
but never so well expressed. Any people or any in¬ 
dividual will interpret its life and experiences in the 
light of traditional belief and prevailing conceptions 
of deity only as long as such beliefs and concents 
are applicable to the experiences. It is the new ex¬ 
perience, which traditional theory can no longer ex¬ 
plain, that forces abandonment of former concents and 
demands new thought forms, new ideals, new gods. So 
it was with Second Isaiah. So it is with Job. Now 
let us look at the story as this book presents it. 

The book can be divided into five main divisions: 

I The Prologue, 1-2 

II The Speeches of Job and the three friends, 3-31 
III Speeches of Elihu, 32-37 

17 Speeches of Yahweh with Job's responses,38:l~r42>:6. 

7 The Epilogue, 42:7-17. 









38 


(1) The Story 

In the Prologue the reader is introduced to a 
good and wealthy man who in a single day loses all he 
has and is left to he consoled by his three friends. 

Job was an upright man who reverenced God and shun¬ 
ned evil. He lived in the East, where he was recog¬ 
nized as the greatest man, blessed with many children, 
and with large flocks and herds. His family life must 
have been happy for there was much feasting among his 
sons and daughters. 

A scene in heaven shows Yahweh and one of the an¬ 
gels— the Satan—engaged in a disoutation about Job. 
Yahweh declares that surely the Satan in all his wand¬ 
erings upon earth couldn’t have found a better man than 
Job. The Satan, however, takes objection to this. 

His claim is that any man can well afford to be right¬ 
eous as long as he prospers like Job prospered. 

“Strip him of his possessions, 11 he challenges, "and 
see whether or not he will remain loyal." 

Yahweh accepts the challenge and gives the Satan 
the power to strip Job completely, with the result 
that the latter, in a few short strokes, loses all he 
has, even his sons and daughters. But Job “did not 
sin nor did he give offence to God." (l:22) Indeed, 























■ 

. 

. 





['<*» 4 










/ 










39 


he can even say 11 the Eternal gave, the Eternal has 
taken-blessed be the Eternal". (1:21) 

Again a scene in heaven follows where this time 
Yahweh gives permission to the Satan to rob Job of 
his health. By this means would he (the' Satan) prove 
his contention. But again Job, even though his wife 

urges him to curse God, remains true-* 11 -Are we to 

take good from God's hand and not evil too?" (2:10) 

In all this Job sinned not with his lips. 

And now the three friends of Job, having heard of 
his plight, come to comfort him. They are:—Eliphaz, 
from Tefcman, Bildad from Shuah, and Zophar from Maan. 
The genius of the writer appears in these chapters, 
that is in 3-31. Two cycles of six speeches each, with 
a speech by each of the Friends and a reply to each in 
turn by Job, and a third cycle with only two of the 
Friends taking part, make up this section of the book. 
■Recently, however, scholars, by a re-arrangement of 
the material have been able to make up, a part at least, 
of Zophar's speech, thus completing the third cycle. 

The Friends, with their orthodox theology, assert 
in turn that Job's suffering is indicative of his sin¬ 
fulness. Hp on tiie other hand, defends his own in¬ 
nocence with such persistence that the intensity of 






40 


feeling of the debate rises to bitterness and anger. 

The argument proceeds on a plane of feeling rather than 
on one of rationality and logic. Anger, scorn, des¬ 
peration, contempt, defiance—all these find a place 
in Job's defence as he replies to the Friends. The 
result is that reconciliation between himself and the 
friends is farther removed at the end of their debate 
than it was at the beginning. For him his oroblem is 
still vivid as ever. 

In 31:35 Job pleads for a hearing from Yahweh, 

"Oh for a hearing, Oh for an answer from the Almighty". 

In chanter 38: Yahweh appears and in his speeches brings 
out His own wisdom, power, and unlimited understanding 
as contrasted with Job's finite and limited being. 

Job's Questions are not answered, but he is given a 
glimpse of what God is like and thereby is content. 

In the epilogue 42:7-17, Yahweh condemns the friends 
while Job is restored to his former position of wealth 
and prosperity. (42:17) "Then Job died, old, after a 
full life.» 

The speeches of Elihu (32-37) have not been mention¬ 
ed, since they are regarded by scholars ?s not belong¬ 
ing to the book. Hence they will be ignored. 

Chanter 28 has already been dealt with, and hence 
will not be included in the main discussion for reps- 












41 













one that have already been pointed out. 











(2) 


The Prologue 


The relation of the prologue to the book nrooer 
has been regarded variously by different scholars. 

The fact that both it and the epilogue are in prose, 
while the main part is in poetry, is sufficient reason 
to auestion the place they hold with resoect to the 
main theme of the book. Whoever the author was, it 
can scarcely be denied that he regarded his work as a 
unit. Popular tradition may have provided him with the 
fundamental elements as they appear in the prologue. 
Driver and Gray suggest that possibility. But certain¬ 
ly to a. writer with such outstanding literary ability 
and organising technicue can be ascribed the origin¬ 
ality of giving his main discussion a significance 
which could only be caught in such a setting as the 
prologue offers. It is here that the author, in mas¬ 
terly prose introduces the reader to the hero of the 
book, makes clear the issue involved, and then draws 
the curtain aside to reveal the enactment of. a real 
human drama that is universal in its appeal. 

The name Job (31 'X-U/j) is very likely borrowed 
from Ezekiel 14:14 and 20 where it apoears alongside 
of other ancient traditionally accented righteous men. 
It may be, as Devine assumes, "that the outline of the 








43 


tradition of Job's'unnaralleled orosperity and afflic¬ 
tion existed in some form," since a mere name could not 
be handed down without some story attached to it.# 

This use of tradition is but one of the precautions 
the writer takes in making sure that his hero is ac¬ 
cepted as a righteous man. Job's possessions, in sons 
and daughters, in flocks and herds, are given in num¬ 
bers 3, 7, 10,—all regarded as perfect numbers. It 
is just a small device of indicating Job's perfection of 
character. Also, at every occasion does the writer 
declare, and also has Yahweh declare, that Job is 
"a blameless and upright man". Indeed this is the 
truth which the Prologue is to set forth. Once the 
dialogue and debate have begun, the only one from 
whom can come such an utterance of Job's innocence and 
uprightness is from Job himself. And what reader would 
not suspect such words as a bit vainglorious, no 
matter from whom they came 7 They would leave Job 
open to a charge of vanity and conceit. 

It is to guard against the possibility of ascrib¬ 
ing any sin to Job, whether known or not known to him¬ 
self, that the writer has Yahweh give the Satan an 
opportunity to test Job's goodness. The Satan or 
# Devine, p. 4 










44 


Adversary is classed as an angel or as one of the sons 
of God. "He is an angel strictly subordinate to Yah- 
weh, whose function it is to test men's pretensions to' 
righteousness. He is not an independent agent, but the 

opposer of men because he is the minister of God.- 

He is the Adversary or Accuser,— the Angel to whom that 
function is specially assigned." # How natural there¬ 
fore is his response to Yahweh's assertion that there 
is no one to compare in uprightness to his servant Job— 
"But is it for nothing that Job reverences God' 5 Have 
you not hedged him safely in, his house and all he has ? 
Y 0 u have prospered him in his business, and his flocks 
are teeming on the land. Only put out your hand, touc 1 ^ 
whatever he possesses and. see if he will not curse 
you to your face." (1:9-11) 

This challenge Yahweh does not refuse. He gives 
the Satan the power to do with Job's possessions what 
he chooses. In a few quick successive strokes, Job is 
deprived of goods and family. But in all this he did 
not sin nor give offence to God. 

Similarly, following the second scene in heaven, 

Job is smitten with painful ulcers, and even urged by 
.his wife to curse God, yet in all this he sinned not. 

"Are we to take good from God's hand, and not evil too?" 

# Devine, p. 272 (%: 10 ) 


















































■ 


. 

. 




















45 


Such is the masterly introduction given to one 
of the most human and eloeuent discussions ever written 
The problem set is that of a real human being, from a 
land of Uz which is not limited by national boundaries, 
but extends to wherever there are people faced with the 
real issues of living. "It is wherever in the wide 
world man struggles to reconcile faith in God with the 
anomalies of life." # It is not Israel that the writer 
is limiting himself to. He feels himself a part of a 
universal order, with a God that is universal. Con¬ 
sequently the question he raises is not confined to 
any particular group, nor to any one particular indi¬ 
vidual. Eis problem is a,s real to the other nations 
as it is to Israel, whether it is in the time of Job, 
or a thousand years before or after. It is a'Human 
problem. As such it can be intelligently faced only 
when the God with whom it is intimately bound up, also 
is regarded as a God universal. 

For convenience sake let this consideration, i.e. 
the type of God recognized here, be momentarily defer¬ 
red, since it c^n be dealt with more appropriately in 
connection with the other oart of the book. In the 
prologue, however, it must be pointed out, is to be 


# Devine, p. 8 




















































46 


the idealist's belief in the inherent goodness of 
God end man. There is no hesitancy whatever on God's 
part to have his servant led through the severest 
trials. The possibility that Job may weaken and thus 
reveal that he was acting with false motives, l.e., 
he was religious because it wps profitable, does not 
even occur to Yahweh. Thus his words to the Adversary, 
"He (Job) still holds to his loyalty: it was idle of 
you to entice me to undo him." 2:3 The writer in the 
Prologue, through Yahweh, exoresses the conviction that 
man, no matter how severely tried, how desperate his 
struggle to reconcile the severity of his experiences 
with the goodness of life has the possibility to triumph 
and realize the spirituality and consistency of the 
world of which he is a part. This is oreciselv the 
thought that is uttered by the Lord in the prologue of 
Goethe's Faust, modelled after that in Job, which judg¬ 
ment Devine does not share when he says that the Pro¬ 
logue in Faust "implies a low view of human nature in 
the Divine mind". # However, it is the lofty view of 
human nature in the Divine mind that the Prologue in 
the Old Testament reveals. Job does fear God for 
naught. His righteousness is not influenced or con- 


# Devine, p. 17 










47 


ditioned by any thought of physical reward. Hence the 
first significance of the Prologue is that it establish¬ 
es the perfection or innocence of Job. This is an es¬ 
sential establishment if the reality of the dialogue 
is to be maintained. 

The other important observation of these first two 
chapters is that they "suggest that the drama of earthly 
life has a significance which earth does not exhaust".# 
Man 1 s powers of comprehension are too limited for God 
and his world. Man's faith begins where his understand¬ 
ing ends. To J 0 b, the scene in heaven between Yahweh 
and the Satan is not known. Thus the cause of his 
suffering, while clear to the reader, is a coraolete 
mystery to him. 

And here something that has been assumed in the 
last few cages, must now be clearly stated. The pro¬ 
logue must be accented as no more than a stage setting 
for the main act of the book. It is the writer's un- 
iaue and original way of asking the Question which has 
been uppermost in his mind, namely;-Why do the right¬ 
eous suffer? It is with the Question that the writer 
is concerned in the orologue, and not with the answer. 
Such a super-natural and simole solution to the oro- 


# H. D. B. , p. 668 



































































48 


blem of suffering by ascribing it to the curiously schem¬ 
ing minds of two heavenly beings, cannot be conceived 
of as satisfying him (the writer). His answer, if he 
has any, will emerge out of the main discussion in which 
Job attempts to defeat the orthodox belief that the 
righteous prosper and the wicked suffer, while hi6 three 
friends are defending it. The prologue must be taken 
as an introduction and a setting, and not as a conclusion 
and an offered solution. Were it otherwise the remaining 
part of the book would have no meaning. No reader would 
be suffieiently fascinated to read on. But the writer 
in all his suggestive grandeur uses the orologue to point 
to something else he wishes to share with his reader. 

He is enough of a realist to face the problems of life 
souarely. He is concerned with the affairs of men, and 
certainly will not be satisfied unless, like the crochets 
with whom he has so much in common, he can give to his 
generation and to those that come after, a gleam of light 
to helc men in their search for God. 







49 


(3) Job'a god 

Whatever other apopUntion the author of Job is 
given, he is one with the Jewish prophets in his keen 
and conscientious search for the ways of God with men. 
The method he adopts of setting: forth his message in 
dialogue is strikingly his own. Nowhere else in the 
Old Testament are to be found such oassages of beautiful 
poetry, such fine and passionate expressions of human 
feeling, as appear in the main oart of this book. 

But no man lives to himself alone. This writer 
as any other man, no matter how humble his role in 
life, is the heir of teachers and. ages that have ore- 
ceded him. He comes out of an age when men were forced 
to give up cherished traditional beliefs, ana turn to 
new and more applicable world-views. The exile had left 
many a Jew disillusioned—with a God who no longer sat¬ 
isfied the hearts of people in the particular situations 
in which they found themselves. Men now began to look 
beyond Israel’s horizons. The history of Babylon’s 
power and the Advent of Cyrus stimulated universaliStic 
ideas for which orthodox Yahweh was too limited. Second 
Isaiah could no longer be satisfied with a national 
deity, but recognized him as God of all the earth, who 
is from everlasting to everlasting. He is the only 






' 


• : r 


■' i 
















50 


God. 54:5 

These thoughts find an echo in Job with consider¬ 
able amplification. The whole nroohetic period, it mufc 
be acknowledged, had left its impact upon succeeding 
generations whether recognized or not. All the 
implications of Job’s God concent, however, cannot be 
traced back to some specific source. Indeed it would 
be giving very little recognition to a man's religious 
genius and spiritual insight, if that could be done. 

But Job doubtless inherited a good many ideas about 
God from Second Isaiah. The most apparent of these 
will be pointed out. 

The poet is a. monotheist. There is no room for 
idolatory. 31:26-28 This belief underlies the whole 
of the discussion and is closely related with the view 
that makes God ruler of all nations. It is significant 
that the national name "Yahweh" appears only in the 
prologue and the epilogue, both of which must be 
regarded as stage setting for the main work, although 
by the same author. In 3-31, names such as <5 X (El) 

77/efo (El op ’~iui Shacclpi) ?re e ?lo •• . 
dogmatic statement can be made with reference to this 
distinction, yet it is repson^ble to suppose that the 
writer tried to avoid any local or nationalistic 









51 


connotation which the purely Israelitiel name TI1TI 1 
(Yahweh) would carry. It has been thought of advan¬ 
tage to include from the International Critical Com¬ 
mentary a table which indicates the use of the divine 
names in different parts of the book. 


Name Number of Occurences in Total 


Sc'.r 72K 

42:7-17 

i — i 

CO 

1 

CO 

o 

o 

Cc. ^2-37 

<TcV3S- 

42:6 


<5,V 

33 

19 

3 

55 

ims? 

33 

6 

2 

41 

i-nu 

24 

6 

1 

31 

XP/7<J-V 

3 

2 

1 

14 

D’/Wa71 

0 

0 

0 


mn 1 

1(12:9) 

0 

5 

29 


Only once does the name "Yahweh" occur in 
Chapters 3-31, (12:9) and this is regarded ps an 


interpolation. On the other hand note the freouency 
with which terms such as "God" and 11 Almighty 11 appear 
in the same section. 

God is a God of greatness, wisdom and power. He 
is the creator and the ruler of the universe. 

"Can you discover the deep things of God* 5 Can 
you reach the Almighty's range of wisdom? Higher it 


is than heaven—how can you match it 15 Deeper than 
death—how can you measure it? Its scope is vaster 
than the earth, and wider than the sea." 11:17 















52 


"Wisdom and authority belong to God; strength and know¬ 
ledge ?re his own." 12:13 

l! Br his power he ouelled the sea, and by his wisdom 
he laid low the Dragon." 26:12 

This whole section is strikingly similar to oas- 
sages in Second Isaiah. So too there is a clear paral¬ 
lel between Isaiah 4-:12 and the following, and Job38:4, 
Indeed the whole of Yahweh’s reply to Job, in which he 
indicates the revelation of himself in the swiftness 
of the wild ass, in the strength of the war horse, in 
the vision of the hawk and the eagle—these and many 
others, can only be eoualled and paralleled by Second 
Isaiah. God’s sublimity and grandeur, his majesty and 
greatness, his all pervading glory are voiced in many 
and varied tones by lightning and thunder, by sun, moon 
and stars, .by clouds with their rains and storms, by 
heights of land, and depths of the sea, by light and 
darkness, by dawn and twilight, by life and death, and 
indeed by all the manifold manifestations of existence 
that come within the experience of man. 

But God is not only a. God of the Universe, apart 
from men. # In addition to being the God of the winds 
and the seas, he is also the God who identifies him¬ 
self with the needs and struggles of men. No Jewish 
# See p. 13, Devine 











r 1 . ■' ' • 



r * 


' v | 








53 


writer with the sensitiveness of the author of Job, 
would have been interested in the oroduction of such 
p document unless he could oortray some experienced 
conviction of a truth that found its reality in human 
relationships and human destinies. Certainly it was 
thus with the prophets, who gave the world a God of 
love, mercy and justice. No lower is the moral olane 
on which this book moves. Concerned with one of the 
most real of all human problems, it fires the imagina¬ 
tion of any sensitive moralist. However, to avoid pre¬ 
mature judgements, the main issue of the book must first 
be examined, since it is here where God's justice and 
its relation to human conduct is ouestioned with the 
most thorough-going frankness. It is in the debate 
between Job and his friends, followed by Yahweh's reply, 
that the contribution of the book is to be found. It 
is here where the conception of God is put under a new 
and powerful search-light. 


















54 


(4) Job and His Friends 

Men of all ages have faced the ouestion of recon¬ 
ciling the idea of a God of might and goodness with 
the absence of any rational pattern in their own ex¬ 
perience. The incompatibility of the implicit good¬ 
ness of Divine nature with the inconsistencies of 
human living has baffled the intellect to a degree of 
bitter disillusionment and pessimism. Idealism has 
nroclaimed a God of love. Life has brought men afflic¬ 
tion, pain and grief. Religious orthodoxy has relent¬ 
lessly clung to vestiges of rigid and outworn dogmas 
the 

long after/convictions and visions of the prophet have 
pointed to heights of fuller freedom. This is the et¬ 
ernal clash which rises out of the ever onward Dress¬ 
ing urge for realization on the part of mankind. This 
is the controversy of the discussion in chanters 5-31. 
Job has no difficulty in accenting a God of wisdom and 
a God of might, but he certainly objects to a God whose 
justice is of the type that his three Friends represent 
to him. 

As has already been made clear in the prologue, 

Job was a blameless and an upright man, who reverenced 
God and shunned evil. This same Job, however, was 
afflicted with unbearable hardships and suffering. 





































55 


Why? To that cuestion he searches an answer. In the 
course of this search, the mo6t formidable odds by far 
"ith which he has to cope are his three Friends, who 
relentlessly answer him with their orthodox doctrine 
that God orospers the righteous and punishes the evil 
doer in proportion to their righteousness and sins. 

For them it is impossible to see anything else except 
that Job is bearing the conseouences of his own sin. 

fhe three cycles that make up the Friends' speeches 
with Job's replies, fall into these three sections: 

I Chapters 4-14 

II Chapters 15-21 
III Chapters 22-31 

Throughout, the Friends have the same thing to 
say generally. The only change that is noticeable is 
the heightening of the intensity of feeling in all the 
speakers as the discussion progresses, and which widens 
the gap already existing between Job and the three. 

In each of the cycles it is Eliphaz the Temanite, who 
is the first to speak, and who voices the thought which 
the other two will echo in that Particular section. 

In chapters 4-14 they are content to point out that 
affliction is caused by sin. Suffering is disciplinary. 
Thus Eliphaz says, "Oh, happy he whom God is chasten- 













56 


ing J Sourn not the discioline of the Almighty; he 
binds up where he wounds, he hurt6 and heals." 

In 15-21 Job is more directly faced. Re arded as a 
sinner his terrible fate is emphasized. "You under¬ 
mine religion with your threatening of God; it is your 
sin inspiring you to sneak, to choose your ground so 
cunningly." (15:4 and 5) 

However in the last cycle, the Friends no longer 
restrain themselves. They mercilessly charge him with 
all sorts of evils. "You have fleeced your fellows 
selfishly, and stripoed your debtors to the skin; you 
have not given the weary any water, the hungry you have 
starved." (22:6 and 7) 

These are but samples of the manner and type of 
charges which the Friends hurled at Job. As one of a 
sensitive nature who had felt keenly and suffered much, 
it is to be expected that he would resoond with all the 
change and deoth of feeling that the human emotions are 
capable of. How sarcastic is his retort to ZoDhar’s 
accusation. "No doubt you are the men who know 7is- 
dom will die with you ! But I have brains as well as 
you; why, anyone knows all you say." (12:2) Yet in 
the same soeech he can humbly plead with God. "Tell 
me all I have done wrong, let me know what sin I am 










57 


guilty of." (13:33) a again in 19:13 he again begs— 
“Have pity on me, 0 my friends, have pity, for God'6 
hand has struck me." 

Job unshakeably clings to the conviction of his 
own innocence, in spite of the relentless accusations 
of the Friends. “I hold unflinching to my innocence; 
not for one hour need I reproach myself." (27:6) And 

again, 11 -for inwardly I have no guilty fears." (9:35) 

These and many other words of Job’s indicate the 
inconsistency and rashness of many of his utterances— 
utterances that are the expressions of the fluctuating 
moods of a man in extreme affliction. 

“Because he (Job) has no other theory of suffering 
than, that of the friends, he can imagine no other .just 
cause for his own suffering than sin on his part; since, 
then, as he knows directly and for certain that such 
.just cause does not exist, he infers that his suffering 
has been unjustly inflicted, that God—the God at least 
of his own old and the friends’ still cherished theory— 
is unjustly causing his suffering, has changed without 
good cause from being his friend into his enemy." # 

Thus in 9:23-24 he declares—“He (God) mocks at 
the despair of innocent men. The world is handed over 
to the wicked; he makes the rulers of men blind to 
# Driver ana Gray> P- L^ 7 










58 


justi ce. 11 

It is at such points at which the Friends and Job 
come into conflict. The Friends defend a theory about 
the manner in which God's justice manifests itself, 
while Job expresses a conviction arising out of his own 
experience which directly contradicts their oosition. 

It is not loss of physical possessions that is 

the severe test for Job, "but loss-if the friends 

and their theory are right, is God's unambifruous asser¬ 
tion that He has rejected Job and become his enemy. 

This is Job's severest trial of all-# 

Well might a character like his have endured the 
physical deprivations. But the possibility of God hav¬ 
ing deserted him and withdrawn His love leaves him grief- 
stricken and desperate. In one of the most memorable 
passages Job's lone and longing spirit finds expression 
in terms that strike resoonse in the hearts of all men:— 
"Oh that I knew where to find v im, how to reach his 
very throne, and there lay my case before him, arguing 
it out to the full." The passage, in suite of Job's 
previous utterances, ends with a feeling of certainty 
and assurance that God is still on his side, and will 
be compassionate and deal fairly with him. 

"Would he confront me with his almighty oower° 


# Driver and Gray, p. LV 


























































■ 

. 





















' 

















59 


”o, he woul Li ten to me; there I might argue with him 
ps one innocent, and hpve my judge acruit me for pH 
time." (23 :3-7) 

"But Job is also at issue with himself. The old 
theory leads inevitably to the conclusion that God is 
unjust, but the old experience of God still prompts him 
to trust God as being good as well as mighty." # 

There is a note of tragedy in Job's situation. 

He is convinced of his own innocence. He ha6 suffered 
complete deprivation, which according to the Friends' 
theory, is God's punishment for his sins. If he were 
to accept their contention, he would be driven to conclude 
that God is unjust. But this conclusion is not accepted 
by his inmost soul, even though at times doubt and 
confusion, inevitable accompaniments of extreme suff er- 
ing, cause him temporarily to Question God's goodness. 
Former experiences of God again and again come to the 
top, and have him assert his faith in ultimately being 
restored into fellowship with u im. In soite of textual 
difficulties of 19:25, and consecuent poor translations, 

H. T. Fowler accents it as an expression on the part of 
Job of eventually seeing God—which would mean the res¬ 
olution of his whole problem. Underlying all his search- 
# r-river and Gray, p. L TT III 










60 


(See 16 :19—?1 

ing, there is already the conviction that he has found. 

The discussion between Job and his Friends i6 the 
means by which the author psks his Question. It is the 
question that has been raised by all honest thinking men 
who have faced life souprely and frankly. Jeremiah knew 
it well. Second Isaiah was forced to se^k an answer to 
it. All philosophers, from the ancients to the moderns, 
in one form or another, have asked why God's finite creat¬ 
ure, in all his honest striving is condemned to nass thr¬ 
ough the entire range of human misery and desoair. 

"From the sorrows of childhood, deeper than the observer 
can calculate, to the stony griefs of age, untold and 
ungauged, there is a range of suffering beyond all enum¬ 
eration, and conception, baffling the imagination, af¬ 
fronting the intelligence -F 0 w can a world crossed 

by such a bar sinister be the expression of wisdom, 

power or goodness?-How shall man oe reconciled to 

life? How are the facts of suffering to be adjusted 

to the sense of value and. the inspiration of hope, 
which are the mainsprings of fruitful labour?" # 

This is the challenge to theism. This is the 
question with which Job wrestles in his attempt to 1 ind 
God, not for what v e can give, but for what He is. 

# Kilpatrick, p. 1 








61 


If he only knew where to find Him J There, in direct 
relationship) with Him could he hope to resolve satis¬ 
factorily the issue with his Friends, and get rid of his 
own inner conflict. God would answer him. And Job was 
prepared for whatever answer might be forthcoming. It 
is in the last verses of the last chapter of the dis¬ 
cussion, where the writer in masterly manner after once 
more having presented Job as one who claims sincerity of 
purpose and honesty of conduct, who denounces adultery, 
who is concerned about rich and poor alike and has com¬ 
passion on them, who is innocent of the worship of money 
and of idolatry, who can claim the virtue of hosoital- 

ity-now the writer has him steo out bold and fearless, 

and ask for God and whatever He may have against him. 

“Well, here I enter my own olea of innocence. 

Oh for a hearing J Oh for an answer from the Almighty ! 
Would that I had his indictment, whatever my Opponent 
has against me l Proud would I be to bear it on my 
shoulder, to bind it like a crown uoon my head, entering 
his presence like a orince, and telling every detail of 
my life." (31:35-37) 

How appropriate a setting of the Question * It is 
an adequate preparation for the climax in Yahweh’s speech 
and reply. 
























V 

■ 


























62 


( 5) Yahweh 1 s Reoly 

As earlier indicated, the soeech of Ei V u f 32-37) 
is accepted by all scholars a6 an interpolation, and 
hence needs no further comment. 

Yahweh's reply begins with ch? ter 38. Since the 
highly technical Question of the integrity of the text 
at this point involves a discussion in which only auth¬ 
orities can take part, the conclusions of scholars are 
accepted as these have been expressed in the arrangement 
that Moffatt adopt8. Reference therefore, is made to 
Moff alt's Bible. 

"Then the Eternal answered Job out of a storm, 
saying: 'Who darkens my design with a cloud of thought¬ 
less words? Confront me like a man; come, answer these 
Questions 1 . " 38:1-3. 

Thus Yahweh is introduced and begins to speak. 

But how unlike are his words to what the modern reader 
would expect. Job has just finished asking boldly for 
an answer to his bewildered pleadings. Surely if God 
appears, He will give clear explanations *nd justify 
His ways with men? 

But Yahweh, instead of directly answering Job, 
ironically hurls back Question after Question which are 
overwhelming in their suggestiveness. Who measured out 











63 


the earth 0 Who heloed to shut in the sea’ What oath 
leads to the home of light? Have you ever entered the 
stores of the sea 0 Can you send orders to the clouds 0 
Do you supoly the war-horse with strength? Does your 
wit send the hawk to soar 7 Does your word make the eagle 
mount? 

Nowhere else are to be found such exoressions of 
sublimity and grandeur, which mock man’s ignorance and 
limitations, and proclaim God's wisdom and might in terms 
that are infinite and eternal. God is the Almighty. 

Who can conceive of His glory as manifested in the won¬ 
ders of His world 7 The vision of H^m will humiliate 
finite man in all his oresumption. His limited views 
and close bound horizons shut out God's greatness, back 
of which lie a thousand reasons for doing what He does. 
His purposes and plans are well beyond the bounds of 
human thought. What right ha6 Job, to go beyond his 
personal knowledge and reorove God 7 "Will critics still 
dispute with the Almighty" To argue with God, answer 
all these questions." 40:1-? "The caustic irony of the 
Divine questions, and the impressive array of the won¬ 
ders of nature and Providence, above all the vision of 
God Himself, crush and humble the presumptuous critic 
of God's ways. Yet the vei sense of v is own ignorance 














64 


and frailty, and of God's wisdom and might, is a return 
to the religious temper of mind. " # 

Thus, Job apoear6 in his last speech and makes his 
confession. "The overwhelming impression made on Job 
by the vision of God leaves him at the end of the ->oem 
contrite and subdued."# 

"I thoughtlessly confused the issues; I spoke 
without intelligence, of wonders far beyond ray ken. 

I had heard of thee by hearsay, but now mine eyes have 
seen thee; so I desoise myself, in dust and ashe6 I 
repent." 42:3-6 

The realisation that at last he h?s seen God, that 
he has seen Him in all the splendor of His greatness, 
and majesty, leaves Job reconciled and satisfied. He 
is like the prodigal son, who having wandered from home, 
has to fight his way through the resistance of a ore- 
tent ious world and the severity of his own inner conflicts, 
and finally finds his way back to his father's house. 

Once more reconciled to life and. hope, he begins to live 
anew, with the certainty that God is with him. 


# Peeke. 

Cent. 

Bible, p. 

20 

# Peake. 

Cent. 

Bible, p. 

18 














65 


(6) The Epilogue 

Very fittingly, it is at this point at which the 
real Job—Job as "character of © great story, is left. 

The epilogue is but an Appendage. It is almost as thourh 
the author, unwilling: to leave his hero so abruptly, 
with whom he has traced the oath of his own life and 
thought, lingers a little while longer just to make 
certain that he is completely reconciled and completely 
restored. As far as Job himself w?s concerned, certainly 
he needed no outward confirmation of the assurance that 
he had won in the vision of God. God Himself was what 
he had striven for. It was God whom he had found. 
Certainly the author of the book accomplishes his pur¬ 
pose before he comes to the epilogue. But there are 
one or two thoughts which he w r ould like to add before 
leaving the stage completely. He adopts this method 
to condemn the folly of the friends in maintaining a 
theory of Providence at the expense of truth, and com¬ 
mends Job for his consistent appeal to truth. And why 
leave such a loyal man in misery, now that the cause fcr 
misery has passed awa3 r? Like an actor in a Play who 
has moved his audience into an emotional tenseness re¬ 
lieves it by a final re-appearance in a stage bow, so 
too the author of this drama relieves his reader with 











66 


the epilogue, in whioh Job is restored to twice his 
former possessions. 

Like the actor and the audience, so the reader 
and the author deoart, together with the reassurance that 
God is in his heaven, all's right with the world. 

"Then Job died, old, after a full life." 42:17 








IV 


CONCLUSION 

It ha6 been said that history is but the inter¬ 
pretation of the oast by the present. Knowledge of the 
past, therefore, is at best deoendent upon judgments forc¬ 
ed and moulded and conditioned by factors pnd circum¬ 
stances that are of the here and now. How much of the 
oresent is read into the past, and to what extent the 
past expresses itself in the oresent, are Questions that 
are invariably raised as soon as the attention is foc¬ 
ussed upon those peculiar attributes of life which are 
limited neither by space nor time, and. yet which at the 
same time have been strangely embellished by the age 
in which they have found their aoolication. Values 
that are real must be eternal values. If truth has any 
universal appeal and connotation it is becpuse it has 
that ouality of intrinsic usefulness pnd asoect of a re¬ 
plicability to any oarticular point in time and olace, 
while, at the same timq it has that element of univer¬ 
sality which enables it,to be recognized ana intuitive¬ 
ly sensed by any one age of any other. It is this 
quality of human value which, like a thread, runs through 
the whole complex fabric of human history, binding the 
past and the oresent into an inseparable and continuous 
flow of value judgments. 


67 





















































68 


Quite justifiably, one feel6 reluctant about making 
an evaluation of a product of the human mind which came 
into existence twenty- our thousand years aero. It is 
a tremendous gap to be bridged ! To what extent had the 
author of those days recognized the oneness of the world 
and the universality and eternalness of basic orinciole6 
of human worth? Interpretation in the intellectual sense 
alone is not sufficient to evaluate the significance of 
any work of art. Most certainly is this true if that 
work is removed by scores of centuries in time. 

There must be some unmistakeable note that regis¬ 
ters resoonse in the hearts of men wherever and whoever 
they are. The writer of Job asks a Question that is 
understood by all men who have at least made a beginning 
of life and who have had some conscious experience. 

The answer may not be complete and wholly satisfactory. 
But it is one that 'has made its contribution to the 
"'“history of human thought. Since man’s st Le for 
self-realization makes him reach for every aid avail¬ 
able, it is to be exoected that here too his Question, 
no matter how refined pnd indirect, undeniably tpkes 
the egocentric oattern which makes him ask-^ "hat con¬ 
tribution has it to offer to me 9 

He who is familiar with the book of Job hardly 










69 


needs to be reminded of the qualities that set it aoart 
from any of the other literpture of the Old Testament. 
The originality of its drp* atic form, the beauty of its 
poetry, the directness of its human insight, the com¬ 
prehensiveness of its 6cope and universality of its 
apolication, and finally its sense of aonrecietion for 
the greatness of God and the v^stness of His universe 
sublime--these make it a treasured work for any lover 
of literature and thought. In masterly descriotions of 
the animals and the solendor of the heavens, the writer 
portrays God's omniootence and majesty. But he does not 
stop there. His interest goes beyond natural phenomena 
and the animal world. It is with man that he concerns 
himself. It is man's view of his relationship with God 
and the world that he wishes to broaden. 

"Job guesses the truth that the world is but one 
stage in the drama of life—he is taken out of himself 
by seeing the wonders of creation; but so long as he 
doubts whether God is infinitely good as well ps great, 
he is in soiritual darkness. It is the vision of the 
God of righteousness and love which saves Mm from his 
darkest thoughts, and lifts him unawares out of all mapn 
thoughts of life, out of loneliness and fear. The mean¬ 
ing of his sufferings is never explained to hir , cut he 









70 


is one with God again in a fellowship untroubled by 
doubt concerning? the morel govern 1 ent of the world. 

It is the soul’s own 8< 1 God has whisnered 

it into the ear it becomes p certainty to faith. It is 
this reveletion-^thet behind the mystery of life there 
is real affinity between the Divine and human nature, 
there is One who understands, shares the thoughts, 
returns the love of His servants—it is this which makes 
the Book of Job supreme in the literature of consolation."/ 

"The writer’s purpose is never so directly form¬ 
ulated as Milton's—to 'assert Eternal Providence and 

justify the ways of God with men'-He (the author), 

had no clpar-cut theology, like Milton's, enabling? him 
to say why God acted ?s He did and thus positively to 
justify His ways; but through oain and trial he had 
discovered in his own experience that God did not aban¬ 
don the sufferer-that suffering and loss had not 

detached him from God, that it was possible to serve 
and love God not for the outward things He gave, but for 

whet He was in Himself. The book aims not at solving 
the entire problem, but at vindicating God and the latent 
worth of human nature against certain conclusions drawn 
from a Partial observation of life." 

# Devine, p. 19 

# Driver and Gray, p. LI 












71 


This is significant. Job wanted God not as a 
guarantee for certain of life’s physical comforts, but 
rather as One who was an inherent part of his being, 
the complement of his nature. It was fellowship with 
God he dr sired. But here it may well be cueetioned just 
in what terms that fellowship expressed itself to Job. 
There are many today who are on the side of the Satan 
who in the prologue doubted that man was capable of 
such pure devotion to God, without a thought of recom¬ 
pense. To them basically man is selfish. The Golden 
Rule is but a recognition that the best way to be -ood 
to oneself is to be good to others, and its fulfilment 
is no indication that the actions were motivated by a 
concern for others, without a thought for self. Is it 
humanly possible for any man to act purely from a con¬ 
cern for humanity at large? 

If this question is stated absolutely, the answer 
must be, “No". But Job’s reconciliation to Go r > *nd 
conseouent satisfaction, certainly point to a truth 
that recognizes the possibility of man so to identify 
himself with the highest and loftiest in humanity—which 
in religion is God—that his own interests and his own 
being find expression and realization in the well-being 
of others. It is not so much a matter of self-renun¬ 
ciation as it is one of self-re-evaluation. It 
may be termed selfishness, but it is a type of self- 









■ 






























. 



















72 


ishness which is infinitely valuable to 'the other' — 

If so, who ha8 reason to quarrel with it? The spiritual 
life thus is not a commercial transaction in which the 
profit has to be anticipated, but rather it is an exoer- 
ience, a certain duality of relationship which is in¬ 
herently profitable. It is a certain mutual and recip¬ 
rocal correspondence between man and man, wherein lies 
the essence of spirituality. To be right with God means 
to be right with men. Every human problem ultimately 
will resolve itself into terms of human relationships. 

Had I one ouarrel with the author of Job, it would 
be this—He has Job reconciled to life and God, without 
having reconciliation between him and his Friends. It 
may be that in the ancient and eastern setting of the 
book, that wa.s included without being put into so many 
words. Yet it can be said of this writer, and it can 
be said of most of the prophets, that they stood a lone 
in the proclamation of their teaching to an extent that 
it was not until years afterwards that people even dimly 
began to see the truth their messages contained. It is 
true that like any leaders, they ere far advanced in 
their thinking and conceptions, far in advance of the mass 
of the people, and by necessity stood alone, as any 
leaders and revolutionists must. They are leaders by 










73 


virtue of the fact that they have something new and un- 
ioue to offer, and to which they can lead all those less 
sensitive to, pnd less capable of, advanced and original 
thought. History and the writings of the prophets < - 
selves, indicate that they failed to make any aooreciable 
immediate impact. v ery few great r> en ever are aporec- 
iated by their own age. Nor does the blame for this 
entirely rest on the other side, a leader who in his vis¬ 
ion is so far removed from people that there is no ap¬ 
preciable response, leaves himself open to ouestion. 
Either it is his new principle or his technioue that 
lacks practicality. Certainly every man owes it to him¬ 
self and to his generation, to become personally recon¬ 
ciled and consolidated with at least a few of his time, 
who, having thus caught the vision and enthusiasm, will 
force home the truth, no matter what happens to their 
leader. In the case of the Jewish prophets it is dif¬ 
ficult to say just to what extent they had npde them- 
sleves a real part of a small intimate group. Perhaps 
not as much as they mis:ht have. Job, t^us intimately 
knit and reconciled with his Friends, could have made 
them the means whereby the world was taught t] 
of a new and wider God. Jesus, more than any other 
recognized the necessity of getting a handful of trustee 












74 


friends—completely reconciled and iron to hi6 position. 
The mutuplity pnd understanding thus existing between 
him and his discioles made Christianity a movement from 
the start. 

Concerning the world of suffering *nd evil, there 
may be very little more that can be said beyond the an¬ 
swer that the author of Job gives. Whether as a race 
or as an individual, nan today passes through trials 
and persecutions, through affliction and suffering that 
are eoual to those of Job. Yet, are these so much out 
of harmony with the scheme of things, that there is no 
room for them? Is the confusion so great that man no 
longer is capable of finding his way to the light? 

Perhaps the ability to suffer is the orice that 
man has to pay for his freedom® 

"God could not create man in his own likeness 
without putting into his hands the power of introducing 
evil."# W e could not choose the right, if we not also 
had the power to choose the wring. 

life is one constant activity and striving, a striving 
in which man is bound to go wrong—to err, not in the 
moral sense, but in the sense of making wrong choices. 
The nature of man and the whole order of which he is a 
part is one constant, eternal change ana struggle pnd 

# Clarke, p. 156 







. 












































. 











. 


























75 


onward urge into realms unconouered end unknov/n. The 
farther he get6, the greeter his responsibility. The 
■^er th< r anism, eater the suffering. Wil 

the emergence of self-consciousness end self-av/ereness 
el so came human loneliness. With the ability to enjoy 
came the possibility to be bored. Only the genius, 
he who has the greatest sensitivity, suffers most because 
he also enjoys most. Man would never have come to those 
heights of consciousness and self-awareness and sensit¬ 
ivity, with all its fullness and appreciation of dif¬ 
ference and distinction, had he not first come through 
those vague gropings and 6truggle6 of his primordial 
development. It is darkness hat makeBappreciation 
the sunshine possible. How could a meal be enjoyed if 
it wasn’t for a sharpened appetite? In this sense 
suffering is but an expression of God’s goodness and 
God’s love. 

"The present order so full of suffering may'not 
be the ideal of God for his creatures, and yet may be 
the best for them at the present stage of their eristence, 
and for that purpose that is now in hand. It is not nec¬ 
essary in the administration of a good God that the 
world at present be the best possible world, but only that 
it be the best world for the present need and purpose." 

# Clarke, *>. 154 












76 


In harmony with the spirit of the prologue, our 
earthly life has a significance which our earth docs 
not exhaust. It is mysterious and unfathomable. Ken's 
faith begins where his understanding ends. Only he who 
has identified himself with the stream of life and con¬ 
sciousness and God, recognises that in every nev/ friend 
he makes, in every new eroerience he has, he oves into 
the realm of the unknown, where dangers lurk and ain 
awaits. But also, it is only he who has sufficient 
confidence and trust in himself and life as a whole, who 
will ever move into that sohere of existence where he 
can say with Job—"Now mine eyes have seen thee."— 
and begin life anew. Few are they indeed who do not 
believe in the goodness of life. They take the nearest 
door out of it. Man recognizes that there is much 
searching yet to be done, but he searches with a know¬ 
ledge that he will find. 

Strong son of God, immortal Love 
lYhom we, that have not seen thy face 
By faith, and faith alone, embrace, 

Believing where we cannot orove. 


— Tennyson, A• Memori 





























. 






























J 










