For Reference 


TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


SURVIVAL OF HATCHERY- REARED CUTTHROAT 


TROUT IN AN ALBERTA STREAM 


BY 


TWITS VS 


U.M.MANGAN 


1 - f 


























@X JIBBIS 
wauiMis 















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/survivalofhatcheOOurba 



THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SURVIVAL OF HATCHERY-REARED CUTTHROAT 
TROUT IN AN ALBERTA STREAM 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGRE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF ZOOLOGY 


by 


Urbain Mahlon Mangan, B.Sc. (Montreal) 


Edmonton, Alberta, 
April 1951 * 







'■ t v; 













ABSTRACT 


Due to the poor returns to the angler from hatchery 
plantings a program was designed to determine the actual 
day by day survival of hatchery reared trout in a stream. 

Using a typical tributary stream of the Alberta east slope 
drainage, four hundred individually weighed and numbered 
cutthroat trout were planted in a section of the stream 
bounded by fish tight screens. The trout were of two 
size groups, one group of 12-15 inch fish, the other 6-8 
inches. Throughout an experimental period of 100 days 
following planting, the surviving trout were caught by 
angling, weighed and returned to the stream. The fish that 
died drifted against the screen and were collected. The 
large trout showed a mortality of 30.15% Tor the first 100 
days and were entering the winter in poor condition, while 
the smaller group showed a calculated percentage mortality 
of 85 %. If the screens had not been present the experim¬ 
ental hatchery fish would have been carried out of the 
stream by the current in a matter of hours. 

A rough measure of the efficiency of natural reproduct¬ 
ion showed that the stream could build up its present pop¬ 
ulation in three to four years. We tentatively conclude 
that the planting of hatchery reared trout in a stream already 
supporting a population of the same species is uneconomical 
and does not contribute to the brood stock of the stream. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

INTRODUCTION . 1 

EXPERIMENT WITH CONFINED TROUT . 5 

Experimental Area - Gorge Creek . 6 

Fish-tight Screens .. 7 

Description of the Enclosures .. 9 

Hatchery Enclosure . 9 

Native Enclosure . 10 

METHODS AND PROCEDURES . 11 

Experimental Trout . 11 

Catching and Reweighing . 12 

MORTALITY OF PLANTED FISH . 13 

Lot One . 13 

Lot Two ... 17 

WEIGHT LOSS OF PLANTED FISH . 21 

POPULATION OF WILD TROUT . 23 

EFFECT OF HATCHERY TROUT ON WILD TROUT . 25 

CAUSES OF MORTALITY. 28 

EFFICIENCY OF NATURAL REPRODUCTION . 34 

SUMMARY . 40 

CONCLUSIONS .. 45 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . 47 

REFERENCES . 49 

APPENDIX. 51 

TABLES VIII - XIII . 









































INTRODUCTION 


During the past fifteen years the major problem 
confronting fisheries management has been the feasibility 
of restocking lakes and streams with hatchery-reared trout. 
Plantings have been made on a large scale in waters which 
have not produced meritable returns to the angler. The 
determination of fishermen and administrators to improve 
the trout fishing has, in some cases, borne fruit. New 
species have been introduced into areas which were previous¬ 
ly barren. But with the exception of a few cases which fall 
into the above category, no noticeable improvement has been 
observed. 

As early as 1900, a high official in the U. S. 

Fish Commission expressed doubt as to the outcome of the 
indiscriminate planting procedure. In the 1920*s, the first 
Canadian experimental work was performed by Dr. R. E. 
Foerster (1936), of the Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, 
B. C. Foerster*s experiment, conducted over a ten year 
period, offered conclusive proof that the salmon hatcheries 
of the Pacific Coast were not improving the commercial catch. 

Foerster*s work started a chain of research in 
Canada and the United States. Experiments were performed 
to determine the age group and the month best suited for 
maximum survival. 












0 /.. 





























2 


Nation-wide averages show that fry survival 
varies from one to four percent, while fingerling survival 
shows better results. Needham (1944) in California showed 
a gross survival of 63.7$ for brown trout fingerlings 
(1.25-1.% inches) over a five year period; also, a gross 
survival of 44.2$ for small rainbow fingerlings (1.32-1.69 
inches). In the above instances, the recorded period varied 
from 89-151 days. Needham's most significant work in respect 
to our study, is seen in the gross survival of 49.8$ for 
large rainbow fingerlings# during a 123 day recorded period. 

Shetter and Hazzard (1938) found a survival of 
1.8$ for spring-planted brook trout and a 17.5$ survival for 
rainbow. Shetter (1942) found in Michigan trout streams 
that 25 . 7 $ of the rainbow trout planted in the open season 
were caught by anglers. Nation-wide returns to the angler 
of planted legal-sized trout average about 25$. 

Miller (1949) summarizes the existing data in 
these words, "This great body of evidence shows a return 
from spring-planted legal-sized fish of about 5“5’0$, average 
around 30$. From fall-planted fish the returns are, with 
few exceptions, negligible." 

The problem then resolves itself into a question 

#The large rainbow fingerlings are comparable in size to our 
lot #2 cutthroat trout. 



- 3 - 


of what causes this serious mortality of hatchery-reared 
trout when placed in natural waters. The fact that hatchery- 
reared trout are different from wild trout in their ability 
to take care of themselves is obvious. Schuck (1948) has 
listed ten possible causes of the low survivability of 
hatchery-reared trout; he states: 

1. *High percentages of fats and carbohydrates 

in diets. 

2. Overfeeding which leads to (among other things) 
detrimentally high growth rates. 

3. Relative lack of exercise. 

4. Artificial conditions where little or no for¬ 
aging for food is necessary. 

5. Relative freedom from predators. 

6. Relative stability of water temperature the 
year round, a condition which does not exist in most trout 
streams. Hatchery trout, if reared in spring water, are 
usually subjected to neither the low temperature (approxi¬ 
mately 32 ° F. during winter) nor the high temperature (above 
75° F.) which trout in the wild must often endure. If trout 
have become accustomed to the rather stable temperatures of 
the hatchery, the more variable temperatures in the wild 
might contribute to their mortality. 

7. Continued domestication of hatchery breeders. 

8. Intentional or unintentional selection of brood 
fish for good performance in the hatchery, i.e., for rapid 

























. 








- 










. 

* 






























- 4 - 


growth rate, large production of eggs and like qualities. 

Such selection does not necessarily produce fish with the 
qualities to survive in the wild. 

9. Relative absence of natural live food . 

10. Transportation and planting methods. 11 

Poor survival of hatchery-reared trout in streams 
is not necessarily due to any one of the above causes, but 
is very likely a combination of several, perhaps all. 
Figuratively speaking, the survival chain is only as strong 
as its weakest link. 

In Alberta, the trout streams on the east slope 
drainage are rated “fair 11 with regard to food and cover; 
they are capable of maintaining a year round population. 

Our anglers are not forced to follow the hatchery truck to 
obtain good fishing. However, anglers do insist on plantings, 
in the belief that they will contribute to the brood stock 
of the streams. 

From the research reviewed above, it would seem 
that these plantings are largely wasted. It is important, 
then, to plan and carry out a number of experiments, under 
controlled conditions, which will tell us how effective the 
planting procedure may be; and, if it is not effective, to 
suggest ways in which it could be improved. 




EXPERIMENT WITH CONFINED TROUT 


A project was planned for the summer season, 1950, 
under the supervision of Dr. R. B. Miller, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton. The program was designed to determine 
the actual survival of hatchery-reared trout in a stream 
which contained a population of native trout. It was also 
hoped that this investigation would shed some light on the 
possible causes of mortality in planted stock. 

The experiment was planned to illustrate the day 
by day fate of planted stock in a stream. This could be 
ascertained by erecting three fish-tight screens approxi¬ 
mately one mile apart. The screens would form the bound¬ 
aries of two enclosures. Planted stock would be confined 
within one enclosure; the other would serve as a control. 
Before planting, each fish would be weighed and marked 
with a numbered t a g. Throughout the summer, the hatchery 
fish would be recaptured as often as possible by angling, 
weighed and returned to the stream. In this way a series 
of case histories could be built up from planting time 
until fall. 

At the same time, a population estimate of the 
wild trout would be calculated for each enclosure by the 
usual method of clipping fins. This would further serve 
as a special check to indicate whether the hatchery fish 




■ 









- 


. 






. 




' 









- 6 - 


had caused any change in the condition of the wild trout, 
or vice versa. An auxiliary program was planned to deter¬ 
mine the efficiency of natural reproduction. The experi¬ 
ment was completed in September, 1950, and the findings 
form the substance of this paper. 

Experimental Area - Go rge Creek 

The creek selected for the experiment is a small 
mountain stream, which arises in two branches, the main or 
south fork and the north fork. The main or south fork has 
its origin at the six thousand foot level of the northwest 
slopes of Blue Rock Mountain. The north fork begins on the 
northeastern slopes of Ware Mountain, approximately at the 
same altitude. Each branch flows about four miles before 
uniting to form the main stream. From the union of the 
two branches, the main stream descends four miles, to the 
4,800 foot level where it enters the Sheep River. The 
junction is approximately a half mile west of the Bighorn 
Ranger .Station. 

The stream gradient of Gorge Creek is 150 feet 
per mile (Andrekson, 1949). During May and June when the 
spring run-off is at its maximum, the rate of flow is seven 
miles per hour. In the latter part of August and early 
September, the rate of flow drops to a summer level of 
1.5-2 miles per hour. 






- 7 - 


The experimental area was located in the lower 
part of the main stream where it is ten to fifteen feet 
wide. It traverses a deep gorge with numerous sheer rock 
faces which are mainly loose shale and limestone. The 
stream twists and turns through the narrow gorge, forming 
well defined pools, under-cut banks, long stretches of 
rapids and gravelly riffles. The water temperature has an 
average variation of 14-16° F. per day. The lowest recorded 
temperature was 33° F.$ the highest 67° F. Bottom food 
samples average 0.5 cc. per square foot (Andrekson, 19*+9) • 
Gorge Creek has been closed for the last five 
years and supports several hundred small cutthroat trout per 
mile. Generally speaking then, this stream is a typical 
tributary stream of the east slope drainage. It differs 
from other streams in that the temperature is somewhat 
warmer and the stream gradient is not quite as severe. These 
factors should increase the chances of survival in planted 
stock. 


Fish-tight Screens 

Approximately the first mile and a half of the 
main stream, known to contain a population of native trout, 
was chosen for the experimental area. Fish-tight screens 
were erected at both ends and in the middle. (The screens 
were about three-quarters of a mile apart. 
















Figure 1. DIAGRAM OF A SECTION OF SCREEN 

















- 8 - 


The screens were assembled in sections. A section 
consisted of 2 x 4 scantling made into a rectangular frame 
measuring 8 or 9 x 3 feet. The frames were strengthened by 
cross supports on each corner and covered with one inch 
chicken wire. An additional piece of chicken wire was attached 
to the bottom of each frame to form an apron. (Figure 1). In 
each case the chicken wire overlapped the frame to allow for 
connection with the adjoining section. 

A sufficient number of these sections were placed 
across the stream to form a screen. The sections overlapped 
one another and were joined together by means of the over¬ 
lapping wire mentioned above. Rocks were piled on the apron 
of chicken wire which lay flush with the stream bed and the 
sections were propped upright on the downstream side. 

(Figure 1). When each section had been fastened to its 
neighbour, the whole screen was covered with half inch net¬ 
ting on the upstream side. The netting hung over the top of 
the screen and was held in place along the stream bed by small 
rocks. The addition of the netting, besides rendering the 
screens fish-tight, also eased the task of daily cleaning. 

These screens were found to be most effective when 
erected on hard bottom and could withstand extreme flooding. 

On one occasion the water rose within five inches of the top 
and the screens remained intact. For the first week after 
installation it was necessary to check each section of the 
screen for undercutting, that is, water flowing over the 
2 x 4 on the stream bottom would cut a deep hole beneath the 




, 



. 

. 










' 


- 

, 








. 

■ 










Figure 2. MAP OF HATCHERY ENCLOSURE, GORGE CREEK 
















- 9 - 


framework. An undercut frame would soon sink into the hole 
dug by the stream thereby weakening the whole structure. 

The three screens were installed in the stream by 
June l?th. The lower enclosure bounded by No. 1 and No. 2 
screens were called the hatchery enclosure, the upper en¬ 
closure bounded by No. 2 and No. 3 screens was called the 
native enclosure. 

Description of the Enclosures 

Hatchery Enclosure . The general layout of this 
enclosure is shown in Figure 2. No. 1 screen was located on 
an outcropping about 600 feet from the junctions of Gorge 
Creek and the Sheep River. Immediately upstream the banks 
of the creek rose rapidly forming the narrow gorge from which 
the whole stream is named. 

The rock walls approached within two feet of one 
another forming a narrow slit or gap through which turbulent 
water flowed. These divided the hatchery enclosure into 
areas X, Y and Z. Due to the difficulty of negotiating these 
narrow places, they were termed Impasse 1 and Impasse 2. 

Area H X U . This was bounded by No. 1 screen and 
the lower end of the Impasse 1. The water was fairly smooth¬ 
flowing, with five excellent pools and a number of small 

Ahoy) c- . 

rapids. On the eastern bank a few feet (abeuty No. 1 screen, 
Dead Horse Creek, a small tributary stream enters Gorge Creek. 















•r 













STREAM TEMPERATURE DEGREES FAHRENHEIT 



Figure 3. GRAPH OF THE AVERAGE MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM TEMPERATURE 
READING OF GORGE CREEK FOR EACH TEN DAY INTERVAL OF 
THE EXPERIMENTAL PERIOD 1950 . 











10 - 


Area t< Y tt . This was the longest of the three areas, 
extended from the upper end of Impasse 1 to the lower end of 
Impasse 2. The water in this area flowed very rapidly with 
numerous shallow rapids and small waterfalls. The furthest 
upstream part of Area Y was characterized by a deep narrow 
channel. The few pools in this area were deep and relatively 
productive. 

Area M Z n . This shortest of the three areas, was 
bounded by the upper end of Impasse 2 and No. 2 screen. It 
was very similar to area “X", with small rapids and fairly 
productive pools. On the west bank immediately above Impasse 
2, a small unnamed tributary stream enters Gorge Creek. 

( Each of the major pools was numbered in all areas be¬ 
ginning downstream. (See map of hatchery enclosure).) 

Native Enclosure . An old log jam situated half way 
between No. 2 and No. 3 screen, divided the native enclosure 
into two parts. The section of the stream is not bordered by 
rock walls and the pools are wider and shallower. The narrow 
gorge which began in the hatchery enclosure is widened con¬ 
siderably and small trees and shrubs grow along the banks. 











11 - 


METHODS AND PROCEDURES 


Experimental Trout 

Two separate lots of cutthroat trout were planted 
in the hatchery enclosure. These plantings were made by the 
staff of the Calgary Provincial Hatchery. 

The trout were tagged at the hatchery by Mr. A. C. 
Sinclair the Provincial Hatchery Superintendent. The tags 
consisted of two celluloid discs, each about the size of a 
dime, one red and one white. A nickel plated steel pin was 
pushed through the hole in the centre of the tag, then through 
the body of the fish immediately below the dorsal fin. The 
remaining tag was placed on the protruding pin and the pin 
clinched. The red disc bore the number in black and the words 
Alberta Government Fisheries Branch, Edmonton. The red disc 
was placed on the left side of the fish, the white disc on 
the right. The fish were anaesthetized before tagging to 
facilitate the operation. As each fish was tagged the number 
and weight were recorded. This method of tagging does not 
seem to cause mortality as tagged fish kept in the hatchery 
ponds suffered no more deaths than untagged. 

Lot One. This consisted of 199 three-year-old 

6 *a/0. Bo?. 

cutthroat trout numbered from 201-400 ; They were hatched in 
Calgary and reared in the ponds at Westmount and Raven river 
rearing stations. This group ranged from 3.5-11 oz. and were 







. 




. i 






































. 



















12 


12-15 inches long, considerably larger than the native wild 
trout in Gorge Creek. They were planted on June 16th, 63 
being released in Area n X n and 136 in Area "Z ". There was 
no mortality during the two hour trip from Calgary and all 
seemed to be in good condition when liberated. 

Lot Two . This consisted of 201 two-year-old 
cutthroat trout numbered from 401-600. Number 303 was planted 
with this lot also. They were hatched and reared in the 
ponds at the Calgary Hatchery. These fish ranged from 1.5- 
3.5 oz. and were 5-8 inches long. The planting took place 
on July 5th. Numbers 401-500 were released in Area U Z U and 
numbers 303 and 501-600 were released in Area M X n . This lot 
was smaller than the native wild trout in Gorge Creek. The 
fish were in exceptionally good condition when released. 

They were of the same size groups that the Alberta Government 
hatchery usually distributes in their restocking operations. 

Catching and Reweighing 

Hatchery Trout . Angling operations were commenced 
about four days after planting. The hatchery trout were 
caught by angling with light tackle and small artificial flies. 
Due to heavy concentrations of hatchery fish in certain pools 
at night we obtained large numbers of recaptures using a 
flashlight and long handled dip net. This procedure was car¬ 
ried out on four or five occasions. 

Each fish when recaptured was weighed with a small 





• • Y 

- 








.. O ' '! . *.„■ 

. 

. ' ! . • 

. . 






/*. ■■ 




. 

. 











. 










- 13 - 

package scale and then liberated. The number and weight were 
recorded. Using this method weights could be accurately ob¬ 
tained to the nearest half ounce. A file was kept for each 
of the four hundred hatchery fish and entries made when the 
fish were recaptured. 

By these means 142 fish of lot one were reweighed, 
many, several times, and 124 of lot two. 

Nativ e Trout . Native trout caught while angling 
were marked by fin clipping and released. The number of fish 
marked in this manner and the number of recaptures were re¬ 
corded daily. Native wild trout in the hatchery enclosure 
were called Hatchery Natives and were marked by the removal 
of the right pelvic fin. Native Trout in the native enclos¬ 
ure were marked by the removal of the left pelvic fin. Re¬ 
captures of native trout from the enclosures enabled the 
calculation of the numbers present. 

Periodically throughout the summer, wild trout from 
both enclosures were killed, weighed and measured. The data 
obtained in this way were used to calculate the condition or 
relative heaviness of the fish so that any effect of the 
hatchery fish on the native fish might be observed. 


MORTALITY OF PLANTED FISH 

Lot One . During the first twenty-four hours after 


planting the vast majority of the hatchery fish planted in 
Area "Z" and Area "X” had been carried downstream by the 







- 14 - 


current. They were observed in large numbers around No. 1 
screen and the adjacent pool, and seemed to be in a state 
of semi-shock. The hatchery fish exhibited a definite pre¬ 
ference for quiet water and were hopelessly baffled by the 
current. About forty fish endeavoured to hold their own 
against the current and were lined up side by side in front 
of the screen. If the screen had not been present the 
major portion of the planting would have been swept out of 
Gorge Creek in a matter of hours. The hatchery fish re¬ 
quired two weeks to become accustomed to the current and 
were not observed in fast water until the 14th day after 
planting. This date coincides with the first record of up¬ 
stream migration. 

The planted fish also exhibited complete loss of 
their natural protective instincts during the first three 
weeks making them an easy mark for predators. It is sur¬ 
prising that only two fish were found dead; the loss of 
natural protective instinct was most evident during the 
first three days, when fish lying in shallow water in front 
of the screen could be picked up with little difficulty. 

On the 18th day after planting we noticed that movement 
along the banks caused the hatchery fish to scatter. By 
the 21st day they had regained their natural alertness. 

The majority of the planted fish made little ef¬ 
fort to feed at the surface until the eighth day. On many 
occasions we witnessed a small native trout obtain a 
morsel of food borne by the current before the large hatch¬ 
ery trout had reached it. 






- 


. 

. 












. 




* 













- 15 - 

Mortality commenced on the second day after 
planting. The bodies of the dead fish were washed against 
the screen. The screen was examined daily and the dead 
fish were reweighed and stomach contents examined. Examina¬ 
tion of the stomach contents yielded varying results. With¬ 
in the first two days after planting, three of the five fish 
found dead against the screen showed evidence of stream feed¬ 
ing. All the remaining hatchery fish that died showed no 
evidence of food. In most cases, the stomachs were collapsed 
and the intestines transparent. The two fish that were killed 
by predators were badly mutilated and the examination of 
stomach contents was impossible. 

The daily mortality was based on the number of dead 
fish washed against the screen in a twenty-four hour period. 

By the twentieth day, 23*1$ of the planting had been washed 
against the screen. Mortality continued at a somewhat slower 
rate until the forty-fourth day, by which time 30 # of the 
planted fish had died. From the forty-fifth to the hundredth 
day, only one fish was found dead. Thus, at the end of one 
hundred days, 30.1# or sixty fish had died. During this re¬ 
corded period, only one wild trout was found dead in the 
hatchery enclosure (except for a few killed by a violent hail¬ 
storm on August 10th, 19?0). 

The true mortality cannot be calculated from the 
number of fish found dead against the screen. One would 
imagine that dead fish thrown into the stream in Area "Z" 



16 - 


would be borne downstream by the current and be deposited 
against No, 1 screen. This was tried and the dead fish 
were never found. An unknown number of hatchery fish may 
have died and failed to drift down to the screen. These 
were termed 'hidden loss' and the numbers ascertained in 
the following manner. 

We considered that the surviving hatchery trout 
had gone wild by the 15th of August, i.e., that they had 
acclimatized themselves to their new environment, and had 
become as hard to catch as the wild trout. Therefore, the 
ratio of hatchery trout to wild trout caught by angling 
would be the same ratio as their numbers in the stream. 

From the period August 19th-September 22nd, 4k lot one hatch¬ 
ery trout and 106 wild trout were caught. It will be shown 
later in this paper that the number of wild trout in the 
hatchery enclosure was 287. Thus: 

number hatchery trout caught = population of hatchery trout 
number wild trout caught ~ population of wild trout 

or 44 = x x, or population of hatchery trout * 119. 

lOS 257 

If we add the total known dead to the remaining 
population, 119 + 60 = 179> we are only 20 fish short of the 
number planted. Due to a violent hailstorm on August 10th 
flooding occurred and we lost a small number of lot one 
hatchery fish into the Sheep River. Anglers returned nine 
tags, and from our own observations we know that 2 more fish 
are still in the river. We presume that our hidden loss for 


















■ 






' 












*: • ' • , -r 









■ 

















. 






• '• 










. 





• 





• 





7 - : ; ■ r \ 






. 


. 








- 17 - 


lot one is nine fish. Such a small number will not 
appreciably affect our percentage loss and we can accur¬ 
ately state that the estimate of 30.1$ represents the true 
mortality. We must then assume that as the trout weakened, 
they drifted downstream and died against the screen. 

Lot Two . This planting was made on July 5th and 
differed from lot one in many respects. The lot two fish 
were more active when planted and encountered little dif¬ 
ficulty moving upstream. They commenced surface feeding a 
few minutes after planting and seemed undisturbed by their 
new environment. For the first twenty-four hours the major¬ 
ity moved upstream. They were not baffled by the current 
and did not line up side by side in front of the screen. 

The fish maintained their natural alertness and in some 
respects were wilder than the native trout. They preferred 
to remain in relatively fast water and deep pools and were 
seldom observed in shallow water. There seemed a distinct 
possibility that the survivability of lot two would be 
excellent. On the second and third day heavy rain made the 
water turbid and surface feeding was greatly reduced. 

Mortality began on the first day when one fish 
died. As with lot one, the dead fish?washed against the 
screen where they were picked up, weighed and. stomach con¬ 
tents examined. Only six stomachs showed evidence of stream 
feeding, but over one-third of the dead fish had food re¬ 
mains in the intestines. Mortality continued at a slow 




- 18 


rate for two days, then suddenly increased on the fourth 
and fifth days. The death rate reached a maximum on the 
sixth day when twenty-two dead fish were removed from the 
screen. By the fourteenth day, the high rate of mortality 
had fallen off, but b6.77% of the planting had died. 
Mortality continued at a slower rate until the thirty- 
seventh day by which time 55 • 72 % of lot two was dead. 

From the thirty-seventh to the eighty-fifth day, one fish 
was found dead against the screen. The known mortality 
of lot two fish for a recorded period of eighty-five days 
was 113 fish or 56.22% of the planting. 

As has been discussed for lot one fish, the 
known percentage loss may not represent the true mortality. 
It is most probable that the dead lot two fish, being small, 
would not be carried downstream by the current. It is also 
possible that the small fish in weakened condition would 
be more vulnerable to predators. So it is likely that 
some of the hatchery fish which died would not drift down 
against the screen and our known percentage loss would be 
too low. 

An estimate of the hidden loss for lot two was 
made in the same manner as previously outlined for lot one, 
i.e., by comparing the ratio of the numbers of lot two fish 
caught by angling to the number of wild trout caught by 
angling in the same period. This would be equal to the 
ratio of the population of lot two trout to the known popu- 


- 

















































. 

■ 


■ 





-19- 


lation of wild trout. The estimate depends on the hatch¬ 
ery fish being completely wild and as difficult to catch 
as the native fish. To obtain sufficient numbers for a 
reliable estimate, it was necessary to use all the fish 
caught after August 1st. This date is less than a month 
after planting and there is a danger that the lot two fish 
had not gone completely wild. If so, our estimate would 
err by being too great. From our observations it seems 
apparent that the hatchery fish were as difficult to catch 
as the native fish and the estimate should be reasonably 
accurate. 

During the period August 1st to September 28th, 

13 hatchery fish and 1?4 native trout were caught. Later 
in this paper it shall be shown that the population of wild 
trout was 287 fish. Therefore: 

No. of lot 2 fish caught by angling = population of hatchery trout 
No. of wild fish caught by angling population of wild trout 

or 13 r x 

if? 2B7 

x or population of hatchery trout * 24 
The known loss (113) added to the remaining population (24), 
gives us a record of 137 fish out of the 201 planted. By 
subtracting (201 - 137 )> we find the hidden loss of lot two 
is 64 fish. This does not represent the actual hidden loss, 
because it includes some of the fish that escaped around the 
screen on August 10th. Escaped fish cannot be considered in 
the percentage mortality. If we use these figures to deter¬ 
mine a total percentage loss (known loss 113 f hidden loss 64), 




























' 































' 






























• 
























. 




. ' : : • 






. 






■ 














20 


we see that the mortality of lot two would be 88%. This 
percentage is not accurate because it includes escaped fish 
and is too high. We must consider the percentage mortality 
of lot two fish as greater than 58.2% and less than 88%. 

This rather large range may be reduced by cal¬ 
culating the number of lot two fish which escaped around 
the lower screen on August 10th. Such a calculation may be 
made by assuming that the proportion of lot two fish that 
escaped was the same as the proportion of lot one fish that 
escaped; and, further, that loss in both lots was proportion¬ 
al to the number of fish in the stream. Now, of 139 lot 
one fish escaped, or approximately %%. If the same pro¬ 
portion of lot two fish escaped, the loss is %% of 88 known 

S* ye a/ 

survivors, or approximately s* fish. 

This estimate is further substantiated by determ¬ 
ining the percentage loss of the wild trout around the 
screen. Table Xll (Appendix) shows the population of wild 
fish was 307 on August 10th. The population of the wild 
trout at the end of the recorded period was 287 fish. The 
difference between these populations indicates that 20 
wild fish escaped. The number of escaped wild trout (20) 
to the number present (307), shows a 7$ loss of native fish 
through the screen. These figures are significant because 
they show the loss for both groups was relatively similar. 

i/v\ Alec/ 

TheO ne w n J number of escapees (6) substracted from 
the calculated hidden loss (64) indicates an actual hidden 
loss of 58 fish. The known loss (113) added to the actual 
loss (58) gives a total mortality of 171 lot two fish or a 



- . •• 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 



21 


percentage mortality of 85$. 


WEIGHT LOSS OF PLANTED FISH 


The weight loss of the planted fish was determined 
by catching, reweighing and releasing live fish and by weigh¬ 
ing dead fish removed from the screen. In this way, weight 
checks were made of 142 lot one fish and 124 lot two fish. 

A number of lot one fish were reweighed a second 
time and a few three and one four times. The fish weighed 
three and four times are of particular interest as they 
illustrate individual case histories. These and several 
that were checked twice, with a long time interval between 
are shown in Table 1. 





0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 


Days after planting 


Figure VJEIGHT LOSS AND MORTALITY OF LOT 01® PLANTED TROUT 

The enclosed circles represent fish that died; the open 
circles are fish released alive after re-weighing. 

The continuous curve is drawn through the average 
percentage of planted weight for each ten day period. 
The broken curve represents survival in percent of 
total number planted. 































































22 


Table 1. Record of weight checks of several lot one fish; 

weights expressed as percentage of planted weights. 


Tag No. 

of Fish 

First Wt. 
Check 

Day Weight 

Second Wt. 
Check 

Day Weight 

Third Wt. 
Check 

Day Weight 

Fourth Wt. 
Check 

Day Weight 

293 

14 

90 

78 

100 

- 

- 

- 

- 

312 

31 

78 

43 

71 

- 

- 

- 

- 

325 

42 

117 

93 

133 

- 

- 

- 

- 

328 

22 

82 

48 

91 

- 

- 

- 

- 

373 

11 

86 

90 

75 

- 

- 

- 

- 

231 

10 

100 

39 

83 

52 

75 

- 

- 

343 

33 

80 

38 

80 

68 

80 

- 

- 

34V 

21 

75 

23 

72 

70 

53 


- 

378 

26 

78 

46 

82 

64 

93 


- 

393 

12 

71 

26 

64 

68 

57 

- 

- 

289 

33 

114 

49 

143 

64 

135 

85 

114 


These individual records show a gradual weight loss 


with time, but three show gains and one shows no change. To 
get a comprehensive view of the changes in weight of the 
planted fish, all the weights obtained were expressed as per¬ 
cent of planted weight and grouped in ten day intervals. In 
Figure 5 the data are presented graphically for lot one fish. 
The continuous curve represents the average percent of planted 
weights for each ten day interval. It shows that the lot one 





















































































































































r 




Figure 6. HEIGHT LOSS AND MORTALITY OF LOT TWO PLANTED TROUT 

The closed circles represent fish that died; the open 
circles are fish released alive after re-weighing. 

The continuous curve is drawn through the average 
percentage of planted weight for each ten day period. 
The broken curve represents observed survival up to 
30 days and, thereafter, calculated survival. 


































- 23 - 


fish lost weight for the first forty-five days, by which 
time they had gradually decreased to 77%> of their planted 
weight. A few individuals fell as low as 63 % and one k5%. 
From the forty-fifth to the hundredth day, the fish as a 
whole, slowly regained their lost weight; by the end of 
the recorded period they were approaching their original 
planted weight. 

The broken curve on Figure 5 is the curve of 
observed survival, drawn by plotting the percent of numbers 
planted and still alive against time. It is interesting 
that around the forty-fifth to the fiftieth day, the sur¬ 
vival became constant, i.e., mortality ceased at the same 
time as the surviving fish began to regain their lost 
weight. 

Figure 6 shows the same data for the small lot 
two fish. They steadily lost weight for the first forty- 
five days, and decreased to 65% of their planted weight. 

By this time only a few lot two fish remained in the stream 
and weight checks became too infrequent to determine whether 
they had commenced to regain their lost weight. 


POPULATION OF WILD TROUT 

The mortality previously recorded indicates that 
the native trout in the stream may have influenced the sur- 












- ' 















. 










- 


t 


























- 2b - 


vival of the hatchery fish by consuming most of the available 
food. It is important, then, to know the number of wild 
trout in the hatchery and the native enclosures. 

A population estimate of the wild trout in each of 
the hatchery and native enclosures was made, employing the 
marking technique of Peterson ( 1896 ). The fish were caught 
by angling, the right pelvic fin was removed from the wild 
trout in the hatchery enclosure, the left pelvic fin from 
the wild trout in the native enclosure. The estimates de¬ 
pended upon a daily record of the number of marked fish re¬ 
leased and the number of recaptures. 

Ricker's (1942) modification of the Schnabel 

(1938) formula was used. The formula is P - STAB where - 

Z C 

P is the daily estimated population; 

A is the number of fish caught on any date; 

B is the number of marked fish at large; 

C is the number of recaptures on any day; 

AB is the product of A and B; 

Z AB is the sum of all the products of AB to date; 

IC is the sum of all the returns to date. 

The complete estimate is obtained when the daily 
totals become constant. 

In an estimate of this type, we must assume that 
the marked fish suffer no greater mortality than themmarked 
fish and the marked fish are as vulnerable to capture as the 
unmarked fish. A small degree of error is found in natural 



- 25 - 


mortality and the recruitment of small fish into the size 
group marked. 

Table Xll (Appendix) shows that the day by day 
estimates for the hatchery enclosure became constant during 
the first week of August, at which time the population was 
307 fish. On August 10th a violent hailstorm caused a loss 
of some of the hatchery native fish around No. 1 screen. 

The population estimate was continued and by September 22nd, 
the figures had again become constant at 287 fish. Thus, 
the loss of wild fish around the screen on August 10th was 
20 . 

The same hailstorm necessitated a new estimate for 
the native enclosure. This was completed on September 19th 
and showed that 25 ? wild trout were present in the native 
enclosure. (Table Xlll Appendix). 


EFFECT OF HATCHERY TROUT ON WILD TROUT 

The most convenient method of estimating the condi¬ 
tion of a fish, i.e., whether it is in poor or good shape, is 
by use of the law that the weight of a solid body increases 
as the cube of its linear dimensions. In fish, the weight is 
roughly equivalent to the length cubed. The formula is ex¬ 
pressed: K - W 


where 





- 26 - 

K is the condition factor; 

W is the weight of the fish; 

L is the fork length. 

If we divide the weight by the length cubed the 


answer will be approximately one. The number K, or the 
condition factor, is a good indication of the relative 
heaviness or condition of the fish. Generally speaking, a 
condition factor of one or greater indicates the fish is in 
good shape and a factor of less than one indicates poor con¬ 
dition. 


Wild trout were removed from both enclosures dur¬ 


ing the early and late part of the summer and the condition 
factors calculated. All the hatchery fish that died were 
measured and the factors calculated. A comparison of the 
condition factors of wild trout from the two enclosures is 
shown in the following table. 

Table 11. Condition factors of wild trout from the hatchery 


enclosure compared with those of trout from the 


native enclosure 


Hatchery enclosure 


Native enclosure 


Date 


No. of fish K factor 


No. of fish K factor 


6 


10 


0.90 


May & June 
August 


10 


0.88 

0.98 


9 


1.02 


















- 27 - 

The table shows that the wild trout in both en¬ 
closures came out of the winter in poor shape (average con¬ 
dition factor of 0.88 and 0.90). As the food supply became 
plentiful, the wild trout slowly improved and by the end 
of the summer they were in good shape (average condition 
factors of O .98 and 1.02). Thus, the wild trout in both 

ciort/Uf A* 'Po/n/ner 

areas regained and were now going into the 

winter in good shape. The wild trout in the control area 
showed no significant difference from those in the hatchery 
enclosure. Thus, we may conclude that the wild fish 
suffered little from competition with the introduced fish; 
in reality the wild trout consumed the majority of the food 
and the hatchery fish suffered. 

A comparison of the condition factors for the 
hatchery fish at planting and at time of death is shown in 
Taole 111. 

Table 111. Condition factor of lot one fish at planting 


and time of death. 


Fish 

No. 

Length 

mm. 

Planted 

Weight 

gm. 

Planted 

Condition 

Factor 

Dead 

Weight 

gm. 

Condition 
Factor 
at Death 

Days 

after 

Planting 

224 

228 

142 

1.2 

99 

0.85 

16 

248 

286 

2 55 

1.09 

213 

0.91 

43 

259 

251 

184 

1.16 

133 

0.84 

43 

264 

241 

170 

1.23 

127.5 

0.92 

12 

323 

2 55 

170 

1.02 

142 

0.85 

14 

338 

261 

213 

1.19 

156 

0.87 

13 

278 

229 

142 

1.18 

99 

0.82 

20 





' 

. 






. 
















. 






















. 

- 







- 28 - 


The table shows that the hatchery fish were 
planted in good shape but due to loss in weight were in 
very poor condition at time of death. Condition factors 
calculated from surviving hatchery trout in August showed 
an average of 0.85, which is further proof that the sur¬ 
viving fish were approaching the winter in poor condition. 
It is not surprising then that few hatchery fish survive 
the winter following planting. 


CAUSES OF MORTALITY 

The data on the survival and mortality of the 
hatchery fish after planting invite speculation as to the 
causes of mortality. The data on K factors show that the 
planted fish were fat and healthy when placed in the 
stream; but soon after, a large percentage of each plant¬ 
ing was lost. For the lot one fish, the mortality commenced 
on the second day and over half of the total mortality oc¬ 
curred during the first two weeks. By the 60th day 30.15$ 
of lot one fish had died. The smaller lot two fish did not 
fare as well and over half of the total mortality occurred 
during the first fourteen days and continued until the 37th 
day, by which time 56.22$ were dead. In Doth cases, the 
greatest loss was observed during the period immediately 
following planting. It must be concluded, then, that at 



- 29 - 


least half of the total mortality was due to the change 
from the rearing pond to the stream. For the lot one fish, 
the initial heavy mortality ceased on the 20 th day, and on 
the 12th day for the second planting. It is evident that 
the initial mortality exceeded later mortality and, there¬ 
fore, that the change from domestic to wild habitat accounts 
for a major share of the deaths. 

Lot One . From our oDservations, we believe that 
the lot one fish possessed a considerable energy reserve. 
This fact was further substantiated when we found a large 
amount of fat tissue in all the dead fish. During the 
period of initial mortality, the hatchery fish did not 
actively feed and appeared to be in a state of semi-shock. 
They were therefore forced to rely on their large energy 
reserve to maintain life. The most pronounced effect of 
shock was evidenced in their complete loss of protective 
instinct. The temporary abnormal shock condition appears to 
be the most important cause of the initial mortality. It 
was accentuated by the change of environment from the quiet 
waters of the hatchery ponds to the current of the stream, 
the daily variation in stream temperatures and the turbid¬ 
ity of the water. The weight curve in Figure 5 shows that 
the fish lost weight consistently during the period of 
initial mortality 5 this is understandable when one considers 
the tremendous drain on their energy reserve. When the 
energy reserve became exhausted, the fish died. This also 



- 30 - 

explains why the fish planted in Area "Z" drifted down¬ 
stream as they weakened and eventually died against the 
screen. 

Two weeks after planting, the shock conditions 
had begun to decrease and by the 20th day the heavy initial 
mortality had ceased. The fish that survived were in a 
very weakened state and on the average were down to 83% of 
their planted weight. They were hungry and made continuous 
efforts to obtain food, but were hampered because they did 
not know how to feed (having been fed in the hatchery all 
their lives), and by the competition of the wild trout. As 
was previously mentioned, on numerous occasions we have 
observed the wild trout obtain a morsel of food borne by 
the current before the hatchery fish could reach it. They 
continued to die until the 60th day, by which time the sur¬ 
viving fish had become acclimatized and were slowly regain¬ 
ing their lost weight. 

A daily temperature check of Gorge Creek showed 
that there is a range of 12-/6§° F. during a 24-hour period. 
The lot one fish were kept in hatchery ponds which varied 
from 38-40° F. Gorge Creek, during the month of June and 
early July, had an extreme temperature range of 36-60° F., 
with a daily average of 45-55° F. (Figure 3). It is 
possible that the change in temperatures was a cause of 
the shock condition and resultant mortality. 

An unexplainable mortality of five lot one fish 




- 31 - 


occurred on the 43rd-44th day, when the water became very 
muddy. At this time, most of the hatchery fish were begin¬ 
ning to regain their lost weight and it seems evident that 
the extreme turbidity may have influenced the mortality. 

The stream was very turbid on the second, third and fourth 
days following planting and on four other occasions during 
the first three weeks. It is very likely that these condi¬ 
tions in some way affected the initial mortality. 

It is difficult to say whether all the surviving 
fish would regain their lost weight before winter. But it 
is safe to assume that the hatchery fish were entering the 
period of food scarcity in poor condition and would not be 
able to maintain themselves over the winter. It is not 
surprising then that so few hatchery fish are found in 
streams during the season following planting. 

Lot Two . The lot two fish were active when 
placed in the stream out seemed to possess a low energy re¬ 
serve. They became acclimatized immediately and were at¬ 
tempting to feed soon after planting. We had hoped that the 
survival of this planting would be excellent as long as con¬ 
ditions remained appropriate for feeding and the fish were 
not forced to rely on their low reserve energy. 

Heavy rain on the second and third day after plant¬ 
ing reduced surface feeding to a minimum. The fish were 
forced to fall back on their reserve energy which was soon 
exhausted. It is not surprising then, that the heavy 



- 32 - 


mortality commenced on the third and fourth day, reaching 
a maximum on the sixth day when 22 fish died. The sur¬ 
vival was hardly dependent upon weather and stream condi¬ 
tions, because the small fish were further hindered in 
their competition for food by the native trout. Examina¬ 
tion of stomach contents showed that only six of the 113 
fish had recently fed. Figure 6 shows that some of the 
hatchery fish that died during the period of initial 
mortality had lost weight while others had not. The fish 
that died and did not lose weight had little or no energy 
reserve to maintain the/#, while the others had a small 
energy reserve which was soon depleted. The loss of the 
small energy reserve resulted in a decrease in planted 
weight. Figure 6 further shows by the tenth day after 
planting the majority of the lot two fish had dropped to 
77 % of their planted weight. As shown by the large 
numbers of closed circles in the first ten day interval, 
these data are mainly based on dead fish and indicates 
that the average fish possessed an energy reserve equi¬ 
valent to 23 % of its weight. The severe initial mortal¬ 
ity was the direct result of a low energy reserve, poor 
feeding conditions and the keen competition of the wild 
trout. 

The surviving lot two fish were leading a meagre 
existence. Their life was dependent on the small amount 
of food obtained each day and their slowly diminishing 












































' 






■ 




- 33 - 

reserve of energy. If either of the two sources failed or 
was radically decreased due to environmental conditions, 
the fish died. Thus, from the l4th to 37th day, 21 fish 
died. Out of the 100 lot two fish planted in Area U Z" , 55 
drifted downstream and died against No. 1 screen. This is 
a good indication that the weak fish unable to fight the 
current drifted downstream and died against the screen. By 
the 37th day, 113 lot two fish had died. So few remained 
that our weight checks became too infrequent to determine 
whether the lot two fish were regaining their planted 
weight. In the meantime, the wild trout had been feeding 
all summer and were now prepared to enter the winter in 
good condition. 


Thus, we can conclude that under the present 
hatchery policy it is impractical to plant hatchery-reared 
trout. The artificial environment of the hatchery does 
not produce fish that are conditioned to natural environ¬ 
ment. The hand feeding to which they have become accustomed 
has not prepared them for foraging in the streams. As 
evidenced in both plantings, the weakened fish drifted 
downstream and would have been swept into the Sheep River 
had the screen not been present. It is not difficult to 
understand why the present policy of hatchery planting is 
not improving the sport fishing in Alberta streams. 





















. 








, 






































- 
















- 34 - 


EFFICIENCY OF NATURAL REPRODUCTION 

Throughout the summer, information was gathered 
on the natural reproduction of the wild trout in Gorge 
Creek. Before spawning commenced, ripe female trout were 
caught and the number of eggs counted. After spawning, 
the redds were dug up and the number of fertile and in¬ 
fertile eggs were counted. When the fry had hatched, fry 
counts were made in the section of stream above the 
experimental area. 

Egg Counts . Ten ripe female trout were caught 
above the experimental area during the period June 2nd- 
10th. The measurements, weights and number of eggs con¬ 
tained are shown in Table IV. 







- 35 - 


Table IV. Weights, lengths and number of eggs of female 


cutthroat trout caught in Gorge Creek immedi¬ 
ately prior to spawning. 


Fish No. 

Weight (oz.) 

Length (m.m.) 

No. of Eggs 

7 


205 

299 

11 

3 

204 

293 

12 

3 

208 

323 

13 

24 

206 

302 

16 

4 

225 

300 

19 

2£ 

190 

300 

20 

3 

210 

300 

21 

6 

246 

562 

25 

2 

198 

210 

26 

3 

222 

309 


The trout had an aggregate weight of 31*5 oz. and 
held 3>198 eggs or roughly 100 eggs per ounce of body weight. 
If we consider the average female trout weighs 3 oz., we 
can conclude that the average egg production is 300 per fe¬ 
male . 

Eggs in Redds . During the period May 23rd-June 
11th, the lower four miles of Gorge Creek were examined 
several times weekly for the presence of spawning redds. 

The first eggs were recovered from redds on June 23rd. 
Examination of spawning areas was continued throughout July 























. 






' 



















. 




, 












- 36 - 

and August and the results are shown in the following table. 
Table V. Results of examination of spawning areas in Gorge 


Creek. 



Size of Area No. of 

Examined Fertile Eggs 

No. of Dead 
Unfertilized Eggs 

; Remarks 

May 23- 
June 11 

4 miles 


_ 

_ 

June 

12 

4 sq.ft. 

23 

- 

- 

June 

12 

36 sq.ft. 

- 

- 

- 

June 

12 

8 sq.ft. 

3 

- 

- 

June 

12 

28 sq.ft. 

- 

- 

- 

June 

14 

Several pools 

- 

- 

- 

June 

15 

3 pools 


- 

- 

June 

17 

1 mile 

- 

- 

- 

June 

21 

4 sq.ft. 

19 

- 

- 

June 

24 

1 pool 

3 

- 

- 

June 

24 

4 sq.ft. 

20 

- 

- 

June 

24 

4 sq.ft. 

12 

- 

- 

July 

1 

1 pool 

146 

1 

- 

July 

1 

1 pool 

10 

- 

2 floating 

July 

11 

8 sq.ft. 

19(eyed) 

- 

6 shells 

July 

18 

1 pool 

- 

- 

- 

July 

18 

4 sq.ft. 

32 

- 

Recently 

Aug. 

1 

1 mile 

- 

- 

deposited 

Aug. 

1 

1 mile 

- 

- 

Fry present 















. 

. 

- 









. 

. 




- 37 - 


The aforementioned table shows that a total of 
287 eggs were removed from redds and examined; of these 3 
were dead, but only one was infertile. This indicates that 
99 $ of the eggs deposited in the gravel are fertilized. 

The presence of six egg shells in a redd on July 11th in¬ 
dicates that hatching had already taken place. Fry were 
observed on July 29 th and by the first week of August, 
large numbers were common in the stream. 

Fry Counts . During the month of August fry 
counts were made by walking slowly along the stream and 
counting all the fry lying in the quiet water. It is evident 
that some of the fry would not be observed. It was therefore 
necessary to determine the ratio of the numbers observed to 
the actual numbers present. This was accomplished by enclos¬ 
ing an area of approximately 2.5 sq. ft. with fine screen 
and counting the numbers present. All the rocks and debris 
under which the fry were hiding w T ere then removed from the 
enclosed area and the actual number present was determined. 
This procedure was repeated in six different areas and the 
results are presented in Table VI. 

Table VI. Comparison of the number of fry observed to the 
number present in a screened area of 2 -J sq. ft. 

Date Area No. Observed No. Actually Present 

Apg. 30 1 6 14 


Aug. 30 2 

Aug. 30 3 

Sept. 1*+ 4 

Sept. lb 5 

Sept. 14 6 


1 

1 

4 

1 

2 


3 

1 

9 

2 







. 

' 

■ 

. 


, 

' 

' 


. 





























- 38 - 

The table shows that a total of 15 fry were ob¬ 
served and on removal of all hiding places. 3*+ were present; 

therefore approximately twice as many fry are present in an 
, as x 

area vthafy one observes. 

By counting the number of fry observed in a 300 

C aN 

yard area and then multiplying by two, we (oeuid) obtain an 
estimate of the number present. As the fry are 
found on both sides of the stream and not in the middle, it 
is necessary to multiply the corrected figures by two for 
an accurate estimate. Table Vll shows the results of fry 
counts made during August and the applied corrections. 


Table Vll. Results of fry counts on one side of a 300 yard 
section of Gorge Creek. 


Date 


No. Fry 
Observed 

Estimated No. Present 
(Correction Applied) 

Remarks 

Aug. 

15 

15 

30 

Size -f-1 inch 

Aug. 

15 

39 

78 

Size f-1 inch 

Aug. 

24 

70 

140 

2 with yolk sacs 

Aug. 

2k 

27 

54 

- 


Note: The areas examined on August 24th had previously 

yielded large numbers of eggs. 


The latter estimates are reasonably accurate, as 
most of the eggs were hatched by this date. A calculation 
based on the average of the numbers observed on August 24th 
shows that there were 1,136 fry in one mile of the stream 
above the experimental area. 







- 39 - 


Spawning Records . Examination of gonads of fish 
caught over the summer enabled us to determine the approxi¬ 
mate date that spawning commenced. Examination of females 
killed during the period May 24th to June l4th showed that 
the ovaries were rapidly ripening, and on June 19th we 
caught the first spent female. As this estimate is based 
on random sampling, it is impossible to fix any set date, but 
we believe that spawning commenced around the l4th of June 
and continued until approximately August l?th, when the last 
spent female was caught. The daily maximum and minimum 
temperatures of the stream are presented graphically in 
Figure 1. During the approximate spawning season, the 
minimum temperature recorded was 4l° F. and average daily 
minima 45-46° F. The maximum daily temperature varied from 
52-67° F. 

Efficiency of Natural Reproduction . We have seen 
that the average female cutthroat trout in Gorge Greek weighs 
3 ounces and releases approximately 300 eggs during spawning. 
Of these, 99$> are fertilized. The population estimates of 
the experimental enclosures show there is a native population 
of approximately 300 fish per mile. The upper part of Gorge 
Creek where this work was performed has a much heavier con¬ 
centration and it is reasonably safe to assume that there 
are 600 wild trout per mile. Considering that half these 
fish are females, the average egg deposition would be 90,000 
per mile. But 1,136 fry were counted per mile. The 













. 







' • 




































. 























- 40 


efficiency is therefore about 1.26$. This enormous loss 
prooably occurs at spawning when a large number of the 
eggs may be swept downstream. Even though the efficiency 
is 1.26$, 1,136 fry per mile are more than the stream can 
support, since the normal adult population of all age groups 
is approximately 600 fish. 

Even though these figures are based on too few 
samples and can only be considered rough approximations, 



is obvious that a closed stream containing a brood stock 


could restock itself in a period of three to four years. 


SUMMARY 


During the summer of 1950, Gorge Creek, a 


typical mountain stream of the east slope drainage in Alberta, 
was used for an experiment on the survival of four hundred 
hatchery-reared cutthroat trout. Two areas, each three 
quarters of a mile long and known to contain a population of 
wild trout, were marked off with fish tight screens. Into 
one of the areas, four hundred tagged and individually 
weighed hatchery-reared trout were planted; the other area 
served as a control. The experimental trout were of two 
size and age groups.;, lot one consisted of 199? 12-15 inch 
trout approximately three years old and were planted on 
June 16, 1950; lot two was of 201 6-8 inch trout approxi¬ 
mately two years old; these fish were planted on July 5, 1950. 


■ 


































- 

' 



-41- 


The lot one fish were considerably larger than the wild 
trout in the stream, while the lot two fish were somewhat 
smaller than the average wild trout. 

Soon after planting, catching and reweighing 
operations were commenced. The hatchery fish i^ere caught 
by angling with light tackle, weighed and returned to the 
stream. The planted fish that died were washed against 
the lower screen where they were collected and weighed, 
and the stomach contents examined. In this way individual 
records of the loss in weight of both surviving and dead 
fish were recorded. By this means 142 lot one fish were 
reweighed, many, several times, and 12k lot two fish were 
reweighed. Native trout caught while angling in the 
enclosures were marked by fin clipping and the number of 
recaptures obtained during the summer enabled a calculation 
of the population in each enclosure. 

Within 24 hours after planting, the majority of 
the planted fish were swept downstream by the current and 
would have been lost into the Sheep River if the fish tight 
screens had not been present. The lot one fish were hope¬ 
lessly baffled by the current and exhibited a (Complete loss 
of their protective instinct. The mortality commenced on 
the second day after planting. Over half of the total 
mortality of lot one fish occurred during the first twenty 
days following planting and then continued slowly until the 
44th day, by which time 30 % of the lot one fish had died. 



- 42 - 


The surviving fish lost weight until the 55th day and had 
decreased to an average 77% of their planted weight. Soon 
afterward, they began to regain their lost weight and by 
the 100th day were approaching their original planted weight. 

The total number of dead fish removed from the 
screen each day represents the known mortality but does not 
account for fish that died upstream and did not drift down 
to the screen to be collected. This loss was termed 
’hidden loss' and was calculated to consist of 20 fish. 

These twenty necessarily include fish lost around the 
screen on August 10th when heavy rains caused a wash around 
one side of the lower screen. Other calculations showed 
that 11 fish were lost around the screen and the actual 
hidden loss was only 9 fish. Such a small number would not 
appreciably affect the percentage mortality and it would be 
safe to assume that the mortality of lot one planting was 
30 . 1 $ for the first 100 days following planting. 

The lot two fish were more active when planted 
and seemingly became acclimatized immediately. Mortality 
commenced on the first day after planting and over half of 
the total mortality of lot two fish occurred during the 
first 12 days, by which time b7% had died. The mortality 
continued at a lesser rate until the 37th day by which time 
113 fish or 56.2$ were known to be dead. A population 
estimate of the lot two fish, showed that 2b remained in 
the enclosure at the end of the recorded period. The hidden 



- 43 - 


loss of 64 fish included the fish that died and were not 
retrieved and a number of fish lost around the screen due 
to flooding on August 10th. Further calculations showed 
that approximately six fish escaped around the screen and 
the actual hidden loss was 58 fish, resulting in a total 
mortality of 171 lot two fish or a calculated percentage 
mortality of 85$. Lot two represents the size group planted 
by the Alberta Government in their restocking operations 
during the last few years. It is not surprising then that 
the restocking program is not showing results to the angler. 

The lot two fish steadily lost weight for the 
first forty-five days and decreased to 65$ of their planted 
weight. By this time so few lot two fish remained that it 
was impossible to determine whether they would regain their 
lost weight before winter. 

The results of the day by day population estimate 
showed that 30? wild trout were in the hatchery enclosure 
on August 10th and 287 on September 22nd. Thus approxi¬ 
mately 20 wild trout were lost around the screen on August 
10th. The population estimate for the control area showed 
that 255 wild trout were present on September 19th. 

Examination of wild trout from the experimental 
and control area showed that they came out of the winter in 
poor condition (K factor of 0.88). After feeding all summer, 
their condition had improved and by August they were in good 
shape and were going into the winter with a condition factor 



- 44 - 


of 0,98. The condition of the wild trout in the hatchery 
enclosure and in the control area showed no significant 
difference. We must therefore conclude that the presence of 
the hatchery fish did not affect the wild fish. 

The condition factor of two lot one fish in 
August was 0.8l. Thus, in August, the planted fish were 
in the same condition as wild fish in the spring; their 
chances of wintering successfully lacking a reserve of fat 
do not appear very good. 

The initial mortality of the lot one planted fish 
was attributed to a shock condition induced by a change of 
environment, variations in stream temperature and turbidity 
of the water. The effects of the shock were revealed in 
the loss of protective instinct and the cessation of feeding. 
From observations, it seems probable that the lot one fish 
did not know how to obtain food in natural surroundings and 
that a high energy reserve played a dominant role in their 
low mortality. 

The lot two fish suffered a heavy initial mortality 
due to inability to obtain food under natural conditions and 
the competition with the wild trout. These combined factors 
slowly induced starvation. They were not as visibly affected 
by shock and their seemingly low energy reserve was rapidly 
consumed with a resultant heavy mortality. 

A study of naturally spawned eggs in redds showed 
that 99/^ were fertile. Fry counts later in the season led 





• • 








■ 


. ' 











































































- 45 - 


to an estimate of 1,136 fry per mile. This figure indicates 
that there is a large loss of eggs at some time during the 
spawning to fry stages of the life cycle; of the potential 
egg supply, 1,136 fry represent only 1.2$. 


CONCLUSIONS 


1. If the fish tight screens had not been present, the 
current would have swept the majority of the hatchery- 
reared trout out of the stream in the first twenty-four 
hours following planting. 

2. Trout raised in the artificial environment of a hatchery 
do not possess the ability to maintain themselves when 
planted with wild trout. 

3. Hatchery-reared trout, due to their failure to compete 
with wild trout for food, begin to lose weight soon 
after planting. 

4. The mortality of 6-8 inch planted trout is almost three 
times that of 12-15 inch trout. 

5. The wild trout in the stream are relatively unaffected 
by the presence of planted fish. 

6. The planting of hatchery-reared trout in a stream al¬ 
ready supporting a population of wild trout of the same 
species is uneconomical and does not contribute to the 
brood stock of the stream. Hatchery plantings made in 



- 46 - 


open streams will only benefit angling for a short 
while after planting. 

7. Natural reproduction in Gorge Creek produced, in 19?0, 
approximately eleven hundred fry per mile; while this 
quantity is only 1.2$ of the potential egg supply, it 
is considerably more fish than the stream can support 
to adult size. 



- 47 - 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


This work was carried out as the major part of 
the 19?0 programme of the Alberta Biological Station. I am 
grateful to the Department of Lands and Forests, Province 
of Alberta, and to the University of Alberta (the two 
organizations which sponsored this station) for the oppor¬ 
tunity to participate in this study. 

I am particularly indebted to Mr. H. B. Watkins, 
Superintendent of Fisheries, and to various members of his 
staff who had a share in the work; to Mr. W. H. Macdonald, 
Inspector of Fisheries, for his continued assistance and 
guidance throughout the summer; to Mr. A. C. Sinclair, 
Alberta Government Superintendent of Hatcheries, who com¬ 
pleted the enormous task of weighing and tagging the 
experimental fish; and to the staff of the Calgary Hatchery 
who completed the plantings without loss; to Ranger J. E. 
Butler, Bighorn Station, and his staff who assisted on 
numerous occasions. 

I wish to express my sincere gratitude to my 
partner in the field, Mr. M. Paetz, who helped collect the 
data and unsparingly put forth every effort to make the 
experiment a success; and to Mrs. L. Morris and Miss M. 

O'Byrne, for their aid in typing the manuscript. 



- 48 - 


I am also indebted to Dr. R. B. Miller, Depart¬ 
ment of Zoology, University of Alberta, for his assistance 
in organizing the experiment, interpreting the data and 
presenting the results. 





- 49 - 

REFERENCES 


Anarekson, A. , 1949? A Study of the Biology of the Cutthroat 
Trout in the Sheep River with Special Reference to 
Gorge Creek. M.Sc. Thesis, University of Alberta. 

Foerster, R. E, , 1936; Sockeye Salmon Propagation in B. C. 
Bull. 53? Biological Board of Canada. 

Miller, R. B. , 1949; The Status of the Hatchery; Canadian 
Fish Culturist, 4(5):19-24, May 1949. 

Needham, Paul R. , 1949; Survival of Trout in Streams; Trans¬ 
actions American Fisheries Society, 77s26-31. 1947. 

Needham, Paul R. and D. W. Slater , 1944; Survival of Hatchery- 
reared Brown and Rainbow Trout as Affected by Wild 
Trout Populations. Journal of Wildlife Management, 

8(1) t 22-36. 1944. 

Petersen, C. G. J. , 1896 ; The Yearly Immigration of the Young 
Plaice into the Limford from the German Sea. Rent. 
Danish Biological Station 1896 ; 6:1-48. (From Ricker 
1948). 

Ricker, William E. , 1948; Methods of Estimating Vital Statis¬ 


tics of Fish Populations. Indiana University Publica¬ 
tions, Science Series No. 15:48-50. 


























_ 












. 

. . 










. 





- 50 - 


Schuck, Howard A. , 1943; Survival of Hatchery Trout in Streams 

and Possible Methods of Improving the Quality of Hatchery 
Trout. Progressive Fish Culturist, 10(1) Jan. 1948:3-14. 

Schuck, Howard A. and Oliver R. Ki ngsbury , 1948; Survival and 
Growth of Fingerling Brown Trout (Salmo fario) Reared 
Under Different Conditions and Planted in Fast and Slow 
Water. Trans. Am. Fish Soc. 75:147-156. 

Shetter, David S. an d Albert 8. Hazzard , 1941; Results from 

Plantings of Marked Trout of Legal Size in Lakes and 

/In- Soc ■ 

Streams of Michigan./1940 70:446-468. 

Shetter, David 3. , 1947? Further Results from Spring and Fall 

Plantings of Legal Sized Hatchery Reared Trout in Streams 
and Lakes. Trans. Am. Fish Soc. 74:35-58. 

Smith, Lloyd L. , 1948; Effectiveness of Modern Fish management 
Practices: Planting. Proceedings 38th Convention 

International Association Game and Fish Conservation 
Commissioners, 1948:42-48. 

Schnabel, Zoe 5, , 1938; The Estimation of the Total Population 
of a Lake. Am. Math. Journal, 45(6):348-352. (From 
Ricker 1948). 

























































APPENDIX 


Table VIII: 

Known mortality of lot one fish planted 

on June 16th, 1950. 

Table IX : 

Known mortality of lot two fish planted 

on July 5th, 1950. 

Table X : 

Record of weight checks of lot one fish 

expressed as percentage of planted 

weights. 

Table XI : 

Record of weight checks of lot two fish 

expressed as percentage of planted 

weights. 

Table XII : 

Population estimate of wild trout in the 

hatchery enclosure. 

Table XIII: 

Population estimate of the wild trout in 

the native enclosure. 



Table VIII 


KNOWN MORTALITY OF LOT 

ONE FISH PLANTED 

JUKE 16th, 

» 1950. 

Date 

No* Days 
After 
Planting 

No* Dying 
per Day 

Total 

Known 

Dead 

Known 

Percent 

Loss 

June 16th 

mm 




17th 

1 

- 

- 

- 

18 th 

2 

3 

3 

- 

19th 

3 

2 

5 

2«5X 

20th 

4 

- 

5 

2.51 

21st 

5 

1 

6 

3.02 

22nd 

6 

mm 

6 

3.02 

23 rd 

7 

mo 

6 

3.02 

24th 

8 

•a 

6 

3.02 

25th 

9 

2 

8 

4.02 

26th 

10 

2 

10 

5.03 

27th 

11 

3 

13 

6.53 

28th 

12 

5 

18 

9.05 

29th 

313 

5 

23 

11.06 

30th 

14 

7 

30 

15.08 

July 1st 

X? 

3 

33 

16.58 

2nd 

16 

4 

37 

18.69 

3rd 

X? 

2 

39 

19.59 

4th 

18 

4 

43 

21,60 

5 th 

X9 

1 

44 

22.11 

6 th 

20 

2 

46 

23.11 

7th 

2X 


46 

23.11 

8th 

22 

- 

46 

23.11 

9th 

23 

- 

46 

23.11 

10 th 

24 

1 

47 

23.60 

nth 

25 

I 

48 

24.12 

12th 

26 

1 

49 

24,63 

13th 

27 

mm 

49 

24.63 

l4th 

28 

mm 

49 

24.63 

15th 

29 

1 

50 

25.12 

16 th 

30 

1 

5X 

25.62 

17 th 

3X 

1 

52 

26.12 

18th 

32 

- 

52 

26.12 

19 th 

33 

- 

52 

26.12 

20th 

34 

- 

52 

26.12 

21st 

35 

1 

53 

26.63 

22nd 

36 

1 

54 

27.14 

23rd 

37 

- 

54 

27.14 

24th 

38 

<99 

54 

27.14 

25th 

39 

- 

54 

27.14 









TableVIIICcont.) 


Date 

No. Days 
After 1 
Planting 

No. Dying 
per Day 

Total 

Known 

Dead 

Known 

Percent 

Loss 

July 26th 

40 


54 

27.14 

27th 

431 

- 

54 

27.14 

28th 

42 

mm 

54 

27.14 

29th 

43 

4 

58 

29.14 

30th 

44 

1 

59 

29.64 

31st 

45 

mm 

59 

29.64 

Aug* 1st 

46 

- 

59 

29.64 

2nd 

47 


59 

29.64 

3rd 

48 

- 

59 

29.64 

4th 

49 

- 

59 

29.64 

5th 

50 

- 

59 

29.64 

6th 

51 

- 

59 

29.64 

7th 

52 

- 

59 

29.64 

8th 

53 

mm 

59 

29.64 

9th 

54 

mm 

59 

29.64 

10th 

55 

1 

60 

30.15 

11th 

56 

- 

60 

30.15 

12th 

57 

mm 

n 

60 

30.15 

13th 

58 

if 

61 


l4th 

59 

if 

62 


l?th 

60 

1# 

63 


16 th 

61 

mm 

63 


17th 

62 

m 

63 


18 th 

63 

- 

63 


19th 

64 

- 

63 


20th 

65 


63 


21st 

66 

1 # 

64 


22nd 

67 

mm ' 

64 


23 rd 

68 

- 

64 


24th 

69 

- 

64 


2?th 

70 

mm 

64 


26th 

71 

He 

64 


27th 

72 

1 # 

65 


28th 

73 

• 

65 


29th 

74 

- 

65 


30th 

75 

- 

65 


31st 

76 

- 

65 


Sept*, 1st 

77 

mm 

Jt 

65 


2nd 

78 

af 

66 


17th 

93 

w 

68 


28 th 

3104 


68 



^Fish which escapedt from hatchery enclosure on August 10th 


and recaptured in the Sheep River* 










1 





I 




. ' 



( 




Table IX 

KNOWN MORTALITY OF LOT TWO FISH PLANTED JULY 5th, 1950 


Date 

No, Days 
After 
Planting 

No. Dying 
per Day 

Total 

Known 

Dead 

Known 

Percent 

Loss 

July 6 th 

1 

1 

1 


7th. 

2 

1 

2 

- 

8th 

3 

3 

5 

2.49 

9th 

4 

11 

16 

7.96 

10th 

5 

16 

32 

15.92 

11th 

6 

22 

54 

26,86 

12th 

7 

13 

67 

33.33 

13 th 

8 

10 

77 

38.31 

14th 

9 

6 

83 

41.29 

3L5th 

10 

4 

87 

43.28 

16 th 

11 

2 

89 

44.28 

l?th 

12 

3 

92 

45.77 

18 th 

13 

- 

92 

45.77 

I9th 

14 

2 

94 

46.77 

20 th 

15 

mm 

94 

46.77 

21st, 

16 

2 

96 

47.76 

22nd 

If 


96 

47.76 

23 rd 

18 

1 

97 

48.25 

24th 

19 

- 

97 

48.25 

25 th 

20 

- 

97 

48.25 

26th 

21 

1 

98 

48.76 

27 th 

22 

mm 

98 

48.76 

28 th 

23 

2 

100 

49.75 : 

29 th 

24 

1 

101 

50.25 

30 th 

25 

7 

108 

53.73 

31 st 

26 

mm 

108 

53.73 

Aug. 1st 

2 ? 

1 

109 

54.23 

2 nd 

28 


109 

54.23 

3^d 

29 

- 

109 

54.23 

4th 

30 


109 

54.23 

5 th 

31 

2 

111 

55.22 

6 th 

32 

- 

111 

55.22 

7 th 

33 

- 

111 

55.22 

8 th 

34 

1 

112 

55.72 

9 th 

35 

mm 

112 

55.72 

10 th 

36 

« 

112 

55.72 

nth 

37 

1 

113 

56.22 

12 th 

38 


113 

mm 

13 th 

39 

« 

113 

- 

14th. 

40 

- 

113 

- 

Sept. 28th 

85 

- 

113 

- 












Table X 


RECORD OF WEIGHT CHECKS OF LOT ONE FISH EXPRESSED AS 
PERCENTAGE OF PLANTED WEIGHTS. 



First Wt. 

Second Wt. 

Third Wt. 

Fourth Wt. 

Tag No. 

Check 

Check 

Check 

Check 

of Fish 

Day Weight 

Day Weight 

Day Weight 

Day Weight 


201 

15 

100 



203 

16 

92 



206 

11 

92 

33 

83 

208 

42 

91 


209 

11 

83 

33 

75 

210 

58 

8 l„ 



211 

18 

100 # 



212 

38 

100 



213 

54 

57 



214 

73 

87*5 



215 

60 

82 



218 

21 

64 



222 

9 

78 

42 

57 

223 

75 

106 „ 



224 

16 

7<r 



226 

11 

87 

39 

100 

227 

9 

85„ 

18 

» # 

228 

12 

90# 



229 

48 

82 ,. 



230 

19 

77# 



231 

10 

100 

39 

232 

19 

8 ? 

20 

87 # 

233 

21 

86 

33 

71 

235 

69 

71 



237 

79 

ffioa 

64 


238 

33 

112 

137 

239 

242 

11 

18 

87„ 

100 # 



243 

11 

100# 



244 

9 

112 

15 

100 

245 

26 

100 



246 

38 

80 

102 

~ w 

248 

11 

89 

43 

83f 

249 

9 

78 

22 

7# 

250 

15 

54 



251 

16 

78 # 



253 

9 

112 # 




52 75 


28 100 






Table X (cont.) 



First Wt. 

Second Wt. 

Third Wt. 

Fourth Wt. 

Tag No. 

Check 

Check 

Check 

Check 

of Fish, 

Day Weight 

Day r Weight 

Dajr Weight 

Day Weight 


255 

33 

6 7 



257 

2 

91# 



259 

42 

80 

43 

73 # 

261 

48 

110„ 

88 

100 

262 

3 

10c# 



263 

22 

75* 

33 

80 

264 

12 

75f 



265 

14 

87# 



266 

73 

87 



268 

22 

75 

44 

69 

269 

38 

110 

59 

no„ 

270 

33 

89 

37 

8# 

271 

21 

83„ 

23 

83 

272 

12 

IOC# 



275 

23 

94 

25 

91# 

277 

88 

67 



278 

13 

70 

20 

70# 

279 

22 

74 

42 

79 

280 

21 

75 

23 

75 

281 

48 

100 „ 



282 

13 

90# 



284 

24 

10c# 



286 

3 

86# 



287 

11 

87.5 



288 

33 

117 



289 

33 

114 

49 

143 

291 

28 

8 7.# 



292 

70 

125 

73 

125 

293 

14 

90 

78 

100 

294 

14 

45 



296 

23 

122 



297 

26 

132 



298 

26 

70 



299 

2 

IOC# 



301 

15 

92- 

48 

94 

304 

42 

86 



305 

68 

86 



306 

14 

82 



307 

11 

100 



310 

19 

83 

52 

83 

311 

72 

90 





64 135 


85 114 






\ 


; . o 





















i 


■ - 


: 




J" 



: ■' i ' ; ; 



) . 

•") C) 

5 ■■ rl 

n 

: 

u? : 1 










Table X (cont») 



First Wt* 

Second Wt* 

Third Wt* 

Fourth Wt* 

Tag No* 

Cheek 

Check 

Check 

Check 

of Fish 

Day Weight 

Dajr Weight 

Day Weight 

Day Weight 


312 

31 

78 

43 

7# 

314 

66 

72 

73 

72 

315 

78 

85„ 

80 

80 

316 

16 

90# 



318 

14 

83$ 



319 

10 

IOC# 



321 

22 

75 u 



322 

12 

8 lf 



323 

14 

83$ 



32!+ 

14 

72# 



325 

42 

117 

93 

133 

327 

66 

115 

88 

115 

328 

22 

82 

48 

91 

330 

9 

108 



332 

10 

75 



333 

38 

50 



334 

14 

89 # 


93 # 

336 

12 

93, 

30 

336 

13 

73 # 



339 

42 

65 



340 

23 

86 



342 

80 

75 



3^3- 

33 

80 

38 

80 

344 

21 

75 

23 

72 

345 

22 

62 

23 

62 

346 

15 

91$ 



347 

9 

9W 



348 

52 

75„ 

85 

83 

349 

43 

75 # 



351 

22 

75, 

23 

75 

352 

12 

6 7? 



353 

27 

61 

70 

67 

354 

48 

91„ 



355 

43 

67# 



356 

70 

61 1 



357 

17 

77$ 



358 

13 

7 n 



359 

10 

90# 



360 

73 

84 



362 

66 

105 

70 

105 

363 

73 

92 

85 

92 


68 80 

70 53 













Table X (cont 0 ) 



First Wt. 

Second Wt. 

Third Wt. 

Fourth Wt. 

Tag No. 

Check 

Cheek 

Check 

Check 

of Fish 

Day Weight 

Day Weight 

Day W r eight 

Day Weight 


364 

1+9 

IK 



365 

11 

85jf 



366 

13 

86# 



367 

70 

71 



370 

1+2 

6 7 S 

55 

80 # 

371 

13 

83f 



372 

11 

75# 



373 

11 

86 

90 

75 

374 

13 

81 

21 

87 

375 

22 

76„ 



376 

2 

- # 



377 

14 

83# 



378 

26 

78 

46 

82 

383 

48 

70 



386 

73 

77 

98 

81 

387 

23 

73 

24 

80 

390 

33 

82 



391 

21 

71 

29 

75# 

393 

12 

71 

26 

64 

395 

73 

77. 



396 

16 

75# 



397 

5 

100# 



399 

38 

73 

70 

73 


6k 93 


68 57 


#Fish found dead against the screen* 


Hot©* In cases where there is no entry in the weight column, 
the tags only were found, or no weight obtained* 





1 


V, -tO i 1: -OU- 

■■ • t 


1 





Table XI 


RECORD OF WEIGHT CHECKS OF LOT TWO FISH EXPRESSED AS 
PERCENTAGE OF PLANTED WEIGHTS. 


First Wt. Second Wt. Third Wt. Fourth Wt. 

Tag No* Check Check Check Check 

of Fish Day Weight Day Weight Day Weight Day Weight 


402 

20 

403 

7 

4o4 

4 

407 

35 

408 

10 

409 

8 

410 

24 

411 

11 

412 

23 

416 

7 

417 

10 

419 

5 

420 

6 

422 

20 

426 

7 

430 

4 

431 

20 

432 

7 

433 

4 

435 

6 

437 

6 

438 

7 

439 

14 

440 

8 

441 

6 

442 

6 

443 

7 

445 

36 

446 

3 

447 

11 

449 

6 

451 

4 

452 

8 

453 

5 

455 

14 

456 

8 

458 

8 


!00 

IOC# 

66 

75# 

% 

& 

& 

75# 

100 # 

75# 

66 

85# 

64# 

42 ^ 

80 # 

73# 

66 # 

58# 

8C# 

fO„ 

83# 

?$ 

100 # 

83 

70„ 

50# 

75# 

75# 


66 # 

5°„ 

58# 

66 # 


24 75# 


24 55# 


25 IOC# 


4 70 


8 80 # 







C si 




Table XI (cont*) 


First Wt. Second ¥t. Third Wt. 
Tag Ho* Check Check Check 

of Fish Day Weight Day Weight Day Weight 


459 

31 

461 

5 

462 

6 

1 hS4 

6 

465 

5 

46? 

6 

468 

3 

4?1 

25 

473 

7 

474 

4 

475 

5 

4?6 

5 

478 

6 

481 

7 

482 

3 

483 

23 

485 

4 

48? 

7 

490 

14 

491 

8 

493 

5 

494 

9 

495 

6 

496 

12 

497 

6 

499 

37 

502 

23 

503 

27 

c 

PUH- 

505 

O 

1% 

507 


508 

2% 

509 

12 

512 

9 

513 

7 

515 

1 ^ 

516 

10 

518 

520 

19 

3 

521 

Zb 

522 

6 


-# 

87 # 

58# 

58f 

81 , 


i 

$ 

& 

<k 

if 

58 

62 # 

Ws “// 

75# 

66f 

7lt 


s S 

ik 

V% 

so# 

70 # 

75 # 

755 

83 # 

83 # 

87 , 

66 # 

ll 


4 81 # 


33 50 35 83# 


If 87 # 


Fourth Wto 
Check 

Day Weight 











Table XI (cont«) 


First Wt* Second Wt* Third Wt* Fourth Wt, 
Tag No*. Check Check Check Check 

of Fish Day Weight Day Weight Day Weight Day Weight 


526 

5 

527 

6 

528 

6 

529 

33 

530 

9 

532 

5 

533 

6 

534 

66 

535 

18 

536 

14 

537 

2 

53? 

18 

544 

6 

546 

4 

54? 

6 

548 

8 

549 

19 

550 

12 

552 

4 

553 

25 

554 

3 

555 

5 

556 

7 

557 

558 

559 

* 

6 

560 

5 

561 

5 

562 

8 

563 

8 

564 

10 

568 

5 

569 

5 

5731 

5 


14 

7 

578 

9 

579 

7 

581 

8 

586 

6 

587 

6 


S3| 

70J 

75 # 

80 


& 

56# 

m 

xoo# 

h2$ 

m 

75f 
83 1 


Ik 


75# 

m 
10 0 # 
looj 
loof 

m 

% 

75j 

66f 

7% 

7% 

10CF 

lo# 

100 ^ 


5$J 

80 # 

■s 

58# 


21 8 # 


1? 8? 












r 



r 










Table XI (cont*) 


Tag No* 

First Wt. 
Check 

Second Wt. 
Check 

Third Wt. 
Check 

Fourth Wt. 
Check 

of Fish 

Day Weight; 

Day Weight 

Day Weight 

Day Weight 

591 

594 

597 

598 

600 

14 8of 

20 IOC# 

47 66„ 

6 80# 

9 75# 





$Fish found dead against the screen. 

Hotes In cases: where there is no entry in the weight column 
the tags only were found, or no weight obtained. 











c 



Table XII. 


POPULATION ESTIMATE OF WILD TROUT IN THE HATCHERY ENCLOSURE 


Ncu No. 


Date 

A 

Marked 
and 
Ret 1 d 

B 

AB 

E AB 

c 

Killed 

Not 

E C Marked 

p 

June 17 

11 

1. 



wm 

wm 

wm 

wm 


21 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

- 

- 

- 


22 

5 

4 

6 

30 

32 

- 

- 

1 


23 

2 

1 

7 

lb 

b6 

- 

wm 

1 


25 

2 

2 

9 

18 

64 

- 

- 

wm 


26 

3 

3 

12 

36 

100 

wm 

wm 

- 


27 

4 

2 

14- 

56 

156 

wm 


2 


28 

3 

3 

17 

51 

20? 

~ 

- 

- 


3P 

8 

7 

2% 

192 

399 

1 

1 

- 


July 2 

1 

1 

25 

25 

424 

0 

1 

- 


4 

6 

6 

31 

186 

610 

0 

1 



6 

3 

3 

34 

102 

712 

0 

1 

wm 


7 

1 

0 

34 

34 

746 

1 

2 

- 


8 

2 

2 

36 

72 

818 

0 

2 

« 


12 

9 

7 

43 

387 

1,205 

2 

b 

** 


13 

8 

7 

50 

400 

1,605 

1 

5 

** 


14 

1 

1 

51 

51 

1,656 

0 

5 

- 

331 

15 

1 

0 

50 

50 

1,706 

1 (dead) 

6 


284 

17 

2 

2 

52 

104 

1,810 

0 

6 

Hi 

301 

18 

1 

1 

53 

53 

1,863 

0 

6 


310 

19 

16 

9 

60 

960 

2,823 

5 (2 killed) 

11. 

2 

256 

20 

2 

2 

62 

124 

2,947 

0 

11 

« 

267 

21 

1 

1 

63 

63 

3,010 

0 

11 

M. 

273 

24 

5 

3 

66 

330 

3,340 

1 

12 

1 

278 

25 

2 

2 

68 

136 

3 476 

0 

12 

- 

289 

28 

3 

2 

70 

210 

3,686 

1 

13 

m 

283 

29 

3 

2 

72 

216 

3,902 

0 

13 

1 

300 

30 

1 

0 

72 

72 

3,974 

0 

13 

1 

305 

Aug. 1 

1 

0 

72 

72 

4,046 

0 

13 

1 

311 

3 

13 

9 

81 

1,053 

5,099 

b 

17 

m 

299 

3 

13 


81 1,053 

5,099 

b 

17 

- 

299 

7 

10 

8 

89 

890 

5,989 

2 

19 

** 


9 

3 

1 

90 

270 

6,259 

2 

21 

- 

298 

10 

12 

0 

90 1*080 

7,339 

2 (killed) 

23 

10 

319 


Average 

30? 

















r 


I 


r 


\ 






Table XII (cont.) 


Date 

A 

No* 

Marked; 

and 

Ret f d 

B 

AB 

2: AB 


c 


No* 

Killed 

Not 

Marked 

P 

Aug. 

14 

6 

0 

90 

540 

7,879 


0 

23 

mm 

342 


17 

3 

0 

9° 

270 

8,149 


1 

24 

- 

339 


19 

5 

0 

87 

435 

8,584 3(all killed)27 


318 


21 

1 

*4 

87 

87 

8,671 


0 

27 


321 


23 

5 

mm 

8? 

435 

9,106 


0 

27 


337 


24 

1 

m 

86 

86 

9,192 

1 

(killed) 

28 

- 

328 


25 

6 

- 

84 

504 

9,696 

2 

(killed) 

30 

- 

323 


28 

19 

- 

80 

1,520 

11,216 


9 

39 

4 

287 


30 

4 

•* 

80 

320 

11,536 


0 

39 

m 

295 

Sept* 

2 

5 


80 

400 

11,936 


3: 

42 

tm 

284 


4 

4 

- 

80 

320 

12,256 


1 

43 

m 

285 


9 

14 

tm 

80 

1,120 

13,376 


3 

46 

- 

290 


10 

5 

- 

80 

400 

13,776 


b 

50 

- 

275 


12 

17 

- 

79 

1,343 

15,119 

4 

(1. dead) 

54 

- 

280 


13 

6 

m 

79 

474 

15,593 


1 

55 

- 

283 


14 

3 

- 

79 

237 

15,830 


0 

55 

mt 

287 


15 

2 

- 

79 

158 

15,988 


1 

56 

- 

285 


18 

5 

tm 

79 

395 

16,383 


1 

57 

tm 

287 


19 

1 

** 

79 

79 

16,462 


0 

57 

- 

288 


20 

1 

- 

79 

79 

16,541 


0 

57 

- 

290 


22 

2 


79 

158 

16,699 


1 

58 

mm 

28? 












Average 












287 


The population is estimated by the following formulas 


where 


P m 2 A3 


P is the estimated population on any date; 

A is the number of fish caught on any date; 

B is the number of marked fish present in the enclosure 

on any date; 

C is the number of returns on any date; 

_ AB is the product of A and B; 

1 AB is the sum of all products (AB) calculated to date; 

£ G is the sum of all returns to date* 







* 





t 










c 










i 












Table XIII 


POPULATION ESTIMATE OF WILD TROUT IN THE NATIVE ENCLOSURE 


No a No:* 


Date 

A 

Marked 
and 
Ret 1 d 

B 

AB 

Z AB 

c 

Killed 

Not 

21 C Marked 

P 

June 

24 

1 

1 

1 

1 

mm 






26 

10 

10 

11 

110 

111 

- 

- 

mm 



28 

8 

7 

18 

144 

255 

1 

1 

- 



30 

11 

9 

27 

297 

552 

2 

3 

- 


Juljr 

8 

7 

6 

33 

231. 

783 

1 

4 

- 



13 

3 

2 

35 

105 

888 

1 

5 

- 



17 

9 

7 

42 

378 

1,266 

2 

1 

- 



20 

15 

lb 

56 

840 

2,106 

1 

8 

- 



2b 

1 

1 

57 

57 

2,163 

0 

8 

m 



28 

11 

9 

66 

726 

2,889 

2 

10 

- 


Aug, 

3 

1 

0 

66 

66 

2,955 

1 

11 

- 



8 

7 

6 

72 

504 

3,459 

1 

12 

W+ 



15 

4 

0 

72 

288 

3,747 

0 

12 


312 


18 

3 

0 

72 

216 

3,963 

0 

12 

- 

330 


21 

14 

0 

68 

952 

4 915 

b 

16 

% 

307 


23 

% 

0 

68 

272 

5,187 

0 

16 

- 

324 


25 

8 

0 

66 

528 

5,715 

2 

18 

2 

318 


28 

3 

0 

65 

195 

5,910 

1 (dead) 

19 

1 

311 


30 

5 

0 

65 

325 

6,235 

2 

21 

- 

297 

Sept, 

2 


0 

65 

260 

6,495 

2 

23 

- 

282 


% 

1 

0 

65 

65 

6,560 

1 

24 

- 

273 


12 

7 

0 

64 

443 

7,008 3 (killed) 

27 

- 

260 


13 

13 

0 

64 

832 

7,840 

3 

30 

- 

261 


lb 

5 

0 

64 

320 

8,160 

1 

31 


263 


17 

5 

0 

64 

320 

8,480 

3 

34 


249 


19 

16 

0 

64 

1,024 

9,504 

5 

39 

mm 

244 


Sept. 12th-19ths average population 255 wild trout. 








r 



r 






c 

c - 










* r 






























B29763 



























