
THE ROLE OP THE CHILD IN ENGLISH DRAMA 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


UP TO THE TIME OP SHAKESPEARE 

































































UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that 
they have read and recommend to the Faculty 
Council for acceptance a dissertation on 
"The R6le of the Child in English Erama up to 
the Time of Shakespeare" submitted by Douglas 
Hastings Telfer, B.A., in partial fulfilment 
of the requirements for the degree of M.A. 


Edmonton, 
April, 1915. 





THE ROLE OF THE CHILD IN ENGLISH DRAMA UP 
TO THE TIME OF SHAKSSPSRE. 


D.H.TSLFER. 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/telfer1915 


THE ROLE OF THE CHILD IN ENGLISH DRAMA 
UP TO THE TIME OF SHAKESPERE. 


The problem with which this paper deals, 
namely, the role of the child in English Drama, up 
to the time of Shakespere, is so vast that an 
exhaustive treatment, within the compass of a 
single paper, seems impossible. Essays have been 
written on the subject of the Child in Drama, but 
these have been limited to single plays or short 
periods. The literature in this field is still 
scant, but it is hoped that some hints may be 
dropped as to the possibilities in this line of 
research, 

Questions will naturally rise as to what 
shall be the age-limit of the child, and from what 
point of view shall he be regarded. We have 
regarded as children,firstly, those who are so 
described in the Dramatis Personae;secondly, those 
whose status is fixed in the historical matter, with 
which the play deals;or thirdly, those whose status 
as children is implied in the nature of the plot. 

SpO 











The child will be studied, in the first place, 
to see what part he plays in the development of 
the drama, and secondly, that we may be able to 
evaluate the dramatist*s delineation of the child.- 
Confined within chronological limits, 
the period from which material is to be obtained, 
extends from about the middle of the fourteenth 
century to the beginning of the seventeenth 
century. The question will arise whether there 
is either a development or a retrogression in the 
power of character delineation and in the 
prominence given to the child in English Drama. 

As to the use of material, it will be 
impossible to give illustrations from every play 
which has a child in it. But as far as this has 
been possible,and the material is valuable in its 
bearing on the subject, it has been done. 

Little need be said here of the develop¬ 
ment of the Drama. It is necessary, however, to 
point out that a distinct development, from the 
Liturgical Drama, the religious show and pageant, 
to the Miracle and Mystery Plays, took place. 

Not only was there a development of the plays 
themselves, but also in the acting of them, 
hereas in the first, the plays, if such they can 







3 . 


be called, were acted by ecclesiastical players, the 
fourteenth century saw the representation of the 
Mystery plays in the hands of the craftsmen and 
professional players of the Trade-Guilds, 

Recent investigation has thrown a flood 
of light on what has been called the Liturgical 
Drama. The Sacrament of the Mass was itself 
essentially dramatic, and, from time to time, the 
clergy added scenic representations. As has been 
said, the acting was in the hands of the Church. 

From the collections of Latin hymns and litanies 
that have come down to us, it is clear that choral 
accompaniments were never wanting to add interest. 

In all probability boys helped in the singing of 
these chants and lauds, and in this way the presence 
of boys would be a familiar occurrence. As the time 
passed, and the acting of these scenes passed from 
the clergy to the laity, the boys used to act minor 
parts, or parts suited to their age. 

As a rule the English Miracle Play deals 
with the whole history of the World, from its 
creation to the Day of Judgment- The fall of Man, 
the Flood, the Birth of Jesus, the Crucilixion and 
the Resurrection, were all considered fit subjects 
for the treatment of the religious playwright. 








































4 . 


Much comic and satirical matter got mixed 
up with these religious plays, owing to their 
representation by the Guilds, and in this admixture 
is to be seen the beginnings of the Interlude, and 
the later great drama, in which the comic and 
serious events of life are seen together. 

The four great Cycles of Miracle Plays, 
that have come down to us, are those of York, 
Towneley, Chester, and Coventry. Here is the first 
field into which we must enter to investigate the 
part played by the child. 

The York Cycle was probably written 
about 1340, and is the earliest of the four Cycles 
under our consideration. The work is principally 
that of one hand, probably of some monk of the North. 
He seems to have had a keener interest in the 
stories of the New Testament than in those of the 
Old Testament, though he uses both sources. 

Strange to say, the writer of the York 
Cycles differs from all the other writers of 
Cycles, in his picture of Abraham and Isaac. Whereas 
they picture Isaac as a boy with all a boy's fears 
of death, he pictures him as a man of ’’Thyrty yere 
and more", strong and conscious of his strength. 







5 . 


Thus the character of Isaac, so far as this Cycle 
is concerned, passes beyond our limits. 

In the Miracle, "Christ with the Doctors 
in the Temple", as it was played by the Sporiers and 
Lorimers, there is a true representation of the 
Bible story and little more. However, the writer 
endeavors by a distinct effort, to retain Ihe 
dignity of the high office of Jesus. 

Although one of the doctors bids Jesus 
go away because he has- 

"No time to play with children," 
yet the whole effect of Jesus* conversation with 
the doctors is to drive away any sense of child¬ 
like naivete and to impress one with the maturity 
of his mind. There is nothing beyond the word of 
one doctor, to indicate that Jesus is a child. 

There is no attempt at characterization, and very 
little originality in this play, which, in fact, 
may be said of the whole Cycle. 

The Towneley Plays were prepared in 
all probability, about the beginning of the XV 
Century. They were preserved in the library of 
Towneley Hall in Lancashire, and were compiled 
by the friars of Widkirk. Throughout these plays 
a more popular appeal is made. Also there is a 















6 


more dramatic touch and original humor. 

There are thirty-two plays in this Cycle, 
beginning with the Creation and ending with the 
Judgment. Passages of the most realistic delin¬ 
eation are to be found in this series, particularly 
in the dialogue between Cain and his garcia is to 
be seen a vivid picture of vulgar life. 

At the outset, "The Killing of Abel," 
Strikes the note of merriment and light-heartedness, 
not altogether in keeping with its title. Cain's 
"garcia" enters shouting:- 

"All hayll, all hayll,both blithe and glad, 
Ffor here come I a mery lad 
Or els the devill you spede 
Wote ye not I com before? 

Both who that, I anglis any more 
He must blow my blak hoi11 bore 
Both behynd and before 
Till his tethe blede. 

Ffelows here I you forbede 
To make nother nose ne cry 
Who so is so hardy to do that dede 
The devi.il ‘hand him up to dy, 

Gedyngis, I am a fule grete wat, 







7 . 


A good yoman my master hat 
Ffue wil ye all hym then 
Begyn he with you for to stryfe 
Certis thus non ye neuer thryfe 
Bot I trow, bi god on life, 

Som of you ar his men. 

Bot let your lippes cover youre ten harlot 
everichon, 

■ 

Ffor if my master com, weloom hym then. 
Ffarewell for I am gone. 

This speech is given- in full because it con¬ 
tains features altogether new in the Miracles; like 
one of the prologues of later plays, in which an 
factor announces the play and then bids farewell, so 
here the boy bids the audience keep silence and 
give a welcome to his master when he appears. It 
is also a fit preparation for the buffoonery, of 
which the play is full. 

The part played by Cain’s garcia is an 
important one. He provides the comic element of 
the play, first in his quarrel with Cain, during 
which Cain offers to fight him. 

,f I am they maister, wilt thou fight?" 







8 


to which challenge the boy replies : - 

"You with the same mesure and weght 
lj -hat I boro will I qwite? 
and secondly, in his mockery cursing Cain*s 
reading the proclamation of pardon for himself, of 
which the following is an example. 

Cain - I command you in the Kynges nay me I 
Garcia - And in my masters, fals Caynel 

Although no definite characterization of 
the boy is given, such as age or looks, yet one 
feels that this is indeed a "mery lad". x he play 
is a decided step forward on anything that has 
preceded it, both in its character portrayal, and 
the material used. The writer has not considered 
it out of keeping to introduce fifteenth century 
thoughts and modes of life into a Biblical narrative. 
This is clearly brought out in the murder of Abel 
and the discovery of the body by the boy, who 
exclaimed : - 

"Wet out upon the thefe 
has thou thi brother slayn" 
and then as he thinks of the consequence he adds 
"We mon hauld mekill rnyschaunce 
And the bayles us taket 
The purpose of the pla^r is a step in a 









9 . 


new direction; no longer is it didactic, but the 
purpose is amusement. The boy's fight with Cain, 
and his mockery of his master must have amused the 
onlookers as much as such things on the stage of 
today amuse a section of our theatre-going people. 

The boy must have been the central figure 
of the play to an easy audience, and undoubtedly, 
the writer has calculated, that all he does and 
says shall move them to laughter. 

Another dramatic version of the well- 
known "Abraham and Isaac" story, is to be found in 
this Cycle. The struggle, on the one hand of the 
patriarch between his obedience to the will of God 
and his paternal affection for his son, and on the 
other, that of the son between his fifial obedience 
to his father, and his natural love of life, lends 
itself to dramatic treatment. Nothing of its 
power has been lost in this play. 

How well the author uses the dramatic ep¬ 
isode, is shown in the scene in which Isaac pleads 
with his father to spare his life. 

"Mercy! ^ercy*.. 

The shynyng of youre bright blayde 
It jars me quake for ferde to dee." 

The fears of Isaac only serve to increase 

































10 . 


the grief of the patriarch, whose eyes are 
blinded by tears. 

’’Water shots in both my eow” 

When he realizes that his life is spared, 
the lad makes the naive confession. 

”ffor ferd sir was I nere hard mad’ 
Although there is no direct word-picture, 
yet the author had succeeded in giving a vivid and 
powerful delineation of the boy, Isaac, and the 
old patriarch, Abraham. The three days journey 
is described; the boy’s wonder at the lack of 
sacrifice; the old man’s obedience to God's will, 
and grief when he relaizes the sacrifice he is to 
make; the simple obedience of the boy Isaac to the 
will of the patriarch, and his fear df death, are 
so well developed that the play is about the most 

consistent play that is to be found in the Cycles. 

■ 

Passing on to the Chester Cycle, one finds 
that here also the tragic opportunities are seized 
: with some degree of skill. It is thought the plays 
; of this Cycle were written by Rone Randle, a monk 
| of Chester Abbey, early on the XV Century. There is 
a most highly wrought scene in the play , ’’The 
History of Lot and Abraham," in which the author, 
realizing the possibilities of pathos, uses them 



































































to good advantage. 

11. 

The sacrifice of Isaac, is a 


familiar subject to the writer of Miracles, but 
this monk of Chester has added to its charm. 

Little could be added to the pathos of 
the followinging:- 


Abraham- 

"Oh, Isaac, Isaac', I must thee kill, 

Isaac - 

"Alas', father is that your will 

Your own child for to spill 

If I have trespassed in any degree 

With a yard you may beat me* 

Put up your sword, if your will be 

For I am but a child." 

Abraham - 

My dear son, I am sorry 

To do to thee this great wrong. 

God's commandment we must, 

Kis works are ever full mild." 

Isaac 

"Would God my mother were here. 

with me , 

She would kneel down upon her knee 

Praying you father, if it may be, 

For to save my life. 


and, again when he finds it is useless to plead for 
his life, he says:- 


"But yet you must do God's bidding 
Father, tell my mother for nothing." 










12 . 


The pathos of this scene is prolonged 
with deliberate dramatic purpose, until the boy 
requests his father to kill him quickly, 

"A few strokes you wele maie 
When you smyte of my hede 
And that he will 
Hide my een 

That I see not the sword so keen." 

At last Abraham binds Isaac to the altar and 
ties a scarf about his head. Isaac kneels and 
prepares for the stroke. 

"I pray you, father, turn down my face 
A little while, you have space, 

For I am full sore adrede." 

The author has used a sympathetic touch, 
a keen sense of the pathos of the situation, and 
has exercised the imagination in picturing the 
scene. Although the general effect is spoiled by 
his straining after a moral, yet he has succeeded 
in stirring the sympathy. 

The boy is not so wooden, not so 
artificial as is ordinarily the case in the plays 
of this period, but a real boy with the love Of life 
running strongly in his veins and a natural dread of 


death. 






13 


The Chester plays contain a piece of realistic 
delineation of rustic life, a forerunner of the 
rustic comedies of Still and Udall. In the play 
of the Shepherds, three comic characters, Harvey, 
^udd, and Trowell, enliven the action by cracking 
jokes of a rude nature and in boasting of their 
pastoral skill. Beside them there is a charming 
| quartette of boys, who give of their possessions 
to the babe, Jesus. 

A picture is given of these boys, 
expressed with great simplicity. Four boys, poor 
rustic lads, take gifts to the new-born Jesus; the 
bottle, the hood, the pipe, and the nut-hook, all 
so necessary and so priceless in the shepherd-lad’s 
eyes. The author has successfully created an at¬ 
mosphere of boyish worship a distinct triumph. 

The First Boy. 

"Now Lord for to give Thee have I nothing 
Neither gold, silver, brooch nor ringe, 
Nor no rich robes meet for a King, 

That have I here in store. 

But that it lacks a stoppel 
Take Thee here my fair bottle 
For it will hold a >good pottle 
In faith I can give no more 





14 . 


The second boy gives his hood, for, 

"Jewell have I none to give Thee" 

The Third Boy. 

"0 noble child of Thee! 

Alasi What have I for Thee 
Save only my pipe? 

Were I in the rocks or in... 

I could make this pipe 

That all the woods should ring 

And quiver as it were. " 

The fourth boy offers his nut-hook for the child 
"To pull down apples, pears and plums" 
because he knows that Jesus in his childhood 
"Wilt for sweet meat look" 

Much there may be that is crude in this account 
but it is a really charming quartette of boys. It 
is also worthy of note that the child Jesus is not, 
as so often pictured, a superhuman child, but a 
real child, who will be needing nourishment, loving 
music and enjoying fruit. It is a simple picture, 
simply expressed. 

The last Cycle with which we shall deal is 
the Coventry Cycle. These plays were written 
about 1468, and were known as the Ludi Corpus Christi 
They show their ecclesiastical origin in the wide 


























' 




■ 










15 . 


biblical knowledge displayed and in the tedious com¬ 
ments made on points of doctrine. Especially 
is their origin to be traced in the frequent use 
of Latin. 

"Noah*s Flood", one of the plays of this 
Cycle, contains an incident of peculiar interest. 

Lameth enters, conducted by a young boy. Lameth 
sorrows because of his blindness. 

"Great mornyng I make and gret cause I have". 

In spite of his affliction he still considers himself 
to be a "Good archere." Upon hearing this boast the 
boy mockingly says- 

"It is trewe, mayster, that ze seyne indede , 
ffor that time ze had youre bowe bent in honde 
If that your pryeke had be half a myle in 

brede , 

Ze wolde the pryk han hette, if ze had stondeV 
Lameth orders the boy to look for something at which 
he may shoot and is told that, 

"undyr zon grett bushe,mayster*, a bests do I 

see 

Take me thin hand swythe and holde it full 

styll 

Draw up thin takyll you best for to kyll'" 

The "good archere" shoots but instead of killing 
































































































16 . 


a beast, he kills the wanderer, Cain. The boy 
announces the accident by shouting- 

M Cayn thou hast kvlled. I telle the ful 

pleyn, 

With thi sharp shetyng his death hath he 

take." 

So angered is Lameth at this misfortune, that 
he kills the boy. 

This incident is a striking instance of 
originality. Its probable foundation is to be 
found in the war-speech of Lamech in Genises, the 
fourth chapter and the twenty-third verse, which 
comes between the murder of Abel and the Flood story. 

"And Lamech said unto his wives Adah and Zillah, 
Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my 
speech, for I have slain a man to my wounding and a 
young man to my hurt. 

If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly 
Lamech seventy and sevenfold." 

The "man" is Cain, and the ’’young man" is 
Lameth's*guide, while the reference to Cain is 
Sufficient warrant to the author to use him in 
this connection. If this be so it is a fine 
piece of imagination work. 

After this interruption the thread of the 





















' 

■ 



. 
















17 . 


story is picked up again in the incident of 
Abraham and Isaac. As in the previous 
representations the Biblical narrative is 
closely followed. However, there is less 
attempt at characterization and no development 
of the tragic element. The imagination is held 
in restraint by a slavish following of the 
source material. 

The hand of the ecclesiast is more 
noticeable than anywhere else in the play, "Christ 
disputing in the Temple." 

The opening conversation of the Doctors 
is half in Latin and half in English. The matters 
for discussion are- 

"metaphesyk and astronomye 
of calculacioun and negremaunsey 
of augryn and asmatryk," 

The author speaks of Jesus as of a mere 
child, who is bidden by the learned men to 

"Goo hom, lytyl babe and sytt on thi 
modere's lappe , 

And put a modaker aform thi brest 
And pray thi modyr to fede the with the 
pappe ! 

Yet this little child enters saying, 







18 . 


"Omnis sciencia a Domino Deo est." 
and asks riddles which reveal an amazing depth of 
understanding. 

It is hard to reconcile the child Jesus with 
the wisdom the author gives to him. This "child© 
that nevyr lettyr dyde lere," discusses the 
Creation, the Trinity and the Immaculate Conception 
with ease and facility. Again, this child, who was 
bidden to go and sit on his mother's lap and to be 
fed on pap is "XII yere of age." 

This is a play in which one of the monks of 
the Grey Friars of Coventry, makes use of his 
opportunity to assert the Trinity and the Immaculate 
Conception. The ecclesiast swallows up the dramat¬ 
ist. Hence the characters suffer and appear 
unnatural. 

In this play the moral is first and art is 
secondary, and as has been the case all the way 
in the history of English literature, art has 
suffered. 

So far in our study it will be conceded 
that the boy has played a part in the early Miracle 
pi:ys. He appears most prominently in the 
Towneley and Chester Cycles whth their tragical 
pictures of Isaac, the rustic and realistic 



























19 . 


delineation of Cain and his garcia, and the 
Shephards and the four boys. 

Both these Cycles are equally noted for their 
skilful expression of the anguish of Abraham and the 
instinctive terror of Isaac. On the other hand, the 
York and Coventry Cycles lack imaginative power, 
appreciation of dramatic opportunities and skill in 
delineation of character. 

In all the Miracle plays the dramatic action 
is determined by the character and deeds of some 
hero from Biblical history. Since destruction, 
more than amusement, is the chief end of the sacred 
play, the value of clever characterization is not 
recognised. 

; 

At times there is an odd admixture of material 
realism and the sacred things. The vulgar shepherds 
and the angel visitants, or the boorish plough boy 
andCain furnish us with examples. The ludicrous 
goes hand and hand with the most sacred. Here,in 

the early stages of the English drama,is to be seen 
the recognition that life is made of the serious and 
sad, the gay and the gloomy, the secular and the 
sacred. 

The Miracles, then, it must be borne in mind, 
were pageants, shows, gorgeous spectacles. 








' 



20 . 


The words counted for litte. They were but the 
power which gave motion to the figures. Read apart 
from their setting they convey but little. On the 
whole, it may be said the pictures are poor, the 
I characterization is crude and dramatic action is 
undeveloped. D ut if one calls to mind certain 
! facts, he will stay to praise. He must remember 
the language was poor and that the art of the 
playwright, was still young and undeveloped. 

Praise is due to these men for the simplicity with 
which they handled such vast and dignified themes 
as the Bible affords. 

How far the boy, as an actor,influenced the 
authors of the Miracles, is difficult to estimate. 
That the boy did take part in these performances is 
beyond doubt. As in earlier dumb shows the choir 
boys had provided the necessary accompaniments of 
chant and song, so in the fifteenth century he had 
come to play an important part in the spoken plays. 
As early as 1378 a protest was made by the children 
of Pauls' against ignorant people taking their plays 
and acting them. 

This much may be said. The fact that these 
were boy actors would assist the author in his 
choice of subjects- he is free to take episodes 






































21 . 


with young boys in them. But the fact seems to 
have ad but little effect upon the delineation of 
character in the Miracles, for reasons already given. 
It was not until the latter part of the fifteenth 
century that the boy really influenced the work of 
early playwrights, being "employed both in performing 
interludes ai d singing." 

As early as the Coventry plays, the 
beginnings of the allegorical figures, which are so 
prominent in the Morality, make their appearance. 
Veritas, Justitia, Misericordia, and Pax, are 
introduced into the action, while Mors and Diabolus 
strut before us. But it is not until the end of 

the fifteenth century, that these a legorical and 

' 

abstract figures play a prominent part and become 
popular. 

There is no real break in the contin- 
uity of the Drama. The external mechanism of the 
Moralities is the same as that of the Miracles. 
However, a move forward is made by the introduction 
of matters of local interest, which become inextric¬ 
ably woven into the plays. Here lies the possibil¬ 
ity of a new form of play; one which later did emerge. 

In the Moralities, abstract terms are used, 
and one feels as if he were moving in a world of 


























22 . 


unrealities. 

The struggle of Juventus with Worldly 
I Living is unnatural when compared to that of a 
real youth fighting against the wily temptations 
of a young woman. But these abstract terms come 
' to stand for dramatic, types, which in the evolution 
of the drama will appear on the stage as real men 
; and mo men. 

The Morality is more interested , as will 
be inferred, in setting forth a mental struggle, than 
the cross purposes of several real figures. ^ence, 
the struggle of Pity and Abominable Living, of Good 
and Evil, of Avaritia and Humanum Genus, as they 
each try to win Youth, attract our attention. 

The study of Morality, it may be thought, 
is not likely to prove a fruitful field so far as 
boy characters are concerned. However, there are 
instances of considerable interest and importance. 
Boys, undoubtedly, will appear, since they were 
attached to the play-companies of the domestic 
establishments of great lords. 

Early in the sisteenth century the 
"Castle of Perseverence" was written. It 
allegorises the conflict between Good and Evil 
for the Soul of Man. On one side Humanum Cenus 























































23 . 


and ten Seven Cardinal Virtues fight against 
Mundus, Belial, Caro, and the Seven Deadly Sins, on 
the ether. 

At the outset cf the play, Humanus Genus appears 
as a new-born child. 

"I was born this night. 

"And nakyd I am as ye may se 
Garcia is also introduced, as the representative 
of the rising generation. In these types one may 
see the forerunners of the Humours of Ben Jonson at 
the end of the century. 

The play is didactic in its purpose, and 
since the whole course of a life is crowded into 
th e compass of one play, there is little or no 
attempt at characterization. This disregard for 
time is one of the notable features of the Morality. 
Little is thought of picturing a young child in the 
beginning of the play growing to be an old man at 
its end. 

A Moral play of the same type is "The World 
and the Child”, issued from the press of Wynkyn De 
Worde in 1522. In it,Infans, a newly-born,naked 
child,comes to Mundus asking for 

"Meet and clothes my life to save" 










24 . 


In return for clothing and food Mundus calls 
the child Wanton, 

’’Till fourteen years be come and gone,” 
i he child spends his days in play, 

”1 can dance and also skip 
I can play at the cherry pit, 

And 1 can whistle you a fit, 

Sires, in a willow rine. ” 

Wanton will not go to school, but when he does it 
will beto do mischief. 

When I to school shall take the way 
Some good man’s garden I will essay 
Pears and plums to pluck 1 
I can spy a sparrow’s nest 
I will not go to school but when me lest 
For there beginneth a sorry feast! 

From this on, the play is but the dry~as-dust 
record of life’s progress. It is interesting to 
note, however, that the author has made an attempt 
to relate the pastimes of a child to the 
character of a child-dancing, skipping, cherry- 
pitting and whistling. Perhaps from experience, he 
has caught the child’s dislike for the restraint of 
school, a "sorry feast." 






























































25 . 


’’Lusty Juventus," takes us another step 
forward. Of the author, R.Wever, nothing is known 
but his name and the fact that he wrote in the 
reign of Edward VI. 

At the opening of the play a very pretty 
lyric is sung by Youth. It sounds as some sweet 
I song sung by the Birds in Spring. 

”In an arbor green asleep where I lay, 

The birds sung sweet in the midst of the day 
I dreamed first of mirth and play. 

In youth is pleasure, in youth is pleasure. 

The play has a few realistic scenes, but 
Juventus never looms up as a real personage. 

^he ’’Interlude of Youth, is different from 
’’LustyJuventus, ” in many ways, but particularly in 
its more delicate and lively description of Youth. 
’’Aback fellows, and give me room, 

Or I shall make you to avoid soon, 

I am goodly of person; 

. I am peerless wherever I come 
My name is Youth, I tell thee 
I flourish as the vine tree 
Who may be likened unto me 
In my youth and jollity? 

My hair is royal and bush’d thick 













■ 
































26 . 


My body is pliant as a hazel stick, 

Mine arms be both big and strong , 

My fingers be both fine and long, 

My chest big as a tun, 

My legs be full light to run, 

To hop and dance and make mery." 

Here indeed is a distinct attempt at a verbal 
picture. x rue it is of a class rather than of an 
individual actor. A robust, athletic figure, in the 
full vigor of youth, and with red blood coursing 
through his veins, Youth is very real. 

Outside of this one description, the play 
is of the usual type. Youth, Riot, Lechery, Charity, 
and Pride, all play their parts and pass away among 
the forgotten dead. 

There is a whole group of Moral Plays which 
have the possibility 6f much more dramatic 
development than is given to them. One of this 
group is the "Marriage of Wit and Science", 1568, 
based upon a much earlier play "The Marriage of 
Wit and Wisdom," by John Redford. It is excellent 
in that it makes its characters stand out in sharp 
contrast and bo'ld relief. i here is an unmistakable 
enthusiam in it and the plot is consistently carried 


out. 







































27 . 


For our purpose, it is valuable in that 
Wit, the son of Nature, is but seventeen, and Will 
his boy, only twelve years of age. 

When Wit sets out to climb Parnassus he 
takes Will with him, a 

"tender child, unripe and green for age l 
and a relative of Nature, who gives him as a servant 
I to her son. 

"Take there withal, this child to wait upon thee 

still, 

A bird of mine, some kin to thee;his name is 

Will. " 

Wit wishes to marry Science the daughter of 
Reason for- 

"Yet there are many in this land that at my 

age do wed. 

To this end he sends Will as his messenger to 
Science. She questions the "prety Boy" as to his 
age to which Will replies- 

"Between eleven and twelve, madam more or less" 
in reply to her questions as to her master’s age,Will 
says 

"Seventeen or thereabouts, I wot not very well” 
and describes him as, 

"Well grown, well made, a stripling clean and tall 







28 . 


Well favored, somewhat black, and manly there withal" 
The parts they play are perfectly in keeping 
with their characters . 

An interesting reference is made by J.A. 

Symonds in his,"Shakespere*s Predecessors in the 
English Drama", to the original play in the History 
Play of Sir Thomas More as indicative of the method 
of presentation. 

Sir Thomas wishes the Lord Cardinal's players 
to act before 

"The Mayor of London and some aldermen, 
ttis Lady and their wives. " 

The player says he can play . 

"The Cradle of Security,"Hit the Nail O'the Head" 
"Impatient Poverty," "The Play of the Four P's" 
"Dives and Lazarus, "Lusty Juventus" and "The 
Marriage of Wit and Wisdom". 

More is attracted by the last and exclaims, 

"The Marriage of Wit and Wisdom! That,my lads, 
I'll none but that. The Theme is very good 
And may maintain a liberal argument 
We'll see how Master Poet plays his part 
And whether wit and wisdom grace his art 
Go make him drink, and all his fellows,too. 


How many are ye , 










. 




' 
































































29 . 


Player. 

Four men and a boy 
More 

But one boy, Then I see 

There*s but few women in the play, 
Player 

There’s rny lord, Dame Science, Lady Vanity, 

And Wisdom, she herself.” 

More 

And one boy play them all? By'r Lady He's 

loaded.” 

The part played by the boy is clearly brought 
out in this quotation. He played the female 
characters as well as those suited to his age. 

"The Marriage of Wit and Science”, is a play 
with genuine enthusiasm andf literary met? It . It is 
a good piece of work and a distinct contribution to 
the Drama in its characterization of Youth and its 
thoroughly well-sustained action. 

"Nice Wanton” 1560, is a play in which the 
old Morality with its allegorical figures shows 
signs of a change. It introduces a family 
comprised of the children Barnabas, Delilah, and 
Ishmael, and their mother Zantippe. The play is 
a moral lesson in obedience and teaches the lesson 












- 




























- 






V 









30 


by showing the fruits of disobedience. 

Barnabas, the older boy, suggests to his 
brother that they should go to school since they will 
be 

"Shent for tarrying so long" 

Ishmael refuses and suggests to his sister 
that they play truant. 

"Now, pretty sister, what sport shall we 

devise? 

Thus palling to school, I think us unwise. 

In summer die of thirst, in winter for cold, 

And still to live in fear of a churl, 
who would?". 

Instead of going to school he would rather spend 
his time with, 

"Lusty companions, two or three 
At good wine, ale and beer." 

In his delineation of children the dramatist 
has failed. These two children, seeking "lusty 
companions" with whom they may indulge their 
passions, belie their very natures. The act is not 
child-like but is that of degenerate adults. 

Can anything be more unnatural than that 
Pelilah, the young girl, should hail this suggestion? 

It is unchildlike that she should find the prospect 










31 


so entrancing, and welcome it with the delight the 
following lines indicate. 

"0 good brother let us go, 

I will never go more to - to school, 

So together they bid 
Farewell to our school 
Away with books and all." 

In the world iniquity lures Delilah to Wantonness 
and Ishmael to vice. Both come to miserable ends. 
Their ruin breaks the heart of Zantippe who is saved 
from self-destruction by God's mercy. 

The play starts with Delilah and Ishmael 
as school children and ends with them as man and 
woman. The course of a life time is traced in a few 
pages. The characters are imperfect. The moral 
is the great purpose. 

M 0 ye children let your time be well spent, 
Apply your learning and your elders obey, 

It will be profit; your profit,another day. 
In the developement of the Drama it will be seen 
that the character of Vice fades and Comic characters 
take his place. From the moralities there breaks 
off a species of play, known as the Interlude. 

About the time of this transition the "New interlude 
called Thersytes " was written. This "Enterlude 







32 . 


following doth declare howe that the greatest 
bolsters are not the greatest doers." 

Thersytes was written to be played by 
"Buskin*d boys" and must have been performed by 
1537, because reference is made to the birth of 
Prince Edward, afterwards Edward VI. 

(a) Mr.Child observes, "The play does not 

require particular notice. Its lively absurdity could 
not have failed to be entertaining to an easy 
audience and is not tiresome how. Thersytes 
indulges plentifully in the privileges of the old 
Vice- that of talking incoherent nonsense. 

The scene in which Thersytes, the 
boastful warrior, armed with a new sword and seeking 
for "lions or other wild beasts to slay," is afraid 
of a snail, must have been childishly comical in the 
extreme. 

There is something very childlike in its 
burlesque of the classical hero. Amusement must 
have been the sole end in view. This alone 
accounts for the disrespectful treatment of the hero 
of antiquity. 

(a) De Haslewood’s Preface to Thersites, 
Dodsle 3 '*s Old English Plays. 













33 . 


The introduction of that'pretty child' 

Telemachus as 

' a proper child 
4nd in behaviour nothing wild’ 

: bearing a letter from his father Ulysses to the 
mother of Thersytes, is an incident impossible of 
explanation. The cure ’from the worms wild' must 
have had some contemporary and local reference. 

The value of the play is in its being performed 
: by ’boys', and its being truly childish and 
consequently suited to its actors. The characters 
are well maintained, though somewhat crude. 

In Thersytes, "A new Snterlude for chyldren to 

„ 

play, named Jacke Jugeler, both wytte and very 
playsent"; The Vice Wanton; and The Disobedient Child 
there is an admixture of comic matter and serious 
matter, used to spread knowledge, or praise 
learning, or enforce some moral. But there is 
also a near approximation to real life. 

Gradually the nebulous figures of the 
Morality are becoming concrete. But since man's 
personality is made up of a vast complexity of 
states, feelings, and actions, the representation 
of single virtues or vices, such as good and evil, 










34 . 


obedience and disobedience, or the representation 
of classes, such as Youth or Genus Humanum, destroys 
the reality of the figures. Such reality will 
only be found when the playwright recognises the 
complexity or personality. 

A keener and more subtle appreciation of 
| child nature is seen in Thomas Preston's "Cambyses" 
1561. This plat is so arranged that it can be 
played by seven men and one boy. It is one of the 
very few extant early plays which deal with 
I classical history. 

In the course of the play Praxaspes accuses 
Carabyses of drunkenness. To avenge himself of the 
insult Cambyses determines to shoot the child of 
Praxaspes. The commend of the King must be obeyed 
and so the sorrowing father brings his child to be 
murdered. The father's grief is very great, and the 
child noticing it says, 

"0 father, father, wipe your face, 

I see the tears run from your eyes, 

My mother is at home sewing of a band. 
Alas dear father why do you cry. 

Thomas Preston has made full use of his dramatic 
powers, which he reveals in the following quotation 










35 


The ’blissful babe' sees the king preparing to 
shoot says- 

'Alas, alas, father will you me kill 
Good master King, do not shoot at me, 

My mother loves me best of all." 

The mother's lament, however, is a piece of the 
most ccnvential work. The most notable phrase 
in it is- 

'Thy mother yet will kiss thy lips 
Silk soft and pleasant white.' 

Between this portion of Cambyses and the 
(a) Miracle play of Abraham and Isaac, there is 
some similarity. On the one hand we have Praxaspes 
bowing before the will of his King, and, on the 
other, Abraham bowing before the will of his God. 
There is also a similarity in the attitude and 
words of the two children, Isaac and the young 
child of Praxaspes. The words of the young child 
of Praxaspes- 

'C, father, father, wipe your face 
I see the tears run from your eye ' 
remind one of the patriarch's grief as he says 
'Water shots from my eow* 

(a) The Chester Plays. 

'The History 


of Lot and Abraham' 









36 . 


Again the child says - 

•Alas, alas ,father will you me kill? 
while in the Miracle play we have- 

Abraham - "Ah, Isaac, Isaac! I must thee kill! 1 ' 
Isaac - "Alas! father, is that your will?" 
Your own child for to spill 
Upon this hill's Brink? 

During this tragic period both boys ’ thoughts 
turn to their mothers. Isaac exclaims 

"Would C-od my mother were here with me 
She would kneel down upon her knee 
Praying father, if it may be, 

For to save my life, 
while Praxaspes’ son says- 

1 My mother is at home sewing of a band 
Alas, dear father, why do you cry?' 

Both incidents contain the same dramatic 
possibilities and these to a large extent have been 
used in a similar way. But in the characterization 
of Praxaspes' child there is little, if any, advance 
on the characterization of Isaac in the old Miracle 
play. May the reason not be, that the author of 
the old Miracle was working with familiar material 
and the feelings awakened within him enabled him to 
give an excellent account of the tragic incident, 







37 . 


the story of Abraham’s sacrifice of his son Isaac. 

The last of the Interludes to which attention 
will be drawn is John Heywood's, 'The Play of the 
Wether",1550. The only child character is that of 
a boy 'the lest that can play'. 

The boy is sent by his companions to sue for 
weather suitable to their sports, because they 
'Saw him so prety a pratelynge lad' 

He makes his suit in the following words- 

'Forsothe syr, my mynde is thys , at few words, 

All my pleasure is in catchynge of birdes, 

And makynge of snow ballys and throwyng the same, 
For the whyche purpose to have set in frame 
Wyth my godfather god I wolde fayne have spoken 
Desyrynge hym to have sent me by some token 
Where I rayghte have had great frost for my 

pytfallys 

And plante of snow to make my snowballys 
O' to re my snowballys lyght on my felowes 

headys 

And to here the byrdes how they flychen theyre 

wynges 

In the pytfall.' 

In this play John geywood reveals an advance 
in his appreciation of the complexity of human 
nature, and in skill to set it forth. 













38 . 


Besides the Miracle, the Moralities and the 
Interludes, withtheir important bearing on the 
formation of the Drama, there was an important 
’ influence from without, with the revival of 
interest in the Latin Language there came a 
growing interest in classical models. From this 
period the effect of the comedies of Terence 
and Plautus on English Drama is traceable. An 
example of this influence is seen in the play, 

Ralph Roister Doister, written by Nichol Udall, 
before 1540, for the boys of Eton to act 
(a) This play, Ralph Roister Doister, is an 
adaption of Plautus’ Miles. Gloriosus, and is full 
of good dialogue and bright sayings. Its plot is 
easy to understand and places the play in advance 
of all that has preceded it. 

A very small part is played by the boy Cook. 

It has nothing very suggestive, as far as our purpose 
is concerned, but it makes plain the fact that a 
new era has dawned for English Drama. No longer 
do puny children become doting grey beards in one 
play. Unity of place and action is now sought after, 
although the classical cleavage between comedy and 




(a) A.W.Ward,English Dramatic Literature,p.L56. 







39 . 






tragedy is not recognised. Herein lies the 
genius of the English Drama; the recognition that 
in everyday life, smiles and sorrow appear together. 
Herein lies the possibility of a keen analysis of 
human character with its complexity. Better 
delineation of the child then may be confidently 
expected. 

(a) By the latter part of the Sixteenth century, 
then, the English stage has passed from the mere 
reproduction of Biblical narrative, to a keen 
appreciation of human qualities as seen in actual 
men and women. Classical history, contemporary 
life, the street, the field, and the mart, will 
afford material for the dramatist. Still 
hampered by allegorical bonds he snaps his fetters 
one by one. He aims more and more to portray life 
as he sees it. The stage is to become the place 

where mnn in his weakness and strength, his joy 
and sorrow,is to reveal himself. 

Throughout the development of the Morality and 
Interlude it will be seen that there has been a 
distinct advance in the characterization of children 




(a). R.W.Bond. 


John Lyly. 


Vol.ll, p.236 
























' 






















40 . 


More and more they take their place as natural and 
necessary parts of the play. Attempts are more 
often made to make words and action suit the child. 
Crude, and often ridiculous, though these attempts 
may be, yet the thought is there. The playwright 
is now presenting a diversity of characters, with 
vivid truth, from the mischief-making page to the 
little child. 

With the development of the play there has 
come a development of characterization. The 
characters receive a more kindly treatment at the 
hands of the playwright. 

The flickering torch of the Drama now bursts 
into full blaze. In its light several great 
figures are revealed. Since some of these great 
playwrights wrote for child-companies it will be 
necessary for us to study the development of these 
companies. 

According to Professor Manly in the Cambridge 
History of English Literature, Vol.VI,p. 282, 

"The origin of the chapel is lost in unrecorded 
antiquity, the date of its earliest histrionic 
efforts is uncertain and the records of its later 


activity are woefully incomplete. 
















41 . 


The earliest record is that of July 12, 1440, 
in which commission was given 'to the King's clerk, 
Master John Croucher, dean of the Chapel, within 
the King's household, to take throughout England 
such and so many boys as he or his deputies shall 
see to be fit and able to serve God and the King 
in the said Royal Chapel." 

These boys served under a number of masters, 
who undertook the 'provision, instruction and 
governance' of the boys of the Chapel. The last 
of these masters was Natheniel Giles, during whose 
tern of office the children of the children were 
forbidden to act and became 'children of the 
Queen's chapel'. Late in 1626 when Giles took up 
the work again he was strictly forbidden to' use 
boys as "Comedians or Stage Players." 

Some of the masters of these boys wrote for 
them. Richard Edwards, the best of the masters, 
wrote Damon and Pithias, 1564, It was written for 
royal amusement and Edward de Vere, Earl of Oxford, 
says it is 'deserving the hyest price for Comedy 
and Enterlude '. The piece acticipates Lyly, 
especially in the spirit of its page-scenes. Grim, 
Kill, and Jack, are again to be seen in Lyly's, 
Motto, Lucio, and Petulas in Midas. 









42. 

The number of songs, four or five, suggests 
that Damon and Pithias, was written for the 
Children of the Chapel. Such a song as was sung 
by the pages at the shaving of Grim, 

'with too midden and too midden', 
suggests this. 

The comic side of the play is kept well 
; balanced by continual quarrels between Jack and Will, 

' who unite to play pranks on grim the collier. It is 
worthy of note that the comic part of the pages is 
| connected with the main action, by a conversation 
; between Grim and the pages concerning the fate of 
Damon. 

Throughout the play Edwards endeavors to fit the 
language of the characters to their station in life. 
The pages .re quick and clever, the collier is dull 
and heavy. Still,there is a lack of action which 
makes the play lose interest. But the 'prety 
: cockrils ' and 'little dapper knaves', Jack and Will, 

, play their part smoothly and are well delineated. 

The child-actors are important since they had 
a great influence on authors, who wrote for them. 

As early as 1384, two of the most distinguished 
dramatists had written for them. John Lyly for 
"the children of the Chapel and for the children of 











43 . 


Pauls’', and George Peele also wrote for them in his 
"Arrayngraent of Paris". Marlowe and Nashe, too, 
wrote for them as the title page of'The Tragadie 
of Dido, Queen of Carterage, played by the 
children of Her Majesties 'Chapelle", makes clear. 

This influence is particularly seen in the 
number of page and servant characters, in the many 
songs, and in the lack of great complexity of 
character which characterize these plays. J.A. 
Symonds in the Predecessors of Shakespere, p.241, 
in comparing Jonson*s art with that of Shakespere's 
says that, ’Instead of persons, he presents 
incarnate types and humors. Has this to do with 
the fact that while Shakespere wrote for his own 
company of men, Jonson knew that he was writing 
for boys?’ 

The same question may well be asked concerning 
the works of the predecessors of Shakespere who 
wrote for child companies. In our study of their 
work we hope to arrive at some definite conclusion 
in the matter. 

It Is clear from the scanty records of the 
children of the Chapel which have been given that 
they occupied a very important place in histrionic 
art. Lyly wrote for the children of Pauls, but 






44 


first he wrote for the children of the Chapel, who 
were the pioneers. Other companies of child actors, 
besides those of the Chapel, were those of Paul's, 
Windsor, Westminster School and of the Merchant 
Taylors'. 

(a) In-1597 Nathaniel Giles, of whom mention has 
been made, together with James Robinson and Henry 
Evans, secured a number of boys, more than were needed 
for the Chapel choir, and with them he established 
a regular theatrical company. Of the career of this 
company little seems to be known. However, it is 
fairly certain that previous to 1600, they had played 
in Burbage's Theatre at Blackfriars. 

Hugh Evans, who leased this theatre in 1600, 
seems to have realized the possibilities of a boy's 
company* For this professional group of boys, 

Chapman wrote his May Day, Sir Gyles Goosecappe, 
Gentleman Usher, and All Fooles. The great Ben 
Jonson, too, used his.skill on writing for them, 
in particular, 'The Case is Altered' , ’Cynthia's 
Revels,’ and the 'Poetaster', were written for 
this 'eyrie of children.’ 

(a) Cambridge History of English Literature 
Vol.VI p.238. 









45 . 


As to the age of these boys, it is difficult 
to say. From the record given in Collier's Annals 
of the Stage, Volume I, page 32, we learn that the 
'Children of the Chapel 8, founded by the King's 
Jewell House for all things that belong to their 
apparel, by the oversight of the Beane, or the Mr. 
of the songs, assynde to teache them,etc. , and he 
to drawe their children as well in Schools of facet 
as in songs, organies or such other vertues,etc., 
Also, when they be gorwn to the age of 18 yeres , and 
then theire voyces be changed they cannot be 
preferred in this Chapel.' 

(a) Also we know that in 1600, James Robinson 
siezed a boy, Thomas Clifton, only thirteen years 
of age, to act in his company. Among Ben Jonson's 
epigrams, there is an epitaph on S.P. one of the 
children of Queen Elizabeth's chapel, part of which 
runs thus, 

'Years he counted scarce thirteen 
When fates turn's cruel 
Yet three fill'd zodiacs he had been 
The stage's jewel; 

And did act(what now we moan) 

Old men so duly 

As,sooth, the Parcae thought him one 
He play'd so truly". 

'a) Cambridge History English Literature Vol.VI d.p.qO 









46 . 


These boys then were comewhere between the 
ages of thirteen and eighteen years when actors. 
Their success was doubtless due, in no small 
degree, to those charming songs that the play¬ 
wrights scattered through the plays, expressly 
for them, as well as the instrumental music 
which they gave before the play commenced, and 
between the acts. 

This brief outline, will clearly indicate the 
great place the child companies occupy in the 
dramatic world and the important part they play 
in the development of English Drama. 

Among the most noted of English playwrights 
who wrote for the child companies is John Lyly 
(1553-1606). His plays show, particularly, the 
influence of the child-actors. There is a delicacy 
of touch, a quaintness and grace, and a general 
placidity of style, that fit his plays for their 
young performers. Lyly uses classical myths upon 
which to build his plays of courtly love. Fairies, 
Nymphs, supernatural beings and shepherds, aid him 
in the action of the plays. Clever and sparkling 
conversation characterize the witty pages, who 
take the place of the buffon Vice of the earlier 
plays and into their mouths Lyly puts some of his 








47 . 


most brilliant repartee. 

(a) Six, out of the eight comedies supposed to 
have i;een then written by Lyly, wore played by 
children. Endymion, 1585, is the most familiar, 
though not the earliest, of these plays acted by 
children. It is the story of a mortal's love for 
the sublime Cynthia, supposed by some to symbolise 
Leicester's love for Elizabeth, the unattainable. 

But the various theories need not be set forth here. 

The comic element in Endymion, is provided by 
that 'miles gloriosus' Sir Tophas, and by the witty 
pages, who break off to torment Sir Tophas and worry 
the watchman or sing a sweet song. 

For our purpose it will be necessary to follow 
closely the parts played by the three pages. Epiton, 
Dares, and Samias, for these are but mere children,- 
'little boys' as Sir Tophas calls them. 

Lyly gives a perfect picture of the Court page, 
a swaggering, mischievous boy, with a propensity for 
practical jokes, and a gift of clever repartee. All 
Lyly's pages are wild spirited boys, each striving 
to outdo the other in wit or mischief. Between them 
there is no marked difference; a great defect. They 
are a class, and the only difference between Epiton 
and Dares or Samias is that he is the brighest of the 
three. 

(a) R. W.Bond, John Lyly, p. 263. 












48 . 


Another noteworthy thing is, that Lyly usually 
endows the smallest choir boy with the wittiest part 
Lyly used to great advantage the element of surprise. 
Witty syaings from a very small boy ould be more 
enjoyed because less expected. 

Lyly also uses his pages as part of the 
development of the plot. Dares and Samias as pages 
of Sndymion apd Eumenides, and Epi.ton as the page of 
Sir Tophas, just as Moth in Love's Labours Lost and 
Puck of Midsummer's Night's Dream, play an important 
part in the main action. 

If one remembers that the actors of Sndymion 
are the 'children of Pauls,' he will see how 
I admirably suited are all the characters to their 
actors. Endymion, is a boy disguised to play the 
part of the Shephard lover; Cynthia is no maiden 
goddnees but a boy disguised as a queen, for, during 
the reigns of Elizabeth and James no woman actors 
were permitted on the stage. The boys were trained 
to take the women-parts, and in them they acquired 
remarkable skill. 

The woman characters of Lyly lack the complexity 
of Shakespere's women. They have little of the 
passion and fire of the master playwright's women, 









49 


their language is careful and simple, and in this 
way one may see Lyly adapting his characters to the 
accomplishments of their actors. 

Much that has been already said, could be 
repeated if we entered fully into a discussion of 
Sapho and Phao 1581, where the girl's parts are taken 
by boys, and the pages, Molus, arid Criticus, afford 
the comic element. 

(a) The women characters are one-sided delineations 
of the eternal feminine and afford easy parts to be 
played by the boys. Lyly's women lack that wonderful 
depth of sweetness and power of self-sacrifice and 
that fierceness of aroused passion with which 
Shakespere andowed his women. However they are not 
capable of being entirely known. They are elusive, 
now we see a sportive mood change in a moment to 
gravity, now a peaceful soul burst forth into 
passion. 

(b) To Lyly belongs the dramatic device of 
disguising a woman as a man, a device common in 
Shakespere and in Beaumont later. How often 
Shakespere imitated the device is seen in s number 
of double parts created by simulated sex; Julia, 
Portia, Nerissa, Rosalind, Viola, ad Imogen. 


^ a ), r.W.B ond, John Lyly. p.263 
(b). R.F.Bond,John Lyly,p.282 







50 . 


This dramatic device is seen with Lyly in 
i Gallatea 1582. The peculiar interest to us is the 
underplot of Gallatea and Phillida, who are two girls 
disguised as boys. Each thinks the other a boy, 
i but conscious of her own sex falls in love with 
! the supposed boy. Confusion reigns throughout. 

Great Delicacy and skill is used in sustaining 
this. This confusion of sexes and complicated love 
! is used by Shakespere in "As You Like It". 

The play was acted by the 'children of Pauls' at 
: Greenwich on New Year's night, 1582. "How strange it 
| must have been to have seen these boys acting the 
women characters, recall the words of Charles Lamb, 

' to see a boy play a woman playing a man". 

For instance, the following will illustrate this 
'violence to the imagination.' 

■ 

Phil, (aside) "What doubtful speeches be these? 

I fears me he is as I am,a mayden." 
Galla. (aside) "What dread riseth in my rainde.' 

I feare the boy to be as I am a mayden' 
Phil, (aside) "Tush, it cannot be, his voice shewes 

the contrarie." 

Galla.(aside) "Yet, I doenot think it, for he would 
then have blushed." 








. 




: 1 





































51 . 


The lines that immediately following remind us 
of Shakespere*s Viola, in her page's dress, confessing, 
"I am all the daughters of my father's house, 

And all the brothers too." 

Phil.asks, 

Have you ever a sister?" 

Galls. "If I had but one, my brother must needs have 
two, but I pray have you ever a one?" 

Phil. "iy father had but one daughter, and therefore 
I would have no sister. 

One feels that the boys, who acted such 
characters as these, as well as the Asphasia of 
Fletcher and the Desdemona of Shakespere, were no 
mean actors but must have attained wonderful efficiency. 

Lyly's Midas, 1589, is important because a pretty 
feminine element is introduced in Pipenetta, Celia's 
maid, and because of the pages, Lucio, Petulus, 

Minutius, and the barber's boy, Delio. These add to 
the already large number of pages and servant 
characters of Lyly. 

In these characters Lyly carries on the sense 
of class distinction he has grasped. Almost invar¬ 
iably the courtiers speak in a lofty strain and in 
refined terms, 


the pages and servants banter, romp and 




52 . 


| play, while the shepherds speak with simplicity. 

The distinction may be artificial but it is 
I distinction, and it originated with Lyly. The 
distinction does not go far enough, for though it 
distinguishes between classes it does not 
differentiate.be twee:, members of the class. 

Mother Bombie, 1590, is a somewhat long-drawn- 

. 

out farce of love. Its plot us weak, being that of 
| a secret marriage of two young folk, who, with the 
contrivance of the usual alert and quick witted 
servants, meet against the wishes of their parents. 
The tediousness of the play is added to by the 
confusion which results from the similarity of 
characters. 

The characters of peculiar interest are Dromio 
Riscio, Halfpenny, and Luccio. Of these Halfpenny 
is, as is usual in Lyly, the smallest is size but 
by far the brightest in wit, as is indicated by the 
following- 

Dromio".looks where Half penny, Sperantus 

boy cometh, though bound up in decino 
sexto for carriage, yet a wit in foli o 
coosnage. M 


As in the other plays there are a number of 













53 . 


songs, an evidence of the influence of the child- 
companies on Lyly. In the wight plays of Lyly, 
there are thirty-two songs. Blount’s edition 
preserve twenty-one of these, which are distributed 


as follows: 

Campaspe.three 

Sapho.four 

Callathea. .... two 

Endimion.three 

Midas.four 

Mother Bombie.four 


The others are indicated in the older texts. 
The influence of child-actors is also to 
be noted in a number of servants and pages- 


Campaspe.three 

Sa£ho.two 

Gallathea.one 

Endimion>.three 

Midas. ..... four 

Mother Bombie.four 


The next of this group of University wits, 
who demands our attention is George Peele, "a most 
noted poet in the University." In 1584, just two 
years before Shakespere came to London, Peele 

produced his graceful Court play "The Arraignment 
































54 . 


of Paris." .This play was acted by the Children of 
the Chapel before Elizabeth. Thomas Nash says of 
it that "in dexterity of wit and manifold variety of 
invention, wherein (me judice) he goeth a step 
beyond all that write". There are no fewer than 
ten songs in all, sung by gods, nymohs, shepherds, 
as well as by the chief characters. In this 
preponderance of song one sees that Peele prepared 
the play aspecirlly for the Children of the Chapel. 

There is seen in Peele 1 s plays a child-like 
live of the wonderful and the extravagant. In his 
most original play "The Old Wives' Tale." acted in 
1590, there is an amusing hodge-podge which 
undoubtedly delighted an Elizabethan audience. It 
is a rambling story of siants, princesses, wizards, 
mixed with the story of two brothers seeking a lost 
sister in the wood. Towards the end of the play they 
are assisted by Jack, a spirit, who is nothing but 
a common, vulgar,village ghost. 

The ghost Jack offers himself as a servant to 
lumenides, a lover of Delia, the lost sister. 

He says- 

"Lack you not a neat, handsome,cleanly, 
young lad, about the age of 15 or 16 years, that can 




















55 . 


I run by your horse and for a need, make your 
masterhsip's shoes as black as ink." 

Beyond this meagre description of Jack there is 
j no other characterization. 

Nothing much is of note in Peele's work for 
our purpose. The only two plays which bear any 
relation to our subject have been mentioned, a,:d it 
will be seen that the relation is very slight. 

However, one must note the growing freedom of the 
stage. The playwright now gives full sway to his 
imagination and his work is that of a skilled writer. 

With Greene, that prolific and many-sided writer, 
one finds an altogether different atmosphere than that 
which previously prevaded the Drama. There is a 
freshness and a joyousness like that of youth. In 
his comedies there is a brightness that in some ways 
reminds one of Shakespere. One meets Oberon and 
his fairies; Dorothea and Nano in the woods; Slipper 
and Miles,and carries away a feeling that Greene, 
particularly in Nano, has developed a sympathetic 
insight into certain characters. 

The Scottish Historie of James the Fourth, 
slain at Flodden, 1590, introduces us to the 
I characters of Nano and Slipper. The introduction to 










56 . 


this play brings Oberon with his fairies and Bohan, 
a disgruntled Scotch man, on to the stage. As 
Slipper and Nano e.ter Bohan asks them to dance 
"Haud your clacks lads, trattle not for thy 
life, but gather oppe your legges, and daunce me 
forth with a gigge worth the sight," 

Slipper and Nano dance , and throughout the 
play, Oberon remains a spectator, adding a light 
tough t o the play during the intervals by dances 
of his fairies. 

As was noted in the discussion of Lyly, the 
smallest character is the wittiest. Nano is the 
smallest of :he boys and also the cleverest. In 
Act I, Sc.II, Nano interrupts Andrew and Slipper 
in a quarrel, by saying- 

"Agree, my maisters, every man to his height, 
Though I stand lowest, I hope to get the best 
maister" 

While Slipper says of Nano- 

M This is my little brother with the great 
wit;’ware him!” 

Nano plays an important part in the play. The 
passionate love of James IV for Lady Ida causes him 
to desert his wife, Dorothea, and to plot for her 




57 . 


To escape, the Queen decides to flee. Nano advises 
her to disguise herself. 

'what may a lueene 

March forth in homely weede and not be seene? 

The rose, although in thornie shrubs she spread 
Is still rose, her beauties waxe not dead; 

And noble mindes, altho the coate be bare 
Are by their semblance, known how great they are. 
Sir Bar - 

"The dwarfe saith true" 

Dorothea - 

"What garments likste thou, then?" 

Nano - 

"Such as may make you seem' a proper man." 

Again when Nano and Dorothea, disguised in man’s 
apparel, wander in the forest, it is Nano who is her 
chief counsellor and support. One of the most 
sympathetic pictures is given by Greene of the heart- 
sore and weary Q,ueen. Nano offers to sing to her 

"Say Madame will you hear your Nano sing?" 
Dorothea - 

"Of woe, good boy, but of no other thing." 
Nano retains a place at prominence even to the 
I: st. In the final scene of the play, he appears 

asking a characteristically boylike boon of .orothea 



















58 


"My boone, faire Queene, is this that you 

WOUld £0, 

Altho my bodie is but small and neate 
My stomach after oyle , requireth meate; 
Ann easie sute, dread Prince-, will you 
wend?” 


K. of Scots. - 

"Art thou a Pigmey bor..e, my pretie friend 

Nano - 

"Not so, great King, but nature, when she 
framde me 

Was scant of earth, and Kano therefore 
made me 

Ind when she saw my bodie was so small 

She gave ijie wit to make it big withal." 

The character of Nano is consistent throughout 
The very name Nano, from the Greek nanos, a dwarf, 
gives an idea as to his appearance. He is a loyal, 
devoted, and witty attendant and deserves a place 
among the famous page characters of English Drama. 

Greene has further :dded to the number of boy- 
characters in his play, George a Greene, The full 
title is "A pleasant conceyted Cornedie of George a 
Greene, the Pinker of Wakefield." printed in 1599. 






59 . 


In Act II,Sc.I the King of Scots is attracted 
by the appearance of Ned the son of Jane and John 
a Barley. He asks Ned 

’’Whose pretie boy art thou?” 

Ned - 

’’Sir, I am sonne unto Sir John a Barley 
Eldest, and all that eer my mother had 
Edward my name.” 

James - 

’’And whither are thou going, Pretie Ned?” 

Ned - 

"To seeke some birdes, and kill them if I can 
And now my s.cholemaster is also gone. 

So I have libertie to ply my bowe; 

For when he comes, I strive not from my booke 

James - 

. Lord Hermes, but mark the vistage of this 

child, 

By him I gesse' the beaute of his mother.” 

The passion of James is inflamed at the sight 
of Lady Jane a Barley, but Ned protests her chastity, 
exclaiming, 

"Were I of age, or were my body strong 
Were he ten kings, I would shoote him to 
the heart.” 





60 . 


Bold though the utterance be, yet the lad revels 
the strain, and causes his mother to say- 

"My little Ned lookes pale for fearel" 

Greene draws a very agreeable picture of a 
courageous boy. There is no straining after 
effect. The lad realizes the seriousness of his 
p'osition and shows that he does so by the pallor of 
his face. However, in the presence of his meter’s 
danger, fear is banished and in a bold speech he 
braves his king. Nad a Barley is well characterized. 

In this play another character is worthy of 
our attention. George a Greene is in love with 
"Bettris", the daughter of Grime, but he is 
hindered from carrying out his wishes by paternal 
disapproval. To assist him he canle upon Wily his 
boy. W r ily is lo go to Grime’s house disguised as a 
woman, and having gained access to Beatrice, is to 
exchange clothes with her, and so allow the lovers 
to come together, after Beatrice escapes from Grime’s 
watchfulness. 

When Wily enters Grime’s house he completely 
deceives Beatrice’s father, who says after Wily 
unveils his face- 

"A pretie wench of smiling countenance 












61 . 


Olde men can like , although they cannot love 
I, and love, though no so briefe as young 

men can. 

Well, gee in, my wench, speake with my 

daughter.” 

The exci ange of clothes is made and Beatrice meets 
her lover, George a Greene. 

In the final scene the characters stand before 
King Edward. Grime, who has fallen in love with the 
disguised Wily, promises Greene his daughter if he in 
turn will permit him to marry 

"with this lovely lasse", Wily. 

!dw. - 

"What sayest thou, George?” 

George a Greene gives his consent, and Wily 
is forced to reveal his identity. 

Wily.- 

”Then shall the marriage soone be at an ende. 
Witness,ray lord, if then I me a woman 
For I am Wilie ,boy to George a Greene 
Who for my master wrought this subtitle 

shift.” 


Sdw. - 


"What is it a boyI What sayest thou to 

t n 1 S , ri . <->tl 

9 Gnme? 





62 , 


The character of Wily is that of a cunning lad. 

His name is the indication of his character, Greene 
is consistent in his characterization of the boy 
throughout. The whole plot rests upon the exchange 
of clothes, and Wily must bebut a mere youth to 
make such a deception upon Grime possible. 

In Nano and Slipper, Ned a Barleu and Wily, four 
characters of considerable importance, from our 
stand-point, h§ve been added to English Drama. -‘•he 
First two particularly must have had some influence 
upon the great master himself, Shakespere. 1 

In the worth of Lodge we find nothing at all 
of value for our purpose1 but in the worth of 
Thomas Nashe there are one or two .things nf note. 

In Pleasant Comedie”, called "Summer's Last Will 
and Testament", written in 1588, the epilogue is spoken 
by a very little boy "the smallest possible". How small 
this boy was may be seen in the fact that he was to 
be carried off the stage. 

Will Summer says of him. 

"Here is a pretty boy come with an 
epilogue to get him audacity. I pray 
you sit still a little and heare him say 
his lesson without booke. It is a good 
boy, be not afraid, turne thy face to 







63 . 


my Lord. Come and sit on my knee 

and I'll daunce thee, if thou canst not 
endure to stand." 

Undoubtedly, the child would be popular with 
the Elizabethian audience, who would rnarvel to 
hear him give the difficult epilogue "without booke". 

Throughout the play there are songs in plenty, 
and parts, particularly Autumns and Vertumnue, 
which lend themselves to the acting by boys. Of 
Autumnus and Vertumnus, Will Summer says, they are 
"praty boys." 

Another play in which Thomas N?she had a part 
was "The Tragedie of Dido, queene of Cartage, played 
b; the Children of her Maiester Chapell, and written 
by Christopher Marlowe and Thomas Nashe , Gent." 

The character of Ganimede, A^scanius, and Cupid 
are well suited to small shildren. Additional 
interest is added by the Nurse caring for Cupid under 
the guise of Ascanius. The exchange is made by Venus 
who carries Ascanius asleep to Ida; 

"Now is he fast asleep, and in this grove, 
Amongst green blakes, I'll lay Ascanius, 

And strew him with sweetOsmelling violets 
Blushing ruses, purple hyacinths, 

These mild-while doves shall be his corohals. 
































64 . 


Cupid, meanwhile, having assumed the form 
of Ascanius, so bewitches the old nurse, as to 
stir up the passion of love within her. She 
endeavors to tempt Cupid away from Dido, thus- 

"I have an orchard that hath store of plums, 
Brown almonds, services,ripe figd and dates 
Dewberries, apples, yellow oranges, 

A garden where are beehives full of honey 
Musk-roses, and a thousand sort of flowers; 



Arid in the midst doth run a silver stream 


Where thou shalt see the red-gilled fishes 


leap. 


White swans, and many lovely water-fowls, 

A nothworthy and pplendid description of a 
garden. 

The characters are well-drawn. They reveal the 
skill of a great dramatist. The scenes in which 
Ganymede and Ascanius appear are original, while 
the rest cf the play is a translation from the "Aeneid" 
This play begun by Marlowe and finished by Nash will 
well serve as a transition between our study of 
Nash and Tarlowe. 

Much extravagant praise has been given to 


Marlowe as the greatest dramatist before 
















65 . 


Shakespere. His position is due to his brilliant 
use of blank vrrse and his pomp in the display of 
heroic action. 

In Tamburlaine the Great, Part the Second, 

1587, we have a pure "hero-play.” The giant-like 
barbarous figure of Tamburlaine dominates all. In 
Act I, Sc II of this lay Tamburlaine expresses his 
disappointment in his three sons, Calyphas, Amyras, 
and Celebines because their looks 

"Argue their want of courage and of wit" 
Zenoerate, his wife, explains that, 

"they have their mother*s looks, 

But when they list their conquering 
father's heart. 

She shows how Celebines, 

"This lovely boy, the youngest of the three 
Not long age bestride a Scythian steed 
Trotting the ring, and tilting at the glove 
Which when he feinted with his slender rod, 

He reined him straight and made him so curret 
As I cried out for fear he would have fallen" 
This dee . of prowess on the part of his youngest 
son brings happiness to Tamburlaine, who bids him be 
"the scourge and terror of the world." 

The second son, Amyras, desires to be known as 









C 6. 


"a scourge and terror” also. Calyphas, the first 
son seeks ease, desiring only to accompany his 
"gracious mother,” a disposition that later 
brought him to de.- th. 

The blood-thirsty nature of these unnatural 
boys Celebines and Amyrus is brought in two 
speeches. 

Celebines avers to Zenoerate that is the chair 
of his father, 

"were in a sea of blood 
I would prepare a ship and sail to it, 

Ere I would lose a title of a King.” 

While Amyras says, 

"And 1 would strive to swim through pools of 

blood, 

Or make a bridge of murdered carcases 
Whose arches should be framed with bones of 

Turks. 

Ere I would lost the title of King." 

These two boys are types of their sire, blood¬ 
thirsty, cruel and courageous. The son, Calyphas is 
slain by the hand of his father, because he does not 
possess these characteristics. 

ihe play ends with Amyras sitting upon the 
throne of his father Tamburlaine. A worthy successor 






67 


of a bloody tyrant. In his treatment of the 
character of both Celebines and Amyras, Marlowe is 
thoroughly consistent. They are the natural off¬ 
spring of a relentless and barbaric father, and are 
worthy representatives of this half-bestial, 
remorseless monarch. 

A more pleasing picture is seen in wh&t is 
spoken of as Marlowe's greatest play, Edward tne 
Second. The skill with which the cuaracter of young 
Edward is drawn is worthy of particular note. 

Prince Edward appears first in Act III, Sc 11 
Queen Isabella is compelled to leave the King 
because of his inordinate affection for Gaveston. 
Edward II gladly seizes an opportunity to send the 
Queen and his young son to France, to offer homage 
to Lord Valois of France. 

"Madam, in this natter 
We will employ you and your little son, 

You shall do parley with the King od France. 
Boy, see you bear you bravely to the King. 

Pr.Edward. 

"Commit you to my youth things of more weight 
Than fits a prince so young as I to bear, 

And fear not,lord and father,Heaven's■ great 


beams 





68 . 


On Atlas' shoulders shall not lie more safe 
Than shall your charge committed to my trust." 

Such a reply from one so young makes Queen 
Isabella exclaim; 

Ah, boy! this towardness makes thy mother fear, 
Thou art not marked to ma y days on earth." 

Later in France this same sagacity in Prince 
Edward is to be noticed- 
Queen Isabella- 

Ah boy! our friends do fail us all in France 

The lords are cruel, and the king unkind. 

What shall we do? 

Pr.Sdw. 

"Madam, return to England, 

And please my father well, and then a fig 
For all my uncle's friendship here in France 
I v-.arrant you, I'll win his highness quickly; 

A loves me better than a thousand Spencers." 

This boldness is revealed after he becomes King Ed¬ 
ward the ihird. His father has b en murdured at the 
instigation of the guilty lovers Queen Isabella and 
young Mortimer, and his mother tells Mortimer that 
the young king, 

"tears his hair and wrings his hands , 

And vows to be revenged upon us both 







69 . 


Into the council chamber he is gone 
To crave the aid and succor of his peers 
Ay me I see where he comes, and they with him 
Now, Mortimer, begins our tragedy.*" 

It is not that the young king shows himself 
"every inch a king". He accuses young Mortimer 
of the murder of his father. This "paltry boy" 
leads Mortimer to see 

"There is a point, to which when men aspire 
They tumble headlong down." 

1'he murderer is beheaded; the Queen is 
committed to the Tower and King Edward reigns in peace. 

The skill with which the young prince is drawn 
places Marlowe in the foremast rank of those who 
have portyared boys. With care he preserves for this 
young prince the good-will of the nobles, and finally 
brings him to the throne. 

With Marlowe our study closes. We now stand at 
the door of a great epoch in English Drama- the 
days of Shakespere . Previous to Shakespere we have 
seen a more or less spasmodic development in the power 
of characterization; from the crude forms of the 
miracle play to the clear figure of Edward the Third. 

In the early days of the Drama we saw that the 







70 . 


child was not much used on the stage. But just 
prior to Lyly there w s a notable increase in the 
number of child characters and plays were being written 
especially for children. 

With Lyly the child took a prominent place, both 
as an . ctor and as a character in Drama. x h e pages 
and servants of Lyly, the songs and dances all 
indicate the increasing influence of the child in 
Drama. But still the child did not stand out clearly 
as a character. He was still one of a class. 

In the plays of Greene and Marlowe Ihis fault is 
absent. The number of child characters is less,but 
the characterization is better* In Marlowe*£ plays 
there is a distinct advance in the power to delineate 
child character.— power which finds its culmination 
in WiIlian Shakesp^re. 









BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Development of the Drama: 

The Cambridge History of English Literature 

Vol.5. 


Predecessors of Shakespeare,J.A.Symonds 
English Dramatic Literature. Ward. 

Mystery ar.d Miracle Plays: 

The York Mysteries 
The Towneley Plays 
The Chester Plays 
The Coventry Mysteries. 

Morality Plays and interludes: 

Dodsley*s Old English Plays,edited by 

Hazleyy 

Predecessors of Shakespeare. J.A.Symonds 
Annals of the Stage. Collier 

English Dramatic Literature. Ward. 

The Child- Companies. 

The Cambridge History of English 
Literature. Vol.6. 

Annals of the stage 
Plays: 

John Lyly, edited by R.W.Bond, 

Robert Greene, Plays and Poems, edited by 




J.C.Collins. 








George ^eele, published by Geo.Routledge 

& sons 

Thomas Nash, edited by R.B.McKerrow 
Christopher Marlowe, Mermaid Series 
The Works of Marlowe. Bullen 
General reference. 

The Cambridge Hi story of English 
Literature. 

English Dramatic Literature. Ward. 
Predecessor of Shakespeare. J.A.Symonds, 
Annals of the Stage. Collier. 

















