For Reference 


\ NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM^ ^ 


Library of the University of A&erta, Edmonton, Alberta \ 

\ 

Thomas, L.G. 

The ranching neriod in southern 
Alberta. 


Please file in cupboard in 


















(3x MBBI* 

uiwomsimais 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/thomas1935 

























/. 

I—A DEFINITION OF RANCHING—ALBERTA 1 S PLACE IN THE 

CONTINENTAL INDUSTRY. 

The word "ranch” is an abbreviation of the Spanish 
"rancho", which in its original sense meant "mess" or 

a 

"persons feeding together 1 ; Used^substantiv6, it 

has com* to mean any establishment for the breeding 

04 a 

of live-stock on a large scale. Used^verb ? it 
refers to the conduct of such an establishment. Usually 
the word implies that either sheep, cattle or horses 
are raised, but "chicken-ranching"*and even "bee-ranch¬ 
ing" ? are not unknown corruptions. For our purposes 
the word "ranching" will mean "cattle-ranching", for 
cattle were the premier products of the Alberta indus¬ 
try, although the same methods were successfully 
applied to horses and sheep. 

Ranching is an extensive rather than an intensive 
agricultural method. Because most of the feed used 
is obtained without cultivation, more acres of land 
per head of livestock are required for ranching than 
for, let us say, mixed farming. Therefore the ranching 
industry has found newly opened and undeveloped lands, 
as for example those available in the temperate plains 
of North and South America during the latter part of 
the nineteenth century, especially suitable for its 
purposes. When settlement increased, the larger „ 











— 




















t 


































, 












X 

population found that a more intensive method of pro¬ 
duction was essential to the maintenance of the stan¬ 
dard of laving and ranching was broadly limited to reg¬ 
ions which for reasons of climate, fertility, or 
topography were unsuited for farming purposes# The 
availability of large areas of suitable land at low 
prices remains the prime condition for the creation 
and survival of a ranching industry* 

The ranching industry, here to be considered in 
its connection with Southern Alberta, was by no means 
of merely local significance# At its height its 
operations embraced much of the open plains of North 
America; and in the similar regions of the Argentine 
it is still an industry of major importance# The 

ranching area of Southern Alberta was the northernmost 

psrf cf the 

•extension of thaf/jgreat plain which in America was the 
home of the industry. Most of the states from the 
Mississippi to the Rockies, from the International 
Boundary to the Rio Grande, were at one time or another 
chiefly concerned with the extensive production of 
livestock. Cradled in Mexico and Texas, the industry 
tprad northwards# As the herds pushed into new lands 
new adaptations were made and a mass of knowledge and 
tradition, almost wholly oral, accumulated. Settlement 















. 













































. 

. 














3 


and barbed-wire forced the industry backward. ' By the 
eighteen-eighties, when ranching in Southern Alberta 
was first beginning, the great days of the cattle- 
kings off the western states were almost over, but the 
industry had played its part. It had opened the West 
and with its tradition and its folk-lore greatly 
enriched the American story. 

Behind Alberta ranching lay the whole American 
experience of the industry. The Alberta development 
was a special aspect of a continental manifestation. 
j Alberta was the last of the great ranch-lands. 

American proximity and American experience, in ranching 
as in other fields, largely influBBced the Alberta 
industry. The United States was the first source of 
cattle for stocking Canadian ranges; it offered men 
of knowledge and experience; and it promised a market./ 
Communication with the outside world was easier via 
Fort Benton in Montana than by the overland Canadian 
route. Even the whiskey-traders, Southern Alberta's 
first merchants, were mostly American. Many 
natural ties drew Southern Alberta into closer contact 
with the continental industry of which it formed a 
part. 

Evidences of the contact are manifold. Fear of 

t'tipcd to 

American penetration into the North-West \ the 


































. 











' 




. 


















H- 

Dominiofi Government to negotiate in 1870 the »e^isr/rir, 

it* iv\ 

of/\the West from the Hudson's Bay Company and encouraged 
that government to give its control realityby the 
despatch of the North-West Mounted Police. American 
ranchers from Montana were among the first to bring 
range-cattle into the region and to open the long 
controversy between government and settler as to the 
disposal of the Indians.(l). When Ottawa decided to 
put ranching in the West on a regular footing, it was 
to Montana's experience that the new raages owed the 
J lease system. Obviously ranching in Alberta was no 
isolated incident. 

To secure a clearer idea of the meaning which 
"ranching" assumed in Southern Alberta, it is simplest 
to consider the gradual changes which the industry 
there underwent. The first "ranches” were merely 1 
herds of livestock, generally cattle, although horses 
were early raised on the range. The owners brought 
them into the country, branded them, turned them 
loose and hoped for the best. This was the era of 
completely free and open range. The land was neither* 
held nor fBssesec*/ Ay any individual, title 
was vested in the Dominion Government and no one had 


(1) Kelly, L.V.; Range Men pp. 127-128 








* 

. 













» t 














. 

t 

. 
















;• ■ . 


i. 






especial claims to any one portion* Such an idyllic 
state of affairs could not be expected to survive 
for long and a new system of government leases 1 
introduced the great period of Alberta ranching. 

The regulations of 1881 and the vicissitudes 
through which they passed will have to be described 
in more detail later but a brief consideration of 

their provisions is desirable here, for they were 

of 

the fore-runners of the "Golden Age"^ They provided 
for the leasi*y, at almost nomibal rentals, of large 
tracts of land to companies or individuals for grazing 



purposes exclusively* Upon th< 


was to place a definite number of beasts/ 

within a certain time* The lessees were supposed 
to have their leases surveyed; meanwhile locations 
were designated in the vaguest possible way, as in 
some range of hills or between two specified rivers. 
Provision was made for the purchase of a home-ranch,i 
again at a very low price. A ranch during the 
"Golden Age" was thus a home-ranch, where buildings, 
corrals and cultivated lands, if any, were located, 
usually in some convenient and attractive river- 
bottom, together with a varying amount of range-land 
where stock roamed unimpeded. 

Gradually, as settlement increased, ranching in 





♦ 

. 

, 

. 

. 

. 


. 







( 










the grand manner declined. Land increased in value, 
the leases were fenced, the open range disappeared 
and the ranchers who survived owned more and more 
of their land. By 1896 all the old closed leases 
had been cancelled but not before many large tracts \ 
had been purchased outright for ranching purposes. 

On this basis the industry continued but by 1905, 
except in certain areas^the old methods of ranching, 
characterized by the open range, had. passed. The 

however, persisted. The holdings gEwere 
smaller, but livestock rather than grain remained 
the focal point of production. Something of the old 
spirit lived on in regions little changed by the 
plough. Ranching no longer dominates^Alberta but it ' 
remains an important industry and the way of life it 
engendered still survives. 









. 

. 














. 

. 

. 

. 






■ 






7 

II- A*foRLBERTA * S POSSIBILITIES *»</ fie.irCorrcc.ffin 

The territories which to-day comprise Southern 

So»Tk*»c*tcrt\ incitek%u>*r* fie t r drt»ftr *T 7 if C 

Alberta^were at the time of^the Dominion 1 s xxepxxxxXX&K 
1 « xxxttKK? kxMar preeminently 
fitted to become the last of the great ranching 
areas# Unoccupied, except for a handful of traders 
and Indians *x» xx***X, xxxx-x* xsarxXxx ** xxv* 

x#xa< * )*»**ntk*i xsrxa* x *« xxarwxxfcjr, xsrx* 

it offered large areas of land at low 
cost. The country in which ranching became especially 
important was that portion of the present province 
of Alberta which lies south of the Red Deer River 
together with the south-west corner of Saskatchewan. 
Besides mere unoccupied extent, the area possessed 
other advantages for a ranching country. Its surface, 
faiily flat except along the eastern slope of the 
Rockies, was broken throughout most of its area by 
coulees and deep river valleys, usually well-wooded 
and affording excellent shelter for ranging stock.— 

The pcairie vegetation in its natural state was ^ 
possessed of certain peculiar qualities which make it 
available as winter feed. Rot only are these wild 

grasses, which include buffalo-grass, blue-joint, 

and 

timothy,^ oat-grass (1) , extremely 

(1) Biller, quoting Harcourt, "Canada and its Provinces" 
xx p. 589 mentions that in Alberta at least 96 varieties 
of wild grasseshave been identified, of which 46 make 
good hay. 




. 

f 




. 


































nutritious to stock, but they cure on the stalk in f 
the autumnand provide excellent winter feed without 
the necessity of hay-making. The climate was similarly 
favourable. The low humidity discouraged disease 
among the animals and the prevalence of Chinook 
winds, especially in the areas adjacent to the Rockies, 

made practical the wintering of stock outdoors, as 

rinds 

the yy melted the snow at intervals and exposed the 
grasses for pasturage. As the region is very dry,t 
scarcity of water was something of a problem in the 
eastern sections, although along the foothills springs 
and mountain streams provided water in abundance. 

These numerous advantages, so obvious now, 
required a good deal of exploration and advertisement 
before the original misconception of the character 
of the Canadian west could be overcome. The fur-; 
trading interests were naturally not enthusiastic 
champions of the region*s potentialities, for 
settlement and fur-trade are irreconcilable. Therefore 
they fostered the impression that the whole North- 
West was an arid, barren and frost-bound waste. Giving 
evidence before the Committee which in 1857 was 
investigating the Hudson's Bay Company's rule, Sir 
George Simpson who, as Governor of the Company for 
thirty-eight years had had ample opportunity to view 



























. 

f 





, 











<?. 

the country, testified: ,T I do not think that any part 
of the Hudson's Bay Company's territories is well 
adapted for settlement; the crops are very uncertain." 
Whatever services the Company rendered to Canada, the f 
encouragement of settlement was not among them. 
Nevertheless Company servants inevitably indicated the 
region's agricultural potentialities by the success they 
achieved in the cultivation of field and garden crops 
around their posts. 

In Mackenzie's Voyages (2) there is mention of a 
kitchen-garden in Northern Alberta: "In the fall of the 
year 1787, when I first arrived in Athabasca, Mr. Pond 
was settled on the banks of the Elk River, and had 
farmed as fine a kitchen-garden as I ever saw in Canada." 
Mackenzie, however, held the conventional Company- 
servant view of the country's future; "The whole of 
this country will long continue in the possession of 
its present inhabitants (the Indians) as they will 
remain contented with the produce of tjie woods and waters 
for their support, leaving the earth in its virgin state. 
The proportion of it that is fit for cultivation is 
very small, and is still less in the interior parts; 


(2) Alexander Mackenzie: "Voyages from Montreal to the 
Frozen and Pacific Oceans", p. 129. 





/o- 

it is also very difficult of access and whilst any 
land remains uncultivated to the south of it, there 
will be n^emptation to settle. Besides, its 
climate is not in general sufficiently genial to 
bring the fruits of the earth to maturity.” 

The testimony of David Harmon, an agent of the 
North-West Company at Dunvegan, was more favourable. 
In 1808 his Journal records: "We have a tolerably 
good kitchen-garden and shall not want the means of 
a comfortable subsistence" (3). Again in 1809: "We 
have cut down our barley. I think it is the finest 
that I ever saw in any country" (4), and in 1810 he 
writes that wheat, rye, barley and oats "would grow 
well on the plains around us," Ross, a fur-trader 
who visited Port Edmonton in 1825 describes its 
agricultural activities thus: "Attached to the place 
are two large parks for raising grain, and the soil 
being good, it produces large crops of barley and 
potatoes; but the spring and fall frosts prove 
injurious to wheat, which in consequence seldom come 
to maturity" ($). 


(3) Daniel Harmon: "A Journal of Voyage and Travel in 
the Interior of North iimerica (The Trail-Makers of 
Canada) p. 142 

(4) Ibid. p. 146 

(5) W.E. Edmonds: "A Brief History of Edmonton" p. 6. 






Scientific exploration in Alberta began in 1857, 
when two official expeditions were sent to the West (6), 
Captain Palliser, whose journeyings covered the period 
from 1857 to 1860 was commissioned by the British 
Government to explore "that portion of British North 
America which lies between the northern watershed and 
the frontier of the United States, and between the Red 
River and the Rocky Mountains," and to endeavour to 
find a practicable route through it. The expedition 
of S.J. Dawson and Professor Hind (1857-^1858) was sent 

bythe government of the Canadas to examine the resources 

•f 

of the Red River Colony and^the Assinibdiine and 
Saskatchewan countries - In his report Hind wrote of 
the discovery of Tf a fertile belt of country extending 
from the Lake of the Woods to the Rocky Mountains," 
and elsewhere he remarked, "North of the great American 
desert there is a broad strip of fertile country, rich 
in water, wood and pasturage, drained by the North 
Saskatchewan, and a continuation of the fertile 
prairies of the Red and Assiniboine Rivers. It is 
a physical reality of the highest importance to the 
interests of British North America that this continuous 
belt can be settled and cultivated." 

(6) Dorothy Diller: "The Early Economic Development 
of Alberta." p. 52. 
























. 

, 






r 
















/a. 

Palliser’s report, published in 1863, also 
described a fertile belt of country lying between the 
great American desert to the south and the northern 
forest area, a belt which included all of present 
Alberta south of the North Saskatchewan except for 
an arid patch in the south where the central desert 
region of the United States "extends for a short 
way into Canada, forming a triangle having for its 
base the 49th parallel from longitude 100° to 110° 
and with its apex reaching to the 52nd parallel 
of latitude." These two reports established as fact 
the existence of rich, arable land in the North-West, 
and as Miss hiHer remarks, captured public imagination 
in England and Canada with the phrase "fertile belt”. 
However^ the reports did little to shatter popular 
illusions about Southern Alberta, and Palliser*>&jc 
*< **¥*JCiK*X strengthened the belief that that region 
was arid and useless. Its possibilities for the 
rancher remained so obscure that as late as 1871 
Butler described it as "arid, treeless and impossible 
of settlement” (7). 

More favourable reports began to circulate after 
the inauguration of the boundary survey in 1872 and 

(7) Capt. W.F. Butler: "The Great Lone Land" p. 374. 

















/ 3. 

the arrival of the North-West Mounted Police in 1874* 
‘Jin exceedingly interesting forecast of the productive 
areas was made on March 1 J.872, in Colonel John 
Stoughton Dennis's first reports to the Secretary 
of State* Basing his classification on reports of 
official explorations, and information obtained from 
the Hudson 1 s Bay Company's posts and from mission 
stations, Dennis estimated that there were 32,000,000 
acres unavailable for cultivation, being the extension 
of the great American desert into Canadian territory; 
76,800,000 acres of prairie country unsurpassed for 
agricultural purposes with occasional groves and 
belts of timber; 298,384,000 acres of timber-land 
with occasional large prairies (as in the Peace Hiver 
district) adapted for the growth of wheat and other 
cereals and possessing an abundance of timber; 
594,048,000 acres sufficiently supplied with timber 
and adapted for the cultivation of potatoes, barley 
and grasses; and 411,072,000 acres of fur-producing 
region, rock, swamp, and barren lands, in which the 
timber growth extending up from the south gradually 
disappears. TT (8). 

(8) TT Canada and its Provinces 11 , Archives Edition 1914 
Volume XIX Section 10, Part 1, page 156. 









Professor Macoun, whose explorations were 
carried on intermittently between 1875 and 1880, 
embodied his observations in a book "Manitoba and 
the Great North-West," which appeared in 1882. 

He regarded the arid appearance of much of the 
southern plains as the result of prairie fires, not 
of natural climatic conditions• The Marquis of Lome 
while Governor-General had visited Southern Alberta 
in 1881 and his widely-circulated remark that if he 
had his life to live over again he would be a rancher 
in the Canadian North-West—"God 1 s Country" he called 
it with viceregal unselfconsciousness—was an 
excellent advertisement for the new country and the 
new industry. By 1882 indeed there were enough 
settlers in Southern Alberta to correct the old 
misapprehensions and that territory was regarded 
as one of the most promising stock-countries of 
North America. 










, 






















Ill—AREAS IN ALBERTA DEVOTED TO RANCHING AT 
VARIOUS PERIODS. 

The ranching country varied in extent and position 
at various in its history. Roughly the ranching 

areas may be said to have comprised at their largest 
extent the part of the present Province of Alberta 
which lies to the south of the Red Deer River, and 
certain similar adjacent areas in Southern Saskatchewan* 
The boundaries of the Provisional District of Alberta 
differed substantially from those of the Province 
of the same name. The eastern boundary of the 
provisional district lay sixty miles west of the 
provincial boundary and the important ranching 
districts around Medicine Hat v/bbs included in the 
Provisional District of Assiniboia. The total area 
in which ranching was at some time the predominant 
industry would be very approximately 35,000 square 
miles in extent. 

The first ranches were established in the vicinity/) 
of the police-posts which offered security, markets 
and company. When their terms of service expired, 
many of the police decided to remain in the country 
and they too naturally established their ranches not 
far from their did comrades. The first herds thus 
had their headquarters near Port Macleod and Port 
Calgary or such subsidiary posts as High River and 










. 












, . 















« 



















/6 

Pincher Creek, The long belt of foothill country 
which extends from the boundary north past Cochrane 
and Morley was, with its prairie hinterland, regarded 
as especially desirable for ranching purposes. The 
first leases lay in this region, an almost solid strip 
of country about forty miles vide running from the 
boundary to a point fifteen miles north of Calgary. 
There were outlying leases granted even in 1882 but 
none lay east of Range 18 west of the fourth Meridian, 
or north of Twwnship 30. The ranches, or at least . 
the home ranches, kept close to water and shelter, 
and settlement, while ranching remained the premier 
industry, followed the innumerable rivers and creeks • 
which intersect the foothills and the prairies beyond. 
The leases which were granted from 1883 to 1887, with 
1882 the great year/. of lease-granting, were seldom 
far from the block described, although there were 
leases as-far north as Innisfail and east 

to the present Saskatchewan border. Many of the 
leases granted were never taken up and the majority 
of those that were not lay too far from water, ) ^ 

In the south the chief centres of settlement, 
where the leases clustered thickest, were the valleys 
of the Belly, the Kootenai, the Old Man and the 
St. Mary's Rivers. Moving north, Willow Creek, 











/ 7 , 

Mosquito Creek, the Little Bow, the Highwood, Sheep 
Creek, Pish Creek and the Bow and Elbow Rivers were 
important ranching centres. All along the Bow from 
west of Morley to the Porks of the South Saskatchewan 
were large leases. The Red Leer River further north 
was mentioned as an important point of settlement in 
1883 (1). The chief leases on this river were granted 
after 1884, on its upper waters and its tributaries. 

A number of leases were granted between 1883 and 1887 
on Milk River and in the Cypress Hills, though few of * 
them were cattle ranches. Indeed in 1884 when many 
of them were granted, there was only one cattle-ranch 
in the territory then opened to sheep and that was 
adjacent to the Peigan Reserve (2). In the Medicine 
Hat district the first big ranch was started in 1886 
by the Medicine Hat Ranching Company. Although water 
was always a problem in these south-eastern districts, 
within a few years there were nearly as many cattle 
on these ranges as on those elsewhere (3). 

The tendency of settlement to cling to streams § 
had an unfortunate result. Water and shelter were 
essential to successful ranching. The homesteaders 


(1) Macleod Gazette, April 24, 1883; "Surveys”, 
f2) Order-in-council, Oct. 6, 1884. 

(3) Kelly, p. 193. 










. 














J. 








. 













. 

















It. 

selected their locations and fenced them* Bench 
lands were destined to prove superior to the valleys 
for farming operations, hut the homesteaders, most 
of whom really intended to raise livestock, preferred 
the valleys* Their fences cut the ranchers off V 
from the water and shelter of the valleys and they 
were forced hack into the hills and the ^rier areas 
of Palliser ! s Triangle. Then settlement began to 
close the open range, over which the ranchers 1 
cattle had grazed, although their leases had been , 
chiefly in the block described* Only the lands 
which were quite useless for farming remained to 
the ranchers. In the foothills of the Hockies, in 
the Cypress and Porcupine Hills, in the Medicine 
Hat region and in the valleys of the lower Red 
Deer, the little Bow, the South Saskatchewan and 
£he Milk Rivers, the citadels of their old ranges, 
the remaining ranchers took their last stand and 
there, to a degree, they have found security* 



















. 










, 






. 



















t 













IV—THE NECESSITIES OF A STOCK-RAISING COMMUNITY 
(a) law and Order, 

A pastoral commu ity doe* W rcqoir* *+*+ as 
ctmplfcstccl * social and economic organization 
that which would he required by l«s* y»r rmit/ue 
comw^mfi'es. Nevertheless certain conditions are 
essential to the successful development of a stock- 
raising community; a measure of security, some v/ 
prospect of markets, and some form of land organ¬ 
ization. After the Dominion T s acquisition of the 
West, the primary necessity was the establishment 
of law and order. The work of the North-West 
Mounted Police was thus of paramount importance 
in the history of the ranching community. 

The Hudson T s Bay Company had never been 
especially active in what was to be Southern 
Alberta. The region, largely prairie, was not 

productive of the more valuable furs, 
and the tribes which controlled it were notoriously 
dangerous. After a few half-hearted attempts to 

re¬ 
establish the^trade in the "Bow Country", as it was 

called, the Company withdrew and was content with 

the hope that the Blackfeet would come to them, 

since they did not feel it worthwhile to go to 

































. 











1 0 


the Rlackfeet. 

With the weakening of the Company's control and 
the growth of free-trading during the third quarter 
of the nineteenth century, a number of free-traders,/ 
established themselves in Southern Alberta. Chiefly 
Americans, with considerable experience in dealing 
with the red man across the border, they built themselves 

l»fernsf/on*/ 

posts at strategic points near the/\Boundary, their 

' 

more notorious strongholds including Kipp, Stand-Off, 
Slide Out and Whoop Up. From these expressively named 
retreats they dispensed whiskey to the Indians at J 
remarkable prices and flourished exceedingly. Even 
more unsavoury characters were the "Wolfers" who had 
their headquarters at Spitzee (near the present town 
of High River). They made their living by slaughtering 

the abundant timber-wolves for their skins. 

est&lhsUJ 

The character of the^inhabitants of Southern 
Alberta in 1870 was hardly such as to encourage the 
intending settler. The fate of las herd of cattle,. 

*parf fram the fact that buffalo still existed 
in large numbers } cqo{4 easily be imagined. s/Other 
considerations were not wanting and therefore in 
1870 the first thought of the Dominion Government 
was the establishment of some degree of law and 
order in its new territories. Realizing that their 














Up¬ 
time of liberty was short, the independent traders 

between 1870 and 1874 achieved new heights of 

ingenuity in their exploitation of the Indians. 

When in 1874 the Mounted Police did arrive and , 

establish posts, the traders accepted the new 

order without much resistance. The Force succeeded 

further in winning the confidence of the Indians. 

With that deceptive appearance of effortless ease 

so characteristic of its more remarkable achievements 

the phenomenal police force had taken the first 

and greatest step towards the establishment of law 

and order. 

Although what Oolonel Robertson-Ross had called 
"an easy and agreeable march of a few weeks 1 duration" 
had brought a measure of security to Southern Alberta, 
in 1874 ranching was a distant possibility. The 
buffalo were not extinct and the few men who brought 
cattle from Montana were so discouraged by the 
depredations of thieves, white and otherwise, that 
in 1879 most of them retired across the line with 
the remnants of their herds (1). The attitude of 
Police officials during these early years was 


(1) kelly, p.128. 






























































xX 

understandable; they did not believe that the 
country was ready for settlement and they thought 
that those who wanted to bring cattle into the 
country should be willing to take their losses. 

The Police could not risk offending the Indians; 
prestige alone enabled the tiny force to control 
them, and if they were ever aroused the whole 
white colony might perish. They could not allow 
the Indians to be treated as the stockmen, with 
American precedent behind them, suggested. 

Unquestionably Police policy was well founded 
on reality, and furthermore, as they pointed out, 
Indians were not always responsible for the ranchers 1 
losses. More cattle died from carelessness than 
were stolen but the rancher was content to rest 
in the illusion that his losses were exclusively , 

V 

the result of theft (2). 

In spite of these difficulties,settlers 

>5 n 

continued to come into the courtry and^bring livestock 
with them. Although the Police doubted the country T s 
readiness for settlement, they did their best to 
protect property and met with reasonable success. 

The unforgivable sin in the eyes of ranchers was 


(2) Kelly, p. 128 et seq 






' 

. 































\3 


theft of stock. Not only Indians, American and 
Canadian, were guilty; there were plenty of white 
thieves from both sides of the border. The ranchers 
would have given suspects short shrift but the law 
required that the thief be seen or taken in the act. 
Under such circumstances it was difficult to secure 
a conviction and many of the guilty escaped. The 
police could not be blamed' they did their duty 
efficiently; if the law made evasion easy it was not 
the fault of the force. 

There was a certain friction between the Police 

force 

and the ranchers, but on the whole theyj seems to 
have had the confidence of the bulk of the settlers. 
Their TT mutual understanding of the sanctity of a 
profession, and also of the underlying gallantry of 
life preserved to the force the goodwill of their 
communities of rough men" (3), During the whole 
early period, the standard of order in Southern 
Alberta, taking into consideration the of the 

country and the the police force, seems to 

have been extremely high. Apparently Ottawa was 
satisfied, for in the 1880 report of the Minister of 
the Interior we read of the general satisfactory 


(3) T. Morris Longstreth; "The Silent Force" p, 115. 









1 k 

state of affairs in the district due TT to the presence 
of the North-West Mounted Police, the administration 
of justice by the stipendiary Magistrates, the 
repression of the traffic in intoxicating liquor, 
and the rrompt punishment of crime,- as well as to 
the natural disposition of the inhal?stints. ” (4)* 

During the ranching era security was so complete 
as to be taken for granted, Oattle and horses 
frequently changed hands without benefit of purchase 
and contraventions of the liquor law were legion 
but more violent crime was rare. Occasional murders 
aroused ddep public indignation, as we may judge 
from the spirited accounts in Kelly’s ”Range Men” 
but the very indignation was indicative of their 
rarity. In those halcyon days, loyal Albertans could 
look southward and hug themselves justifiably in 
gleeful and law-abiding superiority. 


(4) Sessional Papers 1880 Yol. XIII No. 3 Papers 4 
page 10. 








(b) Markets 




Fundamental order once established, the ranching 
community would discover a second necessity--markets•' 
If people fihd it difficult to live by taking in one 
another's washing, they will find it equally difficult 
to live by buying one another T s beef. Mounted police* 
detachments provided the first market for llberta 
beef. The contracts for their supply were held by an 
active and enterprising firm, I.Gr. Baker and Company 
of Fort Benton, Montana, who were willing to buy all 
l the beef locally available (5), Another market was 
developing. The buffalo were rapidly disappearing, 
indeed by 1879 they had completely vanished (6), and 
(the Indians, who depended upon the herds for food, 
were starving. The government was compelled to feed 
its wards, and these contracts too were awarded to 
•I.Gr. Baker and Company. Indeed, prior to the arrival 
of the Railway, this company tAe on/y buyer * 

T .7hile transport remained as primitive as it was 
before 1885, the year which saw the completion of the 
main line of the Canadian Pacific Railway, the ranchers 
of Southern All erta were limited to the local market. 


(5) Kelly, pp, 50-51. 

(6) Ibid, p. 48. 









» 











xc 


The railway reached Calgary in 1883 and the section 
"between that point and Medicine Hat was in operation 
by 1884# The new possibilities for ranching were* 
enormous. The building of the road itself gave a 
strong stimulus to Alberta cattle-production, for 
the labourers on the construction-gangs consumed 
an enormous amount of beef. C.P.R. beef contracts 
gave many an Alberta rancher his "start". The new 
road opened the markets of Eastern Canada and the 
rest of the world to the new ranches and considerably 
increased the capacity of the local market. 

Settlement followed the railways and increased 
settlement meant a larger demand for beef. 


The completion of the main line of the C.P.R. 

tvf iVi pTOiperity ever# ithplicit Hr fon.4* of 

ushered in the hey-day of Alberta ranching/^ Without 


it the industry would have been doomed to local 
stagnation, subsisting entirely upon contracts paid 


for in Eastern Canada. The railway company unfortun- 

for f~kc r*v\ clubf I'ndoffry 

ately^could not make its Alberta sections a paying 


concern on the freight of ranch products alone. 

It needed settlements and would do everything inf 
its power to encourage immigration. Settlement 
Y/ould inevitably follow steel and with egual 
inevitability settlement meant the extinction of 











a? 

ranching as it was understood in 1885. If the ranchers 

could have managed with the main line alone they might 

have saved themselves. The main line merely skirted 

the ranching country; if no branch lines had been built 

the heart of the industry would have remained intact. 

The building of the main line opened new vistas to 

ranching; the building of the Southern Alberta branch 

lines closed them irrevocably. Whether, without branch 

lines, ranching could have maintained itself, remains 

an academic question. Long drives to get cattle to 

shipping-points would have been necessary, but Kacleod 

and Pincher Greek ranchers prospered exceedingly 

before the railway reached them. 

By 1885 ample markets had been established for the 

products of Alberta ranches* For.all the cattle they 

raised the ranchers could reasonably expect to find 

sale. The second great necessity had been realized. 

Naturally an increased demand had implied a greatly 

increased production and by 1885 the industry was 

firmly established as the most important factor in 

z 

Alberta's economy. 









af 

(c) Some form of Land Qrganization--Cheap Land in 

Large Quantities-**Surveys* 

To make available large areas of land at low 
prices in southern Alberta required the establishment/ 
of some form of land organization* »x*g*x*£ Title 
to the land in Southern Alberta^v«»^y^s^kkK^yx^>r4ty^v'K 
was vested in grtfgpaary 

ufifss Government of the Dominion 

of Canada3*870. Prior to 1881 owners of herds 
pastured them, without benefit of lease, on what was 
virtually government land, for although the Dominion 
Lands Act of 1872 provided from its inception for 
the disposal of lands for grazing purposes, they were 
not much sought until 1881 (7)* Such a system, if 
system it could be called, would have led in due 
course to complete chaos, to overcrowding, to degener¬ 
ation of breed and to endless confusion of ownership. 

To avoid these highly undesirable consequences 
a new system was established by an order-in-council 
of May 20, 1881 (modified December 23, 1881) which 
was designed to establish conditions suitable to the 
development of the ranching industry. It provided 
for the grant to individuals and corporations of j 
leases, for grazing purposes exclusively, of areas 


(7) William Pearce Mss. p. 40 












< 








, 


t 







XI- 


not exceeding one hundred thousand acres for a period ^ 

not exceeding twenty-one years at an annual rental of 

ten dollars per thousand acres. Within three years 

the lessee wasjto have placed on the lease one head of y 

livestock for every ten acres. The total number of 

live stock for each range was strictly limited. When 

so 

the lease had been/^stocked the lessee was entitled to 
acquire an area of up to five per cent of the area of 
his lease, within his lease, for a home farm, corrals 
etc., at two dollars an acre. The whole system depen¬ 
ded upon surveys, without which its initiation would 
have been impossible. Subsequent alterations will be 
considered elsewhere but these are in brief the funda¬ 
mentals of the system which prevailed throughout the 
"Golden Age." 
















. 








' 










, 

. * • 




, 


. 

, 















30' 


V—THE DEVELOPMENT OE RANCHING. 

(a) The first Ranchers. 

The whiskey-traders had been the first to exploit 
Southern Alberta's possibilities. Their headquarters 
had been Sort Benton, in the heart of the Montana 
ranching- country, and it would have been surprising 

for Tjt\c/t/nf 

if they had not ok%trvt4 <. the potentialities^of their 
r .'**$*•* The establishment of the Police at 

Port Macleod ended their uncontested sway and there 
remained no reason why they should not reveal the 
suitability of their erstwhile kingdom to the purposes 
of the Montana cattlemen. By 1875 signs of the chang¬ 
ing times were visible. "Life at fort Macleod had 
taken on refinements which were very disturbing to 
the critical handful of reformed whiskey-traders. 

There were two stores now. And a woman had come to 
town, or worse, a lady, the bride of Colonel Macleod. 
In her presence conversation became constrained. And 
it looked as if the traders might have to consider 
marrying their squaws. And when gentlemen called at 
the fort of an evening, the talk drifted to the 
possibility of cattle supplanting buffalo on the 
range, and other radical notions" (1). 


(1) Longstreth p. 69 





* 

. 

. 


< 

. 







It is difficult to say definitely who brought 
the first range cattle into/^Alberta. The McPougalls, 
famous family of Methodist missionaries, who settled 
at Morleyville, west of Cochrane, undoubtedly brought 
the first cattle into Southern Alberta. However, the 
cattle which they brought in in 1871 were not range 
cattle, but came from Edmonton. The next year they 
did trail a herd in from Montana, but the Morleyville 
Mission lay north of the range country proper.(2). 

The Red River Settlement had had disastrous 
adventures with range cattle in the eighteen-thirties^ 
but American success had proved the possibilities of 
the prairies. However, the first cattle in the 
Alberta range country were dairy stock, brought in 
to supply the Police posts (3). There was a legend correct 

zf Ft r*iv:leoc) 

ft that a pioneer rancher/\had four or five hundred I 
cattle at the forks of the Red Peer and the 
Saskatchewan, a legend that in 1878 put an effective 

»cc if felt thtf Sv'h »kerd cavlcj r**wey\t‘ly S^rp^Y o/W- 

damper on any other ranching enterprise^(4). In 
1877 the Western prairie Indians signed Treaty Number 
7, surrendering their lands to the Canadian Government. 

In the same year the first range cattle were placed 

(2) Kelly, p. Ill 

(3) Ibid. pp. 112 et seq. 

(4) Ibid. p. 115. 
















. 


t 

• 












* 

, 



, 














, I 




. 



* 


- 














3*V 


on the Southern Alberta range and a number of men 
began ranching in a small way, a few from Montana jaut 

for /■*»< *«*st p+rt 

ex-Mounted Policemen (5)* 

l>e.r*l 5 

Prom 1877 on, small tends of range-cattle were 
into Alberta from the United States, most 
of their/fk?fs#^iia$ / in the neighborhood of Macleod. 

A number of well-known ranchers had their initiation 
into the business in these early days* Unfortunately 
Indian depredations and climatic conditions so 
discouraged these first pioneers that in 1879 most 
of them crossed into Montana with the remnants of 
their herds (6), although they came back when the a 
Order-in-Council of 1881 introduced a new dispensation 
which seemed to promise prosperity* These pioneer 
ranchers had sad reverses,but their attempts laid 
the first foundation for the ranching industry* 


(5) Kelly, pp. 120 et seq. 

(6) Ibid, p* 128. 






' 



. 



































33- 


(b) The Development of Ranching Before the Railway , 
With the introduction of the new lease regulations 
a novel phenomenon appeared in the ranching world,— 
f the ranch company. Attracted by glowing tales of 
the vast profits to be made in the cattle business. 
Eastern Canadian, British and American capitalists 
took up large leases in the choicest districts of 
South-Western Alberta. Some were speculators, 
by the opportunity to secure enormous amounts 

of land at js#$rh slight cost; others genuinely 

interested in the ranching industry and invested large 
sums in the country. The local managers for the 
companies were usually men with ranching experience, 
or at least Canadian or American stockmen with Eastern 
training. Unfortunately nepotism occasionally 
.triumphed over wisdom, and men of no experience and 
""little ability were appointed. The companies were 
not too popular in the West, as may be gathered from 
the local press (7). Sometimes they treated their 
local employees with scant consideration—John R. Craig 
book,"Ranching With Lords and Commons", is a rather 
one-sided presentation of his tribulations as local 
manager of the Oxley Ranch. The sins of the companies 


(7) See also Kelly pp. 150-151 














3 H 


appear to have been the result of complete ignorance 

of Western conditions and an unfortunate confusion of 

of 

authority rathei* than malice or dishonesty. 

Whatever may be said for or against the companies, 
for the next few years the history of these ventures 
is the history of large-scale ranching in Southern 
[Alberta. Perhaps the most famous of these pioneer 
ranches was the Oochrane Ranch Company in which 
Senator Cochrane of Compton, P.Q. was interested* 

It was stocked in 1881, partly by herds trailed from 
Montana in a TT drive TT remarkable for the speed, the 
cruelty and the tremendous loss of stock which 
characterized it. This company's original lease 
lay st of Calgary, and its home ranch was at the 
Big Hill, near the present town of Cochrane, Misfortune 
dogged its early years and the headquarters was moved 
south in 1885 to another enormous lease near the 
American border in the Wfcterton Lakes country, although 
the northern lease was retained (8), 

There we£e other well-known ranches stocked between 
1882 and 1884, among them the Walromd Ranch in the 
Porcupine Hills, established by British Capitalists, 
chief among them Sir John Walromd, This ranch was for 


(8) Ibid, p, 158. 












3 Jr 


long managed by Dr. John McEaohron, Dominion Chief 

Veterinarian, famous for his long and bitter feuds 

with settlers who endeavoured to squat on the 

for 

"Waldron lease” and*his acrimonious exchanges with 
the Macleod "Gazette” (9). The Oxley Ranch on Willow 
Creek also gained a certain notoriety as a result of 
difficulties aforementioned* Perhaps oife of the most 
famous Alberta ranches was that of the North-West 
Cattle Company, the Bar U, with its headquarters on 
Pekisko Creek. The Bar U was one of the most 
successful of the cattle companies, and was for long 
connected with the name of George lane, one of j 

Alberta ! s most noted stock-men* 

A number of individual ranchers, with smaller 



Pincher Creek and Calgary#xxxkxx, aifctancgfc fcy 1888 
there was a sprinkling of settlers all along the A 
foothills from Mor&ey to Pincher Creek, as well as 
along the rivers. Almost without exception they 
were stockmen. By 1884 forty-one companies and 
individuals held 2,782,690 acres on lease chiefly 
along the foothills south of Calgary. Six of the 
lessees held 100,000 acres each; ten more held over 
50,000 acres each. In 1885 at a conservative 


(9) Kelly, p. 216 






































. 








































3c* • 

estimate, there were on the ranges of Alberta and 
Assiniboia 46,936 cattle, 9694 sheep and 4313 horses(lO) 
They were all on the open range for none of the 
leases had as yet been fenced (11). 

Until 1885 development 

was slow but the foundations were being laid for future 
progress. In 1881, the only year for which figures 
ara available, the Census of Canada gave the population 
of Bow River (approximately the area under consider¬ 
ation) as 3275, of whom 2875 were Indians. The total 
land occupied was 32,562 acres of which 6,296 acres 
were improved. There were 63 occupiers of whom 60 
were owners. By 1885 the increase of ranching had 
wrought a considerable change* The friction between 
settlers and lease-holders had already begun. "Prior 
to the amendment of the Dominion lands Act in 1881 
the squatters were protected on any .land they had 
settled on so long as they did not prove to be (on) 
Hudson T s Bay lands"(12 )• /Then, however, as the result 
of survey, settlers found themselves on such lands, 
the Company could usually be persuaded to take better 
lands elsewhere as compensation. By the aforesaid 

(10) Sessional papers (Ho. 13) 1885 Vol. XVIII 

No. 7, p. 33. 

(11) Diller, p. 89. 

(12) Pearce, Ms. p.41. 
















37 


amendment the Government was authorized not to 
recognize squatters on lands "which may have been 
set apart as railway land or for any other special 
purrose by the Covernor-in-Council". Squatting 
before or after survey or without obtaining entry 
was afterwards prohibited. Usually squatters were 
generously treated but a good deal of friction did 
arise between lease-holders and squatters, for the 
regulations were not as clear-cut as they might have 
been. 

As matters stood, although squatters could 
secure no title to lands included in a lease,they 
could remain there until the lease expired and then 
\ file; meanwhile the leaseholder had no legal power 
to expel them. The squatters who descended upon 
the choicest portions of the leases claimed to be 
bona fide homesteaders, i.e. cultivators, but most 
of them intended to become stockmen (13). Circum¬ 
stances were ideal for the economical development 
of small stock-ranches. The squatter could, in the 
busy season, work for the lessee and earn the ready 
cash so necessary for the establishment of any new 
enterprise* the range cost him nothing} stray 


(13) Ibid. p. 41 















unbranded cattle could easily be picked up; and he 
would have the service of the best bulls (Id). 
Invariably these invaders of vested right squatted 
on springs and river or creek-bottoms, greatly 
injuring the general range capacity for water and 
shelter, for their fences cut off the open range 
on the benches beyond (15). It is doubtful whether 
genuine cultivators would have settled thus, for 
bench lands have proved generally superior to bottom 
lands for crop purposes. The squatters claimed 

in tht 

that only was water available. so their 

settlement inadvisable, for their 

small product did not equal that of the ranchers 
whose leases they ruined. In 1885, on the recommen¬ 
dation of William Pearce, large areas were reserved 
for purposes of watering and sheltering along the 
Belly, Bow and St# Mary’s Rivers, a solution which 
was only temporarily satisfactory, since before long 
these reserves were thrown open to homesteading 
once more. 


(14) Ibid. p. 41 

(15) Kelly, p. 176. 
















31 


( c ) o'] o ■ . j ! 1 WS , (1*9 dotJe » Age s 

D&cIi'k* *»( tu (nui»<Tcy 

With the coming of the railway the "Golden Age" of 
ranching began. The new land regulations of 1881 had 
made possible-the establishment of large ranches; the 
railway provided an outlet for their products, beginning 
a period of great prosperity for the companies and 
individuals who held leases. At the same time the rail¬ 
way made inevitable the eventual decline of ranching 
as it was understood in 1885, Even before that date 
homesteaders T fences were cutting off the range from 
the water and shelter of the bottom-lands. Cultivation 
irrevocably destroyed the range, for once broken the 
prairie sod never recaptured its unique characteristics. 
Difficulties between homesteader and leaseholder 
continued unabated despite the watering reserves and 
the problems which faced the rancher did not find 
easier solution as more and more land was taken up* 

Changes in lease policy an already vexed 

question, Ottawa began by having no policy at all; 
in 1881 it introduced regulations which apparently 
gave all the advantage to those who were fortunate 
ehough to be able to secure and operate a large lease. 
Undoubtedly the government ?ras we 13-advised in its 
introduction of a system which definitely restricted 


























0 




































. 





















the number of cattle to he maintained on the leases, 
instead of the Fontana system which required the pay¬ 
ment of a rental per head. Its aim, in which it 
succeeded, was to prevent the overstocking which 
had ruined the range grass in the Western states. 
However, to many small stockmen it seemed grossly 
unfair that they should he excluded from the choicest 
range merely because they lacked capital. Another 
complaint came from settlers, many of them in the 
towns, who wished to see a rapid increase in population, 
an increase for which the lease system did not 
provide. They demanded its complete abolition and 
were wholly in sympathy with the squatters. 

The lease-system seems to have suited no one ^ 
except the companies. The townspeople thought that 
it checked the growth of population; those who 
wished to farm found themselves excluded from what 
they thought was the choicest land. The individual 
ranchers, many of whom held small leases but also 
depended upon the open range, found that the choicest 
areas were leased to the companies, E.H. Maunsell, 
an ex-Mounted Policeman and one of the pioneers 
who took their stock to Montana in 1879, and later 
the largest individual rancher in the .lest, testified 













against them. The earliest settlers around Macleod, 
of whom he was one, discovered in 1881 that their 
lands had been leased and their rights even to land 
thay had enclosed were in danger. He condemned the 
way in which many of the leases were granted to 
speculators who had no intention of stocking them, 
which had a disastrous effect on settlement. Otherwise 
the country would have been quickly filled up with a 
good class of small stockman (16). The colossal size 
of the leases seems to have been the chief mistake; 
smaller leases of up to five thousand acres would have 

t- 

prevented the company monopolies which were established. 
The rigid enforcement of stocking regulations would 
have done a good deal to check speculation. With all 
its faults,the lease system did to some extent protect 
the rancher*s interests against the flood of indis¬ 
criminate settlement. 

The uncertainty of the lease regulations was 
extremely annoying to both parties. XX 5 f***X 

“The lease holders were to put the squatters 

off their leases but no legal procedure existed by 
which they could do so. If they did attempt toi 
expel the squatters they risked almost certain 


(16) Maunsell, E.H. 


"Memoirs” p.43-44 
















. 
















. 



. 





. 







• . . 













unpopularity and the possibility of reprisals, for 
burning hay lands and trampled crops were frequent 
consequences of eviction (17)* On the other hand, 
if they allowed squatters to remain,they were breaking 
a law themselves and they would be treated by the 
squatters as legitimate frey* The friction was 
incessant, for many lessees were willing to risk 
possible consequences, notable among them the Walrand 
and Oxley Ranches. Perhaps these lessees were 
ill-advised, for sometimes where cordial relations 
had been established, rancher and homesteader 
proved mutually helpful, the latter supplying the 
feed which the former required to carry their herds 
through the winters (18). 

Although by 1885 ranching was firmly established 
as a prosperous industry, the ranchers had other 
problems besides the encroachments of settlement to| 
face. The Indians remained a constant menace to the 
unprotected herds on the open range. They had first 
become troublesome in 1878 (19) when prairie fires 
had driven most of the remaining buffalo south into 
Montana. The treaty payments were quite inadequate 


(17) Pearce, Msvp. 41 

(18) kelly, p. 188 

(19) Diller, p. 90. 












' 








. 

> 

, 

, 






. 






, • 







to provide the Indians with food and they helped 
themselves to the ranchers’ herds. The Police, as 
we have seen, were disinclined to deal too harshly 
with them, and the disgusted ranchers crossed the 
border to a land where a more rational concept of 
Indian policy prevailed. Por the first few years 
Indian depredations continued to be a source of 
considerable loss but after 1888 the Police held 
them more rigidly in check (20) although ranchers 
still attributed their losses to Indians rather than 
to their own methods. Southern Alberta was undisturbed 
by the Riel Rebellion in 188# for Crowfoot, the 
Blackfoot chief, kept his tribe passive. Indeed 
the ranchers profited, for their beef was purchased 
at excellent prices to feed the troops. I 

Poor methods caused considerable loss among the 
herds. Inexperience and a touching faith in the 
Alberta climate were the roots of the trouble. The 
open range, with all its advantages, did not make for 
improvement of breed. Good cows and purebred bulls 
were imported, but as there was no way of preventing 
inter-breeding, the improvement to stock which should 
have resulted was negligible. The larger enterprises 


(20) Kelly, p. 218 












c 


« 































were the leading importers of valuable stock for 
improvement purposes and they suffered from the 
inferior bulls which smaller concerns ran on the 
same ranges* The Cochrane Rsiach, owing to the 
comparative isolation of its kootenai lease, had 
the highest grade stock (21). A gradual deterioration 
of the Western breed took place, for not only was 
cross-breeding prevalent, but many inferior animals 
were brought in from Manitoba and the East as * 

stockers, that is, young animals to be fattened on 
the Western ranges for market. Still worse were the 
consequences of the importation of Mexican stockers, 
which was common from 1902 to 1905 (22). Much of the 
stock brought in by American settlers was very poor. 
Alberta was rapidly becoming a feeding and fattening, 
rather than a breeding country. "Beef" ranchers, as 
those were called, who, like P. Burns and J.H. Wallace, 
bought cattle and turned them onto the range to 
fatten, were accused of cutting into the breeding 
strength of the herds by their demands for fat cows (£3) 
Maiiy men urged the adoption of policies which would 
bring Alberta to the same rank among breeding countries 
as she occupied among feeding countries, but while 

(21) kelly, p. 53 

(22) Ibid,, p, 55 

(23) Ibid., p. 51-52. 






■ 

■ 












, 





























, 

























n 

the open range remained/ such policies demanded more 
self-denial and more co-operation than some of the 
stock men were willing to afford. 

In spite of the limitations imposed, the open 
range led to overcrowding of the choicer ranges and 
the destrudtion of winter pasture. Fencing was the v 
only way out and the practice gradually increased 
after 1885. In the next twenty years the open range 
almost disappeared. Fencing such large areas was 
expensive and only the wealthier ranches could at 
first afford to enclose areas sufficiently large to 
be useful. Their fences were viewed with considerable 
displeasure by those who had profited by the large 
ranchers losses and sabotage was not uncommon. 

The first considerable wire fence was that built 
to enclose the Cochrane Kanch f s Kootenai Range in 
1885. Twenty-five miles long, stretching from the 
Old Man River to the Porcupine Hills, it lasted a 
very short time. The open range was dying hard (24). 

The first ranchers were unfortunately convinced 
that it was possible to witter stock on the Alberta 
ranges without putting up extra feed. In normal \/ 
winters it was possible for a ranch to come through 


(24) Kelly, p. 190 






- 











. 








. 

, 


















a winter on such terms with a comparatively small 
loss, chiefly among weak cows and early calves. 

In exceptionally hard winters, however, such as 
that of 1886-87, the losses were heavy. According 
to Kelly the losses that winter approximated £5$ 
in the Calgary district, from 50$ to 60$ from the 
Highwood River to the Old Man River, £0$ to £5$ 
in the Pincher Creek area, and 50$ in the Medicine 
Hat region. There were however occasional ranges 
where the losses were small (£5). According to 
Mounted Police records, losses that winter averaged 

l-ysipit* af fAe discrepancy > t»er£ h&svy 

about 15$ (£6).^ Lessons of this sort were too 
expensive to be ignored and the folly of relying 
entirely on winter pasturage in the open was 
recognized. However, outdoor feeding remained 
universal, the wisdom of which course was proved 
by experiments later conducted by the HTOndon 

Experimental Earm/\to test the relative 
merit of indoor and outdoor feeding. After 1887 
it became the general practice to put up considerable^ 
hay for the winter, and in some cases considerable 
tame hay and other fodder was raised on the home ranch. 


(£5) Kelly, p. £01 
(£6) Hiller, p. 9£ 














t 


. 




















In this connection some men, among them John R. Craig(27) 
and A.M. Burgess, Deputy Minister of the Interior^(28) 
saw possibilities for the reconciliation of the 
apparently conflicting interests of rancher and 
farmer. The latter, Craig thought, could devote 
himself to raising winter feed for the rancher, who 
could use for grazing lands useless to the cultivator. 
Mutual benefit to both parties would result and the 
bitterness which existed between the two parties 
would disappear in the reciprocal advantages of the 
scheme. 

The deterioration of the Montana ranges during the 
early eighties as a result of successive droughts, 
caused a suspicious drift of American cattle across 
the International Boundary, a circumstance which 
if unchecked could lead only to the overcrowding and 
ultimate destruction of the Southern Alberta ranges, 
fencing the boundary, the surest cure, involved too 
much expense for the industry of the eighties and it 
was necessary for both Alberta ranchers and the 
Mounted Police to patrol the border and drive back 
American cattle. American ranchers were indeed 

(27) Craig, "Ranching with Lords and Commons" pp.236 
et seq. 

(28) Kelly, p. 168. 








suspected of gently encouraging their cattle in a 
northerly direction, a suspicion which threatened 
permanently to poison the happy relations which had 
heretofore existed between ranchers on opposite 
sides of the International line. The overcrowding 
of the Montana range caused the wholesale importation 
of rather poor stock from that region, and the 
^Canadian Government in 1886 imposed a duty of 20 fo 
on American cattle (29). Previously lease-holders 
had been privileged to bring cattle across duty free. 
Henceforth the prevention of "drifting” became a 
matter for police and customs officers and a good 
many more or less bitter border "incidents" occurred. 
Although "drifting" continued after 1886 it became 
less common for many Ajnerican ranches paid the duty 
and moved their herds north (30). 

J Prairie fires perpetually menaced the ranches. 
Almost without warning they could^with remarkable 
rapidity ; . sweep across miles of range, destroying 
feed, stock and buildings in their path. Usually 
they were the consequence of the carelessness of 
Indians or of the settlers themselves but sometimes 
spakks from passing railway locomotives set the 
prairies alight. Mot until 1895 did the C.P.R. 


(29) Diller, p. 94 

(30) Kelly, pp. 340, 353 

















- 




























« 




















fa 

begin ploughing fire-guards along the tracks* As the 
unfenced tracks were death-traps for unsophisticated 
live-stock,and as railway land-grants and high freight 
rates were fruitful sources of discontent, the 
popularity of the railway company was not unqualified(31 \ 
Sometimes the prairie fires were said to be of 
incendiary origin and irate ranchers, who had just 
seen their precious range destroyed, accused recal¬ 
citrant squatters of setting out the fires. The 
authorities as well as the ranchers were keenly alive 
to the importance of prevention. "This is a matter 
which is probably at present of more importance to 
the Territories than any other." 

"If the occurrence of these fires could be 
prevented for even four or five years such an 
improvement would be apparent in certain portions of 
the country that they would hardly be identified" (52}* 
The report recommended the establishment of 
volunteer fire-brigades such as existed in the Mormon ' 
settlement at Iee ! s Greek (Qardston). The lack of 
organization of this sort made fire-fighting extremely 
difficult. The fires were regarded as a Police 


(31) Kelly, pp. 20 et seq. 

(32) Sessional Papers 1891, Paper 17 No. 2, Pt. 1, p. 12 






— 




- 































' 














io- 

responsibility and many settlers were diffident, as 
long as their own possessions were not endangered, 
in helping to extinguish what they regarded as 
providential judgements against the sins of the lease 
holders. In the face of widespread indifference and 
universal carelessness, police and ranchers strove 
in vain, while fires continued annually to levy 
large tolls. 

Timber wolves in the foothill region took conside 
able toll of the young stock (33). In 1893 they 
were said to have caused heavier losses than did the 
severity of the weather. In spite of many petitions 
neither the Dominion nor the Territorial government 
would offer a bounty. Eventually the organized 
ranchmen offered one in the early nineties, and the 
Territorial Government one in 1893, so that a 
considerable reduction in their numbers ensued, until 
by 1914 the danger had become relatively unimportant. 

The relation between Government and ranching 
community was seldom a very happy one. Governmental 
procrastination in the matter of brands, which were 
essential to the open range system, was a standing 
grievance. By Ordinance No. 17 of 1883 of the North- 


(33) Dept, of Interior Reports 1893 p. 24 










































































6 -/. 




West Territories, provision had been made for the 
erection of stock districts, the registration of 
brands and vent marks and for transfer of brands, 
etc*, and penalties i posed for the use of someone 
else's brand and for marking of stock belonging to others* 
Not, however, until 1887 was it provided that "The 
presence of a recorded brand on any animal shall be 
prima facie evidence of the ownership of such 
animal by the owner of such brand lf (34). Under 
previous circumstances it had been almost impossible 
to establish theft, and the confusion consequent 1 
was most irritating to honest men. The Government 
similarly ignored the need for stock Inspectors, 
until in 1897 the Territorial Department of Agricul¬ 
ture took over the business of brands and appointed 
inspectors of brands and stock (35). 

The disposal of mavericks, as unbranded animals 
found on the range were called, was another matter 
which needed government regulation. Unless owner¬ 
ship was claimed and proven the stock associations 
were in the habit of selling mavericks during general 
round-ups, and of turning the proceeds into the 

(34) Ordinance No. 10 of 1887 

(35) Ordinance No. 23 of 1897 (N.W.T.). 

















i-z 

^general funds of the association* As many of the 
mavericks were members of escaped small fenced herds, 
the smaller stock-men protested (36). Efforts by 
the association to have their practice legalized 
were unsuccessful and after a number of suits 
against persons acting in the interests of the 
associations which resulted in decisions adverse 
to the latter, the practice was discontinued (37). 

Southern Alberta’s felicitous climate preserved 
her stock, as it did later her wheat, from serious 
attack by disease. Her good fortune in this respect 
was further assured by the policy of careful super-I 
vision adopted from the beginning by the Dominion 
Department of Agriculture. TT In 1884 a policy of 
veterinary inspection and quarantine was adopted in 
regard to cattle imported from the Western States. 

The quarantine regulations were altered in 1887 and 
1888, and again in 1892, becoming more restrictive 
with each change” (38). The attacks of mange did 
at one time late in the period threaten to become 
serious. The disease first appeared in the 
Lethbridge district. It had probably entered from 
the United States and it spread rapidly throughout 
r? 3 5'3 

(37) Ibid. pp. 302, 346-47. 

(38) Diller, p. 96. 







e 

r 


t 





« 

. 

. 
















Southern Alherta. "Thanks to the efforts of the 
Alberta Stock Growers* Association of the Soxathern 
District, dipping stations were established through¬ 
out that district"(39). This treatment and the 
rigid enforcement of quarantine regulations, had by 
1902 almost eradicated the disease, although another 
serious outbreak occurred between the years 1905 and 
1907, Failure to co-operate was partially responsible 
and once more a divergence appeared between the 
policies of large and small ranches* The large 
ranches were foremost in the movement for prevention, 
since they were well able to afford a comparatively 
small outlay to prevent considerable losses. The 
smaller interests with less at stake were willing 
to risk foregoing preventative methods in order 
to save operating expenses. On the open range the 
cattle of both parties came into contact, and the 
usual friction ensued, the large ranchers accusing 
the smaller men of using their superior voting 
strength to force^political interference with the 
prevention of mange (40). 

The historic divergence between the interests of 


(39) Ibid, p. 97 

(40) Kelly, p. 47 






■ 








. 














. 











, 

« 





























sheep-men and cattle ranchers was an ever-present 
difficulty on the Alberta ranges, one indeed which 
has persisted there and elsewhere to the present day. 
Although the feud never achieved the violent extrem¬ 
ities of those in the United States, "bitterness was 
seldom absent. Sheep were brought in during the I 
early eighties and from the firfct conflict arose as 
they crop grass very close to the ground and ruin 
cattle range for about two years. The Dominion 
Government, cutting the Gordian knot, prohibited the 
grazing of sheep on Dominion lands. This proving too 
restrictive, in 1882 certain areas were set aside for 
sheep. They were not allowed to range from the 
boundary on the south to the Highwood River an^ the 
North Fork of the Bow on the north, and from the 
summit of the Rockies on the west to the eastern 
boundary of the District- of Alberta on the east (41). 
This regulation remained in force until 1893 but 
apparently there was no certainty in the matter (42). 
In 1893 the grazing of sheen was forbidden.in Alberta 
west of Calgary and Edmonton Railway, the Bow, Belly 
and St. Mary’s Rivers, and south tb. the Boundary. 

(41) Annual Report Dept, of the Interior 1885 p 32. 

(42) Diller, p. 98. 
























, 

, 






























. , 













The resciofc hounded bv the Belly and St. Mary's on the 
west, the South Saskatchewan on the north., the western 
boundary, of Assiniboia on the east and the international 
line on the south was set aside for sheep, Elsewhere 
a permit for sheep grazing from the Minister of 
Agriculture was necessary. Another alteration was 
made in 1903 when four areas in alberta and Saskatchewan 
were set aside for sheep grazing, Tn spite of the.. - 
frequent alterations no one was ever quite satisfied. 
Government regulations to be efficient required en¬ 
forcement and it appears that laxity prevented any 
benefits which might have been derived, 

No survey of the ranching industry could be com¬ 
plete without some treatment of the Stock Associations. K' 
Ranching in the days of the open range would have been 
impossible without co-operation between the ranchers, 
since no effort was made to hold the cattle on their 
own lease. The Quorn cattle from Sheep Greek, for 
example, ranged south to the Porks of the South 
Saskatchewan, even to the border. Until the advent 
of fences the only limit to the cattle's travels was 
set by the rivers. Breeding stock were ; held 

on the home range by means of line-riders but the rest 
of the herd was free to drift. Impossible confusion was 













H 

prevented by the association of ranchers who com¬ 
bined to hold the semi-annual round-ups. The as¬ 
sociations were also a convenient method of bringing 
the interests of the ranching class before the gov¬ 
ernment and gave to the cattle interests a solidar¬ 
ity which the homesteaders never posessed. 

The first association, called the South-Testern 
Stock Association, was formed at Macleod in April, 
•v.1883, for the mutual protection of stock-owners (43), 
Among its members were most of the prominent cattle¬ 
men in Southern Alberta. Matters of general interest 
were discussed; the driving of stock across other 
ranges, round-urs and stock laws* ■: The various 

ranges were determined, Kootenai, Pincher Greek, 

Kipp, Tillow Greek and High River 4 /fewards were 

offered for information leading to convictions for 

. itttlrif &vf 

cattle killing, horse stealing and/jprairie fires. 

—Jseparate associations were.formed in the Galgary, 
Lethbridge and Medicine Hat districts. By 1887 the 
'district organizations had merged into two large 
associations, one for the north and one for the south, 
of which the more influential was the Alberta Stock 


(43) Macleod Gazette, April 14, 1883 















y 7. 

Growers 1 Association with its headquarters at Macleod. 
By 1889 its vigour had declined* Also, ranchers in the 
northern district had begun an agitation for a new 
and more extensive organization with its headquarters 
in Oalgary* As the centre of gravity of the industry 
tended to shift northward, the demand was realized by 
1898 in the live Stock Growers T Association, which 
embraced all the district organizations and had its 
headquarters at Calgary (44)* 

J The associations were never dominated by the cattle 
companies and leaseholders although they were very 
influential* The associations were rather the organiz¬ 
ations of those who were primarily interested in 
live stock rather than in grain growing. As organiz¬ 
ations they were able to exert more influence than as 

individuals and if conflicting interests were not too 

fk«y 

strong, l \usually successful in obtaining their demands. 
jThey obtained among other things the restrictions 
on sheep-grazing, the mange regulations, and numerous 
minor but necessary changes in lease regulations. If 
they did not check immigration they at 

least helped to control it. 

Their most important service was the control of the 


(44) Biller, p. 97^98* 




















^open r^n.o-e, xfefcfffc tax fcEKn KiKtataKta. The various 
ranchers, large and small, who held leases or owned 
land in a certain range district, worked together on 
the round-up, each ranch sending representatives. 

Their range was combed for stock which was gathered 
together and held. The stock belonging to the 
participating ranchers was- 3 separated from the strays 
which were handed over to the proper representatives 
from other ranges. Round-ups were held twice a year, 
in the spring for branding, etc., and in the fall for 
^ the selection of animals for sale. The latter was 
called the "beef-roundup." One man for every five 
hundred head was the rule at the roundups, and the 
smaller ranchers worked with the large ones, who 
provided the chuck-wagon and other equipment. Although 
the practice weighed heavily on the rancher who owned 
under five hundred head, it was generally satisfactory. 
Without the co-operation which the Associations madi 
possible, ranching in the grafld manner would have 
caused endless confusion, even local wars. 

"The growth of cattle-ranching in Southern 
Alberta can best be studied in connection with the 
development of markets" (45). As we have seen, before 


(45) Diller, p. 98. 














M. 

the arrival of the Canadian Pacific Railway, the 
product of Alberta ranches was absorbed locally. 

The immediate effect of the arrival of the railway 
at Calgary in 1883 and the inauguration of a trans¬ 
continental service in 1886, was the opening to the 
ranching industry of the markets of the outside world. 
The first shipments of Alberta cattle were to Manitoba 
and the Eastern Provinces; in 1886 shipments began to 
Great Britain and in 1890 to British Columbia, The 
latter market did not become important until the 
building of the Crow's Nest Pass Railway in 1897i*au/e 

Accessible the market 

The increase in the number of cattle on the range 
in Southern Alberta is shown by the following estimates, 
admittedly conservative, from the Annual Reports of 
the Commissioner of Grazing and Timber lands: 


Year No. of Cattle 


1885. ..46,936 

1886 9 • • ••••••*•«74 ,999 

1887.. .......................101.382 

1888.. .108.361 

1889.• 106,968 

1890.. .................................117.669 

1891.. .................................121.116 

1892, ..,139,283 


(After 1892 no separate estimates are available 
for range cattle). 

Prom 1885 to 1892 the ranching industry was 
steadily advancing, in spite of the encroachment of 
































L 6 

agricultural settlement. In 189? the British embargo 
upon Canadian cattle caused a severe depression which 
lasted until the building of the Crows 1 West Pass 
Railway opened the mining market of British Columbia. 
Previously, all range cattle shipped to Great Britain 
had been fattened there; the new regulations ordered 
immediate slaughter. In poor condition, thin and 
bruised, Alberta cattle could not wait for favourable 
markets. Average prices for Canadian steers in the 
English market dropped from $50.00 to $35.00. Neverthe¬ 
less Western shipments continued to grow (46). 

The embargo increased the importation of stockers, 
most of which were shipped to Great Britain, and an 
agitation for a dagger dead**meat trade which led to the 
establishment by P. Burns of an abbatoir and cold- 
storage plant at Calgary in 1899 (47), After 1898 
the British Columbia market increased and prices 
improved. About 1897 a considerable trade with the 
United States in stockers had arisen. Escports of 
Western beef continued to increase yearly but by 1914 
most of it came from the farms and smaller ranches. 

The output of the few remaining large ranches decreased 

\ 


(46) Biller, p; 101 

(47) Ilid. p. 102. 



























6 A 

each yearns ih? </us; nt / !<* J 

The changing lease regulations reflected the 
government's changing attitude toward the development 
of the West. In 1881 it had seemed desirable to 
encourage the capitalist who was willing to invest in 
the ranching industry. The railway, after 1885, 
demanded a more thickly-populated hinterland than 
a ranching country could provide. The railways ^ 
encouraged immigration, and the government, always 
sensitive to railway pressure, encouraged immigration 
too. Prom the West itself, from the people and from 
the press, from visiting scientist and resident 
speculator, came the cry for people. It was an age 
of colonization, of agricultural settlement, and the 
leases could not for long resist the relentless plough. 
Even in 1884, the year the railway reached Oalgary, 
two thousand settlers came to Alberta (48). In 1885 
all even-numbered sections of leases granted subsequent 
to that date, were.thrown open for homestead, preemption 
or sale, such entry or purchase rendering the grazing 
lease void. All leases granted thereafter were ^ 
subject to cancellation upon two years* notice. 
Cancellations were begun in this year for non-payment 


(48) Kelly, p, 172. 














t>^‘ 

of rent and the rental was doubled "in view of the 
success of the industry and the great demand for 
grazing lands” (49). 

In 1887 it was ordered that henceforth, with v/ 
certain exemptions, leases were to be issued only 
after public competition. In response to a memorial 
in 1886 from the organized ranchers, demanding more 
effective protection for lease-holders, the govern¬ 
ment took action. In 1888 the number of acres per 
head of cattle was raised to twenty. The Associations 
of ranchers Were asked to name cases' in which unsuit¬ 
able leases were obtained with the intention of 
finding subsistence for cattle on leases of others 
and lessees were forbidden to homestead lands on 
lease-holds belonging to others. By 1888 a great 
many leases were being cancelled and no new ones 
were granted in Alberta although a few assignments 
of holdings were made. 

In 1889 the regulations were consolidated and 
improved from an administrative point of view. The 
first mention now occurs of any ban on grazing stock] 
on the public domain without the permission of the 
Minister of the Interior. "The grazing of same will 

(49) Order-in-Couucil (Dominion) March 1, 1886. 

















. 
























■ 

- 







































c.3- 


render them liable to seizure and forfeiture by the 
owner” (50)* This was for the protection of the 
lease-holder, but it must have annoyed the rancher 
who for economy’s sake had allowed his lease to be 
cancelled for non-payment of rent and was now excluded 
from the open range.This regulation does not appear^ 
to have been rigidly enforced, although the Assoc¬ 
iations prevented the homesteaders from making free 
use of the range for which the '.lease-holders paid. 


During 1890 and 1891 many leases were cancelled 
and few new leases were granted. Revenues from, grazing 
lands decreased. ’’This decrease was partly caused by 
some of the leases of the largest ranches having been 
cancelled for non-payment of rent. The total number 
of ranches is increasing every year, but the areas 
leased are becoming much smaller than in former 
years. During the last year no ranch disposed of by 
the Department exceeded an area of 3000 acres” (51). 

Times were changing. In 1892 the Report of a Special 

of the Territorial Ley/f/afvre 

Qomm'ittee/lappointed to consider various matters 
relating to the District of Alberta embodied the 
following significant passages: 

’’That owning to the growing settlements in the 


(50) Order-in-Oouneil Sept. 17, 1889. 

(51) Report of Dept. of the Interior 


1893, 


P, 




















































grazing districts, a change is desirable, both in the 
existing leases and in the system of grazing lands. 

The existence of a large number of grazing leases is 
a great obstacle to the settlement of an important 
part of liberta. The enormous acreage covered by 
these leases is altogether out of proportion to the 
actual needs of the lease-hollers. 

" Ahlle admitting the existence of certain vested 
rights in the leaseholders, it must not be forgotten 
that valuable privileges have been granted to them, 
under a policy which is new (sic.) clearly detrimental 
to the best interests of the country, upon conditions 
which, in the. majority of cases, have not been fulfilled 
by them. Public policy and convenience now demand the 
earliest possible throwing open for settlement of large 
portions of the country now covered by grazing leases, 
and the government....will be justified in using every 
means in themr power, not inconsistent with good faith., 
to bring about that result.,.. 

' Hereafter the settlement of the country should be 
the first consideration of the government,,,, v-A 
The Committee believe that the policy of the 
government in regard to the grazing lease system has 
been largely due to mistaken ideas on the agricultural 
capacity of Southern Alberta.... it is a matter of 





























































(,£■ 

regret that false and unfavourable impressions have 
been persistently created and spread abroad...."(52). 

The Dominion Government had already been con¬ 
sidering action* In December 1891 it had sent a 
circular to the lease-holders. In view of the demand 
for lands for settlement and to satisfy the railway 
subsidies which could be expected to follow the 
construction of the railway line between Oalgary and 
Fort Macleod, and wishing not to disturb unnecessarily 
the ranching industry, the Government proposed "to 
offer all those lessees who....have..,.complied with 
the requirements of their leases,the privilege of 
purchasing ten per cent of the area of their lease¬ 
holds at $2 per acre, provided the37- accept for the 
residue of the term a lease of the lands now held by 
them on the new form, which provides for the with¬ 
drawal from time to time of lands as they are required 
for sale or railway purposes," 

In 1892 new regulations were set forth. The lessees 
were informed that their leases would be terminated, on 
September 31, 1896* They could then, or during the 
interval, purchase not more than te;|beycent of their 
leasehold at $2*00 per acre if they would accept open 


(52) Journals of the 
North-Test Tcr~' 


2nd legislative 4ssembley of th* 


25/1/92 pp. 62 et seq 


1st session 10/12/91 to 























c 
































f 























a 

leases for the remainder of their leased lands for the 
unexpired portion, of the twenty-one years (53). By 
1895 all except nine of the old 'leases*—about 523,000 
acres—-had been relinquished and after 1894 no new 
leases of over 6000 acres were applied for for some 
time. The old ranch was dead; all that remained was 
the winding up of the estate. 

With the adoption of the new regulations we pass * 
from the first phase of ranching into the second. Even 
in 1893 the price of land sold to leaseholders had been 
reduced to $1.25 an acre and public competition for 
leases abolished, as no large leases had been applied 
for within the last two or three years. The total 
number of ranches and the total area leased steadily 
increased after 1896. TT As a rule (new) lessees are 
settlers who acquire limited tracts.,,.in the neighbor¬ 
hood of their homesteads, Tf By 1896 all the old leases 
had been finally terminated but the majority of the 
holders had purchased considerable areas of land. ^ 
Between 1896 and 1905 the area leased increased from 
257,983 acres to 2,328,113 acres and the number of 
ranches from 236 to 745, In 1914 there were 1916 
ranches covering 4,480,802 acres, of which 2,402,622 
acres were in Alberta—more land was leased than had 

(53) Order in Council October 17, 1892, 














ever been leased in the TT Golden Age". 

The form of the ranch had changed. Before 1895 / 
the ranch was typically a lease, and frequently a large 
lease. 4fter 1895 the large ranches acquired great 
areas of deeded land from the government and from the^y 
railways, and held less land on lease. The many small 
ranches which were established had a smaller area of 
deeded land and a small lease. There were large leases 
but they were exceptional. After 1895 the small ranch 
was typical of the industry as before that date the 
great holdings of the companies had been typical. 

Old and new ranches alike depended on the open 

range. The rancher was inclined, for reasons of 

Srnbll a 

economy, to pay rent on as leased as possible, 

range 

While the open^remained and regulations as to stocking 
were not rigidly enforced, from a comparatively small 
headquarters he could use a large area. The new 
regulations in themselves would have made little 
difference, but they were the outward sign of settle¬ 
ment, The rapid increase of settlement which could 
n<^ be absorbed by the ranching economy, made inevit¬ 
able the transition from a pastoral to an agricultural 
economy. Gradually after 1884 the ploughed field 
replaced the open range .j 







. 



t 






























Settlement spread out around the centres of Macleod 
and Calgary, clinging to the friendly valleys of the 
foothills. It seemed unwilling to take the plunge 
into the prairies and the areas east of the present 
Calgar y-Mac 1 eo d railway remained untouched. Population 
and farming operations advanced together. Between 1881 
and 1891 the population of Southern Alberta had increased 
from 3275 (the sub-district of .Bow River*—-2875 

Indians) to 18,402 (the sub-districts of Calgary with 
Red Beer and Macleod) (54), Improved land had increased 
only from 1945 acres (R^) to 26,313 acres (5lf). Evident Jr 
in this decade most of the settlers were stockmen rather 
than farmers. 

The development of dry-farming methods sealed the*/ 
fate of the last stronghold of the ranching industry. 
Although in the eighties settlement and cultivation 
alike had clung to the rivers and creeks, they began 
after 1890 to push back into the benches and prairies 
of the hinterland. Fences appeared where they had 
previously been unknown. By 1905 the lands around 
Lethbridge had been fenced within a radius of twenty- 
five miles of the town (57), The block surveys, 

(54) Census of Canada 1891 

(55) Ibid 

(56) Kelly, p. 252 

(57) Kelly, p. 265 






















































u 

unnoticeable in an unfenced and undivided land, where 

"trails" followed the way of least resistance rather 

+■ 

than a rectilinear "Road-allowance", became more and 
more visible.in -their geometrical exactitude. Southern 
Alberta was changing, changing more radically than it 
had even in the early eighties, for the new dispensat¬ 
ion was altering irrevocably the physical make-up of 
the land. 

Through the nineties and until 1905 the ranches 
survived on the dwindling range and stock-raising 
remained the leading industry. When in 1906 the 
Cochrane Ranch Company sold its southern holdings, 
purchased outright during the nineties, to the Mormon 
settlers for S3,128,000 the old era seemed dead at 
last; the luckless company had made one of the most 
profitable speculations in Alberta's history. The 
Ranches survived but were greatly changed. They were 
smaller-, more of their land was privately owned*, 

(ranch* 

generally the owners were resident and managed their y| 
themselves and fewer men were employed. Usually a 
much larger proportion of its area was devoted to 
crops or to tame! hay for "finishing" its stock (58). 
Above all there was no longer any open range, Itvwas 


(58) Kelly, p 9 382. 










♦ < 


























76 - 

however, still a ranch, in the sense that its focal 
point of production was livestock, usually cattle. 
More properly it should have been called a "stock- 
farm TT but as the owners preferred the title, it was 
called a ranch. Economically it was a large mixed 
farm, with the production of stock as its principal 
feature. 

By 1906 the ranch had been absorbed into the gen¬ 
eral agricultural fabric of the Province of Alberta 
and our interest in it as an economic entijry declines 
As a social unit it remains for our purposes of 
considerable interest, for it was on these "new" ^ 
ranches that the life of the "old" survived and 
developed, not quite apart from the rest of the 
province, but sufficiently distant until 1914 to 
merit separate consideration. Wherever the wheat- 
farmer had not penetrated or could not penetrate 
the ranchers remained. Along the foothills of the 
Rockies, in the dry lands north of Medicine Hat, 
along the valleys, of the Bow, the Red Beer and the 
Milk Rivers, in the 'Cypress, Porcupine and Wintering 
Hills, the ranchers carried on the business thejT- had 
adopted, or lived the life which they preferred, 
secure from the invasion of the despised "dirt farmer 








- 

. 

, 




































7 /- 


Settlement proceeded indiscriminately, and without 
scientific direction as was the custom in a new country 
in those unenlightened days* The object was to put 
settlers on the land; after that, the Deluge, or, as 
in Southern Alberta, the drought* From the beginning 
of the century^ settlement of the Poairie Provinces 
continued until some indeterminate point in the middle 
twenties, when farm abandonment began to assume alarm¬ 
ing proportions. One of the last strongholds of the 
rancher, "the semi-arid plains (of south-eastern 
Alberta) were thrown open to homesteading in 1909. 
Settlement was extremely rapid in 1910 and 1911. 
Ranching gave way to settlements59). Unfortunately 
here as elsetohere settlement followed no scientific 
plan and it has since, appeared that such hurried and 
unregulated settlement is inevitably pregnant with 
unpleasant consequences. Just what will happen is 
a matter of considerable moment to Alberta and it 
has been frequently suggested that a renaissance of 
ranching would be a panacea for the problems of the 
southern part of the province. The remarks of a 
scientific observer, who has carefully studied the 
situation, are interesting in this connection. He is 


(59) Prairie Settlement: The Geographical Setting, by 
W.A. Mackintosh, p. 125. 




















f 


















( 









, 

. • 






























referring specifically to the Dry Belt of the prairie 
plains, of which Southern Alberta forms a part. 

"There are in this section many acres in which 
inferior soil and topography render wheat-growing a 
less effective use of land than grazing, if an 
adequate water-supply is available. Ranching may be 
expected to increase and the re-settlement of certain 
areas should be prevented, but there is no possibility 
that over any large proportion of the semi-arid plains 
of Canada ranching will supplant grain-farming. 

'Permanent settlement of the dry belt will probably 
be advanced in three ways. First, as markets expand 
some increase in the irrigated areas may be expected. 
Secondly, areas less favoured in topography and soil 
but better watered will turn more strongly to grazing. 
Thirdly, grain growing with improved rotations and 
improved tillage, larger enterprises with sufficient 
capital to average the good years with the bad, will 
use the better soils and the better topography. 

Unless development is carefully watched and controlled 
there may be much wasteage of capital and human effort 
while the proper adaption to facts of geography id 
being achieved" ( 60 ). 


( 60 ) Mackintosh p. 135 
















The future of the ranching industry is fairly pic¬ 
tured here. It will never again dominate the Alberta 
scene but having served its pioneer purpose, will 
find its place in the agricultural organization of the 
West. Its place will be permanent and assured, a place 
dictated not by arbitrary settlement but by scientific 
decision, a proper adaption to facts of geography. 

















» 

, 






















Note on Horse Ranching in Alberta, 

It has been convenient to deal with the ranching 
industry from the point of view of the cattle-rancher. 
Actually, although cattle were of overwhelming 
importance, a considerable horse and sheep ranching 
industry existed in Southern Alberta. Horse-ranching 
developed parallel to cattle ranching^ to which the 
horse was indispensable. It required the same ne¬ 
cessities, faced the same problems and declined 
before the same forces. Most of the ranchers dealt 
in both cattle and horses although the emphasis was 
usually on the former, 

Indian ponies were the earliest horses in Alberta 
and the Mounted Police brought in the firfet "White 
Man's Horses", Christy and Emerson brought in the 
first horses for sale in separate bands in 1876 and 
found a good market at Port Macleod, receiving for 
some an average of $100 apiece (61). Many of them 
went to the police. Indeed the first stimulus 
received by the industry was the demand for police 
"remounts.” The government established farms at 
various points for breeding-purposes and settlers 
also raised remounts but the local supply did not 
nearly equal the demand. 


(61) Kelly, p. 118 

























■ 










As in the cattle business the early eighties was 
a period of considerable activity in horse-ranching. 
Several ranches were established by British capital)^ 
with the intention of breeding cavalry horses for 
the British army. The Military Colonization 
Company*s ranch on the Bow below Calgary was a 
pioneer. It was established by General Strange as 
a training school for English officers who wished 
to ranch. The Quorn ranch, established on the south 
side of Sheep creek by a group of hunting magnates 
from Leicestershire, had a chequered career. T, The 
Quorn” imported some excellent Irish hunters, but 
mismanagement led to its decline. The High River 
Horse Ranch and the Bow River Horse Ranch were other 
well-known ventures. Many of these imported excellent 
breeding stock which has left an indelible mark on 
blood-stock in Alberta. Considerable success was 
achieved. Unfortunately the British market failed 
and fine animals were sold for almost nothing and 
used for sa d purposes. 

The industry languished during its first years, 

then revived in 1886 and developed rapidly for the 

next two years. In 1886 the number of horses in the 

Calgary and Macleod districts was estimated at from 

seven to ten thousand (62). A good many horses, 

(62) Biller, p. 109 






♦ 

* 






* 












including much poor stock, were imported from Oregon, 
British Columbia and Ontario. By 1888 the number of 
horses in Southern Alberta had risen to 23,868, of 
which many must have been of good quality, since in 
this year the Mounted Police obtained all their 
remounts in the Territories (63). 

Until 1891 the quality of Alberta horses appears 
to have deteriorated, owing to inferior importations, 
and in that year only 100 remounts were obtained. 

The depression which affected the cattle-trade was 
general. Added to effect upon the market for horses 
was the increase in power transport. This eliminated 
the large demand which had existed for inferior 
animals for use on street-cars (64). Many horse- 
ranchers sold out and went into the cattle-business. 
The Yukon gold-rush in 1898 provided a market for 
pack-ponies and saddle-horses, and prices rose 
considerably. It was a golden opportunity to 
dispose of inferior stock at good prices and start 
afresh. Unfortunately the tendency was to continue 
breeding poor animals while such excellent prices 
prevailed. 

A number of ranchers, after 1898 when settlement 
had become considerable, began raising work-horses 


(63) Biller, p. 109 

(64) Kelly, p. 282 








t 












e 

* • 







• - 

. 

. 











77 


for which there was a steady demand. Although the 
Boer War (1899-190E) caused a last revival in the 

c/f 'sjffetrmce of* 1 ** n wye 

saddle-horse trade ,^*\n**XX7i>xxv1l meant inevitable 
doom to horse-ranching on a large scale, A few horses 
remained on the range, some were bred on the farms 
for work purposes and the "new" ranchers raised a 
number of horses, both light and heavy, some excellent 
stock among them. The quality was not generally 
high in spite of the efforts of breeders to improve 
the stock. In 1914 good horses were comparatively 
rare in Alberta, although a fair demand still existed. 
























<n 


Note on Sheep Ranching 

A very brief treatment of the sheep-ranching 
industry in Alberta will be adequate in this thesis. 
The ranchers, who could without conscientious scruple 
raise both horses and cattle, always regarded sheep 
as alien intruders on the range. The prejudice was 
strongest among American cattle-men, but only a few 
of the British ranchers co old brrnj themselves 
to combine the ownership of sheep with their other 
interests. Among the minority, however, were some 
of the most prominent, for example E.H. Ivlaunsell and 
W.S. Huckvale. 

Attempts to breed sheep on a large scale on the 
Alberta range began during the early eighties by 
sheepmen, chiefly Americans, who brought in herds 
from Montana and Wyoming. The industry suffered 
from the regulations which prohibited the grazing 
of sheep in the best range areas. The first sheep 
were a wool type, but mutton proving more profitable 
an attempt was made to increase the weight of the 
carcass. By 1885 there were about 100,000 sheep on 
the range (65) but the restrictions caused a decline 
and sheep almost vanished from the land until an 


(65) Biller, p. 112 
























* 














improvement set in after 1890. In that year there 
were about 45,000 sheep on the range, chiefly in 
Assiniboia. 

An outbreak of scab in 1893 caused an embargo by 
Great Britain on Canadian sheep and the industry 
shared the general depression which was dispersed in 
1898 by the opening of the British Columbia market. 
About 1899 considerable improvement began and sheep 
ranching became very profitable. Number and quality 
increased. In 1901 there were 134,152 sheep in 
Alberta and Assiniboia and about 70,000 in the 
Lethbridge district. Sheep-ranching suffered the 
same fate as cattle and horse ranching and by 1905, 
except for a few isolated cases, was at an end. The 
tradition of ranching had been largely attached to 
the raising of horses and cattle, and those ranchers 
were more tenacious of their hold on the country’s 
imagination. There were few "new" sheep-ranches. 
Without resistance, the sheep were absorbed into the 
mixed farming economy and left little trace of their 
existence as range stock. 




. 


( 

* 

. 












VI— THE RANCHING TRADITION AND THE LIFE OF THE 

RANCHERS 

The preceding sections of this thesis are an 
attempt to explain the development of the ranching 
industry and to describe the problem*?which it faced. 
Ranching was a necessary stage in the agricultural 
life of the Province and it remains the best method 
of utilizing much land unsuitable for cultivation. 

As it was in 1885, it remains to-day, an essential 
aspect of Alberta’s economic fabric. ^ 

In the United States the ranching community 

a 

developed a folk-lore, a tradition and A way of life 
which has been profitably absorbed into the national 
culture. If we examine the history of everyday 
things in Southern Alberta we may find evidences 
of a similar contribution by the ranching community 
there to the Canadian culture. To facilitate such 
examination, an enquiry into the origins of the 
community, a discussion of its daily life and an 
analysis of the relations between the ranch and the 
various social influences and between the ranch and 
the rest of the community, should be helpful. 











( & ) The National Origins of the Ranchers # 

There are no detailed statistics as to the national 
origin of the ranchers in Southern Alberta until 1901, 
There is available information as to the population 
of that district as a whole. By the Census of Canada 
for 1881, the sub-district of Bow River, approximately 
the area under consideration, had a population of 3275 
*ytfijg, of whom 180 were English in origin, 100 were 
i-rench and the remainder Indian. The small white 
population was made up of the Police, a few traders 
and a very few settlers who had small stock-farms or 
herds of stock, chiefly in the vicinity of the Police 
posts. The sixty-three occupiers of land may be 
regarded as the representatives in 1881 of the ranching 
community. 

By the census of 1890-91 the population of the 
districts of Calgary, with Red Beer, and Maeleod had 
risen to 18,402. In the whole Provisional Bistrict 
of Alberta, 18,717 were of Canadian birth (11,595 of 
whom were born in the Rorth-West Territories), 4,365 
of British, and 1,251 of American birth, and 944 
belonged to other nationalities. Until 1901 the 
census reports are of little value for our purpose, 












* 
































n 

as figures are given either for the Provisional 
District of Alberta or for the Worth-West Territories. 
As the ranching community was only a portion of these 
units it is necessary to rely upon the testimony of 
early settlers and upon inferences which may be 
drawn from available books and documents dealing in 
whole or in part with the ranching country. 

The first white settlers, or more properly, 
residents, in Southern Alberta were the traders and 
missionaries. The country was a preserve of the 
free-traders, mostly Americans, who had drifted in 
from the neighboring territories and states. The first 
missionaries to settle down were the MacDougalls who 
were established by 1870 at Morleywille on the 
northern edge of the range country. After the Mounted 
Police arrived in 1874,settlement increased. A number 
of the traders remained and a few farmers came into 
the country to supply the Porce. The new lease 
regulations of 1881 greatly stimulated settlement 
in spite of their alleged effect upon it. Indeed 
it is from 1881 that the population begins to assume 
its eventual composition. 

More than any other agency the Mounted Police 
influenced the complexion of early settlement in 
Southern Alberta. Many members of the force, after 















?3 

their term of service had expired, settled in the 
country which they had helped to open, The makeup 
of the force during its early years has been frequently 
described and its retiring members stamped their 
impress upon the country in which they settled, 
letters and visits to their homes gave free advertise¬ 
ment to the South-west and attracted still more young 
men of their own type. They in turn influenced their 
friends and relatives until Southern Alberta was filled 
with young men from the middle and upper classes of >/ 
Eastern Canada, the British Isles, and even the Eastern 
United States, who found or hoped to find in the less 
restricted life of the West a welcome escape from 
the prosperous but rather stuffy life which several 
generations of commercial success had produced. To 
Southern Alberta came the young men who have been >/ 
generally credited with the building of the British 
Empire, healthy, well-educated, usually possessed 'Of 
a little capital, adventurous and devastatingly 
well-bred. Men of the same variety coming to Southern 
Alberta to-day might find it difficult to credit the 
fascination which that land exerted upon the younger 
sons of the seventies and eighties; in 1874 the virgin 
prairies and inviolate mountains must have had their 
own charm. It was for the time the last frontier 























% 










f 


t 














and not, for a last frontier, unattractive. 

The peculiar instinct which leads young Britons 
to remote and unlikely corners of the earth, led them 
in large numbers to the ranching lands of Alberta.— 

The Eastern provinces and states had not reached 
the saturation point in 1874: they could still 
absorb most of their younger sons. The older lands 
sent more of their young men so that until 1895, that 
is during the "Old Bays", during the "Golden Age" the 
ranching community was predominantly British and 
predominantly upper-class. This applied especially 
to the ranch-owners and to the superior officers of 
the British cattle-companies. The ranch foremen and 
the stock-hands were frequently Americans from the 
ranching states, especially Wyoming and Montana. 

There seems to be justification for accepting the 
view that the early ranching community was predominantly 
British. It is recorded in the Journals of the 
Legislative Council of the North-West Territories 
that in 1885 "the Provisional Bistrict of Alberta 
(had)....received a very important addition to its 
population, consisting principally of wealthy families, 
whose future occupation will be chiefly that of 
stock-raising" (1). L.V. Kelly's book on the ranching 


(1) Lieut.-Gov. Bewdney's Speech at the 8th session, 
Oct. 13— Nov, 19, 1886.* 





I 






ft- 

period, "Range Men", is inclined to suggest that 
immigrants of this sort were, with few exceptions 
drunken and dissolute remittance-men, tolerated for 
the ready money they brought into the country. It 
seems odd that a community such as Kelly describes, 
with its strong resentment of Britain and the British, 
should have sent as its first representative to the 
Territorial Council, Viscount Boyle, who, during the 
eighties, ranched at Macleod (2). Professor Maclnnes, 
in his excellent book, "In the Shadow' of the Rockies," 
regards the British immigration as of the utmost 
importance, and indignantly refutes the suggestion 
that all British immigrants were wasters and drunkards 
Most of them were "remittance-men" in the sense that 
they had allowances or capital from the Mother Country 
but that all should share the blame which rightly 
attaches to a few of their number, is absurd. 

Naturally the ranch-owners during the first years, 
whether individuals or companies, knew nothing of 
Jranching methods. They may have known something 
about agriculture as it was practiced in Eastern 
America or in the British Isles, but they had never 
dealt with stock upon the open range. Practical 

(2) Journals of the Council of the H.W.T. 1885. 








ft- 

assistance could be obtained from the range country 
of the United States, where by 1880 the ranching 
industry had achieved a certain maturity and developed 
a definite practice. The new range inherited the 
experience of the old. The limitation of the American 
range had begun, and American ranchmen and stock 
hands, who loved the life with an abiding passion, 
were glad to come to the new land which offered 
continued freedom from barbed wire and civilization. 
The close contact which had existed between Alberta 
and Montana since the first fur-traders had brought 
in whiskey from Port Benton made it natural that 
during the early years, while the owners of the 
ranches were British or Eastern&x$\ the stock-hands 
or cowboys, and many of the ranch-managers, should he 
America nW^f^ncr* 

This difference in nationality between employers 
and employed was a temporary condition. The ranch- 
owners, except those who were absentees, learnt their 
new business rapidly and many of them became quite as 
capable practical stock-hands as their employees. 

A native-born stock-hand class gradually evolved, 
although it remained essentially American in its 
personality. A number of the smaller ranchers became 




















tr 

good stock-hands since their interests were not large 
enough to require all their energies for executive 
work. Some large ranches employed young Britons, 
who learnt the business from the ground up. At the 
same time a number of American ranchers appeared. 

In spite of the tempering influence of time this 
cleavage remained, that while the owner-class was 

British, even English, in its outlook, the employee- 
class was strongly American and Western. There was 
little friction, for a strong practical sympathy 
existed and each class was secure in the conscious¬ 
ness of its own superiority. As the years passed 
the ranchers drifted out of the country, or proved 
themselves capable, and the good points of the 
stock-hands were revealed to their owners. What 

little friction there had been, disappeared•in 

in 

mutual admiration and^mutual antagonism to the 
"dirt farmer". 

After 1890 the settlers who came into Southern 
Alberta were of all races and classes* 

Those who were drawn 
from the upper reaches of European and Eastern life, 
and they were numerous, were inclined to identify 
themselves with the "ranchers,’* although they were 












. 








?r 

economically more akjn to the farmers. TT They re¬ 
inforced the ranching class so strongly that it 
remained a noticeable section of the population long 
after the ranching industry as it was understood 
during the "Golden Age’’ had been submerged. These 
new settlers helped the older-established ranchers 
to give the industry the new lease of life which has 
been called the "Hew Ranching". Thei/" changed it 
from a particular method of economic subsistence, 
to a way of life against an economic background 
almost indistinguishable from mixed farming. To 
those who were ranching in the "Golden Age" their 
order seemed to end in 1895: actually it survived 
until 1914. Here and there it still lingers 
but it has been absorbed, a valuable leaven, Into 
the life of the province. 

Southern Alberta was fortunate in her early 
settlers. They were, with a few regrettable 
exceptions, the best an old country had to offer 
to a new. In breeding, education, ability and 
spirit. Southern Alberta’s pioneers excelled those 
of almost any other community. Their adventurous 
youth brought them there and enabled them to over¬ 
come the country’s hardships. The solid qualities 













which developed with age kept them there. A few 
passed on, perennially adventurous, to new front¬ 
iers^ a few were misfits in any country, they had 
their day and vanished; the majority remained,a 
reliable foundation. The ranchers had the defects 
of their qualities but the defects can be forgiven 
in view of their services. 













fh) Daily Life 




Nowhere in Alberts, are pioneer days very far 
in the past; many of the communities are 'still in 
the first stage of development and some seem 
permanently arrested therein* The ranchers of 
Southern Alberta were pioneers but their hardships 
were slight compared with those of the people who 
hewed homes out of the forests of Upper Canada a 
etatury 3 .before. country to which, they came 

offered a living with little preparatory effort. 

It is easier to turn cattle onto the range than to 
grow wheat in the heart of a virgin forest. The 
pioneer ranchers often had some capital and a good 
deal of influence, A little social pressure at Ottawa 
must have eased the passage of a good many younger 
sons * 

Perhaps the most striking 
the pioneer rancher a&ifthe pioneer elsewhere Iwas* 

failure to effi hardship 

of his life. There were hardships^ difficult and 
unfamiliar work, long exposure, hitter cold and 
disappointing results for the men, inadequate 
houses, more hard and unfamiliar work, and long 
periods of isolation for the women. Yet when the 




































































pioneers recall their early years, hardships are 
merely recounted as incidental, negligible, amusing. 
Certainly they did not dominate life. Perhaps it is 
the vagary of memory. Perhaps it is the spirit in 
which they had been trained at home. Perhaps it 
was because everyone was young~**a little girl who v/* 
had come to Pincher Creek in 1881 as a baby^wept 
when she saw old men and women for the first time 
when she was taken to Eastern Canada. 

When conditions in a country which has not long 
since passed otit of the pioneer stage are being 
described it should be remembered that advance is 
piece-meal, that at the same point in time 

there are parts of the country in every stage of 
development. Although this is to an extent true of 
Southern Alberta, its natural endowments permitted 
it to attain a unity and homogeneity which make 
generalization possible. The pattern of life in 
one river-valley was repeated again in the next, 
with only slight individual differences. Everyone, 
it was said, knew everyone else. Certainly, everyone T g 
kcattle ranged free and that was a great unifying 
influence, 

fl) Work and Working Conditions of the Men. 


It was the work of the ranchers which gave their 

















community meaning. Their work was the foundation of 
the life of the ranches, the reality behind it. 

Their economic usefulness depended upon the way in 
which they looked after the livestock they owned 
or of which they had charge. Not all the work was 
done by the ranch-owners and the company-managers; 
they planned, and the brunt of the execution of 
their plans fell to the stock-hands and the ranch 
foremen. The small rancher did much of his own 
work and naturally a thorough knowledge of the 
practical technique of the business was essential 
to success. 

The every-day care of the stock was in the hands 
of the cowboys and the foremen under general orders 
from the owner or manager of the ranch. Ranching 
did not mean merely the acquisition of a large -lease 
and a proportionate herd of stock and the placing 
of one in convenient juxtaposition to the other. 

The general routine was not particularly onerous, 
but there were special practices, of which the 
"roundup" has been most frequently described. 

The roundup was the gathering of the cattle from 
the range, at first from all Southern Alberta, and 
then, when this proved impracticable, from various 
well-marked natural districts. There were two 








. • 



















, 



. 






. 

. 



























■ 















roundups, one in the spring for branding, etc., and 
one in the fall for the selection of beef. The 
cattle were divided according to their owners, 
calves were branded and culling was done. The same 
procedure was applied to horses. Sheep were always 
herded and their owners had no need of roundups. 

When the practice of district roundups was 
adopted, it became customary for districts to send 
representatives to ether roundups to claim stock 
which had strayed from its home district on to the 
foreign range. The roundup, as we have seen, bore 
heavily on the small man, with five hundred cattle 
or less. On the roundup the large ranch of the 
district usually "sent out a wagon IT probably several 
wagons, and usually the representatives of other 
ranchers paid board. Branding was done on the 
range, with the minimum apparatus it required. A 
big roundup lasted several weeks; it was the most 
characteristic institution of the ranch and one 
of the most picturesque, with its great herds of 
cattle, its wagons, its fire, and the sight of 
difficult work accomplished with efficiency and 
speed* The canvasses of G.W. P.ussell illustrate 
its intricacies better than they can he described. 












As we have seen elsewhere, the ranchers after several 
cold winters, began to put up hay to carry their stock- 
through this trying season. At first only calves and ^ 
weak cows were fed, later the practice was widely 
extended. As the country developed,grain and forage 
crops supplemented the wild hay. The later phase of 
ranching devoted itself more and more to the winter 
feeding of cattle. A certain amount of agricultural 
labour supplemented the purely pastoral efforts of the 
stock-hands. The men of the old school scorned such 
work as fit only for farmers and on most of the ranches 
except the small ones, cultivation remained at a 

minimum. The ranchers preferred to buy feed from 
homesteaders rather than raise their own. Haying-time, 
however, raridly became the busiest season of the year, 
lasting for about six weeks. Fencing was another 
indignity which the old-fashioned cow-hand suffered 
with blasphemous reluctance. The increase in settle¬ 
ment, the necessity for preserving winter ranges and 
hay and forage crops made fences essential. Much of 
the fencing was in the river-bottoms and the eccentric 
habits of the mountain streams compelled annual 
attention to the miles of barbed wire. 

During the winter some of the herds had to be fed 











9 ir¬ 
on the home ranch. It was the custom to hold breeding- 
cows near the home ranch ail year round while the rest 
of the herd ranged abroad. This required constant 
line-riding. Oattle on the range had to be looked after 
during severe weather and turned onto the choicer 
ranges which had been reserved for winter pasture. 

Water had to be kept open, for cattle, unlike horses , 
cannot quench their thirst with snow, A very severe 
winter meant hardiy cold work in an effort to save the 
lives of stock by guiding and forcing them to distant 
but better pastures. Winter, however, was usually the 
slack season. 

The rancher required very little equipment. At 
the home-ranch there was the usual quota of stables, 
store-houses, granaries, corrals, etc,, and on out¬ 
lying leases or ranches there might be cabins for the 
men and a shed or two. Buildings were simple, generally 
of logs where logs could be obtained, but might, if 
well built, be warm and comfortable, Stock was 
wintered outside, even around the home ranches, 
although there was usually shelter for exceptional 
cases. The agricultural implements used were those 
of the Eastern farm., although in later years ranchers 
tended to lag behind farmers in their use of up-to 











? 6 . 

date machinery, simply because machinery was of 
secondary importance. 

The. most important item in ranch equipment was 
the horse* The stock-hand usually owned his own saddle 
or saddles—stock-saddles of course—lariats and other 
equipment. Frequently he owned his own horse. Most 
of his working hours were spent in the saddle and this 
is the aspect of ranching most popularized. Without 
good horses and capable riders the industry would 
have been like a locomotive without wheels. A good 
stock-horse and a good stock-hand were inseparable, 
and to the rancher indispensable. 

Work on the ranches was not inhumanly hard. It was 
not nearljr as hard as:..work on farms. At certain seasons 
hard work was expected, but there was no weary level 
of back-breaking toil. It was healthy work, with plenty 
of exercise in the open air. The only risk to health 
was frost-bite in the winter. Of course the element of 
physical danger was seldom absent but it was regarded as 
part of the day’s routine. Hours, long at certain 
seasons, were not consistently so. Plentiful leisure 
seems to have been the rule; long hours and hard work 
were seasonal rather than permanent. Ranch wcjfck 
conferred independence on the employee. General 
orders were given but their execution depended upon the 






















































9 7 


energy, initiative and skill of the individual. Skill 
was essential to the success of the stock-hand; he was 
a skilled worker, member of an old, exclusive and 
jealous craft. 

The workers on the ranches liked their life, whether 
they worked for themselves or for another. They believed 
that the life of the ranches was the finest in the 
world were they stock-hands or ranch-owners. Such a 
life appealed only to a certain type. There were 
miserable misfits. Lonely suicides and hasty flights 
from the range proved that ranching ms not a univers¬ 
ally suitable profession. The transports of enthusiasm 
which it evoked from its practitioners, oven those 
who found it financially hopeless,- suggest that working- 
conditions, if occasionally poor, were not uniformly 
wretched. 

(2) Work and 'forking Conditions of the Women 

Well-deserved tribute has been paid to the pioneer 
women of Alberta and the women of the ranches have 
received their share. Their hardships and privations 
have been celebrated, not perhaps in song, but certainly 
in story. To them fell multitudinous duties. They were 
the home-makers and on their shoulders fell much of the 
responsibility of raising their families. Fost of the 
rafch-women came fr^rn homes of comfort and luxury, they 












were accustomed to the ample leisure which the plenitude 


of servants in middle-tflaSs Victorian England permitted, 
and their training had not been one to inculcate sturdy 
self-reliance. 7/hen they came to Alberta, especially 
to the Alberta of the eighties, they found a very 
different existence. It is strange that there were so 
few complaints of the bitter toil of the new life 
but apparently these women bore their burdens with 
praiseworthy equanimity. Thy ? 

Perhaps it was the very difference of their new 
environment. It must have seemed an adventure, and 
before the feeling of adventure wore off, comfort 
had arrived. They were young and the young are 
supposed to be more tolerant of discomfort than the- 
old. Their wants sen tin import ant, for behind 

the ranch-women was a solid tradition which made 
possessions second to origin. The bitterness of 
competition was absent. No one had more than the other 
of the materials of comfort. The shadow of success 
was over their enterprise; they remembered their past 
lives and they would model their future .lives after 
the past. Present discomforts seemed negligible. 

Eor most of the ranchers eaftly discomfoitedid not 
endure. Even those who came before the railway did not 
live for long in their mud**floored, mud-roofed cabins 








• r 





, 



















Solid and watertight log houses replaced them, small 
hut emimently liveable. By 1890 almost everywhere 
money could secure most of the less perishable 
luxuries of life. The wholesale importation of 
young and eligible female friends and relatives as 
governesses, housekeepers and companions, which was 
almost an industry in the nineties and the nineteen- 
hundreds, considerably relieved the burden of work 
which fell to the rancher’ 0 wife. 

The actual work which the women of the ranches had 
to do was very much the same as that of housewives 
everywhere who are without servants, Sometimes 
assistance was available from the source aforementioned, 
ephemeral but helpful, but usually the housewife 
worked alone or with the assistance of her daughetrs. 
Primarily the house had to be kept in livable order and j 
the meals prepared. The former duty was conditioned 
by the size of the house and the ability and convictions 
of the housekeeper. It was not an arduous duty, 
for simplicity was the rule. The preparation of the 
meals was more difficult. Food was plentiful hut it 
was difficult to achieve variety, especially at a 
distance from the railway. The personal factor was 
equally important here for individual ingenuity, 










mi- 

skill and vigour counted heavily under pioneer circum- 

. tKe 

stances TU hospitality of f^r nchcs 

made the preparation of meals, simple though 
they were, the chief duty of the housewife. 

The ranch women had other duties. They made their 
own clothes, their children's and manj? of their 
menfolk's. This duty took up a good deal of spare time. 
Their house-furniture was a matter of their own resource 
men might he trusted with the foundation work hut the 
women supplied the draperies so fashionable in late 
Victorian days* There was always washing, ironing and 
mending to he done and the various seasonal duties like 
preserving. Butter-making was left to the women. 
Frequently women taught their children when no other 
education was available. They were usually the letter* 
writers and the keepers of accounts and diaries, Some¬ 
times they had to act as dentist or doctor when such 
services were not otherwise available and they were 
frequently in demand as nurses. 

The ranch women rarely did much outdoor work. The 
English tradition was strong enough to make it difficult 
for men to believe that the woman who was too weak to 
pass a tea-cup in the drawing-room was strong enough 
to milk a cow in the stable. On many of the ranches 
























161 


very little of the work which on farms is tradition¬ 
ally the task of women was done at all, as may he 

inferred from the small numbers, of fowls and milih 
and 

cows’the small yield of dairv products in the 

A 

Maoleod census district in 1891. On many ranchef3 no 
cows were milked, simply because the men regarded such 
labour as beneath their dignity. It must have annoyed 
housewives to use tinned milk while thousands of 
cattle roamed outside'their doors. On some of the 
ranches where these duties did exist, they fell to the 
women, but because they enjoyed the work or preferred 
to do it rather than do without its products. However 
the typical ranch woman did little outside work 
except for occasional flower-gardening, which was J 
held to be a suitable occupation. 

Since ranch-women did most of their work about ' 
their homes,their working conditions may be conveniently 
considered in connection with their houses. Consider¬ 
ing the newness of the country, they were not unsatis¬ 
factory and the work was little harder than work in the 
same houses to-day. The ranch women worked, hard and 
long at unaccustomed labours, but with a few exceptions 
they seem, like their menfolk, to have found happiness 


in the new life 








in- 


( b ) Housings and House EurniBhings 
( 1) Houses 

The houses of the Victorians may" have been stuffy, 
tasteless, over-ornamented and over-draped but to 
their occupants they were the acme of beauty and comfort* 
Whatever their faults they were large* The houses 
which the ranchers occupied in Alberta must have offer¬ 
ed a strange contrast to their former homes, but with 
pioneer adaptability, they made the best of it and 
produced dwellings which were far from unpleasing. 

Elsewhere in Western Canada, the pioneer has often 
had to be content with a sod shack or a dug-out for 
the first years after arrival. The rancher was 
generally more fortunate* The very early ranchers and 
those who settled later in isolated and uninhabited 
districts sometimes lived in a tent or camped outside 
until the first rude log shack was built. Otherwise 
it was only the men who occasionally roughed it thus. 

The women and children of the rancher's family were 
Deft in town or with friends until adequate shelter 
was available* As the country developed it was possible 
to provide a more finished article as the "first house" 
and the hardship of mud floor and sod roof was rare. 

The dwellings of the first ranchers were very 














103 . 


primitive. logs were the earliest building-material 
as they had been in other pioneer communities. Plenty 
of logs were available in the foothill country and 
spruce and pine were most popular. On the prairies, 
unless spruce and pine could be floated down the rivers 
cottonwood logs were used. The log cabin, built 
without finished lumber, nails or shingles, mud floored 
and mud roofed, was the rudimentary ranch-house. It 
was not long endured, but with improvements it remained 
the typical dwelling until saw-mills were established. 

The size of these houses varied according to the 
length of logs used* Frequently there was only one 
room, but where the rancher had brought his family 
with him the cabin was typically divided into three 
sections. At one end was the men’s quarters, at the 
other, usually the north end, was a store-room and in 
the middle the family quarters. These room§ did not 
communicate with one another but had only one door 
each which opened outside. The central room was 
kitchen and dining room as. well as living-room and 
sleeping room for the family and contained most ofthe 
sparse furniture. 

The walls of this primary dwelling were of logs, 
hewn square or left in the round and chinked with 






mud. The logs were laid in horizontal courses (1) 

♦and the finish of the corners varied with the discretion 
of the builder. Upon the skill of the latter the whole 
structure depended, for the erection of a log house is 
a complicated task. The cabins were usually on sills 
rather than on a more solid foundation. Doors were 
made of hewn planks and various and ingenious hinges 
and fasteners were contrived. Such hardware could be 
imported from Fort Fenton and these complicated 
mechanisms were a proof of ingenuity rather than 
necessity. Tindows were few and small, with glass 
from Fort Fenton, which was very expensive. The 
floors were mud, puddled and tramped to the consistency 
of concrete, and fairly satisfactory except in rainy 
weather. Hoofs were made of split rails, covered with 
grass and mud. Hoofs were the most unsatisfactory 
feature of these houses and the need for shingles or 
even sawn lumber was felt most acutely at this point. 
Euch houses offered shelter but they must have been 
very uncomfortable. 

For the houses, the establishment of saw-mills was 


(1) The attractive vertical method used in Europe, 
i.e., Switzerland, Norway, was seldom adopted. 
Christ Church, Millarville, and its old rectory 

are excellent examples of this rare method. 

The builder, Ehack (Jacques ?) a 'pears to have 

been Swiss and the designer, Canon 7/ebb-Peploe 
knew Switzerland well. The horizontal method 
was that of the French Canadians^ 














/ 4 H- 


the critical event. By 1883 four saw-mills are 
recorded as established in Southern Alberta (2). 

This meant that much better houses could be built 
and finished with sawn and planed wood. Boors and 
windows, frames, wainscoting, floors and roofs or 
the materials to make them, could be obtained. Even 
in those leisured days, to make such articles out 
of logs entirely by hand would have been impossible. 
There were not many carpenters available and the 
cost of transporting-such a bulky article as finished 
lumber was prohibitive. These products of the first 
saw-mills were rough and ill-finished but infinitely 
preferable to the hand-hewn logs and planks of the 
immediate past, f *dien they became available a marked 
improvement took place in the construction of the 
ranch-house. 

By about 1884 the ranchers were moving into their 
new houses. Most of the old ones, with new roofs, 
were converted into stables, store-houses or bunk- 
houses, and served their purposes well. Many of 
them still exist hut few are used for human habitations. 
The new house wes on a considerably more ambitious 
scale. Tog houses allow for almost unlimited additions 
and the average ranch house as it stands to-day was 


(2) Sessional Papers 1883 Vol. XVI Wo, 10 papers 23 

p, 126• 












10L 


seldom built all at once. The first beginnings, even 
of the new house, were very unpretentious. Sometimes 
it was the old house with the new improvements. More 
usually a square structure formed the aeucleug. The 
square plan has many advantages. It is easily built, 
simply roofed, and gives a maximum cubic content for 
material used. The square was divided into living- 
room and bedrooms. Single-storey houses were commonest 
although a loft was often arranged to give extra 
bedroom space. 

Once the first unit was complete additions could 
be made at leisure. Since space and materials cost 
little and the ranchers were accustomed to large 
rooms, the rooms were of good size. A typical ranch 
sitting-room would be about sixteen feet by twenty- 
two and kitchens were usually of similar dimensions. 
Bedrooms were much smaller. The kitchen frequently 
served as dining-room as well. Store-rooms were the 
rule and summer-kitchens were popular. As a few of 
the new houses had stone foundations, although most 
of them were still built on sills, good cellars 
were to be found. Otherwise the cellar was merely a 
hole in the ground reached by a precarious ladder 
and a dangerous trap-door. A good many ranches had 
spring-houses to keep their perishables cool and 










167 


some had root-cellars* Bunk-houses for the men employ¬ 
ed were almost always separate from the main body of 
the house and sometimes at a considerable distance 
from itDccasionally, and usually on large ranches 
in later days, the men had their own cook and the 
lady of the house was relieved of responsibility 
for their physical welfare. Verandahs were popular 
additions to ranch-houses, keeping them cool in 
summer and "affording pleasant auxiliary sitting- 
rooms." Unfortunately they made the house dark. 

Adequate plumbing, always rare in the country, was, 
until the last decade almost unknown. The water- 
supply was the local stream, a nearby spring or else 
a well. As by the very nature of the industry the 
ranch-houses were rarely far from water, lack of that 
necessity was infrequent. 

Bricks were unobtainable during the first years 
of settlement and chimneys were made out of oil-cans 
which are indispensable to the modern pioneer commun¬ 
ity. They would hardly have been acceptable to 
fire-insurance companies and the fire hazard arising 
from their use was an accepted feature of everyday 
life. The North-West Council even went so far as 
to pass an ordinance stating definite requirements 








■ 

, 

r 

♦ 

, 

» 






























lot 

as to chimneys. Stone chimneys may have been 
attempted by the ingenious, as they certainly 
were later, but there is no record of their use 
before 1885. By 1890 the main chimneys were 
usually of brick, but auxiliaries were still made 
of metal. Ranges and heaters were freighted in 
from Fort Benton. In a two-story house of eight 
rooms, one range and one heater were regarded as 
sufficient (3). Coal was often used where it 
was locally available and it was mined very early. 
Sherar's mine near Lethbridge was operating in 
1880. Elsewhere wood was used, for ranch-houses 
were rarely located far from wood supplies. 

Luring the eighties, the log house flourished. 

As the ranchers prospered and their families 
increased,their houses grew larger and more 
comfortable. Some of them were very beautiful and 
all of them had the charm which comes from native 
material used functionally. All through the ranching 
country, along the edges of the rivers and the 
streams, among the trees which grew there, lay 
these houses, simple, solid, comfortable, secure in 
the knowledge that they were pleasant places to live 

(3) Built by George Ives, of Fincher Creek. 














» 

, 










? 














and that they could, with suitable adaptation, grow 
old gracefully. 

Unfortunately fashion was growing in strength 
upon the last frontier. During the "Golden Age" 
the ranchers cared little what capers she cut in 
the remote world. Log houses were comfortable and 
there appeared to be no reason for a change. kashion 
as usual prevailed over common-sense. Log houses 
were discovered to be dusty, hard to keep up, 
draughty, almost indecent. They were old-fashioned. 
Everyone should have a frame house, a nice modern 
hpuse with a balcony, some colored glass and plenty 
of tortured wood work. Everyone of consequence who 
built a house now built a frame house, except for 
those who were so unfortunately poor that they could 
afford nothing but logs. This momentous change in 
Alberta ! s tradition of domestic architecture came at 
slightly different times according to locality, but 
1890 may be selected as a convenient point of 
divergence. Until 1890 an indigenous style was 
developing, attractive, comfortable, simple, in¬ 
expensive and as admirably suited to its purposes 
as the landscape its simplicity adorned. After 1890 
the ranchers joined in the last throes of the Battle 











MO 

of the Styles and an average successful rancher was 
as 1 ike u <2 

as a log house. 

The frame era brought a new series of ranch-houses 
ugly, expensive and devoid of individuality, but 
indicative of their owner ! s social prestige. After 
1890 ranch-houses resembled town-houses in general, 
plan and construction although grudgingly adapted to 
rural: use. No acute distinction could after that date 
be made between rural and urban houses although a few 
isolated die-hards still experimented with logs and 
native stone. 

It is hard not to regret the change. Their style 
of building was one of the ranching period's most 
concrete contributions and it seems sad that it could 
not have been allowed, to develop further. There are 
still people who are experimenting with log in relation 
to new methods of building and at the same time trying 
to preserve the old tradition. Unselfconsciously c ' 
style had developed, of which the characteristics 
were large, irregular masses, long, low lines and 
large roof areas. Beyond this there had been no 
crystallisation, for the style was still in an 
experimental stage. It m&y xxxxX for." the root of 









t 








- 

_ 





































t 












I n 

a style of domestic architecture, unpretentious hut 
beautiful and peculiarly suited to certain rural 
. localities. 

f 2 ) Furniture and Bouse Fittings . 

The construction and general aspect of the ranch 
house in its various phases has been considered. Its 
interior appearance and its furnishings and fittings 
also require treatment. Considerable individual 
differences exist here as well, differences of wealth 
of taste and of necessity, and the most we can hope 
to obtain is a sort of composite picture of what 
some of the rooms in a ranch-house looked like. Fauy 
of them have existed almost unchanged from the eighties 
and nineties, a few draperies removed, a little new 
furniture added, hut substantially the same. The 
Briton abroad has an aptitude for unchanging preserv¬ 
ation which simplifies the problem of reconstruction. 

If Victorian drawing-rooms held too many ornaments 
in 1885, sitting-rooms or Alberta ranches still 
preserved them twenty, thirty, forty, even fifty 
years later. 

The pre-railway ranch houses were fuirnished an^ 
equipped with extreme simplicity, as onlv the berest 


























‘ 








necessities could "be freighted in from Fort Benton. 

The first houses with their leaking roofs and mud 
floors were not designed to encourage the introduction 
of fine furniture. Much of the furniture was home¬ 
made although as early as 1882 Fort Macleod possessed 
a furniture store. Tables, chairs and benches could 
be made by anyonw with a few tools and an aptitude 
for cabinet-work. A cooking-range was usually the 
important purchase and beds and springs were purchased 
rather than made. Chests of drawers and the ubiquito'u 
American rocking-chair sometimes appeared in homes 
where a feminine influence was felt. As in the first 
dwellings most of the furniture was in the family 
quarters, space was at a premium and various devices 
were adopted for its full utilization, truckle-beds 
for example, which could be wheeled underneath more 
permanent resting-places. 

Very few families endured these discomforts for 
long, and after 1883 most established ranchers and 
their families had moved into the more commodious 
dwellings described elsewhere. Better interior 
finishing was one of the greatest improvements. In 
the old houses the logs had boon left hare, a practice 
which, although it gave an ^attractive appearance, was 












«• 




























■ 














, 











/ / 3 

trying to the. house-keeper. The new houses were either 
lined with stained or varnished match-hoarding, or els 
they were lath-and-plastered and distempered. This 
made a warmer and cleaner house, although the walls 
were less picturesque than the hare logs had been. 

Some of the new houses even had huilt-in cupboards, 
closets and linen-presses, especially if* the builder 
happened to be of an ingenious turn. The new houses 
offered a better background for furniture as there was 
no more danger from leaking roofs and there was more 
space to display it. The houses were not overcrowded 
for freight rates still existed, but there was more 
furniture and much more comfort. 

The decorative instinct asserted itself. TTr hen 
the first settlers had freighted in their belongings 
they had brought only the barest Necessities, such 
things as flat-irons, table-silver, linen, bedding 
and cooking utensils, larger furnishings were 
purchased at the nearest store, home-made substitutes 
were used or the article dispensed with altogether. 
Books, pictures, ornaments and fine table-furniBhings 
were non-existent. As the settlements grew older 
these luxuries slowly drifted in, remained and 
accumulated. They were the appurtenances of the 








J I V 


life which the ranchers had known and they were 
quickly absorbed into the new life. The arrival 
of the railway stimulated the importation of these 
trifles, although in the more remote districts 
during the eighties they were still rare and 
precious. 

Taste and ingenuity were valuable assistants in 
the furnishing of the ranch house. Much of the 
furniture was home-made, the dining tables in the 
kitchens, the settees against the wall, the cup¬ 
boards and the chairs. Packing-cases, decked out 
with muslin and covered with the excellent linens 
with which Victorian trousseaux were so amply 
furnished, made sideboards and dressing-tables and 
wash-hand-stands. A little furniture, usually 
American, was purchased. The last decades of the 
nineteenth century were nowhere noted for their 
excellence in furniture design and the American 
industry was far from famous for the quality or 
workmanship of its products. Suitably disguised 
by the yards of drapery which the Victorians adored, 
the few pieces fitted well enough into the general 
scheme. 

Like the furniture, windows were generously 




, 





MV 

draped. Floors were covered with skins. Cattle 
and horse hides were commonest, with bear, wolf 
or coyote for variety. Poorly tanned, these 
skins were hard and odorous; and one lady, more 
ingenious than her friends, covered the floor of 
her sitting-room with a rug made from her family's 
accumulated rags by the Mormon settlers on Lee's 
Creek. Heating arrangements have already been 
described. As for lighting, even very early settlers 
obtained kerosene lamps at the stores at the police 
posts. These were frequently supplemented by 
tallow candles home-made from beef fat. 

After the railways arrived, the ranchers made 
considerable importations from Great Britain and 
Eastern Canada. Family possessions were brought 
out and many new settlers brought all the furn¬ 
iture and household equipment from their old homes. 
Some of it looked a little out of place but a great 
deal of fine furniture and household gear found its 
way into the ranch-houses of Southern Alberta. The 
general atmosphere changed little with the new addit¬ 
ions, indeed interiors seemed to have changed much 
less than exteriors. Packing-case makeshifts rubbed 
shoulders with family Chippendale in a general 
atmosphere of good taste, a little obscured by 












. 



* 






















/ /6 • 


draperies, but solid, comfortable and refined. It 
was hard to change such an interior. Half the 
ornaments could disappear and there would still have 
been a good many. Hew furniture was lost among 
its predecessors. With all their faults and odd, 
amazing inconveniences, the ranch houses were pleasant 
places, homes, as Mr. Staveley-Hill might have 
remarked, from home. (O 


(/ ) O^s. 
JLa ^ Or• 


1 ' 


a , . 

Y ' 


XJL 












, 







Ill 

(3) Foods and Cooking 

Except for the Indian women, the wives of the 
Police officers and a few hardy pioneers like Mrs. 
Armstrong and the famous "Aunty", Southern Alberta 
was in its first years an exclusively male community 
and its food was characteristically simple. After 
1881 the influence of women who began to come Into 
the country transformed the simple diet of the plains. 

A varied diet cannot be completely sustained by 
importation but depends on a measure of agricultural 
development. The Police found a large native meat 
supply available. It had to be supplemented by 
freighting in staples such as flour and salt. To 
avoid the prohibitive costs and to give more variety 
the Government established police farms near the 
posts to raise vegetables and cereals for animal as 
well as human consumption. The police were thus the 
pioneer farmers and gardeners of Southern Alberta. 

An enterprising Montanan, Olson by name, brought 
in a herd of dairy cattle and sold his produce at 
excellent prices. Domestic fowl were unknown until 
a later date. Other supplies were obtained through 
I.G, Baker and Company, whose stores were also the 
chief sources of goods for the early ranchers. Their 




. 

, 

■ 

* 

, 

» 

. 

e ' f 

. 


, 

» • 








I i t 


stocks, which were freighted in from the United 
States, included almost everything which could 
possibly survive the journey, and were sold at very 
high prices. 

The diet d>’f the first ranchers was much the same 
as that of the police. If anything it was less varied. 
After the buffalo had disappeared in 1878, beef 
replaced buffalo-meat as the staple food. By the 
Census of 1880-81 there were only 346 sheep in the 
North-West Territories so it seems unlikely that 
mutton appeared very often on Alberta tables. There 
were no hogs although salt pork and bacon were 
imported. The country fortunately teemed with game 
and its streams with fish. The hunter could take 
all he wanted as game laws and closed seasons were 
unknown. Game and fish formed an important addition 
to the rancher’s diet well into the nineties.at feast* 
Game was often sold in the towns. In Calgary in 
1889 a brace of prairie-chicken fetched thirty- 
five or.forty cents. The proceeds formed a welcome 
addition to the settler’s ready cash. The eggs of wild 
fowl were a popular delicacy and ranchers, remembering 
the past, compared them favourably with plover’s 


eggs. 

















- 
























119 


Like the Police, the ranchers grew vegetables, or 
purchased them from those who did. Potatoes were 
most important, followed by vegetables such as carrots, 
turnips, cabbage and onions, which could be kept 
all winter. At those ranches which had gardens the 
various vegetables were enjoyed in season. The 
ranchers do not seem to have been adventurous gardeners 
but followed beaten paths in their choice of varieties. 
The women were of a more inventive spirit. In 1888 
£omato plants were being raised at a ranch near 
Gleichen and presented to neighbors. Many of the 
ranch women canned and otherwise preserved the more 
exotic and perishable vegetables, to the enrichment 
of their winter menus. 

Flour, as well as other staples and luxuries had 
to be imported. Prices were high at first but sank 
to normal levels after 1885 in regions near a rail¬ 
way. All varieties of tinned stuff were obtainable 
at centres like Macleod and Calgary. Following the 
tradition of the Hudson’s Bay Company the merchants 
stocked the best brands obtainable. Cost of trans¬ 
port made prices so high that the very best cost 
comparatively little more than inferior varieties, 
so the pioneers who could afford them enjoyed the 
best imperishables. 












» 





















( 

. 

, 



I 







/4d 


There were deficiencies. Butter, milk and eggs, 
dear to the housewife's heart, were during the early 
eighties rare and costly. Since by 1888 in the 
Gleichen district butter sold for twenty-five cents 
a pound and in 1889 turkeys sold for $1.25 a bird, 
it would appear that the high prices for such products 
were neither universal nor permanent, Eresh fruits, 
except for those that grew wild, were almost impossible 
to obtain. A barrel of Eastern apples purchased at 
Pincher Creek in the middle eighties cost fifteen 
dollars. Dried and tinned fruits were substituted. 

In post-railway days it was possible to obtain 
most edibles at a price; although even in the first 
decade of the twentieth century out-of-season 
vegetables and fresh fruits were rare outside the 
cities. Even after 1885 most of the ranching country 
was remote from the railway and not until the middle 
nineties did the south-westerly areas come into 
close contact with outside markets. The ranch 
housewife, unlike her urban sister, had only a limited 
range of foodstuffs available and she had to wait to 
replenish jg&X unexpectedly diminished supplies. In 
early years she was compelled to order all her special 
requirements for the year at one time, and this problem, 


























. 














r 








I %(. 


although it progressively- lessened, always remained. 

Ranch meals were simplej meat, vegetables and 
bread, followed by puddings or cake. Cooking was 
very cosmopolitan and recipes were constantly ex¬ 
changed in an effort to secure variety. For great 
festivals Mrs. Beeton's monumental handbook was 
produced and the glories of English cookery attempted 
and, one gathers, achieved. Tea and coffee, with the 
advantage to the former, were the most popular bever¬ 
ages. Beer, and other slightly alcoholic drinkables 
were very often made at home. The men consumed a 
good deal of brandy and whiskey. Meals in the grand 
ranch manner were great occasions reminiscent of 
Dickensian banquets. They were served with the 
utmost informality but a dim reverence brooded over 
them as if the ghost of s not-quite-forgotten 
Victorian mahogany sanctified the rougher boards of the 


last frontier 








( 




y a ^ 


4 ) v loth in-- 

Skins and furs were not the only materials available 
to clothe the pioneers of Southern Alberta. The Hudson 1 
Bay Company had initiated a commendable policy by 
importing only the best cloths. Fen’s work-clothes 
could be obtained at the stores of the posts although 
many men preferred to equip themselves in Fontana, 
where prices were lower and stocks more varied. 

Many of the settlers who came to the ranches brought 
extensive wardrobes with them, more notable for 
completeness than for suitability to the new life. 

One legendary lad£, a later arrival, had eighteen 
trunks. It must have cost a good, deal to freight 
them from Fort Benton. 

When women began to come into the country they 
found the'stores ill-equipped for their needs, and 
mothers wept as they fitted their daughters with 
copper-toed boots. Ready-made clothes were obtainable, 
but in limited variety, and ready-made clothes were 
indeed a little suspect to the generation which wa? 
settling in Alberta. 

' Those ladies r/ho could afford to do so continued 
to have their clothes made "at Home". The less 
fortunarte majority had to be content with makin: their 













(X 3 - 


C 77 n clothes from the excellent materials available. 

This practice had its disadvantages, for in Fincher 
Greek early in the eighties needles cost twenty-five 
cents apiece, a price attributed by the vendors to 
the freight. Trips to the East, or to the "Old 
Country" were usually occasions for the purchase of 
a good many clothes. The women made some of their 
menfolk f s clothing but the men bought more ready- 
made clothes and their English wardrobes lasted longer. 
Tailors and dressmakers appeared at Macleod and Calgary 
and their services assisted the amateur seamstresses. 
Pome of the professional clothes-makers were excellent, 
especially in the later years, and their cut was admired 
we are told, in London and New York, Put during the 
whole ranching era women continued to make most, of 
their own. and their children's clothes themselves. 

Fashions on the ranches during the "Colden Age" 
seem to have been rather insensitive to the changes in 
the prevailing mode decreed elsewhere. The excellent 
English stuffs wore well and descended through the 
family from the eldest to the youngest. Tew of the 
ranchers 1 wives, until the railway brought civill 
cared whether their hat or bonnet was outmoded or 
stylish, since no one knew anyway. They were nr ch too 
busy to he bothered wit? 














life-blood of fashion, was unimportant in a land 
where unmarried women were 20 rare and eligible 3 h 3/ 
young men so common-place. 

An increase in leisure and wealth and the improve 
ment in communications during the nineties and the 
nineteen-hundreds ended this happy state of affairs. 
Women still made their own clothes, or on special 
occasions had a dressmaker make them, but they 
reflected more faithfully the modes of Iondon and 
Paris, although not with the phot i ^curacy 

of to-day. For the majority, cid-thes were 

pie, and the elaborate toilettes of Edwardian 
England were seldom paralleled in Canada. A few 
die-hards, secured against criticism by their early 
arrival, continued to ignore the changes of fashion, 
and complacently wore clothes made along the same 
general lines as those in vogue when thev^]eft their 
native land for the test. 

There is a parallel between the .attitude of the 
ranch-women to clothing and their attitude to house- 
decoration. They used their native taste and ingenu¬ 
ity to make the best of limited materials and against 
heavy odds they achieved a good appearance. The 
influence of fashion appeared in both fields at about 
































the same time and in both their houses anfl their 
clothes the ranch women showed an aptitude for 
preserving- without chang-e the styles to which they 


had been accustomed 










I %L 


5) Morals and Manners 

The years between 1870 and 1900 brought changes 

to every level of English life. Buring the seventies 

the closely-articulated society of the Victorian 

age was almost undisturbed. The eighties shook its 

foundations, but not until the nineties were the 

changes which had begun in London generalized for 

all England. The upper and upper middle classes were 

the first affected, and since the immigrant ranchers 

were largely drawn from these elements, the ranching 

community was not Victorian but late Victorian. It 

knew Wilde and the Few Woman, it was acquainted with 

the Yellow Book as well as/\the works of 

Tennyson. Although they were hearty rather than 
c /> 

arty, most of the ranchers and their wives had the 
outlook of a younger generation. _t the same time 
there were many who had been brought up in the rigid 
seventies, or in the remote country in the eighties, 
whose influence tinged the modernism of the ranchers 
with the past. Perhaps the community is most suit¬ 
ably described as conservatively late Victorian. 

If we can judge morality from a Police-record, 
Alberta was not especially free from the vices of the 
world. Murder, arson, shooting with intent, forgery, 







/ ^ 7 


all the varieties of theft and of assault, deserting 
employment, non-payment of wages, gambling, prostit¬ 
ution, bigamy, vagrancy, attempted suicide, and 
receiving money under false pretences all figure in 
the police list of convictions for 1883. In « ne 1 ^ 
settlement, even where the forces of la* ore rep¬ 
resented by the Founted Police,' the presence of 
a considerable criminal element seems inevitable. 

The Western States were not remarkable for their 
high regard for law. It would be unfair to tax the 
ranching community with all the sins and errors of 
the inhabitants of Southern Alberta, but ranching was 
the dominant industry, it employed many of the 
criminals and provided the conditions which attracted 
them. 

Offences against property were the common change 
of the courts. Oattle stealing always, and horse¬ 
stealing when prices were rising, were the most 
frequent offences. Although the public conscience 
was strongly opposed to these transgressions and 
although the ranchers would have liked to deal 
harshly with the offenders, the property sense of the 
Indians and of many white settlers remained rudimen¬ 
tary. The ranch-owners themselves were rarely 















y a 


implicated for they felt too strongly about such 
theft to countenance it among themselves. Tost 
of the stealing was done by Indians and by the 
undesirables who formed part of the floating 
population common to alyfrontier settlements. 

Standards of personal honesty were high, although 
personal honesty was not always felt to apply to 
other people's cattle. The codes of the British 
settlers, of the American cowboys and of the Mounted 
Police were on this point unanimous. In spite 
of the many cases and convictions for stealing stock, 
personal obligations were met with a scrupulous 
exactitude. There were numerous occasions on which 
cattle-thieves,safe with their booty on the other 
side of the border, sent money to pay debts they had 
contracted before their forced flight. A lie was 
held in deepest infamy hough tall stor' 
admired and retailed with personal additions. In 
spite of large, loopholes, rigid honesty was character¬ 
istic of the ranching community and old-timers take 
a considerable pride in the rectitude of their 
generation. 

Grimes of violence were regrettably common, 
although on this point too the public conscience 



' 

. 

■ 

. 


« 

. 

- 













) 2 . °l 


was extremely sensitive, if the general horror when 
murder was committed can he accepted as proof of 
sensitiveness. Some peculiarly unpleasant crimes 
were committed, but they were usually the work of 
Indians or of the aforementioned undesirables. 
Violence as a result of high spirits, a frequent 
occurence In the range country of the Republic, 
was almost unknown in Alberta. For this condition 
the credit must go to the vigilance and high reputat¬ 
ion of the Mounted Police. Suicide was far from rare 

on the isolated ranches and sometimes business fail- 

too 

ure^led ranchers to take their own lives. 

The attitude of the citizens of Alberta towards 
the law was not always one of patient respect. The 
ranchers felt that the Police treated the Indians 
with unnecessary lenience and they would, cheerfully 
have taken the law into their own hands and strung 
the. suspect from the most convenient tree. A 
"Vigilante Committee" was actually organized,'along 
Montana lines, at Pincher Creek about 188? to deal 
with hors e-stealing in that district. Its members, 
who were amohg the most representative and influential 
ranchers of the region, may have had no intention of 
taking extreme measures; according to one of them they 



































130 


were merely "playing a game of 1 bluff T ,f (4), 

However the incident is suggestive. At Iethbridge in 
1896 a man was tarred and feathered, but not, it 
appears, ridden out of town on a rail (5). Although 
there were these occasional lapses into disrespect 
of law, horse-play of this kind was rare, thanks 
largely to Police efficiency. 

There were other unconventional practices among 
the early inhabitants. The free-traders had taken 
wives from among the native population, a custom 
which as late as the eighties was emulated by the 
settlers, though rarely. Hsua'lly such marriages 
7/ere made Indian fashion although some of them vere 
both legal and lasting. As many of the Hudson’s 
Pay men had had Indian wives, a considerable population 
of mixed blood had grown up in the West and naturally 
had its representatives in Southern Alberta. Although 
during the ranching age marriages with full-blooded 
Indian women were viewed with disapproval, and half- 
breeds were as much suspect as ful'l-bloods, to a 
smaller admixture of native blood no stigma was 
attached. 

(4) F.A. Godsal, "Memoirs" p. 9 

(5) Kelly, pp. 291, 292. 






































































131 - 

Sometimes Indian "wives" were disposed of without 
much ceremony by their mates, who, with the full 
approval of Indian custom, sent them back to their 
tribes* Frequently the "squaw-men" married white 
women from whom they took considerable pains to 
conceal their former alliances. Occasionally their 
fiancees arrived a little previously, only to dis¬ 
cover their predecessors still in possession, a 
circumstance which rarely had a happy result. Such 
mixed marriages belonged to the early days. The 
later settlers brought their own moral standards 
with them and Southern Alberta T s ranchers during the 
pre-war years possessed much the same rules of 
conduct as the English middle and upper classes. 

Public conscience was as strongly opposed to 
lapses of this order as it was to departure from the 
property code. In the Fac’leod Gazette (6) may be 
found editorial reference to the practice cf the 
barbarous custom of the "Chivari" by which primitive 
communities almost universally express their dis~ 
approval of sexual irregularities. Pu lie spirit 
did not, however, prevent the establishment and 
conduct of disorderly houses in most centres cf 


(6) July 29, 1882 























/3 2 - 

population. In spite of the 3aw of prohibition 
which existed, almost every village had a small hut 


flourishing "red-light 


M V. 


rea. 


Mannered society is variousl 


) 


d t 

iM 


ve died 


with.thp end of the ei 

W.7K A 

of the ' /| 

iW 

Empire andjythe outbreak of the Great far* If 


Southern Alberta was ever mannered it was mannered 
as were the later Victorians. The niceties of social 
intercourse were piously observed. Gentlemen sprang 
to their feet when ladies entered and ladies sat up 


straight. Conversation was a fine but neglected art, 
between the sexes swaddled in delicacy and a little 
hampered by a fondness for monologue. As the tributes 
of their menfolk suggest, women remained ! ’t e Sex." 

The relaxation which came to English society with 
the eighties and nineties was in Alberta filtered 
through the preindices of an isolated community. 

The "Souls”!could hardly happen in Macleod and 
Oalgary lacked a Marlborough House. .hen the New 
Woman came to an Alberta ranch, she appeared a little 
fast in the eyes of a community which was late 
Victorian almost against its will. Ranch conditions 
had, of course, modified even convention and the 
women of the ranches were uncensured for actions 















/ 3 3 ' 


which her English cousin would have thought shocking 
and her English aunt scandalous, hut her freedom was 
more real than apparent. Perhaps the breezy .Test 
had tempered convention more than rancher^ admit or 
perhaps this exhortation to better manners had a 
lasting effects "There is a practice frequently 
indulged in here, we believe and hope, thoughtlessly, 
which, to say the least, is in very bad taste, 
refer to noises and remarks should a 3ady and 
gentleman pass down a street together. Facleod has 
always been noted for the respect and courtesy shown 
to the ladies, and we trust that the boys are not 
going to let the town fall from grace by making 
a lady feel uncomfortable.... Ear out 'est ;T e should 
recognize the honour they have done us by casting 
their lot without the pales of civilization, and 
to feel that they can safely go down street without 
fear of being audibly 

Even if, as this passage suggests, the behaviour 
of the ranchers was not always immaculate, their 
vices were the vices of gentlemen, drinking and 
gambling, Women were a too-circumscribed field 
and the gilded professional beauties of the 


(7) llacleod Gazette, August 24, 1883. 














/ S4. 

Homeland woul^ have seemed incongruous in the 
Western sc.ene and would have found it unprofitable* 
The right to drink was however one of the chief 
issues of the day. Prohibition, introduced simul¬ 
taneously with the Mounted Police for the benefit 
of the Indians, had a stormy career. /hite settlers 
felt they had a right to decide the question of 
abstinence for themselves. In the towns which 
were growing up in the North- , r est there was a strong 
temperance movement which regarded some form 
of liquor control as indispensable to progress but 
the ranchers were almost unanimously opposed. , r ariou 
expedients were devised but even after the adoption 
of free sale by hotels, the liquor problem remained 
a burning issue. As so many regarded the existing 
regulations as manifestly unjust there was a general 
conspiracy to evade them which complicated the task 
of the police, themselves far from convinced of the 
divine inspiration of their mission of suppression. 

Although there were frequent exceptions, the use 
of intoxicants was fairly general among the ranchers. 
Consistent excess was uncommon hut if any offence 
against good conduct was frequent, it was drunkenness 
Much of it was merely the outcome of high spirits 
and was probably no commoner in Alberta than it was 





















f 

















































/ 3 ^ 

elsewhere In those hard-drinking days. Unfortunately 
for the good name of the Englishman, a small number 

, 

probably Scotch, Irish or Telsh, oame or were sent 
to the Test and with grim determination, drank 
themselves to death. Their escapades enjoyed an 
undeserved prominence in the rress and in popular 
gossip of the day, a prominence which rather give'' 
the impression that Southern Alberta was largely 
populated by the drunken younger sons of English 
peers. Actually such abuse was rare. Although 
poverty sometimes made impossible the realization 
of their ideals, most of the ranchers shared the 
nineteenth-century belief that spirituous liquors, 
correctly used, had something to contribute to the 
good life. 

Gambling, forbidden and permitted, was a feature 
of most gatherings in ranching days. Cards, racing, 
dice and plain betting kept money in circulation and 
formed an exciting interlude between periods of 
work. There were a number of professional gamblers 
in the country but amateurism prevailed. loker, the 
typically Western game in the United States, was the 
most popular card-game but black-jack, the American 

















t 




























( 36 


variety of vingt-et-un, had exponents* Sometimes 
large sums of money changed hands but gambling seems 
to have ruined fewer ranchers than the speculation 
of later days. 

Local loyalties were strong. The employees of 
a ranch, whether English or American, were faithful 
to its interests regardless of their own. Even 
after they left its employment, they continued to 
take an interest in the well-being of the ranch at 
which they remained welcome. The ranchers of various 
districts were very loyal to the other members of 
their local stock association and sometimes there was 
almost open war between two districts when some 
disagreement arose between stock-owners. local 
loyalty was the reflection of an intense nationalistic 
loyalty, Dmring the Boer T 7ar a Herman family which 
settled in Sheep Greek near Okotoks was driven from 
the country by the petty persecutions to which they 
were subject as "pro-Boers". Before the war they 
had been extremely popular. The loyalty of the 
ranching community to the "Old Country" found 
expression in the Great 7 ar. The districts where 
ranching still predominated sent a larger rercentage 
of their young men to France than almost any others 

























J 3 7 * 


in Alberta. 

The code of the Alberta ranchers was a strange 
synthesis of those of Victorian England’s upper 
classes and of those of the ran^ge country of the 
United States. Isolation made them conservative. 

In the period under consideration'English influences 
prevailed. The first generation was English and 
ranching as a dominant industry did not last long 
enough to permit the second generation to assert 
itself. It would have been more Americanized but 
still English because its atmosphere was English. 

In a few communities which have survived with little 
change in their' racial make-up the English—perhaps 
it would be fairer tb say the "Old Country”—influence 
still prevails unchallenged but the environment has 
forced subtle-adaptations. In such communities the 
body is American but the spirit is English. Although 
these isolated settlements are Canadian, they proudly 
preserve more of their English tradition than almost 
any other group of rural Canadian communities. 











- 















/ 3 f 


( 6) Assooiatlong and Organizations 

During the ranching era in Southern Alberta, 
although the population was small and scattered, 
associations and organizations flourished. Political, 
fraternal, cultural, social and business organizations 
were built up, had their day and either languished or 
were absorbed into the general fabric of provincial 
life. The very smallness of the population created 
a need for these organizations and associations, for 
without them few of the aims anfl ambitions of the 

community could be accomplished. The desire for rapid 

c * 

development, the Booster Complex, from which the ranch 
ers were not entirely free, the desire for a fuller 1/ 
social and cultural life, and the evident benefits 
of co-operation in the ranching industry itself, 
led men into combination. 

The Stock Associations were the most important of 
all the organizations. As we have seen elsewhere, 
the Associations were very useful to the industry. 

They brought the ranchers into contact with each 
other, enabled them to organize their work to prevent 
wasteful duplication of effort, disseminated 

information and enabled the ranchers to combine for 
various useful purposes, ranging from the improvement 








c 







/ 2 V 


of the breed of range-stock to the placing of bounties 
on timber-wolves. They developed the corporate spirit 
of the ranchers and gave weight to their representat¬ 
ions to Dominion and Territorial governments. Indeed, 
without the Associations, the industry would have 
suffered partial paralysis or even death. 

Political organizations had their origin t the 
first elections. Politics was a lively game and the 
ranchers 1 interests were at stake. Instinctively 
Conservative, the rancher cynically believed that 
all governments alike were quite indifferent to his 
plight. His frequent victimization "to protect the 
credit of Canada” (8) suggests that his belief had 
foundation. Even as early as 1883, at the meeting 
for the organization of a stock-association, when it 
was proposed to-place some matter before the North- 
West Council the reply was, "the Council never meets: 
there is no money in it." (9). In spite of this 
attitude of disrespect for the governing bodies, the 
ranchers, or some of them, occasionally took a hand 
in election fights. During the campaign of 1896, an 
enterprising group of amateur politician 0 and newspaper¬ 
men published "The Outlaw" at Scott T s Coulee, no?r 

(8) E.H. Maunsell "Memoirs" Part II page 6. 

(9) Macleod Gazette, April 14, 1883. 










U0- 


Pincher Greek (10). The frank and vigorous personal¬ 
ities. of this organ would have done credit to prof¬ 
essional Journalists. 

Southern Alberta had its intellectuals, or at 
least its intellectual interests. One of her scholars 
shot himself, perhaps unable to find consolation in 
either the volume of Plautus or the bottle of whiskey 
which were found beside his bed. In Macleod, on 
December 14, 1884, a literary, Scientific and Historical 
Society was founded. It had ten charter members and 
others were to be elected by ballot. The first officers 
were the Reverend John Maclean, Captain Cotton, F.'T.C. 
Haultain and J.D. Higinbotham. On December 22 the 
President, Dr. Maclean, delivered the inaugural 
address, which dealt with "Indian literature" (11). 

Such a society was a remarkable phenomenon in 
pioneer community. 

Nomaccount of ranchers’ organizations would be 
complete without mention of their activities during 
the Rebellion of 1885. 11though the Southern .lberta 
Indians remained loyal, tension was high. Harneoned 
teams waited day and night near each isolated ranch 

(10) Mrs. C. lynch-Staunton, "A History of Parly days 
in Pincher Creek", pp. 42-44. 

(11) J.D. Higinbotham, ".Then the Test was Young" 
p. 317 appendix. 













house to convey the women and children to the nearest 

police post at the first sign of trouble, ^any of the 

men joined General Itrange's little expeditionary 

force. The rest organized into patrols to kwep /atch. 

Perhaps the most famous was "Stimson's Rangers" formed 

by Fred Stimson, manager of the Bar U, which operated 

south of High River. Although no outbreak occurred, 

and the "Rangers" were deprived of opportunity for 

heroism, their organization illustrates the remark-'h'! e 

power which a very small and scattered groun of people 

possessed,of co-operation in the face of comi 

fraternal organisations duly appeared. By 1894 

five lodges were advertising in the Kacleod Gazette, 

a medleyof initials and symbols. They were the I.O.O.F., 

. 

I.C.F., A.O.U.’T. , 1.0.1. and the A.F.&.A.M. The 
“joiner ; ’ In so obviously gregarious s 

community, it would have been strange if a good many 
other social clubs had not existed. All through the 
ranching areas, but especially where settlement was 
well-established, as at High River, Oalgary and Macleod, 
cricket, polo and race clubs flourished. Some clubs 
were more purely social in intention and with the 
athletic clubs they formed convenient centres for the 
life of the neighborhood and performed a successful 
function in the clear articulation of society. 






























7) sports and T: sstimes 


(hr 


People’s pastimes reveal their group personality 
even more frankly than their serious occupations• 

The ranchers hebi their leisure leer, anfl they filled 
it with the amusements which the:; had. enjoyed at horn. 
Orioket, polo, tennis and horse*racing p1ayed as 1arp^ a 
part in the new life as in the old. There were new 
sports, by-products of the ne^ 1 ' , Nrtiich they 

found diverting, at first as spectators and 

w f 

the next generation, as performers. The feats which; 
professionals perform at stampedes and redoes to¬ 
day had in the ranching era a real utility. In 
England Irhe squirearchy was committing "slow, 
gentlemanly, unintelligent hari-kari before its 
trinity of the fox, the horse and the pheasant" (12). 
Pox and pheasant found adequate and less expensive 
substitutes; horses were plentiful and cost little 
to keep in the new country. Even quite poor people 
could now indulge the tastes of gentlemen. 

There is a tradition that polo was played for 
the first time in America, near Pincher Creek in 
1886 (13), when a rancher brought the first real 

(12) oft, 

(13) History of Early days at -incher Creek, comp lie 1 
-by F rs. C. lynch-Staunton, p# 36. 









ih 3 - 


sticks and "bans from England, As the p-n.me had only 
"been introduced into England fifteen years before, 
the claim may he Justified. In the years following 
its initiation, polo enjoyed great popularity* 
Stigmatized elsewhere as 01 rich man's o*ame, it could 
he played by Alherta ranchers with a minimum of 
expense. Clubs were formed in almost every ranching 
centre. There were several teams near Pin©her Creek 
and Maaleod and at High River, Millarville, Calgary 
and Cochrane. Tournaments were arranged and cups 
were donated. The Beaver Creek trophy, over which 
many hard-played games were fought, was an ordinary 
tin mug mounted on miniature polo sticks carved by 
members of the club (14). The polo matches and the 
tournaments were great occasions* the former of course 
attracted fewer spectators than the latter, 
came crowds from every district. Polo was a very 
social game and the onlookers were almost as import n J 
as the players. The standard of play was high and. 
Alherta produced some world-famous players, notably 
Major Ceorge Ross of High River, Polo continued in 
favour in Alberta until the war when it languished 
for want of players. Afterwards it recovered and 


(14) Ibid. , p. 10 









teams appeared in umlikely places. Depression 
struck it a bitter blow but it survives, although 
its chief support comes no longer from the ranches 
but from the cities. 

Horse-racing was another popular diversion. 
Informal races between the favourites of two or 
three proud owners were very frequent and race clubs 
were organized early in the period and held frequent 
meets. Horse-races formed an inevitable part of 
the sports days which were held to celebrate 
national holidays and other great occasions. 

Many horse-lovers imported and bred racing-stock 
and, although by the nineties there were already 
protests that the sporting spirit of the West was 
declining, very good races were run on Alberta 
tracks. Every village and town had a track of 
some sort, and there were many tracks where there 
were no towns. Hacing was in the early years an 
almost exclusively amateur affair, with owners, 
jockeys and trainers who lived in the neighborhood. 
Hacing was "straight” in those days, thanks to the 
British tradition. 

Everyone in the country who could, attended 
the meets, driving or riding for miles. Sometimes 
they stayed with friends in the vicinity; sometimes 



















• 




- 












- 





. 










t . 



. 



f 



♦ 

t 










. . 

, 











in their enthusiasm they camped* Everyone met 
everyone else, for the race-meetings were like 
large family parties. Sometimes the meets were 
one-day affairs, often they lasted longer. Almost 
invariably the Race Club held a Ball which everyone 
attended. Until the War the character of the 
"races" changed little, but most of the Clubs 
disappeared then. There are very few rural race- 
meetings to-day, but the one or two which survive 
have lost little of the atmosphere which character¬ 
ized their predecessors of thirty,, forty, even 
fifty years ago. 

In spite of their predilection for the horse- 
sports, the ranchers had time for other diversions. 
Cricket and the Mounted Police appeared simultaneously 
on the Western plains# When the ranchers came they 
organized with zest. Cricket Clubs flourished 
everywhere and matches were regular features at 
Sports Bays and other gatherings. Lawn tennis was 
a popular game with both men and women and showed 
the same notable tendency to tournaments. Many 
of the ranches had courts and the gentle sport was 
everywhere enjoyed. 

Obviously the ranchers’ games reflected very 











faithfully the English scene. Enthusiastic sports¬ 
men, with excellent athletes among them, the ranchers 
played at everything, whether at the games they had / 
imported themselves, or at the new games which cow¬ 
boys from the old ranges introduced. Perhaps no 
pioneer community ever devoted quite so much time 
to amusement. The ranchers had both leisure and 
an exemplary training in its use. 

Tournaments and race-meetings alike usually 
ended with a Ball and dancing was always a favourite 
amusement, even in Mounted Police days, "....a new 
social life was unfolding in the land. Band practice 
was held daily at Port Walsh and Port Macleod and for 
what was a band if one did not dance ? Dancing 
raged. During January and February 1880, at Port 
Walsh, thirteen police dances were held....either 
the half-breed women were exceptionally interesting 
or....girls had followed Mrs. Macleod and Mrs. Winder 
and Mrs# Shurtleff in some profusion” (15). After 
settlement began the Police posts remained the centres 
of social life and their Balls were the great events 
of the social calendar (16). As settlers came in 

(15) Longstreth, T# Morris, "The Silent Force" p. 115 

(16) Macleod Gazette, July 15, 1882; December 14, 1882; 

January 13, 1883. 










they too entertained on a scale commensurate with the 
size of their houses* Their clubs and organizations 
all gave Balls as well. In 1882 at Macleod "there 
were one or two dances every night during Christmas 
week," which was the high point of the year's gaiety. 

The evidence suggests that the ranchers were 
well amused. Most of the dances of the seventies and 
early eighties were quite informal, held wherever 
a floor was available and with whatever music could 
be improvised. The dance-figures themselves were 
those of the England of the seventies, with a few 
American jigs and reels introduced for variety. As 
the years advanced newcomers brought the latest 
innovations and the informality of the pioneers was 
modified. Balls during the late eighties and after 
were modelled after similar functions in England. 
Evening dress became the rule, the ladies strove 
after more elaborate toilettes and the music, the 
decorations and the refreshments—these latter 
somewhat complicated by the liquor laws—were matters 
of consequence to be considered by Committees. People 
still came miles to attend the dances, staying with 
friends or at hotels. Those days of leisured transport 
were the hey-day of the small town hotel, since in 






I 






* 

» 


4 

f 

, 

( 

. 

. 

— 

♦ 




the later .years the centre of sooial life had in 
large measure moved to the towns. 

Cards and theatricals were other indoor diver¬ 
sions only less popular than dancing. Poker was the 
men’s game; few ladies played it, although other card 
games were approved. Whist had its day and by the 
nineteen-hundreds auction bridge was becoming 
popular. Lopgstreth records what must have been 
one of the first theatrical productions in Alberta, 
a performance by the Mounted Police in 1880 (17). 

,T . ...The men, instead of a society drama... .presented 
’Dick Turpin* as their first play, although the 
actors had just come in from making the arrest of 
Pour Jack Bob for assaulting an Indian." Men and 
women shared both indoor and outdoor games—women 
shot, rode, fished and played tennis with vigour 
and skill. So much progress had the New Woman made 
in Alberta. All kinds of expeditions were popular, 
picnics as well as longer camping expeditions such 
as that Craig described at the end of his book 
"Ranching with Lords and Commons" 

The ranchers enjoyed themselves. Life was easy 


(17) Longstreth, T. Morris, "The Silent Force" p. 117 







« 

- 

a 

* 

- f ... 

f 

» 

, ( 

» 








149 


enough to allow plentiful leisure and they used it 
pleasantly without the 

might have troubled those who had known a harder 
pioneering. Every occasion was seized for enter¬ 
tainment and the ranchers foregathered upon the 
slightest excuse. Sometimes work was neglected 
for a more attractive diversion, but very rarely; 
haying meant staying at home and gaiety ran highest 
when work was slack. It would be unfair to call 
the ranchers a lazy people, equally unfair to 
stigmatize them as over-industrious. They were not 
always financially successful; but they did introduce 
into Alberta a tradition of leisure, a more graceful 
mode of living, in welcome contrast to the glorificat¬ 
ion of labour as an end in itself which has been so 
characteristis of the Canadian and American way 


of life 






, 

- 

r 

, 

« 




/ ir 6- 


(c) The Ranch in the Community 
(1) The Ranch and the Church 

In a pioneer community the provision of social 
services is always an important problem and the church 
is usually one of the first to emerge, When two or 
three are gathered together the natural outcome, if 
it be Sunday, is a church service. In the ranching 
life church services played a large part. Although 

% 

at rural points services were infrequent, they 
brought a general turn-out of the faithful and the 
social contact involved was as much anticipated as 
the spiritual food. 

Among the first religious services held in 
Southern Alberta were those of the Methodist FoDougalls, 
that intrepid missionary family who established them¬ 
selves at Morleyville on the Bow. The McDougalls were 
primarily interested in the Indians and although they 
held services for the scattered white population 
of the country, their interests lay as far outside the 
white community as their station lay outside the true 
range area. 

It seems unlikely that the practice of religion 
arose spontaneously among the early traders at 
WhoopGip, Stand Off and Slide Out, although the Rev. 
George McBougall did hold services which were well 
































/* 7 . 

received. The Mounted Police in the severities 

enjoyed such ministrations as their officers could 

contrive. At the beginning of the next decade the 

missionaries began to arrive in greater numbers. The 

denominations first in the field were the 

the Homan Catholics, the and the 

Presbyter' & ns 

Mexhs di&iar. Sent out to work among the IndJans, the 
efforts of the missionaries among the white settlers 
were at first merely subsidiary, but as population 
increased, such work obtained more attention both 
from the clergy in the field and the missionary 
organizations which sustained them. 

Fort Macleod was the first point in Southern 
Alberta to attain anything like regular services. 

In the early numbers of the "Gazette", which began 
publication on July 1, 1882, there is frequent mention 
of the religious bodies. Apparently the Methodist 
Church was well-established for the issue of 
September 14 contains a puff for the community's 
first literary production, a series of allegorical 
essays, "Lone Land Lights", by Hev. John Maclean, the 
Methodist minister. The Church of England was 

early in the field for by 1883 its services 
were regularly held in the Police Barracks and there 
are editorial exhortations to liberality in contributing 






, 


{ 




* 

* 

i 

' ( 













! if X- 


to the erection of an Anglican Church. The first 
Roman Catholic services mentioned were in April 
1883, conducted mcrning and evening "at Hunroe's 
house" by Rather Lacombe. At the meeting which 
followed it was decided to erect a chapel. 

Services were gradually extended to every spot 
where a congregation and a clergyman could coincide. 
Notice was given in the Gazette of April 1883 that 
Church of England services would be held at Captain 
Scobie 1 shouse at Pincher Creek on the last Sunday 
of each month. Captain Scobie was a good churchman, 
for when St. John's Church was built at lircher 
Creek in 1884, the first Anglican Church in Southern 
Alberta, he gave the site. At Calgary the first 
Anglican service was held in 1884 in the Police 
Barracks and was conducted by the Rev. J.W. Tims. 

The organ was loaned by a neighboring saloon and 
taken to church on a wheel-barrow. The Anglican 
congregation at Calgary, the Church of the Redeemer, 
now a Pro-CatheJtfal, shared its priest with the 
temporarily larger congregation of St. Paul's, 

Pish Creek, (Midnapore) a church which disputes 
the claim of St. John's, Pincher Creek, to be the 
oldest Anglican Church in Alberta. 

We seem to be rather preoccupied with the Church 

f 












/ 5'3 • 


of England. It was indeed the church of the 
ranching community, hot all the ranchers were 
Anglican, for many of them were Roman-Catholics or 
/\ Protestants^ A majority of the ranchers were, 
however, Anglican, and among those who were not, 
sectarian enthusiasm was not a fetish. One church 
seemed much like another, and if the Anglicans 
organized they usually received support from other 
denominations. Until 1900 the chief support of 
the other churches came from the towns; after 1900 

oiktr 

they^Protestant denominations led in the farming 
districts, although in ranching communities like 
Millarville and Pekisko, the Anglicans retained 
their majority. 

Sometimes the ranchers went to church at the 
nearest town, but if the town was remote service 
was held at some convenient centre. The centre 
could be a school or a hall—many of the ranching 
districts had some centre of this sort—or it might 
be a house with a large sitting-room. Services were 
held whenever the clergyman could be present. In 
later years the country churches had afternoon or 
morning services and the town churches who Shared 
the priest had early morning and evening services. 

If funds permitted, which they often did not, a 






































< 






, 







church was built. The existence of a parish was 
precarious, depending as a rule upon a faithful 
family or two, who provided the house, the music 
(if there was any), put up the parson (if he was 
a visitor) and gave the congregation tea. 

This last duty was vital. Church was almost 
as important from the social point of view as the 
race-meeting or polo-match to which it sometimes 
deferred. Everyone met at church, discussed future 
plans, issued and received invitations, and exchanged 
news. Eor many districts church services were a 
useful social cement. Race meets were occasions, 
polo and cricket had their season, but the church was 
always there, offering a welcome opportunity to 
combine duty and pleasure. 

The ranchers 5 church was a pioneer organization. 
It lacked buildings, clergy, money, organization. 

Its few clergymen were, if they were conscientious, 
terribly overwprked. Organization was almost 
impossible outside the towns. Nevertheless the 
church went on, Haphazard and incoherent but 
filling a genuinely important place in its people's 
lives and affections. 









(2) The Ranch and, the Schools 

Many of the ranchers had in their original homes 
belonged to the educated classes. The rest of the 
ranchers and most of the stock-hands were wise in 
their own craft but possessed only the most rudiment¬ 
ary formal education. Many of them had a supreme 
contempt for what they are believed to have called 
’’book learning”. With the first-mentioned class 
education had become a habit,and there were certain 
regulations as to education in the North-West 
Territories which were applicable to Southern Alberta t 
but although intellectual curiosity existed, few 
pioneer communities have been as devoid of enthusiasm 
for the building of schools. There was a mild and 
conscientious agitation in the press, attributable 
to the Scotch of the towns, but in the range-country, 
silence. 

The ranchers, faithful to the English tradition, 
were inclined to believe that education was the affair 
of the children’s parents. Where a school was 
available, as in Calgary, Macleod and Fincher Creek 
from very early days, the ranchers in the vicinity 
sent their children there and even sent them to 
live with friends in the town when distance or 













. 

































, 


















* 










r 
























weather conditions forbade riding or driving. This 

was not a universal rule. The children of the 

or of the ranchers 

wealthier ranchers^who had wealthier relatives went 
"Home" to school, to Eastern Canada, to the United 
States, to Great Britain, or even to the Continent. 
Sometimes they were sent because of the advantages 
these countries seemed to offer and very often because 
sentiment dictated their attendanceat the schools 
of their parents. Sometimes mothers taught their 
children at home; occasionally fathers lent a hand. 

In the spate of female relatives governesses were 
common. Tutors were rare. 

The large area of the ranches militated against 
the establishment of school-districts but as settlement 
increased schools appeared at various points and the 
ranchers' children attended. Sometimes ranch families 
wintered in town to give their children an opportunity 
to go to school. Local private boarding schools, 
which solved the educational problems of many parents, 
did not appear in Calgary until the first decade of 
the twentieth century when Western Canada College for 
boys and St. Hilda's School for girls were established. 

The education of the ranchers' children was a 
curious mixture—a year or so at home, with or without 


























































— 


















a governess, then a country school and a taste of 
boarding-out to attend a town or village school; in 
many cases a year or two in the East or in England, 
either at school or being "finished" by contacts 
with relatives* In spite of its peculiarities the 
system, or rather arrangement, was not wholly bad. 

Some children did grow up completely illiterate but they 
v/ere few. Schooling was rudimentary but after the 
railway books were plentiful in many homes and the 
homes did maintain certain standards of culture and 
refinement. It was an informal training, one which 
left great blanks of complete ignorance, but 
perhaps not to be wholly condemned in favour of the 
complete and stultifying formalism of a standardized 
educational system. 

































/ i'X - 


(3) The Ranch and Intellectual Life--the Press 

Some of the ranchers had intellectual interests. 
They were men with good minds, good educations and 
good memories, who brought a few books with them and 
had more sent out. Many of them, moulded by the 
educational system peculiar to the British upper ond 
middle classes, were excellent classical scholars 
who found in their new life a new appreciation of 
classical wisdom and wit. Wot all the ranchers 
were classical scholars; the majority had probably 
shed their hardly-acquired knowledge of Greek roots 
before they saw the foothills of the Rockies, i'or 
those who had the inclination, the new environment 
was favourable to scholastic indulgence, for the 
ranches offered ample leisure, sufficient solitude 
and a disposition to accept the right of others to 
gratify their peculiar tastes. As long as his 
cattle were reasonably well cared for, the 
intellectual rancher who preferred converse with 
Catullus to discourse upon cows was regarded as 
odd rather than offensive. Literary enthusiasm 
was usually genuine; as a pose it would have been 
ridiculous in a country where, since most people 
were preoccupied with cattle, there was more honour 
















< 







to the stock-man than to the scholar. 

The ranchers who were inclined towards things 
of the mind were appreciative rather than creative, 
and their literary output was negligible both in 
quantity and quality. A few jijqgles in the local 
papers and an occasional travel-book or novel 
comprise almost the entire production of the period. 
There was nothing of real literary value but much 
that is interesting to any collector of Ganadiana. 
These writings reveal however that in Southern 
Alberta there had settled a very odd pioneer 

fa <de>kr h C+mJ* ^ 

community-^ for few pioneer s/\have a the time or the 
inclination to read books, let alone write them. 

In the first column of the first issue of the 
Port Macleod Gazette, published on July 1, 1882, ther^ 
appeared above the initials R.O.F. what must have 
been Southern Alberta's first published poem, 

TT A Valentine". It was hardly a poem, little more 
indeed than three eight-line verses of doggerel. 

Its subject rather than its technique is its claim 
to interest. It is an attempt to satirize the 
aesthetic tendencies peculiar to the last decades of 
the nineteenth century in England, and especially 
their most famous representative, Oscar Wilde. 




. 

. 

- 

, 

r t 

, , . 

' ' 


. 








Uo 


True, the "fin-de-siecle" school received rough 
treatment, but that such a composition should ap¬ 
pear in the first number of a pioneer paper in a 
pioneer country is surprising. The literary interests 
of the Gazette were not limited to verse, for in the 
same issue there was a very caustic article on 
"Boy’s Western Stories". The Gazette was destined 
to become more Philistine in its tone for in the 
issue of June 23, 1883 we read, "We received a 
contribution of poetry for insertion in the 'Gazette'. 

No doubt the poem had merit, but then we don't know 
much about poetry, and so did not want to take the 
chances of getting mobbed. We shall always be glad 
to receive contributions which will be of interest 
to our readers, but at poetry, unless above the 
average, we must draw the line. We need all our 
space for more important matters." 

Apparently the Press was adamantly low-brow. In 
the meantime, however, the Gazette, as has been remarked, 
had given a 'puff' to Rev. James Maclean's "Lone Land 
Lights", that book of allegorical essays with a double 
motive, to further the cause of religion and to raise 
funds for the Mission. The price, neatly bound, was 
fifty cents. In 1886 Alexander Stavely Hill, not 
really a rancher, but an English M.P. who was part 










/£/ 


owner of the Oxley Ranch, had published "From Home 
to Home", descriptive of his Canadian travels and 
experiences, especially in the ranching West. The 
sometime manager of the Oxley Ranch, John R. Craig, 
also wrote a book, published in 1903. "Ranching with 
Lords and Commons" is a rather one-sided account of 
the experiences of the Canadian ranch-manager for 
an English ranching company. General Strange, the 
moving spirit in the Military Colonization Company's 
ranch on the Bow below Calgary (near Gjtechen) wrote 
a diverting semi-autobiographical novel "Gunner 
Jingo's Jubilee" in which he recounts his Canadian 
adventures. Members of the Mounted Police as well 
made occasional literary excursions. There was even 
a poetess of the ranches, Mrs. Walter Skrine of High 
River who, under the pseudonym of Moira O'Neile wrote 
a good deal of verse dealing with the North-West, some 
of which is to be found in "Songs of the Glens of 
Antrim" (Blackwood and Sons). Her verse was certainly 
not of a distinguished greatness, but she must have 
caught a measure of the spirit of the days, for there 
are frequent affectionate references to her poetry in 
the reminiscences of pioneer ranchers. 

In none of the arts did any of the ranchers rise 










t 






I 


» 


t 



/GX 


above the level of mediocrity. They were amateurs 
in execution as well as in spirit. None of the 
innumerable water-colours, oils and sketches, which 
the women of the ranches, like their English sisters, 
delighted in making ever equalled the works in which 
C.W. Russill depicted so vitally the life of the 
American range. Painting, like writing, was for the 
ranchers a pleasant hobby, very suitable to men and 
women of taste and refinement but not for a moment 
to be taken seriously. The artist would have been 
a little out of place in the ranchers 1 scheme of 
things, a little unreal, a little unrestrained. 

Their culture was the prerogative of their class, 
inseparable from it and essential to it. It did 
not make for great artistic achievement but it did 
make for a very agreeable and balanced way of life. 

One of the earliest manifestations of community 
life in Alberta was the emergence of a local press. 

The first paper which served the ranching community 
in Southern Alberta was the Port Macleod Gazette, 
which began publication onJuly 1, 1882. It was 
followed closely by the Calgary Herald /hose fir t 
issue came off the press on August 31, 1883. The 
Medicine Hat Times followed in 1884 and the Lethbridge 
News in 1885. These were the pioneer newspapers of 






' 


0 , . 














( 

















» 











/C 3 

Southern Alberta; others were born, but had short 
and stormy existences; these four survived, in one 
form or another, frequent changes of name, staff 

an£ policy. 

Of these four the Macleod Gazette was most defin¬ 
itely the organ of a ranching community. While 
Calgary, Medicine Hat and Lethbridge had other inter¬ 
ests, Macleod was entirely dependant for its import¬ 
ance upon its position as a distributing centre for 
the adjacent ranching areas. Its early prestige and 
growth had been the result of its position as Mounted 
Police headquarters but the Police had little need 
of a newspaper and it was the ranchers who made 
a local press possible. 

The first issue of the Gazette was the work of 
C.E.D. Wood and E.T. Saunders, ex-Mounted Policemen. 

It was to be issued semi-monthly and its subscription 
rate was three dollars a year, payable in advance. 

It was a four-page paper, four columns to the page, 
and the columns were 11*|- inches long. In addition 
to the poem and article previously mentioned, a good 
deal of information was offered. The leading article 
dealt with Port Macleod’s need for a paper, the policy 
it would pursue of independant support of the North- 






/£*■ 


Test to correct the erroneous' impressions of travell¬ 
ers and its desire to form a link between "the two 
greatest countries in the world," presumably Canada 
and the United States. Another editorial complained 
of the type of men sent out by the government to the 
Indian Reserves. Civic pride was a strong point with 
the Gazette. "Stir up, gentlemen, let us put our 
main street into something like respectable shape. 

Cart away a few old dead cats and dogs who have been 
laid out in state long enough, also the old cans aid 
rubbish, and fill up a few holes. The cost will be 
trifling if all throw in the mite." 

The news consisted chiefly of local happenings, 
an Indian attempt at horse-stealing, the arrest of 
Indians for the same offence, the arrival of the m r ' n l 
from Benton on time, indications of a certain friction 
between police and people, a drowning at Kipp. There 
was an account of the Pincher Creek roundup, the first 
to be regularly organized. Two advertisements appeared 
one of I.G. Baker and Co., Ft. Macleod and Calgary, 
General Merchants, and the other of the "Port Macleod 
Hotel and Billiard Peom. Old Eamoose, Prop't." A 
great many personal witticisms of impenetrable meaning 
and a number of exchanges made up the balance. The 































tc IT 


exchanges were chiefly American and largely pre¬ 
occupied with everyday life although there were echoes 
of Royal carriages and the Tichbourne Case. 

The Gazette grew and altered with the country but 
in essentials remained the same. The Gazette was the 

ranchers 1 paper and the town where it was published 

a 

f\ 

towns stood for progress, people, and therefore for 
farming. The lease holders received rough treatment 

in the Gazette*s columns and the grievances of the 

u>er& 

itters xstxst given full publicity. 

A 

Journalism in Southern Alberta had a virility 
and independence in those early years which would 
be refreshing, if a little shocking, to-day. libel 
suits and the gaoling of editors for contempt of co r :t 
were merely part of the game. The voice of the booster 
was loud in the columns of the Gazette, louder still 
in some of the other papers, but it was an age when 
self-deprecation was unfashionable in new countries. 
They had enough prejudices to overcome before they 
could win the passionately desired immigrants. The 
Southern Alberta press depended temporarily on the 
ranchers 1 subscriptions and advertisements; it served 
their purposes and took up their grievances but it 



I 






/ Co c> 


waited with ill-concealed impatience for the flood 
of immigration which in its eyes meant progress. 

4 

The rancher subscribed, tongue in cheek, remembering 
"The Morning Post". 





























{ 4) The Ranch and the Towns 

Southern Alberta towns had diverse origins. 

Some, like Oalgary and Maoleod, were polioe posts. 

Some, 3 ike Medicine Hat, were born with the railway; 
and some, like Okotoks and High River, were convenient 
stopping-places on the long road from Oalgary to 
Macleod. Oochrane grew up around the Cochrane 
ranch, and Lethbridge around its mines. All the 
older towns, which had their beginnings before the 
farming boom of the first decade of the twentieth 
century, drew sustenance from the ranching industry. 
Some, like Macleod, were wholly ranch towns, centres 
of distribution for their neighborhood. Others were 
railway towns, still others mining towns, but to all 
of them ranching meant at least a portion of their 
daily bread. Yet the towns, which depended on the 
ranches, helped to destroy them. Their whole 
influence was thrown on the side of rapid development, 
rapid- development which meant farms and fences in L/ 
place of ranches and the open range. The continuance 
of Southern Alberta as a primarily ranching country 
meant slow, if solid, development; stagnation, the 
towns called it. They wanted instead, floods of 
settlers, new buildings, high prices—-they wanted 








l(*% 


"booms. Their booms oame and went, ranching declined, 
and . after a spasm of growth the small towns of 
Alberta sank back into sleepy placidity. 

Perhaps in this lay the root of the antagonism 
which developed between the towns and the country 
districts which they served. An English observer 
in Canada in the decade before the war (18), was 
strongly impressed by the cleavage, which seemed 
to her one of the dominant characteristics of 
Western life. The feud persists, obvious to anyone 
who has heard the town-dweller*s bland assumption 
of his own superiority, and the frank scorn of the 
country man for his urban brother. 

Curiously enough ranchers were disposed to be 
more tolerant of some towns than of others. High 
River for example, was not so much disliked, but 
Ckotoks, thirteen miles distant, was a TT damned 
T'ethodist hole.” The foundation of such prejudices 
are hard to determine. Perhaps the ranchers still 
clung to the prejudice against "trade” current in 
the English society of their day. Perhaps they 
really did imagine some essential difference between 
their own lives and that of the shop-keepers in 
the nearest village. 


The explanation of the comparative 







U9. 

popularity of towns like High River, Pincher Creek 
and Macleod probably lay in the considerable number 
of settlers there who shared the outlook of the ranch¬ 
ers. Many of them, indeed, as the years passed, were 
retired ranchers. Calgary, which soon superseded 
Macleod as the capital of ranchdom, was large enough, 
comparatively so at’ any rate, to be in a distinct 
and separate class. 

In spite cf the antagonism, the towns were vitally 
important to the ranch life. In those horse-drawn 
days, the country towns were far more important in 
relation to their rural neighborhood than they are to¬ 
day when the city has drarwn nearer. The slops in 
the towns were the nearest available sources of supply 
for the necessaries of life. The all-important mail 
had to be obtained there. ;s the towns grew their 
hotels and assembl/y-rooms offered superior facilities 
for the social functions in which the souls of the 
ranchers delighted. ^here was of course a gco'i deal 
of social intercourse between town and country, 
inevitable while men outnumbered women. Nevertheless, 
when the country cliques gave a dance in the town’s 
ball-room only a very select few of the townspeople 
were favoured with invitations. That remarkable 
institution ’’the county” was well on its wa: r to 





















I 70 ' 


establishment on democratic Alberta soil. 

Oalgary, once it had triumphed, over Maoleod, 
was, of course, the focal point of the ranching 
community’s life. Its economic position wa3 natural, 
it was ideally suited to serve as a distributing 
centre for the whole ranching area. Its social 
position was an inevitable consequence. Perhaps 
Oalgary was relatively more important then than it 
will ever be again. It was however, unsatisfied, 
and added its noise to the chorus of the towns, 
demanding people and more people. The voice of the 
towns was the voice of the press. Herald, Gazette, 
News and Times clamoured together for immigration. 
The destruction of the old order was the triumph 
of the towns over their old antagonists upon whose 
needs their own power had been built. 









17 /. 

VII— THE FUTURE OP THE RANCHING TRADITION. 

In retrospect the ranching period seems a Golden 
Age. In Its economic aspect ranching In Southern 
Alberta was a temporary adjustment of agricultural 
enterprise to the needs of a new country. As a 
dominant industry It has been destroyed; perhaps, 
present conditions suggest, hastily a n d unwisely 
but nevertheless irrevocably. It will never again 
be more than a convenient method for the utilization 
of otherwise useless lands. In its social aspect 
it may have a longer life. It was, from this point 
of view, a not unsuccessful attempt to synthesize u 
the customs and prejudices of Victorian England and 
those of the new West. The ranchers nourished a 
tradition of simple and gracious living which even 
the War, which destroyed many of the realities 

of their period, was unable to eradicate. Here and 
there it still lingers on the ranches and farms and 
in the cities and towns, of Southern Alberta. In the 
past decade it seemed to decline but the last few 
years have seen a rebirth of its spirit. guch a 
tradition, if it has vitality, should have its place 
in Western Canada. A renaissance of the ranching 
industry itself seems improbable but we may at least 

















* 


























/ 73 


{or coyyiiwued lift of* c/'s 5 joint 











BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Primary Monroes 

Butler, Captain W.P.; "The (Treat lone land". 

Calgary'herald, files from 1883. 

Census of Canada, 1881, 1890-91, 1901. 

Godsal, F. .7.; Memoirs 1921, 1924 ms. Southern Alberta 
?ii T . ; ion • 

TT armon, Daniel; 11 A Journal of Voyage and Travel in the 
Interior of Forth America” ( Trail-Fakers of 
Canada Series). 

Journals of the Council and the legislative Assembley 
of the Forth-Test Territories 3878-1905. 

Lawrence, H.F.; Memoirs (Toronto Saturday Fight 1924). 

Lynchs St aunt on, Mrs. E.; "A history of the Jarly Cays 
of ^incher Creek”, compiled by ilberta 
.'omen 1 : tt< -t 9 . 

KacKenzie, Alexander; "Voyages from Montreal to the 
Pacific and Frozen Oceans.” 

,T acleod Gazette, Piles from 1882. 

Maunsell, E.H.; Memoirs 1922 ms. Southern Alberta 
Old Timers 1 Association. 

Morrow, J.7V; "Early History of the Medicine Hat 
Country”, Medicine Hat 1923. 

Orders-in-Council of the Domion of Canada 1878-1895. 

Ordinances of the North-' ; 'est Territories of 
Canada, 1878-1905. 

"er.rce, 7m.; Memoirs (ms*-) 

Sessional Papers of the Dominion of Canada 1878-1915. 

Sessional Papers of the North-Test Territories 1878-1915. 

Diary of Mrs. Alfred Wyndham, Dintcn, alberta 
1886-1889. 


2. Secondary Sources 

Canada and its Provinces, Archives Edition 1914 7c1 . XIX 

■J ft 

1903. 

Biller, Dorothy; "The Early Economic Development of 
Alberta.” University of Alberta 1923. 

Edmonds, VI.; ”A T r 1 - ' tory of Edmonton”. 

Higinbotham, J.D. ; "Then the Test was Young”. 

TIelly, 1.7. ; "Range Men 1 '. 

longstreth, T. Morris; ”The Silent Force”. Few York 3927. 
Maclnnes # C.M.; "In the F the Rockies". 

Hivington T s, Tondon 1930. 








Mackintosh 


Mitchell 
TT The Sto 


ILqj c, ■ 


, 7.^1.; "Prairie Settlement: The Ceogr;-,;Meal 
letting" (Canadian ^Irontiers of Settlement, 
Publication Mo. 1) MacMillan 1934. 
f BJ» ; ”1'' Canada Before the far* 1 # London 1916# 
ry of the Press". Canadian North-Yest historic 
Society Publications, Yol# 1, TT o. 17, part 1 
19?8, "Rattleford, cask. 


"““Mr 












SPECIAL COLLECTIONS 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA LIBRARY 


REQUEST FOR DUPLICATION 


I wish a photocopy of the thesis By 

^ C\ 'TLa 6'W\ 


(author) 


entitled TL? A ^ ^ (MWHl 


The copy is for the sole purpose of private scholarly or scientific study 
and research. I will not reproduce, sell or distribute the copy I request, 
and I will not copy any substantial part of it in ray own work without per¬ 
mission of the copyright owner. I understand that the Library performs 
the service of copying at my request, and I assume all copyright responsi¬ 
bility for the item requested. 


Date _Nr me and address _ Pages copied _ Signature 

2.6 R toz-’m _ 

14-Z- \Urb 




, 'X-Q ifF/*.»><•■> £>, /3>« 


/Orf Hj 

ted ) ■. C-M Vl l MyJ 


» j 

l"V 4 bM , 






F- 236 


September 1975 










































