For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 



















For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 












































































































UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


"THE TRANSCHNDENT-IMMANENT GOD" 

A DISSERTATION 

Submitted to the B. D. Committee 
in candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity 


By 

CHARLES D’YIGHT PORTSLL 


April, 1936 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/transcendentimmaOOchar 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


BEARD, Charles A. "Whither Mankind?" 

New York, 1930. Longmans, Green & Co. 

CAIRD, Edward "Evolution of Religion" Vol. I 

Glasgow, 1907. Maclehose and Sons. 

CAIRD, Edward "Evolution of Religion" Vol. II 

Glasgow, 1907. Maclehose and Sons. 

CALHOUN, R. L. "God is more than mind". 

In "Christendom", Vol. I, No. 2, Winter 1936. 

DURANT, Will "Story of Philosophy" 

Toronto, 1927. Irwin and Gordon, Ltd. 

EUCKEN, Rudolf "Life’s Easis and Life’s Ideal" 

London, 1912. Adam and Charles Black. 

-HUME, Robert E* "The World’s Living Religions" 

Edinburgh, 1924. T. and T. Clark. 

MENZIES, Allan "History of Religions" 

London, 1911. John Murray. 

OTTO, Rudolf "The Idea of the Holy" 

London, 1926. Oxford University Press. 

ROGERS, A. K, "Students’ History of Philosophy" 

New York, 1929. Macmillan Company. 

STREETER, E. H. (Editor) "The Spirit" 

London, 1918. Macmillan and Co., Ltd. 

SWAIN, R. L. "What and Where is God?" 

New York, 1922. Macmillan Company. 

WEBER, A. "History of Philsophy" 

New York, 1906. Chas. Scribners’ Sons. 

WHEELER, R. H. "Science of Psychology." 

London, 1931. Jarrolds. 











CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 

Introduction 1 

I The Immanent Cod in 

• Philosophic Thought 5 

II The Transcendent Cod in 

Philosophic Thought 14 

III The Transcendent-Immanent G-od in 

Philosophic Thought 22 

IV The Immanent G-od In 

Religious Thought 31 

V The Transcendent G-od in 

Religious Thought 40 

VI The Transcendent-Immanent G-od in 

Religious Thought 47 

VII A Discussion of the Immanent 

Conception of Cod 58 

VIII A Discussion of the Transcendent 

Conception of G-od 65 

IX A Discussion of the Transcendent- 

Immanent Conception of G-od 73 

X Some Implications of the 

Transcendent-Immanent Conception 79 
























. 






■ 








. 




' 
















INTRODUCTION 


The newborn infant does not distinguish between 
the various objects and factors of his environment. 

His movements are at first general and undistinguished, 
and in his own mind even parts of his own body are 
not associated with himself as distinct from other- 
objects. From this stage there is a "generic devel¬ 
opment of the self concept." * At first he may ab¬ 
stract his mother’s face, although even that perhaps 
not consciously, from the total environment, and he 
develops until he limits his conception of himself 
and later opposes himself to the total environment. 
There he observes many factors which at first seem 
to be unrelated; but his further observation reveals 
that these factors act and react upon each other 
apparently according to some fixed law. He realizes 
that although he has set himself apart from the en¬ 
vironment he is still subject to the same influences 
that he sees about him.That is the relation of all 
these things to each other? There did they come from 

** Theeler: Science of Psychology, page 


1 










































* 













































. 




2 


in the first place? Towards what are they tending? 
Questions such as these come to his mind and in his 
effort to answer them he develops a system of thought 
or a philosophy concerning them. 

Similarly in the history of mankind we are able 
to discern a development of thought until mankind 
develops a philosophy into which can be fitted the 
facts as they are observed. At first as man looked 
out upon the world he neither set himself apart from 
other objects nor distinguished between the objects 
as he saw them; he did not divide the organic from 
the inorganic nor did he recognize that there were 
different levels of organic beings. All objects and 
himself mossesaed for him life of a kind, but no 
differences in the kinds of life were observed. At 
this stage in his development man put life and feelings 
such as his own into even inorganic objects. Eut as 
he progressed man began to distinguish between the 
various objects, to realize that there were differences 
in the forms of life each possessed, and thus to place 
himself over against the objective world about him. 

. Observation of the phenomena of nature aroused in his 

I 

| mind such questions as these, although probably not in 






3 


this form: What is the nature of this world about 
me? ‘'What is my relationship to it? Is there any 
underlying unity as.a cause or a goal for it all? 

The subsequent history of mankind has revealed 
many attempts to answer these questions satisfactor¬ 
ily. Speculative thought, philosophical and theo¬ 
logical, and Science in its many branches have con¬ 
cerned themselves with finding the answer. Pure 
science is seeking through experiment to find the 
unity or pattern underlying all phenomena in an effort 
j thereby to discover the cause. Philosophy, through 
reflective thought upon the same phenomena, seeks to 
find the ultimate reality in which all are united. 

Each is a legitimate effort and so it is to be ex¬ 
pected that each will contribute truth to the final 
answer to these eternal questions facing mankind. 

The term G-od is generally applied to the answer 
although there is much disagreement as to the nature 
of G-od. The question of (rod's nature remains to be 
answered. 

In this present writing it is my purpose to 
consider various conceptions of G-od that have been 
advanced by both philosophy and religion during their 






















, 







, 


. 


. 














. 



. 


- 









, 




4 


history, to weigh if possible the merits and defects 
of these conceptions, and then in the light of this 
consideration, and having regard to modern thought, to 
suggest a rational conception of God. 

In order to partially limit “the field to be con¬ 
sidered I intend to look for the two extremes of the 
conception of God - God as a transcendent being, and 
God as immanent in nature or man - and to look for 
the mean between these. In cataloguing various 
philosophies and religions under such classes it 
will be necessary to limit our consideration to their 
main points only with the consequent danger of ignor¬ 
ing strains of thought within them which tend in 
another direction. The reader is asked to allow for 
such a difficulty while reading the following chapters 







CHAPTER I 


THE IMMANENT GOD IN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The conception of God as being immanent in 
the universe, being entirely limited by the universe, 
and thus having no reality beyond the forms in which 
he expresses himself, appears early in the history 
of philosophic thought. Perhaps the earliest school 
to enunciate this conception was the school of Mil¬ 
etus, headed by Thales who lived about 600 B. C. 

This g,rouo 0 f thinkers sought to find some universal 
substratum which, with various modifications, consti¬ 
tutes all bodies. Thales himself believed that water 
is the first principle. 

Anaximander, his disciple, said that not water 
but infinite atmosphere is the primary principle upon 
which all depends. Everything that exists owes its 
being to this principle which with various modifica¬ 
tions, warm and cold, dry and moist, forms all. Thus 
for him the infinite atmosphere is the supreme divinity, 
and in itself possesses eternal life. 

Anaximenes stated. Anaximander * s theory more 
exactly. He saw air or breath as the prime principle, 
and by a constant motion of condensation and rarefac- 


5 
















■ ' 














' 






■ 






. 













6 


tion various objects are formed. Diogenes later- 
agreed with him. 

Thus we see that these representatives of what 
we call Ionian philosophy saw a living, moving, ulti¬ 
mate essence or being from which everything comes. 
Heraclitus also believed that there is one element 
underlying all, which appears in various forms, and 
he conceived of it as fire. The whole universe then 
is fire with modifications. 

For all of these men G-od is merely the common 
element -whatever it is. He is theifcfore in all the 
forms within the universe but does not exist, outside 
of them. 

The Fleatic school of philosophy denied Becoming 
and, dismissing change as but phenomenal and illusory, 
looked for some supreme Being. Xenophanes repudi¬ 
ated belief in the national mythology and suggests 
a monotheism which however is pantheistic. ”G-od is 
all eye, all ear, all thought”.* Parmenides, 
his disciple, affirmed that only the eternal being 
exists and that being is all. There is no origin or 


Weber: History of Philosophy, page 25 







7 


decay for God is all and G-od does not change. The 
Eleatics made no distinction between matter and 
spirit for they believed in pure being. Melissus 
(440 B. G.) made this the, basis for a material view; 
the being is infinite in time and space. Zeno also 
saw the one being in which even magnitude, motion, 
time and space are lost. The difficulty with the 
Eleatic affirmation is that the being is a mere 
abstraction since it possesses no positive attributes. 
Gorgias carried this theory to its logical conclu¬ 
sion and denied the existence of being. 

Empedocles, about 450 B. C,, assumed an inter¬ 
mediate position between the Ionians and Eleatids * 

He agreed with the latter in that he denied becoming, 
but he believed that the universe is formed of 
various combinations of four elements; fire, air, 
water and earth. He saw two principles at work upon 
these elements; Love, uniting them, and Discord, 
separating them. He looked to a unifying principle, 
Hod, but it is a God who is entirely immanent in the 
elements. 

Archelaus, a disciple pf Anaxagoras, believed 
that mind and matter are the same and so there is no 









« 

































* 






4 . 

. 


, 






■ 















8 


God except in matter, 

Epicurus, "born about 340 B. C., was the next 
important thinker to affirm immanence. He saw matter 
"composed of innumerable, uncreated and indestructible 
atoms in perpetual motion" *as the universal substratum 
outside of which nothing can exist. There is no 
Deity outside of the universe governing it. All is 
matter and therefore any Deity that exists must be 
resident within matter. 

The Stoic school in its metaphysics offered 
"concrete spiritualism pure and simple. Mind and body 
are two aspects of one and the same reality." $ 

Mind is the active element and body the passive ele¬ 
ment of the same being. There is no such thing as 
pure spirit. Thus, while the Stoics conceived of 
God as living, governing and capable of providential 
love, yet he cannot exist as pure spirit for there is 
no such thing. God and the universe are made ident¬ 
ical, God as the soul, and the universe as the body. 
God, the soul, is to the universe what man’s soul is 
to him. The perfection of the universe proves that 

* Weber: History of Philosophy, page 135* 

# ibid, page 143. 









. 



















. 










4 









, ' 




































■ 






' 













9 


it contains an infinite intelligence but this mind 
does not transcend the universe; it is immanent in it. 
Divinity is immanent within nature and man. Stoicism 
thus compromised between theism and pantheism by 
acknowledging the existence of G-od but by making him 
entirely immanent, 

Bruno, writing at the end of the sixteenth 
century, accepted the heliocentric system. He saw no 
limitation to space, and so denied that there can be 
a realm for pure spirit, or the Supreme Eeing. The 
universe is infinite and God is infinite; but since 
there cannot be two infinites therefore Crod and the 
universe are one. Bruno was anxious to avoid any 
charge of atheism, so he separated G-od from the world, 
and identified him with the universe. This distinc¬ 
tion did not accomplish its purpose, for the G-od of 
Bruno is not a transcendent cause or creator, but 
rather an inner and permanent cause, an immanent cause 
of things. G-od is an absolute unity since he is in all 
things and all things are in him. Bruno sometimes 
referred to G-od as matter which for him is the only 
permanent and eternal principle. It passes through 
many forms, but remains unchanged itself. 










. 
















. 




■ 










. 

" 






. 

, 


- 


: 

' 






. 









10 


Spinoza is the modern prophet of immanence 
reviving Stoicism, as he does, although in a differ¬ 
ent form. He believed that God is the immanent cause 
of all things; everything lives and moves in God. He 
used three terms: substance, attribute and mode. 
Substance for him is ’’that which eternally and un¬ 
changeably is, of which everything else must be a 
transient form or mode.” * This substance has 
neither intellect nor will for this would imply per¬ 
sonality, which in turn would imply limitations. 

God is not the transcendent cause of the world but 
rather the immanent cause. For Spinoza God and the 
universe are one and the same thing, God is the 
eternal substratum of everything. So Spinoza is a 
pantheist making God and the cosmos identical. His 
God is not the author of nature but is nature itself. 
God, the one absolutely infinite substance, has two 
attributes, the first of which, extension, in its 
modifications forms bodies; the second, thought, in 
its modifications forms minds. 

Fichte (1765-1814), a German philosopher, made 


ft 


Durant: Story of Philosophy, page 138 



















, 


' 








. 


' 













* 


. 


- 










, 





■ 


















11 


t’ae only reality the moral Ego. The universe is an 
expression of pure Will, the moral Idea. But the idea 
of 9 transcendent Ego is a mere abstraction - it 
only exists as it expresses itself in the world and 
in man. So "the real G-od is a living G-od, of the G-od 
man." * However, while G-od cannot exist without 
objects in which to manifest himself yet to conceive 
of him as an objective being would be to limit him 
and such a limitation of G-od is impossible. "G-od 
is the moral order of the world, the freedom which 
gradually realizes itself in it: he is nothing more 
than that," # Thus Fichte 1 s G-od is immanent in 
the universe and in mankind possessing no reality 
beyond these manifestations. 

Transferring our attention to contemporary 
times we find modern Humanism as the most important 
movement towards pure immanence. It finds its basis 
in the Stoic philosophy which we have already con¬ 
sidered and asserts that raan has no need to go be¬ 
yond himself to find reality. Comte (1773-1857),a 
French philosopher and father of Positivism, denied 


* Weber: History of Philosophy, page 486 

# ibid, page 487. 


















. 




* 




















' ' 












. 

* 


















■ 

. 







12 


God and placed the whole emphasis upon the things 
we can he positive about, the material things. He 
said that the idea of an infinite reality or a 
transcendent are inerel 3 ^ childish fancies which marked 
an early stage in thinking. 'When we abandon spec¬ 
ulation and examine the positive facts of science we 
discover truth. Gorate gave impetus to the thought 
movement which became modern Humanism. 

Nietzsche (1844-1900) denied the God of his 
fathers and worshipped a Superman, claiming that any 
God that did exist resided in this being, 

Henri Bergson (1859- ) identifies God with 

Life. God for him is a finite being bound by matter 
and neither omnipotent nor omniscient, but rather 
growing with painful steps and slo^ 7 towards know¬ 
ledge and consciousness. Thus he is n unceasing 
life, action, freedom*” * and is found in man 
when man consciously plans his actions. Bertrand 
Russell finds his God in mathematics alone. Gilliam 
James (1842-1900) offers a finite God who is one 
helper among others in shaping the fate of the 

** Bergson quoted in Durant: Story of 
Philosophy, page 502. 











13 


world. John Dewey denies any Absolute and finds 
reality only in the flow of experience as such. 

3. Alexander, of Oxford, follows Bergson’s philosophy 
For him God is immanent in the universe, depending 
upon it, developing along with it. If you eliminate 
all the products of evolution then you have space- 
time as the basis of the universe. From this has 
evolved the ascending scale of the universe until you 
come to Deity. These have all contributed to the 
modern Humanistic movement. 

Humanism either denies the existence of God 
altogether or e3.se finds the only God in Humanity 
itself. The Humanists claim that ” the greatest 
study of mankind is man” and so G-od becomes purely 
immanent. Falter Lippman, W. R. Sellers and Prof¬ 
essor Haydon, in our own time, are exponents of this 
conception. They rule out the idea of transcendence 
entirely. . Humanism is perhaps the most widespread, 
of all philosophies at this time including among 
its suppbters both religionists and non-religionists. 









CHAPTER II 


THE TRANSCENDENT GOD IN PHILOSOPHIC THOUGHT 

Having now considered one extreme in the 
various philosophic conceptions of God, the belief 
that he is entirely immanent in nature and in man, 
in this chapter attention will be turned, to the other 
extreme, the belief that God transcends the universe 
and exists as a separate reality apart from it. 

Anaxagoras (c.480 E.C.-C.430 B.C.) was one of 
the earliest philosophers to give utterance to a 
doctrine of transcendence. He believed that the 
elements are incapable of motion by themselves. 
Therefore to explain the orderly motion within the 
world we must conceive of a reality which transcends 
the elements and within itself possesses force and in¬ 
telligence. This supreme element, which has within 
it spontaneous activity, is entirely separa/ced from 
the inferior passive elements which it governs in an 
orderly manner. Although perfectly free from the 
world it is "the source of all movement and life 
within the world," * 

* Weber: History of Philosophy, page 50. 


14 










15 


Among the G-reeks and indeed among all phil¬ 
osophers Plato (427 B. C,- 347 B. C.) is outstanding. 
In an effort to correct pantheism and the material- 

p 

ism of Stoicism Plato became the pro'hpet of trans¬ 
cendence. He believed with Heraclitus that the seen 
world is in a state of perpetual flux, and so the 
truth cannot be found in the world of sense but must 
exist in the world of ideas. Plato therefore gives 
us a doctrine of Ideas. ’’The senses reveal partic¬ 
ulars, or natural objects; abstraction and general¬ 
ization give us Ideas. n ** Plato makes the Ideas 
real, in fact more real than the beings. They are the 
objective cause of our reason just as natural objects 
are the cause of our sense perceptions. Thus behind 
beautiful objects and just acts are the Ideas of 
Beauty and Justice more real than the objects and acts 
themselves. The particular object presented to the 
senses possesses something of the Idea but the Idea 
is more real than any particular object. From, this 
it follows that the Id.eas are the only real beings, 
that matter exists only because of the reality it 

% Weber: History of Philosophy, page 82. 





















4 















. 


, ■- 

. 




r rp _ ; ■ 




















, 


. 






' 



















16 


receives from the Ideas, The Ideas also possess 
unity and cannot he distinguished one from another 
and therefore we find all the Ideas losing them¬ 
selves in the one Supreme Idea* Plato seems to 
have made G-od identical with this absolute Idea of 
the G-ood. The absolute Idea does not exist in 
space and cannot be perceived through sensations, 
although the objective world shows us an infinite 
number of copies which remind us of the Idea. 

Although .Plato tried to when he turned from meta¬ 
physics he could not "escape the illusion that the 
Idea is something separate, real and transcendent," ■* 

Plotinus, who commenced teaching about 244 
P. 0 ., was responsible for the wave of Neo-Platonism. 
He conceived of G-od as an absolutely transcend¬ 
ent reality. G-od cannot be defined either in 
thought or language for to do so would mean to lose 
him. Plato made G-od equal to the absolute Idea 
but Plotinus placed him far above the Idea, so far 
that he eludes even thought. Though contemplation 
and intuition may aid in the approach to G-od yet 

* after Weber. 








17 


Plotinus could not imagine anyone actually reaching 
to God. There are various stages of Being emanating 
from God: intelligence,soul,body. ’’The end of 
human life is the purification of the soul,and its 
gradual assimilation with the divinity,” # For 
Plotinus the world is simply an overflow or diffu¬ 
sion of the divine life. 

In the early Middle Ages a kind, of Christian 
Neo-Platonism grew up which carried on the concep¬ 
tion of G-od 1 s transcendence* Augustine (354—4-30) 
was the best example of this group of thinkers, 
and his importance is greater because of his effect 
upon the literature and doctrines of the Roman 
Catholic Church even until the present day, G-od is 
pure Reason, Nothing exists without him. G-od is 
omnipotent and eternal. ’’G-od is substantially 
omnipresent, without, however, being everything; 
everything is in him, though he is not the All - 
- - - he exists and yet is nowhere; he lives 
eternally and yet is not in time; he is the principle 
of all change and yet immutable.” # ButAugus- 

Weber: History of Philosophy, page 178. 

# ibid, page 189. 








13 


tine clearly distinguishes between G-od and the 
world, for the latter did not emanate from but was 
created by the former. "The immanency of G-od in 
the world'would be contrary to the divine majesty." 
Augustine tried to prove the glory of G-od by mak¬ 
ing him absolutely transcendent and by making man 
nothing more than G-od 1 s passive instrument which 
of itself is entirely impotent. He believed with 
Plato that G-od is the highest Idea of ideas, and 
as such cannot be found in sensible matter but in 
an invisible transcendence. Therefore man cannot 
apprehend God but can only find him in his revel¬ 
ations . 

Anselm (1033-1109) followed. Augustine's teach¬ 
ing and so revealed the same Platonism. God is the 
unitary and absolute cause of the world. He has all 
the human perfections, although not from without as 
with man, but from within since God is perfection 
itself. Anselm could not conceive of God as both 
omnipresent and eternal, or as being nowhere in 
space or time while still existing, so he is driven 

* Weber: History of Philosophy, page 190. 













Cv,.;! 




. 




























. 




- 






■ 






, : ' 

; , " 










19 


to thd ‘belief that G-od must be unbounded by either 
space or time. There is no change in G-od, but sub¬ 
stance is subject to change, so God must transcend 
substance. 

Hugo (1096-1140), a monk at Paris, taught 
that the infinite being is incomprehensible. He 
did not thus deny the existence of God but placed, 
him beyond logical .categories where we can only 
know him by faith. 

Descartes (1596-1650) by an ontological 
proof proved the existence of God, and. then defined 
God as"the infinite substance on which everything 
depends and which itself depends upon nothing.’* * 
The material world, is a machine which has its 
origin in God, but once created no longer needs 
him to keep it in operation. The Cartesian 
school believed God to be the efficient cause of 
our movements and perceptions, not as an immanent 
being, but as the real subject of them. Actually 
for them we are not real thinking and acting 
creatures but are modes of God which when removed 




Weber: History of Philosophy, page 312. 
























. 





* 





















20 


still leave G-od, the transcendent being. 

Berkeley (1685-1753) arrived at the complete 
negation of matter or pure spiritualism. Objects 
do not exist unless there is a subject to per¬ 
ceive them. If you remove the perceiving subject 
then the world of sensation is removed, which 
I means that there is actually no difference between 
objects and our idea of them. Philosophers always 
I assume that matter exists because they have ideas 
! of its existence but these ideas might just as 
j easily come from G-od himself. Berkeley carried 
out his idea to its logical conclusion by deny- 
j ing the existence of matter and the reality of 
space and time, and by affirming that mind alone 
\ exists, perceiving its ideas "either by themselves 
j or through the action of the all-powerful Spirit 
| on which they depend." # 

The three Critiques of Immanuel Kant (1724- 
* 

1804); one, of Pure Reason; two, of Practical 
■ Reason; three, of Judgment; culminate in absolute 
spiritualism. He believed that there is a trans- 

* Weber? History of Philosophy, page 398. 













21 


cendental self-contained ground of reality, 
knowledge of which is not gained through experience. 
This absolute could not he perceived for that would 
mean to limit it, which in turn would remove from 
it its absoluteness* We are limited by space- 
time perceptions and so cannot have any real know¬ 
ledge of God for he transcends these. C-od exists 
apart from the intelligible ego as the highest 
guarantee of the moral order and the ultimate 
triumph of the good. 

Schelling (1775-1854) followed ICant and 
appeared as the modern apostle of transcendence. 

He made a sharper division than Kant had done 
between the world and G-od. He saw a transcendental 
reality set over against the world. Things pro¬ 
ceed from G-od but he remains outside of them. 

The modern movement of Barth in Germany is 
perhaps more religious in nature than philosoph¬ 
ical, but, since it is based upon a philosophy of 
transcendence, it may be included here. It denies 
that God is immanent in man and places him rather 
above and beyond the world, able to enter the world 
only in some crisis or catastrophic act. 










- 

* 


‘ 





























e 1 

. 


' 












CHAPTER III 


THE TRANSCENDENT-IMMANENT COD IN PHILSOPHIC THOUGHT 

In Chapter I we considered one extreme in 
the philosophic conceptions of God, the idea that 
Cod is immanent in nature and man, not existing 
"beyond them. In Chapter II we considered the other 
extreme, the idea that Cod transcends the universe 
as a separate reality. There are many thinkers 
as we have seen to support each view. However, 
j many great philsophers have discovered the truth 
lying somewhere between the two extremes partaking 
of parts of each, and so it remains to us to con¬ 
sider their conceptions of Cod. I intend to mention 
those who could see both transcendent and immanent 
characteristics in the deity without losing any 
sense of the unity. For-that reason I shall not 
use "transcendent and. immanent” but rather the 
hyphenated form "transcendent-immanent” which 
implies a twofold nature without destroying the unity. 

Early in the history of philosophic thought 
we find Pythagoras impressed with the immaterial 
aspect of matter as he observed the order, harmony 


22 















. 




. • 


' 

. 
























































23 


and unity of the universe. He attempted to 
settle the problem of Being and Becoming not by 
denying one or the other as most of his contemp¬ 
oraries did, but by affirming that each is true. 

We cannot say that Pythagoras conceived of a 
deity who incorporates these two characteristics 
in a real unity, but he was the first to realize 
that a reconciliation is possible. 

Bocrates did not contribute greatly to our 
knowledge of God, certain parts of his spiritual 
faith being even superstitious in nature, yet he 
did perform the service of emphasizing strongly 
the universality of providence, thus opening the 
way for much clearer thought concerning G-od* s 
nature, 

Bpeusipuss, who succeed.ed Plato in the Acad¬ 
emy, saw the necessity for discovering a concrete 
principle which will combine the one - that is, 
Plato*s Idea - and the many - that is, the material 
forms of the universe. For him unity could not 
lie in an abstract form such as Plato suggested, 
but must be found in a concrete principle. 

Aristotle (385-322 E. V.) , Plato*s most 






























. 









































- or l :' cio. 



















■ 



. 























24 


distinguished pupil, believed G-od to be the 
Absolute, embracing and containing H the principles 
of all the sciences and the first causes of every¬ 
thing that exists” * G-od i3 the first genera¬ 
tive cause and is the final goal of all. For 
Aristotle matter and the Idea are not exclusive 
categories but each supplements the other. He 
saw the true reality as an essence that. transcends 
the universe yet has from it emanations of force 
which are inherent in all nature. His G-od there¬ 
fore is immanent in nature and natural laws yet 
exists as pure form without matter, as a trans¬ 
cendent source or cause. G-od while he is the 
first mover is still immovable; and so Aristotle 
sees matter as moved by G-od while God himself 
remains unmoved. Although G-od thus exists as a 
transcendent essence and as as immanent principle 
at the same time, yet he is unity itself. 
Aristotle 1 s God is transcendent-immanent. 

Scotus Brigena believed that the world is 
in God, and God is in it as its essence, its soul. 


Weber*. History of Philosophy, page 107. 
















25 


its life. Whatever living force, light, and 
intelligence the world contains is God, who is im¬ 
manent in the cosmos. Yet, for him, G-od is an 
infinite "being, absolutley eternal. 

Abelard (1079-1142) said that the universal 
exists in the individual as the absolute cause, 
the source of our power and will. John of Salis¬ 
bury (died 1180), who agreed with Abelard’s view, 
said that by his omnipresence God exists in all 
creatures even the most insignificant, although 
he is revealed to a different degree and in an 
\ infinite variety of forms in different orders of 
creation. 

Thomas of Aquin (1225-1274) wrote several 
|| treatises on Aristotle’s metaphysics. He saw God 
as the one pure essence or form since everything 
else combines matter and form. God exists as the 
transcendent form, but exists also in all matter 
as the immanent form without which matter could 
possess no being. 

Oampanella (1568-1639) believed that know¬ 
ledge comes from two sources: sensible experience 
and reasoning, and that it is the duty of man to 










* 


• < 

- 
















\ 

■ 











26 


engage in-metaphysical research* although we can 
' never hope to attain to absolute knowledge Y/hich 
is found in God alone. n G-od is absolute power, 

absolute knowledge, and absolute will or love,’* * 

3 

and since power, knowledge and will are essential 
nr in doles of being G-od must be immanent in all 
being. But everything proceeds from G-od and strives 
: to return to God; therefore we must conceive of 
j God as also transcendent. 

Leibniz (1646-1716) found, reality, not in 
matter conceived of as a lump of extended substance, 
j but in matter as a ’’host of unextended centres of 
force, whose activity is at the bottom, when y je 
I interpret it,, a spiritual or perceptual activity.” # 

; These points of force he calls monads, each of which 

1 

| are independent, but which are all united in God 
j who is the Monad of monads, the infinite and absol- 
| ute monad. Leibniz says himself that all things 

1 happen mechanically but at the same time meta- 

- 

\ physically, and the source of the mechanical is in 
the metaphysical. For him there is an immanent 


* Weber: History of Philosophy, page 294. 

# Rogers: Students’ History of Philosophy, 

page 308. 



















i < 





. 

* 





- j 




' 





i 











C 




. 













force In all things hearing them onward according 
to a pre-efstablished harmony, according to laws 
immanent in the monads themselves, and yet these 
laws find their complete summation in the one ult¬ 
imate being, God. According to this view of 
Leibniz matter and mind alike are a projection of 
an infinite transcendent power. The Monad of 
monads is a real God, distinct from the universe. 
God is supernatural or transcendent in relation to 
man, and he is also supra-rational, but Leibniz, 
denies the absolute transcendence of the divine 
being, affirming rather that God H is nature mani¬ 
festing itself through the medium of a personal 
will. M * 

Hegel (1770-1831) made no sharp distinction 
between reality and appearance. "The common 
source of the ego and of nature does not transcend 
reality; it is immanent In it.” # Mind and nat¬ 
ure do not proceed from the absolute reality but 
are in themselves manifestations of the absolute 
which is actively present In them. Hegel went far 

* Weber: History of Philosophy, page 365 . 

j? ibid, page 498. 















. 





. 





















* 




■ 








. 















28 


in proclaiming the immanency of the absolute. In 
orotest against a one-sided view of truth he offers 
his familiar dialectic which has three stages, a 
thesis first, followed by an opposing antithesis, 
from both of which a synthesis is formed including 
the^ truth of each. Following this system he suggests 
the idea of Being as the thesis, which immediately 
passes into the idea of ITot-being; but neither is 
entirely right alone, and therefore the contra¬ 
diction is resolved in a third term, Becoming. 

Thus, if the immanency of the absolute is proclaimed, 
immediately there follows the idea of its trans¬ 
cendence, and the contradiction between the thesis 
and the antithesis is resolved in a synthesis of 
the two. Thus Hegel conceives of the transcendent 
as, under restrictions, immanent in his works. The 
individual implies the unity of the finite and the 
Infinite. 

Rudolf Eucken affirmed the reality of a 
spiritual existence which is rooted in the absol¬ 
ute. He saw a transcendent order to which human¬ 
ity and the individual are struggling.- The inward 
spiritual life acquires independence and freedom 













: « 
















- 






















' „ 








■ 

. 









• 

•• 


















29 


as it links itself with the world-transcendent 
order. We strive towards spirituality because 
the spiritual life is already at work within us. 

In the words of Pascal: ”Thou wouldat not seek 
me if thou hadst not already found me. M Men are 
divided one from the other by various factors 
such as race and culture, and so the only unity 
comes in a transcendent power that unites us 
inwardly. The spiritual life leads to an inner 
community of feeling among those who possess it. 
The Absolute embodies within itself perfection, 
infinity and eternity, and in turning towards that 
life man gains a part of these qualities or 
attributes. For Sucken the divine is not only 
a ..worid-transcendent sovereignity but Is also a 
world-pervading power, that is, transcendent- 
immanent. There is a movement from the without 
to the within, and then from the within to the 
without. 

Lloyd Morgan acknowledged G-od as the immater¬ 
ial source of change. The natural cause is given 
by science, but there is a supernatural cause that 
Science cannot explain. He added a supernatural 
































c ■ : 














■ 







30 


explanation to the natural, making GrOd transcend 
the universe while still “being Immanent in it. 











CHAPTER IV 


THE IMMANENT G-OD IN RELIGIOUS THOUGHT 

Speaking generally the history of religion 
reveals in its earlier stage the consciousness 
of the finite, followed later "by the consciousness 
I of the infinite,, followed in turn "by a synthesis 
| of the two, when an effort is mad.e to reconcile the 
| finite and the infinite. Once again in general 
j terms, the religions of the Orient have been 
predominantly interested in the infinite and have 
conceived of God as a transcendent being, while the 
religions of the (Greek type have been more concern¬ 
ed with the finite and. their G-od is immanent. 

Man in his earliest stages of life on earth 
can hardly be called even self-conscious, and he 
has no consciousness of G-od at all. As his conscious 
ness develops he realizes the existence of a great 
| power without, which exerts influence upon him, 
jbut there is no reverence for this power, only fear. 

The Melanesian people use the term n Mana ,f to 
| refer to this supernatural mysterious power. 


31 




































. 




• 4 • 












- 

. 







< 













' 
























32 


Although they think of it as impersonal, still 
it is always connected in thought with some person 
or thing which directs it. Among all people of 
primitive times there was this same idea of a 
mysterious power, although it was not always given 
the same name, liana seems to be behind animism 
which most people believe is the basis of religion. 

The central idea in animism is immanence. 

Man ascribes to the objects about him life and 
feelings such as his own because he believes their 
ability to act upon him implies life. Man at this 
stage gains knowledge only through observation, 
not being capable of speculation and reflective 
thought, and so naturally G-od for him is immanent 
in objects, for only in a material object is 
existence possible as far as a primitive man can 
determine. The universal can only exist for him 
in the particular, if at all. The drive behind 
fetichism and idolatry is the desire to objectify 
G-od in a way that can be understood. The primitive 
man is unable to conceive of a transcendent power, 
but he is conscious of a power, so he is driven to 
the necessity of conceiving of an immanent power. 












: 




. j 

. 






■ , 

■ 

' 

. 















33 

.The fetich or the totem becomes the god itself 
and not merely the embodiment or symbol of the 
god. The god is conceived of as a mere object 
among objects. 

This form of religion is not usually anthro¬ 
pomorphic because the fetich or totem is an 
animal, a plant, or any other object rather than 
a man. "The consciousness of the opposition 
between the finite and the infinite first betrays 
itself in the tendency to seek G-od in that which 
is far off from humanity, rather than in that 
which is nearest to it." # But the fetich or 
totem is regarded as being the progenitor of the 
i tribe, the difficulties entailed in an object 
producing a man presenting no barrier to the prim¬ 
itive type of thought. The god, immanent in some 
visible object, is the tribal god. 

However man began to study the heavens, and 
the apparent universality of the bodies there ob¬ 
served lifted him above the worship of special 
objects in nature to the sense of a universal 

* Oaird: Evolution of Religion, Vol. I, 

page 239. 











, 








■ 

















. 


























. 








34 

divinity revealed there. Man felt that he was 
allied with powers which controlled all nature. 
Then© "begins to "be felt in place of the relation 
of each tribe to an exclusive god a universal 
relation of all men to universal powers. This 
| worship of heavenly powers raises the worshippers 
] above superstition to a proud sense of high 

birth and high power. Since more than one object, 

■ 

(sun, moon and stars) is worshipped we have here 
polytheism. 

Religions show a development from polytheism, 
where all the gods are worshipped, to henotheism, 
where one G-od is worshipped while the existence of 
others is allowed, and then to monotheism, where 
| one god alone is believed to exist and he is 
| worshipped. This one Supreme Eeing may be either 

I immanent or transcendent, or else a combination 

| 

S of each. 

. 

The religion of ancient Greece was ant hr o- 
j pomorphic raising man to the highest level of 
| natural beings, and conceiving of man* a nature 
j as most like the divine. It took the various 
| natural powers and gave to them not merely a 





























, 

. 



■ 























. 


' . 




. 






. 

' f* 















35 


pergonal embodiment "but a human image as well. 

The gods were ideal men and women each with a real 
individuality of his own. As Aristotle put it, 

"The gods are immortal men and men are mortal gods." 

' From having connection with some aspect of nature 
the gods came to “be connected with human beings. 

But it was still a natural object which was wor¬ 
shipped and so the divine was necessarily immanent. 

The spiritual must still be given a natural body. 
Because of this fact art and poetry became important in 
; Greek life as an effort to reach to the infinite. 

This religion is polytheistic, and, as mentioned 
above, tends to become henotheistic. In the 
Homeric conception of the gods this need was met 
by a pantheon in which one god had others subord- 
;i inated to him, although he was not supreme or 
! absolute himself. 

Two tendencies, both attempting to find 
| unity, were at work in this Greek religion, one 
| of which conceived of a fate to which the gods 
themselves were subject, and another which made 
the major god the only God, and ascribed to him 
I all the divine powers. Both of them developed in 


















. 

, , c ' ' >.:* ■ 

* 

* 








* 




. 






! | { 



t 


. 


, 








• 

. 



36 


the subsequent history of religious thought in 
Greece. But along with this rational development 
of religion there appeared the mystery religions, 
which were religions of feeling, and which attempted 
to satisfy the desiie for a closer relationship 
with God. In these mysteries as they were called, 
"not “because the knowledge of them was confined to 
a few, hut because some parts of them were trans¬ 
acted in deep silence, and were the objects of 
such awe and reverence that they were not spoken 
of,” # we see a close parallel with some of the 
practices of Christianity. . The Greek philosophers 
who have been mentioned above labored to provide 
religion with a stable foundation in thought and 
their effect was to build up the conception of 
one supreme being who takes the place of the 
weaker deities. The Stoic religion,which was 
based upon the philsophy of Stoicism and which 
held that the absolute good may be realized in man 
and only there, led to a doctrine of social 
morality and universal philanthropy. 

The gods of the early Roman times are ab- 

# Menziess History of Religion, page 299. 












. 




















;• 















, 

. 

■ 
















37 


stractions of natural objects but they only exist 
where the objects exist and are thus immanent. 

Hinduism today is a religion of divine 
immanence. It reveals several stages in its 
history. The early stage, or Vedic religion as 
it is called-, , is a polytheistic nature worship 
which finds its divine being present in the per¬ 
sonalized objects of nature such as: sun, moon, 
shy, wind, rain and others. One of the shy gods 
is worshipped as 'a Heavenly Father, but almost 
with a sense of physical paternity. The worship 
and the dread of the powers of nature still 
persists in Hinduism. The next period, when the 
priestly Brahmans are in control, is marhed by 
ritual, ceremony and sacrifice, and this sacer- ' 
dotalism is an important part of the religion 
today. Popular Hinduism reveals many animistic 
traits such as fear of evil spirits and eclipses, 
a belief in astrology, horoscopes and charms. 

"The fundamental theological belief is in one 
immanent, all-inclusive Being or Spirit, Erahma. H * 


* Hume: The World's Living Religions, page 32.. 





















* 


4 

> 

- ' , ' • , ... r. 




- 


. 

, 












' 

. 














~ ' c ' • 



33 


Jainism arose about 570 B. 0. as an effort 
to reform the animal sacrifices and the caste div¬ 
isions of Hinduism, and it persists today, although 
it is confined to India with comparatively few 
followers. It has deified its founder, Mahavir®, 
although he had himself denied the existence of 
any Supreme Being in the world, and looks to him 
as an immanent deity worshipping him even 
idolatrously at times. 

Confucius discouraged belief in a Supreme 
Being but Confucianism as organized, and practised 
has this belief. However the deity is made 
impersonal and seems to be merely the moral rule 
or order of the world. Actually numerous deities 
are worshipped, most of them spirits in natural 
| objects such as: earth, sun, moon, and important 
;| rivers and mountains. At one time the emperor 
| annually conducted, the worship of Heaven, although 
this is being neglected at present. Ancestor 
worship is a prominent part of popular Confucian¬ 
ism. 

Shintoism, the national religion of Japan, 
was originally a nature worship finding its deities 






















« 

. 


* 









. 

* 


; ■ \ ' 

■ 

: t ■' 


* 
















39 


in the sun, the moon, in sacred mountains, 
notably Mt. Fuji-yama, and other natural 
objects. More recently the Mikado, whose descent 
is traced from the sun goddess, has been thought 
of as a "divinely descended ! Heavenly Sovereign. 1 

* Hume: The World*s Living Religions, 

page 162. 








CHAPTER V 


THE TRANSCENDENT G-OD IN RELIG-IOUS THOUG-HT 

The conception of G-od as a transcendent 
Being existing above and beyond the universe, 
having no concern with the universe, or as the 
first cause or mover of the universe, without 
any part in its subsequent operation except in 
occasional catastrophic acts, is one that has found 
much support in the history of mankind. 

In some of the religions and religious 
practices.already mentioned above traces of this 
conception are to be found, although perhaps, 
only faintly discernible through the immanent 
conception in which they are hidden. It is 
possible that the drive behind fetichism, which 
places a spirit In some ordinary object, is a 
vague feeling, although perhaps not even con¬ 
scious, that there is a transcendent reality. 

There is a trend of thought In Hinduism found in 
the Upanishads which has at its centre the con¬ 
ception of a transcendent Brahma as the one 


40 
















c 

t 

* 






. 





















' 


, 
























41 


Supreme Being. This trend develops from the 
Hindus’ love of philosophical speculation and 

!■ 

| shows a different level of thought from the 
j popular Hinduism mentioned in the last cahapter. 
For the Brahminist, as these philosophical 
thinkers are called, Brahma is an ’’absolute, 
infinite, eternal, omnipresent, impersonal, 
indescribable, neuter Being - - - - in contrast 
with which the manifold world with all its 
! changing finite phenomena must be regarded as an 
illusion.” * Brahminism sees G-od as an im¬ 
personal transcendent Brahma, a philosophical 
' Absolute beyond any ethical or metaphysical 
limitations. 

The early Egyptian religions conceived of 
! G-od as a transcendent Being. Their art, as also 
did the art of the Assyrians, attempted to make 

|the infinite articulate in the only way they knew, 

, 

oy using finite forms. On the veil of Isis is 

| 

|written! ” I am that which is, that which hath 

- 

.been, and that which will be; no man hath lifted 

* Hume: The World’s Living Religions, pages 

24-25. 







' 








e 


: , ■■■' 




< ’ < 


. : ■ - ' 

■ 

. 




















■ t ; v - , .V-' &*%&/$$'} fc ifo: i 

■ 














. 






‘ 







42 

my veil,” which means that there is the idea of a 
unity lying behind all finite forms, in which they 
s are lost. 

As has been said (page 31) the religions of 
: the Orient are principally concerned with the 
| infinite* and so we can expect to find the best 
examples of the conception of a transcendent G-od 
1 in these religions* Brahminism is one example. 

Sikhislm, which stands ninth among the living 
: religions of the world and. is concentrated in 
!! the north- west wort ion of India, teaches a 

9 

‘ mystical monotheism. G-od Is unitary, absolute, 
inscrutable, omnipotent and eternal. In contrast 
with this the world is transitory and vain, and 
man is helpless and submissive. Man obtains 
salvation by merging himself with the mystical 
world soul. 

Taoism, a religion of China, has as Its 
| Supreme Being the Tao who is eternal, impersonal 
I and mystical, and who is fundamentally inactive 
j and indescribable. The worshipper seeks to 
exhibit the same placidity, self-contentedness 
and indifference to all people and all things 













< • 

* 

, 

• - ; 








, 

- 

■ t . ■- 
























43 


that the Tao manifests. Taoism in failing to 
live up to its original ideas now displays 
traces of immanence, 

Mohammedanism has as its Supreme being Allah 
who is the one and only G-od, This G-od is called 
by various names such as: 11 The One, the Mighty, 
the Powerful, the King, the Dominator, the 
Provider, the Compassionate, the-Merciful, the 
Forgiving. ” ** Allah is conceived of as an 

arbitrary?" judge standing ready to punish the wicked 
and to reward the good people. Even in this there 
are some signs of immanence to be found. 

The G-od of Judaism is one who transcends the 
universe. He. is the Creator, yet he stands outside 
of his creation entering into it only by cata¬ 
strophic acts. Judaism developed from the crudely 
polytheistic religion of the Semitic tribes. The 
earlier religion of the Jews was likely a nature 
worship in which such natural objects as mountains, 
hills and springs would, be regard.ed as the abodes 
of various spirits. In their literature can be 


* Hume: The Rorld 1 s Living Religions, page 224. 














* 
























, 

. 




* 






, 






















: 








44 


discovered traces of totemism, of practice of the 
custom of tabu, of ancestor-worship,, and of 
demonology both theriomorphic and anthropomorphic. 
Moses, who led them out of their Egyptian 
captivity, proclaimed, one G-od, Yahweh, who was 
the God of all their tribes and. who would, lead 
them and guide them, although the existence of 
other gods was not denied, as yet. Yahweh spoke 
to them, they believed, through the unusual 
things in nature, through tempests and storms, 
the lightning and thunder, earthquakes and. fire. 
They conceived of God as transcendent over the 
world able to interfere only in a miraculous 
way with the workings of it. They could not see 
God's hand in natural evolution but thought of 
his action as catastrophic. A ritualistic 
formula was developed the practice of which was 
intend-ed to placate the anger of God and to 
encourage his interference in favor of the wor¬ 
shipper. Sven when they conceived, of God as just, 
rather than capricious, still everything 
connected with him. was considered holy and awe¬ 
inspiring. The Jews now believe that God is 












< 

' < • 



. 






, 












1 

C 




. 














. 












45 

universal, interested in all races, but partic¬ 
ularly interested in their own, and they believe 
that he shall send his Messiah to restore Israel 
in some miraculous way to her rightful place 
among the nations. 

Although the religion of Jesus will be 
considered in another chapter there are certain 
tend.encies in Christian thought which properly 
belong in the present chapter. 

Outstanding among these is the interpretation 
of Christianity given by Augustine which has 
remained a powerful factor in theology and relig¬ 
ion ever since he lived* He saw God as separated, 
and removed from the world, (cf. pages 17-13) 
and only approachable through the medium of an 
organized church and priesthood. The Roman 
Catholic stress upon the authority of the Church 
with its priesthood, -and the later Protestant 
stress upon the Scriptures as infallible, are 
directly attributable to the Augustinian concep¬ 
tion of a transcendent God. 

Religion such as that propounded, by Barth 
in Germany today challenges the Id.ea that God is 















. 



... 




■ 

, 





. 

, 


. 






. 













46 

immanent in nature and in man. I-Ie holds that man 
is totally depraved and Gan he saved only hy the 
cataclysmic action of a transcendent being, 

Rudolf Otto has elaborated" the theory of a 
transcendent G-od who has within himself something 
incomprehensible which cannot be expressed in our 
categories. G-od is holy in a mysterious.indefinable 
way. 

Max Muller believes that religion is the 
consciousness of the Infinite. He sees G-od simply 
as the Beyond, the negation of the finite, some¬ 
thing that transcends all measurement. He stresses 
the pure transcendence of the Deity. 

Spencer conceives of an Infinite or Absolute 
which is the true object of Religion. Although 
he believes this Infinite to be the presupposition 
of all our knowledge yet it is itself unknowable. 

For him G-od is an abstract 'unity that swallows 
up all the differences of the finite and even the 


finite itself 
























* 




. 














■ 








■ 















CHAPTER VI 


THE TRAUSC EM DENT - IMMANENT GOD III RELIGIOUS THOUGHT 

Christianity, which has more adherents 
than any other of the living religions of the 
world, and which is the only one among them that• 
can claim the whole world as its sphere of influ¬ 
ence, is the outstanding example of religious 
thought that conceives of God not as either 
transcendent or immanent hut as both combined in 
one unity, transcendent-immanent. It seems to be 
not merely a coincidence that a religion with such 
a belief concerning God can make such claims. 

The first century of this era found two 
opposing doctrines of God. On the one hand there 
was Judaism with its rigidly monotheistic concep¬ 
tion of a transcendent God who, although the Creator, 
stood apart from his creation. On the the other 
Fas the Greek conception of a pantheistic Deity 
immanent in the works of nature and particularly 
in man. Each of these conceptions contained 
valuable truth as far as it went, but there was 
a necessity for a religion which could combine 

4? 

















. 

- 













1 < 


■ 



























48 


the transcendence of montheism with the immanence 
of pantheism in one unity which would preserve the 
truth of each. Christianity was the religion that 
effected this needed combination. This new 
religion was horn on Jewish soil and was given 
a Hellenistic expression in the form that en¬ 
dured. 

Jesus, himself, was a Jew hy hirth, trained 
in the Jewish manner to respect the Law, the will 
of Yahweh, that transcendent being who commanded 
the obedience and loyalty of his creatures. Jesus 
with such a background could not have failed to 
conceive of a transcendent G-od. Thus he said, 

’’Our Father, which art in heaven.” Yet his own 
experience of a very close relationship with G-od, 
made especially articulate at high mornonets in 
his life, and his sympathetic observation of the 
facts of nature as he was able to discover them 
in his delightful boyhood environment,led Jesus 
to the strong conviction that G-od did not exist 
only as a transcendent being in an unattainable 
beyond but also as an immanent being in the 
created world. G-od, he believed, is immanent in 












' 






* 

. 


- 




















' 

















49 


nature, but also transcends it. He is spirit 
but does not exclude nature. At once he had 
combined the Jewish and Greek conceptions in his 
idea of God. He believed in the essential worth 
of the individual because of the in-dwelling 
presence of G-od. While recognizing the high status 
of mankind that the Greeks proclaimed he was still 
able to retain as lofty a conception of G-od as that 
which the Jews held. For Jesus man is the organ 
and manifestation of G-od. Jesus as no one else 
ever did conceived of a divine humanity, man with 
God immanent in him. 

Jesus proclaimed the Kingdom of God upon 
earth. At this time the Jewish apocalyptic hope 
was very strong. They hoped that the Roman rule 
might be thrown off and, since they could see no 
immediate possibility of this happening in the 
ordinary course of events, they looked for God to 
aid his chosen people by accomplishing this in 
some miraculous manner. Jesus answered this hope 
with his proclamation of the Kingdom* but, by his 
insistence that God would only act as mankind 
allowed him to become immanent in its actions. 






























. 


. 

. 

* 

. 






’ 




















50 


he appealed to the Greek Ideal of God as immanent 
in man. The Messiah, whom the Jews believed should 
accomplish the miracle, Jesus believed would not 
establish his rule cataclysmically. For him all 
development is a continuous growth* 

Jesus saw an indestructible principle of 
unity between God and man which naturally must 
lead to a reconciliation in the present. Bo con¬ 
scious was Jesus af this unity that he referred 
to God as a Father, albeit a Heavenly Father, and 
to mankind as Sons of the Father. Indian pantheism 
had reached unity between the finite and the in- 
j finite by denying the reality of the former, but 
I Jesus said that by losing himself in the infinite 
man truly finds himself. That means that by giving 
| up a lower form of life and. by integrating our¬ 
selves more closely with the infinite we shall find 
ourselves in a higher form, higher because there is 
more of God in it. 

Plato had opposed the spiritual life to the 
natural in his maxim "die to live”. He believed 
that the natural life hindered the true development 
of the spiritual, and that only in the extinction 








- 

, 

. 

. J' 

■ 

• ' ' OJ 

.■ ' • 

. 





, 

■ 













51 


of the finite self can the infinite be realized. 
Jesus did "not admit the absolute opposition 
between the universal and the particular, the 
spiritual and the natural," * but recognizing 

that both go together to make up a perfect life 
he subordinated the natural to the spiritual. He 
protested against antagonistic self-seeking and 
urged that, by nurturing the spiritual life, man 
should become united more closely to the 
j transcendent-immanent Gad. 

Christianity had its birth on Jewish soil 
but the opposition it met with from the religious 
leaders of Judaism, along with other reasons, 
caused it to widen its sphere of influence, and 
with missionary zeal to seek to encompass the whole 
world. In this process Christianity came in 
I contact with Greek thought and naturally sought 
to express itself in Greek terms. The most import¬ 
ant of these is the "Logos*’ conception originated 
by Heraclitus who,In his effort to explain the 
world order, discovered in the world a power 


w 


Caird: Evolution of Religion- Vol. II, page 184. 



















t 


' 


1 






. 

- 

* 








' , 




. 




. 




' 




- 












52 


similar to the reasoning power in man. 

Philo (25 E. C.-60 A. D. ) attempted to 
harmonise Platonism and Judaism, both with a 
transcendent God, and Stoicism, with its immanent 
God, by conceiving of the Logos as immanent in the 
universe but also existing independently. The 
Logos is the agent by which the divine creative 
activity formed the world; the agent by which God 
reveals himself; the agent through which man 
rises to participate in universal reason. The 
function of the Logos is threefold: creative, 
revealing and redemptive. 

The writer of the Fourth Gospel, who was 
philosophic by nature, in attempting to make 
Christianity acceptable to the cultured Greek 
utilizes the idea of the Logos. For him God, 
the Father, is the transcendent being, but in his 
son, Jesus Christ, he has come into the world order 
as an immanent being. ’’The Logos was made flesh 
and dwelt among us. ” Or, in other words, the 
transcendent being went out of himself and became 
immanent in man and in nature. This writer had 












■ ' 






, 




















. 








53 


an advantage over Philo in that he had a his¬ 
torical figure within whom to deposit the function 
of the Logos. The Fourth Gospel took Jesus and 
fitted him into the contemporary philosophical 
conceptions. Jesus here "became the Christ or 
Logos, the wisdom of. the transcendent God "becoming 
immanent. This had a religious value, for it is 
the beginning of a theology and creed without 
which the Church.probably could not have survived, 
and without the Church Christianity itself 
probably could not have survived. 

Paul, a Jew trained in the Jewish traditions, 
inherited the Judaistic conception of God as a 
transcendent being, but he believed that in Jesus 
Christ God became immanent in man and in the 
world. He believed that God had given a revelation 
of himself in Jesus Christ. Paul helped much to 
free Christianity from the shackling bonds of 
Judaism when he preached Christ’s life as the 
fulfilment of the Jewish lav/, and. then sought to 
make Christianity the world religion which he 
believed it should be. He was not concerned much 
with the earthly life of Jesus but was concerned 



























' 










. 









■ 

- 

4 









r l 


























t’ 


■ 








54 

rather with Jesus as the Messiah who, although 
he disappointed the old Messianic expectations 
of the Jews, still was the promised Messiah, 

Paul was most interested in the death of Jesus 
because he saw in it the ethical self-abnegation 
of a Messiah who could have conquered his enemies 
by supernatural powers, but who chose to die in 
order to demonstrate the principle of self-sacri¬ 
ficial love. He thought that there was a warfare 
within man between the good and the evil, and that 
the only salvation could come through the same 
self-sacrificial yielding to a Power which is 
revealed in all within and without. He conceived 
of this Power as a Divine Spirit immanent in nature 
and man but at the same time retaining its 
divinity, a transcendent-immanent God. 

The Christian Apologists used the same method 
of relating Jesus to Greek thought bjr conceiving 
of God as transcendent but of the Logos as immanent 
in man and in the world. Clement (150-215) and 
Origen (185-254) both hold to the transcendence of 
God but, borrowing from the Stoic philosophy, they 
ta ught that God is immanent as well. For the 














. 





















- 

. 






' 



. 




. 





* 

■ 

- 




Apologists the Logos that became flesh in Ohrist 
is the same that is immanent in nature as its 
spiritual basis and principle of its order, that 
inspired the Hebrew prophets, the Greek sages and 
all who live rationally and rightly. 

Athanasius showed how the Western view, that 
is the view of the Roman Gatholic Church which 
favors the transcendent theory, and the Eastern 
view, that of the Greek Logos as immanent, could 
be harmonized. He believed in the Eternal Father 
who is the abyss of feeling behind the world, and 
in the Eternal Son who is the outflowing of the 
Father immanent in all nature and in man. 

The history of Christianity reveals many 
imperfect attempts to put into practice the rel¬ 
igion which Jesus had in mind, that in which the 
spiritual is put above the natural while neither 
is denied. Even his own disciples could not 
appreciate such a lofty vie?/ for their conception 
of the spiritual world was really that of a super¬ 
natural world. They looked for the proof of the 
spiritual in miracles, signs and wonders, whereas 
Jesus had emphasized the fact that the spiritual 

























. 








■ 

, 








. 




















56 


Is revealed in the ordinary course of events. 

Paul could not appreciate it for he needed the 
resurrection, a miracle of the highest order, as 
: as basis for his faith, and he looked forward to 
another great miracle, the second coming of 
Christ. Our imagination naturally tends to re¬ 
present the spiritual as only a larger natural 
world without some of the limitations of this 
world. We look for something objective upon which 
to base our faith. For the mediaeval Christians 
this was found in the authority of the Church, and 
for some that authority has retained its efficacy. 

The mediaeval Church, influenced by Augus¬ 
tine’s conception of a transcendent G-od, adopted 
the pessimistic view that the spiritual and natural 
cannot be reconciled in this life, and,laying 
stress upon otherworldliness and the necessity of 
dying in order to attain to the full spiritual 
life, lost sight of the unity of the natural and 
spiritual. 

In the period after the Reformation, when the 
Protestant Christians had denied the authority of 
the Roman Church, there grew'up a doctrine of the 











• < ' : ' r "i ■<; 

• c 




. 


. 

. 








! 












' 

- e : ■ ' 


, 















57 

infallibility of the Scriptures and many who were 
unable because of mental inertia or other reasons 
to build up a rational spiritual faith rested "in 
this objective proof. 

With all the imperfections in the attempts 
to express it Christianity still holds to the 
belief that there is M a spiritual principle 
which manifests itself in nature and in the grow¬ 
ing life of humanity; M * that G-od, although 
transcending the world as the highest spiritual 
principle is still immanent in nature as the cause 
of its regular ordered movements, and in man as 
the explanation of his highest impulses; that G-od is 
a transcendent-immanent spiritual Being, 


** Caird:Evolution of Religion-Vol. 2, page 325. 

















, 










’ 



* " 

■ 


* ■ - - • Y - h ' yj - U ■ c ' 







CHAPTER VII 


A DISCUSSION OF THE IMMANENT CONCEPTION OF G-OD 

For fifteen centuries Augustine, who 
"believed in transcendence exclusively, influenced 
the theological thinking of the world. The Church 
laid stress upon the transcendence of G-od and upon 
otherworldliness believing that this world is evil 
and that the only ?;ay to reach spirituality is to 
die. Now, largely through the challenge of science 
which claims that resident forces are at work in 
the natural world, we have come to stress the 
immanence of G-od. In fact many In our own time 
swing completed over to the conception of an 
immanent G-od and repudiate transcendence, desiring 
to make the immanent Deity serve for the whole 
Deit2/-, 

There are certain strong points in favor of 
such a view; there are also certain elements of 
weakness which must not be ignored. In this 
chapter I shall attempt to note some of these. 

It is impossible to study the natural ?;or-ld 


58 



























■ 










. 

. 


. 

' 



















59 


from the viewpoint of any.of the particular 
sciences without being struck by the order and the 
harmony of it all, A study of the nature of 
astronomical bodies and of the relationship 
between them reveals sizes and distances so 
infinitely great as to defy human comprehension. 
Yet there is such an order in the movement of 
these bodies that the astronomer, by proper use 
of his observations and of mathematics, is able 
to foretell the exact position of a body' in its 
course at any particular moment in the future, 
Natural laws which control this motion appear to 
be inexorably set. At the other extreme a study 
of atoms and. electrons reveals that here too, 
although the sizes and distances are infinitely 
small, there is the same orderly predictable 
action and reaction, apparently in obedience 
to fixed laws. The palaeontologist, the botanist, 
the biologist, each in his respective field is 
able to discover this same principle of order and 
harmony. The scientists observe that creation has 
been a developing process, an evolution. Starting 
from matter as a basis there developed uni-cellular 




















.9 


* 

. 






. 




t ' 






. 



q 

















60 


life when matter was in an appropriate condition, 
and from this form developed multi-celluler life 
in all its complex expressions. 

In the development of matter and life and in 
the present order and harmony of these there is 
evidence of a unifying force underlying all and 
working through all. This resident power or force 
at work in all nature and in man is the immanent 
G-od working through natural law. The element of 
chance, of a ”fortuitous concourse of atoms" is 
ruled out by the facts as science has observed 
them; nature obeys an immanent Law. This is the 
strongest point in favor of a belief in an 
immanent G-od, the fact that it recognizes that 
there are resident forces at work in nature. 

Another is that the belief in an immanent 
G-od means that G-od is believed to be in all men, 
which gives a very sound basis upon which to 
build a doctrine of the brotherhood of man. The 
Gtoics,believing in the divine immanence, made this 
one of the most important parts of their religion. 
This in turn gives a rational sanction for social 
morality. All men are brothers because G-od is 






' 

t 


. 



: ' 








* 









■ 






■ 

















61 


immanent in each, and so it becomes incumbent upon 
each to treat all of his fellows accordingly. 

Those who believe in an immanent G-od usually believe 
in the G-olden-Rule as a guide for social action. 

The belief in an immanent G-od leads to an 
interest in contemporary progress. Those who 
believe that this world is essentially evil, and who 
look for progress either in another world or in 
the catastrophic act of G-od in this, have no incen¬ 
tive for improvement in the present. Eut for those 
who see no such possibility, since G-od is immanent, 
there 'is a concern to rectify things here and now, 
for if it is not done now it never will be done. 

The belief in a G-od who is immanent in man 
with the consequent exaltation of man leads to a 
belief in man rather than in G-od, This, of course, 
is the basis of modern Humanism which makes man 
the measure of all things. Man is deified. It is 
believed that in man’s native instincts are found 
the perfect guide for life, and all the moral and 
religious truth which is necessary. And so the 
keynote of much of our moral.behavior has been 
freedom. for expression without any shackling bonds 






■ 

■ 

. 

. 






« 

. 















- 

* 

■ 







t 

' 




62 


of an external moral sanction. Man asserts his 
absolute independence and. his sovereignity over 
himself. But, when it is discovered that the 
actual actions of man in private life and in 
social intercourse do not justify such a lofty 
view of his nature, there is a reaction which 
leaves him without any faith in himself or in 
God. Man becomes impressed with his own empti¬ 
ness and impotence and thus with the futility of 
Human life. Modern Art and Literature is 
replete with examples of the cynicism which 
follows upon this sense of futility. The modern 
biography with its iconoclastic tendencies is an 
outstanding example of this feeling that life is 
not as worthwhile as man had suspected it to be. 
From the belief in God as immanent in man we 
moved to the belief in man instead of God, and 
now we have arrived at a disbelief in man himself. 

When God is conceived to be immanent in all 
things then there follows a pantheistic belief that, 
since everything contains God, therefore every¬ 
thing is equally moral; moral distinctions are 
lost. Without such distinctions the moral 



















































































' 







, 







63 

dynamic has gone for now that all. things are 
moral there is no necessity for choosing between 
alternate courses of action. This, connected with 
the sense of the futility of human life already 
referred to, leaves man without any adequate 
ideal by which to pattern his living. Speaking 
psychologically the securing of an ideal or an end 
is one of the chief factors in the integration 
of personality. An ideal which can give complete 
satisfaction to the whole personality ends conflict 
and sublimates the repressed instincts, adding a 
power to life which makes moral living possible. 

The belief in G-od as purely immanent leaves man 
without the ideal and without the integration 
that accompanies it. Often the moral life is 
not even taken seriously. 

Thus while the immanent theory does provide 
for an interest in reform and progress here and now 
as noted above, yet it offers no worthwhile goal 
for society. Man is believed to be perfect as he 
now is, and so there is no necessity for efforts 


t owards improvemen t. 















t --- 


















♦ 

1 











» 

, 

■ 

, 




. 

' 


. 

















64 


We have observed how the ancient philosophers 
tried to relate Being and Becoming in some satis¬ 
factory manner. The problem still remains with us. 
The conception of G-od as purely immanent fails to 
recognize the problem, for, while It gives the 
proper consideration to Becoming, it forgets the 
Being that becomes. There is no distinction made 
bet?;een G-od and his expressions. The Becoming 
aspect is often stressed to prove the actuality 
and activity of G-od as opposed to pure Being, but 
it becomes pure immanence for it loses the Being 
itself. 







. 


I '■ 


* 2 










CHAPTER VIII 


A DISCUSSION OF THE TRANSCENDENT CONCEPTION OF G-OD 


As already indicated science has proved 
the facts of evolution from matter through to 
multi-cellular life, hut when science seeks to get 
hack to the cause of matter then It is faced with 
a mystery which it has been unable to solve as yet* 
It realizes that there is an energy and power 
hearing much the same relation to the natural 
world that the Mana in primitive religions bore 
to nature, hut it is mysterious* Lord Kelvin,in 
1903, said that science does positively affirm 
the existence of a creative power, although it 
cannot describe its nature* Spencer, who popu¬ 
larized the theory of evolution, believed that an 
infinite and eternal source of energy caused the 
evolutionary process. A. K* Rogers * says that 
while the laws of nature have a validity in their 
own realm, yet the claims of the Spirit have a 
real validity also that cannot be ignored. Modern 

* in his ’’Students’ History of Philosophy”, page 501. 


65 















66 


science agrees with him and even admits that the 
ultimate cause may he spiritual; the immanent 
energy may he just a projection of a transcendent 
energy. Addington sees a wider field of reality 
behind the physical world, a realm that lies 
beyond scientific investigation. The controversy 
is no longer as to whether belief in the spiritual 
is valid but as to the nature of that spirit. 

The conception of God as a purely transcend¬ 
ent and extra-mundane Being has two points in 
its favor. Such a belief that G-od can exist as 
pure Spirit beyond the necessity of a natural 
world in which to express himself recognizes the 
spiritual nature of the ultimate reality. Pure 
immanence denies the spiritual nature of G-od, but 
transcendence, by going to the other extreme of 
affirming that that is the only nature of G-od, 
plainly demands that G-od be thought of as Spirit, 

The belief in a transcendent God. practically 
points to monotheism. W .hen man thought of 
divinity as only existing in natural objects, and 
was unable to perceive the inherent unity under¬ 
lying them all,then he believed in a-pluralism of 


















. 

• ■ • ■ • ' ■ ■ \ 
. : '■ ■ '■ ~ ", ' 

• - 

. 

< 

' 

rl - "... t S' ■ 

. 














67 

gods. However if God is independent of all natural 
forms there is nothing to divide his unity and he is 
conceived of as the one God. The monotheistic 
belief is the highest, stage in the evolution of 
religion, and represents a truth which no thinking 
person will deny. Judaism which strongly asserts 
the transcendence of God reached a high, ethical 
monotheistic belief. 

There are serious disadvantages to the belief 
in a purely transcendent God some of which should 
be indicated. 

Such a God cannot be defined in our ordinary 
terms for he exists beyond anything finite. In fact 
the transcendent God is what the finite is not. 

The infinite exists apart from the finite. Simply, 
the infinite is the negation of the finite, of any 
limit or determination, when we believe in its in¬ 
dependent existence. Such a negation cannot supply 
an inspiration for worship or devotion since there 
is nothing there to evoke it, and yet we must admit 
that there is a strong feeling in man that something 
does exist beyond this finite world, a feeling that of 
necessity must have a basis in reality. 








■ s 

. 

♦ 











' 

- 
































68 


Spencer, who believes that the infinite is 
simply the negation of the finite, stresses the 
mystical character of God. He carries his thought 
forward to its logical conclusion that since God 
is negative and mysterious therefore he is unknown 
and. unknowable. Our natural reaction to this is 
to make an attempt to picture God in some form that 
we can understand, and so, with some, the effort to 
comprehend a transcendent God results only in an 
anthropomorphic conception of him. There is still 
the feeling that God exists, and that we must 
bring ourselves in contact with him. If he is so 
far beyond us that we cannot comprehend him then we 
put him into a. form in which we can. The Roman 
Catholic belief in the Church as the voice of God, 
and the Protestant belief in the verbal inspiration 
by God of the Holy Scripture, both mentioned above 
(pages 56-57) are efforts to put God into an 
understandable form. 

Another attempt to reach God, when he is con¬ 
sidered to be beyond everything that is finite, 
is the otherworldliness of the mediaeval Christians 
who set God and the world so far apart that only 







* 

* 

. 

. 

- 

, 

ft 

’ 

' 




69 


by freeing themselves of the limitations of the 
finite world could they hope to reach him. They 
denied the finite world as much as possible and 
through asceticism attempted to escape its control 
over them. The gospel of escape from this world 
in order to attain to a fuller life is unhealthy 
psychologically and contrary to the teachings of 
Christianity which they professed. For them there 
is the apocalyptic hone that G-od, in contravention 
of natural law, will obtrude himself catastrophic- 
ally into the world order, but it is denied here 
that such a method is possible to the nature of G-od. 

Buddhism gives us a good example of what occurs 
when the finite is denied so that the infinite may 
be reached.. In the end there is left not even 
the infinite, but only peaceful Nirvana, utter and 
eternal oblivion. 

Thus the logical conclusion of the doctrine of 
a transcendent G-od, who is infinite, absolutely 
opposed to the finite is that God being Unknown 
and Unknowable does not exist at all. 

A second objection to the belief that God is 
purely transcendent is that it implies his omni- 






















. 







* 








. 













. 

< ■ . If' 





. 

















70 


potence and his omniscience, his superiority over 
natural laws, and even his capriciousness, leaving 
man as a puppet in his hands. Thus, as Augustine put 
it, God elects certain people to be saved, and thus 
others are to be left to damnation, although 
Augustine avoided the latter logical conclusion. 

Our fate is predestined for us and no amount of 
action upon our part can alter it. Man is not 
saved by his own efforts but by the grace of God. 
Although it must be admitted that many who held 
this idea lived good lives, yet the moral sanction 
for action is lost if man believes he is clay in 
j the hands of a potter who cannot be trusted. Han’s 
freedom of will and sense of responsibility for 
action is .lost in a theological fatalism. 

A third objection to such an idea is that when 
God transcends the natural world then he becomes 
unapproachable for his people. This was marked in 
Judaism by a sense of the holiness of Yahweh and by 
the growth of a professional priesthood whose duty 
it was to offer sacrifices and to reveal divine 
guidance. The Roman Church has built up its whole 
ecclesiastical system on the basis that God could 










i , i 


, 










. 


, 









. 











, 







71 


not be approached by the people directly but must 
have the Church through its priests make the contact. 
Mot till Martin Luther preached the priesthood of 
all believers was such a theory discounted* It is 
impossible to believe that any individual should be 
able to approach G-od more readily than another pro¬ 
viding that each is equally desirous of doing so. 

The forensic theory of the Atonement is an out¬ 
growth of the belief that Cfod cannot be approached 
by his people. G-od is the unbending Judge of his 
sinful creatures, and since the people cannot plead 
for themselves, it is necessary that there should be 
someone to Intercede for them. 

The final objection to be noted here is that the 
theory of a purely transcendent God is an inadequate 
appreciation of the physical facts of nature. It is 
impossible to believe that God created the universe 
and having once set it in operation only interferes 
from time to time with its operation. Rather the 
unity,' harmony and order of it all indicates that the 
same force or energy which created it is continually 
immanent in it as the explanation of its action. 

"It is highly important, therefore, for relig- 









































. 






. 






■ 

. 

, 





















72 


ious thinking - and for philosophic thinking also - 
to rid itself of a transcendency which seeks to 
magnify G-od’s greatness by separating him from the 
world, placing him at a distance from it, and making 
him self-sufficient and complete without it.” * 

* A* Seth Pringle-Pattison in Streeter: 

’’The Spirit”, page Ip. 










CHAPTER IX 

A DISCUSSION' OF THE TRAITSCENIEHT-IMMANENT 
COTCSPTIOF OF G-OD 


We have seen in the last two chapters that 
each extreme of thought in regard to the nature of 
G-od has definite advantages but even greater dis~ 
advantages. A satisfying conception of C-od Is one 
that retains the former while eliminating the latter 
as much as possible. Each view contains a great 
truth, and so a proper statement must include each 
in a synthesis that will exclude the weak points 
and yet bring each truth into one great truth. 

As A. K. Rogers says, "It no longer Is a question 
of suppressing either side but rather of finding one 
way in which both may have their claims satisfied." * 
The final view must be in accord with the views of 
science, philosophy and religion. I believe that the 
truth lies in a strict harmony of the transcendence 
and the immanence, a union which may best be expressed 
by a hyphenated word which leaves each aspect intact 
and yet binds them together into an inseparable unity; 

^RogersiStudents ■ History of Philosophy, page 502. 


73 
























. 

* 














. 








* 










* 


< f 
















74 


therefore the title to this thesis., "The Transcend¬ 
ent-Immanent God. " Each expression is necessary 
to describe the real nature of G-od and yet they are 
not mutually exclusive; neither can stand without 
the other. The belief that the Deity is immanent 
in nature and man takes into consideration the truth 
that resident forces are at work in the universe. 
However this view only reveals part of the truth 
for the cause and explanation of these forces is 
left a mystery until we posit the transcendence of 
G-od. Uniting the two we have the resident forces 
at work yet with a spiritual significance in their 
operation. As Rudolf Eucken believes the divine is 
not only a world-transcendent sovereignity but is 
also a world-pervading power. 

Why is it that man by his very nature Is not 
satisfied with the experience of the finite and seeks 
for an infinite being ? Edward Caird In his two 
volume work? "The Evolution of Religion" believes 
that the search for God and therefore the idea of 
God is bound up with our very consciousness of the 
world and of ourselves. 4s was outlined in my intro¬ 
duction while man at first neither distinguishes 


) 





















, 

■ 

; 

* 











. 








. 




- . 





















' 

4 „ 










75 


himself from, other objects nor one object from 
another yet as he develops he becomes conscious 
of a distinction between subject and object, be¬ 
tween himself and all the external world, but also 
of a unity underlying them which is presupposed in 
their difference. Since there is this unity and 
since there is an action and. reaction of the subject 
and object upon each other, therefore we are driven 
to a third term, which, Caird says, is God. The 
subject and the object-are essentially distinguished 
but since neither has any meaning without the other 
they must be essentially related. God is immanent 
both in the subject and in the object as the cause 
and explanation; he transcends them both as the 
principle of unity which explains their essential 
relation. Caird believes that the principle of 
unity, God, is present even to primitive man, al¬ 
though not consciously, and the evolution of rel¬ 
igion results from a steadily increasing apprehension 
of the unifying nature of God, Neither an objective 
type of religion which in general stresses the 
immanence of God., nor a subjective type such as 
Judaism, which posits the transcendence of God, offers 













. 











«• 




. 










' 





. 




. 


















« 

















76 

satisfaction. Rather the highest religion is one 
which will bring into harmony the transcendence of 
hod and his immanence without destroying either. 

Scientific investigation does not reduce.the 
mystery of nature but rather brings us to a new 
mystery. The more science seeks the cause and explan¬ 
ation of matter the more it is led to believe that 
at the basis is something spiritual. Science now 
cannot affirm even the existence of matter in the 
accepted meaning of that term. The evolutionary 
theory which is now accepted by all rational individ¬ 
uals does not deny that spirit exists, but on the 
contray offers a new proof, for evolution implies 
something at the first from, which the original forms 
evolve. Our multi-cellular life evolved, from uni¬ 
cellular life, which in turn evolved from inorganic 
matter in an appropriate condition; but there remains 
the question; Where did inorganic matter come from ? 

If we trace evolution from multi-cellular life in 
the o-ther direction we have emerging; first, instinct¬ 
ive activity; second, mind; and finally, spirit. 
Whether we go up or down in the evolutionary scale 
we are driven to recognize that the first cause and 





. 
















. 















' mm-' ■' ' ■ ■ 1 

. 






















■ 

















77 


final end is something spiritual. The study of 
metaphysics now becomes legitimate in the light of 
science for as William James states it, etaphysice 
is nothing but an attempt to think things out clearly 
to their ultimate significance, to find their sub¬ 
stantial essence in the scheme of reality.” 

The conception of a transcendent-immanent God 
satisfies the demands of modern science. The imman¬ 
ence is discernible in the order and harmony of natur¬ 
al law, the transcendence in the spiritual cause of 
such law. The steadily ascending stages of evolution- 
are explained as a fuller impartation of the divine 
spirit into nature. Such a God provides and explains 
the unity of the universe. The transcendent becomes 
immanent while maintaining its essential unity. 

The objection might be raised at this point 
that it isn l t permissible to separate the material 
from the spiritual and ascribe existence to the latter. 
Our own wills express themselves through our bodies 
and through instruments we may choose to use, yet 
no one denies that our wills are real and. separate 
entities. We cannot locate the will in a spatial 
relationship and yet we admit its reality. Similarly 
the world will expresses itself through th# world as 












1 






- 









. ■ 

. 

. 










. 




, 












. 

' 








■ 






■ 

> . 

. 



78 


body and through the natural laws as instruments 
and although v/e cannot locate it in any spatial re¬ 
lationship there is no reason to deny it existence as 
a real and separate entity. It is possible to distin¬ 
guish between G-od and his acts, to realize that while 
he is certainly immanent he is at the same time trans¬ 
cendent. Those who in the past believed in one extreme 
position or the other often found it difficult to dis¬ 
cover the value in the other view without losing what 
they already held. However in the light of modern 
thought it becomes possible and even necessary to syn¬ 
thesize the two extremes into a mean which will unite 
the two views while recognizing that each has a contri¬ 
bution to make in the search for ultimate truth. William 
Wordsworth reached this synthesis in his thinking when 
in his poem, ’’Lines Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern 
Abbey:” 

’’and I have felt 

A motion and a spirit, that impels 
All thinking things, all objects of all thought, 
And rolls through all things.” 













CHAPTER X 

SOME IMPLICATIONS OF THE TRANS CENDENT -IMMEANEETT 
CONCEPTION OF G-OD 


There are several very practical imp 1 id¬ 
eations of the transcendent-immanent conception of 
God, and this concluding chapter will be given over 
to an indication of some of them. 

The conception of G-od as transcendent-immanent 
gives a basis for a rational theology. A theology 
must enunciate a doctrine of G-od, of Christ and of 
man, and must consider G-od* s relation to the universe, 
to Christ and to man. In our conception G-od trans¬ 
cends the universe as the infinite and eternal source 
of it, yet is Immanent in the forms of it. "The one 
living G-od, who is behind and beyond the world, in 
creation goes out of himself and continuously and 
progressively unfolds himself in all the ascending 
forms of the creational process, working toward the 
fullest self-realization of himself in human form.” * 
All the. universe is the incarnation of G-od, but Jesus 
Christ, as the highest form of humanity, which In 
itself is the highest form of creation, stands out as 

h 


•♦After Walker, W. L. in "The Spirit and the 

Incarnation 

79 

























. 

- 

. 

r t 


. 





: ' ? - ■ . 

















. 




■ 




. , . 



















80 


the supreme revelation of G-od to the world. This 
provides for the devotional worship of G-od which is 
necessary for most individuals. Our feelings play an 
important part in directing our actions just as our 
minds do. 

We have in this conception a "basis for a proper 
view of history and of economics. History ceases to 
he merely a series of events linked together in 
chronological order, and becomes the projection of 
an independent spiritual life into ordinary human 
affairs, an infusion of the eternal into the temporal 
order. We have thus a meaning and a purpose in his¬ 
tory. A progressive movement in the interest of 
humanity is an evidence of the presence of spiritual 
principles in the lives of men, of an effort to 
incorporate the Kingdom of G-od in our present world. 
Economic reform since it is a step towards such an 
objective is a further revelation of the transcendent 
becoming immanent. As long as economics seeks to 
establish a self-satisfied finitude, and that is all 
that Capitalism and much modem Socialism is attempt¬ 
ing to do, then it is refusing to the spiritual an 
opportunity to enter into the temporal. 




. 







- 


. 









e 

, 


* 



















* 



















81 


Art and Poetry under the Influence of such a 
belief can become a conscious effort to express the 
spiritual and infinite in form that can be appreci¬ 
ated by our imaginations which are so limited by 
finite forms. 

This conception of G-od gives a rational sanction 
for morality. The same feeling of the brotherhood of 
man and the necessity for contempoary progress that 
were noted In the discussionnof the immanent concep¬ 
tion are retained. But this conception provides the 
moral dynamic that the Immanent belief lacked. Cur 
Inner life may be transformed in answer to a spiritual 
ideal which is outside providing the power for the 
transformation. It is just possible that some deny 
the transeendent-immanent conception because this 
dynamic speaking through their conscience indicts their 
moral laziness. 

At this present moment international affairs are 
in a turmoil with one nation demanding rights over 
another, with nations attempting to regain their 
national prestige, with a world naval race in progress _ 
which threatens to end disastrously. Disarmament con¬ 
ferences, peace pacts, diplomatic relations and the 















. 

, 






















i 














■ 





. 


. 












82 


League of Nations itself all seem powerless to "bring 
any sense of security into the situation. In the 
transcendent-immanent conception properly applied 
we have a solution of the difficulty. G-od is immanent 
in all men, in one nation as much as in another, and 
so no one country can claim superiority over another. 
Although there is a sense of the brotherhood of all 
nations since ail are sons of one Father yet there is 
no need for any nation to sacrifice its national 
identity, for in the idea of transcendency we have the 
true unifying principle in which even opposites may 
become as one. Thus ev®ry nation retains its nation¬ 
ality and yet because of the sense of unity lives in 
peace and harmony with ail others. 

And finally in this idea we have the basis of a 
healthy psychology. Man does not become pessimistic 
about his own worth, as is the tendency under Humanism, 
for in the close relationship with the transcendent 
divinty is the source of man’s dignity. "In Its fund¬ 
amental doctrine of love to G-od and man Christianity 
harmonizes the emotions of the soul into one inspiring 
purpose, thereby abolishing all conflict, and liberat¬ 
ing instead of suppressing the free energies of man. 

















. 

‘ - ■ 

■ 

. ' 

* 

■ 















* 




1 


: 

- 

1 






















83 


In its doctrine of the Spirit it emphasizes the 
element of power in religion/ 1 * Man finds complete 
integration of personality in attuning his will to the 
divine will which transcends everything as the supreme 
principle of unity. 

We have thus a conception of G-od that recognizes 
the existence of resident forces while insisting upon 
their ultimately spiritual nature, that takes the 
truth from, the thoughts of the ages, that is in harmony 
with the best thought of modern science, philosophy 
and religion, and that provides for man a sane and 
proper basis of life. If our G-od is to retain our 
respect and adoration, the assent of our minds and the 
consent of our wills, he cannot be anything less than 
this, transcendent-immanent. Each aspect of G-od is 
included but in an indissoluble and indivisible unity, 
the transcendent-immanent G-od, or as in Paul* s great 
statement harmonizing transcendence and immanence: 

"One GPd and Father of all, who is above all, and 
through all, and in you all/' # 


§ 


Hadfield, J* 
Ephesians 4: 


A.-"The Psychology of Power" in 
Streeter: "The Spirit", page 111. 





























4 










, 

' 


. 






C 




■ 




■ 


















B29744 





