For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Istvanffy, Daniel I. 

Turner Valley:its relationship 
to the development of Alberta’s 
oil industry. 










et 


x 














Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/turnervalleyitsrOOistv 



University of Alberta. 


Faculty of Arts and Science 
Department of History 

The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies 
for acceptance, a thesis entitled: 

Turner Valley: Its Relationship to the Development 
of Alberta*s Oil Industry 
submitted by Daniel Ingram Istvanffy, B.A£, in 
partia-1 fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 

of 

Ma.ster OF Arts 


PROFESSOR. 


PROFESSOR. 


Date 




i e • * • 


PROFESSOR 












1 









THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


TURNER VALLEY: 

ITS RELATIONSHIP TO THE DEVELOPMENT CF ALBERTA * S 
OIL INDUSTRY 

A’ DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MAS TER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


By 

DANIEL INGRAM ISTVANFFY 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA' 


8 APRIL 1950 








Page 


T \ & 

Table of Contents 


# 4.0 

Chapter 1 Introduction 

Geology of Turner Valley. 1 

Formation of petroleum.2 

Early history of the search for oil in Alberta 5 


Chapter 2 Production in Turner Valley 


Production records of typical wells. 13 

Cost of wells. 15 

"Wildcat" wells. 20 

Acidization... 23 

Gas-oil ratios. 23 

Nitro-glycerine experiment... 26 

Water injection. 27 


Chapter 3 Legislation and Controls 


1914 boom... 29 

Legislation for the protection of investors.. 33 

Calgary Stock Exchange... 34 

Dominion Royalties policy....... 37 

Control abd conservation,.... 39 

Provincial Royalties policy. 41 

Right of Entry...... 42 

Conservation and prorationing,.... 
































Page 


Chapter 4 Subsidiaryy Industries 

Pipe lines. 45 

Scrubbing plants. 53 

Separators. 54 

Absorption plants. 55 

Alkylate. 56 

Ammonium nitrate plant. 56 

Propane and ethylene oxide*,. 57 

Refineries. 57 

Transportation companies*.. 61 

Projected industries. 63 

Chapter 5 Natural Gas 66 

Chapter 6 Report of the McGillivray Commission 
on the Alberta Oil Industry 
Early history of conservation legislation.*.* 78 

Conservation Act (1938)...*.... .. 81 

The McGiliivray Commission. 87 

Exploration.. 87 

Production. 88 

Field prices* .... 

Wider markets and transportation costs*,,..*. 93 

Refining...... • • 

Marketing and marketing services 


97 



























page 

Conservation and prorationing . 99 

Summary. 102 

Chapter 7 Impact of the Industry on the Community 

Pioneer oil men. 105 

Employment... 109 

Population growth. Ill 

Railroads and roads. 114 

People of the community. 118 

Summary... & .. 119 

Appendices: 

M A M ... Turner Valley Petroleum Production 1914-1949. 
"B"..,Footage drilled Annually, 1914-1949. 
n C M ...Annual Total Production Figures, selected wells. 
"D 11 .. .Comparison of Production Figures, selected wells. 
”S ,f .. .Cumulative production Records, selected wells. 

‘'G”... Imperial oil Profits, Marketing and Refining 1938. 


M H M ?..Diagram of Typical Turner Valley ell 


























Chapter One 


1 


Introduction 

Turner Valley lies in the foothills of the Rocky 
Mountains about thirty miles south west of Calgary. The 
various formations which must be drilled through to procure 
the petroleum were laid down in Falaeozoic, Jurassie and 
Upper and Lower Cretaceous time. The Rocky Mountains were 
formed to the west comparatively recently, and in the course 
of their evolution the strata underlying the foothills were 
buckled and heaved in the same manner as those mountains. 

In effect the formations underlying Turner Valley became, 
and have been described as, an “underground mountain.” 

Lime deposits were laid down in the Palaeozoic era, and 
the major crude oil and gas concentrations are found in 
this lime. Overlying the limestone are the shale and sand¬ 
stone deposits of Jurassic and Cretaceous times. These 
impervious shales effectively sealed the petroleum in the 
limes tone.Minor gas and oil finds are reported in some of 
the sandstone layers above the limestone, but they are 
relatively unimportant, it must be appreciated that, be¬ 
cause of the faulted and buckled nature of the formations, 
the wells drilled to the petroleum zone are of varying 
dep th. 

The gas had a tendency to rise to the apex of the 
“mountain” --the gas cap. Further down the*slopes»are the 

Crade Underlying the oil is water, which is under 









I 


. 

. 




L f. 



J 


J 






; 


, 


- .V 


ft 
>" 








J 










v* .. i 


i L 








. 






2 


considerable pressure. This water can move more readily 
than the oil through the vugs and fissures in the lime¬ 
stone and has a tendency to drive the oil before it as the 
gas pressure above it becomes less.(l) Thus, if the im¬ 
permeable shales above are punctured by wells, the gas 
from the gas cap, and that proportion of it mingled with 
the oil, expands and drives the oil up the hole. The 
waters beneath also press the oil upwards to the hole 
until the oil is displaced and the water itself is forced 
upwards. 

The manner in which petroleum is formed has not been 
definitely ascertained. It has been established that 
organic matter under long continued heat and pressure, 
possibly with the assistance of bacterial or similar 
biological processes, may be transformed into oil or 
natural gas. Great emphasis must be placed on both the 
pressure and time elements. It ha,s been demonstrated by 
chemical research and other studies done upon some exist¬ 
ing corals and other primitive sessile animals that after 
they die they leave behind them a waxy substance which is 
extremely similar to the kerogen group which are part of 
some of the oil content of many of the shales of North 
America. 

I Vugs:The actual holes in porous limestone in which oil, 
natural gas, and water accumulate. 






* 


■ i ■. : 

I 1 l . w ; ' ' ■■ • 


,v- i 

' " m ■ ■ w 

' 


1 v, 


. 


.. 


2 . 




-: i . 






.,C a . . - 

i . \ " • \ l":.-■ .ru,,; \.:y ■ \J ■. 

. 




1 << 










3 


While the amount of oil or waxy substance which may result 
from the body of one of these minute primitive animals 
is very small, it should be remembered that the seas in 
which they lived covered many thousands of square miles. 

It must also be appreciated that while petroleum finds 
appear to have a surprisingly great amount of oil stored 
in a relatively small area, this is probably the result of 
accumulation by drainage from a considerably larger area. 
The petroleum found in Turner Valley has probably accum¬ 
ulated by such drainage. 

Appendix "H" is a diagram of a typical Turner Valley 
well. It shows the various strata, the periods in which 
they were deposited and the formations which are oil or 
gas bearing. The major crude oil and gas concentrations 
is in the Palaeozoic, locally designated the "Madison”, 
limestone. 

For unnumbered millenia the situation remained static 
beneath the earth*s surface. The ice ages ran their course. 
Through minute cracks and fissures a little, a very little, 
gas and oil camd to the surface - just enough to dirty the 
waters of a small stream or to maintain a small flame if 
lit. 

Thus the situation remained until the nineteenth 
and twentieth centurjres - the Age of Steel and the Age of 
Oil, As machines were invented and developed the need for 

lubricants became apparent. The invention of the internal 





« 

. 

. 










* 













■ 








r-',' i f , 


'■ ! ■ ■- .... . .. .. 


* 








- 

- 

- 

. 





4 

combustion engine made very pressing the need for an ex¬ 
plosive fuel, relatively inexpensive and also obtainable 
in unlimited quantities. 

There are, as usual, various claimants for the 
honour o^ having drilled the first oil wells, or for 
having first used petroleum as a fuel. To contenders, at 
least, claim North American honours. Colonel E.L.Drake 
obtained thirty five barrels of oil daily from a well 
drilled to a depth of sixty nine feet at Titusville, Penn¬ 
sylvania, in 1359. But about 1850 C.N.Tripp of Woodstock, 
Ontario, became interested in the w gum beds 11 of Lambton 
County, Ontario. It is believed that Tripp not only dug 
holes (sump pits) in which oil could collect, but that he 
drilled holes into the under lying formation to speed up 
the collection and to tap fresh sources. If this be true 
he probably qualifies as the driller of the first oil 
well.(2) In any case by 1861 there was an oil boom in the 
Petrolia area, of Ontario « the first Canadian oil field. 
One thing is certain; the oil industry has not yet cel¬ 
ebrated its centenary. Another thing worth remembering is 
that the ^horseless carriage 11 only recently celebrated 
its diamond jubilee in Dtroit. The oil industry received 
its great impetus as the need for fuel for the automobile 
developed. 

In the latter part of thejeighteenth century explorers 


2 Imperial Oil History and Operations, p.3 











5 


had noted oil seepages along the river banks in the North 
West Territories. Indeed Henry Kel3ey had sent samples of 
the MeMurray tar sands to London as early as 1719, Alex¬ 
ander Mackenzie also specifically mentions the deposits 
which we know as the McMurray tar sands. The Director of 
the Dominion Government Geological Survey, G.M.Dawson, in 
1878 made technical references to oil occurrences of the 
Territories, particularly mentioning Athabasca. (3) 

While drilling for water at Langevin, (now Alderson) 
forty miles north west of Medicine Hat, the Canadian 
Pacific Railway Company struck a prolific flow of gas in 
1885. Five years later the "city" of Medicine Hat, also 
drilling to boost its water supply, struck a "good gasser" 
at a depth of six hundred and fifty feet. It was this 
gasser which prompted Rudyard Kipling, who passed through 
shortly afterwards, to write of "Medicine Hat, that city 
with all hell for a basement." 

Other gas discoveries followed at Athabasca Landing 
in 1894-6, and at Pelican Rapids in 1897. At the latter 
point gas was found at eight hundred feet under such 
pressure that it "blew wide open" for fifteen years before 
it was controlled. 

The first oil in Alberta, was procured without 

3 F.K.Beach, History of Alberta Oil, 1939, Alberta, 
Department of Lands and Mines, p.7. 








* 

. 




, 

1 -4 . i . . 

4 • V.' 



‘ 








■ 


H 

, 



- 


. 


■ 

''I 















6 


drilling.Seepages of oil were noticed after 1886 on Cam¬ 
eron Brook, also known as Oil Creek, near Waterton. Two 
enterprising residents of the area, “Kootenai" Brown and 
W.Aldridge, laid gunny sacks near the seepages. When they 
Became impregnated with oil they were wrung out and the 
liquid sold to ranchers of the vicinity for use in lamps 
and as lubricants. They charged a dollar a gallon. It is 
a far cry from these primitive “refining" methods, and the 
equally primitive method of transportation of the fuels on 
horseback to the modern refining methods and fleets of 
trucks and railway oil cars of two generations later. 

In 1901 John Lineham of Qkotoks organized the Rocky 
Mountain Development Company, and drilling operations 
began near Waterton. The company claimed that oil was dis¬ 
covered at 1020 feet on September 21, 1902. The claim was 
for three hundred barrels daily, but the most that is 
officially recorded on the subject is that it was a minor 
success. At least the holes were getting deeper. The 
Pincher Creek Oil Company had drilled several holes to 
198 feet by 1905, and one to 700 feet. In 1907 and 1908 
the Canadian North West Oil Company had drilled to 1706 
feet and 3000 feet, without success. 

Meanwhile Calgary was developing into a large 
prairie city, and enterprising business men were beginning 
to see in her a profitable market for natural gas. Arch- 




, 


. 


. 


, 











7 


ibald Wayne Dingman organized the Calgary Natural Gas 
Company which was organized and incorporated in 1905 under 
the Companies Ordinances of the North West Territories. 

The first well of the company was drilled on the Sarcee 
Indian Reserve to a depth of 3400 feet, hut insufficient 
gas was obtained to make it profitable. 

The casing was pulled and used in another well 
drilled on the Walker Estate within Calgary city limits. 
Gas was encountered in encouraging quantities at 800 feet 
and in even more encouraging quantities at 2900 feet. A 
gas pipe line was laid to The Calgary Brewing and Malting 
Company’s premises and the gas first used in April 1910. 
Later mains were extended to serve districts in East 
Calgary, 

The Calgary Gas Company (not to be confused with 
the Calgary Natural Gas Company) had erected a plant for 
the production of artificial gas. The product sold for 
from f..25 to $1.50 per thousand cubic feet as compared 
with a rate of twenty five cents per thousand for the 
natural gas. Twenty six miles of mains served some eight¬ 
een hundred customers. 

The market for gas was rapidly expanding. Gas had 
been discovered at various points in south eastern Alberta 
in promising volumes. Capital, managerial ability and 
experience were required to bring market and gas supply 

together. Mr. Eugene Coste, in June 1910, organized the 







• , . 














. 

. 






. 


< 





. 


' 


9 









8 


Prairie "Fuel Gas Company. Later in the year it was amal¬ 
gamated with the Calgary Gas Company and the Calgary Nat¬ 
ural Gas Company. The following year the company was 
reorganized again and took the unwieldy but impressive 
title, “The Canadian Western Natural Gas, Light, Heat and 
Power Company, Limited.” 

Mr. Coste had been born in Essex County, Ontario, in 
1859. His father had sent him to the Lycee of Grenoble, 
and to that of St.Louis at Paris where he had studied 
geology and other physical sciences. He returned to Ontario 
with some revolutionary ideas for oil exploration. Hith¬ 
erto the drilling of wells had been a hit or miss propos¬ 
ition. Coste urged scientific study of the geology of the 
field. After a survey of the geology of the area around 
Petrolia he accurately predicted the location of new 
highly productive wells. His coming to Calgary in 1902 
indicated that an era of scientific development of Alberta 
gas fields was to begin. 

The reorganized company took over the wells drilled 
by the Canadian Pacific Railway Company at Bow Island, 
Brooks, Bassano and Dunmore. More wells were drilled to 
assure a potentially adequate field for supplying gas for 
southern Alberta markets. By 1912 a sixteen inch pipe line 
had been laid from the Bow Island field to Calgary. A 

route was chosen so that Lethbridge, Macleod a.nd the 




- 































- 


* 


- 

















- 

' 

■ 





. 

. 







9 


smaller towns were serviced from the one line. For a time 
a gas supply seemed assured for the major cities of south¬ 
ern Alberta, but by 1920 the gas pressure had fallen dan¬ 
gerously low(and the Bow Island field was showing edge 
water intrusion. 

However,an alternative source of supply had already 

appeared. The Turner Valley field, destined to be the 

/ 

major gas and petroleum field in Canada for over a quarter 
of a century, had been ushered in. 

The first step was taken when Mr. A.W.Dingman in 1914 
organized and incorporated Calgary Petroleum Products and 
was appointed managing director. Three,wells, known for 
ten years as the Dingman wells, were drilled on Sheep 
Creek, near Black Diamond. Gas, accompanied by a consid¬ 
erable showing of volatile oil, was discovered. Calgary 
experienced its first major oil boom. World War 1 in the 
fall of the year brought both boom and development of the 
field to a halt until the 1920*s. A small absorption plant 
was built to experiment in the recovery of gasoline from 
the natural gas, but it was destroyed by fire late in 
1920. 

p 

To finance the erection of a new plant the company 
was reorganized in 1921 a,s the Royalite Oil Company. The 
Company drilled a fourth well in 1924. This well, one of 
the most profitable in the history of Turner Valley, was 

the first to penetrate the limestone. At a depth of 3740 













, 

- 

. 

, 




■« 








■ 










' 




- 





* 


















. 










10 


feet, 290 feet into the limestone, gas was struck in trem¬ 
endous quantity and at an unknown pressure. The well casing 
was "blown to the top of the derrick when the crew att¬ 
empted to control the gas flow. Along with the gas came a 
highly volatile "naphtha gasoline". The second Turner 
Valley boom was on though investors and public were much 
more cautious, especially when neighbouring wells turned 
out to be less productive. 

The third major event in Turner Valley history was 
the completion of the Home 1 well in 1929 in another sec¬ 
tion of the field. Home 1, and the later Home wells, 2,3, 
and 4, began as prolific producers. (4) The general op¬ 
timism of the time, along with the encouraging showing of 
the wells and the extension of the proven area of the 
field, engendered another boom in oil which lasted long 
after the general stock market collapse. Separators and 
absorption plants were built for the recovery of natural 
gasoline from the natural gas. 

As yields and pressures fell in the older wells, 
new products were noticed in the separators which sug¬ 
gested that a liquid phase reservoir had been tapped. 

Though crude oil had been hoped for from the first, early 
indications had been that Turner Valley was a gas, or at 
best a gas-naphtha field. However the appearance of the 

4 A brief account of the history of the Home Oil 
Company will appear in- Chapter Seven. 






' 


- ' t 

. 






















■ 








c 

* 

t 

, 

* 




■ 








* 









11 


new products stimulated interest and led to the financing 
of a west flank well, previously abandoned because of lack 
of funds. 

On June 16, 1936, this well, called Turner Valley 
Royalties, blew in from a depth of 6828 feet. It yielded 
prolific quantities of oil with only a small gas flow. To 
use a mining phrase, “the mother lode had been tapped." 
Turner Valley was at last a crude oil producer. For over 
twelve years the Valley remained the major oil producing 
field of Canada. Its success led to the intensive search 
for oil on the prairies which has already led to the dis¬ 
covery of the Leduc and Redwater fields. (5) 

Turner Valley had entered its final phase. Year by 
year the production of crude oil increased, at first 
because of the drilling of new wells, and latterly because 
of the “wide open’ 1 policy pursued during the war years. 

Its peak was reached in 1942 when over ten million barrels 
of oil welled up from the ground. From 1942 to 194? it 
remained the unchallenged Canadian oil field although its 
production was steadily declining. Finally in February 
1947 Imperial 1 of Leduc blew in and Turner Valley’s days 
of unchallenged supremacy were numbered. 

While none will argue that Turner Valley is not well 

5 Beach, op. cit.This chapter, except where otherwise 
noted, is based on that publication. 















- 






















4 

L 










. • 




i'R ■ ■' T I 


















■ 


















12 


past its prime th ere are still many oil men who contend 
that its life will he extended for another fifteen or 
twenty years and that another thirty million barrels of 
oil will he taken from Canada*s, first major oil field. In 
December 1949 there were two hundred and seventy nine pro¬ 
ducing wells in Turner Valley out of a total of over six 
hundred which have been drilled in its history. With the 

t 

exception of an area held by Home Oil Company, which has 
a number of well sites of distinct promise, and some lesser 
important holdings by Royalite and Foothills Oil and Gas 
Companies, the Valley is now considered to be drilled out. 

The history of the Valley has provided many lessons 
for the public, the government, and for private enterprise. 
The Valley has stimulated interest in discovery. It pro¬ 
vided capital for the exploration and development of later 
fields. More detailed and fuller expositions of the many 
sided developments and effects of the expanding oil 
industry as they affected Turner Valley will form the 
subjects of succeeding chapters. 







13 


Chapter Two 

Production in Turner Valley 

Some time in the last week of June 1949 Turner 
Valley produced its 100,000,000th barrel of crude oil and 
napfctha. The true "discovery well", Royalite 4, alone pro¬ 
duced over 925,000 barrels during a lifetime of some 
eight years. Obviously, as over six hundred wells were 
drilled in Turner Valley, relatively few other wells have 
approached its record. Some wells have produced as low as 
eight or ten barrels daily in flush production, (l) Others 
after magnificent starts have declined rapidly to unspec¬ 
tacular levels. Por instance, the first Home wells were 
believed to be potential 7000 barrel a day producers. A 
perusal of early reports on new producers and comparison 
with their actual records of performance will certainly 
discourage over-optimism regarding new discoveries. Very 
rarely does a well continue at a high rate of production. 
Usually there is high production volume for a few days or 
weeks and then the well settles down to a more unspec¬ 
tacular rate. Of course it is the actual level of this 
average production which indicates the potentialities of 
the well or of the field. 

Before discussing various phases of production in 
Turner Valley it will be well to examine the records of 

_ t _ _ _ 


1 Model 3 











14 


a few wells noting the rate of decline in production.(2) 
The figures of production given in the appendices do not 
show the M all-out M potential of the wells. After 1938 a 
system of prorationing and conservation was in effect. 
Neither refineries nor the prairie markets could handle 
the potential out-flow of crude oil. When a well had been 
placed on test and its capacity discovered, it was res¬ 
tricted to a certain percentage of its "possible." At times 
this was as low as 32$. In effect this means that if a 
well could "run wild" and produce 3000 barrels daily its 
actual output was restricted to, say, 1000 barrels da,ily. 

It also explains why the wells were apparently more pro¬ 
ductive in the summer months: actually the demand for 
a farm fuels was higher and the wells were allowed to in¬ 
crease production to meet the demand. An examination of 
the figures for May-June-July-August will prove this. (3) 
Nevertheless a sharp decline in the productive cap¬ 
acity of each well is noticeable over a period of time. 

Thus Sterling Pacific 4 dropped from a daily average of 
1063 barrels in 1937, to 494 in 1938, to 201 in 1939, and 
to 122 in 1940. B & B 1 dropped from a daily average of 
1144 in February 1937 to an average of 581 in September. 

By September of 1940 it had fallen to 132. These are but 

2 See Appendices "C w and M P". 

3. Appendix "T" . 









. 

( 


l ~ -i. v..M 








, > . 






i. . ■ l 


- 

■ . .. 


• ■ , • ■ •/. ; 




;> 




















15 


two examples of many. For illustrative purposes wells 
with very high initial production have been chosen. The 
ratio of decline of all wells is much the same. That is, 
those wells which in flush production yielded 100 or 200 
barrels daily dropped proportionately the same. 

The value of a Vv T ell obviously depends not on its 
initial rate of fl ow but on the total amount of crude oil 
or naphtha which it produces over a period of years. The 
cost of drilling, depths being equal, varies little from 
well to well. In Turner Valley it varied from $125,000 to 
about $150,000. Naturally the greater the total production 
of the well the less the capital cost of producing a 
barrel of oil will be. Borne of the wells in Turner Valley 
have yielded from half a million to over a million barrels 
of oil or naphtha, and hence were highly profitable. 

Others failed to return the costs of drilling, quite apart 
from the other overhead charges. It has been estimated 
that by 1929 over $50,000,000 had been invested in Turner 
Valley and that the return had not been $40,000,000 to 
that date. (4) Of course it will be impossible to accur¬ 
ately assess the net profit on total invested capital until 
the field is completely worked out and all the wells have 
been finally closed down. The figures given include the 
sums wasted in the abortive booms of preceding periods. 


4 Calgary Herald 6 July 1929 












. 




- 

* 

< < , 


t 






. 

< 

t t 

■ 

• ■ 












la 


Royalite 4 had ushered in the wet-gas or naphtha 
phase of the Valley’s history. This remarkable well pro¬ 
duced over 925,000 barrels of naphtha in its eight year 
life time. Neighbouring wells were not nearly as success¬ 
ful or productive. Home 1 came into production in 1929 
as a very large producer and started another boom. (5) 
However the Home well and its immediate successors suf¬ 
fered extremely rapid declines to unspectacular levels. 

Turner Valley Royalties, the crude discovery well, 
made history for two reasons. It was the first major 
producer to penetrate to crude oil levels. Previously it 
had been thought that the Madison lime was the base on 
which the gas and naphtha bearing structures rested, 
and drilling had always ceased shortly after the lime 
was struck. In the case of Turner Valley Royalties the 
lime was reached at 6396 feet. Drilling was continued 
without great expectations of success and under constant 
threat of suspension. Finally, 432 feet into th8 lime, 
crude oil was struck. It flowed at an initial rate of 
nearly 800 barrels daily. This successful penetration of 
the lime was of immense importance because it not only 
proved the presence of crude oil in a new area of the 

5 Winston Churchill was passing through Calgary at this 
time. He became infected with the ”oil fever 11 and in¬ 
vested $5000 in Structure Gas and Oil Company, Ltd. 

The company went bankrupt. The well casing was pulled 
in 1943. Churc?aill had picked a loser. 

Edmonton Journal. 31 August 1943. 











i < • 


. 










■ -v , 

. 

, 


















V . ..... . 







. 












• ... 




* 
















. 

t . 


- 


. 



- 








* 






. 


. 
























‘ 


-■ 

. 


„ 





17 


Valley but it led to the successful deepening of other 
wells, some of which had been abandoned as failures. 

The discovery of crude oil aroused wide interest 
all over the province and the West. The daily newspapers 
reported the completion of each new well with marked sat¬ 
isfaction and enthusiasm - and some exaggeration. It is 
interesting to compare the headlines announcing each 
new well with the actual records of production. On Dec¬ 
ember 2, 1936, Foundation Royalties "blew in". Headlines 

( 6 ) 

announced an output of 1800 barrels daily. The actual 
average for the first month was 226 barrels daily. In 
February 1937 B & B Royalties blew in with an estimated 
output of 1975 barrels daily. (7) The actual average for 
the first month was 1144 barrels daily. Frontier Royalties 
was completed in July 1938. Headlines announced that it 
was the first Turner Valley well to exceed 7000 barrels 
daily. (8) Official figures for the first month only 
show a daily average of 1573 barrels, though this was 
raised to 2155 for its third month. Okalta 6 made the 
headlines periodically during the first half of 1938. By 
July the readers’ hopes were at their highest. The well 
had passed the 9000 foot mark and was the deepest in the 
British Empire. It did not reappear in the headlines. At 

6 Edmonton Journal 2 December 1936 

7 Ibid. 5 February 1937 

8 Ibid. 11 July 1937 







■ 

- 



t 







- 







■ '■(';} ■ ■ 


1 

' 



_ 


. 


, 

i 


' 



■ 

- ' • ■ ■ • . 









* 

- 






18 


10,209 feet it was abandoned when it struck - water. (9) 
Even during the war exaggeration and optimism were .un¬ 
checked. British Dominion 5, completed in mid-July 1943, 
was hailed as 4800 barrels daily producer. (10) Actual 
production records show that it produced 900 barrels 
daily for its first month. 

In all fairness there are two things to remember 
when comparing the reports and the official production 
figures. .The production of all these wells was consid¬ 
erably higher than the average and was therefore worthy 
of special comment. Secondly, after 1937, there was a 
system of prorationing either voluntary, 

dictated by the capacity of the refineries, of after 1938 
government enforced. Hence the potential figures of pro¬ 
duction from those wells might well be from 50$ to 100$ 
higher. Even so there is a wide enough discrepancy to 
justify a careful check of the facts before accepting 
the first enthusiastic reports. This observation applies 
to all oil fields. 

Cost of Wells 

The average cost of drilling a well in Turner Val¬ 
ley, as noted above, is between $125,000 and $150,000.' 

By comparison wells in the Lloydminster field only co&t 

9 Edmonton Journal 4 July 1938. 

10 Ibid. 17 July 1943. 









. it 









t 






















t 









19 

from $15,000 to $50,000. There are several reasons for 
this disparity. The most obvious of course, is the com¬ 
parative depth necessary to drill. The Lloydminster wells 
range in depth from 1750 to 1900 feet. Turner Valley crude 
oil wells vary from 6800 feet to 9000 feet depending on 
their location. The oil bearing formations at a distance 
from the foothills are flat and even. The various layers 
of rock all lie reasonably horizontally and are there¬ 
fore comparatively easy to drill. The formations under¬ 
lying Turner Valley, which is in the foothills, are 
badly heaved and faulted. It has been described as an 
underground mountain, a,nd it has the usual characteristics 
of a surface mountain: sloping, uneven sides, faults and 
fissures, displaced masses of rocks and boulders. To ill¬ 
ustrate the difficulty of drilling in such a formation 
one has only to think of a pile of loose gravel and rocks. 
If one tries to push a stick down vertically into such 
a pile there is always a tendency for the point to slip to 
one side or the other of the various rocks and stones 
rather than to go straight through them. Turner Valley 
well drillers encounter similar difficulties. The point 
of the drill would prefer to take the path of least res¬ 
istance and slough to one side or the other. If it happens 
to enter a large fissure or fault it is almost impossible 
to prevent its following the fault ratiier than a vertical 

line. In the early days of Valley operations, with the 








20 


cable tool rigs, it was not possible to ensure straight 
holes. An added hazard was that a bit might get caught on 
a rock nearly a mile below the surface and the cable break 
in the effort to dislodge it. (11) Weeks or months might 
pass in M fishing" operations; and these were not always 
successful. If the fishing was unsuccessful the only al¬ 
ternative was to try to drill around the tools, a task 
which presented added difficulties. An illustration of 
how costs mount when such difficulties are encountered is 
provided by the Illinois-Alberta 1 well. This well ran 
into a remarkable sequence of unfortunate incidents, such 
as are outlined above. By the time it was completed the 
estimated cost was close to one million dollars. On a 
nearby location the same company completed a successful 
well for just over fifty thousand dollars. It is well to 
bear in mind the risks entailed, and the actual expense 
incurred, before making rash statements about the profits 
the oil companies are H obviously H making. 

" Wildcat" Wells 

A ••wildcat" is a well drilled in unproven territory. 
At times the term is used to designate unproven acreages 
as well. 

11 William Herron, chief driller at Okalta 7, once 
descended two hundred feet into a well, risking a 
cave-in above himself, to reattach a cable to its 
bit. 

Edmonton Journal 2 February 1938, 







t 

■ 

- 










« 




* 



. 

. 


. 

r-, : U r 




, 







- 


. 







, 




. 




+ 

* 






. 




















21 


Oil companies send out survey parties to likely 
locations. The geology of the rock formations in the sel¬ 
ected area is studied and tests are made with all the 
scientific equipment at the companies* disposal. Yet the 
most favourable report that the surveyors and investig¬ 
ators can give is that it is likely or possible that 
there may be petroleum in the area, and that the geol¬ 
ogical structure is similar to that of oil bearing forma¬ 
tions elsewhere. With such a "favourable and encouraging" 
report as the sole basis for confidence, the company 
sinks a well. It may be successful and produce either 
gas or crude oil - which are by no means equally profit¬ 
able. It may strike water. It may not even strike water 
before it is abandoned because of other unfavourable in¬ 
dications. In every case these wells have cost money: and 
the money had to come from previously accumulated profits 
from other wells or else from new investors. A successful 
wildcat can make a man a millionaire: an unsuccessful one 
can bankrupt him. 

Continuous exploration and wildcatting are necess¬ 
ary to maintain a constant or increasing flow of oil to 
the refineries. Evidence given before the Royal Com¬ 
mission inquiring into the Alberta Oil Industry (1938) (12) 

12 McGillivray Commission Report, 1940, Edmonton. 

This report was published by the Alberta Government 
in cooperation with Imperial Oil Company,Ltd. It is 
available in all Public Libraries under the title, 
"Alberta*s oil Industry" and will be referred to 
in the footnotes hereafter as A.0.I . 

















I 







■J , - 




M ; 


.d( 


' 




( 



22 


included some interesting information on wildcat wells. 

In 1937 out of every hundred wells drilled in North Amer¬ 
ica eighty two were drilled on a basis of geological or 
geophysical knowledge. Eighteen were drilled, hopefully, 
without a background of technical knowledge. The former 
yielded one strike in every 6.5 wells; the latter about 
one in every seventeen.(13) 

The latest Alberta figures on wildcat wells are for 
1949. Two hundred and thirty five 'wells were drilled at 
various points in the province. One hundred and eighty one 
were abandoned for different reasons. Thus, at the very 
least it can be said that the successful fifty four wells 
had to pay for the unsuccessful one hundred and eighty one. 
Some of these wells, for instance four drilled along the 
Coal Branch line west of Edmonton, cost over a million 
dollars apiece. The gross loss to be ma.de up by the suc¬ 
cessful wells is certainly not inconsiderable. (14) 

Even in proven fields wells ma.y be sunk and be com¬ 
plete failures. Okalta 6 was, in one sense, a wildcat well 
seeking to extend the boundaries of the Turner Valley 
field. It had to be abandoned after over ten thousand 
feet of expensive drilling when it yielded only water.. In 
the four years 1936 - 1939 one hundred and four wells 

13 A.O.I., op. cit. p • 7 • 

14 Figures supplied by the Alberta Department of 
Mines and Minerals, courtesy of Mir. Jackman. 





. 



* 

- 

; . • . ' .... 


, 

. 

• « 














23 


were drilled in Turner Valley. Six had to be abandoned 
for one reason or another. They represent nearly a million 
dollars of unrernunerative expenditure. 

Acidi zation 

Various experiments were attempted to increase 
production and to decrease the ratio of oil output to 
gas wastage. The most successful method of boosting out¬ 
put was by acidizing the wells. Gas and oil are trapped 
in the "vugs” in the limestone. These vugs are the actual 
holes in the porous limestone in which oil, natural gas, 
and water accumulate. They can vary in size from a frac¬ 
tion of an inch to several feet in diameter but in Turner 
Valley they are only of the small inter-granular type. 

Gas pressure drives the oil towards the foot of the hole, 
but it naturally has great difficulty in forcing it 
through the impermeable limestone. Hundreds of gallons 
of hydrochloric acid are pumped into the well to dis¬ 
solve the limestone in the porous area and thus increase 
its permeability so that the oil ipay flow more freely 
through the formation to the well. Production is increased 
and the gas conserved. Some wells almost double their 
yields immediately. In others the reaction is not quite 
so spectacular but in almost every case acidizing is a 
very profitable operation. 

Gas-Oil Ratios 


Very important in petroleum production is the 














24 


gas-oil ratio. The ideal would be to have a pool of pet¬ 
roleum with the well casing reaching to the centre of it. 
The gas above and the water below the oil would press on 
it and force it up the hole. The gas would expand and 
force all the oil upwards and only escape itself when all 
the oil had been expelled. The very nature of the rock 
and the highly expansive nature of the gas results in the 
gas and the oil coming to the surface together. Conser¬ 
vation measures are designed to slow up the rate of expul¬ 
sion of the oil so that the gas will have time to press 
evenly and drive the oil to the surface with a minimum 
wastage of gas. 

The ratio of the gas to the oil coming to the sur¬ 
face determines the efficiency of the well. For instance: 
suppose it takes 1000 cubic feet of gas to drive a barrel 
of oil to the surface in one well, and 3000 in another. 
The first well is obviously three times as efficient. Sim¬ 
ilarly, a new well may take 
only 1000 cubic feet of gas 
per barrel at first, and later 
take the 3000. Such a well is 
obviously declining in effic¬ 
iency. 

Turner Valley wells have 
declined in efficiency. The 
early gas-oil ratio was less 



Gas 


-V 


\(r 


rU Oil 


“T 


Y/ater 















, 

i • 


- 


■ 



- . 

. 






* 




. 

. 




. 















« 

- 

• . 

















- 










25 


than 1000 cubic feet of gas per barrel of crude oil. The 
present ratio is about 7700 cubic feet per barrel, ave¬ 
raging all the wells in the field. The Gas Conservation 
Board considers all wells which have a ratio of above 
31000 cubic feet of gas per barrel of crude oil as gas 
wells. This will give some idea of the wide variation in 
efficiency among the Turner Valley wells. By way of com¬ 
parison, in the Redwater field, the gas-oil ratio is cur¬ 
rently reported to be about 135 cubic feet of gas per 
barrel of crude oil. 

Only about twenty per cent of the crude oil is 
driven out by gas pressure. The other eighty per cent is 
either abandoned or pumped out, and usually the cost of 
pumping is uneconomieally high. Hence it is in the int¬ 
erests of both the well owner and of the field to have 
as low a ratio as possible. 

Different devices to reduce the ratio were tried 
with varying success. One such device called for 3. double 
cylinder which was lowered into the hole. A series of 
baffle plates precipitated the oil which accumulated and 
was finally forced to the top by the remaining gas pres¬ 
sure. It was claimed that the device reduced gas 
wastage by over three quarters. (15) 


15. From 13,000 cubic feet of gas per barrel to 
4272 cubic feet. 

Edmonton . Journal 19 November 1938. 










, 

, 


. 


. 


* 


, 


- 

' 


V.; t 

* 




















* 


• ■ 

♦ 




, 










2a 


T.IT.T. Experimen t 

Probably the most spectacular experiment involved 
the use of nitro-glycerine (T.N.T.), and was tried just 
after the end of the war. Late in 1945 a group of men 
formed Oil Well Reflow Ltd. They purchased West Plank 2, 
a well completed in 1937 with an initial production rate 
of six hundred barrels daily, but currently producing 
about three barrels a day. They proposed to try to explaie 
a charge of T.N.T. at the bottom of the hole and stimulate 
production by so shattering and fissuring the lime¬ 

stone as to make it easier for the oil and gas to reach 
the well casing and be forced to the surface. Pive thous¬ 
and two hundred quarts of nitro-glycerine were trans¬ 
ported over back roads from Winnipeg to Turner Valley. The 
residents of the immediate countryside 'were alerted and 
warned to keep clear of the convoy route. In February 
1946 the charge was carefully lowered into the hole; suc¬ 
cessfully, but at considerable personal risk to the op¬ 
erators. Finally on 23 February the sponsors declared that 
everything was ready. Local residents had been warned to 
to beware of possible*repercussions! The local school 
was closed for the day. The charge was touched off - with 
no visible effects at the well-head except for a momentary 
ten foot spurt of water.. The sole “casualty” in the 
Valley was a man who was shot out of a barber chair - he 





t v , V 4 ' « 

* 

. 




. . * 


: . ' 


* 

• • 


, 









27 


said. Most residents did not even know the esplosion had 
taken place. 

The effect on oil production? Royalite 36, a quarter 
of a mile away, more than doubled its production from 
100 barrels daily to 240 barrels - temporarily. Nearby, 
Westflank 1 increased its gas flow from 1.2 million 
cubic to 1.8 million cubic feet daily, other wells were 
unaffected. The test well was so shattered that it took 
several months to clear it out. ‘Finally in September 1946 
it was “on production” again. Production had been raised 
from three barrels of oil daily in 1945 to ten barrels - 
of water - in 1946. The cost of the experiment was placed 
at about $100,000. Cost of clearing the well was placed 
at about $50,000. Sole (temporary) beneficiary had been 
a competitor. The experiment was not repeated. (16) 

Water Injection 

The very wasteful methods of production in the 
absence of an organized conservation policy in the earlier 
life of the Turner Valley resulted in a sharp drop in 
reservoir pressures, water intrusion and similar ills 
whic?n accompany excessive flowing of wells. It is felt 
that the total ultimate recovery of oil from the Turner 
Valley will be only a limited percentage of the total 


16 Edmonton Journal 4 December 1945,and 11 September 
1946. 













. 








, 

, 

- 




' 




- 




• 




* 

< 




- 








- 














, 

- 

« 




28 


content of the reservoir. Royalite Oil, with a view to 
increasing the recovery, has been conducting a series of 
experiments with water injection. It is as yet too soon 
to arrive at definite conclusions in regard to this work, 
although company officials have stated that results to 
date are most encouraging. (17) 


17 James Richardson & Sons, Western Canadian Oils, 
1950, ed. number four,p. 81. 






< 

















29 


Chapt er Three 

Legislation and Con trols 

Mr. A.W.. Dingman in 1912 had organized Calgary 
Petroleum Products, Ltd., and the company had commenced 
drilling near Sheep Creek in Turner Valley. By October 
1913 the well had reached a depth of 1560 feet and was 
spitting gasoline. The following May signs were even more 
promising and the first oil boom began. Calgary had just 
passed through its first real estate boom. The pre-war 
depression had dampened enthusiasm for real estate but 
there was still a good deal of ready money around when 
the news arrived from the Valley. Caution and common sense 
were thrown to the winds. Everyone wanted to be **in on a 
good thing. M 

Heal estate offices, presently languishing in the 
doldrums, blossomed out over night as Oil Brokerage 
Houses. Second Hand shops displayed posters prominently 
in their windows indicating a willingness to deal in stocks 
and bonds. Almost over night Calgary could boast of over 
one hundred and sixty brokers’ offices where in 1913 
there had only been fourteen. By 1915 the number had fall 
en to twenty again; and by 1922 to ten. Even in those 
days women were insisting on equality. There was a Calgary 
Women’s Stock Exchange operating at 805 1st Street S.W. 
Printing houses worked overtime turning out share certif¬ 
icates in non-existent and unlocated wells. If the creot 







ls 4"- ! 




' 

' 









{ 


* 


- 








30 


on one company* s "bonds showed one "gusher”, that of its 
competitor was certain to show two. (1) 

There was a mad rush to file on leases in the Turner 
Valley area. The story is told, almost certainly apoc¬ 
ryphal, of an incident which illustrates the oil fever of 
the time. 


All day Saturday a long line of people stood 
in front of the Dominion Land Titles Office in 
Calgary waiting to file on leases. 

One man edged in ahead of the crowd. He had 
"been working for a concern that had gone "broke. 
Jobless, with his hands and forty dollars in his 
pockets, he was loafing on a street corner the 
afternoon of the Dingman strike when a friend, a 
reporter, accosted him. 

"How*re you fixed?" demanded the reporter. 

The down-and-outer explained his predicament.. 

" Forty Dollars* " exclaimed the reporter. 

"You lucky devil. I wish I was in Your shoes." 

Then, voice in a cautious whisper:"Are you willing 
to take a chance?Yes? Well there*s something "big 
due to break at the Dingman well. I’ve got the 
tip plus twenty cents, and the Land Titles 
Office closes in four minutes. Come on, you 
stake me and we’ll file on every acre we can tie 
up." 

They beat it to the land office. Asked his 
occupation the down-and-outer smiled whimsically. 
"Retired business man,"he vouchsafed. 

They tied up eight sections, 5120 acres, close 
to the Dingman well. Less than three-, hours later 
the "retired business man" had sold a half inter¬ 
est in his four sections for $3,000.00; while the 
reporter had $350 cash and still retained t?ne bulk 
of his holdings. (2) 

The boom lasted from May to October 1914. Seven 
hundred companies were incorporated or planned incorperati&n 
It has been estimated that $20,000,000 capital would have 


1 Calgary Herald 6 July 1929. 

Z MacLeans Magazine 15 August 1922. 





t 





I 

- 

. 

- 

* 

, 


5 t 



. 










31 


been required to develop the holdings, actual and imagin¬ 
ary, as given in the various prospectuses. There is no rec¬ 
ord of the amount of money which did in fact change hands. 

It is certain that most of the shares and certificates were 
valueless. Many holders used them to paper kitchen and bed¬ 
room walls as an object lesson. A very few were able to 
take them off again in the 1920’s when drilling and confid¬ 
ence were renewed, and actually realized a profit. (3) 
Figures were published in 1929 to show that by then three 
hundred and thirty six Oil Companies charters had lapsed, 
most after the first boom. (4) 

However the boom had certain definite results. The 
three producing Dingman wells had given the first real 
promise of recognition of the Valley as a centre of oil pro¬ 
duction. True, the yield was relatively insignificant, but 
it was still great enough and definite enough to encourage 
men of vision and capital to continue a development prog¬ 
ramme as soon as the war and the reconstruction period fol¬ 
lowing it would allow. 

It was also obvious t?nat neither the promoters nor 
the public had any accurate idea of the cost of drilling a 
well, and still less as to the probability of finding oil 
at the bottom of one. The cost of the first wells in the 
Turner Valley, using the old cable tobl type of equipment, 

3 Calgary Herald 6 July 1929. 

4. Western Oil Examiner July 1929. 






< 

' • 

. - ' . • • v,; . ,■/..) ! .. , l 

- 




. / . . - !, ■ O M 7 

■ 

, 

» 








32 


as already stated, ranged on an average of from $100,000 
to $150,000 per well. An examination of the geological 
structure of the Valley will show the reason for this wide 
range in costs. Drillers have to drill to varying depths 
to strike the producing horizon. The structure is badly 
faulted. Two wells close together may have to drill to 
widely varying depths - with no guarantee of oil at the 
bottom of either. 

There was very little trained geological talent 
available. The location of well sites was a hit or miss 
proposition, the only rough guide being proximity to some 
already producing well. Any driller, whatever his actual 
qualifications, wa.s regarded as an expert. It was only after 
the field was ’’proven” that pa.instalcing geological Yvork was 
carried out, or in fact, could be carried out. We 11s were 
properly logged and core samples were consistently retained 
for study only after 1927. In the early period the practice 
of 8s,ving samples of the formations penetrated for tech¬ 
nical geological examination did not, with the exception 
of a few companies immediately arise. For this reason, 
wells that failed to get oil production also failed to ben¬ 
efit the industry as a whole in attaining knowledge of 
subsurface conditions. One bright newspaper man, untrained 
as a geologist, recognized this failing and he took the 
trouble to examine a,nd record some well logs. Ee w r as able 





' 
















- 



























33 


to record the general appearance of drill cuttings and to 
distinguish sandstone from shale. (5) 

The first direct result of the boom had been the 
loss of confidence consequent upon heavy over-investment. 
Only the hardy pioneers, the true oil men, carried on. It 
was difficult for companies with real prospects to attra.ct 
the needed capital. Many of the so-called companies had 
been fraudulent and their methods and advertising equally 
so. The Provincial Government was not slow to react with 
legislation''to protect the investing public. 

In 1915 the Board of Public Utility Coromissioners 
was formed, the boom of the preceding year being one of the 
reasons for its organization. “The Sale of Shares Act" 
followed which provided for supervision of the sa-le of 
securities on an orderly basis and gave protection to in¬ 
vestors. This Act could not protect the general public 
from companies chartered by the Dominion Government, Ac¬ 
cordingly the "Securities Act” of 1921 was passed by the 
federal government and has taken the place of the original 
legislation. This measure has been subscribed to by the 
various provinces of Canada as an improved and more pro¬ 
tective enactment, s,nd under it the disposal of such sec¬ 
urities is nor carried out. To round out the system of 
acts protecting investors "The Security Frauds Prevention 
Act" was also passed in 1929. Brokers have to be screened 


5 Beach, op.cit., pp.20-21. 












34 


by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners and to prove 
that they are properly bonded. During the financial crisis 
of 1929 brokers had gone to gaol accused of "bucke ting’ 1 . (6) 
Of course these various acts and measures were applicable 
to other industrial promotion ventures as -well, but Alberta's 
experience with the first oil booms was primarily res¬ 
ponsible for their passage. 

For ten years after 1914 activity in the field lag¬ 
ged. Several companies did drill and obtained modest yields. 
Some of the companies reorganized and amalgamated and so 

saved some of the investors money. 

After the successful completion of Royalite 4 an¬ 
other minor boom developed. Investors were much more 
cautious this time. There was no rail connection to Turner 
Valley and road transportation was to remain uncertain, es¬ 
pecially during wet weather, for many years. Naturally 
there was no oil pipeline nor any justification for one. 
Finally, there was the uncertainty as to whether the new 
well V'as a “freak: 15 or whether it was ushering in a new 
field of major importance. In fact the feeding that the 
productive area was limited in extent led to close drilling- 
on sub-leases as small a,s ten acres. One company actually 
started three wells and projected a fourth on one ten acre 
lease. (7) 

Calgary St ock Exchange 

Nevertheless there w^ as encu ^ activity both in 

6 Bucketing:in.gambling stocks or grains in small amounts. 

7 Beach. op• cix. p. < » 





















' 





v .L 




<' 















35 


drilling and in tra.ding shares to lead to the opening of 
the Calgary Stock Exc&nge in March 1926. It had eighty 
five seats and some fifty active traders. The price of a 
seat was $100 at the opening; ajm onth later it had risen to 
$200. V/ith the continuing boom which preceded the depression 
the price had risen to $1800 by January 1929. By July it 
had risen to $10,000 - bid, with no takers. 

On the opening day in 1926, 3068 shares had changed 
hands. One day in May 1928 99,000 shares were tra.ded in a 
single day. In the busiest year (1 June 1928 - 31 May 1929) 
10.181,090 shares, valued at $23,219,296.25 changed hands. 
These records paled before the hectic days of July 1929 
after Rome 1 came in when over 200,000 shares were traded 
daily for three consecutive days. 

Unhappy experiences following this boom led the 
Provincial Governemint to send legal representatives to 
watch proceedings during the early days of the boom of 1936 
which followed the discovery of crude oil. The purpose of 
this probe was only to satisfy public anxiety as to whether 
certain practices of the oil boom of 1929 were being re¬ 
peated. This 1936 boom saw trading records again broken. 
During the panic selling of January 1930 nearly 370,000 
shares had been sold in one day, while during the H confid- 
ence buying” of December 1936 over 340,000 shares were 
exchanged daily over a longer period. (8) 

8 Calgary Herald 6 July 1929 

Edmonton Journal 5 December .19*36• 






- 



36 


The various government enactments previously men¬ 
tioned v/ere passed for the protection of private investors. 
They have been largely successful in achieving their pur¬ 
pose. It would be unreasonable to blame the Provincial 
Government for not having them on the statute books before 
the early booms. There ha.d been no precedents to show the 
need for such Acts prior to the boom of 1914; and it is 
very rarely that such situations can be met until there 
are unfortunate incidents which show; the particular loop¬ 
holes in the law which must be closed* On the whole the 
investor has been reasonably well protected since. It is 
true that there were company failures and great investment 
losses folllwing the stock market crash of 1929. But it is 
impossible to legislate aga.inst over-optimism, especially 
when that optimism ha.s substantial justification. In a bus¬ 
iness such as the oil industry which is risky at the best 
of times this is especially true. Capital was needed for 
the development of the field. The companies which were 
trying to raise it were legitimate companies. Individual 
investors cannot well bew^ail their fortune if they too 
rashly venture their capital, or bid too high to acquire the 
shares of other investors. Indeed it is worthy of note 
that Turner Valley ma.de solid and substantial progress 
year by yearn during the depression despite the prevailing 
instability of other types of industries. An examination 
of the tables showing the number of wells drilled annually 





■ 





37 


(or rather the annual footage drilled) will hear this out. 
There was a temporary lull in 1932 and 1933 when it was 
realized that some wells near the original Home wells were 
suffering an extremely rapid decline. (9) 

Royalties 

The investor must he certain that honest use will 
he made of his capital. In an industry as uncertain and 
risky as the oil business, where the possibility of total 
loss is so great, he also demands initial compensating ad¬ 
vantages should he he successful. 

It is one thing to drill for oil in an already- 
proven field; there is a reasonable certainty of success. 

It is qugte another thing to explore for oil in unproven 
areas. Even today with modern methods and modern equipment 
the most that the geologist and the geophysicist can say is 
that the geological structure of a certain locality is of 
the type tha,t often hears oil. Eor this reason special 
concessions are made to original or ‘^discovery*' wells in 
new and unproven areas. These concessions usually consist 
of exemption from Crown royalties either forever or for a 
specified period on the production of the discovery well. 

An alternative is a reduced rate of royalty payments. Thus 
the Dominion Government, beginning in 1898, passed a series 
of P.C 1 s. tc encourage prospecting for petroleum. (10) 

9 See Appendix H B W . 

10 P. C *s: Orders-in- Council. 







38 


Their applicability was usually confined to the territory 
south of the main line of the Canadian Pacific Railway. 

The first such P.C. (1822 dated 6 August 1898) res¬ 
erved 640 acres of land for a period of six months with an 
option of buying thereafter at ten dollars an acre or pay¬ 
ing a royalty of 2-£$. P.C. 414, 11 March 1910, specifies 
that the land may be purchased for ten dollars per acre if 
oil is found, and that there wall be no royalties collected 
until 1930. Another later in the same year was designed to 
stimulate the search for oil for the new Canadian Navy. 

Crown lands and mineral rights of the prairie prov¬ 
inces were under the control of the Dominion Government 
until 1930. This had the effect of restricting government 
action in nearly every field outside that of encouraging 
exploration for petroleum. Por example, as may be inferred 
from reading the beginning of this chapter, neither the 
Provincial not the Dominion Government had exclusive con¬ 
trol over the sale of all shares or securities. Joint leg¬ 
islation was necessary. No conservation or prorationing 
legislation had been attempted prior to 1930 for the simple 
rea.scn that the the Dominion Government only controlled 
the mineral rights on its own Crown lands. Canadian Pacific 
Railroad lands and lands alienated prior to 1886 were ex¬ 
empt from control. It would have been nearly impossible to 
have worked out joint legislation satisfactorily. 

















; 








. 













.. 






39 


Control a.nd Con servation 

Prior to 1 October 1930 the authority for the leas¬ 
ing a.nd disposal of mineral rights was in the hands of the 
Dominion Government. On 18 June 1931 the applicable prov¬ 
isions of the Provincial Lands Act came into force and the 
Provincial Government actively embarked on a programme of 
stimulation and control of the petroleum industry. 

The tremendous ga.s wastage in Turner Valley had been 
of major concern to the province for many years and the 
need for control, either self-imposed of governmental, had 
long been apparent. Eence it is not surprising that the 
first official action was restrictive. Under the authority 
of the Oil a.nd Gas Wells Act of 1931 the flow of gas and 
oil from every well in Turner Valley was reduced to forty 
per cent of capacity shown by the la.st monthly test. (11) 

The need for accurate geological know/ledge of the 
field had also been apparent. Accordingly drillers were 
ordered to preserve samples of well cores at ten foot in¬ 
tervals so that a comprehensive maP of the underground 
features of the field might be obtained. Detailed records 
of production of gas and oil from, every well were also re¬ 
quired so that drilling and production regulations could 
be drafted. Actually such records had been kept since 1927 
more or less consistently. (12) 

11 Edmonton Journal 10 March 1931. 

12 Ibid. 10 July 1931. 









i „ -j: 


■ 






- 




J 

T 






, 1) 


* 

■ : 

















40 


Later an Order-in-Council was published, containing 
regulations "to prevent production of natural gas or oil 
in any manner likely to threaten the common reservoirs with 
premature exhaustion." (13) This foreshadowed the first 
prorationing a.nd conservation legislation. A later order 
specified that production could only be taken from one 
zone; that is, a well had to classified, in effect, as 
either a gas or an oil well. (14) Finally prorationing 
was effectively introduced by an order scheduling the 
quantity of naphtha which might be produced from each well 
in the Valley. (15) Unnecessary gas wastage was to cease 
since no more gas was to be produced than was required to 
lift the alotted number of barrels of naphtha. 

Officials began experimenting to find the most ef¬ 
ficient gas-oil ratio. Gas flow was restricted first to 
.57542 of the flow that would be obtained if the well were 
operated on shut-in pressure and, later, to .4619 of that 
rate. (16) These restrictions and experiments were contin¬ 
ued until the original provincial conservation legislation 
was declared ultra-vires in 1934 after which they were re¬ 
newed by Provincial Orders-in-Council. (17) Other regulations 

13 Edmonton Journal 24 November 1931. 

14 Ibid. 25 January 1932. 

15 Ibid. 9 May 1932. 

16 Ibid. 13 and 25 July 1932. 

17 Ibid. 16 July 1934, Spooner Oils, Ltd. had challenged 
the validity of the Alberta Gas Conservation Act. This 
Act hs.d been upheld by the Alberta Supreme Court (21 
ftfawe 1932) but was ultimately declared ultra vires by 
the Supreme Court of Canada and by the Judicial Com¬ 
mittee of the Privy Council, 









41 


affected well spa.cings. One company had actually begun 
three and projected a fourth well on a ten acre lease. The 
new restrictions set the minimum distance between wells at 
four hundred feet, and allowed a maximum of one v/ell to 
forty acres. (18) 

Provincia l Royal ty Rates 

Dominion Government royalty legislation has already 
been noted. Provincial Government legislation followed sim¬ 
ilar principles. The problem was to maximize provincial 
revenues from this source and at the same time encourage 
or allow expansein of the oil industry. The fluctuations 
in royalty rates reflected the desire to take advantage 
of current production, the necessity of giving invested cap¬ 
ital an adequate margin of profit, and the desire to stim¬ 
ulate new discoveries. The original royalty rates were set 
in 1931 at 5 % for four years, 10^ for a further five years, 
and 12-|$ thereafter. In 1936 this was made a flat rate of 
10^, based on the current field prices. (19) At the same 
time a rebate was allowed on the royalty required from a 
discovery well. (20) In 1937 legislation was passed retro¬ 
active to 1931 charging a royalty on absorption plant pro¬ 
ducts, such royalties to be 50^ of other prescribed rates. 

18 Edmonton Journal 26 June 1933. 

19 Ibid. 8 July 1931 and 3 March 1936. 

20 Ibid. 17 March 1936. 










3 ii*>' .v 





) 



< 






















42 


As Turner Valley was now a proven oil field, and hence not 
so risky for capital investors, it v/as also decided to col¬ 
lect a 12 \tf 0 .royalty on all production from wells a.cquired 
under the provisions of the Dominion Lands Act prior to 
1931. (21) 

Of course royalties, no matter what the rates, a,re 
unpopular with the oil companies. For instance in October 
1934 the Provincial Government announced plans to increase 
the royalties on Crown Lands from to 10$. Various oil 

companies immediately protested and asked for outright 
abolition instead in order to encourage the industry. (22) 

Present royalty rates are computed on a basis of a 
sliding scale. V r ells with an average daily production of 
thirty barrels or less pay a 5$ royalty; thirty to forty 
barrels a 6 % royalty; and so on up the scale. All wells 
producing over two hundred barrels daily are assessed a 
15$ royalty. 

Right of Entry 

To protect land surface owners, who are not also 
owners of the mineral rights, the Right of Entry Arbitration 
Act was passed. This assured the owner of compensation for 
loss or inconvenience occasioned by infringement of his 
surface rights and ensured that no one could enter his land 
without either his or the arbiters* permission. 

21 Edmonton Journal 1 March 1937. 

22 Ibid. 31 October 1934, 8 November 1934, 

4 January 1935, 16 Januar 1935. 







* 



' 
















. 


, 

, 

. 








- . 

. 

, 

c ... 





■; - '■ i' '. v V . v .: : .. 



.. . J 

. 


- 


. 



* 



■ 








43 


Conservati on and Prorationing 

The necessity for conservation and prorationing 
laws, and the history of the legislation enacted, will he 
discussed in the chapter dealing with the Report of a 
Royal Commission appointed by the Government of the Prov¬ 
ince of Alberta, under the Public Inquiries Act, to inquire 
into matters connected with petroleum and petroleum 
products. This Commission is usually referred to as the 
McGillivray Commission and the Report as the McGillivray. 
Suffice it to say at present that such legislation was 
passed in 1931, declared ultra vires in 1934, and re-en¬ 
acted in 1938 with concurrent Dominion Government enabling 
legislation. After the discovery of crude oil in 1936 a 
system of prorationing was necessary because production of 
oil had surpassed pipe line and refinery capacity. This 
prorationing was voluntary in 1937, but it was put on a 
statutory basis in 1938 ana controlled by the Petroleum 
and latural Gas Conservation Board. 








44 


Chapter Four 
Subsidiary I ndustries 

“Hppes raised - and deferred - make the heart sick.” 
“Hopes deferred*’ might well have been chosen as the title 
for this chapter. 

The oil industry has given an undoubted economic 
stimulus to the province of Alberta. Much of the capital 
for the development of Turner Valley was raised locally; 
most of the current expenditures and investment returns 
were spent locally. Production, refining and distribution 
gave employment directly or indirectly to an army of 
workers not only in Alberta but in Saskatchewan. But that 
is only half the story. 

The other half deals with possibilities which never 
becsme actualities, with announcements of schemes, some 
of them grandiose, for the establishment of subsidiary in¬ 
dustries - which never got beyond the announcement and 
investigation sts.ge. 

The va.riety of articles which scientists and prac¬ 
tical manufacturers have made from coal seems almost in¬ 
limited. German industrialists have based the prosperity 
of whole regions on the processing and manufacturing of 
article© made from coal. Alberta, which can boast of one 
of the largest coal deposits of any political unit of ttee 
world, has utilized a fractional percentage of her coal 
reserves, and only as fuels. 








m 






< 


) 










45 


As from coal, a multitude of chemical compounds can 
he derived and refined from natural gas and crude oil. From 
time to time startling announcements have "been made of pro¬ 
jects for the manufacture of various products from Turner 
Valley gas and crude. Ironically, many were made in the 
depths of the depression when they would certainly have been 
a boon, both because of the expenditures induced' by large 
capital investments and by the promise the\| afforded of con¬ 
tinuous employment. Unfortunately the prospects of con¬ 
tinued protection and encouragement from Ottawa dimmed 
as the probable effects of the depression on the political 
life of 'the government became apparent. Some measure of 
protection was needed to establish new industries in the 
face of foreign competition. There seemed insufficient 
guarantee that it would be forthcoming. The West, which 
stands to gain by the introduction of new industries, is 
always loudest in its outcries against protection and tar¬ 
iffs. 

Eipe Lin es 

Of the subsidiary industries the pipe line companies 
are among the more important. Pipe lines actually were con¬ 
structed from the Turner Valley field to the Calgary refin¬ 
eries. Pipe line projects to* Regina, Fort William and Van¬ 
couver were mooted from time to time as new waives of optim¬ 
ism swept over the industry consequent upon newly successful 
well completions. It is extremely doubtful if any of the 










% 


) 


■ 




" \ 






' 

» 

• • •••■■«■ 

- • • • 

- 

' • ■ • vj 




I 




■ ■ ‘ •; ■ • * ... , •; 



46 


longer lines would have "been attempted even if the war had 
not intervened. 

Oil pipe lines may he from four to twenty inches 
inside diameter a.nd are operated at normal pressures of 
around 800 pounds per square inch. The diameter of the pipe 
governs the daily capacity flow. A four inch pipe will 
transport about 3800 barrels of crude oil daily; a six inch 
about 10,000; and a ten inch about 21,000. The size of the 
pipe chosen depends on the present production of the field, 
with estimated future production also a factor. 

By 1939 three pipe lines for crude oil had been 
constructed between Turner Valley and Calgary. Two of these 
were of four inch diameter, the other of six. A' pipe line 
constructed latter raised the total pipe line capacity to 
about 27,000 barrels daily. 

The first pipe line was built in 1925, soon after 
Royalite 4 had proven itself, to transport naphtha gasoline 
both from the wells and from the absorption plants. This 
might seem to be excessively optimistic at such an early 
stage in the life of the field. However rail and road con¬ 
ditions as they existed must be taken into consideration. 

It was several miles to the railhead at Okotoks. Roads to 
Okotoks were of earth writhout benefit of gravel. In wet 
weather they were hardly passable and often were quite 
impassable. The mow-familiar ta.nker trucks were practic¬ 
ally non-existent, and therefore horse drawn transport 




. L 

; 

. 

, 

. 
















.‘J ... : . . ■ ' , ■ 

• ■■ I 4 , ' ; : 

. •: : .. ■ * : . . ..... 

. / ■ . , 

' f; ' • X : : ■ ?,’ > ■ ' ■ ' " ■ ■ ■ '• ' ' . a .:. ' / 

- 









47 


had to be substituted. At the very best this was ineffic¬ 
ient and expensive, although there are no records of the 
actual costs of transport. As the field developed tanker 
trucks came into use, hauling about two thousand barrels 
a day. That road conditions had not greatly improved even 
years later is shown by the "donation" of several thouand 
dollars by the Oil and Gas Association of Alberta to the 
government to assist in the improvement of local roads. (1) 
Various witnesses state that it was no uncommon sight to 
see several tankers bogged down either on the roadside or 
on the road awaiting dryer weather or towing vehicles. 
Initially the price of naphtha per barrel, about $4.40, 
was high enough to pay for the cost of horse drawn trans¬ 
port, but this mode of transport gave way to the pipe line 
was soon as it was completed. 

Uncertainties as to both the market and the poten¬ 
tialities of the Valley led to a rather slow development 
for the next few years. However drilling did continue, 
production did mount, and in 1929 a second pipe line was 
projected and completed. The completion of the Home wells, 
high initial producers, early in the year, was a factor 
in giving impetus to the construction. 

Turner Valley entered its most profitable phase 
after the discovery of crude oil in 1936. Successive com¬ 
pletions of wells in the west flank of the structure 

1 Calgary Herald 6 July 1929. 















u 





f 










■ 

■ I : L- , 






48 


soon confirmed the existence of a major oil pool* By 
September of 1937 so much oil was being produced that ex¬ 
isting pipe lines were found to be inadequate to carry the 
increased volume. A third pipe line was necessary and this 
was completed in 1938. Six inches in diameter, it could 
carry nearly three times the load of either of the exist¬ 
ing lines. 

As drilling completions proved new sectors of the 
field, and as oil men and the general public became more 
optimistic about the future of the field and its greater 
potentialities, there was considerable discussion and 
investigation as to the possibilities of additional lines 
either to Vancouver or Fort William. These projects have 
only a historical interest but it is worth noting the 
reasons for abandoning all the schemes. 

A pipe line must be regarded as a wasting asset. 

It is only useful and profitable while oil is being 
pumped through it. Oil fields have only limited life ex¬ 
pectancies. They cannot be expected to produce at high 
rates for more than a limited number of years. Therefore 
the debts incurred in pipe line construction have to be 
amortized in a comparatively short period, usually from 
twelve to fifteen years. It is not a, worthwhile risk 
unless there are definite indications of supplementary 
sources of supply to prolong the life usefulness of the 
long line. As far as a line from Alberta was concerned 




t ' : ■■ • -- • 

; . . -I.,: ' 



. 








- 




£ 













■ 





49 


there were no such definite indications until the Leduc 
and Redwater fields were discovered and proven, in 1948. 

By that time Turner Valley had definitely pa.ssed its peak 
and there was no longer any question of pipe line con¬ 
struction from that area. 

There must he sufficient production of oil to just¬ 
ify and satisfy 'both the local domestic market and some 
foreign demand. While Turner Valley was in position, for 
awliile, to satisfy completely the domestic prairie markets, 
its production was never high enough to compete success¬ 
fully and completely with foreign suppliers beyond a cer¬ 
tain radius. The McGillivray Commission heard evidence to 
the effect that the ’’economic fringe” for Turner Valley 
products was somewhere near Portage la Prairie in the 
east. For a long while it was about Champion, Alberta, to 
the south. Beyond that town freight costs made it difficult 
to compete with Montana oils and refineries. Fven the 
Regina refinery used significant amounts of Montana, crude 
oils. (2) To go beyond Portage la Prairie and capture the 
WINNIPEG market from Sarnia, Ontario, and Illinois, U.S.A., 
Turner Valley producers would have had to substantially 
increase production and markedly lower prices. The mon¬ 
etary return after all that would have been less in both 
net intake and in profits. Although the Commission*s 
figures were based on an inclusive cost of freight charges, 
the same considerations would apply to oil with pipe line 


2 A.0.1.op.cit. ,pp. 64-66 








' .. 






. . 


, 






■ u }J. ; 

)il 


■ 




■ 



50 

charges. The point is that it is neither sensible nor 
profitable to capture foreign or distant markets unless 
supply far exceeds local demands. 

In the case of Turner Valley this was never a dec¬ 
isive factor. Top Turner Valley potential production was 
between fifty and sixty thousand barrels daily. The loca.1 
prairie consumption averaged from twenty five to. thirty 
thousand barrels daily. The excess of production would 
never have paid for the construction of a pipe line within 
the usual amortization period. 

Pipe line projects to Vancouver, Regina, and Port 
William were all mooted from time to time. It is interesting 
to compare the estimated costs of the lines with the pres¬ 
ent estimates (1950). Various experts testifying before 
the McGillivray Commission in 1938 differed widely in 
their”informed guesses.” The cost of a, line to Vancouver 
could range all the way from fifteen to sixty million 
dollars. A German organization, Tropicorp of Berlin, in¬ 
vestigated and tried to secure the right to build. (3) It 
was willing to invest about sixteen million dollars in the 
undertaking. The Canadian authorities, in view of the 
existing international tension, refused to allow the plans 
to be proceeded with. Government authorities said that 
they would welcome a similar offer from British capitalists. 
(4). It is doubtful if such a line will ever be built.lt 

3. Edmonton Journal 26 September 1938. 

4 Ibid. 15 October and 5 November 1938. 











. , .. 




!, : ■■■ ' >\ l ' ■ 'I ’ ■' ■ , ■» '■ " \) : 




! > J, 



1 







e 

:■ . • • ' ' - ; - ' 

• • V .L -J . ' •) 

< '■ < ' r 




- * 








51 

would ha.ve to compete with the very inexpensive ocean 
transport of oil from California. 

We can make a direct comparison in the case of an 
oil line to Fort William. Interprovincial Pipeline Oil 
Company is presently building a similar one from Edmonton 
to the Great Lakes at hn estimated cost of ninety million 
dollars. In 1938 the cost of a similar pipe line to Fort 
William was estimated at about fifteen million, with 
thirty million as top price. (6) It seems unfortunate 
that the line was not constructed at that time. The cost 
of connecting the northern oil fields to an existing 
system would be comparatively low. 

There were sound reasons for not proceeding with 
plans at the time. They were summed up by Mr. A.H.Mayland, 
President of Gas and Oil Products, Ltd., in a public ad¬ 
dress given at Calgary in December 1939. (o) Turner Valley 
was not far from the peak of its production. Mr. Mayland 
believed that construction of a pipeline was impracticable. 
There was only enough oil being produced in Turner Valley 
to fill nicely the line at the present rate of production. 
Production was not greatly in excess of local demand. That 
is, the prairie markets were absorbing nearly the 25,000 
barrels daily which was the capacity of the local, in¬ 
cluding Regina, refineries. Production could have been 
doubled without greatly endangering conservation principles 

5 Edmonton Journal 10 September 1938. 

6 Ibid. 15 December 1939. 









, ' 6 ■ 




, 


i 

■ 










. ... 


. . 

! * < 

- 

■ , 

•- 

• ■ 

, . ' , .. J ■ 

* 

t . ' - • 

c , :* . ■ 

* 




52 


but the extra 25 to 30,000 barrels daily available for 
the more distant markets was not enough to pay for the 
construetion, and the interest and upkeep charges, of a line 
For a pipe line to be profitable there must be a high rate 
of production and a huge potential reserve. 

The war, of course, wrote » finis» to plans and 
projects for pipe lines. 'By the time it was over. Turner 
Valley had obviously passed its peak and there was no 
question of new cons truetion. 

Pipe lines need a certain amount of supervision 
and upkeep. Inspectors patrol the right of way periodically 
to check for leakd and any other type of trouble. "Other 
types of trouble" can take unexpected forms. There was the 
case of the farmer who lived near the Turner Valley- Calgary 
pipe line. In fact the line ran under the floor of his 
barn. He drilled a hole in the pipe and plugged in a tap. 

For a few weeks he did a brisk business selling his neigh¬ 
bours oil that had cost him nothing. Then the oil men 
following the pipe line to trace a leak of major propor¬ 
tions, caught up with him. In the old cattle rustling days 
he would have been lynched. Modern justice is less harsh, 
but a stretch in gaol halted, this wild westerners 
rustling enterprise before it was well started. (7) 

The lines are operated as subsidiaries of, or in 
conjunction with, the big oil companies. In Canada they 

7 MacLeans Magazine 15 April 1939, 





. 



, 



- 





■ 






~ 












53 


are subject to the regulations of the Department of Trans¬ 
port. While natural gas brings the oil to the surface of 
the ground it cannot be used to propel the fluid through 
the miles of pipe apparently, and pumping stations have 
to be installed at intervals. The charge for delivering 
the crude oil naturally varies with the distance, the 
number of pumping stations necessary for operation and the 
total volume of oil delivered. From Turner Valley to the 
Calgary refineries the cost per barrel varied from seven 
to fifteen cents. (8) 

Scrubbin g Pla nts 

The first scrubbing and absorption plant was 
burned down late in the fall of 1920. It was this disaster 
which led to the reorganization of the Dingman Company, 
Calgary Petroleum Products, and resulted in the form¬ 
ation of the Royalite Oil Company. (9) 

New plants were needed as soon as Royalite 4 came 
into production and in 1924 new scrubbing plants and 
separators were built. Turner Valley gas contains a sig¬ 
nificant amount of hydrogen sulphide. This imparted a 
characteristic odor to the unrefined naphtha, to the gas 
used for domestic and industrial purposes, and to the 
Valley itself during the period when the flares were 
burning. This peculiarity had to be removed before the gas 
could be used, especially domestically. Scrubbing plants 


8 A.O.I., op.cit, p. 59 

9 Beach, op. cit. p. 17 









' 

t . 

■ 

- 

, 

- 

- 

, 

, • • 

_ 








54 


a very apt designation, were constructed for the purpose, 
the sulphur was removed except for a small amount left 
for safety reasons. 

Turner Valley gas and crude oils are technically 
described as "sour" because of the presence of these 
chemicals. The gas from the Viking-Kinsella gas fields, 
by way of comparison, is called "sweet". It is naturally 
odorless and no scrubbing plants are necessary to process 
it. In fact,to make it safe for home consumption, slight 
amounts of sulphur are added to it so that its presence 
can be detected in the event of leaks developing or of 
gas valves being left on. 

Similarly naphtha, or natural gasoline had to be 
sweetened. It could be used in the motors of automobiles 
although it was highly volatile. But if it were used with¬ 
out "sweetening" it needed no blood hound to follow the 
route taken by the auto. During the period when nax^htha, 
was the predominant product it was chiefly of value for 
blending with gasoline imported or refined from imported 
stocks. At times the proportions needed for blending 
meant that much of it had to be shipped to relatively 
distant markets. 


Separators a,re used, as the name implies, to 
separate the natural gas from the crude oil. The first 
one was imported and rigged -up to handle the flow from 





: 







. 

- 

' 






- 












* • 

■ 

« .. 

„ 








* 


. ■ 

y. 


- 












■ . 








55 

Royalite 4. So unexpected was the discovery of the oil 
that it took over two months to get this first plant in 
operation. Since that date other separators have 

"been installed as required. 

Absorption Plants . 

The yields of naphtha from the separators became 
lower as time went on and as the gas reservoir pressures 
fell. The lower total recovery per well and lower recovery 
per unit quantity of gas produced led to the belief that a 
large percentage of the liquids in the gas was being lost 
as it passed through the separators. In 1933 an absorption 
plant was built by Royalite for the purpose of recovering 
gasoline from the natural gas which had already passed 
through the separators. The plant wa.s highly remunerative 
from the start. It was apparent that material values had 
been lost for some time through failure to process the gas. 
Other absorption plants were constructed in 1936 and 1943 
and most of the gas produced was so processed. (10) 

For years the government, the press and the public 
had deplored the wastage and flaring of gas in the Valley. 
The well operators had been fearful of restricting their 
wells in the face of the unknown pressure demonstrated 
when Royalite 4 blew in. The Provincial Government, as soon 
as it received control of the Crown la,nds, forced all the 
operators to close in and test their wells - with no dire 


10 Beach, op.cit., p.24 








56 


results. Strong official pressure was brought to bear on 
the industry and this finally resulted in the construction 
of the first absorption plant. The unit processed over 
100,000,000 cubic feet of waste gas daily after it left the 
separators. The plant produced over 27,000 barrels of 
naphtha gasoline in its first two months of operations, a 
figure which exceeded all estimates. (11) 

Alkylate 

In 1943 Royalite built a second absorption plant at 
a cost of nearly $375,000. It was used for producing alky¬ 
late, a blending agent for aviation gasoline. The plant was 
built in conjunction with Allied War Industries, Ltd., a 
Crown corporation specifically organized to encourage such 
industries. By the end of the year Imperial Oil Company 
announced that it was also recovering isobutane in the 
plant. Isobutane is another necessary constituent of high 
test aviation gasoline. The company stated that it was able 
to produce gasoline with octane ratings of from 37 to 100 
from Turner Valley crude oil and gas. (12) 

Ammonium Nitrate Plant 

The war naturally stimulated the demand for various 
chemicals, and particularly for those necessary in the 
making of munitions, Honey was freely voted by Parliament, 
and freely invested by the public when it got the chance, 

11 Edmonton Journal 14 August 1933. 

12 Ibid. 2 December 1943. 









- 










- 

« * 




. 

.. . .. 








1 










* 


'« - '■ 




















. 






. 

■ 






, 




’ 





57 


for the erection of new plants for the production of these 
chemicals. Plans were announced in 1940 for the erection 
of an ammonium nitrate plant in Calgary to extract that 
compound from Turner Valley gas. It cost over $800,000. 

There is a certain satisfaction in knowing that it 
is sx\ industry which has an equally important place in peace 
time work in the production of fertilizers. (13) 

Propa ne and Ethy len e Oxide 

Late in 1948 hr. J.S. Barker, President of Western 
Propane, Ltd., announced that his company had completed 
construction of a half million dollar plant for the manu¬ 
facture of propane from Turner Valley natural gas. Actually 
this is just another form of the gas specially suited for 
use in homes which are not connected with natural gas lines. 
The gas is transported in cylinders which can he connected 
to individual gas stoves. It should prove a means of bring¬ 
ing all the advantages of gas to the more or less isolated 
farm homes. 

The company also announced plans for manufacturing 
ethylene oxide. This in turn is a constituent of ethylene 
glycol, an essential component of all high grade anti-freeze 
products. (14) 

Refineries 

Refining is the most important subsidiary industry. 

13 Edmonton .Journal 24 August,1940. 

14 Ibid. 1 November 1948. 









■ 


. 












-i . f Vv 7:d* 








■ 












si' Li f :--V, ; 










58 


The crude oil must he refined into the many oil products 
necessary for the conduct of all our modern industries. 
Modern refineries produce a wide range of products varying 
from the gasoline for use in automobiles down to wax and 
asphalt. A list of the products refined and sold by the 
Imperial oil Company from its Calgary refinery includes 
gasoline, kerosene, tractor distillate, crude naphtha, light 
fuel oil, hunker fuel oil, asphalt, coke, Marveluhe oils, 
other lubricants, grease, wax, candles, and vacuum oils. 
Other specialized products have alrea.dy been dealt with in 
this chapter. (15) 

Only fully modern and up-to-date refineries can 
produce the whole range. Imperial Oil, British American Oil, 
Gas and Oil Products, and Lion Oils, are the four local 
refineries capable of producing the complete list. Other 
companies operate only H toppingUhiits. M They can refine a 
limited number of products, usually only the lower grades 
of gasoline end tractor fuels. 

Of necessity the smaller refineries or topping 
units ha.ve residual fluids which they must sell to the 
larger refineries since these fluids are too valuable to 
waste. These residual fluids make one of the complicating 
factors in administering fair proration and conservation 
laws to a field.If the larger refineries cannot or will not 
for one reason or another accept these untreated by-prod- 


1 $ 15 A.O.I 


op.cit., p. 120 
































, 




■ 




- 

* . 

- 

. 




. 


r i 












* 

x 

„ 

. 








. 








. 

. 









59 


ucts, they must either go to waste or their accumulation 
will force the small refineries out of business when their 
reserve storage tanks are full. This fact forces the smaller 
companies to maintain their prices a.t the level of the 
larger companies or be forced gradually out of business. 

It should not be inferred from this that the main¬ 
tenance of a level price is a bad thing in itself, price 
cutting can ruin the industry as a whole and force it into 
uneconomic practices. Generally speaking it can only be 
done by these marginal refiners because they perform the 
cheaper and easier refining operations and could be prepared 
to see more of the by-products go to waste. If it is 
desired to make the fullest possible use of the crude oil 
produced, and by this is meant the manufacturing of the 
widest range of marketable products, price cutting is un¬ 
desirable. Evidence given to. the McGillivray Commission 
showed conclusively that a price reduction of one cent per 
gallon on gasoline w;ould have ma.de the profit margin neg¬ 
ligible on the refining operations. (16) 

The evidence also gave a pointed lesson on the 
subject of loose talk when referring to refinery operation 
profits. Refining is an a.ll-inclusive operation. Each of 
the products manufactured in a refinery cannot be regarded 
as being produced at a certain stage and as taking a 
definable proportion of the cost. All products are manuf¬ 
actured simultaneously as it were. An analogy will simplify 


16 A.O . X .op. cit. pp.88 - 106 












■ . ' . 

- ' 





. 

, ... . 

* 

. 






60 


this statement. A cow produces milk, cream, hides, glue, 
meat and calves. It is impossible to say what is a fair 
price for any one of these products since they were all 
being produced at once. If the cow ra.iser is, in all fairness 
to be allowed a net profit for raising cov/s, and the price 
of milk and cream are kept at unreasonably low levels, the 
price of glue, hides and mea.t must be raised accordingly, 
likely to what seem to be unreasonably high levels. Simil¬ 
arly if the price of gasoline were arbitrarily halved, the 
price of oils would have to be raised to a level which 
would al3o w a net profit on the whole refining operation. 

If profits are to be criticized they must be criticized on 
the basis of the whole refinery process, and on the ba.sis 
of the total products sold, and not on a basis of indiv¬ 
idual products. 

In addition to the refineries located in Turner 
Valley and in Calgary which used Turner Valley cfude oil 
for their operations, the refineries in Regina and Moose 
Jaw must be mentioned. CriginaJly they had been built to 
process Montana and other American crudes. When Turner 
Valley reached a volume of production great enough to sup¬ 
ply the prairie markets a switch was made to the Valley*s 
oil. Hence it is only logical to consider them as being 
among the Turner Valley subsidiary industries. It will 
suffice to say that these refineries also manufactured a 
full range of products. 





' 




* 

. - 


. 












..... ■ . . , 

. 




■ V 


■ 













* 












‘ 




. 






. • 


■ 

- 

. - 


. 






. • 










61 


The question may be asked as to why the refineries 
are located so far away from the source of the crude oil: 
that is, why are they not all built in the Valley itself? 
The answer is simple. Freight rs.tes on crude oil are very 
much lower than they are on the finished products. It is 
cheaper to build refineries close to the markets than it 
is to ship the finished products from one central base to 
those markets. Thus the Regina and Moose Jaw refineries 
serve Saskatchewan; and Lethbridge, Calgary and Edmonton 
refineries serve different regions of Alberta. It is'note¬ 
worthy that even the comparative cheapness of pipe line 
operation does not negate this fax tor. In this case, howv 
ever, it is obviously impossible to ship differing 
refined products. (17) 

Transportation Companies 

Various transportation companies also benefitted 
because of the development of the Turner Valley field. 

The Canadian Pacific and Canadian national Railways, and 
to a lesser extent some trucking companies, had significant 
capital investments in equipment for the transportation 
of both crude oil and the finished products. Local agents, 
of the oil companies made local trucking of oil products: 

17 Edmonton Journal 3 February 1S38. Ottawa date line. 

Dr. G.G.Brown, Professor at Michigan State University 
says, 51 Freight rates are .the chief factor responsible 
for refineries being located away from the producing 
fields. If rates on gasoline and other fluid produces 
of crude oil were comparable to the rates on the raw 
material, there would be a,^ tendency for the refineiies 
to locate in the field.” 







. 

« 

I 

- 





•' ... 

< . ... 

. '■ . ■■ 

- 


" 

« 

. 


- ■ 

< ... 

■ 

. 











62 


a profitabile side line. Farmers often found it 
desirable to engage in the carrying trade for themselves 
and for their neighbours. 

It is probably impossible to arrive at any accurate 
financial estimate of the cost of the equipment used in 
this distribution service, and still less to make accura.te 
guesses as to gross or net profits. r.uch of it was done 
as a profitable side line. Farmers with idle trucks, or 
who were taking truck loads of animals to Calgary stock- 
yards, could make expenses at lea,st by trucking their 
own fuels and avoiding the freight costs. Similarly, im¬ 
plement dealers or garagemen of the villages and towns 
kept their trucks in use by hauling of delivering petroleum 
products. 

Sven the railway companies would probably have great 
difficulty in saying what proportions of capital equip¬ 
ment, and earnings were attributable to the presence of 
Turner Valley. They w-ould probably have carried the crude 
oils to prairie refineries even had there been no Turner 
Valley; and the same applies to finished products. The 
difference would have been in the total mileages of the 
different forms of the oil. It is not unlikely that 
prairie consumption of fuels is higher beca,use of the 
presence of a. local oil field than it would have oeen had 
freight costs raised the prices of those fuels. 

This forms a fairly substantial list of industries 




1 








, 

- 

- 






- 

- 


* 





















. 











63 


directly or indirectly dependent upon the presence of 
Turner Valley crude oil. The number of active workers and 
their families is impossible to ascertain with any degree 
of accuracy. As a basis for a guess, Imperial oil em¬ 
ployed nearly six thousand workers directly in 1938 and had 
an annual pay roll of around eight million dollars. This 
includes, of course, Imperial Oil workers in eastern 
Canada who are only indirectly concerned with the Turner 
Valley field. On the other ha,nd it applies only to one 
of the companies active in the Valley. (18) 

In addition, over the years, employment has been 
given to the various construction trades in connection 
with the building of refineries, offices, warehouses, 
storage tanks, roads and so forth. There is no way of 
tracing the growth of other industries dependent in part 
at least on the expansion of the field a.nd oil production. 
We can determine the total number of barrels of oil sold 
from the field and work out the total return to the 
refiners. From that point the figures become hopelessly 
involved. 

hopes Deferred and Defunct 

The list of industries which were established and 
which are functioning is impressive. Another list can be 
formed of industries or of industrial firms which showed 


18 Imperial. Oil History and Operations, p.14. 











i 


, 






. 







■< , • • • 




\ 


1 n 


■J ' r:i ./ ... j , > 

. . 





, 









64 


an interest in the developmental possibilities of the 
field and then faded from the picture. A few examples will 
suffice. The pipe lines projected to the coast by Trop- 
icorp of Berlin, and by other companies, have been noted 
already. 

In 1931 the firm of K.D.Johnson and Co. of New York 
sent representatives to Alberta to investigate the poss¬ 
ibility of establishing a carbon black plant, using Valley 
natural gas. It was pointed out tha.t Great Britain imports 
about $150,000,000 worth of carbon black annually as an 
ingredient for paints. With Empire preference in the air 
at the time, and the probability of a reasonable degree 
of protection for the new industry, the prospect seemed 
fairly bright. However as the depression deepened and the 
likelihood of the defes.t of the federal government seemed 
more certain, with a consequent reversal of policy likely, 
the whole project was dropped. (19) 

It was reverted to again in 1936, briefly. General 
A.G.L.McNaughton, then head of the National Research 
Council, told the Canadian Association of Manufacturers 
that negotiations were under way to commercialize Turner 
Valley gas. Canada imports $1,000,000 Of carbon blank an¬ 
nually and a plant was to be erected to supply this mar¬ 
ket. Nothing came of the negotiations apparently. (2$) 

Even more grandiose was the project announced by 

19 Edmonton Journal 27 April 1931. 

20 Ibid. 4 June 1936. 













. 










■ fiysim 







65 


the Hercules Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company in 
1931* It sought a provincial charter to build a plant to 
utilize all Turner Valley waste gas for power. The Com¬ 
pany’s objective was to industrialize Alberta as much as 
possible. It wanted a ninety nine year lease on certain 
rights and facilities in return for providing cheap in¬ 
dustrial pow r er. The Provincial Government thought the 
terms too binding for such a long period and the project 
was allowed to lapse. The company expected to spend over 
$100,000,000 in its various developmental projects over 
a period of years. Such a sum would have been a godsend 
to Alberta in the depression. The multiplier effects would 
have made a substantial difference to the incidence of 
the depression in southern Alberta at least. (21) 


21 Edmonton Journal 31 March 1931. 





66 


Chap te r Fiv e 
Natural Gas 

"All Hell for a ‘basement," wrote Kipling of the 
Medicine Hat gas fields. The cheapness, the cleanliness, 
the ease; with which it can he obtained and transported, 
and the general advantages in its favour for home and in¬ 
dustry, led southern Albertans from the very first to try 
to organize companies to make gas available for both dom¬ 
estic ana industrial use. Large scalife developments naturally 
had to awa.it the growth of cities and large towns, but 
from their very early days the towns in the vicinity of 
Bow Island and Medicine Hat enjoyed the advantages of 
natural gas. 

Calgary was, by 1910, using natural gas from two 
wells drilled within city limits. The Calgary Gas Company 
manufactured artificial gas and was serving over eighteen 
hundred customers. The city was growing rapidly: it was 
enjoying a real estate boom. It was quite evident that 
there was an expanding market for gas both in Lethbridge 
and Calgary. Mr. Eugene Coste organized a gas company which-, 
after successive amalgamations with all its competitors, 
emerged with the resounding and comprehensive title of 
"The Canadian Western Natural Gas, Light, Heat and Power 
Company, Limited." By 1912 the company had constructed a 
sixteen inch pipe line from Bow Island to Calgary, via or 



















. 


























. 





X :Ji 


i 

' 

7 —- ■ X 


■ 

. 

- 

< « 

„ 


. ;; v ) u ' j 

.. , ■ ; r, 

■ >•*' 






67 


near Lethbridge and Macleod and the intervening major 
towns. For the war years this served as a satisfactory 
source of supply, hut by 1920 the Bow Island field had 
declined drastically. It was showing edge water intrusion, 
and the gas pressure had declined to such a low point 
that it was imperative to secure additional sources of 
supply. 

Meanwhile Mr. A.W. Dingman had discovered "oil” 
at Turner Valley. The oil was accompanied by a gas so vol¬ 
atile that natural gasoline was extracted from it. After 
passing through the absorption plant the excess gas was 
just wasted. It was piped a safe distance from the well 
site and flared. With the decline of the Bow Island field, 
and in view of the promising nature of Turner Valley as a 
gas field, it was apparent that it was economic to con¬ 
struct pipe line connections between the Turner Valley 
wells and the Bov; Island - Calgary pipe line. The junction 
was made at Okotoks. A six and eight inch combination pipe 
line was completed in 1921 and the gas was turned on 
on the first of January 1922. The Turner Valley wells of 
the day provided only an inadequate supplementary supply 
and a vigorous programme of drilling at Foremost and 
Barnwell was embarked upon with considerable success. 

Even with these accessions the supply of ga,s was insuf¬ 
ficient, especially for peak: cold weather demands. 

Turner Valley was the closest proven undeveloped 






68 


field. The reorganized Hoyalite Oil Company continued 
drilling, and finally with the Royalite 4 well, which also 
introduced Turner Valley as a major naphtha producing 
field, the great gas reservoir in the limestone was tapped. 
A' ten inch gas main was laid from the Royalite scrubbing 
plant directly to Calgary in the same year. It was found 
that these lines were insufficient to meet the peak demands 
and a fourteen inch line was laid in 1928 from the Valley 
to join the Bow Island - Clagary main at De Winton. 

From the very beginning the problem of gas wastage 
in Turner Valley was acute and it became increasingly so 
as more wells were completed. (1) The original problem of 
trying to find an adequate reserve and source of supply 
for the southern Alberta gas system was suddenly reversed 
and for years the problem was one of inadequate markets. 

The situation was further complicated by the fact that 
until 1950 lands and minerals did not come under provin¬ 
cial jurisdiction; and even when they did the Dominion 
government had to pa,ss special enabling legislation 
before the province could exeeise full control and en¬ 
force conservation measures. 

Turner Valley wells have a high gas-oil ratio. That 
is, it takes from three thousand to thirty one thousand 

1 In 1925 Turner Valley exceeded the gas production of 
the Petrolia fields of Ontario for the first tine e; 
and year by yea.r the disparity continued to grow. 

Canada Year Book, 1926. 













69 

cubic feet of gas to raise .one barrel of oil or naphtha 
to the surface. To make matters worse the older the well, 
and the lower the daily production, the greater becomes 
the amount of gas necessary to raise the same number of 
barrels of petroleum. That is to say, the gas-oil ratio 
becomes increasingly unfavourable with the passage of time. 

For years there was an additional reason for the 
operators* failure to take any precautionary conservation 
measures. When Royalite 4 came in the well operators, fol¬ 
lowing routine procedure, closed the gas valves to pre¬ 
vent gas wastage and to test the gas pressure. As they 
watch the gauges, the pressure rose steadily at a rate 
of about one hundred pounds per square inch a minute. 

250, 500, 1000, 1500 - finally at just over two 

thousand pounds pressure the well casing - nine and one 
half tons of it - began to rise slowly out of the hole 
through the top of the derrick. Eventually it settled 
back as the gas began to blow up around the casing, but 
the operators became quite convinced that here wan a gas 
pressure, immeasurable and indefinite, which it would be 
decidedly dangerous to try to restrain. Nearly ten years 
later they were to plead that closing the valves was so 
risky as to be almost an impossibility. For the inter¬ 
vening period the gas was merely restricted to the three 
or four hundred pounds pressure necessary to pass it 
through the separators, and the rest was allowed to flare. 









< 


(: 
























70 


» 

It provided a perpetual and pleasing sunset effect, but 
a very expensive one. Even in 1929 when there were com¬ 
paratively few wells it was estimated that gas was being 
wasted at the rate of 158,000,000 cubic feet daily, which 
at current prices represented about ^53,700. (2) 

Such a rate of wastage seems inexcusable now - and 
unavoidable then. The long run effects of excessive 
wastage on a field were well know*u The Cushing field in 
Oklahoma, for instance, had allowed the dissipation of 
its gas reserves at almost twice the rate of wastage in 
Turner Valley and had paid the penalty of premature ex¬ 
haustion and extinction. 

Turner Valley operators were in a difficult pos¬ 
ition. There was only a limited market for the gas. Only 
the naphtha, later the crude oil, had any sale value. 

They probably feared quite genuinely to restrict com¬ 
pletely the escape of gas. Compressors and absorption 
plants were expensive. They might or might not pay for 
themselves in the life of the field. Perhaps worst cf all 
was the fact that so many competitors were drilling 
and producing. The gas reservoir was a common factor. 

All producers had to agree simultaneously to restrictions 
and prorationing. Unless all cooperated in such a scheme 
chaos would have resulted. Ear from virtue being the 
/only profitable path to follow, those who stood out from 


2 Calgary Herald 6 July 1S29 












' 






/' 1 ' . . . 


4 


' 










. 


t 






. t 


. 






- 


, 

' 




•: V 












71 


such a scheme would profit the most. Gas from the general 
reserve would drive the naphtha and crude oil through the 
limestone to their wells and they would make the quicker 
and larger profits. The Dominion Government, which at the 
time had control of the na.tural resources of the prairie 
provinces, was too far away to take a deep interest in 
the problem. In any case it was negotiating a transference 
of its rights to the provinces. 

Yet even as early as 1928-29 the rate of gas 
wastage was so high that the danger of too rapid depletion 
and lack of long run reserves was apparent. Both the pub¬ 
lic and the Turner Valley operators desired some means 
of control and conservation. 

As a matter of fact, positive , if inadequate, 
measures were being taken. The Bow/ Island field had 
shown signs of depletion and decline in the early 1920’s. 
Turner Valley took its place almost entirely after 1924. 

It was proposed that Bow Island should be used as a gas 
reservoir, repressured by the surplus Turner Valley gs.s. 
Accordingly two thirds of the Bow Island wells were 
sealed and the others had compressors installed above 
them. Late in the summer of 1930 the repressuring began. 
For nine years gas was pumped from Turner Va.lley to Bow 
Island at the rate of five million cubic feet per day. 
Thirteen billion cubic feet cf ga,s were injected into 
the old field. The gas pressure was raised from 250 







< 

, 

' 

. 


.. 







72 


to 565 pounds per square inch aga.in. 

After the war repressuring was resumed again a.nd 
in the four years 1945-46 over two and a half billion 
cubic feet of gas was stored in the field. In the same 
period gas w r as being restored to the Turner Valley gas 
reservoir at a rate of about three billion cubic feet an¬ 
nually. 

The provincial government took prompt action to 
curb waste as soon as' the provincial natural resources 
were transferred to its jurisdiction in 1930. Naturally 
there were false starts and several legal disputes before 
a complete a.nd efficient system of conservation was est¬ 
ablished. The life of the Turner Valley field had been 
reduced by an indeterminate number of years and the cum¬ 
ulative wastage had reached colossal proportions before 
the system was established and functioning smoothly. But 
luckily the experiments were made, the lessons learned, 
the means of control tested and proved before the other 
major oil fields of Alberta were discovered and exploited. 
They are "model 11 fields, largely because they were in¬ 
telligently and firmly controlled from the first along 
lines evolved from experience in Turner Valley. 

The government ordered restrictions on total gas 
output to conserve resources. Gas wastage was cut sharply. 
Alljoperators were forced to close in and test their wells 
to secure data on which future controls could he ’cased. (2) 
2 Edmonton Journal 27 July 1931. 








. - • • 










73 


Operators protested of course, pointing to the devast¬ 
ating effects of closure on the Royalite 4 well, but the 
government stood firmly by its orders. The wells were 
closed and tested: the expected catastrophes were notable 
only by their absence. 

"Successively lower yields of naphtha -in the separat¬ 
ors as reservoir, pressures fell, both in total recovery 
per -well, and in recovery per unit quantity of gas pro¬ 
duced led to a belief that a large- percentage of the 
liquids in the gas was'being lost." (3) Both the press and 
the government had been campaigning against the wastage 
of gas and had been advocating the building of plants for 
the extraction of naphtha. from the natural gas. The var¬ 
ious oil.companies had balked, claiming that they would be 
uneconomical and unprofitable in the long run. The Alberts, 
Department of Lands and Mines issued a bulletin which 
amounted to a blistering condemnation of the wasteful 
methods of the Turner Valley companies. (4) After giving 
a short history of the field it explains that a gas 
absorption plant had been constructed by the British 
American oil Company in'1933. This plant was highly re¬ 
munerative from the first. It cost about three hundred , 
thousand dollars and had a processing capacity of 
100,000,000 cubic feet of gas daily. From this an average 
of 342 barrels of naphtha were extracted daily. The annual 

3 Beach, op.cit., p.24 

4 Oil Bulletin, 7 July 1934. 







1 

« 

♦ 

, 

, 



. 








74 


gross revenue was about three hundred and seventy five 
thousand dollars. This return was certainly an effective 
commentary on the previous inefficient and wasteful 
methods. (5) Others plants were erected in 1936 and 1943 
and were equally profitable. 

The history of the Conservation Boards will be 
outlined in a succeding chapter. One was established in this 
gas phase of the Valley*s history to try to control or el¬ 
iminate gas wastage. The legislation establishing it was 

■ 

taken to the courts s.nd ultimately' declared ultra vires 
by the Privy Council in 1934. After enabling legislation 
was passed by the Dominion government a second Conservation 
Board w r as established with the legal power to enforce 
its orders. This Board was established after the discov¬ 
ery of crude oil. While it certainly and vitally affected 
gas wells and gas output, it naturally was more concerned 
with control of the crude oil wells. 

Meanwhile, with or without a legally constituted 
Conservation Board, the government continued to exert a 
constant pressure in the direction of conservation. In 
1936 it urged that Turner Valley gas be piped and used in 
the Edmonton natural gas system, and that the Viking field 
be held in reserve.No steps were taken, however, to enforce 
the advice. (6) 

By 1937 and 1938 the gas reserve situation for the 

5 Edmonton Journal 6 June 1933. 

6. Ibid. II May 1936. 






, - .1 

* 





* 

t ' • 


- i 


k .} x ■ ... ; . 1 ' 

'j JO" f 


J; 




. 








-• - .s.. 









75 


Calgary - Lethbridge system was becoming dangerous. 

Reserves were being exhausted at alarming rates. Worse, 

from the consumers’ point of view;, was the fact that gas 

/ 

pressure was dropping very rapidly. Originabrock pressure 
had been over 2050 pounds per square inch, and this pres¬ 
sure was declining at a rate of about ninety pounds per 
annum. By 1957 it had dropped- to 783 pounds; a year later 
to 640. There had been critical periods before when gas 
pressure had just met'peak winter demands, but major new 
discoveries had always prevented ’’catastrophes. 11 Now, 
for the first time it was announced that gas would have 
to be pumped to Calgary to meet the increased seasonal 
demands in the winter of 1938-39. (7) Plans were made to 
close down seventy five naphtha wells, giving the owners 
lOC^b compensation, both to reduce gas wastage and to 
lengthen the life of the crude oil wrells now coming into 
production. (8) The newly established Conservation Board 
ordered drastic reductions in gas production. (9) Further 
reductions were ordered from time to time as experience 
and expediency dictated. For instance, between February 
and June 1941 production from the gas ca,p v-ells w-as 
slashed from 94.8 to 59 million cubic feet daily. 

The war, of course, brought new problems and a 
severe strain on the field. The highest possible production 

7 Edmonton Journal 9 June 1938. 

8 Ibid. 16 November 1937. 

9 Ibid. 15 October 1938. 
















76 


of crude oil was necessary to meet war time demands. At 
the same time the effects of excessive rates of production 
were only too apparent. Turner Valley wells are charac¬ 
terized by a rapid rate of decline and a high gas-oil 
ratio. To allow production at the maximum rate had as its 
corollary an extremely rapid exhaustion of the field and 
a relatively low gross total volume of production. Drilling 
of wells was accelerated. Nevertheless it was decided 
that the conservative course was the safest and soundest. 
The prorationing and conservation policies were continued 
although they were relaxed to some degree. One factor 
which conduced to this relatively sound course was the 
capacity of the pipelines and refineries; they could * 
only handle a given maximum volume. 

March of 1943 saw the final extinguishing of the 
Turner Valley flares. (10) No longer could it serve as 
a bea.con in the skies. All gas was now being processed 
in the absorption plants, funnelled into the gas pipe 
line system, or returned to the field. The Conservation 
Board entered into an agreement with the Anglo-Canadian 
Oil Company by virtue of which waste gas from the wells 
was returned to the formation through the old Foundation 
well wrhich was no longer a crude oil producer. 


10 Edmonton Journal 4 March 1943 


























. 





















77 


In 1945 Dr, D.L.Katz, Professor of Chemical Eng¬ 
ineering, University of Michigan, testifying before the 
Board of Public Utility Commissioners, estimated Turner 
Valley gas reserves at 406 billion cubic feet of which 
he estimated that 317 billion would be available for 
marketing. In the same enquiry Mr. S.J.Davies, President 
of Davies Petroleums, said that he believed that the 
years 1957 - 60 would be the critical, period for Turner 
Valley gas users because there might not be sufficient 
gas reserves by then to meet peak gas requirements in 
the winter months. (11) The latest estimates place T. u r ner 
Valley gas reserves at 290 billion cubic feet of mar¬ 
ketable gas. (12) 


11 Edmonton Journal 13 March 1945. 

12 Figures supplied by the Alberta Department of 
Mines and Minerals, 1950. 









< . . * 


■ . 


. 



. . . 





• 

i , 


. . 


0 


, j :' v 









78 


Chapter Six 

Report of the Royal Commission on 

The Alberta Oil Industry 

Twice the Alberta government passed legislation to 
enforce conservation of the oil and gas resources of the 
province. The first Cil and Gas Conservation Act was 
passed in 1932 subsequent to the natural resources of the 
province being turned over to the control of the provincial 
government. 

A gas conservation board was established under 
the terms of the a.ct. It was successful in exerting pres¬ 
sure on the well operators of Turner Valley which resulted 
in a sounder attitude being taken to the conservation prob¬ 
lem. Governmental pressure, for instance, was at least 
partly responsible for the erection of the first gas ab¬ 
sorption plant in 1933 with the consequent saving of nat¬ 
ural gas. The Board issued regulations restricting the 
amount of gas allowed to blow wild from each well, despite 
the fears of the well operators that attempts to restrict 
the gas flow would result in disaster. 

Public and government alike were seriously concerned 
about the amount of gas being wasted and flared in the 
Valley. This Board had beer) constituted in the -gas a,nd 
naphtha phase of Turner Valley*s history. There was only 
comparatively limited market for the natural ga-s and it 
was more than satiated. Well operators were therefore in- 


















79 


teres ted only in the naphtha gasoline and the light 
crudes which v/ere being produced and which had a relat¬ 
ively high sales value. They, naturally, could see no 
alternative between wasting a la.rge proportion of nat¬ 
ural gas and being financially embarrassed if they were 
not allowed to waste that gas in the interests of re¬ 
covering the more valuable naphtha gasoline. Furthermore, 
many of the companies were incorporated under Dominion 
charters, with liabilities to the Federal government 
for royalties, in the period before the province had secur 
ed control of its natural resources. Accordingly many of 
them feared that they would be ruined by such conserv¬ 
ation legislation. Some felt that the legislation would 
favour the larger companies which could afford to build 
the gas absorption plants. The Oil and Gas Conservation 
legislation was taken to the courts, and although it was 
first declared intra vires by the Alberta Supreme Court, 
the Supreme Court of Canada and the Judicial Committee 
of the Privy Council in 1934 ultimately decla.red it 
ultra vires the powers of the Alberta legislature. 

After the discovery of crude oil, in 1936 the sit¬ 
uation was drastically changed. Production of crude oil 
soon surpassed the refinery and pipe line capacity. The 
companies now had a larger interest in restricting gas 
wastage in order to conserve the gas needed to lift the 
oil to the surface. Late in 1936 the marketing and ref- 

















80 


inery operating companies introduced prorationing of the 
crude producing wells: they had no alternative. There were 
naturally protests and charges of unfairness in awarding 
quotas, and protests against the basis on which the 
quota.s were assigned. By September of 1937 both the in¬ 
dependent and the large oil companies alike applied for 
some form of governmental control to ensure equitable 
treatment in prorationing. (1) December of that year saw 
thirty five wells of south Turner Valley producing nearly 
27000 barrels of crude oil daily - far in excess of 
existing pipe line capacity. 

The major purchasers of oil found themselves forced 
to pro-rate their purchases, using as a basis only the 
previous month* s purchases. As new wells were completed 
that measuring stick was of no value. It also became 
evident from rising gas-oil ratios that some wells were 
being produced at rates which would soon ruin them and 
which would result in terribly small ultimate recoveries 
compared with what might have been expected if production 
was restricted and carried out on the basis of orderly 
development. (2) 

The exigencies of the situation made it imperative 
that the Provincial government take an active role again. 
The opportunity was presented to pass new conservation 
legislation and to constitute some kind of control board 


2 Beach, op.cit., p. 24. 

1 Edmonton Journal 16 September 1937 








i 








j 



j 


v 


81 


to administer tha.t and prorationing regulations. The 
Dominion government promised to give the Alberta legis¬ 
lature undoubted right to apply gas conservation legis¬ 
lation. (3) There was to be no repetition of the legal 
disallowance which had nullified the first Gas and Oil 
Conservation Act. 

In March 1938 the "Oil and Gas Resources Conser¬ 
vation Act" was passed by the legislature. We cannot do 
better than to reproduce the preamble of the Act. Its 
purpose was to effect conservation by: 

(a) Preventing the exhaustion of petroleum 
producing areas of the energy necessary to 
produce petroleum by any method shown to be 
uneconomic in that such method of production 
allows this exhaustion without proportionate 
recovery of petroleum, to the end that the 
maximum ultimate recovery of petroleum can 
be attained. 

(b) Prorating the production of petroleum, or 
natural gas from the wells in any area to 
the economic markets available in such man¬ 
ner that the uneconomic reduction of price 
is not brought about in such manner that a 
share of the available markets for petroleum 
and natural gas is available to each 
producing well.* 5 (4) 

Wide powers could be delegated or exerted under 
the authority of the Act. Clause 3 in Chapter 1 of the 
Act reads as follows: 

3. The intent, purpose and object cf the Act 
is to effect the conservation of oil resources 
and gas resources or both in the Province by 
the control or regulation of the production 
of oil or gas or both, whether by restriction 


3 Edmonton Journal 11 May 1938. 

4 Revised Statutes of Alberts, 1938. Chapter 15. 









82 


or prohibition and whether generally or with 
respect to any specified area or any specified 
well or wells or by repressuring of any oil 
field, gas field or oil gas field and, incid¬ 
entally thereto, providing for the compulsory 
purchase of any well or wells. (5) 

The Petroleum and ‘Natural Gas Conservation Board 
was formed and given lega.l standing by the government. 

The Board has functioned under the authority of the oil 
and Gas Resources Conservation Act and has administered 
the Act by collecting the necessary data and issuing 
the requisite regulation, (6) W.F.E.Knode was appointed 
first chairman of the Board. 

The well operators agreed that the Conservation 
Board should have a staff large enough to observe the 
essential facts and to assign to each well the allowable 
production to be taken from it. (7) The Board did not 
content itself with occasional observations but main¬ 
tained a continuous service. It issued new prorationing 
orders from time to time as conditions changed. Thus, if 
the "allowable” for any well had been set higher than 
it should have been, falling bottom hole pressure and 
rising gas-oil ratios would cut its next allowable; (8) 
and vice versa. The orders of the Bos.rd were for these 


5 Loc. cit. Clause 3. 

6 Beach, op.cit., p*33. 

7 Edmonton Journal 22 November L938. 

8 Allowables: The amount set by the Conservation Board 
or other controlling body as the maximum number of 
barrels of oil which may be produced from a well 
during a specified period. The determination of 
allowables is a highly technical process. 








IBS 






fc's'V 


a 



r Y 











83 

reasons accepted by the operators in the knowledge that 
in the long run each well would receive its fair share of 
allowable production, that reservoir energy would not be 
wasted unduly, that the price structure would be main¬ 
tained, and the ultimate recovery per well would be mat¬ 
erially increased. 

In addition the Board has controlled the spacing 
of wells, limiting drilling in Turner Valley to one well 
in each forty acres. Considering that the average depth of 
thirty four completed oil wells in Turner Valley in 1939 
was 7868 feet, with a cost of from $125,000 to $150,000 
per well, that ruling of the Board has been accepted as 
a fair one. 

Straight hole drilling has been enforced. Holes 
deviating more than two degrees from the vertical at any 
point are unusual, even though the Board's requirements 
are not so rigorous as a two degree limit. In any case 
drilling contractors have discovered that straight hole 
drilling is less costly than carelessly drilled holes, (9) 

This gives a general background of the legislative 
and regulatory conditions under which Turner Valley op¬ 
erators were v/orking in the 1930*8, and especially in the 
period after the discovery of crude oil in 1936. 

What it cannot give, and what is difficult to 
reproduce in writing, is the attitude of the general 
9 Beach, op.cit. p.39. 








j : ■ 



u 







- 




1 ’ i 'r}Ji 









i 





84 


public of those depression years. Conditions seemed des¬ 
perately hard to the majority of people in Western Canada 
The whole economy was based on wheat and when the prices 
of wheat slumped so disastrously the whole Canadian ec¬ 
onomy was shaken to its foundations. Certain industries 
were not in such a vulnerable position. Either natural or 
artificial protection in the form of tariffs gave them 
shelter. They were able to maintain prices and profits 
by various devices such as restricting output to the 
level of monetary demand, or by curtailing the less essen 
tial services, or by discharging a percentage of their 
workmen. 

Some firms and industries work on a very small 
profit margin anyway. They depend oh volume of turnover 
to build up seemingly huge profits. As an example Canada 
Packers worked on a profit margin of one quarter cent 
per pound of meat processed. The difference between 
Canada Packers and the farmer who originally raised the 
meat was that the farmer had no way of setting or con¬ 
trolling the general market price of his meat, whereas 
Canada Packers simply added the quarter cent to the price 
of all meat irrespective of whether the price was high or 
low. Naturally Canada Packers could show a financial pro¬ 
fit at the end of each year, .Just as naturally the farmer 
felt that he could not. To add to the Parmer»s sense of 
injustice the gross and net profit of the company was 







. 


* 

' 

■ 


85 

set in millions of dollars; his own was non-existent* 

The actual facts of the case did not interest him. He 
could not hut feel that some portion of those millions 
of dollars was rightfully his. He felt that if he were 
getting his fair share, the selling price of his meat 
would he advanced considerably, to give him both a profit 
and a decent standard of living. The actual quarter cent 
per pound which the company was making was magnified in 
his eyes to hundreds of dollars illegitimately taken from 
him. 


This is hut one example. There were many large 
firms and corporations in similar positions making greater 
or lesser profits per unit article sold. Their surpluses 
or profits were written in millions of dollars. The maj¬ 
ority of workmen wrote their gross incomes in hundreds. 

In the circumstances of the time this hred a sense of 
futility and hopelessness - and denunciations. 

"Fifty Big Shots” and a larger number of lesser 
ones are mulcting the country while the people 
starve. Profits are exorbitant. Tax the profits 
of the rich and divide them equally among all. 
Prices are unreasonably high; pass la,ws setting 
fair and just prices (which will be substan¬ 
tially lower than they are now.) The Millions 
made by the corporations are extorted from the 
people; confiscate. 

So ran the popular cries and feelings of the time. 

The arguments were not reasoned; - they were felt , 
and believed blindly. The majority of people are not, 
and cannot be, trained economists. They cannot grasp the 














- 


t 





! i ' ! 







86 


intricacies and the many factors which must he taken into 
consideration in modern business. The plain fact that "I 
have an income of $1200 a year and the T.Eaton Company, 
limited shows a profit of $5,000,000 therefore there is 
a rank injustice somewhere and T.Baton is robbing me 
blind", speaks for itself. The "nigger in the wood pile" 
was hard to detect and to catch but that did not alter 
the unarguable fact that he must be there. 

That was the temper of the time for a large and 
very vocal section of the population. The party which was 
elected to power in Alberta in 1935 reflected one of the 
many facets of that temper^ To a large extent it shared 
the general view especially in the rank and file of its 
members., 

With such a prevailing attitude it is quite under¬ 
standable that the oil industry should be one of the 
objects of attack especially as it was not a nebulous 
easter "big shot." It was very much "localand very vis¬ 
ibly expanding both in numbers and in gross financial 
turnover. It was local "Big Business": a fit subject 
for investigation. 

The government had the crusading fervour of all 
newly elected parties and governments. Legislation to con¬ 
trol the oil industry had already been passed. Accord¬ 
ingly it proceeded to appoint a Commission to investigate 
all phases of the oil industry in Alberta. 






,'V 





















. 

* 













87 


Under a Commission issued 12 October 1938, the 
Honourable A.A.Mc Gillivray and Mr. L.R.Llpsett were ap¬ 
pointed a Royal Commission to inquire into and report on 
a diversity of matters concerned with petroleum and petrol¬ 
eum products. The Commissioners completed their report 
in April 1940. The report has been published in book form 
and is available in most public libraries in the province. 
It is well digested and already rendered so concisely 
that it is impossible to summarize it further. However, 
as it dealt with the Alberta petroleum industry, and as 
that industry at the time was confined for most practical 
purposes to Turner Valley, mention must be made of some 
of the findings and of some of the reasons for those 
findings and recommendations. These notes on the Commis¬ 
sioners 1 Report do not purport to be in any way full or 
conclusive. Some of the evidence and conclusions are very 
interesting and conduce to an understanding of the in¬ 
dustry and these will be noted and commented on very 
briefly* 

Exploration 

Were it not for the financial risks involved the 
ideal would be exploration and discovery of oil fields 
by the government. With the limited number of taxpayers 
that there are in Alberta, the Provincial government 
would not be justified in alone taking the risks of 
exploratory effort a lar S e way. Great expense is 







. 






88 


involved and the history of private exploration is inter¬ 
woven with examples of financial collapse on the part of 
the explorers. (10) As an illustration of the costs in¬ 
volved in exploration, four wildcat wells have been 
drilled (1949) along the Coal Branch railway line. Each 
cost over a million dollars; each was a complete failure. 

The difference between extending a proven field 
and exploration in an unproven area must be fully apprec¬ 
iated. Nevertheless the Commissioners suggest that in 
view of the oil supplies for national defence purposes, 
the Provincial, Dominion and Imperial governments might 
well collaborate in exploring for oil and in holding 
undrilled reserves. 

The reason for holding undrilled reserves is that 
it is possible for the oil market to be completely 
flooded. The resulting chaotic and demoralizing conditions 
in the industry would benefit no one in the long run, (11) 

Production 

It is iinpossible to give an exact and definite 
cost of producing a barrel of oil. Various producers in 
giving evidence showed estimated costs ranging from-45^ 
to 1.67 per barrel. One company alone showed variations 
of costs ranging from a low of 78<£' to a high of fl.67 
per barrel in the period 1933 - 38. To get a reasonable 


10 A.Q.I.., op.cit. ,p.lO 

11 Ibid, p.ll 












" 






• v [ V 




* * V • • - • v . ■ 
















; si' 





■ . .■ . t.l i 
















89 


return many factors must “be taken into consideration: 
cost of the land leases, cost of drilling the well, num¬ 
ber of dry holes owned by the company, taxes, royalties, 
depletion of oil reserves, and depreciation of equipment. 
To use only one factor: if the costs of drilling two wells 
are equal and one produces at a rate of 100 barrels a day, 
the other at a rate of 500, obviously the costs of pro¬ 
duction from the two wells are not equal. (12) 

The refineries naturally pay only one price for 
oil, quality being equal. Disregard of production ; 

costs is understandable from their point of view. Pro¬ 
duction of oil continues until the marginal producer is 
driven out of business. All producers continue raising oil 
as long as they can show a profit irrespective of the rate 
of profit. Several factors conduce to this state of af¬ 
fairs. The oil pool is tapped to some extent by all the 
wells. That is, there is a common reserve of oil and each 
well operator must get all the oil he can while he can. 

Oil pools are subject to a so-called ’’Rule of 
Capture” , which in effect means that the oil belongs to 
whoever brings it to the surface irrespective of whose 
la.nd it was directly under originally. It is another 
wording of the maxim that ’’possession is nine tenths of 
the law.” Governments have an interest in oil production 
and demand that it he produced as rapidly as possible. 


12 A.I.O.. op.cit. p.19 













i- 


. . ;■ 





90 


Royalties are collected from every barrel of oil produced 
and the government desires the gross revenue from roy¬ 
alties to be as high as possible. Government lease contr 
racts enforced production in volume regardless of the oil 
well operators» or of the public interest. 

The "Rule of Capture" leads to overdrilling and 
to offset wells. Each oil company feels it must secure 
as much oil as possible as quickly as possible. Refinery 
owners may have to drill more wells under a prorationing 
scheme in order to keep their refineries supplied by 
their own wells. This overdrilling can leabL to over pro- 
uction which sacrifices natural resources locally, and 
paralyzes the industry as a whole elsewhere. "Rule of Cap¬ 
ture" is in force as long as people may withdraw oil 
from under the lands of other people. It is particularly 
vicious when there are already more wells than are needed 
to supply the markets. The evil can only be mitigated 
when there are laws on the spacing of wells and against 
excessive drilling of wells in a given area. (13) 

It should not be inferred that it is only the 
foolishness of oil producers that leads to such situations. 
United States anti-trust laws and section 498 of the 
Criminal Code of Canada have cabined and confined the 
industry in the matter of making internal agreements 
which might have any direct or indirect effect upon the 


13 A.O.I., op.cit. pp.22-26 









. » ' 


& 'Ut 


J 'l 








- ■ - , ■ ■ 0 

■ i ;• :j . 

. 

. • 


. 



■ 

' 



91 


public interest. In other words the laws forbid the 
companies to get together to systematize production. Any 
suggestion of the companies reaching a mutual agreement 
as to volume of production, or as to relative volume of 
production, is regarded by the public as an attempt to 
form a combine detrimental to the public interest. This 
can be regardless of the absolute certainty that in the 
long run the public will suffer due to depletion of the 
field and a consequent wasting of oil resources. There 
are two possible alternatives. The operators may make 
agreements under government auspices.(Which may be polit¬ 
ically dangerous.) The government may allow regulated 
drilling and enforce conservation law/s. (14) 

Proration has been defined as M a planned production 
measure designed to prevent waste, insure rateable takings 
and balance supply and dema.nd." Conservation and proration 
laws are a compromise in fields of divided ownership 
such a,s Turner Valley. The ideal, form the point of view 
of absolutely sound engineering practices, is to have 
unit operation - which is only possible when one company 
owns the whole field. (15) 

There should not only be proration in pools but 
between pools so that there will be economic stability 
in the industry. With the proviso of fair prices to con¬ 
sumers, no pools should be allowed tp steal the economic 


14 A. 0.1.op.cit. p.25. 

15 Ibid. p.28. 










r ■ . 




. I ' !J 





. ) 























a2 

and natural markets of other pools. This, of course, is 
a subject for inter-governmental and, in some cases, 
international, control. (16) 

Field Prices (17) 

The "Field price" is the price paid for crude oil 
tc the well operator. The price is set by the price leader, 
the largest purchaser in the field. In the case of Turner 
Valley this was the Imperial Oil Company, Ltd. 

Generally speaking crude oil is sold in a buyers* 
market because of over production beyond local needs. The 
price is in dynamic equilibrium over the whole continent. 
Buyers for the refineries, search around to find the 
cheapest crude oil that tiiey can that will make the various 
products needed to serve the given market. Many factors 
enter in: long run volume that can be supplied, cost of 
transportation to the local refineries, the quality and 
grade of the oil. The cost of the crude oil and other 
raw materials make up about 80^ of refinery costs and 
therefore cannot be for long out of line with costs else¬ 
where. The individual producer cannot make a stand, set¬ 
ting his own own price. If his prices are not in dynamic 
equilibrium with competitors in his own and other fields 
he will soon be forced out of business. 

At the time of the Commission*s investigation 


16 A.O.I., op.cit. p•43 

17 Ibid, pp.45 - 61. 


















I "1 
















95 

(1938 - 39) the Regina refineries set the field price for 
Turner Valley crude because they had as an alternative 
source the various Montana crudes. The field price is the 
all-importa,nt factor in stimulating drilling and discovery 
of new fields. If the field price is too low to repay the 
costs of drilling and to compensate for the risks involved 
in the search for oil, drilling will automatically cease. 

Vv f ider Markets and Transportation Costs (18) 

It is obvious tha.t to capture wider markets the 
crude oil from a field must be priced cheaper than, or as 
cheaply as, the crude oil of its competitors. Turner 
Valley's direct competitors were Sarnia to the east, Mon¬ 
tana to the south, and California in the British Columbia 
market. The decisive factor is usually the cost of trans¬ 
portation. Lower freight rates or oil pipe line rates 
favouring one field will extend its ma.rket area.' Tariff * 
protection plays a part. After the anti-dumping laws were 
enforced in 1939 Turner Valley extended its market area 
to the southern part of the province. 

pacts and figures were given to show the effect on 
Turner Valley of any attempt to capture the whole Manitoba 
market area. At that time (1939) the "economic fringe" 
for Turner Valley products was at Portage la Prairie. *ith 
freight rates stable at the figures of the day oil well 


IS A.O.X., op.cit. PP. 73 - 104 







' 

: „ ' 

4 

' 



. 




t 




X 

•. 

. 


■ 








■ . • • ... 1 ■ 

< 



. 


..... . 

' 

• . , • - 

- 




... i!.... . 




.> ; 


li 


■ ; .. 


■ 


. • . . . . • , . 

. 

■ .. • ...., '. 









94 


operators would have had to reduce the price of their 
crude oil by 47^ per barrel in order to compete in the 
Winnipeg market. They would have had to produce 11,750 
barrels per day, for Imperial Oil Refineries alone, as 
compared with the 10,000 barrels which they were presently 
delivering. The price on the total production would have 
been reduced from $1.20 to 73^f per barrel. The producers 
would have grossed $3422 per day less on the larger pro¬ 
duction figure. It would have been financial suicide to 
have tried to capture the voider market at the time. l r any 
producers would have been driven out of business and 
profit margins reduced for all the remainder. 

Refining (19) 

The refining of crude petroleum utilizes the ap- 
lication of heat, pressure, and catalytic principles for 
the separation of the raw material into its component parts 
and for the recombination of the molecular structure of 
the derivatives. 

Crude oil is the material which is produced 
from the ground in liquid form and which exists 
in the ground as a liquid. Crude naphtha is the 
condensate from the gas which is produced from 
the oil and gas horizons. Absorption naphtha is 
the material absorbed out of the gas by an ab¬ 
sorption process and recovered from the absorp¬ 
tion oil in which it has been absorbed from the 
gas by means of distillation. 

Crude oil and crude naphtha are processed in the same 

manner but absorption nap&tha requires separate processing 

19 A.O.I.. op.cit. pp 73 - 104. 









V 




■r 










- . i / . ; . :| 


i' 






■ 

; ' . . , • ■ . 

ji ' • ' '■ 



















95 


and treating. Turner Va.lley crudes contain evil smelling 
mercaptans - in other words hydrogen sulphide - which 
must he removed and which therefore increase the cost of 
refining. 

It is impossible to determine the cost of producing 
any one of the several products which are refined from 
crude oil. The processes by which they are made are inter¬ 
mixed and entwined. Similar accounting difficulties occur 
in the other industries in which there is joint produc¬ 
tion: for instances, the cost of milk as compared with 
cream, of bacon as compared with ham or pigs knuckles, 
of flour as compared with s-horts or bran, or of the 
various grades of lumber from one tree. Only the selling 
prices of these products can be determined. These in turn 
are governed by various factors: supply and demand, or 
transportation and distribution costs. 

By taking the total cost price of the crude oil 
entering the refinery in a year and subtracting it from 
the total selling price of all the products produced, and 
then making the necessary adjustments for taxation, dep¬ 
reciation, obsolescence, and so forth, the net profit 
and rate of profit can be determined. We have done this 
for the Imperial Oil refinery in Calgary for 1938. (20) 
Suffice it to say here that the Commission found that the 
return on investment for the year was 12.68/£, a rate 


20 See Appendix M G W 







- 

■ 



















* 




;y; - ■> ■. 


















■ 

■ 

' 





96 


which, would have be_£n reduced to 10 % had not Imperial 
Oil "been refining oil for the British American Oil Com¬ 
pany that year. 

Dr. G.G.brown, an oil expert from Michigan State 
University, testified that a return of 15j£ on investment 
was not unreasonable, having regard to the fact that 
investment of capital in refineries was hazardous because 
of the high rate of obsolescence, unless that rate of 
profit was being maintained indefinitely. It is note¬ 
worthy that a reduction of one cent per gallon for refinr 
ing and processing would have led to a net loss on 
refinery operations. 

Imperial oil’s was the low cost operating refinery 
because of its size, its range of products, and the 
volume of oil processed. Accordingly it set the price 
for its competitors. The volume of H throughput’ 1 is the 
decisive factor in determining the refining costs. Fig¬ 
ures were produced to show that refinery costs were 
highest in 1932 and 1933 when the volume of crude oil 
was lowest; and lowest in 1930 and 1930 when the volume 
of crude processed was the ?nighest. 

There are economic safeguards keeping the price 
of refined products at proper economic levels. Compet- 
iton between local existing refineries is one factor, 
and fear of new competitors and new refineries is 


another 




; ' 






•/ - • 




j 













' 

' 

■ ■ ‘ ■ . 












97 


Marketing and Marketing S e rvices (21) 

Those who are alarmed at uneconomic marketing 
practices would probably be the first to de¬ 
plore lack of service and lack qf convenience 
and to decry the freezing of competition by 
rigidity of control. 

There is a parallel here with the history of the Canadian 
Pacific and Canadian National Railways. When the Canadian 
Pacific was alone in the field the cry went up against 
monopolistic practices and tendencies. The railway compan¬ 
ies which later formed the Canadian National entered the 
field and so expanded railway services.and coverage that 
there is a great deal of duplication and perhaps excessive 
coverage which results in higher operating costs and lower 
revenues. Any threat or plan of combining the railrods, 
and so eliminating duplication and reducing costs, is met 
with protests and charges of monopoly even from those who 
may be favourably affected. Similar protests would render 
unworkable any attempt to regiment the oil marketing 
services. 

Just exactly what the effect would be if duplic¬ 
ation of services in the distribution branch of the in¬ 
dustry were eliminated is a matter of guesswork. A wide 
range of oil and other industrial products is marketed 
by the service staions and other outlets, and tnere is no 
way of accurately apportioning the cost of marketing any 
particular product. A moments' consideration of tne 
21 A.0.1.op.cit. pp. 108 - 213 - 













- 









- -- ;' •. * ■ . J v : . r. j 








- 













98 

variety of articles to be found in any service station 
will make this obvious. As in the case of refining we 
can only take the net profit shown by the marketing 
branch of the business and, by comparing it with the 
total invested capital, strike a rate of profit. This has 
been done in Appendix •• G ,# , again using Imperial Oil as 
the example. For 1938 the return on investment was shown 
to be 10.57/2. A reduction of one cent per gallon in 

( 22 ) 

marketing prices would have left a profit margin of 2.8$. 

The oil companies have to continually expand their 
services to maintain gallonage turnover and to maintain 
their competitive position. The Commissioners came to the 
conclusion that, generally speaking, duplication does not 
add any appreciable amount to the cost of marketing. El¬ 
imination of duplication would mean eliminating along with 
it all the advantages of competition in the way of 
n consumers 1 choice 51 and of lower prices. 

Turning to another aspect of marketing the Com¬ 
missioners found that "delivery by the commission agent 
to the farmer, which has been described as 'free deliv¬ 
ery 1 , is wrongly described; in fact the farmer is paying 
for the service which he gets" Furthermore, it is rarely 
appreciated by the farmers that in 1938 Imperial Oil 
alone had 94,680 steel barrels on loan to Alberts, farmers. 
These barrels represented an investment of "’884,28 r/ . 

22 A.0,1.., op.cit., p.255. 































99 


This system was compared with the one in vogue in the 
United States where each farmer owns his own tanks, and 
the oil company delivers directly to it. However it must 
he remembered that in the United States the farmers do 
not pay for the tanker trucks which make the deliveries. 

Dr. Drey, one time chief of the Petroleum Section 
of the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce in Wash¬ 
ington, D.C., testified that "Alberta consumers are not 
paying more for petroleum than a,ny other consumers in 
North America., considering the geographical situation 
in which they live." (23) 


Conse rvation and Proratio ning i n Alberta, (24) 

Conservation and prorationing are complementary. 

If governments were solely concerned with con¬ 
servation they V'ould be concerned to see to it 
that oil production operations were carried on 
only in accordance with the direction of petrol¬ 
eum engineers so as to permit of the most effic¬ 
ient and complete withdrawal from a pool. Such 
a course would not take into account the finan¬ 
cial advantage or harm to the individuals who 
had invested money in oil production. To face 
realities governments have had to give recog¬ 
nition to economic considerations and to equities. 
And so w r e have associated with the idea of con¬ 
servation the idea of economic equilibrium 
and the idea od fair play and justice towards 
those who have proprietary interests in a divided 
^pool. Thus we have what is "praration", which .. 
literally means the allocation of demand amongst 
competing producers on a pro-rata basis.(25j 

As an alternative or added meaning, proration may be said 


23 A.0.1.op.oit. p. 180 

24 Ibid. pp. 214 - 260. 

25. Ibid. pp. 214 - 215. 












. 




/ 


■- : • ■- >• ■. 4 ■- v- 


■ > i 






; 


: , 






.. 


' 

« 






100 

to mean a system of control in any oil field which is 
designed to prevent waste with due regard for equity and 
the "balancing of supply and demand. 

Conservation does not just "happen"; nor would 
legislation merely ordering it have any enforceable mean* 
ing. It involves a nice balancing of many factors, some 
of them engineering problems, and some of them legislative 
definitions. It entails regulation of the flow of oil. 
Gas-oil ratios and bottom hole pressures must be born in 
mind. There must be a drilling pattern conformable with 
economic and engineering considerations. Rate-takings 
must be based upon the functions of both the individual 
wells and the whole oil pool. A legislative prohibition 
of waste, and a legislative definition of waste which 
will cover conservation of the total reservoir energy, 
are necessary. 

If prorationing is concurrent with conservation 
there must be full provision for a hearing of interested 
parties, along with a right of appeal. To quote Dr. Drey 
aga.in, "Conservation and prorationing authorities have 
a duty to recognize something more than maximum efficiency 
in production from an engineering point cf view. They 
must recognize the equities of the various operators and 
investors." A general and overriding rule is that produc¬ 
tion should not surpass demand because surface storage oj- 
the crude or refined oil leads to a fairly rapid deterior¬ 


ation. 














; ^ 

. - • • - ; 


. . ! . 


■ 

■ , ' - U t 


~ 


... • u '. 


,, v J ■ 




■ 








. 

* 

■ 

* 

. 


* 











101 


The method of setting the prora.tion quotas was 
given in detail "by Mr. F. G. Cottle, a. member of the Con¬ 
servation Board, and we cannot do better than to trans¬ 
cribe the basic and relevant portions of his evidence. 

Before preparing a proration schedule the 
Board dtermines, in respect of each well in the 
field, its assigned acreage, its gas-oil ratio, 
its capacity to flow’ and its bottom hole.pressure. 
Not more tha.n forty acres is assigned to any 
well. If the well is drilled by an operator who 
controls an acreage less than forty acres, not 
more than his acreage is assigned. The gas-oil 
ratio is determined and revised from time to time f 
from actual records of production. The capacity 
to flow and bottom hole pressure are determined 
by actual tests conducted by the field staff of 
the Board. 

The allowable of each well is determined 
in the following manner: 

1. Having determined the total daily produc¬ 
tion of the field to be prors.ted it is divided 
into four equal parts. The first part is appor¬ 
tioned to each well in the proportion that the 
assigned acreage bears to the total assigned 
a.creage of the field. The second part is appor¬ 
tioned to each well in the porportion that the 
bottom hole pressure of each well bears to the 
sum of the bottom hole pressures of all the v, : ells. 
The third part is similarly based on the tested 
rate of flow of one well to all the wells. The 
fourth part is apportioned to each well in the 
proportion of the reciprocal of each well*s 
gas-oil ratio bears to the sum of the gas-oil 
ratios of all the wells. (That is, a well with 

a large gas-oil ratio receives a relatively 
smaller allowance than a well with a low gas¬ 
oil ratio.) 

Adding the four apportionments described 
above we arrive at the initial sharing position 
of each well. The sum of the sharing positions 
equals the total allowable production of the 
field. 

2. All wells are divided into two groups. The 
first group is composed of those wells having 
less than 3000 cubic feet per barrel; the other 
group is composed of those wells having agas- 
oil ratio in excess of 3000 cubic feet per 
barrel, (any wells with gas-oil ratios in excess 



























102 


of 31000 a.re. classed as gas wells.) If the 
Board allowed those wells with excessive gas¬ 
oil ratios to produce at the rates indicated 
by their initial sharing positiox , 
be excessive volumetric withdrawal from those 
wells. Accordingly, the ,'oard sets a maximum 
withdrawal of gas from each well in the second 
group equivalent to the amount of ga,s v/hich the 
well in the first group with the largest sharing 
position would produce if its gas-oil ratio were 
3000 cubic feet per barrel and it were produced at 
its initial sharing position.For example, if the 
largest sharing position of any well in the first 
group were five hundred barrels, the maximum gas 
displacement would be computed as 1,500,000 
cubic feet.The Board then divides the gas-oil 
ratio of each well in the second group into 
the maximum gas displacement (1,500,000 in the 
above illustration) in order to determine the 
maximum oil displacement allowable of such wells. 
The sharing position of any well, the displace¬ 
ment allowable of which is less than its 
sharing position, is the reduced displacement 
allowable. 

3. In some cases wells with individual char¬ 
acteristics have their sharing positions reduced 
to the amount the Board considers proper. 

4. The sum of the total reductions in initial 
sharing positions made as described under par¬ 
agraphs two a-nd three above are then added to 
the initial sharing positions of those wells 
with gas-oil ratios of less than 3000 cubic 
feet per barrel in proportion to the sharing 
position of each of such wells. 

New wells are given temporary quotas. The above procedure 

is subject to change as engineering practice indicates 

improvement in methods. (26) 

This chapter does not purport to be a summary of 

the facts presented to the McGillivray Commission. Neither 

does it give any of the conclusions reached by that 

Commission. We have taken some of the evidence which 

was presented and which had a bearing on the history of 


26 A.O.I., op.cit. pp. 239 - 240. 






103 


the oil industry in Turner Valley, and which seems not 
only of general interest hut which seemed essential to 
an understanding of some of the issues and problems 
involved in a discussion of that history. 

The investigation was of value if only because it 
resulted in a presentation of facts and figures and 
reasons which illustrate the multiplicity of the factors 
involved in a discussion of the problems of the oil in¬ 
dustry. A study of the report a.nd the evidence would 
dispel many popular misconceptions especially among those 
people who, when they see figures representing large 
sums of money, immediately leap to the conclusion that 
fraud, graft, extcrion, dishonesty and so forth, must 
be involved. 

It must be evident that the findings of the Com¬ 
mission were by no means in acc.ord with many popular 
preconceived notions a.nd that the evidence failed to 
justify the unspoken charges which prompted the inquiry. 
It showed, for instance, that the apparent millions 
being made by the oil companies resolved themselves into 
an extra cent or so per gallon of petrol; and that 
without that extra cent the companies would have had to 
suspend or curtail operations because they would have 
been operating on too small a margin. 

The Commission drew attention to the varied factor 













104 


which must be taken into consideration when fair and 
equitable conservation and prorationing legislation is 
contempiated. It demonstrated the necessity for having 
order and regulation in the oil industry from the first 
day a new field is proven. 

Alberta is very for tuna,te in many ways that there 
was such a time lag between the opening and development 
of her major oil fields. The necessity for legislative 
control of conservation and development v/as amply 
demonstarted by the history of the Turner Valley oil 
field. There was time to enact legislation and get it 
into smoothly functioning order before the other major 
oil fields were discovered and the major oil boom 
started. Otherwise the western Canadian oil industry 
might have found itself in as chaotic a state as char¬ 
acterized the history of many of the oil fields in 
the United States. 




. - 

. 

, 

. 

V . 


L , 


. 





105 


Chapter Seven 

Impact of the Oil Industry on the Community 
The oil industry has had a far-reaching influence 
on the Province of Alberta* Even more striking was its 
effect on the immediate localities in which oil was dis¬ 
covered. Although wells were successfully completed in 
other regions, Turner Valley was the major oil field of 
Alberta, indeed of Canada, for twenty five years. By 1925 
it had surpassed the Petrolia fields of Ontario in nat¬ 
ural gap production. Until the discovery and development 
of the Leduc and Redwater fields it produced over 90;^ 
of the naphtha and crude oil of Canada. With such a record 
the industry v/as bound to have an influence on the com¬ 
munity in which it was situated. 

The Valley lies some thirty miles south west of 
Calgary. It is about eighteen miles long and two broad. 
Drilling was confined in the early phases of its history 
to an area near Sheep River, a small stream which crosses 
it almost at right angles, to which drillers were att¬ 
racted by gas and oil seepages. This is the gas cap area, 
the 11 dome 11 of the underground mountain. The south end of 
the Va^lley was the primary crude oil producing area 
after the completion of the Turner Valley Royalties well, 
but the northern end was developed later, even more 
successfully* 






* 

T 

- « ■ ■ , 

' ' 

. 

, 

' 

, 

, 

,.. . ■ . ' : ' 

■ ■ . / . ' ■ 

■ . ■ • ' : ' 

« . . 

, 










105 


The Turner brothers from Scotland were among the 
first to settle there, and they gave their name to the 
valley. They arrived about the turn of the century and 
staged out their land. Robert Turner still ov/ns his ranch 
north east of the present oil field and can claim the 
distinction of being one of the few residents in the 
whole district who has had little to do with oil. (1) 

Other district pioneers took a much more active 
interest in oil field development. Messrs. Leeson and 
Lineham inaugurated a stage coach service from Black 
Diamond to Calgary in the early 1890*s. Lineham was very 
active in oil discovery and drilling in the Waterton- 
Pincher Creek area of the province in the first decade 
of this century. Although he was a landowner in the 
Turner Valley neighbourhood, oddly enough he took no 
part whatever in oil activities in the district. 

Much more fortunate and active was Mr. W.S. Herron. 
He was born in Gelest, Ontario, in 1870. In 1901 he came 
west and bought land at Okotoks. He became Turner Valley’s 
pioneer oil man in 1902 by acquiring the gas amid pet¬ 
roleum rights to a stretch of land. This land he leased 
to Calgary Petroleum Products Company, and on it the 
Dingman 1 (Royalite 1) well was drilled. When Calgary 
Petroleum Products was absorbed by Royalite in 1921, he 
became the largest private shareholder. By 1929 his 
interests were valued at one and a half million dollars. 




« 

. 


. 

■ 



* - 












. 




. 


* 































106 

He was a shareholder in Okalta and Mcleod, and President 
of Herron Petroleums. This latter firm also drilled in the 
Jumping Pound area west of Calgary. He died in 1939 
after having acquired the nickname of "No Sell" Herron 
hecause of his repeated refusals to sell his holdings 
in 1929 and following years despite decidedly bull 
markets. (2) 

Equally fortunate were the Spooner brothers. They 
came west as farmer-ranchers to the district in 1900 and 
were of the few who filed on oil rights. Some others, for 
example Messrs. Ohlson and Coppich, bought the oil rights 
with their land from the Canadian Pacific Railway Com¬ 
pany. The Canadian Pacific Railway retained the rights 

(3) 

on much of its acreage - a.nd collected royalties of 10-^. 

No account of the history of Turner Valley would 
be complete without mention of Mr. James H. Lowery a.nd 
the R.A.Browns. 

Mr. Lowery, President of Home Oil Company, was 
responsible for the drilling of the wells which started 
the oil boom of 1929. Home Oil Company was incorporated 
with a Dominion charter in September 1929, and drilled 

1 Edmonton Journal 25 February 1929. 

2 Ibid. 2 July 1939 and Calgary Herald 6 July 1929. 

3, Calgary Herald 6 July 1929. By 1929 it was collecting 
royalties from Royalite 4,7,9, 13 and 14. 






















c ( t 






107 

the first Home wells which successfully opened a new 
major producing area of the field. 

When the new area was proven he sold his interests 
to the Royalite Oil Company. Legal disputes during the 
early 1930»s led to his re-entering the oil business with 
a second Home Oil Company and actively embarking on an ex¬ 
tensive drilling programme. He concentrated on the north 
end of the field, previously' undeveloped because other 
oil experts had deemed it unlikely to be oil-bearing. 

The prolific and profitable Home-Millarville wells 
resulted. 

Today the company, in addition to being the 
largest oil producer in the Valley, controls practically 
all the undeveloped proven oil reserves in that area. 

It has under lease approximately 27,000 acres in North 
Turner, plus a 50^ interest in a further 1000 acres. 

As at 30 November 1949 the company had thirty three 
producing wells in the Turner Valley, an interest in a 
further twelve wells, and two wells being drilled. 

Messrs. R.A.Brown, Sr. and Jr., showed a similar 
disregard for the pessimistic advice of oil experts, 
and were similarly rewarded with good fortune. 

They purchased the previously abandoned Turner 
Valley Royalties well in south Turner Valley and drilled 
it to completion. Their success ushered in the major 
crude oil boom of 1936 and the real beginning of Turner 











i • 





. X 








■ 












108 

Valley as a crude oil producing field. It cannot be too 
highly emphasized that it was their enterprise and 
initiative and willingness to risk major financial losses 
which was responsible for the huge success of the final 
phase of the Valley 1 s history. They entered an area 
adjudged by the other oil experts as unlikely to be 
productive, and continued drilling deeper into the lime¬ 
stone contrary to existing practice. The cumulative 
total of the crude oil production of the field is the 
monument to their pioneering faith. 

Others were not so foresighted and felt their 
loss and disappointment keenly - the fate of the majority 
of residents of any oil field area. Fred Stanley and 
John Creighton of Turner Valley took the issue to the 
courts. They fought for natural and petroleum rights 
up to the Privy Council, unsuccessfully. (4) 

One landowner of the vicinity had the oil rights 
given to him. In May 1936 it was announced that drilling 
had resumed on the BP Ranch near High River, and that 
traces of oil had been found at 3200 feet. A few days 
later it was revealed that in 1930 the Provincial gov¬ 
ernment had passed an Order-in-Council granting ^ninety- 
nine year lease on the mineral rights to the Prince of 
Wales to prevent drilling on his land witnout his per¬ 
mission. The ranch is near the Turner /alley jtoyo.lwj.es 


4. Calgary Herald 6 July 1929. 














. 



















109 


crude oil well. However the drilling was discontinued 
again in October 1936 for lack of funds. Oil indications 
were so unfavourable that it has never been resumed. (5) 

These were the effects of the industry on the 
most fortunate. The majority were affected much more 
indirectly and in the same manner in which any permanent 
industry reacts on the locality in which it is situated. 
Turner Valley was originally a. farming and ranching 
district and as in all farming communities the work was 
of a seasonal character. The oil industry provided al¬ 
ternative employment for the slack seasons. Its attract¬ 
iveness drew many of the younger generation into per¬ 
manent employment. This is indicated, if in no other 
way by the relative frequency with which the Black 
Diamond Flare, the local newspaper, reported accidents 
to oil field workers. In many cases the injured were 
referred to as sons of old time residents of the 
district. 

After the discovery and development of the crude 
oil producing area jubilant editorials frequently referred 
to the new prospects of the region. Permanent capital 
was being invested and this was regarded as a guarantee 
of permanent employment, (6) Concurrently, of course, 
protests were being raised against the importation of 

outside workers. It was felt tha t the nev, oil c o mpanies 

5 Edmonton Journal 18 Kay, 27 Kay and 2 October 1936 
6. Black Diamond Flare, 19^November 1937. The FIace 
will be referred to hereafter as B.D.F,. 









. 








W 0 


fu 

, > 

• - - 



110 


from the United States especially, were bringing in their 
own labourers and officials instead of utilizing to 
capacity the local labour force. This unemployment ap¬ 
parently caused quite high feelings at the time, but it 
died down as the drilling programme expanded. (7) 

There were two sides to the question. The Prov¬ 
incial government announced in May 1937 that it was going 
to enforce a forty hour week in the industry. The oil 
companies immediately protested that in that case they 
would have to import qualified and competent men from 
the United States* The men were dissatisfied too. Shorter 
hours meant.shorter pay cheques, and they were quite 
willing to work the longer hours. Besides, well drilling 
in particular had to be worked in shifts and on a daily 
basi 3 . it could not be suspended either over week ends 
or over night. In June the government rescinded its 
order, but it had not given up the point. Finally, in 
December 1937, W.D.King, Deputy Minister of Dines and 
Resources, announced that an eight hour day, forty eight 
hour week was definitely to be enforced. (8) 

The proposed conservation and prorationing laws 
were feared too. It was believed that they would restrict 
drilling and so lead to unemployment. Actually the effect 
was the converse. This was realized later and the news- 


6 

7 


B.D.F. 13 August 1937 

Edmonton Journal 5 May, 2 June and 4 December 


1937. 







^ J 

■ 

* 






. 

-« 

t 

... 1 . 

- 




, 


. . ..... 


• VI 


t 




■ ■'■■.. 4 . 




i 













. 








i 






, 

• - , 

■ . " ■ 









Ill 


paper editorials began to demand more conservation # not 
less, to increase output because more conservation necess» 
itated more drilling to meet peak demands. ( 9 ) 

Efforts were made from time to time to unionize 
the oil field workers. The early proposals, dating from 
depression days, were rejected for two reasons. The first 
was that the organizer sent down from Calgary was Pat 
Lenihan, a locally noted communist leader. His efforts on 
the workers* behalf were so little appreciated that out 
of the total oil field working force only a devils dozen 
turned out for his meeting. The additional reason was the 
same as the one which caused rejection of the government 
proposals for shorter hours. Workers feared that union¬ 
ization would lead to less working time and smaller pay 
cheques. The determining factor was that oil field wages 
were relatively high, and the men felt that union dec¬ 
isions would only lead to the same cake being cut into 
smaller pieces. However, general w r ar time prosperity 
and higher levels of wages in competitive fields of em¬ 
ployment led to Oilworkers Union #1 being organized 
and receiving its charter in 1942. (10) 

Population fluctuated in the Valley with the in¬ 
tensity of the drilling programmes, although there was 
a steady undercurrent of growth as well. Even after wells 
are completed a limited number of men are needed to 


9 B.D.E.. 3 December 1937 and 3 March 1939. 

10 Ibid. 11 August 1942. 







- J 










! ■ 







112 


service and maintain them. The various, scrubbing, 
refinery, separator and absorption plants all were main¬ 
tained by their quotas of men. As the number of plants 
increased so, naturally, did the number of men (and their 
families) needed to operate them. These men in turn drew 
others not so directly concerned with the oil industry, to 
provide the ordinary services and amenities of town and 
country life, and villages evolved in the course of time. 

Black Diamond and Okotoks were the original towns. 
Black Diamond, as the name suggests, was primarily a 
coal mining centre, while Qkotoks had the advantage of 
being on a railroad. Both, however were too distant 
from the Valley for convenience, and the town of Turner 
Valley grew up to serve local needs. 

After the discovery of crude oil in 1936 other 
villages .sprang up almost overnight; Longview, Royalties, 
Kartell, Litle New York and Little Chicago. The latter 
two names perhaps reflect the presence of the newly 
arrived United States oil companies with their American 
staffs. These villages: were built with almost fantastic 
speed. The Black Diamond 71are, a weekly, reported new 
buildings begun - houses, stores, dance halls, restaurants- 
with almost every issue for the three year period 1S37 - 
1939, An interesting comment made, which gives an idea 
of the original nature of the population as well'as of 




« 


. 





c 













t 


ti 



< 



113 

the type of enterprise which first appears in such booms, 
was that over half of the buildings of these villages 
in their early stages were "restaurants of various degrees 
of respectability." With time , of course, the relative 
proportions changed to permanent housing with more per¬ 
manent residents. While it lasted the building boom wa,s 
almost as important as oil production to the economy of 
the Valley (11). Gas and electricity were available in 
all these villages almost from the first. By 1946 Turner 
Valley town had advanced to the stage at which it was 
financially possible to build and install a waterworks 
system.(12) 

An excellent indication of the growth and perman¬ 
ence of population is afforded by the increasing number 
of children in the schools. The problems which follow 
sudden shifts of population in the boom periods are also 
evident. Prior to 1929 there were several rural and 
village sc?aools; Turner Valley, Black Diamond, Glenmede, 
Uphill, and Lineham. The gr th of population in the 
Valley had been relatively constant until that. time. 

V'ith the boom of 1928 - 1929, and the consequent great 
influx of men and their families, the conditions changed 
rapidly. Glenmede school, which had twelve pupils when 
school closed in June 1929, had seventy six in September. 

11 3.D.F.13 August 1937 and 21 January 1944. 

12 Ibid. 15 March 1936. 






, 







114 


In Bleck Diamond the schools worked two shifts daily, 
and in addition the Community Hall and the Church were 
utilized as extra classrooms. The school trustees were 
in a dilemma; was the population increase merely a 
transient phase, or was it to he permanent? They judged 
correctly and formed a consolidated school district, 
with ampler buildings, out of the districts mentioned 
above. (13) 

The same problem developed in south Turner Valley 
after the discovery boom of 1936. Again it was adequate 
school building space which was lacking, but the problem 
was mitigated by the fact that the officials had time 
to build schools while the villages themselves were 
being built. Even then future growth was under-estimated. 
Late in 1943 south Turner Valley students staged a 
H strike”, complaining of their teachers and of inad¬ 
equate facilities. (14) 

A sore point with Turner Valley residents from 
the first was the lack of road and rail facilities. As 
was mentioned earlier Turner Valley is several miles from 
the railroad, and nothing was ever done to improve the 
rail connections. Until 1930 all mineral rights, and 
therefore royalties, were under the control of the 
Dominion government. The Provincial authorities argued 
that since they received no direct return ±rom Turne- 

13. B.D.E.. 12 February 1941. 

14 ibid. 21 January 1944. 









. 








115 


Valley industry they could not treat the area, as far as 
road construction and improvement went, any differently 
from any other area of the province. Even after the 
control of natural resources was turned over to the 
province in 1930 the severity of the depression prevented 
the government from allocating funds for road improvement, 
and as late as October 1937 complaints were raised that 
Turner Valley had no properly gravelled roads. (15) 
Shortly afterwards the government announced plans to 
rebuild and maintain the oil field roads. (16) Observers 
noted that at the time of the announcement, recall 
proceedings were being initiated against the sitting 
M.L.A., who was the provincial Premier. The plans 
apparently were not carried out to the satisfaction of 
Valley residents, beacause as late as Septembe 1929, 
when the war became the main topic of comment, the local 
newspaper was constantly voicing pleas for better 
roads. (17) 

The above paragraphs have as their source the 
issues of the Black Diamond Plare. This paper was car¬ 
rying on a vendetta against the new provincial govern¬ 
ment, and its tone and its facts were highly coloured. 

In any case all local newspapers constantly carry pleas 
for better roads and transportation facilities. 

Actually the Municipal District of Stocklands 

was perhaps the richest in the province and its roads 


15 B.D.P.. 3 October 1937 












* 

. I 

■ 

< 

, 



' 








. 


* 

. 

. 

. 


. : ' ", I v • . 


■ . 


< 


« 






'. , , ■. . . 1 ■ • ci 

* 

■ : ■ t? v 

’ ' ; * * ; . ■ ■ v • ■ , ■ 

. 

. 

. 






116 


in the 1930*s were far superior to those in les 3 
favoured areas. Of course traffic was heavy and main¬ 
tenance a problem. But the Municipal District had a 
source of revenue, unavailable to other municipalities, 
in the oil field properties of the various companies 
and it used this tax revenue for the betterment and main¬ 
tenance of the roads. A very good road was built to 
give direct connection with Calgary. It branched from 
the Macleod trail at Midnapore. The Turner Valley - 
Calgary road was perhaps the busiest in the province in 
its hey-day in both numbers and weight of traffic, and 
it is not to be wondered at if the effects of the 
traffic were only too apparent,expecially during the 
wet seasons. 

Oil investments a,re financially risky. Not less 
risky are drilling for oil and handling it afterwards, 
and periodically, despite all pre'cautions workers are hurt 
some fatally. Reading through the pages of the Black 
Diamond Flare one is struck by the frequency of these 
accidents. Of course, like aeroplane disasters, they are 
more likely to be newsworthy than their frequency relative 
to that of other occupations actually justifies. 

Fire hazards are also greater. Especially during 
the building boom periods they seemed to occur with 

Footnotes from the previous page: 

16 B.D.F.. 15 October 1937. 

17 Ibid. 18 September 1939 








£ 



. 







* 


■ 


« ej u- 









■ 













117 

alarming regularity. Partly this was caused by the fact 
that gas pressures in the mains were not kept constant, 
and sudden increases in pressure, particularly in the 
winter months when home owners were absent, caused most 
of the fires. (18) Later pressure regulators were in¬ 
stalled and the incidence of fires became less frequent. 

Turner Valley was a relatively prosperous region 
even in the depression but this prosperity did not 
extend to all local and municipal governments. Black 
Diamond and Turner Valley (town) had been incorporated 
as towns in the 1920*s but they became insolvent during 

the depression and had to be administered from Fdmonton. 
(19) 

Hot until 1939 did they reorganize and recover local 
autonomy.(20) Another indication of financial stringency 
was the number of tax sales of lots, buildings and equip¬ 
ment, because of failure to meet tax assessments.(21) 
Stocklands M.D. showed an improving financial position 
year by year, especially after 1939.(22) In that year 
it instituted a five dollar poll tax to compensate for 
the services it was affording to the more transient 
of its population (23) 


18 

B.D.F. 

31 December 1937 


w 

Ibid. 

17 February 1939 


20 

Ibid. 

17 March 1939 


21 

Ibid. 

17 March 1939, 7 November 1942, 

20 December 

22 

Ibid. 

24 February 1939 

1942. 

23 

Ibid. 

17 March 1939. 








* 

C 

■ 

_ 

- 

, 

< .. ... 

- t 

* •" i ' < 

■ 

o,/j ■. 


, 


. 


« 

‘ 






118 


Without having been a resident of the district 
it is almost impossible to recapture the spirit of the 
social life of the community. As far as one can judge 
from the pages of the newspaper it followed the general 
pattern of any other western, more or less rural, region. 
Lest what we have already mentioned about the transient 
nature of part of the population instill any false ideas 
as to the type of men attracted to the area, we repeat 
a by-line from the newspaper which contains essential 
truth in it. One young lady says to another following a 
public dance, "I didn*t know a "roughneck" could be a 
gentleman. 1 ' A "roughneck" is any member of a drilling 
crew, and the term has no reference whatever to social 
habits. 

It is true that the type of work attracted some 
undesirable elements. Gambling apparently flourished 
more or less openly, and morality was not always of the 
highest standard. But these are by-the-ways, common in 
other communities as well, and of a type which malce the 
headlines anyway. Most of the social notes, in the Flare 
recount the usual bridge parties, dances, ball games, 
and so forth which mark the area as typically western. 
Turner Valley Oilers, the local hockey team, carried 
the district colours over the province following the 
winter of 1938, but the team was disbanded during the war. 








i 


. 
















■ 








•: 








i.: > 









119 

Apparently the Black Diamond Stampede is an annual event 
of major importance locally, it must have had a run of 
ill luck for the ten years, 1936 - 1946, that the 
Black Diamond PIare was Being published; it seemed to 
be rained out, or postponed because of rain, nearly every 
year. 

One local event or celebration must be unique. 

On Completion of drilling a well is '‘cemented in"; 
cement is run outside of the casing to prevent the 
escape of gas or oil. This is a lengthy process often 
taking two or three days of continuous pouring. After 
this task is completed and the valves are opened to 
test production it is the custom for the management to 
"broach a barrel" for the drilling crew. And the "celeb¬ 
rations" continue until the next well is "spudded in."(24) 

Perhaps the most significant fact about the 
history of the Valley, and one of which Albertans may well 
be proud, is that it was local oil men and local pioneers 
who were responsible for initiating the various phases 
of the fieldte history. Eerron and Dingman had 

the faith and courage to begin drilling in 1913- 1914 
and were responsible for establishing the field. Dingman 
and Royalite completed the Royalite 4 well in 1924 and 
ushered in the gas-naphtha phase of the Valley 1 s history. 


24 B.D.P.. 10 September 1937 










; 



- 


. :j •" 

. 


, 

.. 



, ; . . » 

• .1 

• - . . 

t . 





120 


Major Lowery extended the field with his Home Oil wells 
in 1929. R.A.Brown proved the south end of the field in 
1936 and began the crude oil boom. Major Lov/ery extended 
his operations into the far north end of the field in the 
late 1930*s and early 1940’s and so developed the major 
crude oil area. 

These men were all Calgarians. They extended their 
field of operations often in the face of contrary tech¬ 
nical advice. Eastern capital flowed in to further 
develop the field; but it is significant that it only 
came after the local pioneers had paved and proved the 
way. In more than one sense the history of Turner Valley 
is the history of these men who were willing to take the 
risks and who were fortunate to earn the rewards. Turner 
Valley history is the monument to their faith a.nd 
courage. 









_ 

s ■ 

- 







121 


All official figures used in this thesis and in these 
appendices are supplied from publications of the Alberta 
natural Gas and Petroleum Conservation Board. 


Append ix "A" 

Turner Vall ey Petroleum Production 1914 - 1949 


1914-21 

56,599 

parrels 

1922 

15,355 

ii 

1923 

M 

O 

O 

o 

05 

ii 

1924 

14,049 

it 

1925 

168,643 

n 

1926 

213,617 

ii 

1927 

329,078 

n 

1928 

481,357 

n 

1929 

981,221 

ti 

1930 

1,364,584 

it 

1931 

1,372,625 

ii 

1932 

875,810 

ii 

1933 

976,707 

ii 

1934 

1,232,662 

it 

1935 

1,227,012 

ii 


1936 

1,287,238 

Barrels 

1937 

2,767,221 

ii 

1938 

6,691,075 

it 

1939 

7,556,029 

ii 

1940 

8,452,527 

it 

1941 

9,830,343 

n 

1942 

10,003,935 

ii 

1943 

9,452,697 

ii 

1944 

8,326,314 

ii 

1945 

7,422,061 

ii 

1946 

6,371,572 

n 

1947 

, 5,449,575 

n 

1948 

4,900,739 

n 

1949 

3,595.148 

ii 


(10 Months) 







J 



<5 t 


122 


Appendix ”B” 

Footage Drilled Annually in Tu rner Valley 


1914-27 

115,391 

1938 

303,112 

1928 

53,340 

1939 

281,274 

1929 

240,020 

1940 

297,018 

1930 

123,583 

1941 

377,860 

1951 

61,939 

1942 

348,772 

1932 

13,096 

1943 

244,535 

1933 

51,806 

1944 

266,145 

1934 

78,278 

1945 

159,049 

1935 

27,462 

1946 

77,997 

1936 

52,470 

1947 

78,338 

1937 

245,531 

1948 

69,914 

1928 

111,160 

1949 

36,940 


Appendix 

«c M 


These are not 

typical wells; 

: that is, 

they are among 


the major producing wells of the oilfield* They were 
chosen as examples to illustrate the rate of decline in 
production, Royalite 4, Turner Valley Royalties, and 
Home-Millarville are the "discovery” wells. Model 1 is 
interesting "because of the consistency of its performance. 
The figures also show how increased production was 
allowed after 1940. 

















123 


Annual total production frigures from selected Turner 
Valley wells illustrating the rate of decline in 
productio n_ 



Royalite 

4. 

Turner Valley. 

Home-Fill. 

4. 

Model 1 

1925 

169,008 

• 

Royalities 

• 


• 


1926 

200,470 

• 


• 


• 


1927 

217,539 

• 


• 


• 


1928 

199,147 

• 


• 


• 


1929 

111,947 

• 


• 


• 


1930 

22,673 

• 


• 


• 

40,900 

1931 

3,346 

• 


• 


• 

63,969 

1932 

Closed 

• 


• 


• 

52,409 

1933 


• 




• 

47,639 

1934 


• 


• 


• 

51,435 

1935 


• 


• 


• 

51,831 

1936 


• 

153,142 

• 


• 

53,165 

193? 


• 

244,617 

• 


• 

49,632 

1938 


• 

99,497 

• 


• 

44,382 

1939 


• 

51,122 

• 


• 

37,036 

1940 


• 

38,876 

• 

138,505 

• 

38,107 

1941 


• 

24,981 

• 

118,192 

• 

34,185 

1942 


« 

24,793 

• 

80,337 

• 

52,533 

1943.. 








1948 


• 

2,493 

• 

29,442 

♦ 

5,358 

Total 

924,120 

• 

736,826 

• 

354,250 

• 

671,920 





















t 


< 


* 


< 







124 


Appendix 11 p M 

Average daily production for the month of January of 
some typical Turner Va.lley wells. This table also illus¬ 
trates the rate of decline in production. 


£ & £ 1 3ter. P ac . 4 Davies 2 


Jan* 1937 

1,144 

£arrels 

1,063 

Barrels 

1,339 

Barrels 

Jan. 1938 

425 

ii 

494 

ii 

691 

ii 

Jan. 1939 

184 

ii 

210 

it 

240 

n 

Jan. 1940 

189 

it 

122 

ii 

18 c 

ii 














' 






















125 


Appendix “ E 11 

Cumulative production figures of some of the major 
Turner Valley wells (in "barrels of 35 Imperial gallons). 


Dalhousie 5 
Home 1,2,6, 

Advance 5A 
Foothills 1 
Royalite 6 
Davies 2 
Sterling-Pac. 4 
T.V.Royalties 
Deep Oils 
Sundance 
Vulcan-Brown 
Extension 1 
Home-Millarville 2 
Royalite 36 
Atlas-Brovrn Dorn. #3 


1927-39 

85,850 

1927-39 

60,450 

1930-41 

162,941 

1928-42 

232,755 

1928-37 

139,772 

1937-48 

654,798 

1937-48 

694,876 

1937-48 

736,826 

1938-48 

601,298 

1938-48 

501,875 

1938-48 

829,433 

1939-48 

621,899 

1939-48 

1,492,138 

1939-48 

627,371 

1942- 

216,295 


Shallow Crude 


Naphtha 


Deep Crude 























Appendix "F 11 


126 


Daily averages After Plowing In 


Daviees2 

1957-8 

..T.V.Hoy 
1936-7 

• DeeifiBls 
1938-9 

..Sundance.Extension 
1939-40 1939-40 

. Home-Mill 
1939-40 

Jan. 


• 

• 


• 9 

586 

. 943 

Feb. 


• 

• 


• 9 

356 

. 128 

Mar. 


. 

• 


• 9 

309 

. 371 

Apr. 


• 

• 


9 9 

432 

. 515 

May. 


• 

• 


. 737 

541 

. 649 

Jun. 


. 796 

• 


. 463 

641 

. 907 

Jul. 


. 829 

• 


. 1125 

662 

. 972 

Aug. 


.817 

• 


.1397 

514 

. 682 

Spe. 

1513 

. 799 

• 


. 1599 

419 

. 685 

Oct. 

1580 

. 759 

• 

516 

. 754 

524 

. 816 

Nov. 

1220 

. 726 

• 

386 

. 497 

494 

. 727 

Dec. 

1074 

. 675 

• 

330 

. 414 

329 

. 406 

Ave. 

1339 

. 770 

• 

399 

. 945 

489 

. 684 

Jan. 

1371 

. 674 

• 

324 

. 419 

284 

. 298 

Feb. 

971 

. 634 

• 

217 

. 621 

385 

. 554 

Mar. 

974 

. 604 

• 

237 

. 589 

257 

. 552 

Apr. 

871 

. 587 

• 

314 

. 477 

329 

. 500 

May. 

800 

. 555 

• 

430 

. 544 

325 

. 427 

Jun. 

. 598 

.1003 

• 

544 

. 794 

334 

. 428 

Jul. 

651 

.1203 

• 

540 

. 706 

407 

. 925 

Aug. 

766 

. 955 

• 

432 

. 447 

390 

. 1169 

Sep. 

619 

. 716 

• 

394 

. 377 

364 

. 1186 

Oct. 

325 

. 480 

• 

480 

. 398 

333 

. 1127 

Nov. 

219 

. 356 

• 

462 

.369 

319 

. 1104 

Dec. 

215 

. 496 

« 

233 

. 266 

278 

. 615 

Ave. 

691 

. 695 

9 

385 

. 496 

335 

. 754 























Appendix "G u 

Profit on marketing operations 1938 


127 


Net profit on marketing operations . $ 589,080>80 - 

Investment in marketing, bdgs., equip.,etc.. 4,433,498.32 

Less depreciation. 2,245,062.68 

Net value. 2,190,435.66 

Add working capital. 1,491,199.27 

Total capital. 3,681,634.93 

Return on investment. 10.57^ 

Eofit on refini ng o ft er a c tions 1958 
Total cost of refining and blending 67,116,637 gallons of 

crude oil and naphtha.$ 874,542,12 

Total cost of finished products. 4,327,664.13 

Total sales price of finished products. 4,811,546.29 

Profit on refining. 483,682.16 

Less income tax @ 22^.. 106 ,410.08 

Net refinery income. 377,272.08 

Total cost of Imperial Oil Refinery. 5,289,268,42 

Less accumulated deprecation 1924-38. 3,444,126.25 

Present value 1938. 1,845,142.17 

Add refinery inventories. 976,152.28 

Add inventories of materials and supplies.. 114,303.60 

Cash, Accts. receivable, working' capital... 40,4 55.90 

Total investment. 2,976,032.01 

Return on investment. 12.68/6 































<t t 




« < 















Appendix H H t> 


128 


Formations 

The pre 
Belly River 


sj&nLJami. aurffiffe 


Sandstones 

and 

Shales 


Transitional zone 


Upper Alberta 


(Upper Benton 
including 
cardium) 

1900-1950 


Bark shales 

> 


Cardium s^nd-s. 
Pebble bed 


Upper 

Cretaceous 


lower Alberta 
(Benton) 

850 


Blairmore 

1200 


Kootenay 

200 

Fernie 

220 


Palaeozoic 

1900 - 


Main crude oil 


indicates the 






<AAa&A£> 


Bark shales 
Thin sandstone 

,SrU 


Stockmans ss. 

McBougall-S. ss, 
Sandy shales 
Sandstone 
. \ Coal 

Home snads 
Calcareous zone 
Balhousie sand - 

Sandstone 

Brown sands and 
shales 

Belernnite zone 


Lower 
Cre taceous 


Mississippian, 
Bundle, or 
Madison 
limestone 

one 


Carboniferous 




presence of oil or gas in all zones 























I 





B2SV75& 











