
fry waffi 
• ; : 

For Reference 





S§fj*§l!Pltt -If %*' - A 

NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


■BM&rasStf.Qlifrr* vV<v 

1 1 



Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Byrne, T.C. * 

The Ukranian community in North 
Central Alberta. 1937. 















0X HUBRIS 

mwntsMMis 

aittmaiRsis 














u 


il 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/ukrainiancommuniOOtcby 


TEH UIOUINIAM COMMUNITY 


in 

mnm GMTIUL AlBSrm 


A Thesis 


by 


T*Q#iiyrne 

Presented in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of M.A* University 
of Alberta in addition to four courses with the 
departments of History and Economics. 


April 10, l937 









Chapter. pages 

I introduction— ------- - - i-6 

II Historical origins---- 7-25 

III rhe Ukrainian Community in Alberta—--26-41 

11J) Geography~lmmigration-Lettlement-----26-33 

12) Agricultural development--- 32-39 

13) Urban centres-----—---39-41 

1/ Ukrainian religions------------ 42-62 

V Conflicting Ideals of Ukrainian Leaders-63-81 

VI Come thoughts on Assimilation---------82-95 

oonclusion 

Ihe Ukrainian as a Gitisen—-------96-98 


Maps 


She Ukraine in nurope--------opposite page 7 

Ihe Ukrainian Community in 

alberta-------opposite page 26 






















lUi'HOJU’CTlOll 


i recall clearly childhood memories ol Ukrainians who 
were known to me then as "Russians" or "Galicians". My home 
was in the community of Waskatenau. rrom my father's farm 
on the north bank of the Saskatchewan, I could see the farm 
houses of Ukrainian settlers south of the river. i could 
see also a church with a gray granite dome that stood out 
clearly against the sky line, occasionally the "Galicians” 
crossed the river to visit the stores in our settlement. 

She men wore sheepskin coats and the women brightly coloured 
head shawls. Shey talked an unfamiliar guttural language 
and ate long, evil-smelling sausages. 

Geographically, the two settlements were separated by 
the river; socially they were separated uy language, by 
customs, and uy race. Our settlement knew little about the 
people across the river. She general attitude was that the 
"Russians" or"Galicians ,l were undoubtedly good workers, but 
that they were not "White” and were certainly very inferior 
to English speaking people, une might condescendingly speak 
to w John ,, or "Mike” in bastard English which the uanadian 
fancied was "Russian", .out any other form of social inter¬ 
course was unthinkaule. xhe Galician was presumably dirty; 
he smelled powerfully of garlic and treated his women in a 
way which did not meet the approval of our people. Stories 
were circulated about his under-ventilated house, which. 




















quite often, sheltered pigs and chickens as well as human 
beings. Phe prevailing opinion, right or wrong, was that 
the Ualician was an untrustworthy and vindictive person. 

Much of this opinion arose from racial prejudice. 

Much of it wa 3 justified by the exceedingly low standard of 
living which the Ukrainian endured during his early years in 
Alberta. uur settlers knew nothing of standards of living 
among Ukrainian peasants in Austria. Phey had no conception 
of the stolid endurance and the single-mindedness of im¬ 
migrants who had chosen uanada as an escape from these in¬ 
tolerable standards. fhey had not yet realised the kindly 
hospitality and good cheer of their Ukrainian neighbors, nor 
was there any way for them'to understand for the language 
barrier was insurmountable. 

My first knowledge of Ukrainians as individuals came 
in l9£5 with a teaching appointment in aa&way. 1 taught 
Ukrainian children for four years. 1 found them easy to 
manage and intent on learning English, though they were more 
likely to excel in rapid calculation than in English com¬ 
position. Phe parents were flatteringly respectful to "Mr. 
Professor". 

In spite of this four-year contact I learned very 
little about Ukrainian society. it may be that 1 was un¬ 
observant and indifferent. If so, my indifference was shar¬ 
ed by most English speaking uanadians, even by those in 
closest contact with Ukrainians. 1 knew that clash of 




















opinion and strife existed within the fauric of Ukrainian 
society, but 1 was unaware of its origin, i had heard of 
Ukrainian nationalism but like other English speaking uanad 
ians l considered it only an unholy desire of Ukrainians to 
be un-Ganadian. 


In 1932, I submitted the project oi this essay to the 


university of Alberta as part of a programme of studies 




for the degree of Master of arts. 1 spent the summer of 


1936 in the Ukrainian settlements, lo overcome the dif¬ 


ficulties of language, i had the assistance of Steve Kaspar, 


an amiable young Ukrainian teacher, with a 1928 rord road¬ 
ster, we set out to cover the ukraini&n community, from ited- 


water in the west to Myrnam in the east. 1 had prepared a 


list of thirty questions about /ligion, nationalism, history 
political affiliations and financial status, about Ukrainian 
views on education, on marriage, and assimilation. With 
monotonous regularity we submitted these questions to every 
one we interviewed and tabulated their answers. We^visited 
over a hundred and fifty Ukrainians of all classes, from 
farm labourers to professional men. In some cases the intern 


views lasted several hours; in others only fifteen minutes 


nearly every one was cordial and sincerely anxious to help. 


it is true that some were suspicious and accused us of be¬ 
ing government agents, nut generally absolute strangers 
talked quite confidentially after a preliminary explanation. 
Itwas an agreable and entertainiag summer. 

-3- 











































, 









. 

' 















































. 







1 

It was not long before 1 realized that 1 had held 
uninformed opinions about Ukrainian society in alberta. it 
is difficult to have even a cursory knowledge of the origins 
of a people whose history 3-ies buried in the story of at 
least three nations and who have never, except for brief 
periods, had a government, that they might call their own. 

Phe history of the Ukrainians has been submerged for centur¬ 
ies in that of nussia, of Austria and of Poland, xet in 
spite of their subjection, or perhaps because of it, Ukrain¬ 
ians have cherished their identity and have always offered 
sturdy resistance to the European nations which have tried 
to assimilate them. Phe Ukrainians have been truthfully 
called the “Irish” of Central Europe• lacking a comprehen¬ 
sive knowledge of their historical background, uanadians 
are handicapped in forming fair judgments on the matters 
which agitate Ukrainian society. We are likely to judge 
harshly movements which we do not fully comprehend. 

Phis is most unfortunate. Phe Ukrainians have come 
to live with us and they are here to stay. Phey are the 
fourth largest racial group in alberta, the third in uanada. 
With the passage of time their blood will fuse with ours; 
the genes of this Slavic race crossed with those of the 
English, of the Irish and of the scotch will produce the 
Canadian of the next century, xhe Ukrainians now constitute 
a major problem in assimilation. If we do not want repeated 
here the story of the Polish and the Russian failures, we 


-4- 




























. 


. 

. 



' 








■ i-.. 


; ..... 

































shall have to approach that problem with tact and forbear¬ 
ance. We must deal with these highly sensitive, and emotion, 
al people in the most enlightened manner, if my study con¬ 
tributes even a little towards this enlightenment, it may 
be justified. 

ihe first chapter sketches the story of the Ukrainians 
from its early beginnings to its denouement following the 
world war. 1 have taken this material from such sources as 
are available here in English and jjrencn. In the second 
chapter, 1 have fixed the geographical limits of the Ukrain¬ 
ian community in Alberta and have told the story of Ukrain¬ 
ian settlement in this province, Ihe core of the essay is 
in the third and fourth chapters which deal with the re¬ 
ligious and secular divisions within Ukrainian society, no¬ 
where is opinion so divided or recrimination^ so bitter as 
among Ukrainians. The reason for this internal dissension 
lies in the national movement, dealt wi£h in chapter four. 
The chapter indicates the ferment of Ideas in a remote 
colony caused by the major dissensions among Ukrainians in 
Europe, fhe essay closes with a chapter on assimilation 
which is discussed in the light of material already present¬ 
ed. 

My study lays stress on the social organization of the 
Ukrainian community and hence offers by no means a complete 
picture. Ihe economic side of the picture is inadequate. 

1 found it difficult to get accurate information about the 


-5 
































. 






- 






























, 

■ 





















liabilities and assets of farmers. r £he figures which I did 
secure were not taken from areas widely enough distributed 

in the ulock to be of any statistical value, such conclus- 

. 

ions as 1 have made on the position of the Ukrainian during 
the depression are drawn from observation and from conver¬ 
sation with those intimate with Ukrainian agronomy. 

I am indebted to the following who have been most 
helpful in giving information—to Dr.holubitsky, to Messrs. 
Do resky, Bssow, Lazo'r^vich, Luchko vich, hupchenko and idupsky 
and to numerous other Ukrainians whom I am proud to number 
among my friends. Mr. O.h. Young* s book "The Ukrainian 




Canadians” has oeen frequently consulted, professor 
of the University of Saskatchewan offered many useful 
gestions at the outset of my investigation. phes$ I 
gratefully acknowledge. 


Simpson 
sug- 


-6- 














. 


( ( ' f 


































’■ 




























/3/^c^ ^ 

















Chapter il 

hissohical oaiGiflS 


! 


Phe word Ukraine means border land and it is applied 
to the land bordering on the .black sea* Ethnographically 
the Ukraine covers an area of 338,031 square miles and 
stretches from the Carpathians to the Caucasus, at the 
present time the territory occupied by Ukrainians is divided 
among four states; two-thirds of it lies in Russia, one- 
sixth in Poland, the rest in rtoumania and Czechoslovakia• 
Agriculture is the basic industry but mineral deposits also 
make the region especially desirable, thirty-eight million 
Ukrainians, the largest minority group in Europe, inhabit 
the territory--31 millions in the soviet Ukraine, 5 millions 
in Polish Ukraine and the remainder in Gzecho-Slovakia and 
rtoumania. 

.before the war the Ukraine was divided between two 
nations, rtussia held 302,734 square miles while the remain¬ 
ing 29,297 square miles lay within the Austrian iSmpire. uf 
the 35,000,000 (approximate] European Ukrainians, only three 
and one half millions were under Austrian rule, fhese lived 
mainly in the provinces of Eastern Galicia, now part of 
Poland, and bukovina, now Roumanian territory. [The Ukrain¬ 
ian immigrant to uanada came from the Austrian Ukrainefrom 
Galicia and bukovina. Phis explains the cohfused ideas as 
to his true nationality, since he was designated sometimes 


by the land of his birth, sometimes by his province 

~7~ 
























■ 














, . 








, 






e 


• - 












( 

( 




v ' C 6 f . m I 










■ t 

■ 


f 


* 


















£he Ukrainians are of Slavic origin. In the sixth 
century their Slavic ancestors moved from the Carpathian 
Mountains into the territory which for centuries had been 

a highway for invading tribes passing from southern Asia in- 

6 | 

to Europe. Here the Slavs led a precarious, war-like exist¬ 
ence in defending themselves against aggressive hords of 
civars and Dulgars. xhe Southern Slavic tribes, known as 
the Antes, came in contact with the Dyzantine civilization 
of Constantinople. During the \/Il and Y11I centuries they 
developed a thriving trade with the creek cities south of 
the black Sea. xhey exchanged the grain from the rich 
fields of the borderland for the manufactured commodities of 
the creek artisans. by the IX. century the southern colonies 
due to invasions were in ruins and the centre of activity 
had shifted to the northern and more primitive tribes. 

She first Slavic kingdom about which we have more than 
legendary information was established about 860 at kiev. 

Jrrom the first it was known as the Russian kingdom. It is 
a debated point whether this was the name of the territory 
surrounding kiev or the name of the Scandinavian invaders 
who established the kievan state, but regardless of whether 
these Dorse adventurers, cousins of the Danish invaders of 

' 

England, gave the name to this Eastern Slavic state, they 
gave to it a dynasty and a commercial and military aristoc¬ 
racy whose interest that dynasty represented, xheir coming 


- 8 - 





























■ 































aroused a Slavic revival* It was not long before the 
conquerors had been assimilated with their subjects, and 
the kings had assumed Slavic names, fhe first king to do 
so was Syvoslav, born in 940* 

A descendant of Syvoslav, Vladimir 984-1015 made a 
decision which determined the future history of the aussian 
people. Vladimir wished to strengthen his position as ruler 
of neighboring Slav tribes by raising the prestige of his 
family. xo accomplish this he arranged a marriage between 
himself and the sister of the Greek i&nperor at Constantin¬ 
ople. in return for the honour conferred on him by the 
hyzantine uuler, Vladimir agreed to become a Christian and 
to make Christianity the state religion of kiev. xhis act 
of Vladimir^ brought Ukrainians and Russians within the 
fold of creek Christianity. Latin missionaries reached kiev 
shortly after Vladimir had given his religious allegiance to 
Constantinople out achieved no success. 

!' 

Ihe kievan kingdom secured hegemony over its Slavic 
neighbors and remained their political, cultural and re¬ 
ligious centre during the tenth and eleventh centuries. 
Strong government, hyzantine culture and urthodox Christian-! 
ity provided the basis for a civilization that spread 
throughout surrounding cities. A favourable position with 
respect to trade, good corn lands and hyzantine commerce 
contributed to the prosperity of kiev and produced a wealthy 
and cultured middle class which in time augmented the landed 




































, ' 























. 






. 




. 






. 

■ 























and military aristocracy. Long after Kiev had lost its 


political hegemony and the centre of power had shifted north 
'dt 

ward, continued to be the cultural and religious centre 

Kuat 

of the Slavs. tstee may be justifiably called the "Home of 


rtussia**. 

Towards the end of the eleventh century, dynastic ieudj 
threatened ilievan hegemony. During the twelfth century the 
decline of commerce and the growth of provincial dynasties 
further weakened Russian unity and relegated kiev to a sub¬ 
ordinate position. The advent of the Tartar hordes of 
Gengis Lhan in 1228 completely destroyed the unity of Slavic 
peoples from Novgorod to hlev. Hereafter there were two 
centres of Slavic development, Muscovy in the north east and 
Ukraine and White Russia in the south west. This bloody 
invasion resulted in the Slavs migrating to one or the other 
of these centres. Galicia and Polynia in the south west 
became the new home of Ukrainian migrants and the centre of 
Ukrainian territory. 

The independence of Western Ukraine was threatened by 
two powerful and imperialistic neighbors, Poland and Lith¬ 
uania. Por a century the state maintained a precarious and 
uneasy existence, finally, in 1247, Galicia was incorporat¬ 
ed in Poland. About the same time most of the other Ukrain¬ 
ian lands including vojjzynia became fiefs of Lithuania. The 
one bright spot in Ukrainian history for the nest two cen- 


- 10 - 













' 

■ 

« 

. 

' 

1 

, 

. 

- 

, 

r 

. 

I 

. 

. 

'• 










turies is Moldavia which was a Roumanian principality, Phis j 


territory was the centre of Ukrainian culture for the second 
half of the fourteenth and entire fifteenth century. 

in Galicia, the Poles began their process of assimil¬ 
ation which was to continue for centuries and to build up 
a wall of hatored oetween Ukrainian and Pole. Phe Ukrainian 
boyars (nobles) were polonized rapidly anil accepted Latin 
Christianity, but the Ukrainian peasants and urban dwellers 
clung to their Orthodox Christianity and their Russian way 
of living, Phe Lithuanians on the contrary, having no 
culture of their own, and being closely related to the t/kraii 
nian in.racial origin accepted the civilization and religion 
of the people they had conquered. 

It was inevitable that Pole and Lithuanian, each ex¬ 
panding aggressively, should prove a check to each others 
ambitions. Polish leaders, however, soon saw how much these 
two rising powers had in common, as a result Polish nobles, 
who gave to Poland dominant and intelligent leadership, unit¬ 
ed their dynasty by marriage with that of Lithuania. Phe 
two kingdoms remained separate however, until towards the 
end of the 15th century. At this time the vigorous Poles 
began to incorporate Lithuanian within their kingdom. Phe 

process was fully consummated by the Union of Lublin in 1569, 
though Lithuania retained the status of a separate inichy witl 
the Lithuanian nobility guaranteed certain privileges*. 


-11 











c 








■ 




V :< ) 


' 

- 


















■ 




- 






































• f 


Polish influence now extended over the entire western Ukraine 
Volynia, iiev, and h rotslow were annexed directly to Poland 
while Ruthenia# became an integral part of the Lithuanian 
Luchy. 

Une of the most significant results of the Union was 
in the field of religion, phat urthodox Lithuania had con 
seated to union was due to the fact that Poland at the time 
had accepted the Reformation. Ly the end of the century 
Jesuit activity in the counter-reformation secured Poland 
once more for Rome. ihese indefatigable missionaries then 
turned their attentions to the urthodox subjects of Poland. 
Phe urthodox prelates of Galicia in 1596 consented to union 
with- Rome. Phey agreed to recognize the headship oi Rome, 
out they retained for their church their ureek ceremonies 
and their married clergy, Phey retained their own liturg¬ 


ical language, uld Slavonic, and their own local ecclesi¬ 
astical organization. Phe members of this church became 
known as uatholics of the Greek Rite or more properly Ruthen 
ian Rite, which is a variant of the nyzantine or Greek Rite. 
Phe organization was called the ureek uatholic or the Uniate 
uhurch. 


Phis step did not meet with unanimous approval. Phe 
lower clergy, the common people, and even the non-polonized 
nobles protested. Phere was a vaguely felt, but perceptible 
#Ruthenia was the term applied to Ukrainian territory 
within Poland to distinguish it from Russian Ukraine. 

-l£- 























. 


' 












« 







feeling of nationalism rising among the Ukrainians, Phe 
UCthodox uhurch was a symbol of that nationalise* Phey were 
forced to accept the change in the headship of the church, 
but thereafter the Ukrainians of ualicia and Volynia clung 
to their Areek rfite and rejected any further attempts to 
Latinize the uniate Uhurch. 

Ihe 16th century saw migratory movements of Ukrainians 
eastward into the lands they had vacated three centuries be¬ 
fore, along the Lower Dnieper, free lance pioneer ukrain- 

t 

ians calling themselves wossaks established military camps 

A 

for plundering lurk and lartar, boon the numbers of the 
fighting men were augmented oy fugitives from serfdom and 
feudal extortion, A distinctly democratic society developed 
recognizing the overlordship of Poland but ruled over by a 
hetman or camp commander elected uy a uossack assembly, by 
the beginning of the 17th century ooth sides of the bnieper 
had been settled up to the southern limits of the parkland. 
Wlhat had begun as adventures of Ukrainian freebooters ended 
in a great agricultural movement under the protection of 
armed viligantes. Ihe movement did not secure the approval 
of Poland as the activity of the uossacks led to international 
al complications with the lartars. In an effort to strength 
en Polish control over these former subjects, and to guard 
the frontiers of Polish territory the king in 1576 organized 
a uossack brigade or militia under a Polish hetman, ne 


- 13 - 














tried also to impose serfdom on the non-military classes. 

These measures led to further migrations of malcontents be¬ 
low the falls of the Dnieper, hence the Zaporah (Trans-rapid 
Cossacks). 

It was this zaporah community of uossacks which during 
the 17th century all but dismembered Poland and won undying 
fame in Ukrainian history. The Polish nobles tried, as part 

of their assimilation policy to make these Orthodox ukrain- 

. 

ians members of the homan catholic church. The result was 

■ 

a great uossack uprising led by hetman hoydan uhelmnitsky. 

| 

hy 1649 uhelmnitsky had forced the Poles to recognize his 
demands and for a year and a half he ruled an independent 
and autonomous Ukraine. Though uhelmnitsky 1 a territories 
did not cover the entire Ukraine the uossack period gave the 
Ukrainians the consciousness of a nation. Prom it the 
modern national movement has drawn inspiration. 

■ 

uhelmnitsky 1 s dream was an autonomous uossack State of : : 
substantial yeomen ruled over oy a military aristocracyof 
the orthodox faith, nis policy of compromise and intrigue 
however led to his defeat by the Poles so that he was forced 
to beg the protection of Moscow. It was granted and accept¬ 
ed by the uossack chiefs in 1654. The Muscovite armies 
entered, the Ukraine and for years I/iusoovite and Polish 
forces struggled for supremacy. The treaty of kndrusovia 
ended the war and settled the fate of the Ukraine. Russian 


. 14 . 






























r 















. 1 . 


* 
















- X- 








frontiers extended to the .Dnieper including ancient Kiev. 
Poland was left with the provinces of Volynia, Podolia, 
Galicia and xdholm. Phe remnants of the Cossack state con¬ 


tinued as a supposedly autonomous state within Russia. 

Ukraine protested this division and later opposed it 
with arms. Mazeppa, hetman of Eastern Ukraine secured the 
aid of Charles XII against the imperialistic advances of 
Peter the dreat. Phe combined forces of Ukrainians and 
swedes were defeated at Poltava in 1708 and the leaders, 
uharles XI1, Mazeppa, and John urlick were forced to flee 
for their lives. 

Prom this time on the gradual curtailment of Ukrainian 
autonomy became a policy of the Russian Psar. A similar 


policy was followed in the Polish Ukraine. ±>y the time of 


Polish partitions 1793-5 only the peasants and rural clergy 

called themselves isuthenian. As the result of the partitions 

ualicia and siikovina became part of Austria. Phe rest of 

the Ukraine was merged in the Russian ianpire. j.he existence 

of the Ukrainian was denied by the Russians and the term 
\ *» 

Little rtussian invented to still any national aspirations 
that people of the Ukraine might have. Phe people of the 
Ukraine were declared to be a part of the Russian race. 

A century and a half later the Ukrainian national 
consciousness took life from European nationalism aroused 
by mapoleon. xhe impulse of the Ukrainian movement was 


. xhe spark that had been dead since the days 

- 15 - 


intellectual 

























. 

. 


. 























































of the Hetman ohelmnitsky glowed again through the efforts 
of historians and poets* Hostomarov, a Ukrainian historian, 
a^ter extended research proclaimed that the term "Little 
nussia" was an invention of Peter the ^reat, that it symbol- 
ized the imperialism of the fsars and that it was not applic. 
able to the people of the border land, He denounced ortho¬ 
doxy and autocracy as part of this imperialism, kulish, a 
philologist declared that the language of the Ukraine was 
separate and distinct from the language of Muscovy or Ureat 
nussia. She researches of these men gave the Ukrainian 
national movement a reputable, scientific foundation. The 
poet Shevchenko awakened in the hearts of the people en¬ 
thusiasm and devotion to the national ideal. 

Lhe career of Shevchenko is a sad commentary on 
Russian persecution; "fwenty-four years a serf, nine years a 
freeman, ten years a prisoner in Siberia, three and one 
half years under police supervision", .born cn neb.25, 1814 
in the province of Hiev he died on .neb. 1861, a few days be 
fore the famous proclamation.freeiggnHussian serfs, drain¬ 
ed as a painter in the Academy of Arts at St.Petersburg, he 
turned to poetry to express his love for the Ukrainian land¬ 
scape and his reverence for Ukrainian history. He infused 
his later poems with hatred of a Isardom that had imposed 
despotism and slavery on freedom loving Ukraine. Russian 
imperialism remained for him, until his death the bitter 


- 16 ) 


















symbol of Ukrainian degradation, 

Shevchenko?s influence has been great. His first 
volume of poems the "Koz bar of the Ukraine” is the most 
widely read book in the Ukrainian language. Meetings, lec¬ 
tures and concerts are held in his memory. Schools, liorar 
ies, reading rooms and theatres have been named after him. 
His grave is the mecca of his countrymen, such adulation 
has served to focus Ukrainian opinion on the national ideal 
he set forth in his poetry, nationalism found its way into 
Ukrainian aspirations and was carried there by the passion¬ 
ate appeal of Shevchenko^s poetry. 

Amongst the masses, the impulse towards nationalism 
was economic, fhe Ukrainian peasant hated his nussian land¬ 
lord in iHev or his Jrolish landlord in .Lemberg. 2he nation¬ 
alist propaganda of the intelligentsia fell on the fertile 
soil of economic discontent among Ukrainian peasants. 

In the Russian Ukraine the first organized attempt to 
foster the growing national spirit came in 1846 with the 
formation of the Guild of uyril and Methodius, fhe society 
aimed to gain for the Ukraine, religious liberty and abol¬ 
ition of serfdom. Its members, drawn from the intelligent¬ 
sia, hoped to achieve some sort of autonomy within the 
Russian Empire, fhey were federalists. Hut the whole 
movement was looked upon with disfavour by the xsar. .rally 
aware of the existence of this secret society, the Russian 














« 


























, 





. 















police arrested its members, Shevchenko among the rest, 
iror the rest of the century the movement in Russia was dead, 
stamped out by a suspicious autocracy, fhe Ukrainian 
language was prohibited, its existence denied. Russian 
historians denied the scientific foundations claimed for 
Ukrainian nationalism. 

i'he course of the movement ran more smoothly in 
Galicia• Ihere the Uniate uhurch was its rallying point. 
There the intellectuals enjoyed freedom of opinion granted 
by the Austrian government in the face of strong te&Z&ek 

/is A A>4V7<t/oY<fi> ■ 

opposition^ The explanation lies in the troubled inter¬ 
national politics of pre-war Europe. 

Ahe acute eye of Liamarcll saw in the Ukrainian move¬ 
ment a source of irritation to Russia. An article in the 
"Gegenwart" probably inspired by him, pointed out that the 
peace of Europe could only be secured by a partition of 
Russia, une of the states formed through the partition was 
to be the Grand Principality of Aiev, a Ukrainian state 
under Austrian control. The Austrian government, perhaps 
with this in mind, set out definitely to gain the loyalty 
and friendship of its Ukrainian citizens. Austria gave to 
them the right to use their own language in the schools of 
Eastern Galicia. Ukrainian professors were appointed to 
the staff of the Juemberg university. Ukrainian newspapers 
were free and Ukrainian societies unhampered by government 
restriction. 





































_ 







. 




































All this of course was a bitter pill for the Poles. 
i‘o make matters worse Ukrainian deputies began in 1891 to 
appear in the ^eichsrat and in the Galician diet. Dy 1900, 
two Ukrainian political parties had been formed; one the 
.National Democrats pledged to equal rights for Galician 
Ukrainians and to an autonomous Russian Ukraine; and the 
other, a Ukrainian revolutionary Party. Dy 1907 Ukrainian 

<1 (%tech)Yat 

representation was 6.270 of the total representation^ i'his 
was a real advance though not yet in proportion to their 
numbersj Ukrainians forming 13.870 of the total population 
in Austria. Phe Poles saw the whole movement as a threat to 
their supremacy in Galicia. In spite of their ancient en¬ 
mity towards russia they uegan to feel that Russian .control 
in the Ukraine was preferable to an independent Ukrainian 
State. A ^olish-rtussian rapprochement was founded upon 
their common dislike for the Ukrainian movement. 

Ihe Ukrainian movement achieved some progress in 
Russia during the opening years of the twentieth century, 
following the revolution of 1905 the Psarist government was 
forced to allow certain changes in a lioeral direction. 
Ukrainian publications were started; Ukrainian propaganda 
spread. Intellectuals from the Austrian Ukraine restored 
the vigor of the movement in Russia. In 1906 there was a 
Ukrainian federalist section in the imperial Duma. At the 
University of Deopol a chair in Ukrainian History was es- 

1; 

tablished. Hopes burned high for success, although th e 


-*• 9 - 














' 

■ 

, 





. 









































reaction following the liberal period of 1905 swept away 
Ukrainian gains, nevertheless the movement held its ground 
and advanced with renewed energy when the opportunity present 
ed itself in 1917. 


iSjcrdrn 'ran it>n*1 i$m 

Austrian support of the^Ulfiraiae-phi-l in the £Qth cen¬ 


tury warmed with the rise of Austrian-hussian antagonism and 
cooled with Austrian-hussian under standing. In 1908 the 
duel in the Balkans was renewed with full vigor, xrom that 
time Austrian support for the Ukrainian movement became 
pronounced, Phe Uniate uhurch supported by Austria worked 
among the orthodox of hukovinia and carried the torch of 
Ukrainian nationalism into aussia. Phe Russian orthodox 
ohurch on she other hand propagated Russian ideas among the 
hukovinians and Galicians. 

hy 1912, the Poles had definitely decided against the 
uentral Powers, Ihey were driven into the Russian camp not 
through love but fear; fear of the Ukrainian movement, Phe 
Ukrainians by 1914 had declared in favour of the German 
powers. It was an unhappy choice,, had they been on the 
side of the victors perhaps the story of their ill-fated 
republic might have been different. 

At the beginning of the war the Russians immediately 




invaded Galicia, here they closed Ukrainian schools, stamp¬ 


ed out Ukrainian societies and took as prisoner Msgr • bheptis* 


ky, head of the uniate uhurch. In March 1917 came the 


- 20 - 



























' 






. 


. 










* . 












. 





























Russian revolution and the abdication of the ozar. Phe set¬ 
ting up of the Provisional Government was the signal for Uk¬ 
rainian nationalism. In April an all Ukrainian uongross met 
and appointed a government called the Ukrainian central ttada 
Phe first demand of this aada to the Provisional Government 
at Petrograd was for Ukrainian autonomy, un the refusal of 
this demand the Aada published on June 24, a manifesto call¬ 
ed the “Pirst Universal” declaring that “henceforth we shall 
regulate our own life". A new government called the General 
secretariat replaced the rsada. With the fall of kerenskf s 
government and the rise of the holsheviki to power in retro- 
grad the u-eneral Secretariat proclaimed a Ukrainian people*s 
Republic. 

ihe task of the new government was not easy, ihe 
persokel of the Government was mainly of the intelligentsia 
many of whom were intellectual socialists, iheir chief 
problem was to deal with internal strife stirred up by the 
Polshevik government in Russia. Pheir first step was to 
make peace with the central Powers, xhe first peace treaty 
of the war was negotiated at hrest Litovsk between the 
central Powers and the Ukrainian peopled republic, February 
9,1918. With the treaty went Germany's assistance against 


the Polsheviki. xhis assistance proved fatal to the Ukrain¬ 


ian republic, xhe Germans and Austrians occupied the 
country and secured large stores of grain, with the con- 


- 21 - 











currenoe of wealthy Ukrainian peasants, who were suspicious 
of the Socialistic intelligentsia, the German army of oc¬ 
cupation set up a military dictatorship under the pro-merman 
netman skorapatsky. after the merman withdrawal Sxorapatskyi 
government was overthrown, in dan. 1919 by Petlura, a member 
of the deposed meneral secretariat, ror a short breathing 
space the eastern Ukrainian republic was again a reality. 

following the break up of the Austrian lanpire in 1918 
the Ukrainians of Eastern malicia who constitute 70?© of the 
population set up a "Western Ukrainian republic”. Phe new 
republic defied Polish ambitions and the Poles immediately 
expelxed the government from .Lemberg, in January 1919 East¬ 
ern and Western Ukraine united to form the "Republic of the 
Ukrainian People", Pheir combined armies under Petlura set 
about the impossible task of freeing their country from its 
several enemies. 

.iror a time this ragged Ukrainian army fought the armiei 
of White and of ^ed Russia on one side and of the Poles on 
the other. j.hey regained iiemoerg and ejected the Polish 


army, Phe Poles who had the ear of the Peace uonference and 1 


the support of rrance were authorized by the uonference to 
occupy malicia, and were given military support to do so • 
Phis payable contradiction of the then popular Wilsonian 
doctrine of self-determination is perhaps explained oy the 
fact that the Poles represented petlura‘s army to be 


— 22 — 













, 


























. 















- 








. 






' 










. 












' ' V 







JL V X 

kraine• 
aty of 
ized by 


Bolshevik, xhe action of the conference brought protests 
from Ukrainians all over the world, including uanada. Beve* 
theless by august, 1919, Petlura was forced to cede Eastern 
dalicia to Poland in return for Polish support in driving 
their common enemy, the nolsheviki, out of eastern Ukraine 
xhe effort against soviet nussia failed, hy the treaty 
ttiga, 1920, the Ukrainian soviet nepuulic was recognized by 
nussia and Poland, 

xhus ended seventy five years of intellectual effort 
and three years of physical suffering to establish a Ukrain¬ 
ian iJiatioki. Eastern ualicia was granted to Poland by the 
Ambassadors 1 conference in 1923, sukovina became part of 
Houmania while nussian Ukraine, though bearing the title of 
the Ukrainian Soviet nepublic is not in any sense indepen¬ 
dent, rorty three million Ukrainians divided among four 
nations found their position more hopeless than before the 
war, it can be readily understood why Ukrainians do not 
regard the Versailles settlement with any veneration, 

Put the Ukrainian nationalist movement continues in 
post-war Europe, xhe intellectual centre of the movement 
is now Prague, where the Ukrainians are allowed the utmost 
freedom, as there are not enough Ukrainians in Czecho¬ 
slovakia to constitute a problem to the government, in 

1 

walicia, the Polish-ukrainian feud continues with unparaleled 
ferocity. 























' 


* 






















' 






. 











. . 

1 






’ 






jr. 


















' 



















xhe growth of Ukrainian nationalism has led to discus¬ 
sions bearing on the right of Ukrainians to consider them¬ 
selves as a distinct people, the nationalists oase their 
contentions on the differences between Ukrainian and 
.Even in the time of Russian unity, before the Mongel in¬ 
vasions,marked differences existed between the people of 
Novgorod and of kiev. mhe great-aussian is apparently more 
closely related to his xino - u fir ian neighbors; whereas the 
Ukrainian historians claim their people to ue the true des¬ 
cendants of the kievan Slavs, xhere is much to indicate hou 
ever that the Ukrainian has derived foreign ulood from the 
xarartar races with which he struggled. 

ihe rural commune developed in Russia but did not be¬ 
come part of ukrainian'social organization. in consequence 
the Ukrainian is more individualistic, more democratic and 
less easily regimented than the great-^ussian. ihe politi¬ 
cal tradition of the Ukrainian was demonstrated in the 
uossack democracy. It is distinctly different to the 
tradition of centralized autocracy which has been an in¬ 
tegral feature of great-rtussian society, xiven the church 
of the Ukraine was more popular and less authoritative than jj 


the Russian uhureh. xhe Ukrainian is more "Slavonic” and 
n i 2 iuropean”xthan the Russian, ihrough roland western 
civilization made its impact on Ukrainian society* 

xhe fundamental difference claimed by Ukrainian 


- 24 - 














< 


. 





. 

- 

■ 


, 








' 






■ 
























historians is in language and literature* the Polish in¬ 
fluence is reflected here. Many words related to arts and 




crafts are Polish borrowings originating perhaps from the 
mermans. Pur key axso has left her influence on the Ukrain¬ 
ian language, particularly in the steppe regions, in spite 
of these influences the Ukrainian language has more Slavonic 
elements than the Russian. .Names of the month, for instance 
are Slavonic in Ukrainian while the Russians have adopted 
the rtoman names, xhe phonetic system of the Ukrainian 
language is original and developed after the kievan period. 




Phere is as much difference between the speech of the ukrain 
ian and Russian as between broad Scottish and the speech of 
southern Pingiand. Uxrainain may be ; as was claimed by the 
rtussian$ a dialect of the Russian language but the differ¬ 
ence is so great as to make it almost impossible for one 
to understand the other without special study. 

111 this constitutes evidence to support the case of 
the Ukrainain nationalist, xhe divergent experiences of 
the two peoples following the Partar invasions have led to 
differences in political tradition, psychology, language and 
culture. Surely this is sufficient basis to make, if not 
racial,, at least national distinctions, if a Canadian 
differs from an .American, an Austrian from a derman, then 
it is equally correct to distinguish between Ukrainian and 
Russian. 


5 — 











































Chapter III 

THE UkHAIJN I AM UUllMUnlTY In ALEErTA 


1 1} Oeography-lmmigration-settlement 
The Ukrainian community in alberta at present occupies! 
an area of over a thousand square miles. It commences at 
Hruderheim, 40 miles east of Edmonton, and continues to 
Hurv.eat within thirty miles of the Saskatchewan border, a 
total distance from east to west of 100 miles. With its 
soutnern limits at vegreville the settlement extends seventy 
miles northward to cross the north Saskatchewan river. The 
block lies entirely within the alberta parkland area. Three 
railroads and twenty towns provide services for the Ukrain¬ 
ian Canadian farmer. 

It is difficult to determine the number of Ukrainians 
now in uanada. These immigrants have been listed variously 
as Calicians, sukovinians, RUthenians, Austrians and Russ¬ 


ians. They have been regarded as Ukrainians only since the 




war and many remain registered under the nationality they 
gave when entering Canada, census figures of 1921 report 
the Ukrainian Canadian population as 225,112. Ukrainian 
leaders claim over J500,000. probable somewhere between 
these figures lies the true number of Ukrainians in uanada. 
The figure for Alberta is 55,872. There are over 50,000 
Ukrainians in the block east of Edmonton. The remainder are 
scattered throughout the province, in peace River, in Edmon- 






















































. 






















ton, and at leduc, twenty miles south of Mmonton. 

isven a cursory examination of the soil in the block 
indicates that the Ukrainians were not always wise in their 
choice of land. There is much good land and there are pros¬ 
perous farms but there is also much poor land capable of 
supporting only a meagre standard of living, towards the 
southern, boundary, the soil is good and the land is level. 
Here are the prosperous districts of Ghipman, Mundare and 
vegreville. The districts of atarr, Andrew, Hillingdon and 
Myroam in the centre of the olock have, on the whole, good 
soil and level fields, mart her north within six miles of 
the Saskatchewan lies a strip of sandy, unproductive land. 

2his sandy strip varies from two to five miles in width and 
stretches a distance from east to west of fifty miles. The 
farms in this area are necessarily less productive and pros¬ 
perous. North of the river aadway, Smoky Lake and Vilna are 
excellent agricultural districts. In fact it is difficult 
to distinguish the fertile and. non-fertile areas. Marginal 
and submarginal lands adjoin farms of great productivity 
within the same district. 

Typical of Ukrainian settlement in Canada was the way 
in which Ukrainians chose to settle in parkland and wooded 
areas rather than on the prairies, a reason lor this is 
that wood in Galicia was costly and limited in supply. The 
Ukrainian thought that land which produced trees ©ust be 

-£ 7 - 





















fertile* unfortunately this is not always so because the 
sandy soil of the alberta block, though wooded, is of limit¬ 
ed agricultural value, Phis mistaken idea, together with a 
predeliction for block settlement, may explain why the Uk¬ 
rainian immigrant often chose poor land when much better 
land was available. 

ihe alberta Ukrainians came, almost without exception, 
from ualicia and Bukovina, provinces of the old Austria, Phe 
immigration to wanada was part of a larger movement beginn¬ 
ing about 1890, which touched not only oanada but also the 
United states, .Brazil, and even Manchuria* Ukrainians 
migrated because of the unhappy economic conditions prevail- 1 
ing in the provinces of Galicia and Bukovina. rorced to 
live on two er three-acre holdings, and to eke out a miser- 
aole existence by working for his Polish landlord, the 
Ukrainian peasant was attracted by the promise of broad 

: 

acres and faoulous wealth in the new World, Aha most des¬ 
titute classes were first to leave, later, fear of service 
in the Austrian army led wealthier and better-educated 
Ukrainians to follow the trail of their poorer countrymen 
to a new home. 

Alberta can boast the first Ukrainian settlement in 
Canada, Ahree authenians from ualicia reached Winnipeg in 
the early nineties after a journey reminiscent of the early 
explorers, ihey had heard of uanada from Germans or from 
















Poles, and they had come to corroborate for themselves the 


stories which thpy had heard about the Dominion. Phe sole 
survivor of this trio returned to his native village and 
persuaded nine families to migrate. in 1894 these families,, 
precursors of a great migration, settled fifty miles east of 
Edmonton at otarr. Pour years later the settlement was to 
become the nucleus of a vast Ukrainian community. 

In 1895, uleskew, an Ukrainian Professor visited 
Canada, it was only after he had reported favourably on the 
opportunities for Ukrainians in Canada that migration, hith< ! 
erto directed to .brazil, was diverted to this country, boon 
the Ukrainian immigrant in sheepskin coat, accompanied by a 
barefooted wife, became a familiar sight in the waiting room 
of Western-canadian stations. Uir Clifford nifton, minister 
of immigration in the Daurier uaoinet, regarded the Ukrain¬ 
ian as a most suitable settler for Western uanada. aided by 
the Canadian railroads, he carried out an aggressive im- 
migration policy in Europe. Energetic agents of the govern¬ 
ment and of the railways "sold" Canada to thousands of 

. 

Galicians and Dukovinians in Austria. With this "high- 
pressure” campaign the flood of migration from austria began! 
a.total of 5000entered oanada in 1900. Phe number rose to 
21,000 in 1907 at which figure it stood until 1912. Phe 
recorded number of immigrants entering Canada as Galicians 
or Dukoviniana between 1896 and 1914 stands at one hundred 




-29- 



















































. 


- 









and seventy thousand. x’his does not include these Ukrain¬ 
ians who gave their birthplace as Austria and were therefore 
enumerated, as "Austrian". 

xhe firat immigrants in ±896 settled in Manitoba, it 

was not until 1897-8 that Ukrainians began to take up land 

A 

in alberta. With the original group at dtarr forming a 
nucleus, Ukrainian settlement rapidly extended north and 
east. All the area south of the Saskatchewan aiver was 
settled by 1905. xhe Ukrainian districts north of the Sas¬ 
katchewan were settled between 1907 and 1912. While the 
greater part of the settlers north of the river came direct¬ 
ly from Europe, in some cases sons of the early settlers in 
Starr, uhipman and sruderheim districts sought free land 
across the Saskatchewan. 

Ihe Ukrainians are notorious for their block settle¬ 
ments. ihey have settled in blocks of varying sises across 


i 


i? 


Western Canada, xhe central-Alberta .block is the largest 
solidly Ukrainian area in the Dominion. An examination of 
the area reveals further divisions of settlement according 
to provincial origins. Ukrainians from sukovina have settl- , 
ed in the region between Arakow and xaleland. and north to 
the river, including the districts of Andrew, Willingdon, 
idhepenge and shandro. Ihe smoky lake district is the core 


of a Dukovinian settlement which extends eastward to include 
Vilna, Dellis and speddan. Ihe remainder of the oloek is 
almost entirely Calician. 



































■ 















. 






























Ukrainians in Canada nave kept in contact with the 




neighoors of their youth. Whole districts are made up of 
immigrants from the same village in Europe. xhe local post 
office or school is probauly named after their ancestral 
village, rarmers south of itadway are from villages close to 
Lemjuerg. Villagers from the environs of Peremsyl have sett¬ 


led in the Leeshore district, such names as Krakow, Kahwin, 

Utho^e. iarvillil Witk the ie 


Basel, and Sawale indicate the geographical origins of the 


immigrant settlers. 

xhis racial, provincial and village segregation has re 
suited in the closely-knit fabric of Ukrainian uanadian 
society, communities are inter-related and bound together 
by the customs and dialect of their home village, xhe Uk¬ 
rainian settler in alberta may travel for miles and meet 
only those of his own race, ne may live here the whole of 
his natural life without feeling the need for a language 
other than his own. an English uanadian travelling through 
the Ukrainian community cannot fail to feel like an alien. 

riacial segregation has been condemned for retarding 
the process of assimilation into uanadian life but it helps 
to preserve any culture which immigrant settlers may have to 
contribute. Ukrainian handicrafts are colourful and show 


rare artistic sense. Ukrainian songs and folk dances are 


suggestive of the uossack traditioh. though knowledge of 

d m61-\C? kc. haYm»7»C e/aS3 

this culture is limited, Ukrainians $ay make it their con- 

/N 


-si- 






















. 



















. 




■ 

. 




























. 
















trisution to the local colour of Western Canada* block sett.' 
lenient results also in the cultivation of land which might 
otherwise lie idle* land which would have been scorned by 
English settlors lias been developed by Ukrainians anxious to \ 
be among their own people* an example of this is the sandy 
area south of Redwater* although abandoned by English 
settlers, it was occupied by Ukrainian immigrants. While 
block settlement may result in much that is undesirablej 
there is also something to be said in its favour. 

Phe Ukrainian community has expanded, since 1920, from 
its original settlements in to adjoining areas occupied by 
older Canadians. Ukrainians place a high estimate on land 
ownership. Ukrainian fathers consider it their duty to 
provide their sons with land. In consequence they have 
bought land eagerly at fabulous prices* At Mundare and 
tfegreville they were heavy purchasers of O.P.rf. land. 
Ukrainian, settlement originally several miles north of 
/egreville has crept down to the town limits, Phe Ukrain¬ 
ians have supplanted the rrench in this district, Phey have 
bought out the German settlers of the uhix^man community. 


All land sales in the English community of Waskatenau be¬ 


tween 1920-30 were transacted between old and new uanadians. 

She community is rapidly becoming Ukrainian, inhere was aloni 

ii 

the north banks of the Saskatchewan east and west of Pakan 
a half-breed settlement dating back to 1875. Phis settle- 


- 32 - 













. 






■ 

























. 

. 

. 




' 


■ 














meat is gone, Ukrainians now cultivate the fields of the 
men who knew Kiel* 

Ihe Ukrainian expansion has oeen stopped short by the 
depression. Ukrainians, in common with other farmers, have . 
learned the bitter results of over-expansion. However, the 
extension of Ukrainian settlement will jprobably continue 
with the return of higher agricultural prices. The tendency 
is for the English Canadian to leave a mixed settlement! 
partly because of racial prejudice and partly because he can 
sell his land so easily. The standard of living of the 
Ukrainian farmer is lower than that of the English farmer. 

His operating costs are less, for every member of his family 
labours in the fields, all of which gives the Ukrainian an 
advantage in the coj^etition for land ownership, ihese 
people are so numerous, their families so large that it is 
possible they may expand over a much larger area, may even 
in time take possession of'the entire central part of the 
province. ihe probability is, however that the younger 
generation who have been quick to adopt more expensive ways 
of living will hot be as aggressive in land buying as theft , 
parents. 

II Agricultural development. ■ 

Until 1912 land was acquired maihly by homestead 
grants. nor a payment of ten dollars to the Dominion Governlj 
ment the Ukrainian immigrant could locate on any 160 acte 


- 23 - 

















division still open for settlement, ihe homesteader was not 

■ 

granted a full title until he had made certain improvements 
on his holding. 

Homestead life, uven ior those who have capital to 
clear land and build farm buildings is not easy. Distance 
from railroads, lack of social services, extreme pioneer 
conditions make the life a grim one. Ihe early Ukrainian 
immigrant had no capital. He had been forced to borrow 2 
money to migrate to Canada, ^uite often the ten dollar land 
office fee represented the last of his funds. If he were 
married his first task was to cuild a hovel of logs and mud : 
to house his family, jror the first few years a-fter nis ar¬ 
rival he spent part of his time working for other farmers, 
on the railroads, or in construction camps, assisted by his 
wife he cleared the crush from his land then turned the sod 1 
with a breaking plow pulled by oxen, only small five or ten 
acre plots could be cleared and broken each year. In spite 
of difficulties which would have tried the spirit of a less 
stolid person, the Ukrainian settler cleared enough land 
and acquired enough capital to be able to devote all his 
time to his farm, 

i'hese experiences are typical of the struggles of 
early immigrants, later immigrants brought with them money 
enough to become established less painfully. Ihe average 
amount brought in was between ^500 and qiOOO though there ar« 


-34- 












. 


- 






. 


' 




































' 



























. 

. 














cases of Ukrainians entering Canada with bank accounts of 
$7000. Immigrants since the war have often ueen wealthy, 
xhey have become established rapidly. 

Ihe war period gave the Ukrainians a real opportunity ! 
to advance in material prosperity, iheir sons, considered 
aliens were not conscripted. Having the full benefits of 
family labour and high prices for farm products the Ukrain¬ 
ian farmer in the older districts did well financially. 

' 

Well authenticated stories were circulated at that time of 

Ukrainians who, suspicious of uanking institutions were 

known to keep thousands of dollars hidden in their farm 

buildings. Inis period of prosperity provided the funds for 

the extensive land-buying after the war. 

Ihe size of Ukrainian farms varies in different parts 

of the block, north of the river the average farm is 160 

acres in area. 1 ‘here are a few holdings of 320 acres or 

more in the «.adway district, but these are the exception. 

Phis is true also of the area from Smoky lake eastward. 

larger farms are more numerous south of the river particular. 

' 

ly at &tarr, kruderheitfi, Chipman and /egreville. Hut even 
here the majority of farms are 160 acres only. Phis is 
particularly true in the sandy marginal areas, probably 7 5y 0 
of the holaihgs in the entire block are 160 acre farms. 

It is difficult to determine present valuations of 
machinery, stock or farm land. Heforei930 # land west of 


-25- 


















' 



■ 

. 







. 

































Smoky la ice sold at $100 an acre. Since 1930 there have been' 
no sales and land values are in a chaotic condition. Machin¬ 
ery has not been added to or replaced for seven ye^rs* StocJ 
values are indeterminate. any attempt at adjudging the 
general financial position of Ukrainian farmers by estimat¬ 
ing assets is hopeless. Something of their position may be 
revealed by a glance at their liabilities, alberta farmers 
who are relatively clear of debt and who have sufficient 
machinery to operate are, at present, in a very sound 
po sit ion. 

In the tx adway district, though farmers have accumulat¬ 
ed small debts, they have, with few exceptions, xept their 
farms free from mortgage, riadway is a mixed farming com¬ 
munity with stock and dairy products providing a large part 
of the income. Ihe position of farmers at Mundare and '/eg- 
reville is not, so sound. According to a bank official at 
Mundare at least half the farmers in the district have 
mortgages on their farms far in excess of the true valu^atioi 
of the land. Ukrainian business men in Vegreville state 
that tne farmers in their district are in a similar plight. 1 
In these communities grain is the chief source of revenue. 
Lack of a balanced farm economy accounts somewhat for the 
differences between these southern and northern portions of 
the block. A more important reason is that the Ukrainians 
in the older districts have been less cautious in their 


-36- 






" 

' 









. 

. 

' 



















■ 


. 















borrowing, They could get money on farm property readily 
before 1930, for they had achieved a reputation as honest 
debtors. i T his money was invested in land with the expect¬ 
ancy of continued high wheat prices, The general decline 
in farm prices has left these farmers with great obligations 
and limited income. Speaking generally the position of the 
farmer who balances grain raising with stock and dairy pro¬ 
ducts is sounder than the position of the farmer who has 
depended principally on grain. 

Ukrainian houses have improved considerably over the 
early, earthen floored, one roomed, thatched hovels. In the 
older districts many farmers have built large, handsome, 
modern farm houses, uixpenditures of five thousand dollars 
on houses are mot unknown, xhe typical house however is, .as 
yet, the one that replaced the original pioneer dwelling. 

It is whitewashed on the outside and finished on the inside 


with a hard thick plaster, The Ukrainian house has usually 3 ; 
two, often four rooms furnished with unpretentious beds, 
chairs and tables. The white walls are decorated with re¬ 
ligious pictures and brightly-coloured calendars. The maj- , 
ority of houses are clean and comfortable, dwellings of the 
poorer farmers however, are wretched, one room, log build¬ 
ings. considering the full program o: tne Ukrainian house¬ 
wife it is not surprising that her house shows little 
knowledge of the art of home making. This mare than any- 


-37- 































$ 




































« 


■ 
















thing else distinguishes the house oi the Ukrainian Canadian. 

I 

from that oi his English neighbor. 

The Ukrainians by training and heritage are skilled 
gardeners. Their houses are surrounded by plots of brilliae., 
tly coloured poppies. Their vegetable gardens overflow with 
potatoes, cabbages and onions. Gardens provide food for 
summer and winter. The Ukrainian menu is simple. Cabbage 
and potatoes are the staples oi their diet. X typically 


Ukrainian soup called 'iBorstu*' is made from vegetables and 
sour cream, kice rolled in cauuage leaves, soaked in brine 
•chen fried is another national dish. This diet can be and 
is provided by garden culture. 

une of the most pressing ne^s of the Ukrainian farmer 
is for technical advice on agricultural matters, ae has 
made good progress in his farming methods since his settle¬ 
ment here. This has been done without much aid or instrue- 

I 

tion. The many agricultural bulletins published in the 
English language by the dominion and Provincial governments 
have been of little help to the Ukrainian farmer. There is 
still much room for improvement in Ukrainian farming methods; 

setter grades of stock, better methods of feeding stock, 

■ 

better methods of land cultivation are highly^, desirable. 

At present there is only one district agriculturist in the 
entire block who speaks Ukrainian. The Ukrainian farmer is 
ready and willing to accept advice from those in whom he has 
confidence. The government would be well advised to appoint 


-38- 











































* 


















































agriculturists who have a knowledge of the Ukrainian langu- 

•S 

age arid psychology. 


Ill Urban centres 

fypical of Western Canada, the towns and villages of 
the block are important in the life of the rural Ukrainian, 
fhey are his centres of social and cultural life. fhese 
small urban centres provide the farmer with markets for his 
products, groceries for his table, and with whatever leg^l 
and medical services he requires. Like other towns and 
villages in the Province they are an integral part of rural 
Alberta. fhe centres grow out of the needs of the farmers; 
they thrive when he thrives. Economically., if not socially ; 
the villages form a solid unit with agriculture. Small¬ 
town Albertans think and speak the language of the Alberta 
farme r. 


fhe oldest towns in the ulock are along the main line 

of the u.-w.rt. east from Edmonton. fhey areLa-<mont, Ohipman, 

Mundare and /egreville. fhe villages were busy centres in 

' 

the early days as their hinterland stretched fifty miles 
northward, fhe construction of the Edmonton at.Paul branch 
of the u.n.d. north of the river in 1918-19 cut off their 
northernterritory• fhe building of the Willingdon line 0 f 
the GAP.it. in 1928 further restricted the area upon which 
the older towns depended as a source of business, fhe new- 
er villages of nadway and Smoky Lake on the u.\A. and of 


-39- 



















' 






































Willingclon, Andrew, 2wo Hills and Myrnam on the u.Kh. are 

erviceB for their respective 


mow providing the necessary s 
districts. 

uriginally the uusiness and professional men in village 
and town were non-Ukrainian, ihis was true of uhipman ; and 
v'egreville in the early years of Ukrainian settlement, not 
content to remain "drawers of water and hewers of wood" the 
Ukrainians have entered business and professional life in 
increasing numbers during the past 18 years and have catered 
to the needs of their own people. Many of the younger 
generation Ukrainians educated in Canadian schools, have 
followed the recent trend from rural to urban life and have 
left the farm to make an easier living in the towns and 
villages. Ihis has led to villages becoming predominantly, 
in fact almost entirely Ukrainian. All the villages along 
the u.L.A. are solidly Ukrainian, uhipman is fast uecoming 
so, Mundare is solidly Ukrainian, though /egreville remains 
predominantly non-Ukrainian. £he villages north of the 
river have mixed Ukrainian and English populations when the 
surrounding districts are of that nature, aadway is pre¬ 
dominantly Ukrainian, Waskatenau partially so and smoky 
Lake solidly Ukrainian. 

An illustration of displacement of English by Ukrain¬ 
ians can be seen by consideration of the grain-buying trade. 


fifteen years agoAUkrainian grain^buyer in a Ukrainian 


-40- 
































' 


























" 












Canadian village was exceptional, A certain grain company 
to gain business, oegan to staff its elevators with Ukrain¬ 
ian buyers, uther companies followed suit, now the English 
grain buyer is the exception, ihere are at least 12 Ukrain¬ 
ian doctors in the entire block, as many Ukrainian lawyers 
and scores of' small business men. schools of the block 
are staffed almost entirely by Ukrainian teachers. A know¬ 
ledge of Ukrainian is as indispensable within the boundaries 
of the block as jrrench in ^ueoec or English in untario. it— 
is a eom.pI® - :. e ly &i—4 - s:igua -l- go mi-imity . 


■4l- 
























Chapter IV 


Ukrainian Religions 


A distinctive feature of any Ukrainian village or 
community is the church, fhe churches, regardless of faith, 
are almost identical from without and within, isach church 
is built in the form of a cross, fhe churches are sometimes 
triple-domed. Sometimes there is one large central dome 
surmounted by a cross. The domes are symbolic of the trin¬ 
ity or of the Unity of Cod. Ihe interiors are bare of pews 
or chairs and are lighted by high stained-glass windows, 
fhe Altar is at the east end. It is separated from the 
congregation by a high screen. Ihere are doors on each side 
of the screen with a folding door in the middle. When open, 
this folding door reveals the sanctuary. Almost in the 


centre of the church is a small table with burning candles 


At this table all baptism^and marriage ceremonies are per- 

b*t 

formed. Ahere is no organ. I'here are no statues, brilliant 

A 


banners bear the pictures of the Vir^gin and of the saints 


Ukrainians, almost without exception are followers of 
Creek Christianity. Ihe Ukrainians of ualicia are Creek 
uat'nolics recognizing the ±>ope as their spiritual leader. 

Ihe Ukrainians of nukovina are Creek orthodox enjoying whate 
ever leadership remains to that church since the downfall 


of the czar. Russia provided the spiritual leadership for 




the great majority of Ukrainians until the tievoluti 


ion 


-4.?- 











































- 





































Since that time the Russian Greek orthodox Church has 


suffered the fate of disestablishment and annihilation with¬ 


in Russia and disintegration outside Russia* 

xhe earliest settlers in Alberta were from Galicia 
and were members of the Greek: Catholic Church. They brought 
to Canada from Galicia their religious pictures and the 
memories of their church. Ho priests came with them how¬ 
ever to minister to their spiritual needs. Ihe uniate 
Church was either negligent or so poor as to be unable to 
PYONfide clergy for the immigrants, mive priests came to 
Canada in 1902 out the number was hopelessly inadequate, 
ihis situation existed throughout Canada wherever Ukrainians; 
had settled. 

iror a time the doman Catholic church attempted to 
minister to the Ukrainians, xhe Greek Catholic Metropolitan 
of .Lemberg, Msgr. adeptisky advised his people to accept the 
aid of Canadian Ionian catholic priests. Belgian and mrench 
priests entered the Greek Catholic, or ; as it is known to the 
churchy the itutheriian rite. Some of them spent a short time 
in Lemberg learning the ceremonies of the rite, and the 
Ukrainian language. ihe&e pridsts however were of little 
help. Iheir limited knowledge of the Ukrainian language and 
of Ukrainian psychology ahtagonized the people whom they 
tried to aid. xhe evident attempt on the part of these 
priests to latinize the ceremonies and church customs of the 
Athenian rite met with the disapproval of the more national- 


-43- 













■* 





* 

































































■ 










istic of the U^ainians. Anything Homan or Latin suggested 
the Pole. Another matter which antagonized the Galician 
immigrants was a decree by the Pope forbidding any of the 
married clergy of the Uniate Church to migrate to Canada. 

Phe Ukrainian people wanted, their married priests, as in the 
old country. Celibacy of clergy was a polish custom. All 
of these factors contributed to making the work of aoman 


Catholic priests ineffectual. It hindered even the work o 




the Creek catholic priesthood in Canada. 

. 

After a few years the rioman Catholic Church admitted 
that they could not handle the problem of the Ukrainian 
Catholics. Msgr. bheptisky came to Canada in 1910. After 


a survey, Lis Grace reported that a riuthenian bishopric 
should be erected in Canada, his advice was taken and in 
1912 Hev.H.Jiudka was appointed as bishop. In 19IS the 
riuthenian Greek Catholic iipiscopal coloration of Canada 
Was incorporated by the dominion Government, twenty years 
after the first Greek Catholic had landed in Canada, the 
Canadian church was organized. 

the disorganization of the Greek catholic church, to¬ 
gether with the antipathy to the Latin rite created a re¬ 
ligious vacuum among the Ukrainian people of Canada. into 
this vacuum stepped two organizations eager to win these 
people away.from the Catholic church, uf the two, the 
Russian Green urthodox and the Protestant churches, the 
crthodox was the more successful. 




















xhe Bukovinian immigrants wore without priests as well, 
When they applied for help to the Metropolate of Bukovina, 
they were told to accept the religious ministrations of the 
priests of the Russian Greek orthodox Church and were 
referred to the metropolate of that church established in 
Bew York. 2he priests of the Russian Church had migrated 
to the Uaited States via Alaska and had been ministering to 
the Russian immigrants in the united States for some years. 
Ahere was no objection to Russian priests on the part of the 
.tmkovinians as there was no deep seated racial antagonism 

between the Bukovinian Ukrainian and the Russian, in fact 

' 

there had been strong Muscophil tendencies in the Greek 
orthodox Church in BukoVina, since the Isar considered him¬ 
self the protector of all orthodox Christians. 

xhese priests moved north to the Bukovinian areas in 
Canada in 1900. starting with the Bukovinian settlers, 
they proceeded to extend the influence of the orthodox 
uhurch among the Galicians, fhe Greek orthodox were more 
successful in the Alberta block than in any other area in 
uanada. At Wostok f in 1902, they built their first church 
among the Galicians. Wostok was the base for the advance of 
the orthodox church in cralieian territory. All of the area 
south of the Saskatchewan felt the influence of these 
Russian missionaries. 

i'heir success was due to the fact that the Ukrainians 
had more in common with these priests than with trench 


- 45 - 


























: 















. 

. 

' 




























Canadian priests of the Latin rite. It was also due to the 
sums of money at the disposal of the russian missionaries, 
xhe Russian Creek urthodox uhurch was a state church sub¬ 
sidized by the Russian government. Lhe priests in alberta 
offered free churches to the people. Lhey collected no 
tithes for the support of the clergy, xhis was a real in¬ 
ducement to a people accustomed to burdensome church taxes. 


1 


since there was no apparent difference between ureex Cath¬ 


olic and Russian urthodox, the Calician felt at home in the ; 
urthodox churches, some of them were convinced by the 
priests that they should have always been urthodox. ror the 
first time they heard the story of the formation of the 
the uniate uhurch. uthers were ignorant of the essential 
difference between the two churches, and so accepted urthod¬ 
ox y readily, xhat many remembered the faith of Galicia,how¬ 
ever, is evident by the large numbers who returned to the 
Creek catholic uhurch when their own priests came among them* 
Lhe Russian revolution adversely affected the fortunes 
of the russian urthodox uhurch in Canada, it lost the source 
of its subsidies, i^ision within the church resulted in a 
small group under the leadership of a priest, milipowsky 
breaking away from the new lork Metropolate. Lhe urthodox 
church lost ground in Canada generally, nut so far as 
alberta is conerned, in spite of the gains made by the 
catholics, in spite of the growth of the new Ukrainian 
orthodox uhurch formed in 1918, the Russian Creem urthodox 


- 46 - 



























Church retains its position, xhe older generation Ukrain¬ 
ians eling to the ohuroh of their pioneer days. 

another Ukrainian Church organization,; the (Jreek 

independent ohuroh is of historical interest only, xhe 

■ 

organization oegan in 1903. xhis church was subsidized 
from the first by the Presbyterian Church of Canada. xhe 
Presbyterians hoped by this method to protestantize the 
great mass of Catholic and of urthodox immigrants, ny 1913 
this policy of subsidizing an alien rite had been discarded, 
ihe Presbyterians offered to take the clergy of the church 
into their own ministry. Phis they did, and the creek 
ritual was discared for the simple Protestant ceremony with- 1 

j, 

out any Greek disguise. 

ihe Ukrainian laity of the Greek Church did not follow 
their pastors in^to the Protestant Church, nor has the 
Presbyterian or the united church, after Church union in 
1925, made any headway among Ukrainians. In fact they have 
lost ground steadily,: particularly to the recently formed 
Ukrainian urthodox Church, xhe united church is no longer 
active among the Ukrainians, xhere are a few charges, none 
of which are self supporting, xhe church has left the work 
partly for mcHaoira.gy reasons, and partly because it felt the 
spiritual needs of the Ukrainians were being met sufficiently 
well by their own churches, ether Protestant groups are 
active however; such groups as the baptists. Adventists and 


- 47 - 























. 

' 





■ 




' 


. 













t 




■ 








Pentecostal. Pile number of Ukrainian adherents to these 
groups is very small. 

V 

A Ukrainian united Church Minister made this criticism 
of the work of his church among the Ukrainians, he felt thai 
the united church has been too eager to assimilate; that 
their religious program has been more social than spiritual. 
Phey have offered more canadianism than Christ, Phe church 
mission schools in which Ukrainian children were educated 
tried to assimilate their students completely. Such a policj 
has, in his opinion, turned the Ukrainians against Protest¬ 
antism as being unpatriotic to their own race, fhe Ukrain¬ 
ian who became a Protestant lost caste with his own country¬ 
men. 


It is doubtful if the simplicity, of the Protestant 
service would have much appeal to the Ukrainian! Phey have 
been used to ritual and formalism in their worship, reform¬ 
ation from within, though highly improbable might be success¬ 
ful. Certainly reformation from without, directed by an 
alien church could not hope to succeed. 

ilardly had the ureek Independent Church passed off the 
stage when another Ukrainian church organization made its 
entrance-the Ukrainian Greek urthodox. Its origin was 
European. After the birth of the Ukrainian republic in 1917 
a congress of priests and laity declared the urthodox Church 
independent of russian urthodox authority. phey elected 

their own Metropolitan and repudiated the Russian Mierar h 

-48- ti ^’* 























! • '• 








. 




r 
















. 


















the Ukrainian Orthodox declared their church to be the 
spiritual successor of the ancient church of kiev and the 
national church of all Ukrainians, this new church appealed 
to all Ukrainians to rally to its support. 

the erection of the Ukrainian orthodox church in 
Canada resulted from a schism within the Creek" Catholic 
church, jrrom 1910, educated Ukrainians from Galicia began 
to migrate to Canada. these men were eager to gain a foot¬ 
hold in Canada and to direct Ukrainian affairs. they strove 
to foster a national consciousness among Ukrainians in 
Canada. In close touch with Ukrainian affairs in Europe, 
they were naturally influenced by events there, the Ukrain¬ 
ian Voice, a newspaper published in Saskatoon was the mouth¬ 
piece of tfcte Canadian Ukrainian nationalists. fcjjystun, a 
Winnipeg lawyer, was one of the most vehement leaders of the 
nationalist group. 

irrom the time that hudka was appointed bishop there 
existed between him and the nationalists a state of constant 
friction. -2he nationalists deplored the use of rtoman 
Catholic priests among the Ukrainians, hudka issued an^ 
indiscreet letter in 19l4 calling on all Ukrainians to re¬ 
turn to fight for their ratherland (Austria). This aroused 
the fury of the nationalist group as it deepened Canadian 
prejudice against the Ukrainian. the antagonism came to a 
head over the control of the Ukrainian Institute in 
Saskatoon, the institute was organised by the nationalists 


- 49 - 












' 











1 

on a non-denominational basis. Budka insisted that its 
ownership be vested in the Greek catholic church. When 
the nationalist group refused the bishop abandoned the 
Institute, ojwystun and his followers promptly appealed to 
the people for support and the Ukrainian urthodox Church of 
Canada was formed at a church conference July ? I9i8. 

*ihe birth of this new church ushered in a period of 

became Yc+y hittcY 

religious dissension which A rea et ie4-a-high point - ef bittc-rnco; 

Jnd /990 

between 1920-30. rhe Russian urthodox and Greek Cathoic 
churches had shown towards each other the tolerance of old 
and established rivals. Ihe feeling between the Ukrainian 
jrthodox and the Greek Catholic Church however developed all ' 
the bitterness of a civil war. Members of the Ukrainian 
Urthodox Church criticised the Greek Catholic Church vehem¬ 
ently for its homan (hence Polish) affiliation. They 
denounced the Church for having introduced celibacy of 
clergy in Canada, a practice which was contrary to the 
Greek/Catholic rite and privileges. 2?he nationalists accused 
the clergy of the Catholic Church of trying to control the 
national institutions and reading rooms built by the people. 
Pheir whole attack centred on the indifference of the Greek 
Catholic Church to nationalism. Ihe Greek Catholics, on the 
other hand, protested that the schism was engineered by a 
group of irreligious socialists concerned only with further¬ 
ing their own ambitious schemes. Phey accused the new caurcb 


- 50 - 
















of being more anxious to extend nationalism than to save 
souls* ihe Catholics refecontemptuously to the entire 


Ukrainian Orthodox group as "Swystmns". 

While the influence of Swystmn was paramount the re¬ 
volt met with a success not to be explained by the personal¬ 
ity of the leader. It is clear that there was wide spread 
dissatisfaction throughout the Ukrainians of Canada with the 
Creek Catholic church. 1 good deal of this dissatisfaction 
resulted from the intensification of national feeling in the 
post-war years. 

The attack of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church on other 
church organizations among Ukrainians, though less bitter, 
was as firm in its nationalism. The priests of the Russian j 
Orthodox Church spread the idea of one undivided Russia. 

Ihey stressed one tongue, one nation and ridiculed every 
thing dkravaiah Ukrainian, hence the Russian church stood 


indicted in the eyes of the Ukrainian orthodox as an enemy 
of Ukrainian nationalism. The nationalists denounced the 
Russian clergy as being ill educated and detrimental to 
Ukrainian progress in Canada. She irotestant Church was 


criticized for hiring preacher agents to work among Ukrain¬ 


ians. xhese agents ridiculed the rites and customs, the 

■ 

cross, vestments and holy pictures of the Ukrainian churches., 
ihis ridicule, according to the Ukrainian Orthodox, resulted 
in irreligion and probably bolshevism. The nationalists 



gram of assimilation and condem- 

































. 

■ 




. li. : 





































ned Protestants for undermining the love and respect of the 
Ukrainians for their mother tongue and culture. 

In spite of their feuds, the three Greek churches have 
much in common, they have the same sacraments; all practise/ 
confession* they regard marriage as a sacrament, these 
churches have the same form of communion service, Extreme 
Unction and uonfirmation are parts of their religious pract¬ 
ices. the forms of service are similar. ±Joth Greek Cathol¬ 
ic and Russian urthodox use uld Slavonic in their services 

' 

while Ukrainian Urthodox uses Ukrainian, their churches are 
built of the same architectural design. All Greex Churches 
use the same religiaus calendar, observe the same holp days 
and pay homage to the same saints, the three churches claim 
apostolic succession, though the Russian urthodox and the 

Creek Catholic protest the validity of orders in the Ukrain- 

: 

ian urthodox Church, they are 1 , all episcopalian. in brief, | 
they are all Greek Churches. 


the ecclesiastical differences lie in their headship. 
Here the difference between Greek catholic and the two 
urthodox churches is fundamental, th e - U n ia - t e-- chur - eh ie - 



plhe Russian urthodox Church has not been free from Russian 
imperialism, „ xhe Ukrainian urthodox church is fiercely 
nationalist, there is also a greater amont of lay control 
in the Ukrainian urthodox Church. In fact, some laymen have 
recently revolted against the American Metropolate or Arch- 


- 52 - 












bishop John xheodorovieh. xhe leader o 1 this revolt is none 
other than Mr. 3wystun. 

Another organization called the united earner Labour 
xemple Association has a Ukrainian Hollowing, xhis organiza¬ 
tion is secular but since none oi its members support any of 
the Ukrainian churches and since the society is definitely 
anti-religious it should be mentioned along with the Ukrain¬ 
ian church groups, xhe church groups label the memhers of 
this society as communists. 

xhe number belonging to each Ukrainian church group in 
oanada is recorded in the Canadian census of 1931 under 
"religious .Denominations by national groups”. Ukrainians of 
the Creek rite are listed in this census as Aoman Catholics, 
consequently there is some confusion as to the exact number 
of creek catholics in Canada. Cince few Ukrainians have be¬ 
come .ioman catholics it is safe to assume that most of the ‘ 
156,315 Ukrainians thus regist c red are in reality followers 
of the Creek rite. i‘he actual number of Creek Catholics is 
probably over 155,000. xhe Creek orthodox Church is listed 
as having 55,386 followers, xhe census makes no distinetioi 
uetween Ukrainian Creek orthodox and Russian Creek orthodox 
so there is no way of telling the weakness or strength of 
either group. Lhe Ukrainian orthodox church claims from 
seventy five to a hundred thousand followers, xhis certain 
ly does not with the last religious census taken in 

uanada. xhe United uhur eh have 3,992, while the next large 
Jrrostestant group is the baptist with 1,262. p aly ^ 




/bishop John fheodorovich. fhe Reader of this revolt is 
none other than Mr. owystun. 

Another organization called the united farmer labour 
Semple Association has a Ukrainian following. This organ¬ 
ization might protest against being listed with Ukrainian 
churches. It earns that right by being anti-religious. Bone 


of its members support any of/the Ukrainian Church organisa¬ 


tions. fhe church groups label the members of this society 

,!i I 


as communists. 

In the Canadian census 11921 under ,T religious Denomina¬ 


tions by national groups", f reek Catholic are listed as hay¬ 
ing 156,315 followers, fo fee exact, the creek catholics are 


listed under itoman catholics. Inhere is no Creek catholic 






division, but since there are few rioman catholic Ukrainians 
(those who are call themselves Poles') the figures 155,000 
approximated, fhe Creek prthodox church is listed as having 
55,386. fhe census makes no distinction between Ukrainian 
creek urthodox and itussihn Creek orthodox, so there is no 
way of telling the weakness or strength of either group, fhe 
Ukrainian Orthodox Church claims from seventy-five to a 
hundred thousand followers. Phis certainly doaaenot check 
ith the last religious census taken in Canada, fhe uniate 

ile the next largest group is the 


% 


Church have 3 


Hid 

, 992, mil 


baptist with 1,262^7 only 1215 Ukrainians are listed as hav- 
ing no religion. In alberta { 22 ,512 are listed as homan i.e. 
creek Catholic. Approximately j.9,300 belong to the creek 


- 53 - 














Orthodox churches 
Adventists 363. 


ihe United ohurch has 8l0 and the 


A religious survey of the block reveals the location 
of each church group in Alberta, ihe district of hadway is 
mixed Ukrainian urthodox and Greek Catholic, i’he settlers 
in this district were originally all Greek Catholies. ihe 
work of lather hue, a Belgian ^edemptrist, in the church two 
miles south of hadway until 1917, while commendable for its 
energy, antagonised many. When the new Church was formed 
those who were anti-Catholic and strongly nationalist left 
tfce Greek Catholic Church to become ukra/feian urthodox. A 




church was built in aa&way in 1923 and the district split in¬ 




to two religious factions. Leadership in the new Church 


came from the business men in town. ; ihey organized the 
church gnd gave it financial support, Jror the next few years 


there was open hostility between the two groups, ihey built 


separate halls and attended separate social functions. ihe 


ill 


friction has diminished recently, -ihe depression seems to 
have dwarfed the importance of differences in religious 
opinion, 

ihe religious division in Smoky Lake is between 
Russian urthodox and Ukrainian urthodox. ihe Ukrainian 
urthodox Church was built here about the same time as the one 
in hadway. here again the leaders in organizing the new 


church were the business men. ihe church drew its converts 

y Co m mJy)r 

fricm the Russian uthodox^ certain families who became inter* 

A 

- 54 - 













ested in Ukrainian nationalism left the church of their 
lukovinian forefathers. Since few farmers however were great 
ly concerned about the plea of the nationalists the majority 
of the families remained with the Russian orthodox Church. 


Many were bound to the Russian Church for graveyard reasons. 


They preferred to remain with the church in whose graveyard 


their relatives had been buried, There are few Creek Oath- 


'olios in smoky lake, though the Roman Catholic Church has 
built there a magnificent church in the Greek style* The 
mission has achieved slight success. The u.l.TVT*A. is 
active in Smoky .Lake and draws wide support from the 
lukovinian settlements north and south of the village. 

12ast of Smoky lake, the districts of js&wand, Kellis 
and Vilna are Russian orthodox. The Ukrainian orthodox have 
gained some followers but the number is not great. The 
strongest Russian orthodox district in the entire block 
is shandro, south of the river. At Andrew there are two 


churches, one Russian orthodox and the other Ukrainian ortho... 

1 


dox. The Russian Church is still the greater in numoers. 
There is also a United Church with a Ukrainian pastor. it 
has few adherents. Hillingdon is Russian orthodox with a 




few Ukrainian orthodox within the village, laleland on the 


fringes of the lukovinian settlements is a strong Russian 
Orthodox centre. At Hostok among the Galicians, the Russian 
orthodox maintains its influence. The four townships west 














and north in which are the post offices of Limestone, Share, 
Leno and rfodef are still Russian Orthodox with some creek 
catholics interspersed., Prom Leeshore north to the river 


and east to the Lelph district the farmers are Creek Oatholi' 
A small Ukrainian Orthodox parish has been established west 


of Leeshore. At Jelph there are some Ukrainian orthodox 


who were originally Catholic. 


FoS ill-9, re 



A East *1 Aaleiand from !Two hills to Olandonala., the 

A r * 

°Y 

following figures indicate trie proportions the different 
groups, creek Catholics make up fifty percent of the 


Ukrainian population; the Ukrainian Orthodox fifteen percent 


the aeverAhay Adventists approximately ten percent. The 
largest community of Seven Lay Adventists in the Alberta 
block is between beauvalon and Myrnam. pie church was 
established there in 1916 by the influence of an Adventist 
•preacher, fhe original converts cling to tneir Adventist 
program but no further conversions are being made. u?he 
remaining twenty.five percent are UAL.m.T.h. Myrnam and 
two hills are both centres of this organization. 

chapman : on 1 the* • O.hPAL line II® • d:ivided.etafcween Russian 
orthodox and creek Catholic. I ; W.o large churches, indentical 
in their hyzantine architecture, serve the religious needs 
of the Ukrainian community. The members of the erthodox 
church are Galicians and were originally creek catholics. 


•ihe Ukrainian urthoaox has ho church building and no follow- 


- 56 - 

















. 





























■ 




. 








■ 

























ers in chipman. Mundare is a Greek: Catholic centre. A 

mc^astery and Seminary of the Basilian lathers,( But henian | 

Bite) has been established here. ihere is a small Bussian 

Orthodox Church in Mundare, supported uy a congregation 

living north of the village. 

Worth-west of Vegreville, between Boyal Parle and 

Spring oreek lie two townships that are solidly Ukrainian 

orthodox. . Phis district was one of the strongest in support 

of the organization of a new church in 1918. Many farmers 1 

gave large contriJut ions to its funds, xhe district was | 

influenced by a Ukrainian business man in \Zegreville, 

Peter Svarich. As Svarich thought, so thought these people. 

\ 

When he left the Protestant Church to support the Ukrainian 

orthodox movement in 1918 they followed him. Approximately 

■ 

609 of Vegrevilles 1 s 1800 people are Ukrainian. Phose 

six hundred are divided among the Ukrainian orthodox, Greek 

catholic and Bussian Orthodox Churches, Aast of /egreville, 

\ 

the Plain Pax-ce district is solidly creek catholic, bo also 
are the Ukrainians in the mixed .English and Ukrainian 
districts of Lavoy, Banfurly and innisfree. 

In general the south, the east and northwest of the 
block are predominantly Greek catholic, xhe centre and nortl ( 
and north east portions are predominantly Bussian orthodox, 
xhe Ukrainian orthodox church is stronger north than south 
of the river, it has made very little progress in the 
Bussian orthodox centre, and apart from /egreville has not 


















' ' i||jf . 

■ 


. 














































gained greatly in the Catholic south. The Protestant 


churches with small parishes at Myrnam, Andrew, Krakow and 


dmoky lake are insignificant in numbers of adherents. The 
anti-religious organization, the united labor irarmer Temple 
Association, has three centes, Myrnam, Two Hills and Smoky 
lake but a very small part of the total ukrainain population 
is included in its membership. 

The large membership of the Russian orthodox church 

, 

is not in any way indicative of strength. This organization 
seems doomed to the same fate in Alberta which it has met 

11 

with in other parts of Canada. Its policy and tactics are 
criticized ay its more intelligent clergymen. The priests, 
with few exceptions, continue to maintain that the Ukrainian 
is Russian and not a separate nationality. The ;prapaganda 
carried on by the Ukrainian urthodox church through news¬ 
papers and through speakers has done much to convince the 
people of their separate nationality, nationalism has a 
stronge/appeal'to the younger Ukrainians. The priests of the 
Russian church are badly educated and the temper of the 
church is lethargic. The church is lacking in lay leader¬ 
ship, The membership is almost entirely from the farming 
.class. The Ukrainian orthodox church is strong in leaders 
if not in followers. The majority of ousiness and profes¬ 
sional men in villages and cities of Alberta are members of 
this church, it is the hope of the Ukrainian urthodox that 
within ten years the Russian urthodox will become Ukrainian 


-5b- 


















« 














' 












. 




■ 










- 









. 


















■ 








Shis is possib&Q., since there are no docrinal differences, 
xhe Ukrainian urthodox will gain at the expense of the 
Russian Church not of the Greek catholic. xhe uatholic 
Church is consolidating its position. It is counteracting 
the nationalism of the Ukrainian urthodox Church by a 
Catholic nationalism. She church is carefully removing the 
stigma of the Latin connection of the earlier days. 

une of the chief difficulties of all the dhurchessis 
the lack of priests. Many churches are visited only once 
a month and sometimes once every two months, xhe priest of 
the Ukrainian urthodox Church stationed at 'smoky Lake has 
under his charge the following places-Smoky Lake, nonny- 
ville, sremula, rtadway, neilis, jjowning idtry, namlin, sped- 
den, Glendon,Lessard # and Wastoo. nis parish; from east to 
west measures a hundred miles. Priests of all churches in 
all parts of the block carry a similar load. 

In ualicia, the church played an.all important.part 
in the Ukrainian peasant 1 s life. Shis is evident uy visit¬ 
ing homes in alberta, religious pictures line the walls of 
the house. All Ukrainian holidays are religious in origin, 
xhe landlord and the priest were the two most important 
characters in the European village, xhe church exercised 
wide control over the lives of the people. Any life they 
had apart from labour was lived through the church, xhe 
church provided colour in its ceremonies. She music and the 







dramatic movements in the mass, the emotional Catharsis of 

)|l 

confession, the uowing and kneeling of the congregation, I 1 
the burning of incense and the monotonous reiteration, of 

prayers, these were experiences close to the Ukrainian heart, 

- 

When the Russian priests came among the Galician oatholies 
in the early days of Alberta settlement the ureek Catholics 
accepted them readily. A priest was indispensable. only a 
priest could provide the magic which lit up an otherwise 

i 

drab existence. 

During the thirty years of the Ukrainians in oanada ■ < 
many influences have tended to lessen the importance of the 
church in their lives, xhe older men and women retain their, 
simple or - st faith. In many cases they cannot read 

j/Lo r 3peak isnglish and so have not encountered subversive 
influences, not so with the younger Ukrainians, north 
American civilization is secular, isivery Canadian idea which 
Ukrainians adopt seems to sap the influence of the church, 
the public-school system is entirely secular, xhere has 

|| 

been no attempt on the part of the churches to introduce 
religious education into the schools, xhe curriculum is set 
by the Provincial Department of education; the language is 
English and the teachers are trained in the Provincial 
normal schools, m recent years, the teachers have oeen 
young Ukrainians, out this has not altered the character of 
the training in the Ukrainian Canadian scnools. Dance halls 


- 60 - 









too are a secular influence, To the younger Ukrainian they 

constitute an important part of his social life. There is |j| 

no restriction imposed uy the chut ones against dancing. The 

Canadian ideas of freedom and liberty have had their effects' 

on the attitude of many to the church. The Ukrainians in 

Canada feel that the priest no longer has the upper hand as , 

formerly in jsurope. They become suspicious of their priest 

and openly disregard his admonitions. , | 

f 

The church is less important to the younger generation, : 

j 

Trieste of every church complain of the difficulty in hold- " 
in g the youth to the traditional conception of religion. 

They ascribe it to the lack of priests. It may be traced 
also to the impact of a civilisation entirely aliennto the 
Ukrainian churches. In areas entirely Ukrainian and far 


from communities of other races the church is still some- 

> 


what a factor in the young peoples lives. In areas of mixed 
nationalities, its influence on the youth is slight. There 
are stories told of young people who go to church with their 
parents but remain outside the church during the service. 

As assimilation proceeds, what will be the fate of the 
Ukrainian uhurches? The language of the service is Slavonic 
or Ukrainian. The priests speak in Ukrainian. The clergy fe 
follow rather than lead in the process of assimilation. Will 


the churches make adjustments to retain their existence? 


The ureek uatholics might eventually become itoman uatholics, 


- 61 - 














. 












. 















that is Canadian Catholics, There is no tendency for that i; 
to happen now. ^uite the opposite is true, nut with advance 1 ' 
ing assimilation the Ukrainian-Polish antagonism might be 
forgotten. The transfer fo these people from the creek to 
the Latin rtite might oe effected. The future of the Russian 
orthodox uhurcn is dubious, The members of this church may 
some day transfer their support to the Ukrainian orthodox 
uhurch. xhis would not oe difficult as there are no doctrin. 
al differences. With the Ukrainian ortnodox church lies the 
religious future of those Ukrainians who are not Catholics. 
Since the lay members of the church have a great influence 
in church policy they may direct the church along the road 
to assimilation. The church may in time modify its ritual 
and. become more Protestant in form. The Ukrainian however 
does not take kindly to worship devoid of ceremony. The 
Ukrainian urth'odox Church might conceivably merge with the 
Anglican church. This step would not mean drastic change. 

The sacraments ar similar,e.g. confession, communionsand 


ordination of the priesthood, .soth churches have the 

episcopal system. Tor the present, however, the Ukrainian 

..... $ 

Church is> adverse to asimilation, and fosters Ukrainian 

A 

nationalism. It is not ready yet to make any adjustment. 
If it eontihues to be an instrument of the nationalists 
this adjustment may never come. 



- 62 - 




the Conflicting Ideals of Ukrainian Leaders 


Standing then about my grave 

Make ye haste,.your fetters teari 
Sprinkled with the foemans blood 
then shall rise your freedom fair 


then shall spring a kinship great, 
this a family new and free, 
Sometimes in your glorious state, 
Gently, Kindly, speak of me. 


Shevchenko. 

reverberations of the Ukrainian struggles in pre-war 
Europe echoed in the distant Ukrainian settlements of Canada, 
the Ukrainian settlers here, though anti-Polish, had not 


yet been touched by nationalist propaganda. the majority 


, 


were illiterate and understood very vaguely, if at all, the 


connotation of the word Ukrainian. their immediate loyalty , 
went to their church, hut though no strong feelings of 
national identity existed among Ukrainian Canadians, the 
soil was rich for the seeds of nationalism, fhe Ukrainian 
intellectuals imbued with the aspirations of their Galician 
homeland dedicated themselves to the task of planting the 
seeds, throughout Canada they established institutes-ed- 
ucational centres for the dissemination of national propa¬ 
ganda. these were established, in 1916 at iSdmonton, Saska¬ 


toon and Winnipeg. 

the rise and fall of the Ukrainian republic focussed 
Ukrainian attention on nationalism. . It aroused a national 


- 62 - 









I 


consciousness which was further intensified by the tragic 
stories of post-war immigrants who had served under Petlura 
Phe wo r d. Ukrainian became more widely used, Phose who had 
hitherto acknowledged their nationality to be Austrian or 
Russian now claimed with some pride to be Ukrainian, From 
1918 on,English Canadians became increasingly aware of 
national feeling among Ukrainian Canadians. 




■ 

i!'j 




Phis growing national awareness in the post-war period 
has led to organized propaganda through the medium of 
societies. Puree nationalist groups comxjete for leadership 
in the cause, fhey are the Ukrainian Self reliance League, 
Phe national Union, the united Hetman urbanization, a 
fourth group the united Labour Farmer Pemple Association 
stresses internationalism. 

Phe Ukrainain Self reliance League, known in the 
Ukrainian as "Samostyniki" , (the abbreviated form is iS.U.S.) 
has its origin in the original nationalist movement that 
led to the birth of the Ukrainian Orthodox church. Phough 
Samostyniki was not incorporated until 1927 the spirit of 
the organization had existed among the Ukrainian Canadian 
nationalists since 1911. Phe organization gave purpose and 
direction to the efforts of these self-appointed leaders. 

Phe aim of S.U.S. is to give cultural leadership to 
Ukrainian Canadians. Phe society endeavors to foster and 
develop a love for Ukrainian culture. It emphasizes Ukrain- 




-64 - 











I 


ian history, Ukrainian literature and Ukrainian customs 


Members of S.U.S. fear that knowledge of Ukrainian affairs I 
will pass entirely from the minds of Ukrainian people unless 


their organization makes a definite and energetic attempt 

ational 


to keep this knowledge alive* S.U.S. considers the national 
question in Europe sufficient justification for establishing 
and maintaining Ukrainian culture in Canadian society* 
Ukrainians in Canada should be ready to supx^ort the cause 


of an independent Ukraine* Ukrainian immigrant societies 


should function as similar oganizations among polish-ameri- 
can and Irish-kmerican immigrants prior to the Great War. 
The Ukrainian 1 s failure to achieve their national aspiratio: 


in the last war was partly due, according to bamostyniki, to 


the disorganization and the resultant inability of Ukrainian ; ; 


immigrants to be of service to their mother Ukraine* puture ; 
service to the cause can only be accomplished if the rank 

■ III 

and file of Ukrainian Canadians are emotionally conscious of 
the meaning of Ukrainian nationalism. 

Members of Samostyniki are as ardent in their Canadian*' 
ism as in their Ukrainianism. They decry the low cultural 
standards of their own people. These men protesx their 
loyalty to Canada and affirm that they are contriouting to 
the future well being of Canada by raising those standards 
before assimilation takes place. The society has declared 
open warfare on communism among Ukrainians, and for this 


- 65 - 

















, : i ' ;• ” ;■ ' ; • r.:. t :>1 .u i c 

D'i; < J 1. . *1 , , j. X.:V £.,i. ' , /. ITI.U 


* 

. i i 'i. /. i; * ... :-iu :.i o:re. o,tl 

-it : ; iv - [ .T i : c. *; j itr '-0 o . : a OfiD 

» ; ' ■■ - . j: ,, : f f. 1 l I. - l . J 

i „ : 1 ;; :i -u r D ' /. r iu : - .rx 

* , ; . i ' - ... : r : .... • . J ’! . .. ; ... A, i. - (. J 

. < r r . A c . h , -!» r * J r r .* • c-fr I ‘ <*- < £ K ' z J 3 

. \ 1 rn . r , s : ; - ■ c u, ■ ; i : t 


r;. i c, . u c.j.c w i : { ;vj c ez 1 a : 


I i. ’ r & ' A - A-i i zz i t; i : '■ 

: . . , I: t t - - ■ 


! i 0 ' . r . ■ . 




f, < ■' •. 1 f - j 






» j / > V % 1 . . . . X l j 'AM 

i . . r • i >*. j - > : 

,n f ♦ .. 

tv :• . - 

. • J ,• ? • j : 1 • - • L- 













reason considers that it deserves well of Canada. 

Phe society is Canadian in its origin and has no 
European connections. rtival organizations accuse Samostyn- 
iki of affiliation with the Ukrainian Democratic society in 
Galicia which follows a policy of fraternization with the 
Poles. Phis is tantamount to a charge of treason to the 
cause. B.U«S. indignantly deny this and declare they are 
more concerned with life in Canada than in the Ukraine. 

Pheir desire for an independent Ukraine is genuine out they 
hope to achieve it by publicizing the Ukrainian question 
and arousing sympathy of the world generally for the Ukrain¬ 
ian people. Phe S.U.3. condemn extremists and terrorists in 
Poland and hope the whole Ukrainian question will achieve 
a peaceful solution. 

Bamostyniki claims to have the majority of Ukrainian 
Canadian professional and business men in its membership, a 
claim which is granted by other organizations. Phe organ¬ 
ization, if weak in foliovers, boasts strong leadership* 
3.U.S. is not concerned with extending its membership out 


it is concerned with consolidating its influence and leader¬ 




ship over Ukrainian activity. Members of 3.U.3. are con¬ 
fident of their own ability to direct Ukrainian affairs, and, 

I 

are jealous of any non-Ukrainian attempt to interfere in 
that sphere. Phere is unquestionably a conscious feeling of 
superiority in the attitude of the typical Bamostyniki to 


~ 66 - 






wards other Ukrainian organizations 




I’he organization appeals to the Ukrainian intellectual 1 


on grounds other than pure devotion to the national cause. 


It appeals to the economic interests of this class in Ukrain. 


ian society, rhe lot of the professional man of Ukrainian 

birth in Canadian life is not entirely happy, forced to , 

bear the brunt of the accumulated prejudice against the 

Ukrainian, he fines it impossible to practice his profession j 

j 

among Canadians other than his own race, doctors and lawyer* i 
almost without exception draw their clientele from the Uk¬ 
rainian population, ieachers with ukrainiah names find it 
impossible to secure positions in English speaking districts," 

j 

lo survive, the Ukrainian business and professional man must > 
assure himself of the support of his own race, fhis support !! 
is not easy to obtain, por centuries Ukrainian peasants 
have been doing business with bewish traders. i*hey are 

■ i 

accustomed to buy and to seek legal and medical advice from 
people who are not Ukrainian, fhis adds to the difficulty 
of the Ukrainian middle class in uanada. although it is 
unfair to censure the entire group for a spurious national¬ 
ism a good deal of their nationalism is self-seeking and 
dictated more by economic interests than a deep devotion to 
the aspirations of the Ukrainian race. Some members of 
S.U.ii. are not above fanning nationalist flames for 
business reasons. 


- 67 - 







■±*he organization denies that it is affiliated with 
any Ukrainian Jhurch. Members of any church are free to 
join the organization. Ihe only restrictions are that mem¬ 
bers must be Ukrainians and must not be communists, xhe 
men who organized the Ukrainian urthodox Ohurch however also 
organized Samostyniki. xhe members of the organization, if 
utiey attend any church, attend it. .ifew Ureek uatholics have 
joined aamostyniki. 

Samostyniki has an affiliated organization for young¬ 
er Ukrainians, familiarly known as U.U.M.k. the initials of 
the full Ukrainian title, xhe aims and methods of TT snmk !l do 
not vary appreciably from the parent organization, fhe 
junior group confines itself exclusively to extending know¬ 
ledge of Ukrainian language and culture leaving the polit¬ 
ical question to the senior organization. xhis youth move¬ 
ment organized only in 1934 seems to have an appeal to Uk¬ 
rainian youth, perhaps because of the social opportunities 
it affords It may be through youth organizations that Uk¬ 
rainian nationalists will leave a permanent stamp on Ukrain¬ 
ian uanadian society. 

national union, known to Ukrainians as U.Xf*U., a 
second Ukrainian national society is of recent origin. it 
was organized in 1932 by an insurgent group from the ranks 
of Samostyniki. Ihe break resulted from a clash of opinion 
between the old and the new, the pre-war and post-war im- 


- 68 - 



« 

- 




migrant, rhe latter is usually a veteran of the Ukrainian 



struggle in JSurope. He has been baptized in the national 
cause in Petlura‘s army and is quite sure that he is destin¬ 
ed to lead the national movement in oanada. billed with 
strong feeling for the Ukrainian homeland he was impatient 
with, asiit seemed to him, the luke warm nationalism of the 1 
Ukrainian with a Canadian viewpoint, xhe result has been 

the addition of another organization by these ultra-patriots [ ! 

4 [ i 

to the already overcrowed Ukrainian picture. 

ihe motto of this society decorates the front page of 
their official organ f,t Phe Mew Pathway” and sums up their 
political philosophy-”x # he state over all”. Members of 
Mational union call themselves Ukrainian fascists, fheir 

11 

desire is to set up an independent Ukraine with a fascist 
government. They are anti-soviet and pro-nazi. Members of i 
this society affect militarism and openly support the actions |i 
of Ukrainian terrorists ■ ( o g^val . gation of - tj - krainian 
nat-i - enaI i in Poland, lifee the s.U.S. Mational union 
protests the loyalty of its members to Canada and offers to 
prove it in true fascist fashion. 

Members are drawn mainly form the pest-war immigrants 
and from those whose nationalism is more ardent than that 
of the opportunistic S.U.3. Most of the members belong to 
the ukrain&An urthodox church, although some Creek Catholics 
join tl.M.u. They have a youth organisation known as M.U.M- 


69 ~ 














initials of the Ukrainian title (pronounced "Moon") whose 
aims and methods are similar to the parent organization. 

The national Union has not a large following. The spirit of 
this organization is so foreign to Canada that it is not 
likely to achieve much success among Ukrainian Canadians. 

The organization will probable merge with Samostyniki after 
patriotic fervor has cooled. 

She third nationalist group, the united Hetraenl or in 
Ukrainian "iietmanschi" Jf was incorporated in I9P6. It has a 
Greek Catholic membership. Walter Hossey, a veteran officer 
of the Austrian and Ukrainian armies was organizer of the 
first group in Toronto, official newspapers are the "The 
Canadian Farmer" (Winnipeg ) and "The Ukrainian Toiler" 

( lorontoj. The Ukrainian iSews, Bdmonton, though in reality 
a church paper* devotes some space to proselytizing for the 
"hetmen". 

The aim of hetmanschi as with other nationalist 
groups is to achieve an independent Ukraine. They disagree 
with other groups about the form of government in the future 
Ukrainian state. Their political views are those expressed 
by the Glassocracy league of oanada, an organisation es¬ 
tablished through the influence of Walter xsossey about the 
time of netmanschi 1 s birth. The classocrats, though appeal¬ 
ing to all Christians, were concerned with arousing catholic 
opinion in support of the league‘s political philosophy. 


- 70 - 



















) 











1 


irtiis philosophy is derived from that of lepinsky, au ukrain, 
ian and member of iSko ra pat sky 1 s ill-fated cabinet • ' 

classocrats criticize modern political philosophies 
for their poverty in Christian idealism* fhey consider the , 
underlying philosophy of democracy, which they call ration¬ 
alism to be negative towards belief in Cod. Modern democ- i 
racies though ostensibly Christian are indifferent to its 
teachings. ?hey stand half way between Christian -dealism I 

I 

and a socialistic materialism. Democratic states are con¬ 
trolled by an unchristianlike plutocracy of wealth, xhis 
plutocracy governs the masses by offering them a spurious 
liberty in the form of the franchise. *lhe socialists carry 

ji 

the religious indiff.e rent ism of democracy to its logical end, 1 
the complete negation of Cod. £he inspirational philosophy 1 
of the socialist state is materialism which means atheism. 

Olassocrats consider that because of its virile atheism soc¬ 
ialism! or communism) is a menace to Christian civilization. 

lhat this danger has been recognized in Europe is 
evident in the fascist movement. Classocrats approve of 
fascism in so far as that system remedies the errors of 
lapitaiism and develops government by an aristocracy, xhey ' 
oppose however the one party rule in the fascist state. 

netmen insist that their state will draw its aristocracy 
from all classes rather than from ohe party. Classocrats 
»ould substitute for the fascist motto "She State above ill" 


7 / - 










their own "God. and the State above dll". 

xhe ulassocratic state draws its inspiration from the I 
philosophy of universalism. universalism is creative and 
positive for it is the essence of Christian idealism. it 

' 

derives its name from the fact that unlike fascist national-• 
ism it provides inspiration for all nations, universalism 

i 

recognizes that man has an immortal soul. It maintains that 
mans intelligence can establish the existence of a supreme 
and infinite Spiritual being. i‘he worship of this Supreme j 
being becomes the centre of all activity and is productive 
of the highest dignity in mankind, jfamily, community and 
state affairs are part of this all important activity, ihe ! 
ulassocratic state serves as a means for collective uplift- 
ing not only of itself but, through example, of all other i 
states, xhe state is valued according to its ethical ideals: 

I 

States of the world are to be unified, not in a political 

' i 

but a spiritual unity derived from the universal observance 

r 

of the natural laws emanating from a Supreme being. 

fhe ulassocrats emphasise the need for unity within 
the state also and aim to achieve that unity through divis¬ 
ion. xhe broad divisions in the state are classes or occup-, 
ational groups-agricultural, industrial, commercial and 
intellectual. Ihe divisions within each class are trade 
unions or guilds and corporations, xhese guilds and corpor¬ 
ations achieve class unity by organizing different sections 


- 72 - 





■ 

: ; I f'jc : . .h .. . 








. . .. i:r v . ■ 





of the occupational group. i?no different occupational 
groups merge with one another to achieve a unified state. I 
Jfor the machinery of government, each class forms a council 
with limited jurisdiction from the different guilds and 
corporations. The different class councils merge to form a 1 
united local or municipal class council. Councils exist in 
provincial geographical divisions. 1 united. Class national 
State council forms the central legislative and executive 
body for the entire state. 2 he members of this central 
council are drawn from the superior men in the provincial 
councils, ihey are the aristocracy or "hew elite”, a 
Christian brotherhood supporting a Christian monarch or 
"hetman” who symbolizes in his person the unity of the state, 
he symbolizes the unity of all classes bound together by iovi 
and toil in the name of Cod. 

The united hetmen have an affiliated junior organiz¬ 
ation reflecting netmanschi ideals, known as "Sich". The 
hetmen claim the sympathy of at least 50of all Greek 

Catholis. xhe actual memoership, drawn mainly from the 

A 

cities is not great in alberta, headers in the hetmen 
organization are post-war immigrants of Greek Catholic faith, 
hetmen protest their love for Canada, and at the same time 
affirm that they are the true Ukrainian nationalists. To 
prove this*, they point with some pride to their school for 
war pilots, established in the united States to train pilots 


- 73 - 







. 


I l. 











. 

' 

' , t * ., ;■! v . 0 T j.) \ 'i ■ - 3.. ’ -; ’ ■ * - • 

i .-> »•. i ■_> '■ . . - C‘'. ;,n« 





t <i 











who will serve the Ukrain6*mthe next war. The success of 
the hetmanschi among Creek Catholics is dubious for, althougl 
they have the tacit approval of the creek Catholic clergy 
their ideology is foreign to the Canadian atmosphere. 

Though all three organizations w i&h to establish the 
Ukrainian state, they differ on. how this is to be achiev¬ 
ed. 'Samostyniki insists that it should be achieved through 
publicizing the Ukrainian question. National union favours ^ 
terrorism while the netmanschi, though not approving of ! 

terror look forward to a European war and its assumed result, 
a new deal for the Ukraine. Samostyniki is not concerned 
with the type of government in the new Ukraine, though some - 
members are repuulicans. National union favours a fascist 
state while the netmen wish to establish a Christian Monar¬ 
chy. The hetman or Monarch whom they support is Skorapatsky, 
resident of nerlin since his brief rule in Ukraine during 
the u-erman occupation. All organizations protest their 

i 

Ipyalty to Canada. Samostyniki is however more truly 
Canadian for its roots are here and the fundamental interest;, 
of the society are in Canada not in murope. 

All societies send money to to land to support the 
Ukrainian movement there. This financial aid goes to sup- 

i ■ 

port hospitals, schools, community centres and revolutionary 
organizations. Samostyniki which has, since 1931, refused 
further help to revolutionary organisatioas, contrioutes 


- 74 - 



, 



















. 



' 






. 

. ( 



■ 

f 

. 




. 


- - 





only to the upkeep of Ukrainian schools and hospitals in 
Galicia, national union sends funds to revolutionary 
military organizations, ihe netmen also make contributions 
to their society in Europe, ihe money is raised by concerts 
and plays in the nationalist halls throughout uanada. ihe 
actual amount sent each year is difficult to determine. 
S.U.S., for a three month period in i931 raised $4000 for 
the cause, ihe past six years has seen however a decided 
dropping off in financial aid from Canada. 

x : he history of a fourth society, the united labour 
Parmer iemple association is the story of Ukrainian radical¬ 
ism in Canada. after 1907, the Ukrainian proletariat began 
migrating to Canada. instead of settling immediately on 
land as their peasant predecessors had done, these Ukrainian 
workmen sought employment in mine, factory and forest, 
later, when umrainain intellectuals, many of whom were mem¬ 
bers of the social democratic Party migrated, they gave 
leadership to a proletariat already conscious of the class 
struggle. Many of these intellectuals became nationalists. 
uthers formed a Ukrainian social democratic party in Canada, 
in 1909 a newspaper known as the "Working People" was es¬ 
tablished as the voI S fre 7 of tne socialist movement among the 
Ukrainians, as a resul: of rising anti-soviet feeling, the 
government in 1918 disbanded the Social .Democratic party 
and destroyed the press of M i-he Working people".Ukrainian 


- 75 - 



p 




i 












labour leaders were forced to find other means of furthering 
the class struggle. 

ihey found the means in dramatic and cultural clubs 
already established among Ukrainian workmen, some affiliated 1 
with the defunct U.S.0., others independent of any organ¬ 
ization. f J?he first labour iemple or club received its 
charter in 1918. hereafter radical leaders worked through 
the various Labour femples. Phe period between 1918 and 
1924 was spent- in extending Labour temple organizations : 

among Ukrainian workers. In 1924-5 the Labour organisation 
was extended to include farmers and the new society, the 
United Labour 1’armer temple Association, received its 
Dominion charter. 

Although the Utl.IAt.A. is ostensibly a cultural and 
not a political organization, its ideology is communistic. 

In its cultural program it stresses the perfidy of capital- jj 
ism and the inevitability of the class struggle, in the 
1930 convention the society declared itself a revolutionary 
organization and expressed the need of focussing its atten¬ 
tion on mass revolutionary work. Phe organization declares 
however that it has no connection with the uommunist Party. 
Phis may be true but leaders in the farmer Labour Movement \ 
gave valuable assistance in forming the Uommunist Party in 

9 

1924. Members of u.L.f.x.A# organized the .farmers unity 
League, a radical organization which was responsible for the 


- 76 - 





Alberta grain strike of 1934. ihe U.L.fvr.A. has supported 
all demonstrations and hunger marches of the depression 
period. 'Phe organization is something more than a society 
for adult educationi 

Ihe U.l.lVi'.A. draws its support from both Ualician 
and £ukovinian elements. ihe strong Hussophil leaning of 
the Lukovinians has helped the movement among these people. 
All churches denounce the U*1.1.1'.A. as an enemy of organ¬ 
ized religion, ihe society has had, however a strong appeal 
during the depression years. 

She U.l.F.'l.A#: denounces the nationalists as capital¬ 
ists, enemies of the workers, and as propagandists of 
fascism. Ihey point to the Soviet Ukraine as the logical 
answer to the nationalists demands for an Ukrainian state, 
nationalists protest that the U.l.IVf.a. is bringing dis¬ 
credit to all Ukrainians, ihe farmer Labour group reply 
that nationalism has hindered assimilation and made the 
lot of the Ukrainians more difficult in Canada. 

ihese are the societies which are campaigning for 
Ukrainian membership and support. It is they who are at¬ 
tempting to form Ukrainian opinion in Alberta, who are 
directing Ukrainian activity and aspiring to Ukrainain lead¬ 
ership. through speakers, through the press, through branch 
es of the organizations every Ukrainian, young and old, has 
been made aware of conflicting demands for Ukrainian leader¬ 
ship . 


- 77 - 



r 



In the Ukrainian community in Alberta, the damostyniki 
organization flourishes wherever the Ukrainian orthodox 
church has taken root. A o ranch exists at Hallway, supported 
mainly be the business and professional men in the town. 

Greek Catholics in Hadway show little interest in the nation, 
al question, xhey are apparently indifferent to the 

i 

exhortations of the ketmanschi organization. At fEldorena, 
south of xadway, the national union has a oranch, establish- 
ed through the influence of one of the original organizers 
of the society. (/.Kupchenko) 

xhe village of smoky'Lake is divided betwen national¬ 
ist and communist. Ahe nationalists, are members of 
Sampstyniki• xhe UAL.i*A.A* which has strong support in the i 
village and surrounding district forms a stout opposition 
to the nationalists. Control of the village council, the 

i 

school board and the various civic offices is divided almost 
equally between the two groups, reelings run high and 

□ 

recriminations are bitter, Ah is dissension creates an un¬ 
pleasant atmosphere w/hich is hardly conducive to community 
co-operation. 

Among the kukovinians, only those who have joined the 
Ukrainian urthodox Church are concerned with nationalism. 

i 

xhe large Hussian-urthodox population south of Pakan to 
Andrew and Wostok are indifferent to nationalism and un¬ 
touched by its appeal. Generally these people recognize 


-78 






; 











" 






. 


■ .. . J r . . ... <’•■< ■ 

* 




■ 


. ' J V.< ~ 
















that they are Ukrainian, but they do not go beyond that. 

In the villages of Willingdon, Andrew and St.Michaels 
certain business and professional men sympathise with S.U.3. 
and are members but take no active part in furthering the 
program of the society among the farmers of their district. 
Between two hills and Ivlyrnam the influence of the U.L.iVA.A. i 
organization predominates, aipong the Greek Catholics at 
Myrnam there is a hetmanschi organization which has a limit- I 
ed support. A he United hetmen have al30 organized in the 
Greek Catholic community of i)urwent. 

At Chipman there are no nationalist organizatiohs 

' 111 ; 

and no one participates actively in ahy nationalist program. 

I 1 

Ahe re is some sympathy for hetmen aims at Mundare, but the 
influence of the organization has not penetrated to any 
extent among the farmers. Ahe predominant influence in the 
lives of these people is the Creek Catholic Church which, 
though tolerant of nationalism, is more concerned with jjl 

church than state. At Vegreville among the Ukrainain ortho¬ 
dox there is a Samostyniki organization supported by profes¬ 
sional and business men of the town. 

Ahe rural Ukrainian in alberta has not to any extent 
joined any nationalist society. Borth of the river, Samos- i 
;yniki is active and has some influence. In the catholic 
south, the hetmen have achieved a slight success. Ahe 
followers of the National Union are insignificant and are 


- 79 - 







limited to one or two localities. Sympathy for the object 
of the nationalist organisation may exist, but has not led 
to active participation by more than a few. ihe Russian 
Orthodox are indifferent and the Creek catholics are passive,;' 

In spite of the energy with which the organizations 
are pursuing their programs, the ultimate success of ukrain- i 
ian nationalism among the rank and file of the people may 
be doubted, xhe nationalist ideal is distant, not related I 

i 

to the daily lives of the people and is almost impossible tof 
achieve, fhe nationalism of hetmanschi or the National 
Union offers nothing tangible for accomplishment. 3amostyn- 
iki concerns itself more than the others with the Canadian 

I 

life but its appeal is to a small educated group. u?he 
success of this organization depends on the success of the 
Ukrainian Orthodox Church which is its instrument for ex¬ 
tending nationalist propaganda, phe Creek Catholic Church ( 
though it has climbed on the nationalist band-wagon for the i ; 
present is primarily concerned with extending Catholicism 
not Uxrainianism. As to the internationalism of U^L.F.T.A. 
its appeal varies with the price of wheat though the appeal 
remains constant to farmers on sub-marginal lands. 

Nationalism has done very little to remove the mountain 
of prejudice against the Ukrainians in Canada. In fact the 
term has become a-a* anathema to Lnglish Canadians. English 
business men in Ukrainian towns suspect the nationalists of 


- 80 - 











J '.V V v.i. -5 • r ■ l ;l 




... : ■ , *4 • 4 ; 


, - V r 










; . 








■ ' . 'i -V 


















undermining their business. The Protestant and rtoman Cath¬ 
olic clergy decry the activities of the nationalists as 
defeating their efforts among Ifkrainains. The nationalist 
is accused of self-seeking opportunism. He is accused of 
disloyalty to Canada, of hindering assimilation, of increas¬ 
ing the whole racial problem, These accusations are partly 
true and partly misconceptions• nevertheless the national¬ 
ist stands indicted on one serious charge that he is doing 
very little to assist his people to merge into the Canadian 
nation. 





Chapter VI 


Some thoughts on Assimilation 

O-fterv 

The word assimilation is^loosely applied. Two groups 
of people living in contiguous association exert an influenc'| 
on each other. The group greater in numbers, in culture 
and in prestige will eventually adsorb the lesser group. 1 
The process is necessarily slow regulated by the strength 
of the national or racial consciousness of the lesser group.! 
The individual is completely assimilated when his fundament- 1 
al behavior is that of the assimilaters. he may be complete 
ly at home with his own racial stock, he may understand 

j 

their customs and viewpoints but his own psychology is that 

| 

of the larger group, he will chose his mate, marry and live 
as the people whose emotional life he has adopted. 

uanadian ideas are steadily impinging on those of 
Ukrainians, altering and modifying the Ukrainian way of liv- ( 
ing. Assimilation or fusion has been in progress since theii 
early settlement in Alberta. The first step towards assim¬ 
ilation was taken when the Ukrainian immigrant broke the 
ties of his old home to find a new life in uanada. It is a 
process that cannot be completed however in one or even two 
generations. Considering the handicaps of block settlement 
some progress has been achieved. 

That the Ukrainians should achieve a Canadian view¬ 
point is highly desirable. There is too much sectionalism 

Q 

11a n 



/■ 82 - 






in Canadian political and social life without continuing 
that of immigrant groups. Canada needs more than anything 
else a national unity and a hational viewpoint. Canadians 

Tcoona //r><7 

have a real problem m b le e din gs the divergent views of 
preach and Kngiish citizens. Add to these views, those of 
every immigrant group who have setijed in blocks sufficiently 
large to maintain a degree of national unity, and the prob- ' 
lem becomes one of colossal proportions. There is nothing 

more dangerous, no’thing more detrimental to national progress' 

i 

than the spirit of "little Ukrainianism". She eventual and .1 
complete fusion of Ukrainian people with the other stocks 
that hftre settled in Western Canada is a social and political, 
necessity. 

She re are divergent views on the speed with which this 
fusion should take place, ultra-canadian organizations in- 

5 

sist on immediate and rapid asimilation of the central 
European. Ukrainian nationalists would, if possible, prevent 1 
assimilation or impede its progress for some time, too 
rapid assimilation would destroy the culture which Ukrain¬ 
ians might contribute to Western Canada. It would have and 
has had in many cases, and unsettling effect on the stabil¬ 
ity of Ukrainian society. The aims of the nationalists how¬ 
ever, if achieved|would be disastrous to the Canadian nation. 

There is no reliable measure of assimilation. There is 
no way of striking an average to indicate how far Ukrainians 
have become assimilated to Canadian life, certain Ukrainian 


- 83 - 






Canadians are entirely assimilated; others, in spite of a 
Canadian education, cultivate ukrainianism. Dy considering 
phases of their social and political life some light is 
thrown on their progress in assimilation. 

fhe Ukrainian wedding ceremony is elaborate with ritu¬ 
al and custom, the Dukovinian ceremony is more involved 

i 

than the modified ualician practices. the groom calls for 
the bride on the morning of the wedding and receives the 
blessing of her parents. After a long ceremony at the , 

ehurcn ne taxes his bride back to her parent* s home and 
returns for her late in the afternoon. Dancing, eating, and 
drinking go<~n on sometimes at the hone of both bride and 
groom, all afternoon and far into the night. Sometimes thesr 
celebrations last for three days. the whole community 
gathers to celebrate the union. it is a gala occasion and 

I; 

provides a pleasant break in the summer 1 s work, xhe celebr- 

i 

ation is not without its practical side, kvery man has an 
.opportunity to kiss the bride by contributing perhaps a 
dollar for her future welfare, xhe custom is justified by 
its financial success. 

there has been recently a decrease in typical Ukrain¬ 
ian weddings, this is principally due to excessive costs, 
but there has been a tendency for Ukrainian young people to 
adopt the quiet weddings of the English Canadians. A groom 
pointed ott that he celebrated his wedding Ukrainian style, i 


- 84 - 






































to please the parents of the bride. 

a 

Ukrainian young people like other Canadians, choose 
their mates freely. In the early days of Ukrainian settle¬ 
ment there were instances of fathers arranging the marriages’ 
of their children. Phis was discouraged by the church how¬ 
ever. xhere are no instances of this now unless in the very , 
remote districts. 

"Intermarriage is at once an index and a method of | 
assimilation"# !*he following tables are based on information 

.1 

from the department of Public Health in Alberta as recorded 
in 1927 and 1955, 

Marriages of Ukrainian Men 


crooms belonging brides belonging brides of other 70 of 
to creek Churches to creek churches denominations .intermar- 
year range 


1927 

564 

556 28 

1-/C 

1955 

451 

402 49 

IQ 7° 



Marriages of Ukrainian Women 


brides belonging 
to creek churche 
year 

crooms belonging brooms of other 
s to creek churches denominations 

u /o of 

intermar- 
r iage 

7T 




1927 

576 

556 40 

6 

H 

1955 

491 

402 89 

1 SjO 


xhe percentages are based on the assumption that men 

if Canada and the dew Canadians--John A.cormie m.-U. 

-85- 













or women belonging to denominations other than the Greek 
Churches are non-Ukrainian, ihis is not necessarily the 
case, hor do the conclusions take into consideration mar¬ 
riages contracted between Ukrainians and Poles, who though 
Homan catholic are nearer to Ukrainian than Canadian stand¬ 
ards. lor this reason the percentages do not give an accur¬ 
ate picture of intermarriage, Phe figures do indicate how¬ 
ever some increase in intermarriage, particularly between 
Ukrainian women and non-Ukrainain men. Phe higher percent¬ 
ages in this case is probably explained, by the fact that 
there are obviously fewer obstacles to such a union. 

The percentage of intermarriages is still dow. A i 
factor working against intermarriage is block settlement. 

When a district is completely Ukrainian there is very little 
opportunity for racial intermarriage, isven in mixed English 
and Ukrainian districts there is relatively little intermar¬ 
riage . Differences in home environment act as a deterrent, 
isnglish Canadians of the middle class frown on such an 
alliance. Intermarriage takes place usually among the highly 
educated or among the most ignorant of each race, nacial 
prejudice is strongest among middle class English Canadians. 

xhe status of the Ukrainian woman has changed since 1 
her settlement in Alberta. The wife of the immigrant 
settler worked in the fields with her husuand. Dhe wore no 
shoes and dressed in simple clothing, phere are many such 


- 86 - 





women in the block yet. the Ukrainian Canadian girl has 
different ideas however on her wifely duties. She no longer 
works in the fields, she has discarded the typical Ukrain¬ 
ian head shawl and she wears the latest styles that the mail¬ 
order houses can provide. 

Though lacking practice in self-government the ukrain- 

i 

ians have taken to our political institutions with some 
aptitude, they excel in local politics, unfortunately 
their interest proceeds, not so much from public spirit as 
from the rivalry existing between opposing groups. When the 1 
clash is between nationalists and communist s r the local 
struggle for power is especially bitter. The type of teacher 
hired is often determined by the political colour of the 
school board. Municipal politics in the villages is the 
testing ground for the strength of the factions, although 
such struggles do not add to the dignity of public office 
they at least provide interest which is often lacking in 

local politics. 

■ 

The Ukrainians are just beginning to feel their way 
into the field of Provincial and Dominion politics, before 
the war political parties had Ukrainian agents working to 
secure the votes of these new citizens for English cnadi-datei 
since the war however, Ukrainians have, more often t ha a not, 
been represented ay men of their own nationality. There are 
at present two Ukrainian members in the Provincial House i 


- 87 - 







representing constituencies that lie in the block, until 
1935 the representative for the Dominion Parliament, Mr. 
Luchkovich was also Ukrainian, Xhe demand for national rep¬ 
resentation is partly due to the fact that there are young 
Ukrainian Canadians capable of representing their people, 
it is partly due to the growing national consciousness since 1 
1918. 

Ukrainians consistently voted Liberal in the early 
years after their naturalization. Xhey came to Canada under| 
a Liberal administration and so regarded the Liberals as 
their especial benefactors! Xhe election act of 1917, pass¬ 
ed by a Conservative government disfranchised these people, 
as aliens, Xhe memory of this still rankles in Ukrainian 
minds, xhe U.jr.k. movement in 1921 gained a good many Uk¬ 
rainian followers. in the 1930 Provincial and Dominion 
elections the Ukrainians elected two u.ml. candidates \ 

(Messrs. Core sky and Mi skew) to the provincial house and re¬ 
elected Mr. Luchkovich (u.if.k.j to the Dominion house. 
Ukrainian constituencies in the 1935 elections, however, 
elected a complete social credit representation. Xhe 
political metamorphoses of most Ukrainians ha^fcbeen Liberal, 1 
Ukir.A. and Social credit. 

Xhe franchise was a new experience to Ukrainian im¬ 
migrants and one might expect unusual results. Xhere is 
little to indicate however that apart from local politics, 


- 88 - 









Ukrainian political behavior is any different to that of old 
er Canadians, at one tine the Ukrainians voted according to 
the leadership of some influential citizen. Ihis period of 
"xammany politics’ 1 seems over, iheir choice of cnadidated 
is dictated now by the economic interests of the farming 
class. They supported the U*m*A. when that movement seemed 
to offer so much to Western farmers. Ukrainians were no 
more invulnerable to the attractive promises of docial creddl 
than other Albertans. iSven nationalism failed to stem the 
rush to Social credit support. Mr. liuchkovich was defeated 
in Yegreville by Mr. nayhurst, wp English Canadian. 

xhe public school system has proved a most efficent 
agent in the assimilation of immigrant peoples in north- 
America. Alberta has been singularly fortunate in her 
educatiohal policy among Ukrainians, Ghoul districts were 
organized between the years 1907 and 1915. xhe Provincial 
Department of education appointed a supervisor of school^, 

Mr .a.M.Jfleteher with headquarters at Wostok to take complete 
charge of organization work. Mr • jrletcher was successful in 
overcoming any antagonism which the Ukrainians held towards 
a public school system. In the early years schools operated 
in the summer months only. Gradually the Ukrainians accept¬ 
ed the Departments policy of yearly schools. At present 
practically .all schools operate on a yearly oasis. 

A distinctive educational feature in the Ukrainian 




area has been the development of the two,*room rural school. 
i*his development resulted from the large and increasing 
school population in Ukrainian districts, two- room schools 
are more frequent in the Ukrainian block than in any other 
part of alberta. xhough lacking in facilities they have 
done much towards giving students training beyond public 
school grades. Usually instruction is given in the first 
two years of the high school course. Many students begin 
their high school training in these schools and complete it 
in neighboring villages or towns. 

xhe villages of the block provide excellent high 
school facilities, aadway, Smoky lake, Hillingdon Hairy 
Mill, Chipman and Mundare have two teacher high schools, 
uther villages have single teacher high schools providing 
training to ..grade kl. fhe school buildingsin the newer 
villages along the u.P.a. are handsome structures and are 
quite modern. 

xhe educational development is partly due to Govern¬ 
mental pressure. It is partly due, as well, to the fact 
that Ukrainians have been quick to appreciate the advantage 
d f education. Most parents are anxious to give their child 

• TV 

ren as much traing as they can afford. Ukrainians still 
rememuer their first years in Canada when their ignorance 
made them fair game for numbers of unscrupulous agents. 

xhe schools are staffed almost entirely by Ukrainian 


- 90 - 





teachers, ihis has occured only within the last seven years 
More Ukrainian teachers have graduated recently from the 
provincial normal schools and the tendency has been for the 
Ukrainian school boards to employ these teachers exclusively, 
ihere has been a demand recently for lessons in Ukrainian 
after school hours which necessitates a teacher of ukrainiai 
descent, k reaction against employing English teachers has 
resulted from the knowledge that Ukrainian teachers are not 
employed in English districts, v*uite often the teacher is 
the son or daughter of some influential ratepayer in the 
district. 

ihe teachers are qualified according to provincial 
regulations, unfortunately many speak English with a marked 
accent, duch teachers are unable to teach English properly. 
Ihe language on the playgrounds of a Ukrainian uanadian 
school is quite often nothing more than jargon, k Ukrainian 
teacher however is able to play a greater part in community 
life, xhe tendency of the rkiglish teacher was to hold apart 
entirely from the life of the community, frequently the 
Ukrainian teacher secomes involved in the district warfare 
between the factions in Ukrainian society. in this way his 
position is sometimes less secure than an English teacher 
independent of Ukrainian politics. 

xhe community hall is often used as an educational 
centre. Ukrainain youth organizations, where they flourish 


- 91 - 





are active in the study of Ukrainian culture and the discus¬ 
sions of questions related to farm life in Canada, The U.l. 

carries on an educational program in the localities 
in which it has strength. Summer schools are often held in 
halls to train children in the Ukrainian language. 

The school is the spearhead of the advance of Canadian 
ideas into solidly Ukrainian areas. It cannot be expected 
however to assimilate the children of our immigrant, sett¬ 
lers in one generation, home environment exerts too strong 
an influence on the individuals life to be overcome oy a 
relatively short period of school training. The school 
however opens the community to the Canadian influences of 
press and radio. 

As yet the English language newspaper is rarely read 
in rural Ukrainian holies, home families suoscrioe to weekly 
or monthly farm journals. The majority of Ukrainians, how¬ 
ever read only the publications of the different Ukrainian 
societies. The press is not yet taking much part in the 
assimilative process, neither is the radio. The rural 
Ukrainian Canadian rarely owns a radio, he regards it as an 
English luxury. 

block settlement as a drawback to assimilation has 
been stressed. The national movement in all its ramifica¬ 
tions is also a stumbling block to the fusion of Ukrainians 
into Canadian society. The avowed purpose of all societies 


- 92 - 




is to cheek the assimilative process, The steady bombard¬ 
ment of propaganda from platform, press and pulpit is not 
without its effect. The influence of the junior branches 
has fastened the minds of youth on nationalist issues. If 
Ukrainian youth, through an appeal to national pride can be 
aroused over a matter remote from Canadian interests, they 
are far from being completely assimilated. 

Many young educated Ukrainian Canadians show no inter¬ 
est in Ukrainain affairs and are anxious to participate fullj 
in Canadian life, if they enter business or professional 
life however they are soon aware of the strong prejudices 
held towards Ukrainians, frustrated in their attempts to • 
earn a living among English people they are forced to turn 
to their own people. They become, more often than not, 
bitter nationalists, Thus a good deal of nationalism result* 
from the discrimination against Ukrainians on the part of th< 
older Canadian. Ukrainian Canadians are quick to resent 
the fact that, although their numbers are great, few are 
employed in the civil service. They resent the discrimin¬ 
ation against Ukrainian teachers. It is a sore point with 
the nationalists that there is no Ukrainian representative 
in the kEecutive council. Mo Ukrainian Canadian has ever 
oeen appointed to the judiciary. It may be argued that 
Ukrainians have not yet proved their ability to hold such 

t 

positions. The fact remains that the appointment of even a 

cq 


- 93 - 




capable man would meet with the disapproval of the majority 
of older Canadians. 

!he efforts of nationalist societies are not to ue 
condemned entirely. They have given leadership to Ukrainian 
society where leadership was lacking. All societies, espec¬ 
ially idamo styniki, emphasize the need for education among 
Ukrainians. The favourable attitude of Ukrainians towards 
education has been fostered by nationalists. Nationalist 
societies are working with commendable seal to raise the 
cultural standards of their people. ihey are working to 
develop and maintain Ukrainian culture, ruthermore they 
have attacked the proolem of the Ukrainain youth, who, since 
losing interest in their churches have no real guiding force 
in their lives. 

Nationalists contend that love for the homeland is a 
pre-requisite for good Canadian citizenship. They contend 
that only those who have no national culture, the truly 
ignorant, assimilate readily, xhere is a modicum of truth 
in the statement, xhe Russian (orthodox assimilate more 
readily than the Ukrainian orthodox, since they have no 
loyalties apart from their chirrch. Whether this resuits in 
poorer Canadian citizenship is a moot question f In spite 
of the contrioutions of the nationalists, it would have been 
better for both Canada and the Ukrainians if nationalism 
had not stirred Ukrainian society and if Ukrainian immigrants 


- 94 - 





quietly accepted uanaaian ideas in fh.e natural course 
of assimilation. 


- 95 - 






Conclusion 

The Ukrainian as a citizen 

iDhe idea is often expressed that Canada erred in admit, 
ting Ukrainian immigrants. While these people have raised 
problems for both sociologist and jurist the conclusion is 
neither just nor accurate. Ukrainians in alberta produce a 
large share of the agricultural wealth of the province. They 
have developed unfavourable lands which might otherwise have 
lain idle. Without previous experience and with little 
government aid Ukrainians have proved themselves better than 
average farmers. Sifton®s opinions of the central European 
as a farmer have been justified. 

It is true that Ukrainians in general do not enjoy 
good reputations as law-abiding citizens, lawyers and 
magistrates who have experience with these people comment 
on the relatively high number of convictions among theip. 

Mr. Stanley rtands in a survey# of the inmates of jrort Saskat¬ 
chewan gaol for I93£ came to the conclusion, that no other 
group, with the possible exception of the Poles, had as 
large a proportion in the gaol population relative to its 
proportion of the general population in alberta. Ukrainians 
constituted 2.6 percent of the 1,188 prisoners whereas they 
formed onlyOQ.4 percent (-Mr.Hands figures) of alberta's 
total population, His conclusion corroborates general im¬ 
pressions and constitutes somewhat damning evidence against 

# T hesis-l -9-^-P-Hr .8.Hands. 

/fan^s Stanley "f/he tnJmJv*I i " Thesis of/Ube/f^ 

1 1933 j 












the Ukrainian as a citizen. However there are extenuating 
circumstances which must ue considered and which alter the 
picture considerably, xhe Ukrainians are passing through a 
period of conflict between two completely different social 
and cultural Environments, xhe Ukrainian immigrants soon 
found that proper behavior according to their standards 
might not fac considered proper by Canadians, xhis was 
evidenced by their frequent infringement of the liquor laws 
during prohibition. Ukrainians failed to understand; why 
maxing or sellinasmuch less drinking home^urewed liquor 
should constitute an- indictable offence, a distinct clash 
of viewpoints existed on this matter. 

xhe conflict has been accentuated in the lives of 
second generation Ukrainians, xhe young Ukrainian uanadian 
finds himself suspended between two cultures, xhe standard 
of the home are at variance with those of the state, 
frequently the Ukrainian youth rejects home standards with¬ 
out replacing them with Canadian ideas. He loses respect 
for all authority, lacking a definite, assured oasis of 
bekhvio r the young Ukrainian Canadian is more likely to 
commit offences against the law. 

*£hese conditions are unfortunate but are of only 
passing significance. fhey are phases of the assimilative 
process and have no bearing on the ultimate desirability of 
Ukrainians as citizens, xhe re is evey reason to believe 


- 97 - 







that as assimilation proceeds Ukrainians will achieve 
generally the reputation of law-abiding citizens, uertainly 
the behavior of the majority of these people justifies such 
an opinion. 

Ukrainians have proved themselves on the iarm and in 
the classroom, khey have passed through a trying period of 
initiation and have achieved the status of citizenship, 
xhey should be.treated as fellow citizens. It is true that 
there are aberrations within Ukrainian society that are un¬ 
healthy to Canadian interests, .out these aberrations are 
not so serious that they cannot be corrected by a helping 
hand a.id a square deal, hole ranee is a crying need in the 
treatment of our Ukrainian Canadians. 



- 98 - 





UKRAINIAN HISTORY IN EUROPE 


MAGAZINE REVIEWS: 


Czerniewski 
Gibbon, h.A. 

Alsberg 

Ross 

Unsigned Article 
Books and Pamphlets: 


"Ukrainia" 

"Ukraine Balance 
of Power" 

Allied Dog in 
Ukrainian Manger 
First Impressions 
of Soviet Ukraine 
"Ukraine” 


Living Age, 1918 
Century 

Nation, March 27, 
1920 

Living Age, 1922 

Literary Digest, 
May 10, 1919 


"Taras Shevchenko" Ukrainian publish- 
1936 ing Company of 

■, Canada, Winnipeg 

"Akr^ge De M. Giard et E. 

L’Histoire de Bri^re, Pafis 

L’Ukraine, 1920" 

(a translation from 
the Ukrainian orig¬ 
inal) ^ 

"Histoire de Russie" Leroux, Paris 
1932 


Doreshenko, D. 
Erushevsky, M. 

Milioukof, Eisenman 
and Seignobos 
Mirsky, D.S. 

Lawt on, L• 

Nowak, E. 

Philips, Allison 
Rudnftsky, Stephen 
Ti|tman 
Yatches/ John 


Russia, 1931 

The Ukrainian 
Question 
"Mediaeval Slav¬ 
dom and the Rise 
of Russia" 

Rise of Poland to 
1928 

Ukraine, 1918 

Peasant Europe 
1934 

Ukrainian Lit¬ 
erature, 1924 


The Cresset press 
London 

Anglo Ukrainian 
Committee, London 


Rand McNally & Co 
New York 
Jarrolds, London 

A Thesis, Univer¬ 
sity of Alberta. 


THE UKRAINIANSIN CANADA 


Bossey, W.S. 
Connie, John A. 


"A, Call" 1934 

Canada and the 
New Canadians, 
1931 


Classocracy League 
of Canada 

The Social Service 
Council of Canada 










England, R. 

England, R. 

Scott, W.L. 

Young, C.H. 

Volinetz, M. 

Reports and Reviews: 


"The Central European 
Immigrant in Canada, 
1929" 

The Colonization of 
Western Canada, 1936 

The Ukrainians, Our 
Most Pressing Problem 

The Ukrainian Canad¬ 
ians, 1931 
Fifteen Years of 
U.L.F.T.A. 


Fifteen Years of Cur Progress, 1933 

Annual Report of Vital Statistics Bureau, 
1927, 1935 

Religious Denominations by Racial Groups 


GENERAL: 

Draelisler, J. Democracy and 

Assimilation, 1920 


Macmillan Co. 
of Canada Ltd. 

P.S. King and 
Son, Ltd., 
London 

Catholic Truth 
Society of 
Canada, Toronto 
Nelson, Toronto 

U.L.F.T.A. 

Winnipeg 


The Ukrainian 
Orthodox Church 
Dept, of Health, 
Gpvt. of Alberta 
Dominion Bureau 
of Statistics 


The Macmillan 
Co., New York 



















