

For Reference 



NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 



THESIS'. 


VAPOR - LIQUID EQUILIBRIA IN HYDRO CARBON 

SYSTEMS. 

1 Suonitted in Partial Fulfilment of the 

Requirements for the degree of liasters of Science. 

I 

_ 

fey 

C, A. Johnson, 

under the direction of 

hr, E, H. Boomer, 

j 


























0JC MBBIS 

mwiusiiaais 

EBTO11ISIS 











VAPOR - LIQUID EQUILIBRIA IR HYDRO GARB OR 


SYSTEMS. 

Submitted in Partial Fulfilment of the 
Requirements for the degree of Masters of Science. 

*>y 

C. A. Johnson 
under the direction of 
Dr. E. H. Boomer, 


Time devoted to thesis work, l6 months 

out of 22 months devoted to Masters work. 

Time is proportional on basis of 7 months for an 
academic year and 4 full courses representing 
one years academic work. 


Edmonton, Alberta, 


April 1?36 








page 


CONTESTS. 

Introduction... 1 

Literature Review.. 5 

Theoretical Considerations. 14 

Mat eri al s....» .. 29 

Apparatus and Operation.... 3 5 

Results and Discussion.... ... •. 62 

Calculations, .. 62 

Discussion of Errors. ... . 66 

Properties of Gases. •. .. ................ 72 

Impure Heptanes, Gas A System.77 

n - Heptane Gas B and Nitrogen Systems... 77 

Cyclohexane Gas A and Gas B Systems.,,,,,,,., 100 

Benzene Gas B System.. 110 

Toluene Gas B System... 129 

System Interrelationships,.. 144 

Relations to the Turner Valley Pield.............. 160 

Summary.. 164 

References... 165 

Acknowledgement... 168 























Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/vaporliquidequilOOcajo 


















-1 


Introduction 

A knowledge of the properties of two phase 
liquid - gas systems in equilibria under high pressure 
has become increasingly important in recent years. 
Increasing attention to such investigations has been 
shown by the number of reports appearing in the 
literature. Except rarely, the systems investigated 
have been two or three component types using gases 
and liquids of widely different chemical properties, 
ihe present work deals with systems substantially two 
component, of chemically similar gases and liquids, 
the hydrocarbons. 

Prom the practical point of view, interest 
attaches to this investigation in the application of 
the results to studies of oil and gas producing 
horizons. The immediate local application is to the 
Turner Valley oil and gas field in Southern Alberta. 
Further, the trend to higher pressures in industrial 
practice during recent years, particularly in the 
petroleum industry, makes such investigations as the 
present one necessary as an aid to design of processes 
and equipment. Formerly with moderate pressures, the 
perfect gas laws and such other limited laws as that 
of Henry were of sufficient accuracy for the purpose 
of design. With many procesrses operating today at 

























. 
































• 



, 




















* 










V ■ - 























2- 


pressures upwards of 50 atmospheres,, such laws give 
results that may he in error hy 20/6 or more and are 
obviously inapplicable, ho less however is the interest 
of such systems from a purely theoretical point of 
view, A kinetic or thermodynamic treatment of these 
systems is quite useless until an adequate amount of 
reliable experimental data has been obtained. The 
application of the laws of thermodynamics presents 
results in the form of differential equations, the 
coefficients of which, must be determined experimentally. 
As will be discussed later, expressions for these 
coefficients based on ideal laws fail to represent 
results even approximately. 

Before attempting to consider complex 
systems such as exist in underground petroleum 
reservoirs or for example, in a cracking still, it 
was thought advisable to consider two-, or 

at the most three-component hydrocarbon systems. This 
plan of investigation permitted the use of relatively 
simple procedure in obtaining precise and unambiguous 
data. further the interpretation of the results of 
such systems would be greatly simplified and should 
lead to correlations between phase behavior and 
chemical properties. 

The experimental work was designed to 



















. 

















. 

. 





■ . 

















. 












. 





















, 

t 










'■4 














- 3 - 


determine the properties of the liquid and gas phases 
present in equilibrium with one another at temperatures 
from 25° C. to 115° G and pressures to 5400 lb. per. sq. 
inch, except in cases where the system had a critical 
pressure which was lower than this maximum pressure. 

The critical pressure in the sense used in this thesis 
is the pressure at which the densities of the two phases 
are identical and above which the gas and liquid a,re 
miscible in all proportions. The temperature range 
covered is probably greater than the range of 
temperature existing in oil formations but less than 
common in industrial processes. 

he liquids used were heptane, cyclohexane, 
benzene and toluene. Preliminary steps to include the 
use of hexane and methyl cyclohexane nave been made. 

The gas used in developing the methods and in some of 
the earlier work was a dry natural gas consisting 
largely of methane with small amounts of nitrogen and 
heavier hydrocarbons. Por all other work, a gas 
containing only methane and nitrogen v/as prepared. 

"These simple systems were investigated as a 
preliminary study to the more complex mixtures such 
as exist for example in the Turner Valley field. 

This work is a direct continuation of 
preliminary investigations carried out in previous 
















, 

' 

















. 

. 


, 

. 





. 

































4- 


years in this laboratory by G. H. Argue (2) and 
and J. Edwards, 










-5- 

Literature Review . 

The literature covering this type of work is 
relatively scanty 'but nevertheless is of considerable 
age. Most of the previous work dealt with chemically 
unrelated pairs of gas and liquid or gas and solid 
systems. Only recently has work appeared from a few 
laboratories dealing with pairs having high mutual 
solubility. In what follows it is proposed to review 
briefly some of the literature and to present such 
theoretical considerations as appear necessary in 
clarifying the subject. A more detailed theoretical 
discussion will follow in the next section. 

Of the earlier investigations, that of 
McDaniel (2J) can be mentioned. He determined the 
solubility of hydrocarbon gases in organic liquids at 
atmospheric pressure and at different temperatures. 

He noted the difficulty in connection with the high 
vapor pressure of the liquid, in which case the total 
pressure could not be taken as the gas pressure. As 
will be shown later this effect becomes more apparent 
at higher pressures. further Dalton *s law of partial 
pressures cannot be applied to mixtures of gases and 
vapors. The systems are not ideal and the perfect gas 
lav/ is inapplicable even at pressures near one 
atmosphere. 









-6- 


Frolich, et al. (^7) determined the solubility 
of a number of gases including Methane in hydrocarbons 
and water zo pressures of 200 atmospheres. They 
found that, if the gas does not form a chemical 
compound with the solvent, Henry*s law is obeyed over 
the pressure ranges used, at least within the limits 
required for engineering design. They state that the 
solubility of methane may be considered a linear 
function of the applied pressure for the range studied. 
They further state that the straight line relation 
may hold for even higher pressures if correction for 
the deviation from the ideal gas laws are applied to 
the gas phase. However correcting the pressure of 
carbon dioxide for its deviation from the perfect 
gas laws makes the agreement to Henry’s law less than 
if no correction had been applied. No account was 
taken in this work of the vapor pressure of the 
liquid. 

A number of investigators have determined 

the solubility of natural gas in various crude oils. 
Mills and Heithecker (27) found that the volume of 
oil increased and the specific gravity decreased 
as gas dissolved and the change was proportional to 
the amount of gas dissolved. Beecher and Parkhurst(4) 
and also Boy/ and Galkin (6) <confirmed very largely 





t 










< - 

, 





















. 













•I 


* 























. 










- 7 - 


the results of Mills and Heithecker. In addition they 
showed that the solubility of the natural gas decreased 
to a considerable extent with increasing temperature. 
Lindsly ( 19 ) determined the solubility of natural gas 
in crude oil more or less under field conditions by 
obtaining samples of solution at the existing well 
head xoressure. The amount of gas liberated upon 
gradual reduction of pressure was measured and 
analyzed. His results were roughly similar to those 
described above. 

The most comprehensive work in two phase 
equilibria in hydrocarbon systems is that of Lacey(lp) 
and his co-v/orkers. They devised methods and 
apparatus for studying phase equilibria in hydro carbon 
mixtures up to 200 atmospheres over a temperature 
range of 20 - 100° €. 

Investigating the methane - propane system 
Sage et al (3?) obtained a critical pressure at about 
90 Atmospheres and 20° C. A n increase in temperature 
resulted in a lowering of the critical pressure. 

They say, ” The large region of retrograde condensation 
is to be expected owing to the large difference in 
critical temperature of the components. 11 By M retrograde 
condensation*’ is meant an evaporation, of transfer of 




























■ 





' 


. 




. 




















. 










. 






-8- 


vapor from liquid to gas phase, that occurs where the 
gas pressure is increased at constant temperature. 

This phenomena is observed over a range of pressures 
starting at some pressure below the critical where the 
vapor content is a minimum and becoming more pronounced 
as the critical pressure is approached. This can be 
predicted from a consideration of the kinetics of 
such systems. With different gases the effect of 
pressure on vapor pressure of the same liquid does 
not vary greatly. On the other hand for the same 
gas, the vapor pressure of different liquids is 
increased by widely different amounts measured 
roughly by the relative volatility of the liquid or 
its critical temperature. The critical pressure of 
the system is determined roughly by the difference in 
the critical temperatures of the liquid and gas, being 
higher the greater this difference. On the other 
hand the xoosition of the minimum in vapor content of 
the gas phase is determined largely by the volatility 
of the liquid. Hence bringing the critical temperatures 
closer together by lowering one or increasing the 
other will reduce the pressure range over which 
retrograde condensation occurs. This will be shovm 
more clearly in discussing the results. 





-9 


Studying the solubility of a dry natural gas 
in different crude oils Lacey et al (lj?) found the 
solubility at 100° k. to be almost directly proportional 
to the pressure over the range investigated. Change 
in gas composition had a marked effect on the 
solubility. They state, ” The assumption that a simple 
dissolving process occurs when a gas is brought to 
equilibrium with a liquid in complex hydrocarbon 
systems is valid only when the system is far enough 
belov; the critical pressure of the mixture that there 
is no appreciable transfer of the components of the 
liquid phase into the gas phase. ” In dealing with 
systems having volatile constituents in the liquid 
phase it may be concluded from this type of work that 
the term, ” solubility” cannot be applied in the 
ordinary sense. In such cases equilibrium is 
attained by a transfer of constituents between both 
phases rather than only a partial dissolving of the 
gas in the liquid. 

Since the theoretical developement is 
independent of the nature of the components in such 
systems and a general similarity exists between the 
behavior of all two phase, two component systems ; 
a brief consideration of the work on non- hydrocarbon 






10 - 


systems is of interest. 

Sander ( 41) found that the solubility of 
Carbon Dioxide in certain solvents increased more 
quickly than corresponded with the prediction of 
Henrys law with pressure and in others increased more 
slowly. The composition of each phase v/as plotted 
against pressure on one diagram and a continuous 
curve resulted, for the carbon dioxide - water 
system. large region of retrograde condensation 
was clearly shown. ^ critical pressure was obtained 
at approximately 70 atmospheres and 35° F, the 
critical pressure increasing with temperature. In 
general the reverse ha3 been 3hown to hold for 
hydrocarbon systems. 

Over the range of pressure and temperature 
used by Sander (41) the solubility decreased with 
temperature. He found that the solubility of the 
gas in chemically related solvents such as different 
members of an homologous series decreased with 
increasing molecular weight. This is in contradiction 
to McDaniel’s (25) results at one atmosphere for the 
the solubility of methane in hexane and heptane. 

Larson and -^lack (l6) determined the 
solubility of a 3-1 hydrogen - nitrogen mixture in 







. 







* 










♦ 

, 


. 






. 




- 












■ 













-Il¬ 


liquid ammonia, through a temperature range -2j. 2° to 
+ 22.0° C. at pressures to 150 atmospheres. They 
found the temperature coefficient of solubility to 
be positive at high pressures and the solubility 
increased with pressure according to Henry*s law. 

Saddington and Krase ( 35 ) studied vapor- 
liquid equilibria in the system nitrogen - -water up 
to 300 atmospheres through a temperature range of 50 ° 
to 300° 0. At all pressures used, 100 atmospheres 
and upwards, a minimum was observed in the 
solubility of nitrogen at about 70 -Bo° G. They say, 
“Above this temperature the solubility increases very 
3lowly when it is considered that the gas and liquid 
become miscible in all proportions at the critical 
point ( T *=■ 374° G. )** However this is the critical 
temperature of pure w.ater and it will be shown later 
that such a. system under high pressure must reach a 
critical at a lower temperature than that corresponding 
to pure water. 

Wiebe and Gaddy (45, 46, 47) determined the 
solubility of hydrogen, nitrogen and helium and 
mixtures of hydrogen and nitrogen in water at different 
temperatures to a pressure of 1000 atmospheres. A 
minimum was observed with respect to temperature in 



















, 















t 


* 
















■■ . 

















. 




' 












' 12 - 


all cases, the minimum for nitrogen, hydrogen and 
helium in water being 70, 55 &nd 30° G. respectively. 

It has been pointed out by Kuenen ( 12, 13 ) 
that solubility minima are a phenomena that can be 

deduced on theoretical grounds from the known 

r 

behavior of mixtures and that the occurence of 

A 

minima is not necessarily dependent on the specific 
properties of the solvent or solute. He suggested 
that every gas should show a minimum at some 
temperature. It should be pointed out that such 
minima may not be realized at low pressures inasmuch 
as they may exist only at temperatures above the 
boiling point of the liquid, under low pressures. 

Recently Krickevsky and Kasarnovsky (11) 
derived a thermodynamic equation for calculating the 
solubility of slightly soluble gases in solvents 
with small vapor pressures. The necessity of 
correcting Henry*s law for the changing concentration 
of the liquid phase wa3 pointed out. They corrected 
for this by assuming that the concentration of the 

tw*t- 

gas in the liquid is small. They assumeu^the gas 
pressure was the same as the total pressure. Their 
equation Yras verified for the solubilities of nitrogen 
and hydrogen in water at pressures to 1000 atmospheres 








-13- 


ancl temperatures from 0 - 100° G. 

Howeverjthat their equation would not he 
applicable to hydrocarbon systems is made clear when 
it is considered that the vapor pressure of the 
solvent may a»#t er b -e —re - latively - 'gr e at oompa-rod to 

J =r Zi r* i~ K r^’ ) 

the total pressure, an d-t ha r t the gas concentration in 
the liquid phase at high pressures is usually over 
50 mol ^ Ik y ol r <s> eu=* r* b o r>. s y * s • 












-14- 


Theoretical Considerations . 

The general conditions of equilibrium in two 
component - two phase systems, substantially what are 
being done here, are given by the Phase Rule, P - G-P+2 - 2 
normally one condition is fixed arbritrarily leaving 
P s 1 and the behavior of the system is univariant and 
represented graphically by a line. 

The theoretical background leading to 
quantitative expressions of the properties of such 
systems may be said to be in the theorem of Le 
Chetalier and Dalton’s lav? of partial pressures. 
Practically Le Chetaliers theorem leads to the statement 
of Henry’s law that at constant temperature and in 
the absence of compound formation, the solubility of 
a gas in a liquid is proportional to the pressure of 
the gas. Purther, Henry’s lav? in conjunction with 
Dalton’s lav/ leads to the conclusion that the 
solubility of each component of a gas mixture in a 
liquid is proportional to its £> a *”tial pressure. 

Henry’s law assumes implicitly that the properties of 
the liquid are unaffected by pressure. 

Poynting (30) pointed out from elementary 
thermodynamic considerations that this assumption 
could not be exactly true and that the vapor 







. 

, 


■ 







■ 15 - 


pressure of a liquid was a function of the total 
pressure on the liquid, fhe poyntlng relation is 
defined by the equation 



This equation states that the change in the pressure 
of a vapor dP^ in equilibrium with a liquid when 
the pressure on the liquid is changed by dP^ is equal 
to the ratio of the molal volume of liquid to vapor. 
Using the ideal gas law for the vapor and for the 
liquid the equation of state. 

V x — V Q ( 1 - BP) 

Where B — Coefficient of compressibility of the 
liquid. 

dP V ( 1 - BP ) dP 

_y — _o__ __ 1_ 

P RT 

v 


Integrating, assuming B is constant. 

P V ( P-P ) (l - B ( P + P 


In 


V ( P-P 
o 




--( 1 ) 


RT 


It is evident that this relation will be 
applicable only for the ideal case v/here the liquid 










-16 


is pure and the vapor obeys the perfect gas law. 

The relation may be applicable qualitatively in practice 
to any gas - liquid system however. It is interesting 
to note that this relation requires a continually 
increasing vapor pressure of the liquid at constant 
temperature with increasing total pressure. Of 
course when the pressure is applied by a permanent 
gas over the liquid the mol fraction of liquid in the 
gas phase may decrease with encreasing pressure and 
generally does, up to a certain pressure. The mas3 
of the gas component in the gas phase is increased at 
a faster rate with pressure than the mass of liquid 
vapors in the ga3 phase. At high pressures, as the 
vaporization effect becomes more important, the 
the reverse becomes true and the fraction of liquid 
vapor in the gas phase may increase with pressure. 

A gas under pressure in contact with a 
liquid may be considered to act as a semipermeable 
membrane through which pressure i3 exerted on the 
liquid and into which the liquid may vaporize. The 
vapor pressure of the liquid should increase as the 
gas xoressure is increased, quantitatively according 
to Poyntings relation, if the gas is insoluble in the 
liquid. In practice Poynting ! s relation is not even 









- 17 - 

appro&imately obeyed at moderate and high pressures 
even for such cases as nitrogen and water where the 
gas may he considered inert. Considerably more 
liquid vaporizes than is predicted. 

Gibbs (8) has treated the general case 
qualitatively, according to phase rule principles 
and after assuming the applicability of the perfect 
gas laws and neglecting solubility of the gas in the 
liquid proposed an equation of state similar to that 
given above. 

Hoozeboom (34) from a somewhat similar 
viewpoint concluded that the solubility of the gas 
in the liquid and the vapor content of the gas phase, 
both increase with pressure; ultimately a critical 
pressure being reached above which the system is a 
single phase and the components are completely 
miscible. 

The phenomena of transfer of vapor from 
the liquid phase to the gas phase has been a subject 
of much controversy. One obvious objection-to 
equation (l) is that it neglects the effect of 
solubility of the gas in the liquid. Prom a 
thermodynamic point of view^solution of the gas in 
the liquid should cause a lov/ering of the vapor 








-18- 

pressure of the liquid at a given pressure because of 
the diluting effect of the gas, similar to the 
lov/ering of the vapor pressure in aqueous solution of 
salts. However from a kinetic point of view, solution 
of the gas should cause an increase in the vapor 
pressure of the liquid due to weakening of the forces 
of Van her Waal3 'between the liquid molecules. These 
effects counteract one another, the latter effect 
being the most important. 

The relatively high concentration of vapor 
in the gas phase for different systems has been 
explained by some v/orkers on the basis of specific 
solubility of the liquid in the gas. In such a case 
obviously no general theoretical relation which would 
fit the different systems could be derived, because 
the magnitude of the effect would be a specific 
property of the components. 

Villard (43) observed the solubility of 
iodine from the solid state in carbon dioxide under 
pressure. Large solubility effects ?/ere observed 
with both gaseous and liquid carbon dioxide. 

Hannay and Hogarth (10) using various 
solids and gases obtained the same effect as did 
Villard. 







- 19 - 


Villard (44) later determined the solubility 
of liquids and solids in gases and found methane to be 
particularly effective in regard to solvent action. 

He found that iodine, camphor and paraffin volatilized 
in the presence of compressed methane and on releasing 
the pressure the solids condensed on the inside of 
the tube. These results strongly suggest that gases 
under high pressure have the power to dissolve 
liquids and solids. It seemed highly doubtful to 
them that an increase in the pressure could increase 
the vapor pressure of solids to such an extent as 
was observed. 

Of more recent investigations that of Larson 
and Black (17) might be mentioned. ^hey found that 
at -79° C and 190 atmospheres the concentration of 
ammonia vapor in a compressed mixture of hydrogen 
and nitrogen over liquid ammonia was 5 times as great 
as the concentration calculated with the aid of the 
perfect gas laws and the f>oynting relation. 

Although the solubility of the gas in the liquid was 
appreciable they neglected to take it into account. 

Pollizter and Strebel (29) determined the 
influence of air, hydrogen and carbon dioxide under 
pressure on the vapor pressure of water and of 


















* 











- 20 - 


hydrogen and nitrogen under pressure on the vapor 
pressure of liquid carbon dioxide. The concentration 
of water vapor changed with the gas above it and in 
all cases was greater than that expressed in the 
Poynting relation. The authors beleived that the 
indifferent gas exerts an attractive force on the 
molecules of the liquid and that a measure of this 
force is the difference in the molal heat of 
evaporation of the liquid in vacuum and in the 
presence of an indifferent gas. ^or the system 
liquid carbon dioxide - nitrogen the volume % of 
ca,rbon dioxide in the expanded mixture was plotted 
against pressure. A minimum in the curve was obtained^ 
the volume per cent of carbon dioxide decreasing at 
first with pressure and then increasing. 

Bartlett (3) found that the Dalton partial 
pressure calculated from observed vapor concentration 
and the perfect gas law3 was four times greater than 
the Poynting pressure for water compressed by nitrogen 
at 1000 atmospheres. After a correction for the 
deviation from the ideal gas law had been applied, 
no agreement between observed results and calculated 
results could be detected . He also found that nitrogen 
held 44 % more water vapor than hydrogen at the same 






21 


pressure. However it was found "by Wiebe and Gaddy (4^, 
47) that hydrogen is much more soluble in water than Is 
nitrogen under high pressure. If more hydrogen goes 
into solution at a given pressure one would expect that 
the weakening of the forces of Van Der w aals would be 
greater than for the nitrogen - water system at the 
same pressure. This is the reverse of the observed 
facts and suggests strongly that the higher vapor 
concentration in nitrogen was due to the preferential 
affinity of water for nitrogen; that is to say, 
solubility action is involved. 

Another explanation for this phenomena 
has been discussed, namely, that association of the 
vapor molecules under the influence of the inert gas 
occurs and the measured concentration cannot be used 
to calculate partial pressures by any ordinary 
equations of state. ^his explanation does not appear 
probable in view of the present related work 
involving such compounds as paraffin hydrocarbons 
which commonly show no tendency to associate. It 
is probable that the deviation from the simple 
Poynting relation arises from unwarranted assumptions 
regarding the equations of state for the phases. 

Van Laar (42) has pointed out that the 






- 22 - 


j liquid phase must he considered as a solution of the 
gas in the liquid and that the perfect gas laws 
cannot he applied to the gas phase. He assumed Van 
Der Waals equation for both phases and solved the 
thermodynamic equation for the nitrogen - water 
system and showed that an approximate four-fold 
increase in the Dalton partial pressure as found 
hy Bartlett was to he expected. The equation developed 
hy Van Laar is cumbersome and the calculations are 
difficult. He assumed the validity of Dalton's law 
and averaged the constants for each component in 
arriving at an equation of state for the mixtures. 
i The agreement between calculated and observed values 
is significant in showing that no specific 
solubility effect or other special phenomena need be 
postulated. Lurie and Gillespie ( 20) have shown that 
averaging the constants of equations of state for 
individual components gives the constants in an 
equation of state for a mixture with satisfactory 
precision. However they also show that if Dalton's 
law in the form, 

P- = P X 
1 o 

P^ is the partial pressure of the constituent whose 
mol fraction is X 













23- 


holds for a gas mixture then, the mixture must obey 
the perfect gas lav/s. Since these mixtures do not 
obey the perfect gas laws, Dalton’s law cannot he used 
to calculate partial pressures from vapor concentratian 
ratios. This suggests that the agreement between Van 
Laar’s results and experiment was somewhat fortuitous, 

Randal and Sosnick (33) tested the 
applicability of this form of Daltons law for different 
gaseous solutions. Using the data of Iiaason and Dolley 
( 24 ) for mixture of argon and ethylene they conclude 
that for gaseous solutions above the critical temperature 
of all consitiuents the rule holds approximately, the 
deviation being greater the higher the pressure. For 
gaseous solutions below the critical temperature of 
one of the constituents, the law does not hold. They 
used a3 a basis the work of Larson and Black (17) 
and Lurie and ^illespie (20). They pointed out that 
any attempt to calculate the fugacity of the pure, 
•’supercooled, ” ammonia vapor at the measured total 
pressure would be meaningless. This is obvious 
since under the conditions of temperature and 
concentration of ammonia in the gas phase found, 
ammonia by itself could exist only as a liquid. 

McHaffie (26) suggested using activities 







-24- 


instead of pressures for the sapors* He found that 
the activity coefficient for water vapor in equilibrium 
with liquid water in the presence of air was in good 
agreement with the results calculated from the data of 
Pollitzer and Strebel (29) , ^upples (5) discussed 
the solubility of liquids in the gas phase. According 
to this concept a solubility effect could be defined 
as being a change in the activity of one component 
which i3 due to the presence of other components. He 
discussed the system ammonia,(l), ammonia (g), 
hydrogen (g), nitrogen (g), and using an equation of 
state for the ammonia vapor obtained values for the 
vapor content of the gas phase which agreed well with 
the data of Larson and Black (17)* Prom the results 
Cupples concluded that the behavior of such systems 
could be explained without assuming solubility effects. 

Most of the equations developed so far 
have been for systems in which the two compounds are 
immiscible, relatively, and it is unlikely that any: 
of these equations could be used to describe the 
effects for hydrocarbon systems such as used in 
thi3 investigation. 

A differential equation relating the 
composition of both phases and pressure can be set 














< < • 

- 

' 













- 25 * 


up quite easily as follows. 

Let f, p, P, F and N represent the fugacity, 
partial pressure, total pressure, free energy and mol 
fraction respectively, in the liquid phase. Primed 
symbols refer to the gas phase. Subscript o, refers 
to the pure components. 

Maintaining the system in a state of 
equilibrium, for any change in conditions it must be 
true that, 

dP — dff 1 

This must hold for both components or alternately, 
since f is defined by, 

F - HT In f ~h A, 
d In f = d In f 1 
For the liquid component. 



At equilibrium. 


















This relation is true but of little value 


until integrated, a process requiring a knowledge of 
the partial differentials as functions of P and N. 

That is to say equations of state are required for 
both phases of the system. In the ideal case f may 
be put equal to P and dli^ — 0 and proportional to 

P^ and the equation reduces to the Poynting relation, 
Equations of state are not available for 
either phase but it is of interest to attempt an 
integration making some simple assumptions and 
taking into account the change in composition of 
the liquid phase. 

We may assume 

f^ 1 proportional to 

then 


dlnf. 1 1 



The calculations of Randal and gosnick (33) 
mentioned previously, gives some justification for 
this procedure. 

Purther for the liquid phase. 
























- 27 - 

In f 7 

° 1 ~ 1 


<3 p 

Assuming Raoults law, 


f i = 


d in f 


RT 


f iX 


d In H 


and, 


Then, 


d In f. 


d Iff. 


<) ln h 1 ' 


dP 


IF, 


4- 


dir. 


or 


v 

1 


RT 



<usr 1 




RT 


dP 



dP+dln 


N. 


1 


The second and third terms of above equation are 
unknown and can only be determined by P - V - T 
measurements on the individual phases. The present 
work deals only with two phase systems and does not 
give P - V - T data for the individual phases. 


























-28- 

The system ammonia (g), hydrogen (g) and 
ammonia (l) has been treated somewhat from this 
point of view by Weibe and Tremearne (48). They 
determined the partial molal volume of liquid 
ammonia and hydrogen as a function of composition. 

They point out the necessity of further measurements In 
order to predict the solubility of hydrogen in ammonia 
without having to make unwarrented assumptions. 

Attempts to evaluate the coefficients in the 
present case from assumed equations of state were 
unsuccessful, the integrated equation being little 
better than the equation based on the Poynting relation 
given earlier. 

It is easier to determine by experiment the 
properties of the two phase system than to determine 
the equations of state required to predict such 
properties. 











< 





' 



■ 


« 

. 

















- 29 - 


Materials, 

The gas used in the preliminary experiments 
was Viking Natural gas and after purification in a 
manner to he described, g©,ve the following analysis 
on an Or sat apparatus, 

CH 4 - 90.79% 
c 2 H 6 - 3. 50 % 

h 2 - 5.71st 

Thi3 value of ethane may have included 
traces of other heavier hydrocarbons. The density 
of this gas at 1. T, P, as determined by weighing 
was 7«730 x IQ " 4 g,/ co. This gas will be referred 
to as Gas A* in the experimental results. 

There are obvious objections to the use of 
a three component gas in-thi3 work and a method 
and apparatus were devised whereby the ethane and 
heavier hydrocarbons were removed by pyrolysis. 

A series of experiments based upon previous work ( 9 ) 
showed that pyrolysis at a temperature near 7^0° C. 
and the proper rate of flow resulted in the 
decomposition of all hydrocarbons in the gas except 
CH 4 , The products of pyrolysis excepting methane 
were removed in a manner to be described. Thi3 gas, 
referred to a3 Gas B, hereafter, was 94, 5 ir 0, 5% 








- 30 - 


Methane and 5.3 ■+■ 0.5 Nitrogen with 0.2$ or less 
of other gases such as Hydrogen, Ethylene etc. The 
sample U3ed to determine the p-Y-T relations of 
Gas B. contained $4.3% Methane and 5*6% Nitrogen 
with «.Q, 1$ of other gases and had a density at N.T.P. 
of 7*644 x 10~ 4 g. / cc, 

.Liquid Solvents. 

Heptane, Eastman Heptane, Practical, from 
petroleum, used as starting material was Y/ashed with 
cold concentrated H 2 S0^ to remove olefines and 
sulphur compounds until no discoloration of the acid 
could he noticed. It was nitrated to remove traces of 
aromatics, washed with water and then dilute alkali. 

It was dried over Calcium Chloride and distilled in 
a 38 inch vacuum jacketed column packed with steel 
turnings. The 90 - 95 ° 0. fraction was nitrated 
further, washed with water, dilute alkali, dried over 
Calcium Chloride and the 9 0 - 93° C. (679 
fraction collected. The density of the final product 
was 0,704, ^his high value indicated the presence of 
cycloparaffins. However it was used in the initial 
experiments testing and improving the apparatus. 

joater an attempt was made to obtain heptane 
from Crude Turner Valley Naptha. Sixteen litres 
were distilled and seven fractions collected. The 













t • 

* - 

. '" 

, 


t 

, 


• c • 3 ■ '• 

- 

< • 

, 

. 

* - 














-31- 

80 - 100° C. fractions were' combined, washed with 
cold concentrated Sulphuric acid until no discolor¬ 
ation of the acid was observed, washed with water, 10$ 
Sodium Hydroxide, water, dried over Calcium Chloride 
and fractinated again. The density of the 75 - 94° C, 
fraction was found to be greater than 0.73 and on 
treating with a nitrating mixture gave evidence of 
containing aromatics. This fraction wa3 nitrated, 
sulphonated by refluxing for 48 hours with 10$ 
fuming Sulphuric Acid, washed with water, dilute 
alkali and dried over Calcium Chloride, 

This material was fractionated twice and 
a 83 - 95° Uut examined. The density was found to 
be 0.707 at 21° C, and refraction index of 1.3961 
The physical constants indicated the presence of 
cycloparaffins. Sufficient material to make a few 
experiments was obtained. 

M - Heptane prepared from Jeffery Pine Oil 
was obtained. This material had a density at 22.5° 
of 0.681 and refraction index of 1,3867 at 23.0° C. 

The physical constants remained unchanged- after 
fractionating and it was considered pure enough for 
the requirements. 

Cycloh exane 

Eastman cyclohexane, practical grade, 










I 


* 


* 




- 




' 
















« - ■ - - 

. 




. i 




- 


..- V- 


.■ ' 






"" 

. 

■ 


■ 













. 







-32- 


having a density of 0.776 at 21° C. and a refractive 
index of 1*42416 was nitrated* washed with alkali* 
water, dried over Calcium Chloride and fractionally 
distilled once, the middle fraction being retained 
and fractionally crystallized 4 times to give a 
product with a density of 0.773 and refractive index 
of 1.4271. These values indicated satisfactory 
purity. 

Benzene. 

Thiophene free "benzene, with a melting point 
of 5.40° G. and density of 0 .877 wa3 fractionally 
crystallized 3 times to give a product with a density 
of O .878 at 20° C. and a melting point of 5.4J° C. 
These values indicated a high degree of purity. 
Toluene. 

C. P. grade toluene was washed four times 
with cold condentrated Sulphuric Acid, dilute alkali 
and water. It was fractionated and the fraction 
"below 110° C. was discarded. It was then refluxed 
with a partial condenser of a column held at 100° C. 
This separated any low boiling fractions in time. 

The final product had a density at 20° C of 0.864 
and refractive index at X 6 . 6 ° C, of 1 . 4968 , indicating 
satisfactory purity. 

In addition to these solvents n-hexane 






- 33 - 


and methyl cyclohexane have been prepared for use in 
future work, 

JA - Hexane was prepared from Propyl alcohol 
as outlined by Mair ( 23 J* ^ - Propyl alcohol having 
a density of 0. 8o3 at 24° C. was converted to propyl 
bromide by the hydrobromic - sulphuric acid synthesis 
(28 The distilled material was dried over Calcium 
Chloride for a week and fractionated, the first JO cc. 
being discarded. The yield of final product was about 
80 /£ of the theoretical. 

An attempt was made to convert the propyl 
bromide to hexane according to the method used by 
Lewis @t al( 18 J for the synthesis of octane. The 
specific directions used by Mair in the conversion 
of the bromide to the hydrocarbon were not available 
and the directions for the synthesis of octane were 
followed. Anhydrous ether was prepared by washing 
ether with a saturated sodium chloride solution, 
drying for a week over three portions of Calcium 
Chloride, dried over sodium and distilled. The 
drying and distilling over sodium was repeated until 
no coloration of the sodium in the ether wa 3 observed 
after standing a day, indicating that all water and 
ethyl alcohol had been removed. 


Poliowing the directions of Lewis et al ( l 8 ) 








- 34 - 


a very low yield of hexane was obtained and the 
physical constants of the final product indicated that 
it chiefly consisted of propyl bromide. The reaction 
was then carried out without using any medium, sodium 
wire being put directly into the propyl bromide. The 
mixture was refluxed and the reaction, initiated by 
heating had to be cooled with an ice - water mixture. 
The physical constants of the product indicated a 
high concentration of hexane. The yield was small 
( 20 fa) but it is hoped better yields will be obtained 
in the future. 

Methyl Cyclohexane, 

Eastman, technecial grade, methyl cyclohexane 
having a refractive index of 1.4235 was nitrated until 
no discoloration of the acid occurred. It was washed 
with water, dilute alkali, water, and dried over 
Calcium Chloride for 48 hours. Fractionating four 
times gave a product, boiling within 97.8° C and 
98.0° C (uncorrected) and had a density of 0,766 at 
21.5° 0 and refractive index of 1.4218 at 22 ° C. 



















. 



. 













■ . 





, 

■ ... . • - • 

- - 

... 







. 


. 











- 35 - 


Apparatus and Operation. 

The apparatus consisted essentially of four 
parts,(1) the low pressure pyrolysis and purification 
system. (2) the compression and high pressure 
purification system. (3) the solubility apparatus and 
(4J the analytical apparatus. 

The pyrolysis apparatus is shown in figs. 

1. and 2* The process consisted essentially of 
cracking the higher hydrocarbons and odorant sulphur 
compounds, and then removing the unde3ired products 
of the reactions. 

The flow of gas wa3 controlled by observing 
the flowmeter A. and manipulating the inlet stopcock. 
The gas was passed thru a calcium chloride drier B. to 
a 3/4 inch quartz tube, G. heated to y80° C. over a 
length of 12 inches. , in which conversion of the 
ethane , heavier hydrocarbons and sulphur compounds 
in the natural g&3 to liquids, methane, olefines, 
hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide occured. The gas was 
then passed through a glass wool filter D. to remove 
most of the tar, through a soda lime tower E, to 
remove sulphur compounds and to an activated charcoal 
absorber E. which removed very largely the heavier 
hydrocarbons. The gas was next scrubbed by sulphuric 
acid in the tower G. holding about 400 cc. concen¬ 
trated sulphuric acid containing about \% silver 






•36 



Pig* Pyrolysis Apparatus 













- 37 - 



iJ'ig. 2. pyrolysis Apparatus 





































































































































- 38 - 


sulphate as catalyst. The acid was heated to about 
70° 0 with a gas burner. Continuous circulation of 
hot sulphuric acid v/as obtained by the glass and 
mercury pump shown. This removed the olefines complet 
ly* The sodium hydroxide scrubber H. removed any 
sulphur dioxide produced by reduction of sulphuric 
acid and oxidation of sulphur compounds. The gas 
was passed over 2 killograms of copper oxide I. at 
400° C which oxidized the hydrogen* carbon monoxide 
and any traces of unsaturates left to c a rbon dioxide 
and water. The bulk of the water produced was 
retained in the water trap, after which the ga3 was 
led through a smaller copper oxide tube at the same 
temperature to remove the last traces of hydrogen, 

A soda lime tower removed the carbon dioxide produced 
over the copper oxide. By varying the rate of flow 
and temperature to give the best results it was 
possible to prepare 40 cu. feet of gas per day. The 
composition of the gas was 94,5 ~t 0*5%> methane, 5*3 
ir 0 a 5% nitrogen with 0,2$ or less of other gases, 
chiefly The variable amount of methane was 

produced from ethane due to slight variations in the 
temperature of the pyrolysis tube. The consumption 
of chemicals per 100 cu, ft, of gas prepared was; 

1000 cc, of technical grade sulphuric acid, ?Q g. 





















. 

* 






* 

* 

■ 

• t 






» • - 












. 


. 

, ... 

. 

. 

. ^ . . • 




a 










. 










- 39 - 


calcium chloride, 50 g. activated charcoal, and 80 g. 
soda lime. The charcoal was re-activated when saturated 
by distillation with superheated steam at 300° 0. for 
20 minutes. All temperatures were measured with 
thermo-couple3 and were held constant to 5° of the 
desired temperature "by manual control of the heating 
current through rheostats. The purified ga3 was 
stored in water sealed gas holders. 

The compression and part of the high pressure 
storage system is shown in Pig. 3. and a diagraii&tic 
sketch is shown in fig, 4. The gas was taken from 
water sealed gas holders and compressed into storage 
cylinder A, Por operating pressures below 4000 lb./ 
square inch, the gas was passed directly into a 
subsidiary storage cylinder G. by opening valves 1, 3* 

4 and closing 2. The purification system consisted 
of a calcium chloride drier D, an activated charcoal 
absorber B. # a copper oxide autoclave P. heated to 
320 ° C. followed by sodium hydroxide and calcium 
chloride in G. and H. respectively. This purification 
system served to remove all moisture and traces of 
gases not taken out in the low pressure purification 
system. When natural gas i. s. Gas A. was used for 
the solubility work, concentrated sulphuric acid was 
used in E. to decompose odorant sulphur compounds. 








< 





. 

•. ■ . : 


: fw '■ ■ 









r 








- 












. 




* 




. 




U .i 









40 - 



3 « Compressor & High Pressure Storage 
System. 





























41 - 



!Fig. 4. High Pressure Storage. 













































































































42 - 


Por pressures greater than 4000 lb / sq. in. 
gas wa3 passed into the hydraulic compression cylinder 
B. by opening valve 2 . The pressure in this tank 
could be raised to 5000 lb / sq. in, by pumping a 
75 $ glycerine - water mixture into the tank with a 
hydraulic pump. Gas in cylinder C. could be raised 
to this pressure by closing valve 1 and opening 3. 

The maximum operating pressure (5400 lb / sq. in. J 
was obtained by warming cylinder 0 . with valve 4 . 
closed to the purifiers and open to gauge J, after 
it had been filled to 5000 lb / sq. in. at room 
temperature. 

Connection from cylinder C including gauge 
J. to the pipettes was made through the 3 - way valve 
and valve 5* The combination of the hydraulic pump 
liquid cylinder B. and storage cylinder C. enabled 
the making of several experiments on one lot of gas. 

When it was desired to replenish the 
gas supply, liquid could be withdrawn from cylinder 
B. through valve 7 * 

Pressures were recorded by Bourdon tube 
gauges. Two different gauges were used at J. to 
read pressures in the solubility pipettes. A 
0 - 5000 lb / sq. in, gauge for pressures below 
3000 lb / sq. in. and a 0 - 10,000 lb / sq. in. 






- 43 - 


gauge for higher pressures. These gauges were 
calibrated at frequent intervals by comparison with a 
dead weight piston gauge. The piston of the dead 
weight gauge was calibrated by the National Physical 
Laboratory, England, The other two gauges shown in 
Pig. 4 . are 0 - 10,000 lb, / sq. in. gauges and were 
used only for control purposes. 

The solubility apparatus is shown in Pigs. 

5 and 6, It was so designed and assembled that the 
gas and liquid phases could reach equilibria with 
one another at a resonable rate and known volumes of 
each phase withdrawn for analysis. 

The sample of gas phase was contained in 
the upper or gas phase pipette A. Pig. 6, and the 
sample of liquid phase in the lower, liquid phase 
pipette B, These pipettes were connected to the 
central reservoirs through 1/16 inch and 1/8 inch 
pressure tubing respectively. The pipettes could 
be isolated by closing valves 2, 3 , 4 , 5 * The 
solutions could be withdrawn by connecting to the 
analytical apparatus at E, and slowly opening- 
valves 6 or 7 as desired. 

The volume of the pipettes was determined 
by weighing the amount of mercury required to fill 
them under pressure. The volume of the gas phase 













- 44 * 



Fig. 5 . Solubility Apparatus 














- 45 - 



I 


Pig. 6. Solubility Apparatus 

















































































































-46- 

pipette with valve closed. wa3 11.206 ~t 0. OOj cc. and the 
liquid phase wa3 21.002 t 0,005 cc. The volume of 
each central reservoir wa3 approximately 60 cc. 

The whole assembly wa3 pivoted at C. and 
could be oscillated through about 90 ° "by means of a 
rocker D. The rocking mechanism with the pipettes in 
place is shown in Pig, 7* The rocking mechanism was 
so designed that the pipettes were held in the extreme 
tilted position for about 1/2 minute before tilting in 
the other position. The tilting motion was sufficiently 
rapid as to provide agitation of the contents of the 
central reservoirs. Holding the apparatus in the 
extreme positions for a period of time permitted the 
flow of liquid from one reservoir to the other 
through the liquid phase pipette. A reverse motion 
being followed by the gas phase through the gas phase 
pipette. At high pressures when the density difference 
between the two phases was not sufficient to ensure 
certainly the flow of liquid from one reservoir to the 
other, a close fitting piston was put in the lower 
pipette which would slide from one end to the other as 
the pipettes were tilted. Leakage past the piston, 
while not great did permit sufficient circulation to 
insure uniform composition. 

Considerable time and effert was spent in 













_ 









- 








. 


- 



. 




. <,4 i: ; k ,L 


* 

■ 

. 


. : ■ : .. 


. .;l ..... 








■ 



- 47 - 



Fig. 7 Hocking Mechanism 

showing solubility apparatus assembled. 


















43 - 


developing suitable valves and valve packing. A 
certain valve seat easily made without necessity 
for frequent reseating and consequent change in 
volume was necessary. The most satisfactory type 
of valves was found to be a needle valve in which 
the valve stem did not rotate but moved only 
parallel to its axis. Experience showed only one 
satisfactory type of packing for the glands which 
consisted of 1/2 inch of leather rings backed with 
graphite and oil impregnated asbestos ring packing. 
This gave a gas tight gland and the inside leather 
rings prevented any grease or graphite from entering 
the pipettes and contaminating the liquid. Great care 
was required in packing and tightening the valve 
glands to keep the valve stem and valve seat in 
line. By carefully packing the gland it was possible 
to get a gas tight packing with the gland nut little 
more than hand tight. 

After long us age the valve seat was not 
distorted to any noticeable extent as was shov/n by 
re-calibration of the pipettes after 8 months of 
continuous use. Ho change in volume was noticed. 

The approximate liquid level in the 
central reservoirs was ascertained by means of the 
liquid level indicator shown in section, on Pig. 6. 








- 49 - 


The indicator depended for its operation on the 
different thermal conductivities of the liquid and 
gas phases. Two identical platinum wires (2 inches 
of 1*5 rail foot wire) within the reservoirs formed 
two arms of a Wheatstone 'bridge. The leads to these 
v/ires from the external circuit were carried into 
the reservoirs by means of pressure leads using 
double cone ebonite insulators. The other two arm3 
consisted of two resistances, one fixed and the other 
variable^Maass ( 21 small constant current (0.06 
amps) was impressed upon the bridge between the 
external terminals of the platinum wires and served 
to heat the wires slightly. A sensitive wall type 
galvanometer was connected between the two external 
resistances and the metal work of the central 
reservoir. If one of the platinum wires was in the 
liquid phase and the other in the gas phase the 
galvanometer showed a large deflection due to the 
different rates of heat loss with consequent changes 
in temperature and resistance of the wires. This 
liquid level indicator showed the position of the 
liquid level within the limits fixed by the position 
of the platinum wires. This was sufficient for the 
purpose of the work namely, that there be two phases 






- 50 - 


in the central reservoir. 

The temperature of the pipettes was held 
constant by an oil bath visible in Eig. 7* which 
could be lowered from the pipettes for manipulation 
of valves when necessary. The bath was heated by 
a 400 watt open heater and a 400 watt plate heater 
not shown. The temperature was kept uniform by a 
mechanical stirrer and was thermostatically controlled 
to 0.1° 0. Temperatures were observed on a calibrated 
thermometer reading to 0.1° G. 

The operating procedure during a run was 
as follows. After flushing the pipettes with gas 
and opening valve3 2, 3, 4, 5 {Eig, 6), a funnel 
was fitted at the outlet of valve 8, the 
approximate amount of liquid poured in and valves 7 
and 8 slowly opened. Enough liquid was added so 
that at equilibrium the central reservoir would be 
approximately half full of liquid. The amount 
required could be determined quite easily from 
a knowledge of previous experiments. 

Connection was made to the gas supply and 
the pressure raised to the required value. The oil 
bath was raised to position and oscillation 
commenced. After 15 minutes at temperature the 





- 51 - 

oscullation wa3 stopped, connection made to the gas 
supply and the pressure again adjusted to the operating 
value. This cycle was repeated 5-6 times until no 
discernable pressure drop occur^d in the pipettes 
after one hour of oscillation. The bath was lowered, 
valve3 2 , 3 , 4, 5 closed and connection made at E. to 
the analytical system. After the analysis was complete 
during which process the pipettes were evacuated, 
valves 6 and 7 were closed, 4 and 5 were opened and 

7 opened momentarily to flush the empty space with 
gas. A funnel was connected to E. , the required 
amount of liquid poured in to replace that removed 

from the pipette as samples , and another run was 

* 

made as described above. By this procedure a 
number of runs could be made without releasing the 
pressure in the central reservoirs. 

The analytical system is shown in Eig$. 

8 and 9* The contents of a pipette were allowed to 
expand slowly through valves 6 or 7 (Eig. 6) to the 
analytical system, and most of the liquid was 
retained in condenser B, cooled to -l8° C. by an 
Hydrochloric Acid - ice mixture. 

Connection to the pipettes was made by 
means of a flexible coprjer tube ending in the glass 
to metal joint A. G. is a mercury filled trap to 






5.2' 



Fig. 8 - Analytical & Gas Analysis Apparatus. 
Gas Analysis apparatus shown to the right) 







































- 53 - 



Pig. 9 -Analytical Apparatus 









































































































- 54 - 


give protection against accidental surges of gas 
from the pipettes. Pressures to the left of tap 4 were 
measured on manometer H. excepting for very Ioy/ 
pressures when the Mcleod gauge 0. was used. The gas 
after going through the condenser i3. wa3 passed through 
the Toepler pump D. into the storage system M. which 
consisted of one 1-litre and three 2-litre glass 
flasks. The volume of each was determined accurately 
by weighing the volume of water required to fill them. 
The volume of tubing between taps 9* 10* 11* 13 and 
known positions on the manometer K was obtained by 
pressure comparisons with a small bulb of known volume 
sealed to the apparatus, using pure dry air as gas. 

The volume of this space to a fixed high point on the 
manometer was calculated and a correction added depends 
ing on the manometer reading in each measurement. The 
storage bulbs were surrounded by a cardboard case to 
serve as an air bath in which a calibrated thermometer 
reading to 0.1° C. was placed. The pressure of the 
gas in the bulbs was measured on manometer K. The 
millimeter scales used with the manometers were 
checked with a cathetometer. The vacuum sides of 
all manometers were evacuated periodically, 
pressures being measured on Mcleod gauge C. The 
density of the gas in the bulbs was determined by 




- 55 - 


means of the calibrated density bulb 1*. The weight of 
the bulb was determined in the usual manner using a 
similar sealed bulb a3 a counterpoise and calibrated 
weights; all usual precautions incident to such 
weighings being taken. The volume of the density bulb 
wa3 obtained by determining its weight evacuated 
and full of distilled water at a known temperature. 

The volume was 530.6 cc. Samples for analysis were 
taken off through tap 13 in connection with the 
combustion apparatus to be described. 

The operation of the apparatus was as 
follows. The copper tube was attached to the pipettes 
at E. Pig, 6 , The whole system was evacuated to 0,1 
mm, mercury with mercury diffusion pumps backed by an 
oil pump through tap 6 . 

Taps 1, 3i 5# 7 > 8 , 12, 13 and 9 or 11 

depending on the storage capacity required were 
closed, 2 was connected to the pipettes. The cooling 
mixture wa 3 raised around the condenser and the 
outlet valve on the liquid phase pipette slowly 
opened. The liquid phase was analyzed first because 
of the possibility of very high pressure rising in the 
pipettes due to expansion of the liquid when room 
temperatures were high. 

The gas wa 3 expanded at a rate of about 





. - 








' 


; 

, 

. 


, 

. 

, 




► 

• 


i • « t < «...<•<•• 


. 

. . X. : <, ...... 

........ • . 'X b a x i # riv > 0 i j - ifix 




. 


. 











- 56 - 

100 co, per minute, ^hen the pressure in the pipettes 
was the same as that in the rest of the apparatus the 
volume to the left of tap 7 was evacuated to about 
4 mm, of mercury by the Toepler pump D. The taps 
on the condenser were closed, 1 and 5 opened and the 
evacuation brought down to 0,1 mm mercury. Taps 1 , 5 * 
and 4 were closed, tap 7 opened and the gas was 
circulated through the storage bulbs by the Toepler 
pump; which was operated automatically by a water 
suction pump connected at L*; through the Maass 
control ( 21) E, 

The condenser was removed by warming the 
ground glass joints to soften the sealing wax used as 
a seal. The condenser was weighed, contents removed 
and weighed again. Using a standard procedure which 
permitted correction for the volume of the condenser, 
the weight of liquid could be determined. 

The gas was allowed to circulate for about 
1/2 hour which experience had shown to be sufficient 
to insure uniform composition of the gas in the 
bulbs. Tap 7 was then closed and the volume of tubing 
back of the Toepler pump was evacuated, the mercury 
levelling bulb was raised until mercury reached tap 
10 which was then closed. Prom a knowledge of the 
pressure, volume and temperature of the ga3 its 
volume at B. T. P. could be calculated. The density 





■ 

. 

t - 

. 

t 

- 

... - - 

' 

. . ^ _ - . -• • ^ r; - ••••'*• -- * ’• : - r; 

.. .. : - • - ■ - - ■ 

. 

s . 

. •• • - 




.... : . , ...J ac ... 






. 


















. - 






< 







- 57 - 

bulb i\ was evacuated through taps 12 and 6 ; weighed, 

filled wuth gas at a known pressure and temperature 
and weighed again. 

When relatively non-volatile liquids were 
used the condenser was not used for the analysis of 
the gas phase at pressures below 2000 lb./ sq. in. 

The gas was by-passed directly to the Toepler pump 
through taps 1 and When cyclohexane and benzene 
v/ere used as solvents a condenser having wide 
passages and no small coils replaced the one shown 
in figure 9* in order to eliminate stopages due to 
30lidification. 

Owing to the content of heavy hydrocarbon 
vapors in the gas to be analyzed no standard gas 
analysis apparatus method such as the bureau of 
Mines type of Orsat apparatus or modification would 
give sufficiently precise results. A special method 
of analyzing such gaseous mixtures v/as devised 
employing the principles of ultimate analysis for 
carbon and hydrogen as commonly practiced with 
liquids and solids. Briefly the method consists of 
oxidizing the hydrocarbons to carbon dioxide and 
water in a closed system, using copper oxide as 
catalyst with \% cerium oxide a 3 promoter. The 
accuracy of the method was tested by analyzing 



~ - 













. . 












* . 

, 

' 










- 


- 









. 



j-.-V. L- - - •- , ■ ; 




- 58 - 


known mixtures of benzene and Gas £. The deviations 
between the found and the theoritical values in 
weight % of benzene was found to be 0.1% or less. 

The apparatus is shown in Fig. 10. Samples 
were taken in pipette C. through connection to the 
storage bulbs. The volume of pipette was determined 
by weighing the volume of water required to fill it. 
Thevolume of gas at M. T. P. could be calculated by 
measuring the pressure of the sample in the pipette 
on manometer &. Fig. 9* and the temperature on a 
calibrated thermometer reading to 0.1° 0. in the 
water jacket surrounding the pipette. A modified 
Sprengel pump H, was used to circulate the gases 
over the copper oxide. It was opera/ted by suction 
from a water pump connected to L. A valve K. 
prevented mercury from going into the copper oxide 
tube in case the suction failed to operate. The 
copper oxide tube E. , 15 inches long and 3/4 inches 
diameter held about 200 g. of copper oxide. Copper 
gauze v/hich had been sprinkled with cerium oxide 
was made into a roll, covered with a thin asbestos 
paper and inserted into the quartz tube. The 
asbestos paper served to prevent the copper oxide 
from coming into direct contact with the quartz 
tube, a temperature of 800 ° C + 10° wa3 found 








- 59 - 



Piq. 10 - Gas Analysis Apparatus. 
































































































-60- 

sufficient to oxidize the hydrocarbons completely, 

A magnesium perchlorate drying tube, D. 
placed immediately after the copper oxide tube 
absorbed the water produced by oxidation. 

When the oxidation v/as nearly complete 
the gas could be by-passed through a soda lime 
absorber G. to take out carbon dioxide, A 
magnesium perchlorate tube P, served to absorb all 
moisture given to the gases by the soda lime. 

Oxygen v/as finally let in at H. to replace the 
gases taken up by absorption and to give more 
active oxidizing conditions. All moisture and 
carbon dioxide v/as removed from the oxygen by a 
soda lime absorber J. and a magnesium perchlorate 
tube X. The whole system could be evacuated through 
tap 4 by connection to the vacuum pumps at h. 
Operation, 

Taps 2, 3i 5i 6 were closed; 1 opened 
to the vacuum pumps through 4, and the burette was 
evacuated to 0.1 mm, mercury. Tap 1. was then 
opened to the gas bulbs Pig. 9« with tap 13 of 
Pig, 9 open and a sample of gas brought in. The 

temperature and pressure of the samples v/as 
measured as outlined above. Tap 3 was opened to 
the copper oxide with the taps on the magnesium 
perchlorate tube D. closed, tap 4 to the vacuum 





-61- 


pumps "being open until the pressure was less than 
1 mm. of mercury, Tap 4 was then closed, 1 opened 
to the copper oxide, taps on I), and number 2 
opened. The level of the mercury reservoir supplying 
the sprengel pump was adjusted to match the gas pressure 
in the apparatus and circulation through the copper 
oxide carried on for lj minutes. At this time most 
of the gas was oxidized to carbon dioxide and water. 
Circulation was now discontinued for a moment, tap 
3 opened to the soda lime tower G. and tap 6 opened. 
Oxygen was let in at H. through a mercury bubbler, 
a soda lime absorber J. a magnesium perchlorate 
tube I. by opening tap 5. ^-fter adjusting the level 
of the mercury reservoir again to match atmospheric 
pressure, circulation was resumed for at least one 
hour. As oxygen was used up in burning the 
remaining traces of combustables and by oxidizing 
the copper it was drawn in at H. maintaining nearly 
atmospheric pressure. 

At the end of one hour the absorption 
of water and carbon dioxide was complete and the 
weight of carbon dioxide and water determined by 
the difference. 














- 62 - 


Hesuits and Discussion, 

The results of the experiments are presented 
in the form of tables and graphs. Each series of 
experiments comprising the investigation of one system 
are dealt with separately. -^fter . discussing the methods 
of calculation, the properties of the gase3 will be 
given and then the liquid - gas systems individually. 

A discussion will be given finally on the behavior of 
the systems as a whole and the relations between them. 
Calculations . 

The P - V - T relation of the two gases used 
were calculated very simply from the experimental data. 
The measurements consisted of filling a pipette with 
gas at a definate pressure and temperature, expanding 
into the measuring bulbs and determining the temperature , 
pressure and density as described above. The density 
of the gas under pressure as it existed in the pipette 
was calculated by dividing the total v/eight of gas 
recovered by the volume of the pipette. The compress^ 
Ability factor of the gas PV/P Q V 1 was calculated from 
the expression, 

, pipette volume X pipette pressure 
PV/P 0 V 1 Volume at 1 Atm. and T° C. 

where T° C, is the pipette temperature. The volume of 















. 

. 

■ 

. . 

- 



















<? 


- -U.v 



















- 63 - 

expanded, gas at 1 atmosphere, was obtained from the 
volume measured at the bulb pressure and temperature, 
generally somewhat below 1 atmosphere and at 20° -2J 0 C. 
by use of the perfect gas law. The deviations from 
ideality of the gases are small and over the small 
range of pressure and temperature for w_ich correction 
had to be made to bring the results to 1 atmosphere 
and pipette temperature, the errors in the perfect 
gas laws may be considered negligible. 

In dealing with liquid - gas systems the 
measured quantities were temperature, pressures, 
volumes, densities and compositions • These gave 
directly the density and composition of each phase 
at pipette temperatures and pressures; all other 
tabled data and graphs were derived from the primary 
data, usually by taking points from large scale 
graphs of primary data. 

The preliminary experiments with the 
impure heptane and gas A. were carried out chiefly to 
test the operation of the apparatus and develop a 
procedure capable of giving reproducible results. 

Owing to the small amounts of material available, it 
was possible to carry out a few experiments only, 
further, the liquids were mixtures and identical 



























' 

. 







* 













' 











- 64 - 


material could not "be prepared with, any certainty. 
However the experiments served the purpose desired and 
some interesting conclusions can he made from the data. 

Some ambiguity attaches to the data tabled for 

the above materials excepting under the heading "phase 

density” because of the presence of small amounts of 

ethane and higher hydrocarbons in the gas used. 

Combustion analysis were not carried out on the gas 

from the pipettes since this method was useful only in 

determining two hydrocarbons. For purposes of 

determining the phase compositions it was assumed that 

the density of the gas in the phases was the same as 

that of the original gas. Undoubtedly ethane would 

go preferentially to the liquid phase but nitrogen 

would concentrate in the gas phase. These two processes 

would have a counteracting effect on one another, thus 

reducing to some extent the error in the above 

assumption. On this basis the weight of the gas and 

liquid in each phase wa3 calculated from the volume of 

expanded gas, its density and the density of the 

original gas. The results cannot be very much in 

error and are at least good for comparative purposes, 
volu m«- 

The of natural gas in the sample was 

calculated as follows; 










- 65 - 

Vol. (vapor) x Density (vapor ) + Vol.(Gas A. 

x Density (Gas A) =: Vol. (mixture) x 
Density (mixture). 

'Vol. (vapor) -f- Vol. (Gas A.) = Vol. (mixture). 
Prom this the volume of natural gas and volume and 
weight of vapor could he calculated. 

For the experiments with Gas B. the complete 
composition of the phases could he determined. The 
gas in the storage hulhs containing only methane, 
nitrogen and vapors of the solvent used could he 
determined from the weight of sample and the carhon 
hydrogen ratio of the gas. Prom a knowledge of the 
weight of carhon dioxide and water produced the 
weight of carhon and hydrogen in the sample of gas 
could he determined easily and the composition 
determined as follows, using heptane as an example. 
64 C 7 H l6 -f- 12 CH^ 3= C 

loo, 13 16. 03 

16.13 c 7 H l6 I __4,_03_ CH 4 = H 

100.13 16.03 

Solving. 

c 7 h i6 - 


C - 2.976H 

0.3593 















. 













. 






, 




t 





' 

, 







- 66 - 

CH 4 c - 0.8390 c ? H l6 

o.7487 

The weight of nitrogen in the sample could 
he determined hy subtracting from the weight of 
sample (obtained from the density of the gas and the 
volume of the sample) the sum of the weight of carbon 
and hydrogen. 

With the volume and composition of gas and 
weight of liquid in the condenser it was possible to 
get the mass of Methane, Nitrogen and liquid in the 
phase. With this data and the volume of the pipette 
the density and composition of the mixture in the 
phase could be determined. 

Discussion of Errors . 

Errors in this investigation can be classed 
into three groups; 

(1) Errors of measurement, volume, temperature 
and pressure. 

(2) Errors introduced by the behavior of the 
metal under the conditions of operation and surface 
effects, 

(3) Errors in analysis. 

The low pressure gauge was accurate to 5 lbs, 
and the high pressure to 10 lb. per. sq. inch. At the 









■ 











. 

■ i 

. 


. 

. .. £ 






. 

i 

* I 


- 

. 

. 

. . ... 








-67 


lowest pressures (500 lbs.per, sq. inch), the error 
in pressure reading may have been 1% but for higher 
pressures, constituting the majority of readings, the 
error was less than 0. 

Temperatures were controlled to within 
0,1° G. and since the pipettes were wholly immersed 
in the bath at the temperature of operation for at 
least two hour3 before any analysis were made, the 
error caused by temperature variations could be 
neglected. The volumes of the pipettes, calibrated 
with mercury, were accurate to at least 0.005 cc. 

The maximum error due to calibration of the volume of 
the pipettes would be of the order of 0. 04/2 and 
was neglected. 

The errors due to the behavior of the metal 
under the different conditions of operation could 
be classified as follows; 

(1) Expansion of.pipettes due to pressure. 

(2) Strain hardening and plastic flow, 

(3) Surface effects of the metal on the 
gases and liquids. 

The effect of pressure on the volume of the 
pipettes was determined by filling a pipette with 
mercury at atmospheric pressure, determining the 





. 

. 




, 









' 

■ 


« 

. 









. 

. 

. 

. 


. 






. 








? . 















- 68 - 


volume by weighing the mercury, and applying pressure 
after filling and again determining the volume, ho 
change in volume was observed when the pipettes had 
been filled to a pressure of 2000 lbs. per. sq.. inch. 
The effect of pressure on volume can be calculated 
for a cylinder using Love’s M formula. 


DV_ v 0 (3d 
S(r 2 2 - r x 2 ) 

v/here 


2u > <Vi 2 - V 2 2) 

y- 2 (l+u) (P x - P 2 ) r 2 2 


V Q - capacity of cylinder. 

L — Youngs Modulus ( 20.1 x 10^ atm./cm. 2 ) 

r^ and ■=■ internal and external radii. 

P^ and *=. external and internal pressures 

u *r=. Poissons ratio ( 0.3o). 

The change in volume at 400 atmospheres was calculated 
to be less than 0.05 % * 

Loves formula assumes the cylinder long in 
comparison to diameter and neglects end effects. This 
would not hold strictly for this case but the outside 
radius was ta-ken at the thinnest section of the pipette 
Love---- “Mathematical theory of elasticity” 

Cambridge University Press (1920) p. 141 



. 










- 










:: • 

. 

' - 










. 































-69- 

wall at all other points the metal being nearly twice 
as thick. Under these conditions Love’s formula 
should serve to give an estimate of the maximum possiMe 
increase in volume. Prom these considerations it seems 
justifiable to neglect the effect of pressure on the 
volume of the pipettes. 

The effect of temperature on the volume of 
the pipettes was calculated by means of the coefficient 
of cubical expansion of mild steel. The effect of 
temperature was corrected for*, at all temperatures 
greater than the temperature of calibration, 25 ° C. 

Any possibility of adsorption effects on the 
metal surfaces was tested by measuring the volume of 
pure gas at N. T. P. per cc. of phase for the liquid 
and gas phase pipette. No difference in volume was 
observed. The two pipettes having different volumes 
and hence different surface areas would give different 
results if surface effects were present. 

Any possibility of strain hardening or 
plastic flow, particularly around the valve seats was 
eliminated by calibrating the pipettes after 8 months 
of continuous use. No change in volume was detected. 

Errors in Methods of analysis were relatively 
great at low pressures. The weight of liquid was 
determined to 0.001 gm. At the lower pressures the 






■r 









, 


' 










. 

■ 



























4 - 

< • • 




. . . . ' 










. 


. 








. 

















. 




















. 




- . 










-70- 


weight of liquid, obtained from the gas phase was 
sometines as low as 0.020 and hence the error here was 
appreciable. ^he volume of gas measured in the 
storage bulbs was correct to 1 cc. for the small bulbc^c/ 
2 cc. for the large bulbs. densities and analysis 
of the gas checked to 0.3$ for the duplicates. 

A more or less undeterminate variable was 
the distribution of the nitrogen in both phases. The 
nitrogen content of the gas varied, from time to time 
and since the liquid, level varied within wide limits, 
the nitrogen content of both phases would not necess¬ 
arily be the same for duplicate runs. f'his no doubt 
accounts for the wide variation in the values of 
nitrogen in analysis of duplicate runs. However 
this error would not introduce a serious error in the 
final analytical data, the volume of nitrogen being 
only ei small part, 5 % or so, of the total volume of 
gas. 

In order to eliminate as far as possible 
the possibility of personal errors and to control 
indeterminate variables of technique, a standard 
procedure was used for all runs and an experiment 
was repeated until duplicate determinations were 
obtained. normally two determinations gave 
duplicate results. It is very difficult to calculate 





























i 




. 




• 

















... 1 . 

.... u. 







. 

' 














' 


















-71- 

the probable error of any experiment. On the basis 
of the foregoing checks should agree to 1.0$ at the 
lower pressures , to 0.3$ at the higher pressures, 
precision with which the measurements can he made is 
best demonstrated by actual differences between 
duplicate experiments. deviations from the average 
vary from 0.2$ to 2% for the experiments with Gas A. 
Por the experiments with Gas B. the devi sit ions were 
rarely greater than 0. 5$ and usually 0. 2$ or less. 
Generally the deviation is larger the smaller the 
density of the phase and the lower the pressure. 


fhe 






















. 

' 




, 

. 

. 


. 

. 





• ! 













-72- 

Prop erti es of Gases, 

The properties of Gas A and Gas B. are shown 
in Tables I and II and the results are shown 
graphically in '“igs. 11 and 12, To avoid confusion 
due to closeness of the lines, the results at 3 5° C. 
for Gas B. were not shown in the graphs. 

Ihe phase density-pressure curves shown in 
Pig* 11 are of interest only in comparing the trend of 
the density curves for the pure gas with the gas 
phase in equilibrium with different solvents. 

r 

Pig. 12, shows the deviation of these gases 
from ideal gas laws. A comparison is made to the 
deviations of pure methane at 25 ° C obtained by- 
Kvalnes and Gaddy (14). Gas A. ,containing ethane t 
is less perfect than pure methane as is shown by the 
minimum at the lower pressure*, in the graph,^ig. 12. 

The nitrogen of course would tend to counteract the 
effect of the ethane and hence the difference is only 
slight. Gas B. containing only methane and nitrogen 
is more perfect than pure methane as would be expected. 
As the temperature is raised the gas tends more and 
more to behave as a perfect gas, the curves flattening 


out 







- 




















. 










. 


. 

- 








■ - 

. 


< 






. 






. 




, 


' 









. 










■ 














- 73 - 


Table X. 

P 4 V. Relations of Gas A. at 25 0 C. 


Pres 

sure 

Density 

^o 1 

Atm, 

#/ " 

Grams/oc. 


1 

14 . 73 

0. 0007742 

-- 

36.7 

538 

0. 02732 

0.9478 



o,02722 

0.9513 

68.9 

1013 

0.05446 

0.8919 



0. o ?446 

0. 8919 

102.3 

1508 

0. 08502 

0. 8480 



0.08506 

0.8484 

134.8 

1988 

0.1161 

0.8191 



0.1162 

0. 8194 

168.7 

2483 

0.1457 

0. 8168 



0.1458 

0.8172 

202. 7 

2983 

0.1731 

0.8262 



0.1728 

0.8274 

237.2 

3493 

0.1965 

0.8513 



0.1972 

0. 8545 

245 . 4 

3613 

0 . 2021 

0.8574 



0.2020 

0.8578 

277.4 

4083 

0.2189 

0. 8948 



0.2196 

0.8967 

312 . 6 

4503 

0. 2359 

0 .9363 



0. 23 57 

0 .9371 


3 . So,7, 

r/ t $. V7> 








' 74 - 


P*-V«T Relations of Gas B 


Pressure(abs ) 

Temperature 

Benaity 

BV/P 0 V 1 

#/ " 

Atm. 




14.7 

1 

25°G. 

0.0007644 


523 

35.5 

ii 

0 . 02684 

0.9266 

998 

67.9 

if 

0 . 05344 

0.8900 

1498 

101.8 

it 

0. 08318 

0.8572 

1983 

134.8 

tl 

0 .1133 

0.8332 

2473 

167.9 

It 

0.1423 

0.8266 

2973 

201.4 

ft 

0.1689 

0.8375 

3072 

208.9 

tl 

0.173 5 

0 . 8422 

3589 

243.6 

It 

0 .1955 

0.8726 

4044 

274.6 

It 

0.2130 

0.9031 

4544 

308.5 

ft 

0.2300 

0.9397 

5034 

341.8 

it 

0.2438 

0.9822 

5444 

369.6 

ft 

0.2541 

1.019 


998 

67.9 

35°o. 

0.05118 

0.8991 

1983 

134.8 

!t 

O.IO67 

0. 8563 

4044 

274.6 

ft 

0. 2042 

0.9114 

5034 

■ 341.8 

ft 

0.2343 

0.9870 


998 

67.9 

55.3°c. 

0.04686 

0.9211 

! 9 83 

134.8 

ft 

0.09605 

0. 8902 

3 589 

243.6 

ft 

0.1678 

0.9226 

4544 

308.5 

ft 

0.2008 

0.9774 

5444 

369.6 

ft 

0.2270 

1.035 


5444 

369.6 60, 

4 °C 0.2232 

1.036 


Gas B 

c^ 




Hi 

S, & 




D.l 















75 



Jig. 11, Density - Pressure Relation for 
natural Ga 3 . 

- Gas A 25° 

- Gas B 25° 

-Gas B 25° 


—o- 

-O— • 

















































- 76 - 



i’ig. 12 . Variation of Compressibility Factor 


(PV/P Q V]_) with Pressure 



o 



for Natural Gas. 

-Gas A 25° 

- Pure CH 4 25° 

-Gas B 25° 

-Gas B 55° 
























































- 77 - 


I inpur e Heptanes - Gas A, System, 

The results for Gas •&. and the impure 
heptanes are given in Table III. The density - pressure 
data at 25° are shown along with the n-heptane data in 
rig. 13 . The weight per cent of gas in each phase is 
shown in the last two columns. It is of interest to 
note that the natural gas is less soluble in the 
Turner Valley heptane, than the heptane obtained from 
petroleum. The density of this Turner Valley heptane 
was less than the density of the other, seemingly 
indicating a purer sample , but if such were the case 
the solubility of natural gas in it should have been 
greater. The reason for this is obvious in that the 
impurity must of necessity have been some cycloparaffins 
since any other hydrocarbons would have been separated 
in the preparation, and heptane is a better solvent for 
natural gas than any hydrocarbon that would be likely 
to contaminate the heptane. Ho explanation is offered 
for this behavior other than the suggestion that it 
may be due to the complex nature of the gas used. 
n-Heptane - Gas B and nitrogen Systems. 

The result for 11-Heptane - Gas B. and n- 
heptane - nitrogen are shown in Tables IV. V. VI. 

The results for the investigation of the nitrogen - 
heptane system is shown in the lower part of Table IV. 






















. 


. 


































, ■ 



















— 


























- 78 - 





Table III 



Ga3 

X 

A, - Heptane Equilibria 

at 25° G. 

Run 

Pressure (abs) Phase Density 


*/ " 

Atm. 

niquid Phase 

Gas Phase 

29 

2013 

136.8 

0. 604 

0.127 

31 



0.605 

0.126 

32 



- 

0.126 

33 



0.600 

0.127 

34 

2538 

172. 4 

0. 567 

- 

35 



0. 563 

0.173 

36 



0. 559 

0.171 

37 

3013 

204. 6 

- 

0.217 

38 



0. 519 

0. 221 

39 



0. 515 

0. 226 

40 

3503 

237.9 

0. 440 

0.309 

90 

3508 

238.1 

0. 444 

0.311 


Solubility 

of Ga3 A. in I'urner Valley Heptane 

42 

3 503 

237.9 

0. 454 

0.302 

43 



0. 460 

0.300 

X 

Heptane obtained 

from petroleum. 

d- 0.704 

* * 

d ,707 9 

2/*C 

r?.i * 1.296/ 



Wf. % Ga3 
Liquid Gas 
Phase Phase 

13.9 93.4 

20, 0 88. 5 

26.6 81.0 

33.9 63.7 

39.0 63.5 

37.5 67.2 









- 79 - 


Tahle IV. 


Heptane Gas B System at 25° 


Phase 


Run 

Pressure(ahd) 
#/ w Atm. 

14.7 1 

Phase density 
Liquid phase Gas phase 

0.679 

Liquid Phase 
U7H3.6 OH4 

212 

227 

533 

36.2 

0.661 
0.659 

0.0298 

0.0280 

83.52 

83.78 

16.32 

15.90 

213 

226 

1008 

68.4 

0.637 

0.634 

0.0538 

0.0554 

71. 

57 

27. 63 

214 

225 

1498 

101.7 

0.610 

0. 610 

0.0873 

0.0859 

fi.55 

60.81 

37.64 

38.72 

215 

224 

1988 

135.0 

o. 585 

0. 584 

0.122 

0.121 

5i.i 

32 

47.01 

216 

223 

2473 

167.9 

0. 556 

0. 555 

0.161 

0.160 

43.; 

43.1 

51 

34 

53.91 

53.98 

217 

222 

2978 

202. 2 

0. 521 

0. 521 

0.208 

0.206 

35.35 

3 5. 40 

62. 21 
61.94 

218 

3488 

236.8 

0.457 

0.269 

25. 48 

70. 51 

251 

3477 

236.0 

0.466 

0. 267 

25.98 

70. 47 

219 

3588 

243.6 

0.444 

0.293 

22.; 

?5 

73.08 

220 

3682 

250.0 

0. 414 

0.324 

19.; 

23 

76.11 

221 

3732 

253.3 

0.395 

0.390 

- 


- 


nitrogen Series 

at 100.9 Atm. 





246 

Temp. 

250 

Atm. 

100.9 

0.673 


88. ( 

)i 


241 

242 

55° 

N 

n 

N 

0.653 

0.653 

0.109 

0.109 

87.24 

86.70 


243 

244 

850 

N 

n 

M 

0.625 

0.624 

0.101 

0.101 

86. < 
86. < 

4 

14 


245 

115° 

N 

0.593 

0.098 

85. 02 



Composition (Mol %) 


n 2 

0.16 

0.32 

Gas 

G 7 H 16 

4,5 

1.75 

Phase 

ch 4 

94.5 

92.85 

0. 80 

1.01 

1. 29 

93.20 

92.82 

0 0 

L Co 

-0 M 

1. 09 

1.09 

92. 54 
93.64 

1.17 

1.33 

1.19 

90. 82 
90.98 

2. 58 
2.18 

2. 20 

2.15 

91. 04 

91.03 

2. 44 

2. 66 

3.69 

3.47 

89.44 

89.86 

4. 01 

6.43 

87.14 

3.55 



4.37 

8.34 

85.82 

4.66 

9.62 

84.90 





11.99 


12. 76 

1.76 

13.30 

1.75 

13.96 

2. 44 

13.96 

2. 54 

14.98 

5.05 


Mole3 CH 4 / 
^?1 

.Liquid PHase 

O.195 

O.190 

Mole3 C7H16 / 
Mol Gas.' 10 
Ga3 .ehase 
0.059 
0.019 

0.386 

0. 011 
0.014 

0.614 

0.636 

0.012 
0. 011 

O.907 

0.015 
0. 013 

1. 24 

1.23 

0.025 
0. 023 

1.76 

1.75 

0. 041 

0. 038 

2.76 

0. 074 

2. 71 


3.25 

0.091 

3.96 

0.113 


0.136 


0.147 

0.018 

0.146 

0.018 

0.161 

0.025 

0.162 

0.026 

0.177 

0.053 


5. 40 1 


5.79 

5/89 

6.37 j 

5.27 

7.85 
7. S3 

6.67 | 
6.77 ! 

6.87 

6.67 

6.43 


7.84 
5. 48 


98. 24 

98.25 1 
97. 56 I 

97.46 

94.95 

















, 






„ 




. . 







Table V. 


Run 


Heptane Gas B Equilibria at- 55 C 


#/ " 
14.7 


Pressure(abs) 


Atm. 
1 


Phase Density 
Liquid phase Gas phase 

0.653 


228 

235 

513 

34.8 

0.628 

0.634 

0.0267 
0. 0254 

229 

1487 

100.9 

0.594 

0. 0765 

230 

2463 

167.2 

0. 540 

0.141 

231 

249 

3477 

236 .0 

0. 446 
0.449 

0. 250 

0. 246 

232 

250 

3672 

249.3 

0.393 

0.398 

0.303 

0.299 

233 

234 

3725 

252. 8 

0.385 

0.382 

0.380 


Heptane 

Gas B Equilibri 

a at 85 0 



14.7 

1 

0.628 

> 

229 

513 

34.8 

0.602 

0. 0241 

238 

1487 

100.9 

0. 572 

0. 0735 

236 

2463 

167.2 

0. 521 

0.137 

i 3 i 

3477 

236.0 

0.389 

0.395 

0. 264 

0.262 

247 

3572 

242. 5 

0.363 

0.342 

240 

3672 

249.3 

0.343 

0.341 



28. 42 
28. 42 


21.63 

21. 58 


19.75 


86. 52 
65.14 
48. 58 


26. 44 
22.75 
20. 05 




-Phase 

Composition 

( Mol % ) 



Mole3 Cri.4/ 

Moles C 7 H 

Phase 


Gas Phase 



Mol C£H-l£ 

Mol Ga3^ 

OH4 

iM2 

u 7 H l6 

ch 4 

in 2 

Liquid 

Gas 



23.1 

76.9 



0.301 



3.19 

90. 44 

6.37 



14.10 

0. 42 





0. 033 






O.150 


3 5. 20 

0.93 

2.13 

92.75 

5.12 

0. 552 

0.022 

51.31 

1.86 

3.21 

90.63 

6.16 








1. 096 

0. 033 

68.48 

3.10 

7. 86 

85.97 

6.17 



68.33 

3.25 

7.77 

86.39 

5.34 

2. 42 

2.41 

0.085 

0.085 

74.72 

3.65 

12. 27 

82.18 

5.65 



74.32 

4.10 

11.69 

81.79 

6. 52 

3. 49 

3. 44 

0.140 
0.132 

75. 88 

4.37 

I8.77 

76.81 

4. 52 

3.84 








2.1 

12.95 

0.53 



4.25 

0.150 

0. 044 

33.90 

0.96 

3.05 

91.09 

5.86 

0.520 

0.032 

49.42 

2.00 

5.23 

88. 71 

6. 06 

1.02 

0.055 



12.73 

81.92 

5.35 


0.146 

69.47 

4. 09 

12.96 

82. 07 

4.95 

2. 63 

0.149 

73.53 

3.72 

20.68 

75.17 

4.15 

3. 24 

0.261 






3.8l 

0. 248 

76.27 

3.68 

19. 88 

76. 22 

3.90 
























. 
















-81- 


Table VI 

* 

i?-T Relations for Heptane-Gas B. System 


Temp. 0 C. 

Composition 

Mol % Gas. 

Gas Phase 

25 

55 

Pressure (Atm) 

85 

99.2 

85 

- 

- 

99.0 

55-104 

- 

- 

98.5 

41-143 

- 

- 

97.9 

3l-l68 

85-98 

- 

97.2 

22-174 

45-150 

80 

96* 0 

12-210 

25-184 

37-138 

94.0 

-235 

18-221 

22-185 

90.0 

-251 

9-245 

16-229 

88. 0 

-253 

6-250 

13-23 5 


Liquid Phase 

20 

21 

25 

28 

40 

82 

88 

96 

60 

157 

173 

177 

8() 

224 

22 7 

217 


h- *•< M ® °" a ‘" 

(S>£3,P"C- (?I ’ l 5 ^ 










-82- 

Solubilities are expressed as moles of Methane 
per mol liquid, the nitrogen being neglected. Prom 
Table IV. it can be seen that the solubility of nitrogen 
is much less than that of methane in heptane a,t the 
same pressure and for this reason it was not taken into 
account. 

However the vapor concentration of the gas 
phase was expressed as moles liquid per mol gas (methane 
plus nitrogen).Table IV shows that nitrogen takes up 
only about 20 % less heptane than does methane. The 
nitrogen,behaving so much like methane in this respect, 
was included in calculating the radio of liquid to gas 
in the gas phase. Although the effect of the nitrogen 
was unknown for the other solvents, the ratios of gas 
to liquid etc. were expressed in the same manner. 

The pressure density curves are shown in 
kig. 13 . The density of the liquid phase decreases 
due to solution of the gas and the density of the gas 
phase increases due to the increasing concentration 
of heptane vapor and the decreasing specific volume 
of the gas with increasing total pressure. The two 
lines form continuous curves meeting the critical 
pressure of the mixture. 

This graph is a portion of the complete 
phase diagram of two phase, two component systems at 





-83- 



Eig. 13. Density 

- •- 


x- 


Pressure Relationship 
Impure Heptane Gas A 25° 
n-Heptane Gas B 2 5 ° 
n-Heptane Gas B 55 ° 
n-Heptane Gas B 85 ° 











































- 84 - 


constant temperature* Single phase monovariant systems 
of constant composition would appear as lines terminating 
at the curve shown, those in the gas phase region 
showing rapidly increasing density with pressure, those 
in the liquid phase region showing slowly increasing 
density with increasing pressure. The complete diagram 
would hear a superficial resemblance to that of a pure 
substance, giving isothermal P - V lines as determined 
for CC >2 by Andrews (l). A complete diagram had been 
obtained by Sage et al (37) for the system methane- 
propane. The shape of the curve obtained by plotting 
the density of the “bubble point liquid. 11 (when two 
phases just axopear) against pressure is similar to 
those in Pig. 13. 

The system Gas-JU— heptane had a critical 
pressure lower than that of the system Gas B.—heptane 
at the same temperature. What effect the impurity of 
the heptane used with Gas A had was not known but it 
would tend to raise the critical pressure if. the 
impurities were cycloparaffins. However the critical 
pressure would be lowered by the ethane in Gas A, since 
the ethane content would tend to make the two components 
more nearly identical, apparently the influence of the 
higher gasous hydrocarbons was greater than the 
influence of the impurities in the liquid. 
























* 








. 


■ 

. 






' 








6 




, 



















































. 

. 

' 







4 ?. 






. 






' 





- 85 - 


Ho change within the error of experiment 
could be observed in the critical pressure when the 
temperature was raised from 25° to 55 ° C. but on 
raising the temperature to 85° C. the critical pressure 
drops approximately 9 atmospheres. The reason for 
this effect will be shown more clearly when the 
temperature effect on the solubility of the gas in 
the liquid is discussed. 

The effect of temperature on phase density 
at different pressures is shown in Pig. 14. The 
effect for the nitrogen - heptane system at one 
pressure is also plotted. The density of the liquid 
phase decreases with temperature at all pressures 
studied, the expansion of the liquid with temperature 
having a greater effect than any change in density 
resulting from changes in solubility and pressure. 

At low pressure, the density of the gas phase 
decreases with increasing temperature, the increase 
in specific volume of the gas having a predominating 
influence. However at higher pressures the increasing 
vapor pressure of the liquid has a greater effect and 
the phase density starts to increase with increasing 
temperature. This is well shown in the curve at 240 
atmospheres. The two sides of the curve were 
extrapolated to form a smooth curve. 










. 













* 

< 










































-86 



fig. 14 . Density - Temperature with n-Heptane 


at Various Pressures 















































































-87 


The variation of phase density with 
temperature for the system heptane - nitrogen is also 
shown. The density of the gas phase is greater than 
the corresponding curve for heptane - methane at 
100 atmospheres due to the greater density of the 
pure gas. The greater density of the liquid phase 
becomes explicable when the slight solubility of 
nitrogen in heptane compared to methane is taken into 

account. The shape of the curves shows that temperature 

a 

effects slightly the phase density of this system 
except at pressures near the critical region. 

The variation of solubility with pressure 
for the 3 temperatures is shown in Pig. 15. A 
comparison to Henry’s law can be made by drawing a 
tangent to the curves from the origin. It is obvious 
that Henry’s lav/ fails at pressures greater than JO 
atmospheres. At pressures greater than 200 atmospheres 
the solubility approaches an infinite value, which is 
to be expected since the two phases are completely 
miscible at the critical pressure. 

]?ig. 16 . shows the effect of temperature 
on solubility at various pressures. If the 
experimentally determined points for all temperatures 
were not all at the same pressure the data at the 
required pressure were obtained by interpolation of 







- 88 - 



Pig. 15> Change of Solubility with Pressure. 

-G-25° 

















































89 - 


1 





o 

o 

=?■* 

o" 

-J 

o 

\o 

i CM 

if 

° 

to 
' u 

-J 

o 

! Z °o 
















.-<W\ 







^A-^j 

















OATH 









1 















167. 

2 ATM 

‘—- - * 

> 





r 

100. 

8ATM 

- “« 

l 






— i 

34. 

a ATM 

J 


1 



—--- — • 


25 55 85 

TCMPEP4TUPC 0 C. 


iBig. l6 ? Variation of Solubility with Temperate 
for various Pressures. 






















































■ 90 - 


the pressure - solubility curves made on large graphs. 
The minimum predicted by Kuenen (12, 13) for such 
systems is clearly shown at approximately 55° 0* 
for the two uxoper curves. At lower pressures the 
curves flatten out and the minimum seems to shift to 
a higher temperature. The minimum observed in the 
solubility of hydrogen, nitrogen, and helium in 
v/ater previously discussed seemed to be independent 
of pressure, although the curves did flatten out at 
low pressures. The reason for the constancy of the 
critical pressure at 25 ° 0. and 55° 0. may now be 
seen in the slope of these temperature - solubility 
curves. Between 2 5° C and 55 ° C. near the critical 
pressure, the solubility decreases, an action 
resulting in reduced miscibility of the phases. 

Raising the temperature increases the miscibility. 
Apparently, the two effects equalize in this 
temperature range with the result that the critical 
pressure is constant. Above 55° C. the solubility 
increases more rapidly however, the result being a 
reduced Critical Pressure. If the temperature 
coefficients were sufficiently negative the possibility 
exists that the critical pressure might even be 
raised with a rise in temperature. 











i I 
















. 



















■ 










« 

. 







- 91 - 


This was actually observed by Sander ( 41) for the 
carbon dioxide -watSr system discussed previously. 

The concentration of heptane in the gas 
phase as a function of pressure is shown in Fig. 17 
The liquid to gas ratio at first decreases and then 
increases with pressure. However the mass concentration 
of liquid vapor in the gas phase increases at all 
times of course (see Fig. 46),but at low pressures^ 
the concentration of gas increases faster with 
pressure than does the vapor pressure of heptane. 
However, at high pressures the reverse occurs and the 
mol ratio actually increases as shown. This has been 
discussed previously. The value at one atmosphere 
was calculated from known vapor pressure data of 
heptane and assuming the ideal laws for vapor. 

A comparison is made with the vapor 
concentration a3 calculated from the Poynting relation. 
The upper curve represents the vapor concentration 
at 55° C and the lower one at 25° C. The Poynting 
relation^ gives an increasing vapor concentration at 
about 300 atmospheres although the increase is too 
small to be noticed on the graph shown. It is easily 
seen that the vapor concentration is always very 
much greater than that expressed by the Poynting 
relation. However the difference in concentration 









•92 



Fig. 17, Relation "between Heptane 
of Gas Phase and Pressure. 

-O- 2 5 0 

- X - 55 ° 

-■- 85 ° 


content 


















































■ 






- 93 - 

when the temperature is raised from 2 5° to 55° C. is 
the same for the Poynting relation as was observed 
experimentally. This might be predicted on the 
basis that whatever the relation be, it will e nvalSe " 
the molal volumes of the components. Changes in 
temperature will produce an effect governed by the 
changes in molal volume a.nd these quantities appear 
in the Poynting relation. Why pressure should have 
such a marked influence on the vapor content of the 
gas phase ,or we might say,the vapor pressure of the 
liquid / is a highly debatable point. 

Pig. 18 , shows the variation of vapor 
concentration against temperature for various 
pressures. The vapor concentration for the system 
heptane - nitrogen is also shown. 

The concentration of vapor rises very 
slowly with temperature at low pressures but as the 
critical region is approached the rate of increase 
becomes very rapid. 

Only two points are shown for the methane- 
nitrogen system but the curve represents part of a 
graph including the value at 115° C. The concentration 
of vapor increases only slightly when methane is 
used instead of nitrogen. As can be seen from Table 
XV and V. the heptane content of the gas phase increases 
































. 






























, 






- 






... • -'*> - 

















■ 








. 












... .. /iL 




MOLES C 7 W I6 / MOL EXPANDED GAS 
OJO 0,2 0 


■94. 









/ 






<S 

_ 0 ?s 


2 





^—- 

V 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 







D 





3^-^— — . 





300..^ 
1 _| sO A' 

— 

ATM 1 

8=100 ATM 

— -1 

— 1 


1 L - - 

*-- 

1 l vj 


1 

H 

| 

L . 



I I _I--1-L_ 

25 55 

TEMPERATURE °C 


•6ig. lo, Change of Vapor Concentration with 
Temperature for Various Pressures. 









































- 95 - 

about 20$ v/hen methane is used instead of nitrogen. 

However the solubility of methane in heptane is 
over 300$ greater than nitrogen. 

This suggests that the high concentration of 
heptane in the gas phase is not due to solubility of 
liquid in the gas. As stated earlier the evaporation 
of liquid into the gas phase is largely controlled by 
the pressure and the nature of the liquid, the nature 
of the gas being secondary in importance. 

Pig. 19, shows the relationship between 
phase composition in mol $ gas against pressure. 

The value i at one atmosphere for the gas phase 
was determined from the vapor pressure of heptane at 
one atmosphere and use of the ideal gas laws for the 
vapor. The gas phase curves are not continued to 
pressures lower than atmospheric. The curves would 
continue to give an increase in the mol $ of vapor 
at lower pressures, the system consisting only of 
heptane vapor when the total pressure is reduced to 
the vapor pressure of the liquid. The two lines 
(gas and liquid phase) form a closed curve, coming 
together on the pressure axis at a total pressure 
equal to the vapor pressure of the liquid for each 
temperature considered. These represent invariant 





















•96 



*lg. 19, 


Variation of Phase 


Composition with 


Pressure. 

—O-25 0 

—X-55° 

































































- 97 - 


points for the system. 

The large region of retrogre.de condensation 
(in this case from about 85 atmospheres pressure to 
the critical of 2$2 atmospheres. ) for the gas phase 
is well shown. This phenomena has been observed 
previously for such systems as this, where the 
critical temperatures of the two components are 
widely different. It is interesting to note that 
the pressure of minimum vapor content in the gas 
phase is nearly independent of tempera/ture. 

Pressure - Temperature relations for this 
system are shown in Table VI and Pigs 20 and 21. The 
data are obtained from Pig. 19 . These are not the 
same as Pressure temperature curves for a one 
component system, that is vapor pressure curves, since 
there are two components and transfer of material from 
one phase to the other takes place as Pressure or 
Tempera/ture are changed. The composition of one 
phase only is constant and the other variable. The 
system is described by the phase rule in the form. 

P - C-P f 1 

since the composition is constant. With C ~ 2 

and P — 2 , P — 1. The systems are thus 

rnonova-ridpt as is a vapor pressure curve. Pig. 20 
showing the liquid phase pressures is of interest in 









. 






.. 





























- 




. 

I 






• 









. 



































. 



















3?ig* 20, Pressure - Temperature Relations for 
Different Composition,(Liquid Phase) 



































































- 99 - 



Pig. 21, Pressure - Temperature Relations 
for Different Compositions (Gas Phase) 

















































aocv 


demonstrating a decreasing pressure with increasing 
temperature at high pressures. ^his effect is 
governed by the temperature coefficient of solubility 
shown in Pig. 16, earlier, occuring when the 
solubility increases with increasing temperature. 

Pig. 21 shows similar relationships for 
the gas phase. Two curves are obtained for one 
composition, for one the pressures increasing with 
temperature and the other in the region of 
retrograde condensation, the pressure decreasing 
with increasing temperature. 

On Pigs. 19 and 21 it can be seen that the 
vapor concentration is a minimum at about 
atmospheres and is nearly independent of temperature. 
Increasing pressure above 85 atmospheres or decreasing 
it below 85 atmospheres results in increased vapor 
content, the effect being greater the higher the 
temperature. 

Cyclohexane - Gas A. and Gas B. Systems. 

The phase density-pressure data for Gas A. 
is shown in Table VII and Pig. 22. As with heptane 
it was not passible to make a reliable analysis of the 
phases. 

The equilibria data between gas B. and 
cyclohexane is shown in Tables VIII and IX. 










- 101 - 


Table VII. 

Cyclohexane-Gas A. Equilibria at 25° C. 
Pressure (abs) Phase Density 


a/ " 

Atm. 

.Liquid phase 

Ga3 phase 

503 

34.3 

0.7544 

0.7487 

0.02874 

998 

67.9 

0.7360 

0.7281 

0. 05618 

0.05665 

1493 

101.5 

0.7091 

0.7120 

mtr\ 

rom 

cooo 

COCO 

0 0 

0 0 

1983 

134.8 

0.6763 

0.6728 

0.1243 

O.I25I 

2468 

167.6 

0.6448 

0.6457 

0.1620 

2978 

202.3 

0.6183 

0. 6148 

0.2062 

0.2061 

3283 

223. 0 

236.9 

0. 5926 

0. 2453 

3488 

0. 5692 

0. 5711 

0.2628 

3868 

262.7 

0. 5294 

0. 5279 

0.3187 

0.3167 

3983 

270.5 

0.5220 

0.3321 

4083 

277.3 

0.4709 

0.3810 

0.3822 

4153 

281. 5 

0. 4299 

0. 4019 

0.4507 

0. 4232 

0.4055 

0. 4496 

4213 

286.1 

0. 43 20 

0. 43 23 

4293 

291. 5 

0. 4348 

0.4349 

4493 

305.2 

0. 4386 

0. 4416 



Wt.j 7 ° 

Liquid 

Phase 

Gas 

Gas 

Phase 


59.6 

2. 575 

92.94 

5.13 

95.32 

7.95 

95.85 

10.98 

93.14 

14. 45 

91. 4 

19.18 

85.1 

21.85 

80.0 

23.80 

76.8 

30.95 

66.4 

32.35 

63.9 

39.7 

54.2 












PHASE DENSITY IN GRAMS / CC 0 

0 o 20 0 o 40 0„ 6 0 0 o 80 


■102 








^ ^""O_ 








'0 ^ 







loJC' v 


Xv 

AX 






©\ i 

!'] 






®o / 
o\ 

!¥ 

/JL 




. 

A 

// / 
\C y 

/ 


_ 





Ldd 







100 200 
PRESSURE IN ATMOSPHERES 


Fig, 22, Effect of Pressure 
on Phase Density. 

-* —O-Gas A.. ~ 25° 

-- 0 --Gas B. - 25° 

-O-Gas B. - 55° 























































Table 

Cyclohexane Ga3 


Run 

Pressure(abs) 


*/ " 

Atm. 


14. 7 

1 

133 

156 

523 

35.5 

134 

998 

67.9 

135 

1498 

101. 8 

136 

1983 

134.8 

137 

2473 

167.9 

138 

2973 

201.4 

208 

3 513 

238.5 

139 

4044 

274.6 

142 

4244 

288.1 

140 

141 

4344 

295.0 


VIII 

» Equilibria at 25° 


Phase Density 
Liquid phase Ga3 phase 


0.774 


0.754 

0.748 

0. 03 02 

0.0299 

0.731 

0.705 

0. 0576 

0. 0858 

0.679 

0.124 

0.654 

0.163 

0.632 

0. 206 

0. 586 

0.256 

0. 532 

0.309 

0.497 


o.36l 

0. 449 

0.362 

0.451 


rhase 

.Liquid Phase 


G 6 H 12 

ch 4 

im 2 

89.16 

10.60 

0.24 

88.19 

11.50 

0.31 

80.03 

19.50 

0.47 

71.5a 

27.78 

0.67 

63. 43 

35. 20 

1.37 

56. 21 

42. 02 

1.77 

49.93 

48.10 

1.97 

41.79 

56.47 

1. 84 

32.78 

64.72 

2. 50 

27. 80 

68.02 

4.18 

12.35 

81.62 

6.03 

22.00 

73.73 

4. 27 



composition Mol % 


Ga3 Phase 
g 6 H 12 

13.2 

ch 4 

86.8 

2. 40 

90.78 

2. 50 

91. 5o 

1.43 

89.97 

1.65 

90.4? 

1.45 

90.99 

2. 54 

90.13 

3.24 

88. 52 

5.97 

87.95 

10.03 

83.8? 

12. 68 

21.90 

81.76 

73.78 


Moles CH 4 /Mol 

Liquid Phase 


6.82 

6. oo 

8.60 

7.90 

7. 56 
7.33 

8. 24 
6. 08 
6.10 


o. 119 

0.120 

0. 244 

0.389 

0. 555 / 

0.748 

0.965 

1.35 

1.98 

2.45 


5.56 

4.35 


6.61 

3.35 


iiOles C^H 12 /Mol Gas 
Gas Phase 
0.152 

0.025 
0. 026 

0.015 

0.017 

0.015 

0.026 

0.03 7 

0. 0636 

0.111 

0.146 

2. 78 
















- 104 - 


Table IX. 

Cyclohexane -Gas B. 


Hun 

Temp. 

Pressure (abs) Phase Density 

jjh 



ff/ » 

Atm. 

.Liquid, phase 

Gas phae e o 6 k 12 



14.7 

1 

0. 740 



143 

55° 

523 

35.5 

0.724 

0.0261 

89.10 

144 

N 

1498 

101.8 

0.679 

0. 0775 

73.90 

145 

n 

2473 

167.9 

0.629 

0.147 

58. 46 

253. 

n 

3589 

243.6 

0. 553 

0. 245 

41 ^8 

146 

H 



0. 556 

0. 246 


147 

M 

4044 

274.6 

0.495 

0.312 

32. 03 

148 

B 



0.494 

0.311 

32! 40 

i5o 

H 

4144 

281.4 

0.458 

0.354 

26 48 

151 

n 



0.454 


27^15 

149 

» 

4244 

288.1 

0.398 

0.398 

20.89 

152 

75° 

3 589 

2436 

0. 526 

0. 239 

42. 26 

153 

H 



0. 529 

0. 242 


154 

85° 

n 

H 

0. 511 

0.242 

41. 50 

155 

II 

M 

II 

0. 512 

0. 240 

41. 58 

157 

95° 

n 

11 

0.495 

0.250 

39.89 

209 

m 

H 

II 

0.496 

0.252 

4-0.39 

210 

u 5° 

H 

II 

0. 442 

0.270 

37.36 

211 

n 

H 

II 

0.437 

0. 272 

37.00 


Phase 
liquid Phase 
CH4 

Composition Mol 
Ga 3 

i^2 ^6^12 

% 

Phase 

gH 4 

* 2 ' 

Mole 3 CH4 /Mol C^H 12 
Liquid Phase 

Moles C4H,„ 

Gas PH; 



41.5 

58.5 



0.710 

10. 58 

0.32 

4. 60 

87.93 

7.47 

0.119 - 

0 . 048 

25.63 

0.47 

2.74 

89. 85 

7.41 

0.347 

0.028 

40. 09 

1. 45 

3.86 

89.47 

6.6 7 

0.685 

0. 040 

55.57 

55. 76 

2. 85 

2. 64 

8. 56 

7.93 

85. 89 
86,41 

5 . 55 
5. 56 

1.34 

1.34 

0.095 
0.086 

64.70 

64. 55 

3.27 

3.05 

12.92 

12.59 

81. 85 

81,69 

5.23 

5.74 

2.02 ^ 

1.99 

0.148 

0.144 

69.47 
68.12 

4.05 

4. 73 

16. 64 

78. 66 

4.70 

2.62 

2. 52 

0. 200 

74. 40 

4. 71 

20.68 

74-. 30 

5.02 

3.55 - 

0.261 

55. 22 
55.80 

2. 52 

2. 41 

10.26 

10. 22 

83.93 

83.53 

5.81 
6.25 

1.31 

1.33 

0.114 

0.114 

56. 5l 

55. 80 

1.99 

2.62 

10.78 

11.0 

83.41 

83.62 

5.81 

5.37 

1.36 

1.34 

0.121 

0.124 

57.51 

56.48 

2.60 

3.13 

12. 80 

12. 54 

82.12 

79.60 

5.08 
7.86 

1.44 

1.40 

0.147 

0.143 

59.31 

59.8o 

3.33 

3. 20 

18.11 

18.46 

77. 00 
77.17 

4.89 

4.37 

!. 59 

1.62 

0.221 
0.226 











• • 






; 





















- 105 - 


The density - pressure relationship for 
this system is shown in Pig. 22. The shape of the 
curves is very similar to those obtained when heptane 
was used as the solvent. When Gas B. was used, the 
critical pressure was about 15 atmospheres higher 
than when Gas A. was used. Gas A. would be expected 
to result in a lower critical pressure than Gas B. due 
to the ethane content of Gas A. -a change of 15 
atmospheres is surprisingly large and illustrates the 
important effect on the critical pressure of small 
changes in the gas composition. A rise of 30° G produced 
a lowering of eight atmospheres in the critical pressure 

At low pressures the density of the phase for 
Gas A. equilibria is greater than for Gas B. ^his is 
easily understood for the gas phase, from the greater 
density of Gas a. due to the ethane content. The reason 
for greater density of the liquid phase is not obvious 
nor certainly explained since the phase compositions 
for Gas a. equilibrium were not determined. However it 
may be suggested that the greater density of the gas is 
responsible. 

Pig. 23. shows the variation of phase density 
with temperature at 241.8 atmospheres. ^he curve 
having the smaller phase density,represents the gas 
phase and the other the liquid phase. f ^he density 






-106- 



S’ig. 23 Variation of 
Phase Density with 
Temperature at 
241.8 Atm. 


























-107- 

of the liquid phase decreases with increasing temperature 
continuously, hut the density of the gas phase decreases 
at first and then increases. The approach to the 
critical is surprisingly slow when it is considered 
that thi3 system reaches a critical at 290 atmospheres 
at 25° 0. Thus a lowering of $0 atmospheres pressure 

■ 

causes a rise in critical temperature of much more than 
90° G. The lopsided nature of the curves has heen 
observed for the ether - propylene system by Winkler (49) 
Pig. 24, shows the change in solubility of 
Gas A. with pressure for the two temperatures 
investigated. The temperatures coefficient is negative 
for the lower pressures and positive at higher pressures• 
Henry’s law is obeyed fairly well to pressures of 100 
atmospheres but beyond 2J?0 atmospheres the solubility 
rapidly approaches in infinite value, since at the 
critical pressure the liquid and gas are totally miscible* 
The variation of solubility with temperature 
at 241.8 atmospheres is shown in Pig. 25. The 
minimum discussed previously occurs at 60 - 70 ° G 
for this system, which may be compared with the 
temperature of 55° G. for heptane systems. Heptane 
has a lower critical temperature and the minimum of 
solubility occurs at a lower temperature. This is 










. 









■ 







* 










■c 

. 












. 






-108- 



Pig. 24, Variation of Solubility 
Methane in Cyclohexane with 


Pressures. 





































■ 109 - 



Mg. 2J. variation of Solubility 
Methane in Cyclohexane with temperature 


at 241.8 Atm, 
























- 110 - 


in agreement with the theoretical deductions of 
Xuenen (12, 13). 

The change of vapor concentration in the 
gas phase with pressure is shown in Fig. 26. The 
general shape of the curves is the same as those 
obtained for heptane.- The vapor concentration is 
always much higher than that expressed by the Poynting 
relation. 

The effect of temperature on the vapor 
concentration is shown in Pig. 27, at a pressure of 
241.8 atmospheres. ^he rate of increase is almost 
linear up to 85° and then rises rapidly as the critical 
region is approached. 

The effect of pressure on the phase composition 
is shown in Fig. 28. At pressures below 270 atmospheres 
the mol % of gas in the liquid phase is less at 55° 
than at 25 ° C. corresponding of course to the region 
where the temperature coefficient of solubility is 
negative. The region of retrograde condensation for 
pressures of about 125 atmospheres to the critical is 
well shown. 

Benzene. - Gas B. System. 

The data for benzene - Gas B. system is 
shown in tables X, XI, XII. The temperature investigated 
in this case were 25 , 3 5* and 5JP 0. 


















. 








- 


- 

- 

-- . 

* 

- 


















-Ill 



Pig. 26. Effect of Pressure on the Vapor 
Content of Cyclohexane in the Gas Phase. 

-- 0 -25° G. 

-O-5'5° c. 


Poynting, 
































25 45 65 65 105 

TEMPERATURE ° C 


Pig. 27 Effect of Temperature on the 
Vapor Concentration of the Gas Phase 
at 241.8 Atm, {CyclohexaneJ 






































-11,3- 



Fig, 28 Relation between Phase 
Composition and Pressure. (Cyclohexane) 

















































- 114 - 



Table X. 


Benzene Gas B. Equilibria at 25° 

Run Pressure (abs) Phase Density 



#/ " 

Atm. 

Liquid phase 

Gas phase 


14.7 

1 

0.874 


98 

339. 

23.0 

0.861 

0.0161 

97 

494 

33.5 

0.854 

0.0295 

93 

94 

724 

49.1 

0.850 

0.850 

0. 0415 

0.0416 

95 

96 

1099 

74.6 

0.831 

0.831 

0.0659 

99 

100 

1614 

109.5 

0.811 

0.809 

0.0950 

0.0959 

101 

102 

2109 

142.3 

0. 794 

0.794 

0.131 

0.132 

104 

105 

2614 

177.4 

0.778 

0.777 

0.166 

103 

2909 

197.4 

0.765 

0.188 

106 

2974 

201.9 

0.761 

0.196 

107 

108 

3589 

243.6 

0.742 

0.742 

0.238 

0.237 

109 

110 

4044 

274.6 

0.727 

0.727 

0.267 
0.269 

111 

112 

4544 

308.5 

0.710 
0.707 

0.300 

113 

114 

5034 

341.8 

0.690 

0.691 

0.332 

0.332 

115 

116 

5444 

369.6 

0.674 

0.673 

0.359 

0.359 


C6H6 

95.10 

93.04 

90.64 

90.62 

85.94 

85.95 

80.17 
80. 21 

| 

75. 04 
75.05 

70. 84 
70.44 


j^hase 

Liquid phase 
CH 4 


4. 8$ 

6.88 

9.23 

9.25 

13.70 

13.70 

19.52 

19.48 

24. 55 
24. 50 

28. 50 
29, 90 


Composition Mol 



43. 70 
43.58 

46. 62 
46.77 

49.73 
50.13 


2. 88 

2.75 

3.15 

3.03 


8.18 
7.99 

9.90 

9.97 


84. 54 
84. 49 

83.95 

83.80 




*2 

Hi 

ch 4 

87.6 

m 2 

0. 04 

4. 56 

83.74 

11.70 

0. 08 

2.86 

88. 56 

8. 58 

0.13 

2.94 

89.45 

7.63 

0.13 

2.79 

89.33 

7.88 

0.26 




0. 24 

2.76 

89.71 

7.53 

0.31 

2.03 

91.88 

6. 09 

0.31 

2. 02 

91.74 

6. 24 

0.41 

1.96 

92. 04 

6. 00 

0.45 

2. 09 

91.88 

6.03 

0. 66 

0.66 

2.56 

90.84 

6. 60 

0. 80 




2.83 

90.11 

7. 06 

0. 80 

2.90 

89.94 

7.16 

l. 20 

4.16 

88. 69 

7.15 

1.37 

4. 09 

89.05 

6.86 

1. 48 

4.93 

88. 22 

6.85 

1. 52 

4.93 

88. 42 

6.65 

1.96 




2.10 

6.35 

85. 87 

7.78 


7.28 
7. 52 

6.15 

6.23 


Moles CH 4 / 
Mol C<$H6 
Liquid Phase 


0,0511 

0. 0738 

0.102 

0.102 

0.160 

O.159 

0. 243 
0.243 

0.327 

0.327 

0. 402 
0.410 

0. 466 

0.478 

0.597 

0.598 

O.687 
0. 687 

0.805 

0. 804 

0.927 

0.927 



Moles 05115 / 
Mol Gas 
Ga3 Phase 

0.141 

0.047 

0. 031 

0.030 

0 . 02 7 


0.028 

0.021 

0.021 

0. 020 
0. 021 

0. 026 


0.029 

0.030 

0. 044 
0. 043 

0.052 
0.052 


0. 068 

0.089 
0.087 

0.110 

0.111 



















115- 





Table XI. 






Benzene Ga3 

B. Equilibria 

. 

1 / 


Run 

Temp 

Pressure (abs) Phase Density 

\ 




if / " 

Atm. 

Liquid phase 

Gas phase 

Liquid 

phase 



14.7 

1 

0. 863 


3 6H6 

ch 4 

123 

35° 

998 

67.8 

0. 824 

0.0545 ! 

37.64 

12.15 

124 




0.823 

0.0548 

37. 45 

12.34 

125 

n 

2473 

167.9 

0.764 

0.150 ; 

?1.05 

28.19 

}}Z 


4544 

3o8.5 

O.689 

0.293 ! 

?2, 80 

45. 48 

118 

11 



0.688 

0.297 : 

?2. 92 

45.53 

119 

11 

5034 

341.8 

O.667 

0.311 

^8.30 

49.44 

120 

11 

5444 

369.6 

0.645 

0.362 ^ 

5-4.68 

52. 72 

121 

11 



0.642 

0.361 

5-4.38 

52.90 

122 

45 ° 

5444 

369.6 

0. 599 

0.381 ; 

*9.25 

58. 52 

252 




0.600 

0.381 ; 

*9.15 

58. 50 


55° 

14. 7 

1 

0. 842 




131 

ti 

998 

67.9 

0.803 

0.0520 i 

37.16 

12. 52 

130 

n 

1983 

134. 8 

0.765 

0.101 \ 

76.15 

23.15 

129 

n 

3589 

243.6 

0.699 

0. 214 

>9.72 

38. 88 

128 

II 

4544 

308.5 

0. 647 

0.291 

1-9.76 

48. 48 

127 

It 

5444 

369.6 

0. 542 

0. 413 

3.90 

63.38 

126 

H 



0. 544 

0.417 : 

*4. 24 

63.30 

205 

60. 2° 

5453 

370.2 

0. 465 

0.450 j 

25. 26 

71.60 

207 

H 



0.471 

0. 450 


206 

91 

5490 

372.7 

0. 440 

0. 442 






i*ha3e Composition Mol % 


Ga3 phase 


n 2 

m 

CH 4n 

74.8 

0. 21 

0. 21 

2. 42 

90.73 

O.76 

2. 54 

91.45 

1.72 

1.55 - 

7.12 

7.32 

86.43 

86. 50 

2. 26 

9.34 

84. 00 

2.60 

2.72 

11.15 

11.11 

82.15 
82. 43 

2. 23 
2.35 

14.19 

14. 08 

80. 46 
80.62 


42.9 

57.1 

0.32 

2.64 

91.31 

0.70 

2. 63 

90. 82 

1.40 

5.36 

88.68 

1.76 

9.65 

84. 49 

2.72 

2. 46 

18.68 

18.98 

76.31 
76.00 

3.14 

23.78 

71.57 


u 2 

Moles CH 4 / 
Mol C 6 H/ 
Liquid Phase 

Moles CzH^ 
/ Mol Gas 
Gas Phase 

0.337 

6.85 

0.138 

0.141 

0.026 

6. 01 

0.396 

0.028 

6.55 

6.28 

0.863 

0. 863 

0.096 

0.085 

6.66 

1,02 

0.112 

6.70 

6. 46 

1.18 

1.19 

0.136 

0. 135 

5.35 

5.30 

1. 49 

1.50 

1.76 

1.75 



0.752 

6.05 

0.144 

0.029 

7.05 

0.305 

0. 024 

5.96 

0.648 

0.061 

5. 86 

0.974 

0.114 

5. 01 
5.02 

1.87 

1.85 

0. 245 

0.250 

4.65 

2. 84 

0.332 

















-116- 


Table XII. 


P*T Relations for Benzene Gas B. System 


Temp. °G. 
Composition 
Mol % Gas 
Gas Phase 

98.0 
97.0 
96.0 
94.0 
92.0 
90.0 
88.0 
86.0 


25 


35 

Pressure (Atm) 


125 

34-214 50-203 

25-246 40-235 

14-294 27-284 

8-334 18-325 

3-372. 12-354 

1 8-378 

5 


55 


70-191 

54-220 

41-257 

34-291 

27-314 

23 -331 
19-395 


Liquid Phase 


10 

55 

56 

53 

20 

113 

no 

109 

3o 

179 

176 

172 

40 

210 

199 

190 

50 

296 

279 

256 





- 117 - 


The pressure density curves are shown in Pi g. 
29, The experiments could not 'be carried out at & 
sufficiently high pressure to shov/ the critical 
pressure at any of these temperatures. HoYfever the 
the critical pressure is nearly reached and indicates 
a critical would have been obtained at about 380 
atmospheres. A slight inflection in the curve at 25° 
and 35° G can be noticed for both phases. This might 
be expected in the case of the gas phase, the pressure 
density curve 3 ; Pig. 11, for the pure gas showing a 
decided inflection curve. In this case the vapor 
concentration of the gas phase was not high enough to 
eliminate this effect, a high vapor concentration 
tending to produce a smooth curve with no inflection. 
This is brought out in the 55° curve and the pressure - 
density curves for cyclohexane and heptane. Pigs. 13, 
and 22. One may suggest that the inflection in the 
liquid phase curves is due to the compressibility of 
the liquid, increasing pressure^- causing an increase 
in density so great that the decreased density due to 
solution of gas, fails to mask it. It is possible thctt 
it may be due to an experimental error but this type of 
curvature has been noticed by Sage et al ( lj ) in the 
equilibrium between natural gas and various hydrocarbon 
oils. 







• 


, 

t 













...•, .. 






1 - 


. 

* 

. 






■ 






-llS- 



Pig. 29 . Effect of Pressure on Phase Density. 

- • - 2? ° 

-O-35° 

-O- ? 5 ° 

























































119 


The effect of temperature on phase density 
at different pressures is shown in Fig, 30, The 
upper set of curves represents the liquid phase and the 
lower set the gas phase. As was noticed with the other 
systems, temperature has a very slight effect on the 
phase density at lower pressures. Attention might he 
brought to runs numbered 205 and 207 . l n the critical 
region the difference in phase density being slight 
it was thought that the agitation of the rocking motion 
might mechanically mix the two phases and thus not give 
true equilibrium conditions. However the duplication 
of the runs, shovirs this possibility to be remote. 

Any mechanical mixing at a point so near the critical 
would make it impossible to duplicate the results. 

Fig. 3.1, shows the relation between pressure 
and solubility, Henry f s law holds to approximately 
150 atmospheres, which is considerably higher than for 
either of the other systems already discussed. The 
extended range over which Henry's law is obeyed is 
probably due to the greater dissimiliarity between 
the gas and benzene, as compared to the gas and heptane 
or cyclohexane. The value of the solubility has little, 
apparentlyjto do with it. 

The effect of temperature on solubility for 
different pressures is shown in Fig. 32. Ho minimum 





















-120 



3?ig. 30 Effect of Temperature on Phase Density 
'Upper Curves - Liquid Phase 
Lower Curves - Gas Phase 












































































121 



Fig. 31 . Effect of Pressure on Solubility of 
Methane in Benzene. 


-o- 


25° 


O-35° 













































- 122 - 



5*ig. 32, Relation between Solubility of 
Methane in Benzene, and Temperature, 














































-123- 

is observed in the temperature range investigated for 
this system but the curvature of the graphs (particularly 
at 370 atmosphere) indicate that a minimum could be 
obtained at a lower temperature. Comparison with the 
same data for heptane and cyclohexane 9 Pig3, 15 anc 24 
is interesting. 

Pig. 33, shows the relation between pressure 
and vapor content of the gas phase. The minimum 
observed in the systems is well shown. 

The tempera/ture effect on the vapor 
concentration is shown in Pig. 34. The curves are very 
similar to the corresponding curves of the two systems 
already discussed and further explanation is 
unnecessary at this point. 

The effect of pressure on phase composition 
is shown in Pig. 35® The region of retrograde 
condensation is much greater for this system than 
for either of the other two discussed previously. It 
is also noticeable that over the pressure range covered 
the 25 ° and 35° C. curves are still concave to the 
pressure axis. This is tSa be expected on the basis of 
the greater difference in the critical temperature 
of the components, 

P - T relations for both phases are shown 
in table XII* The temperature range investigated for 

















i 








- 



, 


, 

c 




, 




















- - 

:■ / . , • u' $| 

. 
























124 - 



Pig. 33. Effect of Pressure on vapor 
Concentration of Gas Phase, 

-O-25° 

- Q -35° 

- m - 55 ° 









































- 125 - 



Fig. 34. Relation between Vapor Concentration 
in Gas Bhase and Temperature 













































MOL % CAS 


*126 



P'ig.35* Effect of Pressure on Phase Composition. 




























































■127- 


this system was small and the curves for the different 
temperatures on the composition pressure diagram Fig.35* 
can hardly he distinguished. For this reason the data 
are less accurate than for the other systems where the 
temperature range was greater. Only the data for the 
liquid phase are shown graphically, Fig. 36. At low 
gas concentrations the P-T curves give nearly a vertical 
line hut at higher values the pressure decreases with 
increasing temperature, corresponding to the region 
where the temperature coefficient of solubility is 
positive. 





■128. 



Pig. 36. Pressure - Temperature Relations 
for Different Compositions - Liquid Phase. 





















































-129- 


Toluene . -- Gas B. System. 

The data for the equilibrium between toluene 
and Gas B. is shown in Tables XIII, XIV, and XV. 

The phase density—pressure curves shown in 
Fig. 37 are very similar to the same curves for 
other systems except that the maximum experimental 
pressure possible was too far below the critical 
pressure to justify extrapolation to the critical. 

*he inflection noted in the liquid phase density- 
pressure curve in the benzene series can be noticed 
in the liquid phase for this system at 25° 0. The 
inflection is not noticed at the higher temperatures 
for either system. The increased solubility of the 
gas in the liquid over the pressure range where the 
inflection was observed tending to mask this effect. 

The effect of temperature on phase density 
is shown in Fig. 38. A better comparison to the 
benzene system can be made here. The benzene system 
gave a critical at 60 ° G. and 3 70 atmosx^heres but 
this system required that the temperature be raised 
to approximately 9^° C. and 3?0 atmospheres . It 
is of interest to note that this difference is 
almost the same as the difference in the boiling 
temperatures of the pure liquids. Experiments were 
carried to 115° at a lower pressure ( 241,7 atmospheres) 



























. 


















: 


< 

















































“130- 


Table XIII. 




Toluene Gas B 

Equilibria 

at 

25 0 

1 


Run 

#/ ■ 

14.7 

Pressure (abs) 
Atm. 

1 

Phase Density 

Liquid phase Gas phase 

0.861 

Phase 

Liquid Phase 

C 7 Hq CH4 

158 

179 

528 

35.8 

0.839 

0 . 841 


0.0299 

0.0280 

91.31 

91.38 

8 . 43 

8 . 40 

$ 

1003 

68.1 

0.823 

0.826 


0. 0544 

0.0549 

84.72 

34.72 

14 . 98 

14.96 

160 

177 

1498 

101.7 

0.811 

0.811 


0.0851 

0. 0844 

5 ° 

78.70 

20. 88 

20. 80 

161 

176 

1983 

134.7 

0.800 
0.796 


0.120 

0.120 ' 

73.46 

73.30 

25.94 

25.98 

162 

175 

2473 

167.9 

0.775 

0.777 


0.149 ( 

0.150 ( 

58.12 

38.36 

30.98 

31. 00 

164 

174 

2978 

201.9 

0.765 

0.766 


0.185 < 

0.185 ( 

? 3.57 

> 3.95 

35.30 

35.28 

165 

173 

3589 

243.6 

0.740 

0.740 


0 . 224 1 

0.224 j 

? 8.63 

> 9.15 

39.98 

39.85 

166 

172 

4044 

274.6 

0.725 

0.726 


0.251 t 

0.249 ! 

> 5.68 

> 5.19 

43.05 

43.40 

167 

171 

4544 

308.5 

0.711 

0. 709 


0.280 1 

0.279 l 

il .17 

> 1.59 

46 . 25 
46.70 

170 

5034 

341.8 

0.697 


0.304 j 

*■ 7.95 

50 .14 

168 

169 

5444 

369.6 

0.679 

0.679 


0.332 

0.330 t 

1 - 4 . 25 
K 39 

53.48 

53.56 




Composition Mol % 
Ga3 Phase 
M 2 0 7 Hq 

ch 4 

96:7 

1^2 

Moles CH 4 /Mol C^Hq 
Liquid Phase 

Moles C^Hg t 

Ga3 Phase 
0.034 

0. 26 

0. 22 

1.84 

92,06 

6.10 

0.0919 

0.0919 

0.019 

o. 3 o 

0.27 

0 . 5 ? 

0 .83 

91.78 

92.92 

7 . 63 
6. 25 

O.176 

O.I76 

0.0060 

0.0083 

0.62 

0. 51 

0. 72 

0. 62 

92.87 
93.28 

6. 41 

6.10 

0.264 

0.263 

0.0072 

0.0063 

0.60 

0.82 

0 .79 

91.66 

7.55 

0.354 

0.355 

0.0086 

0.90 

0.64 

1. 26 

1. 26 

92.63 

92.23 

6.11 
6. 51 

0.453 

0.455 

0 . 013 

0. 013 

!. 13 

0.87 

1. 59 

1.67 

91.80 

91.99 

6.61 
6.34 

0. 556 

0. 552 

0.016 

0.017 

1.39 

1 . 00 

2 . 22 

2 . 22 

91. 26 
90.60 

6 . 52 | 
7 . 18 ; 

0.678 

0.673 

0 . 023 

0 . 024 

1.27 

1.41 

3.08 

3.05 

90.28 
90.17 

6.64 

6.78 

0.775 

0.787 

0.032 

0 . 031 

2. 58 

1.71 

3.69 

4 . 07 

90 . 40 

90. 02 

5.91 

5.91 

0.903 

0.905 

0.038 

0.042 

1.91 

4.77 

88.60 

6.63 

1.05 

0.050 

2. 27 

2. 05 

5.85 

5 . 84 

85.98 

86.63 

8.17 

7.53 

1.21 

1.21 

0.062 

0.062 
















Table XIV. 



Toluene Gas 

B Equilibri 

a 



Phas 

Run 

Temp 

Pressure (abs) 

Phase Density 


Liquid Phas 

nu 




Atm. 

Liquid phase 

Gas phase 

°7 h 8 




14. 7 

1 

0.833 




180 

55° 

528 

35.8 

0. 814 

0. 0261 

92.11 

7.81 

181 


1498 

101.7 

0.780 

0.0762 

79. 57 

19.90 

182 

« 

2473 

167.9 

0.743 

0.133 

68. 52 

3o. 62 

183 

N 

3563 

241. 8 

0.708 

0.199 



187 




0.704 

0.199 

58. 27 

40,70 

184 

n 

4553 

309.1 

0. 663 

0. 264 

48.30 

49.72 

188 




0.664 

0. 261 

48.74 

49.36 

185 

ti 

5458 

370. 5 

0.608 

0.3 23 

39.82 

5g- !9 

186 

w 



0.611 

0.327 

38.90 

58. 42 



14.7 

1 

0. 815 




195 

75 ° 

528 

35.8 

0.793 

0. 0255 

92. 27 

7.67 

196 

n 

1498 

101.7 

0.758 

0.0713 

79.98 

19.66 

197 

N 

2473 

167.9 

0.725 

0.122 

68. 77 

30.38 

189 

II 

3563 

241.8 

0.684 


57.54 

40.93 

190 




0.682 

0.190 

57. 58 

41. 20 

198 

n 

4473 

303.8 

0.638 

0. 240 

48. 02 

49.88 

199 

11 

4573 

310.5 

0.623 

0.259 

46. 80 

51.02 

200 

n 

5463 

370.8 

0. 558 

0. 346 

34.50 

62. 02 

201 

H 



0. 562 

0.346 

34.90 

61.84 

203 

90° 

5463 

370.8 


0.391 



204 

H 



0. 454 

0.391 



191 

95° 

3563 

241. 8 

0.661 

0.183 

57.28 

41, 52 

192 

M 



0.660 

0.184 

56.98 

41. 55 

202 

ft 

5463 

370.8 

0.473 

0. 473 



193 

115 0 

3 563 

241. 8 

0. 63o 

0.190 

55.97 

42. 57 

194 

n 



o.63o 

0.186 

56.02 

42. 69 


I 


Composition Mol 


U2 CyHg 

n 15.52 
0.08 2.11 

0.53 1.70 

0.86 2.35 

3. 42 

1.03 3.12 

1.98 5.34 

1.90 5.24 

1.99 8.24 

2.68 8. 52 


Gas Phase 
CH. 


84. 48 
87.97 
91.62 
91.56 
90.70 
90. 82 
88.25 
88.37 
85.76 
86.43 


5. 87 


6.06 

6. 41 
6.42 
6.00 
5.05 


Moles C^ 4 / Mole3 CyHg / 
Mol C^Hq moi Gas 
Liquid Phase Gas Phase 


0.085 
0.250 
0J.447 

O.698 
1.03 
1.01 
1. 46 
1. 50 


0.184 
0. 022 
0.017 
0.024 
0. 036 
0.032 

0. 056 
0. 055 
0.090 
0.093 


31.90 
0.06 3.19 

o.36 2.05 

0,85 2.72 

1.53 

1.22 4.06 

2,10 

2.18 7.60 

3.48 12.45 

3.26 12.07 


68.10 
91.69 
92.67 
91.03 

89.42 

86. 55 
81.80 
82. 64 


5« !2 
5. 28 
6. 25 

6. 52 

5.85 
5.75 
5. 29 


0.083 
0. 246 
0. 443 
0.712 
0.714 
1, 04 
1.09 
1.80 
1.77 


0.468 
0.033 
0.021 
0.028 

0. 042 

0.082 

1.42 

1.37 



18.72 

76. 27 

5.01 


1. 20 
1.47 

4.93 

5. 42 

88.83 

88,85 

6.34 

5.73 

0.726 

0.728 

1.46 

1. 29 

7.33 

7.33 

88. 50 

88. 50 

4.17 

4.17 

0.760 

0.761 


0.230 


0.052 

0.057 

0.079 
0. 079 



















-132- 


Table XV. 


P-T Helations for Toluene Gas B. System 


Temp. °C. 
Composition 

Mol fo Gas 

Gas Phase 

25 

55 

Pressure (Atm. ) 

75 

99.4 

80 

- 

- 

99.0 

55-150 

- 

- 

98.5 

41-190 

- 

- 

98.4 

37-210 

100 

- 

98.0 

25-229 

56-160 

105 

97.0 

2 -277 

28-233 

45-182 

96.0 

-315 

20-267 

32-223 

94. 0 

-371 

11-327 

21-276 

90.0 

CD 

5-400 

12-340 

88.0 

- 

3-428 

9-364 

82.0 

- 

- 

4-399 


Liquid. Phase 


10 

45 

47 

50 

20 

92 

98 

101 

3o 

159 

158 

157 

40 

23 5 

230 

226 

50 

320 

298 

292 

60 

40 5 

36o 

346 































PHASE DENSITY GRAMS / CC 0 
0°20 0,4 o' 0 o 60 O o 80 


■133 



®ig. 37 * ® lis.se Density - Pressure Kelationship. 

-O-25° 

-e-55° 

































































Temperature 


- 134 . 



^ig. 38. Effect of Temperature on Ph8.se 
Density for Different Pressures, 

























































- 135 - 

but little change in phase density was produced. The 
liquid phase just shows concavity at 115° C. 

Solubility - pressure curves are shown in 
Pig. 39* The solution of methane in toluene more 
nearly conforms to Henry’s law than any of the other 
systems in that the solubility is nearly a straight 
line relation to 200 atmospheres. 

The effect of temperature on solubility 
is shown in Pig. 40. At pressures below 168 
atmospheres the solubility decreases with rise in 
temperature and at greater pressures it increases 
with temperature. However the curvature of the 370 
atmosphere line indicates that a minimum would be 
observed at a lower temperature, A striking 
difference with this system however is that, at 
low pressures the minimum v/ould probably be 
observed at a temperature greater than 75° G., but 
at higher pressures f it would occur at a temperature 

below 25° G. 

Vapor concentration curves are show r n in 
Pigs. 41 and 42. They are very similar to the 
same curves for the benzene system and need not be 
discussed further. However the relatively greater 
slope of the concentration temperature curves should 


be noted. 









' 




vq -.■ ' . 






; .y ; 

. 













- 136 - 


!3 

n? 

o 

£ o 

V 












/ 

o 











/ 

// 









/ 

// 

// 









// 

y / 

/ 

o 

/ 

f 








A 

n 

i 




if 

a 

CO 

LJ 





/' 

s' 

s 






o o 

r 


Q 











J 










100 200 300 400 

PRESSURE IN ATMOSPHERES 


^ig. 39. Effect of Pressure on Solubility 
of Methane in Toluene. 





































































Pig. 40 Effect of Temperature on Solubility 
at Various Pressures. 
































































Fig. 41 Effect of Pressure on the Vapor 
Content of the Gas Phase* 

-•- 25° 

-■- 55 ° 

75° 


-O- 
























































- 139 - 



Pig. 42, Variation of Vapor Concentration 
of Gas Phase with Temperature for 


various Pressure. 

















































- 140 - 


^Fig. 4-3. shows the relation between phase 
composition and pressure, r fhis system shows the 
largest region of retrograde condensation which, of 
course As to be expected due to the greatest 
difference in the critical temperature of the 
components. 

Pressure - temperature relations for 
different compositions are shown in Pigs. 44 and 45. 
The discussion for the pressure - temperature curves 
of the heptane system can be applied here. 





141 



•Pig. 43 . Effect of Pressure on Phase Coiaposition 

-O-25° 

- 55 ° 

- 75 ° 










































































■ 142 - 



tfig. 44. Pressure - Temperature Relations 
for Different Compositions (Gas Phase) 

























































- 143 - 



45* Pressure - Temperature Relations 
for Different Compositions (Liquid Phase) 
































































- 144 - 


System Interrelationships , 

In the previous section an attempt has been 
made to present the results obtained from the various 
systems studied and to explain the graphs illustrating the 
behavior of the systems. In this section an effort will 
be made to correlate the relations between the different 
systems and to discuss the results in this respect with 
more detail. In addition to the results given for each 
system, certain relations covering all systems might be 
of interest. 

The apparent vapor pressure of the different 
liquids and the vapor concentration expressed as grams of 
liquid per cc, of phase space, all at 55° C. are shown in 
Table XVI. The apparent vapor pressure of the liquids 
was obtained by assuming Dalton’s law of partial pressures 
and substracting the gas pressure from the total pressure. 
The partial pressure of methane was obtained from the 
analysis and the compressibility data; and the partial 
pressure of the nitrogen was calculated assuming it to 
act as an ideal gas in the low concentrations existing in 
these mixtures. The vapor concentration was obtained 
by dividing the total weight of liquid in the sample 
by the volume of the pipette. 

The results are shown in Pigs 46 and 47. 

Similar curves are obtained at the other temperatures 




























- 










































- 145 - 


Table XVI 

Variations of Apparent Vapor Pressures of Liquids 
at 55° with Total Pressure. 


Solvent 

° 7 H 16 


c 6 h 12 


° 6 h 6 


°7 h 8 


P(totalJ 

Vapor Pressure 

g. Liquid 


P(total)-P(gas) 

/ cc. Pha; 

34.8 

0.5 

0.0042 

100.9 

2.2 

0.0086 

167.2 

- 0.8 

0.023 5 

236.0 

-4.2 

0.0834 

249.3 

5.3 

0.136 

35.5 

0.6 

0.0060 

loi. 8 

- 0.9 

0.0100 

167.9 

-5.6 

0. 0243 

243.6 

- 6.9 

0.0787 

274.6 

-3.4 

0.132 

281 . 4 

13.2 

0.173 

288.1 

17.5 

0.226 

67.9 

0.3 

0.0058 

134.8 

2.0 

0.0105 

243.6 

-2.1 

0 .0474 

308.5 

9.2 

0.0960 

369.6 

60.9 

0 . 216 

3 5-8 

0.1 

0.0028 

101.7 

0.1 

0.0066 

167.9 

-1.0 

0 .0155 

241.8 

- 6.7 

0.0311 

309.1 

- 0 . 5 

0 . 0607 

370.5 

24. 5 

0.113 








- 146 - 



Pig, 46 Variations of Apparent Vapor 
Pressures of Different Liquids with 


Total Pressures, 


















147 



* ! ig* 47, pressure^ vapor Concentration 


of Gas Phase for Different Liquids 







































- 148 - 


used. j-j.s can be 3een all the liquids show a negative 
vapor pressure over a range of total pressures. Thi 3 
obviously does not represent true conditions since a 
negative vapor pressure is meaningless. The only 
conclusion is that Dalton’s law of partial pressures 
does not hold for 3uch mixtures and the presence of 

JL 

the vapors makes the methane more compressible than 
it would be if it existed alone. In view of the 
existence of negative values of vapor pressure when 
calculated in this manner it appears that the 
calculation gives lower values of Y. P. than the 
true values. nevertheless these nominal vapor pressures 
are astonishingly high, reading 60 atmospheres for 
benzene at 55° C» conditions under which benzene 
cannot normally exist as a gas. The critical pressure 
of benzene is only 47.7 atmospheres at a critical 
temperature of 288. 5°» the density being 0.304 grams 
per cc. 

The vapor pressure can also be calculated 
from the concentration data of Pig. 47. Assuming 
the ideal gas lav/s, the results for the highest values 
of each compound given are 32 atmospheres for toluene, 

36 atmospheres for heptane, 74 atmospheres for 
cyclohexane and 78 atmospheres for benzene. The values 
are%hus. much greater than those in Pig. 46, heptane 





! -149- 

showing the greatest relative difference. The pure 
liquids have critical pressures of 41,6, 26,8, 40,4 
and 47.7 atmospheres in the order given above. Calculating 

yy»v 1"h 6 O/wft 

ti^ critical density fjt&sg ideal gas law®, the critical 
pressures would be of the order of four times these 
figures. The vapors under the conditions of the present 
experiments will be less perfect, if anything than the 
vapors at the critical temperatures. In other words 
the actual pressures will be of the order of one 
quarter of those calculated on the ideal gas law above. 
However/the vapor pressures will never be negative, 
ho data are available from the present work permitting 
a more aefinate statement on the behavior of the 
vapors in the gas phase or of their influence on the 
methane. 

The results shown in Ifig, 47, may be predicted, 
qualitatively at least, from the properties of the 
liquid. Considering for example, a concentration of 
0.1 grams per cc. it is seen that the pressure required 
increases with the compound in the order, heptane, 
cyclohexane, benzene, toluene. Or at a constant 
pressure of 200 atmospheres which cuts all the curves, 
the vapor content decreases^ regularly in the 3ame 
order. The Critical temperatures of the compounds 
increase in the same order, from heptane to toluene, 







* 

X 








. 1 






! 


* 

, 















, 

r 

; 

' • I 
■ 

. 

i 




- 150 - 


an observation suggesting some relation between critical 
temperature and volatility. Heptane is a paraffin 
much like methane and might be expected to be most 
soluble in methane. Cyclohexane i 3 a cycloparaffin 
resembling methane more closely than either benzene 
or toluene but of course not so closely as heptane, 
benzene is relatively unlike methane and this 
relatively greater difference in properties is 
shown by the greater shift in the curve. Toluene 

should be more like methane than is benzene and on 

* 

the reasoning above should dissolve to a greater extent 
in methane; which is not the case. However, toluene 
is very much less volatile than the other compounds, 
its boiling point being 110.8° C. while the others 
range from 00 to 9^° G. Its critical temperature of 
320.6° C is much higher than that of the others. The 
decrease in volatility of toluene relative to benzene 
results in a decrease in the extent of vaporization 
more than can be made up by the paraffinic properties 
increasing, due to the introduction of a methyl group. 

It would be interesting to have data on ethyl-benzene. 

The solubility of nitrogen in the mixture 
is shown in Table XVII. and Pig. 48. The pressure 
of Nitrogen was determined by dividing the volume of 
nitrogen (at 1 atmosphere and temperature,degrees C. ) 






















■ 





■ 151 - 



Table XVII. 


Solubility of Nitrogen 


Solvent 

Pressure 


of N 2 

C H . 

2.3 

7 16 

5.8 


12 . 


16.7 


17.0 


17.7 

C 6 H 12 

2.9 


8.6 


13. 5 


16.6 


17.4 


16.1 


17.6 

° 6 h 6 

4.6 


10.3 


16.7 


20. 4 

C„H„ 

7.6 

7 8 

11 . 8 


16,6 


21.6 


21,9 


Mole 3 N„ / 
Mol Liquid 


0 . 005 
0 . oil 
0. 040 
0.114 
0.169 
0.109 

. 0.004 

0 . 006 
0 . 025 

0. 064 

0.067 
0.102 
0.153 
0.225 


0. 004 

0.009 
0 . 023 
0.035 

0.007 

0 . 013 
0.018 

0 . 040 

0.050 





















) 












- 152 - 



J’ig. 48, Solubility of U 2 in the 
Different Liquids at 55 °« 

- O -— u 7 k i6 

-■-06=12 

-4k- c 6 h 6 

-•-c 7 h 8 

































- 153 - 

in the sample "by the volume of the pipette. The 
pressures are of course ideal values but cannot be 
very greatly in error. The solubility of nitrogen 
in the mixture was determined by dividing the volume 
of nitrogen from the liquid phase by the amount of 
liquid in the phase. A better comparison might have 
been made by showing the solubility of nitrogen in 
terms of the volume of mixture representing, not 
the solubility of nitrogen in the liquid, but rather 
the solubility in a solution of the liquid a.nd methane* 

It may be noted that the solubility of nitrogen 
decreases from heptane to cyclohexane to benzene and 
toluene at constant pressure, a phenomena to be expected 
on grounds similar to those given above in considering 
the vapor concentration in the gas phase. The toluene is 
very nearly the same as benzene in this respect. The 
solubility of nitrogen approaches an infinite value 
as the critical is approached because at this pressure 
the two phases are totally miscible. Further at low 
pressures, there is a distribution o£. nitrogen between 
the two phases, favoring the gas phase as might be 
expected, at high pressures and approaching the 
critical pressure the nitrogen becomes more uniformly 
distributed. The values at high pressures show large 
deviations from the curve which may be due to : 





~ 








* 




' 




, 

< ..... 

t 

■ 

1 






. 








■ 


, 


; 




154 - 


(1) errors in analysis 

(2) the liquid level in the pipettes changing, 
which would effect the distribution of nitrogen in 
both phases. 

The peculiar shape of these curves can be better 
understood when it is considered that, the total 
pressure, although not affecting to any great extent 
the solubility of nitrogen directly, increases the 
methane content in the solution and makes the 
nitrogen more soluble in the mixture* Further increasing 
the liquid content of the gas phase makes it more like 
the liquid phase and tends to distribute the nitrogen 
evenly between the two phases. It is unfortunate that 
experimental limitations required the use of a gas 
containing nitrogen. It is believed however that the 
nitrogen had little effect on the general conclusions 
arising out of the work and it is hoped that some 
experiments will be carried out later with pure 
methane to examine this belief. 

The critical pressure of these mixtures is 
a function of the volatility of the components, 
volatility being measured roughly by the critical 
temperature, For instance the critical pressure of the 
systems is in the same order as the critical temperatures 
of the liquids for the same gas. Heptane having the 







- 155 - 


lowest critical temperature of the liquids used 
also gave the lowest critical pressure for the 
system. Raising the critical temperature of the gas 
has the same effect. Using the gas with the small 
amounts of ethane resulted in an appreciable lowering 
of the critical pressure of the system compared to 
the same liquid and the gas with the ethane removed, 
See 3Tig. 22. and discussion for cyclohexane, Gas A. 
and Gas B. systems. 

In connection with the temperature effect 
on phase density, a significant feature is the 
seemingly small effect of temperature on the phase 
density, except at high pressures where the system 
is approaching the critical state. The density of the 
gas phase decreases with increase in temperature, 
generally to a minimum and then increases. With 
heptane the minimum is not reached at 85° G. , at any 
pressure of 200 atmospheres or less. With cyclohexane, 
for one pressure, a minimum is reached at 75° G. , 
for benzene the minimum density is about 55° for 
pressures less than 300 atmospheres, while for toluene 
the minimum is only shown at one pressure (241.7 
atmospheres) at 95° C. The density of the liquid 
phase decreases with increasing temperature for all 
systems. The expansion of the liquid with increasing 













, 'i 




. ■ 


. 

























, 


. 




. 




, 


t 




. 














- 










- 156 - 


temperature having a greater effect on the phase density 
than any change due to the variation of solubility of the 
gas in the liquid.. These curves classify the systems in 
the same way as the critical pressures, with toluene 
showing the greatest divergence in the series. 

The solubility of methane in the liquids obeys 
Henry’s law up to a certain pressure. As the critical 
pressure is approached the deviation becomes much 
greater, the solubility being more than that predicted 
by Henry’s law, approaching an infinite value at the 
critical mixing pressure. The pressure at which the 
solubility begins to deviate is a function of the 
critical pressure of the mixture, of the difference 
between the critical temperature of the components. 3?or 
instance Henry’s law is obeyed roughly to a pressure of 
about 5 0 atmospheres for the heptane system, 100 for the 
cyclohexane, 200 for the benzene, and in the case of 
toluene it is obeyed to nearly 2j0 atmospheres. 

In connection with the effect of temperature 
on solubility it is quite safe to say that a minimum 
would be observed in all cases although it is not 
clearly shown for benzene and toluene for the temperature 
range used. The temperature for the minimum of 
solubility increases with decrease of pressure for all 












• ... .. 


, 


* 






. 




t ■ 


« 


e 

4 








■ 






- 


















- 157 - 


systems. This*particularly noticeable in the toluene 
system. 1 he variation from system to system is fairly 
regular, the temperature of minimum solubility 
decreasing with increasing critical temperature of the 
liquid. Cyclohexane may be an exception. 

The vapor concentration of the gas phase 
expressed as a liquid to gas ratio shows a minimum with 
pressure in all cases and the minimum occurs at nearly 
the same pressure, within 10 atmospheres of 100 
atmospheres, and is nearly independent of temperature. 
See Pig, 17* 26, 33 , 41. The vapor concentration 
increases with temperature in all cases which of course 
is to be expected, since the vapor pressure of a liquid 
always rises when the temperature is increased. Pigs. 
l8, 27, 34, and 42. have very similar appearance to 
the solubility - temperature curves of the liquid phase, 
particularly for the benzene and toluene systems. 
However, these latter curves show a . minimum of 
solubility with temperature and the same phenomena 
does not occur in the gas phase. 

The phase composition -pressure curves are 
all of the same general shape. The region of retrograde 
condensation is greater the greater the difference 
between the critical temperatures of the components, 
the pressure of minimum vapor content being lowest, 






- 158 - 

75 atmospheres, for toluene and the critical pressure 
being highest. For the other three compounds, the 
pressure of minimum vapor content is nearly constant 
at 125 atmospheres, and the critical, decreases from 
toluene to benzene to cyclohexane to heptane. The 
composition of the critical mixture is nearly 
independent of temperature but does vary from compound 
to compound, the mol % gas in the critical mixture 
decreasing with decreasing volatility of the liquid 
from about 85$ for the heptane to 75$ To** benzene. 

The composition of the toluene system is uncertain. 

The amount of gas in the system increases almost 
proportionately with the critical pressure. 

Figs. 21 and 44. show in another way the 
regions of retrograde condensation in presenting the 
temperature - pressure curves for different compositions, 
of the gas phase. The right hand set of curves in 
each case gives composition, temperature and pressure 
in the retrograde region. The much greater slope in 
the case of toluene, Fig. 44. and the wider concentration 
range compared to the heptane system, illustrates the 
large region of retrograde condensation. The transfer 
of materials from the gas phase to the liquid phase 
with increasing temperature is much greater for toluene 
than for heptane. 





. 






« 























t 










: ■ ; 






« . 

' 






.. 

. 








- 15 * 3 - 


'i 


4 

\i 

Pigs. 20, 36, and 45. showing pressure - 
temperature relations at constant composition for the 
liquid phase may he compared. With increasing temperature 
the pressure may rise slowly or decrease slowly depending 
on the composition. With heptane, the change occurs 
at about 60 to 80 % of gas in the liquid, with 
benzene at 10 to 20 % and with toluene at 20 to 3.0 %* 

One might predict that the pressure would increase 
with temperature for the more volatile systems and 
decrease for the less volatile systems. While the 
curves are not particularly exact, being obtained 
from lines on primary graphs that are close 
together, in general, they confirm this prediction. 







-160- 

Relations to the Turn er Valley Pi eld. 

An accurate comparison to the existing 
conditions in the producing horizons in the Turner 
valley Held cannot be made here. The liquids used 
so far have been less volatile than those existing 
in the formations in this field and the mixtures are 
much Teas complex. The Valley gases contain 10 to 
15 % of hydrocarbons heavier than methane and the work 
with gas A. containing small amounts of ethane, has 
shown the great influence of change in gas composition- 
However a comparison with the heptane system may be of 
interest; this system of all those examined approaching 
most closely to Turner Valley Systems, Reliable data 
for the temperature in the gas horizons are not 
available. Early reports (31) stated that the temperature 
at 5000 ft. was around 72 ° E. but considering the 
temperatures usual in other oil producing horizons this 
value is rather low. Extrapolating the temperature 
gradient of the first few hundred feet of depth obtained 
later ( 32 ) indicates that the temperature is between 
60 and 70 0 0, Eor comparative purposes 77° (25°C, ) 

is used. 

The rock pressures in the field are also 
somewhat indefinite. Originally, they exceeded 2000 lb. 
per sq. inch; today, they vary from the range 1600 to 






















' 






































, 




* 


















-l6l- 

2000 lbs in the newer wells to about 600 lbs in the 


older areas. These pressures are not static but vary 
with time even for closed -in wells, usually increasing. 

The average composition over the field, 
expressed in technical figures, is 2 j 0 gallons of 
naptha per million cu. feet of gas. variations from 
this value are very large, a factor of four or five 
either way being common. 

The following table presents some of the 
data for the heptane system in technical units at 

77° P. ( 25 ° c). 

Table XVIII. 

Liquid - Gas System for Heptane Gas A. at 77° 


Gas Phase, 

Pressure 533 1008 

Lbs / sq in 

Gals Heptane 0. 573 0. 433 

/ 1000 ft 
expanded Gas 
1 atm. 77 

Cu, Ft Gas 37 .6 75-4 

1 atm /cu ft phase 

Liquid j?ha 3 e. 

Cu ft Gas 

1 atm 77° F. 5. 23 10. 50 

/ gal heptane 

Cu. ft Ga 3 1 atm 3o. 5 57-9 

77 F. / cu ft.phase 

The composition of the gas phase 3hows a vapor 
content comparable with that common in the Valley, 


1498 1988 

0. 408 0. 486 

119.0 162.2 

17. 5 24.90 

86.6 112.6 







-162- 


Inasmuch as these are equilibrium figures, and as such 
show maxima, the presence of a liquid phase in the 
horizons may be suspected. The large gas content of 
such a liquid phase, comparable with the gas content 
of the gas phase, would result in little change in the 
estimated Reserves based upon a gas phase only. 

Gas - Oil ratios are found in the field to 
increase with increased rate of flow from a well, a 
phenomena usually explained by the lower temperatures 
prevailing in the well. It has been shown in the 
present work that the vapor content of the gas is 
very sensitive to temperature changes. On the other 
hand, if a liquid phase exists and gas is withdrawn 
rapidly, equilibrium between the two phases will not 
be maintained. The result would be also inceasing 
the gas - oil ratio. As the pressure dropped 
through removal of gas, the vapor content should 
pass through a minimum and increase; for the heptane 
methane system at 77° this occurs at about lJOO lbs, 
per sq. inch. Such a phenomena has not been observed 
in the Valley, rather as the pressure drops, the gas¬ 
oil ratios increase steadily. This is explicabbie in 
several possible ways, first, the valley mixtures are 
such that the pressure of minimum vapor content is 
less than those prevailing at present, second, only 







- 163 - 

a gas phase exists-which by cooling is dropping liquid 
hydrocarbons in the horizon or third, both phases 
exist and as the pressure falls there is a preferential 
transfer of lighter hydrocarbons to the gas and heavier 
hydrocarbons to the liquid. Some evidence for the last 
possibility exists in a decreasing boiling range of 
Turner Valley Naptha. 

Sufficient data is not yet available to do 
more than speculate on the conditions in the field. 
Given data obtained in the laboratory with actual 
Turner Valley mixtures and the history of the well 
from which the mixtures were taken, more definite 
conclusions would be possible. 







- 164 - 


Summary 

The equilibria between a natural gas which 
consists essentially of methane and four hydrocarbon 
liquids has been investigated at various temperatures 
to pressures of 5400 lbs. per sq. inch except where 
a critical pressure occulted at some lower pressure. 

The composition and density of both phases in 
equilibrium has been determined. 

The failure of ideal laws to express the 
behavior of such systems has been clearly pointed out. 
Henry’s law is obeyed over relatively wide ranges of 
temperature but fails in every instance considerably 
below the critical pressure. Poynting’s law does not 
express even approximately the vapor concentration in 
the gas phase. Equations developed from the laws of 
thermodynamics cannot be applied without a knowledge 
of equations of state for such mixtures. 

A discussion of the results with the heptane 
methane system from the point of view of the Turner 
Valley field has been given. It is possible though 
not by any means certain, that a liquid phase 
exists in some of the Turner Valley horizons. 
























. ' I.U-. ■ i: -V . •• 1? ‘ " 










* 


. 










, 








4 i 
























. 













-165- 


References . 

(1) Andrews,. Trans. Roy. Soc. , 1 g9 > 5^3, ( 1869 ) 

(2) Argue, G . H., Masters Thesis, U. of A., ( 1932 ) 

(3) Bartlett, E. P. , J. A. c. S. , 4$, 65, (1927) 

(4) Beecher, C. E. & Parkhurst, I. P. 

Pet. Biv. , A. I. M. M. E # $ 51 , ( 1926 ) 

(5) Guppies, H. L., J* A. C. S. jgL, 1026, ( 1929 ) 

(6) Bov/, B. B. & Galkin, L. P. , U. Bur. Mines, 

Kept, of Invest., 2732 (1926) 

(7) Prolich, K. , ^'auch, E, 9 Hogan, J. J. & Peer, it. 

Ind. Ang, Ghem. 2^., 548, (.1931) 

(8) Gibbs, J. W. , ^ollected Works, Longman Green & Go. 

( 1928 ) pp. 156 - 158. 

( 9 ) Gishler, P. E. , Masters Thesis, U. of A., ( 1931 ) 

(10) Hannay, J. B. , & Hogarth, J. , tihem. Hews. 40 , 2.56 

(11) Krichevsky, I. ii . & Kasarnovsky, J. S. , 

J. A. G. S. , 2168 , (1935) 

(12) Kuenen, Proc. E oy# Soc., Edinburgh 23» 312, ( 1900 ) 

(13) Kuenen, w Verdampfung und Verflussigung von 

Gemishen, " Yerlag Johan Ambrosius Batth, 
Leipzig, ( 19 . 06 ) p. 82 . 

(14) Kvalnes, H. M. & Gaddy, V. L. , J. A. G. S. 53 » 

394, (1931) 

(.15) Lacey, W. H. , Gage, B. H. & Kircher Jr., G. E. 

Ill Ind. Eng, Shem. 26 , 652, (1934) 

(16) Larson, T. & Black, C. A., Ind. E n g. Ghem. 

Hi 715* (1925) 

(17) Larson, A. T. & Black, G. A., 

J. A. C. S. ££, 1015, (1925) 

( 18 ) Lewis, H. P. , Hendricks, E. & Yoke, G # R. } 

J, A. G. S., 0 , 1993, (1928) 




t 4 . _ , t * *'* » t * ‘ t 




« 



4 




t • < 




( * 


4 


4 


« 




t - * ' 






-166- 


(19) Lindsly, B. E. , Trans. A. I. M. M. E. , 

Pet. Div,, (1931) 

(20) Lurie, E. Sc Gillespie, L. J. , J. A. G. S. , 

4Q, 1146, (1927). 

(21) Maass, 0., J. A. C. S. , 41, 53, (1919) 

(22) Maass, 0.# Wright, C. H. , J. A. C. S. , 

43, 1103 , ( 1921 ) 

(23) Mair, B. J. , B. S. Journ. Research, 9, i*R,P. ), 

457, (1932) 

(24) Masson, I. Sc -^olley, L. G. P. , 

Proc. Roy, Soc. , (London) 103A , 524, (1923) 

(25) McDaniel, Engineering Societies Library, # 1907 . 

(26) McHaffie, I. R., Phil. Mag., I, 561 , (1926) 

(27) Mills, R. V. A. & Heithecker, R. E., U. S. Bur. 

Mines, Kept, of Invest. , # 2893 . 

( 28 ) Organic Synthesis, J. Wiley Sc Sons Vol. I. p. 5, (1921) 
(£ 9 ) Pollitzer, P. & Strebel, E. , £. Physik. Chem., 

110 , 768 , ( 1924 ) 

(30) Poynting, Phil. Mag., 4^ 32, (l88l) 

(31) Private Communication, Pet. Sc Rat. Gas Div, 

Dept, of Lands and Mines, Govt, of Province 
of Alberta. 

(32) Private Communications, Royalite Oil Co. 

(33) Randal & Sosnick, J. C. S. , JJo, 967 , ( 1928 ) 

(34) Roozeboom, Die Heterogen Gleichyewickte 

Braunschweigh (1904), Vol. 2, Pt. I, p. 99• 

(35) Saddington A. W. Sc Krase, H. W. , J. A. C. S. , 

3i., 353, (1934). 

(36) Sage, B. H. Sc Lacey, W. H. , I, Ind, Eng. Chem. 

26 , 103, (1934) 

(37) Sage, B. H. , Lacey, W. 1. Sc Schaafsma, J. G. 

II, Ind. Eng. Chem. 26, 214, (1934) 




¥ 


t • 


i - * t 


( 



( « * . . « * • < 


5 


( 


' ' t 

< . . t * 

< 

t C (. ' . - t . - - » ^ • 


- < 

< 




K 


( v € * » S 


t 











1 








i 





-167- 


(38) Sage, B. H., Lacey, W. N. & Schaafsma, J. G. , 

IV, Ind. Lng. Chem. , 26, 874, (1934) 

(39) Sage, B. H., Backus, H. S. , & Lacey, W. N. , 

VIII, Ind. Bing. c hem._22, 686 , (1935) 

(40) Sage, B. H. , & Lacey, W. N. , XX. Ind. Bing. Chew. 

28, 249, (1936). 

(41) Sander, W., Z. Physik. Chem., , 78 ? 5l3, (1912) 

(42) Van Laar, J. J., Z. Physik. Chem., 115 . 207, (1929) 

(43) Villard, P., Compt. Rend., 120 , 182 , (1095) 

(44) Villard, P. , '■'hem Sews, 78 , 297 - 8 , 309 - 10 , 

( 1898 ). 

(45) Wiehe, R. & Gaddy, V. L. , J. -a. 0. S. , 

i 6 , 76, (1934) 

(46) Wiehe, R. & Gaddy, v . L. , J. 4. 0 . S. 

57, 847, (1935) 

( 47 ) Wieoe, R. & Gaddy, v . L. , J. • a . C. S. 

J2Z» U935) 

( 48 ) Wiehe, R. & Tremeanre, T. H. , J. A. C. S. 

iZ, 2601 , (1935) 

( 49 ) Winkler C. A. & Maass 0., Can. J. Research 

6, 458, (1932) 





-168- 


Acknowl e dgeme nt . 

I wish to kake this opportunity to 
extend my sincere thanks to all those who have 
assisted in the completion of this work:- 

- To Dr, E, H. Boomer, under whose direction 
this work was carried out, and whose assistance, 
kindly criticism and valuable advice has enabled 
the project to be completed, 

- To the members of the staff of the Chemistry 
Department, and others whose valuable suggestions 
have been given from time to time. 

- To the National Research Council of Canada, 
whose financial assistance made this project 
possible. 









, ■ 



t •. . ■ 





- 

... 

, 


































