







■ / ■ t- { •' ! . : 

> ■ , * s • ' 

■ MH: 



j; ;)^rViv*. ■ " : . ' '"'C , 

V'■" : "' ■ ■ 


4 -* 












DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
EDMONTON 


University of albert* 
faculty of arts 
Department of History 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled 
"The Honorable Frank Oliver , submitted by 
William S* Waddell, B*A, f in partial fulfil¬ 
ment of the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts. 


professor N ftFHrWf H 
Professor *♦ Cm w. . 


Professor 


r\. h. l 



April, 1950 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https ://arch i ve. o rg/detai Is/wadde 111950 


THE HONORABLE FRANK OLIVER 


A Thesis 
Submitted to 

The Department of History 
University of Alberta 

in 


a Programme Leading to the Degree of Master of Arts 


by 

William S. Waddell B.A. 


Bdmonton, Alberta 


March, 1950 












P^777M777: .. 7 - ■7/" ; — •. , 

: / 7, , ' . 7- - " ' > > V 


• . 


• • 

' Mv-v 7, vi-:.; ; . v - 

. .. \ 7 7 . - ' ■ 

- ■ ' V ■' . 






' 




: V 7 , - ^' 7 ' 


1 ■ 


: • ■ ; v ' •' ■ , :: ; ?&■ : A 


























ii 


mmnom 

1!he Hon. Uranic Oliver was fifty-one years of age when 
he became Sir Wilfred Laurie r* s Minister of the Interior 
in 1905• His life during these fifty-one years, and par¬ 
ticularly his influence as newspaperman and legislative 
representative upon the development of the Canadian North 
West, Is the subject of this thesis. 

As Minister during the L&urier regime he left an Indel¬ 
ible mark upon the 'Department of the Interior, His poli¬ 
cies, reflecting the personal philosophy and the system of 
political principles matured during his years as pioneer 
newspaperman and crusading exponent of North West rights, 
were the logical expression of an independent and states¬ 
manlike outlook on public affairs. 1# gave a new direction 
to Canadian immigration policy and effected a more liberal 
and efficient administration of Omaha*© western public 
domain• 

Frank Oliver 1 s life down to 1905 was a period not of 
origins only, but of outstanding accomplishment. As an 
influential critic of federal inertia and mi©management In 
Territorial administration, as a public-spirited citizen, 
and as a constructive legislator, he made far-reaching 
























. ... -V". J > 










. 
















. V ■. /—,v- 


■ 

.. 

. 

. 









ill 


contributions to the growth of the north West. xvom the 
viewpoint both of origins and attainments, the importance 
of this period to an understanding Of his career as a whole 
justifies, I believe, the division of the topic which has 
been made in the planning of this thesis. Oliver’s public 
life extended over the span of half a century. 1 have con¬ 
sidered it advisable, in a paper of necessarily limited 
length, to expand the treatment of one portion of his life 
rather than to cover his entire career in less detail. How¬ 
ever, in order to achieve some measure of perspective, 1 
have found It necessary to do considerable research on the 
years subsequent to 1906. little of the material acquired 
in this research is embodied directly in the thesis. 

For obvious reasons no final attempt has been made in 
this survey to evaluate Oliver*a stature as a newspaperman, 
legislator, administrator and cltlsen. Such a. final evalu¬ 
ation would necessitate the treatment of his career as a 
whole, and a more complete and exhaustive study than is 
here set forth. 

HU a thesis pretends to be no more than a reasonably 
documented examination oi Frank Oliver as a public figure. 
Sources are made evident in the footnotes. Little if any 
use has been made of information and opinions secured from 
Oliver’s contemporaries. lh@ personal reaiini scene©, while 















• 



















. 






c: 























N 






* 

























Iv 


valuable la furnishing background and color lor a full- 
dress” biography, and of aom© importance la directing the 
attention of the Investigator In his quest for facts, has 
been found to have strictly limited us© sad validity in a 
paper such as this, ihe reader will miss the Inclusion of 
those details of family life, and of personal Interest and 
habit, which distinguish "private” from "publie* life, and 
which have their proper place in a work at once more per¬ 
sonal and more pretentious than this survey claims to be* 

For permitting me access to newspaper files and numerous 
books of reference, 1 wish to thank the Librarian and 
staff of the Alberta Provincial Library. Hie proprietor© 
of the tdmoiibon Bulletin Publishing Co. kindly permitted 
m© to refer to certain of their file© of the Sdtaoatoa 
Bulletin which otherwise would have been unavailable to 
me* to professor Mordea II* Long, Load of the Department 
of History, University of Alberta, and to professor h # t$. 
fhomas, Department of History, University of Alberta, 1 
extend my sincere thanks for the advice and encouragement 
which they rendered me in the preparation of this thesis. 






V 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Pag© 


Chapter 

1 

Early Life 

1 

Chapter 

2 

‘The Founding of the Edmonton Bulletin 

9 

Chapter 

3 

Newspaperman and Citizen of the North 
West 

29 

Chapter 

4 

Member of the North West Council 

91 

Chapter 

5 

Continued Interest in Political Affairs 

141 

Chapter 

6 

In the Interests of the North West 
1883-1888 

166 

Chapter 

7 

Member of the North West Legislative 
Assembly 

186 

Chapter 

8 

Edmonton and the Bulletin 1888-1896 

231 

Ghapter 

9 

Member of the House of Commons 

1896-1905 

245 


A Not© on the Career of the Mon* Frank Oliver 
Subsequent to 1905 355 


Bibliography 


355 





THE HONORABLE FRANK OLIVER 


Chapter 1 Early Life 

By the middle of the nineteenth century many of the forces 
and conditions which were ultimately to bring about Canad¬ 
ian confederation could already be discerned. Not the least 
of these was the problem of the West- the ^Canada Irredenta” 
of that period. To the statesmen of the confederation era 
belongs the credit for the acquisition of the West from the 
Hudson’s Bay Company, and for the solution of the immediate 
problems incident to its transfer to the new Dominion. But 
the credit for its subsequent development must be largely 
shared with men of a later generation - men who actually 
]lived in its frontier settlements, who knew at first hand 
the difficulties peculiar to its social, political and 
economic life, and who strove, with the tenacity and courage 
of the true pioneer, to understand and solve its challenging 
problems. Of these men none is more worthy of recognition 
than the Hon. Frank Oliver of Edmonton, whose long and color¬ 
ful career as newspaperman, politician and pioneer citizen 
has left a deep and distinctive mark on the history of the 
Canadian Viest. 

On the 9th of September, 1853, with the currents soon to 




















■ ■ = ■ ' . , ' , ... . . " ■ ' ' 




. 
























' 

. 
















. 


' 





(2) 


set full flood toward confederation and the birth of the new 
vest, Frank Oliver was born near the Upper Canadian village 
of Brampton, some twenty miles west of Toronto. His family, 
of Irish and English descent, famed in the township of 
Chinguacousy, and his early years were spent on his father* e 
farm. Later, while attending the high school In Brampton, 
he combined his studies with an apprenticeship in the print¬ 
ing establishment of the local weekly paper. Meanwhile his 
mother died and his father married again. An estrangement 
developed between father and son. Cutting short his exper¬ 
ience as ’’printer* s devil ’, young Frank severed ties with 
his family and set out to make his own way. 

To the lad of ambition and venturesome spirit the city 
appeared to have the most to offer, and the first stage of 
what was to prove a long and ©ventful journey brought him 
to Toronto, the erstwhile **Muddy fork’ 1 , which by now had be¬ 
come the metropolitan capital of Ontario. His printing 
apprenticeship now served him well, and in the ©arly years 
of the young Dominion, while the Conservative government of 
Sir John A. Macdonald was debating terns for the construct¬ 
ion of the first transcontinental railway, and was moment¬ 
arily shaken by the Metis uprising in Red River, he found 
employment in the composing rooms of the Toronto Globe. (1) 

(1) The Edmonton Bulletin, April 7, 1905 and April 1, 1933. 

Founded by Frank Oliver in T dmonton, Dec. 6, 1880 as 

’’The Bulletin*. 


















• 

. 

; 




















; 


• 





• 

. 




























































(5) 


Although still young in years, Frank Oliver was alert, 
serious-minded and already sensitive to the political forces 
of his day. While it would be unwise to assume too much 
from his association with George Brown and the Grits, cert¬ 
ain influences and parallels are almost unmistakable. The 
Clear Grits were the party of the frontier in Canadian 
politics. From the frontier they drew their inspiration, 
and at various times they, and therefore George Brown and 
the Globe, had waged the battle for responsible government, 
attacked the clergy reserves, denounced the eastern monopoly 
of the Grand Trunk Railway and the western monopoly of the 
Hudson* s Bay Company, and advocated a policy of westward 
expansion involving cheap land and immigration, Each of 
these issues was to have its counterpart in the history of 
the North West* the struggle for responsible government in 
the Territories, the w land lock 4 * constituted by the railway 
land grants and the colonization companies, the alleged 
monopoly of the C.P.R., and the retarding influences of 
Dominion lands policy on western immigration. In the later 
struggles centering on these North West problems, Frank 
Oliver was destined to play an important and at times decis¬ 
ive part, and to reveal on many occasions, whether in a 
scathing editorial in the columns of the Edmonton Bulletin 

or in fiery invective on the floor of the North West Assem¬ 
bly or the House of Commons, a clear kinship with the 










. ' • A • • W ' ; /• " j 

■ 




























n 

























political philosophy of th© great liberal editor of the 
Toronton globe . (2) 

The West, largely because of the troubles at Red River, 
was much in the public eye in the early ' seventies* The 
execution of Scott, with its aftermath of racial and relig¬ 
ious bitterness, and the peculiar relations between "John A w 
and the arch-rebel Riel formed inexhaustible subjects of 
public speculation and dispute. William McBoug&ll, former 
political and editorial associate of George Brown, but now 
disowned by the Grits, had returned from his ill-starred 
mission as first Lieutenant-Governor of the North West, and 
finding himself not only unsupported but abandoned by Sir 
John and his government, was "using much ink in seeking to 
defend and justify his course." (3) Bncouraged by govern¬ 
ment pamphlets and by the promises of private promoters, a 
small stream of immigration was flowing into the Red River 
area over the Lawson Road and the American Route, and new 
communities were being established in ever-widening circles 
beyond the original Red River settlements. (4) 

(2) See Oliver 1 s tribute to George Brown in his article on 
Laurier's assumption of the party leadership. Infra p. 

, 154. 

(3) Hammond, M.O. Confederation and Its Leaders Toronto 

Tsi5~ pT"w:.— — —“— 

(4) Morton, A.S. "History of Prairie Settlement" in Morton, 

A.S. and Martin, C. History of Prairie Settlement and 
"Dominion Lands” Policy Toronto 1^38 p . 57. ” 







































. . 


. 


- 






. 






























• 











' 


















( 6 ) 

From the vantage point of a newspaper office and its 
associations the young printer doubtless talked with men 
who had participated directly or otherwise in the stirring 
affairs of the newly acquired West, and had become impressed 
with its possibilities. Judging from his subsequent career 
he was not one to confine himself to second hand experience 
of those situations which interested him. At any rate, 
three years after the Kiel Rebellion had run its course, 
and while the insatiable public appetite was being regaled 
with the details of the Pacific Scandal, Frank Oliver gave 
up his position with the Toronto Globe and mad© the long 
and arduous journey west to the Red River. (5) Arriving in 
Winnipeg, the growing commercial centre of the region, but 
still little more than a frontier village of scattered wood¬ 
en buildings sprawled on wide, muddy streets near the walls 
of Fort Garry, he took a job in the office of the Manitoba 
Free Press . Like the community which it served, the free 
Press was in its raw infancy, and the new employee *set all 
the ads, and made up the forms and fed the press of both 
daily and weekly. 11 ( 6 ) 

During his three years with ff The press* he rose to become 
foreman of the composing room, but meanwhile the promise 

(5) Morton, op. cit., p. 46 and p. 51 ff. for the Dawson 
Road and the American Route. 

(6) Kdmonton Bulletin, April 1, 1953. 














. 










■ 

■j0f'l4'' s v->. ^ r ' ' ■■ v ' 








■ 












• . 

































( 6 ) 


which a growing Winnipeg had held in 1873 remained unful¬ 
filled. From the very year of his arrival annual plagues 
of grasshoppers destroyed the crops, creating widespread 
privation among the settlers and checking immigration. Bus¬ 
iness fell off rapidly and the general commercial depress¬ 
ion of 1876 brought virtual stagnation. In this situation 
many of the more recent comers, and particularly those not 
already bound too closely to their land, returned Fast. 

Some remained, however, *to ride out the depression”, and a 
few more daring spirits li&e Frank Oliver and J.A. McDougall 
(years later the mayor of Edmonton) saw in the far West the 
new land of opportunity. (7) 

There was indeed much in the life of the Winnipeg of that 
day to stir the imagination of the footloose and the advent¬ 
urous. In the streets of the village the last generation of 
buffalo hunters mingled with Canadian and Yankee merchants, 
itinerant traders, freighters, sober Scottish settlers and 
newly arrived immigrants. Trappers and fur traders from 
the far north and west still came down for the spring trad¬ 
ing, arid full-blooded Indians of the plains pitched their 


(7) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 26, 1908. Oliver in a public 
speech at the Thistle Rink: *Th@ chairman, your mayor 
(Mr. McDougall) adventured west in the early days look¬ 
ing for the sunset, and we happened to take the same 
notion in the same year, le came to the decision that 
Edmonton was the place which was particularly marked 
by the star of Empire.* 








, . ■ > 






• • 

. 


























■ ' . " ' 

. 

. 








. 


(?) 


teepees under the walls of Fort Garry and plagued the Gover¬ 
nor with their importunities. From here, in 1874, Major 
Walsh 1 s fore© set out to join the great march of the newly 
formed North West Mounted Police across the plains and 
through the Cypress Hills to the valley of the Belly and 
the Little Bow, From here government survey parties fanned 
out over the vast reaches of the prairies seeding the most 
feasible route for the projected transcontinental railway, 
and from here the brigades of ox-drawn Red River carts set 
out on their interminable and tortuous journey to the out¬ 
posts in the valleys of the ^u r Appel1©, the Bow and the 
Saskatchewan. 

In 1876, coincident with the depression in Red River, it 
was anticipated that the railway would follow the route 
suggested by surveyor Sanford Flemings from Selkirk, Mani¬ 
toba, westward by way of the Upper Saskatchewan country and 
through the Yellowhe&d pass, (8) So that spring Frank Oliver 
left the Free Press and joined the minor ”rush w into the 
North West. Investing his savings in a small freighting 
outfit, he travelled west across the plains with an ox-cart 
brigade bound for a sawmill at Whlfcemud, some fifty miles 

(9) 

upstream from Fort Edmonton on the North Saskatchewan River. 

(8) Morton History of prairie Settlement Map p. 62. 

(9) Fdmonton Journal, April 1, 1933. 











. 




































































( 8 ) 

Reaching Edmonton after a journey of some three months 41 at |f 

I 

the tail of his ox-cart" (10) he was greatly impressed by 
the tiny settlement nestled on the bench above the river, 

j; 

Throughout the late summer and the fall he remained in the | 
district, trading and acquainting himself with the land, !- 
Ohiat winter he "hoofed it back to Winnipeg by dog train," (11] 
but the following summer he returned with his freight-laden 
ox-carts. For this remote district on the banks of the 

]I 

Saskatchewan was the place to which he was drawn as to 
home « "the place which was particularly marked by the star i : 
of Empire." (12) \ 


(10) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

April 14, 

1905. 

(11) 

Edmonton 

Press, 

Bulletin, 

April 7, 

1905. Quoting Ottawa Free 

(12) 

Supra, p. 

6, n(7). 































. 


■ \, . ; :t < y ■ i ,'ry ., ): ■: : 


• . 


1 


1 












. 








































( 9 ) 


Chapter 2 The Founding of the Edmonton Bulletin 


In the summer of 1795 the North West Company built a trading 
post. Port Augustus, near the junction of the North Saskat¬ 
chewan and sturgeon rivers. Several months later the rival 
Hudson*s Bay Company established Edmonton House on an adja¬ 
cent site. Competition between the two companies rapidly 
depleted the immediate area of furs, and some time between 
1801 and 1806 both posts were moved some twenty miles up the 
North Saskatchewan to the site of the present city of Ed¬ 
monton. In 1810 Edmonton House and Port Augustus were moved 
downstream to the fork of the North Saskatchewan and White 
Earth rivers, but three years later were moved back again. 

There they continued to do business, side by side, 
until the union of 1821 brought the rival companies 
together, and port Augustus was abandoned, 

Edmonton House, or Port Edmonton as it was later 
called,continued to thrive and became the headquart¬ 
ers of the great Saskatchewan district of the 
Hudson*s Bay Company. The settlement that grew up 
around it developed into a city (Edmonton) and be¬ 
came the capital of the Province of Alberta. (1) 

Located in one of the richest fur districts of the West, 


(1) The Beaver Published Quarterly by the Hudson*s Bay 

Company. Outfit 276, Sept*, 1945. *The Founding of 

Fort Edmonton** - 0. Parnell, pp, 3 and 4. 

Morton, A.S. A History of the Canadian West Toronto. 
Norton makes TFequeh t re ference ~to~~Edmonton House and 
Fort Edmonton. See p. 954, Index, under heading 
"Edmonton House** for page references. 


















■J 























( 10 ) 

and on the margin of the great buffalo plains to the south 
and east. Fort Fdmonton was for many years the trading 
centre of the Cree, the Mountain Stoney and the Blackfoot. 
Its position on the north bend of the Saskatchewan River 
made it, during the first half of the nineteenth century 
the breaking point for the great fur company* s transcontin¬ 
ental traffic oetween Hudson Bay and the Pacific coast. w It 
stood at the eastern end of the * traverse* to Fort Assini- 
boine, whence the outfits passed onwards to Lesser Slave 
Lake, to Hew Caledonia, and to the Columbia . n (2) But 
"when trading vessels began to come 1 around the Born* to 
the west coast, that killed trie transcontinental trade 
route of the Hudson* s Bay Company and the glory of Fdxnonton 
departed for a time. American traders pushing up the Miss¬ 
ouri by steamer to Benton drew away the Blackfeet trade; 
and the plain Crees (sic) traded their robes at Carlton or 
Winnipeg so that the importance of Bdmonton had seriously 
declined at the time of the transfer of Rupert’s Land to 
Canada in 1870 from what it had been during the period from 
say 1810 to 1860. M (3) 

(2) Morton, A.S. A History of the Canadian &est p. 697. 

(3) Oliver, Frank j?he Founding of Kcimonton Recorded by 
the Historical Society of 'll Berta"” 1921 Pamphlet. 












' ■ 

. 

. 

■ 












• .. • - • 
















( 11 ) 


When Frank Oliver first came to Hdmonton it was a mere 

I 

village controlled by the Hudson*a Bay Company, its few 
scattered buildings dominated by the Fort which stood on the 
bench below the site of the present parliament buildings. 

i 

Of its population, numbering some two hundred and fifty 
souls including Indians, Oliver himself gave tills descrip¬ 
tion* f, A few men from across the mountains who had been gold 

■ 

miners were now engaged in faming* A few others still 
worked, gold from the sand bars. A few ex-employees of the 

Hudson* s Bay Company had settled on the land. There was !j 

j 

a considerable settlement of buffalo hunters at St. Albert, \ 

I 

and the Mounted Police detachment at Fort Saskatchewan. (§) 

A few Ontario people who like myself had wandered host had 
decided that Fdmonton was a desirable location to await rail¬ 
way development.(5) There were also, of course, the ever¬ 
present Indians encamped along the brow of the river hill 
whfr&h today overlooks Victoria Park* (6) 

n fhe first night 1 slept in a house in this district,** 
Oliver recounted years later, f *the owner and his wife sat 
down to a dinner of boiled muskrats and 4 5 6 lady finger*(small) 

(4) Established in 1874-5 by Col* Jarvis, I.l.M.P* 

(5) Mmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930* 

(6) Oliver, Frank The Indian Drum Published by Queen*s 
University, Kings'"tonJ' J ^^ada™1929. 

Copied by the Historical Society of Alberta, pamphlet. 







( 12 ) 




potatoes. The staple food of the country was buffalo meat 
and whitefish. The nearest railhead was in Minnesota.” (7) 
Wheat flour was a luxury - fifteen to twenty-five dollars a 
ninety-six pound bag. So little progress had as yet been 
made in raising grains that "the police horses at Fort 
Saskatchewan were fed on oats grown at Sun River, Montana, 
five hundred miles away, and brought in across country by 
ox-team.” (8) 

Yet despite the isolation and the primitive conditions 
these were optimistic years for Edmonton. Oreat hopes were 
held for the agricultural possibilities of the district,and 
the survey of the projected Yellowhead rout© had already 
been pushed west, and skirting south of the Beaver Hills, 
passed just south of Edmonton across the site of the present 
town of Leduc. High optimism prevailed at the prospect of 
being, within a few years, but a few miles off the main line 
of the first transcontinental railway. 

Following his first trip of 1876 Frank Oliver established 
himself as a trader in Edmonton, ^hauling his goods by Red 
River cart with an ox-team from Winnipeg in the summer, and 
running opposition to the Hudson 1 ® Bay Company in the 
winter,” (9) The traders usually travelled in brigades and 

(7) Edmonton Journal, April 1, 1933. 

(8) Ibid 

(9) Edmonton Bulletin, April 1, 1933. 




















■ 

' 

■ 

. 

















. 






















( 13 ) 


"left Edmonton each spring when the grass turned green in 
April, journeyed the thousand leisurely miles to Winnipeg, 
secured their loads and reached Edmonton again after the ice 
had begun to form in the creeks in October." (10) There was 
always time, as they crawled and jolted west over the old 

* 

Battleford Trail, to pull up occasionally and do a bit of 
trading with Indians or wayfarers encountered on the road. 

In the summer of 1878 Oliver bought what he claimed was 
the first town lot to be sold in Edmonton. He purchased it 
from Colin Fraser, the original owner of River Lot Ten, for »! 


twenty-five dollars. (11) On this property, the site of the 
present-day Bulletin office, h© built his log store, the 
first place of business in the settlement outside of the 
Hudson^ Bay Post. (12) The erection of the store did not, 
of course, interfere with his annual trips to Winnipeg; rath¬ 
er it centralised his trading activities ana enlarged the 
scale of his operations. During the next few years his 
store business prospered. But ©vents were already conspir¬ 
ing to draw his attention and energies away from trade, and 
direct them back into the field in which he had received his 
early training - printing. 


! 




(10) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930. Reminiscence by 
William Bleasdell Cameron* 

(11) Oliver, Frank The Founding of Edmonton 

(12) This ancient building now occupies a place as Old 
Timers ' Centre at the Edmonton Exhibition Grounds, 








■ ' 

' 

. 





. ■ ■ ■ 












. 





























( 14 ) 


I 


In the ’seventies the telegraph line had been extended 
from Winnipeg to Battleford ( "Telegraph Grossing") and 
thence to a terminus where Leduc now stands on the Calgary 
Trail. In 1878 Alex Taylor, well known in later years as a 
pioneer Edmonton citizen, was the telegraph operator at Hay 
Lakes, about thirty-five miles south-easterly from the Fort. 
With the two-fold purpose of ending his unhappy position of 
!isolation and of improving the service, Taylor suggested 
that the line be extended to Edmonton to meet the needs of 
the Hudson’s Bay Company, the Folic© and the people of the 
village. There was plenty of unused wire stored at the 

Calgary Trail - more than enough to make possible the exten- ; 

: 

sion of the line to Edmonton. Sufficient money was collect¬ 
ed from private subscriptions to proceed with the work, and 
the contractor for the completion of th© main line supplied 
the wire and insulators free of charge. By the fall of 1879 
Edmonton was in telegraphic communication with the outside 
world, the telegraphic office being located for the first 
winter in the carpenter shop of John Walter at the South 
Side ferry landing. (13) An arrangement was mad© by which 
a weekly news bulletin was forwarded over the wire from 
Winnipeg, the cost being met by private subscription. Alex 

(13) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930. 

The telegraph office was later transferred to a room 
in the Fort. 

The old falter house is still standing* 


















. 

. 

■ 

. 











































( 15 ) 


Taylor, by now the operator in Edmonton, received these 
weekly messages, and as they were written out in longhand 
and sent around to the subscribers they were called 
"bulletins". (14) However, this method of disseminating 
the news was rather tedious and inadequate at best, and 
when telegrapher Taylor became acquainted with printer 
Oliver an idea was born, simple enough in its self, but 
destined to be the beginning of an important enterprise. It 
was decided to obtain a small press and some paper with 
which, by virtue of his previous experience in that line, 
Oliver could print off the weekly "bulletins" coming in 
over th© wire to Taylor. 

Accordingly, Frank Oliver located a miniature press ad¬ 
vertised for sal© in Philadelphia. (15) He ordered it, the 
seller shipped it out to Mnnipeg in the spring of 1880,and 
there h© picked it up during his annual freighting trip of 
that summer. It was not a very pretentious affair? "Two 

(14) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 10, 1909. "newspaper 
Reminiscences" by Frank Oliver. 

(15) 'This is my interpretation of the following statement 
by "Janey Canuck" in the Edmonton Bulletin , June 30, 
1927$ "Accordingly a miniature press was purchased in 
Philadelphia by Mr. Oliver in reply to an advertis¬ 
ement." There is no ambiguity as to the seller*s 
having shipped the press to Mnnipeg where Oliver 
picked it up. 



















« % 






■ 





, 

. 






















; . i 

. 

. ' 

, t 


' 




■ 








. 


' 




■ 

■ 















( 16 ) 

full cases of very lean non pareil (6 point) type and a toy 
press, The platen of the press was about eight by ten 
inches. The inking was by hand. Included was a small quan¬ 
tity of newsprint. The whole thing weighed about two hundred 
pounds” (16) and cost around twenty dollars. (17) 

By the time Oliver had unloaded the press outfit at his 
store in Edmonton the original idea had grown, and after 
some discussion the prospective partners resolved to embark 
on a venture rather more enterprising than that first con¬ 
sidered. They decided, in addition to the weekly Winnipeg 
wire, to include the local news - "in fact to publish a 
small newspaper under the firm name of Oliver and Taylor.” 
(IB) 

This decision having been mad©, the problem of a print¬ 
ing office presented itself. Oliver 1 s store was too small 
and crowded, and his living quarters above the store were 
deemed unsuitable. At this juncture Mr. Donald Ross, the 
proprietor of the Edmonton Hotel, came to the assistance of 
,f the firm” by the offer of the use of a small smokehouse ad¬ 
joining his premises. Here the partners installed their 

(16) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930. Oliver*s own 
statement, 

(17) Edmonton Journal, April 1, 1933. 

(18) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930. 














































(17) 

press. They then engaged the servioes of a printer by the 
name of Collins who was working a farm claim at Clover Bar 
a few miles east of the settlement. 

Circumstances naturally suggested "The Bulletin" as an 
appropriate name for the paper, but now a fresh difficulty 
had to be met. There was no type of size suitable for the 
heading. (19) Taylor, however, proved himself a man of re¬ 
source and "using a jackknife he carved the words "The 
Bulletin" on the end wood of a piece of well dried birch." 
(20) This served quite adequately for the heading type; 
Taylor returned to his telegraph to get "the latest" from 
Yvinnipeg, Oliver hustled after the ads and local news, 
Collins set the type, and on December 6, I860, the first 
issue of The Bulletin appeared in the Edmonton settlement. 

Publication continued weekly until the following April, 
when printer Collins was due to return to work his claim and 
Frank Oliver to set out on his annual freighting trip to 
Winnipeg to replenish the stock of goods in his store. Acc¬ 
ordingly, this notice appeared in the issue of April 14, 

1881s "We are discontinuing publication on this date . . , 

(19) In E.J. Walker Fortress No rth Toronto 1947, p. 400, 
John Oliver, Frank Oliver* s'son, is quoted as authority 
for the explanation that the large type was lost in the 
crossing of the South Saskatchewan River when Oliver 
was freighting the press West. 

(20) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1950. 







' 

' 

jj: . V 

. 

... . 






( 18 ) 


and to those of our subscribers who think they have not had 
the worth of their money we oan only say that they have at 
least had the best end of the bargain* Next fall we propose 
to issue The Bulletin in enlarged form* when we will make up 
to both subscribers and advertisers the number of issues 
still due* 11 (21) At this time, too, Taylor decided to ret¬ 
ire from the telegraph service to take up a river claim* w He 
disposed of his Interest, leaving me in full control of an 
enterprise that, although it had not died, was in a condit¬ 
ion of suspended animation* 11 (22) 

The summer of 1881 was an eventful one for the thriving 
proprietor of Frank Oliver’s Store and The Bulletin . During 
his stay in Winnipeg he married Harriet Dunlop, daughter of 
Thomas Dunlop of Prairie drove, Manitoba, and entered into 
a business partnership with his new brother-in-law, Alex 
Dunlop, an employee of the Free Press * Dunlop was to become 
co-proprietor of The Bulletin , and the understanding was 
that he should come out to Edmonton the following summer and 
take over the actual printing of the paper* Oliver was care¬ 
ful to include in his freight a quantity of new type and oth¬ 
er equipment for the intended enlargement of The Bulletin 

(21) Edmonton Bulletin, April 4, 1881. 

(22) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930. 

















' 

. 




' 


. 
























•v ; n 






















' 



























(19) 

with Its re-appearance in the fall. His young bride accom¬ 
panied him on the return journey west, and one of his recoll¬ 
ections of that trip is worth quotings 

I recall that as my wife and self slowly wended our 
way by heavily loaded ox-cart and wagon across the 
plains, hard driving parties with team and buckboard 
frequently passed us in a cloud of dust determined 
to beat the railway to Edmonton. The fact that Ed¬ 
monton was 20 miles distant from the then surveyed 
line of railway meant nothing to them. That was in 
1881. The rails of the C. N. R. reached Edmonton in 
1905. They had beaten the westbound railway by a 
big margin. (23) 

Oliver*s marriage not only put an end to his freighting 
trips to Winnipeg, but made some re-organization of his bus¬ 
iness and living arrangements necessary. Hm and his wife 
too& up residence in a building at the rear of the store and 
the printing office was established in the upper flat of the 
store building. A Mr. Bam was now telegrapher, and Mr. W.H. 
Ashley, later proprietor of a paper In Boissevain, Manitoba, 
was engaged as printer. The first issue of the revived 
Bulletin , enlarged and improved In set-up and coverage, app¬ 
eared on October 29, 1881. From that date the publication 
of the paper has continued without Interruption to the pres¬ 
ent day. 

In the early summer of 1882, in accordance with the arr¬ 
angement made the previous year, Alex Dunlop ^arrived from 

(23) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930. 














■v 

. 

















. 

‘ 












' 




















' • 






■ 















































( 20 ) 


Winnipeg with his family by Hudson*s Bay steamer and brought 
with him a half-medium Gordon press and an outfit of type 
necessary to the proper equipment of the office.” (24) More 
space being needed for the new installation, *the plant was 
removed from the upper part of ray building to a new one- 
storey building further east on Jasper Avenue.” (25) Th© 
first issue of the new edition, again enlarged and improved, 
appeared on November 4, 1882. 

Unfortunately for the new partnership, the spring of that 

year witnessed the collapse of the Edmonton land ”boom” with 

results that are best described in Oliver’s own words % 

The collapse of the boom and the diversion of the 
railway in large measure bro&© th© hopeful spirit 
that had hitherto prevailed in the town and surr¬ 
ounding country. My partner retired from th© bus¬ 
iness and returned to Winnipeg, and I was left hold¬ 
ing the bag. this time my store business had 

pretty well died down so 1 gave it up altogether 
and moved th© printing plant to the ground floor of 
the store building which for many years afterwards 
was the Bulletin office .... (26) I assumed full 
control in May, 1884. There followed a period of 
slow and lean years for the Bulletin as for the 
whole Edmonton district* • , • One year followed 
another with ever recurring sameness and correspond¬ 
ing dlsheartenment of the pioneers who had banked on 
th© railway. During that period th© Bulletin was a 
one-man paper. Sometimes T had a printer and some¬ 
times not. It was a day of small - of very small 
things. At this distance of time I am of th© opin¬ 
ion that th© most useful work of the Bulletin’s 
early career was don© during that perTodT"T^T~ 


(24) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1950. 

(25) Ibid 

(26) Site of the present-day Bulletin office. 

(27) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930. 










































* 

, 

: 

■ 














( 21 ) 


In these early years the Bulletin was truly a "miniature 
paper", in fact upon occasion the editor claimed for it the 
distinction of being "the world r s smallest newspaper". *1116 
issues of Volume I were of four pages, each containing five 
by six inches of reading matter. The use of small, lean non 
pareil type and the absence of "cuts f ’ or display matter of 
any kind created a solid, condensed page of print. The 
Bulletin never used the familiar "filler sheets", prepared 
elsewhere and supplied by contract, to augment Its size. 
Oliver scorned to waste space with "ancient platitudes and 
hoary jokes", and even the efforts of the local poets and 
philosophers, of which a frontier community produces more 
than Its share, found no place in the narrow columns of his 
paper. 

The Issues of Volume 2, which began on October 29, 1881, 
contained six by nine Inches of reading matter per three- 
column page* The actual printing was now generally clearer, 
although, at times the press refused to do justice to the 
contents. A further Increase in page size was made possible 
by the use of the Gordon press in turning out Volume 3, and 
two pages of four narrow columns could be printed at one 
impression. The effect of solidity and condensation remain¬ 
ed in the four-page paper, for small type without display 
was still used. Mth the introduction of Volume 3 the prop¬ 
rietor undertook job printing. 





























■ 





























. 








■ 






. 












( 22 ) 


The birch wood heading "The Bulletin**, carved by Alex 
Taylor, was used only for the first eleven issues of Volume 
I, that is until February 14, 1881. It was then replaced 
by a heading Edmonton Bulletin” of plain, bold-faced type 
of somewhat smaller size, which was used for the remainder 
of Volume I. With the beginning of Volume 2 the name 
Edmonton Bulletin” was retained, but appeared in a * fancy” 
scrolled type of rather original design. This heading, with 
a minor modification on November 4, 1882. continued in use 
for some years. (28) 

The early Bulletin , "a wonder when it was first published 
at the far-off trading post of Edmonton" (29) and enthusi¬ 
astically acclaimed by the local settlers, and even by the 
Winnipegers as the best little newspaper in the country, (30 
records a vivid picture of pioneer days. (31) A reading of 
its columns constitutes a fascinating journey Into the young 
West, and by no means the least rewarding feature of this 
journey is the acquaintance it affords with the colorful 
personality of the Bulletin* s proprietor and editor. 

(28) This information is derived from actual examination of 
the early Edmonton Bulleti n files. 

(29) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 6, 1906. 

(30) Edmonton Bulletin, April 7, 1905. 

(31) The Bulletin was the first newspaper to be published in 

what is now Alberta, the second in the and ex¬ 

cluding B.G. papers, the third west of Winnipeg. It was 
preceded by a portage La prairie weekly and by the 
Saskatchewan Herald of Battleford. 


i 














'A&i ' ' ' ' • •' ' I' / ; | | ■. ' 

' 


. 




























(23) 

In 1880, as a young man of twenty-seven, Prank Oliver 
appeared, in top boots, blue shirt and felt hat, as a typic¬ 
al western "broad-brim". And back of him h,© had, not only 
the knowledge of a trade - now being put to good use - but 
also the hardening and sharpening experiences of the pion¬ 
eer. Newspaper work in Winnipeg, long and arduous journeys 
over the Battleford Trail, the associations and exigencies 
of a frontier trader - all had combined to give him a posit¬ 
ive point of view, resourcefulness and an intimate under¬ 
standing of the North West settler and his problems. He was 
not a big man, nor of what Is commonly termed rugged phys¬ 
ique, but w his wiry frame was the vehicle of a mind that was 
absolutely tireless," and as was to be proven time and again 
during the years to come, "of a will that never weakened and 
a spirit that did not falter at difficulties, misunderstand¬ 
ings or defeat." (32) "Compromise and doubts were alike 
foreign to his disposition" (33) and his transparent sin¬ 
cerity and forthright independence were at times disconcert¬ 
ing to those with whom he came in contact. With a certain 
breezy roughness of manner and speech he combined the moral 
earnestness of the Ontario "dour Grit". "The Bulletin , 9 he 

(32) ydmonfcon Bulletin, April 1, 1930. 

(33) Ibid 















i 




. 

i 




• 

























. 

. 

. 
















(24) 

said, "believes that the right is always the expedient,” (34] 
and he called for men "bullheaded and prejudiced enough to 
believe that right is right and wrong is wrong absolutely." 

(35) With a mind keenly alert to the practical, and with a 
consuming interest in political questions, he possessed a 
talent for picturesque invective and a vocabulary which for 
originality and force was perhaps, even in those days of un¬ 
inhibited expression, unrivalled in the West. He was a man 

■ i 

who not only considered but who called, w a spade, a spade% I 
(£6 ) | 
When making reference, in later years, to the founding of |i 

C\ 

C; 

the Bulletin, Oliver remarked, "For myself I am able to say || 
that the crime was not premeditated,. M (37) But from state¬ 
ments made on various other occasions it is evident that the 
paper had not quite the casual beginning that this implies. 

It ^rew out of the needs of the North West and out of.Frank 

i 

Oliver 1 s faith in the North. West and its people. It had, of 
course, the obvious function of furnishing local and outside 
news to an isolated and news-hungry community. But the 
personality and aims of its editor prevented it from becoming 

(34) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 7, 1885. Editorial policy. 

(35) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 1, 1887. In reference to the 
Manitoba disallowance question. 

(36) vcimonton Bulletin, Nov. 3, 1883. 

(37) Fdmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930. 









a mere local news sheet. It became, almost at once, a power-, 
ful influence on such public opinion as then existed through¬ 
out the North West, and the tireless and outspoken champion 

1 

of the rights of the North West settler. "'From the beginning | 
of the Bulletin’s existence the crisp, pointed paragraphs, 

1 ■ " ■ ■ ■ ” m 1 -i 

dealing with the events of world interest and of local impor¬ 
tance, made it one of the best journals in Canada.'’ (38) 

Frank Oliver made the Bulletin peculiarly his own. In 
its columns he set forth at length his political creed, his 
position on matters of local and general concern and his out-;! 
spoken opinions on the characters and motives or his contempt 

I 

oraries. From the first he revealed all the basic rngre&i- f 
ents of the philosophy, personal and political, which was to 
dominate his long and at times stormy career; and he mad© 
frequent reference to Interests and pre-occupations which on 
many a future occasion were to challenge his energies and 1 
abilities. 

In introducing Volume 2, after noting that special attent¬ 
ion would be paid to matters relating to the North West, he 
said, ®Our opinions in regard to subjects that may claim our 
attention will be expressed truthfully and fearlessly, with 
a single eye to the best interests of this western country." 1 

(29) There is little reason to believe that he ever departed 
-------—-- — - 

(38) Edmonton Bulletin, April 7, 1905. Quoting Ottawa Free 

Press. 

(39) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 29, 1881. j 






















( 26 ) 


from the position implied in this statement. His stand on 
North West matters at this time was very significant, and 
may best be given in his own words; 

In politics we claim to be at once reform, con¬ 
servative and radical. Reform inasmuch as we 
desire to see all abuses of sound principles re¬ 
formed, conservative in that we believe that all 
good principles should be adhered to, and radical 
because we wish to see all principles which are 
radically wrong, utterly uprooted. 

As long as one part is made to bear more than its 
share of the burdens of the whole there can b© no 
real union of feeling, and for this reason we opp¬ 
ose the principle by which the North lest Is made 
to bear almost the whole of the burden of the build¬ 
ing and running of the C.P.K., the larger propor¬ 
tion of the burden of the National Policy, and to 
form through the instrumentality of colonization 1 

societies a bribery fund for the maintenance in 
power of one political party. 

1© will uphold the rights of the squatters at all 
times and against all comers to the best of our poor 
ability, hoping for the time when the right will 
triumph. (40) 

In explaining to his subscribers why the Bulletin, even 

_ - 

with the beginning of Volume 3, was being Kept small in size* 
the proprietor made himself clear. Costs, he pointed out, 
were being kept down; and no very large investment being 
involved, the paper could maintain Its position of indepen¬ 
dence - n that of not being under the influence or control of 
any person, clique or party other than the proprietors, and 
therefore able as well as willing to speak up for the public 
interest at all times and on all occasions. 1 * (41) 


(40) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 4, 1882 

(41) ibid 



















' 


. 














. 

. 

. 
























■ 


















■ 








( 27 ) 


Many aspects of Prank Oliver*s political career can be 
understood only by reference to his long adherence to the 
principle of independence or non-partisanship in politics. 

It is worthwhile here to note his vigorous stand on this 
principle, even during those years before he entered the 
field of active politics. "We support principles, not men,” 
tie stated, in commenting on the general elections of 1882. 
(42) And further* 

When any great cause is being fought out, it is 
sometimes necessary to sink minor differences in 
order to gain the end in which all are interested. 

But when a member altogether drops the interests of 
his constituents for those of his party, he becomes 
false to the trust imposed on him. The elective 
power is possessed by the people, not merely that 
the wishes of some party leader shall be carried out 
but that the wishes, the needs, the selfish inter¬ 
ests of each portion of the country shall be rep¬ 
resented, and its case argued by its representative 
in parliament, so that in legislation to be passed 
the greatest good may be done to the greatest number. 

Government by party may have been a good thing at 
one time In Canada, and may b© yet in the older prov¬ 
inces, but when it ties the hands or the tongues of 
the people of this new Canada from upholding what is 
right and denouncing what is wrong, from speaking of 
what is for or against the interests of this greater, 
and to be the most important, part of the country, 
especially at this time when legislation can affect 
it for either good or ill to such a great extent, it 
becomes a curse. (43) 

His belief - or to put it more strongly, his faith - in 
political non-partisanship was closely allied to a rugged 


(42) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb* 10, 1883. 

(43) Edmonton Bulletin, April 28, 1883. 










, 






. 








■ 

. 






. 













































I 




! 


individualism of opinion and action which scorned to tempor- h 
ize, or to compromise in hope of personal gain* (44) He was 
a man of strong convictions, and a fearless fighter who 
revelled in disputation and conflict* He had a blunt way of j 
sweeping aside what he considered to b© fine-spun or irrele¬ 
vant arguments and directing attention to the bare issue. A 
remark made years later in the House of Commons is character¬ 
istic. There had been widespread complaint among the sett- J 
lers one winter regarding the quality of the coal-oil supp? 
lied by the Canadian branch of the Standard Oil Company to 

jj; 

dealers in Manitoba and the Horth West. Charges were aired \ 
in the House of Commons and the opinion of the experts cited, 
on tests that had been made of the oil. At an appropriate 

moment in the debate Oliver arose and observed succinctly; 

■ 

w We do not care so much about the flash test, or the gravity 

■ 

of the oil; what we do want to know is whether it gives 
light when it burns.’ 1 (45) prank Oliver might not always 
be right, but he always had a well considered opinion to 
express, and the means to make the weight of that opinion 


felt. 


(44) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 10, 1909. Two incidents 
related at the convention of the Alberta and Eastern 
British Columbia press Association illustrate this 
forcefully. 

(45) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 28, 1902. 











, 




■ 






■ 




V.^'v 








'f'' 




' 



















■ 


. 






. 

' 














. 











. 






r 



















( 29 ) 


Chapter 3 Newspaperman and Citizen of the North West 

The place of a newspaper in the life of a pioneer community 
is a very important one, and the influence which Prank 
Oliver and his Bulletin exercised upon the development of 
"Edmonton, and in fact upon th© whole North West, is almost 
incalculable. "He was himself the chief factor in guiding 
and inspiring the forces which shaped its destiny and assur¬ 
ed its growth." (1) The Old Timers of Edmonton, many of 
them his personal friends, and some, no doubt, his political 
opponents, in recalling the growth of Edmonton from M a 
name on the map 51 to a flourishing city, paid him this trib¬ 
ute: "To you, more than to any other man, is the credit of 
this wonderful change to be attributed. In season, and at 
|all times, you have ever by word of mouth and in the columns 
of the Bulletin championed the cause of the west, made known 
its advantages, and fought for its rights.* (2) 

The bane of the pioneer is isolation, and in that respect 
the position of Edmonton really improved but little in the 
four years following the day when Frank Oliver first unyoked 
his oxen under the walls of the Hudson’s Bay Fort. When the 

(1) Edmonton Bulletin, April 1, 1933. 

(2) Edmonton Bulletin, April 14, 1905. Old Timers’ Address 
on the occasion of Oliver’s appointment as Minister 
of the Interior in the Laurier Government. 



































•• 




' 








' 

■ 




■ 




( 30 ) 


first issue of the Bulletin came off the press the nearest 
railhead was at Winnipeg. The mail couriers from that point, 
using dog trains in winter and ponies in summer, arrived 
every three weeks and took three weeks on the way. Birtle 
was the most westerly settlement in Manitoba; and between 
Edmonton and Calgary, still a mere Police post without even 
the beginning of a village, there was not a house except 
that of the Indian instructor at Big Stone Creek. To the 
east there was not a house between Fort Saskatchewan and 
Battleford, a distance of 250 miles. The ranching industry 

j 1 

of Southern Alberta had not yet come into existence, the 
Hudson*s Bay Company brought most of its freight by paddle 
wheel steamer up the Saskatchewan, and the G.P.H. “had been 

■ ■ ' • . : t,, 

talked about.” (5) 

True, the telegraph line had reached Edmonton in the fall 
of 1879 and for a time it appeared that the settlement*s 
position of isolation would end. In anticipation of the 
coming of the railway, the winter of *81 and *82 was the 
time of the great western land “boom”. “Outside speculation 
had included Edmonton in their great expectations, and an 
era of speculation set In. . , . There was active specula¬ 
tion on river claims on the present Edmonton towns!te, and 

— -- —-----—.- 

(3) Edmonton Bulletin, Hov. 1, 1901. The C.P.K. contract 

was brought down to the House for ratification on 
Dec. 10, 1880. 




















' 





■■! , - 


































. . . 


. 











• 








































as spring approached excitement increased." In Winnipeg 
there was a mounting fever of speculation in town lots, with 
exchange of property at the most outrageous figures, "until 
at last a sale of town lots on the Hudson*s Bay Reserve at 

! 

"Edmonton was staged. The sale was a huge success, but it 
broke the back of the boom. . • • There was woe and lamen¬ 
tation and the name of Edmonton was on the lips of all as 
having been the cause of the collapse." (4) Of the most 

i 

serious consequence to Edmonton, the projected route of the ; 
C.P.R. through the Yellowhead Pass was during the winter of 
*81-*82 deflected to the southern route through the Kicking J 

s 

Horse Pass, leaving Edmonton side-tracked and with little 
hope of rail communication for years to come. (5) 

To Frank Oliver, looking back with the perspective of time 
these years no doubt appeared "years of small things*, but 
to the settlers of Edmonton in the ’eighties local problems 
were of the most important and urgent nature - the very 
stuff and texture of their daily lives. Ho surveys other 
than base lines were completed before 1882; land tenure and 
3quatters’ rights were matters of immediate concern. There 

was frequently confusion and uncertainty regarding timber 

_ __ _ ____ ___._„____ 

(4) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1950. 

(5) Referred to in the Bulletin as early as Jan,28, 1882. 
Government action took ‘place in April, 1882. Refer to 
Murray Gibbon The Romantic History of the Canadian 
Pacif ic New York 1937 p. 242. 












i-j. - 



















■ • 


. 








• 




















. J • 















. 

■ 


















' 







( 52 ) 


and mineral regulations. Roads, mail service, schools and 
the administration of justice all created their own peculiar 
problems to challenge the pioneer. 

The two seats of government at Ottawa and Regina were 
remote, and the dual influence of the Dominion Oovernoient 
and the North ?est Council was sufficiently spent by dist¬ 
ance to throw the community largely on its own resources. 
Regulations and prohibitions emanating from the East were 

jl 

often regarded by the settlers in the light of unwarranted | 

restrictions, promulgated by men who at best knew nothing of,; 

| 

the conditions of the frontier and who at worst were the a 

I 

tools of certain "interests' 1 -* Frontier radicalism was manl- / 
fest in many quarters, and found voice in bitter denuncia¬ 
tions of Macdonald*s Conservative government, the Syndicate, 
(&) the National Policy and the colonization companies. Sir 
John*s system of Vl ami able venality 11 (7) did not rest easily 
upon western shoulders. 

The Bulletin, however, did not serve merely as a clearing 
house for North West grievances. It spent column after 
column in publicizing the advantages of the North Wests its 
soil, climate, minerals and forests. It served the impor¬ 
tant purpose of publishing government notices, regulations, 

— 

(6) The C.P,R. was at this time usually referred to as 
the ^Syndicate . 

(7) This phrase is borrowed from Lower, A.R.M, 

Colony to Nation Toronto 1946 pp. 365-6, 

























0 

' 






















( 






" i ■ \ : ? ■; .? 




. 






. 





. 


















tenders. 


( 33 ) 


DEPARTMENT o, .usioRY 
UNIVERSITY Of ALBERTA 
EDMONTON 


and ordinances of the North West Council. Material 


of this latter kind it usually handled quite objectively, 


but upon occasion the editor’s ironic humor found vent in 


something like this; 

Mr. T. Anderson is Issuing timber licenses now, 
and may be found during business hours in the 
Hudson’s Bay Company office in the Fort. As the 
government, from motives of economy or otherwise, 
does not allow Mr. Anderson to advertise except by 
permission of his superiors at Ottawa, w© give the 
above, and will give what further notice may from 
time to time b© deemed of public interest, free, for 
the double purpose of Keeping our readers posted 
and doing an act of charity to a government which is 
either very poor or very mean. (8) 

In the wide range of subjects covered and in the method 
of their treatment, the Bulletin affords a fine cross- 
section of North West frontier life. Two of the topics 
most frequently and most forcefully dealt with were lands 
and railways. 


In 1870, the year of the transfer of Rupert’s Land to 
Canada, the Rupert’s Land Act and the Manitoba Act made 
provision for the control of the western public domain. **Por 
the new province of Manitoba as well as for the North lest 
Territories ’all ungranted or waste lands 1 were by statute 
to be ’administered by the government of Canada for the pur¬ 
poses of the Dominion’.** (9) These ^purposes of the 

(8) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 10, 1881 r^Tlmbe'r Torn" Anderson 

was a Dominion agent in the Edmonton district for years. 

(9) Chester Martin Dominion Lands Policy p. 223, 























■ 






■ 


























■ 




































( 24 ) 


Dominion"’ were chiefly two: railways and settlement. To 
make possible the extension of railways into the North West, 

: 

and particularly the building of a transcontinental line, 
the government instituted the system of railway land grants. 
Within a "belt’* along the prospective railway certain sec¬ 
tions of land were granted to th© railway company. To en¬ 
courage immigration and so provide traffic for the railways, 
a free homestead system was instituted and expanded. By 188k1 
"the significant fact could now be announced broadcast that j 
the even-numbered sections throughout the whole range of 
Dominion lands were now free to the pioneer. * 11 (10) The 
Department of the Interior was organised in 1873, and as one;; 
of its divisions the Dominion Lands Branch was, "specially 
charged . . .with the duty of surveying and alioting to 
settlers the rich and boundless prairies of the lest ..." 

(11) This Lands Branch developed formidable proportions, 

"but the results for many years were meagre . u (12) Despite 
free homesteads, settlers did not pour into the lest. 

One reason is not far to seek. The government, and 
particularly the administration of Sir John A. Macdonald, 
intent upon the doctrine that the railway must be "built by 
means of the land through, which it had to pass," (13) 

(10) Chester Martin Dominion Lands Policy p. 398. 

(11) Ibid p. 396. 

(12) Ibid p. 396. 

(13) Ibid p. 397. 












. 'J ■ 




, ■ r .... ■ . ■ \i „• 

. 






. 


. 


. 

. . . 


■ 






. 

























( 35 ) 


subordinated the free homestead system to the demands of the 

railway land grants. ”... the railway, for the time being, 

•:'*0! 

took priority over every other consideration.” (14) In fact, 


"this priority conceded at the outset to the railway as the i 


most imperative necessity of national policy may be said to 
have remained a feature of Dominion administration until the 
railway land grant system was finally abandoned in 1894.”(15) 
Western lands, then, including timber, mineral and water 1 
rights, were controlled by the Dominion and administered by : 
the Department of the Interior through its agents. Certain 
sections of land were open to free homesteading. Certain 

i 

sections were not open, including the railway land grants, 
Hudson*s Bay Company land (16) and areas reserved to Indians 
and private colonization companies. (17) Some of these hold¬ 
ings, not in solid blocks, but of sections alternating with 
sections of government land, constituted the ”land lock”, 
”which formed the perennial grievance of the western pioneer 
for a generation.” (18) Large reserves and constantly chang¬ 
ing government regulations discouraged settlement; the 


(14) Chester Martin Dominion Lands policy 

(15) Ibid 


p. 395. 
p. 395. 


(16) Lands reserved to the B.B.C. under the terms of the 

transfer of 1870. 50,000 acres adjoining H.B.C. trad¬ 
ing posts, together with one-twentieth of the ”fertile 
belt”.- 


(17) Only 8 sections in a township were actually open to 
homesteading. 


(18) Chester Martin, op. cit., p. 239. 








( 36 ) 


location of the free grants led to undue dispersion of sett¬ 
lers* Much of the land was as yet unsurveyed, and could oe 
occupied only under uncertain "squatters* rignts". 

The purposes of the Dominion as expressed in policy and 
administration conflicted at many points with the immediate 
interests of the early settlers who wanted unrestricted 
choice of lands, security of tenure, reasonably generous 
timber, mineral and water rights, heavy immigration and a 
railway built at the expense of all Canada, and not simply 
"out of North West lands." It is perhaps not necessary at 
this point to attempt an analysis of all the issues involved 
nor an evaluation of the conflicting claims of Dominion pol¬ 
icy and North West rights. But this much is certain* the 
North West did have grievances and it did need to make it¬ 
self articulate. It had to find a politically independent 
voice to oppose Dominion policy ¥/here it appeared unsound; 
to criticize government enactments where they proved in¬ 
adequate, unworkable or unjust; to urge corrective and con¬ 
structive measures; to expose negligence, self-interest or 
officiousness on the part of government agents; and to de¬ 
nounce the rapacity, where it might exist, of colonization 
companies and speculators. The traditional channels of pop¬ 
ular protest against central authority were at this time 
practically non-existent, particularly in that part of the 
North West which is now Alberta. The North West had no 














- 








. ' 












■ 

■ 

■ 




















( 57 ) 


representation in the Dominion House$ and upon the North 
West Council, a body of the most restricted powers, Edmonton 
had no member until 1883. 

The Edmonton area with its sparse population, less than 
one thousand until 1883, was the most isolated community of 
any consequence in the West; and its grievances, particular¬ 
ly with resoect to lands, were correspondingly strong* That 
some of these grievances may have been rooted in the very 
isolation of the settlement rather than in any particular 
shortcomings of the government, did not render them any less 
intense. The Upper Saskatchewan Country found its most un¬ 
tiring champion in Frank Oliver and its voice in the columns 
of the Edmonton Bulletin. 

Oliver was consistently the bitter opponent of ^Macdonald- 
ism w , and he conducted his attacks against the Dominion*s 
western lands policy with unrestrained vigor. Commenting up¬ 
on the rumor that the government was to encourage Irish im¬ 
migration, he inquired caustically what land it would have 
left to give them after its generosity to the railway and 
colonisation companies, and then added; 

But if room can be found for them, it is to be 
hoped that they will come in thousands and tens 
of thousands; for, when the time arrives that the 
country must rid itself of those blood-sucking 
land monopolies, there are no men who are likely 
to do better service in the good cause than these 
same wild Irishmen from the country of Calway. (19) 

(19) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 24, 1881. 

















' 

















■ 

- 




. 


. 


































■ 












■ 




























One of the most urgent needs of the early ’eighties was 
the completion of the survey, particularly around the old 
Fort, Residents and the few incoming settlers held their 
claims under vague squatters’ rights, while settlers coming j ; 
into the more easterly surveyed areas enjoyed security of 
tenure within the homestead laws. This neglect of the orig¬ 
inal settlers was resented, while ’’speculators and paupers 
from the four corners of the earth can have their lands all- 

j, 

oted to them and their titles in their pockets "before they \ 
even see Canada, or strike a blow on the land that is given 
to them.” (20) jj 

The fear uppermost in the minds of the Edmonton pioneers / 
was that with the survey and the railway would come a host 
of speculators and "land sharks” against whom their squatt¬ 
ers’ rights would give them little protection. There is 

, 

scarcely an issue of the early Bulletin which fails to deal 
with this question of security of land tenure. Referring to 
the North West Regulations of January, 1882, Oliver lashed 
out at the government in no uncertain temper*.. After denounc¬ 
ing special grants and privileges to companies, he demanded 
to Know why the regulations guaranteed respect for the rights 
only of those squatters who took up land before 1879. Why,, 
he asked, discriminate against those who came later; and 


(20) Fdmonton Bulletin, Feb. 21, 1881 














■ . 


















. 
















. 















( 39 ) 


why should the squatter have to pay for the railway - or for 

U 

his land? 

Having come here without the aid of either rail¬ 
way or government he owes nothing to either, and to 
maxe him pay for that which did not benefit him is 
simple robbery* 

From the sentences (in the Regulations) relating 
to colonization schemes and pasture lands it seems 
to be the wish of the government to throw the land 
as much as possible into the hands of the speculators. 

It would be well for the government and speculators 
to remember that when they crowd settlers too closely 
someone has to go, and judging by past events in the ! 

old Provinces of Canada, and more recently in Ireland, 
it will not be the settlers, or at least not they 
alone. (21) 

The Bulletin of December 3, 1881, expressed gratification 

: 

at the establishment of the Edmonton timber agency; but, 
the editor warned, "We wish to say emphatically that nothing 
short of liberal measures in regard to timber required by 
|actual settlers for the improvement of their claims will be 
acceptable to the people here. 1 * That the measures adopted 
|were not acceptable soon became evident, and Oliver branded 
;the clause in the timber regulations regarding the homestead¬ 
ers* use of timber as *a specimen of sublime idiocy". (22) 
jVirulent attacks were made on those features of the mineral 
|and timber regulations which the settlers found most obnox¬ 
ious; the duty on timber used over and above the barsfct 
requirements, the tax of twenty-five cents a cord on dry 


(21) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 7, 1882. 

(22) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 17, 1881. 






























v 1 ' 


i 

i 


















. 

■ 












( 40 ) 


wood and the royalty of one dollar a ton on coal mined in 
the North West, 

Why is it that every effort is made to throw the 
lands, minerals and carrying trade into the hands of 
speculators and companies? It is to create great 
monied interests whose existence is hound up with 
that of the government, and who will, of course, 
fight for the government as for themselves. (23) 

. • . the present government seems to consider 
the Territories as a vast grab bag for the benefit 
of its friends, and the settlers as gold pieces to 
be sweated as often as the opportunity occurs or the 
needs of themselves or their friends require. (24) 

Violent dissatisfaction with the timber law revealed it- 

j 

self in a public meeting called in January of 1B82, at which 

H 

D. Maloney of Riviere Qui Barre was chairman and Frank Oliver 
secretary. After the airing of many grievances, both rele¬ 
vant and otherwise, the meeting appointed a committee con- 
jsisting of Father Leduc and two others to interview Anderson, 
the timber agent. Suggestions were made for a league to 
refuse to get wood permits. Finally, after much heated dis¬ 
cussion, the assembled settlers drafted a telegram of prot¬ 
est to the Minister of the Interior. In the issue of the 
Bulletin reporting this meeting Oliver wrote fiery articles 
headed, ’’Free Fuel or Fight” and w Sic Semper Tyrannus*. (25) 
The results were disappointing. The committee did not get 

(23) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan, 7, 1882, 

(24) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 24, 1881. 

(25) Kdmonton Bulletin, Jan. 7, 1882. 




























. 







' 

■ 




■ 










( 41 ) 


very far with "Timber Tom" Anderson who knew his regulations 
and who appreciated his position as a Dominion agent. The 
telegram to the Minister of the Interior elicited a brief 
and non-commital reply from his Acting Deputy Minister, (26) 
The Bulletin expressed disgust at this lack of progress 
made, but its editor put forward a suggestion which revealed 
the politician. Since the settlers could not, apparently, 
get the ear of the government, why not send a petition to 
the leader of the opposition? He would know how to use it 
to embarrass the government, and it might get results. It 
is not known whether this Interesting suggestion was acted 
upon. Oliver advised his readers meanwhile to "grin and 
ibear it". 

But there is a time coming when In spite of opp¬ 
ressive taxes and unfair land regulations, the North 
West will contain an overwhelming majority of the 
whole population of the Dominion, then that time 
arrives, if not before, we can hope for justice for 
we will be able to demand it and enforce the dem¬ 
and. (27) 

The local restiveness induced by insecurity of land ten- 

|ure was aggravated by the rising land values of the "boom” 

\ 

of 1882, and culminated in the claim-jlumping incidents In 
which Oliver was prominently Involved. 

The first incident was precipitated by a Mr. L. George 
who "jumped" the claim of J. Sinclair. This claim, along 

(26) Kdmonton Bulletin, Jan. 7, 1882. 

(27) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 14, 1882. 










( 42 ) 


| the brow of the river hill, was occupied, by A. Macdonald & 

Co. as renters, but Georg© drove stakes on the property and 
put a small force of men to erect a frame house there. By 

i 

! late afternoon, with the house already approaching the i ; 

| 

I skeletal stage, an excited crowd gathered. Arguments ensued.: 

Ml 

George produced a revolver and took up his position in the 

I studded house, from which the crowd tried to induce him to 

i 

I come forth. 

1 

Some of the crowd also reached through and seized 
George, trying to pull him out of the building, but 
as they were attempting to pull him through between 
different studs at the same time they were not success¬ 
ful, so he was allowed to remain. (28) 

While someone went to gat a rope the arguing continued, 
but w as the discussion got rather tame and the rope was a 
long time in coming, some of the crowd began to build a fire 
|by which to warm themselves while others began to tear the 
jbuilding down.” (29) When the rope was finally brought, the 
|building was dragged to the edge of the bank about two hun- 
jdred feet above the river, where George finally decided that 
jit was time to come out. The crowd then dragged the shack 
along until it was on Golin Eraser*s property, removed the 
tent and bedding from its interior, and tumbled it down the 
bank. One of those present then handed back to George the 


(28) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 11, 1882. A Bulletin report 
obviously written by Oliver. 


(29) 


Ibid 













(43) 

revolver of which he had been relieved during the early 
scuffle• 

It was fortunate that no bipod was shed in a situation 
which might well have provoked more extreme violence. App¬ 
arently there was some suspicion that A, Macdonald & Co. had 
instigated George's action, and "a party of about a dozen 
men, thoroughly armed, kept watch in Macdonald & Co.’s store 
all night fearing an attack from the Vigilance Committee 
which was being formed.” (30) The Vigilance Committee was 
organized that night at a meeting in McDougall’s Hall. After 
preliminary discussion it was decided that the committee 
should be secret, and ”all who did not wish to join the soc¬ 
iety were requested to leave the meeting.” (31) 

A committee was then appointed to draft a resol¬ 
ution stating the necessity, object and intentions 
of the society; and to formulate an oath to be taken 
by the members on joining, then this had been done 
forty-seven men signed the roll and took the oath, 
after which the committee was regularly organized. (32) 

The object of ,,f The Vigilantes was, of course, to prevent 
further claim-jumping - by the use of force if need be. 
Frank Oliver, as a leading citizen and as publisher of the 
Bulletin , was in a position to exercise considerable influ¬ 
ence on local opinion. His stand on the formation of this 
strictly "extra-legal” organization Is revealing, 

(30) Fdmonton Bulletin, Feb. 11, 1882, 

(31) Ibid 

(32) Ibid 











. , 






* 






. 
















■ 

























' 






. 

. 






( 44 ) 


The immediate consequence of the trouble has been 

the forming of a vigilance committee who have bound 
themselves to uphold each other in their rights to 
their claims and the probability is that any other 
attempts to jump will be dealt with severely, while 
no doubt a more determined resistance will be made; 
and once bloodshed occurs, as it is almost certain 
to, it is hard to say where the matter will end. 

The people will assert their rights. If the govern¬ 
ment will not protect them in those rights they will 
protect themselves, and any bloodshed that may occur 
will be justly chargeable to the government. (33) 

Oliver maintained, quite rightly, that the only proper 
solution of the land tenure question lay in the completion 
|of the survey and the appointment of a land commission to 
!adjust squatters* claims. Ift/hile approving of the vigilance 
committee, he did not favor continuing it as a secret organ- 
iization, and was soon able to commend its decision to become 
I an open society. 

! While we deplore the necessity for the existence of 

a society which shall have for Its object the taking 
of the law into its own hands, there is no doubt that 
the necessity for such a society exists. 

As the society proposes to take up and deal with 
cases in which the law will not give justice, public 
opinion to b© the judge, so its actions should at all 
times, except in exceptional cases, be open to judg¬ 
ment by the same tribunal. 

Let those who wish to steal their neighbors* land 
bind themselves to secrecy by oath, but let those who 
wish to uphold right for right*s sake do so in broad 
daylight, challenging criticism from all quarters and 
relying only on the justice of their cause and their 
good right arms. (34) 


(33) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 11, 1882. Editorial. 

The Bulletin was subsequently criticized in certain 
quarters as having been the mouthpiece of w Th© Vigil¬ 
antes”. Edmonton Bulletin, June 24, 1882 - Vide 

"Justice” in the Winnipeg Times . 

(34) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 18, 1882. 

























. : : , 

•• ■ - ' .. . ■ 









( 45 ) 


Feeling was running high in the settlement when the sec- 
attempt to "jump w was made. The "jumper" was J.M. Bannerman, 

| 

brother odt a well known member of the Dominion Bouse. Banner- 
man’s action was apparently in the nature of a "test case". 

i 

He informed the vigilance committee of his intention to build 
a shanty on the Methodist Mission claim, stating that he had *' 
authorization from the Minister of the Interior. Jtfftt Mac¬ 
aulay, who was occupying Mission House on behalf of the 
church, forbade him to proceed. Bannerman was informed that ! 
he must await the "real" decision of the government respect¬ 
ing ownership of the property, and that meanwhile the vigil- j ! 
ance committee would "apply the necessary persuasion 5 *. (35) ; 

r 

Bannerman proceeded with the construction of the shack, 
and in due course "The Vigilantes" assembled at the Methodist 
Mission property. They met with no resistance and there was 
jno violence. In mid-afternoon they loaded Banneman’s shack 
on a sleigh, hauled it to the spot where the crowd had dis¬ 
posed of George’s building, and toppled it over the bank. 

Bannerman Immediately had warrants sworn out for the arr¬ 
est of several parties concerned in this "house moving'*. 

• • . the preliminary examination was held on Thurs¬ 
day last before Gapt. Gagnon, J.p. Court was held in 
the school house. At about 2 o’clock in the afternoon 
all parties concerned assembled at the building and 
F. Oliver was placed under arrest. 

— - — . - - . .. ... . ... _- -... .... . .... ..... _ 

(35j Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 25,‘ 1882. 











■ 














■ 

. 






■ 


■ 














. 

' 





(46) 

The charge against the prisoner was that he assist¬ 
ed, aided qnd abetted in the moving and destroying of 
the house and incited others to do likewise, (36) 

During the hearing of the witnesses,Banneman stated that 
he saw Oliver come over to his shanty w a little in advance : 
of the rest.’ 1 (37) Another witness charged that h© had seen | 
Matt Macaulay '"coming to the building with a chain over his 
shoulder. ” In general, however. It seemed very difficult 
for any of the participants or spectators to remember the ex¬ 
act part played in the ”hous© moving'’ by any of those pres¬ 
ent. As an outcome of the preliminary hearing five men, in¬ 
cluding Oliver, were committed for trial at the sitting of 
the Saskatchewan District Court of June 15, on a charge of 
’’aiding, assisting and abetting” in the destruction of Bann- 
erman’s shack. (38) 

Oliver’s treatment of the whole episode in the columns of 

i 

the Bulletin Is straight from the shoulder, and spiced with 
ironic wit. Unequivocally, he upheld the right of the Meth¬ 
odist Mission to its property on the basis of prior possess¬ 
ion and improvements, stating that the land was not open for 
homesteading anyway, and that the vigilance committee were 
in the right to move the shanty from land in the actual occ¬ 
upancy of the missionary society. 

(36) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 4, 1882. 

(37) Ibid 

(38) Ibid 









( 47 ) 


... if the law will protect one man in approp¬ 
riating that which is already in the possession of 
another, whether it be land or moveables, let the 
fact be known at once, and let shot-gun law prevail.(39) 

His lengthy report of the preliminary hearing referred to 
above must be read in its entirety to be properly appreciat¬ 
ed. Referring later to the approaching District Court trial 
he wrote; 

As one of the proprietors of this enterprising and 
veracious journal is among the elect, comments by us 
on the probable course tne affair will take would not 
be in good taste. But one thing has been brought out 
clearly and that is that the people at large are pre¬ 
pared to stand shoulder to shoulder in defence of their 
rights at all times and against all comers, let the 
consequences b© what they may. (40) j 

The news report on the trial itself was very short and to 

ii 

the point, ending; ,f Th© jury, after a short absence, return¬ 
ed a verdict of not guilty,” (41) There is no doubt that 
this verdict was received with great satisfaction by the 
defendants’ fellow citizens, and Oliver himself, in his edit¬ 
orial of June 24, under the heading "Law and Justice did not 
hesitate to gloat over the outcome of the trial as a victory 
for the squatter and a salutary lesson for the claim-jumper. 


(39) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar, 4, 1882. 

(40) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 11, 1882. 

(41) Edmonton Bulletin, June 11, 1882. That this was not 
Oliver’s only "brush with the law" is revealed fey the 
following amusing local item in the Bulletin, June 25, 
1887* "On Thursday last, before A.fi. - Briesbach, J.P., 
Frank Oliver was charged with maliciously killing, maim¬ 
ing, etc., two domestic fowls, the property of Walter 
Scott Robertson, on May 25th last. Plaintiff Robertson 
admitted trespass and damage by fowls, only knew of one 
being injured' and it was killed by his son. Defendant, 
fined ten dollars and costs. G.H. Oonnon for plaintiff." 











































































. • 



































' 






( 48 ) 


The outcome of the Bannerman affair discouraged those who 
had an eye on their neighbor's property. The fall in land 
values with the collapse of the ’'boom’ 1 removed the incent¬ 
ive to claim-jumping. Oliver continued a vigorous campaign 
for the survey and a land commission, meanwhile suggesting, 
"The next time the Council of the North West Territories 
meets for the transaction of business it is to be hoped that 
an ordinance will be passed defining the rights of settlers 
on unsurveyed lands in regard to each other. n (42) 

The surveyors arrived in Edmonton during July of 1882, 
and immediately began their township and section survey 


throughout the district. The progress of the survey was acc*j 


ompanied by re-adjustment 3 of holdings and by land disputes 


enough; but that the squatter fared comparatively well and 
the speculator poorly may be attributed in no small measure 
to Frank Oliver and the Bulletin. Ever zealous of the int¬ 


erests of the settler, and ever ready to publicize adversely 
the activities of the speculator and the land-shark, the 
pioneer paper did everything possible to keep the squatter 
and the homesteader advised of their rights and to discour¬ 
age those who would victimize them. The editor was not 
immune from certain pre-conceptions and prejudices current 
in the life of the pioneer community. He occasionally en¬ 
gaged in a journalistic *tilting at windmills" or in 


(42) Edmonton Bulletin, May 27, 1882. When a member of the 
North West Council Oliver sponsored such an ordinance. 

























- 


' 

. 
























. 












. 


















, • 













( 49 ) 


battering a man of straw. But he was positive, strong- 

minded and absolutely merciless in his denunciation of the 

stupidity of bureaucracy or the avarice of speculation. The 

Bulletin provided a publicizing and restraining force much 
‘ 

needed in the Edmonton of the * eighties. 

Oliver*s satisfaction with the progress of the survey was 
soon tempered by the appearance on the scene of the Edmonton 


Land Co., shortly to be known as the Edmonton and Saskatchew- 


i an Land Co. (45) This company secured a colonization grant 

! 

of six townships centering on Edmonton and including much of ,j 


the choicest land north and east of the settlement. The 
terms of the grant were most liberal - for the company; and |! 
Oliver remarKed caustically that it was now evident why the 
, surveyors had been sent out. (44) He already had a deep 1 
Idistrust of colonization companies, (45) and the establish¬ 


ment of one on his very doorstep gave point and intensity 


(45) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 12, 1882. 

See Morton History of Prairie Settlement p. 62 for 
map showing location of tHe company*s grant. 

The Regulations of January, 1882, mark the beginning of 
colonization company grants. 

Stanley, G.F.d. The Birth of Hestern Canada London 
1956 p. 186 state so f coloniza tion companies that, 

ewan p, 65, to the effect' that, ^Only seven companies 
placed more than fifty settlers on the land.* 

The majority of the companies were dissolved after four 
years. None remained in operation after 1891. 

(44) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 12, 1882. 

(45) Edmonton Bulletin, July 15, 1882. ,4 The Great Swindle" 














. 

' 

■ : Ao ... ‘ wi’. ' 

■ 

’ 

■ 























(50) 

to his antagonism. These companies he now placed with his 
collection of other w b6tes noirs' 1 - the Conservative Jovern- 

! 

ment, the Syndicate and the National Policy - for virulent 
and unremitting attaox. (46) 

The operations of the Edmonton and Saskatchewan Land Co. 
raised new local questions of squatters 1 rights and pre¬ 
emption claims. In February of 1883 a delegation consisting 
of D. Maloney and Father Leduc representing Edmonton, St. 
Albert and Fort Saskatchewan went Fast to interview the 
Minister of the Interior on district problems. This mission, 

i 

which had the warmest support of the Bulletin , accomplished j 

a good deal, securing a fuller guarantee of squatters 1 f 

rights, more satisfactory recognition of pre-emption claims, 

and the prosiise of a land office and registry office to be 2 

established in Edmonton. Meanwhile Oliver continued his 

editorial defences of squatters* rights, even including 

those of the so-called speculative squatters”. (47) 

It seems, however, that these squatters frequently 
happen to select choice locations such as river cross¬ 
ings and other prospective town sites, and thereby 
balk the plans of the government, the Syndicate and 
speculators generally, who look upon th© North West 
as a preserve in which to exercise their ingenuity in 
the getting of other people’s money without working 
for it. (48) 

(46) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 25, 1882; Dec. 9, 1882; 

May 19, 1883. 

(47) Edmonton Bulletin, May 19, 1883. 

(48) Edmonton Bulletin, May 5, 1883. 

. 



































. 




■ 
















. 


. • 


■ 


















( 51 ) 


The squatter was exhorted to "hang on”, and advised that 
a united front would thwart any attempt of the government, 
the railway, or the colonization company to wrest his land 
away from him, (49) "Another turn of the screw” was the 
Bulletin 1 s characterization of the government’s new home¬ 
stead regulations within the railway belt, (50) 

Ranking in importance with land tenure and closely assoc¬ 
iated with it was the problem of railway construction. West¬ 
ern railway schemes and negotiations were current in the 
years following the first abortive G.P.R, Go. of 1875. Note 
has already been mad© of advance surveys in the North West. 

In February of 1881, after lengthy negotiations, Macdon¬ 
ald’s Conservative Government ratified the charter of the 
Canadian Pacific Railway Company, the "Syndicate” of Frank 
Oliver’s scathing editorials. There were, in the charter-, 
many terms which met with violent opposition in the West, 
and to which future reference must be made. The Company 
undertook the construction of a railway to the pacific sea¬ 
board, following the Yellowhead route. (51) The contract 
granted the Comosny a cash subsidy of #25,000,000, and 
25,000,000 acres of land to be taken in alternate sections - 
the odd-numbered sections - extending back 24 miles on each 

(49) Edmonton Bulletin, May 5, ~18837~ ~“ 

(50) Kdmonton Bulletin, Sept, 2, 1882. 

(51) The later diversion of the route south to the Kicking 
Horse Pass has already been mentioned. 












' ■'! 














1 


■ iff ■ ■' 


i • :■ 


- 


■ • ■ * 








■ ' A, 1 , 1 

. 




■ f 














. 

















(52) 

side of the railway from Winnipeg to Jasper House, It was 
understood that the land granted must be at least ’’fairly 
fit for settlement®, and that should there be insufficient 
land of such quality within the railway belt, the Company 
could make up its grant by selections in other areas, (52) 
The property and capital of the Company were exempt from 
taxation "forever", while the land grants were exempt for 
twenty years ’’after the grant thereof from the Grown." To 
protect the line from the competition of American systems, 
the so-called "monopoly clause" forbade, for a period of 
twenty years, the construction south of the G.P.R. main line 
of any other line running North West and South Kast within 
fifteen miles of the United States boundary* (55) 

The G.P.R* 5t d©al lr was bitterly opposed in Parliament by 
Blake and his Liberals; and there was a feeling in the west, 
very strong in certain quarters, that the people of Manitoba 
and the Territories had been "sold down the river"; that 
they had been, in effect, placed at the mercy of a private 
monopoly of immense power, and left with no real assurance 
that its operations, by their very nature vital to the well¬ 
being of the West, would be conducted in accordance with the 
proper interests of the country. 

(52) This was called "indemnity selection". 

(55) Chester Martin Dominion Lands Policy p. 268 ff. 

Gibbon The History of the Canadian “pacific p. 206 ff. 










, 

' 

- 

. 

■ 

. 


. 

. 






• 






. 













(oZ) 

No more vigorous voice was heard throughout the North 
Vlest in denunciation of the "Syndicate deal" than that of 
Frank Oliver in the Edmonton Bulletin . As early as 1880, 
while negotiations were going forward between Macdonald and 
Seorge Stephen, Oliver singled out certain features of the 
proposed agreement for attack. Rather than a line running 
north of the Oreat Lakes he favored a prairie terminus at 
Winnipeg, with connecting lines running south to join the 
American systems, and not , from lake Superior to Red 

River, through a country the whole of which is not worth a 
yellow dog,", (54) He opposed, from the first, the principle; 
of railway land grants and privately subscribed capital, 
especially that of "foreign speculators", *$hy," he asked, 
cannot the government use the public credit to build the 
road?* *And after the road is built, let the government 
sell the land, not to land-sharks but to actual settlers." 
(55) 

In a fiery Bulletin editorial he launched an attack under 
the heading, "The pacific Swindle", Ee charged the East, 

"in their greed and parsimony", with intending to saddle the 
cost of the whole line on the North lest, and damned East¬ 
ern self-inter©st by suggesting that, "The sun rises in 
Halifax, shines all day straight over Montreal and Ottawa, 

(54) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec, 15, 1880, 

(55) Ibid 









( 54 ) 


and sets in Toronto." (56) It would not be too difficult to 
find certain modern parallels to this expression of Western 
wrath. 

Again condemning the section of the road north of LaKe 
Superior as unnecessary, and advocating the development of 
the fertile prairie belt first, he pointed out what he be¬ 
lieved to be, "the great injustice of making the present and 
future settlers of the North West pay for the whole road, 

| and of locking up the land now to pay for parts of the road 
unnecessary to the last degree, and which will not be built 
for many years , . * , M (57) 

It would be misleading to suggest that all testern feeling, 
was equally hostile to the Syndicate. Apart from speculat¬ 
ors, land agents and. government apologists, whose approbation 
of the deal may be assumed, there were doubtless many sett¬ 
lers in whose opinion the fact of actual railway construc- 
. 

tion outweighed any unfavorable features of the Company’s 
charter. There were those also, who, not given to speculat¬ 
ing on probable outcomes, or unaware of the charter terms, 
simply accepted a railway as a railway. However, a large 
section of Western opinion did view the Syndicate with the 
gravest apprehension and alarm, and the following editorial, 
strong though its language may be, no doubt reflects with 


(56) -Edmonton Bulletin, Deo. 27, 1880 

(57) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 24, 1881 












■ 






















. 

■ 

■ 

















. . . . 

■ 












. 






■ 






















( 55 ) 


reasonable accuracy a feeling common throughout the West. 


The Swindlecate 

Unfair to the settler in every point though the 
contract is, all the power of a wealthy company and 
all the strength of a political party, and all the 
self-interest of their myriads of hirelings, will be 
united in its support. But every settler in the North 
West is, and every man who comes into the territory 
to make his living by his own endeavours will become, 
the natural enemy of each and every one who is con¬ 
nected with it; and the time will come when not all 
the wealth nor all the influence nor all the mean¬ 
ness that these three powers can bring to bear will 
keep this bargain - procured by corruption and found¬ 
ed on injustice - from being broken, by fair means or 
foul, by ballot or bullet. (58) 

Oliver was especially critical of the policy of construct¬ 
ing the railway and developing the North west n out of North 
West lands.” 

That is to say, after the H.B.Co., the school funds, 
the railway companies, the thousand and one coloniza¬ 
tion companies, the ranchmen, the religious institut- * 
ions, and the grand army of speculators generally get 
their respective slices of the country, the settlers 
on the paltry balance will have to shoulder the bur¬ 
den of building the C.F.R.* not only through the 
North Y*est, but also through British Columbia, Mani¬ 
toba and Ontario and return ©very dollar that the 
older provinces have spent in developing (?) the 
country. (59) 

As early as 1881 he was advocating the construction of a 
Hudson's Bay Railway as the most direct means of breaking 
the monopoly of the Syndicate, and during succeeding years 
many articles on the desirability of a Hudson's Bay line 

(58) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 7, 1881, 

(59) Fdmonton Bulletin, Feb. 4, 1882. 






' 

' 


. 

■ 





































(56) 

appeared in the Bulletin . (60) His original scheme envisaged 
the improvement of the Saskatchewan River to Lake Winnipeg 
and the construction of a railway from there to Hudson Bay, 
"River to rail-end to Hudson Bay” was, he declared, a per¬ 
fectly feasible route, and one which would circumvent the 
C.P#K. monopoly, "unless the government can be persuaded to ■ 
disallow the Saskatchewan River from running downhill, or 
pass an act to freeze up the Atlantic Ocean,” (61) 

In the spring of 1882 the government passed the Act en¬ 
abling the C.P.R. to change its route from the Yellowhead 
to the Kicking Horse Pass farther south. The exact reasons 
for this re-routing are a matter of some controversy. At 
any rate the Edmonton settlement was dealt a heavy blow, 
Oliver saw in the Act just one more proof of the iniquity 
of the Syndicate and all its works. However, he pointed out, 
once the road came through, branch lines might be built in¬ 
to the Edmonton area, if not by the C.P.R., then by some 
other company. Meanwhile, the only alternative for sever¬ 
al years was to develop the Saskatchewan River and continue 

(60) During his first session in the Dominion House, Oliver 
sponsored a Hudson Bay Railway bill. A feature of 
his noted Land Act of 1908, when he was Minister of 
the Interior, was the sale of pre-emptions to finance 
the building of the Hudson Bay line, 

(61) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 31, 1881, 

See also, Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 3, 1882. 
























■ 












' 








. 














































' 










( 67 ) 


the fight for the Hudson’s Bay Railway. (62) Soon he was 
I pointing out, in a caustic editorial, the wholesale reject- 
j ion of south lands by the C.P.R., and the Company’s **grabb- 
i ing of better land outside the 48 mile belt." (63) 

In fact the Syndicate was an oft-repeated and much malign¬ 
ed object of the Bulletin 1 s wrath during the 'eighties; and 
Oliver, whether attacking its monopoly, (64) condemning its 
alleged "land grabbing", (65) pleading for railway compet¬ 
ition, (66) or backing the Farmers' Union of Manitoba a- 
gainst its alleged rapacity, (67) revealed in his articles 
a tone of uncompromising hostility which, whether or not it 

i 

was altogether justified, unquestionably reflected the 
attitude of many a prairie settler. 


(62) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 28, 1882; Sept. 3, 1882; 

April 7, 1883. 

(63) Edmonton Bulletin, April 7, 1883. The Company was 
rejecting certain lands in the 48 mile celt and making 
selection elsewhere in the "fertile belt in accordance 
with the "indemnity selection" provision of its charter 

(64) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 24, 1883. "Showing their Teeth" 
A reference to the Syndicate's allegedly preventing a 
certain Rykert from holding his timber claim in the 
Cypress Hills, and allegedly thwarting Bannerman, the 
M.P., in his attempt to organize a Hudson's Bay Rail¬ 
way project. 

"The Syndicate wants it all and the small fry want 
their share.* 

(65) Edmonton Bulletin, April 7, 1883. "C.P.R. Lands 1 ' 

(66) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 26, 1883. •'Worse and More of 
It" 

Edmonton Bulletin, June 16, 1883. "The Sphinx Speaks 
An article opposing Stephen’s suggestion of a union of 
the C.P.R. with the G.T.R. 

(67) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 15, 1883. 














' 





































' 



■ 












(58) 

Lands and railways were not, however, the only matter of 
vital concern to the pioneers, and the Bulletin tooK the 
lead on many other questions affecting their interests* 

Included in the area covei*ed by Treaty Number 6 with the 
Cree (68) and not far distant from the domain of the war¬ 
like Blackfoot Confederacy, the isolated district was in a 
peculiarly vulnerable position in the event of trouble with 
the natives. 

'The Dominions Indian administration had undergone sev¬ 
eral changes since the acquisition of the Territories in 
1870. Under the Board of Indian Commissioners for Manitoba ! 
and the North West established in 1873, the Bureau of Ind¬ 
ian Affairs, the Land Bureau and the Indian Commissioners 
each functioned independently of the others. This resulted 
in a diversity of policy and action which threw Indian aff¬ 
airs into a state of confusion. In 1877 this system was 
replaced by Superintendencies and resident local agents 
acting under the office of the Indian Department at Ottawa. 
However, such was the apathy of the government that the 
Superintendencies remained comparatively unorganized, and 
by 1879 Indian administration was in a more disorganized 

(68) Stanley The Birth of kestern Canada p. 171. 

Stanley says of Treaty Numb©r 6 f * r The area treated for 
was vast and extensive. The Indians were wild and 
warlike and (before the negotiation of the Treaty) 
determined to allow no white invasion of a country 
to which immigration had already turned for settle¬ 
ment , M 











( 59 ) 


state than ever. In that year the government appointed the 
Hon. Fdgar Dewdney as Indian Commissioner and sent him to 
the North West with broad organizing and discretionary pow¬ 
ers. In 1880 the Department of Indian Affairs, hitherto a 
part of the Department of the Interior, was established as 
a separate entity. (69) 

In the Seventies and Eighties the old order In the West 
was passing away. The disappearance of the buffalo, the 
coming of the railway, and the settling of the Indians on 
the reserves created problems calculated to tax the under¬ 
standing of the government and the efficiency of its Depart¬ 
ment of Indian Affairs. But according to reports of the 
day and critical opinion since, both the understanding of 
the one and the efficiency of the other were sadly lacking. 
"The papers and correspondence of these times are full of 
references to the misery of the Indians and the danger of 
an Indian uprising.” (70) What was, apparently, common 
knowledge to the settler was unknown to or ignored by the 
governmentsand its higher Indian agents, and as late as 
1884, eight months before the outbreak of the North West 
Rebellion, the Hon. ^dgar Dewdney, Lieutenant-Governor of 
the Territories and Indian Commissioner, informed the North 

(69) Stanley, op. cit., pp. 227-8. 

(70) Black, N.F. A History of Saskatchewan and the Old . 

North V,est HegiOai 1913 “ p.““±99. 











' 

. 


. 






( 60 ) 


West Council; 

The exaggerated reports of Indian difficulties which 
have lately appeared in some of the newspapers and 
which must do the country harm, induce me to say a 
few words to you on that subject, from what I have 
seen myself during my travels in the spring, and 
from what I gather from the correspondence which 
reaches me as Indian Commissioner, I can confidently 
say that our Indians are generally more contented 
than they have been since the Treaty was made. . . . 

• . ♦ that there is cause for alarm I deny. I am 
sure the general feeling is one of security, and 
exaggerated reports that have been circulated are to 
be regretted, (71) 

The ’’exaggerated reports ’ of which Dewdney spoke (72) 
might well have been aimed directly at certain of Oliver’s 


editorials on Indian affairs. Although the North West 
Rebellion was not primarily an ’’Indian war* 1 , it was accom¬ 
panied by Indian risings and massacres and by a general In¬ 
dian danger that hung at times by a mere hair. Which of 
the two men had a keener appreciation of the gravity of the 
Indian situation, "the war-whoop of Big Bear”, resounding 
enough to rouse even the Dominion Government from its leth¬ 
argy, was soon to reveal. 

In the very first issue of the Bulletin , the editor, 
commenting on the alleged negligence of the agent in making 
treaty payments to the Mountain Stoneys, warned that the 
local Indians should be treated decently to win their 

! (71) Journals of the Council o f the North West Territories 

167? - 1887 w. J. Weidman, Printer ' ! Progr e s s p off ice, 

Qu ? Appeile " Saskatchewan No date. 

Journal of 1884 p, 9 

(Hereafter referred to as J.N.W, Council) 
j (72) As a member of the North West Council, Oliver would be 

pres^afc to kear this speech. 
































' 






































































. 

. 










( 61 ) 


goodwill. 


. . . and although there is no danger to be appre¬ 
hended by these people just now, in view of the fact 
that there is liable to be an outbreak of the plains 
Indians at any moment, it would oe well for the govern¬ 
ment, instead of estranging those who are friendly, to 
bind them closer by fair and honest treatment, so if 
the time should come when the scattered settlements of 
this country would have to make head against an over¬ 
whelming force of hostile Indians without the possi¬ 
bility of government aid in time to be of any ser¬ 
vice, they could count on the help or at least the 
friendly neutrality of the only Indians that the 
Blackfeet are afraid of, (75) 

Oliver nourished a prolonged and bitter antagonism to 
Dewdney, and he was deeply critical of the Indian Commiss¬ 
ioner's handling of Indian affairs? 

But matters have come to such a pitch now that it 
is safe to predict that if Mr, Dewdney remains Indian 
Commissioner for a year or two more, and continues to 
administer affairs as he has done, Canada will have 
an Indian war on her hands just as certainly as the 
United States has had them. (74) 

In July of 1883 the Bulletin again warned the government 
of the dangers latent in the Indian situation, With five 
hundred police in the Territories, there was still much 
horse stealing and unrest. Big Bear and Piapot were at the 
Cypress Hills, the potential trouble spot. Only the wisdom 
and moderation of Crowfoot restrained the Blackfoot. ,f This 
situation,” said the Bulletin , ,f st©ms from the general mal¬ 


administration of Indian affairs in the Territories.” (75) 


(73) The Bulletin, Dec. 6, 1880. 

(74) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 21, 1882. 

See also The Bulletin, Jan. 3, 1881. 

(75) Bdmonton Bulletin, July 7, 1883. 







■ 








. 










. 















- 















. 
















. 

. 






( 62 ) 


Oliver’s advice for the effective handling of Indian aff¬ 
airs was simple enough; let the government understand the 
problem, appoint good agents, keep its promises to the na¬ 
tives and scrupulously live up to the treaty stipulations. 
That he was well aware of the weaknesses in the Indian ad¬ 
ministration is revealed in the following comment in con¬ 
cluding a report on rumors of Indian unrest? "With such a 
people and under such circumstances, all that is required 
is the occasion and a leader to land the North West in the 
middle of a first class Indian war.’ 1 (76) Ottawa officials 
were prone to consider Frank Oliver an alarmist, but Mac¬ 
donald’s government would have done well to pay attention 
to the warnings sounded in the fiery little Bulletin during 
these years. (77) 

Under the North West Territories Act of 1875, the powers 
of the Lieutenant-Governor and his North West Council in¬ 
cluded the administration of justice. The Lieutenant- 
Governor appointed justices of the peace and stipendiary 
magistrates responsible for the interpretation of law in 
the Territories. Naturally, in the early ’eighties, these 
law officials were few in number and widely separated. 

(76) Edmonton Bulletin, June 14, 1884. 

(77) Other western papers called attention to the dangers 

of the Indian situation. Including the Saskatchewan 
Herald of Battleford, the Regina Leader and the 
i~ree Tress of Winnipeg. ~~ 































• 




. 


V ■ - r - i. . 





' 




' 




















■ 






































' 


- 


















( 63 ) 


Edmonton particularly felt the “remoteness of magisterial 
power , and the Bulletin was prompt in demanding more speedy 
and effective administration of Justice and the appointment 
of a stipendiary magistrate for th© settlement. (78) 

In the second issue of his paper Oliver dealt with the 
question of North ii.est justice. He charged that three Ed¬ 
monton residents were expected to go all the way to Battle- 
ford for trial in the middle of winter and demanded to know 
why the cases could not at least be tried In summer. He 
also maintained that court was held too seldom, and that 
prisoners had lain in Fort Saskatchewan jail for from six 
months to a year awaiting trial. ”lf,” he said, “a mere 
lack of inclination prevents Col. Richardson from visiting 
this place more frequently in the discharge of his duties, 
it is high time that another man had his place; but if it 
| is impossible for him (and It certainly may be) to come - 
common justice demands the appointment of a magistrate 
specially to this part of the country.” (79) 

Oliver was concerned, not only with the actual administ¬ 
ration of justice, but with the applicability of Dominion 
laws and North West ordinances to conditions throughout the 
North Y/est. Mentioning an article in the Saskatchewan 

(78) In 1880 the nearest stipendiary magistrate. Col. 

Richardson, was resident at Battleford. 

(79) The Bulletin, Dec. 13, 1880. 















. • Cl 


■ 




' 

- 


' . 

' V ' 


■■■ : .. ■' 4 “ 

. .. - ' •, ' I ■ -V ' ' f ' ; 

, b'Cki I; ■& ' 4 

•. 4 . - 

... 




■ ■ 


















■ 


















( 64 ) 


Herald regarding the legal apprehension of men who had de¬ 
serted their employment on Dominion land surveys he wrote, 
H If there is a law making desertion of employment a criminal 
offence it might well be struck out of the statutes at 
once .... It might do well enough on the meridian of 
Greenwich, but it ain’t worth a cent on the 114th Vest.”(BO) 
With considerable feeling the Bulletin called attention 
to the necessity for proper ordinances on such mundane, but 
locally important matters as hogs running at large, horse 
mange, the status of old trails, what constituted occupancy 
in the case of a squatter, the forming of municipalities, 
prairie fires, and the destruction of sheep by dogs. (81) 
Oliver made the notorious McComick case (82) the occasion 
for an editorial roundly denouncing the assumption of extra- 
legal powers by North West officials. (83) Hie foregoing 
matters may appear somewhat trivial, but in terms of their 
time and place they were of the utmost significance to the 
North West settler. No doubt the Bulletin’s outspoken 
opinions had a chastening influence upon the local exercise 

(80) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 4, 1882. 

(81) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 16, 1882. 

(82) In a case given considerable notoriety at the time, a 
certain McCormick was ordered flogged by the Attorney- 
General of Manitoba. 

(83) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 22, 1884. 






(bb) 


of magisterial power. (84) 

Frsnk Oliver was an aggressive and public-spirited man, 
with a vigorous interest in the potentialities and develop¬ 
ment of the Edmonton district. No matter of local concern 
escaped his attention or failed to be dealt with in his pap¬ 
er. Pointing out that, "It takes on an average ten weeKS to 
get a reply to a letter sent to Winnipeg or Ontario . . . 
while a letter to Macleod will perhaps bring back a reply 
in from three to four months," he campaigned for a better 
mail service. (85) He was the leading spirit in a mass 
meeting held in the Edmonton Hotel early in 1881 to take 
action on local matters. After taking steps to secure the 
services of a doctor for the settlement, framing a petition 
for a semi-monthly mail service, and wording a telegram to 
the government demanding an Inquiry into district Indian 
administration, the meeting broke up "with three cheers for 
the Bulletin . w (86) 

Oliver never tired of criticizing the ’’stupidity” of the 
government’s Territorial "bureaucracy", nor of denouncing 
the petty irritations which it inflicted upon the North West 

(84) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 6, 1886. This issue contains 
a spirited defence of Judge Travis of Calgary who was 
in difficulties because of his sincere attempt to 
uphold the law in that settlement. 

(85) The Bulletin, Jan. 10, 1881. 

(86) The Bulletin, Jan. 17, 1881. 







. 





























. 










. 










■ 






























. 































( 66 ) 


A stinging editorial described how Ottawa settled its acc¬ 
ounts with local settlers and traders by issuing cheques, 
with a three months’ ’’deadline”, on the Merchants' Bamc in 
Winnipeg, (87) Allegations of political joboery were not 
wanting. He flayed the government for letting out Mounted 
Police and Indian Department contracts to 1.3. Baker & Go. 
of Macleod and to firms in Ottawa, while ignoring the claims 
of Edmonton traders. (88) He protested against the creat¬ 
ion of Indian reserves close to settlements, and the estab¬ 
lishment of the Mounted Police headquarters at Fort Saskat¬ 
chewan instead of at Edmonton. (89) 

His distrust of the Dominion’s western administration 
was equalled only by his faith in the future of the North 
West in general and of the Edmonton district in particular. 
Edmonton he envisaged not only as a region rich in its own 
right, but as the gateway to an area of great potential 
wealth - the peace River Country. Under the heading of 
"Petrified Facts” he discussed applications which had been 
made for charters for two Peace River railway companies. 

The most eligible country for settlement in the Dominion, 
he claimed, lay along their proposed route; from Milk River, 


(87) 

The Bulletin, Feb. 

7, 1881. 


(88) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Mar. 21, 

1881. 

(89) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Mar. 18, 

1882. 








. 






' 




















. 




' 

, 

■ 




















(67) 

on the International Boundary, to Peace Kiver live hundred 
miles north of Edmonton, With high enthusiasm he described 
the land, the climate, the soil, the timber; and he called 
attention to coal deposits ( "the most extensive Known in 
the world' ), gold, good water, fish, ideal stock-raising 
land and rivers suitable for navigation, ‘‘Although there is 
not enough wealth now in all this part of the country to 
build ten miles of the road, the time will com© when the 
Peace River Railway will be built, and then - wild as the 
prospect seems now - people will say, *Why wasn't it done 
long ago?* w (90) 

Articles of this tone are very numerous in the early 
Bulletin , and are plentifully interspersed with demands for 
an aggressive immigration policy and with advice to pros¬ 
pective immigrants, Enthusiastic articles “booming” the 
country are, of course, a prominent feature in pioneer jour¬ 
nals. But Oliver never descended to careless reporting, to 
mis-informing his readers, nob to painting a “get rich quick' 
picture of the North lest. Occasionally, stirred by outside 
criticism, he allowed himself to be carried away; generally 
he kept his feet planted firmly on the ground. His own 

(90) The Bulletin, Feb. 14, 1881. 

See also, Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 14, 1881 - “Climate”; 
Apr. 4, 1881 - “Coal”; Nov. 19, 1881 - “The Future of 
the North West*; July 22, 1882 - “Immigrants”; June 22, 
1884 - “Edmonton District”; July 5, 1884 - “The Peace 
River District”. 







( 68 ) 


articles and editorials on the land, as well as those re¬ 
ports written by others for publication in the Bulletin , 
were characterized by an unusual wealth of detail and auth¬ 
enticity of material. The advantages and disadvantages of 
the country were set forth at length; and, despite the pre¬ 
vailing note of optimism, a remarkable degree of penetra¬ 
tion was evidenced in evaluating the natural factors gover¬ 
ning agriculture and settlement. The prospective immigrant 
was not promised a land overflowing with milk and honey; 
but a land in which the resources and other natural advan¬ 
tages guaranteed a solid reward for patience, perseverence 
and hard work. 

The following editorial reveals not only Oliver*s faith 
in Edmonton and his eagerness to come to its defence, but 
the ironic flavor which is found in much of his writing. It 
was written in reply to a Toronto Globe reporter who visit¬ 
ed Edmonton and who, upon his return East, enquired in a 
1 Globe article why settlers should n pass up” so many fine 
locations In the North West to take up land in such a re¬ 
mote and unsuitable spot as the Edmonton district. 

Let Us Move 

What in the world are we doing here? Let us git up 
and git. Let us go to the Touchwood Hills, or the Big 
Salt Plains, or Gabrieles Grossing, or Battleford, or 
Macleod, or the top of the Rocky Mountains - any where 











( 69 ) 


to got away from this oondemned spot# What fool3 
these people are who have passed all those Edens 
to come here, and whom money could not induce to go 
back to them. Let us lose no time, but be up and 
away before these "monstrous swamps of rich black 
loam" shall have engulfed us, and before those phe¬ 
nomenal crops of which he speaks shall have had an¬ 
other opportunity to deceive us. Let us away to some 
place where shot-guns are used Instead of harrows for 
planting the grain, and where the farms are on edge 
so that we can cultivate both sides of them, as in 
the Touchwood Hills. Let us go to Bow River where 
the snow was three feet deep on the 6th of April 
last and fifteen inches on the 8th of October, or 
to Gabriel’s Crossing or Battleford where the "rich, 
black loam" is blown about with every breeze, or to 
the great southern plains where the artesian well 
would have to tap the ocean on the other side to get 
water. What do our misguided people mean by bring¬ 
ing plows and harrows, reapers and mowers, binders 
and threshers, grist mills and saw mills to a place 
so utterly unfit for farming, not to say for the 
habitation of man, in preference to other places, 
especially when it costs twice as much to bring them 
here? Why is it that, although the railroad is 800 
miles off, with no prospect of it coming within 200 
miles, a squatter’s right to 100 acres of such coun¬ 
try is worth 110,000 cash? Either the people here 
are very badly mistaken or the Glob© man Is.” (91) 

To Frank Oliver the *fertile belt" was the valley of the 
Saskatchewan; and Edmonton, the last remote outpost settle¬ 
ment of its upper reaches, was the future agricultural and 
industrial centre of the West. "As Artemus Ward said of his 
show we say of our country, ’It is ©quailed by few and ex¬ 
celled by none.*" (92) 


(91) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 11, 1882. 

Regarding the $10,000 for 100 acres, note that this 
was written during the r? boom w , 

(92) Edmonton Bulletin, Apr. 8, 1882. 











(70) 

In the spring of 1882 the Bulletin called attention to 
the mounting land "boom”, and the editor exhorted his fell¬ 
ow citizens to make the rising land values "conducive to 
the general prosperity of the district, and not just to the 
individual. w (93) With the progress of the survey at that 
time his advice was, not to hold the lots for speculation, 
but to build on them and expand the town - ’’Not just sit 
back and expect the place to grow.* 1 (94) With those who 
lost when the ’’boom* collapsed he had scant sympathy* ”lt 
serves the speculators right if they merely bought in an¬ 
ticipation of a higher price.” (95) 

He devoted much of his time and the columns of his paper 
to various local interests* the agricultural society, (96) 
securing a resident doctor, (97) education, (98) roads, (99) 
and the incorporation of the settlement under a North West 
ordinance. (100) He advocated the domestication of the 

> — .. . . -—. . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . I. '■ -. . . . ■ ,, .. . ...--— — - - - 

(93) Kdmonton Bulletin, Apr, 8, 1882. 

(94) Edmonton Bulletin, Apr. 29, 1882* 

(95) Edmonton Bulletin, June 7, 1882. 

(96) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 9, 1882. 

(97) ^diponton Bulletin, Jan. 21, 1882. 

(98) The Bulletin, Jan. 24, 1881. 

(99) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 1, 1882, 

(100) Kdmonton Bulletin, Dec, 16, 1882,* Dec. 8, 1883. 












( 71 ) 


buffalo to utilize certain areas of the Great Plains and 
help solve the Indian problem. (101) 

Oliver was an ardent prohibitionist (102) and never miss¬ 
ed an opportunity to condemn the use and abuse of liquor in 
the North West. Citing the disgraceful situation of the 
old "liquor days ' around the B’ort with their sidelights of 
Indian squalor, starvation and drunken murder, he firmly 
supported the principle of North lest prohibition, (103) 
and demanded the maintenance of a strong police force for 
its enforcement. (104) He denounced premier Norquay of 
Manitoba for allegedly ’’pandering to the liquor interests’ 1 
by granting licenses in that province. ’’Let prohibition 


(101) Steps were taken in this direction many years later 
when the conservation and attempted domestication of 
the buffalo became a policy of diverts Ministry of 
the Interior. 

(102) Oliver never used either liquor or tobacco. It is 
interesting to not© that both George Brown and 
Alexander Mackenzie, Grit Prime Minister of the 
Seventies, were strong temperance men. "Macdonald!sm" 
was far from being identified with the temperance 
cause. 

(103) Liquor could be brought into the Territories only for 
’’medicinal purposes” and then only on a permit from 
the Lieutenant-Governor. The looseness of the permit 
system and the activities of the whiskey-runners, not 
to mention the unpopularity of the law itself, render¬ 
ed ’’prohibition” rather farcical In the North feest 
during the 1 seventies and * eighties. 

Maolnnis, O.M. In the Shadow of the Rockies London 
1930 p. 105 ff. ~ 

(104) Hdmonton Bulletin, Mar. 28, 1881. 









■ 








' 

* 


- 

. 









( 72 ) 


become a political issue,” he challenged, concluding his 
attack on Norquay with an out and out condemnation of the 
liquor traffic. (105) To the twin principles of temperance 
and prohibition Oliver held with the zeal and fire of a 
crusader. 

The term "public opinion” may be misleading when used 
with reference to the Worth West of the Bulletin’s early 
days. The population was small and scattered - an almost 
insignificant encroachment upon the vastness and loneliness 
of the plains. The average settler or trader was too iso¬ 
lated and too busy making a living to be concerned with ab¬ 
stract "political” grievances. But neither he nor the in¬ 
habitant of the tiny village, where "politics had already 
taken root, needed to be politically-minded to know that 
many of their practical grievances arose from the Dominion’s 
western policies and administration and might be remedied 
by sympathetic governmental action. At any rate, upon such 
public opinion as did exist in the Worth west, the Bulletin 
exercised a considerable influence, and doubtless assisted, 
in no small measure, in curbing the more flagrant abuses of 
the Territorial bureaucracy. This does not mean that all 
readers of the Bulletin were unanimous in its support, nor 
that all North Westers subscribed to the uncompromising 

(105) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 2, 1882. 

See also the Bulletin, Nov, 4, 1882, for a strong 
statement upholding prohibition as then operative 
in the North West. 







( 73 ) 


views of its editor* The very intensity of Oliver* s opin¬ 
ions and the virulence with which they were expressed pre¬ 
cluded that possibility* H© had detractors and opponents 
enough, as a small army of critics was only too willing to 
testify. But this worried him not at all. He was a man 
who throve in an atmosphere of conflict - proud of his 
friends, but proud, too, of the enemies he made* It was 
difficult to take the Bulletin in moderation; in fact, it 
was sometimes said that Bulletin readers were of only two 
classes: those who swore by the paper, and those who swore 
at it. 

Frank Oliver did not long confine his participation in 
public affairs to the role of newspaper proprietor and 
journalist. His ©lection to the North tfrest Council for the 
District of Edmonton in 1883 marked the beginning of an ac¬ 
tive political career that was to extend over nearly half 
a century. 

The government of the North West evolved from a series 
of acts beginning with the Rupert’s Land Act of 1869. (106) 
This act provided for the appointment of a Lieutenant- 
Oovernor who should make provision for the administration 
of justice, establish institutions and ordinances subject 
to the ratification of the Canadian parliament, and set up 


(106) Statutes of Canada, 32-33 Viet, c 3, An ct for the 
Temporary Government of Rupert’s Land. 












j 


. 


. 
























' 








































( 74 ) 


a council of from seven to fifteen persons to assist him in 
the administration. When the Province of Manitoba was 
created in 1870, the Rupert 1 s Land Act continued to apply 
to the remainder of the Territories; the Lieutenant-Govern¬ 
or of Manitoba also served as Governor of the Territories 
and was responsible for its administration under direction 
from the Dominion Government. "During the years 1875-5 a 
provisional government, consisting of the Lieutenant-Gover¬ 
nor of Manitoba and his North West Council, ruled from Tort 
Garry (Winnipeg), and laid the early foundations of Terri¬ 
torial administration, while the newly established Depart¬ 
ment of the Interior maintained oversight from Ottawa."(107) 
Lands, natural resources, Indian affairs and the North West 
Mounted Police were reserved to the control of the Dominion 
Government. 

The distinctive political career of the North West 
Territories commenced with the passage by the Domin¬ 
ion Parliament of the North West Territories Act, 

1875. This act provided that the administration of 
the government in the Territories should be placed 
in the hands of a resident lieutenant-governor, 
assisted by a North West Council of not more than 5 
persons, appointed by the Governor-General in Council 
and invested with both executive and legislative pow¬ 
ers. The legislative powers included taxation for 
local and municipal purposes; property and civil 
rights; administration of justice; public health; 
police, roads, highways and bridges; and generally 


(107) Lingard, C.C. Territorial Government in Canada 
Toronto 1946 p4. “ “ 






. 


- 






■ 






. 






(75) 


all matters of a purely local and private nature. 

An ingenious section of the Act further provided 
that when the Lieutenant-Governor was satisfied 
that any portion of the Territories, not exceed¬ 
ing one thousand square miles, contained a popu¬ 
lation of not less than one thousand persons of 
adult age, exclusive of aliens or unenfranchized 
Indians, he was to erect such portion into an 
electoral district, which would thenceforth be 
entitled to elect a member to the Council. When 
the number of elected members should reach twenty- 
one, the Council should cease to exist and the 
elected members should be designated the Legis¬ 
lative Assembly. (108) 

No provision was made for Territorial representation in 
the Dominion House of Commons or Senate. 

North West government, between the years 1870 and 1875, 
was carried on under the successive administrations of 
Lieutenant-Governors Archibald and Morris of Manitoba. In 
1876 the Hon. David Laird was appointed first Territorial 
Lieutenant-Governor, and the seat of the North West govern¬ 
ment was moved from Winnipeg to Livingston, Swan River, in 
the North West Territories. The next year the capital was 
transferred to Battleford; and in 1882, with the southern 
diversion of the C.P.R. route, to Regina. 'The history of 
the Territorial government during these years is a story in 
itself. Despite its narrowly restricted powers the North 
West Council attacked its problems with vigor and determin¬ 
ation, laying a solid groundwork of local legislation. In 


(108) Lingard, op. cit.. 


p. 4. 






(76) 


its relations with the Territorial administration the Domin¬ 
ion government consistently revealed mismanagement, and 
that attitude of apathy and procrastination all too common 
in its dealings with the West. (109) 

The first electoral district under the provisions of the 
Act of 1875 was erected in 1881. This was the Electoral 
District of Lome. Its member, the Hon. Laurence Clarke, 
Hudson's Bay Company factor at Fort Carlton, sat in the 
fourth session of the North West Council in May and June of 
1881, as the first elected Councillor in the history of the 
North West. (110) The second elected member of the North 
West Council was Frank Oliver of Edmonton. 

The Bulletin displayed its interest in the North West 
government as early as December, 1880. Referring to the 
local census then being taken, the editor declared himself 
as certain that the district contained more than the necess¬ 
ary population (111) and appealed to everyone to get his 
name on the census in order that Edmonton might elect a 
representative to the North West Council. 

We must have a representative to that body - we 
are rapidly growing in numbers and should have 
our say in matters pertaining to the Territories 
and this section in particular. 

(109) Black, op. cit.. Chapters XIII, XV and XVIII. 

Maclnnes, op. cit.. Chapters XVI and XVII. 

(110) J.N.W, Council, 1881, pp. 5 and 6. 

(111) That is, for erection into an electoral district. 













- 1 - 1 ; 






i, , 


















































j. . i 
















. 








(77) 


Let us see if we oannot remedy this state of aff¬ 
airs by sending a good lively man to Batcleford to 
speak for us. (112) 

Much to the disappointment of the settlement, the census 
showed fewer than the required one thousand voters. Oliver 
momentarily changed front, charging that "a representative 
on the North West Council would not be much good anyway.* 
Claiming that the real need was a representative to Ottawa, 
he suggested the division of the West into four sections 
with a federal representative in each. "Why should a man, 
by moving from one part of Canada to another, become dis¬ 
enfranchised? * (113) 

Succeeding the Hon. David Laird, the Hon. Edgar Dewdney 
was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of the Territories on 
December 3, 1881. Oliver’s reaction to the appointment 
spoke for itself: 


Vive Le Hoi 

In regard to the appointment of Mr. Dewdney as 
Lieutenant-Governor of the North West, we have only 
to say that our opinion, if expressed of Mr. Dewd- 
ney’s fitness for the position, would leave us open 
to charges of libel, and if the principle the great¬ 
er the truth the greater the libel held good, we 
fear the financial resources of the Bulletin would 
be unable to stand the strain likely to be put up¬ 
on them. (114) 


(112) The Bulletin, Dec. 20, 1880. 

(113) The Bulletin, Jan. 31, 1881. 

(114) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 10, 1881. 









■ 









-■ 
















(78) 

He was not slow in pointing out what he considered to be 
the chief weakness of the North West Council as then con¬ 
stituted; the appointed members were men who were already 
officials of the Dominion Government. Two recent appoint¬ 
ees were the Commissioner of the Mounted Police and the 
Assistant Indian Commissioner. (115) M A mere apology for 
a legislative body/ 1 he dubbed the Council, adding, "If 
there is any necessity for a Council it should be represent¬ 
ative and elective, should have full control of local matt¬ 
ers, and should be of a form that would entail the least 
expense . . . ." (116) Furthermore, "If such a council 
cannot be given for the whole Territories, the people of 
this district, who have no representative in the present 
council, should attempt the organization of a municipality 
and attend to their local affairs in their own way." (117) 

At an important public meeting held in January, 1883, 
to consider land grievances, Oliver played a leading part. 

As one of his contributions to the business he moved the 
following resolution; "That this opportunity be taken to lay 
before the government the claims of the people of these 

(115) Lieut.-Col. Irvine, N.W.M.P. and Hayter Heed of 
Battleford. 

(116) Edmonton Bulletin, June 3, 1882. 

(117) Ibid 











. 

<V " ^ •• 








• 



















. 















(79) 


territories to repreaentation in the Canadian parliament . 

. . (118) 

In its H telegraphic column” of March 24, 1883, the 
Bulletin reported that proclamations had been published 
erecting Edmonton into an electoral district, and in the 
next issue the editor expressed his gratification that the 
district was soon to have a representative on the jtforth West 
Council. His satisfaction was, however, tempered by his 
recognition of the limited powers of the Territorial govern¬ 
ment. Although representation in the Council "might not 
amount to much", his advice was to get all possible advan¬ 
tage from it. ,f It is not probable," he stated, ’‘that only 
one more elected member will be able to accomplish very 
great things under such circumstances. But if a true man 
of energy and ability be sent, he cannot fail to have some 
effect for good." (119) 

What this "true man of energy and ability' might do in¬ 
cluded pressing the fight to obtain for Edmonton certain 
badly needed public works, and for the Korth West Council 
more power, particularly with reference to the establishment 
« of schools and municipalities. Indirectly, local represent¬ 
ation was "an admission by the general government of our ex¬ 
istence as lawful settlers - the first official one that has 

(118) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 27, 1883. 

(119) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 31, 1883. 

























. 





































. 




. 

' 






















( 30 ) 

ever been made.’ 1 'She chief weakness of the Council was 
that ,? owing to the fact of its being representative rather 
of the general government than of the people of the North 
West, its efforts on behalf of the country have been few 
and weak, if any were ever mad© at all*” She time had com©, 
Oliver warned, when changes must be made. Edmonton’s man 1 
must have honesty of purpose, energy of character, and must 
?T be depended upon to act entirely in the interests of the 
people here.** (120) 

To the consternation of a community all agog over its 
first elections, a delay occurred in issuing the writs. With 
rather uncharitable candour Oliver speculated as to causes. 

41 The delay in issuing the writs,'* he wrote, "may or may not 
be intentional, and if intentional may be with good or bad 
intent. In any case MV* Dewdney is a gentleman who is none 
the worse of watching.” (121) Meanwhile he urged his fell¬ 
ow citizens to *keep a bright lookout that no fluke or turn 
is made that will constitute an unworthy resident or an 
outside carpet-bagger the accredited representative of Ed¬ 
monton.” (122) The writs finally came through, and with 
notice in the Bulletin of May 6, 1885, of the names of sev¬ 
eral prospective candidates, Edmonton’s first election 


(lfO) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 31, 1883. 

(121) Edmonton Bulletin, Apr. 7, 1883. 

(122) Ibid 















































































( 81 ) 


campaign got under way. 

Messrs. S.D. Mulkins, M. Macaulay, James Mckernan 
and k• Oliver are candidates for election to the 
North West Council, with several outlying districts 
to hear from. • • . Editorials giving any candi¬ 
date fits supplied at double the ordinary advertis¬ 
ing rates. (123) 

Itwas a rather confusing campaign, ihe ofticial nomin¬ 
ation day was not until May 15; but meanwhile, as reported 
by the Bulletin , several names appeared which were later 
withdrawn. fhere seems to have been a laudable ambition on 
the part of ^dmonto^s more public-spirited men to be the 
settlements first representative on the North West Council, 
and each aspirant found ready backing from a small coterie 
of friends whose enthusiasm for their candidate perhaps out¬ 
ran their knowledge of electoral procedure. 

In a Bulletin advertisement of May 5, Stuart D. Malkins, 
Notary Public and a staunch conservative, appealed to the 
electors to support his candidature. He stressed local 
questions including schools, public works, incorporation 
and fair settlement of half-breed scrip. (124) Frank Oliver 
in the same issue claimed for the Edmonton settlement, ”a 
slice of the |20,000 placed In the Canadian estimates for 

expenditure in the North West by the Council for public 
works.” In offering himself as candidate he promised agg¬ 
ressive action on schools and municipal incorporation; and 


(123) Edmonton Bulletin, May 5, 1883. 

(124) Ibid 


























. • 




. 

. . 










. 























' 













( 82 ) 

advocated abrogation of timber dues, more equitable home¬ 
stead and pre-emption rights for settlers, and an adequate 
solution of the questions of half-breed scrip and land ten¬ 
ure. (125) 

Oliver's attitude on Dominion issues was already well 
known and had been especially emphasized in an editorial in 
which he reiterated his political non-partisanship* Ex¬ 
pressing his whole-hearted opposition to the Conservatives, 
he denied that he belonged to the reform or Grit party, (126 
So long, he stated, as the principles advocated by that par¬ 
ty suited him, he supported them* However, if the Grits 
were changing their tune on the National Policy, the Syn¬ 
dicate bargain or the colonization societies, and if these 
things were no longer obnoxious to them, what claim had the 
Grit party on his support over that of the Conservatives? 

T, Vve support principles, not men, * he repeated, and urged 
that there was 4 *time enough for the people of the North ftest 
to profess allegiance to either of these parties when they 
get representation in the Dominion House* * . . And when 
that time comes, it is to be hoped they will support a more 
national, and less sectional, policy than either of those 
parties now advocates*** (127) 

(125) Edmonton Bulletin, May 5, 1883. 

(126) Ibid 

(127) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb* 10, 1883. 














. 

. 

























. 

. . 










. 












. 






































( 83 ) 


Mr. Francis Lamoureaux of Fort Saskatchewan soon entered 
the field, representing the interests of that settlement 
and St. Albert. (128) Oliver deprecated Lamoureaux’s can¬ 
didature as threatening to raise sectional and religious 
issues, and made a strong plea for minimizing racial, re¬ 
ligious and sectional bitterness in the contest and uniting 
against the common danger <6 the Edmonton and Saskatchewan 
Land Go. (129) Actually, the local voters saw a danger in 
the way the contest then stood. With the probability of the 
Edmonton vote being split between Oliver, Mulkins and Mac¬ 
aulay, the relative ’’outsider ', Lamoureaux, had an excell¬ 
ent chance of being elected. Edmonton’s awareness of this 
unpleasant possibility was revealed in a public meeting held 
on May 10. The announced purpose of the meeting was to give 
the candidates, Macaulay, Oliver and Mulkins, ”and others 
who may so desire % an opportunity to address the electors. 
However, no sooner had the meeting opened than a resolution, 
apparently inspired by Macaulay and prepared unbeknown to 
the other candidates, was proposed for consideration. Its 
tenor was that, “whereas from the action of another portion 
of this district it is advisable not to divide the vote of 
Edmonton and vicinity” the meeting should immediately pick 
one candidate to represent it in the election. 

(128) Edmonton Bulletin, May 12, 1883. St. Albert was the 
Metis settlement several miles North ?*est of Edmonton. 

(129) Edmonton Bulletin, May 12, 1883. 




















, .1 j 








’ 





















( 84 ) 


Since such action was not the announced purpose of the 
meeting and since no prior understanding had been arrived 
at among the candidates, Oliver refused to bind himself. 
Mulkins said he would abide by the decision of the meeting, 
and took occasion to declare himself a Conservative, to ex¬ 
press his opinion that the Conservative government was the 
best we have ever had* 4 , and to urge at some length his per¬ 
sonal qualifications. A sharp discussion followed, and it 
was finally decided to hear each of the candidates and then 
vote on their popularity. 

Macaulay dealt chiefly with local matters and declared 
that he would fight for everything the North West wanted. 
Oliver*s speech referred, not only to the usual local matt¬ 
ers of public works, schools, municipal organization, etc., 
but also to the organization and powers of the North West 
Council and the possibility of reform in Territorial admin¬ 
istration. He warmly defended prohibition in the North 
West, Denying that he was an extremist, he promised that 
as he had been in the past, so he would be in the future.'* 
Mulxins added to his platform on local affairs a repetition 
of his adherence to the Conservative party and boasted of 
all it had done in opening up the country. n If sent to 
Regina ,* 1 he stated, ®he would ge as a supporter of that 
government and thought he would gain more for his constit¬ 
uents by doing so than if he went as a pronounced opponent 
to it.* 














. 

. 





















. 












































. 










( 86 ) 


Of the three speeches, at least as reported In the 
Bulletin , that given by Oliver was the most lengthy and im¬ 
pressive. Macaulay stressed local conditions: Mulkins, his 
affiliations with the Conservative party. Oliver displayed 
a wider interest in North West government and administrative 
reform, and perhaps a broader conception of Territorial 
problems and their possible solution. At any rate, when the 
speechmaking was over, 

A somewhat lengthy and acrimonious discussion 
followed in which Messrs. Macaulay, Oliver, Mullins 
Bleecker, Kippen, McDonald, Dr* Munroe and others 
took part, in regard to the calling of the meeting 
and a few other little matters which required vent¬ 
ilation. finally, an open vote as to the popular¬ 
ity of the different candidates was taken which 
showed twelve for Macaulay, forty-two for Oliver 
and twenty-two for Mulkins. 

The meeting then adjourned. (130) 

Macaulay forthwith dropped out of the running; but Mul¬ 
kins, despite his earlier assertion that he would abide by 
the decision of the meeting, stayed in. Nominations were 
duly made in the school house on May 15, with Capt. J. Gag¬ 
non as returning officer. Despite a last minute rally of 
Oliver supporters to secure his acclamation, the close of 
nominations revealed three candidates officially in the 
field*. Oliver, Mulkins and Lamoureaux. A fair sized crowd 
being present, a meeting to discuss issues was held immed¬ 
iately under the chairmanship of J. McDonald. 


(130) Bdmonton Bulletin, May 12, 1883 











. 


















■ 


















? • r:V : ; 


























( 86 ) 


Lamoureaux spoke very briefly, promising that if elected 
he would do the best he could, and that he would not "pull” 
for Fort Saskatchewan, Mulkins reiterated his belief that 
as a Conservative he was the logical man, and that a rep¬ 
resentative bitter against the government should not be sent 
to Regina. ( "'The proceedings were varied at this point by 
a first class dog fight in the school room. So far as learn* 
ed no money changed hands on the result. Both dogs were 
kicked out and quiet reigned once more.'* ) Oliver in a 
forceful speech added little to his platform, but was at¬ 
tacked violently by K. Bleecker, a barrister and supporter 
of Mulkins, for his Bulletin articles against the Conserva¬ 
tive government and the C.P.R. Bleecker claimed with con¬ 
siderable feeling that, "Mr. Oliver was against everyone in 
authority. He had abused the public men of the country from 
the Governor-General down to the postmaster. If his paper 
had been of any weight or had been read by members of the 
government, he would have been prosecuted for libel." (131) 
He went on to accuse the Bulletin 1 s editor of being a 
speculative squatter 5 , of making utterly unjustified at¬ 
tacks on Lieutenant-Governor Bewdney, and of being incon¬ 
sistent in his stand on the liquor laws. Oliver defended 
himself with his customary vigor, and cleverly diverted the 


(131) Edmonton Bulletin, May 19, 1883 






. 







' 


















. 













( 87 ) 


attention of the meeting by producing a witness who alleged¬ 
ly had heard BleecKer say that "if Mulleins were elected it 
would be a disgrace to the country." Mth biting irony he 
praised Bleecker for quoting the Bulletin . Amid a general 
atmosphere of "mud-slinging* and name calling, the meeting 
finally broke up. 

With the field cleared for the three official candidates 
electioneering proceeded at a lively pace. Although per¬ 
sonal and sectional animosities were not wanting, subsequent 
meetings held throughout the district were apparently con¬ 
ducted in an orderly fashion. The Bulletin appealed to the 
electors to get out and vote, and to judge each candidate 
by his past deeds and present capaoilities. "What is want¬ 
ed, * the Bulletin maintained, "‘is a man who whether bound 
by pledge or not can be depended upon to stand by the inter¬ 
ests of the district and of the people who inhabit it, with¬ 
out distinction of creed, race, party or place of residence, 
through thick and thin, through evil and good report, ably 
and honorably as long as he holds the position of their 
authorized representative.* (152) private canvassing was 
advocated. "Every elector who has strong convictions should 
try to persuade the luke warm or indifferent to vote for 
»his man* . * (133) 


(132) Edmonton Bulletin, May 19, 1883. 

(133) Edmonton Bulletin, May 26, 1883. 








( 88 ) 


Election day, May 29, witnessed intense excitement in the 
district. There were three polls - Edmonton, St, Albert and 
Fort Saskatchewan. Voting was done orally. Each elector 
appeared before the returning officer, gave his name, his 
occupation and place of residence, and stated his choice of 
candidate. If required by the adherents of an opposing 
party, he was compelled to take the qualifications oath or 
the bribery oath or both, The former was an avowal that 
he was a resident householder duly qualified to vote; the 
latter that he had received no bribe, directly or indirect¬ 
ly, as the price of his preference. The polls were quiet 
and orderly, and although some liquor was in evidence in 
Edmonton, the presence of the police no doubt dampened the 
enthusiasm of potential trouble makers. 

Oliver took and kept the lead in Edmonton, while in Fort 
Saskatchewan Lamoureaux*s adherents piled up a large major¬ 
ity. Mulkins had no show. The outcome in St. Albert appea¬ 
red for some time in doubt, the count swinging between 
Oliver and Lamoureaux. During the afternoon, the ”&ul*u.ns 
faction”, seeing that their cause was lost, allegedly be¬ 
gan *throwing their votes” to Lamoureaux. (134) Shortly 
after five o f clock the overall report of the polls showed 

(134) Edmonton Bulletin, June 2, 1883. 





























■ 























’ 







• 



< 




























































# 


















. 















( 89 ) 


a resounding victory for Oliver with a final count of Oliver 
154, Lamoureaux 94, and Mulkins 4. (135) 

The total number of votes cast may appear small in pro¬ 
portion to the ’’one thousand persons of adult age required 
for the erection of Edmonton into an electoral district. 
There is some reason to believe that the minimum population 
requirement had not been strictly interpreted in creating 
the Edmonton electorate, (136) In addition there had been 
some local dispute regarding the interpretation of ’’house- 
holder” as establishing eligibility to vote. Limiting fac¬ 
tors such as isolation, primitive roads and seasonal farm 
work must also be taken into account. The result of Edmon¬ 
ton’s first election does reasonably suggest that a large 
number of residents agreed with the n rampant Grit” Frank 
Oliver in his criticism of the Dominion’s western policies 
and Territorial administration. 

Oliver’s own review of the election issues and results 
is interesting, H© charged that his opponents had no defi¬ 
nite constructive policy of their own, but were merely out 
to beat Oliver”, He denounced as puerile the contention 

(135) The Canadian Parliamen tar y Companion Ed, J.A, 

GemmlTr Ottawa IS05 pV 36$. 

( Hereafter referred to as Can. Pari. Comp., with 
year of issue.) 

(136) Oliver himself stated years later that Edmonton 
probably lacked the required number of persons. 


















. 

. 








' 

. ■ i . 










■ 





































( 90 ) 


that Mulkins could get more out of Regina than he himself 
could, and blamed the bitterness of the opposition on the 
activities of the anti-prohibitionists. *It would be use¬ 
less to deny that throughout the larger part of the district 
there were persistent attempts made to set race against 
race, creed against creed, and section against section, but 
in all cases without success.* ‘'But," he stated in con¬ 

clusion, *the men and their principles were what the elec¬ 
tors voted on.** (137) 


(137) Edmonton Bulletin, June 2, 1883. 














































































( 91 ) 


Chapter 4 Member of the North West Council 

The last meeting of Lieutenant-Governor Laird*s Council, 
with its four appointed and one elected member (1) at Battle- 
ford in May and June of 1881, marked in a real sense the end 
of an era. Great chamges were taking place in the North 
West as the relative stagnation of Laird*s regime gave way 
to increasing activity in surveys, immigration and railway 
construction. In May of 188£ the Dominion Government divid¬ 
ed the west into four provisional districts - Assiniboia, 
Saskatchewan, Alberta and Athabasca, chiefly for the con¬ 
venience of the Postal Department. During 1883 several new 
electoral districts were erected under the provisions of 
the Act of 1875. 

Although appointed Lieutenant-Governor of the Territories 
in December of 1881, the Hon. Edgar Dewdney did not summon 
the North West Council until 1883. The delay was occasioned 
by a dispute concerning the powers of the Council, the 
choice of a new Capital, rumors of the creation of two new 
provinces, and Dewdney*s expressed desire to ^have the as¬ 
sistance of representative men from different parts of the 

(1) The elected member was the Hon. Laurence Clarke, 
District of Lome. 

































' 


. 

























































( 92 ) 


Territories” to assist him in the administration. (2) 

The North West Council which assembled in Regina on Aug¬ 
ust 22, 1885, not only faced a heavy backlog of legislation 
and many new problems, but differed drastically in compo¬ 
sition and temper from its predecessor. Lieut.-Cols. Rich¬ 
ardson sind Macleod, stipendiary magistrates, continued to 
sit as w ex-offioio 4# members, (3) and together with Padcal 
Breland, appointed member, (4) formed the ’’old guard of 
the Council. Recent appointees were Lieut.-Col. Irvine and 
Hayter Reed, Assistant Indian Commissioner. Since Lieuten- 
ant-Covernor Dewdney had a vote, the ^non-elective” member¬ 
ship of the Council was six. Captain D.H, Macdowail re¬ 
placed Clarke as elected member for Lox*ne. Frank Oliver of 
Edmonton and the four other members from the newly erected 
electoral districts completed the elective group on the 
Council. (5) 

(2) J.N.W. Council, 1883, p. 8. The five new electoral dis¬ 
tricts were erected during the first half of 1883, and 
three of the elections were held as late as August 13. 

To include the newly elected members, calling the 
session was delayed. 

(3) Both had served since 1877. 

(4) First appointed in 1878. 

(5) Oliver was elected on May 29, 1883; Macdowail on June b, 
1883; and the others on August 13, 1883. This sub- 
stantiates Oliver*s position as second elected member 

to the North West Council, he being preceded only by 
Glarxe, District of Lome. 



















































. . 





























* 





















( 93 ) 


Lieutenant-Governor Dewdney, already prominent in the 
western service of the Dominion government, was to have a 
long and varied public career. (6) An ultra-conservative, 
he was the perpetual target of frank Oliver who mercilessly 
denounced and lampooned him with an intensity of political 
and even personal animosity which only deepened with time. 
Not everyone, however, was inclined to be as critical as 
the Bulletin 1 s editor, and it is only fair to suggest an¬ 
other side to the picture: 

The governor has been very zealous as regards leg¬ 
islation, and when he had occasion to speak, spoke 
with force and clearness - more force and clearness 
than we should have expected from one so reticent in 
his habitual demeanor. Bven persons disposed to re¬ 
gard him with hostile feelings acknowledge that 
throughout he has displayed breadth and grasp, read¬ 
iness and statesmanlike instincts. (7) 

Col. Richardson was a mild mannered man of conscientious 
ability and conservative views, while Gol. James Macleod* s 
colorful personality and undoubted talents were to win him 
a distinguished career in the judicial field and a high 
place in the estimation of his associates. Pascal Breland, 
a Prench-Canadian, was considered to represent the Metis 


(6) Dewdney*s public career included* Indian Commissioner 
for the North West; Lieutenant-Governor of the Terri¬ 
tories; Member of Parliament for Assiniboia Bast; 
Minister of the Interior, and Lieutenant-Governor of 
British Columbia. 

(7) Nicholas Flood Davin (Cons.) in the Regina Leader , 
quoted from Black, op. cit., p. 233. 











:■ ; I - i 






■ s' < : 






■ 


■ 


























' 






( 94 ) 


interests. Lieut.-Col. Irvine’s duties as N.W.M.P. officer 
kept him often absent from the Council. Hayter Reed’s po¬ 
sition in the Indian Department made him, supposedly, an 
authority on Indian problems. 

Captain Macdowall was a business man and a staunch con¬ 
servative. Hamilton, District of Broadview, was a Scotch 
gentleman farmer much concerned with practical problems. 
"The squatters’ candidate 5 *, White of Regina, revealed a 
keen interest in agricultural questions. Jackson of Qu*- 
Appelle, whose hostility to Dewdney and to Regina were well 
known, did not prove the firebrand anticipated, but rather 
a "decorous and assiduous* Councillor, From Moose Jaw came 
a young rancher of ambition and spirit, soon to be closely 
associated with Oliver in the fight for reform, the fiery 
James Ross. (8) 

N.F. Davin’s estimate of Frank Oliver, as given in the 
Regina Leader soon after the assembling of the North West 
Council of 1885, is particularly interesting: 

One member we have not yet mentioned, perhaps the 
most remarkable man, in some respects, on the Council, 
Mr. Oliver of Edmonton. If this gentleman is a type 
of the people of Edmonton, we take the people of Ed¬ 
monton to our hearts, for Mr. Oliver is a man not only 
of independent thought and great natural ability, but 


(8) These brief characterizations are from M.F. Davin 
in the Regina Leader, quoted from Black, op. cit*, 

p. 252 YfT ~~ 









. ; 











































• 



























( 95 ) 


a man of transparent honesty. Such men the free 
air of the North Vie at breeds. (9) 

The time was not far distant when, in the heat of politi¬ 
cal controversy, Bavin and the Regina Leader were to give 
a much less generous characterization of this r ‘untamed 
broncho * from the Upper Saskatchewan. (10) 


(9) Ibid Davin was a oriliiant speaker, journalist and 
politician. Oliver and Davin were subsequently 
political rivals. 

(10) The following anecdote is taken from John Hawkes’ 

The Story of Saskatchewan Chicago-Regina 1924 p. 500. 

rt The appointed members of the Council exceeded the el¬ 
ected members in number and the Lieutenant-Governor and 
the three stipendiary magistrates formed a friendly 
little conclave which settled everything among them¬ 
selves - to the immense indignation of Frank Oliver of 
Edmonton. Motion after motion would, with monotonous 
regularity, be "moved** by Judge Richardson, “seconded 1 * 
by Judge Rouleau, while Judge Maeleod would say "carr¬ 
ied* . 

'And what do you think of the proceedings today? w ask¬ 
ed stipendiary Richardson, in his mild thin voice, of 
Mr, Oliver. 

‘Same d--d thing as usual, ** snapped back Oliver. 

“Moved by J-s, seconded by C-1, and carried by 

G-di" 

Hawkes offers this as an “old timers" reminiscence, 
and it apparently refers to the session of 1884. How¬ 
ever, it reveals a discrepancy in that Judge Rouleau 
is termed a member of the Council at a time when the 
appointed members exceeded the elected members in num¬ 
ber." Perhaps the “old timer* was referring to occa¬ 
sions when some of the elected members were absent, or 
perhaps he was garbling the story slightly. At any 
rate, as a characterization of Oliver the anecdote 
bears a stamp of authenticity which forbids its omission. 






■ 

























' 


. 












. 







(96) 

Oliver was already well known throughout the Worth west 
as a "political firebrand', and his role in the Council did 
much to justify that appellation* 

Phe elective members of the Council made their presence 
felt immediately. In the Address in Reply to Lieut.-Gov. 
Dewdney’s business-like and rather non-committal Speech 
from the Throne, (11) the Council requested His Honor, 

To consider with us the best means that can be 
adopted to convince the Dominion Government of the 
necessity that exists of some definite action being 
taken with regard to those matters on which repeated 
memorials have been presented by the people, as well . 
as matters and complaints which have arisen as the 
result of more recent legislation by the federal 
authorities* (12) 

Phis statement constituted, in effect, a plea for greater 
legislative scope and a condemnation of 'meddlesome inter¬ 
ference" from Ottawa. (15) 

The Council then proceeded to appoint a select Committee 
composed of the six elected members to memorialize the 
Dominion Government on North West grievances* The Memorial, 
of sixteen sections, was duly drafted and submitted for 
consideration by the Council. An amendment, moved by Jack- 
son and seconded by Oliver, alleging the illegality of col¬ 
onization company agents acting as government agents was 

(11) J.N.W. Council, 1883, p. 6 ff* 

(12) J.N.W. Council, 1883, p. 15. 

(13) These were the two chief grievances dealt with in 
previous memorials. 







. 











. 





• 







. 




( 97 ) 


lost on the adverse vote of the appointed members strength¬ 
ened by Dewdney*s casting vote, and the Memorial was accept 
ed. Its protests covered a wide field, including a plea 
for the land rights of the half-breeds, a condemnation of 
Dominion land policy and a demand for territorial represent 
ation in the Federal parliament. (14) 

Oliver played a prominent part in the deliberations of 
the Select Committee, but It would be a mistake to over¬ 
emphasize his direct contribution to the framing of the 
Memorial. He was but one flian in six. However, it is sig¬ 
nificant that of the sixteen grievances framed and agreed 
upon by these six men of diverse political allegiances and 
backgrounds, and passed by the Council, every one had for 
some time been urged in the columns of the Kdmonton Bullet - 
in. 

Apart from the Memorial and frequent clahhes between the 
appointed and elected members, the Council session of 1885 
was quiet as compared with sessions to come. A good deal 
of useful legislation was achieved. (15) Oliver*s most 
important constructive efforts were directed to paving the 
way for effective legislation on schools. 

(14) J.N.W. Council, 1883, p. 39 ff; pp. 55 and 56. 

(15) Ordinances of the North Best Territories 1878-1887 
FrinFer to the Crovernment of the North ?,est Territor- 

ies Regina 

See Ordinances of 1883. 













■ 


’} 










. 


■ 

■f 

■ 




■ 




v 














. . 








* 








( 98 ) 


The North West Territories Act of 1876 empowered the 
Territorial authorities to pass necessary ordinances in 
respect to education, and made provision for minority 
rights, whether of Protestants or Catholics, In practice 
the ’’school system” of the North West was in 1883 still very | 
inadequate. Under the auspices of the Protestant and Roman 
Catholic Churches a number of church or mission schools had 
been established. Some "public* 1 schools aid exist, but 
sparseness of population and frontier conditions, together 
with inadequate finances, ■undeveloped curricula ana scarce j 

tj 

and poorly qualified teachers rendered them relatively in¬ 
effective. The Act of 1876 made no provision for local tax¬ 
ation except in districts achieving "electoral status . The 
North West Council lacked the power of direct taxation, 
while Federal assistance to schools was sporadic and in¬ 
adequate. (16) The establishment of a proper North West 
school system was overdue, 

Oliver was keenly interested in the school question. (17) 
On September 13, 1883, he was given leave by the Council to 
bring in a ^Bill providing for the Organization of public 
and Separate School Districts in the North West Territor¬ 
ies.” (18) He presented the bill and it was referred to a 
special committee consisting of Oliver, Ross, Macleod and 

Tl6) Black, op.~cit♦, p. T§8”and~p7 66TTf7 ~ ~~~ 

Lingard, op. cit., p, 155. 

(17) Tdmonton Bulletin, 1880-1883, passim. 

. 

(18) J.N.Vy. Council, 1883, p. 33. ^ 






' 









. 







- 


■ 


















( 99 ) 


White. Throughout the session the committee worked on the 
bill, and it was several times reported and discussed at 
length in committee of the whole. It did not reach its 
final stages. On September 26 the bill was tabled, and 
ordered to be printed as reported oy the committee and dis¬ 
tributed. (19) Not only were there certain features of the 
bill upon which agreement coula not be reached, but there 
were some doubts as to whether its passage lay within the 
powders of the North West Council. Copies of the printed 
bill were widely distributed during the ensuing year, and 
the results of Oliver 1 s work are to be found in the School 
Bill as finally passed in the session of 1884. (20) 

During the session of *83 Oliver took a firm stand on 
the prohibition issue. On August 28 Mr. White presented a 
petition from the residents of Regina requesting the Coun¬ 
cil to memorialize the Governor-General- in-Council that 
permission be granted to Henry Lejeune and James Brown of 
Regina to manufacture and sell ale and porter within the 
Territories. The petition was referred to a special com¬ 
mittee of Messrs. White, Jackson, Hamilton, Ross and Oliver. 
(21) A few days later the committee reported in favor of 

(19) J.N.W. Council, 1883, p. 58. 

(20) Consideration of the School Bill of 1884 will appear 
in due course. 

(21) J.N.W. Council, 1883, p. 17. 










. " i V 










tt ' ■■ ' 










. 



■ 






. 




. 






( 100 ) 


the petition, suggesting that the Council request the Dom¬ 
inion Government to empower it to issue licenses to parties 
for the purpose of manufacturing ales and porter within the 
Territories. Oliver, who fought the petition tooth and nail 
within the committee, claiming that prohibition had been an 
issue of his own election, (22) lodged a minority report of 
one: 


It does not appear from such petition that any good 
and sufficient reason exists why Ales and deer should 
be manufactured within the limits of the North kest 
Territories, and . . . there is no reason why such 
a memorial should be made. Therefore it is recom¬ 
mended that no such memorial b© drafted. 

11 Franc is Oliver** (23) 

When word got around Regina that the North West Council 
appeared kindly disposed toward the Lejeune and Brown 


(22) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct, 6, 1B83. 

l n Edmonton Bulletin , June 2, 1883, the following 
statement appeared with reference to Oliver's winning 
the N.W.C. election: "It would be unfair to accuse 
Messrs. Mulkins and Lamoureaux of pandering to the 
liquor interests of the place, but it is notorious 
that Mr. Oliver was opposed very bitterly because he 
was a prohibitionist. . . • Results must be most 
encouraging to those who favor prohibition. tt 

(23) J.N.W. Council, 1883, p. 57. 

The petition included a general appeal for relaxation 
of the liquor laws, and such statements as the follow¬ 
ing: 

M Those of your petitioners who are physicians, drugg¬ 
ists, and chemists state that alcohol is a necessity 
in the drug business for many purposes . • • • 

*. , . patients have been compelled to do without such 
liquors at great risk of their lives. * 1 






































s ... 

. . 















■ 
















' 






. . . . 









( 101 ) 


petition, the Rev, Alex Urquhart and others presented a 
counter-petition praying the Council not to memorialize 
Ottawa for permission to grant 'beer licenses". Urquhart*s 
petition was duly referred to the special committee which 
voted against it, reiterating its recommendation of a mem¬ 
orial requesting permission to grant beer manufacturing 
licenses* Oliver again lodged a minority report, claiming, 
"There Is no valid reason for memorializing the Dominion 
Government on the above subject, but on the contrary there 
is every reason that the present prohibitory law should oe 
maintained in its entirety." (24) 

Prohibition and its enforcement was a live issue in the 
Territories and the Lejeune and Brown affair created some 
stir throughout the North West. It seems evident that Oliver 
in upholding prohibition was supporting the "unpopular* 
side, (25) and that the opinion most widely held was in 
favor of some local concession to brewing to minimize the 
abuses of the licensing system, to check "bootlegging'* and 
to furnish a market for local barley. But Oliver stuc& to 

(24) J.N.W. Council, 1885, p. 57. 

(25) At a public meeting in the spring of 1884 Oliver 1 s 
own constituents moved and passed, over his warm 
protests, a motion favoring government licensing of 
breweries in the North West. 

Prohibition, as it existed in the ♦eighties, was not 
popular in the Territories. 








( 102 ) 


his guns. (26) 

The special committee’s recommendation in favor of the 
beer memorial" was considered on September 26 and accepted 
by the Council. It is perhaps significant that the three 
men besides Oliver who voted against it were stipendiary 
magistrates Richardson and Macleod, and Lieut.-Col. Irvine, 
N.W.M.P. (27) 

During the session Oliver introduced a measure in defence 
of squatters* rights entitled "a Bill to define the rights 
of occupants of Public Lands within the North West Terri¬ 
tories. ‘ It was '’Killed 4 * by the standing Committee on Civil 
Law, as being repugnant to Section 85 of the North West 
Territories Act of 1880. (28) His proposed *'Bill respect¬ 
ing Masters and Servants’ 4 was also reported on adversely, 
the Law Committee claiming that the present Masters and 
Servants Act was satisfactory. (29) Oliver presented a 


(26) Some remarkable arguments were advanced by the support¬ 
ers of the Lejeune and Brown petition. One party made 
his plea in the interests of the immigrants’ health. 
Newcomers, he claimed, were not accustomed to the 
water of the North West, and if they absorbed it in 
large quantities would suffer a shock to their 
systems 1 . Hence a need for plenty of beer and ale. 

With "beer advocates* such as this, and with those who 
stressed the "medicinal value of alcohol, Oliver was 
particularly impatient. He charged them with hypocricy 
and suggested that if they wanted to drink they could 
at least be honest about it. 

(27) J.N.W. Council, 1883, p. 63. 

(28) Ibid p. 45 and p. 60. 

(29) Ibid p. 43 and pp. 59-60. 




■ 












■ 


























































(105) 

petition from the residents of Edmonton praying for incorp¬ 
oration as a municipality , and although the petition was 
approved, (50) it was to be some time before the settlement 
took advantage of its privilege under the enabling "Ordin¬ 
ance respecting Municipalities' passed by the Council in 
the same session, (51) 

During the session Oliver kept his constituents informed 
of the proceedings by numerous dispatches to the bulletin , 
and soon after his return to Edmonton he summarized editor¬ 
ially the Council’s achievements, He concluded by stating, 
^Considering the narrow limits of its powers and the degree 
of uncertainty as to what these powers actually were, a 
very creditable amount of work has been accomplished,* (52) 
At a well attended public meeting the following spring 
he outlined his part in the Council’s deliberations. Call¬ 
ing attention to the useful legislation passed, he stressed 
the ordinance authorizing the erection of municipalities 
and urged that Edmonton should act upon it. He referred to 
his efforts on behalf of school legislation, and warmly de¬ 
fended his stand against the *’beer memorial ‘ • He made 
light of the argument that the manufacture of beer would 

(50) Council, 1885, p. 45. 

(31) Ibid p, 64. 

(32) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 27, 1883. 











- 
































■ 










- 


■ 




. 


















. . . 

. 

- 

. 













( 104 ) 


provide a worthwhile local market for barley. He concluded 
by advocating that the Council, although basically of little 
use, should be nurtured to the end of developing North V;est 
government. The general feeling of the meeting appeared to 
be that Kdmonton*s member had so far justified the faith of 
his supporters. (33) 

As the time approached for the next session, Oliver call¬ 
ed a public meeting to secure the opinion of his constitu¬ 
ents on matters requiring attention by the Council. He had 
himself prepared several resolutions for consideration. The 
first of these, dealing with the powers and duties of the 
North West Council, alluded to matters which were to remain 
controversial not only during the life of that body, out on 
into the years of struggle between Lieut.-lov. Hoyal and 
the Territorial Legislative Assembly which succeeded it. 

The resolution revealed a keen appreciation of the issue 
then shaping up &n the contest between authoritarianism 
and responsible government in the North Wests 

It is the duty of the North Vest Council to see 
that all doubts as to its rights to deal fully with 
municipal and school matters should be removed at 
once; that the funds granted by the Federal govern¬ 
ment for the expenses of the government in the North 
frest be placed for expenditure in the hands of the 
elected members of the Council, in their executive 

(35) Kdmonton Bulletin, Mar. 22, 1884. 




. 





































































































' ' 










( 105 ) 


capacity, as the responsible advisers of the Lieut 
enant-Governor; (34) that the annual grant to the 
North West should be increased proportionately to 
that paid the provinces; and that unless the Council 
in its legislative and executive capacities is plac¬ 
ed in full control of municipal and educational 
matters and the funds for Territorial use, its 
further existence in those capacities is a sham. (35) 

This resolution was moved by Oliver and carried oy the 
meeting, which then voiced its approval of a further state¬ 
ment that it was inadvisable to separate the four provision¬ 
al districts from each other and place each one under a 
petty provincial government, but that the time had arrived 
to warrant their being erected into a united province, un¬ 
der a responsible government, and having the same rights, 
powers and privileges as the other members of the Canadian 
Confederation; and further, that the necessity of allowing 
officials and appointees of the federal Government a voice 
in the management of the affairs of the country had ceased, 
and the policy should be abandoned. 

Other resolutions were adopted with remarkable unanimity 
calling for action on the Hudson 1 s Bay Hallway, condemning 


(34) Dominion grants for expenditure in the North west were 
under the control of the Lieutenant-Governor, The 
Council had no power of direct taxation, and its funds 
were paltry. For example, in 1883 its total receipts, 
from fees, fines and licenses, amounted to $2,674.50; 
its expenditures, consisting of payments to an acting 
orderly of the session and to two persons for register¬ 
ing marriage licenses, amounted to«f54.50. 

J.N.W. Council, 1883 . Appendix A p. 71. 

(35) Kdmonton Bulletin, June 28, 1884. 






























































• 








. 




























( 100 ) 


colonization companies in general and the Edmonton and 
Saskatchewan Land Company in particular, stressing the need 
for improved communications, and advocating that the aver¬ 
age attendance requirement qualifying schools for govern¬ 
ment aid be reduced from fifteen to ten pupils. Oliver and 
his constituents appeared to be in complete accord except 
on one question. Over his violent protests the meeting 
carried a resolution favoring government licensing of brew¬ 
eries in the North Best. (36) 

In the session of 1BB4 which opened on July 3, three 
additional members took their places in the Council. G.B. 
Rouleau, recently appointed stipendiary magistrate, joined 
Richardson ana Macieod as an "ex-officio” member. The re¬ 
turn of J.3. Turriff and J.D. Oeddes from the nevly created 
electoral districts of Moose Mountain and Calgary brought 
the elective strength of the Cotmoil to eight, a clear 
majority over the non-elective membership. Despite this 
shift in weight the Council, while re-affirming the griev¬ 
ances of the memorial of the preceding year, concentrated 
upon problems of practical legislation rather than upon 
questions of Its own powers and limitations. The *fire¬ 
brands" of the session were again Messrs. Oliver and Ross. 

(36) Edmonton Bulletin, June £8, 1884. 



































. 


. . - 


. . 




' 
















' 






■ 

































( 107 ) 


In his opening speech Lieut.-Gov. Dewdney, while admitt¬ 
ing the prevalence of whiskey smuggling, expressed himself 
as satisfied that there was little abuse of liquor imported 
on permits and re-affirmed his desire to see breweries 
established in the Worth V*est. He went on to assure the 
Council that the Indian situation gave no cause for alarm, 
and denounced the "‘exaggerated reports" of Indian unrest 
appearing in certain sections of the North Vest press. (37) 
On both these matters Oliver took exception to the Gover¬ 
nor^ statement, and on the liquor question he moved the 
following amendment to the Address in Reply; 

That this Council regrets that it cannot agree 
with His Honor that very little abuse has been made 
of liquor permits granted in the territories, and 
consider that this abuse has been so great as to 
prejudice the present prohibitory law In the minds 
of many of the inhabitants to such an extent as to 
imperatively call for a closer control by the auth¬ 
orities of all permits granted; and further, that 
this Council cannot agree with your Honor that the 
establishment of breweries would have the effect of 
stopping smuggling or illicit distilling to any 
extent, but rather that by giving the opportunity 
to the young of acquiring the appetite for alcohol¬ 
ic liquors would cause increased smuggling, illicit 
distilling and drunkeness. (38) 

This amendment was lost 11 to 2, only Oliver and Turriff 

supporting It. 

Speaking on Indian affairs Oliver called attention to 


(37) Supra, pp. 59-60 for a quotation from Lewdney 1 s speech. 

(38) J.N.W. Council, 1884, pp. 16-17, 


































































;•£ : 














. 


■ 


















( 108 ) 


prevailing unrest among the natives near Broadview and 
Battleford, and urged that in all conscience the Council 
could not agree with the Lieutenant-Governor that the In¬ 
dians were generally more contented than since Treaty 
Number 6 was made, and that it therefore should not acqui¬ 
esce in his statement that Indian affairs were quiet, he 
warned that the Indians were getting out of hand, and re¬ 
called an ominous incident of the previous winter which 
would encourage them to defy the whites, *when Col. herch- 
mor and his men turned tail to a lot of oreech-clouted 
savages,(39) 

A large majority of the Council, however, apparently 
agreed with the Governor that Indian affairs were under 
control and that Oliver was an alarmist. The Address in 
Reply as passed stated that, 'Ye are g&ad that Your Honor 
assures us of general contentment among the Indians in the 
Territories, notwithstanding the exaggerated reports which 
have been circulated much to the prejudice of the best in¬ 
terests of the country.* (40) The Address In Reply also 
accepted with satisfaction Dewdney* s assurances regarding 
th$ liquor permit system and breweries. (41) 

(39) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 2, 1884. report on N.Y.0. 

A penetrating reference to the part played by Col. 
Herchmer and 40 Police at the outbreak at Crooked 
Lakes in February of 1884, when disgruntled Indians 
led by Yellow Calf successfully defied the Police. 
Stanley, op. cit., pp. 278-280 gives an account of 
the affair. 

(40) J.N.%. Council, 1884, p. 18. 

(41) Ibid 





























( 109 ) 


On the question of constitutional reform the Council 
appeared lukewarm while Oliver continued urgent and persis¬ 
tent. On July 24 he moved, seconded by Ross, a lengthy 
amendment to a committee report on finance. (42) Although 
largely a plea for increased Federal grants, the amendment 
included a strongly worded assertion of the Council*s leg¬ 
islative and executive rights, including control of Domin¬ 
ion grants for North west expenditure. It was defeated. 9 
to 4 on the grounds that the several questions and sub¬ 
jects dealt with in it are already provided for by refer¬ 
ence to the Executive Council. ** (45) A few days later 
Oliver moved, (44) again seconded by Ross, a lengthy reso¬ 
lution setting forth in eight detailed sections the demands 
upon which he had received the approval of his constituents 
at his meeting with them in June. (45) He dutifully in¬ 
cluded, no doubt with considerable heart-burning, their 
plea for local breweries, (46) and in addition requested 

(42) J.N.W. Council, 1884, pp. 47-48. 

(43) Ibid p. 49. 

(44) Ibid p. 60. 

(45) Supra, pp. 104-106. 

(46) This is rather difficult to reconcile with Oliver*s 
uncompromising attitude on such matters. Be maintain¬ 
ed, of course, that he stood pledged to his constitu¬ 
ents* interests, but where such a clash of opinion was 
evident he might have been expected to resign his seat 
rather than to give at the least tacit approval to 
this resolution. 






























. 








' 

. 

' 

, \ • 













. 



















■ 






. 



















( 110 ) 


the government to establish a wholly elective legislative 
assembly without waiting for the requisite twenty-one elect¬ 
ed members. Jackson, seconded by Turriff, offered a sub¬ 
stitute resolution stating, in effect, that the chief func¬ 
tion of the CoTJmcil was to legislate in accordance with its 
powers as laid down under the Acts of 1875 and 1880, that 
the memorial of the previous year fairly set forth the re¬ 
quirements of the Territories, and "that we believe the 
feeling of the co\mtry to be strongly against the introduc¬ 
tion of party politics into the Council as well as against 
any action of the Council being taken in such a way that 
either Political Party in the Dominion Parliament could use 
it for political purposes," (47) Exactly who was trying to 
interject "party politics* 1 into the Council is not alto¬ 
gether clear. At any rate, there were on the Council a 
number of staunch Conservatives who were not too fond of 
subscribing to blanket denunciations of Macdonald's Con¬ 
servative Government, Oliver*s resolution, if passed, would 
certainly have provided ammunition for a Federal opposition 
interested in using it. Jackson*s resolution replacing 
Oliver*s was passed, only Oliver and Ross voting against 
it. (48) 

(47) J.H.W. Council, 1884, pp. 61-62. 

(48) Ibid pp. 62-63. 
































■ 

! 

. 

■ 

■ 























(Ill) 


On August 1 Oliver and Ross introduced a resolution 
criticizing Dominion land policy, and particularly the Lana 
Department’s continued failure to adjust squatters* rights 
on the Moose Jaw, Regina and Bell larra he serves with con¬ 
sequent grave injustices to the squatters. The last sec¬ 
tion was an interesting reiteration of the claim (49) that 
North West lands belonged, not to the Government of Canada, 
but to the British Crown, ’"to be administered by such of 
Her Majesty’s representatives as may be deemed expedient 
and that as soon as Responsible Government is obtained by 
the North est it should be assumed by that Government.(50) 
White offered an amendment in which the adjustment of 
squatters’ rights on the three reserves was urged with more 
restraint, and from which the last section referred to 
above was altogether omitted, and the Council, in referr¬ 
ing the amendment to the "’executive committee*, effectively 
disposed of the original motion. (51) 

The Council appeared willing to rest on its memorial of 
1883, and where laws and regulations made by the Dominion 
were found unsuited to the requirements of the country, to 
make such representations to Ottawa as would induce the 

(49) This claim was made frequently by Metis leaders of 
both the Red River and the Saskatchewan country. 

(50) J.N.W. Council, 1884, p. 72. 

(51) IDid p. 73. 

( 






































































































* 














(112) 


Federal House to legislate in the interests of the Territor¬ 
ies. (52) Pre-occupied with a heavy program of practio&l 
legislation, it was not willing to go along with Messrs. 
Oliver and Ross in the direction of radical constitutional 
reform* 

•lie session devoted considerable time to diver’s school 
bill, carried over from the previous year. Under Dominion 
Orders-in-Council the Lieutenant-(Governor was already pay¬ 
ing out of the Federal appropriation for the North ' est 
government half the salaries of the teachers engaged in ten 
Protestant and two Homan Catholic schools. It was unanim¬ 
ously agreed that the attendance requirement of fifteen 
pupils necessary to qualify a school for financial aid was 
too high, and that it was time to establish regular school 
districts with taxing power. Meanwhile, doubt3 a3 to the 
Council’s power to legislate on schools had been removed. 

Oliver presented his bill respecting schools on July 7 
and it was referred to a select committee composed of 
Messrs. Rouleau, M&edowall, Turriff, Ross and Oliver. Some 
friction developed within the committee, and the following 
day Rouleau requested and received permission to introduce 
an act respecting schools which was forthwith referred to 

(52) J.N.W. Council, 1884, pp. 61-62. 












. 

' 

. 



























' ■ 






(115) 

the same committee. On July £4 Rouleau, as committee chair¬ 
man, reported, "Your committee beg leave to report that they 
have considered the two ordinances and have agreed to submit 
the present Ordinance and ask that it should be considered 
in Committee of the Whole.” (53) The bill was then read for 
the first time. The special committee continued to labor 
over the bill, and it was considered by the Committee of the 
Whole on four subsequent occasions. Oxi the first of these 
it was reported by Oliver, and on the other three by Rou¬ 
leau. Finally, on August 6, the third reading of the bill 
entitled "An Ordinance providing for the organization of 
schools in the North West Territories* was moved by Rouleau 
and seconded by Macleod. It was passed, and signed by 
Lieut.-Gov. Pewdney the same day* 

Despite Judge Rouleau 1 s "intervention with an alter¬ 
native ordinance, his work on the select committee and his 
final moving of the bill, the credit for laying the found¬ 
ation of the North West school system must go to Frank 
Oliver. The bill was predominantly his work, and before 
considering further the school ordinance and Its implicat¬ 
ions, note may be made of Oliver 1 s own opinion of Rouleau’s 

(53) J#N.V:. Council, 1884, p. 46. 

The "present ordinance was the "compromise bill , 
framed largely from Oliver’s bill, but including 
certain of Koule&u’s relatively minor amendments with 
respect to Separate Schools. 







''' ' I 1 











. 

. 

. 


















. 























• .... 









(114) 


contribution: 

E© (Oliver) was somewhat surprised to find on ex¬ 
amining Judge Rouleau’s bill that the latter half 
was the printed bill which he had ©pent his time up¬ 
on during the previous session out out and pasted in, 
while the greater part of the remainder was the same 
bill copied word for word. Not wishing to imperil 
the passage of © school bill by opposing what he 
thought was the somewhat uncalled for conduct of 
Judge Rouleau, an understanding was arrived at be¬ 
tween them that the names of both parties as intro¬ 
ducers of the bill should be dropped, and that the 
bill introduced and amended by the speaKer should 
be taken up by a special school committee of which 
Judge Rouleau was chairman. 

He did claim, however, either blame or credit, as 
the case might be, for the passage of the school 
ordinance at all. (54) 

The School Bill of 1384 was a comprehensive measure. It 
provided for the creation of a Board of Education for the 
North West, appointed bytthe Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council, 
and consisting of not more than twelve members, six of whom 
should be Protestants and six Roman Catholics. The Board 
of Education functioned in two sections, Protestant and 
Homan Catholic, each responsible for the control of its own 
schools. £he Act authorised the erection of local school 
districts upon the petition of not fewer than four resident 
heads of families, and provided payment of a grant from the 
general revenue fund of the Territories where the average 
daily attendance of pupils was not less than ten. It 


(54) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 17, 1885. A report of Oliver’s 
statement at a meeting for the discussion of North 
West affairs. 
















■ 


















(115) 


placed the Individual school district under an elected 
Board of Trustees, responsible for assessment, taxation for 
school purposes, and the general supervision of the local 
school. Provision was made for the erection of separate 
school districts, either Protestant or Roman Catholic, with 
*the same rights, powers, privileges, liabilities and meth¬ 
od of government throughout as hereinbefore provided in the 
case of public school districts•** The Act stated that in 
no case shall & Catholic be compelled to pay taxes to a 
Protestant school or a Protestant to a Catholic school. 11 
The Board of Education exercised general control and super¬ 
vision. It authorized the erection of school districts, 
established and enforced general regulations, iormulated 
curricula, licensed teachers and appointed inspectors. (55) 
In the months immediately following the enactment of the 
School Ordinance, sixty-five applications were received for 
erection of school districts. Before the Council met again 
in 1885, thirty-eight new districts were actually proclaim¬ 
ed, in addition to the twelve already receiving aid out of 
Sorth West appropriations. However, the real establishment 
of the aorth West school system dates from 1885, or rather 
from March of 1386, for the necessary expenditures were not 


(55) Ordinances of the North West Territories 1878-1887 
Ordinance Humber 6 p .' 96. 








. 

. 

. 




- . 

■ 














. 




■ 

. 



























(116) 


provided for until that date. (56) 

The North West Council of 1885 enacted an important 
amendment to the School Ordinance of 1084. Dual control by 
Protestant and homan Catholic sections of the Board of Edu¬ 
cation was continued, but the composition of the Board it¬ 
self was drastically altered, The twelve-man Board of 1884 
had proven unwieldy, and Ordinance Number 0 of 1885 provid¬ 
ed that "the Lieutenant-Governor in Executive Council may 
appoint and constitute a Board of Education for the North 
Vest Territories composed of five members, two of whom shall 
be itoman Catholics and two Protestants, with the Lieutenant- 
Governor as Chairman. ” (57) The inclusion of the Lieuten¬ 
ant-Governor as Chairman of the new Board was a step in the 
direction of more direct control of Territorial education 
oy the North Vest administration* (58) 

The North Vest school system was further modified in due 
course, but frame Oliver 1 a School ordinance of 1884 remain¬ 
ed the foundation upon which it was built, Oliver was 
often enough criticised as being a destructive critic. The 
School Act of 1884 was a fine piece of pioneer legislation, 
and stands as a tribute to his abilities as a constructive 
planner. 

(56) Black, op. cit., pp. 562-3. 

(57) Ordinances of the North Vest Territories 1878-1887 

ToB5—ardrnahWTTfmneT"T-pT^T:------ 

(58) For further treatment of school question, see infra p.u$. 








(117) 


In an editorial review of the session of *84 written up¬ 
on his return to Kdmonton, Oliver expressed satisfaction 
with the practical legislation enacted. He referred favor¬ 
ably to the ordinance authorizing the levying of municipal 
taxes and that dealing with civil justice, but continued, 
"Although the results of the legislative labors of the Coun¬ 
cil are by no means discreditable, as an executive body it 
is as deplorable a failure as ever. Nominally it possesses 
executive power, but actually, executive power seems to re¬ 
side in the Lieutenant-Governor alone. tt He pointed to the 
stringent lack of funds and to the Governor’s control of 
Dominion appropriations for the North West. Referring to 
the relative weight of appointed and elected members in the 
Council of 1884, he expressed deep disappointment that the 
elected members had not made a real test of their strength 
by forcing the issue as to where the final power in the 
Council lay. ,5 If we are to have local government at all, 
he wrote, "let us by all means have self-government.* (59) 

In a further editorial headed m A Bill of Eights" he summ¬ 
ed up his position as oeing that "on local questions the 
two main demands should be for local self-government and an 
equitable return of funds from the federal Treasury with 

(59) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. SO, 1884, See also the 
Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 7, 1885, 





' 

. 








■ 




. 












■ 












. 


■ 













( 118 ) 


which to carry on the different functions of that govern¬ 
ment on a scale proportionate to the value, importance and 
necessities of the country, (60) 

A complete statement of policy headed *0ur Platform'* 
gave a clear summary of Oliver*s stand on current North West 
affairs. Emphasizing that there were three classes of ques¬ 
tions before the people of the North Wests the purely local 
affairs of the Territories, contacts with the Government at 
Ottawa, and general Dominion policy affecting North testers 
as Canadians, he stated his platform as follows; 

The Territories have attained sufficient popula¬ 
tion to assume responsible local government, having 
all the powers of provincial governments* 

Money grants to the Territories should be on the 
same scale as those made to the provinces* 

the North West should control its lands. (61) 

The North West should remain united, at least un¬ 
til such time as one or more of the different pro¬ 
visional districts shall have attained a sufficient 
population to warrant the expense, or make necessary, 
a separate local government. 

Land, timber and other resources should be admin¬ 
istered in the interests of actual settlement. 

The C.P.R. Monopoly Clause is unjust and should 
be repealed. 

The Hudson Bay outlet should be built with Pederal 
assistance in return for North West lands granted to 
the C.P.H. 

The prohibition law is a good one. 

The North West is entitled to as full represent¬ 
ation in the Federal Parliament as other parts of 
Canada. 

The proper way to raise money is by direct tax¬ 
ation, and not by such a discriminatory method as 
the National Policy, 


(60) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 2b, 1884. “sturgeon Meeting 

(61) Oliver later modified this view. See infra p. 335 # 








- 








. 


























^ •• • ■- 1 • 

■ 


. 




. 


















(119) 

11 provinces should have full provincial rights 
including control of natural resources. 

Ihe British connection should be continued as long 
as it is found as profitable and generally advantag¬ 
eous as at present, with a view to independence when 
that connection shall be dissolved; and annexation 
to the United States now or in the future is not 
desired or desirable in any sense. (62) 

the planks * of this platform may be fairly said to voice 
demands widely urged throughout the North Ysest. Oliver was 
not the only proponent of reform, but he was certainly its 
most aggressive and voluble champion. 

Oliver*s two year tern as Edmonton member would expire 
before the next meeting of the Council and sporadic election¬ 
eering began as early as December 2, 1884. Early in the new 
year meetings were held at St. Albert in which some suggest¬ 
ion of religious difficulties appeared in connection with 
schools. Father Leduc, priest of St. Albert, denied in a 
Bulletin statement that his words urging St. 'lbert to elect 
a Roman Catholic to the North West Council on account of 
f, laws such as school laws wa3 to be construed as raising 
the religious issue. (65) Matt Macaulay struck a more per¬ 
sonal note which was to characterize the campaign when he 
stated, "Some people called Mr. Oliver a reformer ana some 
an independent, but for his part he thought he must be a 

(62) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 1, 1884. w Our Platform 
(65) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 10, 1885. 



























































. 










( 120 ) 

socialist for he seemed to be opposed to everyone in author¬ 
ity.* (64) 

The Bulletin continued to feature, in a series of edito¬ 
rials and articles, the political views of its proprietor, 
including the claim that on an estimated total population of 
100,000 the Territories were now entitled to more than eight 
elected representatives on the Council, and a firm declara¬ 
tion that, "The time has come for the people to demand, as 
they are demanding, the control of their own local affairs 
without let or hindrance from Ottawa or Ottawa appointees. 

(65) Public meetings were held and not only political 
issues but personal animosities thoroughly aired. ( 66 ) Oliv¬ 
er reiterated his stand on prohibition and, claiming credit 
for the framing of the school ordinance, warmly defended its 
terms. (67) He assured his constituents that their demands 
of the previous summer, although he had been unable to make 
them acceptable to the Council in his resolution, were now 
being discussed at public meetings throughout the country 
in a way which would bring about their eventual implementa¬ 
tion. ( 68 ) 

(64) Hdmonton Bulletin, Jan. 3, 1885. St. Albert meeting. 

(65) IMmonton Bulletin, Jan. 10, 1885. 

( 66 ) tdmonton Bulletin, Jan. 24, 1885. 

(67) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 17, 1885. 

(68) Ibid 

















' 









































. 





















































( 121 ) 


G.A. Simpson of the Edmonton and Saskatchewan Land Co. 
charged publicly that as a Council member Oliver had accomp¬ 
lished nothing, and that further, "He had been informed by 
a member of the Council that Mr. Oliver*s conduct when att¬ 
ending its sessions was such that he was not treated with 
proper respect by the other members, and that his name 
attached to a bill or motion was sufficient to defeat it.” 
Simpson also held that Oliver had been doing much harm 
through the Bulletin - inciting rebellion, discouraging im¬ 
migration and so on. But the meeting at which these charges 
were made was apparently not too impressed by them, for, 
the Bulletin reported, when Simpson tried to incorporate 
them into a motion, n no person seconding the motion, Mr. 
Simpson took his seat amid derisive applause. w (69) Simp¬ 
son’s charges were typical of criticism then being circu¬ 
lated to the effect that Oliver*s uncompromising attitude, 
aggressive tactics and unrestrained invective were antagon¬ 
ising Dominion Government and North West Council alike, and 
were prejudicing Edmonton*s voice in North West affairs. 

Dr. H.C. Wilson, in urging his claims for electoral supp¬ 
ort stated that, ’’Believing that the best interests of the 
North West cannot be served (at the present time) by fac¬ 
tious opposition and senseless agitation against whatever 

(69) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 17, 1885. 








- , : 






















. 

. 












: 




' 






. 












' 

. 

' 




























( 122 ) 


government may be in power, I shall always oppose any such 
course, but at the same tirue will always stand up for the 
rights of the settlers and endeavour to secure the privi¬ 
leges which this country is entitled to.'* (70) 

The object of these direct and implied attacks willingly 
publicized his opponents 1 statements in the Bulletin , and 
replying to charges thfct he was always **agin the government” 
claimed that, *as a private individual he accorded all due 
deference to constituted authority as representing the will 
of the majority of the people, but as a popular representat¬ 
ive in legislative or executive council he felt it his duty 
to exercise the powers entrusted to him under the constitu¬ 
tion of the country without regard to any authority save 
that which placed him there.” (71) He had no apologies to 
make in reply to the frequent complaints that he was always 
against those in authority and he stoutly maintained that, 

He knew of only one way of accomplishing the ends 
he desired, to gain. That was to fearlessly bring for¬ 
ward the desired measures as opportunity offered and 
advocate them vigorously and intelligently until 
success was attained. Other men might work better 
by other means, he could not. 

To advocate measures because they were right, to 
bring forward arguments proving them to be right, 

(70) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 21, 1885. Dr. Ml son was 
a Conservative. 


(71) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 7, 1885 






■ 


. . 

. 


• - ' -V 




























. 0 -■' " • 

, 

. 




' 

■ 






. 

. 


. 


. 








( 123 ) 


to stand on the question of right was, he believed, 
the true way to obtain what was right, and no other 
way could be successful, (72) 

As for his having voted against the rest of the Council, 

"He admitted having done so, and the meeting could depend 
that if returned, whenever he thought their interests lay 
on a certain side, he would vote on that side, though he 
voted alone or a hundred times." (73) 

With Oliver*s publication of *An Open Letter to the Elec¬ 
tors* in the Bulletin of March 21, the election campaign 
was moving into full stride, when suddenly all interest in 
local politics was suspended in the crisis precipitated by 
the outbreak of the North West Rebellion. 

The Rebellion was not primarily an “Indian war*, but the 
fight for racial survival of the half-breeds and Metis who 
in the years following the Bed River uprising had trekked 
westward into the valleys of the Qu*Appelle and Saskatchew¬ 
an. Contributing to their grievances were the government*s 
failure to concede scrip, insecurity of land tenure under 
tenuous squatters* rights, and the square system of survey. 
'The white settlers of the Saskatchewan, themselves dis¬ 
satisfied with political and economic conditions, gave an 
early lead in organizing half-breed and Metis unrest, (74) 

(72) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 7, 1885. 

(73) Ibid 

(74) Stanley, op. cit., p. 261. 











( 124 ) 


and the Metis claims were merged in that general struggle 
for North West rights of which Frank Oliver himself was a 
leading exponent. 

During the summer and autumn of 1884 reform agitation, 
intensified by economic depression, was widespread through¬ 
out the North Vl/est. Commenting on a stormy meeting neld in 
the town of Wolseley, the Calgary Nor 1 Wester called it, H A 
war-whoop which it was determined should be heard at Otta¬ 
wa, 11 (75) The Edmonton Bulletin added, ”Xf that particular 
whoop is not heard, its echoes, or other similar whoops 
evidently will be,** and claimed that all along the C.P,R. 
line in the Territories mass meetings were being held which 
unanimously and emphatically adopted the principle of North 
lest rights. (76) 

The spearhead of the white agitation in Saskatchewan was 
the Settlers* Union, which adopted at its Colleston School 
House meeting in February, 1884, those resolutions which 
were to form the basis of the w Bill of Rights M forwarded to 
Ottawa in December of the same year by Louis Riel and the 
Union, (77) Including requests for more liberal treatment 
of the Indians, scrip and patent for the half-breeds, 

(75) Stanley, op, cit., p, 504. 

(76) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 6, 1884. 

(77) Stanley, op. cit., p. 265. 












: . : ! J 


. 






















































I; 




























• • , 



























. 











’ 

' ' 













( 125 ) 


responsible government, representation in the Dominion 
Parliament and cabinet, North West control of natural re¬ 
sources, modification of the homestead laws, vote by ballot, 
a Hudson Bay railway, and reductions in the tariff, the 
Bill of Rights' 1 bore a striding similarity in its demands 
to the long succession of Bulletin editorials and articles 
in which Oliver advocated the cause of western reform. (78) 
When Louis Riel assumed the leadership of the iAetis move¬ 
ment he had the co-operation, not only of many English half- 
breeds and white settlers, out of the Settlers* Union, which 
by its active support encouraged him to believe that the 
whole white population of the North Saskatchewan was behind 

him. (79) But his proclamation of the Provisional 
T78) Stanley, op. cit., p. 306, deals with the Bill. 

(79) W.H. Jackson, Secretary of the Settlers* Union, spared 
no effort to enlist the aid of Kiel and make him accept 
-able to the white settlers, Ihat not all leaders of 
public opinion in the North Vest were in agreement with 
this course is evident from the following: 

Frank Oliver, in a letter to Jackson, Oct. 22, 1884, 
warned, A word privately about Kiel. He may be a man 
of the greatest influence and the most high minded pat¬ 
riotism but he is political dynamite, or may be a 
political boomerang. In endorsing Riel you will be 
held up as endorsing his whole course, and your enemies 
will have thus put in their hands the best possible 
weapon they can have against you. I don*t say don*t 
endorse him, you must judge for yourself as to that, 
but I warn you that it is a ticklish thing to do, and 
one that I would not from my slight acquaintance with 
the case, care about doing until he has done something 
to wipe out the blot that stands against him.* 

( Quoted from Stanley, op. cit., pp. 508-509.) 















* 

‘ .... • ■ ,. 

■ - ■ • 

, 4 








. 














' 






























( 126 ) 


Government of the Saskatchewan and the drift toward extremes 
alienated the sympathies of the English half-creeds and 
white settlers who increasingly assumed an attitude of neut¬ 
rality. (BO) Perceiving the position of isolation into 
which his Provisional Government was being forced, Riel, 
already in constant touch with the Indians through his em¬ 
issaries and runners, increased his efforts to secure their 
active support. Already aroused by their past grievances 
and the solicitations of RiePs agents, the native tribes 
were in a dangerous state of unrest and excitement. On the 
eve of Duck Lake, ’’from one end of the North West to the 
other, the possibility of an Indian rising was imminent. 

(81) The storm centre of the Metis uprising lay in a tri¬ 
angle formed by Battleford, Prince Albert and Batoche, and 
in this area the Dominion Government had already taken at 
least some steps to meet the situation. (82) It was the 
Isolated settlement that stood most in danger of Indian 
attack and Edmonton was in an extremely exposed position, 
especially should the Blackfoot rise in support of Riel. 

In the Bulletin of March 28, 1885, the editor mentioned 
reports of trouble coming in from the Saskatchewan, but 

(80) Stanley, op. cit., p. 317 and p. 320. 

(81) Ibid p. 334. 

(82) During 1884 the number of police in the North 
Saskatchewan District was increased from 78 to 200. 











' 








: 












. 

- 

' 




• ' 

■ 

- 

— 









. 


. 








; 






■ 

■ 






. .. 












( 127 ) 


refused to get excited about the whole affair. In the next 
issue, although news of the disaster at Duck: Lake (83) had 
been received, Oliver assured his readers in a rather cryp¬ 
tic statement that, “There is no more present danger than 
there has been at any time during the past ten years," (84) 
The Edmonton district, containing a fighting population 
of at least five hundred Indian men who might well receive 
outside help, lay wide open to attack with the only Police 
stationed at Fort Saskatcheyfan, eighteen miles distant, 
There was as yet no immediate cause for public alarm; but, 
Oliver warned, if th© policy of the Indian Department was 
about to bear fruit, th© settlement had better bestir it¬ 
self for its own protection. (85) By April 11 the Bulletin 
was advising its readers that, “fchen the Indians around 
Edmonton will rise would appear now to be only a matter of 
days," (86) The Saskatchewan Country, under the mismanage¬ 
ment of the Indian Commissioner, “had been made a pile of 
dry wood. Many people have turned their attention from 
plowing to fixing their guns.* It was generally felt that 
the Government would send troops, but this was scant con¬ 
solation, for, "as the Indians are driven back they will 

(83) Oliver’s later comment on Duck Lake; “The later and 
fuller accounts of Duck Lake verify the old saying 
that an array of asses led by a lion are more than a 
match for an army of lions led by an ass. 

Edmonton Bulletin , June 7, 1885. 

(84) Edmonton Bulletin, April 4, 1885. (85) Ibid 

(86) Edmonton Bulletin, April 11, 1885, 












' 
















. 




























. 





















■ 


V‘?i •• ; . iJ' •: • . ' •' I 

■ 


. 


. 







( 128 ) 


revenge themselves on the people here.” (87) 

Rumors of outrage and attack throughout the surrounding 
country threw the settlement into a state of near panic 
during the week of April 8. At a meeting in Kelley 1 s saloon 
a Committee of Safety was formed, plans were formulated to 
get in touch with Criesbach 1 s Police detachment at Fort 
Saskatcnewan and a mounted courier was dispatched to Calgary 
with messages asking for arms and help* The Fort was 
strengthened and set in order. The two brass cannon were 
mounted, the north bastions cleared. Arms were tested and 
patrols established. Captain Crlesbach assumed control of 
Fort Edmonton and the community settled down to a state of 
siege. (88) There is a story that during trie days that 
followed, while most of ldmonton*s inhabitants sought ref¬ 
uge in the Fort or under the protection of its walls, Oliv¬ 
er refused to join them but continued about his business 
and devoted his spare time to preparing his garden for the 
spring sowing. 

Commenting on a speech in the Commons by opposition lead¬ 
er 

Blaice attacking Macdonald 1 s Indian policy, he wrote bitter¬ 
ly : 

Of course it was unpatriotic and altogether too 

(87) Edmonton Bulletin, April 11, 1885. 

See also, Frank Oliver The Indian Drum 

(88) Edmonton Bulletin, pril 11, 1885, 














. 








. . ' 


















































































































. 














( 129 ) 


bad for Mr. Blake to tell so much truth as to the 
rotten administration of North best affairs in one 
speech. But let the people who are visiting the 
graveyards at prince Albert, who are cooped up in 
fear for their lives at Battleford, who are losing 
time and money in being humbugged at Edmonton, who 
are paying for the military necessary to restore 
that security to the North West that need never 
have failed, answer to the truth of the assertions 
.... Sir John once called heaven to witness that 
his hands were clean. Can he do so now? Will the 
stain of blood wash out? (89) 

Around Fort Edmonton the days and nights were filled with 
rumors and alarms, but the St. Albert Metis did not join 
their brethren* s cause, the local Indians confirxed them- 
selves to isolated instances of bravado and rudeness inter¬ 
spersed with veiled threats of imminent action, (90) and 
the Blackfoot did not rise. Toward the end of April the 
approach of General Strange’s column from Calgary reassured 
the settlers and cooled any military ardour among the In¬ 
dians. ,f Since the Indians heard that troops are on the 
way, Oliver reported, ®their desire to go on with their 
farming is marvellous. * (91) 

The Bulletin was by no means the only critic placing the 
blame for the Rebellion upon the shoulders of the Dominion 
Government and its Indian Department, and it reported with 


(89) Edmonton Bulletin, April 18, 1885. 

(90) Edmonton Bulletin, April 25, 1885. A rather amusing 
account of Indian activities around Edmonton during 
the ra erisis days . 

(91) Ibid 







( 130 ) 


evident satisfaction a resolution, which was not without a 
certain grim humor, passed at Wolseley, Assinibola* 

That it is the opinion of this meeting that it is 
now time for the government to tax© decisive action, 
and that their first shall be that orders be issued 
to hang Riel to the first tree when he is caught, 
but if there must be delay that it shall only be 
long enough to capture Dewdney and hang the two to¬ 
gether. 

The Bulletin added, w The candidature of Mr, Pearce, inspect¬ 
or of mines, etc,, etc., for similar honors is hereby sugg¬ 
ested.’ 1 (92) 

Ho opportunity was missed to castigate the Hon. ^dgar 
Dewdney. Referring to a certain Alex Fisher, ferryman at 
Batoche, who, carried away by the prevailing excitement, 
had been signing himself ’’Lieutenant-Governor% Oliver 
quipped, ?, It is to be feared that Mr. Fisher’s ambition to 
fill Lieut.-Gov. Dewdney*s shoes will lead him to a still 
further elevation - by the neck. This is to be regretted, 
for if he makes as good a Lieutenant-Governor as he aid a 
ferryman, he would be a hug© improvement on the present in¬ 
cumbent. (93) 

The bull®tin featured sharp criticisms of Kdmonton’s 
state of defence, and biting references to the loss of lives 
and property which would inevitably have ensued had the 

(92) Bdmonton Bulletin, April 25, 1885* 

(93) Ibid 








" v •< ■. 


















r 'v: •? •; *•. 

'■ * 

' ■' 'Ci ' ■’ '' ' 


. 

„ ■ j : ■ •' :• ■ 

I 




■ 






■ 


























(13Q) 


Blackfoot or the local Indians taken the war-path, "lhat 
such a state of affairs should have existed in a district 
with a military officer in command, nearly a month after 
the first alarm was given and specials sworn in, is a dis¬ 
grace to the Canadian Government, and of a piece with the 
mismanagement which has led to the whole of these deplor¬ 
able occurences. H (94) 

During the early part of May there was still no assur¬ 
ance that General Middleton*s campaign in Saskatchewan 
would bring victory, and it was feared that the Rebellion 
might well drag on through, the summer. Despite the arrival 
of General Strange's troops in Edmonton, there was little 
confidence that the danger was past. Vdiile Oliver blamed 
the Government for the rising, he was far from advocating 
a policy of pampering the Indiansj 

Let it be thoroughly understood that there is only 
one way of settling this Indian question properly. 

It may be true that the method of administering In¬ 
dian affairs has been the cause of the outoreak, but 
it is also true that once the Indians have risen no 
amount of petting or promises will Keep them within 
bounds again. , . ♦ until they are shown forcibly 
and completely that they are not masters of the sit¬ 
uation , there is no possibility of white people liv¬ 
ing in the country in that peace formerly enjoyed . 
... Cost what it may, it is cheaper to crush the 
rising than to deal with it in any other way, and the 
more forcibly and completely it is crushed the less 
it will cost and the less injurious will be its eff¬ 
ects. (95) 


(94) Edmonton Bulletin, pril 25, 1885 

(95) Edmonton Bulletin, May 15, 1885. 











. 














. 






■ V V 

. 

' . 













( 132 ) 


So far as the Indians were concerned he summed up the sit¬ 
uation by saying. Too many white people have been butcher¬ 
ed by the devils already, and from this time forward every 
effort should be made to meet the demand for dead Indians 
by a reasonable supply* We want peace.* (96) 

Oliver had little if anything to say in the Bulletin re¬ 
garding the Metis rising as such, but it is evident that he 
was disillusioned and disgusted by the movements drift to 
extremes under the guidance of Riel. The events of the past 
two months had completely destroyed any vestiges of respect 
which he may have had for Riel or his leadership. Upon re¬ 
ceiving news of Riel’s capture he wrote; 

The idol has proven to be clay, and a poor quality 
clay at that. As a diplomat, as a general, as a man 
of courage, he has proven himself a complete fraud* 
Instead of being a hero he is a nobody, whom moder¬ 
ate oratorical ability and previous associations, 
assisted by circumstances in the shape of incompet¬ 
ent or corrupt government officials and administrat¬ 
ors placed at the head of a movement which could 
only result in disaster to those engaged in it. (97) 

w Riel should be hanged,he advised, especially for inciting 

the Indians arid (allegedly) soliciting Fenian aid. *. . . 

the sooner he is quietly choked, either as a scoundrel or 

a fool, the better it will be for all classes of his fellow 

citizens. (98) 

(96) Edmonton Bulletin, May 23, 1885. 

(97) Ibid 

(98) Edmonton Bulletin, June 20, 1885. 


























■ 


• ■ ‘ ■ 


, ■' v V ■ | 

















( 133 ) 


Although Oliver had a measure of praise for Middleton’s 
"brut© force and persistence % H . • • the kind that wins, 
and when it does win, wins completely, (99) little else in 
the conduct of the camoaign or in the aftermath of the Re¬ 
bellion evoked his commendation. Re criticized Col. Oui- 
met’s refusal to authorize the Edmonton Rome Guards and let 
them have government guns, (100) he ridiculed the 'undue 
leniency with which the authorities treated some of Pound- 
maker’s men, (101) and he flayed the Government for its 
"parsimonious policy in dealing with trie North West. This 
latter charge referred to the alleged reduction in pay of 
the N.Vts.M.P. which thinned their numbers just wlqen the 
‘Government should have oeen building the force up. (102) 
Certain Canadian politicians, the Bulletin stormed, "have 
been transferred from a peanut stand to a wholesale estab¬ 
lishment and are not equal to the duties imposed." (103) 

The charge most calculated to raise western ire was that 

(99) Edmonton Bulletin, June 7, 1886. 

(100) Edmonton Bulletin, May 30, 1886. 

(101) Edmonton Bulletin, June 20, 1886. 

With reference to the Irog Lake massacre Oliver 
wrote in the Bulletin of June 7, 1885, In the case 
of the Bands under Sfg Beer, • • • the Bands should 
be utterly destroyed - neither man, woman, nor child 
left alive. Humanity and justice -not revenge- 
demand this. ’ 

(102) Edmonton Bulletin, June 27, 1885. 

(103) Ibid 








. , . 




. ' ; ... 












* . . 

■ 

I 

. ' ■ ; • : 

: 

- 


" 


% ;v 










■ 










. 

;... ; * • . i,;. '■ 


























( 134 ) 


which accused the people of the North West indiscriminately 
of having incited or participated in the actual Rebellion. 

It is true that numerous "inflammatory ! articles had appear¬ 
ed in certain sections of the North West press, and that 
numerous resolutions of li&e nature had been passed at North 
Vest meetings. But apparently those critics of the Govern¬ 
ment who instigated or approved of these press articles and 
resolutions neither intended them nor expected then to issue 
in actual violence, at least not In the particular type of 
violence represented by the Metis uprising under the leader¬ 
ship of Kiel. Having once and finally disowned the Saskat¬ 
chewan insurgents and their leader, they absolved tnemselves 
from any responsibility for the hebellion. Oliver himself, 
who was frequently enough branded as a "rebel” and an In¬ 
citer of "rebels , hotly repudiated the charge of "white 
treason in the North West. Articles emoodying this charge, 
which appeared in the Winnipeg Times and the Toronto Mail , 
drew down his wrath. Under the banner "Who is Responsible?" 
he accused certain r astern interests of ignorance, stupid¬ 
ity and self-interest, and reiterated his charge that the 
Dominion Government had always mismanaged North West affairs. 

The government and its organs, he claimed, "are now making 
only too apparent the spirit in which the North West has 
all along been governed, and which promoted, instigated and 







- -w* • ' ■ • ' - • ; < . v 








■ , . , • V 


















' 



















( 135 ) 


directly caused the late rebellion," (104) As to the west¬ 
ern press or people being actual fomenters of the Rebellion, 
Ottawa, he warned, would do well not to interfere with the 
North West in its right of free speech, (105) 

He derived considerable satisfaction from the "squabble 
in the East over Kiel's trial with its implicit question 
of whether Quebec or Ontario influence should be supreme in 
the North West, "In the fight for supremacy of which this 
is the beginning, the North West cannot fail to secure from 
on© contestant or the other concessions such as it never 
would, had this little difference not occurred, w (108) 

Riel’s execution he considered fully justified, *but the 
prime cause of the Rebellion was governmental mismanagement. 
The blood 3hed during the Rebellion as weas that of Riel 
is upon the heads of our government at Ottawa, and at their 
hands dod if not man will require it," (107) 

By the middle of August the excitement engendered by the 
Rebellion had subsided and interest in the interrupted 
election campaign was resumed. Meanwhile the Electoral 
District of St, Albert had been erected, giving the Upper 

(104) Edmonton Bulletin, July 18, 1885. 

(105) Ibid See also the Bulletin , Oct. 17, 1885 - 

Circumstances Alter'"Cases 

(106) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 17, 1885. 

(107) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 21, 1885. 





















■ 




. : •* v 




























■ 






















■ 






















( 136 ) 


Saskatchewan Country two representatives on the North West 
Council, one from Edmonton and one from the Metis settle¬ 
ment. Edmonton*s candidates, nominated on September 1, were 
Frank Oliver and Dr. H.C* Wilson, who had for some time been 
very prominent in community affairs. Wilson*s platform did 
not differ materially from that of his rival, including an 
extension and definition of the powers of the North West 
Council, Territorial control of western lands and resources, 
cancellation of colonization society grants, removal of 
appointed members from the Council, and an improvement of 
trails. Dr. Wilson was a man of moderate views and reason- 
aole methods * who had already scored Oliver on numerous 
occasions for always being ,f agin the government . He did 
not claim to be a temperance man, nor a very moral man,* 
and he advocated the licensing of breweries in the North 
West. (108) Oliver expressed his approval of Wilson’s plat¬ 
form with the exception of the breweries issue, and defend¬ 
ed his own record as newspaperman and Councillor. He con¬ 
tinued to urge that the best interests of the district 
could best be served in Council by a man who neither asked 
nor expected favors, but who declared his mind and opinion 
without fear, favor or affection, according to his oath of 
office. (109) Wilson’s Conservative leanings were well 


(108) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 5, 1885 

(109) Ibid 









• 


























. ■ 
















♦ 

- 












' 









... 






( 137 ) 


known, and Oliver took pains to discredit the “personal 
influence' 1 argument that a Government sympathizer could oo- 
tain concessions for his district at Regina more readily 
than could a member who opposed the Government. (110) 

What appears to have begun as a quiet campaign apparent¬ 
ly developed into a bitter contest, and September 15 pro¬ 
vided ^dmonton with an election spectacle which made the 
balloting of 1883 look tame. 

The votes poured in thick and fast on both sides, 
the monotony of recording votes being varied by the 
frequent tender and cheerful acceptance of the qual¬ 
ification and bribery oaths in the most remarkable 
instances. Some men over sixty years of age, and 
who had lived for more than twenty years in the dis¬ 
trict, were compelled to swear that they were twenty- 
one and had been residents one year, while others 
who really saw the district for the first time last 
fall, swore with the greatest alacrity that they had 
resided in it for the twelve months immediately pre¬ 
ceding the 7th august last. (Ill) 

At noon the count was 58 to 50 for Wilson. 

Returns from Belmont at the same time showed Oliver 
far ahead there, with most of the votes polled. The 
Wilson party saw that something must be done or the 
cause was lost. They rose to the occasion. Shortly 
after dinner, Messrs. A* McHicol, P. Brunette and 
T.H. Bradsha/w, the two former ex-policemen and the 
latter still a member of the force, who have resided 
continuously at Fort Saskatchewan ever since their 

arrival in this part of the Territories, swore that 
they had resided in the Edmonton electoral district 
for the twelve months immediately preceding the 7th 


(110) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 12, 1885. 

(111) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 19, 1885. 





* 

* 

- 














. 




:'fv. ./V" 


/• 




















( 138 ) 


August last and voted lor Dr. Wilson. 

Several other similar votes were run in shortly 
afterward, and as the supply seemed only limited 
by the demand the opposite side saw that while they 
were sure of victory if only mem residing in the 
district voted they had no chance if St. Albert and 
Battieford voted against them (112) and gave up their 
efforts while the other side redoubled theirs. (113) 

lh© final count revealed hr. Vsil3on elected by a major¬ 
ity of nine votes. (114) 

Presumably Oliver himself wrote the above quoted reports, 
and it is difficult at this distance of time to judge the 
fairness of the election. At any rate he regarded his de¬ 
feat with a bitterness which may well have had some justif¬ 
ication. Lashing out at his opponents in a fiery editorial 
headed ’’Vox populi, Vox Dei (?) rt , he charged that the voting 
had terminated adversely to the cause of popular government 
and temperance. ®To say that the narrow majority secured 
by the victors was secured by a combination of gerrymander, 
bribery, intimidation and whiskey is to put the case mildly, 
but the fact that it was secured remains. w (115) Apart 
from those who cast bogus votes, he claimed, those ^bribed 
into voting contrary to their convictions or intimidated in¬ 
to staying away, were not less to blame - if blame exists - 

(112) St. Albert and Battleford were, of course, separate 
electoral districts. Apparent exaggeration to empha¬ 
size the distant votes allegedly called in. 

(113) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 19, 1885. 

(114) Can. Pari. Comp. 1887 p. 381. Vilson - l^G; Oliver-111 

(115) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 19, 1885. 

























■ 










, 

'■ ! • ' • ' - 










■ 

- 




■ 

. 























( 139 ) 


for the defeat of their friend’s cause, (116) ’’That such 
means should he used to secure an election is unfortunate; 
that they should be successful is a disgrace to the people 
of the district, , , . The support of the successful man 
came from the desire in Edmonton, in Regina and in Ottawa 
to perpetuate the one-man rule that now exists in the Terri¬ 
torial capital, and against which the former member worked 
so vigorously.* (117) 

Oliver reminded his former constituents that Wilson was 
hound by public promises to pursue the same course toward 
this "one-man government* that he himself had, but intimated 
that Wilson’s support came from those who believed he would 
not take the course which he had laid down for himself, and 
that "a majority of the more or less legally qualified vot¬ 
ers of this district and vicinity are prepared to accept the 
rule of a local clique which is prepared to accept the rule 
of the Lieutenant-Grovernor, who in turn accepts - because he 
belongs to - the rule at Ottawa, (118) Recognizing that 
he had, naturally, been opposed by the saloon interest", 
he maintained that the farmer-barley-beer'" question had not 
really influenced a single vote. tt All parties thoroughly 
understood that the beer argument was only used as a catch - 

(116) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 19, 1885. 

(117) Ibid 

(118) Ibid 





• ■ 

• -V ■ ; 5 . -• 










. 


■ 

. 






v, , , ,-y■ , <■ . 

■ 


















































( 140 ) 


the economic-farmer-barley argument was too thin to Influ¬ 
ence anyone, however simple. w (119) 

He had been asked, he stated, why in view of his open 
charges of corruption he did not contest the election. His 
answer was pointed enough; 

If the impartial jury of public opinion so nearly 
renders a verdict against the people, what can be 
expected of a court in which government influence is 
paramount? Time was when judges were supposed not to 
interfere in political contests, but this contest has 
shown the contrary, and a doubt is thereby thrown on 
the impartiality of the possible election court. (120) 

In evident disgust he concluded his election editorial with 

this bit of philosophyj Politics are to some extent a game 

of chance, and in a case like the present, when the dice are 

loaded or the cards stacked, unless the game can certainly 

be broken, the sooner and more quietly honest men withdraw 

from it the better for themselves.(121) 


(119) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 19, 1885. 

(120) Ibid 

(121) Ibid 







(141) 

Chapter 5 Continued Interest in Political Affairs 

Frank Oliver, after two years on the North West Council, was 
not happy in his enforced role of private citizen. However, 
he possessed one advantage not held by every aspirant to 
public office defeated at the polls. He had a newspaper 
and a vitriolic pen* He also had the continued adherence, 
despite the results of the election, of a good numoer of 
local citizens who were far from satisfied with n sweet reas¬ 
onableness' 11 as a means of urging reform, i'he Bulletin had 
grown in stature throughout the territories a3 the leading 
champion of North West rights. Its editor, temporarily out 
of office, but certainly not out of ^public life", continu¬ 
ed with unabated zeal to pursue his mission as gadfly of 
the administration. 

? Ihe North West Council which assembled in Regina in Nov¬ 
ember of 1885 included thirteen elected members of whom only 
four had served during the previous session. Not only was 
the change in composition evident, but the change in temper 
as well, Dewdney’s vague and high-sounding opening speech, 
(1) in which the recent Rebellion was quickly glossed over, 
provoked a long and bitter debate in the Council. The Reply 

(1) J.N.W* Council, 1885, p* 6, 













■ 






‘ 



































































































. 

. 













(142) 

as finally passed (2) and accepted by the Lieutenant-Gover¬ 
nor (3) amounted practically to a vote of non-confidence in 
the Dominion’s Territorial administration, 

Oliver hailed the vote on the heply as the oeginning of 
a new era in North West politics, declaring it, "the first 
faint declaration of Independence of the absolute control 
hitherto exercised by federal authorities and their repres¬ 
entatives , * . With great satisfaction he noted that 
His Honor "swallowed this dish of crow which they had plac¬ 
ed before him , • . at the same time trying to make himself 
and them believe that it was just such an address as he 
above all things was most enamoured of," (4) The bulletin 
was less enthusiastic regarding the Council’s action on 
schools, Oliver warned that the proposed Board of Educat¬ 
ion would have too much power to dictate school organization 
and that, "every remove that is made of the school districts 
from the immediate supervision of the Council is a remove 
from the assistance of the Council in financing." (5) 

The Council, in fighting mood, passed a condemnation of 

(2) J.N.W. Council, 1886, p. 6. 

All the appointed and two elected members voted for a 
Reply echoing Dewdney’s speech. Dr. Wilson of Edmonton 
was among those supporting the critical, and accepted, 
Reply. 

(3) Ibid p. 50. 

(4) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 26, 1885. 

(5) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 19, 1885. 




















• 


















































































' 

. 




















( 143 ) 


government policy on C*P#R. lands, claimed u still greater 
rights of representation which we reel we are entitled to 
but have not yet received, "■ urged a request for Federal rep¬ 
resentatives, and framed a memorial of 27 grievances in 
which specific demands were made for local self-government, 
an elected legislative assembly, and in effect for a respon¬ 
sible cabinet system of government# (6) All this, of 
course, received the heartiest approval of the Bulletin . 

TSarly in 1886 rumors were current that Dewdney might re¬ 
tire, and speculation was rife as to a probable successor, 
"tfhere are," said Oliver, “many hungry souls waiting for 
the place at the public trough which he must soon vacate . 

• • . w (7) Referring to one candidate whose name had been 
mentioned, he continued, “fthat dirty work Judge Brooks has 
done or is considered capable of doing that would qualify 
him to wrorthily fill the hon. Edgar's shoes has not been 
divulged . . . ." (8) He discounted Joseph Royal (9) as 
having M too long a record of self-interest w , and named as 
his candidate for the office of Lieutenant-Governor and 
Indian Commissioner, Col* James F. Macleod, whose knowledge 

(6) Wilson served on the delegation which presented this 
memorial in Ottawa. 

(7) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 29, 1886. 

(8) Ibid 

(9) Royal did oecome Dewdney’s successor in 1888# 











( 144 ) 


of the West and long record of public service best qualif¬ 
ied him for the position. (10) As for Dewdney, "Hi* ap¬ 
pointment was a calamity, his administration a crime, its 
results disaster and his retirement his most acceptable 
act.’ 1 (11) Phe ‘most acceptable act’*, however, did not 
materialize, and Oliver was to find that his political arch¬ 
enemy was not to be disposed of so easily. (Ik) 

i'he Council of 188b, although reiterating its previous 
claims and framing its annual memorial, was more pacific in 
its Reply. Phis elicited from the Bulletin the comment 
that, "ihile the Council has shown a swallowing capacity 
that a boa constrictor might envy, its ability to swallow 
is more than equalled by its docility in the act. (13) 

While praising the Council for Its stand on representative 
government, Oliver condemned it for not pressing to a con¬ 
clusion the demands taxen to Ottawa by the delegates the 
previous February. 

Actually, the Councils of 1885 and 1886 faced an extra¬ 
ordinarily heavy program of legislation involving numerous 
problems arising from the fteoeilion; Rebellion claims, 
political prisoners, pensions and communications. Many 

(10) Kdmonton Bulletin, Jan. 29, 1886. Despite political 
differences Oliver had great respect for nacleod. 

(11) Edmonton Bulletin, May 8, 1886. 

(12) Dewdney did not retire until July, 1888. Soon after¬ 
wards, much to Oliver 1 s disgust, he was appointed 
Minister of the Interior. 

(13) 17 dm on ton Bulletin, May 8 , 1886. 




























• 

















. ; 












- 












' 














, 





. 




























. 

' 


- 










. 







( 145 ) 


weeks were spent on the organization of the North Vest 
school system, and dozens of ordinances were passed contrio 
uting to effective administration. This work must not be 
lost sight of in the Council’s struggle to secure added 
powers and greater freedom from Dominion supervision. In 
anticipation of en act re-constituting the territorial 
government, a Dominion order-in-council prolonged the life 
of the Council for one year - that is, until 1888. 

In 1886, with the creation of four federal constltuencie 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, West Assiniboia and Fast Assiniboia 
the territories were granted representation in the House of 
Commons. $hy Frank Oliver did not seize upon this opportun 
ity to enter the field of Dominion politics may best be ex¬ 
plained oy an examination of the western federal election 
of 1887. 

As early as isovemoer, 1886, the Bulletin , in a scathing 
criticism of federal "partyism in Manitoba, was demanding 
that the electors ‘choose men who, no matter what their 
political preferences, may be depended upon to set country 
oefore party or private interest,” (14) and preliminary 
electioneering was already under way for the first North 
vest federal election. (15) 

(14) Fdmonton Bulletin, Nov. 20, 1886. 

(15) Edmonton Bulletin. Nov. 27, 1886. Public meeting 
in Saskatchewan City ( Fort Saskatchewan) in the 
interests of Strange’s candidature. 










- 




I 

■^:V -. \ ^ e 


• ■ . ■ » ' ■ . ' f - • . .. ‘ ■ * t: : ■ - 

. ‘ . ■ . : ■ 












. 

. 








' 






.. 










. 






' ■■ , ■ ' ' • , •' ' V.; ■ 

; 








■ v ^ ■ ■ • ' : ■ *■ 


■\ 








■ 

■ 











■ 






( 146 ) 


Party lines were none too clearly drawn in the Vest, and 
formal federal party organization was almost completely 
lacking. Out of the organizational confusion of three 
months, with its conventions, meetings, moves and counter¬ 
moves, and the alignment of the press, there finally emerg¬ 
ed three federal candidates: D,W* Davis, Conservative, Cal¬ 
gary; J.D. L&fferty, Liberal, Calgary; and Richard Hardisty, 
Independent, T ’dmontan. 

D.tt# Davis, manager of 1,3. Baker & Co,, was nominated 
by a “Lihere^-Conservative“ convention held in Calgary dur¬ 
ing tiie last week in January, 1887. This convention had 
been urged by the Calgary Herald , the Lethbridge flews , and 
the Maoleod Oazette to choose a straight party candidate. 

The convention opened with a resolution declaring full sup¬ 
port of Sir John A. Macdonald and his Conservative govern¬ 
ment and of their Morth lest policies. The first plank of 
Davis* s platform was a reiteration ol this declaration. (lt>) 
Later, at an Edmonton meeting, J.B. Gostigan of Calgary, 
“Charged that it was owing to treachery on the part of 
Messrs. A. Taylor, telegrapher, and A.I). Osborne, postmas¬ 
ter, to whom communications on the subject were addressed 
that party lines were drav*n in the contest, as conservatives 


(16) Edmonton Bulletin, ireb. 12, 1887. Open letter of 
D.V. Davis and copy of the convention resolution. 

































’ 








































































(147) 

of the South had been willing to unite with the liberals 
and elect hr. Oliver as an independent by acclamation. M (17) 
( } Mhe parties admitted the receipt of the communications 
but denied that they had suppressed them.”) (18) 

Oliver*s reaction to the Calgary convention was immediate 
and extreme. Be saw in its workings the hand of the Bon. 
*!dgar Dewdney, and accused "hizzoner of having manipulated 
a convention, w which by its unanimous resolution has ab¬ 
solved itself from all responsibility in advocating the 
interests of the district or people for whom it presumes to 
speak; which specifically gives up both for the present and 
the future all claim to administration or legislation for 
the benefit of the constituency, except such as the great 
leader of the party may be graciously pleased to allow in 
the party interests. w (19) As for D.l. Davis, whom the 
Bulletin editorially damned as Simon-pure, trade mark 
blown on the bottle** Conservative, (20) 11 * . . to be a 
member in good standing of either political party is to 
give up all opinions, no matter how much they may be the 
result of honest conviction, to the control of the machine. 
(21) The opportunity was not missed of calling attention 

(17) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 5, 1887. Election meeting, 

(18) Ibid 

(19) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 12, 1887. 

(20) Ibid 

(21) Ibid 


















4 .;•? . ■ ■ ^ , ... . #-_i ■ ••• 

• • • • ' 


. 











v ; : 




a 





; 


■ 

. . 



. . , ■■ ■■ - - 



















- ■ 






- 

■ 

' ■ - • V ■ ■> ' • 




■■ i ‘ ■! 

■ 


: ■ V.;.' , / .■ - -v - • • ; '• " ' - ■ - “ 

■ . . ■ - ■ 

- 








■}, 




' 






(148) 

to Davis’s connections with !•(!. baiter & Go, (2b) 

Dr. J.D, Lafferty was nominated in Calgary by a Liberal 
.ssociation convention which discussed Oliver as a potential 
candidate. A section of the convention proposed that Oliver 
be supported as an independent. To this Lafferty and his 
adherents declined to agree, '(he convention then telegraph¬ 
ed Oliver that the Association would support him as a Liber¬ 
al candidate. Oliver refused the offer, and Lafferty re¬ 
ceived the nomination. (23) Lafferty, claiming to be an 
Independent- Liberal % stated that he did not forfeit his 
right to support measures in the interests of the North 
‘west, and that h© would urge those interests at all tiraes 
and on all occasions irrespective of party lines or the 
origins of such measures. (24) 

In view of Oliver’s subsequent role as ^Independent- 
Liberal 11 in the Dominion House, his opinion of Lafferty’s 
position is interesting. He doubted the effectiveness of 
being a Liberal and an independent at the same time, and 
was not at all certain that the position was even tenable. 
(2b) His criticisms of Lafferty were mild, however, as 

(22) This proved to be a two-edged sword in view of 
Bardisty’s connections with the Hudson’s Bay Company. 

(23) Kdmonton Bulletin, Mar. 5, 1887. Lafferty* s own ex¬ 
planation of his nomination as it appears in a report 
of an election meeting. 

(24) Kdmonton Bulletin, leb. 26, 1887. 

(25) Kdmonton Bulletin, ^ar. 5, 1887. 












' 






■ ■ 






’ l . . * ' J % 












. • 



. 




• 


, 




<r ' h : f 









■ 



. 



\ 









: 







. 




. 


&■-*&: i-->- * • ' ' ‘ ■" ' 

■ 




0 * 




■ 

■ 











( 149 ) 

compared with the torrential abuse he heaped upon Davis, 
that wheel in the party machine 11 . (26) 

Che exigencies of M party had proven too strong to secure 
Oliver a nomination as independent in the South, Be might 
still have secured such a nomination in Edmonton, but with 
Davis and Lafferty in the field, and with a strong Conser¬ 
vative faction to contend with on his own home grounds, his 
chances of election would have been slight. He therefore 
declined nomination and gave his support to Richard Hardisty, 
local Hudson 1 s Bay Go. factor, as Edmonton*s independent 
candidate. In a long open letter accepting his nomination 
Hardisty outlined an elaborate platform, denied being “a 
Hudson*s Bay man , and concluded, W I can best serve you by 
eschewing party lines and by being before all else a ’North 
test first* man. ... I offer myself simply as Richard 
Hardisty, and as being one of the oldest settlers in the 
North West.* (27) As an independent, the Bulletin claimeo, 
Hardisty vas acceptable to both "acdonsId and the Liberal 
opposition because neither was certain of electing a party 
man. (28) Oliver approved Rsrd5.sty*s platform, which con¬ 
tained some reference to constitutional reform couched in 
very general terms and a list of specific North West 


(26) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Feb. 

12, 

1887 

(27) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Jan, 

2 iss, 

1887 

(23) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Mar. 

12, 

1387 














A 










. 






. 

. 

. 

;$ • • • . ■ ' V J 

• • • : • 

. 







( 150 ) 


grievances. It asserts,” the Bulletin stated, as plainly 
as words can do that Mr. Hard!sty has chosen to take the 
popular side in the contest being waged by the North West 
for the next few years to secure its emancipation from mo¬ 
nopoly and mis-government.” (29) Hardisty was a widely 
known and highly respected old timer. He was no politician, 
and it was upon their candidate as a popular man advocating 
popular measures (30) that his adherents pinned their hopes, 
Sectionalism was evident in the campaign and became agg¬ 
ravated b s electioneering proceeded. Both Davis and Laff- 
arty, certain, apparently, of their hold on the South and 
considering the North to be the vulnerable front, invaded 
^dmonfcon with their cohorts In the weeks preceding the elec¬ 
tion and their presence added immeasurably to the local fur¬ 
ore. Dhe Conservative victory in the general elections 
held February 22 (31) strengthened Davis in the old argu¬ 
ment that a government supporter could get more out of 
Ottawa than could an independent or adherent of the oppo¬ 
sition, At the election meetings Oliver represented Hard¬ 
isty who refused to do battle with the H Calgary forces * on 
grounds of inexperience. recurrent charges that Hardisty 

(29) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 29, 1887. 

(30) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 22, 1887. 

(31) Phe Dominion general elections were held on Feb. 22; 
the North West elections for Federal representatives 
not until March 15. 








. 




' 

? ' ■ V i ' - ft- ■ : 




















• - ' ■. ,. 

' 





• 

. 




V, v:; v* :V'■' • /. :% • 















■ 



















































( 151 ) 


was a Hudson’s Bay man with Conservative leanings, Oliver 
replied that his candidate’s connection with the Hudson’s 
Bay Go* was not inimical to the best interests of the coun¬ 
try, and that anyway hardisty was pledged as an independent. 
(52) 

At a tumultous joint meeting held at St. Albert on march 
2, Davis, Lafferty and Oliver exchanged compliments until 
two o’clock in the morning. (53) At A. St. Jeans, a *Laff- 
erty meeting 84 , Oliver defended hard!sty long and vigorously, 
and D.k. Davis, goaded by repeated insinuations regarding 
his connection with 1,0. Baker & Go., declared his indepen¬ 
dence from Company control and hotly informed his audience 
that he had given his firm to understand that if they did 
not like it (his candidature), as soon as they made up their 
minds to do without him, h© would try to get along without 
them.* 1 (34) 

Davis never failed to reiterate his loyalty to Macdon¬ 
ald’s government, nor Lafferty to assay justification of 
his riding two horses at once, Hard!sty, shrinking from the 
rough and tumble of the campaign, stood four-square as an 
independent, kith each of the candidates trying, in a 
measure, to be **ali things to all men% their platforms as 

(32) “Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 5, 1887. Election Supplement. 

(33) Ibid 

(34) Ibid 











■ 










. 
























■' ' « ' • 

• i 












( 152 ) 

appearing weekly in the Bulletin revealed very few material 
differences. Practical programs predominated. Oliver was 
not altogether happy in the position into which circum¬ 
stances had forced him, but as he himself had remarked but 
a few months earlier, politics is to some extent a game of 
chance, gdmonton*s candidate WAS a Conservative, to what¬ 
ever extent he was anything "politically’', but Oliver rested 
his support squarely on Mardisty*s pledge as “independent", 
and did not consider that in so doing he was compromising 
his own political independence. 

Balloting was still open (35) and the election of March 
15 was followed by the customary suggestion of irregular¬ 
ities. Edmonton was not in contact • ith Calgary on elec¬ 
tion day because the telegraph line was found to be "out of 
order . Charges that the line had been tampered with were 
raised but not pressed. (36) Results from Calgary were not 
known until the following day. Davis was elected, mainly on 
the support of the South; Hardlsty scored heavily in the 
tlorfch, and Lafferty fell between the two, trailing the field 
by a wide raargin. (37) To complete Frank Oliver* s cup of 


(35) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 15, 1887. In reply to object¬ 
ions made to the open vote, Oliver at this time defend¬ 
ed it as giving less opportunity for corruption. U A 
man who is afraid to cast his vote openly, he said, 
r is not equal to his privileges." 


(36) Edmonton Bulletin, March 19, 1887. 


(37) Ibid 

Can. Pari. Como. 1887 


p. 177. 


Davis 1037 
ardisfcy 783 
Lafferty 235 










;v -■ , . : • .. :: 

H 


. U-A : - • ' ■ 




' 






• ■ ■■■..■ 

< ■ t*-: 

: ■ ; v V', .■■ ■•: • 

' «. ' • 

■ •• ■■ -’..v • . : 

■ - 

i i :’-r: ■ . 






















' 








' 






. 

. 


. 








( 153 ) 

bitterness, the Conservatives mane a clean sweep of the four 
Territorial constituencies. (38) 

The Bulletin saw in the result another victory for the 
Conservative ^machine , and found what consolation it could 
in the fact that Edmonton, at least, had expressed opposit¬ 
ion to the perty in power at Ottawa. (39) Oliver consider¬ 
ed Lafferty’s candidature a mistake as confusing the issue 
and splitting the votes. The Liberal organization, he 
charged, simply was not strong enough to elect its candid¬ 
ates in the West because it lacked a strong alternative 
North West policy with which to confront the Conservatives. 
Territorial sectionalism and selfishness, he felt, must 
share the blame for the Conservative triumph. (40) 


Following the general election of 1887 Edward Blake (41) 
resigned, the leadership of the Liberal party and Wilfred 
Laurier was chosen to succeed him. Oliver’s opinion of his 


(38) Can. Pari. Como. 1887 p. 177 ff. 

Assiniboia East - W.D. Perley Cons. 

Assiniboia West - N.P. Davln Cons. 

Saskatchewan - D.K. Macdowall Cons. 

Alberta - D.W. Davis Cons. 

( 39 ) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 19, 1887. *After the Battle * 

(40) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 26, 1887. 

(41) Edmonton Bulletin, June 18, 1887. Editorially of Blake: 
That his influence for good upon Canadian public life 
has been greater than that of any man of his day must 
be universally conceded ana in retiring from it he can 
truthfully say, ’These hanas are clean. 



















- 

■ 




. 












■ 









■ 








. 




- 






■ 


. • ■ • 


■ - , ■ 

■ 

■ 




■ 






( 154 ) 


future chief was favorable but qualified. Laurier, he ad¬ 
mitted, was a great orator, a speaker of "rare ability”, 
and would always be w an honor and a strength to the cause 
he advocated.* 1 (42) However, h© was not satisfied that 
Laurier*s health could stand the strain of leadership, nor 
was he pleased with the new leader’s ^extreme' 4 stand re¬ 
garding Riel. (43) Recalling the great Qteorge Brown he 
wrotes 

An able orator, a splendid writer, strong in body 
and determined in mind, inspiring full confidence in 
his honesty of purpose, he swayed, the mind of Canada 
for good as no man ever did before or perhaps will 
again. • . , This is the measure of a reform lead¬ 
er that is still in the public mind, and there is 
little hope that Mr. Laurier with his one or even 
two talents will be able to fill it. (44) 

Territorial representation in the House of Commons fo¬ 
cussed western attention on the Dominion session of 1887. 
The Bulletin , while praising I„F* Bavin’s sponsorship of a 
bill to establish responsible government in the Territories, 
(45) found little else to commend in the work of the North 
West members. Accusing them of Ignoring their election 
promises, and singling out Alberta’s representative partic¬ 
ularly for attack, Oliver commented, "Of the whole platform 

(4fc) Edmonton Bulletin, July 9, 1887. 

(43) Edmonton Bulletin, J an « 1888. 

(44) Edmonton Bulletin, July 9, 1887. George Brown’s in¬ 
fluence on Oliver has already been noted. 

(45) Edmonton Bulletin, May 7, 1B87. 















r •• • •• '- 


. 








. 








. 
























































( 155 ) 


but one plank remained after Mr. Davis and his three part¬ 
ners struct Ottawa - the support of Sir John. Why the num¬ 
erous measures for the benefit of the people, spoken of so 
strongly and so frequently during the contest were so com¬ 
pletely and unanimously ignored in Ottawa by our members 
and by everyone else, seems to require explanation at their 
hands.* 4 (46) He intimated that the western representatives 
had done nothing in righting North West wrongs, in fact up¬ 
on occasion had voted with the government on policies inim¬ 
ical to the North West. In reply to ' .1). Perley (Assiniboia 
^ast) who had allegedly explained that the North test mem¬ 
bers could really do nothing in Parliament, but must try to 
work through their personal influence on cabinet ministers, 
he denounced the explanation as puerile and maintained, 

They are not there to bargain their votes for favors for 
their constituents, but to bring North West rights before 
the House of Commons.(47) 

In broader fields than actual ^politics 1 the bulletin 
revealed an increasing interest in the national scene. The 
early * eighties marked the beginning of an extended depress¬ 
ion, A long decline in farm prices set in, accompanied by 

(46) Pdmonton Bulletin, July 16, 1887. 

(47) Trimonton Bulletin, Sept. 10, 1887. 













... 

' : t 




- 




• : 













• 








■V'V- ■ ,v . ■ . 




























































. 














■ 




















. 




















( 156 ) 


a general falling off in foreign trade and a decline in 
manufacturing* The apparent failure of the National Policy 
to stem the depression encouraged the advocates of commer¬ 
cial union with the United States, and the reciprocity issue 
came again to the fore in Canadian affairs. While a bitter 
critic of the National policy, Oliver feared the implicat¬ 
ions of commercial union* Commenting on the reciprocity 
debates in the Commons he wrote, w • . • it remains for the 
Liberal party to declare exactly what their trade policy is 
and how they propose to secure its adoption* It is to be 
hoped that they will give up whining for traae favors from 
the United Stases and declare straight for tariff for reve¬ 
nue only, which mesas free trade with the world.” (48) With 
reference to the proposed Fisheries Treaty of 1888 (49) he 
claimed that the Treaty implied the surrender of Canadian 
rights, and that it was rejected by the United States Sen¬ 
ate only because it was not unconditional surrender. (50) 

. . the closer Canada is drawn into trade relations with 
the States the better that country is enabled to compel 
political concessions by threatening Canada’s commercial 
prosperity through legislative or executive interference 

(48) F&monton Bulletin, April 14, 1888. 

(49) The Gh&mberlain-Bayard Treaty, rejected by the United 
States Senate. 

(50) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 1, 1888. 











' . • - ' • 

• • ■ 


. 

-.V ■’ % 




. 








. . ■ 


. 












- 

. 

. 















( 157 ) 


with those trade relations. If It (Qanadian nationality) 
is to be preserved, it must be in the face of the open jeal¬ 
ousy and opposition of the United States. (51) 

He was firmly against commercial union, believing that 
the United States would tatce every possible advantage of 
Canada and use its superior economic power to Canada*s dis¬ 
advantage. He was very critical, therefore, of Laurier*s 
appeal that Canada should alter its policy of ’unfriendli¬ 
ness” with the United States with a view to inducing un¬ 
restricted reciprocity* Such a course, ne urged, could not 
be approved on logical grounds, “Laurier is asking the 
liberals of Canada to place their country in such a condi¬ 
tion of commercial connection with the United States as 
would amount to commercial bondage,” with, of course, its 
concomitant lever of political bondage. (52) It will be 
interesting as well as Informative to recall these state¬ 
ments in dealing with the Dominion elections of 1911 when, 
as Laurier*s Minister of the Interior, Oliver backed to the 
hilt his chief’s stand on the reciprocity issue. 

The fresfc had not opened up as anticipated with the build¬ 
ing of the C.P.R. Yet several factors - the railway itself, 

(51) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 8, 1888. 

(52) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 15, 1888. 





■ :; • • • - ■ 

■■ ■■ - - - ‘ 

! • . - ■ v - ' : • ' * : * m ■ ■ ■ / • ■ ’■ V i V- ; .1 

» » ■ \ , ’ . 

■ . *. ■ - • . - ' 

■ 

■ 

• - 






• 























• 



-I 

: 


: 










, - .i' 





■ 





















■ 
















. 






• 













' 

; • ' r • i . ■ - . -V • 




( 158 ) 


the repeated solicitations of the North est Council, even 
the North West Rebellion - served to bring the West and Its 
problems increasingly to the attention of Ottawa. The grant¬ 
ing of western Federal representatives has been considered, 
but following the general elections of 1887 significant 
developments occurred also in the Territorial government. 

At the session in Regina in 1887, Lieut.-Gov. Lewdney 
informed the Council that Ottawa had requested him to con¬ 
fer with the Council members regarding changes in the con¬ 
stitution of the North West ’Territories. (65) the Council 
was happy to oblige with a memorial reiterating its demands 
of 1886, and requesting a system of responsible government 
with a cabinet, with complete control of finances including 
the expenditure of the Dominion grants, and with the powers 
of the Lieutenant-Governor greatly curtailed. 

Darly in 1888 the Dominion Parliament passed an Act re¬ 
specting the North West Territories (54) which inaugurated 
the third stage in Territorial constitutional development. 
The North West Council was abolished, and a Legislative 
Assembly of 25 members was created of whom 22 were to be 
elected and 5 were to be legal experts appointed from the 

(65) J.N.W. Council, 1887, pp. 6 - 10. The Speech from 
the Throne. 

(54) ‘The North lest Territories Act of 1888. 

Statutes of Canada, 61 Viet, c 19 (1888) 











. 










' 


•v!.* 4 - 'f 

■ 


















•- - 






' 






















( 169 ) 


North '"eat Judiciary. 'hose legal experts were to partici¬ 
pate in the Assembly's deliberations but were to have no 
vote. The Assembly, presided over by a speaker, was to have 
powers analogous to those of provincial legislatures, but 
inferior inasmuch as they were to be exercised under orders- 
in-counoil issued by the cj-overnor-General, The Act also 
created an Advisory Council consisting of four members of 
the Assembly, who with the Lieutenant-(Governor constituted 
an Executive Committee in matters of finance. This dvis- 
ory Council was definitely not intended to be a caoinet. 

Sir John Macdonald himself, speaking on the section of 
til© Act creating the Advisory Council, stated, "Hie true 
theory, I think, of the Territorial system, so long as it 
continues, is that government proceeds from here. (55) All 
the Territorial members in the House except N.K Pavin spoke 
against responsible government for the North best. (56) 
Certainly the dominion Government did not favor it. In the 
Territories some of the newspapers were lukewarm; some were 
actively opposed, mainly on grounds of expense; while a 
few, like the Macleod Gazette and. the Fdmonton Bulletin , 
were staunch advocates. (57) The average North Wester was 

(55) Oliver, K.H. Contest between Li eu tenant-Governor 

KoyalHand the Legislative Assembly"of 

the North v.est Territories 1888-1895 
Royal Society of Canada - proceedings and Trans¬ 
actions 3rd Series Vol. XVII 1923 p. 87 
Hereafter referred to as H.E. Oliver in Royal 
Soc. Trans. 


(56) Ibid p. 87 


(57) Ibid p. 87. 





















. . 

I 

■ ' 








. 

. 

. 










. 
































. ■ . ... 










(ISO) 


not a political theorist, and was perhaps interested mainly 
in getting tne best practical administration at the least 
cost whether it came from the Dominion Government or the 
Territorial Assembly, The earnest fighters for responsible 
government were to be the members of the Assembly itself, 
especially those who had served on the old North West Coun¬ 
cil, and who wished now to increase the power and prestige 
of tiie new Legislative ssembly. 

Frank Oliver, at first unfavorable to the proposed Aorth 
* est Act as inadequate, (58) later seized on the provision 
to create an Advisory Council and interpreted it in such a 
way as to furnish the Key to the whole impending struggle 
between Lieut.-Gov. Royal and the new Legislative Assembly: 

This latter provision (for the creation of the 
Advisory Council) is of the highest importance, and 
alters the whole nature of the bill. The Committee 
(the Advisory Council) although nominally advisory 
is really executive, and if it does not give respon¬ 
sible government in name, provides the means by which 
resDonsibility in government may be secured. 

The Advisory Committee . . . places the control of 
Territorial finances, which is the key to the sit¬ 
uation, in the hands of the people’s representatives, 
and all that remains for them is to push that control 
to its proper conclusion. (59) 

Oliver’s interpretation thus differed very widely from 
Sir John’s intent, and all that remains proved to be a 
four-year battle during which the Assembly, split into 


(58) Edmonton Bulletin, May 19, 1888 

(59) Edmonton Bulletin, June 2, 1888 













=■.' v\ ,/*- N, • --,77-- ■,v . .; - . 

- 

•A ■ . ; 




































■ • 

■ 












. 

- 

- 












(161; 


factions, and in an atmosphere electric with personal and 
political animosity, engaged most of its time and energy in 
"pushing that control to its proper conclusion** • 

Vsith the territorial elections unaer the new Act set for 
June 30, 1888, Oliver declared the issue to be responsible 
government versus Dominion control, and announced his candi¬ 
dature for a seat in the North Vest Legislative Assembly. 
(60) His platform, he stated, was well known; and he con¬ 
fined his "Open Letter to the Hectors** largely to an appeal 
on his past record: 

If I have been faithful to every trust, if I have 
always worked to advance the public interest, if X 
have never dealt unfairly between section and sec¬ 
tion, between race and race, between creed and creed, 
or between man and man, and If my endeavours have 
reached a fair measure of success, I ask for the 
support of every voter who desires to be represented 
honestly, earnestly. Impartially and successfully, 
for his vote and influence to secure my ©lection. (61) 

Three other candidates entered the race; Dr. H.C. tilson, 

D. Maloney, and Samuel Cunningham, member of the North V?e9t 

Council for St. Albert since 188b. Open letters from each 

appeared in the Bul l etin , and at the same time its editor 

made a strong plea for non-partisanship. Citing the 


(60) Edmonton Bulletin, June 9, 1888. 

With the disappearance of the North West Council, the 
Electoral District of St. Aloert was merged in the 
Electoral District of Edmonton, which with greatly 
extended ooundaries was entitled to two seats. The 
new Electoral District of Edmonton included Lac St. 
Anne, Peace Hills (letaskiwin), Beaver Lake ana Lac 
La Biche. 


(61) 


Ibid 














■ 




' 
















■ 






















' 






' 

















(X 68) 


"deplorable mistakes” of Manitoba where party politics ran 
rampant, he stated, "It would be deplorable to have the 
North West Legislature divided upon Federal Issues or party 
lines*" (62) 

With little time left for campaigning, at least one large 
public meeting was held at which all four candidates pre¬ 
sented tnelr views. Dr. Wilson affirmed his support of 
responsible government and offered his past record, includ¬ 
ing hi 9 work on the North West delegation to Ottawa. He 
claimed that the only real issiae between himself and Oliver 
was the prohibition law. He still favored a liquor licen¬ 
sing law in the Territories* Cunningham, a half-breed, 
spoke in both Cree and English, simply reviewing his record, 
while Maloney levied general charges of inefficiency and 
corruption against the members of the old North West Coun¬ 
cil. Oliver spoke on responsible government, claiming that 
he had been the first to agitate the question in the North 
West. H© also claimed to be the father of the movement in 
favor of giving the Territories the power to deal with local 
matters, and to be the originator of the school law. Against 
the old charge that he was a kicker" he defended himself 
with his customary vigor. 

The election, climaxing the short but very sharp campaign, 
(62) Edmonton Bulletin, June 16, 1888. 








■ 

- 

...: - v - •' • . . , 






(163) 

was bitterly contested. In those days of open voting each 
party tried to shape its election day strategy according to 
the hour to hour standing in the larger polls. Loose con¬ 
tacts were often maintained by runners, horsemen or even 
flying squadrons in democrats . .here was now a telephone 
line out to St. Albert, but oddly enough it was found to be 
down on the day of the election. Intimations of federal 
"influence H , and the usual charges of electoral aouses and 
"dirty work* were bandied about freely. The victors were 
Oliver and Wilson. (63) Oliver interpreted the result as a 
demand for responsible government ana a desire for a change 
in the liquor law and its administration. (64) 

No sooner were the ©lections over than Edmonton was 
thrown into a political furore by the impending appointment 
of Devdney as Minister of the Interior. (65) Public meet¬ 
ings were held at which pro-Dewdney and anti-Dewdney speak¬ 
ers expressed themselves, frequently with more heat than 
light. ( 66 ) Oliver’s opinion of Dewdney need hardly be 

(63) Can, Pari. Comp ., 1889, p. 397. 


V 11 son 595 
Oliver 350 
Cunningham 3^9 
Maloney 150 


(64) Edmonton Bulletin, July 7, 1888. 

(65) Dewdney entered the cabinet following his election by 
acclamation in Assiniboia East, v/here he succeeded 

Perley who had resigned to enter the Senate. 

( 66 ) Edmonton Bulletin, July 28, 1888; Aug• 4, 1888. 





■' vq : 




■ 













■ ■■■■■ 






v '' , ' 






• 








a ,. 




































• : ■ 







. 



















. 

































■ , ' j • ,• p. V.-’ •- 

, ■ h • v- . 

.. :j 















(104) 


repeated, but Wilson characterised the former Lieutenant- 
Oovernor as a man of ability and honesty , . . . M While 
the local hubbub was at its height Dewdney duly entered the 
Dominion Cabinet as Minister of the Interior, in a final 
blast Oliver informed his readers that the government had 
good reason to Blaise the appointment after the North est 
elections, but before the meeting of the new Assembly, and 
that, "Whoever Dewdney may represent in the Cabinet, he does 
NO? represent the people of the North West* *” (57) 

Dewdney 1 s successor as lieutenant-lovernor of the Terri¬ 
tories was the Hon. Joseph Royal, whose appointment was 
confirmed in July of 1888. Oliver had already expressed, 
himself very freely on Royal and his political activities 
in Manitoba, (88) and in the previous January had written: 


(67) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 4, 1888* 

(68) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 9, 1884. n A Royal Banquet ' 

*fo Mr. Royal and the clique with whom he worked, from 
the viiianous Clar&e to the slippery Torquay, both 
Inclusive, Manitoba owes to a greater extent than to 
any other cause th© despicable position which she occu¬ 
pies today, bound hand arid foot under railway monopoly, 
and gagged by misrepresentations in both local and 
general parliaments•* 

Royal was a "high Conservative and a Catholic. 

In assessing Oliver’s opinion, account must always be 
taken of political animosity and the virulence of 
frontier journalism. E.H. Oliver, op. cit. in 
Royal Soe. Trans , considers that Royal served his term 
very creditably. 





■ . 





- j'V , - . :■:■f 

: .’ rV V 4 ; ' v -V 

- 

. 

■ : '> ' ■ ■ ‘ - 

- ■ . ■ ■ 

. 




<’ ■ V ':-‘x■: • ' ■ - ' ’. - - - 













. 





(166) 


The office of Lieutenant-Governor is chiefly hon¬ 
orary and one that can be properly filled by a man 
whose reputation is such that he does honor to the 
office as well as is honored by it. Mr. Royal is 
not such a man. He is simply a low politician. A 
man who has sufficient ability to keep him in polit¬ 
ical life but not sufficient to raise him in it; who 
must depend upon his rascality, not his ability, to 
secure him political advantages. 

The North West has been disgraced for the past 
five years by such a Lieutenant-Governor; it does 
not want a similar dose for the next four. (69) 

When Oliver took his seat in the North West Council in 
1883 he found himself opposed to a Lieutenant-Governor 
whose public career he had bitterly criticised for several 
years. The situation was repeated upon his election to the 
Territorial Assembly* 


(69) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan* 14, 1888* 


































' 




• • 






















DfcPARfMfcNT O! 
UNIVERSITY of ALlitRlA 
EDMONTON 


THE HONORABLE FRAME OLIVER 


by 


William S. Waddell B.A* 


Volume II 








( 166 ) 


Chapter 6 In the Interests of the North -Yost 1883-1388 

Frank Oliver’s part in active politics vas closely allied 
to a genuine Interest in the North Best and its people. 
Through the Bulletin he urged continuously not only reform 

i 

of the Territorial Government* but of the whole system of 
North Best administration* 

•kith a declared policy of expressing an emphatic opinion 
on North Best matters, the Bulletin claimed with consider¬ 
able justification to be the champion of the North Best sett* 
ler, and was proud to be the uncompromising critic of Dom¬ 
inion policy in the Territories• In reply to the repeated 
charge that it was too radical, it called attention to act¬ 
ual maladministration, and claimed some credit for the 

M < 
"growing admission that the interests of the North test 

settlers and the Dominion government ought to be synony¬ 
mous ." (!) The Bulletin ,8 will continue to offend ’the pow¬ 
ers that be* when opinion differs* It believes the right 
is always the expedient* 55 (2) Further, "'That the Bulletin 
has done something to hold the settlement here by encour¬ 
aging the people and upholding their rights and also - by 
disseminating a knowledge of the district and its people - 

(1) Idmonton Bulletin, Nov* 7, 1885. Introducing Vol* VII, 
Number 1* 

(2) ibid 
















V' •' >' v : .-y- •; ' • r ' 


.. \ 




. ■ . 


c .. , 1 . ' /• . ' • ' b ‘ ' ' /■ • ' 








- > >H V L «/ ■' 






" 4 ' ?l~ ' > .. -' 1 * • • .;.• • : 














' '* r r-■ ■ - r :- MX-. --v, ^ 

’ 

Wt -xyfdm: '4'-^' «i 

■■■>' ■' ■ — - • - ■ • ■ ’ 

. ■■■> ■ = . . •-• -. ■■ . ■ e 

: ■ r T; ■ :K-r> : ; 






‘ 










■ 






( 167 ) 


something to draw the frontiers of civilization nearer, it 
makes bold to claim. 0 (3) 

Oliver considered most political corruption with all its 
varied ramifications to stem from °partyism% (4) and he 
interpreted the Conservative losses in the ©lections of 1887 
as a sign that addiction to -party r was losing its hold in 
Canada. 41 The present party machines of Canada are not a- 
dapted to the work required of them, consequently they are 
either clogged or running empty, and cannot last much long¬ 
er. (5) ! Party!sm , bad enough in federal politics, was, 

he believed, most hamful when carried over into Territor¬ 
ial affairs. long with others who became prominent in the 
Horth lest, he held that federal party ties had no legit¬ 
imate place In Territorial government. (6) 

His opinion of colonization companies was well known, 
and during several years, he continued his spirited attacks 
on the Edmonton and Saskatchewan Land Co. The following 
editorial on the Company is a fair sample of his attitude 
toward the “colonization monopolies \ 

(3) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 8, 1886. 

(4) Lower, in Col ony to Nation, uses the following express¬ 

ions in oharacterlzXng nineteenth century ,{ partyism i? : 
tt The very Ditch in Canada of pure party!sm. A blind 

partisanship. • ; A bitter pseudo-hate. 'Having little 
more satisfactory spiritual sustenance, with no great 
cause before them and no native culture at their side, 
men lived in a tribal frenzy of excitement against the 
opposite party. p. 371. 

(5) Edmonton Bulletin, July 10, 1887. 

(6) The non-partisanship of Haultain and others will o© re- 

_ ferreq to. _ , 







- 


v' VV>W- ' ‘v - ^ V I'J ; ■ ' ' 

' 4 - .v.-' /• ‘ ■ i A . ■■ . : ‘ ' ' ■* ■ 


' r --: W ■ vv'. "■ 

. 


i; ,.5 ' . - . . v) ; ' i ; >ith ' ■ 

;■ • l- ; ; 


y,;/- ' ■- i ' ■ ■ : 

- : v - • ;■ V V ‘ ‘ ...■■■■■- - • • ; 

• - . , * : . ■ - . : ; "X 

■ ■ ' . ■ ^ f ; ■ 




' ■ 

•• 1 ■ • 


■ k<U ■ . 

' 

■ 










: :■?: ? ■> 




' 


' 







• 














t&i t% • - 

. 

'V *;' : ' ' :*'V. ' V '* ^ ’’ ’v ' V^' J- '' • • : • ‘ • " 

- ■ 








' 






















( 168 ) 


The Lion and the Lamb 

The Company secured the land for the sole purpose 
of making money. Corporations have neither souls to 
be saved nor bodies to be kicked. Any one of a thou¬ 
sand reasons might induce the present company to sell 
out to another which might b© as bad as this one may 
be good. The characters of the present members of 
the company, admitting them to be blameless, is no 
guarantee that the promises they have lately made 
will be carried out by their successors beyond the 
points to which they are compelled. The lion of the 
Edmonton and Saskatchewan Land Go# may be a very good 
hearted and mild mannered animal of its kind. But 
the kind is not good, and as in the case of other 
lions, the further it is off, the safer the lamb will 
be. then time and ©vents prove that the company is 
a benefit to this district we will be prepared to ad¬ 
mit It, but until then we are obliged to hold the 
opinion that the probabilities are decidedly against 
this being the case, then we see the lion and the 
lamb lie down together we expect to see the lion get 
up alone. (7) 

At a public meeting featured by an acrimonious debate 
between Oliver and G.JU Simpson, agent of the Company, re¬ 
garding the policies and intent of the enterprise, Oliver 
advised the local people to have nothing to do with it. (8) 
At another public meeting In the summer of 1885, &#B,Soarth, 
managing director, and Senator Carvell, co-director, defend¬ 
ed the Company’s policy and record in the district and ex¬ 
pressed their deep resentment of the attacks made on them in 
the Bulletin. Oliver replied that M he liked the men but did 


(7) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1885. 

(8) Edmonton Bulletin, July 7, 1885. 











I ' ■ V, % 

m " 1 j - 










^ : ; * ■•.' * ‘ . ' /, ' ^ . " 

' ‘ * 










•: 








- 




i - ■ ; ■' : •. . 

V- ■• : , • ; ^ ' ; ;; \ 

. ' 7 , ;; : .W 


* 


■ 




• ■■* v - 


v >:.'■ ■’:■ > -'■’■ ■ ■■"■ ■?■%■•.■'••' ■ 

• i ■ ;v.'. ■■ i : :. ■• ■ ■. ,R.\ J . ■ '.Hi : ■ J 











: 











( 169 ) 


not like their busixiess, * and repeating his criticisms, ex¬ 
pressed the hope that the government would annul the con¬ 
tract of a company that the country could get along nicely 
without. (9) He continued to to© the bitter and voluble 
opponent of th© Company until its ,f baneful presence and in¬ 
fluence* (10) finally disappeared in the general closing out 
of colonization company contracts which occurred in the late 
• eighties. 

Oliver was especially concerned with the problems of the 
squatters, that is, of those who had settled the land in 
advance of the surveys or of the land grants. n The rights 
of the squatters will toe upheld, Sl he promised, 61 and the in¬ 
fluence of this paper will m thrown against monopolies of 
all kinds - particularly those maintained by act of parlia¬ 
ment. ' (11) Its.© Bulletin defended the speculative squatt¬ 
er* whom, it claimed, th© government hated, simply because he 
usually beat Ottawa to desirable lands which it had ear¬ 
marked for its party heelers and their friends. 

Following th© survey in th© Edmonton area, a commission 
was appointed to adjudicate upon squatters* rights, there 
was apparently great dissatisfaction when the adjudications 
were made known, and in th© spring of 1885 a. public meeting 

(9) Edmonton Bulletin, July 21, 1885. 

(10) Idmonton .Bulletin, Dec. 4, 1886. 

(11) Idmonton Bulletin,' Mov. 5, 1885. 































T ' 












' 








"'Tv - •> "V- ■> ;;h /. v;: 




v- 




-.W- .'V> , - v 


' 






.. - ■ . 






. .*• : v->‘ ' v - r .... ., ,, ■; ■ 


, . - -'V, v 






















( 170 ) 


was called to frame a protest to Ottawa, A series of res¬ 
olutions were drawn up including one moved by Oliver that 
"'this meeting is assembled to assert the squatters* rights 
of the settlers of this district, S! and a committee headed by 
Oliver was appointed to continue the battle for fair adjust¬ 
ment of squatters* claims* (12) 

Despite the free homestead policy and the building of the 
C.P.R., immigration during the * eighties was relatively 
slight, giving way toward the end of the decade to increas¬ 
ing emigration to the United States, Hesentful of the 
National Policy tariffs and roused by the Manitoba disallow¬ 
ance battle, a farmer convention at Winnipeg passed, on 
March 5, 1084, the famous *anti~immigration resolution 
which declared, . that in the opinion of this conven¬ 

tion the burdens laid noon the people of Manitoba ar© so 
great that agricultural operations cannot be made to yield 
a fair profit; that immigration before the removal of these 
burdens will profit neither the province nor the immigrant, 
and that this province cannot advise immigrants to settle 
in the province until full redress from the grievances com¬ 
plained of by the convention has been made• 9 (13) This ex¬ 
hibition of frontier radicalism M provoked widespread 


(12) Edmonton Bulletin, March 28, 1885. 

(13) Edmonton Bulletin, April 12, 1884. 











, 


























•: ' >- . ; • • v.: • ■ 







































(in) 


criticism in the East* The Bulletin rose to the defence of 
the farmers and blamed the Government and the C«P»R« for any 
adverse effects the resolution might have# Eastern inter¬ 
ests, Oliver alleged, were now preparing to use it as an 
excuse for the failure of the immigration policy and were 
charging that 'no more railways will come in, no more capi¬ 
tal will be Invested in the country on account of the pass¬ 
age of tliat resolution* * (14) This was a poor cover-up for 
a situation directly hiamahie on the Government, the 
Bulletin said, and exhorted the farmers that "having put 
their hands to the plow they must not look back but must 
meet threats and opposition by defiance and determined ac¬ 
tion* (15) 

The real reason for ineffective immigration, Oliver main¬ 
tained, was to be found in fallacious government policy and 
inefficient administration* Regarding the North lest as an 
area of exploitation, the government sought to sake it pay 
the cost of the C*P.R., and through the national Policy to 
support the manufacturing interests of the East. .Directly, 
the East levied tribute in the form of timber and mineral 
fees; in addition it used th© West*a undeveloped resources 
as a bribery fund to secure the support of colonisation 

(14) Edmonton Bulletin, . pril 26, 1884. 

(15) Edmonton Bulletin, April 12, 1884. 










. 

. 














































' 






















































( 172 ) 


companies and transportation interests. As a ' dumpirig 
ground for political rubbish the Territories were made to 
carry too many, and too inefficient, government officials. 
(16) 

The Hon. Thomas White, now Minister of the Interior, and 
one of the few Conservatives for whom the Bulletin had a 
good word, toured the north test in the autumn of 1885. 
Territorial communities took this occasion to urge their de¬ 
mands upon the government# The Bul letin , in an editorial 
headed Our Wants', called >;; hlte * s attention to w the rights, 
requirements and desires* 1 of the Edmonton district# In a 
formidable list mention was made of recognition of squatt¬ 
ers* rights, abolition of dues on settlers* hay and wood, 
reduction in the price of pre-emptions with the privilege 
of second homesteading, supervision of colonisation compan¬ 
ies, the opportunity for local people to compete for govern¬ 
ment contracts, immediate issue of half-breed scrip, improve¬ 
ment of roads, assistance to Saskatchewan River navigation, 
improved telegraph, service, representation in the House of 
Commons, and responsible government for the North test. (17) 

Oliver was favorably impressed by Ihite during the latt¬ 
er’s visit to Edmonton, deriving particular satisfaction 

(16) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 27, 1886. 

(17) Edmonton Bulletin, Mov. 7, 1885. Our wants^ 


















( 173 ) 


from the Minister's independent opinion on North West aff¬ 
airs. He even went so far as to hop© that White*s visit 
would have concrete results, hut unfortunately the visitor*s 
appreciation of North West needs did not overcome govern¬ 
mental inertia to the extent anticipated# (18) 

In 1870 the claim of the half-oreads of Manitoba to share 
in the extinction of the Indian title was recognized by 
"ungranted lands, to the extent of one million four hundred 
thousand acres to be appropriated for the benefit of the 
families of the half-breed residents. ?f (19) four years 
later the original plan was modified by introducing the 
choice of scrip as an alternative to direct land grant. (20) 
Various other changes were made in due course, but K tbe 
history of the half-breed grant in Manitoba was on© of min¬ 
isterial incompetence, parliamentary indifference and ad¬ 
ministrative delay. 11 (21) 

•Thousands of the half-breeds and Metis trekked into the 
Saskatchewan country following the Red liver Rebellion, and 

(18) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 14, 1885. 

(19) Chester Martin Dominion hands policy p. 257. 

(20) Ibid p. 238. 

Stanley, op* eit., p* 244* ihe actual alternative 
to 160 acres of land was an issue of money scrip to 
the value of flbO to every father or mother; also to 
children resident in Manitoba on July 15, 1870. 

(21) Chester Martin Dominion hand® Policy p. 244. 














■ 


■ 



,■ < ■ 























■ 

. 














. 

■ 

■ 

. 


















( 174 ) 


from the early f seventies the North West half-breeds were 
active In petitioning the government for scrip. (22) How¬ 
ever, the claim of the half-breeds of the North West beyond 
the boundaries of Manitoba for a share in the extinction of 
the Indian title was not recognised until 1885. Government 
Inertia and delay finally gave way to belated action In 
March, 1885, the eve of the North West Rebellion. 

The Bulletin had for years been active in Its demands 
for half-breed scrip, and reported with satisfaction the 
arrival of the scrip commission In Edmonton In the summer of 
1885. (25) Oliver charged, however, that the commission did 
a hasty and bad job in the district. if Th© work was begun 
and closed with, undue haste and was not completely nor sat¬ 
isfactorily concluded. 11 (24) 

Land or scrip privileges under the Manitoba .. ct included 
half-breed children (in Manitoba) born before July 15, 1870. 
Then scrip was finally granted In the Worth West, this date 
of commutation was adhered to, which, meant that Worth West 
half-breed children born after July 15, 1870, had, no scrip 
rights. Hot only the half-breeds but numerous whit© resi¬ 
dents considered this settlement to be unjust, and a long 

(£2) Scrip figures in practically all lists of North feeat 

demands« 

(23) Edmonton Bulletin, June 8, 1885. 

(£4) Ibid 

See also , Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 5, 1885* 


















■ 







■ 



















































(175) 

struggle set in to secure scrip for all hall-Creed children 
resident in th© Territories in 1885. Oliver was a staunch 
champion of this claim, and editorials and articles assert¬ 
ing half-breed rights appeared frequently in th© Bulletin . 

(25) 

Numerous half-breeds throughout the North test were class¬ 
ed as treaty Indians. Upon the concession of scrip in 1885, 
most of them applied for release from treaty In order to be 
eligible for scrip. Although, the government was not enthus¬ 
iastic, Oliver urged the Justice of their claim. In add¬ 
ition, he declared, it would be a great step In a desirable 
direction, that of breaking up the tribal system which is 
th© curse of the Indian and th© great bar to his civiliza¬ 
tion.” (£6) 

In 1888 th© Dominion Government was still cleaning up 5 '" 
after the North test Rebellion, and th© Bulletin brought it 
to tasj£ vigorously for its alleged policy of repudiation and 
cutting down of debts payable to North Westers from accounts 
arising out of military obligations. (27) Said the Bulletin , 
®It is the height of madness at this time, after having seen 
the direful effects that have been brought on the Worth West 

(25) Edmonton Bulletin, July 24, 1886; May 9, 1891 and pass¬ 
im. 

(26) Edmonton Bulletin, July 10, 1886. 

(27) This refers to accounts payable to North west traders 
and settlers for services, food, horse feed for the 
cavalry, etc. 











■ • , 




. 






■ 




' 








. 










. 
























■ 










/ •' •• 















■ 






(176) 

by the double dealing of the government, to resume so early 
that course in such exaggerated form. (28) 

Under the banner f *Whit© Rebels % Oliver, in referring to 
the Regina trials, accused the Government of trying to pin 
the blame for the Rebellion on the "white rebels"', and in¬ 
timated that Ottawa was merely trying to direct Eastern pre¬ 
judice against the North West in order to cover up its own 
mismanagement* (29) Editorially the Bulletin criticized 
the work of the Mounted police detachment under Major .1. 
driesbach during the Rebellion panic days in Edmonton, (30) 
and supported the demand of the Edmonton Volunteers (31) for 
recognition and scrip# (32) the amnesty granted the rebels 
it denounced as a policy of weakness* (33) 

In the early * eighties contracts for 1*1*M*P# supplies 
were let in Ottawa, and consequently no direct opportunity 
was afforded small business in the forth lest to share in 
them* This was a rank injustice, the Bulletin claimed, and 

(28) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb* 13, 1888* 

(29) Edmonton Bulletin, April 3, 1886. 

(30) Edmonton Bulletin, May 1, 1886* the Bulletin carried 
a letter from Maj. Griesbach describing the work of 
his detachment during the Rebellion* Oliver headed the 
letter "Romance'. Then -under an editorial heading, 
""Facts 4 , he refuted Oriesbaeh* s claim to credit. 

(31) Enrolled March 30, 1885* Disbanded shortly afterwards. 

(32) Edmonton Bulletin, May 8, 1886. 

(35) Edmonton Bulletin, July 31, 1886* 












. 

■ 

■ 

































■ 



■■ ' ■ 

























■ 



•/' V 


V 




■ 

i 















■ 




















. 

■ 








( 177 ) 


rt Ordinary Dullness principles have been violated it not for 
the purpose at least with the result of throwing business 
that rightfully belongs to the North West into the hands of 
corporations of which two have their headquarters in St# 
Louis, U.S. and the third In London, England. (34) 

Oliver was active In the movement to have the N.W.M.p* 
oarrac&s moved from Fort Saskatchewan to Edmonton, (55) and 
in contradiction of the Police Commissioner’s report to the 

1 

Territorial Lieutenant- Hovernor, he alleged a deterioration 
In the force and a, growth of lawlessness in the years foil- 
owing the Rebellion. The Bulletin was particularly outspok¬ 
en about the robbery of the Edmonton mail stage near Hum- 
ooit> *• ** —- - 

ial on the circumstances surrounding the trial of the alleg¬ 
ed highwayman, one Harnett, was a fine piece of 'free press* 
comment on the administration of justice. (36) The Bulletin 
frequently criticised, as open to abuse, the right of sti¬ 
pendiary magistrates to set the bounds of the judicial dis¬ 
tricts and to decide the frequency and time of sittings. {37] 

(34) Edmonton SZletin 7 It ayl&7 IsSTT" 

(35) Edmonton Bulletin, tug# 27 , 1807 . Reporting a public 
meeting which reviewed past action and considered 
further steps# 

(36) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct# 23, 1886# Harnett was brought 
to trial at Regina, which, Oliver charged, denied the 
defence sufficient opportunity to present defence wit¬ 
nesses* Harnett was found guilty and given 14 years. 

(37) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb# 6, 1886. 












( 178 ) 


Claims of deterioration and inefficiency in the Police 
Force appeared in title Bulletin throughout 1887. "The good 
old days are gone, 1 mourned the editor, stating that the 
Indians were being pampered into insolence, fch© Police Com¬ 
missioner was subject to increasing political interference, 
and the woi*k of the Force was being made secondary to the 
problems of the Indian Department * t the bottom of this 
"mess', idle Bulletin intimated, was non© other than the Hon. 
Edgar Dewdney in his dual role of Lieutenant-Governor and 
Indian Commissioner, and "When the enforcement of justice 
by the police in the Horth West is mad© second to the ex¬ 
igencies of the Indian Department, or any other department, 
it becomes a mockery, a humbug and a farce and is a gross 
injustice to the law-abiding inhabitants of the Territories 
and to the tax-payers of Canada. • (33) 

Oliver was th© staunchest exponent of prohibition to 
serve on the Horth West Council, and after his defeat by 
Dr. Wilson in 188b he continued his battle against liquor in 
the columns of the Bulletin . M© believed that prohibition 
should be a provincial or Territorial rather than a federal 
matter, and suggested that the whole question should be sub¬ 
mitted to a popular vote in the Territories. He expressed 

(38) ^dmonton Bulletin, Sept. 24, 1887* 

See also the Bulletin issues of Mov. 12, 1887 and 
Hov. 16, 18897““ ’ 


















. 

. • 

- , " ;; - ■ - - - ■ ' • . ■ . * ■ . ; - : '.v. : .. ' 

- \ ; . :• ' ! ^ .. • ' ■ - 

. 

■ . 

- ■. ■■ , ' ' - \ ¥/-. ; ’ l >. •' ' . 

■ 




. 


































' 












( 179 ) 


his faith that the common sense of the people -would declare 
for prohibition, and that thereafter, strengthened by popu¬ 
lar approval, it could be more adequately and justly en¬ 
forced. (39) The Bulleti n did not advocate control of the 
liquor traffic by either the north West Council or the suc¬ 
ceeding Legislative Assembly. It held that prohibition 
should be icept out of the arena of North West politics, and 
consistently advocated a popular referendum. (40) In reply 
to those who .maintained that prohibition had already proven 
a failure in the Territories, Oliver claimed that no honest 
attempt had ever been made on the part of the authorities 
to give the prohibitory law effect. (41) The Bulletin agi¬ 
tated the liquor question frequently during the spring and 
summer of 1888, in anticipation of its consideration by the 
first session of the new north West Assembly. (42) 

During the f eighties the Bulletin continued to feature 
numerous articles on the Hudson Bay rout©, and showed some 
concern lest the Bay outlet should fall into the hands of 

(39) Edmonton Bulletin, June 11, 1887. 

See 1886-1888 issues of the Bulletin for numerous ex¬ 
pressions of opinion. 

(40) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 31, 1888. 

(41) Ibid 

(42) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug, 4, 1888f Aug, 11, 1888. 

Two papers supported the Bulletin as out and out pro¬ 
hibitionists the Regina Journal and the On.* Appall e 
Progress . Others were^elTner neutral or"for a 
license law. (Edmo nton Bulletin , Nov. 10, 1888, 
quo ting v arious' pres s opinions•) 













\ : A. \ i V-- ■/ A ' ‘ ■ 

V-- f , ■'-;••■ 

■. [ 

' 

' i 

■ - ' • - - ' 

v ' ;.'■■■ 1 . ■ - ; - .. 

- r - ■’ ' ■ • 

■ ' ; - - ■■ 

Vf. AAA-- *, :• * , * * « 


m ■' k ■ ■ '• - 




i' v - i 






A :. . - 













, ! 













V 






■ 

- ' ' 

. 



, • ■ 













„ 

" 
































( 180 ) 


the G*?#R* Oliver suggested that the line should be built 
under control of an independent British company or under 
provincial management. (43) 'The chief consideration would 
be that it give competition to the Canadian Pacific* (44) 

He was enthusiastic over a prematurely chartered Iberta 
and Athabasca line (45) and hailed with delight a rumour 
that the Grand Trunk and the jnerican Northern Pacific 
might supply money for Manitoba 1 s Red liver line and contin¬ 
ue it westward* (46) 

The ’’monopoly clause of the 0.?*H. charter involved the 
Dominion Government and Manitoba in a protracted battle over 
provincial rights ♦ When Premier lorqusy of Manitoba granted 
charters to several local railways .running to the inter¬ 
national boundary, Macdonald 1 s government promptly disallow¬ 
ed them. Matters came to a head in 1887 over th© Bed Elver 
Valley line south to th© boundary, Manitoba Insisting on 
its right to charter the road and denouncing the C«?«R* 
monopoly, and the O.P.R.* s Van Horne publicly branding the 
Valley lint’s promoters as annexationists* (47) 

(43) Most of the line would lie outside Manitoba, but would 
be under the management of the Manitoba government* 

(44) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar* 29, 1884; May 10, 1884; Nov* 8, 
1884; Mar* 9, 1888; May 2, 1891* 

(45) Edmonton Bulletin, June 25, 1887. 

(46) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug* 8, 1887* 

(47) Gibbon History of the Canadian Pacific p. 517. 






■ ’ 

. 

. 








r'.V . - , ■ -V ■ •" •. ■ > .. ^ 








• 

. 

■ 

J 

• 




■ 


■ 


■ 









* 


* •• ■ - , ' 




































( 101 ) 


Oliver was no friend of Torquay*s government, (48) nor 
was he an * annexation! st ? *, but as the pronounced opponent 
of the G.P.R. in general and of the monopoly clause In par¬ 
ticular he revealed his sympathy with Manitoba in the dis¬ 
allowance battle* (49) In 1884 a Manitoba delegation visit¬ 
ed Ottawa where its demands for provincial rights were re¬ 
fused, mainly, Oliver charged, because the province had a 
legislature prepared to a man to barter its Independence 
to the 0#P.H* for free passes and free whiskey . * . . 5 • (50) 
*Let Scott and Sutherland, Ross and Royal, Morquay and 
Brown, and the whole list of hucksters and tricksters, suck¬ 
ers and puppets, knaves and fools, who have led the Mani¬ 
toba people by the nose for the last ten years, receive 
short notice to quit * * * • * (51) At the height of the 
Manitoba agitation for the Red River Valley line Sir George 
Stephen threatened to move the G.P.R. main shops from Win¬ 
nipeg to Fort William unless the province moderated its 
attacks on the Canadian Pacific. (5k) In an editorial 

(48) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 25, 1884; Mar. 29, 1884 - n A 
Political Acrobat*; Jan. 1, 1867. 

(49) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 14, 1887. 

(50) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 1, 1884. 

(51) Ibid Oliver was not at all convinced of Mor- 
quay 1 s sincerity in the Manitoba struggle, believing 
that in any provincial Conservative party could be seen 
H the cloven hoof of Ottawa authority 11 . 

Edmonton Bulletin , Jan. 1, 1887. 

(52) Gibbon, op. Git., p. 318. 







. 
























. 














■ 


























■ 













( 182 ) 


headed Down, Dog l rt (Stephen speaking to Manitoba), Oliver 
held up this threat aa an example of the power of th© O.P.R. 
and its lack of consideration for western interests. (55) 

In 1880 rumours were current of the appointment of a 
select committee of th© Senate to enquire into means of 
access to the Northern Territories, particularly the Peace 
Kiver District. tf A committee of enquiry will be a very 
good thing, tf stated th© Bulletin , **but a committee of action 
would be a good deal better. ... If the Senate desires 
to improve the means of access (to the North West) let it 
say to the G.P.R., f Build a branch line to give access to 
that country or the policy of disallowance will be abandon¬ 
ed so that others may be allowed to do what you have failed 
to do. 1 ** (54) 

In this same year, under th© new Greenway administration, 
Manitoba finally reached a settlement with the Dominion on 
the disallowance issue. In return for the Federal Govern¬ 
ment guaranteeing the interest on a 115,000,000 issue of 

C.P.H. bonds, th© Company waived the monopoly clause in 
its charter. Manitoba immediately proceeded with the con¬ 
struction of competing lines, and press comment throughout 

(55) Kdmonton Bulletin, June 4, 1007, 

(54) Kdmonton Bulletin, Jan. 14, 1888. 












; 








' 
































. . 






• 












. 






















■ 





,r; . 






' 








■ 














i;-A 












■ 



























(183) 

the North West was exultant, (55) The Bulletin expressed 
great satisfaction with the final outcome of the Manitoba 
anti- disallowance agitation, and under the banner "Monopoly 
Dead predicted great days for the North West, No doubt, 
it declared, the C.P.R. would now be compelled to push 
branch lines into the Saskatchewan country, (56) There was 
indeed considerable branch line building during the follow¬ 
ing few years, but it is very doubtful if the effect of com¬ 
petition on service and rates was as decided as the expon¬ 
ents of provine!ally chartered railways had hoped. (57) 

The first 0*P,R. train pulled into Calgary in ugust of 
1885. The Bulletin played an aggressive part in the sub¬ 
sequent agitation for a branch line north, for which Edmon¬ 
ton had to wait nearly a decade, (58) 

Frank Oliver was never too pre-occupied with polities to 
find room in his paper for extensive articles of local in¬ 
terest. Items on climate, soil, farming, gardening and 
agricultural exhibits appeared frequently, along with regu¬ 
lar and often detailed meteorological reports covering sea¬ 
sonal weather conditions, precipitation and temperatures 

(55) Edmonton Bulletin, April 7, 1888. 

(56) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 6, 1889. 

(57) Gibbon, op. cit,, p. 329, 

(58) Numerous Bulletin editorials and articles after 1883. 










-* ■ , ■ 










' 










































' 









( 184 ) 


with particular reference to incidence of frost in the 
spring and fall. The Bulletin was one of the leading spon¬ 
sors of the gricultural Society which grew into the Agri¬ 
cultural Exhibition, and it made repeated appeals for the 
establishment of a regular government meteorological service 
on the grounds that facts, not rumours and prejudice, would 
show the superior climate and conditions of the Saskatchewan 
country,** (59) dr eat interest was manifested in the possib¬ 
ilities of the peace Elver Country and the Mackenzie Basin 
which were dealt with in numerous and lengthy .articles. 

Oliver’s interest la schools has already been noted, and 
he was especially gratified by the decision reached in Ed¬ 
monton in December, 1884, to organize a school district un¬ 
der the new North West Ordinance, (60) ffce school question, 
whether to leave the school as it had been, supported by 
public subscription, or to proceed with the erection of a 
formal school district with taxing powers, was settled by 
referendum. Apparently toe voting was accompanied by the 
usual stretching of qualifications. t any rate the Bullet ¬ 
in refers to the * anti* s bringing in Hudson*s Bay Go, em¬ 
ployees, the ”pro* s“ bringing up boarders from the hotels, 
and "'both parties swallowing the cast-iron oath like little 

(59) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 0, 1888. 

(60) Oliver’s School Bill of 1884, 



























#r>*. 





■ 

























( 185 ) 




men. 1 ’ (61) "Not the least satisfactory feature developed 
oy the contest,* wrote Oliver, "was the fact that although 
a Protestant school district was being erected, Roman Cath¬ 
olics were found working and voting for its erection as 
heartily as Protestants•(62) 


Although Edmonton*s growth was not phenomenal during the 
decade the community expanded slowly, profiting to some ex¬ 
tent by the overland traffic from, the G.P*h. at Calgary into j 
the Athabasca country to the north. The Bulletin heartily 
endorsed a petition for a bridge across the Saskatchewan, 
the editor taking occasion to point out the natural strat¬ 
egic advantages of the Edmonton site, fhe late Eighties 
witnessed a growing confidence that, despite past disappoint¬ 
ments and present difficulties, Edmonton was destined to be¬ 
come one of the most important centres in the West. No man 
played a more prominent part in the development of the pion¬ 
eer community than did Frank Oliver* 

(61) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec* 27, 1B84. 


(62) Ibid 

See also the Edmonton Bulletin, Bee* 20, 1884 



























' 












( 186 ) 


Chapter 7 Member of the North West Legislative Assembly 

Che first North West Legislature convened at Regina on 
October SI, 1888# The session opened with the election of 
H.C. Wilson, K&oionton, as Speaker. Lieut.-dov. Royal, who 
appears to have placed a fairly liberal interpretation upon 
the duties of his office, then proceeded to m&xe certain 
concessions which were destined to put him on the defensive 
for tiie remainder of his term, lie announced that with the 
advice of the members of the Assembly he had selected four 
of their number as his dvisory Committee. These were in¬ 
stalled on the Speaker’s right, '"and to all outward appear¬ 
ance a Legislative Assembly had been constituted with all 
the forms of a Provincial ssembiy with duly established 
Cabinet.® (1) It was not long before the Advisory Committee 
was claiming general advisory powers* (2) The assembly was 
soon raising the question of the responsibility of the Ad¬ 
visory Committee to itself. (3) The Lieutenant-Oovernor 
was responsible to the Assembly for funds supplied by it, 
but not for the Dominion subsidies which formed by far the 
larger part of the public expenditures. The Legislative 

(1) Oliver, TS.H. in Royal Soc. Trans , p. 90. 

(2) Ibid pp. 92-94. 

(3) Ibid p. 93. 















' 















... 









































• 





. 










. 















• 


■ 



. .. . . 


































































( 187 ) 


Supply Bill of 1888 dealt with funds of Dominion as well as 
Corritorial origin, and In assenting to th© Bill, Royal used 
a formula in vogue where responsible government prevailed* 
"It is difficult to suppose that at least some of th© mem¬ 
bers of the Legislature did not recognize the fact that 
hidden in this mass of verbiage was th© formal acknowledg¬ 
ment of the Assembly’s financial autonomy and right of con¬ 
trol of public expenditure* 4 ' 1 (4) At any rate the Assembly 
claimed that the Lieutenant-Governor, during th© first ses¬ 
sion, had acknowledged two things: the right of the ssem- 
bly to advise on appointments to the Advisory Committee, 
and its right of control over expenditure of Dominion sub¬ 
sidies as well as territorial revenue* 

From the first, two opposed groups were discernible in 
the Assembly - th© conservative element and the # !orth West 
fire-eaters 11 * men this latter group, of which Oliver was 
a prominent member, seemed reasonably satisfied that Royal ? s 
liberal interpretation of th© ct of 1888 was an assurance 
of at least ‘'practical responsible government* 

Oliver himself, as the session proceeded, began to rele¬ 
gate the constitutional struggle to second place and empha¬ 
size th© liquor question as th© big issue confronting the 

(4) Black, op# cit*, p* SIB* 
































■ 








i 

. ■ 






: v . • ' ' * ' ' ' - 


; 

=. • 



■ 







' 



















■ . . . 


. 





















( 188 ) 


Assembly, (5) He took the lead In attacking a proposed 
liquor licensing ordinance and challenged the House to bring 
the bill to a vote. The three legal experts ruled against 
the constitutionality of such a vote, * Knocking the Assembly 
cold’ 1 (6) and precipitating a debate which lasted for two 
days, F#W*0. Raultain {District of Macleod) and Frank Oliv¬ 
er were the two principal speakers, the former upholding the 
correctness of the experts 5 * 7 8 9 judgment, and the latter, in a 
series of fiery and reasoned speeches, advocating the right 
and power of the Assembly to take the vote. (7) 

Oliver was still regarded by many of his fellow-legislat¬ 
ors as something of a radical and 5l kieker f? , but h© was ra¬ 
pidly adding to his reputation as an able speaker and in¬ 
dependent thinker. Even the Calgary Herald (Cons.) comp¬ 
limented him on his -''powerful speech ■ respecting the re¬ 
sponsibility of the executive, (8) and the Begins header 
said: 

Mr, Frank Oliver is a man of honor. He always 
thinks out his own course. He is against his party 
on the question of Commercial Union, The other day 
he spoke strongly against the ballot and voted. a- 
gainst it as did Mr, Sutherland, W# are not dis- ' 
cussing the rightness or wrongness of their views. 

We merely commend men who us© their own reason* (9) 

(5) Edmonton Bulletin, Deo, 1, 1888; Bee. 15, 1888, 

(8) Edmonton Bulletin, Bec. 15, 1888, 

(7) Ibid 

(8) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 1, 1888. Quoting Calgary Herald . 

(9) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 15, 1888. Quoting Regina Leader. 













■ 

•• = -MV i 

a\ \ ■ ■ ■ i . • - " - ■ . . - , 

■ 





VV ’k'. ... - 














; ■ ; 


.\K V 







■ s 








- 







• 







. 


• 











































































• 


■ 

• 










. 

































( 189 ) 


Writing later with reference to the legislative session 
of 1888* Oliver stated; "They (the .ssembly members) believ¬ 
ed that in the representatives of the people was centred the 
authority of the government, and that the ;dvisory Council 
and the Lieutenant-Governor were merely appliances by and 
through which their wishes could most conveniently be given 
effect. 11 (10) He insisted that the transactions of the 
first session were carried on "with this understanding as a 
basis”; and that the business was given the utmost public¬ 
ity, fi and no protest was made from Ottawa that the intent of 
the North West let had been Misunderstood; while the people 
of the Territories were thoroughly satisfied both with the 
manner in which the government was being conducted and with 
its practical results. 1 * (11) 

His statement that ®no protest was made from Ottawa"' was 
sincere enough, and expressed a belief widely held by the 
Assembly members. Actually, however, following the con¬ 
cessions made during the first session, Lieut.-Gov. Hoyal 
was privately taken to task by the Prime Minister himself 
for having placed too liberal an interpretation on the Act 
of 1888» (12} Therefore, despite Royal 1 s wish; to favor n a 

(10) Oliver, K.H. in Royal Soc♦ Trans . p. 95, gives reasons 
for Royal’s change«PaT€ff?SESeT nnm Oliver’s statement is 
from Kdmonton Bulletin, Deo. 20, 1890. 

(11) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 20, 1890. "The ssembly Fight 

(12) Oliver, 15.H. in Roya l See. Trans , p. 95. 


















i 










: 





































■ 

. ' , . 


■ 








■ 

■ 















( 190 ) 


progressive evolution towards thoroughly responsible govern¬ 
ment”, he had no alternative but to proceed in accordance 
with the spirit of the Act or resign# It is understandable, 
then, that he met his second Assembly with the attitude that 
he must act in accordance with his Instructions from Ottawa. 
( 13 ) 

No sooner had the Assembly met in October, 1889, than a 
crisis developed over public expenditure. Royal refused to 
give the Assembly a full statement of the public accounts, 
in particular of those involving the Dominion grants. Haul- 
tain, the recognised leader of the Advisory Council, pointed 
out tiiat legally the Council was not a. cabinet and could not 
be held responsible for the Lieutenant-Governor 1 s attitude. 
Actually, the situation stood as follows: 

The Advisory Council HAD rendered some assistance 
in preparing the estimates. The crux of the matter 
was that the Lieutenant-Governor only conceded of his 
good will what the Council claimed as a right. The 
issue was not whether the Lieutenant-Governor DID, 
but whether he MUST, accept the advice of his Advis¬ 
ory Council; and whether Dominion grants were to be 
expended under the direction of the Dominion Govern¬ 
ment or under the direction of the Territorial Assem¬ 
bly, 111 © privilege of advising and directing had 
been accorded in 1888. then it was withdrawn, the 
Assembly claimed it as a right. (14) 

The dvlsory Council resigned on October 29, alleging as 
on© reason among many, ’’because we cannot continue to work 


(15) Oliver, K.K. in Royal Soc. Trans , p. 94 
(14) Ibid p. 96. 













- - ~ " - *' 






' 


■ 








' 











f 












\ - : '■■■ ■■■ -v.‘ A - —'•- : • 

' 










, 

’■ :4 .'■ • 

■::■& '*■ 'r •;'* 








-• ;,®a 












( 191 ) 


under a system in which our most Important powers are only 
granted to us in the form of concessions# * (15) The Terri¬ 
torial press as a whole showed little sympathy with the 
Councils action, pointing out that it was too sensitive to 
criticism from the Assembly, or was seeking powers clearly 
in contradiction of the cfc of 1888• (16) 

Royal appointed a new Advisory Council headed by Dr, 

Brett (District of Banff) and events moved rapidly, Brett, 
receding from Haultain’s position, stated, that the Council 
would confine itself to advice upon the expenditure of mon¬ 
ey raised within the Territories* Thereupon the , ssembly 
announced its displeasure and passed a vote of norwconfi- 
deuce in the Council# the Council tendered a resignation 
which Royal refused to accept, on the grounds that since the 
Council had not as yet even functioned, a vote of non-con¬ 
fidence was meaningless# In November, when the Assembly 
went into Committee of Supply, it refused to vote supplies 
until the funds of the preceding year, including the Domin¬ 
ion grant, had been fully accounted for, (17) and suggested 
that the Advisory Council resign. The Council did resign, 
and this time the resignation was accepted* Royal found 

(15) Oliver, E.M. The Cana dian North le st; Its Early 

DiyiTopment s "''ahcTXigiiTa tlve Hecorda 

Publications Archives,.if 67 9 

Ottawa 1915 2 Vol* p. 1102. 

Hereafter referred to as Oliver, !*H. The Canad - 
ian North lest. 


(16) Oliver, V*H. in Royal Soo, Trans * pp, 97-98. 

(17) Ibid p* 102* 



















' 






.. . 








* 




: 








' 










■ 


































(192) 

himself unable to form a new Council since he was unable to 
meet the three conditions laid down by ’the Assembly; proper 
accounting for the expenditures of 1888, control of the pre¬ 
paration of all estimates, and control of all expenditures - 
both of Territorial revenues and Dominion grant, (18) 

The majority of the Assembly, made up of those members 
most favorable to full responsible government, were now 
dubbed *The Thirteen" by the press* They memorialised Qiia~ 

j 

wa at some length on the situation, with little result* The 
Assembly passed an ordinance creating an Advisory Council to ! 
be appointed by itself, and then appointed two members to 
this Council, (19) Western newspapers, with a few notable 
exceptions including'the Bulletin , were very critical of the 
tactics of "The Thirteen". Legally, Lieut.-Oov. Royal was 
in the right throughout* The second session of the ,ssem~ 
bly was prorogued in an atmosphere of tension and frustra¬ 
tion. 

Oliver* s role in the renewal of the constitutional battle 
may readily be conceived* One of the most uncompromising 
and belligerent members of r *The Thirteen 11 , he attacked, both 
in the Mouse and in the columns of the Bulletin , the 

(18) Oliver, E.H* in Royal Soc, Trans , p. 102, 

(19) , step clearly in contravention of the Act of 1888* 

In 1890 the Dominion Clove rnment disallowed the ordin¬ 
ance. 










S ' • 

. b ■ " 

■ ' • •• ' ■■ ■% :; " '■ 








... 


. • ■. . : :r -"' 

if 4 ' : ■ ' ■ . 

* ''Si ,: • ■ • 

' 

i a *,■■■:•? ■ 






' 


1 

'• ^ , ’ ' • - 

V; ' ' " / V-,- ■ - -- ' 

















( 193 ) 


resumption of "one man power at Regina. Calling attention 
to prior expectations that Royal would "delegate to his ad¬ 
visory board some of the powers vested in himself, and in 
tills way give the work of local administration to local men 
representing the people," (20) he submitted that the Gover¬ 
nor had not taken the advice of the Advisory Council in many 
matters of Importance, and that the resignation of Haul- 
tain's Council was *the strongest possible protest against 
the existing order of things." (21) Said the Bulletin s 

If the resignation of the Advisory Board will eff¬ 
ect the desired result, it would not be too much to 
pay, or if that fails, if the resignation* of the whole 
Assembly would secure it, or at least awaken, not only 
the people of the Territories, tout the Dominion Govern¬ 
ment , to the urgent necessity there is for the grant¬ 
ing of full responsible government to the forth lest 
Territories, it would be cheaply secured, and in this 
case the end would justify the means. (22) 

Oliver was bitterly critical of Dr. Brett*$ Advisory 
Council, as lacking the confidence of the Assembly, and he 
warmly seconded Haultain 1 s scathing attacks on this "irreg¬ 
ular executive*. (23) In reply to those who criticized 
responsible government on the grounds of expense he en¬ 
quired? 

Do they know what responsible government meansf 
That it does not necessarily mean a certain amount 

(20) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 9, 1889. 

(21) Ibid 

(22) Ibid 

(£3) Edmonton Bulletin, lev. 30, 1889. 






















. ; : : - •' - - : • - • 
4 . : ■ ■ ■ . V r 






■ ■ . . ' V - - V . ; 

' ' ' 

'■ ( » ' 


: * - ■" 


,?'* i ; h -' - ' ■ ■ ■ 






‘ 

, 4 : r. .^,4' r v '.bp.. b- - ■■■ , ■ . f 

. 

- , * < • . • " . ■ • ~v - . 'i - - 

l ■ ; ' 

, 

: 












'-'fv ■;' ■' ; i" : \'' ‘ „ ' ;; 4 


-t-i 




. 


. • • 






















■ 







( 194 ) 


of government machinery, high salaries and general 
corruption, but that it means responsibility by the 
representatives of the people for the executive acts 
of the government as well as for their own legisla¬ 
tive acts, that is all. 

No doubt it can to© made very expensive and very 
corrupt, and there la little doubt that it can toe 
made very cheap and very effective. ... It is 
a matter of intellectual and moral, not ol financial, 
qualifications. (24) 

The Bulletin devoted a good deal of space to attacks on 
the "pro-loyal* 4 press, particularly the Calgary Herald and 
the Regina header , fhe Conservative papers were rather in- |! 
dined to view the fight at Begin©, as a "battle in a teacup ',! 
and to suggest that control of the purse strings was not as j 
important as getting adequate subsidies from Ottawa. If the 
Lieu tenant** Cove raor, they maintained, could expend the 
grants as efficiently m the Advisory Council, then toy all 
means let him do so. fo this view Oliver replied. What the 
majority of the Assembly demand is simply that the financial 
control now assumed by the Lieutenant-Governor shall be vest- 
ed. in the representatives of the people. That Is their 
right and they will toe satisfied with nothing less. 1 ' 1 (25) 

As for the stand of the North West federal members, the 
people "desired. them to do certain work and yet consented 
to have them fastened down by party ties so that they could 

(24) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb* 8, 1690. 

(25) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 22, 1890. 













-V. ■ ; i 

• ■ . . 

- ' y- . r | 

' r K ;\ ’ >; ‘ ,. v 

•yV- -v > y 

- 

; 

- .. • ■ ■ . 

• • - ' 








(I95J 

not do it, or anything ©Is©, unless the party wished*'* (v6) 
This situation could be remedied only by electing "men who 
will vote for the government just as long as the government 
does what is right by the North West - and no longer/* (27) 

During the recess preceding the third session, Lieut.- 
dov. Royal took a bold step. He selected an advisory Coun¬ 
cil **from among those willing to comply with the law ir¬ 
respective of the fact whether they possessed the confidence 
of the House or not,** (28) This Council, headed by Dr. 
Brett, the Bulletin denounced as an insult to the Assembly 
and to the North West. ^Oovernment by minority* was the 
mildest term Oliver applied to Brett* s cabal, and he urged, 
w Ifc will be for the Assembly during its coming session - 
the last before a general election - to take such a position 
on this question as shall sake it a clear issue when the 
election occurs/ 1 (29) 

When the Assembly met in October, 1890, it was already 

spoiling for a fight, and acting on the initiative of Ui Ehe 

Thirteen 1 lost no time in passing the following resolutions 

They are therefore compelled to believe in the 
right of the majority not only to pass legislation, 
but to advise and control in the matter of its being 

(26) Edmonton Bulletin, May 24, 1890. 

(27) Ibid 

(28) Oliver, B.H, in Royal Soc, Trans , p, 105. 

(29) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct, 18, 1890, 

























■ 




























































, *iV' y%. .. :• ‘•- 






































( 196 ) 


given effect; that the North lest Territories Act 
interpreted in the light of constitutional usage 
provides for control of the executive by an advis¬ 
ory council having the confidence of the majority 
of the House; that the assumption of such control 
by any members of this House not possessing its con¬ 
fidence is a violation of the spirit and intent of 
the North lest Territories Act, and an infringment 
upon the rights of the House, against which it feels 
compelled to enter its most solemn protest and to 
take such measures to protect itself as best it may*(50) 

Oliver had his own way of ^deflating 11 those men who, 
lacking the Assembly's support, had accepted appointment to 
Royal* s w irregular n Council*, *Hh© claim made by the member 
for Prince Albert (51) that he had rescued the country by 
his recent taking of office was a sample of assurance so 
stupendous that it could be illustrated only by a compari¬ 
son. The story of the Irishman at the Battle of Waterloo 
would answer* As the Duke of Wellington rod© along the line 
before the battle commenced he halted and demanded of his 
staff, * Is Patrick Murphy present? * The answer came, 'He 
is* 1 1 Then,* said the Duke, *in the name of God let the 
battle begin. * (32) 

Th© Assembly boycotted the dvisory Council, refusing all 
motions and legislation offered by its members, and prevent¬ 
ing them from serving on any committees* Again the 


(30) Journals of the North Aest Assembly 1888-1904 Regina 
TournaXs^ l^£e^e¥iXorip* 38 

Hereafter referred to as Assembly, with year 

indicated. 

(31) J.F* Betts. 

(32) Sdmonton Bulletin, Nov* 29, 1890* 















■ * 












. r . ■?. .. 










' 












> 
















. ‘ - 














. 










■ ' ■■■ . / 












( 197 ) 


Territorial press, excepting ”radicals* like the Bulletin, 
was critical; the general public, apathetic# 

The Speech fx»om the Throne and the Address in Reply pro-- 1 

voiced a "battle royal* 1 * The Address, a condemnation of the 

. 

North West’s *one-man government”, was finally voted at half¬ 
past three in the morning after a thirteen hour debate# 

Lieut#-Oov« Royal submitted a statement of his position r 
to the Assembly quoting the Minister of Justice on its cor¬ 
rectness, and pointing out, what the Legislature already 
knew, that he administered the Territories under instruc¬ 
tions from 'the (Jovernor-Be tie ra 1-in-0ounci 1 * ’The Assembly 
remained hostile, pointing out in its turn that it valued 
its own interpretation of the Act of 1888 more than it did 
that of the Minister of Justice. *The Thirteen* composed a 
lengthy memorial to the Li©utenant*Sov# mo r, couched in 
scathing terms and denouncing his fl tyrannical attitude* 1 , but 
through some oversight failed to deliver it to him# When 
Royal submitted the Territorial estimates for the year end¬ 
ing June 30, 1891, the Assembly tabled them* A deadlock 
existed when the House prorogued in November# 

In May of the following year Dr# Brett and J.F# Betts, 
two of the Council members, went to Ottawa with a request 
for responsible government. They presented this goal as 
the legitimate aspiration of the Legislative Assembly and 
the people of the Territories, a fin© anti-climax 











' 

-■ 


■ 

i 

■ 

. ■ ■ 










' - 

■'■■■ -V'- 






V -, ;■ • . 












■■ • ; v, ■■ • - . ■■ 













am) 


developed. The territorial Members of Perilament and Sen¬ 
ators at Ottawa informed the drett-Betts delegation that 


responsible government was not the aspiration of the people, 

but only of the ambitious members of the * ssemoly who saw 

well-staffed departments and lucrative portfolios in the 

offing, ($3) Actually, north lest opinion was divided. 

Certain substantial elements in the press and among the pop-j 

ulatioa feared the expense of responsible government; some , 

opinion held it as premature, a matter to be left until the 
--------- 

(33) Here was a situation in which Brett presented respon¬ 
sible government as the legitimate aspiration of the 
territorial Assembly and of the people of the Terri¬ 
tories. Oliver was very critical of the IUP* 1 a who 
claimed it was the aspiration of the assembly only, 
and not of the north lest people* 


luring the autonomy dispute {1900-1906), Haultain 
presented the achievement of autonomy as the legitimate 
aspiration of the Territorial Assembly ana of the north 
est people, Oliver, now a federal M.P #f claimed it 
was the aspiration of the Assembly only, and not of 
the people of the Territories, 

( Edmon ton Bulletin , April 11, 1905, Session deport - 
Oliver *in"~'fiH© J SbuI# of Commons* m l say that the people 
of the Horth west Territories have never asASd for 
provincial autonomy,** *X m not responsible for what 
the government of to# north seat has done.) 


A belief in responsible government does not necessarily 
imply a bellif in autonomy, and Oliver was not necess¬ 
arily inconsistent* However, in urging responsible 
government he consistently held that toe Assembly did 
indeed represent north West - 001111011 ; in the autonomy 
dispute he discounted the Assembly as not truly rep¬ 
resenting north West opinion* He may have been right 
in both instances, or vie may have her© an interesting 
example of the fact that 11 circumstances alter oases." 












( 199 ) 


formation of the provinces; and in stating their opinion the 
Territorial M.P.’s, who were all Conservatives, were doubt¬ 
less weighing their standing with their party which was dis¬ 
tinctly unfavorable to granting responsible government at 
this time. (54) 

It is scarcely necessary to trace in detail the stand 
which Oliver took upon the various points at issue between 
Royal and the ssembly during the third session* He was 

j 

the uncompromising opponent of Royal and his executive upon 
any and all occasions* He argued that no stretching of the 
Act of 1888 was necessary to read into it a guarantee of 
responsible government, that is, the principle of majority 
rule, Territorial control of all revenue, and a responsible 
Council, 

They (the Assembly) believed that when the Act de¬ 
clared that the lieutenant-governor should, have the 
power to make ordinances for the government of the 
North West Territories - that is, to govern - m hj 
and with the advice and consent of the legislative 
assembly of the Territories” - it meant what it said, 
and said what the Parliament of Canada meant when the 
Act was passed* 

They believed that in the representatives of the 
people was centred the authority .of the government 
and that the Advisory Council and the lieutenant- 
governor were .merely appliances by and through which 
their wishes could most conveniently be given effect* 

(35) 


(34) Oliver, E.H* In Roya l Soc* Trans* pp* 109-110, 

Black, op* cit*, pp7~*453-404T 

(35) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec* fcO, 1890. This is Oliver*s 

opinion as expressed in an article entitled, "The 
Assembly fight ** 














. 

■ 




■ 

' 

*: ■ ■ . - ' ' - ' ■■ 

' * • ■ • 






4 






‘ 












. 













. 

■ 























. . 






. 

. 




















( 200 ) 

His contention that a correct legal interpretation of the 
Act of 1888 granted full rosyonsiDie government to the North 
West was not admitted by the Dominion Government, nor by 
Royal and his adherents including a majority of the Terri¬ 
torial press# ^en among many of Oliver’s colleagues, men 
as keen as he in the cause of responsible government, there 
was a recognition that the first real step in the direction | 
of a responsible executive must be an amendment to the Act 
of 1888# Legally, as is now generally conceded, Oliver was 
in the wrong and Royal was in the right throughout• (56) 

The restrictions on North. West self-government were impli¬ 
cit and intended in the Act itself. (57) There is no ques¬ 
tion of Oliver’s sincerity; but it would appear that in his 
£©&1 for the North West cause he strained, the terms of the 
Act of 1888 past the breaking point. 

The third session, disrupted by the battle between 
Brett’s executive and the Assembly, was practically barren 
of legislation# Oliver laid the blame on ’’those who by 
their atrocious usurpation compelled the Assembly to fight 
in defence of the authority conferred upon it by parliament 
. • # * fl (38) and advised the Assembly to ’’fight, with such 

(56) This conclusion is inescapable if !*H# Oliver’s anal¬ 
ysis of the struggle between Royal and the Assembly is 
correct# ( Oliver, TUB. in Royal Boo# Trans # Passim) 

(57) Supra p# 159. 

(58) Bdmonton Bulletin, Dec. 27, 1890. 






. 

' 




' 
















. 

. 










. 





























( 201 ) 


weapons as the statutory law and constitutional usage pro¬ 
vided for the right of the majority to rule and the right 
of the people to control their own money for their own pub¬ 
lic purposes; let the appeal o© to the electors of the Morth 
West and the final decision rest with the Parliament of 
Canada whose Act called the Assembly into existence. 1 * (59) 

He denied the charge frequently levied that the ^Thirteen* 1 
were striving merely for prestige and personal aggrandize¬ 
ment, and he never tired of reiterating hie assertion that 
they were simply elaiming their rights on the terns of the 
Horfch West Act, properly interpreted* (40) As for the ob¬ 
structionism of Brett*s Councils 

Bills on more or less important subjects were pre¬ 
pared, and in still more hours and hours of drivel 
the House, was dared to refuse leave to introduce 
them* But the leave was refused just the same. •• s 
long as the executive refused the House leave to con¬ 
trol the funds, so long the executive was refused 
leave to control the House* fhis was the simple issue 
between the executive and the House and no amount of 
obstruction, or threats, or trickery, or misrepresen¬ 
tation or disreputable tactics of any Kind, however 
skilfully planned on the part of the executive was 
sol© to draw the attention of the House from that 
issue, to which all others were for the time made 
subordinate. (41) 

Oliver was very critical of the Brett-Betts delegation 
to Ottawa ”to advocate government by the majority.^ (42) He 


(39) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Bee. 

27, 

1890 

(40) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Jan. 

10, 

1891 

(41) 

Edmonton Bulletin, 

Dee* 

27, 

1890. 


(42) Supra p. 197* 







. 


. 










. 




. 
















. 

. 

■ 


































( 202 ) 

accused the two Council members of insincerity, suggesting 
that if they were so anxious to attain their object they 
might best secure it by resigning from the Advisory Council. 

(43) Brett’s contention, as revealed in an Interview with 
the Free Press ,was that the Act of 1BBB should be amended to 
give the Assembly control of all funds, make the Council 
responsible to the assembly for their expenditure, and re¬ 
move the Lleutenant-Gtovernor from the sittings of the Coun¬ 
cil. (44) nevertheless, the Bulletin still maintained that, 
"Minority rule in the North West was brought about, not 
through any fault or flaw in the North lest Act, but simply „ 
by the action of the Lieutenant-3overnor - who chose to ac¬ 
cept the advice of the minority in preference to that of the 
majority/* (45) 

The issue, as already noted, was further confused by the 

opinions of the Territorial M.F.’s. (46) Lougheed and Davis 

opposed any change until the North West was divided into two 

districts; Bavin and Macdowall asserted that the people did 

not want any change and therefore responsible government 

should wait upon provincial status. Senator Perley also 
—— - —— .. . — ~- ———. 

(43) Edmonton Bulletin, May 23, 1891. 

(44) Ibid Quoting the Free Press . 

(45) Ibid 

(46) Supra p, 199. 















• ; ■ . 


- • ' 

•: ■ ■■ ;'f >■ . • -r, ;•- '•■■■ 

- ■ , 1 , ■ r 

- S '■ . • . . , ; 

» ‘ 













( 203 ) 


opposed any change. The situation became almost ludicrous 
when Messrs. Richardson and Secord, the other two members 
of Brett* s advisory Council, sent the following telegram to 
Prime Minister Abbott and Lieut,-Bov. Royal: tt We object to 
the division of the Territories into three districts with 


separate councils as proposed by Messrs. Brett and Betts, 
North West delegates. Same not authorized by us . » . ,” 

(47) 


This sort of thing was grist to Frank Oliver*s mill. He 
took occasion to flay the North lest federal members, and 


to ask the world at large just whom Brett and Betts did re- „ 
present. (48) He intimated that the North lest delegates 


either lacked the ability to convince the federal represen¬ 
tatives of the justice of their case or, which was more 
probable, that they had not made an adequate effort. (49) 


(47) Kdmonton Bulletin, July 18, 1891. 

(48) Ibid 

(49) Black, op, clfc., p. 404 offers an explanation for the 
clash of opinion between the members of the Assembly 
and the Territorial M.P.* s. Recalling the primitive 
social and economic conditions of the North West at 
that time, he claims there could have been no very def¬ 
initely organized force of opinion on any subject, 

so far as any public opinion on political subjects ex¬ 
isted at all, it seems generally to have been favor¬ 
able to the principle of Territorial control of local 
financial interests,** However, under the open system 
of voting it was not easy to get a free expression of 
opinion in Dominion elections, and too often the Terri¬ 
torial M.P.*s merely echoed the opinions held by a 
cabinet at Ottawa "astonishingly ill-informed regarding 
every western interest and desire. 5 * 










. 

. 





















.&<>"*" .— ■ . ■ • • • • ■;■■■■/■:* ; 

■ r . * 

• : :• . 












/■ 




s • 4;. • , ■ 












. 

































( 204 ) 


Exactly what the Brett-Betts mission accomplished is a 
matter of controversy. At any rate the Dominion Parliament 
in the session of 1891 passed an amending North West Act 
which established a new constitution for the Territories. 

(50) The act authorized the Lieutenant-Governor to dissolve 
the Assembly and call a general election. Granting definite 
concessions, it removed the legal experts who had sat in the 
Assembly and made that body wholly elective. It gave the 
Assembly power over a portion of the Dominion grants, which 
the Oovernor was authorized to spend in concurrence with the 
ssembly or any of its committees. But Section 13 of the Act., 
of 1888, relating to the financial Advisory Council, was not 
repealed, nor was Section 14 which provided that the Assem¬ 
bly could not pass a money vote unless it had been recom¬ 
mended by the Lieutenant-Governor. However, upon the ad- 
vice of the Minister of Justice, Royal did not appoint an 
Advisory Council - “it simply dropped out of existence when 
the old Assembly cessed to exist.** (51) The Act of 1891 
vested the executive government of the Territories in the 
Lieutenant-Governor acting generally upon instructions from 
Ottawa, and with the advice and. assistance of a committee 

(50) Statutes of Canada 54-55 Viet., c 22 (1891) 

(51) Oliver, S.H. in Royal soe. Trans, p. 111. 




































; ’ 

" 


* 









i 



; . \il :■ 
















. 

. 




• 

■ ■£ 












. 

































■ , ■ 

. 


• • • ' 











(205) 

composed of members or the Legislative assembly, (52) In¬ 
terpreting this latter provision In the broadest possible 
manner, the new assemuly at its first session created by 
ordinance an Executive committee consisting of four mem¬ 
bers of the Assembly, chosen by itself, but appointed by the 
Governor and holding office during his pleasure, (55) To 
give continuity to the administration one member of the com¬ 
mittee took up permanent residence in Regina where he was 
able, between sessions, to work with the Governor, F*W.G, 
Haultain, in this capacity, became in a sense the first 
w premier 31 ' of the Horth V.est Territories, although he himself 
deprecated the use of the tern. The Assembly, from the 
first, considered the Executive Committee responsible to it¬ 
self, and despite the limitations implied or stated in the 
Act of 1891, envisaged its activities as extending to a 
much wider field than merely finance, (54) 

^leofcoral re-disfcribution and an increase in the number 
of seats preceded the elections of 1891 for a new Assembly. 
Edmonton and St. Albert were again separated into distinct 
electoral districts. Oliver was returned by acclamation 

(52) Oliver, E.B. in Royal Soc. Trans , p. 111. 

(53) Black, op. cit., p. 625, 

(54) Ottawa interpreted the Act of 1891 as limiting the 
power of the Executive Committee to matters of finance, 
and specifically to Territorial revenue and a portion 
of the Dominion grants.** The Dominion Government did 
not consider the Lieutenant-Governor as bound by the 

advice and as si stanceof a committee of the Assembly. 


































. 

■ 

. 
















(206) 

for the District of Edmonton. In accepting his nomination 
he reiterated his stand on x*esponsiole government• “I be- 
lieve, he said, ' that the first duty of the new Assembly 
will be to establish firmly the principle - violated so out¬ 
rageously during the past year - that the people's money 
must be controlled by the people*s representatives. Until 
that principle is firmly established, legislation on any 
subject by the ssembly may be rendered useless. fl (55) his 
election statements on dual language and the separate school 
question were significant, and will be dealt with later. He 
considered the Territorial elections of 1891 a victory for 
the reformers. Of the original n Thirteen ’ who had consis¬ 
tently fought for financial control, seven were re-elected 
by acclamation. Of the six who had fought against that con¬ 
trol, only one was so elected. (56) 

The first session of the second Territorial Legislature, 
held in December of 1891 and January of 1892, was compara¬ 
tively quiet. (57) Considerable time was taken up with or¬ 
ganization, and with the separate school controversy. (58) 
Haul tain, as “premier‘, together with the other three 

(55) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 17, 1891. 

(56) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 31, 1891. 

(57) Like its counterpart, the first session of the first 
Legislature in 1888, it was absorbed in organization 
and busy with detail. 

(58) The separate school controversy will be dealt with in 
due course. 


















. 






■ 


: 














I ; yZfM'Z ■ *-'"y 








' 


■ 




































I • ' 











( 207 ) 


Executive Committee members, Neff, Clinksicill and Tweed, 
constituted the first Territorial ’’cabinet**. Frank Oliver 
did not at this, nor at any other time, serve on the execu* 
tive of the North West government. He had no ambitions in 
that direction, but adhering consistently to his position 
as an independent, left himself free to wag© the battle for 
reform from the floor of the House. 

During the second session, which was held in 1892, a 
crisis developed within the Kxecutive Committee Itself. 
Haultaln went to Ottawa on government business, and when he 
returned he found that Cayley, member for Calgary, who had 
acted for him during his absence, had worked up a faction 
with the intent of making himself resident member of the 
Committee. Raising the issue that geographic distribution 
should be taken Into account in choosing executive members, 
Cayley managed to get through the House a vote of non-con¬ 
fidence, and Haultain* s executive resigned. (59) But Cay¬ 
ley had no sooner formed a new executive than Speaker James 
Ross and his deputy, both Haultaln partisans, resigned, and 
Cayley was unable to find anyone willing to replace them. 
While the Assembly was struggling with this impasse, Lieut.- 
Gov. Royal, in exasperation, prorogued the House - a step 

(59) Oliver, K.H. in Royal Soc. Trans , pp. 115-114. 

rhe non-confidence*vote was carried by a majority of 
one, showing how? evenly the House was divided between 
the Haultaln and Cayley factions. 
















, ... ' 






/ . f .. ■ < r ,.> •- iM’-■'•."•:• < *.; fX* •,• j 

^ ;•:• ' : \ 

, 






I V% i % A .. A • ^ - :• • - .. >. 

- 




- 





























( 208 ) 


of doubtful constitutionality, (60) A belated protest from 
the Assembly went forth to Ottawa; but Royal was left with 
Cayley*s executive to administer the year*s finances. 

The 'Manifesto of the Thirteen", a denunciation of Roy¬ 
al’s action in proroguing the Legislature, was widely pub¬ 
lished throughout the North West. Oliver characterized the 
prorogation as the most extreme ana determined attack upon 
popular rights that has ever been made since the Territories 
were given any form of local government.* (61) He stated 
that the Governor*s action, absolutely unnecessary and un¬ 
warranted, was not only unconstitutional, but had "killed* 
a large amount of nearly completed legislation, and had left 
the government again in the hands of an ^irresponsible^ ex¬ 
ecutive. (62) Public opinion as reflected in the press con¬ 
demned the situation as being ridiculous, and several papers 
were not slow in pointing out that reaction in the last was 
bad, and might lead the Dominion Government to retrench in 
the matter of concessions to self-government in the North 
West. (63) 

(60) Royal’s action was frowned upon by Ottawa and he was 
mildly censured. In this crisis he did not consult the 
Dominion Government, his executive or the Assembly. 

His impetuous act was an affront to the ssembly, and 
it 'killed ’much useful legislation which was nearly 
ready for his signature. 

(61) Idmonton Bulletin, Sept. 12, 1892. 

(62) Ibid 

(63) Ibid Quoting from numerous newspapers in the last 

as well as in the North West. 




























• i >’ > ' - ... .' 

, 


- 






















1 













































( 209 ) 


On the other hand, throughout the North lest itself, the 
machinations of the Cayley executive and the ill-considered 
action of Royal perhaps did more to rouse the press in sup¬ 
port of responsible government than all the previous assev¬ 
erations of "The Thirteen'". Cayley himself, and "Brett, 

Betts & Co." came in for a blistering criticism excepting 
from those papers which were ardently "pro-Royal H . The 

I 

Regina header accused Speyer James Ross of extreme partis¬ 
anship in resigning the chair with the defeat of the Haul- 

l 

tain executive, while Oliver warmly defended his fiery 
fellow-reformer and commended him for his political honesty 
and independence. (64) 

It is almost superfluous to say that Oliver backed Haul- 
tain to the limit, and heartily agreed with the latter’s 
view of the situation as expressed in an interview with the 
Macleod dazette ; 

Mr. Cayley and his friends are directly respon¬ 
sible; it was their action that caused our proro¬ 
gation; they mad© no honest attempt to obviate a 
threatened deadlock; they made a bogus nomination 
for the speakership, which they knew would not be 
accepted, and then by the aid of the Oovernor, were 
enabled to retain office by means of prorogation. 

The Lieutenant-Governor must take the responsi¬ 
bility for none of our bills becoming law. (65) 


(64) Kdmonton Bulletin, Sept. 15, 1892. 

(65) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 22, 1892. 
Quoting the Macleod (lazette. 



















• . 






I -■'■■■■ ; ; .• - ; . .v/^-w'v _ 'x.r*:■>.. 

; * ?- - ; . • i •>*« , : . ■: .• r * ’ 

* . ■-*« *- • ' " % {& 

■ : ■ ■■■ - ■ .... : 




■ 


. • 

■ 












■ 


















■ - . ' . 


























(^ 10 ) 


In reply to an attack made upon him by Cayley, Oliver 
wrote, “He (Cayley) is fortunate that he can deal In person¬ 
alities to an unlimited extent without danger of his own 
personality being discussed, as it cannot be fully in the 
columns of a paper intended for family reading as 1 b the 
Bulletin.* (6b) 


The Cayley executive, under heavy fir© from the terri¬ 


torial press, continued to administer public affairs through*' 
out 1892* But late in the autumn, Reamer, a member of the | 
executive, died, and a oye-election thus became necessary 

I 

in the District of Wallace which he had represented* The I,!. 


Cayley and Haultain forces each entered a candidate, and so 
fine was the balance between the two groups that the vic¬ 
tory of Haultain* s man Insinger, assured the Haultain party 
a majority when the Assembly should next meet. 

The third session of the Assembly was summoned for De¬ 
cember 7, 1892, and just before that date the Minister of 
Justice ruled that the Territorial ordinance creating the 
Executive Committee was “ultra vires 11 since it had envisaged 
advisory matters other than finance* Cayley, who already 
felt himself to be in an untenable position, seined upon 
this pretext to resign, then the Assembly met the follow¬ 
ing day, it accepted the ruling of the Minister of Justice 

(66) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept, 26, 1892, once again we 
must note the virulence of frontier journalism* 








. 


.... , • • 

. 


. 











. ■ - 












• * ■ •• . 
























( 211 ) 


regarding the unconstitutional position of its executive* 
It then amended the vetoed ordinance to cover merely the 
appointment of a committee to aavise on finance, and ira- 
mediately elected the members of the committee from the 


floor of the House with Haultain as leader. A telegram was 




then despatched to Ottawa stating that “the House claims 
the right of the House through its Committee to the Lieut¬ 
enant-Cfove mo r in relation to ALL executive acts and ap¬ 
pointments made necessary by territorial ordinance.** (67) 


The Assembly then proceeded to repeal the ordinance which ; 


had been declared “ultra vires** and in its place passed a 
bill respecting expenditure. (68) On the new “finance com- 

' '■ ‘ • Vi 

mittee* mentioned above which was to control the expendi¬ 
ture, it imposed all the duties formerly borne by the now 
defunct Executive Committee. m %t transformed the committee 
on financial affairs into a Cabinet . n (69) In effect, the 
Assembly had merely conformed to the terms of the Act in 
creating and appointing its committee, but it still expected 
of it functions and powers beyond the terms of the Act. In 


a large measure it gained its objective, the government 


(67) Oliver, E.H. in Royal Soc. Trans, p. 116 


(68) I can discover no good reason why the Assembly first 
amended its vetoed ordinance and then repealed it, 
instead of simply repealing it and appointing a 
committee on finance only. It did not, of course, 
repeal the amended ordinance, but merely the original 
vetoed ordinance. 


(69) Oliver, F.H. in Royal Soe. Trans. 


p. 116 










. 




■ 






■ 

' 
















• - • '• • • 




































' 


















( 212 ) 


being in a compromising mood, (70) and Royal, as always, be¬ 
ing personally sympathetic to aspirations to self-govex*a- 
ment. Since the new Committee of the House functioned in 
many practical ways as a cabinet, there was considerable 
justification lor Royal*s closing remarks to his last Assem¬ 
bly in September, 1893s w The Legislature today practically 
enjoys the rights and privileges of self-government. n (71) 
Frank Oliver himself felt that the battle had been won 

i 

by 1893, as may be seen from the following extracts from the ; 
Bulletin . 

*. • .it was not until after the stand taken by the 
Assembly elected in 1888 had been unmistakably en¬ 
dorsed by the people at the general elections of 1891 
and again at the Wallace bye-election in the fall of 
1892 that the principle of control by the people 
through their representatives was finally conceded, 
as it has been. (72) 

At the preceding ©lection (1891) the important 
question before the electors was as to the right of 
the majority of the Assembly to control the public 
affairs of the territories, that question has nav* 
been settled. (73) 

Before considering Oliver*s contribution to significant 
legislation enacted by the Territorial Assembly, it will be 
well to trace very briefly the subsequent constitutional 
development of the Horfch best government down to 1897. The 


(70) The Conservative Party, weakened by the death of 
Macdonald in 1891, was perhaps more anxious than 
formerly to conciliate the West. 

(71) Oliver, E.H. in Royal Sec. Trans , p. 118. 

(72) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 23, 1893. 

(73) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 8, 1894. 










' 








■ 






• - 





; 


■ 






■■ r • " 



' 




























’ 

• 








. X >s? 




: : •• , 








■ 







- 





' 

. 


. 












-• 

■ 




- ■ ' ■' ■ ‘ '■ : ■ ' l “ V - I ; ■ ■ -■ H 

■ ' 1 

' ■ • 




f ■? :• r *4$; ^my mrnyy * 




■ 














(* 13 ) 


administration of Lieut.-Gov. Mackintosh which began in 1893 
was to witness the achievment of complete responsible govern¬ 
ment. The secret ballot was first introduced in 1894. (74) 
Many importent ordinances were passed at the various sess¬ 
ions, but despite the gains made during the Royal regime, 
there were obvious difficulties in the way of effective ad¬ 
ministration. During the session of 1896 the Territorial 
Assembly memoriallied the Dominion (Government asking for a 
more reasonable basis upon which the federal subsidy could 
be determined. It also sought more explicit definitions 
with respect to the powers and organization of the Worth 
West government. 

Although the Assembly was using the Executive Committee 
as "a sort of cabinet* 1 , it was evident on all sides that 
this was unconstitutional. Furthermore, the Committee was 
not authorized to advise except on questions arising from 
Horth West ordinances, and its nature mad© impossible the 
organization of a regular administration with departments 
end ministers. m k permanent Committee of the House was 
something with no precedent to guide it; a feature unique 
in British constitutional development . n (76) 

(74) The ordinance respecting the secret ballot was spon¬ 
sored by Oliver. It will be dealt with in consider¬ 
ing the legislative programme of the ssembly. 

(76) Black, op. cifc., p. 650. 














■ 









( 214 ) 


Meanwhile, the expansion of the West tended to direct 
the attention of the federal government toward western prob¬ 
lems # In 1896 Clifford Sifton of Manitoba entered the 
Laurier Cabinet as Minister of the Interior, an indication 
of the growing importance of tfao West in Canadian affairs. 

In the same year Frank Oliver, now a federal representative, 
expounded the western viewpont with a force and clarity that 
won the attention of the House of Commons and the adminis¬ 
tration. Shortly before the Territorial session of October, 
1897, the Dominion Parliament mad© Important changes in the 
constitution of the Territories# 

The Executive Committee was replaced by an Executive 
Council which was, in effect, a cabinet* The offices of the 
government were ro-organised and public departments were 
created. The members of the new Executive Council, headed 
by Haultain, vacated their seats in the assembly upon their 
appointment, and were re-elected by acclamation# although 
there were still some reservations in the matter of Domin¬ 
ion grants, the Territories now had a system of government 
practically the same as that of the provinces. In the 
Speech from the Throne in the session of 1897, Lieut.-Gov. 
Mackintosh congratulated the Territories on the attainment 
of responsible government# (76) 


(76) J.N.W. Assembly, 1897, p* 8 





■ 




' 












. 




■ • , ■ ■ 













(215) 

In rounding out an estimate of Frank Oliver as & member 
of the North host Assembly, reference must be made to his 
stand on prohibition, dual language, schools, the secret 
ballot, Dominion subsidies and public works, 

Ihe first session of the second Legislature was enlivened 
by acrimonious debates on the liquor question# Only the 
ruling of the three legal experts, declaring a liquor bill 
"ultra vires*,prevented the passage of a liquor licensing | 

i 

ordinance in the session of 1888# (77) Subsequently, having ; 

j 

received the necessary authority from Ottawa, the second. 

I 

Legislature passed a licensing ordinance, "under which in¬ 
toxicants might be sold by hotels or liquor shops if the 
majority of the residents in the district concerned did not 
oppose the issue of the given license and certain other con¬ 
ditions were complied with* 11 (78) Oliver, as might be ex¬ 
pected, opposed the "liquor interests'* as strenuously as 
possible, but he was not in the House to register his vote 
against the ordinance# (79) 

A feature of the session of 1894 was the receipt by the 
Iloiise of a large number of petitions for the suppression of 
the liquor traffic. Oliver was most active in presenting 

(77) Supra p* 188, 

(78) Black, op* cit#, p. £94# 

(79) J*H*f?. Assembly, 1891-1892, p. 117* 







(iil6) 


these petitions to the ssembly and in urging the desirabil¬ 
ity of a prohibition measure* However, he found little 
support from his colleagues. (BO) 

During the second session a memorial to the Federal Gov¬ 
ernment, introduced by Cayley (District of Calgary), to have 
the French language discontinued as an official language of 

the North lest government, (81) provoked a bitter debate j 

1 

and a revival of racialism in the Territories. Decrying 
the attitude of extremists on both sides, Oliver took a tol- 

[t 

erant stand* (82) While supporting the memorial, he denied 
that it was inspired by anti-French sentiment. His support, 
he stated, was based on two points*, first, that the dual 
language clause in the Act of 1880 was an unwarranted re¬ 
striction on North West autonomy; and second, that the use 
of the French language as an official language in the Terri¬ 
tories was unnecessary. (83) 


(80) J*N*W. Assembly, 1894. Passim. 

Despite Oliver*s extreme prohibitionist views, liquor 
advertising appeared regularly in the Bulletin * The 
North West Brewery advertisement in the' E&aohfon 
Bulletin , Aug* 20, 1894, may serve as an example# 

(81) Provision for dual language for the North West Legis¬ 
lature and Judiciary was made in the *ct of 1888* 

(82) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 9, 1889* Oliver made a 

tolerant speech, showing however that he was for 
abolition . n 

(83) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov* 16, 1889; June 7, 1890. 








■ 

• . i ' : . ■ 

... 

.. • . ., . , ■ 1 ^ 

, ■ . $ ' , f . ■ 

' 

.. ; -J 'V. — •.*•••; • • 

. • 




( 217 ) 

Inspired by the dispute in the North West, D*Alton 
McCarthy introduced a dual language bill in the House of 
Commons in the spring of 1890. McCarthy’s bill, to prohibit 
the use of French in the legislature and in the judicial 
procedure of the North West, was defeated, but not before it 
had aroused the already simmering racialism of Ontario and 
Quebec, writing on the debates on the dual language bill, 
Oliver scored Quebec for allegedly attempting to dictate 
Canadian policy. The dual language dispute in the Territor¬ 
ies was, he argued, concerned only with the constitutional 
and practical aspects of the question; Quebec was trying to 
aggravate it into a serious racial issue. He stressed that 
dual language as established by the Act of 1888 was practic¬ 
ally a dead issue because of the absence of French repre¬ 
sentatives in the Territorial Legislature, and that it had 
never in fact induced the Quebecols to come lest. Claiming 
that, ”This.North West molehill (the dual language dispute) 
has been made a -mountain in Ottawa, 11 he denounced Quebec’s 
attempt to apply racial pressure % and concluded? ®It has 
become a question whether Quebec shall or shall not be all¬ 
owed to dictate the policy of the government of all Canada.” 
(84) 

(84) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 8, 1890. 

The Dominion Government later repealed the dual langu¬ 
age clause of the Act of 1888, thus leaving the matter 
in the hands of the North lest government. The ssem- 
bly then abolished French as an official language of 
the North West government and Judiciary. 






1 




• A vV : - .... r ' ' ■ ■■ A ' ■ 1 ‘ v 

- 

U ■ ' ; V • . , - ' 

- -- ■ ■ * ■■ . 



■ ■- 

i$ ‘i: 1 . t. 


? v 


' 








l ' P.. 

i ♦ 

0 ' . 











■ 

■ 






























( 219 ) 


Frank Oliver was more tolerant on the Englieh-French 
racial and religious issue than he was on many another mat¬ 
ter. Further evidence of this fact will be found in his 
stand on the North V&est schools question, the Manitoba sep¬ 
arate schools dispute, and the school clauses of the auton¬ 
omy bills. 

The North West school system, based on Oliver®s school 
ordinance of 1894 as amended the following year, was actu¬ 
ally established in March of 1886 when the necessary ex¬ 
penditures were provided for its operation. Board of 
Education, consisting of two Protestants and two Catholics 
under the chairmanship of the Lieutenant-Governor had con¬ 
trol of the educational system of the Territories. The 
system was divided into two sections, Protestant and Cath¬ 
olic, and each section exercised a very free control over 
its respective schools. 

Increasingly unfavorable to the * separatism" implicit in 
this system, and perhaps inspired by Manitoba’s successful 
attack on the separate schools In 1890, the North West 
Assembly, by the ordinance of 1892, took a bold step in the 
direction of a secularized and "national^* school system. 

The Board of Education was replaced by a Council of Public 
Instruction consisting of the members of the Executive 
Committee and two Protestants and two Catholics appointed 
by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. As the latter four 









. 


- 






' 








. 




























. 












" 












(& 19 ) 


had no vote, control of schools passed Into the hands of 
the administration which was responsible to the Assembly 
and the people. 

The Council of Public Instruction possessed auth¬ 
ority, under the ordinance of 1892 ( Ho. 22 ) to 
appoint examiners of teachers, inspectors, a super¬ 
intendent of education, and other officials, and to 
prescribe their duties; and to make regulations for 
the conduct of schools, the training of teachers and 
the selection and prescription of text Cooks; and to 
determine all cases of appeals or complaints arising 
from decisions of trustees or inspectors. (8b) 

! 

•that this authority extended equally to Protestant and 
Catholic schools moved certain prominent Catholic leaders 

S 

to state, in petitions to the Assembly, that n the Council 
had obliterated ’almost wholly the distinction between 
Catholic and other schools • . . , * 11 (86) 

Haultain, as Chairman of the Council, summed up his atti¬ 
tude and that of the North lest M.L.A.’s generally in this 
statement: 

The responsibility for the general management of 
our schools, for the educational policy of the Terri¬ 
tories, and for the expenditure of the school vote 
is above and beyond any sectarian difference. Ex¬ 
penditure and control are Inseparable, and so long 
as schools continue to receive government grants 
they must be subject to government control. (87) 

Oliver subscribed to Haultain*s view, and defending the 


(85) Lingard Territorial Government in Canada p. 157. 

(86) Ibid p. 157. 

(87) Ibid p. 157. 












:: 'v V • ' V -■ > ^ 

. 






. 






■ 

. 


■ 












































[ 220 ) 


School Act of 1892 as Doing in accordance with the North 
est Acts of 1888 and 1891, he added, 'While religious tol¬ 
eration to a reasonable extent meets the views of a large 
majority of the people of this country, the control of 
schools by any church or number of churches does not. n (88) 
He consistently advocated a ’’middle course*' respecting North 
vest schools. Be believed that non-sectarian schools were 
best, if practicable; (89) but as a concession to Territor¬ 
ial conditions did not oppose separate schools so long as 
they were under the control of the North West administra¬ 
tion and were subject to the common system of regulation 
and inspection, (90) Referring to Manitoba s separate 
schools agitation in 1889, he wrote? 

Whatever may be the result of the proposed move 
in Manitoba or elsewhere, it is most desirable that 
any changes that may be mad© shall be made in the 
interests of education solely and that they should 
be free from the remotest suspicion of a spirit of 
religious intolerance or disregard of the feelings 
of the religious minority merely because it is a 
minority, (91) 

For several ye^rs a member of the Assembly 1 s Standing 
Committee on Schools, he revealed a continued interest in 

(88) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec, 4, 1895, 

See also the Bulletin issue of Nov. 24, 1892. 

(89) Edmonton Bulletin, April 3, 1888. 

(90) Edmonton Bulletin, April 13, 1888; Nov, 16, 1889; 

June 7, 1890; Oct. 17, 1891. 

(91) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept, 14, 1891. 





, • . •' > •; ; . 

' 

. 

;;i . • ■ • • '■ : • r.v ■ •:* 

, . . 

. | ■■■ , ' . ; i \ : ■ ■; | 


' 

; . ; v '>'■ X'*-.Jyji ■’ .■■■■ 




V ? <; : && 










' 


. . u ; 


. 










■ 


A % i': ' 




4$- ii : ’£ 












. 


. 









( 221 ) 


all phases of school organization, taxation and management. 
He was particularly resentful of those who sought to intro¬ 
duce religious intolerance into school issues. Upholding 
the right of the North ftest government to establish its 
school system without the limitations imposed by federal 
acts, he commended uniformity of school administration as 
minimizing '’separatism" and increasing efficiency. 

In 1893, as a step in centralizing and co-ordinating 
educational administration, the Council of Public Instruc¬ 
tion appointed Dr. Coggin as Superintendent of" Education 
and principal of the newly founded Hegina Normal School. 
Oliver approved the appointment as "In line with, good ed¬ 
ucational policy" but intimated that more was needed than a 
"high-salaried"’ man, (92) namely, more and better schools 
and an efficient staff of inspectors. Considerable diffi¬ 
culty had been experienced in training sufficient teachers, 
(93) and to this task Dr. Coggin addressed himself vigor¬ 
ously as normal school principal. Oliver did not agree that 
their "high-salaried man’ should thus "waste his time", 
for the present," he said, ^let us educate the children and 

(92) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 20, 1895. Dr. Coggin 1 s 
salary was #3,000.00 per annum. 

(93) In the three years ©receding Dr. Coggin*s appointment, 
55 teachers were "trained" by school inspectors. 





• 



.. 



■. " • ' ' ' 

• 


' 


■ \ vi. 







■ 

■ ,■ 

■ . 

' 

■ • 



■ . 

, ... ' . 







' 




■ ■ i ■ ... 

, 

: • .... 

• ; ■ ' . ' - .... 
... ■ . ... ■ . ... ' 






, 

. 








. , - 




> ..f 











(2k*i) 

let the teachers educate themselves, he can import teachers 
better and more cheaply than we can educate them, and the 
best is none too good for us." (94) He agreed that higher 
education was laudable, but maintained, with good pioneer 
common sense, that ”The great object of our common school 
system should be to educate children for the farm, and not 
from the farm.* (95) 

Oliver 1 s most constructive piece of legislation during 
his term in the North West Assembly was the ordinance re¬ 
specting the ballot which he piloted through the Legislature 
in the session of 1894. (96) Entitled **A Bill to Amend and 
Consolidate as Amended the Ordinances respecting Elections 
to the North $est Legislative Assembly , the me? sure was a 
thorough and comprehensive elections act. (97) It created 
the machinery for voting by secret ballot. Ihe ballot in¬ 
troduced was especially designed to accomodate the illiter¬ 
ate and the non-English-speaking immigrant. The ballot 
paper itself was perfectly blank. Each candidate was desig¬ 
nated by a certain color as well as by name. In the polling 
booth were placed several pencils of colors corresponding to 
the names of the candidates. The voter’s choice was 

(94) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 20, 1893. 

(95) Edmonton Bulletin, Mai*. 30, 1893. 

(96) J.N.V:. Assembly, 1894, p. 33, Oliver introduced the 
bill on August 13, 1894. 

(97) Ordinances of the North 'West Territories Regina 1894. 
Ordinance Number 2 p. 9. 






- v . ' • ’ ■ ■ 


X" ' • ' ' : 1 ■ ■ ' ’ . 

■* •. - : . ?,/ . , • ■ < ■ . 

- 

. 






. 


■ 

, 

. 

, 



( 823 ) 


Indicated by the color of the lead in the pencil he select¬ 
ed. For those who could read, each candidate*s name was 
painted on the pencil of the proper color. Ballots were 
not spoiled by being marked in any particular way; color was 
what counted. The vote was secret, within the limits of 
frontier political ethics and the prevailing illiteracy. 

There was no voters* list, but candidates had the right to 

ji 

appoint scrutineers and the right to challenge any voter. 

This type of ballot continued in use for some time, and de- 
* 

f 

spite its obvious imperfections marked an important advance U 
in the direction of the secret ballot of today. 

As a member of the Assembly, Oliver was the consistent 
exponent of increased federal grants. In the Territorial 
elections of 1894 (98) he declared that the major problem 
now confronting the North West was no longer a constitution¬ 
al, but a financial one. The question of financial control 
had been fought and definitely settled in favor of the Assem¬ 
bly. There remained the securing of a definite and adequate 
yearly allowance or subsidy in place of the fluctuating 
annual grant from Ottawa. (99) The North West fight for 
an adequate and fixed Dominion subsidy continued until the 

(98) In the Territorial elections of 1894, Oliver was 
returned by acclamation. 

(99) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 8, 1894. 












, : , . ’ ■ 


t 












. 











































































. 












- 












. - 











very eve of autonomy in 1905. To his campaign in the Assem¬ 
bly and later in the House of Commons, for an adequate and 
w dignified (100) financial settlement, Uranic Oliver added 
the weight of the Bulletin and many a fiery platform ad¬ 
dress. (101) 

The member for Edmonton was never too pre-occupied to 
heed th© nractical demands of his constituents. H© exer¬ 
cised constant vigilance to assure Edmonton of its full 
share of moneys appropriated by the North West government 
for public works. (102) 

In th© field of federal politics the ’nineties furnished 
ample evidence of increasing laxity and corruption in the 
Conservative administration. In 1890 Macdonald, still the 
master tactician, unexpectedly asked for dissolution and a 
general election. The Lioerals were quick to lina discred¬ 
itable motives for this move. Actually, the veteran Tory 
leader did not dare delay any longer the last ditch stand 
of a disintegrating w MacdonaldIam w . 

(100) North West delegates had to make an annual pilgrim¬ 
age to Ottawa to ^beg 0 the year’s finances. Oliver 
used the word dignified in envisaging a fixed ann¬ 
ual grant which would obviate the necessity of this 
humiliating trip. 

(101) Frequent references in the Bulletin throughout these 
years testify to Oliver’s efforts on behalf of a 
proper financial settlement for the North West. 

(102) His interest in expenditures for public works is 
evident in numerous Bulletin reports during the 
period. 















• 
































' 


, 


’ 












. 
















( 225 ) 


Frank Oliver charged that the Manitoba separate schools 
question lay at the root of the Conservative strategy. Sir 
John still relied on the support of both Ontario and |ueoec. 
The year for the possible disallowance of the Manitoba sep¬ 
arate school bill was not quite up. If Macdonald disallowed 
it he would antagonize Ontario; if he allowed it he would 
antagonize Quebec, kn election immediately would not only 
keep both in suspense, but secure their support in hopes of 
getting a favorable decision on the schools question. 

Rallying around "the old men, the old flag and the old 
policy , the Conservatives played up patriotism and distort¬ 
ed the Liberal plea for unrestricted reciprocity with the 
United States into annexationism and "veiled treason”. The 
Liberals rested their case on reciprocity, the failure of 
the National Policy, and the corruption and inefficiency of 
the Macdonald regime. 

Oliver was not a candidate in the western federal elec¬ 
tions of march, 1891. The battle for responsible govern¬ 
ment in the Territories was at this time mounting to its 
climax, and he refused to *take his hand from the plough 
by entering the federal field. The candidates for the Dis¬ 
trict of Alberta were D.W. Davis, M*P., (Cons.) Calgary; 
and James Reilly (Ind. Cons.), Calgary. Oliver threw the 
weight of the Bulletin against Davis, and for lack of an 


alternative supported Reilly as an independent. He charged 














■ 

■ 































' 












. 


. 




















. 













( 226 ) 


that Davis had kept none of the promises made four years 
earlier - except the support of Sir John A. Macdonald* The 
election was hotly contested in Edmonton, with Oliver stump¬ 
ing on behalf of Reilly,and Dr. H.C. Wilson on behalf of 
Davis. 

Oliver ridiculed Davis unmercifully. He listed the 14 
planks in the Davis platform of 1887 and then listed the re¬ 
sult of each in such a way as to show that only number one 
had been lived up to, that is, "Sir John**. Plank number 
seven and its implementation appeared as follows: 

7 t Bridging of principal rivers. 

7 t Rivers are bridged - in winter. 

His support of Reilly as an "independent Conservative 
was rather inconsistent with his attitude toward the "in¬ 
dependent Liberal” Lafforty in the elections of 1887. (103) 
apparently, however, he felt himself justified in basing his 
support of Reilly on the latter’s declaration of "indepen¬ 
dence”, in opposition to Davis’s obvious and admitted "party- 
i sm ‘. 

Bhe election, climaxing a number of rousing meetings, was 
quieter than usual and the customary charges of corruption 
were largely lacking. The proceedings, the Bulletin report¬ 
ed, were fairly orderly, but "towards the close of the poll, 

(103) Supra p. 148. 


























- 














. 








■ 



















( 227 ) 


the votes being nearly all in and some whiskey having got 
around, a little scrap was indulged in by a few of the boys 
but the consequences were not serious and no arrests were 
made,” (104) Davis was returned by a wide margin, and once 
again the Conservatives made a clean sweep of the West. But 
contrary to Oliver*s prediction, Macdonald lost heavily in 
Ontario and Quebec. The days of "Macdonaldism" were plain¬ 
ly numbered. 

Oliver attributed the Conservative victory in the West 
to three factors* lack of genuine Liberal Interest in the 
North West, the advantages held by government candidates in 
a short campaign waged in very large constituencies, and 
government influence and patronage in the Territories. (105) 
He still feared the implications of "commercial union , and 
his reference to the unrestricted reciprocity issue in the 
Dominion campaign was significant. "The feeling against the 
high tariff policy has become so strong throughout Canada 
that Sir John owes his present reduced majority rather to 
the active or passive aid of liberals who could not approve 
of the unrestricted reciprocity policy advocated by their 
party , . . than to any merit of his own . . . ." (106) He 

(104) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 7, 1891. 

(105) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 14, 1891. 

(106) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 21, 1891. 






- 








































. 

■ 


















. . . 

' 











( 228 ) 


further referred to unrestricted reciprocity as a "wildfire 
policy*’ which had ’’lost a good deal of true liberal support.* 
(107) 


fhe death of Sir John A* Macdonald on June 6, 1891, mark¬ 
ed ’’the close of an era in Canadian history.’ 1 (108) Oliver’s 
eulogy of Sir John, whose system he had ceaselessly and 
virulently attacked, in season and out during the past de- jjj 

cade as all that was reprehensible in Gan&dian *partyism”, | 

may best be given in his own words and without comment* 

i ; 

. . , it appeared that with Sir John power was an 
end rather than a means and that unlimited confidence 
reposed in him especially in late years by the major¬ 
ity of the people, while a fitting acknowledgment of 
good service, tended to place the interest of the com¬ 
munity below the aggrandicement of the individual and 
kept in abeyance on the grounds of political expedi¬ 
ency many questions arising from the development of 
the country whose settlement was necessary to its wel¬ 
fare. 

But when the political course of the country during 
tile past 24 years is considered, with the difficult¬ 
ies that have been encountered and overcome or avoid¬ 
ed, and when it is remembered that its growth although 
gradual has been healthful to the last degree, that 
at no time in its history was the population as great, 
intelligence and education as widely diffused, its 
business institutions on as solid a basis or the pat¬ 
riotism of its people more thoroughly to b© relied on, 
it will be seen that although as great abilities may 
not be available in Canada’s next political leader, 
as varied talents will not be as necessary as in the 
days of Sir John, His work was to keep the diverse 
and scattered elements of the country in touch with 
each other by any means until they had begun to grow 


(107) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar, 21 , 1891, 

(108) Edmonton Bulletin, June 13, 1891. Editorial. 







































■ 










. 












. 
































( 229 ) 


together, fhat work he did, and it now remains for 
his successors to develop the growth and greatness 
which under his auspices was so well begun. (109) 

Despite "ignoble means", Oliver continued. Confederation, 

the annexation of the North west, the National Policy and 

the C.P.R. would all stand out as great achievements in the 

days to come. (110) 

His comments on the governmental re-organization necessi¬ 
tated by Macdonald’s death were pointed enough. "A govern¬ 
ment," he warned, "with fupper as premier, Chapleau as 
Minister of public Works and A*W. Ross as Minister of the 
Interior would steal Canada poor in six months.” (Ill) He 
expressed general satisfaction with Senator Abbott as Sir 
John’s successor in the Dominion’s highest office, and with 
the appointment of the Hon. T.M# Daley as Dewdney’s succes¬ 
sor in the Interior Department. His parting shot at Dewd- 
ney showed no diminution of the animosity with which he had 
always regarded his political arch-enemy: "Not a statesraan, 
not a politician; ... a lucky adventurer or rather para¬ 
site ... of no talent.” (112) Like many men of strong 
views and intense moral earnestness, Frank Oliver could be 
a good hater. 


(109) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

June 

13 , 

1891 

(110) 

Ibid 





(111) 

■Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

June 

20, 

1891 

(112) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Oct. 

24, 

1892 






(£ 30 ) 


In September of 1894 Wilfred Laurier paid a visit to 
Edmonton, Oliver played a prominent part in the welcome, 
serving as chairman of the reception committee and presid¬ 
ing at the immense reception given in the Liberal chief*s 
honor. Despite Oliver*s oft-repeated claim to be an in¬ 
dependent, and his criticism of certain of the party’s pol¬ 
icies, tile western press already classed him as a Liberal. 
(113) This appellation he denied* Yet he was by tempera¬ 
ment and outlook a frontier !t £5rit w . He despised "partyism", 
but any sympathy he had sho^^n for party or party men had 
almost invariably leaned toward the Liberal side. It is 
quite probable that Laurier*s Edmonton visit was a pre¬ 
disposing factor in Oliver’s decision to enter the federal 
political field in 1896. 


(113) Supra p. 188, the Edmonton Bulletin quoting the 

Kegina Leader , HeTerring to Oliver the Leader said, 
?r He is against his party on the question oF Commercial 
Union.® In context, tt his party" could refer only to 
the Liberals. 

Note that this Leader item was wi'itten in 1888. It 
would be easy to multiply instances of the tendency 
of the western press, even as early as the ’eighties, 
to classify Oliver simply as a Liberal. 













( 231 ) 


Chapter 8 Edmonton acid the Bulletin 1888-1896 

During the •nineties Edmonton*s development was more rapid 
than during the previous decade, and the Edmonton Bulletin 
kept pace with the growing community. Hie format and gen¬ 
eral appearance of the paper was drastically altered in 1892 ^ 
with the introduction of larger type and an increasing em- 

j!! 

phasis on display advertisements. Publication of a serai¬ 
weekly edition began in May of that year. The Bulletin 
claimed its full share of credit for the growth of Edmonton 

* 

and the surrounding district, and first and foremost took 
pride in its wide and adequate news coverage. News, stated 
the Bulletin , is what makes a newspaper - not plate mater¬ 
ial and ^whiskered jokes ff . (1) 

In 1893 the Bulletin format was enlarged, the number of 
pages was increased, and the paper began to take on the 
shape of a city daily. In November, 1893, Oliver installed 
a steam plant to run the presses, arid in the summer of 1894 
he erected a new Bulletin office - an imposing brick struc¬ 
ture of two storeys - on the original office site* The 
steam plant and presses occupied the stone basement, the 
first floor accomodated the bulletin offices and i.f* Henry, 

(1) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 1, 1892. 
































• 

























. 







' 












. 




























(832) 

"Qent’s furnishings”, while the second storey was rented as 
business office space. ifc© first Bulletin issue printed in 
the new building appeared on October 22, 1894. The paper 
was further enlarged in June, 1893; Deoemoer, 1896; and 

itit° 

November, 1899, so that it entered^he new century a six - 
page semi-weekly which did not need to tax© second place in 
news coverage and influence to any paper west of Vvinnipeg. 

( 2 ) 

Until 1898, when the Bulletin passed under the control of 
the Bulletin Co* (Ltd.), Oliver was the paper*s sole prop¬ 
rietor. He took great pride in the Bulletins reputation 
for "fair dealing and plain speaking* 5 , and maintained that 
the first and chief aim of his paper v^as "to be a HEWSF&FER .* 

( 3 ) 

Ihe completion of the C.P.H* in 1885 had left Edmonton 
still some 200 miles off the railway, but with the arrival 
of the Calgary and Edmonton line in 1891, Edmonton oegan to 

come in to its own and to press volubly for an adequate im~ 

t/ 

migration policy. Hie following news item appeared in the 

Bulletin of December 14, 1889; 

At the request of the Edmonton Board of Trade, 

Mr. Frank Oliver has consented to remain a couple 
of weeks longer in the east to deliver lectures 
In Ontario on the North West .... 

(2) Changes noted from actual Bulletin files. 

(3) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 1, 1894. 





























( 233 ) 


1 DEPA 

\z 


department of history 

UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
EDMONTON 


A better selection could not have been made. 

There is no person in this district and probably 
none in the Territories, who could so well repre¬ 
sent the capabilities, advantages and resources 
of this country. 

Oliver was particularly interested in drawing to the 
Territories settlers who would otherwise be lost to the 
United States, and during the closing weeks of 1889 he de¬ 
livered several "immigration speeches in Western Ontario, 
and made contacts and collected information valuable in en¬ 
couraging western immigration. (4) He was very critical of 
Ottawa*s apathy regarding immigration, and made numerous 
suggestions to expedite a westward flow of settlers. He 
advocated supplying O.P.H. trains with maps and tracts on 
the Territories, and the appointment, as eastern immigration 
agents, of men with actual North West experience. (5) Con¬ 
tinuing the battle against the land sharks and speculators, 
he defended the policy of second homesteading as a prime 
inducement to the Ontario pioneer to come Wests "The policy 
of no second homesteads is distinctly in the interests of 
the wholesale land speculator and in no other legitimate 
interest whatever." (6) Referring to the continued drain 
of emigrants to the United States, he pointed out with 


(4) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Feb. 

15, 

1890 

(5) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

Feb. 

16, 

1889 

(6) 

Edmonton 

Bulletin, 

April 

6, 

1889 







































. 















• 




























































( 234 ) 


considerable justice: "Had the Canadian Government not been 
criminally negligent the great exodus of Eastern Canadians 
to these far Western States need never have occurred. If 
the present opportunity to retrieve the mistake is not 
seized and turned to account, the original offence will be 
doubled.” (7) In reply to a query of the Montreal Star , 
"Where are the Immigrants?” Oliver replied: 

It must be evident that to secure rapid settle¬ 
ment of the country there must be cheap land and 
cheap and abundant railway communication. The land 
policy that has been pursued at least since 1881 has 
been to reserve absolutely from settlement at least 
half of the land, and until the monopoly clause was 
done away with, to absolutely prevent railway compet¬ 
ition. Under such a policy the country could not 
settle rapidly and did not, nor will it until there 
is substituted for it a policy of free land and rail¬ 
way extension. (8) 

The Bulletin featured, in issue after issue, lengthy 
articles and editorials ^booming” the Saskatchewan country 
and designed to attract immigrants. (9) 

The Bulletin makes the claim that for purposes of 
grain growing and stock raising combined - that is 
for mixed farming - the Edmonton District of the 
North Saskatchewan country comprising an area two- 
thirds as great as the province of Manitoba, poss¬ 
esses advantages superior to those which are found 
in any other section of the great west, whether 
south or north of the international boundary line. (10) 


(7) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 3, 1889. 

(8) Edmonton Bulletin, July 6, 1889. 

(9) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 1, 1890; Mar. 15, 1890; Mar. 22, 
1890; April 12, 1890. Numerous and lengthy articles in 
the Bulletin all through the early Nineties. 

(10) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 30, 1890. 







( 235 ) 


Oliver’s first choice of immigrants was those from the 
eastern provinces; his second preference, those from the 
British Isles* He was averse to immigration from central 
■Europe. This aversion persisted and had ©n important bear¬ 
ing upon his attitude toward Sifton’s later policy of M un- 
seleetive immigration, and upon the modifications he made 
in this policy when he replaced Sifton as Minister of the 
Interior. The following Bulletin editorial is an important 
declaration of viewpoint. Referring to a Free Press news 
item that North Uest agents were to be sent to Scsndanavia 
and central Europe to encourage immigration, he expressed 
disagreement with such a policy and stated: 

There is a difference between allowing them (cen¬ 
tral Europeans and Scandanavians) to have these 
lands and homes and soliciting them to taxe them . 

. . . 

Vvhen people come to our country and ask us for 
room to settle they accept our terms, social, and 
political; when we go and solicit their coming we 
accept their terms social and political, which in 
so far as they are different from ours are disad¬ 
vantageous to us. (11) 

He went on to suggest that the British Isles contained 
"plenty of good material , and expressed himself as averse 
to an influx of central Europeans who were "bound to be 
drawn from the poorer and less ambitious classes.” (12) 

(11) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 2, 1890. 

(12) Ibid 













' ^ : ' : 

' 






‘ 

' ; . 

■ — ■ 

’ 1 -• ^ .. to. ' ' ■*' 

: 


■ 






















■ r 











- 








< 










. 




















( 236 ) 


By the spring of 1890 the newly chartered Calgary and 
Edmonton Railway Co. was preparing to push its line north 
from the G.P.R. into the Upper Saskatchewan country. Despite 
the road*s name there was as yet no certainty that Edmonton 
would be its terminus and the eventual crossing point of the 
North Saskatchewan river. Other settlements including Ft. 
Saskatchewan and Clover Bar urged their advantages as the 
logical terminus, and Edmonton, mindful of its "side¬ 
tracking by the C.P.R. in 1882, devoted itself with fur¬ 
ious energy to pressing its claim. Spearhead of the 
Edmonton for terminus" battle was the Bulletin , which took 
as an ominous sign the Dominion's continued delay in erect¬ 
ing much needed federal public buildings in the village.(15) 
Ihe formal turning of the first sod in the construction 
of the Calgary and Edmonton Railway took place on July 21, 
1890, (14) and as the line advanced north, "towns!te" and 
"terminus fever mounted steadily. Confident of eventual 
victory, Edmonton experienced another ft boom% and with a 
fine lack of restraint let itself go on the subject of its 
natural advantages as the agricultural centre of the West. 
Issue after issue of the Bulletin poured forth an endless 
stream of articles on the land, the soil, the climate, and 

(13) Edmonton Bulletin, May 17, 1890; May 24, 1890. 

(14) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 2, 1890. 









(^ 57 ) 


the resources. Said the Bulletin^ editor, ‘Come and see 
for yourself, and if you don*t care to come, never mind, for 
plenty of others will be glad to take your place. This 
district needs settlers, desires settlers, will welcome and 
accomodate settlers, but does not require to beg for sett¬ 
lers any more.** (15) 

Early in the wintex* of 1890 the line reached Red Deer, 
where operations were suspended until the following spring. 
The new year opened with an acrimonious dispute involving 
Edmonton, Clover Bar and Fort Saskatchewan regarding th© 
location of the river terminus of the Calgary and Edmonton 
line. There were claims and counter claims, petitions and 
counter petitions, meetings and counter meetings. The 
Bulletin aired the whole question very thoroughly, and Oliv¬ 
er was perhaps the most aggressive champion of Edmonton 1 s 
cause. 

Whether all this furore actually influenced the Calgary 
and Edmonton Go. is not clear, kt any rate in early July 
the Bulletin was happy to announce that “the terminus is 
all settled.” (16) The first through train from Calgary 
pulled into the hastily constructed station across tn© 
river from Edmonton at 11 F.M., Monday, July 27, 1891. 

(15) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 4, 1890. 

(16) Edmonton Bulletin, July. 11, 1891. 






* ' ■ 





■ 


•• v -."- V " ■ • ‘ '■ ' ■ . ‘ ... . 

- 
















( 238 ) 


With no bridge across the Saskatchewan, the terminus had 
to remain on the south side of the river. Edmonton realized 
only too well the danger to its own future development if 
the south side "boamed 11 and became the major townsite. Just 
before the actual arrival of the Calgary and Edmonton, 

Oliver wrote, regarding the south side terminus and town- 
sites "The only point at which there is any clashing of 

< 

interests is, if the railway company attempts to use its 

?i 

private influence to secure undueadvantages in the loca¬ 
tion of the public offices or the construction of public 
works of any kind that would better serve the public inter¬ 
ests by being on the North side. 11 (17) Edmonton became in¬ 
creasingly sensitive to any suggestion of the south side*s 
predominance, and in reply to a letter in the Free press 
(Winnipeg) predicting that the south side would be the site 
of the future city, Oliver stated heatedly, **For the pres¬ 
ent, Edmonton - the old, only and original - is doing very 
well thank you, out of the fact of its having been given 
railway communication, and the surrounding district is in¬ 
creasing in population and prosperity at a more rapid rate 
than any other section of the North lest. 11 (18) 

r Ihe proclamation incorporating the Town of Edmonton took 

07) Edmonton Bulletin, Julyli7T891. 

(18) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept* 5, 1891* 





‘ 

' • 

, . - ) , , . .. 

■ 














• 







. 


4 




■ 




• • : 












( 259 ) 


practical effect on February 10, 1892, when the first coun¬ 
cil of th© new town was chosen, with Matt. Maoaulay elected 
mayor by acclamation. The Bulletin of the next few months 
was filled with ‘'Town Council Minutes”, '‘Municipal Notes”, 
claims for public buildings, and news items on the Edmonton 
Electric Lighting and Power Co. Edmonton, keenly conscious 
of its new status and fairly exuding civic pride, was look¬ 
ing confidently to the future. 

At this critical juncture the famous attempt to ”steal” 
the land office stirred up a veritable hornet*s nest, and 
precipitated a situation reminiscent of the days of the 
claim jumping and ”The Vigilantes”. On the afternoon of 
Saturday, June 18, Tom Anderson, the Dominion Timber Agent, 
attempted to move the books and effects of th© Lands Office 
over to a location on the south side of the river, immedi¬ 
ately opposite the depot being built there for the immigra¬ 
tion office. Books and effects were already loaded on the 
dray when certain Edmonton citizens appeared upon tn© scene, 
unhooked the team of horses, and removing the nuts from the 
hubs of the dray wheels, defied the agent to proceed with 
the removal. Ihat evening a mass meeting was held, from 
which resolutions of protest moved by Mayor Macaulay were 
forwarded to Ottawa. So intense was public indignation at 
the attempted w steal” thst ”the land agent was burned in 





. 

. 

:■ , !■ ' - V. i . , .. 

’• > ' - - v ; ■ : <1 , . • ■. . . ■■■■■. • 

. 


• ■ ' . • ■ . ■ 

/ ; 

. 

:>v i:v"M 
























( 240 ) 


efiigy at the flag pole between MoDougall’s store and the 
Imperial Bank,* (19) 

The following dwy, Sunday, passed quietly enough. On 
Monday morning Inspector Oriesbach arrived from Fort Sask¬ 
atchewan, but so as not to provoke "an incident", he left 
his 20 Policemen at Hat Creek on the outskirts of the town. 
Thereupon, "Mayor Macaulay, Councillor Cameron and J.A. 
McDougall, J. P.»s, issued an order calling out the Home 
Guards - organized in f 85 by General Strange - to keep the 
peace, that is the land office. At 1 P .M. nearly every 
able-bodied man in town - most of them armed - appeared at 
the town clerk*s office, ready for any event. Up to 4 
o’clock (this writing) the police have not appeared and 
quiet reigns." (20) 

Later in the day a telegram came from Dewdney, who was 
at this time Minister of the Interior, assuring the Council 
that Anderson had been acting under his orders, and that 
removal of the Lands Office was intended as a temporary 
measure for the convenience of immigrants arriving on the 
Calgary and Edmonton line. A thoroughly aroused citizenry 
was not convinced, the alarm bells were rung, and a crowd 
collected at the Lands Office to "object" to the removal if 
attempted. 

(19) Edmonton Bulletin, June 20, 1892. 

(20) Ibid 









































I , 




■ 

































■ 


■ 















( 241 ) 


The next morning it started to rain and the Police began 
putting the books, which were still stacked on the dray, 
back into the shelter of the office. Misinterpreting their 
actions, someone rang the alarm. M In 8 minutes not less 
than 150 men were there - and a hundred or two coming.” (21) 
There was, however, no violence; and the crowd, seeing that 
the police were merely acting to protect the Lands Office 
books, soon dispersed. 

Telegrams came from Lieut.-Gov. Royal and other govern¬ 
ment officials pointing out again that the proposed removal 
was only a temporary convenience for immigrants arriving on 
the South Side; (22) and even Wilfred Laurier, Opposition 
Leader in the House of Commons, sent the "insurgentsa 
message of reassurance. 

The result of the disturbance, a victory for Edmonton’s 
irate citizens, was the establishment of a sub-office on the 
South Side. By Thursday morning Anderson was again receiv¬ 
ing land entries at the North Side office, while Assistant 
Agent Jules Royal was doing business at the new South Side 
sub-office, 

Frank Oliver took an exceedingly uncharitable view of 

(21) Edmonton Bulletin, June 23, 1892. 

(22) although the settlement on the south side of the river 
was incorporated as "Strathcona 51 , the terms South 
Side” and "Horth Side" gained increasing currency in 
the ’nineties. 



















■ 








. 






V. " 





































( 242 ) 


the government * 3 part in the land office '‘battle’'. 3e fus¬ 
ing to believe that the protestations of Dewdney and Royal 
were sincere, he insisted that an attempt to steal the land 
office had been made, and that it had been made by specu¬ 
lators operating through government influence. His first 
report on the affair, a front page article headed - 

BOBBERS * 

Attempt to Steal Land Office 

- charged that the attempt was made in order to "boom’ 1 South i 
Side property of Osier, Hammond and Manton, *in a large 
slice of which property the agent has an interest." (25) 

The second Bulletin report, on June 25, was headed in 
large types 

DIRTY DEWREY 
Is in the Steal 

He shows his hand - It is not clean 
fould shed blood to boom his town lots 
Cowardice his only redeeming quality 

There followed a virulent attack on the officials and 
speculators alleged to be Involved, and a lengthy report on 
the proceedings of the citizens, in which Oliver himself had 
played a prominent part. Even after the matter had been 
settled, the Bulletin refused to be mollified. Oliver re¬ 
peated his charges that certain persons had attempted to 
use their official position to advance their private in¬ 
terests* 

(25) Edmonton Bulletin, June 20, 1892. 










■ 








































. . 















( 243 ) 


. . . hogs, who look upon the government only as 

a swill factory, and who will squeal for or against 

anything on the chance of thereby securing a greater 

share of swill. 

. . . it was what the people supposed, a side 
scheme put up by the local agent, the inspector of 
agencies and the minister of the interior at the in¬ 
stigation of those very slick gentlemen. Osier, 

Hammond and Hanton, who trusted if they got away 
with the office quietly to be able to give suffic¬ 
ient reasons for keeping the town office closed. 

It was attempted to boom Osier, Hammond and 
Nanton’s towns!te. (24) 

As in 1882 there was considerable outside criticism of 
the propensity of Edmonton citizens to take matters into 
their own hands* Again the Bulletin found the action taken 
by the community fully justified. ”People do not like to 
be put in the position of having to use physical force to 
protect their rights, and they will b© slow to forget who 
caused them to be put in that position on this recent oc¬ 
casion.” (25) 

Dewdney*s letter to Mayor Macaulay blaming him and the 
citizens for hasty and ill-considered action brought & 
sharp response from the Bulletin, and the suspension of 
postmaster A.D. Osborne for ”being seen carrying a gun on 
the streets and defying the government”, provoked an edito¬ 
rial headed w lhe Right of Opinion” in which Oliver pointed 
out that Edmonton had defied, not the government, but its 


(24) Edmonton Bulletin, June 23, 1892 

(25) Edmonton Bulletin, June 27, 1892 













( 244 ) 


mistaken agents. (26) 

The attempted land office "steal" was not easily for¬ 
gotten, and rumbling echoes of the episode continued in the 
Bulletin for severs! months# The actual and potential riv¬ 
alry between the North and South Sides of the river had 
been clearly revealed# There was little hope at this time 
of a second transcontinental railway - to run through the 
North Saskatchewan country# It appeared that only the con¬ 
struction of a. bridge, enabling the Calgary and Edmonton to 
cross the river, would save the original pioneer community 
from being dwarfed by its growing south side competitor# 
During the next few years Oliver and the Bulletin , realiz¬ 
ing that railway extension to the North Side was now Edmon¬ 
ton’s number one civic problem, led the fight for federal 
aid in building a bridge across the Saskatchewan# (27) 

Meanwhile, great talk of an electric railway connecting 
with the South Side by way of the lower ferry, came to 
nothing. (28) 

(26) Edmonton bulletin, July ab, 1892# 

(<s7) The bridge question was very prominent in the Bulletin 
from 1892 on# 

(28) Edmonton Bulletin, June 26, 1893. Subsequent issues 
of the Bulletin throughout the ’nineties# 









(* 45 ) 


Chapter 9 Member of the House of Commons 1896-1905 

Under Macdonald’s successors the Conservative party contin¬ 
ued to decline, while the Liberals, under the inspired lead¬ 
ership of Laurier, grew in strength and laid plans to unseat 
their rivals in the next general election. The Manitoba 
separate schools question was the rock on which the Govern¬ 
ment eventually foundered. The Liberals made the most of 
this issue in the campaign of 1896. 

The Conservatives had been struggling since 1890 with 
the delicate question of Manitoba’s establishment of a non¬ 
sectarian school system, an act which the Catholics claimed 
to be a violation of the rights and privileges specifically 
granted by the Act of 1870 under which Manitoba entered 
Confederation. The question hod been before the Supreme 
Court and the Privy Council, which ruled that the Dominion 
had the right to pass remedial legislation in protection of 
'minority rights** in Manitoba. 

Mackenzie Bowell’s remedial bill of 1896 split the Con¬ 
servative party and forced his resignation. Dr. Charles 
Tupper was called in to save the party, but his remedial 
bill encountered a filibuster which forced him to call for 
dissolution of the House and a general election. The 
Liberals accused their opponents of trying to 11 coerce 




































. 

■ 










































. 














- 














( 246 ) 


Manitoba, and Laurier advocated a policy of conciliation 
and the appointment of a commission to consider the separ¬ 
ate schools dispute. 

The tariff was the second major issue of the campaign, 
the Liberals favoring a tariff for revenue, but cautiously 
denying that they stood for any sweeping tariff reforms pre¬ 
judicial to the manufacturing interests. 

As early as the spring of 1895 western political groups, 
anticipating a general election some time during the summer, 
began organizing forces. Frank Oliver, backed by the North 
West Liberals, declared his intention of contesting the 
Federal constituency of Alberta as an independent. His de¬ 
cision to enter the federal field is not difficult to under¬ 
stand. Ihe constitutional battle in the Territorial Assem¬ 
bly was as good as won. Responsible government needed only 
the anticipated Act of 1897 to make it a legal as well as 
a practical reality. F.W.O. Maultain, a brilliant politic¬ 
al personality and organizer, overshadowed his colleagues 
and dominated the Assembly as first premier of the North 
West administration. Although, like Oliver, a firm expon¬ 
ent of Territorial non-partisanship, he inclined toward 
Conservatism as Oliver did toward Liberalism. As a rugged 
individualist and independent, Oliver had never served on 
the North West executive. Past events and present circum¬ 
stances did not promise him a satisfying future in the North 








( 247 ) 


West Government, nor incline him to confine his continued 
struggle for North West rights to the Territorial field. 

He was sincerely convinced, apart from the quite under¬ 
standable appeal of the larger sphere, that he could hence¬ 
forth best serve the North West, not as a crusading member 
of the Territorial Assembly, but as a member of the House 
of Commons. The Liberals were clearly on the way in, and 
he saw himself, as a North West representative with Liberal 
backing, well able to wring from a Liberal administration 
North West concessions which had been demanded from the 
Conservatives in vain. If such concessions, involving low¬ 
er tariffs and freight fcates, increased Territorial sub¬ 
sidies and railway extension, could be made to include bad¬ 
ly needed public buildings for Bdmontofcn and a bridge over 
the North Saskatchewan, so muoh th© better. It is quite 
possible, too, that he had already come under the influence 
of Laurier who, if not a second George Brown, was at least 
an inspired and inspiring leader who, he hoped, would oh am- 
ion the cause of the Vsesfc and harry the Conservatives out 
of the land. 

Oliver*s chances of being eleoted were excellent. He 
had already been twice considered as a federal candidate, 
and as proprietor of the Bulletin and long-time member of 
the Territorial Assembly he was widely and favorably known. 
TSven his political enemies conceded his integrity, his 






■ 

. 






. 














■ 

. 

- 

■ 





























( 248 ) 


aggressiveness, and his devotion to western interests. The 
Liberals, desperate to beat the Conservatives at last, came 
to regard him as their white hope. True, he frequently 
indulged in outspoken criticisms of the party policies, but 
so far as he was inclined to "orthodoxy" at all, it was 
certainly toward Liberalism. The Liberals were already 
certain that they recognized, under his belligerent and 
quite sincere protestations of independence, the shape of 
a fellow-Orit, and they hastened to claim him as their own. 
Nor did he have the support of the Liberals alone. He had 
the vote of every frontier radical who hated the North West 
"bureaucracy", the National Policy and the C.P.H., and of 
most of those Northern Alberta Conservatives who placed the 
interests of the North West above the dictates of party. (1) 
Frank Oliver was originally nominated by a convention of 
Liberals in Calgary on February 27, 1895. Dr. Lafferty, in 
opening the nominations, stated that he hoped "they had met 
to nominate a man who, while he would support the Liberal 
party on its platform of tariff for revenue as against tar¬ 
iff for protection, would be a man above party and vote not 
so much for party as for the best interests of the country." 
( 2 ) 

(1) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 4, 1895. Oliver claimed the 
support, not only of Liberals, but of the Patrons of 
Industry, numerous independents and Edmonton Conser¬ 
vatives. 

(2) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 7, 1895. Dr. Lafferty was 
president of the Calgary Liberal Association. 





k ■ 








. ' i ■ 


■ 

' 


' 








' 




























( 249 ) 


A.L. Sifton was first nominated, but he refused to stand. 

(3) Oliver was then nominated, and Sifton seconded the nom¬ 
ination with the remark that "Oliver was liberal enough to 
suit him and independent enough and honest enough to be a 
North west man first, last and all the time.* 1 (4) In accep¬ 
ting the nomination Oliver declared his independence. "It 
is important," he said, "that your representative should be 
in a position to advocate your interests ... in parliament 
without party hindrance even if he has to do it without par¬ 
ty support. Speaking generally I may say that I will sup¬ 
port a policy of development for alberta .... I will 
bind myself to do all in my power to see that each section 
and every interest receives fair and equal treatment . . . . 
I have no personal interest to serve or ambition to grat¬ 
ify*** (5) His first election address in the Bulletin stat¬ 
ed, "The stand which I take with the full knowledge and 
consent of those who have tendered me their support is that 
of an independent as to party, but not as to principle. (6) 
IXiring March and April he addressed several large meet¬ 
ings in the South. Speaking in Fdmonton, he attacked the 

(3) Fdmonton Bulletin, Mar. 7, 1895. A.L. Sifton later 
succeeded Rutherford as Premier of Alberta. It appears 
that Sifton and others had already decided to nominate 
Oliver. 

(4) Ibid 

(5) Fdmonton Bulletin, Mar. 4, 1895. 

(6) Ibid 











' 









- 






♦ ' 

■ 






. . . 

■ ■- -r * - " ■ : • ■" - 

.... 

- • ; ■ : . . V ■ , 


. 




■ 












































( 250 ) 


National Policy, the C.P.K., and party representation, and 
declared, "as to the political position I occupy in the con¬ 
test, it is that of an independent liberal, nominated by the 
liberal party, but independent of party to the extent that 
I am expected to advocate first and foremodt the interests 
of this country. It is the interests of the constituency 
first, and the principles of the party next.” (7) 

;! 

The Conservatives did not nominate during 1895, although f 
D.W. Davis, M.P., T.B.H. Cochrane, and F.W.O. Haultaln were jj 
all mentioned as possibilities in the western press. tohen t 
it became evident that no general election would b© held in 
1895, the Oliver campaign subsided. Throughout the winter 
there was a good deal of political manoeuvring, particular¬ 
ly among the Conservatives, and with the election definite¬ 
ly approaching in 1896, campaigning was resumed in the 
spring. Oliver resigned from the North toast Assembly in 
May, 1896, confirming his federal candidacy. Davis 

refused to stand for re-election. His opponents were un¬ 
charitable enough to impute this decision to his certainty 
that he would stand no chano© against Oliver. The Conser¬ 
vatives finally settled on T.B.H. Cochrane, a retired ranch¬ 
er of Calgary, as their candidate. 

Oliver*s election address in the Bulletin of June 1, 1896, 

(7) Bdmonton Bulletin, April 1, 1895. 





. . 

• ■ 

' 


.,y<‘ 

. 

■ 








































(* 61 ) 


set forth a platform in which he repeated his pledge as an 
independent, supported a tariff for revenue, denounced rail¬ 
way monopoly, advocated lower freight rates, and called for 
a better deal for the North West. On the separate schools 
question h© opposed the policy of coercion as implied in 
the government*s remedial bill, and supported Laurier’s 
policy of conciliation. 

Cochrane and his supporters journeyed north for the clos¬ 
ing days of the campaign, and during June several large and 
lively meetings were held in the Edmonton district, The 
Minister of the Interior came west to w stump rt for Cochrane, 
while Oliver had the platform support of such Liberal not¬ 
ables as A.L.Sifton, Dr. Lafferty and Dr. 0e Veber of Leth¬ 
bridge. The recently formed f, Young Albertans' 5 , a Liberal 
group, campaigned vigoroixsly for Oliver. At a mammoth meet¬ 
ing held in Edmonton*s ‘Thistle Kink, the rival candidates 
were asked to pledge themselves on the perennial liquor 
question. The Bulletin reported their respective stands 
as follows: 

Cochrane: **I can only 3ay that I like my grog myself.** 
(Loud derisive cheers.) 

Oliver: n . . . had only one answer he had given all 

his life, he had never voted against prohib¬ 
ition, and he never would.® (8) 

The main issues locally were, however, tariffs and the 
(8) Edmonton Bulletin, June 11, 1896. 



























i 


. 






- 




































( 252 ) 


Manitoba separate schools question, Cochrane simply supp¬ 
orted government policy; Oliver opposed it. 

The balloting of June 25 swept the Liberals into office, 
Oliver 1 s victory (9) was celebrated in Edmonton by an im¬ 
mense torchlight parade engineered by the w Young Albertans/ 
During the course of a riotous evening Oliver addressed the 
wildly cheering mob from the balcony of the Queen*s Hotel 

V 

on JaSDer Avenue, (10) On that June night, with its fore- | 

<( 

.. 

most citizen and most able champion elected to the House of 
Commons, Edmonton perhaps felt a greater confidence in the l! 

■ 9 

future than it had experienced in years. 


Laurier at once proceeded to form his 11 Ministry of Tal¬ 
ents , but delayed the appointment of a Minister of the 
Interior. (11) It was generally understood that he would 
choose a western member for the portfolio, and speculation 
was rife as to whom his choice would be. Clifford Sifton 
and Joseph Martin both of Manitoba, and Frank Oliver of 
Alberta were all mentioned as possibilities. 


(9) Can, Pari, Comp ., 1897, p. 195. 

Frank Oliver L. 5647 
T.B.H. Cochrane C# 2863 

Humber of voters 10,279 

Note that Oliver was classed simply as a Liberal in this 
record. According to the Edmonton Bulletin , June 25, 
1896, a third candidate, sTmon~J. Clarke of Calgary, 
storekeeper, received 57 votes. 

(10) Edmonton Bulletin, June 25, 1896. 

(11) Edmonton Bulletin, July 20, 1896. Oliver*s criticism 
of the delay. 































- . 
























' 








■ 










. 

















( 253 ) 


The Toronto News said: 

It might surprise the friends of Joe Martin and 
startle Mr. Sifton if Mr. Laurier should select Mr. 
Oliver, M.P. for Alberta, for the vacant portfolio 
of the interior, but stranger things than this 
have happened. (12) 

However, it was hardly to be expected that a memoer from 
a remote and relatively insignificant constituency would be 
called to the Cabinet, especially when that member was not 
a "party man", and had pledged himself to his electors as 
an independent. Laurier*s appointment of Clifford Sifton 
in November met with general approval. Writing of the new 
Minister, Oliver said, M He has had a lifetime of Western 
experience; he has shown administrative ability of a high 
order, and the West looks to him for an active policy in 
the interests of the settlers. 1 * (13) The Bulletin was very 
critical of haphazard and unselective immigration and ex¬ 
pressed the hope, which was to prove unfounded, that Sifton 
would introduce a policy of selective immigration. "Young 
and yet experienced, energetic yet of sound judgment, tal¬ 
ented and still practical, (Sifton) may be confidently ex¬ 
pected to bring about a satisfactory change." (14) As events 
proved, it was to be the writer of these words himself who 

(12) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 21, 1896. Quoting Toronto News 

(13) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 23, 1896. 

(14) Ibid Editorial opinion. 






























































. 







































( 254 ) 


made selective immigration a key policy of the Department 
of the Interior. 


Frank Oliver, erstwhile trader and "ox-pusher" on the 
Battleford Trail, and pioneer publisher from the far West, 
was not overawed by his seat in the Commons. To use a piece 
of western vernacular, he Hook Ottawa in his stride." Ed¬ 
monton school house. Thistle Rink, Territorial Assembly or i 


House of Commons - all were the same to him. What he had to 
say he said, sparing none and flattering none - straight 
from the shoulder and with no diminution of his pungent vo¬ 
cabulary, It was soon current in the eastern press, and 
freely circulated around the Common’s corridors, that the 
"untamed broncho in the government corral® was a fearless 
fighter and a debater to be reckoned with. His frequent 
verbal tilts with N*F, Bavin (Cons,, West Assiniboia) became 
the delight of the House on otherwise somnolent or barren 
afternoons. 

His maiden speech was characteristic. He began by ask¬ 
ing the indulgence of the House for speaking at all. But 
Davin, "supposedly" representing the North West, had critic¬ 
ized the Speech from the Throne and expressed "the bitter 
disappointment of the Territories" that the tariffs on 
agricultural implements were not to be removed during the 
current session. Someone "really"’ representing the North 
West had to refute him. "I am here," Oliver said, "with 
















































' 




































































. 





















■ 













(255) 

a majority of something like 800 votes. Davin is here oy 
the oast of the returning officer, an official appointed by 
the late government. If it could be possible to have a rep¬ 
resentative in this House with less right to speak on behalf 
of the people of the Worth West, I cannot conceive of him.” 
(15) There was not, he informed the House, any disapooint- 
ment in his constituency regarding the Speech from the 
Throne. Refusing to flatter the Liberals on their victory 
he added, n My constituency was carried not so much on the 
merits of the policy laid down by the leader of the present 
government, as on the demerits of the administration of the 
late government during the many years that it has governed 
that western country. It was a case of * Turn the rascals 
out. ,n (16) Now, with the ^rascals" turned out, what did 
the West expect of the Liberals? Not, despite Davin, a 
revision of the tariff at a moment*s notice. With the ag¬ 
ricultural buying season nearly over, tariff revision could 
well wait for the next session* The tariff was an imoortant 
issue. But the West was groaning under even more serious 
disabilities inflicted upon it by the late government. Par¬ 
amount among these were land and railway policies. Relief 
from these grievances was what the West first looked for 

(15) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 17, 1896. 

(16) Ibid 









- 





























. 

■ . " 


































. 









( 256 ) 


from the present government. "The North West for the people 
and not for the monopolies - that is the policy we voted 
for.* (17) 

Did Davin think that he (Oliver) was ti*d to the govern- 
ment's apron strings because of his Liberal backing in the 
election? W I can tell him I am not a strong party man, and 
he knows it. I can tell him I am not bound to support the 

j 

leader of the present government, unless his policy is in 
the interests of the North West." (IB) In conclusion he 
said, speaking of Conservatives in general, "The gentlement 

!i 

whose ideas of the requirements of government rise no high¬ 
er than the filling of places are no men to rule this coun¬ 
try.* 4 As for Davin in particular, *W© must give all credit 
to the clerk of the court who did the final act of electing 
the hon. gentleman . . . . ,f (19) 

This speech marked the beginning of a parliamentary feud 
which was to last for several years* (20) 

The closing moments in the afternoon session were 
peaceful. The lion and the lamb (both Davin and Oliv¬ 
er will know which is the lion) lay down together. 

And thus, with the two belligerents of the after¬ 
noon at peace, the House arose. (21) 


(17) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 17, 1896. 

(18) Ibid 

(19) Ibid 

(20) Nicholas Flood Davin died in 1901, by his own hand, 
previously, he had been involved in litigation with 
Walter Scott, M.P.. his successor as member for West 
Assiniboia, who haa purchased from him the Leader . 

(21) Toronto Telegram, April 22, 1897. 






. 




' 












■ 

■ 










■ 







' 





. 































. 































( 257 ) 


Oliver was frequently accused of spicing his attacks on 
the policies of his opponents with an undue measure of per¬ 
sonal abuse* Undoubtedly he sometimes did so, but there 
were qualifying circumstances* Personal abuse was a polit¬ 
ical stock-in-trade in the ’eighties and ’nineties, and if 
some of his contemporaries indulged in it less effectively 
than he, it may well have been for lack of ability rather 
than lack of inclination. He was extraordinarily astute in 
analysing motives, and he had a flair for the ready phrase 
and the apt analogy. He had certain strong prejudices and 
perhaps allowed himself, upon occasion, to be carried away 
in defence of his principles. Where he suspected insincer¬ 
ity or turpitude, he was absolutely merciless} but where he 
sensed integrity, he was as ready as the next man to re¬ 
spect an opponent’s opinions. (22) 

True to his election pledges Oliver at once set himself 
wholeheartedly to pressing North West claims upon the ad¬ 
ministration. The battle for increased Territorial subsid¬ 
ies, in which he had been a leader in the North West Coun¬ 
cil and the Assembly, he now carried on to the floor of the 
House of Commons. With characteristic thoroughness he 
studied the innumerable government and Territorial papers 

(22) For example, he respected his political opponent 

Dr. H.C. ililson and refrained from extreme criticism. 
Despite political differences, he was a warm admirer 
of Judge Macleod. 






(258) 

bearing on the question, When he was ready to oring his 
demands to the attention of the House, he had at his finger 
tips the history of the subsidies dispute and an imposing 
array of figures on population, educational and public works 
expenditures, specific North West needs, and comparable 
provincial grants. (23) He was not able, of course, to 
effect an immediate increase in Territorial subsidies, but 
even the Hegina header was constrained to credit him with a 
very forceful beginning, 

Whether it is due to the emphasis with which Mr. 

Frank Oliver always seems able to present a subject, 
or the fact that the member for Alberta had powerrto 
impart more information at Ottawa on the question of 
the Dominion grant to the North West Assembly than 
had before been given in that quarter, there is one 
thing certain, viz., that the eastern newspapers are 
devoting space to, and evincing intelligence respect¬ 
ing the matter that has not before been evident. (24) 

He supported Laurier’s conciliatory settlement of the 
Manitoba separate schools dispute, and editorially commend¬ 
ed the settlement as M a common ground upon which both could 
meet and by reasonable mutual concessions arrive at a work¬ 
ing and workable basis.* (25) Pointing out that the Mani¬ 
toba Homan Catholics, including Archbishop Langevin himself, 
had supported the Conservatives * abortive remedial bill, he 

(23) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 7, 1896s Sept. 10, 1896; 

Sept. 14, 1896. 

(24) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 17, 1896. Quoting Kegina Lead¬ 
er. 

(25) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 3, 1896. 






■ 










. 


. 

' 

. 

. 
















( 259 ) 


claimed that Laurier’s settlement was more favorable to the 
religious minority than Bowell’s or Tupper’s proposals, and 
warned that any further separate schools agitation in Mani¬ 
toba would be a deliberate attempt to re-open an angry sore 
in the body politic. (26) 

In an attempt to implement the Hudson Bay Outlet scheme 
which he had favored for years, he piloted through the rail¬ 
way committee of the House a bill to Incorporate a Hudson 
Bay Railway Company with a capital of eight million dollars, 
(27) 

The new government, as was to be expected after a long 
opposition regime, ^housecleaned” the civil service, a 
process which led to the cry of partyism and patronage. 
Oliver defended the Cabinet’s action as necessary to effic¬ 
ient administration, claiming that ”. . . the people of 
Canada . • • voted in support of the new government quite 
as much for the purpose of getting a reform in the civil 
service as on any other grounds.* (28) 

The new Alberta member was very interested in federal aid 
to western agriculture, but he opposed Davln’s motion for 
aid *for the purpose of establishing creameries and cheese 

(26) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 3, 1896. 

(27) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 28, 1896. The bill did not 
get through the House. 

(28) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 21, 1896. "Mr. Oliver in 

Parliament. 





• . • ; ' -r- • • •' 


. - . . . ; 

' > ; , . ' .. '.I 


% '• 


• v ' •• 










. 










' 














• • 

- 


. , . 




■ 





















( 260 ) 


factories in the North West.” "I would certainly object,” 
he said, ”to a proposition that would bring the government 
into active competition with private capital in this busin¬ 
ess.” (29) What the dairying industry needed, Oliver sug¬ 
gested, was aid for creameries already in operation; but 
even before that was practical, ”more settlers and more 
cow's.” (30) 


Although the railway land grants system was abandoned in 
1894, the West continued to suffer for years the ill effects 
of the lavish government terns conceded to the railway com¬ 
panies. The Dominion agreement with the O.F.K. was discrim¬ 
inatory against the West with respect to both the land 
grants and tax exemptions. 

The fact that the C.P.H. land grants alternated 
with homestead lands caused every dollar spent by 
the settler for improvements, whether on his own 
land or in taxation to the local authorities, to 
enhance the value of the Company*s holdings in the 
community. "Federal purposes t? not only required 
the Territories to furnish 86 percent of the land 
grants earned by the railway companies, despite the 
fact that only 43 percent of their mileage was con¬ 
structed in the North West, but added the addition¬ 
al burden of what amounted to a tax upon the pioneer 
communities, in releasing a vast quantity of tax¬ 
able property of a great corporation from taxation. (31) 

A bitter dispute raged over the interpretation to be 


(29) TSdmonton Bulletin, Sept. 21, 1896. 

(30) Ibid 

(31) Lingard Territorial Government In Canada pp. 226-7. 






i$ ■ ■ * 






















i 




















■ 




■ 


■ 




. 
























( 261 ) 


placed on the phrase "*free from such taxation for 20 years 
after the grant thereof from the Grown, 11 in section 16 of 
the schedule to the C.FtR* contract, 1881, with reference 
to land granted to the railway. (32) 

The company contended that its twenty years’ ex¬ 
emption commenced to run only from the date when the 
letters patent for the land were issued by the Domin¬ 
ion government. The local authorities understood 
that the exemption expired twenty years from the date 
of the issue of the charter to the company, or from 
the date of completion of fifty-mile sections of the 
road, or at least from the time when the whole grant 
was "earned , on the construction of the railway. If 
the term of exemption began only on the issue of pat¬ 
ents, and if the patents did not issue until the sale 
of land by the company, it appeared evident that the 
company would never pay taxes on an acre of its vast 
land holdings in the Territories. (33) 


(32) "The Canadian Pacifio hallway and all stations and 
station grounds, workshops, buildings, yards, and oth¬ 
er property, rolling stock and appurtenances required 
and used for the construction and working thereof, and 
the capital stock of the Company shall be forever free 
from taxation by the Dominion, or by any Province here¬ 
after to be established, or by any municipal corpor¬ 
ation therein; and the lands of the Company, in the 
North lest Territories, until they are either sold or 
occupied, shall also b© free from such taxation for 

20 years after the grant thereof from the Crown." 
Statutes of Canada, 44 Vicfc., o. 1, s. 16 of the 
schedule (1881) 

(33) Lingard, op. cit., p. 227. 

A Manitoba appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada was 
decided in favor of the Company in 1903. 

A Supreme Court report of February, 1905, declared 
that "the period of twenty years exemption from tax¬ 
ation of such lands . . . begins from the date of the 
actual issue of letters patent of grant from the 
Crown, from time to time, after they have been earned, 
selected, surveyed, alloted, and accepted by the 
Canadian Pacific Railway Company. 11 


















































( 262 ) 


The North West complained that the G.P,R. and other sub¬ 
sidised railway companies were deliberately slow in choos¬ 
ing their "earned lands, so as to evade taxation. 

Of the total of 56,087,072 acres granted to all 
railway companies, the Department of the Interior 
reported, in June, 1903, that only "about 14,800,000 
acres" had been patented, and of these "about 
11,800,000 acres . . . since February 1901," Clear¬ 
ly then, the C,P,R., like the other companies en¬ 
joying land subsidies, had followed the practice of 
evading taxation, by refusing to select and patent 
its lands until it considered the time opportune to 
put them on the market, (34) 

Oliver lost no time in calling for government action on 
the problem of railway tax exemption. During the first 
session he urged the administration to consider the case of 
certain railways, including the Calgary and Edmonton, which 
by not selecting their lands were evading school and stat¬ 
ute labor taxation. (35) He enquired if the government was 
aware that the C.P.H. was holding in reserve the right of 
selection of public lands on account of grant, enabling 
them to block land grants in the Territories to other rail¬ 
way companies, and he urged that the C.P.H. be compelled to 
choose its land immediately. (36) He moved a resolution 
calling on the government to issue C.P.H. patents at once, 
so that in at least twenty years the Company would have to 


(34) Lingard, op. cit., pp. 228-9, 

(35) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept, 21, 1896. "Mr, Oliver in 
Parliament". 


(56) 


Ibid 

































. 








. 














• ' 

. . . ■ 

■ 

' ' ' 



















(263) 

pay its taxes. (37) 

The Regina Standard was among the western newspapers 
commending his vigorous attack on this perennial North West 
grievance, stating, "With characteristic perseverance he has 
apparently gone to the very root of it.” (38) Oliver*s 
campaign met with no immediate success, but he found a 
staunch ally in R. L. Richardson, member for Lisgar and pro¬ 
prietor of the Winnipeg Tribune , and the two men directed a 
minority fight against railway tax exemption for several 
years. 

Meanwhile he attacked another angle of the railway pro¬ 
blem, that of branch lines and townsites. On several occ¬ 
asions, with short or branch lines under discussion in the 
railway committee or in the House, he urged that lines be 
required, as a condition of their charter, to pass through 
already established settlements so as to minimize "behind 
the scenes” speculation in townsites. (39) 

He charged that certain North West railways, which did 
not enjoy tax exemption by act of Parliament, actually were 
exempted by a secret understanding oetween the companies 

(37) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 28, 1896. Quoting the 
Winnipeg Tribune . 

(38) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 1, 1896. Quoting the 
Regina Standard . 

(39) Edmonton Bulletin, May 24, 1897 - He the Calgary and 
Edmonton and the town of M&cleodj June 19, 1899 - He 
the Edmonton and Saskatchewan line and the town of 
Fort Saskatchewan. 










r ■ ;•* ; r ■ ' - - - ' ' • ‘ '• 


















































■ . ■' 






















' 






" 


' 








(^ 64 ) 


and the government, greatly to the prejudice of the sett¬ 
lers. On these grounds, during the second session, he 
moved a resolution asking that the lands of the Calgary and 
"Edmonton, the Regina and prince Albert, and the Manitoba 
and ftorth western railways be made subject to taxation forth 
with. (40) 

In his Insistent "sniping" at the railways, Oliver de¬ 
clared that they were a national and not merely a western 
question, and placed particular stress upon Canada’s prox¬ 
imity to the more advanced manufacturing interests of the 
United States. (41) He was a vigorous advocate of a Canad¬ 
ian railway commission to co-ordinate and supervise the 
national railway structure. (42) 

f j?he fight which Oliver and Richardson conducted against 
western railway abuses wa3 a long and bitter one. In May, 
1900, the Toronto Telegram stated that so far the two men 
had been baffled, and that one main reason for their defeat 
was the existence of the Winnipeg Free Pres 3 and the 
Regina Leader , “which are ever ready to whitewash schemes 
to betray the people and benefit the G.P.R. M The Telegram 
continued, *Western Canada has been betrayed since the 

(40) Edmonton Bulletin, June 17, 1897. Session reports. 

(41) Edmonton Bulletin, June 1, 1899. 

(42) Edmonton Bulletin, May 29, 1899. A railway commission 
is advocated in many subsequent issues of the Bulletin . 









- 

. 














' 






■ 

■ 

. 








■ 













( 265 ) 


Liberals came into power with the full approval of these 
two Vicars of Bray. All that the West gets will be due to 
the earnestness of representatives liKe R.L. Richardson and 
FranK Oliver who will fight for principle regardless of 
party.* (45) 

During the session of 1900 Richardson and Oliver,contend¬ 
ing that the C.P.R. land tax exemption extended twenty years 
from the issue of the charter, introduced a motion that all 
lands earned by the C.P.R. should be patented to them by 
February 16, 1901, so that they might be subject to taxation 
from that date. In seconding the motion Oliver stated that 
tt . . . the land should be patented so that exemption would 
terminate whenever the law would permit. w (44) Laurier 
himself spoke against the motion, which was lost 99 to 6. 
Said the Bulletin report, **The North ftest got the worst 
throw down of the session yesterday .... There could 
be no more complete exhibition of the abject servility of 
both parties to the interests of the C.P»R. M (45) 

During the ’nineties the potential wealth of the Kootenay 
area in Southern British Columbia was revealed, and the need 
for a Crow’s Nest Pass railway to tap this region was wide¬ 
ly recognized. Oliver was very favorable to the railway, 

(45) Edmonton Bulletin, May 14, 1900. Quoting the 
Toronto Telegram . 

(44) Edmonton Bulletin, July 6, 1900. Session report. 

(45) Ibid Report from Oliver. 
















:v-: ; V, *•. : 


' 

' 


■ . . 

. 

4 . j 






. 








( 266 ) 


but not to the application of th© C.P.R. for a Crow’s Nest 
line charter. ”Unless the Crow’s Nest Pass road is built 
and operated under government control so as to ensure active 
competition it might almost as well never be built as far 
as the business interests of Eastern Canada are concerned.” 

(46) 

The C.P.R. secured the right to build the Crow’s Nest 
line under the charter of the British Columbia Southern 
Railway, but this right was qualified by an agreement sign¬ 
ed in 1897 to reduce rates west-bound on certain commodities 
from Fort William and points west of Fort William. This, 
said Oliver, was not what the West wanted; but that, ”The 
Government should build and own the Crow’s Nest Pass Rail¬ 
way, and either operate it or lease running powers on it.” 

(47) In March, 1897, referring to the ”thunderous silence” 
with which the Winnipeg papers greeted ”the recent reduc¬ 
tion on C.P.R. freight rates between lberta and the Koot¬ 
enay,” the Bulletin claimed, "Whatever was done by any news¬ 
paper to secure th© lowering of these rates was done by the 
Bulletin and by the Bulletin only.” (48) 

Both in the Bulletin and in the House, Oliver made his 

(46) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 30, 1896. 

(47) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 31, 1896. Oliver on the occ¬ 
asion of a Christmas night banquet in Calgary, attend¬ 
ed by the Hon. A.G. Blair, Minister of Railways. 

(48) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 4, 1897. 









( 267 ) 


stand perfectly clear. 

Mr. Oliver supported the construction of the road; 
but claimed that greater benefits would have result¬ 
ed from construction under government control than 
under C.P.K. control, inasmuch as government construc¬ 
tion would have meant the breaking of railway monop¬ 
oly in the North West, while C.P.K. construction 
meant the perpetuation of that monopoly. (49) 

As for the concessions in freight rates which the C.P.K, 
was willing to pay "for a continuation of its monopoly’’, 
“Under this arrangement the North West settler is the decoy 
of the C.P.R.; • ♦ . the Company is to squeeze him until he 
squeals loud enough to compel the government to come to his 
assistance, and then the C.P.R. will demand the price of re¬ 
laxing the freight rat© screw, either in the purchase of its 
lands or in aid to additional branches to still further 
strengthen its monopoly.” (50) 

Despite Oliver*s persistent and vigorous campaign as a 
“reform* member of Parliament, there were, naturally, many 
North West concessions he failed to obtain, and many North 
West abuses that went unrectified. The Conservative press 
in Alberta delighted to twit him about these “unfulfilled 
promises”, and mentioned continued C.P.K. monopoly in the 
Crow*s Nest deal, the continued immigration of *Calician 

(49) Edmonton Bulletin, June 28, 1897, Session report. 


(50) Edmonton Bulletin, July 5, 1897. 

See also ^dmonton Bulletin, July 1, 1897 









( 268 ) 

capitalists", and failure to get the Saskatchewan River 
bridge. The Bulletin replied in kind. In answer to a 
Calgary Herald jibe concerning the bridge, Oliver retorted 
that at least present action on the project was "like greas¬ 
ed lightning compared with when the Herald* s friends were in 
office, and that estimable journal had its late lamented 
cinch on the Pap. w (51) 

I 

Oliver was concerned regarding the vast tracts of ftorth 
West land, which, being reserved in various ways, were still 
closed to the homesteader. He denied Savin*s claim that 
most of the land formerly belonging to the colonization 
companies had reverted to the Crown# Citing the case of the 
Edmonton and Saskatchewan Land Co#, he charged that it had 
held the land for a number of years and had done everything 
to discourage settlement# Then when the charter was can¬ 
celled it received land at the rate of one dollar per acre 
for the amount it had paid in, plus the amount it had put 
into improvements. The Company, he added, was still hold¬ 
ing a good deal of land for a rise in land values, a situ¬ 
ation which was duplicated in many places throughout the 
West# Was it not time for the government to do something 
about it? (52) 

(51) Kdmonton Bulletin, July 26, 1897# 

(52) Mmonton Bulletin, Oct. 8, 1896# 











. 

:V. .. • 


J 

. 




' 















( 269 ) 


With about 20 out of 36 sections in every township in the 
Territories reserved to railway land grants alone, it was, 
he maintained, nothing short of stupid to think that the 
governments immigration policy could be really efiective. 

He advocated immigration, not from Europe or the United 
States, but from the Eastern Canadian provinces, ”to bind 
Canada together*; hut he stressed the 'fallacy of hoping to 
encourage immigration by opening up only alternate sections.* 

(53) His remedy for the continued land-lock was simple 

| 

enoughs All the lands held reserved and remaining in the 
hands of the Crown should he thrown open for settlement 
forth with, i.e., the so-called school lands and the odd- 
numbered sections throughout the country yet remaining in 
the governments hands. (54) To the suggestion that the 
government buy back alienated lands and throw them open for 
sale to actual settlers at low cost, Oliver was opposed. 

The Bulletin will not support a proposition to buy back one 
acre - of railway land for instance - as long as one acre 
of public land is held reserved.” (55) But should the day 
come when no more public land was held in reserve, it might 
be practicable to purchase or reclaim previously alienated 

(53) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 26, 1896. 

(54) Ibid 

(55) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 9, 1896. 










( 270 ) 


land and sell it to settlers, to establish a fund to build 
competing railways. (56) 

Sifton’s policy of mass immigration had not as yet borne 
full fruit, but already there had been an influx of Central 
Europeans sufficiently large to alarm Oliver and move him 
to sound a note of warning. He did not agree with Sifton 
that "peasants in sheep-skin coats made desirable settlers, 
and referring to Ruthenian immigration he wrote, That they 
are not the most desirable immigrants is made evident by a 
glance and is still further established by recent exper¬ 
iences. ... they are just the same servile, shiftless 
people with money as without it * . * • They are not 
people that are wanted in this country at any price.* (57) 
That was in 1896. Two years later, with the rising tide of 
Central Europeans pouring into the North West, Oliver de¬ 
nounced Sifton*s "unselective immigration” on the floor of 
the House. Hr referred particularly to the Galicians as 
"pauper immigrants who, constituting a surplus of cheap 
farm labor, tended to depress the living standards of the 
North West settlers. The average immigrant needed, he main¬ 
tained, seasonal work to help him get established, and im¬ 
migrants of British extraction simply could not compete at 

(56) The principle of land sales to build a competing rail¬ 
way appears in Oliver’s land bill of 1908. 

(57) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 14, 1896. 

















































. - 

' 


■ 

. 

. 














( 271 ) 


the wage levels accepted by the Galicians. (58) 

A rather amusing incident of the following year threw 
light, not only on Oliver*s reaction to the Galicians, but 
on his growing antagonism to the Winnipeg Free press which 
he identified closely with the interests of the C.P.K. and 
’cheap" immigration. In a certain Bulletin article he made 
passing reference to ’’the Galician editor of the free Press ? ’ 
The Free Press editor was quick to point out that he was not 
a Galician, and to demand a retraction. Oliver, insteed of 

■ 

apologizing, took him to task for being obtuse. The term 
"Galician editor”, he painstakingly explained, referred 
neither to the Free Press editor, nor to his nationality. 

It did refer to whichever editor on the "Press was respon¬ 
sible for that department devoted to the interests of the 
Galicians. 

As, for instance, when the words "live-stock editor" 
are used, they do not mean that the editor is a 
horse, mule, ass, one of the neat cattle or swine, 
however closely he may resemble one or other of 
these valuable animals in temperament, appearance 
or mental capacity. 

The Bulle tin had no intention of insulting what 
remnants of manhood and respectability unnumbered 
years of serfdom have left in the Galicians by in¬ 
sinuating that any one of their nationality was cap¬ 
able of taking part in editing the Free Press - a 
paper which it would o© fulsome adulation to'call a 
journalistic prostitute. (59) 


(58) Fdmonton Bulletin, June 13, 1898. Session report. 

(59) Fdmonton Bulletin, Jan. 26, 1899. 












( 272 ) 


Speaking in the Commons on a vote of $100,000 for the 
salaries of immigration officials, Oliver questioned the 
whole philosophy underlying Sifton’s policy and made a plea 
for selective immigration. He disputed the validity of 
measuring the success of a policy simply by counting the 
number of immigrants brought in each year, The North West 
settlers were, he warned, and the whole country should be, 
interested in the Kind of immigrants being brought in. Im¬ 
migration must b© encouraged, "not simply to produce rail¬ 
way traffic . . . but for the purpose of building up a Kin¬ 
dred, and higher, and better civilization in the country." 
If the government continued to put "the wrong kind of sett¬ 
lers” in the North &©st, nothing but irreparable harm could 
result. (60) 

Vfoile Oliver was agitating in the House of Commons for 
selective immigration, the Builetin was conducting an am¬ 
bitious campaign to attract "the right kind of immigrant" 
into "the land of golden ooportunity". (61) This campaign 
reached a peak during the summer of 1900, when issue after 
issue was devoted to "boosting" the country, advising and 
encouraging the prospective settler, and singing the prais¬ 
es of Edmonton - "The Northern Metropolis". 

(feo) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 2, 1899. Session report. 

(61) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 3, 1900. Bulletin Supplement: 

‘The Edmonton Mercantile Review. 







( 273 ) 


“Edmonton’s claim to this ambitious title had indeed been 
strengthened by events of the previous three years. The 
first significant news item on the impending gold ruah to 
the Yukon appeared in the Bulletin of July 29, 1897. In 
refutation of certain eastern press opinions that the Yunon 
was over-estimated and should not and need not be developed, 
the paper contained this interesting statements "If gold 
is flowing from the Yukon, our business is not to stop the 
flow, but to cause it to flow our way. Vie need It, and can 
get it.** 

Most of the traffic to the Yukon went north by water 
from the west coast ports. But as the gold fever mounted 
in the “East and in the United States, Edmonton saw the opp¬ 
ortunity to assert herself as the key point in an All- 
Canadian Overland Route to the new Eldorado. During the 
succeeding months the town did become an outfitting depot 
and jumping-off place** for the Yukon-bound adventurer, and 
business boomed as never before* The most fantastic claims 
were made for the feasibility of the land route north west 
from Edmonton into the Yuiton. Many individuals and parties 
did set forth from Edmonton toward the promised land. Some 
reached it; many did not. The overland route, except for 
the hardiest and most experienced traveller, was fraught 
with extreme danger and difficulty. 




* 

' 


' 




. • • , ; . 

. 


‘ 

. 









(£ 74 ) 


The Bulletin , of course, fostered the Yukon boom and de¬ 
voted columns and pages to advocating the Canadian overland 
route. Suggestions ranged from "a good pack and cattle 
trail” to a standard-built railway from Edmonton to the 
Yukon, (62) The paper ran an endless series of Yukon re¬ 
ports, maps of alternative routes, and articles of inform¬ 
ation to the prospective gold-seeker, foith amazing facil¬ 
ity, in outfitters stores and on the street corners, Ed¬ 
montonians built railways throughout the north and floated 
steamships on the Athabasca, the Peace, the Mackenzie^ the 
Liard, and on the Yukon River itself. Frank Oliver men¬ 
tioned, with reference to a certain matter that had tempor¬ 
arily escaped his attention, that he had been too busy 
"building railways to the Yukon.** He took the platform on 
numerous occasions in defence of the Edmonton Overland 
Route. (65) 

The "Yukon fever” eventually burned itself out. But 
while it lasted the Bulletin was largely instrumental in 
"putting Edmonton on the map”, as copies of the paper, with 
plenty of immigration propaganda included, found their way 
to Eastern Canada, the United States, the British Isles, 
Europe and places even more distant. (64) 

(62) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 4, 1897. Issues of the 
Bulletin throughout the years 1897, 1898 and 1899 
contain frequent references to the route. 

(65) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov, 18, 1897; Dec. 16, 1897^ 

(64) Bulletin publicity and correspondence, 1897-1900. 









( 276 ) 


The All-Canadian Overland Route did not materialize. Mack¬ 
enzie and Mann applied for a charter for the Canadian Yukon 
Railway Co., which proposed to link the head of ocean navi¬ 
gation on the west coast with the interior of the Yukon by 
rail. Oliver consistently opposed the Yukon Railway bill 
in the House debates, urging that the terms offered Macken¬ 
zie and Mann would actually check Yukon development, that 
the line would benefit the United States more than it would 
Canada, that resources of the North West Territories east 
of the mountains would be used to build a railway west of 
the mountains from which the North lest would receive no 
benefit, and that money and lands spent on such a Yukon rail- 
way would prevent the opening up of direct communication by 
the Edmonton overland route. (65) 

Oliver continued to advocate temperance, and devoted him¬ 
self to supporting the prohibitionist forces in the Domin¬ 
ion liquor plebiscite of 1893. I hen the **dry w forces won 
by a relatively narrow margin, h© expressed gratification, 
but at a temperance meeting at McDougall Methodist Church 
in Edmonton in November, 1398, he stated, w Ii»lthough pro¬ 
hibition has achieved a victory at the poll3, the fight is 
beginning rather than ending.’* (66) It was already becoming 

(65) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 10, 1898; Mar. 24, 1898; Mar. 

31, 1398. The bill was defeated in the Senate. 

(66) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 7, 1898. 























(* 76 ) 


evident that the Dominion would not attempt to enforce a 
prohibition policy supported by such a narrow majority as 
that revealed by the plebiscite. Oliver^ suggested solu¬ 
tion, the one he had advocated for years, was to amend the 
constitution to bring the liquor traffic under the control 
of the provinces. (67) In the House of Commons, debating a 
resolution favoring Dominion legislation to provide for 
prohibition in one or more of the provinces, he urged that 
"this parliament should be a party to an amendment to the 
constitution that would place the whole control (of liquor) 
in the hands of the provinces. 11 (68) 

During his first term as federal member Oliver devoted 
himself in various ways to the immediate Interests of his 
constituents. Early in 1897, for instance, he toured Al¬ 
berta with Professor Robertson, Federal Agriculture and 
Dairy Commissioner, who was in the West to implement aid to 
creameries. Oliver played a prominent part in Robertson 1 s 
meetings with the farmers, explaining the plan of govern¬ 
ment assistance to put going creameries 51 on their feet. (69) 
t its annual meeting in 1897, the Edmonton Board of 
Trade, of which Oliver had long been an active member, moved 
a vote of thanks to Iberta*s M.P. for his untiring efforts 

(67) Edmonton Bulletin, Rov, 10, 1898. 

(88) Edmonton Bulletin, May 7, 1900. 

(69) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 15, 1897. 












' . 

• ' >r 


















. 









■ 



• 



. 


, 






















■ 




. 












(£ 77 ) 


on behalf of the Edmonton District. M V*e most cordially 
thank our member, Mr. Oliver, for the valuable assistance 
he has given this board by laying before the government the 
public wants as conveyed to him by your Council . . . . n (70) 
Soon after his arrival in Ottawa in 1896, Oliver tackled 
the problem of the Saskatchewan River Bridge, and the 
Bulle tin reported his negotiations with the Hon. Israel 


Tarte, Minister of Public Works, in an attemot to have work 

|| 

on the structure commenced during the winter. (71) although 
Edmonton tentatively voted a contribution of 460,000 to the 
project, a long struggle still lay ahead. (72) In the 
spring of 1897 Oliver wrote to the Edmonton Council, out¬ 
lining certain conditions which would have to met before 
further action could be expected, The Council, irritated 
by the delay and desperate to see the bridge a reality, held 
a special meeting and wired Oliver as follows} 

Council authorizes you to offer the government 
#26,000 towards immediate construction of combined 
railway and traffic bridge. Citizens, to avoid fur¬ 
ther delay, have raised the cash and marked cheque 
for the above amount mailed Tarte today. Cheque to 
be replaced by town debenture when issued. Council 
passed by-law on Saturday. Have Tarte wire accep¬ 
tance of offer and promise of immediate construction. 

(73) 


(70) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 22, 1897. For Oliver*s record 
as member of the Edmonton Board of Trade, see Edmonton 
Bulletin , Mar. 12, 1900, History of the Board of Trade. 

(71) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. £4, 1896. 

(72) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 26, 1896. 

(73) Edmonton Bulletin, April 12, 1897. 


















(<^78) 


This communication affords an interesting sidelight on pion¬ 
eer public financing. v*hether its fine note of urgency had 
any real effect on the Department of Public Yi/orks is uncer¬ 
tain. At any rate in July the Bulletin was happy to announ¬ 
ce that the government was calling for tenders for the 
bridge abutments, further delays developed, however, and it 
was not until more than a year later that the following 
telegram was received in Edmonton: 

Ottawa, Dec. 22, 1898. 

To Frank Oliver, M.P. 

Arrangements for bridge completed today. 

J.I. Tarte. (74) 

Completing arrangements and building a bridge were, never¬ 
theless, still two difierent matters. Four more years were 
to elsjbs© before the first train pulled across xhe Saskat¬ 
chewan bridge, finally linking Edmonton by rail to the west¬ 
ern transportation system. Government action on the bridge 
was dilatory enough, but had it not been for Frank Oliver’s 
untiring efforts in Ottawa, Edmonton might well have had to 
wait even more long years for the completion of this much- 
needed public work. 

Upon his return home from the session of 1898, Oliver was 
welcomed by a demonstration of public confidence unparal¬ 
leled in the political annals of Edmonton. This 

(74) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 22, 1898. 















' • 




V, v „ 























































■ 

■ 

























( 279 ) 


demonstration took the lorn oi a mass meeting, banquet, 
complimentary addresses and tributes in the press. Making 
due allowance lor the organized Liberal influence behind 
the welcome, it would appear that all shades of political 
opinion joined in paying tribute to a member who had indeed 
kept his pledge to be first and foremost "a North Vnest man", 
standing four-square and vigilant in the fight for Terri¬ 
torial rights. 

it a great outdoor gathering at the Edmonton race track, 
representatives of South Fdmonton, (75) Fidmonton and St. 
lbert read addresses lauding his work. 

A.O. Rutherford, (76) president of the South Edmonton 
Liberal ssocfcatioa, read the address from the South Side 
constituents commending Oliver for having done his duty dur¬ 
ing his term in the House. The address emphasized approval 
of his stand on the Stikine-Teslin Lake railway bill, rail¬ 
way monopoly and immigration. Referring to his battle for 
the All-Canadian Route it stated: 

You have done more than anyone else in placing 
before the House and the country the benefit and 
advantage to Canada of having the route indicated 
made more easy for traffic. 

We feel we have in you a representative who will 
express our views honestly, fearlessly and ably . . 

. . ( 77 ) 

(75) The terms *South Edmoixton* and ”South Side* were 
current in referring to Strathcona. 

(76) Later to become alberta^ first premier. 

(77) Edmonton Bulletin, June 27, 1898. 
























■ 




■ 






































( 280 ) 


The St. Albert address, delivered by F. Prince, Conser¬ 
vative and former M.L.A., stressed the work Oliver had done 
for the protection of Northern Alberta and the agricultural 
interests of the Upper Saskatchewan settlements: 

By your talents, your work, your tact and the 
courage of your opinion, you have attained a point 
which is rarely seen in any electoral division of 
tiie Dominion. Because, although retaining the full 
confidence of the liberals, you have also convinced 
the conservatives that you are the worthy son of 
Alberta. 

fie are now, irrespective of political parties, 
bringing you the congratulations of the agricultur¬ 
al settlements .... (78) 

W* Johnstone Walker, prominent in the Board oi frade, 
delivered Edmonton*s congratulatory message praising the 
able manner in which Oliver had represented the interests 
of the North West, and the marked ability he had shown in 
the House debates on the feslin Lake railway bill, the 
Crow’s Nest Pass railway, and the question of C.P.H. tax 
exemptions and monopoly. Commending him for his activities 
on behalf of the North West carried on outside the House, 
the message stated: 

The able addresses delivered by you during the 
winter to the boards of trade and at other meet¬ 
ings in the leading cities of the Dominion have in 
no small measure already resulted in advancing the 
best Interests of the North West. (79) 

The race track meeting and the elaborate banquet which 


(78) Edmonton Bulletin, June 27, 1898 

(79) Ibid 











. 


. 



























































( 281 ) 


followed in the evening revealed a remarkable degree of un¬ 
animity in acclaiming Oliver as a true "independent , whose 
personal integrity and undoubted political talents well 
fitted him to represent the diverse interests of his constit¬ 
uents. Replying to these enthusiastic expressions of ap¬ 
preciation, he reiterated his faith in the Worth west, dealt 
with the need of expanding markets into the ivootenay and the 
Yukon, outlined steps taken toward the construction of a 
trunk road into the Peace River Country, and pledged himself 
to continue his efforts on behalf of a federal investigation 
into the mineral and other resources of the Athabasca and 
Mackenzie River areas. (80) 

Conservative opinion in the south was well summed up the 
following spring by the Calgary Herald (Cons.) in its edi¬ 
torial on a speech delivered by Oliver during a stop-over 
in the southern town while en route to attend the Parli¬ 
amentary session of 1899; 

The speech of Frank Oliver, M.P., before the 
large meeting of citizens in the Calgary opera 
house was characterized by the deliberation, lu¬ 
cidity and independence for which the member for 
Alberta is noted. The Herald is not disposed to 
be critical toward Mr. Oliver. He has a difficult 
position to fill and he is filling it to the best 
of his judgment and the best of his ability. His 
remarks on his relations towards his party and his 
constituents were decidedly good. He represents 
interests a hundred times more important than those 
represented by the average Eastern member. 


(80) Edmonton Bulletin, June 27, 1898 















• 

- 












































- 








■ 

\ '. • • 1 








































[2QZ) 


The general disDosition (of his constituents) 

Is rather to help than to hinder, except perhaps 
on the part of the particular element interested 
in securing individual favors, and in regard to 
these Mr. Oliver has the sympathy and endorsation 
of the public in his declared determination to 
keep clear of the spoilsmen , . . • (81) 

Between parliamentary sessions Oliver devoted an increas¬ 
ing proportion of his time to a detailed and exhaustive 
study of national and Territorial Issues. He became noted 
for the thoroughness of his preparation for debate, and 
when he stood up in the House he was sure to be armed with 
an imposing array oi facts and figures with which to con¬ 
found the opposition. H© was a tireless traveller, making 
frequent tours through the West and in particular keeping in 
close touch personally with his constituents. No constitu¬ 
ency interest was too small to enlist his time and energy, 
and he was ready to speak whenever and wherever an audi¬ 
ence were gathered to hear him. In the summer of 1898 the 
Increasing pressure of public business lorceu him to re¬ 
linquish the sole proprietorship of the ISdmonton Bulletin . 
The six-page paper, published twice a week, passed under 
the control of the Bulletin Go. (Ltd.). Oliver was a man 
who looked to the future rather than to the past, and no 
sentimental reminiscing accompanied the transfer. Notice 
of change in ovmership appeared in the issue of August 15, 

(81) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 16, 1899. Quoting the 
Calgary Herald . 


















' ", it-'" i- ; 














. 






: 

























■ 













( 283 ) 


1898, followed by the simple statement, "The system and 
principles which have been followed under the late manage¬ 
ment will be continued*" With the formation of the Bulletin 
Co* (ltd*), Oliver did not sever his connection with the 
paper he had founded* He retained a financial interest in 
the Company, and as a matter of fact continued to dominate 
the Bulletin^ outlook and policies for years to come* (82) 
He finally disposed of his interest in 1923* (83) 

The Government approached the general elections of 1900 
with the utmost confidence. Coincident with the Lioeral 
regime of 1896-1900, the long depression drew to an end and 
the tide set toward better times. Actually, the recovery 
was world-wide, and due in no small measure to the rise in 
prices caused by gold discoveries in South Africa and the 
Yukon* But it is hardly to be expected that a political 
party would attribute to international conditions improve¬ 
ments which it might credit to itself. Of the happy co¬ 
incidence of Liberalism and returning prosperity the party 
made valuable political capital. The administration pointed 
with pride to its preferential tariffs, railway and land 
policies, and success in the field of immigration. (84) To 

(82) Edmonton Bulletin, July 14, 1930. 

(83) Edmonton Bulletin, April 1, 1933. 

Edmonton Journal, April 1, 1933. 

(84) Liberal success in immigration was largely due to the 
exhaustion of free public lands in the United States 
whither many immigrants had previously been going. 

















, ■ ' ; v i 










.. , - , • 









































■ 


































( 284 ) 


complete the discomfiture of its enemies, while Laurier 
continued to grow in stature and popularity as a national 
leader, no second Macdonald had emerged from the Conserva¬ 
tive ranks. 

frranK Oliver, assured of continued Liberal backing, 
launched his campaign for re-election during August, 1900, 
at a mass meeting in Edmonton, Not being a party man, he 
did not feel obliged to claim that the Liberals had made the 
prevailing prosperity. He did, however, assert that they 
had helped. He expressed approval of the government's tar¬ 
iff policy, the discontinuance of railway land grants and 
the impending Canadian Northern hallway scheme. Admitting 
regret that railway monopoly still existed, he maintained 
that some alleviation had been effected, for instance, in 
the reduction of western C.P.R. freight rates, while not 
in favor of lavish government spending, he could not be too 
critical as the west had profited greatly by increased fed¬ 
eral expenditures. Territorial subsidies had nearly doubled 
since the Liberals took office, and sums more generous than 
ever granted by the Conservatives had been advanced for 
creamery grants, public works and more efficient North west 
administration. In conclusion he claimed to have maintain¬ 
ed his position as an independent, upholding wefetern inter¬ 
ests first and foremost. (85) 

(85) Hdmonton Bulletin, Aug. 20, 1900. 






















































(28 b) 


In preparation for the campaign a Calgary Liberal con¬ 
vention created a Liberal ‘Executive for Alberta with A.L, 
Sifton as president and C.A. Stuart as secretary, The con¬ 
vention, unanimously agreeing that "Oliver would put the 
west before private interests, w (86) nominated him for re- 
election. (87) In moving the nomination De Veber, the Leth¬ 
bridge delegate said, "While independent, Mr. Oliver could 
always be depended upon to do what he thought was in the 
best interests of the country." (88) 

The Conservatives nominated hichard B, Bennett, a rising 
young Calgary lawyer who, years later in the "hungry 1 thir¬ 
ties , was to become Prime Minister of Canada. Commenting 
on the rival candidates the editor of the Olds oracle wrote: 

Honest Frank is a favorite throughout the con¬ 
stituency and by his businesslike and logical 
reasonings linked with his irreproachable career 
in parliament will make matters extremely inter¬ 
esting for the young orator. (89) 

Recalling the old days when D,W. Davis had invaded the 

North in the interests of the Conservatives, Oliver 

(86) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 31, 1900. Quoting the 
Calgary Albertan . 

(87) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 24, 1900. 

(88) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 31, 1900. Quoting the 
Calgary kloertan . 

(89) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct* 1, 1900. Quoting the 
Olds Oracle. 








. 



. 

/• 















4 

• 
















. 




■ 




' 










( 286 ) 


campaigned extensively in the South, speaking at numerous 
political rallies in the towns centring on Calgary* (90) 

In Calgary he declared, "If there is anything that would 
give me pride and pleasure in having represented a Canadian 
constituency in a Canadian parliament, it would be to rep¬ 
resent it during such an era of progress and prosperity.* 
(91) Going on to express approbation ol the governments 
policies and record, he made one notable exception. While 
approving of Sifton’s vigorous policy of settling the West, 
h© did not agree with the principle of indiscriminate im¬ 
migration. The Doukhobors and Galicians, he maintained, 
were a liability rather than an asset to the country. (92) 
R.B. Bennett charged that Oliver was "too independent" - 
so independent, in fact, that he would have the ear of 
neither the government nor the opposition, and would be un¬ 
able to get anything for his constituency. This charge 
roused the Alberta Plalndealer (South Fdmonton) to come to 
Oliver 1 s defence. In an article headed "Mr. Oliver’s In¬ 
dependence" the editor listed those issues upon which the 
Alberta member had fought a good fight for the North &est* 

Oliver fought the Yukon Railway bill and cham¬ 
pioned the Ail-Canadian Route. 

(90) Kdmonton Bulletin, Oct. 5, 1900. 

(91) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. B, 1900. 

(92) Ibid 



















' 














, 














. 









































< *> 87 ) 


He fought for government ownership of the Crowds 
Nest Hallway. 

He fought, with five others, both parties on the 
tax exemptions. 

He insisted in parliament that the government 
take action to ensure that the Edmonton and Saskat¬ 
chewan Railway touch at Strathcona and Fort Saskat¬ 
chewan. 

He tried to get soldiers medals and scrip for the 
Edmonton District Volunteers of the Rebellion of 1885. 

When the tariff was up for revision, he fought 
for the interests of his constituents in urging 
tariff reduction on agricultural necessities. 

When the Kettle River and Rainy River Railway 
projects were before the House he fought for com¬ 
petition. 

When the immigration department was Oonusing the 
steamship agents in Europe to get Galicians to come 
to Northern Alberta by thous-'mds, Oliver agitated 
the matter in the House and in the Committee until 
he secured satisfaction and the obnoxious bonusing 
system was discontinued. (93) 

"If,* the Plaindealer continued, H the petty appropria¬ 
tions for the benefit of this town or that town cannot be 
secured without abandoning these greater rights which Mr. 
Oliver advocated, we say let the petty appropriations go.* 
(94) However, the Plaindealer insisted that Bennett’s 
assumption was wrong - that a non-party man who fought for 
North West rights could get nothing for his constituents. 
Oliver had not •*pulled‘ t anything for his constituents in 
the sense of lobbying, but he had brought to the attention 


(93) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 15, 1900. Quoting the 

Alberta Plaindealer . These claims are certainly borne 
out by Oliver’s record in the House. 

For Oliver’s stand on the Kettle River and Rainy River 
Railway projects, see Edmonton Bulletin , April 7, 1898; 
April 14, 1898. 


(94) 


Ibid 








"W.. -,'• - % * 










- \ 

i 




. 





. 


. 













( 288 ) 


of the government, and by his energy and aggressiveness had 
helped to secure the Saskatchewan River bridge, action on 
local half-breed scrip, funds for geological expeditions to 
Yellov/head and Peace River, geological survey of Oreat Slave 
Lake (in conjunction with the Edmonton Board of Trade), a 
Northern mail service, assistance for the development of 
irrigation in Southern Alberta, aid to creameries and cold- 
storage plants, and many public buildings including a court¬ 
house and Jail. "Kvery part of the country,* the editor 
concluded, "has been remembered; his independence has not 
interfered with his usefulness* Yet he is not blowing 
around the country about his accomplishments. (95) 

Federal party lines were by this time becoming much more 
clearly drawn in the ftest. The Liberals, stimulated by 
four years in office, were stronger and better organized 
than ever before. The Conservatives, with a young and ag¬ 
gressive candidate in the field, were prepared to make a 
fighting bid for the constituency. The Calgary Herald , 
which had supported Oliver during his term in the House, 
came out strongly for Bennett. Ihe Calgary Albertan (Lib,) 
baoKed Oliver, citing his accurate Knowledge of the West’s 
needs and business problems, and his determination to fight 

(95) Kdmonton Bulletin, Oct. 15, 1900. Quoting the 
Alberta Plaindealer, 








( 289 ) 


th© people’s battles with steadiness and truth. (96) 

Despite Oliver’s protestations of independence many Lib¬ 
erals and practically all "party 11 Conservatives now labelled 
him simply as a Liberal. His own statement oi his stand 
should bear some weights 

If returned I go to parliament to represent west¬ 
ern interests and not party interests. 

It is as an independent member I am now asking 
your support. 

I will work for the interests of the Worth West 
irrespective of party. (97) 

During the campaign Oliver and Bennett several times 
appeared on the same platfom. (98) Oliver was a ready 
"rough and tumble" debater and more than held his own. Ben¬ 
nett, who talked "solid conservative , did not, by his rath¬ 
er aloof manner and rhetorical utterance, arouse much en¬ 
thusiasm in his frontier audience. Oliver spoke his con¬ 
stituents’ language; Bennett did not. 

The Conservatives put up a stiff fight, but in the ©lec¬ 
tion of November 7 Oliver was re-elected by a majority of 
over a thousand, (99) "in soite of every false and belitt¬ 
ling thing which an extremely partisan press could trump up 

(96) 'Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 19, 1900. Quoting the 
Calgary Albertan . 

(97) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 5, 1900. 

(98) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. £8, 1900. 

(99) The Canadian Parliamentary Guide Ottawa 1901 p. 129. 

Hereafter referred to as Can. Tarl. Guide, with year 
of issue indicated. 







: 
































■ 








■ 




. 





























( 290 ) 


against him. M (100) Two days alter the election the Calgary 
Herald quoted Bennett as explaining his defeat as follows: 

Mr. Oliver’s friends urged on every voter that 
if Mr, Oliver was defeated it was goodbye to Edmon¬ 
ton’s chances for being the capital of the future 
province. 

The cry raised in the North against the South, the 
work done by the government officials among the Gal¬ 
icians and other foreign settlers, the work of the 
scrip commissioners among the half-breeds, the free 
use of money . , . , all contributed to the Liberal 
victory. (101) 

Oliver, who at this time regarded Bennett as a personable 

i 

enough young man despite his political “aberrations”, simply 
replied to th© charges “It is to be hoped that Mr. Bennett, 
though defeated, retains sufficient honor and honesty to 
not assume responsibility for the statements credited to 
him.* (102) 

Accusations of influencing the foreign vote became in¬ 
creasingly common from this time on. Bach party charged the 
other with a high degree of skill in "swinging rt the foreign 
element by means of misleading promises, threats and brib¬ 
ery. The Conservatives, now on the outside, became quite 
bitter on the iniquities of the “Liberal machine M , and the 


(100) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 12, 1900. Election results. 

(101) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 16, 1900. Quoting the 
Calgary Herald. 

(102) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 16, 1900. On the occasion, 
several years earlier, of Bennett’s election to the 
N.W. Assembly, Oliver wrote: "A temperance man in 
principle and practice, (he) will no doubt be an 
acquisition to the House, w 











: 








' i. 








■ 




' 
















































(291) 

term "Oliver^ Galicians" became current In Conservative 
campaign vocabulary. Certain Conservatives, following their 
defeat, described the Galicians as sheep swayed by the Lib¬ 
erals* In reply to this belittling characterization, a 
certain Galician, either better versed in English than his 
fellow-countrymen, or else with the aid of an interpreter, 
wrote to a small Edmonton news-sheet as follows: 

Before the election when canvassed for our votes 
we were called gentlemen by the party which now 
calls us sheep; The same party also brought a large 
quantity of liquor to help influence our votes. V>e 
drank the liquor and then voted - for Mr. Oliver. (105) 

i 

In the House of Commons Oliver returned to the attack on 
railway monopoly. During the session of 1901 he spoke in 
favor of the appointment of a railway commission with judi¬ 
cial power to fix rates, regulate matters of railway opera¬ 
tion and management, and settle disputes over railway ser¬ 
vice. (104) He again came into conflict with the Prime 
Minister on the question of C.P.K. tax exemptions. un March 
7, 1901, Kicharcison moved second reading of a bill to fix 
expiration of exemption from tax on the railway lands at 
February 15, 1901^ Oliver supported the bill in a reasoned 
and powerful speech. Laurier, however, moved a six month ! s 

* (105) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 25, 1900. Quoting a letter 
in the Edmonton Post from a correspondent at Star, 
a small Galician settlement north east of Edmonton. 

(104) Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 18, 1901. 





i i'i 


' 

•• 

• , • • 


















• ' • 




































































' 















(^) 


hoist and the bill was defeated, only eight members voting 
for it. (105) Nothing daunted, Richardson and Oliver ap¬ 
pealed to the House to submit the exemptions question to the 
courts. On May 17 Richardson moved and Oliver seconded, 
"That the government make the contention before the courts 
that the exemption period contemplated in the contract be¬ 
gin when the contract granting the subsidies, both in cash 
and lands, was ratified by parliament. w (106) The motion 
was defeated, but the battle continued throughout tne foll¬ 
owing sessions, and there is little doubt that the constant 
pressure exerted by Oliver and Richardson with © handful of 
supporters did something to force the C.P.R. exemptions 
problem into the courts. 

In 1902 the Calgary and Edmonton Railway applied for 
renewal of its charter and permission to build branch lines. 
Oliver opposed the C. & E. bill as Introduced in the rail¬ 
way committee of which he was a member. He urged that the 
bill provide certain saiegufiHds in the public interest. 

There should not be, he submitted, any revival of land 
grants for branch lines, and there should be a guarantee of 
early construction and the protection of certain established 
interests such as townsites. The committee concurred in 
his views and refused to pass the bill as presented. The 


(105) Kdmonton Bulletin, Mar. 25, 1901 

(106) Bdmonton Bulletin, May 51, 1901. 
















■ 

' \ '• ■ 

i: ; ' ; ■ : . ■■ 









■ 

- 


. 




. 

I ir ' . - ■ : ■ ■ - ■ ' ■ 

. 


' . 

- 





' ■ 

. 

. 










( 293 ) 


Company did not satisfactorily amend its proposed Dill dur¬ 
ing the session and the question was carried over, (107) 

That the final C. & 15. bill did contain special provisions 
protecting the public interest was a measure of Oliver’s 
success in helping to put teeth in the railway committee. 

Oliver had long been a staunch advocate of government 
ownership of railways. He even advocated the government 
purchase of certain railways at an arbitrated price and 
their operation as government lines. w Here in the West, 4 
h© stated in 1903, "we all believe in the principle of gov¬ 
ernment ownership of railways, but unfortunately it is not 
so all over the country at present.* 1 (108) Kecognissing, 
therefore, that the government would neither buy nor build 
lines which the feest badly needed, he conceded the necess¬ 
ity of private ownership hedged in by every public safe¬ 
guard which the government could effect. Considering that 
freight rates were in the long run the most important factor 
in the railway problem, he was in favor of government sub¬ 
sidies for the construction of lines in return for control 
of freight rates. 

During the debates on the Canadian Northern hallway pro¬ 
posals in the Commons in 1903, he said, referring to the 

(107) Edmonton Bulletin, May 12, 1902. 

(108) Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 23, 1903. 












' 

' 


... ■ ' . 






■ 


' 


1 


' 




. 

. 








































■ 






























( 294 ) 


North West viewpoint: 

As far as the people there are concerned they 
will look with very great dissatisfaction upon the 
fact of large government assistance being given to 
a railway unless satisfactory provision is made for 
definite maximum rates along the railway so aided, 
so that it will be apparent to the country at large 
that value in rates is secured for the aid given. (109) 

Further emphasis on freight rates as the prime consideration 

in railway deals appeared in his speech in the C.N#R. bond 

debate of June, 1905. (110) 

By the autumn of 1903 Oliver was becoming convinced that 
the fight against railway monopoly was neai'ly won. The rail¬ 
way commission bill was not yet passed, but "the adoption 
of the principle of the railway commission bill has changed 
the position between the people and the railways throughout 
the whole of Canada. For the first time the railways have 
been effectively organized as the servants and not the mas¬ 
ters of the people. Twenty and thirty years ago the Can¬ 
adian transportation question was political rather than 
commercial, but today it is commercial rather than politi¬ 
es 1.® (Ill) This optimism was inspired, not only by the 
governments increasingly favorable attitude toward the 


(109) tdmonton Bulletin, June 19, 1903. 

(110) Kdmonton Bulletin, June 22, 1903. Session report. 
"The question of rates was more important than that 
of the method or amount of aid given or even of the 
security taken." 

(111) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 31, 1903. "The Parliament of 
1903. These parliamentary reports to the Bulletin 
were written by Oliver himself. 













































yi ' , 

... - > 















■ 






. 










, 







- 








































( 295 ) 


establishment of a railway commission, but by his confidence 
that the terns of the Canadian Northern and Grand ?runk 
Pacific charters would safeguard all vital public interests 
including the fixing of rates. "in the G.T.P. and the 
C.N.H.," he said, "the Saskatchewan Valley receives at a 
single stroke railway development and railway competition 
subject to government oontrol of rates." (112) 

Oliver regarded free trade as an ideal in commercial re¬ 
lations, but conceded its Impracticability as a Canadian 
policy. He advocated a tariff for revenue in support of 
the Liberal policy, but was concerned lest the pressure ex¬ 
erted by the Canadian Manufacturers’ Association should 
cause a reversal of the government’s moderate tariff reduc¬ 
tions. In 1902 the feeling was prevalent that the party 
might be in favor of increased protection to be implemented 
at the next session. In the budget debate Oliver oecarne 
involved in an argument with an opposition memoer on the 
word "protectionist* 1 , and objected to its oeing used only in 
the narrow sense of "high tariff 1 . He said; 

I am a protectionist, but possibly what he calls 
protection I would call robbery. Yihen I speak of 
protection, I speak of protection to the general in¬ 
terests of the country. 

I believe In the policy of protection. I believe 
it is the first business of a government to do what 
lies in its power by legislation, administration or 


(112) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 31, 1903 





. 











( 296 ) 


otherwise to protect and advance the interests of 
the people of the country of which it has charge* 

I want to see a protectionist policy on behalf of 
labor in this country. I want to see a policy 
that will protect labor against the degradation of 
unfair competition .... 

If we allow the right kind of people to be dis¬ 
placed by the wrong Kind of people we do ourselves 
an injury. (113) 

During the session of 1903 Oliver was among the few, in¬ 
cluding Laurier and the Minister of Finance, who spoKe a- 
gainst increased protection. Most of the members, even in¬ 
cluding the Liberals, either avoided the subject or defend¬ 
ed a return toward upward revision of the tariffs. (114) 
Oliver objected in particular to any increase in iron du¬ 
ties which would be reflected in a higher price for agri¬ 
cultural implements. (115) He was happy to report from 
Ottawa at the end of the session that despite the pressure 
of the Canadian Manufacturers 1 Association and the oppos¬ 
ition, "From beginning to end the tariff today stands as it 
did a year ago.’* (116) 

The years 1901 and 1902 witnessed the western grain block¬ 
ade and the Western Standards Board scandal. Oliver had 
already defended the right of the government to claim certair 

(113) Edmonton Bulletin, april 4, 1902. Session report. 

A direct reference to Chinese labor in British Colum¬ 
bia, and a slap at the Galicians. 

(114) Edmonton Bulletin, May B, 1903. 

(115) Edmonton Bulletin, June 19, 1903. 

(116) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 24, 1903. 






( 297 ) 


sections of railroad right of way for the erection of flat 
warehouses for the handling of grain. He opposed the 
"monopoly of the elevator companies and branded them as 
middlemen whose services could very well be dispensed with. 
In 1900 the government introduced a bill to regulate the 
grain trade which permitted the erection of flat warehouses 
for storage only. During the debate hichardson moved and 
Oliver seconded an amendment declaring the principle of the 
free right to buy and sell grain through any kind of ware¬ 
house that might be considered suitable. The amendment was 
lost, but Oliver and Richardson continued the fight for flat 
warehouses which would handle the farmers* grain direct to 
the railway. (117) During the actual grain blockade caused 
by an unusually big crop and inadequate railway facilities, 
Oliver was active both inside and outside the House denoun¬ 
cing the shortcomings of the C.F.H. and the iniquities of 
railway and grain elevator monopoly. 

When the Western Standards Board scandal was before the 
public, Oliver and the Bulletin were foremost among the 
critics of the Board, alleging that a combine existed a- 
mongst a number of the principal grain-dealing firms in 
Winnipeg, that this combine was represented on the Board, 
and that the combine had used this representation improperly 

(117) Edmonton Bulletin, June 15, 1900; June 18, 1900. 







; ' : -i ■ > . • i 








•: ■ •• 




















1 
















■ 
























(* 93 ) 


to establish standards on Alberta oats. (118) During a 
House debate on the grain blockade ana the alleged combine 
in the session of 190*, Oliver denounced the oomoine and 
defended the North West, Making a strong plea for flat 
warehouses and direct shipoing, he claimed, that the combine 
was "skinning the farmers of the North Vest today to the 
extent of from 3 to 10 cents a bushel on their wheat. rt (119) 
Hie railways, maintained financially by Territorial pro¬ 
duction and trade, should be compelled "to accept grain 
from anybody who offers it by any means he may cho.se to 
offer it." In defence of the North west he added, "... 
in bringing this matter to the attention of the House we 
are doing it not as sectionallsts, but as nationalists . . 

. ( 120 ) 

In the session of 1903 a bill to provide for compulsory 
voting came before the House. Oliver opposed it, stating, 
"It is not so much the number of men who go to the polls 
as it is the intelligence exercised by those who do go."(l23j 
He declared that parliament should not compel the voters to 
do what the House Itself did riot do, and referred to an 

(118) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 20, 1901; Dec. *3, 1901. 

(119) Edmonton Bulletin, war. 21, 1902. Session report. 

(120) Ibid 

(121) Rdmonton Bulletin, Nov. 2, 1903. 









■ 






. 

. . 





. . 










• 


















■ 











. 




. 








■ 







(299) 

occasion, "the most important in twenty years, when the 
House of Commons vote was only 36 on one side and 74 on the 
other, parliament not being present in hall its numbers on 
that occasion.” (122) While considering the possible re¬ 
lationship of the bill to electoral corruption he made this 
passing references "I have been before the electors for 
twenty years, and I have never paid a dollar directly or 
indirectly to influence a vote in my favor, nor do I know 
of a dollar having been paid either directly or indirectly 
for that purpose.’ 1 (123) 

As Sifton 1 s Immigration department continued to pour a 
stream of settlers into the West, Oliver frequently express¬ 
ed concern at the results of indiscriminate immigration. He 
still maintained that the best settlers were those from the 
eastern provinces, akin to the North West pioneers in in¬ 
tellect, customs and political ideals. Whether writing in 
the Builetin or speaking in the House he claimed that the 
introduction of foreign elements of race, politics and 
social custom was a bad tiling for Canada, and was creating 
a problem in racial assimilation which threatened the very 
foundations of western Canadian society. (124) 

(122) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 2 , 1303. Session report. 

(123) Ibid 

(124) Edmonton Bulletin, April 3, 1901: May 9, 1902; July 
24, 1903. Sessional reports in these issues, and 

frequent Bul.letln comments on immigration 1896-1905. 







( 300 ) 


Although there was a temporary recession following the 
collapse of the Yukon "boom", Edmonton continued to grow 
steadily in the early years of the new century, The Saskat¬ 
chewan River bridge was finally completed, and opened to 
pedestrian and wagon traffic. Work went forward on the ex¬ 
tension of the 0, & E. into Edmonton, although with many a 
dispute and vexatious delay. The extension was built, not 
by the C, & E., now controlled by the C.F.K., but by Mac¬ 
kenzie and Mann of the Canadian Northern. (126) When the 
day finally cgone to effect the actual junction between the 
C.N.K. Edmonton extension and the C. & E. line, complica¬ 
tions arose. The C,P,R. forbade the G.N.R# construction 
engineer to lift its tracks to make the junction. The news 
spread. Angry Edmontonians, resolved not to tolerate any 
further delay on the project, flocked to the spot. A re¬ 
petition of the w house moving 14 and "land office 41 furores 
was narrowly averted. A bold stroke by the C.N.K. engineer 
saved the day and the junction was laid, (126) The first 
C.N.K. train crossed the bridge into Edmonton at 3.45 P.M., 
Monday, October 20, 1902. It was maae up of a Canadian 
Northern engine, a coach, a box-car and two flat-cars, all 

(125) The main C.N.K. line had not yet come through. The 
C. Sc E. was still the only line into the Edmonton 
District. 

(126) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 10, 1902. 

*Fun at the Junction.” 




... 

. 

' 

... . 

. 

. 

. 


14 . 

. 




. 




















( 501 ) 


brought up as dead freight from Winnipeg via the C.P.R., to 
constitute the Edmonton extension^ first rolling stock. 

The Edmonton station was situated jxist below the site of 
old Fort Edmonton. 

On that October afternoon, when the shrill v/histle in¬ 
dicated that “Canadian Northern No. 26” was approaching the 
bridge from the south through the Mill Greek Ravine, some 
hundreds of Edmonton citizens gathered along the brow of 
the hill facing the river. This was the fruition of years 
of struggle. But the wait had been too long. As the train 
rolled slowly across the bridge, linking Edmonton with the 
South, the watching crowd was silent. There was no demon¬ 
stration of any kind. (127) 

Edmonton was now ‘‘booming” again, and out to get its 
full share of Immigrants, $ith a population of 2,675 in 
the spring of 1901, the Town of Edmonton continued to ex¬ 
pand rapidly. (12B) The Bulletin , now publishing a daily 
as well as a twice-weekly edition, contributed its full 
share in the form of publicity. It offered a continuous 
fare of articles on the district, "boosts” for adjacent 
settlements, and information and advice to assist the pro¬ 
spective Immigrant. It launched a campaign to encourage 
Strathcona and Edmonton "to sink their differences and pull 

(127) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 24, 1902. 

(128) Edmonton Bulletin, Jan. 31, 1901. A Bulletin census. 







( 302 ) 


together.” (129) On November 7, 1904, Edmonton became a 
city by ordinance of the North west Assembly. Its incor¬ 
poration was the occasion for tne biggest demonstration 
and banquet ever staged at the Thistle Rink. (130) 

While Frank Oliver assumed a major role in the develop 
ment of Edmonton during these years, he did not permit local 
interests to divert his attention from the relations exis¬ 
ting between the North West and the Dominion Government. 

The struggle for responsible government dominated the 
political history of the North West during the fourteen 
years following 1883. However, responsible government, 
achieved as a practical reality in 1892 and formally con¬ 
ceded in 1897, afforded little mitigation of the North 
West f s financial problems. Nor did it long continue to 
satisfy the constitutional aspirations of the Territorial 
Assembly, The years 1900 to 1906 witnessed a resumption 
of the constitutional battle, this time waged on the issue 
of North West provincial autonomy. 

liie part played by Frank Oliver M.P. in the autonomy dis¬ 
pute affords a sharp contrast to that played by Frank Oliver 
M.L.A. in the fight for responsible government. To under¬ 
stand this contrast, a brief survey of the autonomy ques¬ 
tion will first be necessary. 

(129) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 24, 1902. 

(130) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 8, 1904. 












































. 


















•• 



















( 303 ) 


The turn of the century marked an era of returning pros¬ 
perity, and Sifton’s immigration policies were happily 
timed to take full advantage of the expansive forces ter¬ 
minating the long depression. European immigrants, soli¬ 
cited by Sifton's agents, and diverted from the United 
States by the exhaustion of the American public domain, 
poured into the Canadian West in an ever-broadening stream. 
(131) What this influx meant in added demands on the North 
West government may well be conceived. The Territorial ad¬ 
ministration was responsible for public works and education. 
The dispersion of the settlers over vast areas added im¬ 
measurably to the problem of roads, bridges, ferries, 
schools and the countless other needs of the struggling 
frontier communities. Municipal organization was not suf¬ 
ficiently developed to take the main burden off the shoul¬ 
ders of the North west government. (132) The administration 
was not disposed to levy a heavy school and local improve¬ 
ment tax on the struggling pioneer 4 *at a time when the 
Territorial domain was ♦employed for purely Federal pur¬ 
poses 1 , the holdings of various corporations (were) exempt 
from taxation though enhanced in value by local improvements, 
and the Dominion grant (was) limited to an amount far short 

(131) Lingard Territorial Government in Canada pp. 8 - 9. 

(132) Lingard, op. clt. Chapter IX - The Economic Back¬ 
ground to the Deaihnd for provincial Status* 





fS 

' ' • 

• , 




. 







(304) 

of the urgent need of the country. w (133) 

The Territorial government had two sources of revenue, 
a comparatively paltry local income from licenses and fees, 
and the annual subsidy from Ottawa. The Dominion grant be¬ 
came yearly less adequate in the face of the ever-growing 
necessities of the Territories. f, Not until 1904, on the eve 
of the Dominion elections, did the Territorial government 
actually receive a fair grant." (134) 

The public domain In the Territories was still owned and 
administered by the Federal government "for the purposes of 
the Dominion 1 *. Over a period of years Ottawa had given 
away millions of acres of North West lands through its free 
homestead, generous immigration and lavish railway policies. 
The "land-lock", inseparable from Dominion lands policy,in¬ 
creased the dispersion of settlement and aggravated the 
financial and administrative difficulties of the Territo¬ 
rial government. Federal provision for tax exemption on 
railway and colonization grants lost the North West thou¬ 
sands of dollars a year in local taxes. (135) 

Western sentiment in favor of provincial auton¬ 
omy was the result of a gradual growth over a per¬ 
iod of seven years, and arose at first out of the 
conditions of financial stringency, augmented in the 

(133) Lingard, op. ©it., p. 13# 

(134) Ibid p. 114. 

(135) Ibid p. ig. 





. 


. 







■ 








■ 















' 



- 



■ 












. 















- 


■ 

■ ' 


, 


















( 305 ) 


years 1903-5 by constitutional aspirations. Under 
provincial status the North West would enjoy the 
power to amend its constitution, to borrow money 
for public purposes, to deal with the criminal law, 
to establish charitable and sanitary institutions 
such as asylums and hospitals, to charter transpor¬ 
tation companies and control public undertakings, 
and, generally, to administer local affairs in more 
perfect accord with local needs and desires. In 
addition, the North West hoped to enjoy the bene¬ 
ficiary rights over the public domain, compensation 
for lands alienated for federal purposes, and the 
usual provincial subsidy. (136) 

Although as early as 1898 f.W.G. Haultain, Premier of 
the North West Territories and leader of the autonomy move¬ 
ment, declared that *the time for a change is approaching,” 
it was not until 1900 that the movement for provincial au¬ 
tonomy became vocal. In that year the Territorial Assembly 
presented to the Dominion Oovernmeat its memorial urging 
autonomy. In 1901, following a conference between the North 
West delegates and a sub-committee of the Privy Council, 
Haultain submitted a draft autonomy bill to the Federal ad¬ 
ministration. The draft bill was rejected in a letter from 
the Minister of the Interior the following year, * ? because 
of conditions of population and divergence of opinion in 
the Territories with respect to the number of provinces.” 
(137) Autonomy was the issue of the Territorial elections 
of 1902, and the thirty-five members returned to the Assem¬ 
bly were unanimous in support of the move for provincial 


(136) Lingard, op. cit., p. 115. 

(137) Lingard, op. cit., p. lib. 

























( 506 ) 


status. Haultain, quite justifiably, considered this result 
a mandat© from the people to repeat his demand for federal 
action, and the ssembly itself twice re-affirmed its auton¬ 
omy memorial of 1900. 

furthermore, the Moose Jaw Convention of the 
Territorial Conservative Association in 1905, the 
Territorial Crain Growers’ annual convention of 
1902 and 1903, numerous Boards of Trade in the North 
West, and ’’nearly all, if not all”, the Liberal 
nominating conventions held in the ten North West 
federal constituencies in the winter of 1903-04 
recorded their approval of the contention that the 
time had arrived for granting provincial status. (138) 

To the repeated communications of the North ftest Assem¬ 
bly and its Premier, the Prime Minister himself made but 
two replies, both more evasive than enlightening. (139) At 
various times, however, federal officials, including the 
Minister of the Interior, advanced reasons for delaying the 
grant of provincial status to the North Nest. These reasons 
included the lacK of unanimity in the Territories regarding 
the number of provinces to be created, the expense of auton¬ 
omy to the North West, the fear thet the North West might 
“mortgage its resources , and the need for further study of 
the question. (140) Lingard, in his work on the autonomy 
dispute already quoted, considers that these reasons were 


(138) Lingard, op. clt., p. 116. The North West was grant¬ 
ed 10 Federal members by the Redistribution Bill of 
1903. 

(139) Ibid pp. 116-117. 

(140) Ibid pp. 156-159. An evaluation of p’eaeral 
reasons for‘delaying autonomy. 











' 













A 



























































■ 





















‘ 




















. 


















' 






























. 





















( 507 ) 


trivial and evasive, and suggests that the real reason for 
delay was Laurier*s reluctance to face the separate schools 
issue* (141) 

Laurier was, in fact, in an awicward position, ihe sep¬ 
arate schools question was hound to raise its head in any 
autonomy settlement. Haultain was certain to oppose, on 
constitutional grounds, any provision for separate schools. 
Haultain*s position, distorted into a religious issue, 
would have the support of Eastern anti-Oatholics. Catholic 
Quebec, upon which Laurier leaned heavily, would once more 
become the self-appointed guardian of religious "minority 
rights in the North West. OJie dormant prejudices and 
passions, not so long since inflamed on the Manitoba separ¬ 
ate schools question, would flare up again, fhe Government, 
although riding with comparative security on the wave of 
prosperity, did not dare bring the issue to a head until 
after the general elections. Meanwhile, to add to its em¬ 
barrassment, the Conservative opposition adopted the auton¬ 
omy cause as its own and under the leadership of Robert 
Borden conducted a vigorous campaign in support of North 
West provincial status, including North West control of its 
public lands. Premier Haultain, although a Conservative in 

(141) Lingard, op. cit., p. 96 n. 6&. 'ihe significance 
of the separate schools issue. 





, 








. 

' 










- 


■ 




\ • 












■ 




















( 308 ) 


federal politics, was the foremost exponent of non-partisan¬ 
ship in North West government. His part in tne Moose Jaw 
Conservative Convention of 1903, however, gave birth to a 
charge, assiduously circulated by the Liberals, that he had 
forsaken the policy of non-partisanship and had set himself 
to introduce federal party lines into Territorial affairs. 
(142) On the eve of the general elections of 1904 the au¬ 
tonomy issue was the shuttlecock of federal party politics. 
The Prime Minister, confident that he was now past the dan¬ 
ger point, promised that "if his government was returned to 
power, they would immediately enter upon negotiations with 
a view to dealing with the question of provincial autonomy 
at the next session of parliament.* (143) Laurier*s pro¬ 
crastination in facing the issue of provincial status was 
dictated primarily by political expediency. He was suppor¬ 
ted in his policy of delay by the four North West Federal 
members, including Frank Oliver, 

(142) Lingard, op. cit., p. 118 ff. The charge was certain¬ 
ly unjust, but proved to be good political capital 
for the Liberals. 

(143) Lingard, op. oit., p. 117. The promise was contained 

in a letter dated Sept. 30, 1904, in reply to a lett¬ 
er from Haultain dated June 1, 1904. Lingard says, 
"Douotless he (Laurier) felt that with the four North 
ftest members supporting his policy of delay, he could 
afford to ignore a communication couched in the form 
of a demand for the renewal of autonomy negotiations.* 






. •' ■ ■< ; '• • ! i ■ f4 S 




% :. v', ■" ■ ■■ . Y. - ■. 

- : / ' . ■ ' - 5 - : 

































( 309 ) 


Oliver’s stand in the autonomy dispute reveals a certain 
change in viewpoint, but not necessarily inconsistency. The 
staunch champion of North West rights and responsible govern¬ 
ment maintained throughout the dispute that the main problem 
was the financial one. He was found, on various occasions, 
setting himself against the unanimous claim of the North 
West Assembly by contending that autonomy was neither a 
matter of constitutional urgency, not the object of popular 
demand in the Territories. His attitude is perhaps open 
to various interpretations, but appears to have been based 
primarily on a sincere belief that with responsible govern¬ 
ment achieved, the constitutional aspirations of the Terri¬ 
torial Assembly were relatively unimportant as compared with 
the practical terns upon which provincial status might be 
won. Warning that under circumstances of rapidly increas¬ 
ing population and changing conditions autonomy might well 
be premature, and that caution and delay were necessary in 
order to obtain the best financial terms, he maintained 
that meanwhile North west grievances were being ameliorated 
by increasingly adequate grants, greater representation in 
the House of Commons, better transportation facilities (the 
C.N.R. and the O.T.P.), and the increased powers given to 
the Territorial Legislature in 1903. His supporters prais¬ 
ed him for clear-headed realism, and his critics accused 



























































































































































. 







. 




















■ 






































( 310 ) 


him of subordinating the interests of the North West to the 
dictates of party loyalty. It does seem evident that with 
advancing maturity he tended to lay less emphasis on con¬ 
stitutional theory and more upon the problems of practical 
politics and administration. (144) 

In 1894, after expressing satisfaction with the achieve¬ 
ment of practical responsible government, Oliver set as the 
next Territorial objective increased federal suosidles for 
the North Vseat. (145) He continued to fight for higher 
subsidies, both as a member of the Assembly and of the 
House of Commons. Financial considerations were predomin¬ 
ant in his opnositlon to ’’premature" autonomy, and to the 
creation of two provinces in the North West. (146) Reply¬ 
ing to an article in the Kegina Standard on "One Province 
or Two?" he declared himself unfavorable to division at pre¬ 
sent. "If w© want the largest measure of efficiency at the 
smallest expense, we must wait for a larger population and 
correspondingly larger revenues before demanding the doub¬ 
ling of expenses of local government." (147) 

In the House debates on Territorial subsidies in 1902, 
Oliver reminded the administration that it was still not 

(144) Supra p. 198 n. (33) 

(145) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 8, 1894. 

(146) This was in 1901. He later modified his view regar¬ 
ding the number of provinces. 

(147) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 4, 1901. 










, 




, 

' 




■ 






. 

. 










, 











■ 







( 511 ) 


providing sufficient revenue for the widely scattered and 
expanding North West, end that the Territorial government 
had approaohed the Dominion repeatedly in recent years, and 
most formally in 1901, asking for a definite financial ar¬ 
rangement "baaed upon the terms of confederation as applied 
to the different provinces.” He did not advocate autonomy, 
but argued that "this Parliament and government are requir¬ 
ed either to meet the conditions that exist by an adequate 
vote, or else to put the Territories in the position of the 
several provinces of the Dominion as regards financial ar¬ 
rangements. " Mentioning immigration and the problems of 
education and public works, he added, ”1 hope that the 
Government will see that the public services of the North 
West Territories are not starved at this critical stage in 
our history.” (148) However, "when asked to declare whe¬ 
ther or not he considered that the Minister of the Interior 
gave sufficient reasons for refusing provincial institutions 
to the Territories, (149) (he) declined to answer the ques 
tions put to him and merely stated his readiness to discuss 
the subject when the government introduced an autonomy 
bill.” (150) 

(143) Debates, House of Commons, Canada 1902 Vol. II 

Cols. 5072-3. (Hereafter "referred to as 

Deoates, H. of 0. Canada.) 

See also Edmonton Bulletin , April 28, 1902. 

(149) Supra p. 306. 

(150) Lingard, op. cit*, p. 56. 












. 

' 


■ 

. 

. 

i 4 

. 



















( 312 ) 


In 1902 Conservative support of autonomy was raising 
the whole question of 'who was for and who was against." 

Oliver*s support (of autonomy) depended upon the 
terms. If the territories could get better finan¬ 
cial arrangements as a province, then he would sup¬ 
port provincial organization, but if they could not 
get a satisfactory financial arrangement as a prov¬ 
ince, he would prefer that they remained as they 
were until they could get it. (151) 

When the Conservatives actually embodied their support of 
Territorial provincial status in Borden*s autonomy motion 
of 1903, (152) the North West federal members were obliged 
to declare their stand on the question. They counselled 
delay. (153) 


(151) Fdmonton Bulletin, May 2, 1902. Session report from 
the Ottawa correspondent. 

(152) Debates, H. of C. Canada, 1903 Voi. VI Cols. 13856-83. 

(153) Lingard, op. cit., p. 96 n. 62 considers the govern¬ 
ment’s delay due to its reluctance to deal with "the 
dangerous separate schools question." 

Lingard, op. eit., p. 96 also states, "The Territorial 
Assembly was unanimously in favor of autonomy at the 
earliest possible moment, while the North West rep¬ 
resentatives at Ottawa were on record as favoring 
Indefinite delay. In advising a policy contrary to 
the representations of the North West Assembly and 
Government, Messrs. Scott, Oliver, Davis and Douglas 
left themselves open to the charge of submitting to 
the decision of the Lioeral caucus, thereby stulti¬ 
fying the demands of the people whom they represented. 

Oliver’s stand was quite consistent with his past 
emphasis on financial terms. 




. 


















. 












■ 










. 




■ 

























‘ 









( 513 ) 


Frank Oliver assured the House that the Terri¬ 
tories were not ”in the state of excitement in re¬ 
gard to provincial organization” which the opposi¬ 
tion appeared to imagine, ’’They will find/' said 
he, "that with fair treatment in the matter of sub¬ 
sidy, the people will be satisfied, whatever the 
politicians may be . . . .” He added that if Par¬ 
liament would give the North west the terms asked 
. for in the Haultain draft bill (of 1901), he would 
support it most strongly, but for the present h© 
held that the increased grant was ‘’entirely satis¬ 
factory”. V&iat the Territories wanted at the pre¬ 
sent time, he submitted, was adequate financial 
assistance, (154) 

tt It is a fair matter for consideration,” Oliver stated 
in the House, "whether we should press an immediate and ur¬ 
gent demand upon this parliament for provincial organiza¬ 
tion, or, with the prospect of still larger and very rapid 
increase of population, whether we should wait until that 
increase of population should give us still better terms*” 
(155) 


During the period of the autonomy dispute, Oliver, des¬ 
pite reiterations of independence, was undoubtedly growing 
closer to the Liberal party. Following the session of 1902 
the "Edmonton Young Men f s Liberal Association tendered him 


(154) Lingard, op. elt., p. 87. Referring to Debates, 

H. of C. Canada, Vol. VI Cols. 13887-96 (1903). 

(155) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 12, 1903. Quoting Oliver in 
the House on the autonomy ouestlon. 

further expressions of opinion; 

Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 10, 1903. The Oliver-Scott 
meeting at Regina. 

Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 18, 1903, 

Lingard, op. eifc,. p. 103 - Oliver*s opinions in press 
interviewsj p. 10o - Edmonton Bulletin versus the 

iLfeoleod Gazette, ~ * 



























, 




. 


, :,r • . •: 


i 














- J 








■- • -■ 

' 


. 


. ' 

--V ' ■ . 


- 
























(514) 

an elaborate banquet. Quests for the oooaslon included 
Walter Scott, M.P. (Assinibola West), and the Hon. A.L. 
Sifton, M.L.A., Minister of Public Works in the North West 
administration. (166) Qompliments were exchanged freely. 
Various speakers commended Oliver*s record in the House, 
and credited him with the growing appreciation of western 
problems evident in the East. In reply he stated that the 
current prosperity was not the outcome of chance, but of 
realistic policies, good management, and the leadership of 
Wilfred Laurier. At the same time, W H© reminded his friends 
that he had been elected as an independent liberal, but did 
not wish anyone to think he was any less liberal because 
independent, or any less independent because a liberal - 
the term liberal meant progressive. 41 (157) This banquet, 
seeming to associate Oliver very closely with the Alberta 
Liberal Association and with the Liberal stalwarts Scott 
and Sifton, was the occasion for an article in the Toronto 
Telegram headed "The Return of the Prodigal’*. The article 
implied that Oliver had left the paths of independence for 

(166) Walter Scott, M.P* - Oliver's colleague in the House, 
and later the first premier of Saskatchewan, heading 
a Liberal administration. 

Hon. A.L. Sifton, M.L.A. ~ Highly esteemed by Oliver 
( Edmonton Bulletin , Aug. 23, 1897.); Ruthefford*s 
suecessor as Liberal premier of Alberta. 

(167) Edmonton Bulletin, July 28, 1902* 

















" !. ’ . > : '• ‘ ' ' \ < ' ** • ■" 

, 
















. 




- 





. 

■ ' . ' 

• 







■ 


1 . • ■ • 








( 315 ) 


the yoke of "machine Liberalism" and continued* 

Independence loses a great deal in the loss of 
Frank Oliver. Mr. Oliver is the one politician of 
real and unusual power who is elected by either 
party west of Lake Superior. Some of his articles 
in the Edmonton Bulletin , and some of his speeches 
at Ottawa/ have been really strong and brilliant 
examples of close and powerful editorial and par¬ 
liamentary reasoning. 

The machine liberalism which hounded K«L. Rich¬ 
ardson out of parliament is quite capable of cut¬ 
ting Frank Oliver 1 s throat. (168) 

Ifre Bulletin , "more in sorrow than in anger," denied the 
Telegram’s interpretation of the affair. %hat more natural, 
it enquired, than a Liberal banquet to fete Alberta’s M.P.? 
And why should not his friend Sifton and his House colleague 
Scott attend? (159) Shortly afterward at Calgary, the 
Alberta Liberal Association convention, with Sifton presid¬ 
ing, declared its unwavering loyalty to Laurier and "con¬ 
tinued confidence in our present member Frank Oliver and 
appreciation of the ability and sturdy integrity exhibited 
by him as our representative in the House of Commons.'* (160) 


Late in 1903 the western Liberals began actively prepar¬ 
ing for the next general election. Under the Redistribution 
Bill, Alberta was now divided into four federal constituen¬ 
cies of which Edmonton was one. In December the Edmonton 


(158) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 22, 1902. Quoting the 
Toronto Telegram . 

(159) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 22, 1902. 

(160) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 8, 1902. 


















- . :q-, 7. ■-i -, •, v 

. . 

. 


f . , , ! 










-Ji : 




' ;S V--' V. , s j 


, . - 

' .. 




' 






... 























. 



( 316 ) 


Liberals nominated Oliver fox* re-election. At a meeting of 
Liberals and Oliver supporters following the nomination, 

C.W. Cross, President of the Young Liberal Association, re¬ 
ferred to current rumors that Oliver was to b© offered a 
senatorship. This, he said, was just what the Conservatives 
wanted, but Oliver had no Intention of ending his usefulness 
to the west by taking a seat in the Senate. He was too 
badly needed In the House of Commons, and there he was go¬ 
ing to stay, (161) 

The rumors of a senatorship being widely circulated at 
this time were no doubt encouraged by a recent serious ill¬ 
ness which Oliver had undergone. (162) For a time it was 
feared that his health would no longer permit him the ar¬ 
duous career of a western M.P. However, his remarkable 
resilience was not only mental but physical. He was a long 
way indeed from giving up the hurly-burly of western poli¬ 
tics and retiring into the obscurity of the Senate. 

The big opening gun was fired in the Edmonton federal 
campaign in August of 1904. Over 260 key Liberals and 
Oliver supporters from all over Northern Alberta attended a 
mammoth banquet at the Thistle Rink tendered by the Young 
Men’s Liberal Association. Laurier was unable to accept an 

(161) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 24, 1903. 

(162) Edmonton Bulletin, June 1, 1903. 









( 317 ) 


Invitation to attend, but wrote the secretary of the Associ¬ 
ation, W I am sorry that my legislative duties will not per¬ 
mit me to avail myself of this opportunity to testify to 
the high appreciation in which all members of the Liberal 
party hold Mr. Oliver .* (163) Addressing his adherents 
Oliver claimed the name of an independent liberal: tt Ke was 
a Liberal in principle and practice but claimed to be in¬ 
dependent of the dictates of any political party. He was 
a liberal because he believed the policy and principles of 
the Liberal Party were in the best interests of the coun¬ 
try. w (164) He declared his support of Liberal tariff and 
railroad policies, commending particularly the O.T.P. and 
C.N.K. deals which would bring railway competition to the 
West. His failure to raise the autonomy question on tills 
important occasion foreshadowed the government campaign 
policy in the Territories. Laurier, without being specific 
as to terms, gave assurance that autonomy would be dealt 
with at the first session of the new parliament if he were 
re-elected. The government could not let Borden’s autonomy . 
campaign in the Territories go altogether unchallenged, and 
most of the Horth West Liberal nominating conventions appro¬ 
ved the early establishment of provincial status. Yet 

(163) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug. 20, 1904. 

(164) Ibid 












( 518 ) 


throughout, the campaign the North Vest. Liberals stressed the 
G.T.P. deal, rather than autonomy, as the great issue before 
the people. (165) 

A fine piece of election strategy was the arrival in Ed¬ 
monton late in August of a large party of top-ranking G.T.P. 
officials. Warmly welcomed and elaborately entertained, the 
railway men were shown the lend and resources of the dis¬ 
trict, Oliver himself played a leading part in the affair, 
driving a group of the visitors out to Stony Plain, The 
Bulletin publicised the visit enthusiastically, (166) The 
Issue of the election, the paper stated, was the Grand Trunk 
Pacific Hallway, (167) 

The Conservatives nominated Richard Seeord, who had ser¬ 
ved in the Territorial Assembly, to contest the Edmonton 
riding. At a public meeting in Edmonton early in October 
Oliver outlined his platform. The Liberal party, he con¬ 
tended, had brought prosperity to the West, and its immigra¬ 
tion policy was a wise one capably administered with evident 
good results, (168) He stressed the progress of the Edmon- ■ 
ton district itself under the Liberal regime. Commending 

(165) Lingard, op. cit,, p. 110. 

(166) Edmonton Bulletin, Aug* 25, 1904. 

(167) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 5, 1904. 

(168) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 8, 1904. Mention was not 
made at this time of the Galicians, nor of the ^In¬ 
dia criminate 11 immigration encouraged by S±fton*s 
Department. 








■ : ' • ' ■ • - . 

' ' 

■ 

‘ 


>-■) * - - ■■ ‘ 

. 

' ■ 














. 




•V if " *■ } '■ •. 1 

. 






■ • 






















( 519 ) 


the government policy of railway development with competi¬ 
tion, he praised the 9.T.P. as contrasted with the C.P.K. 
monopoly of the Conservatives and reminded his audience 
that Borden had threatened to repudiate the CJ.T.P. if elec¬ 
ted. Regarding autonomy, he called attention to the govern¬ 
ments generous North ^est grants and declared briefly, H If 
autonomy can be secured on terms that are better than we 
now receive, we want it; if not, we can afford to wait."(169 
Premier Roblin of Manitoba, touring the West on behalf of 
the Conservative candidates, spoke at a mammoth meeting in 
^dmonton f s Thistle Rink, In response to an invitation from 
the Conservatives Oliver hurriedly Interrupted his Stony 
Plain camoaign to take the platform along with the opposi¬ 
tion speakers. When he found that his speech was sandwiched 
between that of Secord and Roblin, he enlivened the meeting 
with charges of Conservative unfairness and misleading rep¬ 
resentations, /is invited speaker, he maintained, he should 
be accorded the privilege of speaking last, or at least of 
having an opportunity to refute Roblin. Charges and counter¬ 
charges, in which the audience freely participated, flew 
thick and fast. But it was, after all, a Conservative meet¬ 
ing, and the opposition won the day, Oliver, following 
Secord on the platform, stressed the O.T.P, as the big issue 

(169) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct, 8, 1904. 






. 

V'--"" V 'j 

. 




•; - v' - •• 




. 


- 

' ' . ■ . • " . : ' 

. • : • ' ' . 


















. 







. 





















. 







•Sy'W-if ■ ; ■ :• 















. 



















• 








■ 

' 















• 








■ 















( 320 ) 


and then had to content himself with listening to Roblin’a 
attack on the Liberals without the chance of speaking in 
rebuttal, 'fhere was, however, some recourse. The Bulletin 
report of Roblin f s speeoh was written in a fine vein of 
irony. (170) 

The Bulletin featured the railway question in a series 

of front-page editorials and articles: 

A government owned railway or a railway owned 
government? (171) 

Vote for Oliver and creak the C.P.ft, monopoly! (172) 

A vote for Oliver is a vote for a second trans¬ 
continental railway built as quickly as men and 
money oan do it, with Edmonton a divisional point 
on the main line! (173) 

VOTE FOR OLIVER AND THE RAILWAY. 

Break the G.P,R. Monopoly! 

Free your children from the octopus which has 
reaped the reward of your laoorsl (174) 

Territorial Premier Haultain also toured the West in sup¬ 
port of the Conservative cause, and shortly after the Roblin 
visit he spoke at various points in the Edmonton area. The 
Bulletin, heading a Kaultain meeting at rort Saskatchewan, 
"Territorial premier takes the stump for Secord,” charged 

(170) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 13, 1904. 

(171) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 18, 1904. 

(172) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 21, 1904. 

(173) Ibid 


(174) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct, 20, 1904* 













( 321 ) 


that "Haultain admits that the terms are the issue, but con¬ 
demns Oliver for demanding terms before accepting autonomy.” 

(175) 

At his Thistle Rink meeting late in October, Haultain 
made an impassioned plea for autonomy and aocused Oliver of 
”not being loud enough in the House of Commons on behalf of 
larger Territorial grants," Oliver countered witn the sug¬ 
gestion that Haultain was raising the autonomy issue to keep 
attention diverted from Borden*s railway policy, and re¬ 
stated that he was against "autonomy now” unless the terms 
were very favorable. (176) 

Keeping the railway issue alive, the Bulletin stated more 
emphatically than grammatically, "Mr. Borden has not and 
dare not pledge himself to construct and operate a transcon¬ 
tinental railway as a government enterprise," (177) Secord 
was aocused of promising that if the Conservatives won, Ed¬ 
monton would be the capital of the new province. The 
Builetin was pleased to publish Haultain*s denial that he 
had ever discussed the question with Secord. (178) 

R.8, Bennett, billed by the Bulletin as a "lone-star 
attraction”, spoke at the Thistle Rink in support of Secord. 

(175) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 25, 1904. 

(176) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 27, 1904. 

(177) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 28, 1904. 

(178) Edmonton Bulletin, Oct. 31, 1904. 





























■ 



















' 

■ 






J . 














. 


















. 
































( 322 ) 


rt A descending scale," the Bulletin Jibed - first Roblin; 
then Haultain, ”riding the hobby-horse of provincial auton¬ 
omy; 11 and now, Bennett. 'The Bennett meeting, restricted 
to Secord speakers only, drew the further remark, "Confi¬ 
dence must have indeed sunk to a low ebb when the silver- 
tongued spellbinder from the ambitious city (179) follows 
the illustrious example of the v/indy premier of the bliz¬ 
zard province (180) and declines discussion." (181) 

On the Dominion-wide front the Liberals were successful 
in keeping public attention focussed on the O.T.P. Their 
plan of a second transcontinental appealed to the growing 
Canadian national spirit. An autonomy settlement, promised 
by both parties "after the election", raised no vigorous 
interest in the East. Haultain*s draft bill contained no 
direct reference to the school question, and Laurier had 
been careful to say nothing on this touchy subject. The 
contentious school clause in the autonomy bills lay as yet 
in the future. Even in the west, expanding, confident and 
railway-hungry, the G.T.P. took precedence over provincial 
status. Laurier was at the height of his power and the 
country was riding high on a wave of unprecedented prosper¬ 
ity and expansion. 

(179) Bennett of Calgary. 

(180) Roblin of Manitoba. 

(181) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 1, 1904. The reference is to 
the Roblin meeting, supra p. 319. 















(525) 

The election, a sleeping Liberal win, strengthened the 
Government by eleven seats in the Commons. Borden himself 
failed to hold his seat. In the West seven Liberals were 
returned, and three Conservatives. 

Frank Oliver shared in the Liberal victory, defeating 
Secord by a majority of over 2000 votes. (182) Climaxing 
a tumultuous election day, M a surging and enthusiastic crowd 
numbering thousands 1 * thronged Edmonton's Jasper Avenue and 
watched the incoming returns flashed on a screen from a win¬ 
dow of the Liberal committee rooms. About 9.30 o'clock in 
the evening, with Oliver's election certain, an immense 
torchlight procession complete with brass band and madly 
cheering citizens moved along the Avenue, halting in front 
of the Queen's Hotel to applaud the Liberal speakers gather¬ 
ed there. Oliver, after delivering an impressive and moving 
address of thanks to his supporters, was escorted home in 
state by the crowd. (183) 

The Liberal triumph in the Territories may be attributed 
to a combination of favorable circumstances and clever 
strategy. 

The autonomy question in the North %est appeared 
to have exercised comparatively little Influence 

(182) Gan, Pari. Guide , 1905, p. 170. 

Edmonton (Created 1903) 

Frank Oliver Lib. 3535 
Richard Secord Cons. 1526 

(183) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 5, 1904. 












. . 












































































( 524 ) 


on the public mind. Apparently Sir Wilfred 
Laurier's pre-election promise that the question 
would receive the attention of Parliament in its 
first session, coupled with the comparatively 
liberal financial grants for 1904 and 1905, and 
the government's Orand Trunk Pacific project to¬ 
gether with the claim of the Liberal press and 
speakers in the West that with Mr. Borden's return 
to power the prompt construction of the new road 
would be most improbable, had a predominating effect 
on the result. According to Conservative conten¬ 
tion, the government's control over the foreign 
vote - through Liberal control of every newspaper in 
the Territories using a foreign language - and the 
influence of their agents in convincing the foreigner 
of the danger of losing his land if the Conservatives 
were elected, greatly contributed to the Liberal 
successes in the outlying constituencies. (184) 

No sooner had the general elections determined that Lau- 
rier, rather than Borden, would have the task of establish¬ 
ing provincial status for the North West, than a large sec¬ 
tion of the Territorial press, including the Bulletin , be¬ 
gan to question the fitness of the Haultain government to 
negotiate the autonomy settlement. The western Liberal 
M case against Eaultain 5 * was based on three main points; his 
part in the Moose Jaw Convention of 1903# the capital grant 
question, and the electoral strength of the North teest 
Assembly in 1905. 

The Moose Jaw Convention H carried by e large majority a 


(184) Llngard, op. eit., p. 111. Based on Hopkins, 0. 

The Canadian Annual Review of Public Affairs Toronto 

TRS¥*rp7’21B-3. - - 

Llngard appears sympathetic to Haultain's fight for 
autonomy, and correspondingly unsympathetic to Oliver 
as M a counsellor of delay'. ”... the North West 

members at Ottawa must share with the Dominion Govern¬ 
ment the responsibility for delay in granting auton¬ 
omy. (Llngard, op. cit., p, 124.) 









* 


















* 






' 


. 































■ 






. 








; 


. 














( 325 ) 


resolution to run the next Territorial elections on party- 
lines and to place a Conservative candidate in every con¬ 
stituency.* (185) Haultain accepted the post of Honorary 
President of the Conservative Association, hut warmly op¬ 
posed the resolution "by speech and vote, and refused to be 
bound by it." (186) Nevertheless, his connection with the 
Convention and his subsequent election tour of 1904 in sup¬ 
port of Borden led to the charge, of which the Liberals 
made political capital, that he had indeed renounced his 
position of non-partisanship and had definitely introduced 
"federal party!sm u into Territorial politics. (187) 

In 1903 the Government placed at the disposal of the 
North West administration a capital advance of $250,000 to 
cover the cost of "approved public works". The implica¬ 
tions involved in the giving and in the use of this grant 
were complex, and need not be discussed in detail here. 
Haultain maintained that any expenditure from the grant was 
inadvisable, inasmuch as the grant really constituted a 

(185) Lingard, op. clt., p. 118. 

(186) Ibid p. 118. 

(187) Haultain had a clear 14-year record as leader of a 
"non-party Territorial government. It was common for 
Assembly Members to take a party stand in federal 
politics and to participate in Dominion elections. 
Lingard, op. cit., p. 117 ff., supports Haultain 1 s 
contention that his part in the Moose Jaw Convention 
had not compromised his non-partisanship in Terri¬ 
torial affairs. 


















■ 







' 







: h - J.M . ' 



• • 


fc; v r ' 












































• 







- 






vr 1 tM 





• 





• 




'!'■ - " - '■ ' ■ V - _t 






















■ 







. 















• 








: 






' 



■ 

; 











( 326 ) 


Territorial debt, that It Involved a degree of federal con¬ 
trol, and that Its acceptance would compromise the Territo¬ 
rial claim for higher subsidies and provincial autonomy.(188) 
In regard to the electoral strength of the Territorial 
Assembly In the autumn of 1904, there were seven vacant 
seats in the Legislature. These vacancies had been created 
by Assembly members resigning to contest federal seats in 
the general elections of 1904. 

Reviewing Haultain*s position on the eve of the autonomy 
settlement, "The Edmonton Bulletin argued that the North 
West government had no assurance, In view of the * turn the 
Premier (had) given Territorial politics* and the seven va¬ 
cant seats in the Assembly, that it represented either a 
majority of the people or of the local members in the Im¬ 
portant question shortly to be decided." (189) In an ar¬ 
ticle on the coming Territorial bye-elections, the Bulletin 
referred to Haultain*s part in the Moose Jaw Convention and 
to "his refusing the projected $250,000 capital grant, in 
order to discredit the Liberal government." (190) further 
reference was shortly made to "the assumption, not to say 

(188) Lingard, op. cit., p. 90 ff. The Territorial Assembly 
was unanimous with Haultain that it was inadvisable 

to touch the capital advance, **until the just demands 
of the Territories had been satisfactorily met." 

(189) Lingard, op. cit., pp. 121-2. 

(190) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 10, 1904. 

See also, the Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 81, 1904. 








( 327 ) 


presumption, of Premier Haultain in refusing to accept the 
$250,000 offered by the Dominion government for expenditure 
on North West roads, and his evident willingness to use the 
question of provincial autonomy for Conservative purposes." 

(191) 

Edmonton's seat in the North West Assembly had been va¬ 
cated by Richard Seoord to contest the federal riding a- 
gainst Oliver. A nominating convention. Liberal in make-up 
if not in name, was held in December, 1904, to select a 
candidate for the impending Edmonton Territorial bye-elec¬ 
tion. Oliver acted as convention chairman, and C.W. Cross, 

(192) a prominent Liberal who referred to himself as an 
"Oliver man' 1 , received the nomination. (193) The Bulletin 
editorially commended the convention's choice. (194) Ap¬ 
parently the policy laid down by the Conservatives at the 
Moos© Jaw Convention cut both ways. 

With the opening of the first session of the newly elec¬ 
ted parliament early in January, 1905, Laurler, true to his 
pre-election promise entered into autonomy negotiations with 

(191) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 30, 1904. 

(192) Later a member of Rutherford's Alberta Cabinet, and in 
the years following the fall of the Rutherford govern¬ 
ment, one of Oliver's bitterest political enemies. 

(193) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 5, 1904. 

(194) Edmonton Bulletin, Dec. 8, 1904. 





. ■ ■ ■ t ■ . . 

t ■ ft 






. ■ '• ' ' ‘ " - : * ' ' *:- V: ; 


, 




.. ■ 










•• 


- i< ■ : ■ 1 

■ 

l ■ : ■ 












■ . ' 

■ 

. "v'" : " ...v" : •’ V. ~ ’• , V iv 

- • ■ * 

■ 








; : . . , v ' - i. Vi . ' ■ ■■■ -• ' ■ ■ . 












( 328 ) 


the North West Government* Simultaneously in Alberta, sec¬ 
tional ambitions, already smoldering through years of the 
autonomy dispute, burst into violent flame in "the battle 
of the Capital." 

Early in the negotiations rumors were current of a Cab¬ 
inet decision to establish two provinces, Saskatchewan and 
Alberta, rather than the on© administrative area advocated 
by Haultain. Calgary and Edmonton were, of course, the two 
chief contenders for capital honors in Alberta. Delegations 
from these two centres were soon in Ottawa urging their re¬ 
spective claims, while at home their local press engaged in 
a violent and wordy warfare. Other aspirants, although 
smaller, were no less vociferous. Lethbridge entrusted its 
case to a delegation; Medicine Hat and Red Deer deluged the 
government with telegrams and letters. In February, Cal¬ 
gary, fearing itself prejudiced by its Conservative record, 
and perhaps evaluating Frank Oliver^ influence with the 
administration, proposed that Banff, a "neutral" town, be 
chosen capital. Rural editors in the areas surrounding the 
contestants threw their weight into the struggle, and for 

| weeks the larger and more vital issues of autonomy were all 

i 

but lost sight of in the fight for sectional advantage.(195) 

(195) Lingard, op. cit,, pp. 133-4. 

Edmonton Bulletin, Jan, 30, 1905; Feb, 7, 1905; 

Feb. 11, 1905; Feb. 14, 1905; Feb. 22, 1906; 

Mar. 3, 1905. 

Edmonton Bulletin, Mar. 8. 1905. - A few towns retain¬ 
ed some sense of humor amidst the mad scramble for 
Capital honors. 









■ ■ . ; • ■ . 




' ■ 

i '■ ? ' . ' ■ ■ • 

' - ' ■ ' ' , : ' ' ‘ - - ' 

1 7 • . • ■ - . •' ■ •; : 

. . 



: 

■ 

;. v - ' 'w* 




. 




■ 

' 


'• :-»f ■■■■ 























* 
































♦ V 

. 




. 

• • ' i ' 







( 529 ) 


The North West Territories were "the creature of the 
Dominion Oovamnent, w (196) and as such had no legal right 
to be a party in the autonomy negotiations. Nevertheless, 
up to a point, the government was willing to concede the 
moral right of the North West to present its case to the 
Cabinet as the autonomy bills were shaped. (197) Premier 
Haultain and his "silent partner" (198) G.H.V. Bulyea (199) 
met with the Cabinet frequently from January 5 to February 
20. The basis of discussion was Haultain*s draft bill of 
1901. 'fttree main propositions, ultimately settled contrary 
to the wishes of Haultain and the Territorial Assembly, must 
be mentioned. Haultain, supported by the North West Govern¬ 
ment, advocated on© province, provincial control of public 
lands and resources, and omission from the bills of an ed¬ 
ucational clause. (200) 

Concurrent with Haultain*s meetings with the Cabinet, 
Laurier held a series of conferences with the North west 
Liberal members of both Commons and Senate. (201) The North 

(196) By the Rupert*a Land Act, 1870; and by the series of 
North West Acts of 1875, 1888, etc. 

(197) Lingard, op. oit., p. 155. 

(198) Ibid p. 152 n. 18. 

(199) First Lieutenant-Governor of Alberta. 

(200) Lingard, op. oit., p. 132. 

(201) Haultain claimed that Laurier consulted the N.W. Lib¬ 
erals much more than he did Haultain himself. 

(Lingard, op. ©it., p.132.) 






, i '! ' t 

.... : ' \ ; ; 










( 530 ) 


West Liberals also met several times with the Territorial 
representatives. It will appear that the Prime Minister 
gave more weight to the representations of the North fcest 
Liberal members than he did to those of the Haultain govern¬ 
ment. 

On February 21, 1905, Laurier introduced the autonomy 
bills in the House. The terms included the creation of two 
provinces, Alberta and Saskatchewan, with Edmonton and Re¬ 
gina as their respective capitals; (202) Dominion control of 
the public lands and resources of the new provinces, with 
financial compensation; end an educational clause garran- 
teeing the rights of religious minorities in the new prov¬ 
inces. Ifce first two of these provisions led to consider¬ 
able contention both inside and outside the House, but it 
was the educational clause that provoked a sectional animo¬ 
sity reminiscent of the Manitoba separate schools crisis, 
and for a time threatened the life of the Government. 

Education in the Territories had witnessed a gradual 
evolution from sectarian schools toward a national school 
system. The North s»est Territories Act of 1875 "empowered 
the Territorial authorities to pass the necessary ordinances 
in respect of education, and secured to the minority of the 
rate-payers, whether Protestant or Roman Catholic, the right 

(202) This choice of Capital in each province was made 
subject to the approval of the first duly elected 
Legislative Assembly after the formal erection of 
the province. 







. . 


'. I 

, . . ■ ; r.. ; " . ■ ■ ' . 

, 

. 

t , . ■ ■ \: \ •' * 

i 7 • - i V; ■ > -7 ' 


z . : • : ■ f 7 ■ E r ’ 

' \ " . . ' ' ' - ' 

• y • ' . - ' * 


.. . ' * : 

. 

■ ' ' .■ 7 ■ i : ; > f i ■ S' 

. 

yv'7 




l#n 


. i .» 

' i; 






% 


■ ■ • 

■ - ? ' : - 5 


: . ; 7:,, v \a7 



y.- - - 


. 





■ 

7^7^77 A 




- ■ - j ■ • *; ' • ■ 


V ; .7 

' ; %:Jr- 


. 





(331) 

to establish separate sohools in any district or lesser 
portion, along with the obligation of paying such rates as 
they might impose upon themselves in respect thereof. 1 " 

(203) In effect the Act of 1876 provided for the develop¬ 
ment of a sectarian school system. The Worth West school 
ordinances and regulations of the years that followed creat¬ 
ed the Territorial school system, at the same time "gradu¬ 
ally ’watering down* the rights conferred on the Homan Cath¬ 
olic minority by the Dominion Parliament in 1876 . . • 

(204) By 1901 the North west had a close approach to a 
national school system. The school ordinance of that year, 
although providing as usual for minority schools of either 
Protestant or Catholic persuasion, ensured for both the same 
.privileges and same method of government; and uniformity as 

to teachers* qualifications, professional training, course 
of studies. Inspection and departmental examinations. ”The 
Haultain government had legislated for uniformity and had 
’administered* most of the separatism out of the school 
law.” (205) Except for the Catholic clergy and a few ex¬ 
tremists, the North west was satisfied with its school 
system. (206) 

(203) Statutes of Canada 59 Viet., o 49 s 11 (1875). 

Lingard, op. cit., p. 155. 

(204) Lingard, op. cit., p. 156. 

(205) Lingard, op. cit., p. 159. 

(206) Lingard, op. cit.. Chapters XII and XIII, passim. 








V"t '4 . ' .'V ; ' ■; " r •'' ; ' ■. " • 

-l^ -a-mi *u>X ■ - v 


0', 

v ■ . m ■■■ t 






- 






■*; -0li $ . 

: • f'V^ ' , ’4. - ■ 

44. 


- 


1 


4; 




..f ] ■ : 

r : • - 

.. 

>4t4-\ 4>-.? 4 J . . ‘ " -I • ■•■■/■ ' -44 

.•■•'4 ; 44 l--' • ‘4 : 4 4 : K’- 

• 






■: 1 




vr 




- v, ■ t : / ■> ' 

; J -4 - 

■ • 











( 33 *) 


The aotual school clause presented by Laurier In the 
House on February 21 came as a surprise, not only to large 
sections of the public, but to many of the Prime Minister’s 
colleagues as well. It provided, not for a continuation of 
the North West school system as it existed, but for a re¬ 
turn to ths sectarian system implicit in the North West 
Territories Act of 1875. Protestant Ontario loosed a flood 
of denunciation. Haultain and numerous "provincial rights” 
groups, both Liberal and Conservative, attacked the clause 
on grounds of constitutionality, claiming that the Dominion 
Government had no right to impose on the new provinces any 
educational limitations other than those implicit in the 
B.N.A. Act. The seven North West Liberal members, who dur¬ 
ing their discussions with Laurier had been left to assume 
that any educational clause included would perpetuate the 
existing school system, protested vigorously. 

Clifford Sifton, Minister of the Interior, who had been 
absent in the United States during the drafting of the bills 
and Laurier*s presentation of them in the House, returned to 
Ottawa on February 23* Expressing surprise at the intro¬ 
duction of the bills during his absence and voicing strong 
dissent from the school clause, he resigned from the Cab¬ 
inet on February 27. He was immediately accorded the sup¬ 
port of the Manitoba and North west Liberal members in 




if i • • 

i * «'•* 


- . ■ ■ 

: % V ■ V.:;;- " * , >; ^r % ‘‘ 

: >}' 1 ■ , </,,/, '• t :< 4, s ■ j .5’ ., v . . ■ 1 • 


, : ■ % ' 

• >;vf . : \jti ■i i'}&& - 




i • 


■ 


", " : '• 


■ 


' 

'V' ■ ; 

■ 

■ 

■ 




■ 

: v " •• * ' ' • '* 






.... 


(533) 


pressing for a modification of the school clause. (207) 
Popular clamor, particularly in the Kast, increased in 
violence. Laurier found himself subjected to oritioism 
from many sides - Haultain and the Territorial government, 
the dissentient seotion within the Liberal Party, the Con¬ 
servative opposition, and pressure groups throughout the 
country. On March 3 the western Liberals presented to the 
Prim© Minister, practically as an ultimatum, a draft clause 
of three sub-sections suggested by Sifton as an alternative 
to the original school clause. The most significant part 
read? 

In and for the Province the Legislature may ex¬ 
clusively make laws in relation to education, sub¬ 
ject and according to the following provisions: 

1. Nothing in any such law shall prejudicially 
affect any right or privilege with respect to sep¬ 
arate schools which any class of persons have at 
the date of the passing of this Act, under the toms 
of Chapters 29, SO and SI of the Ordinances of the 
North West Territories passed in the year 1901. (208) 

Laurier was forced to retreat. The substance of the 
above draft clause was incorporated in the educational 
clause of the autonomy bills as finally passed, guarantee¬ 
ing the new provinces, not a return to sectarian schools, 
but a perpetuation of the North West school system as it 
existed under the ordinances of 1901. 


(207) Sifton, as a member of the Sreenway government, had 
played a prominent part in Manitoba’s battle against 
the Dominion on the separate schools issue of the 
’nineties. 

(208) Lingard, op. cit., p. 183. 





1 

• . 


. *vC . 1 ' ■ • I 







*, •• ' 




m 




u 






. . ■ , • . . • , 








: . 

s-tf: ■ ■ 1 


* ; ■ 











(334) 

Haul tain, the Conservative opposition, and numerous 
provincial rights groups continued to attack the clause as 
a contravention of provincial constitutional rights, The 
western Liberal members, including Oliver, appear to have 
been more concerned with the practical than with the con¬ 
stitutional aspects of the question, They considered the 
system of 1901 r, the best possible” with all factors taken 
into account, and as the one least likely to lead to re¬ 
ligious discord. ’Ihe reception accorded the autonomy settle* 
ment by western opinion largely Justified their stand. (209) 

The North West Liberal group also supported the creation 
of two provinces and Dominion control of the public lands 
and resources of the two provinces. This stand involved, 
for at least some of the Territorial members including Scott 
and Oliver, the reversal of an earlier opinion. 

Eault&in wanted one province; the Laurler government 
wanted two. Vigorous arguments were advanced by both par¬ 
ties in support of their contention. (210) The North West 
Liberals may have been influenced by Manitobans request at 
tills time for an extension of her boundaries north to the 
Hudson Bay and west to Regina. Although the government did 

(209) Lingard, op. eit.. Chapter XVII Ihe Reception of the 
Autonomy Terns by the North West. 

(210) Lingard, op. cit., Chapter XIV The Division of the 
North West Territories. 





' 




. . 







. ' » ■ . ;- 

r " • • 





- '■ ; f w : ' ' 

X X},: V'«V % ■ '■•■ -'^ 1 ;, " 






■ 





(336) 


not favor Manitoba 1 s request, the possibility of an enlarg¬ 
ed Manitoba did bring to three the suggested plans for the 
setting up of provinces in the North West: two provinces, 
one large province, one smaller province bounded on the east 
by a Manitoba extended west to Regina. The government was 
adamant in rejecting the second of these plans. Even the 
prospeot of the third plan being seriously considered was 
perhaps sufficiently disturbing to influence the western 
members in favor of two provinces. At any rate, two prov¬ 
inces rather than one involved no contravention of North 
West rights. To the office-hungry, two administrations and 
two capitals had their appeal; but Frank Oliver and some of 
his western colleagues appear to have become sincerely con¬ 
vinced that the unprecedented growth of the West had ren¬ 
dered one large administrative unit inadequate. 

Ihroughout the long years of Conservative government and 
on into the early years of the Liberal regime, Oliver had 
advocated North West control of North West lands. Yet in 
1905 he took his stand alongside Laurier in supporting Dom¬ 
inion control of the public lands and resources of the new 
provinces. His support of Dominion control was based not 
upon constitutional, but upon practical, considerations. He 
had always charged the Conservatives with mal-administration 
of North West lands, but he believed that the Liberals were 





• ■ • . ' 

’• ■ 1 ' ' : • 

: . ■ . ■; ;> ■ •- ■ 








. v 


- 

/ 


. V r • 






*• - '• •• 




- ■ ■ ■ ■ 








■< ' . 











(336) 


now administering these lands efficiently, and that only 
under continued Dominion Jurisdiction could the aggressive 
immigration policy initiated by Sifton be carried forward 
to its full fruition, 

Frank Oliver, Clifford Sifton 1 s successor as 
Minister of the Interior, stressed the claim that 
the Dominion Government had a greater interest than 
the provincial governments in establishing settlers 
on the lands of the north Y^est, Every family placed 
on the land in the Territories, contended the Minis¬ 
ter, was worth perhaps $100 per year in Dominion 
customs and excise revenue, and w absolutely nothing” 
to provincial revenue. Hie local government, con¬ 
sequently, could not afford to spend money in attrac¬ 
ting settlers. He cited lack of immigration policies 
in the provinces of British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec 
and the Maritimes, which possessed their lands, as 
proof of his contention. The interests of the en¬ 
tire Dominion, stated Mr, Oliver, depended upon the 
settlement of the prairies, and it could not afford 
to adopt a policy which placed in other hands a re¬ 
sponsibility which it was best fitted to discharge. 

®he Dominion alone could afford to give the land 
away as a means of securing immigration. He be¬ 
lieved that the Canadian people at large, through 
the experience of recent years, had become con¬ 
vinced that the policy of free lands was one for 
the well-being of the Dominion, and he could not 
imagine any federal government reversing that poli¬ 
cy. In conclusion he stated that, on the other 
hand, a provincial government cramped for money 
would be likely to adopt a policy of administration 
for revenue, which would prove injurious to both 
the province and the Dominion. (211) 


Following the resignation of Clifford Sifton in February, 
speculation as to his probable successor took second place 
to the heated controversy over the school clause in the 


(211) Lingard, op. cit,. 


pp. 215-6 









; i 3 : 

' :;>/ uj - oyyyy- <*'.;■•* (M* —■■• ; ./>. 

t - 1 - ' * ’ • ■ 



» :. ' 




' ; ■$ 




\ 




• . . . - • ", , ; , • 








(337) 


autonomy bills. As the weeks passed, however, interest in 
the impending cabinet appointment increased both in the 
House and in the press* Walter Scott and Frank Oliver 
emerged as the two most likely contenders for the vacant 
portfolio of the Interior. Laurier chose Frank Oliver, and 
on April 8 the member for Edmonton was sworn of the Privy 
Council and appointed Minister of the Interior. (212) 

Edmonton was, of course, elated. Oliver’s appointment, 
following closely upon the naming of the city as oapital 
of Alberta, (213) was regarded as a second victory. The 
Bulletin marked the occasion by a front page spread express¬ 
ing local gratification. Recalling that Walter Scott had 
been prominently mentioned for the portfolio, the Bulletin 
stated, *The news (of Oliver’s appointment) may be fairly 
said to have com© as a genuine surprise to the public gen¬ 
erally, and even to many well informed in political matters.* 
(214) Nevertheless, the paper continued, Edmonton’s jubi¬ 
lation M ma# in fairness be said to have been shared by men 
of all classes and parties,* including prominent Conserva¬ 
tives who had already promised that Oliver would not be 

(212) Can. Pari. Oulde , 1906 p. 140. 

(213) Subject to ratification by the first elected legis¬ 
lature. 

(214) Edmonton Bulletin, April 8, 1905. 







' '■ . . <■ 


.V:V ! v.v'i.-■ £Ho,i A: p 1 ■ ! t 


■ . 






• 












."’i. v ‘ - : ■ . 



V; •• ;• v 'v 





... 


. 





• lx* r 


. 



VV-" : ;? 




.. • ■ • , 

• 



• 

-. ■ ■ 1 L 




- 



■ 


. r'. 



■ .• v-' IV*- • : 




-• 


■ 


■ 


• : ■ • 





' f \i . -■ % 









(338) 


opposed in the bye-election, (216) Several prominent citi¬ 
zens expressed regret that Oliver had not waited and become 
premier of the new province. (216) 

Press comments on the appointment were numerous and va¬ 
ried, TSditors throughout the country discussed freely the 
probable reasons for Laurier’s choice, and the record and 
capabilities of the new Minister. Characterizing the ap¬ 
pointment as "a distinct and direct reward to an independent 
man* and as a matter of great satisfaction to the west, the 
Calgary Albertan claimed that in all the Dominion House of 
Commons no person could have been found more fitted for the 
portfolio of the Interior* ”In all western Canada, * the 
Albertan added, ®there has been no more striking figure, no 
more stalwart champion, no more intelligent exponent of the 
West. Mr. Oliver is a typical westerner, without frills, 
ornaments or mysteries. 11 (217) 

The Manitoba Free Pres s, emphasising Oliver*s knowledge 
and understanding of western conditions and his qualifica¬ 
tions as a ^worthy successor” to Sifton, said, ”His career 
in parliament has made him known to the whole Dominion as 
an energetic, outspoken representative of this great and 

(215) Edmonton Bulletin, April 8, 1905. 

(216) Ibid 

(217) Kdmonton Bulletin, April 11, 1905. Quoting the 
Calgary Albertan . 










■ 

, 


' * 

... , ", *4 ‘ Z ■ > '• 







■ 

- 


>• • : '• - ■ 

. 




A ; 









. 






. 





■ 



• 






. 

. 






" : : A . 

- 

■ 

■ 










" ■ 

' 

. 

■ ■■ ‘ 1 







- 


. 












i 








•• , 

: • 





' ■ ■ 





. 










(339) 

important section of the Dominion.* (218) 

The Toronto Mall and Empire was critical* "He (Oliver) 
represents a oonstituenoy which can be operated upon by the 
election machine owing to the preponderance of the foreign 
element. Hie Oliver soandal (219) serves to show that we 
have reached the top notch in the matter of corruption."(220) 
The Toronto News , a bitter opponent of the autonomy bills, 
came out with a scathing personal and political denunciation 
of Laurier*a new Minister. Claiming that, "There is no 
more shifty, shuffling and demagogic politician in the House 
of Commons than Mr. Oliver," the Hews charged that he was 
chosen in preference to Walter Scott because the government 
was afraid to oontest Scott*s constituency, Asainiboia West, 
in a bye-election. Edmonton, with its five or six hundred 
French Catholic voters, numerous Oallcians, O.T.P. w pull", 
and gratification at being the new Alberta capital was an 
electoral "cinch 1 * for the Liberals. (221) 

The Calgary Herald , although less critioal of Oliver 
personally, suggested, "The appointment was wrung from the 

(218) Edmonton Bulletin, April 11, 1905. Quoting the 
Manitoba Free Press . 

(219) The Oliver scandal refers to his appointment as 
Minister of the Interior. 

(220) Edmonton Bulletin, April 17, 1905. Quoting the 
Toronto Mail and Empire . 

(221) Edmonton Bulletin, April 20, 1905. Quoting the 
Toronto News. 














■ 


1 

'U:V^y 'oj-n &&;£ Mfy ■:■■■;■ 

<• , ' * ■ •■• i' • ■•: • • i 

*< ‘ - h, ‘ ' . ^ ' - *• ♦*.«•.?> , < 

■*: .■■•■•• • ’ •• 

‘ 


■ 


,■ ' ■ ■ ' * 

£*. ■ : -J : : ^ 

■ * ■. ■ - 

■v. > ; • 




„ . v. . .. \ 


■■ - ; s v •- ' V , 






-.A ■ . • 


' 

■ 

I :.'- 


.v ttm -- ■ 

.&?k j;* *.-■■'* '•:'" i .■ ■■ ] '■■ ' ' ■ ■• : ; ■ : 

^^ 1.4 r * ■•■•■?■■'' ' ■■■' 


, 


. 


















■■ i. 




' 




'.[ /;V' : K >V :-V;"- V 


V- 


, , . ... . • ■ , , -■V; v,..r, ■ :V>' 






(MO) 


Premier by the alarming exigencies of the situation, over 
which he had no control. He (Oliver) ?/as the only eligible 
member with a Catholic constituency, so freely sprinkled 
with a European population as to make his election certain." 

( 222 ) The Didsbury Pioneer called attention to n a big 
Galician vote that will go solid government." (223) The 
Halifax Chronicle stated, H . . . Mr. Oliver is a particu¬ 
larly able and capable man, one of the very ablest and most 
capable Indeed in the Liberal ranks in Canada, and far more 
than a match in all respects for any of the known Conserva¬ 
tive leaders.” (224) In the Vanco uv er News and Advertiser 
the Hon. Joseph Martin commended Oliver’s integrity and 
energy and said, "He has never failed incurring the dis¬ 
pleasure of his party leaders rather than assent to measures 
which he believed he ought to oppose." (226) 

The FiftcbeP Creek Echo expressed itself as follows: 

True, it is hinted that the appointment is one 
not so much of choice as of necessity; necessity 
in that it was needful that & western member be 
placed in the seat of Sifton and then Edmonton 
being the only safe seat in the West at this par¬ 
ticular political crisis, the member from Edmonton 


(222) Edmonton Bulletin, April 28, 1905. 
Calgary Herald . 

(223) Edmonton Bulletin, April 17, 1905. 
Didsbury Pioneer . 

(224) Edmonton Bulletin, April 28, 1905. 
Halifax Chronicle . 

(226) Edmonton Bulletin, April 28, 1905. 
Vancouver News ana Advertiser. 


Quoting the 
Quoting the 
Quoting the 
Quoting the 




















• ■ 


' * ? 




, 






I- O 






' 


/ : f 






1 ’ : 

' 


, V 




■ 














' 

X 'UA. " \ ■ ' 

' 










; .. • . - ■. V, . ' v: , - ' 


r •/. 'ft" ' 

■ * .ft. ‘ i'T. \ 

■ ^ ' ' ' ‘ 




' ■ ■ '■ . • ■ . : : : ;■ " '' ' 1 . 

. ■ ' *i ■■ • 

, 


? - 




■ 








■'? '' •• ' *• ■ 

V 




• - - 





(Ml) 


was Hobson's choice. 

• . . one thing remains, that in Frank Oliver, 
no matter how the portfolio has come to him, it 
was obtained without dishonesty or underhand wire¬ 
pulling on his part, and he will perform his du¬ 
ties as Minister of the Interior fairly and free¬ 
ly with favor or malice toward no man. (226) 

Hie Ottawa Free Press declared that w the choice of Mr. 
Frank Oliver as Minister of the Interior in succession to 
Mr. Clifford Sifton has been dictated solely by a regard 
for what was considered best for the North West at the pre¬ 
sent juncture. 1 * (227) 

Oliver arrived in his home city from Ottawa on April 12 
to stand for re-election. An enthusiastic non-political 
reception, staged by the Edmonton City Council and the 
Board of Trade, greeted him at the Strathcona station. He 
was conducted to the North Side at the head of an immense 
parade upwards of a mile in length, and including ornamented 
floats and over one thousand citizens in carriages. At the 
evening meeting in the Thistle Rink prominent local men de¬ 
livered congratulatory speeches. The keynote of popular 
feeling was best expressed in the Old Timers' Address: 

• • • and now that the Territories are about to 
enter the Confederation of Provinces, it seems to 
us both fortunate and appropriate that the position 


(226) Edmonton Bulletin, April 28, 1905. Quoting the 
Pincher Creek Echo . 

(227) Edmonton Bulletin, April 28, 1905. Quoting the 
Ottawa Free press. 











. .-v- . ■; m t • - -V.:*-; .. - . : " • 

, 

■ 

" $ ; 


' ’ t . ' ' ^ ' ■ 

■ • 

■ ' : : , . . : -' ' • ^ r % >. ■ ■ • s : - 
















* 

* 
























l 





















(342) 

of the Minister of the Interior, that member of 
the government whose ohief duties are concerned 
with the settlement and development of the West, 
should be filled by one who by aotual experience 
has acquired a knowledge of the work to be per¬ 
formed, and who has himself trod in the hard paths 
of a pioneer. (228) 

While no doubt gratified by the popular welcome accorded 
him, Oliver lost no time in organizing his bye-election 
campaign. At a series of public meetings he spoke in de¬ 
fence of his stand on the autonomy bills which were, of 
course, still before the House of Commons. He admitted 
having been against "hasty” autonomy because of a doubt as 
to success in receiving a sufficiently favorable financial 
arrangement. However, the terms of Laurier’s bills were 
eminently acceptable, he claimed, and had his whole-hearted 
support. (229) He defended the school clause as amended on 
the grounds that "these provisions do not create - they mere* 
ly continue - existing conditions in regard to minority 
schools, 'These conditions have prevailed in the Territor¬ 
ies since 1892 without objection or protest from any source, 
and may therefore be considered to be satisfactory to the 
people concerned."(230) 

(228) Edmonton Bulletin, April 14, 1905. 

(229) Edmonton Bulletin, April 15, 1905. 

(230) Edmonton Bulletin, April 20, 1905. Quite consistent 
with Oliver’s previous stand. He was concerned, ap¬ 
parently, with practical results and not with the 
constitutional issue raised by the provincial rights 
groups. 










V, i’ ' : ' 




.< ' ; ' -r* 


. 

’ •••••• 

• , y , .■ ■ ■ ' / ; 

;; . * . • 

■ ■ I ’ * 

■ 

■ i ' - l i .: ; 

- ■- 1 J.'. V '*■ ;V% '■■■■■' ■ ' - ' -'V 

. . 

1 $ ' - 

. V ■ ' S. :/» i . ? ■' ■, - 

■ 

: 'i '{ •• ■ ■ ■ '■ " : . ■ • ' ■ ■ 

, - • • ■ 1 


■ i 




■ 


■ 








■ 




(343) 

Little reference was made to the "two provinces issue", 
or to Dominion control of public lands and resources* Ed¬ 
monton was quite satisfied with two provinces so long as 
she was to be the capital of one of them, while the lands 
question was temporarily dwarfed by the generous compen¬ 
sating subsidies offered by the government, and by the pro¬ 
spect of Edmonton^ own member taking over the effective 
immigration machinery created by Sifton. Denying that his 
appointment was a t&otical move dictated by Laurier’s de¬ 
pendence on the Edmonton "foreign vote", Oliver lashed out 
at his critics and accused them of befuddling the issues* 

(231) He besought his supporters not to elect him on the 
basis of material interests that might accrue from his be¬ 
ing Minister of the Interior, (232) and promised that the 
Department would continue a broad programme of western de¬ 
velopment including the Peace River Country* 

A Liberal rally held in the 'fhistle Rink on April 24 
witnessed the largest crowd ever present at a public meeting 
in Edmonton. (233) Walter Scott was present on the platform 
and his congratulatory speech was a clever move calculated 
to remove any suggestion of friction within the party ranks 

(231) Edmonton Bulletin, April 15, 1905. 

(232) Ibid 

(233) Edmonton Bulletin, April 25, 1905. 





- .. ■, -■ . , . • ' ■: 

ft/-5” . ' 

, . v ! ,/ ’ i S ■ 

S' " ,ti f --1 - : -V ' ' ' . 

S .. '://vx//;/v /'fv 

' S : n }\-S :, V!;SS kV'*\ %il' i SVS : S-~- <*■ ' 

^■■ : 4 : ?' ;; '' 

| '■ . .. j ' . ‘ 

. 


■ 








(M4) 

In connection with Oliver's appointment. 

The Edmonton Conservatives, caught in a wave of popular 
enthusiasm, were at a tremendous disadvantage. The Bulletin 
claimed that "prominent local members of the party have 
frequently expressed their intention of supporting Frank 
Oliver regardless of the wishes of their eastern managers." 

(254) whether or not this claim was entirely valid, the 
local Conservatives meeting in convention decided not to 
oppose the Minister of the Interior in the bye-election. 

(255) With almost certain defeat staring them in the face 
they had little alternative. 

O&e Liberals widely publicized Oliver's re-election by 
acclamation as placing the western stamp of approval on the 
autonomy bills. If, as the opposition charged, Laurier's 
choice of the new Minister was Indeed a tactical move, it 
was a clever and effective one. 


Oliver returned East immediately to participate in the 


(254) Edmonton Bulletin, April 18, 1905. 

(255) Ibid 

Canadian Annual Reylew , 1905, p. 28* *... the oppo- 
sition in par1iament spent much time and many figures 
to prove that (Edmonton's) population was made up 
largely of a foreign element under the thumb of the 
government officials, and that it would, therefore, 
be useless to oppose the Minister's re-election - 
despite the alleged * anti-coercion 1 feeling of the 
West.® 











. 


- 

•• ■ ; Vv fA ’ '- 1 ■. v 

. 

v : t > 

h ■ '■ " ’ ■ 

. 

IX f**fe *>i ’ 


' . ... V‘r- i ■ - 










' 

’ :,.y- - ••• ; ■ ■ • ■ '■ * 

v-v- v 


■■ f 


. - % : ' .S'*r 


■ 






















. 








I 






irt .• • ’ - ~ = ■» • , \ • 














( 346 ) 


remainder of the session, stopping en route at Winnipeg to 
deliver a brilliant defence of Sifton’s immigration policy 
and the autonomy bills* In reply to the repeated Conserva¬ 
tive charge that the education clause violated provincial 
righto, he Justified the school terms as the best possible 
practical solution of a difficult problem. Omission of the 
school clause, interpreted as an attempt to assert Protes¬ 
tant domination would, he submitted, arouse the western 
Catholics and foment useless religious discord. However, 
n with regard to religious instruction, Mr. Oliver said that 
personally he was not in favor of having it in the schools. H 
(*36) 

JXiring the balance of the session the opposition, em¬ 
bittered by a losing struggle, singled out the new Minister 
of the Interior for special attention. Conservative spea¬ 
kers continued to brand his appointment as an unscrupulous 
political move, and to attribute his return by acclamation 
to Liberal control of Edmonton’s "foreign element". To 
"Oliver’s Galicians* were added "Oliver’s Catholics". He 
was, of course, accused of "partyism" and of selling his 
independence in return for the portfolio of the Interior 
and Edmonton’s selection as capital of the new province. As 
a veteran political fighter, quite able to take care of 

(236) Edmonton Bulletin, May 5, 1906. Free Press report. 








. , . ...... 

- •- ; .i: : ■ • • • . ' • >'• 

■ ■ : '0 

.. ' 1 

. 

. 

- * ’ ' ■■ J . 


, 

■ 

■ .<} ; % . . : . V ■ V '' ’' * 

■ • . S\’ •• ■ ’ 

. 

■ • 

■ \ , , ' ' •’ " ^' ' ' '■ 1 '■ " ^ ’ 

i fe'.< '■ ; *: ' 

i . ' ■' 1 / 


♦ V ’ ' • 











( 346 ) 


himself In the rough and tumble of political debate, he 
challenged his critics on every issue, and even carried the 
war into the enemy’s camp* (237) 

He spoke frequently in the autonomy debates. As Minis¬ 
ter of the Interior he had a particular interest in western 
lands, and warmly defended federal retention of the North 
West public domain* He was now sincerely convinced that 
western immigration could proceed efficiently only under 
Dominion control* TSmphasizing that Dominion interest in 
North West lands and resources was in n the revenue that it 
can derive from the settler who makes the land productive, w 
he declared! 

*13118 Dominion of Canada can make millions out of 
the lands of the North West, and never sell an aore; 
it has made millions out of these lands without sel¬ 
ling an acre* The increase in our customs, • • • 
in our trade and commerce, . * • in our manufactures 
is to a very large extent due to the increase in 
settlement on the free lands of the North West Terri¬ 
tories* The prosperity this Dominion is enjoying 
today (1905) is to a very large extent due to the 
fact that the lands of the North west have been giv¬ 
en away .... It is worth the while of the Dom¬ 
inion to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars in 
promoting immigration to that country and to spend 
thousands ... of dollars in surveying and admin¬ 
istering these lands and then to give them away. (23fc) 

The autonomy bills were passed in the House of Commons 

on July 5 and in the Senate on July 18. The prorogation 


(237) Edmonton Bulletin, May 19, 1905. Report from Ottawa. 

{238) Llngard, op. eit., p. 245. From Debates, H* of C., 
Canada , 1905, Vol* II, Cols* 3157-8. 



















* 












■ 


A... ■ ' . ..Iw l ■ 










■ A .. AAAA ii.A; >''■ . 

... 


- 








■ 


• • 

■ 

" , V, : . . - - V • ■ ■' 




■ 






s ;• . .. ■ . ^ . 

. 


v .A . * 








( 347 ) 


of Parliament on July 20 marked the end of the prolonged 
and controversial session noted ohiefly for the North West 
autonomy legislation. 

On September 1, 1905, in the City of Edmonton, and in 
the presence of many of the Dominions leading political 
figures including the Prime Minister himself, the formal 
inauguration of the Province of Alberta took place. (239) 

Since the days of the gold rush Oliver had displayed an 
intense interest in the Yukon, and in the late summer of 
1905 he paid a visit to that remote northern region to 
acquaint himself at first hand with its economic and ad¬ 
ministrative problems. He returned to Edmonton on Septem¬ 
ber 18, and during the succeeding weeks threw himself into 
the Alberta elections in support of the newly-fowned Alber¬ 
ta Liberal Party. (240) 

Meanwhile, on August 24, 1905, the Hon. G.H.V. Bulyea, 
prominent in Liberal circles, had been appointed Lieutenant- 
Oovernor of the new province, and on September 2 it was 

(239) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 1, 1905, The issues of the 
Bulletin during the first week of September, 1905, 
carried lengthy reports of the inauguration ceremon¬ 
ies. 

(240) Edmonton Bulletin, Sept. 21, 1905. A report of a 
lengthy interview with Oliver on his trip to the 
Yukon. 












. 



















- 






. 




■ 











( 348 ) 


announced that His Honor had called upon Mr. A.C. Ruther¬ 
ford, recent choice of the Liberals in Alberta as their 
leader, to form a government. The cabinet, gazetted Sep¬ 
tember 9, was made up of the Premier and four ministers 
including one without portfolio. The provincial elections 
were set for November 9. 

Despite the policy laid down at the Moose Jaw Convention 
in 1903, there is reason to believe that the Conservatives 
wished to oarry the principle of non-partisanship into the 
new provincial legislature. They stood at a decided dis¬ 
advantage in a straight party fight in Alberta. The Lib¬ 
erals held the dominating position. They were the party of 
autonomy and of the G.T.P., and it was evident that they 
would constitute Alberta*s pre-election administration. 

They were charged with having gerrymandered the provincial 
constituencies in their own favor; (241) they were in con¬ 
trol of government patronage and, if the Conservatives were 
to be believed, of the provincial ’’foreign” press and vote. 
As early as July the Calgary Herald charged: 

The Edmonton Bulletin is resorting to extreme 
means to arouse those people of the North who pre¬ 
fer a non-partisan government to a sense of their 
duty to Frank Oliver and the Dominion Government. 

... Those who have interested themselves in se¬ 
curing a non-partisan government for the new pro¬ 
vince have displayed a patriotic spirit which 

(241) Lingard, op. cit*, p. 230. 









. 




































. - 4 , ;; 








- 


■ ■ ■ " 






* ' ■ •■'■■■• '• 

. 








- 

■ ' 


. ^ • ■ ■' "■ " - / : •” 






4 








( 349 ) 


Oliver finds is influencing many people in the 
North as well as in other parts of the country, (242) 

The Liberals played up the Moose Jaw declaration and 
Haultain's "betrayal" of non-party administration, (243) 
Certain of success at the polls they declared themselves no 
longer bound by the non-party tradition, and in convention 
at Calgary on August 3 they formed the Alberta Liberal as¬ 
sociation, drew up a party platform, and threw down the 
gauntlet to their political opponents. The Conservatives, 
not to be outdone, convened in Red Deer on August 16 and 
formed the Alberta Provincial Conservative Association of 
which R.B. Bennett was chosen president. The Conservative 
platform stressed "provincial rights", particularly with 
reference to natural resources and education. 

The Liberal position in the campaign was one of 
attention to the development of Provincial resources 
and the maintenance of political stability; together 
with the charge that the opposition was bent upon a 
disturbing period of race and creed agitation and of 
constitutional contest in the courts; and the state¬ 
ment that it was led by a representative of corpor¬ 
ate interests in general and a friend of the C.P.R. 
monopoly in particular. The Conservative attitude 
was one of vehement protest against the province 
being deprived of educational freedom and control 
of lands; together with the charge against the Lib¬ 
eral party in Ottawa of gerrymandering the constit¬ 
uencies and, through a partisan Lieutenant-Covernor, 


(242) Edmonton Bulletin, July 13, 1905. Quoting the 
Calgary Herald . 

(243) Kdmonton Bulletin, July 6, 1905; July 7, 1905; 
July 20, 1905; July 29, 1905; Aug. 4, 1905. 













j • 








■ , . 


■ ■. 








. 


; ;f&- ' :.r ; ^ 


-feVv 1 -. 










• ..V . ■ 
















, 

, i. a : 


- 


. 






• .. r:S 
























( 350 ) 


of appointing a government which was entirely under 
the control of the Federal authorities. Of course, 
local matters of all kinds, including especially the 
location of the capital, were mixed up with the wid¬ 
er issues; while farmers' prosperity and the expected 
railway development had the effect of producing that 
satisfied feeling which is always so kindly to govern¬ 
ments in a general election. The Conservatives also 
made the charge that all kinds of Dominion government 
officials and "organizers” were being imported or 
utilized in the election to aid the Liberals. (244) 

Oliver played a leading part in the provincial election 
campaign, speaking at numerous points throughout the Pro¬ 
vince. He defended the autonomy terms and made frequent 
references to the advantages which would accrue from a 
Liberal victory. At a Thistle Rink meeting just prior to 
the election he crossed swords with w.a. Griesbach, who 
years later was to defeat him in the Edmonton constituency. 

(245) Griesbach, in criticizing Oliver, referred to him 
as "the Goliath of Alberta politics”. Oliver acknowledged 
the compliment, but added that in attacking him Griesbach 
had used, not the weapon with which David slew Goliath, but 
rather the weapon which Samson used against the Philistines. 

(246) 


(244) Canadian Annual Review , 1905, p. 239. 

(245) Oliver supported Laurier in his opposition to the 
war time conscription measure of 1917. In Canada's 
"khaki election” of 1917, Oliver was opposed by 
Griesbach in the constituency of Edmonton West. 
Oliver won a majority of the civil votes cast, but 
lost the seat to Griesbach on the strength of the 
military votes cast under the provisions of the 
Military Voters Act, 1917. ( Can. Pari, Guide , 1918, 
p. 236.) 

(248) Edmonton Bulletin, Hov. 7, 1906. 










-J 










?' n r . h 








i •' 


■ 

\ 


■ 

. .. 


• • 




■ 






it t 

■ 




X X : - v . 

; 


, 

' 

- 






■ 









(351) 

Ifce elections resulted in the return of 23 Liberals and 
2 Conservatives to the provincial legislature, lhe Con¬ 
servatives unsuccessfully challenged the results in several 
constituencies, and were quick to point out that the larger 
issues had been side-tracked by the dispute concerning the 
location of the capital, and that the "foreign element" had 
been corrupted by Liberal organizers, some of whom were 
officials of the Dominion Government. Said the Calgary 
Herald ; ^tthen the totals are all in it will be found that 
after Oliver’s Galicians and Pollocks (sic), who were voted 
like cattle by the machine, are deducted from the list, 
there will be a majority of good Canadian electors against 
the government.* (247) OSae Bulletin expressed its resent¬ 
ment of the "machine" charge as "a gratuitous insult to the 
electorate" and considered the election results as an ade¬ 
quate answer to Conservative misrepresentation. (248) 

Immediately following the election Frank Oliver, "fresh 
from the scene of the great victory in his own Province of 
Alberta, where he took an active part in the contest, speak¬ 
ing in all parts of the country," (249) returned Fast to 

(247) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 17, 1905. Quoting the 
Calgary Herald . 

(248) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 10, 1906; Nov. 14, 1905. 

(249) Edmonton Bulletin, Nov. 17, 1905. Quoting the 
Manitoba Free Press. 














MfcfU: 




■ 

*:'■• ; ' "■ j:fy' 

•; :>v vf ; . > • 

- 

■ -. ■: . >i '• ■ ■ • - 

■ - ' ‘ .v 

: i i ■■ ■ ■ ■ . ■' i 

v ■ ;. ■?< 

• I 

°.v.- - • - • ; • 


: J 




i 




. 

, 

. 

. 


■r ■-■■■ ■' 


-4 ■ *-v 











■ :#• 






■ 
















( 352 ) 


assume his duties as Minister of the Interior. Interviewed 
en route in Winnipeg he stated, regarding the Alberta tri¬ 
umph, "A decisive and overwhelming victory was just what 
was required to settle the Important questions raised dur¬ 
ing the campaign. No one can hope to raise the school 
question or racial question again alter the answer given by 
the voters in Alberta last week. The great advancement and 
growth of our western communities ... is justly attributed 
to the work of the Liberal administration. M (250) 

Oliver's prediction of a strong Liberal victory in Sas¬ 
katchewan was justified in the December elections. Haul- 
tain's forces went down to defeat in a bitterly contested 
campaign, and the Hon. Walter Scott's Liberals were sustain¬ 
ed 16 to 8 in the provincial legislature of 24 members. 

For Frank Oliver the year 1906 was one of political and 
personal triumph. He assumed the practical duties of 
Minister of the Interior with complete confidence in the 
future, and with the firm resolve to implement those poli¬ 
cies which he had so long advocated for the North west. 

(250) Kdmonton Bulletin, Nov. 17, 1905. Oliver in an 
interview with the Manitoba Free Press. 








. 

. 

T : ■ . ; " 
VN**:’ y : 'M->' ; ■' s'1'y ; ■ 

.r,f . 

v- > A 4 k: ' 


v^-' ; r-‘v.'-: 

. . . 

\UV i' ; ' ; ' : " '■'• ' •’ '■ : ' 1 • : " 

vVV :' . ■ 

'' rv■:''*•••" 

f u> t * 1 v ^ ;'. ■?.•- : , - ' ’•■•'■ 

* f' " 

• ' 

'■ , >; ■ 

£ w* ■ 1 

. 




* 


■•■ ■ ■ 






iv . 1 . ■ n : 


. 




; ■'*;■ * vs •■ ’ ;; 

v ' 


L 





















( 353 ) 


A Not© on the Career of the Hon. Frank Oliver Subsequent 

-ftj-jggg-- 


The Hon. Frank Oliver served as Minister of the Interior 
from 1905 to 1911. An energetic and able administrator, he 
re-organized the Department of Immigration, which under his 
firm supervision continued an aggressive policy of '’settling 
the West." Long the opponent of ’’indiscriminate immigra¬ 
tion”, he was responsible for framing the Immigration Act 
of 1906, a milestone in Canadian immigration legislation, 
which drastically modified the policy of Sifton in the di¬ 
rection of restricted and selective immigration. Oliver 
favored immigrants from the United Kingdom, and to a some¬ 
what lesser degree those from the Scandanavian countries, 
Holland, Belgium, France and the United States. He was un¬ 
alterably opposed to Oriental immigration. In the interests 
of securing "the right kind of settlers” for Canada he paid 
extensive visits to the British Isles, continental Europe 
and the United States. Despite the restrictive and selec¬ 
tive features of his immigration policy, which did a great 
deal to raise the quality of workers and settlers being ad¬ 
mitted into the country, the six years of his Ministry con¬ 
stituted a period of flood tide in Canadian immigration. 

Every branch of the Department of the Interior felt the 
vigor of his administration. He was responsible for the 
formulation of many important regulations and enactments 
relating to western lands, minerals and timber. His notable 
Land Bill of 1908 featured ’’land for the settler'’ and the 
sale of pre-emptions to finance the building of the Hudson 
Bay Railway. 

For five years Oliver remained the firm friend of the 
Liberal Government of Alberta which, in 1905, he had assis¬ 
ted on its way into office. In 1910, however, on the issue 
of the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway, he broke with 
the Rutherford Government and gave his support to the Lib¬ 
eral administration of the Hon. A.L. Sifton which succeeded 
it. 


Ihe Laurier Government, advocating a policy of recipro¬ 
city with the United States, went down to defeat in the gen¬ 
eral elections of 1911. Oliver*s term as Minister of the 
Interior ended with the resignation of the administration 
on October 6 of that year. Although he supported his chief 






. 




. 

, ■< • i .< •, >" 

■ ■ ■ 








. 


■ 


- ' ■ Vi : ' : • i ■ 

■ : 

> j- . ■* ' : - 

. 






l*ii i-i ■ ■ ■ ' 

■ • 






■ 




v ; . A.\‘!' Y : "• ' ' 

'V:;- - : >•' ' N;J ' : ‘ ^ : ' ' ' 

. v ■ - ■ i, ' ■ ■; ■ ■■ .. ' /? 




. ■ . ■ " • ' ■ , ' . . ^ , ■ , . • - ■'•! 

■ 

M : - %)’ * r - ':’"'" r 


- 




- , , : ' * ' • 


J w. & 






> 

















< 3 & 4 ) 


on the reciprocity issue, Oliver himself survived the gen¬ 
eral Liberal defeat. In a bitterly contested campaign, en¬ 
livened by a first class "family quarrel” among the Alberta 
Liberals, he successfully defended his seat against Vfc. A. 
Griesbach (Cons.) by an overwhelming majority. 

as a private member, the stormy petrel” of the House of 
Commons, he continued to be the unflagging advocate of wes¬ 
tern interests. Remaining staunchly loyal to Laurier in the 
troublous years of the First $orld %ar, he denounced the 
War Times Election Act of 1917 as being identified with an 
"oligarchic Aaiaerism", and opposed the formation of the 
Union Government. He supported Laurier's stand against con¬ 
scription, declaring that while calling up the manhood of a 
nation for military service was right and logical in theory, 
it was impossible of practice in Canada. 

Oliver was defeated in the constituency of Edmonton west 
in the general elections of 1917 by W. A. Griesbach (Cons.), 
a determining factor being the military votes c&at under the 
provisions of the Military Voters Act of 1917. This defeat 
ended his parliamentary career of £l years. He contested 
the constituency of Edmonton west again in 1921, but in the 
face of the rising tide of new farmers* groups in the west, 
he lost to the progressive candidate. 

In 1913 he was awarded an Honorary L.L.P. degree from the 
University of Alberta. In 1927 the Old Timers* of Alberta 
honored him by the unveiling of an Oliver Bust at the Old 
Timers* Cabin at the ^dmonton Exhibition Grounds. 

In 1924 he was appointed member of the Board of Railway 
Commissioners of Canada, retiring from active membership in 
1928 at the age of seventy-five. However, he remained with 
the Board as adviser, acting as special officer on grade 
separations. He continued "on duty" in Ottawa until his 
death there on March 31, 1933. He was interred in the City 
of Edmonton. 
















( 355 ) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The Edmonton Bulletin 
The Edmonton Journal 

Journals of the Council of the North West Territories of 

reaar"TB77-ev— msgcs* .iw;- 


Journals of the Legislative Assembly of the North West 

Territories 185$-1904’ Regina PublIshe 6 annually. 

The Canadian Parliamentary Companion Ottawa 1885-1897. 

The Canadian Parliamentary Guide Winnipeg 1898-1899 

mirnTTWI-TSM. - - 

Debates, House of Commons, Canada Ottawa Published annu¬ 
ally. 

Hopkins, J. Castell The Canadian jmnual Review of Public 

Affairs Toronto Published annually." 

Oliver, E.H. (Ed.) The Canadian North we s t; Its Early 

rieveYopmeht and Legislative Records 

Publications of the Canadian Archives 

No* 9 Ottawa 1915 2 Vol. 

Oliver, E.H. Contest Between Lieutenant-Governor Royal 
and fe^'liTigrilaFiv'e- Assembly of the North' 

West' Territories 1888-1895 Royal Society 

of Canada - Proceedings and Transactions 3rd 
Series Vol. XVII 1923. 

Ordinances of the North West Territories Printer to the 
Government of the North West Territories Regina 1878-1904. 

Morton, A.S. and Martin, C History of Prairie settlement 

and Dominion Lands Policy 

Toronto’ I 935.- 

Gibbon, John M. History of the Canadian Pacific New York 

jwsr: - -- 



























i: ■ ■ , 

‘ 









■ ■ 





' 

^ : ' " '-d. 



























( 356 ) 


Hedges, James B. Building the Canadian West; The Land and 

Colonization Polioies of €he Canadian 

£aolI’lo Railway New ^ork "4 i'oronto 1939. 

Stanley, O.F.G. The Birth of Western Canada London 1936. 

Maolnnes, C.M. In the Shadow of the Rookies London 1930. 

Black, N.F. A History of Saskatchewan and the Old North 
West Regina 1913. 

Hawkes, John The Story of Saskatchewan Chicago-Regina 

19241 — - 

Lingard, C.C. Territorial Government in Canada Toronto 

tsw. - 

Skelton, O.D. Life and Letters of Sir Wilfred Laurier 
Toronto 19£I~£Toi;- 

Dafoe, J # W. Clifford Sifton in Relation to His Times 
Toronto 1951. 

Lower, A.R.M. Colony to Nation Toronto 1946. 

Oliver, the Hon. Frank The Founding of Kdmonton Fdmonton 

1921. Recorded by the Historical 
Society of Alberta (Pamphlet) 

Oliver, the Hon. Frank The Indian Drum Published by 

Queen's University Kingston 1929. 
Copied by the Historical Society of 
Alberta (Pamphlet) 

The Beaver Published Quarterly by the Hudson's Bay Co. 
Winnipeg. 



































