Si 

*% 0 . 


For Reference 



NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


iifffci I > V i 

m't/i 


THE WATER SOLUBILITY OF SOME HIGH MOLECULAR 
WEIGHT MERCAPTANS 

by 

William G. Goward, B.Sc, 


University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta* 


April, 1951. 




CM. 


\Vy, ■ ' ■■■' A-:"- 



'!• fm \ 9 






















0JC UBM$ 

iw»Miais 









Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/watersolubilityoOOwill 




THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE WATER SOLUBILITY OF SOM HIGH MOLECULAR 
WEIGHT MERCAPTANS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES IN 


PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE 


DEGREE OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY 


by 


WILLIAM GEORGE GOWARD, B.Sc. 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 

April 7, 1951. 









ABSTRACT 


In the butadiene-styrene copolymerization reaction, 
occurring during the formation of various types of synthetic 
rubber, certain mercaptans play an important role in that they 
are used to promote and modify the reaction. The polymerization 
is carried out in a soap-water emulsion, and prior to entering 
the reaction, the mercaptan must move from an organic phase, 
across a water boundary, to the locus of reaction in a soap 
micelle* One factor expected to govern the rate of this 
migration is the solubility of the mercaptan in the water 
phase* 

In this research, attempts have been made to measure the 
water solubility of some of the mercaptans important to this 
reaction. Two methods have been used in these attempts; a 
radioactive tracer method, and an amperometric titration method. 
The solubilities of five mercaptans have been measured. The 
results obtained in moles per liter at 25°C, are as follows: 
n-octyl, 1.00 x 10 n-decyl, 1*01 x 10”^; n-dedecyl, 

1.18 x 10“^; tertiary-dcdecyl, 4.51 x 10“ 6 ; n-tetradecyl, 

2.63 x 10“ 7 , The reliability of these results has been 
estimated. 

A method of analysis, involving an amperometric 
titration, has been developed for the lead salts of the 
various mercaptans. 

In addition, investigations have been carried out 
to determine whether tertiary mercaptans will undergo an 
exchange reaction with radioactive sulfur. Inconclusive 
results were obtained from these investigations. 



























- 











■ 
















CONTENTS 


Page 

Introduction.1 

Discussion of Analytical Methods.3 

(a) Titration Methods. ....3 

(b) Activation Method.5 

(c) Tracer Method.,19 

Apparatus. .21 

Experimental. .27 

Results. 34 

Evaluation of Results..... 45 

Acknowledgement. 47 

Bibliography.. .4$ 

Appendix 

A. Analysis of Lead Mercaptides..50 

B. Nature of Lead Mercaptides in Solution..54 

C. An Exchange Reaction with S^5. ,56 
























1 


INTRODUCTION 

The group of organic compounds containing the sulfhydryl 
group, commonly known as mercaptans, particularly the aliphatic 
members of the group, have gained some importance in recent 
years in the synthetic rubber industry. 

In the emulsion copolymerization of butadiene and 
styrene, with soap as an emulsifier and potassium persulfate 
as a catalyst, the copolymerization rate at 50°C. is very 
small. The presence of small amounts of relatively high 
molecular weight mercaptans greatly promotes the copolymer¬ 
ization reaction. In the presence of the mercaptans, the 
rate of reaction is practically independent of the persulfate 
concentration within a wide range of concentrations, and 
within wide limits, it is also independent of the amount of 
mercaptan present. There is a definite indication that the 
persulfate can activate monomer molecules but these activated 
monomer molecules are poor initiators of the chain propogation 
reaction. Aliphatic mercaptans in the butadiene styrene 
recipe with persulfate as catalyst exert a strong promoting 
effect on the copolymerization, Mercaptans as promoters in 
this type of recipe are used extensively in industrial 
practice (1), 

The mercaptan present also acts as a modifier in 
the copolymerization reaction. The chain length of the 
copolymer is regulated by the addition of varying amounts 
of mercaptans, thereby modifying the properties of the 
polymer produced. The mechanism of the action of the 
























■ % 






















* 























. 






2 


mercaptans is that of transfer of chain activity, symbolized 
as follows 

R*m ♦ RSH —> R m H + RS* 

RS # + M —> RSM* 

where R • represents the activated growing polymer molecule, 

RSH represents a mercaptan molecule, and RS # , the free 
radicle from the mercaptan which, with a monomer molecule 
M, initiates the growth of a new polymer molecule (2), 

The mercaptan used is initially in solution in the 
monomer. Before the mercaptan is able to act as a chain 
transfer agent, it is essential that it be in the locus 
of reaction. It is known that at the start of polymerization, 
the soap micelles are the locus of reaction. Therefore, prior 
to the chain transfer reaction, the mercaptan must migrate 
from an oil droplet consisting of monomer, across a water phase, 
to the locus of reaction in a soap micelle or polymer particle. 

Factors expected to govern this rate of migration 
are (a) the diffusion coefficient of the mercaptan: and 
(b) the solubility of the mercaptan in the water phase. 
Experimental work on (a) has been, and Is being carried out. 

The work embodied in this thesis involves the measurement of 
the water solubility of some of the mercaptans of importance 
in the above mentioned copolymerization reaction, namely 
the primary and tertiary members of the group containing 
an even number of carbon atoms from the ten carbon molecules 
to the members containing sixteen carbon atoms. 






- 3 - 


DISCUSSION OF ANALYTICAL METHODS AVAILABLE 

(a) Titration Methods : 

D.L. Yabroff (3) has determined the water solubilities 
of some of the mercaptans up to the n-heptyl member of the 
series by means of a potentiometric method with silver nitrate 
The results obtained are shown in Table I. 

TABLE 1 

SOLUBILITY OF MERCAPTANS IN WATER AT 20°C. 

(Yabroff) 


Mercaptan 

Solubility 

(moles/lit- 

Ethyl 

1.12 X 10 -1 

n-Propyl 

2.50 x 10 -2 

n&Butyl 

6.61 x 10~ 3 

t-Butyl 

1.07 x 10" 2 

n-Amyl 

1.53 x 10“ 3 
-5 

n-Heptyl 

7 x 10 ^ 


Yabroff appears to have taken no precautions to 
prevent volatilization or oxidation of the mercaptans before 
titration. Maerov (4) das shown that neglecting these 
precautions may easily give results that are as much as 
40$ low. 

Maerov has employed the more sensitive amperometric 
titration method of Kolthoff and Harris (5) to measure the 
solubilities of various mercaptans up to the n-octyl member 
of the series. The results obtained are presented in Table II 
Also shown in Table II are the purities of the mercaptans used 
Maerov demonstrated that the presence of impurities such as 














- 4 - 


the disulfide corresponding to the mercaptan used, markedly 
lower the apparent solubility of the mercaptan. 

Adequate precautions were taken by this worker to 
prevent volatilization and oxidation of the mercaptans. As a 
result, the solubility values obtained are consistently higher 
than those of Yabroff. However, in agreement with the results 
of Yabroff, a plot of the logarithm of the solubility against 
the number of carbon atoms in the mercaptan gives a straight 
line for the primary members of the series. 

TABLE' ‘II 

SOLUBILITY OF MERCAPTANS IN WATER AT 25 °C. 

(Maerov) 


Mercaptan 

Solubility 

{moles/liter) 

fo Purity of 
Mercaptan 

Ethyl 

1.32 

X 

10” 1 

95.2 

n-Propyl 

3.07 

X 

10~ 2 

96.1 

iso-Propyl 

4. A 6 

X 

Kf 2 

91.7 

n-Butyl 

7.40 

X 

10~ 3 

99.2 

sec-Butyl 

8.80 

X 

10" 3 

96.5 

t-Butyl 

1.50 

X 

io~ 2 

91.4 

sec-Amyl 

2.76 

X 

io“ 3 

96.7 

t-Amyl 

4.05 

X 

10~ 3 

99.7 

n-Hexyl 

6.70 

X 

lO"^ 

90.9 

t-Hexyl 

1.20 

X 

10~ 3 

92.5 

t-Heptyl 

3.70 

X 

H 

o 

82.5 

n-Octyl 

1.03 

X 

10" 4 

94.5 

t-Octyl 

to 

{> 

• 

X 

10" 4 

80.4 


Since the results of Maerov appear to be reliable, one 







5 


method proposed was to extend the method to its limits. The 
method is limited, for all practical purposes by the sensitivity 
of the titration, to about n-decyl or tertiary-dodecyl mercaptans. 
This conclusion was reached by extrapolation of the results of 
Maerov to obtain approximate values of the solubilities of 
these mercaptans. 

(b) Activation Method : 

Because of its relative simplicity, an attempt was made 
to apply the method of activation analysis (6) to the problem* 

In general, the method involves the saturation of water with 
the high molecular weight mercaptan, withdrawal of a suitable 
aliquot portion onto a metal foil, conversion of the mercaptan 
to a non-volatile compound, and subsequent neutron irradiation 
of the foil and its residue in the Chalk River nuclear pile. 

The transformation expected is represented by the equation: 


32 


16° 0 n ' 15 * 1 


,32 


H- 


(7) 


Measurement of the activity of the high energy beta emitter, 

32 

, (8), compared with suitable controls containing known 
amounts of sulfur was expected to give a measure of the 
solubility of the mercaptan. 

The first problem which presented itself was that of 
converting the mercaptan to a non-volatile compound. The ease 
of oxidation of mercaptans with hydrogen peroxide in basic 
solution was investigated, with the hope that the disulfides 
so produced would be able to withstand volatilization and 
chemical decomposition during irradiation. Results were obtained 
in agreement with other workers (9), namely that primary mercaptans 
are easily oxidized, secondary with more difficulty, and tertiary 




- 6 - 


mercaptans are oxidized only with much difficulty. It was 
learned after this work was begun that the samples would have 
to withstand temperatures of about 150°C. during irradiation, and 
since the disulfide .derivatives are volatile below this 
temperature, this method of retaining mercaptan sulfur was 
discarded. 

Subsequently, studies were carried out on the stability 
of the lead derivatives. Lead was chosen because on irradiation 
with thermal neutrons, it produces no isotopes which could 
interfere with the estimation of the P^ 2 (10). Otto (11) 
reports that on pyrolysis, lead mercaptides decompose according 
to the following equation: 

Pb (SR) 2 —* PbS -+• RSR 

where R denotes an alkyl radicle. Since the sulfide produced 
is a liquid, easily volatilized at the temperature of pyrolysis, 
it was expected that the only residue would be lead sulfide. 

In order to determine the proper time and temperature 
of heating to retain the greatest amount of lead sulfide, a 
series of investigations was carried out on lead n-decyl 
mercaptide. 

The mercaptide was prepared from n-decyl mercaptan 
(Humphrey Wilkinson Inc.) and lead acetate according to the 
method of Borgstrom, Ellis, and Reid (12). The mercaptan 
was analysed for lead by igniting with concentrated sulfuric 
acid and ammonium carbonate and weighing the resulting lead 
sulfate (13)* Analysis for mercaptan content was carried out 
by dissolving a sample of the mercaptide in 14% perchloric 




























. . 








I 






* 


















. 







. 



















- 




- 7 - 


acid in 70% ethyl alcohol and titrating the resulting solution 
amperometrically with a standard solution of silver nitrate. 

The analysis showed 36.5% lead and 61.8% SR", (Theoretical, 

37.4% and 62.6% respectively). This method of analysis, modified 
somewhat, has been applied to a series of mercaptides, and is 
described more fully in the Appendix (page 50). 

TABLE III 

PYROLYSIS OP LEAD n-DECYL MERCAPTAN AT 278°C. 


Sample Size 
(grams) 

Time of 
Heating 
(min.) 

Grams of 

Sulfur 

Bound 

Grams of 

Sulfur 

Theoretical 

Percent of 

Theoretical 

Bound 

0.1766 

40 

0.0072 

0.0102 

70.6 

0.2144 

40 

0.0089 

0.0124 

71.8 

0.1417 

40 

0.0059 

0.0082 

71.6 

0.1617 

25 

0.0084 

0.0094 

89.6 

0.1463 

25 

0.0077 

0.0085 

90.4 

0.1545 

20 

0.0081 

0.0089 

90.6 

0.2276 

20 

0.0121 

0.0132 

91.9 

0.2584 

20 

0.0143 

0.0150 

95.8 


Weighed samples of the mercaptide were pyrolysed at 
278°C. for varying lengths of time, and the residue was analysed 
for inorganic sulfide sulfur by evolving hydrogen sulfide from 
it with hydrochloric acid, absorbing the gas in ammoniacal zinc 
sulfate, and titrating the resulting zinc sulfide with standard 
potassium iodate-potassium iodide in acid solution. The titrating 
solution was standardized against pure lead sulfide, using the 
same evolution procedure. Table III gives a summary of the effects 
of the various periods of heating on the mercaptide. The optimum 




time of pyrolysis at the given temperature was found to he 
twenty to twenty five minutes* Parr tomb analysis on some of the 
residues showed that only negligible quantities of organic 
sulfur remained after pyrolysis under the conditions given* 

For example, a sample heated for 25 minutes yielded 0.0165 gm* 
of inorganic sulfide sulfur while a Parr bomb analysis on 
the residue from a sample the same size, heated for the same 
length of time yielded 0*0166 gm* of sulfur* 

More prolonged heating reduced the percentage of sulfide 
sulfur, probably due to oxidation of the lead sulfide. Shorter 
times of heating left appreciable quantities of organic material** 
Although the percentage of sulfide sulfur remaining after 
pyrolysis varied between S 9.6 and 95#8, the method was considered 
to be applicable, since the overall method of analysis could 
not be expected to exceed this precision* 

The apparatus used to obtain the saturated solution 
of the mercaptan is described under Apparatus (page 21), in 
some detail* It suffices here to mention that the saturated 
solution was obtained in oxygen free water in an atmosphere 
free of oxygen* 

Due to the interference expected from chlorine from the 
nuclear reaction: 

1? C1 35 ♦ Q n 1 -> 1$ P 32 -*• 2 He 4 (10) 

all apparatus was first cleaned in an acid bath, rinsed with 
distilled Water, steamed with chloride free steam for at least 
one half hour, rinsed twice with doubly distilled conductivity 
water, and dried at 120°C, for one hour in an atmosphere as free 






from chlorine as was possible 


About 500 ml. of conductivity water was placed in the 
liter flask in a bath regulated at 25 ± 0 . 2 °C., and purified 
nitrogen was bubbled through it for one half hour. The system was 
then closed off from further contact with the air. Sufficient 
n-decyl mercaptan was introduced to the surface of the water 
so that an excess would be present after saturation. The 
liquid beneath the mercaptan layer was kept in gentle motion 
by means of a magnetic stirrer. Samples of the water solution 
of the mercaptan were withdrawn at various intervals by exerting 
a slight pressure of nitrogen over the surface of the liquid in 
the flask. These samples were transferred from the sampling 
tube into an excess of lead acetate solution contained in a 
cup formed from a lead disc one inch, in diameter. Two drops of 
a saturated solution of ammonium carbonate were added to prevent 
corrosion of the lead cups by the conductivity water. The samples 
were then evaporated to dryness under a heat lamp. Triplicate 
samples were taken at intervals over a period of 116 hours, at 
which time it was hoped that saturation had been reached. 

To calculate the size of sample needed to give a reasonable 
counting rate after as short a period of irradiation as possible, 
the following equation was used (14): 

N' = - e"**) (a) 

A 


where N f is the number of radioactive atoms produced by irradiation 
over a period of t seconds; 

f is the neutron flux in neutrons/cm,^/sec.; 

cr is the isotopic cross section for the nuclear reaction 







o 

in cm. /target atom; 

N° is the number of target atoms (assumed constant); 

is the radioactive decay constant of the isotope produced, 
related to its half life by the relation: 

= 0.693/Ti 

s 

Multiplying through by we obtain: 

A t 5 ?VN* a f <rN°(l - e _0,693t ' /T 3 ) (b) 

where A. is the amount of activity in disintegrations per second 
t 

exhibited by the atoms N f produced up to time t. 

To calculate the number of sulfur atoms which on 
irradiation for three days would produce a counting rate of 2 x 10^ 
cpm (counts per minute) at 5% geometry, it was assumed that the 
average neutron flux of the Chalk River pile was lO 1 ^ neutrons/cm. 2 
per sec.; that the cross section for the transformation was 5 x 10*” 
cm. 2 /target atom (7); and that the half life of was 14.3 days. 
Substituting these values in equation (b) and solving 
for N°, it was found that about lO 1 ^ atoms of sulfur would be 

required. Since the solubility of the mercaptan was expected 

-5 

to be about 1 x 10 moles/liter and recovery of the sulfur was 
expected to be about 30samples of approximately 0.75 ml. 

(2 x 10^ atoms) were taken for irradiation. 

Blanks consisting of the lead cups, the lead acetate 
solution, the ammonium carbonate solution, and the conductivity 
water were prepared in triplicate to determine if any of the 
resultant radioactivity could be due to these materials. Five 
controls were prepared by adding known amounts of mercaptan to 
excess lead acetate, and by treating these samples in exactly 
the same manner as the others. 
























V - 






■ 

































. 










* 

' - 






11 


The samples were then placed in an aluminum heating block 
and were heated at 278°C. for 25 minutes. The foils were then 
suitably marked for future identification and were sent to Chalk 
River to be irradiated. 

Five months later, the irradiated samples were returned 
from Chalk River. Due to a misunderstanding, the samples had 
been irradiated for 78 days instead of the recommended three days. 
As a result, an extremely strong activity was produced in the 
lead foils themselves. For example, one sample showed an activity 
of three thousand cpm when separated from the Geiger tube b 3 ^ one 
half inch of Aluminum and four inches of air. Subsequent decay 
and absorption measurements showed that this strong activity was 
probably due to an intense^ long-lived gamma radiation built up 
in the lead or its impurities by the long irradiation period. 
Further identification of the isotope producing the radiations 
was not attempted. 

Due to the fact that the beta radiations of the P^ 2 
could not be estimated in the presence of the strong gamma, 
radiations, it was decided to attempt a separation of the P^ 2 
from the extraneous material. 

The foils with their residues were dissolved in dilute 
nitric acid and equal amounts of phosphate Carrier were 
added to each sample. The phosphate Was then precipitated from 
slightly acid solution as the phosphomolybdate. The samples 
were centrifuged, the supernatant liquid decanted, and the 
yellow precipitate was washed twice with 0.1N nitric acid and 
dissolved in 2N sodium hydroxide. The resulting solutions 
were evaporated to dryness and were then transferred to 



stainless steel counting planchettes, with distilled water* The 

dried samples still showed considerable gamma activity as is shown 

in later measurements, but because of the short half life of P^ 2 

another separation was not possible, and the samples were counted 

2 

a s they were, using an aluminum absorber of 276 mg./cm* ~ thickness 
to bring the counting rate down to a suitable value. The results 
are shown in Table IV. 

All samples were counted over a period of time long 
enough to reduce the R. F. 1. to 1 % or less. R.P.E. (relative 
probable error) is defined by the following equation: 

R.P.E. = 2:.. 6 Z- (c) 

m 

where R particles are counted in any time interval. To obtain 
an accurate estimation of the activity of a radioactive sample, 
it is necessary to determine the background count, and subtract 
this from the final count obtained from the sample* The accuracy 
of the final result depends, therefore, upon the accuracy of the 

two counts that are subtracted. Statistical theory shows that 

standard 

the deviation in the final result will be (15): 

A x 

d * (Ni n 2 ) 8 (a) 

standard 

and so the relative^deviation will equal: 

D _ (N-, +• No)* 

N 1 - N 2 * 

It follows from equation (o) that the relative probable error 
will be obtained from the expression: 

R.P.E. s 0.67 (e) 

For example, the R.P.E. of the result obtained for Sample number 
10, (Table IV) if counted for 10 minutes would be 0.0054 or 0.54$. 







- 13 - 


TABLE IV. 

RESULTS OF ACTIVATION ANALYSIS 


Time of 
sampling 
(hours) 
13.3 

Sample 

Number 

6 

Sample 
Size 
(ml.) 
0.76 

cpm 

Corr. 

487 

Average 

cpm 

487 

Concentration 

(Moles/liter) 

7.8 x 10 -6 

16.6 

7 

tt 

886 




8 

ft 

(653) 




9 

It 

1198 

1042 

1.7 x 10 -5 

16.3 

10 

tt 

1489 

1489 

2.4 x 10" 5 

22.5 

14 

0.77 

1409 




15 

tt 

1044 

1227 

1.9 x 10“ 5 

41.3 

16 

t? 

2478 




17 

tt 

2160 




18 

tt 

(1389) 

2319 

3.7 x 10 -5 

43.3 

19 

tt 

(1254) 




20 

tt 

1923 




21 

tt 

2004 

1964 

3.1 x 10~ 5 

61.3 

23 

tt 

2010 




24 

it 

2050 

2030 

3.2 x 10" 5 

115 

25 

n 

1898 




26 

tt 

2108 




27 

tt 

1870 

1959 

3.1 x 10“ 5 

116 

28 

« 

1997 




29 

tt 

(2591) 




30 


2118 

2058 

3.3 x 10“ 5 


41 

Controls 
0.75 1728 




42 

ft 

(3089) 




43 

tt 

2203 




44 

tt 

1409 

1780 

2.9,x 10-5 
(known ) 





All results were corrected for the resolving time of the G-eiger 
tube, using the expression ( 15 ): 


N = 


n 


(f) 


1 - nt 

where N is the true counting rate in cpm. 

n is the observed counting rate in cpm. 
and t is the resolving time in minutes, found to be 1.1 x 10 *"^ 
minutes for the tube used* 

Table IV shows that the series of samples was incomplete; 

that is, results from samples 1 to 5 , 11 to 13 , 22 , 31 to 39 , and 

45 to 47 are missing. Samples 31 to 39 and 45 to 47 were blanks 

on the reagents and foils. These samples showed an unreasonably 

high activity, and so in the attempt to correlate the final 

results, they were not used. No explanation can be advanced 

for these anomolous results. 

Samples 1, 11, 13, and 22 were used for further 

experimental work involving separation and identification of 
32 

the P present, Results from this work are described later 
(page 15 ). 


In the column showing the corrected cpm, those results 
enclosed in brackets were not used in computing the average 
cpm. It is realized that this is not sound analytical practice, 
but the exclusion of these figures from the calculations may 
be justified if it is understood that an attempt was being 
made to ascertain whether the method should be used or 

discarded. 

The expected solubility of the mercaptan used was 
about 1 x 10 “^ moles /liter; the result obtained from the 




activation analysis was 3.2 x 10 ^ moles/liter. 

Absorption measurements were carried out on samples 
13 and 22. These measurements were made by gradually increasing 
the thickness of aluminum between the sample and the Geiger tube, 
cpm being measured with each increase in thickness. A set of 
calibrated aluminum absorbers was used. The results of the 
absorption measurements on sample 22 are shown in Table V. 

A plot of log cpm vs thickness of absorber used is shown in 
Figure 1. The curve obtained levels off at 282 cpm, and this 
value was not appreciably decreased by interposing more absorbers 
between the sample and the tube. This activity was attributed 
to a relativelyenergetic gamma radiation. The figures in the 
third column were obtained by subtracting the value for the 
gamma radiation, 282 cpm. from the total cpm values. A logarithmic 
plot of the values obtained vs absorber thickness gave the straight 
line shown in Figure 1. This straight line indicates the 
presence of a pure beta emitting radioactive isotope. A plot of 
these values vs thickness of absorber is shown in Figure 2. The 
curve obtained intersects the horizontal axis at a value of 

p 

770 mg./cm. of aluminum. This indicates that the beta particles 

emitted by the isotope present are completely stopped by a 
thickness of aluminum equal to 770 mg./cm/. The accepted 
value for P^ is 799 mg./cm. . (16). Thus, reasonably conclusive 
evidence was obtained that was present in the samples. 

Half life measurements were attempted on sample 11, 
but due to the relatively long half life of the gamma radiation 
present, no conclusive results -were obtained. 





- 16 


TABLE’ V 


ABSORPTION MEASUREMENTS 


Thickness 

of 

cpm 

Al Absorbs 

sr 

(corr.) 

(mg./cm." 

’) 


170 


4495 

214 


3337 

276 


2267 

359 


1372 

445 


865 

573 


496 

660 


385 

783 


324 

969 


282 

969 


282 

1200 


289 

1640 


282 


Although a value ha 


ON SAMPLE 22 
e pm- 

corrected for 
gamma radiations 

4213 

3053 

1985 

1080 

583 

214 

103 

42 


been obtained for the solubility 


of n-aecyl mercaptan, due to the fact that this value was 
obtained in complete disregard of the Irradiated blanks and 
of some of the values obtained, the method must be considered 
as having failed. The failure can be attributed primarily to 


the long irradiation period, which made the samples too active 
to accomplish an accurate estimation of the content. 
According to the most reliable sources (10), lead should not 
develop any radioactivity on bombardment with neutrons, so 


it must be concluded that the gamma radiations arose from 
impurities present. Since the lead used for the sample cups 
was of a very high purity, no identification of the impurities 



- 17 - 



THICKNESS M 6/ / Cm 2 
OF Al 




































































18 - 



THICKNESS My Cw 2 
OF Al 

F IGURE 2 




















































present was attempted. 

However, since the gamma radiations proved to have a 
relatively large half-life, it follows that they would not be 
produced in appreciable quantities during an irradiation period 
of about three days, and so lead still appears to be the best 
backing for the samples. 

Due to the length of time involved in carrying out the 
trial of the activation method, another attempt was not made to 
determine whether a shorter irradiation period would give better 
results. 

(< 3 ) Tracer Method : 

Because a method involving the use of radioactivity 
seemed necessary for the measurement of the small amounts of 
sulfur encountered, it was decided to attempt a tracer method 
employing S-^. 

Since the carbon sulfur bond in a primary mercaptan 
is relatively strong, no exchange with could be expected 
to result from simply heating the mercaptan with active 
hydrosulfide. This conclusion is borne out by Tuck (17), 
who reports no exchange on heating cysteine at 100°C. with 
active sulfide. There is, however, a possibility of exchange 
with tertiary mercaptans, since their carbon sulfur bond is 
quite weak. 

The only method of introducing s35 into primary 
mercaptans seemed to be by direct synthesis. Ellis and 
Reid (IB) have prepared primary mercaptans up to secondary 
nonyl by reacting the corresponding bromide with sodium or 




20 


potassium hydrosulfide in anhydrous ethanol. Noller and G-ordon 
(19) reacted the bromide with sodium sulfide and sulfur in 
water and methanol and then reduced the resulting disulfide 
with zinc and sulfuric acid. Other methods of preparation are 
available, but that of Ellis and Reid seemed to be the most 
readily adaptable to the problem. 

The radiations of are quite weak (173 kev.) (20) 
and any estimation of it with counting devices usually involves 
the use of corrections for self absorption. This troublesome 
factor was eliminated by using very small portions of the 
radioactive material, so that virtually a point source was 
employed for estimation of activity. 

A saturated solution of the mercaptan was obtained 
as described previously, samples were withdrawn into alcoholic 
ammoniacal hydrogen peroxide and the disulfide so produced, 
was counted. Calibration curves were constructed using known 
amounts of the active mercaptan, and from these, apparent 
solubility was calculated. 

The amperometric titration method was extended to its 
limit by using a sensitive electronic microammeter. The values 
obtained served as a partial check on the tracer method. 



21 


APPARATUS 

The apparatus used to obtain the saturated solution 
of mercaptan is shown in Figure 4. 

"A" is a 500 or 1000 ml. three necked round bottomed 
flask in which the saturated solution of mercaptan is prepared. 

"B" is a plastic covered magnetic stirring bar driven 
by the motor and magnet "C tf . 

”D tT is a ground glass dropper fitted to the flask 
to introduce the mercaptan to the water surface without 
introducing air into the system. 

"E" is the combined nitrogen inlet and sample outlet. 
,f F ,f is an inlet to provide a positive pressure of 
nitrogen over the solution to force samples through f, E" into 
the sampling burette 

Figure 4A illustrates the apparatus employed in the 
synthesis of the mercaptans containing 

"A" is a burette used to introduce oxygen free 
phosphoric acid into the flask n B tf which contained the radio¬ 
active sulfur in the form of barium sulfide. 

tf C tf is the reaction flask fitted with a glycerol seal 
carrying a stirrer n D ,f , and a reflux condenser n E ft fitted with 
a dropping funnel "F”, through which the alkyl bromide was 
introduced. 

,f Gr ft is a gas bubbler, containing a solution of sodium 
hydroxide to absorb excess hydrogen sulfide. 

,T H", a two way stopcock, provided a means of directing 
the hydrogen sulfide either to the waste bubbler or to the 




22 



Figure4<a) 

















































































- 23 - 


reaction flask. 

Figure 5 is a photograph of the counting apparatus used 
to estimate the radioactivity of the sample. 

,T A tf is an Atomic Instrument Company scale of 64, 
fitted with a pulse register Tr B". 

r, C tf is a Castle 1 constructed so as to provide a 
shield of lead two inches thick on all sides of the G-eiger 
tube to cut down background radiations. Figure 5A shows 
the castle with its door opened, revealing the G-eiger tube 
mounted on a lucite tray holder, constructed so as to maintain 
a constant geometry for all samples. 

"D" is a preamplifier, which as its name implies, 
amplifies the pulses before they enter the scale of 64. 

n E w and ft F ft are respectively, an electrostatic 
voltmeter, and a variable high voltage supply. The line 
voltage was stabilized with a Sola constant voltage transformer. 

Figure 5B shows a schematic diagram of the counting 

circuit. 

The self quenching Geiger tube used to estimate 
was obtained from the National Research Council laboratories. 

The Geiger-Muller region of its characteristic curve, is shown, 
as determined in Figure 6* 

The tube used to count the soft beta particles of 
was an end window Tracerlab TGC-2 tube. The window had a 
thickness of 1.4 mg./cm. 2 , and as is shown in Figure 6, the 
tube possessed a satisfactory plateau. 


An electronic microammeter, manufactured by the W.S. 





24 - 




Figure 53 


















































































C PM X 10 


25 - 



Figure 6 






































































26 - 


MacDonald Company, Cambridge, Mass*, capable of measuring, 
currents as small as 0*01 microamperes was used to extend 
the amperometric titration method to n-decyl and tert*-dodecyl 
mercaptans. 

MATERIALS 

The bromides used in the mercaptan synthesis were 
Eastman Kodak white label chemicals with the exception of 
n-decyl bromide which was prepared from Eastman Kodak n-decyl 
alcohol, hydrobromic acid, and sulfuric acid according to the 
method given in Organic Synthesis (21). 

Normal octyl, and decyl mercaptans were obtained from 
the Connecticut •«» Hard Rubber Company and Humphrey Wilkinson 
Inc. respectively. Tertiary dodecyl mercaptan was obtained 
from the Phillips Petroleum Company. 

Ten millicuries of S vy was obtained from Chalk River 
in the form of sulfate in acid solution. This solution was 
diluted to 50 ml. with distilled water to give a solution 
containing one millicurie of S*" in 5 ml.. 







EXPERIMENTAL 


( a ) Tracer Lethod: 

35 

To 5 ml. of the S solution was added sufficient carrier 
gulfe/te, in the form of sodium sulfate solution, to give 0,10 gm. 
of barium sulfate. The solution was then made Q.01M in hydrochloric 
acid, and 7.0 ml. of 0.1M barium, chloride solution was added to 
the hot solution. After digestion overnight, the barium sulfate 
was filtered off and ignited in a porcelain boat. Since this 
barium sulfate had an activity of about 10 me. (millicuries) 
per gram, an activity not readily measurable with the apparatus 
at hand, no accurate estimation of its activity was carried out* 

The barium sulfate was then reduced to the sulfide 
by heating at 1000°G, under hydrogen in a tube furnace. Wells 
(22) reports that in a reduction of this type, much hydrogen 
sulfide is formed at 600-70Q°C. but that at 1000°C., 94$ of 
barium sulfide and only 6$ of barium oxide is obtained. These 
figures were checked by reducing inactive barium sulfate with 
hydrogen in a quartz tube. It was found, by titrating the 
residues produced with standard potassium iodide-potassium iodate 
solution, that about 94% of barium sulfide was produced when 
the barium sulfate was heated up to 1000°C. under nitrogen, 
reduced for one hour with hydrogen at this temperature, and then 
cooled under nitrogen. However, since the remaining 6$ was 
reduced to barium oxide, the issuing gases were passed through 
a bubbler containing 2.0 ml. of B! sodium hydroxide to trap any 
hydrogen sulfide present. 

The active barium sulfide was placed, with the sodium 






28 


hydroxide from the bubbler, in the generator flask shown 
in Figure 4A. Carrier barium sulfide was placed in the flask 
to bring the total amount of barium sulfide to 3.86 gm*, the 
minimum amount required as shown by analysis of the reactants 
and products of synthesis using inactive sulfide. 

0.4 gm. of sodium was dissolved in 10 ml. of 
anhydrous ethanol in the reaction flask, and 8.0 ml. of 
oxygen free 1.0M phosphoric acid was run into the gas generator 
over a period of one half hour. The hydrogen sulfide so 
produced was bubbled into the sodium ethoxide solution to 
produce a solution saturated with active sodium hydrosulfide. 
Then 0.01 moles of n-decyl bromide was run into the reaction 
mixture through the dropping funnel on the reflux condenser. 
Over a period of one hour, the rest of the hydrogen sulfide 
was run into the reaction mixture, which was gently agitated 
with the stirrer to keep excess sodium hydrosulfide from 
settling out of solution. The reaction mixture was then 
boiled under reflux for one hour. The system was then 
swept out with nitrogen to displace any free hydrogen sulfide 
into the waste bubbler. The reaction mixture was diluted v T ith 
water and extracted with 20 ml. of ether. The ether extract 
was washed with water, dried, and the ether was evaporated. 

The mercaptan was distilled under vacuum (B.Pt. 120-123°C. at 
15 mm. uncorrected). The yield was 0.71 gm. or The 

remainder of the reaction mixture was combined with the 
contents of the bubbler and set aside for recovery of the 
excess active sulfide. 







- 29 - 


N-dodecyl and n-tetradecyl mercaptans were prepared 
in exactly the same manner, except that for the tetradecyl 
member, the period of refluxing was found to be unnecessary. 
The yield of n-dodecyl was 48$, and that of n-tetradecyl was 
53 fo (B. Pts. 144-147°C.at 15 mm. and 175-17S°C. at 22 mm. 
respectively.). 

Since runs performed previously, using inactive 
sulfide, indicated that the mercaptan obtained by this method 
contained 100% of the theoretical amount of mercaptan sulfur 
within 4%, a standard solution of mercaptan was prepared by 
simply weighing out sufficient mercaptan to give the required 
concentration and making up to volume w r ith an alcohol water 
mixture. This solution was diluted to a concentration 
comparable to that of the saturated solution to be obtained, 
and was used to construct a calibration curve, showing the 
activity produced by varying amounts of mercaptan. To 
construct this curve, in the case of n-decyl mercaptan for 

example, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 ml. samples of a 

-5 

1.17 x 10 M solution of the mercaptan were run into stainless 
steel counting planchettes containing a fixed excess of 
ammoniacal hydrogen peroxide. The samples were evaporated 
to dryness and were counted with the apparatus described. 

Since a very small amount of material was present, no 
correction for self absorption of the weak beta particles 
was necessary. The activity in cpm. was plotted against 

moles of mercaptan present to give the calibration curve. 

8 

About 0.4 gm. {10 times excess) of the mercaptan 









. 

• * : . 

• 

- 
















was then introduced onto the surface of about 400 ml. of 
oxygen free distilled water in the flask of the solubility 
apparatus shown in Figure 4* The aqueous layer was kept in 
constant gentle motion with the magnetic stirring apparatus 
shown. At various time intervals, duplicate or triplicate 
samples of 1.0 or 2.0 ml. were withdrawn from the aqueous 
layer into the sampling burette by exerting a slight pressure 
of nitrogen above the solution. These samples were run into 
the same fixed excess of ammoniacal hydrogen peroxide as 
above, were evaporated to dryness and counted under the 
same conditions as above. This process was continued until 
saturation of the aqueous layer was attained. The saturation 
concentration was then read directly from the previously 
constructed calibration curve. With the n-dodecyl and 
n-tetradecyl mercaptans, saturation was reached in about 
20 hours. Constant readings were then obtained for about 
12 hours, and then the concentration was found to rise 
rapidly. This is in accordance with the behavior observed 
by Maerov (4), and will be discussed later. Contrary to 
expectation , this phenomen^Bwas not observed for n-decyl 
mercaptan. 

To obtain a higher activity to offset the effect 
of the lower solubilities of n-dodecyl and n-tetradecyl 
mercaptans, the amount of used in their synthesis was 
increased to 2 me. Notwithstanding this increase in activity, 

the time involved in estimation of the aliquots of the 
saturated solution of the n-tetradecyl mercaptan proved 







, ' 









- 31 - 

to be very long . It must be understood that the method 
is limited only by the difficulties encountered in manipulating 
larger amounts of the radioactive isotope and presumably,the 
solubility of as high a member as n-octadecyl mercaptan could 
be determined provided that it could be synthesized with a 
high enough activity. 

Because the tertiary members of the mercaptan series 

are difficult to synthesize, an attempt was made to introduce 
35 

into tertiary dodecyl mercaptan by means of an exchange 
reaction. The methods used are discussed in the Appendix 
(page 5$* The solubility of the active mercaptan obtained was 
measured by preparing a saturated water solution of it as above, 
withdrawing aliquots of the solution into excess alcoholic 
lead acetate and estimating the activity of the resulting 
mercaptide. Since the mercaptan had a relatively low activity, 
it was necessary to withdraw aliquots as large as 10 ml. for 
counting purposes. This necessitated the use of large counting 
dishes, making a constant geometry difficult to obtain* However, 
as shown in the results, this does not account fully for the 
anomalous result obtained for the solubility of this mercaptan. 

(b) Titration Method : 

The amperometric titration method used by Maerov ( 4 ) 
involved the withdrawal of aliquots of the saturated solution 
of mercaptan into excess standard silver nitrate solution and 
subsequent back titration of the excess with a standard iodide 
solution. This procedure was simplified by withdrawing the 
samples into a burette and using them to titrate a standard 








- 32 - 


solution of.silver nitrate directly. 

Solubility determinations were carried out on 
n-octyl mercaptan, using the method of Maerov and the modified 
method. In the modified method, samples were withdrawn into 
the sampling burette and were used to titrate 10.0 ml. of 
1.00 x 10 Sff silver nitrate. The tip of the sampling burette 
was immersed in the silver nitrate contained in the titration 
vessel so as to introduce the mercaptan solution directly into 
the titration mixture without exposure to the atmosphere. 
Saturation was reached in about 8 hours. 

Using the MacDonald microammeter described, this 
method was extended to obtain solubility values for n-decyl 
and tertiary dodecyl mercaptans. 

The n-decyl mercaptan used for one run was prepared 
in exactly the same manner as that used in the tracer method. 
The decyl mercaptan used in another run was prepared by a 
different method, in that during its synthesis, the ether 
extract of the reaction mixture was washed with 2.5 M sodium 
hydroxide solution. As is shown in the results, this alkaline 
wash affected the purity and the solubility of the mercaptan to 
a marked extent. Presumably, such treatment removes impurities 
such as lower mercaptans and hydrogen sulfide. 

An attempt was also made to determine whether these 
impurities could be removed from the mercaptan by a f, water 
extraction”. A saturated solution was obtained with the 
supposedly contaminated mercaptan, that is, the decyl mercaptan 
that had not been extracted with alkali during synthesis; the 






- 33 - 


aqueous layer was then removed from beneath the residual 
mercaptan in the flask, and fresh water was introduced to 
obtain a second saturated solution from the same portion of 
mercaptan. Saturation was achieved more rapidly in the first 
case • 

Solubility values were also obtained for commercial 
n-decyl mercaptan and for the same mercaptan after it had been 
extracted twice with 2.5M sodium hydroxide and vacuum distilled. 

The commercial tertiary dodecyl mercaptan was twice 
vacuum distilled before use. As was expected, saturation 
was achieved in a relatively short time, and the concentration 
did not rise after saturation because the tertiary mercaptans 
are oxidized with more difficulty than the corresponding 
primary members of the series. 



EXPERIMENTAL DATA AND RESULTS 


( a ) Tracer Method : 

Figure 7 shows the calibration curves obtained for 
n-decyl, dodecyl, and tetradecyl mercaptans, They were constructed 
as described (page 29 ) by counting aliquot parts of 1.17 x 10"^, 
4.20 x 10~^, and 3*40 x 10“^ molar solutions respectively. 

Since the amounts of the samples used were very small, self 
absorption was expected to be negligible and the curves were 
therefore expected to be linear. This was not found to be 
the case; although best fit straight lines could be drawn 
through the points obtained, it was thought better to draw 
smooth, point to point curves. 

Table VI shows the data obtained from solubility 
runs on n-decyl, dodecyl, and tetradecyl mercaptans. Time 
was measured in hours from the moment of introduction of the 
mercaptan into the solubility apparatus. The activity data 
are the average of at least two samples counted to an accuracy 
of at least one percent with the exception of some of the 
weaker samples from the solution of the n-tetradecyl mercaptan 
which, due to their low activity, were counted to an accuracy 
of about three percent. 

Figure 8 shows the time concentration curves for 
the three mercaptans. These curves were obtained from the 
data of Table IV by reading concentration from the calibration 

curves. Although not shown on the graph, the concentration 

-7 

of n-tetradecyl rose to 7.5 x 10 within 4$ hours. 

The final solubility values for the mercaptans were 







- 35 


obtained by averaging the values of the points lying within 
the plateau regions of the time concentration curves. The 
final values are shown in Table VII. 


TABLE VI 

SOLUBILITY DATA 


n-decyl 


n-dodecyl 


n-tetradecyl 


Time 

(hours) 

Sample Size 
(ml.) 

Average 

cpm/ml. 

1.3 

1.00 

23 

4.3 

it 

36 

6.0 

tt 

39 

13.3 

t» 

55 

22.5 

Tt 

74 

25.3 

ft 

77 

30.0 

ff 

97 

51.0 

ft 

98 

61.0 

tf 

95 

4.3 

ff 

8 

6.5 

ft 

13 

12.3 

ft 

27 

22.3 

ff 

28 

26.2 

ft 

29 

32.4 

ff 

30 

46.3 

ft 

43 

51.5 

tf 

54 

5S.0 

ff 

58 

4.7 

ff 

5 

20.8 

ft 

17 

27.3 

ff 

16 



- 36 - 


Table VI continued 


Time 

Sample Size 

Average 

(hours) 

(ml.) 

cpm/ml. 

tetradecyl 29*6 

2.00 

17 

(c ont.) 



4S.5 

ft 

28 

53.B 

1.00 

49 

60.0 

ft 

241 


TABLE VII 


SOLUBILITY - 

0B PRIMARY MERCAPTANS 

Tracer Method 


Mercaptan 

Solubility 

Time to 

(moles/liter at 25°C) Saturation 



(hours) 

n-decyl 

1.01 x 10" 5 

30 

n-dodecyl 

1.18 x 10 -6 

12 

n-tetradecyl 

2.63 x 10 -7 

20 


It is evident from the above data that the time to 
achieve saturation follows no set pattern* This is probably 
due to the variations in the stirring speed of the magnetic 
stirrer and in the variations in the purity of the three 
mercaptans used. Maerov (4) postulates from considerations 
of the chemical potential of the mercaptan phase, that the purer 
the mercaptan, the more rapidly is saturation achieved and the 
greater the apparent solubility* As was stated in the 
Experimental section (page 29), the mercaptans prepared 
contained 100 ± L$ of the theoretical amount of mercaptan 
sulfur. That is, a mercaptan could contain 101$ of the 
theoretical amount of mercaptan sulfur because lower members 
of the series, not readily identifiable, could be present. 














C PM 


3 ? - 



MOLES OF MERCAPTAN 

O X 10 CTETRADECYL), 10 (DOOECYL);^XIO (DECYL). 

Figure 7 
























































<•» X 10 (DFCYL) 

CONCENTRATION (MOLES/LITEP *10 6 (DODECYL) 




- 38 - 
































- 39 - 

Because this is the largest error introduced into the procedure, 
the overall error of the method should be less than However, 

investigations carried out on the effect of purity on solubility, 
indicate that the accuracy of the results cannot be calculated 
until further work is carried out along these lines. 

The value obtained for the solubility of tertiary 
dodecyl mercaptan, using active mercaptan produced by an 
exchange reaction, was 1.09 x 10”^ moles / liter, while the 
value obtained by the amperometric titration method for this 
mercaptan was 4.51 x 10“^ moles/liter. It is impossible to 
explain this large discrepancy solely on the basis of difficulty 
of counting the weak samples of the saturated solution; 
consequently both values must be accepted, the first, however, 
with some reservation. 

(b) Titration Method : 

The concentration-time curves obtained by using the 
amperometrical. titration method are shown in Figures 9 and 10. 

Curve A, Figure 9, for n-octyl mercaptan was obtained 
using the method of Maerov, wherein the mercaptan samples from 
the saturated solution are run into excess standard silver 
nitrate solution and the excess is back titrated with standard 
potassium iodide solution. Curve B for n-octyl mercaptan was 
obtained using the modified method used for all the rest of 
the solubility measurements described here. The mercaptan 
solution was used to titrate a standard solution of silver 
nitrate directly as previously described (page 32 ). The 
two methods were found to check closely. 


Curve A, Figure 10, for n-decyl mercaptan was obtained 




Jtl0 4 tN-0CTYL)(B) 


- 40 - 



FigureS 



























\ 


- 41 - 





16 0 


5 O CD 


0 

O O 


CONCENTRATION 

\/S 

time 

AMPEROMETRIC 

TITRATION 

METHOD 

©-A 


0©i> 


80 

TIME(HOURS) 


120 


Fig URL 10 



































































using n-decyl mercaptan prepared by the usual method, except 
that the ether extract of the reaction mixture (page 28 ) 
was washed with 2.5M sodium hydroxide solution. The mercaptan 
was analysed and was found to be 78% pure. Curve B, Figure 10, 
was obtained using n-decyl mercaptan prepared entirely by the 
usual method; that is, the mercaptan was not extracted with 
sodium hydroxide. Analysis of the mercaptan showed it to be 
98% pure. Curve C, Figure 10, was obtained using the same 
mercaptan that had been used to obtain curve B. The saturated 
solution was removed after B was complete and fresh oxygen free 
water was run in under the mercaptan. The curve was then 
obtained in exactly the same manner as before. 

The solubility data obtained by the amperometric 
titration method are tabulated in Table VIII. Shown also 
in this table are two results for n-decyl mercaptan not 
illustrated graphically. The first is for commercial n-decyl 
mercaptan. The second is for the same mercaptan after it 
had been extracted twice with 2.5 M sodium hydroxide and 
then vacuum distilled 

TABLE VIII 

SOLUBILITY OF MERCAPTANS 
Amperometric Titration Method 


Mercaptan Percent 
Purity 

Purification 

Treatment 

Solubility Time 
(moles/liter at 
25°C.) 

to Saturation 
(hours) 

n-octyl 

94.5 

none 

0.99 x 10“ 4 
(indirect titration) 

n-octyl 

94.5 

none 

1.00 x 10" 4 
(direct titration) 

3 

n-decyl 

(A) 

78.0 

ether extract 2.69 x 10"^ 

washed with NaOH 

10 




. It 





- 43 


Table VIII (continued) 

Mercaptan % Purity Purification Solubility Time to Saturation 

n-decyl 93.0 ether extract 6.73 x 10"^ 33 

(B) unwashed 

n-decyl — Tt water extracted Tt 1.13 x 10~^ 34 

(C) 

_7 

n-decyl 93 none 1.06 x 10 38 

(commercial) 

n-decyl 80 extracted with 7.65 x 10"^ 30 

(purified NaOH 

commercial) 

The effect of the sodium hydroxide wash seems to be 
to remove some of the lower mereaptans present as impurities, 
and particularly^dissolved hydrogen sulfide. Thus a mercaptan 
not washed with sodium hydroxide during purification, might 
analyse 100$? pure from the standpoint of mercaptan sulfur 
present, while containing lower molecular weight mereaptans 
and hydrogen sulfide. The results show that such a mercaptan 
exhibits a higher solubility than one which has had these 
impurities wholly or partially removed. When purification 
has been carried out and the mercaptan is shown to contain 
considerably less than the theoretical amount of mercaptan 
sulfur, it must be assumed that the remaining product consists 
of mercaptan and other impurities not easily identifiable. 

The above line of reasoning is borne out by the 
results showm, The 73% pure n-decyl mercaptan showed a 
solubility of 2.69 x 10"^ moles/liter, while the 93% pure 
mercaptan showed a solubility of 6.73 x 10“ J and 1.13 x 10”^ 
moles/liter. It is admitted that curves B and C were not too 



- 44 - 


well defined but they are probably indicative of the true 
situation. The same sort of results as shown in Table VIII 
were obtained for commercial and purified commercial n-decyl 
mercaptans. 

It was anticipated that, by carrying out two 
saturations with the same portion of mercaptan, as was done 
for curves B and C, the results would show that the first 
saturation or "water extraction" would remove the greater 
part of the lower mercaptans and hydrogen sulfide, and 
thereby lower the saturation value of the second "water 
extraction". This was not found to be the case. As the results 
show, the second value obtained was considerably higher than 
the first. 

The result obtained for tertiary-dodecyl mercaptan 
was found to be approximately that expected. Saturation 
was reached in a short time and no rise in concentration 
after saturation occurred. 



- k3 - 


EVALUATION OF RESULTS 

The various results obtained by the titration 
method, wherein n-decyl mercaptan was partially purified 
before its solubility was measured, impose an indefinite 
error on all the results obtained. 

Impurities in the mercaptan appear to have two 
opposite effects on its apparent solubility. The first 
effect, caused by the impurities such as lower mercaptans 
and hydrogen sulfide, brings about an increase in the 
apparent solubility because of the greater solubility of 
these impurities. The second effect, caused by the impurities 
other than the above mentioned, would appear to bring about a 
decrease in the apparent solubility. From a consideration of 
the chemical potential of the mercaptan phase and the water 
phase, it can be shown that impurities such as the corres¬ 
ponding disulfide for example, in the mercaptan phase, lower 
the apparent solubility of the mercaptan. More simply, the 
system may be considered as having three phases, wherein the 
mercaptan is much more soluble in the phase consisting of 
impurities than it is in the water phase. That is, the mercaptan 
is extracted from the water phase by the tT impurity phase”. 

Notwithstanding these conclusions, it is felt that 

since most mercaptans as used in industrial processes compare 

here 

in purity to the unpurified compounds used^, the results 
obtained from these compounds are of some practical value. 

If more accurate results are required, each mercaptan would 
have to be extensively purified immediately before use, 







3 • • ---'v - 
















































perhaps by recrystallization of the lead derivative and 
vacuum distillation of the free mercaptan. 

The two methods, tracer and amperometric, have been 
purposely overlapped in order to obtain a check on the tracer 
method. The values obtained by the two methods compare quite 
well for n-decyl mercaptan, and thus show that the tracer 
method is as reliable as the amperometric titration method. 

The explanation proposed for the increase in 
concentration after saturation is reached, is that some of 
the mercaptan in solution is oxidized to the corresponding 
disulfide, which, being more insoluble than the mercaptan, 
separates from the solution to form an emulsion with the 
aqueous layer. This emulsion then takes up more mercaptan 
because of the unlimited solubility of the mercaptan in 
the disulfide. The phenomenon probably depends then, on 
the amount of oxygen in the aqueous layer, and therefore, 
could not be expected to occur consistently, as is shown 
by the fact that it was not exhibited by the n-decyl mercaptan. 
-Since the tertiary mercaptans are oxidized with much greater 
difficulty than the corresponding primary members, they 
should not exhibit this phenomenon at all, which conclusion is 
borne out by the results obtained for tertiary dodecyl mercaptan. 


- 






. 

. 

. 


































- 47 - 


A CKNO\LEDGEKENT 

The author wishes to express his sincere 
appreciation and gratitude to Dr, W.E. Harris, whose 
helpful advice and assistance have greatly facilitated 
the carrying out of this research. 

Grateful acknowledgement is made to Dr. D.B. 
Scott and other members of the Department of Physics 
who gave freely of their knowledge in connection with 
the work involving radioactive isotopes. 

Grateful acknowledgement is made to the 
National Research Council of Canada for research 
grants enabling the author to carry on this investigation. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

(1) Kolthoff, J.M. and Harris, L'.L.:- J. Polymer Sci., 

2, 41 (1947). 

(2) Kolthoff, I.L. and Harris, H.E.:-' I. Polymer Sci., 

2, 49 (1947). 

(3) Yabroff, D.L.:- Ind. Eng. Chem., J32, 257 (1940). 

(4) Maerov, S.B.:- Progress Report, Meeting #12, Proceedings 

of the Research Subcommittee, March 1949. 

(5) Kolthoff, I.M. and Harris, Y/.E.:- Ind. Eng. Chem., Anal. 

Ed., 18, 61 (1946). 

(6) Boyd, G.E.s- Anal. Chem., 21^ 335 (1949). 

(7) Goodman, C.: "Science and Engineering of Nuclear Power” 

Addison-Wesley Press Inc., Cambridge, Mass., (1947). 

(8) Siegbahn, K.:- Phys. Rev., 70, 127 (1946). 

(9) Schbberl, A.:- Ber., 70B,1186 (1937). 

(10) Seaborg, G.T.:-Rev. Mod. Phys., 16 1-32 (1944). 

(11) Otto; Ber., 1£, 1289 (1880)^j. Chem, Soc.,Abstr.,796(1880). 

(12) Borgstrom, Ellis and Reid:- J. Am. Chem. Soc., jLL, 3649 (1929). 

(13) Shriner, R.L.:-"Quantitative Analysis of Organic Compounds” 

Page 30, Edwards Bros. Inc., Ann Arbor, Mich. (1947). 

(14) Boyd, G.E.s- Anal. Chem., 21, 336 (1949). 

(15) Lapp, R.E. and Andrews, H.L.:-"Nuclear Radiation Physics”, 

Prentice-Hall Inc., N.Y., (1948). 

(16) Glendinen, L.E.:- Nucleonics, 2, 12 (1948). 

(17) Tuck, J.:- J. Chem. Soc., . 1292 (1939). 

(18) Ellis and Reid;-J. Am. Chem. Soc., 54 1686 (1932). 

(19) Noller and Gordon:- I. Am. Chem. Soc., j>£, 1090 (1933). 

(20) Yaffe, L. and Justus, K.:- Can. Jour. Research, 26B, 734 (1948). 

( 21 ) Kamm, 0. and Marvel, C.S.:- J. Am. Chem. Soc., L2, 299 (1920). 

(22) Wells, A.E.: - Ind. Eng. Chem., 8, 771 (1916). 


















- 49 


(23) Rheinboldt, Mott and Motzkus:- J. Prakt. Chem.. 

134 . 257 (1932). 

(24) Fore, D. and Bost, R. W.:- I. Am. Chem. Soc., 

12, 2557 (1937). 

(25) Kolthoff and Lingane:- "Polarography", Ch. X, Interscience 

Publishers, Inc., N.Y., (1941). 




50 


APPENDIX 

A, Analysis of Lead Mercaptides: 

During the study of the pyrolysis of lead mercaptides, 
the need arose for a rapid and convenient method of estimating 
the purity of the mercaptides used in the investigation. 

The usual method for such an analysis involves fusion 
of the compound with sodium peroxide and estimation of the 
sulfate produced as barium sulfate. While giving the total 
amount of sulfur present, this method does not indicate whether 
all of the sulfur exists as mercaptan sulfur or partly as 
impurities such as the corresponding disulfide. A method 
involving analysis for the sulfhydryl group specifically 
would provide such information. To achieve this end, the 
amperometric titration method of Kolthoff and Harris ( 5 ) 
was applied to the problem. 

A series of mercaptides was prepared from primary 
mercaptans containing an even number of carbon atoms, from 
butyl to octadecyl inclusive. The method of preparation 
used was that of Borgstrom, Ellis and Reid (12) wherein the 
mercaptide is precipitated from alcoholic solution with an 
alcoholic solution of lead acetate. The mercaptides were 
then recrystallized from benzene and dried in vacuo. It 
was found that the butyl, hexyl, and octyl mercaptides 
crystallized from benzene as fine leaflets, while those of 
decyl to octadecyl inclusive separated as fine powders. 

No mercaptides of tertiary mercaptans could be 
prepared in the solid form, but always separated from solution 





51 


as yellow oils, including the tertiary-hexadecyl compound. 

This appears to be contrary to the results of Rheinboldt, 

Mott and Motzkus ( 23 ), who report a rather high melting point 
for the lead salt of tertiary-butyl mercaptan. It was noted 
that the tertiary mercaptides were much more soluble in 
ethanol than the correspondihg primary compounds. 

Since the mercaptides, once dried, were difficult to 
wet again, neither water nor alcohol would serve as the primary 
solvent. The mercaptides were found to dissolve readily in 
dioxane, but subsequent analysis showed no mercaptan present. 
Presumably, the mercaptan when released, was completely 
oxidized by the peroxides present in the cyclic ether. The 
most suitable solvent was found to be benzene, the mercaptides 
being easily wetted and dissolved in the warm solvent. 

Since neither sulfuric, nitric, nor hydrochloric 
acid could be used to displace the mercaptan from the lead 
salt (Sulfuric precipitated lead sulfate) hydrochloric inter¬ 
fered with the argentimetric titration and nitric would probably 
oxidize the mercaptan), the acid chosen was perchloric acid 
in alcoholic solution, prepared by diluting ice cold 72% 
aqueous acid with ice cold 95% ethanol to give a 10% solution. 
Because of the danger involved in handling such solutions, 
this concentration was later reduced to 2%, which was found 
to be equally effective. 

The method of analysis finally adopted consisted in 

dissolving a sample of the mercaptide in 10 ml. or less of 
benzene with gentle heating, addition of 90 ml. of 2% alcoholic 




* 





perchloric acid and subsequent amperometric titration of 
the resulting solution with a 0.01 M standard solution of 
silver nitrate, using a saturated calomel cell as the reference 
electrode. The perchloric acid present served as the 
indifferent electrolyte. The resulting mercaptans were 
found to be completely soluble in the solution used. 

Analysis for lead was carried out by the usual method 
of ignition with concentrated sulfuric acid and ammonium 
carbonate and weighing as lead sulfate. In addition, a 
number of samples were analysed for lead by dissolution 
of the sample in benzene and addition of alcoholic sulfuric 
acid to make the final solution 0.5M in the acid. The 
resultant lead sulfate was filtered off into a sintered 
glass crucible, washed well with alcohol, then very dilute 
sulfuric acid, and finally with a very small amount of water. 
The precipitate of lead sulfate was then dried for one half 
hour at 110°C. and then heated to constant weight at 400°C. 

The results of the analyses are shown in Table IX. 

A second crystallization from benzene improved neither the 
melting points of the materials nor the results of the 
analyses. The melting points of the dodecyl to octadecyl 
mercaptides compared well with those reported by Fore and 
Bost (24). 

The precision of the method is estimated to be 
about 2%. Consequently as anticipated, combination of the 
method with the Parr analysis cannot be expected to distinguish 
between mercaptan sulfur and that present as impurities. 
However, results as precise and accurate as those usually 
obtained by organic analytical methods are easily obtained, 






TABLE IX 


ANALYSIS OF LEAD MERCAPTIDES 


Mercaptide 

Weight of 

Percent 

Total 

Percent 

Percent Lead 

and M. Pt. 

sample 

Mercaptan 

Percent 

ulfur 

Found 

Theor. 

(°C. uncorr 

.) (gm.) 

Sulfur 

Sulfur 

Theoret. 




Found 

(Parr) 




n-hexyl 

0.0729 

14.7 


14.5 

46.7^ 

46.9 

91-92 

0.0909 

14.1 



46.8^ 



0.0769 

14.0 





n-octyl 

.©■*0758 

12.9 


12.9 

41.6 

41.6 

92-94 

0.105S 

12.8 



41.6 


n-decyl 

0.0775 

11.7 

11.6 

11.6 

37.3 

37.4 

96-98 

0.0844 

11.9 



37.0 



0.0872 

11.9 





n-dodecyl 

0.0797 

10.6 


10.5 

33.7 

34.0 

100-102 

0.0992 

10.4 



34.0 



0.1097 

10.6 





n-tetra- 

0.0817 

9.55 


9.63 

30.5 

31.1 

decyl 

104-106 

0.1010 

9.82 



30.7 



0.1075 

9.81 






0.1207 

9.77 





n-hexa- 

0.0723 

9.03 


8.88 

28.2 

28.7 

dedyl 

109-110 

0.0857 

8.94 






0.0938 

9.06 






0.1214 

s .90 





n-octa- 

0.0589 

8.38 

8.20 

8.24 

26.9 

26.6 

decyl 





A 


111-113 

0.0832 

8.27 



26 . 9 ^ 



0.0960 

8.24 





# lead sulfate precipitated 

from alcohol "benzene 

solution. 













and the method could probably be extended to serve for the 
analysis of all solid lead salts of organic compounds containing 
the sulfhydryl group. 

The ignition method for lead analysis gave low 
results for all the mercaptides except octyl and octadecyl, 
indicating that the compounds contained more sulfur than the 
theoretical amount. The precipitation method gave results 
comparable to the ignition method, and though not quite 
as rapid as the latter, appears to be equally applicable to 
the analysis. 

B. Nature of Lead Mercaptides in Solution: 

Preliminary investigations have been carried out to 
determine whether or not mercaptans are capable of forming 
complex ions when in solution with a heavy metal ion such as 
lead. 

A convenient method of determining the nature and 
formula of a complex ion is by use of the polarographic method. 
Kolthoff and Lingane (25) present a summation of the method, 
based on papers by Stackelberg, Freyhold, and Lingane. 

In effect, if a metallic ion is complexed, its half 
■wave potential will be shifted to a more negative value. If 
this shift is measured as a function of the concentration of 
the complex forming substance, the formula and the dissociation 
constant of the complex ion can be determined. Quantitative 
information can be obtained only when the reduction of the 
metal ion complex takes place reversibly at the dropping 
electrode. It was thought the best plan would be to first 






determine if any complex ion was present, and if such were 
the case, then the reversibility of the reduction of the ion 
would be determined. 

The mercaptide on which preliminary investigations 

were carried out was the lead salt of n-hexyl mercaptan* The 

solvent used for polarographic work was effectively an 80-20 

mixture of dioxane and water. The dioxane was purified by 

prolonged refluxing over sodium and fractionation. A stock 

1.5M in 

solution, 1.5M in acetic acid and^sodium acetate was prepared 
and used as the indifferent electrolyte. The instrument used 
to obtain the polarographic waves was a Leeds and Northrup 
Electrochemograph. 

The half-wave potential of lead ion in an 80-20 

0.15M in 

dioxane water solution 0.15M in sodium acetate and^acetic acid 
was found to be -0.68 volts as compared to the usual value of 
-0.43 volts in aqueous solution. This difference was attributed 
to the organic solvent. 

The half-wave potential resulting from a solution 
containing an amount of n-hexyl mercaptan equivalent to the 
concentration of lead ion was -0.63 volts. With eight times 
excess of mercaptan present, the half-wave potential was found 
to be -0.60 volts. This value is not reliable, as the high 
concentration of mercaptan seemed to interfere with the 
normal lead wave. In both cases the mercaptan v/as added in 
an alcoholic solution. 

These preliminary results suggest that lead does not 
form a complex ion with mercaptan. The shift of half-wave 
potentials to more positive values may be due to the fact that 






- 56 - 


the mercaptan was added in alcohol solution; the alcohol 
would make the solution more polar in nature and thus would 
tend to shift the half wave potential hack towards its value 
in the water solution* 

If further work is to he done on the problem of 
mercaptans as complexing egents, it is suggested that metal 
ions which form complex ions with sulfide ion, such as arsenic 
and antimony be investigated* It is possible that ions 
corresponding to the thioarsenites, etc. may be formed in 
basic solution* 

C* The Exchange Reaction of Tertiary Mercaptans with 

Since the carbon sulfur bond of a tertiary mercaptan 
is relatively weak, it is to be expected that such a mercaptan, 
if heated with hydrosulfide ion containing S35, would undergo 
an exchange reaction. Results have been obtained which indicate 
that such a reaction does take place. 

In a trial investigation, 0.01 moles of tertiary 
dodecyl mercaptan was refluxed for seven hours in a mixture 
consisting of 0.2 grams of sodium and the hydrogen sulfide 
produced from 0.85 gm. of active barium sulfide in 10 ml. 
of anhydrous ethanol. The reaction mixture was then diluted 
with water, the mercaptan extracted with ether; the ether 
extract dried and the mercaptan vacuum distilled. The activity 
of the resulting mercaptan was estimated by weighing 0.0633 gm. 
of it into a volumetric flask and diluting this to 10 ml.* 

0.1 ml. aliquots of this solution were transferred to counting 





- 57 - 


discs containing a measured excess of alcoholic lead acetate, 
were evaporated to dryness and counted. The specific activity 
obtained was 1.6 x 10^ cpm/gm.. However, when the mercaptan 
■was redistilled and the estimation repeated, the activity was 
found to have dropped to 7.5 x 10^ cpm/gm.. A third distillation 
reduced this value to 6.4 x lcA cpm/gm.. 

# In an attempt to obtain a higher activity in the 

resulting mercaptan, the reaction was repeated, usipg ethylene 
glycol as the solvent. The reaction was carried out as 
above, refluxing the mixture for nine hours. The activity 
of the mercaptan found after the first distillation was 
2.3 x 10^ cpm/gm. This value dropped to 9.3 x lO^ C pm/gm. 
on redistillation of the mercaptan. This product was used in 
an attempt to measure the solubility of the mercaptan. In 
both cases, approximately 2 me. of was used in the synthesis. 

These results indicated that either one of two 
processes was taking place; (a) the mercaptan did contain 
active sulfur but on distillation, decomposed into hydrogen 
sulfide and the corresponding olefin, or , (b) the mercaptan 
contained dissolved hydrogen sulfide, which was volatilized 
by distillation. 

In an attempt to prove that the former is the 
true case, the product from a third synthesis was washed 
with sodium hydroxide, steam distilled from basic solution, 
and vacuum distilled. Approximately the same relative drop 
in activity was observed on redistillation. Due to the fact 
that no solid derivative of the mercaptan could be prepared, 





- 58 - 


purification could not be carried out by the process of 
recrystallization. 

The results obtained indicate that an exchange 
reaction did take place, but it is felt that more positive 
proof is required. The only method of proof would seem to be 
by preparation and several recrystallizations of a solid 
derivative of the mercaptan. A constant activity on 
recrystallization would give positive proof an exchange 
reaction had taken place. 








B29761 




