For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 





























©X aiBBIS 

arawiaais 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/williamhazlittonOOflin 


WILLIAM HAZLITT ON HIS GREAT LITERARY CONTEMPORARIES 


BY 


HARRIET BARITES FLINT B .A •, B .Ed. 
DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE UNIVERSITY CF ALBERTA 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS. 


UNDER THE DIRECTION OF 
DR. R.K. GORDON 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


APRIL, 1948 









UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read, 
and recommend to the Committee on Graduate Studies 
for acceptance, a thesis entitled "William Hazlitt 
on His Great Literary Contemporaries," submitted 
by Harriet Bafrnes Flint B.A., B.Sd. in partial ful¬ 
filment of the requirements for the degree of 


Master of Arts. 








ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


I wish to take this opportunity to 
thank Professor R. K* Gordon, under 
whose direction this work was carried 
out, for his helpful suggestions and 
his kindly and valuable criticisms. 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I HAZL3TT THE MAN 1 

II ON SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE 20 

III ON WILLIAM WORDSWORTH 54 

IV ON SIR WALTER SCOTT 79 

V ON BYRON, KEATS, AND SHELLEY 105 

VI HAZLITT THE CRITIC—CONCLUSION 136 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 





CHAPTER I 


HAZLITT THE MAN 








1 


"I have observed that a reader seldom peruses a book with 
pleasure, till he knows whether the writer of it be a black or a 
fair man, of a mild or choleric disposition, married or a bachelor, 
with other particulars of the like nature,^that conduce very much 
to the right understanding of an author.” 

From both the tongues and the pens of his contemporaries 
William Hazlitt received scant justice. Not until nearly half a 
century after his death did students of English literature begin to 
adopt an objective and impartial attitude toward his writings and to 
recognize and appreciate his very real if somewhat wayward genius. 
Since that time the ranks of his admirers have swelled consistently, 
and include such names as George Saintsbury, Robert Louis Stevenson, 

W. E. Henley, Augustine Birrell, and Sir Leslie Stephen and his bril¬ 
liant daughter, Virginia Woolf. Today Hazlitt's most loyal admirer 
and the most understanding interpreter of his life and work is P. P. 
Howe, who followed his Life of Hazlitt published in 1923, with a com¬ 
plete edition of Hazlitt's works based on the edition of Waller and 
Glover (1902) which appeared in 1930 and the following years to com¬ 
memorate the centenary of Hazlitt's death. This edition, attractively 
bound and illustrated, and provided with copious notes, gave rise to 
a new wave of interest in Hazlitt. Reviews and articles appeared in 
the literary journals; probably the inspiration which prompted Cather¬ 
ine MacLean to write Born Under Saturn » her detailed and interesting 
though scmewaht too sentimental biography of Hazlitt, may be traced 
to this source. 


1 Addison, The Spectator . No. I ,Mar# 1, 1711 





















2 


To understand and to appreciate William Hazlitt the critic 
of his great literary contemporaries, it is necessary to have some 
understanding and appreciation of William Hazlitt the man. Let us, 
therefore, review briefly his heredity, his upbringing, and the cir¬ 
cumstances of his youth and early manhood which contributed to the 
j crystallizing of his opinions, the stiffening of his prejudices, and 
in a large measure to the color of his criticism. Hazlitt's critics 
i have been inclined to dwell unduly upon the sour note in his comments 
on his literary contemporaries; in some cases their pronouncements 
are just, but an unbiased examination of the treatment accorded him 
by those whom he had every night to consider as his friends, and upon 
i whom he lavished an admiration little short of reverence, will dis- 
close the fact that he was being only reasonably human when, upon 
occasion, he let them feel the point of his pungent pen. 

William Hazlitt was the son of the Reverend William Hazlitt, 
a Unitarian Minister. Because the influence of this good man has 
left its stanp so ineradicably upon his son, we must consider his 
character, his ideals and the my in which his standards of conduct 
affected Hazlitt*s life and fortune. 

The elder Hazlitt was a man with no pretensions to brilliance 
in the matter of scholarship, but of rugged honesty, strong social 
conscience, and unshakable political and religious convictions. 
Loyalty to his ideals he always placed before material gain, and in 
matters of conscience, he knew no compromise. He had been intended 












) 














3 


for the Presbyterian ministry, but finding himself unable to 
accept the grim tenets of Calvinism, in spite of parental dis¬ 
approval and disappointment he embraced the milder and more ration¬ 
al beliefs of the Unitarian faith, and became one of its staunchest 
exponents. Always outspoken about what he considered to be right, 

Mr. Hazlitt loet one pulpit because of his whole-hearted opposition 
to the war with the American colonies, a second because his unalter¬ 
able belief in the dignity of man and his deep compassion for human 
suffering would not permit him to remain silent upon the subject of 
the brutal treatment accorded the American prisoners of war who were 
| quartered in his parish. 

Disappointed, disillusioned, and thoroughly out of love with 
his native country, Mr. Hazlitt decided to seek security, freedom, 

and peace of mind in the country whose cause he had so stubbornly 

' 

championed. Consequently in the spring of 1783 when young William 
was six years old, the family set sail for America. To Mr. Hazlitt 
the new land did not prove to be the haven of liberalism to which 
I he had looked forward with such high hopes. He found himself hemmed 
| in on all sides by a wall of religious intolerance and prejudice far 
I more insurmountable than that which had reared itself in the old 
■ country. After a stormy sojourn of three years, during which he 
I consistently refused to accept even the common comforts of life at 
the expense of ’his convictions, he brought his family back to England. 
Such was the early career and such was the unyielding temperament of 
the man who was to guide the thinking and mould the character of his 








■ 


i.a: 1 / 


4 

sensitive and gifted son. 

Upon reaching England the tlazlitts settled at Wem in Shrop¬ 
shire where Mr. Hazlitt was to expound the Scriptures from the Uni¬ 
tarian pulpit until his retirement in 1812. Though he was indeed 
"through his whole life a friend to truth and liberty," 1 2 3 his champ¬ 
ionship of lost causes became less militant as he became older and 
more mellow. To Hazlitt, his father was the symbol of integrity. 

Proof of his affection and respect is to be found in his most widely- 
read essay in which he related the highlights of his father 1 s career, 
and tells affectionately of his simple pleasure in his garden, his 
delight in arguing the cause of civil and religious liberty, and his 
daily habit of poring over the huge tomes of religious writings which 
comprised his library, "My father*s life", he says, "was comparatively 

a dream; but it was a dream of infinity and eternity, of death, the 

2 

resurrection, and a judgment to come!" 

At Y/em young William lived out the remainder of his childhood, 

happy in the ccmpanionship of his father and in the obvious adoration 

of his family. His sister Margaret describes him at this time as 

3 

"the most active, lively, and happiest of boys." At this point in 
his life the lad practised his painting and drawing, read Latin and 
Greek and studied Euclid with his father, wandered about the delight¬ 
ful Shropshire countryside, and wrote to his brother John in London 

1 Obituary in the Examiner ; quoted in Born Under Saturn , by Catherine 
MacLean, p. 414. 

2 Complete Works of William Hazlitt edited by ?• P. Howe; hereafter 
referred to as Y/orks; Vol. XVII, p. 110 

3 Quoted in Born Under Saturn, p. 24. 






























5 


long and somewhat sententious letters in which he expressed his 
boyish longings and ambitions. From his father Hazlitt learned 
far more than merely Greek verbs, Latin prose, and problems in 
Geometry. He learned to respect truth and to hate cant and hypocrisy. 
He learned to scorn conpromise and to speak his mind on all occasions 
| regardless of the feelings of friend and enemy alike, for he was 
taught that to remain silent and thus appear to acquiesce in some¬ 
thing that he believed to be false, was an act of moral cowardice. 

He learned to love humanity and to put the welfare of mankind as a 
whole above the narrower interests of national pride and patriotism. 

|He learned to form his own judgments, to defend them logically, and 
never to retreat from a position, once he was assured that he was in 
'the right. Hazlitt*s own comment on the consistency of his convic¬ 
tions is interesting: 

"I am not to be brov/beat or wheedled out of any of my set¬ 
tled convictions. Opinion to opinion, I will face any man. Prejudice, 
fashion, the cant of the moment, go for nothing; and as for the reason 
of the thing, it cqn only be supposed to rest with me or another in 
proportion to the pains we have taken to ascertain it. Where the 
pursuit of truth has been the habitual study of any man*s life, the 

love of truth will be his ruling passion. ......I would quarrel 

with the best friend I have sooner than acknowledge the absolute 
right of the Bourbons..1 remember once saying to this gentle¬ 

man (Mr. Northcote no doubt) that I do not seem to have changed - 
altered any of my ideas since I was sixteen years old.” ^ 

| As Hazlitt passed from childhood to adolescence his active, 

inquiring mind began to react to his intellectual environment. The 

Unitarian world in which he lived was a world apart. Frowned upon 


1 Works, Vol. XVII, pp. 22-23 












6 




by the Church of England and even by the more orthodox of the dis¬ 
senting sects, and reviled and persecuted by the politicians and 
statesmen for their liberal outlook upon the European scene, the 
Unitarians were comparable to the agnostic and the extreme Leftist 
of today. To them France -was but suffering the birth pangs of Lib¬ 
erty, and the French Revolution they hailed as the dawn of a new and 
happier era for mankind. The elder Hazlitt enjoyed the friendship 
of Dr. Joseph Priestley and Dr. Richard Price, two of the most pro¬ 
gressive thinkers of their day, and it was under the influence of 
such men as these that Hazlitt formed his political opinions, opin¬ 
ions which he never discarded during the entire span of his lifetime. 
Indeed it was the burning of Dr. Priestley*s home and the wanton des¬ 
truction of his books by a Birmingham mob that prompted Hazlitt*s 
first attempt at writing which took the form of a letter to the Shrew - 
sbury Chronicle in which he passionately denounced the perpetrators 
of the outrage. Thus at the age of thirteen he entered the lists as 
the champion of the forces of liberalism, and the sworn enemy of the 
spirit of reaction and the doctrine of legitimacy. 

It should be noted, however, that Hazlitt never turned into 
the rabble-rousing, flag-waving type of radical that we have come to 
associate with political extremists of either rightist or leftist per¬ 
suasion. He had no ambition to become a great political leader, rid¬ 
ing to victory on the shoulders of the multitude. His interest in 
the cause of liberalism was intellectual rather than emotional or 


sentimental. He was no narrow-minded and righteous reformed like 


i 

















7 


Bentham, nor, on the other hand, was he an impractical visionary 


like Shelley, His name is never mentioned in connection with the 
idealistic scheme of Pantisocaracy promoted by Southey and Coleridge. 
Yet his convictions were sincere and unalterable; he is the personi¬ 
fication of his own definition of the true partisan: 




"It is a character that requires very opposite and almost 
incompatible qualities--reason and prejudice, a passionate attach¬ 
ment founded on an abstract idea. He who can take up a speculative 
question, and pursue it with the same zeal and unshaken constancy 
that he does his immediate interests or private animosities, he who 
is as faithful to his principles as he is to himself, is the true 
partisan," ^ 


Hazlitt's enthusiasm for the ideals underlying the French 
Revolution was as warm at the time of his death as when he was thir¬ 


teen, Perhaps the reason that he died happy was that he felt with 
the Revolution of 1830 and the subsequent dethronement of the tyr¬ 
annical Charles X, that reaction had been at last unseated and that 
! liberalism was permanently in the saddle. His jubilation is clearly 
| expressed in an essay written shortly before his death, in which, 
looking back to that great day in his life on which he first heard 
Coleridge speak, he says: 

"I should notice, that at this time the light of the French 
Revolution circled my head like a glory, though dabbled with drops 
of crimson gore: I walked comfortable and cheerful by its side— 

’And by the vision splendid 
Was on my way attended.' 

It rose then in the east: it has again risen in the west. Two suns 
in one day, two'triumphs of liberty in one age, is a miracle which 
I hope the Laureate will hail in appropriate verse," ^ 


1 Works , Vol. XVII, p,34 

2 Ibid., p. 377 

















5 














' v. . 
■ - I, 

■ ■.? ■ i'f. 




■ 







8 


There follows a passage in which he flays Wordsworth and Coleridge 
for their apostasy. That these two, Coleridge in particular, on 
whom he had lavished his youthful reverence and admiration, could 
be so easily lured from their early beliefs by the promise of mat- 
I ©rial gain, was the intellectual tragedy in the life of the man who 
"had never given the lie to his own soul'! 1 

Unfortunately for Hazlitt not all the influences to which he 
was subjected during the formative years of his life were good. In 
their firm belief in the aristocracy of the intellect to which they 
felt they belonged, and in their enthusiasm only for their own phil- 
; osophy of life, the men among whom Hazlitt grew up became imbued with 
a spirit of smugness and self-satisfaction which bordered upon bigotry. 
Being intolerant of those whose sole claim to fame was based upon rank 
and privilege, they soon became intolerant of rank itself, and refused 
: to believe that man could possess both nobility of birth and nobility 
: of nature. They were inclined to dismiss the pleasant social amen¬ 
ities as unimportant and beneath their notice. That, in later years, 
Hazlitt*s lack of social poise sometimes made him a figure of fun 
has frequently been emphasized by his contemporaries, and that he 
himself deplored the aspect of his early environment that tended 
to make him intolerant of others and that deprived him of social 
1 training is apparent in the lines which he addressed to his son in 
! a letter that may well be ranked with the famous letters of Lord 
Che sterf ields 


1 Works, Vol. XVII, p. 378 
















9 


"It was my misfortune (perhaps) to bo bred up among Dis¬ 
senters, who look with too jaundiced an eye at others, and set too 
high a value on their own peculiar pretensions• From being pro¬ 
scribed themselves, they learn to proscribe others; and come in the 
end to reduce all integrity of principle and soundness of opinion 
within the pale of their own little communion. 


"•••••I wish you to learn Latin, French, and dancing. I 

would insist upon the last more particularly, both because it is 
more likely to be neglected, and because it is of the greatest con¬ 
sequence to your success in life. Everything almost depends upon 
first impressions; and these depend (besides person , which is not 
in our power) upon two things, dress and address, which every one 
may command with proper attention. These are the small coin in the 
Intercourse of life, which are continually in request; and perhaps 
you will find at the year’s end, or towards the close of life,that 
the daily insults, coldness, or contempt, to which you have been ex¬ 
posed by a neglect of such superficial recommendations, are hardly 
atoned for by the few proofs of esteem or admiration which your in¬ 
tegrity or talents have been able to extort in the course of it..... 

I would not have you, from not knowing how to enter a room properly, 
stumble at the very threshold in the good graces of those on whom 
it is possible the fate of your future life may depend. Nothing 
creates a greater prejudice against any one than awkwardness. A 
person confused in manner and gesture seems to have done something 
wrong, or as if he was conscious of no one qualification to build 
a confidence in himself upon•••••••• A stoop in the shoulders sinks 

a man in public and in private estimation. You are at present 
straight enough, and you walk with boldness and spirit. Do nothing 
to take away the use of your limbs, or the spring and elasticity of 
your muscles. As to all worldly advantages, it is to the full of 
as much importance that your deportment should be erect and manly 
as your actions.” ^ 


The paragraphs from which the above excerpts are taken reveal in 
every sentence how Hazlitt suffered from his own limitations. In¬ 
deed, the whole essay is a masterpiece of self-revelation and self- 
criticism, penned in the hope of revealing to his son, before it was 
too late, the experiences of life which he had found good, and those 
the lack of which had hampered his success. Not if it lay within 
Hazlitt’s power to prevent it was anyone to describe his son’s man- 


1 Works, Vol. XVII, p. 88; pp. 89-90 





















X 










10 


ners as ”99 in 100 singularly repulsive, browhanging, shoe-contem¬ 
plative, strange.” ^ How different Hazlitt's life might have been 
had he been able to make and to retain friends! How much less sour 
his criticism of those who could! 

Until early adolescence Hazlitt was undoubtedly the apple 
; of his father*s eye. The older man gloried in his son's piety, 
delighted in his precocious criticism, and dreamed fond dreams of 
the day when Hazlitt from the pulpit would champion the Unitarian 
cause. But little by little the boy changed; he lost his zest for 
the companionship of his father, and grew moody, sullen, perverse. 

He began to question his father's faith, and seldom put in an appear¬ 
ance at chapel, thus trying the good man's patience. About this time 
! he made the acquaintance of the eighteenth century novelists,— 
Fielding first, then Richardson, Smollett, and Sterne—and as he 
i fell more deeply in love with Tom Jones, Pamela, and "my Uncle Toby”, 
he fell more out of love with human society. The novels were his 
first literary love, and his detailed knowledge and keen appreciation 
of them formed an excellent basis for his criticism of the novels of 
Sir Y/alter Scott. 

At fifteen Hazlitt dutifully set out for the Unitarian Col¬ 
lege at Hackney. His life here is important for two reasons: in 
the first place it proved beyond doubt that he was not cut out for 
the ministry; secondly, it marked his first serious attempt to write. 

! Here he began what he then called An Essay on the Disinterestedness 

1 Quoted by Howe: Life of Hazlitt , p.75 


















. . , . 


















11 


of the Human Mind * He did not finish the essay, nor indeed did he 
touch it again for a number of years, not in fact until he was en¬ 
couraged to do so by Coleridge. Although it was not published until 
1805 it was his first published work, and it remained his favorite. 
Actually it is a long, abstruse metaphysical discussion, dull and 
uninteresting to the modern reader; an incidental importance is 
attached to it because it furnished part of the common ground from 
which the friendship of Hazlitt and Coleridge sprouted. 

Hazlitt's college life affords a sharp contrast to that of 
his literary contemporaries, many of whom were educated in the orth¬ 
odox manner at the great halls of classical learning, Oxford and 
Cambridge. Hackney was, by comparison, a rough sort of place. Cer¬ 
tainly the environment it provided did nothing to help the already 
socially-handicapped youth to acquire the poise, the sophistication, 

, 

and the assurance which were the hallmarks of the university nen of 
;the time. 

At the end of his second year Hazlitt left Hackney, his 
formal education at an end. Actually his preparation for a career 
as a literary critic was just beginning. He returned to Wem, where, 
having lost his father's sympathy because of his failure to enter the 
ministry, he withdrew more and more into himself, end turned for sol¬ 
ace to his reading, which had been interrupted by the interlude at 
|Hackney. Everything that he could lay his hands on he read avidly. 
His favorites at this time were Burke, Rousseau, and Junius; but he 
also came to know and love Chaucer^Spenser, Pope, Collins, and the 














) 






. , ..... ' 


■ 










12 

Restoration dramatists. Later he discovered Shakespeare and Milton, 
and somewhere he came across Coleridge's Ode to the Departing Year 
and took them tb his heart. Although at this time he appears to 
have been without drive, without ambition, content to drift from 
| one day into the next, he could not have been better preparing him¬ 
self for his future, had a career of literary criticism been at that 
time the height of his ambition. 

Then, in the year 1798, came the event which changed the v/hole 
course of Hazlitt's life. He met Coleridge. Already he had Coleridge' 
Ode to the Departing Year by heart, and he had dipped into the poli¬ 
tical writings which he admired immensely. Now he was to meet him 
| face to face and have the privilege of hearing him join religion to 
poetry and philosophy, and give the sanction of the Scriptures to 

genius and truth. His own account of that meeting, written long 

“ 

I after his disillusionment with respect to Coleridge was complete, 

■ 

is unsurpassed anywhere in his writings. All Hazlitt's youthful 
enthusiasm for the man is recaptured in his description of the im¬ 
pact of Coleridge's personality: 

"A sound was in my ears as of a Siren's song; I ms stunned, 
startled with it, as from deep sleep; but I had no notion then that 
I should ever be able to express my admiration to others in motley 
iagery or quaint allusion, till the light of his genius shone into 
my soul, like the sun's rays glittering in the puddles of the road. 
.......My soul has indeed remained in its original bondage, dark, 

obscure, with longings infinite and unsatisfied; my heart, shut up 
in the prison-hquse of this rude clay, has never found, nor will it 
ever find, a heart to speak to; but that my understanding also did 
not remain dumb and brutish, or at length found a language to express 
itself^ I owe to Coleridge.” ^ 

1 Works, Vol. XVII. p. 107 













t 






13 


Hazlitt proceeds to tell of his getting up before daylight on the 
raw January morning and trudging the ten weary miles from Wem to 
Shrewsbury to hear Coleridge preach: 

"As he gave out his text, his voice 'rose like a steam of 
rich distilled perfumes,' and when he came to the two last words, 

I which he pronounced loud, deep, and distinct, it seemed to me, who 
i was then young, as if the sounds had echoed from the bottom of the 
human heart, and as if that prayer might have floated in solemn 
silence through the universe." *■ 

Next, Hazlitt describes the poet's courtesy visit to his 
father's home and points out the contrast between Coleridge and the 
older minister; because Coleridge deigned to make a gracious eorament 
upon one of Hazlitt*s remarks, the essayist remembers that "the leg 
i of Welsh mutton and the turnips on the table that day had the finest 
I flavor imaginable." His spirits are dampened momentarily when he 
; finds that after all, as a result of the bounty of Thomas Wedgwood, 

; he is not to have Coleridge for a neighbor, but he is soon sent into 
i the seventh heaven of delight by an invitation to visit his idol at 
Nether Stowey in a few weeks' time. From then until he was ready to 
set out on his journey, his whole existence was attuned to the refrain 

"I was to visit Coleridge in the spring." 

Hazlitt's visit took place according to plan. He spent three 
unforgettable weeks at Nether Stowey, -where he made the acquaintance 
' of Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy. He talked politics and philos¬ 
ophy with the two poets, listened to them read their poetry, learned 


1 Works , Vol. XVII, p. 108. 
! 2 Ibid., p. 111. 

3 Ibid., p. 115. 












• — 







14 


from Wordsworth to appreciate the beauty of the sunset, took part 
in animated discussions on English literature, enjoyed a three-day 
walking tour with John Chester and his host, and altogether had a 
thoroughly enjoyable time. 

But the visit was something more than merely a pleasurable 
, interlude; its results were far-reaching. Three weeks of close com¬ 
panionship with Coleridge had fired Hazlitt with ambition to continue 
the essay that he had begun at Hackney. Even though he was doomed 
to failure at this time, he was no longer content to vegetate at Wem. 
He must make a career for himself. If he could not write, perhaps 
he could paint. Accordingly to London he went to study with his 
brother John, who v/as already established as a portrait painter of 
note. 

Hazlitt’s career as an artist lasted son© five years. Luring 
this period he made the acquaintance of Henry Crabb Robinson, who was 
in some measure responsible for introducing him to the literary cir¬ 
cles of the city, and whose diary has been the source of many an 
anecdote about Hazlitt and his relation to the other members of the 
j set in which he moved. During this time too, Hazlitt went to Paris, 

| studied and painted at the Louvre, and fell more deeply than ever 
under the spell of his other idol, Napoleon. 

Upon his return from France, Hazlitt paid a second visit to 
the Lake District, this time for the purpose of painting Coleridge’s 
portrait for Sir George Beaumont #iose patronage he had hopes of 
gaining should the work meet with Beaumont’s approval. The portrait 







I 







■ 








15 


was a success, but Hazlitt was not* His uncompromising honesty 
forbade him to accept patronage at the expense of his principles. 
Coleridge could play ths toady to perfection, but not Hazlitt. 

V/hen Coleridge at a dinner given to Sir Ceorge, proceeded to attack 
bitterly Hazlitt's old favorite, Junius, for no other apparent 
reason than to impress the Tory Beaumont, Hazlitt could not remain 
silent, and the sharp argument that followed put Hazlitt forever 
out of the running for Sir George's favor, and marked the beginning 
of the rift between him and Coleridge. The fact that on the next 
day Coleridge attempted to lecture Hazlitt on the subject of the 
proper attitude toward a prospective patron, did little to mend 
matters . 

Hazlitt's second visit to the Lakes ended in a most unfor¬ 
tunate incident—an incident which, while of no importance in itself 
had far-reaching consequences. About what actually happened there 
have been many conjectures, but the facts are scanty. Apparently 
Hazlitt had indulged in an amatory adventure with one of the village 
girls and as a result fell foul of the villagers. He took refuge 
with Wordsworth, who evidently helped him to get away from the dis¬ 
trict without further trouble. Nothing was heard of the incident 
for nearly fifteen years; then Wordsworth, incensed at what he con¬ 
sidered Hazlitt's unjust criticism of his poem The Excursion , told 
the story to Lamb and others, and cited Hazlitt's criticism as an 
illustration of his gross ingratitude. The story went the rounds 
of London, gaining with each repetition, until it would seem that 






... 


J', j- i 


■ • , : 





16 


on that occasion, Hazlitt had been little short of a beast, and 
owed his reputation and indeed his very life to the intervention 
of Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Southey in turn. The gossip reached 
its climax as the second of eight questions put to Hazlitt in the 
article Hazlitt Cross-Questioned which appeared in the August, 1318, 
issue of Blackwood 1 s Magazine : 

"Is it, or is it not, true that you owe all your ideas about poetry 
or criticism to gross misconceptions of the meaning of his (Words¬ 
worth’s) conversation; and that you once owed your personal safety, 
perhaps existence, to the humane and firm interference of that vir¬ 
tuous man, who rescued you from the hands of an indignant peasantry ^ 
whose ideas of purity you, a cockney visitor, had dared to outrage?" 

; To what extent Hazlitt* s behaviour was blameworthy we do not know* 
Probably Catherine MacLean, in her passionate defense of Hazlitt, 

'oversimplifies the incident* On the other hand, had his conduct 
been as blackguardly as the article would infer, it seems strange, 
to say the least, that Wordsworth, much less the talkative Coleridge 
would have remained silent about it so long. Perhaps the most sen¬ 
sible attitude to take is that the incident was a youthful indis¬ 
cretion no different ^or no worse than those indulged in by many of 
Hazlitt*s friends* After all Y/ordsworth sowed his wild oats too. 

When Hazlitt returned to London he resumed his residence 
with his brother. About this time he made friends with Lamb, and 
became a familiar figure in the famous Lamb circle. His marriage 
in 1808 made it necessary for him to seek some means of earning a 

I living. He tried his hand at lecturing, and although he achieved 
a mild success in this field, he could not compete with Coleridge 


1 Quoted by How©s Life of Hazlitt, p. 262 










19 




Q . 'll •, ; 





} 
















17 


whose brilliance as a lecturer was the toast of his generation. 

He wrote personal, political, and philosophical essays for the 
various periodicals, and attempted to establish himself as a dram¬ 
atic and literary critic. For some time he struggled along, barely 
keeping his head above water, until finally "with necessity, fluency 
came . Something I did took ; and I was called upon to do a number of 
things all at once." ^ He had arrived. 

Hazlitt’s modest success as a journalist never made him a 
great literary figure in the eyes of his contemporaries. True, a 
select few, Lamb among them, loved the man and recognized his genius. 
To the majority, however, he was an upstart, a coxcomb, a member of 
the despised "Cockney School." The Tory politicians and statesmen 
feared his caustic pen; the Lake Poets, once his friends, had now 
swung so far to the right that they forswore both his principles 
and his friendship; the Romantics as a whole scorned him for daring, 
in an age when it was fashionable to belittle classical literature, 
to find Pope’s poetry praiseworthy. Hazlitt was savagely mauled in 
the columns of both Blackwood’s Magazine and the Quarterly Review. 

Not only were his writings unjustly attacked, but his lack of clas¬ 
sical education and social polish, his personal habits, his morals, 
and even his appearance were viciously lampooned. To be able to 
stand up under honest and sincere criticism is expected of an honest 
and sincere writer; but to have to endure silently calumny and slander 
is quite another matter, and it is small wonder that Hazlitt’s work 


1 Works, Vol. XI, p. 288 











£ : J { 


.. ) 








18 


occasionally is marked by bitterness and satire toward those who 
condoned the slander. 

That Hazlitt has made a permanent place for himself in the 
history of English criticism is undeniable • Although he has a 
greater knowledge and a deeper appreciation of some periods than 
of others, his critical work is always marked by a soundness of 
taste and an uncanny ability to detect what is second-rate. The 
most difficult task that he undertook was to act as critic of the 
work of his contemporaries. Contemporary criticism in any age is 
always the most difficult, since so many factors enter into the 
formation of opinion. The style that is popular today may seem 
artificial and insincere tomorrow; what is considered starkly rea~ 
listic and honest to one generation may appear uncompromisingly 
crude and vulgar to the next; a subject of timely interest in one 
age may be all but forgotten in the succeeding one. To decide 
whether or not a poem has that element of pernanence and universal¬ 
ity which is the test of true literature requires a very discrimin¬ 
ating taste. That Hazlitt realized the difficulties that confronted 
him when dealing with his contemporaries, is quite apparent in the 
opening paragraphs of his lecture On the Living Poets : 

"Fame is the recompense not of the living, but of the dead. The 
temple of fame stands upon the grave: the flame that burns upon its 
altars is kindled from the ashes of great men. Fame itself is im¬ 
mortal, but it is not he got till the breath of genius is extinguished. 
For fame is not popularity, the shout of the multitude, the idle buzz 
of fashion, the venal puff, the soothing flattery of favour or of 
friendship; but it is the spirit of a man surviving himself in the 
minds and thoughts of other men, undying and imperishable. It is 
the power which the intellect exercises over the intellect, and the 








. . j ; L,- 















19 


lasting homage which is paid to it, as such, independently of time 
and circumstances, purified from partiality and evil-speaking..... 

• •..No modem production can have the same atmosphere of sentiment 
around it, as the remains of classical antiquity. But then our 
| moderns may console themselves with the reflection that they will 
! be old in their turn, and will either be remembered with still in¬ 
creasing honours, or quite forgotten!” ^ 

There follows the apology for the statement of his views which he 
refers to as "face-making:” 

”1 would speak of the living poets as I have spoken of the 
dead (for I think highly of many of them); but I cannot speak of 
them with the same reverence, because I do not feel it; with the 
same confidence, because I cannot have the same authority to sanc¬ 
tion my opinion. I cannot be absolutely certain that any.body, 
twenty years hence, will think any thing about any of them; but we 
may be pretty sure that Milton and Shakespeare will be remembered 
twenty years hence. We are, therefore, not without excuse if we 
husband our enthusiasm a little, and do not prematurely lay out 
our whole stock in untried ventures, and what may turn out of false 
bottoms. I have myself out-lived one generation of favourite poets, 
the Darwins, the Hay leys, the Sewards. Who reads them now?” 

To discover just how highly Hazlitt thought of these poets, 
xo assess the value of his criticism, and to decide in what measure 
it has endured, it will be necessary to examine in detail what he 
has said, directly and by inference, about each of the greatest of 
them: Coleridge, Wordsworth, Scott, Byron, Shelley, and Keats. 


1 Works, Vol. V, pp. 143-144 

2 Ibid., pp. 144-145 



























CHAPTER II 


ON SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE 











20 


"He is the only person I ever knew who answered to the idea 
of a man of genius." — Hazlitt 

Any commentary upon Hazlitt's opinion of Coleridge's work 
must not only begin with their first meeting and the tremendous im¬ 
pression which the poet made upon the youthful Hazlitt, but it must 
take into consideration the whole history of their acquaintance, 
to attempt to divorce Hazlitt's criticism of Coleridge's poetry, his 
prose, or even his conversation, from his feelings toward Coleridge 
the man, is to attempt the impossible. Hazlitt himself v/as unable 
to do so; in every sentence he writes the personal element obtrudes 
itself. All his criticism is coloured by the impact of Coleridge*s 
personality, and even the most scathing of his comments are tinged 
with a feeling of regret that Coleridge's vast potentialities were 
never realized. Never did Hazlitt lose sight of Coleridge's tre¬ 
mendous inherent ability, and never did he cease to lament his fail¬ 
ure to remain steadfast to his early principles and to make the most 
of his genius. Indeed, all of Hazlitt's commentary upon Coleridge 
might well be gathered together and entitled "The Lament for a Lost 
Leader 

Hazlitt first made Coleridge's acquaintance when he was a 
youth of nineteen, shy, sensitive, and reserved. His failure to 
fall in with the plans made for him by his father, had thrown him 
upon his own resources, and had caused him to become introspective 
and apathetic. Coleridge, who had already achieved some reputation 
as a friend of liberty, a philosopher, and a poet was just the man 









i 


. 



'.*,1 











I 



. ■'( 








21 

to jolt Hazlitt out of his lethargy. Only a comparatively few years 
older than Hazlitt, he could be treated as a friend and confidant, 
and at the same time could inspire respect and admiration. The im¬ 
mediate effect of his personality upon Hazlitt has already been dis¬ 
cussed .1 It seems almost unbelievable that an intimacy with Coler¬ 
idge of such short duration would make an impression that would last 
a lifetime, and inspire an affection that would outlive all Hazlitt*s 

feeling of distaste for what he called Coleridge’s cant —he once said 

2 

that Coleridge did not have "sincerity enough to be a hypocrite" 
and his hatred of his political apostasy. Yet it is true. Hazlitt* s 
love for the man that Coleridge had been survived his detestation for 
the man that he had become. He never hesitated to acknowledge his 
;debt to Coleridge. Nearly twenty years after their first meeting 
he said, "He is the only person from whom I ever learned anything," 1 2 3 4 
and again, "Till I became acquainted with the author of the Ancient 
Mariner, I could neither write nor speak. He encouraged me to write 
a book....." ^ 

Although Hazlitt suffered many a slight at the hands of 
Coleridge, he seems to bear little personal resentment. On only a 
very few occasions in the whole volume of his criticism does he refer 
to what must have been a very real cause for resentment. In the 

1 Ante, pp. 12, 13 

2 Works . Vol. XVII, p. 354. 

3 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 167 

4 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. 312 























■ ■ ' i~ 2 . . i 0* . 

. 


. 















* . 



. 



■ 

. 

. 



. .... v; ... L 

; « - - /. .. . 




• • ■. ' ■ v*- - ... : v ■ > i •- .. 

. 










. 

. 

••. 

.. 


v . . . ; 




. 












22 


bitter outburst, "He is the Dog in the Manger of literature, an 

intellectual Mar-Plot who will neither let any body else come to 

a conclusion, nor come to one himself,"^ there can be no doubt that 

Hazlitt has in mind Coleridge*s claim that the most important thoughts 

! expressed in Hazlitt*s favorite essay, On the Principles of Human 

Understanding , originated in his brain, and that the ideas in Haz- 

litt*s first article written for the Morning Chronicle were cribbed 

2 

from his conversation which Hazlitt had heard at the Lambs*. In 
his Reply to Z in which Hazlitt defends himself against the accus¬ 
ations levelled at him by Blackwood’s, he again acknowledges his 
great debt to Coleridge in a frank and manly fashion, and at the 
jsame time evinces his bitterness at Coleridge’s failure for twelve 
long years to recognize the worth of what he had written. As an 
illustration of Hazlitt*s forbearance with its underlying note of 
resentment the passage is well worth quotings 

"When this gentleman, of whom I have at various times spoken 
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, formerly knew 
me, when I passed for an idiot, he used to say of me (and by so doing 
he excited a surprise and incredulity which only his eloquence and 
persuasive tones could overcome) that *1 had the most metaphysical 
face he ever met with,* and when by his advice, and in order as he 
said that I might laugh at the tittle-tattle about my private follies, 

I put my metaphysics on paper, answering for myself, he turned his 
back upon me, and spread those reports over my metaphysical discover¬ 
ies, till twelve years after, when out comes the hard-earned, extorted, 
unlooked for, despaired of, thankless acknowledgement, in a fag-end 
note of an unreadable performance. This same person used at the same 
time to cocker me up with such expressions as these, that *if ever I 
got language for my ideas, the world would hear of it, for I had guts 
in my brains. ’ And now that I have got language for my ideas, he says 

1 Works , Vol. VII. p. 115 

2 Howe: Life of Hazlitt, p. 130 















23 

they are his ideas, that my brains are in his and Mr. Wordsworth* s 
head (I deprecate the last utterly) and he gets such a fellows as 
Z....« to say that I am a charlatan." 1 

Hazlitt had envisioned Coleridge as a leader of men, a man 
of destiny. He had hoped that Coleridge would devote his talent for 
writing and speaking to the high cause of liberalism and social jus¬ 
tice. He himself would have been quite content as a follower with 
Coleridge bearing the banner, and through the eloquence of his spoken 
word, and the fluency of his pen, converting all men of intellect to 
the cause. He had foreseen a new day when, under the intellectual 
leadership of Coleridge, liberalism would reign supreme and the forces 
of tyranny would be forever vanquished. But a3 the power of Napoleon 
increased and the peace and security of England became threatened, 
Coleridge changed his tune; he no longer sang the praises of the French 
devolution, and, forswearing his first love, he became wedded to the 
'hag Legitimacy." Mot only did Hazlitt never forgive, but he never 
forgot. His admiration for the beauty of Coleridge* s poetry is qual¬ 
ified by his hatred of his fall from political grace, and his polit¬ 
ical essays are enlivened by his jibes at Coleridge, jibes which at 
the same time sound a note of bitter regret for Coleridge's misuse 
of his powers. At times he bursts into a sincere lament over what 
the world had lost: 

"You will perceive, Sir, that I do not speak of the author of the 
Watcliman , or of the Ode to the Departing Year , or of the Ode to 
Schiller, or of the Sonnet to Dr. Priestley , or of the Religious 
Musings: these are only the settings of the gem, not the gem itself: 

1 Works , Vol. IX, pp. 3-4. 


















« 




t - ' • •' 




. i J, 

i i 




, h ’ 


- 















> 






24 


I speak of ’THE MAN.”' 1 

Elsewhere with considerably more asperity he says: 

"If he had had but common moral principle, that is, sincerity, he 
would have been a great man; nor hardly, as it is, appears to us— 

’Less than arch-angel ruined, and the excess 
Of glory obscured .* 

We lose our patience when we think of the powers he has wasted and 
compare them and their success with those, for instance of such a 
fellow as—." 2 3 

And one other illustration: 

"And shall I, who heard him then, listen to him now? Not I.... 
rhat spell is broke; that time is gone for ever; that voice is heard 
no more: but still the recollection comes rushing by with thoughts 
of long-past years, and rings in my ears with never-dying sound. 

’What though the radiance which was once so bright, 

Be now for ever taken from my sight, 

Though nothing can bring back the hour 

Of glory in the grass, of splendor in the flow’r; 

I do not grieve, but rather find 
Strength in what remains behind: 

In the primal sympathy, 

Which having been, must ever be; 

In the soothing thoughts that spring 
Out of human suffering: 3 

In years that bring the philosophic mind!*" 

On other occasions Hazlitt blasts Coleridge with such fury 
that it is difficult to reconcile the attack with any sort of respect 
or affection for the man against whom it is launched, until it is 
realized that his purpose was probably, by the very force of the 
accusation, to rouse Coleridge from his mental lethargy and spur him 


1 Works, Vol. XIX, p. 198 

2 Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 118 

3 Ibid., Vol. V, pp. 167-168 





















: , • i 








. : 1 /" L; •' ■" : : T! ?;«■*»*' 'UK; W &J1I 

. ... ■ . , . • r ■ : ■ ' ' • 





' - 










. : '' 'll ■ . : , . 


1 






. ch ' • 

' 


■ ■ 













: I ; 









• - : ■ . • . ' 

* 












. 










25 


to efforts more in tune with the ideals of his youth and more 
commensurate with his genius* Only on such grounds can Hazlitt 
be excused the bad taste of such lines as; 

"You see him now squat like a toad at the ear of the Courier ; 
and oh! that we could rouse him up once more into an archangel's 
shape. But what is it to him what so poor a thing as he himself 
is, who is sublimely indifferent to all other things, and who may 
be looked upon as a terrible petrification of religion, genius, and 
the love of liberty. Yet it is too much to think that he who began 
his career with two Sonnets to Lord Stanhope and Mary Wo1stonecraft, 
in the Morning Chronicle , should end with slimy, drivelling abuse of 
Jacobinism and the French Revolution, in the Courier ; — that, like ' 
some devoted frantic, he should seek the praise of martyrdom by mang¬ 
ling his own soul with a prostituted, unpaid-for pen, and let out 
his last breath as a pander to that which would be a falsehood, but 
that it means nothing." 1 

and, in The Spirit of the Age * the oft-quoted: 

"Alas I 'Frailty, thy name is Genius I * —What is become of 
i all this mighty heap of hope, of thought, of learning, and humanity? 

|It has ended in swallowing doses of oblivion and in writing paragraphs 
iin the Courier .—Such, and so little is the mind of man!" 

That Hazlitt believed that Coleridge had not fallen quite 
far in his abjuration of his youthful principles as had Wordsworth 
and Southey, and that he might therefore be capable of redemption, 
is shown on at least two occasions; the first when he says: 

"Proscribed by court-hire1ings, too romantic for the herd 
of vulgar politicians, our enthusiast stood at bay, and at last 
turned on the pivot of a subtle casuistry to the unclean side : but 
his discursive reason ;would not let him trammel himself into a poet- 
laureate or a stamp-distributor, and he stopped, ere he had quite 
passed that well-l^nown 'bourne from whence no traveller returns' — 
and so has sunk into torpid, uneasy repose, tantalized but useless 
resources, haunted by vain imaginings, his lips idly moving, but 
his heart for ever still, or, as the shattered chords vibrate of 


1 Works , Vol. XIX, p. 210 

2 Ibid 34 

a a 













. 


. 

















t 


. - f . 

t • 

' • . ■ : 

.. . . 

. ; . . ; 0 'lx 








« 








26 


themselves, making melancholy music to the ear of memory!" 1 2 

And again, in the closing lines of the same essay: 

"They did not like to be shut out when places and pensions, when 
the critic's praises, and the laurel-wreath were about to be dis¬ 
tributed. They did not stomach being sent to Coventry , and Mr. 
Coleridge sounded a retreat for them by the help of casuistry, 
and a musical voice. — 'His words were hollov/, but they pleased the 
ear' of his friends of the Lake School, who turned back disgusted 
and panic-struck from the dry desert of unpopularity, like Hassan 
the came1-dr iv er, 

'And curs'd the hour, and curs'd the luckless day, 

V/hen first from Shiraz' walls they bent their way.' 

Thby are safely inclosed there, but Mr. Coleridge did not enter 
with them; pitching his tent upon the barren waste without, and hav¬ 
ing no abiding place nor city of refuge." 

As a matter of fact, Hazlitt never did cease to hope for Coleridge's 
redemption. In an essay written only shortly before his death when 
he was jubilant over the success of the "Revolution of Three Days" 
in France and the end of the Bourbon tyranny, he again lashes out 



supported, and at the same time expresses the hope that Coleridge 
may yet recover his jrouthful enthusiasm and again hold aloft the 
torch of Liberty. 

"And what shall we say to him -the sleep-walker, the dreamer, the 
sophist, the word-hunter, the craver after sympathy, but still vul¬ 
nerable to truth, accessible to opinion, because not sordid or mech¬ 
anical? The Bourbons being no longer tied about his neck, he may 
perhaps recover his original liberty of speculating; so that we may 
apply to him the lines about his own Ancient Mariner — 

'And from his neck so free 
The Albatross fell off, and sank 
Like lead into the sea.’" 3 


1 Works : Vol. XI, p.34 

2 Ibid. pp. 37-38 

3 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. S78 













27 


The matter of Coleridge's fickleness with respect to Uni- 
tarianism is of secondary importance to Hazlitt; yet there is ev¬ 
idence that it did enter into his criticism, since he speaks s ane- 
what sneeringly of Coleridge's having "dipped his wing into the 
Unitarian controversy." ^ Perhaps here he is thinking of his father 
whose disappointment in discovering that Truth after all had not 
found an ally in Fancy, ^ must have been acute. 

For Coleridge's understanding of literature, philosophy, 
history, and indeed of all the branches of knowledge, Hazlitt has 

;the greatest respect, but he deplores the fact that so well-informed 

- 

| a man never used his powers either for his own material advantage or 

jin the service of a worthy cause. Of the amazing range of Coleridge's 

junderstanding Hazlitt sayss 

"Our author's mind is (as he himself might express it) 
tangential . There is no subject on which he has not touched, none 
on which he has rested. With an understanding fertile, subtle, ex¬ 
pansive, 'quick forgetive, apprehensive,' beyond all living precedent, 
few traces of it will perhaps remain.......Hardly a speculation ha„s 

been left on record from the earliest time, but it is loosely folded 
up in Mr. Coleridge's memory, like a rich, but somewhat tattered 
piece of tapestry: we might add (with more seeming than real extra¬ 
vagance), that scarce a thought can pass through the mind of man, but 
its sound has at some time or other passed over his head with rustling 
pinions." 3 

Of his failure to accomplish anything he says further: 

"The man of perhaps the greatest ability now living is the one who has 
not only done the least but who is actually incapable of ever doing 
any thing worthy of him.••••••••••.•.No subject can come amiss to him, 

he is alike attracted and alike indifferent to all—he is not tied 

! ___._ 

1 Works: Vol. XI p. 30 

2 Ibid: Vol. XVII p. Ill 

3 Ibid: Vol. XI p. 29 

















. - *■ 

. 








i • 

'. : 

..... 


: : 




« 














28 


down to any one in particular—but floats from one to another, his 
mind every where finding its level, and feeling no limit but that 
of thought—now soaring with its head above the stars, now treading 

with fairy feet among the flowers.taking in the whole range of 

poetry, politics, metaphysics, criticism, painting, wit, history, 

politics, and private scandal...Set him to write a book, and 

he belies all that has ever been said about him— 

’Ten thousand great ideas filled his mind, 

But with the clouds they fled, and left no trace behind: 1 " 1 

To the ethereal quality of Coleridge’s genius suggested in 
the above passage, Hazlitt makes constant reference. It is a quality 
that he both admires and deplores. He has the highest admiration for 
Coleridge’s marvellous powers of imagination, his flights of fancy, 
and the infinite activity of his mind; on the other hand he is con¬ 
temptuous of the mind whibh, while exploring all channels of know¬ 
ledge, accomplishes nothing solid, comes to no conclusion. 

"His genius has angel’s wings; but neither hands nor feet. 

He soars up to heaven,circles the empyrean, or dives to the centre 
of the earth, but he neither lays hands upon the treasures of the one, 
nor can find a resting place for his feet in the other." 2 

And elsewhere: 

"He who has seen a mouldering tower by the side of a chrystal 
lake, hid by the mist, but glittering in the wave below, may conceive 
the dim, gleaming, uncertain intelligence of his eye: he who has 
marked the evening clouds uprolled (a world of vapours), has seen 
jthe picture of his mind, unearthly, unsubstantial, with gorgeous 
!tints and ever-varying forms— 

’That which was now a horse, even with a thought 
The rack dislimns, and makes it indistinct 
As water is in water.'" 3 

That Coleridge was unable to harness his soaring genius to reality 
and achieve practical results is a sore point with Hazlitt who seems 

1 Works: Vol. XII. op. 198-199 " * 

2 Ibid., Vol. VII p. 117 

3 Ibid., Vol. XI p. 29 











. 

........ 

' 



. 




■ 


















- .. ; ‘/f. ., 

• . ' . s ■. : 

: ? 




: 






" 






- 

* 


' 













29 

to feel that this trait is inherent in the character of the man as 
well as being the result of the mental laziness induced by the use 
of opium. Coleridge, Hazlitt thinks, is the embodiment of the spirit 
of the age which is "an age of talkers, and not of doers. ! ^ 

In his susceptibility to the charm of Coleridge’s conver¬ 
sation Hazlitt kept illustrious company. Lamb, DeQuincey, Southey, 
Hunt, Robinson, all bear testimony to Coleridge’s almost uncanny 
eloquence but no one, not even Lamb, more frequently, or more con¬ 
vincingly than Hazlitt. From the very first time that he met Coler- 

! id&e, when he sat for two hours while the poet "was conversing with 

I p 

W.H’s forehead,” he was the victim of Coleridge’s conversational 

charm. ”1 had heard a great deal of his powers of conversation,” 

he tells us, "and I was not disappointed. In fact, I have never 

met with any thing at all like them, either before or since.” ^ 

In The Spirit of the Age he speaks of the inspirational quality of 

Coleridge* s criticism of the Greek tragedians, at the same time 

pointing out that Coleridge could speak equally well on all the 

sages of antiquity, and concludes his paean with the words: 

"As the impassioned critic speaks and rises in his theme, you would 
think you heard the voice of the Man hated by the Gods, contending 
with the wild winds as they roar, and his eye glitters with the 
spirit of Antiquity.” ^ 


1 Works : Vol. XI p. 28 

2 Ibid:, Vol. XVII, p. 109 

3 Ibid., p. 114 

4 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 32 







. . . ... .... . . . ■ - .. / ■' . •' . 

. . ; h:<J ■ , 

■ j 


.... j . ,t 












• : : . v c ,v ;i c r ' 

d V.:: : ' . i 


. - J ■< 


/ ,i .. ii 








• ' ■ 


. 


. - 






c • • •• ■ . 


■ 

.... 

• ■ 

. 











30 




Hazlitt frequently compares Coleridge’s conversation with that of 
his contemporaries, Wordsworth, Southey, Sir James Mackintosh, for 
example, always emphasizing its fluidity, its evanescence, its charm, 
and leaving us in no doubt as to whom he would prefer to listen to. 
Hazlitt's most sincere tribute is to be found in the delightful 
ewsay in which, long after the breach between him and Coleridge was 
complete, Hazlitt imagines himself seated beside Coleridge in the 
theatre, listening to his comments on the play, and since it is 
somewhat dull, upon any subject that suits his fancy—French poetry, 
Macready's Zanga, the metaphysical distinction between grace and 
form, and so on, until the lights go out and the audience leaves 
the theatre • 

"'But in Adam's ear so pleasing left his voice,'" says 
Hazlitt, "that I quite forgot I had to write my article on the Drama 
the next day." ^ 

Sometimes Hazlitt rather satirically extols Coleridge's con¬ 
versational gift for the purpose of heightening the contrast between 
his ability to talk and his inability to write. On one occasion he 


says: 

"His talk would suit the miracle of the Conversion of Con- 
j stantine, or Raphael's Assembly of the Just. It is not short of 
! that. His face would cut not figure there, but his tongue would 
| wag to some purpose.......Let him talk on for ever in this world 

| and the next; and both worlds will be the better for it. But let 
! him not write, or pretend to write, nonsense. Nobody is the better 
for it." 1 2 


1 Works; Vol. XVIII, p. 374 

2 Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 118 






















. • • ' . J 




. . ■ . .. . . ... . . ... • - - - ■; : • 

. ■ 

.’ . ... . V v ‘iy ' 

















~~ . •. ... ... . .j . ' 

. ....... . . • ; 

. 








..... 
















. 







‘ 



L . # • • , ■ 






. 








31 


Hazlitt’s enthusiasm for Coleridge’s power of conversation is never 
marred by envy. He does regret, however, that Coleridge’s vanity 
and his love of the adulation of his listeners sometimes intoxicate 
him and lead him to talk only to arouse the admiration of his aud¬ 
ience, and with little thought of his subject-matter. 

"C-is the only person who can talk to all sorts of people, 

on all sorts of subjects, without caring a farthing for their under¬ 
standing one word he says—and he talks only for admiration and to 
be listened to, and accordingly the least interruption puts him out. 

I firmly believe he would make just the same impression on half his 
audiences, if he purposely repeated absolute nonsense with the same 
voice and manner and inexhaustible flow of undulating speech!" ^ 

. There is in these lines both regret and a reluctant admiration for 

; the man who inspired them. 


In concluding his Memorabilia of Mr. Coleridge , Hazlittnakes 
what at first glance seems to be a somewhat startling observation, 
in view of his consistently high praise of Coleridge’s eloquences 

"If these remarkable sayings are fewer than the reader might 
expect they are all we remember; and we might avail ourselves of the 
answer which Quevedo puts into the mouth of the door-keeper of Hell, 
when the poet is surprised to find so few kings in his custody— 
’There are all that ever existed!*" 1 2 

Actually these lines contain the essence of Hazlitt’s com¬ 
ments on the subject of Coleridge’s conversation: the sound of his 
voice, his eloquence, his personal magnetism, and his conversational 
charm were the factors that contributed to the tremendous influence 
that he wielded over his contemporaries; the fact that Hazlitt could 
remember but little that was interesting of what Coleridge had said 


1 Works: Vol. XII, p. 35 

2 Ibid., Vol. XX, p. 218 

























. 













' 

. 


. 

















. 








32 


really is a matter of small concern. 

He who expects to find in Hazlitt*s estimate of his literary 
contemporaries the same consistency of opinion that marks his poli¬ 
tical thought is doomed to disappointment. The truth is that on 
this score Hazlitt is thoroughly inconsistent, sometimes delightfully 
so. Indeed his inconsistencies season his criticism, sometimes add¬ 
ing a sprinkling of spies, but more often a dash of vinegar. The 
result is never flat. His inconsistencies may be laid at several 
doors. He was a journalist, and journalists in his time as today 
i had deadlines to meet. Ma:ny of his judgments, therefore, were has¬ 
tily made without careful consideration. Many were made in the heat 
of the moment, when his indignation and ire were at their height; 
then Hazlitt wrote with a passion shared by no other writer of his 
I time, except, perhaps, Byron. The very consistency of his political 
I opinion frequently led him into inconsistency of literary opinion, 
since any violation of his political views prevented him from mak¬ 
ing an unprejudiced judgment. Later, when his wrath had subsided, 
he often retracted or at least modified his original statement. 
Actually, to attempt to apologize for Hazlitt*s lack of consistency 
is unnecessary. Inconsistency is a characteristic of a normal per¬ 
son; and Hazlitt, though eccentric, was a perfectly normal man. 

An interesting inconsistency in Hazlitt*s attitude toward 
Coleridge has, strangely enough, to do with the poet*s political 
thought. So frequently does Hazlitt emphasize Coleridge’s early 
devotion to the principles underlying the French Revolution, and 









































, 






' . 




















- . .. • _ 












. 














33 


so frequently does he flay him for his betrayal of those principles 
and his conversion to the doctrine of legitimacy, that it comes as 
a distinct shock to read the words: 

"I can hardly consider Mr. Coleridge as a deserter from the cause he 
first espoused, unless cne could tell what cause he ever heartily 
espoused, or what party he ever belonged to, in downright earnest.. 
. "1 

That Coleridge was never for long absent from Hazlitt*s 
thoughts is shown by the astonishing frequency with which Hazlitt 
makes incidental reference to him in the course of his work. These 
references if collected and arranged with due consideration for the 
occasions on which they were made and to Hazlitt's mood when he 
wrote them, would in themselves throw considerable light upon the 
whole Hazlitt-Coleridge relationship. They cannot, therefore, be 
entirely overlooked. Sometimes Hazlitt quotes Coleridge verbatim; 
sometimes he fails to name him asad refers merely to "an eminent 
! character," though the reference to Coleridge is quite apparent; 
sometimes he drags him in for no obvious reason except that the 
man is on his mind. He cites Coleridge as an illustration of what 
he hates most—cant. "Mr. Coleridge is made up of cant, that is of 
mawkish affection and sensibility." * Elsewhere he speaks scathing¬ 
ly of Coleridge's legitimist leanings as "the slavering cant of 
Coleridge,"^ and again on the same distasteful subject that the 

1 Works : Vol. XVII, p. 29 

2 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. 46 

3 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. 354 

4 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 190 










V. 







a . (A ' : - . v f 




, •_ . . : 


. 


- e ■- -• • • ' '■ • . - • 

' 


'/ , . , ' •: 

















■ 






. 




. .. ... j..; 


. . 





' ; . ■ 

' 




• • ; 










■ 






. 










. 




... 










34 


king can do no wrong, he uses the phrase, "as Mr. C—cants up to 
it." 1 On other occasions Hazlitt's references to Coleridge sound 
a reminiscent note. Often he introduces a comment or an anecdote 
with "Coleridge used to remark," 2 "Coleridge used to laugh," 3 4 
"Coleridge used to complain,"^ and on four distinct occasions he 
quotes Coleridge’s exclamation, ’That is true fame!* made on that 
memorable walking tour when they found on the window-seat of a 
little-visited country inn a worn out copy of Thomson's The Seasons . 5 6 7 
We sense the pathos of the situation which prevents Hazlitt from 
quoting Coleridge's later remarks and forces him to write that Lamb 
reports "that Coleridge has lately given up all his opinions res¬ 
pecting German literature." 6 But the passage which expresses 

most poignantly Hazlitt's regret for the loss of Coleridge’s friend¬ 
ship is to be found in one of the best known of his personal essays: 

"He (C) could go on in the most delightful explanatory way over hill 
and dale, a summer’s day, and convert a landscape into a didactic 
poem or a Pindaric ode. 'He talked far above singing.' If I could 
clothe my ideas in sounding and flowing words, I might perhaps wish 
to have someone with me to admire the swelling theme; or I could be 
more content, were it possible for me still to hear his echoing 
voice in the woods of All-Foxden." ' 

These references and others similar to them, only serve to emphasize 
the ingredients of Hazlitt's criticism of Coleridge; on one side his 


1 Works : Vol. XIX, p. 164 

2 Ibid., Vol. XX, p. 272 

3 Ibid., Vol. XII, p. 23 

4 Ibid., p. 347 

5 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p.120; Vol.XX, 

6 Ibid., Vol. XII, p.313 

7 Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 183 


p.216; Vol.V, p.88 Vol.VII, p.125 
















I 





















35 


deep affection and esteem for the youthful Coleridge and his appre¬ 
ciation of his potentialities; on the other his hatred of Coleridge’s 
apostasy, and his genuine regret for the poet’s failure to fulfil 
the promise of his youth. All Hazlitt*s criticism is the result of 
the interaction of these two warring elements. When the first is 
uppermost, Hazlitt is enthusiastic, fair, and even generous; when 
the second gets the better of him he is bitter, satirical, and vit¬ 
riolic. Only by weighing one against the other and by making allow¬ 
ances for the excess of personal feeling, can we assess the true 
worth of Hazlitt*s criticism. 

Because of the affection he had for Coleridge, Hazlitt enter¬ 
tained no doubts about his right, and possibly his obligation to crit¬ 
icize him. "There is no one," he says, "who has a better right to 

say what he thinks of him than I have. 

Hazlitt*s criticism of Coleridge’s poetry, too, sounds that 
note of lament that "he has produced nothing equal to his powers. 

It is only to be expected that Hazlitt would express his greatest 
admiration for the poetry which Coleridge wrote when he was still the 
apostle of liberalism, singing "for joy when the towers of the Bas- 

3 

tille and the proud palaces of the insolent and the oppressor fell." 
Indeed, one of his favourite methods of dealing with Coleridge is 

to contrast his later work with that done when he was still fired 

_ 

1 Works: Yol. Y, pp. 164-166 

2 Ibid., Yol. IX, p. 243 

3 Ibid., Yol. XI, p. 34 

















' 




' 

) ■ . ■ 

: • . • [jp ■■ 




, 


. 


. - 

1 


- W ■ • - -V ' ' •. 




’ , v. ... ..... ;• . ' . ’ 

■ ,, . . . 

: . 

..... . .... „ ' j 

. 

■ 






36 


by his love of liberty. "All that he has done of moment," says 
Hazlitt in 1825, "was done twenty years ago: since then, he may 
be said to have lived on the sound of his own voice," ^ Elsewhere 
he says, "All that Mr. Coleridge ever did in poetry, as The Ancient 
Mariner, Chrietabel and The Three Graves , his Poems and his Tragedy, 

he had written when according to his own account he must have been 

2 

a very idle, thoughtless person." As far as Coleridge’s poetry is 
concerned this is perfectly true; it is the opinion of every critic; 
not only of Hazlitt. 

The Ode on the Departing Year , which was the first of Coler¬ 
idge’s poems to make an impression on Hazlitt, remained one of his 
favorites. He was in full sympathy with its liberal principles, he 
liked to apply the description of England in the seventh stanza to 
the objects about him as he walked through the country lanes, and 
the artist in him admired the "sublimity of imagery" 1 2 3 4 5 of the poem. 

From among Coleridge’s other lesser poems Hazlitt singles 
out a few for special comment. He is impressed by the "tender sen¬ 
timent" ^ expressed in Genevieve. He describes Fire, Famine, and 
Slaughter as "an effusion of high political enthusiasm, and showing 

5 

strong political feeling," characterized by "A grotesqueness of 
fancy." ^ With great effect but with little comment he quotes the 
lines beginning, "We have offended, oh I my countrymenl" to show 

1 Works: Vol. XI, p.30 

2 Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 181 

3 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. 115; Vol. VIII, p, 186 

4 Ibid., Vol. IX, p. 243 

5 Ibid., vol. V, p. 166 
























37 


how immeasurably better was the poet of 1798 than the degenerate 
of 1817The sonnet To Schiller Hazlitt twice quotes in its entire¬ 
ty, once as an example of one of Coleridge’s "occasional bursts of 
pathos and fancy" 1 2 3 4 5 which are the exception not the rule among his 
smaller pieces, and once "As a fine compliment to the author of 
The Robbers, and an equally fine idea of the state of youthful en- 

o 

thusiasm in which he compdsed it*" On another occasion when Hazlitt 
is expressing his appreciation of German literature of the sentimen¬ 
tal period, he speaks of his whole-hearted agreement with Coleridge’s 
sonnet, and after quoting the opening lines, pays the poet one of his 
finest compliments. "I believe," he says, "I may date my insight in¬ 
to the mysteries of poetry from the commencement of my acquaintance 

with the authors of the Lyrical Ballads ..^ Though of course 

the compliment must be shared with Wordsworth, there is no doubt 
that it was Coleridge of whom Hazlitt was chiefly thinking. In his 
essay on the Carapbell-Byron controversy over Bowles’s edition of 

c 

Pope, Hazlitt uses "whose bells, the poor man’s only music" as 
an excellent example of poetical association of an artificial object. 
"The sound of the bells," he says, "excites as lively an interest as 
the 7/arbling of a thrush." A number of Coleridge’s other early 
poems, the sonnets to Lord Stanhope, Mary Wollst one craft, and Dr. 

1 Works: Yol. VII, !ppT 218-219 " “ 

2 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 35 

3 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 166 

4 Ibid., Vol. XII, p. 226 

5 Coleridge: Frost at Midnight, 1. 29; auoted 
6, Works: Vol. XpC p. 79 













I 






. 0 


J 


0 












, 



38 


Priestley, for example, Hazlitt mentions as illustrations of Coler¬ 
idge's early political views, but he does not comment upon their 
literary worth. 

" Kubla Khan, 11 Hazlitt says, "only shews that Mr. Coleridge 
can write better nonsense than any man in England." ^ He follows 
this somewhat acrid remark with the statement, "It is not a poem, 
it is a rnsical composition," 1 which, as a brief description of the 
poem, has yet to be improved upon by any of Coleridge's critics. He 
further t^kes the edge off his conment by quoting from the poem, add¬ 
ing that "We could repeat these lines to ourselves not the less often 
for not knowing the meaning of them." ^ 

Christabel Hazlitt thinks, suffers from the poet's character¬ 
istic weakness, his failure to come to a conclusion, "......his mind 

hangs suspended between poetry and prose, truth and falsehood, and an 
infinity of other things, and from an excess of capability, he does 
Little or nothing." ^ Hazlitt regrets the dishonesty and the affec¬ 
tation which prompts Coleridge to flout critical opinion and affront 
lis readers by such an indelicate and unpoetic expression as "tooth¬ 
less mastiff bitch" and at the same time to discard as vulgar the line 
"hideous, deformed, and pale of hue" which appeared in the nanuscript, 
and which Hazlitt thinks "is necessary to make common sense of the 
first and second part." 4 He admits that there is in the poem "a great 

1 Works: Vol. XIX. p. 34 ” “ ~~ ~~ 

2 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 34 

3 Ibid., p. 32 

4 Ibid., p. 32 













; 








t 

: . . 1 ■. - ’ ■ ’ ’■ 1 



.> 


■ 









; 




. 





’ 








■ 





39 


deal of beauty, both of thought, imagery, and versification," ^ 
but feels that "the effect of the general story is dim, obscure, 
and visionary," ^ and that the conclusion of the second part is 
"absolutely incomprehensible," He thinks, too, that Coleridge’s 
superficial, pretty, and ornamental" 1 style is most unsuited to 
a subject about which there is an element of disgust "which is but 
ill glossed over by a veil of Della Cruscan sentiment and fine writ¬ 
ing— like moonbeams playing on a charnel-house, or flowers strewn 
on a dead body." ^ The poem, however, contains one passage on divided 
friendship about which Hazlitt is uncond itionally enthusiastic; he 
quotes this passage which begins, "AlasI they had been friends in 
youtfr," on two occasions as the "one genuine burst of humanity 
worthy of the author, when no dream oppresses him, no spell binds 
him." As Howe points out the personal application of these lines 
to Hazlitt and Coleridge is obvious. 

Of all Coleridge’s poems Hazlitt's favourite is The Ancient 
Mariner. Upon it he bestows the highest of praise that he gives to 
any of Coleridge's poems. He considers it his most remarkable per¬ 
formance, the only one indicative of his great natural power. He 

4 

admires its "wildness of conception" and describes it as "unques¬ 
tionably a work of genius of wild, irregularity, overwhelming imag¬ 
ination, having that rich, varied movement in the verse, which gives 

! 1 7/orks: Vol. XIX, p. 34 
j 2 Ibid., p. 33 
| 3 Ibid., p. 34 
4 Ibid., Vol. IX, p. 243 


i 



















40 


a distant idea of the lofty or changeful tones of Mr. Coleridge* s 
voice." ^ Occasionally in his essays Hazlitt refers half-affection- 
ately to the " author of The Ancient Mariner ." giving the impression 
that not one of his readers could be so uninformed as not to know 
about whom he is speaking. Generally speaking, Hazlitt does not 
give the poetry of Coleridge its just due; particularly in the case 
of The Ancient Mariner , - the acknowledged masterpiece of romantic 
poetry, - Christabel and Kubla Khan. The explanation of the grudg¬ 
ing character of his commsnt lies in his sincere conviction that 
|their worth was very slight in comparison to what Coleridge could 
have done if only he had given full rein to his inherent poetic 
| talent. Had these poems come from the pen of Tom Moore, or Crabbe, 
lor even Canpbell, Hazlitt would probably have been the first to 
laud them to the skies. 

" 

"The age we live in,” says Hazlitt, "is critical, didactic, 
paradoxical, romantic, but it is not dramatic," 2 and he finds 
little in Coleridge’s dramas that would seem to give the lie to 
his dictum. Although he describes Coleridge’s manner of speaking 
as dramatic, he states quite baldly that "he has no genuine dram- 

o 

atic talent." ° He feels that Coleridge is too prone to wander down 
metaphysical by-paths, and lose himself in a wilderness of scholastic 
speculation to be a. convincing dramatist. The behaviour of his char¬ 
acters lacks reality, their feelings are unnatural, and what the 

1 Works's" Vol. XlTpT 35 ~~ " ' " “ 

2 Ibid., Vol. XVIII, p. 302 

3 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 156 


















41 


author intended for involuntary bursts of passion are too studied 
to arouse the sympathy of the audience. Yet Coleridge*s Remorse 
enjoyed some measure of success when staged, and, if we are to 
accept Howe’s reconsidered statement that Hazlitt wrote the review 
which appeared in the Morning Chronicle (the authorship of which 
had for a long time been doubtful) Hazlitt was on the viiole favour¬ 
ably impressed with the stage production. ^ One of Hazlitt*s most 
glaring inconsistencies is revealed in his critical comment on 
Remorse. On one occasion he criticizes Coleridge for his mannor 
of justifying Ordonio’s murder of his brother, pointing out that 
no one ever justified a murder in his own mind by arguing that the 

ten thousand worms that would feed on the corpse were of more im- 

2 

pportance than the soul of the man he intended to kill. Elsewhere 
he reverses this judgment and acclaims "the greet metaphysical 
truth" w which is expressed by Ordonic •. in the same soliloquy. In 
spite of his statement that Coleridge lacks dramatic talent, Hazlitt 
thinks well enough of the tragedy to apply to it the adjective"meri- 
torious," ^ and he includes it among the more worthwhile of Coler- 

5 

idge’s early works. In The Spirit of the Age where Hazlitt*s 
last word on the subject is to be found, he admits that the tragedy 
is "full of beautiful and striking passages," but states further 
that "it does not place the author in the first rank of dramatic 
| writers." ^ 

1 Works* Vol. XVIII, (pp. 463-465) 4 Ibid., 

2 Ibid., pp. 309-310 5 Ante, p. 36 

3 Ibid., Vol. VIIIj PP* 314-315 6 Works s Vol. XL, p.35 


i 










J 

. 



. 



> 

... 











42 


Of Coleridge’s other tragedy, Zapoyla * Hazlitt has very 
little to say except in a general way when he includes it with 
Remorse as an example of "drawling sentiment and metaphysical jar¬ 
gon.” He does, however, quote the passage from the play dealing 
with the true patriot’s duty to submit to the restraint placed upon 
him and to put his trust in heaven rather than in himself, as the 
"dramatic recantation of the author's popular harangues."^ He 
suggests, too, that this recantation is the probable reason for the 
failure of the tragedy to please the theatre-going public. 

The portraits of his contemporaries through which Hazlitt 
epitomized the spirit of the age are the most free of spite and 
contumely of any of his writings, and contain the fairest and most 
considered of his criticism. In his sketch of Coleridge he modifies 
several of his earlier unfavourable comments. When he says, there¬ 
fore, that Coleridge's prose is ’’utterly abortive," it may safely 
be assumed that such was his honest opinion* To this statement he 
adds: 

"Hardly a gleam is to be found in it of the brilliancy and richness 
of those stores of thought and language that he pours out incessantly, 
when they are lost like drops of water in the ground 
wh 

Hazlitt's most vitriolic criticism of Coleridge’s prose is 
to be found in his attacks upon the poet's political opinions. Here, 
as always, Hazlitt’s judgment is likely to be the result of outraged 
feelings, and here, too, is that same note of indignation with its 

1 Works: Vol. V. p. 166 

2 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 203 

3 Ibid., Vol. XI. p. 35 











43 


undertone of regret. 

Although Coleridge’s Conciones ad Populum and The Watchman 

were products of the period of his life when he and Hazlitt were 

in closest sympathy, Hazlitt refers to them collectively as "dreary 

trash." ^ Elsewhere he uses the former as an example of a speech 

2 

which must be heard to be appreciated, and implies that the latter 
is one of the v/orks that in some measure fulfils the promise of Col¬ 
eridge's youtti, ^ although he deplores its lack of practical meaning. 
The Friend * published periodically in 1809 and 1810 and later revised 
and published in book form, Hazlitt does not pretend to understand. 

"This work (he says in 1816) is so obscure, that it has been supposed 

to be written in cypher.The effect is exceedingly like the qualms 

produced by the heaving of a ship becalmed at sea; the motion is so 
tedious, unprogressive, and sickening." 1 2 3 4 5 

And in the same essay he says: 

"What is his Friend itself but an enormous title-page; the 

longest and most tiresome prospectus that ever was written; an end¬ 

less preface to an imaginary work; a table of contents that fills 
the whole volume; a huge bill of fare of all subjects, with not an 
idea to be had for love or money? One number consists of a grave¬ 
faced promise to perform something impossible in the next; and the ^ 

next is taken up with a long-faced apology for not having done it." 

Here Hazlitt harps on the same interminable string: the promise of 
Coleridge v/hich was never fulfilled. Later in 1825, while still in¬ 
sisting that prolixity and obscurity are the chief characteristics 


1 Works: Vol. V, p. 167 

2 Ibid., Vol. XII, p. 265 

3 Ante, p. 36 and p. 41 

4 Works: Vol. VII, p. 115n 

5 Ibid., p. 115 















. 











5 






. 
















. 










. 

. 

• . : 


■ ■ 








. 















44 


of The Friend, he qualifies his statement with the admission that 
"it contains some noble passages and fine trains of thought." ^ 
Coleridge's Lay Sermons, too, come in for their share of 
criticism, some of which shows Hazlitt at his satirical best; some 
of which is so coloured with personal spite as to become tedious and 
even offensive; but all roundly abusing Coleridge for his inability 
to approach his subject realistically, his tendency to dart from one 
theme to another without having adquately dealt with the first, and 
above all his failure to accomplish what he set out to do. Coleridge* s 
first Lay Sermon was repeatedly advertised in the press before any 
sign of it appeared, and Hazlitt in exasperation at Coleridge's pro¬ 
crastination, adopted the unique procedure of anticipating the subject 
natter of the sermon and of reviewing it before it actually appeared. 

By so doing he clearly shows his conviction that Coleridge could have 
nothing worth saying. The resulting masterpiece of satire is based 
on the premise that "there is no difference between his (Coleridge's) 
published and unpublished compositions;” "that it is just as impos¬ 
sible to get at the meaning of one as the other." 1 2 3 On one hand the 
review emphasizes the resourcefulness and the activity of Coleridge's 
nind, and on the other, his failure to come to grips with truth, and 
bo express himself logically. "Two things are indispensable to him— 

q 

to set out from no premises, and to arrive at no conclusion." 

1 Works : Vol. XI, p. 35 

2 Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 114 

3 Ibid., p. 116 












■ ' 


. 

r 


. 




. • : ... •• * • .. 

1 . . , , . 

. 

'. ' ■ . ' * ... 1 : ... - 







45 


After the sermon finally did appear, Hazlitt wrote a second review 
in which he proceeded to show how his anticipated review was borne 
out by the actual sermon in which Coleridge’s aim was to prove that 
:the Bible is the best guide to political skill and foresight. Haz¬ 
litt analyzes the argument, refutes it point by point, and eventually 
dismisses it as being "the doctrine and practice of divine right with 
a vengeance." **■ 

Of another of these sermons Hazlitt says: 

"He (Coleridge) has given full scope to his genius, and laid himself 
out in absurdity....Instead of inquiring into the distresses of the 
manufacturing districts, he ascends to the orbits of the fixed stars, 
or else enters into the statistics of the garden plot under his win¬ 
dow.An attentive perusal of this Discourse is like watching 

the sails of a windmill: his thoughts and theories rise and disappear 
in the same manner." ^ 

Hazlitt outlines Coleridge’s conception of the responsibility and the 
duty of a Christian and concludes that the lay preacher is entirely 
wrong in affirming that the present state of society is the best to 
be maintained. On many of the subjects on which Coleridge offers 
his opinion, Hazlitt feels that he lias not really made up his mind 
although he has deluded himself that he has. He feels too, that 
Coleridge has mistaken hallucinations for truth, though he still has 
misgivings and is hesitant to commit himself: 

"It is in this sort of waking dream, this giddy maze of opinions, 
started and left, and resumed—this momentary pursuit of truths, as 
if they were butterflies—that Mr. Coleridge’s pleasure, and, we 
believe, his chief faculty lies." 


1 v/orks * Vol. VII, p. 123 

2 Ibid., Vol. XVI, p. 100 

3 Ibid., Vol. XVI, p. 101 









.. 


’ 

.. . . '• 





■ 


- 






- ■ ■ ■ 












. 




■ 

. : . 

. 

:B4 .... , . • 

. 




• . ' > ‘. • . . . 


. ... 

. 


■ 

\ ,i . . .... 


' •• ... . ■ .: ’■ •'j 


1 py ;• : .. . 




... 














46 


Hazlitt's letter to the editor of The Examiner is another 
illustration of his device of contrasting the youthful Coleridge 
with the man that he had become* This letter which contains the 
germ from which Hazlitt’s essay My First Acquaintance with Poets 
evolved, contains an account of that wonderful sermon that Coler¬ 
idge had preached at Shrewsbury on that raw January morning nearly 
twenty years before* Hazlitt can scarcely believe that the roan who 
had preached the sermon that he described could have published the 
sermon described by the editor of the Examiner. 

"What right, Sir, has he or any man to make a fool of me 
or any man? I am naturally, Sir, a man of plain, dull, dry under¬ 
standing, without flights or fancies, and can just contrive to plod 
on, if left to myself: what right, then has Mr* C. v/ho is just going 
to ascend in a balloon, to offer me a seat in the parachute only to 
throw me from the height of his career upon the ground, and dash me 
to pieces? Or again, what right has he to invite me to a feast of 
poets and philosophers, fruits and flowers intermixed,—immortal 
fruits and amaranthine flowers,—and then to tell me it is all vapour, 
and, like Timon , to throw his empty dishes in my face?” 

To Hazlitt the change in Coleridge was tragic. 

Hazlitt takes Coleridge severely to task for his defence of 
Southey against the charge of apostasy. Coleridge has taken the stand 
that the early liberal views professed by the Poet Laureate were mere¬ 
ly a manifestation of his youthful indiscretion, ’more an honour to 
the writer’s heart, than an imputation on his understanding,and 
suggests that the author of the Wat Tyler is neither so wise nor so 
virtuous as the Poet Laureate of later years. That Coleridge seems 
to glory in the fickleness both of his friend and himself is the 


1 Works: Vol. VII, p. 129 

2 Coleridge: Article in Courier ? quoted Vol.VII, p.177 























. 


1 




47 


thing that Hazlitt cannot tolerate. He can forgive anything but 
inconsistency of political opinion which is utterly abhorrent to 
him. He divides Coleridge’s ’’flabby defence" 1 2 of Southey into 
six main arguments and disposes of them neatly and vigorously, 
with a nice blend of satire and regret. 

Hazlitt uses Coleridge’s prose style as an illustration of 
the poet’s own comparison of poetic prose to "the second-hand finery 
of a lady’s maid," ^ and what he considers even worse, of the oppos¬ 
ite fault, "an affectation of quaintness and originality." ^ On the 
whole he finds that Coleridge, the writer of prose, is submerged 
and overwhelmed by Coleridge the poet. His efcyle is too extravagant 
too fantastic for clearness, chiefly because he is unable to deal 
logically with one theme at a time, but must indulge in flights of 
fancy entirely divorced from the commonsense and reality which are 
the first requisites of a sound prose style. In attempting every¬ 
thing at once, Coleridge accomplishes nothing. Sven while he scores 
Coleridge for his extravagant use of metaphor, Hazlitt shows himself 
to be extremely apt in the use of figurative language: 

"With bits of tarnished lace and worthless frippery, he assumes a 
sweeping oriental costume, or borravs the stiff dresses of our an¬ 
cestors, or starts an eccentric fashion of his own. He is swelling 
and turgid—everlastingly aiming to be greater than his subject; 
filling his fancy with fumes and vapours in the pangs and throes of 
miraculous parturition, and bringing forth only still births . He 
has an incessant craving, as it were, to exalt every idea into a 
metaphor, to expand every sentiment into a lengthened mystery, vol¬ 
uminous and vast, confused and cloudy. His style is not succinct, 

1 Works: Vol. VII, ?. ISO " “ ‘ ‘ 

2 Ibid., Vol. XII, p. 15 











48 


but incumbered with a train of words and images which have no prac¬ 
tical, and only a possible relation to each other—that add to its 
stateliness, but impede its march. One of his sentences winds its 
'forlorn way obscure' over the page like a patriarchal procession 
with camels laden, wreathed turbans, household wealth, the whole 
riches of the author's mind poured out upon the barren waste of his 
subject. The palm-tree is in the distance. All this is owing to 
his wishing to overdo every thing—to make something more out of 
everything than it is, or than it is worth. The simple truth does 
not satisfy him—no direct proposition fills up the moulds of his 
understanding. .411 is foreign, far-fetched, irre+efcant, laboured, 
unproductive. To read one of his disquisitions is like hearing the 
variations to a piece of music without the score. Or, to vary the 
simile, he is not like a man going a journey by the stage-coach 
along the high-road, but is always getting into a balloon, and mount- 
into the air, above the plain ground of prose. Whether he soars to 
the empyrean,or dives to the centre (as he sometimes does), it is 
equally to get away from the question before him, and to prove that 
he owes everything to his own mind." ^ 

In his detailed criticism of Coleridge's major prose work, 
his Biographia Literaria . Hazlitt successfully proves the truth of 
jmany of the above contentions. Of this work, he is a severe but on 
the whole a just critic. He deals harshly with its weaknesses and 
generously with its excellences. The first part of the work, which 
is concerned with Coleridge's early life and education and his prep¬ 
aration for a literary career, Hazlitt finds net only readable, but 
interesting and enlightening. As he has done elsewhere, he rabidly 
denounces Coleridge for explaining and apologizing for remaining for 
so long aloof from the party of which he was a supporter at the time 
that he was writing his Life. The middle section of the work, which 
deals with Coleridge's hobby of psychology and metaphysics, Hazlitt 

describes as "a long-winded metaphysical march, which resembles a 

o 

patriarchal journey,"* and he differs as sharply with Coleridge upon 


2 Ibid., Vol. XVI, p. 121 









. 

. . ’ • 

' 

. 

' 

; ’ c i 

- 


. 

* 

■ 

■ 

. 

. 

t 


. 

. 

’ ' ■ 


r ■ 


- 



. . 

. 




■ ■ - ... ' : ■ . 

■>* '■ \ c» '• -.s' r 

- - •• V .... v ... - 









49 


Kant and Hobbes as he does elsewhere upon Hume.^ From the chapter 
on the setting up of The Watchman , Hazlitt quotes most copiously. 

Here again we find him putting Coleridge's best foot forward for 
him. It is to be expected that Hazlitt would linger over this sec¬ 
tion of the work, since in this Coleridge is, for the time, the old 
Coleridge whom Hazlitt revered and loved. Of the passages written 
on a lighter note Hazlitt somewhat apologetically remarks: "If this 
is not the very highest vein of wit in the world, it must be admitted 
at least to be very innocent merriment." ^ 

To Coleridge's estimate of Burke, Hazlitt takes violent ex¬ 
ception, particularly with respect to the consistency of the latter's 
opinion. As a matter of fact, there is a certain kinship between 
Hazlitt*s regard for Burke, and his regard for Coleridge. Burke, 
the liberal and the opponent of the American War holds much the 
same place in his affection as the Coleridge of 1798; while Burke 
the opponent of the French Revolution excites the same contempt as 
Coleridge, the apostate of liberalism. Hazlitt, it should be noted 
in passing, is not always consistent on the subject of Burke. At 
one time he even goes so far as to say that "the speaking of him 
with contempt might be made the test of a vulgar, democratical mind." * 2 3 
That Hazlitt does not always live up to this standard is apparent in 
his disagreement with Coleridge's opinion as well as in his two es¬ 
says on The Character of Hr. Burke. As in the case of Coleridge, 

1"Works: Vol. XVI, p. 110 ~ 

2 Ibid., Vol. XVI, p. 129 

3 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. Ill 

















' 




. 




1 •• ' 


■ ■ • : 








■ .. 







■ 



■' -- ’■ J .. V. 



‘ . ... . ; - ) 

■ i 


- . . . . t . . ■ : 


SJ 






* 

1 










. 




■ — • • ... ■ - ' 










* 


. . 




■ 












• -•*•••• 






50 


Hazlitt feels that he has the best right in the world to speak his 
mind on Burke, and his violent attack upon Coleridge’s opinion of 
the orator and statesman, rather suggests that he resents Coleridge’s 
effrontery in daring to express his opinion. 

The long section on the poetry of Wordsworth, which the 
majority of critics consider Coleridge's greatest contribution to 
literary criticism, Hazlitt dismisses with the comment that he does 
not think it "very remarkable either for clearness or candour," ^ 
and adds that since he has already given his opinions of Wordsworth’s 
poetry elsewhere, he does not care to reopen the subject. The review 
ends on a characteristically sour note: 

"This is the true history of our reformed Antijacobin poets; 
the life of one whom is here recorded. The cant of Morality, like 
the cant of Methodism, comes in most naturally to close the scene: 
and as the regenerated sinner keeps alive his old raptures and new- 
acquired horrors, by anticipating endless ecstasies or endless tor¬ 
tures in another world; so, our disappointed demagogue keeps up that 
'pleasurable poetic fervour' vihich has been the cordial and the bane 
of his existence, by indulging his maudlin egotism and his mawkish 
spleen in fulsome eulogies of his own virtues, end nauseous abuse 
of his contemporaries--in making excuses for doing nothing himself, 
and assigning bad motives for v/hat others have done . Till he can do 
something better, we would rather hear no more of him." ^ 

That Coleridge possessed all the qualifications necessary for 
an excellent critic, Hazlitt has not the slightest doubt. For the 
scope of his reading, the depth of his knowledge, the keenness of his 
intellect, and the scintillating brilliance of his mind, Hazlitt has 
the greatest admiration. To the inspirational quality of Coleridge’s 
criticism he pays one of his few really gracious, and certainly one 


1 Works: Vol. XVI, p. 134 

2 Ibid., p. 138 











51 


of his most sincere compliments: 

"There is no man of genius, in whose praise, he descants, but the 
critic seems to stand above the author, and ’what in him is weak, 
to strengthen, what is low, to raise and support*: nor is there any 
work of genius that does not come out of his hands like an illumin¬ 
ated Missal, sparkling even in its defects." 

Hazlitt does not, however, always agree with Coleridge’s 

individual judgments. He thinks that the poet puts too high a value 

on Bowles’s sonnets, admirable as they are; that he is too intolerant 

of Pope, and too contemptuous of Gray. He feels, too, that Coleridge 

(like himself) is likely to allow himself to be too greatly influenced 

by the purely personal element. On this score he says: 

"....he was profound and discriminating with respect to those authors 
whom he liked, and where he gave his judgment fair play; capricious, 
perverse, and prejudiced in his antipathies and distastes." ^ 

Hazlitt is not impressed with Coleridge’s estimate of the value of 

Wordsworth’s poetrjr, and entirely out of sympathy with his criticism 

i 

of Southey and Burke. He is quite willing to concede Coleridge s 
knowledge and critical appreciation of Shakespeare in general, but on 
the subject of the poet’s interpretation of The Tempest , Hazlitt 
writes as though his patience ms strained to the bursting point. 

Ih the first of his series of lectures on Shakespeare Coleridge char¬ 
acterized Caliban as the prototype of Jacobinism and this suggestion 
is more than Hazlitt can stand, and as is usually the case when his 
political feelings have been outraged, he goes further, in his attempt 
to refute the argument, than the dictates of good taste permit. His 

1 ’fforks: Yol. XI. p.3Q 

2 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. 121 

















: 




. • ' 



















52 


exasperation is plainly shown in the last sentence of the following 
excerpt which may be considered in the light of an apology for his 
breach of good literary manners. 

"Caliban is so far from being a prototype of modern Jacob¬ 
inism that he is strictly the legitimate sovereign of the isle, 
and Prospero and the rest are usurpers, who have ousted him from his 

hereditary jurisdiction by superiority of talent and knowledge. 

He is the Louis XVIII of the enchanted island in The Tempest : ... 
.....the superior beauty and accomplishments of Ferdinand and Miranda 
could no more be opposed to the legitimate claims of this deformed 
and loathsome monster, than the beauty and intellect of the Bona.parte 
family can be opposed to the bloated and ricketty minds and bodies 
of the Bourbons, cast, as they are, in the true Jus Divinum mould! 

This is gross. Why does Mr. Coleridge provoke us to write great 
nonsense as he talks?" ^ 

Although Hazlitt has enjoyed himself and given enjoyment to 
his readers in his imaginary account of Coleridge as a dramatic critic 
he holds no very exalted opinion of Coleridge’s actual performance. 

He refers to him as "the long-winded and heavy-handed writer in the 

q 4 

Courier", and implies that here too, his "lumbering criticisms" 
savour too much of metaphysical obscurity. 

All Hazlitt*s references to Coleridge—to the man himself, 
to his eloquence and charm, to his politics and philosophy, to his 
poetry and prose—are variations on the same themes his betrayal of 
his early liberal ideals and his failure to make use of his excep¬ 
tional talents to accomplish anything commensurate with the promise 
of his youth. Yet when Hazlitt*s purely literary criticism is re- 


1 Works: Vol. XIX, p. 207 

2 Ante, pp. 36 and 41 

3 Works : Vol. XVIII, p. 335 

4 Ibid., p. 336 



















53 


fined from the dross of his personal attitude and prejudice, much 
that is pure gold remains, and it is upon this that the soundness 
of his criticism of Coleridge should be estimated. 









CHAPTER III 


ON WILLIAM WORDSWORTH 







54 


M He is the greatest, that is, the most original poet of 
the present day, only because he is the greatest egotist." 

— Hazlitt 

Hazlitt*s criticism of William Wordsworth is not complicated 
by the constant obtrusion of his personal feelings as is the case 
with Coleridge. When Hazlitt was told that he was to make the 
acquaintance of Wordsworth during his memorable visit to Nether 
Stowey, he was prepared to admire the poet for Coleridge*s sake, 
since Coleridge had such a high regard for him, but he was not pre¬ 
pared for the tremendous impression made upon him by the man himself 
and by the simple power of his new and unusual poetry. So great was 
this impression that a quarter of a century later, Hazlitt was able 
to give us so singularly vivid an account of his first meeting with 

Wordsworth that we readily envisage the man as Hazlitt saw him- 

his high narrow forehead, Roman nose, and fiery eye; we hear him 
speak in his "northern burr, like the crust on wine;" ^ and we see 
him, dressed in his brown fustian jacket and striped pantaloons, 
lounging about the garden paths of Alfoxden. Hazlitt speaks with 
gratitude of Wordsworth’s having made him for the first time sen¬ 
sible of the beauty of the sunset, and in one of his last essays he 

uses Wordsworth’s appreciation of the "yellow light shining on the 

2 

evening bank" to epitomize the poet's early ideals. It was Words¬ 
worth’s poetry, too, read to Hazlitt by Coleridge from the manuscript 
of the Lyrical Ballads, that awoke the youth to "the deeper powers 
and pathos" which were the later acknowledged characteristics of 


1 WorkaA Vol. XVII, p. 118 


2 Ibid., p. 377 





















i 





















c , ." ; v ?.V X 




■ 

7 






• 


. 

' 



• 

. 



' 



• 

- ;j 

. 

. 



' 


■ 

• 





. ’ 



. 




. 

. 

• • 

• 




i 

. ■; 

: 1 i:... V • d 

. .. 


.... 

• 

* 

• ' l-.A v w j; / . 

■ 


: ’>■■■■ d ■: X . zXt 





■ 


* \ 






55 


Wordsworth* s poetry, and made him alive to the style and the spirit 
of romantic poetry. 

Of his later relations with Wordsworth we learn little from 
Hazlitt himself. Indeed he rather avoids the subject, or skirts it 
with a reserve which is quite foreign to his usually uninhibited pen. 
We know from Wordsworth* s letter to Hazlitt* s son ^ that on his second 
visit to the Lakes, Hazlitt attempted a portrait of the poet that he 
destroyed unfinished because he was not satisfied with it, and that 
Wordsworth saw Hazlitt on only one occasion after 1803. In another 
letter Wordsworth implies to Coleridge that this occasion was cert¬ 
ainly not of his seeking. Hazlitt*s singular reluctance to discuss 
his relations with the poet on that second unfortunate visit, might 
be considered by some as evidence that perhaps, after all, there was 
more than a grain of truth in Wordsworth* s belated accusation that 
Hazlitt behaved unspeakably in the incident of the village lass. 

Much of Hazlitt*s early admiration for Wordsworth was, of 
course, prompted by his whole-hearted devotion to the political 
principles and ideal which were then expounded by thepoet, but on 
which he later turned an uncompromising back. Wordsworth had lived 
in France during those stirring early days of the Revolution. He 
had seen the Bastille fall, and the crowds dancing in the streets 
to celebrate their new-found liberty, and his sympathies had gone 
out to their cause. Upon his return to England he devoted himself 
to the writing of poetry much of which reflected his revolutionary 
1 Quoted by Howes Life of Hazlitt, p. 72 









* ■ 

' 

I 

' 







, - : 



- 






1 ' ,, , . t 


. . w. . . •. 






' 

■ 





- 











< • ' 









> 
































56 


spirit and his entire lack of sympathy tp the rising tide of nation¬ 
alism. He made no attempt to conceal his hatred of the king, the 
regent, and the ministry. His friendship with Coleridge and their 
subsequent literary partnership in the production of the Lyrical 
Ballads « were in a large measure rooted in their common enthusiasm 
for the principles of liberty. To Hazlitt, reared as he was in an 
atmosphere of liberalism, Wordsworth’s ideals were right and proper; 
indeed they were the only ideals that he felt could be held by high- 
thinking and socially minded men of intellect. But when the French 
Revolution passed into the Terror, the ideals of Liberty, Equality 
and Fraternity began to recede further and further into the background, 
and France drew the European countries one after the other into a 
defensive war ^ Wordsworth lost his faith in immediate social reform, 
and turned to the abstract meditation of roan and society. From the 
year 1805, when he lost his beloved brother John, who was drowned at 
sea, Wordsworth became an altered man. His change in political be¬ 
liefs came gradually, but by 1815 he was as confirmed a reactionary 
as he had formerly been a revolutionary. According to many of his 
apologists’ he had been betrayed by his early political faith, not 
it by him. To these he was not an apostate, but one whose views 
slowly and honestly evolved as a result of changing circumstances. 

To others his change of thought was the normal reaction of a man, 
who, after his early revolutionary adventures strove for serenity 
and security as he approached middle life. But not to Hazlitt. To 
him with his fetish of consistency of political opinion, Wordsworth 







. ' 











57 


wag the epitome of apostasy, beyond the pale either of understanding 
or forgiveness. His admiration and reverence for the man gave way 
to contempt, and because he had never been under the sway of Words¬ 
worth’s personality to the extent that he had been under Coleridge*s, 
his criticism, which sometimes rises to heights of bitter indignation 
and condemnation, is rarely softened by personal regret* That Words¬ 
worth’s political theories could ’’change with his clothes,” while his 
poetical vanity ”stuck to him like his skin” ^ Hazlitt attributes 
to his colossal egotism and to his vanity which he emphasizes through 
out his criticism as, respectively, the most outstanding-axl the most 
offensive features of Wordsworth’s character. The essay subtitled 
On Modern Apostates which appeared in The Sxaminer of December, 1816, 
Hazlitt begins with a sweeping indictment of the apostates of his age 
then taking Wordsworth as an illustration, he says: 

’’See, here comes one of them to answer for himself • It is 
the same person who in the year 1800 w^.s for making an example of 
the whole House of Commons (in spite of the humble petition and re¬ 
monstrance of the writer of this article in favour of a small minor¬ 
ity), for being the echoes of the King’s speeches for carrying on the 
war against the French Revolution* What is that thing he has in his 
hand? It is not, nor can it be, a sonnet to the King, celebrating 
his ’royal fortitude,’ in having brought that v/ar to a successful 
close fourteen years after 1 

’Such recantation had no charms for him, 

’Nor could he brook it.* ^ 

Of Wordsworth* s ’’arbitrary egotism and pampered self-sufficiency” ^ 
Hazlitt writes voluminously. He berates his jealousy and small- 


1 Works: Vol. XVII, p. 26 

2 Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 133 

3 Ibid., Vol. XIX p. 36 







































' 

... . * 







58 


mindedness in refusing to admit the excellence of work other than 
his own, and deplores his inability to recognize the greatness of 
others, the recognition of which, as Carlyle points out, implies 
greatness. Of Wordsworth's all-embracing hates, Hazlitt, with more 
vigor than truth, has this to say: 

"He hates all science and all art; he hates chemistry, he 
hates conchology; he hates Sir Isaac Newton; he hates logic, he hates 
metaphysics, w£ich he says are unintelligible, and yet he would be 
thought to understand them; he hates prose, he hates all poetry but 
his own; he hates Shakespeare, or what he calls ’those interlocutions 
between Lucius and Caius,' because he would have all the talk to him¬ 
self, and considers the movements of passion in Lear , Othello , or 
tlacbeth , as impertinent, compared with the Moods of his own Mind; he 
thinks every thing good is contained in the 'Lyrical Ballads', or, 
if it is not contained there, it is good for nothing; he hates music, 
dancing, and painting; he hates Rubens, he hates Rembrandt, he hates 
Raphael, he hates Titian, he hates Vandyke; he hates the antique; he 
hates the Apollo Belvedere; he hates the Venus de Medicis. He hates 
all that others love and admire but himself. He is glad that Bona¬ 
parte is sent to Saint Helena, and that the Louvre is dispersed for 
the same reason—to get rid of the idea of any thing greater, or 
thought greater than himself. The Bourbons, and their processions of 
the Holy Ghost, give no disturbance to his vanity; and he therefore 
gives them none." ^ 

2 

Hazlitt reproduces this passage in his essay On the Living Poets , 
but in The Spirit of the Age , which contains his most considered 
criticism of Wordsworth, he adds that the indictments contained there¬ 
in "are mere epigrams and .jeux d*esprit as far from the truth as they 

3 

are free from malice." While there may be two opinions as to whether 
this is quite the handsome retraction that Howe would have us believe 
it to be, ^ certainly Hazlitt meant to relieve his former criticism 


I Works: Vol. VII, pp. 144-145 

2 Ibid., Vol. V, pp. 163-164 

3 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 94 

4 Hbwe*> Life of Hazlitt , p. 214 
















































59 


of sane of its sting. 

Y/hat Hazlitt considers Wordsworth’s servility he frankly 
detests. That the poet would stoop to accept the post of stamp- 
distributor from a government that he had hated with such passion 
in his early days, is to Hazlitt, a mark of servility which should 
make the poet blush for shame. He never misses an opportunity to 
jibe at the stamp-collector, the customs house officer, the pensioned 
sonneteer, the poet "with a receipt-stamp in his hand," ^ and even 
goes out of his way to relate an anecdote about the "ostentatious 
servility" of Ytfordsworth*s borrowing a man-servant and insisting 
upon extra table appointments upon the occasion of his entertaining 
a lord at dinner. In this connection he makes the scathing comment 
that "It is better to be a lord than to be a lacquey to a lord." 1 2 
The story itself the merest trifle; it is the fact that Hazlitt 
would take the trouble to repeat it that is enlightening. Perhaps 
it is fortunate that Hazlitt never lived to see Wordsworth accept 
the Laureateship, since there is ho prophesying to what lengths his 
indignation might have taken him. 

Some of Hazlitt*s incidental references to Wordsworth are so 
highly spiced with animosity as to be decidedly unpalatable. When, 
for example, he characterizes Tom Moore as the one honest man among 
the modern mountebank Poets and Patriots and says, "He is neither a 
conoomb nor a cat'spaw—a whiffling turncoat nor a thorough-paced tool, 

1 Works: Vol. VII, pi 152 ” ' “ 

2 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. 27 







^ .. 


0 

.. I .... 








. - 


i'i'Jsi Ui': 


, . 


a 










. j. 


! ... 

■ 




It i l . . 


; L V ff‘J. C,\ 




■ 




■ 


£ 










60 


a mouthing sycophant, "a full solempne man,* like Mr* Wordsworth," 
he goes definitely beyond the borders of good taste. On the other 
hand Hazlitt occasionally pays Wordsworth a veiled compliment, as 
when he suggests that the reader will enjoy Daniel*s Epistle to 

the Countess of Cumberland all the more for knowing that it is one 

2 

of the poet*s favorites. 

In the closing paragraph of his portrait of Wordsworth in 
The Spirit of the Age , Hazlitt comes closest to offering an apology 
for Wordsworth*s peculiarities. Here he says that as Byron was 
"the spoiled child of fortune," so Wordsworth might be called "the 
spoiled child of disappointment," and proceeds to explain the epi¬ 
thet this: 

"We are convinced that if he had been early a popular poet, 
he would have borne his honours meekly, and would have been a per¬ 
son of great bonhommie and frankness of disposition. But the sense 
of injustice and of undeserved ridicule sours the temper and narrows 
the views. To have produced works of genius, and to find them ne¬ 
glected or treated with scorn, is one of the heaviest trials of human 
patience. We exaggerate our own merits when they are denied by others, 
and are apt to grudge and cavil at every particle of praise bestowed 
on those to whom we feel a conscious superiority. In mere self-defence 
we turn against the world, when it turns against us; brood over the 
undeserved slights we receive; and thus the genial current of the 
sould is stopped, or vents itself in effusions of petulance and self- 
conceit."^ 

Hazlitt continues by expressing his opinion that Wordsworth is too 
susceptible to contemporary criticism and not sufficiently sensible 
to what might be the opinion of posterity to be a happy man, ajid de¬ 
plores his tendency to resent censure more than to be gratified by 

1 Works: Vol. VII,p.287 

2 Ibid., Vol.:VI, p. 309 

3 Ibid., Vol. XT 5 pp,.93-94 














1 




La . r; , ' jf.^r •' 

:/iO t\ . : - . ' 

■ ■ . 




' X . 




















u I. ; V c r 






, 

. , * •..<. 

. 

■ 

. . ' .. ; 



■ 













- 










61 

praise* But even in this essay, his mildest in tone, Hazlitt can¬ 
not resist the temptation to end on a somewhat tart note: 

".the tide has turned much in his favour of late years—he 

has a large body of determined partisans—and is at present suf¬ 
ficiently in request with the public to save or relieve him from 
the last necessity to which a man of genius can be reduced—that 
of becoming the God of his own idolatry!” 

Despite Hazlitt f s contempt for Y/ordsworth*s political apos¬ 
tasy and his distaste for his egotism, his self-sufficiency, and his 
servility, he never for an instant denies that the poet is a man of 
genius—genius which he describes as ”a pure emanation of the Spirit 

p 

of the Age.” "In ray opinion,” says Hazlitt, "Mr* Y/ordsworth is the 
only poet of the present day that is likely to live-- should he ever 
happen to be born! But who will be the midwife to bring his works 
to light?" ^ Posterity has seen fit to assign the role of midwife 
to Coleridge, but surely to Hazlitt should go the credit of at 
least acting as assistant accoucheur. 

For Y/ordsworth’s poetry as a whole Hazlitt had the highest 
admiration, although he is not at all backvjard in pointing out its 
weaknesses. He thinks that Wordsworth, like Coleridge, produced 
his best work when he was still young enough to recapture the liber¬ 
al spirit of his youth. To this period belong the Lyrical Ballads. 
The Prelude, most of The Excursion , many of his best known short 
poems and sonnets, and the greater part of his Immortality Ode . 

The later poems in their dignified courtliness and polish follow 

1 Works: Vol. XI, p* 95 

2 Ibid*, p* 86 

3 Ibid., Vol. XX, p. 128 














.... , . 

; .. . ,, , . j v [£ 

. ’ . 



















. j 










.. 

•• 







62 


too much the classical tradition to be typically Y/ordsworthian in 
character. The Laodamia, written in 1814, was, nevertheless, one 
of Hazlitt’s prime favorites. "It is a poem,” he says, "that might 
be read aloud in Elysium, and the spirits of departed heroes and 
sages would gather round to listen to it!" ^ Elsewhere he quotes 
from the poem the line, 

’Elysian beauty, melancholy grace,’ 
as an example of the poet’s subtle sense of beauty and adds, "I 
would as soon have written that line as have carved a Greek statue."^ 
The Lyrical Ballads, Hazlitt thinks, "open a finer and deeper 

3 

vein of thought than any poet in modern times has done or attempted." 

He feels that they are an experiment in keeping with the revolutionary 

spirit of the age, and commends the lofty philosophical tone as well 

as the spirit of humanity which, in contrast to the spirit of fashion 

and worldliness, is the very breath of Wordsworth’s poetry. 

"To the author of the Lyrical Ballads nature is a sort of home; and 
he may be said to take a personal interest in the universe. There 
is no image so insignificant that it has not in some mood or other 
found the way into his hearts sound that does not awaken the memory 
of other years.— 

’To him the meanest flower that blows can give 
Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.’ 

The daisy looks up to him with sparkling eye as an old acquaintance: 
the cuckoo haunts him with sounds of early youth not to be expressed: 
a linnet’s nest startles him with boyish delights a grey cloak, seen 
on some wild moor, torn by the wind, or drenched in the rain, after- 
; wards becomes an object of imagination to him: even the lichens on 
the rock have a life and being in his thoughts. He has described all 
these objects in a way and with an intensity of feeling that no one 


1 Workss Vol. XI, p. 90 

2 Ibid., Vol. XII, p. 320 

3 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 156 














f/v. 

■) 


; 







63 


else had done before him, and has given a new view or aspect of 
nature. He is in this sense the most original poet now living, 
and the one whose writings could the least be spared: for they 
have no substitute elsewhere 

Though Hazlitt himself is not averse to making an occasional slight¬ 
ing remark about the puerilities to be found in the Lyrical Ballads , 
he is quick to defend them against the attacks of others, pointing 
out the great mistake made by Mr. Jeffrey in denying their beauties 
"because they were included in no school, because they were reduc¬ 
ible to no previous standard or theory of poetical excellence," ^ 
Furthermore, he suggests that the reason that some critics scoff at 
their simplicity is that they cannot understand their abstruseness, 
and maintains that they will always be the favourites of men of 
intellect and students of nature everywhere, Wordsworth*s larger 
poems, he thinks cannot compare with certain of the Lyrical 3allads, 
and he cites among others The Reverie of Poor Susan, The Banks of 
7/ye , intern Abbey the bird and flower lyrics, as illustrations 
of "inconceivable beauty, of perfect originality and pathos." 
Hart-Lean Well he quotes in its entirety as an example of v/hat 
Wordsworth’s admirers find t o be delimited with in his poetry. 

Writing of the great Immortality Ode , Hazlitt points out 
that Wordsworth*s philosophy is fallacious, since it is experience 
which brings us to reality after we have emerged from our youthful 
world of desire and fancy, not that our early thoughts are the 

1 Works: VolT XI, pT89 ' “ ~~~ 

2 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 129 

3 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 156 














' ■ ■ 

















64 


links to that other world whence we came* He is doubtful, however, 
that Wordsworth meant the poem to be other than "an ingenious and 
poetical allegory.” ^ What is valuable in the poem is the poet '3 
exquisite rendering of his own feelings about the changp from youth 
to age, and his giving artistic expression to what is true for him. 

Many of Wordsworth 1 2 s early sonnets Hazlitt finds admirable. 

The thought and subject-matter of the later sonnets which were com¬ 
posed after the poet had forsaken his early liberal principles make 
them distasteful to Hazlitt. The 1813 Sonnet to the King particularly 
rouses Hazlitt 1 s ire, and more than once he makes it the butt of his 
vigorous satire. On one occasion he contrasts Wordsworth’s failure 
to uphold his youthful ideals with Milton’s fixed devotion to the 
principles of liberty: 

”Mr. V/ordsworth’s are also finely conceived and high-sounding 
Sonnets. They mouth it well, and are said to be sacred to Liberty 

.The beauty of Milton*s Sonnets is their sincerity, the spirit 

of poetical patriotism which they breathe. Either Milton’s or the 
living bard’s are defective in this respect. There is no Sonnet of 
Milton’s on the Restoration of Charles II. There is no Sonnet of 
Mr. Wordsworth’s, corresponding to that of ’the poet blind and bold,’ 
On the late Massacre in Piedmont . It would be niggard praise to Mr. 
Wordsworth to grant that he was either half the man or half the poet 
that Milton was. He has not his high and various imagination, nor 
his deep and fixed principle. Milton did not worship the rising sun, 
nor turn his back on a losing and fallen cause. 

0 

’Such recantation had no charms for him!” 

That Hazlitt quotes Wordsworth's own line from The Excursion , only 
serves to sharpen his satire . 


1 Works : Vol. IV, p. 250 

2 Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 176 













■ 













• 3 9 







' 








- •• 


. . . . • - i . 

■ i ' 

. d 






, 

■ 


i 
















i ' 















65 


Hazlitt's most comprehensive and at the same time most 
detailed criticism of Wordsworth as a poet is to be found in his 
observations upon The Excursion, which appeared in three instal¬ 
ments in The Examiner , in the fall of 1814, Here Hazlitt loses 
no time in letting us know how much he admires the poem. 

"In power of intellect, in lofty conception, in the depth 
of feeling, at once simple and subline, which pervades every part of 
it and which gives to every object an almost preternatural and pre¬ 
terhuman interest, this work has seldom been surpassed." * 

Hazlitt is impressed, too, by the majestic power and magnificence 
of the poem, and feels that the reader is at once transported to the 
scene of the poem, straightway to be awed by the "gigantic and eter¬ 
nal forms of Nature." ^ Again Hazlitt emphasizes the intellectual 
egotism of the poet, the fact that he identifies himself with Nature, 
and by so doing withdraws himself from the realities of life, cre¬ 
ating his material from his own thoughts. Even as he praises the 
largeness of the poet's conception, depth of his feeling, the rug¬ 
ged simplicity, and the power of imagination which are exemplified 
in the poem, Hazlitt feels that there is a certain lack of variety, 
and that the poet fails to heighten his effect by the development 
of the unusual and by the use of contrast. Above all, he deplores 
the poet's lack of dramatic talent. Wordsworth's characters can¬ 
not speak for themselves; they must speak only through him. In the 
poet's effort to play all the parts himself Hazlitt feels that he 
does not play them well. 


1 Works: Vol. XIX, o. 9 









v 1 J V ' V'L . 

•' : ' 

' « 

; .. ■ ■ -v 

, 


, 


% v •. 

• 

. 


. 


. • ... 



. • • ■ 

\l ' i 


• 

■ 

. . 

. 


1 


• «» 

. 

. 


i 

, 

. 

: ' i 

1 

, 




66 


That Wordsworth did not stay with the philosophical aspect 
of his theme is a matter of regret to Hazlitt. He feels that the 
progress of the philosophical thought is encumbered and retarded 
by "a load of narrative and description." ^ He commends the force¬ 
fulness of the passage in which Wordsworth has contrasted the warm 
and glowing spirit of the religion of ancient Greece with the cold 
and lifeless spirit of modern philosophy, but he disagrees violently 
with the poet’s reference to Candide as "the dull product of a 
scoffer’s pen," 1 2 3 4 and feels that in calling Voltaire’s work dull, 

Wordsworth has not done justice to his own genius. "A speculative 

3 

bigot," he says, " is a solecism in this intellectual world." 

Hazlitt quotes at some length the passages of the poem which 

deal v/ith the French Revolution. These he finds most interesting; 

he cannot agree, however, with Wordsworth’s aspirations for the 

future of society, nor with the conclusion "that one day our triumph, 

4 

the triumph of humanity and liberty may be complete." Howe accounts 
for Hazlitt*s Offering with the application of Wordsworth’s memor¬ 
able lines" by explaining that Hazlitt was aware that the character 
of Solitary was drawn chiefly from Hazlitt’s old friend and mentor, 
Joseph Fawcett, at whose feet Wordsworth himself had sat in the old 
days, and he feels that the poet has done scant just ice to the memory 
of his friend. As Mow© suggests, Hazlitt probably "found himself 

1 Works: Vol. XIX, p. 9 

2 Ibid., p. 12 

3 Ibid., p. 15 

4 Ibid., p. 17 










67 


powerfully divided between allegiance to the work of a poet whom he 
had loved and studied, and to a cause which believed to be even more 
important than that of poetry.' 1 ^ 

In the last instalment of his review, Hazlitt is somev/hat 
critical of the simplicity of Wordsworth's style. Although he has 
always been in sympathy with the new poetry which discarded the trap¬ 
pings and ornament of classical verse and returned to a more subjec¬ 
tive treatment and a more natural style, Hazlitt thinks that Words¬ 
worth has perhaps gone too far and that in many places in his poem 
he has robbed his thoughts of their rare beauty by using too starkly 
simple language. Furthermore, he says that Wordsworth's love of 
nature is both his strength and his weakness, his strength lying in 
his marvellous descriptions of the beauties of nature, his weakness 
in his idealizing of the rustic character. 

"However we may sympathize with Mr. Wordsworth in his attachment 
to the groves and fields, we cannot extend the same admiration to 
their inhabitants, or to the manners of country life in general. 

We go along with him, while he is the subject of his own narrative, 
but we leave him when he makes pedlars and ploughmen his heroes and 
the interpreters of his sentiments. It is, we think, getting into 
low company, besides that we do not like. We take Mr* Wordsworth 
himself for a great poet, a fine moralist, and a deep philosopher5 
but if he insists on introducing us to a friend of his, a parish 
clerk or the barber of the village, who is as wise as himself, we 
must be excused if we draw back with some little want of cordial 
faith." 2 

Hazlitt's own experiences with country life had not given him any 
reason to extol the'virtues of the rural character, and he proceeds 
at some length and with no little relish to give his ideas on the 


1 Howe: Life of Hazlitt, p. 174, and note. 

2 Works: Vol. XIX, p.20 

















;v * 




. 


. ■ 









68 


subject s 


"All country people hate each other. They have so little 
comfort that they envy their neighbors the smallest pleasure or 
advantage, and nearly grudge themselves the necessaries of life 

.They had rather injure themselves than oblige anyone else.... 

There is a perpetual round of mischief-making and backbiting for 
want of any better amusement....Ignorance is always bad enough; but 
rustic ignorance is int olerable......" ^ 

We can understand even if we do not condone Hazlitt's sentiments, 
and we can see how insufferable to him ws.s Wordsworth's glorification 
of the yokel. Not that Hazlitt is a snob in the narrow sense of the 
word. His chief objection here is not to the social but to the in¬ 
tellectual implications of Wordsworth's treatment of his rustics. 
Hazlitt was quite willing to admit their social equality, but that 
Wordsworth should attempt to foist them upon his readers in the 
roles of poet and philosopher, was more than he could tolerate. 

For some of the stories contained in the latter part of 
The Excursion, Hazlitt has the highest praise. He quotes the con¬ 


clusion of the story of Sir Alfred Irthing with the comment that 
it is admirable, and "comes in like some drying close in music." 
The review of the poem ends with these words: 


"If Mr. Wordsworth does not always write in this manner, it 
is his own fault. He can as often as he pleases. It is not in our 
poY/er to add to, or take away from, the pretensions of a poem like 
the present, but if our opinion or wishes could have the least weight, 
we would take our leave of it by saying— Esto perpetual " 


1 Works: Vol. XIX, pp. 22-23 

2 Ibid., p. 24 

3 Ibid., p. 25 














69 


Such then, is the substance of Hazlitt*s famous commentary- 
on The Excursion , the same which provoked Wordsworth to make public 
the story of Hazlitt f s youthful escapade which caused such reper¬ 
cussions. To the unbiased reader it seems fantastic that the poet 
should be so offended at the comparatively few adverse comments, 
and be completely oblivious of the favorable tone of the criticism 
as a whole. Certainly his attitude is prodf positive that Hazlitt 
was not too far astray in his estimate of the man that we find in 
The Spirit of the Age . That Hazlitt was more than a trifle irked 
at Wordsworth’s reaction to his criticism is shown in his observations 

“\7e have been urged several times to take up the subject of 
Mr. Wordsworth’s Poems, in order to do them justice. In doing this 
we should satisfy neither his admirers nor his censurers. We have 
once already attempted the thankless office, and it did not succeed. 

In his lecture On the Living Poets Hazlitt further states 

that The Excursion, for all its nobility and beauty, “stands stock- 

2 

still." Again, in The Spirit of the Age, written more than a decade 
after the poem had been published, he gives his mature opinion of 
the poem. 

“There are delightful passages in the Excursion^ both of 
natural description and of inspired reflection (passages of the 
latter kind that in the sound of the thoughts and of the swelling 
language resemble heavenly symphonies, mournful requiems over the 
grave of human hopes); but we must add in justice and in sincerity, 
that we think it impossible that this work should ever become popu¬ 
lar, even to the same degree as the Lyrical Ballads. . 

The Excursion , we believe, fell still-born from the press. There 
was something abortive, and clumsy, and ill-judged in the attempt. 

It was long and laboured. The personages, for the most part, were 


1 Works: Vol. XX, p. 68 

2 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 156 
































' 
















e.j ,.. 








. 










70 


low, the fare rustic: the plan raised expectations which we re not 
fulfilled, and the effect was like being ushered into a stately 
hall and invited to sit down to a splendid banquet in the company 
of clowns, and wijh nothing but successive courses of apple-dumpl¬ 
ings served up." 

Hazlitt’s comparisons of Wordsworth and Byron shed consider¬ 
able light upon his true opinion of the older poet’s work. In these 
he shows how the differences in their temperaments is largely res¬ 
ponsible for the difference in their poetry. Botj^ are supreme ego¬ 
tists, but Byron’s gloomy, misanthropic, and selfish egotism which 
calls upon his readers to sympathize with all his fancied griefs 
and despairs, is to Hazlitt less understandable and less desirable 
than the "arbitrary egotism andpampered self-sufficiency" of 'Words¬ 
worth. 

"This will never do. It is more intolerable than even Mr. 
Wordsworth’s arbitrary egotism and pampered self-sufficiency. He 
creates a factitious interest out of nothing: Lord Byron would de¬ 
stroy our interest in all that is. Mr* Wordsworth, to salve his 
own self-love, makes the merest toy of his own mind,—the most in¬ 
significant object he can meet with, — of as much importance as the 
universe: Lord Byron would persuade us that the universe itself 
is not worth his or our notice; and yet he would expect us to be 
occupied with him." ^ 

Hazlitt explains the difference in their poetry with keen insight 
and understanding: 

"Mr. Wordsworth’s poetical mistress is a Pamela; Lord Byron’s an 
Eastern princess or a Moorish maid. It is the extrinsic, the un¬ 
common that captivates him, and all the rest he holds in sovereign 
contempt.......The author of the Lyrical Ballads describes the lich¬ 
en on the rock, the withered fern, with some peculiar feeling that 
he has about them: the author of Childe Harold describes the stately 
cypress, or the fallen column, with the feeling that every schoolboy 


1 Works: Vol. VIII, p. 45 

2 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 36 






: ... • ‘ . e 








o . ... ' i 


■ 


■ ., J' o. C . v. . .. '. o ' 










' 








71 


has about them." 

Certainly Hazlitt*s preference for the poetry of Wordsworth is 
implicit in these lines. Furthermore, he finds Byron deficient 
in that appreciation of nature, that ability to associate himself 
with the simplest forms of nature about him which was the inspira¬ 
tion of Wordsworth’s poetry. "Compared to his lines," says Hazlitt, 
"Lord Byrcm’s are but exaggerated commonplaces." ^ 

And again, enlarging on the same theme he says: 

"The spirit of poetry, and the ppirit of humanity are the same. The 
productions of nature are not locked up in the cabinets of the cur¬ 
ious, but spread out on the green lap of earth. The flowers return 
with the cuckoo in the spring: the daisy for ever looks bright in 
the sun; the rainbow still lifts its head above the storm to the eye 
of infanc}' or age— 

’So was it when my life began; 

So it is now I am a man, 

So shall it be till I grow old and die;’ 
but Lord Byron does not understand this for he does not understand 
Mr. Wordsworth’s poetry, and we cannot make him. His Lordship’s 
nature, as well as his poetry, is something arabesque and outlandish'! 

Nowhere does Hazlitt pay any more sincere compliment to Wordsworth 

who personifies to him both the spirit of poetry and the spirit of 

humanity. 


In addition to his comment on Wordsworth* s lack of dramatic 
talent which he makes in reviewing The Excursion, Hazlitt makes sev¬ 
eral other references to the poet’s deficienc}/ - in this respect. In 
the short critical note which he appended to his Anthology of the 
British Poets, he states quite baldly that Wordsworth "has no dram- 

1 Works: Vol. XX~,~ p. 15S “ ‘ " 

2 Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 45 

3 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 76 








0- ... . f ■ ■ ' 






72 


atic power.” ^ It would be interesting to know how Hazlitt would 
have reacted to The Borderers , had he ever had an opportunity to 
read it In its entirety. So far as we know, Hazlitt’s only know¬ 
ledge of the tragedy was gained from hearing Wordsworth read it, 
presumably in 1803. That it made a tremendous impression upon him 

is apparent from the fact that he quotes from it, once unacknowl- 

2 

edged, on at least three occasions. He accounts for Worddworth*s 
failure to publish the work by suggesting that perhaps the poet was 
conscious of its "want of light and shade and the unshackled spirit 

3 

of the drama,.” Wordsworth’s lack of dranatic power, Hazlitt is con¬ 
vinced, is due to his poetical egotisms 

"His moody sensibility would eat into the plot like a cancer, and 
bespeak both sides of the dialogue for its own share... .He sees 
nothing but himself in the universes or if he leans with a kindly 
feeling to any thing else, he would impart to the most uninteresting 
things the fulness of his own sentiments, and elevate the most in- 
!significant characters into the foremost rank—before kings, or 
heroes, or lords, or wits,—because they do not interfere with his 
own sense of importance. He has none of the bye-play, the varying 
points of view, the venturous magnanimity of dramatic fiction....” * 

By and large, Hazlitt is not an unkind critic of 7/ordsworth*s 
poetry. He acknowledges ungrudgingly the loftiness of the poet’s 
conception of nature, the depth and sincerity of his feelings. Fur¬ 
thermore, he admires the simplicity of his style, although he re- 

5 

grets the "levelling spirit of Mr. Wordsworth’s Muse,” which is 


1 Works : Vol. IX, p. 243 

2 Ibid., Vol. XI, p• 92; Vol. VI, p. 130; Vol. IV, p. 231. 

3 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 92 

4 Ibid., Vol. XVIII, p. 308 

5 Ibid., p. 309 
















73 


apparent in his tendency to reduce the noble things of life as well 
as to raise what is mean and unimportant* His most unstinting praise 
goes to Wordsworth’s early short poems which he thinks are more ex¬ 
pressive of the poet’s true genius than his more extended philos¬ 
ophical poems such as The Excursion. He generously concedes that 
Wordsworth is the greatest living poet even if not the most popular, 
and defends him vigorously against Northcote, who adopts the ortho¬ 
dox view of the eighteenth century critic on the subject of what 
constitutes excellence in poetry. True, he resents Wordsworth’s 
egotism when it degenerates into mere peevish vanity, but on the 
other hand he realizes that it is Wordsworth’s intellectual egotism 
that gives to his poetry that original turn which places him so 
deservedly in a class by himself. Although he finds the poet de¬ 
ficient in fancy, wit, and humor, he commends "his combination of 
simplicity of subject with profundity and power of execution.” ^ 
and pays respectful tribute to the natural severity of his style, 
and the sonorousness of his versification. 

Throughout all Hazlitt’s commentary, however, we sense the 
fact that the strongest reason for his failure to place Wordsworth 
in the same class as the great masters, Shakespeare and Milton, is 
that poetical aloofness which prevents him from coming to grips with 
reality, and from entering into the feelings of anyone but himself, 
and his total lack of appreciation for the more human side of life 
with all the joys and weaknessness of the flesh. 


1 Works : Vol. IX, p. 243 














74 


”In Mr. Wordsworth there is a total disunion and divorce 
of the faculties of the mind from those of the body; the banns are 
forbid, or a separation is austerely pronounced from bed and board— 
a mensa et thoro . From the Lyrical Ballads, it does not appear that 
men eat or drink, marry or are given in marriage. If we lived by 
every sentiment that proceeded out of mouths, and not be bread or 
wine f or if the species were continued like trees Mr. YJordsworth* s 
poetry would be just as good as ever •" 1 2 

Hazlitt is no doubt thinking of Wordsworth as the most outstanding 
exponent of the modern school when he expresses much the same thought, 
though in a less earthy fashion, in his essay On Milton and Shake ¬ 
speare . Here he says: 

"The great fault of a modern school of poetry is, that it 
is an experiment to reduce poetry to a mere effusion of natural sen¬ 
sibility; or what is worse, to divest it both of imaginary splendour 
and human passion, to surround the meanest objects with the morbid 
feelings and devouring egotism of the writers' own minds. Milton 
and Shakespeare did not so understand poetry. They gpve a more 
liberal interpretation both to nature and art. They did not do all 
they could to get rid of the one and the other, to fill up the 
dreary void with the Moods of their own Minds. They owe their power 
| over the human mind to their having had a deeper sense than others of 
what was grand in the objects of nature , or affecting in the events 
of human life. But to the men I speak of there is nothing inter¬ 
esting, nothing heroical, but themselves. To them the fall of gods 
or of great men is the same. They do not enter into the feeling. 

They cannot understand the terms 

Wordsworth*s critical ability, Hazlitt thinks, is marred by 
the narrowness of his outlook. Indeed he says "that if Mr. Words¬ 
worth had been a more liberal and candid critic, he would have been 
a more sterling writer." 3 He concedes the point that "his standard 
of poetry, is high and severe, almost to exclusiveness," and thaf'it 
is fine to hear him'talk of the way in which certain subjects should 


1 orks: Vol. V, p. /31 

2 Ibid., 

3 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 94 
















75 


have been treated by eminent poets, according to his notions of 
art." 1 2 He commends Wordsworth's taste in making favorites of 
Chaucer and Milton, and the modern poets, Thomson and Collins, 
and finds his criticisms of Dr. Johnson's "unmeaning verbiage" 
both penetrating and entertaining. He explains Wordsworth's fail¬ 
ure to be in sympathetic accord with Shakespeare by pointing out 
that so great an egotist as the poet could not be expected to ap¬ 
preciate the variety and scope of Shakespeare's dramatic composi¬ 
tions. One of his favorite passages from Wordsworth's poems is, 
nevertheless, the one in which the poet gives his opinion of 
Desdemona: 

"'Two let me mention dearer than the rest, 

The gentle lady wedded to the Moor, 

And heavenly Una with her milk-white lamb.'" ^ 

It is in connection with his criticism of Burns, however, 
that Hazlitt really lets Wordsworth feel the heavy hand of his wrath. 
For what he considers Wordsworth's hypocrisy in calling attention to 
Burns's personal weaknesses while pretending to defend his moral char¬ 
acter, Hazlitt has nothing but contempt. He points out that Words¬ 
worth's defence, "which is as weak in effect as it is pompous in 
pretension," betrays little liking for Burns. 

"He is, indeed, anxious to get him out of the unhallowed 
clutches of the Edinburgh Reviewers (as a mere matter of poetical 
privilege) only to bring him before a graver and higher tribunal, 

which is his own.....sc that though the judgment of the former 

critic is set aside, poor Burns remains just where he was, and no- 


1 Works s Vol. XI, p. 94 

2 Ibid., Vol. XX, p. 88 

















f ... . 








. : ; L : 

















76 

body gains any thing by the cause but Mr. Wordsworth, in an in¬ 
creasing opinion of his own wisdom and purity. 'Out upon this 
half-faced fellowship!' The author of the Lyrical Ballads has thus 
missed a fine opportunity of doing Burns justice, and himself honour'! 

After showing how Wordsworth might have handled the situation, had 

his true purpose been to defend Burns, Hazlitt adds: 

"Instead of this, Mr. Wordsworth hints, that with different personal 
habits and greater strength of mind, Burns would have written differ¬ 
ently, and almost as well as he does." ^ 

That Burns should have to be subjected at all to the "formidable 

patronage of Mr. Wordsworth 1 2 3 4 s pen" is to Hazlitt "the unkindest 
2 

cut of all!" Here Hazlitt, in his passionate desire to have justice 

accorded to Burns, is decidedly unfair to Wordsworth. 

Wordsworth’s prose, Hazlitt seems to take great delight in 

roundly abusing. He considers it tedious, plodding, dull. In 

Wordsworth 1 s pamphlet Concerning the Conventions of Cintra he says, 

"there is nothing remarkable but the profound egotism of the style, 

and some lofty abuse of Lord Wellington," and adds that Mr* Ensor's 

On the State of Europe is as smart and lively as Wordsworth's pam- 

3 

phlet is "solemn and heavy." Here we again have Hazlitt's poli¬ 
tics getting the better of his judgment. The letter to Mr. Gray, 

discussed in the foregoing paragraph, Hazlitt characterizes as "the 

4 

dullest and most contemptible prose-composition in the language." 

When Wordworth undertakes in a letter to the press to point out the 
grammatical erros in the electioneering placards of his opponents 

1 Works: Vol. V, pp. 128-129 

2 Ibid., p. 131 

3 Ibid., Vol. XIX, pp. 121-162 

4 Ibid., p. 213 



















V . t 








i 


: • ' 





.. 


cj . ' v.,, ti'0 


>, , .! ! 











77 

in the Westmoreland election of 1818, Hazlitt gleefully retaliates 
by quoting a few choice examples of Wordsworth*s own grammatical de¬ 
ficiencies, and discusses them with all the "gusto" that his critics 
have always affirmed is the most outstanding characteristic of his 
literary style • 

Whatever Hazlitt may say of Wordsworth’s poetry, and cert¬ 
ainly \dien the spirit moves him he says much that is uncomplimentary, 
he pays him the supreme compliment of quoting from his poems, partic¬ 
ularly from the Lyrical Ballads . on every conceivable occasion. He 
quotes Wordsworth as he does the great classics, Shakespeare and 
Milton. And what a compliment I All the more sincere because it is 
unconscious. True, his quotations are frequently inaccurate, but 
his inaccuracies only serve to heighten the compliment, since they 
show/ that he is quoting from memory, that Wordsworth’s poetry has 
become part and parcel of his poetic knowledge, indeed of his very 
life. He quotes him on the subject of nature, humanity, and society; 
of politics, philosophy, and art; he quotes him to prove one argument 
and to disprove another; and even in the very essay that he attacks 
Wordsworth for the inconsistency of his political opinion, he twice 
quotes lines from his poetryAbove all he delights in quoting him 
against himself, as is illustrated in the quotation from The Excur ¬ 
sion which he uses on two occasions to draw attention to what he 
considers Wordsworth’s apostasy. 

1 Works: Vol. XVII p. 28 and p. 34 















l/i'J 



. 








i 


. 

I 


■- . .. 










. I c 




1 




- 






78 


"•Such recantations had no charms for him 
Nor could he brook it! 1 2 3 4 " ^ 

Again, when comparing Wordsworth and Byron, Hazlitt quotes with the 
tart comment that they apply equally to both poets, the following 
lines from Wordsworth*s Lines left upon a Seat in a Yew-tree: 

'MThe man whose eye 
Is ever on himself doth look on one, 

The least of Nature’s works, one who might move 
The wise man to that scorn which wisdom holds 
Unlawful ever.*" 2 

And, as one more illustration, the passage in The Letter Bell ,where 
Hazlitt triumphantly hails the downfall of the Bourbon tyranny, and 
expresses the hope that Wordsworth will at last be brought to the 
| fine passage, beginning - 

’What though the radiance which was once so bright, 

Be now for ever vanished from my sight ; 

Though nothing can bring back the hour ^ 

Of glory in the grass, of splendour in the flower.*" 

On the number and variety of Hazlitt’s quotations, quotations from 

even the least well known of the Lyrical Ballads, and indeed from all 

of the poet’s work we may well say, as Hazlitt himself has said on 

more than one occasion, 

"But there is matter for a second rhyme 
And I to this would add another tale." 


1 Quoted by Hazlitt; ante p. 57 and p. 64 

2 Works: Vol. XIX p. 36 

3 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. 377 

4 Wordsworth: Hart-Leap Well 


















CHAPTER IV 


ON SIR WALTER SCOTT 







79 


"Y/ho is there that admires the Author of Y/averley more than 
I do? V/ho is there that despises Sir W-S-more?” 

—Hazlitt 

To Hazlitt Sir Walter Scott was two distinct persons: Scott, 
the Tory and aristocrat, whom he frankly despised; and Scott, the 
Author of Waverley, to whom he accorded praise for his accomplish¬ 
ments such as he bestowed upon no other writer of his time. Hazlitt* s 
hatred for the first Scott at times poisons his love and reverence 
for the second and prevents him from doing the Author of Waverley 
full justice. Admiration interacts v/ith contempt, and the result is 
a volume of criticism at one moment loud with praise, and at the 
next equally loud with censure. Toward no writer is Hazlitt more 
inconsistent, and as always his inconsistencies lend colour and 
variety to his work, even if they cannot be explained except in 
terms of political prejudice. 

One reason for Hazlitt*s lack of sympathy with Scott ms, 
of course, the difference in their upbringing and environment. Scott 
was nurtured in an atmosphere of intense patriotism, of Tory respect 
for authority and worship of the aristocracy, where the principle 
that the King could do no wrong was taken for granted. Hazlitt, 
reared as he was in an atmosphere of liberal thought where intellect 
rather than rank was respected, could not fail to be antagonistic 
to one whose outlook upon life was so diametrically opposed to his 
own. It is characteristic of Hazlitt, however, that much as he 
scorned Scott’s Tory point of view, he respected the consistency 









, 

.. 




. 

. ; 

- 




















• ‘ • • ■: 








7 









80 


v/ith which Scott clung to it* At least there was no sin of apos¬ 
tasy to be laid at Scott’s door. Hazlitt's respect for this aspect 
of Scott's character is implicit in his essay on Mr* Sokthey , Poet 
Laureat, in which, when speaking of Scott’s refusal of the Laur¬ 
eate ship in favour of Southey, he says: 

"Whatever may be the balance of poetical merit, Mr. Scott, 
v/e are quite sure, has always been a much better courtier, than 
Mr. Southey; and we are of opinion that the honours of a Court can 
nowhere be so gracefully or deservedly bestowed as on its followers. 
His acceptance of this mark of court favour would not have broken 
in upon that uniformity of character, which v/e think no less beauti¬ 
ful and becoming in life than in a poem. ” 

and elsewhere: 

"Poet-laureates are courtiers by profession; but we say 
that poets are naturally Jacobins. All the poets of the present 
day have been so, with a single exception, which it would be invid¬ 
ious to mention." 2 

Writing of Scott’s Life of Napoleon in 1827 at the same 
time that he was struggling to get the first two volumes of his 
own Life to press, Hazlitt defines Toryism as "that feeling or 
turn of mind which refers every thing to custom or habit, and mis- 
takes the sense of power for the sense of right and wrong." He 
then proceeds to cite a few well-chosen illustrations of Scott’s 
Toryism taken from the Life * He points out Scott’s Tory bias in 
condemning Napoleon on the grounds that he was unknown, and at the 
same time, implying that the Pope's supremacy should not be questioned 
because of the tradition surrounding his office; he objects to 


1 Works: Vol. VII, p. 24 

2 Ibid., p. 182 

3 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 288 


















81 


Scott’s use of the high-sounding term "chivalry of France" with 
all its implications in connection with the plot to assasinate 
Napoleon; he resents the patronizing words and tone of Scott’s 
acknowledgement of the good which resulted from Napoleon’s prison 
reform and from the establishment of the Polytechnic school, and 
he is particularly rabid on the subject of the paltry and dirty 
means by which Tory spite attempts to achieve its ends; and lastly, 
he reveals the fallacy of Scott's reasoning that because the Bour¬ 
bons had given thirty-six sovereigns to the throne of France, they 
should be encouraged to perpetuate themselves indefinitely• ^ More 
than for Scott’s orthodox Toryism, Hazlitt's scorn is for his advo¬ 
cacy of "the old Doctrine of Divine Right, new vamped-up under the 
style and title of Legitimacy.” As is only to be expected, Scott's 
entire Life comes under the ban of Hazlitt's disapproval, for, aside 
from Scott's political opinions, Hazlitt no doubt felt that no one 
could do justice to his idol but himself. 

A second score on which Hazlitt quarrels with Scott is the 
latter's association with The Quarterly Review and Blackwood’s . 

That Scott should countenance the excesses of these two periodicals, 

3 

when he could have stopped them, Howe tells us, at any time he 
pleased, was to Hazlitt intolerable. Furthermore, Scott was a prime 
mover in the establishment of John Bull and The Beacon , the purpose 

1 Works: Vol. XIX, pp. 288-291 ~ 

2 Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 260 

3 Ibid., Vol« XI, p. 335 (notes) 












- 








82 


of which was to offset the Radical revival caused by the popular 
indignation over the trial of Queen Caroline. Hazlitt does not 
spare Scott for his association with these enterprises; indeed as 
he launches into his subject his fury mounts to unprecedented 
heights! 

"If there were a writer.... .who, having secured the admir¬ 
ation of the public (with the probable reversion of immortality), 
showed no respect for himself, for that genius that had raised him 
to distinction, for that nature which he trampled under foot—who, 
amiable, frank, friendly, manly in private life, was seized with 
the dotage of age and the fury of a woman, the instant politics 
were concerned—who reserved all his candour and comprehensiveness 
of view for history, and vented his littleness, pique, resentment, 
bigotry, and intolerance on his contemporaries—who took the wrong 
side, and defended it by unfair means—who, the moment his own in¬ 
terest or the prejudices of others interfered, seemed to forget all 
that was due to the pride of intellect, to the sense of manhoodr- 
who,.....strewed the slime of rankling malice and mercenary scorn 
over the bud and promise of genius, because it was not fostered in 
the hot-bed of corruption, or warped by the trammels of servility— 
who supported the worst abuses of authority in the worst spirit — 
who joined a gang of desperadoes to spread calumny, contempt, in¬ 
famy, wherever they were merited by honesty or talent on a different 

side.deluging, nauseating the public mind with the offal and 

garbage of Billingsgate abuse and vulgar slang; .....insulting the 
misfortunes of sane, and trampling on the early g^ave of others, 
.....But we believe there is no other country of the world^(but 
ours), in which such genius could have been so degraded!" 

Hazlitt f s first thought in this diatribe seems to have been for 
Keats whose "bud of genius" The Quarterly and Blackwood’s had at¬ 
tempted to nip, and whose early grave had been so roughly trampled; 
his second is for himself, for he too, had been savagely attacked 
by the critics. Of course he is inexcusably unjust to Scott, but 
when his passions were aroused he lost his sense of proportion and 


1 Works: Vol. XI, pp. 67-68 










.. ■■ 





i 

. 

' 



83 


frequently said in the heat of the moment what he later deeply re¬ 
gretted. To attempt to excuse him, however, on the ground that he 
was lashing the vice and not the name is perhaps to show him too 
much generosity. 

It is in such passages as the above that Hazlitt's glaring 
inconsistency in connection with Scott is most apparent. Earlier 
in the same essay he pays Scott the highest of tributes, the sin¬ 
cerity of which can scarcely be doubted. After running through 
the extensive list of his favourite characters from the novels, he 
bursts into a chant of spontaneous praise: 

"7/hat a list of names 1 What a host of associations! What a thing 
is human life! What a power that of genius 1 What a world of thought 
and feeling is thus rescued from oblivion! How many hours of heart¬ 
felt satisfaction has our author given to the gay and thoughtless! 
How many sad hearts has he soothed in pain and solitude! It is no 
wonder that the public repay with lengthened applause and gratitude 
the pleasure they receive........His v/orst is better than any other 

person’s best.....His works (taken together) are almost like a new 

edition of human nature. This is indeed to be an author!" 

From here he passes on to the political implications of the novels, 

and commends Scott for his candour, his freedom from prejudice and 

bigotry, and his ability to keep Toryism out of his writing. Then, 

beginning on a mild note, he discusses Scott’s claim that "’he has 

2 

done s omething to revive the spirit of loyalty* by these novels." 

From this it is but a step to the doctrine of Legitimacy, ancl as 
Hazlitt warms to his theme, his praise turns to abuse, abuse which 
reaches its scurrilous climax in the closing paragraph just quoted. 

1 Works: Vol. XI, p. 54 ' “ " ~ ~ 

2 Ibid., p. 65 


















84 


It is almost as if, at the mere mention of the word "Legitimacy," 
a red haze of fury rises up and envelops him, beclouding his vision 
and distorting his judgment. The next day, when his anger had 
cooled, he could read Ivanhoe or Old Mortality , fall in love with 
the author of Waverley all over again, and forget, in his absorp¬ 
tion in the adventures of Ivanhoe and the Black Knight, that he 
had ever felt anything but admiration for their narrator, until, 
perhaps, he is reminded by Scott’s "sneer at the people" which 
he makes as he describes the mob gathered to witness the burning 
of the lovely Rebecca, of the Legitimist colour of Scott's politics,** 
when, no doubt, the merry-go-round would be set in motion again. 

Of the selflessness of Scott, his complete lack of egotism 
and vanity, Hazlitt makes much, particularly in contrast to the 
large body of his contemporaries who weary Hazlitt by their constant 
attempts to force their ideas and sentiments upon the reader through 
the lips of their characters. That Scott never identifies himself 
with his characters nor uses them as a vehicle to express his per¬ 
sonal opinions, Hazlitt considers worthy of commendation; 

"This is the beauty of Sir Waiter Scott: he takes a legend 
or an actual character as he finds it, while other writers think 
they have not performed their engagements and acquitted themselves 
vd.th applause, till they have slobbered over the plain face of nature 
with paint and varnish of their own. They conceive the truth as a 
plagiarism, and the thing as it happened a forgery and imposition on 
the public. They stand right before their subject, and say, ’May, 
but hear me first I 1 We know no other merit in the Author of Waverley 
than that he is never this opaque, obtrusive body, getting in the way 
and eclipsing the sun of truth and nature, which shines with broe-d 


1 Works: Vol. XI, p. 66 















85 


universal light through his different works. If we wero to des¬ 
cribe the secret of this author’s success in three^words, we should 
say, that it consists in the absence of egotism. " 

In commenting upon the absence of vanity in Scott’s make-up Hazlitt 
says: "It has sometimes been a matter of surprise....that Walter 
Scott is fonder of an old Scotch ditty or antiquarian record, than 
of listening to the praises of the Author of Waverley." 1 2 He rather 
nullifies the compliment, however, when he says elsewhere: 


7 


’’Even Sir Walter Scott, I understand, talks of the Scotch Novels in 
all companies; and by waving the title of author, is at liberty to 
repeat the subject ad infinitum." 3 

As a matter of fact, Scott’s insistence that his anonymity be pre¬ 
served at least formally, is a source of minor irritation to Hazlitt, 


who would prefer, as he lets us know on more than one occasion, to 
have the matter cleared up once and for all. 

Hazlitt sometimes speaks disparagingly of Scott’s ability 
to make money. Certainly he would have little sympathy with Scott’s 
ambition to amass a fortune for the purpose of founding a new House 
of Scott, the Scotts of Abbotsford. Although he disapproves of 
Scott’s "fondness for speculative gains," 4 no one felt sorrier for 
Scott, than Hazlitt when the failure of Constable and Company brought 
his hopes crashing about his head. Cn one occasion Hazlitt sneers 
at the "plum" Scott has made out of his writing, but in character¬ 
istic Hazlitt fashion, he turns his jibe into one of his finest ^ r *' butea 

1 Works: Vol. XVI, p. 401 

2 Ibid., Vol. XII, p. 200 

3 Ibid., Vol. XVII, pp. 100-101 

4 Ibid., Vol. XIX, pp. 85-86 













m 


t 


. 

.. 

. 

■ 

■ 

■ 


■ t 


. 






s 




* 

- 










86 


"The course of exchange is, and will be, in our favour, 
as long as he gives us one volume for ourselves, and two for him¬ 
self. Who is there that has not been the better, the wisey,and 
happier man for these fine and inexhaustible productions of genius? 

•.But the genius of the author is not exhausted, nor can 

it be so till not a Scotch superstition, or popular tradition is 
left, or till the pen drops lifeless and regretted from its master's 
hand. Ah! who will then call the mist from its hill? 7/ho will make 
the circling eddies roar? 7/ho, with his 'so potent art 1 2 will dim 
the sun, or stop the winds, that wave the forest-heads, in their 
course? 7/ho will summon the spirits of the northern air from their 
chill abodes, or make gleaming lake or hidden cavern teem v/ith wizard 
or with elfin forms? There is no one but the Scottish Prospero, but 


old Sir Walter, can do the trick aright. He is the very genius of 

the clime.when the last words havd passed the lips of the 

author of Waverley, there will be none to re-kindle your fires, or 
recall your spirit! Let him write on then to the last; drop of ink 
in his ink-stand.and we will not be afraid to read whatever he 


is not ashamed to publish. We are the true and liege subjects of 
his pen." ^ 

Although Hazlitt makes constant reference to the popularity 
of Scott both at home and in Europe, his opinion is that Scott has 
neither enhanced his popularity nor done himself justice by writing 
so voluminously; 

"We judge of an author by the quality, not the quantity, of 
his productions.....The author of Waverley has net risen in pub¬ 

lic estimation by the extreme voluminousness of his writing: for it 
seems as if that which is done so continually could not be very dif¬ 
ficult to do, and that there is some trick or knack in it. The mir¬ 
acle ceases with the repetition!" 2 

Writing early in 1823 Hazlitt admits that he had begun to share the 
feeling of some of Scott's critics that a general falling off, a run¬ 
ning to seed was evident in his work, but with the publication of 
The Fortunes of P igel , and later with Pever 11 of the Peak, his faith 
is restored, and by the end of the year he modifies his earlier 


1 Works: Vol. XIX, pp. 85-86 

2 Ibid., Vol. IX, p. 225 



















. 










87 


opinion to the extent of citing Scott as the outstanding example 
of industrious genius: 

"7/e have a great living instance among writers, that the 
quality of a man’s production is not to be estimated in the inverse 
ratio of their quantity, I mean the Author of Waver ley; the^ecund- 
ity of whose pen is not less admirable than its felicity." 

Of Scott’s poetry Hazlitt is, by and large, both a just and 
a sound critic. It occupies a place in his estimation about half 
way between his love of Scott’s novels and his hatred for his polit¬ 
ics. It incurs neither his enthusiasm nor his invective; his atti¬ 
tude toward it is lukewarm, indifferent, merely tolerant. He admits 
that Scott is the most deservedly popular of the living poets, but 
to Hazlitt popularity and true poetic achievement are far from being 
synonymous. He concedes that Scott's poetry is easy to read, that 
the style is clear, facile, flowing; that the characters are suffic¬ 
iently distinct to command and to hold the interest of the reader; 
that the story, which is always selected with an eye to the taste 
of his readers, is told with great bustle and vividness, and with 
strong emphasis upon incident, manners, costume, and scenery; and 
that the sentiments expressed make up for what they lack in depth 
and loftiness by their wholsomeness and kindly sympathy. The Goblin 
Page in T he Lay of the Last Minstrel Hazlitt finds "a very interest¬ 
ing and inscrutable little personage," ^ and while he commends the 
reality of the descriptions, particularly in The Lady of the Lake, 

L Works: Vol~. XII, o. 53 ~ 

2 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 155 

















■ 


. , 














’ 


... 








, 

. 













































he is never seized with the urge to enter the lists in defence of 
Margaret of Branksome or of Ellen Douglas in the same way that he 
is roused to defend Jeanie Deans and Rebecca. 

"Sir Walter’s Muse," says Hazlittis a Modern Antique. 

The smooth, glossy texture of his verse contrasts happily with the 
quaint, uncouth, rugged materials of v/hich it is composed. • .The 
poet’s figures might be conpared to old tapestries copied on the 
finest velvet." ^ 

Hazlitt’s adverse criticism of Scott’s poetry is not very 
different from that of the modern critic. He finds that it has 
"neither depth, height, nor breadth in it 5 neither uncommon strength, 
nor uncommon refinement of thought, sentiment, or language. It has 
no originality." % Also he finds it deficient in fancy, imagination, 
and passion. 

"Compared with true and great poets, our Scottish Minstrel 
is but ’a mere ballad-monger.’ We would rather have written one 
song of Burns, or a single passage in Lord Byron's Heaven and Earth, 
or one of Wordsworth's ’fancies and good-nights*, than all his epics." 

Hazlitt feels that Scott does little to transform his characters 

and to animate than with new life; he is content to leave them as he 

finds them, the traditional knights and ladies of legend and history. 

"He is a mere narrative and descriptive poet, garrulous of the old 

4 

time. The definition of his poetry is a pleasing superficiality." 

1~ Works: Vol. XI, p. 60 

2 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 154 

3 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 60 

4 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 61 









. 

' 








: 

. 

* . * . 

' 

, 

■ 




















. 




' 

’ 


■ 


. 

. 















• M 


- 

■ 

- 










89 


Despite the general soundness of Hazlitt's criticism of 

Scott’s poetry, he does him some minor injustices. He neglects, 

for example, to make any mention of Scott's smaller pieces, the 

songs which appear both in his poetic romances and in his novels, 

and the scraps of verse which he frequently sets up as chapter heads 

many of which are characterized by great strength and power. It 

seems somewhat strange that Hazlitt, susceptible as he was to the 

beauties of lyric poetry, does not offer some comment upon the haunt 

ing suggestion of such songs as proud Haisie . Again, in his effort 

to prare his point that Scott "is to a great poet what an excellent 

mimic is to a great actor," 1 2 Hazlitt perhaps goes too far in his 

insistence upon Scott's lack of originality and imagination. 

But it is Scott's novels that Hazlitt really loves. To 

read the Waverley Novels is to him to become their ardent admirer. 

His own admiration, he confesses to Northcote is "on this side of 

2 

idolatry and Toryism;" nor is his admiration, despire Northcote's 

accusation to the contrary, marred by envy. On this subject he says 

"No one envies the Author of '/averley , because all admire 
him, and are sensible that admire him how they will, they can never 
admire him enough. We do not envy the sun for shining when we feel 
the benefit and see the light." ^ 

Hazlitt always defends Scott against adverse criticism, other than 
his own, and is provoked to the point of exasperation at Lamb, who 
speaks like an oracle on Defoe's novels, but denies the worth of 
Scott * s. 

1 ^ orks » Vol. V, p. 155 

2 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 276 


3 Ibid., Vol. XX, p. 314 




























. 

















90 


".but why does he vex us by saying that Sir Walter's are trash? 

And that you cannot take any single part and read it aloud, as you 
can)a passage in Milton or Shakespeare, because there is nothing to 
carry you but the story? Cela n'est pas vrai. " 

Hazlitt's favourite novel is, as we should expect from a 

critic of his acumen, The Heart of Midlothian. In a mellow moment 

he is even willing to forgive Scott his association with The Beacon ., 

because he has given this novel to the world. 

’'Wert thou to live a thousand years and write a thousand 
romances, thou wouldst never, old True-Penny, beat thy own Heart of 
Mid Lothian! It is for that we can forgive thee all that thou didst 
mean to write in the Beacon , or hast written elsewhere, beneath the 
dignity of they genius and knowledge of man's weaknesses, as well as 
better naturel" 2 

Rob Roy , too, stands high in his list of favourites, as does The 

Antiquary , the dramatic adaptation of which he discusses, giving, 

however, his brightest bouquets to the "sublime, heart-breaking 

pathos, the terrific painting" of the original work. He likes 

all the novels comprising The Tales of My Landlord series, which, 

he tells us, "have made a considerable addition to my scanty lib- 
4 

rary." He is perhaps least impressed with The Monastery , which 
he conqpares to a ricketty child in need of nursing, and with Red - 
gaunt let , which he considers almost the worst of them. But even 
Red gaunt let he would not willingly dispense with, since he says, 

5 

"I would take it with me into a wilderness." 


1 

Works: 

Vol 

2 

Ibid., 

Vol 

3 

Ibid., 

Vol 

4 

Ibid., 

Vol 

5 

Ibid., 

?• 


. XX, p. 253 
. XIX, pp. 91-92 
. XVIII,’ p. 301 
. XII, p. 220 
319 




























. 

. 




91 


Hazlitt’s favourite heroines from the novels are loyal and 
staunch-hearted Jeanie Deans, the lovely Rebecca, and the spirited 
Flora Mac Ivor whose Jacob it ism he can almost forgive. Scott’s her¬ 
oes, he feels, suffer from the taint of insipidness which is a gen¬ 
eral characteristic of the hero of romance, who is "too fine a gentle¬ 
man" ^ to perform feats of courage and daring, and these must there¬ 
fore be delegated to some lesser character. "The hero of the work," 
says Hazlitt, "is not so properly the chief object in it, as a sot 
of blank left open to the imagination, or lay-figure on which the 
reader disposes whatever drapery he pleases!" ^ Of all Scott’s male 

2 

characters Hazlitt thinks Saladin the "most dashing and spirited," 
but points out that Scott never intended him to be a hero or a lover, 
but merely "a collateral and incidental performer in the scene," and 
that therefore he is as free as the wind. To mention all the char¬ 
acters which Hazlitt singles out for special mention, would be to 
give the list of almost the entire Scott gallery, since he has taken 
them all to his heart • 

What brings down Hazlitt* s wrath most heavily upon Scott is 
his boast that, in his novels, he "’has done something to revive the 
declining spirit of loyalty.’"^ To this Hazlitt refers on several 
distinct occasions, always pointing out that the boast is an empty 
one, since Scott’s descriptions of the "good old times" serve only 

1 Works: Vol. XVII, p. 247 

2 Ibid., p. 253 ff 

3 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 65 













. 






. 

i,,; ' . . 






<- 





.» : 




• 










' 







* 

' 

. 














■ 






. 






. 





4 


- 









92 


to illustrate to the modern reader the evils of the ages gone by* 
One of his outbursts against Scott on this particular score Hazlitt 
ends on a satiric note by invoking the spirits of all the great re¬ 
formers, poets, philosophers, and benefactors of the human race 
through whose efforts it is that we no longer live in darkness, and 
inviting them to return to earth "and beg pardon of Sir Walter and 
his patrons, who sigh at not being able to undo all that you have 
done." ^ Again in his portrait of Godwin he writes in the same vein: 


"Sir Walter Scott in his zeal to restore the spirit of loy¬ 
alty, of passive obedience and non-resistance as an acknowledgement 
of his having been created a Baronet by a Prince of the House of 
Brunswick, may think it is a fine thing to return in imagination to 
the good old times, 'when in Auvergne alone, there were three hundred 
nobles whose most ordinary actions were robbery, rape, and murder,' 
when the castle of each Norman baron was a strong hold from which the 
lordly proprietor issued to oppress and plunder the neighboring dis¬ 
tricts, and when the Saxon peasantry were treated by their gay and 
gallant tyrants as a herd of loathsocB swine—but for our own part, 
v/e beg to be excused; we would rather live in the same age with the 
author of Waverley and Blackwood's Magazine." 

And elsev/here, in accounting for his own "blind, rooted prejudice" 
against the name of king, he says: 


I re: 


"I can give no reason for the faith that is in me, unless 
id a novel of Sir Walter's, but there I find plenty of examples 


to justify my hatred of kings in former times, and to prevent my 

it < 3 > 


wishing to ’revive the ancient spirit of loyalty' in this 


Hazlitt has left us detailed criticisms of two of See 


oo S 


novels, The Pirate and Psveril of the teak. The former he considers 
neither the best nor. the worst of the novels, and states parenthet- 

1 Works; Vo I* XI, p .57 ~ 

2 Ibid*, p. 22 

3 Ibid., Voi . XX, p. 353 










93 


ically, as he has done elsewhere, that "the worst is good enough 
for us." ^ He is sharply critical of Scott 1 2 3 s philosophy in account¬ 
ing for the preference of the gentle and sensitive Minna for the 
bold but profligate Cleveland rather than for the faithful but some¬ 
what stodgy Mertoun, and even more so for Minna’s desertion of 
Cleveland just when the reader's sympathies are beginning to go out 
to him* He suggests, too, that The Pirate is a "lazy repetition of 
himself, second-hand and the worse for wear." ^ Thus Minna, Norna 
the witch, and Cleveland lag far behind Effie Deans, Meg Merrilies, 
and "Gentle Georgie" whose counterparts they are. Many of the minor 
characters, too, are reincarnations of figures used previously to 
the extent that they assume the quality of stock figures of fiction. 
Claude Halero, the poet and friend of Dryden, Hazlitt finds miscast 
in the company of dwarfs, witches, and pirates. Although Hazlitt 
considers The pirate inferior to Scott's earlier works, he leaves 
us in no doubt that he still thinks it excellent: 

"It is inferior, but it is only inferior to some of his former 
works. Whatever he touches, we see the hand of a mster, he has 
only to describe action, thoughts, scenes, and. they everywhere 
speak, breathe and live. It matters net whether it be a calm 
sea-shore, a mountain tempest, a drunken brawl, the 'Cathedral's 
choir and gloom*, the Sybil's watch-tower, or the smuggler's cave5 
the things are immediately there that we should see, hear, and feel. 
He is Nature's Secretary. He neither adds to, nor takes away from 
her bo ok; ^ and that makes him what he is, the most popular writer 
living." 


1 Works: Vol. HX, p. 85 

2 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 94 

3 Ibid., Vol. XIX, pp. 92-93 








- 

, . 

. 






■ 

. 

■ 








: 









94 


The last two sentences are particularly revealing since they ex¬ 
press so clearly one of Hazlitt*s most important theories about 
what constituted Scott's genius. 


In closing his review Hazlitt makes two pertinent remarks. 
The first pays Scott a very generous compliment on his liberal use 


of quotations from the pens of his contenporaries: 

"He takes them every one by turn, and of all factions in 
poetry and politics, under his wing* and sticks a stanza from Coler¬ 
idge, from Wordsworth, from Byron, from Crabbe, from Rogers, as a 
motto to his chapters, not jealous of their popularity, nor disdain¬ 
ing their obscurity. The author can hardly guess how much we like 
him for this ." 1 2 


Since Hazlitt reiterates this sentiment in The Spirit of the Age , 
we can have no doubt of its sincerity. The second comment is hardly 
of so complimentary a nature. Here he takes Scott to task for "the 
slovenliness of style and badness of grammar throughout these admir¬ 
able productions."... ."Take a few instances," he says, "and we have 

2 

done with the subject for ever." There follows a somewhat impos¬ 
ing list of examples. The slovenliness of style is exemplified by 
a certain lack of euphony, the result of Scott's tendency to use the 
noun, adjectiva.l and verbal forms of the same word in a single sen¬ 
tence; the grammatical errors consist of incorrect case forms and 
the failure to make the verb agree with its subject. Hazlitt, how¬ 
ever, does not keep his promise to have done with the subject for¬ 
ever, since this criticism, too, he repeats in r The Spirit of the Age . 

1 Works : Vol. XIX, p. 93 

2 Ibid.- 








. •, .' - I' ' 



] i 4 ; 









; 












95 

About "the most magnanimous Pevcril of the Peak ." ^ the 
scene of which is laid in EnJ.and at the time of the Popish Plot, 
Hazlitt is most enthusiastic, indeed he finds it inferior only to 
Old Mortality , which it resembles in subject matter, spirit, and 
execution. To the modern reader the Poveril is interminably slow 
in getting started, since it is not until about the fourteenth 
chapter that Scott reaches his principal theme. To Hazlitt, however 
the movement of the story is hurried, and the incidents follow each 
other in rapid succession. Although he feels that Scott’s ’’English 
imagination is not so fully peopled with character, manner, and sen¬ 
timent as his Scotch understanding is ”he thinks that Peveril of the 
Peak is Scott’s complete vindication of the charge laid by some of 
his critics that his abilities are deteriorating. "He may now go up 

on a fresh lease," says Hazlitt, "and write ten more Novels, just as 

2 

good or bad as he pleases’." 

The paragraph which follows Hazlitt*s vindication of Scott, 
was suppressed in all but a few copies of The London Magazine, in 
which the review appeared. It opens with an expression of apprec¬ 
iation of "the extreme life of mind or naturalness displayed in the 

descriptions and the magnanimity and freedom from bigotry and prej- 

3 

udice shewn in the drawing of characters." Had Hazlitt stopped 
here, all would have been well; but, unfortunately, he could not re¬ 
sist the temptation to unburden himself of the loa.d of his own pers- 

1 Works: Vol. XIX, p. 97 

2 Ibid., p. 95 

3 Ibid., pp .95-96 













96 


onal prejudice towards Scott. His attack is unwarranted and out of 
place, and is all the more open to censure, since here Hazlitt aban¬ 
dons his usually frank assumption of responsibility for what he 
writes, and makes his accusation without either disclosing its source 
or taking the responsibility for it himself. Since the passage is 
reprinted in the Howe edition for the first time, its entire text 
is quoted: 


".This last quality is the more remarkable, as the 

reputed author is accused of being a thorough-paced partisan in 
his own person,—intolerant, mercenary, mean; a professed toad- 
eater, a sturdy hack, a pitiful retailer of suborner of infamous 
slanders, a literary Jack Ketch, who would greedily sacrifice any 
one of another way of thinking as a victim to prejudice and power, 
and yet would do it by other hands rather than appear in it himself. 
Can this be all true of the author of Waver ley; and does he deal out 
such fine and heaped justice to all sects and parties in time past? 
Perhaps (if so) one of these extremes accounts for the other; and, 
as ’he knows all qualities with a learned spirit,’probably he may be 
aware of this practical defect in himself, and be determined to shew 
to posterity, that when his own interest was not concerned, he was as 
free from that nauseous and pettifogging bigotry, as a mere matter of 
speculation, as any man could be. As a novel-writer he givesthe 
devil his due, and he gives no more to a saint. He treats human 
nature scurvily, yet handsomely; that is, much as it deserves; and, 
if it is the same person who is the author of the Scotch Novels, and 
who has a secret moving hand in certain Scotch Newspapers and Maga¬ 
zines, we may fairly characterize him as 

’The wisest, meanest of mankind’ 

Among other characters in the work before us, is that of Ned Chris¬ 
tian, a cold-blooded hypocrite, pander, and intriguer; yet a man of 
prodigious talent,--of great versatility,—of unalterable self-pos¬ 
session and good-humour, and with a power to personate agreeably, 
and to the life, any character he pleased. Might not such a man have 
written the Scotch Novels?" ^ 


Snail wonder it is that the passage was suppressed "from a motive of 
good feeling toward the author." 2 Small wonder too, that the editors 

1 ^orks; Vol. XIX 3 pp. 95-96 “ 

2 Quoted by Howe from John Taylor’s Reply to Blackwood’s . v»/or*?: v*i.xix, 

?■ 3 *■/ 3 (n) 
























' 














\ 






' 
















! 









97 


of Blackwood's , always Hazlitt's enemies, pounced upon it with un¬ 
scrupulous hands, and reprinted it as further proof of their con¬ 
tention that Hazlitt lacked the instincts of a gentleman. 

Hazlitt believes that a greater parallel lies between Scott 
and Cobbett than between Scott and Shakespeare. To him they share 
a similar naturalness, a strength and vividness of perception, and 
a concreteness of imagery. They have mastered with prodigious effect 
the secret of writing as they feel, and they write with the "same 
strong sarcastic vein of roystering pot-house humour." 1 2 Hazlitt 
considers Cobbett's style far superior to Scott's, and feels that 
Cobbett is the better of the two in his refusal to allow himself 
to act as a cat's paw, while Scott tends to withdraw into himself 
when conditions become too difficult for him. He concludes his 
parallel with the somewhat startling opinion that "there is hardly 
a single page in the Scotch Novels which Mr. Cobbett could not 
write, if he set his mind to it," ^ This is, of course, high praise 
for Cobbett, far higher than he deserved, and far higher than pos¬ 
terity has seen fit to award him. It must be remembered, however, 
that since 1804, Cobbett had been writing in the radical interests, 
and thus, once more, we must interpret Hazlitt's criticism in the 
light of his politics. It is of interest to note, in passing, 
that though. Cobbett spent some of his early :/ears in America where 
he wrote pro-British pamphlets, and upon his return to England 

1 77orks; Vol. XIX. p. W 

2 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 97 
































































. 




. . 

















, 


» 








98 


edited for at least two years his Tory Political Register before he 
changed his political coat, Hazlitt does not seem to be unduly dis¬ 
turbed at his apostasyI 

Even in his critical comment on Scott’s novels, enthusiastic 
as it is on the whole, Hazlitt is not entirely free of inconsisten¬ 
cies, minor inconsistencies which are all the more interesting since 
they do not seem to be rooted in political prejudice. Indeed most 
of them are completely inexplicable except as being the out corns of 
Hazlitt's mood of the moment. One or two examples will suffice. 

On one occasion Hazlitt applies, unacknowledged this time, Coler¬ 
idge's figure of "a lady's waiting-maid, dressed out in cast-off 
finery,” to Scott's poetry, and says that in contrast his prose is 
"a beautiful, rustic nymph, that, like Dorothea in Don Quixote, when 
she is surprised with dishevelled tresses bathing her naked feet in 
the brook, looks round her, abashed at the admiration her charms 
have excited.” ^ This is a double-barrelled tribute, a tribute to 
the prose style in itself and a tribute to the modesty of the author. 
On the other hand he opens his essay On the Prose Style of Poets 
with a reference to Scott, which damns him with the faint praise 
that he has improved his style only through constant practice; and, 
towards the end of the essay he does a complete about-face and says: 

"The style of the author of Waverley (if he comes fairly into the 
discussion) as a mere style is villainous. It is pretty plain he 


1 Works: Vol., XI, p. 61 









. i r 






, 












. 

. 

r 

, 


; 

;j - ' 1 

























99 


is a poet; for the sound of names runs mechanically in his ears, and 
he rings the changes unconsciously on the same words in a sentence, 
like the same rhymes in a couplet.” ^ 

This is, of course, the same fault to which he refers when he speaks 
elsewhere of the slovenliness of Scott's style. Again, although 
Ivanhoe is not one of his greatest favourites since it deals too 
much with those "good old times” when sorcery ms rife, and the 
jester and the swineherd wore the badge of serfdom, he does refer 
to it as "that fine old English romance,” ^ and elsewhere says of 

it: "Ivanhoe,if not the equal to the very best of the Scotch Novels 
3 

is very nearly so.” On the other side of the ledger he says that 
it, the first of his novels to have an English background, is, com- 

4 

pared to what he has already done, "a decided failure.” Although 
the last judgment is comparative, it is still a considerable modif¬ 
ication of his earlier opinion. 

In his comparison of Scott and Shakespeare, Hazlitt clearly 
sets forth his conception of Scott's gifts. In his tremendous en¬ 
thusiasm for the greater master, however, he tends to belittle the 
lesser, until, by comparison, Scott's genius seems to shrink almost 
to the stature of one of his own dwarfs. That Hazlitt does not con¬ 
sciously intend to disparage Scott is apparent in his choice of 
Scott's finest novel, The Heart of Llidlothian , as a basis of compar¬ 
ison. Yet he really does Scott scant justice. His implication that 


1 Works: Vol. XII, p. 17 

2 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 64 

3 Ibid., Vol. XII, p. 338 





































. 


























* 





. 

























* 


■ 





100 


all Scott does in his novels corns s from books, historical records, 
folklore, and legends, and that his imagination does not work upon 
it and transform it, is monstrous. Were such the case, vie could 
all, with equal diligence and patience, be Sir Walter Scotts with 
imposing lists of novels to our credit. Certainly Scott cannot 
compete with Shakespeare in delineating the heights and depths 
of the human passions, nor in revealing the depths of emotion by 
the use of the most casual images, but to deny him the magic gift 
of imagination as well as the power of invention, is grossly unfair. 
Perhaps there is some truth in Hazlitt’s contention that in the 
death-bed scene, Meg Merrilies is merely voicing the superstitions 
of her feypsy clan, but does it follow that Jeanie Deans is less a 
creation of Scott*s own because her story was suggested to him by 
the experiences of Helen Walker? Hazlitt is far more just to Scott 
and far more understanding of what constituted his genius, when he 
says in The Spirit of the Age: 

’’Sir Walter has found out (oh, rare discovery) that facts 
are better than fiction; that there is no romance like the romance 
of real life; and that if we can but arrive at what men feel, do, 
and say in striking and singular situations, the result will be 
’more lively, audible, and full of vent,* than the fine-spun cob¬ 
webs of the brain......He has taken his materials from the original, 

authentic sources, in large concrete masses, and not tampered with 
or too much frittered them away. He is only the amanuensis of truth 
and history. It is impossible to say how fine his v/ritings in con¬ 
sequence are, unless we could describe how fine nature is. All that 
portion of the history of his country that he has touched upon (wide 
as the scope is) the manners, the personages, the events, the scen¬ 
ery, lives over again in his volumes; Nothing is wanting—the illus¬ 
ion is complete." 1 


1 Works: Vol. XI, pp. 62-63 

















Q .. 


.. . i, . ,v- .. 








: ' ; 


■ 

. 

r 

, 0 













101 


Some of the criticism which emerges out of the conparison of Scott 

and Shakespeare is, however, both generous and sound: 

’’Sir Walter has not then imitated Shakespeare, but he has 
given us nature, such as he found and could best describe it; and 
he resenfcles him only in this, that he thinks of his characters 
and never of himself, and pours out his works with such unconscious 
ease and prodigality of resources that he thinks nothing of them, 
and is even greater than his own fane ^ 

The conclusion at which Hazlitt arrives as the result of his compar¬ 
ison, that "the genius of Shake spear is dramatic, that of Scott nar- 

o 

rative and descriptive," is logical, and fair enough too, since 
elsewhere he does more than ample justice to the other aspects of 
Scott’s genius. 

Although Hazlitt finds Sir Walter's dramatic talents negli¬ 
gible in comparison with Shakespeare's, he does not hesitate to affirm 

that they do not suffer in comparison with those of his contemporar- 

2 

ies. He considers Scott "the most dramatic writer now living" Scott's 
talent in this respect he traces to the novelist's selflessness, 
his complete lack of egotism. As Wordsworth fails as a dramatic 
writer because he must play all the parts himself, so Scott succeeds 
because "he is thinking of beggars and a beggar's brat, and not of 

3 

himself when he writes." As a matter of fact, Hazlitt does not 
think that the reader is at all conscious of the author "except 

4 

from a feeling of curiosity respecting his unknown benefactor." 

Jfhile Hazlitt admits Scott's dramatic talent he denies him that 

1 Works: Vol. XII, p. 246 

2 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 72 

3 Ibid., Vol. XII, p. 319 

4 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 72 

















. ' ■ C V ■ 













■ 












■ 








. 
















' 


■ 



. 


- 


, • 











102 


sense of the dramatic that enables a writer not only to create a 
dramatic situation, but to make the most of it. He cites the last 
scene in The Black Dwarf as evidence of Scott's failure to make the 
most of the drama of the situation ihto which , with considerable 
skill, he has led his characters, Scott's handling of this scene 
is, he thinks, not dramatic but melodramatic. In-the essay in which 
Hazlitt states his opinion that his age is not dramatic, he again 
stresses Scott's inability to cope effectively with a dramatic sit¬ 
uation, but adds that he is "not convinced that the author of V/aver- 
ley could not write a first-rate tragedy, as well as so many first- 
rate novels.If he could, Hazlitt wishes that he would and thus 
prevent his novels from being mutilated at the hands of those who 
attempt to adapt them for the stage. The publication in 1822 of 
Scott's unsuccessful Halidon Hill removed for over that trace of 
doubt from Hazlitt's mind. 

If allowances are made for Hazlitt*s passionate condemn¬ 
ation of Scott's political views, and his contempt for certain as¬ 
pects of the novelist's character, he may be considered, on the 
whole, as a good critic of Scott's work. His sincere admiration 
far outweighs his occasional bursts of spite, unreasonable as they 
sometimes are. Ke is, as always, as outspoken in revealing faults 
as he is generous in according praise. Scott's early work, his 
translations and his Border Minstrelsy , Hazlitt consistently ignores, 


1 Works: Vol. XVIII, p. 319 







. ...... 

. 

.v. ... .. , v-. : .. ‘ ' . u Of! 


■ 

. 

. 

- • .. .. . •. 1 , ; ■ : 

- 


.■ . ~ .... . - ■ ■ . * . • 

■ • 


; 

■ 












* 




.. 


. 





















103 


probably because, prejudiced as he was against the Scottish people 
in general, he found them of little interest. His opinion of Scott’s 
poetry does not differ essentially from the estimate made by poster¬ 
ity. That the sincerity of his admiration for the novels is un¬ 
questionable is proved by his constant reference to M the Author 
of Waverley"—what he has said and done, and what he would have 
said and done in circumstances similar to those that Hazlitt has 
been discussing. In his comparisons of Scott with his conten^or- 
aries, the scales are always set in Scott* s favour, at least on the 
things that matter. If Scott suffers by comparison with the great 
masters of the past,—Shakespeare, Chaucer, Spenser, and Milton— 
it is because Hazlitt * s"depth of taste” is too great for him to 
assign to Scott a pla.ce which is not justly his due. Hazlitt is 
too sound, and of course, too cautious a critic, to mistake mere 
popularity for true greatness. It must be remembered, too, that 
criticism of one’s contemporaries is the most difficult of all 
critical tasks to undertake. Hazlitt*s unfavourable reaction to 
Scott’s Life of Napoleon is so laced with political bias, that 
much of his criticism may be discounted. The full flavor of Haz¬ 
litt* s criticism of Scofct may be tasted in the half-affectionate, 
half disrespectful but wholly revealing lines: 

"Old Sir Walter will last long enough, stuffing his wallet and his 
’wane* as he does, with mouldy fragments and crumbs of comfort. 

He does not ’spin his brains,’ but something much better. The cun¬ 
ning chield , the old canty gaberlunzie h as got hold of another clue— 







* . 

■ 

- • • ' 


. 

. ■ 

J‘ —' ■ ■ 

' 

. .. •' -. V : . \ : • . 

5 ' ■ ■ t t . ‘ :• 

: 

....... . . * 

. 






! 










104 


that of nature and history—and long may he spin it, ’even to the 
crack of doom,' watching the threads as they are about to break 
through his fringed eye-lids, catching a tradition in his mouth 
like a trap, and heaping his forhead with facts, till it shoves up 
the Baronet’s blue bonnet into a Baron’s crown, and will the old 
boy turn in his chair, rest his chin upon his crutch, give a last 
look to the Highlands, and with his latest breath, thank God that 
he leaves the world as he found iti And so he will pretty nearly 
with one exception, the Scotch Novels. They are a small addition 
to this round world of ours. We and they shall jog on merrily to¬ 
gether for a century or two, I hope, till some future Lord Byron 
asks, ’Who reads Sir Walter Scott now?” 1 


1 Works: Vol. XII, p. 319 











CHAPTER V 


ON BYRON, KEATS, AND SHELLEY 




l 













105 


Had George Noel Gordon, Lord Byron, not succeeded to tho 
estates and title of his great-uncle, and remained simply George 
Noel Gordon Byron, gentleman, Hazlitt*s criticism of the nan and 
his poetry might have been vastly different in tone if not in con¬ 
tent. Hazlitt approved of Byron the poet, just as heartily as he 
disapproved of Byron the peer. The prejudice against the members 
of the aristocracy who owe their position in the world to the ac¬ 
cident of birth and not to their own accomplishments, which was so 
firmly ingrained in Hazlitt as a youth was too strong to be readily 
overcome, nor did Hazlitt make a conspicuous effort to overcome it. 
Never does he forget, nor let his reader forget that Byron is a lord, 
the sixth of his name. Sometimes the reference is direct, sometines 
it is oblique; but the feeling of distaste is almys present. Haz¬ 
litt uses Byron’s rank to explain much of what he disapproved in 
both the man and the poet. 

"Perhaps the chief cause of most of Lord Byron’s errors is, 
that he is that anomaly in letters and in society, a Noble Poet. 

It is a double privilege, almost too much for humanity. He has 
all the pride of birth and genius. The strength of his imagination 
leads him to indulge in fantastic opinions; the elevation of his 
rank set censure at defiance. He becomes the pampered egotist. 

He has a seat in the House of Lords, a niche in the Temple of Fame. 
........The people are not polite enough for him: the Court not 

sufficiently intellectual. He hates the one and despises the other. 
By hating and despising others, he does not learn to be satisfied 
with himself. A fastidious man soon .grows querulous and splenetic. 

If there is nobody but ourselves to come up to our idea of fancied 
perfection, we easily get tired of our idol, V/hen a man is tired 
of what he is, by a natural perversity he sets up to be what he is 
not.” 1 


1 '.Yorks: Vol. XI, p. 77 









: ■; . . . . . V C 

n j 

, . 













. j 





. :> 


















106 


Even while deriding Byron's position, Hazlitt here expresses a 
sneaking admiration for the poet's disdain of the intellectual 
poverty of the court circles. In Hazlitt's constant references 
to "the Noble Poet," "our Noble author," "our Noble letter-writer 
"a certain Noble Lord," and many similar expressions, there is a 
covert sneer. Hazlitt's contemptuous attitude is much more appar¬ 
ent in the passages 

"In the mixed intercourse of private society every man finds his 
level in proportion as he can contribute to its amusement or infor¬ 
mation. It is even more so in the general intercourse of the world, 
where a poet and a man of genius (if extrinsic circumstances make 
any difference) is as much courted and run after for being a common 
ploughman, e.s for being a peer of the realm. Burns, had he been 
living, would have started fair with Lord Byron in the race of pop¬ 
ularity, and would not have lost it." ^ 

And elsewhere: 

"He was one of the English Nobility, not one of the English 
People; and his occasional ease and familiarity were in my mind 
equally constrained and affected, whether in relation to the pre¬ 
tensions of his rank or the efforts of his genius." 1 2 

When deploring the tendency of the critics of his day to 
judge a work not on its merits alone but on the pretensions to 
noble birth claimed by the author, Hazlitt makes further reference 
to Byron, this time emphasizing the poet's own exalted opin-on of 
himself: 


"No quarter should be given to this arittocratic tone of 

criticism wherever it appears.Lord Byron ms a later instance 

of this double and unwarrantable style of pretension.He 

could not endure a lord who was not a wit, nor a poet who was rot 
a lord. Nobody but himself answered to his own standard of per¬ 
fection." 3 


1 Works: Vol. VII, p. 230 

2 Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. 159 


3 Ibid., p. 194 














107 


Again, v/hen calling attention to the "uncouthness in the rhyms" 
of the last canto of Childe Harold's Pilgrimage , Hazlitt looses 
.another shaft at the shortcomings of the poet which are excused 
because of his exalted position. "It is well his Lordship is born 
so high, or all Grub-street would set him down as plebeian for such 
lines as the following:” Here Hazlitt quotes from the poem to show 
* the "strange mixture of stately phraseology and far-fetched metaphor, 
with the most affected bald simplicity of exj^ression and uncouthness 
in the rhymes.” "What will the Critics of the Cockney School of 
Poetry say to this?" Hazlitt asks, and answers his own question, 

"Lie on, and swear that it is high patrician poetry, and of very 
noble birth." 1 2 

Hazlitt also accuses the poet of taking advantage of his 
lofty rank to patronize those less favoured by fortune. He is part¬ 
icularly indignant over Byron’s condescending attitude towards W. L. 
Bowles of which he says: 

"In the controversy about Pope, he claps Mr. Bowles on the 
back with a coarse facetious familiarity, as if he were his chaplain 
whom he had invited to dine with him, or was about to present a 
benefice. The reverend divine might submit to the obligation, but 
he has no occasion to subscribe to the jest. If it is a jest,that 
Mr. Bowles should be a parson, and Lord Byron a peer, the world 
knew it before; there was no need to write a pamphlet to prove it." 2 

For such behaviour Hazlitt has only the utmost cantenpt. 

perhaps the most penetrating of Hazlitt's barbs directed 
against Byron's aristocratic temperament is to be found in the essay 


1 s Vol. XIX, pp. 37-38 

2 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 75 















108 


in which he compares the poetry of Byron and Wordsworth, excerpts 
from which have been quoted in relation to Wordsworth. After ex¬ 
pressing his surprise that Byron did not think it worth his while 
to study Spenser as one of the masters of poetry in the past, he 
bursts forth with: 

"Did he really think that all genius was concentrated in his own 
time, or in his own bosom? With his pride of ancestry, had he no 
curiosity to explore the heraldry of intellect, or did he regard 
the Muse as an upstart—a mere modern blue-stocking and fine lady? 

I am afraid that high birth and station, instead of being (as Mr# 
Burke predicates), 'a cure for a narrow and selfish mind,* only 
make a man more full of himself, and, instead of enlarging and re¬ 
fining his views, impatient of oxiy but the most inordinate and im¬ 
mediate stimulus." 1 

Again, Hazlitt contrasts sharply the fact that Scott was knighted 
for anonymous productions with what he feels to be Byron’s need of 
trading upon his title for fame and popularity. 

With all his distaste for Byron's rank and the privileges 
pertain thereto, Hazlitt nevertheless gives his readers to under¬ 
stand that he has more respect for Byron who was born an aristocrat, 
than for Moore, who is always seeking the company of men of birth 
and breeding, with whom he pretends to be on terms of great familiar¬ 
ity, in the hope of being considered by others as a member of their 
charmed circle. 

That the radical Hazlitt did not show greater sympathy with 
Byron's liberal tendencies may perhaps be accounted for by pointing 
out that he considered a Liberal Lord to be an even greater anomaly 


1 Works: Vol. XX, p. 155 







»\ ' *;. ' • . ■ ' . m; • 










> ) 








. 


. 

■ 

©ft ' A'i t y; . ' : - 






• 





' 





. 


’ 



t 



: v. 








. , .. 


















- 












■ 

. 








* 

■ 











. , , . : 







109 


than a Noble Poet. He admits that Byron was "liberal in politics," 
but hastens to add that he was "haughty and aristocratic in his 
genius." 1 2 3 4 These two aspects of the poet’s make-up are to Hazlitt 
irreconcilable. He considers Byron's liberalism "preposterous," 
and likes it even less than he like 3 Scott's "gratuitous servility."^ 
Had Byron been less equivocal in his attitude toward Napoleon, Hazl 
litt might have been more tolerant, but Byron committed what was 
to Hazlitt the deadly sin of extolling Bonaparte in victory and 


of castigating him in defeat. 

"There is one subject on which Lord Byron is fond of writ¬ 
ing, on which I wish he would not writ e— Buonaparte. Not that I 
quarrel with his writing for him, or against him, but with his 
writing both for him and against him. What right has he to do 
this? Buonaparte's character, be it what else it may, does not 
change every hour according to his Lordship's varying humour. He 
is not a pipe for Fortune's finger, or for his Lordship's Fuse, 
to play what stop she pleases on. Why should Lord Byron now laud 
him to the skies in the hour of his success, and then peevishly 
wreak his disappointment on the God of his idolatry? The man he 
writes of does not rise or fall with circumstances: but 'looks on 
tempests and is never shaken.' Besides he is a subject for hist¬ 
ory, and not for poetry." ^ 

Byron, Hazlitt thinks, not only does not understand his hero, but 

4 

rants against him, and by so doing "cuts his own throat." * More¬ 
over, Hazlitt points out the fallacy of the argument upon which 
Byron bases his comparison between Bonaparte and Caesar. 

"Why then should Lord Byron force the comparison between the modern 
and the ancient hero? It is because the slaves of power mind the 


1 Works: Vol. XI, p. 7C 

2 Ibid., p. 78 

3 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 153-4 

4 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 36 












' 

; 'r. ;„■/ t.v; 







iiv.' ')- , 








' 




















* i ■ • ' : 




■ 





. 


. 


. 










110 


cause they have to serve, because their own interest is concerned; 
but the friends of liberty always sacrifice their cause, which is 
only the cause of humanit. , tfc their own spleen, vanity, and self- 
opinion. The league between tyrants and slaves is a chain of ada¬ 
mant; the bond between poets and the people is a rope of sand. Is 
this the truth or is it not? If it is not, let Lord Byron write 
no more on this subject, which is beyond his height and his depth. 
Let him not trample on the mighty or the fallen! Bonaparte is not 
Beppo." -L 

That Byron ever contributed to the cause of freedom Hazlitt denied 

until the death of the poet forced him to modify his opinion. 

Writing of the early and tragic deaths in Italy of Shelley and Keats, 

Hazlitt pays his finest tribute both to the hero and the poet: 

"To fchis band of immortals a third has since been added!—a mightier 
genius, a haughtier spirit, whose stubborn impatience and Achilles- 
like pride only death could quell. Greece, Italy, the world, have 
lost their poet-hero; and his death has spread a wider gloom, and 
been recorded with a deeper awe, than has waited on the obsequies 
of any of the many great who have died in our remembrance. Even 
detraction has been silent at his tomb; and the more generous of his 
enemies have fallen into the ranks of his mourners. But he set like 
the sun in his glory; and his orb was greatest and brightest at the 
last; for his memory is now consecrated no less by freedom than 
genius. He probably fell a martyr to his zeal against tyrants. He 
attached himself to the cause of Greece, and dying, clung to it with 
a convulsive grasp, and has thus gained a niche in her history; for 
whatever she claims as hers is immortal, even in decay, as the mar¬ 
ble sculptures on the columns of her fallen temples!"^ 

In spite of his bitter jibes at Byron's rank, and his failure 
to understand his politics, Hazlitt never denied Byron's poetical 
genius. While he is severely critical of Byron's poetry, he is al¬ 
ways just, and for the most part, his criticism is sound. He de¬ 
plores Byron's aloofness, his introversion, his cynicism, and the 
dark and sceptical spirit that pervades his poetry. 


1 ^ orks s Vol. XIX, p. 37 

2 Ibid., Vol# XVI, pp. 268-270 















f 

. 

« - 


* 


' 




■ ' ■ : 








■ 




« 



' £;, 





. 

. 






« 

■ 



• 




.? ■ • - 

■ . a$ - • ...... . 

' 





■ 




. 










Ill 


"He holds no communion with his kind; but stands alone without mate 
or fellow.•••He is like a solitary peak, all access to which is cut 
off more by elevation than distance. He is seated on a lofty emin¬ 
ence, ' cloud-capt,' or reflecting the last rays of setting suns,.**. 
He exists not by sympathy, but by antipathy. He scorns all things, 

even himself.There is no ease, no unaffected simplicity of 

manner, no ’golden mean .His thoughts are sphered and crysta— 

lline; his style ’prouder than whem blue Iris bends;’ his spirit 
fiery, impatient, wayward, indefatigable. Instead of taking his 
impressions from without, in entire and almost unimpaired masses, 
he moulds them according to his own temperament, and heats the mater 
ials of his imagination." ^ 

Again Hazlitt emphasizes Byron’s aloofness v/hen he says, "Lord 


Byron shuts himself too much in the impenetrable gloom of his own 
thoughts, and buries the natural light of things in ’nook monastic.’ 
In the short critical note which Hazlitt wrote on Byron for his 


anthology, Hazlitt describes Lord Byron thus: 

"Lord Byron’s distinguishing quality is intensity of con¬ 
ception and expression. He wills to be sublime or pathetic. He 
has great wildness of invention, brilliant and elegant fancy, caus¬ 
tic wit, but no humour. Gray’s description of the poetical charac¬ 
ter—’Thoughts that glow, and words that ^urn,’—applies to him 
more than to any of his contemporaries." 

Although Hazlitt, in assigning the quality of intensity to Byron’s 
poetry, intends to be complimentary, he feels strongly that in the 
intensity of his egotism and the intensity of his passion, Byron 


sometimes goes beyond the bounds of true poetry. 


"The Giaour, the Corsair, Childe Harold, are all the same 
person, and they are apparently all himself. The everlasting rep¬ 
etition of one subject, the same dark ground of fiction, with the 
darker colours of the poet’s mind spread over it, the unceasing 
accumulation of horrors on horror’s haad, steels the mind against 
the sense of pain....the passion is always of the same unaccount- 


1 Works: Vol. XI, p. 69 

2 Ibid., Vol. V, p. 152-153 

3 Ibid., Vol. IX, pi 244 
















112 


ablB character, at once violent and sullen, fierce and gloomy. It 
is not the passion of a mind struggling with misfortune, or the 
hopelessness of its desires, but of a mind preying upon itself and 
disgusted with, or indifferent to all other things. There is noth¬ 
ing less poetical than this sort of unaccommodating selfishness. 

There is nothing more repulsive than this sort of ideal absorption 
of all the interests of others, of the good and ills of life, in 
the ruling passion and moody abstraction of a single mind, as if it 
would make itself the centre of the universe, and there was nothing 
worth cherishing but its intellectual diseases. It is like a can¬ 
cer, eating into the heart of poetry.” 1 

Hazlitt loves the glowing colour of Byron*s poetry, and he 
is alive to its beauty, even though that beauty may have the macabre 
quality of flowers that M bloom over charnel-houses and the grave." 1 2 3 4 
He uses the same morbid image in his description of Lara. The Corsair , 
and the other "wild and gloomy romances put into ra.pid and shining 
verse." Of these he says: 

"They discover the madness of poetry, together with the in¬ 
spiration: sullen, moody, capricious, fierce, inexorable, gloating 
on beauty, thirsting for revenge, hurrying from the extremes of 
pleasure to pain, but with nothing permanent, nothing healthy or 
natural. The gaudy decorations and the morbid sentiments remind one 
of flowers strewed over the face of deathl" 

Of the power of Byron’s poetry, Hazlitt was fully aware. 

Even while he attacks other characteristics of Byron* s pbems, he is 
forced to admit that sense of overwhelming power. "And power," he 
continues, "rivets attention and forces admiration. *He hath a 

A 

demon:* and that is the next thing to being full of the God." 

He concedes too that Byron, "in vigour of style and force of con- 


1 "forks : Yol. V, p. 152 

2 Ibid. 

3 Ibid., Yol. XI, p. 73 

4 Ibid., Yol. Y, p. 153 













- 










113 

ception in one sense surpasses every writer of the present day." ^ 
The lack of originality in actual subject matter, Hazlitt feels, is 
often more than compensated for in the ''sustained force and bril¬ 
liance of his style and imagery." ^ 

Unlike the majority of his contemporaries Hazlitt on the 
whole , was disappointed in Childe Harold's Pil.-Tima.^e . His opinion 
of the whole poem he gives briefly and in a general way in The Spir ¬ 
it of the Ahq * while in the Yellow Dwarf he gives a detailed and 
meticulous criticism of the last canto of the poem shortly after it 
was published. In The Scirit of the \ge he speaks of th9 lofty phil¬ 
osophic tone of the poem and shows how Byron in a series of magnif¬ 
icent pictures deals with the great events of history, and "comments 
on them from a more commanding eminence," ^ but he emphasizes too, 
Byron’s lack of originality, when he says, "but he dwells chiefly 
upon what is familiar to the mind of every schoolboy; has brought 
out few new traits of feeling or thought." ° The fourth canto of 
the poem, Hazlitt characterizes as "an indigestion of the mind ." 

"It is," he says," the lassitude or feverish tossing and tumbling 
of the imagination, after having taken a surfeit of pleasure, and 
fed upon the fumes of pride." ^ He finds intolerable the sustained 
egotism of the poet as it is revealed in the autobiographical char¬ 
acter of the poem, and misses "the glowing fervor" of Byron’s genius, 

1 Tories; Vol. V, p. 153 

2 Ibid. j Vol. XI, p. 73 

3 Ibid. 

4 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 35 











. 

. 















114 


and the "intense enthusiasm of his favourite topics of invective" ^ 
which marked the earlier cantos, and he complains about the hap¬ 
hazard construction of the canto as well as the canmonplaceness of 
the judgments pronounced. Nor can Hazlitt find much worthy of praise 
in the versification and style of the poem, which, he says, "are as 
perverse and as capricious as the method or the sentiments." 1 2 3 4 The 
remainder of the criticism is taken up with an almost stanza by 
stanza discussion of the poem. For sane of the passages which he 
quotes Hazlitt has the highest praise; others he finds "obscure, 
tortuous, perplexed, and abortive," but at the same time "beautiful, 
striking, and impassioned" while still others he feels are in 
"false and sophisticated taste." ^ At the close of the poem, however, 
Hazlitt finds a passage that more than compensates for the uneven- 
ness of the rest of the canto, and of it he says; 

"But at the end of the poem, in addressing the pathless 
ocean,—the self-willed, untamed mighty world of waters,—his 
genius resumes its beauty and its power, and the pilgrim sinks to 
rest in strains as mild and placid as the breath of childhood, 
that frets itself asleep." ^ 

Hazlitt 1 s commentary on Don Juan, makes lively reading, but 
his.judgments can scarcely be considered sound in every respect. He 
attributes the undeniable power of the poem to the contrast between 
its seriousness and its levity, between the sublime and the ridic¬ 
ulous . 

1 Dorks s Vol. XIX, p. 37 

2 Ibid., p. 40 

3 Ibid., p. 43 

4 Ibid. 















. . . 

. 




V 




. .. ; 

•' ' 




- • e • 

■ ‘ - ■ 


' \ ■ 


' 




. 






















■' ■ - li ..i 
















- 

- 







115 


"A classical intoxication is followed by tho splashing of soda- 
water, by frothy effusions of ordinary bile. After the lightning 
and the hurricane, we are introduced to the interior of the cabin 
and the contents of wash-hand basins. The solemn hero of tragedy 
plays Scrub in the farce." 1 

This type of writing, Hazlitt thinks is a prostitution of Byron's 
talents. He considers it beneath the dignity of the true poet to 
write in this strain, and he seems to sense in this aspect of 
Byron *3 work, in which "he hallows in order to desecrate," ^ some¬ 
thing that is unworthy, sensational, and second-rate. "Our enthus¬ 
iasm for genius or virtue," says Hazlitt, "is thus turned into a 
jest by tho very person who has kindled it, and who thus fatally 

quenches the sparks of both." That Hazlitt should "think little 

a 

of our author*s turn for satire" as illustrated by English Bards 
and Scotch Reviewers, is quite understandable, since the poem was 
written when Byron was very young and very angry at the treatment 
accorded by the Edinburgh Review to his Hours of Idlenes s. The 
poet was not yet the master of the subtleties of satirical writ¬ 
ing, and his satire was broad, heavy, and offensive. But that 
Hazlitt should so greatly underestimate the satire of the Don Juan , 
its flashes of wit, and its irresponsible gaiety, is rather more 
difficult to understand. As a matter of fact, Northcote with all 
his smugness shows himself the more understanding critic of Don 
Juan when he sees in the poem the touch of a master-hand, and says: 

1 Works: Vol. HI, p. 75 

2 Ibid. 

3 Ibid., 

4 Ibid., p. 74 



















116 


”1 do not moan to vindicate the immorality or misanthropy 
in that poem—perhaps his lameness was to blame for this defect — 
but surely no one can deny the force, the spirit of it; and there 
is such a fund of drollery mixed up with the serious part. Nobody 
understood the tragi-coraedy of poetry so well. People find fault 
with this mixture in general, because it is not well-managed; there 
is a comic story and a tragic story going on at the same time, with¬ 
out their having any thing to do with one another . But in Lord 
Byron they are brought together, just as they are in nature. In 
like manner, if you go to an execution at the very moment the crim¬ 
inal is going to be turned off, and all eyes are fixed upon him, an 
old apple -woman and her 3tall are overturned, and all the spectators 
fall a-laughing. In real life the most ludicrous incidents border 
on the most affecting and shocking.” ^ 

Hazlitt considers Byron the least dramatic writer of his age. 
Byron, he thinks, is like Wordsworth, too great an egotist to succeed 
as a dramatist• 

’’Lord Byron’s patrician haughtiness and monastic seclusion 
are, we think, no less hostile than the levelling spirit of Mr. Words¬ 
worth’s Muse, to the endless gradations, variety, and complicated 
ideas or mixed inodes of this sort of comp o sit ion •" 2 

As long as Byron's hero is himself—as in Manfred, "who is merely 
himself with a fancy drapery on," ^—Byron writes convincingly, for 
he is a master-hand at describing the w or Id as he himself sees it, 
but when he attempts to re-create the life and emotions of someone 
other than himself, the effect is artificial, unsympathetic, unreal. 
Thus, Hazlitt argues, Byron's Marino Faliero is not a success from 
a dramatic point of view, since its characters are not real, but 
merely creatures of imagination, while the situations are equally 
unreal and equally romantic. Of Byron's highly poetic but very un¬ 
actable tragedies, Hazlitt's favourite.is Heaven and Barth . In this 


1 Works: Vol. XI, pp. 279-280 

2 Ibid., Vol. XVIII, p. 309 

3 Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 74 

















117 


dramatic fragment Hazlitt feels, that for once, Byron has stepped 
aside and resigned the center of the stage in favour of his char¬ 
acters. To modern readers this preference of Hazlitt's seems to 
be an error in critical judgment, for they soe little of interest 
in the dreary parade of characters placed in an impossible situa¬ 
tion, without the usual force of Byron's poetry to redeem it. 

Soee of Hazlitt's most understanding criticism of Byron 
may be found in his comparisons of the poet with others from among 
his contemporaries. Hazlitt finds Byron's poetry superior to Scott's 
in variety, intense passion, and glowing colour, but inferior in 
picturesque power, in the appreciation of nature, and in moral truth. 
Although he tells us that he would prefer to have written a single 
passage from Heaven and Harth than one of Scott's epics, 1 he con¬ 
siders Scott's prose in every way superior to Byron's and says that 
he "had rather be Sir Walter Scott (meaning thereby the Author of 
Waverley) than Lord Byron a hundred times over." Poor Hazlitt! 

His parentheses are a characteristic touch. Not for worlds would 
he have his readers think that he would be willing to identify him¬ 
self with Sir Y/alter Scott, editor of The Beacon! Hazlitt also 
compares Byron to his advantage with Ho ore , and to his disadvantage 
with Wordsworth. ~ 

For Byron's critical acumen Hazlitt has but small respect. 

___ ! - 

1 Ante, p. 88 

2 Works: Vol. XI, p. 71 

3 Ante, pp. 70 and 71 

1 '*■ r ■ • c-- 











■ ; J. 



*. i - 








, i‘: cl 


, ., ... - | 





118 


He deplores Byron* s egotism and vanity which make him unapprec¬ 
iative of the gifts of others, and comments upon it with more than 
a touch of asperity: 

"His Lordship, as a poet, is a little head-strong and self- 
willed, a spoiled child of nature and fortune: his philosophy and 
criticism have a tincture of the same spirit: he doles out* his op¬ 
inions with a great deal of frankness and spleen, saying, ’this I 
like, that I loathe;' but he does not trouble himself, or the reader, 
with his reasons, any more than he accounts to his servants for the 
directions he gives them. This might seem too great a compliment 
in his Lordship to the public." 

That Hazlitt particularly resents this aspect of Byron's criticism 
when applied to Cowper for whose poetry Hazlitt had a profound res¬ 
pect, is evident by the number of tines—at least four—that he re¬ 
fers to Byron's dogmatic statement that Cowper was no poet. 

"77hy does he pronounce, ox cathedra and robed, that Cowper is no 
poet? Cowper was a gentleman and of noble family like his critic. 

He was a teachor of morality as well as a describer of nature, which 
is more than his Oordship is. His John Gilpin will last as long as 
Beppo, and his verses to Mary are not less touching than the Fare¬ 
well." 1 2 

T .7hile John Gilpin and Beppo are hardly comparable, no one can say 
that Hazlitt's prophecy with respect to these two poems has not been 
fulfilled. On another occasion, after quoting Copwer's beautiful 
description of the coming of the Fost-3oy, Hazlitt says: "And yet, 
notwithstanding this, and so many other passages that seem like the 
very marrow of our being, Lord Byron denies that Cowper was a poetl"^ 
Twice in the essay on 1-cps, Lord "yron, and In. "ri Hazlitt 


1 -7orl:s: Vol. XIX, p. 62 

2 Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 210 
3- Ibid., Vol. XVII, p. 382 








































t; 


i' : 


' 





0 ’1 







119 


mentions this opinion of Byron's as an illustration of the poet’s 
lack of feeling for true poetry and of the short-sightednoss of 
his criticism. 

Much of Byron?s critical opinion of Pope, Milton, and 
Shakespeare Hazlitt dismisses as mere "pribble-prabble." 1 He 
thinks that on the whole Byron does not do justice to Bov/lec, 
although on one point—that Bowles's inquiry into the moral char¬ 
acter of Pope, which Hazlitt considers "a pure piece:of clerical 
priggism," is unworthy of anything but ridicule—he is in whole¬ 
hearted agreement with Byron. Hazlitt has no patience with Byron’s 
estimate of Shakespeare; here again he would like some ree.son for 
the opinion instead of the dogmatic statements that Byron v/as accus¬ 
tomed to make. Sven though he agrees with Byron that the refined 
taste of the French would not tolerate Shakespeare’s clowns, he 
points out that it is a compliment rather than otherwise to the 
spirit of the English people that they can understand and relish 
such delightful nonsense. On the subject of Pope, Hazlitt is wil¬ 
ling to go part way with Byron, but he feels that Byron, strangely 
enough, places far too much importance upon the value of moral and 
didactic poetry. 

Byron’s prose style Hazlitt finds bad; "that is to say, 

heavy, laboured,-and coarse." ^ Indeed he asks, "Why does he -write 
/ 

prose at all?" One prose passage of Byron’s however, Hazlitt 

orks; Vol. XIX, p. 62 3 Ibid.., Vol. XII, p. 17 

2 Ibid. p. 65 4 Ibid., Vol. XIX, p. 70 














v ■ 




















120 


quotes on moro than one occasion, and of it he says, "These words 
should be written in letters of gold," ^ The passage expresses 
Byron* s opinion that the moving spirit in the England of his time 
is 11 cant : cant political, cant poetical, cant religious, cant moral $ 
but always cant •" ^ That this opinion so closely coincides with 
Hazlitt*s own is probably the reason that, in this case, he does 
not seem to be concerned with Byron’s failure to substantiate his 
statement • 

Hazlitt is, on the whole, a discriminating critic of Byron, 
That he is occasionally inconsistent is characteristic, as is his 
prejudice against Byron’s rank and wealth, from which his criticism 
is never totally free. It seems rather strange that Hazlitt had 
nothing to say of Byron’s two Chillon poems which embody so satis¬ 
factorily his love of liberty. It seems strange, too, that he ig¬ 
nores the lyric beauty of Byron’s shorter poems, those which today 
are far more widely read than all his oriental tales and dramatic 
romncss put together, and upon which rests so much of Byron’s rep¬ 
utation as a poet. Furthermore Hazlitt makes only the most incidental 
reference to the charming story of Haidee, which offsets and redeems 
the deliberate coarseness and vulgarity of parts of the satire. 

It is of passing interest to note that, although Hazlitt held a 
far higher opinion of both "Wordsworth and Scott than he did of 
Byron, he devotes throughout his works, more actual space to 3yron 

1 "Yorks: Vol. XEC, t. 70 

2 Ibid. 











. 

’ 

. 







?. ' ■ ‘ 










. 






.a : 










■- ■ ■ • £ - . 
. . . . . • ■ . 

















. 














. , . ; 










121 


than to any of his contemporaries save only Coleridge, 

Between Hazlitt and Keats existed a relationship based 
upon mutual admiration and respect, Keats, being very young and 
therefore the more naive and outspoken of the two, leaves us more 
clear-cut evidences of his esteem for the older man. Every student 
of Keats is familiar with his conviction that 7/ordsworth' s Excursion, 
Haydon’s pictures, and Hazlitt 1 s "depth of taste" were the three 
things of his age which were worth rejoicing over, and with enter¬ 
taining observation that Hazlitt was "your only good daraner , and if 
ever I am damn’d—damn me if I shouldn’t like him to damn me." 1 
And there are many others, Hazlitt, on the other hand, did not write 
so freely of Keats, but if we piece together the references scattered 
throughout his writings, it is not difficult to reach the conclusion 
that he had a high regard for the youthful poet. That Hazlitt* s 
affection for Keats was such that he would not willingly offend him 
is shorn by the fact that in one of his lectures he goes out of his 
way to explain his earlier criticism of Chatterton out of deference 
to the dis satisfaction that Keats had felt about it. Hazlitt did 
not ordinarily modify either the tone or the substance of his remarks 
just because he had happened to tread upon someone’s toes. In tak¬ 
ing the trouble to explain that his intention towards the dead youth 
had been "less to call in question Chatterton* s genius, than to obje-ct 

1 Quoted by Howe, Life of Hazlitt, r. 250 











r 





m 


. 











■ 










to the common mode of estimating its magnitude by its premature ness 
and by enlarging upon his theory for full five pages, he paid Keats 
a compliment that he would pay to no others among his acquaintances 
except, perhaps, Lamb or Leigh Hunt. 

Hazlitt was too canny a critic to be unduly enthusiastic 
about Keats*s poetry while its author was still so young. He re¬ 
quired more evidence than an Sndymion that Keats was a great poet 
before he would unequivocally commit himself. Perhaps he felt that 
to bestow too extravagant praise upon so immature an artist would 
cause him to become vain of his abilities, and thus defeat its pur¬ 
pose. He may have thought, too, that Keats had plenty of time be¬ 
fore him, and that to be forced to wait for a time for public ac*- 
Knowledgement would have a salutary effect upon the quality of his 
poetry. In any event Hazlitt did not write at any length of Keats 
until after the poet’s death, when he seems to have delighted in 
acting as Keats’s self-appointed champion. True, Hazlitt was no 
poet, and could not leave behind him an Adonais , nor had he the 
gift of turning out rhymed epigrams like Byron’s Alio hilled John 
Keats?; nevertheless his many indignant outbursts against Black- 
wood’s and the Quarterly Review must have done something to per¬ 
petuate the idea, erroneous as it was, that Keats’s death was 
caused by the savage treatment that he had received at the hands 
of the critics. To this view Hazlitt clung tenaciously, and used 
1 QTorks Vol. V, p. 123 
















. 

















' . .' 

• ■ 


■' ' r | 





■ 









123 


it with almost fanatical zeal to belabour the reviewers. To him 
it was a sword to be plunged deep into their vitals, withdrawn, 
wiped off, and carefully restored to its scabbard, to bo drawn and 
used again vien the occasion presented itself. Because he enjoyed 
so thoroughly the opportunity that it afforded him to carry the war 
into the enemy’s camp, it is somewhat difficult to decide just where 
his hatred of the unfairness of the critics ended and his real ap¬ 
preciation of Keats's poetry began. Writing in January, 1821, when 
he anticipates Keats's death by only a month, he says: 

"A crew of mischievous critics at Edinburgh having fixed the 
epithet of the Cockney School to one or two writers born in the met¬ 
ropolis, all people in London became afraid of looking into their 
works, lest they too, be convicted of cockneyism. Ch brave public! 
This epithet proved too much for one of the writers in question, end 
stuck like a barbed arrow in his heart. Poor Keats! 7/hat was sport 
to the town was death to him. Young, sensitive, delicate, he was 
like 

'A bud bit by th9 envious worm, 

Ere he could spread his sweet leaves to the air, 

Or dedicate his beauty to th3 sun' — 
and unable to endure the miscreant cry end idiot laugh, withdrew to 
si$i his last breath in foreign' climes." 1 2 3 

Again in 1825 in his portrait of Gifford (which Dr. Broadus charac¬ 
terized as "as fine a piece of energetic hating as we shall come upon 
in many a day" ) Hazlitt uses the same quotation from Romeo and 
Juliot to describe Keats, and proceedswith satirically appropriate 
footnotes, to contrast "rich beauties and dim obscurities" of 
* Eve cf .-alnt o : 


1 -forks: Vol. VIII, p. 99 

2 3tory of English Literature: Broadus, p. 550 

3 ' Torks « Vol. XI, p. 120 















124 


"impoverished lines," 1 and lets the reader decido fof himself 
whether or not Gifford had the right to pass judgment on Keats. 
Elsewhere Hazlitt writes in the same indignant vein: 

"Keats died young; and 'yet his infelicity had years too 
many. 1 A canker had blighted the tender bloom that o'erspread a 
face in which youth and genius strove with beauty; the shaft was 
sped—venal, vulgar, aenomous, that drove him from his country, 
with sickness and penury for companions, and followed him to his 
grave. And yet there are those who could trample on the faded 
flower—man to whom breaking hearts are a subject of merriment — 
who laugh loud over the silent urn of Genius, and play out their 
game of venality and infamy with the crumbling bones of their vie- 
tiast" 1 

Hazlitt likes to expatiate on his theory that Keats was so 
roundly abused in the Scottish reviews, not so much because he was 
an inferior poet, but because, first, he came of poor and humble 
parents, and second, because he had committed the sin of being 
favourably spoken of in the radical Examiner . In his essay On the 
Aristocracy of Letters, Hazlitt points out that "there is not a 
more helpless or a more despised animal than a mere author, without 
any extrinsic advantages of birth, breeding, or fortune to set him 
off," 3 and later uses Keats as an example of a man of genius who 
lacked these advantages, and was therefore defenceless against those 
who scorned him. 

"The poet Keats had not this sort of protection for his per¬ 
son—he lay bare to rather--the serpent stung him, and the poison- 
tree dropped upon this little western flower:—when the mercenary 
servile crew approached him, he had no pedigree to show them, no 
rent-roll to hold out in reversion for their praise: he was not in 

1 'forks : Vol/'kT iuU* 

3 Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 210 


2. ila,d. f Mo i. * vi , p. *<»<j 













i 














:: '; i 

: . 

. 








125 


any great man’s train, nor tho butt and puppet of a lord—ho could 
only offer them 'the fairest flowers of the season, carnations and 
streaked gilliflowers,' —'rue for remembrance and pansies for 
thoughts'—they recked not of his gift, but tore him with hideous 
shouts and laughter, 

'Nor could the Muse protect her son!' ^ 

On the second point Hazlitt says in a fine burst of rancour: 

"A young poet comes forward: an early and varouable notice 
appears in the Examiner, independently of all political opinion. 

That alone decides his fate; and from that moment he is set upon, 
pulled in pieces, hunted into his grave by the whole venal crew in 
full cry after him. It was crime enough that he dared to accept 
praise from so disreputable a quarter. He should have thrown back 
his bounty in the face of the donor, and come with his manuscript 
in his hand, to have poetical justice dealt out to him by the un¬ 
biassed author of the Baviad and MaeviadZ His tenderness and 
beauties would then have been exalted with faint praise, instead 
of being mangled and torn to pieces with ruthless, unfeeling rage; 
his faults would hav9 been gently hinted at, and attributed to 
youth and inexperience; and his profession, instead of being made 
the subject of loud ribald jests by vile buffoons, would have been 
introduced to enhance the merit of his poetry. But a different fate 
awaited poor Keats I His fine fancy and powerful invention were too 
obvious to be treated with mere neglect; and as he had not been 
ushered into the world with the court-stamp upon him, he was to be 
crushed as a warning to genius how it keeps company with honesty, 
and as a sure means of inoculating the ingenuous spirit and talent 
of the country v/ith timely and systematic servility 1" * 

Elsewhere Hazlitt again belabours his argument, and with equal 

asperity: 

"Poor Keats paid the forfeit of this leze majeste with his 
health and life. Yftiat, though his Verses were like the breath of 
spring, and many of his thoughts like flowers--would this, with 
the circle of critics that beset a throne, lessen the crime of 
their having been praised in the Examiner ? 11 ^ 

Leaving aside Hazlitt’s continuous battle with the reviewers, 


1 V/orks: Vol. VIII, p. 211 

2 Ibid., Vol. XVI, p. 237 

3 Ibid., Vol. XII, p. 123 








. 

■ t. ' • ■ . 


' • \ 

I 



: • 

. 

■ 

■ ,/ r-:V. ; 


... 

■ 

... ;■ . . '. 












126 


we can still find ample evidence that Hazlitt held Keats 's poetry 
in high esteem* That he was keenly aware of the rich sensuousness 
and the imaginative, romantic quality of Keats’s Eve of Saint Amos, 
he makes quite clear to us, but he suggests that one should be young 
like Keats to enjoy its full flavour. 

“....•the reading of Mr. Keats's Eve of Saint Agnes lately made me 
regret that I was not young again. The beautiful and tender images 
there conjured up, 'come like shadows—so depart'. The 'tiger- 
moth's wings,' which he has spread over his rich poetic blazonry, 
just flit across my fancy; the gorgeous twilight window which he 
has painted over again in his verse, to me 'blushes'almost in vain 
'with the blood of queens and king*'" 

Hazlitt pays Keats the compliment of quoting him, not often, 

it is true, but inaccurately enough to prove that he is quoting from 

memory, thus showing that certain passages from Keats's poems had a 

place of honour in the well-stocked storehouse of his memory. As a 

heading to his essay On a Landscape of Nicholas Poussin , Hazlitt 

quotes an appropriate line from Endymion; he looks from his window 

and sees through the misty moonlight air the woods of Winter slow 

2 

"'7/hile Heaven's chancel-vault is blind with sleet I'" 

the line being inaccurately quoted from Hyperion ; and again, he 

3 

tells us that the phrase, "that little pouting slut," which he 
uses to describe a popular actress of his day was suggested to him 
by the line, 

"Or mouth with slumbery pout," ^ 

1 TJorks: Vol. XII, p. 225 ‘ 

2 Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 90 

3 Ibid., Vol. XVIII, p. 368 

4 Ibid., footnote 











' 




127 


from Keats’s Endymion . 

Y/hile the artist in Hazlitt is impressed by the rare beauty 
of Keats’s poetry, and by the poet’s philosophy of beauty which his 
poems so aptly illustrate, as well as by the tenderness of the thought 
and the delicacy of the verbal melodies, the critic feels that there 
i is a deplorable deficiency of masculine energy in the poet’s stylo; 

"I cannot help thinking that the fault of Mr. Keats’s 
poems was a deficiency in masculine energy of style. He had beauty, 
tenderness, delicacy, in an uncommon degree, but there was a want 
of strength and substance. His Endymion is a very delightful des¬ 
cription of the illusions of a youthful imagination, given up to 
airy dreams—we have flowers, clouds, rainbows, moonlight, all 
sweet scunds and smells, and Oreads and Dryads flitting by--but there 
is nothing tangible in it, nothing marked or palpable—we have none 
of the hardy spirit or rigid forms of antiquity. He painted his 
own thoughts and character; and did not transport himself into the 
fabulous and heroic ages. There is a want of action, of character, 
and so far, of imagination, but there is exquisite fancy. All is 
soft and fleshy, without bone or muscle. We see in him the youth, 
without the manhood of poetry. His genius breathed ’vernal delight 
and joy.’.... .His mind was redolent of spring. He had not the rich¬ 
ness of autumn, and winter he seemed not to have known, till he 
felt the icy hand of death I" 

Hazlitt’s purpose here seems to have bedn not so much to draw 
attention to the weaknesses of Keats’s poetry, which, as he points 
out, are the weaknesses of youth, a3 to suggest the depth and 
strength which the poet might have achieved, had he lived to fulfil 
his marvellous promise. 

That Hazlitt included Keats in his anthology of Select 
British Poets is. no mean tribute. In the critical note from the 
litt of authors which he appended to his edition, Hazlitt summar- 


1 '.Yorks : Vol. VIII, pp. 254-255 
























! 














s 


o 












n 

» 






















? 
















' 


















128 


izes his opinion of Koats thus: 

"Mr. Keats is also dead* He gave the greatest promise of genius 
of any poet of his day. He displayed extreme tenderness, beauty, 
originality, and delicacy of fancy; all he wanted was manly strength 
and fortitude to reject the temptations of singularity in sentiment 
and expression. Some of his shorter and later pieces are, however, 
as free from faults as they are full of beauties." ^ 

Since his summary is not emotionally charged by references to the 

attack on Keats by the reviewers, snd to the other injustices from 

which Hazlitt felt that Keats had suffered, it is probably safe to 

assume that what is expressed in these lines is Hazlitt*s considered 

opinion of his dead friend. 


That Hazlitt did not leave a full length portrait of Shelley 
in The Spirit of the Age has been a matter both of conjecture and 
regret to many lovers of literary criticism. The reason that he 
failed to include the poet in his gallery of portraits is probably 
that he did not consider Shells}' in any way the embodiment of the 
spirit of the age. There is really little cause for regret, however, 
since by examining the scattered sketches of Shelley throughout 
Hazlitt*s writings it is possible for us to assemble for ourselves, 
if not a full length picture, one of at least kit-cat proportions. 

If the resulting picture is not a true likeness, it is not because 
Hazlitt was an indifferent artist, but rather because he neither 
understood nor sympathized with his subject, and therefore his out¬ 
lines are sometimes blurred where they should be distinct, and harsh 


1 v;orks; Vol. IX, pp. 244-245 













129 


vliere they should be softly shaded. 

To Matthew Arnold writing a generation after Hazlitt 
Shelley was M a beautiful but ineffectual angel, beating in the 
void his starred and luminous wings in vain." To Hazlitt as far 
as he could understand him, he was simply a brilliant, unstable, 
impractical, and slightly obnoxious young man, whose head was 
filled with all kinds of impossible schemes for reforming the world 
in which he lived, all of which were equally unavailing and absurd. 

Of the so-called Shelleyan idealism as Shelley and his friends under¬ 
stood it, Hazlitt had not the slightest conception. He had no pat¬ 
ience with the poet’s vagueness, his lack of responsibility for his 
actions, his scepticism, and above all for the supreme egotism that 
encouraged him to trample ruthlessly upon the feelings of others 
whom he had enmeshed in the web of his unconventional and irregular 
theories of life. Hazlitt considered Shelley as a rebel who reb¬ 
elled for rebellion’s sake, and who did not know what it was that 
he really wanted, except that it was something different from 
what he already had. In his essay On Paradox and Commonplace in 
which he presents the paradox of the reactionary and the radical 
bigot, each of whom in his own way is the enemy of truth, Hazlitt 
selects Shelley as the illustration of the radical bigot, thus 
showing how meagre was his understanding of him. 

"The author of Prometheus Unbound.. .has a fire in his eye, 
a fever in his blood, a maggot in his brain, a hectic flutter in 
his speech, which mark cut the philosophic fanatic....The shock of 







130 


accident, the weight of authority make no impression on his opin¬ 
ions, which retire like a feather, or rise from the encounter un¬ 
hurt, through their own buoyancy. He is clogged by no dull system 
of realities, no earthbound feelings,no rooted prejudices,....but 
is drawn up by the irresistible levity to the regions of mere spec¬ 
ulation and fancy, to the sphere of air and fire, where his de¬ 
lighted spirit floats in ’seas of pearl and clouds of amber.*. 

Bubbles are to him the only realities:—touch them and they vanish. 
Curiosity is the only proper category of his mind, and though a 
man in knowledge, he is a child in feeling......Mr. Shelley has 

been accused of vani'fcy—I think he is chargeable with extreme 
levity; but this levity is so great that I do not believe he is 
sensible of its consequences. He strives to overturn all estab¬ 
lished creeds and systems.He tampers with all sorts of obnox¬ 

ious subjects, but it is less because he is gratified with the 
rankness of the taint, than captivated with the intellectual 
phosphoric light they emit... .With hi3 zeal, his talent, and his 
fancy, he would do more good and less harm, if he were to give up 
his wilder theories, and if he took less pleasure in feeling his 
heart flutter in unison with the panic-struck apprehensions of his 
readers." ^ 

There is no reason to believe that ?Iazlitt ever essentially changed 
his estimate of Shelley from the one given above. Shelley’s friends 
Leigh Hunt in particular, were incensed at what they called Haz- 
litt’s unwarranted attack on Shells};-, and Hunt wrote to Hazlitt 
remonstrating with him, but Hazlitt, though sympathetic to Hunt’s 
own case against him, and anxious to retain his friendship, dis¬ 
missed his appeal on Shelley’s account with the single sentence, 

"As to Shelley, I do not hold myself responsible to him." ^ 

Certainly Hazlitt never retracted or even modified his statements 
although in his later references we seem to detect a conscious 
effort on Hazlitt*s part to do the poet justice as far as it lay 
in his power. 


1 Works: Vol. VIII, pp. 148-149 

2 Quoted by Howe; Life of Hazlitt , p. 322 
















; 










. 

' 

. 


m 


* 





. 














131 


A much kinder picture of Shelley is to be found in Hazlitt's 
review of the poet’s posthumous poems which contains Hazlitt's most 
extensive criticism of Shelley’s poetfry. While his intention is 
to review only the poems contained in the volume which v/as edited 
by Mary Shelley after the poet’s death, Hazlitt often makes inter¬ 
esting generalizations about Shelley’s poetry which throw consid¬ 
erable light upon Hazlitt's opinions of its worth. The first part 
of the review comprises a further survey of the poet's character. 

On the credit side of the ledger, Hazlitt places Shelley’s unden¬ 
iable genius, his intellectual honesty, his sincerity, and his 
willingness to accept the penalties meted out to him as a result 
of his living in accordance with his theoretical principles of 
conduct. On the debit side he places Shelley's uncontrollable 
violence of temperament, his fanatical love of novelty and change, 
and his obnoxious and indiscreet scepticism. "We wish to speak of 
the errors of a man of genius with tenderness,” ^ says Hazlitt, 
and certainly we find him attempting, but only fairly successfully, 
to do just that. 

Hazlitt's yardstick by which he measured his contemporaries 
was accomplishment; and Shelley, he finds, accomplished very little 
that he set out to do. Shelley's purpose is defeated by the very 
st:'le of his _:oetry, which Hazlitt describes as 

11 ...a passionate dream, a straining after impossibilities, 


1 Works: Vol. XVI, p. 257 









m 



132 


a record of fond conjectures, a confused embodying of vague ab¬ 
stractions,—a fever of the soul, thirsting and craving after 
what it cannot have, indulging its love of power and novelty at 
the expense of truth and nature, associating ideas by contraries, 
and wasting great powers by their application to unattainable 
objects," 1 

Although Hazlitt thinks that Shelley i 3 not "deficient in the true 
sources of strength and beauty," 2 3 he laments hi 3 tendency to ob¬ 
scurity and paradox, which, he thinks, is the result of Shelley*a 
preference for poetry which was philosophical and intellectual as 
well as imaginative and fanciful. By attesting too much, he ac¬ 
complishes nothing. 

"He ransacked his brain for incongruities, and believed in 
whatever was incredible. Almost all is effort, almost all is ex¬ 
travagant, almost all is quaint, incomprehensible, and abortive, 
from aiming to be more than it is. Epithets are applied, because 
they do not fit: subjects are chosen, because they are repulsive: 
the colours of this style, for thair gaudy, changeful, startling 
effect, resemble the display of fireworks in the dark, and like 
them, have neither durability, nor keeping, nor a discriminate form. 

...The fumes of vanity rolled volumes of smoke, mixed 

with sparkles of fire, from the cloudy tabernacle of his thought. 

The success of his v/ritings is therefore in general in the inverse 
ratio of the extent of his undertakings; inasmuch as his desire to 
teach, his ambition to excel, as soon as it was brought into play, 
encroached upon and outstripped his powers of execution." 

As Hazlitt proceeds with his review, he throws in obser¬ 
vations upon the qualities of Shelley*s poetry as a whole, which 
when pieced together give a better idea of what he actually thought, 
than do his observations on the individual poems - which comprise 
the collection. He finds all of Shelley*s poetry distinguished by 


1 Works: Vol. XVI, p. 265 

2 Ibid, 

3 Ibid., pp. 265-266 







I 









u 






















^ : 







. 


; 

















133 


a”veil of shadowy or of glittering obscurity;" 1 2 3 that the depth 
of the poet’s feelings often prevent him from expressing them; 
and that with Shelley, colour predominates over form, producing 
"a profusion of dazzling hues, of flaming splendours, of float¬ 
ing shadows, but the objects on which they fall are bare, indis¬ 
tinct, and wild." ^ 

Touching upon Hazlitt’s comments on the individual poems 

of the collection, we find that he thinks Julian and Hadaolo is 

solemn, slow, and sad in style and suffers from "a sluggishness 

of feeling, a dearth of imagery, a unpleasant glare of lurid li$it," 

but that, on the other hand, it is written in Shelley’s "best and 

3 

least mannered manner," less brilliant than some of his work, but 
at the same time, less exaggerated and confused. The fascinating 
nature of the conversation, with its rich personal implications, 
seems to have left him cold, since he makes no reference to the 
subject matter of the poem, except to say that it is a preface to 
a story of Love and Madness. The './itch of Atlas , Marianne’s Dream, 
and particularly The Triumph of Life , the poem on which Shelley ms 
working at the time of his death, Hazlitt dislikes for the disjoint¬ 
edness of their materials, their involved imagery, and the ghast¬ 
liness of some of the scenes which they depict. He is much more 
impressed with Shelley’s shorter poems and with his translations 

1 Vforks: Vol. XVI, p. 270 

2 Ibid., p. 272 

3 Ibid., p. 273 















134 


which he thinks are in general "excellent and highly interesting," 1 2 
though he prefers Keats's Endymion to Shelley's Hymn to Pan . His 
comment on the conclusion of Ginevra is interesting in that he raps 
Shelley's use of the word rats in lines, 

"The rats in her heart 
Will make their nest," ^ 

instead of the traditional worms. for much the same reason that he 
objected to Coleridge's use of the offensive term, "mastiff bitch" 
in Ghristabel. 

The review of Shelley's Posthumous Poems leaves us with the 
thought that we should have enjoyed Hazlitt more as a critic of 
Shelley had he enlarged upon the excellences of his poetry, partic¬ 
ularly those which he admits that the shorter poems possess, in¬ 
stead of carping at their deficiencies, and constantly drawing at¬ 
tention to their faults. No doubt Shelley was an impractical vis¬ 
ionary, an ineffectual dreamer, and unworldly idealist, but to read 
these qualities into practically every line of poetry that he wrote 
seems rather harsh, and decidedly unjust. Even Hazlitt*s meagre 
praise is grudging; he seems content to admit that Shelley had 
genius, without showing us where that genius lay. Surely Shelley 
to all his readers is the consummate inventor of lyric harmonies, 
one of the supreme lyrists of English literature. We can, indeed, 
we hope that we have, found excuses and logical explanations for 

1 7/orks : Vol. XVI, p. 279 

2 Ibid.. 
















. 


■ 

. 

’ 

. 

- 











J . /, 










- 


. .. • - ; •'.. 





* 

■ 








135 


Hazlitt's injustices to the others of ds great contemporaries, 
but to excuse such on observation as, "Mr. Shelley, who felt the 
want of originality without the power to supply it, distorted 
every thing from what it was, and his pen produced only abortions," 1 2 
is beyond us. Sven Hazlitt*s critical summary on Shelley for his 
anthology, does the poet scant justice: 

"The late Mr. Shelley (for he is dead since the commence¬ 
ment of this publication) was chiefly distinguished by a fervour 
of philosophic speculation, which he clad in the garb of fancy, 
and in words of Tyrian die. He had spirit and genius, but his 
eagerness to give effect and produce conviction often defeated his 
object, and bewildered himself and his readers." ^ 


1 ’.Vorhs; Vol. XX, p. 211 

2 Ibid., Vol. IX, p. 244 











CHAPTER VI 


HA2LITT THE CRITIC 
Conclusion 




it 


136 


"I know no writer who has placed so v/ell the great writers 
of his own time.” 

—H. W. Garrod in 

The Place of Hazlitt in Jnglish Criticism 
Of his great literary contemporaries Hazlitt wrote with 
something more than with the gusto which has so often been ascribed 
to him; he wrote v/ith intensity and passion. Two of hi 3 most con¬ 
spicuous qualities—his zest for the revolutionary spirit of his 
age and his sincere love and appreciation of good literature— 
everywhere enter into and colour his criticism. The first quality 
often makes him unjust, though even his injustices are in the grand 
manner; the second makes him generous, more generous than he is 
frequently given credit for. It has been said of Hazlitt that his 
pronouncements were rash and inconsidered, and that he lacked judg¬ 
ment; that his stubborn political prejudices prevented him from giv¬ 
ing praise where praise was due; and that he was unable to separate 
his opinion of the man from his estimate of the work accomplished. 
Certainly his writing is not free from prejudice, particularly where 
he character of his subject is concerned, but if we take the pains 
to examine his purely literary opinion, we will find that it is re¬ 
markably free from the taint of partiality and bias. Hazlitt's 
own well-known remark to Patmore that he could kneel to Sir Walter 
Scott but that he could not take his hand is proof of his ability 
to keep separate the man and the author. 

The scope of Hazlitt*s criticism is broad and comprehensive: 













. • 






















- 


















■ 


■ 





























137 


his method orderly and meticulous. Both his scope and his method 

are well illu rtr t ' in his co ry rordsworth’ ___p._ a 

Coleridge 1 3 Bjogra hia Liter aria and the fourth canto of Chj-ld< 
Harold's Filarimage, which have been discussed earlier. 7ith cop¬ 
ious comment he covers every detail of his subject, and draws upon 
wide knowledge of the literature of the past for pertinent quota¬ 
tions and for appropriate subjects for comparison and contrast. 
Indeed it is Hazlitt's deft use of comparison and his unerring 
ability to make his point stick through the very force and insight 
of his comparison, that makes much of his criticism a joy to his 
reader. His device of comparing the subject of his comment with 
another contemporary writer he handles with just the right emphasis 
upon contrast to make each stand in his proper relationship to the 
other. His comparisons cf Scott and Byron, of Byron and Wordsworth, 
of Keats and Gifford—to mention only a few of them—all illustrate 
the effectiveness of his method. 

The qualifications v/hich Hazlitt brought to the task of 
criticism were excellent. His knowledge of the great literature 
of the past, of Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, Hilton, to say noth¬ 
ing of the great novelists of the eighteenth century served to shape 
his taste and to provide him with a worthy standard of judgment. 

With such a background it is only to be expected that he would be 
an accurate judge of the writings of his contemporaries, and that 
much of his criticism would endure. In addition he brought an in- 







. . ... - -J' 







T 




. 


















■ 






138 


tellectual integrity which was unaffected by the promise of material 
gain, and a desire for the truth at any cost. Though Hazlitt ms 
dependent upon his v/riting for his livelihood, there is never tho 
slightest suggestion that his criticisms were penned for the purpose 
of currying favour v/ith the public; nor is there any evidence that 
he cultivated those eccentricities of tasto and style that are so 
frequently the mark of an unsure critic. 

Hazlitt’s criticism of Coleridge takes the form more of a 
lament for what his friend failed to do, than of an accurate esti¬ 
mate of what he actually accomplished. Coleridge’s accomplishments 
were so meagre in comparison with his gifts that Hazlitt is constant¬ 
ly out of patience with him, and fails, consequently, to give him 
more than the most grudging praise for his poetry, though in his 
choice of The Ancient Lariner, Christabel, and Kubla Khan as Coler¬ 
idge’s most outstanding contributions to poetry, Hazlitt is supported 
by the opinion of posterity. As a matter of fact Hazlitt is not a 
poor, but rather a misguided critic of Coleridge. It is his psych¬ 
ology, like that of the teacher who hopes to spur her brilliant but 
lazy pupil to greater efforts by her carping criticism of his cur¬ 
rent work, that is at fault. As has been pointed out before, Kaz- 
litt was keenly aware of the excellences of Coleridge’s poetry, as 
well as of his critical studies, and had they come from the pen of 
any one else, there is little doubt that Hazlitt would have been 






m 



139 


vociferous in their praise. In his disappointment at Coleridge’s 
failure to accomplish the results that he so sincerely felt lay 
within the poet's power, Hazlitt is perhaps unfair to Coleridge; 
but to his very real greatness he is splendidly fai?, and in ais 
loyalty to the ideal which the younger Coleridge personified to 
him he seems somewhat pathetic. 

Of Wordsworth Hazlitt is essentially an excellent critic. 

In placing him as the first poet of the age he shov/s a discrimin¬ 
ation and taste matched by few of the critics of his time. Better 
than anyone else, except perhaps Coleridge and Lamb, he understood 
the lofty philosophy and spiritual interpretation of nature which 
were masked by the superficial puerilities of Wordsworth's poetry. 
More accurately than anyone else too, he was able to put his finger 
upon both the merits and the weaknesses of the poet'3 work. At 
times Wordsworth's vanity, his calm assumption of superiority, and 
above all his political apostasy rouse Hazlitt almost to fury, but 
even in his most frenzied moments )ie never forgets, nor does he ever 
let his readers forget, that Wordsworth is the greatest living poet. 

Modern admirers of Scott may well be envious of the words 
that Hazlitt found to express his high regard for the author of 
Waverley. His admiration of the novels, as he says himself, was 
little short of idolatry. If we can bring ourselves, not perhaps 
to forgive, but at least to overlook and discount the occasional 
bursts of bad temper and of spite which Hazlitt directs against 



Q. 



140 


Scott, we will find his criticism of Scott's poetry sound and just, 
and of his novels not merely just, but gloriously enthusiastic. 
Modern critical opinion of Scott’s long narrative poems is nothing 
more than an echo of what Hazlitt said v/hen the poems first appeared, 
while the fact that the first thing that the prospective writer of 
historical romances does is to make himself thoroughly familiar with 
the style and techniques of their creator, is surely proof enough 
that Kazlitt did not accord his admiration to an unworthy object. 

Of Byron too, Hazlitt is a fairly satisfactory critic. Al¬ 
though modern critical methods are not those of Hazlitt, and the 
reader sometimes becomes bewildered when attempting to sort out the 
mass of detail which he finds in Hazlitt* s longer and more detailed 
reviews of Byron’s work, the general critical opinion of Childe 
Harold expressed in The Spirit of the Age has never been surpassed. 
Present day opinion, free from the spell of Byron's romantic person¬ 
ality, is somewhat harsher in respect to the oriental tales, the 
novelty of which appealed to Hazlitt as it did to the reading public 
of his time. That Hazlitt underestimated the satire of Don Juan # 
arid entertained so high an opinion of Heaven and Harth. may perhaps 
be put down to that streak of perverseness which occasionally charac¬ 
terizes his criticism and which lends it individuality and colour. 

Hazlitt's criticism of Keats, though lacking in volume, and 
of a very general nature, shows sympathy and understanding, and does 









141 


not differ essentially from the opinion of our own time. Of 
Shelley, however, Hazlitt is both an unsatisfying and an unsatis- 
factory critic. Iiis comment on Shelley is marked by a distinct 
lack of sympathy and a failure to understand the complex nature of 
both the man and his poetry. More than to any of the other great 
writers of his time Hazlitt is unjust to Shelley, and with less 
reason, since Shelley’s revolutionary spirit was in many ways the 
equal of Hazlitt's own. 

More than a century has passed since Hazlitt sat in judg¬ 
ment on his great literary contemporaries. Although his opinion 
was not held in very high esteem during his lifetime, recognition 
and even fame have come to him with the passing of the years. Pos¬ 
terity has set its seal of approval, at least upon the broad issues 
which Hazlitt advanced or defended. In spite of the faint signs of 
wear along the edges, the seams of Hazlitt's criticism have worn 
well. If the whole volume of Hazlitt's criticism with the exception 
of those essays which contain his commentary upon the great writers 
of his time, were to be destroyed, what remained would still be suf¬ 
ficient to guarantee him a permanent place in English criticism. 







BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The Complete Works 


Elton, Oliver: 

Garrod, H. W.: 

Henley, W. E.: 

Howe, P. P. : 

Ker, W. P. : 

Maclean, G. M.: 

More, P. E. : 

Stephen, Sir L.: 

Winche ster, C .T.: 


Primary Source 

of V/illiam Hazlitt . Centenary Edition, 1930-1933 . 

Edited by P• P. Howe ; 

J. M. Dent & Sons, 

London and Toronto 


Secondary Sources 

Survey of ]nylish Literature , Edward Arnold, 
London, 1920, Chapter XXIV 


"The Place of Hazlitt in English Criticism" from 
The Profession of Poetry , Oxford University Pres 3 , 
192ft 


"William Hazlitt" from Modern English Essays , 
Vol. Ill J. M. Dent & Sons, 1923 


T he Life of Milljam Hazlitt , 

George H. Doran & Co., 1923 


"William Hazlitt’ 1 from Collected Essays , Vol. I, 
Macmillan, 1925 


Porn Under Saturn , Collins (London) 1943 


"The First Complete Edition of Hazlitt" from 
Shelburne Essays, Second Series, G. ?• Putnam*s 
Sons 1907 


"William Hazlitt" from hours in a Library . Vol. II, 
Smith, Elder & Co., 1909 


"William Hazlitt" from A Group of English Essay ¬ 
ists of the Early Nineteenth Century . 

Macmillan Co., 1910 

"William Hazlitt" from The CoLxio:: -3— or . 

Second Series, Hogarth Press, 1932 


Woolf, Virginia: 


































