


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


WMisn®® 

aJBttwiiw 













t 












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


c 


https://archive.org/details/workofmethodistcOOwens 


THE WORK OF THE METHODIST CHURCH AMONG SETTLERS 


IN ALBERTA UP TO 1914. WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE 

TO THE FORMATION OF NEW CONGREGATIONS AND 

WORK AMONG THE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE GENERAL FACULTY COUNCIL 
COMMITTEE ON BACHELOR OF DIVINITY DEGREES 
IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEGREE OF 
BACHELOR OF DIVINITY 


by 

Murray Wenstob, B.EcL 


University of Alberta 
April - 1959 











TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


LIST OF TABLES...v 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS...vi 

INTRODUCTION...... 1 

Chapter 

Io METHODIST CHURCH ORGANIZATION......... 4 


II. BRIEF HISTORY OF THE METHODIST CHURCH 

AND ITS MISSIONS IN CANADAo......... 10 

III. SETTLEMENT IN ALBERTA BEFORE 1895.17 

IV. EXPANSION OF THE METHODIST CHURCH 

IN ALBERTA 1895-1914...... 25 

V. HISTORY OF THE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE 0 ....., 6? 

VIo UKRAINIAN EMIGRATION..*.... . .. 71 

VII. RELIGIONS OF THE UKRAINIAN IMMIGRANTS. 7S 

VIII. THE METHODIST CHURCH AMONG THE 

UKRAINIANS. 9 . 33 

Pakan Mission 

Lamont Hospital 

W.M.S. Missions 

Urban and Industrial Missions 

IX. EVALUATION OF THE METHODS AND 

ASSESSMENT OF THE RESULTS OF METHODIST 
MISSION WORK AMONG SETTLERS IN ALBERTA 


PRIOR TO 1914................ 117 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. ..... 127 


- iv - 

















LIST OF TABLES 

Table Page 

I. Gains in Population According to Racial 

Origin, 1901-1911 • •.• ®• • ..».».<> 30 

II* Homestead Entries, 1901-1910*,... 31 

III* Number of Methodist Church Members in 

Alberta from 1695 to 1914............ 37 


- v - 





I 








LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Districts of the Manitoba and North-West 
Conference at 1&$4*»*.. 

Increase in the Number of Methodist 

Circuits in Alberta from 1$95 to 1914 . »®» 

Rural Population Density in Alberta 
in 1901 • 

Effect of Railroads on the Settlement 
of Alberta* «*••».•• <>... 


Page 

• . 12 

2 ? 

.0 36 

». 50 


- vi 










INTRODUCTION 


In any account of past events whether written or oral 
the completely true essence cannot be given. Much depends 
upon the reader. A written account is a condensed record 
occupying a few pages or a few minutes about occurrences which 
have taken months or years to happen. The written Is good in 
that the highlights and the processes at work can more easily 
be comprehended, but at the same time there is lost much of the 
thought, emotion and life of the actors. The only way a record 
of history can be perfect is to live the lives of the charact¬ 
ers in every aspect. This of course is impossible. Thus our 
knowledge of the past is in direct proportion to our ability 
to analyze and correlate the thoughts and deeds of those who 
were involved. This paper gives the facts, the impressions 
and the developments relating the Methodist Church and the 
pioneers of Alberta. It will best be understood if one has 
had experience or can imaginatively experience the problems, 
exhilarations and frustrations of a TI Billy Tt Young, fresh from 
Ireland calling on horseback at every homestead in a new country 
in order that Christ may be brought closer, or a young woman 
in a tent in the midst of a foreign people with whom she can¬ 
not even communicate, attempting to build a community center 
with a school, or a Mr. Woodsworth, upon whose shoulders rest 
the fate of the Church’s service to a people spread over 
200,000 square miles. 














- 

* 






. 

• : 

- 

C*s£ 

? O 

£ 

t " - " : ' . ■ ; , ■- . • 

■ C ’ 

C . t ; - • 

' ' - 

< 



2 


The Methodist Church had begun work in the West in 
1&40 but from this date until 1$&2 all the work in Alberta had 
been specifically for Indians and half-breeds. Any work among 
the few settlers and trading post inhabitants was only coin¬ 
cidental to this. In l££2 the first offical Methodist work 
among the white settlers began. This paper will deal with the 
work of the Methodist Church among these white settlers of 
Alberta up until 1914* These settlers consisted chiefly of 
two groups: English-speaking, and non-English speaking, and 
we shall consider them in that order. Of the English-speaking 
settlers the majority which the Methodist Church had dealings 
with were Methodists who had immigrated from Eastern Canada, 
the United States and Britain. The Baptist, Presbyterian, 

Mormon and other churches served their own people. Services 
by another church occurred only when the people were without 
the services of their own church or when the churches made an 
agreement as to which territory each should serve. Of the non- 
English speaking settlers the Ukrainians were the group among 
whom the Methodist Church did most of its work. The Scandinavian 
and German immigrants had their own Lutheran pastors and the 
French their own Roman Catholic priests. The Ukrainians, who 
were by heritage Greek Catholic, came to Canada with no priests. 
When the Methodist Church saw the need and that no help was 
forth-coming from their Old Country Church they stepped in. 

The first four chapters will deal with the English-speaking 
immigrants. They will also give a general background of immigrant 
circumstances and pioneer conditions for the following four 


- 

.. 

* . : ■ 

. : ocr. •: = ?/ ; 0 bri .be . . er 7 J io >h: dw 

. 


i - 1 


. 


t 

< ' c 

* 

' 


■ 


- 






« 

' 

- 

- 








- 3 - 


chapters which deal with the Church’s work among the non-English 
speaking settlers. This group of people will be designated, as 
they actually were, by a variety of names, Galician, Bukovinian, 
Euthenian, and Austrian. At times they will be designated com- 
positely as Ukrainians. 

Some of the material in this paper is from secondary 
accounts about the Church’s work and the pioneer processes of 
Alberta; but much is first hand, either told to me by the men 
and women involved or by men or women who knew or lived with 
those involved. In this regard I am indebted chiefly to 
Rev. Dr. W. T. Young, Mrs* J.K. Smith, Rev. Dr. Theodore Bay, 

Rev. G.A. Sauder, and Rev« John Sorochan. Other original 
information has been obtained from letters written by those 
involved in the work. Most of this material has been gathered 
in the few months required to write this paper, but some has 
been gathered coincidentiy in talking to pioneers over the years® 

I hope that through this study the reader will be aided 
in getting a deeper insight into the work of the Methodist 
Church in relation to the lives of the pioneers and the result¬ 
ing contribution made to Albertan and Canadian society and 
ultimately to the Kingdom of God. In preparing this paper I 
have seen this deeply. 


2d 

- 



T 

















♦ 












t ■ 










* 












- 






















T 







? 



























. 


f 



• : 

« 

t d ■ 

* 

- 


* 


, 





. 





* 

























, 


' 



c 



















■Jx-i no 





















£< . • 


~ 























* 








C ' 


. 





































CHAPTER I 


METHODIST CHURCH ORGANIZATION 

A tree will not grow without roots, nor will it grow 
without sunlight* The Methodist Church in Western Canada 
would not have grown without its roots of church government, 
church organization and church tradition nor would it have 
grown without the power of Christian settlers who through 
their desire to worship together, their hope for a Christian 
country and their needs gave the church incentive to expand. 

The governmental set-up of the Methodist Church was 
vitally related to both these facets of church expansion in 
the Canadian West. If the people of a new district initiated 
the movement to form a new church they found the organization 
much easier if it was done through regular church channels. 

If instead the church saw need, such as among the Galician 
settlers of the Vegreville-Smoky Lake District, they would 
form a new mission. In most cases this need of initiative 
by the church was not due to lack of desire on the part of 
the settlers but due to unfamiliarity by the foreign immigrants 
of the services offered by the church. The settlers, scatter¬ 
ed over vast areas and preoccupied with changing virgin prairie 
into productive homesteads often deemed the services of the 
church impossible. Many had come from older, thickly populated 
areas in Eastern Canada, United States and the British Isles 


- 4 - 



* 

e . . . : . . ;> 


• ' .-'V i; . ... : . ■ 1 

c :■ , ■ . ■. 

r x '/:l v-C;ui ■ <•' . c\ «: :v • r •. . r\i'I'X&f-vl 


f •/.' J. : J. . v , . : 




• lie J&lt o ii$& •; ,J ■ ■ . - . e j •. , : ; „; 

. 

* 

c ' - 

'•‘C •; £: l\C J;i.p '> G 

% 



* 

t 




- 5 - 


where due to endowments and density of population it was not 
hard to support a church, but here in the Canadian West they 
did not expect the Church to serve except for very primitive 
missionary methods. The Methodist Church saw the problems of 
distance, of the culture and of the philosophy of the immigrants 
clearly and was prepared to tackle the situation. It is, there¬ 
fore very important that the reader should have an overview of 
the organization and government of the Methodist Church, which 
encountered the Canadian West, before delving into a detailed 
study of its expansion in Alberta. 

The four levels of government within the Methodist 

Church were the General Conference, Annual Conference, District, 

and the Local Board of the charge, circuit or mission. The 

level which affected church expansion most was the Annual 

Conference, which consisted of an area assigned to it by General 

Conference. The Annual Conference met each year. It consisted 

of all the ordained ministers of the area and an equal number 

of laymen elected at the district meetings in the spring before 

Conference met. A president was elected to head the Conference. 

Alberta was part of the Toronto Conference until 1$$2 when it 

became part of the newly formed Manitoba and North-West 

1 

Conference. In 1910 Alberta officially became a separate 
Conference. The Annual Conference divided its area into districts 
and appointed a chairman from the ministers stationed there. 

Within each district the charges, circuits and missions already 

- ~ “ ' '• 

*j .H. Riddell, Methodism in the Middle wes t, p. 303. 




< 

2 ... 

'• c . .... ctf ■ u'i. ij';T .. oO v. ... S 

( 

t 

■ ■ ' ^ : • , ■ ' •. •; , c • 
t . • . .. ■ ■ ... • • . j 

. { 

* ... 

t - • • < ' s : ;• .. .i 

' i e 

. ,1 .< 0 . ■ : . J .. , 


1 • •••• ' ‘ • r. i t ' -" . 

* • 


■ . ■ ■ ■■ 

. 

. 

< .. v.o O'OX' ■ : .. f/;-j 







- 6 - 


in existence were recognised and provision was made for the 
formation of new ones, or adjustment of old ones. The Annual 
Conference’s duty of the formation of new districts was of 
great importance to the smooth functioning of the expansion 
which occurred, often in the most unexpected ways and places* 
The Annual Conference through its Stationing Committee was 
responsible for the supplying, not so much each minister with 
a circuit, but more important each circuit with a minister* 

In many cases there were not enough ordained men or probation¬ 
ers to fill all the requirements so lay preachers were used 
or extra territory assigned to the ordained men* The Station¬ 
ing Committee was the only committee within the Annual Confer¬ 
ence constitution which did not have lay representatives. *It 
consisted of the chairman of each district (a minister) and 
one additional minister from each district. These men met 
at each Conference, reached an agreement as to the needs of 
each district, and then matched the needs with the ordained 
ministers and probationers available*^ Thus the Methodist 
Minister had no say, and in fact only a short warning as to 
where he would be stationed. This system was advantageous 
to the birth of a territory like the Western Prairies as 
the broad view of the committee saw the needs and resources 


1 

Alexander Sutherland, The Methodist Church and 
Missions, p. 23. 









' 

<■ • 

" m. ' ■/ ■ -i, ■■ t L; _. 

' ■' j,k: ■ , . ;r ■ ■ ; j ■ 




■ 




. ;*vv .. i: . ■-\ >. c j f . .. .. 

■ : Oi. '• • . •• - • , : . ' • . ' T 

■ -■ -t • • ■ ■. 

:--3 ; ; ; 

- • ■ ■' ■ ! 

■ * 

■ . : ■/ • .' i',. 1 ; . ;v V l'-i ■ - 1 :.-,o 


■ ■ ' 












■ r - ■ ' •- ‘ • r 

« 

; j. . ■■... ‘ 

. 







e 

. . , 










- 7 - 


in perspective. The "call system" which first showed itself 
in Manitoba in 1#90 ^ and became quite general in Alberta in 
1915-20 would in the early days likely have resulted in an 
unequal distribution of church manpower and a corresponding 
ineffectiveness in the work. The Annual Conference through 
its Board of Examiners was soley responsible for the accept¬ 
ance of candidates for the ministry* the annual examination 
of these probationers and the final recommendation as to their 
academic fitness. The Annual Conference then admitted the 
probationers to full connexion and ordained them to the service 
of the Christian Ministry. Superannuation, resignation, with¬ 
drawal and final decisions regarding conduct of ministers 
were duties of the Annual Conference. The approval of this 
body for the sale or transfer of any church property was 
required. The title of church property was under a Model Deed 
in the name of the Methodist Church with trustees in the local 
congregations. The Annual Conference set up its own committees 
which reviewed the work of the Connexional Boards, Standing 
Committees and related organizations such as Missionary 
enterprises, Superannuation Fund, General Conference Fund, 
Church and Parsonage Aid Fund, and Embarrassed Trusts. A 
keen eye was kept on such local activities as the Sunday 
Schools, the Epworth Leagues (Young Peoples 1 }, the State of 
the Work, Statistics, and local financial matters like the 

1 j.H. Riddell, Methodism i n the Middle West^ p. 177* 








- a - 


Layman’s Association and Laymen’s Missionary Association and 
cases of unusual sickness or mishap were under the surveillance 
of the Conference, Social issues such as Sabbath Observance, 
Temperance, Moral Reform and Social Improvement were of keen 
and increasing interest to the Annual Conference. Often 
resolutions were sent to the Government, the General Conference, 
or other groups concerned with the moral issues. At the Annual 
Conference preceding the quadrennial General Conference an 
equal number of lay and ministerial delegates were elected to 
attend the latter. Memorials on various subjects were also 
submitted to the General Conference for action. 

The General Conference met to discuss problems per¬ 
taining to the Church as a whole. It set-up new Conference 
boundaries but had no jurisdiction over the internal affairs 
of the Annual Conferences. This Dominion-wide body of the 
Church was headed by a General Superintendent who was elected 
for eight years. The boards of the church such as Missions, 
Education,and Publications were at first headed by local 
ministers but in time superintendents were appointed. These 
boards consisted of an equal number of ministers and laymen 
and carried on vital work between General Conferences. Sunday 
School publications, administration of church affairs and the 
study of and dealing with home and foreign mission problems 
were areas in need of constant attention. 


From the above discussion it can be seen that the 


j, \ Xo.L‘ :. T . ■. 1 . ‘ ; .u' ' x or: • 1 ” r f ■. ■ 

i 

i r : ■ 

.. ;v : ... " ' / 'X' c x . :*> 1 

• : 

- • ■ : c . ■ . • V■ ■ •> i c:- ■; ’ , •; ■ - c.ltfU i 0':" '£ 

* 

nj . 1 yy r x.v . 

j. • ,.\*V. •; '■ 

» ' I. . :. 

■ o' : :: it ( J • Kite v . I L&n% d a [T 

■ — 

' ' \ . 

c • - . X 

J . ■ .. i ;, • 

. « ■. ; ' • "j. ' xJ ‘v: < .-o x jb'tx. a 

- " • 

« • • 




- 9 - 


Canadian Methodist Church was in many ways unique and different 
from its ancestors* The Canadian Church was in a sense half 
way between the British and United States Methodists* Canada 
had the ministerial equality of the British Wesleyans and the 
General Superintendency of the Episcopal Methodists of the 
United States* A unique feature was the Court of Appeal. 

This court reviewed decisions pertaining to law and appeals 
from Presidents, Annual Conferences, General Superintendents, 
Committees and Boards*^ 

Specific aspects of the organization and methods of 
the Methodist Church Government which played a vital part in 
the expansion of the Church in Alberta were: appointing of a 
Superintendent of Missions, giving this Superintendent per¬ 
mission to set up new missions between Conferences, using 
students on summer fields, forming policies of co-operation 
with other churches, giving aid from the Missionary Fund, 
providing grants for church building, corresponding with the 
British Church with regard to incoming immigrants and obtain¬ 
ing ministers, and co-ordinating mission field work* These 
aspects will be developed later in application to the expansion 
in Alberta* 


1Alexander Sutherland, The Methodist Chur ch a nd Missi ons, 

p • 23 • 












JO 


('•\J 


. 








yj 


C 






c 






c 








. " ': w O' 1 . 




0 









. 


















c 















10 - 


CHAPTER II 

BRIEF HISTORY OF THE METHODIST CHURCH AND ITS 
MISSIONS IN CANADA 

The heritage of Canadian Methodism lies both in 

England and the United States. The first Methodism in 

Canada was carried by Yorkshire colonists to the Maritimes 

from the United States about the turn of the century. An 

influx of United Empire Loyalists strengthened the American 

Methodist cause. They were "accustomed to privations of a 

new country and could adapt themselves to its frontier 
1 

exigencies". These colonists retained the American system 
of "presiding elders" and granted ordination to local preach¬ 
ers. The latter furnished service to many localities which 
otherwise would have been destitute. 

Upper Canada was being influenced by British Wesleyan 
(Methodist) missionaries. In the months preceding the war 
of 1S12 the British and American Methodists in Canada were 
in conflict due to the affiliation of the latter with the 
United States. As a result two distinct Methodist Churches 
resulted, often setting up "rival altars" in the same district. 

In 1$20 a compromise was reached in which the American 
conference was to serve Upper Canada and the British Wesleyans 

— y —- - ' 

E.H. Oliver, The Wi nning of t he F ro ntier, p. 109. 






, 

. 

. ' 

. 


, 

- 

. 

•'• T ■ >■ 






. 




. 

* ' • . j • ■ .■ 

■ 




s' _ 












11 - 


Lower Canada. Ties with the United States were weakened and 
in 1324 the first Canadian Conference was held. In 1327 the 
American Conference (in the United States) formally gave the 
Canadian Conference complete independence. This reduced the 
strain between the British and Canadian Methodists and after 
a series of conferences Union occured in 1347 and the Methodist 
Church of Canada came into being. 

Until 1334 there still existed, besides the Methodist 
Church of Canada, three smaller branches of Methodist believers; 
the Methodist Episcopal Church of Canada, the Bible Christian 
Church of Canada and the Primitive Methodist Church of Canada. 

In 1334 these united. This new union they called just the 
Methodist Church. On June 11, 1334 the Manitoba and North- 
West Conference met, dealt with the necessary business, and 
dissolved'the following morning. The afternoon of June 12, 
the Western delegates of the uniting churches met and formed 
a new conference. The Conference name was changed to just 
Manitoba Conference, although it included all the territory 
of the former Conference (present day Alberta, Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba and the Lake Head Country)* In 1336 the name reverted 
to Manitoba and North-West Conference by action of the General 
Conference. At the time of union (1334) this Western Conference 
consisted of six districts (see fig. 1) 0 

The first contact the Methodist Church had with 
Western Canada was in 1340 when the Hudson’s Bay Company 








a : 

* 

, '4 

- 








- 5 

. 








t ' ' 


- 








‘ 








. ■' J ■ : ' : t 
< : - : ; a ■ 

„ 




. 



• £ 


' 








12 



From J.H. Riddell, Methodism in the Middle West T p. 137 


























- 13 - 


invited the Wesleyan Methodist Church (operating out of 
England) to send missionaries to Rupertsland. The Wesleyans 
accepted the challenge and by careful planning chose strategic 
points; crossing of trade routes, water courses, and trading 
posts as their points of operation and sent top men to do the 
job. The men chosen were James Evans as superintendent, station¬ 
ed at Norway House, William Mason assisted by Peter Jacobs and 
H.B. Steinhauer at Rainy Lake, George Bainley at Moose Factory 
(on James Bay) and Robert Terrill Rundle at Edmonton House. 

At Norway House^Evans founded the mission of Rossville 
and erected a church, parsonage and school. He travelled widely 
among the Indian camps, but his greatest achievrnent was making 
tr birch-bark talk”. He invented a simple syllabic system for 
Indian languages. The Cree language was reduced to an alphabet 
of eight consonants and four vowels which it was possible to 
write in nine characters in four positions. His ingenuity 
produced a printing press and the resulting hymns and scriptures 
printed on birch bark became an invaluable aid in teaching to 
all missionaries of the West. William Mason and Henry Steinhauer 
assisted as translators. In five years Evans did magnificent 
work but due to his opposition to the Hudson’s Bay Company’s 
breaking of the Sabbath and their liquor policies he was falsely 
accused and returned to England where he died shortly. (1346) 

Rundle proceeded to Edmonton House where he became the 
first settled missionary of any church. He was an itinerant 
preacher, forming no churches or societies. However he laid 


» 

. 




: 

r ".o ruty'.xoq • r j 1 m< 

. 

r 


■' 7 r 

' 

- l’:v ,>. .o ■ ■■--'•..o, 

* . 








* 

/ ai t ■ 

. 






.. 

. 


* 









. 








- 14 - 


plans for a settlement at Pigeon Lake and in 1347 procured 
Benjamin Sinclair, a half breed, to operate it as an agricul¬ 
tural mission. Rundle travelled the length and breadth of 
present day Alberta, meeting Crees, Sarcees, Piegans, and 
Blackfeeto He travelled to Rocky Mountain House where he 
met Muskepetoon the great peace chief of the Wood Crees whom 
he later converted to Christianity, to the Stoneys in the 
south near Calgary and Banff, to Red Deer, and east down the 
North Saskatchewan. After eight years of toil he returned to 
England where he served with equal zeal the rest of his days. 

A great word for the layman is evident when we realize 
that after Rundle f s departure, Benjamin Sinclair was for seven 
years the only representative of the Protestant Church west 
of the Red River. Due to Indian massacres he was forced to 
move to Lac La Biche from where in 1355 he proceeded to meet 
Henry Bird Steinhauer and Thomas Woolsey who had been sent to 
his aid. 

Henry Steinhauer, a full blood Eastern Indian, was 
another of the great laymen (later to be ordained) of Methodism. 
His efforts were mainly responsible for the establishment of 
the Whitefish Mission. In 1370 Mr. Steinhauer reported of the 
mission: 

An average congregation of 200; church members 113; 
local preachers 3; Sunday scholars 35; in the day school 
60 with an average attendance of 45. In addition to this 
village containing between 300 and 400 inhabitants, the 
Missionary regularly preaches at two other places 45 miles 
apart. Number of members in the district 443•1 

— r - —— — — — ■“ 

Gerald M. Hutchinson, The Roots of the P rovince, p. 10. 








u ' 




c ' 

e ‘ 


iiii 


, 


, 

t . c 

* 

* 

c 

c ' . <■ ■ 

. 

* 

* 

: 

* 

c 

* 

* s t .li ' # 





- 15 - 


His work as peacemaker, teacher, and agricultural 
missionary is perhaps unsurpassed in the Canadian West, 

At Edmonton, Rev, Thomas Woolsey made his start but 
in 1356 reoccupied the Pigeon Lake Mission on request of the 
Indians. He later moved to Smoking Lake (Smoky Lake) and 
then in 1362 was persuaded by Rev. George McDougall, newly- 
appointed Superintendent of the Saskatchewan District to locate 
at Victoria (Pakan). On the surface it appears that Woolsey 
was not fit to be a wilderness missionary as he could not 
drive dogs, or even walk at a fast pace, had no sense of 
direction, nor could he understand the Indian language. How¬ 
ever his zeal and medical experience left an indelible mark 
in Western Missionary work. 

In 1362 George McDougall and his son John arrived in 
Edmonton; to begin what proved in later years to be a vital 
link in peaceful co-existence of the Indian and white settlers 
and orientation of the Indian in his new environment. The father 
as superintendent did notable work at Victoria, at Rocky Mountain 
House, at the Red River Settlement during the Riel Rebellion, 
on the prairies during the smallpox epidemic of 13?0 in which 
he lost three daughters, and at Morley where he and his son 
John established a Stoney Mission. He died as one supposed he 
would have chosen; on a buffalo hunt near Morley in 1376. His 
son John carried on the work in which he and his father had been 
so engrossed their whole lives. 




e ' 

* 

* c 

« . 

t 

• , 

c c 

.1 , ? 

•- 




« 


: . . ' , 

: • ' '•* - 







' V . 

■ 

■ 










- 16 - 


During his missionary career George McDougall had 
succeeded in interesting other men in Indian Mission work. 
These included Rev. Peter Campbell, two Snider Brothers 
(teachers) John Chantler and Enock Skinner. This mission 
work is carried on today by the United Church at Morley, 
Good Fish Lake, Saddle Lake, Duffield and other reserves. 


■- 

c 

: I > r S 


■c 



’ 

< .. . , 


' 



- 17 - 


CHAPTER III 

SETTLEMENT IN ALBERTA BEFORE 1S95 

Until l£S2 there was no Methodist Minister to the 
white settlers between Brandon and the Pacific except 

1 

James Turner in the Cariboo Country of British Columbia* 

Work until this time had been with the Indians and only 
incidental with white men* Most of the Indians were now 
on reservations and settlers had begun to move into south- 
central and south-west Manitoba* Only a few ranchers, mining 
and trading interests had moved into the prairies of present 
day Alberta and Saskatchewan* 

Settlement was stymied at first by the transportation 
problem but when the Canadian Pacific Railway’s transcontinental 
line reached Alberta in August of l£91 there began what was to 
become a flood of immigrants to that Province* Settlement 
was also hindered by earlier reports which had gone to the 
East of the Red River Rebellion (l£69) and the Northwest 
Rebellion (1&$5), of late spring frosts and early fall frosts, 
of mosquitoes in the summer and below zero temperatures in 
the winters, and of plagues of grasshoppers and vicious hail 
storms. However a few hardy settlers ventured West and 
realized the potentiality of the country* The foresight and 

— —3— — —— " - ~ 

James Woodsworth, Thirty Yea rs in th e Cana dian 
North -W est, p* 1. 





























» 

• ■ 


• -Ki.J-ya bar - . ietrr no 


c - - . 

- 

' ’• b ... ■ .;> .i rn ± - j- u - ; ,, er 


* 














■ 








■ 



. 






* 







* . c 









- 18 - 


hope of those who knew the country is typified by the report 
sent East by Rev. James Woodsworth, the Superintendent of 
Missions for the West. 

Northern and Southern Alberta differ greatly in 
physical characteristics and considerably in climate. 

In the north is the best of soil, wood and coal;... 

The south furnishes as fine cattle ranges as can be 
found on the continent—the richest of grasses, with 
climatic conditions which admit of cattle remaining 
unhoused all winter...An outcrop (of coal) has been 
discovered on the North Saskatchexvan, near the mouth 
of Bulk Creek. This deposit is believed to contain 
140,000,000 tons. 

Red Fife, an early maturing wheat, that appeared in 

1335 followed by Marquis in 1911 provided a stable economy 

for the West. Thus the tide of immigration mushroomed. The 

Government began advertising by sending land agents to Great 

Britain, Ireland, the Continent, and the United States. 

Information was broadcast by lectures and the press. With 

the promise of land, freedom, and the chance to build a new 

life with honest work the stream of settlers steadily increased. 

Up till 1395 most of the settlers were from Eastern Canada or 

the United States; chiefly Minnesota, Dakota, Michigan, 

2 

Washington Territory, Nebraska and Kansas. Of these some were 
Canadian bora who had migrated to the United States but now 
returned. Others were American born and a few European. Many 
of these settlers had homesteaded in the East or in the United 
States but found it profitable to sell their land and move to 


1 

Ibid ., p. 172. 

2 

Ibid., p. 163. 





" « . 


: t 

■ 1 ; 

yi. e • ■ 

* c <t 




t 












c 


c 








r 

c c c 

* 




- 19 - 


the "free land" of the Canadian prairies. Thus they brought 
with them a wealth of experience and greatly assisted the 
stability of the West. In the year 1393, 3000 settled between 
Edmonton and Calgary and in the ten months of 1393-94, 4,000 
immigrants with 250 carloads of effects passed over the 
Sdmonton-Calgary Railway. The flood was beginning. 

German settlements were established at this time 
(1391-94) in the country subsidiary to the railroad; Hoffnungen, 
west of Leduc; Rosenthal at Stony Plain; Wetaskiwin; Rabbit Hill, 
south of Edmonton; Josephsburg at the Beaver Hills near 
Fort Saskatchewan; Leduc; Dunbow, southeast of Calgary; 
Bruderfeld, south of Edmonton; Bruderheim (Moravian Brotherhood); 
Egg Lake, north of Edmonton and west of Morinville; Beaver Lake, 
35 miles southeast of Edmonton; Victoria, northeast of Edmonton; 
and also west of Lacombe. From 1392-96 other nationalities 
established colonies; the Scandinavians at Edna (Lamont); 

New Sweden, east of Wetaskiwin; near Olds; Swea near Sylvan 
Lake and Stony Plain (1395); the Icelanders (1391) six miles 
south of Red Deer; the Ukrainians (Galicians), the first of 
their kind in the North-West of Edmonton, (1394-95)• 

These European settlements can be definitely traced. 

They were the nucleous for development for other members of 
their nationality who arrived. The English-speaking settlers 
who came in as individuals cannot well be traced. They, how¬ 
ever, arrived in much greater numbers than the Europeans. 

- j - • ~ .. ““ — 

Arthur Silver Morton, History of Prairie Settlement, 
Vol.II, p. 103 o 







t t 

■ 








: ( 


' 


c 

■ 

: ( 






? ■- - ' ' ■ ' ,■ 

' * , 

« '. r. . * ; ■: 

* • " ~ < - 


















,11 







20 


The travelling agent’s statement for 1396 shows the various 
sources of settlers for that year. He divides the settlers 
(i.e. the heads of families) who took land as: 652 from the 
United States, 303 from Quebec, 99 from the British Isles 
and 325 from Europe. Thus for the year 1,056 out of 1,381 
settlers in this region were English speaking. It is with 
these English speaking settlers that the Methodist Church 
did most of its work. The work among the non-English speak¬ 
ing or Continental European settler will be dealt with in 
chapters 7-VTII. The Scandinavians and Germans were looked 
after by their own Lutheran ministers and the Roman Catholics 
by their own priests. 

The extent of the work of the Methodist Church up till 
1335 is preserved in James Woodsworth’s account of his visits 

District, 1 

to the Calgary A in 1891 and 1894* At this time Alberta had two 
districts, the Calgary and Saskatchewan districts. These two 
were not divided geographically but rather according to the type 
of work; the Calgary district being concerned with the church’s 
work among white settlers and the Saskatchewan district with 
work among the Indians. The Calgary district prior to 1895 is 
described as follows: 

The Calgary District, most of which is located in 
the Territory of Alberta, is probably the largest 
territorially in the Dominion Methodism, and certainly 
not the least promising. From Swift Current, in the 
east, to Banff, in the west, is a distance of 412 miles. 

From the ’Dry Forks of the Kootenay’ in the south, with¬ 
in a few miles of the Montana boundary and within sight 
of the mountain peaks in British Columbia, to Sturgeon 
River, north of the Great Saskatchewan, intervenes a 


1 

James Woodsworth, Thirty years in the Canadian 
North-Wes t, p. 154-168. 






* 

♦ 

c 

c t . 

„ 


8J. 




■ T (l ' • 

* 

, : ‘ 

■ c 

. 

■ 

- 


' 

' 


t 

e 

c ? 

< . 

< 


« 

* . 

c 

' r 















21 - 


distance of about 350 miles. Within these bounds 
Methodism has fifteen domestic missions and one self- 
sustaining circuit, on which are stationed eight ministers 
and seven probationers and supplies. One field has been 
left unsupplied for the winter months 

The circuits within the Calgary district were Maple 
Creek (present day Saskatchewan), a sheep and stock raising 
community with an ordained Methodist minister; Calgary a 
town of 4,000 with one ordained minister and a church and 
parsonage adequate for a town of its size. Around Calgary 
were three mission fields; Gleichen, High River, and Elbow 
River. The type of work carried on in missions is typified 
by that of Gleichen and High River. Gleichen covered 110 miles 
along the railway east of Calgary. There were nine appoint¬ 
ments on this field, seven in section houses and two in farm 
houses. A typical winter congregation consisted of three or 
four men, a woman and some children. In the summer there were 
more men as some of the farms employed up to twenty. Both the 
Methodists and Presbyterians ministered co-operatively to these 
people. Besides the services occasional visits were made to 
their ranches, twenty or thirty miles from the railway. At the 
High River and Pine Creek Missions there were four preaching 
points. This ranching country was not thickly settled, thus 
making pastoral visiting important, if not the primary feature 
of the minister’s work. Due to the distance it was hard to 
bring the people to a central point. West of Calgary at Morley 

1 - ■ — '' “ — “ 

Ibid., p. 168 








■''■■ . > / 1 . >; - * , 

* 

-Ha a 





: t 


. 





r 






* 

: ' . ' : :e '* 

* 

- 


c' • < 






. 

. 






: < 

- 

- 

l ' ’ ' • . ' 


: J. <. 

. 


■ - 







* _t.\ 









22 


was the McDougall Orphanage. This was under the Saskatchewan 
District. At Banff an ordained man was stationed to minister 
to the resort town itself (upwards of 7,000 tourists registered 
at hotels during the year ending October 1, 1391), and the 
mining towns of Anthracite and Canmore. Southeast of Calgary 
a church was established at Medicine Hat a town of 500. Seven 
miles east of Medicine Hat at Dunsmore a branch of the rail¬ 
way went southwest to Lethbridge with its coal. Lethbridge 
had a minister and as Woodsworth accounts lacked only one 
thing a !T minister f s wife". It is interesting to note at this 
point how the Lethbridge Church was established. When the 
Galt Coal Company opened their new railway line to Lethbridge 
in 1334 they offered a free excursion as part of the celebration. 

Rev. Wellingdon Bridgeman of Medicine Hat took advantage of 

1 

this excursion to do some mission work in the mining town. 

On the first Sunday he preached at the mines and then in a 
billiard hall in town. From that time on services were held 
regularly. Mr. Bridgeman is remembered as the builder of the 
three "Rocky Mountain Churches" (1336-33) at Lethbridge, McLeod 
and Pincher Creek. West of Lethbridge, reached only by stage¬ 
coach was Ft. McLeod an old trading post. Here ranching was 
the main stay. A minister was also placed here. North of 
Calgary the first mission was the Red Deer Mission which 
consisted of four appointments. One of these was Innisfa.il 

J.H. Riddell, Methodism in t h e_Middle West, p. 137. 








a 






















- 23 - 


or Poplar Grove about 20 miles south. There was only one 
preaching appointment between Red Deer and Edmonton; Lacombe, 
which was supplied by the Rev. John Nelson a missionary among 
the Stoneys at Wolf Creek. Edmonton had but one minister with 
five appointments (Sturgeon River was the most northerly point 
of white work on the prairies). Woodsworth saw that here 
another minister and a new church were sorely needed. 

Even at this early point in the settlement of Alberta, 
the church had vision to see what was to come. This vision was 
due in most cases to the calibre of men it had appointed to the 
West. The work of the first two superintendents, Rev. George 
Young and Rev. James Woodsworth and those who followed will never 
be forgotten. Just as it took settlers with a vision and a hope 
for a great future, so the ministers of the Methodist Church 
in the West required the same pioneer spirit. Woodsworth 
sums up this feeling: 

If anywhere true, warmhearted, level-headed mission¬ 
aries are badly needed, it is at the present time in this 
country. The words of an eminent man, otherwise applied, 
are applicable to this great territory. It is T yet in 
the gristle. Society is yet chaotic. Religious, education¬ 
al, and political institutions are embryonic, but their 
character is being rapidly fashioned by the swift, 
impetuous forces of intense Western life. ? The Church 
should play an important part in moulding society in all 
its relations. As settlements grow the number of mission¬ 
aries must be increased. The increase ought to keep pace 
with the demand, which will mean an increased expenditure 
of money and an enlarged staff of efficient ministers. 

The Methodist Church ought not to hesitate for one 
moment in the adoption of a vigorous and liberal policy 
in dealing with so important (because so promising) a 
field. We ought to have a considerably larger sum of 
money placed at our disposal before the work can be fully 




i 

. 

. 

. 

. 










- - ? ' ' ' t 

c • 

* C 

'• 

e . . * 

5 ■ . c 

t■ ’ 

? * 

* 

t ■ 

« 

. 

. 




- 24 - 


overtaken and efficiently prosecuted. If such cannot 
be spared in justice to other interests operated by 
our Missionary Society, then the General Fund ought 
to be increased or special provision be made for the 
exceptional opportunities presented. True, most of 
the settlers as yet are poor. For a few years they 
will need the fostering care of the Church, which in 
future years they will repay a hundredfold*1 


j — - --~- - - - - 

James Woodsworth, Thirty Years in the Canadian 
North-W est, p. 170-171. ———— 













. 

■ c : . 


i". '■> '■ ■ - 



L r 







c 










- 25 - 


CHAPTER IV 

EXPANSION OF THE METHODIST CHURCH IN ALBERTA 1395-1914 

The calm before the prairie thunder storm had passed. 

The tide of settlers was beginning to break through. There 
was now the first rustle of leaves as all waited expectantly 
for the first large drops and awe-stricken for the cosmic 
deluge that was to follow. The years 1395-96-97 were the time 
of rustling, for withih the next four years the first large 
drops of rain fell, followed by the flood of 1902-1910 and 
then the settling down to a steady rain of immigration, 

1911-14* With the war of 1914 the rain of immigration 
suddenly stopped only to be followed by continuous shower 
activity after 1913. 

Until 1335 one district, the Calgary district which 
stretched from the Sturgeon River, north of Edmonton, to the 
Montana border and from Banff in the Rockies to Maple Creek, 
in present day Saskatchewan, had been carved from Alberta. 

In that year the territory from Red Deer north was separated 
from the Calgary district and became known as the Edmonton 
District. It included the missions of Edmonton, Sturgeon 
River, Beaver Creek, South Edmonton, Leduc-Clearwater,Wetaskiwin, 

~T~ 

Min. M.&N.W. Conf., 1393. 












* 

' rr - - c 


•' c 

* 


* - 

ct. 


■■i t . 

c 1 ■ ’ ’... ? ' 

t - ■ . - • : 

* 

t ’ 



- 26 - 


Lacombe and Red Deer. The Calgary district also increased 

and included Calgary, Elbow River and Gleichen, Innisfail, 

Olds, Banff-Canmore, Medicine Hat, Lethbridge, McLeod, Pincher 

Creek, and Maple Creek-Swift Current, The membership of both 

districts was 770 with full membership and 76 on trial for a 

total of 346* During the same year there were 76 infant 

baptisms and 6 adult baptisms for a total of 32, 36 marriages 

and 35 burials. Subscriptions to the Guardian, the chief adult 

magazine of the Methodist Church, numbered 121, The Conference 

report of the State of the Work showed that the Church kept 

abreast of the incoming people. From 1391-94 the population 

of the Territories increased forty per cent from 52,230 to 

1 

73,506, while church membership increased sixty per cent. 

By the year 1914 these figures changed beyond immagination. 

In Alberta alone full membership amounted to 15,236, and those 

on trial 299 for a total of 15,5$5« Infant baptisms were 

1,047 and adult baptisms 94 for a total of 1,141* Marriages 

2 

solemnized were 1,113 and burials 692, The expansion of the 
church can best be seen by reference to the graph on page 27, 
showing the increase in the number of circuits and missions 
of the Methodist Church in Alberta from 1395 and 1914* 

The year 1395 was but a year of rustling partly due 
to the beginning of a depression which was to last five years. 


1 

Ibid,, 1395 o 

2 

Min, Alta, Conf,, 1914* 







5 


1 




• i 

~ 

c 

* 








1 


c '• • <J 








t < 





C 




<3 





















27 - 



Increase in the number of Methodist Circuits in Alberta 
from 1S95 to 1914» *From Min. M.&N.W. Conf. 1&95-1904 and 
Min. Alta. Conf. 1905-1914* 





























































































- 2d - 


Reasons for the depression were the boom price of land in the 
immediately preceeding years followed by a drought in 1 & 94 - 959 
the lack, of the expected settler influx due to the Conservative 
Government’s Immigration policy and efforts and the protective 
economic policy which kept foreign investors at arm’s length 
and kept Canadian prices, especially of manufactured goods 
needed by the farmers, high. In 1396 the Government changed. 
Sir Wilfred Laurier chose Clifford Sifton as Minister of the 
Interior for his new Liberal Government, Under Sifton the 
immigration machinery was re-organized. His immigration 
propaganda to the United States, Great Britain and Europe 
was most vigorous. Agencies were established in important 
centers. Transportation was arranged for delegates to visit 
Western Canada, Advertisements were inserted in British 
country newspapers and metropolitan journals. Agriculture 
displays were made at rural exhibitions and shows. Public¬ 
ations were issued not in the English language alone but also 
in French, German, Dutch, Norwegian and Swedish, Geographies, 
atlases, folders, school maps, comparative area maps, souvenir 
books, newspapers post-cards, reports of delegates, information 
for intending settlers and other immigration literature 
descriptive of wheat growing, of harvest time in Canada and of 
the West were widely distributed. In one year alone 2,703,646 
pamphlets were sent out. Addresses and lectures by practical 
farmers acquainted with Canada’s agricultural condition were 
given. Besides attracting farmers the government paid greater 






T 


1 






C 











t ' 











- 29 - 


attention to their care on arrival* Accoraodative immigration 

halls and other facilities were maintained at points in the 

West including Lethbridge, Calgary, Strathcona, Lloydminster, 

McLeod, Edmonton, Olds, Leduc, and 75 other centers in Alberta* 

Along with this policy the Government made arrangements 

with land companies to bring in settlers. In this scheme the 

company was required in the case of the Saskatchewan Valley 

Land Company to settle 20 homesteaders on free homestead land 

(even numbered sections in a township) and twelve settlers on 

land bought from the government. In return the Company could 

buy the remaining even numbered sections at one dollar per acre* 

Railway companies were subsized by the government and given 

land grants in payment for building their lines. The Hudson f s 

Bay Company received certain blocks of land plus one twentieth 

of the fertile belt in an area bounded on the south by the 

United States border, on the west by the Rocky Mountains, on 

the north by the North Saskatchewan and on the east by 

Lake Winnipeg, Lake of the Woods, and the waters connecting 

them. These companies put forth vigorous advertising campaigns 

of their own, to which are due much credit for attracting settlers* 

This is shown in the account by H. Collier: 

As early as 1907 Collier Bros, invested in Viking 
land. By 1915 they had acquired about 6,000 acres. 

...Settlers were secured for all the farms and assist¬ 
ance given by breaking some 2,000 acres, with fences etc. 

As at one time five tractors and ploughs were in operatioh, 
the outlay in preparing the farms amounted to many 
thousands of dollars. 1 

H.B. Collier, Remember Whe n, p. 15o 







c 


. ' Z , 


Z 


z 




* 





JC. : : . 








■ '■ ? " r > • .vc .. 

T 





' 

^ 

- 

' : ■ c/i. ■ ' c ;■ . ", (■: 

„ , . 

0 .-'Vi:/.. • c. Ic? Oi;.c, C r 

~ ~ . 
. <■■•••/ o » . 




- 30 - 


The effect of these policies, rooted in Sifton, to 

the tide of immigration can be seen by the fact that Alberta’s 

population increased five hundred per cent, 73,022 to 374,663 

1 

in the period 1901 to 1911* 

The gain in population according to racial origin was 

TABLE I - Gains in Population According to Racial Origin, 


ALBERTA 

1901 

1911 

Gain 

[per cent 

Britisn. 

34,903 

192,693 

550 

French and Belgian,.... 

4,665 

21,094 

450 

German* 

7,^36 

36,362 

470 

Au s t ro - Hung a ri an (in c lud 
ing Galicians and 
Bukowinians 

- 1,654 

26,427 

1,530 

Russian (including 

ITkra 

5,376 

9,421 

170 

Scandinavian* 

3,940 

28,047 

780 


^Census of Canada, 1911* 


The census does not give an insight into the number 
from the United States or the number of new Canadians but 
just the composite population. Most of the Ukrainians and 
Hungarians came directly from their homeland while large 
numbers of Germans and Scandinavians came first to the 
United States and then to Canada, A rough idea of the 
United States’s contribution to Alberta’s agricultural 
immigrants of that decade can be gained from the following 
chart® 


Arthur Siver Morton, Historv of Prairie Settlement, 
ol. II, p* 127o 





















c 



i 


f 




( 






t— 5 


C 


( 


e 


c 







f 











- 31 - 


I * 

TABLE II - Homestead Entries, 1901-1910 


NATIONALITY 

Total 

Per Cent 

(of Total) 

Canadians. 

76,75® 

27 

Canadians (returned from U.Si 

5,625 

2 

Americans. 

32,995 

23 

British (including Irish)... 

50,319 

17 

French and Belgians... 

3,200 

1 

Germans... 

6,262 

2 

Austro-Hungarians (including 

21,369 

3 

Galicians)... 



Scandinavians (Swedes, Danes, 
Norwegians, included)..... 

9,735 

4 

Russians (other than Men- 

4,364 

2 

nonites and Doukhobors) <>.. 


Mennonites.. .»*<,••••••• 

576 

1 

Doukhobo ... 

2,356 

1 

Other Nationalities. 

14,293 

7 

T otal.a * 4 1 > 

235,664 

100 


*From Reports of Department of Interior, 1902-1911 
(Ottawa: King f s Printer). 


The tremendous task of assimilation of such an influx 
cannot be imagined until one sees it in perspective. In 1300 
the United States had a population of 5,303,433. In 1901 
Canada had a population of 5,371,315, practically the same. 
From 1300 to 1310 the United States assimilated only 90,000 
immigrants while Canada in a corresponding period 1901-1911 

— ^ - " " " “ ~ ' “ ’ “ 

Census figures from Arthur Silver Morton, 

History of Prairie Settlement, Vol. II, p. 123. Per cents 
caicuiat-edo 























- 32 - 


assimilated 1,764,474* From 1904 to 1920 the United States 
received 134,000 immigrants while Canada from 1900 to 1916 
received 2,906,021 immigrants. During the decade ending 
in 1330 the United States with a population of 50,000,000 
had 250,000 less immigrants than our immigration for the 
decade ending 1914# From 1911 to 1914 a million new immigrants 
came to Canada. There was a significant increase of those 

1 

from south-east Europe (31,205 in 1910 and 100,055 in 193.4)* 

This affected the Canadian West greatly and will be dealt with 
in chapters V - VIII* 

At this point it might be noted that the Canadian West 
was unique in its development. For over a century there had 
been foundation laying in the East. By the time the real 
surge of immigration came the Dominion had already been made 
one, Provincial and municipal forms of government already 
proven effective in the older provinces were ready where needed 
without any trial or error. The pros and cons of school 
policies had been exposed in the Manitoba School Question so 
Alberta did not have to go through the same difficulties. 

Most of the denominations had unified their various branches 
and each had a united missionary effort* The land was surveyed 
ahead of the settlers and in general system arid order prevailed* 
Thus the settler came to a virgin country with its raw materials 
staked out. There was still much to be desired in the way of 

William T. Gunn, His Dominion, p. 210-211* 









C 5 




c ^ 








r 


C 


- 










■ 

«. ' 

j r j: 

* 

Q, 

* 

' ; o-.. : Oo.r V. ; ■ : 






• : ; u l j: ' 




■• .■ J. ',: ■ ■ 1 :v 


. 













- 33 


public works, transportation, medical services, and religious 
services; but this was good for it appealed to settlers with 
a desire to work and to build upon the foundation. This out¬ 
let for freedom, unrestrained freedom to work, was all they 
desired. 

The years 1396-97 saw the beginning of a build-up of 
settlers in the East and United States ready to go West when 
the time was ripe. To date the Canadian Pacific Railway was 
the only one across the prairies. Settlers could move north 
of Calgary to Red Deer in 1390 and to Edmonton in 1391 on a 
branch line of the railway, and south of Calgary to McLeod 
or south-west of Medicine Hat to Lethbridge. 

During these years the Church had kept abreast of the 
settlers, moving into the districts with them. The method of 
church extension at this time is typically portrayed by the 
development at Red Deer. 

Most of the early settlers were of the Methodist faith, 
and in 1391, the Methodist Church, the first church in 
Red Deer was built. It stood on First Street North, and 
is now Walter Code f s grist mill. The work on the church 
was done by organized bees, the women providing the lunch. 

It was truly a labor of love, for all religious differ¬ 
ences were forgotten as peop3.e of all denominations 
worked on the building. The church was ready for opening 
that fall, and Mr. Robertson, a student missionary, was 
in charge. Rev. Geo. Dean preached the dedication service. 
In 1892, Mr. F.W. Locke, then a student missionary, spent 
one year at Red Deer, returning as an ordained minister in 
1395® That year the Presbyterian Church had a student 
missionary at Red Deer, a Mr. Byde, followed by Mr. Donnell. 
The Presbyterians held services in the Methodist Church in 
the morning, the Methodists in the evening, and a Union 
Sunday School was held in the afternoon, and a Union 
Christmas Tree was held each year. Bishop Pinkham, of the 




. 




-• 






» 

, 




z 


< 


z 




t 


c 





- 34 - 


Anglican Church, came through Red Deer in 1&3&, and after 
that yearly visits were made until they could establish 
a church at Red Deer. Catholic Priests also came through, 
solemnizing marriages and holding services. One good 
Anglican woman used to loan her home for Catholic service 
and polished her candlesticks for the occasion 

The problem of the Church adequately serving the settlers 
in Alberta was complicated by the land survey system. In 
Eastern Canada the French system of concessions had been used 
in which each settler received 160 acres of land in a strip 
one-eighth of a mile wide and stretching two miles back from 
the river. Houses were built on the end of the strip nearest 
the river. Thus the settlers were relatively close together 
and visiting was easy. Vestiges of this system exist in Alberta 
in the Oarneau district of Edmonton said the Lobstick Settlement 
near Pakan. 

In Western Canada the government adopted the survey 
system of the American West. The basic plan was to divide 
the prairies into six major north-south meridians (the first 
near Winnipeg) which were subdivided into ranges, north-south 
lines six miles apart with the correction for the earth’s 
curvature every twenty-four miles. Starting at the United 
States border east-west tovmship lines were surveyed six miles 
apart. Thus the whole prairie was surveyed into townships six 
miles square. In each township within twenty miles of the rail- 

r\ 

4 , 

way, the railways were given odd numbered sections. Sections 


1 

Annie L. Gaetz, The Park Country , p. 105-106. 

2 

In 190S the railways chose land grants they had earned 
from other townships also. 






. 

» 






... 




. 


■ 


* 

. ~ 

' f '" ‘ • 

, 










~ 










t V 













. V \ 





< 

■■ iua ■ 




* 

•: i :j .• r-.<. 







* 








- 35 - 


eleven and twenty-six were reserved as school lands. The 
Hudson Bay Company was granted section eight and three-quarters 
of section twenty-six (the whole of twenty-six in every fifth 
township) in payment of the territory which they had once 
owned. The remaining even sections were opened to free home¬ 
steads. The settlers bought railway, school, and Hudson Bay 
land if they had money but in many cases they had no money and 
thus had to move farther afield to settle homestead land. This 
checkerboard system of survey and policy of land grants were 
supported by the railways who harvested a profit from trans¬ 
portation and by the government who got the West settled faster. 
The homestead system at this time involved a ten dollar fee in 
return for which any person over eighteen years was leased 160 
acres of land. If the homesteader lived on the land five months 

of the year for three years and made certain improvements he 

1 

received the title to the land. The period 1898-1901 was that 

of a large influx into the areas along the railway lines (see 

map on page 36). The Canadian Pacific Railway Company in 1897 

bought the narrow gage Lethbridge Railway from the Galt Coal 

Company, relaid it in standard gage and extended it in 189$ 

to the Kooteney District of British Columbia. This helped the 

rancher but at the same time opened up the country to settlers. 

Markets for cattle, butter, cheese and flour were now open west 

2 

of Alberta ac well as East. The large ranches broke up and 

-- 1 -----“~~ 

Arthur Silver Morton, History of Prairi e S ettlement , 
Vol. II, p. 39$-400. 

2 

Ibid., Vol. II, p. 113• 





: . ' • 

• : - , 

. 

; 

- 

t '.oc t 

1 • 

. 

, 








- 

• • 








■ 





















:: ■ < ■ 

• . t ; .i •. 




. 






_ _ _' 5 1 

. 


- 36 - 












































, 


. 


























- 37 - 


farmers from the United States who had been accustomed to 
dry farming in a semi-arid region moved in* The Mormons came 
from Utah to Cardston in 1392 with their knowledge of irrigation. 
By 1902, 614,634 acres were irrigated by 469 miles of ditches ^ 
thus adding to the agriculture prosperity of southern Alberta. 

Although the year books of the Church of these years 
show very little increase in the reported appointments or member¬ 
ship, the fields in operation were becoming well consolidated 
and at the same time stretching beyond their borders to new 
appointments. The breaking point appears in the years 1903-06 
when expansion showed itself formally in the church reports. 

TABLE III - Number of Methodist Church Members in 



Alberta from ! 

1895 to 19: 

L4* . • 

YftAR 

Number in j 

YEAR 

Number in 


Full Member¬ 


Full Member¬ 


ship j 


ship 

1895... 

770 

1905 ... 

4,895 

1896** 

880 

1906... 

5,673 

1897... 

999 

1907... 

7,072 

1898.** 

1,110 

1908... 

8,476 

1899... 

1,224 

1909... 

9,355 

1900... 

1,309 

1910... 

10,650 

1901... 

1,783 

1911... 

11,643 

1902... 

2,043 

1912... 

12,550 

1903... 

2,679 

1913... 

13,884 

1904... 

4,060 

1914... 

15,286 

-*From Min. 

M.&N.W. Conf. ; 

and Min. A' 

Lta. Conf. 


approximate . 

—r~——— 

Ibid., p . 114. 















- 3d - 


The minutes of the 18'9$ Annual Conference asked that 
the office of the Superintendent of Missions remain* The 
ministers and laymen could see the value of such a person* 
Before the appointment of such a man the chairman of each 
district had been in charge of missions. He was bogged 
down with an avalanche of other administrative duties and 
often had only a local view of home missions* The General 
Superintendent on the other hand was able to devote full time 
to missions, a task that was the prime responsibility of the 
Church in a territory such as the West which was in the pangs 
of birth. The Superintendent could get an overview of the 
whole situation. What had happened in Manitoba twenty years 
earlier was now being repeated in Alberta at the turn of the 
century. From a study of past actions and present needs and 
resources the Superintendent was able to avoid many of the 
difficulties of a trial and error method and take advantage 
of many short cuts. During the winter the Superintendent of 
Missions often spent his time touring the East as far as 
Newfoundland presenting the needs of the West. This brought 
forth ministers, finances, prayers and Christian settlers or 
laymen who were, in practice as well as theory, 50% of the 
Church. 

The need for ministers in the Canadian West was acute. 

In 1&94, the General Board of Methodist Missions 
determined to send its corresponding secretary, Rev. 

Jas. Woodsworth, to England to find suitable men for 
its Western missions. Personal letters from Canadian 
to English Methodist officials paved the way for his 
undertaking. Arriving in England, he consulted with 




a" ■: 


. 

. 


1 

. 

. 

" : ■ . 5 






















: ' 






* 


* 

: c ' , w 

* 








< ■ 

• < 






,• V-. 

. 

< ( * ;.■ 









- 39 - 


British church officials and then wrote various Methodist 
papers, explaining his plan and purpose, and arranging 
places and dates for personal interviews with candidates 
for mission service. His first itinerary included London, 
Bristol, Manchester, Cliff College in North Derbyshire, 

Leeds, Newcastle-on-Tyne, Edinburgh, and Belfast. In 
the course of seven such visits Mr. Woodsworth succeeded 
in bringing 2$0 Methodist clergymen to the Western prairies. 
Later on, this work was facilitated by an advisory committee, 
established in England to co-operate with representatives 
of the Methodist Church in Canada.1 

At the Conference of 1902 it was reported that 90 % of 
the probationers and laymen coming into the ministry were 

o 

4 

from Canadian homes, Canadian schools and Canadian culture. 

However the supply was still far from adequate so Rev. Woods¬ 
worth announced that he was again on his way to the British 
Isles to find young men to supply Western Canada f s need. Re¬ 
calling his trip of 1905 he reported that 4$ young men had 
come to Canada, three to Nova Scotia and 45 to the prairies* 

He says; 

the experiment has proven remarkably successful, 

(these young men) have adapted themselves to the con¬ 
ditions of the country in a remarkable manner. With 
very few exceptions they have proved themselves to be 
men of the right stamp, good preachers, diligent students 
and faithful in pastoral work.3 

Rev. Dr. W.T. Young, tells of meeting Dr. Woodsworth 

4 

in Ireland on one of his trips to recruit ministers. At this 
time Mr. Young was a youth of 19 and was advised by Dr. Woods¬ 
worth to wait a few years. The youth had already made up his 
mind and during the interview already had his ticket in his pocket. 


- r — . -.. —- — - 

James Woodsworth, Thirt y Years in the Canadian Nort h- 
West, p . 220-225o 
2 

J.H. Riddell, Metho dism in the Middle West, p. 261. 

3 

Ibid., p. 295. 

4 

Personal account from Rev. Dr. W.T. Young. 

















. 





c 



















* 

c 

« 









. 



« 

























* 






* 










c 




c 


5 '• 




' 




*' 








t ■ 

< 



- 




* ' 

i *• * 

* 


* 




* 


. 







* 















: «• 




■ 

~ 

. J. ' . 


c 

0 








In 1905 he came to Canada and found his place of service as 
a lay supply under Rev. R.E. Finlay on the Daysland circuit. 

The type of work among the settlers at this time is 
well told by Mr. Finlay who was the first minister of any 
denomination among the settlers in the Vegreville district. 
He tells of his first visit to the area with the aim of 


establishing church services. 


The day I got my first sight of Vegreville, I had 
come over from Angus McCallum’s home at Beaver Lake and 
had taken dinner at the Dennis’ Stopping Place, as it was 
then called. It was situated N.W. of Vegrevil5_e, near 
the centre of a very fine section of land and was a large 
farm house built of logs. This stopping place was the 
headquarters for the land seekers and newcomers. In those 
days all comers w r ere expected to bring their own blankets 
and provide their own sleeping accomodation. In case of 
rain, they were allowed to come into the house and make 
a bed on the floor; otherwise they were expected to make 
a bed outside in a horse stall or a granary or alongside 
a hay or straw stack, or under the vehicle in which they 
traVelled«.««««»». *•«.««.*. 

...After taking dinner at the Dennis’ that first day, 

I made arrangements with them to hold religious services 
in their home every alternate Sunday at 11 o’clock. Then 
I set out to explore the area round Vegreville. That did 
not take very long as settlers were few and far between.. 
.Mr. and Mrs. Willis Cole very kindly consented to pro¬ 
vide me with board and lodging, and a free stall with hay 
for my horse. They were a young couple from Minnesota, 
just married in March, 1901, and had a new frame house, 

IS x 24—the only frame house for miles and miles around. 
They,gave me the upstairs; there was no stairway as yet, 
so we nailed slats across the 2 x 4 T s which served nicely 
as a ladder. They provided me with a bed and a chair up 
there, but there was no table or writing desk, and no 
lumber to make one. What was to be done? I noticed that 
Fir. Cole had a nice top buggy, the relic of his courting 
days in Minnesota. The prairie was too rough on the top, 
so Mr. Cole had put it upstairs. I opened it up and sat 
in it. It was a little high but served the purpose. Thus 
I had a "buggy-top" series of sermons while in Vegreville.1 


Alberta Historical Review, Vol.3, No.l, p. 16-23* 









c 













- 41 - 


He goes on to tell about these experiences of a young 
minister including both adventure and the opportunity to help, 

I did not take up offerings at my religious services. 

To pass the plate when people had nothing to offer was 
very embarrassing. However, later, people gave free will 

offering.. ....... •. 

...When November came and ice was formed on the neck of 
sloughs that I had to cross, I carried a hatchet on my 
saddle. When the ice would not carry the horse, but 
would hold me, I cut a channel across the ice wide enough 
for the horse to cross without cutting his legs. 

It is difficult for young people of today to realize 
conditions in those early days. In leaving to visit a 
family or to take a religious service, I assumed that 
r ’a straight line was the shortest distance to a given 
point. TT There were very few fences in those days; a 
calf pasture or a field to turn the cows in after milk¬ 
ing at night, or a garden, might be fenced, but gener¬ 
ally the whole country was before one. And the straight 
line usually had many deviations to get around bluffs and 

to cross sloughs, if the water was not too deep.. 

...Every two weeks I went over to Tofield to hold a 
religious service in their log school, and the Amisk Greek, 
that flowed into the S.E. comer of the lake, was about 
40 feet wide and 10 feet deep in mid-stream. This 
necessitated the swimming of my saddle pony across the 
creek. I crossed over near a ranchman’s home on a raft 
while the saddle pony fed around with a tether rope 
attached to her bit. I would cross over on the raft 
with the saddle, blanket and whatever I was carrying 
and then, tightening up the tether rope, would coax 
the horse over. I had to do this all summer and autumn, 
but bridge builders came in the winter and put a bridge 
over the creek. 

The minister of those days found ample opportunities 
for service in many ways. Aside from preaching, visit¬ 
ing the sick, giving religious instruction to young people 
and children, he was called upon to give advice in temporal 
affairs, to draw up wills, to extract teeth and to give 
help to worried home builders in cutting the right pitch 
for their rafters. He milked cows when Ve found bo^th father 
and mother sick in the home on which he had just called; 
he helped a mother to get a load of hay from a hay slough 
when the father was on a long trip for provisions and the 
supply of fodder had run short. He happened along one day 
in harvest when a farmer was very much out of temper because 
the knotter of his binder failed to tie and was throwing 
out sheaves untied. The minister, being a farmer’s son 
and having worked with similar binders, adjusted the knotter. 
A neighbor in relating the incident to me said ?T that farmer 
had always a wholesome respect for the minister after that. TT l 


1 

Ibid., Vol. 3, No. 1, p.22. 







. c! < 






- 42 - 


The obituary of Rev. E.W. Wood shows that the life of 
the young ministers was not only 11 romantic” adventure. 

As a young man he had taken up a homestead in Manitoba 
but feeling his calling to the Church he became a probationer 
and continued his work and studies and was ordained in l£97<> 
While serving at Carstairs in 1902 he was drowned. The 
circumstances of his death were exceedingly sad. While 
swimming a swollen stream, intent on his duty he sank 
through the raging flood and went up to the blessed home 
above,1 

Another account recorded: 

The pioneer clergyman of any denomination in this section 
of the country was our Methodist missionary, the late and 
highly esteemed brother, Rev. E.W. Wood, He was here when 
the townsite of Crossfield was yet a ranch. His work was 
among the sparse population of ranchers. The field consist¬ 
ed of the present Missions of Carstairs, Crossfield, Airdrie 
and Tapscott, with Carstairs as the chief point. Though 
covering such an extensive area, his work was not without 
effect, and today he is frequently spoken of with admiration 
by the early settler. In the spring of 1902, on the eve of 
his marriage, he was attempting to ford a swollen stream 
and met his death by drowning.2 

The life of the settler also involved more than hard 
work, but danger as well. 

The awful destruction caused by prairie fires is 
described by the Wollen brothers as well as many others. 

For a hundred miles or more north and south one would 
roar through here between the Battle and the Saskatchewan 
rivers, unchecked, consuming barns, houses and fodder in 
its furious rush, and destroying all pasture. Ploughing 
of fire guards was a duty of every farm, many acres of 
land being thus treated for protective purposes only. 

Cn both sides of the railway, strips a rod or more in 
width were ploughed to prevent fires from the engines. 

Besides fire guards, wise farmers also took further 
safety measures by keeping barrels of water near the 
buildings. 

One particularly destructive fire started west of 
the town (Viking} through carelessness of the railway. 

Lars Wollen, Gilbert Sorenson and others were busy hay¬ 
ing, already having made large stacks northwest of tox'm. 

A great loss followed. Mr. Sorenson almost lost his life 
in an endeavor to save his oxen. After a great wall of 
fire had passed, he was found crawling along the ground, 
blinded and half conscious. It required months for him 


1 Min. M. & W^fTG 5nf7TI902; p. 7i 

2 M’.b. Vola S! 




















t 






5 
























- 43 - 


to recover from the terrible experience. Whereas the 
railway was fined $30, no compensation was awarded the 
victims of the fire.l 

By 1902 the railway from Calgary had been in Edmonton 
for 10 years. The Canadian Northern was on its way and in 
1902 had reached Winnipeg. In anticipation of it, settlers 
were now streaming into Alberta. Many came with little 
knowledge of what the lack of a railway meant. The Barr 
Colonists proceeded past Tt the end of steel” at Saskatoon to 
Lloydminster. Their hardship is accounted by Canon Carruthers: 

From the Anglican Mss ion school at Onion Lake, fifty 
miles north of the colony, Indians came down to help them 
in putting up little homes built of poplar poles and 
roofed with sods cut from the prairie turf. The first 
winter was desperately grim. Many were living in tents. 
Others were huddled together in a temporary community 
shelter. The mud used as plaster in their Noddies* 
dried and fell out. Food ran short. Many survived the 
winter only by the men going out and shooting rabbits 
and prairie chicken to add to their rations.2 

The Methodist Church was aware of development taking 

place. At points of entry it had workers who attempted to 

befriend and be of assistance to all immigrants. The immigrants 

were given information about districts to which they intended 

to go and if possible an introduction to the minister of that 

area. To people in a new country seeking a home in a great 

lone land this welcome gave a note of encouragement and hope. 

The extent of the church 1 s efforts to help immigrants can be 

seen in the report of tT Immigration Work” in the 1914 General 

3 

Conference Journal. The report urged the continued need for 
communications with Methodists in the British Isles intending 
to emigrate to Canada, meeting them on arrival and giving them. 


1 

H.B. Collier, Rember When, p. 21. 
2 'Alberta'Uistorical Review, Vol. 1, No. 2, p. 13. 

EftE 









- t 


■i * 

*■ 

■ 

. 


c - ■ . 

■ ■ 








* ‘ ■ ■ • ' ■ 
■ . 






* 










. ■■ 




< 


< , " ' : TC * : '; ' •' ' 


r 





- 44 - 


sympathetic helpful information and a letter of introduction 
to the minister at their destination. The need for workers 
at Quebec, Halifax, St. John, Montreal and Winnipeg was also 
stressed. The committee reported that in the years 1909-13 
43,399 letters of introduction had been given out and in 1912- 
13, 2,699 immigrants had been received as members. This number 
rose to 6,169 in 1913-14* The Field Secretary of Home Missions 
had visited Ellis Island in the United States and found that 
the work of the Canadian Methodist Church among new arrivals 
lagged behind that of the United States Churches. As a result 
the General Board of Missions was asked to appoint a full time 
ma n to deal with the immigrants. 

The method of forming nexv congregations by the Methodist 
Church in these new settlements varied with each individual 
settlement. This was the strength of the Methodist Church. 

It was not bound by one mechanical process which worked with 
precision when the situation fitted it perfectly and stopped 
when one factor was varied or absent. Rather the individual¬ 
ity of each instance was met, reckoned and dealt with. And 
the instances were varied by the variety of immigrants with 
their different religious, economic and cultural backgrounds. 

The Superintendent, Rev. T.C. Buchanan at this time, kept 
abreast of all development in the province. This included 
areas which were developing and those which were likely to 
develop. He personally visited these areas to survey the 
situation. From his personal letter are the following accounts 
of such a trip to the area east and south of Edmonton and another 
north of Edmonton: 


c . * 5 - C : 

- 



• 



. ' 






. 



•' ... - 1 



' Oo. ■' '• 

.. 

. 

. ■ ' . 


c .. n .t; i , 

. 

, ' c . 

v 

: ■ c 








C 0 . t ... 


^ X : - • i> ( Li 


















; 



- 45 - 


Having looked over these missions, Vermillion Valley 
and Tofield, we concluded that such a rearrangement of the 
work could be made as would permit one of the missionaries 
to go further south to the district through which the 
Wetaskiwin branch of the C.P.R. is being built. This 
was subsequently carried out. From Tofield we journeyed 
to Sparling, an important centre, and the present terminus 
of the above Wetaskiwin branch of the C.P.R. Here we found 
a village growing somewhat like Jonah’s gourd: houses being 
built in an incredibly short time. Advising with the pastor, 
Rev. Thos. Philps, we selected in a central part of the 
village, lots on which to build a church and parsonage, and, 
as we write, a comodious church is in process of erection. 

We returned north by way of Beaver Lake, Beaver Hills and 
Fort Saskatchewan, to Edmonton stopping at the two latter 
places to consult with Bros. Aldridge and Huestis regard¬ 
ing the work on their respective districts. We reached 
home in time for Christmas, having travelled twelve 
hundred miles, eight hundred by buggy.1 

r In the townships northwest of the Pembina, for which he 
O^ethodist Land Agent] has the record, he assured us that 
there were about three hundred settlers, of whom at least 
eighty per cent were English-speaking Protestants. let, 
so far as we could learn, there were no regular religious 
services among them.2 

The method of initial organization in these new districts 
which the Superintendent had visited and decided to station a 
man is described below by the Rev. A.E. Aldridge the first 
minister in the Vermillion area. 

At the Alberta Conference, held at Calgary, 1905, it 
was decided to adopt a some what different policy with 
regard to some of our very new fields--that is, to station 
men of several year’s standing and experience at certain 
strategic points, or at least, at points that promised to 
become important centres in a short time. On this account 
Brother Barner was stationed at a new place, ” Alix, Tt and 
became chairman of a large and for the most part new district 
Brother R.E. Finlay in like manner was sent to Daysland, a 
new district being formed with Brother Finlay as chairman. 

I, in turn, was stationed at Breage, a P.0, near-by what 


1 

M.B. Vol. 2, p. 66B. 

2 ” 

Ibid., Vol. 5, p• 195o 













- 46 - 


promised to be a divisional point on the C.N.R. This 
was as new, perhaps, as any work we could take up. Settlers 
had come in apparently in large numbers, if one could judge 
by the number of teams one saw on the trail from Edmonton 
and Fort Saskatchewan eastward. A railway was coming from 
the east, Edmonton being its objective point. A note of 
expectation was being sounded every day, and great pre¬ 
dictions were made. We left Fort Saskatchewan--Mrs. Aldridge, 
our four boys, and myself-«in July, and after a drive of 
something like 120 miles by the trail we reached a small place, 
Mannville by name, the headquarters for the time being of 
the Mackenzie and Mann construction department. Here I 
was able to secure a small house, and so here we pitched 
our tent. A few families were already in the vicinity on 
the land. I announced for preaching service in our house, 
and we soon had a very good-sized congregation. Twenty- 
two miles to the east again I found Breage P.0. Here were 
also a few railway camps, and a few, very few, families on 
the land• A restaurant building was kindly offered as a 
preaching place, and Sundays saw an audience gathered of 
say twenty-five persons. Apart from these two places I 
could find scarcely any settlement. What had become of 
all the folk one saw travelling eastward? They were in the 
country certainly. But such a country of distance. My 
district is roughly 150 x 150 miles, large enough to accom¬ 
modate five million people. I suppose that including 
Galicians, Indians, and other folk, there were not 5,000 
people all told. The immense territory was sufficient to 
account for the scattered settlement. My time, however, 
was not wasted. I found abundant opportunity to minister 
to the railway gangs of men—sometimes indeed preaching on 
the week-nights, and three or four times on a Sunday. 

The railway reached us in due time. I saw the smoke 
of the train away to the east in the Blackfoot Hills. The 
expected divisional point was marked out, the site survey¬ 
ed into town lots, merchants, settlers, etc., all flocked 
in, and in a few weeks quite a thriving town was establish¬ 
ed; its name is Vermillion. It lies west of Battleford, 
and east of Edmonton about 130 miles, and bids fair to 
become not only a stirring railroad town but a good farmers 1 
town besides. 

As soon as possible I made my application for three lots 
in a central part of the town. My first care was to erect 
a house and a stable, for winter was very near. .At some 
inconvenience, and many disadvantages, we built the par¬ 
sonage. It was the first house to be opened, and the 
opening event was the first social function at Vermillion. 

At once we started to hold services in the parsonage, and 
as a Presbyterian minister had now arrived we alternated 
services with him—he preached in the parsonage just as 
often as we did. A church, however, was a necessity. There 
was no probability of any other building being erected which 
would have done for church services. A subscription list was 


< ' 


- 47 - 


opened, and several hundred dollars subscribed. The contract 
was let, and on December 7th, 1906, the first Protestant 
Church on the line between Battleford and Fort Saskatchewan 
was opened.1 

The basic method used as a district became settled is described 
by Mr. Young* Rev. R.E. Finlay, who was stationed at Daysland 
had under him several probationers and lay preachers (including 
Mr. Young)o Each of these men was assigned about three preach¬ 
ing points. From the central point, Daysland, which was Mr, 
Finlay’s headquarters, the student fields covered as much as 
twenty-five miles on each side. Mr. Finlay continually rotated, 
taking over the preaching assignments of the probationer or lay 
preacher while he in turn took Dr. Finlay’s preaching assignment. 
During this rotation Dr. Finlay administered communion, baptisms, 
performed marriages and looked after church business in general. 

Mr. Young tells of riding 17 miles from Wavy Lake (near 
Strome) to Viking to see if it was feasible to organize services 
at. that point. Unknown to him the settlers of various denomin¬ 
ations had already built a church in Viking, and had decided 
that it would become the denomination of the first minister to 
arrive. The Methodist youth rode into town, arranged a service 
and the church became Methodist. 

The phenomonal development, once a man had been stationed, 
can be seen in the following accounts from letters written by 
the ministers on the respective fields; 

j— ~~ ~~ 

Ibid., Vol. 3, p. 757-759. 












- 43 - 


In a little over three years ten Methodist churches 
and five parsonages have been built in territory where 
scarcely anything in church life and work existed before® 

It is true that the church at large has been generous 
in sustaining this pioneer work. The Missionary Society 
in my judgement, has pursued a wise policy in making 
liberal grants and easy loans. No other church has, 
perhaps, been so liberal, and no other missionaries have 
been better cared for. The time will come when this 
liberal policy will bring in more liberal returns.1 

We might give you an idea of one day’s work. Sunday 
May 1, we held our regular morning service in Gamrose at 
11; drove eleven miles to Rosenroll in the afternoon, and 
held the ordinary preaching service with the sacramental, 
service at the close; from here we drove twelve miles to 
New Norway, a new town on the G.T.P. where we held the 
first service in the English language ever held in the 
town. The service was held in a hall, which was filled 
with people. We found our little telescope organ to be 
a great help in the singing, and we felt that the Spirit 
of the Lord was in the service. After the service we 
we drove back to Camrose, making a drive of forty-five 
miles and holding four services during the day.2 

At Daysland, the present terminus of this Branch, a 
church, respectable in size and handsome in appearance, 
had been erected under the safe handling of Rev. R.E. Finlay, 
Chairman of the Wetaskiwin District. This church was 
erected in the short space of four weeks, which is certain¬ 
ly good record and surpassed by only two other communities 
in Alberta, one of which built their church, including a 
shed for horses, in three weeks, and the other in less 
than two weeks.3 

The Annual Conference of 1$9$ had memorialized the 
General Conference to amend the Discipline so that tf a stand¬ 
ing committee of the Annual Conference be appointed to study 

4 

the formation of new missions in relation to the existing ones." 

This committee along with the Superintendent kept 
abreast of developing areas. In Southern Alberta, where settle¬ 
ment had occurred earlier than in the north, many of the large 


1---- 

Ibid., Vol. 5, P. 742-743. 

2 

Ibid., V ol. 6, p. 920. 

3 

Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 742® 

4~Wn. Ml. &N.W. Conf., 1393. p. S6. 










d 



d 


? 


c 


d 


t 


d 


c 


c 


d 


d 




d 



d 



< * . . .( 4 
< *• . _<_» 
i » _ L „ 








- 49 - 


original districts now had enough settlers to warrent divison 
into smaller districts, each with an ordained minister. An 
example was the original field of Carstairs, Crossfield, 

Airdrie, and Tapscott. 

The first Alberta Conference in 1905, thought wise to 
make three distinct missions of the field. By this arrange¬ 
ment Carstairs, Crossfield and Airdrie have each a resident 
minister, with their respective fields extending some 
twenty or thirty miles to the east and to the West.l 

The railways continued to expand bringing with them new settlers 
(see map p. 50). The Canadian Northern Railway by 1904 had 
entered Saskatchewan. In 1905 it reached Lloydminster the site 
of the Barr Colony and the same year went on to Edmonton. This 
line served the Ukrainian settlers in eleven townships near 
Innisfree, near Lamont and Bruderheim and English-speaking 
people who predominated near the Edmonton area. In 1906 it 
went north to the settlements of St. Albert and Morinville 
which were inhabited chiefly by French from Quebec. The will¬ 
ingness of the railway to assist the Church is shown in the 
following excerpt from the "Church Property Committee” report 
of 1906. 


Whereas information has reached this committee that the 
Canadian Northern Railway Company are willing to donate 
sites for the erection of churches in the townsites along 
their lines of railway; resolved that this Conference be 
recommended to respectfully request, through the Superin¬ 
tendent of Missions, such favors of this kind as may be 
necessary in the interests of our work and the company may 
be disposed to give . 1 2 


1 

M.B. Vol. 3, p. 766. 

2 “ 

En. M.& N.W. Confy . 1901, p.36-37* 
















.. 

* 

♦ 


* 






' : ■ ' . 13 : :VY‘fc ' , ; 


. 

. 

' 

r 

t 


^ :• - ■< - - . * . . 


* 






- 50 - 



Effect of Railways on the Settlement of Alberta* 


*Adapted from Arthur Silver Morton, History 
of the Prairie Settlement, P. 247-249. 


































- 51 - 


At the same time the Canadian Pacific had built 
eastward from Wetaskiwin to Daysland (1904) and Hardisty (1905) 
to join the branch from Saskatoon and Wilkie (Saskatchewan) in 
(1909)* The Grand Trunk Railway which had been supported by 
the Canadian Government under Sir Wilfred Laurier as a second 
transcontinental railway had moved north to Saskatoon and now 
1903-09 had built parallel (not more than six miles away in 
Saskatchewan) to the Canadian Pacific to reach Edmonton* Along 
this line settled many English speaking settlers at Chauvin, 
and Wainwright, Ukrainians at Holden and Bruce and Scandinavians 
at Viking, Ryley and Tofield. The railways besides providing 
transportation provided labor with cash wages* This attracted 
young men and in many instances was the means of getting them 
started on a homestead® 

With the tremendous influx of settlers the Church was 
pressed to provide even a portion of the service it knew was 
needed. Until this time the approval of Conference was required 
to form a new congregation. With the turbid situation which can 
be seen graphically on the maps on page 50 the church had to act 
when the time was right or else be handicapped or even lose out. 
Trading centers grew up overnight and so the church was pressed 
to do likewise® As a result the Superintendent was given 
permission to form new congregations between meetings of Confer¬ 
ence. At the General Conference of 1905 the missionary operation 
of the Methodist Church was divided into two sections, Home, 




: •' 0, r-. ;?u : ,-v-v V -otk 

v ’ -w ( 4 1C r ;X ■;luvfju -oct* ni : " 

- A,. 

. 

' 

- . 

• • . i&vr ■ 

c ■ 

r ' 

* t 

* 

* 

. 

* 

* 

'' •• 0 • • : 

. . 

< t 


- 52 - 


and Foreign Departments. In this way the increasing work 

of both departments was much better administered. Through the 

efforts of Mr. Woodsworth, $15,000.00 was set apart to assist 

new settlers to provide for church buildings and equipment 

which they required. This money was administered as a loan 

in most cases. The appearance on the horizon of a few hundred 

dollars was often the initiative for the settlers to go ahead 

with church or manse construction which otherwise would have 

been postponed. A source of ministerial supply for the sparsely 

populated mission fields during the summer were theological 

college students. Before 1906 the Methodist Church aided these 

students by paying$25«00 of their fees. In 1906 the Mission 

Board and Board of Education decided on a method of employment 

for the students. They were sent to mission fields where the 

charge provided room and board and horsekeep while the two 

2 

Boards each contributed §5.00 per week for twenty weeks. 

This helped all concerned. Many fields which otherwise would 
only see a minister occasionally if at all now had a full time 
worker during the summer. These students also helped establish 
new and strong congregations in many of the outlying points. 

The system of Summer Supply worked so well that in a short time 
other denominations readily adopted it. A resolution of the 1902 
Annual Conference further shows the church f s problems in serving 
the large number of settlers. 


J.H. Riddell, Methodism in the Middle West, p. 296. 

2 

Ibid. , p. 315* 







. 


. 

« 1 c ... e J ■ . ' 

. 

. 

, 

till [0 < 


. 
















* 

. 


’ 




* 




- 53 - 


As the pressure of the work in western towns makes it 
difficult if not unjust to both fields and men to ask 
for time and energy in the proper supervision of district 
work and as the present and constantly increasing tide of 
immigration makes necessary a larger amount of supervision 
than ever,. • this Conference directs that'^the Regina and 
Edmonton Districts there shall be appointed a chairman- 
at-large and that in order to give effect to this 
resolution immediately two men shall be stationed at 
some points in these districts with the understanding 
that they shall be elected to be the chairman of said 
districtsol 

There was very little competition between denominations. 
All realized the relation between the needs of the settlers, 
the resources of their combined efforts and the negative 
difference that still existed. As a result they seldom inter¬ 
fered with one another and in general co-operated magnificently. 

Despite the variety of backgrounds the settlers of the 
West were basically of one endeavor; to build a nation of 
opportunity and freedom and to this end they realized that 
co-operation among the various churches was required. Even 
earlier than the turn of the century there were strong visions 
of Protestant union. This feeling among the Churches encouraged, 
co-operation \-\rhich resulted in mutual advantages. The vast 
area of the Prairies could not be covered by each Church so 
agreements were made between Mission Boards and Mission Super¬ 
intendents for a practical division of the work so that all 
settlers could be served adequately. The agreements betw*een 
the Presbyterians and the Methodists were prime. The Congrega- 
tionalists confined their Western mission work mainly to large 
urban centres. The Minutes of the Alberta Conference in 1910 


T"—-— — . . 

Min. M.& N.W. Conf., 1902, p. 






- 

. 

* 

( f - • ' $o ' 

~ 

* ~ 

: 

i 

* 

„ 


* 

■ 

~ ' : ' .■/•■■■ 

. 

* 

* 

. 




~ 

' 




54 - 


have the following resolution; "That this Conference confer 

with the request of the Alberta Synod of the Presbyterian 

Church in the matter of co-operation in Home Missions work 
1 

in this Province® The results of this policy are recorded 

in the "Minutes of the Joint Committee of the Methodist and 

Presbyterian Churches in Alberta on Co-operation" which was 

held in Calgary in 1913• The division of work was in some 

cases territorial: For instance, "re Athabasca Landing 

territory, it was agreed that the Methodists take all territory 

north of the township line between townships 61 and 62 and as 

far north as between townships 69 and 70, east of the fifth 

meridian and west of range 19, and that the Presbyterians 

2 

take the unoccupied territory south of this®" In other cases 
each church was responsible for alternate towns on a railway 
line or else for alternate railway lines® It was observed in 
the West that, "new comers to districts along such railroads 
who desired to remain Methodist had to be careful about their 

destinations, while those who wanted to continue Presbyterian 

3 

had to look well to their predestination®" These "non-intrusion 
policies" avoided overlapping of Church facilities and hence 
a substantial saving of Mission funds. In places where the work 
already overlapped, agreements favorable to both were made. 

Min® Alta. Conf®, 1910, p. $5* 

2 

Minutes of Joint Committee on Cooperation, p . iii® 
Edmund H. Oliver, The Winning of th e Frontier, p. 13£-9. 

















. 


: ‘ i 

' 

1 . ' i' 1 ' ' < ,, ~ ; , A 

■ 

. 






c • 



J 




,. 




■ t' ! 








1 V J' .... 



4 











4 





a 



,■ f;, 

. 

■ 











9 



? 










• 



: j 0 j 




< 














c 


. 




'• 







- 






19 






« ■» ? 

• . I . . • . ■: ; ■ • ■ 







- 55 - 


11 It was moved by Rev. C.D. Campbell, seconded by Rev. G.R. Lang 
that in the opinion of the Cominittee the Presbyterians should 
withdraw from Coronation and that it be given to the Methodists 
as an exchange for Leduc, from which the Methodists have with¬ 
drawn and left the Presbyterians in possession with general 
1 

satisfaction. Tt Often the local people were not consulted and 

as a result, "Methodists within certain areas had to be 

Presbyterian and Presbyterians within another area had to be 
2 

Methodists* 1 '. All this process was possible due to the expectation 
that Church Union would eventually take place. 

This trend was not only in the West. The Churches on 
a dominion level were very congenial to co-operation. At a 
joint meeting of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
and the General Council of the Methodist Church in 1903 it was 
resolved that "all ministers and missionaries on Home Mission 
fields co-operate in all practical ways to avoid unnecessary 
competition and that the Superintendents of both Churches 
keep the principle of comity and co-operation steadily in view 
and when in charge of much the same territory to meet occasion¬ 
ally for consultation respecting the opening of new fields or 

Q 

J 

the possible re-adjustment of fields already occupied**. They 
also laid down the definite principle: "When a field has been 
occupied at least one year by one of the Churches, the Superin- 

— T —- _ — — 

Minutes of Joint Committee on Co-operation, p. iv. 

2 

Edmund H. Oliver, The Winning of the Frontier , p. 133. 
Claris Edwin Silcox, Church Union in Canada, p . 214. 











^ ... 

v . . :ni . J s . * ■ \ 

- • c • : 

. v 

. 

' . ' • ■ ■ • ' c • 

, 

* ■ 

. 

- 

• Hi ;■ . ■ , • 

- 

" ’ ; 7 - ; - ■ - "i r - ■ \ ' i • : ' 

* ' : - 

* 

, 

c 

* • * c - 

0 • ; * . < , 

• - . j t : 














- 56 - 


tendents are recommended to act as far as possible on the 
principle of non-intrusion. 

The railroads had pushed their lines forward creating 
stations or section houses at regular intervals. To these 
points the communities which already existed moved. The village 
of Star moved south to the railroad to become Lamont, Harland 
moved half a mile to become Viking. Where no community existed 
new ones arose as more settlers came in. With this tremendous 
surge of humanity to the West the Canadian Government had seen 
the need for a more personal government. Up until 1905 the 
whole prairie region was classed as the North West Territories 
and governed from Regina. In that year Alberta, and Saskatchewan 
were made separate provinces. In what had been the scene of the 
last great buffalo herds only thirty years before stable organized 
communities were now established. The sudden change in the West 
is reflected in the unbelief of the new comers themselves. 

Mr. Young tells of attending his first Conference in Alberta 
and hearing Rev. John McDougalX reminisce of the vast herds of 
buffalo he had seen. At first the newly arrived youth could not 
believe that such herds of buffalo existed, at least not in the 
life-time of a man Mr. McDougall’s age. Needless to say it 
was not long before Dr. Young was convinced of the integrity 
of McDougall f s stories. The General Conference in 1902 saw 

' 1 ~ “ 

Ibid., p. 214* 











" " • • ■ - 




■ 

■ 

* 




« 









0 




• 


■ 

" 

■ , 

. 

. 

' . - 

. 

. 























- 57 - 


the need of dividing the Far West due to its tremendous growth. 
Thus the Manitoba and North West Conference under a General 
Conference committee divided into three Conferences, Manitoba, 
Assiniboia and Alberta (as far as Maple Creek Saskatchewan). 

They first met in 1904. Then in 1905 when the Dominion Govern¬ 
ment created the provinces the Church made their boundaries 

co-terminous. This was officially aporoved by General Conference 
1 

in 1910. 


The general trend of development of the Church in cities 
in Alberta was that of first establishing a mission which in 
time became a subsidised pastoral charge. In this respect it 
is interesting to note that Edmonton was once served by the 
missionary from Woodville (Pigeon Lake). As the city developed 
a self-supporting charge resulted. Further expansion required 
outreach to the suburbs in the form of missions which in turn 
developed into self-supporting charges. 

An example of this was in Lethbridge where a second 
church was formed to serve a suburb. Rev. M.A. Lytle the first 
minister of the church described its formation in the following 
way: 


In the North Ward, (of Lethbridge) the English, Welsh, 
Scotch, and Canadian element, of course, predominate. 

Less than one year ago, the pastor of Wesley Church, 
Rev. J.M. Harrison, deemed it advisable to establish a 
church here. Backed up by his Quarterly Official Board, 
but acting entirely on faith, a church building 24 x 46 
feet in size, which had been abandoned by the Greek 
Catholics, and which was located near No. 3 mine, was 


1 

J.H. Riddell, Method ism in t he Mid dle West , p. 267• 











- . Ihj • 1 










■ 


T . 

^ : 


' 

: 

. „ 


' 

' - 

. 

« 




* 


t 








e 

. 

' - ■ ! ' ■. . - ■ ; t : 

* * <_ . , - , . 





■ 'I ■ ■!.£ 

“ 











- 58 - 


purchased for $500.00 which, by the way, was less than half 
its value. Three lots were also secured in the most central 
place on the main street of North Ward. The church was 
moved, placed upon these lots, and comfortably fitted up, 
the total cost amounting to about $1,700.00.... 

The present pastor acted as supply during May and June, 
and was definitely stationed here for the present year by 
the Stationing Committee..,, 

A Ladies 1 Aid was formed, which numbers now about 
twenty members.•.. 

A Sunday School was organized....We began with a member¬ 
ship of about forty, but up to the present over one hundred 
and sixty have been enrolled, the infant class alone number¬ 
ing twenty-seven.l 

The work in the cities with regard to missions like All-Peoples 
and Bethlehem in Winnipeg for non-Engiish speaking immigrants 
will be dealt with in chapter VIII. 

However despite the seeming stable organiztion that 
now existed in the Province (1910) the lot of the pioneer still 
involved much hardship. Dr. Geo. Stanley tells of one of his 
experiences: 

I was called urgently one night to rush to a woman 
in convulsions, about forty miles distant. I took my 
old team and buggy and forced them to their limit to 
get there. The patient was late in her pregnancy and 
had had two convulsions. In those days we proceeded 
forthwith to deliver in such cases. It was in a one- 
room shack on a hot summer day, and countless mosquitoes 
came through the cracks in the board walls. There was 
one so-called bed, a small camp stove, a tin pail and a 
dipper, and some split tree trunks for firewood. An 
old lame woman was the patient’s sole companion. The 
only course to follow was to proceed to deliver. I 
took the pall and dipper to the slough one quarter-mile 
distant, washed away the green slime on top of the water, 
filled the pail from the slough, and returned to the 
shack. We stirred up fire enough to boil the water and 
to bluff at the sterilizing the delivery instruments. 

The old woman became anaesthetist at the head, and I 
became anaesthetist director and obstetrician at the 
other end. The woman lived, the babe lived, 


I-—-— 

M.B. Vol. 5, p. 733-734. 










X 


c. 


e 




c 




i, 








. 





s 


f 



- 59 - 


but I had to shoot one of my old horses because I foundered 
him on the journey. It was all a matter of an obstetrician T s 
duty, or of a country doctor’s love, or both, because I 
received no pay for any part of the whole proceedings, 
horse included*1 

Although the settlers of the West were co-operative 
and broad minded with regard to the various denominations 
the methods and beliefs of each denomination still played 
a part in strengthening or weakening it. The methods of the 
Methodist Church were in general a modification of those of 
the traditional Methodists. The Sunday Services were fervent 
and evangelical. The Church attempted to conduct a Sunday 
School at each preaching point but this was difficult due to 
lack of lay leadership. The preacher did not have time as 
he had several appointments each Sunday. In 1902 there were 
300 preaching points without Sunday Schools in the Manitoba 
and North-West Conference and in 190$ sixty per cent of the 
appointments in Alberta had no Sunday Schools. At each 
Conference the ministers and probationers were urged to 
organize Sunday Schools through teacher-training sessions. 

Rally Days and Decision Days as the Church saw the vital role 
of Christian Education. Children’s sermonettes were also 
suggested for the Church Service. The Church zealously publish¬ 
ed Sunday School literature such as the Onward, Pleasant Hours, 
Happy Days, Sunbeam and others for all ages. Through these 
efforts and community consolidation the Sunday Schools became 
stronger. Evangelistic campaigns were arranged by the Church. 

—-j- ™ ' 

Alberta Historical Review . Vol. 1, No. 1, p. 14o 








. 

' ' ' :■ . 

: ~ • ' '• 

* 


■ 

» 

1 •' ■: . v .. ' ■- • '.o . ' : • ., ...J a 

- 

« 


t 
















. 


i a ! 

(► 

. 

* 










- 60 - 


The Committee of Evangelistic work reported to the 1906 and 

1909 Conferences that the work was very successful* They 

recommended that Evangelists continue to be employed by the 

Conference and that co-operation with the Presbyterian Church 

be secured to conduct a General Evangelistic Campaign* Special 

reference was made by the committee to the particular value of 

1 

these evangelistic meetings on weak and outlying districts* 

The standard methods of traditional Methodism had been that 
of prayer meetings, class meetings and camp meetings* None 
of these proved to be of lasting value in Alberta* Prayer 
meetings were essentially cell-groups which met for edification 
and to pray for specific things* The class meeting was the real 
strength of the British Methodists. Each person who joined the 
church was assigned to a class of 10-12 members with a leader* 
They met each week and discussed their personal Christianity, 
temptations, victories, and defeats with the view of strength 
through fellowship. Few of these class meetings appeared in 
Alberta despite the attempt at each Conference to emphasis 
their need. According to Mr. Young the meetings had lost 
their original spirit* He relates his attendance at a class 
meeting in Ireland which his father led. A young man who had 
turned from alcohol to the church was a member* Each week he 
told of his temptations to fall back and of his victories. 

One week he told of his defeat. The leader did not condemn 
him but reassured him that they were all behind him in his 

—~ — - 

Min* Alta* Conf*, 1906, p* 32. 







* '■ 

. 

~C 

° : 


- 






- ’ 

* 






* 

* 

* v ~~ 

t 

. . ,;.j: . ■; 

a 


. 

, 

. 




1 

* V 

. 




* t 






- 61 - 


difficulty• There was a fervent Christian spirit among them. 

Mr. Young tells of another member who each week told of a 
conversion experience he had forty years previous. In time 
the class meeting tended to be this type of experience rather 
than the former. The meetings were attended out of habit and 
duty and took a rigid form, losing their spirit and as a result 
their popularity. For this reason Mr. Young believes they held 
little attraction for the prairie pioneer. Camp meetings were 
week-long meetings of whole families who came together to study, 
holiday, and contemplate the Christian life. Although few of 
these were held in Alberta the record of one is preserved. It 
is entitled, "The first camp meeting in Alberta". In 1&96 
the Rev. C.R. Sing at Innisfail wrote: 

Gathering the results from that meeting between 25-30 
persons will be received on trial some of whom belong to 
Olds and some the Red Deer Missions. About a dozen of 
these will unite with the Presbyterian Church at Innisfail 
and Red Deer....As to the result of the campaigning, in 
all directions I find a generous spirit of inquiry. The 
doors of many hearts have opened and I am looking for the 
breaking forth of a revival flame everywhere over these 
prairies during the fall and winter.1 

The chief reason these methods which had played such a 
vital role in Britain failed in the Canadian West was the 
difference in situation. Due to the great distances people 
could not easily meet. The climate was such that long hours of 
work were required by the whole family during the short summer, 

J.H. Riddell, Methodism in the Mi ddl e West, p. 233® 








$>' 












t 




















' 

' 














- 62 - 


while the cold snowy winter made travel difficult. The 

population was not as dense as Britain. The denominational 

lines were stronger with regard 'bo specific practices of a 

Church. The people gladly joined in general worship but not 

so readily in a specific Methodist Class Meeting. As a result 

the minister’s role involved much personal visiting. Mr. Young 

recalls leaving home for a week at a time on horse back and 

sleeping in bams while visiting every homestead in the area. 

The denomination of the minister ma.de no difference; all were 

more than glad to be visited. Thus visiting compensated for 

the Meetings of the Old Country and Eastern Methodism* 

Other organizations within the Church which made their 

appearance as the Church became established were the Epworth 

League for Young People, Laymen’s Organization, and Women’s 

Associations. H.B. Collier tells of what he believes to be 

the longest session of Ladies Aid on record: 

It was March 4th, 190$, when the Ladies’ Aid of the 
Methodist Church met at the home of Mrs. Walter Jones 
(Viking)*.The cold, clear frosty day saw in all forty 
gathered at the two story log dwelling. The accomodation 
consisted of four rooms upstairs and three down, but all 
in the area of 19 x 24«. .about four-thirty it grew 1- dark 
and began to storm fiercely. The storm became so fierce 
with the fall of night that it appeared too dangerous to 
attempt to return to town. So it was decided that all 
should remain overnight right where they were. The 
piano furnished music for hours of singing of familiar 
hymns and ballads...by three in the afternoon (the next 
day) the storm was almost over so preparations were made 
to leave. Thus ended the longest session of Ladies’ Aid 
on record, a full 25 hours.1 


1 

H.B. Collier, Remember Wh en, p. 42. 



















■ ’ Ji' n: -uv 










. 










. 

ft 
















’ 




• • 





c 

< 



< 







: 

• » • 




• ■ . , '■ v c! >; 



I 


. 






•. ■ r i 

’ 





' 1 : i v' 

. 


-* 

e 


- - - - - . 



- _. _ 1 ■ 

_ ,■ ^ . 



• 















- 63 - 


Besides its direct community organizations the Church 
behind the scenes was the driving force for moral reform. Through 
its preaching, organizations, delegations and resolutions to 
the government it dealt with temperance problems, Sabbath Day 
observance, and other moral issues. This service was recognized 
by many settlers and thus gave added support to the churcn. 

The years 1911-14 showed a steady increase of settlers as 

the railway construction continued at a phenomenal pace. From 

1 

1911-15, 1,700 miles of railway were completed in Alberta. 

The Grand Trunk 'Pacific was extended to Prince Rupert, the 
Canadian Northern built northwest eighty miles to Sangudo and 
north to Athabasca. The Edmonton, Dunvegan and British Columbia 
line reached Lesser Slave Lake. A railway was built south¬ 
west from Saskatoon through Drumheller to Calgary, another from 
Camrose. to Edmonton., another from Tofield through Camrose to 
Calgary, and another from Red Deer to Brazeau and Rocky Mountain 
House. There was a similar extension of lines in Southern 
Alberta. Throughout southern, central and east-central Alberta 
the communities were stable with much homestead land taken up. 

The churches were well organized and had become to a great extent 
self-supporting. However into outlying areas the late settlers 
and the more adventuresome settlers were still pushing. In 
1911 an land agency was established at Grande Praire to 
supplement the one already at Grouard. The region was still 
far from railway transportation and yet the fertility of the 

— r ” ” " ~ ~ 

Arthur Silver Morton, History of Prairie Settlement, 

Vol. 11, p. 144<» 








j 




. 


• 5 • C 




- 




. 




. ■ t i.: 

• - t 

* - , ; 

ti. 










' ■/. 1 • "- r o' 








L . 



























- 64 - 


soil and prospect of a railway in the near future attracted 
many hardy settlers over the Edson and Lesser Slave Lake Trails. 
One pioneer wrote of his adventures: 

I came from England to Canada, worked around Edmonton 
for a few years in the lumber business. Another settler 
and I with teams of oxen drove into the Peace River Country 
in 1910. We brought in one year T s supplies, a mower, rake, 
plough, doors, and windows, and squatted prior to the survey 
of’ our land. In October we left everything behind except 
our bedding and the oxen, and by riding and walking we 
reached Edmonton in IS days. We returned early in the 
New Year with sleighs, tools, other equipment and addition¬ 
al supplies,1 

We went 100 miles north to Athabaska Landing. From 
there we went by ice on the Lesser Slave Lake, thence 
overland to Peace River Grossing (100 miles), then on 
to Dunvegan (60 miles by river) and from there by trail 
to Grande Prairie. The trail over the Saddle Mountains 
was so narrow that we had great difficulty in getting 
through with the caboose. We were 31 days on the trail.2 

A Methodist mission was established on the west end 
of Lesser Slave Lake in 1909. F.W.H. Armstrong, the missionary 
in telling of the conditions wrote: 

We have just decided to build a nice little church 
here next spring and summer. W T ill write only a few words 
to-night as* I am very tired and have to be up at 5:30 a.m. 

In preparation for building I am cutting saw-logs in the 
woods about three miles from town; we are at work in the 
woods at daybreak. We (a hired man and myself) have cut 
110 logs in two days and intend to cut 200 logs. These 
will, saw into 20,000 feet of lumber. The Roman Catholic 
Mission are sawing on shares, so that will leave 10,000 
feet for us. Rough lumber costs $30 a thousand, so we 
will save $300 on this item. 

The people are going to haul the logs to the mill 
free of charge. The church building will be very simple 
and yet so far as possible attractive. It. will be 18x24, 
finished inside and outside with dressed lumber. We would 


1 

Carl Addington Dawson, The Settlement of the Peace River 
Country, Vol. VI, p. 28* 

2 

Ibid., V ol. VI, P. 29. 



















5. * _c * 




- 65 - 


like to build this church and dedicate it free from debt, 
and. v.e can if our friends from the outside help us. When 
we get through the rush of cutting and skidding the logs 
I shall have time to work up interest in the outside 
world. When we have decided the size and price of the 
windows we are going to see who will buy a window, a door, 
or a keg of nails. We want to purchase all those things 
in Edmonton and bring them through on the ice this winter.1 

It is interesting to note in a subsequent letter the 
progress and also the misunderstanding with the Roman Catholic 

Church. 


We have the logs for our new church all cut and skidded 
and hope to get them to the mill in a few days. I have been 
working very hard lately, but everything has gone along 
nicely. The only irregularity which lias arisen is that 
the Roman Catholic Mission (which have the only saw mill) 
has refused to saw our logs, on the ground that it is to 
help another denomination. This shows the spirit of 
Catholicism.2 

In 1912 most of the settlers to the Peace River area were 

from Eastern Canada and the United States and settled at 

Sawridge, Grouard, Peace River, Shaftsbury, and Dunvegan. 

The population of the Peace River country was 743 in 1906, 

3 

1,165 in 1911 and 16,102 in 1916. At the Conference of 1903 

the Spworth League was so impressed by the needy situation of 

the vast Peace River area that they asked the Leagues of Albert© 

4 

to support a missionary to that area. In each case the pioneer 
life and work of the church was repeated. 

In the more settled areas competition between different 
denominationshad begun. The existing communities were becoming 


M.B., Vol. 6, p. 618. 

2 

Ibid., Vol. 6, p. 620. 

3 

Ibid., Vol. VI, p. 61. 

4 

J.H. Riddell, Methodism in the Midd le ~Zest, p. 279• 











t 


4 




t 


(1 















e 









t 




c 


t 




D 








0 










c 








- 66 - 


consolidated economically and socially. The trading area 
was centered at a town on the railway and the whole community 
co-operated with regard to school and recreation activities. 

With this drawing together the people realized more and more 
the similarities of their denominations. They realized the 
absurdity of and inability to support several churches when 
one was adequate. As a result "Local Church Unions" appeared. 

They began in 190& in Saskatchewan (although a similar type 
existed in the East) and spread rapidly to Alberta, The 
community called a minister who ministered to the one Community 
Church. The people’s united effort gave generous support to 
the work. Sane leadership was given the Local Unions and 
sympathetic understanding by the three main uniting bodies 
led to co-operation. The Methodist* Presbyterian and Congregation¬ 
al Churches sent representatives to the advisory Committee and 
kept the Local Church Unions in organic union with at least one 
of the parent denominations. The understanding of these parent 
denominations was responsible for the Local Church Unions not 
breaking away to form still another denomination and thus 
further complicating the scene. Instead Church Union was 
forced by the Union Churches and became inevitable. In 1925 
union was consummated. 

By 1914 9 the war in Europe stemmed the tide of 
immigration. A few immigrants still came from the United States 
but in the main the young men were away at vrar. It was not until 
after the war that immigration and expansion of the Church began 
again 0 




c 


i. f) 0 


. d i 2 




t • 


vf. ,J 11 












. 






■ 




ft . 




':::e:: «?:• • Kv. '•;, / ! 
ocJ. 
















i • • 




. :':r 


n i 


* 

* 


. 


: • c ....... ;■ . :j. J- • 















CHAPTER V 


HISTORY OF TEE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE 

The preceeding chapters have dealt with immigration 
conditions and problems in general and English speaking 
immigrants specifically® The next four chapters will deal 
in detail with work of the Methodist Church among the non- 
English speaking immigrants. These non-English speaking 
immigrants comprised almost exclusively, one group, the 
Ukrainians® The German, Scandinavian and French settlers 
had their own churches® Before delving into the Methodist 
work among the Ukrainians a brief sketch of their political 
and religious background is necessary. 

Ukrainian history emerges with the establishment of 
the principality of Kiev as the result of conquests by a line 
of Scandinavian Princes beginning with Rurik of Novgorod in 
£62 A.D. Kiev due to the strong government within its borders, 
the fertile corn land surrounding it and its position on east- 
west trade routes became the great trading and cultural center. 

In A.D. Vladimir the ruling prince of Kiev married a Byzantine 
princess and as a result the Ukraine (and all of Russia ultimate¬ 
ly) were "converted" to the Greek section of the Christian Churcho 
In the 13th century due to internal corruption, changes of 
trade routes and finally the Mongol invasion under Ghengis Khan 
(1239) the Ukraine fell. The country never again attained the 


- 67 - 


■ . . .. ;VuI X . 10 !/:■ iTBIK 

x; 1,x:..x .1 ii.:l Oxlv: d r ...-v.:0 vx; axivdrfsrio , r‘.i sve'V-i 

£ i • a tall ' • o 

. i . . 

■*': x • ■ - . • ... ’ ,. : r ..ex ; " : : ■" .* , • ,‘x . , 1 

■' 

e ' o. . lx 

. < „ ; 

'00 0.' ■' » • • e ■ \ 

...... . .. ' C . 

- ; ” ■ x, : ■. x On ..a ex >1 .. x v / '• *■ I ac 

. / . 0 .' - ■. 

' - - - . ; d . V . ret 11 It ' 

■ ■■■■■ ' • ' • • - / O'. J x.od xee xj/X; ., x ; :v- -x .. - :a xo 

1 ., ' , . » 

■ cOi xx x.;. ■ xi : . ; x.x.exx; >■■■■■. x.xxl i^oo xeix,x.xl exit 

* ; \ ■ 

■ •' x. : .Me, .. x x x .. # ■ ■ 

) '. : • • ■ 

' . . , ' ■ e 

X $ . 








- 68 - 


political position it had enjoyed these two centuries* 

After this conquest migration occurred with some 
people moving north to Moscovy to mix with the Finns to form 
modern Russia and others west to Galicia (east Poland) near 
the kingdom of Lithuania. Through marriages and unions between 
Lithuania and Poland the Ukrainian people in 1569 became part 
of Poland. 

This union was remarkable for the birth of a new 
church destined to play a prominent role in the future history 
of the Ukrainians, especially those in Canada. The Ukrainians 
had been under the Greek section of the Christian Church and 
had remained there, following the Great Schism (1054). How¬ 
ever when the Roman Catholic Poles took over the Ukraine they 
instituted Roman Catholic Bishoprics and Orders of the Roman 
Church. Friction resulted but in 1596 a reconciliation between 
the Papacy and Bishops of the Orthodox Church in the Polish 
Ukraine resulted in the establishment of the Greek Catholic 
Church or Uniat Church. The Church of Rome made several 
concessions: "Clement VIII readily agreeing that the old 
rites and the use of the Slavonic Language might be retained, 
and the secular clergy might be allowed to marry". This Uniat 
Church continues as a mark of Ukrainian nationalism today. 

Under Cossack leadership the Ukrainians arose and gained 
independence from the Tartars, Turks, and Poles in 1648. To 

Charles H. Young, The Ukrainian Canadians, p. 19* 







■ 

- 






: 

' ' ■ :• ' . 

k ' lode. 

: : ■' ■ : ■ ' ■ " ■ 1 . ; 

■ 

- 

. 

; 

' . ' • j-._ 

' 

; ’ -.. ■. ■■■• - 
• : r «" ■ t < ..V. . . 


* * '■ ;.. .....i. t 









- 69 - 


solidify its strength a union, with full Ukrainian autonomy, 
was made with Russia in 1654• However Russia failed to live 
up to the agreement and gave some Ukrainian territory to Poland, 
ceded part of Galicia to Austria and after a series of Ukrainian 
revolts suppressed the remainder of the Ukrainians under Russian 
rule and culture* 

With the growth of nationalism throughout Europe during 
and after the Napoleonic Era the Ukraine once again strove for 
rebirth* National tradition, renaissance of their language and 
ultimate Slavic union was attempted* The Czarist State crushed 
these efforts through exiling the leaders and banning the 
Ukrainian language* Meanwhile the Ukrainians in Galicia under 
Austrian rule had helped Austria fight against Poland and as 
a result were allowed their own language, schools, and educated 
priesthood* Galicia became the center of Ukrainian national¬ 
ism and by 1905 a strong Ukrainian Party had been formed urging 
that the Ukraine be a federated Russian State* These advances 
of the Ukrainians in politics in Galicia had been gained only 
in the face of strong Polish opposition* Riotious rural 
strikes had occurred in Eastern Galician Polish estates and 
in 1902 a general strike had broken out demanding that Eastern 
Galicia be constituted a separate Ukrainian province* This 
turmoil was the initiative for much emigration to Canada at 
the beginning of the century* In Russia as well as Galicia 
the Ukrainians had also gained ground towards nationalism due 
largely to the fact that Russia was engaged in the Russo- 
Japanese War and the Revolution of 1905. The Ukrainian 


C • « 

* ' 

i ■ ' - ••• 

Biol 

■ ‘ ' - : •' ■■ . .... ... 






. . .. • . 

. 

* 

„ 

^ ; • ? 

* . 

* ' 

’loll'", i:u u',<:cn.loz : ui : 

» • • 

c 

w 

• .. 

” 








- 70 - 


Language was again allowed and the governmental representation 
was promised. Thus in spite of repression and persecution the 
Ukrainians by the time of the Great War were well on the road 
to autonomy as a nation. This promised independence was how¬ 
ever a false hope. Subsequent to the War the Ukraine was 
divided among Soviet Russia, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Roumania. 
Today it remains thus under complete Communist jurisdiction 
and any Ukrainian nationalism or culture is communist dictated. 


~ . . , 

« 

* ■ < ' c 

: U. ,*■; - /; 

• : ; . • 








CHAPTER VI 


UKRAINIAN EMIGRATION 


Peasants from Galicia and Bukovinia in Austria and from 
parts of the Russian Ukraine emigrated in large numbers at the 
close of the ninteenth century. There were deep seated reasons 
for this Ukrainian exodus. Many individuals cited family crises 
like sickness, unemployment, and misconduct as direct reasons 
for leaving, but more general and elemental factors lay beneath. 
A prime cause was the small land holdings of the peasant. After 
the land reforms of 1&4& and l$6l the lords sold the land to the 
peasants. These were small holdings to begin with but after 
two generations of sub-dividing it among children and grand¬ 
children the holdings were even smaller: 

Of all the agricultural properties in the country, 
nearly $0 per cent are 1 small* (that is under twelve and 
a half acres) and nearly half consist of less than five 
acres. That this excessive subdivision is the main cause 
of emigration from Galicia is undisputed.1 

Combined with this was the picture of the vicious 
economic situation: 

the climate (in Galicia) exceedingly unfavourable 
to agriculture, the lack of industry, capital and markets, 
the backward agriculture, and the excessive population, 
excessive that is, in proportion to the means of profit¬ 
ably occupying it.2 


T.. 

Ibid., p. 36. 
2 “ 

Ibid., p. 36. 


- 71 - 







* 


t 










- 72 - 


The rest of the Ukrainians in other territories had 
the same experience. In Russia for example: 

The peasant-land under this system (large estates and 
individual holdings) is steadily becoming less fertile. 

The end is emigration. In the last year before the War, 
for which statistics are available, of all the peasants 
from European Russia emigrating to Central Asia, 62 per 
cent came from the Ukrainian provinces; that is to say, 
from the richest corn-land in all Eastern Europe.1 

The peasants saw steady decline of their social status 
to property-less labourers. They were also under political 
subjection. The younger generation had compulsory military 
service for three years and were not allowed to marry until 
they had fulfilled the obligation. This in itself was a pain¬ 
ful reminder of the conquered status and lost independence of 
this proud people and any chanqe of affirming their individual¬ 
ity was welcomed. 

To the above reasons which constitued a "push" was the 
"pull" of 160 acres of land in Canada, virtually an estate, 
for ten dollars. Only the daring went first, but? when they 
revisited or wrote back of the opportunities available the 
more conservative packed immediately. 

The first emigration of Ukrainians was to the United 
States, Brazil and Argentina, as early as 1&79* The first 
immigrants to Canada appear to have been three Ruthenians 
who heard of Canada third hand from Poles in West Galicia. 

They made their way to Canada but only one reached as far west 


T 





' 




* ■ 


.- 


; O'i'i •; ■ • o ■ ■’ 


ri XL:' 




. 

: ,1: i ■ ' . 

• : : . n - e v = : : 

*■*: *" l- , 'rj.-j 

- 


L.'Fu 


. . 

11 • 

■e : III , - , • 






11 . O f.-rf 0 j;,r. r x .-',; i )Plii 


■V • : A 

- •' V • ' : 


r O ■ ■ c ; : *v V C. d 

■ 5 t ” 

■’ I..’. \ ■. J: v ,; /’.{ix*’* <;> f .• v ‘Ic. l■ r Lo rf s.t :-e.tj;exve*x 








' 1 ' •• •% v >. , , : ".t ’ 


nr'-r rJ 















- 73 - 


&s Winnipeg. Seeing the great land he returned home and within 

months reappeared in Canada with nine families and settled near 

Star (north of Lamont), Alberta in 1394* 

Professor Oleskow of the Ukrainian center of Lemberg 

was sent by the Ukrainians to Canada in 1395 to survey the 

situation* He returned and published a pamphlet "Opportunities 

in Canada" which was very enthusiastic about Canada as a 

1 

prospective home for Ukrainian emigrants* This coupled with 
the aggressive Liberal Immigration Policy of Sir Cliford Sifton 
had a pronounced effect on emigration from the Ukraine* From 
then on there appeared constantly, "on the platforms and in 
the waiting rooms of the old C*P*R* Station in Winnipeg strange 
men and women wearing sheepskin coats with the wool turned in¬ 
side, either very large boots or often no boots at all, the 

women with shawls or scarves on their heads and hemp skirts 

2 

extending not quite to the ankle* In 1900 there were 5,000 
Ukrainians in Canada and by 190? this total was 21,000* The 
department of immigration reported that 170,000 Galicians, 
Bukovinians or Ruthenians arrived between 1396 and 1914 inclusive. 
These figures do not include Ukrainians who were designated as 
Austrian, Russian, Roumanian or Polish* The classification of 
Ukrainians before the Great War under such a variety of nation¬ 
alities made it impossible to know the exact number who immigrated* 
Tne European countries themselves were concerned over the number 
emigrating and did not encourage it. 


Ibid* , p. 40* 

2 

Ibid* , p* 40. 







8 £ 

■ ■ ain rl. • 

« > 

' 

• Co / r;J : : u [f , j ^ 0f * u j V ; , ■. r< , 

. 

; £-lo Ir * : 

* 

- ■ ■ :■ c< ■ • ■ • , ■ •. • ; 

t ■ 

- • * - 

~ ■ ' •. .i\J"JV ! • 

* 

c ' ■ ■ c , 

■ “ v - v ' : ' ,v ’ ;r t.'.jx | 

‘ " ; ■ ^ ■ -■ . . • £'.r.a. ■ ; ;•/, 

' ^ ■■■■•.- <- r -:^. : r ir r, < 

0 


. 










':)■ la 'W : 


c 



- i' . x 




w- 1 •. • : 


, 








- 74 - 


Over in Austria during 1913 > the Government, already- 
planning the war as we have since learned, was anxious 
when the recruits from the Cracow corps were 20,370 short, 
the Przemysl corps 26,112 and the Lemberg corps 33,360 
missing, and they estimated that 90,000 of their men had 
gone to Canada, The Emperor, like Varus of old, cried, 

"Bring back my legions", and devised measures to check 
the loss.l 

Those who came were in most cases poor peasants. 

2 

According to the Woodsworth Survey in 1917 T! of the 332 families 

from whom information on this point was secured, fifty per cent 

started with no capital at all and forty-two per cent with less 

than $500.00". This substantiates an earlier United States 

survey in which Ukrainian Immigrants had an average of $12.36 

3 

per capita compared with $21.57 for all immigrant aliens. 

The Woodsworth survey also stressed the fact that an 
important minority cf Ukrainians did not come as a family unit 
due to lack of funds. The suffering and demoralization of this 
factor affected the immigrants greatly and influenced the Church 1 s 
approach in dealing with these people. 

The Slavic immigrants in most cases did not receive the 
same welcome or opportunity which the English-speaking immigrants 
received. Much of this was due to the Ukrainians’ inability to 
speak English and the foreigness of Canadian ways. To the 
English-speaking settler the Ukrainian was often designated as 
"foreigner", "Galician" and "Non-Preferred". This doubtful 
welcome was an invitation to the Church to act, and a challenge 
to gain rapport with this people who had a culture and feeling in 


William T. Gunn, His Dominion, p . 207-203. 

J.S. Woodsworth, Ukrainian Rural Communities , Unpub. mss. 
1917. From Charles H. Young, Ukrainian Canadians, p. 40 0 

3 Report of Immig. Comm., Wash., 1911, Vol. 1, p. 103. 

Thi H r> ~~ 'Ll,. - 










© 



5 : . 

f'-'-’I 


: t ■ ■ 

c 

'C.^rviO 



Ct 3 , 


t ■ • '• c 

; *• r 

s • 


:. • 0 . c j . 3 ■ . . j 

i"V . . 


* 




. 





^ .. : 









* 



* . .. 



CIS 3'• *j «?o f: ii $ »'>s aas'T. 3 


J X , 




& i o i i o x ci‘ s a J.; 1 sx: oi : i© ,5 bn c 


f :■ ; 

•• 3' ’ 3C ' ;• r i; : • " 



. 


• ■ L iO 

... ■ • j' .: . i.w t , ; J 

ill 


• 

: d . i• o .< 

Qu * 

"C ? .... : ' /<; j. 

3 : J- c-s 





b.'d . x-.CvJ,;: 




j n 


• ^ 


. 

, / . . 

"■ * ;■ ■ ■ '.V ■ id . 3 ■- , -0J-. 

I 

d 0 j. 

. 

.1. y * V*X vr! 

■ ■ - -• ' ' •■•x.'lC .••• 


. 

•’ : ' • . ■ "V..,- 'Tcj?V: 


..j 


">eb ai do i-uyi'/rq 




visoty? 




‘ ' ' • . ■ ■ > . L •- 




: ! f j tlirwiiO c-t’o .,t ncLt'-.Jivn.r . • Sl . iC olew 

" ! ri;; " ' 'Iqoeq alii:!' d.: : jv 3'ios -px nx ■■■■ od 


irx 




” .^.yj 






VI ■ 








- 75 - 


many cases superior to their English-speaking brethren. 

An account from the House of Commons describes the plight 
of these immigrants: 

As regards the cleanliness of the Doukobors and 
Galicians, I would point out they had just left a vessel 
on which they had been two or three weeks crossing the 
sea and if the honourable members (of the Commons) would 
see the condition in which the holds of such vessels are 
kept—vessels that have brought cattle across and return 
with immigrants—they would realize how difficult it was 
for these people to have any regard for cleanliness.1 

Dr. Joseph Zak a pastor of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic 
Church in Toronto wrote regarding the general Canadian attitude 
toward the people from the Ukraine; 

My investigations proved to me that the Ukrainians are 
left to work out their own salvation after they arrive here. 
No one seems to be interested in whether or not they become 
Canadianso They are classed as foreigners with all the 
accompanying suspicion against foreigners created by a war.— 
The result is the Ukrainian, and I suppose other foreigners, 
too, live together in colonies. This breeds a feeling of 
isolation and uncertainty. It is this feeling of uncertain¬ 
ty that is responsible for the fact that Ukrainians keep 
on using their own language, and keep in close touch with 
the old land, although most of them come out here with the 
idea in mind of settling down permanently.2 

Once in Canada their lot was often not improved. Enroute 
to the Canadian West they were locked up in railway cars and 
left in the care of railway officials and news agents. Ukrainian 
women with children at their breasts were charged exorbitant 
prices for milk and other necessities in the stations and trains. 
At Winnipeg they were taken by agents to secondary distribution 


T— —————— — ”-——-— 

Sessi on al Papers, 1901» Vol. 1, p. 2900. From Ibid.» p. 47o 

2 

W.G. Smith, Building the Nation, p. 17&-179# 










* 












' 1 

. .. OO 
















0 , 


' ‘ 

. 








•i ‘ VJ <) - 


.. V i 

v o,:' 




■ . i •: ■.'■ *; 


Oil 


' X 

. a 'V 


0 ' 




c 


1 • '' c , ■ ’• ' ■ r.;-; J . , 

- 

\lo ■ 3‘j> / •; • ,/ • .a© 7£ jv. 


•Ti ■ . 






0 'Vi’5 • >...L r • 'Y 




* ?,'-*• 

* x __ 


.. JUsnc.' 



















- 76 - 


points where often they were isolated from distribution centers 
and had no shelter* Those who came to Alberta settled north¬ 
east of Edmonton, thirty-five to eighty miles from the rail¬ 
way* The land they settled was heavily wooded and the soil 
was not particularly good. Later settlers moved further south 
to Vegreville where the soil was richer. This settlement 
stretched from Bruderheim ninety miles east to Vermilion and 
north to Smoky Lake with an average width of fifty miles. 

Smaller settlements were at Leduc and Viking* 

Some of the Ukrainians did not settle on farms, although 
they had intended to, but were forced to work on railway gangs, 
survey crews, and in the coal mines to make enough money to 
get started. Others were induced to invest in city lots and 
beginning to live in the city were diverted from their original 
purpose. These circumstances produced a variety of problems 
for the Church in dealing with these people. 

The Church did much for these people and yet for their 
success as Canadian citizens the Church can only claim a small 
part for they were typical pioneers, not afraid to work and to 
hope. Typical of the men and women who pioneered the Ukrainian 
sections of Alberta is: 

Mike H , who nearly 25 years ago left the Ukraine, 

and with wife, Tnother and children arrived after a long 
and weary journey, third class on ship and colonist on 
train, at Edmonton. By means of an interpreter, he made 
entry for a piece of land near some friends, paid thereon 
ten dollars, and with his last ten he possessed, proceeded 
with his family north-east to face the wilderness and earn 
a livelihood. He made his abode at first with some friends 
who had preceded him, and then obtained, often on trust, 
simple tools with which to work. Gradually he acquired a 
horse, some oxen, a wagon, and lumber wherewith to build 
a house. The small cottage, with thatched roof and mud 




■■ ■ . i; . . /■ . 

“ 

'• ■ ' ■' c .. : : 

- 

• : ■- 

jao.Xui'ie v - o:; r.v. tLh'.i'si&bzrxl rcc/i' r x a 

* ’ 01 • • 



. .. -x V 








- ■ o: 

' , 



o:: oci a 

t 



' ■ ■ o ' n 




• • ' • j. Ij • 

° 

: « - ; 

t 

tel 

' ; : , 

' , 

■' ' t 

t . ■ ; • 

t ■ ■ ' ■■■ ■ ■ ■ : ■: : t ■ 

- - ' - ■■■ ■ . 

• ■ , , ' 

' ' t 

. • 

■ 




- 77 - 


walls, soon appeared, and the evolution of an Albertan 
farmer was in progress. Mother and wife mixed that mud 
plaster with their feet, packed it on the walls with 
their hands and smoothed it with the bare palms. Then 
when dry it was limed, until the cottage appeared white 
as chalk, and the house was made. It had no chimney, 
and a bake oven took the place of stove, but it was 
home and the beginning of independence, and now (1922) 
the record is written not only in buildings, stock and 
golden grain in fertile acres, but in bent backs, crooked 
figures and hard hands of man and women alike. 

Yet the guest sits at their table where hospitality 
abounds, partakes of food with which no fault can be found, 
and wipes his fingers on linen napkins, but is compelled 
to express his admiration and thanks through an interpreter, 
because in the early days of the conquest of the wilderness 
there were no schools, Children grew up to manhood without 
the rudiments of education, worse off in that respect than 
if they had remained in Central Europe. But the youngest 
girl has become the recipient of the gifts of the new 
school, and in a modest, limited vocabulary, tells how 
far she has got in her studies, despite the brevity and 
intermittence of attendance. But her muffins are delicious, 
and the house, inside and outside, is in keeping with the 
rest of the farm, with its barns, cattle sheds, protected 
machinery, fences, and ripening grain. A quiet 
calculation would indicate that this man’s worldly posses¬ 
sions, if valuated, would require at least five figuresa 
And the day is at hand when the Ukrainian farmer, who 
entered the wilderness twenty-five years ago with $10, will 
drive to Edmonton over excellent roads in a comfortable, 
even luxurious, touring car.l 

Today the original colonies have enlarged, and dispersed 
throughout large sections of the province. The Ukrainian 
11 babushka n has become a common sight on Alberta women of any 
nationality. Alberta and Canadian culture, economy and progress 
are not without their debt to the Ukrainians. 


1 = ~ 

Ibid., p. 114. 






t 


t 






c 



















CHAPTER VII 


RELIGIONS OF T HE UKRAINIAN IMMIGRANTS 

The work of the Methodist Church among the Ukrainians 
and the effect it had cannot be discussed without an insight 
into the religions these people brought with them 0 The majority 
of the Ukrainians came from Eastern Galicia where from 1595 they 
had been part of the Uniat or Greek Catholic Churcho No religious 
leaders accompanied these Galicians. About 1900 they appealed 
to their homeland for priests but only six were available. For 
these six Greek priests the task among the thousands of Ukrainian 
settlers was far too great. The Ukrainian settlers were advised 
by their Uniat Church to accept the Roman Catholic Services. 

This was a grave mistake and resulted in a serious loss to 
the Greek Catholic Church, as the Ukrainians would not accept 
the Roman Catholic services 

Owing to the fact that they have for centuries been 
held in j^Litical subjection by the Latin Poles, the 
Ruthenians are inclined to distrust all Latin Catholics. 

To many of them,every Latin Catholic is a Pole, one of 
their hereditary enemies. They are in constant fear of 
being Latinised.1 

Further, a papal decree forbade the Greek Catholic 
priests the right to marry, a priviledge they had had in the 
old country. These factors were the seeds of a serious defection 

" — - — — — ' -- 

Charles H. Young, The Uk rainian C anadians 3 p. 134* 


- 7 « - 











. -f J 


J 







■ . V 


. 

. hh- ■ ••• ' ' ' ' • .• 

: ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ 

■ 

* 

: V j 

' ‘ ‘ : • •, ■ 

’ - ‘ ' •' • '• •' ' - 

' '■ ;■ hr,; . e ,iJ 

* • < ' 

•' i•‘« i " - v h ■ -A;' Cv ‘ q r 

< 

^ - • : - . v •' . 

: - : t ! . Vi. 

* 

< 

■ : . . ; ... 

. ...... ( . .. 










- 79 - 


from the ranks of the Catholic Church# The importance of this 
defection is gathered from a Catholic writer: 

Thousands and thousands of these Greek Catholics were 
scattered through the prairies; roaming flocks without 
shepherds, a prey to ravening wolves# Presbyterian 
ministers were seen to celebrate among them ’bogus Masses’; 
Schismatic emissaries tried to bribe them with ’Moscovite 
money’; fake bishops were imposing sacrilegious hands on 
outlaws and perverts; traitors from among their ranks, 
like Judas, bartered away their faith for a few pieces 
of silver#1 

The Roman and Greek Churches when they fully realized 
the problem appointed a Greek Catholic Bishop as head of the 
Church in Canada in 1912# Thirty priests were also sent# How¬ 
ever the lateness of the time and Bishop Budka’s allegiance to 
Austria during the Great War consumated the weakening of the 
Greek Catholic Church among the Canadian Ukrainians# 

These Ukrainians, religiously destitute and with the 
undercurrent of antipathy toward the Roman Church gave lease 
to two other religious movements: The Russian Orthodox Church 
and the Independent Greek Church (and later the Ukrainian 
Orthodox Church)• The Russian Orthodox Church which until 
this time had consisted chiefly of Bukovinian Ukrainians had 
its numbers increased by the defecting Greek Catholics. Priests 
from the Russian Orthodox Church had moved to America, many by 
way of Alaska, before the turn of the century. In 1900 they 
centered their work in the area north of Vegreville which was 
the strongest Bukovinian settlement in the West# The Greek 


1 

Ibid#, p# 135* 







V. - 


: 


• l ■’ 


i : r I 




■ '• 


. 

' 

' ' 




t 7 ■■ 


. ' 








•" vii. 




; • 

* 

l US eo'iJC 




. c ■ . 1 _■ 




0 


\, i r r ■ : 

: . ...... j 




■ s.J : 




. ■ ■ 




■ ■ ■ ' ■ : ' z 

■ • . 

1 : • ■ : ' ei . ('oil 

* " ■' ' < 












ii 






* r. . 


T 


JL* 














- so - 


Catholics who were without priests found themselves much closer 
allied to the Russian Orthodox priests than to the French priests 
of the Roman Catholic Church and thus defected, hence the refer¬ 
ence to "Moscovite money"* The extent of the work of these 
Russian Orthodox priests in the West and specifically in Alberta 
is mentioned by Woodsworth in his report: 

According to the Calendar of the Russian people, the 
Greek Orthodox Church has about 65 churches in the three 
provinces* There are 26 priests and 22 *Mother Churches* 
already built* There is a monastery at Wostok, Alberta, 
and a nunnery and orphanage at Shandro, Alberta*1 

With the Russian Revolution (1917) the Russian Orthodox Church 

lost its source of funds* Its position in Canada was seriously 

weakened and many of its members joined the newly formed 

Ukrainian Orthodox Church (1916)* Today it still is weak, with 

the only moderately strong block in Canada at the Vegreville 

Colony in Alberta* 

Among these neglected Greek Catholic Ukrainians, there 

arose also the Greek Independent Church which began a sensational 

though somewhat abortive life* It began in 1903 under the 

auspices of the Presbyterian Church* It was largely a group 

church manned by Ukrainian priests, most of whom were at Manitoba 

College and ordained by the Orthodox Bishop Seraphim* It used 

the Ukrainian language and much of the Greek Orthodox ritual 0 

2 

Its theology was Protestant* In 1905 the Superintendent of Home 

Ibid *, p* 133* 

2 

Personal account from Dr. Theodore Bay a former Greek 
Independent minister. 








i . »; ixoiK'j/ " i.our' r-:•. 

^ * : ‘V- i‘ ■. v l .- - • - C,' 

c ■ ' : ' 






.v 


oxixoec b LTt 


« 

■ ; • ■ ■> ; ' c ' .• ■ - ■ cx ,'V. ■ j.: ■ r.rx 

' ■: \ \ -' r-r J, .• ■ / 


t. 


•" ’ o 1 - ■ ■■ vf r:j* oo. 

■ 








* 


c 

‘ « • - ' - ; : . 

■ * 
















< -'J ;x' l 

* 

./■' «■ ’ x .i . •- X..x • loc ■;> 

. 

- ; '. 

— ■ « . . - f. 

* 

„ 


■ 







Missions for the Presbyterian Church reported "the Church 
(Independent Greek) has now twenty ministers, thirteen of whom 
are employed by us as colporteurs* Between 20,000 and 30,000 
of the Ruthenians, both Galicians and Bukovinians, have openly 

J. 

professed their adherence to the Independent movement*" The 
movement was well received by the Ukrainians* Services were 
held at central points and were well attended* In 1907, only 
four years after the movement had begun, the Presbyterian Church 
claimed that it had "prevented" 30,000 to 40,000 people from 
falling under the sway of the Church of Rome. 

However this Greek Independent Church went, almost as 
it had come* The Presbyterian Church Councils expressed dis¬ 
satisfaction over the expenditure of so much money for the pre- 
petuation of an alien ritual* The Board of Home Missions g$ve 
the priests of the movement their choice of joining the Presbyterian 
Church or being left on their own* Many joined, but the people 
who were not prepared, for such a movement did not follow 0 It 
had also been rumored among the Ukrainians that the Protestant 
Missions were not religious but political and that their aim 
was the assimilation of the Ukrainians; "swallowing them up in 
the English sea"* Thus the Independent Church disappeared 
almost overnight. 

It can be seen that the Ukrainians, deeply religious 
by nature, were frustrated by the Church development in Canada* 

Charles H* Young, The Ukrainian Canadians a p* 140* 









V 

% 



C i 


< 

< 


* 


«- 




* 

<' i - . 

« 

C < • 1 • : . 

v 

< ■ < . < ' c ; 

<* 

C 

^ : - '■ -■ ' ■ 

- 

. 

■ ‘ ■■ • i . ■, 

c 

* • 

■ 

" . 

\ 

, 

* ., 

< ■; ' 

' ' ' ; , ■ ( 

.. . __ ____ 

r " 

• * - -.-. ... • . t 



- 82 - 


The rise of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, beginning in 1916, 
has been an answer to many, while others have found their way 
into other Canadian Churches reflecting in most cases the 
Protestant efforts among the Ukrainians* 













, 




' : ‘ - \ •’ ' •• . . 

















CHAPTER VIII 

THE METHODIST CHURCH AMONG THE UKRAINIANS 
Pakan Mission 

The Ukrainians had first come to Alberta in 1394* The 
Methodist Church in the West until this time had been working 
almost exclusively among English-speaking settlers and Indians* 

In 1&S9 some work had begun among non-English speaking settlers 
in Winnipeg© Miss Dolly Maguire a young Sunday School teacher 
had begun a class for neglected German children* With the help 
of the Rev. T.E. Morden the work grew and other nationalities 
were drawn in. Night classes and other types of social work 
for adults were organized© Finally a separate building was 
secured-. This was the beginning of All Peoples 1 Mission in 
Winnipeg. The work of people such as Miss Maguire and Mr© Morden 
along with the consciousness of the Church of the increasing need 
to bring the gospel with its social concomitants to the ever 
increasing number of non-English speaking immigrants brought 
official action from the Church Councils. In the Manitoba and 
North-West Conference of 1&9& a resolution was put forth "that 
conference be requested to take proper steps to secure the appoint¬ 
ment of one or more colporteurs or missionaries to work amongst 
the foreign population especially the Galicians and to adopt ways 

tt 1 

and means for carrying on the work. it was also asked that the 
Min. MScNW Gonf., lS9$, P<» 36© 


- 33 - 















' 



~ ‘ ./ ' 

. -f 

■ 

. . 


. 






1 ■ ■ . • 




0 








.■ :■ . : -i.r-i. .. ., : .... • 

• • 


• $3 • 


r f 

- 


* * t _ 








- $4 - 


chairman of each district act on a committe to study the Galicians® 
The Missionary Committee was unable to proceed beyond discussion 
and reports and stated "that in view of the very meagre inform¬ 
ation received touching work amongst the large foreign population 
of this country and the lack of funds for carrying on such work 
your committee cannot see its way clear at present to make any 

1 

recommendations concerning the same (appointment of missionaries)". 

However the Annual Conference of 1&99 saw clearly that 
these new people "called loudly across a deep racial and social 
gulf to the churches of their adopted home"* The Missionary 
Committee reported and Conference was further bewildered by the 
arising problem® A standing committee of Rev® Dr. John MacLean, 

Rev. James Woodsworth and Rev. Dr. L® Gaetz was appointed to 
study the whole question during the year 1$99-1900. The action 
that followed was to a great extent due to these men. They 
reported in 1901 and the first concrete action was taken. It 
was resolved, 

that a committee be appointed with authority to 
initiate and prosecute work among the foreigners of 
this province and the North-West Territories as 
opportunities offer and that a grant of $1,000.00 
be asked from the missionary society through the 
Winnipeg district meeting to defray expenses incurred 
in such work in the present year.2 

Mr* Woodsworth in his report took pains to stress the 
responsibility of the church. The committee was enlarged. 


1 

Ibid®, 139&, p. 36® 

2 

Ibid®, 1900, p. 121. 






o.£'"os.>) })ii 

- C ‘ fli; 99: .0 , y; / / . , - jy f[.r ,j : .. 

fJf.Lfooo iloocA •.■:■ / ;; , ■' : ' 

: *' ■ :■ . :: > r ...■ -on.E . r;r ; 

J* vloo-lc V V'/tj. 'ic; oo/'s 

f ■ • - • , 




. . .9.9 0 L 


T . 


• * or-r 

J 91. . f: r 

: ■ • 

.xdvt lo 
.. : 

o-a foooo 


■ 9 Of rlj. h 

* 




. 


o; • >©chr ■ ■ Jo x< ■ ' c 0 

, 


• ~ ' . I 

* 

' ~ ; ’ f JO \ 9 

< 

f'■ : ■ 9 yd ", ;iJ ;.;-oo J . "J* 

•xsfioi . ■. ■ :> r iov: oj- . .'^q j .o ■ : ;• • 

- ■ ■ : ■ f 

4 t -• 

' 

. ■ ; 

•• J' : .i JO ■ 


f; 0 ;oloo f.:..: ; oJ’Ji 


'■'9- i f . > f j if I c $ 11 j; (;.a o qs JO 




. . . . 





- 85 - 


Among others Rev, T.C. Buchanan, later to become Superintendent 
of Missions for Alberta, was included. Further impetus was 
given the work when a resolution for the Laymen 1 s Association 
asked the Church to take steps to open up work among the Galician 
immigrants. The action taken consisting of C,H, Lawford M.D, 
being appointed in 1901 to work among the European foreigners 
near Victoria (Pakan) on the North Saskatchewan, Dr. Lawford 
had been a probationer bent on foreign mission work but decided 
that he could better serve as a doctor. He graduated from 
Manitoba Medical College and became the earliest pioneer of 
the Methodist Church in medical work except for Dr, Bolton in 

his work among the Indians on the Coast of B,C. who proceeded 

1 

him by about a year. The Church recognized the value of a 

combined medical and spiritual ministry and in 1901 resolved 

that tf he {.Dr. Lawford) be continued as medical missionary to 

the Galicians and that he receive license from the general 

superintendent to empower him to administer the ordnances of 
2 

our church. 

In so many fields of human endeavor only the man who 
does the first work is remembered and those who follow and often 
do greater work are forgotten. With Dr. Lawford this was not 
so. He was the first worker among the Galicians in Alberta and 
he was also one of the greatest. Despite an artificial limb due 
to the loss of one foot after a fall during his first year among 

..... r ~ — — ~ — ~ 

J.H, Riddell, The Ukrainian Canadians, p. 253• 

2 

Min. MScN.W . Conf. v 1901, p. 346. 













; 

- 

■ ■ < 

* 

fX: 


‘ : X X 




S ’ 



? , 



■ 



- 




■ - •' / o -x 

• 

* * 

■ 

* . 



, .-XX..X • 

: .1 rx 


' 




• mxx 


ixxo" X 

X 

- 

! 



V 

■ 

■ fr.o • 



1 

1 

•: 






* > • 


■ 

XXX' ■■ 

£ 




‘.U x / . 

• x . ' : ' p :' • :[/ (i'j 

' 

•* . • ■ 

{na:' : ;) 

■■ -•/ ' ; i 

• . r -x 





Tx 




• * • \ : . : 

* * 

• ••• ■ ■ I •'1 ■ V xrxx • c. Izolbev xtxixxoo 

. 

-"-'9 ' - • i: j - •: 

■ ' '• '•'•'-.x : x . ' x ■ •mio; 


« : : 

' f """ V X v'i.-MX-. 'T.o C;c ; lt J 

■ ; ;; ■- ■ ■■ iXX 0 : ■ r- , ,-i: ;i . XX 


■ :x: xxv J , j: ns. }\;:i ei. r u ; 

x ; : •' • : ’,xxx': a. exJ 


0 

*■ 

••• ^ J c' o'. 0(iv '.o e»oI exit tv- 







* ' 


* I * » 







- S6 - 


1 

the Galicians he carried on* His insight into the needs of 

the people, and his ability to meet these needs and his true 

Christian Spirit shine throughout his ministry* 

Dr* Lawford f s first residence was at Star (north of 

Lament) an English community on the fringe of the Galician 
2 

settlement. His official appointments were Victoria (Pakan) 
and Beaver Lake, but the extension of his work was ominous for 
besides the Galicians which were a large and increasing colony 
in themselves, four Indian Settlements in the area also depended 
on Dr* Lawford for medical assistance* He moved almost immediate¬ 
ly to Pakan in the heart of the Galician settlement* 

Among this group of new Canadians of well over 300 
families to begin with, isolated from the rest of the province 
one can imagine the immense task which would confront one doctor, 
or one minister, or one educated man, or one friend* Dr* Lawford 
was only one and yet was all of these* His work included setting 
up movers and rakes which were shipped in pieces from the East, 
writing, letters concerning machinery payments and land survey 
disputes and explaining the organization of school districts, 
besides his primary task of ministry to souls and bodies* "Can 
you imagine your minister before the congregation has had time 
to disperse, with a patient seated in one of the front seats 

in the act of extracting a tooth or with a stethoscope examining 
f 3 

a patients lungs* A page of Dr* Lawfords 1 diary shows a 

-—j—— -— ~ ' 

M.B. Vol. 11, p. 200* 

2 ~~~ 

J.H. Riddell, The Uk raini an Canadians, p. 254. 

3 

M*B* Vol* 11, p* 205* 












- S7 - 


typical day’s work* 

I enclose yesterday’s (diary, February 27th) exactly 
as it happened: 

Case 1 * - Three Austrian farmers, from about three 
miles/ asking me to write Edmonton Land Office for 
permits for logs to cut into lumber for their homes 0 
Case 2* - Austrian, from about eight miles, for 
medicine for his wife, also to have letter written 
re land he wishes for his farm. 

Case3» - Young Jftan (Metis) with suppurative middle 
ear disease. 

Case4. . - Two Austrians, one for medicine, other to 
get letter written. Both from this neighborhood. 

Case 5o - Austrian, from twelve miles distant, tooth 
extracted, treated prior for filling. 

P.M. (Dinner ) 

Case 6. - Austrian to see about money due him for 
work from Canadian Pacific Railway, for which I had 
previously written. From about thirteen miles north. 
Case 7. - Canadian settler, from twenty miles distant, 
to have tooth extracted. 

Case - Austrian settler, from six miles south, to 
get instructions how to proceed to conduct business 
in forming school district. 

Case 9. - Two Austrians, from twenty miles east, for 
me to write re homesteads. 

Case 1 0. - A trustee of Creek Church ten miles east, 

Tor Tie to write re logs they wished the Government to 
give them for their church. 

(Supper) 

Case 11 . - Austrian, accident on hill, team ran away, 
came for one of my horses to overtake his. 

Case 12 . - A trustee of another Greek Church, to have 
me write out a list of men and number of logs they 
were contributing to their church, and write re the 
grant of land they desire.1 

At times communicable diseases such as diphteria, typhoid 
and whooping cough were rampant, throwing an extra strain on 
Dr. Lawford and his helpers. Dr. Lawford states: 


r - — - — 

Ibid.» Vol. 11, p. 606. 

























- 66 - 


Since I wrote you last our Kate Lilian has had 
diphtheria, contacted from a Galician who had come 
from an infected home, and who remained over night 
in our house. I found on going to his home that 
three children had diphtheria. We are grateful 
that these and our own have been spared. Five 
other children who did not have medical aid have 
Succumbed to this dread disease.l 

The ignorance of the people regarding health practices was a 

carry-over from the old country, where hospitalization and 

medical care were to be dreaded as they were the last resort. 

Few who entered hospitals returned. Old wive ! s tales, folk 

lore and home remedies also held the people strongly, often 

to the disadvantage of the patient. Lawford tells of a young 

boy who: 

had been sick ten weeks with empyema. His father had 
taken him to an old woman who tried by charms and making 
the boy hold his head over steam from a wash tub to cure 
him, but after a month gave the case up as too hard for 
her. When the father saw me passing, he called me in and 
you may judge of his thoughts when I forthwith, by 
respiration, drew off over two quarts of purulent fluid, 
i.e. pus, and after operation and the usual treatment, 
in six weeks he returned home strong and recovered.2 

The need for a hospital was urgent and yet the Christian 
spirit of Dr. Lawford can be seen: 

There are quite a number of surgical cases that 
thus need help, but it is very difficult for us to take 
charge of them without any other place than our home, and 
none but native help for Mr. Lawford. 

We have often thought of a small cottage hospital at 
this point, but when we think of the very great opportunities 
at this time in Japan and China especially, w© hesitate to 
present the claims of this work, though here is so far- 
reaching a field of spiritual work in connection with this 
project.3 


Ibid., Vol. 11, p. 603. 

2 

Ibid.» Vol. Ill, p. 306. 
3 

Ibid. t Vol. Ill, p. 307. 






i 

. 

; . ;• : ; 


j 



t ' 


. i i l 

' 



^ .. 


Cl 


- ■ 



*■ 


b 


<E ■ 

f 

■ 


c . 




• li Ui O" 


* 


3.1 




. 


■ 


■ 








. 

£ 


c 

* 




« ~ 


c 


% 


- • . I ‘ ' 


* 

v -,-yi 

- 

C 




S' O' ooo 


o S ..hi 2 


^ Si 'll).'-,o ... ‘ o ■. : •• ^ j - 

S A ■v v- a u • -x o'i o'!oi:' .1' ... v c l j j; r..; ' ,-j; r ,,. 

.% - -O '■ S-X o 0:. ' . . . . • 

* 

- - 1 ... ;■ 

" v - • ■' - 1 ' .. s ■ v t •' ; 

1 V’ /• ? 1.1 ' J : -,v... " • : r;;. 

. “ ~ 3 - : ~ " ■ ’ - ' ? ■ : V ■ . O 

' IK'S.AO' r. • o;; >If/V , r VTu e '.to o.foj'i • 






c - 


jO 






X*_ 






- 89 - 


This is true w agape Tr when one will see even his own 
loved people suffer in order that the suffering of others in 
distant lands might be lessened* 

A hospital was begun in 1907. Dr. Lawford wrote on 
May 1st. of that year: 

We are making every effort to have the hospital 
erected here this summer. We have secured all the 
lumber for the frame work at a very moderate price, 
and have it here on the site. The exeavation for 
the basement is almost completed, and the stones and 
cement for the foundation have been hauled. The team 
is now away fifty miles for a load of lime, and the 
stone and concrete work will begin about Monday next* 

The well has been dug and cribbed, and we have an 
abundant supply for good water.! 

Thus the George McDougall Hospital, at Pakan was 
opened on February $, 190$ with two nurses one from the Public 
Hospital in Edmonton and one from the W.M.S. At the hospital 
Dr. Lawford visited each patient in the morning and evening 
and Christian nurses were in contact with them at all times. 
All patients were furnished with a copy of the Scriptures in 
their own language and, if they could not read, Metro Ponich 
an assistant to Dr. Lawford read to them. A Sabbath Service 
of scripture, talk, and hymns was always held in the hospital. 
Patients came from Mannville, Saddle Lake, Vegreville, Scarrow 
and Lament and as far north as they settled. Dr. Lawford 
estimated that through the hospital three times as many people 
were reached as through the Sunday Services. Dr. Lawford f s 
own assessment of the work was given in his report to Alberta 
Conference in 1909: 


T—~~~ ~~——_ 
Ibid.,, Vol. 17? p. 23-24. 











- 

' V£ . 

K 

* 

r - • ' < 

* * 










* 

, 19 i 

• •• “ 7 

* ‘ ■ ■ • . 

M 1 iV '/ vl w . 

: *. . > • .. 

















- 90 - 


The work of the year has been of an encouraging nature 
though the fact of our being 34 miles from a railway center 
brings its own difficulties. The number of patients treated 
from February 190$ till May 1909 was 76, including 46 
Austrians, 11 Half-breeds and others. 

We have great need of better furnishings, sterilizer 
and certain instruments, in order to carry on the work 
as it should be carried on* 

We believe that this work is of God and is already 
telling for good in the hearts and lives of the people* 
Sabbath Services are regularly held and well attended. 

Two young men after confessing their conversion have 
been publicly received into the church and are now 
preparing themselves for active work of fhe Ministry.1 

The financial and spiritual support for Dr. Lawford's 

work was received from the Church at large as well as from 

specific sources. An outstanding contribution in the field 

of missions was given by the Epworth Leagues. The educational 

and spiritual emphasis of ,T The Forward Movement for Missions rt 

on the Leagues made missionary enterprises the major interest 

of the Young People. Dr. Lawford received direct support from 

the Epworth Leagues of the Campbellford and Brighton districts. 

Other support came from private sources; "the money for this 

table (operating table) and several much needed instruments 

was given by a kind friend in Toronto". "I have received 

$5°00 unsolicited from a friend in Linsey, $2.00 from a lady 

in Toronto, as well as the promise of help from three persons 

2 

here in Edmonton for our hospital." Fees from patients who 
could afford to pay and Governmental grants were also a source 
of revenue. 


1 -- * “ 

Min. Alta . Oonf, 1909, P° 54* 

2 — 

M.B. Vol. IV. p. 24o 





C 'V, ' - 






r- r i:e i-x Siic- ' '.hi >i 

. 

J . 




' 


. ■ . 


- 

j\te< 'ir in •„ 


■ 

e. 


c - r •• 

* 

' 




J J j,-;. * :/■ • ,:\£e • ovido/j 


c!l vjf ‘-••niuBftv ; .jUj; 


:o'' - , a - - • - c ,i'.. •_ j< ■ r ; • 

■ ' • , 

. ■ 


’ v’-M. - vC •. : /I 


1 




i 





.■'. : uL /v , n: -Lr/.iovi s . u; 


• 



- • 





“ c . 

& -mn± b& 

. 





t 





x ■■ , 



: 3 .;. ■ \ 1« .? fi.iYieVoi, 


■v - V 


a 


* * < 


.. „ 













- 91 - 


The George McDougall hospital was moved from Pakan 

1 

to the railway settlement of Smoky Lake (Kolokreeka) and con¬ 
tinued to be operated by the Methodist and later United Churches 
until 1957i when it was sold to the municipality. 

Dr. Lawford was as much an evangelist as he was a doctor. 
He organized services in homes and soon had a circuit of six 
preaching appointments. The type of co-operation and appreciation 
he received was often very congenial: 

Nikolai Goligun, one of our members near Pakan, has 
at his own expense fitted up the half of his house as a 
place for Divine worship. The members at this point have 
purchased a heating stove, pipes, lamps and coal oil, and 
we have a comfortable meeting-place for service. We have 
here an attendance of between twenty-five and thirty adults 
on an average, each Sabbath morning. The Thursday evening 
service is also well attended, and gives cause for great 
encouragement. The W.M.S. has a Sabbath School at this 
point as well. At many other places the attendance is not 
regular, as we have no membership, and the occasional visits 
of the priests keep the people away.2 

Dr. Lawford realized the situation of these people 
and modified his evangelistic approach accordingly. He wrote 
that: 


Last Sabbath was the day for our regular one-in-three- 
weeks service at Veranka, about twelve miles from here, and 
at Hoveralacks about six or eight miles fromthere. We took 
for our lesson 1 Thess., chap. iv., verses 13-lS, and made 
this the introduction to the subject of "What the Bible says 
about a future state." 

By the questions at the beginning we found the view of 
those present. This is not a difficult matter, for the 
people are not bashful and answer readily regarding religious 
subjects. 


*2 * ' ' 

Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 192. 

1 

About 1920-25 according to Mrs.^*^* Smith. 







oct 


c 


» 






JB 




c 






00 




0~ 


\..oo t 



.lv 9i0l 

< 






; 9< ; 

: jon 


. 

. 

0 0'. .L o •. yu 









" o 






- 92 - 


We found in each congregation that some had been told 
by religious teachers that they entered purgatory unless 
they were too bad, but one man volunteered the information 
that not a Greek priest had told him this but a missionary, 
whom he thought was a Roman Catholic, had led him to think 
so in the Old Country*1 

Dr* Lawford saw the need for more workers especially 
those of the same nationality as the settlers* Through his 
efforts he obtained three local Austrian men and a young woman 
to assist in the work* The three men were licensed to preach* 
They knew the ways and language of the people and were in many 
ways more effective than Lawford* The first two Austrian 
probationers were Metro Ponich and Taranty Hannochko who in 
subsequent years did a great service for God through the Church. 

In 1909 the Church ordained Rev. J.K. Smith and stationed 
him as a missionary among the Ukrainians. 

Mr. Smith had come West as a teacher in 1903• He saw 
the need in the ministry and became a probationer, fulfilled 
the college requirements and was ordained* He had thought 
of foreign work but Dr* Buchanan interested him in the needs 
of the Ukrainians in Alberta. Mr. Smith 1 s first interest was 
in learning the Ukrainian language, so before ordination he 
taught school and travelled about the colony. He wrote in the 
Missionary Bulletin: 

Now there is work here even for one who cannot speak 
Ruthenian. Six miles east of Kolokreeka is a settlement 
of Scotch Indians (they resent the name "half-breeds tT ) • 

At this place it was my privilege to hold a meeting on 
the afternoon of the Sunday mentioned. 


T~ ----- 

Ibid* , Vcl* 111, p* 230-231. 






.... 

'... i-i.. i !v 1 i < .. y, ,[ v.i , . 

" 




:V 




* ■ ^ 


ict 





l: 






. aj': ,':U 








. 


* 






' 


•» 

« . , 

<' ■ 

*■<: 

* 

: 

' ■ ' ' 1 r >*> ■ ■; ■ ; v/';./• s. w: i;, \ ■: j ••i 









- 93 - 


After this afternoon service I went eight miles 
further southeast to the Wahstao W.M.S, station on 
the north bank of the Saskatchewan and spoke in English 
to a company of young people who for six years have 
been learning English in the school which Miss Munro 
and Miss Edmonds started,1 

Mr, Smith learned the language quickly, and became 
so fluent that on several occasions the Ukrainians mistook 
him as a native Ukrainian and asked him, ff How long is it since 
you came over?” With this linguistic ability the Church allowed 
Mr, Smith to carry on mission work in the most effective way he 
thought possible. He became similar to a Bible Society colporteur, 
distributing Bibles i except that he was able to read and discuss 
the scriptures, a thing the Bible Society men were not allowed 
to do, Mr. Smith’s wife tells of an instance in which he gave 
a Bible to an old Russian army officer on a homestead. A year 
later when he visited him again the Russian pointed to the 
Bible and said ”You see this book; I would not sell it for 
#1,000, no not #10,000, I would give my arm for it, 

Mr. Smith did much of his work with a Ukrainian 
companion. This helped him gain the confidence of even more 
people. The extent of his travels can be seen from the follow- 
in letter by Mr. Smith: 

About the time I wrote the last BULLETIN letter my 
companion and I were to start on a visiting tour. As 
we owned only one pony between us we chose to go on foot. 
Travelling was slow, and on some hot days wearisome. The 
journey lasted about seven days and covered eighty miles. 

At the end of it I found myself very close to the life of 
my companion. So it happens with those who work, pray and 
are comforted together. How I enjoyed the new experience 
of visiting where for days we heard no sentence of English.2 


T -“ 

Ibid. , Vol. VI, p. 503, 

2 

Ibid, , Vol. VII, p. 59o 






i 









» * * 



' 












■ 





. 






■ 


- 













* 






t 





. 



' 









* 







vhf' 



















- ■ 










« 








/ •' ■ --0 OJ ' % 

■ 










< 



! 7 i l i 







f , 7 

* 



* 










. 




. 







[-T 














. 











♦ 


■ : . ■ ;j'. : e r. ..V. ;... 

0 






■ 

* 



i 

; 

■V' r ‘c: 






: * 


xO Jo':.; J. J; S.: . -t o’iw 7 e :iij . 

* ■ 

" 

* ■ ^ 

- 

. -:.o. ■ ' v ' V ■ I •: ,tj; r 0 : 

C „ 

»' 

... .... 


. 0 



















- 94 - 


Mr. Smith worked until 1915 throughout the colony, 
with considerable time spent at Lamont* He then taught English 
in Alberta College but in 1920 returned to the colony, at 
Chipman. In 1927 he became secretary of the Alberta Branch 
of the British and Foreign Bible Society, a post he held until 
his retirement, in 1941. 

The W.M*S. sent workers among the Alberta Ukrainians 

as early as 1904. The great work of these women will be dealt 

with in a separate section even though their work and that of 

Dr. Lawford and his colleagues was a co-operative effort* 

One cannot proceed without mentioning Dr. Lawford*s 

greatest source of assistance, his wife and family* As a source 

of inspiration, love and devotion they were not surpassed* On 

many occasions his wife was called far beyohd the duty of a 

spouse* He relates one incident: 

At the beginning of March a patient was threatened with 
brain abscess from mastoid disease, and immediate operation 
was imperative* On telegraphing to my neighboring doctor, 
thirty miles distant, to assist, I found he was sick and 
could not come* So I stated the case to my partner--my 
wife—who consented to give the anesthetic and be assist- 
ant-in-chief at the operation* So with sterilized dress¬ 
ings, etc*, two babies or rather one baby and a two-year 
old, we proceeded to the patient*s home, a little room or 
shanty about 14 ft* by 12 ft*, and there with a girl to 
look after the children, my assistant unflinchingly, and 
with care, gave the anesthetic while I chiseled away 
through the bone to the abscess* Our patient made a good 
recovery, thanks to the courage of my able assistant* 

Another line of work taken up by her has been to 
deliver an address or two on occasions to people we had 
gathered in our home for Sabbath evening service* 

On another occasion she conducted the services un¬ 
assisted throughout* This required no little courage and 
faith in God*l 


I--- * *- 

Ibid* t Vol* 11, p* 363o 





■ 


v..v 


xj 




< 




. 

' : 




t 

- t- ...V ■ 

” 

’ i v ( : - 'i yi ‘i ■ ■ . ' • • 

t ' ■- . i f . yi 




< 

? ' ■: 

- 

• , ■ - . . V : ■ 

J ok; 

v' 

:■ 


ns 

- • 






- 

* 







- 95 - 


It is interesting to note that Dr. Lawford signed 
most of his missionary letters ,f Alice and C.H. Lawford”. 

Cne of the great problems which faced all the Protestant 
workers was the old religions of the settlers. The Greek Church 
had done little work in the early years and the Roman Catholics 
to whom the job was left had also proved inadequate. This fact 
plus the freedom offered, gave the Protestant Churches a strong 
foothold. When the Greek, Russian, and Roman Churches realized 
this threat they made strenuous efforts to regain lost ground. 

Dr. Lawford 1 s view of the Greek Catholic Church was: 

Last Sabbath the Greek Church authorities opened a 
place of worship—-the first on this side of the river. 

If these workers would, but preach the simple Gospel, 
instead of occupying so much time with the carrying 
out of elaborately-devised ceremonials and ritualistic 
observances, they could do very much to uplift the people. 

But as a matter of fact the service is so long that the 
people do not feel under obligation to remain, and so 
keep coming and going during the entire service. It 
is very lamentable to see so much time and thought 
occupied with non-essentials, and the truths of the 
Gospel that set forth the need of the inner spiritual 
life crowded out. What shall it profit that a system 
of religion succeed in establishing a people in religious 
forms if that system lead them not into loving union with 
Christ, whether the system be called Christian or non- 
Christian?! 

The great handicap these old churches p>laced on their 
people in a new and free country is seen by the fact that in 
many of their letters Dr. Lawford and Mr. Smith went to some 
length to point out the failings of the Greek and Roman Churches. 
Dr. Lawford writes: 


T 











. 










oJ- ■ . . "L'SJ'i.r ;■ 




















V 




« ■ ■ « - 

: . ■ ; - t 

* ■ • —* 

t - 

' >J d o i c a ; .. i'. u o c o 1 c) b 1 . • J: i 1 

. ? ; 

<; 

\ ■' . ~ .... . ;■ : 

' 

, r 

■ .. ii'j r : i v• . c .. i iej j 

■ c . 

I .'iiyidai^dO 

* ' rid* vc 


: 


. 

* 






- 96 - 


In the coming of these people to our land, God is 
giving to Canadian Protestantism the privilege of 
emancipating these our fellow men, who for centuries 
have as a people groaned under a system of bondage 
worse than any African slavery.1 

While Mr. Smith writes: 

A few Sundays since, I went with Dr. Lawford to a 
service. During the service the question of Peter’s 
place in the church arose. One man said, T, Christ gave 
Peter the keys and also charge of the sheep.” 

"Yes,” said the Doctor, "Christ told Peter to feed 
the sheep, but He never said to fleece the sheep. 7t 
They saw the point at once, for they had been fleeced 
again and again by their priests.2 

The good points of the priests were by no means 
minimized when they did appear. 

When the priests were returning from consecrating 
their church a week ago they called at my house, where 
Mrs. Lawford, with Grace on her lap, was seated teaching 
the Sabbath School. The two priests and the wife of one 
of them came in and took seats, and when the collection 
was taken the priests each came forward and contributed 
liberally to the offering, though the plate was not passed 
to them. One of these men, when we were trying to carry 
out reform on temperance lines some time ago, gave us no 
little assistance in the work.3 

In general however the priests were not Christian 
leaders of the people. Dr. Lawford recounts: 

The priest of the Greek Church now in charge near 
here seems from his own people’s report of him to be 
a disgrace to any church. We are constantly hearing 
of drunken revellings and quarrelling as the result 
of the drinkings, in which the priest is said to be 
the chief actor. Baptismal feasts and other revellings 
in the name of religion are held, such as we had not 
before he came. It is very evident that though the 
people may bow to his ecclesiastical authority, they 


1 Ibid», Vol. VII, p. 192. 
2 

Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 194o 
3 

Ibid., Vol.,V, p. 223o 










<1 









- 97 - 


cannot rely on the leadership of such a one for spirit¬ 
ual help. It is certainly a case of the blind leading 
the blind. Think of the absurdity of a man, in the name 
of religion, conducting a so-called religious service the 
wind-up of which drinking of two gallons of whiskey by 
the priest and the people. The priest became so in¬ 
toxicated that he could scarcely remain on his feet and 
pleaded with his parishioners to help him home. 

People under such leadership certainly have little 
chance to become good citizens and need another spiritual 
help than that furnished them from such sources .1 

These churches were attempting to regain their former 
prestige and conquer new fields, Dr. Lawford wrote: 

Do we observe what the church of Rome is doing to 
try to bring this people under her influence—the 
hospitals; the nuneries, or training homes; the churches; 
the periodicals in the language of the people; the separate 
schools; the priests ffom the old country and the young 
men natives, that she has sent out as priests to these 
people? Do we know that these things do not represent the 
efforts of a people for themselves, but that of a system 
which has for its object the subjugation of this people 
to its rule and bondage? The people themselves in most 
places are not in sympathy and openly criticize much of 
these efforts .2 

The reaction of the people especially the older ones 
was often to return to the church of their fathers for the 
fear of hell, of priests, and of interdiction were bred in 
them. Many however challenged the old faith: 

At this latter place there has been quite a decided 
move toward accepting the Gospel as the only rule, and the 
sufficient rule, of- faith and practice. About twenty- 
three persons partook of the sacrament at our service two 
weeks ago, and" this notwithstanding the fact that they knew 
the priest would be in their settlement a few days after¬ 
wards. Of course their action could not but result in 
opposition from the priest, who treated them very harshly, 
and abused them before a very large assembly. But you can¬ 
not drive these people now they are in a free land.3 

With regard to this freedom Dr. Lawford wrote: 

For it is very evident from the actions of the priests 
of Rome as we know them that they are as much opposed to 
the people having the Scriptures to read for themselves 
today as they were in the time of Luther. The power of 

l ibid.. Vol. l/il, p. z’lbicl.. Vol. Vll, p. 665 - 666 . 

O Tr-Trl Vrn . VT . r , ._ 








< 


- 





c 


i"' 










•j:'.. ,r,J‘ . 



c 







. }- • 


•> ' ■ ,, ' . • ; o*i 





- . V : 

< 










v , ' : ct 






c 

- 




■ 









- 9S - 


the priest cannot continue where the people study and 
accept the teaching of the Bible,, The teaching of the 
Church of Rome and that of the Apostles cannot be har¬ 
monized where the people have liberty from the bondage 
in which they were held by the tradition of the Church. 

In many places the people are aroused to see the 
importance of depending upon the Word of God for their 
rule of faith and practise. As their interest in the 
Bible increases, the knowledge of the truth of God 
increases, and with a better knowledge of God there 
is more love for Him and a greater desire to do His 
Will.l 

As the work of the Methodist missionaries continued further 
breaks from the church resulted Dr. Lawford wrote: 

There is no doubt a great deal of unrest among the 
people. In one place, where the people had built a 
new church, they went to a lawyer and had papers drawn 
up so that the deed might be made out to them and they 
should be free to have in the building whom they desired. 
At a neighboring place the priest got angry and assaulted 
a man in his church. A member of the church laid the case 
before a justice of the peace, and the priest was fined 
twenty dollars, a thing unheard of in the Old Country.2 

In retaliation the Greek and Roman Churches used their 
power of fear of interdiction and instigated coercion by 
neighbors and families on the converted* Dr. Lawford reported: 

It will interest you to know that we are getting very 
brisk opposition recently from the Greek Church. Two of 
their young men were publicly received into full member¬ 
ship in our church, and the Greek Church authorities have 
striven to oppose and close out our work, but we find that 
many of the people continue to show their sympathy and 
appreciation of all our work. 

The priest threatened to turn out of the church the 
parents of both young men, unless they succeeded in bring¬ 
ing their boys back into the fold. It is reported that the 
parents and sons were publicly denounced at different 
preaching places, and that the parents of one young man, 
first by severe threats of violence, and than by tears and 
various devices, sought in vain to turn their son from his 
purpose.3 


Ibid. , Vol. VI, p. 760* 

2 

Ibid., Vol. VI, p. 501, 

3 

Ibid., Vol. VI, p. 30&o 























. I 

7 U v 


, 

. : 

' ' :i • * . ; , : ; . 

* - 


icii/ -n.. 




- JJ.C 




III. 




i 


♦ i 


t • • 

? . • s 1 v ■ -J . o t.\i- .1 




'■ la .. xJ’ 

■ ■ ’ ■ O' 0 f;fi 

■‘ ;l ' O' o ; / ’J.c i : _ ■[ ‘t] 


- •• - . ’ v-> L 


. 


H 

.'X iCT ■; 


' &aoc. Jv. . • 




t 








c 




- 99 - 


A vacant church stands within six miles of where I 
am writing, under the interdict of Rome, because the 
trustees would not have the deed transferred from them 
to the Roman Church* 1 

Another very sad incident was the shooting by her 
unconverted husband of the daughter of one of our members* 
Her motherless babe was left with the distracted parents* 
These are but results of the ignorance and superstition 
due to the religious systems of the old land*2 

Later Dr* Lawford moved to Smoky Lake and then to 

3 

Edmonton where he retired. He passed away in 1952. He had 
begun a great work, he had done a great work and he was now 
assured that the great work would carry on for the reins fell 
into the hands of one of his proteges Taranty Hannochko a 
product of the Pakan mission. The work of Dr. Lawford and 
his colleagues is only partially seen in the printed page. 

Rev. Gr.A. Sauder, still in the active ministry in 1959 at 
Beverly adjacent to Edmonton, as a summer student lived and 
worked with Dr* Lawford. In Mr. Sauder f s accounts and life 
some of the spirit of Dr. Lawford can be seen. The mention 
and appreciation of Dr. Lawford 1 s great work at almost every 
Annual and General Conference during his active ministry at 
Pakan is also a tribute to his endeavor. 


Ibid., Vol. VI, p. 506* 
ibid* , Vol. VIII, p* 1399. 

Mrs. J.K. Smith believes this date is fairly accurate* 

















100 


Lament Hospital 

Dr. Lawford was not alone in his work. H.R. Smith a 
medical doctor whose thought, feeling and purpose were a product 
of the Methodist Church T s "Forward Movement for Missions" 
settled in 1901 at Star. In 1902 he married Dr. Martha Doyle. 

A year later her tragic death occurred and Dr. Smith left his 
work in the hands of Dr. A.E. Archer. Dr. Archer had volunteered 
for foreign work but had become convinced of the Galician need. 

He became one of the truly great Methodist laymen. When the 
railway skirted the district to the south in 1904 he moved his 
practice from Star to the nearest station Lamont. 

At this time the nearest hosptial was one operated by 
the Presbyterian Church at Vegreville. Dr. Archer made constant 
trips there for operations. The need for a hospital was urgent. 
Under Dr. Archer's chairmanship, a local committee was set up. 

Presentation of the need to the Methodist Church by himself 

1 

and Rev. J.K.Smith and the great assistance of Dr. T.C. Buchanan, 
Superintendent of Missions resulted in the building of a 15 bed 
hospital at Lamont in 1912, at the cost of $15,500. The community 
raised $13,000 and the Board of Home Missions contributed $2,500. 
The hospital was deeded to the Methodist Church which assumed 
responsibility for management and contributed annually to its 
operation. With the assistance. Dr. W.T. Rush the hospital was 
greatly extended. A second, third and fourth stage of a building 

1 " ~ 1 

Personal account from Mrs. J.K. Smith. 













q ' 




r 


O ii U. 


* 






» 


Li'. V > 








•- v f/OB '■ .! i 












■ 






. : 


t 


■ c ; . . • ' : t 

i ; CT V ' . .' n ill ' C :•? u JJ fj v'jl OO bfii'.i i 1 • j,;- if< 

, 




!. J „• 


J J' 






c 












101 - 


prograjn were completed along with nurses 1 residences and a 
nurses’ training program. The Board of Home Missions financed 
most of the hospital building and the W.M.S. most of the nurse’s 
residence and training program. 

Dr. Archer and Dr. Rush were encouraged by the mission¬ 
ary authorities of the Methodist Church in their medical efforts 
to help these new Canadians both English and non-English speak¬ 
ing to understand and practice the Canadian ways of life. The 
cultivation of sanitary habits and forms of medical cleanliness 
were in themselves a tremendous task. It is impossible to 
calculate the contribution these doctors made in shaping and 
molding the character of these new settlers in the Lamont area 
and protecting an uneducated people against disease and accident 
and teaching them to understand and practice the laws of health. 

The impact of this medical work is seen in the following excerpt 
from a report dated 1912: 

Ten years ago, in the early days of the hospital 
at Lamont, in Alberta, it was very difficult to get 
sick Ukrainians to enter the hospital door, for in the 
peasant life of Europe entrance into a hospital was a 
last resort. But there is no such difficulty today in 
the large area surrounding Lamont thanks to the skill 
of two devoted medical men and a group of nurses who 
are building nobly the structure of a Canadian nation.1 

This work also owes much to Mrs. Archer who for 
fourteen years gave all the anesthetics and to,Rev. J.K. Smith 
who acted as chaplain and interpreter in the hospital while 
working in the Ukrainian Colony. Mrs. Smith states that Dr. Archer 
could understand Ukrainian quite well but was hesitant in speaking 


W.G. Smith, Building the Nation , p. 1SS-1&9* 





r 














102 - 


it as he wanted to be sure he was giving the right medical 
directions* As a result her husband, was constantly interpret¬ 
ing and became very fluent in medical terms* Mrs* Smith 
remembers when her husband explained the need for an operation 
to a Ukrainian with a ’telescoping bowel 1 • Finally the Ukrainian 
who could not speak English consented to the operation providing 
Mr* Smith stayed beside him until he was asleep in case he wish¬ 
ed to say something to Dr* Archer who might not understand him. 
Mr* Smith dressed in medical garb stayed until his patient was 
anethesized and was then invited by Dr c Archer to remain and 
witness the abdominal operation* Mrs* Smith wondered why her 
husband was away so long but when he returned at noon, "look¬ 
ing pale and green", she needed no explanation*1 This pioneer- 
medical center of the Methodist and later United Church is today 
still a highly qualified center for training nurses and has had 
two of its doctors Dr* Archer, and Dr* Young hold the position 
of President of the Canadian Medical Association. 

W.M.S. Missions 

Along side this tremendous work which was done under 
the direct auspices of the Mission Board of the Methodist Church 
was the equally great work of the Woman’s Missionary Society of 
the Methodist Church* The Church realized the value of this 
Society of women and aided and co-operated with them in every 

possible way. 

_ — ■■■ T — -- — — ; ” “ 

Personal account from Mrs. J*K* Smith. 






[,-•)/ 7 .f, 

~ v ; 


. 


' ■ c . 




7. $ ; -j • 

. 






? ■ 




1 ' 

• di .. .to 

o 






* 

■ 

. 

t • 

« 

:'/ • T[£v1 3 


















. ' •> ' . . 7 "7 -f ,/V . : 


' 

•’ ' '' 1 ' X .to : i‘ ■ 


-*77 -:' . 


• c ' 




-.71X0 j.i ‘'7 7 


; 7 ' v ■ j ; ... 






7-77 .77., 7. 

-•1 'to 

j 


? 


" i ■’ ■ r r • • r , r-\ . ,. ~. 

.*1-1 7 ' * •’ •• 

* 


“ : . 7 V, ;r 

- 










n 


- 103 - 


Since the beginning of work by Dr. Lawford in 1901 
the W.M.S. had desired to send teachers among the Galicians of 
Northern Alberta. However, the absence of a home or school or 
boarding place for the workers seemed to bar the way. In June 
1904 Miss Munro formerly of Japan and Miss Edmunds a trained 
nurse determined to face the difficulties. With a tent and 
other provisions for housekeeping they started for Alberta. 

At Winnipeg they met a member of the Greek Independent 
Church who on learning of their mission gave them a letter of 
introduction to the head of the Greek Church near Pakan. At 
Edmonton they purchased a horse and buggy and in company with 
two ministers who were going out to their new fields they drove 
the seventy-five miles to Dr. Lawford 1 s at Pakan. The roads be¬ 
ing mere trails, deep sloughs and broken bridges were different 
from those they had been accustomed to in Ontario. With only 
one day’s rest at Dr. Lawford’s they set out to survey the 
country. After assessing several townships they finally selected 
a settlement north of Pakan, Wahstao, at which to build their 
headquarters. This settlement, twelve miles from the nearest 
post office and four miles from the nearest English settler 
consisted of 300 families without a school or church or any 
provisions for teaching the children. Few of the people could 
read or write. 

The lumber, brick, lime, and hardware for the new mission 
home had to be floated down the river from Edmonton, a distance 
of a hundred miles. Living in a tent and boarding their work- 






«' 

„ 0 

t 

■ .•.■ J' • 

- 

* 


•j.uOd H il v ! 'i 




f 






' 




' 1 O r X >' 












« ~ 

, ... t : ! i 

* . 

. \ f * . * 

. 

• < * 

. ( 






C -10 


f : !>or> ' o 


* 




c ' t c - 
C 









- 104 - 


men Miss Munro and Miss Edmunds watched the erection of their 
house which though small was to serve as a home, school, preach¬ 
ing place, hospital and general headquarters. Sunday School 
was begun in the tent and day school, with one pupil, in the 
house when it was finished on October 3, 1904. 

Another worker, Miss Edith Weekes B.A. arrived in 1905. 
Until this time the chief draw back in the work among the Galicians 
had been the inability to speak their language. Dr. Lawford 
had received some help from a book published in Winnipeg by 
two Austrian immigrants about their language, but he still relied 
very much on an interpreter. Miss Weekes sent to Austria for 
more books and when they arrived was able through her knowledge 
of German to piece together a grammar and lexicon. This was a 
vital step not only for her but for all the workers who followed. 
Dr. Lawford in 1910 in emphasizing the need for a complete 
Ruthenian Grammar stated: 

There was hot in existence an English-Ruthenian 
grammar. In the beginning of this work, I tried to 
get one, but in vain. But Miss Weekes, our W.M.S. 
worker, has translated through the German a series 
of grammar exercises in Ruthenian and arranged a 
vocabulary to suit the need of a Christian worker. 

I believe we should arrange with Miss Weekes to have 
these published for the use of our future workers.1 

The growth and quality of the mission work was 
phenomenal. The young women reported that: 

In two short years our Galician work has outgrown 
the pioneering stage,...In the day school twenty were 
enrolled last year...Reading, writing and speakir^ 

English have greatly improved, and there is a marked 


1 

M.B. Volo VII, p. 58. 






o:. o r : ’ ° h-‘^" . Lfix cam/, ■•. e 

i • - < :' 

9 t - 

C r - . ' < ' V I j. I 

» C ' ' I i ■ U'V :■■££< 




- »■' ■ ■ ■ • ... <... > > * ' . .... .; ,/ ... ' ; 

« . 

- 

J „ 


- on 


<1 


* 

‘ t < 


t 

' 






. : 

J. 

Ctij 





■ 

'<■' ■. *1 all mm mmmJ 

■ ' 7 .'-H. 1: ; 




: 

. ' ' , 1 ■. H , ■ .or •• • 

• • • c 

• . .. , c . ‘ 





- 105 - 


advance in neatness and cleanliness. There are five or 
six in the second book, and their understanding of English 
is said to be surprising. It will not be long before, in 
many homes, there will be a child ready to interpret in 
simple matters. The School Inspector, Mr. Fletcher, visits 
the school, and the government grant, will be received, 
since two of our missionaries, Miss Weekes, B.A. and Miss 
Chace, are qualified teachers, are complying with tine school 
regulations of the Province. 

The attendance of the Sunday School is most encouraging, 
there having been as many as thirty present, not counting 
the very small children, of the men who come for the after 
service. The children who have advanced sufficently to 
attempt Bible reading are deeply interested. It is to be 
the owner of a book and to be able to read it, which is 
beyond the highest accomplishment of the majority of the 
parents. The older children have memorized the Lord T s 
Prayer, the twenty-third Psalm, the Commandments, selected 
portions of the Sermon on the Mount, and many hymns; and as 
a reward have been given Testaments. One Sunday the therm¬ 
ometer stood at thirty below zero at eight o T clock a.m. 

At ten o’clock there were present fourteen at Sunday School. 

A second Sunday School was opened near Shandro, seven miles 
distant, in October, 1905, but without a day school the 
progress is slower. 

A night school for men and boys in winter, women’s meet¬ 
ings whenever possible, house to house visiting and Bible 
reading all through the settlement, with language study, fill 
up the time for our two teachers, and of Miss Cartwright, 
our evangelistic worker.1 

Co-operation between the W.M.S. workers and Dr. Lawford 
was actually at the point of being one task with divided duties. 
Whene Lawfo rd and his fellow workers preached, the W.M.S. women 
conducted Sunday School and where the immigrants needed assist¬ 
ance, friendship, and the knowledge of Christ, Dr. Lawford’s 
mission and the W.M.S. were one. 

As the number of immigrants increased the W.M.S. sent 
in more workers. Miss Weekes and Miss McLean, a new arrival, 
moved sixteen miles north of Wahstao to Kolokreeka (present day 
Smoky Lake) to establish a mission. In the dead of winter these 


Harriet L. Pratt, Story of the Years, V ol. 1, p. 125-126. 













< 


c 









4 







S 



r 







to.. 


x 




- 106 - 


women moved into an unfurnished house and proceeded to form a 
community center with the purpose of transforming the down¬ 
trodden peasants of south-eastern Europe into self-reliant, 
self-respecting Canadians, Miss Weeks described the house 
as "cozy and comfortable. We have a splendid stable and drive 

shed under one roof with a loft large enough to hold hay for 

1 

the whole winter". The young women also mention the vital part 
played by their horses "Cricket and Spider" at Kolokreeka and 
"Peter and Pat" at Wahstao, The methods used by these young 
women were at first the traditional visit involving a formal 
service of singing, reading, prayer, etc. However it was not 
long before this charged. 

We are learning the value of making opportunities. 

If a woman is weeding her garden we offer to help, we get 
close in touch in a few minutes, and often without a book 
or anything that suggests another faith (of which they are 
so much afraid) we find that she is deeply in earnest. To 
the question ’Can we have our sins forgiven?’ many a time 
they say, ’Oh it would be good to know, but from where can 
we knov/. ’ 2 

This method of work was especially valuable among the 
women as the women had very little chance for education. Their 
husbands often left home during the summer to work on railway 
gangs leaving the woman in complete charge of the family. Thus 
the average day of a Ukrainian woman was strenuous and left little 
time for education or Church activities. A typical day for a 
Ukrainian woman was: 


1 

Mrs. E.S. Strachan, The Story of the Years, Vo3. Ill, p, 73o 

2 

Ibid, . Vol. Ill, p. 75. 








5 r. o 



t hm 



-j. 


, 

' ■ ■ '■ , : 


■ y-:+:r : Oils rttfsM *i:.$noo V:t Jtais: c co 

t ’ 





~ 

0 , 









ii.. r 


« 












9 
















. 






fit 


z z- 


- 

• ■- . . - ' : r ' ■ • ' ' • 

? 

c 

■ 

- f i . f c ' 

■ ' ■ ■' ■ ■■ ■' :i." ' v ■ j. ' ' o ■ ^ J-j . 

« - • ■ ; 

' ■ • v. m.i: v ;■ • ■ ' v. 

* . . ■ ■ 

7 : 'M>. ,:: ■ v . . , 1 , • ■ ■. . , • ■ 

: * , . . 


: 


% • - >it 






. < ' * 






- 107 - 


She gets up between four and five in the morning 
and goes to bed at eleven at night* When she gets up 
she does the chores outside, feeds the cattle and milks 
the cows* She then prepares breakfast and washes the 
dishes, after which she follows the family to the field 
where she may hoe or drive a gang plow,stook etc. She 
comes in shortly before dinner, prepares it and cleans 
up, a matter of one and a half or two hours, then returns 
to the field until eight o 1 clock when she milks, after 
which she gets supper*1 

Despite this the W.M.S* workers realized the vital 
need for education* It was pointed out by one of the mission¬ 
ary’s reports that: 

Another woman in the hospital when we read to her 
f I am the way, the truth and the life 1 said ’Oh, if I 
had Jesus, I have the way, the truth and the life—with¬ 
out reading’• This had been her grief that she could 
not read and she thought without reading she could not 
find Jesus • On another occasion, I overtook a lad one 
day and gave him a ride. I spoke of seeing him at the 
sacrament service and asked if he did not want to follow 
Jesus© His answer was ’Very much I do, but I do not know. 

I cannot read’.2 

She reports that a chum of his walks four miles to school and 
is seldom absent. ”It is pathetic to see them treasuring up 
the new words on bits of paper to take home and learn during 
the week 1 ’© 

The value of the school these women started in their 
little home was realized by all the settlers© By day the child¬ 
ren attended, and on winter nights men and boys attended© How¬ 
ever it soon became evident that day school was not enough to 
fill the great need. Many children lived too far from school 
and often the roads and trails were impassable and home conditions 
not conducive to study© To relieve this situation the missionaries 


Charles H. Young, The Ukr aini an Canadians> p. 

2 

Mrs. E.S. Strachan, The Story of the Ye ars, Vol. lll,p® 75» 


























: 0 . 1 ' 


TIf 


**V< ,/i > 


0 ■ 0 


■ c j bev/. r r>:oo;bliiit' \ f;ib 
site; 










- 10S - 


made room for six resident boarders at Wahstao and in 1910-11 
four at Kolokreeka. More parents desired their children to 
board at the school and thus gain a better education so plans 
were made to enlarge the building at Kolokreeka* During the 
winter of 1911, fourteen teams were used to haul lumber sixty 
miles for a new dormitory at Kolokreeka. Registration at the 
new school and dormitory during the winter months of 1913-14 
was thirty day-pupils and thirty-one boarders. Here the girls 
also learned the fundamentals of nutrition and general house¬ 
keeping. In conjunction with the school, Kolokreeka was still 
a community mission. In 1913-14, 1,100 Ruthenians came there 
with various needs and requests, 2&7 for treatment of toothaches, 
colds and wounds, £3 to have letters read and written. In 
1907-& the government had built a school but operated it only in 
the summer from May to October. The settlers were made partly 
responsible for the upkeep, .which helped increase the attend¬ 
ance. Miss Ruby Robinson a W.M.S. Missionary was appointed 
teacher of one of the government schools thus giving her an 
opportunity to carry on the cause of the Church. Still the need 
was great. In 1913 a. survey made by the Women T s Organization of 
the United Farmers reported: 

that more than one-third of the children of the province 
were retarded by reason of no schools and closed schools; 
that in many places there are no churches, no Sunday Schools, 
no Bible teaching in the day schools; no Bible teaching or 
any instruction in the home; many of the rural school 
districts have no church service and no Sunday School; that 
thirty-five percent of those having church services have no 
Sunday schools; that where they have religious service only 
about one-half of the young people are reached; that one- 



> 






■ 


Xi J . 




t 


o 








g 


— 









I 







X- " 11 '' 


t 












, o •/. 




, * « ' * 

;. i rlX a Xo oil OB ’ •.!?.. xvox vtio- l.o oao ’ic "i od o 

. 

r • -■■• i 

: 

■ : -T f f. , X ' , ■ , . j :ic < ' XX' X'-’Xi . > «" 1 ‘X C Ci 1 ' ' X 

* -,. : . : .. .. ■. X ' ' Xx x : xx . x.x: \ 5 

c , • ; • : • . • x 

■ ’ft X oiio") v '£ " • x •-*' ill 

l 

: , x: ; • , ’ ; : vxc e rto xxaiu 

. X . ' 

■ : / .X-x;: X - • . - : ; XX or 

'l : . X. XX : • : < ' ■ ■ V 1 J xJXX-X.l ■ : 




109 - 


half of the children of rural Alberta are growing up in 
entire ignorance of the Christian religion^ and only one- 
third get any kind of religious teaching®1 

In comparison with this general situation in Alberta 
the great success of the work among the Ukrainian people can 
be realized from the report in 1916 that only 2,108 Ukrainians 
ten years and over were unable to speak English® 

The hardships encountered by these women were many and 
varied® As with Dr® Lawford f s work their work was also handi¬ 
capped by the old religions of the people® The Greek priests 
on their occasional visits did not accept the visiting, Bible 
teaching and temperance teaching of these Methodists. At first 
this reduced Sunday School attendance but in time it was observed 
that there was"a growing spirit of independence and freer thought 
among the people"® 

Miss Chase a successor at Kolokreeka stated "the 
strategic importance of the public school cannot be over 
emphasized. It is humanly speaking the surest weapon that 
can be used against ignorance and bigotry®" 

Nor can the physical hardships encountered by these 
young women be minimized. They drove 2,500 to 2,700 miles on 
rough roads in a few months® Their work was further hampered 
because the daily distance was limited by the necessity of being 
home at night as: "there were no stopping places by the way, 
and there are disadvantages about staying overnight in a one 

--p— ———- ' 

W.G® Smith, Building the Nation, p. 182. 













. .... t ' . ■’ ' • 

* 

. 

. 2j . ■ 

■ 

. 






110 - 


roomed house"o 

Dr, Lawford told more of their hardships coupled with 
devotion when he wrote: 

Miss Sanford, our W.M.S. worker from Wahstao, is at 
present in quarantine here, suffering from diphtheria® 

Miss Sanford brought in a child who had blood-poisoning 
in the foot. As she was not feeling well herself, I 
found, on examination, that diphtheria was the cause. 

Had it not been for Miss Sanford’s kindness to the child, 
her own illness might have been left until it was too late® 
We expect her to return to her work next week.l 

The courage of these young women can be seen when we 
realize that most of them were from cultured homes in the East 
and knew nothing of the language and customs of these new 
Canadians. Miss McLean in 1913 after five years of work married 
Rev. P.Gr. Sutton a fellow worker among the Austrians, but in 
three months passed on. This was the extent of service of the 
W.M.S. workers of the Methodist Church® 


Urban and Industrial Missions 


The Galicians or Austrians as they began to be called 
were an agricultural people and had come to Canada with the view 
of farming® Most of them settled in the established colonies® 
However, some settled in cities or drifted to mining or rail¬ 
road camps in order to make enough money to start farming or to 
keep their families. Many of those who entered the cities never 
returned to the farm® Adding to this urban population of 
Ukrainians were young people who drifted from the colonies into 


M.B., Vol. VII, pa 34a 









* 

.■ 

: [ 








' 

.. ■ i. ■ i 

, o 








. • 

c t 

: •. • 

. ’ ii ) 8 &' iJ'i £1 r - : : i 


: 




; ,1 : t : . !“■ 


i’cc .... 

^ ■ aiivti •: 








' ' , LC " : C- I ii .Ov; !' 0 J. : (- S‘.l " } ' 

<\ :: 

• ’ . ■ v‘ • j "• ■ .. vC i';. - «... J ‘ H J ' 






i r i u 


- 








e*x e vi 




< * “ 






Ill - 


the cities in search of jobs® The men experienced only in 

agriculture and unaccustomed to the city ways of life were 

often mistreated, hoodwinked and in general taken advantage 

of* Many young girls from the settlement north-east of Edmonton 

came to Edmonton to enter domestic service* These wholesome, 

trustful girls untrained and with no knowledge of city life or 

or the language often started on the wrong foot* The W.M.S. 

saw the need and in 190$ rented a single room in the east-end 

of Edmonton for this protective work. The work expanded 

rapidly and soon two rooms were acquired in three different 

1 

locations in Edmonton. In 1911 a permanent location was 
secured for this ”Ruthenian Home for Girls”* The home not 
only provided shelter, but offered to the perplexed and worried 
girl sympathetic and discriminating advise. The Home Department 
of the W.M.S. reported to the General Conference of 1914: 

The outstanding feature of the Austrian work was the 
erection in Edmonton a large and well planned ”Home and 
School for Ruthenian Girls,” which more than justified 
its existence from the opening day* The management of 
the Home and the classes held in it, visiting Ruthenian 
girls employed in restaurants and other places, and conduct¬ 
ing sewing classes and Sunday schools in two places, suburbs 
of''the city, form the chief work of our three missionaries *2 

Under the direction of Rev. W.H. Pike a home of a 
religious, social and protective character for new Canadians 
was also opened in Edmonton. This home had as its objective 
the assistance and guidence of young boys end men seeking work 
in the city. Rev. Pike had come to Alberta from Newfoundland* 


This original building is new part of Edmonton 1 s Y.W.C.A. 
J. P.G. Conf., 1914, p. 231. 







. 

. • ' < j 1, i At , 

*-• . 


c ■ • 
















■ 


• f r - 










:uo'i ••X 7 i.‘\. . 

: 




c *. J J".r. Xv.. !'.no 

i Oil .. 












J.vi. t r: , •..: ,r;oJ:' ; 

■- 

t 




. 


: . 

j c 


.. t . 




■!* o:;Iv: ■ >o 

t 







j 




' [ j ; 

o » 

.. : ' c ; 










= ’ . 



112 - 


At the Alberta Conference in 1909 Dr. Lnwford impressed upon 
him the needs of the Austrians. As a result Mr. Pike received 
his call and began by spending a year at Pakan studying the 
language and customs of the Slavic people. Transferring to 
Edmonton in 1911 he began a mission in a house with a spare 

1 

room in which he could talk, counsel and teach the new Canadians. 
The problems he was dealing with are best described in his own 
words: 


We find overcrowding and unsanitary conditions in 
many of the homes and boarding houses breeding disease, 
immorality and vice. There are fiends who traffic in 
innocent girls who are all too easily caught by the 
glitter of cheap and gaudy attractions and are frequently 
being lead to rain. What shall we do for four hundred 
young men who frequent the pool rooms and the saloon 
and the dance? How shall we change the flow of the 
stream from flowing towards anarchy and infidelity and 
guide the people into the ways of true citizenship and 
fellowship with the Divine? What shall we do to counter¬ 
act the teaching of a religious system which declares 
that the more education a man gets the more the Lord 
darkens his mind, and the good faith is true education? 

And further, that the priest is responsible for the souls 
of the people to whom he ministers, no matter whether they 
sin or not". What shall we do, I ask, to bring in the reign 
of the higher and nobler things for this people.2 

The methods Mr. Pike used in coping with these problems 
suited the situation, he reported: 

The past few months have been very busy ones. With the 
launching of our Ruthenian paper in December we opened a 
reading-room in the same building, which we have named 
Ruthenian Headquarters. We have provided newspapers in 
different languages that the people may read in their own 
language the news of the world. Games also have been 
provided and offer amusement and diversion to those who 


-— -- — * ’ “ ~~ 

In the 1920*3 Mr. Pike did further work in Beverly. 

He also heloed found Buchanan United Church and McQueen ? s Mission, 
(now Bissel}. 

2 

M.3., Vo l. VII, p. 522. 





. 

■; ■ I "\r ; .. : y 1-rr,;yY-. 

( ) ■ ‘ • ; •y (■:; ‘ 

■ t;rf : ; .r. i.c Y 


. f- v Y ■ u i ; 

. ■ 

■ : ' V ■' " j ; ' 

-• 'y P>: ID ' 

I: ' C L.r /.! • ' •, 


: 


Y ' '■■■• . ' 

u; dJ 






t'lai & net 

YYYY ; 








i'r'iiJ vl ■ - ;'J ric i.. 


alt;. 


‘ ■ • . t 

''• c 
c 

t ' c 


' 

c • e 




' • \ 


^ic-ctod; 




. 

•' ‘i Y . : • '■ .. it.*; 

« " ; ■ - ; / • ; 

. 




5 . * 









- 113 - 


come to the roomso Three nights a week find us busy 
with classes studying English®...Early in January we 
opened a Sunday evening service in the rooms,®®.We 
held a Saturday evening sociable not long since, and 
had twenty-five of the young mfen in. Various games 
were indulged and a little refreshment also® Then 
after a talk on Citizenship, we sang together in 
Ruthenian, "What a Friend we have in Jesus," after 
which we closed with prayer. The following week I 
was invited with the boys to a sociable at the 
"Ruthenian Home for Girls". We went and had a most 
enjoyable time. It was an excellent thing for the 
fellows and girls, for they never get anything of a 
similar nature in the Greek Church.1 

The immediate result can be seen from the following 

account: 


Early in January we opened a Sunday evening service 
in the rooms, with an attendance of five. Last evening 
we had the joy of preaching to an audience of thirty and 
had a blessed time. We have the help of four young men— 
Austrians—who were converted recently at 3eulah Mission. 

One of them has been going out into the lanes and byways 
and compelling the people to come in. Last night I saw 
him come in with three men whom he had found in a pool- 
room across the way playing cards, and who did not want to 
come to the service. However, he kept at them until they 
threw down the cards and came to the meeting. Two of the 
young men were at once put on trial—according to Discipline. 
If they prove worthy they will be received into full 
connection. They are taking their part in the services, 
testifying and praying, and are indeed proving their faith 
by their words.2 

Mr. Pike also had trouble with the Greek priests: 

We met a bit of opposition now and again, which does 
us no greater injury than to hinder the work for a few days. 
The priest has been getting after us and has been denouncing 
us from the pulpit. The newspaper [Methodist Ukrainian 
Language Newspaper} aroused his ire to such an extent that 
on a recent Sunday he spent an hour and a half denouncing 
it in no uncertain tone. Before his tirade, he took the 
precaution to consecrate it by sprinkling the unclean thing 
generausly with holy water in order that he might not be 
polluted by handling it in his pulpit. However, after he 
had consecrated and, throwing it on the floor, spitefully 


Ibidl. Vol. VIII, p. 1405-1406. 

2 

Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 1405o 










t 




■ ,:.J u$ i . r -id* ■ 

' 

1 J ■ 








- 114 - 


placed his foot upon it and spat upon it. He did us 
a good turn, though, in the way of advertisement, for 
the next day we sold every copy that remained in the 
office. The people were solemnly warned to keep away 
from us, not to attend the night school, not even to 
enter the building. But it’s like water on a duck T s 
back, for they are coming to us—possibly to see if we are 
are black, as painted,1 

A similar center for non-English speaking immigrants 
was started in Calgary in 1914. In other centers the regular 
ministers were urged to give attention to the needs of these 
people. 


Alberta College, a Methodist Institution in Edmonton 
also played its part by offering a higher education to the 
Ukrainians who wished to go on. Scholarships were provided, 
Eriglish classes were given and in 1914 it was suggested that 
the course of studies be modified to fit the Austrian work 
better. 


Many of the Ukrainians ventured to the mining centers 
of the Crow’s Nest Pass in search of work to support their 
families. The conditions resulting when these agricultural 
people were confined to a congested area were like those of 
the city; in many cases squalor and tragedy. In 1911 the W,M.S, 
sent Mss Hanna Paul to initiate work in the neighborhood of 
Frank, Alberta, With the threat of another landslide the head¬ 
quarters was moved to Femie, B.C. from which point Michel, 

Natal and other places in the Pass were visited. 

The need in the coal centers was seen by a young Methodist 
minister W.T. Young. In 1910 he began work in Blairmore. His 


T-”----- 

Ibid,, Vol, VIII, p. 1406 9 




. - ■ ' . . 

* . • ? c : 

. 

% . ; 
c • . * 


c ? 

: .1 r. ■ r; 

o . / 



- ■ ? 


.. 


. 

- ■ •• 






' 

5 » 

. "■ . ' ■ r ; V.- 

« 


T . • / 

„ 

* - * ’ c • : ■ . • 

„ c - 

< ■ ' . V . t . 

. - . 

. 




- 115 - 


technique was unorthodox in comparison to the average Methodist 
Minister,, The Slavic people he dealt with had no use for the 
Roman Church (to which they nominally belonged through their 
baptism) nor any church for that matter. Mr. Young wore no 
collar, nor anything with which he could be identified with 
the despised Roman Church. He worked chiefly among the young 
people at first with a stress on sports. The people could not 
realize their community or their young people amounting to very 
much. They laughed when he suggested starting a rink. How r ever 
it was not long before they saw' the value of training the young 
people and co-operated gladly. The hockey team made a magnificent 
showing in the province and in 1926-27 still under the leader¬ 
ship of Mr. Young won the Alberta Junior Championship. The 
baseball team during the same years won the Western Junior Champ¬ 
ionship. This work with the young people was the impetus for 
getting the adults interested. In the evening Mr. Young conduct¬ 
ed classes in English and Canadian culture with the adults. A 
tribute was paid to Mr. Young in the Missionary Society’s report 
in 1922: 

In Blairmore there is an Independent Union Church 
served since inauguration by ’Billy Young’ a Methodist 
minister who has spent twelve years in the Pass. His 
ministry is helping to a very large degree to make the 
whole region a better place for men and boys and women 
to live in, and a safer place for girls and boys.l 

This work of Dr. Young reflects one of the great 
strengths of the Methodist Church—the ability to accomodate 
to any situation where the work of the kingdom could be furthered. 

—~~ , 
Annual Report of the Missionary Society of the Methodist 

Church Alb ert~ConTe~r er?cTe ^' 7*19227 pY XXIVY ~ 














o 

• ... .' 

C'- I' J, .. \ •• . 







C 

3 


.i 


. 

> 






o 



■ 

3 

“ 



- 

. . 

“ 


„ 


* 

. 




: 

. 

? ; ? ■ : 

* 

•■■■■' ■ t 

• : ‘ - . : ' ; V ' ■ ' V ■ ' • 


■ ■' -■ 

■ 








p • . - -_^ _ _ 






- 116 - 


Dr, Young was not a regular minister of the Methodist Church 
in the Crows Nest Pass during his years of service; but received 
leave of absence from it each year in order to work in the 
Blairmore Community Church, The Slavic people in the area so 
afraid of the rigidness and dictatorship of a narrow church were 
more open to this community type organization. This type of 
organization and a man like Mr. Young resulted in a great work 
among the new Canadians of ithis coal raining area. 

Thus the Church 1 s social attitude broadened as the needs 
appeared. As a chameleon changes its color but not its essence 
so the church changed and modified its approach to bring all 
types of people to the feet of Christ. The Methodist Church 
was truly "all things to all people". This Church which had 
been almost exclusively one of the ministry was now providing 
medical missionaries, hospitals, social workers, institutional 
homes and social centers. Young people played together, talked 
together, planned together in a wholesome Christian atmosphere. 
Older people from other lands learned the English language and 
Canadian culture. Young children received an education. From 
the confined task of rescuing human souls the church saw its 
responsibility for the mental, physical and social well being 
of the community. Sin was eradicated at its source besides being 
treated in its manifestations. The character of the young W.M.S. 
women and the Methodist ministers and missionaries along with 
their work created a social consciousness which has been a large 
factor in initiating the social institutions and Christianity we 


in Alberta enjoy today 




■ . 




J .■ I . 1 




vJ I ■ 






; 




- 








. '. \i> : 0*1 n ■ • . ;• 

. 

' : V; - i ■ ■ . . ; ,' J. ' < 

t * 

« . ’ ^ 

* ■ - 

■. r, J' -; ■: oriel* 








.i.aov' ::, [j *;. t;■• -:;o,uo 


t 


- 


. 


■- 





. 

:',JKi» i. . 





■ 


1" i‘r J 1 

- 

v '.t/ 





CHAPTER IX 


EVALUATION OF THE METHODS AND ASSESSMENT OF THE RESULTS OF 
METHODIST MISSION WORK AMONG SETTLERS IN ALBERTA PRIOR TO 1914* 

Eighty-five years ago the prairies and parklancls of 
Alberta were the range for huge herds of buffalo. Near sloughs 
and small lakes there can still be seen triple depressions as 
if an immense three wheeled jauggernaut once rolled toward them. 
Along the center track strolled the cow buffalo as the calves 
romped on the fainter outer tracks. Huge rocks, the remains of 
the last ice age, still lie exposed on the prairies and bear the 
polished edges of centuries of buffalo who have rubbed against 
them. The bleached skulls of giant bulls and the memory of the 
last of the hunters is all that remains. A process has been at 
work. Today Alberta is different. In eighty-five years—no, in 
little more than sixty years a million people have formed a 
community. This community sends oil and gas to markets 2,000 
miles away, it boasts world wheat championships, it has schools 
and universities equal to any in the world, it has sons who lead 
others in law, in politics, in sports and in the arts. How has all 
this come about? The answer lies in a people who came to make 
Alberta a home; a people with hopes, and dreams, and faith, from 
countries where in many cases creativity was stymied by archaic 
systems; a people who welcomed work and hardship and isolation 
in return for a chance to release their ability. 


- 117 - 



■ 

. ‘ 








. - 

* 

Ci 1C:.. < cf J:-> i,<o 

- 

i c- f . -'orr L $ -rso ‘ .■ 

c 1 • 

- • : < . j 

. 

< — ~ - . 


• . t ; j:- ' , . < 

. 




* 


c 




J ■ . ■ • 

• t : • ? - 

■ 

t •• < < 

11 

- 






- 113 - 


However surely people think they have broken from the 
old way, either deliberately or due to the fact that they are 
5,000 miles from it there inevitably remain traces of it. 

Through this deep ingraining old country attitudes to government, 
religion and family were brought to Alberta, in many cases to the 
detriment of this new and free country; but in many more cases 
to the benefit of the developing cosmopolitan culture. 

The purpose of this paper has been to deal with one 
force within this matrix of an evolving nation; the Methodist 
Church. In one sense the Methodist Church had squatters rights 
in Alberta because its Rundle, Sinclair, Woolsey, Steinhauer 
and McDougalls have been the first to come. As most forces it 
produced both benefits and hindrances for the new land; but in 
my opinion the former has been its bright star. 

The basic governmental structure of the Methodist Church 
was one of its advantages. It was not only nation-wide but had 
spiritual ties with its counterparts, Methodist and otherwise, 
in Britain, the United States and throughout the world. With 
this "Rock of Gibralter" solidarity the people and the Government 
knew that they could rely upon it. At the same time this was a 
hindrance in that many of the immigrants, especially those from 
South-East Europe, came to Canada in order to escape overshadow¬ 
ing organizations. The fact however, that the Methodist Church 
was completely Canadian with no ties to Rome or Moscow and that 
it had much local autonomy outweighed this disadvantage. The 
Church was self-governing and moreover its courts were composed 






v ;I' . 















- t 



















< 








■ \ 



1 





























c 












• 



..C. 1 c 


































' V ' 









■ 

















* 








< 


t 



c 







» 


i.- 



* 













l 




















• 








j 















* 















- 











. 



i 



o bjI 







* 












■ii 














w o 

c . 



- 

•' ‘ • < • '• v ... / . : . ;• : 

- ■ : ' i . ■ . : t : : ' . - 

C 


. 











- 119 - 


throughout of an equal number of laymen and clergy. This was 
a freedom European countries had fought centuries to obtain. 

The homesteader of Alberta could make representations concerning 
the Sunday School his children attended to a Dominion body which 
could act; or a local businessman could fight the destitution 
caused by liquor through a Provincial and Dominion body to 
whom the government lawmakers would listen. Through the Methodist 
Church 1 s various Departments and Boards the settlers of Alberta 
had the advantage of religious publications of high quality for 
children, youth and adults, or loans to assist the building of 
their church or manse, or fellowship groups for young people, 
men, and women, and Sunday schools for the religious education 
of their children. 

Perhaps the greatest service of the Church was the men 
it sent to Alberta. Alberta was built by great men and great 
women and those whom the Church sent were conspicuous among 
them. The reason for this was the Methodist policy of looking 
first at the needs of the people and then searching for men to 
fill these needs. In reference to this policy the stationing 
system may on the surface appear to have been a little unfair 
to the ministers but when one realizes that these men dedicated 
themselves to God f s service then one can see that they actually 
chose their own destinationsthe places of need. Of course, some 
usually unfortunate appointments did occur but by and large the 
system was successful in Alberta’s formative years. Rotating 
the ministers, usually every three or four years had its advant- 


. 

* 

. 




» 








■ a 






■ . ■ c ^ ■ <. ; '; ,p 

* t 

? . c . \ 

. 

■ : 'P ■' : - P'-VlP . ■ 

. 

; ■. " r.ij'f ?■. u v . ju/;:- /, 

' 


od' i)• o -:i “lol .;r ,..P 

1 :' . . .■ - pt j:.i * . pj v < ■ 








. . : •; • 

o . 'i 

* 



ji-c ~i.-. i . 




. 

: ' :>0r' i.u vp 

•• p-ivp.p . IPilo' 

. ■: .. " ' 

v,v. ; .. oJ ■ .■ . ; \ .. ■; •/ 

1 . ■ 

< p' ;. , f r 











120 - 


ages in giving a variety of personalities at least one of whom 
was sure to appeal to everyone*. This short ministry at each 
point strengthened the local churches by forcing the local 
board to be the leaders of building projects and organizations® 

No one minister stayed long enough to give the continuity needed® 
On the other hand such an itinerant ministry prevented adequate 
rapport to develop between the minister and anyone "outside" 
the church® The reason the Church overlooked tnis was that it 
was a much narrower fellowship than our present day United 
Church and relied more on a complete, almost sudden self-giving 
to God® Present day psychology of religious experience has 
shown us other paths to Christian commitment involving counsel¬ 
ling and the development of rapport® Thus I believe that for 
the Methodists of pioneer Alberta the rotation of ministers was 
good but that a period of five or six years at each appointment 
would have been more satisfactory® 

Many of the ministers were recruited in Britain® On 
the surface this seems foolish; to bring cultured men to a vast 
pioneering area, especially when one thinks of the many recent 
immigrants who even today have such trouble adjusting to rural 
Alberta® But the facts of history show the opposite* These men 
brought from Britain proved to be the ablest ministers of the 
Methodist Church. This can be accounted for by the fact that 
they came realizing the task and thus consciously tried to adjust* 
Also, many of the settlers they worked among were British 
Methodists® Thus they were right at home® Behind all of this 


- 

X 'ooi ; . v ; 

* 

. 

> -■ „ 

' - • ” • ? • 

„ 

" . 4 ~@ • ■ .V. . L 

. 


. 






. . ? 

.oJ.v irc^c; dui. : L ov ;, n \ u.oJ new Ir/ml 

■ - 

* • • : . ■ . • 

' • ■' . < • ' : ' : .t : \.i i '• " ,‘t ■' ■ ' ' . 

* 

* ‘ . * - . \ ' 

, 
















121 - 


was of course the quality of men the Church chose. Tile train¬ 
ing and rigid examinations of the Church added "steelAn 
important part of the man-power other than the ministers were 
the probationers, summer students and lay preachers. Without 
these many settlers would have had no contact with the Church 
and would have been in a situation similar to that of the early 
Galician immigrants. The importance of these students and laymen 
can be seen in the examples cited, such as Daysland and Vermilion 
where there was only one ordained man with six or seven preaching 
assistants serving a large area. Tnese unordained men were often 
more effective in gaining the "rapport of present day psychology" 
as the settlers saw them on a more equal level than the ordained 
man with his characteristic "garb of the clergy". The lives 
of the ordained and unordained alike were effective in their 
sincerity. This was what most people looked for in a minister 
and this is what they found. A farm background of many of the 
preachers was effective in building Christianity through fixing 
binders and milking cows. This was "practical Christianity" 
to many a pioneer man and was an even more important method of 
cormnunica.tion with the non-English speaking pioneer. The effect¬ 
iveness of this method is vouched for by the success of Dr. Lawford 
among the Galicians. 

The appeal and effectiveness of the Church along strictly 
spiritual lines was increased in various ways. The Old Country 
methods of class and camp meetings were ineffective with Alberta f s 
scattered population and efforts put forth trying to revive them 


- - * - 

• ; v • ' ■ • - v' • -v , J ' : , ; L 

, n 

* - c 0 - ' 




: 


l 1 • £ . • 


■ • Icon xxi: 'xoi. be:Aa:L bSy^oo 3 or . cion* 

. 


. 

' 


’ o.:.-.oo r : o; o/o : 


'■ ' - ' . . L O ' ■ 0 • ■ 

. 


Ct . \ • ■ • j- 

«■ 

m 


n . n ~ .-j ■ : ro; - . - : L ;.r ■ loo 

» .. ' 


e ?; .-■'•: vj'Xo 


-l:.o - 

•• vL 00 - OX ;-V. O' ' [ j >: -O hi£>. oq.r-1,0 1 

•;•••■■■ . i 


t 


122 


(as the Minutes of every Annual Conference show) could have 
been used to greater advantage in other avenues. Visiting the 
homesteads was the great strength of the Methodist Church among 
the pioneers. Travelling evangelists were of some value. The 
Church was wise in choosing (as the records show) competent men 
for this task and refusing support to the occasional ecstatic. 

The Church took a great interest in the immigrants. 

Its method of contacting Methodists in Britain who intended to 
come to Canada, its surveys, its training of men, its multitud¬ 
inous efforts to greet immigrants, and the information it gave 
immigrants regarding their destination and the minister in charge 
were of great service both to the immigrant and the church itself. 
So often the first contacts made in a new country are the ones 
remembered. The Church was always among the first and in most 
cases made a good impression. 

As suggested in several places throughout this paper 
the ability and foresight of the Methodist Church to modify 
and even create or discard methods according to what the situation 
warranted was of prime importance to its success. As a true 
pioneer the Church could see the problem, see the resources and 
then improve. The improvision often resulted in a lasting con¬ 
tribution. For example: among the Galicians Dr. L&wford allowed 
questions and answers during the service, the W.M.S. workers 
weeded gardens in order to tell women of Christ, Dr. Young was 
given a leave of absence each year in order to serve the coal 
mining area. The new methods created were those of starting 




■' ■ ■ so \ ■ •' »Vc v v ’ o L 

•* 

>\ - vT. : ;i :• ' *S 

- 

C'0> {\?i -soxculs ) . : iL;acrno iJ' -■i.-Iv: uxwX’ 

* . • ' 3 i.: 


« 

v fil . 'us isj".: -> oo • '• acTi 

< - < <■ 

■. J t ; 

' : . 0 • O' . ■. ■ •, ..V 1. - •: . •. ; is 






100 L- i 















.... ' .. V. 

V*-' v. • ... r.L'I U Jcy.bvJ:J: ■ Li, .. . 

C" A r'i© DC '.’c; 

•' V j i L : . Xd 

■ •; " 

. 

„ U. : . . 

o . A A • < . 

« t ■ 

< 'C (.. 

* 






- 123 - 


social institutions like the Tf Ruthenian Home for Girls", 

Mr. Pike f s social center for Men, Alberta College for higher 
education and the publishing of the Ruthenian newspaper. 

Organizational changes occurred. Throughout its history 
in Western Canada the Church looked ahead. Alberta was first 
under Toronto Conference, then the Manitoba and North-West 
Conference and finally made an independent Conference. It was 
not subjected to outside authority nor was it pushed out on 
its own too soon. This sane, natural evolution which resulted 
in optimum service can be seen in the appointment of a General 
Superintendent of Home Missions and in the division of the Mission 
Board into Home and Foreign DepartmentSo Modification of the 
Church 1 s policies and practices can be seen on a local level 
when no offering was taken from penniless settlers (this was 
also effective although not meant to be in demonstrating the 
sincerity of the Church) and on a larger scale in social issues. 
The Church gradually became more aware of its social commitments. 

From the quite narrow Methodism practised in Eastern 
communities the Church took a far more liberal outlook in the 
West. Denominational lines were thin and the Church recognized 
this. It co-operated with other denominations and respected their 
rights. The Lutherans had pastors so the Methodists did not 
interfere but when the Galicians came with no priests the Church 
stepped in. Besides the immediate help this gave the Galicians, 
it stimulated the Greek Church to act. A delay by the Methodists 


5 ■ 




- ' \0i X.6'0 .. 


. 7 








0 

0 

• . - - vl »: ■ co 1 ... 

. 

; r 

* 

* 


. 

c 

. 0 • 


V 


^ V • 




■ • . ■ 0 
tec. - ■ 








< / 




.. 











- 124 - 


would have greatly increased the problem of adjustment between 
the Ukrainian and Canadian cultures. With the vast area and 
the few ministers co-operation of the churches gave the "great¬ 
est possible service to the greatest number". A disadvantage 
of this co-operation at the time was that with certain towns 
being designated as Presbyterian end others Methodists a 
staunch Presbyterian or Methodist had to choose the right 
one. However the eventual result, Union in 1925, justified 
these inconveniences. 

That man is a unity; that spiritual and material needs 
go together appears to have been the philosophy of the Methodist 
Church. The schools and hospitals in the Galician settlement 
reflect this. And this was to a great extent the secret of the 
success among these non-English speaking immigrants. Schools, 
churches and hospitals which did not try to make Methodists 
but plainly to serve God and fellow men appealed to the Ukrainians. 
If the Church had been trying to further a narrow denominational 
cause it would have gotten nowhere. Although the statistics 
of the Galician work do not show a marked success I am convinced 
that the success is showing up now in the second and third 
generations of Galicians* We need only look at the United Church 
rolls of members and adherents to see the many Ukrainian names; 
names of families which came to Canada as Greek Catholics. The 
work of the Methodist missionaries through their schools, 
preaching, hospitals and lives made an imprint of freedom on 
these people* The old generation in many cases supported the 





* 

: - : 


- 

r . 




- • .: 










o 

< ' * - 








' ' ■- ■ - 

















. 


l ■ 


» > 


. < 

„ 













- 125 - 


Protestant thinking but the old religion was too deeply ingrained 
for overt conversion* In the second and third generations 
which have moved from the colonies into other parts of the 
Province the freedom has taken hold and is now appearing in 
the membership in various Protestant churches* 

However it should also be pointed out that although 
the work which the Methodist church did among the Ukrainians 
was of high quality it did not extend very far. For the thousands 
of Ukrainian immigrants in the Alberta colony only four Methodist 
Church centers, Pakan, Wahstao, Kolokreeka and Lamont all 
relatively close together, were established. These served but 
a fraction of the Ukrainians. Much greater initial work was 
done by the Presbyterian Church, through its Greek Independent 
Church, but as has been pointed out this came to an early end. 
Thus, throughout Alberta today are many second and third 
generation Ukrainians who are untouched by the T *01d Church ff or 
by the Protestant churches. Wider and more understanding work 
by the Methodist and other Protestant Churches in the early days 
would have helped these people, to say nothing of the strength 
the church would gain. Also, the workers sent among the 
Ukrainians would have been even more effective with better 
training. The medical ability of the doctors, the teaching 
ability of the W.M.S. workers and the Christian sincerity of 
all the workers could not be surpassed but at the same time 
when one realizes that only one of the early workers, Rev. J.K. 
Smith could speak Ukrainian fluently and that not one of them 




. ;:.i; ■. , , •. 

/ 


. . ; 

« ■ c 

. ? 

- 

< 

n " ? 

t 


( . 

, , , 



t 






















- 126 - 


had previous training in Ukrainian customs or culture, we see 
the inadequacy,* This training was difficult to obtain but an 
increased effort by the Church, rather than leaving it to the 
ingenious efforts of the workers when they arrived, would have 
been a great advantage,* Thus in the area of Ukrainian work, 
the workers themselves did a tremendous job, and so did the 
Church but it reached only a fraction of the settlers* 

Alberta had a great need for mission work, and yet 
throughout its work in this province the Church held before 
the settlers the needs of people in other lands* This was a 
vital force within the Church of early Alberta and I feel it 
is a Christian task we have forgotten today* If as the pioneers 
of Alberta we could see the needs of others our narrow self- 
interest would be lessened and the stimulus to help and to 
build would be heightened* 

My assessment and evaluation of the Methodist Church 
in pioneer Alberta is one of highest regard. The culture of 
our Province, the state of our Church and the lives of our 
people, prove this* 

. The day of the buffalo is gone and is but a memory, 
but the day of pioneer Methodists although gone is a tangible 
foundation of present day Alberta* 


„ 

















* 














< 


. 

























* 



















v 








- 










' 









: 























* 























. 




















■ * 





' 

* 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


BOOKS 


Alberta Historical Review # Vo Is. 1-6. Edmonton: 

Hi s to r i ca1 Socie t y of Alberta, 1953-195#. 

Bridgman, Wellington. Breaking Prairie Sod . Toronto: 
Musson, 1920. 

Chalmerf; Randolph Carleton. See the Christ Stand . 
Toronto: The Ryerson Press, 1945* 

Collier, Herbert B. Remember When? Edmonton: 
Commercial Printers Ltd., 1937* 

Davis, Jerome. The Russians and Ruthenians in America 
New York! George h. Do ran TTo., 1$ 22.' 

Dawson, Carl Addington. Pioneering in the Prairie 

Provinces . Toronto! The MacmiIlian Co., 1940. 

o The Settlement o f the P eace River Country. 
Vo 1. VI. 'Toronto: J= The~lfecmiikian CoY, 19341 

Dempsey, Hugh A. Historical Sites of the Province 
of Alberta. Edmonton: Government of the 
Province of Alberta, Publicity Bureau, 1952. 

Earp, Edwin L, The Rural Church Mov ement. New York: 
The Methodist Book 'Concern, 1914c*" 

Gaetz, Annie L. The Park Country. Vancouver: The 
Wrigley CoT Ltd., 1943. 

Gershaw, Fred William. Medicine Hat. Medicine Hat: 

1953 c 

Gunn, William T. His Dominion. Toronto: Press of 
the Hunter-Rose Co.Tltcf., 1917<> 

Hedley, Ralph. East of the Beaver Hills . Edmonton: 

1955c 


- 127 























c. * 





























- 128 - 


Hiemstra, Mary* Gully Farm* Toronto: McClelland 
and Stewart, 1933! 

Horan, John William. West Nor T West * Edmonton: 

Northgate Books, 1933! ~ 

Hunter, Alexander Jardine, A Friendly Adventur e. 

Toronto: Board of Home Missions, Unitec Jl 
Church of Canada, 1929# 

Hutchinson, Gerald M. The Roots of the Province. 

Edmontcn, Kamiy Press, 1955. 

Lysenko, Vera. Men in Sheepskin Coats. Toronto: 

Ryerson Press, 1947. 

Morton, Arthur Silver. History of the Prairie 

Settlement. Vol. II. Toronto: The Macmillian 
Co., 1933. “ 

Oliver, Edmund H. His Dominion of Canada . Toronto: 

The Board of Home Missions and the Woman f s 
Missionary Society of the United Church of 
Canada, 1932. 

. The Winni ng of the Frontier. Toronto: 

The "United Church Publishing Ho us e, 193 0 • 

Peel, Bruce Braden. A Bibliography of the Prairi e 
Provinces. Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 1956. 

Pidgeon, George C. The United Church of Canada. 

Toronto: The Ryerson Press, 1953. 

Platt, Harriet Louise. Tna Story of the Years. 

Vol. I* Toronto! Woman's Missionary 'Society 
Methodist Church, 1908. 

Pollard, William Cornell* Life on the Fronti er. London: 
A.H. Stockwell, 1933T~~ 

Riddell, J.H. Method i sm in the Middle West. Toronto: 

The Ryerson'Tress', 1946. 

Russel, R.C. The Carlton Trail. Saskatoon, Modern 
Press, 1955® 

Shriver, William P. Immigrant For ces. New York: Mission¬ 
ary Education Movement of the United States and 
Canada, 1913 o 

Silcox, Claris Edwin. Church Union in Canada* New York: 

Institute of Social and Religious Research, 1933. 























5 








< 









C 


C 



















- 129 - 


Smith, W • G • Building the Nation, Toronto: The 
Ryerson^Press, 1922* “ 

Steen, Ragna. Pioneer Days in Bardo. Tofield: 

Historical Society of Beaver Hills Lake, 1944„ 

Strachan, Mrs* E.5. The Sto ry o f the Years* Vol. Ill* 
Toronto: Woman 1 s Missionary Society Methodist 
Church,1917* 

Sutherland, Alexander. The Methodist Church and 
Missions . Toronto: Dept, of Missionary 
Literature of the Methodist Church, 1906. 

The Doctrine and Discipline of the Methodist C hurch. 

Toronto: William Briggs, 1919® 

Woodsworth, James. Thirty Years in the Canadian North- 
West . To route: McClelland, Goo dchild and 
Steward Publishers, 1917. 

Wrong, George McKinnon. The Canadians. New York: 

The MacmiIlian Co., 1936. ~‘ 

Young, Charles H. The Ukrainian Canadians. Toronto: 
Thomas Nelson - and "Sons Ltd., 1931« 


REPORTS 


Annual Report of the Missionary Soci e ty of the 

— Methodist Churclu AlVerta~ Conference. Toronto: 
Methodist Mission Rooms, 1922. 

t Committee of the Methodist and 
erian Churches in Alberta on~Co^operat ion. 


Minutes of the Alberta Conference of the Methodist 

Minutes of the Manitoba and North-West Conference of 

the Methodist Church. 1888-1904# 

Missionary Bulletin Containing letters from mission¬ 
aries and missionary superintendents to their 
fellow-workers at home. Vol. I-VIII. Toronto: 

The Methodist Young People 1 s Forward Movement 
for Missions, 1903-1912. 

The Methodist Church. Journal of Proceedings of the 

General Conference. For the years: 1398, 1902, 
19 o 4,T-906, 1910, 1914# Toronto: William Briggs. 


Minutes of Join 
Presbyt 


wj: 

































c 








t 











5 



. 


< . < c 















- 130 - 


OTHER SOURCES 


Edmonton, Alberta. Personal interviews with 
Rev. Dr. W.T. Young, Mrs. J.K. Smith, 
Rev. Dr. Theodore Bay, Rev. G.A. Sauder, 
and Rev. John Sorochan. 


ABBREVIATIONS USED 


J. of P.G. Conf. .*•••••••••. Journal of Proceedings 

of the General Conference. 

M.3. o... •.o • o • •.«.. * ... . . . •. Missionary Bulletin. 

Min. Alta. Conf. ..........o* Minutes of the Alberta 

Conference of the Methodist 
Church 


Min. M. oc N.W. Conf. ...... 9 . 


Minutes of the Manitoba and 
North-West Conference. 































































