






For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Gtx HIBfil* 

wMMmm 

KSBIBWIMIS 
















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worshipinnewtestOOotto 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 
(DIVINITY) 


We, the undersigned, hereby certify that we have read the 
within thesis entitled "WORSHIP IN THE NEW TESTAMENT", 
submitted by Ottomar Frederick Cypris, M.A., in partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Bachelor 
of Divinity, and we hereby recommend its acceptance# 


Edmonton 

Alberta 







Professor 



August 

1951 


Professor 
























; ' C 




. , . 




* 



































. 





"WORSHIP IN THE NEW TESTAMENT" 


A dissertation 

submitted to the B« B* Committee of the 
Senate of the University of Alberta 
in candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity 


by 


Ottomar Frederick Oypris, M.A* 


University of Alberta 
August 1951 













. 











CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 

Preface i 

I Time and Place of Worship 1 

II Prayer 17 

III The Scriptures 31 

IV Hymaody 39 

V The Lord* s Supper 57 

VI Worship at Corinth 

(A Case History) 74 

Conclusion 100 

Appendix 105 

Bibliography 116 


«o-00~o«’ 




PREFACE 








PREFACE 


This thesis is an attempt to show that the worship 
as it is recorded in the literature of the New Testament 
is rooted in the worship of Judaism; that it was trans¬ 
formed by the Christian experience of the early Church 
into something new; and that, as early as A.D, 54, first 
principles of worship were stated which are valid and 
applicable to modern worship. It is written from the 
point of view of a western Canadian who in the formative 
years of childhood was exposed to a regular diet of lit¬ 
urgical as well as non«liturgical worship in continental 
Europe, and who is concerned that Form and Freedom be 
conserved in the worship of the Church, and that liberty 
of prophesying as well as regard for the historic contin¬ 
uity of the Church find their respective places in the 
worship of the Church to-day. 

To that end the several constituent parts of worship 
place, scripture, prayer, hymns - as found in the New 
Testament are examined and some general conclusions and 
comments are made on the nature of worship. 

The chronological order of New Testament literature 
accepted is that proposed in Good speed’s "An Introduction 
to the Literature of the New Testament" as follows: 




■ 

■ 

. ,1 

. 




- 


v ; 

j ; Ai, - 


■ >1 ; . 


... - ' .. 

- ' • ’ ■ V. . . ■ , ' .. , : 

t • 









. 











ii - 


Epistles (50-64 A.D.) - 1st and IInd Thessalonians 

Galatisns 

1st and IInd Corinthians 

Romans 

Fhilippians 

Colossians 

Philemon 

Gosp els (70-85) Mark 

Matthew 
Luke-Acts 

before 95 Ephesians 

95 Revelation 

He brews 
1st Peter 

Second Century (early years) James 

110 Gospel of John 

The epistles of John 
125 Jude 

150 1st and XXnd Timothy 

Titus 

ca. 150, before 180: XXnd Peter 


In quotations from and .references to the Mew Test ament 
the Revised Standard Version has been used throughout, 
except where otherwise indicated in Chapter XT, 


Allowance is made for the following: 

(a) That some extra-New Testament literature is valuable 
in discovering the trend of worship and reflecting 
practices accepted by the early Church at large yet 
not recorded in the New Testament (e»g, the Didache, 
Justin Martyr, etc,) - although of necessity limited 
due to inaccessibility of sources. 

(h) That chronological priority does not necessarily 

guarantee greater trustworthiness. Some of the later 




' 

. . 












f t '• I < 







. 


. 




. 












' 

. 

. 








\ 



- iii 


literature may contain more accurate records of 
specific happenings. 

(c) That Mark is the story of Jesus as told by Peter 
and interpreted and later recorded by John Mark. 
Therefore the Gospels, although later in date than 
Paul, may preserve earlier and wove accurate accounts. 

(d) That some of the actual events have been irretriev¬ 
ably lost, 

(e) That argument from silence, although hazardous, can 
be of real value. Events known to all, or of which 
knowledge is taken for granted, would not always be 
recorded, 

(f) That the human element in transmission is responsible 
for some errors, and that the conscious or uncon¬ 
scious attempt to heighten the events, deeds and 
sayings of Jesus may at times be misleading. 

In addition, notice has been taken of the "genetic 
fallacy” - the belief that when we have traced anything 
to its original source we have completely explained it.(1) 
Also, of the "Doctrine of Development": 

"We need not maintain, (e,g.) that everything 
we read into the Eucharist was actually in 
Jesus’ mind. The doctrine of development can be 
applied and bis authority claimed for those 


(1) Caird, G.B, , 


"The Truth of the Gospel", p;£6 





















4 . 

. 






. 

• . . , 

V; 

, : ■. ■ 

■ 





* 






• % 




■ 


4 



' 












■ 








■i ' f ' 

. 
















developments, provided they are self-consistent 
with his words and acts at the time." 

The Spirit of God is ever at work, creating and 
recreating. It is not for us to circumscribe the 
workings of that Spirit by c.laiming that all that is 
to be has been. 


(1) Quick, Canon Oliver C, , as quoted by Freeman in 
"The Lord* s Supper and Protestantism", p.45 










Chapter I 


TIME AM) PLACE OE 










WORSHIP 




I 


TIME AM ) PLACE OF W ORSHIP 

Two of the most direct influences on the forms 
of worship of the early Christian Church were the 
Temple and the Synagogue. Tie early Christians, as 
devout Jews reared in the peculiarly Jewish atmosphere 
of religious awe and reverence, would continue to ob¬ 
serve the Jewish law and to frequent the Temple and the 
Synagogue, participating in the worship and cmsterns 
of both. The break with Judaism was as yet in the 
future and not even contemplated at that time. However, 
with the destruction of the Temple in A.D. 70 and the 
dispersion of the Christians as a result of persecution, 
it is reasonable to assume that the traditions of 
Temple worship would wane in Importance, while those 
of the Synagogue would grow correspondingly. 

The Temple 

The Christian connection with the Temple is very 
clear in the Cospel according to Luke, The prenatal 
and infancy narratives make frequent mention of the 
Temple, Zechariah, the father of John the Baptist, 
was serving as a priest in the Temple when he received 
the news of the forthcoming birth of his son (Luke 1:8-15). 
Simeon and Anna beheld the infant Jesus in the Temple 
when, according to oust cm, his parents brought bim there 

to present him to the Lord and make the required sac- 
















’ 







c 










* 








. f' f if ./ ■' v ' ' .. is-i 


. 


. 

i 



, 

- v > 

. 






. 

j.'v; ■■■.>.*. j'*‘' ’a:;,i;00 : 


' 


'■iil c 1 -. 7 

i v ’ ! ' • 



v' - - 7 M ;.*rT:bxi 

\ :’> :W. -vil-.. 



> : . 'sitf ■■ 








: v 1"' 








' 

. 


. 


- 2 


rifice-offerings (Luke 2:22f). His parents were said 
to go up to the Temple for the Passover every year, and 
Jesus accompanied them at the age of twelve (Luke 2:41). 
Even at this age Jesus is pictured as showing a preco¬ 
cious sense of closeness to God, his Father, and his 
Father’s house. "Did you not know that I must be in 
my Father’s house?*’ (Luke 2:49). He taught daily in 
the Temple during Passion week (Mt. 21:23*35; 26:55b; 

Mark 11:27; 14,49; Luke 22:53; 19:47) and left the 
Temple only at night when he ’’lodged on the mount called 
Olivet” (Luke 21:37-38). Consumed by zeal for the house 
of God, he drove out the money changers from the Temple. 
”My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the 
nations, Eut you have made it a den of robbers.” 

(Mt, 21:12-13; Mark 11:15-17). He also healed in the 
Temple (Mt. 21:14). When Jesus died, the veil of the 
Temple was rent from top to bottom, before his death 
(Luke 23:45) or immediately after (Mark 15:38; Mt. 27:51), 


While we must make allowance for the probable pre¬ 
sence of symbolic and apologetic tendencies in these 
accounts, at the same time we would expect the influence 
of the Temple to be very reel and vital to Jews of that 
day. As Luke begins with scenes laid in the Temple, so 
he ends his story in the Temple, ’’And they returned to 
Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the 














; t ' 


: 

. 

, . 


5 . i 


'• ! •' V-'. 





. 



e ' 










r . ; t 














. 













3 


temple blessing God", (Luke 24:52-53). 

The Gospel of John shows a strange dualism in 
attitude to place of worship. Its author is apparently 
in sympathy both with the importance of ritual and with 
the desire to return to the simplicity and spontaneity 
of the primitive era. Consequently he shows Jesus going 
up to Jerusalem for the feasts (John 4:45; 5:1; 

10:22-23), as driving out the money changers from the 
Temple (John 2:14-16) and teaching in the Tempi© (John 
7:14,28.37; 8:2,20; 18:20). At the same time John 
shows a bias against ordinances, and references to the 
Temple are therefore scant. In fact, John 4:20-24 in¬ 
dicates that place and ritual are not the important 
things in worshipping God, who is a spirit and must be 
worshipped in spirit and in truth. 

The book of Acts and the letters of Paul bear tes¬ 
timony as to the importance of the Temple in the life of 
the Early Jerusalem, Group, They worshipped daily in the 
Temple (Acts 2:46) , Peter and John heeled a lame man in 
the name of Jesus on their way up to the Temple (Acts 3:If). 
They tf walked in the Temple", and Solomon’s portico is 
mentioned (Acts 3:11). They also taught and preached 
in the Temple (Acts 4:1-2; 5:20-21,42), Paul himself 
was taken into protective custody when he went up into 



- 4 - 

the Temple for purification after returning to Jeru¬ 
salem (Acts 21:26f), 

Having established that the early Christians con¬ 
tinued to worship in the Temple, we now pause briefly 
to consider the actual services held in the Temple, and 
we find that the central ritual act of the Temple was 
sacrifice, (1). The form of worship included: pre¬ 
paration for the morning sacrifice of a lamb, prayers 
offered to God, reciting of the commandments, and me 
burning of incense on the altar in the Holy Place, fol¬ 
lowing which the Priest stepped out of the Holy Place 
and solemnly pronounced the blessing from the steps* of 
the porch upon the people praying in the courts* The 
daily meat and drink offerings were then offered, at 
the conclusion of which the Levites began their song of 
praise, pausing at times while the trumpets sounded and 
the people worshipped. 

On the Sabbath day an additional service of praise 
w§sregularly performed in the Temple. The mid-day 
duties of the priests were the offering of the people* s 
sacrifices, which varied in number according to circum¬ 
stances, being especially numerous at great festivals. 
The evening service started at the ninth hour (three 

(1) On the Temp le, of. Hastings, "A Dictionary of Christ 
and the Gospels”, vol.II ,pp ,708-713; also Underhill, 
"Worship”, pp,802-808, 

On Sacrifice, of, Underhill, "Worship”, pp.47-59, 
a comprehensive and sympathetic treatment. 







- 

- 

. 

. 

. 


•' ! 

■ 


- 






' 




■ 


. 









5 


o’clock) and was similar to that solemnized in the 
morning • 


The language and symbolism of Temple sacrifice 

could not fail to enter into the thinking of the early 

Christians. Miss Underhill states that the life and 

mission of Jesus were conceived by him. from beginning 

to end in terms of sacrifice. (1) 

"In the three crucial events of the Passion - 
the Last Supper, Gethsemane, and the Cross ~ 
the deepest and most awful meanings of the 
sacrifice of communion, of total oblation, and 
of atonement, are declared" (2) 

Her conclusion is that "Christian worship can never be 

divorced from sacrifice" (3). Throughout the ages 

it has always formed the background and framework of 

discussions on the Atonement. In the New Testament, two 


books in particular make extensive use of the language 
of Temple worships firstly, the Boibk of Revelation, 
with its descriptions of "the Lamb that was slain, the 
incense, the prostrations, and the repeated songs of 
praise" (4); and secondly, the ICpistle to the 
Hebrews, which states that sacrifices are many, and 
priests are many, but Christ’s sacrifice was offered 
once for all, and he holds his priesthood permanently. 


The emphasis in the epistle is not on the outward observ¬ 


ance of "sacrifice and offerings and burnt-off ©rings and 


sin-offerings" (Hfeb.l0:8), b ut on the 

(1) Underhill, "Worship", p«54 

(2) ibid, p.55 


inward attitude 


(2) ibid, p.58 
(4) ibid, p.207 









^ :>& : i • o& 

v • .! "t 

, J , : . .■ ■' 

. 

. 








. 

. 






. 








t . • : ; ; 

« - • t 

. 


, 




< : - - . 


6 


of offering to God "acceptable worship, with reverence 
and awe" (Heb. 12:28b). The sacrifices pleasing to 
God are those which result from the constant effort "to 
do good, and to share what you have" (Heb. 13:15-16). 


As we now proceed to the study of the Synagogue 
end its connection with early Christianity, it will be 
helpful to bear in mind T. W. Manson’s estimate as to 
the relative value of Temple and Synagogue in the devel¬ 
opment of Christian forms of worship: 

"The centralization of the Sacrificial ritual 
in Jerusalem was one of the first steps in 
teaching Israel to do without it,,., further, 
at the beginning of the Christian era vast num¬ 
bers of Jews were scattered over the world for 
whom a visit to the Temple was something of the 
same kind as the pilgrairiSpige to Mecca—a thing 
that might be undertaken once in a lifetime,... 

The more the Law became the centre of Jewi sh piety 
the more the Synagogue was bound to play the de¬ 
cisive part in moulding the forms and spirit of 
Jewish piety." * (1) 


The Synagogue 


The second important influence in the religious 
life of the Palestinian Jew was the Synagogue. Jesus 
went to the Synagogue "as his custom was" (Luke 4:16), 
teaching and preaching there (Mt. 4:23; 9:35; 15:54; 

Mark 1:21,39; 6:2; Luke 4:15,44; 13:10; John 6:59) and 
healing there as well (Mark 1:23-26; Luke 4:33-36). The 
picture of Jesus in the Gospels is the picture of a 
devout Jew, honouring the customs of his fathers (Mt,8:4; 


(1) Manson, T.W., 


"Worship", pp.35 and 36 
















, . ■ , 


' 














■ 

. 

- 

... 


































* ' - C * ! 

• 













c : 













7 


Mark 1:44; Luke 5:14), continuing in worship both in 
Temple and Synagogue, obeying the rules of fasting 
(Mt. 6:16-18) and almsgiving (Mt. 6:1-2). He eats 
with the officers of the Synagogue and heals at their 
homes (Luke 14:1; 8:41; Mark 5:22f). 

At the same time, notwithstanding his continued 
obedience to long-established rules and customs of wor¬ 
ship, a new freedom is in the air - a spirit of indepen¬ 
dence which we shall meet again and again in our discus¬ 
sion of Prayer, Scriptures and Hymns - s spirit which in 
time irresistibly and logically led to the break between 
Judaism and Christianity. Jesus healed on the Sabbath 
day (Mt. 12:9-14; Mark 3:1-6; Luke 6:6-11; 13:10-17; 

John 5:16; 7:23; 9:14). When there is a choice to make 
between the finer points of the Law and the weightier 
matters of mercy, love and compassion, the Law always 
loses out. "The Sabbath was made for man, not man for 
the Sabbath." (Mark 2:27). "The Son of man is lord of 
the Sabbath" (Luke 6:5). His disciples ate with unwashed 
hands (Mt. 15:2; Mark 7:1-7), and were not altogether 
careful enough regarding the finer details of observance 
to suit the legalistic minds of their critics. 

Moreover, the place of Jesus* ministry was not only 
the Temple or the Synagogue, The actual ministry of 
Jesus can be summarized in three words: teaching, 
preaching, and healing (Mt, 4:23; 11:1,5; Mark 1:39; 


. 

. : 






" 

. 


>! - 

VI 

: ■ ~ - - : 












■ 






* 1 

■ 




* 














. 


t ' * ' * 






. 































• 






















8 


Luke 4:31-44; 8:1-3), and he carried out this ministry 
wherever an opportunity presented itself for reaching the 
masses to whom his heart went out in compassion and love. 

Paul, too, presented his message wherever opportun¬ 
ity presented itself, whether on the banks of a river 
(Acts 16:13), in the market place (Acts 17:17), or daily 
for two years in the lecture room of Tyrsnnus, at 
Ephesus (Acts 19:9-10). But his regular procedure was 
to start in the Synagogue, with the Jews of the Disper¬ 
sion, in their place of worship, ins truction and fellow¬ 
ship. Missionary beginnings in the Synagogue are record¬ 
ed as taking place at Salamis (Acts 13:5), Pisidian 
Antioch (Acts 13:14), Xconiurn (Acts 14:1), Thessalonica 
(Acts X7:l-B), and Corinth (Acts 18:4). There he would 
present the Good News, and usually his message would be 
rejected. With the Jews who accepted the new teaching 
he would look for some other place of assembly, such ©s 
a house (Acts BO:7-8) or a lecture room, as in Corinth 
(Acts 19:9). Sometimes his reception in the Synagogue 
would be friendly and the response good, as at Beroea 
(Acts 17:10ff) and at Ephesus (Acts 18:19). At Corinth 

k 

the ruler of the Synagogue, Grispus, and his whole house¬ 
hold accepted the new faith (Acts 18:18), and Sosthenes, 
another ruler of the Synagogue, who was beaten by his 
followers (Acts 18:17), also embraced Christianity and 
must have attained a position of leadership in the 
Christian Church thereafter (i.Cor. 1:1), if both refer- 














- • • 

- 

£ I . . 

. 

■ 

. 

, . ■ ; ■ ■ ; - . ■ ; ■ ; : 

; , . . ; . ; ■ , - : : V 

' ' ' . • , : ■ . . ' .. 1 

- ; 

. . 

: 

■ . . : - j • : • . . r 

. 

. ■ .! I 


9 


ences are to the same person. But more often the 
experience described in Acts 18:6 was typical of what 
took place: "When they opposed and reviled him, he 
shook out his garments and said to them, ’Your blood 
be upon your heads! I am innocent. From now on I will 
go to the Gentiles.*" 

As the main function of the Temple was sacrifice, 
so that of the Synagogue was instruction (1). The 
reading of the Law was the main purpose for the exist¬ 
ence of the Synagogue and for the rise of it. In ad¬ 
dition, the Synagogue in the Graeco-Roman world of the 
first century served as a communal, judicial and social 
centre. The chief officers were: the elders, pre¬ 
sided over by "the ruler of the Synagogue" (Acts 18:8,17), 
the Sheliaoh or spokesman, who led the form of prayer, 
the Chazzan or attendant (Luke 4:20), whose duties 
were to look after the building and to act as teacher 
during the .week, and the ten Batlanim, or men of leisure, 
who managed the affairs of the Synagogue, 

The order of service in the Synagogue opened with 
the Shema (Hear, 0 Israel) with introductory and closing 
benedictions, followed by prayers by the leader of the 
Synagogue. Psalms and selections may have been used, 
but sparingly as yet. There is no record of the singing 

(1) On the Synagogue, of. Hastings, "A Dictionary of 
Christ and the Gospels", Yol.II,pp.689-692; also 
Davies, "Christian Worship", pp.8-13; also 
Underhill, "Worship", pp.208-213 






10 


of hymns. At the close of each prayer the people re¬ 
plied with an audible "Amen". The central part of the 
service then followed, consisting of reading from the 
Law and the Prophets. The Law was read by male members 
of the congregation appointed to do so. (1). The 
Prophets were read by anyone upon trhom the choice of the 
Sheliach might fall. These "stood up to read" (Luke 4;16). 
With the reading of the Scriptures the service proper 
terminated. 

Thus Christianity can be seen to have taken over 
from Judaism forms of worship and institutions which were 
sanctioned and hallowed by the use of countless genera¬ 
tions. From the Temple it inherited the priestly empha¬ 
sis, from the Synagogue the prophetic. But, Miss Under¬ 
hill warns, we must not look upon these modes of worship 
as being in opposition to one another in the minds of 
devout Jews; 

"In the full religious practice of the devout 
Jew of New Testament times, both Temple and 
Synagogue were accepted as the two aspects of 
one total response to God: as the moral demands 
of the prophets, and the ritual demands of the Law, 
were accepted without any sense of incongruity. 

They were....two ways of expressing one love." (2) 

Christian Meetings 

Not only did the early Christians take part in 
the established services of worship in Temple (whenever 

presence in Jerusalem made this possible) and Synagogue 

(1) cf. Acts 15:21. Moses was read in the Synagogue 
every Sabbath day. 

(2) Underhill, "Worship", t>,2Q9 









u - 

' 

. 


' 




. 

, 

l 




: 




i 


' 




' . .. 

. 

, . ■ ) r t '' ■ 

... 




. 


. 








. 

. 







. 

, 


... 

. 

■ 




11 


(regularly), but from the first, because the need was 
felt for special meetings of their own in different 
places and at different times, they held meetings in 
private houses. We have already seen how Paul and his 
converts were forced to abandon the Synagogue and to 
meet in private homes (1). In the early Jerusalem 
group and later everywhere, these meetings of Christians 
were held separately by choice. 


Such meetings were held for the purpose of informal 
prayer (Acts 1:12-14; 2:1; 4:23,31; 12:12; 13:1). The 
social solidarity of the early group is shown in that 
they met together for prayer also when one or more of 
their number got into difficulty with the authorities: 
e.g. during the arrest of Peter and John (Acts 4:23) and 
the imprisonment of Peter (Acts 12:12). These private 
meetings were held also for the characteristically 
Christian gathering known as "the breaking of bread" 

(Acts 2:42; 2:46; 20:7-11; X.Oor,10:15-17; 11:17-34). (a) 
Whether this meeting was the celebration of the Lord’s 

(1) Note : The phrase "the Church that meets in their 
house" (I.Cor.16:19) refers to meetings held in 
private homes after the Christians left the Syna¬ 
gogues. Of, also Col. 4:15 

(2) Of these passages, I.Cor. 11; 18 is particiilarly inter¬ 
esting, "When you assemble as a church" implies 
frequent and customary assembly as a body, probably 
of a more formal nature. 






: 

V; ,‘ v '>■ 1- 

, 

t ' 

, ■ 




■ 

■ 

. 

t 

■ 

' 

• ' f 

.-mii 

. 


12 - 


Supper, or the Agape, or a combination of both, is not 
always easy to determine (1), end is a matter of dis¬ 
pute among scholars. 


In Tertulliante ”Apology", written about A.D. 197, 
the Agape is described as follows: 

"Our feast explains itself by its name. The 
Greeks call it love. Whatever it costs, our 
outlay in the name of piety is gain, since with 
the good things of the feast we benefit the needy 
....The participants, before reclining, taste first 
of prayer to God. As much Is eaten as satisfies 
the cravings of hunger; as much is drunk as befits 
the chaste....After the washing of hands and the 
bringing of lights, each is asked to stand forth 
and sing as he can a hymn to God, either one from 
the Holy Scriptures or one of his own composing... 
as the feast commenced with prayer, so with prayer 
it closes.” ' (2) 


The first actual mention of the term Agape in the 
New Testament occurs in Jude IE: f? These are blemishes 
on your love feasts, as they boldly carouse together, 
looking after themselves.” The similarity to the Corinth¬ 
ian situation is obvious. At this time, apparently, the 
Agape had fallen into disrepute. The term Agape may also 

be found in II.Peter 2:13, but the reading is suspect: 

> 1 _ :> t 

it could be H S_ or 


(1) Oesterlev, "The Jewish Background of the Christian 
Liturgy”, p.94, interprets Acts £:46 as follows: 

”the ’continuing day by day in the Temple’ refers to 
the daily services there; the ’breaking of bread at 
home’ refers to the weekly celebration of the Eucharist 
in private houses; the taking ’their food with gladness 
and singleness of heart’ refers to the Agape, rendered 
possible for all, poor as well as rich, through their 
having all things common (mentioned in the preceding 
context).” 

(2) As quoted in Freeman, ’’The Lord’s Supper and Protest¬ 
antism”, p. 27 
















' 












. 

: 

_ 

■ 




...... 

- ' 


< 


. 


















« 


. 




.. 

* 











• ' 










s ■ ' * i .• .. ; 

. 











13 


Another reference we have is in the Didache (1); 

"After ye are filled, thus give thanks" and then follows 
a prayer of thanksgiving with the reply "To Thee be the 
glory for ever". Here the Agape seems to precede the 
Eucharist. There are also passages in the New Testament 
which may refer to the Agape, such as I.Cor. 11:30-21. 

(Cf. with Acts 20:7, where the breaking of bread is a 
fellowship meal having a religious signifieance). 

Acts 20:10 "When Paul...had broken bread and eaten" prob¬ 
ably refers to the Eucharist much later in the meeting. 
Acts 27:35-36 refers to such a meal, this time partaken 
on shipboard. But by far the best passage is that in 
Acts 2:42,44-46. The meals referred to here as "the 
breaking of bread" are hunger-satisfying meals partaken 
in gladness of heart, and evidently fellowship meals. 

A natural deduction from the foregoing is that the 
disciples, in imitation of the last supper with Jesus, 
sometimes had two meals, some times only one. As Jesus, 
at the last supper, after they had eaten, instituted the 
Lord 1 s Supper, so his followers, after their fellowship 
meal, sometimes broke bread again and observed the 
Eucharist, There must have been something very distinctive 
about the way in which Jesus "broke bread"—some gesture or 
some distinguishing mannerism which had endeared this meal 


(1) Didache, eh, X, appendix p,109 





- 

■t. ?v • 








- 5 ":; ’ "-1 ' 

■ 4 • « 

* . 

. 

■ : • 


' 












' 


i 

' 

' 

' 








' 











14 


to his disciples. It was in the breaking of bread 
that the two disciples at Emmaus recognized Jesus. 

These fellowship meals were the natural outgrowth of 
the Kiddush (1). John 14-16 preserves for us the con¬ 
versation which Jesus had with his disciples as they 
sat at table prior to the Last Supper. At any rate, 
the Agape and the Eucharist existed side by side, until 
later the Agape, probably because of disorders such as 
mentioned in Jude IE, fell into disrepute. Then the 
Agape disappeared and the Eucharist grew in importance (E). 

In addition to the new element of holding meetings 
in private homes, the Christians chose a new meeting 
day, being motivated in all likelihood by practical as 
well as religious reasons. "The first day of the week" 
is mentioned in the Resurrection narratives (Mark 16:2; 

Mt. 28:1; Luke 24:1} and none of them leave any doubt 
that this was the day following the Jewish Sabbath. Be¬ 
cause of its connection with the resurrection of Jesus, 
the first day of the week subsequently gained a position 
of highest importance in Christian worship. As early 
as Paul’s time Christians were urged "to put something 
aside and save" (in other words, to make an offering for 
the needy saints at Jerusalem.)' "on the first day of 
every week" (I.Cor.l6:2). It was "on the first day of 

(1) Of. pp. 64fTof this thesis “ ~ 

(2) A full discussion of the Lord's Supper is found in 
Chapter V. 



t . 

. 

• ■ ’ 

•'N 

. 

- 

- 

* 

* 






15 - 


the week" that Paul gathered together the Christian 

group at Troas for the breaking of bread and lengthy 

discourse (Acts. 20:7). By A.D. 95 it was customary to 

call this first day of the week "the Lord’s Day" 

(Rev. 1:10), and by A.D, 140 it had become the regular 

day of meeting for Christian worship: 

"Now we all hold our common meeting on the 
Day of the Sun, because it is the first day 
on which Cod, having changed the darkness 
and matter, created the world; and Jesus 
Christ our Saviour rose from the deed." (1) 

In summing up our conclusions regarding the time 
and place of early Christian worship we may say that 

the places of corporate worship regularly frequented by 
the early Christians were three: the Temple, the Syna¬ 
gogue, and the private Christian meeting. (2) 

From the Temple Christianity inherited the priestly end 
sacrificial emphasis, the content and terminology of 
which entered Christian thinking and Christian worship. 
From the Synagogue it inherited the prophetic emphasis. 
Both of these types of worship existed side by side 
without any sense of incongruity, but as Christianity 
moved out into the Craeco-Roman world, the Synagogue 
naturally assumed an ever increasing importance as the 
rallying and starting point for Christian missionary 
activity. 


(1) Justin Martyr, Apologia, ch. 67, appendix, p. Ill 

(2) We assume that private worship, particularly private 

prayer, would be engaged in by the disciples and 
early Christians at any time and place, following 
the example of Jesus (cf. pp, 17-18 ) and that the 

quality of corporate worship would be determined thereby. 












, 








■ ‘ ' . 4 . : , . ' 
1 




. . 

. ■ 










• ■ •>- .' i . . . • 

. 


m 
















\ c ■ ’T’ 

- 





' 




oa.-V'C * ■ 












- 16 


Almost from the earliest days of Christianity 
there was the third place of worship, namely the private 
homes of Christians, where they held informal meetings 
for prayer and the distinctively Christian meeting known 
as f, the breaking of bread", #iioh was a celebration of 
the Lord’s Supper ©r the Agape or a combination of both. 
These meetings were held "on the first day of the week", 
and as time went on this became the day on which all 
Christian common meetings were held. 


Combining the findings of our survey thus far, 

we are led to conclude that 

"Christian worship... .had been from the first 
both liturgic and prophetic, historical and 
mystical, sacramental and spontaneous," (1) 


(1) Underhill, "Worship", p.236 










Chapter II 


PRATER 




II 


PRAYER 

We turn now to the various component parts of 
worship taken over by Christianity from the existent 
forms, to discover in what measure new elements were 
added through Christian influence. The first act of 
worship we shall consider is Prayer. 

The prayer life of Jesus as revealed in the Gospels 
is such that men have continuously com© to him for in¬ 
struction in the manner of personal approach to God. 

We note that he had intense periods of private prayer. 

It was after one such experience titien he returned to his 
disciples, transfigured and radiant, that the request 
was made: "Lord, teach us how to pray". When he went 
to the Temple or the Synagogue he no doubt took an active 
part in the prescribed and traditional exercises of devo¬ 
tion, and his public prayers will have been strengthened 
in content and meaning by the intensity of his private 
prayer life. 

The Gospels note the frequency with which h© went 
apart to pray. He departed to a lonely place (Luke 4:42), 
he went up into the hills (Mt. 14:23; Mark 3:13, 6:46) and 
told his disciples, "Coma away by yourselves to a lonely 
place, and rest awhile" (Mark 6:31). We know that he 
realised the renewing and recreating power of a retreat. 
Was he influenced by the philosophy of th© prophet who 


• 17 - 











. 


* 

, 

. 





















. • ' • l ,, 


* 












' 










- , - 








18 - 


said, "They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their 
strength (Isaiah 40:31), and again, "Be still and know 
that J am God" (Psalm 46:10)? Knowing the Scriptures as 
Jesus did, he probably found the direction for this action 
there. That the purpose of "going apart" was not simply 
for rest but for fellowship through prayer is indicated 
in some other passages: "He went out into the hills to 
pray; and all night he continued in prayer to God" 

(Luke 6:12), "And in the morning, a great while before 
day, he rose and went out to a lonely place and there 
he prayed" (Mark 1:35). 

The fact that Jesus addressed God as "Father" re¬ 
flects his teaching about the nature of God, and shows 
that his whole life was rooted and grounded in love, trust 
and confidence. When he taught his disciples to pray^ 

the address to the deity was "Father", This word appears 
146 times in his recorded sayings in the New Testament, - 
three times as often as the term "God" itself. It was 
not amply a matter of words with him, but of deep and 
abiding trust in God as his Father, In Matthew 11 , when 
we look at the context of the prayer, "I thank Thee, 

Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hidden 
these things from the wise and understanding and revealed 
them to babes; yea, Father,for such was Thy gracious will" 
(Mt. 11:25-26), we discover that there were enough calam¬ 
itous happenings in progress to discourage the stoutest 
of hearts, John’s doubts concerning Jesus, the fickleness 










fji. 


' “V *.* 

^ ' ’ >• 


. 








. 




















, . 




■ 

























19 


of the crowd, the hardness of heart on the part of the 
inhabitants of the cities of Chorazin, Bethsaida and 
Capernaum, - all these coming together would be enough 
to bring on a fit of pessimism. But at the conclusion 
of all these experiences comes the note of thanksgiving 
(possibly influenced by the Jewish Benedictions), followed 
by the invitation, "Come to me, all who labour and are 
heavy-laden, and I will give you rest," (Mt. 11:88), The 
same strength of spirit is evident during that bitter 
experience on the Cross, where, according to Luke, his 
first utterance was "Father, forgive them" (Luke 83:34), 
and the last word, just before his death, "Father, into 
thy hands I commit my spiritl" (Luke 83:46) 

It is very revealing to study the occasions which 
called forth prayer in Jesus, After the baptism 
(Luke 3:21), before the first preaching tour in Galilee 
(Mark 1:35), before choosing the twelve (Luke 6:12), after 
feeding the five thousand (Mark 6:46, Mt. 14:23), at the 
transfiguration (Luke 9:28-36), at Gethsemane (Mt* 26:36-46 
Mark 14:32-42; Luke 22:39-46), on the cross (Luke 23:46; 
Mark 15:34), that is to say, in times of crisis or 
decision we find him in prayer* 

In his teaching on prayer, the right attitude of 
heart and mind is stressed* In the parable of the 
Pharisee and the Publican who went up into the Temple to 
pray, it is the humility and sense of utter unworthiness 
of the Publican which is commended (Luke 18:9-14), Prayer 
must be made in great simplicity, he maintains, end not 




. 

■ 

- - 

' 

: - 

. 






. 

r . ■ . . ■ i ' 

- 

. 




. 


♦ 








20 


with many words and empty phrases, if it is to be 
pleasing to God (Mt. 6:7-8)* And prayer is a matter 
which involves only the one who prays and his God; there¬ 
fore it should be in secret, with all distractions of 
body, mind and spirit absent (Mt* 6:5-6). Prayer must be 
directed to God alone (Mt. 6:1) and is not to be used as 
a means for establishing a reputation for devoutness. 
Above all, prayer must be offered in a forgiving spirit 
(Mt. 6:12-15). "If you are offering your gift at the 
altar, and there remember that your brother has something 
against you, leave your gift there before the altar and 
go; first be reconciled to your brother, and then come 
and offer your gift" (Mt. 5:23-24). In this connection 
it is interesting to note Miss Underhill’s comment: 

"Ritual is accepted, and ritualism is 
condemned,. .He neither desires prophetic 
realism to destroy liturgic form, nor 
liturgic form to quench prophetic realism". (1) 

The importance of the forgiving spirit is further em¬ 
phasized at the conclusion of the Lord’s Prayer as given 
in Matthew, Jesus singles out for special commeht the 
fifth petition, as if he meant to say: "Be sure you 
know whst you are doing when you pray, Forgive us as we 
forgive," Praying this petition unthinkingly or insin¬ 
cerely may amount to calling down the wrath of God upon 
the unfo rgiving spirit, 


(1) Underhill, "Worship", p.223 






' ■ : 

■ 

; 

. • 

o , . 

, 




23 


What should be the content of our petitions? 

’’Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask in prayer, be¬ 
lieve that you receive it, and you will" (Mark 11:24; cf. 
also Mt, 7:7-11; Luke 11:9-13) • Lest this sound like an 
open invitation or a blank cheque given by an over- 
indulgent parent, we find the corrective in what is prob¬ 
ably an interpretation by John of this saying of Jesus, 
when we read (John 15:7), "If y ou abide in me, and my 
words abide in you , ask whatever you will , and it shall 
be done for you." Here the conditional clauses are all- 
important. And again (John 16:23-24), "Truly, truly, I 
say to you, if you ask any t hing of the Father, he will 
give it to you in my name. Hitherto you have asked 
nothing in my name; ask, and you will receive, that your 
joy may be full." 

This involves acceptance of the will of God, and 
here again Jesus did more than teach -- he is the incarna¬ 
tion of his teaching. The battle between his own personal 
desires and the wi3.1 of God was fought in awful loneliness 
(Mt. 26:36ff) in Gethsemsne, Luke does not record that 
he became sorrowful and troubled and that he said: "My 
soul is very sorrowful even to death", as do Matthew 
(26:37,38) and Mark (14:33,34) (1). Although Luke omits 

these details, either in line with a hei^itening tendency 

(1) Note: Even Luke 22:43-44 are omitted by many ancient 

authorities (cf, Blass: "Philology of the Gospels" p.91ff) 













: 









































































. 

























. 























' 





















■ : 



t 












. 








• 










. 

■ 






• ' ■ 





or because he was following a different tradition, yet 
all three Synoptic Gospels agree that the outoome of 
this fierce battle of the soul, was a complete submission 
to the will of God: "My father, if it be possible, let 
this cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but 
as thou wilt” (Mt. 26:59; Mark 14:56; Luke 22:42), The 
Church has done as .Jesus taught. The liturgical formula 
"through Jesus Christ, our Lord" is intended to convey 

the idea th^t the prayer is offered to God in the spirit 

■ 

of our Lord, with his complete submission to the will 
of God, 

The Lord 1 2 s Prayer 

The Lord’s Prayer has been the common property of 

Christendom from the time Jesus first taught the words 

to his disciples. Gore, in his little classic on 

"Prayer", first published in 1898, says: 

"The Lord’s Prayer is not so much one prayer 
among many, as the type end pattern of all 
Christian prayer." (1) 

E. F. Scott, in his work published in 1951, says: 

"It sums up in a concentrated form the whole 
substance of Jesus 1 teaching." (2) 

The Christian Church has ever been in essential agreement 

with these statements, Detailed examination of the Lord’s 

Prayer reveals the.t the first three petitions deal with 

our relationship to God: God is addressed in the first 

(1) p,27, 1947 reprint 

(2) In "The Lord’s Prayer, Its Character, Purpose and 
Xnterpre tat1on", p.55 

















■ -V 

. 

, 

. 














. 




, 

. 






■ 








. . 







23 - 


petition as the Father whose name must be hallowed, in 

the second as the King whose Kingdom is to come, and in 

the third as the Lord of Heaven and earth whose will must 

be fulfilled. (1). The last three petitions deal with 

our relationship to men. In the middle, Jesus in his 

realism placed the petition for daily bread, knowing that 

he who has no bread wi!3 find it difficult either to 

worship God or to serve his brother as he should. The 

Lord’s Prayer contains the essence of the true meaning 

of religion — that which binds us to God and to men f 

”It links that fundamental and primary prayer 
which is the soul’s absolute action towards God, 
with that secondary prayer which consists in the 
imbuing of Men’s successive actions with absolute 
worth by directing them to God.™ (2) 

It was natural that this prayer should enter the 
liturgy of the Church. As early as the middle of the 
second century it had become an important part of the 
liturgical forms of the Church. Our source for this in¬ 
formation is the Didaehe, which also takes it for granted 
that this prayer will be prayed three times daily, (5) 

Neither Mark nor John records the Lord’s Prayer, and 
it is likely that they simply neglected to set down infor¬ 
mation very well known to all. John, in addition, would 
have theological reasons for omitting it. Neither Matthew 
nor Luke concludes the prayer with the doxology, as does 

the Didaehe. Oesterley quotes in full the resemblances 

(1) Eastings, "A Dictionary of Christ and the Gospels” p.61 

{ Z) Underhill, ’’Worship”, p.228 

(3) Of. Didaehe, Oh, 8, appendix, p.108 









' 


. 


- 

* ■ V - 

■ 


r . 


; 








, 




: 








• . ' . 












24 


between the Lord’s Prayer and the Eighteen Benedictions (1). 
He also traces the influence of the Sherooneh Egreh upon 
all early Christian prayers, thus showing one very defin¬ 
ite area in which Synagogue worship was carried over into 
Christian worship in New Testament times, (2) 

Jesus’ intention regarding the use of the Lord’s 
Prayer seems to be quite clear. In Matthew the prayer 
follows his discourse in which he warns against the use 
of empty phrases; in Luke it follows the direct request 
of the disciples, ’’Lord, teach us to pray”. The intro¬ 
duction to the prayer as we find it in Matthew (probably 
the early and original form), ”Pray then like this”, seems 
to imply that it should not be used in parrot fashion. 

The context corroborates this. His followers since that 
day have repeated it in this way only too often in their 
individual and corporate worship, yet such misuse does 
not in the least lessen the great value to the Christian 
Church of the content and form of this prayer. It still 
is and always will be ’’the type and pattern of all 
Christian prayer ” • (2) 

A study of the occasions when prayer is mentioned 
in the Book of Acts shows that in the early days the 
Christians continued to pray in the Temple (Acts 2:46) 

’’day by day., .praising God”. Peter and John went up to 
the Temple for prayers (Acts 3:1), At the same time, the 

(1) Oesterley, ”The Jewish Background of the Christian 
Liturgy”, pp.151-154 

(2) ibid, pp,125-147 

(3) Gore, ’’Prayer”, p.27, 1947 reprint 










.... *, 




'< .. • v? 

■ r'- v . . . -■ V 

. 

. 



. 

. 

. 

i j . 

. 

* ' v :•. ■ • ... • 1 . 

' 

‘ ' * ' • 


- 

. . . 








- 25 - 


more informal mode of worship in homes, for example in 
the "upper room" (Acts 1:13), allowed the early Christians 
to devote themselves with one accord to prayers* There 
are many other references to informal prayers and meetings 
for the edification of the Christian group assembling in 
private homes (Acts 2:1-4; 12:12; 16:7-8; 20:20; 28:23)* 

Fasting and pra 3 rer seem to go together, prior to 
some important decision, asjtoT example the setting apart 
of Barnabas and Saul for the Gentile Mission (Acts 13:1-3). 
Earnest prayer was made by "the church" for Peter, who 
had been imprisoned (Acts 12:5), Paul and Silas in 
prison in Philippi sang and prayed together at midnight 
(Acts 16:25), When Paul arrived at Miletus he sent for 
the elders at Ephesus, and at their parting "he knelt 
down and prayed with them all" (Acts 20:36), Again at 
Tyre the Christian community "with their wives and 
children" accompanied Paul to the city limits, and 
"kneeling down on the beach we prayed and bade one an¬ 
other farewell" (Acts 21:5), 

With one exception, none of the words of the 
prayers are recorded. This one exception is found in 
Acts 4:24. (1). The prayer occurs after the release 

of Peter and John, and its wording seems to be an example 
of the more formal prayers used in the early Christian 
community. Liturgically, the passage is interesting for 


(1) The prayer: Acts 4:24b-30 










• C‘ 


. 

. , ; . . I ■ ' ' • I I ; : t . - ; . ^ • . ) £ ?n<>.c ; | 












. 




■ 






■ 

• * ' • .! , •. 














26 - 


its use of the word "Lord" (1) , According to 

F. J. Foakes-Jackson, 

"Despots is found in the Greek Liturgies. 

In the New Testament it is used, once, in 
the Nunc Dimittis of Simeon, ’Lord (Despota) , 
now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace* 
(Luke ii:29), once in the Apocalypse (Rev.vi.10), 
and also in 2 Pet. ii.l, as in the similar 
passage in Jude 4". (2) 


For the actual content of the prayers of Paul, we 

must go to the letters themselves. As Dibelius says: 

"In outer framework Paul follows the epistolary 
style of his times, though not with.out himself 
changing what he found at hand, A Greek private 
letter begins with the prescript: *(the sender) 
gives (his) greetings to (the recipient)*. Paul 
employs this formula, but instead of the Greek 
greeting chairein (salutation), he employs the 
similar sounding but far deeper charis (grace) 
and adds the Semitic greeting ’peace 1 2 3 , e.g., 

’Grace and peace from God our Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ 1 , This combination of words 
of greeting had possibly already become customary 
in Greek-speaking Judaism, but it may originate 
with Paul....Frequently in a Greek private letter, 
an assurance of prayer for the recipients follows 
on a prescript. Oharacteristically in Paul an 
expression of thanks grew out of this feature; 
when he mentions his readers his prayer is one of 
thanksgiving. That is the foim in which Paul 
gives praise to his churches." (3) 

Prayer to Paul is vital, and his letters abound in pray¬ 
ers of thanksgiving and joy. "We give thanks to God 
always for you all, constantly mentioning you in our 
prayers" (I.Thess. 1:2), "For what thanksgiving can we 
render to God for you, for all the joy which we feel for 
your sake before our God, praying earnestly night and 


(1) "Sovereign Lord" in Moffatt 

(2) Moffatt Commentary on Acts, p.29 

(3) Dibelius, "A Fresh Approach to the New Testament and 
Early Christian Literature, pp.142 and 143 











i 




i ‘: ■ • 

■ 




t • . » 








e 

, 1 

. 

, *. 

. 

. 








. 

. 


, 

















- 27 


day,.." (I.Thess. 3:9-10). I thank my God in all my 
remembrance of you, always in every prayer of mine for 
you all making my prayer with t joy " (Phil., 1:3-4). "And 
it is my prayer that your love may abound more and more 
....to the glory and praise of God" (Phil. 1:9,11). 

"Yes, and I shall re joice . For I know that through 
your prayers and the help of the Spirit of Jesus Christ 
this will turn out for my deliverance" (Phil, 1:19). 

"We worship Cod in spirit, and glory in Christ Jesus, 
and put no confidence in the flesh" (Phil, 3:3). "We 
always thank God , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
when we pray for you" (Col. 1:3), and "we have not 
ceased to pray for you" (Col, 1:9). 

We may further infer what were the contents of 
Paul’s prayers from his instructions regarding prayer, 
as given to his converts. "Rejoice always, pray con¬ 
stantly , give thanks in all circumstances; for this is 
the will of God in Christ Jesus for you" (I.Thess, 5: 
16-18). "Rejoice in your hope, be patient in tribula¬ 
tion, be constant in prayer" (Rom, 12:12). "I appeal 
to you...to strive together with me in your prayers to 
God on my behalf" (Rom. 15:30). "...but in everything 

by praye r and supplication with thanksgiving let your 
requests be made known to God" (Phil. 4:6), "...always, 
and for everything giving thanks in the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father" (Eph, 5:20). "Con- 












. 









. - 






















: 

■ 


. 

, 

: 

- . 





28 - 


tinue steadfastly in prayer, being watchful in it 
with thanksgiving " (Col. 4:2). "And whatever you do, 
in word or deed, do everything in the name of the Lord 
Jesus, giving thanks to Cod the Father through him" 

(Col. 3:17). 

Here is the new element entering into the prayers 
of the early Christians, - an element of overflowing 
gratitude for their salvation as found in Christ Jesus, 
expressing itself in thanksgiving. The great love which 
bound their hearts and minds would naturally lead them 
to make supplication and intercession in their prayers. 
With the heightened respect accorded Paul through the 
passing of the years, the reading of his letters in 
Christian assemblies would have a strong, effect upon 
those who heard, and who no doubt strove to imitate the 
Great Apostle, It is not fanciful to suppose that some 
of his phraseology, and some of the doxologies with 
which he closed his letters, entered the thinking and 
the liturgy of the early Church, These doxologies, 
stated with so much simplicity, beauty and dignity, would 
lend themselves easily to liturgical use, and they prob¬ 
ably were used in this way in later years. 


Two passages on prayer from I.Timothy, although 
probably not by Paul, yet show in phraseology and spirit 
such a similarity to Paul’s authentic sayings that they 




29 - 


very well could be by him* If they are not, they il¬ 
lustrate that at this stage in the development of the 
Christian Church Paul’s influence was of such import 
as to give plausibility to the suggestion made above* 
At the very least they are valuable in giving us some 
insight into the forms and content of prayers used in 
the Church at this early time: 

"I urge that supplications t prayers , interces ¬ 
sions, and thanksgivings be made for all men, 
for kings and all who are in high positions, 
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, 
godly and respectful in every way. 1 ’ (I * Tim* 2:1-2) 

”1 desire then that in every place the men 
should pray, lifting holy hands without anger 
or quarreling.*’ (I.Tim.2:8) 

Two passages from Ephesians are interesting for the 
same reasons: 

’’Let there be thanksgiving ” (Eph* 5:4) 

’’Pray at all times in the Spirit, with all 
prayer and supplication* To that end keep 
alert with all perseverance, making supplica ¬ 
tion for all the saints, and also for me” 

TSph. 6:18-19). 


Conclusions 

(1) The worship of the early Christians took two forms, 
which existed side by side: 
a) They kept all the formal religious observances 
of Temple and Synagogue - the feasts, the hours 
of prayer, and the ritual of Judaism, with the 
result that both Temple and Synagogue worship 
would certainly influence the form and content 
of early Christian prayers. 














. 

■ 

' 

: , . ■ 


. 

- 

' 










... . 







b) At the same time they would meet for informal 
prayer and "the breaking of bread" at the 
house of one of their number* 

(2) As Christianity moved out of Palestine, the worship 
of the Synagogue influenced to an even greater ex¬ 
tent the form and content of Christian prayers* 

(3) In time, due to the teaching of Jesus on prayer, and 
due to the influence of Paul, the prayers of the 
Christians developed along independent and more in¬ 
formal lines* 

(4) The Lord’s Prayer and some phrases by Paul would in 
all probability be taken up into Christian worship 
and later become part of the liturgy of the Church, 
The content of prayers would be along the lines sug¬ 
gested by Paul, the expression being determined by 
the joy and enthusiasm which filled their hearts 

as a consequence of their Christian experience* 


\ ^ 





Chapter III 


THE SCRIPTURES 











Ill 


THE SCRIPTURES 


As in the case of Prayer, the use of the Scriptures 
in early Christian worship was an inheritance from Juda¬ 
ism. Modern man can hardly comprehend the almost sacred 
reverence in which the Scriptures were held by the 
Jewish people. Even at the present time the reading of 
Torah in the Jewish synagogue is surrounded with much 
ceremony and solemnity. 

Torah Service 

Isaiah 2:1-4 is read by the Reader 
Choir 

{after which the congregation rises. Reader 
takes Scroll from Ark and faces congregation): 
Reader : This is the covenant which dedicated Israel 
to the One and Eternal God. 

This is the Torah,' the pillar of right end 
of truth. 

This is the Law, that proclaims the Father¬ 
hood of God and the Brotherhood of man. 

Congregation : May we never fail in gratitude to our 
fathers for this blessed heritage, and for 
the martyrdom they suffered in its defence. 

Reader : Let us acknowledge its truth, 
abide by its teachings 

and ever proclaim the watchword of our faith. 

Reader and Congregation, then Choir 

Hear, 6 Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord 
is One. (repeated three times) 

Choir : True it is that the God of the Universe is 

our King; throughout all generations He en- 
dureth; and His kingdom and faithfulness 
endure forever, 

(Congregation is seated) 

Torah benedictions. Torah is read. Translation. 
Haftarah. (Special Prayers, etc.) (1) 


(1) Union Prayer Book, pp.94-95 


31 - 





















? : 


... : at. I 




0 ;:X'ZL 


O.VO' Vt! .1 •„ - 

!■:> if.il tvVi ■ •’ j , V, 

. 


!v ;• • / >M. 


J j,: ; 


L " rj 10 




U ... 


. , , ■ , 1 ■ ; ; • i i ' \ 

-C-j ‘.i\ i.• t ' M.V Vi ■ V- s ' f — 

’0 ■ r i • .V •...■ .. ,:: i; " ^ i- j i 1 v ,J 

: 


. 


. * ' .' V t 

. - .... 


: . . : 

- 

, . ./ • :. 

'. /• .:' .; :>.r. 

T J".. .. 


i-f • V.c V'V : ■ 'V ; : •.V 


() Vj .V 


iu .. vr ' 




' . v.-r..,; 








■ 












32 


Some such order was probably followed in the 
Synagogue of Jesus* day, and the reading was in all like¬ 
lihood surrounded with like dignity and reverence. Tak¬ 
ing into consideration this spirit, it is not difficult 
to understand how the Jewish religion was able to sur¬ 
vive the destruction of the Temple, 

With regard to the reading of the Scriptures in 
the Synagogue service, (1), it should be noted that, 
even before Jesus* time, the knowledge of Hebrew had 
dwindled amongst the common people, and the language 
generally spoken was Aramaic, Although a little Hebrew 
may have been known, since it was taught in the Synagogue, 
the Scripture reading was translated and interpreted in 
Aramaic, the Law being paraphrased verse by verse and 
the Prophets three verses at a time. In fact, well 
before the time of Jesus, this procedure had come to 
mean not simply paraphrasings or translations but fairly 
extensive expositions which followed the reading, (2), 

In such teaching and expounding of the Scriptures we find 
the origin of the sermon. The Gospels record several in¬ 
stances when Jesus taught and preached in the Synagogue 
(Mt. 4:23; Mark l:21f, 6:2; Luke 4:16ff, 6:6; John 18:20), 
The instruction was didactic rather than rhetoric, as 
may be inferred from the sitting position (Luke 4:20; 

Mt, 5:1, 26:55; John 8:2). However, we note that at 

Pisidian Antioch (Acts 1 3:14-16) Paul stood up to speak _ 
TlTof, Hastings, **A Dictionary of Ghrist and the Gospels’* 
Vol#II,pp,689-692; Davies, "Christian Worship" pp,8-13 
(2) Oesterley, "The Jewish Background of the Christian 
Liturgy", p.41 








d'.l, 


, 


; 


r i 









>/' ' . ■>2 . , : fk x 




1 

c 


- 












33 


when invited to address the Synagogue after the Scrip¬ 
tures had been read. 

We sometimes fail to see, from our vantage point, 
that when the New Testament speaks of the "Scriptures”, 
the Old Testament is meant, and not the Bible as we 
know it. Indeed it sometimes comes as a shock to 
realize that the Christian Church came into being, 
grew and expended without the benefit of the New Testa¬ 
ment in the form which is so indispensable today. But 
this growth would have been practically impossible 
without the Law, the Prophets and the Writings, The Law 
in particular was surrounded with an air of sanctity 
which, as has been shown, still surrounds it in the 
modern worship of the lews. It was only in time, due 
to the influence of the teachings of Jesus, that the 
New Testament literature was considered to be of e^ual 
value to the Law and eventually of even greater value. 
This was, to say the least, revolutionary. The begin¬ 
nings of the process of canonization of the New Testa¬ 
ment writings can be seen in Paul’s injunction, "And 
when this letter has been read among you, have it read 
also in the church of the Laodiceans ; and see that you 
read also the letter from Lsodiees" (Col, 4:16). In 
this way, as early as A.D. 140 the "memoirs of the 
Apostles" (epistles and Gospels) were being read side 
by side with the Prophets. (1). When we read in 
I,Tim. 5:18 about "the scripture", and we know from 


(1) Maxwell, "Outline of Worship", p.12 













. . i j . . . J 




•' ••/ J i 0 








, ■: , J 

. • i ... . \ 

> : 1 ) . . - 11 


■ . . \i! J 


o u::- * mu ;; n i 


; 


J. :J O X- 


• J' 1 : v/ ■ );■ -j' . ■ ■ I .)i~J j JJofS hi 

' / .. >: J '• ' 'J .JC V ! .1. ‘ . I 

■ . . . 

. ... i ■ , :, ; 

. ■ ... ' j > 0 J 1 I ... ■ . 

; / • .1: .. . ■ . 

/ ? ■ >; j. ' .1 . ... ’ . ■ •. ;•> j :’J .ij '\T 

" ' - . V r- t J . .., ; •••; • j . . , J'Z 








rn' ? •: i-r j':v. d :f-± i 

; ( ■ ' ■ - ' ■ ; "I .X ■ M ’ • . x T‘;i.v' .1 ' . J' 1 J' -j,:'. ;i . 

:: • : ■ : : x “o ■ ■ .'..-■•J- j.i 


. 








J q ■'} f ilSz'oqA 

'' > ' "■'•A'' i - : ■ ..j iv; ■ -) > • vd 






■ ' ' 


34 - 


the quotation used that the writer is referring to 
the Old Testament and passages now contained in the 
New Testament, the circle is almost complete: the 
New Testament material has become "Scripture". 

When we tabulate the number of quotations from, 
and allusions to the Old Testament which are contained 
in the books of the New Testament (1), we can see 
that the early Christians were steeped in the knowledge 
of the Old Testament. Certainly they knew the Scrip¬ 
tures. It is not surprising that Isaiah and Psalms 
stand at the top as most-quoted books, and that Hev- 
elation, Matthew and Hebrews lead in the use of Old 
Testament allusions, considering the purpose, source 
and destination of each book. 

The recorded sayings of Jesus show an intimate 
knowledge of the Scriptures. In Matthew are recorded 
27 direct quotations used by Jesus, while Mark and Luke 
each contain 12. He refutes the tempter and withstands 
temp tation with this knowledge (Luke 4:4-12 and parallels)» 
In reply to John’s question he 'quotes Isaiah 61 
(Luke 7:22). In the parable of Dives and Lazarus he 
implies that a knowledge of Moses and the Prophets 
should be sufficient for salvation (Luke 16:29) and even 
the return of the dead would have no effect if people 
did not hear Moses and the Prophets. He sometimes quotes 


( 1 ) Appendix, pp, 105-106 












-o:- 

Vi o 

: i J . J: > •' 

.. • 




• i 

■ 


. j a? 





j j . t j' 



' 

. 

. 


; 

i , .., "... h ; ; 

.. m . 'j 

.noInul 



-i ...e 

■ . 

■ > 



• • 'V ' ' • 

• zi ' 

v.i-: or J • J 



„•' i ... ; * ! -' - • ' 

.. o j-j J J. • ■ 

, ; r : 7 :.l. , • , 'i ' O' '• , ' : 1 - 0 ; 

; , .! ,) ■_ J ... >J V -• .J T. •' , -■ O’ 

, '• .){■ a j .V.M'.v aa an' 



.. ‘J J .-.1 ... : . •? . 



. 




• 

’ 



) oat . .!_ a - 


. 

t if 

-v ->' a- ! 

. s- 

. ■ ■. '■■■' - 

■. . J f. .. a ■ ;i 

: j • 5 -o .j .';m; 

. . : 



1 : 

llhJd) 

: 

■i 


. 



: j , , 

• 



' a\ ;: ,1 . 

. 1 1 

4 

j, 1 


: 

• 

. . '. . <• >. i. ';..) 

)' 6oil 

.. .1... 

j 



1 i< •' i O' v L 

.A J . 



•C . 


. 




a.a al'aa -..a; 



. ' a ■ 

> 

■ 

& on hi® 



35 - 


Scripture to drive home a point (Mt. 12:1-7) or to 
rebuke (Mt. 13:14) or both (Mt. 21:42; Mark 12:10; 

Luke 20:17). Jesus loved the rich young ruler 
(Mark 10:21) because he kept the Law (of. also Mt* 19: 
16-30 and Luke 18:18-30). It seems to be quite clear 
that during the three hours 1 silence on the Gross Jesus’ 
mind turned to Psalm 22. The risen Christ says to his 
disciples: ”These are my words which I spoke to you, 

while I was still with you, that everything written 
about Die in the law o f Moses and the prophets and the 
psalms must be f ulfilled* (Luke 24:44). The Great" Com¬ 
mandment, which we consider peculiarly Christ’s own and 
our own (Mt. 22:35-40; Mark 12:28-31; Luke 10:27) is a 
direct quotation from Deuteronomy 6:5 and Leviticus 19:18, 
What was original is the combination and interdependence 
of the two and the addition of mind to ’’heart, soul and 
strength”. 

One would naturally expect Old Testament quotations 
to be used as "proof-texts". The term ”it is written”, 
or "it is said”, is used about fifty times in the New 
Testament: 23 times in the Gospels, 7 times in Acts, 

6 times in the Catholic epistles, and 14 times in Paul 
(of. for example John 5:39, 10:34, 19:24,28,36-37; 

Acts 1:20; Galatians 4:27), It almost seems as though 
each author were saying to the reader or listener: 

”This is so. But you want proof? Well, then, it is 
written,,..,’.” And that should convince anyone. 









; ' 




i 


} 




IJ V Qf>r. 



;< Vi-'.: V 






.M. 


■■ . ... 


t 


' " : J : 




£' J 






f 






Vj a 


1 


‘ 




> 


. 








I. 





7'""V' 


J'.; .V : 








36 


The term 




in the New Testament is used 


"solely in its pregnant technical usage as designation 
of the Sacred Scriptures". (1). Employing a "proof- 
text" in order to endow a statement with final and 
divine authority is, however, a very dangerous technique, 
and one which may lead to misuse. It can even be argued 
to the point of absurdit}^ an example in point being 
contained in Matthew’s account of Christ’s triumphal 
entry into Jerusalem, when in his anxiety to "prove" 
that the Scriptures are being fulfilled, yet not realiz¬ 
ing, the effect of the poetic use of parallelism in 
Hebrew poetry, he has Jesus riding into Jerusalem 
sitting on an ass and a colt’. (Mt. 21:7). 


At the same time we are able to notice how the Law 
is gradually, at times imperceptibly and subtly, being 
undermined. Cut of the ashes of the old there arises 
a fairer and nobler structure, with its foundation on 
the old, and yet completely transformed: the Law is 
being fulfilled before our very eyes. "I have not come 
to abolish (the law and the prophets)" says Jesus 
(Mt. 5:17), "but to fulfill them". The Sermon on the 
Mount in Matthew is a sermon on the text: "You have 
heard (in the law)....but I say unto you....", the 
completion consisting of a new principle., arrived at by 
ruthlessly discarding unessentLsls and thereby deepening, 
transforming and enriching the old. The emphasis is on 


(1) Hastings, "A Dictionary of Christ and the Gospels", 
Yol.II, p.585 




















... 


■r 








i\ : j. i‘ 


>■ is 4 






c ) 


y > J- ( - ‘ : 




. 


. 


J :: 


































37 


inwardness, not on external observances which quite 
easily can lead to hypocrisy, for ’’they preach but 
do n ot practice ” (Mt. 23:1-3), they quote the Law and 
pretend to live by it, but neglect ’’the weightier 
matters of the law: justice, mercy and faith; these 
you ought to have done, without neglecting the others” 
(Mt. 23:23-36). This process of destruction and recon¬ 
struction can be seen quite clearly in the use Jesus 
makes of Isaiah 61 in the Synagogue (Luke 4:17-22), 

^here Isaiah has a.comma: ”To proclaim the acceptable 
year of the Lord (,) and the day of vengeance of our 
God” (Isaiah 61:1-2), Jesus makes a full stop. Neither 
the vengeance of the Lord nor exclusive racism has a 
place in the Good News, To say that Jesus was thus the 
first ’’modern critic” of the Scriptures may be fanciful, 
yet it certainly is in harmony with the life, teaching 
and example of Jesus. 

The same path was trod in great anguish of mind 
by Paul, for he knew the Law, and because he knew it 
he loved it. He says, ’’The Law is holy” (Rom. 7:12), 

’’the Law is good” (Rom 7:16), yet what the Law could not 
do, God has done in Christ (Rom, 8:3), ’’For Christ is 
the end of the Law, that every one who has faith may be 
justified” (Rom, 10:4); and again ’’Love is the fulfil¬ 
ling of the Law” (Rom, 13:10). ’’The promise,. ,did not 
come through the Law but through the righteousness of 
faith” (Rom. 4:13), ’’For in Ghrist Jesus neither circum- 





• f . ;7 



H 


:. J 


. & 










/i 




» '"o. ; J . 


I . . 





J(i 


1 ■ wT xiy t UCU;. l J ) 











38 - 


c is ion. nor uncircumcision is of any avail, but fsitb working 
through love" (Gal.5:6). "Real circumcision is a matter 
of the heart, spiritual and not literal" (Rom. 2:29). 

The logical end of the process begun in the teachings 
of Jesus is that "the Law is abolished through Christ" 

(Gal. chs.2-6; EpL. 2:15; Col. 2:14; Heb. 7). 

The conclusion to be drawn from the foregoing in¬ 
vestigation is that the early Christians knew, loved and 
obeyed the Scriptures, and that they also used and quoted 
Scripture so extensively that it was like a part of the 
air they breathed. And yet through the leaven of the 
teaching of Jesus Christ the old was done away with and 
a "new" spirit and a "new" attitude were created. The 
emphasis on the word "new" (the New Testament, the new 
song, the new earth, the new heaven, a new creature) 
bears witness to this revolutionary change which took 
place within the lifetime of many of the early Christians, 
who could say: 

"In many and various ways God spoke of old 
to our fathers by the prophets; but in these 
last days he has spoken to us by a Son." 

(Heb. 1:1-2) 






. 

- 

. 


. ii‘ . ■ . v ! - 


• . ; - * > ' • - • ; 


- 


i I 




v. . 




V ":J' - j L ./ 1; . ;j, ■ [j J . i 


■ i ij , 

' ' . . Li . J 

1 U’ ' ; •' 'i/ C, s.h)" .. !. i 

, 


- 






.0 0$ 


i •. . • 




, 

• ■ ■ .. I 

. hi V _ ■ ; ; : ■ -,. r 

' Vi - t •*' '— ■ ' : : i 

V ’ 

' v . i'V . •: '... ; 

. 

: i «c 


' u ’• • / \‘ V-*r> ; ii* . . 

. /*. >>11 u (liPt !$©,£>» [,m 




.V }: . .) ; L. "v ,, 

J ; J J i\: : . o' 


■ • '1 ' X 

•'■'ll '* : 3 v/ ' f : t i o 

U fl,i' ; i,i: i: 3;’t Xsv (r.fc --.!&£•):£ ■ 

: • 















Chapter IT 


HYMNODY 



IV 


HYMNODY 

Christianity was born in a burst of song (Luke 2:14), 
and the Christian Church has grown continuously as a 
singing Church. There are numerous indications that the 
earliest Christians praised God with joyful ana grateful 
hearts. After Jesus had partaken of the Last Supper 
with his disciples, they sang a hymn before they went 
out (Mt, 26:30, Mark 14:26). (1). Paul and Silas sang 

at midnight in prison (Acts 16:25). After the risen 
Christ had appeared to the disciples they Tt returned to 
Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the 
Temple blessing God" (Luke 24:52). 

"There is no recorded instance of singing 
in the Synagogue" (2) 

and there was little congregational singing in the 
Temple. It seems evident, therefore, that the singing 
of hymns by individuals and by assembled groups, so com¬ 
mon among the early Christians, is one of the new elements 
in the worship of the early Church. 

When the heart overflows, it must express itself 
in some form, whether in a quotation from the Bible, or • 
in a wordless sigh of gratitude, or, as is more frequent, 
in the words and music of a hymn. For this reason the 
hymnbook is as important in the devotional life of the 

(1) Goodspeed suggests, in "A History of Early Christian 
Literature", n.170, that this hymn was "the second 
part (Pss.115-118) — of the Hallel". 

(2) Davies, "Christian Worship", p.13. Gf. also Lietz- 
mann, "Geschiehte der alten Kirche", pp>151-152 


39 








M 


. 

• - 


* . : 

. : .. ' J’ .. ' . it J j 

. 


1 


- , . ... 4 0 . .. L J .. . . 

i ■ .• . . ......... 

■ - • ■ • : : . . . . .. . , 

■ 

. . J. : • . „ . 




■ ‘ a 2 . . . 

■ 






{ >• •• . 

■■ • • ; :Ki- : . 

• > ■ ■ . - . ■ 






- 40 


Christian as is the Bible. To some the hymnal is even 
more important than the Bible, as an aid in expressing 
an overwhelming sense of gratitude and thanksgiving for 
the redemption in Jesus Christ. The greet power of such 
feelings is evident in the spirit-filled experiences 
in Corinth, where the overflowing heart found, its outlet 
sometimes in wordless, senseless sounds, sometimes in 
snatches of inspired song, or in ”psaims, hymns and 
spiritual songs”. (Col. 5:16). 

This perfectly natural experience has repeated 
itself in the history of the Christian Church in every 
period of renewal and revitalisation. So it was at the 
time of the Reformation, when the long-re pressed 
emotional fervour of the redeemed expressed itself in 
hymns, and Luther’s ”Ein* feste Burg ist unser Gott” 
became the battle song of the Reformation. So it was 
with Calvin, in whom the same fervour expressed itself 
in stately and dignified metrical hymns. The Wesleyan 
revival gave us the emotional warmth and fervour of 
the evangelical hymn (Charles Wesley wrote over 6,000 
of these), and in more recent times the Gospel Hymns of 
Moody and Sankey have enjoyed popularity (1). In 
our own day there is evidence that we are standing on 
the brink of another forth-pouring. Some very excellent 

hymns have been written, and there is promise of more 

(l) Strangely enough, when people request ’’the good""old""” 

hymns”, these are the hymns they mean, not realizing 
that their ”good”-ness is questioned by many, and 
their ”old”-ness is a comparative youthfulness. 





jj i 3 




■ 


■ >;■ 


I. 







ic.iv.; At ’..di- j 






T\ 



l 


r 


l j j . 


) . 



. 3:■ ■ j 


7' 













41 


to come. From this short digression into later eras 
we return now to consider the hymnody of the early 
Church. 


Paul is our best source of information as to the 

foim and content of early hymnody. We find expressed 

in Col. 3:16 our charter of Christian song: 

”Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, as 
you teach and admonish one another in all wisdom, 
and as you sing psalms and hymns and spiritual 
songs with thankfulness in your hearts to God.” 

The parallel passage is found in Eph. 5:18b-20: 

”Be filled with the spirit, addressing one 
another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, 
singing and making melody to the Lord with all 
your heart, always and in everything giving thanks 
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the 
Father 

According to Paul, then, the source of hymns is to be 
the spirit; the enthusiasm is to be spiritual as opposed 
to physical; the note is to be a note of thanksgiving. 
Teaching, admonishing and praise are to be joined 
together in perfect harmony. This is still the best 
statement of what a good hymn should be, and still 
describes the best of our hymns. 


Paul’s three-fold division, "psalms, hymns and 


spiritual songs” calls for comment: 

”0f these th e yUQS is properly a ’song 

with musical accompanixaent’ (possibly harp) and 
doubtless includes the Old Testament Psalms: 


er 


V 1UV0 S » a song in praise of God or of 
’Famous men’ , such as that in Acts 4:84-30, 



_ / 

<M t KV| , any song on a spirit- 
the^lBtinction is not technical 


9 








. '■ i b J» Vr 



* ' 


* ' ' ' . • 


? 



. ; ■ ■ .. U ■ . 

. i 

■ 


.. 

. . u t ... ’ ) ) - < i 

. • 

■ 

... "v/'.' : .>:■ 


■ ;/.r ‘ . ' i .... J ,:k; i '■ 


. 




1 :;, ';j 

■ 

s . . . U . . . • ' . 

• ■ hPmj 










■ . ) 






!K r 


.)■ ft ) ' i ) • 

•: ' •: •• ;• •. / O' . b 




) 



O'J*' U . ' 

■ - 

j '■ > : J :r 


* 



t 

.. .. ) 5 





• U 










e 


. . ? . . . ' £ . ■ . . 

j.f Li .fail ■; 





- 42 


Cf 

»nd cannot be pressed rigidly, for U JJL VOS 

is used of the Psalms of David (Ps."~71:20, 

ti 

Jos. Ant. vi i , xi i . 3) , and bo th. V ii X V 0 S 

and & y \ _ occur frequently in the titles 

of those Psalms(1) 

Unfortunately, the actual words of most of the 
hymns from those formative years of the Church are lost, 
or at best have been preserved in fragmentary form in 
the New Testament, Of course, in view of the fact that 
the first Christians expected an early return of Christ, 
there would appear to be no need to preserve things for 
posterity. Their attitude would be: Why change things? 
Let everyone be content to remain in the state in which 
he is, for the Lord will come soon. Only with the 
passing of years there came (for example in Paul) a 
slow adjustment to the probability that the long-expected 
return would not be in the immediate future, and with 
this adjustment came a realization of the need for 
setting down records for the edification of future gen¬ 
erations. Careful examination of the literature of 
the New Testament with a view to reconstructing (albeit 
with many assumptions) the earliest hym.nody used in 
Christian worship yields: 

A) Jewish hymns 

B) Hymns which are Christian in content but based 
on Jewish models 

C) Some original Christian hymns 

(1) Hastings’ Dictionary of the Bible, article on Hymns 
in Yol.II, p.441 













; . 


; :.v ■ it- a : .. 


, 


• j 

- 




, \' "i' o 3 . J 


i Vi 


).! 


. 

" .■ V . '■ ■ j- •:> ' ' 

v.! ; ,*v"' : o'. 




. 

j V ■ i J ;) (,< 'J ' ' *X ) 

»■' J • •• 


-r 




j ' r- j - "J J \.<\ . ' ... * : ■■■ ■ '• 

, ■ 


■ 




■r 




, 




■>; j 


■A 




••••' .i'LOi )j,,, 






a . . .r.i « 


.r :.o OV o‘::iJ j .. *:• 

■: v: . .30 )A ■ j ■ i\ o 

.< • : ■ ■ ■ ■ • 


0 ./ v0:' 0 .. .i. ' 0 ri- ! j ... .... * . , . 0. i 0 • 

. 

■ i 1 1. . C 1 . 

i. j. W* , 


.. j : .. . .- .i. j J.‘0 ■ p'\:- . . \ 0 l .... "■ j'Ji 

.0. .1) ' .0 ... i j , i 


J 


.. .. j 1 : ;..i J '! 

■ , . * ... . 


/ 






4.3 


At times it is very difficult to draw the line between 
hymn, credal staternsnt and exalted discourse. Examples 
of: 

D) "sung dogma" 

E) prose-poetry, and 

F) doxologies 

also emerge and cannot be passed over, for 

"The truest dogma is the faith which authen¬ 
ticates itself experimentally in the adoring 
praise of the Church," (1) 

A) Jewish Hymns 

When we set out to examine hymns or fragments of 
hymns in the New Testament, we would expect that the 
influence of Old Testament models would be considerable. 
Even in Old Testament times we find spontaneous out¬ 
bursts, for the "new songs" mentioned in the Old Testa¬ 
ment are "songs of thanksgiving expressly made for un¬ 
expected mercies". (2). It is beyond the scope of 
this dissertation to show how great the influence of 
the Psalter was, but some idea of this influence may 
be obtained at a glance from the tabulation of most- 
quoted Old Testament books, (3) 

Some Jewish hymns have been preserved for us in 

the Book of Revelation: 

Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, 
who was and is and is to cornel (Rev, 4:8), 

which simply echoes the Sanctus of Isaiah 6:3, Another 

is the song of Moses, the servant of God: 

(1) Whale, J.S,, "Christian Doctrine", p,106 

(2) Scott, E. F. , "The Book of Revelation", p.139 

(3) Of, appendix pp.105-106 















J: o' 


o 


. 


a 


' 


) 



. 









o 




. 


./ • L. '< : ■ ' f - /. ; w "j il c . 0 



J l ,.)-.; ,;U 


/ 




) 




> ■' 


< 






,U--v 



J 


: ;s " 




j. j 





44 


Great and wonderful are thy deeds, 

0 Lord God the Almighty 1 . 

Just and true are thy ways, 

0 King of the ages! 

Who shall not fear and glorify thy name, 0 Lord? 

For thou alone art holy. 

All nations shall come and worship thee, 

for thy judgments have been revealed. (Rev.l5:3-4) 

And again, 

We give thanks to thee, Lord God Almighty, who 
art and who wast, 

that thou hast taken thy great power and begun 
to reign. 

The nations raged, but thy wrath came, 

and the time for the dead to be judged, 
for rewarding thy servants, the prophets and saints, 
and those who fear thy name, both small and great, 
and for destroying the destroyers of the earth." 

(Rev. 11:17-18) 

Even here we note from the context that the reference 
is to the redemptive work of God in Christ (Rev.7:10,12) . 
Rev. 4:11 echoes the first four of the Eighteen Bene- 
di ctions: 

Worthy art thou, our Lord and God, 

to receive glory and honor and power, 

for thou didst create all things, 

and by thy will they existed and were created. 

(Rev. 4:11) 


It is open to question whether Acts 4:?4-26 is a Jewish 
hymn or a prayer or both: (1) 


Sovereign Lord, who didst ms kg the heaven and 
the earth and the sea and everything in them, 
who by the mouth of our father David, thy servant, 
didst say by the Holy Spirit, 

"Why did the Gentiles rage, 
and the peoples imagine vain things? 

The kings of the earth set themselves in array, 
and the rulers were gathered together, 
against the Lord and against his Anointed." 


(1) Of, p,25 of this thesis 









45 


B) Hymns Christian in conte nt, but based on Jewish models 

Two good illustrations are to be found in Revelation: 

Pev, 7:10,12 (Lamb substituted) 

(10) "Salvation belongs to our God who sits upon 
the throne, and to the Lamb l" 

(12) "AmenI Blessing and glory and wisdom and 

thanksgiving and honor and power and might 
be to our God for ever and everl Amen/ 1 

Also Rev, 11:15 

,T The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom 
of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall 
reign for ever and ever," 

A passage found in Paul’s letter to the Corinthians 
almost sounds like a hymn to be sung, as it still is 
(of. Abide with me) at a funeral service: 

I,Cor, 15:54-57 

"Death is swallowed up in victory," 

"0 death, where is thy victory? 

0 death, where is thy sting?" 

The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin 
is the law. But thanks be to God, who gives us 
the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 

The finest illustrations of hymns Christian in content 

but based on Jewish models are the hymns preserved in 

their complete form in the Gospel of St, Luke, The 

hymns are, of course, the Magnificat, the Benedictus, 

the Gloria in excelsis, end the Nunc dimittis. Goodspeed 

suggests that in these hymns we see "the dawn of 

Christian hvmnology" (1), 


The Magnificat (Luke l:46b-55) is largely based on 
the Old Testament, especially the Song of Hanna 
(I,Sam.2:1-10) • It al so shows the influence of the 
Eighteen Benedictions, 

(1) Goodspeed, E,J,, "A History of Early Christian Lit¬ 
erature", p, 170 












. 

t 

' 

■ 

•• •■■■■:- 

l ■, / ■ , . . • ; - . - - ■ 

• : • 

; -to I 'mo \to 

■ ' 


. : ... ■, •. ■- *- 1: / 

■ . - i 

; ■ r ’ . 

. : ' ' '. • - ‘ . j J : . • 

;.j ;■ ;■ x *i>v- s * i 

v '*• • . •:. J VO'- X-., f 

'• ' . .. ’ ■ . ; 

. . ' : ; !' ' ' . • 1 
, ' L \ J ; V 

• 3 : ■ ■ * • ■■ 

• ■ . ■.. ‘ ; • ; . Oi ' 

•i o , 

, . . ■ ' Q L - . .Vi ; ■ J- J , i V. 

f < -- i ■ . • . . . . , : 

; ; . ; ’ • ! . s .. ... .; . • v« • , : L - ::) ;■ J; :y, , j' i• • 

„. . .. . ... . 


... .... . . • ' <• 



.. .- O ' X XI 

. 









46 - 


"Like the songs of Zachsrias and Simeon, 
it is something more than a psalm, and some¬ 
thing less than a complete Christian hymn." (1) 

Its structure naturally falls into four strophes: 

(i) 46-48, (ii) 49-50, (iii) 51-54, (iv) 54-55. 


The Benedictus (Luke 1:68-79) quotes the Old 
Testament extensively and again makes use of the Eight¬ 
een Benedictions, and is 

"enphatically a ’Hymn of the Incarnation’ 

"In structure it consists of three stanzas - 
the first (vv68»70) setting forth the fact 
of God’s interposition in the approaching 
birth of the long-looked-for Saviour; the 
second (w.71-75) telling the purpose of 
His incarnation; and the third (w.76-79) 
an apostrophe to Zacharias’ babe, declaring 
his office as the forerunner of Christ." (2) 


The Gloria in Excels! s (Luke E:14). In this 
canticle 

"the clauses are carefully balanced, whether 
arranged in a double or triple form. It was 
early used in the Church as a morning hymn 
(Apost. Const, vii.47), and is found in a 
collection of hymns at the end of the Psalter 
in Codex Alex, of the LXX." (3) 

The Nunc Diralttls (Luke 2:£9-32), This ohe above 

all of these early Christian hymns Is still being used 

extensively in the Church, 

"Both the Roman Catholic and the Anglican Churches 
have appointed it as a hymn at Vespers..,.. In the 
Church of Scotland, while Knox’s Prayer-Book held 
its place, and again after the introduction of 
the Paraphrases (1781), it became customary to use 
it at the close of the Communion Services while 
in a few churches, both Episcopal and Presbyterian, 
it is sung at funerals when the body is being 
carrie d out of_ the church," _ ___ 

(1) Hastings, "A Dictionary of 0hrist and the Gospels", 

(2) ibid, Vol.I, p.191 Vol.II, p.103 

(3) Hastings* Dictionary of the Bible, Vol.II, p.441 

(4) Hastings, "A Dictionary of Christ and the Gospels", 

Vol.II, p.254 











- v .?■ 



4 

: 

!■ 

. 



■ 

:o \ 


* < ;; 

•••>' : L ' ; ■ ' 

. . 


■ J ■ 

. .1:1 i f i J' ' 

•. .I.i • of a •''»**. jJ' 


.,{,: . 


- 



.to O -.! o' '■ J) r 






, 

* ?; ■■*.. i u") 


■ 

, 









. 

' 

' 

‘ . - * - i ; , 

i S ' 

. 

- . ; J ; • 

. 

' 

■ • j .vj - ;i.'. iy[$i C h,'J i I s ' 

. 

■ ? u ' XLJuu . I- 'to 

■ ■ • ' : : ' ' - ■' 

i , 

■ .. ■■■ j . n ,■ i.-f nif,". y ' 20 sboJ-'-V o X XX 

• ■ : i . ■ 

v . X *,'... J 

- 

j j.G. . c ■. ■ nx o"- : ' 1 .) 

. , \ 1J".. 






! 1 . , 
■ • ' • • 













47 


It falls into three couplets: the first (v.29) 
giving thanks for departure in peace; the second 
(w. 30-31) stating the reason for Simeon’s peace - 
"for mine eyes have seen thy salvation which thou 
hast prepared in the presence of all people’’, and. 
the third (v.32) stating the different prophetic 
functions of Christ - "a light for revelation t o the 
Gentiles and for the glory of thy people Israel”. 

In structure these earliest hymns of the Church follow 
closely the Psalter, in substance they are reminiscent 
of the Psalms and the prophets and reflect the Syna¬ 
gogue service in the use of the Eighteen Benedictions, 
their criterion in the Messianic fulfilment, and, as 
we would expect, there is a predominance of praise. 

C) Christi an Hymns . 

Not only do we find Jewish hymns, and Christian 
hymns based on Jewish models, but, as would be expected, 
we also find some peculiarly Christian hymns. The fol¬ 
lowing are such hymns or fragments of hymns: 

2.Tim. 2:11- 13 

Die we with Christ, 

And we shall live with HimS 
Endure all, 

And with Him we shall reign. 

Deny we Him, 

Ourselves shall be denied -- 
But seek his love 

’Twill hold in spite of all. 









I 4 

liMi* ■' 8 :i 3 . - 3 

' . i: f L. '= . ■; J . .3 ■ x ■ - • , ; 

. 

; . . : ■ ‘ 1 ■' . j . ..i j >\{\\ j-*i ■ ,/ - '0 

• ■ ..•• - : 3 .3 ... . ... / -ii .\-J .'i.- J 

. 

. 

; ■ ' 

.. . . 1 . 1 ■, . ' 1 .. ■. .1 

... . ... ; : ‘ - .. . . i .. > • V.! I ) 

. .. ...... ;,3 .: 3 . .. .. ‘ f.; : 

. .. 

#.m r:/ c to «• r { i > • 8 s ; p 'l t&gm 

. 

■ 

v 

■ 

„• . 

. 

. • .3. 3 1 


■ . 

...... J 






48 


Dim though our faith, 

The Christ will faithful prove. 

We are in Him: 

Himself He cannot fail. (1) 

In this translation by the Bishop of London the hymn¬ 
like structure is brought out quite clearly. This seems 
to be a hymn on the glories of martyrdom. 


Rev. 12:10-12 

TlOj "Now the salvation and the power end the 
kingdom of our Cod and the authority of 
his Christ have come, for the accuser of 
our brethren has been thrown down, who 
accuses them day and night before our Cod. 

(11) And they have conquered him by the blood of 
the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, 
for they loved not their lives even unto death. 

(12) Rejoice then, 0 heaven and you that dwell 
there in*. But woe to you, 0 earth and sea, 
for the devil has come down to you in great 
wrath, because he knows that his time is short!" 

Rev._ 19:1-2,5 ,6-8 

(l-2f "Hallelujah! Salvation and glory and 
power belong to our Cod, 
for his judgments are true end just; 
he has judged the great harlot who corrupted 
the earth with her fornication, 
and he has avenged on her the blood of his 
servants," 

(5) "Praise our Cod, all you his servants, 
you who fear him, snail and great," 

(6-8) "Hallelujah! Per the Lord our Cod the 

Almighty reigns. 

Let us rejoice and exult and give him 
the glory, 

for the marriage of the Lamb has come, 
and his Bride has made herself ready; 
it was granted her to be clothed with 

fine linen, bright and pure". 

It is not surprising that the Book of Revelation contains 

so many hymns, both Jewish and Christian, By the time 

this book was written the first enthusiasm had passed 

and forms of worship were being stabilized, WeiszJa^Q.^ r 


(1) Herklotz, "A Fresh Approach to the New Testament", 
p.9Q; the Bishop of London’s translation. 



















49 


maintains that 

"the delineation of divine service in heaven 
followed the actual proceedings in the Church 
on earth: by which he means that the actual 
order of worship in the assemblies was the 
framework on which the author of the Apocalypse 
hung the rich tapestries depicting the worship 
of heaven." (1) 

Benson, however, claims: 

"They do not sound like songs of worship trans¬ 
mitted from an earthly atmosphere so much as 
like songs of those who lool^aek or down upon 
the nations and the Church, and are now enclosed 
within the vision of God" 

(and) "it may be prudent to regard them, as 
idealizations of the Church’s praise, or pro¬ 
phetic suggestions of what it shall be, rather 
than as transcripts from the apostolic hymn book," 

( 2 ) 

It is well to remember in this connection that the lit¬ 
urgy as we find it recorded in Justin Martyr (3), 
was in the process of formation. By the turn of the 
century, forms of worship seem to have been fairly well 


fixed. Consequently we agree with Weiszaeeker and de¬ 
duce further that the hymns recorded in Revelation to 
a great extent reflect hymns that were used in the wor¬ 
ship of the Christian groups. 


In addition, the following are probably fragments 
of Christian hymns: 

I Corinthians 2:9 

"What no~eye has seen, nor ear heard, 

nor the heart of man conceived, 

what God has prepared for those who love him." 

(1) "Das apostollsche Zeitslter", Vol.11,p.259f, as surn- 
marized in Benson, "The Hymnedy of the Christian Church" 

(2) Benson, op.eit., p.53 p*52 

(3) Cf. appendix, pp.IlO-111 







■ii 




/*: 



i; . . 


. i 



j '•'.iliJ 






mm 


j :)* & 

hi 'J .3 J ' *T' 




■ 

n ho- : hh,,, 

* . • , . tit i li 

;r ' i'l 3 

t iXQh . " .. . 

. 

. 1*4 'i ■ . . ■ ■ . 






50 - 


Ephesians 5:14 

"Awa ke , 0 si eep er , 

From thy grave arise, 

The light of Christ upon thee shines," (1) 

"It is the opinion of many that the hymn was or¬ 
iginally used in connection with Baptism, as a 
song of welcome into the new life, as the convert 
was rising ©gain from the water*" (8) 


Hebrews 2:12-15 

>T I will proclaim thy name to my brethren, 
in the midst of the congregation I will praise 

Thee". 


"I will put my trust in him," 

"Here am I, and the children God has given me," 


"The Christian faith gave rise to hymns of a new 
character, often produced in the heat of the moment 
and almost as soon forgotten; but sometimes short 
lyrics of real beauty which were treasured and re¬ 
peated," (3) 


D} " Sung Dogma " 

The dividing line between the Hymn and the Doc¬ 
trinal Lyric is a very thin one. Most of the following 
could have been hymns, in which case they were what 
German scholars call "gesungenes Dogma", Both the 
"sung dogma" and the "prayed dogma" are part and parcel 
of the liturgy of the historic Church, Passages of 
this kind are described by Lietzmen as "hymn-like con¬ 
fessions of faith", (4) 

Philippians 2:5-11 

"Who being in the form of God, 
thought it not robbery 
to be equal with God; 

but made himself of no reputation, 

taking upon him the form of a servant, 
and being made in the likeness of men; 


(1) Translation by Dr. J.W.C .Wand,Bishop of London,quoted in 
Herklotz,"A Fresh Approach to the New Testament7 p.9Q 

(2) Mac dona Id, "Christian Worship in the Primitive Church" 

(3) Scott,"The Nature of the Early Church" ,p. 75f “7 

(4) "hymnenmaessig gebildete Glaubensbekenntniss", in 
"Geschichte der alten Kirche", p.153 









m <■ 







' 

Av ,i' i 

\ ./ j \ i 


.. • uT . ( •, ' .. ¥ 

' > '} A . • " f } ' ... . 4 .. ) 0 -i ‘ 




- I . ■■ iV . ;,1 .. • . 

. ’ ■ Hi 6 • • : . . . 

v'D. i ‘i . "‘a )\a •■'u j ;uU' r oi> 

' - ‘ J . 6 • • ,4 i 

:D ' . . , 

/ V\; U : .. 'I 


J .■ .... .. ; : I.; . : ; „ j‘ 

- : -w ' , ... r. i }_£i • ill :X: f .n : 1 

. - ..... • • ... i. ..i ; 

. 

. 



u / .;. ... J 

-i . j. 



51 - 


and being found in fashion ss a man, 
he humbled himself 

end became obedient unto death, 
even the death of the cross. 

Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, 
and gives him a name 

which is above every name; 

That at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow 

of things in heaven, and things in earth, 
and things under the earth; 

And that every tongue should confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord, 

to the glory of God the Father.” 

Here is "a highly-finished and exquisitely- 

balanced work of art”. (1) 

I.Timothy 5:16 

"He was manifested in the flesh, 
vindicated in the Spirit, 
seen by angels, 
preached among the nations, 
believed on in the world, 
taken up in glory.” 

The following is an example of the doctrinal mnemonic, 
which is the simplest form of doctrinal hymn, consisting 
of 

”rhythmical formulas of things a Christian 
must know for his soul’s health that could 
be set to familiar cantillations”. (2) 

I.Peter 5:1.0-12 

"He that would love life 

and see good days, 

let him keep his tongue from evil 

and his lips from speaking guile; 

let him turn away from evil and do right; 
let him seek peace and pursue it. 

For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, 
and his ears are open to their prayer. 

But the face of the Lord is against those that 

do evil”. 


(1) Macdonald, ’’Christian Worship in the Primitive Church” 

p.120 

(2) Cf. Benson,”The Hymnod3’* of the Christi an Church” ,p.143 








ocSOilf' it 

d 


. 

j ado oo.c ..O.'.iO 

1. o . ; 



. 1 ,; 



i 


a 




.) ’ ■> j 




■ 


.! 


1 







■ij'l O ' ).!■ J -V •'■O.d 


O . i : 







- 52 


In the opinion of Calvin, "To sing the Nicene Creed 
is prefereible to using it as a confessional formula." (1) 
And J. S. Whale adds: 

"A living Church is a worshipping, singing 
Church; not a school of people holding all 
the correct doctrines." (2) 

E) Prose-Foetry 

Sometimes a speaker seems to he carried beyond 
himself and expresses his feelings in prose-poetry 
which just misses being a hymn, Although the examples 
referred to below were probably not used in congrega¬ 
tional singing, yet their influence upon the phraseol¬ 
ogy of current hymns must have been considerable. One 
example of such exalted discourse is found in 
Sph. 1:15-14 , with three sections ending in the triple 
re fra i n IS '& jyti V O V \ ^ S o 0 £ yj <> JLQ ItO . 

(for the praise of his glory). 

Further examples are found in Ephesians 3 : 14 - 21 , parts 
of the Prologue to the Fourth Gospel, Colossians 1:15-20, 
Romans 8:31-39 (Hymn of the love of God), Romans 11:33-36, 
and probably even the Lord’s prayer in its liturgical 
setting in Matthew 6:9-13. (3). The most famous of 

these prose poems is Paul’s great Rhapsody of Love 
(I.Cor. 13). The close relationship of this exalted 
discourse to the hymn can be seen in translations and ar¬ 
rangements such as that by Professor E. F, Scott. (4) 

(1) Whale7T.1T7^toFsti an'Doct^ne^lp'.106 ~ 

(2) ibid, p.106 

(3) Hastings* Dictionary of the Bible, Vol.II, p.441 

(4) In "The Literature of the New Testament",pp.l34-135 













: ' ■' ' i.fv s 5 

i > iv • ii-V. 


j , 




; . : - ; . 

•sq • } ■, : ' , .. ■ I ; . ' 70 ■ X -u 

. • . , . , •/ . . ■j -i ■■ ■ ■' 

• • ' . •' ... ■ J • " ■■■ J..'. ■ i | O' ■- ■' 

i \.i y:J' i 7 ,'O.uJ ,]’£•£ 077.0.. £ i 7 , XJ 

•. . j : r v : 7 - ’ .... •] ‘7, . v - V. •• ■ 

0 ” J. o :J 

X ■ J • * j j . X . : 








t , i; * .: . : ■ ■) ;.i .3. •- 

5 l £[[■ J. o'; ol . . loo •. :: .Jo jj oriX co 0.10 ,oi. u o'oo '.to 

. . ' . - ! ... 

‘o , ", !/ Ml • 1 .' v ■ 7. 7 , : ? .. J u . / ■ ',7 ■' • 7 . o ■ 

■ . , ; ■ 

O' . '; i > ' ..j 7 ' .. : 7 £,£ 70,100 ; 1 7707... _r •/ 




* . ‘ - 


.i i 


I . J 


. . .. -.7.: J. r : 7 ).I •• ... o 

J 7.1 Vi:. : Jt'j 7:7. ■ 0 7:7:071 : i 1J vj' v .7 7 ) 7 0.L 
, 1 .. * ' 7 : ,;i >- 7 .. .. ;■ J; o:. )' i V 

. ■’ ;. • 7 . t . . V ' ”7. ; 


10 £ 


- 


7 -. /. 7 


>.:$ ... ■> 0 070 77 0 .7 . 7 / 7,7 7 



53 


I .Corinthians 13 

Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels 
And have not love 

I am become as clanging brass or a tinkling cymbal. 
And though I have prophecy and understand all mys¬ 
teries and all knowledge 
And have not love 
I am nothing. 

And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, 
And though I give my body to be burned 
And have not love 
It profits me nothing. 

Love is long-suffering and kind, 

Love envies not, love boasts not, is not arrogant, 
Does not act rudely, is not self-seeking, is not 
ill-tempered, thinks no evil, 
Rejoices not in wrongdoing but rejoices in the truth. 
Bears all things, believes all things, hopes all 
things, endures all things. 


Love never fails; 

But whether there be prophecies they shall fail, 
Whether there be tongues they shall cease; 
Whether there be knowledge it shall vanish away. 
For we know in part and we prophesy in part; 

But when that which is perfect is come 

Then that which is in part shall be done away. 

When I was a child 

I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I 
thought as a child; 

But when I became a men 
I put away childish things. 

For now we see in a mirror darkly 
But then face to face. 

Now I know in part 

But then shall I know even as also I am known. 
And now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; 
But the greatest of these is love. 


F) Pomologies 

The great beauty of the Shemcneh Esreh is apparent 
when one reads them (1), The Jewish Christians 

were familiar with them and loved them. Their influence 
upon Paul can be seen by studying the concluding sections 

(1) e.g. in the translation in Oesterley, "The Jewish 
Background of the Christian Liturgy",pp.60-67 

















' - 


. 


ii> I J \ • )i 






■ 

. 


j .v ;’l «>J ID '.>U* 






.. / ■ ■: 


:j. ,• t 7 J 'Ji 




.l : n i 





■ * • 

' 7" : . ' 


. 


. 










/ 

. 

. 

4 

DjlJ. 





, 







i t 



. ■ 

■ . L 

rjC >V. J .1 0 ‘X 

■ :v 





ij"". : 'i . 7 . • o 

•. J J . X 





■ . : . . ■. ■ • ' 



: j 

i 






. 

. 

■ .... . ■) . 

• d’ . U.a:i 



. . 


. 







. 





. 




. 

i 

- 

U.Jv 





. ... . J . .■ .. ' i 











. • ; • J 











.. ‘ • 



"h:- 

x. J 

. 

















- .. n; 













. 

. 

d :v 77. 





. 






J . i . 7 ■ r 

■ 

J / ♦ 




. 

J’ ' . , > 



" 


- • . ;;j ■ 1 ;, v]' ' -7 \ 

' 









54 


of his letters* (1)* As the respect for Paul grew 
with the passing years, his letters would be read more 
and more frequently, not only for their doctrinal but 
also their devotional value. Hence these beautiful, 
dignified, reverential and Christo-centric expressions 
would enter the vocabulary and thinking of the early 
Christians and eventually would become part of the liturgy 
of the Church. That this is what happened can be seen 
from a study of the doxologies in Peter, in the Pastorals, 
in Jude 24-25 (one of the most beautiful ascriptions of 
glory contained in the New Testament), and in the three¬ 
fold, four-fold and seven-fold doxologies in Revelation. 

( 2 ) 

"The regular liturgical conclusion of the 
services of the Temple, and afterwards of the 
Synagogue, came to be a doxology beginning 
’blessed be (or is) God ? ,..,The Old Testament 
usage was expanded, so that at a very early 
date there arose a Christian formula, which 
in the public adoration of the worship of the 
Church would serve in a secondary sense as a 
creed, expressing the doctrine that the risen 
Christ shared in Divine honour with the Father," 

(3) 

The further development of the Christian hymn at 
this early time is shrouded in mystery. We are fortunate, 
however, to have some indication of the hymns of the next 
century in the "Odes of Solomon", found in 1909 by 
Dr. J. Rendel Harris. There are 42 odes in the collection, 
their probable time of composition being the middle of 
the second century, Goodspeed describes them as 


(1) Cf. appendix, pp ,112-11.3 

(2) Of. appendix, p. 115 

(3) Hastings, "A Dictionary of Christ and the Gospels", 
Yol.I, pn.492-493 




J 

: 


J* 


i >iiu 'tc c.&Mv'r.- 

. v,; ■ • , v J :ir ,.• : 

? i. • . J- 

' ? 5 ' 

v- .:o'i 

, \ 1 ■/ ■, V. , •: •*’/* f. ’ ,, i • /' • ; ; ,,? >\o'j ; 

- 

• i . ■ L ; f .‘T> • ; i i ■ 


U ' . r'' i ; ? *; . 

r \r. il ' 

j )j ■ ■ 







■i 









55 


"spiritual, mystical, imaginative, and boldly, 
even harshly, figurative....They sometimes 
recall characteristic touches in the G-ospel 
and'Letters of John, and, of course, they owe 
much to the Hebrew Psalms.” (1) 


The following is a passage from the Odes of Solomon : 

As the work of the husbandman is the ploughshare, 
and the work of the steersman is the guidance of 

the ship, 

so also is my work the psalm of the Lord; 
my craft and my occupation are his praises, 
because his love hath, nourished my heart. (2) 


As long as men are moved to gratitude and joy at 
the remembrance of God’s great redeeming love as re¬ 
vealed in Christ Jesus, just so long will men continue 
to write about God’s love and sing praises to His name. 
We know from Pliny’s letters that the Christians were 
accustomed to assemble on a fixed day before daylight 
and sing by turns (i.e. antiphonally) hymns to Christ 
as a god. (5), That was neither the beginning nor 
the end of singing "psalms and hymns and spiritual 
songs", but Christian hymnody, which began in such a 
simple and humble way, has grown since that day and 
brought spiritual refreshment and strength to those who 
have sung the Lord’s song. Whether in happiness, 
sadness, persecution or death, whether in sunshine or 
in shadow, the Christian hymn has been a veritable 
means of grace. What Clement of Alexandria said of 

(1) In "Early Christian Literature", p.172 

(2) As quoted in "The Living Church", p.76 

(3) Of. appendix, p , 107 










■ 

. { , i i ' A ; A ’l-'.: 

, ...... a; .. 


: A _ ; ; AAA I./ : J'- • - ■ - & 

' . .A A A ■ a..a: ' A.v A J 

€ A ! .. .. ' A A' ' 

• . . ' • 

) . j*.{. ■’ . \.„ ! . : J 


. ; ' _ . . '. J.. 1 . ■ ' ' A ■' ' ' : ^ 

■'j,J J. V < V. j. .... ... ' .1 / .... .' j" • A; ••• AA'A.) ' v 

:• ' ■ •. .. •■. . . ; ..... •' , f J '• ■' .’.-J: ' - 

j .. A'.:..' : A 7 , ‘1 AA *J • ’ .' 1 ■ • ■ -. 

Art; a.. ,, - .6 Ao: AA A‘ .no l a. ; : 1 >A A' 1:0 ya 

A;; .a -A .. ... . « ; ' • • >■>- 

••..; ■ • ,i;.'. ....A - • .’ ') A . ... 

A .A; .A. .'. : Ail. ,a A;a .: .'a A a.a ■ '-a ; , A A : ao aA 7 

. ,Aa« r : .., - A . . a ;r. a.-" n.sJj ..AaAA ,AaA A n ,. 

. 

.-'i A .aA Ai, a A:. Alt : A.- , .A.; a. A.. ■ .a; I Ai in A i • ; 

• : ■ ■ 

.. .. .' 

\ A . [ . .A. 

... : : .. 1 . .' • ■ ■ . . 


. , 




• ■ J 


A 1 ' . j Ac A a: 

■ : v. A/.:.. aA;;_ 

-. . , : . 


. ; 

■ - 

A". 











56 


the Christians of the second centiiry also describes 
many of God’s children in the twentieth: 

"Holding festival, then, in our whole 
life, persuaded that God is altogether 
on every side, we cultivate our fields, 
praising; we sail the sea, hymning; 
in all the rest we conduct ourselves 
according to rule," (1) 


(1) Stromata, VII, 7 in "Ante Nicene Fathers", Vol. II, 
p. 553 




Chapter V 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 




V 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 

The last acts and words of great men are regarded 
as being peculiarly sacred. This is especially so 
when Christians reverently transport themselves to 
that last supper Jesus had in the intimate circle of 
his disciples. To countless Christian® the succeeding 
seasons of oouiaunion bring renewal of 11 comfort and 
strength in this earthly pilgrimage and warfare 1 *. (1) 
When they recall what God’s love is and what Christ 
has done for them, they are moved to a fresh dedication 
of their lives to warfare for the good and service for 
the true. Communion has been a time when in a very 
special sense they have glorified God and enjoyed him 
forever. It has always been a season of gratitude for 
the redemptive work of their God — in very truth an 
"Eucharist* 1 . This aspect of the sacrament has been 
emphasized in the Eastern branch of the Church. We in 
the Western Church would do well t© follow that example 
and counterbalance the "funereal" aspect which is all 
too oommon in cur "celebration" by placing greater em¬ 
phasis upon the element of thanksgiving. 

This chapter is an attempt to discover in what 
measure, if any, the Lord’s Supper was rooted in the 
religious observances of Judaism. The relevant passages 

(1) The Book of Common Order, The United Church of Canada, 

p.123 


5? - 




0 


L J. 




, 




. I, t 


u’ : l%:r HfJ 


.. j . J, 






58 


are found in the Synoptic Gospels (Mark 14:12-26; 
Matthew 26:17-30; Luke 22:7-23), the Fourth Gospel 
(John 13:1-20) and Paul (I.Cor.11:17-26)• The area of 
common agreement in all is that Jesus before his death 
had a meal with his disciples. The Synoptics agree 
essentially in that Jesus instituted a rite at which 
he took bread and when he had blessed it (had given 
thanks) he broke it and gave it to his disciples, 
saying, "This is my body". He likewise took the cup 
saying, "This is my blood". Paul’s words ©re in essen¬ 
tial agreement with this, except for the addition of 
the words "Do this in remembrance of me", (1), 

There are no words of institution in John, Instead the 
new commandment is given to them: 

"A new commandment I give t© you, that you love 
one another; even as I have loved you, that you 
also love one another. By this all men will 
know that you are my disciples, if you have love 
for one another" (John 13:34-35) 

and is preceded by a dramatized parable on this text. 


An Evaluation of Sources is important here as an aid in 
understanding and interpreting the event. John Knox, in 
discussing the sources for a life of Paul, proclaims the 

superior value of primary over secondary sources: 

"We may, with proper caution, use Acts (a second¬ 
ary source) to supplement the autobiographical 
data of the letters (a primary source), but never 
to correct them." (2) 

(1) Also found in Luke. However, Luke 22:19-20 is con- 

sidered by many scholars to be a Western non-inter¬ 
polation, or at least a hamonistie addition. 

Of. Blass, "The Philology of the Gospels",p.l79f. 
Yv.l9b-20 are omitted in the Revised Standard Tersion. 

(2) Knox, "Chapters in A Life of Paul", p.53 






*:* r . ) . n~ o . i v-r 

■■■■■ 






. 


. > ' ' - .? ' : " • 

J 

c 

. 

C ' ' ■ : • • • 

. 

, • : , 

« 

. 

_ 

. 

< 

* 

r . ' ■ 


59 - 


In discussing the relative historical trustworthiness 

of the Synoptics and the Fourth Gospel he says: 

"•••we are not justified in distrusting the 
historical accuracy of the Synoptic Gospels 
to the extent that we are forced to doubt 
the historical accuracy of the Fourth Gospel*(1) 
Still, in Mark no less certainly, even if 
less extensively, than in John •history’ is 
shot through with ’interpretation’, and the 
careful historian must do his best to allow 
for this fact.” (2) 


This warning is applicable as well in a study of the 
sources of the Lord’s Supper* Of all the sources 
stated above, the most valuable and trustworthy is 
that found in Paul, and this not only because chrono¬ 
logically it is the earliest, but because it reflects 
a tradition which was normative in the early Church. 
It is well, therefore, to digress for a moment In 
order to discover the manner in which Paul received 
his information. 


The Authority of Paul as a Source : When Paul says to 
the Corinthians, "Do you not knew" (3), he is remind¬ 
ing them of the things that h© has taught them. The 
Greek CQK oiocCpE oi s is used for questions 

which can be answered in the affirmative* His impli¬ 
cation is, "Of course you know, for I taught youS" The 
authority of his teaching is based on: 


(1) Over against this statement we put Oesterley’s query 
that "behind the fourth Gospel (there may be) a gen¬ 
uine historical tradition, which seomtimes helps 

to supplement, sometimes even to correct, the Synop¬ 
tic accounts". (Oesterley, "The Jewish Background 
of the Christian Liturgy", p.161) 

(2) Knox, "Chapters in a Life of Paul", p.X4 

(3) Six times in the sixth chap ter of I.Cor. alone. 













- 60 - 


a) the Old Testament (I.Cor. 9:9, "for it is written 
in the law of Moses”) 

b) his own interpretation (I.Cor. 7:25f, "I have no 
command of the Lord but I give my opinion as on© 
who by the Lord’s mercy is trustworthy”, the pur¬ 
pose being "to promote good order and to secure 
your undivided devotion to the Lord", I.Cor. 7s35) 

c) "the word of the Lord" (I.Thess. 4:15-17 and I.Cor. 
7:10, "not I say, but the Lord"). In connection 
with the words of the Institution of the Lord’s 
Supper in I.Cor. 11:23, he says, "For I received 
from the Lord what I also delivered to you". The 
exact meaning of this phrase will be understood 
only if we relate it to Paul’s terperament and his 
First Century psychological "Weltanschauung". W© 
must keep the possibility in mind that he actually 
did receive revelations in a supra-human way* How¬ 
ever, a rational explanation of this statement is 
probably found in the phrases quoted in the next 
basis of authority: 

d) tradition. (I.Cor. 15:3, "For I delivered to you 
as of first importance what I also received.") 
Reference to a tradition which Paul delivered to 
the converts is made in II.Thess* 2:15, "So, then, 
brethren, stand firm and hold to the traditions 
which you were taugit by us, either by word of mouth 
or by letter", (cf» also 3:6), and in I.Cor. 11:2, 






- 61 - 


"you., .maintain the traditions ©yen as I have de¬ 
livered them to you". A due to these traditions 
is found in Paul f s letter to the Gelations, in 
vftiioh he reveals that after his conversion he re¬ 
tired to the Arabian desert, probably to readjust 
his whole life to the new revelation. Then he re¬ 
turned to Damascus and three years later went up to 
Jerusalem to take his "graduate course in the history 
of the life of Jesus". He says explicitly that 
there he saw only Peter and James, the Lord f s 
brother (Gal. 1:£0, "In what I am writing to you, 
before God, I do not liet"). As Dr. Clyo Jackson 
used to say in class, 'When they did get together, 
they did not talk about the weather". In the fifteen 
days Paul spent in solitary communion with these two 
who had been closest to Jesus, the on© as a brother 
and now the leadercf the Jewish-Christian community 
in Jerusalem, and the other an intimate friend and 
follower, he learned more about the earthly life and 
teaching of Jesus than we will ever know from all 
our reading of the Gospels. Paul with his rabbinical 
training would be very careful to learn and retain 
what was thus delivered to him. Consequently, the words 
as recorded by Paul in connection with the institution 
of the Lord*s Supper are in essential agreement with 
those in the Synoptics, and it is quite probable 
that the words "Do this in remembrance of me" were 




' 

. 

X: J.i ■ V i - ; ■ ' ' ' ■ !i 1 '•' ' J ' "” 

.1 ,X > X! ' U.. ■ /. ) Xvl il J.i ■. 1' It' 

;; j..-: . ■ XX.J-.' >v • ,} r . U'U -J - ;i 

. ,.u. .] n.I jx :/i; : l .*h, 

J ■ i. '■ ->.I * ‘ ■ '• ■ x- : ■ ' 

J 


, . . t ’■ ■ ■■ 

„ ■ 1 ; J X ’ I :■ J i . . ! '. ' ' X' - 

XL- , ‘ \ . . J Xj . .xX.' .5 X'X- • : > ‘ \ • *t 

) ■ i X j j: jl 

V 1 . - 


XX i v.!. ;■ liVO XX . XX;! •, • '±- '... X ■ ? XX >. • ■ i AU iJ 'X-i. X ; 

■ x x ; .X '.. • X , 

j ' , ' 

■ ' X. . • : . * X' ■ J XX X; X ■ , i. \ ’ J' 

: 

, V; 

■; .* * lm ' u 

■ ., ■ ■ • .. ■ , . ,x;. xx-j ■;. ,. v x- j x 

. i.; x vS Ujx'I \ d m 

' . ' i. * „ .... ; - 

{.L 

;■ j t v ; ■. . 






62 - 


part of the genuine historical tradition, which for 
soma reason or other were emitted by both Mark and 
Matthew. 

In addition, Paul was the father of the Gentile 
Churoh. We may be sure that he instructed not only 
his converts in Corinth, but all converts in a new 
ccmmunity of Christian believers, in the meaning and 
observation of the Lord’s Supper. He not only instruct¬ 
ed but afterwards exercised careful supervision over 
the different churches he had founded, and as a result 
we have much of his correspondence in which he renewed 
instruction and promised further direction when he came 
to visit (e.g. I.Cor. 11:34b). Paul believed and con¬ 
sequently taught that Jesus had said "Do this in remem¬ 
brance of me”, and apparently was very insistent that 
this com and be heeded. 

Disagreement Among Sources : We have taken note of 
the essential agreement in the Synoptics and Paul in 
regard to the words of institution at the Last Supper. 
The agreement ends when it comes to recording the day 
on which the meal was held, and the nature of the last 
supper Jesus had with his disciples. This perplexing 
question is best answered by Oesterley as follows: (1) 

(1) "The Jewish Background of the Christian Liturgy", 
chs. V-VX, pp.156-193* The explanation contained 
herein seems to be accepted by many liturgical 
scholars at the present time. Oesterley quotes 
the following scholars who appear to have arrived 




s . ■ .UX : j . Xr : So j"f, 1 : 

, j : ' S : x.\'x 7. >.tt x -u;, ; :x‘i uv: 


.4 

- 


- 


xxx n 


V . • C ) j .! 1 - -'-0 J .' ri -i'H • v. i.j *.i 


; •• i 






fit i". ; j "I .«J. X 


V"; 


1 . 


0£ 




! 




./ J 


'■ u .. , U v f 5 • 


. 1 " ' . ■ J . ! ■ • ' ' . ■ ' o 

> • j , .7'; aOjiif ■ ; ; r.:..; ,.‘ i. n. x..t.x ‘ i. •... - V ... 

} ■ ■ . .1 ■ y. J'l.- .! : ’i ' ! ‘ .. ■ ''' " • ■ X ' ' : ;> 

, i. ' S' J- J- : , J. ,f- .i ■ .S . j; 


i 

1 ■■■ LI :j .its 1 .J 

■ .• • J' Stv 4 j.J\ 


(j 


. ■ 


: 


- ■ ■. • . 1 ■ d . .. ‘X 


J. J 




» - 


> . ux.i 


J ; !S S; it; i . ;jj 


• .iS ,xS J. . 








. ••• .... . . 

/ • - '0 0 '■ :■ iJ ; o' - 

-■ > - ■■ 





•j 


xri 


S; 








63 - 


The institution took plaoe either during, or 
more probably after a meal (Mt. 26:20, Mk.l4:18, 
Luke 22:14, John 13:1 f). The Synoptic accounts 
reflect the popular conception, that the institu¬ 
tion of the Lord* s Supper took place on the Pass- 
over. John states that it took place on the day 
before the Passover (John 13:1 ff, 13:26, 18:28, 
19:14, 19:31 and 42). "We must frankly face the 
fact that either the Synoptics are right or the 
fourth gospel; they cannot possibly both be right 
according to the form of their respective accounts 
as we now have them. If we accept the Synoptic 
accounts of the meal which represent it as a 
Passover meal, we are confronted with difficulties 
which are insuperable" (1), vis: 

"(1) the chronological discrepancy between the 
Synoptic accounts and that of the fourth 
gospel; 

(2) The mention of on© cup only, partaken of 
by all, instead of each person present 
using his own cup as at a Passover feast: 
and the uncertainty ©f the records as to 
the order of th© cup and the bread; 

(3) The fact that the meal preceded the bless¬ 
ing of the cup and the Dread, whereas the 
Passover meal proper come© after this; 

(4) The fact that the memorial at the Pass- 
over feast would be annual, whereas from 
the very beginning the memorial meal was 
weekly; and 

(5) The further fact that if it had been the 
Passover meal it would have meant that 
the feast had already begun before the 
betrayal and the events recorded in con¬ 
nexion with the crucifixion; this would 


at the same conclusion quite independently of one another: 
Drews, Spitts, Foxley, Box and Burkitt. It is generally 
accepted and forms the background for any discussion on 
the subject by Maxwell, Cirlot and certainly Dam Gregory 
Dix in his monumental book, "The Shape of the Liturgy". 

We acknowledge our indebtedness to both Oesterley and Dix, 
and despite the observation of Per© Brou that "Dorn Gregory 
Dix* s interest in the primitive Eucharist is not primarily 
that of historical research, but rather of maintaining a 
thesis" (appearing in an authoritative Vatican publication, 
Ephemerides Liturgioae,vol.xl,1946, fasc. i and ii and 
quoted in "Thoughts on the Shape of the Liturgy", by Drs. 
Bate and Eeles, p.3) we confess that Dix # s book has been 
more instructive and stimulating in our study than any 
of the other recent books on this subject. 

(1) Oesterley, "The Jewish Background of the Christian 
Liturgy", p.166 













. 


■v; >o 5 *>0 


■ 









- 64 - 


have been such an infraction of the Law 
forbidding wo ik during the feast as to 
be inoredible." (1) 

On the other hand, if we accept the fourth gospel 

account we must explain what the meal was, if it was 

not a Passover meal. Oesterley then proceeds to show 

that the "Kiddush" fils the facts: 

"Among the Jews, some time after the Exile, 
but exactly when cannot be decided -- at any rate 
well within pre-Christian times — it was the 
custom early on (what we should call) Friday 
afternoons for friends to meet together in the 
house of one of them, and partake of a social 
meal. There was a distinctly religious atmos¬ 
phere about these gatherings; religious topics 
were of paramount interest to the Jews, hence 
the subjects of conversation on these occasions 
were of a religious character. 

These weekly gatherings were arranged by 
small groups or societies of friends. Such 
societies were called ’Ghaburoth’ (singl, 

Chaburah) from the word ’Chaber’, a ’comrade*, 
’companion 1 2 , ’friend’. The social quasi- 
religious meal began fairly early in the after¬ 
noon, and was drawn out by conversation and dis¬ 
cussion of religious questions until dusk. Then 
the meal was interrupted because the Sabbath was 
about to commence. He who presided at the table 
took a cup of wine and said a benediction over 
it for what was called the ’sanot ioation of 
the day’." (Kadaahath ha-yam) (£) 

H It is important to bear in mind that this 
social, qua si-religious meal, together with the 
subsequent ceremony of the •sanctification of 
the day’, took place in private houses, and had 
originally nothing to do either with the Temple, 
or, later, with the Synagogue worship. In early 
post-Christian times both were transferred to the 
Synagogue, and eventually the meal itself was 
given up and only the ceremony of the sanctifi¬ 
cation was retained. In still later times (and 
this is the practice at the present day), while 
the sanctification ceremony continued to be a 
liturgical one in the Synagogue, both it and the 

(1) Oesterley, op.cit.,pp.165-166 

(2) ibid, p.167. For detailed description of a Chaburah 
meal and parallels to the last supper, see Dix, 

"The Shape of the Liturgy", pp.51-58 






65 - 


social meal reverted to their original place 
in the home; but with this notable difference . 
that whereas originally the meal preceded the 
sanctification ceremony, now the order was re¬ 
versed, and the sanctification ceremony preceded 
the meal." (1) 

Further, "This meal, and the sanofcifi oation 
ceremony which followed, ushered in not only 
the weekly Sabbath, but also took place on the 
eve of great festivals". (2). "The circle 
of friends farmed by Christ and the Apostles 
constituted a Chaburah. According to John 15:14 
our Lord refers to this in the words, Ye are my 
friends, if ye do the things which I command you. 
They met as they had doubtless done many a time 
before, for the usual weekly social meal. It was 
on a Thursday instead of a Friday on this partic¬ 
ular occasion" (3), for the reason "that in 
this year the Sabbath day coincided with the 
first day of the Passover Feast; on such occa¬ 
sions, according to ancient Jewish law, the 
Feast superseded the Sabbath. The weekly social 
meal could not take place on the usual Friday 
afternoon, because the sacrificing of the Pass- 
over lambs was taking place iji the Temple then; 
and the ordinary Sabbath Kiddush could not take 
place at 6 p.m. on Friday because the Passover 
meal was celebrated at this time in the year in 
question. Therefore the weekly social meal had 
to be held on the Thursday afternoon. At 6 p.m. 
on that Thursday began the day of Preparation, 
and Passover Kiddush was therefore said. It in¬ 
augurated the Feast; for although the day of 
Preparation was not regarded as the official 
first day of the Feast, yet, as being the day on 
which the Passover lambs were sacrificed (op. 
Exod. 12:2,6) it was, in a very real sense, the 
introduction of the Feast." (4) 


The fact that the Synoptic Gospels make the Passover 
meal that during which the Eucharist was instituted is 


(1) Oesterley, "The Jewish Background of the Christian 
Liturgy", pp.169-170 

(2) ibid, p.171 

(3) ibid, p.172 

(4) ibid, p.175 








' • ■ ,• , 1 1: .' ■- ‘X J ■ •' ■ 

. , . 

; - 

vr u; x...-.....,./'.; ..... '• ..D i . v 









. 


. 








- 66 - 


regarded by Oesterley as follows: 

"Was it not the most natural thing in the world 
that they (fthe disciples and the generation of 
Jewish-Christian3 that followed^, in thinking of 
the sacrifice of Christ, and of His redemptive 
work, and of the memorial of Him, should have 
connected all these with the Passover*♦ . .and 
have thought of the Last Supper as a Passover 
meal rather than of its connexion with Kiddiish? 

In this case it oould justly be said that 
the Synoptic accounts reflect the popular con¬ 
ception, which in its essence was perfectly 
right, though chronologically inaccurate; while 
the fourth Gospel, written by one with more 
intimate knowledge, gives the more strictly 
acourate account." (1) 

The Conclusion arrived at by Oesterley is that the 

last supper Jesus had with his disciples was the 

Chaburah meal (John 15:14-15). The blessing of the 

cup and bread after the meal are to be identified with 

the sanctification ceremony known as the "Passover 
A 

Kiddush". The antiquity of the rite and purity of its 

transmission have preserved for us the exact words 

Jesus used when "he gave thanks", since it was the 

grace used at all Jewish meals: 

over the bread: "Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord our 

God, Eternal King, 

Who bringest forth bread from 
the earth" 

over the cup: "Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord our God, 
Eternal King, 

Who createst the fruit of the vine." 

( 2 ) 


(1) Oesterley, "The Jewish Background of the Christian 
Liturgy", p.177 

(B) Ibid, p.174. Based on Psalm 104:15 




X;. : 

- m - 

' 

L/ t Oa ©fc : ,0 iVsJK ■»? 


- vi; m. ,. . • ' 

, ' . s ■ - : . '. : 

•• .; .u- .n Xv, 

. 

• . 

' •.'/ •, . v ... *J -• J.. ' vJ *> 

j» 1 ■ *yj fii 

< X J X X.‘ v •. ' J X ..:. x .. 

XXX- O Xi. ..KX'i , p':$ z-,2- 

. .. ' X . , - 4 

.. " ■ / ■. f..!-.'* ? ; o 

• 

.3XX\X,X .... :. :XoO XXlXK;! X X.J 




, , i . i. 






tf* 


? . 


Ji'-.j XX. i: .' \;iA 

• 1 ”, 

. . ■ . 


.x.XX 
i i 


:i • t 


:jo 


. ' . 

; . 0 % 


v x 

X 0 I- 3 • jj- 

. . 


j. a ri 

. 

J' X 


» A :3 J.I 

; xxxj 
:-3 oxl‘ 


■ .. ,v 


4 




- 67 - 


The ultimate conclusion is (1), that the rite 
instituted by Jesus in the Upper Room was not something 
new, but that all the constituent elements were "de¬ 
rived from the Jewish customs of the chaburah supper: 

(1) The offertory , the ♦taking 1 of bread and wine, 
which in its original form in the four-action 
shape was probably derived from the bringing 

of contributions in kind for the ohab&rah meal. 

(2) The prayer , with its preliminary dialogue of 
invitation, derived directly from the berakah 
or thanksgiving which closed the chaburah meal. 

(3) The fraction , or breaking of the bread, derived 
from the Jewish grace before all meals. 

(4) The communion , derived frcm the distribution 

of the broken bread at the beginning and the 
cup of blessing at the end of the supper of 
every Jewish chaburah. (2) 


In its earliest stages of development, as w© have 
seen, the Lord’s Supper and the Agape were one rite, 
known collectively as "the breaking of bread". W© 
have taken note of the difficulty which confronts the 
student in differentiating between the two. A study of 
the relevant passages makes this quite clear (3). 

Dom Gregory Dix, after a careful examination of the 
available documents, decides that the separation of the 
two rites must be placed in a period of about fifty 
years, between A.D. 54 £i.e. after the writing of 
I.Corinthians) and A.D. 100. (4). But originally 

TXy According to Dix, "The Shape of ihe Liturgy" ,p»103 

(2) ibid, pp.78-82, where it is discussed in detail 

(3) cf. this thesis, pp.12 -14 

(4) Dix, op.cit. p.100• Complete discussion in pp.96-102 







... Jv.. 


L ^ J' : 1 3 





; 








)■ 






i a ■ 



'I 





'■J Jx 




. . a . 


! 




- 68 


both existed side by side, and both found their 
comnon derivation in the ohaburah meal* 

"The euoharist eonsists simply of those things 
in the ohabHrah supper to which our Lord had 
attached a special new meaning with reference 
to Himself, extracted from the rest of the 
Lord* s Supper , to which no special Christian 
meaning was attached* The agape is simply 
what remains of the chaburah meal when the 
euoharist has been extracted*" (1) 

New Meaning (Paul* s Interpretation) 

When we now ask, what was that special new meaning 
i&ioh Jesus attached to this religious rite taken over 
from Judaism, we find the answer in Paul • To Paul the 
Lord f s Supper was a meal of commemoration s "Do this 
in remembrance of me" (I*Gor* 11:84b,3§b). It was 
also a meal of communion with Christ s "The cup of 
htessing which we bless, is it not a participation in 
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it 
not a participation in the body of Christ?" (I.Cor.10:!©)* 
Furthermore, it was a meal of communion binding in a 
closely-knit fellowship the hearts of those who partook: 
"Because there is one loaf, we who are many are on® 
body, for w© all partake ©f the same loaf*" (I.Cor.10:17). 
Of equal importance was the sacrificial meaning implied 
in I*Cor. 5:7-8, "For Christ, our paschallamb, has been 
sacrificed." 

The sacrificial language and concepts of the Old 
Testament were familiar to Paul, the trained Pharisee 


(1) Dix, "The Shape of the Liturgy", p.78; of. also p.99 










.f. ;'\ r; 


;;.ix . . o ■. ‘ 


■ f 


: i 


‘ , .. : . ( 


; •; 1. ... i ; : '.k O'O O/ Jo i j " .. ■■■'? .. 

or j *:-.j Y c' . ■ / u [ : ) 







- 69 - 


(Gal* 1:14; Phil. 3:5; Acts 23:6^. Therefor© it 

seems legitimate to say that the sacrificial aspect 

of the Lord’s Supper m>uld be present in Paul’s 

thinking. The reconciling effect of the blood of 

Christ is not only mentioned in the passage quoted 

above (I.Cor.5:7-8), but is also referred to in other 

passages (Rom. 5:11, Col. 1:20,21-23). To a strict 

Jew the eating of blood (or drinking of it) would be 

particularly abhorrent, since 

’’the eating of blood was emphatically prohib¬ 
ited, ’for the blood is life’ (Deut.12:23)” (1) 

This prohibition was (and still is) of such vital 

importance to devout Jews that it 

"was extended even to the blood that comes 
forth from the meat. Therefore, the Jew 
was commanded to keep meat in water for 
half an hour, and then in salt for an hour, 
so that the blood be extracted” (2) 

Here was the transformation of a religious ob¬ 
servance of Judaism, viz. the chaburah supper, into a 
specifically Christian rite. The body of Christ was 
identified with the broken bread, the shed blood with 
the wine. The significance of this would not as yet 
dawn upon th© disciples, for the sacrificial death 
was still in the future. But ever afterwards, when 
they sat down to the chab&rah supper, the deeper 
meaning of that last action of Jesus would be recalled. 
To Paul, then, the meaning of the Lord’s Supper, as he 

had received, understood and taught it, was that it 

(lj Idelsohn,"Ceremonies of Judaism” ,p.67. (2)ibid,p.69 




70 - 


was not only "a supper of love, loving memory, loving (i) 
communion" but it was also a meal which had a "Messianic, 
redeeming, sacrificial significance" (2). It was, 
truly, a showing forth of the Lord’s death until the 
coming of the Kingdom* 


Subsequent Development * a) John * 

Of the subsequent development of the Lord’s 
Supper little is known* We have already seen that the 
Gospel of John has no words of institution* E* F* 

Scott points out that we find two opposing sides in 
the Fourth Gospel: 

First: "the universal nature of Christianity is 

more fully recognised than in any other 
book in the New Testament; (3) 

Second: "the Church is in the most emphatic manner 
separated from ’the world’ {4). There¬ 
fore, this gospel which gives the grandest 
expression of universalism, is thus at the 
same time the most exclusive of the New 
Testament writings*" (5) 

The explanation for this dualism is found in the 

milieu out of which the Gospel came (A.D. 100-120). 

"The wav© of enthusiasm on which Christianity 
had launched itself upon the world was now 
almost spent* Law and institution took the 
place of impulse* As a natural result of this, 
an extravagant value was set on the doctrine, 
of the Sacraments* John has no institution 
of the Lord’s Supper to counteract this ten¬ 
dency in the Church. However, in recording the 

(1) Massie, "Corinthians" (Century feible) p*36 

(2) Dix, "The Shape of the Liturgy", p*77 

(3) Scott, "The Fourth Gospel, its Purpose and Theology" 

(4) ibid, p.114 p*112 

(5) ibid, p*115 





- or - - 

l 1$ ~ a va.' ,i 'O •o.-c ’ ' ' 

*.* ' • ? . ..£*'• 

) ■ • . : ' -■ o ....; ■ • •;■ 

■ ■ 

* ■ . Uf 


. , . . . ; . . ■ . 

• O : > :■ i. 'U..- ■ i , 0 0 


. 

4 „ , .... ... . -J ' : : ... . 1 . ■ ... • " .... .' -ii .. . ..... 


. ... , • . . X.i . ... j 




• - ' 1 / ' ■ 




X Vj 


• v . J' : ; • ■■• O ' 

: , .. . 0 C 0 


t 

* , 




. 


... j 1 : H 

. 


. ... 


- 

J.l ■ ... V; 


.V j :■ i J 'iO v;\\; ;.:J J.X.' 


• 0. : 0 a aL.- < 

■.. ..it ;ao‘ 


' ■:. .j l,.... .•.. ' ) 

, , . . . 


..UOU 0 


M • ) -*• U'.XO -'.LX’: J. 1 ■ - .i. 

.• . to J'lrj a ;.L:..aa 


0 


•; V. a a. 




■ •. 


, S . g . 




t Li ' 

. 

a.-. .. a 0. . •/ ... / . g ,i .a i'U) 

: * 

> ■. ' . ■ 

. • , . 




. ... 


V ■ . ■ . . a •; g ., .... .. 




' . ; 




- 

. 


. i 









- 71 - 


Miracle of the Feeding of the Five Thousand 
he usee the technioal sacramental language of 
his day (John 6)* The incidents which follow 
serve to explain that Jesus was the "Bread of 
Life" (6:48)* The Imparting of the Bread of 
Life, is the communication by Jesus of his own 
mind and spirit to his disciples, John f s aim 
is to substitute a deeper more religious con¬ 
ception of the Supper for that which he found 
prevalent in the Church of his day. As the 
outward ordinance of Baptism is the symbol of 
entrance into the new life, so the Eucharist 
typifies the inward communion with Christ." (1) 


The value of the Fourth Gospel in this connection 
rests on the probable reconstruction of what happened 
between the breaking of bread and the giving of "the 
cip of blessing". It may be true that this Gospel, 
more than the Synoptics, is a portrait* of Jesus, 
rather than a photog^h, and that its historical trust¬ 
worthiness is therefore suspect. Yet it may ©Iso be 
true, as Oesterley suggests, that behind it there rests 
a genuine historical tradition. At least it could be 
true that in essence, though not in detail, it supple¬ 
ments the records of the other Gospels. If that is so, 
then we have the substance of the discourse of Jesus 
in chapters 14-16 of the Fourth Gospel. Oesterley has 
shown the community of thought between the contents 
of the Passover-Kiddush and tfoi^ discourse of Jesus (2), 

viz. Completion of the work of creation: John 17:4,5 
redemption: John 14:1,2 
election: John 15:18; 14:16; 15:19 
freedom: John 15:15 
and joy: John 15:11; 16:22; 17:15 


(1) Scott,"The Fourth Gospel, its Pu^os© and Theology", 
a summary of pp.106-152 

(2) Oesterley, "The Jewish Background of the Christian 
Liturgy", pp.184-187 



: / ; .. . j' U > . : 

:. w '.*■$->.l3hii.) U. .>:i 

. . 

“iO 'o •• %r : . ; ,i v ' ■ i': 


• > 



: > •\iJ 





i 


■ 




’dl 


it 





■ 

• ... . - •..•. , s* fU • . •..! ‘ V 

... J .<> y.- 

. ■ A i V ,v, 

r: sil.'J b :jI\' !.•?%# 


m.:-.- ... . .; . •: • . v*' -V•: .../ .• ... ..• , '.{.O - v J.'. . 

. ■ 

.•') . ...' , j .1'. -j v5 -..i . :. .. > .j 

. ,/.i i . : , 

{ ,. .. ■'./ ’ j ' .■•.*■ \ jji >.. c. : 

-y .-.r i. .j . ./•. ~ • a«..: o VjJ J 

t ,c t 

;-u :• . '. 1 ' . : . .. m . ■ ■*,. ;. . J .i >'■;... ...; . . 


' ; ■ - .i. ■ * '. -• i .. ' • '. .. J ; ' .i . !.i; . 

' ; i ■ • -■ . ‘ . ... ■/ ■. .'. . !. •.»C. 

: • ••■ ■ • -w' ... ' *.;■ ■ ...• . J /;,i < 

'• • •' '■' ! r. v • - ■■)... > . ;,'i ; 'y" .4 

• • ' ■ ' • - ■ • • • • .. w • 1 . j .,... ./ •- . :■ J ? •: : .: 

•• - ■». : 1 -i: ,)■ . , / .... v : iJ • 

' >"" ■■■ # :o. fteswoii.&ltfo 

. .. : • X. . ; 




; ‘ . - ■■ ■’ : -i '■ * J. i> 


: 

I . : . 


'fi ijJ 

. " 










... w’ 


- 

■■ .’ ..; . .. ’-j. •.;■ >0 ' ' j 


! ■ 


; 





72 - 


Here is another instance of current religious 
ideas being taken over by Christianity and transformed 
into something new. 

Subsequent Development , b) Manner of Celebration 

About the manner in which the Lord’s Supper was 
celebrated in the early Church we have very little 
information, except the indirect references made by 
Paul in writing to the Corinthians (1). However, 
we have Justin Martyr’s order of service (2), and 
taking for granted that this order of service was the 
result of much effective experiment and development 
which took place during the period when the later lit¬ 
erature of the New Testament was being written, we 
feel justified in saying that in substance this order 
of service was ’’apostolic”, and that by the turn of 
the century the form of celebration in its essential 
details had become fixed. 

We notice that the two main movements of wor¬ 
ship are rooted in Judaism; the normal diet of worship 
on the Lord’s Day consisted of a service based on that 
in the Synagogue, with the reading and explanation of 
the word central, (5), and on the worship experience 
in the Upper Rocm (4). The observances, taken over 

Til" This will be discussed at greater length in Ch.VI, 

where it will also be seen that Paul laid down 
principles as to the proper, reverent observance of 
the Lord’s Supper. 

(2) cf. p. Ill of this thesis 

(3) Later called the "Liturgy of the Word” 

(4) Later called "Liturgy of the Upper Roo^", which as 
previously noted was based on the chaburah supper. 





W aro :/1 r ’ o *i?< w. 0 / . n > U 

•....; wO' " £i " ■ 

li i 



. r j J -v. 0 ■. j' v: v ;.i. ■0 - o 


. ,■ OOnanJO v; Ion?,* on J i,u. . 00 vo 

• .■: . ; 1 .' ■•■ ■'.! 0 •' ' O’ 0> . ■■ ■..!. 0 -• 0 • 'iO 

t . >:. » ; it [ ■ -' ■ • n ; - 

. ' „ f . ,• .. .• ' ‘ * '■ \ u .. > "■ V • ). *) - 

' . ■ w .i. J ' ■ ■' • V • * ■ •.■■ ■ ■ J \ i . .. •> V J -- -c.,'* w 

,, i ■/ -r ■ o •. - Jo: . j vo •./•* )'■. . n o: 

;; J .1 • 0 n. .. -Jo-;:./ .oJ - ...nJ/.o i oo-r j_ J cnin# 



' . ; o o J , ■- - ■ . s >. c ' - . - • / ,.■ - ' < ■ • i . ■: '/■. '. .. 

i,- x $:.i *'. r-. • .) i / .'• J' . ‘ 0'■ y ■ j, o, Xo *.\l0 1 Olv V. 1 ,:. >v. /•./,* o • * 

. V.;; j ... L . i ' j..| ,> 


o; . J'.i.v., 'voi-a •. .■».0; : • J i : :i . 

.'. • . . :i . j.. .1 1. j '■ , ’■ •> ■ .' : 1 

■■ ■ • i • .’ v , , . ■ ...-o \ f o ■ .. • oi.: 

'O''- : .' V .(’• ■■.(■ , ‘U o-o-i 0,0 n; \0^iL ,;3- OOt aX 

■ '■•Si) j . - ' 0\ /•, . ; 0- ; ! 0,0. ' • of.# hi 

- . : ' Cj ■ ■ 

I I . ,! ..'JO ,:o ■. 0 J. ! J ' ' 'Vi ' OO 

'• o ‘O ;j c-J ^ rjJ.-] UJ'l 1‘1^ 

. '* ' * O 

■ •• ..; :. . o ...» 0 .0 , / 

. 

■ ■ ) • : :• - , J ’O' ..• -jj,/.'; 1: P j;.L . ; • 0. -o ■ 1. : } 

. 





73 - 


from Judaism, were transofrmed into something new 
by the influence of the Life and Death of Jesus. In 
both these essential parts of the Corinthian service 
of worship, the forms and contents of Jewish prayers, 
scriptures and hymns were used and transformed. 


To conclude our discussion we quote Principal 
Davidson: 

"The Lord’s Supper is the one complete act 
of Christian worship. Other acts of common 
worship are derived from it, or auxiliary to it." 

(1) 


and again J. S. Whale: 

"In the full diet of public worship in every 
Church throughout Christendom, two permanent 
elements together constitute ’the means of 
grace 1 2 first, the preaching and hearing 
of the Word; second, the Sacrament of the 
Eucharist, where the highest is not spoken 
but acted; where the promises of the Gospel 
are visibly seeled by the Yea and Amen of a 
ritual act. Separable though they may be in 
our practice, these two elements are one ser¬ 
vice in our thought. They are the two foci 
of an ellipse, together forming a unity to which 
each is equally indispensable. Differing in 
their operation they are one in their essential 
function, which is the publication of the Gospel 
of Redemption in all its incomparable majesty 
and ecmfcrt. Whatever the rich variety of its 
historic forms Christian worship has always and 
everywhere received the blessing of the Gospel 
in this two-fold way of Christ’s appointing." (2) 


(1) Davidson, "The Sacraments", in "The Living Church", 

p .118 

(2) J. S. Whale, "Christian doctrine", p.153 



: : 

v. ' ,j ■' J. . J.i 4 u' ■ -J < i< ! 


J ■ - { . . - . OJ • J : 











Chapter VI 


WORSHIP AT CORINTH 


( A Case History ) 








VI 


WORSHIP AT CORINTH 

( A Case History ) 

In any study of worship, the worship experiences 
of past generations need to be revalued. Just as a 
musician would be foolish to attempt to write music 
without first studying the fundamentals of composition 
laid down in the greatest musical masterpieces, so too 
it would be folly for a leader in worship to design 
orders of service while ignoring the accumulated wisdom 
and eaqperiences of the past, which have yielded some 
great principles of worship. Human nature does not 
change very much, fundamentally, throughout the centur¬ 
ies, and its basic needs have been and continue to be 
constant. So it has happened that sometimes a religious 
genius, consciously or unconsciously realizing these 
deep psychological and emotional needs, has uttered 
basic solutions which are applicable to the problems of 
any people in any age. Such a one was Jesus, to an 
infinite degree. Such a man was Isaiah, who stated a 
universal principle of worship in Isaiah 6. Another 
such man was Paul, who, though ever concerned with the 
temporary situation, yet in his statement of the 
problem and his own solution unconsciously laid down 
valid principles in ethics, morality and worship. 

While we may deplore the occasion which called 
forth Paul’s First Letter to the Corinthian congregation, 


- 74 





JV- 


} 


< : •• ‘i ■■ : V, I c‘ I i. 








.J I.. cm C. , r J. :• ■' . C3 .■ 0 1 Ui:S 


%< JO : ; :/ i rv 


..I:.:,,/.. 


i:.' 


U . . K 


■ f \iO i" .v ; .j. .• . i v" ■; 


■ A \ - l . ■ 

:.o\ o .1 : o.i ?: ■ - -■ a :.i'i oy. ) 

. J ..1 jc c ...J g .■>. ■■ >■. ' i j i) sno •;c • c 




tl • _ \ 


:• t *',(> 30,) '.T .• . , • X > ..C, J. • ’; M' ■ • •' *£ 00)-lO 

J >1 \ . 0> O •>. -©_Ui Ci£ £.l\£ - i.-.i i: 1. J.v< *jj " ■” 0 

>.,■ ■ c * ■, i ■' nv• ;.c 

. ■ ■: 

* ' -- , ■ '{ 3 ' !. > • .. . ' . 

. t ■ , , , . ■' ■ -j ■ 

•' ■ • '• j t v : * . 

• ■•■...■ * .i ■ ic; ;■ .ii :■ i ' .• . 

* • ■ • i : u . ■: t j ; ill : ol. ■ ■ ■ .' : . l j .1 v 








. 


• . 




3 


■ 





: 



- 75 - 


we still have are ry reason to be grateful for the exist¬ 
ence of this letter, because it furnishes us with the 
only details given in the New Testament on the conduct 

of current worship services. Even these few clues are 
given quite incidentally, and after an almost fruitless 
search of the New Testament for further comments on 
the actual services, we agree with Oesterley that this 
very silence has something to tell us: 

"The silence,...in itself offers some 
justification for the belief that the 
earliest Christians continued to worship 
in their traditional way." (1) 


Corinth was a strategic commercial centre, sit¬ 
uated on the main route between East and West, It was 
a seaport with about one-half million inhabitants, who 
were noted for the pursuit of business and pleasure. 
The worship of Aphrodite with its attendant immoral 
practices was very popular. 

"In common parlance of the Mediterranean world 
Corinth suggested culture and courtesans. 
♦Corinthian words* implied pretensions t© 
philosophy and fine talk; f t© live like a 
Corinthian* meant to abandon all pretensions 
to moral decency". (2) 


Dissension is an unedifying spectacle at any time, 
but if in a Christian congregation one sees member at 
variance with member, and members at variance with 

(1) Oesterley, "The Jewish Background of the Christian 
Liturgy", pp.84-85 

(2) Westminster Study Edition of the Bible, p.287 



■ 





•» , * 

• '• - ■ « 

t.: . 3 I‘ V - ■ • ij V J.\ & X *' 

. . 

' . > ■ ! ' - ' ; 

l | ' ■ : ■ 1 1 







u.u j.i. 



x. • J Jr' " ,:v \ ^ •' 

o ••<; xvi ntxxa 0*.!xt in ?• tJw 
1. I t :..i ‘ , j.'V - ■■■' i o 1, 

. 'i'': X xid "lo J x XX X.XfO *&i *t ix $ $U& OKt 0$ 

; | 

. 

>•.•1 x •• •' i.'I .-U X.X i j'J" 

:.f: - j.a x . j\ ); - hi . x^xJ-tO 

f ■, .! X .V r 

■ ; j i 

f' ■ 


”.i .■ . » X j . i V XX .v’ AS i ; - i • • <-■ 

' -j . .x. ,•». J - •- : .lx v 




X.' 'v 






. 

. .:■£& ‘ * ■. . :•. ■■ -j r • v , 




76 - 


their spiritual leaders, then the worship of that con¬ 
gregation is not likely to result in spiritual benefit 
to all parties concerned. That is exactly the situation 
pictured for us in the Corinthian correspondence. Had 
it not been for this unhappy situation, however, we 
would not today have the Rhapsody of Love (I.Cor. 13), 
we would not have the imaortal paean of the Resurrec¬ 
tion (I.Cor. 15), we would not have insight into the 
physical discomforts, sufferings and persecutions en¬ 
dured by early Christians (II,Cor, 4:8-10; 6:4-10; 
11:23-28; 12:7-9), nor a glimpse behind the scenes 
at the worship of the Corinthians (I.Cor. chs.10-14). 
on all four counts the loss would be immeasurable. 

Most of Paul’s letters are incidental letters, written 
in the heat of controversy to instruct, to correct or 
to strengthen. The difficulties referred to in the 
Corinthian congregation are not a noof worship 
throughout the early Church. The very fact that Paul 
deplores and denounces certain practices of the church 
in Corinth would seem to imply that this situation was 
extraordinary and had not developed in the other congre¬ 
gations. 

Paul had arrived in Corinth in A.D. 50. As was 
his custom, he had started his mission in the Synagogue. 
After the usual rejection from the Synagogue, he had 
turned to the Gentiles (Acts 18:6), going to the house 
of Titus Justus, who resided next door to the Synagogue 







77 


(Acts 18:7). He had worked at his trade of tent¬ 
making, and as a result made one of the most beauti¬ 
ful friendships on record in working at his trade and 
later in missionary work with Aquila and Priscilla. 
Crispus, the President of the Synagogue, and his 
whole household, had become Christians, as had also 
Sosthenes, another President of a Synagogue, nho was 
beaten by his fellow Jews before Gallic as a result 
of the disorders caused by Pau^s activities (Acts 18:17). 

The congregation Paul had founded at Corinth is 
pictured as a vital but undisciplined group, inclined 
to excessive emotionalism, needing a firm hand and con¬ 
tinued reminders of the things which Paul had delivered 
to them (I.Cor. 11:23). The implication of 11:2, "I 
commend you because you remember me in everything and 
maintain the traditions even as I have delivered them 
to you", may be a slightly ironic censure, for certain¬ 
ly the rest of the letter refutes any suggestion of 
praiseworth!ness• 

Reports had com© to Paul at Ephesus that since 
his departure from Corinth, after having spent 18 months 
at work in their midst, matters had not progressed as 
might be expected. The most glaring disorders that 
had been brought to his attention by Chios*s people 
(I.Cor.l:ll) were dissension and party spirit (11:18,19; 
chs. 1-4) and particularly disgraceful behaviour at 
their assembling together (11:18). This picture of 


V ? 








78 - 


the worship of the Corinthians reveals that the 
Lord’s Supper, instead of being observed with due 
reverence, had become a social convenience. (1). 

The richer disregarded the needs of the poorer among 
their number, and instead of sharing there was gluttony 
on their part; worse still, drunkenness seemed to be 
quite common. All these disorders, contradicting the 
spirit of Jesus, are sternly rebuked and denounced by 
Paul. 

In addition, the gift of speaking with tongues 
had come to be held in such high esteem by the Corinth¬ 
ians that the possession ©f this gift, valuable in 
itself, was given priority over prophecy ("utterance of 
wisdom" and "utterance of knowledge", cf. 12:8). A 
stranger entering their meeting would believe himself 
to be in a madhouse (14:25) and Cod would not be 
glorified, nor the unbeliever wen. If there must be 
speaking in tongues, advised Paul, let it be done 
decently and in orderly fashion — only two ©r three 
speaking in turn, with each one’s utterance being 
interpreted (14:27). But if no on© is able to interpret, 
writes Paul, let there be silence and let the "inspired 
one" speak to Cod, for in that case what he says in 
tongues is not really for the ears of those who are 

IT) "the secular and social aspects of the communal 

supper had largely obscured for them it religious 
and sacramental elements." (Dix, "The Shape ©f 
the Liturgy", p.97) 



' • - ... • 1 1 ■ 

■ : ' 

- . ■ •• : ■' ■ * ' • ' 

■ ; •: y . ; .i J r. *;y ■ • *« •• - 

:.yj. ■ ■ ' ■ ■ •' • : : ° ■ : 


v - ,Hf 












J ; 


•V. ,,•] J.M: 


Si 


*■. v*.: 


. 

,.. .‘X . i. 

7 J •. * i 'v ■ t , 


i : 


. . 

u.i o*,t - : Xo ■ :,i-. o 

J -j . orii^lX., yx 

■ i . . .... - a > ' 


. 




■ ■ j ‘%i 

i "H. X; 






■ • . • - 

do b '■ *x©qqy« 

■ X. :-.L V x'rSi .' ; l : X 

. 


- 79 - 


assembled together for worship (14:28). Paul mentions 

in 

that he himself is/possession of this much desired gift, 
yet in the list of spiritual gifts (12:4-11, 28-21; of. 
Gal. 5:22f) he pieces speaking with tongues last, and 
states that in church he would rather speak five words 
with the mind, in order to instruct others, than ten 
thousand words in a tongue. 


With this basic groundwork laid, he proceeds to 

set down principles for the conduct of Public Worship. 

In all these principles Paul takes for granted that 

there will be activity of the Spirit which empowers, 

strengthens and leads the individual to be enthusiastic 

(in the literal and original meaning of €v $£Qg> 

(i.e. possessed by God). We have seen that this activity 

of the Spirit is highly desirable, but that at times, 

as in the case of the Corinthian congregation, it led 

to excesses which had to be curbed. 

"The Church has not failed to do justice to 
Paul as the man of bold pioneering mind who 
greatly widened the horizons of herthought. 

Yet we must feel that he rendered an even 
more vital service when he gave his strength 
to head her off, in the days of her unchasten¬ 
ed youth, from the perils of emotionalism and 
orgiasm." (1) 

This he accomplished by prescribing four principles of 

worship; viz., that worship, whether it b© a hymn, 

a lesson, a revelation, a tongue, or an interpretation 

(14:26) — note the order — must be 

1. intelligent, 

2. edifying, _ 

3. decent, and f (1} Macdonald: "Christian 

4. orderly. / Worship in the Primitive 

- ———-Church”, p.25 





f'\ - 


V n i:;:: .i 




■ 4 ^ r •< . u ,0' .i.'V:; , 

i" • J 

» 7.1 -t •id' 

v■< ‘.<.c ■ i:. ■).■■■ j xi.•\‘ 

; ■ -J 'i ••• - 1 '■ ■ 

. i \ i I .. 3 ' w 



Jo J ■ wJ *jai : j w 






t • • T r A. ii 



- . . ■ ■ ; j . • 1 . I M ■' 1 

■ i . I . . cl 3 1 ' I ■ > a ■ 

.i.i .; .'-k > ... • n . : -) 

-• ’.:■ J • i / ■ . - . . 

... - ' •' ; j . J ; • ■ c 1 " . ■ •’ : ■ ' • •’ 

.... v A. ,< J’ ' ‘J ■ ■ .. .x ' - T<* ■ ■>. iJ 'J J 1 : ■ 'o'l 

. 

• • vi : - : .< v . .v. - .» i. -J \J. >■ ■ - • • ’ : 

•. >, ’o': A .: iOJ. ... .)* i. '*'■ ' ■■■>■■ <*) f.< - • • i 

' ' 

vv r J .!;•• •••;.’ *3'*: ii J' ..j A.. V J Y 

■ . ' • 

' ’ . ' • . . . / ' ■ ' . ; . w 

• j • " .’’ Ji.'.'. ’• .i.’■ j ■.■' J -i >. ■ 

. '■ ' '....i , .. • :.J •] ). i : . i. r. .; 

• J . ' /‘ j : 

. ' . . ■. ' . 

;:i ; -- -v , ...... : " • / 


I" ill «X 






- 80 - 


The First Principle ; Worship must be intelligent 


also 


"I will pray with the spirit and I will pray 
with the mind also; I will sing with the 
spirit and I will sing with the mind also*" 

(I.Cor. 14:15) 

”The spirits of prophets are subject to 
prophets.” (I.Cor. 14:32) 


In other words, the ecstatic must be tempered by the 


prophetic, and the emotion must be balaced by the 


intellect. As a matter of fact, Paul states that he 


who prophesies is greater than he who speaks in tongues 
(14:5b). If your worship consists only of unintel¬ 
ligible gibberish, important though that may be to the 
worshipper and to God, how can anyone in the position 
of an outsider, writes Paul, say "Amen” to your 
thanksgiving (14:16}, when he does not know what you 
are saying? To him it will be merely ”sound and fury 
signifying nothing”. Evelyn Underhill says in this 
connection: 

”We do not get a balanced view of the worship 
of the Apostolic Church unless we remember that 
it did practice together, and held in equal 
honour, the sacramental and pneumatic, liturgie 
and prophetic responses to God in Christ. The 
two aspects are not to be sharply divided, but 
are at best understood as the completing opposites 
of one experienced reality, and it is still true 
that the fullest and deepest worship accepts and 
uses both.” (1) 

The battles that once raged around the relative importance 

and value of subjective as opposed to objective worship 


are in the past. It is well, however, to be reminded 
that in the given Corinthian situation Paul leans 


(1) Underhill, ”Worship”, p.234 





- . 





70 



f ■ v , ■ 

■ 


1 ■ L : 


d' 

j.-.::;,- 

All - ' 

.A'Xvi i.i. J.' 



ad- ..J 



{ > 

. i 

•7. A. . .. . w 



i 





• ■ ‘ 



■ 






: •> .1 


d' d 

a 


• i 

1 do 

i i i 

v ' •’ 7 





; 


. 

A 

j 



J 

. ;. . 


< 

A-.'.;' t : 



7. ... 

. 

j • . - s y 


. 

; .* .d )d ■ a a • 


■ • >0 i ' 



. 

j . 


’•A'UdAi 

. 


• v .. 


d. a .a id a .a 


J. s -'’.I*. 

7 

- :da : 

, L " ' 


■ .Jr. 

■ J: •' .. ; )t : I.. 



% , ■ . 

O j -£ Ow A.: 


d 


' ■. ■ ’ A 


. 

. i . • i: i; .. 

.i ■» ■ . : 


4-1 " 


/..! 77 7: 






4 ;j.a 

« . • 

. ... a; la; 

. 

a,.- a-, do 

' • V 

1 

■ ox i . i m ■ )of> 

.. ;• ■:" . J : ... : 


.c „a7 a ad d 

\;7 nd b. 


; 7.7 . . 1 f '7 > 7 (.' 

/ .i :. J ■■■ ' ...a! 

: ■ 

i; 

1 s j. *. 6 


: ”i-f * ; ‘ l dia j . 

. ■ i . ; . 


i 






f'f , V 

J 


•• -f; 7 / v.-»f 7 ■ • 


• 

} • 


■ 

. ■ 'M ■ t -: .7 '.7 

‘ ■ : 1 ' j 


3 



. 

. 

■ 

V J. 

. V ► f , * . * .J! - • ’ 


. . , . 

■ ■ 


. Lv . i 

ada 

, / 

1 • 

.< ) ■ i. ■ >' i* ■ a. i ■ 

f '■ 

iaa 



Ivl ' 1 : d 

J v. oi> a;; 


... 


o ■ 

j i/ 7‘. ■ :7 J A ! 

3 . ‘ 


•j*,:. • 


;.jd 

. 

f A 


■ 



‘ ' ' 

& 

7.,: d 








•. a.. ■ 


. ■ • .. U ■ 

■ 

•: 7 J 

V d 7'U ,,A 


.. 




• a 7 7 • ' -i.aaf.. -.a.;: a O0.L7 

7 tfT 

7 od { * 

' 

c , ■ • ’ j I 

m. ■.• 


. ‘ a •• ; • 




' 












81 - 


toward intelligent, objective worship, in order to 
restore the balanoe between the objective and subjective. 

Contemporary worship has moved from the true 
balance that should be preserved. Regarding the Great 
Commandment, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and 
thy neighbor as thyself", extremely ojeotiv© views of 
worship are based on the first clause, extremely sub¬ 
jective worship on the second. Too much of our Protest¬ 
ant worship is based on the latter without reference 
to the former — the mood is all that matters, so we 
•create 1 mood-moulding services; the present needs are 
given prime consideration, so the whole service is 
arranged to male© a proper "psychological" impression; 
the immediate effect upon the worshipper is the be-all 
and end-all of our worship experience, so we let the 
soloist, the choir (and the minister) "perform"; and 
the arrangement of the sanctuary usually fosters these 
attitudes. What is worse than any of these faults is 
that we sometimes have services of worship arranged in 
a haphazard way, without regard to order, fitness ©r 
propriety. 

The ideal service of worship is one in tfhioh the 
subjective and objective elements are held in proper 
balance, where we pray with the spirit and with the 
mind also, and where w© sing with the spirit and with 
the mind also. Some of the best contemporary books on 





:)V. Cm 



0£ 


... . 




/ ... ' .<■*, i 


.) 









C: 




■> 




VC 









i 










- 82 - 


worship realize the great necessity of restoring this 

balance to our worship. Pratt defines 

"objective worship as that which aims at making 
some kind of effect upon the Deity or in some 
way communicating with him" and subjective wor¬ 
ship as that worship which "seeks only to induce 
some desired mood or belief or attitude in the 
mind of the worshipper." (1) 

Simpson describes objective worship as 

"our offering to God. The first thing in it 
concerns our giving, not our getting" (i.e., 
it is sacrifice). "Only, we must remember 
that the sacrifice is not of things, but of 
persons, and it is not the sacrifice of our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, but of His Body 
which is the Church. As members of that Body 
in our worship we offer unto God, in the love 
of Jesus Christ and through Him, our thanks¬ 
givings and ourselves." (8) 

Both agree that more lasting subjective results are 

obtained from objective worship than from subjective 

worship. Simpson continues: 

"You get as you give; you receive from God 
as you present to God. Objectively you make 
your sacrifice; subjectively you find on your 
side the means of grace." (3) 

Sperry makes clear the difference between Roman Catholic 

objectivity and Protestant subjectivity by relating the 

following: 

"One day not long ago a Boston minister was 
visiting a Catholic friend, a member of a 
preaching order connected with a mission 
church. The Romanist was showing his Protestant 
friend through the church. They passed from 
station to station until their way led them out 
of the open and public places of both nave and 
choir into a dim recess behind the great organ. 
There, in a bare dark spot they came upon a lay 
brother down on his knees scrubbing the floor, 
apparently spotless and clean. f But why wash 
the floor?* said the visitor. * Surely no one _ 

(1) Pratt, "Religious Consciousness", p.390 

(2) Simpson, "Ideas in Corporate Worship", p.113 

(3) ibid, p.114 







ii 


's 6* 




, i 










i- .'' • 



c 




At' 







83 - 


ever canes in here to see this plaoe. 1 The 
words were no sooner out of his mouth than he 
realized what he had said and anticipated the 
answer he got, *No, no one ever comes in here. 

We keep this place clean for the eye of God*." (1) 

The services of the early Church at their best 
preserved the necessary balance, rooted as they were in 
the reality of God f s presence and activity. Something 
real did happen. The note of gratitude, Joy and thanks¬ 
giving of which we have made mention in preceding 
sections found its source in this. A real transaction 
took place betwwen God and man, between man and God, 
and resulted in the right attitudes and actions between 
man and man. When that balance was distrubed, as it 
was in Corinth, there was need to restore it by a call 
to intelligent worship: praying with the spirit but 
with the mind also, and singing with the spirit but 
also with the mind. 

Second Principle : " Let all things be done for edification" 


TT¥T m .—~TU 


O / 

The Greek word GiRoOo.m f means "that which up¬ 


builds". According to the Oxford Dictionary (p.362) the 
verb "to edify" means "to benefit spiritually; to improve 
morally". Goodspeed translates this phrase "for the good 
of all"; Luther, "Besserung"; and Phillips, "to make your 
Church strong in the faith". The underlying ethical 

(l) Sperry, "Reality' in Worship**, p#261 “ ' 

/ 









:ll TV 


. 


> i 




■ai 


, ■ .1 ... 


■> J ) 


- 


3, 7 .. JV. 


vur .i J i:v OoX■ 


") 70;; -Mi : : J j/ J 


f xtch. j: 


: '7 c 




/ 




• 84- 

principle is that behind all our actions, whether they 
oonoern our life or our worship, each must be guided 
by concern for others. Enslin defines edification as 
"the act of promoting another’s growth in the Christian 
graces" (1). We shall consider edifioation, there¬ 
fore, as involving two aspects, namely correct action 
and correct instruction. 

Paul was greatly concerned about the social solid¬ 
arity of the Christian fellowship. All the members, 
he reminds them, are parts of one body (of. I.Cor.l2:12-27), 
so that if one part suffers, all suffer, and if one 
part rejoices, all rejoice. If the whole is to be 
built up and grow, then all things must be don© for 
edification. Writing to the Romans (14:19) he refers 
to this same principle: "Let us then pursue what makes 
for peace and for mutual upbuilding" (edification). 

Early in this chapter we noted how disregard of IMs 
vital principle had caused the disorders at Corinth. 

A small group considered themselves especially "spiritual" 
and as a result there had risen a spirit of antinomianism 
and a flagrant disregard of brother for brother. Paul 
pinned down this spirit when he set forth valid guides 
to conduct in the matter of eating meat which had been 
sacrificed to idols: 


(1) Enslin, "The Ethics of Paul", p.231 





fc ■ 



0 


t 




.11 <' 1J 


vto 


v> i 




o 


/ 


i 





I 


i 


85 - 


a) "All things are lawful for me", but not 

all things are helpful (I.Cor. 6:12) 

b) "All things are lawful for me", but I will 

not be enslaved by anything (6:12) 

c) "All things are lawful", but not all things 

build up (edify) (I.Cor. 10:23) 

If eating meat sacrificed to the idols would make a 
weaker brother fall, or prevent the unbeliever from 
becoming converted, then no such meat should be eaten. 
Things and actions which do not build up the whole must 
be sacrificed by the individual. 


From the foregoing it will be seen that Paul f s 
second principle rot only refers to Corinthian worship 
services, but 

"was an underlying principle of Paul*s 
thought - an essential requirement for 
walking worthily of the Gospel". (1) 

The conduct ensuing from the right kind of worship 


should show forth all the Christian virtues, such as 
the list contained in Galatians 5:22-23; or individually 


referred to many times: 

love (Col. 3:14; I.Cor. 8:1; 13 et al), 

forbearance (Rom. 14;1 to 15:6), 

peace (Eph. 4:3; Col. 3:15a), 

humility and lowliness of mind (Phil. 2:3), 

mildness (Il.Cor. 10:1), 

gentleness (Gal. 6:1), 

kindness (Rom. 2:4; 11:22; Il.Cor. 6:6; 

Eph. 2:7: Col. 3:12). 
slowness to anger (Il.Cor. 6:6) 
relief of the poor (Rom. 12:13; Eph. 4:28), 
hospitality (Rom. 12:13). 

Conduct always tests the reality of the worship experience 


(1) Enslin, "The Ethics of Paul", p.294 





i 


\ 




/•. 



j i 



j 





J 









- 86 


Involved in edification is not only building up 
by right conduct but also by "patient instruction" (1). 

It matters tremendously what a man believes* Right 
belief will always be a relative matter, but Christ laid 
upon his followers the injuction to worship God with 
the mind. Man may never attain to the fullness of love 
or knowledge, but it is his sacred duty to strive to¬ 
ward these goals. There are ’theological bases of 
worship’ (2), and Scott points out the "significant 
fact that the ages of faith have also been pre-eminently 
the ages of doctrine", (3), drawing his evidence from 
the New Testament Age, the thirteenth century, and the 
periods of the Reformation and the Puritans. 

The ministry of Jesus was not only a preaching 
and healing ministry but also a teaching ministry. If 
the Church is to be true to the example of its founder, 
it must be aware of its responsibility towards the up¬ 
building of its members by teaching. Religious Education 
is having an ever increasing part in the total life of 
the Church. The pulpit, too, has its great opportunity 
to upbuild, so that Church members will ever be able and 
ready to give an account of their faith. Sacramental 
worship is an area in which the Church today requires 
careful instruction, for as Cyril C. Richardson points out: 

(1) E. E. Scott ,"The Nature of the Early Church" ,p.l43f~ ' 

(2) Cf.,e.g.,Coffin, "The Public Worship of God",ch.XX 

(3) E. F. Scott, op.cit. p.143 







UlO >1 -.Jli 


... *y 


I Hfc ■ 




0 




i. 


a. f. 




.IV ) .1. 







I 


! 


■;> 

IV 


i ' J 


IV.. J ! 


i 


V (j.J .s'. V 



a o 


,V Cf r 




oubv CVJ 


.1 


(j 






v;:; xr: : J *v: > 


o 


■ 




,v 


S 


4. 


. . I 










)' 




. 


- i 



■> 







- 87 - 


"the dangers implicit in all sacramental 
worship are twofold. On the one hand there 
is the tendency to identify the form and 
the reality, which leads to magic and to 
superstition. On the other hand there 
is the danger of divorcing the form from 
the reality, which leads to rationalism." 

He goes on to say that 

"educational preaching will prevent any return 
to magic and superstition in our effort to re- 
cover sacramental worship." (1) 


Third Principle: "Let all things be done decently" 

- —- ; («:40) (I) 

The Greek adverb 6 06 K Vj aa 0 \/ ol,S means "in a 
seemly manner", "with grace like a gentleman" (3) 
that is to say, free from vulgar and unworthy elements. 
Paul had in mind the disgraceful and selfish behaviour 
of those who made the time of the Lord’s Supper an 
occasion for drunkenness and gluttony. This danger 
is no longer with us, hut there is always indecent and 
unseemly behaviour in worship services when it is for¬ 
gotten that "the chief end of man is to glorify God 
and to enjoy him forever." 


One of the greatest services the Church can render 
to mankind is to foster a feeling ©f reverence. It is 
true that man can worship God in field or fo^St, in a 
simple unadorned church or schoolhouse on the vast 
prairies or in a stately cathedral in a congested 


(1J Richardson, Articles "Preaching and Worship" in 
Religion In Life, Sumner 1942, pp.400-401 

( 2 ) _ / / / 

IldVTfr £06 ~Xv| yw£-64)u) 

(3) Liddell and Scott’s Greek-BngXish Lexicon,abr.,p.289 







■Vf - 


i ■ . .... • . 

.■ 

' 

l • ■ > 

*J • • 


- v-. 

. .' i ' 

. 

i ■ 

r x 




•x ...j 

) 



■ 

.«. .J 


•A' 




i 





..I . 1 ) .-JJ. ,■ ■' ^ 1 . • ■- 


J 't 


' <■> 


’ j . * 



HO 


■■ ■ 


■ 


. •«. ■ J 


1 1 i . ^ ■ ■■.. 1 

jx\ . J.. i. l .' : ^ -v 

, • V m i. ... ’ 3 ■' -J ' i . 

.• ! t .. ! J . tj i . *, ■! "... ’ •' .1. V • ... ; 

' ■ / “ ■ . ' „ : ■■ ... • J’ ' - • 'j- ' • J- • • 

. ^ \ t., , .. .' ..' , .f. . • ... w 

... 

' 

■... o ■ |i,i I ■ . ■ . w • I .' < , i. ' ■. 

I 

:-.‘i. . • , J : >.ioi J '-- 1 • • • ' ( ■■ 

. ‘ i ' ,: 

‘ ■ . ■ f . , :■ 






. . . 











- ee 


metropolis. Yet there are certain aids to worship, 
or symbols which represent the great Other to the 
finite mind of man. Men find it very difficult to 
bow in expectation for the revelation of the Lord, 
high and lifted up, in buildings that are not fit 
dwelling places of the Most High. Not only Truth and 
Goodness, but also Beauty is an attribute of God. 

He made this world so fair that his children should 
enjoy it, and certainly that they should worship him 
in the beauty of holiness. 

The greatness of the first half of the Both 
century in the history of the Christian Church is 
the growth and development of the Ecumenical Movement. 
Along with it, and probably as a direct result of it, 
there has been a parallel growth and development of 
the liturgical movement - an effort to make worship 
a fit and seemly vehicle of approach to God. The 
bizarre and individualistic attempts on the part of 
some denominations have been found singularly unsatis¬ 
fying. The efforts to "prettify", enrich and develop 
mood-moulding services of worship in the non-liturgical 
churches have led to some haphazard and completely 
unedifying and unseemly experiments. To all this the 
liturgical movement, which is confined neither to one 
country nor to one branch of the Church, is a healthy 
corrective. The liturgical movement has been evaluated 
in a recent periodical by Howard Hageman as follows: 






89 - 


1* "Liturgy is concerned solely with what a 
congregation says and does in its acts of 
worship." (Editor’s comment: It is not at 
all a matter of pulpit furniture, clerical 
garb, or lighting fixtures.) 

2. "Authentic Christian Worship must be corporate." 

(Editor’s comment: It is not a ’duet* between 
the minister and quartette which those in the 
pews listen to and observe.) 

3. "Worship is dogma come to life". (Editorfe com¬ 

ment: It is not a substitute for doctrine but 
the expression of it.) 

4. "All Christian worship is basically sacramental". 

(Editor’s comment: This not only puts the 
Sacrament in the first place of importance, 
but reminds us that "Christian worship moves 
in two worlds at once.") (1) 


One of the results of the current interest in 
liturgy has been the revaluation of modern customs of 
worship. Art and architecture are being rallied to 
use for the glory of God. However at times a great 
deal of confusion results because of disregard of 
historical tradition and continuity on the one hand, 
and modern need on the other. Neo-Gothic churches are 
built which disregard the modern idiom which is more 
familiar to worshippers today. Many non-liturgical 
churches are restoring the chancel and the altar. In 
this connection it is well to heed the warning voiced 
in an editorial in "Church Management": 


(1) Article, "The Liturgical Revivsl", by Howard 

Hageman, in Theology Today, January 1950, pp. 490 
to 505. 







| ■ . : 

, .. ; s nol$ ■ ■■ 

. T . - ' . ) ' - t • 

. ■ ■■ 

. I : 



. * 




a ; J £ 




{ y 4 • ■; 

:• J 


, 

. ■■ f;e j. nl ;t : j 

■- ■ • ■■ 

, 




•x 




. ... •.. i. j : 

- 


,, s ;,j x ■ 7 •. '-.7J ;; c ' ■ ■ ■ ■ 

■ Slsitf ■, - t 

ta • - 

to m ■ £ ■'■■■" ' ' 

■ J » . i » i ■ ' ■' •• ' - ' ' * ■ 

j. ; -oa : i. , 1 '- 1: . Uvu ;.• .• i . ■ 

■ , . -r j r ..:. d 


■ < < 


. 


j .. i .• :: ,.l U),l o ('-.i' o < *■ : 

} ... i > i ... J i ~ 1 : j 

; • . ■; .■ U. ■ ! " > : 4 i . : . ,1 ' J l - 4 ■ - 









. 

. , • 









- 90 - 


" Urges the Chancel Choir" 

•The Catholic Choirmaster 1 , a Journal of 
liturgical authority in its field, gave its 
leading editorial in a recent issue to the 
chancel choir. It urges churohes to bring 
their choirs from the rear telconies to the 
chancel where there may be closer cooperation 
with the congregation and the priest. This 
interests us immensely because it is being 
urged at a time when some Protestant liturgists 
are insisting that the choir should be moved 
from the chancel to the balcony. 

A parallel mix-up of signals may be seen in 
the recommendation of an Episcopal Liturgical 
Guild that the altars of the churches give 
way to communion tables, while some non- 
liturgical bodies are insisting that their 
camnunion tables be converted into altars. 

Here the argument is that the change will 
bring the priest closer to his people. 

To us it all adds up to something like this: 
the only tradition of church building and 
liturgy which is binding upon the church is 
that it should build and organize so that 
it serves its generation in the most helpful 
way. We might add that the exponents of 
inflexible traditions in church buildings 
have more often come frcm the non-liturgical 
than the historic liturgical groups. 

This is one of several fields where certainly 
•a little learning is a dangerous thing 1 ." (1) 


There does not seem to be any doubt that historical 
tradition confirms the central position of the communion 
table (3). It is interesting to note that the 
liturgical revival in the Roman Catholic Church, begin¬ 
ning with the Benedictines in Germany, aims at restoring 


(1) Editorial, in Church Management, December 195G. 
(3) Cf. Lowrie: "The Lord’s Supper and the Liturgy", 
p.33f; also Dix: "The Shape of the Liturgy", 
pp .33-27. 





;) t ' 

-«i 




. 


-i 







to 


< 














. 















- 91 - 


"the basilican posture" (1). The same movement 
is afoot in the Episcopal Church in The United States(2). 
In the renewed interest in liturgy in the Church of 
Scotland, a similar trend is noticeable: in many 
churches the communion table is being restored to the 
oentral position. All these efforts to make the ex¬ 
ternals of worship decent and seemly are to the good, 
so long as the changes are in harmony with the philos¬ 
ophy of worship which is consistent with early Church 
and Protestant principles. They will avail nothing, 
however, unless the worshipper realizes that in order 
to worship God "decently" his attitude to the object 
of his worship should be rooted in "wonder, love and 
praise"♦ (5), In worship God speaks to man and 

man responds to God. Unless there are both an expectant 
waiting and a feeling of awe and reverence, unseemly 
behaviour will continue, and there will continue to be 
irreverent words and actions which will mar the most 
perfectly planned and most beautifully executed service 
of worship. 

More than a hundred years ago, Soeren Kierkegaard 
noted the prevailing tendency of the Protestant worship - 
per to come to worship in the same frame of mind in 

(1) Of. Amsterdam report, Yol.I, p.116 

(2) Of. Lowrie, op.cit. 

(3) A phrase found in both Charles Wesley’s hymn, "Love 
divine, all loves excelling", and in Joseph Addison’s 
hymn: "When all thy mercies, 0 my God, my rising soul 
surveys". 



, ■ . '' ' - : ' 

■■ ■ -• 

; .• i •• i ‘ V ‘ ^ ? ~ ^’ "" U " " 

| ; • ; ■ - * ■ : 1 1 ' • • ■: ■■ 

; .• _ • j . .! . j. . . ■.! .; i - • ••■'• ■ >. ■. • 

> , . .•■■•. ' • • ■ ■ ■ 

, •• oil *■ ■ . X.U •~'Xvt a *■' 

;u ,n ; " X-WKSiCi ViX 33 

. .. ■ . . 


i.r, • i'" 


<■■■■; ■ • •- 

i. . .y "" ■-> 

, . J... J. V • •• • , * • - 

‘V ')‘XO al.i. '■> . «•? X • ■' ' •>*•» r - 4 ; 

j.-., j' J‘ i-J■'•.«.*i-j .j" ■- - J-ii 

... / , .. ,, ! lJ~ -X) ••• • 

Ji- : • - 1- > >• - 1 - 

X :) ) . j i i i J :< - - ■ ;• *.> ' . *i v - ;i .<.id 

vX :o . vo/. v.*. . , 

J v.; .’ V. . . t • - ' 

•. • > ■; i.V .: . 4 r ‘X',,.' 1 - .'*'X v J 

.'. .J. ; :: J ' ■ •" ,?-u J V, ■ 


d ii ■■■ 0 . Q *1 Vi, • 

< '• • 

'' , v i •■)%,} d,X ii VI j . 

u ax.il 

. X r; , 

, 


... . ; ■ v t . - : ' ' VX . v; . .. : : X ri.j. . 

, v..,' X..; ■ .X. vWv: n; v:,!l.u':;./v*v.{ J .c 


.1 ...i ...J. 


i ■■ ! v 





«'iv V ,1 


... . 


■ ;{vi v.: 

’. .. > • 



'J ...>¥ J,-. 

o J. i' 


• . - 

* 

o‘;t va d'li'.. i\ 

: 

' : 












92 - 


whioh he would attend a lecture, a reoital, a concert 
or a play, reserving the right to pass judgment on the 
content of the message and the artistry of the "perform¬ 
ance”. The Church is a theater, to be sure, says Kier¬ 
kegaard, but unlike every other theater in the world. 
There is a stage in that Church, but it is much larger 
than the minister^ platform, and the entire congre¬ 
gation is on it. The audience have become the actors, 
and God is the only audience. He is the sole spectator. 
The minister remains in the picture, but he is no longer 
the center of the drama. He is only the prompter, be¬ 
hind the wings, whispering the lines to the forgetful 
actors. It is the minister who reads out the text by 
which the actors must examine themselves and direct 
their acting. The minister, too, is under divine 
scrutiny. He is responsible to God for what he says, 
and for what he is. He must not stand in the listener* s 
light, but must take him to the light. (1) 

With this ideal of worship ever before th®& con¬ 
gregations and ministers will realize constantly that 
they stand on hoi# ground. They will offer unto God 
nothing but their best. Their worship will be "decent" 
and "seemly". They will heed the advice of the apostle: 

"So whether you eat or drink, or whatever you 
do, do all to the glory of God." (I.Cor.10:51) 

(1) based on "Purity of Heart". Cf. Douglas Steere, 
"Doors Into Life", pp. 136-137 










j ! 



i u 




!, 



X 












- 93 - 

Fourth Principle: "Let all things be done in order" 

- -‘TnrioT- to— 


The Greek word 7(5 has almost the force of "with 


military precision". The whole service should march 
along. There should be no useless or senseless doings 
which may offend tbe good taste or insult the intel¬ 
ligence of the worshipper. Paul reminds the Corinthians 
that "God is not a God of confusion, but of peace"(14:33). 

Simpson suggests that all the different elements 
of the service of worship should be arranged in such 
a way that 

"the attention of the worshipper shall be secured, 
the imagination touched, his emotions moved, his 
conscience roused, and his whole self in fellow¬ 
ship with his brethren be presented an oblation 
unto God." (2) 

It is quite evident that in the worship of the 
early Church no set orders of service were prescribed 
(of. I.Cor. 14;26ff). Room was left for the working 
of the spirit. There was freed cm and spontaneity. If 
anyone "has a hymn, a lesson, a revelation, a tongue 
or an interpretation" (I.Cor.l4:26), by all means let 
him speak or sing as the spirit moves him, but all must 
be done in order. There must be no confusion. In time 
it was found convenient to pay some attention to form. 

The New Testament is silent about the way in which this 
took place. Possibly the reason for this silence Is 
that the early Christians took over from the worship of 


TTTT7— 

N<*.VT~<* 



(2) Simpson, "Ideas in Coiporate Worship", p.96 







. ' . ■■ 


?r •• 


. 1 ■" ' ■ '■' 1 ■ ..r*. 

* ■ 

: J • :<•: j C : i • •- :: 0 • % ,J j '■ 

• ■■■ = - • ■ ■ ■' J 
' ,• I . ■ ■ 


j . 


j J. u 


. 






, 


nolJ&LCi- 




1 o 11 ; ' i 1 r 

. 




, . .. . J • ■ UUit ’ '• ! 

. - 

; ' ■ ■ 'T * - • : 0/0 

V . . - : ./ ”, ■ , .. • - * -V’ ' ' •• 

. 

. ; ' / , ■ ’ - 

• : . ' ■ • - '• * '• ' V ' ' - - y " 

... . :j ■ ■ ■ , v f.xrr.s ■*> •- - ■ '* ;j 

j ; i . . r. ■ ,J j i') (I 5 J- 10 , I.tB el J.... > ■ -j ' ■ A- ' . I •>-- 


dr.'X 


. ■ ,1 , ' ‘ X ' ±\i • ■ i 


j 






- 94 


both Temple and Synagogue foms of worship sanctioned 

and hallowed by the use of many generations* 

"We have*..♦grounds far believing that during 
the period covered by the New Testament records 
Palestinian Jewish Christians as well as the 
Hellenistic Jewish and Gentile converts in the 
Dispersion used the Jewish liturgical form of 
worship in the Synagogue on Sabbaths and ordinary 
week-days, held their informal prayer-meetings in 
private houses, and on the first day of the week 
held a special form of worship of which the 
essential and central part was ’the breaking of 
the bread’ - the Eucharist - this being cele¬ 
brated at first in the home, but even in these 
early days at some central place of meeting." (1) 


The spontaneous, enthusiastic outbursts could not be 
maintained for any length of time without the loss of 
reality* 

"The assumed lack of liturgical restraint and the 
spirit-induced freedom created no new and individual¬ 
istic Christian cult-forms, but dissolved into 
nothing* After the first period of effervescent 
spirit-filled activity, Christians soon fell back 
totally on the forms of the hellenisti© synagogue, 
which have been the basis of the Christian Word- 
of-God-Service (Wortgottesdienst) until the present 
day." (2) 


(1) Oesterley, "Jewish Liturgy", p*99 

(2) Lietzmann: "Geschichte der alten Kirehe", p.153. My 
own translation of the German text: "Die zu vermu- 
tende liturgische Ungebundenheit End geistgewirkte 

Freiheit (hat) keine neuen und eigenartigen 
christlichen Kultusformen gescbaffen, sondern^sieh 
in Niehts aufgelost.feert. Nach der ersten Zeit der 
brausenden Geistesbetatigung zog sich die Christen- 
heit bald allgemein^auf die Formen der hellenist- 
ischen Synagoge guruck, die den Grundstock des 
christlichen Wortgottesdienstes bildet bis auf den 
heutigen Tag*" Of* also Scott, "The Nature of 
the Early Church", pp.80-95. 






I 





95 - 


In regard to the forms of worship, then, in 
the early Church the line of progression was: Temple, 
Palestinian Synagogue, Greek Synagogue, Christian 
worship. From evidence found in the Corinthian cor¬ 
respondence, the reconstructed order of worship would 
be something like the following: 

I. Preliminary Meet leg for business. Correspondence 

would be read and discussed. Here, no doubt, 
would appear the letters of Paul. Disciplinary 
action, if necessary, would be taken at this 
time (II.Cor. 2:5-6 and I.Cor. 5:4). Money 
matters, such as "the collection for the saints" 
would find their place here also (of. Acts 4:34 
to 5:11), and the setting apart of missionaries 
(Acts 13:2-3). 

II. The Agape would follow this preliminary meeting, 

during which or following which opportunity 
would be given for the exercise of spiritual 
gifts, speaking with tongues, prophecy and 
interpretation of tongues. 

III. The regular service of worship based and patterned 

on the Synagogue service (a hymn, a lesson, a 
revelation, a prophecy - 14:26). 

IV. The Lord’s Supper which formed the natural climax 

of the service. (1) 


We are finite beings, and our inner spiritual 
attitudes must find some outward expression. As Evelyn 
Underhill says: 

"Since we can only think, will, and feel in and 
with a physical body, and it is always in close 
connection with sense-impressions received through 
that body that our religious consciousness is 
stirred and sustained, it follows that we can 
hardly dispense with some ritual act, seme sensible 
image, sem© material offering, as an element in the 
total act of worship, if that act of worship is to 
turh our humanity in its wholesomeness towards God"(2) 

(lT Note: Lietzmann suggests that' the Lord* s Supper "fol- 

lowed immediately upon the reading of Paul’s letters. 

("Geschichte der alten Klrche", p.154) 

(2) Underhill, "Worship", p.25 








J . 01 


,r o,,a;.. o.f*x,; ; :o 3 a J- 


. 


j o 
'■ H ) . 


< /• ' ■> ; •• - - . ■. *J 

\J X ii.j ‘IO Jt'.Li . .i ' _v J. , ! .«J .U* Owk. 

■ . . • . ' ’ ' - 
' V O'.,-.; , n : J . ■ 

« - iQJ 


cx. o o' .j -x: . i. ■ 


U L ' O J 


. j. ■'! . 

) ■ ,.o- ■ a ■ o ; 

. . - i ■; 

.' .... ■■ '■ 

' 

o..r *: .■ o 


- 


• . .. t - V,,. r. ; ,i0‘ • i. :• ' 

.' / • o'... ; .o' 

I • I ( ,) 0 i J 0 JO... J 

_Li >. L .1. id o i - 1 ■ - o 


.1 . O X ’ 




l.,.' It 


>‘j 


i.,in .t--o 


3 .ki.i . \i 






’ - ] . ' itilQi 

.i. ‘ : •„[.: ) j . J' ; ;c J 

... ..' ,’■ :J -' . ■o 

, , ' - . 

. v o :. J . :. ,). v./'O . 

.... . - - 1 . 
i. j ..- d J.a - ; . o: a\, J 




«.j ..\ ■j < ■ : ') * )*■ jj'i iin i * ».■; w > i — ■ 
. :. . o; ' lo-j.o' ' j 1 . ; 











- 96 


We have no record of the process of development 
of form within the New Testament itself. We are fortun¬ 
ate, however, in having on record a complete order of 
service by Justin Martyr (!)• It probably was the 
culmination of much experimentation which must have 
taken place throughout the period of the writing of the 
later literature of the New Testament, As early as 
A.D. 140, after the first flush of enthusiasm had 
spent itself, reverence was fostered by dignified and 
psychologically sound form* The outline of the service 
as observed at Rome was as follows: 

1, Reading of Scripture (from the "memoirs of the 

apostles called the Gospels", frcm the epistles 
and the prophets, 

2, Sermon: "admonition or exhortation", based on the 

scripture reading, 

3, Prayers for all estates of men (said by all), people 

responding "Amen" (*so be it*), This was 
probably in litany form, such as we see in 
the Didacha . 

4, The Kiss of Peace (of. the letters of Paul) 

5, Offertory (here, or after communion?) 

The elements are brought in 

- ^ “ 

6, Thanksgiving ( f|Q^o - at length) for crea¬ 

tion, providence and redemption. This the 
leader did "as he was able", i,e, extempor¬ 
aneously, 

7, Prayer of Consecration 

(introduced by the above thanksgiving). 
Memorial of Passion (later known as Anamnesis) 
Oblation of gifts with self-oblation. 
Invocation of the Holy Spirit and the Word 
to bless the gifts of bread and wine 
(later known as Epiclesis)• 

8, Intercessions, people responding "Amen", 

9, fraction 

10, Cessna union (2) 


(1) Liturgies Eastern and Western, p,xl 

(2) based on "Liturgies Eastern and Western", p ,xi 

















' 




97 - 


In this basic liturgy (very olosely resembling the 
order of service for the Lord’s Supper or Holy Com¬ 
munion in The United Church of Canada ritual), 

"the balance was kept between the sacramental 
and Scriptural elements: both the reading of 
the Scriptures with instruction and consecra¬ 
tion and reception of the bread and wine were 
integral parts of the rite. Without either it 
was incomplete." (1) 

All that succeeding generations were able to do with 

this order was to add, to elaborate, or to misinterpret, 

but the basic form of any worship experience is right 

here. In times of reform men have always returned to 

this complete, well-balanced diet of worship. 


The early Christians were fortunate in having 
provided for them a worthy vehicle for the new exper¬ 
iences which were soon to transform the world. If they 
had not had this heritage, the development of a sound 
liturgy would have taken much, much longer. 

"The reading of the Scriptures, in which God 
spoke to man; prayer and praise, in which man 
spoke to God; an address, in which man spoke 
to his fellow man. ...These must always remain 
the essential elements of spiritual worship."(2) 

The present-day absorption in form has its dangers. 

Scherer has pointed out that it 

"may record the nostalgic hunger for a sense 
of history which marks the end of every era, 
or represent the hysterical substitution of 
form for content which testifies to the bank¬ 
ruptcy of every faith" but he goes on to say 
"that it may mirror even now the slow recovery 
of a truer doctrine of the Church and th© 
awakening into life of that central and creative 
experience which is Christian worship." (3) 

(1) Maxwell: "Outline of Worship", p.13 

(2) Scott: "The Nature of the Early Church", p.72 

(3) In the Inter seminary Series, vol.III, pp. 52-54 





: . ■ • • 

■\ .. : : ' • : f ■■ i'v»' ■ •:' 

t TO 

J J •" • •' •• • • • •- 

■ , '■■ ■' <■ : r 


,*■■■■ ■ <■' 

. 

. . . ■ - ■■ ■ - ? ■' , _■ 

' |§ 

• .. . , , . ..T :• - r 4 ) :*t.: / '.'I ^ 

i ',;v J- yo 1 OXtK-*'k.*V 

. ... v • J ' • " '• *■> ■ - 

s ■ 

# 

• ‘J i. ■ : " • J ... ■‘j 

. . ' ' 

. 

. 

-r.‘ : .) jo': '■ y,.. Iq;i 

, ' ■■■ •. v • i i- ■ • ri . . ' t i ' v c 

’ ' 

: •. •, v •; ' •' ;, ? . 

V >*. :/'•.! r--yo 

'. '; : . O 

*;■ '* . 







v.U 1 




C'»i \ ' 






98 - 


We can hardly dispense with forms: only the 
saint does not need them* And even his thoughts, 
vehicles of divine grace, may become as formal as the 
most liturgioal service* God himself, through the 
Incarnation, realizing man 1 2 s limited capacities, "took 
upon himself the form of a servant". The danger is 
implioit in either extreme; whether absence of form 
or too-rigid form* It is true that minutiae of wor¬ 
ship may 

"assume such importance that attention is 
transferred from the meaning of worship to 
the means, from the total adoring action of 
the creature to the detail through which it 
is expressed.^ (1) 

Paul was very much concerned that things should 

be done in order, and we do need orderliness, but w© 

also need warmth and spontaneity. Whenever we are in 

danger of losing our balance, some prophet is sure to 

arise and "to speak forth". At the recent Fourteenth 

General Council of The United Church of Canada (2) 

Dr. John A. Mackay said; 

"if the aesthetic becomes too pronounced, and 
the form too perfect, w© lose the rugged awk¬ 
wardness of spiritual growth." 

This is in line with another pronouncement of his: 

#There has been developed a cult of frigid 
restraint; liturgical procedures are being 
promoted whose aesthetic perfection sancti- 


(1) Underhill, "Worship", p.35 

(2) September, 1950 



. 

_ 

- ■'>■* -V- J ' 

. ■ - . 

. • ■ ... ,i ■ . J ■ . . •, .. . ■ i •’ 

; f ■ ■ ' 

■ ... :: : . "> ■ . • ■ c 

. 

' ,.. •; ’ . vv • .< 

, . • : . , . . > • ■ ■■ • 

.. f ' /v ' 

: , ' ' ' , •, .■ i. * J ' w ■ 

■: , ? ■ 1 . • £ '. 1 ' 0 .. " 

. 

. . • : . ' ' 

. ■ 

' 

• ' ' K : • ' ' * 


. < 

C\H:.! t ) 




- 99 


fies spiritual death. As if there was nothing 
in religion for people to get really excited 
about.” (1) 

The forms are provided for us. We have the classic 
pattern of all worship, Isaiah 6; there is Justin 
Martyr’s outline; there is Sperry’s triple division 
of Thesis, Antithesis and Synthesis (E). The forms 
are there and are important. At the same time it is 
well to keep in mind that the most perfectly construct¬ 
ed order of service may still be so weak and sentiment¬ 
al in content as to counteract all the benefits of 
perfeot form. Worship must be intelligent and edifying 
as to content, and decent and orderly as to form, but 
it must also be aglow with the presence and power of 
the Spirit, or else it will be lifeless and ineffective. 


(1) Mackay, Dr. J.A., in Theology Today, October 1947, 

p.309 

(E) Illustrated at great length in "Reality and Worship” 

Ch.xiv 



; 

, ■: ... : ■ - • v» ■ ■ o‘, . - x 

. ; . ; ... • ‘ ; • ■ - xi ;: x ^ ’• t 

. 

x. ... -i . *x,x'xKo I v-r: , • v,$ J aw 

... . - . -:d / X ' .. ■ •: 0 ,. - ■' - x ••• - ■' 

. , : ■ : 

,! .. : 1 i •' : ■ • 

■ , ‘ x 


i ' 



- 

■ .v :x;'.U'., .; . ; xx, t -x:x ... {j.;j 

.. 








CONCLUSION 












CONCLUSION 


The thesis of this dissertation is that the worship 
recorded in the literature of the New Testament is 
rooted in the worship of Judaism; that this worship 
was transformed by the Christian experience into some¬ 
thing new; and that as early as A.D. 54, first prin¬ 
ciples of worship were stated by Paul which are valid 
and applicable to modern worship* 

The main body of the thesis is contained in the 
first five chapters. The first chapter, in discussing 
the time and place of worship in the early Christian 
Church, shows that the Christians continued to worship 
in Temple and Synagogue. From the Tempi© Christianity 
inherited the priestly, sacrificial emphasis; from the 
Synagogue, the prophetic. The emphasis in the Syna¬ 
gogue on teaching and instruction (1) was of supreme 
importance on the content of Christian worship in its 
subsequent development ♦ In addition to these regular 
places of formal worship at the regular times, the 
early Christians held their own special meetings in 
private houses, for informal prayer and for a service 
known as "the breaking of bread", which later devel¬ 
oped into the Agape and the Lord’s Supper. In time 
their assembling together was on a special day of 
their own, the first day of the week, the Day of the 
Sun, which celebrated the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 


(l) CfV p.9 supra 


- 100 - 

















> 

* 



. 

. 

, 

.* 

. 

< 

, 

' 

’ . j c .. >, 

v, ■■ . .. . . .• \ ■ ; • 









- 101 - 

Chapters II to IV discuss the principal parts 
of worship: prayer, scripture and hymn. Prayer 
(Chapter II) was a vital part of the worship of both 
Temple and Synagogue. However it was f ran the Syna¬ 
gogue that the early Christians, who were devout 
Jews, inherited the forms and the habit of prayer. 

In time, due to the example and teaching of Jesus 
and the influence of Paul, Christian prayers developed 
along more independent lines. The new element added 
was the result of a deeper understanding as to the 
nature of Cod, as revealed through Jesus, summed up 

and crystallized in the Lord^ Prayer, "the type 
Christian 

and pattern of all/prayer". (1). Emphasis was 
laid by Paul upon the constant expression in prayer 
of the elements of supplication, intercession and 
particularly joyful thanksgiving. The joy and 
gratitude of Christian prayer found their source in 
the great objective work of Cod in the redemption of 
the world through the words, deeds, death and resur¬ 
rection of Christ and his abiding presence with them. 

Like all devout Jews of their day, the early 
Christians loved and reverenoed "the Scriptures" (Chap¬ 
ter III). Evidence abounds throughout the literature 
of the New Testament that they possessed a thorough 


(1) Gore, "Prayer", p.27 (cf. p.22,24 supra) 




' 








s 


7 ■. . „1 ?joy i. *I’i 


















- 102 


knowledge of the Law, the Prophets and the Writings* 
They quoted Scripture extensively and used it for 
"proof-texts"• Yet, through the influence of the 
teaching and the spirit of Jesus the Law was fulfilled, 
the old was transformed (often done away with), and 
in time the new Scriptures of the Christian Church 
evolved. These for a while approached and then over¬ 
took in importance and value the old Scriptures of 
their fathers* 

Chapter IV discusses Hymns, taking not© of the 
fact that there is no recorded instance of singing 
in the Synagogue. However, the spirit of praise as 
expressed in Jewish hymns (e.g* the Psalms) current 
and well known, served as models for the early 
Christian hymns. From earliest Christian times hymns 
were composed, most of them being created in moments 
of ecstatic praise, and as soon lost and forgotten. 

Only very few hymns and fragments of hymns are found 
in the New Testament. The charter of Christian hymnody 
is stated by Paul in Colossians 3:16, and the "psalms, 
hymns and spiritual songs" he mentions were inherit¬ 
ances from Jewish hymnody but by their Christian con¬ 
tent became new creations. 

The Lord’s Supper (Chapter V) is found upon exam¬ 
ination to have had its origin in the chab^rah meal. 


. 

' 

■ 


. 

- 

. 




6 I 




' 

, 

. . 

. 

, . 

. 

- 

I 


■ # 

. 

■ 








- 






- 103 - 


Almost every single element in its observance was 
taken over frcta this quasi social-religious meeting 
of Judaism, However, the old form and content took 
on new meaning by its interpretation as a meal of 
commemoration, communion with Christ and with the 
fellowship, and by its messianic, redeeming and 
sacrificial significance associated with the life 
and particularly the death of Jesus, 

Consequently, every investigation of early 
Christian worship as revealed in the literature of 
the New Testament has shown that some elements of 
worship already at hand were taken over by the 
early Christians, and that these elements then took 
on Christian colouring and became something new. 

The final chapter. Worship at Corinth, has as 
its sub-title "A Case History*. It is not added as 
an afterthought but is intended to show that as 
early as the first generation of Christians, because 
old forms were in the process of transfomation 
into fit and worthy vehicles for an overwhelming 
experience, certain problems ©rose. These problems 
were faced courageously by one of Christianity’s 
greatest leaders. The chapter not only presents a 


■' v .. ",.a ; . • 




. 



. 








•: . ' W • • i ■' 

* 

■ r ■■ l ' ■ ■ ■ • ■, 

' ' . . \. .. V ' .j -i. f. i I'’ ' L ' i & i ' Y " 

. / O : .!•': ... ,+ , J ; 


■. . • ■ . . 






* 








. 





, , . 




. 

■ 




■ 


4 






. 







. 

.. 

; . • • . . . ;'.i. * •’ '■ • • J- - : 












104 - 


backward look but also a glance at the present, 
with the hope that the contemporary and future 
worship of the Church may profit by the principles 
of worship which Paul formulated quite incidentally 
and with concern only for the immediate situation. 
The Spirit of God is ever at work, creating and 
recreating. It is not for us to circumscribe the 
working of that Spirit by claiming that all that 
is to be has been. 


. 

. ■ ■ 


: 

. j '■! , • • 

: - - -.J 








APPENDIX 






TABLE OF FREQUENCY OF OLD TESTAMENT REFERENCES IN NEW TESTAMENT 
“^(Compiled from footnotes in Standard Revised Version) 


105 


STVIOL 


nojq.QXQAaH 

apn p 
uqofin 
uqofu 
uqofi 

II 

-iaqa^'i 

sautef 

smajqaH 

uomarjtfci 

snqTJ, 

JfcttooiTJ,*! 

•ssaqj/ix 

•seaq^*! 

susTssopoo 

sueTddxiTW 

suaxsQtlda 

•joq*I 
sxxatnoH 
sq.oy 
trqop 

a^ni 

3{J8H 

Maqq.q.eK 


H CD CO 

(J»OH 
CM iH «0 
H i-4 

00 H* CM 

in in in 

Ok r-4 <0 
CO CO CM 

r-4 

CM 

HON 
CM CM rH 

to CO r-4 
rH r-8 r-4 r-4 

CO CM 
lO CM CM 

o in CM 
rH 

O Ok CM 
CO rH to 

to h m 

r-4 

tO 

CO CM Ok 

9 CM H HI 

1 1 I 

CM 1 • 

1 9 1 

rH CM 9 

9 

1 • 1 

9 9 

9 

9 

1 1 1 

1 1 1 

1 1 8 

8 

9 1 

9 

1 8 8 

9 1 

9 

9 

1 1 I 

1 « 1 

8 1 4 

1 

9 1 

1 

9 8 9 

9 9 

1 

1 

9 » 1 

9 9 1 

8 1 8 

I 

9 9 

® 

« 9 8 

9 9 

9 

9 

ton 1 

tO 8 | 

1 8 1 

CM 

8 9 

9 

9 rH 8 

1 1 

9 

9 

o»ioh 

CM 1 r-4 

8 9 1 

1 

1 CM 

9 

rH CM I 

9 i 

9 

9 

CM CM H 

CM H H 

8 9 0 

9 

1 CM 

9 

9 HI CM 

1 H 

1 

9 

0»H« H 
CM CM 

IN Ok tO 
CM 

CM CM r-4 

tO H tO 

9 

rH CM 9 

H* 9 

9 

9 

9 9 1 

9 i 9 

8 8 9 

9 

1 t 

9 

9 9 8 

9 9 

8 

9 

9 H 3 

8 r-4 8 

8 8 r-4 

8 

9 1 

1 

9 1 9 

9 9 

1 

9 

r-4 3 HI 

S 1 9 

1 9 8 

H 

0 9 

1 

1 9 8 

9 9 

9 

8 

9 9 1 

CM CM 9 

a a 3 

1 

9 9 

0 

9 8 9 

9 1 

8 

1 

H 1 8 

1 1 9 

r-4 1 HI 

9 

9 9 

8 

8 9 8 

i 9 

8 

1 

H 8 1 

1 9 9 

9 8 1 

8 

9 8 

8 

9 3 9 

9 8 

9 

9 

CMH 8 

8 8 H 

i a a 

8 

3 9 

8 

8 rH 9 

9 9 

8 

9 

1 1 1 

1 9 9 

a 9 i 

8 

8 8 

8 

8 9 1 

1 8 

9 

9 

lO ^ CM 

8 CM 8 

1 8 H 

8 rH 8 

9 

9 8 9 

9 9 

8 

9 

CM CM H 

tO CM 

8 H 9 

9 

8 9 

9 

9 9 8 

9 1 

* 

8 

tO CM 

r-4 CM HI 

8 ^ CM 

9 

9 § 

9 

tO r-4 8 

8 H 

8 

9 

O Ok GO 
H 

in CO HI 

HI H 8 

tO 

8 1 

8 

H 9 8 

9 CM r-8 

8 

CM HI 

CM CM 

<0 o& in 

1 rH 

9 

9 CM 

CM 

to in hi 

HI r-4 rH 

1 

tO tO H 
r-4 CM CM 

to 0* Hi 
CM 

a inn 

to 

1 H 

8 

H 8 CM 

9 

9 

9 l 

o> to CO 
r-4 HI 

0k 0k tO 

in to c** 

tOH* 8 

to 

tO 8 8 

1 CM H CO 

O Hi ^ 
CM H r-4 

£N <0 H 
HHH 

<o m cm 

in CM IN 

to 

H CM H 

£> EO ^ CO 

o> o> <o 

to c» in 

^ CM 3 

CM H 8 

r-4 

H 9 3 

CM 9 HH 

Isaiah 27 
Psalms 24 
Exodus 18 

Genesis 7 
Deut. 25 

Levit. 18 

0k co to 

Hi 

H • © 

© 0 «H 

•d 

QUO 

00 © H 

tN 0> ^ tO 

to 

© w w 
U tap Q| 

© • « r! 
M 

g © w • 

p © ® H 
S5NH H 

tO tO CM 

m 

f 

© © 

© > H 
mom 

QUO 

WP«^ 

HI CM tO 

•H 

• 43 

0 043 

© © © 
CQ 43 r-4 O 

H-saa 


(See following page for totals) 















1 









ft l I 

i ( \ 


(It l 


! 


[• ' t 1 

I 1 


I I 
1 I 


I f I 


I I I 


i li 


i 




i | I; ; « t I i i ‘ 

ft ( I .!::(• : l • ■ 

I I [ ( t I ’» * ' ■■■ fj * 

l ' i ■' i l fi f : ' i i ft ' . 

[■ ! | ■ i * f B i P * ■ 

I I 1 I 11! i I B 
1 1 I t 1 ! 1 

i l i f i : ! II 

f : I ft II : I • . ' 


t t i 1 I 1 ! f 

I : i r 



i : * f 


f l 


f i i I 1 


l i 1 


1 Ii I 





Table of Old Testament References - (Continued) 


106 


smoi 

H Oft 

H 

<o to to 


tO tO 02 HHHHHHH 

to 

o» 






02 

H 


1 1 1 

9 9 9 

H 9 1 

1 9 • 1 8 8 8 rH I 

1 

02 

epnf 

1 1 1 

9 1 9 

9 1 9 

9 9 9 9 8 9 < 1 8 rH 

tO 

uqojTin 

1 1 1 

9 1 9 

1 1 9 

9 8 8 8 1 1 8 9 19 

O 

UTJOfll 

1 1 8 

9 1 9 

1 9 9 

1 9 1 9 9 9 1 9 1 1 

O 

uqof *i 

1 I 8 

9 9 9 

1 9 9 

9 8 9 9 1 8 9 8 9 1 

o 

II 

1 1 1 

9 9 9 

9 9 9 

8 9 9 8 9 9 8 9 9 1 

to 

rH 


1 1 1 

9 1 9 

9 9 9 

1 1 9 1 9 9 8 9 9 9 

to 

02 

sanref 

1 1 1 

9 9 9 

9 9 9 

9 9 9 8 9 9 8 9 9 1 

to 

rH 

SM9Jq8H 

1 02 

9 H 

9 9 9 

18 1 H 1 9 8 8 1 8 

O 

to 






rH 

uoTneima 

1 1 1 

9 8 9 

9 9 9 

9 9 9 1 9 9 8 9 1 9 

o 

sum 

1 1 1 

9 9 9 

9 8 9 

9 8 1 1 9 9 9 1 9 1 

to 

Xqq.oniTx • II 

1 8 8 

1 t 9 

1 9 9 

8 9 8 9 9 1 0 1 9 8 

to 

ifqqoinTi*! 

9 9 1 

8 1 1 

9 8 9 

8 9 1 1 9 9 9 9 8 9 


♦SS9HJi*II 

9 9 9 

9 8 9 

1 9 0 

rH 1 8 9 1 9 9 9 1 8 


•ssanj/l 

9 1 9 

9 1 8 

8 9 9 

9 8 8 8 9 9 9 9 9 8 

H 

subtssoioo 

8 9 9 

1 9 9 

9 9 9 

8 9 8 8 9 8 8 9 9 1 

to 

•ddnmd 

1 • 9 

9 9 1 

9 9 9 

9 8 9 1 9 8 9 1 9 1 

o 

sue is an da 

9 9 9 

1 9 I 

9 § 9 

18 1 8 18 9 119 

to 

H 

subiibtbo 

9 1 1 

9 9 rH 

1 9 9 

1 8 9 9 9 8 9 9 1 9 

o> 

H 

•joq*ii 

1 i 9 

9 9 9 

8 9 9 

9 8 1 9 9 1 9 9 8 9 

§ 

•^oo*I 

I 1 9 

1 9 9 

9 9 1 

8 H 9 8 9 9 HI HI 9 1 

S 

sueinoH 

1 02 H 

1 H H 

1 8 9 

8 02 9 1 9 9 1 9 9 1 

to 

Oft 

sqoy 

tO 1 rH 

9 8 H 

02 9 9 

19 8 19 19 19 

| 

rH 

o 






rH 

uqof 

02 1 H 

9 9 

9 9 9 

8 1 8 8 8 HI 8 1 8 i 

to 

o 






rH 

a^ni 

H 9 

H 9 H 

r-1 tO HI 

t-J0 1 H 9 3 9 9 8 8 8 

D* 

to 






H 


9 9 H 

9 8 a 

9 8 9 

111 8 H 9 8 8 1 1 

S 

jaaqqqBH 

H60H 

• 

HHH 

9 H tO 

H 9 H 1 8 9 9 9 9 3 

Oft 


3 

A* 

• 

• 

rH 


O • 

<d 

d 

• • © © 




© a aj 

o 

ua 

m *h ^ oUo 

©• © © © N © Jd 

d rj A © © W S O 

3 


Aon 

to © © 
*d.d,o 

© a © 

<c 


Q • • 

Q o d 

+> o p< *>+* b a • • o 

do© flffi NH H d 

E-* 


O M H 

d © © 

a • o 

o 


H H 

W 

< Hb 

(Awta wwwhh h w 

EH 































I 


[ 


i 


t t 


f 


i 


s 


i 


t 


lit } 

1 i 

! it ? 


i { t i; 


I' ! I I !l 





• [ '• p « i 1 

: } t .t t i i i ; ; ; < t f ’ 

t i t f t t i ft; til f i * ' * J 

i ; i ■ : ; : I * 

.1 ! i i ; } V 1 i ' ■ I » * : > * 

i > i {list i ! ; t } t I ' 8 

J i 'till i! . I t til 

I !■ t : . ; ! !■ f i :■ I • t 1 : t II) 


I I 


[ 


I 


I 








107 - 


Plinius Junior, Eplstulaw . X,96,97. Preuschen, 
Analecta.I,12ff. Cf. Mirbt. nn.14.15 

, uJ 

Ep. 96.. . • .Others who were named by an informer said 
that they were Christians, and soon afterward denied 
it, saying, indeed, that they had been, but had ceased 
to be Christians, some three years ago, some many 
years, and one even twenty years ago. All these also 
not only worshipped your statue and the images of the 
gods, but also cursed Christ. They asserted, however, 
that the amount of their fault or error was this: 
that they had been accustomed to assemble on a fixed 
day before daylight and sing by turns (i.e. antiphon- 
ally) a hymn to Christ as a god; and that they bound 
themselves with an oath, not for any crime, but to 
commit neither theft, nor robbery, nor adultery, not 
to break their word and not to deny a deposit when 
demanded; after these things were done, it was their 
custom to depart and meet together again to take food, 
but ordinary and harmless food; and they said that 
even this had ceased after my edict was issued, by 
which, according to your commands, I had forbidden 
the existence of clubs. On this account I believed it 
the more necessary to find out from maid-servants, 
who were dalled deaconesses (ministra), and that by 
torture, what was the truth. I found nothing else 
than a perverse and excessive superstition. I there¬ 
fore adjourned the examination and hastened to consult 
y©u. The matter seemed to me to be worth deliberation, 
especially on account of the number of those in danger. 
Eor many of every age, every rank, and even of both 
sexes, are brought into danger; and will be in the 
future. The contagion of that superstition has pene¬ 
trated not only the cities but also the villages and 
country places; and yet it seems possible to stop it 
and set it right. At any rate, it is certain enough 
that the temples, deserted until quite recently, begin 
to be frequented, that the ceremonies of religion, 
long disused, are restored, and that fodder for the 
vicfims cones to market, whereas buyers of it were 
until now very few. From this it may easily be sup¬ 
posed what a multitude of men can be reclaimed 
there be a place of repentance. 

m 'Estimated date's 111 - 113 A.D. The above excerpt 

is copied from Ayer, "A Source Book for Ancient 

Church Hi story", pp»31-22) 












- 108 - 


THE TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES (Didache) 

Ch. VII - Concerning Baptism 

And concerning Baptism, thus baptize ye: Having 
first said all these things, baptize into the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, 
in living water* But if thou have not living water, 
baptize into other water; and if thou canst not in 
cold, in warm* But if thou have not either, pour out 
water thrice upon the head in the name of the Father, 

Son and Holy Spirit, but before the baptism let the 
baptizer fast and the baptized and whatever others 
can; but thou shalt order the baptized to fast on© 
or two days before. 

Ch. VIII - Concerning Fasting and Prayer 

- IVhT Lord's Prayerj. . 

But let not your fasts be with the hypocrites 
for they fast on the second and fifth day of the week, 
but do ye fast on the fourth day and the Preparation, 
(Friday). Neither pray as the hypocrites but as the 
Lord canmanded in His Gospel, thus pray: Our Father 
who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name, Thy Kingdom 
come, Thy will be done as in heaven so on earth, give 
us today our daily (needful) bread, and forgive us 
our debt as we also forgive our debtors. And bring 
us not into temptation but deliver us from the Evil 
One (or evil) for Thine is the power and the glory 
forever. Thrice in the day thus pray. 

Ch. IX - The Thanksgiving (Eucharist) 

Now concerning the” manksgiving (Eucharist) thus 
give thanks: (1) concerning the cup: We thank Thee, 
our Father, for the holy vine of David Thy servant, 
which Thou madest known to us through Jesus, Thy 
servant; to Thee be the glory forever ft • And con¬ 
cerning the broken bread: We thank fhee, our Father, 
for the life and isnowledge which Thou madest known to 
us through Jesus, Thy servant; to Thee be the glory * 
forever. Even as this broken bread was scattered over 
the hills, and was gathered together and became one, 
so let Thy church be gathered together from the ends 
of the earth into Thy kingdom; for Thine is the glo ry 
and the power through Jesus Christ for ever ft .But 
let no one eat or drink or your Thanksgiving (Eucharist), 
but they who have been baptized into the name of the 
Lord; for concerning this also the Lord hath said, 

Give not that which is holy to the dogs. (1) 


ft Congregational response? 

(1) Approximate date of Didache: 125 A.D. 



























. 

. « 

« : ■ -- 

■ 


.. 

.* 

■ 

. ■ 


, 


. 

* - ' • 

. 

. 

, 

, 

. 

- 

. i ‘■ : x €^ xii " c cj",;Tr* . ’ ./ 

, 

. 

j . 

. 

i. -■ ' 

' 










- 109 - 


Ch. X - Prayer After Communion (Didache, continued) 

But after ye are filled thus give thanks: We 
thank Thee, holy Father, for Thy holy name which Thou 
didst cause to tabernacle in our hearts, and for the 
knowledge and faith and immortality, which Thou 
madest known to us through Jesus Thy servant: to Thee 
t be the glory forever . Thou, Master almighty, didst 
create all things for Thy name’s sake; Thou gavest 
food and drink to men for enjoyment, that they might 
give thanks to Thee; but to us Thou didst freely give 
spiritual food and drink and life eternal through Thy 
Servant. Before all things we can see that Thou art 
A mighty; to Thee be the glory for ever . Remember, Lord, 
Thy church, to deliver it from ail evil and to make 
_ it perfect in Thy love and gather it from the four 
winds, sanctified for Thy kingdom which Thou hast pre¬ 
pared for it; for Thine is the power and the glory 
& forever . Let grace come and let this world pass away. 
Hosanne to God (Son) of David*. If anyone is holy, 
let him come; if anyone is not so, let him repent. 
Marantha. Amen. But permit the prophets to make 
thanksgiving as much as they desire. 


Ch. XII - Reception of Christians 

But let everyone that oometh in the name of the 
Lord be received, and afterward ye shall prove and 
know him; for ye shall have understanding right and 
left. If he who cometh is a wayfarer, assist him as 
far as ye are able ; but he shall not remain with you 
except for two or three days if need be. But if he 
willeth to abide with you, being an artisan, let him 
work and eat; but if he hath no trade, according to 
your understanding see to it that, as a Christian, he 
shall not live with you idle. But if he willeth not 
sc to do, he is a Christ-monger. Watch that ye keep 
aloof from such. 


Ch. XIV - Christian Assembly on the L Q rd* s Day 
-But every Lord*¥ Day do ye gather yourselves to¬ 
gether and break bread, and give thanksgiving after 
having confessed your transgressions, that your sac¬ 
rifice may be pure. But let no on© that is at vari¬ 
ance with his fellow come together with you, unt.il 
they be reconciled, that your sacrifice may not be 
profaned. For this is that which was spoken by the 
Lord- in every place and time offer to me a pure sac¬ 
rifice; for I am a great King, saith the Lord, and 
my name is wonderful among the nations. (l) 


jfc Congregational response? 

(1) Approximate date: 125 A.D 












. - - 

... 

' 


t 




















■ 




: ; 





• 


I 

, 

-I 

' 

- ■ 






: 




































« 








; 


c 













• 






• , f , 







- 













* 














r-; *■ \ 








- 


. 

e 



. 













• 





















c 


















t- 























' ■ ’ 



* 



J 

■« 








* 


i 














no - 


JUSTIN MARTYR, Apologia . I 65-67. (MSG,6:428ff) 

Of. Mirbt, n.18 (1) 

Ch. 65. But after we have thus washed him who is per¬ 
suaded and has assented, we bring him to those who are 
called the brethren, to where they are gathered to¬ 
gether, making earnest prayer in conmon for ourselves 
and for him who is enlightened, and for all others 
everywhere, that we may be accounted worthy, after we 
have learned the truth, by our works also to be found 
right livers and keepers of the commandments, that we 
may be saved with the eternal salvation. We salute 
each other with a kiss n&en we conclude our prayers. 
Thereupon to the president of the brethren bread and 
a cup of water and wine are brought, and he takes it 
and offers up praise and glory to the Father of the 
universe through the name of the Son and the Holy 
Spirit, and gives thanks at length that we hate been 
accounted worthy of these things from Him; and when 
he has ended the prayers and thanksgiving the whole 
people present assent, saying "Amen". Now the word 
Amen in the Hebrew language signifies, So be it. Then 
after the president has given thanks and all the 
people have assented, those who are called by us 
deacons give to each one of those present to partake 
of the bread and of the wine and water for which 
thanks have been given, and for those not present 
they take away a portion. 

Ch. 66. And this food is called by us the eucharist, 
and it is not lawful for any man to partake of it but 
him who believes the things taught by us to be true, 
and has been washed with the washing which is for the 
remission of sins and unto a new birth, and is so 
living as Christ commanded. For not as common bread 
and common drink do we receive these; but just as 
Jesus Christ our Saviour, being made flesh through 
the word of God, had for our salvation both flesh and 
blood, so, also, we are taught that the food for which 
thanks are given by the word of prayer which is from 
Him, and from which by conversion our flesh and blood 
are nourished, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus 
who was made flesh. For the Apostles in the memoirs 
composed by them, which are called Gospels, thus de¬ 
livered what was commanded them: that Jesus took 
bread and gave thanks and said, This do in remembrance 
of me, this is my body; and that he likewise took the 
cup, and when he had given thanks, said, This is my 
blood, and gat© only to them. And this the evil 
demons imitating, commanded it to be done also in the 
mysteries of Mithras; for that bread and a cup of 
water are set forth with certain explanations in the 
ceremonial of initiation, you either know or can learn . 

(1) Ayer, "Source Book for Ancient Church Hi£tory"p33-35 








’ 


- 




. 


•• 

■« 

. 















■ I 


, . / n ? - 

■ 

, . . ■ . .. - 


.. 

' c 

i * 

C « 

. 

. 

; 

t 

. 

; 

c 

■ 

. 

; 





Ill - 


JUSTIN MARTYR, Apologia - concl. (1) 

Ch. 67. But we afterward always remind one another 
of these things, and those among us who are wealthy 
help all who are in want, and we always remain to¬ 
gether. And for all things we eat we bless the 
Maker of all things through His Son Jesus Christ and 
through the Holy Spirit. And on the day called the 
Day of the Sun there is a gathering in one place of 
us all who live in cities or in the country, and 
the memoirs of the Apostles or the writings of the 
prophets are read as long as time allows. Then, when 
the reader has ceased, the president gives by word of 
mouth his admonition and exhortation to imitate these 
excellent things. Afterward we all rise at once and 
offer prayers; and as I said, when we have ceased to 
pray, bread is brought and wine and water, and the 
president likewise offers up prayers and thanks¬ 
givings as he has the ability, and the people assent, 
saying "Amen". The distribution to each and the 
partaking of that for which thanks were given then 
take place; and to those not present a portion is 
sent by the hands of the deacons. Those who are 
well to do and willing give, every one giving what 
he will, according to his own judgment, and the 
collection is deposited with the president, and he 
assists orphans and widows, and those who through 
sickness or any other cause are in want, and those 
who are in bonds, and the strangers that are so¬ 
journing, and, in short, he has the care of all that 
are in need. Now we all hold our common meeting on 
the Day of the Sun, because it is the first day on 
which God, having changed the darkness and matter, 
created the world; and Jesus Christ our Saviour on 
the same day rose from the dead. For on the day 
before Saturn’s they crucified Him; and on the day 
after Saturn’s, which is the Day of the Sun, having 
appeared to his Apostles and disciples, he taught 
them ibBse things which we have offered you for con¬ 
sideration. 


(1) Ayer, "Source Book for Ancient Church History", 

pp •33— 3 5 











9 



; 



. 




, 










. 

* • 

. ' ,• «. t •• ' ' ■ ' ‘ 
c 

•' " • " " 


i 


- 

. 










1 


, 

.... , v ■ 

' } 

t 

, : ; ’ , 













• 9 ’ 













: 



















* 

















■ 





. 















9 














■ 






- 












. 




. 





112 - 


CONCLUSIONS OF EPISTLES 

I Thessalonians : May the God of peace himself sanc- 
tlfy you wholly; and may your spirit and soul and 
body be kept sound and blameless at the coming of 
our Lord Jesus Christ* He who calls you is faithful, 
and he will do it, 

Brethren, pray for us 
Greet all the brethren with a holy kiss 
I adjure you by the Lord that this letter be 
read to all the brethren* 

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you* 

II Thessalonians : Now may the Lord of peace himself 
give you peace at all times in all ways. The Lord be 
with you. 

Galatians: The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be 
with your spirit, (Own Mark) brethren. Amen. 

I .Corinthians : I Paul, write this greeting with my 
own hand. If anyone has no love for the Lord, let 
him be accursed. Our Lord, cornel (Maranatha) The 
grace of the Lord Jesus be with you. My love be with 
you all in Christ Jesus. Amen. 

II.Corinthians : and the God of love and peace be 
with you all. Greet one another with a holy kiss. 

All the saints greet you. The grace of the Lord 
Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship 
of the Holy Spirit be with you all. 

Remans : Now to him who is able to strengthen you accord¬ 
ing to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, ac¬ 
cording to the revelation of the mystery which was kept 
secret for long ages but is now disclosed and through 
the prophetic writings is made known to all nations, 
according to the command of the eternal God, to bring 
about obedience to the faith - to the only wise God be 
glory for evermore through Jesus Christ! Amen. 

Philippians : And my God will supply every need of 
yours according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus. 
To our God and Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren who 
are with me greet you. All the saints greet you, 
especially those of Caesar 1 s household. The grace of 
the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. 

Colossians : I Paul write this greeting with my own 
hand. Remember my fetters. Grace be with you. 

Philemon : The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with 
your ^irit. 














. 

• • 

I 

. 








- 113 - 


Ephesians ; Peace be to the brethren, and love with 
faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ* 
Grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ 
with love undying. 

Revelation : He who testifies to these things says, 
"Surely I am coming soon". Amen. Come, Lord Jesusi 
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the 
saints. Amen. 

Hebrews 13:20 4-Now may the God of peace who brought 
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shep¬ 
herd of the sheep, by the blood of the eternal coven¬ 
ant, equip you with everything good that you may do 
his will, working in you that which is pleasing in 
his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory 
for ever and ever. Amen. 

....Greet all your leaders and all the saints. Those 
who come from Italy send you greetings. Grace be 
with all of you. Amen. 

I .Peter : Greet one another with the kiss of love. 

Peace to all of you that are in Christ. 

James : (none) Moralistic exhortation. 

I. John : And we know that the Son of God has com© and 
has given us understanding, to know him who is true; 
and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. 
This is the true God and eternal life. Little children 
keep yourselves from idols. 

II. John : none 

III. John : Peace be to you. 

The friends greet you. 

Greet the friends, every one of them. 

Jude : Now to him who is able to keep you from falling 
and to present you without blemish before the presence 
of his glory with rejoicing, to the only God, our 
Saviour through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, 
majesty, dominion, and authority, before all time 
now and forever. Amen. 

I. Timothy : Grace be with you. 

II. Timothy : The Lord will rescue me from every evil 
and save me for his heavenly Kingdom, To him be the 
glory for ever and ever. Amen. Greet.... ..The Lord 
be with your spirit, Grace be with you. 

Titus: All who are with me send greetings to you. 

Greet those who love us in the faith. Grace be with 
you all. 















■ t . 

. ■ i-i Vi- f ^ ■ ; v 

. 

: 

- 

. 

.:.-.. • /■ .. ; : ■ •. \ ■ ; vv - 

- 

. 

» ■ 

, 

. • : . .. • * 

* 

1 1 ■ ■ : 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. t t 

. I ■ 

, ■ 

. 

. 

' - . • : '■/ •' •' \t 

« 


/ 








II.Peter : But grow in the grace and knowledge of 
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ• To him be the 
glory both now and to the day of eternity. Ameh. 


DOXOLOGIES and BENEDICTIONS . ASCRIPTIONS OF GLORY 

Romans 2:7 and 10 - to those who by patience in well¬ 
doing seek for glory and honour and immortality, he 

will give eternal life.but glory and honor and 

peace for every one who does good. 

Remans 7:25 - Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ 
our Lord! 

Romans 15:5 - May the God of steadfastness and en¬ 
couragement grant you to live in such harmony with 
one another, in accord with Christ Jesus, that togeth¬ 
er you may with one voice glorify the God and Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Romans 15:13 - May the God of hope fill you with all 
joy and peace in believing, so that by the power of 
the Holy Spirit you may abound in hope. 

I .Peter 4:11 - As each has received a gift, employ it 
for one another, as good stewards of God*s varied 
grace: whoever speaks, as one who utters oracles of 
God; whoever renders service, as one who renders it 
by the strength which God supplies; in order that in 
everything God may be glorified through Jesus Christ. 

To him belong glory add dominion for ever and ever.Amen. 

I.Timothy 6:15 - ...end this will be made manifest at 
the proper time by the blessed and only Sovereign 
(despota), the King of kings and Lord of lords, who 
alone has immortality and dwells in unapproachable 
light, whom no man has ever seen or can see. To him 
be honor and eternal dominion. Amen. 

I. Timothy 1:17 - To the King of ages, immortal, invis- 
ibie, the only God, be honor and glory for ever and 
ever. Amen. 

II. Timothy 1:10 - ..our Saviour Christ Jesus, who 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to 
light through the Gospel. 




















. 


, 
























■ 

. 











< 





' 




. 

. 








• 






■ 






. jj 



■\ ■ •; . • ■G i. 

. 



■ • '• < • 

' . 

i 




- 115 - 

Doxologies,etc concl• 

II♦Timothy 4:16 - The Lord will rescue me from 
every evil and save me for his heavenly kingdom. 

To him be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

Jude 24*25 - Now to him who is able to keep you 
frcm falling and to present you without blemish 
before the presence of his glory with rejoicing, 
to the only God, our Saviour through Jesus Christ 
our Lord, be glory, majesty, dominion, and author¬ 
ity, before all time and now and forever. Amen. 

REVELATION 

(1) Threefold 

4:11 - Worthy art thou, our Lord and God, 

to receive glory and honor and power 

19:1 - Hallelujahl 

Salvation and glory and power 
belong to our God 


(2) Fourfold 

5:15 - To him who sits upon the throne and to the 
Lamb be ble ssing and honor and glory and 
might for ever and ever. 


(5) Sevenfold 

7:12 - Blessing and glory and wisdom a nd thanksgiving 
and honor and power and might be to our God 


for ever and ever. Amen, 

































c. 


■ 




- 




. 












. 

, 

• < 

. 






- ■ 


. 

' ■ 


v 4 

' 





. 








■ 


- 




















































BIBLIOGRAPHY 



- 116 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(contains only the authors and titles of 
books quoted in this thesis) 

Amsterdam Series Man’s Disorder and God’s Design 

(4 toIs in 1) 1948 Vol.I pp.210 

New York: Harper and Brothers 

Bate, H.N. and Thoughts on the Shape of the Liturgy 
Beles, F.C. 1946 pp.56 

Alcuin Club Tracts xxiv 
London: A.R.Mowbray and Co. Ltd. 

Benson, L. F. The Hymnody of the Christian Church 

1926 xi,pp.310 

New York: Geo. H. Doran Co. 


Blass, F. 
Caird, G. B. 

Coffin, H. S. 

Davies, H. 

Dibelius, M. 


Philology of the Gospels 
1898 pp.250 

The Truth of the Gospel 

1950 vii 3 pp.l68 

London: Oxford University Press 

The Public Worship of God 
1946 pp.208 

Philadelphia: Westminster Press 

Christian Worship 
1946 pp.108 

Surrey: The Religious Education Press 

Ltd. 

A Fresh Approach to the New 
Testament and Early Christian Lit¬ 
erature 1936 xi,pp.280 

New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 


Dix, Dom Gregory The Shape of the Liturgy 

1949 xix,pp.764 

Westminster: Dacre Press 


Enslin, M. S. 


Fey, H. E. 


The Ethics of Paul 

1930 2&x,pp.335 

New York: Harper and Brothers 

The Lord’s Supper: Seven Meanings 
1948 pp.117 

New York: Harper and Brothers 


Foulkes-Jackson, 

F.J. 


The Acts of the Apostles 
1945 xx,pp.23G 

London: Hodder and Stoughton 













' 






< 

. 


. . «■: - 

, 










' 


. 




; • - 




. * 

, 

' 

• - : c • ' ' ; 






, . ; . • 






• < ' 

v' , • , • 

, 

- 

■ 

. 







- 117 - 


Freeman, E. S. 

Gifford, W. A. 

Goodspeed, E. 

M N 

Gore, C. 

Hammond, 0. E. 

Herklots, H.G. 

I del sohn, A. Z 

Knox, John 

Latourette, R. 
(editor) 

Lietzmann, H. 

Lowrie, W. 


The Lord’s Supper and Protest¬ 
antism 1945 xvii,pp.l74 
New York: Maomillan Co* 

The Story of the Faith 

1946 xiii,pp.622 
New York: Macmillan Co. 

J. A History of Early Christian Lit¬ 

erature 1942 xiii,pp.324 
Chicago: University of Chicago 

Press 

An Introduction to the New Testa¬ 
ment 1937 xvii f pp.362 

Chicago: University of Chicago 

Press 

Prayer 

1947 xv,pp.l24 
New York: Harper and Brothers 

Liturgies Eastern and Western 
1878 lxxxiii,pp.391 

Oxford: Clarendon Press 

G. A Fresh Approach to the New Testa¬ 
ment 1950 pp.127 

London: S.C.M. Press 

>• The Ceremonies of Judaism 

1930 vii,pp.l34 

Cinncinnati: National Federation 
of Teazle Brotherhoods 

Chapters in a Life of Paul 
1950 pp.168 

New York: Abingdon-Cokesbury 

S. The Gospel, the Church and the 

World (Interseminary Series, Bk.III) 

1946 xiv,pp.225 

New York: Harper and Brothers 

Geschichte der alten Kirehe Vol. I 
1937 viii,pp.226 

Berlin-Leipzig: Walter de Gryter Co. 

The Lord’s Supper and the Liturgy 
1943 xvii,pp.184,5 plates 

New York: Longmans, Green & Co. 









•: .«)* I .‘'/zc 

. 

, 

. 






t 









- 






. 



. 


. 

. 




;• 4 

' 








• 4 ' ' ■ 

. 










. 





118 - 


Maodonald, A. B. Christian Worship in the Primitive 

Churoh, 1934 viii,pp.230 
Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark 


Massie, J. "Corinthians* (The Century Bible) 

no date pp.339 

Edinburgh: T* C. and E, C, Jack 


Maxwell, W. D. 


Micklem, N. 
(editor) 


An Outline of Christian Worship 
1949 pp.199 

Oxford University Press 

Christian Worship 

1936 xi,pp.259 

Oxford: Clarendon Press 


Oesterley, W.O*E. The Jewish Background of the 

Christian Liturgy 

1925 pp*243 

Oxford: Clarendon Press 


Pratt, J, B. 


The Religious Consciousness 
1927 viii,pp*488 

New York: Macmillan Co. 


Scott, E, F # 


tt tt 


« it 


ft ft 


tt ft 


Simpson, R. S, 


Sperry, W, L* 


The Lord’s Prayer 

1951 vii,pp*126 

New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 

The Fourth Gospel, Its Purpose 
and Theology 1930 ix,pp.379 
Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark 

The Book of Revelation 

1940 pp *191 

New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 

Introduction to the Literature of 
the New Testament 

1947 xv,pp*512 

New York: Columbia University Press 

The Nature of the Early Church 

1941 vii ,pp *245 

New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 

Ideas in Corporate Worship 
1927 vi,pp*129 

Edinburgh: T. and T* Clark 

Reality in Worship 
1927 pp,346 

New York: Macmillan Co, 






' 

, t . f ... 






i , \i ,••/ 






* 











. 



, 

. 








. 




■ ? 


• « 

- 












. 


- 

. 


; • : : ■ • 




. 




*■ 


' , 







» 




« 



















119 - 


Steere, D. V. Doors Into Life 

1948 pp.189 

New York: Harper and Brothers 


Underhill, Evelyn Worship 

1937 xxi,pp.350 


Vaughan, H* W. The Living Church 
(editor) (in memory of Principal Richard 

Davidson) 

1949 viii,pp.193 

Toronto: United Church Publishing 

House 


Whale, J. S. Christian Doctrine 

1942 pp.197 

Cambridge: University Press 


REFERENCE BOOKS 


Ayer, J* C. A Source Book for Ancient Church 

History 1923 xxi,pp.707 

New York: Charles Scribner*s Sons 


Burton-Goodspeed A Harmony of the Synoptic Gospels 

1929 xv,pp.279 

New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 


Hastings, Jas* A Dictionary of the Bible: Vol.II 

1906 xv,pp.870 

New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 

” ” A Dictionary of Christ and the 

Gospels 1908 Vol.I,xii,pp«936 
Vol.II,xiv,pp.912 
New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 


Souter, A. A Pocket Lexioon to the Greek New 

Testament 1935 viii,pp*29 0 
Oxford: Clarendon Press 


The Westminster Study Edition of the Holy Bible 
1948 xxvi,01d Testament pp.1376 
New Testament x,pp.486 
Concordance pp.103 
Atlas, pp*6, and xvi plates 





. 

■ - ■ - 










i' s r -u 

- 




t 




■ 

' .. 

: 




• - 







. 

- 


- 






. - 






- 

. * 

: r . .,' v : : 

. - 


. 






1 

: 


'•••■". c 

. 

. 

< 







PERIODICALS 


Religion in Life, Summer 1942 (pp.400-401) 
Theology Today, October 1947 (p.309) 


« ♦» 
Church Management 


January 1950 (pp.490-505) 
December 1950 


BOOKS OF PUBLIC WORSHIP 


Congregational: A Book of Public Worship 

(compiled by Huxtable, Marsh, 

Micklem and Todd) 1949 xxiii,pp.223 
London: Oxford University Press 

Congregational: A Book of Worship for Free Churches 

(General Council of the Congregation¬ 
al Christian Churches in the U.S.) 
1948 xxv,pp.416 

New York: Oxford University Press 

Jewish: The Union Prayer Book for Jewish Worship 

1945 Part I 395pp. Part 2 350pp. 
Cinncinnati: The Central Conference of 

American Rabbis 

Methodist: The Book of Worship for Church and Home 

1945 xil,pp.562 

The Methodist Publishing House, U.S. 

Presbyterian: Book of Common Order of the Church 
in Scotland 1940 x,pp.338 

Edinburgh: Oxford University Press 

United Church of Canada: The Book of Common Order 
1950 (revised and reset) viii,pp.303 
Toronto: United Church Publishing 

House 











, 


v . , ' • , . 


- 










• * 


, ■ .. 















- 



. 










' 































: 


. ■ 



























* 











