
: 
















Gbc asBRis 









THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


ALBERTA-MONTANA RELATIONSHIPS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF ARTS 

FACULTY OF MTS 

BY 

GERALD L. BERRY 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 

March, 1950. 











. 












. 










. 




, 





t 










\9SO 

#1 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter Title Pag© 

I. The 49th Parallels a Man-Made Boundary 1 

II* The Physical Background of the divided Alberta- 

Montana Area 6 

III* The Aborigines 10 

IV* The Saskatchewan Approach 19 

V* The Missouri Approach 22 

VI* Infiltration of White Men in the Early Period 38 

VII. Th® Whisky Traderss Fort Ihoop-up 48 

VIII. The I* G. Baker Company and th® Whoop-up Trail 65 

IX. The North West Mounted Police 85 

X* The Cattlemen 112 

XI. Railways and Settlement 124 

XII* Coal and Oil 134 

XIII. Boundary Waters and Irrigation 141 

XIV. Some Rresent Bay Relationships 146 

XV. Conclusion 153 







MONTANA 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


% 


« 


https://archive.org/details/albertamontanareOOberr 


Chapter I 


The 49th Parallel: a Man-Made Boundary 


The 49th Parallel was established as a boundary line 

between Canada and the United States for that part of their territories 

east of the Rocky Mountains by Convention between the governments of 

Great Britain and the United States, October 2, 1818. The same 

Convention provided for joint occupancy by the two countries of the 

Oregon territory for a period of ten years, and this arrangement 

was extended indefinitely in 1827. The 49th Parallel was also 

established as the boundary west of the Rocky Mountains by the 

Buchanan-Pakenham Treaty of 1846, which automatically ended the joint 

occupation of the Oregon area. 

However, the history of the 49th Parallel as a boundary 

line and as a projected boundary line is much older. In the late 

seventeenth century and throughout the eighteenth century the British 

interests in the northern portion of the continent were in the hands 

of the Hudson*s Bay Company. After hostilities in Queen Anne * g 

War were concluded in 1712, the Hudson*s Bay Company stated terms 

which seemed to it desirable for the establishment of a boundary 

line by the Treaty of Utrecht, 1715® The company wished to have 

included in the treaty a provision to keep France south of a line 

extending from Cap© Perdrix in Labrador, latitude North 58° SO 9 , 

southwestward to Lake Mistassini, and thence through that lake® (l) 

1. Mills, David, Reports on the Boundaries of "the’~Provinc© of Ontario, 
1877, pp. 156-7; cited in Pauliin, C. 0., Early Choice of 
the Forty Ninth Parallel as a Boundary Line, Canadian 
Historical Review, IV, 1925, p. 127. 










> i 







' I 


) 


I 




2 


Nothing was done regarding the drawing of a boundary by 
the Treaty of Utrecht, except that Article 10 of the Treaty provided 
for the appointment of commissioners to establish the same* As no 
immediate action was taken, the Hudson’s Bay Company in 1714 again 
made a memorial to the government, this time urging the extension of 
the boundary from Lake Mistassini southwestward into North Latitude 
49°. (2) This is probably the first mention in history of the 49th 

2. Mills," op. cit. pV~173, cited in Pauli in, op» cit". p. 128. * 

Parallel as the prospective boundary. When the British Government 
finally appointed its commissioners under the Treaty of Utrecht in 
September, 1719, it instructed them to obtain the line requested by 
the Hudson’s Bay Company, and further instructed them that where the 
said line cut the 49th Parallel a new line should begin and extend 
westward along the parallel. (3) 

3. Ibid, p® 175« 

No settlement of the boundary resulted from the delibera¬ 
tions of the commissioners, but the combination of the reference in 
the Treaty of Utrecht, the deliberations of the commissioners, the 
memorial of the Hudson’s Bay Company, and the claims of the British 
Government, led both cartographers and historians into the error of 
confusing the attempt to establish the boundary with an actual 
settlement. Thus in 1738, Salmon states in reference to Article 10 
of the Treaty of Utrecht \ 

"Commissioners did afterwards settle the limits by an 
imaginary line drawn from a Promontory situate on the 
Atlantick Ocean in 58° 30*, and running from thence 







■ 


















■ 








> . ’I 














3 


South-West indefinitely to the Latitude of 49° .” (4) 


4. Salmon, Thomas, Modern History, IV, p. 349, cited in Paullin, 

op, cite p. 129. 

Similarly in 1749, the southern limits of the Hudson’s Bay Company 
are described by Douglass: 

”The true Definition of it is, from the Treaty of Utrecht, 
1713s viz. From a certain Promontory on the Atlantick 
Ocean, N. Let, 58d. 30m, runs S. W. to Lake Mistasin 
(this includes the western half of Terra Labradore) thence 
S. W. to N. Lat. 49d. and from this Termination due West 
indefinitely.” (5) 

5. Douglass, Ufaui A Summary, Historical and Political, I,~pV 2T67~~ 

cited in Paullin, op, cit. p. 129. 

In 1752, Bolton, on his Map of North America, shows the boundary 
claimed by the Hudson’s Bay Company in 1712-1714, and states in the 
legend, ”The line...was established by Commissaries after the Peace 
of Utrecht.” With the end of the Seven Years War in 1763, Canada 
passed into British possession, and the settlement of the boundary of 
the Hudson’s Bay Company’s territory ceased to be urgent, with the 
result that nothing was done for forty years. 

When the United States acquired Louisiana by the purchase 
agreement of 1803, the boundary became of paramount importance to 
them, and, under the impression that it had been established by the 
Treaty of Utrecht, they claimed this line as the boundary. In a 
letter to James Monroe, Minister to England, February 14, 1804, 

James Madison writes: 

”There is reason to believe that the boundary between 
Louisiana and the British Territories north of it was 
actually fixed by commissioners appointed under the 

Treaty of Utrecht, and that this boundary was to run 
from the Lake of the Woods westwardly in latitude 49°.” (6) 









4, 


6. American State Papers, Foreign Relations, III, p. 90. 

Further evidence is to be found in a statement made by Messrs. Monroe 

and Pinckney to the Spanish first secretary of state, April 20, 1805: 

"The boundary between Canada and Louisiana on the one side* 
and the Hudson*s Bay Co. and the Northwestern Co. on the 
other* was established by commisseries, by a line to commence 
at a cape or promontory on the ocean in 58° 31* north 
latitude, to run thence southwestwardly to latitude 49° 
north from the equator, and along that line indefinitely."(7) 

7. lbid~XI, pT 664. ^ ~~ ~ ~ * 

England, having thus limited her claim in 1719 to lands north of the 
49th Parallel, weakened any claim that she might have had to lands 
south of the line, and in 1818 she accepted the Convention establishing 
the 49th Parallel as the boundary line to the Rocky Mountains. 

There was no immediate necessity for marking the line even 
after it was decided upon, since there were no whit© men in any 
numbers in the area, and the Indians would have found no value in the 
establishment of the "Medicine Line". However, as traders and miners 
came to the western frontier areas, the survey of the boundary became 
more and more urgent, and the International Boundary Commission was 
set up in 1875-74. Until the line was marked, every man carried his 
own law in his holster and Jack Colt was the supreme arbiter. The 
Commission was working on the area which eventually became the 
Alberta-Montana boundary in the summer ©f 1874, ©nd had it completely 
marked before the police earn© west in the fall of that year. The 
Commission was no small surveyors party, but a well-equipped corps 
of men. The Canadian contingent was mad© up of 300 men in the 
surveying party and a corps of mounted scouts, while the Americans 










‘ 









% 



' 

' 




t 







’ ! 




I . J: > 





■ i 1 ; ; . .i , : D. • < >n ' [Q.^ ■ 
















5. 


had 250 men escorted by two troops of the 7th U. S. Cavalry and five 
companies of U. S. Infantry. (8) The boundary was marked with stone 

8. Shepherd, George, toorth of the border—=Up Canada Way, kiver Press 

Centennial. I wrote to Mr. Shepherd at his home in West 
Plains, Saskatchewan, re source, and in his reply dated 
Dec. 16, 1949, he said in part: 11 • • •information was secured 
from...John Peter Turner who was lately the Historian for 
the R. C. M. P. w 


cairns placed at half-mile intervals, so that no longer was there any 
doubt as to what territory belonged to each government. 

Following settlement of the boundary, the Hudson*s Bay 
Company in 1865 claimed compensation for the forts south of the 49th 
Parallel, which were given up at the times Vancouver, Chsmpoeg, 
Cowlitz, George (Astoria), Cape Disappointment, Chinook (Pillar Rock), 
Mez Perce (Walla Walla), Hall, Boise, Umpqua, Okanagan, Colville, 
Kootanai, Flathead. They claimed no indemnity for the following, 
although they were on American territory: Simcoe, Carkeeman, Saleesh, 
Hisqually, Bellingham, and Spokane. (9) 

9. Voorhis, E., Historic Forts and trad£ng~"Postis, Department of the 

Interior, Ottawa, 1950. p. 132. 







'"'Ov 








•/ : 




t 


t t • «. 


















6 


Chapter II The Physical Background of the Divided Alberta-Montana Area 

The story of Montana-Alberta relationships begins in the 
prehistoric era when the two were one* Long before the white man 
came to this part of the world, the red man traversed the great 
spaces east of the Rocky Mountains, and long before the red man came, 
animals that would appear strange to us roamed the area without 
benefit of the Customs or Immigration officers when they crossed the 
49th Parallel* 

In the prehistoric period which geologists discuss so 
glibly, the area now known as Alberta and Montana was formed of 
layers of sedimentary rocks under water* Then a portion was raised, 
and we had an area with a climate similar to that of modern Florida* 

The flora was of a luxuriant tropical nature, while the fauna was 
dominated by huge reptiles known as dinosaurs* The coal deposits 
and fossil remains which are found in significant amounts bear ample 
witness to these facts. The next stage in geological development 
brought the contractions which resulted in upthrusts of the Rocky 
Mountains and the Cypress Hills* The Rocky Mountain chain extends 
as a skeletal backbone for the whole continent, providing part of 
the western boundary of Alberta, and the western portion of Montana* 
Because of climatic changes during this mountain building period, 
the dinosaur era ended, but warmer periods followed, as fossil 
remains of sabre-toothed tigers and small three-toed horses give 
evidence* Then the continental ice-cap was pushed down from an 
area west of Hudson Bay to cover most of Alberta and the north- 







! ■ 


- 




i l 








•i .:)• wl r -I 


a . 


■ 




•; X . -A :■ } .. ; C j ' :• V 




' ■; - . > 










, . ' 

* ’ ; • V • , ■ • 

■ t ' ■' • ;.:o‘ £)(■;{ ■ ; 1 > j 

, 1 ; ; • • 




t ; ■ ,.v' •' - '■/ o >. v . 







7 


eastern part of Montana* In this area only the crest of the Cypress 
Hills, an island of approximately 88 square miles, ■was left exposed. 
Since the ice-cap was not formed by excessively low temperatures but 
was forced down from the more frigid north, there is no reason to 
assume that life could not have persisted on the top of the Cypress 
Hills throughout the ice age, and there is reason to believe that 
some life did exist. Even today we still find survivals of some 
sub-tropical animal and plant life in the area—scorpions, lizards, 
black-widow spiders, wasps, yucca grass, and orchids. The movement 
of the ice-cap filled old stream beds and cut new ones which were 
left in its wake. Since it receded about 50,000 years ago, surface 
changes have come about through the less spectacular agencies of 
wind and water erosion, (l) 

1* Strickland, E. H., department of Entomology, University of Aloeri&7 

cited by W. Eggleston, Lethbridge Herald, Aug* 11, 1949 t 
n In prehistoric times, the climate of Alberta was much 
warmer than now, and the area was covered with luxuriant 
vegetation, indicated by coal and fossil deposits. It 
all ended with the coming of the ice age, which covered 
the vast prairies of North America—with the exception of 
the Cypress Hills. Ice apparently never completely 
covered these hills....I see no reason for assuming that 
life could not have persisted on this...island of bare 
ground throughout the ice age» w 

The areas of southern Alberta and northern Montana with 
which we are chiefly concerned belong to what Canadian geologists 
refer to as the Third Prairie Steppe, while the same area is 
divided by American geologists into two sections, generally called 
the long-grass prairie and the short-grass plains areas. Both the 
province and the state have Rocky Mountain Foothill areas, much more 





„ ' : : , 




■ i i 















8 


prominent, however, in the former. The Canadian technical designation 
for the area is Area 4b, Cretaceous Plateau, Upper; Third Prairie 
Steppe; while the designation of the American geologists is Area 
U. S. 13, Missouri Plateau Glaciated and Missouri Plateau Unglaci¬ 
ated. (2) 

2• Kroeber, Alfred L., Cultural end Natural Areas of Native North 

America, University of California Press, 1939. p. 195. 

The topography over large areas of Montana and Alberta is 
dissimilar. The mountains of the state break abruptly from the 
plain, leaving little of the foothills area so important in the 
province. Dr. R. L. Rutherford of the University of Alberta gives 
some reasons for this difference. In Alberta the Rocky Mountains 
consist of a series of folded ©aid faulted strata with evidence of 
increasing deformation from east to west, bringing to the surface 
successively older geological units as one progresses westward. On 
approaching the mountains in Montana, the first major uplift that 
one contacts has been of a magnitude to raise Precambrian strata to 
the surface, resulting in an entirely different physiography. There 
is a striking difference in the plains areas. In Alberta deformation 
resulted in broad synclinal and anticlinal areas of sedimentary rocks. 
In Montana there is a series of massive igneous intrusions, laid bar© 
by erosion, elevated to fairly high levels, end surrounded by large 
sedimentary basins. (3) 

3. Rutherford, R. L», ’'Departr^nF of Geology, University of Alberta, 

to M. H. Long, January 31, 1950. 


Neither Alberta nor Montana is at present or is likely to 












I 






J 










r 


. 








9 


become a centre of heavy industry. Both are devoted to primary 
production of the farm, forest, and mine--wheat, livestock, building 
materials, coal and oil. Montana has considerably more metallic 
minerals, especially gold and copper, than Alberta, but these alone 
do not provide a basis for north and south trade* 

The fact that the mountain ranges run north and south gives 
certain unity to the area* However, the north-south direction of 
the mountains results in the streams flowing in an easterly direction. 
This would seem to encourage an east and west flow of transportation, 
but the streams are all small and sufficiently shallow to permit easy 
crossing. Thus, while there is little natural encouragement of 
north-south traffic, there is but little barrier to it. 

From earliest times the Old North Trail ran north and 
south; then the lhoop-up Trail followed the ancient track; later 
the Sunshine Trail became a tourist-worn highway; and today the 
Alaska Highway is a bond of union and a supply line to the last 
great frontier of the North* 



• . 

t € 








* 


* 1 

* 5 < 

* 






' 

. t . " • - . 


t - : 

■ • •• 

. 










10 


Chapter III The Aborigines 


The origin of the Indians is not definitely established, 
but it is thought that they crossed at a very early period from Asia, 
and thence spread southward. There is a reasonably well-defined 
Indian trail which extends the length of the continent just east of 
the Rocky Mountains known as the Old North Trail, and over this trail 
the earliest Indians probably came to America, (l) 

1. McClintock, Walter, The Old North Trail, or Life, Legends and 

Religion of the Blackfoot Indians, Macmillan, London, 1910. 
He cites on page 454 the following account of Bring-Down- 
the-Sun, an old Blackfoot chiefs "There is a well known 
trail we call the Old North Trail. It runs north and 
south along the Rocky Mountains. No one knows how long it 
has been used by the Indians. My father told me it origin¬ 
ated in the migration of a great tribe of Indians from the 
distant north to the south, and all the tribes have, ever 
since, continued to follow in their tracks. The Old North 
Trail is now becoming overgrown with moss and grass, but 
it was worn so deeply by many generations of travellers, 
that the travois tracks and hors© trails are still plainly 
visible....In many places the white man’s roads and towns 
have obliterated the Old North Trail. It forked (sic) 
where the city of Calgary now stands® The right fork ran 
north into the Barren Lands as far as people live. The 
main trail ran south along the eastern side of the Rockies, 
at a uniform distance from the mountains, keeping clear of 
the forest, and outside of the foothills. It ran close t© 
where the city of Helena now stands, and extended south 
into the country inhabited by a people with dark skins, 
and long hair falling over their faces (the Mexicans)." 

The early Indians in all likelihood used dogs as beasts of 

burden, with travois mad© of two poles fastened together above the 

dogs® shoulders with a platform slung between for carrying their 

small possessions. In later times, when they acquired the horse, the 

travois was still used, and traces of the more used trails were easily 

found when the white man came to the region. The Old North Trail 





J. ' J. V ■ ■. 


t 










1 





















11 


was then well-defined from the Mackenzie River to Mexico, as it was 
still being much used by the Indians in following the annual trek of 
the buffalo north and south, and also for war parties# The trail, 
following the base of the mountains as it did, crossed many streams, 
and well-known fords became favorite camp sites, where the Indians 
stopped to perform tribal rites, to make pemmican, and to bury the 
dead* Such camp sites are well marked even at the present time with 
tepee and fire circles of stones* 

The Indians of the Alberta-Montana region in the period 
after the white man came were the tribes of the Blackfoot Confederacy, 
which ranged from the Missouri River to the North Saskatchewan, and 
from the Cypress Hills to the Rocky Mountains* The legends of the 
Blackfoot bear out other evidence that they came from the north* 

Their legends inform us that in very early times they were held as 
slaves in the north—hence the terms Great and Lesser Slave Lakes* 
Ultimately they became so numerous and powerful that they drove their 
masters before them, and conquered a vast area south and east to the 
Yellowstone River, an area which they held until it was wrested from 
them by the whites* Henday bears out this legend by referring to all 
the Blackfoot Confederacy as Slave Indians* The tribes of the Black¬ 
foot Confederacy, except the Sarcee, speak the same basic language, 
a language which also indicates origin in the north and a southward 
migration* Some of their words for direction, for example, are: 

North--Aputosokts, back or behindj South—Amskapokts, ahe&dj East— 
Pinapokts, down the river j West—One tukts, up river, following it 







4 * 

t .. o.' ‘ 

C 

* 

* . . ' : _ . 

; ‘ - 

c 

■ . ; 

* 


" ■■ i ‘ : , 




• .. . 







• t 



, 


■ 

. t 


.'.f ■ ^' 





• 



* 



• : ! 


t - , 


t ' c 

•i . ■> ■<*'. ./ 


«s 

- 

' 

« 

’ ■ ' 4 


' 

, 



t' 

' 

1 - . : 

- ' 

' " 






12* 


to its source. (2) 

2. Middleton, Archdeacon S. E., LethbridgeHerald, Armiversery, Dec. 

11, 1947, p. 9, section 6. NOTE: Hereafter this edition 
will he referred to in footnotes as LH Arm. Archdeacon 
Middleton spent forty years on the Blood Reserve at Card- 
ston, Alberta, and is familiar with much Indian lore. 


The Blackfoot Confederacy was made up of five tribes, 
generally called the Blackfoot, Blood, Peigan, Gros Ventre, end 
Sarcee. These five tribes were all recognised very early, as 
Franklin thus divided them: 

n They are divided into five nations. First the Pawansticey- 
thin Yoownc, or Fall Indians, so named from their residence 
on the falls of the Saskatchewan. River. (These are the 
Gros Ventre, afterwards found on the headwaters of the 
Missouri.) Second, the Peganoo-eythinyoowue Pegans, or 
Muddy River Indians. Third, the Meethco-thinyoowuc, or 
Blood Indians. Fourth, the Cuskoeteh-wawthesseetuck, or 
Blackfoot Indians. Lastly the S&ssees, or Circess 
(Sarcee). w (3) 

3. Franklin, J*, Narrative" of a Journey to the Shores - of - the" PoTar 

Sea, in the Years 1819-20-21-22, Murray, London, 1823. 
p. 108. Cited in Macrae, A. 0., History of the Province 
of Alberta, Western Canada History Co., 1912. p. 81. 

The Blackfoot or Siksika, the Blood or K&inah, the Peigan, 

and the Gros Ventre or Fall or Atsina were all tribes of the western 

division of the Algonkin Indians, but of such a diversity of language 

as to indicate a very early movement to the plains areas. They are 

the only tribes to be found in the mountain foothills area in the 

earliest period of white infiltration. (4) Interesting experiments 

4* KroeWr, op. cit. pp. '80-83. ~ ' ~~~ — 

carried out by Matson and Schrader seem to indicate that there is 
probably no relationship in origin of these tribes and other American 
Indians. ‘While all other American Indians are predominantly of 

1 





















13 


blood group 0, the Blackfoot and Blood show a predominance of 
blood group A -which is too great to be explained by any admixture 
or crossing. (5) 

5. Matson, G. A., and Schrader, E~." F*V Blood Grouping Among the 

Blackfoot and Blood Tribes of American Indians, Journal of 
Immunology, XXV, 1933, pp. 155-163. 

The Sarcee was a small tribe of Athapascan Indians which 
had separated from its kinsmen in the north and had formed a 
political alliance with the Blackfoot Confederacy. (6) 

6. Kroeber, loo, cit. ~ ~ - - - - — 


There is an interesting legend of the origin ©f the three 

original tribes of the Blackfoot: 

”Long years ago when their great forefathers crossed the 
Mountains of the Setting Sun and settled along the sources 
of the Missouri and the South Saskatchewan, it came to 
pass that a chief had three sons: Kernia, or the Blood; 
Peaginon, or the Wealthj rad a third, who wag nameless. 

The two first were great hunters: they brought to their 
father’s lodge rich store of moose and elk meats, and the 
buffalo fell before their unerring arrows; but the third, 
or nameless one, ever returned empty handed from the chase, 
until his brothers mocked him for his want of skill. One 
day the old chief said to this unsuccessful hunters *My 
son, you cannot kill the moose, your arrows shun the buffalo, 
the elk is too fleet for your footsteps, and your brothers 
mock you because you bring no meat into the lodge; but see, 

I will make you a great hunter,* and the ©Id chief took 
from the lodge fir© a piece of burnt stick and, wetting 
it, he rubbed the feet of his son with the blackened char¬ 
coal, rad he named him Sat-Sea-Qua, or the Blackfoot, and 
evermore Sat-sea-qua mis a mighty hunter, and his arrows 
flew straight to the buffalo rad his feet moved swift on 
the chase.” (?) 

7. Macrae, A. 0», Hi at orjpojFthe" Province of Alberta, Western Canada"" 

History Co., 1912. p. 83. 

From these three sons are supposed to be descended the 
three tribes of Blackfoot (Sat-sea-qua or Siksika), Blood (Kemxa or 














. '. ■ < ■ ! 



I 


i > ■' \ ■ . ■ 

X. • ■ ■ - : 1 






14 , 


Kainah), and Peigan (Peaginon). There are other tales of the origin 
of the names, but this seems least like a white man’s explanation* 

The Indians of these tribes were physically, culturally, 
and intellectually well developed. The men were generally tall, 
well-formed, fine-looking fellows. Although nomadic, they had 
achieved a highly complex social and cultural organization under a 
patriarchal chief, with rigid tribal customs and a code of morals and 
ethics almost Spartan in its simplicity. (8) Archdeacon S. H. 

8. Jenness", Diamond," Indians of Canada, Department of Mines,' 

Bulletin 65, Ottawa, 1952. p. 127 and pp. 517-328. 

Middleton quotes a passage from a conversation which he had with 

Chief Yellow Bull of the Blood shortly after he came among the Indians: 

”We listened to your words about the Ten Commandments, 
which you said God wrote on two tablets of stone. He may 
have don© that, but long before you Holy Yfhite Men or any 
whit© men came here, we had five laws of our own; and while 
you white men may have your Ten Commandments, we keep our 
five better than you keep your ten....In the long ago, our 
forefathers were wise men. They taught their children 
songs, games, rituals, dances, prayers % what they ought 
to do, what they ought not to do; and amongst these things 
were five laws which governed the tribe.,..The first was 
murder| we always demanded a life for a life. Two- 
theft; the thief had to restore the stolen goods. Three-” 
adultery; an ear was cut off for the first offence, both 
ears and added punishment for subsequent offences. Fourth— 
cowardice; the person was clothed in woman’s garb, mad© t© 
do menial tasks around the camp and not allowed to marry. 
Fifth—treachery; brought back to camp and shot at sight.”(9) 


9. Middleton, loc. cit. 


Primarily the Indians were sun worshippers, but they also 
had a lesser, mysterious, more homely deity whom they called Napi, 
the Old Man. (10) Anything which the Indian could not understand was 

10 . demess, op 1 , cit'« p. 189 .. " .."".—— - 









T 



















15 


believed to be magic* and therefore the work of Napi. When they 
heard that one of their streams came out of the side of a mountain, 
they attributed this marvel to him and called the stream, n The River 
the Old Man Played On”. One of their favorite camp sites, a place 
where many of their great Sun Dances were held, was at the ford where 
the Old North Trail crossed this river, "The«Place-Wher e-th©-Trail- 
Crosses-the-Cldman-River”, and it was to this site that Jerry Potts 
in 1874 led Colonel Macleod and the first contingent of the North 
West Mounted Police. The Blackfoot like Colonel Macleod, whom they 
called Stamixotoken (Bull’s Head), so well that they renamed their 
ford, ” The-Pl&ce-Whe re - Stamixotoken- Stays ”« 

While some of their legends and myths rank with those of 
classical times, and some of their art is still used in modern 
design, it was not alone in the cultural fields that western life was 
enriched by contact with the Indians. Long experience with the 
climate and elements had taught them many practical techniques which 
were passed on to their white brothers. Not a few white infants in 
the early days of Alberta and Montana were carried in moss bags. 

Many recipes have a basis in Indian knowledge of plants and roots. 
Methods of hunting and first aid remedies were adopted in whole or 
in part. The buffalo, from which the Indian secured every basic 
necessity of food, clothing, shelter and fuel, was never domesticated, 
because it was so plentiful and so easily killed. 

The Blackfoot Confederacy ranged freely from the Missouri 
to the Bow and Elbow, and swept this area free of all other Indians* 




, ; ‘ : .. ■ . i ■ ■ 

c 

•• •’ - ■ 

*k>- oXoaM Xvwto i. hi X *Y u 






■ 










* 

■ . • ‘ t 


- 

♦ 

« 

■ • 'jU^Y V - I .. ' • ..I V ; ■ ‘ . 


* * 

t ' ' t t 

, 

1 

• * ' 



16 


With the deadly enemies of the Cree to the north and the Cro-w to the 
south, they seldom ventured outside their own preserve, except to 
melee forays along the Old North Trail against the Cree, and to trade 
■with the white men at Rocky Mountain House and Fort Edmonton. Before 
the white men invaded their country, the Blackfoot lived a happy and 
contented existence, and viewed with complacency their own parochial 
world. 

In the decades just before the coming of the police in 
1874, this idyllic existence cam© to an end. Matthew Cocking, a 
Hudson’s Bay Company trader, spent the winter of 1772-78 with the 
Blackfoot Confederacy, and found them a friendly and hospitable 
people, (11) but in 1806, Captain Lewis of the Lewis and Clark 

11. Morton, A. S., History of the Canadian West to 1870-71, 

Nelson, Toronto, p. 285. 

expedition shot a Blackfoot in the border country, and for the next 
twenty-five years no white man was safe in their domain. However, 
from 1880 onward the traders from the south gradually re-established 
friendly relations, and it was not long before the trader wag 
following the Old North Trail into the very heart of the Blackfoot 
country. The members of the Confederacy traded both north and south, 
with the Hudson’s Bay Company and the American Fur Company respective¬ 
ly. At on© time the Indians reported that the Hudson’s Bay Company 
had offered them rewards if they would kill all the whites on the 
Missouri—a charge which nowadays would have caused an international 
”incident”, but which was then dropped after Governor James Bird 
of the Hudson’s Bay Company vehemently denied the accusation when 





■ 

■ ' / ‘ : ; r .• 

,'••• . . • . r .y.r t 




* 


t 




h 


t 










T. 






' 




„ 







<L 


■ 






' - 








' 






> ' 


■ 4 ’ :v.' .... •... 


,i- ■ . 





■}. ■■ >.Vi, . V , 


, 

t . : / •. ' : 

■ • • ■ ■ ’,%■) / V ■ J.I ■ •.:./ :;i ! , ■ ,f.f ; ■>. " {* ' > 


17 


approached by Kenneth McKenzie of Fort Benton. (12) 

12* Vaughn, Robert, Then and Now, Tribune Printing Co".," ¥irme~apolisV 

1900. g, 191. 

The smallpox plague of 1869 which so ravaged the Blackfoot 
Confederacy was caused by the malevolence of a single white man. An 
American trader named Evans and his partner had trouble with the 
Blackfoot in 1868, the partner being slain and all their horses 
stolen. Evans mad© his way back to St. Louis, where he swore revenge. 
Purchasing several bales of blankets infected with smallpox, he set 
them out on the banks of the Missouri in Indian country, and the 
plague swept through the tribes like wildfire. (13) The Blackfoot 

13. Kelly7~1U^r7~ 1 i^ Toronto, 1913. p. 85. 

tribe alone lost nearly 1400 men, women and children in five months. 
(14) 

14, Qv8rholser7“°d>V Centenary History ~~of r ~Fort leriton, Benton, 1946. 

Late in the fall of 1870 the last great Indian battle was 
fought on the present site of Lethbridge. The Cree thought the 
time opportune, as the Blackfoot tribes had been decimated with the 
smallpox plague of the previous year. The story of this last great 
battle has been well preserved, for among the Peigan who took part 
in it was Jerry Potts, a halfbreed who was to become the most famous 
of the North West Mounted Police scouts. Through the coulees and 
across the river the battle raged, the Blackfoot, although victorious, 
losing about forty killed and having about fifty wounded. Although 
the exact loss of the Cree is not ascertainable because many of them 
were drowned in the river, conservative estimates place the number 
at more than two hundred. The following year the Cree sent gifts 

















« : c i •:« i i 

■ ' ■ ' j- ■ i-i ' . -J"' \ : ' : J 

" v 

* 



18* 


of tobacco to the Blackfoot and a formal treaty of peace was made 
on the Red Deer River* ”The powerful Blackfoot Confederacy still 
exists, but is sadly shorn of its one time greatness* Smallpox 
commenced the work, whisky continued it, and now the relentless 
Moloch of advancing civilization with its attendant trail of disease, 
is causing these Indians to disappear like snow before the warm 
breath of the Chinook.” (15) 

15. Kennedy, G. A., Last Great Indian Battle Fought on Present Site™” 

of Lethbridge, Lethbridge News, April SO, 1890. 

ROTE: A. M. S. in the Lethbridge Herald Golden Jubilee 
edition, July 11, 1935, reports a conversation with Howell 
Harris in 1897, in which Harris claimed that h© and 
another trader watched the whole affair from across the 
river, and were in touch with Jerry Potts during the battle. 

While Kennedy’s comment was perhaps true in 1890, such 

a statement is far from the truth today. In 1801, Alexander Mackenzie 

estimated the population of the Blackfoot Confederacy as approximately 

9000 (16), while Hind estimated a population of 7600 in 1858. (17) 


16, Mackenzie, Sir Alexander, Voyages from Montreal on the River St. 

Lawrence Through the Continent of North America in 1789 
and 1793, London, 1801. p. Ixx. 

17. Hind, H. Y., North West Territory, Reports of Progress, Toronto, 

1859* p* 115. 

The ravages of smallpox end whisky reduced the number rapidly in 
the sixties and seventies. However, with family allowances, better 
care, and medical supervision, the population is again increasing. 
At December 31, 1948, the numbers of these Indians in Alberta were: 
Blood, 1844 5 Blackfoot, 1105j Feigan, 653j Saroee, 192; a total 
of 3,794. (18) 


18. Gooderham, G. H., Regional Supervisor of Indian Agencies, 

Calgary, letter to the writer, Dec* 9, 1949. 














19. 

Chapter IV The Saskatchewan Approach 

White infiltration, at first slow and uncertain, gradually 
increased in weight and momentum until finally it swept all before 
it and relegated the once lordly red man to some of the less desirable 
and more arid regions of the Alberta-Montana area. There may have 
been white men on the plains as early as the year 1000, but if the 
Norse explorers of that period did move that far westward no 
convincing traces have yet been discovered. 

Among the white men who encountered the Blackfoot 
Confederacy before 1800 were Anthony Henday, Matthew Cocking, David 
Thompson and Peter Fidler. Probably the first white man ever to 
make contact with the Blackfoot was Anthony Henday, who left York 
Factory, June 26, 1754, and arrived at a point possibly on the Red 
Deer River near Nevis on October 11* Her© he first saw Indians on 
horseback, and counted 522 tepees in their camp, (l) Another 
lV Morton, op. oitTT"p. 19 and pp. 245-247. . 

Hudson*s Bay Company trader from York Factory, Matthew Cocking, spent 
the winter of X772»3 among the Blackfoot, Blood, Beigan, and Sarcee, 
to whom he referred as the Confederacy of Waterfall Indians. He 
reported that they had attained a reasonable degree of advanced 
culture, using earthen pots for cooking and possessing enough 
agricultural knowledge to plant tobacco gardens. Cocking found the 
Blackfoot a hospitable people—they as yet had no reason to fear 
or to hate the whites. (2) David Thompson spent the winter of 1787 

ZTTbT rryTSHT" . .. - -- 











'■.'uO'.'.;" s : Ti' 1 >•:IV 


1 ' %'■■■' 











a 


'X: 


1 


t t 


7 




7 , 





u:;-• 










1 <’j /),(: / v- 






20 


with the Indian chief, Sauganappee, on the Bow River near its 
junction with the Swift, now called the Elbow River. ( Z) 

5. Ibid, pV 444 ~~ ~ 

As the century closed, the two great Canadian fur companies 
were establishing themselves firmly in the area which was to become 
Alberta. The North West Company built Fort Augustus about twenty 
miles east of the present site of Edmonton in 1795, and the same 
year the Hudson’s Bay Company built Fort Edmonton near the opposition 
post—the most western post at that time. (4) In 1799 the North 
4» Ibid, p. 463. 

West Company established Rocky Mountain House, and the Hudson’s 
Bay Company raised an adjacent fort, Acton House. These posts, 
combined after the union in 1821 as Rocky Mountain House, served 
the Blackfoot Confederacy more or less regularly for the next seventy- 
five years. (5) Peter Fidler built Chesterfield House on the South 

5, Ibid.~~~—" ' ' ' ~~~~ 

Saskatchewan River at the mouth of the Red Deer River in 1800 for the 
Hudson’s Bay Company, although this post was little used except in 
1804 and 1805 because there was but little beaver in the area. (6) 

6. ' Xbid7 p» 511 .~ ~~ 

Both the North West Company and the Hudson’s Bay Company were 
primarily interested in furs, and as the best furs were found in 
the north, they made little attempt to penetrate into what is now 
southern Alberta. Neither participated to any large extent in the 
vast robe trade of the period 1850 to 1880. 











t t 


t ■ 

’ t ■ ■ r ■ 


. 

7 

i ■ 

t « t 

«. . • „ . 

■ - . ■ i , . • ... ■. ■ ; j 

. 


• '■ ■’ ' 1 ■■ > . ■■ J - -, ;/; . , , 

t . : 

. • - - ' ' ; ' :' . 

- « 

5 ' . • ■ : ' J ; . J-IO. ; 

* • ' , - ‘ 1 ' ■ . 

' or ; . k : ; 

- 









21 


Both companies moved into northern Montana territory west 
of the Rockies and parts of what is now Washington and Idaho in the 
first decade of the nineteenth century* The North West Company sent 
Finan McDonald and David Thompson from Rocky Mountain House through 
the mountains to the Columbia River, on which they established a 
temporary fort, Kootenai Post, near Lake Windermere in 1807* This 
post was replaced the following year by Saleesh House, or Kullyspell 
House, on Clark’s Fork* (7) The Hudson’s Bay Company did not enter 
7*~ 'Ibid,' ppT 481-484,. . — 

the Montana field until 1810, when Joseph Howse built Howse House 
at the north end of Flathead Lake, a post which was used only one 
season. (8) 

8* Ibid,~“p*"' 4961 ~ ~ 












■ ■ 














* • 

> 





/ . 


i 



c : 





* 

t ' t ' 





. 

• 





’ 



. 



. 

* 

* 



* . ; •.) 

' ' ' t 





22 


Chapter V The Missouri Approach 

Until the opening of the nineteenth century there was 
little or no activity of white men south of the 49th Parallel in 
the Montana region, but on April 50, 1803, a big business transaction 
focussed the attention of the American government on the Missouri 
area. On that date the United States Government concluded a 
tremendous $15,000,000 land deal with the French Emperor, Napoleon 
Bonaparte--the Louisiana Purchase. This vast, vaguely defined tract 
of land included most of the future treasure state, Montana, any 
one of whose great gold gulches would have paid the purchase price 
many times over. Several weeks prior to the purchase, in January, 
1805, the United States Government had appropriated $2500 for an 
overland journey to the west coast, but now that they owned the 
intervening area plans were rushed to completion, and the Lewis and 
Clark expedition wag launched. This party passed through Montana 
both on the westward and eastward trips in 1805 and 1806. 

An event of great importance to white relationships with 
the Blackfoct Confederacy occurred during the return journey in 
1806* Lewis, with three members of the party, explored the Teton 
and Marias regions late in July. One evening they camped with a 
party of eight Blackfoot. Early the next morning the Indians tried 
to run off with the four rifles of the white men, but one of the 
latter, Reuben Fields, grappled with them, stabbing and killing one 
of the Indians. Mien the remaining seven Indians then tried to 




: ' ' ' ' ■ . 

' ■ 

' 


> , ' '■ ■ r\' ' X 

• , •. t ' 

* 





‘ t ; 

r , , .! ■•, ! &> , . , ■ 

t 0. 


■ ■ • ' . . > > - - \ 1 U,t 




' 


* 

. 

- ' . ■ t • X 


y.iO' oav!/ .) L' ^ ; t 

4 . 


i fO - X :. ' ' • 

• 




■ 

■ /' , Xj •' 5 : i 


t \ . 

, 

. .. . ■ ’ Ci. 


• 

t ' •' ‘ 

' 

‘ ' * 

* t 

■ 





23 


rim off the horses, Lewis first warned them and then shot one of 
them, (l) This episode was to result in much bloodshed in the 

1. Fletcher, Robert H., American Adventure^ Imericen Pioneer Trails 

Association, New York, 1945, p. 47. 

Blackfoot country for the next twenty-five years, and no white man 
was safe henceforth until Kenneth McKenzie (2) finally established 

t. NOTE: Kenneth McKenzie was born~in Scotland* Placed in control"" 

of the American Pur Company on the upper Missouri, he 
retired in 1839 with a fortune of $50,000. He died in 
St. Louis, 1861. 

friendly relations with the Confederacy in 1828. Repercussions 

were felt from one end of the Blackfoot country to the other, and 

Fort Augustus, nearly 400 miles away, was destroyed by the Blackfoot 

in 1807. 

Following the Lewis and Clark expedition, American traders 
started to move up the Missouri. Manuel Lisa (3) went as far as the 

3* James,~General~Thomas, Three Years Among^the^ Ihd i aniTancf Mexicana^ 

Missotiri Historical Society, St. Louis, 1918. p„ 257. 

Yellowstone, and up the latter to the mouth of the Big Horn, where 
he established a post in 1807. The following year he organized 
the Missouri Fur Company, which was active on the Yellowstone until 
1820 when Lisa died. In 1810, John Jacob Astor formed the American 
Fur Company, the trading concern which was to become the greatest 
of all the American companies, and which played a prominent part in 
opening up the upper Missouri country. There is evidence that Astor 
offered the North West Company a one-third share in his venture in 
order to avoid competition, but the Canadian company declined the 
offer. (4) So powerful did the American Fur Company become that it 















r • , . , 




* 





e. 













24. 

4. Morton, op^ cit. p. 489. also Bell, W. S., Old Fort Benton, 

Helena, 1909. 

even disputed the title of the Government to the land about its forts, 
as is shown by the following excerpt from a land title transfer at 
Fort Benton, April 4, 1877: ”...all the rights, title, and interest 
the grantor may have in and to all the land south of said old Fort 
alleged to be held by the United States..• (5) 

”River Press, Fort Benton, "Centennial, August 21, 1946. Hereafter 

in footnotes this paper will be referred to as RP Cent. 

The white traders who ventured into the Blackfoot country 
during this period literally carried their lives in their hands, 
for the whole Confederacy were implacable enemies of all white men 
following the incident with Captain Lewis mentioned above. John 
Colter (6), in the employ of Manuel Lisa, three times made trips 

6. Tint on, S.,”John Colter," "discoverer of Yellowstone' Park, Hew 

York, 1926. NOTE: Colter was with the Lewis and Clark 
expedition! joined Lisa in 1807! was credited with 
discovery of Yellowstone Park! died in St. Louis, 1813. 

into the Yellowstone country and three times was driven out in the 

years immediately following the organization of the Missouri Fur 

Company. The third time the Indians stripped him naked and forced 

him to rim for his life, giving him but a short start across cactus- 

studded plains before setting several braves on his track. Colter 

reached safety, but he told Lisa that the Yellowstone country was 

M bad medicine” and refused to return. In 1809, Manuel Lisa and 

Andrew Henry tried to establish a post at the Three Forks, but 

Henry, left in charge, lost at least twenty men before he finally 

withdrew. (7) The Rocky Mountain Fur Company, organized by William 












■' ri. • > . ■: -v . 1 ■ i 


• »i / V-: f: 


; > 






J ; t 

■ 


i ■- 




25 


7. Chittenden, American fur trade of the Far West, Harper, 

1902, v• 1. 

Ashley and Andrew Henry in 1822, outfitted an expedition to try to 
establish a post in the Blackfoot country in that year, but on 
June 2, 1825, a battle resulted in Ashley’s having twelve men killed 
and fourteen wounded, whereupon he decided to withdraw* (8) A 

8. Ibid ~~ 


Missouri Fur Company expedition under Jones and ImmeXX consisting of 
twenty-nine men moved up the Missouri in 1825* It was ambushed by 
the Indians on May 51, and seven men, including both leaders, were 
killed. The loss of property, including horses and beaver, was 
estimated at $15,000. (9) 

9. IbidT"~ ' ' ~~ ~ ... ' ' 

"Rightly or wrongly, the Missouri traders attributed 
these acts of persistent hostility t© the instigation 
of the British traders.• .whether these suspicions were 
well-founded or not. It was a fact that the fire-arms with 
which the Indians attacked the traders came from, across 
the line, and the furs which they took from our people 
quickly found their way back there in payment." (10) 

~ ———— - - — — 

Kenneth McKenzie and his associates finally made friendly 
contact with the Indians for the American Fur Company in 1828. Two 
important considerations which contributed to McKenzie’s success 
were the facts that he was married to a Peigan princess and that he 
employed men who were able to speak the Indian dialects. He built 
Fort Floyd, sometimes called the first Fort Union, in 1828, re¬ 
placing it after it was burned in 1851 by the better known Fort 
Union at the mouth of the Yellowstone. In 1851 he made a formal 
















*1. 


:■ 




••• 








• ’ ; . r \ t .. : • 


‘ 






t 







i 




' L- 


:>o th 


' 


. 


X 




f' 


•„ i 


r ; r . 


■■ ' X; >. J : ![.£ 






26 


treaty with the Blackfoot, a mutual agreement not to prey upon 
each other* (11) He sent James Kipp (12) with twenty-five men to 
IX* Ibid, pp. 387 et. seq. 

12* Ibid* NOTE: James Kipp was born in Canada in 1788* He came to 
the Missouri fur trade in 1822, and was almost immediately 
employed by the American Pur Company, remaining with that 
company until his retirement in I860* He kept a diary for 
forty years, but unfortunately this was destroyed by fire 
in 1870. His son, Joe Kipp, played an important part in 
early Alberta-Montana history* 

build Fort Peigan at the mouth of the Marias, and although the fort 
was used only until the following March it carried on a $>46,000 
trade in beaver in that time* It was at Fort Peigan that Kipp held 
his famous three day party for a thousand Indians on on© barrel of 
alcohol* 


Three events contributed to make 1832 a memorable year in 
the history of the Indian trade on the Missouri. On July 9, the 
United States Government prohibited the introduction of intoxicants 
into the Indian country--a law seldom invoked and generally dis¬ 
regarded by the traders. David D. Mitchell established Fort McKenzie, 
one of the most famous of the Missouri forts, a few miles above the 
site of Fort Peigan* This fort was visited by several notables in 
the next few years? George Gatlin, famous Indian artistj Prince 
Maximilian of Wied, adventurers and John J* Audubon, well-known 
ornithologist. In this same year the American Fur Company proved 
in the eyes of the Indians its undoubted superiority to the Hudson*s 
Bay Company by bringing a "firebo&t” (steamboat) to Fort Union 
at the mouth of the Yellowstone. (13) 

T3 V 1B ' i d . ~~—— 


















! 







i )! 




■ :t-v' 










r • 






' ^ ' : - >:. 


• . 


0 -j "i : : 


t 


V > 


■ 




■ .[ t ) /.v> 






i 














•j.’tfoJXl ‘i ; , : r 








27 


In 1833, Alexander Culbertson became manager of the American 
Fur Company on the Upper Missouri and remained one of the chief 
traders for many years* He entered the employ of the company in 1829 
when only twenty years old, and became one of the most successful of 
the Indian traders* He married a Blood princess, Natawista Bcsana, 
and raised a considerable family* After being in charge of Fort 
McKenzie from 1834 to 1842, he was moved to Fort Laramie, but was 
recalled the following year at the then munificent salary of $5000 
per annum* 


During Culbertson’s short term at Fort Laramie, Fort 
McKenzie was left in charge of F* A* Chardon and Alexander Harvey* 

The latter was a sadist, on© of the most cruel men who ever parti¬ 
cipated in the upper Missouri trade* (14) Early in 1842 the Indians 

14* John J* Stevens, in a short article in the" River Press Centennial, 

The Toughest and Meanest Man in Montana, writes as follows: 

”Alexander Harvey was on© hundred and sixty five pounds of 
meanness and greased lightning. He never knew the word 
* defeat * .Many men faced his trip-hammer fists and 
lightning draw—but none weathered the stem of ferocity 
that fell upon them* Most of the women along the river 
from Missouri to Montana would claw your eyes out—if a 
word was said against Harvey—but men cursed him often, 
but, also, silently* Harvey was kind to his friends, but 
vicious to his enemies* When Harvey was chief trader at 
Fort McKenzie***he led the massacre of 30 Indians and 
according to Culbertson, he scalped them all, and danced 
a war-dance* Even the Indians trembled as they heard his 
piercing yells and hideous laughter* When dismissed from 
Fort McKenzie for his cruelty, he...armed only with a rifle 
walked all the way to St* Louis overland. By threatening 
his bosses, he was reinstated.***Qn© by one he hunted down 
the two dozen or more men who had squealed on him. One 
by one he unmercifully beat each and every one into in¬ 
sensibility. ...Harvey died of natural causes at the age 
of forty-five*•*.His obituary in the St. Louis paper... 

’Here lies a brave, honest, and kind-hearted man.’” 





% . 

. ' ■; . : . • - . ", • ; 
■' • , : ■ 












„o.) *,o ; '■ x >•. 


















J ' j ' i i 


/. XX:-. 



: 







28 


killed a pig which belonged to the post, and when pursued by 
Chardon they ambushed the whites and killed a Negro named Reese* 

Harvey immediately planned a terrible revenge* A cannon was loaded 
with lead trade balls, and when a band of Blackfoot came to trade it 
was fired into their midst while they were massed about the gate of 
the fort, killing twenty-one and wounding nine others who were after¬ 
wards slain* ,f That night the whites involved in the massacre danced 
a regular Indian scalp dance, waving the scalps of their victims •” (15) 

15. Bradley, Lt* James H., Journal,' Contributions, v* Montana 

Historical Society, 

The traders spent a miserable few weeks cooped up in their fort follow¬ 
ing this episode, not daring to step outside the stockade, and as 
soon as the ice went out of the river they slipped down quietly to 
a new post at the mouth of the Judith variously known as Fort F* A* 

C. (for F. A. Chardon) or Fort Chardon. Fort McKenzie was burned by 
the Indians, and henceforth was known as Fort Brule* Culbertson was 
immediately recalled to make peace with the Indians, and Harvey was 
dismissed from the American Fur Company for his actions. H© built 
a rival post. Fort Campbell, near Culbertson’s new fort and did a 
thriving business until the American Fur Company bought him out 
in 1852. (16) 

16* RP CentT ~~ ' ’. "" r ' ‘ ' — - 

During his second term on the upper Missouri, Culbertson 
was the founder of Fort Benton, a post that was to serve as the 
distribution centre for southern Alberta for forty years. Abandoning 







^ ; 












■j 


! 




.•••> y 


.. ! ' 


pit- i m 








29 


Fort F. A* C., he established Fort Lewis, sometimes called Fort 
Cotton, in 1843, but this post was poorly located on the wrong side 
of the river and too far from the popular Teton camping grounds of 
the Indians, so he listened to their entreaties and moved the fort 
log by log down river about five miles to the present site of Fort 
Benton in 1846. At first called by the old name, the post was re¬ 
christened Fort Benton by Culbertson on Christmas Eve, 1850. The name 
was chosen in honor of Senator Thomas H. Benton, who had been instru¬ 
mental in saving the trading license of the American Fur Company when 
it had become involved in illegal liquor activity. This tiny outpost 
of civilization, situated on the west side of the Missouri River about 
3575 miles from its mouth, was destined to become the hub of a great 
trading empire which would extend over all of northern Montana and 
southern Alberta. Culbertson began to rebuild the fort of adobe in 
1850, a job which required ten years to complete. The enclosing wall 
was 250 feet square, made of bricks 4 x 8 x 16 inches, placed end to 
end to make a wall 32 inches thick. There was no stockade, but two 
bastions ‘were placed at diagonally opposite corners in such a manner 
as to give protection to all four walls. The buildings, also of 
adobe, faced the centre of the enclosure with the wall of the fort 
making the rear wall of each building. A large wooden gate faced 
the river, with a small postern gate within it for convenience. The 
usual garrison of the trading post consisted of a governor, clerk, 
interpreter, carpenter, blacksmith, cook, one or two hunters, and 
some three score laborers. The latter were ordinarily employed in 





■:: > t;' :■ - < ‘ 

* 


, 




1 ■ 










■ 




. 


* 

■ 

. 

* 

. 

t ' « - t 

. 


block 


SOf^o^s- 

5 

JSOOH 

ayoj.5 




Ui 

U1 


io ; 

o 

^ < 

K 

0 

tf} 

X 


zg 

5h 

e-Z 

tu r. 

o m |“ 

^ h 

O od 

c£ r o 

CD CjL, 


w 

\ 


■BSnoH e>-*o^s ->Of 

JpOS*1 

3SOOH 

5>01 i 




fl^era^s Thickness of W'a.Hs 57 incites, 
Vails of 8ld$s. /4- f± high. 

WaHs of 3lock Houses 2d ft. h\<sk. 





























so. 


making adobe bricks and in cutting wood for fuel, but in emergency 
could be armed for the defence of the post. (17) The year following 
17. Bell, op. cit. ~ ~~ ' — — 

the re-naming of the post, Culbertson made a trip from Fort Union to 
Fort Benton by wagon, and this wagon was said to be the first wheeled 
vehicle to enter the country now known as northern Montana, a fore¬ 
runner of the great freighting trains of the future. (IB) 

Is; RP Cents also" Bell, op# cit* " ~ 

Fort Benton was established for the purpose of the rob© 
trade with the Indians, and from its opening day it was one of the 
most profitable of the company’s posts* The average annual robe trade 
from the inception of the fort until the American Fur Company sold 
its holdings in 1865 was 20,000* This seemed large until the whole¬ 
sale slaughter of the buffalo began in the middle seventies* The 
shipments for the next few years were enormouss in 1875, about 
60,QGQj in 1876, 71,900j in 1877, 50,500, then a rapidly dwindling 
figure to 1882, the last year that robes played an important part 
in the trade. (19) 

19, RP Cent* ~~~ -- - — — - — • 

The town flourished, and as civilisation advanced the great 
companies withdrew from the scene to be replaced by private business* 
Culture, in the form of a Protestant missionary. Reverend Elkanah 
Mackey, arrived at Fort Benton in 1856, but the attempt to found 
a mission failed. (20) Matthew Carroll and Georg© Steell left the 

20. Contributions, Montana "Historical Society, v* 10, 1940. “ ~~ 


















Original Sketches of Old Fort Benton made by the war department in 1869. 
























31 


employ of the American Fur Company and set up the first independent 
business in Fort Benton in 1864* I* G, Baker then became chief clerk 
for the company, but he also began an independent business when the 
American Fur Company sold its holdings in 1865 to the Northwest Fur 
Company, owned by Hubbel, Hawley and Smith# T. C« Power and Brother 
(21) established their first store in 1867, and along with Carroll, 

21# NOTE: In an interview with C© B. Power, son of T. C. Power, 

August 28, 1948, in Helena, he said that to his knowledge 
the old business records of the firm of T# C# Power and 
Bro© are not extant# 

Steell and Baker became the pioneer merchants of Fort Benton# Thomas 

C. Power landed from Dakota, June 14, 1867, with a small stock of 

trade goods purchased on credit, and from this inauspicious beginning 

built one of the greatest of the early mercantile businesses in 

the Montana area. He was later to become the first United States 

Senator from the new State of Montana. (22) The Gonrad brothers 

22# Bowen, A# W», Progressive Men of Montana, Chicago, 1900. 

bought shares in the Baker Company in 1874# Murphy, Neel and Company 
took over the bankrupt Carroll-Steell partnership in 1876, to become 
eventually one of the biggest of the freighting outfits, with over 
one hundred wagons on their lines and fifty men on the regular 
payroll. (23) 

23, RP Cent. ..~ ~. ~~ 

When the Territory of Montana was created. May 26, 1864, 
Fort Benton held practically all the white population of Chouteau 
County, with about two hundred eligible voters for the first terri¬ 
torial elections which were held October 24. The first census at 












0 







o 




Photo by courtesy of Pioneer Mercantile Company 










32® 

Fort Benton in 1870 reveals the following statistics: dwellings, 

145; families, 115; white males, 272; white females, 13; colored 
males, 12; colored females, 6; Indian females, 14; halfbreed males, 

36; halfbreed females, 62; Chinese males, 3; quarterbreed males, 12; 
quarterbreed females, 3* It is of interest to note the information 
concerning the business leaders of that year. I. G. Baker, aged 50, 
had property worth $30,000; George Baker, aged 40, $15,000; T. C. 
Power, aged 31, $51,000; and Matt Carroll, aged 35, $27,000. The 
data concerning country of origin reveal that 39 of the population 
came from Canada, plus one from Nova Scotia. (24) 

IT. NOTE: The man from Nova Scotia must have been either ignorant of 

the Confederation of Canada three years before, or too 
staunch a Nova Scotian to be classified as a Canadian. 

Progress in Fort Benton was rapid and continuous® The 

first newspaper was the Benton Record, established in 1875 by John 

J. Healy (25) and W. H. Buck. Benton was incorporated as a city in 

NOTE: Healy seems to have been a very versatilV'maai, with his ’ 

hand in every enterprise that appeared—whisky trader, 
freighter, sheriff, ferryman, and newspaper publisher. 

Not all his ventures were successful, and the newspaper 
was one that failed,,/the press being sold at sheriff*s 
gale in 1885 for $1400. 

1883, with W® G. Conrad as the first mayor. The saying that all 

trails led out of Fort Benton wag nearly true between 1860 and 1880. 

One could meet almost anywhere in the Northwest people who had been to 

Fort Benton, and if bull trains came into the picture, they were more 

than likely from Fort Benton, the head of navigation on the Missouri. 

It was said that in the gold rush days sixty per cent of all freight 

coming into Montana came to Benton* Fort Benton was at the anchor 















k 






t 




cVi 


4 







. 





















33 


end of the Whoop-up Trail, and the traffic on that trail alone made 
the post hum with activity in the seventies and eighties. 

The steamboat history of the upper Missouri goes back to 
1832, but it was not until 1860 that Pierre Chouteau and Captain 
John LaBarge reached Fort Benton in the '‘Chippewa” and established 
that point as the head of navigation* In the years that followed, 
Benton became a great trading centre, with the wharves and levees 
piled high with trade goods in the summer months when the river was 
navigable* The freighters toiled night and day to move the mountains 
of goods, and made fortunes over night. Between 1860 and 1866 the 
steamboat arrivals were few, the only traffic being provided by 
traders bringing supplies up river and shipping robes and furs down, 
but with the start of the gold rush to Montana the river trade 
flourished. The. number of steamboat arrivals at Fort Benton in the 
following years was as follows: 1866-31, 1867-40, 1868-36, 1869-42, 
1870-8, 1871-11, 1872-13, 1873-7, 1874-7, 1875-13, 1876-22, 1877-33, 
1878-60, 1879-49, 1880-21, 1881-36, 1882-49, 1883-14, 1884-15, 1885- 
15, 1886-15, 1887-21, 1888-4, 1889-2, 1890-1* (26) 

26* Contributions, Montana Historical" Society, v* 1 and 3. 

In the period between 1860 and 1890 there were about 
six hundred landings made at Fort Benton, with over 150 boats 
participating in the traffic at various times. Most of the trips 
were made by relatively few boats—the Helena, the Josephine, the 
Benton, the Rosebud, the Far West, the Red Cloud, and the Deer Lodge* 
There were four large steamboat lines, the Baker, the Power Block P, 






t 




4 


V / *"1 ■) 


t t 








t 






'I /■, 



34 


the Peck, and the Coulson, in addition to a number of independents. 
The Red Cloud, the mainstay of the Baker line, was a favorite boat 
because of her speed, and it was this boat that the Mounted Police 
used in 1877 when a contingent cam© to western Canada via St. Paul, 
Bismarck, and the Missouri to Fort Benton. Freight rates varied from 
a high of 27 cents a pound in 1863 when boats were few, down to 12J 
cents a pound in the gold rush days when competition was fierce, for 
the trip from St. Louis to Fort Benton. (27) In the four years of 
27. Contributions, Montana Historical Society, v. 10 . 
the gold rush between 1866 and 1869, the boats were estimated to have 
carried over 10,000 miners to Benton. 

Fortunes were made by the boats and the men who operated 
them. The n Peter Balen" brought up on© cargo of 400 tons at 12j| 
cents a pound, end the "Ida Stockdale", which was valued at $ 20 , 000 , 
netted $42,500 for a single trip. The total freight and passenger 
charges in 1867 amounted to approximately $ 3 , 000 , 000 . One pilot. 
Captain Bill Massie, received a wage of $7500 for making one round 
trip from St. Louis to Fort Benton, but it was "easy come, easy go" 
in those days, end he lost every cent of it in one evening’s 
gambling in St. Louis. He flipped the last dime to decide whether 
he should buy a drink or a sandwich and coffee, and the dim© rolled 
down a crack in th© floor. 

General Thomas F. Meagher spent his last night in Fort 
Benton. IfHhile acting as Governor of Montana, he came to Fort Benton, 
July 1, 1867, and was a dinner guest of I. G. Baker. After dinner 







U ' 


























■: 




C 












' 


\L ! • \> 








-1 ! 












) ■ s " on : 










I 


" ’ ":j "i ' ■ >: : s.' ■ : 

;. i ,; v ,.:. ■ ;.,> / 



t 'i : 7. /• • ’ • • ’ 


j. 0 J )7.i.r -i 




35 


he boarded the steamboat ”G. A. Thompson”, and about ten o’clock 
in the evening fell overboard and drowned. (28) ”So closed the life 

28. MOTS: keagher"*s~Morrtaiia career lasted only two years. Abo?e 

is the "official” account of his death. His body was 
never recovered from the shallow waters of the Missouri, 
despite an offered reward of $10,000. Ugly rumors 
persisted that the Vigilantes had murdered him as a 
"Roman Catholic Dictator.” 

of one of the most picturesque characters in Montana’s,and the 

world’s, history. In his youth, Meagher, an Irish rebel, was 

sentenced to be hanged, drawn and quartered. This sentence was 

changed to exile to Tasmania; Meagher escaped, came to this country, 

fought in the Civil War, then came to Montana." (29) 

29“.“ RP" C~ent". "" ™- 

Risks were great on the river, and insurance rates were 
high, premiums running from 15 to 20 per cent of the value of the 
boat and the cargo. The loss of the Red Cloud in 1882 practically 
marked the end of the Baker line. 

An examination of the list of steamboat arrivals shows a 
considerable recession in the river trade in the five years following 
1870. This depression was the result of the ending of the gold rush. 
The languishing trade was revived by the coming of the Mounted Police 
to western Canada, and the influx of ranchers and settlers again 
caused a boom period for the river port. The Canadian business 
from 1875 to 1883 made up about twenty per cent of the total freight 
through Benton. In 1877, for example, total freight shipped via 
Fort Benton was 5,673 tons, of which 1,025 tons was for the Canadian, 
Government. (30) Another depression in river trade is noted after 









, 1:1 


< 


-X 


V. 


, / 







r 



. t •) 


.... * , ' . : ■ ' ; 

t ■ t ' t ' 

) , " , • ■ : „ ' . ; 'X' ; • i i i . ■ ' . / « i 'I 







36 


50. Qverholser, op# cit. 

1883, the year that the Canadian Pacific Railway was extended into 
southern Alberta, marking the end of north-south freighting. When 
the American railways reached Montana, the boats did less and less 
business, as they could not compete with the speed and all-year 
efficiency of the railroads. The last commercial trip up the 
Missouri was made in 1890. 

The gold rush was a short-lived but important phase in 
the opening of the Montana region. Prospectors began to find gold 
in the gulches of northern Montana in the years following the middle 
of the century. Three men, John Owen, Samuel Caldwell, and Francois 
Finlay (better known as Benetsee), reported gold discoveries in 1852. 
Finlay reported his discovery to the Hudson*s Bay Company, which kept 
it secret, fearing injury to the fur trade. A "mountaineer”, John 
Silverthorne, traded gold at Fort Benton on October 1, 1854. Although 
Culbertson was not familiar with raw gold, he took Silverthorne * s 
word that the commodity was gold and traded him |1C00 worth of goods 
on his own account rather than risk funds of the American Fur Company. 
Culbertson did very well for himself on the trade, as he later sold 
the gold to the mint for fl525. James and Granville Stuart made 
important gold strikes in 1861. The gold rush followed the first 
really big discovery, at White’s Bar in Grasshopper Gulch, now 
Bannack, August 16, 1862. (51) 

3l« RP Cent. - “ 







Co 




’£ ■ 




t 


K: ; 


CUT- : * J 





* ) 


' 







■ ' ’ 




Ti 




' ' t ’ ' .! 

■ \. - ' ' ; ; 

■ 


'f -1 , 0 > j. ' ' „ v • *i • J.0 y\ C O . ( 0 o : ■■'£ > f . 

5 ’ i : ' '• ’ 

1 

» 













37 


The beginning of the gold rush marked the end of an era. 
Ho longer was there a thin trickle of white traders, but a steady 
flow of miners and settlers began to pour into the country. Over 
10,000 miners passed through Fort Benton, the head of navigation 
on the Missouri, in the late sixties, and the overflow spilled 
northward into Alberta* Numbers of Civil War veterans came west to 
find their fortunes, and the stage was set for the golden age of 
the Whoop-up Trail. 








«. t ' 

t t 

, • * 

. : • 

, 











38 


Chapter VI Infiltration of White Men in the Early Period 

Until Kenneth McKenzie was successful in establishing the 
American Fur Company on the upper Missouri, the Hudson*s Bay Company 
secured practically all the Blackfoot trade through its posts at 
Fort Edmonton and Rocky Mountain House. The two great Canadian 
companies, the Hudson’s Bay Company and the North West Company, were 
amalgamated in 1821 under the name of the former, and all local 
competition ceased. The Peigan, living nearest to the mountains, 
were the only tribe of the Confederacy that had furs of any value. 
Following the penetration of American traders up the Missouri, some 
of the Peigan trade began to move southward, and the Hudson*s Bay 
Company bestirred itself to retain it. 

To this end, an expedition, probably under the leadership 
of J. J. Bird, Jr., (l) was sent into southern Alberta and Montana, 

1. Letter^ J. Rowand t© J. Hargrove, Jen. li, 1834, Hargrove 

Correspondence, Champlain Society $24, 1938, p. 134. 

NOTE 5 James J. Bird Jr., better known as Jimmy Jock Bird, 
was the son of the Hudson’s Bay Company factor, James 
Bird, and an Indian mother. H© had a long and eventful 
life. He was with Pierr© C. Pambrun in 1816 at the time 
of the attack on the Selkirk Settlement. He was at Fort 
Union, in 1832. Maximilian of Wied mentions him, and 
speaks of him as a treacherous, dangerous, halfbreed who 
had worked for both the American Fur Company and the 
Hudson’s Bay Company and cheated both. He served as 
interpreter for both Rev. R. T. Rundle and Fr. P. de Smet, 
and both speak of his surly behaviour. The artist Paul 
Kane found Jimmy Jock Bird a hospitable host in charge of 
Rocky Mountain House in 1848. He was recommended to Isaac 
I. Stevens as an interpreter for his Indian treaty negoti- 
ations in 1853-5. At that time he was spoken of as a 
respectable and intelligent elderly man and the best inter¬ 
preter in the country. He spoke seven languages fluently-* 
English, French, Blackfoot, Cree, Grog Ventre, Stony, and 








I 


* 



J ■ 





39 


Sarcee* Th© police owed much to him in their negotiations 
of Treaty 7 with the Blackfoot, as Jerry Potts could not 
understand the manner of speech of Governor laird, and the 
negotiations would never have been completed had not another 
interpreter in the person of Jimmy Jock been found on the 
spot* Although he lived among the Indians the greater part 
of his life, his grandson, Thomas J. Bird of Browning, 
Montana, had acquired an English accent from association 
with him which he kept until he went to school at Fort Shaw* 
W* H* Cox, ex-member of the N* W* M* P., in his Diary for 
1889 records: ”James Bird, known as Jimmy Jock in the north 
country, came to the Peigan and stayed all winter* We were 
told to give him rations and treat him well as he had been 
of some use to the government in the making of treaty with 
the Blackfoot* He was very old and blind* His wife, an 
old Cree woman, used to drive around from one reserve to 
another all over the country, even to Montana, with a Red 
River cart, th© old man sitting in the back, the old 
woman driving* He asked me if I would always put a piece 
of liver in his pack as it was good for his complaint* He 
said, ’The old wife used t© chew my food for me, but her 
teeth is no good now* A friend of mine in Prince Albert 
mad© me a present of a food chopper and I find it very 
convenient* * This old man had lived with the Indians sine© 
his boyhood and could speak all the Indian tongues* w 
Jimmy Jock lived in Alberta until th© summer of 1891 when 
he returned to the Blackfoot reserve in Montana, hoping 
to get a grant of money for services he had rendered the 
American government as interpreter* He died December 11, 
1892, at the age of 107 according to the mission records* 
(Data from Montana Historical Society, Helena) 

with the purpose of establishing new posts on the South Saskatchewan 

and of persuading the Peigan to bring all their furs to th© Hudson’s 

Bay Company* A sub-expedition under John Edward Harriott followed 

the Old Horth Trail as far south as the Marias River. The Hudson’s 

Bay Company did not have the trouble with the Blackfoot that the 

American trading companies were having, but they abandoned the project 

of establishing southern posts as long as the Confederacy was 

unfriendly to whites* They built only one post at this time, the 

second Saleesh House on Clark’s Fork, near the present Eddy* 

























■ r .h ’ x 













). 


. 


.. 


40 


In 1831-32 Henry Fisher journeyed to the Peigan to try to 
persuade them to come to Rocky Mountain House to trade* 

When these attempts failed in their object, the Hudson’s 
Bay Company decided in 1832 to establish a new post near the 49th 
Parallel to replace Rocky Mountain House which they closed in that 
year* The new fort was located on the Bow River, 210 trail miles 
from Fort Edmonton, Latitude H. 51° 9*, Longitude W* 155° 4’ 22”• 

This fort, generally called Old Bow Fort because of its situation on 
the Bow, is undoubtedly the seme as the Peigan Post of the company 
records* The dates and the personnel coincide, arid such a location 
as f, n©ar the 4Sth Parallel” is very vague when no survey had yet 
been made* The new post ms placed under the command of John E« 
Harriott, the trader of the Marias expedition ten years earlier, a 
man regarded by the company as on© most likely to win back the Peigan 
trade from the American Fur Company* Associated with Harriott were 
Colin Fraser, Hugh Munro, Donald McDonald, and Jimmy Jock Bird* 

Harriott very early foresaw the failure of the project and abandoned 
Peigan Post in 1834, returning to Rocky Mountain House, as that was 
a better centre for the Blood trad©* (2) 

2* Mac lead, J* E* A*, Peigan Post and the Blackfoot Trade, r "5anadian ~~" 

Historical Review, XXIV, 1943, pp. 273-279 and 
Macleod, J* E* A*, Old Bow Fort, Canadian Historical Review, XII, 
1931, pp* 407-411, 

The Hudson’s Bay Company made no further attempts to establish 
posts in the southwest until after the police cam© in 1874* Alexander 
Culbertson is credited in American works with having negotiated a 












, -■ ' 




■ 


r , o 


% 


t. 





41 * 


"gentlemen’s agreement" between the American Fur Company and the 
Hudson’s 3ay Company in 1833 by which they were to refrain from direct 
competition with each other. (3) While there is no Canadian reference 


5* River Press, Centennial 

to such an agreement, this may be the explanation of the apparent 
indifference of the Hudson’s Bay Company to the Blackfoot trade, 
which poured southward for the next forty years* Another possible 
explanation is that the United States Government made overtures to 
the British Government in 1832 to induce them to help stop the liquor 
traffic. While the British Government apparently took no direct 
action, they may have asked the Hudson’s Bay Company to stay away from 
the border country, and this would account for the apparent lack of 
competition between the American and British companies on the upper 
Missouri. (4) 

4, NOTE: After the police" came, the Hudson’s Bay Company moVed~"into — " 

southern Alberta, and became the bitter rival ©f the 
American traders who succeeded the American Fur Coxapany, 
especially the I. G. Baker Coxapany* The Saskatchewan 
Herald, Battleford, August 25, 1878, reports a price war 
between these two companies at the Sounding Lake Treaty 
with Big Bear. So severe was the competition that all 
independent traders were forced to pack up as they could 
make no profit. A comparison of some prices at Battleford 
and on the Treaty ground is given % 3 point blankets, $8 
and #5| tea, 75^ and 5Q^j Winchester rifle, $75 and $50j 
cloth, $2.50 and $l 9 25g tobacco, $1 and 80/. 


Missionaries began to com® into Montana and Alberta before 
the middle of the century. Reverend Robert T. Rundle came t© Alberta 
about 1840, the first Protestant missionary. Father Pierre de Smet 
travelled widely in both Alberta and Montana. He entered what is 








, 

















t 


0 


‘if- ' 














, 






! 




> ' t ■ 








42 


now western Canada on August 18, 1845, and remained until May 28, 

1846• Most of this time was spent in Alberta, his travels covering 
about 1125 miles and taking him as far north as Fort Edmonton and 
Rocky Mountain House. For a time he was guided by Jimmy Jock Bird, 
but the latter deserted him during the winter. (5) 

5. Me Guinness, Rev. k. J., Missionary Journey of Father Peter tie 

Smet, S. J., Canadian Catholic Historical Association 
Report, 1941-2, 

Probably the first whit© child born in what is now southern 
Alberta was Louis Watson, who clamed that h© was born in 1847 on 
the island which became the site of the first Fort Macleod. His 
father was English and his mother French. They had camped on the 
island for several weeks at th© time of his birth, enroute from Red 
River to the fobaoc© Plains. (6) He told the following story to a 

6. NOTE? Tobacco Plains is an area""about sixty miles long by twenty 

miles wide, lying east of th© Kootenai River on both sides 
of the International Boundary. It lies east of Eureka, 
Montana. 


reporter in the 1920®ss 

”My earliest recollections are of vast herds of buffalo, 
elk, deer and antelope roaming over the country. There 
were terrible Indian wars in those early days and our lives 
were in constant danger. We lived among the Indians and 
halfbreeds subsisting on buffalo meat chiefly. For butter 
we used to grind up the buffalo bones, boil them until the 
grease cam© to the top. We would skim this grease and 
place it in a buffalo®s bladder and us© it for butter, 
and it was mighty good. We used to ©at a great deal of 
pemmican, also. This is buffalo meat ground very fine and 
dried. W© used to pound it with rocks and axes. We 
raised a sort of barley which we ground between rocks. 

This barley flour mad© a sort of black bread which w© 
washed down with water, th© hulls sticking in our throats. 





















1 





■ 

: l 

* V>T 

1 ■ v..; ; V. \..f 

" 

. 

r . ; 

, 

* 

' 

- 










Dates and directions not shown 
on routes passed over several 
times. 


From Paul Burgoldt, in 
H. M. Chittenden’s 
Fr. De Smet’s Travels. 













43 . 


I remember the coming of the first white traders from 
Montana. They brought with them some old flintlock guns 
which we secured in exchange for furs. Fred Kanouse was 
among the first traders I have any recollection of. I 
also remember the coming of the early Hudson’s Bay Company 
traders....I was in Macleod when Colonel Macleod and the 
police came in 1874. That marked the beginning of a new 
period in the history of the country....” (7) 

7. Lethbridge Herald, Macleod 75th Anniversary Edition/ p. 39. 

Lieutenants H. J* War re and M. Vavasour were sent westward 
from Canada in 1845 by the British Government, to explore and report 
on the defensibility of the area in the ©vent that war should ensue 
between the United States and Great Britain over the Oregon boundary. 
The overland journey was made t© the Columbia from the Red River 
Settlement by way of White Man Pass. They reported that a small body 
of cavalry supported by locally raised halfbreed regiments would be 
suitable and adequate for the defence of the area. (8) Fortunately, 

8. Morton, op. cit. p. 808. ~ ~ ~~ 

war was avoided, but military necessity made both Great Britain and 
Canada aware of the need for unity of, and for a transportation link 
between, the eastern and western colonies of British North America, 

The British government further exhibited an active interest 
in the region by sending the Palliser expedition to explore it. 

Captain Palliser and Dr. James Hector made journeys in the region 
between Fort Edmonton and the boundary and between the Cypress Hills 
and the Rocky Mountains between 1857 and 1860. Lieutenant Blackiston, 
R. A., a member of the expedition, was probably the first white man 
to see the Waterton Lakes, which were to become a part of a great 






























->ii j 




. 


r 


o. ■. 1 ' 




■ ■ 


t. 



Vi I. 
















■ 









: 1 00 : 




i \) "x 









44 


international playground, Palliser reported to the British Govern¬ 
ment that the south portion was an arid desert unfit for agriculture, 
and recommended that it should be left to the Indians* 

From the time of the discovery of White * s Bar, there was 
considerable activity between northern Montana and southern Alberta, 
with prospectors in increasing numbers moving northward to new 
streams in search of gold* In 1862 a party mad© up of Matt Carroll, 
J* M. Arnoux, J. M* Brown., Dr* Atkinson, Paul Longtime, E. Bostwick, 
Ed Williamson, D. Carafel, G. Magnum, J. Munro, end one other whose 
name has been lost set out on the Old llorth Trail and prospected 
every stream from the Marias to a point some twenty-five miles south 
of Fort Edmonton* They reported color on ©very stream, but made no 
discovery of amounts profitable for placer mining. (9) As Matt 
9 * Frad cit * " ~~~ -- ~ 

Carroll at this time was one of the chief traders of the American 
Fur Company at Fort Benton, this expedition would seem to indicate 
that that trading company was ©.etively interested in gold* J* J* 
Healy, who was to become one of the most prominent of the whisky 
traders, first came to Fort Benton and made his first trip thence to 
the Milk River in the fall of 1862* (1G) A large prospecting party 

10, Adney, E # T., John Jerome Healy, ^Conversation and 'roary^’tps*, ™ 

Montana Memorial Library, Helena, 

of about forty started from Montana along the foot of the Rockies 
from Sun River to the Bow in 1864, where they split into two groups, 
one moving north, the other south* Craig reports that this party 















t 


r • 
























% 


it 




«. • «. 




t • * * 












■ t 








45 . 


TOS responsible for the naming of Pincher Creek, as a pair of pliers 

lost on one creek originated the name, (ll) G. W. Houk, well-knonvn 

11. Craig, John R.^ Renching^with Lords and Commons, Briggs, 

Toronto , 1908. _ _ _——-— -—- 

southern Alberta "squaw-man" who helped build Fort Whoop-up in 1869, 

first entered Alberta in 1864, prospecting along the base of the 

mountains as far as Fort Edmonton, where he re-outfitted from the 

Hudson's Bay Company and continued to Peace River, whence he returned 

along the Old Worth Trail. He also was said to have lost the pair 

of pincers which gave Pincher Creek its name. (12) These two parties 

71 -- 

could have been, and. probably were, the same. Mrs. C. Lyneh-Staunton 
records! "...1868 a party of prospectors including G. W. Hank (sic), 
Joe Healy or Kipp, Bed (sic) Rock Jim, Mart Holloway, John Nelson, 
and Old Man Lee lost a pair of pincers....In 1874 found by a party 


IfTlfS^taunton, Mrs. 0., history of the Early i»ays of Pincher 

Creek, Herald Printing Co., Lethbridge, n. d., p. 84. 
Mrs. Lynch-Staunton is probably in error regarding the 
date. “g. W. Hank is likely a mis-print for G. ffl. Houk, 
and Bed Rock Jim is Red Rock Jim. 


One of the best organized of tlie prospecting expeditions 


was the McClellan expedition of 1868. With twenty-five men and 
J. J. Healy as guide, McClellan left the Sun River Crossing on 
May 17 to explore and prospect the headwaters of the Bow River, 
thought to be 200 miles north and about forty males within British 
America. A report in mid-July that McClellan had found gold 






















or 







46 


resulted in the party 1 s being joined by another group of fourteen 
men* The expedition returned to Helena on August 8, and gave details 
of their exploration* From the Teton River they had gone 15 miles 
to Birch Creek, thence 20 miles to the Marias, 25 miles to the north 
fork of the Marias, 35 miles to the Milk River, 25 miles to the 
divide separating the headwaters of the Missouri and Saskatchewan 
Rivers and 30 miles to the headwaters of the Belly River* Here they 
discovered a seam, of coal of considerable extent and about twelve 
feet thick. They explored up one branch of the Belly about 90 miles, 
coming upon a ”falls in three steps” and going beyond for some 
distance. They continued another 40 miles north to a stream which 
the Indians called the ”River the Old Man Played on” (the Oldman), 
and thence north to another stream. On their return journey they 
reached the Bow River on July 10 at a point where it was about the 
size of the Missouri at Fort Benton. They explored up this a distance 
of 70 miles, where they met Stoney Indians who informed them that 
there were no supplies at the Hudson’s Bay Company’s post at Fort 
Edmonton so they turned back. They reported that they met John 
Wren’s wintering party for Elk River, forty miles north of the Bow* 
(14) 

14* Montana Post, Helena," May 22, 1868 j July "24V 18687" August 147"'1868 

Julius F. Morley reports a prospecting trip in 1873 from 
Sun, River north to the north fork of the Oldman,. He recorded that 
he paid a visit to J* J. Healy at Fort Whoop-up. (15) 

15* Morley, Julius F., Account of a prospecting trip north. Mss., 

Montana Memorial Library, Helena. 










/ 

„ 

^ • • t 

■ ■ , 


' : ' •' ' : ' ' 

;• . . ! - V ■. i ’ ' 


. 


. 




• ; • /' vl - ' • 

* 

> 




v » n- 






r - ».- lo [v . ' f • 

t. 








:w (■ »J' : ’ ' 






■ 

• t 

■ . 


• J. '• J Ii 

" r 


•1 '' . < 'i 








* 

-* i0 - ** ' • 

a 




t* * 












47 


The part which Fort Benton was to play in the Canadian 
North West Rebellion of 1885 may be briefly noted here* When the 
Canadian halfbreeds came in search of Louis Riel in 1884, they 
followed the well-beaten trail to Fort Benton* Here the leaders 
assembled and discussed their plans before going north in 1885, and 
here at least two of them, Gabriel Dumont and Michael Dumais, returned 
in June, the rebellion having been quelled* (16) 

16* River Press, Fort kenton, June - 10, 1885." 





„ 


' “ " 

r , / : ' ■ ' .■ ■ ■ ' 

• * ' 

t . ' , .v : ' 













48 


Chapter VII The Whisky Traders: Fort Whoop-up 

There are at least two generally recognized reasons for the 
movement of the liquor and fur traffic northward from Montana to 
Alberta in the late sixties. The discovery of gold in Montana had 
resulted in unrest among the Indians. The Blackfoot tribes were 
driven north of the Marias River, where they stayed, and the traders 
naturally followed them. Numbers of young men came west following 
the Civil War, no doubt with the same restlessness that marks every 
generation following a major conflict. A new York manufacturer had 
discovered that buffalo hides not only made excellent coats and robes, 
but also could b© tanned into a very tough and durable leather suitable 
for industrial machinery belts, so the demand for them was insatiable. 
Therefore, the Montana traders, including these young veterans seeking 
adventure, pushed more deeply into the buffalo and Indian country. 

A third reason is found in the fact that the United States Government 
at this time undertook to enforce the law they had enacted in 1832 
forbidding the sale of intoxicants to the .Indians* A number of free 
traders conceived the idea of evading the liquor laws arid maintaining 
their lucrative liquor trade by moving across the International 
Boundary into Canada, intending to establish bases on Canadian soil 
from which they could operate smuggling rings into Montana. However, 
the Canadian Indians offered just as profitable targets for exploita- 
tion as the American redmen, s© the traders took advantage of them 
and remained here. Their trade goods, of course, still had to be 
imported from bases on the Missouri. 












. 

n ■. 

• " 

l ■ *■■■ 

- 

. 

. 

t ' : 

t 



. ; ' ■ < ■ ■ t 

» - «■ 1 

l .?• : ’ .v J.'lJ •) • c ' o'O.O! U <t.f X bl L 1 1; "'■> ■ 

• r , s ' • '•<> 1 j ' ■■■ : 1 


r .v, - 





t ; . . • ■ : 


* ■ 


i 

• 

• f ■,.} v, • H;>i. ifw*i‘. * 

_ 



‘ < iJ ..! ' 'ft 


. 


:: v ■ > ' «, - v .* ' • 

n < • 

9 



49. 


Favorite locations for the establishment of trading posts 
in British America were near the Old North Trail, preferably at the 
junction of two rivers or streams so that two sides of the fort could 
be easily protected from attack by the water barrier. Among the 
forts that were in operation prior to the coming of the police in 
1874 were Fort Whoop-up at the junction of the St. Mary and the 
Oldman, Robber’s Roost at the junction of the Belly and the Oldman, 
Stand-off at the junction of the Kootenai (Waterton} and Belly, Fort 
Kipp or Weatherw&x 1 s post just south of Robber’s Roost, Fort Spitzee 
near the present High River, a post in the Cypress Hills, and a post 
near Blackfoot Crossing, (l) 


1. NOTE: Sources are considerably confused on the origin, dates, and 

personnel of some of the early whisky forts. This may be 
attributed chiefly to two causes which appear paradoxical. 
Some of the men concerned afterwards became respected and 
honored citizens and hesitated to have their background 
revealed. Such a man was D. W. Davis, Alberta’s first M. P#, 
of whom records before 1874 ar© scanty or meager. On© ex- 
member of the N. W. M. P. mumbled, rf Nothing but a d—n 
criminal” when questioned, but would not elaborate the 
statement. On the other hand, after some notorious events 
or exploits, several men claimed to have had a part in 
them, when actually they did not, probably hoping thereby 
to establish a better claim to being ”old-timers”. Such a 
men, was Henry Keiser, who claimed to be one of the men 
involved in the Cypress Massacre, although the records 
prove that he had nothing to do with it. 

The earliest, most elaborate, most notorious of the whisky 

forts was Fort Whoop-up, built in 1869 by J. J. Healy and A. B. 

Hamilton. They established their first post under the name of Fort 

Hamilton, but it soon became known by the more picturesque name of 

Fort Whoop-up. The original post consisted of eleven log huts 

















is 







% 











If 


.o i • y ■ 0 




50. 


arranged in the form of a semi-circle connected by a picket fence 
running in an arc from the St. Mary's to the Oldman. (2) This fort 

2. Higinbothsm, John D., ohen the"West ■was Young, Ryerson, Toronto, 

1955. pp. 187-190. 

did not long survive, as it was burned by the Indians, possibly the 
same year that it was built, but certainly not later than 1871. The 
second fort on the site was on a much more pretentious scale, and 
was intended to be permanent. A ship's carpenter, William Gladstone, 
placed in change of the construction with a crew of about thirty 
men, spent almost two years in bringing the plans to completion. (3) 

5. NOTE: W. S. Gladstone "was formerly'employed by "the Hudson's Bay 

Company, but had left them to trade on his own account. 

One of the men who worked for him at the building of 
Whoop-up was George W. Houk. 

The post was said to have cost f25,000. It was solidly built of 
squared logs in the form of a hollow square, complete with ramparts, 
loopholes, bastions at opposite comers, three wicket® for trading 
purposes, and a large gate to admit traders with loads of supplies. 
One bastion wag mounted with a two-inch muzzle-loading cannon, (4) 


4. NOTE? This cannon is now located in the north-east corner of 
Galt Gardens, Lethbridge, and bears a plaqxie inscribed 
as follows? ”History of the 2^ Smoothbore Muzzle loading 
gun presented to the City of Lethbridge by J. D. Elgin- 
botham, 1929— Cast by Horace A. Dimmick, St. Louis, Mo,, 
1846. Sold to the American Fur Co. wh© were succeeded by 
the Northwest Fur Co. Brought up the Missouri River and 
placed in the following forts? Brule, Cotton, Berth©!, 
and Benton. Thence conveyed in 1871 by J. J. Healy and 
A. B. Hamilton to Fort !hoop-up at the junction of the St. 
Mary and Belly Rivers. Purchased from Dave Akers in 1892 
by John D. Higinbotham. 'This was the first cannon brought 
into what is now Southern Alberta.'” There is probably 
some error here, as Fort 3rule (old Fort McKenzie) was 
destroyed in 1845, so either the gun was cast earlier than 



































































51 . 


the date given or was not used at Brul6. Fort Cotton is 
also known as Fort Lewis—the first site, above the later 
Fort Lewis which had its name changed to Fort Benton in 
1850. The 1871 date is interesting, in that it would bear 
out the fact that Fort 'Whoop-up was first built in 1869, 
the second fort being completed about two years later in 
1871. It is most likely that Healy and Hamilton would 
bring the gun as soon as the fort was completed. 

while the other contained an alarm bell, a mountain howitzer, and 

a well. (5) The buildings faced inward on three sides of the square. 


5 ♦ Higinbobham, loc. cit» 

with all doors and windows opening on the square. In the fourth side 

was the gate in a stockade. 

Colonel S. B. Steele thus described the forts 

"There were two walls about a dozen feet apart, built of 
heavy squared timbers braced across by heavy log partitions 
about the same distance from one another, dividing it into 
rooms which were used as dwellings, blacksmith shop and 
stores, the doors and windows opening into a square. There 
were bastions at the comers and the walls were loopholed 
for musketry. Iron bars were placed across the chimneys 
to prevent the Indians from getting in that way. There 
were heavy log roofs across the partitions and a strong 
gate of oak with a small opening to trade through. The 
trader stood at the wicket, a tub full of whisky beside 
him and when an Indian pushed a buffalo robe to him through 
the hole, he handed out a tin cup full of the poisonous 
concoction. A quart of the stuff bought a fine pony. 

When the spring came, wagon loads of the proceeds of the 
traffic were exported to Fort Benton in Montana, some 
200 miles south of the border line." (6) 

6. Steele, Colonel Sam B., cited in LH Mao. W1tou~~pT ToT 

The most substantial evidence points to the date 1869 for 
the building of Whoop-up, although several accounts place the date 
earlier. J. J. Healy himself in his letters to Adney (?) states 

t«, °p» cit. ~ - - —* ~ 












1 


' 

. ' ' r 




■ 




;0i.; 




52. 

that he w opened up Tflihoop-up in 1869” and later says that the fort 
was sometimes called Hamilton, which would forestall the argument 
that Healy was referring to the second post. The only road used north 
at that time was the Old North Trail, which crossed the Indian reserva¬ 
tion in Montana. The law forbade the bringing of liquor on the 
reservation, and the garrison at Fort Shaw was supposed to enforce 
the law, Healy’s point of departure for Canada was on the Sun River, 
not too far from Fort Shaw. In order to prevent the military over¬ 
taking him on the reserve with his load of liquor, he telegraphed to 
his partner, A. B. Hamilton, and gave him a direction different from 
the one he was taking, knowing full well that the message would be 
picked up by the Fort Shaw garrison. He thus caused the cavalry to 
be sent on a W wild goose chase n seventy-five miles out of the way and 
gave himself plenty of time to reach Canada* The telegraph line did 
not reach Fort Shaw until October or November, 1869, so it must have 
been at least as late as the fall of that year when Healy mad© this 
brip. Healy also gave as his reason for leaving the United States 
bhe fact that he, a loyal Democrat, had been annoyed by being forced 
bo contribute to the Republican campaign chest the amount of $500 the 
previous year. (8) 

~8. NOTEs 1868 was an election year in the" United States. 

Healy said that the day of the great fur companies had 
ended and the independent traders had taken over the field by this 
date. After 1867 T. C. Power and Brother and I. G* Baker and 
Company commanded the trad© at Fort Benton, and most of the little 






j 


}\> 








r 




t • » t 


t;cc> ;. > 




- i 









c. 




if r 5 '>'■').( .i;j' ;ofi f-itl (,{X flfM'htli 


‘ ; 







" " I. r:: <j ■ •. ■ - 


i ' ' 










53 


traders were financed by one or other of these concerns* Although 
Healy said that he bought from T* C* Power, it is quite likely that 
the Healy and Hamilton partnership was financed by I* G. Baker, as 
Hamilton 1 s mother was a sister of the latter* (9) 

6 * NOTE: Alfred B* Hamilton" was born in New Haven, OomiY, kept72, 

1839* His mother was Grace Baker Hamilton, a sister of 
I. G. Baker, a fact which probably accounted for Hamilton*s 
coming to Montana in 1863* The family connection would 
indicate that Hamilton worked for Baker* Hamilton died on 
the Blackfoot reservation in Montana in May, 1920, having 
spent most of his life as a trader among the Indians* 

There are several explanations of the name "Whoop-up, which 

was commonly applied to Fort Hamilton* According to one of them, 

a trader, Joe Wye, having returned to Fort Benton for additional 

supplies, was questioned by John Power (10) concerning the trad© 

lOV NdTEr~John~Power was the ^Brother** of T* 0* Fower^and Brother, 

across the line* He replied, ,f We*re just a-whoopin* it up , n and 
the name Whoop-up was thus coined and came into common usage* (11) 

LI* Higinbotham, loc* cit*; Kelly, op* ci't.'p* 90$ HP Cent* 

Another story relates that since the free traders were frowned 
upon by the regular companies, they would make their preparations 
in secret and leave Fort Benton at night, travelling up to fifty 
miles without a stop--they n whooped it up w for the border, thus the 
name. (12) Newspaper writers have speculated about the name (13) 

12* Brown, J. ¥., The Whoop-up* frail. Mss., Montana Historical * 

Library, Helena* NOTE: As Brown himself was actively 
engaged in the trade, he says that they moved out to avoid 
the regular companies* At that time the companies could 
have done nothing to stop them, and Brown and his confreres 
undoubtedly slipped out at night or in secret to avoid the 

soldiers from Fort Shaw, who were supposed to prevent them 
from carrying liquor onto the reservation* 










54 


13. LH Mac. 75 Ann. p. 13 states that the name originated because the 
Indians gave good fighting after getting drunk on cheap 
trade -whisky. Calgary Morning Albertan, Anniv., Feb. 28, 
1909, p. 1, says that the pest was called Whoop-up because 
Baker had warned his men not to let the Indians whoop-up, 
that is, round-up, the whites. 

and have come up with some novel suggestions, but probably the first 
explanation above is the true one, with the second an alternate. 

Blood Chief Joe Healy reminisces as follows about the days 
of Fort Whoop-up: 

W I was only a boy then, but I remember well the long wagon 
trains loaded high with goods and supplies. It was a two- 
week trip for us, and we passed through many dangers before 
we reached our destination....Our last stopping place was 
where the town of Raymond now is, and from there w© crossed 
fifteen miles of country to the spot where the famous Fort 
Whoop-up was erected. I remember, too, the erection of 
Fort Whoop-up. W. S. Gladstone was the head carpenter, and 
with his assistants he erected the first great trading 
fort of the Canadian West. There were erected a stockade, 
watch tower, loop holes, ramparts, and wide gates. The 
interior of the buildings were enclosed by large and heavy 
doors, while the storerooms, stables and living room of 
all the quarters were connected. By this plan the white 
men could remain within for days while the wild drunken 
Indians fought without. The exchange of furs and merchandise 
was dealt with only through the loop holes. In this wild 
atmosphere Fort Whoop-up prospered. The days of scalping 
were at their height, and the raids and threats of the 
savage Indians became a horror. The desperate natives 
would attempt continuous attacks on the traders. The liquor 
supply from the nigger gangs (who travelled the country) 
steadily grew, until one could even find the dead lying 
around uncovered. There was no law, justice or a demand 
for peace. Fort Whoop-up was the jolly home of the 
American desperadoes, the meeting place of the Indian 
tribes.••.Yet the Indians liked Fort Whoop-up. There was 
a lot of life there. The trading was interesting too, and 
for one split buffalo robe they got five dollars and for 
one head and tail robe they got twelve dollars. Of course 
the Indians did not get the money. They got supplies and 
merchandise as they desired. The red men seemed satisfied 
with this form of barter, and only when under the influence 
of liquor were they restless. I recall going back to Sun 
River for additional supplies, and on my return trip when 









55 


I reached a high hill about 10 miles from camp, the Fort 
T/Vhoop-up traders would fire a cannon* The same cannon is 
now in the Lethbridge Park* The volley from the cannon 
was a signal to the effect the new supplies were at hand* 
The first to come were the first served....! remember one 
day when I arrived at Rocky Springs how I found the bodies 
of three white men* They had not been dead long, and had 
been killed by the Assiniboine end stripped of even their 
clothes*•«.Probably the only reason the Assiniboine had 
for killing them**..The days at Fort Vi/hoop-up were at their 
best at the time of the Cree and Blackfoot Battle (1870).. 
..The Fort Whoop-up days were dangerous end uncertain. 

Every vice and crime was practiced there. The Indian camps 
were alight with dance and all forms of savage practice 
and crime. The White Traders in those days were mere 
gamblers and the Indians knew it. They violated the 
simplest principles of justice. The whole place was a den 
of revelry, well fitted for the name it went under...” (14) 

14. Healy Chief Jo©, cited by~ Noel"~St©wart, LH Gold Jub# p. 51. 

ITOTEs Chief Joe Healy of the Blood was a full-blooded 
Indian. His parents were killed by white men on Sun River, 
and the little fellow was taken by John Healy to be raised. 
He always retained the Healy name, probably given to him 
as a joke on Johnny Healy by the old-timers. H© spoke and 
understood English very well, and has sometimes been blamed 
for relaying news of the progress of the Rebellion of 1885 
to the Indians—he was around Macleod at the time, and 
would hear all the news that came to the police as he was 
a police scout. He died at St. Paul’s mission on the Blood 
Reserve in 1SS6. 


The traders brought with them into British America cheap 
trade goods, guns, pots, axes, ammunition, hatchets, sugar, flour, 
tea, salt, knives, tobacco, cloth, blankets, and whisky. Legitimate 
trade was profitable enough, but the whisky trade meant much wider 
margins of profit, so whisky became the chief commodity at the forts. 
Most of the Indians would take it diluted as long as it had some 
”kick ,f and was hot to the taste, so many weird concoctions passed 
for whisky in the Indian trade. The Blackfoot liked their whisky 
strong, and insisted that it must be potent enough to bum, hence 






56 


the term firewater. Some of the Indian whisky recipes were: 1 gallon 
of high wine to 3 gallons of water; 1 quart of alcohol, 1 pound of 
rank black chewing tobacco, 1 handful of red peppers, 1 bottle of 
Jamaica ginger, 1 quart black molasses, water ad libitum, mixed well 
and boiled until all the strength was drawn from the tobacco end 
peppers; 1 keg of alcohol. Perry 1 s Painkiller, Hostetter’s Bitters, 
red ink, castile soap. Blackstrap chewing tobacco, and water; alcohol, 
Florida water. Painkiller, tobacco, and blue stone. (15) There were 

15# Kelly, op*" cit. p. 221; Koch, Peter, Life on the Musselshell in 

1869-70, Contributions, Montana Historical Society, II, 
p. 298. 

instances of death recorded from drinking the final draft from the 
keg of some of these mixtures. (16) The Indians went wild under the 
16. Kelly, loc« cit. ~ “ ~~ 


influence of alcohol, so the traders led a dangerous existence— 
they made their trade, collected, and barricaded the fort until the 
party was over. 

Prices in the whisky trade were fairly stable—2 cups of 
whisky for an ordinary robe, 2 cups of whisky and a blanket for a 
silk robe (17), 4 gallons of whisky for a first grade buffalo pony, 

17. Burlingame, M. G», Buffalo in 'trade and Commerce, North Dakota 

Historical Quarterly, Vol. 3, Ho. 4, July, 1928, classifies 
the robes in order of value as follows: 

1. Vftiite, valued highly by the Indians for superstitious 

reasons. 

2. Blue, which had body color of a blue cast and long, fine 

silky hair--probably the "silk” robe. 

3. Beaver, the color of beaver with fine wavy hair. 

4. Black, or Black and Tan, fairly common. 

5. Buckskin, the most common light tan shade. 











' - • -x 


-- 

a 









57 


furs to the height of a gun to purchase the same, (18) 

i'6.' Williams, William James^ Diary, in possession of J* Williams, 

907-7th Ave. S., Lethbridge. William J. Williams came 
to Benton in 1868 and was employed as bookkeeper by T. C. 
Power. Cited in LH Gold Jub. p. 111. 

In general, the men who took part in the trade were young 
and adventurous. Many of them were the product of the Civil War in 
the United States, made restless by that struggle and seeking further 
adventure on the frontier. Bands of Negroes did much of the rum 
running for the white men—they had just obtained their freedom and 
did not knov/ how to use it. Some of the traders afterwards became 
H solid citizens”, and tried to close the pages of the past by leaving 
few or no records. (19) Such a man was D. W. Davis, who first came 

T9V nOTE: For example,'" A. B. Hamilton, D. W. Davis, I. G. Baker, 

T. C. Power, the Conrad brothers, and J. J. Healy. 

to Alberta in 1869 as chief trader at Fort Whoop-up for Healy and 
Hamilton. (20) He later became a legitimate trader and acted as 

20. NOTEs The fact that Davis was manager of Wkoop-up and later 

manager for I. G. Baker at M&eleod would be further evidence 
of a connection between I. G. Baker and Healy and Hamilton. 

manager for the I. G. Baker Company at Macleod from 1874 until 1890 

when that company sold its Canadian interests to the Hudson's Bay 

Company. He served two terms as M. P. for Alberta, 1887 to 1896. 

Another who rose to political prominence was A. B. Hamilton, who 

served in the Montana territorial legislature for two terms in 1870 

and in 1883. (21) Healy says of the men who worked for him: 

21. McDonnell, Mrs. Anne, Montana Historical Library, letter to the 

writer, August 51, 1949. 































C" 





















58 


"When the police reached Whoop-up they found no cut-throats 
or outlaws* Instead they found the best brand of prairie 
men that the world produced doing legitimate business 
scattered through the various posts* These men had taught 
•••(the Indians)••*to behave•»•(and).•«made the country 
safe." (22) 

22. Adney, op. cit. NOTE* Healy paints too pretty a picture. The 

trade became legitimate after the police appeared on the 
scene. Some of the men involved in the trade were criminals, 
and soon after the police came they were taken into custody 
or fled back across the line* 


The number of men involved in the whisky trade is hard to 
determine* The Hudson’s Bay Company reported to Ottawa that five 
hundred American desperadoes were demoralizing the Indians with 
whisky* (25) This number is probably high, although there were 

WTThi&7~ ~ —~~ ™——- 

several traders interested in the business and several partnerships 
and small companies were operating. Higinbotham says that Healy and 
Hamilton employed thirty-eight men* (24) If other leading traders 
&4* Eiglnbothcim, loe* cit*' . 

like Kipp, Thomas, Wetzel and Weatherw&x employed a similar number, 
there could have been over two hundred men engaged. 

Whether Healy and Hamilton sold Fort Whoop-up to Dave Akers 
©r merely left him in charge is not definitely established, but it 
was Akers whom the police found when they arrived at Whoop-up in 
1874* (25) 

25* Williams, loo* cit*' ----- - 

Fort Whoop-up was not only the chief whisky post in 
Canada, but as an outpost of Fort Benton it also served as a 












' 1 >' . V 

: ; r 






' 


* 

• r v. ■ ■ , 

■ 




■ V . .’X 


■ 






j i . 


■ ' ' ■./ i i •}' . H i\> f 




i . w ■ i''j 


■ v i'a i ‘id. "■/ > J a: -j-.T. 







59 


gathering place for all the traders* They found it safer to travel 
in groups, so the ro&d from Benton led first to Whoop-up, thence to 
the other posts* 

Among the better known of the other posts were Fort 
Stand-off, Fort Slide-out, Fort Kipp (Robber’s Roost), Fort Conrad, 
a post in the Cypress Hills, and a post at Blackfoot Crossing* Fort 
Stand-off was built in 1871 at the confluence of the Waterton and 
Belly Rivers by Joe Kipp (26) and Charles Thomas* The United States 

26* Joe Kipp was the son of James Kipp "of the - es,rlyMiasouri trade 

and his Indian wife, who was said to have been a very 
fierce Mandan squaw who would fight anything* 

was doing a more thorough job of checking on liquor sales to the 
Indians, and these traders, after leaving Helena with a large load 
of alcohol, were pursued by U* S. Marshall Charles D. Hard and a 
small body of cavalry* The Marshall caught the traders on Cut Bank 
River, but Kipp stood-off Hard by telling him that the creek marked 
the boundary line and that the Marshall should not cross. He 
presented his loaded Winchester as evidence, and this proved the 
soundest argument, as the Marshall retired. The traders then con¬ 
tinued northward about 120 miles to the sit© of their post, which 
they named Stand-off in memory of the occasion* These same traders 
later abandoned Fort Stand-off and built Fort Kipp, an unfortified 
post, at the junction of the Oldman and Belly Rivers. (2?) 

2?* HOTEj John R. Craig in his book. Ranching with Lords and Commons, 

gives a similar story but with different characters. He 
tells that it was a party under the leadership of John 
Wren, and claims to have had a list of the personnel of 
the party from Wren himself, which was as follows: John 

















1 











.. ' 










. . 

I ' 



. 












60 


Wren, Fred Wachter, Bill McClure, Lew Kaiser, Keller, 

Red Fitzpatrick, Liver Eating Johnson, Honas, and Bill 
Hart* Fred Wachter was operating the post in Craig*g 
day. 

Henry Keiser, perhaps the same as the Kaiser of 
Craig*s story, in his reminiscences published in the 
Billings Gazette, Dec., 1935, tells of being in the party 
with Wren which stood off the Marshall and later built 
Fort Stand-off. He gives a graphic description of the 
n stand-off”, but does not mention any altercation about 
having crossed the boundary. He also claimed to have been 
at the Cypress Hills Massacre, but his name does not appear 
in the list, so probably his account may be discounted. 

James W. Schultz, partner of Kipp for many years, 
gives the Kipp and Thomas version in his biography of Kipp. 

Other traders followed in the steps of Healy, Hamilton, 

Kipp and Thomas. Among these were Jim Devitt, Reid Buckland, Fred 

Wachter, and J. D, Weatherwax. Weatherwax built south of Fort Kipp 

in time to enjoy only one profitable season before the police came. 

He was one of the less fortunate, however, in that he lost his entire 

second year’s supply by confiscation in 1874. Healy and Hamilton, 

or their representative Akers, had been forewarned sufficiently to 

cache the liquor at Whoop-up, and Kipp and Thomas had not yet brought 

theirs into Canada. (28) 

26. Big Timber Pioneer, June 14, 1920, Big Timber," Montana. - 

In the half dozen years of the whisky trade prior to the 
coming of the police, southern Alberta was a M wide open”, lawless 
community. The traders knew no law which they could not back with 
their guns® They carried their lawless trade to the very gates of 
Fort Edmonton, although most of it was don© south of the Bow River* 
The Hudson*s Bay Company sent a formal complaint to Ottawa objecting 
to the invasion of their trading preserves by the American traders. 























. 






' > 














^ 1 A ■■ - 






■ * 


i j . 








61 


and Ottawa’s complaint to Washington resulted in an investigation at 
Benton* J* J* Healy represented the traders at this conference with 
Major William H* Lewis, who had been sent by Washington authorities 
to investigate* (29) 

29* Adney, op. citl NOTE: Lewis was stationed at Fort Shaw with the" 

7th U. S. Infantry. Mrs. A* MacDonnell of the Montana 
Historical Library says of this investigation: n Since 
many of the traders north of the line were very prominent 
and respected citigens of Montana, very little publicity 
would be given to such an investigation. I don’t believe 
the investigation would have been very thorough or 
followed through.” 


If Healy spoke to Lewis of the traders in the same way he wrote to 

Adney concerning the men in his employ, he no doubt was successful 

in stopping further investigation. 

Life was cheap, and the men who engaged in the trad© knew 

that any trip might be their last. More than fifty men lost their 

lives around Whoop-up, some at the very gates of the fort. The 

following brief epistle from one Skookum Jo© to a friend in Fort 

Benton will give some impression of the conditions that prevailed: 

w Bill Geary got to putting on airs and I shot him and 
he is dead. My potatoes are looking fine.” (30) 

30. LH Mao."Y5~Innr pY~l6. . " ~ ' ' " 

The desperate nature of the life is further demonstrated 
by the activities of the High River traders, a band generally known 
as the High River Wolfers or the Spitzee Cavalry. (31) These men 

31. NOTE: Spitzee was an Indian word for High Tfood, and referred to 

the tree growth along the Highwood or High River. Senator 
Riley always claimed that his homestead was on the site 
of old Fort Spitzee. Among the leaders of the Spitzee 
Cavalry wag Gabriel Dumont, one of Louie Riel’s lieutenants. 










* 

. » 

: - ■ • i 

- , . . * 

: 

. 

* _ ■ . r ' ' ■ ' - 

« 



* 


- 

, 

„ . , . 

•- - 

■ 


« 








62 


were organized to protect their own trade and to keep the territory 
for themselves. 

"They determined to call Healy’s activities to a halt, 
by armed force if necessary. Accordingly these traders, 
armed to the teeth rode down to ‘Whoop-up....They found 
Healy, who had been apprised of their coming and mission, 
with the fort gates wide open and Healy himself sitting 
behind the counter of his rough log store quietly smoking 
a large, black, well-lighted cigar. The intruders also 
noticed something else and this was that on the counter 
was a keg of gunpowder lying on its side with the head 
knocked off and its contents spilled over the counter. As 
the argument waxed hotter Healy rose to his feet, declaring 
that if the gang of traders did not immediately clear out 
of his store he would plunge his lighted cigar into the keg 
of gunpowder, ’blowing them all to Hell—himself going 
with them’....and the free traders, well knowing the 
desperate character of the man they were dealing with, 
rushed pell mail out of the store, leaving Healy master 
of the situation.” (82) 


82. Shepherd, op. cit. 

Healy himself gives a different version of the episode 
with the Spitgee Cavalry. H© said that they were a group banded 
together for trading purposes under the secretaryship of Fred Kanouse. 
Their intention was to prevent the sale of guns to the Indians, and 
then to run off with all their horses and robes, which would have 
meant the destruction of the Indian tribes. Healy prevented them 
from carrying out their object, and this was the reason for their 
hatred of him. (88) 


33 » Adney, op. cit. 

The climax of the whisky trade, the ©vent which marked 
the beginning of the end of lawlessness and debauchery in the 
Canadian West, was the Cypress Hills Massacre, July 11, 1873. A 





















/ t 


i) i 












' J 

. . 




«. ■■ 

* ' ; 














65 


Helena newspaper of the time gives the following account, which may 

be taken as the American view of the incident: 

M •••several days ago a party of wolf hunters who had been 
out in the Whoop-up country during the past winter were 
encamped on the Teton River near Benton expecting to reach 
that place shortly with the packs of pelts. During the 
night, however, some Indians stole their horses and were 
far out of reach when morning came. The men made their 
way into Benton where they procured other horses, ammunition, 
etc# and ten of them left in pursuit of the thieving 
Indians. Each man was armed with a Henry rifle and two 
Smith and Wesson revolvers and well mounted••••on the 
evening of the third day they arrived at a small log 
trading post at Cypress Mountains belonging to one Abel 
Farwell..♦some forty miles within the British border* 

Here they found encamped forty lodges of North Assiniboine 
Indians who met the whites with bows strung and guns 
cocked saying that they knew the whites were after a fight 
with the Indians who had stolen their horseg$ that the Cree 
who.had stolen them had only left their camp the day befone, 
but that the Cree were friends of the Assiniboine and that 
if the whites desired a fight that they could have it right 
there. At this the whites took shelter within the trading 
post which contained half a dozen white traders. From these 
they learned that the Indians had passed with the stolen 
horses only the day before. The traders also told that 
the Assiniboine were aiding the Cree and had fired several 
shots into the trading post only recently. The whites 
took council and it was determined to attack the encamp¬ 
ment of the Assiniboine numbering some two hundred all 
told, and to do it on the Indian plan. Accordingly at 
the first break of day the next morning the sixteen or 
seventeen whites attacked and effectually wiped out the 
forty lodges, very few Indians escaping. Only one white 
man was killed...Ed Grace....The remains of Grace were 
buried in the rear room of the trading post and the building 
after removal of the contents, was burned to the ground. 

Some of the men assisted Farwell to load his wagons with 
the furs and robes from his winter*s trading and all left 
for Benton.” (54) 

34. Helena Weekly Herald, August^11, 1875. 

The better known Canadian version is told thus: 

"In 1673 a party of men...came from Fort Benton, Montana, 
to the Cypress Hills about forty miles north of the border. 



























A) 













■ 

■ 

- 



•x 


f v V 


i 





64 


near where Fort Walsh was afterwards built* These men 
traded large quantities of whisky to a band of Assiniboine 
Indians who had encamped along the creek on a flat piece 
of prairie*• • *ifihen night came these fiends in human shape 
decided to ’clean out’ the Indians’ camp, and accordingly 
proceeded to a cut bank on the south side of the creek* 

Here they could stand on the gravel, breast high, rest 
their Winchesters on the top and fire from cover* The 
Indians were in the midst of their orgy, every lodge 
lighted up so that a good view of each could be had* Fire 
was then opened, with the result that over thirty of the 
Indians were killed, many wounded, and the rest not knowing 
where their assailants were, took to the hills for refuge* 
This occurrence was'seen by Abe F&rwell, a respectable 
American trader who had a post close by, and who was 
married to a Crow woman, known as Big Mary* After the 
Indians had fled the ruffians had made prisoner a young 
squaw who had crossed the creek to take refuge with the 
Farwells, and were in the act of carrying her off when 
Big Mary appeared upon the scene covering them with a 
revolver, and, backed up by Abe, dragged her from them 
and took her to their post. w (35) 

35* Brown, Ernest, ~Old ‘Trading Forts in Southern Alberta, n* d* 

NOTE? The Helena Weekly Independent, Hov* 18, 1886, 
carries an article on the Cypress Hills Massacre by John 
Duval, one of the men present, and he lists th© participants 
as follows j Ed Grace, Thomas W, Hardwick, John Evans, 
Trevanion Hale, John Harper, Jeff Devereaux, F* Vogel, 

G* M* Bell, James Hughes, S* Vincent, George Hammond, Moses 
Solomon, John Duval, and two halfbreeds not named, fifteen 
in all. The Cypress Hills affair did not end here, but 
nothing was done until the police had investigated two 
years later, and their part in it will be dealt with in 
due course. 













65 


Chapter VIII The I« G* Faker Company and the "Whoop-up Trail 


Under the impress of many bull trains and many loads of 
furs and trade goods the Old North Trail soon became more clearly 
defined, and the traders themselves soon began to call it the Whoop- 
up Trail, or simply the Whoop Trail. After the coming of the police, 
when Macleod became the capital of the West, the trail was extended 
to- Macleod and was often called the Macleod Trail or the Fort Benion- 
Macleod Trail. Today the old trail is almost indistinguishable 
except for a few short sections on raw prairie lend. At one time 
it was well-defined, and spread over a width of fifty yards in some 
places. Attached is a copy of a map made from the recollections 
and personal experiences of the cartographer. The following is a. 
copy of the memoranda made to accompany the map; 

’’Notes to accompany Whoop Trail Map. 

1. Whoop-up Crossing on Teton 3 miles from Benton. 

2. Capt. Nelse 1 s Ranch on Teton 18 miles from Benton. 

Nelse was French Canadian Narcisse Velleux. 

3. Pend o’Reille—damit, you spell it—Springs. Trail 

ran between East Knee and the Goosebill. 

4. Pend D*Oreille Leavings, 8 miles from, the Springs. 

5. Yeast Powder Flat 

6. Fort Conrad, 200 yards below the Marias Railroad Bridge, 

70 miles from Benton. 

7. Medicine Rock Coulee. 

8. Big Alkali Flat, the* it may now be Healy Couleef?) 

9. Rocky Springs—*40 miles from Fort Conrad, where Buckshot 

and Polite (poleet) were killed by Indians in *72. 

10. Red River, trail here crossed the boundary—really 

Red Coulee—but the bull-whackers always called it 

River. 

11* Milk River Grossing. 

12. Red Wagon Coulee, called after Red Wagon Jim 

13. J. 0. Coulee. 








THE WHOOP-UP TRAIL 


Ft. Benton to Ft. Hamilt on t V/hoop — U 

2 I 0 mi I es 


BRITISH AMERICA N.W.T. 







Virjiir 


fast tfuite 


Srass Hills’ 
Butte 


MONTANA 




BRITISH AMERICA N.V.T. 


Copy fro»M 

Harry Stanfo^ 

Kalispdl “Montand 
19 a? 


Verdi ^ 


U We 

















X 


_o 



V) 

9 


Comfort" 











*. Vv* 

















■ < 








66 


The Whoop-up Trail from Fort Benton to the middle of the 
Whoop-up Country—say Fort Macleod—was always called 240 
miles in length. It was in places 50 yards across, where 
the ground was soft*’ 1 (l) 

1. Map and Mss., The Whoop-up Trail, Montana Historical Library, Selen a 

Another old time freighter has also left an account of 

the Whoop-up Trail; 

"When I came to Montana in 1866, the only road on the 
reservation was called the Red River Half Breed Cart trail, 
which ran from Edmonton to Fort Benton. It ran along at 
the foot of the mountains on the east side just outside 
the timber. It passed through Glacier National Fark below 
the railroad station of the Great Northern. It then kept 
along the foot of the mountains clear to Fort Edmonton. 

In 1871 quite a trade sprung (sic) up her© between 
the Fort Benton people and the northern Indians. Those of 
us who engaged in it at that time laid out another road 
leading from Fort Benton through to Canada. It came up 
the Teton about 25 miles, then left the Teton through the 
Knees and went on to the Marias. It struck the Marias a 
little below where the Great Northern Railway now crosses 
the river. Leaving the Marias it came up Medicine Rock 
Hill, as it was called, and from this hill crossed the 
bench to about where Shelby now is, and down onto the 
Alkali flat. It followed up the flat for 15 miles in a 
northerly direction, when it left the flat and continued 
along what ie called the Rocky Spring ridge. From Rocky 
Spring ridge it ran on north to what is known as Red River 
or Dry Gulch....After leaving Red River, the road kept on 
to what was called John Joe’s Spring, and from there on 
to Milk River. Still going north, it crossed Eighteen 
Mile coulee, continuing to Middle Coulee, north to Kipp’s 
Coulee. Leaving Kipp’s Coulee it went on until it struck 
St. Mary’s between St. Mary’s and the forks of the Belly, 
which it forded at old Fort Tnoop-up, a branch running to 
what is called Standoff at the present time. This is the 
first wagon road.... 

When the Mounted Police came in 1874, there was another 
road laid out from Fort Shaw to Macleod, a mail route. 
(Signed) James W. Brown better known as Diamond R* Brown”(2) 


2. Brown, J. W., The Whoop-up Trail, Mss., Montana Historical Library, 

Helena. Diamond R. Brown was at Fort Kipp with Charles 
Conrad in the fall of 1874, and claims to have directed 
Colonel Macleod to the site of the police fort. Jerry 










67 . 


Potts, Howell Harris and Georg© W* Houk are among others 

who claim to have selected the site of Fort Maoleod* 

The bull train was the chief mode of transportation* It 
was introduced to southern Alberta by the I* G* Baker Company, and 
for twenty years these impressive looking outfits were seen on the 
Whoop-up Trail* Each team was made up of six to twelve yoke (3) of 
5* NOTE; A yoke was"one pair of"oxen* 

oxen, the usual team consisting of eight yoke. The record team was 
supposed to have been a seventeen yoke outfit out of Bismarck. Each 
team pulled a load of three big wide-guaged wagons, the guage 
generally being five feet. The wagons were spaced with stub tongues, 
and a M rough lock chain” served as a brake* Heavier trade goods 
were loaded on the first wagon, while lighter, bulkier articles were 
loaded on the other two* The wagons were called the lead, swing, 
and trail wagons, with average loads respectively of five, three, and 
two tons, although loads up to fifteen tons were recorded* The 
oxen, in order from the wagons, were called the wheelers, first, 
second, third, fourth pointers, and first, second and third wings. 

The average speed of these outfits was only ten to fifteen miles a 
day, the trip from Fort Benton to Fort Ihoop-up taking about fourteen 
to twenty days. Under pressure, greater distances could be covered, 
and some drivers would drive their animals mercilessly night and 
day. The organized freighting companies did not approve of this, 
however, as the oxen were comparatively expensive. A good yoke would 
cost up to $300, so they were worth caring for. 






; * - 

‘ 

, 

, 

« 

, 

. 






^ 1 

' 

$ 








* 

; H 





„ 






t 

■ 4 






. 




' 



* 












t 






« 







* 




. 

•- 






■ 



, 







































• 

■ 






t 


« 


e , 

■ 

/' v . ! J 1 ' ■/ i 1 . . t r ■ - 

* 

' 





68 . 

Usually the teams travelled in trains or brigades, the 
train consisting of eight to ten teams. The train crew would be made 
up of one driver or bull-whacker per team and one train boss and a 
night herder per train. The bull-whackers received fifty dollars a 
month and their board, each of them having to take week about turns 
as cook for the outfit. Among the best known of the bull-whackers and 
train bosses were Pink Wilson, Jeff Davis, Dave Jerks, Ed Trainer, 

Milt Emsley, Ben Roberts, Diamond R. Brown, and Howell Harris. (4) 
i» Lethbridge Herald, April 25, 1949, Story of N» TV Macleod« 

Bull trains travelled generally from Fort Benton to Fort 
Whoop-up, and thence to the other trading posts, later they went 
to Forts Macleod, Calgary and Walsh. In 1885 an experimental train 
wag sent to Fort Edmonton with supplies for the Field Force. This 
train was made up of nine teams of six yoke each, pulling two wagons 
of three and a half tons each—a total load of sixty-three tons. 

The train reached Edmonton, June £4, 1885, but the experiment was 
not again repeated because the ground north of the Bow River proved 
too soft for economic©.! operation. (5) 

5. Blue, John, Alberta Past and Present, Pioneer Historical Publish-" 

ing Co., Chicago, 1924, v. 1, p. 311. The last bull 

train passed over the trail from Fort Benton to Fort 

Macleod in 1892. 

The first commercial trip was made over the Old North 
Trail in 1870 before it became known as the Whoop-up Tra.il, and 
curiously enough, it was made from north to south. The Hudson’s Bay 
Company sent a train of carts from Edmonton to Fort Benton with furs 












t. 






10 








69. 

for shipment east, experimenting in search of cheaper transportation. 
The train returned loaded with trade goods. The Hudson*s Bay 
Company, however, used carts rather than bull trains. The cart was 
a two-wheeled vehicle, with a flat load bed about 2% by 4 feet, 
capable of carrying a load of about one-half ton, pulled by one ox 
or pony. There were ten of these carts in the experimental train, 
and the trial must have proved unprofitable, as we hear no more 
about the company using the Benton trail. (6) 

6. Blue, op. cit.,' p«~ 505" ~ ~ ' '. ‘ ~~ 

This trip of Hudson’s Bay Company’s carts to Benton in 1870 wag the 
first penetration of the southern part of the province by that 
company since the old agreement with the American Pur Company in 
1833. (7) 

7. "cf»~pp. 40-41 

Much smarter looking, and much faster than the bull trains, 
were the mule teams, and later the horse stages. They were used 
extensively for hauling lighter goods, especially the contraband 
whisky used in the Indian trade. Where the bull trains took fourteen 
days or more for the Bent on-Whoop-up trip, mule teams could cover 
the distance in eight to ten days, and the horse stages in four to 
six days. (8) 

8. Lynch-Staunton," E*,~ Fort Benton-Fort Macleod Trail, Lethbridge 

Herald, May 27, 1948. 

Mule teems were hooked in a tandem arrangement just as 
were the oxen, with six to eight span (9) in a team, the former 
9Y j^iUThi A span is a pair. ~ ' ~~~ ' .... 











t : ' 













THREE MODES OF TRANSPORTATION 



AN INDIAN TRAVOIS 


Photo courtesy of Great Falls Photo View Co. 



BULL TEAMS AT FORT BENTON 
Photo courtesy of Will lain Todd 



MULE TRAIN AT COAL BANKS, 1877 


Photo courtesy of Ernest Brown 


















70 


number being most common* These teams were controlled by a jerk¬ 
line, and some of the jerk-line drivers became so expert that they 
could round corners or drive through gates with their long teams and 
three wagons with ease and skill* The three wagons were hooked 
together with stub poles, and braked with rough lock chains in the 
same way as the bull train wagons* One of the lead mules was known 
as a jerk-line mule. It was equipped with a special bridle with a 
short chain attached to the ends of the bridle bit and passing under 
the jaw* The jerk-line was attached to this chain, then passed back 
through rings on the harnesses of the other mules to the driver* 

With a steady pull the driver indicated a turn in one direction, 
while a series of short jerks on the line indicated a turn in the 
opposite direction* Mule teams were expensive—up to $300 per mule, 
and more for a well-trained jerk-line leader* Before coming into 
towns, the mule teams were decked out with bells, and they made a 
imgnificent sight as they came spanking into town with all their 
bells a-jingle* 

Horses were not used a great deal for freighting on the 
Whoop-up Trail, although after the police came they were used for 
the passenger and mail stages* The usual outfit for the stage was 
a four-horse team driven with reins* However, horses were used on 
the trail, especially in Canada, for hauling hay* For this purpose 
the drivers reverted to the three wagon hook-up and jerk-line 
driving* On the hay trail to Milk River Ridge outfits of six to 
eight teams driven with a jerk-line were common. The racks for hay 




- 

, 

■ 

t 

* 

* 



. .J : ' , 


- 

“ 

* 

■ «. • ’ 

’ ■ ;; 





„ 

• / , , ■ t ; J : : . 



■ ' 


o •/ ■ /• /j .. 



■ • ' /./.. o.j j.:.. 

, 


. 

■ 

• /.Vi : ' . 


i 1 ; 


» 


: r >: ; 








71 


were of the following dimensions: lead, 15 by 24 feet; swing, 14 
by 16 feet; and trail, 12 by 14 feet. (10) 

10. Warren, S. E., Milk River Bidge Hay 'trail, Lethbridge Herald, 

August 16, 1947. 

In 1882, the Macleod Gazette of August 24 reported: 

"There are one hundred teams of all kinds on the road between here 
and Benton.” The Whoop-up Trail played an important part in Fort 
Benton history and trade until the railway came in 1883. 

Most important of the trading companies working on the 
Whoop-up Trail was the I. G. Baker Company of Fort Benton and St. 
Louis, Other freighting companies in the earlier period stayed with 
the Helena and Judith Basin mining trade, but from early in the 
sixties the I* G. Baker trains moved north into Canada. Evidence of 
the extent of their trade is the fact that the Hudson*s Bay Company 
at Edmonton began to feel the competition of the I* G* Baker Company 
among the Blackfoot at this time. In the early sixties, the I. G. 
Baker trade to Canada was of a nomadic nature. Freighters like 
M. W. Emsley, Jeff Davis, and S&ndford Sims visited the tribes with 
trade goods, whisky and tobacco, and returned laden with buffalo 
robes and wolf pelts, establishing no posts. The trade reached 
significant proportions after 1868, and as th© mining boom in Montana 
decreased, the Canadian trade grew. The I. G, Baker Company, having 
been first on the ground, retained a practical monopoly. The trade 
in one year before the railway came reached the enormous figure of 
30,000,000 pounds according to W* G. Conrad, one of the partners-- 


















t 

■ 

* 





1 l . 




5 , . - ■ 


* 





72. 

a figure of no mean proportions when we remember that the freight 
rate was often greater than the original cost of the goods. (11) 

11. RP CrrntT ~~ ' 

Isaac G. Baker (12) began his career in the Indian and fur 

12. HOTE: Isaac Gilbert Baker was born in New Haven., Connecticut, in 

1819. He died in 1904. Many of the Canadian references, 
including the Sessional Papers, give his name as J. G. 
Baker, but someone has probably transcribed I for J, and 
the mistake was perpetuated. 

trad© at the age of eighteen in Iowa. He came to Fort Benton to 
take charge of the American Fur Company post in 1864. The death of 
Pierre Chouteau, head of the American Fur Company, in 1865, and the 
effects of the Civil War resulted in the closing of all American 
Fur Company posts in that year. I. G. Baker and his brother, George 
A. Baker, organized a company of their own early in 1866 and opened 
their first store in Fort Benton under the name of I. G. Baker and 
Brother. From this small log building the holdings of the company 
increased to include large freighting outfits, a line of Missouri 
steamboats, several trading posts in Montana and Alberta, ranching 
interests, and branch offices in St. Louis and some eastern cities. 

At the beginning, the trade was largely with the Indians for robes 
and furs, but with the discovery of gold in Montana the importance of 
the cash retail trade was greatly enhanced. In the lush days of 1866 
to 1869 the months of September and October were often marked by 
receipts of $1800 worth of gold dust per day. Income returns from 
Benton in 1866 show I* G. Baker as the individual with the largest 
personal income, $7560. (15) 











l 
















• t t . 


. ■ 






; 


















. 


c. ' 

•• ....... ' 

* 


. 






. 


















73 , 


13, Helena Herald, July 10, 1867. 

The three Conrad brothers, W. G,, C, E,, and John H,, had 
come west from Virginia to enter the employ of the I, G, Baker and 
Brother firm, and in 1872 they were admitted as members of the 
company. The new name was I, G, Baker, Brother and Company, but the 
commonly accepted name was the I, G* Baker Company, and it is under 
this name that practically all references are found, (14) Eventually 

14, NOTEs There seems to be no important collection of I, G, Baker 

Co, papers. The best lead I could find indicated that 
such papers, if extant, would probably be found in the 
Chouteau papers in the Missouri Historical Society collec¬ 
tion, but I quote the following from a letter received 
from the Secretary of the Society dated February 1, 1949s 
”0ur Chouteaii papers are very inadequately indexed and I 
do not have the time to make a search for letters and 
documents of this firm though I am sure there is no sizeable 
collection . I have found a few references.... I do not 
find any reference to trade with Canada... , tf 

the Conrad brothers purchased the Baker interests, but the firm 

continued under the old name. (15) 

15, Overholser, J. F., Fort Benton, letter to the writer, AugT ~8~7 1~9~48 . 

By 1870 the whisky trade with Canadian Indians warranted 
the establishment of permanent posts in the Blackfoot country, and 
the I, G. Baker Company wag not slow in seizing the opportunity. 

After Healy and Hamilton, who were probably financed by Baker, had 
shown the way by building Fort Ihoop-up, other forts were established, 
Howell Harris, who later became a prominent Alberta rancher, built 
Fort Conrad for I, G. Baker in September, 1871, about three miles 
below Fort Kipp, which may also have been an I, G, Baker post. In 
1872 Harris helped build Fort Standoff and left one of the Conrads 


























5 . 









74 . 


in charge, himself returning to Fort Benton* He left Standoff on 
December 17, and before reaching Benton was caught in a driving 
blizzard. So severe was the storm that a party of seventy-five 
United States soldiers caught between Fort Benton and Fort Shaw lost 
forty of their number through exposure. (16) Slide-out and Whisky 
16* Harris, Howell, Recollections, cited in Macrae, op* cit* p* 985. 

Gap were other outposts of the company built in 1872, 

Following the coming of the North West Mounted Police in 
1874, the I* G. Baker Company’s business took a legitimate turn. 

When Commissioner French and Colonel Macleod made their side excursion 
from, the Sweetgrass Hills to Fort Benton, I* G. Baker could not do 
enough for his new-found friends. He had not been trading for forty 
years without learning to sense a dollar as far as the next .man, 
and here lay prospects for a large, lucrative contract, just when 
the company needed it to replace the declining trade of the mining 
camps. His slogan was that he traded all things to any man, and he 
supplied the immediate needs of the police: moccasins, mitts, boots, 
socks, oats, barley, horses, wagons, grease, thread, and a good 
guide in the person of Jerry Potts. To insure getting the supply 
contract. Baker sent W. G. Conrad back to the Sweetgrass Hills camp 
with Colonel Macleod and Jerry Potts. Conrad was able to say that 
the first bull train of supplies was already on the road. (17) 

17. Denny, C» E., Riders of the Plains, Herald Company, Calgary, 

1905. p* 46. 

The Baker company gave good service and got its reward. 













' 








* 








■ r • 





* 







75. 

The contract for supplies and for the freighting of them was awarded 
to I. G. Baker year after year, in 1882 reaching the figure of a half 
million dollars. (18) As the I. G. Baker Company was the only firm 
18. Qverholger, op. cit. 

doing a general banking business at Fort Benton or Helena, they also 
acted as the financial agents for the Canadian Government and the 
paymasters for the police. They succeeded in getting the mail contract 
and later the contract to supply the Indians with beef and other 
treaty supplies. On these various contracts the Baker company profited 
enormously, and the traffic over the Old North Trail boomed to new 
peaks in the years before the railway came* 

I* G. Baker himself had little contact with Canada except 
for the negotiation of the original contract. He moved to the new 
head offices of the company in St. Louis in 1874 to take care of the 
purchasing end of the business, and relations with Canada were main¬ 
tained through W. G. Conrad. (19) D. W. Davis was sent t© Macleod 

TsT"Letter to the writer from Mrs* Anne MaeDonnell, Montana Historical 

. Library, August 51, 1949. 

as manager of the first company store, and later was made manager 
of the Canadian business. He went in 1875 to supervise the building 
of Fort Calgary for the police, and also to construct a small store 
for the company. 

The first I. G. Baker Company staff at Macleod included in 
addition to Mr. Davis, Hiram Bates as cook, John Black in charge 
of groceries, George Overfield in charge of drygoods, Ellis Miller 















, 


t 

. ‘ 


• 





• 

. . 

. . 


. 

, 

... • t ■ ■ ' •■ 




• ■ 

, • ' ' «' : ' • ' ■ 

V ■ ■ 1 . e ; . _ 


t" 

* 


' • ... 4 •: 



* ’i '. 




t ■ t . 

1 ■ 





76 


and Cowan, clerks, and George O'Callaghan and Parker as accountants* 
Cowan became chief accountant before the company closed out its 
Canadian holdings* (20) When the I* G. Baker Company sold its 

20* Calgary Herald, July 28, 1934$ Davis, G. Rider, M&cleod Oldtimer 

Looks Back, LH Mac* 75 Ann* pp* 8~9, 

Canadian interests to the Hudson's Bay Company many of the employees 
passed into the service of the latter company, but John Black set 
up a grocery business in opposition directly across the street* In 
contrast to the legend of the Hudson's Bay Company store, "The 
Governor and Company of Adventurers of England trading into Hudson's 
Bay—Pro Pelle Cutem , n Black opposed his sign* "John Black, Adventurer 
and Trader, Groceries and Guff—Pro Belly Catchem." (21) 

21* Davis, opT cit* ' ~ .~ 

The I* G« Baker Company did not neglect its robe trade, 
although this was now necessarily on a legitimate basis, and wag 
fast dwindling with the disappearance of the buffalo* There were 
rumors that the American Government was paying a bounty of three 
dollars per buffalo robe in order to have the great herds destroyed, 
as they thought that they would never be able to settle the Indians 
peaceably on reserves until the buffalo were no more* (22) The robe 
22* Brown, Ernest, op* cit* 

trade from Walsh and Macleod fell from nearly 50,000 robes in. 1877 
to 50,000 in 1878 to’ 14,000 in 1879 to only a few hundred in 1880. 

The Iforth American buffalo, or bison, would probably be 
extinct today had not the Honorable Frank Oliver of Edmonton per- 












t 



; 




.X 










t 









77 


euaded the Dominion Government to purchase the last known, herd in 
the Flathead country of Montana for the Dominion National Parks* 

The herd, consisting of about 600 head at $250 each, was shipped 
to the Elk Island National Fark, whence, after considerable increase 
and dissemination to other parks, it was shipped during the recent 
war to the Athabasca and Slave River area* 

As the robe trade diminished, the bull trains returned to 
Fort Benton loaded with coal from Fort Whoop-up* The first train 
load of coal, thirty-six tons, arrived in Benton, November 1, 1880. 
(23) 

£'3*~?P Cent7 ~ ~ ~ """ " ---- - - — 

The police and the settlers who followed them meant not 
only a lucrative government contract for I* G* Baker, but also a 
profitable retail trade* T* C, Power as well as I* G* Baker 
established retail store outlets in Macleod in 1874, and at Calgary 
and Walsh in 1875* These two great trading companies were serious 
rivals, but their leaders were too shrewd to injure themselves by 
trying ”cut-throat” trading methods against their opponents* Both 
stores had to carry enormous stocks of goods, as replacements could 
be made only once a year from Benton when the boats could navigate 
the Missouri. To avoid expensive duplication, the Conrad brothers 
and the Power brothers made an agreement in 1881 by which the I* G* 
Baker Company closed its store at Fort Walsh in return for T. C* 
Power and Brother closing their store in Macleod, a profitable 
arrangement for both companies. (24) 





; , • . M ■ . -j; 

. t 


4 ~ * 










X- , \ :/ ' 








vu 





■ 

■ ! \ , 




78 


24, Cox, W, E,, Diary of a Mount ie, cited in LH Gold Jub, pp, 67*76 

The Baker company provided many luxury goods as well as 
necessities to the police in Canada, The Christmas menu in Macleod 
in 1874 included turkey freighted in from Benton for the occasion. 

The menu for Christmas dinner in Calgary, 1875—the first Christmas 
celebrated there by white men—included soup of canned oysters end 
condensed milk, prairie chicken, trout, deer and buffalo meat, plum 
pudding, mince pie, nuts, candy, and coffee, (25) 

25, — king, ^TT.y ’interview/ cited" in L* H* Bus sard. Early History of 

Calgary, University of Alberta thesis, 1955, p, 27, King 
was an ex-policeman who became manager of the I, G. Baker 
store in Calgary and later postmaster. 

The Baker company spared no effort to improve their service. 
By 1885 they had a regular stage running from Fort Benton to Fort 
Macleod—an open wagon drawn by four mules, running bi-monthly. The 
trip took eight dajre, one outfit setting out from each end of the 
run, and meeting at the end of four days at Rocky Springs, midway 
point on the Whoop-up Trail, Here loads were exchanged along with 
the passengers and the two outfits returned the way they had come,(26) 

&6, ‘Tims, Archdeacon J, W # , Missionary Spent" First “light Here in 

Tent Hotel, Calgary Herald Diamond Jubilee, p, 18, sect, 2, 

The I, G, Baker Company startled its competitors in 1885 
by adding to the staff a milliner and a dressmaker, a real innovation 
for the West of that day. (27) This addition proved a decided 
27, Mac lend Gazette, July 4, 1885, ~ . ----- 

success, as the first bride in Lethbridge could testify; 

”1 had a lovely white dress and everything to go with it. 












* 






t. 




<L 






’ 


■ 








79 


No difficulty in getting fine clothes in those days from 

the I* G, Baker Company at Macleod." (28) 

28. '"HodderV Mrs 7 J. E., nee Alma Isabella Forbes, the first bride"of" 

Lethbridge, March 9, 1886. Cited in LH Gold Jub. p. 98. 

Following the signing of Treaty 7 at Blackfoot Crossing in 
1877, the I. G. Baker Company was awarded the contract of supplying 
the Indians with beef. They made enormous profits on this contract, 
driving the cattle in on the hoof, and butchering them, as needed to 
fulfil the contract. While the MacDougalls at Morley probably had 
the first cattle in Alberta, the first beef cattle were those brought 
in by the I. G 0 Baker Company on the Indian, contract. 

As the financial agents of the Canadian Government, the 
I* G« Baker Company also supplied all the currency for the treaty 
payments, in both American and Canadian paper money of #1 to #20 
denominations. Considerable difficulty was experienced in making the 
first payments, as the Indians were superstitious of telling either 
their own names or the numbers in their families. The currency 
was unfamiliar to them, for they had always bartered goods prior to 
this time. The police were kept busy watching that the free traders 
who swarmed the treaty ground did not take advantage of the Indians, 
who could see little or no difference between a ©nondollar bill and 
a twenty-dollar bill. The natives, however, knew that they could 
trust the police, and many of them turned this new kind of wealth 
over to their red-coated friends until they could turn it into trade 
goods. (29) One independent trader reported that he sold his entire 

29, Denny, op, cit, p. 100 








t 

t 4 • 

* '. ! r 

, • 


. 

■ . .... . . 

* 

t 

, 

t ■ 

i 

« 

t . .... 


- 




, . t 1 ■ : - 

' ■ • ; - ' • • ' ' /X J 


' . - '. ; 







80 


stock of three cart loads in one day for cash. (30) 

30T~McKay, W. Henry^Story - iof" Edward McKay, Canadian Cattlemen, 

September, 1947. 

The coming of the railway marked the end of the great 
freighting businesses from Fort Benton, and trade and mail began to 
move east and west instead of north and south. The sinking of the 
Red Cloud in the Missouri in 1882 terminated the Baker steamship line, 
and the company gradually declined. In December, 1890, the Canadian 
interests of the I. G« Baker Company were sold to the Hudson*s Bay 
Company. In April of the following year the Conrad brothers sold 
all the Benton stock of the company with the exception of farm 
machinery to Strain’s of Great Falls, and the I. G. Baker Company 
ceased business shortly thereafter. (31) With the end of the great 
31. Overholser,~J. F., letter to the writer," August 6, 1948. 

company came the close of a picturesque chapter of Montana-Alberta 
history. 

Some idea ©f the extent of the trade to Canada from Fort 
Benton may be gained from the following table of freight shipments, 
taken from the pages of the Benton Record, which published from 1875 
to 1881® Keeping in mind that the freight rate averaged about on© 
cent per pound per hundred miles over travelled routes, and that 
these figures are not necessarily complete, one may easily recognize 
the value of the trad©. All figures are in pounds* 











V 

* 



4 

t 











■ ■ • ci,,-.c ■ : ■ . :; , ‘ 

- . i . 

, « 

' 

• -i ' : ■! : i ■ 1 / '• ■ ■ V. ; > . / pz- > 

« 










4 

4 • 

. 


« ■ ■ •% ■ b ipt 




i ■ 1 . : • ■ ■. ' :• 


: : v." , . \ ■; / : : ' 











81 


Date 

Destination Macleod 

Destination Walsh 

Other 






Destination 


Baker 

Power 

Baker 

Power 

Baker 

26-6-75 


3,919 




28-8-75 

117,643 


143,900 



18-9-75 


96,000 




25-9-75 


60,000 



96,000a 

2-10-75 




2,500 


16-10-75 

94,800 


30,000 



23-10-75 




30,000 


30-1C-75 



10,000 

20,335 


11-12-75 


30,000 




18-12-75 


10,000 




16-6-76 

184,645 


82,540 



14-7-76 

80,000 

17,389 


10,044 


28-7-76 

250,000b 

12,539 




4-8-76 


43,259 




11-8-76 



36,000 



8-9-76 

338,000 


67,000 



16-3-77 

10,000 





11-5-77 

65,000 

23,599 

45,000 

16,436 


8-6-77 

151,523 

20,460 

2,253 



29-6-77 


18,628c 


5,232 


6-7-77 

97,228 


29,378 



20-7-77 

111,101 


29,850 

23,965 


27-7-77 

101,000 


76,000 



3-8-77 

75,000 


120,000 

19,879 

26,084d 

17-8-77 

96,960 

55,910 




24-8-77 

212,500 






a 9 to Edmonton 

b« to Macleod and Calgary 

c» includes 7,971 pounds to Hamilton (Whoop-up) 
d 6 to Battleford 

Travel ling and living accomodation along the way were not 
so luxurious as they are today* The following is an account of a 
trip in 1883, several years after the police had established Fort 
Macleod, which was still located on the island in the river* Arch¬ 
deacon J* W* Tims came to Alberta in that year, leaving England on 
June 9, and arriving at Blackfoot Crossing on July 20* He landed 
in Hew York and thence travelled by Northern Pacific Railway to 








82 


Buffalo, Chicago and St. Paul. From St. Paul he gives the following 
account* 


”The next part of the journey was in a construction train 
which was crowded with people making their way West. This 
part of the journey took from Monday morning to Wednesday 
evening, when we were dumped off at Helena, then only a 
village of log buildings and no railway station. It was 
at the end of the track at that time. At Helena I found 
& Concord Coach was to leave for Fort Benton the following 
morning, and I secured a seat but had to produce my port¬ 
manteau to be weighed for which I had to pay so much per 
pound....We reached Benton without mishap. This part of 
the journey took thirty-six hours without stopping except 
for meals and to change horses at certain stopping places. 
What we did encounter were mosquitoes in their millions... 
especially troublesome at night....At Fort Benton I had 
to stay six days until the I. G. Baker Express (an open 
wagon drawn by four mules) was ready to make its bi¬ 
monthly trip to Macleod.•..From Fort Benton...it was an 
eight days journey in an open wagon to Macleod. On the 
fourth day, another Sunday, we reached Rocky Springs, about 
half way, and here we were met by another wagon and team 
that had come out from Macleod to meet the Express. I 
was the only passenger on this trip and was transferred 
to the Macleod outfit with all the express matter. Another 
four days* journey brought us to Macleod, then a small 
place situated on an island in the Belly River....That 
night we stayed at Macleod and put up at a restaurant kept 
by a negress who went by the name of Aunty. It was a 
long building, one storey in height, with a lean-to at the 
far end which served as kitchen and Aunty 1 s bedroom. The 
sleepers provided their own blankets and slept on the 
floor. About six a* m. Aunty appeared with a broom, poked 
each sleeper with it, and told them to get up and roll up 
their bedding. Then from the far end of the room she com¬ 
menced to sweep the floor and expected everyone to be up 
with blankets rolled by the time she reached them....I 
recall that the country through which I travelled from 
Fort Benton to Blackfoot Crossing was primitive in the 
extreme. Only between Benton and Macleod were there 
stopping places with a man in charge who kept relays of 
horses and prepared meals for travellers. These were 
about forty miles apart. Between Macleod and the Crossing 
there were no signs of human life or habitation. There 
were no bridges crossing the rivers, no fences of any kind 
and no roads, the only trails being those made by the 
ox-teams....” (32) 

32. Tims, loc* citT “ ” ~~ 





4 1 ' t 

U- 













t r •• : . ' 








* 

- 

■ 

. 

■ ' A (>< 

* ,r i. ■ ■■ ■: J 1 1 ; . ,‘iu4 

9 

. j 

t 

« 4 • 1 









83 


One of the most colorful proprietors of the early hotels 

was Harry Taylor of Macleod. According to his own reckoning, he 

came to the West when Chief Mountain was a hole in the ground. Better 

known by his Indian cognomen. Old Kamoose (Squaw Thief), he had 

gained notoriety by becoming the first man arrested by the police 

after they came to Alberta. He never quite forgave the police for 

confiscating a whole load of whisky found in his possession, and 

never spoke well of them* He drew up a set of Hotel Regulations for 

his establishment in Macleod which are well worth preserving, carrying 

the full flavor of life in the early West* 

tt Hotel Regulations, adopted unanimously by the proprietor, 
September 1, 1882, A. D. 

1. Guests will be provided with breakfast and dinner, but 
must rustle their own lunch. 

2* Spiked boots and spurs must be removed at night before 
retiring. Dogs are not allowed in the bunks, but may 
sleep underneath. 

3. Candles, hot water and other luxuries charged extra, 
also towels and soap. Towels changed weekly. 

4. Insect powder for sale at the bar. 

5. Crap, Chuck-Luck, Stud Hors© Poker and Black Jack games 
are run by the management* 

6. Indians and Niggers charged double rates. Special rates 
to Gospel Grinders and the Gambling Perfesh. 

7. Every known fluid (water excepted) for sale at the bar. 

8. A deposit must be made before towels, soap or candles 
can be carried to rooms. When boarders are leaving, a 
rebate will be made on all candles or parts of candles 
not burned or eaten. 

9* Two or more persons must sleep in one bed when requested 
to do so by the management. 

10* Not more than one dog allowed to be kept in each single 
room. 

11* Baths furnished free down at the river, but bathers 
must furnish their own soap and towels. 

12® No kicking regarding the quality or quantity of meals 
will be allowed ; those who do not like the provender will 
get o\rt, or will be put out. Assaults on the cook are 
strictly prohibited. 







' 


' ' 

6 '.' - • 















* 






t 






84 


13. Quarrelsom or boisterous persons, also those who shoot 
off without provocation guns or other explosive weapons 

on the premises, and all boarders who get killed will not 
be allowed to remain in the house. When guests find them¬ 
selves or their baggage thrown over the fence they may 
consider that they have received notice to quit. 

14. Jewelry and other valuables will not be locked in the 
safe. This hotel has no such ornament as a safe. The 
proprietor will not be accountable for anything. 

15. In case of FIRE the guests are requested to escape 
without any unnecessary delay. 

16. The BAR in the Annex will be open day and night. All 
Day drinks, 50/ eachj Night drinks, $ 1.00 each. No mixed 
drinks will be served except in case of a death in the 
family. Only regularly registered guests will be allowed 
the special privilege of sleeping on the Bar Room floor. 

17. Guests without baggage must sleep in the vacant lot 
and board elsewhere until their baggage arrives* 

18. Guests are forbidden to strike matches or spit on the 
ceiling, or to sleep in bed with their boots on. 

19. No cheques cashed for anybody. Payment must be ma.de in 
Cash, Gold Dust, or Blue Chips. 

20. Saddle horses can be hired at any hour of the day or 
night or next day or night if necessary. 

21. Meals served in rooms will not be guaranteed in any 
way. Our waiters are hungry and not above temptation. 

22. To attract attention of waiters or bell boys, shoot a 
hole through the door panel. Two shots for ice water, 
three for a deck of cards, and so on. 

23. All guests are requested to rise at 6 a. m. This is 
imperative as the sheets are needed for tablecloths. 

24. No tips must be given to any waiters or servants. 

Leave them with the proprietor, and he will distribute them 
if it is considered necessary. 

25. Everything Cash in advance. Following tariff subject 
to changes Board $25.00 per months Board and Lodging, 

$50.00 per month with wooden bench to sleep on 5 Board and 
Lodging, $60,00 per month with bed to sleep on.” (33) 


33, Higiribotham, op. cit, pp. 79-81, 






’ 








■ 











o 












85 * 


Chapter IX The North West Mounted Police 

The north West Mounted Police played a very important 
part in the relations between Alberta and Montana. Before the coming 
of the police, the influx of free traders, dealing chiefly in whisky, 
provoked an intolerable situation. Until 1870 the Blackfoot Confeder- 
acy had permitted no permanent posts in their terrtiroy, but traded 
with men from both the Missouri and the Saskatchewan. However, 
firewater was gradually breaking down, the barrier, and posts were 
being established in the early seventies which became centres for 
great drunken orgies. The culmination of the whisky trade came in 
the Cypress Hills Massacre (l), and the police were organized pertly, 
1. cf. pp~.~ 62-64. ~ - - -- . — - 

at least, as a direct answer to this case of deviltry. The Americans 
had the impression that the Hudson*s Bay Company had made representa¬ 
tions to Ottawa concerning their inroads into Canadian territory and 
that this fact resulted in formation of the force. (2) There were 
ITT""?. Cent','""" ——— ~~~~~~~~ ‘ 

other reasons: the new boundary needed supervision, the country could 
not be settled unless the government could maintain law and order, 
there was the ever present danger of Fenian inroads, and a new rail¬ 
way across the continent was being considered. All these reasons 
contributed to the decision of the Canadian Government to establish 
a small mobile force in 1873* The immediate objectives of the force 
were to stop the liquor traffic, 'to gain the respect and confidence 
of the Indians so as to prevent the fiasco of Indian affairs across 







■ 

. « ■ 

, 


















j ' ■ J J. r.' : ■ ■; ;. 


















- 


: 

-:.'j ’• ; ' l 1 ■ 1 * 






4 

■ 

i 








O ‘' C! 







86. 


the line, to break down the old Indian tribal rites and practices 
by tact rather than force, to collect customs, and to perform general 
police duty. (3) The scarlet tunic recommended by Colonel P. Robert- 

3, Canada, bepartment of Justice, brief Outline of the Activities of 

the Force, 1873-1940, King’s Printer, 1945. NOTE: The 
following is quoted from a letter received from S. T. Wood, 
Commissioner of the R. C. M. P., dated April 29, 1949: 

”1 regret to have to inform you that many of the old fyles 
of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police were destroyed by 
fire in the West Block at Ottawa. The fire took place on 
February 11, 1897, and unfortunately the old reports from 
Fort Macleod, Fort'Walsh, etc. are amongst those destroyed.” 
He enclosed the above-mentioned pamphlet. 

son-Ross and adopted as part of the uniform of the new force took 

its origin from the Oregon disputes of 1845-6. The Indians had been 

impressed in a friendly way by the British troops stationed at Red 

River, and ever associated the red tunic with the forces of Her 

Majesty, the Great White Mother. 

The force left Dufferin on July 8, 1874, and after a 

summer’s march across unmapped plains they reached the present site 

of Medicine Hat on September 6. Here they found no grass, as the 

buffalo herds had grazed the whole area clean. Cold rains added to 

the hardships of both men and horses, and on September 12 the decision 

was reached to move south to the Sweetgrass Hills in search of fodder, 

while Commissioner French and Colonel Macleod (4) went to Fort Benton 


4* NOTE: Colonel James Farquharson Macleod, 0. M. G., was born on the 
Island of Skye, 1836, and came to Canada with his parents 
when he was only four years old. He graduated from the 
University of Toronto in 1854 and was called to the bar in 
1860. He served under Sir Garnet Wolseley in the Red River 
expedition of 1870. In 1873 he joined the N. W. M. P., and 
was appointed Assistant Commissioner, Sept. 25, 1874. He 
resigned from the force, Dec. 31, 1875, to become one of 








'■ - 4 

* 

* 










. 


: ; 








■ • ; ■ . ■ ■ )&: ■ : 

. .■ . .. 


. 

* • ' . ' 

i ■■ . ■ ' . !.rr 

* t .■ - . , •. ': < . : 





87 . 


three stipendiary magistrates in the North West Territories. 
On July 22, 1876, he was appointed Commissioner of the 
N. W. M. P. by Order-in-Council, and he held both positions 
until October 1, 1880, when he again resigned from the 
police force. He was appointed Judge of the Judicial 
District of southern Alberta, February 18, 1887, and held 
this position until his death, September 5, 1894. 

for supplies. The rain had turned into a light snow fall, and as 

the troops moved south to the Sweetgrass Hills, on looking back they 

could see H the earth blackened to the very roots of the sun by one 

vast herd of bison moving south. M (5) The force encamped at the foot 


LH Mac. 75 Ann, p. 44. 

of the West Butte on September 18, and here rested and awaited the 
return of Colonel Macleod. (6) 

6. Denny, op. cit., p. 44. 


French and Macleod were very successful in Fort Benton. 

I. G. Baker was prepared to take care of ©very need, and even 
recommended a guide and interpreter in the person of Jerry Potts. (7) 

7. NOTE: Jerry Potts was a Peigan halfbreed. He stayed with the 

police from 1874 to the time of his death in 1899. The 
only time that h© ever failed them was at the Blackfoot 
Treaty negotiations in 1877, when he could not understand 
Laird’s mode of speech. Tom Clarke, ex-member of the 
N. W. M. P. now living in Macleod, in an interview, April 
17, 1949, told me of the time that he accidentally shot 
Jerry Potts in the ear with a 2B shot. The pellet lodged 
in the lobe of the ear and Potts carried it for many years, 
calling it his lucky charm. Clark© said that some of the 
"boys” for a lark seized Potts one time, slit his ear lobe 
and removed the shot, and n gure enough, he died within the 


Potts was added to the force as a scout at the relatively high wage 
of ninety dollars per month compared to the fifty cents per diem of 
the enlisted men* A message sent from. Colonel Macleod to the troops 



























f 







Photos courtesy ©f Ernest Browi 





















88 


informed them that they were only sixby miles from Whoop-up, and 
ordered them to move fifteen miles further west where they would find 
the well-worn Whoop-up Trail, 

On October 1, the police searched a train of whisky traders 
on their way back to Fort Benton but found no contraband liquor. On 
October 2, they camped on the Milk River and two days later Macleod 
rejoined them with Jerry Potts and W, G. Conrad, (8) Jerry Potts 
B, Denny/ op, cit, ppV 45-40, 

led the police unerringly along the Old North Trail to Fort Whoop-up, 
The force expected to find stiff opposition at Whoop-up, 
and were prepared for an attack if not for a siege. They were 
surprised and pleased to meet no opposition. C. E. Denny records 
that D, W. Davis was in charge with three or four men, and that the 
force was welcomed to comfortable quarters heated with coal stoves,(S) 
' p/TsT 

Longstreth writes as follows? 

?f Macleod, hoping that a parley might obviate bloodshed, 
left his troops some distance up the slope and rode, in 
disregard of earthly caution, toward the closed gate. He 
knocked! a rumbling echo was the one response. He 
knocked again, and was startled at being confronted by 
a cripple, an American deserter who had been left with an 
aged halfbreed woman to hold the fort until it should be 
safe for the owners to return.” (10) 

ToV" NOTE:" Commissioner S# T. Wood in the letter cited above 

recommends both Longstreth*s books (The Silent Force, 
Century, New York; and In Scarlet and Plain Clothes, 
MacMillan, New York) for authentic information re the 
early days of the police. 

Macleod, in command of the force and in the name of the 
Canadian Government, offered those in charge 1X0,000 for the fort 















' 

. - 








t 

















' : ' i.l 

/< " ■ «. 

. 


. 



t •’ ’ '• t 















89 


but the offer was refused because the post was said to have cost 
$25,000. Healy and Hamilton would have been wise to have accepted 
the offer, for the coming of the police marked the end of the whisky- 
trade, and the post fell into disuse except as a ranch headquarters 
for Dave Akers. 

Since ‘Whoop-up could not be purchased, Potts led the force 
further along thd Old North Trail. Crossing the St. Mary at Whoop-up 
and the Belly at Slide-out, he brought them to the island in the 
Oldman, The-Place-Where-the-Trail-Crosses-the-Oldman-River, and here 
was established the first police post in the British northwest. 

The fort was substantially built of twelve-foot logs stood 
upright in trenches dug in the ground, and the barracks were completed 
before the end of the year. Roofs were of poles covered with earth 
and the floors were packed mud. Bull trains from Benton brought up 
window sash and lumber for doors. (11) By Christmas the force was 
11. Dennv, op. cit., p» 51. ' ~ 

comfortable and one of the men described the first Christmas spent 
by the police in Albertat 

"On our first Christmas in the West we had a regular fine 
time—a real Christmas. I remember I was cook for our 
company. We had juicy buffalo steaks and several roast 
turkeys—yes, we had turkeys brought in from Montana by 
the traders. Then we had spuds and biscuits and dried 
fruit, and of course plenty of te© to wash them down.... n (18) 

HT Larkin, Edward, cited in LE Mao 75 Ann.' pV 20 

Colonel Macleod wasted no time in making the purposes and 
aims of the police clearly known to the various Indian tribes. So 
well was he received by them that they renamed the ancient ford. 










, 

- 









* 

“ 

t'-• ' 1 ■ ./■ „/ .1' , J 

- 

. 

. ■ ..... , - 











't 


r 




■ 


St 

« 

t 







! • ; •• > > . >u; ; I <;>:i ' ,[■; i< , ! 'v 


1 r r • .' ;' •; : , : ’c ■ ' h\j j 






Men's Qrs. 



•Serpent 's 
Mess 


•Stable * I 


//////>///// 


///////t //// 



S^fc'S. Qrs. and 

Troop Office 

Stable #■ 2 

-JS Aor 

•«s 

SO 





^cc»-eation and 

'BiiHa.r-ck ^oom 

Stable *3 

Wrs. Static 

S4 A 


EtfTRRHCE 


Su&r-cJ 'Hoot 


1 

i 49' 

r-Q"' ^ ai,ne 



//o' 


Artisan's Stop 



vo' 




//o' 


Orderly f?Oom And / 

DiV. Off/s4 _ / 

Store 1J«im 

OfCtc a 



Offr* Qrs. 


Offr». Qr 


Otfrs. Qtrs 


60 



Smith '3 Shop 




Shed 



FORT MACLEOD 


M W. M. P. POST 

Seale S-S' 7 tKe I neb 


Rppendix 
Session. 


r. 

il papers 


















































































1 .. ; J : o . !; O ■ i > ' ", : t d; ii *- »!'i - . , 1 u \ 

■ ‘ ; ' ! ' O'- ' Xi ' 





















5 . 




* ", t 


‘ 

t . . . . ’ ■>' 

. 

4 

t -i ; *. 

■ 







Photo courtesy of R 









91 


corpse was found in the early spring. (16) 

16. benny,' loc» cit. ~ ' '' ~~ 

In 1875 the police established two new posts, one farther 
north and the other south and east of Macleod. Captain Brisbois was 
sent north to establish a new fort, and selected the junction of the 
Bow and Elbow, the present site of Calgary, for his post. John 
Herron, one of the original members of the North West Mounted Police 
who came West in 1874, was added to the escort of Major-General 
Selby-Smyth (17) in 1875, and he tells that Selby-Smyth chose the 

17. NOTE: Selby-Smyth was an Imperial Army officer, in command of 

all the militia forces of Canada. In. 1875 he made a tour 
of inspection via Winnipeg, Fort Pally, Edmonton, Macleod, 
and thence home via Fort Steele and Walla Walla in the 
United States. 

site. As the latter was on his way south from Fort Edmonton with his 

escort he met Captain Brisbois with his detachment who explained that 

he was looking for a site for a new barracks. Selby-Smyth said, 

"You*re too far north now. Captain Brisbois, we* re going south and 

1*11 tell you when it is time to pick a barracks site. 11 The two 

parties camped together that night, and the following day continued 

southward together to the junction of the Bow and Elbow, where was 

chosen the site of what ms to become Calgary. If Selby-Smyth rather 

than Brisbois did choose the site, this might be part of the reason 

for Macleod*s over-ruling of Brisbois when the latter wished to name 

the fort after himself. The barracks were made under contract by 

the I. G. Baker Company with D* W. Davis in charge—palisades of 

upright logs placed in trenches, mud floors and ceilings, and walls 









t 












- 



















* ■ • • 


. 








■> 


t 


‘i ' 


■ 







o 


l 








92 


plastered both sides with mud applied by hand as no trowels were 
available. The new post was three hundred miles from the source of 
supply at Fort Benton. 

Fort Walsh was established in the Cypress Hills in 1875, 
primarily for the purpose of watching the international line in that 
area and also as a centre for investigation of the Cypress Hills 
Massacre. When the Sioux under Sitting Bull began to arrive in 
Canada following the Custer Massacre on the Little Big Horn in 1876, 
Fort Walsh became the centre of police activity in the West, and was 
made the headquarters for the force in 1879* The route to Fort 
Walsh, and thence to Fort Macleod, for a few years became even more 
travelled than the more famous Whoop-up Trail. 

The history of Fort Walsh antedated the coming of the 
police, Edward McKay, a brother of a Hudson*s Bay Company factor, 
and the great grandfather of Dr. J. 0. G, Sanderson of Calgary, 
established a post in the Cypress Hills, May 10, 1872. Here he 
built several houses for himself, two married sons and hired men. 
This group turned the first sod in the area and grew the first 
potatoes. They traded with the Peigan, the Hez Perce, and the Crow, 
getting supplies of trade goods and alcohol from Fort Benton, along 
with staples such as flour, sugar, salt, drygoods, and ammunition 
for themselves. McKay tells of at least one hanging by Vigilantes 
as a result of three desperadoes stealing forty of his horses in 
June of 1874. (18) The other two escaped the Vigilantes but were 












' ' 






; , J 1 ■! : 


. 








* 


iT 
















1 





« < >‘£ 

< ••• j ' ( 


* 


. 

■ ■ ' t 


















- 


* 

. 

• ' . 

' .. , . : 


* 


* 


t «. t «,■ 




. : 




: ■ • ■ 

' 

















q<e 
i?0 • 


18* IJOTEs McKay must have referred to some clandestine Vigilance 

Committee. The famous Vigilantes of Virginia City, organ¬ 
ized by individual Freemasons to oust Henry Plummer and hi? 
gang of cut-throats, worked chiefly in 1863 and 1864. 
Granville Stuart organized a Vigilance Committee of fourteen 
members in 1884 which became famous as "Stuart 1 s Stranglers" 
Its prime object was to subdue the horse thieves of the 
badlands* Estimates of the number hung by this group varied 
from 19 to 75* James Fergus, after whom Fergus county was 
named, issued a statement in the late fall of 1884 in which 
he averred that Stuart’s committee was the result of a 
general understanding among all the large cattle ranchers 
of Montana, following the spring meeting of the Montana 
Stockgrowers’ Association* Theodore Roosevelt was a member 
of this association at the time, and in his usual inimitable 
fiery manner would have had the Association itself declare 
war on the outlaws# Stuart’s cool-headed foresight pre¬ 
vented this. Granville Stuart himself was a refined and 
cultured gentleman who later became special United States 
minister to Uruguay and Paraguay. He wrote a book of 
reminiscences. Forty Years on the Frontier, published in 
two volumes by A# H* Clarke in 1925# He discusses the 
Vigilance Committee in volume two* He died in Butte in 1918 


killed in a gun feud about the same time# Major Walsh and his 
detachment of police happened by accident on the McKay establishment 
in 1875 and built Fort Walsh at that point. (19) McKay had to close 

19# McKay, t/.' Henry, Story of Edward McKay, Canadian Cattlemen, 

September, 1947. 

his trading post because the I# G* Baker Company followed the police 
to Fort "Walsh, and the competition of the big company was too strong 
for the independent trader# However, McKay did secure the contract 
to supply buffalo meat, butter, milk and cheese to the police, and 
also got the mail contract to carry the mail both ways between Fort 
'Walsh and Fort Benton. He also kept a hand in the Indian trade, as 
we learn of one of his sons being among the independent traders at 
Blackfoot Crossing in 1877 at the signing of Treaty 7# (20) 

mrTFTcf -—--—...- ---- 










■ 


. 


... 

■ 



o' >J 7 1 






> y'i : 




. 




1 * * 


0 


. 




t ' ’ ; 

' 












« 













94 


Colonel Macleod and Major Walsh were not slow to search 
for the perpetrators of the Cypress Hills Massacre, and in the 
pursuit of these men they stirred up a great deal of resentment in 
Montana. A detachment of police went to Helena where they found that 
some of the participants had died and others had left the country, 
but five were placed under arrest for an extradition trial—Thomas 
Hardwick, John Evans, John Harper, Trevanion Hale, and Jeff Devereaux. 
The extradition trial dragged through the greater part of the summer 
of 1875, not being completed until the end of July. The trial w&s 
held before U* S. Commissioner W. E. Cullen, and a long-hand transcript 
of the proceedings was mad© by Colonel James T. Stanford, (El) 

21. HOTS: This transcript has never been located, and .so" far as 

known by the Montana Historical Society, is not extant. 

We casi only surmise that someone in authority wished to 
have the evidence suppressed and had the transcript 
destroyed. 

Public resentment against the police flared in Helena and throughout 
northern Montana as the trial progressed. (22) There was little 

22* The Benton Record in its issues of March 1 and March 15, 1875, 

gives very sarcastic and hostile accounts of the activities 
of the N. W. M. P., referring to them as tt grabbers of the 
spoil”, and accusing them of seizing robes ”on suspicion” 
that they had been obtained for whisky. Even as late as 
Nov. 22, 1878, this paper vilifies Major Walshs ”...record 
does not enhance hi® military skill or even his diplomatic 
skill in handling Indians, but speaks much of his ability 
as a propagator of the halfbreed race.,,.” 


doubt concerning the guilt of the men involved, but feeling among 
the whites was so strong against the Indians that they would have 
condoned almost any act of violence ©-gainst them. The people could 














i 






c. 







I 


, 

' 



; 






* 
















95 


not understand the attitude of the police, who seemed to have ”the 
intention of hanging good Montana citizens for the shooting of a few 
Indians.” (23) The chief witness for the police was Abe Farwell, and 
23. Shepherd, George, North of the Border, Up Canada Way, HP Cent. 

according to the Montana papers he was proved in court to be a 
”plain unvarnished liar”, so Cullen discharged the prisoners for lack 
of what he considered sufficient evidence. Helena celebrated the 
night of the acquittal. All the saloons ran wide open, bonfires were 
lit in the streets, and the sidewalks were said to have been so 
thickly strewn with drunken celebrators that passage through them 
was difficult. There was no doubt that the police had lost this 
round, but they had effectively served notice that such acts could 
no longer be perpetrated with impunity on British territory. 

The close of the Cypress Hills affair, however, did not 
come with the end of the extradition trial. Early in September the 
police caught F. Vogel, one of the participants, on a ”borrow@d” 
Indian horse on the north side of the line and imprisoned him for 
horse theft. (24) Two months later they brought in a true bill of 
%4« iBenton 'Record, Sept. 4, 1875 . ' - 

murder against Vogel and two others—G* M. Bell and James Hughes— 
whom they had caught in British territory. (25) They were brought 
25. Benton ‘Record, Hot. 6, 1875. ~ ~ ~ .. ' 

to trial in Winnipeg the following year, where the jury returned a 
verdict of not guilty, so they were acquitted. (26) 











t 


4 ' e V \ 

' 


t \ 















' 





















t . 


' o r r . o. > - ri 


■ . 

. 


. 







4 

. 

• c 

4 ““ .. . 


« ' 


t *i ■• 1 ; .. •-■ ; . /. 








96 


23. Benton Record, July l- 1 , r ?• •, published the following letter to 

Captain John H. Evans, Grand Forks, Dacotah Territory, 

June 26, 1876s "Friend John, It is with pleasure that we 
announce to you our acquittal and discharge by the British 
authorities, although bound over in our own recognizance 
for the sum of $2600 each, to answer two other indictments, 
which will amount to nothing. Our acquittal was received 
with satisfaction by the people of Winnipeg, as everyone 
here was satisfied that we were innocent of the nefarious 
charges made against us. The trial lasted four days.... 

We leave here for Bismarck, from which place we will proceed 
to Benton. Vogel, Bell and Hughes." Money for the defence 
of the three men in Winnipeg had been raised in Fort Benton. 

The editor of the Benton Record, John J. Healy, was able 

to discredit the actions of the police with one hand while he wrote 

% 

editorials praising their work in bringing law and order, and seeking 
their trade, with the other. In an editorial, August 21, 1875, he 
asks for a bonded line from Fort Benton to Canada to avoid the pay¬ 
ment of duties. His argument was that if such a line were not 
granted the Hudson’s Bay Company in its "slow but sure" way would 
soon squeeze Fort Benton out of the Canadian trade picture. He 
argued further that goods could be laid down at Fort Benton just as 
cheaply as they could be laid down at Winnipeg, and there would be 
only 200 miles of good road from Fort Benton to Fort Macleod instead 
of 700 miles of no road from Winnipeg to Fort Macleod. A month later 
he records that T. C. Power and Brother had secured a bonded route 
to Forts Kipp and Macleod, and estimated that this route should be 
at least twenty-five per cent cheaper than the Winnipeg route. T. C. 
Power had to post a bond of $100,000. (27) The following year, a 
27. Benton Record, Sept. 16, 1875 


bonded route was established from Fort Benton to Fort Edmonton which 







* 




4 


t ' 

t t • 4 

4 ■ 

. 

V - 1 t 

J 

' 

4 ’ ' . ' 

„ „ „ „ 


* 

4 , 

4 




* 




. ' * •' 








4 ■' 4 * 4 

* 

' -x ■ : - Jm ' '■ 5 "■ . • • ! 1 - : ■ ; 

1 \■ ; 

.. . tt ' 

' 

. 

- * 


. . ■/ ; ,/ •- . ' 


« 






4 ' — 


■ 










97. 

provided quicker and cheaper transportation than the Winnipeg route* 
The bonded freight rate from Benton to Edmonton was only eight dollars 
per hundredweight, as compared with eighteen dollars per hundred¬ 
weight from Winnipeg to Edmonton. (28) 

28* Benton Record, February 12, 1876* 

One duty assigned the police when organized was to avoid 
by tact some of the evils of the Indian troubles in the United 
States* Following the Minnesota Massacre of 1862, the American 
Government had made treaties with their Indians ceding a large part 
of North Dakota and most of northern Montana to the Sioux as a 
reserve which would be forever free* The discovery of gold in these 
areas in the sixties proved too much of a temptation for the avari¬ 
cious white men, find the treaty was broken* The seemingly endless 
influx of white miners alarmed the Indians, so they took the war 
trail. By 1869 practically every wagon train out of Fort Benton was 
being attacked, A smallpox epidemic in that year added to the fear 
of the Indians—the Blackfoot lost 681 men, 378 women and 341 
children in five months—and they determined to exterminate the 
whites and free themselves from the terrible scourge of the white 
men’s diseases* 

On August 17, 1869, Malcolm Clark, a popular oldtimer, 
rancher, and trader of the Prickly Pear region, was shot by Indians, 
thought to be of Mountain Chief’s band, and this act led to another 
of those white atrocities which spurred the Indians to greater fury. 
Major Baker, with a troop of cavalry and Joe Kipp as guide (29), 







98 


29. Ilealy, J. J., Letter to T. Adney, Seattle, August 25,' 1905, in 

Montana Historical Library. 

set out in January, 1870, in search of Mountain Chief’s band. They 
came upon an Indian village, and opened fire in a dawn attack, January 
24, 1870. The village happened to be that of a friendly Peigan chief. 
Heavy Runner, and the latter came running out of his lodge waving 
papers of friendship, but he was shot down and the slaughter continued, 
a total of 173 Indians, mostly women and children, being slain. 

This villainy is generally referred to as the Baker Massacre. 

The culmination of the American Indian trouble came with 
the Custer Massacre on the Little Big Horn in June, 1876. Under the 
leadership of Sitting Bull and his war chiefs. Crow King, Crazy 
Horse, and Gall, the Sioux attacked and annihilated a part of the 
7th U* S. Cavalry under George A. Custer. The entire troop wag 
killed, although some Indian scouts claimed to have had a share in 
the fight and to have escaped by mingling with the attacking Sioux. 
Sitting Bull, in his own account (20), says that Custer would have 

50, UOTEj Sitting Bull’s account of the Custer fight is” given in 

full in the Macleod Gazette, Anniv., June 25, 1942, p. 6. 

He told the story to Major Crozier of the police, who 
gave the original transcript of it to the late William 
Black, whose widow delivered it to the Macleod Gazette. 

been spared but he chose to die with his men. Realizing that they 

could expect no quarter from the Americans, Sitting Bull and his 

followers turned northward to the safety of the British line. 

The police -were faced with a two-fold problem when the 

Sioux came—to keep the peace between Sioux and Blackfoot when the 











t t / 

■ t 

. 

: > • ■; ’■ : t ■ 

. 




■ • ’! 










„ . 

i i ’ 

• •. i ‘ , . . ;o. -■ • b 




' 

, 


1 

t 

■ 










. 




' 


•, . . ■ ■ • ■< > 




-- 









99* 

former Invaded the already depleted hunting grounds of the latter, 
and at the same time to prevent the two great confederacies from 
becoming too friendly for fear that they might unite against the 
whites* (31) Sitting Bull made several appeals to the Blackfoot to 
31* Canada, Department of Justice, op* cit* 

join the Sioux in their war to exterminate the white invader, but 
Chief Crowfoot was able to keep his young men in check* Even the 
Benton Record, enemy of the police as it was, expressed concern for 
their safety* (32) Police headquarters were moved to Fort Macleod 
32* Benton Record, JulyTsT” 1878 ~ — - - ~ " 

and the detachments at Macleod and Walsh were strengthened, while a 
sub-post was established at Wood Mountain where the Sioux were 
assembling* (33) Chief Medicine Bear of the Yankton Sioux and Chief 
33*"^amli7"Wgarto®nt g of Justice, op* cit* ~~ ~~ 

Four Horns of the Teton arrived first at Wood Mountain to establish 
the winter ©amp, and bands of refugees drifted in throughout the 
winter* Sitting Bull himself arrived with the last of his followers— 
a total ©f 5600— in May, 1877. (34) 

MTlhi&r ~~ - - - - -.- - 

About the same time as the Custer Massacre, Chief Joseph 
and his Mez Perce tried to make their way north to Canada. The Nez 
Perce fought some of the best organized and best managed of the 
Indian campaigns* They were recognized as superior Indians by the 
white men, and they fought in a w civilized ss manner in that they took 
no scalps, permitted no mutilation of the dead, and no mistreatment 














" ‘ • ■ ' ' , it ' ' : ■ 

. 7 ; 1 ■ ' ' 1 : • . ' . ■ . t • . 








■ ' 










I r 




>J .0 


/S 


'll :t\i. 




. ■ ’£ 




















100 , 


of wounded or women prisoners* Chief Joseph was a master-mind 
among the Indians* He had brought his tribes through the mountains, 
at one time or another engaged and beaten all the troops available 
in Montana, and on one occasion had stolen the horses of an army and 
set it afoot. He and his men were caught in the Bear Paw Mountains 
by General Miles only because he thought he was safely across the 
line in Canada. Miles made one charge against Joseph’s position and 
lost nearly a whole company, so decided to lay siege to the Ne& 

Perce• 

When Sitting Bull heard of the position of the Hag Perce, 
he wished to lead his braves across the boundary to join Joseph in 
fighting General Miles. Such an act would probably have resulted 
in another debacle like the Custer Massacre. It was only with the 
help of Chief Spotted Eagle of the Sans Arcs, Black Bull of the 
Ghcapapa, Spotted Elk of the Mimiecoug, and Broad Tail, Stone Dog, 
and Little Bull of the Ogalalla that Walsh was able to dissuade 
Sitting Bull from his design* Walsh warned the Sioux that any brave 
who crossed the line in warlike manner would not again be permitted 
to enter Canada. Sitting Bull seemed satisfied with the promise of 
Walsh that the Meg Perce could find refuge in Canada even as the 
Sioux had done, and that the U* S. Cavalry would not be allowed to 
follow them. 

Chief Joseph realised the helplessness ©f his situation, 
and on October 5, 1877, he surrendered to General Miles with the 
historic words, w From where the sun now stands, I fight no more. 





* 

* 

■ . • ' ; • .. ; : ; 1 .' V J ■ ' ' ’ ■' - ■’ 

■ t 

' 

« , 







' 





• 




* 

. ' 

■ V ' . «. : . 1 


- 

■ , x .. . . . ' ... ' i 1 ■ 

; •••■ • 


' 

* t 

, 







. - ' ’■ l 





101 . 

forever.” Chief White Bird and 104 of his braves escaped into 
Canada and joined the Sioux encampment. This band later returned to 
the Lapw&i Reservation in Idaho, but White Bird himself remained in 
Canada until his death. (35) 

35. Howard, H. A., War Chief Joseph, Caxton Printers, 1941, pp. ~ 

269-285. 

The attitude of the Benton Record toward the police 
changed after the Sioux came to Canada* This paper openly congratu¬ 
lated 'Major Walsh on his handling of the Indians, and gives consider¬ 
able coverage to the activities in the Sioux camp. Immediately 
after the first arrivals, Walsh issued orders forbidding the sale of 
arms and ammunition to the Sioux. (36) This order was relaxed after 

36. benton"’Record, bee. 1, 1876. " ~~ 

Sitting Bull himself arrived, to the extent that the Indians were 
issued sufficient ammunition for hunting purposes. In return. 

Sitting Bull gave his promise that his braves would keep the peace 
and would not attack the Americans from the Canadian side of the 
international boundary. (37) The new light in which the Record 
57. Benton Record, June "15, 18777 ~ 

editor saw the police was revealed in one of his editorials, where 
he said concerning the adoption of the Canadian system ©f handling 
the Indians that ”it would also be successful in the United States 
only if administered by men of the same honesty and ability as the 
Worth West Mounted Police.” (38) His changed attitude also reflected 
58rr~Benton Record, Wot. 25, 1877, ~~. 


















1 


) V, :) 


1 


'i 



f 


' 


u 
























102 


a change in American public opinion towards the police. 

The United States Government sent a commission under 
General Terry in October, 1877, to negotiate for the return of the 
Sioux under Sitting Bull. The choice of General Terry as head of the 
Commission was unfortunate, as the Sioux knew and hated Terry. The 
Commission passed through Fort Benton both going to and returning 
from Canada. It arrived at Fort Walsh, October 16, 1877, and opened 
negotiations the following day, the council being held under the 
chairmanship of Colonel Macleod of the police, as he was the only 
man the Sioux chieftains would trust. Terry offered food, clothing, 
and reserves, and required in return that Sitting Bull and his band 
undertake to give up all arms, ammunition and horses not needed for 
civilian life, the proceeds of the sale of the surplus to be applied 
by the United States Government to the purchase of cattle for the 
Indians. Sitting Bull could not d© enough to demonstrate his friend¬ 
ship for Macleod and th© police, and his distrust and hatred of 
Terry and the Americans. Macleod explained t© him that it was im¬ 
possible for the Great White Mother to provide reserves for the 
Sioux, and that th© hunting grounds were so depleted that he would 
be wise to return to his own country. Sitting Bull, however, uncon¬ 
ditionally refused the offer of the Terry Commission, even offering 
Terry the supreme Indian insult of allowing a squaw t© address him 
in council. 

There has been much speculation concerning the reasons for 
the refusal of the American offer by the Sioux. Major Walsh expressed 






' , 

;■> ‘x . vi .v. .>! / J ' ' m : ; '•/ 1 1 










105. 

the belief that the refusal of Sitting Bull was due to fear of 
reprisals for the Little Big Horn massacre and distrust of the con¬ 
centration of troops under General Miles just across the line in 
Montana. Many Americans thought the police encouraged the Sioux to 
refuse, hoping to use them as frontier guards against Fenians and 
other possible attackers, at the same time expressing the opinion 
that the police were taking on a bigger job than they could handle. (39) 
59. teenton Record, 0ct» 26, 1877. 

The police would have been only too glad to be rid of the Sioux, for 
they fully realized the responsibility placed upon them by having 
these 5600 alien Indians in their territory. 

Hunting was spars© on the Canadian side, and Sitting Bull 
gradually realized that the Canadian Government would make no pro¬ 
vision for him. (to February 4, 1880, he applied to the Pine Ridge 
Agency for terms for his return, and regretted that no agreement 
could be reached at that time. (40) Small bands of stragglers 

40. Vaughn, Robert, Then and Now, Tribune Printing" Co"., Minneapolis, 

1900, pp. 370-375. 

returned to Montana in 1880 and 1881, surrendering their ams as 
they arrived at the agencies. The last of the Sioux left Canada with 
Sitting Bull himself on July 18, 1881 (41), end three days later 
ITT'^B^t^'llecord, July 28, .. 

surrendered at Fort Buford. After standing trial. Sitting Bull was 
taken to the Standing Rock Agency, where he became very influential 
as a priest. He was shot, December 15, 1891, resisting arrest for 









' 

' ' • ■ ' ■ ■ ' ■ 1 v ■ :0 *,t.. : : r ■ ’ 1 ■ 

* 

, 

‘Iv..i ■ 1 / » i ,' •, 

t ■ 

. 

* i .'Vi .■ ' ’ ) ' 

I ' ; .. ■ 1 ■ ' 1 ’ .) ;• *'■ ... 1 

e . . ■' * ■ . 1 




■ v . '. < ' 


V .<v r 


; 0 . , V' j 


- 1 • c. < 

< ;< ■ • . . , ' . 


' t . ! .' - 




104* 

”ghost dancing”, and so passed from the scene one of the great 
Indians of modern times, (42) 

42, Vaughn, op, cit, p, 586, 

The coming of the Sioux meant that there were four powerful 
elements in the area comprising Alberta: the Sioux in the south, the 
Hudson’s Bay Company in the north, the Blackfoot Confederacy in the 
foothills, and the police omnipresent. The Sioux were but a trans¬ 
itory factor, and the power of the Hudson’s Bay Company was fast 
waning since they had surrendered their extensive claims to the 
British Crown, which had transferred them to the Canadian Government, 
so the main job of the police was to establish a basis for permanent 
agreement with the Blackfoot Confederacy, 

A great council of all the tribes of the Confederacy was 
called for the simmer of 1877 at Blackfoot Crossing, and here were 
worked out the terms of Indian Treaty 7, the most far-reaching of 
all the Indian treaties. The force at Fort Walsh was preoccupied 
with the Sioux, so the whole escort for Governor Laird was drawn 
from Macleod and Calgary, (43) Treaty 7 covered the area from the 
SET Denny, op, cit, p, 95, ' ~ 

Bow River to the Boundary, and from the Cypress Hills to the Rocky 
Mountains, Treaty negotiations nearly broke down when Jerry Potts 
could not understand the mode of speech of Governor Laird, but 
fortunately Jimmy Jock Bird (44) was found among the Indians, and 
44, cf,"footnote p, 38, . 

he proved satisfactory to both sides, (46) 














J) 






- 




■ . J . i ; k l> 



- 






105 # 


45. NOTE: W. H. Cox in his Diary, cited in US Gold Jub. pp. 67-76, 

gives an example of interpreter troubles that were sometimes 
encountered: M A big council was held at the Blood Reserve, 
Dave Mills, interpreter. Old Red Crow, head chief, spoke 
half an hour without a stop. Old Dave just saying, *Ah. 

Mm. Ah. Mm. * This went on for a long time until the 
Governor-General got tired of this song Dave was singing. 

He said, ’What does he say, interpreter? 1 ’He says you 
fellows want to give him some more grub.* Another quarter 
hour. The same old thing. ’Tflhat does he say, interpreter?' 
’Oh, seme thing, want more grub.' This Dave Mills was half 
nigger end half Indian. His English was very limited, but 
he always said he was one of the first white men in the 
coraitry. w 


The annual treaty payment made by the Canadian Government 
was to be #5 per individual, #15 to minor chiefs, and #25 to chiefs, 
with double treaty the first year. Considerable trouble was experi¬ 
enced because the Indians had a superstition against revealing the 
names or numbers of their families, and they did not understand the 
paper money supplied for the payment by the I. G. Baker Company, so 
the police had all they could manage to keep the traders honest. 

Baker, Power, and the Hudson’s Bay Company had stores on the treaty 
grounds, besides the establishments of the independent traders. N. T. 
Macleod reported that the I. G. B&ker Company had gales of #5500 in 
three hours after the treaty payment. (46) A later treaty with the 
46. 'LethbriSgeTEerald, April' 25, 1&49T" 

Blood, July, 1885, gave them the largest single reserve in the 
Dominion of Canada, an area of about 540 square miles. 

Following the above two treaties, the police had very little 
trouble with the Indians• W. H. Cox records in his Diary that he 
and Staff Sergeant Homer received at Wild Horse Lake in 1881 a 











4 

■ 

t 

« 




t , 








- 

, 

*•: ' 

- 






- 


■. 


: \ i ' : . 












4 





' 

* 

' v • ; A:, ; 


. 





' 

. 


■ i ”i • ■ i 


• • 1 t 


- 

■ 



^ ' 



. 

: ■ - ' ' ' . :'i . >., • 

* 



. 'x 
















106. 

band of Canadian Indians escorted to the line by several battalions 
of United States soldiers. He states that he had a four-horse wagon 
loaded with flour, tea, bacon and dried meat for the Indians, and 
that the latter had a "big time at Wild Horse Lake that night”, 
while the American Major expressed surprise that the police were so 
few in numbers. In 1883, the police had some trouble with the South 
Peigan, American treaty Indians* Following a disturbance on their 
reserve in 1882, the American government had placed some troops 
among them, and many of the braves decided to join their brothers 
north of the boundary, where they caused considerable unrest before 
being persuaded to return. (47) After the North West Rebellion, 

47. Denny, op~.~cit. p. 166~. 

numbers of Cree Indians had fled t© Montana and settled, and the 
American government wished them to return to their own country. In 
1896, United States troops escorted 531 of these Indians with 1300 
horses and all their equipment to the line, where they were received 
by Inspector R. B. Deane and one constable, ”much to the astonishment 
of the American officer and his men.” (48) Other than these few 

48. 'Kelly," op.' oit."p. 301. ~~.^ 

episodes there was no appreciable Indian trouble. 

Before leaving the Indians and the Indian reserves, it is 
interesting to note a reason for the distribution of the reserves 
among the various churches. During the early 1890*g, three men 
prominent in the Indian missions met by accident in the Macleod Hotel 
while awaiting a stages Reverend John McDougall, Methodist| Father 















- 










. 










, 

' 

* 




, 









. 














107 . 


Lacombe, Roman Catholic; and Bishop Pinkham, Anglican. In the course 
of conversation, McDougall complained of his lack of success with 
the Blood. The three thereupon made a pact that the southern reserves 
would be left to the Anglicans and the Roman Catholics, while the 
Methodists would confine their efforts to the northern reserves. (49) 

49. Goode rham, G. H., Regional Supervisor of Indian Agencies, letter 

to the writer, Calgary, Feb. 1, 1950. I quote: "On the 
Blood, Blackfoot, Peigan and Sarcee Reserves, the mission 
work is done by the Roman Catholic and Anglican Churches. 
There is a United Church and residential school at Morley." 
R. D. Ragan, Superintendent of the Blood Indian Reserve, 
Cardston, informs the Writer in a letter dated Jan. 17, 

1950, that the Mormons have placed missionaries on the 
Blood Reserve during the past year. 

The North West Mounted Police maintained reasonably good 

order along the boundary. There were cases of criminality, of course, 

and the police dealt with these as best they could. Craig remarks 

that there was a marked contrast between conditions on the two sides 

of the line, and credits most of it to the fact that the police had 

curbed the liquor traffic in Canada, while liquor sales and gambling 

were both common in Montana. (50) Horse thieves from Montana caused 

50. CraigV opT cit. " ' 

a stir in the 1880*0, but the Montana Stock Association took a firm 
hand in helping the police to stop their activities. On one occasion 
when the Association caught thieves with the horses, they notified 
the police because some ©f the horses had Canadian, brands. When the 
police arrived, they were given the horses but no men, with the 
simple explanation that the thieves would steal no more unless there 
were horses in the hereafter. (51) Poetic justice took care of some 












' 

















t : 






' 




" • ‘ ' > O .; ti C >| ui 

t. ^ 

to,?: 

o.'i'i r.c 





108 


51. cf. footnote re "Stuarts Stranglers 1 * p. 95. 

evildoers with no help from the police* Gus B r ©de, known as King of 
the Smugglers because he carried whisky one way and Chinamen the 
other, was killed by lightning on the trail to Fort Benton in 
1891. (52) 

52. Kelly, op. cit», pp. 261—262. 

In 1894 Corporal Dickson of the Writing-on-Stone detach¬ 
ment caught a whole band of outlaws in the Sweetgrass Hills. He 
first ran off their horses, then fired off all their arms while they 
were after the horses, and then arrested them. Although the arrest 
was made north of one of the boundary cairns, a new survey revealed 
that the cairn was out of line and that the outlaws were really on 
American territory, so they were freed. However, the United States 
authorities by this time took an interest in the matter and cleaned 
out the band with a troop of cavalry. (53) 

53® Ibid, pp. 287-288”. NOTE: The police annals have accounts of~~~ 

many instances such as the above, which imply that one 
policeman was as effective as & troop of American cavalry. 

By the turn of the century, the authorities on both sides 

of the line were working in reasonable cooperation with each other. 

In 1895 Constable Richardson was attacked south of the boundary by 

an old enemy who shot him in the hip, but such acts were uncommon. (54) 

54." Ibid,~ p. 29l7~~~~~ " ' 

In 1902, James Fisher, wanted for stealing cattle in Canada, wag 
arrested by Sheriff 0. Wallace Taylor of Choteau, Montana, whereupon 
Fisher waived extradition proceedings and returned to Canada, where 











. 

. . ■ ■■■':■' . . 


, 


. 





* t. r -* « c 

. .... 

4 

■ 

, r ■- ' V •/: . ' 

* 

, - ■ t • 


r •: . - .V, <n 



* - - . 




„ 




; , - , 

' 


t - 

. 

' . ' ■ 




. 


' ' 1 ' . .• * •: • • , 
t t '■ ■ ' ! ' ) ' ■ ' • 









109. 

he was sentenced to five years imprisonment. (55) This was but an 

55. Ibid, p. 549. 

early example of the cooperation which has marked legal relations 
in more recent years. 

Agitation resulted in Canada from the fact that while 
American citizens could pursue horse thieves into Canada and have them 
tried and punished by the Canadian magistrates, the Canadian police 
were not permitted to pursue thieves or prosecute south of the 
line. (56) The Commissioner of Police in his annual report, 1884, 

56. Maoleod liagetie, Sept. 14, 188&. ... 

says that ©very effort was mad© to return horses stolen by Canadian 
Indians ©n the American side, but that American Indians raiding on 
the Canadian side and returning home escaped punishment. He says 
in parts 

"X regret to say that those stolen horses could not be 
secured though they were traced by their owners across the 
line, as the United States Indian Department did not show 
the same disposition t© aid our citizens as we have in¬ 
variably, as far as lay in our power, afforded them.” (5?) 

57. " Sessional "Papers, yi35, 47 Vic'toriaT1884,’ pp. 16-17. 

In July, 1884, Superintendent Mcllree was sent to Fort 
Assiniboine, Montana, to get the help ©f the United States military 
forces to suppress hors© thieves. Colonel Coppinger of the post 
replied that h© would be glad to cooperate but that he must first 
get some higher authority. H© referred the matter to General Huger 
at Helena, who referred it to his Department Headquarters, who 
referred it to Washington. Nothing further wag heard of the matter 



















I 

. * • . 


. 

t ' 














■' t 



„ 

; 





















- 






, t 






. . 1 


< 

< 






*■ • - 


t • e. 

. 

: 


' 


, 










e 

' 













110 . 

until September 1, when Coppinger wired Mcllree his regrets that 
he was not permitted by the authorities to enter into any negotiations 
on the subject, as his powers were limited to recovering Government 
horses and to keeping trespassers Qff the Indian Reserves. Thus we 
see that it was indifference at Washington which caused some of the 
friction in the two frontier communities. (58) 

&8. Sessional Papers, ffiLSS, 48 Victoria A 1885, p. 16. 

The police were unable to take care of all the justice 
that was meted out in the early days. Occasionally the people took 
a leaf from the book ©f the Vigilantes in Montana. Two examples 
will suffices 

**Gn© stag© driver used his whip t© force passengers to 
get out and push up a steep hill. After the latter 
reloaded their guns they held an inquest, and decided 
that the driver had perished of pneumonia.** (59) 

5§T River I¥ege7~^intennial7~ . ' ' .. 

M A man named Bowles was lynched by some cowboys....He 
refused t© assist them to fight a prairie fire, and 
after the boys got it out•».they took him out and hung 
him.** (60) 

60T Maoleod Ciaiette,"October "14, 1882. 1 ~~ 

However, the general tendency in Canada was to leave all such 
matters to the police® 

During the early years of its establishment in the West, 
the police force did a tremendous business with the American trading 
firm of I. G. Baker. The totals of the police accounts for the 
first three years were as follows : 













„ 








■ 










, 


* 









' * t ■' ■ 

* 

■ v ' ; ■ !.:i ' if;.) ■; w J'"{ iy ■ ' ■ f ' . 

' 

- 

' 

■ 









1374-1375 


$23,395*06 
122,771*85 
122,057.00 (61) 


111 


1875-1876 


1876-1877 


61. Sessional Papers, #188, 42 Victoria A 1879, p* 2, p. 31, and 

pp. 129-130. NOTEt The figures for trade with the I* G* 
Baker Company were not included in the printed papers 
for other years. 


The first figure is for only part of a year. A breakdown of the 
figures for the two complete years is given in Appendix A of the 
thesis. Appendix B gives a schedule of prices of various commodities 
delivered to the different posts in 1880, the only year for which 
contract figures are available* 













112, 


Chapter X The Cattlemen 

Cattle dealings played a very important part in Alberta- 
Montana relations from very early times* Only a few head of stock 
were found in southern Alberta before the Police came, but as soon 
as law and order were brought to the area the exceptional grazing 
properties of the foothill grasses tempted ranchers to come to 
Alberta tn increasing numbers* The earliest ranchers in Alberta were 
John and David McDougall* They brought in fifty head of horses, on 
November 20, 1871, and the following year purchased one hundred head 
of steers and breeding stock from Ford of Montana* (l) 

1* Kelly, op* cit*,"‘prTQ~^~‘~" a ~ 

As soon as the Police came, a few settlers straggled into 
the area around Macleod and some of them had a few head of cattle. 
Small herds could supply the domestic demand until & larger market 
could be established* In 1875, the I* G, Baker Company got the 
contract to supply beef to the new police post at Calgary* They 
sublet this t© a man named Shaw, (2) who thus has the honor of having 

TTWm Little'is known of Shaw, except that he brought his beef 

herd in through the Kootenay Pass, stayed at Morley about 

one year, end then proceeded north toward Edmonton* 

sold the first beef cattle in Calgary, which was to become a great 
cattle mart in a few years time* Three small dairy herds were brought 
into the Macleod area during the same year, on© at Brockett by 
William lee, on© down river from Macleod by Jo© McFarland and Henry 
Olsen, and on© up river from Macleod by Mr* and Mrs* Armstrong and 



















'i' 

■ . 

. 






, 


O' ..O’ 








.<> *sc»5 ■;.< 










<H j . i'J 'Jt 


t \. 




* 




.. - : ->v .- I . 




. 

















113® 

their foreman, Morgan® (3) Mrs® Armstrong, apparently the business 
5® Kelly, op® citT pp® 1X2-113® 

manager of this establishment, made a profitable contract to supply 
dairy products to the police in Macleod® The business did not last 
long, however, as Mrs* Armstrong and Morgan retired to Montana in 
1879, where they were murdered in 1882® (4) 

4® Ibid, p* 158 ~ ~ 

Several men started ranching in Alberta in 1876-77. In 
1876 Jim Christy brought horses and Georg© Emerson brought cattle 
from Montana into the Macleod district. (5) W. F* Parker, an ©x- 
5®' Ibid, p® 115 . ~~~ ' ' ” 

policeman, started cattle ranching with the purchase of some stock 
from J® J. Healy® (6) Lafayette French and 0. H. Smith became the 

671bid7 pT"U6. —— - — - — — — 

first settlers in the High River district the same year® They 
established their headquarters immediately west of the present torn 
on the old Fort Benton-Fort Edmonton trail, their ranch providing a 
stopping-place and a post office. (7) Several other retired police, 

7.' Riley, Senator^Sa,"^eminiscenc©s of a Rang© Rider, LETGold Jub® 

pp. 59-60® 

including J® B. Smith, H. Ball, J. B® Murray, and Robert Patterson, 
followed Parker*s example in 1877. They purchased basic herd stock 
from George Sierson and Tim Lynch, who war© beginning to develop an 
important business of buying in Montana, driving to Alberta, and 
selling at a profit without the risk of holding the stock over winter® 
(8) John Miller cam© in from Montana in 1877 bringing range stock 

































, 






■ 

: : \ 'i ' ' •• • 






* 










s L* 




























114 


8. Kelly/ op. cit. p. 121 

with him* (9) The following year Baker and Lynch and Emerson brought 
9* Ibid. .~ ~ ' " ' ' 

in considerable numbers of stock for disposal to new ranchmen. (10) 

10. Ibid. ~ 

C. E. Denny, another ex-policeman, contracted for one hundred head 
of yearling heifers with Lynch and Emerson, price delivered to 
Calgary ten dollars per head. (11) 

IT.~~ i^eany,""op cit *~ p. 110. ' 

An effective damper was being placed on the growth of 
ranches in 1878-79 by the Indians. The buffalo herds were becoming 
g© depleted that the Indians were sorely tempted to steal the white 
man f s cattle to feed themselves. They provided, a really difficult 
problem for the police, because they stole only as they butchered, 
and there was seldom any evidence against them. The government 
attempted to put a stop to this Indian stealing by importing large 
quantities of beef through the I. G-. Baker Company to feed the 
Indian®. In 1879 they brought about on© thousand head of stock t© 
the Porcupine Hills for this purpose. (18) 

T2. Blue," ©p.~~ei¥Tl^.H^21 . ” 

All the individual ranch owners at this time were small- 
scale operators* Many of them had no legal right to the land, but 
simply ran their stock on the open range, took their chances with 
Nature and the Indian®, and reaped the profits of the natural increase 
of their herds. 

















V ' 









116 


The Canadian Government in 1880 opened large areas for 
leases at attractive rates—one cent per acre per year* (13) Having 

13, Kelly, o'p* citVp. 142 ' ~ 

seen the effects of overstocking which had resulted from the Montana 
lease system of rental per head, Canada profited by the mistakes of 
her neighbor by using the acre rental basis with restrictions as to 
the number of cattle which could b© grazed on any area, (14) The 

14, blue, op, cit, pV 522 

opportunities for profits in the cattle business were so great that 
many large companies were formed and ranching boomed in southern 
Alberta in the eighties and nineties, No duty wag imposed on stock 
imported if it was not sold for three years after entry. This regu¬ 
lation proved to be no hardship and no deterrent t© imports, as the 
^aby beef** market had not yet been developed and prime beef was 
considered to be a four or five year old steer. 

In 1886, the lease rate was doubled, and a tariff of twenty 
per cent was placed on all American stock imported. (15) This heavy 
IsV EeTly, op,' citY pT~T89V ' .. ~~ 

tariff proved such a deterrent to many Montana stockmen who had been 
running stock on both gides of the line, that some tried to circum¬ 
vent the law, Conrad Brothers owned Circle brand stock on both sides, 
and it wag impossible to distinguish American stock which ”gtray©d M 
to the Canadian ranch. The Spencers of Montana tried a similar 
scheme. They purchased gix hundred head of stackers in Ctotario, 
shipped them to Alberta, and started a ranch at M&nyberries with 
























„ 


' 






* 






. '-J ' 


















. . 


. 

» 

4 

, 








116 


their 5CU brand* (16) They, also, seemed to accumulate large numbers 
16* Ibid, pp. 308-369 

of "strays” from their over-grazed ranches south of the line* To 
prevent such chicanery, the Canadian Government provided in 1901 that 
every brand used in Canada had to be registered, and if it were the 
same as an American brand it had to be placed on the opposite ribs 
so that American and Canadian cattle could be distinguished. (17) 

ITT Ibid, p* 536 ~ 

Following the opening of cheap leases by the Canadian 
government in 1880, several large company-owned ranches were estab¬ 
lished in Alberta. Among the better known of these, with some of 
their personnel were: the Circle, Conrad Brothers and I* G* Baker 
owners, Howell Harris (18) manager, Frank Strong, (19) foreman; the 

16. NOTErHowell Harris snd^rank Strong had a livery stable "in Fort 

Benton in 1882 in partnership, and came to Alberta together 
in the employ of the Conrad brothers. A. 0. Macrae, in his 
History of the Province of Alberta, cites recollections of 
Howell Harris from, which we glean the following: He came 
to Canada for the first time in the fall of 1869 after 
stolen stock. In 1871 he directed the bull train which 
came to Whoop-up t© collect the winter*s catch of fur from 
Healy and Hamilton. The fort was burned by Indians just 
after Harris left, but was rebuilt. In September ©f the 
same year he built Fort Conrad three miles below Fort Kipp, 
and another post three miles above the present High River 
in December, where he spent the winter. In March, 1872, 
Starchild, the Indian who shot Constable Graybum seven 
years later, attempted to shoot him. Jerry Potts would 
have shot Starchild on the spot, but Harris prevented him 
from doing so. During the summer of 1872 he freighted on 
the Benton-Eelena rout©, returning to Canada to help build 
Fort Stand-off in the fall. He started his return journey 
to Fort Benton on December 17, and was caught in a sever© 
blizzard—so sever© that some forty of seventy-five American 
soldiers caught between Benton and Fort Shaw in the same 
storm perished from exposure. He freighted in Montana 




















* 




t ' t' 



' 





c. c . t 

4 

■ ■ 

, 

' . a 

' 

* 

- >' ' 

' 






117, 


until 1875, when he again came to Canada, this time with 
a train load of flour for the police post at Fort Macleod. 
In 1877 he reported that he had a contract to supply the 
police with 500 tons of hay. He was in charge of the 
supply trains which accompanied Governor Laird to both the 
Blackfoot Treaty in 1877 and the Sounding Lake Treaty 
with Big Bear in 1878. He did some prospecting at the head 
of the Belly River in 1877, and reported that he found the 
"biggest piece of pure tin on record in this continent and 
it is now in the United States Assay Office in Helena." 

His last year with the bull trains ms 1878. In later 
years be became a Councillor at both Lethbridge and Fort 
Benton. He died at Benton. 

19. NOTEs Frank Strong came to Montana from Michigan in 1871 and 
to Alberta in 1880. He died in Victoria in 1888. 


Cochrane Ranch Company, Major Walker manager, Casous foreman; the 
Northwest Cattle Company or Bar U, Fred Stimson manager, George Lane 
foreman. Nigger John Ware (20), Herb Miller (21), Phil Weinard, 

20. NOTE: Nigger John War© came from Idaho through Montana to Alberta. 

He was one of the best riders of the early days. After 
leaving the Bar U, he worked for the Quorn, and later 
established the 19 for himself. He was killed by a gentle 
horse falling on him. The Indians called him In-a-toxe- 
sex-appe-quin, Bad black white man. 

21. NOTEs Herb Miller remained with the Bar U until 1935, something 

of a record. He died early in 1950+ 


and Jim Me insinger, all hands; the Walrond Ranch Company, James 
Patterson, manager; the Ckley Ranch Company (22), John Craig 

22l NOTEs The Oxley Ranch Company was an." English company organized 

in 1882. Craig wag given t© understand that his company 
was backed with unlimited capital, and proceeded accord¬ 
ingly to take two leases of 100,000 acres each, and to 
purchase considerable stock in Montana. He was given no 
cash, and as a result he had to buy stock on credit—a 
most unusual procedure—and to sell some stock cash in 
advance—a still more unorthodox procedure for those 
times. Another temporary expedient adopted by Craig in 
his financial troubles was to borrow from the 1* G. Baker 
Company. Conrad willingly made the advances he needed 















' 




with interest at the rate of one per cent per month* One 
creditor, Frank Farmer, perished on the road to the Oxley 
Ranch in an attempt to collect his claim, and other credi¬ 
tors were able to collect only through a seizure by the 
sheriff* This most irregular financial procedure left a 
bad odor in ranching circles in both Alberta and Montana, 
and hurt the credit of other ranchers* 


manager; the Brown Ranch, Walter Ross, owner; the Powder River Cattle 
Company (23); and the McIntyre Ranch, W. H. McIntyre owner* A 

23* NOTE* The Powder River Cattle Company came in from Wyoming, and 

settled on Mosquito Creek just before the severe winter of 
1886* They suffered less than any other company that 
winter, possibly because they were experienced cattlemen 
and had taken the precaution to come in with a dry herd, 
killing all calves born along the way, 

considerable number of individual owners, including Dave Akers, John 

Quirk (24), John Sullivan, D* J. Whitney, Hod Main, Maunsell brothers. 


24* NOTE* F. W. Ings tells the story of John Quirk in LH Gold Jub* 
pp. 52-58* The Quirks were married in Ireland in the 
seventies, and Johnny left for America to seek their 
fortunes* He went first to Detroit, then followed the gold 
rush to Montana, where he entered a partnership with John 
Sullivan and had a reasonable degree of success* Mrs* 
Quirk, after not hearing from her husband for a period of 
years, followed him to Montana, broke up the partnership, 
and made her husband buy cattle with his capital, trailing 
them to a ranch at Kew, on the north fork of Sheep Creek* 

George W* Roe, and Jim Harris, also took advantage of the cheap 

leases* Most of these men came from Montana, bringing stock with 

them, and those who came from other places bought stock in Montana 

and trailed it into Alberta* 

Increased demand for cattle meant increased prices* We 

have already noted that C* E* Denny bought his first herd in 1878 

for #10 a head. Dave Grier had to pay #20 a head in 1881, and had 

some difficulty in getting them for that price when he went to 






























o ;■(' 













. 

. . ' V. ,!■> j . J ') • rr.j, 


' 

« 








119 


Choteau, Montana, to take delivery. The Walrond Ranch Company two 
years later had to pay $32 a head for their first herd, 3125 head 
purchased from the Judith Cattle Company in Montana. (25) 

25. Buchanan, C. W., History of the Walrond Cattle Ranch Ltd., ~ 

Canadian Cattlemen , March, 1946. 

The style of cowboy attire came from the American side of 

the line along with the cattle. The River Press tells of one drive 

of cattle from Texas to Alberta which swam the Missouri at Fort 

Benton. The account in part is as follows: 

**The band was accompanied by twenty men, and headed by 
Lords (sie) Waldren (sic) and Cochrane, who to the delight 
of impious oowpunchers wore for© and aft caps, knee pants, 
gaiters, rolled stockings, monocles, and sideburns. 1 * (26) 

j2'6"." River Press, Centennial ~ ■ 

The cowboys who brought in the Cochrane herd introduced the chaps, 
big hats, high-heeled boots, and spurs that we have learned to 
associate with stockmen ever since. (27) 

27.' Cox," W. H., "Diary of a Mountie, cited in LH Gold Jub. pp.87-76. 

From the late seventies until the end of the century, 
prairie fires took a sever© toll ©very year. These fires burned over 
large areas, and sometimes for several weeks at a time without any 
control being exercised. Such fires were partly responsible for 
driving the last of the buffalo south of the Missouri River in 1878. 
(28) W. H. Cox reported that on one trip from Fort Walsh to Fort 
IfS'." Kelly, op.' c'ltp» 122. ----- ‘ ' " "" 

M&cleod in August, 1881, he saw one strip eighty miles long that had 
been burned by a prairie fire. (29) W. H. McIntyre reported that 
29. Cox, op. cit. “ ' ~ 























t * * c. 




5 


* 




' 










120 


after he bought his first ranch near Cardston in 1894 fires burned 
for several weeks each fall, but that in general they were confined 
to the area east of the Lethbridge-Great Falls narrow guage rail¬ 
way. (30) Agriculturists might find in this fact a reason for the 

30* McIntyre, W» H., Story of the McIntyre Ranch, Canadian Cattlemen, 

September, 1947. 

lesser fertility of the soil east of the present Canadian Pacific 
Railway line, Lethbridge to Coutts, as compared with the area west 
of the line* 

In 1884, a meeting of stock growers was called for the 
purpose of forming the Western Stock Growers* Association* As this 
was a new venture and many of the men were from Montana, the rules 
of the Montana Stock Association of Choteau were adopted, another 
contribution of Montana t© Alberta progress* Jim Scott, former mail- 
carrier on the Benton-Macleod route, was appointed the first stock 
inspector. (31) 

31* Cos, ©p* eit* ' ' . 

The Western Stock Growers* Association and the Montana 
Stock Association found common ground for cooperation in trying to 
control various cattle diseases. 3n 1889, blackleg began to spread 
from Alberta to Montana herds. In 1892, scab appeared in Alberta 
sheep flocks, having come from Montana, Cattle mange began to spread 
northward into Alberta in 1893, and horse mange appeared in 1902. 

Xn March, 1892, the Police gave notice that all stock coming into 
Canada must undergo a period of ninety days quarantine, and set up 
a quarantine ground between the north and south forks of the Milk 










. 


- 






„ 




V; V, . *. v v;i >.;■( jil Ji 


t ■ . ' 

■ 

* ■* C. ♦ 

' 


* 

* 



t 

« 





K • • 

M." ' IT-V^ 

■ 


r i’ j <:• J . 



■ ' 4 t 

'■ , v . , ' ■■ ■ < .• "■ 0 ^ ■, *, iv 

■ 






121 


River, under Indian herders* The task became so onerous, however, 
that the regulations were dropped against all Canadian stock that had 
strayed south of the line during the winter storms and all Montana 
ranch stock, the quarantine thus applying only to imported domestic 
stock* (32) By 1900 the two Stock Growers* Associations were fully 
32T~Keliy, op* cit® p* 270*' 

cooperating to dip stock in an attempt to control mange, and by 1904 
the veterinary inspector reported that this disease was effectively 
cleared from Canadian herds. (33) 

33* Ibid, p* 358 

By the middle eighties the Montana ranges were becoming 
seriously depleted because of overstocking, which had resulted partly 
at least because of the Montana lease system of rentals at so much 
per head of stock® After the twenty per cent tariff was imposed on 
imports of American stock in 1886 there was considerable border 
trouble, with American stock pressing over the line to the lush 
grazing on the Alberta side* The police were kept busy patrolling 
the boundary to turn back stock, and sometimes they had recourse to 
more rigorous measures to keep the American ranchmen on their own 
side of the line. In the summer of 1887, they seized and sold 183 
head of Spencer stock, and for a short time this proved an effective 
check® (34) By 1895 the chief offenders were the bigger companies 

34T~ffiTd7 g p7" 20 5« . 

such as the Benton and St® Louis Cattle Company (the Conrad Brothers 
Circle brand) and the Conrad Kohrs and Company, DS brand® There was 




















<' 






. , 

■ 





- 

, . t 

e 


















t * 

' 









. • . i 






. 



• 







\t • V i -i 


* 

/J .! \ ' r ' 



. 

■ -■ ‘ 












, 


- 








* 






J 




* ' « 

















122 * 

considerable evidence that these companies shipped thousands of head 
of cattle by rail to within a few miles of the boundary, where they 
unloaded them and headed them north* (35) By 1901, it was estimated 
55 . Ibid, pp. 256-297 "" " .. " 

that there were 16,000 head of stock north of the Marias hills, with 
only six men to ride line herd—a number increased to nine after many 
complaints by the Western Stock Growers* Association* (36) 

36*" Ib~i~d7 p* 329 

Finally, after sixteen years of border trouble, an arrange¬ 
ment was made which eased the situation in 1902* American stockmen 
were permitted to lease land in Canada and bring in stock from 
Montana provided that they paid the duty on it* Some of the leases 
granted to Americans that year were? Spencers, 90,000 acresi C* E* 
H&llward, 60,000 acresi J, A* Thatcher, 65,000 acresi A* G* Day, 
65,000 acresi D. A* Richardson, 11,000 acresi J. 0* Born, 10,000 
acresi John Jenson, 4,500 acresi J* W. Taylor, 47,000 acresi George 
M. Cannon, 10,000 acresi J* D. Wasesha, 22,000 acresi and Wallace 
and Brown, 100,000 acres. Tony Day shipped 22,000 head of cattle 
from Trinidad, Colorado, to Billings, Montana, then trailed them to 
his lease seventy miles south of Medicine Hat, after paying $40,000 
duty* (37) 

w. MrpPi-gir ——- — 

The following year a Canadian Customs Bulletin warned that 
all foreign livestock found in Canada after June 1, 1903, would be 
subject to seizure and forfeiture except in the case of bona fide 


















' 




123. 

estrays. Because of a severe late snow storm, American owners were 
given one month* s grace, after which time they were conscientious in 
hiring sufficient line riders and building some border fence. (38) 

38. Ibid, p. 353« 

In 1904, the length of border fence was increased to ninety miles, 
and the border trouble was effectively ended. (39) 

39. Ibid, p. 358. 

The first sheep to enter Alberta were five head brought 
into the Macleod area by Joe McFarland in 1877. (40) The first sheep 

40. Ibid,'pp." 120-121. . 

leases granted by the Canadian government were given in 1881, and 
foundation stock of Merino and Rambouillet breeds was brought in 
from Montana and Wyoming following this date. (41) The British 

41. Blue, op. cit. pT 345. 

American Hors© Ranch Company, a subsidiary of the Cochrane Ranch 
Company, brought in the first large flock, about 5000 head, in 
1884. (42) Thus we see that the same company that began cattle 

42. Kelly, op. cit. pp.'T88”189, 

ranching on a large scale also started the first large sheep camp. 
Alberta*s first wool clip, shipped east in 1885 from Calgary, 
amounted to 70,000 pounds. (43) 

43. Calgary Herald, diamond Jubilee, July 13, 1945, p.~2, sect. 1. 

















, ■ 

■ 

- 

* 


- 

* 


t ' • t * 

, 

* «, 










124 


Chapter XI Railways and Settlement 

The building of three lines of railway was important either 
directly or indirectly in the history of Alberta-Montana relation¬ 
ships* These lines were the Canadian Pacific Railway from Medicine 
Hat to Calgary, the Lethbridge-Dunmore line, built by the North-West 
Coal and Navigation Company, and the link from Lethbridge to Great 
Falls built by the Alberta Railway and Coal Company and the Great 
Falls and Canada Railway Company* 

The Canadian Pacific Railway built rapidly across the level 
prairie lands of Alberta in 1883* The first train reached Medicine 
Hat on June 10. By July 21 the rails had reached Blackfoot Crossing 
and the first train entered Calgary on August 10. (l) The coming 
IV Calgary Herald, 50th innlyTT” October" 13V T923* ~ ~ " 

of the Canadian Pacific Railway to southern- Alberta marked the end 
of th© great freighting outfits from Benton along the Whoop-up 
Trail. Calgary began to assume her place as th© distribution centre 
for southern Alberta instead of th© old post at th© head of navigation 
on th© Missouri. 

Sir Alexander Galt and his son, Elliott T. Galt, early 
realized that th© North-West Coal and Navigation Company must have 
a much wider market for its coal than th© settlements around Leth¬ 
bridge and Macleod could provide. Th© attempt to supply th© Canadian 
Pacific Railway by the use of boats and barges on the Oldman River 
proved abortive, but the coal was so suitable that the railway 
company offered th© Gaits a long term contract for large amounts if 












' 




— ' — 


• 


. 






- 

c ' ■ 









J : J , i 








• 



; 





. 

■ 






* 


. 








t ' . 


- 










' 


- 

«. * « •' • 

- 


- ■ 






•J • - ; > • 









they would undertake to deliver it at Dunmore* The North-West 
Coal and Navigation Company immediately applied for a charter to 
build a narrow-guage railway between Lethbridge and Dunmore, and some 
grading was done in the fall of 1884* The North West Rebellion de¬ 
layed the project for a time in the spring of 1885, but the line was 
completed during the summer of that year* The little company laid 
the 109 miles of track, in 43 working days, and had the line completed 
by August 28* (2) The official opening date was September 24, 1885, 

£* Eggleston,' W*,~ NEWS Tells of Early Buildings, IiT.^Tjold JufcV p. 

although the road had been in use for nearly a month at that time* (3) 
3* bominion Annual Register for 1866. 

The rolling stock included 6 locomotives, 2 auxiliary water tenders, 

95 coal cars each with a capacity of 9 to 10 tone, 1 pay car, 4 
cabooses, 12 freight cars, 2 accomodation cabooses, 2 passenger cars, 
and 6 stock cars, (4) In spit© of its diminutive size, much traffic 

moved over this line in the years that followed before it was 
acquired by the Canadian Pacific Hallway Company in 1897* 

The Gaits early realized the potentialities of the Leth¬ 
bridge coal field, and turned their eyes southward for an expanded 
market* The Alberta Railway and Coal Company was organized in 1889 
to succeed the North-West Coal and Navigation Company, and it 
immediately applied for a charter to build a railway line south to 
the boundary* The new company was incorporated by Act of Parliament, 

March 20, 1889* (d) A further spur to effort was the fact that 
5"*' statutes of Canada, Vol* 1 and 27~ OFapt er~BP,~ IB89. 















- 




— 

4 

t " 




4* 4 








4 4 <• ' 

- ■ ■ ■ 4 ■ • <• . 

. 

* 

■ . • 

e 

. 

4 ‘ “ 

K 

„ . 





126. 

another company was at the same time applying for a charter asking 
for a subsidy to build a road from Calgary to Benton in the event 
that the first road failed to go through with its project. (6) The 

6. Edmonton Bulletin, March29, 1890. 

Alberta Railway and Coal Company was financed through Baring Brothers 
of London, and just in time, as this firm also acted as the financial 
agent of the Argentine Government, and when that government defaulted 
on payments in 1890, Baring Brothers were forced into liquidation. (?) 

7. Wilson, E* H., Lethbridge and the A* R. and I., LK. Ann. p. 9, 

sect. 2. NOTE: Wilson was the London secretary of the 
A. R. and I., successor to the Alberta Railway and Coal Co. 

The charter to build from Great Falls north was secured by the Great 

Falls and Canada Railway Company, promoted by A. T. Galt, W. G. 

Conrad, and S. T. Hauser, ex-governor of Montana. (8) The contractor 

8. Helena Independent, Sept. 11, 1889. 

for the Canadian section was P. Egan, and for the American section 
Donald Grant and I. S. Ross. (9) Chief engineer for the whole project 

9. kreat' Falls 1'ribune,' May 28, 1890.. ~ 

wag W. D. Barclay. (10) It was early decided to make the guage of 

lOY' 'ibid, iFeb. 1, 1890, p. 4." "" —— ~ .~~~ 

the new line the same as that of the Lethbridge-Dunmore line, thus 
providing a link between the Canadian Pacific Railway at Medicine Eat 
and th© Northern Pacific Railway at Benton. 

Surveys of the route were completed and grading started out 
of Great Falls on February 2, 1890. Work from the Lethbridge end 
started in May. (11) We quote from a private letter from Lewis and 
ll. Ibid, tflay 28, 1890. 





























i-J' -I 










r.-r 






, 















127 . 


Clark County, Montana, as follows: 

"The new railroad, Montana and Canada, is being rapidly 
pushed to completion. It will run from Great Falls to 
Lethbridge, will pass about 25 miles east of Choteau and 
8 miles west of the West Butte of the Sweetgrass Hills. 

It is narrow guage. Iron is laid and construction trains 
are running on about 35 miles of track. Eighty miles of 
grade is completed and the Teton bridged. Most of the 
grading is being done by machines called graders, drawn by 
12 horses. One machine works on each side of the road bed, 
thereby completing it as they go. Four men are required 
to run each machine, and they build from half a mile to 5 
miles a day. These machines are adapted for light work and 
comparatively level country. This railroad is being built 
very cheaply and does not rank very highly as an engineering 
feat. Wages are lower then on any other work in the country 
— $1.75 per day for men, out of which is taken $5.25 per 
week for board and $1 per month for hospital fees, besides 
$3 for road tax and $2 for poor tax per year. The con¬ 
tractors expect to finish the road this fall." (12) 

^Saonton Bulletin, June 21, 1890. 


The road was to have been completed by September 1, but it 
was delayed by rains. Actual working time for building the link was 
108 days. (13) The first excursion train ran over the line from 
18." Ibid,' Sept. ~27~~T890. - 

Great Falls to Lethbridge on October 15, 1890. (14) The trip, 201 

14. Great Falls"tribune, Oct. 18, 1890, p. 4. 

miles, took from 8:30 p. m. on© day to 11:00 p.m. the next. (15) 

15. tjeth’brTdg® lews,""Act. £9, l89'6. 

The railway from Lethbridge to Great Falls was not the last 
scheme promoted by Galt. Another short line of importance to southern 
Alberta was built by a company organized by him in 1903. This was 
the St. Mary River Railway Company which built a narrow guage line 

from Stirling to Cardston in that year. (16) 

16. Statutes of Canada^" Vol« 11, l9Qfe,' cK. lfe v / 





















128 


These small companies were soon absorbed by larger concerns• 
The Canadian Pacific Railway acquired the Lethbridge-Dunmore line in 
1897 and changed it to standard guage. (17) In the fiscal year between 
17, Slue, op* cit* p, 3lL4, 

June 30, 1900 and June 30, 1901, the u reat Northern Railway Company 
purchased the line from Great Falls to Coutts on the International 
boundary from the Great Falls and Canada Company* This line was 
operated by the Great Falls and Canada Company for about a year after 
the purchase until the narrow guage could be changed to standard, (18) 
18* Great Northern kaliway annual report,'~19~01,~ p*~ X&. ~ 

In 1904, the Alberta Railway and Coal Company, the Canadian North 
West Irrigation Company, and the St. Mary River Railway Company were 
amalgamated as the Alberta Railway and Irrigation Company (19), and 
19* Statutes of Canada, Vols* I and ^ 1964, chapter 43« 

the interests of this new company were acquired by the Canadian 
Pacific Railway in 1911. (20) Thus we see that the large companies 

20. thirtieth Annual Meeting of the Shareholders of the Canadian. " 

Pacific Railway Company, Oct* 4, 1911, p* 8. 

eventually had control of all the railway lines an the Alberta- 
Mcntana area, but we should not lose sight of the fact that little 
companies did much to develop the area* 

The Dominion Lands Act, 1872, cleared the way for agri» 
cultural settlement on the virgin plains of the West, but it was not 
until after the Police came to southern Alberta in the late fall of 
1874 that settlement really started, and not until after the Canadian 
Pacific Railway came in 1883 that settlers cam© in considerable 

















rj ; (J 




a • 1 J 














■ 


. . 

, . i • - ••• 

’ • <. ■ 

t , 

. t • ■ 

; i 1 i '■ ' 








numbers 


When the Dominion of Canada was formed in 1867 there were 
probably not more than ten or a dozen white men in southern Alberta, 
and most of these were transient traders. One who might be regarded 
as a settler was Reverend George McDougal! of the Morley district 
near Calgary, who was joined by his son, David McDougall, in the 
Confederation year. Dave Akers was another white man who had come to 
Alberta before the Police and remained after they came to become a 
settler with headquarters at Fort Whoop-up, where he grew a fine 
garden within the enclosure. (21) Jack Collins settled in the 

21. NOTE: Dave Akers was an old whisky trader who worked for Healy 

and Hamilton. When the latter refused to sell the post 
at Whoop-up to the police, Akers squatted there and used 
the fort as hie headquarters. For a time he was in partner¬ 
ship with Tom Purcell, a Montana gunman, and in an alter¬ 
cation that ensued concerning the division of stock when 
the partnership broke up, Purcell shot and killed Akers. 

On account of his age, Purcell escaped with a sentence of 
three years in the penitentiary. 

Pineher Creek area the same year that the Police came, becoming the 
pioneer settler of that community. As late as 1881 W. H. Cox reports 
no settlers between Macleod and High River. Near the latter point 
lived Old Man Livingstone, Pi scan Munroe, Tom Lynch and Lafayette 
French, all from Montana. From High River to Calgary there was only 
John Glenn, established on Fish Creek near the present site of the 
Lacombe Home. (22) C. A. Magrath reported that on a journey from 

22. Cox, loc* cit. NOTE; John Glenn had married a half breed woman 

and had taken up farming on this site. He was credited with 
the first irrigation project in Alberta. _ 


Winnipeg to Macleod in 1881 he saw only one squatter between Fort 









. 










. 

f ■ *, • ' ■ ■ i r 

« 

■ 














. 






« 

* 

: t : 

' 

.. 






* 

T.r < 

■ «, : 


1 




■ 


0 < 







- 


\ 






130 , 


Ellice on the Assiniboine and Fort Macleod, a distance of six 
hundred miles, and that one was Nicholas Sheran at Coal Banks (Leth¬ 
bridge). (23) 

23. Magrath, C. A., Makers of Lethbridge, LH Gold Jub. pp. 2-4. 

Joseph McFarland, the man who claims to have grown the 
first wheat in commercial quantities in the area, was from Montana. 

He emigrated from Ireland and brought about 25 head of milch cows 
from Montana to the vicinity of Macleod in 1875 with the intention of 
supplying dairy products to the Police. As the Police were then 
paying $1.70 per bushel for oats, McFarland broke some land and grew 
oats for them, thus laying indubitable claim to being southern 
Alberta*s first farmer. In 1882 a promoter from Calgary came to 
Fort Macleod and promised to build a grist mill if wheat were grown 
in the district. McFarland harvested 250 bushels of wheat in 1882, 
but the grist mill did not materialise, so the grain was sold as 
chicken feed. (24) 

S4^Macleod ^azett®, ibrniv. June 25, 1942, p. 1 . ~~ 

Other early farmers included David J. Grier and Francis 
Willock. The former, an ex-policeman, homesteaded in 1883, imported 
seed wheat from Brandon at |5 a bushel, and recouped his outlay by 
selling his first crop to his neighbors for seed at the same price.(25) 
S§V LH GqM Jub.~ p. 30. 

Willock came from eastern Canada and took squatter’s rights near 
Pincher Creek in 1882. From a head of Golden Chaff wheat—a soft, 
beardless, heavy-yielding, easy shelling strain—which he found in 









* 






4 






I’ ‘I 









<L 












' 

t 




' 







131 


his pocket, he soon raised good quantities of seed, starting with 
the crop of 1883* (26) From these small beginnings, the increase in 
£6. Ibid, 

wheat production was rapid* The bumper crop of 1906, 5,923,000 
bushels, gave tremendous impetus to settlement projects, and between 
1914 and 1935 more than 506,000,000 bushels of wheat were shipped 
from the Lethbridge area. 

The railways, of course, carried on extensive settlement 
campaigns. The Alberta Railway end Irrigation Company was at least 
partly responsible for the coming of the Mormons to southern Alberta. 
Charles Ora Card heard in Montana of the wonderful grasslands of 
southern Alberta, and with some other leaders of the Mormon Church 
made a journey of exploration and investigation in the fall of 
1886. (27) The first Mormon settlement, indeed the first settlement 
27. Higinbothak, op. cit. p. 128. 

of any size, in southern Alberta resulted from this trip, when 
Charles Card brought about sixty Mormon families to Lees Creek, now 
Cardston, early in 1887. (28) The Mormons had been accustomed to 
28* Blue,'op. cit. p. 21%Y - - --- 

irrigation in Utah, and by 1897 the Alberta Railway and Irrigation 
Company had made a deal with them to construct irrigation canals 
from Kimball on the St. Mary*s River to water the Raymond, Magrath, 
Stirling, and Taber areas. The Mormons were to be paid half in 
cash and half in land at three dollars per acre. (29) John Silver, 
29. Magrath, loo, cit. 
























t 

$ 




- 



e. 




* ^ 

t ' 






*1 


4 


' ■ '■^ ■ •' 5 . •">* ■ - ' -i ■ 

! 










. 










■ I . ) 


' 

* ■ • ; ■ 

* | 






132. 

one of the participants, raised 40,000 bushels of wheat on 1000 
acres near Wilson Siding in 1906 on land that had cost him only $3 
an acre under the scheme. From its beginnings in 1887, the Mormon 
settlement has grown and expanded in the south. Two large land 
purchases made by the Mormon Church were the Cochrane Ranch, 67,000 
acres, in 1905, (30) and the Kirkcaldy Ranch west of Warner, 80,000 

30. Wood, Edward J., The Mormon Church and the Cochrane Ranch, 

Canadian Cattlemen, September, 1945. 

acres, in 1948. 

While speaking of settlement by religious groups, it may 
be well to mention the Hutterite colonies, which have become an 
important factor in southern Alberta. Most of the Hutterites came 
to the area following the first World War, and although they did not 
come from Montana, the overflow is now largely moving to that state, 
as restrictions against land purchase by them in southern Alberta 
are forcing them into more distant areas* At the present time the 
Hutterites in Alberta comprise some thirty-five colonies, holding 
approximately 125,000 acres of land. (31) 

31. Lethbridge Chamber of Commerce letter to writer, January 25, 1950 . 

The Canadian Pacific Railway carried on an extensive 

colonization project after 1883. In a pamphlet entitled, ”Hints to 

Emigrants”, 1884, we find some of their campaign literatures 

”In consequence of the necessity for freighting goods so 
far, a comparison of prices of staple goods with those in 
the east may not appear to the advantage of the Calgary 
merchants, but we give a few quotations of present prices 
of goods hares 














, 








t ■ 








t 


■l ' 1 




. 


, . 


p 


. 




t 








■ 





t 

. 





, 

* 

1 v 1 


c * 

r ’ ). cJ 'I *. ' f ' >/ v f ■. 



, 



; '• ■ ' ■ ; 




4 

- 




t • ■ , * 

« ' 

: 








133 


Flour, Ogilvie's, sack 

$3.50 to $4 

.25 

Bacon, side, lb. 

.14 

.16 

Beef, lb• 

.15 

.20 

Sugar, 8 to 12 lb. 

1.00 


Tea, lb. 

.30 

.70 

Eggs, doz. 

.25 


Potatoes, lb. 

• 0l£ 

.03 

Oatmeal, lb. 

.05 


Rice, lb. 

.07 


Beans, lb. 

.07 


Coffee, lb. 

.35 


Lard, lb• 

.18 

.20 

Cheese, lb. 

.18 

.20 

Dried apples, lb. 

.13 

.17 

Syrup, keg 

4.50 



....the labor market is overstocked here at present* 

We would advise those intending to come here, to be 
prepared to take up land and go into faming. (32) 

32* Cited inCalgaryHerald," diamond Jubilee, July 13, 1943, 

p* 22, sect. 4. 

Of the several land companies formed to attract settlers 
into southern Alberta from Montana and the United States, one of the 
most successful was the 0. W* Kerr Company, which centred its 
activities around Warner, then Bunion. 0. W. Kerr himself viewed 
the area in the fall of 1906 and purchased a large section of the 
lands south of Lethbridge on the Coutts branch of the Canadian 
Pacific Railway. Placing T. S. McKenzie and R* H. Owen in charge 
of the Lethbridge office and hiring C» T. Lathrop as guide and 
adviser to prospective settlers, he himself returned to headquarters 
at Minneapolis whence he directed the campaign. He advertised widely 
that one good crop of wheat would pay for the land, using the slogan, 
’’There is no investment on earth like the earth itself.” Cars of 
interested men were brought in and shown the standing crops and the 
virgin prairies, and under the smooth salesmanship of 0* T. Lathrop 
thousands of acres were soon settled. 

















'0 . 







: 

' f • 

' 

• ... 




■ y • ' ' • ■ ' 






134 


Chapter XII Coal and Oil 

On© of Alberta's oldest industries is coal mining, and 
coal was a staple product of Alberta-Montana trade from 1870 to 1896. 
ifter the latter date the flow of coal southward was but a dribble. 

The chief market had been the Great Northern Railway and the smelters 
at Great Falls, Butte, and Anaconda. After 1895 the Sand Coulee 
mines in the vicinity of Great Falls were producing quantities of 
coal, and Alberta lost her Montana market to them. James J. Hill 
was interested in the Alberta product, but he owned the Sand Coulee 
mines. 

Coal was discovered in Alberta as early as 1792 by Peter 
Fidler, but the first commercial development was by Nicholas Sheran. 
Sheran was an Irish Roman Catholic, bom in New York. He joined the 
Union Army during the American Civil War as a drummer boy of fourteen 
and saw service at the battle of Gettysburg. Cte demobilization, he 
went to sea for two years, and then, like many another veteran seeking 
fortune and adventure, he drifted westward to Montana, finally coming 
to Fort Benton. Here he met the Eealy brothers and with them he came 
to southern Alberta. He found no gold, but at the junction of the 
Oldman and the St. Mary’s Rivers he found outcroppings of coal. He 
did some mining at this point, but found the seam too thin to be 
profitable, so in 1872 he moved to a new site about where the Canadian 
Pacific Railway viaduct now crosses the Oldman and began to mine in 
earnest. His whisky-trading companions laughed at his project, but 




r' 

- 

■ r ■ * ■ • ( ' • ' 






■ 









- 


« 






















. 


























X 



- 
























x 

t 














• 












; ( ' 




X 


t 






‘ 

t 


• 






X 







. 








. 

kJ 




X 





’ 



« 





! 


, 









* 

















X i 

















125. 

he built up a very profitable trade, freighting his coal to Fort 
Benton, and later to Forts Walsh and Macleod. The freighters were 
glad to have a return load which paid well--the coal was worth $3 
a ton at the pit head but sold for as much as $24 a ton in Fort 
Benton, (l) Sadly enough, Sheran did not live long to enjoy the 
j» Macleod Gazette, bee. 14, 18&2. 

business which he started. He was drowned on May 27, 1882, while 
assisting a party of police to cross the Oldman River at Fort Kipp, 
and his body was never found, although a reward of $100 was offered 
for its recovery. (2) 

2V NOTE: The notice of this reward was one of the advertisements 

carried in the first issue of the Fort Macleod Gazette, 
July 1, 1882. 

An interesting bit ©f southern Alberta romance may be 
mentioned here. Many of the traders took Indian wives, both for 
their companionship and to ease the barriers between themselves and 
the natives, but before the Police came in 1874 white women were 
indeed a rarity. The first white woman to travel the Fort Benton- 
Fort Whoop-up Trail was Marcella Sheran, sister of Nicholas, who 
came to keep house for her brother about 1872 or 1873. (3) She 

3® Lynch-Staunton, E*, Fort Itenton-Fort" Macleod trail, Lethbridge - 

Herald, May 27 and 28, 1948. 

became a party to the first whit© marriage in southern Alberta, as 
witness the following account cited from the Benton River Press of 
August, 1877s 

w Joseph McFarland and Miss Marcella Sheran were married 
at Who©p-up, Br. N. W. T., on the 4th of July last. 



















> 




a 







' 









136 


Father Scollan performed the ceremony, and the happy 
couple received a salute of six guns from Fort Whoop-up, 
after which they were escorted to the McFarland Mansion 
by their friends*” 

The coal industry did not die with Nicholas Sheran in 
1882* Fred Kanouse started where Sheran left off and had ten men 
working by September, with the announced intention of loading all 
bull and mule teams with coal for the return trip to Fort Benton. 
Kanouse said that he could use another twenty miners to get the coal 
out if he could find them. (4) 

4. Macleod Gazette, &ept. 4,188&. 

Coal mining brought the Galt family and their connections 
to southern Alberta, a Tact of far-reaching importance because the 
Galt developments eventually included railway building and irrigation* 
Elliott T. Galt travelled through southern Alberta in 1879 as an 
assistant t© the Indian Commissioner, Edgar Dewdney. He reported 
the outcroppings of coal along the Oldman River to his father. Sir 
Alexander Galt of Montreal, who was prompt to organize the North- 
Western Coal and Navigation Company to develop the findings. Elliott 
I. Galt was the first manager of the new company, and William Leth¬ 
bridge, who gave his name t© the now thriving city which grew at 
the site of the ”C©al Banks”, was the president. A son-in-law of 
Sir Alexander Galt, C. A. Magrath, who was to play a prominent part 
in the development of irrigation in southern Alberta, also came 
to the area in connection with the North-Western Coal and Navigation 
Company. (5) 

5. NOTE: Magrath cam© west as a dominion Land Surveyor in" 1878, and' ~ 

joined the Galt enterprises in 1885. 










* 

' 

: 7;:; 

•: 





' 

<:>■) ; • 

) , J: 


■ 
























i; '.'f'-v ' 













: ) 


* 








i 



« 


























. 









* 

* . 

- 


- 


1 

• f M‘J\ i 1. .7/ 











- 


t 







■ 





■ r ■ 









- 





- 

* 





' 


c. 

' 






■ 


- 





* 





* 




• 





- 



■ t 






, 





* 




I. ;K< • 




7 

•* 


• 









7 








, 








, 




* 




137. 

Th© Gaits sent Captain Nicholas Bryant to do some prospect¬ 
ing for coal in 1881. Bryant asked for a man familiar with coal, 
and the Acadia Coal Company recommended Mr. William Stafford, an 
employee of theirs. Stafford and his son, William, left Westville, 
Hov& Scotia, on May 22, joined the Bryant party at Londonderry, 
reached Montreal on May 24, thence travelled via Toronto, Chicago, 

St. Paul, and Bismarck to Fort Benton, where they arrived on June 4. 
Bryant had already shipped a team of horses to Fort Benton for the 
use of the party, and they outfitted from Benton with cooking end 
camp equipment. Stafford made a thorough survey of all coal resources 
from Fort Benton t© th© ”far north” and selected Coal Banks (Leth¬ 
bridge) as the best spot for development. The mines were first 
opened on December 11, 1882, being worked the first winter with a 
small crew. (6) 

6. Steel©, C. F., Seeking Gold Sheran found Coal, LH Gold Jub. pp. 21- 

22 . 

Th© original plan was to produce coal for the settlers, 
but the Gaits quickly realised that they needed a much larger market. 
This was offered by th© Canadian Pacific Railway if transportation 
could be provided. Captain Todd of the Missouri River steamer. 
Rosebud, and his brother, Nels Todd, were brought in from Montana by 
the company in the hope that th© river would prove navigable to 
Medicine Hat. The Baroness was built at Lethbridge in 1883, and the 
Alberta and the Minnow at Medicine Hat in 1884. (?) Navigation, 

7. ' Higinbotham, op. cit. p. 108, 














138* 

however, proved impracticable, and the experiment was abandoned* 

The coal was very suitable to the needs of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway, which offered the North-Western Coal and Navigation Company 
a large long-term contract if the latter would build a railway to 
deliver it at Dunmore* The coal company agreed and immediately 
applied for a charter to build a narrow-guage railway* The contract 
was let in the early spring of 1885, but nothing was done toward 
building the line until the threat of the North West Rebellion was 
past* The 109 miles of line was completed on August 28, 1885, and 
coal was delivered to Dunmore over it the following day* Further 
expansion of the mines encouraged the Gaits to look south to Montana 
for markets, and in 1890 a subsidiary company built another narrow- 
guage railway link two hundred miles from Lethbridge to Great Falls*(8) 
8* ef* pp* 125-127. 

The coal company with its successors and subsidiaries had 
a payroll of #30,000 per month shortly before the Great Falls and 
Canada Railway was completed, and expected to increase this to 
#80,000 per month after completion of that railway* (9) Some idea 
9* Edmonton Bulletin, Sept* 15, 1890* 

of the size of the enterprise may be gleaned from a news item report¬ 
ing that October 6, 1890, marked the record output of coal from the 
Lethbridge mines in any one day up to that time—720 tons* (10) 
T0*' m Tbid7~"Nov» 1, 1890*.~ ~ 

When it is remembered that the coal cars on the narrow-guage railway 
had a capacity of only nine to ten tons, this amounted to nearly 











* ■ t \: v v 





5* 

- 

ft ■ 1 ; 




n 


• 


■ 




■ 




* 


* 


4 

4 

' • . 

* 

■ • ft 

. 

. 

„ - ■ 



' ■. . •, O.M : ,:! \ K.f;.. 




139 


eighty cars, a sizeable amount. At the same time the Great Falls 
Tribune reported that the demand for Lethbridge coal was greater than 
the railway could transport. (11) 

11. Ibid. ~ 

An interesting sidelight on the finance of the early days 
is noted in 1393 when the Lethbridge banks practically refused to 
accept gold by placing such a high discount on it that the miners 
could not afford to deposit it. The company was in financial straits 
with the Union Bank, and had decided to bring back gold in payment 
for coal delivered in Montana, using the gold to pay the miners. The 
men, most of whom were Americans, were delighted with the hard money, 
but were greatly chagrined when they took it to the bank. (12) 

12. Magrath, loc. cit. ~ 

Coal traffic became a mere trickle after the turn of the 
century, but oil gradually took its place in the trade picture, the 
chief difference being that oil moved north from the Montana fields* 
Three refineries operated for a time at Coutts, in addition to a 
cracking plants the Olsen refinery built in 1924, the Maple Leaf 
refinery in 1926, the Beaver Cracking Plant in 1929, and the large 
Stellarene refinery in 1930. All used Montana crude. Imperial Oil 
bought the Maple Leaf plant in 1932, but dismantled it and shipped 
it to Calgary to use Turner Valley crude in 1936. The British- 
American Oil Company purchased the Stellarene in 1933, but closed 
it down in 1937, the other plants closing about the same time. At 
the present time, the Imperial Oil and the British-American Oil 
















* 






) .H: -i 




. 










■ 



















- 








« 


* 


1 




• 


t 





„ 






* 




• . 




t ' 


» 






i/0 •* 'i ", ", , :> 






, 




,, 






' • • 


« ’ ' • 4 ’ ' - 









140, 


companies each have a crew of three at Coutts to take delivery of 
Montana crude, which is now piped into tank cars for refining at 
Calgary or Moose Jaw, Oil is delivered at Coutts by two pipe-lines, 
a five-inch line from the Cutbank field, and a four-inch line from 
the Kevin-Sunburst field. Considerable crude oil and gasoline is 
also imported in tank cars and trucks. Pipeline deliveries in 
three recent years were: 1944—36,208,446 gallons; 1945—33,999,530 
gallons; and 1946—31,776,013 gallons, (13) 


13, LH Anniv, p, 17, sect, 3. 










i . 


- 

- t >■ 













. 


t — 5 

x y\ — 


, ■ . 







141 


Chapter XIII Boundary Waters and Irrigation 


Boundary waters and their diversion have always been a 
matter of importance in Alberta-Montana relations# Both the St. 
Mary’s and the Milk Rivers rise in Montana and flow into Alberta, 
whence the Milk returns to join the Mississippi system while the St* 
Mary’s empties into the Saskatchewan system. 

Article VI of the Boundary Waters Treaty between Great 
Britain and the United States, January 11, 1909, reads in part as 
follows: 


"The High Contracting Parties agree that the St, Mary’s and 
Milk Rivers and their tributaries (in the State of Montana 
and the Provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan) are to be 
treated as one stream for the purposes of irrigation and 
power, and the waters thereof shall be apportioned equally 
between the two countries, but In making such equal appor¬ 
tionment more than half may be taken from one river and less 
than half from the other by either country so as to afford 
a more beneficial use of each# It is further agreed that 
in the diversion of such waters during the irrigation season, 
between the 1st of April and 31st of October, inclusive, 
annually, the United States is entitled to a prior appro¬ 
priation of 500 cu# ft. per sec# of the waters of the Milk 
River, or s© much of such amount as constitutes three- 
fourths of its natural flow, and that Canada Is entitled 
to a prior appropriation of 500 cu® ft# per sec# of the 
flow of St# Mary’s River, or so much of such amount as 
constitutes three-fourths of its natural flow# The channel 
of the Milk River in Canada may be uged at the convenience 
of the United States for the conveyance, while passing 
through Canadian territory, of waters diverted from the 
St# Mary’s River...." 

Controversy regarding interpretation of this Article led the two 
countries to refer the question to the International Joint Commission 
for a ruling. Canada contended that the waters to be divided included 
all the waters of the two streams to their mouths, and that the equal 
division should be exclusive of the priorities! the United States 




> r >'.n r ■ ■ 

, . - ' . i..V J . 

• • ' . 

: \ ‘ •/. . j ■_ •: ■ *.l ' . ! \l f . 1 " }{.' , ' 

■V ’ '1 ’ ‘ : ’ ■ U 1 ■ - ' , V 'i 

< f t ' * ' 





■ 


* 






*.i; *’■' 5 U 




. J 4 . V ; • -t J 


* * 

O'. n~\ : 1 ■ 


, 






4 ‘: 

' ’• ..1' ; ■ ■■ ‘J. 

1 ' 

* 




','V. : ; 

' 










;,i 

’ 


. ■ 

; ' ■ " : ’C-‘ ' ■ 'v' ! 

4 








t '.<> -:'o. 

; 




142 


that the waters to be divided were only those crossing the Inter¬ 
national Boundary and that the equal division should be inclusive of 
priorities. An order of the International Joint Commission, October 
4, 1921, accepted the American view that only waters crossing the 
boundary were to be considered, and the Canadian view that priorities 
should first be apportioned and the remainder divided equally* (l) 

1. Canada, St. Mary’s and Milk divers Water bevelopment Committee 

Report, February, 1942, pp. 22-24. 

The United States exercised their right to use the Milk 
River to carry water diverted from the St* Mary* s in 1916, when water 
was diverted from Sherburne Lake into the north fork of the Milk 
River, thence 216 miles through Canada to storage in Frenso Lake for 
us© in Montana irrigation. Nothing further was done until 1949, 
when one mile of new canal was built to replace a metal flume which 
carried the water over Spider Coulee. (2) 

2* Lethbridge Herald, May 28, 1949. 

Canada took no steps to utilize her share of the water of 
these two rivers until 1947, when development of the St. Mary’s- 
Milk River Irrigation Project got under way. Such action was urgent 
and imperative, as Canada had either to utilize her share of water 
or lose her rights. 

The Report of the St* Mary’s and Milk River Development 
Committee was tabled in the House of Commons in 1942. This report 
outlined a seventeen-year plan of construction at an estimated cost 
of $16,178,435. This figure has been increased by inflated costs 
to approximately $20,000,000 at the present time. The original plan 








' 


. 










143 


called for the construction of the St* Mary’s River dam, reservoirs, 
and outlet canals with irrigation of 24,000 acres in the third year, 
with extension for the next fourteen years until the whole project, 
inclusive of the present Lethbridge Northern, Taber, Magrath, and 
Raymond units but exclusive of the Aetna, Leavitt, Mountain View, 
and Macleod Southern units, would cover 465,000 acres. The first 
irrigation in the third year of the project was to be in the Grassy 
Lake-Burdett area; the fourth year 27,161 acres around Yellow Lake 
and Purple Springs; the fifth year, 42,424 acres around Big Bend 
and Medicine Hat; the sixth year, 24,162 acres around Lethbridge and 
Coaldale; the seventh year, 39,184 acres around East Chinj and the 
ninth to seventeenth years, 20,000 to 30,000 acres per year to extend 
to all irrigable land from the foothills to the Saskatchewan boundary 
south of the Waterton, Oldman and South Saskatchewan Rivers. The 
fifth year called in addition for the construction of the Chin Power 
Plant with a capacity of 3,540 horsepower; while the eighth year was 
to be used for the construction of the East Pot Hole Coulee reservoir, 
with a capacity of 14,000 acre-feet. This latter project has already 
been undertaken by the provincial government, so the original plan 
should be speeded up by one year. The total storage plans for the 
project included the main dam on the St. Mary’s River with a capacity 
of 300,000 acre-feet; the East Pot Hole Coulee reservoir; the Chin 
reservoir, 150,000 acre-feet; the Horsefly reservoir, 6,000 acre- 
feet; and the Verdigris reservoir, 140,500 acre-feet. (3) 

5. Stout, Lome, 194&—*fhe ^ear of Irrigation, Canadian Cattlemen^ 

March, 1946. 













- 



' 


V „ ' 

« “ ■ ' t ' 

« 

' 

• 4 . ’• ' • 

\ ~ 







1. E. I. D., Brooks, 150,000 acres* 

2. W. I. D., Strathmore, 54,000 acres. 

3. L. N* I. D., Lethbridge, 95,000 acres. 

4. Canada Land Company, Vauxhail, 40,000 acres. 

5. United I. D., 34,000 acres. 

6. Mountain View I. D., 3,500 acres. 

7. Leavitt I. D., 4,500 acres. 

8. A. R. I., Taber, 105,500 acres. 

9. A. R. I., Magrath, 7,000 acres. 

10. A, R. I., Raymond, 15,100 acres. 

Miscellaneous, 4,700 acres. 

Total irrigated area, 508,000 acres. 

Proposed Additions: 

11. South Macleod, 10,000 acres. 

12. Aetna, 10,000 acres. 

13. Canada Land Company Extension, 125,000 acres. 

14. Red Deer Diversion Canal, 500,000 acres. 

15. St. Mary’s-Milk River, between Milk and Oldman, 465,000 acres. 
Total Alberta irrigation now planned, 1,518,000 acres. 




































. 






144* 

The St* Mary*s Dam will be the highest earth dam in Canada 
and one of the engineering marvels of America when completed* The 
crest, one-half mile long and thirty feet across, will rise 185 feet 
above the river bed. The base will be a quarter mile across. The 
water face, on a three-to-one slope, will be covered with coarse sand 
and gravel to a thickness of one foot at the crest increasing to ten 
feet at the base, the whole to be covered with riprap ten feet thick. 
The project will require over 5,000,000 yards of clay and 1,000,000 
yards of rock and gravel. The contract for its construction was let 
to W. C* Wells Construction Company, Limited, for $2,081,700. The 
project when completed is expected to increase the population density 
from 5*59 to 48 per square mil© in the area. (4) 

4~a Lethbridge Chamber of Commerce,' 1947» 

Further border trouble over water rights came to a head in 
1947, when the International Joint Commission held a hearing in 
Havre, Montana, regarding diversion of Sage Creek. Sage Creek rises 
in the Cypress Hills northeast of Manyberries and comes to a dead 
end in Wild Horse Lake on the International Line* This so-called lake 
is really a large hay flat extending on both sides of the boundary. 
Montana put forth claims that the Smith ranch, Cox ranch, Prescott 
ranch, and Sims ranch had established claims to water sufficient for 
irrigating 1,965 acres by right of prior use, and presented evidence 
of squatter*s rights as early as 1898. Evidence was presented that 
there had been sufficient water nearly every year until the early 
1950*s when Gilchrist Brothers had purchased the ^ ranch and had 







* 


’ t * 

„ 

t' ■ 4 

;••••: : • •> .» '. a - ;■ 1 i 


t «. ■ 




* 






„ 

. - ' * 

> ' 1 .. i ■' 1 r 


■ 


4 




* 

5 

i 



y ", • 1 - a : ■ 



- 









„ 

t 

4 * 

. ' 1 ■ • 






145 


diverted more and more water to Canadian use, leaving insufficient 
for Montana users, except in very wet years such as 1943. Testimony 
was presented that in several years when there was little hay south 
of the line there was plenty on the Gilchrist holdings* In 1947 
there was enough water to irrigate only 496 acres on the Montana side 0 
The Alberta claims were presented by C* H. Gilchrist, who maintained 
that much of the irrigation was done with overflow from Sage Creek 
which was free for the taking, that Montana could establish no 
"prior right” to flash flood waters, and that the scarcity of water 
was due to drought and not to undue usage by Canadian, ranchers. 

Montana requested that the Canadian government install sufficient 
storage facilities to cure the present conditions, that a water master 
be placed on the creek to apportion waters fairly, end that steps be 
taken to allow sufficient water to reach Montana ranches to enable 
them to continue operations* The International Joint Commission 
reserved judgment, asking for further briefs to be presented, and 
their decision is still pending. (5) 

5* Lethbridge Herald," Nov* 12 and NoVV 13',"'1947* 














* r " ' ' ■ ", ' ; r , 

. 


* 

' 


■ 






. 



' 





t ; . 




. 






• 

' 


' ' * ' ■ ' '' I ' 1: 1 > l 1 !' V . ' j. i ; ; 

l 

' 

« 




146 


Chapter XIV Some Present Day Relationships 

One of the finest manifestations of friendly relations 
between Alberta and Montana is to be seen in the establishment in 
1933 of the Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park# Probably the 
first white man to see Waterton Lakes was Lieutenant Thomas Blackiston 
of the Pal User expedition, but more important in having the area 
set aside as a park was John George "Kootenai” Brown, who came south 
from Edmonton in 1865 to make his home by the lakes. The Balliser 
expedition named the Lakes in honor of Charles Waterton, English 
traveller, naturalist and ornithologist* 

Kootenai Brown was an Englishman, a product of Eton and 
Oxford, an Imperial Army officer from India, who finally came to 
Alberta as an Indian trader in search of adventure and did much to 
have the Waterton Lakes area set aside as a national park* The 
first step was to have the area established as a forest reserve in 
1895* The reserve was gradually extended until it included about 
320 square miles* A survey was made in 1910 for the purpose of park 
incorporation* As Waterton Lakes Park adjoined Glacier National 
Park in Montana, the Rotary Clubs of Alberta and Montana started a 
movement for union of the two* The idea was considered by the two 
governments, and in 1933 the Waterton-Glaoier International Peace 
Park was established, commemorating 130 years of peace along the 
49th Parallel* A further demonstration of amicable relations was 
given in 1947 when the Rotary Clubs erected and dedicated two peace 










, 

4 

t • 

4 ' 

" c' 

4 4 ' 

, 

' 


* 

* 

« 

* 

- - 4 

4 

' '. •' ' " 

•; • V ; ,) ' *' •: [ •- co ; i 








147 


cairns on the Chief Mountain Highway on the International Boundary 
in the park, (l) 

1,Lethbridge Herald, August 4, 1947. 

There is considerable fraternal intercourse between northern 
Montana and southern Alberta, Since 1888 fraternal visits among 
the Masonic lodges have been common. At the present time, the border 
lodges hold an annual International Night, alternately at Cutbank 
or Shelby, Montana, and at Calgary, Alberta. There is at least one 
club of Lions International which is truly international, the Coutts- 
Sweetgrass Lions Club, which has members on both sides of the line. 

The Chambers of Commerce of Great Falls and Lethbridge cooperate to 
promote better road, rail, and air services north and south, and 
better customs facilities at Coutts-Sweetgrass with twenty-four hour 
service at the port. Since the war, the Montana Flying Farmers and 
Ranchers Association and the Royal Canadian Flying Club of Alberta 
have been working together to try to have their respective governments 
establish landing strips at the ports of entry. Splendid examples 
of cooperation have been set by the Kiwanis and Rotary Clubs of 
Alberta and Montana in erecting boundary cairns and markers. The 
twenty-fourth such tablet was unveiled on the boundary at Coutts on 
May 29, 1949, by the Kiwanis clubs. The inscription on this tablet 
reads t 

M This unfortified boundary line between the Dominion of 
Canada and the United States of America should quicken 
the remembrance of the more than a century old friendship 
between these two countries, a lesson of peace to all 
countries.” (2) 









♦ 







. 



” 










* 











e. 










• 


* 






* 


« 








r 






, 







* 














'■' ': 0 fi '.( 



' «_ 








<L 

• 


• 




~ 












5. 





♦ 












’ 



trx « M 












. 



■ 






\>: ' r 

. 


i ' I ' i : 





, 






. > 

t t • • 




J 






: 


'' t 



148 


£. NOTE:’Service clubs are sometimes lax in historical accuracy. 

Until 1870, the 49th Parallel was a boundary between the 
United States and British North America, and for much of 
the period a share of credit for the maintenance of peace 
should be accorded to Great Britain♦ 

The tourist traffic between the two countries has become 
of major importance in the last few years* Tourist trade constitutes 
a very important, although invisible, item in the balance of inter¬ 
national trade• Expenditures by foreign tourists in Canada have the 
same effect on the balance of trade as exports, while expenditures 
of Canadian tourists abroad have the same effect as imports* Canada 
has had a favorable balance of tourist trade over a period of years, 
the most favorable balance being shown in 1949 when American tourists 
spent |98,000,000 more in Canada than Canadian tourists spent in 
the United States. (3) Alberta,/ with her world-famous playgrounds, 

5. Dominion Bureau of Statistics* 
takes no small part in this important phase of international relations. 
Entry to Alberta from Montana is made usually at Chief Mountain in 
the Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park, at Carway, Del Bonita, 
or Coutts. There is practically no difficulty experienced at the 
border by bona fide American tourists who are coming to Canada for 
six months or less, although all are warned to carry sufficient 
proof of their citizenship to satisfy their own immigration officials 
on their return. Similarly, Canadians experience no border diffi¬ 
culties, but at present there are restrictions ©n the amount of 
money they may carry out of the country. 

Coutts, originally operated as an outpost of the Lethbridge 















* 

t • " > ■ - «. • ■ 
























A:; aa ■ A ) I a : 


4 






V 











149 


port, was established as a full-fledged customs port in 1936, and 
now ranks as the most important port of entry between the Pacific 
Coast and the Great Lakes. From a staff of one in 1906, the personnel 
has grown to a staff of twenty-three in 1949. The following figures 
will serve to show how traffic through the port has increased: 


Year 

Number of 

Value of 


commercial entries 

Imports 

1922-23 

354 


1937-38 


$1,286,888 

1945-46 

9,628 

3,398,482 

1946-47 

12,421 

5,544,226 

1947-48 

16,651 

10,540,570 

1948-49 (50 weeks) 

17,046 

16,262,900 


47 Ibid. 

Up to 40,000,000 gallons of crude oil come through Coutts annually 
from Montana. Excessive traffic through Coutts in 1948 and 1949 has 
been congesting the facilities far beyond capacity. The lifting of 
the embargo on Canadian cattle in 1948 resulted in a tremendous flow 
of livestock southward through the Coutts port. Much of this stock 
was driven to the border in the style ©f sixty years ago, where all 
was tested for Tuberculosis and Bang’s Disease before it could pass 
through customs. The sudden slump in the Chicago market brought 
an end to much of this traffic. The Montana Livestock Auction 
Company of Butte was reported to have paid George Ross of Aden a 
deposit of several thousand dollars for his herd, but refused to 
take delivery after the price drop, preferring to lose their deposit 
rather than suffer the greater loss involved in taking delivery. 

The opening of the Leduc oil field resulted in heavy traffic north- 





<• 

\ 

t 






1 ■ ■■ . \ 

■ 

* 


'' i i' 















* 

. 

.. • ■ •. IV!--; I", 

■ • : 


■ U:n oil 









150 , 


ward of oil-well rigging and equipment. On March 21, 1949, over 
250 tons of oil-well equipment were cleared through the port in 
addition to 2,250 head of sheep from J. T. Henninger’s ranch going 
south to Kevin and all the regular traffic. The importance of Coutts 
has been recognized by the Federal Government in an appropriation of 
$140,000 for a new Customs Building there. (5) 

5~. Lethbridge Herald, March 22, 1949, 

There has been considerable international sport along the 
border. As far back as 1891, we find records of an interchange of 
baseball games between Great Falls and Lethbridge, both teams winning 
their home game. Great Falls 8-7 and Lethbridge 27-2. During the 
same year. Belt and Lethbridge exchanged soccer games. To celebrate 
July 4, 1891, Lethbridge baseball, football and tennis teams jour¬ 
neyed to Great Falls. Lethbridge won the baseball game and the 
tennis matches, but the football game was a draw. Sportsmen of 
those days were true enthusiasts—as there was no passenger train 
available for the July 4 trip, a train was made up of fourteen 
cabooses to make the special run. (6) There is some interchange of 
8. Great Falls Weekly Tribune, July 11, 1891. 

sport today, with golf, baseball, and hockey predominating. 

From its inception in 1912, the Calgary Stampede has 
attracted the cream of rodeo artists from Montana and other States. 
Among Montana winners at the first Calgary Stamped© were Fanny 
Sperry of Mitchell, for cowgirls’ bronco riding, and Otto Kline of 
Livingstone, for cowboys’ trick and fancy riding. (7) An interesting 
7. Kelly, op." cit. go. 437-458 ~~~ """ ~ 












■ 




. J 






' 





S' 




h ■ 


. \f ; .v; 











„ 






; ' ' 

* t . : > ' t , : 

t 

■ •„ .■ n J j 




, , . ■ ... 



€ 

• 


* 
















151 


sequel is found in the fact that Miss Patsy Rodgers, chosen to 
represent Canada as Miss Calgary at the Madison Square Cardens Rodeo 
in October, 1946, was a granddaughter of '’Dublin” Rodgers, one of 
the I* C* Baker Company's bull-whackers on the Benton-Macleod 
Trail. (8) 

8. Canadian Cattlemen, June, 1946, p*. 46. 

The necessity of war resulted in considerable development 
along the Old North Trail* The American government had to get 
supplies through to Alaska, and to facilitate the traffic the Alaska 
Highway, an all-weather road, was constructed from the end of steel 
at Dawson Creek to Whitehorse in Yukon Territory, thence to Fairbanks, 
Alaska* The establishment of a port of entry at Snag, Yukon, makes 
it possible for American shippers to send goods in bond across the 
whole of the Dominion of Canada* 

To carry on development of the work so well begun, the 
International 87 Highway Association was formed at Brady, Texas, in 
1945, with the avowed object of linking the Alaska Highway with the 
Pan American Highway by following the route of Highway 87 through 
the United States and a network of roads through the Province of 
Alberta. Starting at the northern end of the route, the proposed 
highway would run from Fairbanks via Dawson Creek, Edmonton, Macleod, 
Coutts, Laredo, and Mexico City, to Panama, a total distance of 
7,810 miles* (9) The route is roughly the Old North Trail of the 
9* Lethbridge Herald, Aug. 16, 1947, Highway of the^lmericas ♦ ~~ 


Indians, so we see that there is a thread of development throughout 









' 

- 


' 

'■ • ■ , ■ . 

: ' t 


. 


















•;!., ,' , f-i : >J .■ !. ■/' ’j :■ \ 'v i ' • . '• .'i ■■ '• 

«. i : . r " ■' 


t ■ ' 5. « 


- t t * 













152 


the period along this ancient way, with southern Alberta and 
northern Montana in the very midst of it* 




























153 


Chapter XV Conclusion 

It is a truism to say that one measure of man’s culture is 
the efficiency of his integration with his environment* The environ¬ 
ment of northern Montana and of southern Alberta is the same—the 
same soil conditions, the same natural grasses, the same errors of 
cultivation of land that should have been left raw, the same drought 
cycles, and the same winds. Agriculture is the backbone of the 
economy of both, and "sidewalk farmers" who mine the soil and live 
in cities are all too prevalent in both. Mechanization was the 
cause of this evil, and the mechanized farmer is not prone to plan 
for generations of the future. 

Soil and moisture conservation methods originated in 
Canada. It is said that the principle of summer fallow was dis¬ 
covered so far as Western Canada was concerned as a result of one 
of those accidents of history—the North West Rebellion of 1885. 

Angus McKay was left alone on his farm at Indian Head because his 
young men went to fight. Unable to do all the work alone, he left 
one field unseeded, but kept it clean. The following year—1886, 
a dry year—the field yielded 55 bushels per acre as compared to 
only two bushels per acre on an adjoining field which had been 
continuously cropped. This was probably the first use of surmaer 
fallow on the northern plains. The principle used for conservation 
of top soil from wind erosion is an adaptation of the ancient 
practice of terracing fields to prevent water erosion. Two Dutch 




—* .■ • : ; : 

t ■ t ' 

, - 

.1 1 

- . 

« • — — 

. 

.... 

0 

. ■ 






154 


brothers, Leonard and Arie Koole of Nobleford, Alberta, are credited 
with the application of the principle of terracing to flat fields 
which resulted in strip farming. 

The next step in cooperative integration with environment 
must be long range planning. Farm scientists recognize the fact that 
the 49th Parallel is no frontier of weather or of economy, and that 
there is an identity of interests of the northern plains of the 
United States and the southern plains of Canada—an area embracing 
the old buffalo range, including Montana, the Dakotas, Wyoming, 
Nebraska, southern Saskatchewan and southern Alberta, While 
adaptations for moisture and soil conservation came from Canada, 
the first experiments in long term planning are being carried out 
south of the line. Montana was not slow in using summer tillage 
and strip farming, and neither must we be laggard in following her 
lead in long range planning, 

Montana has three outstanding long distance planning 
programs in operations Teton County, the Mi zpah-Pumpkin Creek 
Grazing District, and the Milk River Northern Montana Land Utili¬ 
zation Project, Teton County is an example of a unified county 
program, embracing tax revision, soil conservation, water utilization, 
erosion control, pest and weed eradication, range management, and 
cultural activity. As it has a balanced economy of ranching and 
fanning and of irrigated and dry land, and was never so destitute 
that any change was improvement, it has good experimental value, 

Teton is a large county, comprising 1,500,000 acres, but tax re- 













. 

. 






. 


~ 

4 4 t t 

» ■ «. 

. 

t ' 

* 

■ m; V 

" 4 : 

. t • 

4 ’ • • ’i • ' t e 

4 ' ’ ' ' > ■ - : * 

* ' , ■ 
i 'i ^ • 4 t 





155 


classification on the basis of productivity was undertaken on each 
forty acre subdivision, with four classes of plow land and five 
classes of grass land being distinguished. Some taxes were raised, 
some lowered, but collections were improved. Better land use was 
encouraged, and today most of the sub-marginal land has been returned 
to grass. Fortunately, there was enough good raw land to replace 
the areas taken out of cultivation. Small farms have been discouraged, 
and there are few farms as small as 160 acres today except those 
held by old people reluctant to move in their declining years. The 
small farmers are paying their way by concentrating on production of 
dairy stock, hogs, and poultry. 

The Mizpah-Pumpkin Creek Grazing District, formed in March, 
1928, was the first cooperative range grazing district. It includes 
108,000 acres between the two creeks which give it its name. Private 
owners held 28 per cent of the area, the Northern Pacific Railway 
Company 41 per cent, the State of Montana 6 per cent, and the re¬ 
mainder was public domain. The private owners and the railway were 
persuaded to lease their holdings to the ranchers * association for 
a rental just covering taxes, and the public domain was leased for 
#20 a section per year, the whole on a ten-year rental basis. The 
area was fenced, fence-riders hired, prairie dogs poisoned, cattle 
quotas allotted to members on a basis which would permit recovery 
of the range, reservoirs built, and range reclamation measures taken. 
Bulls, salt, and feed supplements are purchased cooperatively. At 
first the rental fee per head for eight months grazing was #1.50, 







156 


but it has been reduced to $1.25. The controlled range has demon¬ 
strated its ability to maintain carrying capacity even in the driest 
years, and has given much needed stability to the ranching industry. 

The "Malta plan", originally a local scheme for resettle¬ 
ment, was seized upon by the federal government and became the Milk 
River Northern Montana Land Utilization Project in 1934, covering 
some 7,000,000 acres in Blaine, Phillips, and Valley Counties in 
Montana, and affecting about 5000 farm families. The area includes 
irrigable and dry land farms, and grazing land. The basic idea in 
the project was "area diversification", or integration of the dry 
and irrigable areas to the best advantage. The clients of the 
project are all former dry land farmers, encouraged to dispose of 
their sub-marginal dry land and move to irrigable land. Their debts 
were liquidated by federal loans, averaging $3500 each. There are 
three classes: purchase clients, buying land on a forty-year payment 
plan; lease clients, operating on a share-crop basis with the govern¬ 
ment! &nd labor clients, who ©am their living as laborers, estab¬ 
lished on small five-acre plots. A study of the incomes of sixty 
affected families is a revelation. Annual average family income 
before the project started was $962, made up as follows: 41 per cent 
from the farm, 40 per cent from direct relief, 10 per cent from 
federal bonuses, and 9 per cent from outside labor. Annual average 
family income under the project (1940) is $2300, with 83 per cent 
from the farm, 16 per cent from federal and sugar beet bonuses, and 
1 per cent from outside labor, with no relief payments. In addition. 




t <L 













157 


the people have better homes, better schools, and a richer social 
life. (1) 

1. Howard, J. K., Montana High, Wide, and Handsome, Yale, New Haven, 

1943. pp. 287-311. 

The people of Alberta and Montana have much in their 
common heritage on which to build a sound culture. A synthesis of 
the ideals of all who have lived along the Old North Trail will 
provide the basis for it* From the Indians we derive a heritage of 
stamina and love of the freedom of the outdoors, from the traders 
a tradition of ardent fearlessness, from the metis a religious fervor, 
from the miners and the outlaws who followed them extravagance and 
recklessness, from the cowboy and cattleman a happy carelessness, 
and from the homesteader a burning ambition, a stoic resistance to 
despair, and the optimism inherent in all who work the soil. No 
ideology would be right or adequate for the area unless it includes 
something of each part of this magnificent heritage* 

As the Old North Trail brought men from Asia to this area 
for the first time, so the new North Trail, the Alaska Highway, 
may carry our culture and our ideology back to Asia, and with it 
a hope for a better world tomorrow. 






* 

£ 








* 

* 






'■ ■ ; : '• i 


. 




i 


■ 

i 

' 


t • 

l 


- 


t ■ «, 

\ 

» 





APPENDIX A 


A schedule showing classification of payments of the 
North West Mounted Police to the I. G. Baker Company for two years, 
1875-6 and 1876-7, as shown in Sessional Papers #188, 42 Victoria A 


1879. 



1875-76 

1876-77 

Pay of the force 

$18,481.98 


Subsistence 

30,438.29 

$38,124.94 

Clothing and uniforms 

2,608.75 

4,685.05 

Arms and ammunition 

27.91 

24.50 

Travelling expenses 

598.94 

33.50 

Freight and transport 

4,018.21 

3,084.34 

Horses and equipment 

6,850.02 

2,801.23 

Forage, etc. 

31,428.25 

64,435.02 

Sleighs, wagons, buggies 

406.42 

369.49 

Buildings and repairs 

4,591.91 


Oxen, carts, harness 

127.62 


Printing, stationery 

287.00 

116.87 

Barrack and camp equipment 

2,877.96 

3,306.60 

Fuel and light 

1,104.75 

1,493.80 

Telegrams 

208.97 


Postages 

57.29 


Blacksmith stores 

707.92 

1,066.48 

Hospital expenses and stores 

1,342.32 

272.24 

General stores 

6,951.14 

4,123.69 

Rents 

49.46 


Farming implements 

1,887.92 

93.00 

Legal expenses 

7,718.82 

26.25 

TOTALS 

122,771.85 

122,057.00 







APPENDIX B 


Schedules A, B, C, D, E, and F give prices delivered of 
various commodities supplied on contract by the I* G. Baker Company 
to the North West Mounted Police at the posts of Walsh, Macleod, 
Wood Mountain, Fort Saskatchewan, Battleford, and Qu*Appelle 
respectively, for the year 1880, as shown in Sessional Papers #80, 
45 Victoria A 1882, 


Article Schedule s 

A 

B 

c 

D 

E 

F 

Be<a£ (IB.) 

4f 

4i 

4 

4* 

4i 

6i 

Bacon 

isi 

14 

i4 

isj 

17 

isi 

Flour 

6 

6| 

6f 

1°4 

5 

4f 

Tea 

50 

50 

SI 

60 

53 

55 

Coffee 

23 

2%i 

24 

28 J 

27 

24 

Sugar 

14j 

14f 

isj 

19J- 

i8i 

isi 

Dried apples 

10 

ni 

11 

ie| 

14 

13 

Beans 

6i 

ei 

7i 

ni 

1°J 

8i 

Ris,e 

8 

8'l 

9 

isi 

12 

10 

Pressed vegetables 

39i 

40 

40 

45 

43i 

42 

Pressed hops 

19 

20 

20 

25 

23 

22 

Baking Powder 



25 

30 

28i 

25 

Salt 

4i 

4* 


9i 

8i 

6i 

Pepper 

25 

25 

26 

25 

29 

25 

Potatoes 

3i 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

Biscuit 

8f 

9 

9* 

14 

12f 

8i 
















: >.0 


> t 

£ 

1 4 l 


' „ , 





£ 


i- 




, 


5. 





t 

4 







* 



/ >>: J 






t r 























! ' r 






f 






: r 



















. 

. 






. 






















* 















. 

■X . -A 










Article Schedule 

i A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

Oatmeal (lb.) 




Ilf 

lOjfc 

8f 

Sperm candles 

20 

21 

21 

25 

24 

22j 

Bran 

3f 

4 

4i 

9 

5 

3^ 

Coal oil (gal.) 

48 

52 

56 

92 

80 

65 

Oats (cwt.) 

3.74 

3.25 

4.25 

4.00 

4.00 

3.50 

Hay (ton) 

10.75 



9.50 

9.00 

9.00 














BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Manuscripts: 

Brown, J* W., The Whoop-up Trail, Ms., Montana Historical Library. 

Cox, W. H., Diary of a Mountie, cited in Lethbridge Herald, 

July 11, 1935, pp. 67-76. 

Healy, J. J., Letters to T. Adney, August, 1905, Montana 
Historical Library. 

Morley, Julius F., Account of a prospecting trip north, Ms., 
Montana Historical Library. 

Whoop-up Trail, Map and Ms., Montana Historical Library. 

Williams, W. J., Diary, in possession of J* J. Williams, 
Lethbridge, Alberta. W* J. Williams was bookkeeper 
for T* C. Power after 1868. 

Government and other reports: 

American State Fapers, Foreign Relations, v. II and III. 

Canada, Sessional Papers, #188, 42 Victoria A, 1879 

#80, 45 Victoria A, 1882 
#125, 47 Victoria A, 1884 
#153, 48 Victoria A, 1885 

Canada, Department of the Interior, E. Voorhis ed.. Historic 
Forts and Trading Posts, 1930. 

Canada, Department of Justice, Brief Outline of the Activities 
of the Fore®, 1873-1940, 1945. 

Canada, St. Mary’s and Milk Rivers Water Development Committee 
Report, February, 1942• 

Canada, Statutes of, Vol. 1 and 2, 1889| Vol. 11, 1903j 
Vol. 1 and 2, 1904. 

Canadian Pacific Railway, Annual Report, 1911. 

Dominion Annual Register, 1885 

Great Northern Railway, Annual Report, 1901. 

Lethbridge Chamber of Commerce report, 1947. 




4 


4 


4 






4 


' 



Theses and contributions of historical societiess 


Bradley, Lieut. James H., Journal, Contributions, Montana 
Historical Society, v. 3. 

Bussard, L. H., Early History of Calgary, University of 
Alberta thesis, 1935. 

Contributions, Montana Historical Society, Vols. 1, 2, 3, 10. 

Hargrove Correspondence, Champlain Society #24, 1938. 

James, General Thomas, Three Years Among the Indians and 

Mexicans, Missouri Historical Society, St. Louis, 1916. 

Koch, Peter, Life on the Mussel shell in 1869-70, Contributions, 
Montana Historical Society, v. 2. 

McGuinness, Rev. R. J., Missionary Journey of Fr. Peter de 
Smet, S, J., Canadian Catholic Historical Association, 
1941-2. 


Periodical Articles! 

Buchanan, C. W., History of the Walrond Cattle Ranch Ltd., 
Canadian Cattlemen , March, 1946. 

Burlingame, M. G., Buffalo in Trade and Commerce, North Dakota 
Historical Quarterly, July, 1929. 

Davis, G, R., Maelead Old Timer Looks Back, Lethbridge Herald , 
June 25, 1949. 

Eggleston, W., News Tells of Early Buildings, Lethbridge 
Herald, July 11, 1935. 

Eggleston, W., No Cypresses in the Cypress Hills, Lethbridge 
Herald, August 11, 1949. 

Kennedy, G. A., Last Great Indian Battle Fought on the Present 
Site of Lethbridge, Lethbridge News, April 30, 1890. 

Lynch-Staunton, E., Fort Beni;on-Fort Macleod Trail, Lethbridge 
Herald , May 27-28, 1948. 

Macleod, J. E. A., Peigan Post end the Blaekfoot Trade, 
Canadian Historical Review, XXIV, 1943. 
















iV'» 




^ • * 


* * 




«. ■■ 


j»C» 





t • 






r 









Macleod, J. E. A., Old Bow Fort, Canadian Historical Review, 

XII, 1931. 

Magrath, C. A*, Makers of Lethbridge, Lethbridge Herald, 

July 11, 1935. 

Matson, G. A., and Schrader, H. F., Blood Grouping Among the 
Blackfoot and Blood Tribes of American Indians, Journal 
of Immunology , XXV, 1933. 

McIntyre, W. H., Story of the McIntyre Ranch, Canadian Cattlemen , 
September, 1947. 

McKay, W* Henry, Story of Edward McKay, Canadian Cattlemen , 
September, 1947. 

Faullin, C. 0., Early Choice of the Forty-Ninth Parallel as 
a Boundary Line, Canadian Historical Review, IV, 1923. 

Riley, Senator Dan, Reminiscences of a Range Rider, Lethbridge 
Herald, July 11, 1935. 

Shepherd, George, North of the Border—Up Canada Way, Fort 
Benton River Press, Centennial, 1946. 

Steele, C. F., Seeking Gold Sheran Found Coal, Lethbridge 
Herald , July 11, 1935. 

Stevens, John G., The Toughest and Meanest Man in Montana, 

Fort Benton River Press, Centennial, 1946. 

Stout, Lome, 1946—The Year of Irrigation, Canadian Cattlemen, 
March, 1946. 

Warren, S. E., Milk River Ridge Hay Trail, Lethbridge Herald , 
August 16, 1947. 

Wilson, E. H., Lethbridge and the A. R* and I., Lethbridge 
Herald , December 11, 1947. 

Wood, Edward J., The Mormon Church and the Cochrane Ranch, 
Canadian Cattlemen , September, 1945. 

Books and Pamphlets? 

Adney, E, Tappan, John Jerome Healy—Conversation and Diary, 
tps., Montana Historical Library, Helena. 

Bell, W. S., Old Fort Benton, Helena, 1909. 





















c. 




t 








s. * * t 













- , ' 







Blue, John, Alberta Past and Present, Pioneer Historical 
Publishing Company, Chicago, 1924. 

Bowen, A. W., Progressive Men of Montana, Chicago, 1900. 

Brown, Ernest, Old Trading Forts of Southern Alberta, 

Edmonton, n. d# 

Chittenden, H. M., American Fur Trade of the Far West, Harper, 
1902. 

Craig, John R., Ranching with Lords and Commons, Briggs, 

Toronto, 1903. 

Denny, C. E., Riders of the Plains, Herald, Calgary, 1905. 

Fletcher, Robert H., American Adventure, American Pioneer Trails 
Association, New York, 1945* 

Franklin, J., Narrative of a Journey to the Shores of the Polar 
Sea in the Years 1819-20-21-22, Murray, London, 1823. 

Higinbotham, John D., When the West Was Young, Ryerson, 

Toronto, 1933. 

Hind, H. Y., North West Territory, Reports of Progress, 

Toronto, 1859. 

Howard, H. A., War Chief Joseph, Caxton Winters, 1941. 

Howard, J. Montana High Wide and Handsome, Yale, New 
Haven, 1943. 

Jennass. Diamond, Indians of Canada, Department of Mines, 
Bulletin 65, Ottawa, 1932. 

Kelly, L. V., The Range Men, Briggs, Toronto, 1913. 

Kroeber, Alfred L«, Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North 
America, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1939. 

Longstreth, T. M., The Silent Force, Century, New York, 1927. 

Lynch-Staunton, Mrs. C., History of the Early Days of Pin dier 
Creek, Herald Printing Co., Lethbridge, n. d. 

Mackenzie, Sir Alexander, Yoyages from Montreal on the River 
St. Lawrence Through the Continent of North America in 
1789 and 1793, London, 1801. 




Macrae, A. 0., History of the Province of Alberta, Western 
Canada History Co., 1912, 

McClintock, Walter, The Old North Trail, or Life, Legends and 
Religion of the Blackfoot Indians, Macmillan, London, 
1910. 

Morton, A. S., History of the Canadian West to 1870-71, 
Nelson, Toronto. 

Overholser, J. F., Centenary History of Fort Benton, Fort 
Benton, 1946. 

Stuart, Granville, Forty Years on the Frontier, v# 1 and 2, 

A. H* Clarke, 1925. 

Vaughn, Robert, Then and Now, or Thirty-Six Years in the 
Rockies, Tribune Printing Co., Minneapolis, 1900. 

Vinton, S., John Colter, Discoverer of Yellowstone Park, 

New York, 1926. 





*■" ’ V'.- 

l' 




t" 4 

, 









t 


-4 

















4 

















University of Alberta Library 

timing 

0 1620 0567 9053 


B29758 
























